1 


HAROLD  B.  LEE  LIBRARY 

BRIGHAM  YOUNG  UNIVERSITY 

PROVO,  UTAH 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2011  with  funding  from 
BrighaiTi  Young  University 


http://www.archive.org/details/preachersconiplet06newy 


A 

HOIILETICAL    COMMENTAEl 


ON  THE 


BOOK  OF  JUDGES. 


THE 


jpr^acker'0  CToinplcte  Jgomtletical 

COMMENTARY 


ON  THE 


OLD    TESTAMENT 

(ON  AN  ORIGINAL  PLAN). 

ith  €ritkal  anb  (SxpIaMtarg  ^Qit^,  inbiaB,  kt.,  H 


BY 


VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 


5Ccta  Yorft 

FUNK   &   WAGNALLS   COMPANY 

London  and  Toronto 

1893 


/ 


r^ 


ZO/1 

A 


HOIILETICAL  COIIENTART 


0:^r    THE    BOOK    OF 


JUDGES. 


®litl;    Crrtinil    anb    (iBrjalanatDnr    Itofi^s,    S^fai^ral    Puitbrctr 
#athitts,  mang  ^Suggestions  antr  CBinmciitS;  Jfnbiccs,  (j^tc. 


BY  THE 


EEY.    J.    P.    MILLAE,    M.A. 


FUNK   &   WAGNALLS   COMPANY 

London  &  Toronto 

1892 


N.B. — It  is  due  to  tlie  Rev.  P.  G.  Marohant,  author  of  the  Commentary 
on  Joshua,  to  state  that  the  commencement  of  this  treatise  down  to  the  close 
of  the  Second  Chapter  was  executed  by  him  ;  while  all  the  rest  of  the 
Commentary  from  the  beginning  of  Chapter  III.  to  the  end,  including  the 
Preface,  the  two  Indices,  and  the  Appendix,  has  been  the  work  of  him  whose 
name  is  given  on  the  Title-page. 


THE    LII 
BRIGHAM  lOUN  RsiTV 

PROVO,  UTAH    ^       ^ 


PREFACE. 


By  Homiletic  writiDg  in  these  pages  is  not  to  be  understood,  an  analysis  of  the 
thought  contained  in  the  text,  for  that  properly  is  the  province  of  exposition. 
Yet  some  critical  examination  of  the  exact  truth  intended  to  be  conveyed,  is 
needful  as  a  foundation  for  this  kind  of  writing,  so  that  exposition  may  be 
regarded  as  the  basis  of  homily.  This  want  has  been  met  in  the  present  treatise 
by  giving  **  Critical  Notes,"  at  the  beginning  of  each  chapter,  sufficiently  ample 
to  bring  out  what  is  supposed  to  be  the  true  interpretation.  But  Homiletic  writing, 
properly  so  called,  concerns  itself  with  bringing  out  the  practical  bearings  of  the 
truth,  after  the  meaning  has  been  ascertained.  It  is  nearly  the  same  as 
Applied  Expositioriy  and  may  be  d«  fined  as  the  enunciation  of  the  practical 
principles  contained  in  the  text,  but  its  work  is  rather  to  eliminate  those 
prii  ciples  than  to  illustrate  them.  It  opens  up  fountain-heads  of  truth,  and 
leaves  it  to  others  to  go  along  the  course  of  the  winding  stream. 

The  writer  of  these  pages,  however,  has  not  confined  himself  rigidly  to  this 
idea  of  homily,  his  object  being  rather  to  write  a  useful  book,  than  to  prepare 
one  which  might  strictly  square  with  the  requirements  of  a  logical  definition. 
On  the  one  hand,  he  was  anxious  to  give  the  writing  a  living  form,  infusing  into 
it  the  interest  which  naturally  lelongs  to  life  in  contrast  with  dry  bones,  and  so 
he  has  endeavoured  to  put  a  little  flesh  and  blood  on  the  skeleton  of  homily. 
On  the  other,  he  has  had  in  view  what  might  be  profitable  to  the  popular  class 
of  readers,  as  well  as  to  those  who  care  for  little  more  than  the  seeds  of  thought. 
Hence,  he  has  intentionally  studied  to  give  some  expansion  to  the  principles 
enunciated,  but  not  beyond  the  point  of  developing  the  seed  into  the  bud.  To 
carry  it  to  the  length  of  bringing  out  the  full  flower  and  the  ripened  fruit,  is  the 
work  of  sermonising.  A  mean  between  the  dry  seed  and  the  full  blossom, seemed 
to  him  a  more  useful  mode  of  treatment,  than  if  he  had  covered  the  page  with  a 
multitude  of  sapless  roots,  not  yet  cast  into  the  soil,  and  without  any  savour  or 
comeliness.  Utility  he  regards  as  a  more  important  aim,  than  conformity 
to  a  mechanical  standard.  But  he  has  endeavoured  to  guard  against  any 
latitudinarian  departure  from  the  form  of  writing  which  the  Book  professes 
to  give. 

Another  feature  of  this  volume  which  the  author  thinks  is  due  to  himself  to 
explain,  is  tiie  multiplicity  of  divisions  and  subdivisions  of  thought  which  are 
given  in  certain  parts,  and  especially  in  the  earlier  chapters.     To  this  he  waa 


led,  in  great  measure,  by  finding  that  not  a  few  regarded  the  Book  of  Judges  as 
little  else  than  a  record  of  heroic  history,  without  supplying  any  important 
principles  for  the  guidance,  and  the  fostering  of  the  religious  life.  Being 
convinced  that  no  part  of  the  word  of  God  was  barren  of  good  for  the  soul  of 
man,  he  devoted  himself  to  the  purpose  of  showing  that  this  Book,  so  far  from 
being  merely  secular  and  wanting  in  spiritual  instruction,  was  everywhere,  even 
in  the  sentences  and  clauses,  specially  full  of  sacred  principles  and  practical 
suggestions  for  the  leading  of  a  godly  life.  Hence  he  has  dealt  somewhat 
elaborately,  with  such  subjects  as  prayer y  the  operations  of  the  Spirit  of  God, 
and  sin,  in  the  many  aspects  here  presented,  showing  that  these  misht  be 
entered  on  and  fairly  discussed  in  the  Book  of  Judges,  as  well  as  any  other  book 
of  the  Old  Testament. 

That  a  considerable  number  of  paragraphs  are  occupied  with  quotations  from 
diflferent  auth'^rs,  is  not  an  arrangement  of  the  author's  choosing,  but  was  one 
imposed  on  him  by  those  who  asked  him  to  undertake  the  work.     Yet,  with  the 
exception  of  these  and  any  quotations  that  are  so  marked  throughout  the 
volume,  it  is  scarcely  necessary  to  say,  that  every  sentence  from  beginning  to 
end  has  been  carefully  thought  out  by  himself,  and  expresses  his  own  judgment 
on  the  matters  recorded.     He  confesses  his  obligations  to  such  authors,  chiefly 
modern,   or  such   works,  as  Keil,  Cassel,  Lias,  Rogers,  Hengstenherg,  Bush, 
Trapp,    Auherlen,   Scott,   Saurin,   Stanley,   Adam   Clarke,    Dods,   Wiseman, 
Patrick,    Wordsworth,  Jamieson,  Josephus,    Gihh,   Luther y   Henry,   Fausset, 
Speakers  Commentary,  Pulpit  Commentary,  Hall,  Pictorial  Bible,  ^Vidi  others — 
though  venturing  not  infrequently  to  differ  from  them  on  some  of  the  more 
important  questions  discussed,  such  as  Ehud's  conduct  to  Eglon,   JaeFs  to 
Sisera,  and  Jephthah's  to  his  daughter.     He  is  of  opinion,  that  much  mis- 
interpretation of  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures  arises  from  overlooking  the 
peculiar  genius  of  the  history  there  recorded,  as  diff'ering  from  that  of  all  other 
histories.     It  is  the  history  of  a  people,  who  lead  their  life  under  the  shadow  of 
the  covenant,  and   whose  atmosphere  and   surroundings  are  all  of  a  sacred 
character.    They  have  special  relations  to  the  great  Jehovah,  so  that  everything 
has  a  colour  and  an  emphasis,  which  belong  to  no  other  people.    There  are  some 
other  important  principles  which  are  too  little  regarded,  but  which  really  supply 
the  true  secret  to  the  right  understanding  of  a  great  portion  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment writings,  such  as  the  preserving  of  a  well-balanced  view  of  the  God-ward 
and  the  man-ward  sides  of  all  that  is  there  recorded ;  making  the  proper  dis- 
tinction also,  between  the  Rectoral  and  the  Fatherly  character  of  God  •   and 
especially,  noting  the  weight  of  the  fact,  that  in  Old  Testament  times,  the  great 
propitiation  had  not  yet  been  made,  so  that  God  could  not,  consistently  with 
what  was  due  to  His  own  holy  name,  act  as  the  God  of  peace,  but  must  as  a 
rule,  "give  to   every   transgression  and  disobedience  its  just  recompence  of 
reward."    Were  these  principles  duly  weighed,  many  difficulties  of  the  Old 
Testament  Scrii)tures  might  be  brought  nearer  to  a  solution. 


8 

The  author  greatly  regrets  that  this  work  has  been  prepared  amid  so  many 
distracting  thoughts,  occasioned  by  his  being  constantly  called  away  to  attend 
to  other  duties;  so  that,  if  the  reader  should  occasionally  find  a  lack  of 
symmetry,  or  a  tendency  to  redundancy,  he  must  crave  his  kind  indulgence. 
He  can  only  say  in  general,  that  in  the  getting  up  of  this  commentary,  everything 
has  been  examined  with  the  utmost  care,  as  to  accuracy  of  fact,  suggestiveness  of 
thought,  suitableness  of  sentiment,  as  well  as  justness  of  interpretation.  As  to 
style,  he  leaves  it  to  others  to  speak,  but  it  may  not  be  improper  to  say,  that  he, 
has  studied  clearness,  freshness,  force,  and  precision. 

All  imperfect  as  the  offering  is,  the  author,  with  trembling  hand,  now  lays 
it  on  the  altar  to  Him  who,  he  believes,  has  suggested  not  a  few  of  its  words  to 
his  pen,  if  thereby  a  little  moonlight  be  shed,  on  what  has  so  long  been  regarded 
as  a  field  less  fruitful  than  most  others  in  the  great  world  of  Bible  truth,  and  a 
glimpse  be  got  of  its  abounding  fertility  and  unsearchable  riches. 

J.  P.  MILLAR, 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY 


ON 


JUDGES. 


INTRODUCTION. 

The  authorship  of  the  book  of  Judges  is  unknown.  It  has  been  ascribed 
to  Samuel,  to  Hezekiah,  and  to  Ezra.  Each  of  these  names  represents  a  mere 
conjecture,  while  the  last  two  are  at  variance  with  the  internal  evidence  of  the 
book.  Jewish  tradition  points  to  Samuel  as  the  writer.  Dr.  Cassel,  having 
regard  to  the  office  of  historian,  or  recorder,  in  the  royal  household,  set  forth  in 
such  passages  as  2  Sam.  viii.  16,  1  Kings  iv.  3,  2  Kings  xviii.  18,  37,  hazards 
the  conjecture  that  the  author  may  have  been  "a  Benjaminite  of  the  court  of 
Saul."  Gesenius  says  of  this  particular  post,  "  A  similar-  officer  is  mentioned 
in  the  royal  court  of  Persia  both  anciently  and  in  modern  times,  amongst  whom 
he  is  called  Waka  Nuwish,  and  also  in  that  of  the  Roman  Emperors  Arcadius 
and  Honorius,  and  afterwards,  bearing  the  name  of  magistri  memorice." 

The  date  of  the  book  must  be  placed  somewhere  between  the  beginning  of 
SauPs  reign  and  the  conquest  of  the  Jebusites  by  David.  It  was  obviously 
written  a  considerable  time  after  Samson's  victory  at  Lehi  (xv.  19),  and  after 
the  Israelites  had  become  familiar  with  kingly  rule  (xvii.  6  ;  xviii.  1  ;  xix.  1  ;  xxL 
25).  On  the  other  hand,  it  was  apparently  written  before  Davi<l  had  taken 
Jerusalem  (i.  21  ;  2  Sam.  v.  6-9).  These  considerations  are  set  aside  by  some 
of  the  German  writers,  and  in  the  article  on  "  Judges"  in  Smith's  Bib.  Diet. 
The  latter  assumes  that  there  were  several  authors,  and  a  final  author  and 
editor  after  the  Assyrian  captivity,  and  then  proceeds  to  state  :  "  There  is 
some  doubt  as  to  xviii.  30.  It  is  thought  by  some  to  refer  to  the  Philistine 
oppression.  But  it  seems  more  probable  that  the  Assyrian  captivity  is  intended, 
in  which  case  the  writer  must  have  lived  after  721  B.C.  The  whole  book,  there- 
fore, must  have  taken  its  present  shape  after  that  date."  Thus,  a  "  doubtlul"  passage 
is  considered  sufficient  for  an  unhesitating  conclusion,  and  that  notwithstanding 
other  very  weighty  internal  evidence  to  the  contrary,  and  this  easy  process 
towards  such  a  decision  is  all  begun  and  ended  within  the  space  of  a  dozen 
lines.  On  the  question  of  several  authors,  without  which,  of  course,  the  verse 
chap.  i.  21  must  be  held  to  be  conclusive,  Keil  remarks  :  "  The  arguments 
adduced  against  the  unity  of  authorship  in  all  three  parts,  the  introduction, 
the  body  of  the  work,  and  the  appendices,  will  not  bear  examination.  Without 
the  introduction  (chap.  i.  1,  iii.  6),  the  historical  narrative  contained  in  tlie  book 
would  want  a  foundation,  which  is  absolutely  necessary  to  make  it  intelligible ; 
and  the  two  appendices  supply  two  supplements  of  the  greatest  importance  in 
relation  to  the  development  of  the  tribes  of  Israel  in  the  time  of  the  Judges, 
and  most  intimately  connected  with  the   design   and  plan  of  the  rest  of  il'.e 

4  I 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES, 


book.  .  .  .  All  these  portions  are  just  as  rich  in  allusions  to  the  Mosaic  law 
and  the  legal  worship  as  the  other  parts  of  the  book,  so  that  both  in  their 
contents  and  their  form  they  would  be  unintelligible  apart  from  the  supremacy 
of  tlie  law  in  Israel.  The  discrepancies  which  some  fancy  they  have  discovered 
between  chap.  i.  8  and  chap.  i.  21,  and  also  between  chap.  i.  19  and  chap.  iii.  3, 
vanish  completely  on  a  correct  interpretation  of  the  passages  themselves.  And 
no  such  differences  can  be  pointed  out  in  language  or  style  as  would  overthrow 
the  unity  of  authorship  or  even  render  it  questionable."  In  addition  to  this,  the 
phrase  "  until  the  day  of  the  captivity  of  the  land,"  in  chap,  xviii.  30,  is  far 
more  satisfactorily  explained  by  the  successive  victories  of  the  Philistines,  cul- 
minating in  the  gi*eat  overthrow  at  Ebenezer,  than  it  is  by  referring  it  to  the 
great  captivity  in  Assyria.     A  few  considerations  will  make  this  apparent. 

1.  The  next  verse,  chap,  xviii.  31,  limits  the  30th  verse  to  **the  time  that 
the  house  of  God  was  in  Shiloh,"  till  which  day  only  the  sons  of  Jonathan 
ininistered  before  Micah's  graven  image. 

2.  If  the  time  of  the  Assyrian  captivity  is  meant,  this  gross  idolatry  at  the 
city  of  Dan  must  have  been  carried  on  in  defiance  of  all  Israel,  at  least  in  the 
time  of  David.  The  completeness  of  David's  dominion  in  Israel,  and  his  hatred 
of  idolatry,  alone  render  this  supposition  an  utterly  untenable  contradiction. 
Besides,  if  Micahism  lasted  for  nearly  700  years,  and  these  sons  of  Jonathan 
remained  ceaselessly  its  priests,  it  is  reasonable  to  ask.  How  ig  it  that  during 
those  seven  centuries  we  never  again  hear  of  either  it  or  them?  True,  the 
Speaker's  Commentary  intimates  that  we  do  hear  of  the  men  again  in  1  Kings 
xii.  31,  in  the  phrase  "the  priests  which  were  not  of  the  sons  of  Levi."  But 
this  is  in  spite  of  the  statement  that  Jeroboam  ^^made"  these  very  priests  "of 
the  lowest  of  the  people ;  "  and  on  this  verse  in  Kings,  so  far  from  venturing  to 
renew  its  statement  made  on  Judg.  xviii.  30,  the  commentary  forgets  itself, 
and  says  :  "  As  Levites  were  not  to  be  had,  Jeroboam  set  up  his  new  order  of 
priests,  taken  indifferently  from  all  the  tribes."  This  is  very  unlike  *'the  sons  of 
Jonathan,"  who  in  the  passage  on  Judges  are  made  to  seem  "  priests  of  the 
worship  of  the  golden  calf  which  Jeroboam  established  at  Dan." 

The  supposition,  made  alone  from  these  two  verses  (xviii.  30,  31),  that 
after  the  removal  of  the  ark  from  Shiloh  the  sons  of  Jonathan  became  priests 
of  some  new  form  of  idolatry,  instead  of  Micahism,  is  too  forced  and  unnatural 
to  be  admitted.  It  is  obviously  suggested  merely  as  a  means  of  finding 
employment  for  these  continuous  priests,  and  is  so  entirely  foreign  to  anything 
which  the  verses  say  that  it  can  only  be  regarded  as  an  entirely  unfounded  and 
to  some  extent  contradictory  conjecture.  As  Du  Pin  long  since  remarked,  **  The 
priests  which  the  Danites  made  were  the  priests  of  Micah's  idol.  They  lasted 
no  longer  than  their  image  did,  and  their  priesthood  ended  with  it." 

3.  The  whole  of  the  main  narrative  in  the  book  of  Judges  tends  to  offer  a 
sufficient  explanation  of  the  phrase,  "  the  captivity  of  the  land,"  and  Scripture 
phraseology  elsewhere  (of.  Ps.  Ixxviii.  61)  is  in  harmony  with  treating  the 
domination  of  the  Philistines  as  the  period  to  which  reference  is  made.  The 
Hebrew,  y^Kn  T)\b^  US"'^!^  (dd  y6m  g'ldth  hd-drets),  means  literally,  "  Until 

the  day  of  the  exile  of  the  land."  But,  as  Dr.  Cassel  has  excellently  argued, 
this  is  an  expression  which  cannot  be  interpreted  literally,  and  is  sufficiently 
unnatural  to  have  suggested  to  many  a  transcriber's  error.  Consequently 
Kimchi,  and  other  Jewish  authorities,  long  since  proposed  to  read  ]i"^^<^T  {hd-drdn)^ 

"  the  ark,"  that  is,  the  ark  of  the  Covenant,  instead  of  yiKil  {hdrdrets)^  a  read- 
ing supported  by  Houbigant  and  even  Ewald.  But,  in  any  case,  the  expression 
must  be  interpreted  in  more  or  less  of  a  figurative  sense,  and  may  well  be 
allowed  to  refer  to  the  captivity  of  the  ark,  and  thus  of  all  Israel,  even  as  it 
stands  in  the  text. 

% 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDQS8, 


The  chronology  of  the  period  embraced  by  the  various  Judges  is  /ery 
uncertain.  The  following  table  by  Professor  Keil  is  thought  by  many  to  present 
one  of  the  best  approximate  views  of  this  question. 

Principal  Events  from  the  Exodus  to  the  Building  op 

Solomon's  Temple. 


EVENTS. 

Years  of 
Duration. 

Date  B.O. 

The  Exodus  from  Egypt 

1492 

The  Law  given  at  Sinai    ....•••• 

... 

1492-1491 

Death  of  Aaron  and  Moses,  after  the  Exodui     .... 

40 

1453 

Conquest  of  Canaan  by  Joshua 

7 

1452-1445 

Division  of  the  land  to  the  invasion  by  Cushan-Rishathaim 

10 

1445-1435 

Death  of  Joshua,  about  B.C.  1442 

Wars  against  the  Canaanites,  from  B.C.  1442  onwards 

War  of  the  tribes  with  Benjamin,  about  B.C.  1436    .         . 

Oppression  by  Cushan-Rishathaim    .         ,         .         ,        ,         , 

8 

1435-1427 

Deliverance  by  Othniel,  and  rest       .         .         ,        , 

40 

1427-1387 

Oppression  by  the  Moabites       .         •         •         • 

18 

1387-1369 

Deliverance  by  Ehud,  and  rest          .         .        •        , 

80 

1369-1289 

Shamgar's  victory  over  Philistines          •        , 

Oppression  by  Jabin          ..,.,, 

20 

1289-1269 

Deliverance  by  Deborah  and  Barak,  and  rest    •        , 

40 

1269-1229 

Oppression  by  the  Midianites 

7 

1229-1222 

Deliverance  by  Gideon,  and  rest       •        •        •        ■ 

40 

1222-1182 

Rule  of  Abimelech   ..••••« 

3 

1182-1179 

Tola,  judge , 

23 

1179-1156 

Jair,  judge  (coinciding  with  first  20  years  of  Eli) 

22 

1156-1134 

SYNCHRONOUS  EVENTS. 

In  the  East.                                  In  the  Wi 

:ST. 

Ammonite  oppression,  18  years  ;    Philistine  oppression     , 

40 

1134-1094 

from  1134  to  1116  B.C.                        Last  20  years  of  Eli 

1134-1114 

Jephtbaii,  judge  6  years ;                       First  20  years  of  Samuel 

1114-1094 

from  1116  to  1110  B.a                       Samson's  deeds 

1116-1096 

Izban,  judge  7  years  ;                              Defeat  of  the  Philistines 

1094 

from  1110  to  1103  B.O.                Samuel,  judge 

19 

1094-1075 

Elon,  judge  10  years ;                      Saul,  king    .... 

20 

1075-1055 

from  ]  103  to  1093  B.a                David,  king  at  Hebron  . 

7 

1055-1048 

Abdon,  judge  8  years  ;                     David,  king  at  Jerusalem 

33 

1048-1015 

from  1093  to  1085  B.a                Solomon,   to  the  building  of  ) 

the  Temple       .        •        .  { 

3 

1015-1012 
rs. 

Total 

•        • 

480  yea 

With  this  table  compare  Judg.  xi.  26 ;  1  Sam.  viii.  1,  xii.  2 ;  1  King  vl  1  ; 
Acts  xiii.  20. 

The  short  period  assigned  by  the  table  from  the  time  of  the  division  of  the 
land  to  the  invasion  by  Cushan-Kishathaim  seems,  however,  inadmissible,  not- 
witb.standing  the  arguments  to  the  contrary  of  Professors  Bachmann  and  Bliss. 
As  has  been  frequently  pointed  out,  this  short  term  of  ten  years  would  require 
Joshua  to  have  been  one  hundred  years  old  at  the  time  of  the  conquest  of  the 
land,  it  would  leave  too  little  room  for  Josh,  xxiii.  1  ;  it  would  allow  no 
sufficient  space  to  answer  to  the  expression,  "  Israel  served  the  Lord  all  the  days 
of  the  elders  who  outlived  Joshua  "  (Josh.  xxiv.  31,  Judg.  ii.  7),  nor  would 
it  allow  any  time  for  the  decline  of  piety  as  noted  in  Judg.  iii.  7,  8.  The  time 
allowed  for  the  administration  of  Samuel  and  Saul  also  appears  to  be  insufficient. 

9 


HO  MI  LET IC  COMMENT AltT:  JUDGES, 


The  plan  of  tlie  book  may  stand  thus : — Preface,  chaps.  i.-iii.  4  ;  History 
of  the  Judges,  chaps,  iii.  5 — xvi  ;  Supplementary  Narratives  :  {a)  The  story  of 
Micah  and  the  Danite  expedition,  chaps,  xvii.,  xviii. ;  (6)  the  story  of  the  Levite 
and  the  overthrow  of  the  Benjaminites,  chaps.  xix.-xxi.  ;  (c)  the  story  of  Ruth, 
which  in  ancient  copies  of  the  Hebrew  text  was  always  included  in  this  book. 
Of  the  separate  parts  of  the  book  as  it  now  stands,  only  the  first  needs  atten- 
tion here.  What  is  the  true  relation  of  the  preface,  or  introduction,  to  the  book 
of  Joshua  which  precedes  it,  and  to  that  of  the  Judges  which  follows  ? 

The  object  of  the  preface  is,  mainly,  a  threefold  one.  {a)  We  are  reminded 
in  chap.  i.  1  that  "  after  the  death  of  Joshua"  there  still  remained  "very  much 
land  to  be  possessed."  This  agrees  with  Josh.  xiv.  1,  and  the  subsequently 
peaceful  years  of  Joshua's  life,  {h)  We  are  told  of  the  backwardness  of  the 
Israelites  to  cast  out  the  Canaanites,  as  God  had  commanded  (chap  i.  21,  27 — 
36).  To  this  general  backwardness  of  the  people  to  do  the  will  of  the  Lord 
there  were  at  first  three  honourable  exceptions.  Judah,  and  Simeon,  and  Joseph 
endeavoured  to  complete  their  conquests  (chaps,  i.  3-7,  17-20,  22-25),  and  it 
is  specially  noticed  that  "  Jehovah  was  with"  these  men  in  their  early  endeavours 
to  be  faithful  (chap.  i.  4,  22).  In  noticing  the  appointed  military  mission  of 
Judah  (chap.  i.  2),  a  long  parenthesis  is  used  to  tell  us  of  the  honourable  place 
which  Judah  had  already  occupied  in  the  previous  war^  under  Joshua.  This  paren- 
thesis extends,  inclusively,  from  ver.  8  to  ver.  16  of  chap.  i.  In  it,  a  retrospect 
is  purposely  taken  of  Judah's  conspicuous  prowess  in  the  past  conflicts,  and 
especially  those  of  Judah's  great  leader,  the  faithful  Caleb.  But  for  all  this 
past  prowess,  and  though  '*the  Lord  was  with  Judah"  as  long  as  Judah  faith- 
fully trusted  and  fought,  yet  even  Judah  became  timid,  and  unbelieving,  and 
inert  before  the  chariots  of  iron  possessed  by  the  dwellers  in  the  valley,  (c)  The 
third  main  object  of  this  preface  is  to  show  us  that  out  of  the  general  backward- 
ness and  unbelief  of  the  tribes  in  casting  out  the  Canaanites,  there  grew  up  a 
sinful  spirit  in  other  matters  also.  Failing  to  do  God's  will,  the  people  began 
to  have  no  regard  to  God.  They  served  other  gods  (chaps,  ii.  1 1-23  ;  iii.  1-4). 
At  the  point  where  the  Lord's  chastisement  by  Chusan-Rishathaim  overtook 
the  Israelites, they  had  actually  begun  to  marry  the  Canaanites  (iii.  5-7).  Thus 
the  author  of  the  book  shows  us,  in  these  first  two  chapters,  the  circumstances 
which  gradually  led  to  Jehovah's  chastisements,  and  to  the  raising  up  of  the 
various  Judges  of  deliverance,  of  whose  exploits  the  book  gives  an  account. 
In  the  second  chapter,  even  as  in  the  first,  there  is  a  long  parenthesis.  After 
the  words  of  Jehovah's  rebuke  at  Bochim,  the  author,  in  a  passage  extending 
from  ver.  6  to  ver.  10,  reminds  us  that  there  had  been  no  such  need  foi'  God's  rebuke 
and  Israels  tears  in  the  days  of  Joshua,  nor  even  in  the  days  of  the  Elders.  These 
two  parentheses — one  in  either  chapter — and  the  object  for  which  they  are 
inserted,  should  be  distinctly  kept  in  mind  if  we  would  not  have  both  chapters 
a  maze  of  involved  statements  and  of  inextricable  confusion.  Read  in  the 
light  suggested,  they  become  a  valuable  and  necessary  introduction  to  the 
understanding  of  the  main  narrative.  For  want  of  some  clearer  apprehension  of 
the  purpose  of  the  author  of  this  book.  Lord  Arthur  Hervey,  the  Bishop  of  Bath 
and  Wells,  in  the  Speaker's  Commentary,  has  written  a  laboured  and  confused 
note  of  great  length,  in  which  he  assumes,  as  a  matter  of  course,  that  the  Gilgal 
of  chap.  ii.  1  was  the  Gilgal  near  Jericho,  rather  than  Jiljilia,  "in  the  plains  of 
Moreh,"  and  very  near  to  Shi'oh ;  and  in  which,  mainly  from  this  assumption, 
and  from  neglecting  the  twt>  parentheses,  he  concludes  that  "the  events  in 
chaps  i.  and  ii.  1-6  all  belong  to  Joshua's  lifetime,"  and  assigns  the  transaction 
at  Bochim  "  to  the  early  part  of  Joshua's  government, "  notwithstanding  the 
contradiction  which  ii.  2  would  then  ofier  to  ii.  7.  The  note,  moreover,  closes 
with  the  somewhat  curious  suggestion  that  chap.  i.  1  "might  have  originally 
begun,  *  Now  after  the  death  of  Moses.'  " 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES,  OHAF.  L 


The  spirit  and  purpose  of  the  book  demand,  also,  a  short  notice.  With  a 
series  of  historial  records  that  deal  with  the  sin  and  degradation  of  men  in  very 
extreme  forms,  the  moral  influence  and  spiritual  teaching  of  the  book  are  no 
less  Divine  than  the  Scriptures  elsewhere.  All  through,  the  voice  that  speaks 
to  the  generations  following,  is  the  voice  of  God.  Four  things  are  especially 
worthy  of  notice  : — {a)  God's  determinate  repression  of  sin  in  His  oivn  people,  even 
as  in  others.  From  the  warning  at  Bochim,  to  the  beginning  of  the  Lord's 
chastisement  by  Cushan-Kishathaim,  and  on  to  the  end  of  the  narrative  recording 
the  punishment  of  Benjamin,  we  are  made  to  see  that  the  Lord's  people  can 
no  more  sin  with  impunity  than  Canaanites  themselves.  (Jb)  God's  merciful 
forgiveness  of  men  when  they  repent  of  siru  This  is  emphatically  set  forth  in  many 
conspicuous  instances.  In  fact,  the  book  is  one  continued  panorama,  in  which 
man's  sin,  God's  chastisement,  man's  penitence  and  God's  pardon,  are  ever 
passing  before  our  eyes,  (c)  God's  gracious  condescension  towards  men  who  live  in 
dark  and  ignorant  times.  Nothing  is  more  beautiful,  all  through  the  book,  than 
the  way  in  which  the  Divine  love  and  mercy  stoop  to  man's  very  low  condi- 
tion. The  Angel  of  the  Covenant,  long  before  He  becomes  incarnate  and  speaks 
to  us  as  in  Luke  x.  30-37,  is  here  also  the  **  Good  Samaritan,"  ever  yearning  to 
help  the  wounded,  and  ever  coming  to  them  where  they  are.  (d)  Finally,  we  see 
here  the  gradual  furtherance  of  God's  purpose,  notwithstanding  marCs  unfaithfulness 
and  sin.  The  misery  of  the  people  under  the  rule  of  the  Judges  presently  made 
way  for  the  kings,  who  had  been  long  before  predicted  (Deut.  xvii.  14,  15) ; 
the  kings,  among  others,  contained  David,  *'  the  man  after  God's  own  heart," 
while  under  their  various  reigns  prophets  predicted  the  coming  of  '*  the  Son  of 
David."  Then  the  monarchy  in  its  turn  failed,  the  people  were  carried  into 
and  brought  back  from  the  Assyrian  captivity,  the  prophets  died,  and  in  the 
great  silence  and  desolation  and  sorrow  which  forthwith  settled  upon  the  once 
favoured  land,  the  world  found  its  fittest  preparation  for  the  advent  of  its 
only  true  Saviour  and  for  the  final  government  and  reign  of  its  everlasting 
Lord  and  King.  Thus,  amid  the  very  ruins  wrought  by  man's  sin.  Divine 
grace  finds  its  opportunity  to  lay  the  foundations  of  the  kingdom  that  has  no 
end. 


CHAPTER  L 

FAITHFULNESS  AND  UNFAITHFULNESS  IN  THE  LORD'S  WAR, 

Critical  Notes. — 1.  Now  after  the  death  of  Joshua.]  The  Speaker's  Commentary  says  on 
these  opf-ning  words:  "But  from  i.  1  to  ii.  9  is  a  consecutive  narrative,  ending  with  the 
death  of  Joshua.  It  is  therefore  impossible  that  it  should  begin  with  the  death  of  Joshua."  This  is 
obviously  incorrect.  "  A  consecutive  narrative  "  is  precisely  what  these  two  chapters  are  not ; 
they  are  a  narrative  containing  two  long  parentheses  (cf.  Introduction.)  It  is  not  necessary  to 
offer  any  remark  on  the  suggestion  of  the  Commentary  that,  under  certain  circumstances,  "the 
chapter  might  have  begun,  Noio  after  the  death  of  Moses  ;^*  and  that,  '*  If  Moses  is  read  instead 
oi  Joshua,  all  difficulty  disappears  at  once."  This,  in  the  face  of  chap.  ii.  2  and  ii.  7,  is  un- 
answerable from  its  innocence.  2.  Who  shall  go  up  for  us  against  the  Canaanites?]  Heb.^ 
•'Who  shall  go  up  for  us  to  the  Canaanites  ? "  the  purpose  of  the  going  up  being  stated  in  the 
words,  *'  to  fight  against  them."  **  The  reason  why  Judah  was  to  commence  the  hostilities  is  not 
to  be  sought  for  in  the  fact  that  Judah  was  the  most  numerous  of  all  the  tribes,  but  rather  in 
the  fact  that  Judah  had  already  been  appointed  by  the  blessing  of  Jacob  (Gen.  xlix.  8-10)  to 
be  the  champion  of  his  brethren."  [Keil.'\  3.  Gome  up  with  me  into  my  lot.]  This  invita- 
tion must  have  been  given  to  Simeon  while  the  tribe  of  Ju(i;ih  was  located  in  its  own  lot,  though 
not  in  full  possession  of  it.  It  is  unnatural  to  suppose  with  Professor  Cassel  that  when  Judah 
gave  this  invitation  to  Simeon  both  tribes  were  dwelling  at  Gilgal,  near  Jericho,  and  that  the 
Canaanites  were  in  full  possession  of  the  territory  assigned  to  Judah  and  Simeon.  This  would 
be  to  conclude  that  Joshua's  conquest  of  the  south  had  almost  entirely  failed,  and  that  during 
Joshua's  own  lifetime,  and  is  altogether  at  variance  with  Josh.  xv.  13-19,  63,  xviii.  1,  xxi. 
43-45,  xxii.  4,  xxiii.  1,  xxiv.  28,  and,  kideed,  to  the  whole  of  the  latter  half  of  that  book. 

0 


CHAP.  I.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES, 


The  request  for  Simeon  to  aid  in  conquering  the  Canaanites  in  the  lot  of  Judah,  made  under 
the  promise  that  Judah  would  similarly  assist  the  tribe  of  Simeon  in  their  lot,  shows  that  the 
men  of  Judah  were  only  appointed  to  recommence  hostilities  on  their  own  account.  Thus,  tho 
phrase,  ** for  us,"  in  ver.  1,  must  not  be  taken  to  mean  that  the  Judahites  were  to  make  war 
on  behalf  of  all  the  tribes,  but  that,  after  the  death  of  Joshua,  they  were  to  begin,  in  their  own 
tribe,  to  fulfil  the  commands  of  the  Lord,  and  thus  set  an  example  of  faithfulness  to  all  Israel. 
4,  The  Periazites.]  The  Canaanites  and  Perizzites  are  occasionally  put  for  all  the  inhabitants 
of  the  land,  and  the  latter  are  spoken  of,  not  simply  as  dwellers  in  the  South,  as  here,  but  in 
all  parts  of  the  land  (Gen.  xiii.  7,  xxxiv.  30;  Josh.  xi.  3,  xvii.  15.)  Dr.  Kalisch says,  "The 
etymology  of  the  word  'Perizzite'  proves  that  they  were  the  inhabitants  of  open  towns  and 
villages  (Jl^TID  pWdzoth\  ;  it  is  clearly  explained  by  Ezek.  ixxviii.  11  to  denote  the  popula- 
tion of  places  *  without  walls  and  bars  and  gates;'  and  it  is,  in  Esther  ix.  19,  used  for  the 
unfenced  cities,  in  contradistinction  to  the  metropolis  named  in  ver.  18.  The  two  names  of 
the  Canaanites  and  Perizzites,  if  so  coupled,  designate,  therefore,  both  the  inhabitants  of  the 
walled  towns  and  of  the  open  country;  and  describe,  with  a  certain  emphasis,  the  two  chief 
portions  of  the  population."  InBezek.]  "According  to  the  Onomast.  there  were  at  that  time 
two  places  very  near  together  both  named  Bezek,  seventeen  Roman  miles  from  Neapolia  on  the 
road  to  Scythopolis,  i.e.y  about  seven  hours  to  the  north  of  Nabulus  on  the  road  to  Beisan. 
This  description  is  perfectly  reconcilable  with  1  Sam.  xi.  8."  [ZetZ.]  8.  Now  the  children  of 
Judah  had  fought,  &c.]  Heh.  =  ^^  fought,'^  the  pluperfect  form  not  being  given  in  the  original. 
Still,  the  seu&e  {&,**  they  formerly  fought,"  **  they  had  fought."  A  similar  use  of  the  past  for 
the  pluperfect  has  been  noticed  under  Josh.  viii.  12.  For  the  time  when  Judah  had  fought 
against  Jerusalem  we  may  refer  to  Josh,  xii.  8,  10,  when,  though  the  king  was  slain,  the 
strongholds  of  the  city  were  not  fully  possessed  (Josh.  xv.  63).  As  Mr.  Groser  observes,  "  It 
is  inconsistent  to  suppose  that  Adoni-bezek  was  carried  into  a  city  which  his  captors  had  just 
taken  and  set  on  fire."  This  eighth  verse  begins  a  parenthesis  which  extends  to  the  close  of  ver. 
16.  The  main  object  of  the  parenthesis  is  to  show  the  conspicuous  valour  and  fidelity  which 
Judah,  whom  the  Lord  had  just  chosen  (ver.  2),  had  already  displayed  in  previous  conflicts. 
The  reference  to  Jerusalem  in  the  close  of  ver.  7,  naturally  suggests  the  beginning  of  the 
parenthesis  as  in  ver.  8.  After  the  parenthetic  account  of  Judah's  faithful  courage  at  Jerusalem 
and  Hehron,  and  after  the  author's  record  that  the  children  of  the  Kenite  had  settled  in  the 
wilderness  of  Judah,  the  history  of  the  expedition  of  Judah  and  Simeon  is  resumed.  This 
explanation  gives  a  perfect  sense,  and  in  no  way  disturbs  the  record  in  the  book  of  Joshua. 
Peter  Martyr  and  Richard  Rogers  long  since  contended  for  this  parenthesis  as  the  correct 
exposition  of  the  local  value  of  tlie  several  verses.  9 — 15.  And  afterward,  &c.]  Cf.  on  Josh.  xv. 
14-19.  16.  The  children  of  the  Kenite.]  The  Kenites  are  first  mentioned  in  Gen.  xv.  19. 
They  were  either  a  tribe  of  Midianites,  or  a  people  who,  having  long  before  the  Exodus 
settled  in  the  land  of  Midian,  had  established  themselves  there  in  some  strength.  Exod.  ii, 
16  may  mean  that  Reuel,  or  Jethro,  was  only  a  prince  or  priest  of  Kenites  who  had  settled  in 
the  land  of  Midian  ;  or  he  and  his  people  may  have  been  descendants  of  Abraham  by  Keturah, 
and  thus  a  branch  of  the  Midianites  themselves.  Numb.  x.  29  favoura  the  latter  conjecture, 
Reuel  being  distinctly  called  **  the  Midianite."  In  the  time  of  Barak,  a  branch  of  these 
Kenites  are  found  as  settlers  near  Kedesh-Naphtali,  by  the  Lake  of  Merom,  or  el  HUleh,  17, 
And  Judah  went  with  Simeon.] 

The  history  is  here  resumed,  after  the  digression  (vers.  8-16).  Zephath  or  Hormah.]  The 
latter  name,  meaning  " a  devoting**  was  evidently  given  to  Zephath  on  account  of  the  ban  of 
destruction,  for  the  second  time  executed  here  (cf.  Numb.  xxi.  1-3,  and  Com.  on  Josh,  xii, 
14).  The  LXX.  have  ^Avdde/xa.  "Now  Sebaita,  a  large  deserted  town  situated  in  a  large 
plain  at  the  foot  of  the  Magrdh  mountains,  and  not  far  from  the  head  of  the  Wady  el  Ahaydh, 
Five  miles  off  is  an  old  fort,  on  a  steep  hill.  Perhaps  this  is  the  *  watch-tower'  from  which 
the  place  derived  its  name.  This  discovery  was  made  by  Professor  Phlmer  and  the  late  Mr. 
Tyrwhitt  Drake."  [Oroser.'^  18.  Qaza.  .  .  Askelon.  .  .  Ekron.]  Cf.  on  Josh.  xi.  22,  xiii, 
3.  After  the  conquest  of  these  places  by  Joshua,  they  appear  to  have  been  re-occupied  by  the 
Canaanites.  This  is  specially  said  of  Gaza,  Gath,  and  Ashdod,  even  in  the  time  of  Joshua 
(Josh.  xi.  22).  After  events  and  statements  show  that  the  present  subjugation  was  as  imperfect 
as  the  former  ( Judg.  xi  v.  19,  xvi.  2,  &c.).  19.  Could  not  drive  out.]  They  were  "  not  to  he  driven 
out,"     "  The  expression  •')^3>  ^^7  {to  ydch'lu),  *  they  could  notf'  is  purposely  avoided.     They 

would  have  been  quite  able  when  God  was  with  them ;  but  when  it  came  to  a  contest  with  iron 
chariots  their  faith  faileil  them."      [Cassel.]    The  inhabitants  of  the  valley.]    pD^H    ^ot 

tw^Wn   as  in  ver.  9  of  this  chapter.     **  Umek  is  not  applied  to  ravines,  but  to  the  long  broad 


J 


sweeps  sometimes  found  between  parallel  ranges  of  hills."  [Dean  Stanley.]  Thus  "the  valley** 
would  be  suitable  for  the  use  of  the  chariots.  20.  And  they  gave  Hebron  unto  Caleb.]  Thii 
is  repeated  for  the  same  purpose  as  the  repetition  in  the  parenthesis  (vera.  8-16),  namely,  to 
show  Judah's  general  faithiulness  towards  God  and  Israel,  This  faithfulness  in  fulfilling  the 
Lord's  words,  is  given  as  an  explanation  of  the  Lord's  choice  in  ver.  2, — "Judah  shall  go  up." 
21.  Unto  this  day.]  Therefore  this  book  was  written  before  the  expulsion  of  the  Jebusites  by 
David  (but  cf.  Introduction).  "Jerusalem  was  a  border  city.  In  Josh,  xv,  63  we  read  that 
6 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES,  ohap.  I 


the  Jndaliites  did  not  expel  the  Jebusites  from  the  upper  city,  or  Zion ;  here  we  are  told  that 
the  warlike  Benjaminitea  failed  to  do  so.  There  is  no  need  to  suppose  an  alteration  in  the  text. 
This  shows  that  ver.  8  records  only  the  capture  of  the  lower  city."  [Oroser.'\  23.  The  name  of 
the  city  before  wasLuz.]  Cf.  on  Josh.  xvi.  2,  Preacher's  Commentary,  pp.  267,  270.  In  these 
rerses  it  is  shown  that  the  children  of  Joseph  also,  like  those  of  Judah,  began,  after  the  death 
of  Jcshua,  faithfully  to  execute  the  word  of  the  Lord.  But  vers.  27-29  tell  us  that  this  fidelity 
was  only  very  partial.  They  soon  ceased  to  obey  Jehovah,  and  "put  the  Canaanites  to  tribute." 
27-29.  Neither  did  Manasseh,  &c.]  The  condition  of  unbelieving  inactivity  noticed  of 
Manasseh  in  Josh.  xvii.  11-13,  and  of  Ephraim  in  Josh.  xvi.  10,  is  here  shown  to  have  continued 
to  the  time  of  the  opening  of  the  history  in  the  book  of  Judges.  Thus  the  latter  part  of  this 
chapter  does  something  more  than  show  **  the  identity  of  the  transactions  referred  to  "  in  the 
book  of  Joshua.  It  shows  that  iht  want  of  faithful  and  vigorous  transactions  noticed  there, 
remained  to  be  noticed  several  years  later.  It  is  precisely  this  perpetuated  inaction  which  leads 
to  the  further  sins  and  the  subsequent  calamities  of  which  the  book  of  Judges  gives  tlie  liistory. 
It  is  in  this  light  that  ciiaps.  i.  and  ii.  become  a  very  pertinent  introduction  to  the  whole 
of  this  book.  34.  Forced  the  children  of  Dan  into  the  mountain.]  Probably  with  the  iron 
chariots  with  which  they  were  able  to  command  the  valley  or  more  level  ground  adjacent  to  the 
mountains.  Thus  were  the  Danites  straitened  for  room,  and  presently  led  to  seek  more  terri- 
tory, as  stated  in  chap,  xviii.  35.  In  Mount  Heres.]  Lit.:,  *'  The  mountain  of  the  sun^'^  or  **the 
aHd  mountain.'^'  Probably  so  named  in  connection  with  sun-worship,  and  the  same  as,  or 
adjacent  to,  Ir-Shemesh,  **  city  of  the  sun,^*  which  occurs  in  the  parallel  passage,  Josh.  xix.  41, 
and  called  Beth-shemesh,  *'  house  of  the  swn,"  in  Josh.  xv.  10,  1  Kings  iv.  9.  It  may  be  the 
modern  Ain-Shems,  about  seven  miles  from  Ekron,  though  this  seems  too  far  south  for  the  hand 
of  the  house  of  Joseph  to  have  been  heavy  upon  the  Amorites  there,  gradually  making  them 
tributary.  The  LXX.  curiously  render  the  first  part  of  the  verse,  **  And  the  Amorite  l)egan  to 
dwell  in  the  mountains  of  shells,  in  wiiich  are  bears  and  foxes."  36,  From  the  going  up  to 
Akrabbim.  Cf.  Numb,  xxxiv.  4,  and  remarks  on  Josh.  xv.  3.  Some  place  Akrabbim  ten  miles 
due  south  of  the  Dead  Sea,  and  others  at  the  Pass  es-Sufah,  somewhat  more  west.  From 
the  rock  and  upward.]  **  *  From  the  rock'  cannot  be  understood  as  relating  to  the  city  of 
Petra,  but  must  denote  some  other  locality  well  known  to  the  Israelites  by  that  name.  Such  a 
locality  there  undoubtedly  was  in  the  rock  in  the  desert  of  Zin,  which  had  become  celebrated 
through  the  events  that  took  place  at  the  Water  of  Strife  (Numb.  xx.  8,  10),  and  to  which,  in 
all  probability,  this  expression  refers.  The  rock  in  question  was  at  the  south-west  corner  of 
Canaan,  on  the  southern  edge  of  the  Rakhma  plateau,  to  which  the  mountains  of  the  Amorites 
extended  on  the  south-west  (cf.  Numb.  xiv.  25,  44,  45,  with  Deut.  i.  44)."  [Ke'd.']  A  line 
from  the  two  points  thus  described  is  here  said  to  have  formed,  probably,  the  original  southern 
boundary  of  the  Amorite  kingdom. 

MAIN  H0MILETIC8  OP  THE  PARAORAPH.-^Venti  1-4. 

Dead  Leaders  and  Living  Duties. 

One  generation  passeth  away  and  another  foUoweth.  The  book  of  Joshua 
began  with,  "  Now  after  the  death  of  Moses."  This  book  opens  with  the 
similar  words,  "  Now  after  the  death  of  Joshua."  Human  life  is  a  succession 
of  revolutions,  beginning  with  a  cradle  and  ending  with  a  coffin.  Generations 
and  individuals  have  in  them,  in  their  relation  to  other  generations  and  indi- 
viduals, much  of  variety,  but  something  also  of  monotony.  We  see  in  these 
opening  verses — 

L  A  great  leader  dead,  and  life's  duties  as  pressing  as  ever.    Joshua  had 

departed  from  Israel,  but  the  necessity  for  conflict  was  still  with  them.  Of 
that  the  people  now  made  no  question  whatever.  As  Peter  Martyr  observes, 
**  They  doubted  not  whether  they  should  make  war  against  the  Canaanites,  but 
their  doubt  was  which  tribe  should  fight  before  all  the  others."  That  the 
fighting  must  be  done  was  sufficiently  manifest  to  everybody.  Possibly  the 
death  of  Joshua  at  once  made  that  more  manifest  than  it  had  been  for  some 
time,  the  death  of  Israel's  mighty  captain  encouraging  their  enemies  to  bestir 
themselves.  1.  Let  who  will  and  what  will  pass  away,  our  own  work  only  passes 
with  our  own  life.  Joshua  himself  had  diligently  laboured  to  the  very  last. 
After  resting  from  war,  he  had  divided  the  land  ;  after  dividing  the  land,  he 
built  his  own  city  of  Timnath-serah,  and  appointed  the  cities  of  refuge  and 
those  of  the  Levites ;  while  the  very  close  ol    life  finds  him  twice  gathering 

7 


CHAP.  1.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES, 

together  and   earnestly  counselling   the   people  of  his   charge.     "  The  night 
cometh  when  no  man  can  work  ; "  till  it  come,  no  one  should  look  to  rest  from 
what  he  has  strength  to  perform.     In  God's  army  there  are  no  retired  officers, 
and  none  on  half-pay.     He  who  is  too  "  old  and  stricken  in  years  "  to  fight  as  he 
fought  when  younger  may  still  find  some  city  to  build,  and  some  of  his  fellows 
who  are  less  experienced  than  himself  to  whom  he  can  offer  holy  encourage- 
ment and  counsel.     He  who  began  by  saying,  '*  Wist  ye  not  that  I  must  be 
about  My  Father's  business,"  never  ceased  to  prosecute  that  business  till  He 
laid  down  His  life  upon  the  cross.    2.  The  advancement  of  God^s  purpose  is  depen- 
dent m  no  life  in  particular.     Though  the  great  leader  of  Israel  was  no  more,  the 
conquest  of  the  land  must  still  go  forward.     Just  as  the  advance  of  the  people 
was  not  formerly  stayed  by  the  death  of  Moses,  so  they  were  not  to  be  kept 
back  now  by  the  death  of  Joshua.     Only  God  is  necessary.     There  is  no  man 
who  cannot  be  spared  when  God's  time  comes  for  his  removal.    3.  Great  lives  are 
sometimes  removed  that  other  lives  may  better  feel  their  responsibility  and  cultivate  their 
strength.     Children  cannot  always  have  their  parents,  without  the  penalty  of 
always  remaining  children.     He  who  is  always  led  will  never  learn  to  lead.     It 
had  already  been  said  of  Jacob  :     "  As  an  eagle  stirreth  up  her  nest,  flut- 
tereth  over  her  young,  spreadeth  abroad  her  wings,  taketh  them,  beareth  them 
on  her  wings,  so  the  Lord  alone  did  lead  him,  and  there  was  no  strange  god  with 
him."     He  who  fears  he  may  fall  is  in  a  fair  way  to  learn  how  to  stand. 

n.  Human  direction  suddenly  failing,  and  Divine  guidance  specially  sought. 
"  After  the  death  of  Joshua,  the  cliildren  of  Israel  asked  the  Lord."  1.  Prayer 
prompted  by  the  removal  of  long  familiar  light.  Joshua  had  been  the  Lord's  uuide 
and  helper  for  the  people.  A  consciousness  of  increasing  darkness  around  us,  or 
within  us,  should  ever  prompt  us  to  come  as  near  as  possible  to  Him  who  is  the 
Light  of  the  world.  2.  Prayer  over  unfulfilled  commandments.  The  charge  to  cast 
out  the  Canaanites,  and  to  make  no  alliance  with  them,  had  been  very  solemnly 
given  by  God.  As  long  as  Joshua  was  alive,  he  was  the  responsible  head  of  the 
people.  When  Joshua  was  removed,  the  commandment  forthwith  became  so 
much  direct  obligation  resting  upon  every  Israelite.  Thus  burdened,  the 
people  drew  near  unto  God  for  counsel.  Corporate  duties  are  a  matter  for 
individual  concern  and  supplication.  That  which  is  a  national  obligation  affects 
also  every  citizen.  A  commandment  of  God  fulfilled  in  humble  obedience,  is  aa 
a  field  sown  with  good  seed,  which  will  presently  yield  a  harvest  of  blessing ;  a 
commandment  unfulfilled,  is  ever  tending  to  bring  forth  fruit  unto  our  discom- 
fort, and  sickness,  and  death.  He  who  neglects  the  Divine  precepts  is  in  sore 
need  of  prayer.  3.  Prayer  provoked  by  gathering  dangers.  The  death  of  Joshua 
was  very  probably  the  sign  for  increased  activity  among  the  Canaanites.  Adoni- 
bezek  had  evidently  gathered  a  large  army,  or  he  could  not  have  lost  in  one 
battle  ten  thousand  men.  4.  Prayer  far  God*s  appointment  of  our  post  in  life. 
"  Who  shall  jjo  up  1 "  An  appeal  to  God  to  assign  the  post  of  honour  to  whom 
He  would.  With  some,  it  may  have  been  an  appeal  to  God  in  the  hope  of  not 
being  chosen.  He  whom  God  exalts  should  wear  his  honours  meekly.  He 
whom  God  calls  to  battle  should  enter  into  conflict  without  fear.  5.  The  realism 
of  prayer  to  every  true-hearted  suppliant.  It  was  no  light  thing  to  ask  this  counsel 
of  God,  and  then  wait  for  a  categorical  and  manifest  answer.  All  true  prayer 
wants  real  courage.  When  a  man  knows  God  will  answer,  it  is  no  light  thing 
to  pray.  The  man  may  be  sent  to  the  battle-field.  He  may  be  deprived  of  a 
great  honour,  or  be  charged  with  an  arduous  duty.  Many  engage  in  what  they 
call  prayer,  who  would  not  dare  to  come  before  God  if  they  believed  that  He 
would  audibly  or  visibly  impose  His  commands  upon  them.  It  is  because  they 
never  expect  any  answer  that  myriads  are  bold  to  pray. 

III.  An  eminently  faithful  past  demanding  a  no  less  vigorous  tuture.    ^'  Judah 

8 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES.  chap.  I. 

shall  go  up."  As  the  verses  8-16  show,  the  Judahites  had  already  played  a 
conspicuous  part  in  those  more  detached  conflicts  which,  after  tlie  great  national 
battles,  had  fallen  to  the  separate  tribes.  They  had  taken  the  lower  city  of 
Jerusalem  (cf.  chap.  i.  8  with  i.  21,  and  Josh.  xii.  10),  and  under  the  lead  of 
Caleb  and  Othniel,  Hebron  and  Kirjath-sepher  had  both  fallen  before  their 
attack.  He  who  has  done  well  in  the  past  is  under  perpetual  obligation  to  do 
no  less  well  in  the  future.  God  also  chooses  those  for  new  duties  who  have 
best  served  in  the  past. 

IV.  God  specially  choosing  some  of  His  servants,  but  leaving  them  liberty  to 
seek  the  help  of  others.  "  And  Judah  said  unto  Simeon  his  brother,  Come 
up  with  me  into  my  lot."  1.  The  benefits  of  co-operation.  What  one  cannot  do, 
two  can.  What  one  can  only  do  with  difficulty,  two  can  do  easily.  No  one 
should  despise  the  assistance  of  his  brethren.  He  who  accepts  assistance 
should  be  willing  to  assist  others :  **  I  likewise  will  go  with  thee  into  thy  lot." 
This  mutual  help  one  of  another  becomes  strength  and  joy  to  both.  2.  The 
limits  of  co-operation.  Judah  might  only  seek  aid  from  his  own  brethren.  He 
might  ask  help  from  Simeon,  but  not  from  idolaters.  Cod  allows  us  to  unite 
with  all  who  are  our  brethren  in  Him,  but  He  will  suffer  no  union  with  the 
ungodly.  For  nothing  more  sharply  than  for  this  were  the  Israelites  rebuked 
in  the  time  of  the  monarchy. 

V.  The  Lord's  call  to  great  duties  followed  by  His  rich  blessing  on  those  who 
seek  faithfully  to  perform  them.  "The  Lord  delivered  the  Canaanites  and  the 
Perizzites  into  their  hand."  1.  God  calls  and  sends  none  of  His  servants  in  vain. 
To  be  set  to  work  by  Him,  is  to  be  set  to  work  which  will  be  presently  fruitful 
of  enlarged  possessions  and  greater  peace.  2.  God's  blessing  answers  to  His  own 
promise  of  blessing.  To  the  man  who  is  faithful,  the  Divine  promise  is  the 
shadow  which  the  actual  mercy,  in  its  coming  to  us,  casts  before.  Thus,  the 
words  of  promise  in  ver.  2,  herald  the  same  words,  as  history,  in  ver.  4.  3. 
God's  blessing  satisfies  His  people^s  highest  hopes.  If  this  was  so  with  Ju*lah  in 
his  earthly  possession,  much  more  will  it  be  true  in  relation  to  the  inheritance 
above. 

OUTLINES  AND  COMMENTS  ON  TEE  VERSES, 

Threatened  Danger  and  Anxious  Prayer. — Ferses  1,  2. 

It  is  thought  that   the  Canaanites  peace.     Probably  they  learned  to  in- 

were,  at  this  time,   preparing  to  act  terpret  this  interval  of  peace  as  a  sign 

on  the  offensive  against  the  Israelites,  of  Israel's   weakness.      Jehovah   had 

From  vers.  4-7,  it  would  appear  that  not  recently  done  many  mighty  works, 

large  numbers  of  warriors  had  again  They  mistook  the  visible  for  the  actual, 

ventured  to  mass  themselves  together.  Thousands   do   that   every    day   that 

Probably  Adoni-bezek  was  gathering  passes.     2.  The  Canaanites  seem  to  have 

his  forces  to  attack  the  southern  tribes  been  tempted  to  renew  the  war  by  Israel's 

of  the  recent  conquerors  of  the  land,  apparent  weakness.     The  time   of  the 

Regarded  in  this  light,  the  verses  may  weakness  of  the  Church  is  the  time 

be  treated  as  follows  : —  of  the  world's  boldness.     But  wicked 

I.  The  Lord's  enemies  threatening  ™®^  ^^^^^^  remember  the  God  of  the 

the  Lord's  people.     1.  Ths  Canaanites  9^''''^^  ;  rl  '^^^'m         .^^      t  I      T 
may  have  judged  Israel's  strength    by  done  and  I  kept  silence    says  Jehovah 
outward  appearances.     Joshua  was  now  H^  adds,  ''But  I  will  reprove  thee, 
dead.      The    able   soldier    could   act  The  silence  of  Jehovah  is  not  any  sign 
against  them  no  more.     But  they  for-  ^f  His  weakness, 
got  Joshua's  God.     Then,  the  Canaan- 
ites had  long  been  allowed  to  rest  in  XL   The   Lord's  people    driven  to 


CHAP.  L  HOMILETIC  COMMENT  A  R  Y  .  JUDQE8. 


prayer  by  danger.      "Israel  asked  of  thought  of  a  refusal.     They  had  no 

the  Lord."     The   removal  of  Joshua,  idea  that  God  would  be  silent.     Their 

and  the  bold  front  of  their  enemies,  brief  and  urgent  question  is  full  of  the 

made  them  ask  counsel  of  God.     His  faith  pressed  upon  the  Hebrews  of  a 

prayer  has  the  following  features  : —  later  generation  :  "  He  that  cometh  to 

1.  It  recognised  the  necessity  of  human  God   must  believe   that    He  is,   and 

eff(yrt.      "  Who  shall  go  up  ? "      Some  that  He  is  a  rewarder  of  them  that 

one  must  go.     God  will  not  so  work  diligently  seek  Him." 
as  to  save  us  from  conflict ;  He  thinks 

it   enough   to  turn   our   conflict  into  III.  The  Lord's  gracious  answer  to 

victory.     2.  It  was  a  simple  and  direct  His  people's  earnest  inquiry.     1,   The 

prayer.     It  had  no  redundancies  and  answer  was  prompt.     It  seems  to  have 

"  vain  repetitions. "    Men  in  deep  want  been  given  at  once.       2.  The  answer 

seldom  use  superfluous  sentences  and  was  clear.     It  left  no  one  in   doubt, 

phrases.     The  eloquence  of  prayer  is  "  Judah  shall  go  up."     3.  The  answer 

in  its  sense  of  need,  and  in  its  direct-  was  in  excess  of  the  prayer.    The  people 

ness.     3.  This  prayer  was  based  on  a  did  but  ask,  "  Who  shall  go  i "     God 

Icnown  command.    There  was  no  inquiry  both  answered  that,  and  gave  them  a 

as  to  the  work  being  a  duty,  but  only  gracious  promise  of  success  :  "  Behold, 

as  to  the  manner  in  which  the  duty  I  have   delivered  the   land   into   his 

was  to  be  done.     4.  The  prayer  mani-  hand."     4.   The  answer  was  sufficient, 

festly    anticipates  some    answer.      The  In   the    strength    of    God's   gracious 

words  of  the  inquiry  leave  no  impres-  words,  Judah  and  Simeon  went  on  to 

sion  that  the  suppliants  so  much  as  victory. 

"God,  Who  Giveth  to  All  Men  Liberally."— F^rs^  2. 

L  God  gives  to  all  who  ask.  III.  God  gives  fully  as  much  as  He 

TT    n  J           .                   .,  promises. 

n.  God  promises   more    than  we  jy^  ^^^^  ^^^h  promises  md  gives 


ask. 


according  to  our  need. 


Enticements  to  Prayer. 

**  God  gives  more  than  is  asked,  or  he  laid  for  their  lives.     But  what  did 

thought  needful.     The  which  dealing  the  Lord  1     He  not  only  saved  them, 

of  His  doth  add  yet  greater  hearten-  but  utterly  destroyed  both  Ham  an  and 

ing  and  encouraging  of  us  to  prayer,  all  his  seed.     So,  when  the  prodigal 

Joseph,  whose  feet  were  pinned  in  the  son,  in  his  penury  and  misery,  desired 

stocks,  prayed  that  he  might  be  de-  that  he  might  be  received   but  as  a 

livered  out  of  prison ;   and  God  not  servant  into  his  father's  house,  he  was 

only  delivered  him,  but  brought  him  taken  in  and  entertained  as  a  son,  and 

out  with  great  honour.    Esther  prayed  nothing  of  the  costliest  apparel  and 

against  the  spiteful  attempt  of  Haman,  daintiest  food  was  thought   too  good 

that  she  and  her  people  might  be  pre-  for  him."     [Bichard  Roger Sy  1615.] 
served  from   the  deadly  snare  which 

The  Manifold  Meaning  of  God's  Answer  to  Israelis  Prayer. 

**  It  asserts  the  sovereignty  of  God  is  to  fight  the  enemy,  and  the  other 

in   disposing  and  ordering  the  work  tribes  are  to  remain  at  home, 

which  His  servants  have  to  perform.  '*  It  promises  victory,  not  to  every 

"  It  reminds  us  that  every  one  is  ardent   soldier  who   might  volunteer 

not  to  attempt  everything ;  for  Judah  to  take   t-he   field,   but  to  the   tribe 


HO  Ml  LET IC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


CHAP.  L 


whom  the  Lord  should  order  to  the 
battle. 

"It  disturbs  all  rule -of- three  cal- 
culations of  success  in  proportion  to 
the  number  of  agents  men  may  induce 
to  go  to  work  ;  success  is  for  those 
whom  the  Lord  shall  send. 

**  It  allows  of  no  objection,  no  plea 


of  incompetency,  no  deceitful  humility, 
on  the  part  of  tlie  called  soldier;  *Judah 
shall  go  up : '  it  is  the  word  of  a  King. 
•*  It  hides  pride  from  man,  by 
declaring  that  although  Judah  would 
conquer,  it  would  be  only  through 
Divine  ordination  and  help."  [Luke 
E.  Wiseman,  M.A.] 


Beginning  and  Continuing. 


**  Israel  is  believing  and  obedient 
after  the  death  of  Joshua.  Like  a 
child  after  the  death  of  its  father,  it 
has  the  best  intentions.  First  love  is 
full  of  flowing  zeal.  To  begin  well  is 
never  without  a  blessing.  The  best 
inheritance  is  to  continue  obedient 
towards  God."     [Dr.  Cassel.] 

"The  words,  *I  have  delivered  th". 


land,'  are  meant  prophetically ;  with 
God  that  which  is  certain  in  the  future 
is  as  if  it  were  present."     [Lisco.'\ 

"The  death  of  Joshua  is  the  date 
of  degeneracy.  So  in  spiritual  re- 
spects :  as  long  as  the  true  Joshua 
lives  in  the  soul,  there  is  health.  St. 
Paul  says,  *  I  live ;  yet  not  I,  but 
Christ  liveth  in  me.'  "    [Origen,] 


Prayer  to  God,  and  Co-operation  with  Men. — Ferses  3,  4. 


I.  God's  promises  are  not  to  pro- 
voke careless  ease,  but  to  stimulate 
us  to  holy  caution  and  effort.  Judah 
has  received  an  unconditional  and 
absolute  promise,  but  seeks  neverthe- 
less the  aid  of  Simeon.  As  Bachmann 
says,  '*  It  is  not  incompatible  with 
the  obedience  of  faith  that  Judah 
makes  use  of  the  helps  placed  by  God 
at  his  disposal."  It  would  be  incom- 
patible with  true  faith  not  to  use 
such  helps. 

II.  Those  who  are  '*  workers  to- 
gether with  God"  must  not  despise 
the  aid  even  of  their  weaker  brethren. 

When  men  are  workins;  for  the  Lord 
and  with  the  Lord  (1)  They  must  not  seek 
aid  from  the  Lord's  enemies;  (2)  They 
have  a  claim  on  all  who  are  brethren ; 
(3)  The  very  weakest  of  their  brethren 
may  afford  good  help. 

III.  Such  as  seek  help  from  their 
brethren  should  be  very  willing  to 
render  help  in  return.  "  Come  with 
me  into  my  lot,  that  we  may  fight 
against  the  Canaanites  ;  and  I  likewise 
will  go  with  thee  into  thy  lot."  Trapp 
says,  *'  The  number  two  hath  by  the 
heathen  been  accounted  accursed,  be- 


cause it  was  the  first  departure  from 
unity."  By  the  Christian,  with  a 
loftier  outlook,  that  same  number  two 
might  rather  be  blessed,  because  it  is 
the  first  number  at  which  true  unity 
can  begin.  Real  union  is  not  in  any 
one  particle,  or  unit,  bat  in  the  blend- 
ing of  many.  The  weakest  may  find 
some  one  he  can  help — may  help  even 
the  strong. 

**  Let  me  not  deem  that  I  was  made  in  vam, 
Or  that  my  heing  was  an  accident, 
Which  Fate,  ip.  working  its  sublime  intent, 
Not  wished  to  be,  to  hinder  would  not  deign. 
Each  drop  uncounted  in  a  storm  of  rain 
Hath  its  own  mission,  and  is  duly  sent 
To  its  own  leaf  or  blade,  not  idly  spent 
'Mid  myriad  dimples  on  the  shipless  main. 
The  very  shadow  of  an  insect's  wing, 
For  which  the  violet  cared  not  while  it  stayed. 
Yet  felt  the  lighter  for  its  vanishing, 
Proved  that  the  sun  was  shining  by  its  shade: 
Then  can  a  drop  of  the  Eternal  Spring, 
Shadow  of  living  lights,  in  vain  be  made  ?" 
—Hartley  Coleridge. 

Thus,  the  weakest  worker  has  his 
mission  :  there  is  some  one  to  whom 
he  may  be  of  service ;  but  he  who 
receives  aid  from  the  weak  should  not 
refuse  to  help  the  weak. 

IV.  "  Those  who  help  one  another 
in  love  have  reason  to  hope  that  God 

11 


OHAP.  L 


HO  MI  LET  IC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES, 


will  graciously  help  them  both."  God 
helps  us  more  willingly  when  we  are 
found  in  the  union  of  brotherhood, 
than   in   the   isolation   of  selfishness. 


Judah  might  have  triumphed  without 
Simeon ;  what  we  should  rather  remem- 
ber is  this — with  Simeon,  Judah  did 
triumph."     [Partly  from  Matt.  Henry.'] 


Union  in  Works  of  Faith  and  Obedience. 


**  As  by  this  specimen  at  the  begin- 
ning of  this  book,  showing  what  two 
tribes  of  Israel  could  do  by  faith  and 
obedience  against  Adoni-bezek,  M'ho 
had  subdued  and  enslaved  seventy  kings, 
God  showed  what  the  twelve  tribes 
niigiit  have  done,  if  they  had  believed 
and  obeyed  Him ;  and  that  all  their 
subsequent  miseries  were  due  to  de- 
fection from  God.  In  like  manner, 
also,  the  Christian  Church,  if  men  had 


followed  the  example  of  the  Apostles — 
the  Judahs  and  Simeons  of  the  first 
ages — and  gone  forth  in  their  spirit  of 
faith  and  love  against  the  powers  of 
darkness,  they  might  long  since  have 
evangelised  the  world.  All  the  dis- 
tresses of  Christendom  are  ascribable 
to  desertions  from  Christ,  and  not 
to  any  imperfection,  as  some  have 
alleged,  in  Christianity."  [Z>r.  Words- 
worth.'] 


The  Use  of  Means. 


**  All  they  are  counted  to  tempt  God, 
whicli  trusting  to  God's  promises  do 
neglect  human  help.  Christ  hath  no 
otiierwise  confuted  the  devil,  which 
counselled  Him  to  cast  Himself  down 
headlong,  under  the  pretence  of  God's 
promise.  David,  in  the  latter  book 
of  Samuel,  setteth  himself  forth  unto 
us  as  an  example,  who  being  wonder- 


Sadducees,  and  testified  that  he  was  a 
citizen  of  Rome.  It  is  evident,  there- 
fore, that  we  must  use  the  help  of 
nature  and  wisdom  to  obtain  those 
things  which  God  hath  promised  to 
give  us.  Wherefore  the  young  men 
of  our  time  are  diligently  to  be  ad- 
monished to  attain  unto  languages, 
good  arts  and  sciences,  and  that  with 


fully  adorned    with   the   promises   of  great  study ;   which   they  may,  when 

God,  used  for  all  that  in  the  insurrec-  opportunity  serveth,  use  in  preaching 

tion  of  Absalom  not  only  to  flee  away,  and  defending  the  Gospel.  Foralthough 

but  also  the  diligence  of  Hushai  the  God  has  promised  that  the  preaching 

Archite  and  of  the  priests.     Yea,  and  of  His  Word  shall  be  fruitful  through 

Paul   the  Apostle,  although  his  only  the  benefit  of  His   Spirit,    yet   must 

confidence    was    in     Christ,    yet    he  every  man  instruct  himself  in  his  voca- 

appealed  unto  Caesar,  and  made  a  dis-  tion  according  to  his  ability."     [Peter 

sension   between    the    Pharisees  and  Martyr ,  1560.] 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  5-7, 

The  Recompence  of  Wickedness. 

This  lord  of  Bezek  had  grown  into  a  very  formidable  tyrant.  The  seventy 
victims  whom  he  had  overcome  and  so  cruelly  mutilated  were  doubtless  only 
petty  princes,  or  chieftains,  of  small  cities  and  their  surrounding  districts.  The 
number  seventy  seems  to  make  it  certain  that  the  depredations  of  this  monster 
were  committed  in  the  surrounding  neighbourhood,  and  among  tribes  of  his  own 
people,  the  Canaanites,  as  well  as  among  more  distant  enemies.  Adoni-bezek 
cut  off  the  thumbs  and  toes  of  the  kings  he  had  vanquished.  This  was  no 
doubt  done  to  render  them  unfit  for  war,  and  thus  in  an  age  when  men  reigned 
by  personal  prowess,  to  prevent  them  from  again  coming  to  the  power  of  govern- 
ment. The  mutilation  practised  by  this  tyrant  upon  the  captive  kings,  became 
afterwards  very  common  in  Roman  history,  when  men  cut  off  their  own  thumbs 
12 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES,  chap.  i. 


to  escape  military  service.  On  this  Kitto  remarks  :  "  A  trace  of  this  practice 
exists  in  the  word  poltron,  which  we  and  the  French  have  adopted  from  the 
Italian,  which,  while  it  immediately  denotes  a  dastardly  soldier  who  shrinks 
from  his  duty,  etymologically  signifies  ^cut-thumb,*  being  formed  from  pdllice 
*  thumb,'  and  trdnco,  *  cut  off,  maimed.'" 

I.  The  sin  of  Adoni-hezek.  1.  Ee  was  guilty  of  great  cruelty.  No  "  custom 
of  the  times"  could  excuse  this  barbarity.  The  man  himself  felt  that  he  had 
been  remorselessly  wicked,  when  a  like  judgment  was  inflicted  on  him  by  the 
men  of  Judah.  By  his  own  verdict  he  stands  condemned.  Cruelty  is  one  of  the 
most  heartless  forms  of  wickedness.  It  brings  nothing  to  him  who  practises  it.  It 
is  indulged  in  simply  from  brutal  tastes,  unless  it  be  employed  for  pur])oses  of 
extortion.  It  is  a  low  delight  in  the  sufferings  of  others.  Cruelty  is  one  of  the 
most  degrading  forms  of  wickedness.  Nothing  so  rapidly  takes  away  a  man's  man- 
hood. It  is  at  the  very  antipodes  of  the  cross.  The  Cross  of  Christ  is  an 
exhibition  of  voluntary  suffering  that  others  might  be  spared  pain  ;  cruelty  is  a 
selfish  and  coarse  delight  in  others'  pain.  Nothing  so  enriches  manhood  as  the 
spirit  that  sacrifices  itself  to  save  others ;  nothing  so  rapidly  debases  manhood  as 
the  spirit  which  delights  in  the  pain  of  others.  Keckless  cruelty  is  the  suicide 
of  the  moral  nature.  Cruelty  is  perhaps  the  most  rapidly  increasing  and  incurable 
form  of  wickedness.  Some  have  given  the  palm  to  covetousness,  but  while 
covetousness  seems  ever  fatal,  the  disease  is  of  slower  growth  than  cruelty.  It 
takes  but  little  time,  after  they  have  begun,  beast-like,  to  taste  blood,  to  make 
a  Herod  or  a  Nero  ;  and  from  this  vice,  too,  men  never  recover.  Covetousness 
is  a  passion  for  self,  heedless  of  others  ;  cruelty  is  a  passion  against  others,  with- 
out even  the  motive  of  enriching  self  There  can  be  no  place,  even  in  hell, 
below  where  the  cruel  have  their  abode.  This  is  the  lowest  discernible  deep 
of  the  pit  that  is  bottomless.  2.  Adoni-bezek  was  guilty  of  haughty  pride.  It  was 
not  enough  for  him  that  the  seventy  kings  should  be  mutilated ;  he  made  his 
poor  maimed  captives  humble  themselves  daily  in  his  presence,  feeding  them, 
like  dogs,  under  his  table  upon  the  odds  and  ends  which  he  chose  to  throw  them. 
To  the  littleness  of  inflicting  pain  by  a  barbarous  outrage,  this  tyrant  added  the 
further  meanness  of  daily  gloating  over  those  whom  he  made  to  suffer.  In  this 
case  it  was  true  indeed,  that  "  the  haughty  spirit  goeth  before  a  fall." 

II.  The  punishment  of  this  man's  sin.  The  men  of  Judah  "  caught  him,  and 
cut  off  his  thumbs  and  his  great  toes."  They  used  him  as  he  had  used  others. 
They  carried  out  the  law  of  retaliation — "  Eye  for  eye,  tooth  for  tooth,  hand 
for  hand,  foot  for  foot,"  as  they  had  been  taught  by  Moses  (Exod.  xxi.  24;  Lev. 
xxiv.  20,  &c.).  With  a  fine  adaptation  of  the  words  of  Isaiah  touching  the 
fallen  king  of  Babylon,  Kitto  says  concerning  the  mutilated  Adoni-bezek,  *'  Nor 
can  there  be  any  doubt  that  when  the  seventy  discrowned  princes  beheld  their 
old  oppressor  thus  brought  low,  they  rose  from  the  dust  to  greet  him,  crying. 
Art  thou  also  become  like  unto  us,  thou  that  didst  weaken  the  nations,  thou 
that  madest  the  land  to  tremble  *? "  We  see  in  the  judgment  which  overtook 
this  man — 1.  Sin  punished  during  the  sinner's  lifetime.  2.  Sin  punished  tardily, 
but  no  less  certainly.  3.  Sin  so  punished  that  the  sinner  is  led  to  trace  the  connection 
between  his  own  guilt  and  its  consequences.  "As  I  have  done,  so  God  hath  requited 
me."  The  punishment  came  in  kind.  The  judgment  was  a  mirror  in  which 
the  criminal  started  as  he  beheld  the  features  of  his  own  manifold  transgres- 
sions. God  would  not  only  have  the  guilty  suff'er ;  He  would  have  them  see 
clearly  why  they  suffer. 

III.  The  man's  acknowledgment  of  God's  justice.  The  narrative  here  throws 
into  prominence  the  following  points  : — I.  An  idolaters  knowledge  of  the  true 
God.  ^^  God  hath  requited  me."  This  man  must  have  frequently  heard  of  the 
God  of  the  Israelites  during  the  miracles  of  the  wilderness  and  the  triumphs 

13 


CHAP.  I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


of  Joshua.  It  was  only  in  the  hour  of  judgment  that  he  acknowledged  God. 
The  most  wicked  will  confess  their  faith  in  the  Lord  presently.  In  such  faith 
we  can  trace  no  true  repentance.  It  is  the  way  of  fallen  spirits  only  to 
*'  believe  "  when  they  are  made  to  "  tremble."  2.  The  activity  of  an  idolaters 
conscience.  Adoni-bezek  felt  that  this  was  a  requital.  Conscience  may  sleep 
long,  but  it  wakes  eventually  in  a  power  proportioned  to  the  efforts  whicii  have 
been  made  to  force  it  into  quietude.  3.  An  idolater  acknowledging  the  justice  of 
God's  recommence  of  sin.  "  As  I  have  done,  so  hath  God  requited  me."  As  the 
guilt,  so  was  its  reward.  Long  years  of  guilt,  even  in  remorseless  cruelty, 
cannot  remove  from  the  conscience  its  power  of  perceiving  the  justice  of  Divine 
punishment.  It  is  onl}'  when  men  turn  to  speculating  on  the  Bible  theory  of 
punishment  that  they  get  dissatisfied  with  what  the  Bible  seems  to  reveal  of 
the  way  of  God  in  chastisement ;  those  who  suffer  under  God's  hand  are  ever 
seen  acquiescing  in  the  fairness  of  sin's  penalties.  The  penitent  thief  says, 
**  The  due  reward  of  our  deeds  ; "  and  the  impenitent  thief  says  not  one  word  to 
suggest  that  he  thinks  contrariwise.  Even  Dives  in  torments  does  but  speak  of 
being  tormented,  and  breathes  no  single  word  about  injustice;  nay,  he  even  fears 
that  his  brothers  must  become  as  he  is  also.  No  sufferer  under  the  hand  of  God, 
who  speaks  to  us  from  the  Bible,  ever  complains  that  the  penalty  is  beyond  the 
desert.  Yet  the  Bible  is  very  frank  in  its  record  of  man's  rebellious  words. 
This  silence  from  murmuring,  and  this  acquiescence  in  the  fairness  of  Divine 
chastisements,  are  also  significant.  The  debates  on  God's  justice  in  punishment 
will  probably  all  be  confined  to  time. 


OUTLINES   AND    COMMENTS    ON    THE    VERSES. 
God's  Ministers  of  Judgment. — Verses  5,  6. 


"  And  they  found  Adoni-bezek,"  &c. 
God  has  many  ways  of  finding  the 
transgressor.  Sometimes  He  finds 
him  with  the  messenger  of  disease  ; 
sometimes  by  losses  or  accidents  ; 
sometimes,  as  here,  by  the  chastise- 
ments of  avenging  men ;  sometimes 
by  the  working  of  the  sin  itself.  Thus 
Moses  said  to  the  tribes  on  the  east 
of  Jordan,  "  Be  sure  your  sin  will  find 
you  out."  God,  eventually,  always 
finds  the  sinner  out  by  some  instru- 
ment or  other.  Thus  Samuel  finds 
Agag  (1  Sam.  xv.  33),  and  becomes 
the  minister  of  Divine  retribution ; 
Saul  finds  and  destroys  the  Amalekites 
four  hundred  years  after  they  had 
fallen  upon  the  Israelites  (cf.  1  Sam. 
XV.  1-7) ;  Mordecai  and  Esther  find 
and  expose  Haman ;  Daniel's  enemies 
are  found  by  Darius  and  the  lions. 
He  who  sins   against  his   fellow-men 


should  always  be  prepared  to  see  his 
sin  come  back  with  a  scourge  in  its 
hand.  Jacob  may  deceive ;  he  will 
presently  be  deceived.  The  Egyjitians 
may  murder  the  male  children  of 
Israel ;  the  angel  will  avenge  them  in 
the  death  of  the  firstborn.  David 
may  sin  against  Bathsheba,  and 
murder  Uriah  ;  his  first  sin  shall  be 
repaid  to  him  in  Absalom,  and  his 
second  in  Amnon.  The  retribution 
which  overtakes  Adoni-bezek  is  but 
a  common  issue  of  those  transgressions 
in  which  one  man  does  wilful  harm  to 
his  fellows.  It  is  noteworthy  that  all 
these  prominent  instances  of  retribu- 
tion in  the  Scriptures  are  not  punish- 
ments of  sin  in  ge7ieral,  but  the  punish- 
ment of  sins  against  men.  It  is  as 
though  God  said.  He  who  is  guilty 
against  men  shall  be  requited  during 
this  life,  even  in  the  presence  of  men. 


The  Relation  of  God's  Chastisements  to  Man's  Offences. — Ferses  6,  7. 

"  God    has    not     relinquished    the  as  ever  ;  and  in  His  former  dispensa- 

government  of  the  earth  :  He  orders  tions  we  behold  a  perfect  exhibition  of 

and  overrules  everything  now  as  much  the  government  which  He  still  admi- 
14 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES, 


OEAP.L 


nisters.  Still,  as  formerly,  does  He 
requite  the  wickedness  of  men  ;  some- 
times on  the  offenders  themselves f  as 
when  He  smote  Uzziah  with  leprosy  ; 
and  sometimes  on  others  upon  their 
account,  as  when  He  slew  seventy 
thousand  of  the  people  to  punish  the 
sin  which  David  had  committed  in 
numbering  his  subjects.  Sometimes 
He  inflicts  the  judgment  immediately, 
as  on  Hero(l,  who  was  eaten  up  with 
worms  ;  and  sometimes  after  a  long 
season,  as  on  the  sons  of  Saul  for  their 
father's  cruelty  to  the  Gibeonites 
many  years  before.  Sometimes  His 
judgments  are  sent  as  preliminary  to 
those  heavier  judgments  that  shall  be 
inflicted  in  the  eternal  worlds  .  .  and 
sometimes  after  tJie  offenders  themselves 
have  been  forgiven,  as  was  experienced 
by  David  in  his  family  (2  Sam.  xii.  13, 
14),  and  by  Manasseh,  whose  iniquities 
were  visited  upon  Israel  after  he  him- 
self had  been  received  up  to  glory 
(2  Kings  xxiv.  2-4).  Sometimes  His 
chastisements  had  no  particular  affinity 
with  the  offence  committed;  and  some- 
times the  oflfence  was  clearly  marked  in 
the  punishment,  as  in  the  case  of  Joram 
(2  Chron.  xxi.  4-17),  and  as  with 
David  (2  Sam.  xil  10-12,  and  xvi.  21, 
22).  So  minutely  is  this  correspond- 
ence marked  in  the  Scriptures,  that 
even  the  time  and  the  place  are  noticed 
as  designed  to  manifest  the  very 
offence  which  God  designed  to  punish  ; 
as  Israel's  wandering  in  the  wilderness 
forty  years  on  account  of  their  murmur- 
ing at  the  reports  which  were  brought 
them  by  the  spies  who  had  searched 
out  the  land  forty  days  (Numb.  xiv. 
33,  34)  ;  and  as  Ahab's  blood  was 
licked  up  by  dogs  on  the  very  spot 
where  dogs  liad  licked  up  the  blood  of 
Naboth,  whom  he  had  murdered. 

"  We  might  further  notice  the  cor- 
respondence between  the  spiritual 
judgments  which  God  sometimes 
inflicts  for  spiritual  transgressions. 
Those  who  will  not  hearken  to  His 
voice  He  gives  up  to  their  own  counsels 


(Ps.  Ixxxi.  11,  12) ;  those  who  abandon 
themselves  to  all  manner  of  wickedness, 
He  gives  up  to  vile  affections  and  a 
reprobate  mind  (Kom.  i.  26-28) ;  and 
those  who  will  not  receive  His  truth 
in  order  to  salvation.  He  gives  up  to 
their  own  delusions  that  they  may  be 
damned.  .  .  . 

"  If  any  imagine  that  this  conduct 
of  God  was  confined  to  the  nation 
whose  temporal  Governor  He  was, 
we  must  remind  them  that  He  dealt 
precisely  in  the  same  way  with  the 
heathen  nations  (Isa.  xxxiii.  1),  and 
has  taught  us  to  expect  that  He  will 
do  so  to  the  end  of  time.  .  . 

"  From  hence  we  may  learn — 

"L  To  investigate  the  reasons  of 
God's  dealings  with  us.  Every  dispen- 
sation of  Providence  has  a  voice  to 
which  we  should  give  diligent  attention. 
I  would  say  unto  you  therefore,  '  Hear 
the  rod  and  Him  that  hath  appointed 
it.*  If  you  see  not  the  reason  of  it, 
go  unto  your  God,  and  say,  *  Show  me 
wherefore  Thou  contendest  with  me  ;* 
and  let  no  cross  be  suffered  to  escape 
from  you,  without  having  first  paid  to 
you  that  tribute  of  good  which  by  the 
order  of  Providence  you  are  entitled 
to  exact. 

"  XL  To  repent  of  particular  sins. . . . 
God  has  borne  with  us  indeed  ;  but 
we  must  not  consider  His  longsuffering 
as  any  proof  of  His  approbation  :  He 
is  recording  everything  in  the  book  of 
His  remembrance,  and  will  call  us 
into  judgment  for  it,  whether  it  be 
good  or  evil.  Let  us  then  search  and 
try  our  ways  ;  let  us  pray  that  He  will 
not  *  remember  against  us  the  sins  and 
transgressions  of  our  youth.' 

**III.  To  abound  in  every  work  of 
good.  The  godly,  no  less  than  the 
sinner,  shall  be  recompensed  in  the 
earth*  (Prov.  xi.  31,  xiii.  21).  Visit 
and  relieve  your  sick  neighbour,  and 
*  God  will  be  with  you  in  trouble,  and 
make  all  your  bed  in  sickness  (Ps,  xlL 
l-$y    [Cfuirles  Simeon,  M,A.] 


15 


OBAP.  L 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES, 


The  Accusing  Conscience  Quickened  by  Divine  Judgments. — Verse  7. 


By  the  recent  discovery  and  inven- 
tion of  Professor  Hughes,  sounds  that 
have  never  before  been  audible  to  men 
may  now  be  heard  distinctly.    Through 
the   wonderful  powers  of  the  micro- 
phone,  much   in   nature  which   once 
appeared   silent  is  now  vocal ;    and, 
as  years  go  on,  we  may  expect  these 
still  small  voices  not  only  to  be  heard 
but  understood.     Just  as  the  micro- 
scope has  revealed  a  new  world  to  the 
eye,  so  will  the  microphone  discover 
a  new  world  to  the  ear.     Similarly, 
God   has  a  microphonic  way   in  the 
moral  world  of  making  that  audible 
which  many  have  long  since  ceased  to 
hear.      Paul    speaks   of    men   *'  past 
feeling  *'  whose  consciences  are  '*  seared 
as  with  a  hot  iron."     Such  are  not  only 
past   feeling   the   reproaches   of    con- 
science, but  even  past  hearing  them. 
Scripture  history  shows  us  very  plainly, 
in  not  a  few  instances,  that  God  has  a 
method  of  making  men  hear  again,  who 
have  long  been  deaf  to  the  very  feeble 
utterances  of    the    conscience  which 
they  appear  quite  to  have   silenced. 
There  are  microphones  in  this  moral 
world  also,  by  which  conscience  not 
only  becomes  audible,  but  even  over- 
whelming in  the  energy  and  terrible- 
ness  of  its  tones.     The  following  are  a 
few  of  the  forms  in  which  the  Bible 
shows  us  how  the  consciences  of  men 
may  again  speak  so  as  to  be  heard  in 
irresistible  power : — 

I.  Conscience  speaking  through  the 
pain    of    suffering    in    the    present. 

Adoni-bezek  can  hear  well  enough 
through  the  pain  of  his  own  mutila- 
tion. "  As  I  have  done,  so  hath  God 
requited  me."  In  similar  circum- 
stances, Pharaoh  heard  the  reproofs  of 
his  conscience  through  the  medium  of 
the  ten  plagues  (c£  Exod.  ix.  27,  28 ; 
X.  IG,  17). 

II.  Conscience  speaking  through 
fear  of  suffering  to  come  (1  Kings 
xxi.  20).  The  blood  of  Naboth  cried 
out  in  the  ears  of  Ahab  at  the  very 
sight  of  Elijah.     Hastening  down  to 

16 


the  vineyard,  to  take  possession  of  the 
spoil  of  his  murdered  foe,  he  saw 
there,  at  the  very  gateway  to  the 
new  estate,  the  terrible  Elijah  ;  and 
ere  ever  a  word  was  said  by  the  pro- 
phet, and  in  view  of  the  judgment  so 
surely  casting  its  shadow  before  in  the 
form  of  that  stern  Tishbite,  conscience, 
silent  in  that  dull  bosom  for  many  a 
year,  made  the  poor  guilty  being  cry 
in  unmistakable  alarm,  "  Hast  thou 
found  me,  0  mine  enemy  % "  Men 
who  are  sinning  in  peace,  should  now 
and  then  listen  for  the  sounds  of 
conscience  through  the  judgment  to 
come.  In  view  of  this,  men  have 
sometimes  found  conscience  over- 
mastering creeds.  Thus  Herod,  the 
Sadducee,  who  believed  in  no  resurrec- 
tion, said  when  he  heard  of  Jesus, 
**  It  is  John,  whom  I  beheaded  ;  he  is 
risen  from  the  dead."  Thus  Volney 
prayed  in  the  storm.  Thus  Byron 
struggled  with  himself  to  **  be  a  man 
to  the  last." 

ni.  Oonsclence    speaking  through 
the  sufferings  of  the  innocent.     Judas 
sold  his  Lord  for  thirty  pieces  of  silver, 
but  the  thought  of  the  guilt  in  which 
he  had  given  Christ  over  to  condem- 
nation was  too  much  to  be  endured. 
"  When  he  saw  that  Jesus  was  con- 
demned, he  brought  again  the  thirty 
pieces  of  silver  to  the  chief  priests  and 
elders,  saying,  I  have  sinned  in  that  I 
have  betrayed  the  innocent  blood.  .  .  . 
And  he  cast  down  the  pieces  of  silver 
in  the  temple,  and  departed,  and  went 
and     hanged     himself.''      Conscience 
becomes    audible     also    through    the 
medium  of  the  sufferings  and   blood 
of  the  innocent.     What  may  not  the 
Herods,  and  Nero,  and  Domitian,  and 
Marius,  and  other  tyrants,  have  heard 
of  the  thunders  of  conscience,  when,  in 
their  more  reflective  moods,  they  found 
the  moral  atmosphere  about  them  clari- 
fied and  made  resonant  by  thoughts  of 
their  innocent  victims !      While    an 
oppressor  is  always  a  coward,  there 
must  come  a  time  when  he  had  need 
be  among  the  bravest  of  the  brave. 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES, 


CfBM.  I. 


IV.  Conscience  speaking  through 
severely  chastened  piety  (cf.  2  Sam. 
xvi.  10.)  In  the  punishment  which 
waits  on  sin,  not  only  the  deliberately 
wicked,  but  the  fallen  righteous,  hear 
the  rebukes  of  conscience  as  they  have 
seldom  heard  them  before.  Even  the 
cursing  tones  of  Shimei  sound  in  the 
ears  of  transgressing  David  as  the 
voice  of  a  messenger  of  his  God. 

V.  Conscience  speaking  unto  salva- 
tion through  gratitude  for  deliverance 
and  mercy  (Acts  xvi.  24-30  ;  Luke  xv. 
21).  The  jailor  who  had  made  the 
feet  of  Paul  and  Silas  fast  in  the  stocks, 
probably  in  antipathy  towards  them 
for  the  truth  which  they  preached, 
heard  conscience  proclaiming  his  sin 
through  the  joy  which  he  felt  in  the 
security  of  his  prisoners  and  the  conse- 
quent safety  of  his  own  life,  fie  who 
in  one  moment  "would  have  killed 
himself,"  is  made  to  ask  in  the  next, 
"  What  must  I  do  to  be  saved  ? "  It 
is  in  the  hour  of  mercy  that  conscience 
forces  the  heart  to  such  tears  for  sin 
as  make  sin  seem  most  loathsome.  As 
Whittier  has  truthfully  written  it — 

**  Thy  healing  pains ;  a  keen  distresf 

Thy  tender  light  shines  in  ; 

Thy  sweetness  is  the  hittemess, 

Thy  grace  the  pang  of  sin." 

Or,  in  the  measure  of  an  older  and 
more  familiar  utterance,  we  have  often 
expressed  the  feeling  thus : — 

**  When  beneath  the  Cross  adoring. 
Sin  doth  like  itself  appear." 

The  true  microphone   for  making 


the  voice  of  conscience  at  once  audible 
and  helpful  is  the  Cross  of  Jesus 
Christ 

VL  Conscience  heard  speaking 
after  a  silence  of  many  years  (Gen. 
xlii.  21,  22).  This  was  probably  so  in 
the  case  of  Adoni-bezek  ;  it  was  em- 
phatically so  with  Joseph's  brethren. 
More  than  twenty  years  after  their 
inhuman  guilt  they  are  made  to  say, 
**  We  are  verily  guilty  concerning  our 
brother."  That  conscience  has  long 
been  silent  is  no  sign  that  it  will  not 
presently  be  heard  in  power.  God 
knows  how  to  awaken  both  what  we 
call  the  sleeping  and  the  dead. 

Vn.  Conscience  speaking  in  the 
presence  of  death  (Josh,  vii  20). 
Achan,  who  was  deaf  to  all  self-rebuke 
during  the  despoiling  of  Jericho,  heard 
conscience  speaking  with  awful  plain- 
ness when  he  knew  that  he  must  die. 
The  death-sayings  of  the  wicked  have 
been  showing,  through  many  genera- 
tions, that  the  vaulted  cavern  of  a 
visibly  open  tomb  has  ever  been  a  kind 
of  intensified  whispering-gallery,  back 
from  which  the  once  unheard  reproofs 
of  conscience  have  rolled  with  a 
terrible  energy  through  the  departing 
soul.  When  conscience  is  silenced 
here,  it  seems  to  take  on  a  distinct 
tongue  for  every  forgotten  sin,  and  to 
become  a  very  Babel  there.  Happy 
is  that  man  who  learns  to  say,  "  I 
acknowledged  my  sin  unto  Thee,  and 
mine  iniquity  have  I  not  hid." 


"The  Law  of  Requital." — Verse  7. 


"  This  narrative  is  an  illustration  of 
a  severe  yet  most  holy  law.  *  The 
Lord  of  recompences  shall  surely  re- 
quite.* *  With  what  measure  ye  mete, 
it  shall  be  measured  to  you  again.' 
This  is  the  law  under  which  we  are 
now  living.  Let  us  study  some  of  its 
bearings,  that  we  may  live  with  reli- 
gious wisdom. 

"  *  As  I  have  done,  so  God  hath 
requited  me.'  '* 

I.  ''Then  the  life  of  man  cannot 
escape  the  judgment  of  God.      'Be 


not  deceived  ;  God  is  not  mocked ;  * 
man  may  deny  it :  may  theoretically 
disregard  it ;  but  cannot  escape  it.  At 
the  heart  of  things  is  the  spirit  of 
judgment.  Human  life  appears  to  be 
confused,  but  before  the  Almighty  it 
has  shape,  and  plan,  and  purpose. 

n.  '^  Then  let  no  man  take  the  law 
into  his  own  hands,  'Vengeance  is 
Mine,  I  will  repay,  saith  the  Lord.'  .  .  . 
Why  have  we  suffered  loss  in  business  f 
May  it  not  be  that  we  have  oj/pressed 
the  poor  and  needy  ?  fFhy  are  our 
li  17 


OHAP.  L 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


schemes  delayed  and  thwarted  t  Pro- 
bably because  we  have  been  obstinate 
and  unfriendly  towards  the  schemes  of 
others.  Why  are  we  held  in  disesteem  or 
neglect  ?  Probably  because  of  the  con- 
tempt in  which  we  have  held  our 
brethren.  .  .  . 

III.  "Then  every  good  deed  will 
"be  honoured  with  appropriate  reward. 

The  law  is  equally  effective  on  both 
sides  '  God  is  not  unrighteous  to  for- 
get your  work  of  faith  and  labour  of 
love,'  &c.  '  Whosoever  shall  give  a 
cup  of  cold  water  only/  &c.  *  The 
liberal  soul  shall  be  made  fat.'  Re- 
member :  1.  Good  deeds  are  their  ovm 
reward ;  2.  Deeds  done  merely  for  the 
sake  of  reward  cannot  he  good. 

IV.  '*  Then,  though  justice  be  long 
delayed,  yet  it  will  be  vindicated 
eventually.    Adoni-bezek   had   run  a 


long  course  of  wickedness.  .  .  .  Yet 
see  him  in  the  grip  of  the  law,  and  learn 
that  the  time  of  punishment  is  with 
the  Lord  and  not  with  man.  Do  you 
think  that  you  have  outwitted  the  law 
of  retribution  ?  God's  hour  is  coming ; 
a  stormy  and  terrible  hour.  .  .  . 

"But  what  of  those  who,  having 
done  evil,  hate  both  themselves  and 
their  wickedness  ?  There  is  a  Gospel 
for  such — *  Repentance  towards  God, 
and  faith  in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,' 
will  destroy  the  evil  of  the  past,  and 
satisfy  the  otherwise  inexorable  law 
of  retribution."     [Dr.  Parker.'] 

Note. — For  homiletic  outlines  and 
remarks  on  the  paragraph  that  follows 
— ^vers.  8-16,  see  on  the  correspond- 
ing passages  in  the  Book  of  Joshua,  as 
treated  in  "  The  Preacher's  Commen- 
tary." 


OUTLINES  AND  COMMENTS  ON  THE  PARAGRAPH,— Veraet  17-86. 

The  Battle  the  Lord's  only  while  fought  with  the  Lord. — 

Verses  17-19. 


L  Men  working  together  with  each 
other,  and  working  in  the  fear  of  God. 
1.  '* Unity  is  strength''  wherever  unity  is 
lawful.  Had  Judah  become  confede- 
rate with  idolaters,  such  an  alliance 
would  have  wrought  weakness.  When 
Judah  went  with  Simeon  his  brother, 
the  Lord  went  with  them  both.  2. 
To  unite  in  God's  work  is  of  no  avail  un- 
less we  unite  to  serve  in  the  fear  of  God. 
That  Judah  and  Simeon  did  this  is 
e^  Ment.  All  Israel  had  inquired  of  the 
Lord,  saying,  "  Who  shall  go  up  "  (ver. 
1)  ?  In  their  victory  over  Zephath, 
they  both  devoted  the  city  to  the  Lord, 
and  re-named  it  Hormah,  in  token  of 
having  executed  again  upon  it  Jehovah's 
ban  of  judgment  (see  Critical  Notes). 
Not  only  did  they  thus  show  that  they 
were  walking  in  the  fear  of  God ;  they 
also  "  gave  Hebron  unto  Caleb,  as 
Moses  had  said,"  knowing  that  it  was 
God  who  had  spoken  through  Moses, 
Thus  did  Judah  and  Simeon  start 
aright  in  this  terrible  work  of  war  and 
judgment.  God  does  not  overlook  even 
the  faithful  beginnings  of  those  who  de- 
18 


pend  upon  His  help  and  have  respect 
unto  His  commandments. 

IL    Men    working    together    with 
God,  and  thus  working  triumphantly. 

Zephath  fell  before  them,  and  they 
took  Gaza,  and  Askelon,  and  Ekron, 
with  the  territory  bordering  upon  each. 
1.  Success  is  not  because  of  our  co-opera- 
tion with  men,  but  because  of  our  union 
with  the  Lord.  "  The  Lord  was  with 
Judah."  The  Lord  was  not  kept  from 
working  with  Judah  by  the  fact  that 
Judah  had  sought  the  help  of  Simeon. 
Had  not  Judah  taken  wise  precautions, 
then  the  Lord  might  not  have  helped. 
God,  also,  helps  them  who  wisely  help 
themselves.  Yet,  though  Simeon's  aid 
was  thus  approved  of,  the  battle  was 
the  Lord's.  After  we  have  done  all 
that  we  can,  He  is  our  help  and  our 
shield.  2.  The  Lord  does  not  withhold 
His  help  because  our  union  with  Him  may 
soonfaU,  He  who  said  to  Peter,  "Be- 
fore the  cock  crow  thou  shalt  deny  Me 
thrice,"  saw  well  enough  how  soon 
Judah  and  Simeon  would  deny  Him. 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES.  chap.  x. 


Yet  God  began  with  blessing  the  men  possession  of  the  mountain,  but  the 
who  began  by  trusting.  The  crown  of  inhabitants  of  the  valley  were  not  to 
life  is  promised  to  those  who  are  "faith-  be  expelled,  because  they  had  chariots 
ful  unto  death ;  "  but  our  Lord  does  of  iron."  Had  Jiidah  still  trusted  in 
not  withhold  all  His  mercies  till  we  the  Lord,  Judah  had  still  been  victo 
have  proved  our  abiding  fidelity.  There  rious.  1.  Where  faith  is  severely  tried, 
are  many  victories  given  to  us  on  this  some  promise  may  generally  be  found  to 
side  of  the  crown.  He  who  taught  us  sustain  it.  It  was  so  here.  God  had 
to  pray,  "  Give  us  this  day  our  daily  already  said,  through  Moses  (Deut.  xx 
bread,"  gives  that  day's  bread  in  an-  1),  "  When  thou  goest  out  to  battle 
swer  to  that  day's  believing  prayer.  3.  against  thine  enemies,  and  seest  horses. 
The  union  with  God  that  comes  of  even  a  and  chariots,  and  a  people  more  than 
small  faith,  may,  nevertheless,  lead  to  thou,  be  not  afraid  of  them;  for  the 
mighty  victories.  The  trust  of  Judah  Lord  thy  God  is  with  thee,  which 
which  utterly  failed  in  sight  of  the  brought  thee  up  out  of  the  land  of 
iron  chariots,  could  only  have  been  Egypt."  Similarly,  some  promise 
feeble  in  these  earlier  conflicts.  Had  stands  over  against  all  our  tempta- 
it  been  strong,  the  iron  chariots  could  tions  to  unbelief.  2.  The  promises  and 
not  so  speedily  have  turned  it  into  our  ovm  personal  experience  always  point 
unbelief  Yet  even  with  this  feeble  in  the  direction  of  abiding  trust.  As  far 
faith,  Zephath,  and  Gaza,  and  Aske-  as  the  men  of  Judah  had  trusted,  they 
Ion,  and  Ekron  were  overcome.  Union  had  not  been  confounded.  They  had 
with  God  is  everything.  The  faith  conquered  in  every  field  where  they 
that  is  just  enough  to  lead  men  to  had  ventured  to  fight.  Our  past  ex- 
union  with  God  is  as  victorious  as  perience  of  God's  help  is  never  out  of 
though  it  were  perfect  faith.  It  is  not  harmony  with  His  written  encourage- 
the  amount  of  our  faith  that  triumphs,  ments.  3.  In  spite  of  both  promises  and 
but  the  fact  that  the  Lord  is  on  our  experience,  it  is  all  too  easy  to  give  way  to 
side.  Strong  faith  has  most  of  rest  doubt,  God  continually  encourages  men 
and  peace  ;  strong  faith  gives  most  to  go  forward,  and  when,  having  known 
honour  to  God ;  but  the  faith  that  just  nothing  of  defeat,  He  sets  before  them 
suffices  to  do  the  Lord's  bidding  is  an  open  door  to  some  mercy  in  which 
also  certain  of  victory.  The  trembhng  all  previous  mercies  might  become 
households  of  Israel,  on  the  night  of  crowned  and  complete,  they  shrink 
the  slaying  of  the  first-born,  were  just  back  in  dismay,  and  thus  risk  the  loss 
as  safe  as  the  confident  households,  of  everything.  One  may  almost  hear 
if  they  had  possessed  faith  enough  to  the  Divine  voice  saying  in  this  trial 
sprinkle  the  blood  as  they  had  been  also,  "  0  thou  of  little  faith,  wherefore 
directed.  The  trembling  gazer  at  the  didst  thou  doubt  ? "  4.  He  who  doubts 
brazen  serpent  was  healed  as  completely  God  becomes  subject  to  the  repeated  rebukes 
as  the  man  who  had  no  doubt  of  the  of  history.  The  people  were  rebuked 
result.  She  who  did  but  find  faith  by  history  which  many  of  them  might 
enough  to  secretly  touch  the  hem  of  well  remember.  At  the  waters  of 
herLord'sgarment  found  it  better  than  Merom,  under  Joshua,  they  had  de- 
twelve  years'  aid  from  the  physicians,  feated  their  enemies  who  were  "  as  the 
He  who  has  faith  enough  to  do  his  sand  upon  the  sea-shore  in  multitude, 
Lord's  bidding,  has  also  enough  to  with  horses  and  chariots  very  many  " 
command  his  Lord's  help  ;  and  salva-  (Josh.  xi.  4).  In  the  days  yet  to  come 
tion  is  of  the  Lord's  help,  not  of  the  multitudesoftheir  grandchildren  would 
measure  of  our  trust.  see  them  reproved  again.     Bidden  to 

the  battle  by  a  woman,  Barak,  a  cen- 

m.  Men  working  successfully  with  tury  later,  led  his  little  army  against 

God,  and  yet  coming  to  a  point  where  the  multitudinous  array  of  King  Jabin, 

God   is    no   longer    trusted.      *'  And  and   Sisera,  and   his  *'  nine   hundred 

Jehovah  was  with  Judah ,  and  he  took  chariots  of  iron,  and  all  the  people 

19 


OHAP.  li 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES. 


that  were  with  him,"  were  discomfited, 
"  and  all  the  host  of  Sisera  fell  upon 
the  edge  of  the  sword,  and  there 
was  not  a  man  left "  (Judg.  iv.  7,  13, 


15,  16).  Thus  does  God  ever  beset 
us  behind  and  before  with  proofs  of 
our  folly  in  all  our  unbelief  of  His  holy 
words. 


Making  Shipwreck  of  Faith  after  a  Good  Voyage. — Verse  19. 


I.  Faith  failing  after  much  faith  in 
the  past.  Judah  had  believed  much, 
and  therefore  "  the  Lord  was  with 
Judah."  Their  previous  faith  is  seen 
in  three  things.  1.  They  had  faith  to 
offer  acceptable  prayer.  In  common  with 
all  Israel  they  had  asked  of  the  Lord, 
"  Who  shall  go  up  for  us  ? "  &c.  That 
prayer  was  so  offered  that  the  Lord 
heard.  2.  They  had  faith  to  accept  the 
issues  of  jorayer.  He  who  really  prays 
commits  himself  to  great  responsibili- 
ties. God  may  send  him  into  the  very 
forefront  of  the  battle.  Judah  had 
so  prayed.  "  And  the  Lord  said, 
Judah  shall  go  up."  This  post  in  the 
van  of  the  Lord's  war  had  been  faith- 
fully accepted.  3.  They  had  faith  not 
only  to  go  to  battle^  but  to  mn  victory  after 
victory.  He  that  girds  on  the  harness 
for  God  has  faith,  but  he  who  con- 
tinues his  trust  till  the  Lord  makes 
him  more  than  conqueror  has  yet  a 
better  faith.  This  also  had  Judah 
known.  The  Canaanites  and  the 
Perizzites,  with  Adoni-bezek,  had  been 
overcome.  Zephath,  Gaza,  Askelon, 
and  Ekron  had  also  fallen.  For  all 
that,  the  faith  of  the  men  of  Judah 
failed  before  the  iron  chariots.  They 
were  like  those  of  whom  Paul  wrote  : 
"Holding  faith  and  a  good  conscience  ;*' 
that  in  their  earlier  career :  "  which 
some  having  put  away,  concerning  faith 
have  made  shipwreck ; "  that  in  their 
later.  To  such,  Paul  said  elsewhere  : 
"  Ye  did  run  well  ;  who  did  hinder 
you  that  ye  should  not  obey  the  truth  ? " 
It  is  those  that  stand  who  have  need 
to  take  heed  lest  they  fall. 

II.  Faith  failing  by  reason  of  look- 
ing on  the  things  which  are  seen. 
The  men  of  Judah  looked  on  the  iron 
chariots,  and  became  disheartened  and 
afraid  ;  they  should  have  looked  on 
God's  well-known  love  and  oft-proved 
power  to  help  them.     1.  No  man  can 

20 


rightly  understand  the  things  of  this  life. 
We  judge  of  things  in  fragments  and 
sections.  Our  view  is  too  limited  even 
for  a  bird's-eye  view  of  what  God  sees 
as  a  whole.  Even  momentary  defeat 
is  often  the  way  to  victory.  It  was  so 
at  Ai.  What  if  Joshua,  instead  of 
prostrating  himself  before  the  Lord  in 
humble  inquiry,  had  given  up  the  war? 
Where,  then,  had  been  the  inherit- 
ance %  We  are  not  told  that  Judah 
had  been  defeated  even  once  by  the 
iron  chariots.  But  what  if  this  were 
so  ?  It  might  have  been  God's  well- 
prepared  way  to  more  effectual  victory. 
He  who  judges  life  and  God  by  the 
few  things  which  he  can  see,  is  in  much 
the  same  position  as  a  man  who  should 
attempt  to  decide  on  the  merits  of  a 
painting  by  gazing  at  a  square  inch 
cut  from  the  large  picture  on  the 
canvas.  2.  That  man  is  wisest  who  rests 
in  the  well-proved  love  and  wisdom  of  God. 
Philosophy  has  not  ventured  to  raise 
any  quarrel  against  the  child  who 
trusts  in  a  wise  and  good  father  in 
preference  to  his  own  narrow  judg- 
ment. It  is  only  when  our  decisions 
have  to  do  with  the  far  more  intricate 
perceptions  of  religious  life  that  some 
would-be  wise  men  tell  us  that  it  is  not 
well  to  trust  a  Father  in  heaven  whose 
love  and  mercy  have  been  manifestly 
displayed  for  six  thousand  years.  "  We 
have  no  data/'  they  tell  us,  "  whereby 
to  form  any  opinion  of  your  religious 
matters ;  and  we  decline  to  accept  your 
Christianity."  As  though  any  one  of 
them  would  venture  to  commend  the 
presumptuous  boy  who  said  to  his 
father  about  some  sphere  unknown  to 
his  narrow  wisdom  :  *'  I  have  no  data  ; 
and  I  must  decline  to  walk  when  I 
cannot  see  clearly  for  myself."  A  great 
deal  of  our  walking,  even  in  temporal 
things,  has  to  be  done  by  faith  in  some 
one  else.  Must  it  not  be  so,  much 
more,  when  the  path  we  travel  leads 


HOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


OHAP.  L 


to  a  life  and  a  world  that  no  living  man 
has  seen  *?  3.  Thus,  he  best  hears,  and 
best  fights,  who  endures  "  as  seeing  Him 
who  is  invisible."  "  No  man  hath  seen 
God  at  any  time,"  as  he  has  seen  an 
earthly  parent ;  yet  he  who  walks  the 
path  of  the  Divine  testimonies  humbly 
will  say,  with  no  lack  of  confidence, 
"The  only-begotten  tSon,  which  is  in 
the  bosom  of  the  Father,  He  hath  de- 
clared Him."  The  whole  question  of 
modern  faith  rests  here  :  Is  Jesus 
Christ  to  be  believed  1  was  He  false  1 
or  was  He  mistaken  1  Till  that  is 
settled  by  all  who  doubt  it,  nothing 
else  is  worth  arguing. 

III.  Failing  faith  declining  the  con- 
flict, and  thus  getting  nothing  more  of 
victory.  Judah  rested,  and  forthwith 
God  rested.  In  that  case  there  was 
nothing  for  it  but  that  conquest  should 
cease  also.  In  this  mood,  not  an  acre 
more  could  be  added  to  the  inheritance. 
How  silently  God  seems  to  have  rested ! 
For  some  time  we  hear  of  no  single 
word  of  reproof  or  exhortation  when 
He  had  been  thus  dishonoured.  God 
left  His  people  to  find  out  by  bitter 
experience  their  sin  against  Him,  and 
their  folly  as  it  concerned  them  selves.  It 
is  not  seldom  thus.  God  sits  in  silence 
which  we  might  well  feel  to  be  appal- 
ling, and  leaves  unbelief  to  work  out 


its  own  shame  and  pain.  Meanwhile, 
the  enemies  of  faith  find  power  enough 
to  become  "  as  thorns  in  the  sides  "  of 
those  who  have  forgotten  their  God. 

IV.  The  failing  faith  of  leading  men 
becoming  utterly  ruinous  to  the  faith 
of  others.  Judah  had  been  chosen  to 
take  the  lead  in  the  war  which  followed 
the  death  of  Joshua.  While  Judah 
was  strong  in  faith,  Simeon  was  strong 
also.  Perhaps  it  was  under  the  in- 
fluence of  their  joint  victories  that 
Joseph  was  stirred  up  to  the  conflict 
in  which  Bethel  was  taken.  When 
Judah  fell,  defection  forthwith  spread 
itself  throughout  all  Israel.  Benjamin, 
Manasseh,  Ephraim,  Zebulon,  Asher, 
and  Naphtali  all  failed  in  the  failure 
of  Judah.  And  not  long  after  it  re- 
mained to  be  written  :  "  And  the 
children  of  Israel  dwelt  among  the 
Canaanites.  .  .  .  And  they  took  their 
daughters  to  be  their  wives,  and  gave 
their  daughters  to  their  sons,  and 
served  their  gods.  And  the  children 
of  Israel  did  evil  in  the  sight  of  the 
Lord,  and  forgat  the  Lord  their  God, 
and  served  Baalim  and  the  groves." 
"No  man  liveth  to  himself"  He  who 
fails  in  faith,  destroys  the  faith  of 
others.  Ruinous,  indeed,  are  the  re- 
sults when  they  fail  whom  God  has 
called  and  qualified  to  lead. 


God  Leaving  His  People  Helpless. — Ferse  19. 


•*  The  Lord  was  with  Judah "  only 
so  long  as  Judah  believed.  God  de- 
clines to  help  those  who  decline  to  trust 
in  Him.  It  would  do  His  people  harm. 
It  would  put  a  premium  on  doubt,  and 
timidity,  and  idleness,  were  the  Lord 
to  present  His  soldiers  with  victory 
while  they  refused  the  conflict.  Dr. 
Thomas  remarks  on  this  verse  :  "  It  is 
said  that  God  could  not  drive  out  the 
inhabitants  of  the  valley,  because  they 
— the  inhabitants  of  the  mountain — 
had  chariots  of  iron."  But  it  is  not 
said  that  God  could  not  drive  them  out. 
Even  in  the  English  text  the  sense 
is  clearly  intimated  as  being — Judah 
could  not  drive  them  out,  the  nearest 


antecedent  being  "  Judah,**  and  not 
"the  Lord."  But  the  Hebrew  certainly 
does  not  say  that  ^^  God  could  not" 
drive  them  out.  The  literal  rendering 
of  the  verse  stands  thus  :  "  And  was 
Jehovah  with  Judah,  and  he  took 
possession  of  the  mountain  ;  but  not  to 
be  expelled  (were)  the  inhabitants  of 
the  valley,  for  chariots  of  iron  (were) 
to  them."  This  is  very  different  from 
"  God  could  not  drive  out  the  inhabi- 
tants of  the  valley."  It  is  undoubtedly 
true,  as  a  point  of  doctrine,  that  God 
cannot  do  that  which  is  wrong,  and 
which  would  work  evil.  It  is  thus 
similarly  said  of  Christ  in  His  own 
country,  *'  He  could  there  do  no  mighty 

21 


OEAP.  L  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 

work,"  the  reason  assigned,  elsewhere,  believing  men  of  Judah  with  mighty 

being  that  this  was  **  because  of  their  works  :  atill,  that  is  not  how  "  it  is 

unbelief.''    God  could  not  help  the  un-  said ''  in  this  rerse. 

No  Pleasure  in  the  Death  op  the  Wicked. 

"As  Augustine  has  said,  *  God  is  not  mourned  for  Saul  the  king,  whom  he 

a  cruel  tormentor,  but  a  just  corrector/  knew  nevertheless  to   be  rejected  of 

Moreover,  because  holy  men  are  very  God.      Jeremiah    also  wept    for    the 

familiar  with  God,  and  therefore  when  captivity   which   was   at   hand  ;    and 

by  some  heavenly  revelation  they  are  Christ  wept  for  the  city  of  Jerusalem 

ascertained  of  His  will,  because  they  which   should    be    destroyed.      They 

exceedingly  love  Him  they  cannot  but  which  be  men  indeed,  cannot  but  be 

allow  His  sentence;  yea,  they  faithfully  sorry  for  their   neighbours   and  their 

pray  that   the   same   may  be   accom-  own  flesh  when  it  is  afflicted.    Neither 

plished;  although,  in  that  they  be  men,  doth  God  require   of  us   that  we  be 

they  be  both  sorry  and  also  take  it  stoical  and   lacking   in   compassion," 

grievously  to   have   their  neighbours  [Peter  Martyr,] 
so  vexed.     After  which  sort  Samuel 

The  Gift  of  Hebron  to  Caleb. — Ferse  20. 

This  verse  is  certainly  not  "  a  con-  Joshua's  lifetime  "  has  no  more  force 
elusive  proof  that  this  campaign  (of  than  to  say  that  Josh.  xiv.  13  is  a 
Judah  and  Simeon)  took  place  in  conclusive  proof  that  Joshua's  gift  of 
Joshua's  lifetime,"  as  stated  by  the  Hebron  took  place  in  the  lifetime  of 
Speaker's  Commentary.  All  the  time  Moses.  Hebron  was  given  to  Caleb, 
the  Canaanites  were  in  such  force  in  in  promise,  by  Moses ;  it  was  re-given 
the  lot  of  Judah  as  is  represented  in  by  Joshua,  when  the  adjacent  country 
vers.  3-6,  Caleb  could  not  have  held  had  been  partly  subdued.  With  this 
Hebron  in  peaceable  security.  He  title  to  the  city,  Caleb  wrested  it  from 
might  have  continued  to  hold  the  city  the  Canaanites,  and  apparently  held  it 
from  the  time  of  his  victory  (which  is  amid  increasing  dangers  till  the  over- 
recorded  both  in  Josh.  xv.  13,  14,  and  throw  of  Adoni-bezek  and  the  conquest 
in  the  retrospective  parenthesis  of  this  of  Zephath  and  the  western  strong- 
chapter)  to  the  time  of  the  campaign  holds,  at  which  time  its  security  was 
of  Judah  and  Simeon ;  but  the  city  threatened.  From  this  danger  the 
was,  probably,  more  or  less  threatened  two  tribes  delivered  Hebron  ;  and  as 
by  the  growing  power  of  the  Canaan-  situated  in  their  own  territory,  and 
ites.  After  the  victories  of  the  two  liberated  by  their  eff'orts,  the  men  of 
tribes,  Caleb's  possession  of  Hebron  Judah  still  gave  the  city  to  Caleb, 
would  have  been  comparatively  un-  They  thus  confirmed  the  previous 
disturbed.  But  the  men  of  Judah,  so  gift  of  both  Moses  and  Joshua.  The 
far  from  taking  any  advantage  over  verse  is  really  needed  here  as  an 
Caleb,  gave  him  Hebron,  as  Moses  had  assurance  that  Caleb  was  suffered  to 
said.  They  did  not  give  him  the  city  retain  his  heritage.  The  retrospective 
for  the  first  time;  Joshua  had  given  it  clause  with  which  the  verse  closes,  is 
before  the  men  of  Judah  gave  it,  and  simply  a  repetition,  quite  in  keeping 
Moses  before  Joshua.  To  say  that  the  with  the  author's  manner  throughout 
gift  as  stated  here  is  "a  conclusive  the  chapter, 
proof  that  the  campaign  took  place  in 


22 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES,  ohaf.  L 


The  Inactivitt  of  Benjamin. --F<5r««  21. 

The  boundary  of  Judah  and  Benja-  %  bad  example.    Judah  was  the  first 

min  divided  the  city  of  Jerusalem,  the  to  go  up  against  the  Canaanites.     For 

lower  city  belonging  to   the   former  a  time  the  men  of  Judah  walked  by 

tribe,   and    the  upper    city  with  its  faith,    and     conquered ;     then     they 

stronghold,  so  long  retained  by  the  walked  by  sight,  and  the  iron  chariots 

Jebusites,  to  the  latter.     The  eighth  were  too  much  for  the  courage  which 

verse  tells  us  that  the  men  of  Judah  depended    on  what    could    be   seen, 

had  taken  that  part  of  the  city  which  The  Benjaminites  were  far  more  ready 

lay  in  their  territory,  while  this  verse  to  copy  the  bad   example   than   the 

records  the  slothfulness  of  the  men  of  good.     Evil  is  ever  more  contagious 

Benjamin  in  suffering  their  part  of  than   virtue.     The   pre-disposition   of 

Jerusalem  to  remain  in  the  hands  of  the  heart  is  ever  toward  sin.    He  who 

their  enemies.  walks  much  with  evil-doers  has  need 

I.  Benjamin's  want  of  faith.    There  ?^„g^®.^^    g^.f®  *^^    ^^^P    ^^°^    ^^^^ 

was  want  of  faith  (1)  in  God's  warn-  following  evil. 

ings  (Numb,  xxxiii.  56) ;  (2)  in  God's  V.    Benjamin's    lost    opportunity. 

willingness  or  power  to  help ;  (3)  in  The  city  which  the  people  feared  to 

the  blessings  which  ever  follow  obedi-  attack  now  was  not  taken  till  four 

ence,  hundred  years  afterwards  (2  Sam.  v. 

IL  Benjamin's  want  of  love.    Love  ^-l^)-     The  Lord  was  waiting  to  be 

to   God   should    have   prompted   the  with  Benjamin,  just  as  much  as  He 

people  at  least  to  make  an  effort  to  do  was     "  with     Judah  "     and     "  with 

as  God  had  commanded  them.     They  Joseph."    But  Benjamin  let  the  day 

seem,    however,    to    have    made    no  ^^r     conflict    go     by,   and    for    four 

attempt  to  take  the  city.     The  Lord  centuries    no    occasion     of    sufficient 

had  done  great  things  for  them,  but  Promise  to  stimulate  them  to  victory 

they  were   not  glad   enough  in   Him  ever  returned.     Even  when   the  city 

even  to  strive  to  obey.     Love  to  their  was  taken,  Saul  the  Benjaminite  king 

brethren  should  have  stimulated  them  was  passed  over,  and  David  who  was 

to  the  attack.    This  motive  failed  also,  o^j  ^^  ^^is  matter,  the  more  faithful 

,__    _     .      .  ,           .     _       ,      mu  tribe   of  Judah,   was   chosen   as   the 

m.  Benjamins  want  of  zeaL     The  instrument  for  adding  the  stronghold 

people   of    the    tribe   seem    to   have  ^f  ^ion   to    the    territory   of  Israel, 

quietly  settled  down  to  make  the  best  Henceforth,   this   part  of    Jerusalem 

of  things  as  they  were.     He  who  lacks  became  at  once  "the  City  of  David," 

faith   and  love  now  will  be  no   less  ..^^^  Qi^y  of  the  Great  King,"  and 

wanting  in  zeal  for  the  Lord  of  Hosts.  ^^^  gj^e  of  the  temple   of  Jehovah. 

The  issues  of  life  as  to  life  s  conflicts  Opportunity  once  forfeited  by  sinful 

are  also  out  of  the  heart,  and  he  who  ^^^^^lei  and   sloth  is  often  slow  to 

would  wm  many  victories  must  keep  ^^^urn.       **  To-day    is    the    accepted 

his  heart  with  all  diligence.  ^i^^  „  ^^^  ^  good  many  mercies  that 

IV.  Benjamin's  readiness  to  copy  may  have  fled  for  ever  to-morrow. 

Chronologioal  Note. — "We  have  a  firm  datum  tor  determining  more  minutely  the  time 
when  the  book  of  Judges  was  written,  in  this  statement  that  the  Jebusites  in  Jerusalem  had 
not  been  rooted  out  by  the  Israelites,  but  dwelt  there  with  the  children  of  Benjamin  ^unto 
this  day.*  The  Jebusites  remained  in  possession  of  Jerusalem,  or  of  the  citadel  Zion,  or  the 
upper  town  of  Jerusalem,  until  the  time  when  David  went  against  Jerusalem  after  the  twelve 
tribes  had  acknowledged  him  as  king,  took  the  fortress  of  Zion,  and  made  it  the  capital  of 
his  kingdom  under  the  name  of  the  City  of  David  (2  Sam.  v.  6-9  ;  1  Chron.  xi.  4-9).  Conse- 
quently the  book  was  written  before  this  event,  either  during  the  first  seven  years  of  the  reign 
of  David  at  Hebron,  or  during  the  reign  of  Saul,  under  whom  the  Israelites  already  enjoyed 
the  benefits  of  a  monarchical  government,  since  Saul  not  oiUy  fought  with  bravery  against  all 

23 


0Bir.L 


EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES 


the  enemies  of  Israel,  and  *  delivered  Israel  out  of  the  hands  of  them  that  spoiled  them  *  (1 
Sam.  xiv.  47,  48),  but  exerted  himself  to  restore  the  authority  of  the  laws  of  God  in  his  king- 
dom, as  is  evident  from  the  fact  that  he  banished  the  wizards  and  necromancers  out  of  the 
land  (1  Sam.  xxviii.  9).  The  Talmudical  statement  therefore  in  Bava-bat/wa,  to  the  eflfect 
that  Samuel  was  tiie  author  of  the  book,  may  be  so  far  correct,  that  if  it  was  not  written  by 
Samuel  himself  towards  the  close  of  his  life,  it  was  written  at  his  instigation  by  a  younger 
prophet  of  his  school.  More  than  this  it  is  impossible  to  decide.  So  much,  however,  is  at  all 
events  certain,  that  the  book  does  not  contain  traces  of  a  later  age  either  in  its  contents  or  in 
its  language,  and  that  chap,  xviii.  30  does  not  refer  to  the  time  of  the  captivity."     [KeiL] 

Dr.  Cassel  further  remarks  on  this  point,  "If  our  book  had  not  been  written  before  the 
time  of  David,  references  to  his  reign  could  not  be  wanting.  From  Othniel's  time,  the  tribe 
of  Judah,  David's  tribe,  falls  into  the  back'jround.  The  mention  of  it  in  the  history  of 
Samson  is  far  from  honourable.  The  relatively  copious  treatment  of  affairs  in  which  Benjamin 
figures,  points  to  the  time  of  King  Saul.  While  the  history  of  Othniel  is  quite  summarily 
related,  that  of  Eliud  is  drawn  out  to  the  minutest  detail.  Similarly  rich  is  the  flow  of  tradi- 
tion in  the  narrative  concerning  Gibeah  (chap.  xix.  seq.).  Saul  says  of  himself  that  he  is  *  of 
the  smallest  of  the  tribes*  (1  Sam.  ix.  21).  This  history  of  Gibeah  explains  the  cause  of 
Benjamin's  smallness,  and  traces  it  to  the  savage  war  made  on  him  by  Israel." 


Faith,  Obedience,  and  Victory. — Ferse  22. 


I.  Faith  and  obedience  helped  by 
brotherly  union.  The  house  of  Joseph 
consisted  of  both  Manasseh  and 
Ephraim.  So  long  as  they  worked 
together,  these  brother-tribes  seem 
to  have  gathered  encouragement  from 
each  other.  When  they  were  united, 
Bethel  was  fearlessly,  diligently,  and 
successfully  attacked.  Separating  from 
each  other,  both  Manasseh  and  Ephraim 
are  found  slothful,  weak,  and  disobe- 
dient (vers.  27-29).  Says  a  Spanish 
proverb  :  "  Three,  helping  each  other, 
are  as  good  as  six."  Similarly  an 
Italian  proverb  tells  us  that,  *' Three 
brothers  are  three  castles."  In  the 
Lord's  work  we  all  need  each  other. 

11  Faith  and  obedience  stimulated 
on  the  ground  of  former  mercies.  It 
was  against  Bethel  that  the  children 
of  Joseph  went  up.  The  very  name 
was  an  inspiration  :  fighting  for  the 
"  house  of  God,"  would  not  God 
certainly  be  with  themi  But  the  name 
had,  no  less,  an  inspiring  history. 
Here  good  old  Jacob,  their  common 
father,  had  seen  his  vision  of  the  angel- 
trodden  ladder,  set  up  between  earth 
and  heaven,  and  *'  he  called  the  name 
of  that  place  Bethel"  (Gen.  xxviii.  19). 
William  Hazlitt  remarks  in  his  open- 
ing lecture  on  the  English  Poets : 
"  There  can  never  be  another  Jacob's 
dream.  Since  that  time,  the  heavens 
have  gone  further  off,  and  grown 
astronomical."  Doubtless;  there  can- 
24 


not  be  any  dreaming  of  the  ancient 
vision  over  again,  yet  who  does  not 
feel  that  the  original  dream  has  lost 
nothing  of  its  power  even  to  us,  the 
astronomical  vastness  of  ourunladdered 
heavens  notwithstanding.  What  an 
inspiration  it  must  have  been  to  the 
sons  of  Joseph  as  they  went  to  battle 
on  this  scene,  made  so  bright  to  Jacob 
with  the  vision  of  ascending  and 
descending  angels  of  his  God  !  Again, 
God  had  sent  Jacob  to  Bethel  after 
his  return  from  Laban.  Here,  at  the 
Divine  command,  he  had  built  an  altar; 
at  this  very  spot  the  nurse  of  Jacob's 
mother  lay  interred  ;  here  the  new 
name  "Israel"  had  been  confirmed; 
on  this  very  ground  the  promise  had 
been  given  that  "  a  nation  and  a  com- 
pany of  nations"  should  be  of  Jacob 
their  father  ;  here  the  covenant  to 
Abraham  and  Isaac  had  been  renewed, 
*'  And  the  land,  to  thee  I  will  give  it, 
and  to  thy  seed  after  thee  will  I  give 
the  land  ; "  and  here,  for  the  second 
time,  had  Jacob  set  up  a  pillar  of  stone, 
and  poured  oil  upon  the  top  of  it,  and 
called  the  name  of  the  place  the  "  house 
of  God."  That  this  history  was  care- 
fully remembered  is  clear  from  the 
fact  that  the  name  Bethel  was  again 
substituted  for  Luz  ;  and  that  the 
history  was  reverently  cherished  is  no 
less  clear  from  the  way  in  which  for  a 
long  time  after,  Bethel  was  made  a  place 
for  enquiring  of  the  Lord  (cf.  chap.  xx. 
18,  26,  27  ;  xxi.  2).     These  memories 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES.  chap,  l 


of  God*s  mercies  to  Jacob,  and  of  the  inhabitants ;  equally,  when  Manasseh 

absolute  promise  on  that  very  spot  to  and  Epliraim  failed  in  faith  and  obedi- 

give  the  land  to  his  seed,  could  not  ence,  nothing  more  is  said  of  the  Lord's 

have  done  other  than  make  the  house  presence.      He  who   never   begins   to 

of  Joseph    strong    for    this   conflict.  serve  God  never  feels  able  to  serve ; 

The  very  stones  could  hardly  "  hold  he   who   sincerely   attempts    to   fight 

their  peace  "  if  faith  and  zeal  should  against  sin  in  himself  or  in  others,  only 

falter  here.     On  not  a  few  of  the  fields  finds  that  he  is  helpless  when  he  ceases 

where  God  calls  us  to  conflict,  similar  to  be  sincere.    Even  the  withered  haijd 

encouragements  wait  to  streno-then  all  can  beorin  to  move  when  it  tries  to  lift 

who  will  reverently  search  them  out.  itself  at  the  bidding  of  Christ. 

III.  Faith  and  obedience  helped  by  IV.  Faith  and  obedience  crowned 
the  Lord  at  the  very  outset.  **And  with  victory.  Bethel  fell,  and  its 
the  Lord  was  with  them."  No  sooner  inhabitants  were  slain,  according  to  the 
does  Joseph  go  up  to  the  Lord's  war,  Divine  commandment.  There  v.an  be 
than  the  Lord  goes  with  him.  He  no  question  of  victory  when  we  begin 
who  sets  out  for  God,  and  in  obedience  and  continue  and  end  our  warfare  with 
to  God,  has  God  with  him  even  at  the  Lord  of  Hosts  for  our  helper.  If 
setting  out.  On  the  contrary,  he  the  Lord  be  on  our  side,  greater  is  H«? 
who  declines  to  begin  to  walk  in  the  that  is  for  us  than  all  they  which  be 
way  of  the  Divine  commandments,  can  against  us  (cf.  2  Kings  vi.  16  ;  2  Chron. 
never  have  it  truly  written  that  '*  the  xxxii.  7  ;  Ps.  Iv.  18).  To  all  who  faith- 
Lord  was  with  him."  This  word  fully  contend,  seeking  His  help,  Christ 
occurs  no  more  in  this  chapter.  It  has  certainly  promised  the  crown  of 
was  not  spoken  of  any  of  the  tribes  life. 
who  did  not  attempt  to  drive  out  the 

Luz  AND  Bethel.— r^r^e  23. 

The  word  Bethel  occurs  before,  Gen.  after  Jacob's  vision,  and  that  the  new 

xxviii.  19,  in  which  place  this  name  is  name  which  Jacob  had  given  to  Luz  is 

said   to  have   been  given  to  Luz  by  carried  back  by  the  author,  with  an 

Jacob.     In  Gen.  xii.   8,  we  are  told  anachronism,  to  the  time  of  Abram. 

that  Abram  removed  from  the  plain  of  As  to  the  slightly  different  sites  of  Luz 

Moreh  "unto  a  mountain  on  the  east  and  Bethel, see  Preacher's  Commentary 

of  Bethel."     This  is  only  an  evidence  on  Joshua,  p.  270. 
that  the  book  of  Genesis  was  written 

The  Traitorous  Bethelite. — Verses  24,  25. 

There  is  no  reason  for  thinking  that  medium  of  His  people.    This  Bethelite 

this  man  believed  in  God,  and  that  probably  believed  nothing  of  the  kind, 

from   motives    of    religious    faith   he  He  expressed  no  faith  in  God;   not 

betrayed   his   city   to    the   Israelites,  casting  in  his  lot  witli  God's  people, 

Some  of  the  older  authors  have  com-  he   evidently   got   away   from    them, 

pared  his  case  to  that  of  Rahab.     It  with  his  family,  as  soon  as  he  could 

need  hardly  be  said  that,  in  motive,  make  his   escape  ;   and,  so   far   from 

they  are  evidently  and  utterly  unlike.  being  oppressed  by  the  sense  of  his 

Rahab   was    manifestly   overwhelmed  traitorous  conduct,  he  called  his  new 

with  the  conviction  that  the  God  of  city  by  the  name  of  the  city  he  had 

the  Israelites  was  the  true  God,  that  helped  to  deliver  up  to  the  Israelites. 

the  end  of  her  people  was  at  hand  ;  and  On  the  other  hand,  Dr.  Adam  Clarke's 

in  that  belief  she  sought  a  refuge  for  abuse  of  the  poor  creature  is  needlessly 

herself  and  her  household  under  the  extravagant.       He   was    probably   no 

mighty   God  of   Jacob,  through  the  willing  traitor.     He  did  not  betray  his 

25 


OHAP.  I.  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES, 


city  for  gain.     The  man  had  not  had  a  weak  man,  trembling  for  his  personal 

the  advantage  of  Dr.  Clarke's  training,  safety,  and  having  perhaps  no  small 

nor  had  he  breathed  the  iiealthy  atmo-  fear  for  his  family.     His  act  was  not 

sphere  of  a  land  which  had  long  been  an  exalted  one,  but  the  ordeal  which 

blessed  with  great  civil  and  religious  he  had  to  undergo  might  have  sorely 

liberty  and  knowledge.  He  was  merely  tried  even  a  better  man. 

The  Bethelite  in  "the  Land  of  the  Hittites." — Verse  26. 

The  land  of  the  Hittites  must  not  neighbourhood  of  Hebron  (Gren.  xxiii. 

be   confused   with    the   land   of    the  17-20;   xlix.  30),  and   twice  as   "in 

Chittim,  which  probably  had  its  ori-  the  nioiintains"  (Numb.  xiii.  29;  Josh, 

ginal  centre  on  the  sea-coast  north  of  xi.  3).     Generically,  the  words  D^JIH 

Sidon,  and  subsequently  extended  to  (Hittites),  and  D^^^nn  ob'D  (Kings  of 

Cyprus  and  to  some  of  the  adjacent  ,i     u-^A-i.    \           *  '      •  "  '  n     „     j  ^.^ 

.  f  ^  J          J           ^        r,    ^x      n/r*^  jv  the  Hittites),  are  occasional! v  used  to 

isiandg   and   coasts    or    the   Mediter-  i  „    .,      ,i  ''/^           .,            ^            _ 

T^     /-,       1  •      P       •   •       -1    ^  describe  the  Canaanites  under  a  com- 

ranean.     Dr.  Cassel  is  ot  opinion  that  _              n,.      ,i    \^   ■    a     ^  tt    ^  ^ 

,,^^            ,                   o  ^^     ^    •   .   '     ^  mon  appellation  (Josh.  1.  4  ;  1  Kings  x. 

"Movers  has  successruUy  maintained  oo    ott-          ••  c\     \Kr-ir\.A     ^f^J;^;*. 

^u  ^  «»«^       1-.—-.     c     ^   i.u  29  ;  2  Kinojs  vii.  6).    With  these  tacts  m 

that  D^i^n  and  D^^3  reier  to  the  same  •        -i.    if  •      i              i.  \.             *.  a.^ 

•  .           '^  *.  .  view,  it  obviously  cannot  be  correct  to 

race  of  people."     This,  however,  can-  treat  the  Hittites  and  the  inhabitants  of 

not   be,   unless   we   are    prepared   to  Kittim  as  "  the  same  race  of  people," 

ignore   the  Biblical   account  of  their  notwithstanding  that  subsequent  Phoe- 

entirely  distinct  origin.     The  Chittim,  nician   coins  may  be  "designated  by 

or   more  correctly  the   Kittim,    were  the  terms  JIH  and  JID." 

descended   from   Japheth  ;   while  the  As  to  the  town  built  by  this  Hittite 

Hittites   were   the   sons   of   Heth,   or  froj^  Bethel,  the  site  of  it  is  unknown. 

Cheth,    and    thus    belonged    to    the  Speaking   of    the   ruin    of  the  older 

family  of  Ham.     The  Scripture  account  Shechem,     Dean     Stanley     remarks  : 

of  the  two  races  is,  from  the  first,  so  « xhe    very    graphic    description     of 

distinctly  and  consistently  maintained,  Shechem  in  fheodotus  as  '  under  the 

both  as  to  the  territory  occupied  and  ^oots   of    the    mountain '  is    decisive 

the  Hebrew  spelling  of  the  two  names,  against  placing   it   on  the  summit  of 

that  no  considerable  intermixture  of  Qerizim.     He    speaks    of    the    name 

the  two  families  is  at  all  probable.     In  « Louzah,'   as   given   to   the   ruins   of 

Gen.  X.  4  and  1  Chron.  i.  7,  Kittim,  Qerizim  by  the  Samaritan  high-priest 

the  son  of  Javan,  the  son  of  Japheth,  ^t  N&blus,  which  certainly  agrees  with 

IS  named  as  the  father  of  the  people  the    position     of    Luza    noticed    by 

dwelHng  in  what  the  E.V.  invariably  Jerome  (Onomast.,     Laza).     Can  this 

calls  Chittim.     From  the  first  to  the  y^^   the   second   Luz,  founded  by  the 

last  of  Old  Testament  notices,  these  inhabitants  of  Luz  when  expelled  by 

Kittim  are  mentioned  as  a  maritime  the  Ephraimites  fromBetheU"     This 

people,  dwelling  to  the  north  of  Canaan,  j^ay  be,  but  it  scarcely  seems  probable 

and    they   are,    moreover,   repeatedly  ^jj^n  we  are  told  that  the  man  went 

associated  with  the  great  Tynan  and  u  i^to   the   land  of  the   Hittites  "  to 

Sidonian  commerce  (cf.   Numb.  xxiv.  ^uild  his  city,  and  when  we   bear  in 

24  ;  Isa.  xxiii.  1,  12  ;  Jer.  ii.  10 ;  Ezek.  ^j^^i  that  Ebal  and  Gerizim  were  held 

xxvii.  6  ;  Dan.  xi.  30).     On  the  other  ^t  this  time  by  the  powerful  tribe  ot 

hand,  the   Hittites   are  kept   equally  Ephraim,    and    that    only    Gezer    is 

distinct     both     orthographical ly    and  named,  in  ver.  29,   as  a  place   from 

geographically.     Though  a   numerous  ^^ich  the  Ephraimites  had  failed  to 

people,  they  were  manifestly  of  feebler  ^^pel  the  Canaanites,—  Gezer  being 

character  and  of  more  uncertain  loca-  j^g^r  to  Beth-horon,  and  standing  on 

lity  than  the  hardy  commercial  Kittim  the   southern    boundary -line   of   the 

of  the  north.     Tribally,  their  dwelling-  tribe  (Josh.  xvi.  3). 
place  twice  appears  as   being  in  the 
2G 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDQES. 


0HA7.  L 


Helpers  op  the  Lord's  People. 


"There  are  four  classes  of  persons 
whose  various  conduct  towards  the 
Church  of  God,  and  to  the  Gospel 
preached  by  her,  is  represented  by 
four  cases  in  the  books  of  Joshua  and 
Judges. 

"  1.  There  is  the  case  of  the  man  of 
Bethel.  He  might  liave  dwelt  with 
the  men  of  Joseph  at  Bethel,  and  have 
become  a  worshipper  of  the  true  God, 
and  have  thus  become  a  citizen  for 
ever  of  the  true  Bethel,  the  house  of 
God,  which  will  stand  for  ever.  But 
he  quits  the  house  of  God  to  pro- 
pagate heathenism  and  idolatry.  Tiie 
man  of  Bethel,  therefore,  is  presented 
to  us  in  this  Scripture  as  a  specimen 
of  that  class  of  persons  who  help  the 
Church  of  God  in  her  work  from 
motives  of  fear,  or  of  worldly  benefit, 
and  not  from  love  of  God  ;  and  who, 
when  they  have  opportunities  of 
spiritual  benefit,  slight  those  oppor- 
tunities, and  even  shun  the  light,  and 
go  away  from  Bethel,  the  house  of 
God,  as  it  were,  unto  some  far-off  land 
of  the  Hittites,  and  build  there  a  hea- 
then Luz  of  their  own. 

*•  2.  There  is  the  case  of  the  Kenites 
(ver.  16),  who  helped  Judah  after  their 
victories  in  Canaan,  and  were  received 
into  fellowship  with  them. 

**  3.  There  is  the  case  of  the  Gibeon- 


ites,  who  came  to  Joshua  from  motives 
of  fear,  and  were  admitted  to  dwell 
with  Israel  as  hewers  of  wood  and 
drawers  of  water. 

"  4.  There  is  the  case  of  Kahab. 
She  stands  out  in  beautiful  contrast  to 
the  man  of  Bethel.  He  helped  the 
spies  of  Joseph,  and  was  spared,  with 
his  household,  but  did  not  choose  to 
live  in  their  Bethel.  But  Rahab 
received  the  spies  of  Joshua,  even 
before  he  had  gained  a  single  victory, 
and  she  professed  her  faith  in  their 
God ;  and  she  was  spared,  she  and  her 
household,  and  she  became  a  mother 
in  Israel,  and  an  ancestress  of  Christ." 
[JVordsworth.'] 

"  It  is  of  no  avail  to  conquer  by 
faith,  unless  it  be  also  maintained  in 
faith ;  for  Bethel  became  afterwards  a 
Beth-aven,  a  House  of  Sin."  [Dr. 
C asset  ]  Cf  1  Kings  xii.  29  ;  Hosea 
iv.  15,  V.  8,  X.  5.  The  remark,  how- 
ever, of  Gesenius  should  here  be  borne 
in  mind  :  "  The  Talmudists  have  con- 
founded this  town  with  the  neighbour- 
ing city  of  Beth-El,  from  the  latter 
having  been  sometimes  called  by  the 
prophets,  in  contempt,  Beth-Aven." 
Beth-Aven,  as  is  seen  by  Josh.  vii.  2, 
was  near  to  Ai  on  the  east  side  of 
Bethel. 


Manasseh  and  Ephraim. — Verses  27-29. 

This   continued    disobedience   is   also 


These  verses  are,  in  substance,  a 
recapitulation  of  the  previous  state- 
ments in  Josh.  xvi.  10;  xvii.  11-13. 
But  the  repetition,  so  far  from  being 
needless,  is  necessary  on  two  grounds  ; 
it  shows  that  since  the  negligent 
beginning  recorded  in  the  book  of 
Joshua  there  had  been  no  improve- 
ment, saving  in  the  capture  of  Bethel 


set  forth  as  an  introduction  to,  and  a 
reason  for,  the  calamities  recorded 
throughout  this  book  of  Judges. 

For  additional  homiletic  remarks  on 
the  subject  of  these  verses,  see  the 
Preacher's  Commentary  on  Joshua,  pp. 
266,  272-274,  280. 


Forsaking  the  Lord's  Work. — Verses  27,  28. 


These  records  which  follow  to  tlie 
end  of  the  chapter,  remind  us  of  the 
unfiuished  towers  which  were  spoken 
of  by  our  Lord,  and  of  the  war  under 


taken  with  too  little  thought  (Luke 
xiv.  28-32).  There  are  a  great  many 
unfinished  towers  in  the  world  which 
ought  never  to  have  been  begun ;  there 

27 


OHAP.  L 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES, 


are  a  great  many  more  which,  having 
been  begun,  ought  certainly  to  have 
been  completed.  Just  the  same  may  be 
said  of  life's  conflicts,  Manasseh,  and 
Ephraim,  and  the  rest  of  these  tribes, 
did  not  fail  in  completing  their  war- 
fare because  they  had  begun  impru- 
dently, but  because  they  did  not  con- 
tinue believingly.  The  tower  of  con- 
quest was  unfinished,  not  because  they 
had  not  counted  the  cost  at  the  begin- 
ning, but  because  they  forgot  their 
infinite  resources  in  the  help  of  Jeho- 
vah.    We  see  in  these  verses — 

I.  Men  forsaking  a  work  which  had 
been  begun   after    long  preparation. 

The  plagues  of  Egypt,  the  miracles  of 
the  wilderness,  the  gifts  of  the  manna 
and  other  supplies,  and  the  long 
period  of  discipline  in  the  desert,  were 
all  designed  to  lead  up  to  the  full 
inheritance  of  the  land. 

II.  Men  forsaking  a  work  which 
had  already  been  prosecuted  with 
great  energy  and  at  great  cost.     How 

strikingly  does  the  indifference  here 
contrast  with  the  passage  of  the 
Jordan,  with  the  rapid  movements  at 
Beth-horon  and  the  Waters  of  Merom, 
and,  indeed,  with  the  vigour  displayed 
in  all  the  earlier  part  of  the  cam- 
paign !  What  vast  efforts  and  un- 
flinching zeal  had  been  previously 
expended  on  this  great  work  of  con- 
quest !  Now,  with  the  inheritance 
almost  in  hand,  the  strife  is  aban- 
doned. The  Church  has  thrown  away 
not  a  little  eneigy  for  want  of  just  a 
little  more.  When  the  seed  of  past 
efforts  is  not  cultivated  right  up  to  the 
point  where  harvest  is  sure,  it  may, 
after  all  our  labour,  only  result  in  a 


harvest  of  thorns  which  vex  us  (of. 
Numb,  xxxiii.  55 ;  Josh,  xxiii.  13 ; 
Judg.  ii.  3). 

III.  Men  forsaking  a  work  about 
which  they  had  cherished  ardent 
hopes.  The  whole  way  up  from  Egypt 
had  been  a  long  path  of  expectation. 
Enthusiasm  had  often  been  high,  as  in 
the  song  at  the  Red  Sea,  and  in  the 
service  at  Ebal.  We  see  here  brilliant 
hopes  blasted  for  ever  for  want  of  a 
little  more  faith  and  a  little  more 
service.  How  many  of  our  once 
cherished  visions  have  fled  for  the 
same  reason  ! 

IV.  Men  forsaking  a  work  in  which 
they  had  already  won  splendid 
triumphs.  The  path  of  their  past 
prowess  was  almost  vocal  aL>ainst  this 
sinful  inaction  and  unbelief.  The 
ruins  of  Jericho  were  a  protest  that 
must  have  seemed  almost  audible  to 
the  few  more  godly  of  the  host.  The 
great  days  of  Beth-horon  and  of 
Merom  might  well  have  waked  every 
sleeper  with  loud-echoing  rebukes. 

V.  Men  forsaking  a  work  to  which 
God  had  commanded  them,  in  which 
God  had  marvellously  helped  them, 
and  in  which  He  no  less  waited  to 
help  them  still.  They  did  not  "re- 
member the  years  of  the  right  hand 
of  the  Most  High."  "They  forgat 
His  works."  No  less  did  they  forL^et 
His  absolute  commands,  and  His 
unbroken  promises.  Herein  they 
grievously  sinned,  and  in  this  sin  lies 
the  terribly  appropriate  introduction 
which  this  chapter  makes  to  the  great 
sorrows  and  humiliations  and  further 
transgressions  recorded  throughout  this 
entire  book. 


Unconquered  Parts  of  our  Inheritance. — Verse  29. 


The  fruits  of  the  most  brilliant 
victories  blighted  for  want  of  grace  to 
follow  them  up. 

The  inheritance  which  has  been 
won  by  much  faith  becoming  a  ground 
of  temptation  and  trouble  for  want  of 
a  little  more  faith. 

The  unconquered  parts  of  our  estate 
in  God  bringing  a  curse  on  us  in  those 
28 


we  have  conquered  (cf.  1  Chron.  xx.  4  ; 
2  Sam.  xxi.  18). 

The  possessions  which  the  Lord's 
people  fail  to  win,  given  to  them 
presently  under  circumstances  of  much 
humiHation  (cf.  1  Kings  ix.  15-17). 

The  Lord's  help  failing  when  men 
fail  to  diligently  use  it.  The  Lord 
who   had    been    "with    Judah"   and 


no  Ml  LET IC  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES.  chap,  l 


**  with  Joseph,"  was  no  less  ready  to  hardly  pray  that  the  Lord  would  not 

be  with  Ephraira.  forsake  it. 

The   ground   for   prayer   becoming  The    sinful    disobedience    of    men 

untenable   to   those  who  fail  to  take  carrying    its     own     acknowledgment 

encouragement  from  the  Lord's  good-  that  it  is  without  excuse.     Manasseh 

ness,     David  prayed  (Ps.  cxxxviii.  8)  and  Ephraim,  who  thought  they  could 

"  Forsake  not  the  works  of  Thine  own  not  conquer,   both  put  their  enemies 

hands."     When   the  Israelites   them-  under  tribute  (ver.   28  ;   1    Kings   v. 

selves  forsook  this  work,  they  could  13,  ix  15). 

The  Position  and  Neighbourhood  of  Gezer. 

"  The   situation   of  Gezer   may  be  in  quarto  milliario  Nicopoleos  contra  sep- 

exactly  determined  from  Josh.  xvi.  3.  tentrionem,  although  the  distance  does 

The  border  of  Ephraim  proceeds  from  not  appear  to  be  accurately  given.    The 

Lower  Beth-horon,  by  way  of  Gezer,  Ganzur  o[  Esther  ha-Parchi  (ii.  434),  on 

to  the  sea.     Now,  since  the  position  of  the  contrary,  is  entirely  incorrect. 

Beth-horon  is   well    ascertained   {Beit  *'  The  position  of  Gezer  enables  us 

'Ur    et-Taiha),    the    border,    running  also  to  see  why  Ephi-aira  did  not  drive 

northwest  past  Ludd,  which  belonged  out  the  inhabitants.     The   place   was 

to  Benjamin,  must  have  touched  the  situated  in  a  fine  fertile  region.     It  is 

sea  to  the  north  of  Japho,  which  like-  still  surrounded   by  noble   corn  fields 

wise    lay    within     the    territory     of  and   rich    orchards.     The  agricultural 

Benjamin.     On  this  line,  four  or  five  population  of  such  fruitful  regions  were 

miles  east  of  Joppa,  there  still  exists  readily   permitted  to  remain   for   the 

a  place   called   Jesdr   (Jazour,   YazHr),  sake  of  profit,   especially  by   warlike 

which  can  be  nothing  else  than  Gezer.  tribes  who  had  less  love  and  skill  for 

It  is  not  improbable   that   it   is   the  such  peaceful  labours  than  was  pos- 

Gazara  of  Jerome  (p.  137,  ed.  Parthy),  sessed  by  Issachar."    [Dr.  Caesel.] 

The  District  of  Kitron  and  Nahalol. — Ferse  30. 

Kitron  is  taken  by  Gesenius  to  be  northwest  of  SeffArieh  has  its  name, 
the  Kattath  of  Josh.  xix.  1 5,  which  For  this  name  comes  from  Abel,  which 
is  there  mentioned  with  Nahallal,  or  also  means  pasture.  This  moreover 
Nahalol.  The  name  of  this  latter  suggests  the  explanation  why  from 
place  is  from  TzaAa/,  ^*  to  lead,"  s-pecially  just  these  two  places  the  Canaanites 
to  lead  to  water,  or  with  protecting  care.  were  not  expelled.  They  both  became 
Hence  Gesenius  supposes  Nahalol  to  tributary,  and  remained  the  occupants 
mean  i^ pasture  to  which  cattle  are  led  and  bailiff's  of  their  pastures  and 
out  {cf.  Heb. ,  IssL.  \ii.  19)."  Dr.  Cassel  meadows."  As  similar  features  of 
thinks  that  Kitron  and  Nahalol  were  profitable  tribute  are  equally  suggested 
put  to  tribute  for  exactly  the  same  by  several  of  the  names  in  the  follow- 
reason  as  was  Gezer — because  they  ing  verses,  there  seems  some  ground 
were  both  surrounded  by  rich  pasture-  for  the  suspicion  that  greed  and  idle- 
lands.  He  further  says  of  Nahalol :  ness,  in  some  cases>  had  even  more  to 
"  It  answers  perhaps  to  Abilin,  a  place  do  than  fear  with  the  disobedience  of 
from  which  a  wady  somewhat  to  the  the  various  tribes. 

The  Power  of  Evil  Examples. — Verses  30-33. 

A    bad    example    is    full    of    evil  the  dereliction  of  Judah.     Judah  did 

issues ;  what  one  tribe   does  another  run  well,  but  the  iron  chariots,  and  a 

does   also.      All   the   western    tribes,  love  of  ease,  became  hindrances  to  a 

saving  Issachar,  seem  to  have  followed  continued  obedience  to  the  truth. 

29 


OHAP.  L 


BOMILETJC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


The  evil  example  of  the  great  and 
powerful  is  specially  harmful ;  Judah 
and  Joseph  draw  all  the  rest  in  the 
train  of  their  disobedience. 

These  evil  examples  and  their  evil 
results  are  all  well  remembered  by 
God.  Eichard  Rogers  quaintly  ob- 
serves :  "  Let  not  men  be  deceived ; 
God  hath  all  these  things  and  such 
like  registered  and  written,  not  with 
ink  and  paper  (for  then  there  were 
hope  that  in  time  they  might  be  worn 
out),  but  in  His  remembrance,  which 
never  faileth.  If  Paul,  who  is  so  rare 
a  pattern  of  piety,  desires  that  men 
follow  not  his  example  further  than 
he  follows  Christ,  what  shall  they 
have  to  answer  who  look  no  further 
than  to  this,  that,  however  odious 
their  doings  are,  they  see  others  do  the 
same  1  They  that  lead  and  entice  us 
on  by  their  example,  cannot  help  us  to 
bear  our  punishment  when  their  own 
shall  become  intolerable  to  them." 

"  Example  is  like  the  press :  a 
thing  done  is  the  thought  printed; 
it  may  be  repeated,  but  it  cannot  be 
recalled ;  it  has  gone  forth  with  a 
self- propagating  power,  and  may  run 
to  the  ends  of  the  earth,  and  de- 
scend from  generation  to  generation." 
[Melville.] 

"  There  is  at  the  top  of  the  Queen's 
staircase  in  Windsor  Castle,  a  statue, 
from  the  studio  of  Baron  Triqueti,  of 


Edward  VI.  marking  with  his  sceptre 
a  passage  in  the  Bible  which  he  holds 
in  his  left  hand,  and  upon  which  he 
earnestly  looks.  The  passage  is  that 
concerninfi:  Josiah  :  *  Josiah  was  ei2;ht 
years  old  when  he  began  to  reign  ;  and 
he  reigned  thirty  and  one  years  in 
Jerusalem.  And  he  did  that  which 
was  right  in  the  sight  of  tlie  Lord,  and 
walked  in  all  the  way  of  David  his 
father,  and  turned  not  aside  to  the 
right  hand  or  to  the  left.'  The 
statue  was  erected  by  the  will  of  the 
late  Prince,  who  intended  it  to  convey 
to  his  son  the  divine  principles  by 
which  the  future  governor  of  England 
should  mould  his  life,  and  reign  on  the 
throne  of  Great  Britain."   [T.  Hughes.] 

*'  I  am  not  the  rose,  but  I  have  been 
with  the  rose,  and  therefore  am  I 
sweet."     [Eastern  Proverb.] 

"  Take  away  yourselves  from  among 
the  evil  ones ;  for  if  ye,  being  weak 
and  unskilful,  shall  company  with 
them,  ye  must  needs  both  see  and  hear 
very  many  things  against  godliness 
and  the  religion  which  you  profess. 
And  because  you  are  able  neither  to 
confute  nor  to  reprove  them,  you  shall 
seem  to  be  as  witnesses  of  blasphemies 
and  a  reproach  of  the  truth.  And, 
peradventure,  there  will  remain  a  sting 
in  your  minds,  wherewith  your  con- 
science will  be  vexed  longer  than  you 
think  for."     [Peter  Martyr,] 


Undestroyed  Monuments  of  Idolatry. —  Ferses  33-36. 


The  names  of  several  of  these  places 
were  notoriously  derived  from  the 
idolatrous  worship  of  which  they  were 
so  many  centres  and  strongholds.  Beth- 
shemesh  was  *'  the  house  of  the  sun," 
and  Har-cheres,  or  Mount  Heres,  "  the 
mountain  of  the  sun."  These  pointed  to 
the  worship  of  the  sun.  Of  Beth-anath, 
"  the  house  of  response  "  (perhaps  "  of 
echo,"  Gesen.)^  Cassel  says  :  "  The 
name  indicates  that  its  situation  was 
that  of  the  present  B^nids,  the  ancient 
Paneas.  The  inscriptions  on  the  grotto 
called  Panium,  still  point  to  the  echo. 
One  of  them  is  dedicated  the  'echo- 
loving'  Pan.  The  love  of  Pan  for  the 
30 


nymph  Echo  was  a  widely-spread 
myth.  Another  inscription  tells  of  a 
man  who  dedicated  a  niche  to  the 
Echo."  While  the  identification  of 
B&ni&s  with  Beth-anath  rather  than 
with  Baal-gad  may  be  questioned,  it  is 
quite  possible  that  the  worship  of  the 
"  echo-loving  "  Pan  was  carried  on  at 
Beth-anath  also.  In  any  case  this 
town  could  not  have  been  far  from 
B^ni^s,  or  Caesarea-Philippi.  Eusebius 
and  Jerome  speak  of  it  as  Batansea, 
fifteen  miles  east  of  B^ni^s,  which  is 
not  a  great  distance  for  the  spread  of 
a  prominent  feature  of  idolatry. 

These  monuments  of  idolatry  the 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


OBAP.  II, 


men  of  Naphtali  and  Dan  suffered  to 
remain  in  their  midst.  They  spared 
the  inhabitants,  and  the  towns,  and 
the  ancient  idolatrous  names,  and  thus 
helped  to  perpetuate  in  their  very 
midst  the  pernicious  idolatrous  influ- 
ence. Dan,  in  the  south-western 
possession  of  this  tribe,  seems  to  have 
been  overpowered  for  a  time ;  but  yet 
the  "heavy  hand"  of  the  house  of 
Joseph  was  stretched  out  only  to  make 
tributaries,  and  not  to  overthrow 
idolatry.  To  this  arrangement  Dan 
also  probably  consented. 


**  Our  corrupt  nature  will  show 
mercy  only  where  severity  should  be 
used,  and   is    altoijether 


rough 


and 


hard  where  gentleness  might  be  prac- 
tised. 

"  Self-conceit,  avarice,  and  self- 
interest  can  bring  it  about  that  men 
will  unhesitatingly  despise  the  com- 
mand of  God. 

**When  human  counsels  are  preferred 
to  the  express  word  and  command  of 


God,  the  result  is  that  matters  grow 
worse  and  worse."     [Starke,] 

"Obedience  and  love  toward  God 
are  wrecked  on  greediness  and  love 
of  ease. 

"  Perfect  obedience  is  the  only  safe 
way.  Every  departure  from  it  leads 
downhill  into  danger. 

"  The  fear  of  God  is  still  ever  the 
beginning  of  wisdom  ;  but  it  must  not 
be  mixed  with  the  fear  of  men. 

**  Preaching  is  still  ever  effective ; 
but  respect  to  tribute  and  profitable 
returns  must  not  weaken  it. 

"  The  Word  of  God  has  not  lost  its 
power  ;  but  the  people  who  have  it  on 
their  tongues  do  not  thoroughly  enter 
into  its  life. 

"  When  confession  and  life  do  not 
agree,  the  life  must  bear  the  conse- 
quences."    [Dr.  Cassel] 

"  The  sin  prepared  its  own  punish- 
ment, and  the  love  of  present  ease 
became  the  cause  of  their  perpetual 
disquiet.'*     [ScotLl 


CHAPTER  a 


TBS  BEGINNING  OF  THE  L0RD*8  REBUKB. 

Critioal  Notes. — 1.  An  angel  of  the  Lord.]     Not  merely  **a  messenger y**  but  the  "  angd  of 

Jehovah^  "The  phrase  is  used  nearly  sixty  times  to  designate  the  angel  of  God's  presence. 
[Speaker's  Commentary.']  "  Kot  a  prophet,  or  some  other  earthly  messenger  of  Jehovah,  either 
Phinehas  or  Joshua,  as  the  Targums,  the  Rabbins,  Bertheau,  and  others  assume,  but  the  angel 
of  the  Lord,  who  is  of  one  essence  with  God.  In  the  simple  historical  narrative  a  prophet  ig 
never  called  Malach  Jehovah.  The  prophets  are  always  called  either  NOJ  or  N^Il^  I£/''^^J 
as  in  chap.  vi.  8,  or  else  'man  of  God,'  as  in  1  Kings  xii.  22,  xiii.  1,  &c.  ;  and  Hag.  i.  13,  and 
Mai.  iii.  1,  cannot  be  adduced  as  proofs  to  the  contrary,  because  in  both  these  passages  the 
purely  appellative  meaning  of  the  word  Malach  is  established  beyond  all  question  by  the  con- 
text itself.  Moreover,  no  prophet  ever  identifies  himself  so  entirely  with  God  as  the  angel  of 
Jehovah  does  here.  The  prophets  always  distinguish  between  themselves  and  Jehovah  by 
introducing  their  words  with  the  declaration  *  Thus  saith  Jehovah,'  as  the  prophet  mentioned 
in  ciiap.  vi.  8  is  said  to  have  done."  [JTeti.]  The  language  itself  proclaims  the  presence  of 
the  Angel  of  the  Covenant  ;  it  cannot  be  thought  of  as  the  utterance  of  a  merely  human 
messenger.  Came  up  from  Gilgal.]  The  situation  of  Bochim  is  unknown.  As  the  people 
were  assembled  in  congrei:ation  (ver.  4),  probably  the  gathering  was  in  the  usual  locality,  i.e., 
at  or  near  to  Shiloh  (cf.  Josh,  xviii.  1,  10  ;  xix.  61  ;  xxi.  2  ;  xxii.  9,  12).  Then  the  angel 
coming  up  "from  Gilgal"  would  probably  come  from  the  Gilgal  near  to  Shiloh,  where  the 
Israelites  liad  so  long  encam[>ed  during  the  war  under  Joshua  (cf.  Preacher's  Commentary,  pp. 
170,  172,  199).  It  would  be  sufficiently  appropriate  that  the  angel  should  be  seen  to  come  with 
Jehovah's  rebuke  from  the  very  place  from  which  the  ** Angel  of  His  Presence"  had  gone 
up  with  them  to  mighty  and  repeated  victories  (Isa.  Ixiii.  9  ;  Josh.  x.  6-9,  43,  xi.  7).  The 
moral  significance  of  the  angel  being  seen  to  come  from  Gilgal — thus  associated  with  past  help 
— would  be  very  great.  What  could  be  more  full  of  tender  historic  reproof  than  that  the  angel 
who  had,  as  it  were,  waited  at  the  warrior's  camp  to  help  the  faithful,  should  come  from 
*uch  ground  to  rebuke  the  unbelieving  aud  slothful  ?    To  Bochim.]    That  this  is  seen  to  be  on 

31 


CHAP.  n.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES. 


higher  ground  than  Gilgal,  is  no  proof  that  the  Gilgal  was  that  near  Jericho.  All  the  time  the 
site  of  Bochim  is  unknown,  there  is  nothing  to  suggest  that  this  was  other  than  the  Gilgal 
of  Deut.  xi.  30,  and  2  Kings  ii.  1,  from  which  Elijah  and  Elisha  went  ^^  down   to  Bethel" 

(7^i''/^^2l  ^T),"!).     The  LXX.  place  Bochim  near  to  Bethel,  saj'ing  that  the  angel  '*  went  up 

from  Galgal  to  the  (place  of)  weeping,  and  to  Baethel,  and  to  the  house  of  Israel."  Even  if 
this  were  accepted,  Bochim  may  have  been  on  **  the  mountain  east  of  Bethel"  from  wlience 
Abraham  obtained  so  wide  an  outlook  in  all  directions  (Gen.  xiii.  14,  15)  ;  in  which  case  it 
might  be  quite  correct,  at  least  of  the  latter  part  of  the  distance,  to  speak  of  the  angel  as  going 
"up  to  Bochim."  Keil,  however,  points  out  that  this  reading  of  the  LXX.  "gives  no  clue 
whatever."  2.  Why  have  ye  done  this?]  Lit,,  "  What  is  this  which  ye  have  done?  "  Not  so 
much  an  inquiry  as  a  remonstrance  and  a  chiding.  8.  But  they  shall  be  as  thorns  in  your 
sides.]  =  "But  they  shall  be  to  you  for  adversaries"     1!^    "a  side^'*  pi.  D''"^ii     is  from  the 

root  "^125  "to  turn  oneself,"  **  to  oppose  oneself ,"  to  any  one.  Hence  Chald,  "T^D^  "on  the 
side  of"  "  the  part  of"  (Dan.  vi.  5)  ;  and  1^7  "  against  the  side  of**  (Dan.  vii.  25).  Therefore 
D^^iJ  here  should  be  rendered  "adversaries"  ;  otherwise,  the  expression  would  stand,  "they 
shall  be  to  you  for  sides."  This  makes  the  various  conjectures  on  this  expression  unnecessary. 
Cf.  Gesen.  and  Buxtoif,  jun.,  who  both  refer  to  this  verse,  and  both  render  T^   as  found  here, 

"an  adversary."  5.  They  sacrificed  there  nnto  the  Lord.]  "This  indicates  the  close 
proximity  of  Bochim  to  Sliechem,  where  the  tabernacle  was  at  this  time  (Josh.  xxiv.  25,  26)." 
[Speaker's  Commentary  .'\  Keil,  however,  thinks  that  "it  does  not  follow  from  this  sacrifice  that 
the  tabernacle  or  the  ark  of  the  covenant  was  to  be  found  at  Bochim.  In  any  place  where 
the  Lord  appeared  lo  the  people,  sacrifices  might  be  offered  to  Him  (chap.  vi.  20,  26,  28  ;  xiii.  16 
sqq.  ;  2  Sam.  xxiv.  25).  "  On  the  other  hand,"  it  is  added,  "  it  does  follow  from  the  sacrifice  at 
Bochim,  where  there  was  no  sanctuary  of  Jehovah,  that  the  person  who  appeared  to  the  people 
was  not  a  prophet,  nor  even  an  ordinary  angel,  but  the  angel  of  the  Lord^  who  is  essentially  one 
with  Jehovah ."  6.  And  when  Joshua  had  let  the  people  go.]  The  visit  and  solemn  message  of 
the  angel  had  led  to  tears.  The  temporary  repentance  was  so  general  tliat  the  place  of  the  visit  was 
named  after  the  weeping  which  it  had  produced.  But  tears  for  sin  are  of  small  use  so  long  as  the 
sin  itself  is  not  put  away.  Israel  remained  in  league  with  the  tributary  Canaanites  in  spite  of 
the  tears.  That  being  so,  the  sin  went  on  to  work  out  its  inevitable  calamities  and  to  bring 
tears  which  were  more  abiding.  These  verses,  from  Josh.  xxiv.  28-31,  are  therefore  quoted 
to  contrast  the  fidelity  of  Israel  under  Joshua  with  the  infidelity  of  Israel  after  the  death  of 
Joshua,  and  of  his  contemporary  elders,  who  had  seen  the  great  works  of  Jehovah.  The 
quotation,  therefore,  is  not  only  appropriate;  it  is  inserted  as  giving  emphasis  to  Joshua*s 
influence  in  the  past,  as  laying  an  emphasis  on  God's  merciful  keeping  of  His  covenant  while 
Israel  remained  faithful,  and  thus  as  giving  a  fearful  emphasis  to  the  facts  which  this  history 
of  the  Judges  records  to  show  that  the  beginning  of  sin  is  the  beginning  of  sorrows,  and  that 
the  continuation  of  sin  is  their  inevitable  perpetuation  and  aggravation  also.  7.  All  the  days 
of  the  elders.]  **  No  exact  term  of  years  is  assigned  to  'the  days  of  the  elders,'  which  must, 
therefore,  remain  uncertain.  The  length  of  Joshua's  government  is  also  uncertain.  If,  how- 
ever, we  assume  Joshua  to  have  been  about  the  same  age  as  his  companion  Caleb,  as  is  pro- 
bable, he  would  have  been  just  eighty  at  the  entrance  into  Canaan,  and  therefore  thirty  years 
would  bring  us  to  the  close  of  his  life.  These  elders  would  be  all  that  were  old  enough  to 
take  part  in  the  wars  of  Canaan,  according  to  Judg.  iii«  1,  2  ;  and  therefore,  reckoning  from 
the  age  of  twenty  to  seventy,  we  cannot  be  far  wrong  in  assigning  a  period  of  about  fifty  years 
from  the  entrance  into  Canaan  to  the  death  of  the  elders,  or  twenty  years  after  the  death  of 
Joshua,  supposing  his  government  to  have  lasted  thirty  years."  [Speaker*s  Commentary.]  9. 
Timnath-heres.]  Called  in  Josh.  xix.  50,  xxiv.  30,  Timnath-serah.  Cf.  Preacher's  Commentary, 
p.  286.  The  difference  of  the  names  in  the  original  is  simply  that  of  a  transposition  of  the  letters. 
10.  Whicli  knew  not  the  Lord.]  That  is,  they  knew  Him  not  as  their  fathers  did,  who  had 
seen  so  many  of  Jehovah's  mighty  works.  It  is  not  even  meant  that  they  were  mentally 
strangers  to  the  history  of  God's  goodness  under  Joshua;  they  knew  not  God  in  their  hearts. 
They  had  no  love  to  Him.     The  word  ^"f  is  similarly  used,  in  Exod.  i.  8,  of  the  king  who 

T 

"knew  not  Joseph."  11.  And  served  Baalim. ]  The  pi.  form  indicates  the  different  Baalim, 
or  the  different  characters  and  modifications  under  which  Baal,  the  sun-god,  was  worshipped, 
rather  than  the  different  images  of  Baal.  The  singular,  Baal  =  " /oroJ,"  principally  in  the 
sense  of  owner  and  possessor.  "  When  the  worshippers  wished  to  express  a  particular  Baal 
they  generally  added  some  particular  epithet,  as  Baal-zephon,  Baal-peor^  Baal-zehuh^  Baal- 
shamayim^  &c.  The  two  former  were  adored  by  the  Moabites;  Baal-zehuh^  by  the  Ekronites  ; 
Baal-herith  was  honoured  at  Shechem  ;  and  Baal-shamayim^  the  lord  of  the  heavens,  was 
adored  among  the  Phoenicians,  Syrians,  Chaldeans,  &c.  Probably  among  all  these  people, 
Baal  meant  the  sun."  [Dr.  A.  Clarke.']  13.  Ashtaroth.]  The  pi.  form  of  Ashtoreth,  the  Greek 
Astarte.  Solomon  followed  the  impure  worship  of  this  idolatry  (1  Kings  xi.  5,  33  ;  2  Kings 
xxiii.  13).  "Ashteroth  Karnaim  points  to  the  horns  of  the  crescent  moon,  by  which  also 
A8taii(  of  Askelon  is  indicated  on  the  coins  of  that  city  (cf.  Stark,  Qaxa,  p.  259).  The 
52 


HOMILETIQ  COMMENTARY .  JUDGES.  chap.il 


armed  Aphrodite  in  Sp.irta  is  the  same  will)  Helena  or  Selene,  the  moon-goddess,  a  fact  clearly 
demonstrative  of  her  identity  witli  Astarte.  Moon  and  stars,  the  luminaries  of  the  night-sky, 
are  blended  in  Ashtarotii.  She  representa  the  collective  host  of  heaven."  [Cassel.^  Tlius, 
Ashtoreth  cannot  be  limited  to  Venus,  but  is  the  moon-goddess,  including  Venus  and  the  rest 
of  the  stars,  Ashtoreth  of  the  night  thus  standing  over  against  Baal  of  the  day.  This  relation 
of  Ashtoreth  to  the  moon  is  of  importance  in  understanding  Joshua's  command  for  the  moon 
"  to  stand  still,"  as  well  as  the  sun.  15.  Whithersoever  they  went  out  the  hand  of  the  Lord 
was  against  them.]  "  This  is  in  terrible  contrast  to  what  is  said  in  Josh.  i.  9."  [^Speaker'8  Com.'\ 
Hence  tlie  relevancy  and  great  significance  of  the  quotation  in  ver.  6-9.  They  were  greatly 
distressed.]    Lit,  **  And  it  became  to  them  very  narrow.*'    "liJ"!    from  "l-lif    '*  to  straiten,  to  press 

upon,  to  compress;  "  thence,  intrans.,  "  to  become  straitened  "  (cf.  chap.  x.  9).  16.  Nevertheless,  the 
Lord  raised  up  judges.]  Heb.,*^and  the  Lord  raised,"  &c.  This  is  the  first  use  of  the  word  shophHim, 
or  judges,  from  which  ihe  book  takes  its  name.  18.  For  it  repented  the  Lord  because  of  their 
groanings.]  "Because  the  Lord  had  compassion  upon  their  sighing.**  [KeiL]  "'  The  Lord 
was  moved  with  compassion,'  or  *  was  grieved,*  *  because  of  their  groanings,'  as  xxi.  15.  So, 
too,  Ps.  cvi.  45.  The  sense  of  repenting  which  the  word  (DH^)  bears,  Jon.  iii.  9,  and  elsewhere, 
is  secondary  "  [Speaker  s  Com.]  19.  Audit  came  to  pass.]  *'  But  it  came,"  &c.,  the  vau  being 
taken  adversativeiy.  They  ceased  not.]  Cf.  Marg.j  "  they  let  nothing  fall  of  their  doings,'*  i.e., 
of  their  wicked  doings.  LXX.,  "  They  abandoned  not  their  devices."  20,  And  the  anger  of 
the  Lord.]  This  resumes  the  statement  from  ver.  14,  the  intervening  passage  being  a  general 
description  of  details  presently  to  be  mentioned  in  the  main  narrative.  21.  I  also  wiU  not 
henceforth,  &c.]  Lit.,  '•  I  also  will  not  continue  to  drive  out  a  man  from  before  tliem." 
This  cessation  of  Jehovah's  working  is  placed  over  against  the  want  of  cessation  from  evil 
doings  spoken  of  in  verse  1 9.  23.  Therefore  the  Lord  left.]  That  is  to  say,  **  Therefore  the  Lord 
had  left,"&c.  He  had  foreseen  this  backsliding  of  Israel  (Deut.  xxxi.  16-18),  and  had  sufiered 
the  Canaanites  to  rally  from  the  apparently  overwhelming  defeats  of  Joshua,  in  order  that  they 
mii^ht  remain  to  prove  Israel.  Thus,  as  Prof.  Steenstra  remarks,  "the  'not  speedily'  of 
Joshua's  time  had  by  Israel's  faithless  apostasy  been  changed  into  *  never.'  "  The  impression 
left  by  this  verse  in  the  A.  V.  as  to  not  "  driving  them  out  hastily,**  is  certainly  not  in  harmony 
with  the  emphatic  statement  in  ver.  21,  that  Jehovah  would  not  go  on,  or  add,  ^'  to  drive  out  a 
man  "  in  the  future. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OP  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Ver,  1-6. 

The  Inevitable  Consequences  of  Sin. — Verses  1-4. 

The  latter  half  of  the  previous  chapter  is  a  necessary  introduction  to  the 
opening  verses  of  this.  God's  messenger  of  chastisement  never  appears  till  our 
sins  have  preceded  him.  The  pleasures  of  sin  are  the  evening  twilight  which 
ever  comes  before  the  night  of  Divine  punishment.  The  lurid  light  of  the 
evening  sunset  may  have  its  fascinations ;  for  all  that,  it  does  but  precede  the 
darkness. 

This  messenger  of  punishment  is  none  other  than  "The  Messenger  of  the 
Covenant "  (Mai.  iii.  1).  This  angel  is  none  other  than  He  of  whom  it  has 
presently  to  be  written,  "  The  Angel  of  His  presence  saved  them"  (Is.  Ixiii.  9  : 
cf.  also,  Ex.  xiii.  21,  xiv.  19,  xxiii.  20,  23,  xxxii.  34,  xxxiii.  14,  Num.  xx.  16). 
How  passing  sad  that  the  messenger  who  heralds  the  dark  night  of  human 
suffering  should  be  He  who  ever  loves  to  come  to  us  as  the  Sun  of  Righteous- 
ness !     In  these  five  verses  we  see — 

I.  The  Lord  determinately  following  His  people.  He  who  in  after  years 
said  through  Hosea,  "  How  shall  I  give  thee  up,  Ephraim?  how  shall  I  deliver 
thee,  Israel  % "  here  shews  us  that  the  feeling,  expressed  seven  centuries  later, 
was  cherished  long  before  it  was  expressed.  Even  though  the  tribes  had  all 
turned  to  sin,  He  would  '*  hedge  up  their  way  with  thorns  "  (Hos.  ii.  6),  and 
for  this  very  purpose  the  Lord  Himself,  speaking  in  His  own  person,  now 
appeared  to  them  (ver.  3).  1.  Kis  purpose  at  the  first  was  too  firmly  taken  to 
suffer  Him  to  forsake  them  now.  The  promises  to  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob 
had  in  them  no  hesitation.  The  language  to  Moses,  when  the  work  of  redemp- 
tion was  beginning,  left  no  place  for  failure  (Exod.  vi.  2-8).  The  Divine 
miracles  against  Pharaoh  had  in  them  no  appearance  of  faltering.  Thus,  God 
is  seen  following  His  people,  even  when  they  turn  almost  universally  to  sin. 

0  33 


cHAF.n.  EOMJLETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUU0E8. 


2.  He  had  done  too  much  fm'  them  to  give  them  up  lightly.  The  price  of  their 
deliverance  from  Egypt  had  been  too  great  to  suffer  it  to  be  lost.  From 
Goshen  right  up  to  Joshua's  tomb  at  Timnath-serah,  the  way  had  been  lined 
with  miracles  and  paved  with  mercy.  The  price  of  our  redemption  has  been 
still  more  precious.  We  may  look  on  the  *'  unspeakable  gift."  and  find  in  that 
the  Divine  Amen  to  the  Divine  promise,  "  I  will  never  leave  thee,  nor  forsake 
thee."  3.  The  glory  of  His  name  was  involved  in  their  failure.  Moses  had  contem- 
plated the  overthrow  in  the  wilderness,  and,  overcome  with  horror,  he  had 
turned  as  mediator  in  strong  cryings  to  his  God,  saying,  '*  What  wilt  Thou  do 
unto  Thy  great  name  ]  "  So,  keeping  His  name  as  "  the  name  which  is  above 
every  name,"  Jesus  Christ  is  here  seen  as  the  angel  of  reproof  at  Bochim.  Every 
one  of  the  western  tribes,  except  Issachar,  whom  Gideon  found  no  better  than 
the  rest,  is  actually  named  as  having  departed  from  the  Lord;  yet  the  Lord  says 
here,  *'  My  kindness  shall  not  depart  from  thee."  4.  The  love  of  His  heart,  had 
there  heen  nothing  else,  was  sufficient  to  constrain  Him  to  follow  them.  The  Divine 
purpose,  the  miracles,  and  the  committing  of  His  glorious  name  in  some  measure 
to  men,  had  all  proceeded  from  the  Divine  love.  These  things  were  but  the 
streams  ;  the  love  of  Jehovah  was  the  fountain  from  which  all  of  them  had 
flowed  forth  unto  men.  The  purpose  of  God  to  save,  and  His  unfailing  cove- 
nant ;  miracles  like  those  of  the  nianaa,  the  flowing  water,  the  divided  sea  and 
river,  the  falling  walls  of  Jericho,  and  the  victory  at  Beth-horon  :  all  these,  and 
many  similar  mercies,  are  fit  themes  for  glad  and  holy  song.  Yet  he  thinks 
most  wisely,  and  is  likely  to  sing  most  continuously  and  sweetly,  who  finds  in 
all  spoken  promises  and  visible  favours  so  many  evidences  of  the  changeless 
love  of  the  living  God.  His  mercies  are  precious,  but  His  priceless  love  which 
can  repeat  them  all  again,  and  multiply  them  to  meet  our  utmost  need,  is  more 
precious  still.  It  was  in  the  living  love  of  Jehovah  that  the  cause  was  to  be 
found  of  this  gracious  visit  to  Bochim. 

II.  Rebuke  emphatically  attending  on  sin.  The  words  of  the  Angel  are 
all  words  of  rebuke  (vers.  1-3).  Yet  how  calm  is  the  rebuke.  It  has  in  it 
no  haste,  and  no  passion.  Every  word  is  terrible  with  truth  and  gentleness. 
We  have  here  : — 1.  Rebuke  set  in  the  overpowering  light  of  past  mercies,  (a)  The 
Angel  reminded  them  of  deliverance  from  bondage.  "  I  made  you  go  up  out  of 
Egypt."  The  hole  of  the  pit  whence  they  were  digged  was  brought  before 
them.  The  rugged  quarry  whence  they  were  hewn  was  recalled  to  thought. 
(&)  The  Angel  reminded  them  of  mercies  on  the  way.  "And  have  brought  you 
unto  the  land."  These  mercies  are  not  enumerated  in  this  record.  They  may 
have  been  alluded  to  in  detail,  but  even  this  general  reference  to  them  contri- 
buted to  tears.  He  thinks  but  poorly  of  sin  who  does  not  contemplate  it  in 
view  of  what  God  has  done  to  deliver  him  from  its  power  and  sorrow,  (c)  The 
Angel  reminded  them,  of  the  unalterable  covenant.  *'  The  land  which  I  sware  unto 
your  fathers."  Their  fathers  had  been  encouraged  by  the  unfailing  promises  of 
God,  which  had  been  solemnly  given  to  three  successive  generations  through 
Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob.  The  covenant  with  the  fathers  had  been  renewed 
unto  the  children  :  "  I  said  I  will  never  break  my  covenant  with  you."  This 
covenant,  however,  from  the  first,  included  the  condition  of  Israel's  obedience 
(Gen.  xvii.  7-14).  God  never  did  break  that  covenant,  even  when  Israel 
was  carried  away  to  Babylon,  or  when  the  Romans  overthrew  Jerusalem. 
((d)  The  Angel  "  came  up  from  GilgaV  He  laid  emphasis  upon  all  the  mercy 
of  the  past  by  coming  visibly  from  the  place  of  the  old  encampment,  from 
which  He  had  so  often  gone  forth  with  Joshua  and  the  host  to  mighty  vic- 
tories. Probably  Bochim  was  near  to  Sliiloh,  or  Bethel  (chap.  xxi.  19),  and 
the  site  of  the  camp  at  Gilgal  lay  between  them,  so  that  the  Angel  might 
liMve  been  actually  seen  by  the  festive  host  coming  from  the  very  place  froiD 
34 


IIOMILETW  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES.  ORap.  il. 


which  they  had  so  often  been  led  out  to  ever  successful  war.  What  rebuke 
could  possibly  be  more  keen  1  Here  were  men  both  pleading  their  inability  to 
cope  with  iron  chariots,  and  yet  putting  their  enemies  under  tribute.  The 
tribute  itself  was  answer  enough  to  the  plea  about  the  chariots.  But,  as  if  it 
were  not  enough,  the  Angel  of  Jehovah  comes  up  from  the  place  from  which 
Israel  had  never  obediently  gone  forth  to  a  single  lost  battle.  The  present 
wicked  unbelief  was  exposed  in  a  light  which  might  well  make  the  place  a 
place  of  shame  and  tears.  God  was  saying  w^ith  dramatic  and  irresistible  force, 
"I  have  been  thy  helper,  but  under  the  shadow  of  My  wings  thou  will  not 
rejoice."  The  reproofs  of  the  Lord  are  ever  overwhelming.  When  He  under- 
takes to  rebuke,  the  name  of  the  place  where  He  so  appears  to  us  must  needs 
henceforth  be  Bochim.  "  Will  He  plead  against  me  with  His  great  power  ?  " 
2.  Rebuke  sustained  by  the  proof  of  direct  disobedience,  "  Why  have  ye  done 
this?"  or,  "  What  is  this  which  ye  have  done  ?  "  Evidences  of  the  league  were 
visible  all  through  the  land.  The  enemies  of  God  and  truth  were  living  in 
peace  among  the  people  of  God.  It  may  have  been  that  some  of  them  were 
even  now  present  with  the  multitude.  The  altars  of  the  idolaters  were  not 
thrown  down.  There  they  still  stood,  visibly,  in  the  midst  of  the  people  of 
every  tribe.  "  Why  have  ye  done  this  ^ "  When  Christ,  the  Mediator,  pleads 
against  us,  who  shall  answer  1  3.  Rebuke  pointing  to  coming  sorrow.  "  They 
shall  be  adversaries  to  you  (cf.  Crit.  Notes),  and  their  gods  shall  be  a  snare 
unto  you."  The  Lord's  rebuke  is  not  vain  and  empty.  It  ever  brings  forth 
bitter  fruit.  '*  What  is  this  that  thou  hast  done  ?  "  when  spoken  to  Eve,  is 
followed  by,  "I  will  greatly  multiply  thy  sorrow."  "What  hast  thou  done  %  " 
when  asked  of  Cain,  does  but  precede  the  terrible  words,  *'  And  now  thou  art 
cursed  from  the  earth."  To  Moses  and  Aaron  the  Lord  said,  "  Ye  believed 
me  not,  to  sanctify  me  in  the  eyes  of  the  children  of  Israel ; "  and  the  Lord 
also  added,  "Therefore  ye  shall  not  bring  this  congregation  into  the  land  which 
I  have  given  them."  David  heard  Nathan  say,  "  Thou  art  the  man,"  and  forth- 
with the  sentence  followed,  "  The  sword  shall  never  depart  from  thine  house  " 
.  .  .  "The  child  also  that  is  bom  unto  thee  shall  surely  die."  Similarly,  sen- 
tence follows  rebuke  all  through  the  Scriptures.  Yet  are  we  encouraged  to  say, 
"There  is  forgiveness  with  Thee,  that  Thou  mayest  be  feared." 

III.  Tears,  from  the  first,  accompanying  rehuke.  "  All  the  people  lifted  up 
their  voice  and  wept,"  L  Weeping,  for  the  most  part,  has  to  do  with  sin.  The 
sources  of  the  Nile  may  have  to  be  sought  many  a  year ;  the  place  where  the 
river  of  tears  takes  its  rise  may  generall}^  be  found  at  once,  and  without  mis- 
takes. The  well-head  of  human  sorrow  is  seldom  far  removed  from  the  moun- 
tain-foot of  human  guilt.  "  By  one  man  sin  entered  into  the  world,  and  death 
by  sin."  When  the  tribes  of  humanity  gather  at  some  Bochim,  there  is  ever 
something  wrong  as  to  their  respective  inheritances.  2.  It  is  a  mercy  when  the 
sinful  can  weep.  Our  truest  tears  are  the  venting  of  our  guilt.  Without  tears 
for  sin,  sin  would  petrify  in  our  nature  ;  it  would  assimilate  every  holier 
emotion  to  itself,  and  then  turn  all  to  stone.  It  was  of  men  who  had  experienced 
this  that  Paul  wrote  as  "  being  past  feeling."  Many  about  us  now  would  be  thus 
hardened,  but  for  the  tender  power  of  Divine  grace.  The  Angel  of  the  Covenant 
appears,  and  forthwith  the  place  of  sin  and  formal  religious  festivity  becomes  a 
Bochim.  "God  is  able  of  these  stones  to  raise  up  children  unto  Abraham."  Thanks 
be  unto  God  who  is  able,  that  He  is  also  willing!  Kowland  Hill  used  to  say, 
"  Repentance  is  so  sweet  a  companion,  that  my  only  regret  in  going  to  heaven 
is,  that  1  shall  leave  her  behind  and  know  her  no  more."  This  is  hardly  a 
wise  lament.  As  ioiig  as  sin  is  with  us,  tears  are  a  sweet  because  a  necessary 
relief ;  but  "  no  more  sin  "  must  be  far  better  than  sin  and  tears.  We  may  be 
devoutly  thankful  that  it  is  written  of  the  saints  in  heaven,  "  God  shall  wipe 

35 


OHAF.  n.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JUDQBS, 


away  all  tears  from  their  eyes  ; "  we  ought  to  be  no  less  thankful  that  no  hand 
ever  altogether  wipes  away  the  tears  from  the  sinful  eyes  of  earth.  There, 
tears  would  be  an  unmeaning  pain  ;  here,  they  are  a  necessity.  An  old  poet, 
more  than  two  centuries  ago,  wrote  tenderly  and  beautifully  on  the  tears  ef 
Mary  Magdalene  at  the  tomb  : 

"  Not  in  the  Evening^s  eyes, 
When  they  red  with  weeping  are 
For  the  Sun  that  dies ; 
Sits  Sorrow  with  a  face  so  fair. 
Nowhere  hut  here  did  ever  meet 
Sweetness  so  sad,  sadness  so  sweet* 

*•  Sadness,  all  the  while 
She  sits  on  such  a  throne  as  thli. 
Can  do  nought  hut  smile, 
Nor  helieves  she  Sadness  is  : 
Gladness  itself  would  be  more  glad, 
(Thus)  to  be  made  so  sweetly  sad." 

[Richard  Crashaw^  1<{46.] 

Sadness  which  mourns  the  loss  of  Christ's  presence,  or  of  His  Spirit,  must 
needs  be  among  the  keenest  sorrows  of  earth  ;  but  the  sadness  which  has 
suffered  this  loss,  and  has  not  mourned  it,  must  presently  be  the  bitterest  sorrow 
of  all.  3.  Weeping  h  of  small  me  to  the  sinful,  if  they  only  weep.  Bochim  is  of 
no  avail  unless  it  leads  to  the  breaking  of  all  leagues  with  idolaters,  and  to  the 
throwing  down  of  all  forbidden  altars.  Tears  must  be  followed  by  a  refornra- 
tion  ;  otherwise,  they  are  a  useless  pain. 

IV.  Punishment  inevitably  succeeding  the  tears  in  which  there  is  no 
amendment  of  life.  This  whole  book  of  the  Judges  is  God's  comment  on  the 
folly  of  weeping  without  truly  repenting.  Emerson  has  written  :  "  Crime  and 
punishment  grow  out  of  one  stem.  Punishment  is  a  fruit  that,  unsuspected, 
ripens  within  the  flower  of  the  pleasure  which  concealed  it.  Cause  and  effect, 
means  and  ends,  seed  and  fruit,  cannot  be  severed ;  for  the  effect  already  blooms 
in  the  cause,  the  end  pre-exists  in  the  means,  the  fruit  in  the  seed."  There  is 
no  separating  between  sin  and  its  natwal  punishment;  unless  there  be  true 
repentance,  there  is  no  separating  between  sin  and  its  Divine  punishment. 
Nineveh  is  spared  ;  the  thief  enters  Paradise  ;  Saul  *'  obtains  mercy ;  "  but  the 
weepers  of  Bochim  have  their  history,  for  centuries,  written  in  bitter  chastise- 
ments. As  that  Cornish  proverb,  so  sentient  of  a  rock-bound  shore,  puts  the 
matter  :  "  He  who  will  not  be  ruled  by  the  rudder  must  be  ruled  by  the  rock" 
So  he  who  will  not  be  led  to  serve  Jehovah  by  *Hhe  Angel  of  the  Lord,"  must 
be  driven  to  seek  God  indeed  by  the  chastening  hand  of  Canaanites  and 
Philistines. 

OUTLINES  AND  COMMENTS  ON  THE  VERSES. 

God's  Reproof  of  Sin. — Verses  1-6. 

I.  Sin  confronted  by  the  Lord  in  thou  doest  do  quickly,"  the  bitterness 

person.     The  Angel  of  the  Lord  was  of  death  was  not  distant.    God's  silence 

none  other  than  the  Lord  Himself  (cf.  should  be  interpreted  by  the  guilty  as 

above).     1.  God  confronts  the  guilty  in  the  noise  of  coming  judgment.      "  I 

mercy.     If  He  did  not  come  to  trouble  kept  silence,"  is  immediately  followed 

the  sinful,   they  might  well  despair,  by  "I  will  reprove  thee  (Ps.  1.  21). 

God  came  through  His  messengers  to  2.   When  God  so  confronts  the  guilty ,  none 

guilty  Saul,  to  David,  to  Nebuchadnez-  can   answer.      Throughout    this   brief 

zar.     When  the  Lord  answered  Saul  narrative  the  only  voice  that  is  heard 

no  more,   the  end  was  nigh.     When  is  the  voice  of  the  Lord.     The  sinful, 

the   Saviour   said   to   Judas,    "  What  like  guilty  children,  can  only  answer 
36 


HO  Ml  LET IC  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES, 


CHIP.  IL 


by  their  tears.  Job  cried,  "Oh  that 
I  knew  where  I  might  find  Him.  .  .  . 
I  would  order  my  cause  before  Him, 
and  fill  my  mouth  with  arguments  ;  " 
yet  even  Job  in  that  awful  Presence 
could  only  say,  "  Now  mine  eye  seeth 
Thee  :  wherefore  I  abhor  myself,  and 
repent  in  dust  and  ashes." 

II.  Sin  manifested  by  the  greatness 
of  Divine  mercy.  1.  Mercies  of  deliver- 
ance from  bondage.  "  I  made  you  to 
go  up  out  of  Egypt."  2.  Mercies  of 
promised  help.  "The  land  which  I 
sware  unto  your  fathers."  "  T  said  I 
will  never  break  My  covenant  with 
you."  3.  Mercies  of  actual  inheritance. 
"  I  have  brought  you  unto  the  land." 

III.  Sin  exposed,  and  the  proofs 
visible  on  every  hand.  The  league 
had  been  made  with  the  inhabitants. 
The  altars  still  stood  throughout  the 
land.  "  Ye  have  not  obeyed  My  voice." 
The  law  was  even  then  engraven  on 
the  stones  at  Ebal ;  the  book  of  the 
law  was  already  written  (Josh.  viii. 
31,  32).  There  was  no  disputing 
either  what  the  Lord's  voice  had  been, 
or  that  it  had  been  disobeyed.  Who 
can  answer  when  God  contends  with 
him  on  account  of  sin  1  If  God  be 
against  us,  who  can  be  for  us  1 

IV.  Sin  the  shadow  of  coming  sor- 
row. **  They  shall  be  adversaries  to 
you,"  &c.     Our  departures  from  the 


way  of  the  Lord  ever  originate  in  the 
heart.  The  actual  commission  of  sin 
is  the  point  of  contact  in  the  beginning 
of  the  eclipse  which  hides  from  us  the 
Sun  of  Righteousness,  and  the  hiding 
of  His  face  is  ever  the  beginning  of 
darkness.  "  Thou  hidest  Thy  face, 
they  are  troubled." 

V.  Sin  lamented,  but  not  forsaken. 

"  The  people  lifted  up  their  voice,  and 
wept."  They  also  offered  sacrifice  unto 
the  Lord,  but  they  did  not  put  away 
the  transgression.  God  cannot  be 
reconciled  to  men  who  do  not  forsake 
iniquity.  "  Blessed  is  he  whose  sin  is 
covered  ;  "  but  no  tears  and  no  amount 
of  sacrifice  can  cover  the  sin  which  is 
still  persisted  in.  The  Hebrew  word 
")S3  "  to  cover!*  '*  to  expiate "  sin,  is 
also  used  in  the  Old  Testament  for 
a  village.  A  village  was  so  called 
because  it  afforded  shelter,  or  a  cover, 
for  the  inhabitants.  Sacrifice  can 
afi'ord  no  dwelling-place  and  no  cover- 
ing to  the  man  who  continues  in  his 
sin.  Even  Calvary  leaves  the  soul  in 
all  its  wickedness,  "  Naked  and  open 
to  the  eyes  of  Him  with  whom  we 
have  to  do,"  so  lOng  as  sin  is  not  for- 
saken. He  who  comes  to  the  sacrifice 
of  Christ  with  such  tears  as  lead  him 
to  turn  from  iniquity,  will  find  that 
his  sin  is  covered,  and  that  Christ  is  as 
a  City  of  Refuge. 


Divine  Visitations. — Verses  1-5. 

I.  The  time  of  the  Lord's  visitation.  IV.  The  influence  of  the  Lord's  visita- 

When  disobedience  was  at  its  height,  tion.     The  Israelites  shed  tears,  called 

II.  The  method  of  the  Lord's  visita-  the  name  of  that  place  '  The  Weepers,' 
tion.  He  was  seen  to  come  "from  and  offered  sacrifice ;  yet,  with  all  this, 
Gilgal,'*  the  place  of  much  past  help,  they  "  knew  not  the  day  of  their  visita- 

III.  The  spirit  of  the  Lord's  visitation,  tion  "  as  they  should  have  done. 
He  came  in  tender  and  loving  reproof. 

The  Time  of  God's  Manifested  Help.— Fers^  1. 


I.  God  comes  to  men  in  the  sorrow  of 
that  bondage  wherein  they  were  bom. 
"  I  made  you  go  up  out  of  Egypt." 

II.  God  manifests  Himself  freely  to 
His  delivered  children  so  long  as  they 
are  faithful.  The  Pillar  of  Cloud  ;  the 
Red  Sea,  <fec. 

IIL   God  is  nigh   at  hand  in  all 


hours  of  weakness  and  need.  The 
passage  of  the  Jordan ;  Jericho  ,  Beth- 
horon  ;  the  waters  of  Merom. 

IV.  God  is  full  of  long-suffering, 
even  when  His  people  sin.  The  alter- 
n^jting  plagues  and  miracles  in  the  wil- 
derness. The  gracious  manifestation 
at  Bochim. 

37 


OBAP.  n. 


SOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES, 


The  Angel  of  the  Covenant. — Verse  1. 


I.  The  Angel  of  the  Divine  Presence 
(Exod.  xiii.  21  ;  xiv.  19).  II.  The 
Angel  of  gracious  promise  (Exod. 
xxiii.  20-25  ;  xxxii.  34  ;  xxxiii.  2). 
III.  The  Angel  of  previous  help  (Exod. 
xiv.  24-30  ;  Numb.   xx.   16  ;  Josh.  v. 


14).  IV.  The  Angel  of  severe  rehuke 
(Exod.  xxiii.  21  ;  and  verses  1-3).  V. 
The  Angel  of  deliverances  yet  to  come 
(Judg.  vi.  11-23;  xiii.  9-20).  VI. 
The  Angel  of  perpetuated  song  (Ps. 
xxxiv.  7  ;  Is.  Ixiii.  9). 


Divine  Remembrances. — Verse  1. 


L  God*s  remembrance  of  what  we 
were.  He  knew  Israel  as  having  come 
up  "■  out  of  Egypt."  "  He  found  him 
in  a  desert  land,"  and  the  land  had 
not  been  forgotten.  God  always  re- 
members where  He  found  us,  and  what 
we  were. 

II.  God's  remembrance  of  the  deli- 
verances which  He  has  wrought  for  us. 
"  I  made  you  to  go  up  out  of  Egypt." 
The  Lord  has  daily  in  view  all  the 
help  He  has  ever  given  to  us.  He 
knows  where  He  helped  us  unsought. 
He  sees,  no  less,  where  we  have  reached 
forth  a  secret  hand  to  touch  the  hem 
of  His  garment ;  and  knows  all  the 
virtue  which  has  come  forth  to  us. 
How  great  must  our  sin  appear  in  the 
eyes  of  Him  who  sees  all  His  mercy 
and  our  guilt  at  one  glance  ! 

III.  God's  remembrance  of  His  pro- 
mises after  they  are  fulfilled.  He 
who  had  sworn  to  the  fathers,  and 
fulfilled  His  words  to  the  children, 
forgat  neither  the  one  nor  the  other. 
God  knows  every  promise  that  has 
ever  been  fulfilled  to  us  each.  He 
knows  some  promises  as  having  "been 
fulfilled  to  us  many  times.  He  who 
makes  His  promises  all  *'Yea  and 
Amen  in  Christ  Jesus,"  knows  also 
how  many  times  we  have  found  them 
thus  abiding  and  helpful. 


IV.  God's  remembrance  of  the  rela- 
tion between  our  past  and  our  present. 

God  who  remembered  the  bondaiie  of 
Egypt,  and  saw  His  people  now  in 
possession  of  Canaan,  had  every  step 
from  the  one  to  the  other  perfectly 
under  His  gaze.  He  had  made  them 
to  "  go  up  out  of  Egypt ; "  He  also 
had  *'  brought  them  into  the  land " 
which  they  now  had  for  an  inherit- 
ance. 

V.  God's  remembrance  of  His  cove- 
nant. "  I  said,  I  will  never  break  my 
covenant  with  you."  Many  a  broken 
promise  of  our  fellows  puts  the  best 
of  them  to  shame  :  God  can  always 
look  upon  His  word  in  holy  satisfac- 
tion that  not  one  jot  or  tittle  of  it  has 
ever  passed  away.  It  is  not  a  little 
imposing  to  find  our  attention  chal- 
lenged as  to  God's  faithfulness  at  the 
very  place  where  God  was  about  to 
depart  from  the  people  who  had 
already  departed  from  Him.  We  cry, 
"  Stablish  Thy  word  unto  Thy  servant, 
upon  which  Thou  hast  caused  him  to 
hope;"  but  God's  unestablished  words 
are  ever  because  we  have  got  where 
they  can  no  longer  be  fulfilled.  We 
break  the  covenant,  and  then  wonder 
at  the  fragments ;  but  the  fragments 
are  of  our  making,  not  of  our  Heavenly 
Father's. 


"From  Gilgal  to  Boohim." 

If  Bochim  was  at  Shiloh,  or  near  Bochim,  near  Shiloh.     The  historian 

Bethel,  as   is   probable,  it   would   be  evidently  means  to  convey  the  impres- 

utterly  inappropriate  to  any  thing  which  sion  that  the  Angel  came  from  Gilgal, 

the  assembled   Israelites  could  observe,  or  from  the  direction  of  Gilgal,  in  the 

to  speak  of  the  Angel  as  coming  from  sight  of  all  Israel.     If  the  Gilgal  near 

Gilgal,  in  the  Arabah,  near  Jericho,  to  Jericho  were  meant,  it  would  be  alco- 
88 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES,  CHAP.  IL 


gether  irrelevant  thus  to  speak  of  a  incompatible  with  what  we  know  of 

place  more  than  twenty  miles  distant.  the  after-history  of  that  place.     Gilgal 

In  a  volume  very  recently  published,  was    one    of   the    three    cities    where 

Dr.    Edersheim   makes   the   following  Samuel  judged  the  people  (1  Sam.  vii. 

remarks    on    this    question: — "From  16;    here,    also,    he   offered   sacrifices 

this    solemn    transaction    (at    Mount  when  the  Ark  was  no  longer  in   the 

Ebal),    the    Israelites    moved,    as    we  tabernacle  at  Shiloh  (1  Sam.  x.  8;  xiii. 

gather  from   Josh.   ix.    6,   to    Gilgal,  7-9;  xv.  21),  and  there,  as  in  a  central 

where  they  seem   to   have   formed   a  sanctuary,    did   all    Israel    gather    to 

permanent    camp.      The    mention    of  renew  their  allegiance  to  Saul  (1  Sam. 

this  place  in  Deut.  xi.  30,  where  it  is  xi.    14).      Later   on,    Gilgal   was   the 

described     as     *  beside    the    oaks    of  great   scene    of    Elisha's    ministry   (2 

Moreh,*    that    is,    near    the    spot    of  Kings  ii.  1),  and  still  later  it  became 

Abraham's  first   altar   (Gen.    xii.    7),  a  centre  of  idolatrous  worship  (Hosea 

implies  a  locality  well  known  at  the  iv.  15;  ix.  15;  xii.   11;  Amos  iv.  4; 

time,  and,  as  we  might  almost  conjee-  v.   5).     All  these  considerations  lead 

ture  from  its  after-history,  a  sort  of  to  the  conclusion  that  the  Gilgal  which 

traditional     sanctuary.       This     alone  formed  the  site  of  Joshua's  encamp- 

would  sufiice  to  distinguish  this  Gilgal  ment  is  the  modern   Jiljilieh,   a   few 

from  the  first  encampment   of  Israel  miles  from  Shiloh,  and  about  the  same 

as  east  of  Jericho,  which  only  obtained  distance    from     Bethel — nearly    equi- 

its  name  from  the  event  which  there  distant  from  Shechem  and  from  Jeru- 

occurred.     Besides,  it  is  impossible  to  salem."  [*^ Israelin Canaan** pp.  75,76."] 
suppose  that  Joshua  marched  to  the         This  entirely  agrees  with  the  view 

banks  of  the  Jordan  (Josh.  ix.  6 ;  x.  advocated  in  our  treatment  of  the  re- 

6,  7,  9,  15,  43) ;  and,  again,  that  he  spective  passages  in  Joshua.    The  great 

did  so  a  second  time,  after  the  battles  importance  of  the  point   in   question, 

in  Galilee,  to  make  appointment  of  the  not  only  geographically,  but  as  it  affects 

land  among  the  people  by  the  banks  far  more   serious   considerations,   will 

of  the  Jordan  (Josh.  xiv.  6).     Further,  probably  be  deemed  sufiicient  to  justify 

the    localisation    of    Gilgal    near    the  this  insertion  of  Dr.  Edersheim's  valu- 

banks  of  the  Jordan  would  be  entirely  able  corroborative  notice. 

Limitations  of  Liberty  before  God  and  Men. — Ferses  2,  3. 

If,  m  some  have  contended,  this  and  children.     We  are  not  our  own.     We 

the   preceding   chapter   belonged    "  to  have  been  redeemed  from  bondage  by 

the  early  part  of  Joshua's  government,"  God.      The    very    conditions    of    our 

then  these  two  verses  would  be  utterly  redemption   required   that   we   should 

at  variance  with  all  that  we  are  told  of  form  no  league  with  the  enemies  of  Him 

Joshua's  faithfulness,  and  would  stand  who  gave  us   freedom.     To  ally  our- 

in  direct  contradiction  to  Josh.  xxiv.  selves  with  God's  enemies  is  to  become 

31,  and  to  verse  7.     The  verses  con-  enemies  ourselves, 
front  us  with  the  fact  that  no  man  has        jj   The  tolerance  of  some  forms  of 

liberty  to  disobey  God,  or  to  practise  go.called  religion  is  an  infringement 

or  tolerate  m  others  such  wickedness  ^f  i^uman  liberty.     "Ye  shall  thfow 

as  ism  violation  of  the  rights  of  others,  ^^^    their   altars."     A  great    many 

even  though  this  wickedness  be  taught  altars  in  this  world  have  been  thrown 

inthenameofrehgion.  ^^^^     by    a    persecuting     despotism. 

I.  Fellowship  with  the   wicked  is  There  are  some  altars  which  even  the 

enmity  with  God.     "Ye  shall  make  God  of  all  liberty  demands   that  we 

no  league  with  the  inhabitants  of  this  utterly  abolish.     The  Canaanites  were 

land."     God   claims   the  right  to   say  religious    teachers   of   fornication   and 

with  whom  His  children  shall  associate,  murder  (cf.  Deut.  xii.  31 ;    1  Kings  xL 

We    claim    such    authority   over  our  7,  33 ;  2  Kings  iii   27 ;  xvi.  3 ;  Pa. 

39 


CHAP.  n.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES. 


cvi.  37,  38 ;  Is.  Ivii  5,  &c).  Their  the  screams  of  his  burning  child  "  ao- 
religion  was  an  overt  and  shameful  ceptaWe  to  his  god,"  or  the  corpse  of 
attack  on  the  most  sacred  and  inherent  his  murdered  son  or  daughter  *'  a  reli- 
rights  of  the  whole  human  race.  In  gious  sacrifice."  Should  any  congrega- 
such  a  case,  toleration  is  out  of  the  tion  of  such  worshippers  be  found  in 
question.  Reckless  advocates  of  liberty  England  to-morrow,  every  citizen 
might  far  more  consistently  plead  worthy  of  the  name  would  demand 
for  the  toleration  of  a  poisonous  fac-  that  they  be  exterminated,  or  made  to 
tory  which  gave  off  fatal  vapours  in  abjure  their  horrible  faith, 
the  midst  of  a  populous  community.  m.  To  disregard  the  voice  of  God 
America  has  long  liesitated  as  to  is  to  incur  the  reproof  and  correction 
tolerating  in  her  midst  systematic  both  of  God  and  men.  1.  God  calls  the 
adultery  under  the  sheltering  name  disobedient  to  account.  "Ye  have  not 
of  Mormonism.  Probably  the  public  obeyed  my  voice.  Why  have  ye  done 
conscience  in  the  United  States  will  this?"  2.  Victory  ceases  with  fidelity. 
ere  long  demand  that  the  evil  be  swept  « I  will  not  drive  them  out  from  before 
away.  But  suppose  Mormonism  should  you."  The  triumphs  at  Jericho,  and 
add  to  adultery  the  wholesale  offering  Gibeon,  and  over  the  host  of  Jabin, 
of  human  sacrifices.  In  that  case,  every  were  all  won  when  the  Israelites  were 
true  man  must  feel  that  the  evil  creed  little  used  to  war.  Sihon  and  Og 
of  sin  and  blood  must  at  once  be  wiped  were  conquered  when  the  army  had 
out  in  blood.  The  personal  faith  of  little  discipline  and  almost  no  military 
every  man  should  be  tolerated  so  long  experience.  In  the  day  of  Canaan's 
as  his  faith  does  no  gross  wrong  to  might  and  Israel's  weakness,  the 
the  faith  and  liberty  of  others  ;  but  latter  was  everywhere  triumphant, 
when  vice  and  murder  are  labelled  When  the  people  were  weak  then 
religion,  no  real  lover  of  liberty  will  were  they  strong.  In  the  day  of 
submit  to  be  duped  by  a  mere  name.  Israel's  strength  and  Canaan's  feeble- 
The  rights  and  liberties  of  sufferers  ness,  Israel  could  win  no  more  battles. 
must  also  be  respected.  There  was  He  who  fails  to  obey  God,  must  not 
nothing  to  be  done  but  that  God  wonder  if  he  fails  every  where.  3.  God's 
should  command  the  overthrow  of  enmity  takes  form  in  the  enmity  of  men. 
altars  which  were  set  apart  to  vice  "  They  shall  be  to  you  for  adversaries." 
like  this.  For  men  who  had  begun  to  Godhas  many  instruments  of  correction, 
enter  into  the  liberty  wherewith  God  and  He  not  seldom  uses  our  fellow- 
makes  free,  the  only  possible  course  creatures  for  this  purpose.  Many 
M^as  that  they  should  be  instructed  to  instances  of  this  are  found  in  the  Old 
kill  off  from  the  face  of  the  earth  Testament.  May  not  this  form  of 
organised  religious  teachers  and  doers  Divine  correction  be  common  now  ] 
of  wholesale  murder  and  incessant  Said  a  popular  teaoiier  of  the  past 
fornicatioa  "  Free  and  independent  generation,  when  vexed  with  disturb- 
thought,"  in  which  partial  men  of  a  ances  in  the  church  over  which  he 
certain  bias  love  to  indulge,  has  seldom  presided,  "  My  sins  are  reappearing  to 
perpetrated  any  anti-climax  more  ridi-  nie  in  the  form  of  men." 
culous  than   the   hundreds  which,  in 

modern  days,  it  has  pronounced  against        IV.  Disobedience  to  God  is  a  seed  of 

this  painful  but  necessary  destruction  temptation  to  yet  more  disobedience, 

of  the  Canaanites.     He  who  contends  "  Their  gods  shall  be  a  snare  unto  you." 

for  a  liberty  which  has  to  be  nurtured  It  may  be  said  of  all  sin  as  it  was  said 

daily  in    the  blood  and  purity  of  mul-  of  vegetable  life  on  the  morning  of 

titudes  of  helpless  children,  is  either  creation — "  Whose  seed  is   in  itself.*' 

a  terrible  despot  towards  the  children,  The  man  who  transgresses  sows  sin  in 

or  beyond  the  reach   of  all  ordinary  his  own  heart,  and,  alas  !  the  seed  is 

argument.     Of  what  matter  is  it  that  naturally    fruitful,    and    the    ground 

the  worshippers  of  Molech  should  call  naturally  fertile.     He  who  has  lived 
40 


HO  Ml  LET  10  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES. 


OHAP.  XL 


long  in  sin  need  not  wonder  that  the 
way  of  holiness  is  difficult.  By  grace 
we  are  saved.  The  gods  whom  she 
formerly  served  would  ensnare  the 
Church  to  her  ruin  now,  were  it  not 
that  the  God  of  gods  still  graciously 
says,  "  Behold,  I  will  allure  her ! " 
He  who  has  been  lifted  up  from  the 
earth,  was  lifted  up  to  draw  us  from 
the  sin  which  many  previous  sins  had 
made  too  fascinating  for  us  to  forsake 
alone.  "No  man  can  come  to  Me, 
except  the  Father  which  has  sent  Me 
draw  him."    Whatever  occult  doctrinal 


meanings  may  or  may  not  be  concealed 
in  these  emphatic  words  of  the  Son  of 
God,  the  natural  enslaving  power  of 
sin  needs  the  full  weight  of  that  awful 
utterance  to  rightly  depict  the  weakness 
in  which  sin  leaves  us  all.  Every  sin- 
ful man  re-writes  in  his  own  history 
the  ancient  word  of  Jehovah — "Thou 
hast  destroyed  thyself;  in  Me  is  thine 
help."  The  gods  of  our  old  idolatries 
have  surrounded  us  by  too  many  snares 
for  us  ever  to  be  able  to  escape  them 
alone. 


Broken  Commandments. — Verse  2. 


God's  commandments  are  written  so 
plainly  upon  the  tables  of  Scripture, 
and  man's  violation  of  them  appears 
so  clearly  upon  the  tables  of  life,  that 
when  the  Lord  begins  to  expose  sin, 
conviction  must  certainly  and  immedi- 
ately follow. 

The  dangers  of  adversity  may  be 
great,  but  so  also  are  the  dangers  of 
prosperity.  When  the  Israelites  were 
without  any  experience  of  either  war 
or  victory,  they  overthrew  Silion  and 
Og,  and  went  on  to  victories  yet 
greater :  when  they  had  won  the  land, 
then  they  began  to  lose  it,  through 
love  of  ease  and  fear  of  iron  chariots. 

Mighty  works  of  God  may  fail  to 
make  His  servants  believe,  and  succes- 
sive years  of  mercy  may  find  them 
increasingly  ungrateful ;  but  when  the 
goodness  of  the  Lord  is  no  longer  suffi- 


cient, then  rebuke  and  chastisement 
at  once  become  necessary. 

Many  victories  often  lead  God*s 
people  to  think  lightly  of  winning  more. 
The  vast  importance  of  the  divine  com- 
mandments becomes  obscured  by  the 
illusive  light  of  unbroken  triumphs, 
and  a  rich  earthly  inheritance. 

The  light  which  comes  to  us  through 
adversity  is  often  the  clearest  and 
purest  that  we  get.  So  it  was  with 
the  Israelites.  The  proof  of  this  is 
again  and  again  set  before  us  in  their 
history  under  the  judges.  To  use  the 
magnificent  imaire  of  Edmund  Burke, 
on  a  political  occasion, — The  light 
broke  in  upon  them,  *'not  through 
well-contrived  and  well-disposed  win- 
dows, but  through  flaws  and  breaches ; 
through  the  yawning  chasms  of  their 
national  ruin." 


The  Inexcusableness  of  Sin. — Verse  2,  last  clause. 


I.  The  sin  which  is  done  in  duties 

which  are  left  undone.  *'  Why  have 
ye  done  this  % "  Only  one  of  these 
three  charges  has  to  do  with  sins  of 
commission ;  the  other  two  speak  of 
sins  of  omission.  The  league  with  the 
idolaters  was  a  transgression  actual  and 
positive  ;  for  the  rest  of  the  accusation, 
the  altars  had  not  been  thrown  down, 
and  the  Divine  voice  had  not  been 
obeyed.  Yet  the  Andrei  says  of  all 
these  things  alike,  '*  Why  have  ye  done 
this?"  The  duties  which  we  do  not 
are  sins  which  we  do.     Our  very  sins 


of  omission  are  full  of  commission. 
Every  altar  which  the  Israelites  suffered 
to  stand  would  be  a  wrong  actually 
done  to  the  land  generally,  and  to 
every  child  in  each  family.  We  should 
remember  that  our  very  neglect  to  obey 
God  becomes  an  actual  and  positive 
wrong  to  men. 

IL  The  silence  of  the  sinner  in  the 
presence  of  his  Divine  Judge.     "  Why 

nave  ye  done  this  1  "  No  answer  is 
given.  Not  a  word  of  excuse  seems 
to  have  been  uttered.     How  awful  and 

41 


CHAP,  n. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES, 


significant  is  this  silence  !  What  em- 
phasis it  lays  on  the  righteousness  of 
the  Judge's  accusation  !  How  clearly 
it  manifests  the  guilt  of  the  accused  1 
Here  is  a  nation  of  transgressors,  and 
not  one  man  can  make  reply.  It  will 
be  so  with  many  at  the  last  judgment. 
*'  Friend,  how  camest  thou  in  hither, 
not  having  a  wedding  garment?  And 
he  was  speechless."  There  is  nothing 
to  be  said  for  sin.  It  is  put  to  silence 
by  Divine  majesty;  for  who  shall 
answer  God.  It  is  put  to  silence  by 
Divine  mercies;  common  gratitude 
ought  to  have  led  to  obedience.  It  is 
put  to  silence  by  Divine  willingness  to 
help ;  all  the  idolatrous  altars  which 
men  are  too  weak  to  throw  down 
alone,  may  be  thrown  down  by  the 
ever-willing  arm  of  God. 

III.  The  poor  answer  which  the  sin- 
ner must  make  if  he  were  to  answer 


truthfully.  "  Why  have  ye  done 
this  ? "  1.  For  ease,  and  been  disap- 
pointed. Their  unwrest  was  even  now 
beginning  in  these  tears.  2.  For  fear, 
and  had  to  fear  more.  The  undestroyed 
iron  chariots  were  the  commencement 
of  an  iron  yoke.  3.  For  gain,  and  have 
to  suffer  loss.  The  men  who  were  spared 
under  tribute  to  cultivate  the  fat  lands 
which  the  tribes  were  too  idle  to  tend 
themselves,  would  soon  take  the  pro- 
duce of  the  lands,  and  in  their  turn 
exact  tribute  from  the  Israelites.  4. 
For  jpeacey  and  have  found  ourselves  at 
war  with  man,  with  God,  and  even  with 
our  own  consciences.  All  these  things 
were  beginning,  and  would  soon  be 
fully  felt.  "  The  way  of  transgressors 
is  hard."  He  who  seeks  to  spare  him- 
self or  please  himself  by  disobeying 
God,  inherits  all  he  would  avoid,  and 
loses  all  he  would  obtain. 


Sins  of  Omission.— Ferse  2. 


I.  Their  great  magnitude.     We  are 

apt  to  think  that  great  sins  are  only 
those  which  we  actually  commit.  This 
is  a  mistake.  We  see  here  the  follow- 
ing serious  forms  of  transgression  :  1. 
Disobedience  to  God's  will.  2.  Disbelief 
in  God's  Word.  3.  Man's  judgment  pre- 
ferred before  God's  unerrhig  wisdom. 

II.  Their  fearful  consequences.     1. 

A  troubled  conscience.  2.  An  encumbered 
inheritance.  3.  An  open  door  made  for 
temptation.  4.  A  fruitful  source  of  covu- 
flict.  "From  henceforth  thou  shalt 
have  wars "  (2  Chron.  xvi.  9).  6. 
Ultimate  overthrow  and  captivity.  This 
is  seen  in  the  repeated  subjection  of 
Israel  under  the  judges,  and  in  the 
great  captivity  at  Babylon.  All  began 
here,  nor  did  it  end  there.  6.  The 
removal  of  the  privileges  of  worship. 
Siuloh  was  associated  with  Ichabod 
(chap,  xviii.  30,  31;  1  Sam.  iv.  21, 
22) ;  the  ark  was  taken  to  Philistia ; 
the  temple,  later  on,  was  utterly 
destroyed. 

IIL    Their    tremendous    warnings. 
All  this  Old  Testament  narrative  is 
42 


not  given  merely  for  information.  God 
seeks  something  higher  than  the  satis- 
faction of  our  curiosity.  Nor  is  the 
record  only  or  principally  for  interest. 
The  Holy  Spirit  meant  to  give  us 
something  more  than  an  exciting  his- 
tory. "  All  these  things  happened 
unto  them  for  ensamples  ;  and  they  are 
written  for  our  admonition,  upon  whom 
the  ends  of  the  world  are  come." 

"  The  accusation  against  them  at 
Bochim  was  negative  rather  than  posi- 
tive. There  are  degrees  of  guilt  in 
the  rebellions  of  the  Church  asjainst 
her  Head ;  and  as  yet  the  Israelites 
were  not  charged,  like  Ahab  after- 
wards, with  doing  very  abominably 
in  following  idols  :  still  less  had  they 
reached  the  villainy  of  Manasseh  at  a 
yet  later  period,  who  even  '  overpassed 
the  deeds  of  the  heathen,'  for  he  'did 
wickedly  above  all  the  Amorites  did, 
which  were  before  him,  and  shed  inno- 
cent blood  till  he  had  filled  Jerusalem 
from  one  end  to  another.'  It  is  true 
that  their  downward  course,  after  they 
had  once  placed  themselves  on  the 
smooth  deceitful  gradient,  soon  became 


IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUD0S8,  chap.  n. 

rapid  and  headlong ;  but  as  yet  they  the  Lord,  and  served  Baalim.* "  [Lake 

are  expostulated  with  chiefly  for  sins  H.  Wiseman,  M.J.] 

of  omission.  n  a-        r  •    •  i 

,,  ^TTT-i        i.u     nv       u   u       1.  i.  i^iiis  01  commission  are  usual  pun- 

"  When  the  Church  has  beffun  to  .  ,         ^     ^        •         n        •    •        ^tt 

V   ,  .,     n  1    ,  ^    u  ishments   tor   sms   oi   omission.      Me 

habitually    nesrlect    any   one    oi    her  .i    ^  i  j  i.  r       ^    x.    ^  c^ 

T      -1,     1  °  J        .  n  that  leaves  a  duty  may  tear  to  be  left 

Lord  s  known  commands — still  more  ,  .,         •       „     rn        ??  t 

,  1      V,     •       4.      i  1.      1  V  to  commit  a  crime.       \GurnaU.\ 

when    she    begins    to    '  break   one    ot  l  j 

these  least  commandments,  and  teach  "We  may  lose  heaven  by  neutrality 

men  so ' — the  day  is  not  far  distant  as  well  as  by  hostility,  by  wanting  oil 

when,  unless  arrested  in  her  career  by  as  well  as  by  drinking  poison.     An 

the  mercy  or  judgments  of  God,  she  unprofitable  servant  shall  as  much  be 

will  be  found  openly  consorting  with  punished  as  a  prodigal  son.     Undone 

the    mammon-worshippers    by   whom  duty  will  undo  souls.     The  last  words 

she  is  surrounded.  .  .  .  From  sparing  of  the  industrious  Archbishop  Usher 

the  lives  of  the  enemies  of  the  Church,  were,   *  Lord,   in   special,   forgive   me 

it  was  an  easy  step  to  make  comfort-  my  sins  of  omission.'  " 

able  agreements  with  them.  **  Love  puts  not  off  the  pursuit  of 

"  The  evening  twilight  soon  fades  duty  till  it  attains  the  possession  of 

into  total  darkness  ;  so  their  negative  glory.     There  is  no  rocking  this  babe 

evil   soon   degenerated    into   positive  to   sleep   but   in    the   cradle  of    the 

revolt :  *  they  did  evil  in  the  sight  of  grave."     \Wm.  Seeker.'] 

No  League  to  be  made  with  God's  Enemies. — Verse  2. 

"It  is    perilous   work   when    men  \F.    W.  Robertson^   M.A.,   Lectures  on 

begin  to  decide  who  are  believers  and  Corinthians,  p.  368.] 
who  are  not,  if  they  decide  by  party 

badges.  .  .  .  Nevertheless,  there  is  an  **  In  every  age  the  Church  of  God 

irreligion   which    he    who    runs   may  has  to  drive  out  her  spiritual  Amorites 

read.     For  the  atheist  is  not  merely  — Unbelief,  Ungodliness,  Heresy,  Ido- 

he  who  professes  unbelief,  but,  strictly  latry,  the  setting  up  of  man's  inven- 

speaking,  every  one  who  lives  without  tions  and  forms  in  place  of  the  pure 

God  in  the  world.     And  the  heretic  truth  of  God  ;  and  unless  she  is  dili- 

is  not  merely  he  who  has  mistaken  gent    and    bold    these    enemies    will 

some   Christian   doctrine,   but   rather  beleaguer  her  and  infest  her,  and  will 

he  who   causes  divisions   among   the  at  length  drive  her  out  of  her  inheri- 

brethren.     And   the    idolater   is    not  tance.     These   are    the   enemies   who 

merely  he  who  worships  images,  but  will  dispute  with  the  heirs  of  promise 

he  who  gives  his  heart  to  something  every  foot  of  their  expected  heritage, 

which  is  less  than  God  ;  for  a  man's  With   these  it  is   no  child's   play  at 

god  is  that  which  has  his  whole  soul  arms,  but  a  veritable  struggle  for  life  ; 

and  worship,  that  which  he  obeys  and  for  as  the  spies  reported  of  the  sons  of 

reverences  as  his  highest.     Now  there  Anak,  which  come  of  the  giants,  *We 

are  innumerable  doubtful  cases  where  were  in  our  own  sight  as  grasshoppers, 

charity  is  bound  to  hope  the   best ;  and  so  we  were   in  their  sight ' — so 

but   there   is    also   an    abundance   of  these  bold  gigantic  foes  are  not  afraid 

plain  cases  ;  for  where  a  man's  god  is  of  the  utmost  efforts  the  believer  can 

money,  or  position  in  society,  or  rank,  put  forth  by  the  mere  force  of  his  own 

there  the  rule  holds,  *Come  ye  apart.' '*  will."     [L.  H.  Wiseman^  M.A.] 

The  Punishment  of  Sin  a  Punishment  in  Kind. — Verse  3. 

I.  Men  neglecting  God,  and  having  met  by  the   "  I    will   not "   of  God. 

to  hear  that  God  will  neglect  them.  Men  omit  duties,  and  the  Lord  omits 

The  "  Ye  have  not "  of  the  people,  is  help.      God    does    not   threaten    the 

43 


OHAP.  IL 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


Israelites  with  His  enmity;  He  simply 

declares  that  He  will  leave  those  who 

have  so  sinfully  left  Him.  Forsaking 
is  punished  by  forsaking. 

II.  Men  making  a  league  with  the 
wicked,  and  finding  that  their  chosen 
confederates  are  to  become  their  direst 
foes.  "  They  shall  be  to  you  for 
adversaries  "  (cf.  Critical  Notes).  The 
point  of  departure  becomes  the  place 
of  chastisement.  Those  for  whom 
God  had  been  cast  off,  should  be  God's 
instruments  to  turn  that  unhallowed 
choice  into  the  chief  cause  of  mourn- 
ing. It  is  ever  thus  :  Delilah  is  gene- 
rally chosen  to  shear  Samson  ;  Gehazi 
lies  to  the  healed  leper,  and  buys  the 
cast-off  leprosy  ;  Judas  covenants  with 
the  priests,  and  has  to  hear  them  say 
in  his  anguish,  "  See  thou  to  that ; " 
Saul  of  Tarsus  allies  himself  with  the 
Jews  to  persecute  Christians,  and 
forthwith  his  future  history  is  one 
of    continued    perils    by  his    *'own 


countrymen,"  and  "  perils  among  false 
brethren," 

III.  Men  preserving  idolatrous 
altars,  and  ensnared  by  idol  gods. 
"  Their  gods  shall  be  a  snare  unto 
you."  The  altars  which  they  spared, 
contrary  to  the  command  of  God, 
became  the  future  place  of  their  own 
sacrifice.  No  man  can  afford  to  keep 
what  God  would  have  him  to  destroy. 
All  our  forbidden  possessions,  so  far 
from  being  assets  in  the  account  of 
our  individual  happiness,  had  better 
at  once  be  entered  as  debts  which  will 
certainly  have  to  be  paid.  To  strike 
them  off  the  account  as  items  which 
cannot  be  realised,  is  only  half  the 
loss  ;  they  must  be  put  on  the  other 
side.  The  gods  that  we  spare  are  not 
only  helpless  and  useless ;  they  are 
a  snare.  The  altars  that  we  leave 
standing  not  only  bring  us  none  of 
the  joy  of  worship ;  they  require  us  as 
a  sacrifice. 


Causes  of  Spiritual  Weakness. 


**The  history  illustrates  the  causes 
of  the  weakness  of  the  Church  and 
people  of  God. 

'*I.  One  of  these  causes  was  indo- 
lence. .  .  .  Patient  labour  there  must 
be,  if  we  would  win  the  prize  of  our 
high  calling.  The  athlete  cannot  re- 
tain his  strength  without  daily  exer- 
cise j  the  vocalist  cannot  retain  his 
power  and  command  of  voice  without 
incessant  practice  ;  and  the  child  of 
God  cannot  go  on  to  perfection  with- 
out a  daily  spiritual  gymnastic  '  exer- 
cising himself  with  a  view  to  godliness' 
(1  Tim.  iv.  7  Gr.),  as  an  athlete  with 
a  view  to  the  games.  Faith  and  love, 
correcting  the  indolence  of  our  nature, 
will  make  this  holy  toil  delightfuL 
In  the  second  century  it  passed  into  a 
proverb,  when  men  would  express  the 
impossibility  of  a  thing,  to  say,  '  You 
may  as  well  take  off  a  Christian  from 
Christ ; '  and  our  blessed  Master, 
whose  example  is  the  most  perfect 
rebuke  of  slothfulness,  declared  that 
it  was  His  meat  and  drink,  not  merely 
44 


to  begin,  not  merely  to  carry  on,  but 
to  finish  His  Father's  work. 

"II.   Another    cause    of  spiritual 
weakness  is   a   secret   love   of   sin. 

The  Israelites  found  in  the  habits  of 
the  men  of  Canaan  much  that  was 
congenial  to  their  own  corrupt  inclina- 
tions. ...  In  religious  families  there 
are  sons  and  daughters  who,  although 
outwardly  restrained  by  the  circum- 
stances of  their  position,  cherish  a 
bitter  hatred  of  religion,  and  a  secret 
love  for  a  dissipated  life.  And  even 
in  the  hearts  of  the  faithful,  what 
strange  occasional  lingerings  there 
are  towards  evil !  What  treacherous 
trifling  with  things  forbidden  !  What 
hovering  about  the  devil's  ground ! 
What  secret  inclinations  to  taste  the 
poisoned  cup  !  What  strange  revival, 
at  times,  of  the  power  of  old  habits 
which  we  had  imagined  subdued  for 
ever !  What  infatuated  dancing  on 
the  brink  of  hell,  like  the  moth  flutter- 
ing round  the  candle  to  its  destruc- 
tion !     Who  can  explain  the  depth  of 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES,  OMAP.  n. 


that  hidden  treason?     Who  can  dis-  weakness  is  unhelief,  if  indeed  this 

close  the  inner  sources  of  that  secret  one  cause  does  not  sum  up  and  exhaust 

alienation  from  the  adorable  God,  that  the  whole  subject.     Unbelief  is  vitally 

lusting  of  the  flesh  against  the  spirit,  connected  with  that  alienation  of  heart 

which  so  many  of  the  faithful  mourn  1  and  affections  from  God,  in  which  the 

'Never/  says  Calvin,  *  does  the  love  deepest   ruin   of  man    cQnsists.   .   .   . 

of  piety   sufficiently    flourish    in   our  Here  is  the  great  secret  of  unbelief — 

hearts  unless  it  begets  in  us  a  hatred  it  is   '  the  evil   heart  departing  from 

of  sin.'  the  living  God.' "    [Luke  B,  Wiseman, 

M.A.'l 

''III.  Another    cause  of   spiritual  '^ 

The  Power  of  the  Lord's  Word. — Verses  4,  5. 

From  the  fact  that  '*  all  the  children  people  joyful  in  His  house  of  prayer, 
of  Israel "  are  here  spoken  of,  Bishop  but  there  is  much  that  is  more  impor- 
Patrick  says,  "  By  this  it  appears  they  tant  than  our  gladness.  As  has  been 
were  all  met  at  some  solemn  festival,  said  of  the  children  of  Dan,  even  "  in 
as  they  were  bound  to  do  three  times  Aijalon,  the  place  where  Joshua  had 
every  year,  for  otherwise  it  cannot  be  commanded  the  sun  to  stand  still ;  so 
conceived  what  should  occasion  such  far  from  being  animated  by  the  memory 
an  assembly  of  the  whole  congrega-  oftheirleader's  faith,  they  were  actually 
tion,  and  consequently  the  place  where  driven  back  by  the  heathen  and  forced 
these  words  were  spoken  to  them  was  to  take  shelter  in  the  mountains  (chap. 
Shiloh."  Probably  this  was  so  (cf.  i.  34,  35),  thus  turning  the  noblest 
Exod.  xxiii.  14-17  ;  Deut.  xii.  10-14).  battle-field  of  the  Church  of  God  into 
If  so,  we  see  in  the  very  circumstances  a  scene  of  defeat  and  shame."  Similar 
of  tliis  gathering  these  three  things :  evidences  of  unfaithfulness  were  appa- 
1.  The  form,al  services  of  religion  carefully  rent  all  through  the  land.  The  wor- 
oZ;sg?•■^;ec?7^o^w;^^/is/ft7^(im^^ro5S  5m.  With  ship  of  the  congregation  might  well 
heathen  altars  all  around  them,  with  a  be  turned  into  weeping.  When  the 
league  recently  made  with  idolaters,  heavens  are  brass,  and  our  prayer  will 
and  with  the  broken  words  of  God  not  pass  through,  it  is  meet  that  we 
coming  between  the  Most  High  and  make  search  for  idol  altars,  and  break 
their  service,  the  Israelites  met  to  away  from  sinful  leagues, 
worship  Him  whose  will  they  had  so  This  assembly  at  Bochim  dissolved 
utterly  ignored.  What  a  picture  it  into  tears  by  the  message  of  the  Angel, 
presents  of  many  a  subsequent  religious  may  suggest  to  us  the  following  con- 
service  I  2.  God  refusing  to  accent  service  siderations  : — 
spoiled  by  disobedience,  and  wanting  the 

worship  of  the  heart     That  the  service  1.  The  power  of  the  word  of  the 

was   not   accepted,  follows  from    the  Lord  to  work  conviction.    "The  people 

words  of  the  Angel.     And  yet,  while  lifted  up  their  voice  and  wept."     As 

God  rejects  the  worship  He  does  not  was  written  to  the  Hebrews  of  a  later 

at  once  forsake  the  worshipper.     Just  generation,    *'  The   Word   of  God    is 

as    at    the   beginning    Divine    mercy  quick  and  powerful,  and  sharper  than 

gently   reasons  with   Cain  as   to  his  any  two-edged  sword,"  Heb.  iv.   12). 

rejected  offering,  so  does  that  mercy  As  heard  on  this  occasion,  this  word — 

here   tenderly   remonstrate   with    the  1.  Beveals  the  love  of  God,     It  tells  of 

formal  worshippers  at  Bochim.     Here,  His  loving  acts  in  the  past.  It  declares, 

also,  we  see  a  Father  who  "knoweth  no   less,  His   tender   concern  in    the 

our  frame,  and  remembereth  that  we  present,  and  His  care  for  His  people's 

are  dust."     3.  A  festive  gathering  of  the  future.     2.  It  makes  manifest  the  sins  of 

Lord's  people  turned  into  an  assembly  of  men.     It  spares  no  one.     The  leaders 

"  weepers,"     God  loves   to   make    His  of  the  people  are  exposed  even  more 

45 


^HAP.   11. 


HO  MI  LET  IC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


than  the  mass.  It  is  the  glory  of  the 
Bible  that  it  has  no  respect  to  persons. 
The  sins  of  Noah,  Abraham,  Isaac, 
Jacob,  Moses,  Aaron,  David,  and  Peter, 
are  as  fully  revealed  as  are  the  sins  of 
Amnon,  Absalom,  Gehazi,  or  Ananias 
and  Sapphira.  King  or  peasant,  child 
of  God  or  openly  wicked,  the  word  of 
the  Lord  declares  and  judges  sin 
wherever  it  is  found.  3.  It  displays 
the  sinner's  base  ingratitude.  It  throws 
the  strong  light  of  God's  past  love 
and  goodness  on  the  dark  evidences 
of  man's  idolatrous  sympathies.  It 
*'  discerneth  the  thoughts  and  intents 
of  the  heart,"  which  after  being  made 
glad  by  God,  wickedly  turns  against 
God.  How  many  has  it  thus  judged 
and  condemned !  What  multitudes 
it  is  so  condemning  even  to  this  day  ! 
4.  It  proclaims  coming  punishment.  Men 
argue  against  its  penalties  as  being 
unlike  the  God  whom  it  declares,  but 
the  Bible  still  goes  on  speaking  in  its 
awful  calmness  about  the  ''worm  that 
dieth  not,  and  the  fire  that  is  not 
quenched."  Blessed  be  God  for  the 
faithful  word !  It  shows  that  God 
has  not  given  up  as  hopeless  the  sinful 
men  to  whom,  through  it,  He  still 
comes  with  words  of  rebuke  and 
exhortation.  Let  the  hands  that  so 
often  hang  down  be  lifted  up  to 
preach  it,  well  assured  that  **  it  is  the 
power  of  God  unto  salvation."  People 
still  weep  when  they  hear  the  words 
of  the  law  of  the  Lord  (cf.  Neh. 
viii.  9). 

II.     Conviction    expressing    itself 

through  tears.  *'  The  people  lifted  up 
their  voice  and  wept."  The  weeping 
seems  to  have  been  very  general. 
Unless  very  many  had  been  in  tears, 
we  should  not  have  been  told  that 
the  people  wept,  nor  would  the  place 
have  been  named  "The  Weepers."  1. 
Tears  must  ever  follow  sin.  They  may 
come  as  tears  of  genuine  grief  for  sin. 
They  may  be  delayed  till  sin  brings 
punishment.  In  one  way  or  the  other 
they  must  certainly  succeed  the  trans- 
gression of  God's  righteous  laws.  Every 
sinner  is  a  debtor  to  grief,  and  sooner 
or  later  the  bill  must  be  met.  The 
46 


longer  payment  is  deferred,  the  worse 
for  the  debtor,  for  the  interest  charged 
on  overdue  tears  for  sin  is  always  both 
high  and  compound.  Emerson  says : 
*'  The  ingenuity  of  man  has  always 
been  dedicated  to  the  solution  of  one 
problem, — how  to  detach  the  sensual 
sweet,  the  sensual  strong,  the  sensual 
bright,  &c.,  from  the  moral' sweet,  the 
moral  deep,  the  moral  fair ;  that  is, 
again,  to  contrive  to  cut  clean  off  this 
upper  surface  so  thfn  as  to  leave  it 
bottomless ;  to  get  a  one  end  without 
an  other  end.  .  .  .  This  dividing  and  de- 
taching is  steadily  counteracted.  Up 
to  this  day,  it  must  be  owned,  no  pro- 
jector has  had  the  smallest  success. 
The  parted  water  reunites  behind  our 
hand.  We  can  no  more  halve  things 
and  get  the  sensual  good  by  itself,  than 
we  can  get  an  inside  that  shall  have  no 
outside,  or  a  light  without  a  shadow. 
'  Drive  out  Nature  with  a  fork,  she 
comes  running  back.' "  Natural  law 
alone  exacts,  unfailingly,  the  due  pen- 
alties of  sin  ;  and  behind  Nature,  and 
working  through  Nature,  stands  God, 
"Who  will  by  no  means  clear  the 
guilty."  He  who  chooses  the  pleasures 
of  sin  for  a  season  will  also  in  due 
season  have  to  take  its  pains.  It  is 
well  that  this  is  so.  If  sin  could  be 
committed  without  tears,  to  use  a 
paradox,  it  w(3uld  be  more  full  of  tears 
than  ever.  The  sorrow  that  multiplies 
upon  itself  and  cannot  weep,  has  need 
to  weep  indeed.  2.  Tears  are  necessary 
till  sin  is  put  away.  Sir  Walter  Scott 
wrote  of  the  comparatively  innocent 
tears  of  children, — 

**  The  tear  down  childhood's  cheek  that  flows, 
Is  like  the  dewdrop  on  the  rose : 
When  next  the  summer  breeze  comes  by, 
And  waves  the  bush,  the  flower  is  dry.' 

God  has  mercifully  ordered  it  that  the 
tears  that  flow  for  iniquity  shall  not 
be  dried  so  quickly.  In  heaven,  where 
there  is  no  more  sin,  God  wipes  away 
all  tears  with  His  own  hand.  He  will 
love  us  there  no  more  than  He  loves 
us  here.  He  leaves  us  in  tears  here, 
simply  because  we  have  too  much  sin 
to  do  without  them.  3.  Tears  for  sin, 
nevertheless,  are  often  only  temporary. 
Men  dry  their  owr  eyes,  and  harden 


ROMlLETlC  COMMENTARY:  JUDQBS. 


enu».  tL 


their  own  hearts,  when  God  would 
see  them  still  weeping.  '*  Bochim  " 
is  not  mentioned  again  throughout 
the  Scriptures.  The  tears  of  these 
transgressors  were  of  short  duration. 
The  tears,  and  the  name  of  the  place 
where  they  shed  them,  were  alike  soon 
forgotten.  The  forgiven  man  rejoices 
that  tears  are  put  away,  and  exclaims, 
— "Sing  psalms  to  Jehovah,  ye  His 
saints,  and  give  thanks  at  the  remem- 
brance of  His  holiness.  Because  His 
anger  is  for  a  moment.  His  favour  for 
a  life-time  ;  weeping  may  tarry  in  the 
evening",  but  at  morning  there  is  joy  " 
(cf.  Heb.  Ps.  XXX.  5,  6).— The  unfor- 
given  man  has  need  to  weep  again 
that  his  tears  are  dried  all  too  soon. 
4.  Tears  are  most  hopeful  when  most 
hidden.  "  They  called  the  name  of 
that  place  Bochim."  They  named  it 
after  their  weeping.  They  made  a 
display  of  their  penitence.  Their  tears 
were  so  poor  that  they  must  needs 
advertise  them.  It  can  hardly  be  a 
matter  for  wonder  that  neither  name 
nor  tears  lasted  long.  He  fasts  best 
who  *'  appears  not  unto  men  to  fast." 
He  weeps  best  whose  tears  for  sin 
have  in  them  enough  of  shame  to 
make  him  seek  to  hide  them.  Our 
Heavenly  Father  would  no  more  have 
us  cry  at  the  corners  of  the  streets 
than  He  would  have  us  pray  there. 

III.  Tears  promptly  followed  by 
sacrifice.  "  And  they  sacrificed  there 
unto  the  Lord."  Probably  they  offered 
special  sin-offerings,  on  account  of  the 
message  of  the  Angel,  in  addition  to  the 
festive  offerings  in  connection  with  this 
particular  gathering  of  the  congrega- 
tion. 1.  Tears  for  sin  are  nothing  without 
sacrifice.  Personal  offences  between 
man  and  man  are  to  be  forgiven  freely, 
even  *'unto  seventy  times  seven." 
Every  man  is  commanded,  without  any 
reparation  whatever,  to  forgive  his 
fellows,  as  he  hopes  to  be  forgiven. 


But  no  ruler  of  a  community  can  for- 
give offences  thus  freely.  In  this  case, 
forgiveness  of  the  one  would  be  a 
wrong  to  all  others.  At  the  public  bar 
the  requirements  of  justice  are  simply 
absolute.  Whatever  other  reasons 
may  or  may  not  exist  with  God,  this 
alone  is  imperative.  The  law  must  be 
magnified,  and  made  honourable. 
Tears  can  never  suffice  with  out  sacrifice. 
2.  Tears  should  lead  us  to  the  sacrifice  of 
Christ.  In  Him  ^^  righteousness  and 
peace  have  kissed  each  other.''  3. 
Gh'atitude  for  tears  wiped  away  should  lead 
us  to  personal  sacrifice.  He  can  know 
little  of  the  sacrifice  of  the  Cross  who 
does  not  believe  with  some  self-sacrifice 
of  his  own. 

IV.  Conviction,  tears,  and  sacrifice, 
all  fruitless  for  want  of  true  repent- 
ance. "  The  curse  causeless  shall  not 
come"  (Prov.  xxvi.  2),  but  the  curse 
foretold  by  the  Angel  did  come,  and 
come  speedily.  There  can  be  only  one 
conclusion ;  the  repentance  was  too 
unreal  for  the  conviction  to  be  worth 
anything,  for  the  tears  to  be  grateful 
to  God,  or  for  the  sacrifice  to  be  accept- 
able in  His  sight.  The  final  punish- 
ment of  those  who  never  repent  must 
be  dreadful ;  but  the  final  punishment 
of  those  who  all  their  life  long  are  con- 
victed without  conversion,  who  weep 
without  penitence,  and  who  come  to 
Christ  without  really  giving  themselves 
to  Christ,  must  be  terrible  indeed. 
To  all  the  woe  of  the  impenitent  lost, 
their  woe  must  have  added  the  awful 
vexation  of  a  disappointment  which 
must  seem  as  though  hell  were  added 
to  hell.  It  is  an  apostolic  conclusion, 
that  those  who  in  this  life  only  have 
hope,  '*  are  of  all  men  most  miserable." 
Unreal  religion  in  this  life  is  a  factor 
by  which,  in  the  life  to  come,  the  Divine 
punishment  of  sin  will  be  self-multiplied 
by  the  sinner  to  his  own  aggravation 
of  the  ordinary  woe  of  the  lost. 


The  Way  to  and  from  Transgression.— Fer^es  4,  5. 

I.  The  easy  way  to  disobedience  genous  even  to  the  best  of  human 
against  God.  Weeds  need  no  cultivat-  hearts.  "  111  weeds  grow  apace ; "  we 
ing,  but  a  good  harvest  comes  of  much  cannot  see  w?iy  they  grow  so  readily, 
labour.      Transgression    seems    indi-     but  the  process  through  which  they  come 

47 


CHAP.  IL 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


can  be  traced  with  tolerable  distinct- 
ness. The  disobedience  of  these  Israel- 
ites may  be  traced  through  the  following 
stages  : — 1.  Decreasing  prayer.  Awhile 
back  they  asked,  "  Who  shall  go  up  for 
us  against  the  Canaanites  "  (chap.  i.  1)  ? 
When  Judah  failed  in  faith,  we  hear 
of  no  fresh  inquiry.  When  the  rest  of 
the  tribes  were  discouraged,  we  are  told 
of  no  further  supplication  to  God. 
Had  the  prayer  of  Ps.  Ixxx.  been  upon 
the  hearts  and  lips  of  the  tribes  now, 
we  had  heard  of  no  such  rebuke  as  this 
at  Bochim.  Had  Israel  cried,  "  Before 
Ephraim  and  Benjamin  and  Manasseh 
stir  up  Thy  strength,  and  come  and 
save  us,"  there  could  have  been  no 
such  record  as  that  in  the  last  part  of 
chap.  i.  The  failure  of  prayer  is  the 
beginning  of  failure  '*  all  along  the  line." 
2.  Love  of  ease.  Incessant  conflict  was 
probably  getting  more  and  more  dis- 
agreeable. He  who  prefers  rest  in  his 
own  way  to  obedient  rest  in  the  word 
and  will  of  God  is  fast  nearing  the 
place  of  tears.  3.  Increased  desires  for 
gain.  The  tribes  *'  could  not  drive 
out"  their  enemies,  yet  they  "put 
them  to  tribute,"  and  thus  betrayed 
the  "  would  not "  which  underlay  their 
"could  not."  Tribute  and  no  conflict, 
seemed  easier  than  conflict  and  no  tri- 
bute. That,  too,  led  to  Bochim.  They 
were  seeking  to  make  a  profit  out  of 
God's  enemies.  Like  Achan,  they  too 
were  taking  of  God's  devoted  things, 
and  they  also  were  seeking  to  conceal 
them  :  Achan  hid  his  spoil  in  his  tent, 
and  they  attempted  to  hide  theirs 
under  the  idea  of  lawful  tribute. 
4.  Growing  self-assurance.  When  the 
tribes  were  weak,  then  were  they  so 
strong  that  they  never  lost  a  battle; 
when  they  grew  strong  enough  to  put 
their  enemies  to  tribute,  then  they 
never  won  another  victory,  till  out  of 
their  distress  and  renewed  weakness 
they  cried  again  unto  the  Lord  (chap, 
iii  9,  10). 

II.  The  diflS-culty  of  escaping  from 
sin  when  once  it  has  been  committed. 
The  way  of  escape  is  (1)  through  tears  ; 
(2)  through  sacrifice;  (3)  through  obedi- 
ence, without  which  both  tears  and  sacrifice 
ore  in  vain.  The  real  difliculty  of 
^8 


escaping  from  a  life  of  sin  is  thus  seen 
to  lie  in  the  difl&culty  of  true  repent- 
ance. God  is  ever  "  ready  to  forgive  " 
when  we  are  ready  to  be  forgiven. 
Esau  might  have  found  mercy  as 
readily  as  Jacob,  could  he  have  found 
a  heart  to  seek  and  wrestle  with 
God ;  the  difficulty  was  here, — Esau 
"found  no  place  of  repentance,  though 
he  too  came  to  Bochim,  and  '*  sought 
it  carefully  with  tears."  Pardon  is 
ever  off'ered  to  the  penitent ;  but  if 
they  who  have  known  God's  goodness 
turn  from  it,  the  difficulty  is  "  to 
renew  them  again  unto  repentance " 
(Heb.  vi.  4-6).  The  dying  penitent 
is  ever  on  the  borders  of  paradise,  but 
the  dying  are  often  very  far  from 
penitence  (Luke  xxiii.  39-43). 

TIL  The  great  grace  of  God  through 
Jesus  Christ  the  Saviour.  1.  God  sent 
many  warnings.  Repeated  warnings 
of  these  very  sins  were  given  through 
Moses.  Many  more  were  given 
through  Joshua.  Victory  was  always 
afforded  to  them  when  faithful. 
Yet  they  sinned.  2.  God  came  with 
personal  remonstrance.  The  Angel  of 
the  Covenant  Himself  enters  into 
controversy  with  the  disobedient  at 
Bochim.  "  Last  of  all  He  sent  unto 
them  His  Son."  Neither  did  this 
avail.  The  league  was  still  main- 
tained. The  altars  were  still  spared. 
3.  God  manifested  gracious  patience. 
The  evil  foretold  in  verse  3  did  not 
come  to  pass  at  once.  The  Lord 
waited,  that  He  might  be  gracious. 
It  is  not  till  we  read  that  "  Israel 
served  Baalim  "  that  we  are  told  "  the 
anger  of  the  Lord  was  hot  against 
Israel"  (verses  11-14).  The  Lord 
tried  them,  and  proved  them.  4.  God 
showed  great  readiness  to  hear  their  cries 
of  distress.  At  the  very  first  signs  of 
penitence  He  raised  them  up  judges 
to  deliver  them  (ver.  1 1 ;  chap.  iii.  9). 
For  all  that,  yet  did  they  not  truly 
seek  Him  (verses  17-19).  Thus, 
though  Divine  grace  is  so  exalted, 
"  the  way  of  transgressors  is  hard ; " 
it  is  hard  while  they  pursue  it,  and 
hard  for  them  to  turn  back  from  it 
into  the  paths  of  righteousness  and 
peace. 


EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


OHAP.ia. 


The  Tears  of  Earth  and  the  Tearless  Heaven. — Verse  6  (a). 


It  is  said  that  there  shall  be  "  neither 
sorrow  nor  crying"  among  the  re- 
deemed in  heaven,  but  that  "God 
shall  wipe  away  all  tears  from  their 
eyes.*'  The  place  where  there  is  no 
more  sin  is  to  be  a  place  where  there 
shall  be  no  more  tears. 

I.  God,  who  will  presently  wipe  all 
tears  away,  here  causes  them  to  flow 
abundantly.  It  is  the  angel  of  His 
presence  who  here  constrains  the 
people  to  weep. 

II.  God,  who  wipes  tears  away  only 
where  there  is  no  more  sin,  here 
makes  them  to  flow  for  sin.     Did  sin 

bring  no  tears,  the  sinful  would  know 
little  enough  of  penitence.  This  Book 
of  Judges  is  the  Lord's  own  com- 
mentary on  the  necessity  for  our  tears. 
Nowhere  more  than  here  is  it  seen  that 
''  through  much  tribulation  we  must 
enter  into  the  kingdom." 

III.  God,  who  waits  to  wipe  all  tears 
from  off  all  faces,  has  no  pleasure  in 


causing  them.  Weeping  is  not  an 
arbitrary  arrangement,  but  is  born  in 
us  of  Divine  pity  and  love.  "  Whom 
the  Lord  loveth,  He  chasteneth." 

IV.  God,  who  while  we  are  here 
moves  us  to  tears  Himself,  will  when 
we  are  there  Himself  wipe  them 
away.  As  at  Bochim,  so  often  ;  He 
comes  to  us  on  earth  to  make  us  weep. 
In  heaven,  it  shall  be  as  it  was  at  the 
crossing  of  the  Jordan  into  the  land 
of  Canaan,  about  which  the  bards  of 
Israel  presently  sang  :  *'  The  waters 
saw  Thee,  0  God,  the  waters  saw 
Thee  ;  they  were  afraid  : "  **  What 
ailed  thee,  0  Thou  sea,  that  thou 
fleddest  ^  thou  Jordan,  that  thou  wast 
driven  back  1 "  So  at  our  entrance  to 
the  Promised  Land  on  high,  the  river 
of  tears  shall  be  driven  back  at  the 
very  sight  of  the  God  of  love.  We 
'*  shall  see  His  face ; "  and  from  the 
everlasting  joy  of  His  countenance 
shall  be  born  the  tearless  and  im- 
mortal gladness  of  our  own. 


BOOHIM. 


Our  tears  are  of  small  account  when, 

moved  by  penitence  and  love,  we 
voluntarily  come  into  our  Lord's  pre- 
sence and  shed  them  at  His  feet. 
Tears  have  even  much  sweetness  in 
their  pain  then.  When  Peter  went 
out  from  Christ  to  cry,  he  **  went  out 
and  wept  bitterly;"  when  the  sinful 
woman  came  into  Christ' s  presence  and 
washed  His  feet  with  her  tears,  who 
does  not  feel  that  her  tears  were  tears 
of  gladness  1  The  tears,  too,  of  Mary 
Magdalene,  shed  at  the  empty  tomb, 
presently  got  all  the  pain  taken  out  of 
them  when  she  was  able  to  exclaim, 
Rabboni.  He  who  sheds  his  tears  at 
the  feet  of  Jesus  will  always  find  that 
he  is  the  happier  for  them.  When 
our  tears  for  sin  fall  on  His  feet,  they 
turn  to  diamonds  of  the  first  water, 
and  as  we  recall  how  He  said,  '*  Thy 
sins  which  be  many  are  all  forgiven 
thee,"  memory  does  but  pick  them  up 


as  jewels  for  our  souPs  future  enrich- 
ment. 

Fain  is  God's  great  teacher.  Ko  one 
can  learn  well  without  it.  Take  two 
boys  of  equal  gifts  and  equal  industry. 
Let  one  grow  up  with  almost  no  crosses 
and  suffering,  and  the  other  with  trials 
many  and  deep,  yet  borne  with  patient 
fortitude.  How  shallow  will  the  one 
life  be  when  compared  with  the  rich- 
ness and  depth  of  tone  in  the  other  ! 

Fain  must  always  be  interpreted  rela- 
tively. You  cannot  look  on  a  wounded 
child, on  a  strongman  crippled  suddenly 
for  life,  or  on  a  young  mother  taken 
from  several  young  children,  and  read 
the  meaning  there.  These  are  but 
"  parts  of  His  ways."  You  can  make 
nothing  of  the  Cross  on  Calvary  if  you 
look  at  that  alone.  You  may,  in  spirit, 
join  those  of  whom  it  is  said  that 
'*  sitting  down  they  watched  Him 
D  41> 


cfiAp.  n. 


HO  Ml  LET  iC  OOMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


there,"  but,  like  them,  you  also  will 
fail  to  understand  it  thus.  You  will 
have  to  keep  them  company  in  yet 
that  further  experience,  when  they 
'*  smote  their  breasts,  and  returned." 
But  look  out  on  Pentecost ;  look  at 
the  records  of  the  apostles'  labours,  as 
given  in  the  Acts  and  in  the  Epistles ; 
look  at  the  eighteen  centuries  during 
which  the  Crucified  One  has  been 
drawing  all  men  to  Himself:  read  the 
Cross  in  the  light  of  all  that,  and  it 
will  be  beautifully  diflferent  from  the 
same  Cross  when  you  look  at  it  merely 
through  the  terrible  gloom  of  the  three 
hours'  darkness,  or  try  to  make  out  its 
rich  and  far-reaching  meanings  through 
the  agonised  utterances  of  the  suffer- 
ing Son  of  God.  Even  so  our  smaller 
crosses  can  seldom  be  made  out  amid 
the  gloom  of  their  own  darkness. 
'*  Blessed  are  all  they  that  wait 
patiently  for  Him,"  to  make  the  vision 
of  suffering  and  tears  plain  upon  the 
tables  of  life. 

"  They  wept,  but  we  do  not  find 
that  they  reformed, — that  they  went 
home  and  destroyed  all  the  remains 
of  idolatry  and  idolaters  among  them. 
Many  are  melted  under  the  Word  that 
harden  again  before  they  are  cast  into 
a  new  mould."     [Matt.  Henry.] 

*'  From  Gilgal  to  Bochim  "  is  a  path 
much  shorter  and  much  easier  than 
that  from  Bochim  to  Mount  Zion. 
The  history  of  the  one  is  in  a  few 
brief  pages,  which  record  no  conflict ; 
that  of  the  other  is  a  history  of  many 
struggles,  extending  to  the  time  of 
David  (2  Sam.  v.  6-10). 

**  If  transgressors  cannot  endure 
the  rebukes  of  God's  Word  and  the 
convictions  of  their  own  consciences, 
how  will  they  be  able  to  stand  before 
the  tribunal  of  the  holy  heart-search- 
ing Judge  ] "     [Scott.] 

**  The  Israelites  called  the  place 
Bochim ;  they  named  it  from  their 
own  tears.  They  laid  the  principal 
stress  on  their  own  feelings,  and  on 
their  own  demonstrations  of  sorrow. 
But   they    did   not    sneak    of    God's 


mercies,  and  they  were  not  careful  to 
bring  forth  fruits  of  repentance ;  they 
were  a  barren  fig-tree,  having  only 
leaves.  Theirs  was  a  religion,  such 
as  is  too  common,  of  sentiment  and 
emotions,  not  of  faith  and  obedience. 

"  Reproofs  which  produce  only  tears 
— religious  feelings  without  religious 
acts — emotions  without  effects,  leave 
the  heart  worse  than  before.  If  God'si 
rebukes  are  trifled  with,  His  grace  la 
withdrawn. "     [  Wordsworth.  ] 

"Repentance  and  temptation  are 
the  two  purgatories  that  a  Christian 
in  his  way  to  heaven  must  pass 
through.  The  first  is  of  water,  the 
other  of  fire.  We  can  no  sooner  come 
out  of  the  one,  but  we  must  look  to 
enter  into  the  other.  No  sooner  have 
we  bathed  and  washed  our  souls  in 
the  waters  of  repentance,  but  we  must 
presently  expect  the  fiery  darts  of 
Satan's  temptations  to  be  driving  at 
us."    [Dyke.] 

"  Like  Janus  Bifrons,  the  Roman 
god  looking  two  ways,  a  true  repent- 
ance not  only  bemoans  the  past  but 
takes  heed  to  the  future.  Repentance, 
like  the  lights  of  a  ship  at  her  bow 
and  her  stern,  not  only  looks  to  the 
track  she  has  made,  but  to  the  path 
before  her.  A  godly  sorrow  moves 
the  Christian  to  weep  over  the  failure 
of  the  past,  but  his  eyes  are  not  so 
blurred  with  tears  but  that  he  can 
look  watchfully  into  the  future,  and, 
profiting  by  the  experience  of  former 
failures,  make  straight  paths  for  his 
feet."     [/.  G.  Pilkington.] 

When  men  are  in  the  wilderness  of 
sin,  even  the  heart  of  rock  must  be 
made  to  give  forth  water,  lest  the 
thirsty  spirit  perish  outright.  There 
are  times  when  tears  are  a  relief. 
There  are  places  where  oi)pressed 
manhood  cries,  "  Oh,  that  my  head 
were  waters,  and  mine  eyes  a  fountain 
of  tears,  that  I  might  weep."  Whether 
God  Himself  speak  to  the  rocky  heart, 
or  whether  "  the  rod  of  God  "  be  used, 
tears,  in  this  desert,  may  well  be  an 
occasion  of  joy  and  thankfulness. 


HOMILETJC  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES.  cSap.  It. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH,— Vctm  6-10. 

Rewritten   History. 

Nearly  all  of  this  paragraph  is  repeated  from  Joshua  xxiv.  28-31.  The 
language  here  is  almost  identical  with  that  in  the  earlier  account,  but  the  verses 
are  not  repeated  in  the  same  order,  verse  7  being  placed  here  before  the  account 
of  Joshua's  death  and  burial.  This  is  evidently  done  to  throw  stress  on  the 
defection  of  the  Israelites,  this  being  the  particular  subject  on  which  the  author 
of  the  Book  of  Judges  is  here  dwelling.  In  the  account  in  Joshua,  Joshua's 
death  and  burial  form  the  principal  subject  of  the  four  verses  common  to  both 
books.  What  is  here  given  as  verse  7,  is  given  there  as  a  subortlinate  and 
incidental  remark.  In  this  chapter,  verse  7  takes  precedence  of  the  mention 
of  Joshua's  death  and  burial,  because  the  degeneration  of  the  Israelites  since 
the  death  of  Joshua  has  here  become  the  main  tlieme  of  discourse.  This  alone 
should  be  sufficient  to  prevent  us  from  the  mistake  of  the  Speaker's  Commentary, 
in  which  the  passages  from  the  two  books  are  copied  out  and  placed  side  by 
side,  with  the  idea  of  showing  that  the  verses  in  Judges  are  merely  a  confused  and 
aimless  repetition  of  the  earlier  record.  It  is  true  that  we  ha\'e  here  a  piece 
of  rewritten  history,  but  the  rewritten  history  is  not  therefore  without  an 
object.  The  object  of  the  recapitulation  is  evident.  As  he  writes  of  the  rebuke 
by  the  angel  at  Bochim,  the  author  is  reminded  that  no  such  remonstrance  was 
ever  needed  in  the  days  of  Joshua,  nor  in  the  days  of  the  elders  who  had  seen 
the  great  works  which  the  Lord  wrought  by  Joshua.  The  history  under  the 
judges  would  form  a  dark  contrast  to  the  history  under  Joshua.  In  the  latter, 
God's  mighty  works  have  been  invariably  for  Israel ;  in  this  history,  which  the 
author  was  now  writing,  God  would  often  have  to  be  shown  as  fighting  against 
Israel.  Under  these  circumstances,  what  could  be  more  natural  than  that  he 
should  restate  the  record  at  the  close  of  the  Book  of  Joshua  *?  The  mm'e  exactly 
he  copied  the  identical  wwds  there,  the  more  clearly  would  it  serve  to  show  his  purpose 
here :  it  would  show  ivhy  God  had  turned  against  the  people  whom  He  had  aforetime 
so  marvellously  helped.  In  view  of  this,  and  of  other  features  in  the  paragraph, 
the  following  points  may  be  noticed  : — 

I.  The  value  of  history.  It  is  God's  monitor.  It  is  in  harmony  with  His 
own  words.  It  shows  us  the  ground  for  His  rebukes.  It  explains  His  altered 
bearing  towards  nations  and  families  and  individuals.  History,  rightly  read, 
would  explain  many  of  our  reverses.  History  would  interpret  lor  us  many  of 
the  Divine  judgments.  In  addition  to  all  this,  history  is  full  of  incitements  to 
a  better  and  more  spiritual  life.  It  calls  aloud  to  the  backslider  to  return.  It 
bids  the  prodigal  son  leave  the  swine  and  their  coarse  food  and  come  home 
again  to  his  father.  It  tells  the  penitent  woman  of  One  who  is  ready  to  for- 
give. It  warns  the  Pharisee  of  all  ages  that  the  man  of  broad  phylacteries  and 
pompous  prayers, — stand  to  the  front  in  the  Temple  as  he  may, — is  ever  farther 
from  heaven  than  the  humble  soul  thft  cries,  "  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner  ! " 
It  says  to  every  idolater  of  all  times  and  kinds,  "  All  the  gods  of  the  nations 
are  idols,  but  Jehovah  made  the  heavens."  History  is  the  great  rock  of  a 
mighty  past,  from  which  these  and  many  similar  truths  are  echoed  on  to  us 
in  modulations  incessantly  varied  by  many  difiering  voices,  which  give  their 
peculiar  tone  and  cadence  to  each  particular  truth  they  illustrate  and  enforce. 

As  to  the  impulse  which  may  come  to  us  from  history.  Emerson  says,  with 
his  usual  deep  insight :  "There  is  a  relation  between  the  hours  of  our  life  and 
the  centuries  of  time.  As  the  air  I  breathe  is  drawn  from  the  great  repositories 
of  Nature,  as  the  light  on  my  book  is  yielded  by  a  star  a  hundred  millions  of 
miles  distant,  as  the  poise  of  my  body  depends  cu  *ihe  equilibrium  of  centrifu- 

51 


OHir.n.  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES. 


gal  and  centripetal  forces,  so  the  hours  should  be  instructed  by  the  ages,  and 
the  ages  explained  by  the  hours."  Again  :  "  All  that  is  said  of  the  wise  man 
by  stoic  or  oriental  or  modern  essayist,  describes  to  each  reader  his  own  idea, 
describes  his  unattained  but  attainable  self.  All  literature  writes  the  character 
of  the  wise  man.  Books,  monuments,  pictures,  conversation,  are  portraits  in 
which  he  finds  the  lineaments  he  is  forming.  The  silent  and  the  eloquent 
praise  him,  and  accost  him,  and  he  is  stimulated  whenever  he  moves  as  by 
personal  allusions.  .  .  .  The  student  is  to  read  history  actively  and  not  pas- 
sively ;  to  esteem  his  own  life  the  text,  and  books  the  commentary.  Thus 
compelled,  the  muse  of  history  will  utter  oracles,  as  never  to  those  who  do  not 
respect  themselves.  I  have  no  expectation  that  any  man  will  read  history 
aright,  who  thinks  that  what  was  done  in  a  remote  age  by  men  whose  names 
have  resounded  far,  has  any  deeper  sense  than  what  he  is  doing  to-day."  If 
any  man  would  know  the  deep  doctrine  which  is  written  in  history  that  is 
most  exalted,  he  must  do  and  be  the  history  over  again.  History  will  be  to  us 
what  we  are  to  it. 

II.  The  peculiar  value  of  the  history  of  God's  more  faithful  servants. 
History,  to  the  wise  man,  has  both  a  negative  pole  and  a  positive.  If  our 
hearts  are  right  before  God,  when  we  read  of  Jeroboam  and  Ahab  and  Manasseh 
and  Judas  Iscariot,  history  will  repel  us  in  another  direction ;  but  when  we 
read  of  Moses  and  Joshua,  Isaiah  and  John,  the  history  will  be  drawn  to  us 
and  we  to  it.  In  the  measure  in  which  our  hearts  are  right,  we  shall  take  up 
the  hidden  power  in  the  history,  and  shall  make  it  our  own.  The  holy  yearn- 
ings and  beliefs  and  joys  of  the  godly  dead  will  live  again  in  us.  Then,  with 
their  spirit  taken  up  into  our  own  spirit,  their  prayers  and  songs  and  holy 
deeds  with  our  own  individualism  of  life  and  opportunity,  we  shall  rej^roduce 
also.  Thus  would  God  have  us  feel  of  each  of  His  holier  servants,  "  He,  being 
dead,  yet  speaketh," — speaketh  in  my  own  heart,  and  in  my  own  life.  Sir 
John  Lubbock  tells  us  that  ''  savages  have  a  great  dread  of  having  their  por- 
traits taken.  The  better  the  likeness,  the  worse  they  think  it  for  the  sitter ; 
so  much  life  could  not  be  put  into  the  copy  except  at  the  expense  of  the  ori- 
ginal." The  holy  dead  have  no  such  feelings  of  reservation.  Paul  said  to  his 
Corinthian  brethren,  "  Be  ye  followers  of  me,  even  as  I  also  am  of  Christ."  He 
who  makes  a  vivid  picture  of  godly  history  in  his  own  mind,  takes  so  much 
new  life  to  himself  from  those  who  have  gone  before  him  as  the  actors  of  that 
history. 

III.  The  advantage  which  comes  from  specially  reviewing  such  history. 
There  are  particular  places  in  our  own  experience  where  we  all  have  need  to 
go  back  and  contemplate  some  particular  section  of  the  past.  The  chemist's 
stores  may  not  have  medicine  for  all  diseases ;  yet  do  the  stores  of  history  con- 
tain some  warning  against  all  our  follies,  some  stimulant  for  all  our  weaknesses, 
some  corrective  for  all  our  sicknesses.  Just  as  the  Word  of  God  has  some  balm 
for  each  wound  of  sin,  so  have  the  lives  of  godly  men  some  help  which  they 
can  afford  us  in  our  moments  of  spiritual  necessity.  But  the  lives  must  be 
studied.  Unread  libraries  benefit  no  one  but  the  book-makers  and  the  book- 
keepers. Idle  men  should  read  of  Paul ;  men  who  fear  hardships  should  read 
of  Livingstone  ;  those  who  lack  consecration  should  study  the  life  of  the  self- 
surrendered  Brainerd  ;  the  stern  and  harsh  might  sit  with  advantage  at  the  feet 
of  M'Cheyne.  All  men,  everywhere  and  always,  should  sit  at  the  feet  of 
Jesus,  and  learn  of  Him.  He  is  the  bread  of  life  in  all  life's  hunger,  and  the 
true  physician  in  all  life's  sicknesses.  The  wealth  which  we  might  each  find 
in  the  lives  of  godly  men  is  priceless,  but  it  is  all  stored  up  again  in  the  single 
life  of  Jesus  Christ.  In  Him  *'  are  hid  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  know- 
ledge."    The  Holy  Spirit  shows  us  here  how  we  are  to  rebuke  ourselves  in  sin, 

52 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES. 


OHAF.  IL 


and  encourage  ourselves  to  holiness  by  lives  like  that  of  Joshua;  the  same 
Spirit  waits  to  bring  to  our  remembrance  whatsoever  has  been  said  to  us  by  the 
greater  JoSHUA.  "  He  shall  take  of  Mine,  and  shall  show  it  unto  you,"  is  the 
Lord's  unfailing  promise  to  every  one  who  seeks  to  be  a  disciple  indeed. 


OUTLINES  AND  COMMENTS  ON  THE  VERSES. 

L  The  Inheritance  which  comes  to  a  Faithful  Life. — Verse  6. 


Joshua  was  faithful ;  he  possessed 
Timnath-serah.  The  two  and  a  half 
tribes  were  found  faithful ;  they  were 
sent  with  words  of  encouragement  to 
their  inheritance  on  the  other  side 
Jordan.  Under  Joshua's  wise  lead  and 
good  example  all  Israel  was  found 
faithful,  and  the  people  "went  every 
man  into  his  inheritance  to  possess 
the  land."  There  is  no  such  thing  as 
missing  the  rewards  of  true  fidelity, 
even  in  this  life.  There  is  a  spiritual 
possession  for  every  heart  that  is  true 


to  God,  true  to  men,  and  true  to  itself ; 
and  here,  the  acreage  and  fertility  of 
the  estate  are  always  according  to 
faithfulness. 

"  If  you  serve  an  ungrateful  master, 
serve  him  the  more.  Put  God  in  your 
debt.  Every  stroke  shall  be  repaid. 
The  longer  the  payment  is  withholden 
the  better  for  you  ;  for  compound 
interest  on  compound  interest  is  the 
rate  and  usage  of  this  exchequer." 
\E7ners0n.'] 


II.  The  Influence  Exerted  by  a  Faithful  Life. — Verse  7. 


The  miraculous  help  which  God 
gave  to  Joshua  had  a  great  influence. 
Joshua  must  have  been  led  by  it  closer 
than  ever  to  the  Lord  who  gave  him 
such  great  and  repeated  victories. 
*'  The  great  works  of  the  Lord  "  influ- 
enced also  the  elders  who  had  likewise 
seen  them.  But  holy  lives  of  leading 
men  seem  quite  as  influential  as  the 
miracles  of  Jehovah.  The  people  who 
had  not  seen  the  miracles,  served  the 
Lord  all  the  time  they  were  led  by  the 
elders  who  had  seen  them.  Every 
holy  life  is  a  miracle.  The  holy  life 
of  any  man  in  a  high  position  is  as  a 
miracle  on  a  hill-top  ;  the  wonderful 
work  of  grace  is  well  within  the  gaze 
of  the  surrounding  and  less-elevated 
multitude. 

He  who  serves  God  in  a  lowly  posi- 
tion can  never  serve  Him  in  vain  ;  he 
who  occupies  a  high  position  is  doubly 
responsiljle  to  walk  worthily. 

One  man  can  lead  many  around 
him  to  serve  the  Lord,  and  they  may 
be  able  to  persuade  many  more. 

"  People  seldom  improve  when  they 
have  no  other  model  to  copy  but 
themselves."     [Goldsmith,'] 

"  Be  a  pattern  to  others,  and  then 
all  will  go  well ;  for  as  a  whole  city  is 


infected    by   the    licentious    passions 
and  vices  of  great  men,  so  it  is  like- 
wise reformed  by  their  moderation. 
[Cicero.'] 

*' Pious  Joseph,  by  living  in  the 
court  of  Pharaoh,  had  learned  to 
swear  by  the  life  of  Pharaoh.  A  high 
priest's  hall  instructed  Peter  how  to 
disclaim  his  suff'ering  Master.  Fresh 
waters  lose  their  sweetness  by  gliding 
into  the  salt  sea.  Those  who  sail 
among  the  rocks  are  in  danger  of 
splitting  their  ships."     [Seeker,] 

"Sometimes  the  sun  seems  to  hang 
for  a  half  hour  in  the  horizon  only 
just  to  show  how  glorious  it  can  be. 
The  day  is  done ;  the  fervour  of  the 
shining  is  over,  and  the  sun  hangs 
golden — nay  redder  than  gold — in  the 
west,  making  everything  look  unspeak- 
ably beautiful  with  the  rich  effulgence 
which  it  sheds  on  every  side.  So  God 
seems  to  let  some  people,  when  their 
duty  in  this  world  is  done,  hang  in  the 
west,  that  men  may  look  on  them  and 
see  how  beautiful  they  are.  There 
are  some  hanging  in  the  west  now." 
[Beecher.]  So  did  Joshua  "  hang  in  the 
west,"  after  his  more  active  course 
was  accomplished,  a  beautiful  and 
attractive  sight  to  all  Israel. 

53 


CHAP.  IL  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES. 


III.  The  Honour  which  Men  Render  to  a  Faithful  Life. — Verses  8,  9. 

*'  And    they    buried     him     in     the         Many  good  men  are  hardly  known 

border  of  his  inheritance."     The  words  till    they   have   passed   away.      Most 

read   as   though    well-nigh    all   Israel  nations  and  families  know  their  worthy 

might  have  gathered  to  do  honour  to  dead  far  better  than  they  knew  them 

the  memory  of  their  faithful  leader.  when  living.     Half  the  monuments  of 

Those  who   have   served   the  Lord  our  public  squares  would  never  have 

most  worthily  must,  nevertheless,  be  been  accorded  but  for  the  light  which 

gathered  to  their  fathers.     Those  who  death    shed     forth     upon     the    lives 

live  to  God  do  not  cease  to  live  when  which   they  commemorate.      He  who 

they   die.     Living   above,   with   God,  is   not   known   yet,   if  he   is   worthy 

their  memory  is  still  cherished  by  their  to   be    known,    will    be    known   pre- 

fellow-men   below.      In    this   twofold  sently. 
life  Joshua  still  survives. 

IV.  The  Rebuke  which  is  Given  by  a  Faithful  Life. — Verse  10. 

**  One  generation  goes  and  another  their  native  place.     It  is  needful  that 

comes,  but  the  Word  of  God  abides  for  Christian  fathers  and  mothers  should 

ever.     It  holds  good  for  fathers  and  often  instruct  their  children  in  those 

children ;    it    judges     ancestors     and  moral    and    spiritual     limits    beyond 

descendants.     The  new  Israel  had  not  which   they   dare    not    go.     But   for 

beheld  the  deeds  of  Joshua  and  Caleb  ;  prayerful   and  watchful   care   in   this 

but  the  God  in  whose  spirit  they  were  there   will    arise    another   generation 

accomplished  still  lived."     \CasseL^  after  them  which  know  not  the  Lord. 

In  some  parts  of  England  it  is  still  Note. — Further  homiletical  outlines 

common  to  walk  in  procession  round  on  these  verses  will  be  found  in  the 

the  boundaries  of  the  parish.     By  this  Preacher's  Commentary  on  the  corres- 

means,  the  elder  inhabitants  acquaint  ponding  passage  in  chap.  xxiv.  28-31, 

the  younger  with  the   landmarks  of  of  the  Book  of  Joshua. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OP  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  11-ld. 

Man's  Sin  and  God's  Anger. 

"We  see  in  these  verses,  sin  notwithstanding  much  goodness,  anger  on  account 
of  grievous  sin,  and  mercy  because  of  great  distress. 

I.  The  sin  of  the  Lord's  people.  Their  transgression  was  of  a  twofold 
nature.  1.  They  forsook  God.  (a)  They  forsook  Him,  notwithstanding  His  holy 
character.  The  lofty  manifestations  of  His  holy  name  made  no  abiding  im- 
pression on  them.  The  pure  truths  which  He  had  given  them  had  no  place  in 
their  hearts.  They  preferred  the  lewd  service  of  idols  to  the  knowledge  of  the 
holy  God.  The  reason  of  unbelief  and  forsaking  God  now,  is  often  because 
God's  Word  is  too  pure  and  too  holy  in  its  requirements.  No  man  forsakes 
God  because  God  is  below  his  ideal  of  goodness,  (b)  They  forsook  God  in  spite  of 
His  Divine  right  to  their  service.  They  were  not  their  own,  but  bought  with  a 
price.  God  was  their  Maker.  He  had  "brought  them  out  of  the  land  of 
Egypt."  He  had  fed  their  fathers  forty  years  long  in  the  wilderness,  and  often 
saved  them  when  they  were  ready  to  perish,  (c)  They  forsook  God,  forgetting 
His  boundless  goodness  to  themselves.  The  mercy  in  which  the  Lord  had  dealt 
with  their  fathers  He  had  shown  to  them  no  less.  He  had  helped  them  in  all 
their  necessity,  (d)  They  forsook  God  on  the  very  ground  which  He  had  given  to 
them  for  an  inheritance.  Every  city  which  they  held  was  Jehovah's  gift.  They 
set  up  their  idols  on  the  land  which  He  had  won  for  them  with  a  high  hand 
54 


no  Ml  LET IC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES.  CHAP.  n. 

and  an  outstretched  arm.  He  who  sins  in  these  days,  always  sins  with 
strength  and  amid  opportunities  which  the  Lord  has  given.  This  is  ever  one 
of  the  heinous  features  of  all  transgression.  God  gives  men  health,  riches, 
intellectual  gifts,  a  comely  person,  many  social  advantages ;  and  when 
men  sin  they  invariably  use  God's  favours  as  a  means  of  offence  against 
God.  (e)  They  forsook  God,  heedless  of  many  warnings,  Jehovah  had  repeatedly 
warned  them  in  plain  and  unmistakable  terms,  through  both  Moses  and 
Joshua,  of  these  very  transgressions  of  which  they  were  now  guilty.  He  had 
warned  them  of  the  danger  of  disobedience  by  the  defeat  at  Ai.  More 
recently  the  angel  of  His  own  presence  had  warned  them  at  Bochim.  They 
had  themselves  affirmed  to  Joshua,  in  a  solemn  covenant  at  Shechem,  tliat  they 
would  reject  all  the  strange  gods  of  the  Ganaanites.  They  had  said,  "  The 
Lord  our  God  will  we  serve,  and  His  voice  will  we  obey."  They  had  heard 
Joshua  say,  "  Ye  are  witnesses  against  yourselves  that  ye  have  chosen  you  the 
Lord,  to  serve  Him  ; "  and,  accepting  that  solemn  challenge,  they  had  answered 
back,  "  We  are  witnesses."  God  ever  has  room  to  say  to  those  who  trans- 
gress, "  Out  of  thine  own  mouth  will  I  judge  thee."  All  sin  is  "  without 
excuse."  2.  They  served  the  Baalim  and  Ashtaroth  of  the  Canaanites.  (Different 
forms  of  Baal-worship  have  already  been  mentioned  in  the  Critical  Notes  on 
this  verse.)  "The  worship  of  Baal  amongst  the  Jews  seems  to  have  been 
appointed  with  much  pomp  and  ceremonial.  Temples  were  erected  to  him 
(1  Kings  xvi.  32,  2  Kings  xi.  18);  his  images  were  set  up  (2  Kings  x.  26) 
his  altars  were  very  numerous  (Jer.  xi.  13),  were  erected  particularly  on  lofty 
eminences  (1  Kings  xviii.  20),  and  on  the  roofs  of  houses  (Jer.  xxxii.  29) ;  there 
were  priests  in  great  numbers  (1  Kings  xviii.  19),  and  of  various  classes 
(2  Kings  X.  19)  ;  the  worshippers  appear  to  have  been  arrayed  in  appropriate 
robes  (2  Kings  x  22) ;  the  worship  was  performed  by  burning  incense  (Jer. 
vii.  9)  and  offering  burnt  sacrifices,  which  occasionally  consisted  of  human 
v^ictims  (Jer.  xix.  5) ;  the  officiating  priests  danced  with  frantic  shouts  around 
che  altar,  and  cut  themselves  with  knives  to  excite  the  attention  and  compassion 
of  the  god  (1  Kings  xviii  26-28).  Throughout  all  the  Phoenician  colonies  we 
continually  find  traces  of  the  worship  of  this  god  ;  nor  need  we  hesitate  to 
regard  the  Babyloniafi  Bel  (Isa.  xlvi.  1),  or  Belus,  as  essentially  identical  with 
Baal,  though  perhaps  under  some  modified  form."  [Smith's  Bib.  Dict.'\  In  the 
same  manner,  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  Assyrian  goddess  Ishtar  is,  for 
the  most  part,  the  same  as  the  Phoenician  Ashtaroth.  In  the  "Assyrian 
Discoveries  "  of  the  late  Mr.  George  Smith,  many  of  the  inscriptions  refer  to 
the  goddess  Ishtar  and  to  the  honours  demanded  and  rendered  in  her  worship. 
It  need  hardly  be  said  that  the  distinguishing  feature  between  the  worship  of 
Jehovah,  whom  the  Israelites  forsook,  and  of  Baal  and  Ashtaroth,  for  whom 
they  went  astray,  was  emphatically  this  ; — one  was  pure  and  self-denying,  the 
other  was  lewd  and  self-indulgent.  They  who  change  their  gods,  generally  do 
so  because  their  affections  are  set  on  things  of  the  earth,  and  not  on  things 
which  are  above ;  because  sensuousness  and  indulgence  of  the  passions  are 
more  pleasant  than  the  self-denying  ordinances  of  the  God  of  heaven. 

11.  The  severity  of  the  Lord's  anger.  "  The  anger  of  the  Lord  was  hot 
against  Israel."  1.  It  was  terrible  in  its  reality.  Some  people  lay  so  much  stress 
upon  the  mercy  of  God,  that  they  get  to  treat  His  anger  as  a  mere  sentiment, 
liaving  little  expression  except  in  words.  God's  anger  is  the  anger  of  truth, 
and  righteousness,  and  love.  It  is  no  less  severe  because  it  is  calm  and  full  of 
patient  waiting.  The  angel  does  not  smite  at  Bochim,  but  the  smiting  is  none 
the  less  terrible  M'hen  it  comes. 

•*  When  anger  rushes  unrestrained  to  action. 
Like  a  hot  steed,  it  stumbles  in  its  way. 
The  man  of  thought  strikes  deepest,  and  strikes  safely."    [Savage.^ 

55 


CHAP.  II.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES. 


God  bears  long  with  His  disobedient  children,  but  woe  comes  heavily  on  those 
who  mistake  His  patience  for  indifference.  2.  God's  anger  was  fearful  in  its  con- 
sequences. "  He  delivered  them  into  the  hands  of  the  spoilers  that  spoiled  them, 
and  He  sold  them  into  the  hands  of  their  enemies  round  about,  that  so  they  could 
not  any  longer  stand  before  their  enemies."  These  consequences  became 
matters  of  history.  The  Book  of  Judges  is  one  early  fragment  of  that  history. 
When  men  would  forget  tlie  anger  of  the  Lord  in  the  more  pleasing  thought  of 
His  mercy,  they  should  remember  that  Divine  anger  has  an  awful  history.  No 
vapid  sentiments  can  do  away  with  the  history  of  the  deluge,  with  the  overthrow 
of  Sodom,  with  the  plagues  of  the  wilderness,  with  this  suffering  under  the 
judges,  or  with  the  subsequent  captivity  at  Babylon.  Men  may  refine  upon 
iuture  punishment  as  they  will ;  past  punishment  will  always  stand  ready  to 
revise  their  theorisings  in  the  human  judgment,  and  an  ineffaceable  sense  of  the 
deserts  of  sin  stands  equally  ready  to  correct  them  in  the  human  conscience. 
Any  calm  and  tender  preacher  of  the  wrath  of  the  Lamb  is  good  against  all  the 
books  that  were  ever  written  to  make  light  of  it ;  history  and  conscience  make 
short  work  of  what  may  be  called  the  poetry  of  the  appetites.  3.  God's  anger 
is  not  vindictive.  There  ever  seems  to  be  in  it  far  more  thought  for  truth  and 
for  His  creatures  than  for  Himself.  The  wise  man  can  do  little  but  fear  an  anger 
which  rests  on  a  basis  so  broad  as  this,  and  which  moves  to  punishment  with 
slow  gentleness  through  so  many  remonstrances.  4.  The  anger  of  God  is  neces- 
sary. Unlike  ours,  His  anger  is  Mercy's  last  plea  with  the  obstinate.  It  is 
necessary  for  the  vindication  of  His  own  laws ;  it  thus  becomes  necessary  for 
justice ;  it  is  necessary  for  those  who  have  not  been  so  fully  tempted  to  trans- 
gress ;  it  is,  at  least  in  this  life,  necessary  for  the  transgressor  himself.  Fancy 
the  effect,  in  a  single  year,  if  the  thought  of  the  reality  of  God's  anger  were 
blotted  out  from  the  universal  conscience  of  living  men  to-morrow  ! 

IIL  The  tenderness  of  the  Lord's  pity.  "  Nevertheless  the  Lord  raised  up 
judges  which  delivered  them  out  of  the  hand  of  those  that  spoiled  them." 
Man's  distress  is,  in  itself,  a  plea  before  God.  It  was  "  when  they  were  greatly 
distressed"  that  the  Lord  was  thus  moved  to  compassion.  Our  suffering 
becomes  a  prayer  to  God,  even  when  no  word  of  prayer  is  uttered.  It  was  so 
with  the  Israelites  in  Egypt.  When  "the  children  of  Israel  sii^hed  by  reason 
of  the  bondage,  and  they  cried,  their  cry  came  up  unto  God  by  reason  of  the 
bondage.  And  God  heard  their  groaning^  and  God  remembered  His  covenant " 
(Exod.  ii.  23,  24).  "  Mercy  hath  but  its  name  from  misery,"  said  Thomas 
Binney,  "and  is  no  other  thing  than  to  lay  another's  misery  to  heart."  It  is 
the  severe  Apostle  James  who  tells  us  that  "the  Lord  is  very  pitiful."  The 
severity  of  truth  and  the  tenderness  of  love  ever  dwell  together.  The  anger 
of  the  Lord  makes  His  mercy  very  beautiful ;  the  mercy  of  the  Lord  makes 
His  anger  very  terrible. 

OUTLINES  AND  COMMENTS  ON  THE   VERSES. 

The  All-Seeing  Eye  of  God. —  Ferse  11. 

I.  He  who  "  does  evil,"  always  does  IIL  He  who  serves,    other   gods," 

it  "in  the  sight  of  Jehovah."     There  ever  bows  down  to  them  under  the 

is  no  other  place  in  which  to  do  it.  eye  of  the  only  God.     All  the  idola- 

'*  Thou  art  acquainted  with  all  my  tries  of  men  are  carried  on  at  the  foot 
ways 


"  of  the  throne  of  their  insulted  Lord. 


II.  He  who  forsakes  the  Lord,  is 
still  and  ever  in  the  presence  of  the         Mrs.  E.  B.  Browning  tells  us  that 
Lord.     He  "  compasses  the  path  and      though  all  her  gentlest-hearted  friends 
lying  dowji  "  of  the  idolater  also.  could  concentre  their  gentleness  in  one 

56 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES,  esAP.  xl 

heart,  that  still  grew  gentler,  till  its  We  all  have  to  bear  this  everlasting 

pulse  was  less  for  life  than  pity,  she  face-to-face  with  God  every  day ;  many 

must  hesitate  to  reveal  her  own  heart  bear  it  heedlessly,  because  His  face  is 

even  to  such  a  friend.     She  says —  not  yet  visible.      They   walk  before 

*' I  should  fear  ^^°^  neither  by  sight  nor  faith,  but 

Some  plait  between  the  brows,  some  rougher  they  are   "  in  the  sight  of   the  Lord," 

chime           ^^  nevertheless.     Human  blindness  blots 

In  the  free  voice;  ^^^    ^^    existence    nothing    that    is. 

and  then,  thinking  of  those  who  stand  Every  tree  is  a  tree,  whether  seen  or 

continually  under  the  glance  of  Omni-  not ;  every  rose  is   beautiful,  though 

science,  she  exclaims  in  wonder  and  every  passer-by  has  lost  his  eyes.     So 

envy  concerning  the  holy  angels,  man  is  not  out  of  "  the  sight  of  the 

"Who  bear  calmly  all  the  time  Lord,"  because  the  Loid  ifl  OUt  of  the 

This  everlasting  faoe-to-face  with  God."  Sight  of  man. 


Forsaking  God. — Verse  12. 

L  When  men  forsake  God  they  seek  the  Lord,  they  attempt  what  is  Impos- 

false  gods.     Few  men  propose  to  do  sible.     They  may  follow  other  gods, 

without  a  god.     It  is  only  '*  the  fool "  but    God,    from   whom    they   would 

who  hath  "  said  in  his  heart,  There  is  depart,  still  follows  them.     1.  If  men 

no   God."      Man   must    have   a  god.  could  forsake  God,  they  would  he  godless 

Men  may  forsake  the  living  God  in  indeed.     With  exquisite  sarcasm  Jere- 

heart  and  thought,  and  still  cleave  to  miah  says  of  the  gods  of  the  idolaters  : 

Him  in  their  creed.     Even  then,  they  "They  are  upright  as  the  palm  tree, 

both  forsake  God,  and  serve  false  gods,  but  speak  not ;  they  must  needs  be 

The  essence  of  idolatry  is  in  having  a  borne,  because   they  cannot  go.     Be 

new  god,  not  in  serving  the  new  god  not  afraid  of  them,  for  they  cannot  do 

openly,  evil ;  neither  also  is  it  in  them  to  do 

good."     2.  But  no  man  can  forsake  God, 

IL  When  men  forsake   God  it  is  The  children   of  Israel   tried   to,  for 

usually  through  misguided  love.     It  is  many  generations,  but  presently  re- 

"  M;i^A/A6Amr<,"  also,  that  man  believe th  turned   even   from  Babylon   to  build 

unto  wickedness.  Changed  affections  ever  again  the  Temple  of  Jehovah.     God 

have  to  do  with  a  change  of  gods.  will  not  forsake  us.     He  will  be  for  us, 

as  He  was  for  Israel  under  Joshua ;  or 

IIL  When  men  forsake  God  they  do  He  will  be  against  us,  as  He  was  often 

80  in  misdirected  efforts.     They  still  against  Israel  under  the  judges  (ver. 

"serve; "and  serving  idols,  they  serve  15).     "He  must  reign."     There  is  no 

where  the  yoke  is  no  longer  easy,  and  Tarshish  to  which  we  can  flee  that  is 

the   burden   no   longer   light.     Israel  beyond  His  presence.     There  is  no  sea 

forsook  God,  but  **  served  Baalim,"  and  on  which  we  can  sail  that  He  does  not 

^^  followed  other  gods  and  bowed  them-  rule  its  waves.     There  is  no  shipmaster 

selves  unto  them."     He  who  forsakes  with  whom  we  can  take  passage  whom 

the  fountain  of  living  waters,  always  He    cannot  constrain  to    cry   to   us, 

finds   a  heavier  task  in  hewing   out  "What    meanest    thou,    0    sleeper  1 

"  broken   cisterns  that    can   hold  no  Arise,  call  upon  thy  God."     The  Lord 

water."  has  His  messengers  of  reproof  beside 

every  idol  altar   before  which  it  is 

ly  Wlien  men  attempt  to  forsake  possible  for  men  to  boir  down. 


•I 


CHAP.  n. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES. 


Changing  Gods. — Verses  12,  13. 


L  Gods  changed,  heedless  of  the 
claims  of  the  only  true  God.  Jehovah 
had  done  great  things  for  them,  but 
they  were  not  glad  in  Him. 

II.  Gods  changed  out  of  regard  to 
indulgences  which  might  be  afforded. 

Children  sometimes  think  a  foolish 
nurse  kinder  than  wise  parents.  That 
is  because  they  are  children. 

III.  Gods  changed,  and  prosperity 
changing  also.  He  who  had  been  for 
them  in  many  a  field,  was  turned  to 
be  their  enemy,  and  fought  against 
them  (ver.  15.)  That  could  only  end 
in  their  being  *'  greatly  distressed." 

IV.  Gods  changed,  and  heaven  find- 
ing therein  an  occasion  for  astonish- 
ment. "  Hath  a  nation  changed  their 
gods  which  are  yet  no  gods  ]  but  My 
people  have  changed  their  glory  for 
that  which  doth  not  profit.  Be  aston- 
ished, 0  ye  heavens,  at  this,  and  be 
horribly  afraid  ;  be  ye  very  desolate, 
saith  the  Lord"  (Jer.  ii.  11,  12). 


I.  Motives  for  changing  gods.  These 
all  lay  in  the  direction  of  sense,  and 
of  time. 

II.  Determination  in  changing  gods. 

Neither  Moses  nor  Joshua,  and  not 
even  the  angel  at  Bochim,  sufficed  to 
hinder  these  men,  whose  hearts  were 
set  in  them  to  do  evil. 

III.  Besults  from  changing  gods.    1. 

The  results  which  were  external  and 
general.  *'  They  were  greatly  dis- 
tressed '*  in  their  surroundings.  2. 
The  results  which  were  internal  and 
personal.  Every  man  must  have  been 
troubled  in  his  own  conscience. 

IV.  God's  way  of  asserting  that  He 
alone  is  God.  1.  He  chastised  them 
severely.  2.  He  chastised  them  by  the 
very  people  with  whom  they  had  made 
leagues.  3.  He  chastised  them  by  the 
corruptions  which  came  of  their  newly- 
chosen  worship. 


The  Lord  God  of  our  Fathers. — Verse  12. 


The  expressions,  "  My  father's  God," 
"  the  God  of  his  fathers,"  "  God  of  our 
fathers,"  **  God  of  my  fathers,"  &c.,  are 
used  many  times  in  the  Scriptures. 
The  thought  is  common  to  both  the 
Old  and  New  Testament  utterances. 
Dr.  Parker,  under  the  title,  ''The 
Pathos  of  Theology,"  has  a  suggestive 
outline  on  the  phrase,  as  occurring  in 
Exod.  XV.  2.  An  abstract  from  this  is 
here  given.     "My  father's  God  "  : — 

**  I.  Then  religion  was  no  new  thing 
to  them.  .  .  Religion  should  not  be  an 
originality  to  us ;  it  should  not  be  a 
novel  sensation  ]  it  should  be  the 
common  breath  of  our  daily  life,  and 
the  mention  of  the  name  of  God  in  the 
relation  of  our  experiences  ought  to 
excite  no  mere  amazement 

"II.  Then  their  father's  religion 
was  not  concealed  from  them.  They 
knew  that  their  father  had  a  God.  .  . 


Is  it  possible  that  your  child  is  unaware 
that  you  have  a  God  ?  Is  it  possible 
that  your  servants  may  be  ignorant  of 
the  existence  of  your  religion  1 

"III.  Yet  it  does  not  follow  that 
the  father  and  the  child  must  have 
the  same  God.  Religion  is  not  heredi- 
tary. You  have  power  deliberately 
to  sever  the  connection  between  your- 
self and  the  God  of  your  fathers.  It 
is  a  terrible  power. 

"IV.  Then  we  are  debtors  to  the 
religious  past.  There  are  some  results 
of  goodness  we  inherit  independently 
of  our  own  will.  This  age  inherits 
the  civilisation  of  the  past.  The  child 
is  the  better  for  his  father's  temper- 
ance. Mephibosheth  received  honours 
for  Jonathan's  sake.  The  processes 
of  God  are  not  always  consummated 
in  the  age  with  which  they  begin. 
Generations  may  pass  away,  and  then 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES. 


ohap.il 


the  full  blessing  may  come.  We  are 
told  that  some  light  which  may  be 
reaching  the  earth  to-day,  started 
from  its  source  a  thousand  years  ago. 
What  is  true  in  astronomy  is  also  true 
in  moral  processes  and  events ;  to-day 
we  are  inheriting  the  results  of 
martyrdoms,  sacrifices,  testimonies, 
and  pledges  which  stretch  far  back 
into  the  grey  past  of  human  history. 

"The  text  impels  us  to  ask  a  few 
practical  questions : — 

"  1.  Are  you  so  much  wiser  than  your 
father  that  you  can  afford  to  set  aside  his 
example?  2.  Will  you  undertake  to 
break  the  line  of  a  holy  succession  f  3. 
Will  you  inherit  all  that  your  father  has 
given  you  in  name,  in  reputation,  in  social 
position,  and  throw  away  all  the  religious 
elements  which  made  him  what  he  was? 
You  would  not  willingly  forego  one 
handful  of  his  material  possessions. 


Are  you  willing  to  thrust  out  his 
Saviour  1  4.  Your  father  could  not  live 
without  Gody — can  you?  Your  father 
encountered  death  in  the  name  of  the 
Living  One.  How  do  you  propose  to 
encounter  the  same  dread  antagonist? 
When  your  father  was  dying,  he  said 
that  God  was  the  strength  of  his 
heart,  and  would  be  his  portion  for 
ever.  He  declared  that  but  for  the 
presence  of  his  Saviour  he  would 
greatly  fear  the  last  cold  river  which 
rolled  between  him  and  eternity,  but 
that  in  the  presence  of  Christ  that 
chilling  stream  had  no  terror  for  him. 
When  the  battle  approached  the 
decisive  hour,  your  father  said, 
*  Thanks  be  unto  God  which  giveth  to 
us  the  victory,' — how  do  you  propose 
to  wind  up  the  story  of  your  pilgrim- 
age 1 "     [Dr,  Parker  J\ 


Idolatry. 


"  Idolatry  1  you  cannot  find  any  more 
gross,  any  more  cruel,  on  the  broad 
earth,  than  within  the  area  of  a  mile 
around  this  pulpit  (in  New  York). 
Dark  minds,  from  which  God  is  ob- 
scured j  deluded  souls,  whose  fetish  is 
the  dice-box  or  the  bottle  ;  apathetic 
spirits,  steeped  in  sensual  abomination, 
unmoved  by  a  moral  ripple,  soaking 
in  the  swamp  of  animal  vitality. 
False  gods,  more  hideous,  more  awful 
than  Moloch  or  Baal ;  worshipped  with 
shrieks,  worshipped  with  curses,  with 
the  hearth-stone  for  the  bloody  altar, 
and  the  drunken  husband  for  the 
immolating  priest,  and  women  and 
children  for  the  victims."     [Chapin.] 

"A  singular   phenomonon,  known 


as  the  Spectre  of  the  Brockenj  is  seen 
on  a  certain  mountain  in  Germany. 
The  traveller  who  at  dawn  stands  on 
the  topmost  ridge,  beholds  a  colossal 
shadowy  spectre  moving  on  the 
summits  of  the  distant  hills.  But,  in 
fact,  it  is  only  his  own  shadow  pro- 
jected upon  the  morning  mists  by  the 
rising  sun,  and  it  imitates,  of  course, 
every  movement  of  its  creator.  So 
heathen  nations  have  mistaken  their 
own  image  for  Deity.  Their  gods 
display  human  frailties  and  passions, 
and  scanty  virtues,  projected  and 
magnified  upon  the  heavens,  just  as 
the  small  figures  on  the  slide  of  a 
magic  lantern  are  projected  magnified 
and  illuminated  upon  a  white  sheet." 
[E.  B.] 


Effects  of  the  Lord's 

"  After  the  judgment  of  the  word 
comes  the  judgment  of  the  sword. 

**  He  who  ceases  to  remember  the 
works  of  God,  ceases  also  to  enjoy  the 
power  of  God.  For  him  who  shuts 
his  eyes,  the  sun  affords  no  light. 

"Men    are   judged    by    the  truth 


Anger. — Verses  14,  15. 

which  they  despise,  and  betrayed  by 
the  sin  which  they  love.  Israel  can  no 
longer  withstand  the  nations  over 
whom  it  formerly  triumphed,  because 
it  courts  their  idols  and  leaves  its  own 
God."    [Cassd.] 

"  He  who  engages  in  another  wor- 

59 


CHAP.  n.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES, 

ship,    forsakes    the    true    God,    and  *'The    judgment    affords    a    deep 

apostatises   from    Him.     But   woe   to  glance  into  God's  government  of  the 

the  man  who  does  this,  for  he  brings  world,  showing  how  He  makes  all  sin 

himself  into  endless  trouble.  subservient    to    His    own   power,    by 

"  God  is  as  true  to  His  threats  as  punishing  it  with  the  very  evils  that 

to  His  promises."     [StarkeJl  arise  from  it."    \Gerlach.'\ 

MAIN  HOMILETIOS   OF  THE  PARAGRAPH, ^Verses  16-23*. 

The  Conflict  of  God's  Mercy  with  Man's  Sin. 

The  Book  of  Judges,  of  which  these  verses  give  a  summary,  is  a. "book  of  the 
wars  of  the  Lord."  We  see  here  God  contending  with  sin  in  the  hearts  of  His 
people.  He  who  reads  the  Books  of  Joshua  and  Judges  merely  as  accounts  of 
battles  between  the  Israelites  and  their  enemies,  will  overlook  by  far  the  larger 
half  of  the  conflicts  set  down  in  the  narratives.  As  was  observed  in  treating 
of  the  siege  of  Jericho,  God's  great  battle  there  was  with  sin  and  unbelief  in 
the  hearts  of  the  Israelites.  Such,  too,  was  the  strife  at  Ai,  at  Beth-lioron,  and 
in  the  subsequent  conflicts.  Such,  even  more  manifestly,  is  the  great  underlying 
purpose  of  all  the  struggles  between  man  and  man  recorded  in  the  history  before 
us.  In  every  battle,  whether  won  by  Israel  or  lost,  the  God  of  love  is  seen  con- 
tending with  the  unbelief  and  idolatry  of  the  people  whom  He  had  redeemed 
from  the  bondage  of  Egypt.  The  Divine  word,  through  Hosea,  might  stand, 
indeed,  for  the  text  of  this  whole  book  :  "  I  taught  Ephraim  also  to  go,  taking 
them  by  their  arms  ;  but  they  knew  not  that  I  healed  them.'* 

I.  Great  sin  followed  by  still  more  abundant  mercy.  *'  Where  sin  abounded, 
grace  did  much  more  abound."  1.  God's  mercy  was  in  excess  of  His  promises. 
The  "thorns  in  their  sides"  had  been  repeatedly  foretold  to  these  Israelites. 
The  punishments  that  would  follow  unfaithfulness  had  been  reiterated  again 
and  again.  These  great  deliverances  under  the  judges  had  not  been  so  foretold. 
While  God's  judgments  are  ever  equal  to  His  threatenings,  His  mercies  are  often 
largely  in  excess  of  His  promises.  The  evils  which  would  follow  disobedience  were 
foretold  in  much  detail,  and  they  came,  even  ''  as  the  Lord  had  said  "  (ver.  15) ; 
little,  if  anything,  was  said  about  the  deliverances,  but  tl>ey  came  no  less  than 
the  judgments.  The  wicked  have  every  reason  to  believe  that  the  threatened 
woes  of  the  last  day  will  also  be  even  "as  the  Lord  hath  said;"  the  truly 
penitent  will  find  in  the  way  to  heaven,  and  still  more  when  there,  that 
the  half  has  not  been  told  them  of  God's  wondrous  goodness.  2.  The  mercy 
was  through  one  man,  because  of  the  unfitness  of  the  multitude.  Each  judge  was 
made  the  great  instrument  of  deliverance.  This  was  emphatically  the  case  in 
the  instances  of  Ehud  and  Shamgar,  Gideon  and  Samson.  It  seemed  as 
if  the  Lord  purposely  took  away  all  opportunites  from  the  people  to  glory  in 
their  own  might.  They  were  too  wicked  for  success,  and  even  in  their  deepest 
penitence  fit  only  for  mercy.  Hence  God  gave  them  deliverance  through  the 
personal  prowess  of  a  few  men.  The  multitude  was  not  fit  to  win  favours ;  it 
was  hardly  prepared  to  receive  them.  The  measure  of  a  Church's  spiritual 
success  is  probably  often  according  to  its  ability  to  bear  success.  The  manner 
in  which  success  comes  may  also  furnish  some  indication  as  to  our  preparedness, 
in  the  sight  of  God,  to  receive  the  blessings  of  prosperity. 

IL  Rejected  mercy  followed  by  reckless  sin  (vers.  17,  19).  The  Lord  raised 
up  judges,  and  delivered  the  people  out  of  their  great  distress ;  the  people 
prayed  for  deliverance,  and  gladly  accepted  it  when  it  came ;  then,  when  their 
distress  was  removed,  they  rejected  the  Lord  who  had  showed  mercy  upon 
them,  and  thus  rejected  all  the  high  meanings  with  which  the  mercy  was  laden« 
60 


UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES.  ohap.  n. 

It  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  that  we  read,  after  that,  **  They  returned,  and  cor- 
rupted themselves  more  than  their  fathers,  in  following  other  gods  to  serve 
them,  and  to  bow  down  unto  them ;  they  ceased  not  from  their  evil  doings,  nor 
from  their  stubborn  way."  To  ignore  great  kindness  and  mercy  is  one  of  the 
most  sure  and  terrible  ways  of  hardening  the  heart  in  wickedness.  Take  the 
case  of  Judas.  How  tenderly  our  Lord's  kindness  must  have  pleaded  with  that 
man  in  the  upper  room !  Think  of  the  Saviour  washing  the  feet  of  the  man 
who  was  already  committed  to  the  sale  of  his  Master  !  After  the  washing  of  the 
feet,  Christ  let  Judas  see  that  He  fully  knew  the  dark  purposes  of  his  wicked 
heart,  and  yet  had  washed  his  feet,  notwithstanding.  Think  of  the  kind  sad 
tones  of  the  voice  that  said,  "  One  of  you  shall  betray  Me  ! "  Think  of  the 
inquiry  of  the  twelve,  "  Is  it  1 1 "  and  of  the  miserable  creature  who,  not  to 
betray  himself  by  being  unlike  the  rest,  was  forced  in  his  turn  to  ask  that 
question  also  !  Think  of  the  words  to  John,  and  of  the  gift  of  the  sop  which 
followed  them !  Why  did  not  Judas  drop  the  sop,  and  burst  into  tears,  and 
openly  acknowledge  what  His  Lord,  and  through  Him  the  eleven,  so  evidently 
knew  ]  How  hard  the  heart  of  Judas  must  have  been  after  he  had  taken  that  sop, 
and  managed  to  swallow  it  without  crying  !  The  tears  must  have  all  petrified 
within  the  man — a  heart  full  of  tears,  turned  into  the  severe  hardness  of  diamonds, 
but  having  none  of  their  purity.  The  tenderness  of  Christ's  deeds  and  words  was 
not  only  making  evident  Christ's  former  saying — "One  of  you  is  a  devil  ;"  for 
Judas  to  reject  such  love  was  to  diabolise  himself  more  than  ever.  Think  of 
the  opportunity  for  spontaneous  confession  which  the  Lord  gave  to  the  man 
in  the  words,  uttered  probably  with  infinite  tenderness  :  "  What  thou  doest,  do 
quickly  ! "  Why  did  not  Judas  answer  back  :  "  Lord,  I  cannot  do  it  at  all ;  much 
less  can  I  do  it  quickly,  against  love  like  Thine  ? "  But  the  man  had  no  spontaneity 
in  him.  Poor  Peter  would  have  broken  down  half  a  dozen  times  through  that 
supper ;  but  Judas  had  no  good  impulses.  So,  **  he  then  having  received  the 
sop  went  immediately  out."  And  he  went  out  fully  prepared  to  do  his  dreadful 
work.  After  being  able  to  resist  all  the  tenderness  of  the  Saviour  at  the  supper, 
it  was  easy  work  to  go  for  the  band  of  men  and  officers,  and  comparatively  easy 
even  to  betray  Christ  with  his  kiss.  The  act  of  spurning  the  Lord's  tender 
mercy  had  turned  his  poor  heart  to  very  stone.  Take  the  case  of  a  young  man, 
rejecting  a  good  mother's  love  and  tears.  Suppose  a  wicked  son  bent  on  doing 
some  wicked  deed.  Think  of  a  Christian  and  ever-gentle  mother  pleading  with 
him  on  her  knees,  her  eyes  streaming  with  tears,  not  to  do  the  evil  thing  in  his 
heart.  Imagine  such  a  son  striking  that  mother  a  brutal  blow  to  the  earth, 
and  then  fleeing  from  her  presence  while  she  was  yet  insensible.  Who  does  not 
see  how  so  wicked  an  act,  against  such  love,  would  harden  the  heart  almost  beyond 
redemption.  The  man  would  be  capable  of  anything  after  that.  So  it  ever  is 
with  any  who  resist,  and  overcome,  and  put  away  from  them  tender  pleadings 
of  the  love  of  Christ  in  their  own  consciences.  So  it  was  with  these  Israelites 
when  they  resisted  the  pleading  of  God's  great  mercy  with  them  in  their  distress, 
and  turned  again  to  sin.  Isaiah  saw  the  glory  of  Jehovah  as  He  sat  upon  the 
throne  high  and  lifted  up,  and  the  prophet  cried,  "  I  am  a  man  of  unclean  lips !" 
To  others  of  the  Jews,  God  had  showed  the  glory  of  much  mercy  and  gentleness 
and  love.  But  the  Jews  resisted  that  mercy.  Therefore  Isaiah  said  of  Jehovah 
in  His  splendour  of  goodness,  *'  He  hath  blinded  their  eyes,  and  hardened  their 
heart,  that  they  should  not  see  with  their  eyes,  nor  understand  with  their  heart, 
and  be  converted,  and  I  should  heal  them.  These  things  said  Esaias,  when  he 
saw  His  glory,  and  spake  of  Him."  The  resisted  light  of  God  ever  turns  to 
darkness.  The  heart  that  turns  from  His  glory,  must  needs  rush  very  deeply 
into  sin,  to  forget  itsel£  The  glory  makes  a  man  feel  with  Peter  :  "  Depart 
from  me,  0  Lord,  for  I  am  a  sinful  man ; "  it  makes  him  who  sees  it  cry  with 
Isaiah,  "  Woe  is  me  1  for  I  am  a  man  of  unclean  lips ; "  or  it  drives  him  who 

61 


7HAr.IL  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES. 


beholds  it  more  recklessly  into  wickedness  than  ever.  Thus  was  it  with  the 
Israelites.  When  they  turned  again  to  sin  after  God's  very  marvellous  and 
gracious  deliverances,  there  was  nothing  for  it  but  that  they  should  give  them- 
selves up  to  idolatry  without  restraint.  To  sin  against  great  light  and  tender 
love,  is  to  sin  with  utter  recklessness. 

III.  Reckless  sin  followed  by  still  severer  chastisements  (vers.  20,  21). 

"  The  anger  of  the  Lord  was  hot  against  Israel."  He  said,  "  I  also  will  not 
henceforth  drive  out  any  from  before  them  of  the  nations  which  Joshua  left 
when  he  died."  On  one  occasion,  we  see  how,  for  a  time,  the  Lord  absolutely 
refused  to  hear  their  prayer.  He  answered  them  in  their  distress  :  "  Wherefore 
I  will  deliver  you  no  more.  Go  and  cry  unto  the  gods  which  ye  have  chosen ; 
let  them  deliver  you  in  the  time  of  your  tribulation"  (chap.  x.  9-14).  1,  God's 
'punishment  of  sin  is  too  just  to  be  given  up  without  repentance.  It  is  not  grounded 
on  the  anger  of  impulse,  but  on  the  calm  anger  which  has  its  foundation  in  a 
sense  of  wrong — wrong  to  Himself,  wrong  to  men  generally,  and  wrong  to 
the  souls  of  the  evildoers.  Man's  anger  is  a  fire,  burning  with  impulsive  and 
selfish  passion  ;  God's  anger  is  a  consuming  fire,  unless  it  be  met  by  repentance, 
for  it  is  kindled  by  eternal  principles  of  righteousness  and  benevolence  2. 
God  punishes  sin  too  deliberately  to  forego  His  chastisements  without  reason.  He  does 
not  begin  to  build  His  towers  without  counting  the  cost.  The  steady  and 
increasing  pressure  upon  Pharaoh  can  only  end  in  Pharaoh's  destruction  unless 
he  repents.  Israel  itself  must  presently  be  carried  even  to  Babylon,  if  Israel 
will  persist  in  idolatry.  3.  God's  punishments  are  too  full  of  love  to  be  given  up 
lightly.  Not  only  is  the  anger  calm,  but  the  love  is  very  deep.  The  anger  of 
God  against  sin  has  no  hatred  of  the  guilty — 

**  He  hates  the  sin  with  all  His  heart, 
And  yet  the  sinner  loves." 

"  Having  loved  His  own  which  are  in  the  world,  He  loves  them  unto  the 
end."     Hence  we  are  prepared  to  see,  as  indicated  in  these  closing  verses, 

IV.  Chastisement,  in  its  severest  form,  still  made  the  vehicle  of  God's 
merciful  purposes  (vers.  22,  23).  God  would  "prove  Israel"  to  see  whether 
or  not  they  would  keep  His  way.  The  spirit  of  this  patient  purpose  runs  all 
through  the  book.  It  was  not  a  sudden  purpose,  formed  only  when  the  Israel- 
ites began  to  depart  from  God.  God  had  cherished  that  purpose  even  in  the 
time  of  Joshua,  and  forborne  to  deliver  the  Canaanites  entirely  into  Joshua's 
hand.  Notwithstanding  this  dark  history  under  the  several  judges,  the  Divine 
purpose  did  not  fall  to  the  ground.  Through  steady  and  stern  chastisements, 
the  Israelites  gradually  grew  into  the  feeling  that  the  way  of  sin  was  a  way  of 
sorrow.  God  made  Bye  Path  Meadow  rougher  than  the  King's  highway. 
There  were  times  when  Giant  Despair  fastened  the  people  in  his  terrible  strong- 
hold. They  were  often  glad  to  return  again  by  the  way  in  which  they  had 
departed.  The  result  was  that  during  Samuel's  time  the  nation  was  found, 
probably,  nearer  God  than  at  any  period  between  the  death  of  "  the  elders  who 
outlived  Joshua,"  and  that  of  Samson  in  the  house  of  Dagon,  at  Gaza.  Mr.  L. 
H.  Wiseman  has  well  expressed  the  real  progress  of  the  nation  in  the  following 
remarks  :  "  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  the  period  of  the  judges  was,  upon  the 
whole,  a  period  of  national  advancement.  The  prevailing  idea  is,  no  doubt, 
opposed  to  this  view.  It  contemplates  the  period  of  the  judges  as  an  unbroken 
series  of  idolatries  and  crimes  and  miseries,  relieved  only  by  the  occasional 
appearance  of  a  Barak  or  a  Gideon,  like  a  momentary  gleam  of  sunshine  on  a 
dark  tempestuous  day.  But  a  deeper  study  of  the  times  tends  to  modify  and 
correct  this  idea.  The  rule  of  the  judges  secured  long  periods  of  tranquillity. 
Of  history  in  general,  it  may  be  justly  said  that  it  brings  into  bold  relief  a 

62 


BOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES.  ohaf.  n. 


nation's  wars  and  discontents,  while  epochs  of  peace  and  prosperity  are  eithei 
thrown  into  the  background,  or  left  unnoticed.  The  exceptions,  rather  than 
the  rule,  are  recorded ;  just  as  a  voyager,  narrating  the  story  of  his  crossing 
the  ocean,  dwells  chiefly  on  a  storm  or  two  which  befell  him,  and  passes  lightly 
over  many  a  week  of  smooth  and  pleasant  sailing.  ...  It  is  thus  with  tiie 
Book  of  Judges.  The  period  of  which  it  treats  was  not  a  period  of  incessant 
warfare ;  but  it  was  marked  by  long  and  frequent  intervals  of  repose.  War 
and  disgrace  were,  after  all,  the  exception;  peace  and  tranquillity  were  the 
rule.  Thus,  after  the  victory  achieved  by  the  first  judge,  Othniel,  '  the  land 
had  rest  forty  years  ;  *  after  Ehud's  victory,  *  the  land  had  rest  fourscore  years ;  * 
a  little  later,  '  the  country  was  in  quietness  forty  years  in  the  days  of  Gideon  ;  * 
the  twenty-three  years  of  Tola,  the  twenty-two  years  of  Jair,  tlie  twenty-five 
years  following  the  death  of  Jephtha,  all  passed  without  any  recorded  national 
struggle  ;  and  the  forty  years  of  Eli's  official  life  were  free  from  war  till  its 
melancholy  close.  And  although  the  people's  lapses  into  idolatry  were  frequent, 
they  were  so  far  checked  and  restrained,  that  of  450  years,  according  to  the 
computation  of  a  learned  writer  (Graves  on  the  Pentateuch),  there  were  not 
less  than  377  years  during  which  the  worship  of  God  was  generally  maintained. 
Gloomy  and  fearful  as  are  some  of  the  details  furnished  in  the  Book  of  Judges, 
the  Hebrew  nation  was  nevertheless  in  a  better  state  during  that  period,  morally, 
politically,  and  spiritually,  than  it  became  afterwards  during  the  reigns  of  the 
later  kings.  For  these  long  intervals  of  tranquillity  and  of  rest  from  the 
enemy — during  which  many  a  family,  no  doubt,  followed  the  Lord  in  quiet- 
ness and  faith,  according  to  that  lovely  picture  of  domestic  piety  given  us  in 
the  Book  of  Ruth — the  Church  of  those  days  was  indebted,  under  God,  to  the 
judges,  who,  through  faith,  *  wrought  righteousness,  and  obtained  promises.' .  .  . 
On  the  whole,  during  this  period,  the  Hebrew  nation  increased  in  importance 
and  strength.  After  Joshua's  death  there  had  been  a  rapid  decline  ;  but  if  we 
take  as  the  commencement  of  the  period  the  state  of  things  in  the  time  of 
Othniel,  the  first  judge,  and  compare  it  with  the  state  of  things  in  the  time  of 
Samuel,  who  was  the  last,  the  advancement  is  too  manifest  to  be  disputed. 
The  Jewish  state  went  on  from  that  time  increasing  in  glory  till  it  reached  its 
culminating  point  a  century  later  in  the  reign  of  Solomon :  after  which  com- 
menced its  long  and  unretrieved  decline.  In  the  period  of  the  judges,  notwith- 
standing the  defections  from  God,  the  rebellions,  the  outrages,  the  confusion, 
the  bloody  civil  strifes  which  the  historian  records,  so  that  at  the  close  of  the 
book  we  seem  to  behold,  as  a  learned  writer  (Bishop  Wordsworth)  observes,  *  An 
overclouded  sunset,  almost  a  dark  eclipse,  of  the  glory  of  Israel,*  yet  idolatry 
was  neither  so  frequent,  so  open,  so  obstinately  continued,  nor  so  shamelessly 
immoral,  as  it  became  in  the  later  period  of  the  monarchy.  The  rulers  of  the 
people,  instead  of  being  hereditary  tyrants,  and  sensualists  who  taught  their 
people  to  sin,  were  special  messengers  of  God,  men  of  faith  and  power,  capable 
of  checking  public  disorder,  and  of  restoring  religion  and  faith.  Notwithstand- 
ing frightful  interruptions,  like  the  deep  rents  and  yawning  chasms  which  meet 
the  traveller  ascending  their  own  Lebanon,  the  general  tendency  and  direction 
of  the  period  of  the  judges  was  not  downward,  but  upward  toward  the  heights 
beyond."  So  far  as  progression  under  the  judges  is  concerned,  little  exception 
can  be  taken  to  this  careful  and  eloquent  estimate,  which  well  accords  with 
the  view  taken  by  Dr.  Kitto.  As  to  the  subsequent  decay  under  the  later 
kings,  perhaps  the  verdict  is  somewhat  too  emphatic.  Notwithstanding  the 
guilt  of  Jeroboam,  Ahab,  Manasseh,  and  other  monarchs,  and  the  dire  results 
of  their  apostasy  among  the  people,  it  should  not  be  forgotten  that  even  in 
Ahab's  days  there  were  seven  thousand  who  had  not  "  bowed  the  knee  to  Baal," 
and  probably  many  more  who  bowed  reluctantly.  There  seems  even  some 
ground  for  Dean  Stanley's  remark    lying  wholly  in  another  direction ;  "The 

63 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JUDQBSL 


age  of  the  psalmists  and  prophets  was  an  immense  advance  upon  the  age  of  the 

judges."  Of  the  progress  of  the  people  from  Othniel  to  Samuel,  however,  there 
can  be  little  doubt.  God's  chastisements  were  not  in  vain.  The  purpose  of 
the  Lord  was  full  of  mercy,  and  the  mercy  did  not  fail.  In  the  language  of 
one  of  the  last  of  the  judges,  "  Out  of  the  eater  came  forth  meat'*  The  Lord's 
chastisements  are  no  less  full  of  merciful  purpose  in  these  latter  days. 


OUTLINES    AND    COMMENTS    ON    THE    VSHSBS, 

A  Nation's  Great  and  Good  Men. — Ferse  16. 

L  The  relation  of  a  nation's  great  The  great  sin  of  Israel  made  these 
men  to  God.  1.  The  Lord  raises  them  judges  necessary,  yet  the  judges  were 
ujp.  They  are  of  His  providing.  not  given  till  distress  had  wrought 
After  all  allowances  for  evolution  and  penitence.  When  the  people  were 
natural  development,  He  is  at  the  back  penitent,  then  God  sent  them  a  helper. 
of  both.  2.  The  Lord  chooses  the  time  for  Periods  of  national  calamity  on  account 
raising  them  up.  He  raises  them  up  of  sin,  like  those  which  we  find  in  this 
when  they  are  wanted.  Carlyle  says :  book,  account  for  the  spirit  of  much  of 
"Show  our  critics  a  great  man,  a  Solomon's  prayer  at  the  dedication  of 
Luther  for  example,  they  begin  to  the  temple;  still  more  is  their  influence 
what  they  call  *  account  *  for  him  ;  to  be  marked  in  the  profound  sense  of 
not  to  worship  him,  but  to  take  the  national  humiliation  pervading  the 
dimensions  of  him,  and  bring  him  out  prayer  of  holy  Daniel  (Dan.  ix.  3-20)» 
to  be  a  little  kind  of  man.  He  was  2.  Such  leaders  are  not  raised  up  by  God 
the  '  creature  of  the  time,*  they  say ;  after  the  thought  and  manner  of  men. 
the  time  called  him  forth,  the  time  did  They  may  be  lefthanded,  like  Ehud, 
everything,  he  nothing — but  what  we  They  may  be  women,  like  Deborah, 
the  little  critic  could  have  done  too  1  They  may  be  of  such  a  class  as  Gideon, 
This  seems  to  me  but  melancholy  work,  who  cried,  "0  my  Lord,  wherewith 
The  time  call  forth  1  Alas,  we  have  shall  I  save  Israel )  behold  my  family 
known  the  times  call  loudly  enough  is  poor  in  Manasseh,  and  I  am  the 
for  their  great  man  ;  but  not  find  him  least  in  my  father's  house."  The  Lord 
when  they  called  !  He  was  not  there ;  never  needs  to  prop  up  His  greatness 
Providence  had  not  sent  him ;  the  with  any  of  the  so-called  greatness  of 
time,  calling  its  loudest,  had  to  go  down  men.  Shamgar,  the  man  of  the  ox 
to  confusion  and  wreck  because  he  goad,  or  Jephtha,  *' the  son  of  a  strange 
would  not  come  when  called."  All  woman;"  either  can  do  the  Lord's  work 
this  is  true  enough.  Still,  when  Pro-  so  long  as  the  Lord  is  with  them, 
vidence  does  not  answer  the  call  of  a  "  The  Lord  seeth  not  as  man  seeth.*' 
critical  time,  it  is  because  there  is  3.  Some  leaders  are  raised  up,  even  from 
something  in  the  men  of  the  time  their  birth,  to  give  deliverance  to  their 
which  forbids  this  answer.  When  the  nation.  They  are  the  subjects  of  God's 
man  for  the  time  does  not  come,  it  is  forethought,  and  training,  and  careful 
not  because  God  is  short  of  men,  but  provision.  Such  was  Samuel  He 
because  the  men  of  the  time  have  got  whom  the  Lord  would  raise  to  con- 
where  "  confusion  and  wreck  '*  are  spicuous  greatness  and  usefulness  is 
better  for  that  time,  or  after  times,  generally  nurtured  amid  the  influences 
than  any  amount  of  prosperity,  of  pure   religion.     We    do   not  hear 

much  of  the  mothers  of  the  judges,  in 

II.  The  relation  of  great  and  good  general ;  nor  was  the  influence  of  the 

men  to  a  nation's  social  and  religious  ordinary  judges  very  abiding  (ver.  19): 

condition.       1.     True    leaders   are  not  Samuel  whose   influence   was  to  last 

always  given  because  of  a  nation's  merit,  through  all  the  nation*s  history  was 

huf  often  in  spite  of  its  unworthiness.  the  child  of  a  mother  who  both  knew 
64 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


OHAt.  II. 


that  is  the  other  side.  2.  The  Lord 
works  most  enduringly  with  those 
leaders  who  walk  most  with  the  Lord, 
Set  the  work  of  the  sensual  and 
mighty  Samson  over  against  that  of 
the  pure  and  unselfish  Gideon,  whose 
humility  led  him  to  claim  the  lowest 
place  in  the  poor  house  of  his  father, 
and  see  whose  life  brings  most  of 
blessinof  to  his  nation.     Even  the  rude 


how  to  pray,  and  how  to  give  her 
much-loved  child  to  her  more-loved 
God.  A  nation's  real  leaders  must 
needs  be  scarce  when  there  are  no 
real  mothers. 

III.  The  relation  of  men  whom  God 
raises  up  to  a  nation's  deliverances. 
1.  All  victory  is  of  the  Lord ;  leaders 
are  hut  the  instruments  through  whom 

He  works,    (a)  None  of  the  deliverances  strength  of  Jephtha — a  man  of  ready 

are  wrought  to  any  considerable  extent  resources,  quick  movements,  and  a  born 

by  the  people.  In  this  Book,  it  is  the  man  commander,  but  tainted  with  the  spirit 

by  whom  God  works,  not  the  multitude,  of  the  surrounding  idolatry — compares 

{b)  No  leader  is  too  weak  so  long  as  God  feebly  indeed  with  the  enduring  mercy 

strengthens  him.   Ehud,  the  left-handed  that  comes  to  Israel  though  the  calm 

man  triumphs  when  God  is  with  him  ;  gentle  strength  of  holy  Samuel.   Israel's 

yet  even  mighty  Samson  fails  when  the  great  song  in  this  Book  is  the  outcome 

Lord  has  "departed  from  him."   Sham-  of  the  ardent  piety  of  a  woman,  and 

gar's  ox  goad,  or  the  jaw  bone  of  an  the  best  perpetuated  mercies  of  the 

ass,    or    the    ardour    of    the  woman  nation  spring    from    the    labours    of 

Deborah  ;  nothing  is  too  rude,  no  one  Gideon   and   Samuel  who   walk   very 

is  too  weak  and  unskilled,  if  the  Lord  near  to   God.      Even   here,   Gideon's 

does  but  bless  the  instrument,    (c)  All  influence  becomes  sorely  weakened  by 

these  features  of  victory  were  meant  to  the  Ephod,  which  became  a  snare  to 

teach  Israel  that   "  the  battle  is  the  his  nation,  his  household,  and  himself 

Lord's**    "  Without   Me  ye   can   do  (Chap.  viii.  27).     Great  leaders  are  a 

nothing  ;'*  that  is  one  side  of  the  Book  great  gift  of  God,  but  when  greatness 

of    Judges  :    "I  can    do    all    things  and  true  piety  go  together,  the  Lord's 

through  Him  which  strengtheneth  me";  favour  is  rich  indeed. 


The  Influences  of  Good  Lives. —  Verse  16. 

**  What  an  umpire  Nature  is ;  what     the  bad  seed  of  our  lives  grows  also, 
a  greatness,  composure   of  depth  and      Our  moral  and  spiritual  rubbish  is  full 


of  life-germs,  and  the  soil  around  us  is 
still  more  favourable  to  get  a  heavy 
crop  out  of  them.  **  Whatsoever  a 
man  soweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap  ;  " 
alas !  others  around  him  will  reap  a 


tolerance  there  is  in  her.     You  take 

wheat  to  cast  into  the  earth's  bosom  : 

your  wheat  may  be  mixed  with  chaff, 

chopped  straw,   barn-sweepings,    dust 

and  all  imaginable  rubbish  ;  no  matter : 

you  cast  it  into  the  kind  just  earth  ;     good  deal  of  it  also. 

she    grows    the    wheat,  —  the    whole 

rubbish   she  silently  absorbs,  shrouds         A  good  life  is  light  from  heaven  ; 

it  in,   says  nothing  of   the  rubbish,      it  is  a  revelation  of  God ;  it  is  God's 

The  yellow  wheat  is  growing  there ;     image,   wherein    man    was  originally 

the  good  earth  is  silent  about  all  the     made,  set  up  before  surrounding  lives. 

rest, — has  silently  turned  all  the  rest     The   holier  of  these  judges  not  only 

to   some   benefit  too,   and   makes  no     showed  the  people  what  a  human  life 


complaint  about  it."     [Carlyle.^ 

This  is  so,  and  not  so  in  the  sowings 
that  come  of  our  human  lives.  The 
good  seed  of  a  good  life  grows.  God 
suffers  not  that  to  lack  a  harvest.    But 


should  be  ;  every  approach  to  holiness 
which  they  made  in  their  work  was 
in  that  measure  a  revelation  of  the 
Divine  character  to  their  fellows. 
Every  true  worker  now,  in  proportion 
as  his  work  is  true  indeed,  reveals  his 
8  65 


CHAP.  It. 


GOMtLETlC  COMMENTAHY:  JUDGES, 


Father  which  is  in  heaven  before  the 
eyes  of  his  fellows.  In  this  sense, 
there  is  much  beauty  in  the  lines  of 
Goethe,  as  translated  by  Carlyle  : — 

**  In  Being's  floods,  in  Action's  storm, 
I  walk  and  work,  above,  beneath. 
Work  and  weave  in  endless  motion 


Birth  and  Death, 
An  infinite  ocean  ; 
A  seizing  and  giving 
The  fire  of  living  : 

*Tis  thus  at  the  roaring  loom  of  time  I  ply, 
And  weave  for  God  the  garment  thou  seest 
Him  by.*' 


God's  Unappreciated  Mercies. —  Verses  17-19. 


I.  Man's  insusceptibility  to  mercy 
(ver.  17  j  : — 1.  Through  blindness  to 
what  was  good  in  man.  "They  would  not 
hearken  unto  their  jud«^es."  2.  Through 
love  oj  what  was  evil  in  things.  Their 
gods  represented  so  much  self-indul- 
gence in  wickedness.  3.  Throughingrat- 
iiude  for  all  that  was  gracious  in  God. 
They  did  not  care  to  remember  His 
great  goodness.  La  Rochefoucauld  said, 
"  We  seldom  find  people  ungrateful 
as  long  as  we  are  in  a  condition  to 
render  them  services."  Yet  these 
Israelites  show  us  how  possible  it  is 
to  take  the  Lord's  services  and,  at  the 
same  time,  to  ignore  Him. 

II.  God's  persistence  in  mercy  (ver. 
18).  I.  In  raising  up  judges.  It  must 
have  needed  much  encouragement  for 
the  judges  to  have  come  out  from  the 
multitude  :  God  gave  them  sufficient 
encouragement  to  do   even   that.     2. 


In  being  present  with  the  judges.  Som  e 
of  them  were  very  faulty,  but  for  all 
that  tiie  Lord  would  not  forsake  them 
for  His  people's  sake.  3.  In  giving 
the  people  actual  deliverance  from 
oppression.  He  who  had  put  them  into 
the  hand  of  their  enemies,  when  afflic- 
tion had  done  its  work,  also  took  them 
out  again.  4.  Becauseof  I  lis  great  pity. 
"It  repented  the  Lord  because  of 
their  groanings." 

III.  Man's  rejection  of  mercy.  Even 

after  they  had  again  and  again  "tasted 
and  handled  and  felt"  the  grace  of 
God,  sometimes  bestowed  in  answer 
to  their  own  earnest  prayers,  they 
turned  again  to  evil.  Well  might  they 
be  spoken  of  as  men  of  a  "  stubborn 
way."  Yet  unto  us  also  God's  mercies 
are  **  new  every  morning."  Are  we 
more  grateful  than  these,  whose  faults 
we  can  so  easily  perceive  ? 


Israel's  Apostasy. 


"  Apostacy  is  followed  by  ruin  ;  the 
loss  of  character  by  that  of  courage. 
Heroes  become  cowards ;  conquerors 
take  to  flight.  Shame  and  scorn  came 
upon  the  name  of  Israel.  The  nation 
could  no  longer  protect  its  cities,  nor 
individuals  their  homes. 

*'  In  distress  the  people  returned  to 
the  altars  which  in  })resuniptuous  pride 
they  had  left.  Old  Israel  wept  when 
it  heard  the  preaching  of  repentance ; 
new  Israel  weeps  only  when  it  feels  the 
sword  of  the  enemy. 

"1.  Israel  must  contend  with  sin, 
and  with  enemies.  2.  Israel  experiences 
the  discipline  of  judgment  and  of 
compMSsion.  3.  That  which  approves 
itself  is  the  victory  of  repentance  and 
66 


the  obedience  of  faith. 

"  A  recent  philosopher  (Fischer) 
defines  philosophy  to  be,  not  so  much 
universal  science  as  self-knowledge.  If 
this  be  correct,  lepentance  is  the  true 
philosophy ;  for  in  repentance  man 
learns  to  know  himself  in  all  the 
various  conditions  of  apostacy  and 
ruin,  reflection  and  return,  pride  and 
penitence,  heart-quickeningand  longing 
after  Divine  compassion."     \Cassel^ 

"God's  judgment  on  Israel  is  the 
non-destruction    of   the    heathen." 

\Lisco^ 

"  From  the  fact  that  the  whole 
history  does  at  the  same  time,  through 
scattered  hints,  point  to  the  flourish- 


UOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:   JUDGES.  oflAP.  li. 


\wg  period  of  Israel  under  the  Kings,  but    that    through    them    all    God's 

we  learn  that  these  constantly-recur-  providence  conducted   His  people  by 

ring  events  do  not  constitute  a  fruitless  a   road,   wonderfully    involved,  to    a 

circle,  ever  returning  whence  it  started,  glorious  goal."     [Gerlach.^ 

The  Love  that  Lingers  in  Divine  Anger. —  Verses  20-23. 

I.  The  angler  of  the  Lord  is  not  it  may  resolve  itself  into  terrible  suffer- 
without  due  cause  (ver.  20).  The  ing,  it  may  spread  to  a  whole  nation, 
covenant  with  the  fathers  was  trans-  and  require  a  vohime  for  the  history 
gressed.  Tbe  voice  of  the  Lord  was  of  its  consequences, 
not  hearkened  to  by  the  people  tli em- 
selves.  God's  words  to  the  fathers  III.  The  lord's  anger  is  not  without 
is  binding  on  the  children.  God's  loving  designs.  This  is  true,  so  far 
messengers,  and  mercies,  and  judg-  as  it  applies  to  His  anger  in  time.  He 
ments,  are  His  "voice"  to  the  men  to  would  still  ''prove  Israel,"  and  still 
whom  they  are  sent.  watch  to  see  if  they  should  "  keep  the 

way  of  the  Lord."    Love  waited  to  be 

IL  The  Lord's  anger  is  not  without  gracious  wherever  gracious  manifesta- 

painful  results.     The   nations    which  tions  would  work  no  harm.     He  who 

had  been  left,  under  Joshua,  to  prove  led  His  people  forth  by  a  right  way 

the  people,  were  to  be  left  still.     This  that  He  might  bring  them  to  a  city  of 

is  but  a  sentence,  as  it  stands  written  habitation,  no  less  determined  to  keep 

here,  but  it  presently  expands  into  a  them  in  a  right  way.     In  the  end,  our 

history   of  woe.     No   word   of  God's  salvation  must  all  be  seen  to   be  of 

warning  must  be  neglected,  otherwise  Divine  goodness. 


CHAPTER  IIL 

GOD'S  MEANS  OF  TESTING  CHARACTER  AND  CHASTISING  FOR  SIN.— Verses  1-4, 

Critical  Notes. — 1.  Which  the  Lord  left.]  Allowed  to  remain,  i.e.,  spared  from  doom  ;  not— 
did  not  mark  out  for  destruction.  For  all  the  Canaanitea  were  doomed  to  be  exterminated, 
including  the  Philistines,  the  Phoenicians  and  Sidonians  ;  also  the  Hivites,  as  far  north  as  the 
Gate  of  Hamath,  which  was  about  one  hundred  miles  farther  north  than  the  conquests  of  Joshua 
reached  (Num.  xxxiv.  7-9  ;  Gen.  xv.  18).  God  Himself  was  to  do  the  work  ;  His  people  were 
to  be  the  instruments  employed  (Deut.  vii.  2,  23,  24  ;  xi.  23,  24  ;  xx.  16, 17).  But  His  engagement 
to  aid  them  was  conditioned  on  their  obedience  and  trust.  When  they  failed  in  fidelity  to  Him, 
their  conquests  were  arrested,  and  the  tide  began  to  flow  the  other  way  (Josh,  xxiii.  12,  13). 
When  from  unbelief  or  indolence  they  held  back  from  attacking  the  Canaaniies,  God  spared 
those  whom  they  spared.  Hence,  what  is  called  "  breach  of  promise  " — apparent,  not  real 
(Num.  xiv.  34).  To  prove  Israel  by  them.]  niD37  {Greek  lirtl^otatii).  Some  regard  this  phrase 
as  having  a  different  meaning  here  from  what  it  has  in  verse  4,  and  in  chap.  ii.  22,  where  it  is 
used  of  moral  probation,  or  testing  faith  and  obedience.  Here,  they  say  it  means  to  exercise,  or 
train  for  war — to  give  them  practice  in  fighting  with  the  view  of  keeping  up  the  warlike  spirit 
among  them.  [^Pulp.  Com.  and  others.'\  This  altei-ation  in  the  interpretation  of  the  word,  in  one 
and  the  same  paragraph,  is  purely  arbitrary,  and  could  scarcely  have  been  thought  of  but  for  the 
necessities  of  a  certain  theory,  as  we  shall  see  under  ver.  2.  Here,  it  means  to  test  character^  as 
in  Deut.  xiii.  3  ;  and  the  point  to  be  tested  is  stated  in  ver.  4  to  be,  whether  they  had  the  spirit 
of  true  allegiance  to  their  Covenant  God.  As  many  of  Israel  as]  those  who  came  to  man's 
estate  after  the  close  of  the  wars  of  Canaan  (chap.  ii.  10).  The  survivors  of  the  wars  of  Canaan 
did  not  need  this  discipline.  Had  not  known  all  the  wars  of  Canaan]  i.e.,  by  personal  eyesight 
and  experience.  They  had  not  passed  through  them,  seen  with  their  own  eyes  the  formidabla 
dangers,  and  met  them  boldly,  through  strong  faith  in  the  promise  of  their  God. 

67 


CHAP.  m.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES, 


2.  Only  that  the  generations,  etc.]  Here  we  have  a  statement  of  the  moral  purpose  served  by 
the  wars.  It  was  to  prove  what  the  younger  generations  \vould  do  when  they  had  personal  experi- 
ence of  those  wars.  Would  they  show  the  same  fidelity  and  courage  as  the  fathers,  or  not  ?  The 
construction  of  this  verse  is  peculiar,  arising  partly  from  a  diflference  in  the  idiom  of  the 
languages.  Bertheau  makes  Jehovah  the  subject  of  the  verb  to  know,  and  makes  Israel  the 
object — the  sense  being  '*  that  He  (Jehovah)  might  know  Israel  (by  putting  them  to  the  proof ) 
in  teaching  them  war  (giving  them  the  opportunity  of  fighting  against  these  nations  in 
dependence  on  His  promise)."  This  gives  a  good  sense,  though  it  seems  more  natural  to  regard 
«'  the  generations  of  Israel "  as  the  proper  subject  of  the  verb.  We  prefer  to  render  it  thus : 
** Only  for  the  purpose  (]pi^7  i)Z)  that  the  generations  of  the  children  of  Israel  might  have  the 
Tcnoidedge  {TX^'^)  of  war,  through  a  personal  experience  of  it  (D"1!2i77)  (not  all  the  generations  of 
Israel,  but)  those  only  (pn)  who  before  had  not  known  it.''*  The  important  question  here  is,  what  is 
meant  by  "  teaching  them  war."  Many  understand  it  to  mean,  knoioledge  of  the  art  of  war — 
to  cultivate  in  them  a  martial  spirit,  skill  in  handling  their  weapons,  and  true  valour  in  the  field. 
This,  it  is  said,  would  be  a  check  on  effeminacy,  and  keep  them  up  to  the  mark  of  being  always 
able  to  defend  their  country  when  peril  should  arise.  Trapp  has  it,  that  Israel  might  not  rust 
through  long  rest  ..."  them  slay  not  lest  my  folk  forget."  "  Scipio,"  he  says,  "  persuaded  the 
Romans  not  to  ruin  Carthage  lest  their  youth  should  want  exercise,  and  grow  wanton  with  too 
much  ease,"  If  this  be  the  correct  view,  it  is  singular  that  they  should  be  required  to  fight  with 
their  enemies,  in  order  to  be  able  to  fight  with  their  enemies.  But  passing  this,  it  is  significant, 
that  none  of  the  many  critics  who  adopt  this  meaning  quote  any  parallel  passages  in  its  justifica- 
tion. There  are  no  such  passages.  The  whole  teaching  of  Scripture  is  to  the  opposite  effect, 
viz.,  that  the  people  of  the  covenant  must  rely,  in  all  conflicts  with  their  enemies,  solely  on  the 
promised  help  of  their  God.  (Ps.  xx.  7-9  ;  xliv.  3,  5-8  ;  Hos.  xiv.  1-3  ;  Ps.  cxlvii.  10,  11.)  The 
use  of  natural  means  had  its  place,  but  the  people  are  never  taught  to  rely  at  any  time 
on  that  prop,  for  the  defence  of  their  country.  On  the  contrary,  the  manner  in  which 
they  acquired  possession  of  the  land,  is  ever  represented  as  the  rule  according  to  which 
tht-y  might  hope  securely  to  occupy  it,  namely,  by  faithfully  obeying  the  commandments 
of  their  God.  To  learn  war  after  the  manner  of  the  *'  wars  of  Canaan "  we  understand 
to  be,  to  look  for  victory,  not  through  personal  bravery,  but  through  the  omnipotent  help 
of  Jehovah,  given  in  fulfilment  of   His  promise,  in  answer  to  faith  and  prayer. 

3.  Five  lords  of  the  Philistines.  Three  of  these  lordships  had  been  formerly  subdued  by 
Judah  (chap.  i.  18),  but  seem  afterwards  to  have  been  lost  through  the  sloth  and  unbelief  of  that 
tribe  in  failing  to  follow  up  their  advantage.  Where  sin  is  not  extirpated,  it  will,  like  a  noxious 
weed,  take  root  again — "lords,"  or  satrapies  (Sept.).  The  original  sarnaim,  or  "princes"  literally 
signifies  axles.  The  chief  is  so  called  because  the  people  and  public  affairs  alike  revolved  around  him 
as  the  parts  of  a  wheel  upon  its  axis.  [Bush.]  Josh.  xiii.  3  ;  Jud.  xvi.  5,  8  ;  1  Sam.  vi.  4, 12,  16, 
etc.,  xxix.  2,  6 — C^P.'^P)  lordships,  or  principalities.  And  all  the  Canaanites.l  This  list  is  not  quite 
the  same  with  that  given  in  Josh.  xiii.  3,  etc.  Changes  had  occurred ;  conquests  had  been  won  and 
defeats  suffered.  But  the  difference  lies  chiefly  in  the  fact,  that  the  paragraph  in  Joshua  gives 
an  account  <>f  the  allotment  to  the  different  tribes  of  the  land  occupied  by  the  nations,  that  are 
here  said  to  be  spared  to  serve  as  scourges  for  Israel's  sins.  The  phrase  "  all  the  Canaanites  '* 
does  not  refer  to  all  the  nations  called  by  that  name  who  originally  occupied  the  country,  for 
very  many  of  these  had  been  slain  ;  but  partly,  it  refers  to  those  that  were  still  found  within  the 
territory  conquered  by  the  tribes  (both  the  uplands  and  valleys  having  towns  that  were  either 
wholly  or  partially  filled  with  Canaanites),  and  chiefly  to  that  large  and  formidable  nation  of 
the  Canaanites  outside  the  conquered  territory  to  the  north-west,  whom  the  Israelites  had  not 
yet  met  in  arms — the  Phoenicians.  This  people,  who  are  generally  identified  with  the  Sidonians, 
occupied  a  narrow  strip  of  land  of  only  two  miles  in  breadth,  but  extending  along  the  coast  for 
a  distance  almost  equal  to  the  entire  length  of  Palestine  from  Dan  to  Beersheba.  In  this  strip 
were  the  cities  of  Tyre  and  Sidon ;  it  was  densely  populated,  and  the  people  were  among  the 
most  intelligent,  enterprising,  and  powerful  nations  of  ancient  times.  It  ])egan  near  the  point 
where  the  territory  occupied  by  the  tribes  terminated,  and  extended  northward,  shut  in  between 
the  Lebanon  range  and  the  sea.  It  was  all  within  the  original  limits  of  the  land  of  promise, 
and  ought  to  have  been  occupied  by  the  Israelites,  as  part  of  their  inheritance,  though  it 
never  was  really  subdued  by  them.  Sidon  was  the  firstborn  of  Canaan,  and  his  descendants 
were  the  very  worst  among  races  where  all  were  so  bad.  Take  Jezebel  for  an  example 
(1  Kings  xvi.  31  ;  xxi.  25).  The  Canaanites  who  dwelt  among  the  Israelites  were  most 
numerous  in  the  northern  tribes,  and  it  was  these  especially  that  were  "  snares  and  traps  to 
them,  scourges  in  their  sides,  and  thorns  in  their  eyes."  The  Ph'listines.l  The  plain  of 
Philistia,  with  a  breadth  of  about  twenty  miles,  ran  along  the  entire  seaboard  of  the 
Mediterranean  from  the  desert,  in  a  line  parallel  with  Judah,  to  a  point  near  the  middle 
of  Palestine.  In  the  central  section  of  the  coast,  the  plain  becomes  narrower,  being  only  two 
miles  in  breadth,  and  is  shut  in  by  the  mountains  of  Manasseh  and  Ephraim.  This  is  called  the 
plain  of  Sharon.  And  the  Hivites  that  dwelt  in  Mount  Lebanon.]  The  derivation  of  "  Hivites  ** 
is  interesting.     First  comes  TT^H  to  live,  and  Tl^H  including  the  idea  of  roundness,    i/w  ovum 

63 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES,  chap.  m. 


an  egg  (Sept.),  which  is  both  round  and  the  source  of  life.    Hence  'r\'^r\  and  H^n  came  to  signify 

«nca7npmen<  (2  Sara,  xxiii.  11),  and  village  {^wxn..  xxxii.  41),  from  the  circular  form  in  which 
camps  and  villages  were  disposed.  The  people  called  "the  Hivites"  are  those  who  reside 
in  round  villages.  Even  down  to  the  present  day,  the  villages  are  so  built  that  the  conically- 
shaped  houses  form  a  circular  street,  enclosing  an  open  space  in  the  centre  for  the  flocks  and  the 
herds.  This  habit  of  building  distinguished  the  Hivites  from  the  other  nations.  [Oassel.^ 
Baalhermon,]  from  D~1S  heijht,  or  highlands.     Hermon  is  the  loftiest  peak  in  the  Anti-Libanus 

range.  It  is  the  southern  spur,  and  towers  far  above  all  its  surroundings.  This  district  and  all 
northward  among  the  hills  and  valleys  of  the  Lebanon  range,  for  a  distance  of  nearly  100  miles 
beyond  the  point  of  Joshua's  conquests,  was  occupied  by  the  Hivites  (Josh  xi.  17  ;  xii.  7). 
Baal-gad  is  the  same  with  Baal-hermon.  All  this  district  was  originally  marked  out  for  inheri- 
tance by  the  tribes,  but  in  fact  was  never  subdued  by  them.  The  entering  in  of  Hamath.  The 
narrow  pass  which  opens  out  on  Hamath — the  most  northern  point  in  the  land  of  promise 
lEadie.}    This  is  the  gate  to  Canaan  on  the  north. 

Note  on  the  "Wars  of  Canaan."— These  did  not  belong  to  the  common  category  of  human 
wars.  They  were  specially  made  at  God's  command  for  a  high  moral  purpose — to  vindicate 
Jehovah's  character  in  the  punishment  of  flagrant  transgressors.  In  doing  this,  solemn  displays 
of  the  Divine  Perfections  wore  made,  both  before  the  heathen  nations  and  before  the  chosen 
people.  They  were  therefore  sacred  wars,  and  on  sacred  principles  were  they  fought.  As  com- 
pared with  other  wars,  the  differentiating  element  in  them  was,  that  God  Himself  was  the  chief 
actor,  who  always  determined  the  issue,  and  the  principle  on  which  He  gave  success  or  permitted 
defeat,  was  the  possession,  or  the  want  of  trust  in  His  name,  and  fidelit}^  in  keeping  His  command- 
ments. These  wars  were  indeed  both  a  test  of  spiritual  obedience  and  also  a  discipline  to  correct 
and  refine.  To  know  them  implied  a  great  deal  more  than  to  know  the  art  of  fighting  bravely 
as  warrioi's.  Brave  as  Joshua  and  his  followers  were,  there  was  no  proportion  between  their 
small  resources  and  weak  arms  on  the  one  side,  and  the  chariots  of  iron,  with  the  hosts  numerous 
as  the  sand  on  the  sea  shore,  which  these  nations  mustered,  on  the  other.  It  was  a  war  of 
children  against  giants — of  sheep  against  wolves.  Never  were  armies  more  unequally  matched, 
and  never  was  faith  of  victory  through  God's  promised  help  more  thoroughly  tried.  The  fathers 
knew  that  the  conquest  of  Canaan  was  not  a  thing  of  easy  achievement.  And  now  the  children 
must  be  trained  on  the  same  lines,  that  they  may  learn  how  hard  a  thing  it  is,  as  a  condition  of 
their  retaining  possession  of  the  inheritance,  to  be  firm  and  loyal  to  their  God  in  the  actual 
presence  of  enemies,  so  superior  in  all  the  equipments  of  war,  to  themselves. 


MAIN  HOMILETIOS  OP  THE  PARAGRAPH. 

The  genius  of  the  history  of  Israel,  as  distinct  from  every  other  history,  lies  in 
the  fact,  that  they  were  the  people  of  the  Messiah.  They  were  His  brethreriy 
beini;,  together  with  Hiin,  Abraham's  seed  and  members  of  one  family  circle. 
They  were  His  ancestry,  for  "  of  them  Christ  came  who  is  God  over  all."  etc. 
They  were  His  people,  and  represented  Him  on  earth  till  the  times  of  His  per- 
sonal appearance.  Being  the  people  of  the  Messiah,  the  Messiah's  God 
becomes  their  God.  God  unites  them  to  Himself  in  the  bonds  of  an  ever- 
lasting covenant,  engaging  with  great  condescension  to  make  Himself  over  to 
them  as  their  God,  and  adopting  them  to  Himself  to  become  His  people.  In 
them  and  in  their  history,  we  see  a  practical  embodiment  of  the  blessings  which 
the  Messiah  procures  for  men.  In  them  we  see  an  illustration  of  what  God,  for 
the  Messiah's  sake,  can  do  in  following  sinful  men  through  all  their  course  of 
disobedience  and  rebellion,  and  not  only  preserve  them  from  utter  ruin,  but  lilt 
them  up  at  last,  through  faith  and  repentance,  to  the  full  enjoyment  of  ever- 
lasting life. 

This  is  the  picture  which  is  set  before  us  in  this,  and  in  all  the  historical  books 
of  the  Old  Testament.  The  Covenant  is  the  backbone  of  all  the  Divine  dealings 
with  this  people,  as  set  forth  in  these  books.  We  see  there,  in  the  position  which 
God  takes  up,  and  from  which  he  never  withdraws — /  will  he  your  God — the 
vast  resources  of  love  which  may  be  drawn  upon,  in  support  of  all  the  demands 
made  on  the  patient  forbearance  and  forgiving  tender  mercy  of  God,  by  the 
terrible  depravity  and  highhanded  rebellion  of  a  perverse  people.  We  see  why 
it  is  they  are  not  "consumed  in  a  moment" — why  not  utterly  cast  off  at  any 

69 


CHAP.  in.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


time,  not  even  under  the  Babylonish  captivity — why  they  are  so  often  forgiven, 
and  such  astonishing  proofs  of  the  Divine  favour  are  shown  on  their  behalf. 
From  the  beginning,  Jehovah  became  their  God.  That  position  once  taken,  their 
history  throughout  becomes  the  medium  for  a  glorious  display  of  all  the  Divine 
perfections,  in  pardoning  and  blessing  men  for  the  Messiah's  sake. 

Hence  we  uniformly  find  them  greatly  beloved  of  God.  We  see  God  in  close 
contact  with  them  every  moment  of  their  existence ;  they  are  never  out  of  His 
sight,  and  no  hand  is  allowed  to  touch  them  but  His  own.  They  are  to  Him  a 
"peculiar  treasure,"  and  He  keeps  them  in  the  hollow  of  His  hand  (Deut. 
xxxiii.  3  ;  Psa.  cxxi).  He  takes  the  entire  direction  of  their  history,  and  all  its 
issues  are  to  him.    This  we  shall  now  endeavour  to  trace. 


Tests  and  Chastisement. —  Verses  1-4. 

Z.  The  work  to  be  done. — The  trial  and  chastisement  of  an  unfaithful 
people. 

1.  Chastisement  as  well  as  trial,  'i^he  people  had  already  shown  symptoms  of 
apostasy,  and  there  was  more  than  reason  to  suspect  their  fidelity.  The  plague- 
spot  had  appeared,  and  there  was  need  to  cauterise.  When  symptoms  of  "  fretting 
leprosy  '*  show  themselves,  an  examination  nmst  be  made.  The  mere  presence 
of  such  neighbours  as  these  Canaanites,  and  the  having  to  dwell  among  them, 
was  itself  a  chastisement.  The  presence  of  bears  and  wolves  in  the  family  circle, 
even  if  they  should  be  muzzled,  would  be  a  great  affliction  to  the  children, 
though  the  object  might  only  be  to  ascertain  whether  they  would  put  their  trust 
under  the  parental  wing.  But  it  would  be  chastisement  in  terrible  earnest,  were 
the  muzzle  removed.  So  with  Israel,  when  these  wicked  were  first  allowed  to 
dwell  among  them,  and  when,  afterwards,  the  reins  were  let  loose,  and  they  were 
permitted  to  exercise  their  savage  passions  at  will. 

2.  A  special  mark  is  put  on  the  reason  for  this  course  of  dealing.  God  had 
already  explained  with  great  distinctness  the  ground  of  His  procedure  (chap.  ii. 
20-23).  Yet  He  now  repeats  it,  to  put  emphasis  on  the  necessity  of  such  a  course 
of  dealing  with  a  people  who  had  been  the  recipients  of  unbounded  mercy,  and 
yet  were  beginning  to  show  the  extreme  of  ingratitude.  "  He  speaks  once,  yea, 
twice."  He  calls  aloud  that  men  may  mark  His  jealousy  for  His  own  honour  as 
a  Holy  God,  while  yet  so  full  of  compassion  for  His  adopted  people.  Thus  at 
the  outset  of  this  checkered  history,  He  explains — "  line  upon  line  " — the  ground 
of  his  procedure,  that  it  may  stand  clear  to  every  ej^e.  On  this  trial  and  chastise- 
ment these  thin}.'S  are  to  be  noted  : — 

I.  It  was  God's  own  thought  to  put  them  to  the  proof.  "  The  Lord  left 
these  nations."  He  kept  the  guidance  of  their  history  in  His  own  hand.  He 
directed  it  this  way,  not  that  way.  He  put  the  machinery  in  motion.  It  did 
not  fail  out  in  the  ordinary  course  of  events.  Neither  did  the  nations  them- 
selves entertain  any  such  thought. 

1.  Far  otherwise  were  the  thoughts  of  the  nations.  "  Israel  was  a  speckled 
bird  among  the  nations — the  birds  i^ound  about  were  against  her.*'  There 
was  a  something  about  that  people  which  excited  the  hostility  of  the  other 
nations.  It  was  the  old  "enmity  between  the  woman's  seed  and  the  ser- 
pent's seed."  This  hatred  was  not  due  merely  to  the  successful  war  which 
Israel  had  waged  against  their  cities  and  armies,  though  that  had  its 
share  of  the  reason.  But  it  was  due  mainly  to  the  character  of  Israel's  God 
and  His  ways.  He  was  too  holy  and  righteous  in  Himself— too  severe  in  His 
condemnation  of  men's  sins — for  a  world  lying  in  wickedness  to  do  other  than 
hate  His  image  wherever  seen.     Their  thoughts  were — 

(a)  when  Israel  was  strong,  to  seek  alliance  with  them — only  for  their  own 
70 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    JUDGES,  chap.  in. 


advantage ;  to  gain  the  profits  of  commerce,  or  obtain  security  against  future 
possible  exterminating  wars.  W'lien  true  religion  is  in  power,  the  world  will  be 
obsequious,  and  multiply  honeyed  words ;  but  when  the  opportunity  is  given,  it 
will  stab  to  the  heart,  and  not  pity.     So — 

{b)  when  Israel  became  weaky  their  thoughts  were  of  conquest  and  revenge. 
They  gnashed  their  teeth  when  they  thought  how  terribly  tliese  upstarts  among 
the  nations  had  decimated  their  armies,  destroyed  their  cities,  and  robbed  tliem 
of  their  soil.  Feelings  of  retaliation,  or  of  self-interest,  were  their  only  motives. 
Depraved  human  nature,  without  the  grace  of  God,  cannot  rise  higher.  The 
last  thing  they  would  have  thought  of  would  have  been  to  serve  any  purpose 
of  the  God  of  Israel  in  the  matter.  But  *' there  be  higher  than  they."  While 
they  thought  they  were  serving  only  purposes  of  their  own,  He  was  overruling 
all  that  they  did  to  accomplish  His  own  holy  and  benignant  ends. 

2.  The  nations  could  do  nothing  without  God's  permission.  God  "sets  a 
hedge  round  about"  His  people  that  none  may  touch  them  till  permission 
is  granted.  Even  Satan  admits  this  (Job  i.  10).  The  lapidary  allows  no 
one  to  cut  or  grind  his  jewels  but  himself,  or  if  another  comes  in,  it  is  by 
express  appointment,  and  the  work  is  done  under  his  own  direct  supervision. 
Jehovah  would  not  allow  these  nations  to  look  Israel  in  the  face,  to  tempt, 
chastise,  or  intermeddle  with  them,  until  they  were  needed  as  instruments  to 
execute  some  gracious  purpose  of  His  own.  Had  he  not  judged  it  necessary  to 
sift  Israel's  character,  and  put  it  to  the  proof,  we  should  not  have  read  a  line 
of  the  raids  of  Chushan-rishathaim,  or  of  Eglon,  and  other  marauders,  whose 
tragic  deeds  constitute  so  large  a  part  of  the  story  of  this  book.  These  rough 
hammers  would  never  have  been  employed  on  God's  precious  stones,  had  he  not 
seen  good  reason  for  it,  and  permitted  it  to  happen.  But  as  soon  as  the 
hammer  has  done  its  work,  it  is  flung  aside,  and  not  another  stroke  is  allowed. 
The  nations  did  nothing  till  God  gave  them  a  charge ;  and  when  Israel 
became  penitent.  He  applied  the  bridle  to  their  wrath.  **  Their  wrath  He 
made  to  praise  Him,  and  the  remainder  He  restrained." 

3.  This  proving  of  character  was  done  out  of  respect  to  His  covenant. 
It  was  His  own  doing,  and  it  was  done  according  to  a  fixed  rule  of  dealing. 

(a)  God  acted  by  principle,  and  not  by  temporary  impulse.  He  never  acta 
otherwise.  He  is  never  in  haste,  and  never  under  the  influence  of  excitement 
as  man  is.  Were  it  so,  He  would  be  weak  like  man.  But  He  acts  by  fixed 
covenant  arrangement.  Covenant  implies  system — a  definitely  arranged  course 
for  all  time  to  come.  It  is  beneath  the  majesty  of  the  King  Eternal  to  act  by 
temporary  impulse,  or  to  make  any  real  change  in  His  rules  to  meet  what 
mortals  regard  as  peculiar  contingencies.  He  comprehends  from  the  first  all 
that  may  happen,  and  provides  against  every  emergency. 

{b)  He  acted  according  to  His  established  manner  of  dealing  with  His  peoples 
sins.  It  was  foreseen  that  sin — its  existence,  its  inveteracy,  its  continual  breaking 
out  among  the  people,  notwithstanding  all  the  precautions  taken  to  prevent  its 
prevalence — would  constitute,  to  human  wisdom,  a  perplexing,  hopeless  difficulty 
in  the  way  of  carrying  out  the  provisions  of  the  covenant.  God's  character,  as  a 
"consuming  fire"  against  the  workers  of  iniquity,  was  not  changed  by  His 
entering  into  covenant  with  this  people.  On  the  other  hand,  '*  His  people  were 
bent  to  backsliding  from  Him,"  and  there  was  an  extreme  necessity  for  vindi- 
cating the  Divine  character,  in  order  to  the  righteous  bestowmeut  of  covenant 
blessings. 

(c)  Provision  made  for  this  through  the  intervention  of  the  coming  Messiah, 
the  real  Mediator  of  the  covenant.  Of  His  api)earance  and  work  in  "  the 
fulness  of  time,"  intimation  was  daily  given  by  i'resh  victims  evermore  laid 
upon  the  altar,  throughout  their  entire  history  as  a  people.  Meanwhile  some 
course  must  be  takeu  to  carry  home  to  the  hearts  of  the  people  a  conviction  of 

71 


CHAP.  in.  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


tlie  flagrant  character  of  their  sin,  in  presuming  to  break  their  solemn  pledge  to 
the  Most  High,  and  to  prefer  the  unhallowed  service  of  heathen  gods  to  the 
pure  worship  of  Israel's  God.  Afflictions  serve  this  purpose.  God  will  not 
break  His  promise,  for  it  is  an  *'  everlasting  covenant."  Neither  can  He  look 
upon  sin.  But  He  will  chastise.  He  will  cast  into  the  furnace  to  "purely 
purge  away  their  dross,  and  take  away  all  their  tin."  So  He  leads  them  back 
to  Himself,  in  the  exercise  of  unwearying  forbearance,  "  for  His  mercy  endureth 
for  ever."     (Ps.  Ixxxix.  31-34.) 

4.  God  puts  His  people  under  discipline  to  serve  wise  and  holy  ends.  If 
enemies  are  used,  they  are  but  the  rod  in  His  hand,  employed  to  do  a 
necessary  work.  They  do  nothing  merely  at  their  own  discretion.  Any 
commission  given  to  an  earthly  power  is  limited  by  the  charge,  **Thus 
far,  but  no  farther." 

(a)  No  real  injury  is  ever  intended.  They  are  more  sacred  to  Him  than 
any  other  property.  He  watches  over  them  as  the  mother  bird  fluttering  over 
her  young ;  and,  as  that  motlier  placeth  her  own  body  between  her  young  and 
the  arrow  that  is  aimed  at  their  heart,  so  he  who  would  smite  a  child  of  the 
covenant  must  first  fight  with  Him  that  made  it. 

(b)  Never  is  the  rod  without  some  gracious  instruction.  "  Hear  ye  the  rod,  and 
Him  who  appointeth  it."  **  All  his  woi^ks  are  done  in  truth  and  uprightness.'* 
(Ps.  XXV.  10.)  This  gives  confidence  to  the  pious  heart,  and  stills  all  appre- 
hension as  to  the  issue.  How  many  "  Fear  nots  "  are  in  Scripture.  Instances 
in  David's  history.  Before  Shimei  he  "accepts  the  punishment  of  his  iniquity." 
"  Let  him  curse,  for  the  Lord  hath  bidden  him  ! "  God  put  him  to  the  test, 
and  he  stood  it.     (See  also  Ps.  xxxix.  9  ;   2  Sam.  xxiv.  14. 

5.  God  Himself  determines  the  time,  manner,  and  severity  of  the  trial. 
{a)    The  time — not  too  soon — lest  He  should  seem  to  be  suspicious  of  His 

people,  and  take  pleasure  in  hastening  to  chastise.  His  language  rather  is, 
"  Surely  they  are  My  people,  children  that  will  not  lie  "  (Isa.  Ixiii.  8.)  Nor  too 
long— lest  the  malady  should  get  too  deeply-rooted,  and  require  a  far 
more  severe  operation  to  eradicate  it  at  a  future  period.  In  the  one  case, 
the  tendency  would  be  to  foster  a  spirit  of  bondage  ;  in  the  other,  to 
make  light  of  sin,  and  presumptuously  to  cast  off  the  fear  of  God. 

(bj  1  he  manner — in  such  form  as  to  instruct  the  mind  in  the  evil  nature 
of  the  sin  which  has  brought  down  the  chastisement,  The  bitter  streams  of 
which  God  causes  them  to  drink,  spring  from  the  very  sins  on  account  of  which 
God  chastises  them.  **  Thine  own  wickedness  correcteth  thee,  and  thy  back- 
sliding s  reprove  thee." 

(c)  The  severity — not  destructive,  as  if  He  found  pleasure  in  taking  ven- 
geance. "  To  crush  under  His  feet  the  prisoners  of  the  earth  .... 
the  Lord  approveth  not "  (Lam.  iii.  34,  36).  "  /  will  not  contend  for  ever"  etc. 
(Isa.  Ivii.  16).  A  ruthless  enemy  may  be  employed  as  the  instrument,  yet  he 
cannot  go  a  step  beyond  the  limit  prescribed,  nor  durst  he  inflict  a  single  pang 
to  gratify  malice  or  revenge,  except  in  so  far  as  that  may  be  a  means  of  carrying 
out  the  purpose  of  the  real  actor,  "/awz  jealous  for  Jerusalem  with  a  great 
jealousy  ;  1  am  very  sore  displeased  with  the  heathen,  for  I  was  but  a  little  dis- 
pleased (with  my  people),  and  they  helped  forward  the  affliction  "  (Zech.  i.  14, 
15).  Sometimes  His  hand  is  very  heavy.  He  goes  the  length  of  "  barking  our 
fig  tree,"  and  "laying  our  vine  waste"  (Joel  i.  7).  That  which  is  proverbially 
fruitful  He  makes  conspicuously  desolate.  But  He  has  always  "  a  bottle  for  the 
tears,"  and  a  balm  for  the  wounds.  He  may  use  the  "scourge,"  but  never  the 
"  sword,"    He  "  afflicts  not  willingly."    He  "  chastens  for  our  profit," 


78 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES,  chap,  iil 
COMMENTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

The  Lord's  Thoughts  About  His  People. —  Verses  1-4. 

I.  God  has  many  thoughts  about  III.  Behind  all  His  thoughts  are 
His  people.  "Many  are  thy  thoughts  gracious  intentions.  They  ail  sprin- 
to  US-ward ;  they  cannot  be  reckoned  from  love  at  bottom.  Not  one  is  die- 
up  in  order."  He  concerns  Himself  tated  by  enmity,  or  even  indifference, 
much  with  them  and  their  history.  They  are  all  only  different  forms  of 
"/  know  the  thoughts  that  I  think  loving-kindness  and  tender  mercy, 
toward  you — thoughts  of  peace  and  not  corresponding  with  the  different  or 
of  evil,  to  give  you  an  expected  end."  changing  circumstances  in  which  they 
They  are  the  children  He  has  nourished  are  placed.  ^'  How  precious  are  Thy 
and  brought  up.  They  are  called  by  thoughts  to  me,  0  God  I  How  great 
His  sacred  name.  He  has  once  taken  is  the  sum  of  them!"  Sitting  on  the 
them  by  the  hand,  and  His  love  is  un-  throne  of  the  Gospel,  God's  thoughts 
changeable.  He  has  removed  mountains  to  His  people  are  only  of  pardon, 
for  them,  and  dried  up  seas — rolled  back  reconciliation,  peace,  and  the  hope  of 
rivers  in  their  course,  and  made  the  eternal  life.  The  Father's  will  is  that 
hard  rocks  gush  forth  streams  of  water,  nothing  of  "the  bundle  of  life"  be  lost, 
and  the  heavens  send  down  angels'  food,  but  "  raised  up  again  at  the  last  day." 
How  should  He  not  have  many  and  And  even  now  His  several  chastisements 
loving  thoughts  about  His  people !  are  sent  to  serve  the  ends  of  love. 

II.  God's  thoughts  about  His  people  IV.  God's  thoughts  of  what  true 
are  often  anxious  thoughts.  He  has  love  is  are  very  different  from  ours. 
chosen  them  to  show  forth  His  praise  ;  *'  As  the  heavens  are  higher  than  the 
but  howcan  a  disobedient  and  rebellious  earth,  so  are  my  thoughts  higher  than 
people  serve  a  purpose  like  this?  He  ap-  your  thoughts."  He  can  forgive  without 
points  them  to  illustrate  the  righteous-  dithculty  to  any  extent,  where  there  is 
ness  of  His  law,  and  tlie  tenderness  of  true  penitence,  and  trust  in  the  blood. 
His  dealings;  but  how  can  they  do  this  "He  abundantly  pardons."  But  He 
when  they  are  daily  sinning  before  Him,  often  withholds  that  for  which  flesh 
and  there  is  no  end  of  their  murmurings?  and  blood  ardently  crave.  He  applies 
He  has  engaged  to  see  them  all  safely  crucial  tests  to  bring  out  the  whole 
through  the  dangers  of  the  wilder-  heart,  and  covers  us  with  shame  and 
ness,  and  settled  in  the  enjoyment  of  humiliation.  In  place  of  allowing  us 
the  spiritual  inheritance  above  ;  but  to  sit  down  at  ease,  and  enjoy  the  good 
how  can  this  be  accomplished  When  things  of  this  life  without  stint  or 
there  is  so  much  unbelief  and  hardness  annoyance,  He  makes  us  go  through 
of  heart  shown  at  every  step  of  the  the  briers  and  thorns,  and  learn  to 
Divine  leadings  ?  "  0,  Judah,  what  "  scorn  delights  and  live  laborious 
shall  I  do  unto  thee  ?  How  shall  I  put  days."  "As  many  as  I  love  I  rebuke 
thee  among  the  children,  and  give  thee  and  chasten."  The  permanent  rooting 
a  pleasant  land  and  goodly  heritage  V  out  of  sin  from  the  heart,  though 
"Have  I  been  a  wilderness  unto  Israel —  requiring  sharp  present  suffering,  is 
a  land  of  darkness  ?  Wherefore  say  regarded  as  true  love  in  the  end  in  the 
my  people.  We  will  come  no  more  unto  estimation  of  our  God. 

thee?" 

The  Chastening  op  thb  Lord. 

•*  God  not  only   appoints   all    our  effects.     What  a  comforting  reflection 

chastisements,  but  they  are  under  His  this  !     To  have  every  circumstance  of 

special  direction  and  management  as  to  our  distress  in  the  management  of  such 

their  nature,  degree,  continuance  and  a  hand !    He  is  most  intimately  ac- 

7a 


CHAP.  in.  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


qiiainted  with  our  frame  and  feelings.  Christian  came  to  the  Slongh  of  Des- 

He  is  possessed  of  unerring  wisdom  pond,  they  both  fell  in  and  wallowed 

and    infinite    goodness,    so    that   our  for  a  time  in  the  mire.    Pliable  was  in- 

affairs  cannot  miscarry  in  His  hand,  stantly  unmasked.     He  angrily  asked 

Not  a  sparrow   falls   to   the   ground  his  companion,  Is   this  the  happiness 

without  His  permission.     So  minute  you  have  been  telling  me  of  all  this 

and  tender  is  His  care  over  us,  that  while?      After    a   desperate  struggle 

He  'makes  all  our  bed  in  our  sick-  he  got  out  of  the  mire  on  that  side 

ness.' "     \McLean.'\  which   lay  next  his  own  house,   and 

"  The  raising  of  our  troubles,  the  Christian  saw  him  no  more.  But  Chris- 
keeping  them  upon  us,  and  the  re-  tian  got  out  on  the  side  next  the 
moving  of  them,  is  all  of  the  Lord.    It  wicket  gate. 

is   His  wise  disposal,  and  not  an  ill  But  sharp  tests  while  they  sift,  also 

chance  (Amos  iii.  2).     Do  not,  there-  strengthen  religious  characters.    When 

fore,   rest  in  second  causes,  nor  vex  the  wind  shakes  a  young  tree,   and 

yourselves  as  if  spurning  against  the  bends  it  to  the  earth,  it  seems  to  be 

Lord,  but  patiently  bear  them.    Who-  retarding  its  growth,  yet  it  is  really 

ever  may  be  the  instrument,  the  Lord  furthering  it.     It  makes  it  strike  its 

is  the  overruling  cause.  roots   deeper  into  the  soil,   that   its 

**  When  by  God's  kindness  and  many  stem    may  rise  higher   and  stronger, 

comforts  we  cannot  be  brought  to  cleave  till  it  can  struggle  with  tempests  and 

to  Him  with  all   our  hearts.  He  will  spread  its  green  leaves  to  a  thousand 

take  another  course  to  bring  us  there-  summers.     The  winds  and  storms  are 

to.     He  will  acquaint  us  with  wants,  the   educators   of    the  tree,   no    less 

trouble,  and  sorrow.     And  yet  such  is  than  the  sunbeams  and  the  dew.     In 

His  love,  that  if  they  prevail  with  us,  the  intellectual  world  a  strong  mind 

and  work  kindly  upon  us,  to  bring  us  thrives  on   difficulties.     There   is  no 

to  repent.  He  will  return  to  us  again  falser  method   of  education   than  to 

graciously   and   continue   His  former  make  all  smooth  and  easy,  and  remove 

bounty.     Our  first  parents  when  they  every  stone  before  the  foot  touches  it. 

sinned  began  to  know  what  good  and  God  has  ordained  that  where  there  is 

evil  meant.     Children,  while  tenderly  tobe  progression  there  must  be  struggle, 

dealt  with  by  their  parents,  have  all  Specially  is  this  the  case  where  the  alloy 

things  with  ease  provided  for  them  ;  of  sin  has  entered,  and  needs  to  be 

but  when  they  grow  up  and  are  put  smeltedout  by  the  hot  furnace."  [^(?r]. 

to  shifts,   they  come  to   know   what  "The  country  of  the  Israelites  was 

hardness  means,   through    the   rough  rich,  and  abounded  in  dainties  of  all 

handling  of  strangers"     [^Itogers.^  sorts,  so  that  they  were  in  danger  of 

sinking  into    the   utmost    degree    of 

"Chastenings  from  the  lord  often  act  luxury  and  effeminacy.     They  must, 

as  a  touchstone  of  human  character,  therefore,  sometimes   wade   in   blood. 

They  are  an  Ithuriel's  spear  to  reveal  and  not  always  in  milk  and  honey." 

every  man  as  he  is.   When  Pliable  and  \^Henry.\ 

GoD*s  Change  of  Dealing. 

Here  we  have  the  first  step  taken  in  day ;  but  soon  came  the  frown,  and  "He 

a  new  course  of  the  Divine  dealings,  drove  out  the  man."     All  the  days  of 

The  change  is  very  marked — similar  to  Joshua  were  as  a  bright  morning  in  the 

that  of  the  attitude  of  the  Lord  God  history  of  the  young  nation  whom  the 

towards  our  first  parents  in  the  garden  Lord  had  brought  out  of  Egypt.    *'  He 

of  Eden,  when  man  had  sinned.     A  b  couched,  he  lay  down  as  a  lion ;  he  did 

first  his  voice  was  heard  in  loving  in-  eat  up  the  nations  his  enemies ;  he  brake 

tercourse  with  man  at  the  cool  of  the  their  bones,  and  pierced  them  through 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   JUDGES. 


CHAP   IIL 


with  his  arrows**  Prosperity  flowed 
**  as  the  waves  of  the  sea."  These 
were  the  "  lights  "  of  Israel's  history  ; 
but  alas  !  the  "  shadows  "  followed. 
In  the  first  chapter  of  Judges,  the 
atmosphere  becomes  electrical ;  in  tlie 
second,  specks  begin  to  appear  on  the 
horizon,  and  the  first  mutteriiigs  of  the 
approaching  thunder  are  heard.  Now 
in  this  chapter,  we  see  the  dark  clouds 
getting  settled  in  the  sky,  and  the 
elements  of  destruction  being  prepared. 
What  could  have  happened  that  that 
same  God,  who  had  given  up  these 
Caiiaanites  to  Israel  to  be  trodden  down 
as  the  mire,  should  now  permit  them 
to  rise  up  and  become  Israel's  masters, 
and  even  sweep  over  the  land  as  an 
over-running  flood  ?  The  change  is  too 
marked  to  escape  notice  : — 

1.  It  is  rendered  necessary  by  sin. 
Israel  had  an  "  evil  heart  of  unbelief  in 
departing  from  the  living  God.''  This 
apostacy  in  the  heart  was  now  showing 
itself  in  the  life.  "  God  who  seeth  all 
tilings,  taketh  notice  of,  and  is  much 
displeased  with  the  sin  of  having  any 
other  god." 

2.  There  is  no  real  change  in  the 
Divine  Love,  An  altered  conduct  on 
the  part  of  the  people  leads  to  an  altered 
tone  on  the  part  of  their  God.  When 
the  child  forsakes  the  father,  that  does 
not  imply  that  the  father  forsakes  the 
child.  God  did  not  depart  from  His 
purpose,  but  other  means  now  became 
necessary  to  carry  it  out.  If  God  now 
speaks  in  notes  of  thunder  in  place  of 
whispers,  it  is  still  Love  that  speaks. 

3.  A  change  in  the  Divine  attitude 
is  required  from  the  danger  of  leaving 
sin  unchecked.  When  the  stone  has 
begun  to  roll  down  the  hill,  it  must  be 
stopped  at  once,  if  stopped  at  all,  for 
soon,  otherwise,  it  will  become  un- 
manageable. As  soon  as  the  heart 
shows  that  it  has  decided  to  have 
another  god,  true  love  will  hasten  to 


take  measures  to  show  the  folly  and 
ruin  in  which  such  a  course  must  end. 

4.  Apathy  in  the  worship  of  God 
led  to  this  change.  We  note  a  strange 
silence  in  this  book  on  the  subject  of 
the  observance  of  Divine  ordinances. 
We  hear  nothing  of  the  solemn  feasts, 
of  the  services  of  the  priesthood,  and 
the  performance  of  duties  in  the  sanc- 
tuary. The  altars  and  their  sacrifices, 
the  sprinklings,  washings,  and  cere- 
monial requirements  of  the  law,  are  as 
if  they  were  not.  The  few  glimpses 
given  of  the  religious  life  of  the  people, 
show  how  mournfully  they  fail  in 
forming  the  most  elementary  concep- 
tions of  the  meaning  of  the  Divine 
ordinances.  Micah  had  a  supersti- 
tious parody  of  the  Mosaic  rites.  The 
Danites  followed  his  example.  Gideon 
worshipped  a  visible  god.  Jephthah 
had  but  a  slight  knowledge  of  the  law 
of  vows.  While  ISamson  and  his 
parents  had  but  a  very  crude  know- 
ledge of  the  Mosaic  institutions. 

This  is  instructive.  The  mind  must 
be  filled.  If  it  does  not  accept  the 
true  God,  that  which  is  no  god,  or  the 
things  of  this  world,  must  occupy  His 
place.  If  it  is  not  led  by  the  Spirit  of 
God,  it  must  be  under  the  dominion 
of  "ungodliness  and  worldly  lusts." 
To  "  walk  in  the  Spirit "  is  the 
appointed  means  of  gaining  the  victory. 
(Gal.  V.  16.)  To  neglect  to  do  so 
leaves  the  door  open,  and  the  danger 
is  imminent. 

The  very  mention  of  these  nations 
looks  like  the  wolves  prowling  round 
the  sheepfold.  It  is  the  appearance  of 
a  dark  cloud,  ominous  of  stormy  times. 
It  is  the  first  visible  frown  on  the 
countenance  of  Him,  who  bore  His 
people  through  so  many  dangers  for 
two  generations  as  on  eagles'  wings. 
There  was  a  change  in  God's  attitude, 
but  not  in  God's  purpose. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS.— Verses  1-4. 

II.  It  was  necessary  to  put  Israel  to  the  proof. 

1.  Their  allegiance  to  their  God  must  be  ascertained.    This  was  indispensable. 

(1.)  God's  jealousy  required  it.     In  this  character  He  reveals  Himself  in  the 

covenant.    "  i  the  Lord  thy  God  am  a  jealous  God — thou  shalt  have  no  other  gods 


CHAP.  III.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


before  me.**  The  smoke  and  the  thunders  of  Sinai  were  a  visible  confirmation 
of  that  character  of  jealousy.  Both  the  attitude  of  the  Speaker,  and  what  He 
said,  showed  that  He  was  intently  watchful  of  the  measure  of  respect  that  was 
paid  to  His  character,  by  those  whom  He  addressed. 

(2).  Without  allegiance  the  people  were  not  in  a  fit  state  to  receive  Divine 
blessings.  Every  promise  was  conditioned  on  this.  It  was  no  secondary  question. 
The  good  of  the  creature  cannot  be  advanced  by  sacrificing  the  glory  of  the 
Creator.  It  would  have  been  derogatory  to  God's  holy  name,  to  have  lavished 
His  favours  on  a  rebellious  people.  Those  whom  He  shall  bless  must  have 
a  fitness  of  character  to  receive  the  blessing.  If  they  are  to  be  a  mark  toward 
which  His  love  is  to  go  out.  He  will  see  to  it  that  they  be  worthy  of  His  love. 
He  loves  all  men  with  a  love  of  compassion,  but  He  regards  tliose  only  with  a 
love  of  complacency,  who  bear  His  image  and  keep  His  commandments.  ^'He 
taJceth  pleasure  in  them  that  fear  Him" 

(3.)  Ways  and  means  were  easy  where  there  was  allegiance.  A  consistently 
religious  character  on  the  part  of  the  people  being  given,  all  difiiculty  was 
at  an  end  for  bestowing  any  needed  blessings  upon  them.  As  regards 
deliverance  from  dangers,  however  great,  it  was  easy  for  God  to  "  drive 
asunder  the  nations,"  to  make  "  one  man  chase  a  thousand,"  or  to  make 
a  mighty  host  melt  away  in  absolute  weakness,  before  a  mere  handful  of 
men.  Nay,  even  iron  chariots,  solid  walls  of  masonry,  and  armies  of  giants, 
were  as  the  small  dust  of  the  balance  before  Omnipotence.  These  things  were 
small  in  God's  estimation  ;  what  was  great  was — trust  in  His  character,  and 
obedience  to  His  voice.  This  trust  was  uniformly  required  ere  He  put  forth  an 
atom  of  his  power.  The  refrain  of  every  chapter  seems  to  be,  "  0  that  my  people 
had  hearkened — I  would  soon  have  subdued''  (Ps.  Ixxxi.  13,  14).  Men's  sins 
block  the  way  to  the  outgoings  of  God's  loving  kindness  (Isa.  lix.  1,  2).  Even 
the  power  of  working  miracles  was  a  greatly  smaller  possession,  than  a  good  title 
for  admission  to  the  heavenly  world.  A  similar  principle  in  Matt.  xii.  50. 
Where  Jesus  found  faith,  He  had  no  difficulty  in  working  cures.  In  one  short 
hour  He  could  with  ease  heal  the  whole  sick  list,  in  any  of  the  towns  through 
which  He  passed.  But  when  there  was  no  faith  He  paused.  "  He  could  there 
do  no  mighty  works  because  of  their  unbelief" 

2.  Human  protestations  of  obedience  are  little  to  be  trusted.  "  He  that 
trusteth  to  his  own  heart  is  a  fool."  Every  page  of  human  life  confirms  the 
sentiment — the  history  of  this  people  pre-eminently.    Take  two  illustrations — 

(a)  When  they  first  received  the  law  from  their  God.  Awe-struck  with  the 
majesty  of  Him  whose  terrible  voice  was  echoed  by  the  thunders  and  the  earth- 
quake, and  which  made  even  Moses  exceedingly  fear  and  quake,  never  did 
people  i)ledge  themselves  more  solemnly  to  keep  His  law  with  all  care,  in  all  the 
duties  of  life  (Ex.  xxiv.  7).  Yet,  behind  the  scene,  what  is  the  verdict  of  the 
Searcher  of  hearts  ?  "0  that  there  were  such  an  heart  in  them  .'"  etc.  (Deut.  v. 
29).  Within  six  weeks,  this  same  people  were  gathered  on  the  same  s[)ot  to 
demand  of  Aaron,  *'  Up,  make  us  gods  to  go  before  us,  for  as  for  this  Moses  .  .  . 
we  wot  not  what  is  become  of  him  "  (Ex.  xxxii.  1). 

(b)  When  they  were  newly  settled  in  their  promised  home.  The  human 
heart  was  here  tried  under  totally  altered  circumstances.  Formerly,  there 
was  indeed  the  great  deliverance  from  bondage  as  an  accomplished  fact 
before  them,  but  as  yet  there  was  nothing  possessed.  All  was  wilderness 
around  them.  They  were  in  complete  destitution,  and  had  nothing  to  look 
to  but  promise,  while  that  seemed  to  be  of  impossible  accomplishment.  Now 
the  thing  promised  has  been  accomplished  in  all  its  length  and  breadth. 
The  people  are  assembled  in  their  thousands  to  receive  the  farewell  counsel 
of  the  venerable  captain,  who  had  led  them  to  an  unbroken  series  of  victories 
over  mighty   armies   all   over   the   land,    with    scarcely  the  loss  of  a   man. 

76 


EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES.  OHAt.  m. 


Their  hearts  within  them  swelling  with  gratitude  for  "the  great  goodness 
of  their  God  to  the  house  of  Israel,"  they  are  called  upon  to  say,  in  sight 
of  the  thrilling  history  they  had  passed  through,  would  they,  in  all  candour  and 
sincerity,  resolve  from  this  time  and  henceforth  to  fear  Jehovah  and  serve  Him 
as  their  God,  or  would  they  prefer  to  join  with  the  Amorites  around  them  in  the 
worship  of  their  gods?  Instantly  and  vehemently,  they  protest  against  the 
possibility  of  their  forsaking  Jehovah  and  worshipping  other  gods  (Josh.  xxiv. 
16).  They  are  warned  against  a  loose  decision  in  so  important  a  matter,  and 
solemnly  asked  to  make  it  on  a  broad  and  well-considered  basis.  They  feel  hurt 
that  their  sincerity  should  be  doubted  for  a  moment — '*  Nay  1  but  we  will  serve 
the  Lord."  The  decision  was  unanimous,  unhesitating,  firm.  Alas !  for  human 
protestations  !  At  that  very  moment  there  were  already  strange  gods  among 
them,  though  the  welkin  rang  with  the  cry  of  undying  allegiance  to  Jehovah, 
and  not  a  single  dissentient  voice  was  raised  thronghout  the  vast  multitude,  that 
were  assembled  on  that  solemn  day.  Now  the  "root  of  bitterness"  has  begun 
to  bear  fruit. 

Causes  op  Failure  in  Fidelity  to  the  Covenant. 

(1.)  Their  avowal  was  made  in  self-confidence.  They  did  not  rely  on  the 
promised  grace  of  God,  as  alone  able  to  make  them  stand.  They  trusted  to  the 
present  warm  emotions  of  their  own  breasts,  when  their  feelings  were  raised  to 
flood-mark  at  the  retrospect  of  their  marvellous  history,  and  they  supposed  they 
would  always  feel  as  they  felt  then.  But  good  resolutions  are  not  indigenous  to 
the  human  heart.  They  do  not  grow  all  the  year  round,  nor  all  the  week 
through.  They  are  not  like  the  stone  pillars  on  which  the  rough  blasts  beat  in 
vain,  and  stand  unshaken  in  all  weathers.  Eather,  they  are  like  the  gourd 
which  comes  up  in  a  night,  and  perishes  in  a  night.  Our  safety  lies  not  in  the 
warmth  of  present  feeling,  but  in  offering  up  the  prayer,  "  Teach  me  the  way  of 
Ihy  commandments,  and  I  shall  keep  it  unto  the  end.  Incline  my  heart  unto 
Thy  testimonies**  (Ps,  xvii.  5.)  Peter  was  sincere,  though  not  wise,  in  what 
he  said,  as  the  result  showed.  (Matt.  xxvi.  33,  35,  and  72,  74.)  His  real 
security  lay  in  the  fact,  that  he  was  in  the  hands  of  a  mighty  Advocate,  who 
had  beforehand  prayed  for  him  that  his  faith  should  not  fail.  Good  moods, 
even  high  moods,  may  be  occasionally  reached,  but  they  afford  no  security  for 
to-morrow.  "If  God  withdraw  His  grace  and  leave  us  to  ourselves,  we  are  like 
a  city  without  gates  and  walls — a  prey  to  the  first  enemy  that  appears,  however 
contemptible." 

(2.)  It  was  made  in  self-ignorance.  Every  man  is  disposed  to  ''think  more 
highly  of  himself  than  he  ought  to  think.'*  This  is  the  besetting  sin  of  our 
fallen  nature.  Trying  themselves  by  man's  standard,  many  think  them- 
selves to  be  something  before  God  when  they  are  absolutely  nothing,  and  so 
deceive  their  own  hearts.  The  people  that  stood  before  Joshua  thought,  that 
the  strength  of  their  convictions  was  so  great,  they  could  stand  any  amount  of 
temptation  to  turn  them  aside  from  their  allegiance.  The  spectacle  of  all  that 
God  had  done  for  them  in  the  wilderness,  and  in  the  land  of  their  inheritance, 
was  now  fresh  before  them,  and  they  reckoned  that  it  would  always  be  thus 
vivid.  But  it  is  little  that  any  man  knows  of  **the  plague  of  his  own 
heart."  There  is  more  latent  wickedness  in  the  hearts  of  even  the  best 
of  men  than  is  ever  suspected  to  exist.  It  is  only  when  the  seemingly 
clear  pool  is  stirred  to  the  bottom,  that  a  discovery  is  made  of  the  large 
sediment  of  evil  that  is  deposited  in  it.  The  heart  is  not  a  fountain  whose 
goodness  is  in  itself,  and  that  has  power  to  purify  itself,  but  it  is  a  spring- 
head naturally  impure,  that  has  to  inqmrt  from  without  all  its  cleansing 
influence.     "Let  him  that  thinketh  he  standeth,  take  heed  lest  he  fall." 

77 


CHAP.  111.  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 

(3.)  It  was  made  in  ignorance  of  the  evil  influpnces  around  them.  Satan  is 
ever  desiring  to  have  the  Jobs,  the  Davids,  and  the  Peters,  to  sift  them  as  wheat. 
The  wolf  does  not  more  thirst  for  the  blood  of  the  lamb,  than  does  the  Wicked 
One  show  himself  ravenous  for  the  ruin  of  souls.  "  He  goeth  about  as  a  roarim; 
lion,"  etc.  Woe  to  those  that  are  off  their  watch,  and  are  unprepared  for  the 
spring  of  the  terrible  enemy!  He  ever  prowls  around  the  fold  of  the  Good 
Shepherd,  hoping  yet  one  day  to  be  able  to  seize  something  out  of  His  hands. 
Yet  there  is  the  precious  assurance  ;  "  1  give  unto  my  sheep  eternal  life — and 
they  shall  never  perish''  The  world  too,  both  by  its  smiles  and  by  its  frowns, 
proves  a  formidable  enemy.  It  has  long  been  an  enchanted  ground  to  Zion's 
pilgrims.     Yet  throu<;h  faith  we  "overcome  the  world." 

(4.)  It  was  made  without  counting  the  cost.  God's  service  ever  has  a  cross 
of  some  kind,  and  every  man  who  enters  it  must  have  some  idea  of  the  weight 
of  that  cross.  If  this  is  not  done  beforehand,  he  will  soon  come  to  "take 
offence  at  that  cross,"  for  he  will  find  that  what  he  supposed  to  be  a  mere 
pleasure-walk,  has  turned  out  to  be  a  steep,  rugged,  and  dangerous  course.  The 
rule  is — "  Crucify  the  Hesh  with  the  affections  and  lusts  " — ''cut  off  a  right  hand  " 
when  that  is  required — "  hate  father  and  mother  '*  rather  than  lose  Christ 
We  must  appreciate  the  strength  of  Christ's  claims  upon  us,  and  know  before- 
hand the  lions  we  shall  have  to  fight  with,  if  we  are  to  enter  His  service,  and  so 
calculate  whether  we  shall  accept  it  with  all  its  risks,  or  whether  reckoning  the 
cost  to  be  too  great,  we  shall  go  over  and  join  the  standard  on  the  other  side. 

3.  Their  responsibility  was  now  greatly  increased.  God  had  done  great 
things  for  them,  and  the  rule  now  applied — "  7'o  whom  much  is  given,  of  them 
ranch  shall  he  required''  For  upwards  of  eighty  )^ears  they  had  had  a  remarkable 
history  of  privilege.  No  nation  since  the  beginning  of  Time  had  seen  such  a 
sublime  series  of  Divine  interpositions  on  their  behalf.  It  was  a  unique  history, 
and  now  the  climax  was  reached.  'J^hey  were  in  actual  possession  of  the  land 
flowing  with  milk  and  honey.  God  was  now  saying,  "  What  more  could.  I  have 
done  for  my  vineyard^  "  The  time  of  a  great  expectation  was  come.  The  fruit 
of  so  much  nurturing  and  caretaking,  for  two  generations  or  more,  was  at  last  to 
be  reaped.  Settled  in  the  land  after  so  much  cost,  and  with  Jehovah  himself  as 
their  God,  it  was  a  reasonable  expectation  that  they  should  be  a  pattern  of 
loyalty  and  allegiance  to  all  the  other  nations — an  oasis  in  the  otherwise  wide 
desert  of  heathenism — a  solitary  garden  bringing  forth  the  fruits  of  righteousness, 
while  all  around  rose  up  nothing  save  briers  and  thorns.  No  people  were  more 
sacredly  bound  by  obligations,  and  if  their  devotedness  were  at  all  to  correspond 
with  the  measure  of  their  privilege,  it  must  amount  to  a  "  cleaving  to  the  Lord 
with  full  purpose  of  heart." 

4.  Their  temptations  to  indolence  were  increased.  Flesh  and  blood  love  to  be 
at  ease.  The  "  wars  of  Canaan"  were  practically  over.  They  were  "sitting 
comfortably  under  their  vine  and  their  fig-tree."  They  had  long  been  wanderers  ; 
now  had  reached  home  at  last,  and  such  a  home  ! — The  glory  of  all  lands  ! — 
"  A  land  of  brooks,"  etc.  (Dent.  viii.  7-9).  Their  heads  laid  on  the  lap  of  ease, 
sweet  odours  filling  the  air,  and  a  table  of  luxury  daily  spread  before  them,  it 
was  a  hard  battle  to  keep  in  subjection  the  cravings  of  sense,  and  live  according 
to  the  dictates  of  a  pure  and  spiritual  faith.  Some  sharp  stimulus  was  needed 
to  prevent  a  people  so  situated  from  "  settling  down  on  their  lees."  They  must 
be  "  em])tied  from  vessel  to  vessel."  By  some  suitable  ordeal  they  must  be  pre- 
vented from  indulgim^  in  "  the  lust  of  the  eye,  and  the  lust  of  the  flesh."  It 
was  wise,  it  was  needful  to  set  tliem  on  great  searchings  of  heart  " — to  cultivate 
self-denial  and  watchfulness  on  the  one  hand,  and  on  the  other  to  institute  such 
external  tests  in  the  course  of  Divine  Providence,  as  would  infallibly  indicate 
how  the  needle  of  the  heart  was  pointing  from  time  to  time, 

78 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES.  chap.  lu. 

.  COMMENTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.^Verse  L 

God  often  Proves  but  never  Tempts, 

He  never  pnts  any  object  before  the  what  the  Sovereign  Power  itself  inclines 

mind  with  the  intention  of  drawing  it  us  to.     Having  laid  down  such  severe 

into  sin,  but  He  oftentimes  applies  laws  to   restrain  men  from  sin,  and 

touchstones  to  a  man's  character  to  having  crucified  His   own   Son,  when 

ascertain  what  he  really  is.   When  the  acting   as   our   sin-bearer,    it   cannot 

magnet  is  presented,   immediately  it  be,  under  any  circumstaiices,  that  He 

draws  the  steel  filings  to  it ;   but  if  should    stir  up  or  excite  us   to   sin. 

there  were  no  affinity  in  these  filings  A  pure  flame  cannot  engender  cold, 

with  the  magnet,  they  would  not  be  neither  can  darkness  be  the  offspring 

drawn.     Were  evil  neighbours  brought  of  a  sunbeam."     [C/iarnock.^ 
round  a  man,  if  there  were  nothing  in  "God  neither  deceives  any  man's 

him  in  common  with   the  characters  judgment,  nor  perverts  his  will,  nor  se- 

and  ways  of  these  neighbours,  he  would  duces  his  affections,  nor  does  anything 

not  be  attracted  by  their  society  but  else  that  can  subject  him  to  the  blame 

rather  repelled,  and  induced  to  make  of  men's  sins.    Temptation,  in  the  bad 

a  resolute  stand  against  their  errors  sense,  always  proceeds  from  the  malice 

and  wickedness.     But  if,  with  a  profes-  of  Satan  working  on  the  corruptions 

sion  of  righteousness,  he  is  yet  really  of  our  own  hearts.    God  may,  however, 

ungodly  in  heart,  and  has  no  true  love  consistently  with  all  His  perfections, 

to  God,  then  the  presence  of  the  wicked  by  His  providence  bring  His  creatures 

around  him  is  certain  to  disclose  the  into  circmxiBtanceso^  special prohatlo?t, 

fact,  that  he  is  an  alien  to  God.    When  not  for  the  purpose  of   His  receiving 

God  tries  a  man's  character,  He  only  information,  but  in  order  to  manifest 

brings   to   light  the   character  which  to  themselves  and  others  the  prevailing 

already  exists.     He  never  puts  any  evil  dispositions  of  their  hearts.     In  this 

into  him  which  he  had  not  before,  nor  sense  of  putting  to  the  proof — bringing 

does  He  ever  stir  up  a  man  to  commit  to  the  test — the  term  is  used  in  many 

sin,  merely  for  the  sake  of  committing  other  instances.     In  Deut.  xiii.  3  it  is 

it.  said,  *  The  Lord  your  God  proveth  you, 

"Light  might  as  soon  become  the  to  know  whether  ye  love  Him  with  all 

cause  of  darkness,  as  holiness  itself  your  heart  and  soul.'     Of   Hezekiah 

become  the  cause  of  unholiness.     'Tis  it  is  said,    *  In  the  business  of  the 

a  contradiction,  that  He  who  is  the  ambassadors,  God  left  him  to  try  him 

Fountain  of  good  should  become  also  (le-nas-soth-o)  that  He  might  know  all 

the  fountain  of  evil.    Sweet  waters  and  that  was  in  his  heart.'      Indeed,  we 

salt  cannot  come  from  the  same  spring,  find  this  kind  of  trial   is  sometimes 

Men  are  said  to  be  *  fitted  to  destrnc-  made  a  subject  of  petition,  on  the  part 

tion,'  but  it  is  not  said  that  God  fits  of  good  men,  as  if  they  regarded  it  as 

them.      [The   Greek   verb    is    in  the  an  act  of  special  favour  (Ps.  xxvi.  2). 

middle   voice  ;    it   therefore  must   be  *  Examine  me,  0  God,  and  prove  me 

read  self-fitted.^     They  by   their  sins  (nassani),  try  my  reins  and  my  heart.' 

fit  themselves  for  ruin,  and  He  by  His  Also   (in  Ps.  cxxxix.  23,  24),  *  Search 

long  suffering  keeps  it  from  them  for  a  me,  0  God,  and  know  my  heart  ;  try 

while.  God  cannot  excite  to  that,  which,  me,  and  know  my  thoughts  ;  and  see 

when  it  is  done.  He  will  be  sure  to  if  there   be  any  wicked  way  in  me, 

condemn.     Sin  would  deserve  no  re-  and  lead  me  in  the  way  everlasting.' 

proof  from  Him,  if  He  were  in  some  Also     (2     Cor.    xiii.    5),     *  Examine 

sense  the  author  of  it.     If  God  were  (Trei^afExe) — try  yourselves  whether  ye 

the  author  of  it,  why  should  our  own  be  in  tlie  faith — prove  your  own  selves  ; 

consciences   accuse   us   of  it  ?      It    is  know  ye   not  your  own  selves,'  etc." 
God's  deputy,  and  cannot  accuse  us  of  [^lias}i,\ 

79 


oiiAP.  III.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


MAIN  ffOMILE TICS.— Verses  1-4. 

III.  This  testing  of  character  was  made  in  love,  not  in  anger.    It  was  the 

doing  of  a  wise  and  loving  Father,  not  of  an  offended  Lawgiver.     For — 

(1.)  All  God's  dealings  with  His  covenant-people  are  necessarily  in  love. 
This  is  the  very  spirit  of  His  covenant :  "  Your  God  " — "  God  is  for  you  " — always 
on  your  side.  This  is  His  fixed  attitude.  His  love  may  assume  many  different 
forms,  corresponding  with  the  different  phases  presented  of  their  character  and 
conduct,  but  it  is  always  love.  When  He  chastens  them  for  their  sins,  even  going 
the  length  of  scourging,  it  is  still  love  that  leads  Him  so  to  act  by  them.  (Heb. 
xii.  6 ;  invariable  as  in  ver.  7.)  His  threatenings  are  the  hoarse  notes  of  His 
love.  The  hidings  of  His  Jace  in  dark,  providential  dispensations  are  so,  as  in 
bereavement,  adversity,  or  a  sense  of  desolation,  so  that  they  cry  out,  "All 
these  things  are  against  me  !  "  All  tests  of  character,  in  like  manner,  are  still 
but  different  forms  which  the  covenant  love  assumes,  working  mysteriously,  but 
not  less  sincerely  or  fervently.  It  is  the  love  of  an  unchangeable  God.  "  He 
loves  to  the  end."  "  He  rests  in  His  love"  The  whole  tone  of  His  dealings 
is,  ** / have  loved  with  an  everlasting  love** 

(2. )  It  was  love  to  prevent  a  breach  of  the  covenant.  Though  the  covenant  is 
everlasting,  it  is  expressly  on  the  condition  that  His  law  is  observed  and  His  name 
glorified.  Most  of  the  Divine  promises  are  cojiditionai ;  few  of  them  absolute. 
Were  no  change  of  circumstances  to  take  place  from  those  under  which 
they  were  made,  they  would  remain  without  change.  But  where  such  an 
alteration  of  circumstance  occurs,  the  very  unchangeableness  of  the  Divine 
character  requires  that  there  be  some  alteration  in  the  promise  itself,  or  that  it 
be  not  carried  out,  for  it  was  made  only  as  applicable  to  certain  circumstances, 
and  where  these  no  longer  exist  the  promise  cannot  apply.  God  promised  to 
bless  His  people  with  blessings,  but  it  was  only  as  a  holy  and  obedient  people 
that  He  could  possibly  do  so,  in  consistency  with  His  character  as  a  holy  God. 
On  their  ceasing  to  manifest  this  character,  God's  blessings  towards  them  would 
cease  to  flow,  yet  not  because  of  any  change  in  His  desire  to  love  them,  or  fulfil 
His  promises,  but  simply  from  the  want  of  the  necessary  condition.  The  same 
character,  however,  always  continuing,  the  promise  would  also  always  continue. 
There  never  was  a  promise  made  to  carry  a  disobedient  people  into  the  land 
marked  out  for  inheritance.  For  only  loyal  subjects  of  the  God  of  Israel  was  it 
intended  from  the  beginning.  When,  therefore,  God  dealt  sharply  with  the  sins 
of  His  people,  He  was  really  taking  the  direct  course  to  prevent  a  direct  breach 
of  the  covenant,  and  so  was  acting  in  the  purest  love. 

(3.)  It  was  love  to  teach  the  hearc  the  bitterness  of  sin.  That,  in  the  first 
instance,  is  learned  from  the  bitterness  of  its  fruits.  "  7 he  end  of  these  things  is 
death."  The  chain  becomes  heavier  at  every  step,  for  "  the  way  of  transgressors 
is  ha  I'd." 

(a)  God  hides  His  countenance  when  His  people  sin  against  Him.  *'  I  will  go 
and  return  to  My  place  till  they  acknowledge  their  offence"  etc.  (Hos.  v.  15.)  Tliat 
is  usually  the  case  when  they  prove  stubborn,  and  "  will  not  frame  their  doings  to 
turn  unto  their  God."  (Hos.  v.  4.)  Sin  in  any  form  is  unspeakably  abhorrent 
to  His  holy  nature.  Intercourse  with  Him,  therefore,  cannot  be  granted  to 
His  children  till  they  come  to  view  their  sins  as  He  does.  He  would  impress 
on  them,  that  it  is  an  exceeding  evil  and  bitter  thing  to  forsake  Him  as  their 
chief  good,  and  "cast  off  His  fear  from  before  their  eyes."  (Ps.  xxv.  14; 
xMatt.  V.  8  ;  Heb.  xii.  14.) 

[b]  An  evil  conscience  troubles  the  soul.  Conscience  is  either  the  best  friend  or 
the  most  terrible  enemy  the  soul  has.  It  is  the  echo  of  God's  voice  in  the  inner 
!uan.  The  trouble  which  it  can  raise  in  the  soul  is  like  a  s})iritual  earthquake,  so 
profoundly  are  all  things  unsettled  by  it.   The  pleasures  of  sin  are  felt  to  have  been 

80 


HOMILETIQ  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES.  OHAF.  in. 

purchased  at  a  terrible  price.  "  Thou  art  the  man !  '*  is  rung  in  the  ear  with 
threatening  empliasis,  and  the  soul  is  glad  at  any  price  to  buy  back  its  former 
quietude.  The  sinner  feels  that  his  way  is  "  hedged  up  with  thorns,"  while 
"  trouble  and  anguish  make  him  afraid "  on  every  side.  "  A  dreadful  sound 
is  in  his  ears.  He  is  scared  with  dreams  and  terrified  with  visions"  He  cries 
out  in  the  bitterness  of  his  soul — 

**  The  fire  that  on  my  bosom  preyi 
Is  lone  as  some  volcanic  isle  ; 
No  torch  is  lighted  at  the  blazfl^ 
A  funeral  pile  I " 

At  last,  feeling  the  hopelessness  of  carrying  on  a  war  with  God,  and  remembering 
that  His  mercies  are  great,  he  thinks  of  confessing  liis  sin  and  returning  to  Him 
from  whom  he  has  deeply  revolted.  He  takes  up  the  language  of  the  penitent 
spouse,  and  says,  "  /  will  go  and  return  unto  my  first  husband^  for  then  it  was 
better  with  me  than  now." 

(c)  The  mere  cherishing  of  sinful  thoughts  in  the  soul  causes  misery. 
They  pollute  and  degrade.  The  feelings  that  necessarily  accompany  them 
are  shame,  dread,  and  self-reproach.  The  soul  is  conscious  of  being  deeply 
dishonoured,  as  was  Cain  when  banished  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord. 
ISin  is  felt  to  be  a  great  humiliation.  It  is  like  a  bird  of  paradise  dropping 
to  the  ground  from  mid-heaven,  and  trailing  its  wings  in  the  mire.  It  is 
felt  to  be  something  abnormal,  as  if  the  wheels  of  life  were  moving 
backward.  It  is  something  strangely  unnatural  for  the  creature  to  rise  in 
rebellion  against  the  author  of  its  being  ;  and  when  conscience  is  awake,  the 
instinctive  experience  of  the  heart  is  a  thrill  of  horror,  or  a  feeling  of  disquiet 
that  is  prophetic  of  a  danger  we  cannot  measure.  Sin  means  the  giving  over 
of  man's  nature  to  a  vile  use.  It  is  the  profination  of  God's  holy  image,  and 
the  rendering  of  the  great  gift  of  an  immortal  life  not  only  practically  worthless, 
but  converting  it  into  a  boundless  and  intolerable  misery.  It  implies  the 
perversion  of  every  faculty  of  our  rational  nature,  and  a  total  eclipse  of  its 
spiritual  loveliness.  It  darkens  the  understanding,  deflects  the  will,  deadens 
the  conscience,  corrupts  the  affections,  and  subjects  the  reason  and  the  moral 
instincts  to  the  service  of  the  appetites  and  the  passions.  Sin  is  in  all  respects 
the  bane  of  the  soul,  of  which  it  must  absolutely  get  rid,  if  life  and  happinesss 
are  to   be  enjoyed.     Hence  it  is  truest  love  to  teach  the  bitterness  of  sin. 

(4.)  It  is  love  to  teach  self-knowledge  and  humility. 

(a)  Self-knowledge.  God's  people  knew  little  of  the  real  state  of  their  own 
hearts — what  a  small  foundation  of  goodness  there  was  in  them,  and  how  even 
that  was  entirely  owing  to  the  grace  of  God.  Hence  the  innumerable  mistakes 
they  were  ever  falling  into  when  giving  promises  for  the  future.  It  was  true  love 
to  discover  the  foundation  of  all  these  mistakes  ;  and  the  proof  that  was  made  of 
Israel  by  the  discipline  to  which  it  was  subjected,  was  for  the  instruction  of  Israel 
itself,  quite  as  much  as  for  any  other  reason.  To  know  one's  self  is  indispensable 
to  make  every  other  kind  of  knowledge  valuable.  The  knowlege  of  ourselves 
as  we  stand  before  God  is  necessary  in  order  to  realise  our  guilt,  and  need  of 
an  Advocate — our  vileness  and  need  of  cleansing.  Heart-searching  trials  give 
this  knowledge.  Then  our  destitution  of  good,  and  natural  corruption  are 
made  to  appear.  The  man  feels  he  must  be  speechless  when  the  demand 
is  made  for  a  righteousness  such  as  God  can  accept.  A  glance  at  that 
standard  leads  him  to  cry  out,  "  Woe  is  me!  for  I  am  undone!" — "in  me 
dwelleth  no  good  thing."  The  Laodicean  Church  imagined  itself  "rich,"  etc. 
until  put  to  the  test  by  the  Searcher  of  hearts ;  then  it  was  found  to  be 
"  wretched,"  etc.  (Rev.  iii.  17). 

(6)  Humility  goes  with  self-knowledge.  "  God  led  thee  these  forty  years 
in  the  wilderness,  to  humUe  thee  and  prove  iheey  to  know  what  was  in  thine 

F  81 


CHAP.  IIL  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    JUDGES. 


hearty"  etc.  (Deut.  viii.  2).  It  is  humbling  to  feel  that  we  are  dependent 
for  everything  on  the  will  of  another.  But  it  is  crushing  to  our  pride  to 
be  told,  at  the  place  of  judgment,  that,  ''from  the  sole  of  the  foot  even 
unto  the  head^  there  is  no  soundness  in  us,  but  all  is  wounds  and  bruises, 
and  putrefying  sores"  etc.  The  natural  man's  natural  plea  should  be,  ''God 
be  merciful  to  me — the  sinner ! "  And  when  the  natural  man  becomes  tlie 
spiritual  man,  his  natural  language  will  be,  "  By  the  grace  of  God  I  am  what  I 
am  ! "  Poverty  of  all  native  goodness,  with  alienation  from  God,  and  a  ten- 
dency to  evil  thoughts  and  desires,  will  be  found  to  be  more  or  less  the  state  of 
every  heart  when  discovered  to  itself 

(5.)  It  is  love  where  a  false  character  exists  to  have  the  discovery  of  it 
made  in  good  time.  God's  Israel  was  now  beginning  to  prove  "  an  empty 
vine  bringing  forth  fruit  only  to  himself'^  Had  this  been  allowed  to  go  on, 
justice  must  ere  long  have  required  that  the  tree  be  ''cut  down  as  a  cumberer 
of  the  ground"  Faithfulness  to  his  interests  prompted  to  the  use  of  such 
means,  as  would  seriously  awaken  his  attention  to  the  fact.  Hence  the  trials 
which  were  now  brought  upon  Israel.  It  is  kind  to  *' stony-ground"  hearers 
to  impress  them  with  the  fact  that  they  have  "no  root"  to  their  religion 
while  going  forward  to  meet  the  day  of  trial.  For  those  who  are  *'  building 
on  the  sand,"  it  is  truest  kindness  to  have  it  thundered  in  their  ears,  that 
they  may  not  lose  a  moment  in  quitting  their  ground,  and  placing  all  that 
is  precious  on  the  solid  rock.  Tests  of  the  very  strictest  will  be  applied 
when  the  day  of  reckoning  comes.  As  travellers  are  searched  for  contraband 
goods  on  crossing  the  frontier,  so  when  the  soul  passes  the  boundary  line 
between  time  and  eternity  will  it  be  searched,  lest  it  should  have  about  it 
such  forbidden  things  as  unbelief,  deceit,  pride,  lusts  and  passions,  covetousness, 
and  the  like.  For  "  they  that  cherish  such  things  shall  not  inherit  the  kingdom 
of  God."  It  is  true  kindness  to  have  all  tlie  chaff  winnowed  out  of  our  cha- 
racter on  this  side  of  time,  that  we  may  enter  the  solemn  world  beyond  with 
the  true  wheat  alone.  Trials  put  us  through  this  preliminary  winnowing 
process. 

SUGGESTIONS  AND  COMMENTS.—Verst*  1-4. 

The  Importance  of  Having  the  Real  Character  Revealed. 

I.  Religious  character  is  the  most  God  loves  to  see  man's  heart  going 

important  thing  about  man  before  out  to  Himself  as  its  chief  good,  and 

God.    He  is  more  important  as  a  crea-  its  affections  clinging  to  Him  as  the 

ture   of  intellect    or   imagination,   of  highest  and  best  of  all  objects.      He 

judgment  or  reasoning,  than  he  is  as  loves   to   see   the   will,   amid  all  the 

an  organism  of  flesh  and  blood.     And  oscillations  in  the  stormy  sea  of  life, 

in  like  manner  he  is  greatly  more  im-  always   deciding    according    to   God's 

portant  as  an  intelligence  gifted  with  will,  as  the  needle  follows  the  direc- 

will,  conscience,  affections,  and  moral  tion  of  the  pole.     He  loves  to  see  the 

faculties,  generally,  than  simply  as  a  C07iscience  in  man  responding  in  per- 

possessor  of  intellectual  powers.  Hence  feet  harmony  to  the  teachings  of  the 

it  is  a  spectacle  of  deeper  interest  to  Divine  law.     He  delights   to  see  the 

the  Searcher  of  hearts,  to  behold  the  whole  soul  bowing  habitually  in  reve- 

powers  with  which  man  worships  and  rence  before  him.    To  his  Creator,  this 

knows  God,  going  out  in  proper  exercise  is  the  most  pleasing  aspect  which  a 

to  their  legitimate  object,  than  to  look  creature    made   after   His   image  can 

on  the  exercise  of  the  faculties  which  present. 

are     either     merely     intellectual     or  And  since  man  has  lost  this  excel- 

physical.  lent  disposition  of  his  faculties,  what 
82 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


CHAP.  III. 


God  now  delights  in  is,  to  see  his  dis- 
ordered nature  beginning,  through  His 
grace,  to  get  back  somewhat  of  its 
original  exquisite  balance.  Hence  He 
loves  to  try  tliem,  especially  His  own 
children,  that  He  may  see  whether  the 
heart  will  come  back  to  Him  in  new 
obedience. 

II.  The  foundation  of  God's  dealingfs 
with  men  must  be  made  clear.     It 

seems  singular  that  God  should  ap])ly 
tests  to  bring  out  men's  characters, 
though  He  already  absolutely  knows 
them.  But  in  ruling  over  a  world  of 
men,  God  deals  with  things  as  they 
appear  at  men's  point  of  view.  For 
Himself,  He  "  knows  what  is  in  man," 
without  any  use  of  means.  His  eye 
reads  character  with  equal  clearness, 
as  it  exists  in  embryo  in  the  heart,  as 
when  it  comes  to  full  developement 
in  the  life.  It  reads  the  first  emotion, 
or  purpose  of  the  heart,  with  equal  dis- 
tinctness, as  it  does  the  lines  of  the 
countenance,  or  the  doing  of  the  hand. 
To  him  "  the  darkness  and  the  light  are 
both  alike." 

But  that  God  may  be  glorified  in 
the  estimation  of  man,  it  is  necessary 
that  the  grounds  of  His  proceedure  be 
to  some  extent  made  known  to  him. 
That  of  which  He  ap])roves  or  dis- 
approves must  be  made  visible  that 
man  may  understand  the  meaning  of 
His  providential  rule ;  also  men's 
characters  must  appear  in  their  actual 
contluct,  that  it  may  be  known  why 
He  chastises  on  the  one  hand  and 
blesses  on  the  other.  The  grounds  of 
His  moral  government  with  men,  are 
either,  what  is  brought  out  in  their 


conduct,  or  what  in  their  hearts  they 
know  themselves  to  be. 

III.  Men  do  not  know  even  their 
own  hearts  till  they  are  tried.  Tests 
are  often  used  to  bring  to  light  un- 
suspected evils.  Peter  little  thought 
he  was  capable,  when  put  under  the 
pressure  of  a  strong  trial,  of  denyiiig 
his  Lord.  David  little  supposed  that, 
when  left  to  himself,  he  could  have 
gone  so  far  in  presumptuous  sin,  as  he 
did  in  the  matter  of  Uriah  the  Hittite. 
Hezekiah,  when  he  was  sick,  little 
dreamt  that  he  could  have  acted  so 
vainglorious  a  part,  as  he  did  in  parad- 
ing his  wealth  before  the  deputies  of 
the  king  of  Babylon.  His  friends  never 
supposed  that  in  the  heart  of  so  meek 
a  man,  vanity  of  so  rank  a  growth 
should  be  found. 

In  like  manner,  the  people  who  had 
been  called  by  Jehovah's  name,  who 
had  experienced  numberless  proofs  of 
His  fatherly  care  and  love,  and  had 
had  the  most  marvellous  history  the 
world  ever  saw,  of  Omnipotence  itself 
interposing  in  their  behalf,  might  have 
been  expected  to  have  been  the  most 
loyal  of  all  people  to  their  God,  and 
the  most  unswerving  in  keeping  His 
commandments.  Yet  at  the  very 
moment  they  were  protesting  fidelity, 
idolatry  was  appearing  among  them  in 
the  background,  and  ere  long  the  mass 
of  the  people  began  to  show  an  in- 
veterate tendency  to  apostatize  from 
the  God  of  the  covenant.  It  was  fit 
that  means  should  be  used  to  bring 
out  their  real  character,  that  they 
might  know  themselves. 


The  Deceptive  Character  op  Sin. 


"  Sin  deceives  with  appearing  to  be 
so  little  before  it  is  committed.  It 
seems  so  shallow,  that  I  migiit  wade 
through  it  dry-shod  from  any  guilti- 
ness ;  but  when  committed,  it  seems 
so  deep,  that  I  cannot  escape  with- 
out drowning.  Thus  I  am  always  in 
extremities.  Either  my  sins  are  so 
email,  that    they   need    not   my   re- 


pentance, or  so  great  that  they  cannot 
obtain  thy  pardon."     [^^1  hos.  Fuller.^ 

**  Some  children,  when  they  first  put 
on  nevv  shoes,  are  very  careful  to  keep 
them  clean.  They  will  hardly  touch 
the  ground  with  their  feet,  lest  they 
should  dirty  the  soles  of  their  shoes. 
Yet,  perhaps,  next  day  they  will  trample 
with  the  same  shoes  in  the  mire  up  to 

83 


CHAP.  III.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


their  ankles.  Clnldren's  play  is  our  soon  after,  we  wade  in  sin  up  to  the 
earnest.  On  the  day  of  vowing  we  are  ankles — nay,  they  go  over  our  heads." 
overscrupulous  in  our  professions,  yet,  [Thos,  Fuller.^ 

The  Uses  of  Discipline. 

"  The  stones  from  the  wall   said,  plicable.     But  you  are  destined  for  a 

We    come    from    the    mountains   far  higher  building  ;  and  one  day  you  will 

away — from   the   sides  of  the  craggy  be  put  in  it  by  hands  not   human — 

hills.     Fire  and  water  worked  on  us  a  living  stone   in  a   living  Temple." 

for    ages,    but  only   made   us   crags.  [Parables  in  Household  Things.^ 
Human  hands  have  made  us  into  a         Self-searching  is  an  imperative  duty 

dwelling,    where   the   children    of    an  in  the  first  instance,  "  Examine  your- 

immortal  race   are   born,  suffer,  and  selves — prove  your  own  selves."    Much 

rejoice  ;    act   their    part    during    the  unsuspected  sin  exists  in  the  hearts  of 

morning  of  their  existence,  and  per-  the  best  of  men  which  trial  brings  to 

form  the  duties  which  belong  to  their  light.     The  pond  is  often  clear  on  the 

earthly  state   of   existence.     But   we  surface,  but  when  it  is  stirred  much 

have  passed  through  much  to  fit  us  foul  sediment  is  found  to  have  been 

for   this.      Gunpowder    has   rent   our  lying  at  the  bottom, 
very  heart;  pickaxes  have  cleaved  and  ''  *  Whose  fan  is  in  His  hand*   Well 

broken  us  ;  to  us  it  seemed  without  it  fits  Him,  and  He  it.    Could  Satan's 

meaning,  as  we  lay  misshapen  stones  in  clutches  snatch  the  fan,  what  work  he 

the  quarry.     Gradually  we  were  cut  would  make  !     He  would  winnow  in  a 

into    blocks,    and    some    of   us    were  tempest    and    throw    the    best   away. 

chiselled   with  finer  instruments  to  a  Had  man  the  fan,  out  goes  for  chaff 

sharper  edge.      But  we  are  complete  all  that  are  opposed  to  the  opinions  of 

now — are   in   our  places,   and  are  of  his  party.     But  the  fan  is  in  a  wise  and 

service.     You  are  in  the  quarry  still,  faithful  hand.    Only  He  who  knows  the 

not  complete,  and  much  seems  inex-  heart  is  fit  to  hold  it."  [I'Aos.  Fuller.^ 

MAIN  HOMILETICS.—Veru  4. 

IV.  Obedience  is  with  God  the  all-important  requirement. 

"To  keep  the  commandments  of  the  Lord"  was  the  people's  term  in  the 
sacred  covenant.  To  bless  was  God's  term  ;  to  obey  was  reasonably  that  of  the 
people.  ''Fear  God  and  keep  His  commandments ;  this  is  the  whole  datij  of 
man''  To  find  the  fruits  of  righteousness  in  the  life,  was  the  revenue  of  glory, 
which  the  Creator  looked  for  in  bringing  His  creature  into  existence.  Never 
was  the  duty  of  obedience  to  the  laws  and  statutes  of  the  great  Jehovah,  more 
solemnly  and  afFectingly  impressed  on  men's  hearts  and  consciences,  than  in  the 
illustration  which  we  find  in  the  book  of  Deuteronomy,  from  chap.  iv.  and 
onward.  This,  too,  is  the  burden  of  every  exhortation  addressed  by  the  servants 
of  the  Lord  to  the  people.  It  is  the  natural  condition  laid  down  on  which 
eternal  life  may  be  enjoyed.  *'  If  thou  wilt  enter  into  life^  keep  the  command' 
ments." 

1.  Obedience  is  the  index  which  shows  that  the  heart  is  right  with  God.  Not 
more  certainly  do  the  movements  of  the  hands  on  the  dial-plate  indicate  that 
the  machinery  is  working  correctly  within,  than  does  a  regular  walking  in  the 
way  of  God's  commandments  prove,  that  the  heart  is  faithful  in  its  allegiance  to 
its  God.  As  the  exercise  of  walking  calls  into  play  all  the  parts  and  faculties  of 
the  body,  so  does  obedience  call  into  exercise  all  the  faculties,  feelings,  and 
principle's  of  the  soul,  so  that  it  becomes  the  offering  of  the  whole  man  to  God. 
84 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    JUDGES,  chap.  hi. 


It  is  the  complement  and  the  crown  of  devotion,  meditation,  and  experimental 
feeling,  and  is  the  forthcoming  of  inward  principle  and  inward  purpose. 

2.  Obedience  springs  naturally  from  the  fear  and  the  love  of  God.  The  fear 
of  God  implies  reverence  for  His  authority,  and  shows  itself  by  keeping  His 
commandments.  These  two  are  always  conjoined  together  in  Scripture,  as  root 
and  flower.  But  love  must  go  with  fear,  for  fear  without  love  would  be  cold  ; 
but  love  produces  the  enthusiasm  of  fear. 

3.  In  the  Gospel  obedience  must  spring  from  love.  There  man  is  dealt  with 
as  guilty,  and  so  as  having  lost  the  true  fear  of  God.  This  can  only  be  got  back 
through  love.  Love  in  the  form  of  "  love  to  Christ  "  becomes  the  spring  of  new 
obedience.  "The  great  God,  before  whom  man  has  fallen,  restores  him  to 
obedience  by  leaving  the  throne  of  judgment,  and  coming  down  to  him  as  a 
Friend  and  a  Saviour.  He  descends,  step  by  step,  into  closer  relations  of 
alliance,  and  binds  men  to  Himself  by  personal  ties  until  He  reaches  the  lowest 
step,  which  is  also  the  highest,  for  lowest  condescension  is  highest  love.  He 
becomes  one  with  men  in  all  respects,  especially  in  becoming  sin  that  He  might 
fully  establish  the  claim  of  love,  and  so  create  obedience  by  attraction  rather 
than  command  it  by  law.  The  Christian  character  of  obedience  is  not  built  up 
like  a  cold  and  lifeless  column,  stone  by  stone — it  grows  like  a  tree  from  within, 
and  its  root  is  love  to  Christ."     [Ker.] 

4.  Obedience  in  the  Gospel  is  the  obedience  of  children.  Those  who  continue 
to  live  ungodly  after  being  dealt  with  by  gospel  motives,  are  called  "  sons  of 
disobedience,"  while  those  who  yield  to  the  gospel  call  are  regarded  as  "  obedient 
children"  (see  Eph.  ii.  2  and  1  Peter  i.  14).  The  love  and  the  honour  which 
are  implied  in  making  them  "sons  of  God,"  are  mighty  motives  to  inspire  them 
with  an  obedience  that  "runs  in  the  way  of  God's  commandments."  "Of  all 
children,  the  children  of  God  are  most  obliged  to  obedience,  for  He  is  both 
the  wisest,  and  the  most  loving  of  Fathers.  The  sum  of  all  His  commands  is, 
that  they  endeavour  to  resemble  Him  (Matt.  v.  48  ;  Lev.  xi.  44).  The  imitation 
of  this  highest  pattern — this  primitive  goodness — is  the  top  of  excellency.  It 
is  well  said,  *  summa  religionis  est  imitari  quern  colis*  Children  that  resemble 
their  fathers,  as  they  grow  in  years  grow  the  liker  to  them ;  so  the  children  of 
God  increase  in  resemblance,  and  are  daily  more  and  more  renewed  in  His 
image.     \^Leighton!\ 

"  All  obedient  believers  are  of  near  kin  to  Jesus  Christ.  They  wear  His  name, 
bear  His  image,  have  His  nature,  are  of  His  family.  He  loves  them,  and  con- 
verses with  them  as  His  relations.  He  bids  them  welcome  to  His  table,  takes 
care  of  them,  provides  for  them,  and  sees  that  they  want  for  nothing.  When 
He  died.  He  left  them  rich  legacies ;  now  that  He  is  in  heaven.  He  keeps  up  a 
correspondence  with  them,  and  will  in  nothing  fail  to  do  the  kinsman's  part. 

[Henry. ^ 

5.  Obedience  must  be  shown  in  the  face  of  opposition.  To  show  that  it  is  not 
propped  up  merely,  but  lias  a  root  of  its  own.  It  must  be  of  a  robust,  and  not  a 
sickly  nature — able  to  withstand  the  force  of  a  thousand  breezes,  and  be  onl}^  all 
the  more  firmly  rooted  in  the  soil.  Steadfastness  of  obedience  is  very  gloryfying 
to  God.  "Caleb  had  another  spirit  in  him,  and  followed  the  Lord  fully.  He 
had  no  apprehensions  when  he  looked  at  the  dangers.  He  offered  no  objections 
and  raised  no  difficulties.  He  had  entire  confidence  in  his  God.  The  chariots 
of  iron,  the  cities  with  walls  up  to  heaven,  the  giant  sons  of  Anak — all  were 
nothing.  With  the  eye  of  faith,  he  saw  the  Lord  of  Hosts  going  forth  to  battle 
before  him,  and  treading  down  all  enemies  under  His  feet.  *  Only  rebel  not  ye 
against  the  Lord,'  were  his  noble  words.  Consequences  he  left  to  omnipotence  ; 
his  concern  simply  was  to  do  his  duty.  Similarly  did  Nehemiah  act.  When  all 
around  him  were  giving  way  before  the  formidable  dangers  that  were  ever  rising  up, 
his  uniform  language  was, '  So  did  not  I,  because  of  the  fear  of  God.' "    \Gisborne.\ 

85 


CHAP.  m.  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY  :  JUDGES. 


The  Kind  of  Obedience  Due  to  God. 

1.  Ifc  must  have  respect  to  the  heaven."  "I  delight  to  do  thy  will, 
authority  of  God.    It  does  this  or  that  0,  my  God. 

from   the  motive,    "  Thus    saith  the  8.   It  ought  to  be  perpetual.     As 

Lord."  man  is  a  subject  as  soon  as  he  is  a 

2.  It  ought  to  be  the  best,  and  the  creature,  so  he  is  a  subject  as  long  as 
most  exact.  The  best  of  the  flock  was  he  is  a  creature.  God's  sovereignty  is 
laid  on  the  altar.  '*  Hath  the  Lord  as  of  perpetual  duration  as  long  as  He  is 
great  delight  in  burnt  offerings  as  in  God.  And  as  God  cannot  part  with 
obeying  the  voice  of  the  Lord  ? "  His  sovereignty,  neither  can  man  be 

3.  It  must  be  sincere,  and  inward,  exempted  from  his  subjection.      Obe- 

4.  It  must  be  sole  obedience  (Matt,  dience  is  continued  in  heaven. 

iv.  10  ;  Acts  iv.  18,  19).  \Charnock.'\ 

5.  It  must  be  universal.  It  should  also  be  : — 

6.  It  mM^\,  hQ  indisputable.     Readi-  1.  Childlike  Siud  implicit 
ness  in  the  subject  is  of  the  essence  of  2.  Single-intentioned. 
true   obedience.     This  the  centurion  3.   Unconstrained. 

had  from  his  soldiers,  and  God  ought  4.  Eager  and  hearty. 

to  have  from  all  His  servants.    "  Speak,  5.  All  round  the  circle  of  duty. 

Lord,   thy  servant    heareth."      Thus  6.  Pure  in  motive  and  aim, 

did  Abraham  (Gen.  xxii.  3).  7.  Faithful  and  true. 

7.  It  ought  to  he  joyful.   "  Meat  and  8.   Unfaltering  andjirnu 
drink  to  do  the  will  of  our  Father  in 


MAIN  HOMILETICS.—Vena  1,  8^  & 

ZI.  God's  choice  of  instruments. 

Scripture  does  not  give  us  history  from  man's  point  of  view.  It  sees  God  as 
**  King  of  all  the  earth,"  reigning  over  the  heathen  and  them  that  know  Him 
not.  So  here,  when  describing  the  pivot  on  which  the  whole  history  turns, 
we  do  not  read  that  the  Canaanites,  having  recovered  from  the  prostration 
caused  them  by  the  desolating  sweep  of  the  sword  of  Joshua,  gathered  up  tlieir 
strength  anew  to  expel  the  presumptuous  invaders  of  their  territories,  or  try  to 
crush  them  with  a  grinding  servitude.  But  what  is  brought  before  us  is,  what 
the  hand  of  the  Lord  did,  and  the  instruments  whom  He  employed  to  do  Hia 
work.     We  are  taught : — 

1.  God  designates  His  own  agency  to  do  His  work.  "  The  Lord  left  these 
nations  to  prove  Israel,"  etc.  It  did  not  come  about  through  the  chances  of  war, 
through  the  turning  of  the  wheel  of  fortune,  or  through  the  changes  of  time, 
which  are  always  bringing  up  results  that  surprise  us.  The  God  who  helped  His 
people  for  the  destruction  of  these  nations  for  their  sins,  now,  because  of  the 
apostasy  of  His  people,  strengthens  these  nations  against  them  and  employs  them 
as  fit  instruments  for  doing  His  chastening  work.  He  not  only  permits  them  to 
do  what  they  did,  but  He  gives  them  a  JJiviue  commission  for  doing  it.  As  if 
He  had  said,  "  Go  and  scourge  my  people  because  of  their  grievous  sins."  It  is 
not  any  agencies  at  random  that  are  so  chosen,  but  certain  specific  nations  whom 
the  Divine  wisdom  selects.  Besides  the  glory  accruing  to  the  Divine  name  from  the 
doing  of  any  work,  there  is  the  additional  glory  arising  from  the  manner  of 
doing  it,  God  designates  the  instruments  that  He  reckons  the  fittest — those,  by 
whose  doing  it,  most  instruction  will  be  conveyed.  He  puts  His  finger  on  the 
agencies  He  means  to  employ,  and  calls  over  their  names  at  length  in  the  hearing 
of  all.  He  gives  them  in  charge  the  particular  work  they  have  to  do,  and  they 
86 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    JUDGES.  chap.  m. 


are  told  off  for  the  doing  of  it, — thongli  all  tlie  while  they  know  Him  not,  and 
do  the  work  in  reality  from  quite  other  motives,  than  that  of  a  desire  to  serve 
and  honour  Him.  Yet  He  puts  His  mark  upon  them  beforehand,  that  it  may  be 
known  that  they  are  in  His  employment,  so  that  what  is  done  by  them,  may  be 
understood  to  be  really  done  by  Him  through  their  agency. 

2  God  selects  His  instruments  from  the  camp  of  His  enemies  equally  with 
H'S  friends  His  enemies  do  not  cease  to  be  His  subjects,  and  His  creatures 
though  they  have  become  rebels.  He  has  not  lost  His  right  to  command,  though 
they  have  lost  their  will  to  obey.  They  are  equally  at  His  disposal  with  any  of 
tiie  loyal  races,  that  people  His  dominions.  Nor  does  He  need  to  put  any 
constraint  on  their  free  wills,  to  make  them  serve  His  purposes.  He  is  so  superior 
to  them  in  the  conduct  of  His  moral  government,  as  to  lead  them,  all 
unconsciously,  to  carry  out  special  designs  and  purposes  of  His  own,  while  they 
have  no  other  thought  than  to  gratify  their  malicious  purposes  and  cruel 
intentions. 

(1.)  God  makes  use  of  the  enemies  of  His  people  as  a  rod  to  chastise  them. 
They  had  ends  of  their  own  to  serve.  They  wished  to  have  some  severe 
retaliation  inflicted  on  these  intruders  from  the  wilderness,  for  having  the  best 
part  of  their  country,  taken  from  them,  also  their  corn,  their  wine  and  their  oil, 
and  indeed  for  a  complete  spoliation  made  of  their  whole  stock-in-trade,  so  that 
they  were  left  with  only  fragments  of  territory,  now  in  their  possession.  These 
Moabites,  Canaanites,  Philistines,  Midianites  and  others,  thought  they  were  only 
favoured  with  excellent  opportunities  of  taking  revenge.  Yet  God  was  merely 
for  a  time — a  time  determined  by  His  wisdom  and  love — delivering  over  His 
people  to  chastisement  for  their  backslidings,  that  He  might  ere  long  convince 
them  of  the  wisdom  and  necessity  of  returning  unto  Himself. 

(2.)  God  has  a  place  in  His  plans  for  the  wicked  to  praise  Him.  "  The  Lord 
hath  made  all  things  for  Himself,  even  the  wicked  for  the  day  of  evil**  Even  some 
of  the  plagues  of  Egypt,  it  is  said,  were  inflicted  by  God's  "sending  evil  angels 
among  them."  Balaam  God  made  use  of  to  bless  His  people,  when  Balak  would  have 
cursed  them  altogether.  Satan  was  made  use  of  as  an  instrument  to  bring  out, 
by  his  wicked  devices,  the  utter  spotlessness  of  the  Saviour's  character.  The 
efforts  made  by  principalities  and  powers  against  man's  substitute,  while  they 
were  allowed  to  do  their  worst  as  He  hung  on  the  cross,  to  get  Him  to  mar  His 
great  work  of  silent  uncomplaining  suffering  under  the  curse — by  murmuring 
against  God  for  the  bitterness  of  the  cup  He  was  called  on  to  drink,  or  by 
throwing  up  the  cause  of  guilty  men  on  account  of  their  extreme  ingratitude 
and  wickedness — these,  from  their  entire  failure  to  gain  their  purpose,  were 
overruled  by  God  to  bring  out  the  perfect  character  of  the  offering  made,  on 
which  men  might  build  their  hopes  for  the  eternal  future.  Not  only  was  the 
redeeming  work  not  stopped — till  the  Sufferer  could  say,  "  It  is  finished  " — but 
the  gloriously  excellent  character  of  the  work  is  brought  out  by  the  very  efforts 
that  were  made  to  stop  it. 

3.  A  sinning  people  often  supply  the  means  of  their  own  correction.  The 
whole  of  these  Canaanites  were  marked  out  for  destruction.  Their  cup  was  full, 
the  sentence  against  them  was  gone  forth,  and  the  people  of  Israel  were  appointed 
to  execute  it.  So  long  as  the  firm  hand  of  Joshua  was  at  the  helm,  all  went 
well,  but  when  that  hand  withered  in  death,  there  was  no  other  to  strike  in,  and 
finish  what  was  so  well  begun.  It  became  irksome  to  put  to  death  every  idolater, 
young  and  old.  Forgetful  of  the  sins,  of  these  Canaanites,  and  forgetful  of  the 
sacred  charge  laid  upon  them  by  their  God  to  exterminate  them,  the  people 
gradually  shrunk  back  from  their  fulfilment  of  the  duty,  partly  through  sloth, 
and  still  more  through  the  risks  they  ran  in  measuring  swords  with  these 
stalwart  natives  of  the  soil.  7%^?/  did  their  work  by  halves,  and  came  to  the 
best  terms  they  could  with  these  enemies  of  their  God.     They  lived  with  them  as 

87 


OHAP.m.  EOMILETiC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


neighbours,  and  did  business  with  thera  as  traders.  The  demand  made  was 
virtually,  to  "cut  off  the  right  hand  ;  "  they  chose  instead  to  disobey  their  God; 
and,  in  righteous  wisdom,  God  made  their  sin  become  the  means  of  their 
punishment. 

Did  they  spare  the  Canaanites?  He  also  spared  them,  and  allowed  them  to 
increase,  and  become  strong  in  the  land — the  result  being,  that  they  became 
enemies  always  lying  in  anjbush,  and  waiting  their  opportunity  for  slaking  their 
thirst  for  revenge.  Too  truly  did  they  prove  "snares,"  "traps,"  and  "  scourges." 
Had  they  been  entirely  rooted  out,  how  many  halcyon  days  of  peace  and  true 
happiness  would  Israel  have  enjoyed,  in  a  land  which  seemed  little  less  than 
Paradise  regained !  How  differently  would  their  story  have  run!  But  their 
"  own  wickedness  did  correct  them,  their  hackslidings  did  reprove  them.**  Had  Lot 
not  sat  down  among  the  Sodouiites,  though  well  aware  of  the  danger  of  moral 
contact  with  them,  he  would  never  have  had  such  a  fiery  trial  to  go  through  in 
the  end — with  property  lost  and  himself  saved  only  "as  by  fire."  If  David  had 
not  put  his  trust  in  the  Philistines,  instead  of  going  forward  in  the  path  of  duty, 
with  his  confidence  solely  in  his  God,  he  would  have  escaped  the  dire  experience 
of  that  miserable  morning,  when  he  came  upon  the  smoking  ruins  of  Ziklag,  and 
suddenly  found  the  world  turned  into  a  desert  before  him! 

"  The  sinners'  hands  do  make  the  snarei 
Wherewith  themselves  are  caught." 

4.  God  can  tnrn  the  most  unlikely  persons  into  fit  instruments  for  doing 
His  work. 

(1.)  These  nations  were  unlikely  instruments  for  doing  God's  work. 
What  purpose  can  be  served  by  brambles,  or  upas  trees  growing  in  the  garden 
of  the  Lord  ?  What  benefit  to  God's  church  could  ever  be  rendered  by  a  people, 
that  had  sold  themselves  "  to  do  evil,  only  evil,  and  that  continually ^'*  and  who 
were  now  regarded  as  "  reprobate"  ?  How  could  it  ever  consist  with  propriety, 
that  animals  of  the  wolf  species  should  lie  down  in  the  same  fold  with  God's 
sheep?  Infallibly  the  wolf  nature  must  quickly  show  itself,  and  deadly 
mischief  be  done.  Yet  the  circumstances  being  abnormal,  God  uses  an 
abnormal  method  of  meeting  them,  and  a  valuable  end  is  gained. 

(2.)  They  served  as  tests  of  Israel's  character.  As  it  was  of  their  own 
choosing,  God  left  His  people  to  live  side  by  side  with  the  Canaanite,  looking  daily 
at  the  spectacle  of  idolatrous  practices  set  before  their  eyes,  so  that  it  might  be  seen 
whether  they  would  be  allured  by  the  objects  and  the  ways  of  sin,  and  whether  the 
needle  of  the  heart  pointed  to  the  pole  of  allegiance,  or  that  of  apostasy.  Had 
they  been  decided  to  "  cleave  to  the  Lord,"  they  would  have  rejected  all  the 
overtures  used  to  turn  them  aside,  but  if  secretly  inclined  to  idol  worship,  they 
must  certainly  show  it  by  the  manner  of  associating  with  their  sinful  neighbours. 
The  presence  of  these  ungodly  transgressors  had  the  same  influence  on  the 
ungodly  heart,  as  the  magnet  has  on  the  steel  filings.  Israel  cannot  be  passive. 
If  so,  they  were  certain  to  be  carried  down  the  stream  ;  if  conscientious  in 
their  opposition  to  every  feature  and  form  of  the  prevailing  sin,  they  must 
rouse  themselves  from  their  apathy,  and  resolutely  take  their  stand  on  the  side 
of  Jehovah.  The  presence  of  these  idol- worshippers  was  a  touch-stone  of 
character  for  the  professing  people  of  God. 

(3.)  Such  a  presence  was  a  loud  call  to  the  exercise  of  prayer 
and  faith.  The  Israelites,  as  a  rule,  were  but  children  in  the  hands  of 
strong  men  before  these  giant  races.  It  was  not  by  sword  or  spear  they 
could  hope  to  succeed  in  war,  but  only  by  earnest  wrestling  prayer,  and  the 
pleading  of  Divine  promises  specially  given.  Thus  only  could  they  hope 
that  omnipotence  would  interpose  on  their  behalf,  and  faith  must  ever  enter 
into  prayer,  "  Whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  in  prayer,  believing  ^  ye  shall  receive" 
88 


EOMTLETIO  COMMENTARY:   JUDGES. 


CHAP.  III. 


Great  faith  in  God's  word,  and  deep  dependence  on  Him  for  hourly  and 
daily  protection,  were  specially  called  for.  To  believe  that,  in  ways  known 
only  to  Himself,  He  would  deliver  His  people  out  of  the  hands  of  their  enemies 
in  due  time,  if  they  but  proved  true  to  Him — not  to  trust  in  human  strength, 
skill,  training,  resources,  or  any  thing  of  that  kind,  as  the  origin  of  the 
deliverance  ;  but  to  trust  that  God  Himself  would  be  with  them,  and  find  the 
means  of  fighting  their  battles  successfully  in  answer  to  believing  prayer  and 
righteous  living  before  Him — that  was  to  fight  the  "  wars  of  Cauaan"  in  the  old 
spirit. 


COMMENTS  AND  SUOOESTIONS.— Verses  1,  8,  6. 

God  Glorified  by  the  Instrumentality  He  Employs  to  Execute  His  Will. 


I.  By  the  variety  of  instruments 
He  employs.  We  seldom  find  that 
the  same  nation  twice  over  is  employed 
to  oppress  Israel.  As  a  rule,  in  each 
new  case  it  is  a  different  nation,  and 
different  kind  of  nation  from  the  last 
that  is  employed. 

(1.)  God  would  have  transgressors 
to  learn  how  full  His  quivsr  is  of 
arrows,  so  that  it  is  impossible  to 
contend  with  him  in  battle.  He 
could  in  a  moment  make  all  things 
become  our  enemies.  It  is  "  as  if  a 
man  did  flee  from  a  lion  and  a  bear 
met  him,  or  he  went  into  the  house  and 
leaned  his  hand  on  the  wall,  and  a 
serpent  bit  him." 

(2.)  He  would  show  how  many 
unsuspected  instruments  of  death  are 
all  around  the  wicked,  but  for  His 
preventing  their  action.  How  easily 
could  all  the  nations  have  been  turned 
against  Israel  together,  instead  of  oneat 
a  time !  and  how  many  were  there  of 
them  !  But  for  Divine  protection,  they 
were  in  constant  peril.  The  Egjptians 
never  suspected  it  was  such  a  terrible 
thing  to  contend  with  the  God  of  the 
nation  they  held  in  captivity,  till  they 
found  the  vast  variety  and  terrible  cha- 
racter of  the  weapons  which  He  could 
bring  against  them — in  turning  their 
waters  into  blood,  filling  their  houses 
with  frogs,  making  the  dust  of  the  land 
become  lice,  filling  the  air  with  swarms 
of  flies,  and  again  with  swarms  of 
locusts,  smiting  down  all  herbs  and 
trees  of  the  land  by  destructive  hail 
mingled  with  fire,  sending  a  murrain 
on  the  beasts,  and  severe  boils  on  the 


men  and  women,  not  to  speak  of  the 
terrible  doom  of  all  the  firstborn. 
"  Thou,  even  Tliou,  art  to  be  feared, 
and  who  may  stand  in  Thy  sight,  when 
once  Thou  art  anj^ry?"  He  does  not 
need  to  go  to  a  distance  for  troops  to 
fight  His  battles.  He  can  raise  them 
up  at  hand  at  a  moment's  notice  when 
the  occasion  requires.  Happy  are  the 
people  that  are  protected  by  the  God 
of  Jacob  as  their  God. 

(3.)  It  suggests  the  thought  that 
the  universe  itself  is  but  a  vast 
armou  y,  full  of  instrumeits  at  the 
disposal  of  Jehovah,  to  carry  out  His 
will.  (Ps.  ciii.  19.)  The  armies  that 
are  in  heaven  are  His  armies — "His 
hosts,"  that  do  His  pleasure.  The  place 
of  supreme  power  is  also  the  home  of  the 
good,  and  by  all  such  His  will  is  done. 
That  world  is  a  model  of  obedience.  His 
will  is  done  naturally,  freely,  implicitly, 
universally.  It  is  done  joyfully,  swiftly, 
enthusiastically.  Tiiere  "  His  servants 
do  serve  Him,  resting  not  day  nor  night 
in  His  service."  "Their  plume  never 
droops,  their  fervour  never  sleeps." 
The  swift- winged  seraphim,  witli  out- 
stretched wing,  stand  ready,  at  a 
moment's  notice,  to  fly  through  the 
heavens,  to  execute  the  behests  that 
issue  from  the  throne  before  which  they 
stand.  In  tiie  kingdom  of  Providence, 
He  who  rules  is  attended  by  multitudes 
of  spirits  that  are  in  the  midst  of  the 
wheels,  that  are  "  full  of  eyes,"  by 
whom  the  wheels  are  turned,  and  all 
of  whom  "go  straight  forward."  In 
fulfilling  the  instructions  given  them, 
run  and  return  like  a 
89 


these  agents 


OHAP.ra.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES, 


flash  of  lightning,"  to  show  the  extreme  its  constant  inclination  to  evil.    Every 

alacrity  of  their  obedience.     The  very  man  is  conscious  that,  notwithstanding 

lightnings  of  heaven,  when  they  hear  his  dejjravity  of  nature,*his  will  is  still 

His  voice,  report  themselves  and  say,  free  ;   he  is  not  compelled  either  by 

*'  Here  we  are  ! "  God  to  do  a  good  act,  or  by  Satan  to 

"  He  has  all  the  creatures  at  His  do  an  evil  one.     However  much  he 

hech,  and  can  commission  any  of  them  maybe  influenced  by  others,  he  yet 

to  he    a   dreadful   scourge.      Strong  feels  that  every  act  which  he  does  is 

winds  and  tempests  fulfil  His  word,  his  own  act. 

He  can  make  an  army  of  locusts  be-         Mens  freedom  of  action  consistent 

come  as  mischievous  as  an  army  of  with  God  6  control  over  them  as  iiistrii- 

lions ;  can  forge  the  meanest  creatures  ments.     When  God  employed  any  of 

into  swords  and  arrows,  and  commission  these  kings,  such  as  Eglon  or  Chushan- 

the  most  despicable  to  be  His  execu-  rishathaim,  to   test   tlie  character  of 

tioners.     He  can  never  want  weapons  Israel  and  to  chastise  them,  He  was 

who  is  Sovereign  over  the  thunders  of  not  known  to  either  of  those  king?!,  nor 

heaven,  and  the  stones  of  the  earth,  and  did  He  begin  by  making  Himself  known 

can,  by  a  single  word,  turn  our  com-  to  them.     Their  hearts  were  already 

forts  into  curses.     He  calls  the  cater-  entirely  in  His  hands,  and  He  could 

pillar  and  the  palmer-worm  His  "great  turn  them  as  he  pleased,  thoui^h  He 

army,"  that  climb  walls  without   op-  should  remain    entirely   unknown   to 

position,  and  march  without  breaking  them.     He  has  Himself  laid  down  the 

their  ranks.    He  can  restrain  men  from  laws  by  which  the  movements  of  every 

carrying  out  evil  designs  against  His  heart  are  regulated,  and   in  all   His 

people.     He  kept  back  Saul,  who,  like  dealings  with  men.  He  shows  respect  to 

a  hawk,  was  pursuing  David  as  a  par-  the  laws  which  He  has  laid  down.    He 

tridge  among  the  mountains,  when  a  has  made  it  a  rule  of  our  nature,  that 

special  message  came,  that  the  Phili-  the  will  should  be  influenced  by  mo^zv^^, 

stines  had  invaded  the  land,  so  that  andof  these  motives, however  numerous 

the  persecutor  was  obliged  to  go  else-  they  may  be,  He  has  such  an  absolute 

where.     He  also  put  a  check  on  the  knowledge — both  of  actual  and  possible 

wicked  men,  who  had  gone  so  far  in  motives — and   also  such   an    absolute 

their  malice  as  to  crucify  the  Lord  of  control  of  these  motives,  in  adjusting 

glory,  so  that  at  first  they  did  not  them  in  any  manner  he  pleases,  in  the 

absolutely  oppose  the  preaching  of  the  case  of  every  individual  heart,  that  he 

cross  by  the  apostles.      He  that  re-  can  foretell,  and  even  fix  beforehand 

strained  the  roaring  lion  of  hell  himself,  with  infallible  exactness,  what  the  de- 

also  restrained   his  whelps  on   earth,  cision  of  that  will  shall  be,  in  regard  to 

The  lions  out  of  the  den,  as  well  as  any  one  matter,  without  in  the  slightest 

those  in  the  den,  are  bridled  by  Him  degree  interfering  with  its  freedom  of 

in  favour  of  His  Daniels."  [Chai^nockJl  action. 

Practical  Illustration.    The  motives 

II.  By  the  liberty  of  action  He  present  to  the  minds  of  these  two 

allows  to  those  who  are  held  as  in-  heathen  kings,  which  induced  them  to 

struments  in  His  hands.     God  never  go  against  Israel  to  oppress  them,  were 

restrains  the  free  action  of  the  human  as  far  as  possible,  away  from  any  idea 

will.     If  He  did  so,  it  would  destroy  of  causing   Israel   to   pass  through  a 

the  foundation  of  human  responsibility,  salutary  discipline,   and   this   by  the 

That  rests  on  the  fact,  that  man  is  free  command  of  Israel's  God.     They  were 

to  decide  according  to   his  pleasure,  altogether  the  reverse  of  what  could 

Were  he  not  free  so  to  decide,  the  be  pleasing  to  that   holy  God.     Yet 

decision  would  not  be  his,  but  that  He,  of  set  design,  allowed  them  to  go 

of    another    by  whom    his  will    was  forward  with  their  own  evil  intention? 

coerced.     We  say  nothing  at  present  in  view,  just  in  so  far  as  it  suited  His 

about  the  depravity  of  the  will,  and  of  own  purpose,  but  not  a  moment  longer. 
90 


HOMILETIC  COMMESTARY:  JUDGES.  chap.  ui. 


Then  the  current  was  changed,  or  was  \r\<y  the  nations  for  tlieir  sins.     But  to 

entirely  8toppecl.     Their  motives  were  punish    them    for    their    sins    against 

a  desire  for  revenge,  thirst  for  conquest,  Jehovah,   was    not    tlieir    meaning  in 

exaction  of  tribute,  an  extension  of  doing   what   tliey   did    (Is.  x.   6,   7). 

territory,  and  especially  a  boasting  of  When  therefore  the  work  was  done, 

the   superiority  of  their  gods.      The  the   manner   in    which   the   rod    had 

incentives  to  their   action   were  thus  dared  to  shalce  itself  against  Him  who 

entirely  wrong,  but  the  action   itself  wielded  it  came  before  God  in  judg- 

was   exactly  in  the  direction    of   the  ment,   and   it   was  flung  out  of  His 

Divine  purposes,  and  God  was  pleased  hand  as  fuel  into  the  fire  (Is.  x.  12-15). 

to  use  them  as  His  instruments  ac-  Babylon  also  was  wielded  by  the  Ruler 

cordingly.  In  acting  from  such  motives,  among  the  nations  as  His  battle-axe 

or  with  a  view  to  such  ends,  they  deeply  and  hammer,  and  a  whole  list  of  nations 

incurred  the  wrath  of  Jehovah,  more  was   marked   out  for  him   to  destroy 

especially  for  these  two  things — their  (Jer.  xxv.),  and  another  list  was  made 

maltreatment  of  a  nation  that  was  now  out  to  be  put  in  servitude  (Jer.  xxvii.). 

sacred  in  God's  estimation.     "  He  that  But  the  executioner  of  God's  designs 

toucheth  you,  toucheth  the  apple  of  in  these  cases  had  wicked  motives  in 

mine  eye."    Also,  for  their  daring  to  his  heart,  and  wicked  aims  before  his 

slight  the   authority,  and  despise  the  eyes,  and  his  time  of  reckoning  also 

na.sie  of  Israel's  God.     On  these  two  came.      Babylon   was    "  rolled    down 

accountsmainly,  great  wrath  went  forth  from  the  rocks,"  and  broken  in  pieces, 

from  Jehovah  against  them,  which  ended  because  of  all  the  "  evil  it  had  done 

in  their  destruction.  in   Zion,"  and  of  the  contempt   with 

Assyria  and  Babylon  were  long  em-  which  it  had  treated  the  sacred  name 

ployed  as  God's  instruments  in  punish-  of  Jehovah  (Jer.  L  and  li.) 


MAIN  HOMILETICS.— Verses  1,  2,  4. 

XZZ.  The  tendency  of  the  covenant  people  to  apostatise  from 
their  God. 

This  is  always  the  most  visible  thing  in  the  page  of  Israel's  history.  Other 
things  may  be  traced  only  in  faint  and  indistinct  lines  ;  but  this  is  always 
broadly  marked. 

1.  It  is  what  might  have  been  least  expected.  Situated  as  they  were,  they 
were  the  most  favourable  specimen  of  the  human  race  to  show  the  spirit  oi  true 
allegiance.  None  were  so  highly  privileged  ;  none  so  well  trained  ;  none  had 
such  an  excellent  parentage  ;  none  had  been  the  children  of  so  many  prayers  ; 
none  were  the  heirs  of  so  many  promises;  none  had  had  set  before  them  such  force 
of  motive  in  the  noble  obeilience  of  a  remarkably  pious  ancestry  ;  none  had  had 
such  striking  patterns  of  fidelity  to  God  set  before  them  in  the  case  of  their 
national  leaders ;  none  had  seen  such  a  series  of  gracious  interpositions  of  the 
hand  of  Omnipotence  on  their  behalf; — in  short,  nothing  but  the  firmest 
attachment  to  the  God  of  their  fathers,  might  have  been  expected  of  these 
children  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob — Abraham,  the  "friend  of  God  ;  "  Isaac, 
the  man  of  devout  meditation  and  readiness  to  sacrifice  his  life  at  the  call  of 
his  God  ;  Jacob,  the  man  who,  as  a  prince  above  other  men,  had  power  even 
wilh  God  in  prayer,  and  prevailed.  W  hat  a  force  of  holy  example  did  such  men 
leave  behind  them  for  the  good  of  their  descendants  ! "  What  specimens  of 
faith,  of  self-denial,  and  true  fear  of  God  did  they  exhibit ! "  Under  what  a 
hallowed  roof-tree  were  their  children  cradled !  Could  a  richer  or  fatter  soil  be 
found  in  which  to  plant  the  young  shoots  of  a  coming  generation  ?  l>id  ever 
richer  dews  or  warmer  breezes  come  from  the  Lord  to  foster  any  flowers  that 
were  put  into  His  garden,  than  in  the  case  of  that  generation  which  "  entered 


CHAP,  in,  HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


into  the  rest"  of  the  lion-hearted  Joshua?     And  yet  if  anything  is  clear  about 
them,  it  is  that  they  showed  a  tendency  to  apostatise  from  tlieir  (Jod  ! 

2.  The  root-cause  lies  in  the  depravity  of  tne  human  heart.  There  is  within 
men  an  "  evil  heart  of  unbelief  departing  from  the  living  God."  The  character 
of  the  fountain  is  seen  in  the  muddy  nature  of  the  stream.  The  disposition  of 
the  heart  to  go  away  from  God,  is  not  occasional  or  changeable,  but  it  is  in  the 
very  constitution,  and  is  abiding.  "  The  carnal  mind  is  enmity  against  God" 
The  current  flows  uniformly  in  one  and  the  same  direction.  Its  tendency  is 
fixed.  After  the  miserable  exhibition  made  by  the  descendants  of  Abraham, 
Isaac,  and  Jacob,  what  shall  be  said  for  the  cliildren  of  any  other  class  of 
parents  ?  We  fear  nothing  can  come  out  of  it  but  the  old  conclusion,  which  we 
must  write  down  once  more — *'  there  is  none  that  doeth  good,  no  not  one !" 

3.  Remissness  of  parental  training  one  of  the  immediate  causes.  The  gene- 
ration that  formed  the  Israel  of  the  day  in  this  third  chapter,  were  not  those 
wlio  had  seen  the  Divine  wonders  of  power  and  grace  that  distinguished  the 
golden  age  of  the  immediate  past,  but  those  who  followed  after,  and  had  only 
heard  of  such  mighty  acts.  But  no  duty  was  more  imperative  on  those  who 
had  seen  and  taken  part  in  them,  than  to  imprint  the  whole  record  diligently  on 
the  minds  and  memories  of  the  rising  generation.  This  was  the  tixed  rule  with 
regard  to  the  whole  history  of  this  people  from  age  to  age — that  one  generation 
should  instruct  the  one  that  followed  it,  and  that  again  those  that  followed  after, 
in  regular  succession.  This  was  a  binding  duty  (Fs.  Ixxviii.  3-8 ;  Deut.  vi. 
2,  7-9,  20-25). 

Parental  training  had  a  very  important  place  among  God's  people,  for,  first — 

(a)  God  7neant  the  lessons  imparted  to  one  age  to  he  learned  equally  by  all 
succeeding  ages.  He  deals  with  all  the  generations  of  Israel  as  but  one  people. 
He  appeals  to  any  one  generation  by  arguments  drawn  from  what  He  had  done 
to  previous  generations,  or  from  obligations  undertaken  by  these  previous  gene- 
rations, as  if  they  were  identical  with  the  generation  immediately  addressed. 
And  this  bond  of  intimate  union  of  the  different  generations  in  one  people, 
could  only  be  sustained  by  a  very  full,  faithful,  and  persevering  course  of 
instruction  and  pious  example,  such  as  is  implied  in  the  exercise  of  parental 
training. 

{h)  The  children  were  taken  into  the  covenant  equally  with  the  parents. 
Hence  parental  training  became  a  sacred  duty.  The  children  are  expressly 
mentioned  as  being  present,  along  with  their  fathers  and  mothers,  at  the  first 
great  convocation,  held  when  they  were  being  devoted  to  the  Lord  as  a  whole 
people,  in  view  of  their  being  about  to  enter  the  land  of  their  inheritance. 
(Deut.  xxix.  10-18).  The  charge  of  obedience  is  laid  on  the  children  equally 
with  the  parents  (Deut.  xxx.  2). 

(c)  A  special  command  for  instructing  the  children  in  God's  law  was  given  in 
perpetuity.  Once  every  seven  years  was  the  great  law  of  the  covenant  to  be 
read  aloud  in  the  hearing  of  all  Israel,  and  the  children  were  then  to  be 
specially  instructed  (Deut.  xxxi.  9-13). 

{d)  The  young  people  of  the  early  ages  of  Israels  history  were  specially  de- 
pendant on  parental  training.  In  times  when  writing  was  rare,  reading  as  an  art 
must  have  been  very  im[)erfect.  Thus  the  young  received  all  their  knowledge  in 
the  form  of  oral  instruction  from  the  old.  Besides,  this  dependance  was  all  the 
greater,  that  the  instructions  which  the  young  Israelites  received  from  their 
God,  were  so  widely  different  from  those  required  of  the  children  whose  parents 
worshipped  other  gods,  and  required  much  greater  self-denial. 

{e)  Difficulties  of  parental  training  under  the  circumstances.     This  training 

was  conducted  with  fewer  facilities,  and  amid  more  discouraging  circumstances, 

than  it  is  with  us,  so  that  less  good  fruit  might  reasonably  be  looked  for  than  we 

are  accustomed  to  do,    From  the  severity  of  the  trial  of  character,  to  which  the 

92 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES.  chap.  m. 


whole  people  were  subjected  in  so  strongly  idolatrous  an  atmosphere,  those  who 
were  ftxlse  in  profession  would  quickly  become  supine  in  the  discharge  of  duties 
for  which  they  had  no  heart,  while  among  the  steadfast  few  there  would  be  many 
a  David,  who  never  said  to  his  Adonijah,  "  What  doest  thou  ?"  or  many  an  Eli, 
who  "  heard  of  his  sons  making  themselves  vile,"  through  idolatrous  practices, 
and  "  he  restrained  them  not."  And  there  might  be  few  Abrahams,  of  whom 
God  said  as  to  parental  training,  "  I  know  Abraham,  that  he  will  command  his 
children,  and  household  after  him,  and  they  shall  keep  the  way  of  the  Lord." 
Thus  may  we  account,  in  considerable  part,  for  the  subsidence  into  idolatrous 
practices,  which  quickly  became  general  over  the  land. 

IV.  Each  new  g'eneration  requires  in  some  deg'ree  to  be  taug-ht 
by  an  experience  of  its  own. 

Parental  training  is  not  enough.  It  seems  strange  that  both  a  history,  and  a 
law,  wliich  were  so  repeatedly  impressed  on  the  minds  of  the  whole  people,  first 
under  Moses,  and  then  under  Joshua,  should  not  have  so  penetrated  into  tlie 
very  heart  of  the  nation,  as  to  have  been  engraven  with  an  iron  pen,  to  last  for 
many  generations,  if  not  for  ever.  And  yet  those  laws  which  were  proclaimed 
literally  in  notes  of  thunder  from  heaven,  and  those  facts  of  extraordinary 
strength,  which  make  up  the  stirring  history  of  Joshua's  days,  seem  not  to  have 
got  so  deep  into  the  minds  of  the  Israelitish  nation,  but  that  in  the  very  next 
generation,  there  was  need  for  farther  instruction  in  the  same  lessons.  Those 
who  had  not  actually  seen  the  doing  of  the  Lord,  and  witnessed  the  operations 
of  His  hand,  required  to  be  put  through,  on  a  small  scale,  the  experience  of  the 
fathers.     This  teaches  the  following  lessons  : — 

1.  The  strange  incapacity  of  the  human  heart  for  receiving  Divine  lessons. 

{a)  t^cripture — makes  it  the  cardinal  error  of  our  fallen  race,  that  *'  there  is  none 
that  have  understanding  to  seek  after  God'^  as  the  first  thing  a  creature  should 
do  (Rom.  iii.  11).  The  people  that  were  of  all  others  the  best  instructed  in  the 
knowledge  of  God,  who  were  taught  it  all  their  life,  through  "  precept  on 
precept,  line  on  line,"  are  yet  continually  charged  with  being  *'  a  nation  void  of 
counsel,  neither  haviiig  any  understanding'^ — ^' fools  and  blind" — even  "  sottish 
children,"  *'  who  have  eyes  and  see  not,  ears  and  hear  not,  whose  hearts  have 
waxed  gross,  and  their  ears  are  dull  of  hearing," — who  know  less  of  their  God 
in  the  sjiiritual  world,  than  "the  stork  in  the  heaven,  the  turtle,  the  crane,  and 
the  swallow  "  know  of  the  laws  which  affect  them  in  the  natural  world.  Even 
the  knowledge  of  "  the  ox,"  and  "  the  ass,"  for  practical  purposes,  is  said  to  be 
sn[)erior  to  that  of  God's  own  people.  Well  may  the  account  be  wound  up  with 
the  statement,  ^' my  people  are  destroyed  for  lack  of  knowledge.  And  they 
are  suitably  addressed  in  such  lines  as  these  : — 

"  Ye  brutish  people  understand, 
Fools  !  when  wise  will  ye  grow  ?  " 

(6)  Experience,  As  regards  practical  proof,  we  might  say,  it  would  take  a  less 
force  to  make  water  and  oil  mix  together,  than  to  induce  the  human  heart  to 
take  an  everlasting  embrace  of  God's  holy  truth. 

(c)  The  names  given  to  man  in  his  natural  state.  Take  one  as  a  specimen — 
the  name  "  Fool,"  so  often  applied  to  those  who  know  not  God.  This  word 
not  only  indicates  that  man  is  ignorant,  and  without  discretion,  but  also 
that  he  is  unimprovable,  under  a  spell,  or  infatuated.  And  the  difficulty 
of  teaching  a  fool  any  lesson  of  practical  wisdom,  is  that  he  has  no  natural 
reco])tivity  for  it.  "  Reproof  enter etii  more  into  a  wise  man  than  a  hundred 
strijMs  into  a  fool."  Yea,  "  though  thou  shouldest  bray  a  fool  in  a  mortar,  yet 
will  not  his  foolishness  depart  from  him"  (Prov.  xvii.  10;  xxvii.  22).  Those 
who  cannot  catch  God's  meaning  at  once,  by  a  slight  indication,  or  a  significant 
movement  of  the  eye,  must  be  treated  like  the  dull  horse  or  mule  who  understand 

93 


CHAP.  III.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   JUDGES, 


nothing  save  the  bridle,  or  the  hish  (Ps.  xxxii.  8,  9).  Wliat  stubbornnesa 
characterises  the  human  heart  in  receiving  God's  holy  trutli ! 

2.  Personal  experience  is  the  most  effective  method  of  teaching^.  The  persona 
now  to  be  instructed  are  those,  who  *'  had  not  known  the  wars  of  Canaan  "  by- 
personal  experience.  God  was  now  to  put  them  through  some  of  the  experience, 
which  the  fathers  had  to  go  through.  No  knowledge  is  so  effectually 
gained,  as  that  which  comes  in  this  manner.  Teaching  by  testimony,  or 
report,  exercises  but  a  slight  influence,  compared  with  that  which  is  gained 
by  personally  passing  through  all  tbe  circumstances  of  any  particular  scene. 

{a)  A  more  vivid  impression  is  made.  It  is  when  knowledge  passes  in  direct, 
through  the  five  gates  of  the  senses,  that  it  gets  the  best  hearing  from  the 
understanding,  and  makes  the  deepest  impression  on  the  heart.  Everything  is 
distinctly  realised,  and  felt  to  be  an  actual  fact.  All  passes  before  the  eye  and 
is  no  dream.  There  is  no  comparison,  as  to  vividness  of  impression  made  by 
things  known  through  personal  experience,  and  things  known  only  by  hearsa}^ 

(h)  Personal  interests  are  more  deeply  touched.  It  was  one  thing  for  this  people 
to  believe  it  as  a  tale  that  was  told  them,  that  through  the  Divine  promise  given, 
it  was  possiljle  to  fight  all  the  giants  and  subdue  mighty  armies,  for  that  had 
now  become  matter  of  history.  But  to  see  the  lions  at  hand,  to  witness  with 
their  own  eyes  the  ferocious  Canaanites  mustering  their  forces  to  battle,  with  a 
weight  of  armour,  strength  of  bone  and  muscle,  and  equipment  for  the  field  far 
superior  to  their  own,  while  yet  they  were  successful  in  the  conflict — tliis  was 
to  give  the  knowledge  of  experience,  and  teach  what  mighty  {hmg^  prayer  could 
do,  when  it  had  Divine  promises  to  plead — what  trust  in  the  character  of  the 
covenant  God  could  do — and  what  good  issue  could  arise  from  obedience  to  the 
Divine  commandments  in  the  practical  duties  of  life. 

tJxamples. — It  was  said  of  the  good  liichard  Cecil,  when  leaving  a  sick  bed, 
where  he  had  been  confined  for  upwards  of  six  weeks,  a  friend  remarked  to  him 
he  had  lost  much  precious  time  lying  on  that  couch.  ''  No,"  he  replied,  ''  the 
time  has  not  been  lost.  I  have  learned  more  within  these  curtains  during  these 
weeks,  than  I  learned  during  all  my  academical  course  at  the  university." 
Joseph,  too,  learned  the  lessons  which  served  him  so  well  in  after  life,  more 
effectually  in  the  pit  of  Dothan,  and  the  dungeons  of  Egypt,  amid  cruelty,  in- 
justice, and  desertion  of  friends,  than  he  ever  could  have  done  under  the  wing 
of  parental  indulgence  in  his  natural  home.  Suffering  is  the  most  effective  of 
teachers. 

3.  Each  generation  must  have  a  character  of  its  own,  and  answer  for  itself. 
The  parent  cannot  believe  for  the  child,  neither  can  the  chihi  inherit  the  faith, 
the  prayerful  spirit,  and  the  religious  worth  of  the  parent  merely  from  the  fact 
that  he  is  a  child.  However  valuable  the  inheritance  of  piety,  of  faith,  and 
godliness,  left  by  those  who  had  gone  before,  it  was  still  im])erative  on  the  young 
generations  after  Joshua's  days,  to  know  for  themselves  the  sacred  principles, 
by  observing  which  they  gained  possession  of  their  inheritance,  and  still  retained 
it  in  ])ossession.  God  dealt  with  each  generation  according  to  its  own  character, 
sending  evil  and  dark  days,  or  days  of  bright  sunshine  and  prosperity,  as  their 
conduct  was  pleasing  or  displeasing  to  His  Holy  eye, 

COMMENTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.^Verses  1,2,  4, 

The  Difficulty  of  Getting  Divine  Truth  into  the  Heari^ 

1.  How  much  care  and  many  argu-  ordinarily  willing  to  receive  such  pre- 

ments  are  used  in  va^'n.    Why  so  much  cious  truths,   and  to   be  taui^dit  such 

pains   taken    to    instruct  the   coming  impressive  lessons,  no  argument  would 

generations.     If  the  heart  had  been  have  been  necessary,  and  the  only  diffi- 

94 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES.  chap,  iii. 

CTilty  would  have  been  to  have  rojected  a  sense  of  their  obligations  to  the  cove- 

them.     Yet  arguments  need  to  be  em-  nant  God.     Yet  how  faint  the  impres-  , 

ployed  for  a  whole  lifetime,  and  kept  sion  made  !     At  the  first  rough  blast  * 

up  from  generation  to  generation,  to  of  trial,  it  was  found  they  had  such  a 

keep  the  people  at  the  exercise  of  faith  slender  hold  of  religious  principle  that 

and  obedience — sad    proof    that    the  they  gave  up  the  services  of  Jehovah 

"  natural  man  receiveth  not  the  things  and  accepted  those  of  Baal, 
of  the  Spirit  of  God,"  etc.  3.    When    milder   means    do    not 

2.  The  facility  with  which  the  heart  suffice  to  educate  men  in  relisrious 

lets  slip  the  Divine  teachings.     It  is  duty,  sterner  measures  are  held  in 

like  "  tlie  morning  cloud  and  the  early  reserve.    When  these  young  Israelites 

dew."  What  earnest  effort  and  intense  would  not  listen  to  the  quiet  teachings 

anxiety   are   needed    to   retain   truth  of  faithful  parents,  they  had  ere  long  to 

which    is  already   imparted  !     "  Give  go  forth  and  meet  the  Canaanite  in 

earnest  heed  to  the  t/niir/s  you   have  the  open  field,  and  learn,  in  the  stern 

heard,  lest  you  should  drift  away  from  work  of  actual  war,  those  lessons  whuh 

them"  (see  Heb.  ii.  1,  revised  version),  they  were  so  slow  to  acquire  around 

"  Take  fast  hold — keep — let  not  go  "  the  domestic  hearth.     What  an  iUus- 

(Prov.  iv.  13).     As  oil  runs  ofi*  water  tration  of  the  inveterate  tendency  of 

without  uniting  with  its  drops,  so  do  the   heart   to  reject   and   push  aside 

God's  most  impressive  teachings  pass  spiritual  appeals  !     It  remains, 
off  without  mixing  with  the  deep  con-  "  Though  woo'd  and  aw'd, 

victions   of   the   heart.      The    young  A  flagrant  rebel  still." 

Israelites  of  the  next  generation,  doubt-  When  the  father's  kindly  hand  and 

less,  heard  a  great  deal  about  the  glo-  the  mother's  soft  touch  had  no  effect, 

rious   transactions   of    their    national  God's  people  must  be  given  up  to  the 

history,  which  made  them   the  envy  handlingoftherugged nurse— Adversity, 

and   the  wonder  of  every  land      The  that  through  her  more  rigorous  discip- 

mere  tale  of  such  deeds  should  have  line  they  might,  by  any  meana,  come  to 

sufficed,  to  rivet  in  their  hearts  for  ever  learn  practical  wisdom. 

Pious  Parents  may  have  Ereinq  Children. 

1.    Religious    character    does    not  not  run  in  the  blood,"  as  Eli,  Aaron, 

depend  on  natural  birth.  Noah,  David,  and  even  Samuel  (I  Sam, 

"  That  which  is  born  of  the  flesh  is  viii.  3,  5),  knew  to  their  cost. 
flesh."     The  corrupt  nature  which  is 

common  to  our  race  is  transmitted  by  2.  Yet  the  children  of  godly  pa- 
natural  law.  Proofs  of  this  are  un-  rents  are  often  pious.  Though  grace 
failingly  given  in  every  life.  "Inhere  does  not  run  in  the  blood,  it  does  often 
is  not  a  just  man  upon  earth  that  run  in  the  line.  The  line  of  Seth 
doeth  good  and  sinneth  not."  The  seems  to  have  been  the  line  of  the 
undoubtedlv  pious  son  of  the  God-  godly,  and  it  continued  for  centuries, 
fearing  Jesse  tells  us,  he  did  not  get  The  line  of  Eleazar's  priesthood  appears 
his  piety  from  his  parentage.  He  says,  to  have  gone  on  from  the  day  that  the 
"  Behold,  I  was  shapen  in  iniquity,  and  people  took  possession  of  their  inheri- 
in  sin  did  my  mother  conceive  me."  tance,  until  the  day  when  they  were 
And  the  Saviour  affirms  that  every  driven  out  of  it  into  captivity,  with 
man,  to  be  fit  for  His  kingdom,  must  only  a  few  breaks  (from  Eli  to  the  ex- 
be  **  born  again."  Thus,  no  generation,  pulsion  of  Abiathar,  1  Kings  ii.  27) — ■ 
however  pious,  can  give  security  that  or  more  than  a  thousand  years — most 
their  children  will  be  the  same  that  of  whom,  if  not  all,  appear  to  have 
they  have  been,  l^he  result  is,  that  been  men  worthy  of  their  office.  The 
none  are  pious  by  birth.     "  Grace  does  line  of  Abraham  is  also  a  strong  case. 

95 


CHAP.  IIL  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   JUDGES, 


3.  fpecial  advantages  belong  to  the  admonition  of  the  Lord."     They  also 

seed  of  the  godly.     There  is —  have  the  promise,  ''Train  up  a  child 

(1).     The  sranding  special  promise  in  the  way  that  he  should  go,  and  when 

which   God   makes   to   all   believing  he  is  old,  he  will  not  depart  from  it." 

parents.     "  I  will  be  a  God  to  thee  and  (5).     For  the  most  part  they  are  in 

thy   seed  after  thee."     It   is  indeed  the  company  of  the  righteous.     They 

conditional  ;    but  when  the  condition  are  led  "  in  the  footsteps  of  the  flock." 

is  fulfilled,  or  in  the  degree  in  which  The  natural  principle  of  imitation — so 

it  is  fulfilled,  the  promise  is  sure.  strong   in   the   young   mind — is   thus 

(2).     They  are  usually  the  children  utilised  to  lead   them   to  do   as   the 

of  many  prayers.       Where    parents  righteous  do. 

neglect  this  duty  it  is  cruelty  to  the  4.  Illustration  of  a  degenerate  seed 

children.  Every  parent  should  not  only  springing  from  godly  parents.     The 

i)ray,  but  "  travail  in  birth  "  again,  till  generation  that  entered  Canaan  under 

L  hrist  is  born  in  every  child  that  God  Joshua,  are  supposed  to  have  been  more 

has  given  them.     Look  at  the  mothers  pious  than  almost  any  other  through 

of  Augustine  and  John  Newton.  the  whole  history  of  that  people.     Of 

(3).  They  have  commonly  the  benefit  this  we  have  proof  in  the  great  out- 

of  a  good  example  set  before  them,  standing  fact,  that   "  by  faith    they 

This,thoughnotalonesufficient,hasinit  subdued  kingdoms,"    over  the   whole 

all  the  teachin.i^  force  which  the  silent  length  and  breadth  of  the  land  (Joshua 

presentation  of  religious  realities  can  ii.-xi).     Another  proof  of  fidelity  to 

*'ive.     Example  is  often  more  elTectual  principle  we  have  in  Joshua  xxii.    Yet 

shan  precept.  a  large  number  of  their  children,  and 

(4).     They  are  usually  the  subjects  nearly  all  their  grandchildren,  became 

of  a  pious  training.     Parents  who  fear  idolaters,  and  required  dealing  of  the 

God  themselves  are  required  to  '*  bring  severest  kind  to  bring  them  back   to 

up  their  children  in  the  nurture  and  God. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS.-^Verm  6-lL 

Great  Sin  and  Severe  Chastisement. 

Critical  Notes.—  6.  And  tlie  children  of  Israel  dwelt.]  Here  are  two  downward  steps  at  once 
.^a  refusal  to  drive  out  the  Canaauites,  and  this  followed  by  a  decision  to  sit  down  and  dwell 
pmong  them.  "  Canaanites,  Hittites"  etc. — not  etlinological  but  geographical  names,  say  many. 
The  inhabitants  of  Canaan  were  a  congeries  of  various  races,  who  adopted  a  common  Semitic 
language,  and  were  attracted  to  the  country  by  the  commercial  facilities  of  the  sea-coast,  the  fer- 
tility of  its  soil,  and  the  strength  of  its  mountain  fastnesses.  The  word  "Canaanite"  signifies 
loivlander ;^'  Amorite,"  hiuhlander  ;  "  Perizzite,"  dioeller  in  the  open  country  ;  "  Hivite."  dweller  in 
tillages,  as  described  above;  "Jebusite,"  a  thresher  ;  ^  Hittiies"  the  posterity  0/ Heth,  in  the 
mountainous  country  of  Judah,  who  may  have  had  something  of  the  character  of  their  father, 
whose  name  signifies,  the  terrible.     [Lias  and  Young.^ 

Verse  6.  And  they  took  their  daughters,  etc.]  Another  downward  step  naturally  following 
on  the  first  two.  To  form  connection  with  these  wicked  people  by  intermarrying  was  expressly 
f(irl-)idden,  and  solemn  warnings  were  given  to  beware  of  striking  on  that  rock.  (Ex.  xxxiv.  16  ; 
I3eut.  vii.  1-4  ;  also  Gen.  xxiv.  3  ;  xxvi.  34,  35  ;  xxvii.  46  ;  1  Kings  xvi.  31 ;  Ezra  ix.  2,  11,  12  ; 
Neh.  xiii.  25-28.) 

Verse  7.  The  actual  narrative  now  proceeds.— Served  Baalim  and  the  groves.]  (Sept.  and 
Vulg.  )Heb.  Asheroth,  not  A shtaroth.  Not  "  groves  "  literally,  hnt  ui>right  wooden  pillai'S  ;  for 
they  were  often  cut  down  and  burned  (chap.  vi.  25-30).  (2  Kings  xxiii.  6,  15  ;  Deut.  xii,  3). 
Tlie  stone  pillars  of  Baal,  on  the  contrary,  are  said  to  be  "  broken  down "  (Ex.  xxxiv.  13; 
I)ent.  vii.  5).  [Douglas.]  Some  hold  that  Asherah  was  a  wooden  image,  or  symbol  of  Astarte. 
[Berthcau  and  Bengstenherg.]  {See  Notes  on  chap.  ii.  11-13,  p.  32  and  35  ;  also  Prof.  Lias 
in  ioco.)  It  has  been  supposed  the  reference  is  to  Jnpiter  and  Venus.  [Douglas.]  It  is  styled 
the  worsliip  of  the  "groves,"  because  the  "pillars"  referred  to  were  placed  in  the  groves,  and 
the  worship  was  carried  on  there. 

96 


HO MILETW  COMMENTARY:    JUDGES.  ohap.  m. 


Verse  8.  Sold  them.]  Taken  from  the  manner  of  disposing  of  a  slave;  moans— He  gave 
them  entirely  over  into  his  hand  without  any  visible  protection  from  their  Ood  (Dent,  xxxii.  30  ; 
1  Sam.  xii.  9;  1  Kinos  xxi.  20;  2  Kings  xvii.  17).  *' As  the  Lord  had  said'"  (Lev.  xxvi.  ; 
Deut.  xxviii.  29).  "  Worthy  are  they  to  serve  those,  whose  false  gods  they  have  served."  [Hall.^ 
"  And  they  served,"  if  not  formally  as  vassals  and  slaves,  yet  the  service  must  have  been  a 
virtual  bondage — such  cruel  treatment  as  the  caprice  of  a  heathen  tyrant  might  dictate. 
The  Hebrew  word  ^TIll?!  implies  a  worse  servitude  than  being  tributary,  though  that  is 
included. 

'' Chushan-rishathaim" — "Chushan  of  double  wickedness."  The  Targum  and  Peshito 
interpret  it  to  mean,  "  the  crime-committing  Chushan.""  The  former  calls  him — "  Chushan  the 
wicked,  king  of  Syria  on  the  Euphrates."  Rawlinson  regards  him  as  a  powerful  king,  who 
is  represented  on  the  Assyrian  inscriptions  as  the  subduer  of  rebellious  countries.  Cush  is 
a  general  name  for  a  widely-diffused  family  of  nations,  and  is  descriptive  of  their  general 
characteristics,  their  mode  of  life,  their  darkness  of  complexion,  etc.  Kings  and  heroes  beyond 
the  Euphrates  are  named  ]K7^0.  Probably  the  first  part  of  the  name  is  ethnological  in  its 
reference.  Cush  was  the  son  of  Ham,  and  the  father  of  Nimrod,  and  so  his  name  may  have  been 
taken  by  the  whole  line  of  warlike  heroes  who  followed  each  other  on  the  banks  of  the 
Euphrates,  somewhat  in  the  same  manner  as  the  Sultans  of  Turkey,  who  f(;rmed  an  almost 
unbroken  line  of  men  of  energy  and  enterprise  for  a  long  period.  In  that  case,  Chu.shan  would 
be  a  mere  titular  or  honorary  designation.  The  latter  name  may  have  been  given  to  express  the 
detestation  in  which  he  was  held  as  the  enslaver  of  the  nations.  It  would  imply  a  similar  odium 
to  that  attaching  to  the  phrase,  "  publicans  and  sinners,"  or  it  may  simply  mark  the  ferocious 
character  of  the  man.  It  has  lieen  said,  "  Tyrants  delight  in  terrible  names  and  titles,  as  Attila 
the  Hun,  who  styled  himself  ^^  Ira  Dei  et  orhis  vastitas.^'  [Trapp.]  "  King  of  Mesopotamia." 
Heb,  Arani-naharaim,  signifying  "the  Syria  of  the  two  rivers" — the  Tigris  and  the  Euphrates — 
or,  "  the  highland  by  the  two  streams."  He  must  have  come  a  considerable  distance  {Mu/er  says 
400  miles),  which  according  to  Groser  made  it  a  punishment  less  severe  than  subsequent  servi- 
tudes to  tribes  at  hand.  This  raid  of  Chushan  appears  to  have  been  similar  to  the  incursion 
made  by  the  four  kings  from  the  plain  of  Shinar,  to  the  country  occupied  by  Sodom  and 
Gomorrah,  and  other  tribes,  in  the  days  of  Abraham.  (Gen.  xiv.)  ^^  Served  him  ei'jht  ye<trs." 
'i  he  same  length  of  time,  say  some,  that  they  had  openly  practised  idol  worship. 

Verse  9.  Cried  unto  the  Lord.]  Sad  change  from  the  days  of  Joshua  !  (Comp.  chap.  x.  10, 15.) 
"Raised  up  a  deliverer.^'  V^W'^'^ — a  Helper,  or  Saviour.  (Comp.  2  Kings  xiii,  5  ;  Neh.  ix.  27.) 
"Raised  up.**  Prompted,  or  stirred  up.  A  special  Divine  influence  was  exerted  on  the 
individual.  This  phrase  forms  a  striking  parallel  to  Acts  xiii.  23.  "  OthnieV  The  Kenizzite, 
the  younger  brother  and  son-in-law  of  Caleb,  and  formerly  conqueror  of  Kirj  ith-sepher. 
(Josh.  XV.  16,  17,  of.  chap.  i.  13.)  He  bore  one  of  the  most  honoured  names  in  the  royal  tribe, 
was  himself  a  hero,  and,  above  all,  was  a  man  who  understood  the  science  of  the  "  wars  of 
Canaan,"  viz.,  that  all  real  victory  is  secured  by  faith.  Thus  he  was  well  qualified  at  this 
critical  moment  to  step  forward  and  lift  from  the  dust  his  country's  torn  standard.  Othniel  was 
not  elected  to  office  by  the  vote  of  the  people,  but  God  Himself  made  the  choice,  as  He  did  in 
all  the  other  cases.  . 

Verse  10.  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  came  upon  h^m.l  (n^n  *^^7V  *^^^^'i^^)  I*  i^  ^^  ^i^^^e  pu*"- 
pose  to  make  much  (as  Ketl  does)  of  the  distinction  between  the  Spirit  of  Elohim  and  the  Spirit  of 
Jehovah— heiwe&a.  the  Spirit,  as  the  principle  of  the  natural  life  which  we  receive  through  birth, 
and,  as  the  principle  of  the  spiritual  life  which  we  receive  through  regeneration — or  between 
the  spirit  of  prophecy  and  the  spirit  of  power,  with  other  similar  distinctions.  The  main  thi  g 
to  be  noticed  is,  that  the  Divine  Spirit  was  specially  given  and  in  an  extraordinary  degree,  so  that 
the  recipient  felt  assured  beyond  doubt  God  had  called  him  to  do  a  great  work,  and  was  endow- 
ing him  with  all  the  gifts  and  qualifications  that  were  needful  for  the  execution  of  that  work  ; 
whether  courage,  wisdom,  zeal,  prophecy,  power,  or  any  other  quality  that  mi -lit  be  needed. 
The  man  was  lifted  above  himself,  and  gifted  so  far  as  was  necessary  to  make  him  an  instrument 
entirely  meet  for  the  accomplishment  of  the  work  .«et  before  him.  But  it  was  the  supernatural 
rather  than  the  gracious  influences  that  were  conferred  (chap.  vi.  34  ;  xi.  29  ;  xiii.  2.5  ;  xvi.  6,  9). 
Joshua  is  described  as  a  man  in  whom  was  the  Spirit  (Num.  xxvii.  18,  see  also  Neh.  ii.  18). 
"  This  gift,  like  every  other,  has  Faith  for  its  foundation  ;  yet  human  weakness  is  not  excluded." 
[Hengstenherg],  It  was  given  in  such  measure  and  manner  as  to  secure  the  entire  efficiency  of 
the  instrument.  No  details  are  given  of  Othniel's  mode  of  action.  It  is  likely  he  conquered 
in  battle.  Josephus  says,  "  he  collected  a  band  of  resolute  men  and  surprised  the  king's 
guard."  The  force  of  the  phrase — "came  upon  him  "  is.  He  lighted  upon  him,— *^ and  the 
Lord  gave  Chushan  into  his  hand,"  etc ,  (cf.  i.  2  ;  iii.  28).  The  battle  was  not  due  to  mere 
skill  and  courage,  but  the  presiding  mind  that  ordered  all  the  circumstances  and  brought 
out  the  victory,  was  the  Lord.  ^' Hts  hand  prevailed'^ — became  strong  over  him  (ch.'ip.  vi.  2). 
He  smote  him  so  that  he  was  compelled  to  evacuate  the  country.  "  lie  judged  Israel " — 
acted  as  a  head  to  Israel — became  a  father  to — righted  what  was  wrong,  administered  justice, 
and  decided  for  the  nation  its  path  of  duty  in  the  special  emergency.  This  is  the  force  of  the 
word  125^.     Besides  taking  a  general  charge  of  public  affairs,  "  the  judge  "  specially  enforce*! 

a  97 


CHAP.  III.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES, 


the  law  under  which  Israel  lived,  and  taught   the  people  to  recognise  in  it  the  authority  ol 
Jehovah. 

Verse  11.  The  lard  had  rest.]— was  hushed  to  repose,  like  the  stormy  ocean  when  a  Inll 
ooines  on  in  the  eveuins^,  and  not  a  ripple  moves  on  the  surface.  This  calm  is  secured  by 
righteousness,  Isa.  xjudi.  17.     "  And  Othniel  died  " — at  the  end  of  the  forty  yearg. 

MAIN  BOMILETICS.— Versa  5-7. 

The  Downward  Couese  of  Sin. 

Prefatory  Note.  Hitherto  we  have  seen  the  faithfulness  of  the  Covenant- 
God  in  accomplishing  His  word  to  His  people.  From  first  to  last,  there  had 
heen  no  failure.  All  had  come  to  pass,  and  the  whole  nation  were  the  witnesses. 
They  had  become  a  great  nation.  They  had  been  put  in  possession  of  one  of 
the  most  beautiful  homes  the  earth  could  furnish.  Jehovah's  right  hand  had 
done  it,  and  done  it  in  such  away  as  to  leave  them  with  a  history  full  of  thrilling 
interest  and  gratitude  to  all  succeeding  generations.  No  wonder  that  so  many 
of  their  spiritual  odes  begin  and  end  with  a  call  to  " Pt^aise  the  Lord"  This  is 
the  gist  of  the  historical  portions  of  Exodus,  Numbers,  Deuteronomy,  and  Joshua. 

Now  in  the  Book  of  Judges,  we  are  to  read  how  the  people  fulfilled  their  side 
of  the  Covenant.  Were  they  loyal  to  their  God  and  King  ?  Did  they  appreciate 
the  high  distinction  conferred  upon  them,  and  did  they  realise  the  weighty 
obligations  under  which  they  were  laid  to  love  and  serve  their  God,  notwith- 
standing the  temptations  that  might  be  employed  to  induce  them  to  apostatise? 
Now  that  their  God  has  done  everything  that  He  promised  to  do  on  His  part, 
the  time  has  come  to  say  how  they  mean  to  fulfil  what  they  had  promised  on 
their  side.  They  are  left  entirely  to  themselves,  without  any  Moses  or  Joshua 
to  guide  them,  that  they  may  give  an  unbiassed  answer.  They  are  allowed 
ample  time — 400  years  and  upwards — that  they  may  have  a  thorough  trial,  and 
that  God  may  bring  out  all  that  is  in  their  hearts.  Every  security  is  taken  that 
the  verdict  shall  be  entirely  their  own. 

But  alas  !  the  response  to  all  this  kindness  and  painstaking  is  extremely 
melancholy.  On  every  page,  as  we  read,  is  stamped  the  word  faithless.  They 
erred  from  the  beginning  and  they  erred  all  through.  In  a  single  line  may  be 
epitomised  all  that  needs  be  said  on  the  subject.  "  1  hey  forsook  the  Lord  God 
of  their  fathers^  and  followed  other  gods."  For  allegiance  we  have  treachery 
and  alienation  of  heart ;  for  alacrity  in  keeping  the  Divine  commandments,  we 
find  listlessness  and  disobedience  ;  for  ardent  gratitude  we  find  cold  indifference, 
and  mulish  insensibility  ;  instead  of  lifting  up  a  testimony  for  the  God  of  their 
fathers,  they  seem  totally  unconscious  that  they  have  a  mission  in  the  world, 
and  ever  betray  a  tendency  to  fraternise  with  the  devotees  of  heathen 
worship  around  them.  Their  history  is  a  long  and  ever-repeating  series  of  back- 
slidings  and  punishments,  of  repentances  and  deliverances — and  this  throughout 
the  entire  era  of  the  judges  I  What  an  expenditure  of  Divine  mercy  made  to 
all  appearance  in  vain  I 


In  the  downward  course  of  sin  related  at  verse  5,  we  mark — 
X.  The  form  of  their  sin. — One  of  omission.  A  sin  of  omission  stands 
at  the  head  of  the  list  of  the  heavy  charges  which  God  brings  against  His 
people.—"  Ye  have  not  obeyed  my  voice"  (chap.  ii.  2).  To  clear  the  land  of 
those  wicked  peoples,  the  last  sands  of  whose  day  of  forbearance  were  run  out, 
was  the  express  injunction  of  Jehovah,  and  was  most  imperative  in  its  character. 
"  Thou  shalt  utterly  destroy  them — thou  shalt  save  alive  nothing  that  breatheth  " 
(Deut.  vii.  2 ;  xx.  16, 17  ;  also  Lev.  xxvii.  29).  How  faithfully  Joshua  executed 
98 


BOMILETW  COMMENTARY:   JUDGES.  chap.  m. 

this  stern  commission  appears  from  Josh.  vi.  21;  x.  28,  40;  xi.  11,  12.     The 

heathens  themselves  seemed  to  have  a  premonition  tliat  they  were  all  doomed 
because  of  their  wickedness  (Josh.  ix.  24,  also  ii.  9).  Joshua  had  done  much, 
but  much  still  remained  to  be  done  ;  and  now,  after  twenty  years  have  passed 
away,  tlie  sad  account  is,  that  no  progress  has  been  made  since  that  good  man 
was  laid  in  his  grave,  but  on  the  contrary,  that  the  work  has  been  going  back 
very  percejitibly.     Notice  : — 

1.  No  sin  of  omission  is  ever  small.  Usher's  last  prayer  was,  *'  0  Lord  ! 
pardon  all  my  sins — especially  my  sins  of  omission."  Tlie  half-hearted  king  of 
Israel  thought  his  sin  of  omission  too  slight  to  be  taken  account  of,  when  he 
spared  the  best  of  the  sheep  and  the  oxen,  among  the  people  that  were  given 
over  to  entire  destruction.  His  self-satisfied  statement  was,  "  I  have  per  J  or  med 
the  commandment  of  the  Lord."  "  What  then"  was  the  stern  reply—  **  what 
meaneth  this  bleatAng  of  the  sheep  and  this  lowing  of  the  oxen,  that  I  hearV 
(1  Sam.  XV.  14).  Why  did  ^'the  rich  man  in  hell  lift  up  his  eyes,  being  in  torment "? 
Because  of  a  sin  of  omission  !  What  will  form  the  ground  of  condemnation  of 
"  the  goats  on  the  left  hand"  at  the  great  day  of  account?  Sins  of  onrsdon  ! 
Why  is  it  that  millions  of  souls  are  lost  that  might  have  been  saved  ?  Because 
of  a  sin  of  omission — neglect  of  the  great  salvation. 
Reasons  why  it  cannot  be  held  small  : — 

(1.)  It  slights  God's  authority.  It  may  seem  at  first  sight  less  defiant  of  that 
authority,  than  a  sin  of  commission,  and  so  some  regard  it  as  trifling.  But  this 
thought  is  insidious.  No  sin  from  its  nature  can  be  small.  Though  not  a  direct 
transgression,  if  it  be  a  non-compliance  with  God's  law,  it  implies  a  slight  done  to 
the  Majesty  of  the  Lawgiver,  and  a  throwing  off  the  yoke  of  obedience  to  His 
law. 

(2.)  It  implies  alienation  of  heart  from  God.  Obedience  is  the  natural  ex- 
pression of  love.  (1  John,  v.  3.)  But  where  obedience  is  not,  there  cannot  be 
love.  And  as  there  cannot  be  neutrality,  there  must  be  alienation.  In  God's 
estimation,  no  line  of  demarcation  is  more  broadly  marked  than  that  between  a 
heart  where  love  reigns,  and  one  whose  instinct  is  that  of  alienation.  Sin,  in  any 
form,  is,  in  the  principle  of  it,  treason  against  God's  supremacy  in  the  soul,  and 
this  principle  once  admitted,  who  can  tell  to  what  it  may  grow  ?  Indeed,  it  is  a 
sin  of  omission,  that  forms  the  chief  ground  of  condemnation  of  the  whole  race 
of  man — the  want  of  love  to  God,  with  all  the  heart,  soul,  strength,  and  mind. 
(3.)  There  is  no  fear  of  God  before  the  eyes.  True  reverence  of  God  im- 
plies the  greatest  sensibility  of  response  to  His  word.  It  is  called  a  *'  trembling 
at  God's  word"  (Isa.  Ixvi.  2).  It  is  the  opposite  of  indifference,  and  implies  that 
the  soul  is  jealously  sensitive  that  God  should  have  from  it  all  the  love, 
obedience,  and  consideration  that  is  His  due.  But  neglect  of  God's  law,  or  any 
of  God's  commands,  means  the  opposite  pole  from  jealous  sensitiveness  to  give  to 
God  His  due.     This  neglect,  then,  cannot  be  a  small  sin. 

2.  Sins  of  omission  may  become  indefinitely  great.  Over  the  space  of  many 
years  the  tribes  failed  to  fulfil  a  paramount  duty.  They  lingered  and  doubted, 
they  temporised  and  put  off  the  disagreeble  duty,  and  so  the  doomed  races  were 
not  removed  out  of  the  land.  On  the  contrary,  they  were  allowed  to  recover 
from  their  panic,  they  gathered  heart  again,  recovered  ere  long  much  of  their 
lost  ground,  and  began  rapidly  to  multiply  in  numbers.  And  now,  so  far  from 
their  being  exterminated,  we  see  large  cities  in  the  interior  filled  with  them, 
fertile  valleys  crowdedly  occupied  by  them,  and  the  sea-port  towns  in  their 
possession  along  with  fortresses  and  fastnesses  all  over  the  land.  Six  races  out 
of  seven  count  as  before.  What  had  these  Israelites  been  doing,  that  there 
seemed  scarcely  to  be  any  thinning  of  the  numbers  of  the  doomed  nations  ? 
Bather  they  seem  to  be  advancing  than  retreating.  What  a  fatal  issue  was 
imminent !     Had  Divine  Providence  not  interposed,  the  rising  tide  of  idolatry 

99 


OHAP.  III.  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JUDGES. 


mnst  soon  have  swelled  up  to  the  Israelitish  comnmnity  itself,  and  gradually 
overflowed  the  only  true  God-feaving  centre  among  men  on  the  earth.  To  such 
a  climax  mast  the  evil  effects  of  this  sin  of  omission  have  reached,  had  there  been 
no  check. 

Illustrations  of  this  principle.  That  sins  of  omission  grow  when  let  alone. 
{a)  Neglect  of  parental  training .  This  goes  on  from  day  to  day  for  years,  till 
the  result  a})pears  in  evil  habits  contracted  and  evil  dispositions  fostered  in  the 
children,  ensuring  a  bitter  harvest  of  sorrow,  {b)  Neglect  of  self -training. 
When  a  man  neglects  day  by  day  to  fulHl  his  duties  to  liis  God,  he  becomes 
confirmed  in  the  habit  of  living  "without  God,"  and  "living  to  himself,"  the 
result  being  the  growth  of  all  manner  of  ungodly  dispositions  in  the  heart.  It 
is  as  in  a  garden.  If  no  care  is  taken  to  clear  away  the  weeds,  and  turn  over 
the  soil,  it  will  gradually  become  the  garden  of  the  sluggard,  or,  losing  the 
character  of  a  garden,  it  will  become  an  offensive  jungle,  or  a  noisome  marsh. 
"  I  went  by  the  field  of  the  slothful"  etc.  (Prov.  xxiv.  30-32.) 

IX.  The  tendency  of  sin  to  multiply  itself. 

1.  No  sin  stands  alone.  Any  sin  when  tolerated  becomes  a  mother  sin. 
The  appropriate  name  for  it  is  "  Gad — a  troop  cometh.''  All  history  verifies 
this  as  a  matter  of  fact.  And  if  we  look  for  the  principle,  we  find  it  is  a  natural 
sequence  tliat  one  sin  should  open  the  door  for  another  sin.  The  same  state  of 
heart  that  can  commit  one  sin  deliberately  can  commit  others,  and  many  others, 
so  long  as  the  heart  is  not  changed.  Besides,  it  is  part  of  the  punishment  of 
one  sin  to  have  the  barrier  broken  down  between  the  man  and  another  sin. 
"  He  that  committeth  sin  becomes  the  servant  {slave)  of  sin."  The  sinner  is  also 
given  up  to  the  influence  of  the  wicked  one  who  knows  too  well  how  to  work  on 
tiie  bias  of  his  sinful  nature. 

2.  The  root  sin  here  was  failure  to  exterminate  t' e  Canaanites.  This 
was  an  act  of  direct  refusal  to  obey  a  Divine  command.  Had  they  done  as 
commanded,  they  would  have  removed  the  temptations  and  the  active  influences 
that  led  to  other  sins.  But  this  first,  sin  paved  the  way  for  all  that  came  after. 
It  led  to— 

3.  Their  dwelling  among^  the  idolaters.  There  was  no  alternative.  Either 
root  them  out,  or  live  among  them.  Kill  them,  or  have  them  for  snares.  Being 
permitted  to  live,  these  idolaters  became  inters})ersed  with  the  tribes  in  all 
corners  of  the  land.  *''  7 he  sojis  of  God"  cultivated  brotherhood  with  "  the 
children  of  the  Wicked  One."  The  professedly  holy  held  fellowship  with  the 
unrighteous,  and  the  openly  sinful.  The  eyes  became  accustomed  to  look  upon 
sin,  and  the  ears  got  used  to  hear  the  voices  of  sin  day  by  day,  for  a  long  period. 
They  made  a  perilous  peace  with  a  sworn  foe.  They  made  the  hopeless  attempt 
of  trying  whether  it  might  not  be  possible  for  "  light  to  hold  communion  with 
darkness." 

4.  Their  intermarrying  with  the  ungodly.  Their  sparing  these  nations 
led  them  to  live  among  them,  and  now  their  living  among  them  leads  to  their 
intermarrying  with  them.  "  The  lust  of  the  eye  and  the  lust  of  the  flesh  " 
speedily  overcame  what  remained  of  their  failing  fidelity.  "  The  beauty  of  the 
11am ite  women,  and  the  secular  advantages  which  such  alliances  promised, 
exerted  a  mightier  influence  than  the  counsels  and  the  warnings  of  the  noble 
men  who  pled  the  cause  of  God  and  truth,  or  the  remembrance  of  past  mercies 
and  })ast  chastisements."  This  was  no  longer  walking  merely  on  the  borders  of 
sin.  it  was  giving  it  the  right  hand  of  friendship).  It  was  taking  hot  coals  into 
the  bosom,  and  those  who  did  so  could  not  fail  to  be  burned.  It  was  allowing 
sin  to  work  under  the  greatest  possible  advantng(\s,  and  to  work  unchecked. 
The  most  powerful  of  all  influences — those  which  belong  to  the  domestic  circle — 
are  enlisted   as  a  means   to   entice   the  soul   into  the   commission   of  "the 

100 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   JUDGES.  chap.  hi. 


abominable  sin."     Influences  leading  to  idolatry  tluis  carae  streaming  in  upon 
theui  through  all  tlie  avenues  of  daily  life.     Raj)idly  a  lower  descent  is  readied. 

5.  Their  worship  of  false  gods.  It  is  indeed  all  put  in  one  sentence,  as  if 
there  were  no  appreciable  differeuce  in  time  between  the  one  step  and  the  other. 
(Ver.  6.)  They  intermarried  and  ''served  their  gods,''  as  it  the  two  things  went 
together  as  a  matter  of  course.  The  spaik  does  not  more  surely  kindle  the 
tinder.  But  so  painful  is  the  fact  that  the  statement  is  made  twice  over,  first 
more  briefly  in  ver.  6,  and  then  more  explicitly  in  ver.  7,  as  if  to  put  a  melan- 
choly emphasis  on  the  statement.  "  Yes,  it  was  even  so.  The  children  of  Israel 
DID  the  evil,  about  which  so  much  care  was  taken  to  keep  them  from  it — they 
reallij  did  Jorget  the  Lord  their  God,  and  served  Baalim  and  the  groves.'' 
Wonder,  0  Heavens!  and  be  astonished  0  earth,  etc.  A  flagrant  breach  was 
made  of  the  first  and  greatest  of  all  the  commanduients — '*  Thou  shalt  have  no 
other  gods  before  Me.''  They  were  indeed  casting  away  the  very  foundations  of 
their  religion  as  the  seed  of  Abraham.  They  were  formally  abamloniug  the 
sacred  covenant  that  stood  between  them  and  their  God.  His  fear  was  cast  ofl  ; 
they  trampled  on  His  laws,  and  cast  His  ordinances  behind  their  backs.  They 
shamelessly  gave  that  honnige  to  the  lifeless  images  which  was  due  to  the  true 
and  living  God. 

6.  The  facility  with  which  they  made  the  change.  Why  should  a  whole 
nation,  in  the  short  space  of  twenty  years,  swing  round  to  the  opposite  pole  from 
that,  to  which  by  their  remarkable  history  they  were  solemnly  pledged  to  adhere 
for  all  coming  time  ?  It  was  another  sad  example  of  the  fact,  that  "  the  heart 
is  deceitful  above  all  things  and  des[)erately  wicked."  Peculiarly  offensive  such 
conduct  must  have  been  in  the  sight  of  the  Jealous  God.  The  despising  of 
His  great  name — the  dishonour  done  to  His  Ma;esty — the  deep  offence  given 
to  every  perfection  of  His  holy  nature — were  all  fitted  to  provoke  Him  to 
anger,  and  to  say,  "Shall  I  not  visit  for  these  things?  Shall  !iot  my  soul  be 
avenged  on  such  a  nation  as  this  ?  "  What  culpable  forgetfulness  of  all  His 
mighty  acts  and  gracious  deliverances  !  What  a  slight  put  on  the  lavish 
display  of  loving-kindness  and  tender  mercy  1  Tell  it  not  in  Tyre  and  Sidon 
lest  the  uncircumcised  should  triumph  ! 


COMMENTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.— Verm  6-7. 

The    Unexpected    Outbreak    of    Great    Sin. 

Who  could  have  imagined  that  a  have  been  secretly  wedded  to  evil.  The 
people,  exalted  to  heaven  in  point  of  stream  is  deepest  where  it  flows  most 
privilege,  should  have  so  swiftly  slid  noiselessly.  Three  things  were  re- 
down  the  steep  to  the  pit  of  heathenism?  markable — 

It  suggests  ; —  (1.)  That  the  depravity  of  the  heart 

should  have  gone  so  tar. 

I.  The  latent  power  of  sin.     Such  (2.)  That   it  should  have  done  so 

an   event   could   not   have   happened  when  surrounded  by  sucli  sacred  mo- 

without  a  strong  force  of  gravity  to-  tives  drawing  in  the  opposite  direc- 

wards  evil.    When  temptation  can  lead  tion. 

astray  with  such  facility  there  must  be  (3.)  That  it  should  have   done   so 

much  afhnity  with  it  in  the  heart.  Not  with  so  lit  le  appearance  of  apostasy 

more  certain  is  the  action  of  a  spark  beforehand.  '' Men  love  darkness  rather 

on  tinder  than  is  the  influence  of  evil  than  light,  because  their  deeds  are  evil." 
in  alluring  our  fallen  nature  to  sin.  In 

the  present  case,  though  there  were  no  II.    The   fostering   causes   of  this 

noisy  demonstrations,  the  heart  must  sin— 

101 


OHAF.  III. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    JUDGES. 


(1.)  Supineness.  Sloth.  Men  love 
to  be  at  ease.  The  craving  of  flesh 
and  blood  for  self-iudulgeuce  is  strong. 
But  the  si'iritual  life  requires  the 
subordination, and  even  the  crucifixion, 
of  flesh  and  blood.  Constant  dili- 
gence in  the  use  of  means,  and  the 
strict  fulfilment  of  duty  are  necessary, 
not  only  to  promote  advancement  in 
holiness,  but  also  to  prevent  back- 
sliding into  the  ways  of  evil.  There  is 
ever  a  latent  current  of  feeling  in  the 
heart  downward  toward  ungodliness, 
so  that  the  oar  requires  to  be  actively 
handled  that  the  boat  may  ascend  the 
stream.  When  the  oar  is  laid  aside, 
instantly  there  is  a  going  downward. 
There  is  no  such  thing  as  remaining 
stationary.  But  wlien  a  difficult  duty 
has  to  be  performed,  how  many  cry  out 
like  the  slothful  man,  "  There  is  a  lion 
in  the  way — a  lion  in  the  streets." 

(2.)  Neglect  of  watchfulness  and 
prayer.  To  "  watch  and  pray  "  is  the 
Master's  own  receipt  for  not  entering 
into  temptation.  AH  who  have  over- 
come in  spiritual  battles  have  used 
this  receipt,  while  those  who  have  neg- 
lected to  do  so  have  sooner  or  later 
been  overcome.  There  is  much  to  be 
opposed  within.  "  I  am"  carnal,  sold 
under  sin.  1  find  a  law  that  when  I 
would  do  good,  evil  is  present  with 
me."  There  is  much  to  be  guarded 
against  from  without.  All  that  is  in 
the  world,  its  bewitching  influences, 
its  vain  show,  its  pride  of  life,  its 
smiles  and  frowns  alike.  And  there  is 
much  of  danger  coming  both  from 
within  and  without.  "  The  god  of  this 
world  "  is  ever  wielding  its  influences 
for  the  spiritual  injury  of  men,  and  as 
*Hhe  spirit  that  works  in  the  cliildren 
of  disobedience,"  he  is  ever  secretly 
engaged  in  trying  to  seduce  the  heart 
from  the  ways  of  righteousness  and 
truth. 

(3.)  Faith  dying  out.  Where  true 
faith  is  once  fairly  planted  in  the 
heart,  "  He  that  begins  the  good  work 
will  carry  it  on  "  to  final  accomplish- 
ment. But  not  a  few  profess  to  have 
faiih  who,  on  trial,  prove  to  be  false, 
and  become  as  bad  or  worse  than  the 
unbeliever.  In  other  cases  true  faith 
102 


may  exist,  and  yet  sink  so  far  dowm  as 
to  seem  "  ready  to  die,"  and  so  lead  to 
backsliding  for  a  time.  Where  faith 
is  not  in  operation  there  is  great  risk 
of  violent  outbreaks  of  sin,  for  without 
faith  there  is  no  ground  to  stand  on  in 
opposing  sin.  It  is  "  by  faith  we 
stand." 

(4.)  Being  spoiled  by  luxury. 
When  "  Jeshurun  waxed  fat  he 
kicked ;  he  forsook  God  that  made 
him,  and  lightly  esteemed  the  Rock  of 
his  salvation.''  When  Israel  got 
settled  down  in  a  rich  and  fertile 
country  which  he  could  call  his  own, 
as  abundance  flowed  around  him,  he 
was  in  danger  of  L)sing  that  sense  of 
dependence  on  his  God  which  was  so 
necessary  to  a  healthy  piety.  Hence 
this  is  put  down  as  one  special  cause 
of  apostasy  (Deut.  xxxi.  20  ;  Hos. 
xiii.  6  ;  also  Neh.  ix.  25,  26  ;  Deut. 
viii.  12-14).  The  well- watered  plains 
of  Jordan,  which  seemed  like  the 
garden  of  the  Lord,  became  a  curse  to 
Sodom.  Thus,  too,  it  was  with  the 
Egyptians,  Assyrians,  and  Babylonians. 
(Oomp.  Prov.  XXX.  8,  9  j  Ps.  Lxxiii. 
7,  18  ;  Ps.  xvii.  10.) 

III.  The  tendency  of  sin  to  seek 
the  lowest  level.  As  water  ever  flows 
downwards  seeking  the  lowest  level,  so 
does  a  heart  that  is  estranged  from 
God.  It  is  always  instinctively  seeking 
to  get  farther  and  father  away  from 
God.  "  Cain  went  out  from  the  presence 
of  the  Lord  and  dwelt  tJi  the  land  of 
Nod."  Of  the  wicked,  it  is  said,  "  God 
is  not  in  all  his  thoughtSy'  and  as  this 
alienation  grows,  he  begins  to  doubt  his 
very  existence,  because  he  more  and 
more  wishes  that  no  God  did  exist. 
He  has  a  memory  for  everything  else, 
but  no  memory  for  the  living  God. — 
His  name,  His  law,  and  our  responsi- 
bility towards  Him.  A  godless  man, 
who  was  seventy  years  of  age,  once 
confessed  that  he  had  never  used  the 
name  of  God,  but  twice  all  his  life,  and 
that  was  as  a  means  of  sweaiing. 

The  course  of  sin  is  ever  downwards, 
and  that  with  accelerating  force,  as 
the  stone  rolling  down  the  mountain 
side,  which   moves    faster  and   more 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    JUDGES. 


CHAP.  iir. 


furiously  at  every  bound.  And  it 
never  stoi)s  !     The  sinner  finds  that 

•'  Tn  the  lowest  deep  a  lower  deep 
Siill  threatening  to  devour  him  opens  wide." 

But  never  does  he  reacli  the  very 
lowest.  It  is  a  "  bottomless  pit.''  It 
was  hard  from  the  first  to  convince  the 
Jews  that  the  Christ  had  really  come. 
But  it  grew  harder  and  harder  as  time 
went  on,  until  it  could  be  said  of  the 


very  teachers  of  the  nation — '^having 
ejies  they  saw  not,  and  ears  they  heaid 
not."  None  are  so  blind  as  those  who 
will  not  see.  "  Jesus  said,  For  judg- 
ment am  I  come — that  they  who  see 
might  he  made  blind.''  There  is  such 
a  condition  as  '^  having  the  understand- 
ing darkened  —  ham  )g  blindness  of 
heart — and  (as  regards  the  conscience) 
being  past  feeling  " — si  lowing  an  ad- 
vanced growth  in  evil  habits. 


The  Religious  Standard  not  to  be  lowered. 

This  lay  at  the  root  of  the  apostasy,  as  well  as  the  comforts,  the  labour  as 

Josliua  nobly  put  it  up  to  the  right  well  as  the  reward,  the  race  as  well  as 

mark  (Josh.  xxiv.  19,  etc.).     But  the  the  prize,  the  battle  as  well  as  the  vic- 

people  with  distem[)ered  vision  did  not  tory.     If  these  things  are  kept  out  of 

see  it.     Already  they  pitched  it  lower  sight,  there  will  be  no  real  success;  there 

while  he  was  speaking,  and  the  ensnar-  may  be   counterfeit   religion,    but   no 

ing  influences  of  every  day  life   led  vital  principle  of  godliness.    There  will 

them  to  keep  on  gradually  bringing  it  be  no  root,  and  tlierefore  no  'bearing 

down,  until  they  could  first  bear  to  look  unto  perfection.'  "     [Foote.] 
on  evil,  then  to  come  near,  and,  by  and  "  Nothing  does  so  much  harm  to  the 

bye,  to  embrace  and  practise  it.    When  cause  of  Christ  as  backsliding.     And 

Jesus    saw   the   multitudes    following  nothing  causes  so  much  backsliding  as 

Him,  He  turned  to  them  and  said,  "  If  enlisting  disciples  without  letting  them 

a  man  come  to  me  and  hate  not  his  know  what  they  take  in  hand.     Jesus 

father  and  mother,  yea  and  his  own  had  no  desire  to  swell  the  number  of 

lije  also,  he  cannot  be  my  disciple."  His  disciples  by  admitting  soldiers  who 

"  By  presenting  an  easy  and  lax  view  would  fail  in  the  hour  of  need.  He 
of  religion,  many  have  been  brought  bids  all  who  think  of  taking  service 
over  nominally  to  the  gospel,  who  with  Him,  to  *  count  the  cost '  before 
neither  knew  its  nature  nor  felt  its  they  enter  on  it.  People  are  often  self 
power.  Imperfect  views  of  what  Christ  deceived,  and  think  they  are  converted 
requires  have  never  done  any  real  when  they  are  not  changed  at  all.  lb 
service  to  the  Christian  cause.  It  is  costs  something  to  be  a  true  Christian. 
said  of  Philip  of  Macedon,  that  he  To  be  a  nominal  Christian  and  go  to 
conquered  less  by  the  sword  than  by  church  is  cheap  and  easy.  But  to  be- 
his  bribes.  No  such  success  is  possible  lieve  in  Christ  with  the  heart,  and  to 
in  spiritual  warfare.  We  must  not  follow  Him  in  life,  requires  much  self- 
keep  back  any  part  of  the  truth — the  denial.  It  will  cost  us  our  sins,  our 
essential  depravity  of  our  nature,  the  self-righteousness,  our  ease,  our  wo  all  i- 
need  of  a  radical  change  of  heart,  the  ness.  All  must  be  given  up.  Christ's 
necessity  of  dependence  on  the  mercy  religion  begins  with  a  sacrifice.  Tne 
of  God  through  faith  in  the  blood  of  cross  appears  at  the  outset."  \_l^,^|ie.^^ 
Christ,  and  the  requirement  in  all  cases  "  If  we  mean  to  follow  Christ,  we 
of  a  holy  life.  We  must  not  tell  people  must  reckon  on  not  making  anything 
that  every  part  of  their  progress  will  be  more  than  heaven  out  of  our  religion, 
free  from  anxiety,  that  their  path  will  as  we  must  not  think  of  anything  less. 
be  uniformly  smooth,  that  no  opposition  A  true  disciple  is  one  that  comes  alter 
will  arise  without,  and  no  struggle  Christ,  and  does  not  prescribe  to  Him. 
within.     We  must  describe  the  trials  He  comes  after  him  as  the  sheep  after 

103 


CHAP.  Ill  HO  Ml  LET  10  COMMENTARY :    JUDGES, 


the  slieplierd,  the   servant   after   the  worst,  because  his  best  will  not  counter- 
master,  tiie  soldier  after  his  captain ;  vail  his  worst,  but  Christ's  will,  and 
and  Christ's  service  will  bear  scrutiny,  that  exceeding  abundantly." 
Satan  shows  the  best  and  hides  the  \Henry,'\ 


MAIN  HOMILETTCS.-^Vene  7. 

ZZZ.  The  deplorable  end  to  which  their  evil  course  led* 

1.  There  was  entire  abandonment  of  Gcd  as  their  God.  They  were  exalted 
to  heaven  with  the  privilege  of  being  able  to  call  the  great  Jehovah  their  own 
God.  He  had  made  to  them  a  special  gift  of  Himself.  What  a  possession  was 
this  to  belong  to  "  dust  and  ashes  !  "  **  Blessed  were  the  people  whose  God  was 
Jehovah.'*  Yet  this  apostate  generation  did  not  covet  the  incomparable  privi- 
lege. Dumb  images  made  with  men's  hands  they  preferred  to  that  great  Being 
who  made  heaven  and  earth  ! 

(1.)  Sin  is  a  great  spoiler.  It  not  only  robs  men  of  some  of  their  valuable 
treasures,  but  it  takes  God  Himself  out  of  the  list  of  their  possessions  !  And 
what  a  loss  to  any  man  is  the  loss  of  his  God  !  What  a  terrible  robbery  is  here  ! 
To  have  the  Divine  favour  withdrawn  ;  to  have  the  Divine  image  eclipsed  ;  to 
be  cut  off  from  the  source  of  all  righteousness,  goodness,  and  truth  ;  to  lose  the 
protecting  shield  of  Jehovah's  arm  ;  no  longer  to  enjoy  the  watchful  care  of  His 
loving  eye  ;  and  especially  to  put  away  from  them  the  love  of  His  mighty  heart, 
and  the  inexpressible  joys  of  His  holy  fellowship — to  give  up  all  this  of  their 
own  accord,  is  an  extraordinary  illustration  of  how  far  sin  can  go  through  its 
enchantments  in  stripping  men  of  their  possessions. 

(2.)  Sin  is  a  great  madness.  When  God  Himself  is  abandoned,  this  madness 
is  of  the  very  worst  type.  For  immortal  beings  to  be  travelling  on  to  a  never- 
ending  Future,  where  the  laws  of  righteousness  and  truth  hold  on  their  fixed 
course,  yet  to  cast  off  all  thought  of  God  !  To  see  mighty  forces  in  nature 
around  them  now  slumbering,  or  only  partially  at  work,  before  which  man  is  but 
a  straw,  liable  to  be  swept  away  at  a  moment's  notice,  and  to  know  that  at  the 
boundary  line  of  the  eternal  state  these  forces  will  awake  in  all  their  majesty, 
yet  still  to  reject  the  friendship  and  protecting  care  of  their  God !  0  this  is 
deplorable  indeed  for  those  who  were  once  children  of  the  covenant ! 

2.  There  was  sinking  down  to  the  level  of  heathen  worship,  and  heathen 
practices.  It  is  difficult  to  estimate  the  melancholy  character  of  the  announce- 
ment— "  they  forgot  the  Lord  their  God,  and  served  Baalim  and  the  groves'* 
Through  the  rough  discipline  of  the  wilderness  journey,  the  idolatrous  spirit  had 
been  almost  wholly  purged  out  of  the  nation,  and  under  the  strict  administration 
of  Joshua  *'  the  house  had  become  empty,  swept,  and  garnished.''  Now,  the 
unclean  spij'itwas  going  and  taking  with  himself  seven  other  spirits  more  wicked 
than  himself,  and  they  were  entering  in  and  dwelling  there,  so  that  the  latter 
condition  of  the  nation  was  worse  than  it  was  in  the  beginning.  7 he  degrading 
character  of  the  new  service.  The  service  of  Baalim  for  the  most  part  consisted 
in  the  perpetration  of  a  series  of  acts  of  cruelty  in  honour  of  the  god,  while  that 
of  the  *'  groves  "  consisted  in  tlie  commission  of  crimes  so  gross  as  to  court  con- 
cealment. In  both  cases,  crimes  of  unrestrained  profligacy  were  converted  by 
them  into  acts  of  religious  worship  !  The  practice  of  the  most  hideous  forms  of 
wickedness  became  their  religion  !  The  liglit  they  had  was  "  become  darkness^ 
and  great  was  the  darkness.''  The  religious  sense  was  for  the  time  practically 
obliterated,  conscience  was  seared,  and  the  reins  were  let  loose  for  every  measure  of 
practical  wickedness.  A  state  of  life  where  all  the  grosser  passions  reign  supreme, 
where  the  idea  of  responsibility  for  moral  conduct  is  given  up,  where  there  is 
no  thouj^ht  of  an  all-seeing  eye  looking  on,  where  there  is  no  higher  object  to 
104 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES,  chap.  in. 

look  up  to  than  dumb  wood  or  stone,  and  where  every  suggestion  of  enlightened 
reason  is  drowned  amid  the  wild  cravings  of  evil  affection  and  desire — such  is 
the  low  level  reached  by  those  who  had  cast  off  their  God. 

COMMENTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.— Verse  7. 

Necessity  of  Separation  between  the  Righteous  and  the  Wicked. 

1.  The  rule  has  always  been  clear.  "  In  unequal  matches,  the  bad  are 
At  the  earliest  dawn  of  history  we  find  more  likely  to  corrupt  the  good  than 
strict  requirement  made  as  to  noii-  the  good  to  reform  the  bad."  [Henry.] 
allowance  of  intermarriages  between  3.  The  line  of  separation.  The 
the  godly  and  the  ungodly,  and  also  righteous  are  not  to  associate  with  the 
as  to  intimate  intercourse  of  any  kind,  men  of  this  world  in  any  of  their  evil 
In  the  lines  of  Seth  and  of  Cain  respec-  principles  or  corrupt  practices.  They 
tively,  we  read  of  the  distinction  of  are  not  to  act  with  them  while  giving 
tlie  "sons  of  God"  and  the ''daughters  way  to  sinful  indulgences,  or  to  arts 
of  men."  Abraham  was  most  strict  in  and  acts  of  dishonesty,  deception  and 
arranging  that  his  promised  son  should  fraud,  or  any  conduct  whatever  which 
not  intermarry  with  a  heathen  family,  the  word  of  God  condemns.  But  there 
It  went  deeply  to  tiie  heart  of  Isaac  is  a  field  of  action  and  of  thought 
and  Rebekah  that  their  firstborn  son  which  the  Christian  has  in  common 
should  have  so  recklessly  violated  this  with  the  man  of  the  world,  such  as 
rule.  It  was  a  solemn  injunction  to  professional  duties  and  engagements, 
the  nation  of  Israel  to  keep  themselves  commercial  transactions,  scientific  pur- 
entirely  aloof  from  intimate  fellowship  suits,  and  also  the  ties  of  relationship, 
with  other  nations.  Especially,  an  or  trade,  or  neighbourhood  ;  also  bene- 
emphatic  charge  was  given  not  to  mix  volent  and  philanthropic  schemes,  the 
themselves  up  by  marriage,  or  other  rights  and  duties  of  citizenship,  etc. 
ties,  with  the  nations  that  occupied  In  regard  to  these,  some  measure  of 
the  land  of  their  inheritance.  Any  intercourse  is  allowed,  if  care  is  taken 
violation  of  this  charge  was  found  at  not  to  compromise  Christian  principle, 
all  times  to  lead  to  disastrous  conse-  4.  Care  must  be  taken  to  draw  the 
quences.  So  it  is  said,  "  Israel  shall  line.  The  friends  of  God,  and  the 
dwell  safdy,  being  alone."  friends  of  sin,  if  sometimes  accidentally 

2.  Its  application  to  New  Testament  brought  together,  must  never  become 
times.  The  principle  is  laid  down  that  bosom  friends.  Christians  are  the 
Christians  should  not  form  intimate  holy  temple  of  God,  and  must  not  get 
relations  with  the  men  of  this  world,  polluted  by  contact  with  transgressors. 
They  are  not  to  make  close  companions  The  intercourse  of  evil  men  is  very  apt 
of  them,  even  when  they  are  led  in  to  corrupt  the  hearts  of  Christians, 
the  course  of  their  calling  to  do  By  the  secret  influence  of  their  words, 
business  with  them  (1  Cor.  v.  9-11).  looks,  and  conversation,  they  do  so. 

They  are  not  to  entangle  themselves  We  come  to  have  less  horror  at  vice, 

in   intimate   unions  with   the  openly  as  we  accustom  our  eyes  to  look  at  it 

wicked  and  profane.      This  is  but  to  from  day  to  day ;  we  feel  less  alarm 

follow  up   the  prayer — "  lead  us  not  while  we  hear  of  it  frequently  ;  and  we 

into  temptation"     It   is  to  obey  the  gradually   get   less  cautious  and  cir- 

injunction,    "  be  not  unequally  yoked  cumspect    while    we    constantly   mix 

with  unbelievers"   etc.      And    again,  with  the  gay,    the  worldly,   and  the 

**  Come  out  from  among  them,  and  be  men  of  corrupt  minds.     Even  the  Old 

ye  separate."     And  it  is  to  act  in  the  Dispensation     could    teach    that    we 

spirit  of  the  maxim,  "Evil  communi-  should  "not  plough  with  an  ox  and 

cations  corrupt  good  manners,"  an  ass  together,"  Le.^  with  a  clean  and 

105 


CHAP. III.  HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:    JUDGES. 


an  unclean  animal  in  the  same  yoke,  lii^lit  have  comnmnion  with  darkness. 

So    now    under    the    New    Economy  (See  Barnes  on  2  Cor.  vi,  14-18;  also 

righteousness  should  not  liave  fellow-  on  1  Cor.  xv.  33.) 
ship  with  unrighteousness,  nor  should 

MAIN  HOMILETICS.—  Versoi  8,  A. 

The   Inevitable   Issue   of  Sin. 

I,  Their  experience  of  a  course  of  sin. 

1.  It  begins  with  high  promises.  Its  nature  is  to  work  by  allurement.  It 
flitters  and  it  flatters  ;  it  smiles  and  it  enchants ;  it  deceives  and  it  intoxicates. 
It  promises  immediate  gratification,  and  that  of  the  richest  kind.  Its  golden 
apples  are  easily  plucked,  and  they  are  to  be  had  at  once  without  the  trouble  of 
waiting  for  them.  Its  enjoyments  are  lip-full  in  measure — all  that  is  agreeable 
to  flesh  and  blood,  all  that  the  "  carnal  "  heart  can  desire.  An  air  of  fascina- 
tion is  thrown  around  every  object,  and  all  things  are  made  to  appear  *'  couleur 
de  rose"  Bright  flowers  are  presented  to  draw  the  eye,  sweet  odours  to  regale 
the  sense  of  smell,  rich  harmonies  to  ravish  the  ear,  and  choice  delicacies  to 
please  the  taste.  Whatever  witchery  can  be  practised  on  the  senses,  wliatever 
seductive  arts  can  be  employed  to  win  the  affections,  whatever  lulling  influences 
might  possibly  succeed  in  soothing  the  conscience,  whatever  persuasive  power 
can  be  brought  to  bear  on  the  will,  all  is  employed  with  the  skill  of  a  magician 
to  draw  the  soul  across  the  line  of  rectitude  into  the  region  of  transgression, 
A  certain  nameless  influence  is  felt  to  be  drawing  the  soul  onward,  more 
difficult  to  analyse  than  the  ozone  of  the  atmosphere  around  us. 

The  Israelites  thought  they  had  got  a  hai)py  solntion  of  their  difficulties  when 
they  closed  hands  in  cordial  alliance  with  these  Canaanites,  agreed  to  live  with 
them  as  good  neighbours,  and  employed  the  sacredness  of  the  marriage  tie  to 
cement  their  relations  in  a  lasting  peace.  Thns  would  they  be  saved  from 
carrying  out  farther  the  dangerous  and  murderons  work  of  extern)i nation.  Thus 
the  brightest  commercial  prospects  were  opened  to  them,  and  the  full  cup  of  life's 
enchanting  pleasures,  which  these  nations  were  accustomed  to  })nt  to  their  lip, 
would  also  be  shared  by  them.  The  argument  was  irresistibly  plausible,  and  they 
allowed  themselves  to  be  beguiled.  But  one  thing  it  lacked.  It  was  against  the 
express  command  of  their  God  !    And  so — 

2  Sin  soon  proves  a  peace  disturber.  When  the  soul  is  first  enticed  all 
things  are  at  peace.  There  is  no  thunder  in  the  sky,  nor  even  a  single  black 
cloud.  The  sun  shines  brightly  overhead.  The  air  is  balmy  and  genial.  The 
flowers  bloom  freshly  and  sweetly  around  us,  the  lawn  is  verdant,  the  birds 
sing  among  the  branches,  and  all  nature  by  her  profoundly  peaceful  attitude 
seems  to  second  or  support  the  argument  of  sin  by  her  tacit  approval.  The 
tempted  one  is  thus  induced  to  put  forth  his  hand,  and  phick  the  forbidden 
fruit.  From  that  moment  the  wheels  begin  to  move  backward.  No  abrupt 
external  change  takes  place.  The  sun  still  shines,  and  the  birds  still  sing. 
But  presently  a  snake  appears  in  the  grass.  Ere  long  the  flowers  droop  and 
the  leaves  wither.  Thistles  and  tangled  brakes  begin  to  appear.  The  path 
becomes  rugged,  and  the  wildness  of  the  desert  replaces  the  culture  of  the 
garden.  A  black  cloud  gathers  in  the  heavens,  and  instead  of  the  warm  soft 
zephyrs,  cold  moaning  winds  begin  to  be  heard.  At  last  come  the  thunder 
clouds,  and  the  forked  lightnings,  with  the  tempest  and  the  hail — too  sure 
evidence  as  to  what  is  the  legitimate  issue  of  sin. 

"  'J here  is  no  peace,  saith  my  God,  to  the  wicked^  Israel's  peace  was  gone 
from  tlie  day  that  they  openly  threw  off  the  authority  of  Jehovah,  and  of  set 
106 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    JUDGES.  chap  hi. 


purpose  gave  tliemselves  up  to  tlie  \vorslii[)  of  idols.  Their  liistory  from  that 
point  became  a  series  of  painful  surprises  and  crushing  calamities.  Instead  of 
being  a  perpetual  summer,  their  history  more  resembled  a  succession  of  desola- 
ting winters,  with  intervals  of  not  very  genial  spring  seasons  between.  Tlie  high 
name  which  the  fathers  had  won  in  the  conquest  of  the  land  did  not  secure  to 
their  successors  undisturbed  repose,  whether  they  continued  faithful  or  not. 
Sin,  true  to  its  antecedents,  leads  to  trouble.  From  near  and  far  the  dangers 
come.  Sometimes  one  king,  sometimes  another  ;  in  all  directions  messengers 
are  found  to  execute  the  threatened  judgments.  Israel  is  not  at  n'st  in  the  land 
of  rest.  That  which  should  have  been  a  land  of  peace  is  turned  into  a  sea  of 
troubles. 

3.  Sin  is  an  essential  weakness.  "  Righteousness  exalteth  a  nation,  but 
sin  is  a  reproach  to  any  people."  The  ndghty  people  before  whom  the  armies 
of  more  than  thirty  kings  were  hopelessly  discomfited  now  quail  and  turn  their 
backs  at  the  appearance  of  a  single  chief  and  his  traintnl  followers.  They  were 
utterly  unable  to  make  head  against  the  invader.  Chushan  walked  the  course. 
"  'J heir  men  of  might  did  not  find  their  hands."  **  'J heir  defence  was  departed 
from  them." 

The  one  cause  of  their  weakness  was,  that  through  their  sin  God  had  become 
their  enemy.  This  was  not  merely  one  cause  among  others,  but  it  was  the  only 
cause.  For  though  many  instrumentalities  may  be  at  work  to  punish  the  guilty, 
one  Sovereign  Will  controls  and  guides  the  whole. 

{a)  A  mans  own  conscience  is  turned  against  him,  and  he  cries  out  ''My 
punishment  is  greater  than  I  can  bear!"  Imaginary  terrors  make  hiiu  afraid. 
" Each  bush  he  takes  to  be  an  officer."  "  Terrors  take  hold  on  him  as  waters" 
and  he  fleeth  from  his  own  shadow.  It  was  an  evil  time  in  the  liistory  of  Israel, 
when  they  had  a  man  with  a  guilty  conscience  for  a  king,  when  his  army  was 
scattered,  and  his  few  friends  followed  him  trembling.  But  among  the  few  was 
one  man  with  a  good  conscience,  before  whom  and  his  armour-bearer  ten  thousand 
were  put  to  flight. 

(6)  God  can  bring  adversity  against  him  on  every  side.  Every  scheme  which 
the  wicked  man  attempts,  God  can  make  to  fail.  He  can  set  His  face  against 
him  on  every  side,  so  that  all  things  shall  work  together  for  his  injury  and  not 
for  his  profit.  As  in  the  case  of  Pharaoh's  chariots  and  horses,  He  can  take  off 
the  chariot  wheels,  so  that  they  shall  drive  them  heavily  in  endeavouring  to 
carry  out  their  purposes.     "  Evil  shall  slay  the  wicked." 

(c)  There  is  no  escape  from  this  misery.  God  can  shut  him  in  on  all  sides. 
When  God  sendeth  trouble,  who  can  give  quietness?  He  can  arm  all  the 
creatures  against  him,  for  they  are  ever  ready  to  avenge  the  quarrel  of  their 
Creator.  *'  Jf  the  man  should  flee  from  a  lion,  He  can  cause  a  bear  to  meet  him; 
or  if  he  goes  into  his  house,  and  leans  his  hand  on  the  wall,  lie  can  cause  a 
serpent  to  bite  him."  If  he  should  ''  should  flee  from  the  iron  weapon,  the  bow 
of  at  eel  shall  strike  him  through." 

4.  Sin  is  a  great  humiliation  This  is  what  it  always  comes  to  in  the  end, 
though  it  may  reach  it  in  different  ways.  It  was  a  sad  change  for  Israel  from 
the  days  of  Joshua  !  The  invincible  army  that  fought  under  that  noble  captain, 
before  whom  all  the  kitigs  of  the  Aniorites,  with  their  mighty  hosts,  melted  like 
water,  had  now  fallen  so  low  that  they  were  unable  to  stand  against  one 
king  and  his  army,  but  become  an  easy  prey  to  a  stranger  from  the  far  North- 
East.  ''  How  are  the  mighty  fallen,  and  the  weapons  of  war  perished  !  "  We 
see  the  people  for  whom  the  Lord  hurst  the  letters  of  an  Egyptinn  bondage  now 
bowing  their  necks  to  the  yoke  of  a  foreign  prince.  "  Their  Rock  had  sold  them^ 
and  the  Lord  had  shut  them  up."  Those  who  went  on  "  conquering  and  to 
conquer  "  were  not  only  arrested  in  their  course,  but  reduced  to  a  condition  of 
slavery,  under  the  iron  foot  of  a  rough  despot  from  an  unknown  land.     How 

107 


OHAP.IIL  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JUDGES, 


galling  to  those  who  were  accustomed  to  the  air  of  liberty,  thus  to  be  trodden 
upon  as  the  mire  ! 

II.  The  preliminaries  of  punishment.  The  tale  of  Israel's  liistory  is  ex- 
ceedingly abbreviated,  yet  it  is  given  so  compactly  that  much  lies  on  the  surface 
and  much  more  may  be  picked  up  without  hard  searching.  There  are  certain 
instructive  preliminaries  which  may  be  so  gathered,  thus  : — 

1.  The  grounds  of  punishment  are  clearly  stated  before  it  is  inflicted. 
Not  a  drop  of  the  thunder  shower  falls  till  it  be  fully  proved  that  such  a  step  is 
necessary.  Before  proceeding  to  send  forth  His  judgments,  God  is  careful  hrst 
of  all  to  vindicate  His  own  character  in  adopting  such  a  course  of  action.  He 
wall  make  it  clear  that,  in  the  government  of  the  world,  no  doing  of  His  shall 
lead  fairly  to  the  conclusion,  that  He  sometimes  takes  delight  in  sending  out  His 
arrows  merely  to  show  His  power,  though  no  provocation  be  given.  He  cannot 
lose  His  great  name  as  a  God — *'  slow  to  wrath,  rich  in  mercy,  who  has  no 
pleasure  in  the  death  of  the  wicked,  and  whose  tender  mercies  are  over  all  His 
works  " — in  dealing  with  men  on  the  earth.  (Ezek.  xviii.  23,  32,  chap,  xxxiii.  11 ; 
Lam.  iii.  33  ;  Ps.  Ixxxvi.  15,  ciii.  8,  etc.  ;  1  Tim.  ii.  4  ;  2  Pet.  iii.  9.) 

Hence,  before  a  single  speck  appears  in  the  sky  to  indicate  the  approach  of  a 
storm,  a  whole  chapter  is  taken  up  with  a  careful  explanation  of  the  grounds  of 
the  Divine  procedure  (chap,  ii),  that  "the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  "may  "be 
justified  when  He  speaks  and  clear  when  He  judges."  Far  more  importance  is 
attached  to  that  in  the  general  account  given,  than  in  the  gathering  or  dispelling 
of  the  successive  storms  that  broke  over  them.  The  capital  charge  urged  against 
them  is,  that  they  forsook  Jehovah,  and  went  after  other  gods.  'J  his  is  fixed 
upon  as  the  root  evil — the  one  springhead  from  which  all  the  streams  of  their 
evil  practices  flowed.  They,  as  a  people,  had  read  backward  the  very  first  com- 
mandment of  their  sacred  law  ;  and  their  conduct  is  repeatedly  and  emphatically 
condemned  (chap.  ii.  vers.  2,  11,  12,  13,  17,  19;  iii.  5,  6,  7).  There  was 
reason  enough  in  this  one  capital  sin  for  all  the  rigorous  dealing  that  follows 
throughout  this  hook. 

2.  God  waits  long  before  H«  sends  His  judgments.  The  work  of  wrath  is 
not  that  in  which  He  delights.  Had  it  been  so,  the  terrible  calamity  recorded 
in  verse  8  would  have  fallen  much  earlier.  Yet  a  full  generation  has  passed 
away  since  the  last  convocation,  presided  over  by  Joshua  (chap.  ii.  10).  At  the 
date  of  that  meeting,  symptoms  of  the  cancer  of  idolatry  had  began  to  appear 
(Joshua  xxiv.  23),  notwithstanding  the  apparent  earnestness  with  which  the  oath 
of  fidelity  was  taken.  Insidiously,  but  surely,  that  cancer  kept  working  its  way 
for  some  30  or  40  years,  until  now  "  the  whole  head  had  become  sick,  and  the 
whole  heart  faint,  and  from  the  sole  of  the  foot,  to  the  crown  of  the  head,  there 
was  no  soundness  in  it,  but  wounds  and  bruises,  and  putrefying  sores." 

{a)  God  waited  at  every  stage.  When  they  showed  so  little  heart  in  driving 
out  the  Canaanites,  it  was  forseen  that  that  would  lead  to  fuller-fledged  evils, 
yet  their  God  waits  to  allow  them  a  fair  opportunity  of  shaking  off  their  indul- 
gence and  "  doing  the  first  works."  When  again  they  sat  down  among  the 
Canaanites,  and  accepted  them  as  neighbours.  He  still  waited  that  it  might  be 
seen,  whether  there  might  not  be  several  persons  of  a  Lot-hke  spirit  among  them, 
who,  with  all  his  worldliness,  still  felt  his  "  righteous  soul  vexed  among  them  from 
day  to  day  with  their  unlawful  deeds"  And  even  when  they  went  the  length 
of  intermarrying  and  so  becoming  amalgamated  with  these  ungodly  races,  God 
waited  to  see  whether  they  would  not  take  alarm  at  the  length  of  their  own 
wickedness,  and,  shrinking  back  from  the  frightful  precipice  before  them,  would 
adopt  the  course  of  speedy  and  thorough  ro])entance.  Not  till  they  had  reached 
the  climax  of  their  evil  course,  and  were  actually  mingling  with  all  the  abomi- 
nations of  Baalim  and  the  groves,  did  God  proceed  to  pour  upon  them  the  vials 
of  His  wrath. 
103 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    JUDGES.  CHAP.  ill. 


(h)  This  waiting  was  in  harmony  with  other  occasions.  It  was  not  a  solitary, 
nor  even  a  rare  case.  Ten  generations  from  Adam  were  allowed  to  pass,  during 
which  men's  sins  were  accumulating  more  and  more,  ere  the  old  world  was 
destroyed  by  a  deluge.  In  like  manner,  ten  generations  from  Noah  were 
numbered,  ere  the  fires  of  heaven  came  down  on  the  towers  of  Sodom.  What 
patience  was  exercised  with  the  Canaanites  !  Though  they  had  long  sinned 
before  Abraham  sojourned  among  tliem,  yet  400  years  more  must  elapse  ere  the 
cup  of  their  iniquity  should  be  filled.  Even  Jerusalem,  though  so  ripe  in 
wickedness,  that  it  could  crucify  the  Lord  of  Glory  on  a  tree  of  shame,  has  yet, 
after  such  an  act,  forty  years  of  pause  given  to  it,  that  it  might  "  look  to  Him 
whom  it  had  pierced  and  learn  to  mourn  J'  His  character  is  to  be  "long-suffering" 
and  "  slow  to  wrath."  He  does  not  proceed  at  once  to  punish,  so  soon  as  a  case 
is  made  out,  but  He  "  waits  to  be  gracious."  When  men's  sins  begin  to  cry  out 
against  them,  He  stops  His  ears  for  a  time  that  He  may  not  hear  them.  His 
sword  hangs  long  in  the  scabbard,  before  it  is  drawn.  He  does  not  fly  in  the 
sinner's  face  at  his  first  provocation.  The  Jews  were  accustomed  to  say,  that 
**  Michael,  the  minister  of  justice  flies  with  but  one  wing"  and  therefore  slowly, 
whereas  **  Gabriel,  the  minister  of  mercy  flies  with  two  wings,"  and  therefore 
very  swiftly. 

3.  God  warns  before  He  strikes.  While  the  people  were  going  on  sinning, 
and  advancing  from  bad  to  worse,  the  Angel-Jehovah,  who  had  redeemed  them 
from  all  evil  hitherto,  appears  before  them  at  Bochim,  chides  them  severely  for 
the  past,  and  utters  a  solemn  warning  for  the  future.  The  marking  out  of  so 
many  nations  for  the  purpose  of  testing  and  cliastising  them,  was  also  a  most 
expressive  warning  given  of  a  coming  catastrophe.  Not  more  so  was  the  building 
of  the  ark  from  day  to  day  for  so  long  a  time,  in  the  days  of  Noah.  He  publishes 
His  anger  long  before  He  executes  it,  and  when  He  does  punish,  it  is  in  the 
manner  and  measure  that  He  had  threatened  (chap.  ii.  15  ;  Hos.  vii.  12). 

Examples.  The  old  world  was  warned  by  Enoch  (Jude  14)  ;  by  Methusalah 
(whose  name,  Bush  says,  signifies  "  lie  dies  and  it  is  sent  out " — prophetic  of  the 
deluge,  which  happened  in  the  year  when  he  died)  ;  by  Lamech,  who  had  his 
eyes  open  to  the  coming  calamity  (Gen.  v.  29)  ;  and  by  Noah,  the  venerable 
**  preacher  of  righteousness."  The  famine  in  Egypt  was  foretold  by  Joseph. 
Repeated  warnings  were  given  to  Pharaoh  as  to  what  would  happen  to  him  and 
his  people,  so  long  as  he  refused  to  let  Israel  go.  The  captivity  of  the  ten  tribes 
was  predicted  by  Hosea  and  other  prophets,  and  many  expostulations  were  used. 
The  overrunning  flood  of  the  Babylonian  army,  and  the  capture  of  the  sacred 
city  with  the  massacre  of  the  inhabitants,  were  all  announced  beforehand  by 
Jeremiah  and  others,  and  warning  given  that  it  was  for  long  continued  rejection 
of  their  God.  There  is,  indeed,  scarcely  an  instance  of  the  infliction  of  the 
Divine  judgments  recorded  in  Bible  history,  which  is  not  preceded  by  suitable 
warning  given  beforehand. 

4.  Ihere  is  a  climax  in  the  Divine  forbearance.  Up  to  a  certain  point, 
He  acts  as  if  He  saw  not.  Perhaps  for  a  considerable  time  the  thunders  of 
heaven  sleep,  and  the  transgressors  are  not  consumed.  The  wicked  interpret 
this  forbearance  to  mean  that  there  is  little  harm  in  their  conduct,  or  that  God 
does  not  see,  and  will  not  require.  "  Because  sentence  against  an  evil  work  is 
not  executed  speedilij,  therefore  the  heart  of  the  sons  of  men  is  set  in  them  to  do 
evil.'''  This  misinterpretation  usually  is  not  allowed  to  continue  long.  *'  These 
things  thou  hast  done,  and  I  kept  silence  ;  thou  didst  think  I  was  such  an  one  as 
thyself;  but  I  will  reprove  tiiee,  and  set  them  in  order  before  thine  eyes" 
(Ps.  1.  21,  22).  Though  God  does  not  punish  sin  as  soon  as  committed,  we  dare 
not  suppose  that  He  is  at  any  moment  indifferent  to  it,  or  that  any  act  of  sin 
separately,  as  well  as  a  course  of  sin,  fails  to  excite  His  intense  o])p<)sition  to  it. 
It  is  the  yearnings  of  mercy  in  the  Divine  bosom  that  lead  to  the  sparing  of  tho 

109 


CHAP.  IIL  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   JUDGES, 


sinner  for  a  time,  that  means  and  opportunities  may  be  granted  for  re])entance, 
and  not  because  tlie  Divine  anger  does  not  burn  against  every  transgression. 

{a)  1  he  object  of  the  silence.  After  sin  is  committed,  tliere  is  a  waiting  for  a 
longer  or  sliorter  period  to  show  that  God  does  not  desire  the  death  of  the 
sinner,  but  is  on  the  contrary  intensely  willing  to  save  him.  Hence  the  period 
of  inactivity  or  forbearance  wliich  takes  place  between  the  date  of  entering  on 
a  sinful  course,  and  the  hour  when  retribution  falls.  That  interval  is  filled  up 
with  calls,  remonstrances,  and  arguments  of  all  kinds  to  induce  repentance.    But 

(b)  All  the  while  God's  anger  burns  against  every  sin  in  the  series.  When 
the  object  of  the  silence  has  been  gained  and  there  is  no  repentance,  then  the 
laws  of  righteousness  must  hold  on  their  natural  course,  and  the  Divine  anger, 
which  has  really  existed  all  the  time  against  the  sins  committed,  must  have  its 
due  display.  Ilowever  deep  the  Divine  wish  that  the  sinner  should  not  perish, 
when  that  has  been  clearly  established,  regard  must  also  be  had  to  God's  great 
jealousy  for  the  holiness  of  His  character,  and  for  the  sacred  order  and  purity 
of  His  moral  government.  Hence  there  is  a  limit  to  forbearatice.  A  purpose  is 
gained  by  it  for  a  time,  and  another  purpose,  equally  high  and  sacred,  is  gained 
by  ceasing  to  forbear  after  a  time. 

{c)  When  forbearance  ceases,  it  is  not  merely  on  account  of  the  heinous  nature 
of  the  last  sin  committed.  That  sin  may  be  less  criminal  than  many  that  pre- 
ceded it,  but  it  marks  out  the  limit  which  Wisdom  has  determined  for  the 
display  of  mercy,  and  therefore  doom  comes  with  it.  Regard  is  had  to  the 
whole  series  of  sins  in  the  list,  for  "God  requireth  that  which  is  past."  The 
whole  category  of  evil  deeds,  and  the  cloud  of  evil  thoughts,  are  together  before 
His  eye.  For  nothing  is  forgotten  till  forgiven,  and  there  is  no  forgiveness  till 
there  is  penitence.  It  must  ever  be  remembtTed  tliat  God  looks  to  the  whole  of 
a  man's  life  when  making  a  reckoning  with  him,  and  not  merely  to  particular  sins, 
however  culpable  these  may  be.  *'  'I hey  consider  not  that  I  remember  all  their 
wickedness.''  **  God  will  bring  every  work  into  judgment,  with  every  secret 
thing." 

Jllustrations. — Pro  v.  xxix.  1;  Ps.  vii.  11-13  ;  Rom.  ii.  5  ;  Matt,  xxiii.  35,  36  ; 
2  Kings  xvii.  ;  2  Chr.  xxxvi. 

Cases  of  Ahab  and  Jezebel;  Pharaoh;  the  three  Herods ;  Hophni  and 
Fhinehas ;  \i\ugSaul;  A  haz,  etc. 

COMMENTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.— Verses  7,  8. 

A  Special  Brand  put  on  Root  Sins. 

Those  sins  which  form  the  roots  of  down  the  page  it  is  condemned  in  the 

other  sins  receive  a   special   mark  of  most  pointed  and   solemn   manner  as 

condemnation  on  every  page  of  Scrip-  implying  in  itself  the  very  essence  of 

ture.     Each  of  these  sins  is  like  a  upas  depravity,  and  as  giving  birth   to  all 

tree  that  distils  its  poisonous  influence  manner  of  corrupt  practices  in  the  life, 

on  every  side,  and  like  the  banyan  tree  It  was  in  its  nature  an  apostasy  from 

it  spreads  itself  in  all  directions.  God — a  forsaking  the  living  and  true 

1    Idolatry   is   a  root   sin,   and   is  God,  and  a  violation  of  innumerable 

pointed  out  in  these  chapters  as  the  all  sacred  obligations  to  love   and   serve 

comprehensive   sin    of    the   peo])le   of  Him  ;  but  it  was  also  a  giving  that 

God.     Three  times  over  in   as  many  supreme   place    in    the   heart,    which 

successive  verses  (('hap.  ii.  11,  12,  I'i)  belonged    to     Him     alone,    to    other 

is  this  set  forth   as   the   leading   and  objects  the  creatures  oftentimes  of  their 

terrible  iniquity  of  the  people  whom  own  impure   imaginations   and   sinful 

God  brought  out  of  Egypt.     And  all  desires.     The   restraints   of    sin    were 

no 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   JUDGES.  chap.  in. 


thus  set  loose,  for  the  objects  of  their  tively  in  many  parts  of  the  Book  of 
fealty  and  homage  were  in  reality  ''P«alms."  "Isaiah"  strikes  the  key- 
creations  of  their  own  wicked  hearts.  note  of  severe  condemnation  in  his 
They  imparted  to  their  gods  such  second  chapter.  "Jeremiah"  does  the 
qualities  as  wonld  permit  the  gratifica-  same  at  chap.  ii.  13.  While  "  Ezekiel' 
tion  of  their  own  evil  desires,  and  so  and  "  Hosea  "  throughout  give  melan, 
not  only  did  they  sin  without  let  or  choly  pictures  of  the  awful  guilt 
hindrance,  but  their  very  religion  was  contracted  through  idolatrous  practices, 
made  up  of  the  indnl^ence  of  those  2.  TJnbelie'',  showing  itself  by  dis- 
*'  lusts  and  passions  which  war  against  obedience,  is  another  root  sin  which  is 
the  soul."  What  a  long  list  of  severely  condemned  here.  Unbelief 
flagrant  crimes  and  corrupt  practices  itself  is  not  expressly  mentioned,  be- 
would  be  given,  were  that  short  state-  cause  in  a  historical  account  it  is  more 
ment  expanded  to  specify  all  the  suitable  to  speak  of  deeds  done  in  the 
details — "  they  served  Baalim  and  the  conduct  than  of  principles  at  work  in 
groves!"  the  heart.    But  disobedience  in  the  life 

Idolatry  was  thus  a  root  sin.  It  led  had  unbelief  for  its  root  in  the  heart, 
to  multitudes  of  other  sins,  and  it  was  And  unbelief  again  has  for  its  root  the 
the  national  "  easily — besetting  sin."  alienation  of  the  heart  from  God.  For 
The  most  careful  precautions  were  this  sin  the  whole  congregation  that 
taken  acainst  it,  and  the  most  solemn  left  Egypt  perished  in  the  wilderness — 
utterances  were  made  in  denouncing  for  "  they  conld  not  enter  in  because 
its  evil  character.  The  very  first  of  unbelief."  (Heb.  iii.  8-19  ;  Ps.  xcv. 
precept  in  the  Decalogue  formally  8-11).  For  the  same  reason  1 1 ere  the 
brands  it.  The  second  precept  details  Israelites  could  not  drive  out  the 
the  dreadful  insult  it  offers  to  the  glory  Canaanites.  Chap.  i.  19-36  ;  Chap.  ii. 
of  the  Jealous  God.  By  all  the  2.  They  could  not  do  it,  because  they 
prophets  throughout  their  history,  God  would  not  in  faith  go  through  with  it. 
warned  the  people  against  it  saying —  There  was  much  latent  disobedience  ; 
"  O  do  not  this  abominable  thing  which  and  on  this  the  reproving  angel  puts 
I  hate!'*  The  very  spots  where  this  his  finger  in  the  last  quoted  verse. 
sin  was  practised  were  to  be  destroyed  "  They  would  not  hearken  " — "  they 
and  purged  with  fire  (Deut.  xii.  1-3).  turned  quickly  out  of  the  way" — 
The  sacrifice  of  little  children  either  "  they  did  not  obey  the  commandments 
by  immolation,  or  causing  them  to  pass  of  the  Lord  " — "  they  ceased  not  from 
through  the  fire,  was  a  frequent  practice  their  own  doings,  nor  from  their  stub- 
under  this  wicked  system,  and  roused  born  way."  All  this  is  repeated  again 
the  Divine  anger  (Deut.  xii.  29-32;  and  again,  and  given  as  the  ground  of  the 
Ezek.  xvi.  20,21).  All  that  might  entice  terrible  chastisement  which  followed. 
to  idolatry,  whether  false  prophets.  This  corresponds  with  the  whole 
brother,  son,  daughter,  wife,  or  bosom  account  given  of  unbelief  throughout 
friend,  were  on  no  account  to  be  Scripture.  It  was  by  an  act  of  unbe- 
spared,  but  summarily  to  be  stoned  to  lief  or  disobedience  that  man  fell  and 
death.  (Deut.  xiii.  1-5  and  6-11  also  lost  all  his  earthly  happiness.  It  is 
12-17).  also  by  an  act  of  unbelief  that  millions 

But  indeed  there  is  scarcely  a  page  on  millions  lose  heavenly  happiness 
which  treats  of  the  history  of  God's  after  having  had  a  full  offer  of  all  the 
Israel  that  does  not  single  out  this  blessings  of  the  great  salvation.  It  is 
sin  for  emphatic  denunciation  as  being  a  root  sin,  as  it  lies  at  the  root  of  all 
the  prolific  source  of  many  practical  the  disobedience  to  the  Divine  corn- 
evils.  The  Book  of  "Deuteronomy"  mandments  which  prevails  in  the  world, 
is  full  of  warning  against  temptation  The  "works"  on  account  of  which  the 
to  it.  "Judges"  records  the  sad  wicked  shall  be  condemned  on  the  day 
issues  to  which  its  commission  led  of  account,  all  proceed  from  unbelief 
The  same  thing  is  bewailed  medita-  as  their  cause. 

Ill 


cHAt.  in.  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


3.  All  other  root  sins  are  singled  fulfilment  of  all  the  duties  we  owe  to 

cut  for  special  reprobation.     It  is  so  our  neifflibour,    \NQ\mt(\o\sn  Covetous- 

with  Pride,  which  is  the  cause  of  a  ness  in  this  list,  for  we  are  told  that 

whole  brood  of  sins  in  practical  life —  the  'Move  of  money  is  the  root  of  all 

jealousies,  envies,  evil  speakiucs,  ha-  evil."     Lying  also  stands  at  the  head 

treds,  strifes,  and  all  manner  of  offences  of  a   long   catalogue   of  crimes  ;    and 

against  our  neighbour,  as  also  almost  Deceit — Ambition — Ingratitude,  with 

every  sin  that  can  be  named  against  many  others  might  be  mentioned — all 

God.     Selfishness  2iho  may  be  so  reck-  of  which  fall  under  a  special  condemna- 

oned,  as  it  strikes  against  the  golden  tion  as  being  the  sources  whence  many 

rule,  and  saps  the  foundation  of  the  other  sins  proceed. 

Sin  sure  to  find  us  out. 

These  children  of  the  covenant  were  presence  of  our  sin,  and  of  our  Judge.** 

now  sitting  at  ease  in  the  land  of  their  [Biblical  'Ireasury.] 

inheritance,   and   supposing,    notwith-  "A  minister,  preaching  from  the  text, 

standing  their  neglect  of  Divine  com-  *  be  sure  your  sin   will  find  you  out/ 

mands,   that  they  would  never  more  said,  *  If  you  do  not  find  out  your  sin, 

see  trouble,  that  they  would  "die  in  and   bring   it   to   Calvary    to   get    it 

their  nest,  and  multiply  their  days  as  pardoned  through   the  blood  of  Jesus, 

the  sand."     But  their  "  condemnation  your  sin  will  find  you  out,  and  bring 

slumbered  not."    Sin  has  a  cry,  and  you    to    the   judgment    seat,   to    be 

that  cry  came  up  before  God,  calling  condemned  and  made   the   object  of 

for  a  reckoning.  God's  righteous  displeasure.     A  young 

"  It  often  happens,  that  a  man  who  woman  who  had  told  a  lie  before  she 

has  committed  a  crime  takes  his  place  heard  the  sermon,  thought  within  her- 

secretly    in  a  railway  train,  and    is  self  *  Oh  that  lie  !  I  must  either  find 

swiftly  whirled  away  to  the  sea  coast,  it  and  bring  it  to  Calvary,  or  it  will  find 

But  fast  as  he  travels,  there  is  something  me  out  at  the  great  day.'     She  was 

travelling  faster,  namely,  the  message  alarmed  ;  the  thought  pursued  her,  till 

along  the  telegraph  wires ;  and  when  at  length  she  was  led  to  Jesus,  and 

he  hurries  out  at  the  distant  terminus  knew  the  joy  of  being  forgiven." 

he  is  instantly  grasped  by  officers  of  [Biblical  Treasury, "] 

justice,  who  have  been  long  in  waiting.  "We  need  a  monitor  to  remind  us 

So  God  often  meets  startled  sinners,  that  sin  calls  for  a    reckoning.      A 

who  have  been  vainly  trying  to  escape  magician  once  presented  a  ring  to  his 

His  notice  and  retribution.  prince.     This  ring  was  valuable,  not 

There  was  a  man  who  committed  a  for  the  diamonds  and  rubies  that 
foul  murder  in  a  Scottish  castle  on  a  gemmed  it,  but  for  a  rare  and  mystic 
young  bridegroom,  at  whose  marriage  property  in  the  metal.  In  ordinary 
festivities  hehad  hypocritically  assisted,  circumstances  it  sat  easily  enough,  but 
The  assassin  took  horse  in  the  dead  so  soon  as  its  wearer  formed  a  bad 
of  night,  and  fled  for  his  life  through  thought,  or  wish,  or  designed  a  bad 
wood  and  winding  path.  When  the  action,  the  ring  became  a  monitor, 
day  dawned,  he  slackened  his  pace,  and  Suddenly  contracting,  it  pressed  pain- 
behold  !  he  was  emerging  from  a  thicket  fully  on  the  finger,  warning  him  of  sin. 
in  front  of  the  very  castle  whence  he  That  ring  is  conscience — the  voice  of 
had  fled,  and  to  which  by  tortuous  God  within  us,  the  law  written  on 
paths,  he  had  unconsciously  returned,  men's  hearts,  according  to  the  scripture 
Horror  seized  him  ;  he  was  discovered,  statement,  '  their  conscience  also  bear- 
and  condemned  to  death.  So  however  eth  witness,  and  their  thoughts  the 
far  and  fast  we  may  fly,  we  shall  find  mean  while  accuse  or  excuse  one 
ourselves,  when  light  returns^  ever  in  another.'"  [Guthrie,^ 
112 


BOM  I  LET IC  COMMENTARY:   JUDGES. 


CHAP.  111. 


The  Danger  of  Leaving  One  Known  Sin  Unconquereh. 


**  Sin  is  like  *a  serpent  by  the  way — 
(Gen.  xlix.  17)  an  ad<ler  in  the  path/ 
The  reference  in  tliis  scripture  is  to  a 
very  poisonous  kind  of  viper  with 
horns.  Tt  moves  with  ^reat  rapidity 
in  all  directions,  forwards,  backwards, 
and  sideways.  When  he  wishes  to 
surprise  one  at  a  distance  from  him, 
he  creeps  with  his  side  towards  the 
person,  his  head  averted,  till  measuring 
the  distance  he  turns  rcund  and 
s])rings  upon  him.  Sometimes  he  will 
lie  in  hiding  for  hours,  till  some  one 
come  within  reach,  when,  watching  his 
opportunity  he  will  spring  a  distance 
of  some  feet  to  bite  his  hand  or  foot. 
He  is  called  by  the  Orientals  'the  Her 
in  wait.'  Pliny  says  it  hides  its  whole 
body  in  the  sands,  leaving  only  its 
horns  exposed,  which  being  like  grains 
of  barley  in  appearance,  attract  birds 
within  its  reach,  so  as  to  hecome  an 
easy  prey."     [Bussell's  Palestine.] 

&in  is  such  a  viper — stealthy  in 
approach,  and  deadly  in  nature.  So 
the  Israelites  found  it  to  be,  when  they 
were  allured  by  the  hope  of  gain  and 
other  attractions  to  enter  into  league 
with  the  Canaanites.  It  was  the  one 
sin  of  sparing  these  wicked,  which  by 
degrees  brought  Israel  to  the  frightful 
pass  of  becoming  open  and  systematic 
idol-worshippers  and  practisers  of  all 
the  abominations  of  the  groves. 

"  JVot  a  Canaanite  was  to  he  suffered 
to  breathe.  The  taint  of  idolatry 
seemed  to  infect  the  very  air  of  the 
defiled  land  ;  contamination  breathed 
from  the  trees  of  its  groves.  If  God 
were  desirous  of  letting  the  whole 
human  race  drift  away  from  Him  into 
hopeless  darkness,  and  to  stultify  all 
His  promises,  no  surer  plan  for  effec- 
ting these  ends  could  have  been  taken 
than  that  of  sparing  this  people.  The 
Israelites  had  not  pushed  their  conquest 
back  into  the  fortresses  and  fastn(?sses 
of  the  hills,  and  in  these  were  growing 


up  and  under  training  fresh  troops  of 

young  warriors. 

"  So  one  unconquered  sin  often  he- 
comes  a  thorn  in  the  side.  We  are 
not  careful  to  make  war  on  our  sins  in 
tlieir  fastnesses  and  breeding  places — 
in  the  lurking  places  of  thought  and  of 
our  habitual  tone.  We  do  not  believe 
that  happy  is  he  who  dasheth  the  little 
ones  against  the  stones.  We  do  not 
grapple  with  and  put  an  end  to  the 
young  things  that  grow  up  to  be  strong 
and  subduing  sins.  The  result  is  that 
they  become  thorns  in  our  sides.  We 
may  try  to  wear  the  thorn  under  our 
garment,  and  go  about  smiling  as  if 
there  were  not  terrible  havoc  being 
made  of  our  peace  with  God  ;  we  may 
wear  it  as  the  ascetic  wears  his  spiked 
girdle  under  his  frock  ;  but  it  is  there 
reminding  us  by  pain  and  misery  of 
our  slackness  in  cleansing  our  life. 
One  sin  thus  overlooked  cleaves  to  us 
and  makes  itself  felt — not  a  day  passes 
but  something  occurs  to  give  it  occasion ; 
it  is  a  '  thorn  in  the  flesh '  cleaving  to 
us  in  all  companies,  and  at  all  times. 
Like  a  cruel  foe,  it  sweeps  off  our  best 
harvests.  When  we  have  made  a 
goodly  effort,  and  offered  earnest  prayer 
for  a  time,  so  that  we  seemed  to  bear 
fruit,  the  old  sin  comes  in  to  cheat  us 
of  the  fruit  of  long-continued  exertion, 
and  puts  us  back  to  the  lowest  point  in 
the  s[)iritual  life.  The  whole  weary 
work  has  to  be  begun  afresh  ;  as  a  land 
exposed  to  perpetual  invasion,  our  life 
is  left  fruitless,  and  we  have  to  go 
through  again  the  same  routine  of 
ploughing  and  sowing."     [Dods] 

The  vital  point  is  not  to  break  down 
the  wall  of  opposition  to  sin  at  all.  For 
it  is  much  easier  to  avoid  committing  the 
first  sin  than,  having  been  once  guilty, 
to  avoid  going  on  to  a  course  of  sin. 

Presumptuous  sins  are  especially  to 
be  avoided,  as  being  most  provocative 
to  God,  and  most  perilous  to  ourselves. 


113 


CHAP.  III.  nOMILETIC  COMMEJ^'TARY:  JUDGES, 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verse  8. 

ZZZ.  The  character  of  @od's  puniBhments  for  sin. 

1.  They  are  inflicted  with  a  weighty  hand.  The  downcoming  of  that  rough 
king  from  the  region  of  *'  the  two  rivers"  was,  as  if  "  the  boar  out  of  the  forest " 
had  been  let  loose  on  the  vineyard  of  the  Lord  of  Hosts,  breaking  down  its 
hedges,  and  wasting  it  at  pleasure.  It  was  a  sign  that  *'the  anger  of  the  Lord 
had  waxed  hot  against  Israel."  When  God  proceeds  to  punish,  it  is  done  in  a 
manner  worthy  of  His  own  greatness.  His  great  name  must  be  vindicated. 
The  weight  of  the  infliction  must  correspond  with  the  majesty  of  Him  who  senHs 
it — whose  law  has  been  violated,  and  whose  authority  must  be  upheld.  God  is 
to  be  feared  in  His  judgments  (Ps.  Ixxvi.  7).  It  must  be  seen,  as  by  a  flash 
amid  the  darkness,  that  power  is  really  on  the  side  of  righteousness,  and  that  sin 
has  a  terrible  odds  to  contend  with  under  the  government  of  a  holy  God.  It 
must  also  be  left  in  no  doubt,  that,  notwithstanding  the  greatness  of  His  mercy, 
God  cannot  deal  with  sin  as  a  trifling  matter  in  the  exercise  of  His  moral 
government  of  the  world  ;  nor  can  He  permit  men  to  regard  it  as  a  thing  which 
lightly  touches  their  interests,  and  which  a  few  tears  can  at  any  moment  wash 
out. 

(1.)  Yet  the  weight  of  the  infliction  is  great  only  according  to  a  man's 
estimate.  It  is  never  absolute.  That  is  not  needed,  to  produce  on  the  minds 
of  creatures  a  suitable  conception  of  Jehovah's  majesty,  and  His  jealousy  for  the 
spotless  purity  of  His  character.  To  do  this,  the  mere  putting  forth  of  His 
finger  will  suffice.  *'The  pillars  of  heaven  tremble,  and  are  astonished  at  His 
reproof."  Many  similar  wonders  take  place  at  His  bidding.  Yet  all  this  we 
are  told  is  "but  the  whisper  of  Him  ;  the  thunder  of  His  power  who  can  com- 
prehend?" (m!^p — borders,  skirts,  or  extremities, 'a^  compared  with  the  full 
body,  or  entire  dimensions.  Job.  xxvi.  14).  In  anguish  of  spirit,  the  afflicted 
patriarch  exclaims,  that  the  mere  touch  of  God's  hand  had  made  him  a  spectacle 
of  commiseration  to  all  around  him  (Job  xix.  21).  What  then  must  have  been 
the  effect  of  the  blow  of  His  arm  !  Nay,  he  says  again,  "  thine  eyes  are  upon 
me,  and  I  am  not"  (Job  vii.  8).  David  cries  in  distress,  **  liemove  thy  stroke, 
for  I  am  consumed  with  the  blow  of  thine  hand"  (Ps.  xxxix.  10).  When  punishing 
His  people  in  the  wilderness,  we  are  told,  that  "  God  did  not  stir  up  all  His 
wrath,  for  He  remembered  they  were  but  flesh,  a  wind  that  passeth  away,  and 
Cometh  not  again"  (Ps.  Ixxviii.  38,39).  At  other  times  language  is  used, 
intimating  that  God  puts  forth  the  greatness  of  his  power  in  sending  out  His 
judgments,  i.e.,  at  man's  point  of  view  it  seems  so.  In  speaking  of  the  destruc- 
tion of  Pharaoh,  and  the  redemption  of  the  people,  these  are  said  to  be  done 
with  a  *'  strong  hand,  and  a  stretched  out  arm."  x'^nd  when  vengeance  is  taken 
on  the  Philistines  for  daring  to  profane  God's  sacred  ark,  we  are  told,  "  the 
hand  of  the  Lord  was  heavy  on  them  of  Ashdod,  and  it  was  very  heavy  on  the 
men  of  Ekron"  (1  Sam.  v.  6,  11).  Also,  when  individual  afflictions  are  felt  to 
be  severe,  God's  hand  is  said  to  be  ''mighty."  "  Humble  yourselves  under  the 
mighty  hand  of  God,"  etc.  (1  Pet.  v.  6).  It  is  clear  that  in  all  these  cases,  the 
weight  of  God's  hand  is  measured  by  the  relative  strength  of  man  to  bear  it. 
What  is  to  God  insignificant,  is  to  man  overwhelming. 

(2.)  The  measure  of  the  infliction  is  determined  by  what  will  sufiice  to 
prostrate  the  soul  before  its  God.  Sometimes  a  mere  touch  of  the  rod  will 
suffice  to  do  this,  as  in  the  case  of  the  good  Hezekiah  when  he  turned  sick,  and 
was  threatened  with  death  ;  that  pious  man  was  at  once  led  to  penitential  tears 
and  earnest  prayers.  A  simple  look  will  even  suffice,  as  when  "  the  Lord  turned 
and  looked  upon  Peter,  he  went  out  and  wept  bitterly."  But  in  dealing  with 
incorrigible  sinners,  the  rod  must  be  grasped  with  a  firmer  hand.  Emphatic 
lU 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES.  chap.  ill. 


evidence  must  be  furnished,  that  the  righteous  Governor  of  the  world  "  can  by 
no  means  clear  the  guilty."  And,  in  the  case  of  His  own  people.  He  will,  if 
necessary,  go  the  length  of  seeming  to  violate  His  holy  covenant,  and  reject  the 
people  whom  He  had  chosen  rather  than  not  subdue  their  rebellious  spirit,  lead 
them  to  genuine  sorrow  for  sin,  to  unreserved  confession,  and  a  spirit  of  new 
obedience  in  the  life. 

(3.)  The  weight  of  Israel's  first  great  trial.  The  stroke  was  heavy.  They 
are  ^'delivered  ui^  into  the  hands  of  men'*  and  if  **  the  greatest  enemy  of  man 
be  man,"  their  prospects  at  this  moment  might  well  be  regarded  with  dismay. 
For  the  name  of  the  agent  employed  to  execute  the  purpose  of  the  Divine  anger 
— **  Chushan  of  double  wichdness'* — whatever  its  precise  import,  was  sufficiently 
prophetic  of  dark  days  and  doleful  nights,  which  they  would  have  to  spend  for 
an  unknown  length  of  time  in  the  iron  grip  of  that  unpitying  monster.  The 
sentence  was — to  be  given  up  for  an  indefinite  time,  to  become  the  victim  of 
the  wild  caprices  of  this  lawless  freebooter,  who  was  already  the  terror  of  all  the 
East.  In  this  man's  hands  they  were  placed  helplessly.  That  is  the  force  of 
the  expression,  "the  Lord  sold  them  into  his  hand."  He  who  owned  them  gave 
them  entirely  over  into  his  possession  for  a  time,  that  he  might  gratify  upon 
them  all  the  savage  instincts  of  his  brutal  nature,  maltreating  them  as  the 
veriest  chattels,  and  wantonly  treading  them  down  as  the  mire  of  the  streets. 
It  was  truly  a  sentence  of  "penal  servitude."  The  expression  "  they  served" 
meant  much  more  than  that  ih^y paid  tribute.  Where  "might  was  right,"  and 
moral  principle  was  unknown,  justice  and  humanity  would  alike  be  cast  to  the 
winds.  Where  barbarism  and  lust  of  power  reigned  unchecked,  appeals  against 
cruelty  of  dealing  might  as  well  have  been  addressed  to  tigers  and  hyenas,  as  to 
men  accustomed  to  deedsof  brutality  and  of  torture.  The  condition  must  havebeen 
pitiable  indeed,  implying  perpetual  exposure  to  all  manner  of  indignities  shown 
and  acts  of  injustice  done,  merciless  treatment  both  for  individuals  and  for 
families,  the  young  and  the  old,  as  well  as  the  active  and  the  strong — a  condi- 
tion of  grinding  oppression,  and  of  virtual,  if  not  of  literal  slavery.  "  Their 
crops  for  which  they  toiled  would  be  eaten  by  another ;  their  goodly  houses 
tenanted  by  their  foes,  and  themselves  turned  into  the  street ;  their  wives  and 
daughters  made  bondwomen,  and  their  sons  made  slaves ;  their  national  glory 
turned  to  shame,  and  their  fondly-cherished  hopes  withered  into  despair." 

The  bitterness  of  their  distress  may  be  judged  from  the  fact,  that  a  deep  cry 
of  anguish  rose  from  every  household  all  over  the  land,  similar  to  that  which 
was  wrung  from  the  groaning  multitude  in  the  brickfields  of  Egypt  in  the  days 
of  their  fathers,  during  the  ever-memorable  bondage.  For  the  same  word  is  used 
here  as  in  Exod.  ii.  23 — ^i?^^^ — an  utterance  of  great  distress — shouting  aloud 
for  help — as  the  cry  of  children  to  their  father  when  some  ferocious  animal  is 
u})on  them.  The  same  word  is  used  in  Jer.  xi.  11,  meaning — "  however  bitterly 
and  earnestly  they  cry,  I  will  not  hearken."  For  years  they  thus  cried,  until 
eight  years  were  accomplished  !  Who  can  tell  how  much  unwritten  history  is 
implied  in  this  short  statement !  A  history  of  robberies,  murders,  and  bonds — 
of  groanings  under  heavy  exactions  levied,  and  savage  blows  inflicted — of  sighs 
breaking  on  the  midnight  air,  and  sleepless  pillows  bedewed  with  tears — of  frantic 
shrieks  raised  to  heaven  for  help,  on  the  one  side,  and  "souls  weeping  in  secret 
places  "  on  the  other — A  history  of  breaking  hearts,  and  bruised  limbs — of  backs 
giving  way  under  their  burdens,  and  spirits  fainting  within  from  the  extinction 
of  hope — ot  loud  but  vain  api)eals  to  deaf  ears,  and  steeled  hearts — of  spasmodic 
but  fruitless  efforts  on  the  part  of  the  feeble,  to  resist  the  ferocities  of  the  strong 
— In  one  word,  a  history  of  tragic  tales  of  desolated  hearths,  and  heavy  records 
of  grief  written  over  many  a  once  happy  home  ;  while  oppressions,  cruelties,  and 
wrongs,  like  a  Marah  sea  were  rolling  all  over  the  land.  The  dark  prince  of  the 
house  of  Ham  realised  to  the  full  his  notorious  character  of  **  double  wickedness," 

115 


CHAP.  m.  MOMILETIC  COMMENTARY;  JUDGES, 


in  the  doable  rlostriiction  which  lie  dealt  out  to  the  descendants  of  the  house  of 
Shem,  when  a  mysterious  Providence  granted  him  permission. 

2.  They  are  calmly  inflicted.  The  statement  in  ver.  8  seems  to  indicate,  that 
the  rod  was  used  with  great  excitement  of  feeling.  It  is  said,  '' tJie  anger 
of  the  Lord  was  dot  against  Israel."  But  this  mode  of  speaking  is  used  expressly 
in  accommodation  to  men's  conceptions  of  God's  ways  of  acting.  No  such  thing 
as  agitation  of  feeling,  far  less  tumultuous  or  passionate  excitement,  can  ever 
consist  with  the  real  character  of  the  King  Eternal.  In  the  Divine  bosom  there 
reigns,  and  ever  must  reign,  an  everlasting  calm.  Filling  immensity  with  His 
presence  ;  maintaining  absolute  control  over  all  beings  as  His  creatures,  and  over 
all  events  as  possible  to  happen  only  by  His  permission  ;  no  other  force  being 
independently  at  work  throughout  the  universe,  but  His  volition — what  can 
possibly  transpire  to  excite  any  violent  emotion  in  the  bosom  of  our  God !  His 
own  nature  being  in  itself  an  infinite  Majesty,  it  is  beneath  its  mark  to  be  liable  to 
changes  of  feeling,  such  as  is  the  common  experience  of  a  creature  nature.  Man 
yields  to  the  impulse  of  events ;  his  bosom  heaves  with  excitement,  and  he  is 
hurried  along  by  the  current  of  ungovernable  feelings.  But  loss  of  self-command 
never  can  be  predicated  of  the  unchangeable  Jehovah.  The  statement  in  ver.  8 
is,  therefore,  entirely  the  language  of  accommodation  to  human  modes  of  thinking. 
God's  nature  being  infinitely  holy — being  in  fact  the  fountain  head  and  standard 
of  all  holiness,  is  ever  in  the  fixed  attitude  of  opposition  to  all  sin.  When  sin  is 
committed,  this  opposition  is  awakened,  and  receives  a  suitable  manifestation.  It 
is  however,  not  the  opposition  of  a  dead  mechanical  law,  but  the  feeling — the 
abhorrence  of  a  Personal  Being  ;  yet  exercised  with  all  the  instinctive  force,  and 
undeviating  regularity  of  a  natural  law.  It  is  invariable  and  constant  ia  its 
action,  exercised  with  all  the  intelligence  and  emotion  of  a  living  Person,  \nth 
the  wise  and  tender  consideration  of  a  Father,  and  with  the  high  unswerving 
principle  of  a  Judge. 

3.  They  are  impartially  inflicted.  God  punishes  idolatrous  practices  when 
committed  by  His  own  Israel,  equally  as  when  they  appear  in  the  conduct  of 
the  heathen  nations  round  about  them.  To  sin,  in  its  own  essence.  He  is  irre- 
concilably opposed,  by  whomsoever  committed.  Against  it  His  wrath  invariably 
goes  forth  until  satisfaction  is  given.  **  He  is  no  respecter  of  persons."  In 
some  respects,  He  hates  sin  more  in  His  own  people  than  in  those  who  know 
Him  not.  In  their  case  sin  has  peculiar  aggravations.  It  is  committed  against 
clearer  light,  in  the  face  of  stronger  remonstrances,  in  opposition  to  still  more 
tender  pleadings,  in  the  abuse  of  peculiar  privileges,  and  under  the  most  sacred 
obligations  to  give  an  unvarying  obedience.  But  in  their  case,  the  great  fact 
is,  that  they  have  a  "Daysman."  This  fact,  though  in  no  degree  diminishing 
the  Divine  anger  against  their  sin,  entirely  alters  the  complexion  of  the  Divine 
dealing  with  themselves ;  inasmuch  as  the  office  of  the  "  Daysman  "  is  to  give 
full  satisfaction  for  their  sin,  and  to  put  them  in  a  position  in  which  they  shall 
have  as  complete  peace  with  God,  as  if  they  had  never  sinned.  The  idolatry  of 
God's  Israel  was  equally  heinous,  and  more  so  than  that  of  the  heathen  around 
them,  and  would  not  less  surely  have  issued  in  their  final  ruin,  but  for  the  inter- 
position of  a  system  of  sacrifice  and  cleansing,  whereby  satisfaction  was  given  to 
the  Throne  of  Eternal  Righteousness.  To  this  hope  the  seed  of  Abraham  were 
specially  called  ;  nor  were  any  excluded  from  participation  in  the  precious 
privilege,  who  complied  with  the  requirement  of  faith  and  repentance. 

4.  They  are  irresistibly  inflicted.  God's  special  visitations  cannot  be  turned 
aside.  The  Israelites  could  not  drive  back  this  Mesopotamian  king,  though  he  was 
but  one  foe,  and  they  had  already  in  past  times  been  "  more  than  conquerors  '* 
over  a  whole  confederacy  of  monarchs,  who  brought  huge  hosts  against 
them  in  battle  array.  The  mighty  God  of  Jacob  was  then  by  their  side,  and 
all  went  down  before  them.    Now  He  is  against  them  and  nothing  prospers. 

116 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES,  chap.  iii. 


Their  weapons  were  the  same,  tlieir  natural  courage  was  up  to  the  mark,  tliey 
could  bring  an  equal  number  of  men  into  the  field — yet  defeat  was  inevitable. 
Their  God  had  abandoned  them. — Nay,  He  had  specially  given  them  over  into 
the  hands  of  the  spoiler,  and  no  means  that  could  be  employed,  could  either 
secure  a  victory,  or  prevent  defeat.  He  who  had  "  exalted  tlieir  horn  "  in  the 
days  of  their  allegiance,  now  "  defiled  it  in  the  dust."  Those  whom  "  He  had 
lifted  up,"  He  now  "  casts  again  to  the  ground,"  and  "  causes  men  to  ride  over 
their  heads."  When  He  appears  upon  His  throne,  what  is  seen  is  like  a 
**  jasper  stone  " — a  colour  of  dazzling  whiteness — and  a  *'  sardine  stone  " — or  a 
fiery  red  colour.  His  spotless  holiness,  and  His  great  jealousy,  combine  to 
sustain  His  character  as  the  All-perfect  One.  When  He  moves  forward  to 
vindicate  His  name,  "who  would  set  the  briers  and  thorns  against  Him  in 
battle  ?  He  would  go  througli  them,  He  would  burn  them  togetlier."  *'  None 
can  deliver  out  of  His  hand," — no  more  than  the  tree  can  save  itself  from  the 
fire. 

5.  They  are  sparingly  inflicted.  Less  than  migh  t  be  expected  from  the  grievous 
character  of  the  sin  committed — heinous  ingratitude  ;  the  most  obstinate 
disobedience  ;  responding  to  the  most  earnest  and  affectionate  pleading  with 
hardness  of  heart  and  stubbornness  of  will.  Sins  in  this  world  are  always 
punished  less  than  they  deserve.  The  full  desert  of  sin  is  reserved  for  the 
future  state.  The  measure  of  punishment  now  inflicted,  is  only  such  as  to 
indicate  the  kind  of  consequences  which  sin  brings  along  with  it,  not  the  full 
amount  of  the  penalty  which  it  deserves.  The  purpose  is  to  save  the  infliction 
of  that  penalty,  by  putting  checks  on  sin,  and  showing  the  necessity  of  repent- 
ance. The  infliction  of  the  penalty  is  in  itself  a  thing  in  which  God  finds  no 
pleasure.  "  As  I  live,  saith  the  Lord,  I  have  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  the 
wicked,  but  that  the  wicked  turn  from  his  way  and  live**  The  infliction  of  the 
penalty  He  calls  His  '*  strange  act " — that  which  is  not  congenial  to  Him,  but 
against  His  natural  desires — to  which  He  is  not  inclined  of  His  own  promp- 
tings, without  some  reason  of  righteousness  requiring  Him  to  proceed  to  such 
an  act. 

Hence  God's  first  use  of  the  rod  with  His  people  was  lighter  than  it  became 
afterwards.  It  was  not  so  humbling  to  be  subjugated  by  a  strarger  like  this 
Chushan-rishathaim,  as  it  was,  afterwards,  to  come  under  the  more  galling  yoke 
of  those,  whom  they  themselves  had  at  one  time  trodden  under  their  feet. 

6.  They  are  considerately  inflicted.  Wisdom,  as  well  as  love,  presides  over  all 
the  treatment  which  God  gives  to  His  people.  Love  prompts,  and  wisdom 
guides.  No  chastisement  is  inflicted  blindly,  or  rashly.  Every  thing  is 
considered  from  man's  point  of  view,  as  well  as  from  God's.  There  is  no  harsh 
disregard  of  human  feelings,  nor  is  the  stern  brow  of  the  Judge  seen  so  much,  as 
the  tender  eye  of  the  Father  (Hos.  xi.  3,  4,  etc.).  Not  only  is  the  reasonableness 
and  the  equity  of  the  law's  requirements  looked  at,  but  also  the  difficult 
surroundings  amid  which  man  is  placed  for  obeying  the  law,  the  force  of 
temptation  with  which  he  is  beset,  his  infirmities,  constitutional  and  otherwise, 
his  weakness  and  ignorance,  and  any  other  element  which  requires  to  be  taken 
into  account  to  form  a  perfectly  just  estimate  of  human  character  and  conduct. 
This  is  beautifully  brought  out  in  several  touching  passages  in  the  writings  of 
the  prophets,  e.g.,  Isa.  Ixiii.  ;  Hos.  xi.  1-4  ;  Zech.  i.  12-17  ;  also  in  several  of 
the  Psalms,  such  as  the  Ixxviii.  ;  ciii.  ;  cv.  ;  and  cvi. 

He  always  mixes  more  of  mercy  than  of  wrath  in  His  treatment.  The  years 
of  suffering  are  far  fewer  than  the  years  of  .sinning  which  led  to  the  suffering. 
"  He  stirred  not  up  all  His  wrath,"  "  His  mercies  are  great,"  and  '*  He  afflicteth 
not  willingly."  When  the  end  can  be  gained  without  the  direct  use  of  the  rod, 
it  is  not  resorted  to,  and  after  recourse  is  had  to  it,  it  is  immediately  lightened 
when  the  purpose  has  been  served.     "  /  will  not  contend  for  ever,  neither  will  1 

ni 


CHAP.  Ill,  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   JUDGES, 


he  always  wroth ;  for  the  spirit  should  fail  before  me^  and  the  souls  which  I  have 
made  (Isa.  Ivii.  16,  also  17,  18)." 

7.  They  are  inflicted  in  faithfulness.  The  whole  nation  might  say,  as  well  as 
the  individual  pious  man,  "7  knou)  that  in  faithfulness  thou  hast  afflicted  me** 
God's  chastisements  of  His  people  are  never  harsh,  nor  even  stern,  but  always 
faithful.  Harshness  implies  disregard  of  our  feelings,  and  this  can  never  be 
predicated  of  our  God.  He  never  afflicts  for  the  sake  of  afflicting,  but  for  the 
purpose  of  serving  holy  and  necessary  ends.  Sternness  implies  the  want  of 
tenderness  ;  and  this  is  never  absent  from  the  character  of  God,  though  its 
manifestation  may  be  less  prominent  at  one  time  than  at  another.  It  is  always  a 
Father  that  afflicts  the  people  of  God.  But  the  Father  is  a  Judge,  and  cannot 
forget  what  is  due  to  Himself,  both  in  His  character  and  His  law.  Indeed,  God's 
afflictings  of  His  peo})le  are  true  to  every  interest  concerned — true  to  His  own 
glory  as  a  jealous,  sin-hating  God  ;  true  to  His  people's  well  being  ;  and  true  to 
His  own  word,  both  of  threatening  and  promise.  His  anger  in  His  chastisements 
is  never  in  the  strict  sense  vindictive,  but  is  always  exercised  on  the  ground  of 
righteous  principle. 

His  chastisement  of  His  people  is — 

(1.)  True  to  His  own  glory  as  a  jealous,  sin-hating  God.  He  must  be 
faithful  to  Himself  in  preserving  unsullied  His  own  great  name  as  "  The  Holy 
One  of  Israel" — who  "is  of  purer  eyes  than  to  behold  evil,  and  cannot  look 
u[)()n  iniquity" — who  cannot  be  the  God  of  a  sinful  people  without  showing  His 
marked  displeasure  with  their  sins,  and  sacredly  enjoining  them  to  *'  cast  away 
their  transgressions,"  and  "  become  holy  as  He  is  holy  ;"  for  "  His  eye  is  only 
on  the  righteous,  and  His  countenance  beholdeth  the  upright." 

(2 )  True  to  Eis  people's  well-being. 

(a)  ISin  is  a  heart  disease  ;  and  every  one  must  be  made  conscious  of  "  the 
plague  of  his  own  heart"  and  be  directed  to  look  for  Divine  help  in  its  cure 
(1  kings  viii.  3«). 

{b)  fSin  is  a  heavy  burden — too  heavy  for  the  heart  to  bear  even  now 
(Ps.  xxxviii.  4),  and  sure  to  become  greatly  heavier  if  not  removed.  Bunyan, 
correctly  makes  his  pilgrim  say,  "  I  fear  that  this  burden  on  my  back  will  sink 
me  lower  than  the  grave,  and  that  I  shall  fall  into  Tophet."  Chastisement 
causes  the  soul  to  realise  the  weight  of  that  burden,  and  shows  the  necessity  of 
getting  one  to  act  as  a  burden -bearer.  Scripture  intimates,  that  **  the  Lord 
hath  laid  on  Him  {our  Substitute)  the  iniquity  of  us  ally'  and  that  "  Christ 
Himsjlf  bare  our  sins  in  His  own  body  on  the  tree.'* 

"  He  seized  our  dreadful  right,  the  load  sustain'd, 
And  heaved  the  mountain  from  a  guilty  world," 

Taught  by  the  chastising  hand,  the  sinner  is  led  to  say— 

"I  lay  my  sins  on  Jesus, 

The  spotless  Lamb  of  God  ; 
He  takes  them  all  and  frees  U8 
From  the  accursed  load." 

(c)  Sin  is  the  soul's  poison.     Its  very  nature  is  to  destroy  life,  as  it  is  the 

nature  of  fire  to  consume.  "  Sin  reigns  unto  death."  To  live  in  sin  ;  to 
commit  it ;  even  to  touch  it,  is  to  die.  Sinners  are  said,  because  of  their  course 
of  life,  to  be  "  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins ; "  and,  viewing  it  as  a  service,  the 
only  reward  they  receive  for  it  is  "  death  "  (PJph.  ii.  1 ;  Rom.  vi.  23).  Means 
must  be  used  to  have  this  poison  purged  out  of  the  system. 

(d)  Sill  is  the  soul's  leprosy,  loathsome,  painful,  and  deadly ;  incurable  by 
any  ordinary  means,  and  yielding  only  to  the  touch  of  the  Great  Physician. 

(e)  Sin  is  the  venom  left  in  the  system  Jroni  the  bite  of  the  old  serpent. 
Chastisement  prepares  for  the  application  of  such  means  as  shall  expel  that 

118 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    JUDGES,  chap,  'il 


venom  from  the  system  ;  for  then  the  ear  is  opened  to  listen  to  heaven'*' 
remedy  of  the  ''  sanctKication  of  the  Spirit,  and  the  belief  of  the  truth." 

Thus  sanctified  affliction  is  faitlifulness  to  the  soul's  well-being.  It  is  the 
office  of  love  to  save  a  child  from  that  which,  if  allowed  to  remain,  would  prove 
its  ruin,  as  in  the  giving  of  medicine  under  a  malady,  or  performing  a  surgical 
operation  when  life  is  threatened. 

(3.)  True  to  His  owa  word  of  threatening  and  promise  in  the  gracious 
covenant.  The  threatenings  are  in  the  interest  of  His  people's  good,  as  well  as 
the  promises.  As  the  gospel  turns  all  curses  into  blessings  to  them  that  believe, 
so  it  turns  all  threatenings  into  promises.  Hence,  when  Me  says,  "  You  onl;j 
have  I  known  of  all  the  families  of  the  earth,  therefore  will  I  punish  you  for 
your  iniquities'*  (Amos  iii.  2),  the  threatening  is  really  a  promise  of  benefit 
made  on  the  ground  of  friendship.  Chastisement  is  indeed  a  specific  blessing  of 
the  covenant,  as  much  as  the  administration  of  a  course  of  medicine  would  be 
to  a  sick  child  to  save  it  from  a  fatal  issue.  It  shows  the  wise  care  of  an 
affectionate  father.  It  acts  as  a  check  on  the  soul's  apostasy  from  God.  It 
puts  an  arrest  on  the  wayward  tendency  of  the  heart  to  forget  God,  and  despise 
His  authority.  Hence  the  beautiful  stipulation  (Ps.  Ixxxix.  30-34).  God,  in 
love  to  His  children,  '*  will  not  suffer  sin  upon  them!'  but  chastens  them  now, 
that  they  may  not  be  condemned  with  the  world  at  last.  So  it  is  never  said  of 
the  wicked  that  God  deals  with  them  by  chastisement.  "  But  if  ye  endure 
chastisement,  God  dealeth  with  you  as  with  sons."  The  wicked  ''  He  knovvetli 
not."  But  Israel  is  precious,  and  must  be  refined  and  preserved.  The  precious 
metal  must  be  cast  into  the  furnace  that  the  tincture  of  alloy  may  be  removed 
(Zech.  xiii.  9 ;  Kev.  iii.  19  ;  Isa.  i.  25).  The  intention  is  not  to  destroy,  but  to 
purify  ;  to  purge,  not  to  consume.  ^*  He  chastens  for  our  profit,  that  we  might 
become  partakers  of  His  holiness**  Affliction  is  indeed  love,  taking  a  weird 
form  of  showing  itself,  corresponding  with  the  malignant  character  of  the  plague 
it  is  intended  to  remove. 

IV.  The  punishment  set  over  agralnst  the  sin. 

It  is  important  to  bring  the  sin  and  its  punishment  before  the  eye  in  one  view, 
so  as  to  see  how  the  one  answers  to  the  other  as  seed  and  fruit,  or,  as  cause  and 
effect.  It  is  too  common  to  look  on  God's  judgments  as  events  standing  by  them- 
selves, separated  from  their  procuring  causes,  and  to  place  them  in  contrast  with 
what  might  naturally  be  expected  from  the  hand  of  Him  *'  who  is  love,"  and  ''whose 
tender  mercies  are  over  all  His  works"  A  difficulty  is  th  us  created,  to  accon  n  t  for 
the  unexpected  events  that  have  fallen  out  under  the  government  of  a  God  of  love. 
Doubtless  if  we  keep  our  eyes  half  shut  to  the  disagreeable  truths  of  our  sinful 
condition,  we  are  not  likely  to  come  to  a  well-balanced  view  of  God's  ways,  and 
we  shall  find  it  hard  to  reconcile  many  of  His  providential  dealings  with  His 
benignant  character.  But  much  of  the  difficulty  disappears,  when  we  look  at 
the  aggravated  character  of  the  sins,  which  preceded  the  judgment,  and  which 
rendered  it  absolutely  necessary  that  such  judgments  should  be  inflicted. 
Though  God  is  infinitely  tender  of  the  feelings  of  His  creatures.  He  cannot  allow 
a  shadow  of  impurity  to  stain  the  administration  of  His  Holy  and  righteous 
government.  To  maintain  the  purity  of  His  own  character,  is  necessarily  with 
Him  the  first  of  all  considerations. 

In  the  present  case,  things  had  gone  so  far,  that  a  shadow  would  have  been 
cast  on  the  honour  of  the  Divine  name,  had  something  not  been  done  to 
mark  the  Divine  abhorrence  of  high  handed  sin.  As  an  illustration  of  the 
extreme  wickedness  of  the  age,  it  may  be  mentioned,  that  this  is  generally 
supposed  to  have  been  about  the  period  when  the  abominations  of  Gibeah, 
recorded  in  chaps,  xix.  and  xx.,  and  those  of  the  tribe  of  Dan,  referred 
to  in  chap,  xviii.  took  ])lace.     But,  even  if  this  were  not  the  case,  there  were 

119 


CHAP.  III.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


special  aggravations  in  the  fact  of  their  hipsiiig  into  idolatry  at  all,  and  it  is 
these  we  must  now  look  at,  as  especially  occasioning  the  national  calamities. 
What  were  these  aggravated  features,  and  what  punishment  did  God  set  over 
against  them  ? 

1.  There  was  deep-seated  unbelief  on  their  part,  and  rejection  of  them  by 
God.  Tiiere  is  in  every  man  by  nature  *'  an  evil  heart  of  unbelief,  tending  to 
depart  from  the  living  God ;  "  and  now  these  children  of  the  covenant  showed 
it  by  their  disposition  to  forsake  the  God  who  had  done  so  much  for  them  in 
the  past,  and  to  seek  after  the  gods  of  the  heathen  round  about  them.  If  we 
compare  the  depravity  of  tlie  heart  to  the  primary  rock  system,  or  that  which 
lies  underneath  all  the  series  of  strata  of  which  a  sinful  character  is  made  up, 
then  the  position  of  unbelief  is  that  of  the  lowest  of  the  palaeozoic  strata. — Or, 
if  we  regard  the  heart's  depravity  as  the  protoplasm,  then  unbelief  is  the  first 
organic  form  which  that  depravity  assumes.  From  this  arise  aversion  to  God, 
evil  thoughts  of  God,  a  spirit  of  rebellion,  all  manner  of  lusts  and  passions  in 
tiie  heart,  and  all  manner  of  ungodliness  in  the  life. 

here  it  was  distrust  that  began  the  downward  course.  They  had  not  confi- 
dence in  their  God,  that  He  would  give  them  certain  victory  over  these  mighty 
Canaanites.  They  were  feeble  while  the  enemy  was  strong.  They  looked  to 
the  arm  of  flesh.  They  did  not  trust  in  the  power  of  their  God  to  aid  them 
effectual ly  against  all  danger,  notwithstanding  all  the  examples  He  had  given 
of  what  He  could  do,  to  overcome  the  most  formidable  opposition.  Nor  did 
they  trust  in  His  faithfulness  to  abide  by  His  word  of  promise,  that  no  man 
should  be  able  to  stand  before  them,  while  they  were  loyally  engaged  in  the 
execution  of  His  purposes.  It  was  not  for  them  to  weigh  consequences.  Their 
only  question  was,  What  is  duty  ?  They  were  to  see  no  difficulty  when  God 
gave  the  command.  Their  only  thought  should  have  been,  how  speedily  and 
conscientiously  shall  we  perform  the  commandment  of  the  Lord.  Whatever  the 
strength  of  their  adversaries,  as  compared  with  their  own,  it  was  an  insult  to 
Him,  before  whom  **  the  nations  were  as  a  drop  of  a  bucket,"  to  doubt  whether 
He  could  make  "the  worm  Jacob  thresh  the  mountains." 

Their  fundamental  sin  was  the  rejection  of  Jehovah  as  their  sovereign^  and 
this  He  meets  by  a  temporary  casting  them  off  as  His  people.  He  not  only  stood 
aloof  from  them  when  danger  arose,  and  no  longer  acted  as  their  Rock,  but  "  He 
sold  them  into  the  hand  "  of  the  enemy.  He  gave  a  commission  to  the  destroyer 
against  them.  **  As  they  had  walked  contrary  to  Him,  so  now  He  walks  con- 
trary to  them."  They  had  **  cast  Him  behind  their  back,"  and  now  "  He  shows 
them  the  back  and  not  the  face."  He  no  longer  dwells  among  them,  but  says, 
/  will  go  and  return  to  my  place,  till  they  acknowledge  their  offence  and  seek  my 
face;  in  their  affliction  they  will  seek  me  early."  The  expression,  "He  sold 
them,"  implies  that  He  handed  them  over  into  the  hands  of  their  enemies,  as  if 
He  had  no  more  any  property  in  them,  or  concern  about  them.  It  was  as  if  He 
had  said,  "  Ye  are  not  now  my  people,  and  I  am  not  any  longer  your  God,"  or, 
as  if  He  had  said  to  the  heathen,  ".Take  them,  and  do  as  you  will  with  them  ; 
they  are  yours,  not  mine"  (see  Lev.  xxvi.  and  Dent,  xxviii).  [Pulp.  Com] 
Thus  they  could  read  their  sin  in  their  punishment.  They  were  ''left  to  eat  the 
fruit  of  their  own  ways,  and  be  filled  with  their  own  devices."  God  said,  "  they 
are  a  very  forward  generation,  children  in  whom  is  no  faith  ;  I  will  hide  my  face 
from  them,  and  see  what  their  end  shall  be." 

2.  They  sinned  against  their  character  as  a  holy  people,  and  Jehovah  treated 
them  as  if  they  were  no  longer  holy.  Their  name  was,  in  great  condescension, 
associated  with  the  great  and  holy  name  of  Jehovah.  The  blood  of  the  Covenant 
was  sprinkled  upon  them.  They  were  "  a  kingdom  of  priests,"  and,  throughout 
their  whole  history,  were  dedicated  to  holy  services.  They  were  appointed  to 
show  forth  the  praise  of  Jehovah  in  connection  with  glorious  manifestations  of 

120 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JtlDQES.  ofiAP.  ill. 


His  character  that  stretclied  down  to  future  ages.  In  the  couduct  of  a  people  so 
privileged,  acts  of  disobedience  were  peculiarly  heinous.  Their  sins  were  a  pro- 
fanation of  their  sacred  position.  It  was  like  sinning  against  Jehovah  in  the 
Holy  of  Holies,  as  compared  with  doing  any  act  of  irreverence  in  the  outer  court 
of  the  Gentiles.  Wilful  sins  on  the  part  of  God's  people  have  always  a  special 
aggravation  in  that  they  are  brought  so  near  to  God,  and  bound  by  the  most 
sacred  obligations  to  show  their  allegiance.  "  /  will  be  sanctified  of  all  them 
that  draw  nigh  to  me." 

Jehovah  now  acts  towards  them  exactly  according  to  the  character  which  they 
assume.  He  treats  them  as  no  longer  a  holy  people.  *'  Heprofanes  the  princes 
of  the  sanctuary,  gives  Jacob  to  the  curse y  and  Israel  to  reproaches."  How- 
ever dear  they  might  be  to  Him  as  His  redeemed  and  adopted  children,  "He 
delivers  over  His  turtle-dove  to  the  multitude  of  the  wicked."  "  He  abhors  His 
own  inheritance  and  gives  them  into  the  hand  of  the  heathen."  "  The  Lord  God 
hath  sworn  by  Himself  saying,  I  abhor  the  excellency  of  Jacob,  and  hate  his 
palaces."  Wherefore  He  "  sold  them  "  to  a  Hamite  prince  !  Imagine  the  Holy 
One  of  Israel  selling  His  Church  as  a  slave,  to  a  hard  and  cruel  master,  having 
more  of  the  instincts  of  a  wild  beast  than  of  a  man  !  "  Yea  the  Lord  trod  the 
virgin,  the  daughter  of  Judah,  as  in  a  wine-press  ;  He  covered  her  with  a  cloud 
in  His  anger,  and  did  cast  down  from  heaven  to  earth  the  beauty  of  Israel ;  He 
polluted  the  kingdom,,  and  the  princes  thereof  A II  that  passed  by  did  clap  their 
hands  ;  they  hissed  and  wagged  their  head,  saying,  *  We  have  swallowed  her  up  ; 
this  is  the  day  that  we  looked  for  ;  we  have  found  it,  we  have  seen  it  J  " 

3.  They  sinned  in  the  violation  of  solemn  pledges ;  and  God  acted  towards 
them  as  if  He  had  forgotten  His  solemn  Covenant.  At  the  foot  of  Sinai, 
when  the  Covenant  was  lirst  publicly  made  with  the  people  as  a  nation,  they 
vowed  solemnly  in  the  sight  of  heaven,  "  All  that  the  Lord  hath  said  will  we  do 
and  be  obedient."  This  Covenant  was  renewed  under  very  solemn  circumstances 
at  the  moment  they  were  about  to  take  possession  of  their  inheritance  (Dent. 
xxix.  10-29).  They  were  also  a  circumcised  people,  and  so  marked  off  for  God. 
In  all  their  national  observances  an  implied  pledge  was  given  of  their  dedication 
to  God's  service.  This  was  especially  the  case  in  their  three  great  festivals  year 
by  year.  Most  emphatic,  too,  was  the  manner  in  which  they  pledged  them- 
selves when  Joshua  took  leave  of  them  as  their  leader,  and  they  were  to  be  lelt 
alone  to  the  trial  of  faith  and  obedience.  All  these  pledges  they  had  now 
violated  ;  they  had  broken  God's  holy  covenant,  and  proved  treacherous  to  their 
most  sacred  promises  They  had  become  **a  people  laden  with  iniquity."  They 
were  spiritual  perjurers.  And  now  God  was  saying  to  them,  as  He  said  to  the 
congregation  that  grieved  Him  so  long  in  the  wilderness,  "  Ye  shall  know  My 
breach  of  promise."  For  ''He  made  void  the  covenant  He  had  made  with  them  ; 
He  profaned  their  crown  by  casting  it  to  the  ground."  He  had  engaged  to  be 
their  Rock  ;  ''  the  eternal  God  was  their  refuge,  and  underneath  them  were  the 
everlasting  arms."  And  the  exultant  hymn  was  sung  over  them,  ''Happy  art 
thou,  0  Israel !  who  is  like  unto  thee,  0  people,  saved  by  the  Lord,  the  shield  of 
thy  help,  and  the  sword  of  thine  excellency  ?  "  But  though  He  had  thus  pledged 
Himself  to  protect  them,  He  now  **  gives  them  as  sheep  to  the  slaughter ;  He 
makes  them  to  turn  back  from  the  enemy  ;  He  makes  them  a  byword  among 
the  heathen  ;  He  sells  them  for  nought ;  and  makes  them  a  scorn  and  derision 
to  them  that  were  round  about  them."  They  were  to  all  appearance  cast  off  hy 
their  God.  '*  He  hid  His  face  from  them,  and  allowed  many  evils  and  troubles 
to  befal  them  "  (Ps.  xliv.  and  Deut.  xxxi.  17,  18). 

4.  They  sinned  in  resisting  repeated  warnings :  and  now  God  hears  them  not 
after  repeated  cries.  Never  were  a  people  more  loudly  warned  of  what  terrible 
consequences  must  ensue  should  they  enter  on  a  course  of  disobedience  and 
rebellion.     The  words  of  the  great  Legislator,  in  giving  such  warning,  were  like 

121 


CHAP.  m.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


those  of  the  mighty  angel  at  wliose  call  "seven  thnnders  did  utter  their  voices." 
Wliat  henrt,  less  hard  tlian  the  nether  millstone,  could  fail  to  be  moved  by  the 
solemn  appeals  made  in  Deut.  xxviii.  and  xxix?  Scarcely  less  spirit-stirring, 
and  with  like  fidelity,  are  the  addresses  given  on  the  same  subject  in  the  la^t 
two  chapters  of  the  Book  of  Joshua.  To  this  has  to  be  added  the  special 
warning  given  by  the  Angel-Jehovah  in  Jud.  ii.  1-5.  Yet  all  this  line  of 
argument  with  the  heart  was  resisted  by  the  people,  who  now  ^'forsook  the  Lord 
and  served  Baal  and  Ashtaroth.''  They  stopped  their  ears,  and  would  not 
listen.  Their  sins  were  of  the  nature  of  resisting  the  strivings  of  the  Spirit  of 
God,  and  implied  a  hardening  of  the  heart  against  His  entreating  voice 
(Isa.  Ixiii.  10). 

When  they  began  to  cry  to  the  Lord  under  their  grievous  oppression,  they 
found  the  heavens  above  them  to  be  as  brass.  God  turned  to  them  the  back  of 
His  throne,  and  acted  as  if  He  heard  not.  He  virtually  said  to  them,  "  When 
ye  spread  forth  your  hands,  1  will  hide  mine  eyes  from  you  ;  yea^  when  ye  make 
many  prayerSy  1  will  not  hear,"  **  You  set  at  nought  all  my  counsel,  and  would 
none  of  my  reproof.  JSow  also  I  will  laugh  at  your  calamity,  and  mock  when 
your  fear  cometh"  etc.  (Jer.  xi.  14).  In  all  likelihood,  shortly  after  their 
oppression  began,  they  began  to  cry ;  but  not  till  eight  years  had  passed  away 
did  God  listen  to  them,  so  as  to  relieve  them.  That  was  after  all  but  a  short 
period,  contrasted  with  the  period  of  their  sinning,  which  must  have  been  twenty 
or  thirty  years  at  least ;  yet  it  would  seem  a  long  time  to  their  sensations,  when 
every  day  would  seem  a  week,  and  every  hour  a  day,  under  severe  suffering. 

5.  They  sinned  by  showing  deep  ingratitude ;  and  God  acted  toward  them 
as  if  He  had  lost  all  love  for  them,  and  would  reason  with  them  no  more. 
Their  whole  history  was  full  of  remarkable  scenes  and  episodes,  of  crises  and 
junctures,  setting  forth  in  ever  fresh  form  the  workings  of  the  Divine  love  on 
their  behalf  To  forget  such  a  history  seemed  an  impossibility.  And  yet  so 
ungrateful  did  they  prove,  that  "  they  quickly  forgot  His  mighty  works,  and  the 
wonders  that  He  had  wrought."  They  acted  as  if  they  had  no  debt  of  obligation 
to  their  God.  Amid  the  brightest  beams  of  sunlight,  they  could  see  no  claim 
that  God  had  established  on  their  love  and  new  obedience.  They  were  insen- 
sible, as  the  very  stones,  to  "  the  great  goodness  of  God  toward  the  house  of 
Israel,  which  lie  had  bestowed  upon  them  according  to  His  mercies,  and  the 
multitude  of  His  loving-kindnesses."  They  turned  a  deaf  ear  to  all  the  voices 
of  these  mercies  in  the  past,  and  preferred  to  listen  to  the  syren  enticements  of 
the  false-god  worship.     Their  sin  was  one  of  the  deepest  ingratitude. 

Therefore  God  acted  by  them,  as  if  He  had  given  them  up,  and  would  reason 
with  them  no  more.  Ingratitude  implies  that  love  shown  has  been  despised  ; 
and,  according  to  the  greatness  of  the  love,  was  the  guilt  of  this  people.  Now, 
therefore,  He  practically  gives  them  up.  "  Ephraim,"  notwithstanding  all  the 
arguments  of  the  Divine  love  to  draw  him  back,  "  was  joined  to  his  idols — now 
he  is  to  be  let  alone  !"  "  The  bellows  were  burnt  (through  the  long  trying  to 
take  away  the  coarse  metal),  the  lead  was  consumed  of  the  fire,  the  founder  had 
melted  in  vain."  Now  they  are  held  to  be  "  reprobate  silver,  for  the  Lord  had 
rejected  them."  God  said  of  them,  "  I  have  forsaken  my  house ;  I  have  left 
mine  heritage ;  I  have  given  the  dearly-beloved  of  my  soul  into  the  hand  of 
her  enemies." 

All  this  representation  must  be  understood  as  made  from  man's  point  of  view. 
It  is  only  in  that  view  that  we  can  speak  of  any  change  of  purpose,  or  breach 
of  promise.  To  human  eyes,  God's  dealings  with  His  people  for  a  time  had 
that  appearance.  But  in  reality  "  He  kept  truth  with  them  for  ever — His 
Covenant  stood  fast  from  generation  to  generation." 


122 


nOMlLETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


CHAP.  lit. 


COMMENTS  AND  SUGGEST lONS.  —  Verm  7,  a 


Put  away  the  Idols. 


1.  *'God  good  to  Israel"  in  re- 
quiring the  idols  to  be  put  away. 
It  is  not  kind  dealing  to  let  a  man 
alone  when  under  a  deadly  disease,  ur 
when  hastening  to  cast  himself  over 
the  precipice.  But  the  wicked,  after 
a  certain  measure  of  dealing  which 
they  have  resisted,  are  thus  let  alone,  in 
righteous  punishment  for  their  refusal 
to  repent.  *'  They  have  no  bands  in 
their  death — they  are  not  in  trouble  as 
other  men."  After  long  and  earnest 
dealing,  such  as  to  show  that  God  has 
no  pleasure  in  their  death  but  ardently 
desires  their  salvation,  while  they  still 
reject  all  the  offers  of  Divii»e  Love, 
God  at  last  ''gives  them  up  to  their 
own  hearts'  lusts,"  and  allows  them  to 
sleep  the  sleep  of  death.  But  "  blessed 
is  the  man  whom  the  Lord  chastens. 


and  teaches  out  of  His  law. 


The 


raid  of   the    barbarian    king  was   the 
Divine  loving-kindness  in  a  mystery. 

2.  It  is  a  hard  experience  to  have 
the  heart  purged  of  its  idols.  It  is 
one  of  the  "  terrible  things"  by  wliich 
**  the  God  of  our  salvation  in  righteous- 
ness answers  our  prayers."  Tlie  penitent 
cries,  "Create  in  me  a  clean  heart,  0 
God  !  "  The  wise  love  of  the  covenant 
God  replies,  "From  all  your  filthiness, 
and  from  all  your  idols  will  I  cleanse 
you." 

(1).  In  the  furnace  is  it  done.  There 
the  dross  is  consumed,  and  the  genuine 
metal  is  made  to  shine  with  greater 
distinctness.  For  when  the  heart  is 
put  to  the  proof,  the  good  principle,  if 
it  exists  at  all,  is  led  to  assert  itself 
with  more  decision,  and  is  quickened 
into  fresh  and  more  vigorous  life  ;  and 
as  it  gathers  strength,  the  heart  begins 
to  slacken  hold  of  its  idols.  When  a 
man  really  good  at  bottom  is  pushed 
by  force  of  circumstances  to  say,  that 
he  must  either  part  w*ith  his  convic- 
tions altogether,  or  carry  them  out  with 
a  more  resolute  purpose,  he  is  roused 
from  his  temporary  torpor,  and  through 
God's  grace  shakes  himself  loose  from 


those  objects,  which  were  competitors 
for  his  affections  with  his  Saviour  and 
Lord. 

(2.)  It  is  done  by  the  bitter  experi- 
ence which  the  heart  has  of  these  idols, 
so  long  as  it  clings  to  them.  All  the 
enticements  of  sin — all  the  allurements 
of  the  world,  are  felt,  even  while  in 
our  hands,  to  be  "a  mockery,  a  delu- 
sion, and  a  snare."  So  Lot  felt,  while 
actually  possessing  the  rich  plains  of 
Sodom,  that  his  "  righteous  soul  was 
vexed  from  day  to  day  with  the  wicked 
deeds"  ot  those  among  whom  he  dwelt. 
And  a  similar  experience  had  these 
Israelites  when  dwelling  with  the 
Canaanites  that  remained  in  the  land. 
They  were  **  thorns  in  their  sides,"  and 
"scourges"  and  "snares,"  so  long  as 
they  had  to  do  with  them. 

(3).  Also  by  the  great  miseries 
which  idols  bring  on  a  man  in  the 
long  run.  Lot  was  ruined  as  regards 
this  world.  tSolomon  lost  his  God-given 
peace  in  his  latter  days.  Jacob  spent 
a  great  part  of  his  life  under  an  eclipse, 
on  account  of  his  idols,  but  being  a 
man  of  great  prayer  and  faith,  his  star 
shone  out  brightly  in  theend.  IJezekiak, 
for  idolising  his  treasures  in  the  sight 
of  the  messengers  of  the  king  of  Baby- 
lon, was  assured  that  in  the  end  these 
treasures  would  be  all  seized,  and 
carried  away  as  spoil  by  that  rapacious 
monarch.  David  found  that  the  two 
members  of  his  family  whom  he  had 
specially  indulged  and  idolised,  turned 
out  in  the  end  to  be  the  two  greatest 
miseries  of  his  life — Absalom  and 
Adonijah.  Jehoshap/iat  very  nearly 
lost  his  life  at  llamoth-gilead,  and 
afterwards  had  all  his  ships  broken  at 
Ezion-gaber,  because  he  made  an  idol 
of  his  friendship  with  the  house  of 
Ahab.  And  these  Israelites,  who  ac- 
cepted the  gods  of  the  Canaanites, 
found  ere  long  that  "  their  sorrows  are 
multiplied  that  hasten  after  another 
god."  All  the  flatteries  of  sin,  and 
the  promises  of  the  world,  after  a  short 

123 


CHAP.  in.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES, 


experience,  not  only  sting  with   dis-  salubrity  of  the  ocean,  and  prevent  its 

ai:)pointnient,  but  pluii<;e  the  soul  into  waters  from  lapsing  into  putrefaction, 

untold  grief,  if  not  despair.     By  and  which  a  state  of  stagnancy  would  cer- 

bye,  the  really  good  man  feels  that  he  tainly  produce,  so  days  of  trial,  though 

must  cut  off  a  right  hand  and  pluck  unwelcome   to  flesh    and    blood,    are 

out  a  riglit  eye,  rather  than  having  most  salutary  for  the  purging  of  the 

two  hands  and  two  ej^es  to  be  cast  into  good  man's  character  and  advancing 

the  fire.     At  last  he  learns  the  folly  of  the  work  of  sanctification,  in  view  of 

choosing  any  other  object  for  his  true  entering  heaven   at  last.      It  is  dan- 

and  proper  portion  but  God  Himself  gerous  for  the  Christian  to  get  settled 

(4.)  The  troubles  of  life  generally  on  his  lees,  but  nothing  is  more  bene- 

help  this  result  when  sanctified.     As  ficial  for  health  than  to  be  emptied 

the  dashings  of  the  wave  preserve  the  from  vessel  to  vessel. 

The  Afflictions  of  God's  People  are  Never  Penal. 

This  distinction   is  of  the  utmost  ment  due  to  their  sins,  nor  any  part  of 

importance.     Israel  being  in  covenant  it.     That  is  already  inflicted  on  a  sub- 

with  God,  none  of  the  calamities  which  stitute,  that  they  may  go  free.     And 

befell  them  at  the  hands  of  the  nations  this  principle  of  substitutionary  sacri- 

round  about  were  sent  as  a  legal  re-  fice  is  steadily  kept  in  view  from  the 

tribution   for  their  sins  before   their  days  of  Abraham,  and  onward — more 

God.     Whatever  the  measure  of  their  visibly  from   the  era  of  the   Mosaic 

severity,  they  were  but  the  chastise-  institutions  and  onwards — and  forms 

ment  of  a  wise  and  loving  Father,  with  the  reason  for  God's  dealing  with  His 

whom    a    foundation    of    peace    had  people  in  the  way  of  correction  and 

already  been  estabHshed.     They  were  discipline,  and  not  of  retributive  judg- 

the  corrections  of  the  rod  in  a  Father's  ment.     Retribution  being  exacted  on 

hand,  not  the  vengeance  of  the  sword  the  substitute,  there  is  no  need  to 

in  the  hands  of  an  angry  Judge.  exact  it  also  on  the  person  of  the 

I.  The  people  of  God  have  a  sin-  off'ender.     In  the  times  of  the  Judges, 

bearer.     Though  alike  unworthy  with  there  is,  indeed,  little  or  no  reference 

others,  there  is  one  provided  for  them  made  to  the  observance  of  sacrificial 

"on  whom    all    their  iniquities    are  worship  among  the  people,  but  God 

laid"  and  by  whom  they  are  all  borne  had  established    this    system   among 

away.     What  other  meaning  can  be  them  with  great  solemnity  ;   and  He 

given  to  all  the  sacrifices  so  strictly  Himself  pays   jealous  respect  to  His 

required  to  be  laid  on  the  altar  from  own  ordinance,  whether  the  people  do 

age  to  age,  through  their  whole  history,  so,  or  not. 
by  the  covenant  people  ?    They  were 

so  many  fingers  that  pointed  down,  II.  The  unusual  character  of  this 

through  the  long  period  of  waiting,  to  arrangement.     Many  object  to  a  pro- 

the  "  Lamb  of  God,"  whose  offering  ceeding  so  diff'erent  from  the  ordinary 

should  for  ever  '*  put  an  end  to  sin,  course  of  law  as  to  lay  the  punishment 

and  bring  in  everlasting  righteousness."  deserved  on  another  different  from  the 

The  privilege  of  having  such  a  sin-  offender  himself,  and  ask  in  wonder, 

bearer  as  one's  own  is,  indeed,  open  to  Why  should  the  innocent  suffer  for  the 

aU,  but  it  is  only  on  those  by  whom  it  guilty  ?  "      The  reply  is,    that   God 

is  accepted  that  the  benefits  are  ac-  Himself  proposes  to  us  this  method  for 

tually  conferred — the  people  of  God.  disposing  of  our  sins.      He  Himself 

This  gives  a  new  complexion   to  all  provides  the  substitute,   and  in  the 

God's  dealings  with  them.    The  suffer-  exercise  of  His  prerogative  as  Law- 

ings  which  they  endure  in  connection  giver  and  Judge,  He  necessarily  must 

with  their  «ins  are  not  the  legal  punish-  endorse  His  own  plan.    The  practical 
124 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   JUDGES. 


OHAP.  III. 


value  of  tlie  plan  is,  that  all  who 
accej^t  of  this  substitute  receive  the 
full  benefit  of  His  suhstitntion,  and 
every  sin  which  they  commit  is  counted 
to  have  been  legally  punished  in  Him 
(2  Cor.  v.  21). 

When  a  rational  creature  violates 
the  laws  of  God's  moral  government,  it 
is  not  for  human  reason  to  determine 
what  should,  be  done  in  the  emergency — 
wliether  the  laws  are  to  hold  on  in 
their  natural  course  by  the  infliction 
of  death  on  the  offender,  or  whether 
Mercy,  in  some  form,  is  to  come  in  to 
operate  ;  and  if  so,  in  what  form  ? 
That  is  a  question  where  there  are  no 
fixed  rules  to  guide  us — where  reason 
therefore  has  no  vocation — where,  in- 
deed, it  I'emains  entirely  with  the  good 
pleasure  of  the  Lawgiver  and  Father  to 
say  what  He  wishes  to  be  done.  Our  pro- 
per course  in  such  a  case  is  to  cease  to 
reason,  and  receive  reverently  the 
Divine  testimony  as  to  the  method  of 
dealing  which  He  proposes  to  take. 

But  sin  is  something  abnormal;  we 
may  expect  therefore  something  abnor- 
mal in  the  means  devised  for  disposing 
of  it.  And  there  is  much  about  the 
method  proposed,  which  marks  it  as 
above  the  sphere  of  reason  to  judge 
of  it.  Our  duty  is  not  to  determine 
the  question  for  ourselves,  but  to  hear 
the  voice  of  *'  Him  with  whom  we  have 
to  do.'*  "  Who  shall  lay  anything  to 
the  charge  of  God's  elect  ?  It  is  God 
who  justifieth  " — in  the  method  pro- 
posed in  tlie  gospel.  "  Who  is  he  that 
condemneth  ?  It  is  Christ,  who  died  " 
— as  the  substitute — not  any  ordinary 
subject  of  government,  who  required 
to  obey  the  law  for  himself,  and  who 
had  no  power  to  give  away  himself  as 
he  pleased,  because  he  was  not  himself 
his  own  property — but  **  it  is  Christ 
who  died  " — an  extraordinay  Person, 
and  who  therefore  could  meet  the  ex- 
traordinay condition  of  things — "yea 
rather,  who  is  risen  again,"  etc.,  sure 
proof  that  the  penalty  has  been  ex- 
hausted, and  that  no  more  suffering 
work  has  to  be  gone  through.  Thus  the 
Lawgiver  is  Himself  the  Saviour,  and 
we  rely  on  such  a  method  as  He  has 


Himself  devised  to  meet  the  case,  on 
His  own  testimony. 

III.  The  legal  punishment  due  to 
His  people's  sins  already  borne  by 
t^ieir  sin-bearer.  The  proper  penalty 
of  sin  is  of  the  nature  of  destruction, 
as  opposed  to  correction  or  discipline. 
*'  The  wages  of  sin  is  death."  The 
creature  by  sinning  forfeits  his  exis- 
tence, or  all  that  properly  consti- 
tutes life.  He  forfeits  the  smile  of 
Him  that  made  him,  and  falls  under 
His  frown  ;  which  means  the  h)ss 
of  all  possible  happiness,  and  liability 
to  all  ])0S8ible  misery.  For  the  smile 
or  frown  of  his  Creator  is,  to  a  creature 
made  after  his  image,  the  sum  total  of 
all  possible  good,  or  all  possible  evil. 
Such  a  creature,  losing  the  image  of 
God,  and  so  becoming  depraved,  or, 
disobeying  the  will  of  his  Creator,  and 
so  ceasing  to  serve  the  purpose  for 
which  he  was  created,  according  to  all 
rules  of  righteousness,  forfeits  his  ex- 
istence. But  the  principle  of  a  sub- 
stitute being  admitted,  that  substitute 
undertakes  all  the  sinner's  liabilities, 
and  suffers  death  under  the  frown  of 
the  Lawgiver.  This  is  what  Christ  did. 
In  the  room  of  sinners  He  endured  tlie 
full  force  of  the  Divine  frown  against 
their  sins,  as  an  exhibition  of  the  treat- 
ment which  they  deserved ;  and  so 
infinite  in  its  grandeur  is  that  ex- 
hii)ition,  from  the  fact  especially  that 
the  Person  who  was  chosen  to  act  as 
substitute  was  Divine,  as  well  as  hu- 
man, that  nothing  farther  is  required 
as  an  ex[)iation  for  any  number  of  sins, 
or  for  any  class  of  sinners.  It  is  the 
unspeakable  privilege  of  all  who  trust 
in  Christ  as  their  substitute,  that  the 
full  effect  of  what  He  has  done  to 
vindicate  the  purity  of  the  Divine 
character,  and  the  honour  of  the  Divine 
government  should  be  regarded  to  them 
as  if  they  had  done  it  personally,  seeing 
it  was  done  expressly  in  their  stead, 
and  with  the  intention  of  being  for 
their  benefit.  Hence  the  precious 
statement,  that  "  (/hrist  is  the  end  of 
the  law  for  righteousness  to  everyone 
that  believeth."  In  Him  to  whom  they 
are  united  by  faith  so  as  to  become 

V^6 


CHAP.  IIL 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


one  with  Him,  the  full  desert  of  tlieir 
sins  has  been  suffered — of  all  tlieir 
sins  whatever  the  number,  and  there 
now  remains  no  more  any  penal  con- 
sequences for  those  terrible  sins  !  Who 
can  estimate  the  magnitude  of  such  a 
privilege  ? 

rV.  What  then  is  the  precise  charac- 
ter of  the  affiictions  of  the  people  of 
God?  Are  they  not  caused  by  sin — 
the  consequence  eitlier  of  overt  acts 
committed,  or  of  sin  still  lingering  in 
their  hearts  ?  If  so,  why  should  they 
not  be  regarded  as  the  proper  punish- 
ment of  sin  ?  If  they  are  called  chas- 
tisement, how  does  that  differ  from 
proper  punishment? 

1.  Legal  punishment  is  the  expres- 
sion of  the  Divine  wrath  directed 
a?^ainst  sin,  hearing  death  to  the 
sinner.  It  implies  that  in  giving  to 
sin  what  is  its  due,  the  whole  weight 
of  the  Divine  displeasure  must  come 
down  upon  it,  which  can  result  in  no- 
thing but  destruction  to  the  creature, 
and  that  this  in  fact  is  the  creature's 
desert  because  of  his  sin.  We  do  not 
suppose  for  a  moment  that  God  hates 
any  creature  that  He  has  made  merely 
as  a  creature,  It  is  not  in  His  nature 
to  do  so.  But  w  hen  a  creature  cherishes 
sin,  commits  sin,  and  clings  to  sin,  not- 
withstanding every  argument  used  to 
induce  him  to  separate  himself  from  it, 
then  He  must  bear  the  expression  of 
the  Divine  wrath  which  necessarily  goes 
forth  against  his  sin.  Thus,  ])unish- 
raent  is  the  expression  of  judicial 
anger  directed  against  sin,  giving  to  it 
its  due  desert  in  utter  destruction. 
As  opposed  to  this,  chastisement  is 
the  expression  of  fatherly  displeasure, 
needed  to  convey  to  the  child  proper 
views  of  the  evil  of  his  conduct,  to 
show  the  deep  offence  given  to  the 
father,  and  to  point  out  the  necessity 
of  amendment  of  wa3S.  It  is  all  in 
the  way  of  correction,  reformation,  or 
di-cip!ine,  and  not  of  rciiibntion. 

9..  In  chastisement,  whatever  the 
sufferings  he,  they  are  always  partial 
and  limited  never  going  the  length 
of  destruction,  hut  only  intended  to 
correct  a  id  improve.  In  marking  the 
126 


difference  between  retribution  and 
chastisement,  God  says,  "7  will  make 
a  full  end  of  all  the  nations,  yet  will  I 
not  make  a  full  end  of  thee;  1  will 
correct  thee  in  measure''  (Jer.  xxx.  11). 
And  again  He  says,  *'/  am  very  sore 
displeased  with  the  heathen"  {i.e.,  for 
what  they  did  in  afflicting  Israel)  ''for 
I  was  hut  a  little  displeased^  and  they 
helped  forward  the  affliction.**  h\ 
showing  His  anger  against  His  people. 
He  never  goes  the  full  length  of  what 
they  deserve.  It  is  never  a  penal  in- 
fliction (Zech.  i.  15).  Perhaps  it  is  in 
this  sense  that  the  expression  is  used. 
"  Jerusalem  hath  received  at  the  Lord^s 
hand  double  for  all  her  sins"  (Isa.  xl. 
2) — according  to  the  rule  of  expressing 
only  fatherly  displeasure  against  His 
own  people,  not  judicial  wrath.  The 
sufferings  are  limited,  not  being  the 
expression  of  the  full  amount  of  what 
is  deserved,  but  being  intended  to 
correct  and  improve. 

V.  The  purpose  served  by  these 
afflictions. 

1.  To  keep  alive  in  their  minds  a 
reverent  sense  of  what  is  due  to  God's 
character  and  law.  Being  yet  but 
very  partially  sanctified,  and  the  old 
roots  of  evil  being  still  strong  in  their 
hearts,  there  is  the  need  of  some  powerful 
restraint  on  the  outbreak  of  evil,  in 
view  of  the  fact  that  they  are  entirely 
freed  from  the  penal  consequences  of 
sin.  They  must  learn  to  **  stand  in 
awe,  and  sin  not."  They  must  be 
taught  the  profound  reverence  which  is 
due  to  the  cliaracterand  thelaw  of  their 
God — that  "  great  fear  is  due  unto  His 
name,"  and  that  profound  regard  must 
be  had  to  His  authority  in  all  that  He 
requires — that  there  must  be  no  trans- 
gression of  His  holy  commandments, 
and  no  trifling  with  His  merciful  for- 
bearance— that  right  conceptions  must 
be  kept  up  of  what  is  due  to  His  Infinite 
Majesty  and  unsullied  Holiness,  and 
that  there  must  be  no  slackening  of 
His  Divine  authority.  It  is  all-impor- 
tant to  notice  that  in  tlie  manner  in 
which  this  lesson  is  taught,  mercy  is  so 
much  mingled  with  judgment,  tliat  the 
element  of  harshness  is  entirely  elimi- 


no  MI  LET IC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES, 


OHAP.  III. 


nated  from  the  (Uspensation,  so  that  it 
wears  the  soft  as[)ect  of  a  chastisement, 
and  not  the  stern  appearance  of  a 
retribution. 

2.  To  teach  them  the  offensive  and 
deadly  nature  of  sin.  Thoui^li  forgiven 
for  the  Redeemer's  sake,  they  must  be 
taught  that  sin  covers  the  Divine  face 
with  anger,  puts  a  stop  to  intercourse 
wit!)  God,  and  prevents  tlie  outflow  of 
Divine  blessings.  The  bitter  nature  of 
sin  must  be  seen  in  the  bitterness  of  its 
fruits.  They  must  see  that  sin  from 
its  very  nature  leads  to  grief  and 
sorrow,  and  but  for  the  mercy  of 
God  in  tiie  gospel  arrangement,  would 
inevitably  lead  to  their  ruin.  'J^hey 
must  realise  that  they  cannot  sin  with 
impunity,  for  the  "  end  of  all  sinful 
ways  is  death."  And  especially  they 
must  understand,  that  by  the  Gospel 
itself  they  cannot  be  saved,  if  they 
were  to  continue  in  sin  ;  and  that  its 
whole  drift  and  bearing  is  to  save 
them  from  sin  itself  as  well  as  from  its 
consequences. 

3.  To  imT3ress  on  them  the  great  duty 
of  cultivating  personal  holiness.  "  He 
corrects  us  that  we  may  become  par- 
takers of  Ills  holiness**  "  He  prunes 
the  branches  that  they  may  become 
more  fruitful."  {a)  They  remind  of 
the  extreme  inconsistency  of  sin  in  a 
child  of  God,  Every  affliction  as  a 
bitter  fruit  of  sin  teaches,  that  it  is  not 
for  one  that  is  born  of  God  to  commit 
sin — that  his  practice  in  so  far  as  he 
indulges  in  sin  is  most  incongruous 
with  his  calling.  He  is  kindly  but 
pointedly  told  that  "  the  flesh  must  be 
crucified  with  the  affections  and  lusts  " 
in  the  interest  of  the  sanctification  of 
the  soul.  He  is  reminded  of  the  great 
law  of  the  new  life,  that,  in  becoming 
Christ's,  he  is  "  dead  to  sin."  And 
"  how  shall  we,  who  are  dead  to  sin, 
live  any  longer  therein  ?  " 

(b)  They  prevent  the  heart  from 
fixing  on  earthly  objects.  They  break 
our  cisterns  which  we  would  fill  with 
earthly  joys  ;  they  wither  our  gourds, 
or  fond  earthly  comforts  ;  they  destroy 
our  idols  which  we  would  place  in  the 
room  of  our  God ;  they  dry  up  our 
earthly  streams,  and  lead  us  to  look 


away  to  the  fountains  of  living  water 
which  Christ  has  opened  up,  and  to 
look  for  our  rest  under  *'  7 he  shadow 
of  the  great  rock  in  the  weary  land.*' 
They  form  checks  and  disappointments 
to  us  in  our  earthly  pursuits  and  hopes, 
that  we  may  learn  that  all  earthly  ob- 
jects in  the  end  prove  to  be  "  vanity 
and  vexation  of  spirit ;  "  that  there  is 
no  true  happiness  but  in  God,  and  no 
home  but  in  heaven. 

(c)  lliey  lead  to  the  subduing  of  the 
evil  passions  and  corrupt  propensities 
of  the  soul.  Afflictions,  especially  all 
great  trials,  which  lift  a  man  quite  off 
his  feet,  when  "the  floods  come  in  unto 
his  soul,"  teach  a  man  most  effectually 
his  great  helplessness,  and  feebleness. 
Thus  the  foundations  of  pride  and 
self-sufficiency  are  shaken,  and  he 
learns  better  the  lesson  of  "  not  think- 
ing more  In'ghly  of  himself  than  he 
ought  to  think."  The  heart  of  stone 
is  in  a  condition  to  become  a  heart  of 
flesh.  There  is  less  of  the  obstinate 
self-will,  and  more  of  the  obedient  ear 
and  willing  mind.  The  imperious  will 
is  broken,  and  there  is  more  of  "  the 
meekness  and  gentleness  of  Christ." 
The  spirit  of  patience  and  submission 
prevails,  and  realising  the  hallowing 
influence  of  the  Divine  dealings,  he 
begins  to  say,  ''It  was  good  for  me 
that  I  was  afflicted!* 

(d)  They  reveal  to  the  soul  the  lovf 
mark  of  its  piety.  No  light  is  so  true 
by  which  the  soul  may  test  its  real 
character  as  that  of  the  fires  of  afflic- 
tion. There  the  magnifying  influence 
of  self-flattery  disappears,  and  the 
meagre  attainments  are  seen  in  their 
proper  proportions.  A  faithfal  voice 
warns  the  soul  to  the  following  eff'ect  : 
Is  it  tit  that  one,  who  is  "  risen  to  sit 
with  Christ  in  heavenly  places,"  who 
has  been  called  to  live  in  a  Holy  world, 
to  breath  a  Holy  atmosphere,  to  be  the 
associate  of  Holy  companions,  and  to 
spend  existence  in  Holy  pursuits — 
should  live  here  at  so  h)\v  a  mark  of 
personal  piety,  should  walk  so  closely 
on  the  borders  of  sin,  and  make  such 
a  poor  appearance  of  the  fruits  of 
righteousn^'ss  in  the  practical  life.  Is 
it  seemly  that  a  man  who  professes 

127 


CHAP.  III. 


UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   JUDGES, 


to  be  linked  by  a  tender  tie,  and 
linked  inseparably  with  the  only-be- 
gottqii  Son  of  God,  who  is  honoured 
with  His  ])ure  fellowship  and  enjoys 
His  Almighty  guardianship,  and  who 
is  at  last  to  dwell  with  Him  in  His 
home,  and  share  with  Him  in  His  joys 
and  honours,  should  spend  his  reli<T'ious 
life  now  in  a  state  of  languor  and  gloom, 
as  if  "scarce  half  he  seenied  to  live, 
and  were  dead  more  than  half," — is  it 
fit  that  such  a  man  should  lead  a  life 
which  is  scarcely  above  the  mark  of 
those  who  are  content  to  grovel  among 
the  things  of  time  and  sense?  0  how 
unbecoming  for  one  who  is  destined  to 
wear  priestly  robes  of  fine  linen,  white 
and  clean,  to  be  found  wallowing  in 
the  mire  and  pollution  of  the  horrible 
pit  out  of  which  he  has  been  drawn  ! 
It  is  little  worthy  of  the  heir  of  untold 
treasures  in  the  skies,  to  spend  so  much 
of  his  time  and  his  energies  here,  in 
grasping  at  the  dross  and  the  dust  of 
this  earthly  scene.  It  looks  ill  to  see 
a  man  who  has  so  large  an  interest  in 
eternity  looking  with  too  keen  an  eye 
on  tiie  few  pebbles  he  may  be  able  to 
pick  up  on  the  shores  of  time.  What 
a  coming  down  from  his  high  stand- 
point is  it  for  one  whose  destiny  is 
lirighter  than  that  of  a  seraph,  to  be 
ever  complaining  of  the  few  trials  that 
are  mixed  up  with  his  lot  in  this  his 
tem]»orarv  dwelling-place  ? 

(e)  When  sanctified,  the  afflictions 
of  God's  people  lead  them  to  aim  at  a 
higher  mark  of  the  Christian  life. 
Warned  by  their  sufferings  that  their 


time  on  earth  is  so  short  on  the  one 
hand,  and  that  the  Christian  life  is  the 
only  true  life,  on  the  other,  they  give 
themselves  more  sincerely  and  de- 
votedly to  secure  the  aims  of  that  life. 
Voices  around  them  seem  to  say, 
''  Why  should  one  with  such  prospects 
as  yours  live  like  the  drudges  of  Satan, 
or  the  slaves  of  sin  ?  "  "Are  you  called 
to  be  an  heir  of  glory,  though  equally 
undeserving  with  any  worldling  by  your 
side,  and  will  you  not  show  your  grati- 
tude by  cultivating  a  tone  of  speech 
and  temper  of  mind,  far  above  that  of 
the  grovelling  earth-worm?  Howcareful 
of  its  speech  should  that  tongue  be  that 
is  soon  to  sing  so  sweetly,  and  so  loudly, 
the  praises  of  redeeming  grace  !  How 
high  should  those  feet  be  lifted  above 
the  pollutions  of  the  world,  which  are 
ere  long  to  tread  the  streets  of  pure 
gold  like  unto  transparent  glass  !  How 
pure  a  sanctuary  should  that  heart  be 
which  is  destined  to  become  for  ever 
the  dwelling-place  of  the  Lord  of  glory  ! 
How  clean  should  those  hands  be  that 
are  dedicated  for  ever  to  Temple  ser- 
vice !  How  rapidly  should  that  race 
be  run  which  leads  to  a  weight  of 
glory  !  How  manfully  should  that 
battle  be  fought,  which,  you  know, 
shall  end  in  the  crushing  of  every 
enemy,  and  gaining  a  complete  and 
everlasting  triumph  !  Lay  aside,  then, 
all  weights,  and  run  with  patience  the 
appointed  race ;  fight  prayerfully  the 
good  fight,  and  soon  you  shall  be  a 
conqueror  and  more." 


Afflictions  coMiua  from  the  Hand  of  God,  and  fkom  the  Hand  of  Man. 


All  affliction  to  God's  people  comes 
either  as  directly  sent  by  Him,  or  ex- 
pressly permitted  by  Him.  "  Shall 
there  be  evil  in  a  city^  and  the  Lord 
hath  not  done  itV  There  is  a  differ- 
ence between  trouble  as  sent  directly 
from  God's  hand,  as  in  the  case  of 
famine,  pestilence,  or  the  earthquake, 
and  trouble  as  sent  through  the  agency 
of  many  as  in  the  case  of  being  de- 
livered up  into  the  hands  of  enemies 
of  our  own  race.  David  had  experience 
128 


of  both  ways,  and  decidedly  preferred 
the  former,  when  he  must  choose  the 
one  or  the  other  (2  Sam.  xxiv.  14). 
What  is  the  difference  between  the 
one  mode  and  the  other,  that  there 
should  be  a  ground  of  preference  ? 
The  following  considerations  will  help 
us  to  judge  how  much  better  it  is  to 
have  our  afflictions  coming  directly 
from  the  hand  of  God,  than  coming 
through  the  agency  of  man :— » 


HOMILETIC  COMMEMTART:  JUDGES.  chap.  m. 


I.  On  God's  side  there  is  always  requirements  of  the  case  when  fault 
much  cause  for  sending  the  affliction  ;  has  been  conunitted.  **  7 he  Lord  is  a 
on  man's  side  there  is  little,  and  often  God  of  knowledge,  and  by  Him  actions 
no  reason.  To  God  we  are  responsible  are  weighed ^  There  is  never  a  dis- 
for  the  whole  of  our  moral  conduct,  turbance  of  the  exact  balance  of  justice 
In  the  whole  domain  of  conscience  it  when  measuring  out  to  men  what  is 
is  "with  Him  we  have  to  do;"  and  due,  on  the  account  of  not  knowing 
before  Him  we  have  contracted  a  debt  the  exact  merits!  of  every  case.  If 
of  more  than  ten  thousand  talents,  so  there  is  any  such  disturbance,  it  is  all 
that  there  is  tlie  highest  reason  to  ex-  on  the  side  of  mercy  to  the  offender, 
pect  He  would  send  upon  us  the  Man,  however,  is  often  hasty,  rash, 
severest  use  of  the  rod.  But  to  man  and  greatly  mistaken  in  his  judgment 
we  are  not  responsible  at  all  in  the  of  the  conduct,  as  well  as  the  character 
province  of  conscience  ;  and  though  we  of  his  fellow  man.  His  knowled,L,^e  of 
owe  him  many  duties  of  love  and  kind-  the  case  is  always  limited — the  motives 
ness  under  the  second  table  of  the  law,  from  which  his  fellow  may  have  acted, 
it  is  not  to  him  we  have  to  answer  for  iiis  precise  intentions  in  the  case,  the 
the  manner  in  which  we  fulfil  these  circumstances  in  which  he  was  placed, 
duties,  but  to  God,  whose  subjects  his  ignorance  of  what  was  duty,  and 
alone  we  are.  Man,  indeed,  is  at  best  many  other  elements  which  must  be 
only  a  subject  himself,  and  not  a  go-  taken  into  account  in  forming  a 
vernor;  and  he  only  goes  out  of  his  place  complete  judgment.  Thus  afflictions 
when  he  presumes  to  take  any  part  of  coming  from  the  hand  of  God  are 
the  moral  government  of  the  world  greatly  in  contrast  with  those  coming 
into  his  hands.  Besides,  such  debt  as  from  the  hand  of  man,  because  in  the 
we  owe  to  man  is  relatively  less  than  one  case  there  is  a  perfect  knowledge 
one  hundred  pence,  and  therefore  tri-  of  every  element,  and  feature  of  cha- 
fling  compared  with  what  we  owe  to  racter  and  conduct,  while  in  the  other 
God.  David  had  grievously  sinned  there  is  always  imperfect  knowledge, 
against  both  Uriah  and  Bathsheba  ;  and  sometimes  serious  errors  of  judg- 
yet,  so  much  greater  did  his  sin  seem  ment  all  through. 

which  he  had  committed  against  God, 

that  he  speaks  of  it  as  his  only  sin         III.    God  is  never  actuated  by  any 

(Fs.  ii.  4).  unholy  spirit   in  His  judgment  and 

dealings,  while  man  is  liable  to  be 

II.  God  never  errs  in  the  judgment  swayed  by  many  selfish  and  evil  pass- 
He  forms  of  men's  characters  and  ions.  God  always  acts  from  principle, 
conduct;  man  is  often  and  greatly  with  S(mie  holy  and  wise  end  in  view, 
mistaken.  "  The  eyes  of  the  Lord  No  such  elements  as  prejudice,  ill  will, 
run  to  and  fro  through  the  whole  or  evil  passion  of  any  kind  can  exist 
earth — Uis  eyes  behold,  His  eyelids  in  the  Divine  mind,  from  the  very 
try  the  children  of  men — there  is  not  necessity  of  His  nature.  "  God  is 
a  word  in  my  tongue  but  thou  knowest  light,  and  in  Him  is  no  dai^kness  at 
it  altogether;  thou  hast  beset  me  all.''  Neither  can  a  spirit  of  revenge 
behind  and  before — He  knows  what  is  find  a  place  in  His  bosom,  for  there  is 
in  man.''  He  is  the  Author  of  that  no  fou!idation  for  any  such  feeling  in 
word  which  "  discerns  the  thoughts  His  nature  as  God.  He  is  therefore 
and  intents  of  the  heart."  In  prayer  always  calm  and  measured  in  the 
He  hears  the  thoughts  of  the  heart,  afflictions  He  sends  on  His  people.  He 
whether  "  uttered  or  unexpressed."  also  exercises  great  tenderness  of  deal- 
He  cannot  therefore  in  any  case  inflict  ing  and  wise  consideration  of  all  the 
an  unrighteous  sentence,  either  by  circumstances — "  staying  His  rough 
punishing  the  wrong  person,  or  punish-  wind  in  the  day  of  His  east  wind, 
ing  where  there  has  been  no  fault  at  "correcting  in  measure,"  "not  always 
all,  or  punishing  in  excess  of  the  actual  wroth,  lest  the  spirit  should  fail  before 

S  129 


OHAP.m.  MOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


Him,"  causing  the  "weeping  to  endure  criminate  in  his  strokes,  and  is  sonie- 

but  for  a  night  and  bringing  joy  in  the  times    even    reckless    <is    to    results, 

morning," — "  witli  the  trial  making  a  provided  only  his  own  purposes  can 

way  of  escape."  be  carried  out. 

With  man  on  the  contrary  there  is 

often  a  spirit  of  malice  and  revenge,  V.  God  is  more  easily  entreated  by 

a  desire  to  oppress  or  crush,  or  a  desire  the  voice  of  prayer.   Though  Ephraim 

to  exalt  himself  by  the  humiliation  of  was  an  incorrigible  offender  and  seemed 

his  neighbour — it  may  be,  a  desire  to  for  the  most  part  unmoved  when  even 

rule  over  his  neighbour,  and  to  make  "  hewed  "  with  the  strong  words  of  God 

profit  by  his  loss.     Or  there  is  often  through  His  prophets,  the  moment  he 

the   harbouring   unjustifiably   of   evil  turns  again,  the  ear  of  his  God  listens 

thoughts,  which  have  only  an  imagin-  — "  1    have    heard — /    ham     heard 

ary  foundation,  or  a  very  sliglit  found-  Ephraim     bemoaning    himself    thus, 

ation  in  fact — an  evil  interpretation  of  *  Thou  hast  chastised    me  and  I  was 

appearances  which  are  susceptible  of  a  chastised — turn    thou  me  and  1  shall 

satisfactory   explanation,    with    many  be    turned''*    (Jer.    xxxi.    18,    etc.). 

such   feelings  to  warp  the  judgment.  Amid  all  the  stern  work  of  the  cap- 

and  bring  down  affliction  unrighteously,  tivity,  the  afflicting  God  was  yet  the 

Saviour,    and    assures    them,     "  Then 

IV.    God  always  thinks  of  a  wise  shall  ye  call  upon  me,  and  pray  unto 

and  merciful  result ;  man  is  often  in-  me,  and  J  will  hearken  unto  you.    And 

considerat'3  and  regardless  of  conse-  ye  shall  seek  me  and  find  me  when  ye 

quences.    ^^  Happy  is  the  man  whom  search  for  me  with  all  your  heart." 

the  Lord  correcteth,   for  though    He  So  it  was  with  Saul  i)f"  Tarsus.     The 

cause  grief  He  will  have  compassion  moment  he  repents  and  lifts  his  cry  to 

according    to  the    multitude    of   His  heaven,  the  exalted  Saviour  listens,  and 

mercies,  for  He  doth  not  afflict  wil-  says  of   him,   **  Behold  he  prayeih  ! " 

lingly"  etc.     It  is  really  for  the  best  Similar  assurances  are  given  of  God's 

interests  of  the   soul   itself   that   He  willingness  to  be  entreated  under  the 

proceeds  with  the  work  of  chastisement  afflictions  of  the  rod  (Ps.  1.  15.  ;  Matt, 

to   cure   of   worldliness,   of  pride,  of  xviii.  27. ;   James  v.  13.  ;   Ps.  xxxiv. 

backsliding,  of  some  easily  besetting  4,  6,  etc.).     Man,  however,  is  so  diffe- 

sin,    or    to    quicken    diligence,    zeal,  rent,  that  he  may  hear  our  cry  to-day, 

devotedness,  self  denial,  godliness,  or  and  be  deaf  to  all  entreaties  to-morrow  ; 

some  other  element  of  the  Divine  life,  when  the  case  may  be  most  reasonable  he 

The  soul   itself  often   vindicates   the  is  most  impracticable ;  and  what  he  does 

hand  that  smites  it  by  saying,  "  I  know  give  the  hope  of  doing  at  one  time,  he 

that  in  fciitlifnlness  thou  hast  afflicted  will  fail  to  fulfil  when  the  period  arrives, 

me."      But   man,   when    he  has  the  His  decisions  are  regulated  by  caprice, 

opportunity  to  afflict,  is  often   capri-  or  convenience,  and  not  by  justice  or 

cious  in  his  acts  as  well  as  in  his  judg-  the  kindness  required  by  the  golden 

ments,  proceeds  with  blind  indifference,  rule, 
if   not  intentional  cruelty,  is  indish 

Hatred  of  the  World  to  the  People  of  God. 

Of  this  the  incursions  made  by  the  given  in  Ps.  Ixxxiii.  5-8.     They  speci- 

heathen    nations   from   time    to   time  ally  disliked  the  God  of  Israel,  because 

were  striking  illustrations.     Their  pur-  He  could  make  no  peace  with  their 

pose  was  thus  expressed — "  Comey  let  gods,  nor    even    tolerate    their    very 

us  cut  them  off  from  being  a  nation,  existence.     The  people  too  dwelt  alone 

that  the  name  of  Israel  may  be  no  more  and  did  not  commingle  with  the  other 

in  remembrance."    The  confederacy  is  nations, but  observed  religious  customs 
130 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   JUDGES, 


OHAP.  ui. 


and  manners  different  from  all  others. 
Moreover  the  God  of  Israel  had  been 
most  severe  in  inflicting  overthrow  and 
calamity  on  all  the  nations  that  came 
in  contact  with  that  people.  In  this 
we  see  a  type  of  the  hatred  which  the 
representatives  of  the  world  cherish  to 
the  church  and  people  of  God. 

I.  This  hatred  has  always  existed. 
The  case  given  in  this  chapter  is 
no  solitary  instance  of  God's  people 
being  hated  by  the  world,  and  of  a 
conspiracy  being  formed  for  their 
ruin.  This  spirit  of  antagonism 
was  foreshadowed  by  the  case  of  the 
**  woman's  seed,"  and  the  *'  serpent's 
seed."  On  this  principle  Cain  hated 
Abel  (1  John  iii.  12),  and  the  apostle 
adds  "  Marvel  not  if  the  world  hate 
you,"  for  many  reasons  which  he  speci- 
fies. The  child  of  the  bondwoman  did 
persecute  the  child  of  the  free  (Gal.  iv. 
29).  Pharaoh  and  his  people  tried  to 
crush  the  infant  Church  in  Egypt — in 
its  cradle  ;  so  did  Herod  seek  to  destroy 
the  child  Jesus.  The  king  of  Moab 
sent  to  the  famous  soothsayer  among 
the  mountains  of  the  East,  saying, 
"  Come  curse  me  this  people."  And 
all  through  the  history  of  that  people, 
the  nations  were  ever  glad  when  they 
could  get  an  opportunity  of  giving  a 
deadly  thrust  to  Israel.  The  same 
feeling  still  prevails  and  always  has 
prevailed  between  the  world  and  the 
Church.  The  weapons  employed  have 
been  persecution  in  all  its  forms,  where 
that  was  possible.  And  when  not 
practicable,  all  kinds  of  oppression,  un- 
just and  harsh  dealing,  detraction  and 
slander,  proscription,  raillery,  revilings, 
and  reproaches. 

II.  This  hatred  has  a  deep  root.  The 
world  hates  the  image  of  God,  wherever 
it  is  seen.  Birds  of  the  night  hate  the 
sun.  Christ  says,  '^  Ye  know  that  the 
world  hated  me  h^ore  it  hated  you" 
And  again  He  says,  **  Me  it  hateth  be- 
cause 1  testify  of  it  that  the  works 
thereof  are  evil."  Indeed  no  two  per- 
sonalities are  more  antagonistic  than 
Christ  and  the  world.  It  is  the  opposi- 
tiou  of  the  embodiment  of  sin,  to  the 


personification  of  all  holiness.  The 
owls  and  the  bats  flee  from  the  morning 
beam.  The  fifth  angel  poured  out  his 
vial  on  the  seat  of  the  beast,  and  his 
kingdom  became  full  of  darkness,  and 
they  gnawed  their  tongues  for  pain. 
Thus  bitterly  did  they  resent  it.  So 
when  the  enemies  heard  Stephen 
preach,  "they  gnashed  on  him  with 
their  teeth." 

III.  Christ  gives  complete  victory 
over  the  world's  hatred.  "  In  the 
world  ye  shall  have  tribulation,  but  in 
Me  ye  shall  have  peace."  While  the 
world  is  doing  its  utmost  to  cause 
trouble,  Christ,  working  more  mightily 
still,  is  at  the  same  moment  producing 
peace.  There  is  more  in  Christ's  smile 
than  in  all  the  world's  frown.  Madame 
Guyon,  who  suffered  severely  on  every 
side,  from  an  unhappy  union  in  mar- 
riage, from  the  loss  of  children  and 
friends  by  death,  from  the  alienation  of 
aff'ection  by  calumny,  from  persecution 
for  the  truth's  sake — thrown  first  into 
one  prison,  then  into  another,  then  into 
a  third,  then  into  a  fourth,  and  finally 
banished  from  her  home  till  she  died — 
was  yet  oftentimes  in  heart  overflow- 
ing with  joy,  because  of  the  peace  of 
Christ.  "  Oh,"  she  cries,  "  the  un- 
speakable happiness  of  belonging  to 
Jesus  Christ !  This  is  the  balm  which 
sweetens  all  pains.  The  satisfaction 
and  joy  I  feel  in  being  a  prisoner,  and 
in  suffering  for  Christ,  are  inexpres- 
sible. I  seem  like  a  little  bird  which 
God  has  placed  in  a  cage  with  nothing 
to  do  but  to  sing."  Her  prison  walls 
grew  warm  as  she  literally  sang  for  joy. 
So  felt  Paul  in  the  Roman  dungeon. 
Alone  —  unbefriended  —  unsuccoured, 
this  was  yet  the  happiest  man  in  Rome. 
Among  the  millions  within  her  wide 
walls,  not  another  heart  was  so  buoy- 
ant with  liope,  so  lifted  up  with  joy. 
That  dark  and  cheerless  cell  was  his 
last  resting-place  on  earth.  Soon  his 
feet  should  stand  within  the  gates  of  the 
New  Jerusalem.  One  of  the  loftiest 
seats  around  the  throne  should  soon 
be  his.  One  of  the  sweetest  songs  in 
the  land  of  joy  should  soon  be  raised 
by  him.     Shielded   by  such   a  faith, 

131 


OHAP.m.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   JUDGES, 


animated  by  such   a  hope,   he    rose  bosom,  guided  by  His  eye,  instructed 

above  and  beyond  all  the  horrors  of  by  His  lips,  and  warmed  by  His  love. 

his  condition.     His  afflictions  became  His  wounds  are  his  life.  His  smile  the 

lii^ht,  and  lighter  still,  until  he   felt  light  of  his  path,  the  health  of  his  soul, 

til  em  not  at  all.     So,  too,  it  was  with  his    rest    and    heaven    here    below." 

Bunyan  in  Bedford  jail.     And  thus  it  [Balfern.'] 

was   with   a  long  line  of  martyrs  in         The  world  is  a  vanquished  enemy — 

every  age.     "The  Christian  is  fed  by  it  is  crucified  to  the  Christian,  and 

Christ's  hand,  carried   in   His  heart,  he  to  it 
supported  by  His  arm,  nursed  in  His 

MAIN  HOMILETICS.—  Verses  9-11. 

V.    The  salutary  effect  of  the  Divine  Chastisement* 

"  They  cried  unto  the  Lord  "  Here,  in  a  small  nut,  we  have  a  large  kernel. 
In  all  parts  of  Scripture  we  are  ever  coming  on  unexpected  riches,  if  only  we 
look  carefully,  and  dig  deeply.  How  many  thoughts  all  apposite  are  wrapped 
up  in  this  short  statement  I     It  teaches  the  following  truths  : — 

1.  Severe  chastisement  awakens  from  the  sleep  in  sin.  All  these  many 
years,  they  had  been  living  without  any  proper  sense  of  the  evil  of  their  conduct, 
in  leaving  off  the  worship  and  service  of  the  covenant  God,  bowing  down  to 
idols,  and  practising  systematically  known  sin.  They  had  been  acting  as  men 
who  were  buried  in  deep  slumber.  They  had  become  dead  to  all  sense  of  guilt, 
and  were  unconscious  of  the  clouds  of  wrath  that  were  rapidly  gathering  over 
them.  Now  with  rough,  but  kind  hand,  they  are  awakened,  and  begin  to  realise, 
the  fir.st  time  for  many  years,  the  aggravation  of  their  sin,  and  the  magnitude  of 
their  danger.  "  Those  who  would  hardly  speak  to  God  in  the  day  of  ease,  now  cry 
to  Ilim  with  importunity."  [IJenry.]  Sin  leads  a  man  to  shut  his  eyes,  that  he 
may  not  be  startled  by  looking  at  the  wickedness  of  what  he  is  doing,  and  to 
shut  his  ears,  that  he  may  not  hear  the  condemning  and  warning  voices,  that 
are  uttered  respecting  his  conduct.  By  continuing  often  thus  to  close  both 
eyes  and  ears,  while  the  practice  of  sin  goes  on,  his  insensibility  grows  until  it 
becomes  practically  a  deep  sleep. 

7o  be  awakened  out  of  sleep  is  the  first  beneficial  effect  of  severe  chastisement. 
The  sinner  comes  to  know  how  things  stand  between  him  and  his  God.  Sin  is 
seen  to  be  a  gift  presented  by  man's  enemy  to  lure  on  to  man*s  ruin.  It  is  a 
Trojan  horse  introduced  into  the  soul,  full  of  armed  men,  and  of  the  instruments 
of  death.  It  is  seen  to  be  a  thing  serious  enough  to  awaken  the  thunders  of 
justice,  or  to  bring  an  earthquake  after  it  as  a  natural  sequence.  Every  act  of 
sin  is  felt  to  be  equally  solemn  with  the  first  act,  at  the  commission  of  which 
the  poet  says, 

**  Earth  felt  the  wound,  and  Nature  from  her  sea^ 
Sighing  through  all  her  works,  {,..  e  signs  of  woe 
That  all  was  lost." 

2.  It  shows  the  folly  of  trusting  to  one's  own  resonrces  against  the  day  of 

trial. 

(1.)    Men  are  ever  disposed  to  pride  themselves  on  their  own  sujQiciency. 

They  boast  of  their  physical  strength,  or  their  mental  endowments,  their  stores 
of  knowledge,  their  skill,  tact,  social  influence,  high  position,  or  great  possessions. 
(2.)  In  the  day  of  trial  these  are  found  to  be  broken  reeds.  The  I^aelites 
had  doubtless  their  well-smoothed  arguments  for  justifying  themselves  in  their 
evil  course.  Yet  when  the  shock  of  calamity  actually  came,  they  were  un- 
deceived in  a  moment.  It  was  an  experience  they  had  not  thought  of.  It 
13^ 


BOMlLETtC  COMMENTARY:   JVDQBS,  Ohap.  m. 


seemed  as  if  a  rock  had  fallen  upon  them,  and  they  felt  crushed  under  it.  They 
felt  themselves  to  be  entirely  lielpless.  A  more  bitter  cry  could  not  have  been 
raised  if  the  whole  nation  had  been  put  upon  the  rack.  When  they  thought  of 
the  brave  days  of  old,  they  fancied  themselves  equal  to  any  emergency,  and 
trusted  accordingly.  They  had  long  enjoyed  the  prestige  of  being  more  than  a 
match  for  all  the  nations  of  Canaan,  north  and  south — none  had  been  able  to 
stand  before  them.  And  who  was  this  proud  bison  from  the  prairies  of  Meso- 
potamia, that  he  should  advance  against  a  nation  of  heroes,  that  knew  no  defeat 
in  a  hundred  fights,  under  the  captaincy  of  the  noble  Joshua  ?  Had  they  not 
good  reason  to  be  self-reliant  and  dauntless  ? 

(3.)  But  they  were  unmindful  of  the  real  source  of  their  strength.  Vainly 
assuming  that  in  their  own  arm  slumbered  the  prowess  that  overthrew  the 
Canaanite,  they  counted  that  the  future  would  be  as  the  past,  though  "  they 
had  forsaken  the  God  who  made  them,  and  lightly  esteemed  the  rock  of  their 
salvation."  It  was  thus  they  met  the  foe,  and,  as  might  have  been  anticipated, 
they  went  down  before  him  as  the  frail  reed  before  the  rushing  cataract.  Now 
we  see  them  floundering  helplessly  in  the  gulf  for  a  period  of  eight  years,  and, 
with  their  eyes  at  length  opened  to  their  extreme  wretchedness,  they  come  back, 
with  a  wailing  cry,  to  Him  from  whom  they  had  so  guiltily  wandered. 

(4.)  This  self-trust  proceeds  from  self-ignorance.  In  the  day  of  peace,  men 
are  confident  and  boastful,  while  as  yet  they  have  not  measured  their  strength 
with  the  forces  they  shall  have  to  contend  with  in  the  time  of  trouble.  When 
they  *' prosper  in  the  world  and  increase  in  riches,  they  i^peak  loftihj,  and  their 
tongue  walketh  through  the  earth.**  **  The  wicked  man  saith  in  his  heart,  I 
shall  not  be  moved,  I  shall  never  be  in  adversity.  The  Lord  shall  laugh  at  him, 
because  He  seeth  that  his  day  is  coming."  Men  may,  for  a  time,  be  great  in 
power  and  wealth,  like  the  vine  planted  by  the  waters,  wliich  is  fruitful  and  full 
of  branches  ;  they  may  have  strong  rods  as  sceptres  of  influence  in  society,  and 
their  stature  may  be  exalted  among  the  thick  branches,  yet  if  they  have 
neglected  to  prepare  for  the  great  trial  of  the  future,  tlie  hour  is  approaching 
when  they  shall  be  plucked  up,  and  cast  to  the  gmuiid — the  east  wind  drying 
up  their  fruit,  their  strong  rods  broken  and  withered,  and  the  fire  consuming 
them  (Ezek.  xix.  10-12). 

3.  It  shows  that  idols  are  worthless  as  a  refuge. 

(1.)  It  is  an  instructive  fact  that  throughout  their  entire  history  the  people 
of  Israel  never  apply  to  their  idols  for  help,  when  they  get  into  deep  waters 
In  Elijah's  day,  when  the  tide  of  idolatry  was  at  its  high- water  mark,  we  do 
indeed  hear  the  cry  raised,  "  0  Baal,  hear  us  1 "  but  it  was  not  the  people 
themselves  who  raised  it.  King  Ahaziah  did  send  to  enquire  of  "  the  god  of 
Ekron,"  as  to  his  cure  from  the  serious  injury  he  had  sustained.  But  he  was  a 
son  of  the  wicked  Jezebel  ;  and  this  must  be  held  to  be  an  exceptional  case.  As 
a  rule,  conscience  was  so  far  awakened  by  the  occurrence  of  stern  trials,  that  the 
make-believes  of  their  hypocrisy  were  dissipated,  and  they  fell  back  on  their 
sincere  convictions.  Days  of  crushing  sorrow  proved  too  clearly  that  "  other 
gods  were  but  dumb  idols,"  and  that  confusion  must  be  the  portion  of  ''  those 
who  serve  graven  imai^es"  (see  ch.  x.  13-15;  Jer.  ii.  28  ;  Isa.  x.  3).  "Idols 
are  the  work  of  men's  hands,  but  our  God  is  in  the  heavens  "  (Ps.  cxv,). 

(2.)    Examples. 

Wolsey  made  an  idol  of  his  king,  and  was  cruelly  deserted  by  him  at  the  last. 
He  died  with  the  bitter  confession  on  his  lips,  that  *'  had  he  served  his  God  as 
faithfully  as  he  had  served  his  king,  he  would  not  have  forsaken  him  in  his  grey 
hairs."  Ilaman  made  an  idol  of  worldly  honour,  but  that  did  nothing  to  save 
him  when  he  fell  under  the  wrath  of  the  king.  Lot  made  an  idol  of  his  worldly 
possessions,  but  he  lost  them  all,  and  barely  escaped  with  life  itself,  in  the  flood 

133 


OHAP.  m.  ROMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JUDGES. 


of  ruin  which  overwhehned  Sodom.  The  same  trutli  is  illustrated  in  one  of  the 
parables  given  by  the  Saviour  ;  and  any  representation  of  truth  made  by  Him, 
even  in  parable,^  must  be  held  to  be  equally  correct  with  any  recorded  fact  of 
history.  The  rich  man  "  whose  grounds  brought  forth  plentifully  "  and  who  so 
idolized  his  wealth  that  he  "  resolved  to  pull  down  his  barns  and  build  greater" 
did  not  on  that  account  save  himself  from  the  doom  then  impending  over  his 
head.  Judas  Achan,  Demas,  Simon  Magus,  Ananias  and  Sapphira,  all  made 
idols  of  this  world's  wealth  or  good  things,  yet  they  are  all  witnesses  that 
idols  are  worthless  as  a  refuge  in  the  day  of  trial.  Even  religion  itself,  if  it  is 
idolized  simply  as  a  fashionable  religion,  will  not  prove  a  refuge  in  the  hour  of 
trial.  It  has  been  told  recently  of  a  man,  in  a  country  district,  that  he  walked 
habitually  four  miles  every  Lord's  Day  in  order  to  hear  a  living  gospel  preached 
in  an  humble  edifice,  though  his  house  was  within  a  few  yanls  of  a  large  and 
fashionable  church,  to  which  multitudes  thronged.  *'  The  fashionable  religion," 
he  said,  "  is  all  very  well  to  live  with,  but  it  will  not  do  to  die  with." 

4.  It  leads  instinctively  to  prayer  to  God  as  the  true  refugee.  "  They  cried 
to  the  Lord."  Though  they  had  forsaken  Him,  they  still  believed,  in  the 
deepest  convictions  of  their  heart,  that  He,  and  He  alone,  was  the  true  God. 
This  is  very  instructive. 

(1.)  It  is  the  heart's  spontaneous  testimony.  So  long  as  the  sunshine  of  peace 
lasts,  and  the  delusions  of  sin  remain  unbroken,  the  soul  keeps  chanting  to  the 
strain,  "  I  have  loved  idols,  and  after  them  will  I  go."  But  the  moment  a  great 
peril  arises,  and  a  life-struggle  is  entered  on,  instinctively  it  "shuffles  off"  all 
the  incrustations  of  false  belief,  and  goes  straight  to  the  God  of  its  being,  and 
importunately  pleads.  Could  anything  more  effectually  testify  to  the  lying 
character  of  the  teachings  of  sin,  and  the  solid  truth  of  all  that  God  testifies 
respecting  Himself  ?  When  appeal  is  made  to  the  soul's  deepest  convictions, 
the  response  comes  like  a  trap  rock  shooting  up  through  all  the  superincumbent 
strata  of  unbelief,  that  God  is  the  only  true  refuge  of  the  soul  in  the  day  of  deep 
distress.  With  passionate  cry  it  is  confessed  that  the  Creator  is  necessary 
to  the  creature,  that  His  favour  is  its  life,  and  that  without  Him  all  is  lost. 
The  innate  convictions  of  the  heart  give  the  lie  to  its  acquired  creed. 

(2.)  The  cry  is  as  instinctive  and  sincere  in  the  unbeliever  as  in  the  believer. 
Paine,  who  spent  his  days  in  blasphemy  and  ridicule  of  religion,  and  who 
boasted  that  with  his  axe  he  had  cut  down  every  tree  in  the  forest  of 
Christianity,  leaving  only  a  few  saplings  untouched,  when  he  found  himself 
amid  the  billows  of  the  Atlantic,  the  vessel  in  which  he  sailed  tossed  like  a 
straw  on  their  crest,  and  every  moment  about  to  be  engulphed,  is  found  on  his 
knees  crying  aloud  to  the  God,  whose  existence  he  had  denied,  and  whose  name 
he  had  for  years  profaned,  the  most  earnest  praying-man  in  the  ship,  as  he 
had  need  to  be,  beseeching  the  Almig[ity  with  tears  and  supplications  to  have 
mercy  on  his  soul  1  What  a  picture  alike  of  the  hollowness,  and  revolting  im- 
piety of  infidelity  !  And  when,  afterwards,  death  itself  actually  came,  he  found 
no  other  protection  to  cling  to  but  the  very  God  to  whom  all  through  life  he 
had  reviled  in  the  language  of  ribaldry  and  cursing.  In  *'  the  last  alarms  "  he 
was  heard  crying  out  hundreds  of  times,  **  0,  God  !  help  me  !  0,  Jesus  Christ, 
help  me  !  help  me !  In  thy  great  mercy,  help  me  !  "  Volney^  notwithstanding 
his  atheistical  belief  during  a  severe  storm  at  sea,  was  seen  running  about  in  the 
greatest  alarm  crying  out,  "  0,  God,  help,  help  !  0,  my  God  !  what  shall  I  do  ? 
what  shall  I  do?"  Even  Voltaire,  who  occupied  the  bad  pre-eminence  of 
being  esteemed  the  arch-unbeliever  of  his  day,  and  who  wasted  the  most 
brilliant  mental  endowments  ever  conferred  on  man,  in  reckless  vituperations 
against  the  Christian  faith  and  satirical  mockery  of  all  things  Divine,  turned 
coward  in  a  most  humiliating  manner  at  the  approach  of  the  last  enemy.  The 
134 


HOMILBTtC  COMMENTARY:   JUDGES.  mu^,m. 


prey  of  an  Ornish  and  abject  terror,  he  alternately  supplicated  and  blasphemed  the 
God,  against  whom  he  had  so  defiantly  raised  his  puny  arm.  And  while  his  last 
sands  were  running  out,  so  long  as  speech  was  continued  to  him,  he  called  aloud 
in  the  most  plaintive  accents,  **  Uli,  Christ !  Oh,  Jesus  Christ !  help  me  ! 
help  me  !  "  Other  instancies  we  have  in  Jonah's  shipmates  ;  the  disciples  in  the 
storm  ;  Peter  walking  on  the  water  (Jonah  i.  5,  6  ;  Mark  iv.  38 ;  Matt.  xiv.  30), 
and  the  general  examples  referred  to  in  Ps.  cvii.  6,  12-13,  18-20,  28,  also 
Ps.  Ixxviii.  34).  Indeed,  when  anyone  is  suddenly  confronted  with  death,  the 
ejaculation  involuntarily  springs  from  his  lips,  **  May  God  have  mercy  on  my 
soul!" 

(3.)  It  proves  how  impossible  it  is  to  banish  God  from  the  human  mind. 

The  stoutest  heart  gives  the  same  testimony  with  the  tenderest.  When  no 
danger  is  in  sight,  "  the  fool  saith  in  his  heart  there  is  no  God.''  Rather,  **  he 
keeps  saying  this  in  his  heart,"  as  if  to  keep  down  the  fears  ever  rising  up  that 
there  is  a  God,  or  as  if  to  banish  the  disturbing  evidences  breaking  in  here  and 
there,  and  on  all  sides.  His  strong  wish  that  there  were  none,  is  the  real  cause 
of  all  his  forced  repetitions  that  there  is  none.  For  if  there  is,  then  it  is  all 
wrong  with  him.  But  God  has  so  formed  the  human  heart,  that,  notwithstanding 
all  the  violence  done  to  its  natural  instincts,  through  the  working  of  its 
depravity,  when  the  real  test  is  applied,  its  needle  always  points  to  the  Great 
Supreme,  as  the  being  who  made  it,  who  preserves  it,  to  whom  it  is  responsible 
for  its  moral  conduct,  and  who  holds  its  destiny  for  good  or  evil  entirely  in  His 
hands.  Even  those  who,  like  Cain,  **  have  gone  out  from  the  presence  of  the 
Lord  into  the  land  of  Nod  (the  land  of  distance),"  and  have  practically  tried  to 
spend  life  without  God  in  any  of  their  thoughts,  are,  at  certain  moments, 
checked  by  certain  upheavals  in  their  own  breasts  of  forces  too  deep  down  in 
their  nature  for  them  to  be  able  to  control.  At  those  moments,  even  those  who 
say  they  are  conscious  only  of  the  existence  of  the  egOy  are  constrained  to  admit 
tliat  there  is  also  One  who  made  the  ego,  who  made  it  what  it  is,  and  who  made 
it  to  be  responsible  to  Himself  No  gathered  crust  of  atheistical  assumptions, 
or  maxims,  however  compacted  by  reasoning  or  speculation,  or  hardening 
by  habitual  practice,  shall  be  able  for  a  moment  to  resist  the  subterranean 
force  when  it  begins  to  act,  or  suppress  the  upstarting  conviction,  that  it  is 
everything  for  a  man  to  find  His  favour  through  the  Crucified  One  of  the 
blessed  Gospel. 

6.  Severe  chastisement  prepares  the  way  for  true  penitence. 

(1.)  Not  necessarily  so;  sometimes  it  hardens.  Some  substances  become 
harder  as  they  are  exposed  to  the  action  of  fire.  In  like  manner,  certain 
characters  become  more  stubborn  under  severe  distresses.  God  puts  a  mark  on 
King  Ahaz,  becaiise  ''in  the  time  of  his  distress  he  ti*espas?ed  yet  more  and  more 
against  the  Lord  ;  this  is  that  King  Ahaz  "  (2  Chron.  xxviii.  22).  Some,  when 
reproved,  harden  their  necks.  Pharaoh's  heart  seemed  to  become  more  hard 
as  the  infliction  of  the  plagues  went  on.  Gain^  instead  of  repenting  after  he 
heard  of  his  awful  sentence,  went  out  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  and  dwelt 
in  the  land  of  Nod.  He  went  as  far  away  from  God  as  he  could  go.  He  became 
a  restless  wanderer.  There  are  some  indeed,  who,  when  pursued  by  the  terrors 
of  the  Lord,  in  place  of  returning  to  Him  by  mourning  and  humiliation  for 
their  sins,  prefer  to  commit  suicide.  Thus  did  Judas.  Similar  is  the  story  told 
of  tSardanapalus,  the  last  King  of  Assyria,  who,  when  his  capital  was  besieged, 
and  seeing  no  possibility  of  escape,  shut  himself  up,  with  all  his  household  and  liis 
goods,  in  the  royal  palace,  and,  with  his  own  hands,  in  despair,  applied  the 
lighted  torch,  turning  the  whole  into  a  vast  funeral  pile  1    So— 

135 


OHAP.lii.  nOMlLETlC  COMMENl'ART :  JUDGES. 


"  The  scorpion  girt  by  fire. 
In  circle  narrowing  as  it  glows, 
The  flames  around  their  captives  close  | 
Till  inly  searche<i  by  thousand  throes, 

And  maddeniug  in  her  ire. 
One  and  sole  relief  she  knows 

— her  sting ; 
Gives  but  one  pang  and  cures  all  pain, 
And  darts  into  her  desperate  brain.** 

Others  have  been  so  accustomed  to  give  the  full  force  of  their  wills  to  sinful 

practices,  that  they  liave  become  thoroughly  enslaved,  and  though  they  have 
their  eyes  open  to  its  worst  consequences,  they  will  not  repent,  but  plunge  more 
wildly  than  before  into  the  destructive  vortex  (Isa.  i.  5),  etc.  But  to  those  who 
are  not  altogether  infatuated  by  sin,  severe  affliction,  when  the  Divine  blessing 
goes  with  it,  prepares  the  way  for  true  penitence.     For — 

(2.)  The  heart  must  find  relief  from  its  misery.  The  avalanche  which  now 
came  down  on  the  homes  of  Israel  from  the  distant  north,  was  an  overwhelming 
evil.  They  were  compelled  to  cry  to  their  God,  through  the  pure  force  of 
their  misery.  Conscience  was  awakened,  and  they  became  alive  to  the  fact,  that 
all  this  had  happened  to  thein  because  they  had  forsaken  their  God.  The  con- 
viction would  thus  arise  that  there  was  nothing  to  be  got  in  a  life  of  sin,  but 
misery,  and  misery  ever  deepening.  In  all  directions,  where  they  might  look, 
they  found  no  other  result  but  this.  "  The  end  of  these  ways  was  death."  They 
saw  that  the  necessary  effect  of  sin  was  to  put  them  into  a  state  of  war  with 
God  ;  for  the  man  who  sins  becomes  a  criminal  before  his  God,  and  must  count 
on  God  as  his  enemy.  And  who  would  madly  ''rush  against  the  thick  bosses  of  the 
Almighty's  buckler?"  Who  could  dare  to  contend  in  battle  with  the  great 
*'  I  am  ? "  As  the  soul  values  its  own  peace  with  God,  it  feels  shut  up  to  the 
step  of  returning  to  God.  Feeling  the  hopelessness  of  opposition  to  God,  they 
find  they  must  at  least  feign  submission  to  Him  as  their  God,  to  save  them- 
selves from  absolute  ruin.  Their  cry  for  relief  was  a  necessity,  and  whatever 
objection  the  evil  heart  might  have  to  holding  fellowship  with  a  holy  God, 
under  ordinary  circumstances,  they  felt  that  in  their  present  circumstances 
there  was  no  alternative.  They  must  come  to  be  at  peace  with  Him  under  any 
conditions.  Their  stubborn  wills  must  bow  before  an  imperious  necessity.  They 
are  checkmated  at  every  point  all  round  the  compass.  I'hey  cannot  carr}"  on 
the  strife  against  the  God  of  their  being ;  for  "  woe  is  unto  him  that  striveth 
with  his  Maker  ! "     **  Their  way  was  thus  hedged  up  with  thorns." 

(3.)  The  heart  is  drawn  to  God  by  the  intimations  of  His  sin-forgiving 
character.  It  is  shut  up  by  the  pressure  of  its  misery  to  look  for  help  where  it 
is  convinced  help  alone  can  be  found.  But  mere  weight  of  affliction  alone  will 
not  dispose  the  depraved  will  to  accept  of  God  as  its  object  of  supreme  love. 
That  argument  goes  no  farther  than  to  prove  that  it  is  impossible  for  the 
soul  to  keep  up  war  with  its  God.  The  strong  hand  of  vengeance  might 
push  back  the  stream  of  its  rebellion  to  the  fountain  head,  but,  so  soon  as  the 
hand  is  removed,  that  stream  will  flow  on  as  before.  Another  all-important 
factor  is  needed  to  incline  the  will,  freely  and  naturally,  to  submit  to  God  as 
its  rightful  Sovereign,  against  whom  it  has  rebelled.  There  must  be  something 
to  draw  as  well  as  to  threaten.  An  appeal  must  be  made  to  hopes  as  well  as  to 
fears.  There  must  be  something  to  dispose  the  will  of  itself  to  go  out  to  God 
without  constraint.  What  is  needed  to  produce  that  disposition  of  will  in  a 
guilty  man,  is  the  presentation  of  pardon  by  Him  against  whom  sin  has  been 
committed.  This  is  nowhere  done  certainly,  on  just  grounds,  and  in  the  most 
soul-subduing  manner,  except  in  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  God. 
Hence,  "  the  apprehension  of  God's  mercy  in  Christ"  is  an  essential  preparative 
to  all  true  repentance.  When  a  sinful  man  has  set  before  him  the  warrant,  on 
136 


BOMILETW  COMMENTARY:   JUDGES,  oHaMU. 


good  and  certain  grounds,  to  believe  that  he  shall  receive  the  pardon  of  all  his 
sins  as  a  free  gift  on  his  return  to  God,  and  also  a  complete  renewal  of  the 
Divine  love  towards  him,  as  it  was  before  the  period  of  his  sin  commenced,  his 
obstinacy  hegins  to  give  way,  his  heart  is  melted,  he  is  drawn,  he  yields  himself 
up  to  God  in  true  penitence.  Instantly  he  turns  against  himself,  begins  the 
work  of  self-condemnation,  self-abhorrence,  shame,  and  self-abasement — is  full 
of  genuine  grief  for  the  evil  of  his  ways,  spontaneously  makes  confession, 
justifies  God,  and  condemns  himself  in  ever3'thing,  and  finally  sets  himself  to 
walk  henceforth  in  ways  of  new  obedience. 

Thus  the  prejyaratices  to  true  penitence  are,  partly,  the  conviction  that  sin 
leads  to  nothing  l)Ub  misery,  and  is  therefore  essentially  evil;  bat  principally 
that  the  God,  against  whom  sin  had  been  committed,  instead  of  taking  pleasure 
in  punishing  the  sinner,  yearns  and  longs  to  grant  a  complete  pardon,  if  he 
would  but  repent  and  accept  of  the  pardon,  on  the  terms  which  declare  God's 
righteousness  in  granting  it.  In  the  case  of  the  Israelites,  this  exhibition  of 
God's  sin-forgiving  character  was  continually  set  before  them,  in  the  prominent 
place  which  the  institution  of  sacrifice  had  in  their  daily  worship.  It  was  also 
repeatedly  confirmed  as  a  most  precious  truth,  in  the  many  times  that  He  for- 
gave their  sins  in  His  providential  dealings  with  them,  when  it  would  have 
been  just  to  have  consumed  them  in  a  moment.  Indeed,  their  whole  past 
history  was  a  history  of  mercy.  Every  promise  was  a  spring — all  the  lacts  were 
streams  running  from  these  springs.  And  one  great  Fountain  head  they  had, 
which  a  thousand  rivers  could  not  exhaust,  in  the  everlasting  promise — "  /  am 
your  God  J  " 

COMMENTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.— Verse  9. 

I.  Men  hope  for  peace  in  the  future  father  to  the  thought.    The  calm  which 

from   their   immunity    in    the    past,  now  prevails  around  the  sinner,  while 

These  Israelites  were  living  under  the  the  bright  sun  shines,  the  birds  sing, 

hallucination  that,  because,  for  so  long  and  nature  chants  sweet  melodies  in 

a  time,  they  had  escaped  from  day  to  his  ear — while  the  great  forces  sleep, 

day  manifestations  of  the  Divine  anger,  and  all  things  go  well  from   day  to 

therefore  it  would  always  be  so,  not-  day — all  this  forms  a  plausible  ground 

withstanding  their  systematic  violations  for  concluding,  that  what  seems  so  like 

of  the  Divine  law.      They  shut  their  a  permanent  state  of  things  will  really 

ears   to   the  emphatic   condemnation  never  be  altered.     The  men  of  Noah's 

which  God  uniformly  gives  of  sin,  and  days  had  lived  so  long  in  security,  that 

practically    formed    their    judgments  they  went  on  '*  eating  and  drinking, 

more  from  the   peace   which   reigned  buying  and   selling,"    etc.,    notwith- 

around  them  in  nature  than  from  the  standing  a'l  the  warnings  given  by  the 

express  assurances  of  the  Divine  voice.  "  preacher  of  righteousness,"    "until 

Hence  it  was  a  great  surprise  to  them  the  day  when  Noah  entered  into  the 

when    the  punishment    did    actually  ark,  and  the  flood  came,"  etc.     The 

fall,  course  of  nature  was  so   fixed   that 

This  is  common  with  mankind.     An  there  seemed  no  likelihood  the  flood 

under-current    of    reasoning    is    ever  should  come.     "  In  the  last  days,  too, 

going  on  in  men's  minds,  with  which  scoffers  will  come,  saying,  '  Where  is 

the  heart  has  more  to  do  than   the  the  promise  of  His  coming?     Since 

undertanding,  the  drift  of  which  is  to  the  fathers  fell  asleep,  all  things  con- 

bias  the  decisions  of  the  latter  in  favour  tinue  as  they  w&re  !  * " 
of  the  wishes  of  the  former.     The  wish         Thus  it  is  still.     It  is  part  of  the 

of  the  criminal  is,  that  there  were  no  "  idols  of  the  tribe."     Men  are  warned 

day  of  reckoning,  and  the  wish  becomes  solemnly  of  a  coming  day  of  puttin^^ 

137 


CHAP.  in.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   JUDGES. 


to  the  test  the  character  they    are  He  is  from  taking  pleasure  in  their 

forming  now.     Partly  by  express  inti-  death  (Ezek.  xxxiii.  11). 

mations ;  partly  l)y  the  appearance  of  (3.)    It  has  cost  much  to  open  the 

the  Son  of  God  in  our  midst,  wearing  door  for  their  repentance, 

our  human    nature  ;    and    yet    more  (4.)  He  would  intimate,  that  where 

solemnly,    by   that  mysterious   death  there  is  repentance  a// we*// ^^^  6^  «^;^//. 
which  He,  the  Lord  of  Life,  passed 

through  ;  and  by  all  the  solemn  issues  III.   The  certain  approach  of  the 

which  must  spring  out  of  these  facts  day  of  reckoning.     How  can  men  be 

are  they  warned.     Yet,  so  accustomed  safe  to-morrow  when  they  sin  to-day  ? 

are  they  to  count  on  immunity  from  (Rom.  ii.  3.)     Must  they  not  give  up 

evil  consequence,  that  they  hold  on  in  sin  and  flee  to  the  refuge  ?    "  He  hath 

their  course  of  unbelief,  regardless  of  appointed  a   day  in  which   lie  will 

all  the  voices  addressed  to  them  by  the  judge  the  world  in  i'ighteousness,"  etc. 

God  of  the  Gospel.    ''Because  sentence  Of  those  who  recklessly  fill  up  in  sin 

against  an  evil  work  is  not  executed  their  present  season  given  for  repen- 

speedily^  the  heart  of  the  sons  of  men  tance,  it  is  said  "their  judgment  now 

is  set  in  them  to  do  evil."    Practically,  of  a   long  time   lingereth    not,"   etc. 

they  disbelieve  in  a  coming  judgment.  (2  Peter  ii.  3).    Blackwell  says,  "  This 

"  'i^hey  see  not  the  smoke  of  the  pit,  represents  vengeance  as  an  angel  of 

therefore   they  dread   not  the    fire"  judgment  pursuing  incorrigible  sinners 

Ps.lv.  19.   \South.'\  They  go  on  to-day  on  the  wing,  continually  approaching 

repeating  the  folly  of  yesterday,  saying,  nearer    and    nearer,    and    meanwhile 

**  To-morrow  shall  be  as  this  day,  and  keeping  on  them  a  watchful  eye,  that 

much  more  abundant."  he  may  at  length  discharge   an    un- 
erring blow." 

II.    Men's   misapprehension   of  the  **  To-morrow  is  the  wrecker's  beacon,  the  wily 

Divine  silence.        **  These   things  thou  ^nare  of  the  destroyer ; 

hast  done    and  I  kept    silence;     thou  When,  unrepented  the  growing  avalanche  of 

.7         1.     .     T                 il       j7                7  sin  rolls  down  the  easy  slope, 

thoughtest   I  was    altogether    such  an  Alas  !  so  ponderous,  and  moving  on  in  might, 

one  as  thyself  and  did  approve  thy  that  a  Sisyphus  may  not  stop  it." 
sin."     It  is  singular  that  men  should 

make  this  interpretation  of  the  silence,  IV  The  danger  of  underrating  the 

when  there  is  such  ample  proof  passing  severity  of  the  trial  of  the  future, 

before  their  eyes  continually,  that  the  This  people  had  come  so  to  underrate 

time  for  waiting  is  fast  coming  to  a  the  strictness  of  God's  dealings  with 

close.    Without  intermission  the  arrows  them  when  He  should  rise  up,  that 

of  death  are  doing  their  work,  and  every  they  seem  not  to  have  counted  on  more 

man  is  marked  to  fall.     If  men  were  than  a  moderate  discipline,  which  they 

but  half  awake,  this  fact  could  not  fail  could  manage  to  struggle  through  of 

to  strike  the  dullest  mind.     Yet  "  all  themselves.     But  when  the  blow  fell, 

men  think  all  men  mortal  but  them-  it  was  insupportable,  and  they  shrieked 

selves."  aloud  for  help.     When  men  find  that 

Men  mistake  the  meaning  of  God's  a  day  of  final  trial  is  coming  on  in  the 

delay.     His  own  explanation  is,  "  the  future,  they  set  to  work  to  abate  its 

goodness  of  God  leadeth  thee  to  re-  serious  character.      They  form  their 

pentance."  ideas  of  what  God  will  do,  not  so  much 

(l.j  He  would  give  them  time  for  from  the  intimations  -which  He  Him- 

repentance — time  for  the  case  being  self  makes  in  His  Word,  as  from  the 

fully  argued  and   leisurely   weighed  ;  views  which  they  themselves  form  of 

also  that  opportunity  might  be  aftbrded  His  character.      He  is  a  Father,  and 

for  their  returning  to  God  in  sincere  the  kindest  of  Fathers.      Most  true, 

and  thorough  penitence.  But  does  the  "  righteous  Father  "  (as 

(2.)  He  vionld  show  how  greatly  He  the  Christ  expressly  calls  him),  con- 

desires  their  repentance,   or  how  far  tiuue  to    acknowledge    men    as    His 
138 


EOMJLETIC  COMMENTARY:    JUDGES. 


CHAt.  itt. 


children  after  they  have  become  un- 
righteous? And  if,  as  the  record 
assures  us,  "  there  are  none  righteous^ 
no,  not  one'*  liave  not  all  lost  the 
privileges  of  children,  and  can  only 
re*);ain  them  by  faith  in  Christ  Jesus? 
Is  it  right— is  it  safe  tlien,  to  suppose 
for  a  moment,  that  God  will  deal  with 
all  men  as  children  merely,  in  the  day 
of  account,  and  not  in  their  character 
as  impenitent  sinners — i.e.y  all  who 
have  not  re])rented  and  believed? 
Must  not  all  the  impenitent  stand  as 
criminals  before  a  judge,  and  be  dealt 
with  according  to  the  laws  of  Eternal 
Righteousness  ?  And  how  can  tiiese 
laws  be  properly  exercised,  if  God  does 
not  express  the  terrible  extent  to  which 
He  hates  sin  ?  Can  any  punishment 
which  fitly  marks  the  depth  of  that 
displeasure  be  less  than  insupportably 
severe  ?  Even  in  this  world  His  judg- 
ments are  fitted  to  strike  men  with  awe. 
In  the  plagues  of  Egypt,  the  destruc- 
tion of  the  cities  of  the  plain,  in  the 
flood  of  waters  let  loose  on  an  ungodly 
world,  in  the  destruction  of  whole 
nations  by  the  sword  of  Joshua,  on 
account  of  their  awful  sins,  we  liave 
proofs  how  terribly  severe  God's  hand 
may  become  in  punishing  men's  sins, 
when  they  obstinately  cling  to  them 
and  take  the  consequences. 

More  ominously  still  we  are  assured, 
that  a  day  is  coming  on  when  some 
shall  call  to  the  rocks  and  the  moun- 
tains— "  Fall  on  us,  and  hide  us  from 
the  face  of  Him  who  sits  on  the  throne, 
and  from  the  wrath  of  the  Lamb  !  " 
On  that  day,  we  are  told,  "  the  fire 
shall  try  every  mans  work  of  what  sort 
it  is.''  "  God  shall  judge  the  secrets  of 
men's  hearts."  *'  J  will  lay  judgmetd 
to  the  line,  and  righteousness  to  the 
plummet,  and  the  hail  shall  sweep  away 
the  refuje  of  lies,"  etc.  ;  "  the  rains 
shad  descend,  the  foods  come,  and  the 
winds  blow  and  beat  against  that 
house"  etc.  "  He  that  despised  Moses 
law,  died  without  mercy.  Of  how 
much  soever  punishment  shall  he  he 
thought  worthy  who  hath  trodden  under 
foot  the  !Son  of  God,  and  counted  the 
blood  of  the  covenant  an  unholy  thing," 
etc.     "  Whoso  was  not  Jound  written 


in  the  Book  oj  Life,  was  cast  into  the 

lake  of  fire." 

These  statements,  however  inter- 
preted, prove  unmistakably  how 
terrible  unsafe  it  is  to  underrate  the 
strictness  of  the  standard  by  which 
God  will  try  men's  characters  in  the 
day  of  final  account.  As  yet  the  hour 
has  not  come  for  weighing  men  in  the 
strictest  balances.  At  most  we  have 
but  the  breezes  and  the  gales  here,  and 
many  dream  we  shall  never  have  more. 
Hereafter  we  are  assured  in  God's 
Word  the  hurricanes  shall  be  awakened, 
and  the  most  thorough  test  applied  to 
the  stability  of  the  foundation  on 
which  every  man  is  building.  Blessed 
shall  they  be  who  shall  then  be 
found  to  have  prepared  for  the  worst, 
and  to  have  fled  for  refuge  to  Kim 
"  who  is  able  to  save  unto  the  utter- 
most  those  that  come  unto  God  by 
11  im." 

V.  The  wisdom  of  preparing  for  the 
strictest  possible  trial.  The  common 
difficulties  of  life  are  generally  not 
greater  than  a  brave  heart  and  strong 
will  may  surmount,  without  any  special 
helping  hand ;  though  the  Christian 
will  "  in  everything  by  prayer  and 
supplication  make  his  request  known 
unto  God."  That,  however,  is  but  to 
"run  with  the  footmen  ;"  how  different 
to  "  contend  with  the  horses !  "  There 
are  times  even  in  this  life  when  trials 
come  to  the  most  intrepid  with  over- 
mastering force,  when  the  man  is  lifted 
off  his  feet,  and  feels  borne  irresistibly 
as  a  straw  on  the  surface  of  the  torrent. 
For  such  seasons  he  needs  the  help  of 
an  arm  stronger  than  his  own.  And 
there  are  also  days  of  "fiery  trial," 
where  there  is  no  effectual  succour  all 
round,  save  that  which  is  supplied  by 
Him  who  is  **  mighty  to  save  !  " 

But  for  every  man  a  day  is  coming 
on  in  the  future,  when  his  character 
shall  be  **  sifted  as  wheat  "  and  "  tried 
as  fire " — when  he  shall  become  a 
helpless  thing  in  the  hands  of  infinite 
forces.  What  he  needs  at  that  dread 
moment,  is  the  means  of  meeting  every 
possible  contingency — a  refuge  which 
can  give  shelter  from  the  fiercest  pos- 

139 


OHAP.  m.  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JUDGES. 


sible  wind  that  can  blow — afire-escnpe  Christ  of  God** — the  God-man,  we 
from  the  most  awful  possible  coiiflnora-  behold  one  who,  on  our  behalf,  fultila 
tion  that  can  burn — a  sum  wliich  shall  that  "righteousness  which  is  very 
meet  to  the  full  the  largest  debt  which  high/*  and  renders  perfect  obedience 
the  messengers  of  justice  can  possibly  to  that  "  commandment  which  is  ex- 
exact.  Literally,  every  man,  as  a  ceeding  broad" — one  who  **  magnifies 
responsible  being,  will  then  have  to  the  law  (under  which  we  are  placed) 
answer  all  that  the  Divine  perfections  and  makes  it  honourable.'*  Placed 
can  claim  of  allegiance  to  the  Divine  under  that  law  in  our  room  by  the 
throne — all  that  love,  reverence,  purity  Lawgiver  Himself,  He  meets  all  its 
of  character,  and  obedience  of  life,  claims  according  to  the  loftiest  ideas 
which  is  justly  due  from  a  creature  of  what  is  due  from  responsible  suhjects, 
made  after  the  image  of  God.  In  that  in  the  presence  of  the  holy  and  righteous 
hour  when  God  shall  decide  the  final  God.  Cordially  accepting  this  refuge, 
relation  in  which  He  is  to  stand  for  no  man  in  the  history  of  our  fallen 
ever  to  His  creature.  His  full  character  race,  need  be  afraid  how  high  the 
shall  be  revealed  h\  all  its  aspects — no  claims  of  eternal  righteousness,  may 
perfections  obscured,  but  all  revealed  rise  before  him.  Thus  protected,  he 
as  they  are.  What  is  naturally  and  dwells  in  absolute  security  amid  the 
properly  due  from  the  creature  to  the  full  blaze  of  the  Divine  perfections 
Creator  must  be  exacted  in  full — not  before  him.  Once  united  to  Christ, 
more,  not  less.  How  much  that  may  all  possible  foundation  for  farther 
imply  may  be  judged  of  from  the  fact,  charges  against  a  sinner  is  for  ever 
that  every  man  is  bound  to  "  love  God  taken  away.  No  claim  of  the  Divine 
with  all  his  heart,  soul,  strength,  and  law  can  ever  rise  higher  than  that 
mind,**  every  moment  of  his  being,  fulfilment  which  has  been  given  by  His 
"  How  shall  I  know  when  I  have  done  glorious  substitute.  "  Christ  is  the 
enough  ?  **  exclaimed  Dr.  Johnson,  end  oj  the  law  for  righteousness  to  every 
when  looking  at  the  question  of  God's  one  that  believeth''  "  Who  shall  lay 
claims  on  the  heart,  with  the  light  of  anything  to  the  charge  of  God's  elect? 
eternity  breaking  in  upon  him  !  It  is  God  that  justifieth ;  who  is  he 

that  condemnethi    It  is  Christ  that 

VI.  An  all-sufficient  refuge  we  have  died" 
set  hefore  us.    In  the  Person  of  "  the 


MAIN  HOMILETICS.— Verses  9-11. 

VZ.    The  Divine  deliverance  and  the  human  instrumentality. 

Here  we  have — 

I.  The  state  of  mind  to  which  God  grants  deliverance.  This  is  all-important. 
All  God's  promises  are  made  to  those  who  bear  a  certain  character,  or  who 
approach  Him  in  a  fit  state  of  mind.  The  account  given  here  is  very  abbreviated, 
but  two  features  are  implied  in  the  attitude  of  the  people  "  when  they  cried  unto 
the  Lord."    They  showed — 

1.  Sorrow  for  the  past.  This  we  may  fairly  suppose  if  we  are  to  judge  from 
the  fact,  that  no  mention  is  made  of  their  openly  sinning  any  more  for  the  next 
forty  years.  Also,  we  could  hardly  suppose,  that  God  would  have  vouchsafed  to 
deliver  them  now,  had  they  not  repented.  Besides  when  it  is  said  that  Othniel 
judged  Israel,  surely  one  of  his  first  duties  would  be  to  cleanse  the  land  of  its 
idolatry.  Further,  when,  on  a  similar  occasion,  they  cried  to  God  for  deliverance 
(ch.  X.  10-15),  they  made  unreserved  confession  of  having  forsaken  their  God 
and  worshipped  Balaam.  They  also  put  away  their  strange  gods,  and  that  with 
140 


HOMILETTC  COMMENTARY:   JUDGES.  chap.  lU. 


shame  and  sorrow.  May  we  not  suppose,  the  same  was  done  here.  In  the  da)  s 
of  Samuel,  after  several  3^ears  of  sin,  we  are  told  that  all  at  once,  "  the  whole 
house  of  Israel  lamented  after  the  Lord''  (1  Sam.  vii.  2.)  Very  likely  the 
hidden  cause  of  this  revival  was  the  prophet's  prayers.  (James  v.  16.)  Patrick 
says  also,  that  "  Samuel's  reproofs  and  instructions,  along  with  the  representation 
he  would  make  of  their  sin,  had  touched  their  hearts."  This  also  was  followed 
by  their  putting  away  their  sin. 

This  God  always  requires.  *'  True  penitence  consists  in  the  heart  being  broken 
bothybr  sin  and/rom  sin."  There  must  be  self-condemnation,  and  an  acknow- 
ledgment that  God  is  righteous.  The  sorrow  arises,  not  merely  from  the  sad 
experience  of  the  calamities,  in  which  sin  involves  the  sinner,  but  especially  from 
a  sense  of  guilt  in  rebelling  against  God,  disobeying  his  commands,  acting 
ungratefully  by  His  manifold  mercies  and  favours,  and  spending  life  in  entire 
neglect  of  His  claims,  and  even  of  His  presence.  What  need  for  sorrow,  bitter 
and  poignant,  at  the  remembrance  of  so  much  sin  in  the  past !  It  robs  God  ; 
ruins  the  soul ;  and  necessitates  the  death  of  Christ  ere  it  can  "  be  made  an  end 
of."  The  sins  of  these  Israelites  called  for  sorrow.  They  had  renounced  the  most 
sacred  obligations,  they  had  despised  the  most  bountiful  of  benefactors,  and  they 
had  trampled  under  foot  the  most  "holy,  just,  and  excellent"  of  all  laws. 
Their  high  calling  was  to  "shine  as  lights  in  the  world."  Yet,  for  many  years, 
that  light  had  been  eclipsed,  and  the  conduct  of  these  sons  of  Jacob,  instead  of 
being  quoted  as  a  reason  why  the  heathen  should  turn  from  their  idol-worship, 
to  the  service  of  the  living  God,  had  become  the  most  powerful  reason  in  the 
world  to  justify  them  in  going  on  their  sinful  course,  and  banishing  the  thought 
of  the  God  of  Israel  from  the  earth.  "  It  is  sad  when  a  Christian  becomes  the 
chief  argument  against  Christianity."     [South.^ 

2.  All  their  trust  was  in  prayer  to  God  as  their  own  God.  In  returning 
to  Jehovah  they  virtually  confessed  their  error  in  making  idols  their  confidence. 
They  now  anew  acknowledged  Him  to  be  the  only  true  God,  and  implored  His 
forgiveness  in  earnest  prayer.  This  was  both  faith  and  repentance,  "  without 
which  it  is  impossible  to  please  God."  The  heart  must  rest  on  God  alone  as  its 
essential  good.  It  must  acknowledge  Him,  trust  in  Him,  and  give  Him  the 
homage  due  from  the  creature  to  the  Creator.  Faith  looks  to  God  alone  for  its 
portion,  and  makes  Him  its  all  in  all.  It  takes  Him  as  He  describes  Himself  to 
be,  believes  Him  to  be  all  that  He  declares  Himself  to  be,  and  trusts  Him 
accordingly.  The  most  perfect  revelation  of  God  ever  made,  is  that  which  is 
exhibited  in  the  gospel  of  His  Son  ;  and  this  the  people  of  Israel  had  in  a 
rudimentary  form,  in  the  Mosaic  system  that  was  established  among  them. 

II.  God's  readiness  to  give  relief. 

It  ought  never  to  be  forgotten,  that  the  great  end  of  all  God's  dealings  with 
this  people  was,  to  illustrate  the  excellence  of  His  own  character  in  that  view  of 
it,  which  is  ex[)ressed  by  the  phrase,  "  Mercy  rejoiceth  against  jadgnient'  (Isa. 
xliii.  21).  Hence  such  things  are  brought  prominently  befi)re  us  as  these  : — 
His  bearing  with  sin,  while  yet  He  shows  intense  hatred  towards  it  ;  His 
restraining  its  outbreaks  on  the  one  hand,  while  yet  there  is  no  infringement  of 
liberty,  on  the  other  ;  His  condemning  it,  and  yet  His  forgiving  it;  and  here, 
His  readiness  to  deliver  from  its  consequences. 

1.  He  gives  relief  where  there  is  the  appearance  of  penitence.  Even  where 
the  reality  may  not  actually  exist.  Some,  perhaps,  a  considerable  number  of 
the  people,  may  at  this  time  have  become  true  ])enitents,  but  it  is  probable  that 
the  majority  merely  assumed  a  penitent  attitude,  because  driven  to  it  through 
force  of  circumstances,  while  there  was  no  real  forsaking  of  sin  in  the  heart. 
Uod  says  of  the  men  of  Hosea's  days,  "  /  have  hewed  them  by  the  prophets^  I 

141 


CHAP.  in.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES, 


have  slain  them  by  the  words  of  my  mouth.  Yet  they  did  not  cry  to  me  with 
their  heart  (in  prayer) ;  they  but  howled  upon  their  beds'*  But  though 
many  may  not  have  been  true  penitents,  simply  because  there  was  tlie  :ipi)ear- 
ance  of  it,  God  raises  up  a  de  iverer.  So  it  was  with  Ahab  ;  when  he  humbled 
himself,  God  said,  *'  1  will  not  bring  the  evil  in  his  day  but  in  the  days  of  his 
sons"  (1  Kings  xxi.  27-29).  This  shows  God's  extreme  readiness  to  meet 
the  sinner  in  mercy,  so  soon  as  tiiat  which  obstructs  the  way  is  removed. 
He  virtually  says,  Let  sin  be  but  confessed  and  abandoned,  and  the  Divin^i 
mercy,  will  flow  forth.  If  penitence  is  not  real  but  only  seeming.  He  often 
gives  some  blessings,  to  show  how  ready  He  is  to  go  the  full  length,  when  it  can 
be  done  consistently  w  th  His  character.  Such  blessings,  indeed,  are  but 
temporal  and  partial.  Spiritual  blessings,  implying  true  and  proper  forgiveness, 
with  the  gracious  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  are  only  given  when  the  sinner 
really  "  turns  from  sin  to  God,  with  full  purpose  of,  and  endeavour  after  new 
obedience,"  Yet  repentance  alone  does  not  entitle  any  sinner  to  forgiveness  ;  it 
only  qualifies  for  it.     The  title  comes  through  faith  in  Christ. 

2.  He  allows  no  earnest  cry  to  go  long  without  relief.  It  is  not  probable 
that  they  began  to  cry  to  God  in  penitence  as  soon  as  they  were  afflicted.  It  is 
more  likely  that  towards  the  end.  of  the  eight  years,  after  trying  all  other 
ex])edients,  they  at  last  gave  up  the  controversy  with  God  and  laid  down  their 
weapons  of  rebellion.  Probably  they  had  not  long  to  wait  after  their  cry  be- 
came earnest  and  general  throughout  the  land,  ere  He  responded  and  granted 
them  relief.  This  is  God's  usual  manner.  When  it  became  manifest  that  the 
prodigal's  penitence  was  quite  sincere,  "  the  father  ran,  embraced  him"  etc. 
Yet  not  at  the  very  first  moment  when  the  cry  of  penitence  is  raised,  does  God 
answer.  There  are  reasons  for  some  delay — reasons  of  wisdom  and  propriety, 
why  the  petitioner  should  be  allowed  to  cry  for  some  time.  To  be  convinced 
how  extremely  far  he  is  from  deserving  it — how  much  of  a  miracle  of  grace  it  is 
that  he  should  receive  it  at  all — that  he  may  have  time  to  consider  how  long- 
continued,  how  deep  and  aggravated,  have  been  his  provocations — tiiat  he  may 
have  opportunity  of  showing  the  sincerity  and  the  earnestness  of  his  repentance 
— and  especially  that  he  may  have  it  rivetted  on  his  heart  that  he  owes  his 
deliverance  solely  to  the  grace  of  God  through  the  atoning  merits  of  his  Lord 
and  Saviour  Jesus  Ciirist.  Yet  it  must  not  be  su})p()sed  that  some  time  must 
needs  elapse  before  God  becomes  willing  to  grant  re  he  f.  His  willingness  may 
be  counted  on  as  instantaneous  on  a  sinner's  really  repenting  of  his  sin.  His 
mercy  is  active  not  passive.  It  is  disposed  to  move  of  itself,  without  waiting 
for  motives  to  induce  it  to  act.  The  spontaneous  outgoing  oP God's  nature  to 
His  creatures  is  to  be  merciful,  or  good,  where  there  is  no  obstruction  in  the 
way.  "  The  Lord  is  good  unto  all  and  His  tender  mercies  are  over  all  His 
works."  Reasons  of  wisdom  and  justice  permitting,  He  lingers  not  for  a  moment 
but  hastens  to  the  sinner's  relief. 

III.  The  instrumentality  made  use  of  in  giving  deliverance. 
1.  The  instrument  chosen  was  a  man  like  themselves. 

(a)  No  angel  was  sent  down  from  heaven,  as  at  the  slaying  of  the  first-born 
in  Egypt,  or  at  the  destruction  of  the  Assyrian  army.  Neitiier  was  an  army 
brought  from  the  West,  to  fight  the  host  wliich  had  descentled  from  the  East, 
against  which  Israel  had  no  power.  Nor  was  any  excercise  of  miraculous  power 
alone  made  use  of,  such  as  an  earthquake,  or  fan  ine,  or  pestilence. 

(b)  But  one  of  themselves  is  raised  up^  and  is  held  as  a  rotl  in  the  hand  of 
omni[)otence,  and  so  the  work  is  done.  God  finds  the  instrument  on  the  spot. 
He  does  not  need  to  go  to  other  camps  to  obtain  that  which  is  suited  to  His 
purpose.     The  humblest  of  the  men  of  Israel,  he  could  make  sullioieut  for  the 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES.  chap.  iii. 


task  should  He  so  determine.  He  is  never  at  a  loss  for  instruments — "  babes 
and  sucklings  "  praise  Hiui  in  His  temple  ;  a  little  captive  maid  glorifies  His 
name  before  a  heathen  court ;  a  malefactor  in  the  jaws  of  death  illustrates  the 
wonders  of  His  redeeming  grace  ;  a  forgotten  prisoner  hid  out  of  sight  from  all 
the  world,  comes  forth  at  the  proper  moment  to  furnish  sustenance  for  a 
famishing  world ;  and  unlearned  fishermen  are  taken  from  tlieir  nets  to  herald 
the  message  of  pardon  to  a  whole  sinning  world,  through  the  blood  shed  on 
Calvary. 

(c)  But  here  there  is  a  deeper  reason  why  the  deliverer  should  be  a  man  like 
themselves.  The  sons  of  Israel  were  a  Messianic  people,  and  all  God's  manner 
of  dealing  with  them  was  intended  to  foreshadow  the  Messiah.  He  came  in 
human  form  to  act  the  part  of  a  Saviour.  "  He  took  not  on  Him  the  nature  of 
angels,  but  He  took  on  Him  that  of  the  seed  of  Abraham."  In  all  things  it 
behoved  Him  to  be  made  like  unto  His  brethren.  "  And  forasmuch  as  they  were 
partakers  of  flesh  and  blood,  He  in  like  manner  took  part  of  the  same."  **  There 
is  one  Mediator  between  God  and  man — the  man  Christ  Jesus." 

2.  The  selection  is  made  by  God  Himself.  It  was  not  lefb  to  the  vote  of 
the  people.     It  was  not  witii  Israel,  as  with  any  other  nation. 

{a)  'Ihey  were,  in  a  peculiar  sense,  His  own  people.  He  was  their  king. 
Their  laws  and  all  their  arrangements  came  from  Him,  and  especially  every- 
thing connected  with  their  salvation,  and  their  advancement  to  honour  and 
privilege  was  His  gift.  They  were  His  diamonds,  and  no  hand  was  allowed  to 
touch  them  but  His  own. 

{h)  Besides  it  was  not  an  ordinary  ruler  that  was  now  needed.  A  King 
or  a  Magistrate  to  administer  civil  or  social  or  national  law.  But  a  special  work 
was  to  be  done.  A  salvation  was  to  be  wrought  from  a  ruin  brought  on  the 
people  by  their  sins  ;  and  the  means  of  accomphshing  that  salvation  was  not  the 
ordinary  weapons  used  in  war.  The  victory  to  be  gained  did  not  depend  on  the 
weapons  used,  but  on  the  manner  in  which,  or  the  principles  on  which  the  war  was 
waged.  It  was  to  be  seen  by  all  as  a  special  work  of  God,  wrought  out  through 
means  of  God's  own  providing.  Hence  the  man  chosen  to  be  a  saviour  was 
specially  selected  by  God. 

{c)  A  nd  he  was  to  be  successful  in  his  work,  not  from  his  own  natural  gifts^ 
hut  through  special  qualifications  conferred  on  him  by  God,  and  through  the 
special  co-operation  of  the  Providence  of  God  in  bringing  out  the  result.  Every- 
thing was  special,  and  everything  was  sacred  ;  hence  the  selection  must  be  God's 
own.  For  this  same  reason  no  vote  of  the  people  was  taken  in  the  choice  of  any 
of  the  other  judges  or  saviours  mentioned  in  this  book.  This  selection  of  a 
saviour  for  the  people  by  God  Himself  is  a  peculiarly  Messianic  idea.  Isa. 
xlii.  1.,  etc. ;  Gal.  iv.  4.,  etc.  ;  1  John  iv.  14. 

3.  One  man  only  is  employed.  He  was  not,  indeed,  to  fight  alone,  but  to 
put  himself  at  the  head  of  such  a  number  of  the  people  as  could  be  got  together 
to  make  head  against  the  enemy.  Yet  all  depended  on  the  leader.  He  was  to 
be  the  mainspring  of  the  movement.  He  had  to  show  a  courage  and  resources 
equal  to  the  occasion.  He  had  to  inspire  others  with  an  enthusiasm  similar  to  his 
own.  He  was  to  be  the  rallying  point,  the  vehicle  through  which  all  the  energy 
should  flow,  and  the  guide  to  conduct  the  whole  enterprise,  from  first  to  last. 

How  often  does  the  history  of  a  whole  people,  or  even  of  an  age,  take  its  com- 
plexion from  the  doings  of  one  man  !  What  a  blank  there  would  have  been  in 
the  history  of  Abraham's  day,  had  that  one  good  man  been  removed  from  his 
place  !  It  would  have  been  like  removing  a  solitary  star  of  tlie  first  magnitude 
from  the  spiritual  heavens  ;  or  had  Moses  been  removed  in  his  day  how  differently 
should  we  have  read  the  history  of  Israel  !  And  if  Elijah  and  Elisha  had  not 
stood  forward  in  their  places  in  their  day,  we  should  have  lost  some  of  the 

143 


OHAP.ra.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES, 

brightest  pages  of  Old  Testament  history.  Deeper  still  would  have  been  the 
eclipse,  if  David,  the  sweet  singer  of  Israel,  had  not  arisen,  and  the  man  after 
God's  own  heart  had  not  sat  on  the  throne  of  Israel.  '1  he  names  of  Isaiah  and 
Jeremiah  among  the  prophets,  and  of  Peter,  John  and  Paul  among  the  apostles, 
are  surrounded. with  such  sacred  yet  stirring  associations,  that  had  their  places 
remained  empty,  it  would  have  been  equivalent  to  leaving  out  the  most  glowing 
and  most  thrilling  portions  of  the  Book  of  God,  and  shutting  up  nearly  all  the 
wells'  mouths,  whence  refreshing  draughts  of  water  of  life  are  supplied  to  weary 
pilgrims,  as  they  pass  on  to  the  heavenly  Canaan. 

IV.  The  suitableness  of  the  individual  chosen. 

1.  God  ever  chooses  the  fittest  instruments  for  doing  His  work.  The  hour 
had  come  and  the  man  appears.  He  does  not  despise  men's  natural  gifts,  when 
they  are  found  possessed  in  greater  measure  by  some  than  by  others.  For,  with 
these  gifts  He  Himself  has  endowed  the  possessors.  And  when  He  requires  an 
instrument  to  do  His  work,  He  chooses  those  whom  He  has  already  best  qualified 
for  serving  His  purpose.  It  is  when  men  become  proud  of  their  gifts,  and  begin 
to  forget  the  Giver,  that  they  and  their  gifts  together  are  condemned  (Jer.  ix. 
23,  24  ;  Ex.  ix.  11 ;  Isa.  x.  12,  13  ;  1  Cor.  i.  19-21,  27,  28,  29  ;  iii.  18-20  ; 
Dan.  iv.  30-34).  Natural  gifts,  however,  are  not  slighted  by  the  Giver  of 
"  every  good  and  perfect  gift,"  but  are  employed  when  they  are  suited  to  the 
end  required  ;  beyond  that  when  special  qualifications  are  needed  they  are 
specially  sui)plied.     Examples  we  have  in  Moses,  David,  and  Paul 

2.  The  qualifications  of  the  instrument  employed.  On  making  enquiry  as 
to  the  man  whom  God  had  selected  "to  make  up  the  hedge,  and  stand  in  the 
^ap  before  Him  for  the  laud,"  we  are  agreeably  surprised  to  find  that  degenerate 
Israel  could  produce  such  a  man  as  "  Othniel,  the  son  of  Kenaz,  Caleb's  younger 
brother."  The  phrase  "son  of  Kenaz,"  means  simply — of  the  stock,  or  family 
line  of  Kenaz,  and  is  equivalent  to  the  ai)pellation — "  Kenezite  "  (Josh.  xiv.  6  ; 
XV.  17  ;  Jud.  i.  13).     Othniel  had  many  elements  of  fitness  : — 

(1)  He  was  naturally  brave.  Names  in  those  days  were  often  significant 
of  character,  and  if  we  are  to  judge  by  this  criterion,  Othniel,  "  the  lion  of  God," 
must  have  stood  among  the  foremost  for  natural  courage.  As  a  matter  of  fact, 
he  had  the  reputation  of  being  a  hero  all  through  his  past  history. 

(2)  He  belonged  to  an  honoured  family.  He  was  of  the  house  of  Caleb, 
than  which  name  none  stood  higher  among  all  the  genealogies  of  the  chosen 
people.  Now  that  Caleb  himself  was  gone,  no  fitter  man  could  have  been 
selected  as  a  centre  around  which  the  tribes  might  rally,  and  especially  the 
tribe  of  Judah,  to  which  the  elected  "judge  "  belonged.  None  would  dispute 
his  ascendency,  or  refuse  to  follow  his  lead.  He  was  just  the  man  in  whom  the 
people  would  place  confidence.  The  aroma  of  the  name  was  still  felt  through 
all  Israel,  though  two  generations  had  elapsed  since  it  first  became  famous. 

(3)  He  had  a  long  experience.  He  was  not  a  young  man,  with  the  flush 
and  ardour  natural  to  youth,  and  ready  to  attempt  great  exploits.  However 
valuable  may  be  the  elasticity  and  enthusiasm  of  growing  years,  no  qualities  are 
so  much  required  for  the  leader  of  a  great  and  difficult  enterprise  as  those  which 
are  expressed  in  the  phrase — a  large  experience.  Othniel  was  now  a  veteran, 
probably  as  old  as  his  brother  (or  kinsman)  Caleb  was  on  the  day  when  at  the 
term  of  85  years  of  age,  he  set  himself  with  undiminished  vigour  to  expel  the  men  of 
the  giant  race  from  their  native  strongholds  (Josh.  xiv.  11, 12).  The  spirit  of  Caleb 
still  survived  in  Othniel.  Both  instances  forcibly  illustrated  the  truth  of  the 
promises  before  they  were  given,  "  They  that  wait  on  the  Lord  shall  gather  fresh 
vigour  ;  they  shall  show  a  strength  of  wing  like  the  eagle  ;  they  shall  run  and 
not  be  weary,  and  walk  and  not  faint."    On  ordinary  and  extraordinary  occasions 

144 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES,  ohap.  ni. 


alike,  they  slmll  be  adequate  in  strength  to  undertake  whatever  falls  to  them 
in  the  way  of  duty  to  do.  The  language  of  their  God  is  "  Even  to  old  age  I 
am  He,  and  to  hoar  hairs  will  I  carry  you/' 

(4)  He  was  eminently  a  man  of  God.  He  appears  to  have  been  one  of  those 
noble  men  of  true  moral  greatness,  who  do  not  go  with  the  tide  of  public  opinion, 
or  "  follow  a  multitude  to  do  evil,"  but  stand  fast  like  a  rock  to  the  cause  of 
their  God,  prepared  to  stand  with  a  small  minority,  or  altogether  alone,  if  that 
were  necessary,  rather  than  swerve  from  fidelity  to  the  principles  of  truth  and 
righteousness.  To  his  eye  Israel's  weakness  did  not  consist  in  lack  of  men  of 
arms,  or  of  martial  valour,  but  in  a  low  condition  of  piety  towards  their  God. 
Doubtless  "  his  heart  trembled  for  the  ark  of  God,"  when  he  beheld  the  tide  of 
apostasy  all  but  universal  over  the  land,  and  his  place  would  generally  be  found 
among  "  those  who  leared  the  Lord  and  spake  often  one  to  another — being  deeply 
concerned  for  the  honour  of  his  name."  The  honour  of  his  God  was  dearer  to 
him  than  all  things  else.  For  this  he  was  prepared  to  go  through  fire  and  water. 
For  this  he  would  fight  against  any  odds.  Where  the  honour  of  tliat  name  was 
concerned,  he  was  not  afraid  though  a  whole  troop  of  Chushans  were  in  the  field. 
"  His  heart  was  fixed  trusting  in  the  Lord."  Life  was  indeed  precious,  but  that 
he  would  cheerfully  hazard  a  hundred  times  to  redeem  the  hallowed  name  of  his 
God,  which  had  so  long  been  vilely  profaned  on  all  the  coasts  of  Israel.  It  was  not 
personal  valour  in  which  he  trusted ;  man  of  strong  arm  and  strong  heart  though 
he  was,  he  would  spend  much  of  his  time  in  secret  "  sighing  and  crying  for  all 
the  abominations  done  in  the  midst  of  the  land."  In  secret  he  had  thus 
honoured  God,  and  now  before  all  Israel  God  honoured  him. 

(5)  He  was  specially  a  man  of  great  faith. 

(a)  Importance  of  Faitli.  To  faith,  more  than  to  any  other  feature  of 
character,  does  God  have  respect  in  granting  success.  '*  By  faith  the  elders,  one 
and  all,  obtained  a  good  report ;  "  and  "  without  faith  it  is  impossible  to  please 
God."  He  had  learned  long  ago  the  science  of  the  "  wars  of  Canaan,"  namely, 
that  all  victory  came  through  ^a/^A  in  the  God  of  the  covenant,  and  all  defeat 
happened  through  unbelief,  and  departure  from  the  living  God. 

(b)  Character  of  Faith.  Faith  begins  with  giving  up  self,  and  looking  to 
God  alone.  It  says  self  is  nothing,  but  God  is  all  in  all.  It  takes  God's  own 
account  of  Himself  as  the  true  account,  believes  that  all  his  perfections  are  as 
He  describes  them,  and  that  in  everything  in  which  we  have  to  do  with  Him, 
He  is  to  be  absolutely  trusted  both  as  a  Father  and  a  Sovereign  Ruler.  It 
believes  that  all  the  requirements  of  His  law  upon  us  are  just  and  reasonable, 
that  all  the  principles  of  His  moral  government  are  righteous  and  true,  that  He 
has  an  unquestioned  right  to  appoint  our  lot  in  this  world,  being  His  creatures, 
that  we  are  responsible  to  Him  at  all  times,  and  that  whatever  mystery  may  hang 
over  his  dealings  with  us  in  this  world,  He  will  always  act  by  us  according  to 
the  acknowledged  principles  of  His  character.  It  believes  all  Tlis  declarations, 
takes  all  His  promises  as  trustworthy,  and  resigns  itself  implicitly  to  His  arrange- 
ments. 

(c)  J ts  foundation.  Its  great  strength  lies  in  the  foundation  on  which  it 
rests.  Being  guilty  we  dare  not  trust  God  for  anything,  but  a  great  Redeemer 
is  provided,  *'  in  whom  we  are  brought  nigh  unto  God,"  and  "  in  whom  all  the 
promises  of  God  are  yea  and  amen."  To  the  ancient  Israelite,  the  Messiah,  or 
Abraham's  promised  seed,  was  the  channel  through  whom  all  the  blessings 
wrapped  up  in  the  covenant,  (**  I  will  be  a  God  to  you")  were  to  flow  out  to  all 
the  families  of  the  earth.  Assurance  of  preservation  at  the  line  of  duty  was  one 
of  the  details  of  this  all  embracive  covenant  of  blessing.  A  man  like  Othniel, 
who  walked  daily  with  his  God,  would  be  able  to  apply  this  great  genuine 
promise  of  the  covenant  to  all  the  details  of  duty  in  practical  life.  Thus  his  faith 
rested  on  the  express  testimony  of  Jehovah  in  the  covenant,  and  on  the  provisions 

K  U5 


CHAP.  in.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES. 


made  for  ratifying  that  covenant  by  the  institution  of  sacrifice.  All  his  past 
experience  as  a  man  of  piety,  and  all  that  he  knew  of  the  history  of  his  people, 
would  be  as  so  many  confirmations  of  this  grand  fundamental  promise  on  wiiich 
his  faith  rested. 

(6)  He  had  a  brilliant  name  ia  the  history  of  the  past.  The  storming  of 
])ebir  was  not  yet  forgotten.  Its  capture  was  one  of  the  proudest  stories  of  the 
heroic  age  of  Joshua.  Then  the  name  of  Othniel  rose  as  a  star  of  tlie  first 
magnitude  in  Israel's  sky.  But  as  in  every  victory  gained  through  faith,  the 
victor  ascribed  all  the  glory  to  that  God  who  had  *'  covered  his  head  in  the  day 
of  battle."  His  language  virtually  was  "  By  thee.  I  have  run  through  a  troop, 
by  my  God  have  I  leaped  over  a  wall." 

(a)  Dehirs  importance.  In  the  history  of  that  period  of  conquest,  which  is 
so  briefly  given,  and  where  so  many  things  are  left  out,  the  subjugation  of  Debir 
receives  a  special  prominence.  It  belonged  to  the  hill  country,  and  was  inhabited 
by  the  "  Amorites,"  who  were  the  "  highlanders"  of  Canaan — and  probably 
those  very  Anakim  at  whose  presence  the  spies  who  were  sent  out  from  Kadesli 
some  38  years  before  to  search  out  the  land,  were  so  much  scared.  It  was  one 
of  the  cities  of  the  giants,  and  seems  to  have  been  one  of  the  most  diihcult  of 
them  all  to  subdue.  After  Caleb  had  driven  the  natives  from  all  the  other 
strongholds,  he  paused  on  coming  to  Debir,  and  offered  a  special  reward  to  the 
man  who  would  undertake  to  reduce  it.  Its  other  names  may  shed  a  little  light 
on  this  point.  It  was  called  "  Kirjathsannali  "  (Josh.  xv.  49),  which  signifies 
**  the  city  of  instruction"  and  "Kirjath-sepher,"  (Josh.  xv.  15,  16)  which  means 
**  the  city  of  books''  It  is  supposed  to  have  been  the  city  of  law  y  where  the 
national  records  were  kept,  and  perhaps  was  a  seat  of  learning  among  the 
Canaanites.  It  is  farther  confirmatory  of  this  view,  that  the  word  "  Debir  " 
signifies  oracle.  Here  probably  were  treasured  up  the  archives  of  these  nations, 
such  as  they  were.  For  we  know  that  the  Phoenicians,  and  probably  too  the 
other  Canaanitish  nations,  were  among  the  first  in  the  world  to  possess  a  knowledge 
of  letters.  It  is  not  so  surprising  then  to  hear  of  the  hook-city,  though  the  art 
of  printing  was  entirely  unknown.  A  very  few  books  would  suffice  in  those 
days  to  justify  a  town  taking  to  itself  such  a  name.  The  few  books  there  were 
however  would  be  esteemed  very  precious.  It  would  be  equivalent  to  their 
hank  of  knowledge  \\\\QYQ  vio\\\dihQ\2adi  up  all  the  treasures  of  knowledge,  or 
learning  they  had  at  that  early  date  been  able  to  acquire,  on  such  subjects  as 
history  and  science,  the  useful  and  the  fine  arts,  languages,  archaeology  and 
astronomy,  all  of  which,  though  of  the  rudest  kind,  would  be  regarded  as  valuable 
by  the  age  itself.  Here  as  in  a  hank-safe  were  these  treasures  collected,  which 
would  give  to  that  town  an  unusual  measure  of  importance  above  the  other 
towns  ;  so  that  it  might  be  expected  to  be  doubly  fortified,  and  rendered  quite 
impregnable. 

(b)  Its  conquest  by  Othniel.  He  was  the  man  found  with  sufficient  confidence 
in  his  God,  to  scale  the  walls,  batter  down  the  gates,  and  put  all  the  men  of 
might  to  the  sword.  "  In  tlie  name  of  his  God  he  set  up  his  banner,"  and  could 
say  in  the  face  of  the  enemy,  "  why  do  ye  heathen  rage  against  the  God  of  Jacob  ? 
and  ye  people  of  the  giant  city,  why  do  ye  imagine  a  vain  thing  ?  " 

V.  The  Spirit  of  God  the  source  of  all  real  qualification  for  sacred  duties 
"  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  came  upon  him."    There  needs  not  more  to  raise  a 
man  to  the  height  of  an  angel  of  the  Lord,  or  to  lift  up  a  people  groaning  under 
the  heel  of  oppression  to  become  "more  than  conquerers." 

1.  The  Spirit  of  God  is  the  source  of  life  in  nature.     In  the  widest  sense  He 
is  the  source  of  all  power  and  of  all  life  whatever.     When  life  began  to  exist  in 
the  world,  the  Spirit  of  God  was  moving,  or  brooding  dove-like  on  the  face  of 
146 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES,  chap.  in. 


the  waters — the  chaotic  mass.  It  was  by  His  agency  that  all  the  laws  of  the 
natural  world  were  at  first  established,  and  it  is  by  Him  they  still  hold  or. 
their  course.  All  man's  natural  faculties,  both  of  body  and  mind,  are  endow- 
ments of  the  Holy  Spirit.  These  operations  may  be  said  to  be  in  the  line 
of  natural  law.     But  there  are  gifts  of  a  much  higher  order. 

2.  He  is  the  source  of  the  special  gifts  of  the  kingdom  of  grace.  There  is  a 
dispensation  of  grace  as  distinct  from  the  reign  of  natural  law.  The  gifts 
of  that  dispensation  are  spiritual  in  character,  pertaining  as  they  do  to  the 
dispositions  and  relations  of  the  heart  towards  its  God.  They  are  such  as 
faith,  repentance,  love,  and  all  the  elements  of  a  new  religious  character 
which  a  man  comes  to  possess  when  he  is  "  born  of  the  Spirit,"  and  so  enters 
what  Christ  calls  ''  the  kingdom  of  God."  This  class  of  gifts,  though  offered 
to  all  men,  are  yet  bestowed  only  on  those  who  comply  with  the  call  to 
receive  them  on  the  terms  offered. 

3.  He  is  the  source  of  the  supernatural  gifts  conferred.  God  sometimes 
confers  powers  on  men  so  as  to  raise  them  above  their  natural  level,  by  which 
they  come  to  know  what  in  the  natural  exercise  of  their  understanding  they 
could  never  reach,  and  come  to  have  strength  to  perform  what,  by  the  natural 
exercise  of  their  physical  faculties,  they  could  never  accomplish.  These  high 
and  peculiar  gifts,  usually  called  supernatural  gifts,  were  conferred  only  on 
those  who  were  called  to  do  some  special  work  for  God,  such  as  Apostles  and 
Prophets — those  who  were  commissioned  to  make  some  special  revelation  of 
the  mind  and  will  of  God,  or  who  were  empowered  to  work  miracles,  or  who 
were  called  to  perform  duties  that  required  qualifications  above  the  natural 
standard.  Of  this  latter  class  were  "  the  Judges,"  a  special  class  of  saviours,'' 
(Neh.  ix.  27),  who  were  raised  up  to  meet  a  particular  conjuncture  of  circum- 
stances, when  the  cause  of  God  was  greatly  imperilled,  when  the  church  of 
God  seemed  almost  destroyed,  and  when  the  tide  of  sin  like  a  vast  flood 
was  overrunning  the  land.  In  these  times  there  was  special  need  for  the 
Spirit  to  be  given. 

4.  Both  the  gracious  and  supernatural  gifts  of  the  Spirit  were  conferred  on 
special  grounds  It  is  of  the  highest  importance  to  notice  the  grounds  on 
which  the  gifts  were  conferred,  and  the  purpose  for  which  they  were  given. 
The  gifts  referred  to  were  all  given  under — 

{a)  A  special  dispensation — a  dispensation  of  grace,  and  not  in  natural 
course.  They  were  conferred  in  connection  with  the  great  scheme  of  mercy, 
which  God  from  the  beginning  has  had  in  store  for  sinful  men  through  the 
Mediator,  and  which  is  gradually  developed  in  the  history  of  His  church. 

(b)  The  gracious  gifts,  along  with  pardon  of  sins,  and  acceptance  with  God, 
constitute  the  blessings  of  salvation  which  that  scheme  presents,  and,  as  a  seal, 
mark  the  happy  recipients  as  saved  ones. 

(c)  The  supernatural  gifts,  though  usually  (not  always,  e.g.,  Judas,  Balaam 
and  Matt.  vii.  22,  23),  conferred  on  the  saved,  are  not  conferred  for  the  purpose 
of  saving  their  possessors,  but  for  the  purpose  either  of  revealing  some  part  of 
the  remedial  scheme,  of  attesting  its  Divine  character,  or  of  preserving  and 
sustaining  it  under  all  emergencies.  In  no  other  connection  have  the  influences 
of  the  Holy  Spirit,  for  purposes  of  human  salvation  been  given  at  any  time 
except  through  the  remedial  scheme,  i.e.,  through  Christ  in  some  form,  and 
always  on  the  footing  of  grace,  or  the  special  and  free  favour  of  God. 

{d)  It  was  because  there  was  a  church  in  Israel,  and  a  scheme  of  salvation  by 
grace,  having  its  development  in  the  dispensation  that  was  planted  among  them, 
that  God  gave  His  Spirit  to  assist  in  the  furtherance  of  the  interests  of  that 
scheme.    The  people  of  the  Messiah,  and  of  whom  He  was  to  come,  must  be 

147 


onAP.m.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


preserved  wiien  in  danger  ;  there  mnst  be  no  overthrow  of  the  sacred  system  of 
rites  and  ceremonies,  laws  and  ordinances,  which  God  had  established  among 
them  to  prefigure  the  work  of  the  Messiah,  while  the  religions  worship  and 
religions  privileges  of  His  own  appointment  must  be  continued  from  age  to  age, 
and  to  enable  those  who  were  raised  up  to  be  the  ''saviours*'  (Neb.  ix.  27)  of 
the  people  to  fulfil  their  liigh  vocation,  the  Si)irit  of  the  Lord  came  upon  them 
in  a  supernatural  way.  The  Spirit  was  given  out  of  regard  to  the  covenant 
('*  I  will  be  your  God,")  which  was  ratified  by  the  coming  of  the  Messiah. 

VI.  The  special  qualifications  conferred  on  Othniel  through  the   Spirit. 

Genernlly  speaking  they  were  conferred  on  him  in  such  measure  as  to  fit  him  in 
all  respects  to  be  not  only  the  leader,  but  the  saviour,  of  Israel  in  this 
emergency.  He  was  not  only  qualified  to  direct  the  movement,  but  was 
furnished  with  every  requisite  necessary  to  ensure  the  complete  liberation  of  his 
country. 

1.  He  was  consecrated  to  the  office  of  a  saviour  by  the  Spirit.    It  set  him 

apart  from  a  common  to  a  sacred  purpose.  He  became  by  it  "  the  Lord's 
anointed."  When  the  prophet  Samuel,  by  God's  direction,  anointed  Saul  to 
be  king  over  Israel,  he  poured  a  vial  of  oil  over  his  head  (1  Sam.  x.  1).  And, 
again,  he  anointed  David  to  be  king,  with  a  horn  of  oil  (1  Sam.  xvi.  12,  13). 
In  both  cases  it  was  the  same  method,  the  only  difference  being  that  a  vial  was 
used  in  Saul's  case — a  brittle  vessel,  and  easily  broken — emblematic  of  the  after 
events  of  the  history ;  whereas  a  horn  was  used  in  anointing  David,  indicating 
strength  and  durability  of  the  kingly  power.  The  oil  was  emblematic  of  the 
Holy  Spirit's  influence,  signifying  that  God  had  called  the  person  to  the  office, 
and  would  qualify  him  sufficiently  for  the  discharge  of  its  duties.  Accordingly, 
we  are  told,  that  after  the  anointing,  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  came  first  on  Saul, 
and  afterwards  on  David — not  in  His  gracious  influences,  for  the  personal 
salvation  of  the  possessor,  but  to  qualify  for  the  duties  of  a  sacred  office,  held 
for  the  good  of  God's  Church.  Also,  when  Aaron  and  his  sons  were  consecrated 
to  the  priestly  offices,  the  holy  anointing  oil  was  poured  on  their  heads.  The 
Christ  Himself  was  so  anointed  with  the  Holy  Spirit  (Isa.  Ixi.  1  ;  Ps.  xlv.  7  ; 
Acts  X.  38).  All  true  Christians  are  reckoned  anointed  ones,  because  the  Spirit 
of  Christ  is  conferred  on  them  all  (John  i.  16  ;  2  Cor.  i.  21,  22  ;  1  John  ii.  20, 
27;  Rev.  iii.  18) 

This  was  the  best  of  all  evidences  that  God  had  called  him  to  the  work  before 
him,  both  for  Othniel  himself,  and  for  all  the  people  round  about  him.  It  was 
impossible  after  this  to  doubt  that  a  great  purpose  was  to  be  accomplished,  and 
was  to  be  accomplished  through  his  instrumentality.  It  was  the  Lord  Himself 
indicating  His  choice  of  an  instrument. 

2.  He  felt  that  all  his  natural  gifts  were  strengthened  in  an  extraordinary 
degree-  His  courage  was  now  truly  up  to  the  lion  pitch.  He  could  say  with 
simple  truth,  "  Though  an  host  encamp  against  me,  yet  will  I  not  fear."  *'  If 
mine  enemies  should  compass  me  about  like  bees,  they  shall  be  quenched  as  the 
fire  of  thorns.  In  the  name  of  the  Lord  I  will  destroy  them."  He  fell  his 
physical  vigour  so  increased  that  he  was  prepared,  though  but  one  man,  to  go 
against  a  thousand.  His  knowledge  of  men,  his  skill  and  tact  in  making  arrange- 
ments, his  fertility  of  resources,  his  capacity  for  conducting  great  undertakings, 
he  felt  to  be  all  so  wonderfully  increased,  that  all  difficulties  melted  away  before 
him,  and  he  felt  himself  on  all  sides  equal  to  the  occasion.  Great  mental 
energy,  power  of  practical  endurance,  and  zeal  for  God's  honour,  were  also 
added,  along  with  a  self-denial  that  could  go  through  any  amount  of  hardship, 
and  a  willingness  to  risk  life  itself  in  the  holy  cause  of  his  God  I  It  was  thug 
that  "  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  stirred  him  "  (chap.  xiii.  25). 

148 


BOMILETW  COMMENTARY:    JUDGES,  oaap.  iti. 


3.  He  became  fully  conscious  that  God  was  with  him.  It  was  not  merely 
a  persuasion,  but  a  knowledge — an  act  of  direct  consciousness  that  omnipotence 
itself  was  on  his  side.  He  felt  that  an  infinite  force  was  at  his  back,  which 
nothing  could  withstand.  Nay,  he  felt  that  this  force  was  acting  through  hiin 
as  its  ort,^an.  He  knew  from  personally  feeling  it,  that  God  was  in  possession  of 
his  spirit,  and  could  no  more  doubt  that  He  was  acting  with  him  in  every  thing 
he  did,  than  that  when  he  put  forth  an  act  of  his  will,  he  knew  his  arm  would 
be  moved  by  that  act  of  will.  He  acted,  indeed,  in  the  full  blaze  of  the  con- 
sciousness tliat  Omnipotence  was  on  his  side,  and  that  all  obstructions  must  give 
way  as  certainly  as  that  matter  is  moved  this  way  or  that  by  a  law  of  nature — or 
by  that  Omnific  word  which  at  first  brought  all  matter  into  existence. 

4.  His  faith  became  very  strong.  It  rose  at  once  to  be  a  faith  of  assurance. 
There  was  not  a  single  admixture  of  doubt.  He  believed  that  God's  own  glory 
was  concerned  in  the  matter  ;  that  His  faithfulness  could  not  fail,  and  that  He 
must  show  Himself  jealous  on  behalf  of  His  people  according  to  His  engagements. 
He  also  strongly  believed  that  God  had  but  to  show  Himself,  and  His  enemies 
would  be  scattered.  "  As  smoke  is  driven  before  the  wind,  or  as  wax  is  melted 
at  the  touch  of  fire."  His  trust  was  unshaken  in  the  character  of  the  God  of 
Jacob,  and  in  the  gracious  promises  He  had  made  to  the  people  with  whom  He 
had  entered  into  covenant.  When  he  went  out  to  meet  the  enemy,  he  went 
with  the  absolute  assurance  of  victory,  as  if  it  were  already  an  historical  fact. 
He  knew  he  could  not  possibly  fail. 

5  In  all  things  he  was  -instructed  by  Jehovah  Himself.  The  Spirit  of  the 
Lord  prompted  him  in  all  his  plans  and  arrangements,  so  that  nothing  could 
fall  out  amiss.  "  The  Lord  ordered  the  battle."  His  hand  was  at  the  helm  of 
the  movement. 

VII.  The  ease  with  which  he  conquered.  When  the  Lord  delivered  Chushan 
into  his  hand,  the  issue  was  not  doubtful,  nor  was  it  long  in  suspense.  He  who 
has  all  hearts  in  His  hand,  and  all  events  at  His  disposal,  can  always  make 
victory  easy  for  those  whom  He  loves.  The  Divine  Spirit  wrought  to  secure 
the  result  ;  not  only  by  qualifying  the  instrument  chosen  to  do  the  work,  but 
also  by  over-ruling  all  the  circumstances  of  Providence  to  bring  out  the  desired 
result.     Tbis  was  the  case  in  all  the  wars  of  Joshua,  and  it  was  the  case  now. 

1.  Means.  Sometimes  the  enemy  were  made  to  feel  faint-hearted  in  the 
midst  of  the  fight  while  Israel  waxed  valiant  in  the  battle.  Sometimes  a  panic 
was  made  to  prevail  throughout  the  ranks  (Duet.  ii.  25  ;  Josh.  ii.  9,  24).  Some- 
times "  hornets,"  or  stinging  insects  were  made  to  fly  in  whole  clouds  in  the 
face  of  the  enemy,  so  that  victory  became  easy  (Josh.  xxiv.  12).  At  other  times 
God  turned  every  man's  sword  against  his  fellow  (chap.  vii.  22  ;  1  Sam.  xiv. 
15,  20).  Again  He  sends  a  spirit  of  confusion  or  bitter  enmity  against  each 
other  into  the  camp  of  the  enemy  (2  Chron.  xx.  22,  23).  And  sometimes  he 
rolls  down  great  stones  from  heaven  on  those  who  would  seek  to  destroy  His 
people  (chap,  x  11).  All  the  circumstances  connected  with  the  position  of  the 
two  parties  concerned,  were  fully  known  to  God,  and  also  all  the  causes  that 
could  possibly  have  to  do  with  bringing  out  the  issue  of  the  struggle.  And  we 
are  told  in  few  words,  "  The  Lord  delivered  Chushan  into  the  hand  of  Othniel, 
and  his  hand  prevailed  against  him." 

2.  Ways  and  means  are  easily  found  when  the  moral  purposes  have  been 
served  When  the  people  became  penitent  there  no  longer  remained  any 
difficulty  in  effecting  deliverance.  The  "  Strength  of  Israel "  could  give  victory 
this  way  or  that  way,  as  it  might  seem  good  to  Him.  He  has  but  to  will  it, 
and  the  weak  shall  become  strong,  or  the  strong  weak.     All  these  eight  years 

U9 


CHAP.  III.  BOMILETW  COMMENTARY:    JUDGES, 


there  was  no  difficulty  with  Him  to  grant  release  from  the  oppressor's  grasp,  at 
any  hour.  He  might  at  any  moment  have  said  to  the  raging  storm,  **  Peace  ! 
be  still  !  and  there  should  have  been  a  great  calm."  But  high  moral  purposes 
required  to  be  wrought  out.  His  people  must  be  taught  the  true  character  of 
a  service  of  sin — that  the  "  ways  of  transgressors  are  hard  " — "  that  the  end 
of  these  ways  is  death  " — and  that  "  it  is  an  evil  and  bitter  thing  to  forsake  the 
fountain  of  living  waters."  They  required  to  know  by  experience  the  treachery 
of  their  hearts,  the  ingratitude  of  their  ways,  and  the  grievous  folly  of  their 
apostacy.  They  must  be  n-ade  to  understand  that  though  *'  God  is  merciful 
and  gracious  and  long-suffering,  He  is  yet  so  holy  that  He  cannot  by  any  means 
clear  the  guilty."  These  lessons  being  taught,  He  was  ready  at  a  moment's 
notice  to  arise  and  show  Himself  as  "  the  Lord  of  hosts,  strong  and  mighty 
in  battle." 

VIII.  The  lons^  peace  after  so  much  trouble.  "  The  land  had  rest  forty 
years." 

1.  The  elements  of  disturbance  in  the  atmosphere  were  completely  cleared 
away.  Such  rout  was  given  to  Chushan,  that  it  was  manifest  to  the  nations  that 
the  God  of  Israel  had  again  come  to  the  help  of  His  people  ;  and  His  "  fear  was 
upon  them,"  so  that  they  did  not  dare  to  attack  a  people  that  were  surrounded 
on  every  side  by  such  invisible  strength. 

2.  The  people  in  general  had  become  penitent.    The  worship  of  Jehovah  was 

resumed,  and  probably  the  idols  were  all  removed. 

3.  Righteousness  again  prevailed  throughout  society.  This  is  always  the  basis 
of  peace,  as  sin  is  always  the  fountain  head  of  trouble.  There  are  ever  two 
broad  features  in  the  Divine  character — mercy  and  righteousness.  And  in  any 
instrument  raised  up  to  do  a  work  of  God  in  His  Providence,  the  reflection  of 
these  features  is  seen  in  the  duties  given  him  to  discharge.  "  The  judge"  in 
Israel  was  charged  not  only  with  the  duty  of  working  salvation,  but  also  with 
that  of  establishing  the  reign  of  righteousness  among  the  people.  This,  we 
believe,  included  not  only  the  administration  of  civil  justice  as  between  man 
and  man,  but  also  a  supervision  of  the  practical  observance  of  those  laws  and 
ordinances  which  God  had  laid  down  as  rules  of  righteousness  for  the  life  of 
His  peo]^le.  "  Peace  flows  like  a  river  "  in  a  land,  when  its  "  righteousness  is 
strong  like  the  waves  of  the  sea." 

The  "  forty  years  "  we  regard  as  commencing  with  the  deliverance  wrought, 
and  terminating  with  the  beginning  of  the  next  chapter  of  oppression.  Whether 
Othniel  died  during  the  forty  years,  or  at  their  expiry,  we  cannot  tell.  The  long 
continuance  of  peace,  and  the  short  term  of  oppression,  show  what  delight  God 
has  in  niakin-  His  goodness  go  forth  to  His  people,  and  how  extremely  reluctant 
He  is  to  visit  them  with  the  rod. 


COMMENTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.— Verse  10. 

The  Holy  Spirit,  the  one  Source  of  all  Spiritual  Blessing. 

"The  Judges,"    or   "saviours"   of  supernatural  influences  of  the  Divine 

the  church  and  people  of  God,  had  Spirit ;  for  He   is  the  fountain-head 

extraordinary  duties  assigned  them  to  of  all  real  wisdom  and  strength.      But 

do,  for  which  qualifications  above  the  every  man  who  becomes  a  true  Christian 

natural  standard  were  required.  Hence  needs  the  Holy  Spirit  both  to  begin  this 

their  need  of  what  we  usually  call  the  new  life  in  him  and  to  carry  it  on. 
150 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:    JUDGES, 


OHAP.  in. 


Eternal  life  is  the  gift  of  God  the 
Father  ;  it  is  manifested  in  God  the 
Son  ;  and  it  is  enjoyed  only  through 
the  influences  of  God  the  Sjurit.  God 
the  Father  reveals  Himself  by  the 
Son  ;  and  the  Son  reveals  Himself 
through  the  Spirit.  The  Spirit  is  to 
Christ  what  the  atmosphere  is  to  the 
sun — without  it  His  glory  would  not 
be  revealed,  and  He  would  shine  in 
vain — Christ  procures  eternal  life,  and 
the  Holy  Spirit  applies  it.  The 
presence  and  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
are  equally  necessary  to  the  enjoy- 
ment of  the  blessings  of  salvation,  as 
those  of  the  Father  and  the  Son. 

I,  The  nature  of  the  Divine  Spirit's 
influence.  "  In  enlightening  the  mind 
it  is  not  the  office  of  the  Spirit  to 
give  new  revelations  ;  nor  yet  does  He 
discover  to  us  mysteries  and  recondite 
meanings  of  scripture.  But  it  is  clear 
from  scripture  statement,  that,  until 
a  man  have  the  Spirit  of  God  to  instruct 
him,  he  cannot  "discern"  the  excellence 
of  spiritual  things  (1.  Cor.  ii.  14).  The 
man  who  has  great  perspicacity  in 
matters  of  science,  may  be  stone  blind 
in  religion. 

"No  words  however  carefully  selected 
could  make  a  man  who  had  been  born 
blind  form  an  idea  of  light.  But 
those  who  are  taught  of  the  Spirit 
"behold  with  unveiled  face  the  glory 
of  the  Lord,  and  are  changed  into 
His  image,"  through  the  influence  of 
what  they  are  made  to  discern.  Such 
a  manifestation  is  made  of  the  ex- 
cellence of  the  truth  of  the  gospel, 
as  awakens  a  train  of  feelings  and 
affections,  that  were  never  experienced 
before.  The  same  words  of  scripture 
had  often  been  read  before,  but  without 
any  emotion.  Now  they  possess  a 
loving  virtue  which  penetrates  into 
the  inmost  recesses  of  the  soul,  and 
fill  it  with  light,  and  love,  and  hope, 
and  activity.  A  similar  change  would 
take  place  if  a  man  of  gross  mind 
wero  suddenly  inspired  with  those 
refined  perce})tions,  and  that  delicate 
sensibility,  which  are  the  foundation 
of  taste.  A  new  lii^ht  would  be  poured 
on  the  face  of  nature.     The  scenery 


at  which  he  looked  with  languid  eye, 
would  present  features  of  sublimity 
and  beauty.  Where  formerly  there 
was  nothing  but  dull,  uninteresting 
irregularity,  he  now  discovers  order, 
proportion,  harmony,  and  grace." 

[Dich:\ 

"He  does  not  make  us  wise  above 
that  which  is  written,  but  makes  us 
wise  up  to  that  which  is  written. 
He  does  not  tell  us  anything  that  is 
out  of  the  record  ;  but  all  that  is  in 
it,  He  sends  home  with  clearness 
and  effect  on  the  mind.  When  a 
telescope  is  directed  to  some  distant 
landscape  it  enables  us  to  see  what 
we  could  not  otherwise  have  seen ; 
but  it  does  not  enable  us  to  see  any- 
thing which  has  not  a  real  existence 
in  the  prospect  before  us.  It  does 
not  present  to  the  eye  any  fanciful  or 
fictitious  scene.  The  natural  eye  saw 
nothing  but  blue  land,  stretching  along 
the  distant  horizon.  By  the  aid  of  the 
glass,  there  bursts  upon  it  a  charming 
variety  of  fields  and  woods,  and  spires 
and  villages.  Yet  the  glass  has  not 
added  one  feature  to  the  assemblage. 

So  of  the  Spirit,  He  does  not  add 
a  single  truth,  nor  a  single  character 
to  the  book  of  Revelations.  He  simply 
enables  the  'spiritual  man'  to  see  what 
the  'natural  man'  cannot  see." 

[Chalmers.'] 

II.  Fullness  of  blessing  which  the 
Spirit  gives.  "  The  one  comprehensive 
work  of  the  Spirit  is  to  illustrate  Christ 
— Christ  in  His  person — offices — and 
work — and  through  Christ  to  show 
the  evil  of  sin,  to  exhibit  the  glory  of 
the  righteous  character  of  God,  and  to 
undo  thoroughly  the  work  of  Satan 
(John  xvi.  8-11).  *He  convinces  of  sin 
and  misery,  enlightens  the  mind  in  the 
knowledge  of  Christ,  renews  the  will, 
and  persuades  and  enables  to  embrace 
Christ  as  He  is  freely  offered  in  the 
Gospel  *  He  brings  a  man  into  a  new 
state ;  gives  him  7iew  views  of  himself, 
of  God,  of  sin,  of  salvation  ;  leads  him 
to  choose  new  objects  of  affection ;  in- 
duces him  to  cherish  new  desires  and 
aims ;  causes  him  to  experience  new 
enjoyments ;   leads  him  to  form   new 

151 


otiAp.  nt 


tiOMJlETtC  COMMENTAJlt:  JtlVGEB. 


habits;  and  stirs  him  up  to  begin  a 
new  corijlict  in  his  soul,  a  conflict  not 
only  between  sin  and  the  conscience,  but 
between  sin  and  the  will." 

[Buchanan.'] 

**  The  Spirit,  as  '  water  '  cleanses, 
fertilises,  refreslies,  is  abundant,  and  is 
freely  given.  As  'Jlre*  it  purifies, 
illuminates,  and  searches.  As  'wind' 
it  is  independent,  sovereign,  powerful, 
sensible  in  its  effects,   reviving.      As 

*  oil '  it  heals,  comforts,  illuminates, 
consecrates.  As  *  rain  and  dew!  it 
fertilises,  refreshes,  is  abundant,  im- 
perce})tible,  and  penetrating.      As  a 

*  dcme '  it  is  gentle,  meek,  innocent, 
forgiving.  As  a  'voice'  it  speaks, 
guides,  warns,    and    teaches.      As  a 

*  seal'  it  impresses,  secures,  and 
authenticates,     [^wow.] 

**  It  is  called  the  *  Comforter  ; '  the 
'  Free  Spirit ; '  the  '  Good  Spirit ; ' 
the  '  Holy  Spirit ; '  the  '  Holy  Spirit 
of  Promise ; '  the  *  Power  of  the 
Highest ;  *  the  *  Spirit  of  the  Lord 
God;'  the  *  Spirit  of  the  Father;' 
the  *  Spirit  of  Christ;'  the  'Spirit 
of  the  Son  ; '  the  *  Spirit  of  Life — 
grace  —  truth  —  prophecy  —  adoption 
wisdom  — counsel — wisdom — might — 
understanding  —  glory — knowledge — 
fear  of  the  Lord — holinesss — revela- 
tion ; '    **  Seven     Spirits    of     God  ; ' 

*  Voice  of  the  Lord.'"    [^wow.] 

III.  The  Spirit  needed  by  every 
man. 

1.  On  whom  he  is  conferred.     "As 

we  press  our  seals,  not  on  air  or  water, 
but  onmateri.'s  capable  of  receiving 
the  characters,  so  the  Holy  Spirit  of 
God  is  only  given  to  really  believing 
minds  capable  of  receiving  and  pre- 
serving his  seal."    [Jean  Claude.] 

2.  He  sets  free.  "  To  know  the  way 
to  heaven,  sometimes  to  cast  a  longing 
eye  in  that  direction,  and  by  fits  and 
starts  to  make  a  feeble  effort  heaven- 
wards, can  end  in  nothing.  We  must 
get  the  Spirit  of  God.  Thus  only  can 
we  get  free  of  the  shackles  that  bind 
the  soul  to  earth,  to  the  flesh,  and  sin. 
I  have  seen  a  captive   eagle,    caged 

152 


far  from  its  distant  home,  as  he  sat 
mournful-like  on  his  perch,  turn  his 
eye  sometimes  heavenwards  ;  there  he 
would  sit  in  silence  like  one  wrapt  in 
thought,  gazing  through  the  bars  of 
his  cage  up  into  tlie  blue  sky;  and, 
after  a  while,  as  if  noble  but  sleeping 
instincts  had  suddenly  awoke,  he  would 
start  and  spread  out  his  broad  sails, 
and  leap  upward,  revealing  an  iron 
chain,  that,  usually  covered  by  his 
plumage,  drew  him  back  again  to  his 
place.  But  though  this  bird  of  heaven 
knew  the  way  to  soar  aloft,  and,  some- 
times, felt  the  thirst  for  freedom, 
freedom  was  not  for  him,  till  a  power 
greater  than  his  own  proclaimed 
liberty  to  the  captive,  and  shattered 
the  shackles  that  bound  him  to  his 
perch.  Nor  is  there  freedom  for  the 
soul  of  man  till  the  Spirit  of  God  sets 
him  free,  and  by  the  lightning  force 
of  truth,  breaks  the  chains  that  bind 
us  to  sin."  [Guthrie.] 

8-  We  need  Him  as  a  Monitor. 
"  He  stirs  up  in  us  diligence,  watchful- 
ness, and  earnest  endeavours.      He  is 

*  the  Word  behind  thee  saying,  "  This 
is  the  way — walk  ye  in  it,  when  ye 
turn  to  the  right  hand,  and  when  ye 
turn  to  the  left.'"  The  cares  and 
business  of  the  world  often  drive  the 
sense  of  our  duty  out  of  our  minds. 
God's  Spirit  puts  us  in  remembrance, 
and  revives  truth  to  us  in  season.  A 
ship,  though  never  so  well  rigged, 
needs  a  pilot ;  we  need  a  good  guide 
to  put  us  in    mind    of  our    duty." 

[Mantoti.] 

4.  He  gives  a  heavenly  instinct. 
"  *  Tell  me,'   said  a  father  to  a  son, 

*  what  difference  you  can  detect 
between  two  needles — one  of  which 
has  received  an  electric  shock,  while 
the  other  has  not,  and  yet  the  one  has 
hidden  virtues  which  occasion  will 
show,  of  which  the  other  has  none.' 
The  electric  shock  has  rendered  the 
one  needle  a  magnet,  which,  duly 
balanced,  will  enable  a  man  to  find 
his  way  across  the  trackless  ocean.  As 
this  needle,  so  may  that  soul  be  which 
has  received  the  electric  shock  of  the 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES. 


CHAP.  III. 


Holy  Spirit ;  on  the  ocean  of  a  sinful 
world,  it  shall  point  wanderers  to  the 
heaven  of  everlasting  rest."  [^mow.] 

5.  He  conveys  a  knowledge  of 
spiritual  things.  "  You  may  try  to 
teacii  a  child  the  meaning  of  the  term 
'  sweetness/  but  words  will  not  avail ; 
give  him  some  honey  and  he  will  never 
forget.  You  might  seek  to  tell  him  of 
the  glorious  mountains,  and  the  Alps 
that  pierce  the  clouds,  and  send  their 
snowy  peaks,  like  white-robed  am- 
bassadors, up  to  the  courts  of  heaven  ; 
take  him  there,  let  him  see  them,  and 
he  will  never  forget  them.  You  might 
paint  to  him  the  grandeur  of  the 
American  continent,  with  its  hills,  and 
lakes,  and  rivers,  such  as  the  world 
sees  nowhere  else  ;  but  let  him  go  and 
view  it,  and  he  will  know  more  of  the 
land  than  he  could  do  by  all  your 
teaching,  while  he  sits  at  home.  So 
the  Holy  Spirit  not  only  tells  us  about 
Christ's  love,  but  *  sheds  it  abroad  in 
the  heart.'  He  not  only  tells  us  of 
the  sweetness  of  pardon,  but  gives  us 
a  sense  of  no  condemnation,  and  then 
we  know  all  about  it  better  than  we 
would  have  done  by  any  teaching  of 
words  and  thoughts."     [Spurgeon.^ 

"  None  so  blind  whose  eyes  the 
Spirit  cannot  open.  He  who  by  His 
incubation  upon  the  waters  at  the 
Oeation,  hatched  that  rude  mass  into 
the  beautiful  form  we  now  see  ;  and 
out  of  that  dark  chaos  made  the 
glorious  heavens,  and  garnislied  them 
with  so  many  orient  stars,  can  move 
on  thy  darkened  soul,  and  enlighten 
it,  though  now  it  be  as  void  of  know- 
ledge as  the  evening  of  the  world's 
first  day  was  of  light.  The  school- 
master sometimes  sends  home  the 
child,  and  bids  the  father  put  him  to 
another  trade,  because  not  able,  with 
all  his  art,  to  make  a  scholar  of  him  ; 
but  if  the  Spirit  of  God  be  the  master, 
thou  shalt  learn,  though  a  very  dunce." 

\Gurnall.\ 

"  The  most  correct  and  lively  descrip- 
tion of  the  sun  cannot  convey  either 
the  light,  the  warmth,  the  cheerfulness, 
or  the  fruitfulness  which  tlie  actual 
shining  of   that  luminary    conveys  ; 


neither  can  the  most  laboured  and 
accurate  dissertations  on  grace  and 
spiritual  things  impart  a  true  idea  of 
them,  without  an  experience  of  the 
Holy   Spirit's   work  on  the  heart. 

[Toplady.\ 

6.    He    breaks   the    seal    of  the 

Scriptures.  "He  that  hath  not  the 
right  key  is  as  far  from  entering  the 
house  as  he  that  hath  none,  yea,  in 
some  sense  further  ;  for  he  that  hatli 
none  will  call  to  him  that  is  within, 
while  the  other,  trusting  to  his  false 
key,  stands  pottering  without  to  little 
purpose.  The  Pharisees  were  not  a 
little  conversant  with  the  Scriptures, 
yet  they  missed  that  truth  which  lay 
before  them  in  almost  every  page  and 
leaf  of  Moses  and  the  Prophets,  whom 
they  were  in  their  every-day  study 
tumbling  over. — I  mean  the  grand 
truth  concerning  Christ,  of  which 
Moses  and  the  Prophets  everywhere 
speak."     [Gurnall.^ 

**  Scripture  can  be  savingly  under- 
stood only  by  the  inward  illumination 
of  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  Gospel  is  a 
picture  of  God's  free  grace  to  sinners. 
Were  we  in  a  room  hung  with  the 
finest  paintings,  and  adorned  with  the 
most  exquisite  statues,  we  could  not 
see  one  of  them  if  all  light  were  ex- 
cluded. Now  the  blessed  Spirit's 
irradiation  is  the  same  to  the  mitid 
tliat  outward  liglit  is  to  the  bodily 
eyes."     l^^l'oplady.^ 

"  If  you  go  to  a  sun-dial  at  night 
and  study  it  with  a  brilliant  lamp,  you 
may  trace  every  figure  and  understand 
the  markings  thoroughly,  but  you  will 
learn  nothing  of  its  practical  use.  If 
you  want  to  do  that,  you  must  go  to  it 
when  the  sun  is  in  its  meridian,  and 
then  j^ou  will  not  only  see  the  structure 
of  the  dial,  but  discover  from  it  the 
hour  of  the  day.  So  in  reading  this 
sacred  book  you  can  by  the  lamp-light 
of  human  reason,  or  the  moonlight  of 
tradition,  understand  it  in  its  outward 
facts,  but  in  its  inner  and  saving  mean- 
ing, you  must  ask  the  Author  of  the 
book  to  exjJain  it  to  you.  If  on  read- 
ing any  l)ook  you  find  a  passage  of 
which  you  can  make  nothing,  you  do 

153 


OHAP.  in. 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:    JUDGES. 


not  go  to  others  for  the  solution,  but 
you  go  to  tlie  author  himself,  if  within 
reach  and  accessible,  and  so  get  from 
him  the  best  of  all  explanations.  So 
the  Divine  Spirit  who  at  first  wrote 
this  book  waits  at  all  times  to  explain 
its  contents  to  those  who  ask  Him  to 
enlighten  them."     [Gumming.'] 

"  To  unconverted  persons  a  great 
part  of  the  Bible  resembles  a  letter 
written  in  cipher.  The  blessed  Spirit's 
office  is  to  act  as  God's  decipherer,  by 
letting  His  people  into  the  secret  of 
celestial  experience,  as  the  key  and 
clue  to  those  sweet  mysteries  of  grace 
which  were  before  as  a  garden  shut  up, 
or  as  a  fountain  sealed,  or  as  a  book 
written    in    an    unknown    character." 

[Topladi/.] 

"  Unconverted  men  often  say,  *  If 
these  things  are  so  clear  and  so  im- 
portant, why  cannot  we  see  them  ?  * 
And  there  is  no  answer  but  this — 
*  Ye  are  blind.'  *  But  we  want  to  see 
them.  If  they  are  real,  they  are  our 
concern  as  well  as  yours.  0  that  we 
had  a  preacher!'  But  there  is  no  such 
preacher  as  they  desire.  Let  him 
gather  God's  liglit  as  he  will,  he  can 
but  pour  it  on  blind  eyes.  A  burning- 
glass  will  condense  sunbeams  into  a 
focus  of  brightness  ;  and  if  a  blind  eye 
be  put  there  not  a  whit  will  it  see, 
though  it  be  consumed. 

Strong  powers  of  understanding  on 
your  part  will  not  serve.  The  great 
Earl  of  Chatham  once  went  with  a 
pious  friend  to  hear  Mr.  Cecil.  The 
sermon  was  on  the  Spirit's  agency  in 
the  hearts  of  believers.  As  they  were 
coming  from  church,  the  mighty  states- 
man confessed  that  he  could  not  under- 
stand it  all,  and  asked  his  friend  if  he 
supposed  that  any  one  could  ?  *  Why, 
yes,  said  he,  *  there  were  some  plain, 
unlettered  women  and  some  children 
there,  who  understood  every  word  of  it 
and  heard  it  with  joy.' "    [Hoge.] 


u 


7.  He  vitalises  all  means  of  grace. 
Such  is  my  belief  in  the  reality,  and 
existence,  and  agency  of  the  Divine 
Spirit,  that  I  think  I  should  have  no 
hope  and  no  faith  as  a  minister  and 
labourer  for  the  enfranchisement  of 
154 


mankind,  if  it  were  not  that  I  believed 
there  was  an  all-prevalent,  vitalising 
Divine  Spirit.  I  should  as  soon  attempt 
to  raise  flowers  if  there  were  no  atmos- 
phere, or  to  produce  fruits  if  there  were 
neither  light  nor  heat,  as  I  should 
attempt  to  regenerate  men,  if  I  did 
not  believe  there  was  a  Holy  Ghost. 
I  have  faith  in  the  Divine  Spirit  spread 
abroad  over  the  whole  human  family, 
which  is  really  the  cause  of  life  in  the 
higher  directions  ;  and  it  is  this  faith 
that  gives  me  hope  and  courage  in  all 
labour."     [Beecher.l 

"  Ordinances  are  but  as  the  sails  of 
a  ship,  ministers  as  the  seamen  that 
manage  those  sails  ;  the  anchor  may 
be  weighed,  the  sails  spread  ;  but  when 
all  is  done,  there  is  no  sailing  till  a 
gale  come.  We  preach  and  pray,  and 
you  hear  ;  but  there  is  no  motion 
Christward,  until  the  Spirit  of  God 
blows  upon  them."     [Flacel.] 

'*  In  vain  do  the  inhabitants  of 
London  go  to  their  conduits  for  supply, 
unless  the  man  who  has  the  master-key 
turn  the  water  on  ;  and  in  vain  do  we 
think  to  quench  our  thirst  at  ordi- 
nances, unless  God  communicate  the 
living  water  of  His  Spirit.  The  word 
of  God  is  of  no  avail  to  salvation 
without  the  Spirit  of  God.  A  compass 
is  of  no  use  to  the  mariner,  unless  he 
has  light  to  see  it  by."     [Toplady.'] 

"  An  atmosphere  without  the  sun 
would  leave  the  earth  cold  and  cheer- 
less— a  dreary  habitation  for  living 
men.  So  the  ordinances  of  the  Gospel 
are  streams  which  gladden  the  Church 
of  God  only,  when  He  makes  them  the 
vehicles  of  His  own  power  and  presence 
to  the  soul."     [palter. 'l 

8.  Without  him  no  power.  "Suppose 
an  army  to  sit  down  before  a  granite 
fortress,  and  they  intend  to  batter  it 
down.  We  ask  how  ?  They  point  to  a 
cannon-ball.  Well,  but  there  is  no 
power  in  that.  It  is  heavy,  but  not 
more  than  a  hundredweight,  or  even 
half  that.  If  all  the  men  in  the  army 
were  to  throw  it,  that  would  make  no 
impression.  *  No,'  they  say,  *  but 
look  at  the  cannon.*  Well,  but  there 
is  no  power  in  that ;  it  is  a  machine, 


ROMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


OHAP.  III. 


and  nothing  more.  *But  look  at  the 
powder/  Well,  there  is  no  power  in 
that  ;  a  child  may  spill  it,  a  sparrow 
may  pick  it  up.  Yet  this  powerless 
powder,  and  this  powerless  ball,  are 
put  into  this  powerless  cannon  ;  one 
spark  of  fire  enters  it,  and  in  the 
twinkling  of  an  eye,  that  powder  is  a 
flash  of  lightning,  and  that  cannon- 
ball  is  a  thunderbolt,  which  smites  as 
if  it  had  been  sent  from  heaven.  So 
with  our  church  machinery  of  the 
present  day.  We  have  instruments  for 
pulling  down  our  strongholds,  but.  Oh! 
for  the  baptism  of  fire^    \Arthur^ 

IV.  Demonstration  of  the  Spirit. 

**  Demonstration  is  opposed  to  loose 
declamation,  whereby  the  affections  are 
captivated,  but  the  judgment  is  left 
out.  Here  the  judgment  is  first  en- 
liglitened,  and  then  the  will  and  affec- 
tions obey  its  decision.  "  The  new 
man  is  created  in  knowledge  after  the 
image  of  Him  that  created  him." 
There  is  not  merely  rational  demon- 
stration. "  He  that  hath  heard  and 
learned  of  the  Father  cometli  unto 
Me."  He  works  as  the  "Spirit  of 
wi.sdom  and  revelation  in  the  know- 
ledge of  Christ."  Before  the  eyes  of 
the  Galatians  Jesus  Christ  was  set 
forth  "  evidently,"  or  drawn  to  the  life. 
No  one  could  do  this  but  the  Holy 
S{.>irit.  Man  can  no  more  communicate 
this  demonstration  to  his  fellow  than 
he  can  give  understanding  to  an  idiot, 
or  sight  to  the  blind."  This  good  and 
perfect  gift  cometh  down  from  the 
Father  of  lights."  The  things  thus  de- 
monstrated are  "  most  surely  believed." 

A  man  who  has  a  just  sense  of  the 
weaknesss  and  fallibility  of  his  own  in- 
tellect may  have  misgivings  that  there 
is  some  flaw  in  his  reasoning.  It  is, 
after  all,  but  a  chain  of  deductions, 
and  some  link  may  be  left  out,  or  may 
be  weak  and  loose.  But  he  who  is  led 
by  the  Spirit  is  assured  by  direct  con- 
sciousness, and  "  needs  not  that  any 
man  teach  him,"  for  in  himself  he  feels 
"that  this  is  truth,  and  is  no  lie."  *'The 
Gospel  comes  to  him  not  in  word  only, 
but  also  in  power,  and  in  the  Holy 
Ghost  and  much  assurance." 


The  man  who  knows  the  truth,  as 
taught  by  the  Spirit,  finds  it  to  be 
**  light  to  the  eyes,"  and  "joy  to  the 
heart."  He  rejoices  in  God's  Word 
"  more  than  in  all  riches."  It  creates 
a  present  heaven  in  the  soul,  for  it  is 
*'  full  of  glory."  He  knows  the  para- 
dox, "  as  sorrowful,  yet  always  re- 
joicing." The  man  with  merely 
rational  conviction  does  not  inter- 
meddle with  this  joy.  The  joy  of  the 
believer  is  far  superior  to  that  of  those 
who  "  divide  great  store  of  spoil."  He 
says  out  of  a  full  heart,  "  I  will  delight 
myself  in  Thy  commandments  which  I 
have  loved."  Many  who  could  not 
defend  their  faith  by  force  of  reason- 
ing against  the  sophistical  cavils  of 
their  persecutors,  could  yet  give  this 
noble  and  unanswerable  reply: — "I 
cannot  speak  for  Christ,  but  I  can  burn 
for  Him  !  "  There  is  what  the  demon- 
stration of  the  Spirit  can  do. 

\Jamieson!\ 

V.  Indwelling"  of  the  Spirit.  "Every 
man  who  gives  himself  to  Christ,  and 
so  belongs  to  Him,  receives  the  Spirit 
of  Christ  to  dwell  in  him  as  a  proof  of 
the  same;  *for  if  any  man  have  not 
the  Spirit  of  Christ,  he  is  none  of  His.' 
All  Christians  are  said  to  be  '  builded 
together  for  an  habitation  of  God 
through  the  Spirit.'  Addressing  those 
who  are  Christians,  the  sacred  writer 
says,  *  Know  ye  not  that  ye  are  the 
temple  of  God  and  that  the  Spirit  of 
God  dwelleth  in  you.'  *  Tlie  temple 
of  God  is  holy,  which  temple  ye  are.' " 

Tiiis  indwelling  of  the  Spirit  displays 
love,  grace,  and  power  worthy  ot  the 
highest  admiration.  To  enter  into  a 
human  soul  foul  with  the  deepest 
stains,  in  which  everything  revolting 
to  the  holiness  of  His  nature  is  ex- 
hibited, and  to  exert  his  influence 
there  to  purify  it,  and  fit  it  for  the 
refined  and  exalted  joys  of  religion  is 
condescension  and  benevolence,  sur- 
passing conception.  He  meets  with 
resistance  but  does  not  retire ;  all  the 
strength  of  the  corrupt  nature  is 
opposed  to  His  design — yet  He  subdues 
it  with  the  utmost  patience  and  for- 
bearance.    In  His  plastic  hands,  man 

155 


CHAP.  III.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES, 


an  outcast  from  His  Maker,  vile  and  the  soil ;  and  when  the  purchaser  of  a 

helpless — given  over   as  irrecoverably  house  received  seizin  or  possession,  the 

lost,  is  transformed  into  a  being  adorned  key  of  the  door,  era  butidle  of  thatch 

with  the  likeness  of  his  Creator,  devoted  plucked  from  the  roof,  signified  that 

to  His  service,  and  destined  to  live  in  the  building  was  yielded  np  to  him. 

the  happy  seats  of  the  spirits  of  light.  The  God  of  all  grace  has  given  to 

As  a  Divine  Person,  the  Holy  Spirit  His  people  all  the  perfections  of  heaven 

inhabits   the   temple  of  the  universe,  to  be  their  heritage  for  ever,  and  the 

and  heaven  and  earth  are  sustained  earnest  of  His  Spirit  is  to  them  the 

and  beautified  by  His  influence.     But  blessed  token  that  all  things  are  theirs. 

He  selects  the  souls  of  believers  as  the  The   Spirit's   work  of  comfort  and 

scene  of  His  gracious  operations.  There  sanctification   is   a   part   of    heaven's 

He  is  present  as  the  Spirit  of  truth  and  covenant   blessings — a   turf  from   the 

consolation.     It  is  His  office  to  diffuse  soil  of  Canaan,  a  twig  from  the  tree  of 

the  cheering  and    tranquillizing  light  life,  the  key  to  mansions  in  the  skies, 

of  heaven,   to  shed  a  divine  serenity  Possessing  the  earnest  of  the  Spirit, 

over   the  thoughts   and    feelings,    to  we  have  received  seizin  of  heaven." 

inspire  and  strengthen  good  principles,  [Spurgeon.^ 
to  elevate  the  affections  above  secular 

objects,  to  give  a  taste  of  the  sweetness  VI.  Spirit's  work  silent  and  gentle, 

of  spiritual  things,  and  to  awaken  hope  "The   Holy   Spirit  leads    us  as   a 

with  all  its  blissful  anticipations.     It  mother  leads  by  the  hand  her  child  of 

is  compared  to  a  ''well  of  living  water  two  years  old  ;  as  a  person  who  can  see 

sprini^ing  up  to  everlasting  life."     In  leads  one  who  is  blind."     [^VianneyJ] 

youth,  manhood,  and  old  age.  He  pro-  "  The  operation  of  the  Spirit  doth 

motes  the  growth  of  grace,  and  gives  a  very  much  imitate  that  of  nature.     It 

foretaste  of  celestial  bliss.     The  joy  of  is  in  a  very  still  and  silent  way,  that 

the  Christian  is  thus  within.     No  man  the  sap  is  drained  in  by  the  root,  and 

takes  it  from  him.  He  is  satisfied  from  ascends  up  the  trunk  of  the  tree,  and 

himself — from  the  communications  of  diffuses  itself  to  every  branch,  so  that 

the  divine  inmate  in  his  soul,  whose  we  may  see  that  it  lives,  but  we  do  not 

presence  is  life  and  whose  favour  is  the  see  how.     The  case  is  with  souls  that 

sunshine  of  his    spirit.     Omnia   mea  are  brouglit  to  live  in  the  Spirit,  as 

mecum  porto,  said  a  self-sufficient  sage  with  very  infirm  and  languishing  per- 

of  antiquity  ;  it  was  a  poor  stock,  and  sons,   who   have  been  consumed   and 

he  must  have  starved  upon  it  without  even  next  to  death,  in  a  corrupt  air. 

the    assistance    of    pride.      But    the  Being  removed  into  such  as  is  pure  and 

Christian,  with  the  Holy  Ghost  dwelling  wholesome  they  revive,  but  in  a  very 

in  his  heart,  can  say  with  truth,  that  insensible  way  ;  so  is  this  life  preserved 

he  "  carries  all  his  treasures  with  him,"  by  a  vital  spiritual  influence,  which  is 

for  wherever  he  goes  his  joy  renjains  a  pure  air  to  them,  a  gentle,  indulgent, 

and  is  full "  (Rom.  xiv.  17).     [^Dick.l  benign,  and  cherishing  air;  they  live 

"  A  house  uninhabited  soon  comes  by  it,  and   never  a  whit  the   worse, 

to  ruin  ;  and  a  soul  uninhabited  by  because  it  is  not  so  turbulent  as  to 

the  Holy  Spirit  of  God  verges  faster  make  a  noise."     [Salter.'] 

and  faster  to  destruction."    [^J'oplady.l  **  Many  of  the  most  powerful  agents 

"This  indwelling  of  the  Spirit  is  a  of  nature  are  themselves  unseen,  and 

pledge   and   foretaste   of  heaven.     In  only  discovered  by  their  fruits.     We 

the  early  times  when  land  was  sold,  the  do   not  see   the   wind,  either  in  the 

owner  cut  a  turf  from  the  green  sward,  gentle   breeze   to   fan    us,   or  in    the 

and  cast  it  into  the  cap  of  the  pur-  hurricane  to  work  destruction  among 

chaser  as  a  token  that  it  was  his;  or  he  the   labours  of  man.     The  heat  that 

tore  off  the  branch  of  a  tree  and  put  it  nourishes  the  ])lants  of  the  earth,  and 

into  the  new  owner's  hand  to  show  that  the  electricity  so  intimately  connected 

he  was  entitled  to  all  the  products  of  with  all  atmospherical    and    organic 
156 


HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:    JUDGES. 


CHAP.  m. 


changes  move  secretly  and  in  silence. 
God  Himself  too,  is  unseen  in  the 
midst  of  His  works.  When  we  go 
forth  to  meditate,  we  are  constrained 
to  acknowledge  that  God  is  everywhere 
among  these  works  of  grandeur,  and 
yet  by  intense  gaze  we  cannot  discover 
His  person,  nor,  by  patient  listening, 
hear  the  sound  of  His  footsteps.  No 
jarring  sound  of  mechanism  comes 
across  the  void  that  intervenes  between 
us  and  these  heavens — no  voice  readies 
our  ear  to  tell  of  the  Worker — it  is 
the  heavens  themselves  that  declare 
His  glory.  And  why  should  the  God 
who  created  us,  not  be  able  to  renew 
the  heart,  and  yet  be  as  unseen  in  the 
one  case  as  the  other  ? 

There  is  a  manifest  congruity  in  the 
circumstance  that  the  Agent  conducts 
His  work  so  silently  and  imperceptibly. 
Only  thus  can  the  spirit  of  man  retain 
its  separate  action  and  freedom.  There 
is  no  violence  done  to  man's  nature  in 
the  supernatural  work  carried  on  in 
the  heart.  The  dealings  of  God  are 
in  every  respect  suited  to  the  essential 
principles  of  man's  nature,  *  I  drew 
them   with   the   cords  of  a   man.' " 

[McGosh.} 

"  Can  I  see  the  dew  of  heaven  as  it 
falls  on  a  summer  evening  ?  I  cannot. 
It  comes  down  softly  and  gently, 
noiselessly  and  imperceptibly.  But 
when  I  go  forth  in  the  morning  after  a 
cloudless  night,  and  see  every  leaf 
sparkling  with  moisture,  and  feel  every 
blade  of  grass  damp  and  wet,  I  say  at 
once  'there  has  been  a  dew.'  Just  so 
it  is  with  the  presence  of  the  Spirit  in 
the  soul."     [iiyle.^ 

"  A  young  man  who  had  been  piously 
brought  up,  but  who  had  given  himself 
to  vice  and  folly,  at  last  joined  a 
company  of  pirates.  A  voice  soft  and 
gentle  as  a  mother's  seemed  to  be 
always  pleading  with  him  ;  it  was  the 
cooing  of  a  dove.  He  tried  to  shake 
off  the  effect,  but  again  and  again  the 
sound  threw  his  soul  into  a  turmoil. 
One  night  when  all  was  still  around 
him,  the  tender,  reproachful  murmur 
seemed  to  pierce  his  very  heart.  He 
could  stand  it  no  longer  ;  but  throwing 
himself  on  his  knees  in  an  agony  of 


contrition,  he  vowed  before  God  to 
forsake  his  evil  ways.  By  God's  help 
he  did  so.  He  went  back  to  his  home, 
became  an  altered  man,  and  liv^(l 
henceforward  a  pious  and  useful  life." 

[Anon,] 

VII.  Sin  and  folly  of  grieving^  or 
resisting  the  Spirit.  "  In  times  when 
vile  men  held  the  high  places  of  the 
land,  a  roll  of  drums  was  employed  to 
drown  the  martyr's  voice  lest  the 
testimony  of  truth  from  the  scaffold 
should  reach  the  ears  of  the  people — 
an  illustration  of  how  men  deal  with 
their  own  consciences  and  seek  to  put 
to  silence  the  truth-telling  voice  of  the 
Holy  Spirit."     [Ar?ioL] 

"The  Holy  Spirit  of  God  is  our 
guide.  Who  would  displease  his  guide, 
a  sweet,  comfortable  guide,  that  leads 
us  through  the  wilderness  of  this 
world  ?  As  the  cloud  by  day,  and  the 
pillar  of  fire  by  night.  He  conducts  us 
to  the  Heavenly  Canaan.  If  we  grieve 
our  guide  we  cause  Him  to  leave  us  to 
ourselves.  The  people  of  old  would 
not  go  a  step  further  than  God  by  His 
angel  went  before  them.  It  is  in  vain 
for  us  to  make  toward  heaven  without 
our  blessed  Guide."     [Sibbes.] 

"  Take  heed,  sinners,  how  you  use 
the  Spirit  when  He  comes  knocking  at 
the  door  of  your  hearts.  Oi)en  at  His 
knock  and  He  will  be  your  guest ;  you 
shall  have  His  pleasant  company ; 
repulse  Plim,  and  you  have  not  a 
promise  that  He  will  knock  again. 
If  once  He  leave  striving  with  thee, 
unhappy  man,  thou  art  lost !  Thou 
liest  like  a  ship  cast  up  by  the  waves 
on  some  high  r.  k,  where  the  tide 
never  comes  to  fetch  it  off.  Thou 
wilt  use  ordinances  in  vain.  The 
Spirit  is  both  wind  and  tide  to  them, 
to  set  the  soul  afloat,  and  carry  it  on, 
or  else  it  lies  like  a  ship  on  dry  ground 
which  stirs  not."     [GurnalL] 

VIII.  Invite  the  Spirit  to  come 
again.  *'  Lord,  the  motions  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  were  formerly  frequent  in 
my  heart.  But  alas !  of  late  they  have 
been  great  strangers.  It  is  my  great 
desire  they  should  come  again.    Let 

157 


CHAP.  m.  EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


the  Spirit  be  pleased,  not  only  to  stand  as  not  to  bid  the  Holy  Spirit  welcome, 

and  knock  before  the  door,  but  also  to  let   Thy  effectual  grace  cause  me  to 

come  in.     If  I  do  not  open  the  door,  make  it  so."     {^Fuller.] 

let  me  humbly  beg  of  thee,  that  thou 

would'st    make    the    iron    gate    of  my  Return,  O  Holy  Dove,  return  ! 

,         ,  n  ..  ^   J       rni     "^  Sweet  messenger  of  rest  ; 

heart  open   of  its  own  accord.      I  hen  I  hate  the  sins  that  made  thee  mourn, 

let  thy  Spirit  be  pleased  to  sup  in   my  And  drove  thee  from  my  breast. 

heart.     I  have  given  it  an  invitation, 

and  I  hope  I  shall   give   it  room.      But  ^he  dearest  ifol  I  have  known, 

thou  that  sendest  guests,  send  the  Help  me  to  tear  it  from  thy  throne, 

meal  also ;  and  if  I  be  so  unmannerly  And  worship  only  thee. 

ADDED  SIN,  RENEWED  CHASTISEMENT,  AND  GRACIOUS  DELIVERANCE, 

Verses  12-30. 

Critical  Notes.— 12.  Did  evil  again  in  sight  of  the  Lord.]  The  word  V^n  or  TIV") 
from  37^"^  is  used  the  same  both  here  and  in  verse  7  to  signify  evil;  but  whereas  in  verse  7  we 
have  the  verb  ^CTP'^,  meaning  simply  did,  or  wrought,  in  verse  12  we  have  ^iDD?,  meaning  added 
to  former  sin  (see  also  chap.  iv.  1  ;  x.  6  ;  xiii.  1),  or  continued  to  do  evil.  God  does  not  forget 
to  count  the  old  sin,  when  He  marks  the  commiss  on  of  new  sin.  Did  evil,]  not  evil  generally, 
but  the  evil  to  which  they  were  prone,  and  on  account  of  which  the  Lord  had  a  controversy  with 
tnem,  viz.,  idolatry.  The  Lord  strengthened  Eglon,  the  king  of  Moab,  against  Israel.]  stirred 
him  up,  gave  him  facilities  for  carrying  out  the  designs  of  his  own  heart  against  that  people,  and 
overruled  all  the  circumstances  of  Providence,  so  as  to  give  him  easy  success  in  oppressing  Israel. 
The  name  Eylon  signifies  "  little  calf."  In  the  present  instance,  the  contrary  epithet  would  be 
more  correct. 

13.  Gathered  unto  him— Amnion  and  Amalek.]  Allied  himself  with  these  near  neighbours. 
]VIoab  and  Ammon  were  brothers,  having  the  same  parentage,  and  might  naturally  be  supposed 
to  co-operate  in  all  great  enterprises.  In  the  Amalekites  the  old  spirit  of  Esau  breathed,  who 
looked  on  Jacob  with  undying  hate,  because  by  him  he  had  been  defrauded  of  the  blessing. 
Now  that  spirit  still  rankles  in  the  hearts  of  generations  far  down  the  scale ;  and  if  we  even  go 
on  to  the  days  of  Jehoshaphat,  we  find  it  burning  with  undiminished  intensity  (2  Chron.  xx.) — 
if,  as  is  probable,  "  the  inhabitants  of  Mount  Seir  "  there  spoken  of,  be  the  same,  in  whole,  or  in 
part,  with  the  Amalekites  (comp.  1  Chron.  iv.  42,  43).  (See  also  Ex.  xvii.  14  ;  Deut.  xxv. 
18,  19  ;  1  Sam.  xv.  ;  Ps.  Ixxxiii.  6,  7.)  "As  God  raised  up  deliverers  to  Israel  when  they  were 
penitent,  so  He  stirred  up  enemies  to  them,  and  gave  them  power  to  oppress  them,  when  they 
revolted  from  Him.  Since  they  worshipped  the  gods  of  the  people  round  about  them  (chap.  ii. 
12),  it  was  fit  that  they  should  be  punished  by  those  very  people."  \_PatricTc.]  In  this  crusade 
against  Israel,  all  the  parties  might  not  have  the  same  motives,  but  they  were  at  one  in  their 
bitter  hatred  of  that  people — the  seed  of  the  serpent  as  against  that  of  the  woman — the  world 
as  against  the  church  of  God.  Moab  was  the  chief  actor,  tempted  partly  by  the  richness  of  the 
country,  for  Josephus  says  it  was  a  "  divine  country."  Casket  says,  "  The  Moabites  longed  for 
the  excellent  oasis  of  *•  The  city  of  Palms."  Jericho  was  indeed  destroyed,  but  the  indestructible 
wealth  of  its  splendid  site  attracted  them.  Perhaps,  too,  they  had  began  to  observe  signs  of  a 
certain  weakness  among  the  tribes  of  Israel,  now  that  Othniel  was  dead  ;  for  it  could  not  escape 
the  notice  of  surrounding  nations,  that  states  of  weakness  and  strength  were  periodical  with 
Israel,  according  as  God  was  absent  from  them,  or  was  with  them.  This  was  now,  therefore, 
reckoned  a  fit  time  to  put  in  execution  a  long-cherished  design.  A  large  part  of  the  territory 
occupied  by  Reuben  and  Gad,  to  the  east  of  Jordan,  was  of  old  time  possessed  by  Moab.  Of 
this  it  had  been  dispossessed  by  the  Amorites.  When  the  Israelites  came  round  on  their 
march  to  Canaan,  they  routed  and  annihilated  these  Amorites  under  Sihon,  and  took  possession 
of  their  lands.  These  lands  Moab  now  claimed,  and  made  this  a  pretext  for  war.  Joseplius  says, 
Eglon  first  subjugates  the  tribes  to  the  east  of  the  river,  and  then  made  a  sudden  incursion  to 
the  west.  He  probably  regarded  the  site  of  Jericho  as  a  good  strategical  point  for  headquarters, 
whence  he  could  stretch  his  hand  on  either  side  with  ease.  It  was  also  the  spot  to  command  the 
fords ;  and  so  he  could  split  Israel  into  two,  preventing  those  on  the  east  and  west  sides  from 
helping  each  other.  The  city  of  palm  trees.]  A  heavy  curse  was  pronounced  against  it  by  Joshua, 
and  a  blight  seems  already  to  have  fallen  upon  its  name  ;  for  it  is  no  longer  known  as  "  Jericho," 
but  as  "  the  city  of  palm  trees "  (Joshua  vi.  26).  Sixty  years  had  passed  since  it  had  been 
burned,  and  it  was  not  rebuilt  until  the  time  of  Ahab  (1  Kings  xvi.  34).  But  the  exceedingly 
desirable  character  of  the  site  led  the  Israelites  to  occupy  it  as  an  un walled  town,  or  village,  but 
not  as  a  fortress,  or  compactly  built  city.  Eglon  would  disregard  the  corse  of  Joshua. 
158 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:   JUDGES.  chap.  in. 


14.  Israel  served  Eglon.l  He  became  their  absolute  master,  which  was  very  humbling  at  the 
hands  of  an  old  enemy,  who  was  struck  with  dismay  before  them  in  the  days  of  Balak.  But 
probably  the  word  has  the  force  of  stating  that  they  lay  at  his  mercy,  i.e.,  the  mercy  of  a  cruel, 
despotic,  and  capricious  tyrant.  "Eighteen  years"  is  more  than  double  the  period  of  their 
former  servitude.     But  their  sin  being  repeated  was  now  aggravated. 

15.  Israel  cried  unto  the  Lord.]  (See  notes  on  verse  9.)  Probably  "humbled  themselves  before 
Him,  acknowledged  their  offence,  begged  His  pardom,  and  besought  His  help,"  [Patrick.] 
They  may  have  used  such  supplications  as  are  recorded  in  Psalm  xliv.  20-26.  The  Lord  raised.l 
"  The  same  hand  that  raised  up  Eglon  against  Israel,  raised  up  also  Ehud  for  Israel  against 
Eglon."  He  was  not  chosen  by  the  people  on  account  of  any  supposed  gifts  of  wisdom  and 
prowess  which  he  possessed,  but  was  the  instrument  God  was  pleased  to  employ  in  working  out 
His  salvation  for  the  people.  Hengstenberg  says,  "  the  choice  of  means  was  left  to  Himself." 
That  is  at  best  an  assertion,  to  meet  a  difficulty.  It  is  not  likely  that  God  would  leave  His 
chosen  instrument  to  use  means  of  which  He  would  not  Himself  approve.  The  deliverance  here 
wrought  certainly  was  from  God,  whose  servant  in  doing  it  Ehud  was.  Son  of  Gera,  etc.],  i.e., 
a  descendant  of  Gera,  who  was  an  immediate  son  of  Benjamin  (Gen.  xlvi.  21).  He  was  a 
Benjamite  in  the  line  of  Gera — of  that  family-tree.  Shimei,  who  cursed  David  long  afterwards, 
was  also  "a  son  of  Gera,"  which  may  mean  a  descendant  of  Gera;  or  there  were  very  likely 
more  persons  of  that  name  in  the  same  tribe.  Benjamin  was  the  tribe  which,  being  nearest,  was 
likely  to  be  most  severely  oppressed  by  the  invader,  and  therefore  it  was  fit  that  the  deliverer 
should  come  from  it.  A  man  left-handedl — shut  up,  or  bound  in,  his  right  hand.  Some  suppose 
that  Ehud  was  an  ambidexter,  and  could  use  both  hands  alike,  corresponding  with  chap.  xx.  16, 
and  1  Chron.  xii.  2.  It  is  singular,  as  appears  from  these  passages  was  the  fact,  that  the  descen- 
dants of  the  man  who  was  "the  son  of  the  right  hand,"  should  have  coveted  the  distinction  of 
being  skilled  in  the  use  of  the  left.  The  word  used  here  neither  means  strictly  both-handed,  nor 
one-handed,  but  rather  that  from  some  cause  he  was  disabled  as  to  his  use  of  the  right  hand,  and 
therefore,  as  Josephus  expresses  it,  "o/  the  two  could  use  the  left  hand  best."  There  was  some 
deficiency  of  power  in  the  use  of  the  right  hand,  whether  from  habitual  non-use,  or  accidental 
defect,  it  matters  not.  It  was  by  a  man  who  had  only  the  effective  use  of  his  left  hand  that 
God  delivered  His  people.  A  deliverer]  means  one  to  set  them  free  from  bondage.  Sent  a  preso'^t 
unto  Eglon.]  Some  say,  this  was  a  voluntary  offering  sent  to  purchase  peace  with  Eglon,  or  to 
secure  the  lightening  of  the  yoke  he  put  upon  them.  But  the  general  opinion  is,  that  it  was  the 
annual  tribute  which  they  were  required  to  pay  in  acknowledgment  of  their  subjection,  and 
which  it  was  better  for  them  to  pay  voluntarily,  than  to  have  exactors  coming  through  among 
their  homes.  It  also  gratified  the  vanity  of  the  monarch,  and  led  him  to  be  better  pleased  with 
them.  The  word  nnri^p,  though  used  of  "meat  offerings  "  in  Lev.  ii.  1,  is  generally  a  euphe- 
mistic phrase  for  tribute  (1  Kings  v.  1  ;  2  Sam.  viii.  2,  6),  an  acknowledgment  of  dependence,  but 
also  a  token  of  goodwill  (Gen.  xxxii.  18  ;  Ps.  Ixxii.  10).  Ehud  was  chosen  to  be  the  bearer  of  it, 
because  he  was  recognised  as  raised  up  of  God  to  be  the  deliverer  or  redeemer  of  Israel,  and  not 
because  of  the  high  place  he  held  in  the  estimation  of  his  countrymen.     [Fausset.] 

16.  Made  him  a  dagger  which  had  two  edges,  etc.]  The  Hebrew  word  signifies  sioord  (Sept. 
and  Vulg.).  The  word  dagger  or  dirk  properly  expresses  it  here  ;  or,  some  regard  it  as  a  stiletto, 
as  used  by  the  Italians.  It  was  a  somewhat  peculiar  weapon,  made  very  sharp  and  short,  to  be 
both  very  effective,  and  capable  of  being  easily  concealed.  It  was  clear  that  the  purpose  for 
which  it  was  eventually  used  was  already  in  Ehud's  mind.  The  "word  of  God"  is  compared 
to  a  "  sharp  sword  with  two  edges,"  Vecause  it  is  a  more  powerful  weapon,  as  applied  to  the  heart 
and  conscience  than  any  other  (Heb.  iv.  12 ;  Rev.  i.  16,  etc.).  He  did  gird  it  on  his  right  thigh  (conip. 
Ps.  xlv.  3),  to  be  in  readiness  for  use  by  the  left  hand,  and  where  its  presence  would  not  be 
suspected,  the  left  being  the  sword  side.  A  cubit  length.]  Go-med  is  not  tlu  usual  word  for 
cubit.  The  Sept.  translates  it  ayriOxfA^,  which  the  Greeks  made  half  an  ell,  or  three-fourths  of 
a  foot.  Being  thus  only  nine  inches  in  length,  and  the  handle  also  being  short,  it  could  easily 
be  concealed.  Put  under  raiment.]  Military  cloak,  or  wide  flowing  garments.  He  thus  would 
have  the  appearance  of  a  man  unarmed.  "  With  such  daggers  in  their  garments,  the  Sicarii 
raged  among  the  crowds  at  the  fall  of  Jerusalem." 

17.  Eglon  was  a  very  fat  man.]  Probably  was  a  luxurious  liver,  and  belonged  to  the  class 
described  as  "natural  brute  beasts  "  (2  Peter  ii.  12),  "whose  god  is  their  belly  "  (Phil.  iii.  18), 
"  who  spend  their  days  amid  wealth,  and  in  a  moment  go  down  to  the  grave  "  (Job  xxi.  13  ; 
Luke  xxi.  34  ;  Pom.  xii.  13).     Belshazzar  and  Nabal  are  examples. 

18.  Dismissed  the  people.]  His  retinue,  here  called  IZ^nTIS,  implying  that  there  was  a  con- 
siderable number  of  persons  employed  to  bear  the  minchah.  Also  the  phrase  "  made  an  end  to 
offer  the  present "  implies  it  was  a  matter  of  great  ceremony.  It  is  quite  in  keeping  with  Oriental 
customs  to  make  great  parade  in  presenting  such  offerings.  To  enhance  the  apparent  value  of 
the  gift,  a  great  number  of  persons,  camels,  and  horses  were  employed  to  convey  what  might 
have  been  carried  with  ease  by  two  or  three.  (See  account  in  Pictorial  Bible  in  loco.)  Thie 
ceremony  was  now  gone  through  with  punctilious  order,  and  signs  of  due  submission. 

159 


CHAP.  III.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES. 

19.  Quarries.]  C"^  ^^P^*  Iii  other  places  where  this  word  occurs  it  signifies  graven  images 
(Deut.  vii.  25  ;  Jer.  viii.  19  ;  li.  52).  So  also  the  Sept.  and  Vulg.,  and  the  margin  of  our  Bibles. 
The  Targum  renders  as  our  version.  Lias  says  it  is  never  elsewhere  used  of  stone  qnarries  ;  but 
it  is  derived  from  a  word  signifying  to  heio  stones  (Ex.  xxxiv.  1,  4  ;  Deut.  x.  1,  3),  where  it  is 
used  of  the  making  of  the  two  tables  of  stone.  Keil  thinks  it  unlikely  that  stone  idols  were  set 
up  in  the  open  air,  and  prefers  rendering  it  as  in  the  text,  "stone  quarries/*  which  is  the  one 
adopted  by  the  Chaldee,  by  Rashi,  and  most  Jewish  commentators,  also  by  the  Syriac  version. 
Fausset  prefers  "graven  images,^'  which  he  says  the  Moabites  would  put  up  to  mark  the  conquered 
country  as  under  the  tutelage  of  their  gods,  at  the  place  which  marked  the  boundary  line  of  the 
Moabitish  dominion.  This  was  Gilgal,  about  four  miles  to  the  west  of  Jordan.  The  name 
signifies  "rolled,'"  because  here  the  Israelites  rolled  off  the  reproach  of  Egypt  by  being  circum- 
cised. Now  that  reproach  is  rolled  back  on  them  again,  The  sight  of  these  images  would  fire 
Ehud's  zeal  against  Eglon.  We  prefer  CasseVs  interpretation,  who  translates  the  word  boundary- 
stones — not  quarries,  for  this  does  not  harmonise  with  the  locality,  but  stones  set  up  to  mark  the 
borders  of  Eglon 's  territory,  which  he  had  wrenched  from  Israel.  They  might  be  called  posts, 
(TTioXxi  or  lapides  sacri,  which  marked  the  line.  Honours  were  generally  paid  to  them,  and 
hence  they  were  called  Pedlim,  idol-images,  or  idolatrous  objects.  The  Targum  substantially 
agrees  with  this,  which  makes  it  to  mean  heaps  of  unhewn  stones.  Bachmann  only  slightly 
differs,  who  thinks  the  Pesilim  were  idolatrous  images  set  up  as  boundary  marks  of  the  territc^ry 
ruled  over  by  the  heathen  king.  So  Ehud  did  not  feel  secure  till  he  had  passed  the  Pesilim. 
Edersheim  concurs,  who  makes  it  signify  terminal  columns,  which  were  always  objects  of  idolatrous 
worship,  that  divided  the  territory  of  Israel  from  that  of  Eglon.  He  turned  again  from  the 
boundary  stones,  etc.]  The  account  now  becomes  very  vivid  and  graphic.  He  returns  all  alone 
to  the  king,  perhaps  within  a  few  liours.  His  coming  alone  both  disarmed  suspicion,  and  also 
consisted  with  his  profession  to  have  a  sacred  mission  to  the  king.  Eglon  would  doubtless  be 
already  fovourably  impressed  towards  the  man  who  had  been,  oidy  a  few  hours  ago,  the  bearer 
of  so  handsome  an  offering,  and  would  be  prepared  to  grant  any  reasonable  request  he  might 
make.  The  way  was  thus  open  ;  and  Ehud,  as  if  eager  and  in  haste,  said— rather,  bid  say,  to 
the  king,  "/  have  a  secret  word  to  thee,  0  king.''*  On  hearing  this,  the  call  is  given  DH  Bush/ 
AH  present  at  once  understood,  and  retired,  leaving  the  sovereign  liege  and  his  vassal  together 
alone.  "  All  thai  stood  by."  The  attendants  did  not  8it  in  the  royal  presence  ;  all  stood.  It  was 
natural  to  suppose  that  Ehud  wished  to  communicate  something  which,  at  his  previous  visit,  he 
covild  not  tell  in  the  hearing  of  the  people  who  were  with  him. 

20.  And  Ehud  came  unto  him.]  At  first  he  appears  to  have  been  only  in  the  ante-chamber. 
Now  he  is  admitted  into  the  inner  apartment — the  king's  own.  This  is  called  a  summer  parlour, 
an  upper  room  of  cooling.  Luther  calls  it,  his  summer  arbour.  It  was  something  like  a  Turkish 
kiosk — "  a  small  room  built  by  itself  on  the  roof  of  the  house,  having  many  windows  to  catch 
the  breeze."  At  that  part  of  the  course  of  the  river,  its  bed  lies  low,  and  there  being  high 
grounds  on  either  side,  it  is  necessarily  very  warm,  so  that  such  a  cooling  shelter  is  greatly 
needed.  An  Eastern  traveller  says,  "there  is  often  a  door  of  communication  from  the  cooling 
apartment,  or  aiijah,  into  the  gallery  of  the  house,  besides  another  which  opens  immediately 
from  a  privy  stair,  down  into  the  porch  or  street,  without  giving  the  least  disturbance  to  the 
house."  Persons  having  secret  audience  with  the  king  might  be  admitted  or  dismissed  through 
that  private  stair,  without  passing  through  the  rooms  of  the  house.  The  apartment  where  the 
king  was  sitting  was  properly  intended  for  purposes  of  entire  seclusion  and  rest,  but  might  be 
used  as  an  audience  chamber — which  he  had  for  himself  alone.]  It  was  entirely  for  his  own 
private  use.  Possibly  Ehud  found  this  out  only  on  the  early  part  of  that  same  day,  when  he 
came  with  the  present,  and  saw  how  things  were  arranged  in  the  king's  palace.  He  then  dis- 
covered that  it  would  be  perfectly  possible  to  get  access  to  him  alone,  could  he  but  assign  a 
proper  reason  for  asking  such  a  privilege.  Doubtless  he  prayed  for  Divine  direction  and  success 
in  regard  to  what  he  was  about  to  do,  for  he  felt  he  was  working  for  God.  And  Ehud  said,  1 
have  a  message  from  God  unto  thee] — from  Elohim — which  Ehud  would  understand  to  mean 
the  true  God,  the  God  of  Israel,  but  which  Eglon  would  probably  regard  as  a  name  for  the  gods. 
We  cannot  suppose  that  Ehud  a  man  chosen  by  God  Himself  for  doing  His  work,  should  directly 
lie  to  the  heathen  king,  saying  that  chemosh  or  some  heathen  deity  had  sent  him,  and  so  by  a 
nefarious  method  seek  to  gain  his  end.  It  is  also  quite  fanciful  to  suppose,  as  Cassel  does,  that 
the  reference  is  not  to  the  Deity  at  all,  but  to  the  supreme  authority  of  Moab — the  reigning 
monarch,  of  v/hom  Eglon  was  only  a  satrap  or  liegeman.  The  reference  must  have  been  to  the 
Deity  ;  and  even  if  Eglon  had  regarded  it  as  meaning  the  God  of  Israel,  princes  sitting  on  his 
throne  had  trembled  at  that  name  before  and  might  do  po  again.  The  story  of  Balak  and  his 
frantic  efforts  to  get  that  people  cursed  l.y  their  God,  had  lived  down  through  the  three  genera- 
tions that  had  elapsed  since;  and  the  destruction  of  the  whole  of  the  Canaanitish  peoples 
before  the  sword  of  Joshua,  created  a  mighty  shock  among  all  the  surrounding  nations  ;  so  that 
the  name  of  such  a  God  was  certain  to  strike  with  dismaj^  every  heart  among  the  worshippers  of 
idols  (Joshua  ii.  9,  11  j  ix.  24).  To  have  a  message  sent  direct  to  himself  personally  from  such 
a  Deity,  would  inspire  Eglon  with  an  undefined  awe,  and  he  would  almost  involuntarily  rise 
from  his  seat,  at  the  very  mention  of  such  a  thing.     It  was  really  a  message  from  the  G«d  of 

160 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES.  ch^p.  in 


Israel  to  Moab's  ruler,  in  a  way  similar  to  that  which  was  addressed  to  Pharaoh.  To  the  latter 
the  message  was,  "  Let  my  people  go,  that  they  may  serve  me."  To  the  former,  it  was  a  message 
of  doom.  "  Because  thou  hast  oppressed  my  people  so  long,  now  the  hour  of  thy  doom  and  of 
their  deliverance  has  come,  and  thou  must  die."  Ehud  might  have  supposed  that  this  statement 
would  induce  the  king  to  rise,  but  the  principal  reason  for  his  so  addressing  the  monarch  was  to 
assure  him  from  whose  hand  the  blow  came — the  God  whose  people  he  had  been  treading  down 
like  the  mire.  We  believe  that  Ehud's  conduct  was  straightforward  throughout,  and  without 
deceit,  however  strong  the  step  he  was  taking. 

21.  At  once  Ehud  put  forth  his  left  hand,  etc.]  We  now  see  the  value  of  Ehud's  left-handed- 
ness.  He  could  lay  his  hand  on  his  dagger  without  exciting  any  suspicion,  till  it  was  too  late 
for  the  victim  to  call  for  help.  In  like  manner  Oleander  stabbed  Parmenio  while  he  was 
reading  a  letter.  And  Clement,  a  monk,  who  had  obtained  a  commission  to  get  into  the 
presence  of  Henry  III.  of  France,  stabbed  the  king  the  moment  he  was  bidden  to  draw  near. 
Metillius  Cimber,  along  with  other  conspirators,  pressed  closely  on  Caesar,  making  most  urgent 
entreaty  for  the  recall  of  his  banished  brother,  and  so  they  all  closed  in  upon  their  victim. 

22,  23.  And  the  haft  also  went  in.  etc.]  It  appears  there  was  an  actual  perforation  of  the 
body  The  poniard  was  so  forcibly  thrust  into  the  abdomen,  that  the  hilt  followed  the  blade, 
and,  the  fat  closing  on  both,  it  was  impossible  to  draw  the  dagger  out  again,  To  show  the  force 
of  the  blow,  it  is  added  that  the  excrement  came  out.  The  king  appears  to  have  fallen  without 
being  able  to  utter  a  single  cry;  the  deed  was  done  so  swiftly  and  so  overwhelmingly.  Ehud  lost 
not  a  moment.  First,  he  is  careful  to  lock  the  door  or  doors  (for  there  seems  to  have  been  two — 
cue  leading  into  the  antechamber  where  the  attendants  usually  stood  in  waiting,  and  the  other 
leading  to  the  private  stair  which  conducted  down  to  the  porch  or  front  hall  and  street).  He 
must,  at  the  foot  of  that  stair,  down  which  he  went,  have  had  to  pass  through  some  of  the 
attendants  before  getting  to  the  outside  of  the  building.  But  his  demeanour  seems  to  have 
been  so  cool  and  collected,  that  no  suspicion  was  excited  of  anything  so  terrible  having  happened 
in  so  incredibly  short  a  space  of  time  ;  and  more  especially,  as  not  even  the  most  distant  hint,  or 
sign,  of  throwing  off  the  yoke  of  the  conqueror  had  been  given,  but  the  very  contrary  had 
happened  that  very  day.  Nothing  therefore  was  farther  from  their  thoughts  than  such  a 
suspicion.     But  what  did  occur  to  them  we  are  told  of  in — 

24,  25.  They  said,  Surely  he  covereth  his  feet,  etc.]  The  rules  required  that  they  should  not 
enter  into  the  al'jah  or  private  cooling  chamber,  till  the  person  who  had  been  privileged  with  the 
secret  audience  had  gone  away,  nor,  indeed,  till  called.  After  waiting  for  some  time,  and  no 
call  being  made,  they  examined  the  doors  of  the  alijak,  both  of  which  they  found  locked.  On 
which  they  concluded  that  their  lord  was  taking  his  siesta — it  still  being  the  hot  part  of  the  day. 
In  this  case,  it  would  have  been  dangerous  for  them  to  have  awakened  him,  at  any  rate  for  some 
time.  Hence  they  waited  till  they  were  ashamed  of  having  waited  so  long.  Then  only  they 
began  to  suspect  that  all  was  not  right.  These  small  circumstances,  though  natural,  were  yet 
overruled  by  Divine  Providence  to  accomplish  important  ends.  To  gain  time  was  essential  to 
Ehud's  safety.  Had  the  servants  burst  open  the  door  at  once,  he  would  infallibly  have  been 
pursued,  and  brought  back  to  be  put  to  a  certain  and  cruel  death — that  which  they  would 
reckon  suitable  to  a  regicide,  and  so  the  great  cause  of  the  liberation  of  God's  people  from  a 
foreign  yoke,  with  which  Ehud's  life  was  bound  up,  would  have  come  to  nought.  It  was  of  God 
that  such  thoughts  should  be  made  to  rise  in  the  minds  of  the  servants,  and  so,  that  much  time 
should  have  been  allowed  to  elapse,  ere  a  discovery  was  made  of  the  fearful  tragedy  which  had 
just  been  enacted.  At  length  they  opened  the  doors  with  another  key,  of  which  the  chief  ofl&cer 
of  the  house  was  in  possession  (for  it  was  his  privilege  to  keep  a  duplicate  of  the  key)  and 
behold  their  master  was  stretched  on  the  floor  quite  dead  I 

26.  And  Ehud  escaped  while  they  tarried.l  That  Ehud  should  make  a  clear  escape  was  of 
God.  First  he  got  to  the  boundary-stones.  These  are  referred  to,  because  they  marked  the 
border  between  Moab  and  Israel  as  it  then  existed.  Then  he  took  the  direction  toward? 
Ephraim,  and  seems  not  to  have  halted  till  he  reached  "  Seirath,"  where  he  reckoned  himself 
safe  from  pursuit.  It  was  either  a  forest  or  weald,  that  bordered  on  the  cultivated  land  near 
Gilgal,  and  extended  into  the  mountain  or  hill  country  «.£  Ephraim  (Joshua  xvii.  15-18) ;  or  it 
was  a  continuation  of  the  bushy,  rugged  hills,  that  stretch  to  Judah's  northern  territory  from 
Mount  Ephraim  (Joshua  xv.  10).  But  Seirath  is  little  known,  and  is  not  referred  to  again.  It 
seems  to  have  been  in  Ephraim,  on  the  southern  frontier,  and  near  the  borders  of  either  Judah 
or  Benjamin. 

27.  Having  got  among  his  own  people  Ehud  felt  there  was  not  a  moment  to  be  lost.  With 
vigorous  hand  he  seized  a  trumpet,  and  blew  a  blast  loud  and  long,  awakening  the  whole  land 
with  the  tidings,  that  now  the  door  was  open  for  regaining  their  precious  liberties  from  the 
yoke  of  the  oppressor.  They  had  but  to  follow  up  the  blow  that  had  been  struck,  and  every 
home  in  Israel  would  be  free.  It  was  a  true  "  reveille  "  note.  Fresh  with  hope  Israel  rose  at 
the  call.     As  awakened  out  of  sleep  those  who  heard  it  sprung  up,  and  came  trooping  to  the 

L  161 


OHAP.  m.  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


deliverer — from  the  caves,  the  thickets,  the  rocks,  and  even  the  pits,  in  which  the  country 
abounded  (1  Sam.  xiii.  6),  and  to  which  the  people  in  large  numbers  had  betaken  themselves,  as 
a  refuge  from  the  oppression  of  Moab.  It  was  chiefly  the  men  of  Ephraim  and  perhaps  of 
Benjamin  who  responded  to  the  call ;  and  they  went  as  one  man,  flushed  with  the  hope  that 
victory  was  already  sure,  and  that  God  was  with  their  deliverer  in  the  work  which  had  been  so 
well  begun.  Ehud  had  already  matured  his  plan  of  operations.  Believing  that  so  much 
depended  on  courage  and  confidence,  he  himself  sets  the  example,  not  calling  to  them  to  move 
forward,  but  going  forward  himself  in  front,  and  then  calling  on  them  to  follow  him.  The 
vital  point  of  strategy  was  the  fords  of  Jordan.  With  these  in  their  possession,  they  could  pre- 
vent the  Moabites  on  the  west  side  from  returning  homewards,  and  equally  prevent  those  on  the 
east  side  from  crossing  over  to  assist  their  countrymen  who  were  attacked  on  all  sides  in  the 
land  of  Israel. 

Note  to  Verse  27.  It  has  been  noticed  in  connection  with  the  people  taking  refuge  in  the 
mountains,  that  "  in  those  days  of  cruel  warfare  and  oppression,  the  home  of  liberty  was  always 
in  the  fastnesses  of  the  mountains.  As  the  narrative  of  Xenophon  shows,  the  mountain  peoples 
in  the  Persian  empire  were  practically  independent  of  the  central  power.  So  in  the  middle 
ages,  the  Swiss  mountaineers  defied  alike  the  power  of  Austria  and  Burgundy.  And  among 
ourselves,  the  history  of  Wales  and  the  Highlands  of  Scotland,  are  proofs,  that  even  a  p  >werf ul 
government  had  very  little  real  authority  in  the  inaccessible  recesses  of  the  mountains.  It  is  only 
the  rapid  advance  of  modern  discovery  which  has  enabled  us  to  penetrate  these  regions,  and  to 
place  the  invaders  of  a  mountain  district  upon  a  footing  of  something  more  like  equality  with 
its  defenders." 

28,  29.  The  Lord  hath  delivered  your  enemies  into  your  hands,  etc.]  This  announcement 
coming  from  the  lips  of  the  man  whom  God  had  already  owned  with  such  signal  success,  would 
inspire  them  with  the  assurance  of  victory.  Moving  on  with  leaps  and  bounds,  they  soon 
reached  the  fords  of  Jordan  ;  of  which  they  at  once  took  possession,  and  slaughtered  the 
Moabites  who  came  in  straggling  bands  from  Jericho,  with  the  view  of  crossing  the  river.  Of 
the  whole  army  of  Eglon  on  the  west  side  of  the  river,  not  a  man  seems  to  have  escaped.  There 
fell  of  them  lO,O0O  men — all  robust  or  chosen  men — (]^ti^  ti?''S  robust,  well-conditioned,  b^R 
power,  valour)  and  men  of  valour.  This  had  the  effect,  we  are  told,  in  verse  30,  of  crushing  all 
further  attempts  of  Moab  to  oppress  Israel. 


NOTS.— Kow  we  are  to  view  Bhud's  conduct.  Most  commentators 
pass  a  severe  censure  on  **  the  manner  in  which  hjhud  acted  throughout  this 
whole  transaction,  and  feel  difficulty  in  accounting  for  the  fact,  that  God  should 
make  use  of  such  means  to  emancipate  His  people  from  bondage.  Some  go  so 
far  as  to  deny  to  Ehud  any  grandeur  of  character  at  all,  and  accuse  him  of 
duplicity  and  sleight  of  hand.  Others,  while  admitting  that  a  measure  of 
admiration  is  due  to  the  courage  he  displayed,  his  heroic  spirit  of  self-sacrifice 
for  the  good  of  his  country,  and  his  purity  of  motive  on  the  whole ;  yet  denounce 
the  means  he  adopted  as  treacherous  and  savage.  Most  writers  regard  it  as 
conduct  of  wliich  God  could  not  approve,  and  notice  that  it  is  not  said  **  the 
Spirit  of  the  Lord  came  upon  him,"  and  that  no  special  mark  of  commendation 
is  put  on  his  conduct,  while  his  name  is  not  found  in  the  list  of  those  "  elders 
who  by  faith  obtained  a  good  report."  Neither,  we  might  add,  is  it  said  that 
**  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  came  upon  "  Barak,  or  Tola  or  Jair,  who  were  all 
''judges  "  of  Israel,  and  the  first  of  whom  has  his  name  enrolled  in  the  honour- 
able list  of  the  men  of  faith.  As  to  that  list,  it  is  evident,  that  only  a  few 
names  are  given  as  a  specimen  ;  otherwise,  why  should  no  mention  be  made  in 
it  of  such  men  as  Joshua,  Caleb,  Othniel,  and  many  others  ?  As  to  the  means 
adopted,  if  these  had  been  displeasing  to  God,  would  there  not  have  been  some 
special  mark  of  His  disapprobation  given,  of  the  manner  in  which  the  messenger 
had  fulfilled  his  duty,  as  in  the  case  of  Saul,  when  he  returned  from  his  expedition 
against  Amalek,  and  was  severely  reprimanded  for  having  failed  to  perform  the 
commandment  of  the  Lord  ;  or,  as  in  the  case  of  Moses,  when,  standing  in  the 
stead  of  God,  he  smote  the  rock,  in  a  spirit  of  unhallowed  impatience,  in  place  of 
calmly  and  solemnly  speaking  to  it. 

It  is  affirmed  in  the  record,  that  "  God  raised  up  Ehud  to  be  a  deliverer  '* 
162 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   JUDGES.  ohap.  iil 


to  Israel  (iii.  15).  Admitting  this,  Hengstenherg  says,  "the  clioice  of  the 
means  was  left  to  himself."  Fausset  adds,  that  "assassination  by  a  lie 
and  treachery  was  a  method  of  his  own  devising."  The  Speakers  Com- 
mentari)  regards  his  adoption  of  such  a  method  as  due  to  the  age  in 
which  he  lived,  when  human  society  applauded  such  acts,  though  viewed 
in  the  light  of  Christianity  and  the  advanced  civilisation  of  the  present 
day,  it  would  be  reckoned  a  serious  crime.  Dr.  Cassell  holds  that  the 
brilliancy  of  the  act  cannot  exculpate  its  highly  reprehensible  character. 
Ehud  had,  indeed,  zeal  for  God,  but  "  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  inspires 
neither  such  artifice,  nor  such  murder."  While  The  Pulpit  Commentary  sees, 
in  this  transaction,  the  Ruler  among  the  nations  making  use  of  bad  actions 
as  well  as  good  ones,  to  subserve  His  purposes.  Thus,  Jacob's  deceit  in  obtaining 
the  blessing,  is  referred  to  as  an  illustration.  But  there  the  Divine  disappro- 
bation was  distinctly  marked  in  Jacob's  future  history.  If  the  Jews  put  the 
Saviour  to  death,  and  thereby  God's  high  purpose  in  our  redemption  was 
fulfilled,  they  never  contemplated  any  such  issue,  but  thought  only  of  gratifying 
their  own  malicious  feelings  against  a  Messiah,  in  whom  they  were  completely 
disappointed.  This  was  no  parallel  to  the  case  of  Ehud,  who  had  no  end  of  his 
own  to  serve,  but  meant  only  to  carry  out  the  purpose  of  Him  who  sent  him. 
Besides,  the  Divine  displeasure  with  the  conduct  of  the  crucifiers  has  been 
expressed  with  unexampled  emphasis  in  the  whole  of  their  subsequent  history. 
Ehud's  name,  on  the  contrary,  has  been  handed  down  to  immortality,  without  a 
single  note  of  disapprobation  at  what  he  did,  while  the  Providence  of  God 
wrought  along  with  him,  and  protected  him  at  every  step  in  his  perilous 
enterprise. 

These  explanations  of  Ehud's  act  appear  to  us  to  be  alike  defective  and 
erroneous.  We  do  not  believe  that  God  would  choose  an  agent  to  do  an 
important  work  in  which  His  own  glory  was  concerned,  such  as  the  emancipa- 
tion of  His  own  people  from  bondage,  without  both  giving  him  qualification  for 
the  work  (or  causing  the  Spirit  to  rest  upon  him),  and  also  giving  him  instruc- 
tions as  to  how  he  should  act  so  as  to  glorify  God  in  the  doing  of  it.  Had 
Ehud  out  of  revenge,  and  at  his  own  instance,  committed  a  cold-blooded  murder 
on  a  defenceless  man,  without  a  note  of  warning,  hurrying  him  into  the  presence 
of  his  God  all  unprepared,  with  his  crimes  on  his  head,  even  though  he  was 
lying  under  a  ban,  was  a  tyrant,  a  heathen,  and  an  oppressor,  we  cannot  suppose 
that  God  would  accept  such  a  deliberate  act  of  assassination  as  the  means  of 
working  out  His  holy  ])urpose3,  without  some  explicit  mark  of  reprobation  of 
the  means  used.  Had  Ehud  put  Eglon  to  death  of  his  own  thought,  it  must 
have  been  murder,  and  that  is  a  crime  of  such  magnitude,  that  when  committed 
by  one  who  was  acknowledged  by  God  to  be  acting  as  His  servant,  it  must  have 
been  marked  by  the  sternest  condemnation.  Even  among  men,  such  an  act 
could  not  escape  severe  reprehension,  on  the  part  of  all  who  repudiate  the 
principles  of  retaliation,  and  who  believe  it  wrong  to  do  evil  that  good  may 
come.  We  feel  then  shut  up  to  the  conclusion,  that,  in  what  he  did,  he  acted 
in  obedience  to  Divine  command.  This  agrees  with  his  own  declaration,  "  / 
have  a  message  from  h^lohim  unto  thee!'  ^"^^  the  parallel  statement  in  verse  19, 
"  1  have  a  secret  errand  unto  thee,  0  King,'  meaning  a  message,  or  errand  of 
doom.  In  going  to  the  king  then,  he  acted  as  one  commissioned  ;  it  was  not  at 
his  own  instance.  The  statement  in  verse  28  corresponds,  "  Follow  me,Jor  the 
Lord  hath  delivered  your  enemies  into  your  hands.''  This  seems  to  be  said 
oracularly,  as  by  one  who  was  under  God's  guidance  in  the  whole  transaction, 
and  had  received  the  intimations  of  His  will 

This  we  believe  is  the  first  step  to  any  true  explanation  oj  the  Jacts.  The 
matter  proceeded  from  the  Lord.  The  Supreme  Ruler  took  this  method  of 
executing  sentence  on  a  noted  criminal  under  the  administration  of  His  mora] 

163 


OHAP.  in.  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    JUDGES. 


government  of  the  world.  It  is  not  Eglon*s  personal  sins  as  a  man  that  are  here 
referred  to  so  miicli,  as  his  crimes  in  his  public  character  as  the  King  of  Monb, 
and  the  long-known  oppressor  of  God's  people.  To  oppress  any  people  without 
cause  was  a  crime  of  itself ;  but  Eglon  was  chargeable  with  something  incompar- 
ably more  heinous.  He  had  dared  to  attack  the  people  whom  Jehovah  had  set 
apart  for  Himself,  to  be  His  own,  to  be  His  jewels,  to  be  called  by  His  name, 
and  to  be  entrusted  with  the  high  duty  of  holding  up  that  name  for  the 
reverence  of  the  world.  That  people  were  the  custodiers  of  the  Divine  honour, 
and  their  history  was  inseparably  associated  with  the  promotion  of  the  Divine 
glory  in  the  earth.  To  attempt  to  crush  such  a  people,  as  Eglon  had  done,  was 
to  challenge  the  majesty  of  Israel's  King  as  their  Protector  ;  it  was  to  stretch 
forth  his  hand  against  the  Lord's  annointed  ;  it  was  to  maltreat  the  beloved 
children  of  the  living  God  ;  it  was  to  lay  unholy  hands  on  the  sacred  property 
of  the  Most  High  ;  it  was  to  waste  the  church  of  the  living  God,  an  object 
incomparably  dearer  to  Him  than  heaven  and  earth. 

For  such  a  crime  Pharaoh  and  all  his  host  had  been  cast  like  a  millstone 
into  the  the  sea.  From  the  days  of  the  redemption  from  Egyptian  bondnge 
onwards,  every  other  potentate  that  had  dared  to  lift  a  hand  against  this 
people  had  been  ground  to  the  dust.  And  now  here  was  this  Prince  of  Moab 
not  only  trampling  them  under  foot,  but  taking  occasion  thereby  to  magnify  his 
own  gods,  as  superior  to  the  great  "I  am  "  of  the  oppressed  Israel.  This 
contempt  of  the  Divine  name,  and  the  treading  down  as  the  mire  of  that  peo])le 
whom  God  so  dearly  loved,  constituted  Eglon's  special  crimes.  It  is  for  the 
Judge  of  all  the  earth  to  decide  as  to  the  timey  the  forntj  and  the  means, 
whereby  any  transgressor  under  His  government  shall  be  punished.  Pharaoh 
He  overthrew  in  the  waters  of  the  Ked  Sea.  The  Canaanites  He  wasted  by 
the  sword  of  Joshua.  The  ringleader  in  the  sin  of  Baalpeor  was  put  to  death 
by  the  javelin  of  Phinehas.  And  now  the  head  of  the  Moabitish  nation  must 
meet  death  at  the  hand  of  Ehud,  the  man  whom  God  has  raised  up  to  deliver 
His  chosen  Israel.  If  such  a  proceeding  should  be  thought  harsh,  what  shall 
we  say  of  the  hundreds  of  thousands  of  Canaanites  who  were  put  to  death  so 
sternly  and  unrelentingly,  that  in  all  the  cities  attacked  not  a  man,  woman,  or 
child  was  left  to  breathe.  This  was  done  by  Jehovah's  express  command  on 
account  of  the  extremely  heinous  character  of  their  sins.  And  if  such  a 
spectacle  is  justifiable,  where  vast  multitudes  become  victims,  it  is  a  com- 
paratively insignificant  matter  to  hear  of  the  same  thing  being  done  where 
only  a  solitary  individual  is  concerned. 

But  there  is  no  cruelty,  or  barbarity  in  either  case.  Rather  in  such  cases 
we  see  the  Righteous  Governor  among  the  nations  giving  to  the  wicked  the  due 
reward  of  their  deeds.  Should  the  ])unishment  inflicted  seem  to  us  appalling, 
the  natural  and  wise  inference  is,  that  there  must  be  something  correspondingly 
awful  in  that  which  could  have  brought  down  such  a  doom  upon  them,  at  tiie 
hands  of  so  merciful  and  just  a  God.  If  men  wonder  at  the  terrible  nature  of 
the  calamity,  which  is  not  only  permitted,  but  apj^ointed,  in  such  a  case,  to 
take  place,  why  should  they  not  equally  wonder  at  the  terrible  character  of  the 
cause  which  has  gone  before — the  greatness  of  the  sins  committed  ?  Men  are  so 
accustomed  to  the  exercise  of  God's  forbearing  mercy,  that  they  forget  what  is 
due  to  the  majesty  of  His  great  name.  They  reflect  not,  that  in  conducting 
His  holy  government.  He  must,  before  all  other  things,  maintain  the  purity  of 
His  own  character  as  God,  His  authority  as  Supreme  Ruler  in  His  own  universe, 
and  give  specimens  of  how  He  will,  sooner  or  later,  visit  with  just  indignation 
flagrant  and  long-continued  sin.  To  show  forth  God's  glory,  by  making  His 
universe  a  scene  of  holiness  and  happiness,  was  the  grand  end  for  which  all 
things  were  made,  and  not  to  suit  men's  wishes  by  sparing  them  though  rnnning 
on  to  any  length  in  a  career  of  sin,  and  forgetfuluess  of  Him  to  whom  they  owe 
164 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY!   JUDGES.  chap.  m. 


their  being.  Men's  wishes  are  not  the  principal  element  that  guides  the  forma- 
tion of  God's  purposes  ;  and  though  He  will  never  forget  the  length  and  breadth 
of  His  tender  mercies  in  His  dealings  with  men,  what  is  due  to  His  own 
character  as  God  will  ever  form  His  first  consideration  in  the  moral  government 
of  His  intelligent  creatures. 

It  does  seem  strange,  that  many  persons  who  write  on  this  subject,  and 
attempt  to  account  for  the  tragic  character  of  this  death,  should  make  little  or 
no  mention  of  the  heinous  character  of  the  sins  of  him  on  whom  the  jud^anent 
fell.  May  we  not  suppose  that,  to  fix  the  eye  on  the  atrocious  aspect  which  this 
man's  sin  presented  to  the  God  of  Israel,  was  the  real  reason  why  the  naked 
narrative  is  allowed  to  stand  as  it  is,  without  any  farther  explanation  ?  All  the 
spectacles  of  mourning  and  woe  in  this  world  are  simply  the  natural  conse- 
quences of  sin.  If  the  woe  be  so  dreadful,  even  though  it  is  but  the  beginning 
of  sorrows,  how  dreadful  in  God's  estimation  must  be  the  character  of  the  sin 
of  which  it  is  the  index  ! 

But  to  rise  for  a  moment  to  the  higher  view  of  God's  method  of  acting  in 
/lis  government  of  this  world.  Human  life  is  justly  reckoned  more  precious  in 
this  age  of  advanced  civilisation  than  it  was  in  the  days  of  Ehud,  and  esi)ecially 
under  the  light  of  a  much  longer  and  fuller  experience  of  the  value  of  Scriptural 
truth,  than  the  early  fathers  had.  Yet,  however  revolting  to  us  the  act  of 
assassinating  the  King  of  Moab  may  seem  ;  though  we  regard  as  truly  terrible 
the  massacre  of  whole  Canaanitish  peoples,  the  aged  and  the  feeble,  the  women 
and  the  children,  as  well  as  those  who  could  carry  arms  ;  and  though  we  are 
appalled  at  the  slaying  of  all  the  first-born  in  the  land  of  Egypt  in  one  night, 
or  at  the  destruction  of  a  formidable  Assyrian  army  at  one  fell  stroke — all  tiiese 
are  but  temporary  specimens  of  Jehovah's  jealousy  for  the  honour  of  His  holy 
name,  and  fall  far  short  of  the  height  of  that  eternal  monument  which  He  has 
set  up  in  sight  of  heaven  and  earth  in  the  cross  of  Christ,  as  a  spectacle  to 
be  looked  at  by  all,  where  every  eye  may  read,  through  everlasting  ages,  the  real 
estimate  in  which  He  holds  His  own  glorious  perfections,  the  measure  of 
reverence  whicli  is  due  to  Him  as  God,  and  His  unalterable  determination  nob 
to  lower  His  standard  in  judging  of  the  evil  of  sin,  but  to  give  it  a  treatment  to 
the  full  as  it  deserves,  whatever  sacrifice  it  may  cost ! 

To  sum  up :  We  regard  this  act  of  Ehud  as  the  infliction  by  Jeliovah's 
direction,  of  a  special  retribution  on  the  head  of  the  heathen  monarch,  for 
having  dared  to  insult  the  majesty  of  the  God  of  Israel,  and  for  having  oppressed 
the  people  that  were  called  by  his  name.  But  though  clearly  justifiable  as  having 
been  commanded  of  God,  it  is  yet  to  be  viewed  as  one  of  those  special  events  that 
seldom  happen,  and  form  almost  a  class  by  themselves.  It  is  on  no  account  to 
be  held  as  a  warrant,  or  precedent,  to  authorise  any  one,  however  zealous,  for 
God's  cause,  to  rise  up  against  a  blasphemer  of  God's  name,  or  a  persecutor  of 
God's  people,  in  any  other  age,  and  put  him  to  death  in  like  manner.  For 
Ehud  did  nothing  of  himself,  but  only  as  he  was  commanded  of  God — God  alone 
has  the  right  to  punish  the  adversaries  of  His  own  truth. 

It  is  also  to  be  particularly  noted  that  this  event  belongs  to  the  history  of  the 
Old  Testament  period,  which  takes  its  complexion  throughout  from  the  fact,  that 
the  great  atonement  had  not  yet  been  made,  and  that  God,  in  all  His  dealings 
with  man,  acted  as  the  un propitiated  deity.  Hence  a  certain  aspect  of  sternness 
and  rigour  in  the  divine  dispensations,  which  disappears  when  the  great  sacrifice 
on  Calvary  has  been  offered.  In  tiiat  sacrifice,  so  grand  an  exhibition  has  been 
made  of  **  the  righteousness  of  God  "  with  all  its  claims,  and  such  security  has 
been  taken  against  all  possible  lowering  of  the  standard  of  the  evil  of  sin,  that 
there  is  not  now  the  same  necessity  for  displays  of  the  divine  anger  against  men's 
wickedness  or  lor  heavy  judgments  occurring  ia  Providence  to  manliest  God's 
jealousy,  as  did  exist  in  the  aati-christiau  age.     Though  sin  itself  be  the  same 

165 


CHAP.  ra.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   JUDGES, 


still — ever  hateful  to  a  holy  God,  and  though  it  is  attended  now  with  even 
higher  aggravations  than  under  the  former  economy,  so  gloriously  complete  is 
the  satistaction  which  has  been  rendered  to  the  character  of  Him  whose  law  has 
been  transgressed,  that  the  way  is  opened  for  a  more  benignant  exercise  of  the 
Divine  government  among  men,  and  other  monuments  are  not  needed  to  impress 
men's  minds  with  the  terrible  evil  of  sin,  and  God's  determination  to  punish  it 
as  it  deserves,  so  far  as  the  })resent  world  is  concerned.  Hence  God's  attitude 
towards  men  in  this  the  Christian  age  has  in  it  the  character  of  *'  the  God  of 
peace,"  because  all  His  transactions  with  them  are  done  under  the  shadow  of 
Calvary, 


MAIN  HOMILETWS.—  Versesl^-Za. 

Sin — Suffering  ;  Penitence  and  Deliverance  Repeated. 

It  is  to  be  noticed  that  the  history  of  mankind  generally,  and  of  this  people 
in  particular,  is  represented  in  the  Bible  as  always  taking  place  under  the  obser- 
vation of  God  as  '*  King  of  all  the  earth."  God  is  the  faithful  witness  and 
rightful  jud;2:e.  It  is  His  world  which  men  occupy ;  they  are  His  creatures, 
made  to  serve  and  to  glorify  Him  ;  His  sceptre  is  over  them  ;  and  it  is  before 
Him,  and  to  Him,  that  human  life  is  led.  Hence  it  is  ever  said,  the  actors, 
in  history,  did  this  or  that  **  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord**  "  The  children  of  Israel 
did  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord."  He  is  the  constant  observer  of  men's  conduct. 
*•  The  ways  of  man  are  before  the  eyes  of  the  Lord,  and  He  pondereth  all  His 
goings'*  He  looks  on  men's  conduct  not  merely  as  a  spectator,  but  as  the  judge 
who  has  to  reckon  with  them  at  last.  It  is  "He  with  whom  they  have  to  do." 
To  Him  all  that  is  is  done  in  human  life  belongs,  and  He  is  the  proper  judge  of 
it  all.  To  Him  men  are  accountable  for  all  their  actions  ;  for  was  not  man  brought 
into  existence  to  show  forth  God's  glory  by  his  love  and  obedience  (I  Sam.  ii.  3). 
It  is  His  prerogative  to  sit  in  review  of  men's  actions  from  day  to  day,  and  to  pass 
an  absolutely  accurate  verdict  on  every  man's  character  and  conduct,  with  the 
authority  of  the  ludgment  seat,  from  which  there  is  no  appeal.  That  man  acts 
wisely  who  says,  "  with  me  it  is  a  small  thing  to  he  judged  of  you  y  or  of  mens 
judgement ;  He  that judgeth  me  is  the  Lord"     Here  we  have — 

I.  New  sin  added  (verse  12). — **  Israel  did  evil  again  in  the  sight  of  the 
Lou'd"    There  is  emphasis  in  saying — "  did  evil  again"    It  implies — 

1.  A  painful  surprise.  After  such  thorough  yet  tender  dealing  on  the  part 
of  the  covenant  God,  it  might  have  been  supposed  that  the  ungodliness  of  the 
people  would  have  been  effectually  cured,  and  tliat  henceforth  no  accounts  would 
have  been  heard,  but  those  of  hearty  and  permanent  allegiance  to  Him,  whom 
they  had  accepted  as  their  own  God.  The  disease  had  been  so  deeply  lanced, 
that  it  might  well  have  been  supposed  to  be  now  entirely  eradicated,  and  that 
we  should  hear  no  more  of  Israelitish  apostacy.  What  long  suffering  had 
been  shown  !  What  arguments  of  loving  kindness  and  tender  mercy  used  ! 
What  faithfulness  in  using  the  rod  rather  than  permit  them  to  continue  the 
infatuation  of  sleeping  on  in  sin  !  But  alas  !  for  the  inconstancy  and  shallowness 
of  human  good  resolutions  apart  from  the  grace  of  God  !  Here  they  are,  sinning 
as  before,  in  the  sight  of  God's  holy  heavens,  as  if  ''the  Lord  did  not  see,  and 
the  God  of  Jacob  did  not  regard."  After  being  crushed  to  the  very  dust  under 
the  weight  of  Divine  chastisements,  they  yet  show  themselves  capable,  when  the 
pressure  of  the  Divine  hand  is  removed,  of  committing  over  again  the  same  fatal 
error,  of  going  astray  from  the  living  and  true  God.  But  we  have  the  same  truth 
166 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES,  chap.  in. 


in  every  part  of  human  history.  Go  back  to  the  days  of  the  great  deluge.  We 
have  the  same  account  given  of  the  human  heart  a/i^^r  that  catastrophe  as  before 
(comp.  Gen.  viii.  21,  with  vi.  5) — or,  come  forward  to  our  own  times,  and  after 
all  tlie  superior  advantages  enjoyed,  and  greatly  multiplied  arguments  used,  the 
same  melancholy  truth  comes  out,  that  men  are  by  nature  "  bent  to  backsliding  " 
from  the  living  and  true  God.  After  their  long  chapter  of  sad  experiences,  this 
people  "  did  evil  again  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord." 

2.  Deeper  guilt.  It  was  heinous  sin  to  apostatise  the  first  time.  It  was 
greatly  more  aggravated  sin  to  do  it  a  second  time.  On  many  accounts  it  was 
so.  It  showed  more  deliberation  in  the  act  of  rebellion,  more  stubbornness  of 
will,  and  greater  defiance  of  the  Divine  Authority.  It  also  implied  the  heavy 
guilt  of  despising  all  the  argument  involved  in  the  close  and  faithful  dealing 
God  had  with  them,  in  the  terrible  chastisements  He  had  already  brought  down 
on  their  heads.  To  what  purpose  had  all  the  severe  remedies  been  made  use 
of  if  the  old  evil  should  now  break  out  again  ?  Had  the  faithful  use  of  the  rod, 
by  the  wise  and  kind  Father,  in  the  awful  scourge  of  the  Syrian  invasion,  for 
eight  years  been  wholly  in  vain  ?  And  must  the  same  drastic  process  be  gone 
through  again,  ere  the  cancerous  spot  be  removed  ?  Fearful  was  the  guilt  of 
this  people  to  forget  their  sacred  character  so  far,  as  **  a  holy  nation  and  a 
peculiar  people,"  dedicated  to  the  service  of  God  by  so  many  hallowed  ties, 
as  even  once  to  cross  the  line  between  fealty  and  apostacy  ;  but  what  shall 
we  say  of  their  daring  to  lift  an  unhallowed  foot  in  that  direction  again, 
notwithstanding  all  the  entreaties,  warnings,  and  chastisements  used  to  prevent 
them,  by  their  gracious  and  long-suffering  God  ?  This  was  a  systematic 
despising  of  the  voice  of  their  God. 

3.  A  perplexing  problem  to  solve.  Why  should  the  children  of  such  holy 
men  as  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob  become  such  incorrigible  rebels  ?  This 
is  the  puzzle  that  meets  us  everywhere  in  the  history  of  God's  Israel. 
Greater  obstinacy  in  sin,  or  more  wilful  persistence  in  forsaking  a  holy  and 
loving  God,  could  hardly  be  found  among  the  worst  of  the  heathen  nations. 
How  then  can  we  account  for  such  a  tendency  among  the  descendants  of 
the  most  pious  stock  that  ever  existed  in  the  history  of  our  humanity,  and 
who,  if  any,  might  be  expected  to  be  an  honour  to  our  race,  for  their  strictly 
religious  character,  and  entire  consecration  to  the  keeping  of  God's  com- 
mandments?   Some  reasons,  indeed,  may  be  assigned  for  the  present  apostacy. 

(1)  The  people  had  lost  their  leader.  We  hear  of  no  outlareak  of  the  ten- 
dency to  go  after  other  gods,  so  long  as  he  was  alive.  Had  he  been  at  the  helm 
of  affairs  now,  there  is  little  doubt  how  he  would  have  acted.  Swift  and  sure 
would  have  been  the  steps  he  would  have  taken  to  restore  the  spirit  of  reverence 
for  Jehovah's  character  and  law  throughout  the  kingdom.  At  whatever  risk, 
he  would  have  tolerated  no  disloyalty  to  the  Divine  King.  He  would  have  said, 
"  It  is  not  necessary  for  me  to  live  ;  it  is  indispensable  that  I  should  be  faithful 
to  my  God."  As  a  "judge"  he  was  responsible  for  seeing  that  the  people  had 
at  least  a  visible  respect  for  the  covenant  of  their  God.  And  while  he  was  alive, 
both  by  his  example  and  personal  influence,  not  to  speak  of  his  authority  as 
judge,  he  would  have  deterred  many  from  turning  aside  to  crooked  ways.  But 
now  that  he  was  gone  no  barrier  remained  to  the  bursting  of  the  banks  of  the 
river,  so  that,  almost  at  once,  idolatry  again  reached  the  floodmark  among  the 
chosen  people  ! 

(2)  Aspostasy  was  due  in  part  to  the  universal  evil  example.  It  is  not  easy 
to  withstand  the  force  of  the  current  when  surrounded  by  a  multitude  of  waters. 
While  the  whole  human  race  around  them  were  moving  strongly  in  one  direc- 
tion, it  was  hard  for  a  single  nation  to  stand  out  by  itself,  and  dare  to  be  singular. 
This  may  in  part  account  for  the  fact,  though  it  does  not  afford  the  slightest 

167 


CHAP.  III.  HOMILETIC  COM  MEN  TAR  Y :   JUDGES, 


justification  of  the  lapse  into  idolatry.  If,  on  the  one  side  the  temptation  was 
strono^,  the  motives  on  the  other  side  were  incomparably  stronger.  The  word 
and  character  of  their  God  ought  infinitely  to  have  outweighed  every  other 
consideration  ;  but  to  this  had  to  be  added  the  long  course  of  gracious  and 
solemn  dealing  He  had  had  with  them,  from  the  beginning  of  their  history 
onwards.  Besides  this  general  consideration,  their  aspostacy  was  inexcusable, 
on  the  ground  of  the  strong  representation  of  the  dangers  arising  from  giving 
way  to  it,  and  the  many  helps  and  encouragements  supplied  for  maintaining 
their  stedfastness  in  the  covenant.  The  greatest  care  also  was  taken  to  make 
them  live  apart  from  *'  the  world  lying  in  wickedness."  Israel  was  to  "  dwell 
safely,  being  alone  "  (Deut.  xxxiii.  28.)  Thus  too  is  it  with  the  people  of  God 
in  every  age.  When  they  are  separate  from  the  world  they  are  safe  ;  when 
they  are  in  it,  they  are  in  danger  (2  Cor.  vi.  17  ;  1  Cor.  xv.  33 ;  Acts  ii.  40,  44  ; 
Prov.  xiii.  20  ;  Ps.  xxvi.  8,  9  ;  ci.  4—7  ;  Eph.  v.  11). 

(3)  Idolatry  was  their  easily-besetting  sin.  While  all  sin  is  strong  in  a 
sinful  nature,  there  is  a  specially  enslaving  power  in  an  **  easily-besetting  sin." 
By  it  a  man  is  led  captive,  even  when  his  eyes  are  open  to  the  terrible  con- 
sequences which  must  come  out  in  the  end.  He  is  like  a  captive  in  chains. 
Idolatry  had  a  fascination  for  the  eye  of  the  Israelite.  It  allowed  him  free 
indulgence  in  all  the  corrupt  propensities  of  his  fallen  nature.  In  one  word, 
it  allowed  him  to  make  his  God  after  his  own  wishes.  This  was  the  great 
allurement  to  idolatry  among  mankind  everywhere.  No  wonder  if  God  should 
say  of  it,  "  Oh,  do  not  this  abominable  thing  which  1  hate."  It  diverted  the 
homage  of  tlie  creature  from  being  given  to  the  Creator,  and  led  to  its  being 
bestowed  on  the  meanest  and  most  grovelling  things.  Yet  it  presented  to  man 
the  form  of  a  religion,  and  gave  room  for  the  exercise  of  the  devout  feelings  of 
the  fieart — so  satisfying  the  craving  for  a  religion  which  exists  in  man's  nature. 
Such  a  system  kept  the  Israelite  abreast  of  the  religious  fashion  of  the  age. 
He  did  not  require  to  be  singular,  and  look  sourly  on  every  other  form  of 
religious  worship  that  was  practised  among  the  nations. 

(4)  A  new  generation  had  sprung  up.  It  was  not  the  same  generation  that 
saw  the  great  deliverance  which  God  had  wrought  by  Othniel.  It  was  a  new 
generation  that  had  not  seen  God's  mighty  works,  on  behalf  of  Israel,  with  their 
own  eyes.  Their  fathers  in  all  likelihood  told  them  much  of  the  glorious  past, 
and  they  would  listen  with  interest  to  the  thrilling  accounts;  but  not  having 
personally  passed  through  the  scenes  described,  and  regarding  them  only  as 
matter  of  hearsay,  they  would  be  looked  on  as  little  better  than  beautiful 
shadows.  Out  of  this  circumstance  would  sin  deceitfully  construct  an  apology. 
The  impression  made  by  a  bare  recital  is  indeed  not  of  so  vivid  a  character  as  when 
one  personally  passes  through  the  excitement  of  great  perils,  and  is  an  eye-witness 
to  sublime  deliverances  wrought.  Yet  the  bare  recital,  accompanied  by  irrefragable 
evidence  of  the  truth,  and  astonishing  character  of  the  wonders  accomplished,  was 
sufficient  to  inspire  the  most  thorough  belief,  and  to  call  forth  earnest  gratitude  and 
devout  obedience.  It  is  thus  that  God  always  reckons — that  after  generations 
should  give  Him  their  allegiance  and  confidence,  because  of  mercies  which  He 
Las  bestowed  on  generations  that  have  gone  before,  of  which  an  account  is  given 
to  those  that  come  after.  The  whole  series  of  generations  He  views  as  hanging 
together,  both  as  regards  duties,  and  as  regards  privileges.  He  never  addresses 
any  one  generation  as  if  it  stood  apart  fiom  all  the  rest.  Links  are  always 
8U]>])osed  to  exist,  binding  the  whole  in  one — links  of  duty — of  a  common 
heritage— of  a  common  example,  instruction,  and  interest.  They  are  always 
addressed  as  one  people,  allied  in  blood,  as  children  of  one  father,  heirs  of  the 
same  promises,  and  partakers  of  the  same  Divine  covenant-relationship,  with  its 
laws,  and  ordinances,  and  privileges,  and  hopes.  The  men  of  this  backsliding 
generation,  therefore,  were  verily  guilty  in  not  having  been  fully  confirmed  in 

168 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   JUDGES.  chap.  hi. 


their  allegiance  to  God  by  the  argument  derived  from  the  experience  of  the 
fathers.     (See  pp.  92-94.) 

(5)  The  inveterate  depravity  of  the  human  heart.  This  is  too  truly  the 
principal  reason  that  accounts  for  the  apostacy  of  Israel  from  their  God.  Nothing 
could  more  strikingly  bring  out  the  fact  of  this  inveterate  depravity  than  the 
truth  that  in  all  ages,  under  all  circumstances,  and  among  all  peoples,  the  heart 
shows  an  invariable  tendency  to  depart  from  the  living  God.  The  tendency 
indeed  shows  itself  with  all  the  force  and  regularity  of  a  law,  and  hence  we  read 
of  ''the  law  of  sin"  We  have  also  the  distinct  testimony  of  Scripture, 
"  The  Lord  looked  down  from  heaven  on  the  children  of  men  to  see  if  there 
were  any  that  did  understand  and  seek  God.  They  are  all  gone  aside — 
there  is  none  that  doeth  good;  no,  not  one"  This  testimony  is  given  twice 
over  (Ps.  xiv.  and  liii.).  A  melancholy  confirmation  of  the  testimony  we 
have  in  the  history  recorded  in  the  book  of  Judges.  Of  Israel  it  may  be  said 
that  "  though  woo'd  and  aw'd"  they  are  "  rebels  still.*'  "  Neither  ministry,  nor 
miracle,  nor  misery,  nor  mercy,  could  mollify  their  hard  hearts,  or  contain  them 
within  the  bounds  of  obedience."  [Irapp.^  The  unqualitied  verdict  of  Him 
who  searchetli  the  heart  is,  that  it  is  "  desperately  wicked  " — or  incurable  by  any 
natural  means.  Alas !  for  the  honour  of  our  race,  that  it  should  pass  into  a 
proverb  **  humanum  est  peccare"  and  yet  this  is  mild  compared  with  the  Divine 
verdict. 

XZ.     JTew    chastisement    Inflicted      (verses  12-14).  —  "  The    Lord 

strengthened  Eglon  against  Israel"  etc. 

1.  The  Lord  chastises  in  faithfulness  (pp.  118,  119).  In  all  circumstances 
God  marks  sin  with  His  abhorrence.  As  He  would  be  faithful  to  Himself,  He 
must  keep  up  a  due  sense  of  His  sovereign  authority,  and  the  unsullied  purity 
of  His  character  and  government,  before  the  eyes  of  His  creatures.  According 
to  an  established  arrangement  with  His  people  (Ps.  Ixxxix.  30-34),  He  gives 
them  to  understand,  it  is  due  both  to  Him  and  to  them,  that  they  should  be 
chastised  when  they  sin  against  Him.  He  afflicts  them  to  show  His  jealousy 
for  His  holy  name  ;  that  He  is  deeply  offended  with  sin  even  in  His  own 
people  ;  that  He  cannot  love  them  at  the  expense  of  His  own  glory  as  a  holy 
God  ;  that  He  cannot  allow  them  to  go  on  in  sin  at  the  expense  of  sacrificing 
their  best  interests  ;  that  He  cannot  trifle  with  that  which  would  poison  their 
happiness,  and  sap  the  foundations  of  their  fjiture  good.  By  chastise- 
ment, too,  He  reminds  them  that  sin  implies  loss  of  character, 
as  well  as  loss  of  favour ;  that  it  brings  them  under  the  Divine 
frown,  and  sinks  them  in  the  scale  of  honour.  And  finally  He 
afflicts  them,  to  bring  them  quickly  to  a  state  of  penitence  and  reforma- 
tion of  conduct.  He  impresses  it  on  them,  that  while  they  continue  to 
sin,  He  must  continue  to  punish  ;  and  that  if,  after  all  His  dealings  with  them, 
"  they  will  not  hearken,  hut  walk  contrary  to  Him,  then  He  will  walk  contrary 
unto  them  in  fury,  and  chastise  them  seven  times  for  their  sins"  The  standard 
of  His  holiness  as  absolutely  perfect  must  not  be  let  down,  in  the  estimation  of 
the  subjects  of  His  government,  however  clamantly  certain  circumstances  may 
seem  to  call  for  a  relaxation.  His  moral  government,  even  of  a  sinful  world, 
must  go  on  without  a  stain,  notwithstanding  that  so  much  sin  is  ever  being 
committed.  How  that  could  be  so,  consistently  with  His  vast  designs  of  mercy, 
was  a  problem  for  His  Divine  wisdom  to  solve.  And  in  the  great  sacrifice  of 
Calvary,  we  see  the  purity  and  righteousness  of  the  Divine  character  kept  up, 
for  ever,  at  an  absolute  height.  But  as  there  is  need,  in  every  a<>e,  for  some 
immediate  expression  of  the  Divine  displeasure,  in  the  case  of  individual  sins 
as  they  are  committed,  this  is  supplied  by  chastisements,  both  to  remind  us  of 

169 


CHAP.  III.  HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:   JUDGES. 


the  sin-hating  character  of  our  God,  and  to  be  a  check  on  farther  indulgence  in 
sin. 

When  sin  is  committed  afresh,  after  the  application  of  costly  means  of  cure, 
men  would  be  disposed  to  give  up  the  case  in  despair,  or  to  inflict  summary 
vengeance  once  for  all  on  the  transgressors.  God  does  neither  ;  but  with  a 
patience  which  is  calm  and  regular  as  the  laws  of  nature,  He  proceeds  again  in 
the  same  course  which  has  already  proved  abortive ;  and  for  many  times  he 
does  so,  to  show  the  glory  of  His  long-suffering,  and  the  multitude  of  His 
mercies  (Ps.  cvi.  43-45). 

2.  He  makes  use  of  a  new  rod.  It  is  not  the  same  scourge  that  is  now 
employed.  A  nation  by  their  side  is  raised  up,  apparently  one  of  the  weakest 
of  the  surrounding  nations,  certainly  one  that  hitherto  had  been  too  much 
awed  by  the  mighty  hand,  and  outstretched  arm  of  the  God  of  Israel,  to  dare 
to  meet  them  in  battle  array.  Moab  now  becomes  "  the  rod  of  God's  anger  " 
to  chastise  his  people  for  their  unfaithfulness  to  His  covenant.  For  the 
greater  part  o\'  a  Imndred  years,  they  had  longed  to  wreak  their  vengeance 
on  this  much  hated  people,  but  hitherto  had  lacked  courage  and  opportunity. 
Now  both  are  supplied,  and  with  eager  foot,  they  tread  the  soil  of  Israel, 
for  purposes  of  plunder  and  oppression.  God's  quiver  is  full  of  arrows,  and 
it  is  glorifying  to  Him  to  show  the  fulness  of  His  resources,  by  using  a 
variety  of  instruments  to  execute  His  will.  It  proves  His  universal  supremacy 
to  make  choice  now  of  one,  now  of  another  nation,  in  turn  all  round,  to  serve 
His  purpose — not  always  the  most  suited,  but  though  the  most  unfit,  yet 
made  by  Him  most  successful  in  gaining  the  end.     (See  pp.  88,  89). 

3.  He  sends  a  more  severe  token  of  His  displeasure.  When  a  man  has 
had  the  character  of  having  been  a  transgressor  in  the  past,  and  is  brought 
up  anew,  charged  with  crime  at  the  bar  of  justice,  it  must  go  harder  with 
him,  than  if  he  had  been  spotless  before.  For  now  he  shows  more  settledness 
of  purpose  as  a  criminal,  and  greater  persistence  in  defying  constituted 
authority.  Thus  it  was  with  Israel.  Theirs  was  now  a  case  of  sin  added 
to  sin.  The  old  sin  was  remembered  when  the  new  sin  was  committed,  and 
the  guilt  was  accounted  to  be  much  greater  than  before,  calling  for  many  stripes. 
We  do  not  know  indeed,  that  the  oppression  of  the  Moabites  was  heavier  than  that 
of  the  Mesopotamian  hordes.  Probably  there  was  not  much  to  choose  between 
them.  But  it  was  certainly  much  longer  continued.  Now  it  is  18  years  of  servitude, 
whereas  formerly  it  was  but  eight  years.  In  this  respect,  the  scourge  was  much 
more  severe,  not  only  because  the  lash  was  longer  applied,  but  also  because  God 
showed  that  His  ear  was  more  heavy  to  hear  their  prayer.  It  was  also  a  deeper 
humiliation  to  be  trodden  upon  by  a  people  whom  till  now  they  had  despised, 
from  their  birth  onwards,  and  who  had  been  accustomed  for  more  than  three 
generations  to  tremble  at  the  name,  and  the  mention  of  the  God  of  Israel. 
*'It  must  have  been  most  mortifying  to  Israel  to  see  Jericho,  the  very  city  which 
had  been  delivered  into  their  hands  by  a  miracle,  now  made  a  Moabite  strong- 
hold to  guard  the  passes  of  Jordan,  and  to  keep  Israel  down  in  lasting  subjec- 
tion. Now,  too,  their  old  enemies,  Ammon  and  Amalek  join  against  them. 
Their  adversaries  seem  to  flock  together  to  crush  them  (Ps.  Ixxxiii.  5-8).  They 
would  not  serve  the  Lord  with  their  corn,  wine,  and  oil,  which  He  had  given 
them  ;  so  now  they  must  serve  the  oppressor,  and  pay  him  tribute  of  all  (Hosea 
ii.  5-10  ;  Dent,  xxviii.  47,  48.) " 

As  to  their  groanings  under  the  yoke,  the  history  is  silent.  These  we  can 
only  imagine  ;  but  doubtless  they  implied  a  deep  sense  of  degradation  as  well 
as  sutieiing.  This  feature  of  passing  over  details  in  silence  adds  greatly  to  the 
sadness  of  the  history  of  so  many  victims  of  oppression,  in  various  countries  of 
the  world,  in  the  terrible  past.  How  much  more  miserable  has  this  world  beeu 
170 


HOMILETIC  CO^n/EXTARF:   JUDGES.  chap.  m. 

in  its  iminerous  wretched  homes,  than  the  world  itself  knows !  What  heavy 
clouds  of  sorrow  have  discharged  their  contents  on  these  homes  at  various 
epochs,  of  which  no  record  has  been  kept !  Had  that  portion  of  the  history  of 
our  race  which  has  been  left  untold,  been  given  in  full  on  the  printed  page,  in 
wivdt  red  and  dark  colours  must  the  pen  have  been  dipped,  suitably  to  pourtray 
the  facts  !  How  many  heart-rending  cries  have  gone  up  before  liigh  heaven, 
which  no  human  ear  has  heard,  from  the  wretched,  down-trodden  subjects  of 
tyrannical  and  despotic  rulers  in  the  ages  of  the  mournful  past,  not  only  among 
savage  nations,  but  those  also  that  are  the  so  called  civilised  !  We  need  not  con- 
jecture what  sufferings  must  have  been  endured  but  never  told,  under  the  iron 
hands  of  such  incarnations  of  cruelty,  as  Jenghis  Khan  and  Tamerlane,  of  Tartar 
notoriety,  or  the  occupants  of  the  throne  of  the  great  Mogul  ;  but  were  the 
history  of  it  written,  what  tales  of  misery  might  be  given  to  the  world  from  tlie 
prisons  of  Europe,  the  mines  of  Siberia,  the  slave-grounds  of  Africa  and 
America,  and  the  manifold  homes  of  oppression  and  hardship  in  lands  which 
have  been  ruled  over  by  capricious  and  cruel  monarchs !  What  cries  of 
bleeding,  tortured,  mangled  humanity  have  been  raised  which  no  ear  of 
sympathy  has  ever  listened  to,  save  that  of  Him  who  "  looks  down  from  heaven 
to  hear  the  groaning  of  the  prisoners"  to  mark  the  oppression  of  the  poor,  and 
the  sighing  of  the  needy,  and  who  will  appear  in  due  time  **  to  judge  the  world 
in  righteousness,  and  the  people  with  equity  !  ** 

4,  He  helps  His  enemies  against  His  own  people.  "  He  strengthened  Kglon 
against  Israel"  etc.  How  He  did  so  we  are  not  informed,  but  in  Providence 
He  so  ordered  it  that  all  Eglon's  schemes  and  efforts  should  succeed,  while 
disastrous  failure  attended  all  the  movements  of  Israel.  On  a  former  occasion, 
while  the  Lord  was  with  His  people,  Balak  had  no  power  to  curse  them,  or  to 
lift  a  finger  against  them  ;  but  now  Jehovah  not  only  permits  the  heathen  king 
to  triumph,  but  Himself  actually  takes  the  side  of  the  enemy  against  His  own. 
How  deep  must  have  been  the  provocation  given,  when  the  Divine  Father 
proceeds  to  take  the  part  of  a  ruthless  stranger,  in  the  enslavement  and 
degradation  of  His  own  son  !  It  was  even  worse.  It  was  giving  up  His  well- 
beloved  child,  whom  He  had  so  tenderly  cared  for  all  along,  to  be  savagely 
beaten  by  a  slave ;  while  He,  the  Father,  stands  by,  not  to  protect  Him  from 
chastisement,  but  rather  to  see  that  a  sufficient  number  of  stripes  is  given  !  This 
is  the  same  God,  who  was  always  so  ready  to  exalt  the  horn  of  Israel,  in 
opposition,  or  in  preference  to,  all  others  !  How  great  the  offence  which  He 
must  have  taken  at  Israel's  sins  !  Yet  this  mysterious  dealing  of  the  God  of 
Jacob  was  really  a  blessing  in  disguise.  Seeming  to  work  against  them,  He  was 
by  this  course  all  the  more  effectually  working  for  them.  He  was  casting  the 
metal  into  the  fire  to  get  the  dross  consumed.  He  was  thus  opening  their  eyes, 
and  leading  them  to  see  that  things  must  be  fearfully  out  of  course,  when  their 
God  deemed  it  necessary  to  join  Himself  to  their  enemies.  It  was  God  fulfilling, 
in  part,  the  awful  threatening  which  He  had  long  ago  made  in  the  days  of 
Moses  (Lev.  xxvi.  28),  when  He  would  walk  contrary  to  them  in  like  manner  as 
they  liad  walked  contrary  to  Him.  In  short,  it  was  lifting  the  veil  of  warning 
in  time,  to  prevent  the  fearful  issue  of  being  for  ever  cast  off. 

III.  IXevr  expressions  of  penitence  (verse  15). — "  Ihe  children  of  Israel 
cried  u7ifo  the  Lord" 

1.  In  distress  they  flee  to  the  universal  refuge.  As  when  a  ship  is  overtaken 
by  a  great  storm  at  sea,  those  who  sail  in  it  either  cast  anchor,  or  betake 
themselves  to  some  accessible  harbour  of  refuge,  so  these  Israelites  in  their 
extremity  fell  back  on  the  Divinely-established  means  of  relief  in  prayer. 
'I'aught  by  a  bitter  experience  that  "  the  ways  of  transgressors  are  hard,"  the 

171 


OHAP.lii.  E03IILETJC  COMMENTARY :    JUDGES. 


unfaithful  Church  soh'loquises  in  her  bondage  thus — "  I  will  2^0  and  return  to 
my  first  husband  ;  for  then  it  was  better  with  me  than  now."  Prayer  is  indeed 
a  refuge  for  all.  It  is  the  instinctive  cry  of  the  creature  to  Him  who  made  it, 
when  feehng  its  feebleness,  its  wants,  its  perils,  above  all  its  sins  and  their 
threatening  consequences.  "  Should  not  a  people  seek  unto  their  God  ? " 
**  Is  any  afflicted  ?  let  him  pray." 

Prayer  is  the  cry  of  the  heart  in  returning  to  its  God.  It  is  a  refuge  for  all. 
"  0  thou  that  hearest  prayer,  to  thee  shall  all  flesh  come  "  (Isa.  Ivi.  7).  While 
we  are  in  the  land  of  the  living,  we  are  in  the  place  of  hope,  and  on  praying 
ground.  While  the  gospel  trumpet  blows,  prayer  is  never  shut  against  the 
guilty  during  the  day  of  human  life.  For  all  classes,  mercy's  gate  in  prayer 
stands  open — at  all  times,  and  under  all  circumstances.  God  is  said  to  sit  on 
a  "  throne  of  grace  "  to  receive  all  the  petitioners  who  come  to  Him.  By  what- 
ever name  miserable  men  are  known,  it  is  the  privilege  of  all  to  come  to  this 
throne,  before  which  a  brother-man  as  mediator  between  God  and  man  con- 
tinually pleads. 

As  the  '*  Creator  "  of  all,  God  finds  an  interest  in  every  living  being.  As  the 
"  Father  of  mercies,"  He  is  "  kind  even  to  the  evil  and  unthankful."  Rejoicing 
in  the  consciousness  of  His  own  fulness,  He  is  naturally  disposed  to  supply  the 
wants  of  the  needy.  As  being  Himself  the  "ever-blessed  God,"  He  finds 
pleasure  in  diffusing  happiness  among  His  creatures  around  Him.  But  it  is  a 
guilty  world  that  He  has  before  Him,  and  a  special  mode  of  approach  is 
established.  Christ  as  sacrifice  and  intercessor  is  the  way.  "  Through  Him  we 
all  have  access  by  one  Spirit,  unto  the  Father." 

The  voice  which  Christiaiity  raises  among^  the  abodes  of  our  suffering 
humanity,  is  one,  not  only  of  hope,  but  of  assurance,  that  the  God  in  wliose 
hands  we  are,  is  disposed  to  listen  to  all  the  cries  and  plaints  that  come  from 
distressed  hearts.  The  notion  of  the  ancient  Epicureans,  who  represented  the 
Deity  as  indolently  reposing  in  His  own  hi^h  region  of  undisturbed  happiness, 
careless  of  what  might  pass  among  men  under  His  footstool,  on  whom  He  could 
liardly  deign  to  look,  has  long  since  been  exploded  as  a  dream  of  the  murky 
nights  which  brooded  over  men,  ere  yet  the  "  Day-spring  from  on  high " 
began  to  gleam  on  their  dwellings  of  sorrow.  Abortive,  too,  have  proved 
the  efforts  of  the  men  of  cold  intellect,  during  the  past,  and  a  portion 
of  the  present  century,  who  would  represent  the  Deity  as  dwelling  apart 
from  men  amid  the  unapproachable  splendours  of  His  own  heavens,  having 
cut  off  every  tie  with  His  creatures,  regarding  their  history  as  too  insignificant 
to  engage  His  attention,  and  their  interests  too  unimportant  to  claim  His  aid. 
On  the  contrary,  Christianity  teaches  that  "  77ie  Lord  looketh  upon  all  the  in- 
habitants  of  the  earth,  and  considereth  all  their  works  ;  that  He  is  good  unto  all 
and  His  tender  mercies  are  over  all  Uis  works ;  that  the  eyes  of  all  wait  on 
Him,  He  opens  Uis  hand  and  satisfies  the  desire  of  every  living  thing  ;  that 
His  eye  is  on  the  rig/deous,  and  Uis  ear  is  open  unto  their  prayer  ;  that  He  is 
the  helper  of  the  fatherless,  relieveth  the  widow,  preserveth  the  strangers,  and 
looseth  the  prisoners" — in  one  word,  that  He  is  "  The  preserver  of  all  men 
specially  of  them  that  believe."  To  this  God  all  men  are  taught  to  pray,  coming 
with  penitent  hearts,  and  asking,  in  the  name  of  Christ,  for  such  things  as  may 
be  agreeable  to  His  will. 

2.  They  had  a  special  plea  with  God  as  children  of  the  Covenant.  The  plea 
which  men  had  with  God  merely  as  His  creatures,  is  lost  on  their  becoming 
sinners.  *^  For  we  know  that  God  heareth  not  sinners."  He  cannot  continue  to 
be  the  Father  of  apostate  children.  He  cannot  bless  the  guilty,  till  some  great 
thing  is  done  to  dispose  of  their  guilt.  But  this  people  were  adopted  by  God 
into  the  relation  of  Father  and  children,  on  the  ground  of  the  covenant  He  had 
172 


HOMILETTC  COMMENTARY :   JUDGES,  ohap.iii. 


been  pleased  to  establish  with  them  ;  and  thus  though  by  nature  "far  off"  from 
God,  they  were  "made  nigli."  The  great  promise,  *'  Iwill  be  a  God  to  thee'' 
went  with  them  as  a  pillar  of  hope  in  all  the  steps  of  their  wonderful  history. 
And  however  often  they  might  come  with  their  requests  to  His  throne,  He 
was  never  weary  of  remembering  the  word  of  His  covenant,  and  acting  according 
to  it  in  all  the  difficulties  through  which  they  had  to  pass,  "i  said  not 
to  the  seed  of  Jacob y  seek  ye  me  in  vain" 

3.  Their  temporary  apostasy  did  not  shut  them  out  from  the  privilege  of 
prayer.  It  might  be  said,  that  if  men  as  God's  creatures,  lost  their  title  to 
call  God  Father  because  of  their  sins,  for  the  same  reason,  these  children 
of  the  covenant  ought  to  be  held  as  having  lost  all  title  to  any  of  the 
blessings  of  the  covenant.     This  would  have  been  the  case  but  for  two  reasons  ; 

(1)  They  had  a  mediator  to  plead  for  them  in  their  priesthood,  and  tlie 
continual  sacrifices  were  laid  on    the   altar,    as   the    means   of  propitiating. 

(2)  Their  apostasy  was  not  allowed  by  their  covenant  God  to  become  permanent. 
For  if  so,  they  must,  in  the  nature  of  things,  necessarily  have  forfeited  every 
title  they  had  to  God's  favour  and  promised  blessings,  on  the  ground  of  their 
sacred  relationship.  That  is,  God  must  have  cast  them  off.  In  these  latter 
times  the  most  solid  and  permanent  security  is  taken  that  the  privileges  and 
blessings  reserved  for  the  people  of  God  shall  not  be  lost — prayer  included. 
The  rule  which  is  laid  down  objectively  reads  thus  :  "  If  any  man  sin,  we  have 
an  advocate  with  the  Father^  Jesus  Christy  the  Righteous'*  "  We  have  a 
Great  High  Priest  that  is  passed  into  the  heavens,  Jesus  the  Son  of  God : 
let  us  therefore  come  boldly  unto  the  throne  of  grace,'  etc.  No  case  that  is 
once  fairly  put  into  the  hands  of  that  advocate  can  be  considered  hopeless. 
For  "  He  is  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost,"  etc.  And  we  have  "  boldness  to 
enter  into  the  holiest,  by  a  new  and  living  way,  even  by  the  blood  of  Jesus, 
which  He  hath  consecrated  for  us,''  etc.  And  there  is  provision  made  sub- 
jectively also.  "  /  will  pray  the  Father,  and  He  shall  give  you  another  Com- 
forter, that  He  may  abide  with  you  for  ever."  What  is  the  force  of  this  but 
practically  saying,  on  the  one  hand,  if  the  Spirit  is  given,  no  other  blessing  can 
be  withheld  ;  and  such  arrangement  is  everlasting  ;  while,  on  the  other,  it  is 
doing  the  same  thing  as  "putting  God's  laws  into  the  mind,  and  writing  them 
in  the  heart,"  so  that  the  most  effectual  security  is  taken  for  the  fultilling  of  the 
condition  of  the  covenant,  and  so  it  is  established  for  evermore. 

IV.  New  Deliverances  experienced  (verses  15-30). — For  an  account 
of  this  we  must  read  the  narrative,  and  mark  how  providence  overruled  events 
so  as  to  secure  the  complete  emancipation  of  the  people  from  their  state  of 
vassalage.  The  point  to  be  noticed  is,  that  the  hand  of  the  Lord  specially 
directed  the  events  to  this  issue. 

1.  This  deliverance  came  in  answer  to  prayer.  Thus  is  it  best  seen,  that 
all  is  "  of  Him,  through  Him,  and  to  Him,"  and  so  it  is  the  mode  most  glorifying 
to  God.  It  is  the  fixed  rule — "Ask,  and  ye  shall  receive."  Acknowledge 
the  Fountainhead.  **  When  the  children  of  Israel  cried  unto  the  Lord,  He 
raised  up  a  deliverer."  His  compassion  and  tender  mercy  would  prompt  Him 
to  save  them  at  the  mere  spectacle  of  their  misery,  but  to  maintain  His  character 
as  the  Holy  One  of  Israel,  He  grants  deliverance  only  in  answer  to  their  pro- 
fessions of  return  to  God,  and  suitable  expressions  of  their  sorrow  for  sin. 
Their  professions  in  most  cases  might  be  only  in  appearance,  and  in  only  a 
few  cases  might  there  be  "  that  godly  sorrow  for  sin  which  needeth  not  to  be 
rei)ented  of"  The  majority  of  the  people  may  only  have  done  what  they  did 
in  Hosea  s  days — *'  howled  to  God  on  tlieir  beds,"  without  crying  to  Him  with 
their  hearts  (Hosea  vii.  14).    Yet  God  is  pleased  to  see  even  the  appearance 

173 


CHAP.  m.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


of  penitence,  and  in  cases  where  temporal  blessings  are  concerned,  He  often 
gives  these  though  there  sliould  be  nothitig  more  than  the  appearance  (1  Kings 
xxi.  27-29).  There  is  however,  in  every  age  "a  remnant" — "the  living  in 
Jerusalem"— ''the  Israelites  indeed  "—"  the  tenth  "—who  "follow  the  Lord 
fully,"  and  whose  *'  hearts  are  circumcised."  These  would  now  act  the  part  of 
Ezra '(Ezra  ix.  6),  or  of  David  (Ps.  li.  17). 

2.  It  was  brought  about  by  a  suitable  instrument.  God  Himself  made  the 
selection.  **  He  raised  him  up."  As  a  particular  description  is  given  of  him, 
the  features  of  that  description  must  he  held  to  indicate  the  reason  of  his  fitness 
to  serve  as  an  instrument  for  accomplishing  the  Divine  purpose.  It  was  a  man  who 
wanted  the  natural  use  of  his  right  hand,  and  had  only  left  to  him  the  effective 
use  of  his  left.  He  seems  likely  to  have  been  among  the  last  who  could  do  any 
great  thing  by  his  own  power.  And  his  fitness  seems  to  have  consisted  rather  in 
his  defects,  than  in  his  powers.  God  at  one  time  chooses  one  that  is  specially 
gifted,  at  another  one  that  is  defective,  to  show  that  He  can  do  his  work  with 
any  kind  of  instrument.  For  while  a  man's  natural  gifts  are  not  despised,  but 
made  use  of  so  far  as  they  can  be  of  service,  it  is  not  so  much  by  these  that  he 
succeeds  in  discharging  his  mission,  as  by  the  special  aid  given  him  by  the  Spirit 
of  God.     "  Not  by  might,  nor  by  power,"  etc. 

The  manner  of  the  Deliverance.  We  believe  the  manner  of  accomplishment, 
as  well  as  the  end  to  he  gained,  were  matter  of  Divine  direction  to  Ehud.  He 
was  commissioned  to  deliver  Israel  from  Moabitish  bondage.  This  was  to  be 
accomplished. 

(1)  By  the  death  of  the  King.  The  oppressor  was  marked  to  die.  Eglon 
had  served  God's  purpose  in  being  a  rod  wherewith  to  chastise  His  children, 
and  now  that  the  purpose  is  served,  there  being  no  further  need  for  it,  He 
casts  it  into  the  fire.  [Trapp^.  How  many  illustrations  of  this  kind  occur 
throughout  history  !  All  the  nations  round  about  the  ancient  Israel  so  suffered 
in  the  end,  because  of  the  injuries  or  indignities  they  inflicted  on  the 
people  of  God.  How  many  examples  might  be  found  among  the  kingdoms  or 
powers  of  Europe  during  the  Christian  era,  who  once  persecuted  the  church  of 
God,  and  have  had  troubles  and  degradation  in  their  future  history.  For  it  is 
specially  to  be  noticed  that  whilst  a  valuable  purpose  was  served  by  the  chas- 
tisement of  the  backsliding  church,  that  was  as  far  as  possible  away  from  the 
intention  of  these  persecuting  powers.  Their  only  thought  was  partly  to  gratify 
their  malice  against  a  religion  which  they  intensely  hated,  and  so  they  strove 
to  put  it  down  ;  and  partly  to  extend  their  own  power  and  possessions.  To  do 
this  at  the  expense  of  the  interests  of  the  church  of  God,  was  to  offer  an  insult 
and  defiance  to  Him  to  whom  the  church  belonged. 

Eglon  s  sins,  there/ore,  were  not  merely,  that  he  had  acted  the  part  of  a  public 
robber,  in  seizing  the  property  which  belonged  to  another  nation,  and  that  as  a 
tyrant  and  oppressor  he  had  for  a  great  length  of  time  filled  the  homes  of  that 
nation  with  misery  and  wailing.  But  he  had  dared  to  stretch  forth  his  hand 
against  the  Lord's  anointed — a  sin  which  even  David  shrunk  from  after  he  had 
himself  been  anointed,  and  when  the  object  was  the  wicked  Saul,  whom  the 
Lord  had  now  rejected,  from  being  king.  Because  this  monarch  had  been 
chosen  to  the  sacred  office  of  being  king  over  God's  people,  and  so  had  the 
Divine  seal  set  upon  him  in  that  office,  David  preferred  to  risk  his  own  life 
rather  than  do  harm  to  one  whose  person  had  thus  become  consecrated.  It 
was  therefore  a  grave  crime  of  which  Eglon  had  been  guilty,  for  Israel  had 
beeii  thus  consecrated,  and  so  were  regarded  by  their  God  as  sacred  property. 
Their  name  He  had  associated  in  the  most  intimate  manner  with  His  own 
great  name.  By  them,  and  their  history,  was  His  name  known  on  the  earth. 
In  attacking  such  a  people,  Eglon  was  virtually  making  war  upon  Jehovah 
174 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES.  CHAP.  m. 


Himself!  A  worm  of  the  dust  was  defying  the  Omnipotent  at  arms  !  God's 
jewels  he  had  been  appropriating  to  himself,  and  treating  them  as  if  they  were 
the  merest  dross  !  Ei-lon,  though  himself  an  alien,  had  dared  for  so  long  a  time 
to  treat  God's  dear  children  as  if  they  had  been  the  veriest  slaves  !  This  was 
the  same  people  before  whose  march  God  had  dried  up  the  sea,  and  rolled  back 
Jordan  when  in  full  flood  ;  whose  sustenance  in  the  desert,  for  He  had  caused 
the  rock  to  gush  forth  streams,  and  the  heavens  above  to  rain  down  manna  ; 
before  whom  every  nation  in  Canaan,  from  the  one  end  to  the  other,  had  been 
either  annihilated  or  paralysed,  and  who  still  lay  under  the  shelter  of  the  same 
Almighty  arm. 

Now  the  time  was  come  for  delivering  Israel,  and  at  the  same  hour,  Eglon's 
sins  come  into  remembrance  before  God,  not  having  been  repented  of,  nor  a 
pardon  given.  Hence  the  sentence  goes  forth  that  the  oppressor  of  God's  Israel 
must  die,  and  His  ransomed  ones  be  set  free  from  the  yoke,  while  Ehud  is  the 
man  appointed  to  execute  the  work. 

(2.)    Special  qualifications  were  given  to  the  instrument  chosen. 

(a.)  We  hold  it  to  be  a  rule,  that  in  all  cases  where  God  sends  a  man  on  a 
special  mission.  Be  both  qualifies  and  directs  him  more  or  less  in  the  discharge 
of  the  duties  of  that  mission.  Many  have  felt  a  difficulty  in  supposing  that  God 
had  given  instructions  to  Ehud  in  the  present  case,  because  there  seems  to  be  a 
cold-blooded  and  deliberate  murder  committed,  with  circumstances  of  treachery 
and  lying  accompanying  it.  But  we  have  already  seen,  that  before  God,  Eglon's 
death  was  not  regarded  as  murder,  or  the  unlawful  taking  away  of  life,  but 
a  just  retribution  on  a  daring  criminal,  under  the  Divine  government,  for  his 
great  sins,  at  a  point  when  the  time  had  come  for  the  emancipation  of  his 
vassals,  and  for  the  infliction  of  his  own  doom  as  their  oppressor. 

(6.)  Objection  as  to  the  charge  of  duplicity  and  deceit^  our  judgment  must 
be  guided  by  the  interpretation  we  put  on  the  narrative  itself.  To  us  the 
main  features  of  the  story  are  consistent  with  perfect  honesty  of  purpose  and 
truthfulness  of  statement.  His  principal  statements  are,  **  I  have  a  secret 
errand  unto  thee,  0  King,"  and  "  I  have  a  message  from  God  unto  thee."  It 
has  been  generally  supposed,  that  by  this  he  meant  some  statement  which  he 
was  to  make  in  words,  which  was  used  as  a  mere  blind  to  gain  for  him 
admission  into  the  royal  presence,  and  also  to  deceive  the  king  and  throw  him  off 
his  guard.  But  why  make  any  such  supposition  ?  We  believe  Ehud  sincerely 
meant  what  he  said.  He  had  a  message  from  God  to  deliver,  but  it  was  one 
of  deeds  not  words.  He  meant  to  say,  **  I  have  come  with  a  message  from 
that  God  against  whom  you  have  so  dreadfully  sinned,  whose  name  you  have 
blasphemed,  whose  people  you  have  trampled  on,  and  whose  power  you  have 
defied  ;  and  that  message  is,  that  your  hour  is  come,  and  you  are  doomed  by 
my  hand  to  die  1  There  is  no  strain  in  this  interpretation  ;  it  seems  most 
natural,  and  yet  it  vindicates  the  uprightness  of  Ehud  throughout  the  trans- 
action. That  Eglon  put  another  interpretation  on  the  words  is  beside  the 
question.  He  was  already  a  doomed  man  before  Ehud's  visit,  and  had  no  right 
to  any  mercy  shown.  Already  he  had  had  a  long  day  of  mercy,  and  the  last 
moment  had  now  expired.  From  Ehud's  words  he  was  given  distinctly  to 
understand  whence  and  why  the  blow  came  that  stretched  him  a  corpse  at  his 
feet. 

(c.)  On  Ehud  rested  the  spirit  oi  loyalty  to  his  God.  He  was  specially  called 
by  God  to  be  the  saviour  of  his  people,  who  formed  at  that  time  the  only  church 
of  God  in  the  world.  Like  as  God  said  to  Saul,  "  Go  and  smite  Amalek,  and 
spare  them  not ;  slay  man  and  woman,  infant  and  suckling,"  or  like  as  Joshua 
was  commanded  concerning  the  Canaanites  and  other  nations,  "  thou  shalt 
utterly  destroy  them,  thou  shalt  save  alive  nothing  that  breatheth/* 
So  now  Ehud  received  the  command,   "  Go  and  slay  Eglon,  the  oppressor 

176 


OHAP.ni.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES, 


of  my  people,  and  spare  him  not."  It  was  a  very  stern  duty  that  was 
imposed  upon  him,  both  very  revolting  in  itself,  and  involving  the  greatest 
risks  to  his  personal  safety.  It  was,  we  believe,  the  last  thing  which  he 
would  have  chosen  to  do,  if  it  had  been  left  to  himself  to  decide.  But 
believing  that  all  God's  commands  were  in  truth  and  upri^^htness,  he  went 
forward  in  Joshua-like  spirit  at  the  call  of  duty.  It  was,  indeed,  not  a  duty 
of  so  bewildering  a  character  as  that  imposed  on  Abraham,  when  required  to 
offer  up  his  only  sou  as  a  burnt  offering,  yet  it  was  a  severe  test  of  his  loyalty 
to  his  God,  and  his  staunchness  to  the  call  of  duty. 

{d.)  He  had  the  spirit  of  self-sacrifice  for  the  cause  of  God  on  earth.  He 
liad  to  discharge  this  duty  alone.  **  Of  the  people  there  was  none  with  him." 
He  dismissed  all  that  accompanied  him  on  his  first  visit  to  the  king.  He  kept 
the  secret  locked  up  in  his  own  bosom.  He  prepared  the  instrument  of  death 
unknown  to  others  ;  and  every  step  of  the  omnious  journey  was  undertaken 
alone.  Other  *'  judges "  were  commanded  to  raise  an  army,  generally  one 
far  inferior  in  number  and  equipment  to  the  force  of  the  enemy.  But  in  such 
a  case  there  is  something,  however  little  it  miglit  be,  to  sustain  natural  courage. 
But  here  there  is  nothing.  Only  such  is  the  will  of  his  God  ;  and  the  end  to  be 
gained  is  the  liberation  of  his  country,  and,  what  was  to  him  more  important 
still,  the  preservation  of  the  Church  of  God  on  the  earth.  And  for  that  he 
risks  all.  Since  not  only  the  well-being,  but  the  very  existence,  of  the 
canse  of  God  on  the  earth  depended  on  his  going  through  with  the  perilous 
duty  entrusted  to  him,  he  takes  his  life  in  his  hand,  and  without  a  murmur 
proceeds  to  discharge  it.  He  stood  the  test  of  zeal  for  the  holy  cause  in  which 
he  was  embarked. 

{e.)  He  had  the  spirit  of  great  boldness  and  courage.  Many  such  cases  stand 
out  in  history,  such  as  that  of  the  Roman  Seseva,  a  soldier  of  Caesar's,  who  at 
the  siege  of  Pyrrachium  alone  resisted  Pompey's  army  until  he  had  two  hundred 
and  twenty  darts  sticking  in  his  shield.  It  was  said  of  the  great  Caesar  that  he 
always  said  to  his  soldiers,  "Come,"  never  **Go" — meaning  that  he  himself 
ever  went  first.  It  was  also  said  of  Hannibal,  the  Carthagenian  general,  that 
he  was  always  first  in  the  battle  and  the  last  out.  Truly  heroic  courage  was 
displayed  also  by  the  Swiss  Tell,  and  the  Scottish  Wallace,  and  many 
other  great  patriots.  But  in  the  courage  and  boldness  displayed  by  these 
"judges,"  there  was  a  higher  than  the  natural  element.  They  went  forward  in 
a  state  of  absolute  fearlessness,  conscious  that  Omnipotence  itself  was  with 
them,  that  all  obstacles  must  give  way  before  them,  and  that  success  would 
attend  their  action  with  the  certainty  of  a  law  of  nature.  Thus  moral 
considerations  were  at  the  root  of  their  courage. 

(/)  He  had  the  spirit  of  strong  faith.  He  believed  that  God  would,  by  his 
hand,  work  a  great  deliverance  ;  both  because  he  believed  that  He  had  such 
complete  control  of  all  events  and  issues,  that  He  could  in  any  circumstances 
open  a  wa}'  of  escape,  and  also  because  he  had  the  conviction  that  God  was  with 
him,  and  would  not  fail  him.  Over  all  his  other  armour,  this  warrior  threw 
"the  shield  of  faith,"  and  so  became  not  only  mighty,  but  invincible.  This 
accounts  for  all  his  high  qualities,  and  for  his  noble  bearing  throughout  the 
whole  occasion.  It  was  by  his  faith  that  he  obtained  a  good  report.  His 
allegiance  to  his  God,  his  spirit  of  self  sacrifice  for  the  cause  of  God,  his 
courage,  coolness,  zeal,  and  fearlessness  all  arise  from  his  strong  faith. 

When  he  left  his  companions  and  returned  alone,  the  thought  which  he  carried 
in  his  heart  was  the  terrible  one  of  taking  a  life,  and  that  in  cold  blood. 
It  was  too  the  life  of  a  king  surrounded  by  all  the  attendants  of  his  house- 
hold, and  chosen  troops  within  easy  call.  It  was  a  king  too  who  had  long  been 
able  to  crush  Ehud's  people.  It  was  to  be  done  in  open  day  and  in  the  very 
heart  of  the  palace.  He  knew  that  if  he  should  make  the  attempt  and  not 
176 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES.  chap.  iti. 


succeed,  his  own  life  was  certain  to  be  forfeited,  and  that  he  would  die  a  very 
cruel  death.  He  was  single  handed  in  the  project ;  he  had  no  backing  ;  nor 
any  place  of  shelter  to  flee  to.  The  deed  itself  was  of  the  most  tragic  character, 
and  in  all  but  universal  estimation,  would  be  reckoned  infamous.  Even  if 
successful  it  was  fitted  to  mark  his  name  with  a  stigma  to  future  ages.  Yet 
he  is  calm,  intrepid,  and  decided.  There  is  no  hesitation,  no  flurry,  not  a 
doubt  as  to  what  he  should  do — not  a  trace  of  blanching  seen  in  his 
countenance,  nor  a  moment's  misgiving  felt  in  his  heart.  He  is  in  no  hurry, 
neither  before  nor  after,  nor  does  he  show  the  slightest  discomposure  in  any 
of  the  steps  taken.  How  do  we  account  for  this  demeanour?  Was  it 
merely  natural  courage  ?  Was  he  a  fanatic,  or  a  desperado  ?  Was  he 
nothing  more  than  a  patriot  in  the  usual  sense  of  the  term  ?  Did  he  hold 
human  life  so  cheap,  and  regard  it  so  legitimate  a  thing  to  get  rid  of 
tyrants,  that  he  was  reckless  what  means  might  be  used  if  only  the  end 
could  be  accomplished  ? 

We  do  not  so  interpret  the  character.  Ehud,  we  believe,  acted  as  a  man 
who  felt  he  had  received  a  sacred  commission  from  Jehovah  to  execute  judg- 
ment, not  on  a  fellow  man  merely,  or  on  a  wicked  man,  but  on  one  who 
held  the  church  of  God  bound  down  under  oppression,  and  whom  it  was 
necessary  to  get  rid  of,  now  that  the  hour  was  come  for  setting  the  captive 
free. 

(3.)  The  Providence  of  God  co-operates  in  bringing  out  the  issue.  Ehud 
found  remarkable  facility  in  carrying  out  every  step  of  the  process.  He 
might  have  said,  *'  I  came ;  I  saw ;  I  conquered."  Not  an  obstacle 
remained  standing  in  the  way.  We  hear  of  no  demurring  on  the  part  of  his 
companions,  that  he  should  return  to  the  city  of  palm-trees,  nor  does  any 
suspicion  seem  to  have  been  awakened  among  the  enemy  by  his  return  visit. 
He  had  already  secured  favour  at  court  by  the  presentation  of  his  handsome 
gift.  The  eff'ect  of  his  statement  that  he  had  a  secret  errand  to  the  king 
(the  nature  of  which  he  was  not  bound  to  explain),  was  that  admission  was 
at  once  granted  to  the  royal  presence,  for  still  there  was  no  suspicion.  Nor 
in  Eglon's  own  mind  was  there  any  apprehension  of  danger,  for  he  gave  the 
signal  for  their  being  left  alone  together.  The  other  circumstances — his 
never  supposing  that  Ehud  came  as  an  enemy,  his  rising  up  to  meet  him, 
and  his  not  calling  aloud  for  help — all  seemed  arranged  for  the  successful 
execution  of  the  project.  Ehud's  firmness  of  nerve  and  coohiess  of  manner, 
his  locking  the  door  of  the  summer-parlour  and  abstracting  the  key,  his 
going  down  by  the  privy  stairs  into  the  porch,  and  calmly  passing  through 
such  of  the  attendants  as  might  be  there,  while  no  suspicion  of  anything 
wrong  having  been  done  was  excited,  seemed  all  to  be  providentially  arranged. 
And  still  more  striking  was  the  fact,  of  the  attendants  waiting  so  long, 
before  they  entertained  the  thought  that  something  wrong  had  occurred. 
Every  minute  of  time  during  which  they  waited  was  most  precious  to  Efmd, 
for  it  allowed  him  to  get  clear  away,  not  only  beyond  the  boundary  stones,  but 
also  to  escape  as  far  as  Mount  Ephraim,  before  any  arrangements  could  be  made 
for  pursuit. 

Farther,  the  fact  that  no  pursuit  was  made^  and  that  the  Moahites  were 
paralysed  from  taking  any  kind  of  energetic  action  by  the  death  of  their 
king,  specially  favoured  the  success  of  the  scheme.  All  this  was  crowned  by 
the  activity  which  was  awakened  on  the  other  hand  in  Israel,  the  spirit  of 
enthusiasm  which  in  a  moment  took  possession  of  all  classes,  and  the  vigour 
with  which  they  threw  themselves  on  the  astonished  Moabites,  ere  they  had 
time  to  recover  from  their  consternation.  In  all  these  items  there  was  not  a 
single  interruption  to  what  might  be  called  Ehud's  good  fortune,  or  as  we 
interpret  it,  not  a  single  break  in  the  chain  of  favouring  providential  circum- 

M  177 


OHAP.  m. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JVLQES. 


stances.  Had  there  been  only  two  or  three  particulars  propitious,  success  might 
either  have  not  come  at  all,  or  have  been  greatly  delayed,  and  so  the  hand  of 
God  might  not  have  been  distinctly  traceable  in  the  occurrences.  But  when  so 
many  circumstances  hang  all  together  in  a  chain,  and  several  of  them  were  less 
likely  to  have  happened  than  their  opposites,  while  yet  every  one  of  them 
directly  favoured  the  result  that  was  sought,  we  cannot  resist  the  conviction  that 
all  was  arranged  by  the  Ruler  of  Providence  to  effect  the  emancipation  of  his 
chosen  people. 


COMMENTS  AND  SUOOESTIONS.— Verses  12-80. 

God's  Messages. 


What  constitutes  a  message  from 
God  to  any  man?  Any  intimation 
of  His  will  made,  either  directly  to 
a  single  individual  alone,  or  generally 
to  a  number  of  persons  together,  with 
individual  application  to  each.  It  may 
be  made  : — (1.)  By  words,  written  or 
spoken.  (2.)  By  Providential  events 
or  dealings,  (3.)  By  the  workings  of 
conscience,  or  impressions  made  on  the 
mind  consistently  with  right  reason, 
or  it  may  be  in  other  ways  still. 
Scripture  throughout  is  generally  a 
Book  full  of  messages  from  God  to 
each  individual  reader. 

I.  God's  messages  are  of  different 
kinds- 

That  now  sent  from  God  to  Eglon 
by  the  hand  of  Ehud  was  of  a  very 
special  character.  It  was  determined 
altogether  by  Eglon's  relations  to  the 
people  with  whom  God's  name  was 
intimately  associated,  and  under 
whose  special  protection  they  were. 
It  was  one,  therefore,  of  an  awful 
character,  corresponding  with  these 
two  facts,  that  he  had  dared  to  stretch 
out  his  hand  to  crush  God's  church  on 
earth,  and  he  had  dared  to  blaspheme 
the  name  of  the  Holy  One  of  Israel. 
Hence,  it  was  a  message  of  doom. 
But  messages  addressed  to  men 
generally  are  of  all  different  kinds. 
In  God's  word  there  are  messages 
of:— 

1.  Reconciliation.      Sometimes   an 

individual  man  is  addressed,  as  in  the 

case  of  Nicodemus,  Zaccheus,  or  the 

jailor  of  Philippi.      More  frequently 

178 


men  in  masses  are  addressed  with  a 

strict  application  to  each  distinctly 
understood.  But  either  way,  this 
message  which  is  sent  to  all,  is  the  most 
important  of  all  messages,  and  gives 
colour  to  all.  Nothing  can  be  more 
important  for  guilty  men  than  to  hear 
that  God  is  willing  to  receive  them 
back  again  into  His  favour,  and  has 
actually  provided  means  complete  and 
effectual  for  their  being  so  received  ; 
and  that  now  He  calls  them,  commands 
them,  diXi^  pleads  with  them  to  become 
reconciled  to  Him.  The  sentiment  of 
2  Cor.  v.  18-21,  is  not  only  paralleled 
by  many  passages,  but  is  the  general 
drift  of  God's  addresses  to  men  every 
where  in  Scripture. 

2.  Repentance.  This  is  a  message 
which  God  sends  to  every  man  in 
connection  with  the  message  of  recon- 
ciliation, Matt,  iii.  2  ;  iv.  17  ;  Luke, 
xiii.  3,  5  ;  Acts,  xvii,  30 ;  xx.  21 ; 
ii.  38  ;  Isa.  i.  16-18  ;  Ezek.  xviii.  31,32; 
also  Dan.  iv.  27  ;  Jer.  iii.  12-14  ;  Ps. 
xcv.  8 ;  Joel,  ii.  12,  13,  etc.,  etc. 

3.  Faith.  That  every  man  all  the 
world  over  should  believe  in  Christ — is 
God's  message  in  chief  to  every  reader 
of  the  Bible,  and  every  hearer  of  the 
preached  Gospel.  Compliance  with  that 
message  carries  with  it  compliance  with 
all  others.  Hence  we  find  this  message 
put  in  the  fore  ground  in  every  part 
of  God's  word — for  the  most  part 
addressed  to  men  generally  with  an 
individual  application,  as  John  vi.  29  ; 
V.  24  ;  iii.  16-18,  36  ;  1  John,y.  11, 12. 
And  this  call  to  believe  which  is  so 


tiOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    JUDGES. 


CHAP.  m. 


often  made  is  always  accompanied  by 
the  assurance  that  pardon  of  sins,  peace 
with  God,  and  the  gift  of  eternal  life 
shall  follow  the  true  exercise  of  faith, 
John  vi.  47 ;  Mark  xvi.  16;  Rom.  v.  1 ; 
X.  4  ;  iii.  25,  26. 

4.  Life  and  Salvation.  These 
appear  in  many  forms,  but  are  all 
messages  from  God,  properly  so  called 
to  mankind  sinners  as  such.  These 
are  o^ers  of  pardon,  peace,  and  every 
blessing  through  Christ ;  invitations 
to  come  to  Christ ;  calls  to  accept  of 
Christ  as  a  Saviour  ;  promises  to  give 
every  blessing  from  first  to  last, 
which  the  blood  of  Christ  has  pro- 
cured ;  entreaties  to  accept  what  is 
put  within  our  reach  ;  expostulations 
employed  to  overcome  men's  back- 
wardness, or  reluctance  ;  and  threaten- 
ings  made  use  of  when  other  means 
fail,  so  that  men  may  be  appealed  to 
on  every  side  of  their  nature. 

5.  Gospel  privileges.  Such  as  : — 
(1.)  Access  to  God,  in  prayer  and 
otherwise ;  as  Heb.  iv.  14-16  ; 
X.  19-22 ;  Eph.  ii.  18.,  etc.,  etc. 
(2.)  Acceptance  with  God.  ^  This, 
dXongvi'xiXi  pardon,  constitutes  justih- 
cation  before  God,  as  in  Rom.  v.  1 ; 
iii.  24  ;  Gal.  ii.  16,  etc.  (3.)  Peace 
of  conscience.  Rom.  viii,  1  ;  viii.  6  ; 
Phil.  iv.  6,  7  ;  Ps.  cxix.  165,  etc. 
(4.)  Adoption.  All  who  receive 
Christ  to  become  theirs  are  greatly 
raised  in  rank,  and  cannot  be  regarded 
as  less  than  sons.  Hence,  John  i.  12  ; 
Gal.  iv.  4,  5,  etc.  (5.)  Indwelling  of 
the  Holy  Spirit.  Gal.  iv.  6 ;  Rom. 
viii.  9,  16,  17  ;  1  Cor.  vi.  19  ;  Gal.  v. 
25  ;  Ei)h.  V.  18,  etc.  (6.)  bruits  d,\A 
witnessing  of  the  Spirit,  such  as  looey 
hope,  joy,  gentleness,  humility,  etc. 
See  Gal.  v.  22,  23  ;  Rom.  viii.  16  ; 
1  John  iv.  7,  8 ;  Rom.  v.  2,  5  ; 
viii.  24;  xv.  13  ;  Phil.  iv.  4  ;  1  Cor. 
xiii.  4-7  ;  2  Tim.  ii.  24  ;  I.  Peter 
V.  5.  (7.)  Guidance.  Ps.  xxxii.  8  ; 
Ps.  Ixxiii.  24 ;  cvii.  6,  7 ;  Prov. 
ii.  1-5 ;  Ps.  xxxvii.  5 ;  Prov.  iv. 
13-15;  Acts  xvi.  6,  7,  9,  10,  etc. 
(8.)  Support  and  protection.  Ps. 
xxxvii.    3,    4 ;    xxxiv.   9,    10;     Pa, 


xxiii.    1,    2,    5 ;    Iv.    22 ;     Ps.    xci.  ; 
Ex.  xix.  4;  Deut.  xxxiii.  27-29. 

6.  Special  tokens  of  Divine  favour. 
Given  to  David  in  2  Sam.  vii.  ;  to 
Abraham  in  Gen.  xxii.  15-18  ;  to 
Jacob  in  Gen.  xxviii.  10-22,  and  in 
Gen.  xxxii.  28,  also  Rev.  iii.  5,  10, 
etc. 

7.  Deliverances.  Message  to 
Hezekiah  in  2  Kings  xix.  28,  32-34, 
35,  36  ;  Isa.  x.  24-34 ;  chariots  of 
fire  round  about  Eiisha,  2  Kings 
vi.  15-17  ;  to  Joram,  2  King  vii.  1, 
etc.  ;  to  Joram  and  other  two  kings, 
2  Kings  iii.  17,  18  ;  to  Joash,  King 
of  Israel,  2  Kings  xiii.  17,  etc. ;  to  Ahab, 

1  Kings  xviii.  44,  Ex.  iii.  7-10  ;  to 
Jehoshaphat,  2  Chron.  xx.  15,  etc. 

8.  Messages  of  warning  and  threat- 
ening to  the  false  prophet,  Jer. 
xxviii.  16,  17 ;  to  Hezeldah,  Isa. 
xxxviii.  1-5  ;  to  Pliaroah,  Gen.  xli. 
1-8,  25-36  ;  to  Eli,  1  Sam.  iii.  11-14  ; 
to    house    of    Israel,    Hos.  ii.   6,  7  ; 

2  King  viii.  11-13;  to  Ahaziah, 
2  Kings  i.  16  ;  also  adverse  provi- 
dences, such  as  sickness,  bereavements, 
defeating  of  schemes,  losses — each  and 
all  of  which  have  a  voice  of  reproof, 
warning  or  threatening. 

9.  Calls  to  Duty,-to  Saul  of  Tarsus, 
Acts  ix.  15,  16  ;  xxii.  21  ;  xiii.  2  ;  to 
Joshua,  chap.  i.  1-9  ;  to  the  different 
Judges  ;  to  smite  Midian,  Num.  xxxi. 
1-4  ;  to  anoint  a  king,  1  Sam.  viii. 
7-9,  22 ;  to  build  a  temple,  1  Chron.  xxii. 
7-11 ;  to  build  it  after  captivity,  Ezra, 
i.  1-4  ;  many  exhortations  to  duties. 

10.  Commands.  Messages  from  Moses 
to  Pharaoh,  from  Ex.  iv.  21-23  to  chap, 
xi.  8 ;  all  the  Decalogue  in  Ex.  xx. 
3-17  ;  the  laws  and  ordinances  given 
through  Moses  ;  all  the  commands  or 
messages  given  by  the  prophets,  priests, 
or  kings;  many  special  commands  given 
at  different  times. 

11.  Encouragement  to  Israel  at  Red 
Sea,  Ex.  xiv.  15,  16 ;  the  name  of 
Israel's     God,     Ex.     xxxiv.     6,    7 ; 

179 


OHAP.  in. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


Ebenezer,  1  Sam.  vii.  12;  comfort, 
Isa.  xl.  1,  2  ;  Isa.  Ixi.  3-11  ;  chaps. 
Ix.,  ]xii ;  to  Solomon  in  1  Kings 
ix.  2-9  ;  by  Haggai,  chap.  ii.  1-9  ; 
Isa.  xli.  10 ;  also  Ps.  xxxiv.  8,  9 ; 
Psalms  passim.  Hos.  xiv.  4,  calls,  to 
trust,  wait,  hope,  be  glad,  fear^  be 
grateful,  be  strong,  etc.  in  Psalms. 

12  Doom.  Eglon  as  here ;  Cain 
Gen.  iv.  12,  15  ;  Belshazzar,  Dan.  v.  ; 
Pharaoh  and  Egyptians,  Ex.  xi.  4-8, 
and  xiv.  13-31,  Antediluvians,  Gen.  vi. 
13  ;  Ahab,  1  Kings  xxi.  21-24  ;  also 
chap.  xxii.  28-37 ;  Prov.  i.  24-31  ; 
Prov.  xiv.  32  ;  Herod,  Acts  xii.  21-23. 

II.  Every  man  has  Divine  messages 
sent  to  him  personally.  In  the  Gospel, 
in  the  ordinary  Providence  of  God,  and 
in  the  workings  of  His  own  conscience 
every  man  has  messages  sent  to  him. 
Thus  Herod's  conscience  was  set  to  work 
Avhen  he  heard  of  the  works  done  by 
Jesus.  "It  is  John  !  it  is  John  ! " 
That  good  man's  blood  was  on  his 
hands  ;  and  every  moment  he  feared 
some  messenger  of  judgment  would 
visit  him  from  the  other  world.  Mark 
vi.  16.  Thus  too  did  Joseph's  brethren 
feel  as  to  the  past.     Gen.  xlii.  21,  22. 

(1.)  God  individualises  every  man. 
None  are  passed  over,  sooner  or  later 
every  man  hears  a  voice  saying  to  him, 
"I  have  a  message  from  God  unto 
thee."  None  are  lost  in  the  crowd. 
**  Some  one  hath  touched  me  "  said  the 
Saviour,  when  the  multitude  thronged 
around  Him.  He  knew  all  about  every 
individual  that  was  there  ;  and  all  over 
the  land  where  He  went.  He  knew  about 
every  case  without  being  told.  He 
knew  every  individual  person  on  land, 
as  he  knew  about,  every  individual  fish 
in  the  sea — where  he  was,  what  he  was, 
the  life  he  was  leading,  and  the  state 
of  his  heart  as  to  receiving  or  rejecting 
Christ.  He  knew  Zaccheus — his  person, 
name,  character,  wants,  wishes — all 
about  him,  though  for  the  first  time  He 
met  him  on  that  day  when  He  passed 
through  Jericho.  And  he  addressed 
him  accurately.  So  does  He  with  all — 
no  inaccurate  messages.  In  God's  vast 
universe  there  is  not  an  object  great, 
or  small  but  He  knows  in  its  place. 
180 


(2.)  The  wise  things  for  every  man 
is  to  act  as  if  he  were  the  only  person 
dealt  with.  As  the  Judge  dealt  with 
the  first  culprit,  so  does  He  deal  still 
with  all  culprits.  "Adam  !  where  art 
thou?"  every  man  should  count  on 
having  his  conduct  as  narrowly  scanned, 
and  his  purposes  and  motives  as  fully 
known,  as  if  he  were  the  only  subject 
of  God's  moral  government  in  the 
world.  We  are  expressly  told  that  at 
the  final  reckoning,  ''every  one  of  us 
shall  give  an  account  of  himself  unto 
God."  It  follows  that  every  one  now 
must  regard  the  great  message  of  sal- 
vation as  sent  to  him  personally,  the 
same  as  if  he  were  the  only  person 
addressed.  Men  may  be  addressed  in 
masses,  but  they  are  saved  only  as  in- 
dividuals. Multitudes  came  around 
the  Saviour,  and  He  spake  to  them  all 
together,  yet  the  good  experienced  by 
each  individual  hearer  depended  entirely 
on  how  he  heard  for  himself.  Of  the 
thousands  that  were  sometimes  present, 
every  individual  felt  that  the  message 
was  for  him  equally  as  if  he  had  formed 
the  sole  auditor — the  eye  of  the  Master 
was  upon  his  heart,  and  the  finger  of 
the  Speaker  was  pointed  to  him,  say- 
ing, "  Thou  art  the  man  !  "  And  on 
the  solemn  day  of  account,  every 
hearer  will  be  singled  out  and  dealt 
with  by  the  judge  as  if  he  were  the 
only  person  placed  at  the  bar. 

(3.)  The  messages  are  framed  so  as 
to  have  always  an  individual  appli- 
cation. "  Ho !  every  one  that  thirsteth ;" 
**  come  ye — he  that  hath  no  money, 
come  ;  "  "  incline  your  ear  and  come ;  " 
"  hear  {thou)  2a\Ayour  souH\idiX\  live  ;  " 
"if  any  man  thirst  let  him  come  to 
Me,"  etc.  ;  "if  any  man  hear  My 
voice  and  open  the  door,  I  will  come 
in  to  him,"  etc.  ;  ''him  that  coraeth  to 
Me  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out;" 
believe  {thou)  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
and  thou  shalt  be  saved;"  "he  that 
believeth  shall  be  saved,"  etc.  ;  "  who- 
soever will,  let  him  take,"  etc. 

III.  God's  messages  are  always  to  be 
reverently  received.  What  Mary  said 
to  the  servants  at  the  marriage  is  still 
said  to  all  who  have  the  privilege  of 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:    JUDGES,  ohap.  m. 


hearing  Christ's  voice — ** Whatsoever  with,  He  at  last  condemned  them  to 

He  saith  unto  you,  do  it."      "  Fear  wander  in  the  desert  for  life,  so  that 

God  and  keep  His  commandments^  for  they  never  reached  the  promised  rest 

this  is  the  whole  duty  of  man"    This  (Fs.  xcv.  10,  11).     When  Eli  did  not 

was  the  final  conclusion  to  which  tlie  set  forth   with   sufficient   reprobation 

wise  man  was  brought  in  all  his  medi-  the  evil   conduct   of  his  sons  in  the 

tations.     "  The  fear  of  the  L(yrd  is  the  priests'  office,  but  allowed  them  to  re- 

heginning  of  wisdom  ;  a  good  under-  main  in  the  priesthood,  notwithstand- 

standing  have  alt  they  that  keep  His  ing  their  grievous  sins,  God  punished 

commandments."    All  God's  messages  both  father  and  sons,  by  the  terrible 

are    "  holy,    just,    and    good,"   most  death  which  befell  the  latter  in  one 

reasonable  and  wise,  never  against  but  day  (1   Sam.   ii.  26-34,  and   iv.   17). 

al ways ybr  our  interests.  And  a  solemn  When  Saul  disobeyed  repeatedly  the 

caution  is  given  respecting  the  manner  commandment  of  the  Lord  by-and-bye 

in   which   God's  messages  should   be  "  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  departed  from 

received.     ''  If  thou  he  wise,  thoushalt  him,  and  an  evil  spirit  from  the  Lord 

be  wise  for  thyself;  hut  if  thou  scornesty  troubled  him  "  (1  Sam.  xvi.  14).     This 

thou  alone  shalt  hear  it"     Every  mes-  ended  in  his  going  to  a  sorceress  for 

sage  from  the  officer  must  be  obeyed  comfort,   and  finally  finding  a   tragic 

implicitly  by  the  soldier,  otherwise  the  death  in  the  battle-field  (chap.  xxxi.). 

battle  cannot  be  won  ;  and  he  would  The   curse    of  barrenness  in    Ahab's 

be  treated  as  a  deserter  from  duty  if  days  came  because  of  the  wide-spread 

he  did  not  yield  such  obedience.     The  idolatries  in  the  land,  and  the  refusal 

farmer  must  obey  the  messages  he  re-  of  both  king  and  people  to  hear  the 

ceives  from  God,  in  the  laws  of  nature.  Divine  messages  sent  to  them  (1  Kings 

if  he  would  reap  a  harvest  in  due  xviii.  18).     For  a  like  reason  destruc- 

season.     The  child  must  obey  the  mes-  tion   came   on    Ahab's    house   (chap, 

sages,  or  rules  for  his  guidance,  which  xxi.  20-23).     (See  also  2  Chron.  xxv. 

his  father  lays  down  for  him,  all  through  16  ;  xxxiii.  10, 11),  and  on  the  kingdom 

his  early  life,  if  he  would  receive  in  of  Israel  first,  and  then  of  Judah,  for 

the  long  run  the  great  promise  annexed  their     long  continued     idolatries     (2 

to    the    Fifth     Commandment.       To  Kings  xvii.    5-18 ;    2   Chron.    xxxvi. 

"hearken  to  God's  voice"  in  all  His  15-17  ;  Jer.  xxv.  3-11).     Destruction 

messages  was  the  one  thing  indispens-  of  Jerusalem  (Luke  xix.  41-44). 
able  to  securing   His  favour   in   the 

former  dispensation.     And  to  hearken  V.  Messages  of  good  to  the  righteous, 

to  the  messages  of  life  and  salvation  and  of  evil  to  the  wiclced  often  come 

sent  to  men  over  the   blood  of  His  together.     The  message  of  a  son  at  last 

Son,  is  the  one  condition  of  enjoying  to  be  born  to  Abraham,  and  so  the  first 

all  the  blessings  set  forth  under  the  step  taken  to  fultil  the  great  promises 

new  and  better  covenant.  made  to  him,  came  the  same  day  and 

by  the  same  hands  as  the  message  that 

IV.  It  is  dangerous  to  turn  a  deaf  the  hour  of  Sodom's  doom  was  at  last 

ear  to  God's  messages  (Prov.  xxix.  1).  come  (Gen.  xviii.  10,  with  verses  20-23). 

When  Pharaoh   would   not   listen  to  Here,  the  message  of  doom  to  Eglon 

God's  messages  though  warned  by  one  was  also  a  message  of  liberty  to  his 

plague  after  another,  he  was  at  last  captives.     Ehud  was  a  death-bearer  to 

visited  by  the  death  of  his  first  born  ;  the  one,  but  a  ''  Saviour"  to  the  other, 

and  when  after  a  pause,  he  would  not  The   death   of   the    first-born   meant 

listen  even  to   that,  he  was  drowned  deliverance  to  the  bond-men,  see  also 

and  all  his  host  in  the  waters  of  the  Isa.  x.  5-19,  with  verses  20,  21. 

Pved  Sea !      When    the  Israelites  in  The    condemnation   of   unbelievers 

their  wanderings  would  not  believe  in  always  goes  with  the  message  of  pardon 

God's  course  of  leading  them,  but  com-  and  eternal  life  to  those  who  believe, 

plained  of  every  new  trial  they  met  The  future  lot  of  the  righteous  and  thai. 

181 


OHAP.  m. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES, 


of  the  wicked  are  also  set  side  by  side 
in  parallel  columns  on  tbe  page  of 
Scripture,  Isa.  iii.  10,  11  ;  Matt,  xiii. 
41,  42,  with  43  ;  xxv.  34,  with  41,  also 
46.  Here  v.  20  with  28.  See  Ps. 
xxxvii.  18,  19  with  20  ;  9, 10  with  11 ; 
34-36  with  37. 

VI.  God  sends  messages  of  mercy 
before  He  sends  messages  of  judgment. 
He  would  prevent  the  necessity  of 
sending  the  latter  bysending  the  former 
first.  When  Moses  gave  the  final 
messages  of  his  God  to  the  people,  he 
narrates  first  the  blessings  which  shall 
come  on  the  people,  if  they  should  obey, 
and  afterwards  denounces  the  curses 
which  shall  come  on  them  on  their 
disobedience,  (Deut.  xxviii.  1-14,  with 
verses  15-68  ;  comp.  Lev.  xxvi.  3-13, 
with  verses  14-39).  In  the  Gospel 
dispensation,  God  uniformly  sends 
messages  of  peace  and  reconciliation 
to  all  classes  of  sinners  in  the  first 


instance,  calling  on  them  to  repent  and 
believe,  and  assuring  them  that  if  they 
do  so,  the  thunder  cloud  will  pass  away 
— but  adding  that  if  they  refuse  "the 
wrath  of  God  shall  abide  upon  them." 
The  present  is  ''the  day  of  merciful 
visitation  "  to  every  man ;  but  at  death 
comes  the  message  of  judgment  to  all 
the  impenitent  (Acts  xvii.  30,  31  ; 
Rev.  xxi.  6,  7,  with  8  ;  and  N.  T. 
passim). 

VII.  It  is  our  duty  and  our  wisdom 
to  be  always  ready  to  receive  theLord's 
messages.  Most  men  are  not  ready 
when  the  message  comes,  Luke  xvii., 
27-30  ;  xii.  20 ;  xvi.,  19,  with  23  ; 
Matt.  xxv.  5  ;  1  Thes.  v.  3 ;  1  Kings, 
xxii.  26,  27,  with  34-37  ;  Prov.  xiv. 
32  ;  Matt.  vii.  13  ;  2  Sam.  xviii.  9. 

Some  are  ready,  Luke  ii.  29,  30 ; 
2  Tim.  iv.  6-8;  Acts  vii.  59,  60; 
Heb.  xi.  13-16  ;  2  Cor.  v.  2,  9  ;  2  Sam. 
XV.  26  ;  Ch.  xxiii  5 ;  1  Sam.  iii.  18. 


Hard  Tests  of  Loyalty. 


I.  Fidelity  to  God's  cause  costs  much. 
If  a  man  would  be  faithful  to  God  in 
standing  up  for  the  cause  of  righteous- 
ness in  a  world  of  sin,  he  must  be  ready 
to  sacrifice  flesh  and  blood.  Christ  lajs 
it  down  as  a  rule,  that  we  must  "  bear 
a  cross,"  if  we  would  follow  after  him. 
He  even  goes  the  length  of  saying — 
"  If  a  man  come  to  me,  and  hate  not 
father  and  mother,  yea  and  his  own  life 
also,  he  cannot  be  my  disciple'  These 
judges  had,  each  of  them  to  take  his 
life  in  his  hand,  in  proving  his  fidelity 
to  his  God.  Most  of  them  were  at  the 
head  of  armies  in  the  field,  yet  these 
armies  were  small  in  comparison  with 
the  force  of  the  enemy  ;  and  all  hope 
of  victory  according  to  mere  natural 
calculation  was  taken  away.  But 
Ehud's  case  was  one  that  required  a 
greater  sacrifice  still.  He  had  to  do 
the  work  of  an  army  all  alone  ;  and  in 
this  respect  bore  some  analogy  to  the 
case  of  Samson.  The  work  assigned 
him  was  to  emancipate  the  church  by 
putting  to  death  the  persecutor.  The 
duty  was  a  stern  one.  It  was  most 
182 


revolting  in  itself — a  savage  and  cruel 
act,  having  all  the  appearance  of 
murder — the  murder  too  of  a  king, 
without  the  least  warning,  in  the 
midst  of  his  guards  and  the  entire 
responsibility  rested  on  him  alone. 
But  the  victim  was  the  oppressor  of 
God's  church,  and  Ehud's  eye  must 
not  spare.  The  question  was  how  far 
would  he  go  in  loyalty  to  God's 
command,  and  for  the  good  of  God's 
church.  Would  he  go  through  the 
most  disagreeable,  revolting  and  dan- 
gerous duty  without  flinching,  when 
it  became  a  question  of  duty  to  his 
God? 

II.  Examples  from  Scripture. 

(1.)  The  case  of  the  Levites,   When 

Moses  called  on  them  to  go  from  gate  to 
gate  of  the  camp,  and  slay  every  man, 
his  brother,  his  companion,  his  neigh- 
bour, and  even  his  children,  who  had 
been  guilty  of  the  capital  crime  of 
idolatry.  The  test  was  stern ;  but 
they  stood  it,  and  in  proof  of  their 
loyalty  to  their  God  no  less  than  3000 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


CHAP.  III. 


perished  in  this  way.  A  greater 
sacrifice  of  their  feelings  they  could 
not  make.  Hence  they  are  honoured 
ever  afterwards,  and  rewarded  with 
the  Divine  blessing,  Deut.  xxxiii.  9, 
with  Ex.  xxxii.  26-28. 

(2.)  The  case  of  Abraham  and  his 
son.    Gen.  xxii.  1-3,  10. 

(3.)  The  case  of  Aaron  making  no 
mourning  for  his  sons.     Lev.  x.  1-7. 

(4.)  The  case  of  Phineas.  Num.xxv. 
6-13. 

(5.)  The  case  of  Abraham  yielding  up 
the  richest  soil  to  Lot,  rather  than  have 
any  quarrel  ;  for  the  Canaan ite  was 
still  in  the  land,  and  strife  was  a 
reproach  to  religion.     Gen.  xiii.  9. 

(6.)  The  case  of  those  who  acquiesce 
in  the  destruction  of  all  that  are  dis- 
loyal to  the  Saviour.  1  Cor.  xvi. 
22  ;  Rev.  xix.  3 ;  Luke  xvi.  24-26  ; 
27-29 ;  30,  31. 

Ill,  General  examples. 

(1.)  At  a  critical  moment  in  the 
battle  of  Waterloo,  when  everything 
depended  on  the  steadiness  of  the 
soldiery,  the  iron  Duke  himself  rode  up 
to  one  of  the  bravest  regiments  in  the 
British  army,  to  encourage  them  in  the 
perilous  position  which  they  occupied. 
It  was  in  the  heat  of  the  flight,  when 
the  bullets  were  flying  thick  as  hail. 
Many  had  fallen,  and  many  werefalling. 
The  men  were  most  anxious  to  be 
allowed  to  meet  the  enemy  with  the 
bayonet.  And  when  they  saw  their 
commander  so  near,  the  cry  went  up, 
"  Let  us  at  'em,  my  lord !  let  us  at 
'em  !  "  "  Not  yet,  my  brave  men  " 
was  the  reply  ;  "  but  you  shall  have  at 
'em  soon  !  Stand  firm — stand  firm  !  " 
"  Enough  my  lord  !  "  was  the  rejoinder, 
**  We  stand  here  till  the  last  man  falls  !" 
Severe  was  the  test  of  loyalty,  and 
nobly  did  these  heroes  stand  the  test. 

(2.)  Memento  of  fidelity.  That 
fatal  day  on  which  Vesuvius,  at  whose 
feet  Pompeii  stood,  burst  out  into  an 
eruption  that  shook  the  earth,  a  senti- 
nel kept  watch  by  the  gate  which  looked 
to  the  burning  mountain,  and  amidst 
the  fearful  disorder  the  sentinel  had 
been  forgotten  ;  as  it  was  the  stern 
rule,  that  happen  whatmight,  the  senti- 


nels must  hold  their  posts  till  relieved, 
he  had  to  choose  between  death  and 
dishonour.  He  resolved  to  stand  by 
his  post.  Slowly  but  surely  the  ashes 
rise  on  his  manly  form ;  now  they 
reach  his  breast  ;  and  now,  covering 
his  lips  they  choke  his  breathing.  He 
was  faithful  to  his  soldier's  duty  unto 
death.  After  nearly  eighteen  centuries, 
they  found  his  skeleton  standing  erect 
in  a  marble  niche,  clad  in  its  rusty 
armour,  the  helmet  on  his  empty  skull, 
and  his  bony  fingers  still  closed  upon 
spear. 

(3.)  An  incident  of  the  Seikh  war. 
(1846).  At  the  celebrated  battle  of 
Ferozeshahr,  when  the  English  Empire 
in  India  hung  by  a  thread,  an  incident 
is  related  by  one  who  was  present  on 
the  field,  which  forcibly  illustrates  the 
stedfastness  and  loyalty  of  the  British 
troops  under  severely  trying  circum- 
stances. The  battle  had  been  raging 
throughout  the  day.  A  deadly  storm 
of  lead  and  iron,  consisting  of  round 
shot,  shells,  grape  and  musketry  had 
been  playing  on  the  small  British  army 
throughout  the  day,  while  mines  also 
were  sprung  under  their  feet.  Not  a 
man  had  tasted  food,  that  day,  nor  had 
had  a  drop  of  water  to  cool  his  parched 
lips.  A  fearful  night  followed.  The 
enemy  kept  firing  on  incessantly.  Tlie 
glare  of  the  burning  camp,  the  explosion 
ofmines,  shells,  and  ammunition  wagons, 
mixed  with  the  wild  cries  of  the  enemy, 
the  huzzas  of  our  men,  and  the  groans 
of  the  wounded  and  dying — the  tramp- 
ling of  men  and  horses,  and  the  con- 
tinual plunging  of  the  shot  among  us, 
altogether  formed  a  scene  of  terrific  and 
awful  grandeur  which  it  is  impossible 
to  describe. 

Many  a  gallant  fellow  was  lying  in 
those  silent  squares,  bleeding  to  death, 
yet  not  a  murmur  was  heard.  Among 
other  cases,  a  man  of  a  cowardly  spirit 
was  struck  with  a  grape-shot  in  the 
shoulder,  receiving  afiesh  wound.  The 
foolish  fellow  wished  to  get  out  of  the 
square,  and  would  not  be  quiet,  but 
kept  on  telling  everyone  he  was 
wounded,  as  if  his  wound  was  of  more 
consequence  than  that  of  anybody  else. 
Being  refused   by  a  Sergeant  of  his 

183 


CHAP.  III.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    JUDGES. 


company,    he    went    to    his    Colour-  Colonel    commanding    the    regiment, 

Sergeant,   saying,    "  Sir  !  I  am  badly  who  was  still  on  horseback.      He  was 

wounded;  let  me  go  out  of  the  square,  only    two     yards    distant    from    me. 

that  I  may  get  a  surgeon."     The  reply  **  Sir  !  "      the     man     cried,     "I    am 

was,  "  Lie  down  where  you  are,  sir  ! —  wounded."     "  Oh  !  you  are  wounded, 

look  at  me,"  lifting  up  his  leg  without  are  you  ?"  said  the  Colonel.      "And 

a  foot !       But   he    was    determined  so  am  I  ! "     1  then  perceived  that  he 

to   gain  his   point,    and    came    to   a  was  wounded  just  below  the  knee,  and 

Lieutenant,  who  commanded  his  com-  the  -blood  having  filled  his  boot,  was 

pany,  and  was  lying  near  me,  saying,  trickling  from  the  heel  to  the  ground  ! 

**  0,  sir  !  I  wish  you  would  give  orders  The     Assistant     Sergeant-Major    was 

to  let  me   out  of  the   square — I  am  watching  the  man,  and  being  annoyed 

wounded."  "  So  am  I,"  coolly  answered  at  the   disturbance    he  was   causing, 

the    Lieutenant,   at    the    same    time  determined  to  stop  it.      He  ran  and 

lifting   up  his  left  arm,  which   hung  seized  him,  and  was  about  to  give  him 

shattered  by  his  side.     Though  he  was  a  severe  reprimand.      But  just  at  that 

so  near  me,  I  knew  not  till  then  that  instant,   a   large    cannon-ball   carried 

he  was  hurt.  away  both  his  head  and  that  of  the 

The  man  still  persisted,  and  went  cowardly     complainer    at    the     same 

to  a  higher    ofiicer    with    the    same  moment — so  killing  both  !      What  a 

request,    who    replied,     "I    too    am  severe    test  to  the   loyalty  of  those 

wounded  as  well  as  you."      Still  he  noble  troops  1 
persevered,    and    came    now    to   the  [An  Eye-witness^ 


Period  of  Rest. — Verses  30,  31. 

30.  The  land  had  rest  fourscore  years  ]  This  must  mean  the  whole  country, 
and  not  merely  the  tribes  of  Benjamin,  Judah,  and  Ephraim.  The  fourscore 
years  would  date  from  the  deliverance  by  Ehud  till  the  oppression  by  Jabin. 
During  some  part  of  that  long  course,  Ehud  died  ;  and  it  may  have  been  a 
considerable  time  after  his  death  that  the  invasion  by  Jabin  commenced.  The 
mention  of  Ehud's  name  in  chap.  iv.  1  does  not  mean  that  Ehud  had  just  died, 
open  sin  again  began,  and  the  scourge  by  that  northern  power  was  sent — all 
simultaneously.  But  the  case  stood  thus :  Ehud,  while  he  lived,  was  a  check  on 
the  open  exhibition  of  idolatry,  which  all  the  time  had  been  more  or  less  secretly 
cherished  in  the  hearts  of  most  of  the  people.  On  his  death,  the  obstruction 
being  removed,  the  tide  again  began  to  flow,  and  gradually  reached  high-water 
mark.  But  then  there  was  no  Ehud  to  roll  it  back.  Therefore  the  Divine 
judgments  again  fell  on  the  land.  This  may  have  been  a  considerable  time 
after  Ehud  was  dead. 

It  is  instructive  to  notice,  what  a  beneficent  influence  for  good  a  single 
righteous  man  at  the  helm  of  power,  may  exercise  fn  giving  a  tone  to  the 
character  of  his  people  and  his  age.  If  he  is  but  faithful  to  his  trust,  and 
skilful  at  the  helm,  he  may,  under  the  Divine  blessing,  steer  the  vessel  safely 
through  all  the  mountain  waves  that  threaten  to  engulph  her,  and  in  due  time 
bring  her  into  a  smooth  sea,  with  canvas  spread  to  a  favouring  breeze,  giving 
promise  of  a  prosperous  voyage  and  a  rich  harvest  of  results  to  all  concerned. 
On  this  topic  we  do  not  now  dwell,  as  it  will  come  under  review  again.  But 
meanwhile  it  speaks  much  for  Ehud,  that  he  was  so  much  missed  after  he  was 
gone.  This  is  one  of  the  best  testimonies  a  man  can  have — that  when  he  is  gone 
things  go  wrong,  and  it  is  hard  to  get  one  to  fill  his  place. 

184 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    JUDGES.  chap.  m. 


Shamgar. 

After  him  was  Shamgar,  the  son  of  Anath.]  Not  after  his  example  [Casset], 
meaning,  in  like  manner  as  Ehud  did  so  did  Shamgar.  Nor  yet  does  it  imply, 
that  after  Ehud  was  dead,  Shamgar  came  as  his  successor.  But  the  next 
deliverance  in  the  series  was  that  wrought  through  the  instrumentality  of 
Shamgar.  Some  suppose  that  this  exploit  of  Ehud  took  place  during  Ehud's  time, 
at  some  part  of  the  period  of  the  eighty  years.  [Jewish  Expositors  generally, 
Cassel,  etc.]  This  is  most  unlikely,  both  because  Ehud  while  alive  acted  as  the 
protector  of  the  land,  and  also  because  the  times  of  Shamgar  were  times  of  great 
oppression  (chap.  v.  6),  which  was  not  true  of  Ehud's  time.  It  is  indeed  all  but 
certain  that  Ehud  was  dead,  and  that  another  time  of  oppression  had  come  on 
the  land,  when  there  was  no  Ehud  to  stand  in  the  gap.  The  people  were  again 
going  on  sinning,  and  God  was  again  beginning  to  smite  them  with  the  rod — 
Jabin  in  the  north,  and  the  Philistines  in  the  south.  Anath,  some  suppose  to 
be  the  same  with  Anathoth,  which  was  a  sacerdotal  city  of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin, 
a  few  miles  to  the  north  of  Jerusalem,  and  the  birthplace  afterwards  of  the 
prophet  Jeremiah. 

Slew  of  the  Philistines  six  hundred  men  with  an  ox  goad.]  The  Septuagint 
uses  the  word  dpoTpoirovs,  or  the  plough  handle — that  part  which  the  ploughman 
holds  in  his  hand,  and  with  which  he  guides  the  plough.  But  the  Tar  gum 
version  seems  more  correct,  viz.,  the  ''  prick  "  against  which  the  oxen  "  kicked  " 
when  struck  with  it — the  ox-goad  proper.  Jamieson  says  "  this  implement  was 
eight  feet  long,  and  about  six  inches  in  circumference.  It  is  armed  at  the  lesser 
end  with  a  sharp  prong  for  driving  the  cattle,  and  on  the  other  with  a  small  iron 
paddle  for  removing  the  clay  which  encumbers  the  plough  in  working.  Such  an 
instrument,  wielded  by  a  strong  arm,  would  do  no  mean  execution.  He  may, 
however,  have  been  only  the  leader  of  a  band  of  peasants,  who,  by  means  of  such 
implements  of  labour  (and  in  particular  the  ox-goads),  as  they  could  lay  hold  of 
at  the  moment,  achieved  this  heroic  exploit." 

The  Greeks  called  it  /SovTrXr]^.  With  such  an  instrument,  king  Lycurgus  is 
said  to  have  attacked  the  wandering  Bacchus  and  his  followers.  In  like  manner 
Camillus  and  Curius  went  from  the  plough  to  save  Rome  from  the  Gauls.  A 
tradition  in  Holstein  says,  that  in  the  Swedish  time  a  peasant  armed  with  a 
pole  put  to  flight  a  multitude  of  Swedes,  who  had  entered  his  house  and 
threatened  to  burn  it. 

He  also  delivered  Israel.]  There  is  something  peculiar  in  the  manner  in 
which  these  victories  of  the  judges  are  gained.  It  is  not  in  the  exact  proportion 
in  which  the  spirit  of  heroism  is  possessed.  There  is  a  deeper  element  than 
bravery,  or  skill,  or  physical  force.  There  is  the  element  of  piety.  The  victors 
were  more  than  patriots.  They  were  men  of  faith.  While  ardently  devoted  to 
their  country,  they  saw  in  their  land  a  sacred  possession  given  them  by  their 
God  as  a  pledge  of  His  covenant  love  ;  and  they  saw  in  their  people  the  church 
of  the  living  God,  among  whom  He  had  planted  His  institutions  and  His  laws. 
Faith  in  the  promises  He  had  given  His  Church  and  people  lay  at  the  root  of 
all  their  action,  both  as  re,<7ards  the  object  they  had  in  view,  and  the  confidence 
of  victory  which  they  cherished.  "  The  Lord  of  hosts  is  with  us,  the  God  of 
Jacob  is  our  refuge.' 

It  is  for  this  reason  that  Shamgar's  act  receives  an  honourable  mention  in  this 
Book.  It  was  an  act  of  deliverance  wrought  for  the  Church  of  God  in  an  evil 
time  ;  it  was  done  on  the  spot  where  his  lot  was  cast ;  it  was  done  of  his  own 
free  will  when  no  others  appeared  ready  to  repair  the  breach  ;  it  was  done 
against  the  greatest  odds ;  and,  above  all,  it  was  done  in  faith — that  sacred 

185 


CHAP.  III.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDQE8. 


feature  of  character  by  which  "  all  the  elders  obtained  a  good  report."  On  thia 
account  a  single  verse  is  added  to  notice  this  noble  act  of  a  man  of  true  faith  ; 
and  through  this  single  verse  his  name  "will  be  held  in  everlasting  remembrance." 
More  imperishable  is  the  monument  thus  raised  to  an  otherwise  humble  man,  than 
to  those  mighty  Egyptian  monarchs  who  have  the  Pyramids  for  their  memorial. 
God  has  always  a  few  names,  in  a  backsliding  age,  of  those  who  are  loyal  to  His 
cause,  to  show  that  His  Spirit  has  not  left  His  Church  on  earth.  And  now  there 
was  at  least  one  man  of  the  Joshua  and  Caleb  spirit  still  in  the  land.  Though 
only  one  man  comes  to  the  front,  there  may  have  been,  as  in  Elijah's  day,  other 
7000  hidden  behind  the  curtain,  who  did  not  bow  the  knee  to  Baal. 

Was  Shamgar  entitled  to  the  honourable  distinction  of  being  a  Judge 
over  the  people  of  God  ?  Many  answer  in  the  negative,  because  it  is  not  said, 
"  the  Lord  raised  him  up,"  nor  that  "  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  came  upon  him  ;  " 
nor  is  he  said  to  have  ruled,  but  only  to  have  gained  a  victory  with  small 
means.  He  is  also  passed  over  in  Chap.  iv.  1.  Yet  his  name  stands  in  the 
same  honourable  roll,  ("  After  Ehud  rose  Shamgar,"  etc.)  Few  could  doubt  on 
reflection,  that  it  was  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  coming  upon  him  that  led  him  to 
do  as  he  did  The  value  of  his  act  affected  the  whole  land,  for  it  was  not 
merely  the  slaughter  of  a  few  hundred  men  in  some  isolated  foray  ;  it  seems 
rather  to  have  been  the  nipping  of  an  invasion  in  the  bud — arresting  a  calamity 
at  its  outset,  which  but  for  this  timely  extinction  might  have  overspread  the 
whole  country.  There  can  be  little  doubt,  that  if  Shamgar  had  not  stood  for- 
ward to  the  rescue,  this  incursion  of  the  Philistines  would  have  rapidly  over- 
shadowed the  nation. 

Besides,  it  is  expressly  stated,  that  he  "  delivered  Israel "  like  the  other 
Judges.  The  office  of  a  **  judge**  in  that  age  was  not  to  administer  justice  in 
the  ordinary  way.  It  was  rather  to  act  the  part  of  a  "  saviour ,"  (so  it  is 
expressly  termed  in  Neh.  ix.  27) — one  who  accomplishes  a  deliverance  on  the 
foundation  of  righteousness.  He  was  to  lead  the  people  to  penitence,  not  only 
to  sorrow  for  the  past,  but  to  reformation  for  the  future.  His  duty  was  to  see 
that  the  law  of  God  be  kept  by  the  people  as  the  only  secure  foundation  for  a 
lasting  peace.  On  this  footing,  all  the  *' judges"  were  types  of  the  Saviour, 
whose  great  work  in  this  world  was  to  work  out  an  eternal  redemption  on  the 
ground  of  perfect  righteousness — to  make  "  grace  reigfi  through  righteousness 
unto  eternal  lifey*  etc.  It  is  easy  for  God  to  work  deliverance  for  any  people 
when  His  law  is  kept.  When  that  is  not  done,  He  cannot  deliver,  because  He 
cannot  offer  a  slight  to  His  own  character. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

TEE  SAD  HISTORY  OF  SIN  CONTINUED.-- Verses  1-11. 

Critical  Notes. — 1.  And  the  children  of  Israel  again  did  evil,  etc.]  They  "  continued  to  do 
evil."  After  all  the  solemn  and  affecting  dealing  God  had  had  with  them,  no  practical  lessons 
were  learned.  They  are  as  stubborn  as  ever  in  resisting  Jehovah  and  going  after  idols.  There 
is  a  causal  connection  supposed  between  the  death  of  Ehud  and  the  renewed  rebellion  of  the 
people  against  their  God.  When  the  hand  that  held  it  back  is  removed,  the  needle  of  the  heart 
turns  to  the  old  pole  of  idol-worship.  This  implies  that  Ehud,  while  he  lived,  was  a  power  in 
the  land,  and  had  long  been  successful  in  stemming  the  torrent  of  evil,  If  so,  this  is  very 
unlike  the  character  of  a  man  who  could  commit  an  atrocious  murder,  as  so  many  commentators 
itippose  he  did  on  Eglon.  Shamgar  is  not  mentioned,  because  his  date  was  subsequent  to  this. 
Also,  he  did  not  deliver  from  a  long  subjugation  of  the  land  by  an  enemy,  when  the  people  bad 

186 


EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES,  ohap.it. 


been  for  a  series  of  years  in  bondap^e.  Rather,  his  work  was  to  turn  back  the  first  wave  of 
oppression,  and  prevent  it  happening  at  all.  Though  a  new  generation  had  sprung  up,  the 
identity  of  the  people  as  a  whole  is  still  assumed  ;  and  so  it  ever  is. 

2.  And  the  Lord  sold  them  into  the  hand  of  Jabin,  etc.]  He  gave  them  up  helplessly  into 
his  power,  leaving  him  to  do  with  them  as  if  they  were  his  own  property  (see  Notes  on  chap.  iii.  8). 
Considerably  more  than  a  century  and  a  half  before  this  period,  we  hear  of  another  Jabin,  king 
of  Hazor,  whom  Joshua  defeated,  destroyed  all  his  people,  and  burnt  his  city  with  fire  (see 
Josh.  xi.  1,  8-11).  But  the  name  Jabin  was  probably  the  hereditary  and  official  title  of  the 
kings  of  Hazor.  It  means  "the  discerning,"  or  "the  wise — the  intelligent"  (Speaker's  Com.). 
"  Hazor  "  means /ori,  or  castle.  The  Hebrew  word  means  anything  enclosed  ;  but  in  the  kindred 
Semitic  languages,  the  root  means  to  wall  round — to  besiege,  It  was  a  common  name.  In  our 
own  language,  the  name  Chester  is  similarly  common,  as  in  Gloucester,  "Leicester,  Cirencester,  etc. 
Its  position  seems  to  have  been  near  the  Lake  Merom,  and  was  within  the  territory  assigned  to 
the  tribe  of  Napthali,  though  there  is  great  difference  of  opinion  as  to  its  precise  site.  It  was  a 
strong  fortress  both  by  nature  and  art,  and  standing  as  it  did  on  a  hill  surrounded  by  a  plain,  it 
was  specially  suitable  as  a  stronghold  for  a  people  whose  main  reliance  was  upon  horses  and 
chariots.  Hazor  had  now  been  rebuilt,  and  become  again  the  head  of  the  northern  Canaanitish 
nations.  The  other  cities  had  also  long  recovered  their  old  strength.  But  Hazor  was  the  chief 
city  in  northern  Palestine.  Jabin  appears  to  have  been  hoping  that  some  happy  accident  would 
one  day  put  it  in  his  power  to  win  back  the  territories  of  which  his  predecessors  had  been  dis- 
possessed by  Joshua.  Sisera  ("meditation  ")  was  his  commander-in-chief — a  name  long  a  great 
terror  to  Israel  (1  Sam.  xii.  9  ;  Ps.  Ixxxiii.  9).* 

"  ffarosheth  of  the  nations"  (Josh.  xii.  23).  This  word  nations  has  been  taken  to  mean  a 
collection  of  peoples  of  various  nationalities  fused  into  one  state,  as  the  kingdom  of  Mercia  was 
in  early  English  history.  **  Harosheth  "  signifies  arsenal  or  workmanship — cutting  and  carving, 
whether  in  stone  or  wood  (Exod.  xxxi.  5),  and  so  might  be  applied  to  the  place  where  such  works 
are  carried  on.  The  conjecture  is,  that  this  being  a  great  timber  district,  rich  in  cedars  and  fir 
trees,  and  near  Great  Zidon  (Josh.  xi.  8),  Jabin  kept  a  large  number  of  oppressed  Israelites  at 
work  in  hewing  and  preparing  it  at  Harosheth  for  transport  to  Zidon  ;  and  that  these  wood 
cutters,  armed  with  axes  and  hatchets,  formed  the  soldiers  of  Barak's  army. 

3.  Cried  unto  the  Lord,  etc.]  (See  Notes  on  chap.  iii.  9),  comp.  Josh.  xvii.  16.  The  chariots 
of  iron  were  a  very  formidable  arm  of  fighting  in  those  days.  Mightilyl  or  with  crushing  force 
(1  Sam,  ii  16).  The  same  as  tyrannically.  The  word  V^nb  is  the  same  with  that  iised  in 
Ex.  iii.  9,  meaning  oppressed  cruelly.  Their  task  work  in  hewing  timber  was  like  that  of  their 
ancestors  in  making  bricks. 

4.  Deborah,  a  prophetess,  judged  Israel,  etc.]  Deborah,  a  prophetic  woman.  She  was  a 
prophetess,  like  Miriam  (Ex.  xv.  20),  Huldah  (2  Kings  xxii.  14).  This  character  which  she  had 
was  the  reason  for  her  taking  the  lead  in  this  emergency.  The  prophetic  state  was  more  than  a 
Divine  ecstasy,  a  high  poetic  enthusiasm  under  the  influence  of  which  the  praises  of  God  are 
spoken  {Cassel).  It  was  a  being  made  the  organ  of  communicating  the  Divine  will  to  men — a 
spokesman  for  God.  She  was  commissioned  to  act  both  as  judge  and  as  prophetess.  Tiie  name 
Deborah  signifies  "  a  bee  ;  "  and  she  is  described  as  a  burning  woman — "  the  wife  or  a  woman  of 
Lapidoth,"  torches — a  woman  of  a  torch-like  spirit.  She  was  a  person  of  fire-bearing  character 
and  intense  enthusiasm.  Some  say  she  was  the  wife  of  Barak,  which  signifies  lightning. 
[^Edersheim.l     "  She  was  a  honey  bee  to  her  friends,  but  a  stinging  bee  to  her  enemies."  [Fausset.l 

5.  She  dwelt  under  the  palm-tree  of  Deborah,  etc.]  She  sat  in  judgment  (Ps.  ix.  4)  under  the 
Deborah  palm — so  called  because  Rebekah's  nurse  was  here  buried  (Gen.  xxxv.  8)  in  Mount 
Ephraim,  between  Kamah  and  Bethel.  Ramah  was  built  on  a  round  liill,  five  miles  east  of 
Gibeon  ;  and  a  little  to  the  north  of  it,  in  the  deep  hot  valley  between  Eamah  and  Bethel,  was 
the  palm-tree  of  Deborah.  The  ordinary  place  for  giving  judgment  was  the  gate  (Ruth  iv.  1,  2), 
but  this  retired  spot  was  suitable  to  the  unsettled  times. 

6.  Barak,  the  son  of  Ahinoam,  of  Kedesh-Naphtali.]  Barak  signifies  lightning,  an  appropriate 
name  for  a  warrior  ;  and  there  was  more  in  names  in  those  days  than  there  is  now.  Some  call 
him  the  Boanerges  of  the  Old  Testament;  but  that  is  too  much,  for  it  required  not  a  little 
rousing  to  bring  him  up  to  the  high  mark  of  the  character  known  by  that  name.  Kedesh  was  a 
Levitical  city  of  refuge  assigned  to  the  Gerahon  division.  It  stood  on  a  high  ridge  jutting  out 
from  the  hills,  at  the  western  edge  of  Lake  Huleh,  the  marshy  basin  through  which  the  Jordan 
passes  into  the  sea  of  Merom.  It  was  in  Naphtali  (Josh.  xix.  37).  The  Lord  God  of  Israel.] 
The  name  of  the  God  who  made  a  covenant  with  Abraham  and  his  seed,  and  who  brought  up 
Israel  with  high  hand  out  of  Egypt.  Go  and  draw  toward  Mount  Tabor,  etc.]  Draw  PiZWlL^, 
This  is  rendered  very  differently  by  commentators.     Some — Approach  to.     But  the  preposition 

*  The  name  Sisera  occurs  among  the  Nethinim,  or  servants  of  the  temple,  who  returned  from 
Babylon  with  Zerubbabel  (Ezra  ii.  53) ;  also  in  Neh.  viL  54,  55,  it  is  associated  with  the  nam* 
Uarsha,  as  if  conneoted  with  Harosheth. 

187 


CHAP.  ly.  HOMJLETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 

is  in  or  upon.  Others — Draw  out  or  prol(mq.  As  sound  of  trumpet  would  do,  when  the  people 
were  summoned  to  come  forward  to  Mount  Tabor,  just  as  the  people  were  required  to  meet 
Ehud  at  Mount  Ephraim.  Others  make  it — draw  out,  or  extend  the  military  force  to  be 
employed.  Others  regard  it  as  a  command  to  enlist  or  draft  all  the  willing  among  the  people, 
or  persuade  the  people  by  attractive  methods.  Keil  renders  it — proceed  one  after  another  in  a 
long-drawn  train  (chap.  xx.  37  ;  Ex.  xii.  21) — referring  to  the  captain,  and  the  warriors  drawing 
after  him.  This  is  near  it.  JBut  Lias  expresses  it  better — ^^  Draw  out  upon  Mount  Tabor y 
We  understand  that  Mount  Tabor  was  the  point  of  rendezvous  toward  which  Barak  was  to  lead 
his  troops  gradually,  until  Jehovah  had  led  Sisera  with  his  host  to  the  brook  Kishon.  Yet  more 
precisely  the  meaning  seems  to  be — draw  in  small  detachments,  one  after  another,  men  willing  to 
figlit  for  their  country,  until  10,000  are  assembled,  as  rapidly  as  can  be  done,  when  all  Israel  is 
scattered,  and  as  secretly  as  can  be  done,  that  Sisera  may  not  prevent  their  assembling.  Draw  to 
Tabor,  not  to  Kedesh,  for  that  town  is  too  near  Hazor,  and  besides  the  mountain  named  is  a 
better  centre  for  a  rendezvous,  being  considerably  farther  south.  Mount  Tabor] — now  called 
Jehdet  2'itr  — rises  on  the  east  from  the  plain  of  Esdraelon,  where  Sisera's  chariots  would  be 
assembled,  and  was  a  convenient  rallying  point  for  all  in  Napthali  and  Zebulon  on  the  north,  and 
for  Issachar  and  Munasseh  on  the  south.  It  stands  by  itself  on  the  plain,  a  truncated  cone  of 
limestone,  with  flat  top,  an  area  of  a  quarter  of  a  mile  in  length,  and  half  that  in  breadth.  Round 
the  circumference  ate  the  ruins  of  a  thick  wall  of  masonry,  and  there  are  the  foundations  of 
private  dwellings  within.  The  height  is  estimated  from  1000  to  3000  feet,  and  it  requires  an 
hour  to  ascend  it.  The  sides  to  the  very  top  are  covered  with  verdure  and  clumps  of  trees,  oaks, 
olives,  and  sycamores,  with  many  plants  and  flowers.  It  overtops  all  the  neighbouring  hills 
(Jer.  xlvi.  18),  and  commands  a  magnificent  view  of  Northern  Palestine,  especially  to  the  west. 
It  may  have  been  the  Mount  of  Transfiguration,  as  the  reasoning  to  the  contrary  consists  quite 
as  much  of  strong  assertion  as  of  clear  evidence. 

7.  And  I  will  draw  unto  thee  to  the  river  Kishon,  Sisera,  etc.]  Speaking  in  the  Spirit  she 
says,  I  will  draw — meaning  God  will  draw  Sisera  to  Kishon.  This  word  signifies  hent  like  a  bow, 
and  is  so  called  from  its  winding  course.  It  was  a  sort  of  winter  torrent  [Lias]  like  Kedron 
(John  xviii.  1).  It  is  perennial  for  eight  miles,  fed  from  sources  along  the  whole  plain  of  Jezreel. 
It  takes  its  rise  near  Mounts  Tabor  and  Gilboa.  Though  dry  in  summer,  a  rushing  stream  pours 
down  in  it  in  winter.  In  the  valley  on  both  sides  of  this  river,  or  brook,  called  the  plain  of 
Jezreel,  the  greatest  battles  have  been  fought  for  the  possession  of  Palestine,  from  time  imme- 
morial down  to  recent  times.  Thither  God  was  now  drawing  Sisera  and  his  host  as  "  the  sheaves 
into  the  floor,  that  the  daughter  of  Zion  might  arise  and  thresh  "  (Micah  iv.  12,  13).  This  was 
typical  of  the  drawing  of  the  forces  of  Antichrist  to  their  place  of  doom  (Rev.  xvi.  14,  16 ; 
xix.  19,  20).  God  draws  His  people  to  their  salvation  (verse  6  ;  John  vi.  44)  and  the  ungodly 
to  their  destruction  (1  Kings  xxii.  19-23). 

8.  If  thou  wilt  go  with  me  then  I  will  go,  etc.]  These  words  spoken  to  a  woman  are  not 
very  like  a  Boanerges.  Barak's  faith  was  manifestly  weak,  like  Gideon  (vi.  15,  3d),  and  Moses 
(Ex.  iv.  10,  13),  and  Peter  (Matt.  xiv.  30,  31),  showing  that  the  best  of  men  are  but  men 
at  the  best.  God's  command  and  promise  ought  to  have  been  enough  (verses  6,  7).  Yet  God 
has  not  left  His  name  out  of  the  list  of  faitb,  any  more  than  that  of  Samson  (Heb.  xi.  32-34). 
To  show  that  God  has  regard  to  faith,  even  when  it  is  only  like  a  grain  of  mustard  seed. 
Yet  we  must  not  underrate  Barak.  He  did  not  look  on  Deborah  so  much  as  a  woman,  as  on  one 
who  had  the  Spirit  of  God.  And  this,  be  it  man  or  woman,  meant  an  all- conquering  strength. 
It  did  however  look  a  little  like  the  superstitious  feeling  of  the  Israelites,  when  they  thought 
themselves  safer  by  taking  the  ark  into  the  field,  than  by  simply  trusting  in  the  promise  of  help 
assured  by  their  God  on  their  obedience  (1  Sam.  iv.  3-5).  Some  class  Barak  as  an  illustration 
of  the  phrase,  "out  of  weakness  made  strong"  (Heb.  xi.  34).  He  needed  some  visible  presence 
to  strengthen  his  faith  in  the  invisible  power.  We  too  often  need  something  of  sight  to  help  our 
weak  faith — the  touch  of  our  Father's  hand  in  the  dark,  to  show  that  He  is  with  us.  But  God 
had  compassion  on  his  imperfect  faith,  and  accepted  him,  seeing  "the  root  of  the  matter  was  in 
him."  Ten  thousand  men,  and  these  undisciplined,  was  after  all  but  a  feeble  wand  to  be  used 
against  a  mighty  host  like  that  commanded  by  Sisera.  It  was  like  "the  worm  Jacob  employed 
to  thresh  the  mountains.*'  But  all  the  battles  of  God's  cause  are  battles  of  faith — not  however 
to  the  exclusion  of  the  use  of  rational  means,  within  the  limits  prescribed  by  God's  Providence. 
2rapp  says,  the  soldiers'  motto  should  be,  Negue  timidi,  neque  temer^. 

9.  Into  the  hand  of  a  woman.]  This  was  Jael,  though  Barak  might  suppose  it  was  Deborah 
herself.  The  honour  was  certainly  denied  to  Barak.  Deborah  appears  to  have  been  a  remark- 
able character,  full  of  the  true  fire  of  enthusiasm,  and  just  the  very  person  to  stir  the  embers  of  a 
dying  faith  among  the  people.  It  is  wonderful  sometimes  how  a  whole  nation  will  instinctively 
follow  a  single  bold  flashing  spirit,  with  resolute  purpose,  and  mind  fully  made  up,  pursuing  what 
seems  to  it  the  J3ivine  path  of  duty.  Her  influence  arose  not  from  her  social  status,  though  that 
was  considerable,  if  we  are  to  believe  the  Chaldeeparaphrast,  who  tells  us  that  she  possessed  palm- 
treea  in  Jericho,  parks  (or  paradises)  in  Ramah,  and  productive  olives  in  the  valley,  a  house  of 
irxitration  in  Bethel  and  white  dust  in  the  kinjj^'s  mount.    But  her  peerless  distinction  was  that 

188 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES.  chap.  iv. 


the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  spake  by  her.  The  people  beh'eved  that  she  was  the  organ  of  Divine 
communications.  Hence  her  power  to  lift  the  whole  nation  from  a  state  of  languid  despondency 
to  the  elevation  of  the  assurance  of  hope,  l^y  the  nature  of  the  communications  which  she  made. 
A  bright  face,  kindled  up  with  intelligence,  from  which  doubt  has  fled,  where  resolution,  zeal, 
and  ardour  reign,  where  the  spirit  triumphs  over  the  flesh,  and  where  man  seems  transformed 
into  an  angel  of  the  Lord,  could  not  fail  to  inspire  men  as  with  life  from  the  dead.  And  so  from 
the  moment  that  Deborah  announces  the  Divine  purpose  to  emancipate  the  people,  and  Barak 
accepts  of  the  oflice  of  leader,  all  things  flow  naturally  and  rapidly  'on  to  success. 

10.  Barak  called  Zebulon  and  Naphtali  to  Kedesh.]  These  were  the  tribes  that  chiefly  furnished 
the  supplies  of  troops  (verse  6),  though  not  exclusively.  Ephraim,  Benjamin,  Manasseh,  and 
Issachar  sent  valuable  help  (chap.  v.  14,  15).  And  some  other  tribes  are  spoken  of  reprovingly, 
if  not  upbraidingly,  because  they  failed  to  show  their  practical  sympathy  (chap.  v.  16,  17).  For 
this  oppression  affected  the  whole  land,  and  that  most  grievously,  though  the  northern  parts  in 
a  greater  degree.  To  Kedesh  the  prophetess  accompanies  Barak.  Notwithstanding  the  distance 
in  the  extreme  north,  and  the  dangers  of  travelling  in  such  times,  she  hesitates  not  for  a  moment. 
When  God's  work  has  to  be  done,  all  other  considerations  must  give  way.  She  herself  acts  on 
the  firm  belief  of  her  own  words,  and  wherever  she  goes  she  becomes  a  revival  power.  The 
leaders  of  the  people,  or  heads  of  households,  assemble  to  Barak  in  his  home  at  Kedesh.  Not 
the  whole  people.  But  those  leaders  would  receive  their  instructions  from  Deborah  and  Barak 
together,  and  then  return  to  their  respective  circles  to  collect  their  people.  Fired  with  the  idea 
that  the  hour  of  deliverance  was  come,  the  men  of  Israel  collect,  descending  on  all  sides  from 
their  mountains  like  the  Swiss  against  the  Austrians,  and  proceed  to  Mount  Tabor,  Barak  going 
before,  and  ten  thousand  following  in  his  train  ;  or  as  some  render  it  on/boty  implying  that  they 
were  all  infantry,  and  neither  chariots  nor  cavalry. 

11.  Now  Heber  the  Kenite  ....  had  severed  himself,  etc.]  The  interesting  notices  given 
of  this  family  (the  Kenites)  arise  first  from  their  connection  with  Moses,  and  afterwards  from 
the  principal  branch  of  them  casting  in  their  lot  with  the  people  of  God.  The  father  was 
"  Reuel,"  or  "Raguel  "  (Ex.  ii.  18  ;  Num.  x.  29),  the  priest  of  Midian  (Ex.  ii.  16  ;  also  xviii.  1  ; 
some  say  the  word  means  prince).  "  Jethro"  was  still  another  name  which  he  had,  as  in 
Ex.  xviii.  passim.  [Some  would  prefer  to  say  that  Renel  was  the  father,  and  Jethro  and  Hobab 
were  the  two  sons — in  this  case  translating  the  word  chotheen  to  mean  brother-in-law  in  Ex.  xviii., 
for  in  such  a  case  Jethro  would  be  the  brother  of  Zipporah,  and  therefore  brother-in-law  to 
Moses.  But  we  prefer  to  regard  all  the  three  names,  Reuel,  Raguel,  and  Jethro,  as  simply 
different  names  for  the  same  person.]  Hobab  was  his  son,  and  therefore  brother-in-law  to  Moses. 
Thus  the  word  ought  to  be  rendered  here.  Moses  seems  to  have  been  successful  in  making 
Jethro  a  decided  fearer  of  the  God  of  Israel  (see  Ex.  xviii.  8-11).  And  when  he  got  tne 
opportunity  he  used  his  most  earnest  entreaties  with  Hobab,  his  brother-in-law.  Though  at 
first  unsuccessful  (Num.  x.  29,  30,  etc.),  he  would  appear  in  the  end  to  have  won  him  fairly  over. 
For  we  find  in  Jud.  i.  16  allusion  made  to  the  family  name  among  the  children  of  Israel — the 
children  of  the  Kenite,  who  seemed  at  first  to  have  settled  in  the  city  of  palm  trees,  finding  it 
not  suitable  apparently  for  their  flocks,  they  went  up  to  the  wilderness,  or  open  pasture  lands  of 
the  tribe  of  Judah.  And  now  here  again  is  another  change.  From  some  cause  there  was  a  split 
among  the  descendants  of  Hobab,  and  Heber,  an  influential  member  of  the  circle,  left  the  others 
in  Judah,  and  found  his  way  north  as  far  as  Kedesh.  Whether  it  was  that  the  Kenites  were 
degenerating  into  idol-worship  like  the  Israelites  generally,  among  whom  they  dwelt,  and  that 
Heber  was  a  fast  worshipper  of  the  God  of  Israel,  we  cannot  tell  for  certain.  But  the  separation 
was  permanent.  He  still  lived  in  tents  ;  the  desert  life  was  not  forgotten,  and  the  spot  he  chose 
for  his  rest  was  the  oak  forest  of  Zaanannim,  near  Kedesh. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS.— Verses  1-11. 

Fresh   Peovocation  ;    Renewed   Bondage  ;    Resort    anew    to    Prater  ; 

Deliverance  again  Provided, 

It  ought  never  to  be  forgotten  by  the  thoughtful  readers  of  this  Book  that  one 
leading  purpose  in  view  is  to  put  the  human  heart  fairly  to  the  test.  Under 
the  most  favourable  circumstances,  it  is  left  to  itself  to  decide  whether,  without 
any  driving  or  special  pressure  of  any  kind,  it  would  be  disposed  of  itself  to 
choose  the  service  of  the  only  living  and  true  God,  and  keep  vows  of  fidelity  to 
Him  which  it  had  solemnly  made.  There  is  no  Joshua  nor  Moses  now  alive  to 
guide  this  people.  They  are  left  purposely  without  any  man  in  the  position  of 
having  to  decide  for  them.  Their  decision  must  be  entirely  their  own,  and  it  must 

189 


CHAP.  TV.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   JUDGES, 


be  made  in  such  a  way  as  to  be  a  fair  index  of  the  state  of  their  hearts.  The  experi- 
ment goes  on  throughout  the  whole  Book,  and  though  it  is  continued  for  upwards 
of  400  years,  it  is  one  long  continued  series  of  failures  to  keep  their  allegiance  to 
their  God.  At  the  close,  it  might  be  written  down,  fiilli/  tried  and  found  wanting. 
This  Book  of  Judges  is  of  far  higher  use  than  ordinary  histories.  It  is  a  sacred 
history — the  history  of  men  as  before  God,  and  under  very  special  moral  and 
spiritual  dealing.  It  is  the  history  of  the  Church  of  God,  or  of  the  cause  of 
God  in  the  world,  so  that  sins  committed  have  a  deeper  aggravation,  afflictions 
sent  have  a  deeper  and  more  significant  meaning,  and  deliverances  accomplished 
have  a  more  sacred  character.  But  first  of  all,  the  object  is  to  bring  out  men's 
characters  before  God,  and  that  we  should  specially  keep  in  view  as  we  proceed 
to  gather  up  the  instruction  of  chapter  iv. 

X.  Fresh  provocation.  "  Tkep  did  (the)  evil  again  in  the  sight  of  the 
Lord,"  etc.  This  comes  in  like  a  melancholy  dirge  from  the  tombs,  indicating 
the  hopeless  condition  of  those  who  are  "dead  in  trespasses  and  sins."  We  hear 
it  as  a  moan  from  captives  that  are  helplessly  bound.  "  Ichabod  "  is  indelibly 
marked  both  at  the  top  and  bottom  of  the  page,  and  all  through.  "  The  plague 
of  the  heart  "  continues.  **  The  whole  head  is  sick  and  the  whole  heart  faint,'* 
etc.  The  leprosy  is  in  the  blood.  (See  on  chap.  iii.  7,  12.)  "  When  Ehud 
was  dead,''  rather,  and  Ehud  was  dead.  Not  that  their  apostasy  broke  out 
immediately  after  he  had  died  ;  but  when  it  did  break  out,  there  was  no  Ehud 
to  stem  the  torrent. 

How  briefly  the  notice  given  of  the  people's  sin  !  A  single  line  suffices  for  that 
— two  verses  tell  the  story  of  their  suffering  which  lasted  for  twenty  years,  and  with 
the  weight  of  a  tyrant's  rod  all  the  time.  But  the  whole  chapter,  or  twenty-one 
verses  are  occupied  with  the  account  of  the  Divine  deliverance.  Why  is  this  ?  Is 
it  (1)  Because  man's  work  is  so  bad  that  it  will  not  bear  to  be  repeated,  or  dwelt 
upon,  and  the  sooner  it  is  forgotten  the  better,  or  is  it  (2)  Because  God  in  mercy 
to  Bis  people  would  say  as  little  about  their  backslidings  as  possible.  Faithfully 
He  points  out  that  there  is  something  decidedly  wrong,  but  He  has  no  pleasure 
in  dwelling  upon  it.  His  '*  charity  thinketh  no  evil,  and  rejoiceth  not  in  iniquity." 
The  statement  is  made  to  justify  Him  in  sending  His  judgments,  not  to  gratify 
any  possible  delight  He  could  take  in  spreading  out  their  sins  before  His  face. 
Or  is  it  (3)  Because  the  simple  fact  that  they  had  cast  off  their  God,  without  any 
amplification  of  details,  was  quite  enough  to  kindle  the  Divine  anger,  and  lead 
to  deplorable  results — whatever  the  reason  may  be,  the  fact  is  patent 
throughout  this  book,  that  the  sins  of  the  people  are  told  in  a  line  or  two, 
while  the  story  of  God's  mercy  in  delivering  them  from  the  consequences  of 
their  sins  goes  down  all  over  the  page. 

Their  sinning  against  God  afresh  after  so  much  chastisement  shows : — 

1.  The  ineradicable  nature  of  sin.  No  number  of  stripes  seems  to  have  any 
effect  in  curing  this  terrible  evil.  Though  it  has  been  burned  into  them  that 
"  the  way  of  transgressors  is  hard,"  so  soon  as  they  are  left  to  themselves  they 
again  begin  to  transgress.  Sin  is  like  some  of  those  strong  chemical  liquids,  of 
which  when  a  drop  falls  on  the  cloth,  it  is  impossible  with  ever  so  much  washing 
to  take  out  the  stain.  ^'Though  thou  wash  thee  with  nitre  and  take  thee 
much  soap,  yet  is  thine  iniquity  marked  before  Me,  saith  the  Lord  God.  This 
people  had  unmistakable  evidence  of  the  fearful  calamities  that  must  accompany 
or  come  in  the  track  of  sin.  Two  black  clouds  had  already  darkened  their  slcy, 
the  bursting  of  which  it  might  have  been  supposed  would  never  have  been  for- 
gotten. Either  of  these  tempests,  but  for  the  interposition  of  the  Divine 
mercy,  out  of  ordinary  course,  might  have  blotted  them  out  of  existence  as  a 
nation,  or  reduced  them  to  the  level  of  a  second  Egyptian  bondage.  They  were 
placed  entirely  at  the  mercy  of  those  whose  tenderest  mercies  are  cruel.  They 
190 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES,  chap.  iv. 


had  experience  of  the  cold,  hard  fact,  that  "  the  worst  enemy  of  man  is  man." 
And  yet  we  find  them  here  running  down  the  hill  to  ruin  as  before.  There  is 
no  change  in  the  stubborn  tendency  to  go  astray  from  God.  Though  they  have 
already  tumbled  twice  over  the  precipice  and  been  dashed  among  the  rocks, 
through  their  obstinately  taking  the  wrong  course,  being  saved  only  by  the 
outstretching  of  the  gracious  hand  of  their  God,  they  yet,  after  all,  now  rush 
on  blindfolded  in  the  old  track.  Well  might  the  prophet  of  many  tears  exclaim, 
**  Can  the  Ethiopian  change  his  shin,  or  the  leopard  his  spots"  etc. 

2.  The  special  force  of  evil  in  an  easily-besetting^  sin.  Idolatry  was,  for 
the  Israelite,  an  easily-besetting  sin,  mainly  for  two  reasons :  (1)  Because  of 
the  strong  native  tendency  of  the  human  heart  to  go  away  from  God,  and  give  its 
love  and  allegiance  to  other  objects,  which  also  must,  in  some  sense,  be  gods  ;  for 
the  human  heart  cannot  want  a  god  of  some  kind  ;  and  (2)  Because  the  stream 
of  custom  over  the  whole  world  was  always  flowing  in  that  direction.  It  was 
a  kind  of  spiritual  aneurism  in  the  system,  an  evil  tumour  which  draws  into  it 
the  arterial  blood,  we  might  say,  the  very  life-blood,  defying  all  art  or  skill  of 
man  to  effect  a  cure.  It  seems  as  if  the  whole  strength  of  corruption  in  a  man's 
nature  were  gathered  up  in  his  easily  besetting  sin,  so  that  to  do  battle  with  it 
is  to  assail  the  very  fortress  of  depravity  and  not  merely  an  outpost.  The  whole 
garrison  of  evil  in  the  heart  fights  at  this  point.  The  word  used  in  the 
original  is  very  forcible  (Heb.  xii.  1) — ^vTrepia-raTov — the  sin  which  well  sur- 
rounds us — i.e.y  easily,  or  strongly  surrounds,  which  besets  or  encircles  us 
like  the  folds  of  a  serpent,  a  veritable  boa-constrictor,  that  which  encircles  and 
holds  us  fast,  which  keeps  us  as  prisoners.  All  sin  does  so,  more  or  less,  but 
none  grasps  so  tight  as  that  to  which  we  are  peculiarly  prone  or  liable, 
whether  constitutionally,  from  long  indulgence,  or  strong  temptations.  Victory 
over  an  easily  besetting  sin  means  victory  over  the  whole  strength  of  evil  in 
the  heart. 

3.  A  specific  for  the  cure  of  sin  must  be  something  out  of  ordinary  course. 
Nothing  within  the  limits  of  ordinary  motives  will  effectually  turn  a  man  aside 
from  his  idols,  and  permanently  stem  all  the  outflow  of  evil  from  the  bitter 
spring.  The  strength  of  the  passion,  or  evil  tendency  of  the  nature,  always 
overmasters  the  force  of  reason.  "7  see  the  good ;  I  follow  the  evil"  is  the 
candid  confession  even  of  the  heathen  heart.  While  the  Christian,  conscious 
far  more  clearly  of  the  strength  of  evil  within  him,  cries  out,  "  0,  wretched 
man  that  I  am  I  who  shall  deliver  me  ? "  etc.  The  headstrong  tendency  of 
sin  in  the  heart  has  all  the  force  of  an  ungovernable  passion,  or  of  a  blind 
infatuation.  Happy  is  the  man  who  is  candid  enough  to  admit  the  cancerous 
nature  of  his  heart  malady,  and  who  with  that  conviction  applies  in  good 
earnest  to  the  One  Physician  who  is  able  to  effect  a  cure.  **  Create  in  me  a 
clean  heart"  is  the  only  prayer  that  will  do;  and  Psalm  li.  throughout  is 
the  best  prescription  to  meet  the  case. 

The  whole  history  of  ancient  Israel,  especially  as  recorded  in  this  Book  of 
Judges,  is  a  luminous  commentary  on  the  truth  and  force  of  the  paragraph  in 
Rom.  vii.  14-25.  The  law  of  God  presents  duty  clearly  ;  men's  hearts  and 
consciences  assent  to  its  excellence,  but,  notwithstanding  of  this,  the  evil 
principles  in  the  heart  remain  in  full  force,  and  there  is  still  a  persistence  in 
going  astray  from  God.  The  mere  strength  of  reason  for  the  performance  of  a 
certain  duty,  or  the  avoidance  of  a  certain  sin,  will  not  take  away  the  disobedient 
spirit  of  the  unrenewed  heart.  "  The  law  in  my  members — in  my  flesh,  the 
unsanctified  nature — brings  me  into  captivity  to  the  law  of  sin  which  is  in  my 
members,"  i.e.  to  itself.  That  law  of  sin  is  always  in  operation,  and  can  only 
be  counteracted  and  fairly  overcome  by  the  fixed  and  permanent  operation  in 
the  soul  of  another  law — **  the  law  of  the  spirit  of  life  by  Christ  Jesus."    l/See 

191 


CHAP.  IV.  nOMlLETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


Hodge  on  Rom.  vii.  throughout.']  One  thing  is  abundantly  proved  by  every  page 
of  this  book — that  the  authoritative  declaration  that  a  thing  must  not  be  done, 
does  not  destroy  the  inclination  to  do  it.  It  follows  that  if  sin  is  to  be 
effectually  cured  in  the  heart  and  life,  a  man  must  be  "  created  anew  in  Christ 
Jesus  unto  good  works."  (See  Ezek.  xxxvi.  25-27  ;  Eph.  iv.  23  ;  2  Cor.  v.  17.) 
[See  other  remarks  on  chap.  iii.  7  and  12.] 

ZZ.  Bondage  renewed  (verses  2,  3). — "  The  Lord  sold  them  into  the  hand 
of  Jabin,  etc. — twenty  years  he  mightily  oppressed  them" 

1.  The  calamity  did  not  come  unsent.  It  was  not  "  a  chance  that  happened 
to  them."  They  first  sold  themselves  to  do  wickedly  before  the  Lord,  and  in  due 
time  He  sold  them  into  the  hands  of  the  spoiler.  Their  long  season  of  prosperity 
instead  of  confirming  them  in  their  attachment  to  their  own  God,  only  led  them 
to  forget  Him  and  to  walk  after  their  own  wicked  ways,  from  which  they  had 
never  been  really  weaned.  **  The  prosperity  of  fools  destroyeth  them."  Henry 
remarks,  "they  alienated  themselves  from  God,  as  if  they  were  none  of  His; 
and  then  God  on  His  part  alienated  them  as  none  of  His.  They  that  throw 
themselves  out  of  God's  service,  throw  themselves  out  of  God's  protection. 
What  has  my  beloved  to  do  in  my  house^  when  she  has  thus  played  the  harlot  ?  '* 

Men  are  slow  to  regard  their  afflictions  in  life — their  disappointments,  their 
hard  lot,  their  bitter  experiences,  and  their  dark  skies,  as  having  anything  to  do 
with  the  ungodly  life  they  lead — their  practical  forgetfulness  of  God,  and  setting 
aside  His  law  as  the  rule  of  life.  It  seems  not  to  occur  to  them  that  the  God 
before  whom  they  lead  their  life,  is  greatly  offended  with  this  neglect  of  His 
claims  and  despising  of  His  commandments,  as  if  a  creature  would  dare  to  assert 
that  it  was  not  His  property,  and  owed  Him  no  allegiance  and  even  no  attention. 
For  this  practical  forgetting  of  God,  and  neglect  of  their  duties  to  Him,  He 
sends  one  arrow  of  adversity  after  another  to  awaken  their  attention  to  His 
voice.  But  they  are  slow  to  understand.  They  "  hear  not  the  rod  "  neither 
do  they  know  Him  who  appointed  it.  (Jer.  viii.  7).  God  said  of  His  ancient 
people  "they  are  sottish  children  (thich  headed)  and  they  have  no  understanding." 
Even  when  God  dealt  in  great  mercy  with  them,  "taking  them  by  the  arms, 
they  knew  not  that  He  healed  them."  Christ  says  of  foolish  Jerusalem,  "thou 
knewest  not  the  time  of  thy  visitation." 

No  affliction  comes  unsent.  There  is  indeed  no  audible  voice  telling  in 
articulate  tones,  why  this  and  the  other  bitter  dispensation  of  God's  providence 
is  appointed.  Also,  some  time  generally  elapses  between  the  commission  ot  sin 
and  the  sorrow  which  comes  after  it,  just  as  some  time  elapses  between  the 
moment  when  we  see  a  gun  fired  at  a  considerable  distance  from  us,  before 
we  hear  the  report  of  the  firing.  God  is  not  quick  to  use  the  rod,  for  He  takes 
no  pleasure  in  the  work  of  inflicting  punishment.  This  men  mistake  to  mean, 
that  there  is  no  causal  connection  between  their  sin  and  their  misery.  Yet  not 
more  certain  is  the  law  by  which  a  man  reaps  of  the  same  kind  that  he  sows, 
than  is  the  arrangement  by  which  misery  in  some  form  will  either  accompany  or 
flow  from  sin.  It  is  fundamental  to  say  "The  wages  of  sin  is  death."  God, 
however,  does  not  tell  it  with  articulate  voice.  Everything  in  His  dealings  with 
us  must  go  by  faith.  Hence  He  acts.  Just  as  Jesus  did  not  answer  John's 
question  directly,  but  bade  His  disciples  go  and  tell  him  what  things  they  had 
seen  Him  do,  so  God  acts  in  a  certain  way  in  His  providence,  and  bids  us  look 
on  and  consider — "  Whoso  is  wise  and  observeth  these  things,  he  shall  under- 
stand " — the  meaning  and  purport  of  God's  providence  in  dealing  with  sinners 
and  sin. 

2.  Sin  brings  sorrow.  The  character  of  God  as  Moral  Governor  of  the  world 
requires  this :  To  sin  He  is  irreconcilably  opposed ;   and  towards  those  who 

192 


HO  MI  LET IC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES.  chap.  iv. 


commit  it,  His  frown  must,  in  the  events  of  His  Providence,  be  sooner  or  later  mani- 
fested. Well  is  it  for  a  man  who  has  been  leading  an  ungodly  life,  if  God  should 
show  His  frown  noWy  while  yet  his  course  of  sin  may  be  arrested,  and  his  guilt 
taken  away,  ere  it  be  too  late.  For  there  is  such  a  thing  as  being  allowed  to  sleep 
in  sin  till  the  hour  for  repentance  has  passed,  and  there  is  no  possibility  of  escaping 
the  terrible  condemnation  of  the  finally  impenitent.  Sorrows  sent  now,  though 
severe  and  even  rigorous  in  character,  may,  if  improved  as  warning  bells,  lead  us 
to  lay  hold  of  the  great  refuge  from  eternal  sorrows  (1  Cor.  xi.  32). 

These  Israelites  found  that  the  "  pleasures  of  sin  "  soon  turned  to  gall  and 
wormwood.  "What  better  were  they,"  says  Bp.  Hall,  **to  have  killed  Eglon, 
king  of  Moab,  if  the  idolatry  of  Moab  was  now  killing  them  ?  The  sin  of  Moab 
was  a  worse  tyrant  than  Eglon.  Israel  is  for  every  market.  They  sold  thein^ 
selves  to  idolatry ;  God  sells  them  to  the  Canaanites.  It  is  no  marvel  they 
become  slaves,  if  they  will  be  idolaters.  After  their  longest  peace  they  have 
now  their  sorest  bondage.  The  longer  the  reckoning  is  deferred,  the  greater 
is  the  amount." 

3.  The  Divine  mercy  is  seen  in  severely  chastising  but  not  destroying. 
God  might  have  said  :  "  Thy  bruise  is  incurable,  thy  wound  is  very  grievous.  I 
will,  therefore,  give  thee  as  fuel  for  the  burning,  and  raise  up  to  myself  another 
people,  true  to  Me  in  heart,  and  that  will  better  show  forth  my  praise."  He  had 
already  twice  delivered  them  from  the  terrible  consequences  of  their  apostasies, 
and  said,  "  Behold  thou  art  made  whole.  Go,  and  sin  no  more,  lest  a  worse  thing 
come  upon  thee!'  And  now  their  sin  was  greatly  more  aggravated  than  before. 
*'  The  waters  which  were  at  first  to  the  ankles,  were  now  to  the  loins."  And  there 
seemed  to  be  no  appearance  of  any  abatement.  Might  we  not  expect  that  the 
voice  would  come  forth  from  "  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  "  saying,  I  will  utterly 
destroy,  and  make  a  full  end  of  a  people  so  incorrigible  and  rebellious?  Men  are 
disposed  to  act  thus  in  similar  circumstances.  They  are  impatient,  and  would  cut 
the  knot,  when  they  cannot  easily  untie  it.  They  will  not  stand  parleying  long 
with  perverse  natures,  but  tell  them  flatly  you  must  comply  with  the  terms,  or  be 
shut  out  from  our  fellowship  for  ever.  "  Why  should  this  dead  dog  curse  my  lord 
the  king  ? "  So  of  Shimei.  **  Let  me,  I  pray  thee,  smite  thine  enemy  with  the  spear 
to  the  earth  at  once,  and  I  will  not  smite  him  the  second  time."  So  of  king 
Saul.  "  When  Herod  saw  that  he  was  mocked  of  the  wise  men,  he  was  exceeding 
wroth,  and  sent  forth  and  slew  all  the  children  that  were  in  Bethlehem."  Thus 
it  ever  is  with  the  wrath  of  men  when  excited  ;  it  goes  forth  to  an  extreme 
result  (2  Sam.  iii.  9  ;  1  Sam.  xxv.  22  ;  Jer.  xl.  15,  etc.,  etc.) 

But  when  God  is  provoked  to  anger  by  the  sins  of  His  people,  how  different 
His  tone  1  "  I  will  correct ;  but  I  will  not  destroy.  I  will  correct  in  measure ; 
— not  without  limit.  I  will  not  leave  thee  unpunished,  but  1  will  not  make  a 
full  end."  The  stripes  are  never  given  at  random,  but  according  to  rule,  and  a 
careful  account  is  kept  both  of  their  number,  and  their  severity — not  a  stroke 
too  many,  and  no  suffering  inflicted  beyond  what  the  person  is  able  to  bear. 
Even  when  God  goes  so  far  as  to  give  His  people  ''tears  to  drink  in  great  measure 
like  water,"  it  is  still  in  measure  (Ps.  Ixxx,  5 ;  Jer.  xlvi.  28). 

God  was  now  greatly  provoked  with  the  repeated  and  high  handed  sins  of  His 
people,  and  for  twenty  long  years  He  gave  them  into  the  hands  of  a  relentless 
and  revengeful  enemy,  who  might  in  one  fourth  part  of  that  time  have  destroyed 
Israel  utterly  as  Israel  of  old  time  destroyed  the  Canaanites.  But  their  God 
would  not  allow  it,  though  no  doubt  it  was  in  the  hearts  of  these  Canaanites  to 
make  the  attempt.  But  their  lives  were  made  bitter  with  haid  bondage  in 
being  set  to  act  as  hewers  of  wood,  and  do  all  sorts  of  drudgery  work.  They 
also  had  the  sting  in  their  hearts,  that  all  this  oppression  was  exercised  by  out 

K  193 


OHAF.  IV.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


casts  and  aliens,  who  were  trampled  on  by  their  fathers,  as  the  refuse  of  the 
earth — a  people  not  fit  to  live. 

The  truth  always  conies  out,  that  however  severely  they  were  punished,  they 
were  never  made  a  full  end  of.  He  watches  over  them  in  the  furnace,  and 
allows  not  the  fire  to  consume  them.  **  When  they  walk  through  the  fire  they 
are  not  burned,  neither  does  the  flame  kindle  on  them."  When  His  own  image 
is  seen  in  the  heated  metal,  instantly  He  abstracts  it  from  the  fire.  He  is 
jealous  lest  His  people  should  receive  one  stroke  of  the  rod  too  many  (Zech.  i. 
14,  15),  and  is  angry  with  those  who  would  dare  to  go  one  step  beyond  their 
commission  (Isa.  xl.  2).  (See  Ps.  Ixxxix.  33,  34  ;  Jer.  iv.  27  ;  v.  10,  18  ; 
XXX.  11  ;  Amos  ix.  9  ;  Jer.  xxxiii.  24-26.) 

[Remarks  on  the  character  of  God's  judgment,  their  severity,  the  spirit  in 
which  they  are  inflicted,  and  the  ends  to  be  gained  on  pp.  114-119.] 

COMMENTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.— Verses  1-3. 

True  Religion  requires  an  Undivided  Heart. 

When  a  man  professes  solemnly  and  No  reserve  or  compromise,  or  half- 
with  tears  that  he  deeply  regrets  heartedness,  is  for  a  moment  to  be 
having  committed  some  error  of  allowed.  Our  mind  must  be  made  up. 
conduct,  on  which  those  who  have  *  The  eye  must  be  single.'  One  master- 
to  do  with  him  agree  to  pass  over  motive  —  the  love  of  Christ.  One 
his  offence  and  to  continue  friendship  mighty  aim — to  glorify  God  in  the 
as  before — and  when  after  a  time,  Gospel  of  His  Son.  All  other  objects 
during  which  he  enjoys  peace  and  and  aims  must  give  way  before  this, 
prosperity,  he  again  commits  the  same  Its  language  is  '  this  one  thing  I  do  ! ' 
error  and  that  more  deeply  than  before,  Such  were  the  hearts  of  Abraham,  and 
and  even  repeats  this  process  several  Moses,  and  David,  and  Paul — of  Luther 
times  of  sinning  and  confessing,  we  and  Latimer.  Though  they  erred  in 
begin  to  question  his  sincerity  and  to  some  things  they  had  this  peculiarity 
believe  that  his  heart  was  not  in  his  — they  had  single  hearts — they  were 
confession  of  wrong-doing,  and  his  men  of  one  thing.  Such  a  man  does 
purpose  of  amendment,  but  that  he  good  by  wholesale.  He  is  like  a  light- 
was  merely  resorting  to  shifts  to  get  house  in  the  midst  of  a  dark  world, 
quit  of  a  difficulty.  Thus  we  naturally  He  reflects  light  on  hundreds  of  whom 
judge  of  these  Israelites  :  he  knows  nothing.  His  Master  is  seen 
"Forthough  their  words  were  good,  their  heai-t  ^J^  ^very  department  of  his  behaviour 
With  Him  was  not  sincere ;  And  he  might  appropriate  to  himseli 
Unstedfast  and  perfidious  the  language  :  *  I  live,  yet  not  /,  but 

They  in  His  covenant  were."  ^^^^-^^  liv^th  in  me.'     All  SCO  the  bias 

In  all  true  religion  there  must  be  an  of  His  character,  and  are  obliged  to 

undivided  heart.     "  We  naturally  love  confess  that  his  religion  is  a  real  and 

an  easy  Christianity.     We  dislike  col-  influential  thing.      Without  this  de- 

lisions,  and  we  fear  extremes.     When  cision  a  man  has  no  true  comfort  in  his 

the  world  presents  its  claims  alongside  religion  ;  he  has  as  much  as  to  make 

those  of  Christ,  we  are  in  danger  of  him  miserable,  by  allowing  two  oppo- 

halting  between  two  opinions.     Such  site  camps  to  have  a  place  in  his  heart. 

an  attitude  is  full  of  peril.     Nothing  But  with  it,  he  has  a  joy  and  peace, 

is  more  offensive  to  Christ  than  luke-  to  which  others  never  attain.    His  face 

warmness  in  His  service.  is  toward  the  sun,  and   his  heart  is 

"  We  must  serve  Christ  with  all  our  seldom  cold, 
hearts,  if  we  are  to  serve  Him  at  all.         **  We  must  not  be  satisfied  with  re- 
194 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


OHAP.  IT, 


ligious  reformation  without  heart  con-     do  without  the  power  of  practical  god- 
,,«««;^..       fVr.  ig^y  asids  open  sin  is     liness  experienced  in  the  inner  man." 


version. 


To 


nothing  unless    grace  reigns  m    our 
hearts.    The  formal  trappings  will  not 


U¥^.] 


To  Begin  the  Religious  Life  Easier  than  to  Go  On. 


While  the  sun  shone  hrightly  on  the 
faces  of  the  vast  multitude  whom 
Joshua  addressed  for  the  last  time, 
and  all  nature  seemed  in  cheerful 
mood  ;  while,  too,  all  the  Divine  words 
of  the  sacred  past  were  now  changed 
into  the  living  facts  of  the  present, 
and  they  could  read  as  matter  of  his- 
tory that  which  was  at  first  hard  to 
believe  even  as  Divine  Prophecy — it 
was  easy  to  subscribe  with  the  hand 
and  to  say,  "  This  God  shall  be  our 
God  for  ever  and  ever  ! "  No  cross  was 
in  sight.  No  voice  was  heard  breaking 
the  stillness  of  that  lovely  morning, 
with  the  faithful  words,  *'  If  a  man 
will  come  after  Me  let  him  deny  him- 
self ^  and  take  up  his  cross  daily ^  and 
follow  Me."  But  when  a  little  time 
passes  on,  and  the  clouds  gather,  and 
the  winds  begin  to  moan,  and  the 
weather  becomes  foul,  what  a  melting 
away  of  resolutions  so  chivalrously 
made  !  "  From  that  time  many  went 
hack,  and  walked  no  more  with  Jesus'^ 

It  is  not  the  beginning  but  the 
continuing  of  the  religious  profession 
that  is  the  true  grace.  "  If  ye  con- 
tinue in  my  word^^  says  the  Saviour, 
**  then  are  ye  my  disciples  indeed" 
Many,  under  the  influence  of  tempo- 
rary excitement,  enrol  themselves  as 
Christians  without  considering  what 
they  are  doing.  To  begin  the  religious 
life  is  comparatively  easy.  Mixed 
motives  aid  us.  The  love  of  novelty, 
the  praise  of  well-meaning  professors 


around  us,  the  secret  self-satisfaction 
of  feeling  "  how  good  I  am,"  and  the 
general  excitement  attending  a  new 
position.  Lifted  up  by  the  wave  the 
man  begins  the  race,  lays  aside  some 
bad  habits,  takes  up  some  good  ones, 
has  many  comfortable  frames  and  feel- 
ings, and  gets  on  swimmingly  for  a  time. 

But  when  the  newness  of  the  position 
is  past  and  gone,  when  the  freshness  of 
his  feelings  is  rubbed  off  and  lost,  when 
the  world  and  the  devil  begin  to  pull 
hard  at  him,  when  the  weakness  of  his 
own  heart  begins  to  appear — then  it  is 
that  he  finds  out  the  real  difficulties  of 
Christianity.  Then  he  finds  that  to 
begin  is  one  thing,  and  to  go  on  is 
another.  Yes.  "  Patient  continuance 
in  well-doing  "  is  the  only  sure  evidence 
of  grace.  It  is  not  he  that  runs  fast  at 
first,  or  runs  furiously,  but  he  that 
keeps  up  his  speed,  who  runs  so  as 
to  obtain.  By  all  means  make  much 
of  conversion.  But  let  us  not  be  too 
sure  that  it  is  conversion,  till  Time  has 
set  its  seal  upon  it. 

Time  and  wear  test  metals  and  prove 
whether  they  are  solid  or  plated.  So 
Time  and  Wear  are  the  surest  tests  of 
a  man's  religion.  Where  there  is 
spiritual  life  there  will  be  continuance 
and  steady  perseverance.  It  is  the 
man  who  goes  on  as  well  as  begins  that 
is  the  disciple  indeed  (John  vi.  67-69  ; 
Luke  xxii.  28  ;  1  John  ii.  19 ;  Heb. 
iii.  6).     [%k] 


Why  should  Sm  be  so  inveterate  in  the  Human  Hearts. 


Dr.  Howat,  in  illustrating  a  similar 
sentiment  says,  "  It  is  the  great  law  of 
contraries.  *  The  corruption  of  the 
best  is  the  worst,*  says  the  Roman 
proverb.  There  is  nothing  so  beautiful 
as  a  woman's  love  ;  there  is  nothing  so 


terrible  as  a  woman's  hatred.  Athaliah, 
to  gratify  her  own  ambition,  *  destroys 
all  the  seed  royal.'  The  daughter  of 
Herodias  solicits  the  Baptist's  head. — 
Jezebel  vows  to  take  Elijah's  life. — 
The  pretended  mother  proposes  to  slay 

195 


CHAP.  IV.  nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


the  living  child."    The  finer  a  nature  hand,  then  his  side,    then  his  whole 

is    under    its    natural    conditions    it  body     became     numb     and    without 

becomes    proportionally    worse     than  feeling,  as  if  he  bad  had  a  stroke  of 

anotlier  nature  when  it  is  perverted,  the  palsy.     It  grew  worse  and  worse, 

If  it  has  a  capacity  for  rising  higher  in  till  a  physician  was  called,  and  he  was 

its  normal  state,  it  must  also  have  a  thought   to   be   dying.       *  You    iiiusfc 

capacity  for  sinking  lower  in  its  ab-  somehow  have  taken  poison,'  said  the 

normal  state.     The  men  of  finest  gifts  physician.       *  No,'    he  said,    '  I  have 

and  finest  sensibilities,  when  they  do  not.'      At  last    he    remembered   this 

sink   into   the    depths   of  wickedness  ring.       On   examination    it   was   dis- 

generally  become  more  abandoned  and  covered  that  he  had  been  playing  with 

desperate   than  the  common   wicked,  what  used  to  be  called  a  death-ring, 

For  this  reason  the  fallen  angelic  spirits  and  which  was  often  employed  in  the 

are   more   fearful  embodiments  of  all  wicked  Italian   States    three  or    four 

mannerof  evil  than  fallen  men.  Physic-  hundred  years  ago.      When  one  man 

ally  speaking  too,  bodies  which  have  hated  another  and  desired  to  kill  him 

the  finest  texture,  such  as  the  human  he  would  present  him  with  one  of  these 

body,  when  they  do  become  corrupt,  rings.      In  the  inside  was  a  drop  of 

are  more  loathsome  than  other  bodies,  deadly  poison,  and  a  very  small  hole 

All  over  the  rule  holds.  out  of  which  it  would  not  make  its 

Man's  highest  faculty   is  that    by  way  except  it  was  squeezed.      When 

which  he  is  capable  of  knowing  God,  the   poor   man    was    wearing  it,   the 

loving  God,  admiring  and  adoring  His  murderer  would  come  and  shake  his 

wonderful    perfections,   and    enjoying  hand  violently  ;  the  lion's  claw  would 

His  divine  fellowship.      But  the  power  give  his  fin^jer  a  little  scratch,  and  in 

to  rise  so  high   infers  his  capacity  for  a  few  hours  he  was  a  dead  man." 
sinking  down  to  a  proportionate  depth.  "  For  four  hundred  years  this  ring 

And    what     measure    of    depth    can  had  kept  its  poison,  and  at  the  end 

correspond    fitly    with     the    all    but  was  strong  enough  almost  to  kill  the 

measureless    height    to    which    it    is  man  who  had  accidentally  scratched 

possible  for  him  to  attain.      But  this  his  finger  with  the  claw.      It  required 

capacity    for    going    down  to  an  in-  great  skill  and  the  strongest  medicines 

definate   depth    when    his    nature    is  to  save  him.      So  is  it  with  shi.      Our 

perverted  is  really  the  measure  of  his  first  father  had  such  a  ring  put  into 

corruption  or  depravity.      It  is  like  a  his  hand  by  the  Tempter,  and  by  the 

pit  of  unfathomed  depth.    Or  speaking  unhappy   squeezing  of  the    claws    he 

of  it  more  Uterally,  the  degeneracy  is  died  of  it.      The  same  ring  has  been 

in  proportion  to  the  greatness  of  man's  handed  down  to  his  posterity  from  the 

nature — as  a  rational    and    immortal  days  of  the  Expulsion   from  Paradise 

being,  formed  after  the  image  of  God.  till   now  ;    and   for   well   nigh    6,000 

Man's  capacity  of  loving  God  in  his  years  it  is  still  a  fatal  ring  to  all  who 

upright  state  is  equalled  by  the  deep  touch  it."     [Bib,  Treas,^ 
and  inveterate  dislike  to  God,  which  The  inveteracy  of  sin  is  illustrated 

he  has  in  iiis  perverted  state.      Hence,  by  the  manner  in  which  the  plague  of 

the    inveteracy   of  sin    in   his  fallen  leprosy  showed  itself  in  its  workings, 

nature.  both  in  the  human  body  and  even  in 

The  ancient  ring.    "  A  man,  wishing  human  dwellings.     When  the  plague 

to  find  a  handsome  ring,  went  into  a  got  into  the  walls  of  a  building,  there 

jeweller's  shop,  in  Paris,  and  there  had  was  no  way  of  getting  it  cleansed  but 

presented  to  him  a  very  ancient  gold  by  taking  down  the  walls  to  the  foun- 

ring  which  seemed  to  be  very  superior,  dations.     '*  When  N.  Phocas  liad  built 

and  on  its  inside  were  two  little  lion's  a  strong  wall   about  his  palace  for  his 

claws.     With  this  he  played  for  some  own  security,  in  the  night  time  he  heard 

time,  but  did  not  purchase  it.  Scarcely  a  voice  crying  to  him,  0  Emperor  ! 

had  he  reached  home  when,  first  his  though  thou  build  thy  wall  as  high  as 
196 


IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JVDQE8.  ohap.  it. 

the  clouds,  yet  if  sin  be  within,  it  will  and  the  sand  covers  them.     He  wishes 

overthrow  all. "  to  turn  back,  but  his  efforts  only  make 

Sin  is  also  a  quicksand.    It  not  only  him  sink  more  deeply.    With  terror  he 

penetrates  to  the  very  core  internally,  perceives  that  he  is  in  a  quicksand, 

but  externally  it  swallows  up  without  He  throws  down  his  burden,  but  it  is 

power  of  rescue.  too  late.     He  finds  he  is  slowly  being 

"  On    certain    parts  of   the   coast,  buried  alive  !     The  sand  reaches  to  his 

especially    in    Scotland,    difficulty  is  waist  — to  his  chest — to  his  neck — now 

experienced  in  walkin.f^ — ^the  shore  is  only  his  face  is  visible.     He  cries,  but 

like  pitch,  to  which  the  soles  of  the  alas  1  none  hear.     At  last  the  sand  fills 

feet  cling.    The  coast  a})pears  to  be  dry,  his  mouth,  and  all  is  silent — his  eyes, 

but  the  footprint  when  the  foot  is  lifted,  and  the  curtain    is  drawn.       He  is 

becomes  filled  with  water.     There  is  no  swallowed  up.      So  of  the  man  who 

appearance  of  danger,  but  suddenly  the  persists  inveterately  in  a  course  of  sin." 

traveller  sinks.    He  looks  at  his  feet,  [ud/jo/i.] 

The  Deceitfulness  of  Sin. 

"  The  wages  that  sin  bargains  with  Sea  apple  which  is  tempting  to  tlie 

the  sinner  are  life,  pleasure,  and  profit ;  eye — ^many  a  cruel  hand  which  is  as 

but  the  wages  it  pays  him  with  are  soft  as  velvet.    Sin  is  a  siren  while  she 

death,  torment,  and  destruction.     He  tempts,  but  an  u^ly,  raw-boned  hag 

that  would  understand  the  falsehood  when  she  has  her  prey  within  her  toils, 

and   deceit  of  sin   thoroughly,   must  Those  tresses  which  appear  so  comely 

compare  its  promises  with    its    pay-  may   change  to   snakes  to  sting  the 

ments.".     \South.^  hand  which  smooths  them ;  those  dove- 

"  The  approaches  of  sin  are  like  the  like,    winsome    eye3    that    swim    so 

conduct  of  Jael — '  It  brings  forth  butter  wantonly  shall  flash  like  basilisks  upon 

in  a  lordly  dish.'     It  bids  high  for  the  you,  if  you  are  captivated   by  their 

soul.     But  when  it  has  fascinated  and  blandishments. 

lulled  the  victim,   the  nail   and  the         *'  In  the  Halls  of  the  Inquisition 

hammer  are  behind."     [Cecil.]  there   was   a    beautiful   statue   of   a 

"Sin  has  always  two  aspects — that  virgin.  The  painter's tenderest strokes 
which  she  assumes  before  the  deed  is  had  been  used,  to  give  loveliness  to  the 
done,  and  that  which  she  puts  on  after  face,  and  the  sculptor's  utmost  skill 
having  ensnared  her  dupe,  and  hung  had  been  enlisted  to  add  charm  to 
her  fetters  on  his  soul.  How  musical  charm  in  the  rounded  moulding  of 
in  the  ear  of  Judas  was  the  jingle  of  form  and  limb.  The  white  arms  were 
the  thirty  pieces  of  silver,  while  the  undraped,  and  extended  wide  as  though 
bribe  was  dangling  in  the  purse  of  the  to  embrace ;  the  eye  and  lip,  and  whole 
treasurer  of  the  chief  priests  and  attitude,  were  full  of  winning  invita- 
scribes  !  Yet,  how  dull  was  its  ring,  tion,  and  the  professing  penitent  was 
as  he  dashed  them  down  upon  the  led  into  this  fair  presence,  and  corn- 
table  in  his  agony,  after  their  lustre  manded  to  advance  and  embrace  the 
had  been  tarnished  by  the  tinge  of  figure.  As  soon  as  he  drew  near,  the 
harmless  blood  !  How  fair  was  the  fair  white  arms  encircled  him,  not 
enchantress  when  she  came  with  her  with  the  caress  of  love,  but  with  the 
promises  ;  yet  how  hard  and  haggard  vice-like  clutch  of  vengeance,  and  the 
were  her  mocking  features  when  the  bosom  opened  and  lips  expanded, 
mask  had  fallen  and  the  real  face  was  and  a  hundred  gleaming  knives  shot 
seen  !  It  is  always  so.  There  is  many  from  the  virgin  figure,  transfixing  the 
a  deadly  poison  which  is  pleasant  to  victim  with  a  hundred  scarlet  stabs, 
the  taste — many  a  fatal  lullaby  which  The  parted  lips  pushed  forth  a  barbed 
is  charming  to  the  ear — many  a  Dead  tongue,  and  showed  fanged  teeth  to 

197 


CHAP.  IV.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES 


acerate  and  tear.  In  short,  the  beauty  soms  imbibes  a  fatal  opiate,  and  drops 

was  transformed  into  a  beast,  the  fairy  dead  from  among  the  crimson  flowers 

form  became  an  armoury  of  poignards,  to  the  earth.     Beneath  this  enticing 

whose  every  charm  concealed  a  dagger,  tree  the  earth  is  strewed  with  the  vic- 

aiid  whose  every  grace  was  death.  tims  of   its  fatal  fascinations.      That 

"/So  it  is  with  sin.     Decking  her  bed  fatal  plant  that  attracts  only  to  destroy 

withroses,  she  merges  her  poison-breath  is  a  vivid  emblem  of  the  deceitfulness 

amidst  their  fragrance,  and   hdls  her  and  deadliness  of  sin.     For  the  poison 

silly  victim  with  a  counterfeit  repose,  of  sin's  bewitching  flowers,  there  is  but 

Oh  rest  not  on  her  pillow,  for  a  serpent  one  remedy.  It  is  found  "  in  the  leaves 

coils  beneath  it!    Wander  not  amidst  of  the  'tree  of  hfe'  that  groweth  on 

her  bowers,   for  wasps  are  honeying  Mount  Calvary."     [Cayler.^ 

amidst  her  blossoms  and  leaving  their  Avoid  the  beginnings  of  sin.  *' Those 

stings  in  the  core  of    all   her   fruits,  who  would  nut  f^iU  into  the  river  must 

Recline  not  upon  the  sunny  knolls,  for  notapproachtoonearthebanks.  He  who 

volcanic  lava  lurks  under  the  moss,  and  crushes  the  eg<;-  need  not  fear  the  flight 

the  fire  of  hell  lights  up  her  transient  of  the  bird.    He  who  would  not  drink 

heaven.      *  My  son  !  when  sinners  en-  of  the  wine  of  wrath,  must  not  touch 

tice  thee,  consent  thou  not.'"  [^Mursell.'\  the  cup  of  pleasure.    He  who  would  not 

Allurements  of  sin.      "Tiiere  is    a  hear  the  passing-bell  of  eternal  death, 

tree  called  the  Judaa  tree.     The  bios-  should  not  finger  the  rope  of  sin.    The 

soms  appear  before  the  leaves,  and  they  man   who   carries    gunpowder    cannot 

are  of  brilliant  crimson.     The  flaming  stand  too  far  from  the  fire.     If  we  go 

beauty  of  the  flowers  attracts  innumer-  with  sin  one  mile,  it  will  compel  us  to 

able  insects  ;  and  the  wandering  bee  go  twain.    It  swells  like  Elijah's  cloud, 

is  drawn  to  it  to  gather  honey.     But  from  the  size  of  a  man's  hand  till  it 

every  bee  that  alights  upon  the  bios-  covers  the  whole  sky."    [Seeker.] 

MAIN  HOMILETICS.— Verse  8, 

ZZZ.  Resort  anew  to  Prayer.    "  The  children  of  Israel  cried  unto  the 
Lord,"  etc.,  under  their  oppression. 

This  they  had  done  twice  before  when  similarly  situated — in  the  time  of  the 
Syrian  invasion  from  the  North  East,  and  again  when  crushed  under  the  heel 
of  the  Moabitish  king.  It  indicates  two  things  :  (1.)  The  whole  land  became  a 
scene  of  prayer.  From  every  corner  streams  of  supplication  went  up  from 
penitent  hearts  to  Him  that  was  able  to  save.  It  was  no  longer  confined  to  the 
few  Israelites  indeed,  who  were  accustomed  at  all  times  to  call  on  God,  and 
whom  God  regarded  as  his  "  remembrancers,"  in  times  of  peace  as  well  as  in  the 
evil  days  ;  but  the  whole  nation  were  on  their  knees.  (2.)  77ie  cry  was  impor- 
tunate. The  extreme  pressure  of  the  calamity  made  it  so.  To  a  large  extent, 
doubtless,  the  motives  were  defective,  yet  God  is  pleased  sometimes  to  hear  an 
earnest  cry  and  grant  the  deliverance  asked  where  there  is  only  the  appearance 
of  genuine  prayer.  Such  is  the  compassion  of  His  nature.  It  is,  iiowever,  only 
temporal  blessings  that  are  so  given.  Spiritual  gifts  are  reserved  for  those 
exclusively  who  become  His  children.  Where  there  is  faith  along  with  it, 
importunity  is  sure  to  prevail  in  the  long  run.  But  the  chief  feature  to  which 
the  God  of  Israel  would  have  regard  in  the  present  case  would  be  the  call  of 
His  own  children,  who  could  liold  Him  by  the  girdle  of  His  faithfulness,  and  who 
would  take  no  denial.     Here  we  see  : 

I.  The  gates  of  prayer  still  open.     After  so  long  a  time,  God's  ear  is  still 
open.     Long  and  grievously  had  the  people  sinned.     In  the  face  of  warning  and 
remonstrance,  while  the  trumpet  of  reconciliation  was  blowing,  and  Mercy  kept 
198 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   JUDGES,  chap.  iv. 


pleading  and  imploring,  by  every  argument  she  could  devise,  they  sinned.  By 
three  long  epochs  of  rebellion  against  their  covenant  God,  was  the  page  of  their 
history  darkened.  "  Forty  years  had  their  God  suffered  their  manners  in  the 
wilderness,"  and  now  for  four  times  forty  more,  when  settled  in  the  land  of 
their  inheritance,  had  He  continued  to  bear  with  their  frowardness,  while  not 
improved,  but  tending  to  become  worse  than  before.  How  could  it  be  expected 
that  His  ear  would  be  open  to  their  prayer  as  at  first  ?  Had  no  Divine 
jealousy  been  awakened  in  the  Divine  bosom ?  Were  such  persistentprofanation  of 
the  Divine  name,  and  such  incorrigible  perversity  of  nature  to  be  always  allowed 
to  happen,  without  producing  any  change  on  the  privilege  of  prayer  ?  Might 
we  not  fear  that  Jehovah  would  now  turn  to  them  the  back  of  His  throne  and 
allow  the  arm  of  His  justice  to  work  unimpeded  by  the  voice  of  mercy  ?  After 
this  people  had  for  160  years  turned  a  deaf  ear  to  the  voice  of  their  God,  it  was 
surely  natural  to  expect  that  He  would  act  as  One  who  had  *'  forgotten  to  be 
gracious,  and  in  anger  had  shut  up  His  tender  mercies  ? "  Would  he  not  now 
say  :  "  When  ye  spread  forth  your  hands  1  will  hide  mine  eyes  from  you,  and 
when  ye  make  many  prayers  I  will  not  hear — your  hands  are  full  of  sins."  Yet 
His  ear  is  still  open,  and  mainly  for  two  reasons  : — 

1.  God's  long-suffering.  From  j&rst  to  last  He  retains  His  great  name  which 
He  made  known  to  Moses.  "  The  Lord,  the  Lord  God,  merciful  and  gracious, 
long-suffering  and  abundant  in  goodness  and  truth."  An  old  writer  says  :  \ 
**  God's  most  wonderful  attribute  is  His  patience."  Though  deeply  offended  ' 
with  every  individual  act  of  sin,  He  can  wait  a  thousand  years  before  inflicting 
the  punishment  due,  should  the  claims  of  righteousness  permit.  He  is  the 
King  Eternal ;  and  His  patience  is  not  to  be  measured  by  a  man's  standard. 
Were  it  to  be  so  estimated,  this  people  had  long  ere  now  been  swept  off  the  face 
of  the  earth.  But  His  own  account  of  Himself  is  :  ''  1  wiU  not  execute  the 
fierceness  of  mine  anger  and  destroy  Ephraimyfor  I  am  God  and  not  man,  I 
am  Jehovahj  1  change  not ;  therefore  ye  sons  of  Jacob  are  not  consumed" 

He  is  far  above  the  irritation  and  fretfulness  of  a  creature  nature.  His 
Majestic  Being  is  not  liable  to  be  ruffled  by  any  storms  of  rebellion  that  may  arise 
under  His  throne.  With  all  His  supreme  hatred  to  sin,  He  ever  retains 
absolute  self-command.  There  is  no  ill-considered  haste  (as  often  happens  with 
man),  in  closing  up  the  channels  of  mercy  on  account  of  extreme  provocation 
given.  "The  Lord  is  slow  to  anger"  (Nah.  i.  Z)y\\iQra)lyy  of  wide  nostrils  1^ 
^12^  "^T)^.  When  the  nostrils  are  narrow,  the  anger  that  burns  in  the  bosom 
has  little  room  to  escape,  so  that  there  is  great  agitation  in  the  frame.  But 
when  the  nostrils  are  wide,  the  heaving  of  the  bosom  is  relieved,  and  there  is 
free  outlet.  There  is  no  agitation  or  heaving  of  the  nature  when  the  anger 
comes  forth.  There  is  great  anger,  yet  absolute  self-possession.  Tliere  is 
vehement  anger,  yet  no  hasty  expression  of  it.  In  verse  2  it  is  said,  "  The 
Lord  is  ^'f^V}  bP5  a  master  of  anger"  as  if  He  could  command  the  possession 
of  it  to  any  extent ;  and  yet  He  retains  perfect  composure.  So  differently  must 
we  think  of  God  from  the  thoughts  we  have  of  man.  His  anger  is  never 
wrongly  directed,  nor  breaks  loose  from  control,  as  blind  passion  does  in  the  case 
of  man. 

It  is  added,  "  He  is  great  in  power."  He  not  only  has  power  over  all  the 
creatures,  but  has  power  also  over  Himself.  He  shows  this  in  being  guided  not 
by  mere  feeling,  but  by  holy  principles  in  the  expression  of  His  anger,  by  right- 
eousness, truth,  and  faithfulness  as  well  as  mercy  and  compassion  (Num.  xiv.  18). 
Our  God  is  "the  God  of  patience."  (Rom.  xv.  5).  "  He  waits  to  be  gracious," 
and  so  keeps  the  gate  ^  of  mercy  open  all  the  day  of  life  long.  His  patience  ia 
the  silence  of  His  justice,  and  the  tender  whispering  of  His  mercy. 

199 


CHAP.  IV.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES, 


2.  Provision  is  made  for  keeping  the  gates  open.  The  way  of  approach  to 
God  is  called  *' a  living  way";  a  way  which  must  always  continue  open,  on 
account  of  what  has  been  done  both  to  get  it  opened,  and  to  keep  it  open.  It  is 
a  way  that  cannot  be  blocked  up.  It  is  like  a  fountain  that  always  keeps  flowing. 
Everything  in  the  gospel  is  of  a  living  character.  It  speaks  of  a  "living  hope" 
(or  "lively  "),  one  that  will  never  wither;  "living bread,"  such  as  never  becomes 
moulded,  and  gives  life  to  him  that  partakes  of  it ;  "  living  water  "  and  "living 
fountains  of  water,"  always  fresh  and  refreshing  ;  and  "  living  stones,"  stones 
possessing  the  strange  property  of  life,  without  losing  the  properties  of  solidity, 
strength,  and  durability.    And  the  way  of  access  is  a  "  living  way."     How  is  it  so  ? 

(1.)  The  propitiating  blood  is  always  efficacious.  The  Lamb  in  the  midst 
of  the  throne  always  appears  "as  it  had  been  slain*'  i.e.  as  if  newly  slain.  The 
blood  seems  fresh  to  this  day,  as  if  in  the  act  of  trickling  from  the  wound.  It 
never  coagulates  or  becomes  vitiated,  but  is  alwa3'S  warm  and  full  of  virtue,  as 
when  it  first  flowed  from  the  vein.  There  is  "  no  remembrance  any  more  of 
the  sins "  that  are  confessed  over  this  sacrifice.  "  We  are  sanctified  by  the 
offering  of  the  person  of  Jesus  Christ  once  for  all."  (Heb.  ix.  26.)  His 
blood  is  "  a  fountain  opened  for  sin,"  without  any  stone  on  the  mouth  of  it, 
and  it  flows  perennially. 

(2)  The  great  Intercessor  lives  to  keep  it  open.  It  cannot  be  that  any 
work  of  a  Divine  person  should  be  merely  temporary.  For  His  own  honour  and 
for  the  Father's  honour.  He  lives  to  see  that  His  great  work  should  have  ever- 
lasting results.  "  Our  great  High  Priest  is  passed  into  the  heavens — let  us 
therefore  come  boldly  unto  the  throne."  "  He  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession 
for  us."  "  This  man  continueth  ever."  Seen  by  the  seer  of  Patmos  in  His 
exalted  and  permanent  state,  in  the  heavenly  world.  He  was  "  clothed  with 
a  garment  down  to  the  foot,  and  girt  about  the  breasts  with  a  golden  girdle," 
Le.  the  robe  of  blue,  the  distinctive  official  robe  of  the  high  priest,  showing  that 
in  heaven  He  was  still  at  work,  and  always  could  continue  to  be  at  work  in  His 
priestly  character  keeping  the  way  of  access  open.  He  also  had  on  "  the  curious 
girdle  of  the  ephod,"  which  was  virtually  the  working  coat  of  the  priestly  office. 

(3.)  God's  names  imply  that  the  gates  are  always  open.  He  is  addressed 
as — "  Thou  that  hearest  prayer,"  as  if  that  were  His  perpetual  attitude  toward 
man.  He  is  often  called  "  the  God  of  Jacob,"  and  He  often  takes  this  name  to 
Himself,  because  of  the  delight  He  takes  in  those  who  have  much  of  the  spirit 
of  prayer.  Still  more  emphatic  is  the  corresponding  name — "  the  God  of 
Israel " — ^the  God  of  the  man  who,  in  prayer,  "  as  a  prince,  had  power  with  God 
and  prevailed."  It  is  also  recorded,  "  I  said  not  unto  the  seed  of  Jacob,  seek 
ye  me  in  vain."  It  is  implied  also  in  the  name,  "  the  God  of  peace,"  which 
implies  that  He  is  accessible  to  men.  Or,  more  emphatically  still,  He  is  said  to 
be  "  God  in  Christ,  reconciling  the  world  unto  Himself,"  etc.  This  is  His  fixed 
attitude  throughout  New  Testament  times. 

(4.)  His  seat  implies  it.  It  is  a  "  throne  of  grace."  Anciently  it  was  called 
a  "  mercy-seat,"  because  blood  was  sprinkled  upon  it,  and  justice,  however 
stern,  was  satisfied,  so  that  Mercy  could  freely  flow  forth.  And  now  through 
all  time,  "  He  slumbers  not."  A  suppliant  never  can  come  and  find  the  gate 
shut. 

(5.)  His  standing  promises  regarding  prayer  imply  it.  "  His  ears  are  open 
to  the  cry  of  the  righteous."  "  He  will  fulfil  the  desire  of  them  that  fear  Him." 
"  Call  upon  me  in  the  day  of  trouble  and  I  will  deliver  thee."  "  Commit  thy 
way  unto  the  Lord  ;  trust  also  in  Him  and  He  will  bring  it  to  pass."  "  And  all 
the  promises  of  God  are  in  Christ,  yea,  and  in  Him,  Amen." 

(6.)  His  readiness  to  hear  every  class  of  suppliants  implies  it.     Even  the 
ruthless    persecutor  of  God's    church    (Acts  ix.   11) ;    the  bloody  Manasseh 
(II.   Chron.    xxxiii.    12,   13) ;    the    destitute,    and    th©    groaning    prisoner 
200 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:   JUDGES,  chap.  rr. 


(Ps.  cii.  17,  20) ;  those  who  accept  the  punishment  of  their  iniquity 
(Lev.  xxvi.  41,  42) ;  the  broken  hearted  penitent  (Ps.  li.  17) ;  the  penitent 
thief  (Luke  xxiii.  42,  43)  ;  and  many  others. 

(7.)  His  constant  attitude  of  expectancy  that  men  will  pray  to  Him. 
"  When  thou  prayest,  be  not  as  the  hypocrites,"  implying  that  they  are  expected 
to  pray  without  being  told  to  do  so.  Mark  xi.  24  ;  John  xiv,  13,  14  ;  xv.  7  ; 
Jer.  xxix.  12,  13 ;  xxxi.  18,  etc. ;  Isa.  Ixv.  24  ;  Iviii.  9  ;  Eph.  iii.  20. 

"  The  doors  of  the  church  are  thrown  open  but  once  a  week,  and  the  com- 
munion table  is  but  occasionally  spread ;  but  the  pages  of  the  Bible  are  always 
open,  and  the  gates  of  prayer,  like  those  of  heaven,  are  never  shut.  Prayer  is 
like  a  private  postern,  through  which  by  night  as  well  as  by  day,  we  have  the 
privilege  of  access  to  the  palace  and  the  presence  of  the  King.  Prayer  is  the 
first  door  that  is  open  to  us,  and  it  is  the  last  that  is  shut.  When  a  man  is 
tossing  on  his  deatn-bed  and  cannot  read  his  Bible ;  when  even  he  is  unable  to 
give  assent  to  the  promises  that  we  pour  into  his  ear,  he  still  can  offer  up  some 
petitions  to  the  throne  of  grace.  Mark  those  moving  lips  !  behold  he  prayeth  1 
and  his  spirit  flies  heavenward  on  the  wings  of  prayer."     [Guthrie.'\ 

II.  The  baseness  of  praying  to  God  only  in  adversity.  While  the  sun  of 
peace  shone,  these  Israelites  gave  themselves  to  the  worship  of  idols,  and  in- 
dulged themselves  in  their  sins.  They  refused  to  walk  with  God  and  cast  His 
laws  behind  their  backs.  But  when  the  storm  now  arises,  and  the  waves  of 
trouble  threaten  to  overwhelm  them,  immediately  they  return  confessing  their 
error.  It  is  indeed  right  to  pray  and  confess  sin  under  all  circumstances.  But 
what  should  we  think  of  a  friend  that  never  paid  us  a  visit  except  when  he  bad 
got  into  difficulties  and  came  merely  to  borrow.  To  pray  to  God  only  in  emer- 
gencies, after  we  have  tried  other  refuges  all  round  and  found  them  false,  and 
we  go  to  Him  as  a  last  resort  because  we  cannot  do  better — this  is  most  base, 
and  might  well  fill  a  man  with  shame  and  confusion  of  face.  "  The  servile  man 
plies  his  prayers,  as  sailors  do  their  pumps,  only  in  a  storm,  or  when  fearful  of 
sinking."     [Seeker,^ 

The  proper  rule  of  the  christian  life  is  to  keep  up  intercourse  with  God  at  all 
times,  David  says,  "  I  have  set  the  Lord  always  before  me ;  He  is  at  my  right 
hand.  Evening,  morning,  and  at  noon  will  I  pray  and  cry  aloud,  and  He  shall 
hear  my  voice."  How  diligent  and  proficient  he  was  in  closet  duties  and  exercises 
these  perennially  interesting  Psalms  testify.  The  result  was,  he  was  not  "  greatly 
moved  "  even  when  the  mountain  billows  passed  over  him.  Cornelius  "  prayed 
to  God  always."  In  due  time  an  abundant  answer  was  given.  Daniel  at  the 
height  of  power  knelt  before  his  God  three  times  a  day,  and  could  be  calm  under 
the  stern  trial  through  which  be  had  to  pass.  Jobw&s  careful  to  keep  up  inter- 
course with  God  in  his  family-circle  in  the  day  of  prosperity,  and  so  stood  pre- 
pared for  the  day  of  adversity.  Read  the  first  paragraph  of  Job  I.  with  the  last 
paragraph,  and  see  how  "the  prudent  man  forseeth  the  evil  and  hideth  himself." 

7  he  condition  of  heathen  families  is  described  a,s  thsi.t  of  those  who  "do  not 
call  on  God's  name."  God  complains  of  His  own  Israel  that  they  restrained 
prayer  before  Him.  Is.  xliii.  22;  Ps.  Ixxxi.  10,  11  ;  Hos.  v.  4,  with  verse  15 
and  vi.  1-3.  Not  till  He  slew  them  did  they  return  and  inquire  after  God. 
Ps.  Ixxviii.  3'4.  But  when  trouble  was  removed,  "  they  turned  back  and  tempted 
God,"  comp.  Deut.  xxxii.  15.  Here  Jehovah  complains  that  notwithstanding 
God's  goodness  to  them  in  settling  them  in  the  land,  "  they  forsook  the  Lord 
God  of  their  fathers  and  served  other  gods."  Only  when  a  mountain  wave  over- 
whelmed them  did  they  think  of  coming  back  to  their  God. 

Beecher  says,  "  How  poor  is  prayer  when  men  are  driven  to  it  by  the  whip, 
and  they  resort  to  it  only  when  they  feel  the  lash  of  trouble  on  their  back  1 
What  would  you  think  of  a  son  that  never  went  home  to  his  father,  except 

201 


CHAP.  IV,  HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES, 


when  he  was  in  debt,  and  had  the  sheriff  at  his  heels,  and  wanted  help ;  but 
the  moment  that  he  obtained  relief  forgot  that  father  again,  and  had  no  further 
intercourse  with  him  till  he  was  again  in  trouble  ?  " 

III.  Prayer  specially  suitable  to  times  of  great  distress.  Though  it  was 
case  to  come  to  God  only  in  great  emergencies,  it  was  natural  and  most  proper 
that  Israel  should  come  to  Him  as  their  refuge  in  the  day  of  great  calamity. 
For  **  to  whom  should  a  people  go  but  to  their  God  ? "  The  whole  Book  of  Psalms 
is  the  record  of  seeking  God  in  distress,  with  the  invariable  happy  result  of 
doing  so.  Many  special  examples  of  the  wisdom  of  such  a  course  occur 
throughout  Scripture — 1  Sam.  xxx.  6  ;  Gen.  xxxii.  7,  9-12,  24-30  ;  Ex.  xvii. 
11,  12;  xxxii.  10-14;  Josh.  vii.  6-9;  Jud.  xv.  18,  19;  Isa.  xxxviii.  1-5; 
Dan.  ix  ;  James  v.  13  ;  Ps.  1.  15  ;  cxxx.  1  ;  Matt.  viii.  25  ;  xvii.  14,  15  ; 
Jon.  i.  6  ;  John  xi.  3,  21,  22  ;  Acts  vi.  4  ;  xii.  12  ;  Rom.  xii.  12  ;  Eph.  vi.  18 
(in  the  evil  day)  ;  iii.  13,  14  ;  Col.  iv.  2,  3  ;  2  Thess.  iii.  1,  2  ;  Heb.  iv.  16 
(time  of  need)  ;  1  Pet.  v.  7. 

Gethsemane  teaches  us  profound  lessons  on  this  subject,  both  by  precept  and 
example  ;  and  it  is  by  following  the  Master's  example  in  "  offering  up  prayers 
and  supplications,  with  strong  crying  and  tears,  unto  Him  that  is  able  to  save," 
that  we  may  expect  to  fight  our  way  successfully  to  the  crown  of  glory.  It  is 
through  prayer  that  all  great  deliverances  come  now.  Thus  Joshua  gained 
every  battle ;  thus  Joseph  rose  from  the  pit  of  Doth  an  and  the  dungeons  of 
Egypt  to  the  position  of  being  ruler  over  all  the  land  of  Egypt ;  thus  Hezekiah 
turned  the  tide  of  battle  to  the  gate,  when  encompassed  with  formidable  hosts ; 
thus  Elijah  proved  more  than  a  match  for  the  King  of  Israel  with  the  whole 
nation  at  his  back ;  thus  Jacob  changed  the  heart  of  his  brother  Esau,  and 
earned  an  undying  fame ;  thus  Samson  "  out  of  weakness  became  strong,," 
and  slew  more  of  the  enemy  at  his  death  than  he  had  done  during  his  life ; 
thus  Jonah  escaped  from  the  most  hopeless  prison  into  which  a  living  man 
was  ever  cast ;  thus  Paul  and  Silas  awakened  the  slumbering  arm  of  Omnipo- 
tence, and  the  solid  walls  of  their  prison  shook,  while  the  barred  and  bolted 
gates  became  loose  in  a  moment,  as  flax  at  the  touch  of  fire  ;  thus,  too,  did  the 
Apostles  gain  all  their  victories  against  the  enemies  of  the  Church  in  the  early 
years  of  her  ever-memorable  history. 

**  Sinking  times  are  praying  times  with  the  Lord's  people.  Peter  neglected 
prayer  when  starting  on  his  perilous  journey,  but  when  he  began  to  sink  his 
danger  made  him  a  suppliant,  and  his  cry,  though  late,  was  not  too  late.  In 
our  hours  of  bodily  pain  and  mental  anguish,  we  find  ourselves  as  naturally 
driven  to  prayer  as  the  wreck  is  driven  upon  the  shore  by  the  waves.  The 
fox  hies  to  its  hole  for  protection  ;  the  bird  flies  to  the  wood  for  shelter  ;  and 
so  the  tried  believer  hastens  to  the  mercy-seat  for  safety.  Heaven's  great 
harbour  of  refuge  is  All  Prayer  ;  thousands  of  weather-beaten  vessels  have 
found  a  haven  there,  and  the  moment  a  storm  comes  on,  it  is  wise  for  us  to 
make  for  it  with  all  sail."     [^SpurgeonS\ 

IV,  Great  trials  lead  to  greater  earnestness  in  prayer.  It  was  when  these 
Israelites  came  into  deep  waters  that  they  found  the  practical  value  of  the 
privilege  of  prayer  ;  it  was  then  too  that  they  began  in  good  earnest  to  pray. 
The  more  crushing  the  calamity  that  befel  them,  and  the  deeper  sense  they  had 
of  their  own  insufficiency  to  cope  with  it,  the  more  eager  Avas  their  application 
to  the  divine  footstool,  and  the  more  fast  was  the  hold  they  took  of  the  divine 
promises.  It  is  when  "  deep  calls  unto  deep "  that  prayer  becomes  a  cry. 
Langour  is  exchanged  for  ardour,  and  the  soul  pants  with  desire  for  the  blessing 
needed.  Lukewarmness  disappeaus,  and  all  the  force  of  the  instinct  of  self- 
preservation  is  thrown  into  the  cry  for  relief  Its  language  is,  "  My  heart  and 
202 


ii^MILETW  COMMENTARY  :  JUDGES.  chap.  iv. 

(lesli  cry  out  for  the  living  God."  There  is  a  pouriog  out  of  the  heart  before 
God.  The  heart  is  enlarged.  Prayer  is  no  longer  a  bondage  but  a  blessed 
relief.  An  old  writer  remarks,  "  As  music  upon  the  water  sounds  farther  and 
more  harmoniously  than  upon  the  land,  so  do  prayers  joined  with  tears." 

Would  Jacob  have  wrestled  so  hard  but  for  the  great  pressure  put  upon  him 
by  the  approach  of  the  revengeful  Esau  ?  Would  Abraham  liave  carried  on  the 
argument  so  skilfully  on  behalf  of  doomed  Sodom  but  for  the  fact  that  he  knew 
the  ministers  of  wrath  were  already  on  their  way,  and  were  on  the  point  of 
pouring  out  their  vials  ?  Would  David  have  been  so  excellent  a  pattern  of  the 
manner  in  which  ch^set  duties  should  be  performed,  had  he  not  been  so  often 
cast  into  the  furnace  when  seven  times  heated  ?  He  who  has  sounded  the 
lowest  depths  of  sorrow  can  take  the  firmest  grasp  of  the  girdle  of  the  Divine 
faithfulness.  And  he  who  has  been  most  heavily  overloaded  with  a  weight  of 
care  and  anxiety  is  likely  to  become  most  skilful  in  the  use  of  tlie  weapon — all- 
prayer.  Thus  does  God  bring  good  out  of  evil,  and  make  great  triala  "  yield 
in  the  end  the  peaceable  fruits  of  righteousness." 

COMMENTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.— Verse  8. 

The  Excellence  op  Prayeb. 

Prayer  and  an  open  Bible  are  the  matter  of  the  petitions  presented  may 

greatest   of  all    Christian    privileges,  be,  or  whatever  confessions  are  made. 

They  constitute  the  means  by  which  (1.)    It  assumes  His  sovereignty — 

all  others  are  enjoyed.      It  is  through  that  He  is  the  Great  Supreme,  before 

these  that  the  devout  believing  soul  whom    every    knee    shall    bow,     **  of 

transacts  all  its  business  of  communion  whom,  through   whom,  and  to  whom 

with  God.     Through  the  one  we  make  are   all   things," — the    Maker    of  all, 

known    all  our  thoughts,  wishes  and  the   Possessor  of  all,   and    the   Wor- 

feelings  to  our  God  ;  and  through  the  shipped   of  all.      Tlie   great   Roman 

other  God  speaks  to  us,  revealing  His  said,    "  I  will  be   Csesar    or  no  one." 

mind  and  will.     Prayer,  of  which  only  Prayer  assumes   that  if  God  is  to  be 

we  now  speak,  is  also  a  highly  elevating  acknowledged   as   God,    He    must  be 

and  purifying  exercise.     "  It  is,  in  one  held  as  Sovereign  in  His  own  universe 

choice  handful,   Heaven  !  "      For  the  — that  the  first  duty  of  the  creature 

work  of  Heaven  is  praise,  arising  from  should   be    to    adore    and   obey    its 

answered  prayer.      It  is  the  soul  in  Creator,    and    that   all    the    blessings 

audience  with  its  God,  heaving  sighs  which    God    confers  on    his  creatures 

at  the  footstool  which  shall  become  are     bestowed    of    His    own     good 

songs    on    the     throne.       From     no  pleasure. 

exercise    can   greater   soul-profit    be  (2.)   It   ascribes   to   Him   all-suffi- 

reaped  when  it  is  well  performed.      It  ciency — that  He   possesses    boundless 

is  fitting  therefore  that  now,  when  the  riches   of  blessings.      The   suppliant 

subject  is  before  us  formally,  it  should  feels  himself  but  a  tiny  insect  at  the 

be  carefully  considered.  door   of  the    Divine    all    sufficiency, 

just  as  an  ant  might  be  supposed  to 

I.  Prayer   specially  glorifying  to  lie  at  the  door  of  a  large  storehouse, 

God,  but  could  only  take  a  single  grain  of 

wheat  from  the  vast  abundance. 

It  is  so  for  two  reasons  :—  (3,)  it  ascribes  boundless  benevolence 

1.  It  ascribes  to  God  the  glory  of  — that    He  is   so    kind,    as    of  His 

His  perfections.     Prayer  does  this  by  own  goodness  to  open  His  hand  and 

its  very  attitude,  and  as  offered  in  the  supply  the  wants  of  every  living  thing, 

name  of  Christ,  whatever  the  special  It  supposes  that  He  finds  the  greatest 

203 


ohap.it. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES. 


pleasure  in  making  His  creatures 
happy  by  showering  His  gifts  upon 
them,  through  Jesus  Christ,  the 
appointed  channel. 

(4.)  It  assumes  His  faithfulness  and 
truth — that  He  cannot  violate  His 
word,  but  will  remain  true  to  His 
promises  in  all  circumstances  and 
times. 

(5.)  It  supposes  Him  to  be  omni- 
present— so  that  from  any  spot  on 
earth,  or  in  the  vast  creation,  prayer 
might  rise  up  before  Him. 

(6.)  It  also  ascribes  omniscience — 
that  He  can  hear  the  thoughts  and 
musings  of  the  heart,  equally  with  the 
utterances  of  the  voice. 

(7.)  And  omnipotence — that  He  can 
do  all  that  is  asked  without  fail — no 
proper  wish  but  He  can  gratify ;  no 
want  but  He  can  supply  ;  no  danger 
but  He  can  remove ;  no  fear  but  He 
can  dissipate  ;  no  enemy  but  He  can 
subdue — that  "  He  is  able  to  do  ex- 
ceeding abundantly  above  all  that  we 
ask  or  think." 

(8.)  Also  unchangeahleness  —  that 
however  often  we  approach,  and  how- 
ever changing  the  circumstances,  He  is 
always  the  same  in  character — a  rock 
amid  a  sea  of  change  —  that  the 
"strength  of  Israel  will  not  lie." 

All  this  is  assumed  by  every  right- 
hearted  petitioner  that  comes  before 
the  Divine  footstool,  and  thus  prayer 
is  reckoned  to  be  most  honouring  to 
God. 

2.  In  prayer  the  creature  takes  its 
right  place  before  God— and  so  God  is 

greatly  honoured.  It  is  weakness  lay- 
ing hold  of  strength — the  child  of 
yesterday,  throwing  itself  into  the  arms 
of  the  Everlastin<^^  Father — the  thing 
made,  bowing  itself  before  Him  that 
made  it.  It  is  the  empty  cistern 
placing  itself  at  the  fountain-head. 
It  is  the  homage  of  felt  subjection 
rendered  to  acknowledged  supremacy. 
Prayer  offered  through  Christ  as  the 
appointed  way  of  approach  to  God  is 
the  soul  coming  to  the  throne  of  God's 
holiness  on  His  own  terms  laid  down 
for  receiving  the  guilty  and  unde- 
serving. 

204 


Prayer  is  often  the  exercise  in  which 
the  soul  passes  out  of  darkness  into 
light,  or  when  it  first  draws  the  breath 
of  spiritual  life.  It  marks  the  moment 
when  the  soul  becomes  "dead  unto 
sin  but  alive  unto  God  through  Jesus 
Christ  the  Lord."  Thus  does  prayer 
on  all  sides  greatly  honour  God. 

But  all  is  not  prayer  that  is  called 
prayer.  When  prayer  is  a  mere  form- 
ality, it  is  not  counted.  Though  Saul 
of  Tarsus  prayed  for  years  with  devout 
regularity  as  a  Pharisee,  none  of  his 
exercises  were  listened  to  till  he  began 
to  pray  as  a  penitent.  On  the  same 
principle,  most  prayers  of  most  people 
are  never  counted  prayers  at  all.  A 
man  who  had  been  taught  to  pray 
when  he  was  three  years'  old,  and  was 
converted  in  his  old  age,  used  to  say  : 
"  I  am  the  old  man  who  said  his 
prayers  for  seventy  years,  and  yet  all 
the  time  never  prayed  at  all."  It  is  of 
the  greatest  importance  to  know  what 
kind  of  offerings  will  be  acceptable  to 
God.  There  is  a  holy  skill  in  the  con- 
ducting of  this  exercise  which  all  who 
really  wish  to  draw  down  blessings 
from  above,  must  set  themselves  to 
learn.  There  is  an  art  in  prayer,  and 
the  art  mainly  is  to  be,  above  all  things 
natural. 

Luther  understood  this  art  when  he 
adopted  the  motto — "  bene  precasse  est 
bene  studuisse.'*  When  most  pressed 
with  gigantic  toils,  he  said :  **  I  have 
so  much  to  do  that  I  cannot  get  on 
without  three  hours  a  day  of  praying." 

General  Havelock  rose  at  four,  if 
the  hour  for  marching  was  six,  rather 
than  lose  the  precious  privilege  of  com- 
munion with  God  before  setting  out. 

Sir  Matthew  Hale  says  :  "If  I  omit 
praying  and  reading  God's  Word  in 
the  morning,  nothing  goes  well  all 
day." 

Dr.  Pay  son,  when  a  student,  said  : 
"  Since  I  began  to  beg  God's  blessing 
on  my  studies,  I  have  done  more  in  one 
week  than  in  a  whole  year  before." 
These  men  knew  the  art  of  acceptable 
prayer. 

II.  Acceptable  Prayer. 

All  true  prayer  to  God  will  be 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES. 


CHAP.  IV 


answered  sooner  or  later  in  some 
form.  There  is  not  a  single  case  of 
refusal  on  record.  Such  a  case  as 
that  of  Moses  is  only  an  apparent 
exception.  (Deut.  iii.  25.  26).  He 
got  more  than  an  equivalent.  "  The 
Lord  buried  him,"  and  after  death  he 
opened  his  eyes  on  the  heavenly 
Canaan !  '*  Everyone  that  asketh 
receive th."  No  man  ever  yet  perished 
at  mercy's  gate.  No  petition  sincerely 
offered  in  the  name  of  Jesus  ever  fell 
to  the  ground.  Look  at  the  long  list 
of  applicants  who  came  to  Jesus  **  in 
the  days  of  His  flesh."  None  were 
put  away.  It  is  not  doubtful  whether 
we  shall  be  answered,  if  we  pray  in  the 
required  spirit — humbly,  penitently, 
believingly.  But  we  must  leave  God 
to  take  His  own  time  and  His  own 
way  of  giving  the  answer. 

Were  there  only  a  possibility  of 
success,  such  is  the  urgency  of  our  case 
as  sin-burdened  and  helpless,  that  we 
might  well  implore  our  God  impor- 
tunately to  answer  us.  The  four 
lepers  at  the  gate  of  Samaria  acted  on 
a  mere  peradventure  (IL  Kings  vii. 
3-5),  yet  were  successful.  Esther 
was  not  sure  of  the  king's  favour,  yet 
she  went  in  to  the  royal  presence. 
Jonah's  companions  in  the  ship  could 
only  say  "  call  on  thy  God  if  so  he 
that  God  will  think  on  us."  The 
heathen  deities  were  supposed  often  to 
spurn  their  suppliants  away  instead  of 
hearing  them.  Yet  not  the  less 
earnestly  did  they  come  again  with 
the  cry,  "  0  Baal,  hear  us  !  "  But  we 
have  the  sure  word  of  Him  who  is 
"the  Amen  — Faithful  and  True." 
(Matt.  xxi.  22.)  What  an  encourage- 
ment to  ask,  seek,  knock  until  it  be 
opened  to  us ! 

Acceptable  prayer  must  be  : — 
1.  Personal  —  the  exercise  of  the 
man  himself.  His  own  heart  must  be 
engaged  in  it,  though  there  should  be 
a  thousand  present.  Without  this 
there  might  be  "  dew  on  the  ground  " 
all  round  about,  but  our  ''fleece" 
would  be  dry.  It  will  not  do  to  have 
others  praying  for  us  ;  we  must  also 
pray    for  ourselves.      We  must    also 


often  pray  alone  ;  for  we  have  sinned 
alone,  must  die  alone,  and  will  be 
judged  alone.  We  should  have  our 
own  secret  place  for  meeting  with  God 
— our  "fig  tree,"  like  Nathanael ;  our 
"  house-top,"  like  Peter ;  the  open 
*' field,"  like  Isaac;  the  "plain,"  like 
Ezekiel ;  the  "  river-side."  like  Daniel ; 
or  even  the  "dungeon,"  like  Jeremiah  ; 
"  the  depths,"  like  David  ;  down  "  at 
the  bottom  of  the  mountains,"  like 
Jonah  ;  or  like  the  Master  Himself, 
"  the  desert  place  or  the  mountain 
side." 

2.   Simple  and  sincere,    {a)   Not 

artificial,  not  mechanical.  What  a 
drudgery  is  such  prayer  !  The  mere 
pronouncing  of  words  for  a  certain  length 
of  time,  along  with  the  hending  of  the 
knee,  is  by  many  reckoned  a  respectful 
offering  up  of  prayer.  And  yet  it  is 
scarcely  better  than  the  conduct  of  the 
Thibetan,  who  puts  his  written  prayers 
into  a  cylinder,  which  revolves  on  a 
handle,  and  which  he  twirls  by  the  aid 
of  a  ball  and  chain,  each  revolution 
counting  for  an  offering  of  the  enclosed 
petition.  Sometimes  the  cylinder  is 
attached  to  running  water,  and  thus 
"praying  without  ceasing"  is  carried 
on  by  water-power.  We  pity  the  poor 
Buddhist,  who  ties  his  prayers  to  a 
bamboo  stick  and  waves  them  many 
times  before  his  idol  god,  each  oscilla- 
tion being  a  repetition  of  the  prayer  ; 
or,  we  pity  the  Tavist,  in  China 
who  writes  out  a  statement  of  his  case 
on  paper,  with  a  request  accompanying 
it,  and  then  entrusts  it  to  the  priest 
who  burns  it,  and  determines  for  the 
suppliant  whether  his  case  will  be 
considered  favourably  by  the  god  or 
not.  Yet  what  better  is  the  position 
of  the  man  who  repeats  formally  the 
words  of  prayer,  without  having  in  his 
heart  anything  of  the  spirit  of  the 
exercise  ?  Better  indeed  than  the  mere 
formalist  was  the  case  of  the  man  who 
wished  sincerely  to  pray,  but,  being 
entirely  ignorant  of  how  to  proceed, 
went  every  morning  before  the  Lord, 
and  repeated  the  letters  of  the  alphabet 
saying,  "  and  now,  0  good  God,  put 
these  letters  together  into  words,  to 

206 


CHAP.  IV.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES. 


make  such  sense  as  may  be  most  to  the  seraphim,  each  of  whom  with  two 

thy  glory  and  my  good."  of  his  wings  covered  his  face,  as  being 

(J))  real.    The  talk  of  the  little  child  ashamed,  though  a  seraph,  to  stand 

has  nothing  in  it  of  the  grace  of  speech  uncovered  before  so  much  excellence  ; 

or  beauty  of  language,  and  yet  it  is  with  other  two  wings  he  covered  his 

more  pleasing  to  the  father's  ear  than  feet,  lest  even  a  seraph's  foot  should 

the  sweetest  music,  or  the  most  melli-  pollute  ground  so  holy ;  and  with  his 

fluous  phraseology.     So  it  is  with  the  remaining  two  wings  he  stood  ready  to 

hearer  of  prayer,   who,    "before    all  fly  swiftly  as   the  lightning,    at  the 

temples  made  with  hands,  prefers  the  lightest  whisper  that  comes  from  the 

upright  heart  and  true."     It  is  said  of  throne.     The  holiest  of  creatures  are 

Him,    "  thou   desireth    truth  in   the  the  most  full  of  godly  fear,  and  have 

inward  parts."     The  great  art  in  pray-  their  places  nearest  the  throne, 
ing  is  to  be  artless.     Eloquence  or  any 

straining  for  effect  is  a  blemish,  and  a  4,  Believing.    This  exercise  is  the 

detraction   from  the  acceptability  of  very  least  we  can  give  to  God   as  a 

prayer.     The  more  natural  and  true,  foundation  of  intercourse  with  Him — 

the  nearer  to  success.   Our  interjections  to  trust  Him  in  all  that  He  does,  and 

may  be  prayers.     Our  sighing  may  be  believe  Him  in  all  that  He  says.     But 

praying.     The  bursting  forth  of  our  on  that  footing  a  great  deal  may  be 

real  feelings  or  wishes,  however  simple  done — the  whole  business  of  the  soul's 

the  clothing.     A  grief  or  a  care,  or  a  salvation  may  be  transacted.     If  we 

genuine  wish,  expressed  by  a  penitent,  but  believe  all  He  has  told  us  about 

humble  heart,  trusting  in  the  Saviour's  Christ  as  a  Saviour,   and   trust  His 

advocacy,  and  relying  on  the  Divine  character  as  revealed  in  Christ,  what 

promises  is  the  kind  of  offering  which  a  mighty  impression  it  must  make  on 

God  desires.  the  heart.     We  shall  have  "  boldness 

at  the  throne" — the  boldness  of  the 

3.  Reverent.    He  whom  the  Father  little  child  that  climbs  his  father's  knee, 

always  hears  teaches  us  to  approach  and  throws  his  arms  around  his  neck. 

Him  with  these  words  on  our  lips —  "  Prayer  is  the  key  of  heaven,  and 

"Our    Father    who  art  in   Heaven;  faith  is  the  hand  tfiat  turns  it.    Faith  is 

hallowed  be  Thy  Name  ! "     "  God  is  to  prayer  as  the  feather  is  to  the  arrow ; 

greatly  to  be  feared  in  the  assembly  of  faith  feathers   the    arrow  of  prayer. 

His  saints,  and  to  be  had  in  reverence  and  makes  it  fly   swifter  and  pierce 

of  all  that  are  about  Him."     South  the   throne   of  grace.      Prayer    that 

says,  "  we  are  to  keep  our  distance  is  faithless  is  fruitless "  (Mark  xi.  24). 

from  God  in  our  very  approaches  to  \Watson.^ 

Him."     We   approach   to  an  Infinite  Many  pray  to  God  for  pardon  and 

Majesty  ;    One  who   fills  heaven  and  peace,  for  hope  and  spiritual  joy,  as  if 

earth,  before  whom  the  seraphim  cry  they  did  not  believe  that  God  were 

aloud,   "  Holy,  Holy,  Holy  Lord  God  listening  to  their  words,  or  as  if  they 

Almighty  I  "     We   come  as  dust  and  thought  He  grudged  to  give  them  such 

ashes,  confessing  we  are  vile,  and  rebels  things.  The  promises  made  to  believe  in 

against  the  "King  of  Kings  and  Lord  of  prayer  are  most  explicit  (Mai^t.  xxi.  22 ; 

Lords."     Therefore  our  spirit  ought  to  John  xiv.  13,  14  ;  Mark  ix.  23  ;  James 

be  that  of  the  publican  (Luke  xviii.  13),  i.  5,  6  ;  Jer.  xxix.  12, 13  ;  John  xv.  7 ; 

or  that  of  Elijah,  when  "  he  cast  him-  xvi.  24  ;  1  John  v.  14,  15). 
self  down  upon  the  earth  and  put  his 

face  between  his  knees"  (1  Kings  xviii.  5.  With  the  use  of  all  the  argu- 

42),  or  that  of  Abraham  when  he  said,  ments.    When  an  advocate  undertakes 

"  Behold,  I  have  now  taken  upon  me  to  plead  a  cause,  he  looks  at  the  case 

to  speak  unto  the  Lord;  "  "0,  let  not  on  all  sides,  and,  not  content  with  one 

the  Lord  be  angry  and  I  will  speak  "  argument  or  two,  he  carefully  treasures 

(Gen.  xviii.  27-32)  ;  or  that  even  of  up  every  plea  he  can  devise,  so  that  by 
206 


UOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


CHAP.  IV. 


any  means  he  may  bring  off  his  case 
successfully.  And  when  we  come  be- 
fore God  we  are  directed  "to  take 
with  us  words  " — both  our  own  words 
suitable  for  expressing  our  needs  and 
desires,  and  also  such  words  as  God 
has  supplied  us  with  as  arguments,  in 
order  to  plead  with  Him.  We  are 
like  Job,  though  not  in  his  self-justifying 
spirit  to  **  order  our  cause  before  God, 
and  fill  our  mouth  with  arguments." 
We  are  not  to  be  content  with  always 
quoting  the  same  passages  of  Scripture 
— those  with  which  we  are  most  familiar 
— but  to  turn  over  the  whole  Bible  in 
every  part,  and  make  use  of  all  its 
promises  and  gracious  statements,  each 
in  turn.  God  wishes  us  to  honour 
every  part  of  His  word  on  the  one 
hand,  and  on  the  other  He  delights  to 
see  us  gathering  up  all  the  pleas  with 
which  He  has  furnished  us,  so  as  to 
make  the  most  of  our  case.  He  loves 
us  to  reason  with  Him,  *'  Come,  let 
us  reason  together."  "Produce  your 
cause  with  the  Lord  ;  bring  forth  your 
strong  reasons,  saith  the  King  of  Jacob." 
"  Hear,  0  mountains,  the  Lord's  con- 
troversy, for  the  Lord  hath  a  controversy 
with  His  people."  And  especially  is 
it  said,  "  Put  me  in  remembrance,  let 
us  plead  together,  declare  thou,  that 
thou  mayst  be  justified."  This  is  a 
direct  call  to  make  use  of  all  the  pro- 
mises or  examples,  or  gracious  state- 
ments that  we  find  anywhere  within 
the  limit  of  the  blessed  volume,  which 
contains  the  revelation  of  God's  will, 
and  to  hold  Him  by  the  girdle  of  His 
faithfulness,  saying,  "We  will  not  let 
thee  go,  except  thou  bless  us."  The 
mightier  anyone  is  in  the  word,  the 
mightier  will  he  be  in  prayer. 

6.  Fervent.  The  blessings  of  God's 
hand  are  so  valuable,  we  are  in  such 
necessity  to  have  tliem,  and  there  are 
such  strong  reasons  for  our  losing  no 
time  to  secure  them,  that  a  state  of 
fervour  is  the  natural  frame  for  us 
always  to  cultivate.  Also  God  is  much 
more  disposed  to  answer  an  earnest 
wish  than  a  feeble  wish,  for  the  former 
puts  a  higher  estimate  on  His  blessings 
than  the  other.     Hence  the  power  of 


Elijah's  prayers  (James  v.  16-18). 

"  Cold  prayer  is  no  more  prayer  than 
painted  fire  is  fire.  Fervency  is  to 
prayer  what  fire  was  to  the  spices  in  tlie 
censer  ;  it  makes  it  ascend  to  heaven 
as  a  sweet  perfume.  Prayer  without 
fervency  is  no  prayer  ;  it  is  speaking, 
not  praying  :  lifeless  prayer  is  no  more 
prayer  than  the  picture  of  a  man  is  a 
man.  Fervent  prayer,  like  a  petard 
set  against  heaven's  gates  makes  them 
fly  open.  Clirist  prayed  with  strong 
cries."     \Watson\ 

"  One  great  extremity  is  approach- 
ing death.  What  can  then  support  us  ? 
Prayer  —  Fervent,  earnest,  wrestling 
prayer.  With  our  blessed  Lord,  prayer 
was  a  refuge  from  the  storm  ;  almost 
every  word  He  uttered  during  that 
tremendous  scene  was  prayer  —  the 
most  earnest,  the  most  urgent ;  repeated, 
continued  proceeding  from  the  recesses 
of  the  soul  ;  private,  solitary  ;  prayer 
for  deliverance,  for  strength,  above  all 
for  resignation."     [Paley.^ 

**  A  small  vessel  with  smart  gales  will 
sail  faster  than  a  large  ship  with  small 
winds.  When  prayer  mounts  on  the 
wing  of  fervour  to  God,  then  answers 
come  down  like  \\g\\tmng  from  God." 
[Seeker.'] 

"  The  arrow,  though  well  pointed 
and  feathered,  is  of  little  use  unless 
pulled  to  the  head  by  a  strong  hand." 
\_Filkington.] 

Prayer  if  only  dribbled  forth  from 
careless  lips  falls  at  our  feet.  It  is  the 
strength  of  fervour  which  sends  it  to 
heaven,  and  makes  it  pierce  the  clouds. 
It  is  not  the  arithmetic  of  our  prayers, 
how  many  they  are  ;  nor  the  rhetoric 
of  our  prayers,  how  eloquent  they  be  ; 
nor  the  geometry  {){  our  prayers,  how 
long  they  be  ;  nor  their  music^  how 
sweet  the  voice  may  be ;  nor  their 
logicy  how  argumentative  they  may 
be ;  nor  their  method,  how  orderly 
they  may  be  ;  nor  even  their  divinity, 
how  good  their  doctrine  may  be — 
which  God  values.  But  fervency  of 
spirit  "availeth  much."  (James  v.  16.) 
[Bp.  Hall] 

"It  is  hke  the  rope  in  the  belfry. 
Prayer  pulls  the  rope  below,  and  the 
great  bell  rings  above  in  the  ears  of 

207 


OHAP.iV.  HOMiLETIC  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES, 


God.    Some  scarcely  stir  the  bell,  for  be  kept  by  Him,  who  chargeth    not 

they  pray  so  languidly ;    others  give  Divine  Providence  with  his  keeping  ? 

but  an  occasional  pluck  at  the  rope  ;  The  angels  pitch  their  tents   round 

but  he  who  wins  heaven  is  the  man  the  saints'  dwellings,  but  as  the  drum 

who  grasps  the  rope  boldly  and  pulls  calls  the  watch  together,  so  God  ex- 

continuously    witii    all    his    might."  pects  that  by  humble  prayer  we  beg  of 

[SpurgeonJl  Him  their  ministry  and  attendance." 

I  Gurnall  adds  (in  1   Thess,  v.  17), 

7.  Daily  and  without  ceasingr.  service  and  prayer  are  the  warp  and 

Beecher  says,  "  Let  the  day  have  a  woot  or  the  Oliristian  hfe,  of  which 

blessed  baptism  by   giving  your  first  every  part  of  it  is  composed.     Both  are 

waking    thoughts  into  the   bosom  of  in  the  groundwork  of  the  stuff.  Prayer 

God.     The  first  hour  of  the  morning  at  stated  seasons  is  good  and  necessary ; 

is  the  rudder  of  the  day."  but  a  proper  Christian  will  find  it  im- 

Spurgeon  says,    "  Keep  on  pulling  possible  to  confine  his  prayers  to  stated 

the  bell  in  the  belfry,  and  though  the  seasons.     He  will  discover  that— 

bell  is  so  high  up  that  you  cannot  hear  "  Prayer  is  the  Christian's  vital  breath, 

it  ring,  depend  upon  it  it  can  be  heard  The  Christian's  native  air," 

in  the  tower  of  heaven,  and  is  ringing  and  that  to  attempt  to  carry  on  the 

before  the  throne  of  God,  who  will  give  spiritual  life  without  more  prayer  than 

you  answers  of  peace  according  to  your  a  short  recital  in  the  morning  and  the 

faith."  same    on  retiring  to   rest  is   equally 

Trapp  says,  "  A  good  Christian  is  absurd  with  a  man  opening  his  case- 
daily  either  praying  or  praising,  or  ment  morning  and  evening  and  inhal- 
both.  He  drives  a  constant  trade  ing  the  fresh  air  for  a  few  minutes,  and 
betwixt  earth  and  heaven."  then  saying  to  himself  that  amount  of 

Henry  says,  *'  Prayer  is  the  key  of  breathing  will  sufiice  for  the  rest  of 

the  morning   and    the    bolt    of  the  the  day.     We  must  always  be  in  the 

evening."  spirit  of  prayer,  and  so  '*  pray  without 

Guthrie  says, "  It  is  as  impossible  for  ceasing." 
the  soul  to  live  and   thrive  without         Salter  put  it,   "The  bird    is  not 

daily  prayer  as  for  the  body  to  do  so  always  on  the  wing,  but  is  ready  to  fly 

without  daily  food.      Our  graces  are  at  any  moment." 
like  plants  that  need  daily  watering  ; 

watches    that    need    daily    winding ;        8.  Importunate.    No  Christian  should 

lamps  that  need  daily  filling ;  bodies  in  any  case  despond,  because  for  a  time 

that  need  daily  feeding."  he  is  not  heard.     The  rule  laid  down 

Talmage  says,  "  A  good  day  begins  for  all  by  the  Master  Himself  is,  that 

with  God ;  a  wise  merchant  would  no  "  men  should  always  pray   and   not 

more  think  of  going  to  business  without  faint"     Nay,  we    must    go    further, 

communion  with  Christ  than  of  going  Since  our  privilege  is  so  great  in  having 

to   the    store    without    coat,   hat,  or  a  living  advocateon  high — a  Great  High 

shoes.    Ihada  poor  watch  and  used  to  set  Priest  within  the  veil,  we  ought  to*'coine 

it  every  morning  in  order  to  make  a  guess  boldly  to  the  throne  of  grace,"  as  those 

from  it  about  the  time  of  day.      Our  who  are  assured  of  being  heard.     We 

souls  are  poor  timepieces,  utterly  out  are  to  throw  an  earnestness  into  our 

of  order.      Every  morning  we  need  to  prayers  like  that  of  Jacob  (Gen.  xxxii. 

set  them  by  the  Sun  of  Righteousness."  26,) — to  "pray  with  groanings  or  de- 

GurnaU  says,  "  He  who  closes  his  sires  that  are  too  great  for  expression.'* 

e\  es  at  night  without  prayer  lies  down  When  we  can  put  our  finger  on  a  pro- 

beforehisbedismade.  Heislikeafoolish  mise,  and  go  to  God  with   a  "Thou 

captainina  garrison  who  betakes  himself  saidst,"  our  course  is  to  persevere  im- 

to  rest  before  he  has  set  the  watch  for  portunately,    for    God     cannot    deny 

the    city's    safeguard.      God    is    His  Himself,  and  we  are  sure  of  success  if 

people's  keeper  ;  but  can  he  expect  to  we  hold  on. 
208 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES, 


OHAF.  IT. 


•'Our  prayers  are  our  bills  of  ex- 
change, and  they  are  allowed  in  heaven, 
when  they  corae  from  trustful  and 
earnest  hearts  ;  but  if  we  be  broken  in 
our  religion  and  bankrupts  of  grace, 
God  will  protest  our  bills  ;  He  will  not 
be  won  with  our  prayers.     \^Adams.^ 

How  often  have  1  seen  a  little  child 
throw  its  arms  round  its  father's  neck, 
and  win  by  kisses  and  importunities 
what  had  been  refused  ?  Is  God  less 
pitiful  than  we  ?     [Guthrie.'] 

9.  Submissive.  Everything  we  re- 
ceive from  the  throne  of  grace  is  a  favour 
— an  undeserved  gift,  and  therefore  all 
that  we  ask  should  be  asked  in  sub- 
mission to  the  will  of  the  Great  Giver. 
The  tone  of  every  right  prayer  should 
be,  "  Not  my  will  but  thine  be  done  ! " 
Besides,  it  would  be  presumptuous  in 
us  to  be  supposed  to  dictate  to  God 
what  He  should  give  us.  It  is  not  for 
us  on  any  account  to  prescribe  to  Him. 
We  dare  not  suppose  that  He  will  bestow 
His  gifts  according  to  our  caprice  or  iU- 
considered  wishes,  but  according  to 
what  he  judges  to  be  wise  and  good. 
Farther,  it  might  often  be  the  case 
that  the  prayers  which  we  offer  up, 
and  those  of  the  blessed  Advocate 
might  conflict,  so  that  He  might  be 
asking  one  thing  for  us  at  the  throne 
while  we  might  be  asking  another. 

"  Many  times  Jesus  and  His  people 
pull  against  one  another  in  prayer. 
You  bend  your  knee  and  say,  **  Father, 
I  will  that  thy  saints  be  with  me 
where  1  am."  Christ  says,  "  Father, 
I  will  that  they  also  whom  thou  hast 
given  uie  be  with  me  where  /  am." 
Thus  the  disciple  is  at  cross-purposes 
with  his  Lord.  The  beloved  one  can- 
not be  with  Christ  and  with  you  too. 
Now,  which  pleader  shall  win  the  day  ? 
If  the  king  himself  should  step  from 
his  throne  and  put  it  to  you,  "  Here 
are  two  supplicants  praying  in  opposi- 
tion to  one  another  ;  which  shall  be 
answered  ? "  Surely  you  would  say, 
"  Well,  whatever  it  costs  me,  Jesus, 
not  my  will,  but  thine  be  done  1 " 
\Spurgeon^ 

10.  Watchful.  He  that  prays  and 
watches  not,  is  like  him  that  sows  a  field 


with  precious  seed,  but  leaves  the  gate 
open  for  hogs  to  come  in  and  root  it  up ; 
or  him  that  takes  great  pains  to  get 
money,  but  no  care  to  lay  it  up  safely 
when  he  hath  it."     \Gurnall.] 

We  ought  to  watch  our  prayers  to 
see  what  success  we  have  at  the  throne. 
"  Children  shoot  arrows  on  purpose  to 
loose  them,  and  never  so  much  as  look 
where  they  light ;  but  men  when  they 
shoot,  aim  at  the  mark,  and  go  after 
the  arrow,  to  see  how  near  it  falls.  So 
wicked  carnal  men  when  they  have  said, 
not  made  their  prayers  to  Almighty 
God,  it  is  but  opus  operatum,  they  have 
no  more  regard  of  them  ;  but  God's 
children,  when  they  on  bended  knee 
dart  out  their  prayers,  eye  them  up 
into  heaven,  observe  how  God  entertains 
them,  and  wait  for  a  happy  return,  at 
His  good  will  and  pleasure."  [  Wilkin- 
son.] 

We  are  to  add  watchfulness  and 
thanksgiving  together.  "  Prayer  and 
thanks  are  like  the  double  motion  of 
the  lungs  ;  the  air  that  is  sucked  in  by 
prayer,  is  breathed  forth  again  by 
thanks." 

"  Let  your  requests  be  made  known 
with  thanksgiving.  As  God  hath 
an  open  hand  to  give,  so  He  hath 
an  open  eye  to  see  who  comes  to  His 
door,  and  to  discern  between  the 
thankful  beggar  and  the  unthankful." 
[Gurnall.] 

11.  In  the  Spirit.  The  Holy  Spirit 
is  said  to  '*  help  our  infir^mities"  and 
to  **  make  intercession  for  us  with 
groanings  that  cannot  be  uttered."  He 
is  called  "  the  Spirit  of  grace  and  of 
supplications"  (Zech.  xii.  10).  We 
are  said  to  ^' pray  in  the  Holy  Ghost" 
(Jude  20).  We  ''pray  with  all  prayer 
and  supplication  "  only  by  the  help  of 
"  the  Spirit  "  (Eph.  vi.  18). 

**  We  must  implore  the  help  of  God's 
Spirit  to  fix  our  minds,  and  make  them 
intent  and  serious  in  prayer.  Tlie  ship 
without  a  pilot  rather  floats  than  sails. 
That  our  thoughts  do  not  float  up  and 
down  in  prayer,  we  need  the  Blessed 
Spirit  to  be  our  pilot  to  steer  us.  A 
shaking  hand  may  as  well  write  a  line 
steadily,  as  we  can  keep  our  hearts  fixed 
o  209 


OHAP.  IV.  SOMTLETIG  COMMENTARY:  JtJDOES. 


in  prayer  without  the  Spirit  of  God."  Holy  Spirit  is  the  chariot  wheel  of 

[Watson.]  prayer.     Prayer   may  be  the  chariot 

"  As  the  sails  of  a  ship  carry  it  into  the  desire  may  draw  it  forth  ;  but  the 

the  harbour,  so  prayer  carries  us  to  the  Spirit  is  the  very  wheel  whereby  it 

throne  and  the  bosom  of  God.     But  as  moveth."     [Spurgeon.] 
the  sails  cannot  of  themselves  speed  the 

progress  of  a  vessel  unless  filled  with         III.  Advantages  of  Prayer.    Prayer 

a  favourable  breeze,  so  the  Holy  Spirit  is  of  such  extensive  advantage  to  the 

must  breathe   on   our  hearts,   or  our  Christian,  that  it  may  be  said  to  be  an 

rrayers  will  be  motionless  and  lifeless."  envelope  for  the  whole  Christian  life. 

lopladi/.]  Swinnock    says,   "  As   every  sacrifice 

T'here  is  need  of  a  spiritual  frame  was  to  be  seasoned  with  salt,  so  every 

inprayer.  Ourofferingmust  be  "in  spirit  undertaking  and   affliction    must    be 

and  truth."     The  arrow  which  is  shot  sanctified  with  prayer.     It  shows  the 

from  a  loose  cord  drops  powerless  to  excellence  of  gold  that  it  is  laid  upon 

the  ground  ;    but    from    the  tightly  silver  itself,  and  so  it  speaks  the  excel- 

drawn  bow-string  it  springs   forward,  lency  of  prayer,  that  not  only  natural 

soars  upward  and  reaches  the  object  to  but  even  religious  actions  are  overlaid 

which  it  is  directed.     So  it  is  not  the  with  it.     We  pray  not  only  before  we 

loose  utterance   of  attempted  prayer  eat  and  drink,  but  also  before  we  feed 

that  is  effectual,  but  the  strong  earnest-  on  the  bread  of  the  word  and  the  bread 

ness  of  the  heart  sending  its  pointed  in  the  sacrament.     Prayer  is  needed 

petitions  to  heaven,  that  reaches  the  to  get  a  blessing  on  every  providence 

Divine  ear,  and   obtains  the  desired  and  every  ordinance  ;  it  is  also  needed 

blessing."     [Bowden.]  to     make     our     callings    successful. 

We  must  take  delight  in  our  prayers,  Prayer  secures  the   fort-royal  of  the 

and  in  order  to  do  this  must  have  the  heart ;  it  is  the  porter  that  keeps  the 

Spirit  resting  on  us.     *'  Delight  is  the  door  of  the  lips  ;  it  is  the  strong  hilt 

marrow  of  religion.     It  makes  the  me-  which   defendeth   the  hands  ;  it  per- 

lody,  without  which  prayer  would  be  fumes  every  relation  in  life ;  helps  us 

but  a  harsh  sound.     God  accepts  the  to  profit  by  every  condition  ;  is  the 

heart's  offering  when  it  is  a  gift  given,  chemist  that  turns  all  into  gold  ;  and 

not  forced.     Joy  is  the  tuning  of  the  is  the  master  workman,  who  being  out 

soul.      We  are  first  to  *  Rejoice  ever-  of  the  way,  the  whole  trade  stands  still, 

more,*   then  *  Pray    without    ceasing/  or  goeth  backward.     What  the  key  is 

Dullness  is  not  suitable  to  the  excel-  to  the  watch,  that  prayer  is  to  religion, 

lence  of  the  things  we  pray  for.  Gospel  it  winds  it  up,  and  sets  it  going." 
blessings  are  a   feast.      Manna  from         The  advantages  of  prayer  are  incal- 

heaven  is  not  to  be  sought  for  with  a  culable. 

dumpish  heart.  With  joy  we  must  1.  It  is  always  good  for  the  soul  to 
draw  the  water  out  of  the  wells  of  be  in  the  presence  of  its  God.  "  The 
salvation.  Faith  is  the  bucket,  but  mind  wants  steadying  and  setting  right 
joy  and  love  are  the  hands  that  move  many  times  a  day.  It  is  like  a  corn- 
it.  They  are  the  Aaron  and  Hur  that  pass  placed  on  a  ricketty  table  ;  the 
hold  up  the  hands  of  Moses.  "[C^ar??<?c^.]  least  stir  of  the  table  makes  the  needle 
Men  never  weary  of  the  shining  of  swing  round  and  point  untrue.  It 
the  sun  ;  so  a  man  who  is  taught  of  must  settle  till  it  points  aright.  Stand 
the  Spirit  will  never  weary  of  spiritual  awhile  in  the  presence  of  Jesus,  in  the 
exercises.  "  The  Spirit  dwells  in  us,"  attitude  of  prayer,  and  the  thing  that 
and  does  not  depart.  Hence  there  is  worries  you  will  soon  drop  as  a  sedi- 
provision  for  being  always  in  a  devout  ment  to  the  bottom,  and  the  soul  shall 
frame.  be  no  longer  turbid."     [Goulhurn,'] 

"When  thou  art  wrestling  like  Jacob         As  the  earth  moves  round  the  sun, 

and  art  nearly  thrown  down,  ask  the  exposing  every  part  of  its  surface  in 

Holy  Si'irifc  to  nerve  thine  arm.     The  turn  to  receive  his  enlightening  beams, 
210 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


OHA?  IV. 


and  be  warmed  by  his  genial  rays,  so 
by  the  habit  of  having  recourse  to  God 
in  prayer  in  all  our  states  and  moods 
of  mind,  we  are  blessed  with  His 
charming  presence  in  all  our  mental 
experiences  however  varied.  Amid  all 
the  dark  phases  of  Providential  deal- 
ings, we  ever  turn  round  to  receive 
afresh  the  light  of  the  Divine  counte- 
nance and  say,  *' Truly  this  light  is 
sweet,  and  a  pleasant  thing  it  is  for  the 
eyes  to  behold  the  sun."  Like  Moses 
in  the  cleft  of  the  rock  we  are  strength- 
ened by  a  mere  glimpse  of  tlie  Divine 
countenance  (Ps.  xlii.  5,  la.  cL). 

Trench  says,  "  If  we  would  measure 
in  some  sort  the  gains  of  this  com- 
munion with  God  J  think  how  much  we 
gain  by  intercourse  with  good  and  holy 
men,  and  then  conclude  from  the  less 
to  the  greater.  What  ennobling  in- 
fluences does  it  exercise  on  the  cha- 
racterto  live  in  habitual  fellowship  with 
the  excellent  of  the  earth,  whose  con- 
versation is  in  heaven,  and  whose  tone 
of  mind  is  always  lofty  and  pure  !  Un- 
consciously we  catch  something  of  their 
spirit,  and  feel  that  we  inhale  an  at- 
mosphere of  health.  But  how  incom- 
parably mightier  the  reactive  influence 
for  good,  when  we  continually  enjoy 
the  i)resence  of  Him  who  is  highest, 
purest,  and  best — in  whom  all  perfec- 
tions meet,  and  from  whom  all  true 
nobleness  proceeds ! " 

Newman  adds,  "  Prayer  has  a 
natural  effect  in  spiritualising  the 
soul.  A  man  is  not  what  he  was  before 
— gradually  he  imbibes  a  new  set  of 
ideas,  and  becomes  imbued  with  fresh 
principles.  He  is  as  one  coming  from 
king's  courts  with  a  grace,  delicacy, 
dignity,  and  propriety — a  justness  of 
thought  and  taste,  a  clearness  and  firm- 
ness of  principle,  all  his  own.  As  speech 
is  the  organ  of  human  society,  so  is 
prayer  the  instrument  of  Divine  fellow- 
ship and  Divine  training." 

Beechers  conception  is,  "  Prayer  is 
chiefly  translation  or  transfiguration. 
It  was  worth  more  to  Peter,  James, 
and  John  to  stand  for  an  hour  and  see 
the  spirits  drawn  through  the  heaven, 
and  talk  with  Christ,  whose  face  shone 
as  the  sun,  than  if  the  three  tabernacles 


which  they  craved  had  been  built  of 
diamonds  and  rubies  on  the  mountain- 
tops.  It  is  what  we  get  by  the  soul 
that  makes  us  rich." 

2.  Prayer  is  the  appointed  channel 
for  receiving  spiritual  blessings. 
"  Ask  and  ye  shall  receive."  "  Open 
thy  mouth  and  I  will  fill  it."  "Ye  have 
not,  because  ye  ask  not."  We  must 
seek  if  we  are  to  find.  It  is  the  hungry 
soul  that  is  filled  with  good  things. 
"  Prayer  is  the  vessel  by  which  the 
good  man  is  continually  trading  with 
the  Holy  Land  ;  he  sendeth  it  out 
fraught  with  precious  graces — faith 
hope,  desire,  love,  godly  sorrow,  and  it 
Cometh  home  many  times  richly  laden 
with  peace,  joy  and  increase  of  faith." 

The  very  heathens  seemed  to  feel 
instinctively  that  prayer  was  the 
natural  way  of  receiving  blessing  from 
their  God.  Pericles,  thegreat  Athenian 
statesman,  never  addressed  an  audience 
without  first  praying  to  the  gods. 
Cornelius  Scipio,  the  great  Roman 
General,  when  he  assumed  the  toga., 
never  undertook  any  affair  of  import- 
ance without  having  passed  some  time 
alone  in  the  temple  of  Jupiter  Capitoli- 
nus.  "  The  best  and  noblest  action," 
says  Plato,  "  which  a  virtuous  man  can 
perform,  and  that  which  will  most 
promote  his  success  in  life,  is  to  live 
by  vows  and  prayers,  in  continual  in- 
tercourse with  the  gods ;  nay,  all  who 
would  act  with  due  consideration, 
ou^dit,  before  beginning  any  under- 
taking, great  or  small,  to  invoke  the 
Deity." 

3.  The  warrant  is  to  expect  much 

^*  Hitherto  ye  have  asked  nothing  in 
my  name ;  ask,  and  ye  shall  receive 
that  your  joy  may  he  full."  (John  xvi . 
23,  24  ;  xiv.  13,  14  ;  xv.  7,  16.)  The 
terms  are  *^ anything'' — '^whatsoever 
ye  ask " — "  what  ye  imll"  "  in  every- 
thing let  your  request  be  made  known 
to  God."  When  Elishain  God's  name 
called  on  the  king  of  Israel  to  shoot 
the  arrows  of  deliverance  of  the  Ijord's 
people  from  their  enemies,  the  Syrians, 
the  timid  monarch  smote  thrice  on  the 
ground  and  stayed.     The  prophet  was 

211 


CHAP.  !▼. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUD0E8. 


angry  that  so  important  a  moment 
should  have  been  half  lost  by  the  want 
of  largeness  of  heart  on  the  part  of  the 
king  (2  Kings  xiii.  15,  19.)  Yet  this 
is  what  most  of  us  are  always  doing — 
making  mistakes  as  to  how  far  the 
measure  of  the  Divine  goodness  will 
reach.  We  hold  out  a  trembling  hand, 
and  feel  a  palpitating  heart,  when  we 
pray  to  our  God.  We  feel  we  deserve 
nothing,  and  therefore  we  ask  little,  as 
if  our  own  worthiness  were  the  ground 
of  our  asking.  If  so,  we  should  ask 
nothing  at  all,  for  we  have  no  ground 
of  that  kind  to  stand  on.  Our  natures 
are  so  selfish  and  so  carnal  that  we 
cannot  appreciate  that  riches  of  Divine 
goodness  which  is  set  before  us  in 
Christ,  and  so  we  ask  timidly. 

The  good  Philip  Henry,  after  pray- 
ing for  two  of  his  children  who  were 
dangerously  ill,  said,  *'  If  the  Lord  wiU 
be  pleased  to  grant  this  my  request,  I 
will  not  say  as  the  beggars  do  at  our 
door,  '  I  will  never  ask  anything  of  you 
again.'  On  the  contrary,  *  Thou  shalt 
hear  oftener  from  me  than  ever  ;  and 
I  will  love  thee  better  as  long  as  I 
shall  live.'  "  It  is  said  of  Alexander 
the  Great  that  on  one  occasion  he  gave 
permission  to  one  of  his  favourites 
with  his  accustomed  generosity  to  ask 
of  him  any  gift  he  pleased.  The  person 
so  favoured  immediately  named  a  large 
sum  of  money.  The  bystanders  expected 
that  a  frown  would  instantly  over- 
spread the  royal  countenance.  But  in 
place  of  that  the  monarch  smiled,  and 
gave  orders  that  it  should  be  done  as 
he  desired.  **  That  Jriend,  he  said, 
honours  me  hy  the  largeness  of  the 
amount  which  he  asks."  In  a  certain 
poem,  a  man  is  represented  as  timidly 
venturing  into  God's  presence  with  a 
little  draft,  and  God  inquires  why  he 
did  not  ask  a  larger  sum,  knowing  that 
He  delighted  to  satisfy  the  longing 
soul,  and  would  not  send  the  hungry 
soul  empty  away.  As  He  said  of  Jere- 
miah, so  He  says  still,  **  Call  unto  me, 
and  I  will  shew  thee  great  and  mighty 
things" 

The  Armenian  Christians,  along  with 
many  gross  fancies,  yet  believed  in  the 
great  power  of  prayer.  >S^^.  Basil,  from 
212 


his  great  sanctity,  was  credited  with 
having  an  almost  resistless  power  of 
prayer,  so  that  he  not  only  delivered 
souls  from  purgatory,  but  even  lost 
angels  from  the  abyss  of  hell.  On  the 
sixth  day  of  the  creation,  when  the 
lost  angels  fell  from  heaven  through 
that  opening  which  we  call,  "  The 
Milky  Way,"  one  unlucky  angel,  who 
took  no  part  in  the  rebellion,  3  et  got 
entangled  in  the  crowd,  and  fell  with 
the  rebels ;  nor  was  this  unfortunate 
spirit  restored  until  long  afterwards. 
St.  Basil,  coming  to  understand  his 
condition,  made  his  case  the  subject  of 
earnest  pleadings,  and  at  last  was  suc- 
cessful in  effecting  his  rescue.  His 
condition  meantime,  for  about  5000 
years,  must  have  been  very  uncomfort- 
able, like  that  of  Klopstock's  repentant 
demon  in  the  Messiah. 

"  Man's  plea  to  man  is  that  he  never  more 
Will  beg",  and  that  h©  never  begged  before  ; 
Man's  plea  to  God  is,  that  he  did  obtain 
A  former  suit,  and  therefore  sues  again. 
How  good  a  God  we  serve,  that  when  we  sue, 
Makes  His  old  gifts  the  examples  of  His 
new!" 

4.  Prayer  is  for  the  spiritual  health 
of  the  soul.  Prayer  is  the  soul  spread- 
ing its  sails  to  catch  the  heavenly 
breeze  which  is  to  make  it  hasten  on 
its  voyage  on  the  homeward  bound 
course  more  rapidl}^  In  prayer,  Paul 
first  draws  the  breath  ol  spiritual  life, 
and  in  prayer,  t^tephen  breathes  his 
spirit  at  the  point  of  death  into  the 
arms  of  the  Saviour.  The  praying 
Christian  is  the  receiving  Christian, 
and  so  becomes  the  prosperous 
Christian. 

"More  things  are  wrought  by  prayer 
Than  this  world  dreams  of.     Wherefore  let 

thy  voice 
Rise  like  a  fountain  for  me  night  and  day  ; 
For  what  are  men  better  than  sheep  or  goats, 
That  nourish  a  blind  life  within  the  brain, 
If  knowing  God,  they  lift  not  hands  of  prayer. 
Both  for  themselves  and  those  who  call  them 

friend? 
For  so  the  whole  round  world  is  every  way 
Bound  by  gold  chains  about  the  feet  of  God." 

The  good  man  will  seek  God's  face 
for  evermore.  He  will  call  upon  Him 
as  long  as  he  lives.  (Ps.  cv.  4 ;  cxvi.  2.) 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDQE8. 


OHAP.  IV. 


It  IS  His  atmosphere  which  he  breathes, 
without  breathing  which  he  mustdie.  It 
is  the  ambient  air  that  goes  all  round 
about  him,  in  which  he  lives  and  moves 
and  has  liis  being.  "  There  is  a  class  of 
animals,  neither  fish  nor  sea-fowl,  called 
the  cetaceous,  that  inhabit  the  deep. 
It  is  their  home ;  they  never  leave  it 
for  the  shore  ;  yet  though  swimming 
beneath  its  waves  and  sounding  its 
darkest  depths,  they  have  ever  and 
anon  to  rise  to  the  surface  that  they 
may  breathe  the  air.  Without  this 
they  could  not  live.  And  similarly  is 
it  with  the  Christian.  It  is  by  ever 
and  anon  ascending  to  God,  rising 
through  prayer  into  a  purer  and  loftier 
region  for  supplies  of  Divine  grace, 
that  he  can  preserve  his  spiritual  health. 
Prevent  these  animals  from  rising  to 
the  surface,  and  they  die  for  want  of 
air ;  and  prevent  the  Christian  from 
rising  to  God  in  prayer,  and  he  dies  in 
like  manner."     [Guthrie.^ 

"  J5  the  tender  dew  that  falls  in  the 
silent  night  makes  the  grass  and  herbs, 
and  flowers  to  furnish  and  grow  more 
abundantly  than  great  showers  of  rain 
that  fall  in  the  day,  so  secret  pra3^er 
will  more  abundantly  cause  the  sweet 
herbs  of  grace  and  holiness  to  grow  and 
flourish  in  the  soul,  than  all  those  more 
open,  public,  and  visible  duties  of  re- 
ligion, which  too,  too  often  are  mingled 
and  mixed  with  the  sun  and  wind  of 
pride  and  hypocrisy."     [Brooks.^ 

The  root  that  produces  the  beautiful 
and  flourishing  tree,  with  all  its  spread- 
ing branches,  verdant  leaves,  and  re- 
freshing fruit — that  which  gains  for  it 
sap,  life,  vigour  and  fruitfulness,  is  all 
unseen  ;  and  the  farther  and  deeper 
the  roots  spread  beneath,  the  more  the 
tree  ex])ands  above.  So  the  man  who 
would  flourish  as  a  Christian,  and  bring 
forth  the  fruits  of  holiness  must  strike 
his  roots  wider  and  deeper  in  private 
prayer.  Even  the  priests  of  Buddha 
teach  that  if  men  pray  to  Buddha,  and 
do  not  become  Buddha,  it  is  because 
the  mouth  prays  and  not  the  mind." 

"  Prayer  purifies  :  it  is  a  self -preached  sermon." 

6.  It  reveals  the  true  state  of  the 
heart.    The  barometer  makes  us  ac- 


quainted with  the  actual  state  of  the 
atmosphere  ;  it  takes  cognisance  of  the 
slightest  variation,  and  by  its  elevation 
or  depression  gives  indication  of  every 
change  at  any  given  time.  So  the 
Christian  has  an  index  within  him  of 
the^  elevation  or  depression  of  his 
spirituality  of  mind,  namely  his  spirit 
of  devotion.  As  is  the  love  for  com- 
munion with  God  in  prayer  and  medita- 
tion, so  is  the  Christian  life  in  the  man. 

"  You  may  see  the  son  of  a  prince 
one  day  in  richer  and  more  glorious 
apparel  than  on  another  day,  but  you 
will  never  find  him  in  sordid,  ragged, 
and  beggarly  clothes ;  he  still  is  clad 
as  becomes  a  king's  son.  And  the 
Christian  you  may  sometimes  see  come 
forth  with  more  enlargement  of  afi*ec- 
tions  in  prayer  and  all  his  graces  in 
high  exercise,  but  you  will  never  find 
him  with  his  robe  of  grace  altogether 
laid  aside.  The  true  saint  will  dis- 
tinguish his  birth  by  his  everyday 
course,  he  will  not  altogether  neglect 
spiritual  duties.  It  is  the  brand  of  a 
hypocrite  to  have  his  devotion  come  by 
fits,  and  like  a  drift  of  snow  to  lie  thick 
in  one  place  and  none  in  another — to 
seem  to  vie  with  the  angels  for  zeal 
at  one  time,  and  live  like  an  atheist  for 
weeks  after."     [GurnalL] 

The  exercise  of  prayer  is  so  free  of 
all  difficulty,  that  it  requires  nothing 
hut  a  proper  state  of  heart  to  make  it 
the  easiest  of  duties.  By  every  right- 
hearted  person  it  ought  to  be  hailed 
instinctively  as  the  means  of  enriching 
the  soul  with  marvellously  little  trouble. 
We  are  not  required  to  ascend  to 
heaven,  nor  take  any  long  journey  on 
earth ;  we  have  not  to  go  through  a 
long  course  of  penitential  service,  to 
weep  tears  of  blood,  or  to  subject  the 
body  to  stripes,  lacerations  and  agonies; 
nor  have  we  to  grind  in  the  prison- 
house  for  long  years  of  hard  servitude. 
We  have  but  to  come  to  God  as  a 
Father  in  the  name  of  Christ,  to  tell 
Him  in  the  spirit  of  little  cliildren  all 
that  is  in  our  hearts,  to  express  deep 
sorrow  for  our  sins,  and  supplicate  par- 
don and  spiritual  liberty  for  Christ's 
sake,  to  plead  His  promises  and  pour 
out  our  whole  hearts  for  such  blessings 

913 


CHAP.  TV.  EOMILETia  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES, 


as  He  declares  Himself  ready  to  be-         What  a  power  belongs  to  prayer 

stow — and  we  shall  find  the  gate  of  when  it  is  carried  on  with  a  skilful 

mercy    open — the    spiritual     heavens  pleading  of  the  Divine  promises !  The 

open,  and  the  God  and  Father  of  our  most  honoured   list  of  names  in  the 

Lord  Jesus  Christ  willing  to  pour  down  sacred  Book  itself  is  distinguished  by 

blessings  till  there  be  not  room  to  re-  nothing  more  prominently  than  by  the 

ceive.  spirit  of  prayer,  from  Abraham   and 

" Every  time'^    says    Faher,    "  is  Jacob  downward  to  Daniel  and  Nehe- 

suitable  for  the  duty,  every  place  and  miah  in  the  Old  Testament,  and  from 

posture.     Talent  is  not  needed  ;  nor  Zacharias  and  Elizabeth,  down  to  the 

eloquence,     nor     dignity     of     rank,  well-beloved  Gains  and  the  praying  ones 

Thoughts  are  needed  ;  actions  too  can  in  the  seven  churches  of  Asia  Minor,  in 

pray,  and  sufferings  can.     There  need  the  New  Testament.    All  the  successes 

be  no  ceremonies,   and   there  are   no  gained  in  the  planting  of  the  Christian 

rubrics  to  keep.     The  essence  of  the  church  in  Judea,  Samaria,  and  over  so 

duty  is  the  child  at  the  Father's  knee,  vast  a  territory  of  heathendom  in  the 

penitent   and  trustful,   earnest  words  Apostles'  days,  and  those  of  their  suc- 

and  a  still  more  wistful  face."  cessors,  as  well  as  in  every  a^e  of  the 

thrilling  history  of  time,  \vere  due  to 

6.  It  leads  to  the  fulfilment  of  the  prayer.      A    praying    church    always 

Divine  promises.     Prayer  is  the  key  moved  the  hand  that  controlled  the 

that  opens  the  pate  of  Heaven's  trea-  storms,  and  could  make  all  events  work 

sure-house.     It  is  the  child  knocking  together  for  her  good.    But  for  i)rayer, 

at  his  father's  door  for  food  and  drink,  the  worst  of  the  persecutors  had  not 

In  such  a  case  there  is  nothing  more  become  the  chief  among  the  apostles, 

agreeable  to  the  father's  feelings  than  and   one   of  the   most   profligate    of 

to  open  his  hand  and  supply  the  wants  youths  had  not  been  raised  up  to  lay 

of  the  suppliant.     But  in  addition  to  the  foundation  of  the  church's  sacred 

natural  willingness,  there  is  in  the  case  system  of  faith,  and  to  shine  as  a  star 

of  all  prayer  offered  in  the  name  of  of  the  first  magnitude  in  one  of  the 

Christ,  all  the  encouragement   which  darkest  nights  of  her  strange  history, 

can  be  given  by  promises  made,  expli-  The  mighty  Luthers  were  what  they 

citly  and  decidedly  by  Him  who  can-  were  because  of  their  prayers.  Theprayers 

not  lie.     Hence  when  the  tree  of  the  ofdefencelessKnoxwere  more  feared  by 

promise    is  shaken  by   the    hand  of  the  persecuting  Queen,  than  an  army 

prayer,  we  are  assured  that  precious  of  ten  thousand  men.     Whitefield  and 

fruits  more  or  less  will  fall  into  our  Wesley  gave  another  and  fresher  colour 

hands.     It  has  been  said  that  *'  words  to  the  religion  of  England  by  means  of 

in  1)1  ayer  are  but  as  powder ;  faith  is  their  prayers.      Through  the  prayers 

the  kindled  match,  and  the  promise  is  of  Finney,  Edwards,  and  many  others, 

the  bullet  that  doeth  the  execution,  what  a  beneficial  influence  was  brought 

while  fervency  gives  great  force  to  the  to  bear  in  the  formation  of  the  religious 

discharge."   He  is  an  imprudent  soldier  character  of  the  young  giant   nation 

who  leaves   the    work    of  fitting    his  of  the  Western  world  !  And  how  many 

bullets  to  the  bore  of  his  pieces  till  he  individual  great  men,  who  have  been 

comes  into  the  field;  so  he  is  an  un-  burning  and  shining  lights  in  their  day, 

wise  petitioner  at  God's  throne   who  were  converted   in  answer  to  fervent 

does  not  provide  promises  suitable  to  and  united  prayer  !     And  still  it  is  this 

his  case,  before  he  appears  to  present  same  power  which  has  done  so  much  to 

his  request.      Daniel  and  Jacob,  and  bless  the  church  and  the  world  in  the 

David  with  other  wrestlers,  seem  all  to  past,    to   wliich  we  are  to  look   for 

have  had  their  mouths  filled  with  argu-  bright  days,  and  glorious  triumphs  for 

ments,  and  especially  with  the  promises  the  future.    It  has  been  the  motto  in  the 

of  God,  every  time  they  visited  the  past,andstill  willbe  in  thedaystocome. 

throne  of  grace.  "  Prayer  and  pains  can  do  any  thing." 
214 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES.  chap.  IV. 


7.  It  cultivates  a  spirit  of  depen-  the  Father  in  Heaven  upon  His  Son 
dence  on  God.  No  posture  is  more  Jesus  Christ,  and  payable  to  every  pious 
humble  than  that  of  prayer ;  none  more  bearer — to  everyone  that  comes  to  the 
impresses  on  the  creature  a  sense  of  his  mercy-seat,  and  offers  the  promise  or 
own  emptiness,  or  on  the  sinner  a  sense  bill  for  acceptance,  and  pleads  in  the 
of  liis  own  unworthiness.  Gratitude  is  way  of  obedient  faith  and  prayer. 
also  taught,  and  hope,  notwithstanding  Jesus  the  High  Treasurer  of  Heaven 
of  our  guilt.  But  especially  the  feeling  knows  every  letter  of  His  Father's 
of  dependence  on  a  mightier  arm  than  handwriting,  and  can  never  be  imposed 
our  own,  and  a  heart  truer  in  love  is  upon  by  any  forged  note.  He  will  ever 
deeply  impressed  on  all  who  bend  the  honour  His  Father's  bills ;  He  accepts 
knee  at  the  Divine  footstool.  them  all.    It  is  for  His  Father's  honour 

that  His  bills  never  fail  of  acceptance 

8.  It  strengthens  for  great  duties  and  payment."    [Beaumont] 

and  for  severe  trials.  It  is  after  being  Prayer  elevates  as  well  as  strengthens. 
long  on  the  Mount  with  God  that  the  "  Constantine  the  Great  was  one  day 
face  shines  with  an  unearthly  brilliancy  looking  at  some  statues  of  noted  persons 
like  that  of  Moses,  and  the  hands  who  were  represented  s^awc^iw^.  *  I  shall 
become  strong  to  fight  against  any  have  mine  taken  kneeling*  said  he,  *  for 
odds,  as  in  the  case  of  Joshua,  of  that  is  how  I  have  risen  to  eminence.' 
Elijah,  or  of  David.  Through  prayer.  Thus  it  is  with  the  Christian ;  if  he 
the  weak  learn  to  become  as  David,  would  obtain  any  real  eminence  in  the 
and  David  becomes  as  an  angel  of  the  Christian  life,  he  must  be  often  kneeling 
Lord.  Through  prayer,  we  make  peace  in  prayer  to  God." 
with  the  powers  of  the  world  to  come,  It  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  good 
we  conquer  death,  obtain  an  Advocate  men  will  get  anything  they  choose  to 
and  propitiation  in  judgment,  and  ask  for,  God  will  not  give  what  is 
acceptance  and  a  verdict  of  "  Well-  hurtful,  what  would  feed  vanity  or 
done,"  from  the  Great  Judge  at  last,  pride,  or  worldliness.  He  will  not  give 
The  whole  sky  of  the  future  becomes  the  fish  they  ask,  when  it  would  turn 
cleared,  every  cloud  is  dispelled,  and  a  out  a  serpent.  He  gives  the  bitter  now, 
transporting  vision  of  life  and  glory  that  the  sweet  may  come  by  and  bye. 
through  the  long  vista  of  our  immor- 
tality is  assured  without  fail  to  those  IV.  Hindrances  to  prayer. 
who  place  their  trust  in  the  Saviour.  1.   An  unsuitable  frame  of  mind. 

These  great  and  awful  fears  respect-  This  may  arise  from  various  causes : — 

ing  our  eternal  state  being  removed,  (1.)  Place  may  have  to  do  with  it. 

the  dangers  and  trials  of  time  lose  all  Where  there  is  bustle  or  excitement  it 

their  really  formidable  aspect  (Rom.  is  hard  to  give  that   close  attention 

viii.  18).    Deliverance  from  the  greater  and  profound    homage  of  the   heart 

trials  includes  deliverance  from  the  less,  which     is     essential     in    transacting 

Prayer  is  indeed  the  wall  that  surrounds  business  with  our  God.     When  Peter 

the  Christian,  wherever  his  lot  is  cast  in  wished  to  do  the  work  of  penitence, 

this  world  of  distance  and  of  darkness,  "he  went  out**     In  the  court-room. 

No  evil  can  befal  him,  no  plague  can  and  in  the  midst  of  enemies,  he  could 

come  nigh,  but  instantly,  swifter  even  not  pour  out  the  feeling  of  a  full  heart 

than  the  working  of  the  telegraphic  without  molestation.     The  Master  has 

wire,   he   can  communicate  with  the  said,  **when  thou  prayest,  enter  into 

Supreme  Governor  over  all  things,  and  thy  closet**     We  read  of  some  who 

darkness  shall  become  light,  weakness  prayed    ou    **  the    house-top  ** — which 

shall  become  strength,  and  trouble  shall  among  the  Jews  was  one  of  the  best 

be  changed  into  peace.  places  of  retirement.     We  hear  also  o^ 

2  he  believer  has  a  claim  in  prayer,  other  spots  used  for  the  sacred  purpose 

"  AU  the  promises  in  the  Bible  are  so  of    prayer  —  "  the    little    chamber  " 

many  bills  of  exchange  drawn  by  God  (II.  ELings  iv.  10) ;  **  the  upper  roam  " 

215 


OHAP.  IV. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


(Acts  i.  13) ;  "  the  inner  chamber  '* 
(I.  Kings  XX.  30  ;  xxii.  25).  But  any 
place  which  is  private,  or  free  of  that 
which  may  distract  the  attention,  is 
suitable.  **The  desert  place,  the 
mountain  side,  or  in  the  presence  of 
the  disciples y  were  the  places  chosen 
by  Jesus  himself.  Nicodemus  chose 
the  friendly  shelter  of  "  the  fig-tree." 
Ezekiel  "  went  forth  into  the  plain." 
(Ezek  iii.  22).  Jeremiah  prayed  in  ''the 
dungeon.  *  David,  "  ifi  the  wilderness 
depths."  Jonah,  from  ''the  bottom  of  the 
mountains."  Daniel,  from  a  chosen 
"  chamber  in  his  own  house,  with  the 
windows  open  towards  Jerusalem." 

Wherever  the  soul  may  find  com- 
posure, and  be  free  of  all  disturbing 
influences,  there  is  suitableness  of 
place.  A  man  cannot  concentrate  his 
thoughts  amid  a  gabble  of  tongues, 
or  where  a  multitude  of  intruders 
come  in  to  divide  the  attention. 

(2.)  Irritation  of  feeling  may  have 
to  do  with  it.  Where  anger  or  wrath, 
or  other  passions  are  excited,  and  a 
man's  spirit  becomes  ruffled,  heavenly 
work  like  that  of  prayer  cannot  go  on. 
The  Spirit  of  God  has  for  His  emblem 
"  the  dove."  He  flies  from  the  abodes 
of  strife  and  clamour,  of  envyings, 
hatred,  and  variance.  Eli sha's  spirit  was 
roused  to  a  high  pitch  of  righteous 
anger  at  the  presence  of  the  idolatrous 
King  of  Israel,  Ahab's  wicked  son, 
when  he  came  to  him  for  aid  merely 
out  of  courtesy  to  Jehoshaphat,  King 
of  Judah.  So  great  was  his  pertur- 
bation of  spirit  (II.  Kings  iii.  13,  14), 
that  he  felt  himself  in  an  unsuitable 
frame  for  the  Spirit  of  God  to  rest 
upon  him  ;  and  he  sought  the  soothing 
influence  of  music  to  bring  down  his 
mind  to  that  calm  and  placid  temper 
which  was  necessary  to  fit  him  for  being 
also  a  suitable  medium  for  receiving 
the  Divine  afflatus  (ver.  15).  When  the 
soul  is  tranquil,  like  the  canvas  before 
the  painter,  it  is  ready  to  receive  what- 
ever may  be  depicted  thereupon.  **  The 
still  and  quiet  soul  is  like  a  ship  that 
lies  quiet  in  the  harbour;  you  may  take 
in  what  goods  you  please.  But  it  is 
very  difficult  to  put  cargo  on  board  ship 
in  a  rough  sea.  So  the  soul  must  lie 
21Q 


quiet  under  God's  hand,  in  order  to  get 
into  it  much  of  God,  of  Christ,  or  of  the 
spirit  of  prayer.     {BroohsX 

Jeremy  Taylor  says,  "  rrayer  is  the 
issue  of  untroubled  thoughts  ;  it  is  the 
daughter  of  charity,  and  the  sister  of 
meekness  ;  to  pray  with  a  discomposed 
spirit  is  like  retiring  into  a  battle 
to  meditate.  Anger  prevents  prayer 
rising  up  in  a  right  line  to  God.  He 
compares  the  case  to  the  lark  rising 
6*0 ni  its  bed  of  grass,  soaring  upwards, 
singing  as  it  rises,  and  hoping  soon  to 
get  above  the  clouds  ;  but  the  poor 
bird  is  beaten  back  by  the  loud  sighings 
of  an  eastern  wind,  its  motions  become 
irregular,  and  it  descends  more  at 
every  breath  of  the  tempest,  than  it 
can  recover  by  the  frequent  balancing 
of  its  wings.  At  last  the  little  creature 
is  forced  to  sit  down  and  pant,  and  to 
wait  till  the  storm  is  over ;  then  it 
rises  joyfuUy  and  sings  as  if  it  had 
learned  music  from  an  angel,  and 
passes  through  the  air  to  regions  out 
of  sight.  So  the  good  man  must  wait 
till  his  spirit  is  free  of  all  ruffle,  is  calui 
as  the  brow  of  Jesus  and  smooth  like 
the  heart  of  God.  Then  shall  it  ascend 
to  heaven  upon  the  wings  of  the  holy 
Dove,  and  return  like  the  useful  bee, 
laden  with  a  blessing,  and  with  the 
dew  of  heaven." 

(3.)  Want  of  sympathy  with  the 
exercise.  How  often  is  the  devotional 
spirit  lacking  !  The  heart  feels  dull 
and  leaden  in  its  frame  when  the  call 
comes  to  address  the  throne  of  grace. 
Yet  if  the  heart  be  cold,  prayer  is  a 
more  likely  means  to  warm  it  than  to 
omit  prayer.  We  must  come  to  the 
fire  before  we  get  warm.  As  Baxter 
remarks,  "  God's  Spirit  is  more  likely 
to  help  you  in  duty,  than  in  the  neg- 
lect of  it."  But  cold  prayers  are  a 
sacrifice  without  fire.  The  true  method 
is  to  cultivate  spirituality  of  mind  as  a 
rule — to  "  walk  in  the  Spirit,"  i.e.^  to 
be  habitually  spiritually-minded — 

"When  prayer  delights  the  least  then  learn 

to  say, 
Soul,  now  is  greatest  need  that  thou  shouldst 

pray. 
Oh,  come,  warm  sun,  and  ripen  my  late  fruits. 
Pierce,  genial  showers,  down  to  my  parched 

root*'* 


BOMTLETIO  COMMENTARY :  JVDQE8.  ottAt.  iV. 


We  must  by  all  means  get  into  the  be  definiteness  of  object,  and  earnest- 
spirit  of  prayer,  for  without  delight  in  ness  of  manner.  We  must  consider, 
it,  prayer  will  make  a  harsh  sound.  "  Meditation  is  ])rayer's  handmaid  to 
"Delight  is  the  marrow  of  religion."  wait  on  it,  both  before  and  after  the  per- 
"  With  joy  we  are  to  draw  water  out  of  formance.  It  is  as  the  plough  before  the 
the  wells  of  salvation**  To  refer  to  a  sower  to  prepare  the  heart  for  the  duty 
sentiment  already  quoted,  *'Faithisthe  of  prayer,  and  the  harrow  to  cover  the 
bucket,  but  joy  and  love  are  tlie  hands  seed  when  it  has  been  sown.  As  the 
that  move  it.  God  does  not  value  that  hopper  feeds  the  mill  with  grist,  so 
man's  service  who  accounts  not  His  does  meditation  supply  the  heart  with 
service  a  privilege  and  a  pleasure."  matter  for  prayer.  Before  the  trades- 
*'  The  arrow  which  is  shot  from  the  man  goes  to  the  fair,  he  looks  over  his 
bow  with  a  loose  cord  drops  powerless  shopthathemay  know  what  commodity 
to  the  ground."  It  is  not  the  vapid  he  most  lacks.  So,  ere  we  engage  in 
utterance  of  a  dull  leaden  heart  that  prayer,  we  should  be  careful  to  ascertain 
has  power  with  God  and  prevails,  but  the  graces  and  mercies  we  most  need, 
the  strong  Jacob-like  cry  which  will  Also  our  heart  is  like  a  watch  that  is 
take  no  denial  till  the  blessing  come.  soon  run  down,   and   needs   constant 

(4.)  Wandering  thoughts.  These  winding  up.  It  is  an  instrument  put 
must  be  called  in,  and  the  whole  atten-  easily  out  of  tune.  Meditation  tunes 
tion  given  to  the  subject  in  hand.  The  the  instrument,  and  sets  it  for  the 
petitioner  must  be  able  to  say,  "  My  harmony  of  prayer.  One  great  reason 
heart  is  fixed  ;  0  God,  unto  Thee  will  why  our  prayers  want  success  is,  that 
I  sing,  and  unto  Thee  will  I  pray."  AU  we  do  not  meditate  before  them.  We 
other  things  must  retire,  and  be  shut  should  be  able  to  say  with  David, 
out  while  the  soul  is  iti  audience  with  "  Give  ear  to  my  word,  0  Lord ;  con" 
its  God.  Never  should  the  thoughts  sider  my  meditation."  [Gurnall.^ 
be  more  collected.  Newton,  who  God  calls  for  our  best  and  our  ut- 
complained  occasionally  of  wandering  most.  We  are  to  bring  the  choicest 
thoughts,  said  of  his  case,  '*  I  compare  of  the  flock  for  an  offering,  and  not 
myself  to  the  case  of  a  man  on  his  to  present  a  lame  unconcocted,  wander- 
knees  before  the  king  pleading  for  some  ing  discourse  to  God,  when  we  might, 
great  favour  ;  in  the  midst  of  his  peti-  with  consideration,  give  something 
ticTning,  he  sees  a  butterfly  fluttering  more  accurate  and  exact.  When  a 
before  him,  he  immediately  breaks  off,  Roman  gentleman  invited  Augustus 
and  runs  to  catch  the  butterfly.  Such  Caesar  to  supper,  and  provided  him 
a  man  is  thought  mad  ;  and  alas  !  my  with  a  mean  entertainment,  Caesar 
thoughts  prove,  that  I  am  not  free  very  properly  took  him  up  with  the 
from  spiritual  insanity."  question,  "  Friend,  how  came  you  and 

I  to  be  so  familiar  ?  "     God  will  reject 

2.    Want    of   premeditation.     We  the  sons  of  presumption  and  impertin- 

ought  to  have  a  definite  object  to  pray  ance  with  disdain,  and  since  they  take 

for.     "Be  not  rash  with  thy  mouth  no  time  for  the  making  of  their  prayers, 

and  let  not  thine  heart  be   hasty  to  He  will  teike  long  time  before  granting 

utter  anything  before   God."     Wliere  them."     [South.] 
there  is  no  well-defined  object  to  be         "  We  often  ramble  in  our  prayers 

gained  present  to  the  thoughts,  there  and  get  nothing,  because,  in  fact,  we 

can  be  no  sincere  wish  for  it  in  the  desire  nothing.     We  only  chatter  about 

heart,   and  therefore   no   real  prayer,  a  number  of  things,  but  the  desires  of 

It  is  so  great  a  privilege  to  be  allowed  to  the  heart  do  not  fix  on  any  one  thing, 

come  at  any  time,  and  at  all  times,  to  Imagine  an  archer  shooting  with  his 

the  Fountain-head  of  blessing,  with  the  bow,  and  not  knowing  where  the  mark 

a^^surance  of  acceptance,  that  one  should  is.     How  could  he  succeed  ?    Conceive 

always   make   sure   of    not  returning  a  ship  putting  out  to  sea,  without  the 

empty-handed;  but  to  do  that  there  must  captain  having  any  idea  in  what  direc- 

217 


ottAP.iV.  HOMlLETlC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES, 


tion  he  should  steer !    How  foolish  !  4.  Cares  and  anxieties.    These  pre- 

Or  suppose  a  man  goes  to  the  market  vent  the  calm  and   firm    exercise   of 

to   make  purchases,  but   he  has   not  faith,  and   so   hinder  prayer.     Hence 

thought   beforehand  what   things  he  Phil,  i v.  ft,  7.     It  is  uot  all  at  once  that 

needs.     So  is  it  both  unwise  and  ir-  most  people  can  compose  their  minds 

reverent  to  go  into  the  presence  of  God,  to  a  praying  frame.     When  the  sea  has 

without  being  able  to  answer  the  ques-  been  agitated  all  day  with  the  wind,  it 

tion,  "  What  is  thy  petition,  and  what  does  not  become  calm  and  placid  the 

is  thy  request,  and  it  shall  he  done  unto  very  moment  that  a  lull  comes  on.    So 

theeJ'     \Spurgeon.'\  a  man's  mind,  wiiich  has  been  full  of 

cares  all  the  day  over,  will  still  for  a 

3.    Sin  wilfully  cherished  in  the  time  feel  in  the  midst  of  bustle,  after 

heart.      In  order   to  make   thorough  he  retires  to   his   chamber.     Gurnall 

work  of  the  religious  services  of  his  day,  remarks,  that  '*  it  is  hard  to  converse 

especially  in  regard  to  prayer,  James,  with  the  world  all  day,  and  then  shake 

in  his  epistle,  frequently  calls  on  his  it  off  at  night,  in  order  to  enjoy  privacy 

readers  : — "  Cleanse    your  hands,    ye  with   God.     The   world   does  by  the 

sinners ;  purify  your  hearts,  ye  double-  Christian,  as  the  little   child  by  the 

minded"    Only  thus  could  they  expect  mother.     If  it  cannot  keep  the  mother 

that  God  would  draw  nigh  to   them  from  going  out,  then  it  will  cry  to  be 

when  they  drew  nigh  to  Him.  Jeremiah  taken  with  her.     If  the  world  cannot 

also  reproves  the  people  of  his  day  for  keep  us  from  going  to  religious  duties, 

''dissembling  in  their  hearts,"   when  then  it  will  cry  to  be  taken  along  with 

they  asked  him  to  pray  unto  God  for  us,  and  there  will  be  much  ado  to  part 

them,  and  therefore  their  prayers  should  between  it  and  the  affections."     If  our 

be   heard   in  judgment,   and    not   in  prayers  would  ascend  like  a  pillar  of 

mercy  ( Jer.  xlii.  20-22).  ^  (See  Ps.  Ixvi.  incense  from  the  altar,  there  must  be 

18  ;  Isa.  lix.  1,  2  ;  Isa.  i.  15,  16,  etc.  ;  a   holy  calm    on  the  spirit,   and  the 

James  iv.  3  ;  Job  xxvii.  8,  9).     We  do  boisterous  winds   of  inordinate  cares 

not  read  that  Elijah  offered  a  single  about  the  world  must  be  laid, 
prayer   for  the   return   of  the   much 

needed  showers  of  heaven  to  refresh  the  5.  Praying"  without  the  Spirit. 
parched  land  until  the  people  had  "The  Spirit  helpeth  our  infirmities, 
publicly  and  unanimously  repented  of  for  we  know  not  what  we  should  pray 
their  sin  of  forsaking  their  own  God  and  for  as  we  ought ;  but  the  Spirit  itself 
going  after  the  worship  of  idols.  But  maketh  intercession  for  us  with  groan- 
the  moment  they  ceased  to  practise  this  ings  which  cannot  be  altered  "  (Jude  20 ; 
sin,  we  find  him  at  once  on  his  knees,  Rom.  viii.  15  ;  Gal.  iv.  6  ;  Eph.  ii.  18; 
imploring  with  earnest  wrestlings  the  vi.  18).  He  is  called  "the  Spirit  of  sup- 
reopening  of  the  windows  of  heaven  to  plication"  (Zech.  xii.  10).  AH  spiritual 
refresh  the  burnt  up  fields  and  valleys  strength  is  from  Him  (Eph.  iii.  16). 
of  Israel.  (1  Kings  xviii.  42.)  For  "  We  need  the  help  of  God's  Spirit 
three  years  and  a  half  he  ceased  to  to  fix  our  minds,  and  make  them  intent 
pray  for  the  land,  while  the  people  and  serious  in  prayer.  The  ship  with- 
cherished  their  sin  unrepented  ;  now,  out  a  pilot  rather  floats  than  sails, 
he  loses  not  an  hour  !  To  sin  while  That  our  thoughts  do  not  float  up  and 
we  pray,  is  as  if,  while  a  house  was  on  down  in  prayer,  we  need  the  blessed 
fire,  we  were  to  throw  water  on  it  with  Spirit  to  be  our  pilot  to  steer  us. 
the  one  hand,  and  to  cast  fuel  or  oil  A  shaking  hand  may  as  well  write  a 
upon  it  with  the  other.  The  fire  will  line  steadily,  as  we  can  keep  our  hearts 
not  be  quenched.  Unrepented  sin,  like  fixed  in  prayer  without  the  Spirit  of 
a  partition  wall,  prevents  our  prayers  God."  [^Watson.] 
ascending  before  God.  Guilt  on  the  "  As  the  sails  of  a  ship  carry  it  into 
conscience  is  a  great  hindrance  to  the  harbour,  so  prayer  carries  us  to  the 
prayer.  throne  and  bosom  of  God.  But  as  the 
218 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   JUDGES.  ohap.  iv. 


sails  cannot  of  themselves  speed  the  and  ye  shall  receive;  seek  and  ye 
progress  of  a  vessel  unless  filled  with  a  shall  find,"  etc.  etc.  **  Buy,  without 
favorable  breeze,  so  the  Holy  Spirit  price  ! " — "  let  your  soul  delight  itself 
must  breathe  ou  our  hearts,  or  our  in  fatness ! " — "  ask  and  ye  shall 
prayers  will  be  motionless  and  lifeless."  receive,  that  your  joy  may  be  full." 
[Toplady.']  Our  expectations  cannot  rise  too 
"  Tliere  must  be  life  in  the  soul  high — to  meet  all  our  needs,  desires, 
before  there  can  be  life  in  the  duty,  longings  and  aspirations  ;  to  have  fears 
All  the  rugs  in  the  store  will  not  fetch  dissipated,  sins  pardoner],  and  peace 
a  dead  man  to  warmth  ;  nor  will  any  with  God  established;  to  get  deliverance 
arguments,  though  most  moving  in  from  dangers,  help  under  burdens,  light 
themselves,  make  thee  pray  fervently  in  darkness,  strength  in  weakness,  and 
while  thy  soul  lies  in  a  dead  state,  comfort  in  sorrow  ;  all  that  can  bless 
Go  first  to  Christ,  that  through  His  the  soul  for  the  present,  and  spread  the 
Spirit  thou  mayest  have  life;  and,  bow  of  hope  for  it  in  the  future.  ^' My 
having  life,  there  is  then  some  hope  God  shall  supply  all  your  need  accord- 
to  chafe  thee  into  some  heat.  Prayers  ing  to  His  riches  in  glory,  by  Christ 
offered  without  the  Spirit  are  but  Jesus"  "  God  is  able  to  make  all 
smoke  before  God,  offensive  to  His  grace  abound  toward  you,  that  ye 
pure  eyes,  instead  of  incense  and  a  always,  having  all  sufficiency  in  all 
sweet  savour."     [Gurnall.]  things,    may    abound    to   every  good 

work" 

V.  Suitable  subjects  of  prayer.  Southey  puts  in  the  foreground  four 

1.  The  widest   range  is  allowed,  subjects  for  prayer  : — 

The    statute-book    gives    this    liberty.  Four  things  which  are  not  in  thy  treasury. 

The  God  who  began   by  giving  us  His  I  lay  before  thee,  Lord,  with  this  petition  ; 

Son  will  now  stop  nowhere.      So  far  as  My  nothingness,  my  wants, 

disposition  to  give  is  concerned,  there  My  sins,  and  my  contrition, 

cannot  now  be  any  holding  back.     In  2.  Nothing  is  too  little  to  ask  from 

giving  His  Son,  He  has  pitched  the  God.    Nothing  is  too  little  for  Him  to 

scale    of    benevolence    so    high    that  attend  to.     He  provides  the  bee  with 

nothing  can  remain  ungiven.     If  we  its  food ;   the  gnat  and  the  moth  are 

only  devote   ourselves  to  Christ,  and  fed  from  His  hand  ;  He  cares  for  the 

keep  constantly  to  Him  as  our  portion,  worm,  the  insect,  and  the  animalcule, 

we  may  "  ask  what  we  will  and  it  shall  Nothing  which  it  seemed  good  for  Him 

be  done."     Christ  refuses  nothing  to  to  create  is  beneath  His  care, 

thorough  friends.      "  Whatsoever    ye  Nor  is  anything  too  small  for  us  to 

shall  ask  in   my    name,    that   will   I  ask.  Any  want,  however  small,  we  may 

do,"  etc.     "  If  ye  ask  anything  in  my  name  before  Him  if  its  supply  would 

name,   I   will   do   it."      We  come  as  be  to  us  a  relief.     Any  desire,  however 

children  to  a  father,  and  what  good  trifling  it  may  seem  to  others,  we  may 

thing  will  the  Father  of  our  Lord  and  express  before  Him,  if  to  grant  it  would 

Saviour  Jesus  Christ  deny  to  children  be  to  us  a  material  good.   That  may  be 

whom  He  loves  so  well — who  are  all  of  consequence  to  a  boy  which  would 

so  dear  to  Him  through  the  sprinkled  be  trivial  to  his  father.     That  may  be 

blood  1     Also  we  come  to  a  "  throne  a  godsend   to  one  weak  in  the  faith, 

of  grace" — not  a  throne  oi  justice — of  which  is  regarded  as  mere  puerility  or 

power  or  majesty — high  and  lifted  up,  simplicity   by    one    well    established. 

where  we  could  use  only  stuttering  and  Little  and  great,  indeed,  are  relative 

stammering     speech — but    a    throne  terms.  It  depends  on  the  scale  by  which 

before  which  sin  is  forgiven — a  throne  we  measure.     What  is  life  and  death 

of  grace,  to  which  we  are  called  to  to  us,  is  very  small  before  God.     Nay, 

"  come  boldly."  all  His  creatures  with  all  their  interests, 

Hence  the  language  so  worthy   of  as  compared  with  Himself,  are  "  less 

Him  who  is  "rich  in  mercy," — "ask  than  nothing  and  vanity."  And  all  are 

219 


OHAP.  IV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JVDOEB. 


before  Him  at  the  same  level  of  insig- 
nificance, so  that  if  He  should  attend 
to  the  wants  of  the  mightiest  angel 
around  His  thione,  He  may  also  be  ex- 
pected to  attend  to  the  necessities  of 
the  meanest  of  us  all. 

Things  which  are  distressing  to  us 
seem  to  Him  no  more  than  the  breaking 
of  a  toy  to  a  child  ;  yeb  as  the  father 
of  that  child  does  not  judge  of  the  im- 
portance of  the  event  by  the  aspect  it 
bears  to  him,  but  regards  it  entirely  as 
it  affects  the  child,  and  begins  to  soothe 
the  distress  of  the  little  one,  and  ten- 
derly wipe  away  his  tears,  so  does  God 
act  as  our  Heavenly  Father  when  an 
event  may  happen  which  proves  very 
afflictive  to  the  feelings  of  any  of  His 
children.  He  does  not  sit  above  the 
clouds  as  the  heathen  thought  their 
gods  sat,  wrapped  in  the  selfishness  of 
His  superiority,  and  despising  the  little- 
ness of  the  creatures  that  crawl  below. 
**  He  knoweth  our  frame."  "  He  under- 
standeth  our  thoughts."  "  He  tells  the 
number  of  the  stars.  He  also  healeth 
the  broken  in  heart  and  bindeth  up 
their  wounds."  And  there  is  nothing 
which  is  a  source  of  pain  or  uneasiness, 
of  doubt  or  difficulty,  of  grief  or  anguish 
to  any  of  His  children,  which  He  is 
not  only  willing  to  hear,  but  is  desirous 
that  they  should  tell  Him. 

3.  All  that  He  has  promised  we 

may  ask.  Here  every  step  is  sure. 
God  cannot  take  back  His  own  word  ; 
He  cannot  fail  to  fulfil  it.  "  Heaven 
and  earth  may  pass  away.  His  word 
shall  not."  "  The  strength  of  Israel 
will  not  lie."  But  one  thing  must 
always  be  kept  in  view,  it  is  only 
through  Christ  as  Mediator  that  any 
promise  can  be  answered  consistently 
with  God's  holy  andrighteous character. 
Every  promise  we  plead  in  His  name 
we  can  plead  with  the  greatest  confi- 
dence. "  In  Him  all  the  promises  of 
God  are  yea^  and  in  Hiniy  A  men,  to 
the  glory  of  God" 

To  plead  God's  faithfulness  to  His 
own  word  is  the  mightiest  of  all  the 
arguments  we  can  use  at  the  throne  of 
grace.  "  My  faithfulness  will  I  estab- 
lish in  the  heavens" — in  the  most 
220 


conspicuous  and  public  manner,   be" 
cause  it  is  so  essential  to  the  glory  of 
His  name.      Even    when   His  people 
prove  treacherous,   and   violate   their 
engagements  to  Him,  though  He  may 
severely   chastise   them,    He  still  de- 
clares :  *'  /  will  not  suffer  my  Jaithf ill- 
ness to  fail ;  my  covenant  J  will  not 
break,  nor  alter  the  thing  that  has  gone 
out  of  my  lips."    The  secret  of  Jacob's 
mighty  power  with  God  lay  entirely  in 
the  short  utterance  :    *'  Thoio  saidst." 
The  precious  promise  made  at  Bethel, 
Jacob   had   kept   in   his   breast   as   a 
treasure  too  rich  to  be  parted  with. 
For  the  long  period  of  20  years  he  kept 
that  treasure  locked  up  in  his  bosom,  as 
a  thing  not  to  be  given  for  gold  nor  any 
amount  of  precious  silver.     God  loved 
him  for  it ;  and,  in  His  Providence, 
brought  round  an  occasion  to  bring  to 
light  the  excellent  character  of  the  man 
who  sets  a  high  value  on  His  promises. 
When   that   occasion    arrived,    Jacob 
showed  the   fast  hold  he  had  of  the 
girdle  of  the  Divine  faithfulness,  when 
he  would  take  no  denial,   because  it 
was  for   God's  own  honour  that  His 
word  should  not  fail.     And  as  he  so 
highly  honoured  God,  God  also  greatly 
honoured  him,  by  giving  him  "  exceed- 
ing abundantly  above  all  that  he  asked 
or    thought."      This,    too,    was    the 
secret  of  Moses'  power  in  prayer,  when 
he  wrought  so  mightily  that  God  said 
to  him  :  "  Let  me  alone  " — implying 
that  if  Moses  went  on  pleading  God's 
promises,  as  he  was  doing,  God  must 
comply   with   his    request.      Joshua's 
argument    was    similar  :  "  What  wilt 
Thou   do   unto    Thy   great  NameV 
And    Abraham's     case     is    parallel  : 
"  Wilt    Thou   destroy    the    righteous 
with  the  wicked  V     (Gen.  xxxii.  12, 
with  verse   26  ;  Ex.   xxxii.   10  ;  Josh. 
vii.   9 ;    Gen.   xviii.   23).      They   are 
called  "  Sure  mercies  "  (2  Sam.  xxiii. 
5 ;  Isa.  Iv.  3). 

Our  duty  then  is  to  go  to  the 
promises  daily  and  fill  our  mouths  with 
arguments  to  be  pled  at  the  Divine 
footstool,  according  to  the  directions 
given  :  "  Take  with  you  words  and 
turn  to  the  L(yrd"  *'  Put  me  in  re- 
membrance*  let  us  plead  together," 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES.  chap.  iv. 


etc.  **  Come,  let  us  reason  together."  was  in  reality  the  God  of  the  gospel  to 

"  God's  promises  are  prizes  in  the  the  fathers,  in  His  gracious  dealinti^s 

hand  of  God  to  stimulate  the  soul's  with  them  and  the  promises  He  made 

activities — more  glorious  than  laurel  to  them,  the  same  as  He  is  to  believing 

wreaths,  or  the  trumpeting  of  fame,  or  men  still.       And  we,    on    the  other 

principalities  and  thrones.     They  are  hand,  are  warranted  to  plead  all  His 

yielded  by  God  only  to  an  application  gracious  acts   done  to  them,   and  all 

of  faculties,  at  the  least,  as  intense  and  the  great  and  preciofis  promises  made 

ardent  as  is  put  forth  in  pursuit   of  to  ttiem,  as  equally  done  and  made  to 

human     ambition.      God     doth     not  us,  and  arguments  for  the  same  things 

cheapen  His  promises  down  to  a  glance  being    done    and    made    agai?i    and 

at  them  with  the  eye,  or  a  mouthing  again,  in  our  blessed  experience  as  we 

of  them  with  the  tongue  ;  but  he  re-  may  have  need  of  them, 

quireth  of  those  who  would  have  them  Moses   pled   thus  when  he    suppli- 

an  admiration  equal  to  that  of  lovers,  cated   God    to    *'  pardon    the    people 

an  estimation  equal  to  that  of  royal  — as    He    had    forgiven     them    from 

diadems,  and  a  pursuit  equal  to  that  Egypt   until    now."    (Num.  xiv.   19). 

of  Olympic  prizes."  [lrving\  It     is    said,      "  He     remembers    His 

word    to    a    thousand    generations." 

4.  All  such  blessings  as  God  has  (Ps.  cv.  8).     Which  implies  that  the 

already    given.        This    opens    out  same  word  lives  down  all  that  time, 

another    ground   of  pleading    equally  and  will  be  equally  serviceable  to  any 

good   with   direct  promises.       Every-  of  the  generations,  as  it  was  to  the 

thing  that  God  does  is  a  promise  in  first.      We   have  also  the  statement, 

deed  that  He  will  do  the  same  thing  "  Thy  memorial  endureth  throughout 

again  in  the  same  circumstances.     For  all  generations."      What  God  does  in 

He  is  absolutely  consistent  with  Him-  one  age  is  a  lesson  for  every  age  that 

self,  in  all  ages,  and  under  all  circum-  follows,  that  He  will  show  Himself  the 

stances.      He  always   shows  that  He  same    God    in    the    same  or  similar 

is  the  same  God  ;  that  He  is  "  without  circumstances. 

variableness,  or  the  shadow  of  turning."  Can  we  point  to  special  seasons  in 
His  rules  in  dealing  wdth  men  never  our  personal  history,  when  we  had 
change.  What  He  laid  down  as  rules  exceptionally  severe  trials  to  pass 
in  the  days  of  Abraham  He  lays  down  through,  when  the  waters  came  in 
still,  as  the  footing  on  which  He  acts  unto  our  soul,  and  our  feet  did  sink 
in  His  intercourse  with  men.  The  in  the  mire  ;  when  friends  stood  aloof, 
circumstances  may  be  widely  different,  and  no  man  cared  for  our  soul ;  when 
and  there  may  be  expected  a  corres-  we  cried  to  our  covenant  God  *'  out  of 
ponding  change  in  the  manner  of  the  depths,"  and  He  inclined  His  ear 
applying  the  rules.  But  there  is  no  to  our  cry  ;  when  He  brought  us  up 
departure  from  the  rules  themselves  out  of  the  horrible  pit  and  miry  clay, 
in  their  substance  and  tenor.  In  that  and  set  our  feet  upon  a  rock  and 
respect  they  are  identically  the  same  established  our  goings,"  —  then,  no 
now  as  they  were  then,  however  better  argument  could  we  use  for  all 
different  in  aspect  and  in  the  manner  time  to  come,  in  the  midst  of  great 
of  application  they  may  seem.  A  few  trials,  than  to  call  to  remembrance 
thousand  years  make  not  the  slightest  those  seasons  and  God's  gracious 
alteration  on  the  character  and  govern-  dealings  in  connection  with  them, 
ment  of  the  eternal  and  immutable  and  go  to  the  throne,  with  a  Jacob- 
Jehovah  !  It  is  the  God  of  Abraham,  like  confidence,  and  remind  our  Un- 
Isaac  and  Jacob  that  is  our  Uod,  changeable  Rock — "Lord,  thou  didst 
though  with  the  grand  addition  to  His  so  much  for  me  in  the  past ;  wilt  thou 
name — the  God  and  Father  of  our  not  do  again  as  thou  hast  already 
Lord  and  Saviour,  Jesus  Christ.  But,  done?  Would  it  not  be  like  thyself 
though  it  was  not  then  revealed,  He  so  to  act?     Would  it  not  be  unworthy 

nx 


CHAP.  IV, 


EOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


of  thee  to  even  to  seem  to  be  different 
now  from  what  thou  wast  then?  Show 
that  thou  dost  '  rest  in  thy  love/  and 
that  thou  wilt  '  continue  thy  loving 
kindness  to  them  that  know  thee.'  " 
Such  must  ever  prove  a  successful 
ground  on  which  to  supplicate  blessings 
at  the  throne  of  grace. 

5.  All  that  we  know  to  be  agree- 
able to  His  will.  There  may  be 
many  things  that  are  of  the  nature 
of  blessings  of  the  Divine  hand,  that 
are  not  specially  particularised  in 
the  Divine  promises  —  especially 
those  that  relate  to  the  details 
of  daily  life,  and  the  lot  of  in- 
dividual men.  The  promises  are 
generally  made  to  those  who  possess 
a  certain  character — the  meek,  the 
humble,  those  that  fear,  love,  and 
obey  God,  the  righteous,  etc.  This 
not  only  shows  that  "  God  is  no 
respecter  of  persons,"  that  He  respects 
only  characters,  but  also  sets  every 
man  on  inquiring  whether  he,  for 
his  part,  possesses  such  features  of 
character  as  are  described  in  these 
promises  This  is  often  a  puzzling 
problem  to  solve,  and  it  is  often  a 
great  relief  to  get  the  auxiliary 
principle  brought  in,  that  all  that  is 
really  agreeable  to  God's  will  must  be 
held  as  suitable  subject  of  prayer. 
Nay,  we  have  a  distinct  intimation  on 
the  subject  made,  "  If  we  ask  any- 
thing according  to  His  will  He  heareth 
us." 

"  No  one  thinks  of  praying  that  the 
sun  may  rise  in  the  west  instead  of 
the  east.  Not  because  it  is  impossible 
with  God,  but  long  experience  proves 
to  us  that  it  is  not  His  will.  No  one 
thinks  of  praying  that  one  who  has 
just  breathed  his  last  may  wake  up  to 
life  once  more ;  and  for  the  same 
reason.  Nor  does  anyone  deem  it 
right  to  pray  that  those  who  have 
advanced  to  extreme  old  age  should 
be  granted  a  new  lease  of  life,  and 
blush  again  into  youth,  and  the 
blooms  of  early  promise.  When  we 
see  clearly  what  is  the  will  of  God,  we 
feel  we  must  submit  to  it  without 
seeking  to  go  against  it."  [Roberts.^ 
223 


A  faithful,  prolonged,  and  intelligent 
istudy  of  the  Word  of  God,  where  God 
reveals  His  character  and  will,  is 
necessary  in  order  both  to  be  able  to 
plead  the  promises  aptly  and  skilfully, 
and  also  to  judge  accurately  of  what 
things  would  be  agreeable  to  the 
Divine  will.  To  pray  that  we  may  be 
at  peace  with  God  through  the  accept- 
ance of  Christ  as  our  personal  Saviour, 
that  all  our  sins,  however  numerous 
and  great,  may  be  forgiven  and  for- 
gotten, that  we  may  get  the  victory 
over  any  evil  principle  or  passion  in 
the  heart,  that  God  may  truly  become 
our  Father  and  God,  that,  in  fact,  we 
may  individually  come  to  have  a  share 
in  all  the  spiritual  blessings  that  are 
enjoyed  by  those  who  accept  of  Christ 
as  their  Saviour — we  know  to  be 
agreeable  to  God's  wiU,  though  our 
names  are  not  given  in  the  Bible. 
From  God's  nature  we  know  it,  for 
"He  is  love."  Also  from  express 
general  statements  we  know  it.  '*  He 
will  have  all  men  to  be  saved,"  etc. 
"  He  willeth  not  that  any  should 
perish."  A  multitude  of  texts  prove 
it 

6.  The  best  gifts  we  may  most  freely 
ask.  To  ask  temporal  blessings  is 
allowable.  Yet  they  occupy  a  greatly 
inferior  place  in  the  scale  to  those 
which  are  spiritual.  There  is  but  one 
petition,  in  the  model  prayer  taught  us 
by  the  Saviour,  for  temporal  good 
things,  but  five  references  made  to 
those  which  relate  to  spiritual  bless- 
ings. The  Saviour  also  expressly 
requires  us  to  put  the  blessings  of 
the  kingdom  in  the  foreground.  *'  Seek 
first  the  kingdom  of  God,"  etc.  It  is 
also  to  be  noticed  that  while  temporal 
blessings  are  recognised  as  a  suitable 
subject  for  prayer,  the  promise  extends 
only  to  a  very  moderate  degree  of  those 
blessings — "  Daily  bread,"  "  bread  and 
water "  (Isa.  xxxiii.  16)  ;  **  food  and 
raiment"  (I.  Tim.  vi.  8);  "to  eat, 
drink,  and  be  clothed"  (Matt.  vi. 
31,  32);  "to  be  fed"  (Ps.  xxxvii.  3). 
Manna  only  was  given  as  wilderness 
provision,  which  was  esteemed  "  li^ht 
food"  (Num.  xi.  6,  and  xxi.  5).    The 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   JUDGES.  chap.  iv. 


prayer  of  Agur    is    recorded    as  an  What  is  necessary  is  promised    (Ps, 

example  for  us  to  copy,   who,  while  xxxiv.  9,  10,  22  ;  xxxvii.  3). 
wishing  to  be  kept  above  poverty,  does 

not  covet  riches  (Prov.  xxx.  8,  9).  7.  All  that  would  be  for  God's  gflory 
Solomon's  choice  is  specially  com-  and  for  our  good.  Many  miscellaneous 
mended,  who  when  left  free  to  ask  subjects  are  ever  coming  up  in  daily 
any  good  thing  he  might  desire,  put  life,  in  regard  to  which  it  will  be  felt 
his  finger  on  wisdom  as  better  than  more  or  less  difficult  to  decide,  whether 
rubies.  God  both  gave  him  a  wise  they  should  be  made  matter  of  prayer 
and  understanding  heart,  and  added  to  God  or  not.  Bui  there  can  be  no 
riches  and  honour  (I.  Kings  iii.  9-13).  doubt  it  is  right,  to  bring  every  thing 
Mary  was  specially  approved  of  by  her  whicli  we  feel  to  be  a  difficulty  to  the 
Lord  in  improving  the  occasion  of  His  throne  of  grace,  and  ask  Divine  direc- 
presence  in  her  house  by  "sitting  at  tion  (Jas.  i.  5).  Also,  every  thing 
His  feet  and  listening  to  His  word,"  which  we  feel  to  be  a  corroding  care, 
rather  than  by  busying  herself  with  or  a  burden  of  anxiety,  we  must  refer 
efforts  to  prepare  Him  a  sumptuous  to  our  God  (Phil.  iv.  6).  But  many 
table  (Luke  x.  38-42).  Spiritual  things  which  are  not  expressly 
blessings  are  alw^ays  to  be  greatly  pre-  promised  must  be  asked  only  in  sub- 
ferred  to  temporal,  in  our  prayers,  mission  to  the  Divine  will,  and  under 
The  latter,  indeed,  are  only  tolerated,  the  condition — As  far  as  it  may  be 
or  recognised  as  proper  in  their  place,  for  God's  glory  and  for  our  good. 
never  to  be  coveted  as  a  portion  ;  while  It  is  right  to  pray  for  recovery  from 
the  latter  are  set  forward  as  the  great  sickness,  whether  in  regard  to  ourselves, 
matter  of  prayer  (Ps.  iv.  6  ;  xvi.  3, 5,  6  ;  or  in  regard  to  any  object  near  and 
Prov.  viii.  10,  11 ;  I.  Cor.  xii.  31 ;  dear  to  us,  but  God  may  have  ap- 
John  vi.  27  ;  Ps.  xvii.  13,  14  ;  Habak.  pointed  the  sickness  to  be  unto  death 
iii.  17,  18).  and  the  great  Intercessor  on  High 
The  choice  of  Peter  is  recorded  to  may  be  expressing  it  as  His  will  before 
his  everlasting  honour  (.John  vi.  68) ;  the  throne,  that  the  afflicted  membei 
and  the  choice  of  Moses  (Heb.  xi.  of  His  body  may  be  taken  home  to 
25,  26)  has  upon  it  the  seal  of  an  Himself  to  behold  His  glory.  There- 
approving  heaven.  We  must  hold  it  fore  we  should  pray  in  submission  to 
to  be  wrong  to  pray  for  riches  as  such,  the  Divine  will.  If  some  rough  wind 
not  only  because  these  as  a  rule  of  adversity  blows  over  us,  and  we  find 
become  more  or  less  of  a  temptation  our  fair  prospects  suddenly  blighted, 
and  a  snare  (I.  Tim.  vi.  9,  10),  but  with  cruel  "  Disappointment  standing 
because  they  are  unsuitable  as  a  before  us  as  our  only  Comforter."  For 
portion  for  the  soul,  and  their  acquisi-  a  return  of  former  prosi)erity  we  may 
tion  is  discouraged  in  scripture,  supplicate,  both  as  to  the  measure  and 
Should  God  confer  upon  us  riches  as  manner,  but  only  as  it  may  seem  meet 
well  as  spiritual  blessings,  they  are  to  to  our  Father  in  heaven.  For  the 
be  regarded  as  merely  added  to  the  success  of  this  or  that  project  we  have 
latter,  which  constitute  the  real  gifts,  devised  we  may  pray,  or  for  the  obtain- 
And  they  are  to  be  understood  as  not  ing  of  some  eligible  situation  in  life, 
absolutely  ours,  but  only  given  to  us  or  for  general  success  in  business,  and 
in  stewardship.  So  David  judged  a  comfortable  through  bearing  in  life, 
when  he  said,  "  Of  Thine  own  have  we  but  always  in  the  tone  of  saying — If  it 
given  Thee"  (I.  Chron.  xxix.  14,  16).  be  for  God's  glory  and  for  my  good. 
For  the  supply  of  necessary  wants,  for  Both  of  the  one  and  the  other  of  those 
the  means  of  giving  to  everyone  his  things,  God  Himself  must  be  the 
due,  or  helping  on  the  Lord's  work,  or  jud>,^e.  For  we  are  utterly  incom- 
for  a  proper  competency  for  one's  self  petent  to  determine  what  is  for  God's 
and  family  circle,  we  may  and  ought  glory,  and  even  as  to  our  own  good, 
to  pray  (I.  IHm.  v.  8 ;  Eom.  xiii.  8).  we  oftentimes  ask  a  stone  for  bread  in 

223 


CHAP.  IV, 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUBGBH. 


our  ignorance,  or  we  ask  a  serpent  for 
a  fish.  And  were  God  to  answer  our 
prayers,  it  would  not  prove  a  blessing 
but  ratlier  a  curse.  But  our  Heavenly 
Father's  knowledge  of  wiiat  is  best  for 
us  to  have  is  always  perfect,  and  His 
character  is  such  that  He  never  can 
decide  otherwise  than  for  our  highest 
good,  if  we  will  only  let  Him  have 
His  own  way. 

VI.  Answers  to  Prayer. 

1  True  prayer  is  certain  to  be 
answered  If  prayer  is  both  so  glory- 
fying  to  God,  and  so  beneficial  to  our- 
selves, then  it  must  be  accepted.  The 
form  in  which  the  answer  is  to  be  given 
may  differ  more  or  less  in  every 
different  case,  but  that  God  will  hear 
all  genuine  prayer  and  put  it  to  our 
account  is  certain.  He  has  given  His 
word  for  it  six  times  over  in  one 
sentence  (Matt.  vii.  7,  8).  Cuyler  says, 
"  Answered  prayers  cover  the  field  of 
Providential  history  as  flowers  cover 
western  prairies."  The  whole  Book  of 
Psalms  is  a  testimony  to  what  God  has 
done  in  answering  prayer.  It  is  not  a 
doubtful  matter  whether  we  shall  be 
listened  to  and  answered  in  some 
manner  when  we  pray  aright.  There 
are  no  exceptions  in  point  of  fact, 
whatever  may  seem  to  be  the  case  to 
the  petitioner  himself.  Though  the 
heavens  do  not  open,  though  no  audible 
voice  is  heard,  though  no  sign  is  given, 
it  is  as  certain  as  any  fixed  law  of 
nature  that  humble,  penitent,  believing 
prayer — the  prayer  of  the  "heart  of 
flesh,"  is  treasured  up  before  God,  and 
shall,  without  fail,  be  attended  to  in 
God's  time  and  way.  Not  a  single 
believing  prayer  is  ever  lost.  The 
passage  above  quoted  proves  it.  All 
the  ex[)erience  of  God's  people  prove  it. 
All  the  promises  in  the  Bible  on  the 
subject  of  prayer  prove  it. 

2.  The  answer  is  often  delayed. 

*'  Answering  prayer  does  not  always 
stand  next  door  to  petition  ;  yet 
prayers  are  not  forgotten  by  the 
faithful  God.  Even  when  we  have 
forgotten  them  He  remembers  them. 
224 


I  stand  in  the  rooms  of  my  office,  and 
wish  to  communicate  with  an  official 
in  the  fifth  story.  I  blow  a  whistle 
and  talk  through  the  tube.  I  know 
the  message  has  got  up  there  and  that 
he  has  heard  it.  Yet  I  do  not  see  him 
and  he  does  not  answer  me  back.  I 
ask  him  to  send  down  some  papers, 
and  after  waiting  for  some  time  he 
answers  me.  So  when  we  send  up  our 
prayer  to  God  in  heaven,  we  know  He 
is  there  and  knows  about  it.  It  is  not 
for  us  to  fret  and  worry  about  it,  but 
leave  the  case  in  His  hand,  for  He  will 
do  what  is  right  ere  long."    [Beec/ier.] 

"  We  shall  have  harvest  after  all, 
says  the  believer,  in  Gen.  viii.  22, 
though  the  rains  should  fall  and  the 
prices  rise,  though  the  barometer 
should  be  low  and  the  winds  threaten 
to  destroy  the  crop.  And  this  we 
may  safely  say  of  the  fruits  of  devout 
and  earnest  prayer.  The  answer  may 
be  long  in  coming,  but  in  due  time  it 
will  come.  The  seed  often  lies  buried 
in  the  ground  for  months  ;  but  what 
is  dormant  is  not  dead.  True  prayers 
are  not  lost,  they  only  bide  their  time, 
God*s  *  set  time.'  And  when  that 
time  comes  round,  he  who  has  sown  in 
tears  shall  reap  in  joy.  The  God  who 
puts  His  people's  tears  into  His  bottle 
will  certainly  not  forget  their  prayers." 
[Guthrie.^ 

Many  reasons  may  cause  delay  : — In 
general,  any  want  in  the  right  spirit  of 
prayer,  or,  where  that  spirit  exists, 
God  may  wait  to  convince  us  that  we 
have  no  claim  to  the  blessing,  that  it 
comes  as  a  pure  favour,  and  is  given 
without  being  deserved  ;  or.  He  may 
wait,  because  it  becomes  the  majesty  of 
His  nature  as  God  to  proceed  slowly 
and  with  deliberation  in  all  His  doings. 
Also,  because  one  step  of  blessing  is  a 
precedent  and  a  pledge  of  other  steps. 
Also,  because  the  present  may  not  be 
the  best  time  to  give  an  answer.  Or, 
because  if  the  answer  were  given  at 
once  it  might  lead  to  presumption, 
and  we  might  suppose  we  could  com- 
mand God's  blessings  at  our  own 
pleasure,  and  to  try  our  faith  in  His 
character  and  word  is  always  part  of 
the  reason  for  this  waiting. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


CHAP.    IV. 


Gurnall  says,  ''  Prayers  are  not  long 
on  their  journey  to  heaven,  but  long 
in  coming  back  with  a  full  answer. 
There  is  often  a  long  and  sharp  winter 
between  the  time  of  sowing  and  that 
of  reaping.  Christ,  at  this  day  in 
heaven,  hath  not  a  full  answer  to  some 
of  those  prayers  which  He  put  up  on 
earth,  for  He  is  said  to  ^^  expect  till 
His  enemies  be  made  His  footstool." 
The  father  reads  his  son's  letter  which 
has  come  from  a  distance  ;  he  likes  his 
request,  his  heart  closeth  with  it,  and 
he  resolves  to  grant  it ;  but  he  takes 
his  own  time  to  send  his  despatch. 
Princes  have  their  books  or  records 
wherein  they  put  down  the  names  of 
those  whom  they  deem  worthy  of  their 
favour,  but  they  may  stand  for  years 
without  any  honour  being  conferred. 
The  name  of  Mordecai  stood  in 
Ahasuerus'  book  somewhile  before  his 
honour  was  given,  and  God  records  the 
names  of  His  saints  and  their  prayers 
in  a  degenerate  age,  but  the  reward  is 
not  given  till  the  end  come"  (Mai.  iii. 
16-18). 


rp 


3.  We  ought  to  look  for  an  answer. 
To  offer  prayer  to  God,  and  not  to 
follow  it  up  by  expecting  an  answer,  is 
a  certain  indication  either  of  insincerity 
in  our  petitions,  or  of  unbelief  as  to 
God  s  promise  to  answer  them.  "Where 
the  treasure  is,  there  the  heart  will 
be."  If  the  blessing  sought  be  esteemed 
a  treasure,  the  heart  will  certainly  go 
out  after  it  till  it  be  gained.  What 
shall  we  think  of  a  subject,  who  has 
got  the  privilege  of  coming  into  the 
royal  presence  to  present  a  petition, 
which  he  professes  to  regard  as  of  the 
utmost  importance  to  his  interests? 
He  offers  his  petition  with  becoming 
gravity  of  manner,  but  the  moment  he 
is  done  with  the  duty  of  presenting  it, 
he  turns  his  back  on  his  sovereign,  and 
walks  out  of  the  audience-chamber 
without  waiting  or  caring  to  hear 
whether  any  reply  be  made  or  not ! 
What  is  this  but  to  mock  royalty,  and 
abuse  the  privilege  of  access  to  the 
fountain-head  of  power.  Yet  thus  do 
we  act  towards  God  when  we  do  not 
look  after  our  prayers. 


"To  pray  and  not  watcli  what  be- 
comes of  our  prayers  is  a  great  folly, 
and  implies  no  little  guilr.  It  is  to 
take  the  name  of  God  in  vain,  aud 
trifle  with  an  ordinance  that  is  holy 
and  sacred.  It  is  like  little  children 
who  knock  at  the  door  of  some  great 
house,  and  run  aAvay  before  it  is  opened, 
for  their  own  amusement.  When  thou 
hast  been  with  God,  expect  good  to 
come  from  God,  either  at  the  moment, 
or  some  time  after,  or  both.  Enter 
His  I  resence  with  the  purpose,  *  I  will 
direct  my  prayer  to  thee,  and  will  look 
up.'  Your  prayer  will  certainly  receive 
no  more  attention  from  God  if  it  is  no 
longer  attended  to  by  you.  If  you  do 
not  believe,  why  pray  ?  And  if  you  do 
believe,  why  not  expect  ?  By  not  ex- 
pecting you  again  renounce  your  confi- 
dence."    [Gurnall.^ 

"  People  say,  *  What  a  wonderful 
thing  that  God  should  hear  George 
Miiller's  prayers  ! '  Truly,  we  are  come 
to  a  strange  pass  when  we  think  it 
wonderful  that  God  is  true  !  It  is  in- 
deed wonderful  that  God  should  make 
so  many  promises  to  us,  but  not  won- 
derful that  He  should  fulfil  His  word." 

We  should  not  only  look  for  an 
answer,  but  wait  patiently  for  it,  and 
pray  again  and  yet  ;igain  until  the 
answer  come.  If  the  thing  asked  is 
promised  by  God,  or  is  agreeable  to 
His  will,  let  us  only  persevere  in  look- 
ing for  an  answer.  Elijah  looked  out 
seven  times  for  the  little  cloud  before 
it  came ;  so  should  we  look  if  it 
were  seventy  times  seven  rather  than 
cease  looking  and  expecting  an  answer. 
David  went  through  the  exercise  of 
devotion  before  God  with  the  greatest 
care.  First  he  began  with  *'  medita- 
tions ;  "  then  followed  petitions,  hum- 
ble, believing,  fervent ;  next  came 
**  looking  up  ;  "  and  lastly  came  trea- 
suring up  in  his  book  of  remembrance. 
This  is  to  do  the  business  of  prayer  in 
a  business  manner.  When  we  are 
asked  to  pray,  we  are  bidden  to  "knock," 
which  implies  more  than  one  call  at 
the  gate.  And  if  we  are  not  heard  at 
once,  let  us  knock,  again  and  yet  again 
for  we  know  we  are  at  the  right  gate. 

225 


CHAp.it.  HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


Should  there  be  no  sound  of  any  one  He  cannot  in  any  case  be  misinformed, 

approaching  to  open  the  gate  we  must  or  make  mistake  on  the  one  hand,  and 

continue  to  knock,  for  at  last  some  one  on  the  other  hand  it  is  His  very  nature 

shall   appear,    and    our    waiting    and  to  be  just,  compassionate,  righteous, 

anxious    expectation    shall  not   have  merciful  and  true,  so  that  our  interests 

been  in  vain.  are  absobitely  safe  in  His  hands.     He 

not  only  *'  will  give  grace  and  glory, 

4.   Trust    God  for  the  time    and  but  He  cannot    withhold    any  good 

manner  of  giving  the  answer.     The  thing  frv>m  th^m  that  walk  uprightly." 

circumstances  are  so  numerous  and  so  His  heart  will  not  allow  Him  to  do 

varied  which  must  be   considered   in  less.     "  They  that  seek  Him  shall  not 

order  to  i^ive  a  w^ise  and  even  a  kind  want  any  good  thing."      His   nature 

answer,  that  our  narrow  minds  are  not  forbids  Him  to  give  less.  Truly  "blessed 

competent  duly  to   weigh    them   and  is  the  man  that  trusteth  in  Him." 
come  to  a  well-balanced  judgment  in  As  to  the  manner  of  the  answer: 

the  matter.     It  is  therefore  not   the  God  may  give  directly  what  is  asked, 

leastproof  of  God's  loving  kindness  and  or  may  give  something   better  in  its 

faithful  care  in  watching  over  us  that  place,  or  may  give  support  meantime 

He  should  take  the  decision  as  to  the  while  it  is  delayed,  or  may  make  the 

time   and    manner   of  answering   our  denial  of  it  the  means  of  an  excellent 

prayers  into  His  own  hands.     For  He  discipline  to  tlie  soul  which  is  often  the 

IS  not  only  thoroughly  trustworthy,  but  most  profitable  of  alL 


MAIN  HOMILETICS.— Verses  4,  11. 

ZV.  Deliverance  agraln  provided. 

We  must  here  call  attention  to  the  statement  formerly  made  (p.  190),  that 
while  the  fact  of  sin  is  told  in  a  single  sentence  in  this  chapter,  the  stori/  of  the 
deliverance  from  its  consequences  is  spread  over  the  whole  chapter.  The  Bible 
is  a  book  written  to  give  an  account  of  one  grand  Redemption,  and  many 
smaller  redemptions,  which  are  emblems  of  tlie  greater.  Its  spirit  is  not  to 
depict  elaborately  the  dark  features  of  fallen  human  nature,  and  show  how  fully 
the  race  deserve  to  be  destroyed  ;  but  rather  to  show  how  man  has  brought  ruin 
on  himself,  and  needs  a  great  redemption.  The  final  end  kept  in  view  is  not 
destruction,  but  salvation.  Hence  at  the  opening  of  the  Book,  the  account  of 
man's  falling  into  sin,  his  loss  of  the  favour  and  the  image  of  God  ;  his  expul- 
sion from  the  society  of  the  holy  ;  and  his  exposure  to  all  manner  of  evils  from 
his  falling  under  the  Divine  frown — all  this  is  given  in  a  single  chapter  (Gen.  iii). 
Whereas  the  whole  Bible  otherwise  is  taken  up  with  an  account  of  the  working 
out  of  the  scheme  of  man's  redemption.  It  is  so  easy  to  destroy  ;  it  is  so 
difficult  to  restore.  God  delights  so  much  to  save ;  He  is  so  loathe  to  consign 
to  destruction. 

Corresponding  with  this,  it  ought  to  be  noted,  that  while  the  sins  and  black- 
slidings  of  God's  people,  in  this  book  of  Judges,  are  faithfully  narrated,  and  a 
true  exhibition  of  their  character  is  given,  so  that  no  one  can  mistake  what  is 
their  own  personal  desert,  the  eye  is  yet  not  allowed  to  rest  long  on  a  delinea- 
tion of  details  of  their  wickedness,  but  full  scope  is  given  to  the  pen  of  the 
sacred  writer  when  it  is  employed  to  describe  the  interposition  of  Divine  mercy, 
Almighty  power,  and  marvellous  wisdom,  in  the  accomplishment  of  their 
deliverance.  The  glory  of  God  manifested  in  the  repeated  redemption  of  an 
exceedingly  sinful  people,  from  the  consequences  of  their  sins,  is  the  spirit  of  this 
book  of  Judges. 

In  noticing  the  account  of  the  deliverance  here  narrated,  we  find  : — 
226 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES.  chap.  iv. 


1.  God  was  the  author  of  this  deliverance.  The  thought  arose  with  Him. 
The  nation  had  become  so  sunk,  not  only  in  ungodliness,  but  in  all  that  was 
noble  and  manly,  that  no  one  was  found  of  sufficient  force  of  character  to 
attempt  to  act  the  part  of  a  liberator.  As  on  all  other  occasions,  God  Himself 
originated  the  means  of  deliverance  for  His  people.  Though  He  had  already 
three  times  delivered  them  (if  we  count  cha[).  iii.  31,  as  one),  from  national 
ruin,  while  now  for  at  least  160  years  they  had  provoked  Him  to  anger  with 
their  idolatrous  tendencies,  yet,  full  of  pity,  He  rises  up  for  their  help,  exclaim- 
ing, "  How  shall  I  give  thee  up,  Ephraim  ?  How  shall  I  deliver  thee,  Israel  ?  " 
It  was  for  the  glory  of  His  own  great  name  in  the  world  that  He  should  preserve 
their  existence  as  a  nation.  They  owed  their  existence  to  a  gracious  purpose 
which  God  was  to  fulfil  through  their  instrumentality  ;  but  should  their  name 
as  a  nation  be  blotted  out,  that  purpose  must  fail  of  accomplishment.  Another 
nation  might  have  been  created  to  supply  their  place  ;  but  still  it  would  have 
been  said  that  God's  original  purpose  in  bringing  this  people  into  existence  had 
failed.  And  it  must  not  be  whispered  in  heaven  above  or  on  the  earth  beneath 
that  any  plan  of  the  Divine  Wisdom  and  Love  had  proved  abortive.  Hence  we 
find  this  people  always  spared  in  some  manner,  that  no  shadow  might  rest  on 
Jehovah's  name.  **For  mine  own  name's  sake  will  I  defer  mine  anger." 
(Isa.  xlviii.  9-11.)  Besides,  the  history  of  this  people  stood  as  a  whole.  Only 
a  part  of  it  had  yet  run.  A  glorious  display  of  the  divine  perfection  had  already 
been  made  in  connection  with  that  history,  much  more  of  which  had  yet  to  run. 
It  was  of  the  highest  consequence  therefore  for  the  glory  of  the  Divine  name 
that  this  people,  notwithstanding  the  heinous  character  of  their  sins,  should  be 
preserved,  and  that  it  should  be  seen  how  radically  different  was  the  character 
of  their  God  from  the  dumb  idols  of  the  heathen  around  them.  To  show  forth 
anew  God's  glory  was  the  great  purpose  to  be  gained  in  the  deliverance  now  to 
be  effected. 

That  the  idea  of  a  hostile  movement  against  Sisera  was  of  God  himself, 
appears  from  the  statement  in  ver.  6,  where  Deborah  speaks  as  one  commissioned 
by  Jehovah  to  be  an  organ  for  the  communication  of  His  will  to  men.  All  the 
directions,  also,  as  to  what  should  be  done,  who  were  to  do  it,  and  how  it  was  to 
be  done,  were  given  by  God  through  the  prophetess.  His  honour  and  glory 
were  the  ends  to  be  gained  ;  His  hand,  therefore,  must  be  seen  in  all.  Not  only 
in  the  general  scheme  of  Providence,  but  also  ia  the  history  of  every  individual 
nation,  and  individual  man  it  is  true,  that  "  of  Him,  and  through  Him,  and  to 
Him  are  all  things." 

2.  The  hopeless  character  of  Israel's  prospects.  Not  only  had  truth  fallen 
in  the  streets,  but  its  form  was  scarcely  anywhere  seen  in  the  land.  Only  a  few 
glimmering  lights  appeared  like  torches,  while  darkness  was  in  all  the  dwellings 
of  Israel.  Not  only  the  race  of  heroes,  but  that  of  the  men  of  God  had  died  out. 
No  prophet  seemed  to  be  at  work  from  North  to  South  ;  and  the  sole  possessor  of 
the  heavenly  gift  in  all  Israel  was  a  woman  whom  God  had  chosen.  All  had 
become  craven  hearted,  abject  and  weak.  The  nation  had  lost  its  manhood, 
and  had  again  become  a  herd  of  slaves.  They  were  now  learning  in  their 
miserable  plight,  what  an  *'  evil  and  bitter  thing  it  was  for  them  to  have  forsaken 
the  Lord  their  God ;  "  for  now.  He,  their  Rock,  had  sold  them — their  God  had 
shut  them  up.  There  was  no  sword  nor  spear  in  Israel.  There  was  no  leader. 
There  were  no  resources.  There  was  no  courage.  There  was  no  rallying  point. 
Everything  forbade  the  possibility  of  anything  being  done.  On  all  sides  there 
was  prostration.  It  was  the  doing  of  sin  ;  which  is  ever  the  reproach  of  any 
people.  If  an  army  could  be  raised  in  Israel,  how  could  it  make  head  against 
the  nine  hundred  chariots  of  iron  of  the  enemy;  which,  in  all  the  ages  of  antiquity, 
were  reckoned  an  irresistible  force  ?     There  was  also  the  large  general  army  of 

227 


OHAP.  IV.  HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


the  enemy  to  be  reckoned  with  ;  there  was  their  renowned  captain,  wlio  was  a 
host  in  himself ;  and  there  was  the  demoralised  condition  of  the  whole  people 
of  Israel. 

Who  should  come  to  the  help  of  the  Lord  agaifist  the  mighty  in  such  an  evil 
day  ?■  "  Jehovah  looked  and  there  was  none  to  help  ;  He  saw  that  there  was 
no  man,  and  wondered  that  there  was  no  intercessor  ;  therefore  His  own  arm 
brou<,dit  salvation."  "  Man's  extremity  is  God's  opportunity."  It  is  part  of  His 
W()nder-worl<ing  wisdom  to  turn  the  wickedness  of  man  into  the  means  of  praising 
Him.  The  weakness  to  which  his  people  had  been  reduced  through  their 
wickedness  furnished  the  occasion  for  a  more  illustrious  display  of  His  glory  as 
their  Saviour  God,  than  could  have  been  made  in  an  ordinary  condition  of  things. 

3.   Suitable  instruments  are  found  when  required  to  do  God's  work.     Yet 

though  the  energies  of  the  nation  were  paralysed,  and  the  mainspring  of  its 
activities  was  broken  ;  though  its  princes  had  become  as  harts  fleeing  before  the 
pursuer,  and  all  its  men  of  heroism  had  disappeared  from  the  land  ;  though  the 
Joshuas  and  Calebs,  and  Othniels  were  no  longer  to  be  found,  while  the  people 
had  become  fewer  in  number,  spent  their  days  in  terror,  and  were  thoroughly 
crushed  inspirit — within  a  few  days,  perhaps  within  one  short  week,  when  God  was 
raised  up  by  the  voice  of  their  penitence  and  their  prayers,  agents  were  found  to 
tahe  the  lead  to  seta  machinery  in  motion,  and  carry  out  a  plan  suitable  to  meet  the 
emergency  that  had  arisen,  Man  in  such  a  case  fails  to  find  the  fitting  ujaterials. 
God  is  at  no  loss.  Jesus  knew  in  a  moment  where  to  find  the  fish,  which  had  a 
piece  of  money  in  its  mouth,  that  was  needed  to  meet  a  just  claim  which  had 
occurred  in  the  ordinary  relations  of"  life  ;  and  now  though  the  land  of  Israel 
was  stripped  bare  of  resources  as  the  barren  wilderness,  God  knew  at  once  where 
instruments  were  to  be  found  suitable  for  carrying  out  His  purpose.  All  hearts 
are  in  His  hand,  and  all  events  are  at  His  disposal.  No  time  is  needed  to 
institute  a  search  for  the  fit  persons.  In  a  moment  He  points  with  the  finger  to 
the  persons  whom  He  shall  employ  to  execute  His  will. 

To  our  thinking  the  individuals  thus  singled  out  may  seem  to  he  in  several 
respects  most  unqualified  to  occupy  the  position  to  which  God  calls  them.  Yet 
thereby  are  they  all  the  better  qualified  for  bringing  praise  and  honour  to  the 
Divine  arm  and  the  Divine  wisdom,  in  the  successful  issue  of  the  means  employed. 
"  God  chooses  the  foolish  things  to  confound  the  wise,  and  weak  things  to  over- 
come things  that  are  mighty  ;  yea  the  base  things,  and  such  as  are  desjdsed,  He 
employs  to  bring  to  nothing  things  that  are — that  no  flesh  should  glory  in  His 
presence."  Who  could  have  supposed  that  two  women  would  have  been  put  in 
the  foreground  to  meet  this  most  serious  juncture  in  Israel's  history — the  one  to 
act  as  the  head,  and  the  other  as  the  hand,  in  vanquishing  and  even  in  annihi- 
lating the  formidable  power  that  had  ground  Israel  to  the  dust  for  twenty  years! 
Had  a  Joshua  been  raised  up  to  act  as  leader,  then  the  glory  might  have  been 
ascribed  to  the  great  captain  that  led  Israel's  armies.  But  when  a  Deborah  and 
a  Jael  are  employed  to  do  the  work,  then  is  it  aU  the  more  conspicuous,  that  the 
hand  of  the  Lord  had  brought  about  the  result. 

In  congregations  of  Christian  people  there  may  sometimes  be  few  persons,  or 
almost  none  who  have  the  gifts  to  act  as  leaders,  by  whom  the  Church's  work 
may  be  carried  on.  In  communities,  sometimes  scarcely  a  man  can  be  found  to 
come  to  the  front,  who  possesses  education,  tact,  firmness,  or  natural  ability 
sufficient  to  act  the  part  of  a  public  leader.  In  a  great  religious  crisis  when  the 
interests  of  Christ's  truth,  or  the  spiritual  w^elfare  of  thousands,  may  be  alarm- 
ingly at  stake,  few  or  none  may  appear  possessing  all  the  qualifications  to  take 
the  helm,  and  conduct  the  vessel  safely  away  from  the  breakers  and  bring  it  into 
port.  But  in  such  a  case  the  course  is  clear.  Let  ''  the  Lord's  remembrancers" 
put  the  case  into  the  hands  of  Him  who  can  ''  make  the  weak  becouie  as  David," 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:   JVDQB8.  chap.  iT. 


and  who  now  wrought  with  the  Deborahs  and  the  Baraks  as  mightily,  as  He  did 
with  the  Samsons  and  the  Jephthahs.  No  matter  what  may  be  the  instruments 
employed,  if  the  Lord's  hand  is  at  work,  the  Church  will  always  be  able  to  say, 
"  We  lack  nothing." 

4.  Fit  means  must  be  employed  along  with  Divine  power.     God  never 

despises  the  use  of  means  in  bringini,^  about  certain  results,  because  it  is  the 
arrangement  He  Himself  has  established  through  all  nature,  that  certain  means 
should  be  employed  to  produce  certain  effects.  When  Jesus  opened  the  eyes  of 
the  blind  man,  "  He  spat  on  the  ground,  and  made  clay  of  the  spittle,  with  which 
He  anointed  his  eyes."  Not  that  the  spittle  had  any  efficacy,  but  He  would 
show  His  regard  to  the  use  of  some  means,  rather  than  work  without  means  at 
all ;  and  that  He  could  make  use  of  any  means,  however  unlikely,  to  serve  His 
purpose  successfully.  So  now,  though  God  could  have  easily  overthrown  Sisera 
and  his  army  by  miracle,  by  pestilence,  by  an  earthquake,  by  the  lightnings  of 
heaven,  by  paralysing  the  muscular  power  of  every  soldier  in  the  enemy's  camp, 
or  in  many  other  ways,  yet  he  chooses  to  employ  natural  means  for  the  purpose. 
He  gives  orders  that  an  army  be  raised,  and  appoints  a  suitable  leader.  He 
requires  that  army  to  engage  in  battle  with  the  enemy,  and  gives  the  assurance 
that,  through  their  instrumentality,  He  will  overthrow  Sisera,  and  utterly 
destroy  his  host. 

The  army  was  limited  hy  God  to  10,000  men,  lest,  as  in  Gideon's  case,  if  a 
larger  number  had  been  chosen,  Israel  might  have  said,  "Mine  own  hand  hath 
saved  me."  It  was  extremely  inadequate  when  looked  at  in  the  light  of  the 
terrible  opposition  it  had  to  meet.  The  number  of  Sisera's  army  is  not  given  ; 
but  judging  by  the  whole  account  given  it  seems  to  have  been  an  overwhelming 
force.  The  proposition  might  be  similar  to  the  force  of  Israel  in  the  days  of 
Ahab,  as  compared  with  the  huge  host  of  Benhadad — "  like  two  little  flocks  of 
kids,  while  the  Syrians  filled  the  country."  As  the  men  of  this  small  army 
came  chiefly  from  the  tribes  of  Naphtali  and  Zebulun,  it  is  supposed  that,  as 
Hazor,  Jabin's  royal  city,  lies  in  the  territory  of  the  former  of  these  tribes,  and 
as  it  is  likely  that  it  was  at  Hazor,  or  near  it,  where  tlie  chariots  of  iron  were 
made,  Barak's  army  was  largely  made  up  of  the  smiths  or  workers  in  iron,  his 
vassals  who  actually  made  these  chariots  of  iron,  or  along  with  these  the  wood- 
cutters, armed  with  their  axes  and  hatchets,  who  were  employed  in  large  numbers 
in  that  great  timber-growing  district.  If  so,  what  a  retribution  on  the  head  of 
the  oppressor  !  Another  supposition  is,  that  as  in  Elijah's  day,  the  number  of 
these  who  had  not  bowed  the  knee  to  Baal  was  7000,  so  in  the  days  before 
Deborah  arose,  the  number  of  this  class  in  Northern  Israel  was  10,000 — a 
supposition  not  so  fanciful  as  at  first  might  seem,  for  the  battle  was  fought  on 
religious  grounds.  "  They  came  to  the  help  of  the  Lord  against  the  mighty," 
and  "  they  jeoparded  their  lives  unto  the  death  in  the  high  places  of  the  field." 
The  glory  of  the  God  of  Israel  was  the  chief  thing  concerned  in  the  fighting  of 
this  battle,  and  that,  every  man  who  was  there,  or  who  stayed  away,  seemed  to 
understand. 

Here  then  was  an  army  of  fearers  of  the  God  of  Jacob,  who  had  not  gone 
after  other  gods,  men  whose  religious  principles  were  put  to  the  test,  and  they 
nobly  stood  the  test.  Can  we  wonder  if  God  Himself  should  go  forth  before 
them,  if  He  should  "  teach  their  hands  to  war  and  their  fingers  to  fight,"  and  if, 
thus  succoured,  the  stout  hearted  should  be  spoiled  before  them,  and  none  of 
the  men  of  might  should  find  their  hands. 

5,  A  strong  faith  and  its  reward.  This  we  find  in  Deborah.  She  was  the 
centre  of  interest,    and    the   spring  of  all   active  movement  throughout  this 

teresting  episode  of  history.  All  Israel  looked  to  her  for  counsel.  She  was 
the  nation's  oracle.      We  hear  nothing  of  high  priest  or  seer  in  this  degenerate 

229 


CHAP.  IV.  BOMILETlG  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES, 


day — only  Deborah.  She  was  prophet,  priest,  and  king.  Witliout  her  Barak 
was  nothing,  and  could  do  nothing.  She  was  the  one  hope  of  Israel.  That  star 
put  out,  the  whole  sky  would  have  been  hopelessly  dark.  But  for  this  one 
woman,  the  liistory  of  this  sorrowful  period  would  have  been  far  more  dismal 
Btill.    Throngh  her  the  turning-point  was  made  to  a  happier  and  brighter  era. 

All  this  she  was  because  of  her  faith.  She  had  indeed  the  gift  of  prophecy, 
and  performed  the  function  of  a  judge,  for  she  was  appealed  to  in  that  capacity 
from  all  parts  of  the  land.  But  that  which  determined  her  character  was  her 
faith  in  the  God  of  Israel.  She  believed  in  His  name  ;  in  His  character  ;  in 
His  covenant  with  His  people  ;  and  in  His  promises.  She  believed  tliat  the 
God  of  Jacob  was  with  Jacob's  seed,  that  "  the  Strength  of  Israel  would  not  lie," 
that  God  would  not  forsake  His  people,  but  would  in  due  time  return  and  send 
relief  to  them  under  their  manifold  sorrows. 

This  faith,  though  that  only  of  a  single  individual,  was  most  refreshing  in 
times  when  all  things  looked  so  dull  and  dreary.  It  revived  the  drooping 
spirits  of  the  nation.  If  there  was  but  one  rose  in  the  desert,  its  sweet  perfume 
seemed  to  be  wafted  to  every  home  in  the  land.  When  a  man  thought  of 
Deborah  he  thanked  God  and  took  courage.  This  was  most  honouring  to  God 
— to  see  faith  burning  so  strong  in  one  bosom  when  it  seemed  to  be  so  sickly 
and  languishing  everywhere  else.  When  she  announced  the  message  of  her  God 
to  Barak,  she  spoke  with  the  utmost  certainty  of  success.  No  faltering  of  tone, 
and  no  hesitation  of  manner.  Doubt  and  fear  were  cast  to  the  winds,  while 
every  word  was  spoken  and  every  step  was  taken  in  the  assurance  of  victory. 

And  what  is  the  reward  of  such  faith  in  a  degenerate  time  ?  Every  step 
succeeds  of  tlie  directions  which  she  gave.  Barak's  scruples  are  overcome  ;  the 
10,000  men  assemble  at  Mount  Tabor  ;  Sisera's  army  are  drawn  together  to  the 
River  Kishon  ;  Jehovah  specially  interposes  on  behalf  of  Israel,  and  the  enemy 
are  destroyed  beyond  remedy.  The  praises  of  the  God  of  Israel  are  again  sung, 
and  the  fear  of  His  name  spreads  abroad  to  every  land.  Another  briglit  chapter 
is  added  to  the  history  of  Israel,  and  Deborali's  name  shall  be  known  as  that  of 
a  "  mother  in  Israel  "  to  all  generations.  How  many  in  after  years  would  rise 
up  to  call  her  blessed  !  Her  name  is  immortalised  as  a  "  saviour  "  of  the  Church 
of  God  in  an  evil  day,  and  that  name  shall  shine  as  a  star  in  the  firmament 
through  every  age  to  the  end  of  time.  Nor  shall  it  be  lost  sight  of  when  the 
stream  is  swallowed  up  in  the  shoreless  ocean  beyond.  For,  from  the  wreck  of 
time  all  God's  jewels  shall  be  carefully  gathered,  and  made  up  in  a  glorious  wreath 
to  adorn  the  Redeemer's  head  through  everlasting  ages.  Nothing  that  has  been 
done  for  the  church  of  God  shall  be  forgotten.  All  who  have  been  "faithful 
unto  death  shall  receive  the  crown  of  life." 

6.  A  weak  faith  and  its  chastisement.  Barak  looked  on  the  same  picture  as 
Deborah  did,  but  {at  first)  with  very  different  eyes.  He  started  back  when  he 
saw  what  seemed  to  be  hobgoblins,  satyrs,  dragons,  and  all  manner  of  hideous 
spectres  ;  while  she  exulted  at  the  thought  that  "  the  angel  of  the  covenant  " 
encamped  round  about  His  people,  covering  them  with  His  feathers,  and  giving 
them  all  needful  shelter  under  His  protecting  wing.  Weak  faith  saw  in  the 
near  foreground  the  dark  thunder-cloud,  surcharged  with  the  elements  of  ruin, 
and  hanging  ready  to  burst  over  the  homes  of  the  once  beloved,  but  now 
deserted  people,  strong  faith  saw  a  mighty  wind  sent  out  from  the  Lord,  dis- 
persing the  murky  clouds,  clearing  the  whole  sky  of  danger,  and  opening  out  a 
period  of  glorious  sunshine  to  succeed  the  period  of  gloom  and  sorrow.  Weak 
faith  saw  the  billows  too  mighty  for  the  little  skiff  they  carried  on  their  bosom, 
and  fearing  it  might  founder  at  any  moment,  began  to  call  for  aid.  Strong 
faith  saw  that  skiff  under  the  care  of  Him  who  walks  on  the  wateis,  and  com- 
mands every  wave  by  a  word,  who  controls  every  breath  of  wind,  and  has 
230 


BOMILBTIO  COMMENTARY:  JVDQES,  chap.  iv. 


pledged  Himself  to  bring  all  safe  in  due  time  to  land.  Weak  Bardk-like  faith 
sees  the  enemy  stretching  out  his  lines  in  deadly  array,  believes  in  the  faintest 
possibility  of  its  own  success,  and  the  lii*^li  probability  of  crushing  defeat  with 
its  frightful  consequences.  Strong  faith  says  :  "  Who  are  these  uncircum- 
cised  that  they  should  defy  the  armies  of  the  living  God  ?  These  Canaanites 
**  are  men  and  not  God,  and  their  chariot  horses  flesh  and  not  spirit."  "Far 
more  are  with  us  than  all  that  are  against  us."  Once  more  weak  faith  says  :  We 
have  no  might  against  this  great  company  that  come  against  us,  we  are  as 
grasshoppers  before  them,  while  they  are  a  vast  multitude,  well-disciplined  by 
the  best  of  generals,  and  highly  accoutred  in  arms.  Strong  faith  says  : 
"  Though  they  compass  us  about  as  bees,  they  shall  be  quenched  as  the  fire  of 
thorns,  for  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  we  will  destroy  them."  It  sees  the  finger  of 
Omnipotence  about  to  be  put  forth,  and  victory  sure,  swift,  an  I  overwhelming 
over  the  foe  secured  for  the  Church  of  God. 

Barak's  faith,  though  at  first  weak,  was  genuine.  It  seemed  to  be  in  part  the 
weakness  of  surprise.  He  was  taken  aback,  when  told  that  he  was  chosen  to 
occupy  the  perilous  and  difficult  position  of  being  captain  over  G(^d's  people ; 
and  he  felt  his  insufficiency  for  the  duties  of  the  situation.  But  weak  faith  is 
yet  true  faith  ;  as  a  drop  of  water  is  water  as  well  as  the  ocean,  or  a  spark  of 
fire  is  fire  as  well  as  a  large  flame.  The  little  finger  lives  the  same  life  that  the 
hand  or  foot  does.  A  little  grace  may  be  true  grace,  as  the  filings  of  gold  are 
as  good  gold  (though  little  of  it)  as  a  whole  wedge.  Tliough  the  pearl  of  faith 
be  small  it  shines  with  great  beauty  in  God's  eye;  it  is  a  ray  of  His  own  ex- 
cellence. As  yet  Barak  could  only  say  :  "Lord  I  believe  !  help  thou  mine 
unbelief!  "  If  he  were  helped  by  Deborah,  he  was  prepared  to  undertake  the 
arduous  duty.  That  indicated  true  faith.  He  knew  that  the  Lord  was  with 
the  prophetess,  but  he  did  not  as  yet  feel  that  the  Lord  was  in  any  special  sense 
with  himself  Had  he  shown  a  firm  faith  and  at  once  said,  without  any  hesita- 
tion :  Here  am  I !  Send  me  1  Very  likely  the  next  sentence  we  should  have 
read  would  have  been  :  "  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  came  upon  him."  This  is  the 
first  chastisement  of  his  weak  faith — the  lack  of  the  double  portion  of  the 
Divine  Spirit.  That  he  had  the  Spirit  was  manifest,  but  it  was  not  given  in 
such  large  degree  apparently,  as  in  the  case  of  some  others  of  the  judges. 

His  faith  seems  to  have  grown  stronger  every  hour  while  Deborah  was  with 
him  ;  and  at  last  we  see  him  boldly  taking  the  initiative  in  going  forth  to 
encounter  the  mighty  host  of  Sisera  in  battle  array.  And  because,  when  the 
time  came,  he  rose  with  the  occasion,  and  performed  the  great  feat  of  that  day 
by  faith  and  not  by  sight,  therefore  his  name  finds  a  place  in  the  honourable  list 
of  the  men  of  faith.  Thus  in  the  end  his  faith  obtained  a  great  reward,  though 
the  crowning  laurels  were  denied  to  it,  because  it  staggered  at  the  beginning. 
While  Sisera  lived  the  enemy  lived.  His  destruction  was  the  p\itMng  an  end  to 
the  oppression  of  the  people  of  God,  and  the  signal  for  their  immediate  emanci- 
pation. Tiiis  honour  was  withheld  from  Barak  and  conferred  on  a  woman. 
And  thus  more  especially  was  his  weak  faith  chastised.  Zacharias  was  struck 
dumb  for  his  unbelief ;  and  Moses  had  the  scar  of  Meribah  left  on  him  till  the 
last.  But  the  blessed  thing  is  to  have  true  faith  at  all.  Even  when  small  as 
the  acorn  it  is  able  to  move  mountains  of  difficulty.  And  if  only  living,  how- 
ever small,  it  will  grow.  Under  proj)er  cultivation  it  may  become  powerful  as 
the  cedar,  and  be  able  to  use  the  noble  language,  "  I  can  do  all  things  through 
Christ  who  strengtheneth  me." 

7.  God's  ordering  the  battle,  a  presage  of  victory.  The  thought  of  having 
a  battle  at  all  was  God's  own.  It  was  the  natural  way  of  getting  out  of  the  hands 
of  the  oppressor.  Though  war  in  itself  is  a  thing  to  be  deprecated,  it  sometimes 
becomes  a  necessity ;   and  as  a  matter  of  fact.  God  sometimes  takes  that  way  of 

231 


CHAP.  TV.  no  MT LET  to  COMMENTART:  JUDGES. 


puDisliing  the  oppressor.  It  was  so  now.  In  verse  6  we  are  told  that  the  God 
of  Israel  gave  the  command  to  raise  an  army  and  go  out  to  battle  against  tlie 
Canaanites.  This  command  was  the  first  step.  The  second  lay  in  appointing 
Barak  to  be  the  leader  of  the  army  of  Israel  ;  as  is  implied  in  the  same  charge. 
Another  step  commanded  was  to  make  the  number  of  combatants  as  few  or  as 
many  as  10,000.  Still  another  step  was  that  God  Himself  would  draw  forth 
Sisera  to  engage  iu  battle,  with  his  full  force  assembled.  And  lastly,  a  promise 
is  added,  ''  I  will  deliver  the  enemy  into  thine  hand." 

The  Lord  is  a  rock  ;  His  work  is  perfect.  W/ten  He  begins,  He  carries 
through.  If  He  stir  up  a  spirit  of  prayer  in  a  man  for  some  special  blessing, 
the  pouring  out  of  that  spirit  is  itself  evidence  enough  that  He  means  to  bestow 
the  blessing.  Or  if  with  the  finger  of  Providence  He  points  out  the  steps  of 
some  course  of  duty  we  are  to  take,  the  fact  of  our  beini-  Divinely  directed  is 
sufficient  proof  that  God  will  bless  us  with  success,  if  we  iaithfully  walk  in  the 
path  of  duty  of  His  appointment.  There  is  such  a  thing  as  reading  the  leadings 
of  Providence,  an  attainment  at  which  one  may  expect  to  arrive,  by  carefully 
and  prayerfully  watching  the  course  of  God's  dealings  for  a  period  of  time. 
When  we  can  make  out  that  God  is  pointing  out  some  work  for  us  to  do,  and 
we  set  about  doing  it,  we  may  count  on  success,  for  He  does  not  go  back  in  His 
purpose.  Besides,  in  anything  which  He  calls  us  to  do,  He  always  promises  His 
presence  and  help  in  tlie  doing  of  it.  When  He  called  Joshua,  He  promised — 
"  I  will  be  with  thee,  I  will  not  fail  thee,  nor  forsake  thee."  *'  He  sendeth  none 
a  warfare  on  their  own  charges."  In  the  present  case  Barak  had  strong  ground 
to  conclude  that  God  was  with  him,  from  the  many  specific  directions  given  to 
him,  all  of  which  implied  that  God  had  a  plan  to  be  carried  out,  and  therefore 
He  would  certainly  be  with  the  agent  whom  He  employed  to  carry  it  out.  He 
also  knew  that  Deborah,  who  gave  him  his  instructions,  was  well  accredited  as 
the  messenger  of  God,  so  that  what  she  said  had  the  Divine  seal  upon  it,  and 
was  authorised  by  God.  All  this  was  sufficient  to  form  a  foundation  for  a 
strong  faith.  In  the  great  majority  of  cases  there  is  evidence  furnished  for 
cherishing  a  strong  faith,  were  there  only  a  disposition  to  do  so.  But  in  how 
many  cases  is  that  disposition  a-wanting  I 


VICTORY— TEE  LORD  GOING  BEFORE.-  Verses  12-24. 

Critical  Notes  — 12.  And  they  showed  Sisera,  etc.]  Sisera  was  the  generalissimo  of  the  King 
of  Hazor  ;  to  him^  therefore,  the  report  was  carried,  that  the  revolt  of  the  tribes  of  Israel  from 
under  the  hand  of  Jabin  his  master  had  come  to  a  head,  and  that  an  army  was  being  collected 
at  Mount  Tabor  under  the  captaincy  of  Barak,  with  the  \iew  of  breaking  their  yoke  of  servitude. 
Of  this  God  made  use  to  fulfil  His  promise,  "  I  will  draw  to  thee,  Sisera,  with  his  chariots  and 
multitude,"  etc.  (in  verse  7).  l^or  Sisera  required  no  further  motive  to  rouse  him  in  a  moment 
to  opposition  and  to  vengeance  ;  though  we  might  add  here  as  in  Pharaoh's  case,  that  the  Lord 
hardened  his  heart  so  that  he  pursued  after  the  people  (comp.  Ex.  xiv.  3-8).  Accordingly  we 
read  in — 

13.  Sisera  gathered  together  all  his  chariots,  etc.]  Filled  with  indignation  at  the  attempt  of 
the  long  subject  nation  to  recover  their  liberty,  he  resolves  to  put  forth  the  whole  mighty  force 
at  his  command  to  crush  for  ever  their  aspirations  after  national  independence,  and  reduce  them 
to  a  state  of  perpetual  vassalage.  All  the  people  that  were  with  him  from  Harosheth  of  the 
nations  unto  the  River  Kishon.l  This  seems  to  indicate  that  besides  Jabin 's  subjects  proper, 
there  were  many  others  in  this  formidable  conscription  brought  together,  mercenaries,  or 
tributaries — a  huge  host  collected  out  of  the  whole  north-west  of  Palestine,  in  addition  to  the 
mighty  chariot  force  already  specified.  The  description  covers  a  large  breadth  of  country, 
BufBcient  to  furnish  from  one  to  two  hundred  thousand  men  ;  though  the  precise  number  is  not 
given,  the  only  expression  used  being  "his  multitude  "  (27).  There  seemed  to  be  a  powerful 
confederacy,  who  said  to  each  other,  "  come  let  us  cut  them  oflf  from  being  a  nation  ;  that  the 
name  of  Israel  may  be  no  more  in  remembrance."     (Comp.  Ps.  Ixxxiii.) 

14.  And  Deborah  said  unto  Barak,  Up ;  for  this  is  the  day,  etc  ]    It  is  a  sad  omission  that  in 

232 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    JVdOES.  cftAt.  iV. 


this  critical  juncture  of  the  national  history,  we  hear  nothing  of  God's  priests — the  men  whose 
office  it  was  to  present  the  offerings  and  prayers  of  the  people  at  the  Divine  footstool.  Had  the 
class  become  defunct  ?  If  not,  why  such  a  dead  silence  in  regard  to  them  ?  Why  not  appeal  to 
the  sacred  Urim  and  Thummim  in  order  to  ascertain  God's  will  at  this  solemn  moment  ?  Where 
was  the  ark  of  God  before  which  supplications  and  confessions  might  be  made  ?  Did  the  sacred 
fire  still  burn?  Is  not  the  Lord  gone  out  before  thee  ?]  "The  captain  of  the  Lord's  liost  " 
fought  at  the  head  of  the  Israelitish  army  in  every  battle  ;  unseen  He  appeared  only  to  Joshua 
at  the  beginning  of  the  campaign.  But  He  had  gone  before  the  people  in  the  wilderness  as 
their  Guide  and  Protector  or  Shepherd,  though  all  unseen.  For  "  this  is  He  that  was  with  the 
church  in  the  wilderness"  (Acts  vii.  38;  Ex.  xxiii  20-23  ;  xxxiii.  2  ;  Deut.  xviii.  15).  And  as 
a  proof  that  this  same — not  angelic  merely,  but  Divine — Friend  was  with  them  still  to  act  as 
their  Saviour,  we  have  a  distinct  notice  of  His  presence  at  the  beginning  of  the  dark  days  of 
the  Judges  in  chap.  ii.  1-5.  Now  He  was  to  act  as  the  general  of  the  army  -the  Lord's  host, 
and  to  go  forth  at  the  head  of  that  host  (Isa.  lii.  12).  He  was  Himself  the  army  ;  the  King  of 
Kings. 

15.  And  the  Lord  discomfited  Sisera  and  all  his  chariots,  etc.,  with  the  edge  of  the  sword,  etc.] 
The  word  -^Ti^  means  agitated — dispersed — or  rather  confounded  (2  Sam.  xxii.  15  ;  Ps.  cxliv.  6) 
{Keil,  Casstl,  etc.),  which  is  more  than  simple  defeat ;  as  if  a  higher  than  ordinary  power  had 
been  at  work.  It  is  the  same  word  that  is  used  to  express  the  effect  produced  on  Pharaoh's 
host,  when  they  pursued  after  Israel  into  the  sea.  "  The  Lord  troubled  the  host  of  the 
Egyptians."  It  was  made  manifest  that  another  than  human  power  was  arrayed  against  them. 
So  it  was  in  the  destruction  of  the  Canaanites  in  Joshua  x.  10,  where  the  same  word  is  used. 
In  the  present  case,  as  well  as  in  that  which  occurred  in  Joshua's  days,  there  were  two  powers 
at  work — the  seen  and  the  unseen  ;  the  first  being  enclosed  (so  to  speak)  in  the  other.  The 
matter  stood  thus — It  was  a  bo.ttle  of  faith.  There  was  no  visil)le  sign  of  the  Divine  presence. 
There  was  the  gieatest  possible  disparity  of  force  on  the  side  of  Israel.  It  seemed  an  act 
of  madness,  according  to  all  reasonable  calculations,  for  Barak  and  tiie  people  he  had  assembled 
to  throw  themselves  against  the  irresistible  chariot  force  of  the  Canaanites.  No  wise  soldier 
leader  would  have  tried  conclusions  at  arm>  in  such  circumstances — sheep  against  wolves,  boys 
against  men.  Nothing  but  faith  could  justify  the  step  which  they  now  took  in  going  down  into 
the  plain — faith  in  the  covenant  God,  in  His  character  and  standing  promises,  in  the  intimations 
He  had  given  of  specific  steps  to  be  taken  on  this  occasion  in  order  to  the  carrying  out  of  a 
certain  plan  of  His  own,  implying  that  He  had  a  plan,  and  if  so,  woidd  certainly  carry  it  out. 

Deborah  was  the  guiding  spirit  of  the  occasion.  The  people  trusted  her  as  a  prophetess  of  the 
Lord — the  chosen  organ  for  communicating  the  intimations  of  His  will.  All  things  being  ready 
for  the  conflict,  under  an  impulse  of  the  Divine  Spirit,  she  calls  aloud  to  Barak,  with  a  tone  of 
authority,  as  speaking  iu  God's  name,  that  now  the  moment  had  arrived  when  prompt  and 
decisive  action  must  be  taken  against  the  enemy,  for  the  Lord  Himself — the  God  who  had 
wrought  all  the  wonders  of  the  past — had  gone  out  before  him.  Nor  would  she  confine  herself 
to  that  single  sentence,  recorded  in  verse  14,  but  "  with  many  other  words  would  she  testify  and 
exhort,"  till  the  whole  camp  was  roused  to  the  highest  pitch  of  fervour.  Like  a  seraphic  spirit 
in  human  form,  faith,  hope,  and  courage  flashing  from  her  eyes,  and  going  out  like  elec  trie  sp<orks 
from  all  her  features  and  her  movements,  the  very  incarnation  of  trust  in  her  God,  standing 
before  the  people,  it  was  no  wonder  if  every  man,  from  Barak  downward,  became  animated  with 
something  of  the  Divine  fire,  if  doubts  and  fears  were  cast  to  the  winds,  and  one  feeling  filled 
every  breast,  that  of  assurance  that  victory  was  already  theirs. 

The  people,  too,  were  all  men  of  faith ;  or  the  greater  part  of  them.  For  "  they  offered 
themselves  willingly"  (chap.  v.  2).  Their  characters  were  tried  in  their  being  called  to  be 
soldiers.  It  was  not  merely,  could  they  pray  to  Israel's  God,  as  in  the  case  of  Cromwell's 
"  Ironsides,"  or  Havelock's  noble  regiments.  But  what  included  everything  else  essential  to  a 
true  religious  character — had  they  practical  faith  up  to  the  mark  of  facing  all  danger  out  of 
loyalty  to  Israel's  God  ?  Hence  the  true  force  of  that  word  (verse  6) — "  Go  and  draw  toward 
Mount  Tabor,  and  take  with  thee  ten  thousand  men  of  Naphtali  and  of  Zebulun."  Every  man 
was  to  have  life  and  death  set  before  him  on  the  one  side,  and  his  duty  to  his  God  on  the  (-tlier. 
Between  these  he  is  left  to  choose.  It  was  no  easy  thing  to  go  up  that  hill.  Only  hearts  of 
steel  could  try.  Many  on  such  terms  preferred  to  continue  under  their  drudgery  and  their 
bonds.  "  The  inhabitants  of  Meroz ;  the  men  of  Reuben,  of  Gilead,  and  of  Dan  "  (chap.  v. 
23,  15,  16,  17).  Not  so,  many  in  Zebulun  and  Naphtali,  with  the  princes  of  Issachar  (chap.  v. 
18,  15).  This  character  of  the  people — their  being  all  chosen  men,  chosen  on  the  ground  of 
their  faith,  was  a  most  important  factor  in  the  case.  For  on  this  account,  the  summons  to 
battle  in  their  case  would  be  felt  with  the  power  of  a  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord."  Also  the  fullest 
measure  of  the  Divine  blessing  might  be  expected  to  crown  their  efforts.  How  could  such  men 
fail  of  success,  when  the  faithfulness  of  their  God  was  pledged  to  aid  them  ? 

Barah  their  leader  was  also  now  risen  to  the  occasion.  A  man  of  faith  at  bottom,  he  had  now 
got  over  his  first  surprise.  His  doubts  would  all  be  solved  by  Deborah,  and  no  doubt  in  answer 
to  much  prayer  he  would  have  grace  given  according  to  the  day.  He  now  seems  fully  to  realise 
that  the  battle  is  the  Lord's,  and  that  the  glory  of  His  name  and  the  success  of  His  cause,  are 

233 


CHAP.  IV.  HOMILETW  COMMENTARY :   JUDGES. 


the  objects  above  all  others  to  be  gained.  He  is  now  assured,  that  "  the  Lord  of  Hosts  is  on  the 
side  of  Israel,  and  that  the  God  of  Jacob  is  their  refuge."  It  is  in  this  spirit  that  he  goes  forth 
to  fight,  taking  his  place  in  the  van,  and  calling  on  his  army,  "  Follow  me,  for  the  time  of  the 
Lord's  deliverance  is  come."  In  the  thickest  of  the  fight  we  see  him,  and  all  through  to  the 
end,  desisting  not  till  he  can  find  the  man  who  had  dared  to  stretch  forth  his  hand  against  the 
anointed  people  of  the  Lord. 

It  is  manifest  from  this  account,  that,  lohile  human  instruments  are  employed  to  do  the  great 
work  contemplated,  these  were  cdl  animated  by  the  presence  and  succouring  strenylh  of  the  Spirit  of 
the  living  God.  That  Spirit  gives  courage  to  every  heart  and  strength  to  every  arm.  He  fills 
every  bosom  with  the  assurance  of  victory,  and  enables  the  whole  to  act  as  one  man  in  striking 
the  requisite  blow.  Ten  thousand  determined  men,  acting  as  if  with  one  arm,  could  accomplish 
great  things  under  any  circumstances.  But  here  the  Kuler  of  all  the  ten  thousand  Providential 
circumstances  in  life,  which  may  easily  prevent  the  "  race  going  to  the  swift  or  the  battle  to  the 
strong,"  was  on  theii-  side,  and  about  to  employ  His  resources  on  their  behalf.  Imagine,  then, 
this  little  army  of  Barak,  at  a  given  moment,  making  a  whirlwind  charge  down  the  western  side 
of  Tabor,  and  throwing  itself  in  a  compact  mass  on  the  ranks  of  the  bewildered  foe.  Sisera  was 
apparently  only  in  the  act  of  marshalling  his  mighty  forces,  puttiny  his  cliariots  in  their  places, 
and  his  footmen  in  order,  when  this  unexpected  avalanche  of  enthusiasm,  came  thundering  from 
the  hill,  ere  his  preparations  were  completed.  In  a  moment  everything  was  in  confusion.  So 
sudden,  and  so  unlocked  for  was  the  rush  made,  and  so  extraordinary  was  the  change  in  the 
spirit  of  the  assailants  from  being  men  of  craven  hearts,  to  being  men  of  lion-like  spirit,  that  the 
Canaanites  were  stunned  and  even  appalled. 

Add  to  this,  the  visible  signs  of  the  omnipotent  hand  of  Jehovah.  In  the  text  these  are  not 
given  in  detail.  Only  we  are  informed,  that  it  was  '*  the  Lord  "  who  "discomfited  or  confounded 
Sisera  and  his  host."  Also,  at  the  beginning  of  the  fight  it  is  said,  "  the  Lord  is  gone  out  beft)re 
thee."  The  whole  ordering  of  the  battle  was  His — "I  will  draw  Sisera  to  thee— I  will  deliver 
him  into  thine  hand."  It  is  said  also  in  Deborah's  song,  "  They  fought  from  heaven  ;  the  stars 
in  their  courses  fought  against  Sisera."  There  must  then  have  been  visible  signs  of  God's 
mighty  hand.  Josephus  says  that  a  dreadful  thunderstorm  came  on  at  the  moment  of  attack, 
and  that  extraordinary  hail-stones  beat  with  great  force  in  the  faces  of  the  foes,  so  that  the 
bows  and  slings  of  the  Canaanites  were  rendered  useless,  and  the  men's  hands  were  benumbed 
with  cold.  We  know  that  in  the  battle  recorded  in  Joshua  x.,  "  the  Lord  cast  down  great 
stones  from  heaven  upon  the  Canaanites,  so  that  more  died  in  consequence  of  these  stones  than 
from  the  sword  of  IsraeL"  Something  similar  took  place  on  the  occasion  referred  to  in  1  Sam. 
vii.  10.  Some  even  go  so  far  as  to  imagine  that  the  eyes  of  Sisera's  host  were  opened  like  those 
of  Elisha's  servant  (2  Kings  vi.  16,  17),  and  "behold  Mount  Tabor  was  full  of  horses  and 
chariots  of  fire  round  about "  Barak's  army.  This  would  indeed  give  a  striking  meaning  to 
chap.  V.  20.  But  the  fact  that  such  a  thing  took  place  once,  is  insufficient  ground  for  bringing 
it  in  without  any  warrant  at  any  other  time.  Bather  we  are  disposed  to  think,  that  if  so 
striking  a  spectacle  as  an  army  of  angels  with  horses  and  chariots  of  fire,  in  the  form  of  a 
protecting  shield  to  the  army  of  the  living  God,  had  really  been  exhibited,  we  must  have  heard 
of  it  from  the  inspired  writer  himself. 

/»  any  event,  the  host  of  Sisera  were  struck  with  terroVj  and  thrown  into  confusion  all  over  the 
field.  Thus  they  became  an  easy  prey  to  the  sword  of  Barak.  That  mighty  heathen  host  fell 
a-trembling,  when  they  saw  from  all  the  appearance  of  things  around  them,  that  the  old  irre- 
sistible force,  which  had  destroyed  all  the  nations  of  Canaan  in  the  days  of  Joshua,  was  again 
awakened  and  bearing  down  upon  them  with  overwhelming  weight ;  so  that  they  said  to  one 
another,  as  did  the  Egyptians,  when  the  Lord  pulled  off  their  chariot  wheels,  "  Let  us  flee  from 
the  face  of  Israel,  for  the  Lord  fighteth  for  them  against  the  Canaanites."  Thus  the  little  army 
of  Barak,  braced  up  to  the  highest  degree  of  courage  and  confidence,  was  but  one  of  the  elements 
of  the  case  ;  there  were  certain  supernatural  influences  or  agencies  at  work  at  the  same  moment, 
sufficient  to  show  that  the  mighty  God  of  Jacob  was  present  to  defend  His  people. 

15.  Sisera  lighted  down  off  his  chariot  and  fled  away  on  Ms  feet.l  Even  the  stem-hearted 
captain  shared  in  the  universal  panic.  "  The  stout-hearted  were  spoiled,  and  none  of  the  men 
of  might  did  find  their  hands."  Such  was  his  terror  that  he  was  glad  to  leave  his  chariot  and 
run  away  on  foot ;  in  order  no  doubt  to  mislead  his  pursuers,  and  get  to  some  retired  spot  for 
safety,  while  they  were  off  the  track. 

16.  Barak  pursued.]  Though  faint-hearted  a  little  at  first,  from  the  time  that  he  recovered 
his  faith  and  began  the  work  of  a  leader  in  good  earnest,  Barak  nobly  acted  his  part  on  to  the 
end,  foremost  in  the  fight,  and  slaclfing  no  rein  till  he  had  run  his  course  to  a  successful  issue — 
all  the  host  fell  on  the  edge  of  the  sword,  and  there  was  not  a  man  left.]  The  destruction  of 
so  large,  a  host  was  made  so  complete,  that  it  seemed  as  if  a  very  special  arrangement  of 
Providential  circumstances  had  been  made,  so  as  to  secure  such  an  awful  result.  In  any 
ordinary  case  many  would  have  escaped.  But  here  "  not  even  to  one" — not  a  single  man  was  left. 
The  River  Kishon  swept  away  vast  numbers,  for  it  was  then  overflowing  (chap.  v.  21).  But  it 
was  by  means  of  the  sword  that  most  of  them  were  cut  off.    They  were  like  stricken  deer, 

234 


BOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES,  chap.  Vf. 


many  of  them  smiting  down  each  other,  but  the  majority  falling  an  easy  prey  to  the  sword  of 
Barak  and  his  little  army  of  heroes. 

17.  Sisera  fled  away  on  his  feet  to  the  tent  of  Jael,  etc.]  He  naturally  in  his  flight  takes  a 
northern  direction,  that  being  towards  Hazor.  He  must  have  gone  a  long  way  on  foot,  for  the 
place  where  he  now  took  rest  was  many  miles  from  the  battle-field.  Besides,  he  was  overcome 
with  fatigue,  and  soon  fell  fast  asleep.  In  his  flight  he  bethought  him  of  a  house,  not  occupied 
by  an  Israelite,  but  by  one  who  was  friendly  with  Jabin,  and  might  be  counted  on  as  affording 
safe  shelter  now,  when  every  other  spot  was  a  point  of  danger,  xt  was  the  house  of  Heber  the 
Kenite.  That  family  we  have  already  seen  (verse  11),  though  casting  in  their  lot  with  Israel, 
originally  belonged  to  a  different  race,  and  still  kept  up  the  custom  of  dwelling  in  tents.  For 
this  reason  probably  Jabin  was  not  bitter  against  them,  as  he  was  to  all  Israelites.  So  we  are 
told  there  was  peace  between  Jabin  and  the  house  of  Heber  the  Kenite.]  Here,  therefore,  the 
fugitive  thought  he  might  find  temporary  refuge.  But  it  is  the  part  of  the  tent  occupied  by 
Jael,  not  that  of  Heber,  into  which  he  enters.  For  though  they  were  husband  and  wife,  they 
had  different  apartments  in  the  tent  according  to  eastern  custom  (Gen.  xviii.  6,  10  ;  xxiv.  67  ; 
xxxi.  33 ).  In  the  absence  of  Heber,  Arab  custom  required  that  Jael,  his  wife,  should  perform 
the  duties  of  hospitality  to  a  stranger.  Sisera's  claim  for  protection  was  as  valid  as  a  common 
claim  for  hospitality,  and  could  not  be  refused.  Having  once  received  a  stranger  into  his  tent, 
and  given  him  the  rites  of  hospitality,  it  is  then  reckoned  an  invariable  rule,  which  the  most 
unprincipled  Arab  never  fails  to  observe,  that  his  guest  should  be  concealed  in  case  of  danger, 
and  even  defended  with  life  from  his  pursuers.  The  giving  of  refreshments  was  i  egarded  in 
every  instance  as  a  seal  to  the  covenant  of  peace  and  safety.  It  is  probable  that  Jael  introduced 
Sisera  for  safety  into  the  inner  part  of  the  tent — the  woman's  division — where  no  man  dared  to 
enter  without  her  permission,  under  the  severest  penalty. 

18.  She  covered  him  with  a  mantle.l  A  close  covering  or  rug — perhaps  the  rug  on  the  ground 
on  which  Jael  slept,  it  being  the  Oriental  custom  to  sleep  on  mats,  or  rugs  stretched  on  the 
ground  {Lias).  The  2'aryuiii  regards  it  as  a  xawvax*),  a  covering  rough  on  one  side.  It  was  a 
close  covering,  fitted  to  conceal  the  soldier  who  lay  beneath  it.  Some  make  it  the  counterpane. 
It  ought  here  to  be  noted  that  the  Kenites,  the  people  to  whom  Heber  belonged  retained  till 
now,  and  long  after  this,  the  habits  of  their  primitive  tent  life.  The  liechabites  referred  to  in 
Jeremiah's  day  were  a  nomadic  tribe  belonging  to  the  Kenites  of  Heniath  (1  Chron  ii.  55)  of 
the  family  of  Jethro,  Moses'  father-in-law.  They  came  into  Canaan  with  the  Israelites,  but  to 
preserve  their  independence  chose  a  life  in  tents,  without  a  fixed  habitation  (1  Sam.  xv.  6). 
They  seem  to  have  been  proselytes  of  the  gate.  Their  clinging  to  tent  life  on  to  Jeremiah's 
time  is  proved  by  the  passage  in  Jer.  xxxv.  7-10. 

On  Verses  18-22,  see  chap.  v.  24-27. 

23.  So  God  subdued,  etc.]    Not  Barak,  Deborah,  or  the  people  ;  but  God  did  it. 

24.  Hand  of  Israel  prospered  and  prevailed]  Lit,  "continued  going  on  and  proving  heavy." 
There  was  progress  in  the  successes  against  Jabin,  as  in  2  Sam.  v.  10 ;  iii  1  ;  Gen.  xxvi.  13. 
Israel's  hand  increased  in  its  presence  on  Jabin  till  he  was  destroyed. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS.— Verses  12-21 

Lessons    from    the    Battlefield. 

1.  The  Church's  Battles  under  the  Old  Dispensation  were  fought  with  carnal 
weapons.  The  people  of  Israel  formed,  throughout  their  whole  history,  the 
Church  of  the  living  God.  They  were  never  left  to  themselves  to  guide  their 
own  history,  or  to  .seek  to  attain  ends  such  as  might  seem  good  to  themselves, 
or  might  be  for  their  own  glorification.  They  were  the  property  of  another, 
and  the  very  end  of  their  existence  was  to  glorify  another.  This  fact  they  were 
never  allowed  to  forget.  Hence  (1.)  Evei'y  battle  they  Jought  was  ordered  by 
their  God.  Should  they  enter  into  any  battle  without  asking  counsel  of  their 
God  it  was  an  offence  against  their  true  and  proper  King.  On  this  principle  it 
was  disobedience  and  distrust  not  to  go  up  against  the  Canaanites  when  they 
heard  the  report  of  the  spies ;  and  again,  when  they  were  forbidden  to  go  up,  it 
was  presumption  in  them  to  do  so,  when  they  saw  the  fatal  conseq  uences  ^ 

235 


CHAP.  IV.  HOMTLETtC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


their  unbelief.  In  like  manner,  in  all  Joslnia's  campaign,  not  a  single  battle 
was  undertaken  on  his  own  responsibility.  He  was  simply  a  sword  in  (lod's 
hand.  All  the  battles  in  this  book  of  Judges  were  specially  ordered  by  God,  as 
an  attentive  perusal  of  the  fir.st  few  chapters  alone  will  show.  It  is  the  same 
with  all  that  is  recorded  in  every  historical  book  of  the  Old  Testament.  But 
it  was  not  so  with  all  the  other  battles  which  the  nations  of  the  world  fought 
with  one  another.  Though  God's  general  providence  includes  all  events,  and 
all  actors  in  the  world's  history,  there  was  no  such  special  taking  in  hand, 
and  directing  the  national  movements  of  any  other  country  as  in  the  case 
of  the  Israelites.  The  great  reason  was  : — (2.)  Every  battle  they  fought  was 
to  serve  the  interests  of  God's  Church.  It  was  in  no  case  to  exalt  the 
martial  prowess  of  Israel  over  the  nations.  In  every  instance,  from  beginning 
to  end  of  their  history,  the  glory  of  their  God  over  all  the  gods  of  the 
nations  was  the  end  to  be  gained,  and  not  their  national  fame ;  or  if  they 
are  sometimes  spoken  of  as  superior  to  any  other  people,  it  is 
solely  because  their  God  has  made  them  so,  and  for  the  purpose  of  showing 
forth  His  glory,  not  theirs.  Their  very  existence  on  eartli  was  to  be  a 
church  for  the  living  God.  Their  battles,  therefore,  had  always  a  spiritual 
or  holy  end  in  view.  They  were  really  the  battles  of  the  living  God  as 
against  the  dumb  idols — the  Holy  One  of  Israel  and  His  people,  as  against 
*'  the  rulers  of  the  darkness  of  this  world  "  and  the  multitudes  of  their  wicked 
subjects.  (3).  Though  the  end  was  spiritual,  it  was  necessary  to  make  use  oj 
carnal  weapons  as  the  means.  In  the  old  Dispensation,  that  mi>;hty  spiritual 
weapon,  called  ''  the  sword  of  the  Spirit,"  had  not  yet  been  drawn  from  its  scab- 
bard. "Christ  crucified" — was  as  yet  "a  mystery  hid  from  the  ages,"  and  in  its 
absence  other  means  must  be  used.  The  weapons  must  correspond  with  the 
times  in  which  they  are  to  be  used.  The  nations  of  the  world  as  yet  lived 
down  at  the  low  level  of  deep  spiritual  ignorance  of  God  and  His  ways,  and 
owned  as  their  only  rules  to  act  by  force,  by  violence,  by  cruelty,  and  to  give 
natural  expression  to  every  evil  passion.  Such  was  the  sort  of  world  the 
Church  in  its  imperfectly  formed  state  had  to  pass  through.  It  was  also  the 
first  stage  of  God's  dealing  with  His  Church — when  he  taught  His  truths  by 
pictures  and  signs  in  the  external  world.  He  appealed  to  men's  senses  rather 
than  to  their  spiritualised  reason.  Laws  for  the  conscience  and  the  heart  came 
through  an  elaborate  system  of  sensible  ceremonies  and  symbols.  In  cor- 
respondence with  this,  the  vindication  of  God's  truth,  and  the  maintenance  of 
the  Church's  interests  in  the  world,  were  effected  by  the  use  of  external  force, 
strictly  regulated  by  God's  commands.  The  arrangement  was  confessedly 
temporary  and  imperfect.  But  the  fact  that  so  horrible  a  tiling  as  war  with 
carnal  weapons  was  necessary  to  keep  alive  God's  truth  in  the  earth  and  to 
prevent  the  extinction  of  His  Church  was  not  only  a  sad  proof  of  the  world's 
enmity  against  God,  but  also  a  conclusive  argument  for  some  more  effectual 
means  being  used  to  bring  back  the  world  to  God.  To  lead  this  proof  in  full, 
long  time  was  given  that  the  conclusion  might  be  more  perfectly  made  out. 
And  now  we  have  the  reign  of  the  love  of  God  and  the  peace  of  God  through 
Jesus  Christ,  as  the  true  method  of  governing  a  restored  world,  established  on  an 
everlasting  basis.  (4).  The  great  disadvantages  of  using  carnal  weapons.  It  is 
always  stern  work  to  go  to  the  battle  field.  The  work  of  .shedding  human  blood  by 
the  sword  is  always  most  revolting.  It  is  the  vocation  of  the  tyrant  or  the  beast 
of  prey.  It  transforms  man  into  a  savage,  and  kills  out  of  his  breast  all  the  kindlier 
feelings.  It  Is  to  make  man  the  most  terrible  enemy  of  man.  It  is  to  rouse  all 
the  most  ferocious  passions  that  belong  to  our  fallen  hufwan  nature,  and  let 
loose  the  raging  of  the  evil  feelings — legions  in  number — that  slumber  unknown 
in  the  deep  cavities  of  the  heart.  How  can  the  spirit  of  })eac ;  and  love  live  in 
an  atmosphere  of  passion  and  revenge  !     How  can  the  work  of  God  be  promoted 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES.  chap.  iv. 


by  destroying  man,  made  after  the  image  of  God  !     How  can  our  own  personal 
profit  be  advanced,  when  ruthlessly  taking  the  life  of  a  fellow  creature  ! 

Yet  war  was  to  the  religious  man  in  ancient  times  often  a  commanded  duty. 
However  stern  the  work,  it  was  only  commensurate  with  the  stern  necessities  of 
the  times  which  called  for  it.  It  w;is  oftentimes  the  visible  and  well-deserved 
punishment  of  the  wicked  for  their  wicked  deeds.  It  was  often  God  meeting  the 
ungodly  on  their  own  ground,  and  showing  what  jealousy  and  reverence  must 
be  maintained  for  His  great  name.  Bat  what  a  mighty  relief  it  is  for  those 
who  live  in  the  times  of  *' peace  on  earth  and  good  will  to  men."  No  human 
instrument  is  now  to  be  used  but  that  of  the  tongue.  No  weapon,  but  the  word 
of  reconciliation.  No  spirit,  but  the  meekness  and  the  gentleness  of  Christ. 
Now  we  do  not  look  at  the  hard  metal  by  wliich  the  body  may  be  cut  to  pieces, 
but  we  have  regard  to  the  iron  that  enters  into  the  S(ml.  We  now  carry  on 
war  with  sin  in  the  heart — our  own  hearts,  or  those  of  others.  Evil  principle 
and  evil  purpose  must  be  subdued  there.  Evil  principles,  evil  schemes,  and 
evil  practices  in  the  world  everywhere  must  be  put  down.  And  one  weapon  is 
sufficient  for  every  purpose — the  quick,  sharp,  powerful  two-edged  sword  of  the 
Spirit  of  God. 

2.  God  employs  great  variety  of  instruments  in  carrying  out  His  purposes. 
The  honour  of  service,  and  the  distinction  of  success  are  not  contined  to  one 
person  alone.  Even  the  mighty  and  the  noble  have  sometimes  to  come  down 
from  their  seats,  while  the  Ruler  of  Providence  "  exalts  the  man  of  low  degree, 
that  no  flesh  might  glory  in  His  presence."  Who  could  have  supposed  that  in 
a  great  crisis,  when  all  that  was  precious  in  the  Church  of  God  was  at  stake,  a 
solitary  woman  should  be  brought  to  the  front,  and  through  her  an  agency 
should  be  set  on  foot  that  would  effectually  stem  the  tide  of  oppression  nnd 
bring  back  the  best  days  of  Israel's  history  ?  The  miglity  king  that  sat 
frowning  like  an  overshadowing  cloud  over  the  land  and  defying  the  armies  of 
the  living  God,  finds  more  than  his  match  in  one  of  the  weaker  sex.  When  the 
warriors  had  all  disappeared,  wiien  there  were  no  kings  nor  princes  to  lead  on 
the  nation  to  assert  its  independence,  when  true  piety  seemed  to  have  taken 
refuge  in  the  dens  and  caves  of  the  earth,  and  when  the  enemy  swept  like  a 
flood  over  all  the  homes  of  Israel — then  God  was  pleased  to  raise  up  a  woman  to 
be  the  "  saviour  "  of  His  Church  and  people.  Formerly  He  had  made  use  of  a 
man  without  the  natural  use  of  his  right  hand  in  a  great  extremity  ;  at  another 
time,  a  man  taken  from  the  plough,  able  only  to  wield  an  ox-goad  ;  still  again 
a  foreigner  dwelling  in  Israel  but  not  of  Israelitish  blood.  And  in  after  years 
we  know  He  used  sometimes  a  man  of  Herculean  strength  like  Samson  an 
outcast  Gileadite  like  Jephthah,  or  one  of  the  least  of  a  j)Oor  fatnilyin  Manasseh 
like  Gideon — all  of  them  most  unlikely  to  l)e  chosen,  as  seeming  to  be  unfit,  for 
the  service  of  God's  Church  in  her  days  of  great  trial.  But  in  this  very 
circumstance  lies  an  important  element  of  their  fitness,  that  in  not  possessing 
of  themselves  qualifications  sufficient  to  meet  the  emergency,  but  full  of  faith  in 
the  resources  of  Him  who  has  called  them,  they  all  the  more  distinctly  prove 
"  that  the  excellency  of  the  power  is  of  God  and  not  of  them." 

Barak  cannot  originate  a  scheme  to  meet  the  emergency,  and  if  he  could, 
has  not  the  courage  to  carry  it  through.  Deborah  has  the  plan  of  what 
should  be  done  set  hefore  her  by  God  ;  and,  though  she  cannot  go  out 
herself  to  battle,  she  has  ardour  and  faith  enough  to  inspire  the  hesitating 
Barak  with  a  zeal  and  fortitude  equal  to  the  occasion.  There  is  work  for 
both,  and  the  work  of  each  cannot  be  done  by  the  other.  "The  eye  cannot 
say  to  the  hand,  I  have  no  need  of  thee;  nor  the  head  to  the  feet,  I  have 
no  need  of  you."  Sometimes,  indeed,  the  more  feeble  members  are  the  more 
necessary. 

237 


CHAP.  IV.  HO  MI  LET W  COM  ME  NT  A  R  Y :  JUDGES, 


And  what  shall  we  say  of  Jael?  God  has  need  of  her  in  this  singular 
adjustment  of  agencies.  She  is  brought  in  to  carry  away  an  honour  that 
might  and  would  have  belonged  to  Barak  had  he  firmly  stood  the  test  when 
put  to  the  proof.  How  singularly  she  is  brought  in  !  Not  an  Israelite,  but 
a  member  of  a  heathen  family,  who  in  Moses'  days  forsook  their  worship  of 
idols  and  did  cast  in  their  lot  with  the  people  of  the  living  God — a  family 
that  kept  fast  by  the  worship  of  Jehovah  amid  all  the  changes  that  swept 
over  the  land  of  Israel.  Travelling  from  point  to  point  in  the  land  of 
Israel,  Heber  had  now  pitched  his  tent  near  to  Kedish-Naphtali,  but  keeping 
up  his  distinctive  character  as  a  Kenite,  and  therefore  a  naturalised  foreigner. 
The  Lord  has  now  need  of  one  in  this  house,  who  can  better  serve  the 
purpose  than  a  native-born  Israelite — one  of  foreign  blood  and  therefore  one 
to  whose  dwelling  Sisera  would  come  for  shelter,  yet  one  of  Israelitish  faith, 
and  full  of  zeal  for  the  cause  of  Israel's  God.  Who  could  have  thought 
such  an  one  could  be  so  easily  found  ? 

3.  God  makes  use  of  men  unconscionsly  to  do  His  will-  To  Barak  He  said, 
"I  will  draw  unto  thee  to  the  River  Kishon  Sisera,  the  captain  of  Jabin's 
army,"  etc.  Yet  all  that  is  done  to  induce  Sisera  to  collect  his  army  there 
is  the  report  carried  to  him  that  Barak  had  planted  the  standard  of  revolt 
on  Mount  Tabor,  (verse  12.)  There  is  no  constraint  put  on  Sisera  ;  he  is 
left  entirely  free  to  himself.  It  is  of  his  own  free  will  that  he  resolves  to 
collect  his  army  round  the  base  of  Mount  Tabor.  He  never  once  thought  of 
Israel's  God  in  the  matter.  Nothing  was  farther  from  his  thoughts  than  to 
imagine  that  he  was  but  an  instrument  in  the  hands  of  that  God  to  bring  to 
pass  His  deep  purposes.  Nor  do  the  wicked  ever  think  of  this.  "  They  boast 
of  their  heart's  desire  ;  and  through  the  pride  of  their  countenance  they  will 
not  acknowledge  God  ;  God  is  not  in  all  their  thoughts."  Their  language  is. 
**I  am,  and  there  is  none  besides  me."  It  is  indeed,  according  to  everij  mans 
consciousness y  that  he  is  not  put  under  the  slightest  restraint  in  his  action. 
Were  it  to  be  so,  the  first  principle  of  moral  government  would  be  interfered 
with — the  freedom  of  the  subject  of  moral  government.  But  while  that  is 
preserved  complete,  God  has  still  such  entire  control  over  his  own  creature, 
that  He  can  employ  him  as  an  instrument  in  His  hand  to  fulfil  His  purposes  as 
it  may  seem  good  to  Him.  How  can  it  be  so  ?  One  step  we  can  explain.  God 
acts  by  every  creature  He  has  made,  according  to  the  faculties  He  has  bestowed 
upon  him.  To  man  He  has  given  the  god-like  faculty  of  free  will,  and  in  all 
His  dealings  with  him,  the  Maker  allows  the  fullest  exercise  of  that  faculty  to 
His  creature.  But  free  will  is  governed  or  influenced  by  motives,  and  according 
as  the  motives  set  before  it  may  be  in  agreement  with  its  inclinations,  so  is  it 
led  to  decide.  God,  having  entire  control  of  all  possible  motives  that  can  influence 
the  human  mind,  as  He  is  Supreme  Ruler  in  Providence,  has  but  to  adjust  the 
proper  motives  which  shall  induce  the  human  will  to  decide  this  way  or  that 
way,  in  a  given  case,  and  the  end  is  gained. 

There  is  no  compulsion  used  in  leading  a  man  to  adopt  a  particular  line  of 
action,  while  yet  God  makes  use  of  him  to  accomplish  His  purposes  as  He 
pleases.  In  tims  making  use  of  him  He  does  not  begin  by  destroying  his  liberty 
of  will  to  deciile  as  he  njay  choose  ;  but  having  respect  to  that.  He  takes  means 
to  influence  that  will  legitimately  according  to  its  inclinations,  and  so  leads  it 
to  decide  in  such  a  manner  as  shall  execute  His  will.  Thus  far  we  can  go. 
But  there  are  questions  at  the  back  of  this  which  demand  an  answer  ;  but  this 
is  not  the  place  to  enter  on  these.  It  is  enough  at  present,  if  the  great  principle 
is  acknowledged  that  while  men  feel  perfectly  free  to  act  in  all  matters  according 
to  tiieir  own  inclinations,  God  yet  employs  them  as  He  sees  meet,  to  execute 

238 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES,  chap.  IV. 


any  purpose  which  He  pleases  to  have  fulfilled  in  the  course  of  His  holy 
providence. 

In  the  case  of  Sisera^  it  is  easy  to  see  how  he  was  led  to  fulfil  God's  purpose, 
in  marshalling  his  army  on  the  plain  through  which  the  River  Kishon  flowed. 
The  report  of  the  daring  of  Jabin's  vassals  to  try  to  break  the  yoke,  that 
had  been  so  long  rivetted  on  their  necks,  would  act  like  an  electric  shock 
on  the  mind  of  the  high-spirited  general,  and  rouse  him  to  unwonted  energy 
in  collecting  an  army.  The  same  motive  would  induce  him  to  bring  out  all 
his  resources  at  once,  so  as  to  inflict  a  crushing  defeat  on  the  people,  on 
whom  he  wished  to  trample ;  but  thus,  in  case  of  defeat,  which  God  intended, 
he  prepared  an  occasion  for  the  whole  strength  of  the  nation  being  broken  at 
one  blow.  God  employed  him  unconsciously  to  do  His  will,  in  effecting  the 
complete  emancipation  of  His  chosen  Israel  from  the  oppression  of  the  cruel 
Canaanitish  king. 

4.  The  Lord's  battles  are  always  gained  through  faith.  In  the  Lord's 
battles,  the  Lord  Himself  must  always  he  present^  and  faith  makes  Him 
present.  It  is  the  province  of  faith  to  say,  *'  Lord !  without  thee  we  can  do 
nothing.  We  have  no  might  against  the  great  company  that  cometh  against 
us,  neither  know  we  what  to  do,  hut  our  eyes  are  upon  thee.  Thine  is  the 
greatness,  and  the  power,  and  the  victory.  In  thine  hand  it  is  to  give 
strength  to  all.  Except  the  Lord  keep  the  city,  the  watchman  watcheth  in 
vain."  And  when  the  victory  has  been  gained  faith  adds,  ''If  the  Lord 
had  not  heen  on  our  side  when  men  rose  against  us,  then  they  had  swallowed 
us  up  quick — the  waters  had  overwhelmed  us,  the  stream  had  gone  over  our 
soul.  Blessed  he  the  Lord,  who  hath  not  given  us  as  a  prey  to  their  teeth." 
Battles  gained  through  faith  are  thus  always  glorifying  to  God.     Because — 

(1.)  It  is  His  purpose  that  is  to  he  gained  hy  the  hatt^e.  Barak  felt  that 
he  was  nothing  but  an  instrument.  He  had  nothing  to  fight  for  of  his  own. 
There  was  no  plan  shaping  itself  before  his  mind  in  the  exercise  of  his  own 
ingenuity.  The  deliverance  of  God's  Church  from  vassalage  and  fronr 
burdens  he  knew  to  be  the  one  object  in  view,  along  with  the  destruction 
of  the  Church's  enemies,  and  thereby  the  vindication  of  the  name  of  the 
God  of  Israel  in  tlie  sight  of  the  heathen.  For  that  with  all  his  might  he 
fought.  The  idea  of  showing  that  superior  prowess  belonged  to  the  army  of 
/srael  over  that  of  Canaan  ;  or  that  his  skiU  of  generalship  was  superior  to 
that  of  Sisera,  did  not  for  a  moment  cross  his  mind.  The  reverse  of  this 
was  too  obvious  a  fact  to  be  disputed.  No  circumstances  could  make  it 
clearer  that  this  battle  was  entirely  God's  own,  and  fought  in  the  interest 
of  showing  forth  His  glory. 

(2.)  It  is  hy  His  means  that  success  comes.  Barak  owed  his  valour  to 
the  fact  that  God's  Spirit  rested  upon  him.  The  people  did  the  same.  For 
manifestly  God  poured  out  His  Spirit  on  those  who  so  "willingly  offered 
themselves"  at  the  greatest  personal  risk  to  vindicate  the  honour  of  His 
name.  The  courage  which  led  them  to  jeopard  their  lives  in  the  high  places 
of  the  field,  and  tlie  extraordinary  feat  they  performed  in  the  destruction  of 
the  whole  of  Sisera's  army,  prove  that  special  aid  must  have  been  given 
them.  It  was  God,  too,  that  ordered  the  battle.  All  the  steps  were  laid 
down  by  Him.  It  was,  also,  through  special  signs  from  heaven  that  the 
Canaanitish  host  were  struck  with  terror  and  fled  before  the  sword  of  Israel. 
And  it  was  of  God  that  the  River  Kishon  should  have  risen  so  far  above  its 
mark  even  in  high  flood,  and,  overflowing  its  banks,  should  have  swept  away 
so  many  whom  the  sword  did  not  slay  (chap.  v.  21). 

(3.)  God  honours  faith  hecause  faith  honours  Him.  It  was  greatly 
honouring  to  God  to  believe  that  He  would  make  the  handful  of  the  Church's 

239 


CHAP.  IV.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  :  JUDGES. 


defenders  on  Mount  Tabor — a  raw  and  undisciplined  force — too  mighty  for 
Sisera's  warriors  to  stand  before  them.  To  take  His  word  for  it,  that  if  His 
people  went  forth  at  His  call,  however  insignificant  in  numbers  and  resources, 
He  would  **give  power  to  the  faint,  and  to  them  that  had  no  might  He 
would  increase  strength,  so  that  they  would  mount  up  as  on  eagle's  wings, 
run  and  not  be  weary,  and  walk  and  not  faint,"  and  on  the  faith  of  that 
assurance  to  go  into  battle  against  such  overwhelming  odds,  was  most 
honouring  to  the  trustworthiness  of  the  Divine  character.  Indeed,  faith  is 
the  exercise  of  the  soul  looking  away  from  one's  self  and  all  other  objects, 
and  fixing  on  God  alone  as  its  stay,  strength,  and  shield,  thus  making  every- 
thing of  God,  and  keeping  all  things  else  in  the  background.  No  wonder  if 
such  a  man  is  "  compassed  about  with  the  Divine  favour  as  with  a  shield," 
and  that  Omnipotence  will,  sooner  or  later,  be  found  operating  on  his  side. 
"  Them  that  honour  me,  I  will  honour/'  The  Saviour's  invariable  rule  with 
all  who  came  to  Him  in  distress  was,  "According  to  your  faith  so  be  it  unto 
you.  If  thou  canst  believe,  all  things  are  possible  to  him  that  believeth." 
The  great  work  of  the  soul's  eternal  salvation  is  made  to  depend  solely  on 
believing  ;  and  the  most  honourable  list  of  names  known  in  God's  Church  is 
the  list  of  those  "  Elders,  who  by  faith  obtained  a  good  report." 


5.  The  importance  of  God's  people  helping  each  other  in  the  day  of  battle. 
"  If  thou  wilt  go  with  me  then  I  will  go  ;  but  if  thou  wilt  not  go  with  me, 
I  will  not  go."  This  confession  was  not  to  Barak's  credit.  It  showed  a 
limping  faith  at  least,  though  it  did  not  prove  the  want  of  loyalty  altogether. 
But  it  showed  what  stress  he  put  on  the  aid  he  might  receive  from  Deborah. 
That  to  him  was  so  important  a  consideration  that  it  turned  the  balance. 
Deborah  seeing  the  necessity  of  the  case  did  consent  to  go  ;  for  their  was  no 
rule  transgressed  by  her  compliance,  and  the  emergency  for  Israel's  well-being 
at  the  moment  was  so  great,  that  she  felt  every  other  consideration  must  give 
way  to  gain  the  success  of  the  enterprise  in  hand.  Barak  looked  to  her  as  the 
medium  chosen  by  God  for  the  communication  of  His  will,  and  hence  felt  that 
her  presence  was  of  the  greatest  possible  consequence.  As  a  matter  of  fact, 
though  the  account  given  in  the  text  is  very  brief,  we  may  fairly  infer,  that  she 
not  only  gave  directions  to  Barak  as  to  how  to  proceed  with  the  arrange- 
ments, but  also  that  she  was  of  the  greatest  service  in  stirring  up  the  faith, 
patriotism,  and  pious  zeal  of  all  around  her,  beginning  with  the  captain  himself 
and  going  down  to  the  meanest  in  the  ranks.  She  was  the  soul  of  the  army  ; 
and  that  soul  was  one  of  burning  euer^j,  and  of  genuine  loyalty  to  her  God. 
Nor  did  she  stop,  until  every  man  of  the  ten  thousand  had  got  a  soul  infused 
into  him  of  equal  energy  and  fervour  with  her  own. 

So  helpful  may  God's  people  he  to  each  other  in  times  of  great  difficulty. 
Their  mere  presence  and  sympathy  with  each  other  in  fighting  the  battle  of 
truth  against  error,  or  of  righteousness  against  sin,  is  of  itself  the  greatest 
possible  encouragement.  Even  the  Saviour  Himself,  in  the  hour  of  His  terrible 
agony,  showed  the  need  of  a  weak  human  nature,  by  imploring  His  own  disciples 
to  give  Hiui  their  feeble  aid,  such  as  it  was.  **  Could  ye  not  w^atch  with  me  one 
hour  ?"  It  was  like  a  strong  man  clinging  to  a  few  straws  in  the  midst  of  the 
torrent ;  or  lifce  a  father  seeking  a  little  comfort  from  the  prattle  and  sympathy 
of  three  of  hi^  own  little  children,  when  pressed  down  under  the  weight  of  an 
intolerable  burden.  The  duty  and  the  advantage  of  helping  each  other  when 
carrying  on  the  Lord's  work  was  recognised  by  the  Master  Himself  when  He 
sent  out  His  disciples  to  preach  His  Gospel,  in  the  form  of  two  and  two  going 
together.  When  Pe^er  and  John  had  to  fight  so  hard  a  battle  before  the 
Sanhedrim,  it  was  very  helpful  to  them  at  the  close  to  be  able  to  ''  go  to  their 
own  company  and  report  all  that  the  chief  priests  and  elders  had  done,"  and 
240 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES.  chap.  iv. 


follow  this  up  by  ''lifting  up  their  voices  with  one  accord,"  and  so  to  put  the  whole 
case  anew  into  the  hands  of  the  exalted  Saviour,  asking  grace  that  they  might 
be  able  on  other  occasions  to  prove  themselves  worthy  of  Him  whom  they 
served.  And  the  answer  was  given  (Acts  iv.  23,  24,  with  v.  29-42).  Paul, 
notwithstanding  the  abundant  grace  conferred  on  him,  confesses  his  obligations 
to  be  so  deep  to  many  who  were  his  fellow-helpers  in  the  cause  of  Christ,  that 
but  for  their  succour  we  are  led  to  conclude,  he  never  could  have  gone  through 
the  work  and  the  struggle  that  he  did.  What  help  did  he  get  from  their 
Christian  fellowship,  their  sympathy,  their  prayers,  their  counsels,  and  their 
many  services  in  connection  with  carrying  on  the  work  !  Rom.  xvi.,  and  the 
closing  chapter  of  several  other  Epistles,  contain  allusions  to  several  "fellow- 
workers  unto  the  kingdom  of  God,"  who  were  of  the  greatest  service  to  him 
in  his  work.  On  some  names  he  puts  a  special  emphasis — the  Timothys, 
E[)apliroditus-es,  Zychicus-es,  Onesimus-es,  and  certain  others,  not  to  speak  of 
the  labourers  of  the  first  class,  such  as  Barnabas  first,  and  Silas  afterwards. 

The  same  principle  is  illustrated  in  Church  History  from  the  earliest 
years  to  the  present  time.  We  uniformly  perceive  the  triumphs  of  the  gospel 
to  be  owing  in  large  degree  to  the  practical  union,  and  mutual  help-giving  of 
Christians  among  each  other  in  carrying  on  their  great  work.  What  striking 
proof  of  this  have  we  in  such  examples  as  those  of  Luther,  Melancthon,  the 
Elector  of  Saxony,  and  the  many  other  Reformers  who  succoured  each  other 
in  duty  and  danger?  Were  not  the  ultimate  successes  of  missions  in  the 
South  Seas  largely  due  to  this  ?  Might  not  such  men  as  (Jarey,  Henry 
Martyn,  and  D.  Brainerd  have  done  much  more  in  the  pit  of  heathenism,  liad 
the  Christians  at  home  held  the  rope  better?  Is  not  the  whole  Church- 
history  of  this  country,  for  centuries,  a  prolonged  evidence  of  the  value  of  mutual 
help  in  doing  the  Lord's  work  ? 

COMMENTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.— Verses  12-24. 

Variety  of  Gifts  in  the  Church. 

This  IS  suggested  by  the  variety  of  the  rich  and  noble  of  the  land,  but  for 

persons  and  characters  introduced  to  the  most  part  appear  to  have  been  the 

notice,  in  this  striking  episode  of  Church  workers  in  iron,  who  were  employed  by 

history.     Deborah  tops  the   list  with  Jabin  probiibly  in    making    his    iron 

her  strong  faith,  force,  and  fervour  of  chariots,    and   the  hewers  of   timber, 

genuine  piety,  dauntless  courage,  un-  whom  he  einpL)yed  in  large  numbers 

flagging  zeal,  fertility  of  resource,  and  in  cutting  down  his  forests  in  the  dis- 

supreme  faculty  of  infusing  into  others  trict  of  Harosheth,  and  utilising  the 

her  own  spirit.      Barak  comes  next,  wood    by    transporting    it  to    Zidon. 

with  true  faith,  but  greatly  troubled  These,  all  with  stout  hearts  and  brawny 

with  doubt  and  fear,  depressed  with  arms,  would  give  service  in  the  battle- 

tlie  low  condition   of  his  church   and  field. 

people,  conscicmsly  incompetent  to  Besides  these,  in  the  foreground  of 
meet  the  emergency,  yet  not  unwilling  the  story  we  read,  that  "out  of  Machir 
to  do  what  he  can,  if  only  others  (tribe  of  Manasseh,  to  the  West  of 
would  come  forward  with  counsel  and  Jordaji)  came  down  governors''  or 
aid.  Next  come  "  the  willing  people  "  cliieftains;  "  and  out  of  Zehulun  they 
(verse  2),  all  of  them  self-devoted  to  this  that  handle  the  pen  of  the  writer'' — 
work,  because  it  is  the  cause  of  their  or  staff  of  the  officery  as  some  make  it 
God  they  have  in  their  hands,  and  His  — the  military  scribe,  whose  duty  it 
glory  in  the  good  of  His  Church,  is  the  was  to  keep  the  muster  roll,  and  super- 
end  they  ardently  seek.     They  are  not  intend   the    recruiting  of   the    army 

241 


OHAF.  IT 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES, 


(2  Kings  XXV.  19).  The  princes  of 
Issachar,  too,  gave  their  help,  doubt- 
less in  their  own  proper  capacity. 
Others  are  also  alluded  to  as  being 
there  on  the  great  occasion.  All 
wrought  in  their  place,  and  all  gave  a 
willing  service.  And  lastly  came  Jael, 
whose  act  brought  the  whole  strange 
chapter  of  events  to  a  close. 

Thus  one  great  result  was  brought 
about  by  til e  employment  of  a  variety 
of  agents,  each  doing  what  was  his 
part  to  do ;  and  this  was  according 
to  the  counsel  of  Him  who  ordered 
the  battle. 

1.  A  variety  of  gifts  in  the  Church 
is  a  necessity.  In  carrying  on  the 
work  of  the  Church,  all  the  different 
aspects  of  human  life  must  be  met,  for 
in  the  constant  turning  of  the  kaleido- 
scope, each  of  these  in  turn  must  have 
an  agency  provided  which  is  ada])ted 
to  the  circumstances.  No  one  worker, 
however  versatile  his  genius,  can  be  ex- 
pected to  show  superiority  of  skill 
all  round  the  compass,  and  to  be  as 
thoroughly  proficient  in  every  depart- 
ment as  the  specialist  of  that  depart- 
ment. There  are  all  manner  of  trades 
and  professions  in  civil  and  social  life, 
and  so  there  may  be  expected  to  be 
persons  of  all  classes,  and  of  all  kinds 
and  degrees  of  capacity  for  usefulness 
in  the  Church.  There  is  every  possible 
variety  of  work  to  be  done,  every 
variety  of  station  to  occupy,  every 
variety  of  qualification  to  be  exercised, 
and  every  phase  of  danger  to  be  met. 
All  have  their  respective  places  to 
occupy  in  a  very  complicate  arrange- 
ment. No  man  can  do  his  neighbour's 
work  so  well  as  his  own  ;  and  each  is 
responsible  for  doing  what  belongs  to 
him  to  do,  or  that  which  he  is  qualified 
to  do,  whatever  may  be  done  or  left 
undone  by  those  around  him. 

All  the  members  of  the  human  body 
have  their  respective  functions  to 
perform.  The  eye  is  for  seeing,  the 
tongue  for  speaking  or  singing,  the  ear 
for  hearing,  the  nose  for  smelling,  and 
the  hand  for  touching,  grasping,  or 
working.  "  If  the  whole  body  were  an 
eye,  where  were  the  hearing ;  if  the 
242 


whole  were  hearing,  where  were  the 
smelling."  So  in  the  Church  there 
are  different  offices  to  fill  and  different 
functions  to  discharge.  Some  are 
church  office-bearers,  and  others  are 
private  church-members.  Some  have 
the  gift  specially  for  acquiring  know- 
ledge suitable  for  the  church's  instruc- 
tion, others  have  the  skill  for  imparting 
it.  Some  have  a  special  adaptation 
for  the  training  of  the  young,  others 
for  teaching  and  enforcing  truth  in 
the  public  assembly.  Some  have  the 
faculty  of  addressing  men  in  a  popular 
style  of  thought,  and  others  the 
capacity  of  meeting  the  wishes  and 
tastes  of  the  scholarly  and  refined. 
"  There  are  diversities  of  gifts,  but  it 
is  the  same  Spirit ;  and  there  are 
diversities  of  operations,  but  it  is  the 
same  God  who  worketh  all  in  all." 

2.  God  bestows  the  gifts  according 
to  His  good  pleasure.  All  the  qu  ili- 
fications  possessed  by  all  the  workers 
are  gifts  conferred  on  them  by  God. 
No  man's  genius  is  a  thing  of  his  own 
acquirement,  or  an  heir-loom  handed 
down  to  him  by  his  ancestors.  His 
possessions,  too,  though  they  may  come 
in  one  sense  as  the  result  of  his  own 
industry  or  skill,  yet  would  never 
come  without  the  ordering  of  God's 
over-ruling  Providence.  **  The  Lord 
maketh  rich."  Every  man's  special 
faculty  for  work  is  given  him  originally 
by  his  Maker.  For  God  confers  on 
every  man  some  endowment,  but  the 
nature  of  it,  and  the  measure  of  it, 
God  himself  determines.  He  has 
made  the  gifts  exceedingly  diverse 
one  from  another.  *'  He  who  taught 
the  lark  to  trill,  has  taught  the  eagle 
to  scream.  He  who  moulded  the 
dewdrop,  and  caused  it  to  hang  in 
silence  on  the  fringe  of  the  flower, 
poured  out  the  boundless  sea,  and 
caused  it  to  roar  night  and  day  as  if 
uttering  the  prayer  of  all  earthly 
troubles."  "  In  the  same  pasture  the 
ox  can  find  fodder,  the  hound  a  hare, 
the  stork  a  lizard,  thefairmaid  flowers." 

"  On  the  face  of  a  watch  there  are 
three  workers,  or,  as  we  usually  call 
them,  handj) — the  second-pointer  mak- 


UOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  JUD0E8,  chap.  iv. 


ing  rapid  revolutions,  the  minute-  endowed  are  made  to  realise  their  need 
pointer  going  at  reduced  speed,  and  for  succour  from  those  around  them, 
the  hour-pointer,  which  is  more  tardy  In  the  conducting  of  such  a  great 
still.  Any  one,  not  knowing  the  movement  as  the  Reformation  from 
mechanism,  would  suppose  that  the  Popery  in  the  sixteenth  century,  such 
busy  little  second-pointer  was  doing  qualities  were  needed  as  a  Boanerges- 
all  the  work.  It  is  clicking  away  at  like  spirit,  great  powers  of  reasoning, 
sixty  times  the  speed  of  the  minute-  force,  fervour,  passion,  energy  of  cha- 
poiuter ;  and  as  for  the  hour-pointer,  racter,  on  the  one  hand ;  and,  on  the 
it  seems  to  be  doing  no  work  at  all.  other,  a  well-balanced  judgment,  learn- 
So  is  it  in  the  church.  There  are  ing,  depth  of  insight,  along  with 
active  fussy  men  who  appear  to  be  patience,  caution,  and  equanimity  of 
doing  the  whole  work,  while  others  seem  spirit.  God  divided  these  gifts,  con- 
to  be  doing  little  or  nothing  at  all.  ferring  the  former  on  Luther,  and  the 
But  can  we  do  without  the  hour  and  latter  on  Melancthon  ;  but  they  were 
minute-pointers  ?  The  noisy  second-  all  put  at  the  service  of  the  church. 
hand  might  go  its  round  for  ever  with-  Luther,  gifted  as  he  was,  felt  he  could 
out  telling  the  world  the  true  time,  not  do  without  Melancthon,  and  Me- 
The  silent  steady  hour-hand  need  not  lancthon  felt  that  the  work  could  not 
envy  its  noisy  little  colleague.  It  go  on  without  Luther.  Both,  too, 
gives  by  far  the  most  valuable  in-  were  ever  made  to  feel  that  their  all- 
formation.  Every  man's  duty  is  to  do  sufficiency  was  of  God. 
his  allotted  work,  so  as  to  gain  the  Again,  in  the  ordinary  distribution 
approbation  of  the  Master  whom  he  of  mental  gifts  among  men,  we  find 
serves." — {Parker.)  checks  put  on  vanity  and  pride.    Some 

But  as   no    one  key  can  open   all  possess  the  gift  of  genius,  and  exhibit 

locks,  so  no  one  man  possesses  all  the  feats   of  mental   ability  whicli   excite 

gifts.     God  has  made  no  man  so  rich  the  envy  and  the  admiration  of  tliose 

in  genius  or  resources,  but  that  he  is  around   them ;    but   yet,  in  regard  to 

dependent  on  some  other  men,  as  the  several   of  the   ordinary   faculties   of 

wheel  goes   round.     The   strongest  is  mind,  they  are  only  on  a  par  with  those 

not  unfrequently  made  to  depend  on  around    them,    or   are   even   inferior, 

the  weakest ,  and  the  highest  on  the  Others,   again,    are  gifted  with  great 

lowest.     Even  the  little  mouse  (in  the  intellectual  grasp   and  strong  powers 

fable)  is  made  to  gnaw  the  meshes  of  of  reasoning,  but  are  deficient  in  fer- 

the  lion's  net,  and  set  free  the  lord  of  tility  of  imagination,  and  in  skilfully 

the  forest.     The   little   captive  maid  decorating    their    thoughts    with    fit 

may  direct  the  mighty  captain  of  the  drapery  of  language.    Some  are  mighty 

host  of  Syria  where  to  find  a  cure  for  rhetoricians  and  brilliant  orators,  who 

his  leprosy.  can  elicit  the  applause  of  the  multi- 

God  so  distributes  his  gifts  to  all  tude,  and  yet  they  want  capacity  to 

that  the  most  highly-gifted  shall  feel  he  excavate    in    the    deeper    mines     of 

is  still  not  independent  of  those  beneath  thought,  and  to  build  up  solid  struc- 

hini^  and  all  shall  feel  that  what  they  tures  of  maxims  and  rules  for  men's 

possess  is  not  their  own,  but  talents  guidance  in  the  practical  affairs  of  life, 

given  to  trade  with  for  another,  while  In  all  cases  gifts  are  so  bestowed  as  to 

at  any  moment  they  may  be  called  to  prevent   boasting   on   the  part  of  the 

give  an  account  of  their  stewardship,  recipients,  and  to  make  all  feel  their 

All  the  best  gifts  are  not  conferred  on  mutual  dependence  on  one  another, 

any  one  man,  lest  lie  should  become  God  would  also  show  His  sovereign 

arrogant  towards  his  fellows,  and  begin  right  to  bestow  His  gifts  entirely  ac- 

to  glory  in  the  presence  of  the  Sove-  cording  to  His  own  good  pleasure,  to 

reign  Giver  !     Even  with  the  best  of  bless  one  after  this  manner,  and  another 

men   care   is   taken   to   avoid  ground  after  that.     He  assigns  to  one  man  a 

for  boasting,   and  those  most  richly  place  in  His  church  here,  and  to  another 

243 


CHAP.  nr.  HOMILETTC  COMMENTAIRY:   JUDGES. 


there,  as  it  seemeth  good  in  His  sight,  presented  of  endlessly  diversified  lights 

Not  that  any  are  ever  treated  unjustly  and  colours — of  manifold  beauty — yet 

or  unkindly.    But  as  none  receive  their  all  arising  from  one  and  the  same  light 

gifts  as  a  matter  of  claim,  God  shows  falling  on  many  surfaces. 

His   right   in    His   own    creature,    in  (1.)    We  see  this  element  of  beauty 

endowing  liim  with  this  or  that  faculty  in  Nature : — "Am()n^st  the   trees  of 

as  it  pleaseth   Him,  in  order  to  gain  the  wood  there  is  great  variety — the 

the  ends  of  His  own  wisdom.     Thus  sturdy  oak  ;    the  flexile  willow  ;    the 

He  qualifies  some  to  occupy  a  higher  solid  maple  ;    the  graceful   ash  ;    the 

place  in  His  Church  ;  others,  a  lower,  terraced    cedar,    with   cones   uprising 

Some  are  qualified  to  teach  and  build  through  each  grassy-looking  lawn   of 

up  in  the  faith;  others,  to  devise  plans  tender  leafery  ;  the  larch,  hanging  its 

and  institute  organisations  for  carrying  scarlet   blossoms  from    every   pointed 

on  the  work  of   the  Church.      Some  arch  of  its  green  pagoda  ;    the  stiff, 

have  special  aptitudes  for  attending  to  stout  holly,  disdainful  of  the  breeze  ; 

financial  affairs;  others  for  conducting  the  fidgety  aspen,  all  in  a  flutter  at 

religious  meetings,   and  attending  to  the  faintest  sii^h ;  the  spacious  chestnut; 

the  spiritual  well-being  of  the  Church,  the  strict,  solemn  cypress,  with  every 

Some  find  their  element  in  the  instruc-  twiglet  pointing  straight  up  to  heaven, 

tion  of  the  young,  and  in  rendering  So,  too,  with  the  bark  of  the  timber — 

the  work  of  religion  attractive  to  their  the  ebony,  sinking  like  stone;  the  cork, 

youthful  minds;  while  others  are  more  riding  on  the  crest  of  the  billow  ;  the 

adapted  to  sympathise  with  the  aged  elder,  so  soft  and  spongy  ;  the  box,  in 

and  the  infirm,  to  give  succour  to  those  his  firm  structure,  retentive  of  the  finest 

that  are  in  distress,  and  to  comfort  the  engraving  ;  the  homely  deal,  and  thyine 

feeble-minded.  veneer — beautiful  some,  but  usef  J  all, 

and    not    to    be    interchanged    with 

3.  This  variety  is  a  feature  of  great  advantage. 

beauty  to  the  Church.     The  Church  (2.)  ''So  is  it  with   mens   minds. 

is  not   a  vast   surf  ice   of   dead  uni-  Melancthon  would  have  made  a  poor 

formity  ;    were    it    so,    the   spectacle  substitute  for  Luther,  bnt  the  absence 

presented  would  be  tame,  monotonous,  of  Melancthon  would  have  leffc  a  poor 

uninteresting.  But  as  God  has  arranged  Reformation.    Great  as  was  the  inven- 

things  in  the  world  of  nature,  so  has  tion  of  the  Sunday  School,  it  was  not 

He  done  in  His   Church.      There    is  revealed    to    Bishop  Butler,  but    was 

every  possible   diversity   of    taste,   of  reserved  for  Robert  Raikes  ;  and  yet 

disposition,  of  temperament,  of  quali-  if  the  former    had    not    written    the 

fication,   among  the   members  of  His  '*  Analogy,"     the     latter     could     not 

Church.     While  all  exhibit  a  family-  have  supplied  the  desideratum.     And 

likeness  of  cliaracter,   each  has  some  although   Jeremy    Taylor    and    John 

special    features   of   spiritual    beauty  Bunyan  had  each  a  fine    fancy,    the 

peculiar  to  himself,  his  own  tint  and  world  is  now  agreed,  that  if  they  had 

hue  of  loveliness,  or  his  own  special  changed  places,  they  could  have  made 

faculty  of  service,  which  none  possess  it   no   better  ;    we  are  quite   content 

precisely  the  same  in  kind  or  degree  with    the    pilgrim    of  the    one,    and 

but  himself.     This  diversity  of  excel-  the     golden    grove    of    the     other." 

lence,  extending  over  the  whole  com-  [Hamilton.^ 

munit}  of  the  Christian  brotherhood,  (3.)    I  hroughout   nature  there  is  a 

gives  to  the  Chnrch  the  appearance  of  charm  in  variety.       "  The  plough  is 

abody  of  manifold  interest  and  beauty,  fital   to  the  picturesque.      A  country 

It  is  as  when  a  light  is  reflected  from  under     husbandry,     with     all     God's 

a  multiplying  glass,  in  which  all  the  beautiful    flowers  cut  down    and  cast 

surfaces  are  differently  sized,  differently  out  under  the  name  of  weeds,  is  as 

coloured,  differently  cut,  and  all  placed  inferior  in   point  of    beauty,  as  it  is 

at  different  angles,  there  is  a  spectacle  superior  in  point  of  profit,  to  moor  or 
244 


HOMILETIC  COMMi:NTARY:  JUDGES,  CHAP.  iV. 


mountain.  How  tame  your  levelled  faith.  Yet  all  Lave  the  one  Spirit 
fields  of  wheat  or  barley  compared  of  grace,  and  all  possess  one  family- 
wit  h  the  rudest  hill  side,  where  green  likeness.  Those  greatly  mistake  the 
bracken,  and  the  plumes  of  the  fern,  matter  who  would  have  all  Christians 
and  the  bells  of  the  foxglove,  and  modelled  on  their  own  pattern,  as,  for 
brown  heath  with  its  purple  blossoms,  example,  of  some  modest,  retiring, 
and  the  hoar,  grey,  rugged  stones  that  gentle  spirits,  who  cannot  appreciate 
lie  scattered  in  wild  confusion,  unite  the  worth  and  usefulness  of  those 
to  form  a  mantle,  in  richness  and  whom  God  has  cast  in  a  rough  mould 
variety  of  hues,  such  as  loom  never  and  made  of  stern  stuff."  [Guthrie.] 
wove  and  queen  never  wore.  Without  (6.)  h'ven/ofie  is  needed  in  his  place, 
this  variety,  how  tame  our  gardens,  T'he  Samsons  are  needed  in  their  placey 
with  every  flower  in  form  and  colour  as  well  as  the  Samuel Sj  to  fill  up  the 
the  counterpart  of  another  ;  and  how  beauty  of  the  picture.  The  little 
monotonous  the  music  of  early  morn,  captive  maid  to  tell  the  mighty 
did  every  lark  in  the  sky,  linnet  in  captain  where  to  go  for  his  cure,  as 
the  bush,  rook  and  ringdove  in  the  well  as  the  prophet  to  direct  him  in 
woods,  all  utter  the  same  notes!"  God's  name  what  to  do.  The  quiet, 
[Guthrie-]  simple-hearted  Nathanael  is  needed  to 

(4.)  "  But  variety  is  everywhere,  pray  and  to  meditate  under  the  fig- 
Each  lamb  of  the  flock  has  a  bleat  tree,  as  well  as  the  more  noisy  and 
known  to  its  mother  ;  each  rose  on  demonstrative  Peter  to  be  the  mouth- 
the  bush  has  its  own  shape  and  shade  piece  of  his  brethren.  The  meek  and 
of  colour  ;  and,  there  is  not  a  lark  that  soul-absorbed  Mary,  putting  every- 
hangs  carolling  in  the  clouds,  but  has  thing  aside  for  Christ  as  *'  the  one 
a  voice  recognised  by  the  brood,  above  thing  needful,"  has  her  place,  and 
whose  grassy  nest  she  sings  her  morn-  also  the  bustling,  more  pretentious 
ing  hymn,  calling  the  drowsy  world  to  Martha,  who  is  anxious  to  give  the 
rise  for  worship  and  for  work.  So  is  it  best  of  welcomes  to  her  Lord.  The 
in  the  world  of  mankind,  who,  though  eloquent  and  honest,  though  somewhat 
numbering  so  many  hundred  millions,  blundering  Apollos  is  needed,  and  also 
and  showing  so  much  similarity  of  the  quieter  but  better-informed  Aquila 
general  characteristics,  have  yet,  in  and  Priscilla.  The  bold  warriors  are 
the  case  of  each  individual,  a  face  and  needed  to  go  out  into  the  open  field 
features,  a  configuration  and  colour,  to  measure  swords  with  the  foe  ;  and 
organs,  limbs,  and  voice  peculiarly  his  also,  "  the  women  who  remain  at 
own.  The  same  law  operates  among  home"  are  of  service,  in  their  place, 
the  fishes,  the  beasts,  the  birds,  and  "to  distribute  the  prey."  A  Luke  is 
the  insects  ;  it  is  everywhere  also  needed  to  act  the  part  of  the  *'  beloved 
among  the  stars  of  the  sky;  and  physician;"  the  house  of  Stephanas  to 
taking  nature  as  a  whole,  what  a  '*  addict  themselves  to  the  ministry  of 
manifold  and  magnificent  diversity  the  saints  ;  "  an  "  Epaphras  to  labour 
do  we  perceive  among  the  works  of  fervently  in  prayer"  for  Christian 
God  ! "     \Guthrie^  professors,  that  they  may  "  stand  com- 

(5.)  ^  it  is  the  same  in  the  world  of  plete  in  all  the  will  of  God;"    and 

grace  and  in  the  Christian    Church.  Christian     widows     are     required    to 

There  are  difi'erent  peculiarities  among  "  wash  the  saints'  feet,  to  relieve  the 

different  Christians,  which  constitutes  afflicted,    and    be    patterns   of   every 

a  charm  rather  than  a  defect.    A  John  good     work."       God     has     given    to 

is  pre-eminent  for  love  ;   a  Peter  for  every  thing  a  place,   and    has   made 

ardour)   a  Paul  for  zeal\  a  Job  for  every  thing  beautiful  in  his  place. 
patience ;   a  Moses    for   meekness ;    a 

David  for  devoutness ;    a  Samuel   for  4.  Every   Christian  is  responsible 

a  prayerful    spirit ;    a  Jeremiah    for  for  making  his  own  contribution  for 

tenderness ;    and    an     Abraham     for  the  good  of  the  Church. 

245 


OttAP.  IV.  -  BOMILETW  C0M3IENTARY:  JUDGES. 


Every  gift  or  faculty  which  a  man  hands  that  He  may  have  to  give  to 

has  is  given  him  in  stewardship.     It  is  him  that  needeth."     [Austen.^ 
a  talent   committed  to  his    trust,  of 

which  his  Lord  says,  "  Occupy  till  I  Every  man  should  devote  himself  to 

come."      The  giver  expects  that  every  the  task  for  which  he  is  best  qualified. 

talent  shall  be  traded   with  so  as  to  Everyone    should     ask     himself    tlie 

gain  something  ;  some  more,  some  less,  question — For   what  am  I  best  qaali- 

according  to  the  number  given  to  trade  fied  ?  and,  on  discovering  tliat  special 

with.      If  two  are  given,  it  is  expected  faculty,  should  regard  it  as  the  iiidica- 

the  trader  will  make  other  two ;  if  ten  tion  of  God  in  His  Providence  of  the 

are  given,  the  result  looked  for  is  other  line  of  duty  appointed  to  him  in  his 

ten,  and  so  on.      The  fruit  tree  that  place.      It  may  be  to    visit  the  sick 

occupies  the  best  soil,  and  has  had  most  couch;  to  express  sympathy  with  the 

time,  cost,  and  labour  bestowed  upon  destitute,    the   bereaved,    or   those  in 

it,  is  expected  to  yield  most  abundant  special  distress  ;    to  counsel  the    un- 

fruit.      "  In  the  ceremonial  law,  God  wary,    the     inexperienced,    or    those 

required  more  sacrifices  from  the  rich  exposed  to  strong  temptation  ;  to  dis- 

than  from  the  poor;  such  as  had  great  tribute  tracts  or  books,  and  carry  on 

store  of  oxen,  sheep,  and  other  things  spiritual  conversation  from   house    to 

to  be  offered  in  sacrifice   would    not  house.      Or  it  may  be  to  take  a  lead 

have  been  accepted  had  they  offered  in  prayer  meetings,  to  strengthen  the 

'*  a  pair  of  turtle  doves  or  two  young  hands  of  the  Christian  pastor,  to  take 

pigeons,"    which  yet  were  acceptable  part   in   encouraging   all    schemes   of 

from  the  poorer  sort  of  persons."  "To  Christian   good-doing,  to  watch    over 

whom  much  is  given,  of  them  much  is  the  spiritual   well-being  of  the  Church 

required."  God  had  done  great  things  with  which  one  is  connected,  and  to  do 

for  Eli  and  for  David,  and  from  tliem  all  that  can  be  done  by  conscientious 

expected  greater  returns  of  duty  and  and  believing  prayer  for  every  person 

obedience  all  their    lives  after  ;    but  and  every  interest  around  us. 
when  they  failed  in  some  great  par-  **  Lord  Tiiurlow  was  astonished  that 

ticulars,  God  was  sore  displeased  with  his  kinsman,  William  Cowper,  should 

them,    and    reckoning  up    the    great  have   resigned   the    clerkship   of  the 

benefits    He  had    conferred,  He  tells  Lords,  because   he   had  not   courage 

them  that  He  expected  other  returns  to  read  aloud  petitions  and  minutes  ; 

from    them.       Hezekiah,    too,  having  yet,  though  the  Chancellor  was  himself 

received  much,  God  looked  for  answer-  a  stranger   to  trepidation,  it  may  be 

able  returns,  and  was  greatly  oiBfended  questioned,  if,  even  to  secure  the  Great 

when  such  were  not  given.  Seal,  he   could    have    written    *  The 

Task,' or 'John  Gilpin.'" 

*'  God  gives  to  some  many  giftSj 
both  of  nature  and  of  grace.  He  5.  This  varied  and  unequal  distri- 
gives  them  much  knowledge,  learning,  bution  of  gifts  calls  into  exercise 
wisdom,  great  riches,  honours,  offices,  many  excellent  features  of  the  Chris- 
pla^ies,  much  time,  liberty,  great  and  tian  character.  What  seems  at  first 
choice  means  of  grace,  special  provi-  a  great  irregularity  is  really  the  best 
deuces  and  dispensations,  and  many  means  that  could  be  devised  for  knit- 
other  things  which  others  have  not.  ting  and  cementing  together  the  whole 
Of  these  persons  God  requires  more  body  of  Christians  in  one  harmonious 
than  of  those  who  have  fewer  and  less  brotherhood.  Those  who  are  rich  feel 
of  such  things,  and  their  not  making  they  are  debtors  to  the  poor  whom  G^d 
suitable  returns  provokes  God  against  has  made  dependent  on  others,  and  so 
them.  But  no  one,  whether  having  are  called  upon  to  exercise  6^?^^^c^?^c^. 
greater  or  less  gifts,  is  freed  from  The  poor  are  made  to  feel  that  a  great 
making  returns  of  duty  to  God,  even  favour  is  done  to  them  by  the  rich,  and 
if  he  should  *'  have  to  work  with  his  so  become  bound  to  them  by  ties  of 
246 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES.  chap.  iv. 


gratitude.    The  one  class  feel  they  are  posing  His  own.     Whatever  may  come 

making  a  sacrifice  with  which  God  is  to  my  share  is  only  a  favour  greater 

well  pleased,  in  giving  without  the  ex-  or  less— a  thing  to  which  I  can  lay  no 

pectation  of  being  recompensed  again,  claim.     Let  Him  take  His   own  way 

Tlie  other  class  feel  they  owe   their  with  His  own. 

love,  their  thanks,  and  their  prayers,  to  ..'i  dare  not  choose  my  lot, 

those  who  have  done  them  a  material  I  would  not  if  I  might ; 

kindness,    and    whom    they  cannot   re-  Choose,  then,  for  me,  my  God, 

coujpense  again.  ^^  ^^^^]  ^  ^'^^^  ^"^^V' 

Humility  is  cultivated  by  this  Contentment  is  also  called  into  exer- 
arrangemeiit,  and  a  sense  of  creature  cise.  The  family-likeness  here  between 
dependence.  Everyone  is  led  to  put  this  and  the  disposition  we  have  spoken 
the  question,  "What  have  I  that  I  did  of  is  so  strong,  that  they  seem  to  be 
not  receive  ?  Now  if  it  was  received,  twin  sisters.  To  be  content  is  to  be 
why  dost  thou  glory  as  if  thou  didst  not  meekly  satisfied  with  our  share  of 
receive  it  ?  I  am  full  of  wants  —  a  things.  And  for  this  there  are  many 
mere  empty  cistern,  and  all  my  supplies  good  reasons.  Every  well-taught  Chris- 
are  made  by  the  Giver  of  all  good."  tian  will  say,  if  such  is  t!ie  Master's 
Self  is  thus  reduced  to  nothing,  and  will,  I  am  satisfied.  My  will  is  always 
God  becomes  all  in  all.  His  will.  Besides,  I  brought  nothing 
Jiesignation,  or  submission  to  God's  into  this  world,  and  it  is  certain  I  can 
will  in  the  ordering  of  our  lot  is  culti-  carry  nothing  out.  And  it  is  always 
vated.  This  springs  out  of  a  sense  true,  were  I  to  receive  only  what  I 
of  our  dependence,  for  all  graces  of  deserve,  I  would  receive  nothing  at  all. 
the  Christian  character  are  closely  Other  features  would  also  be  called 
allied  as  members  of  one  family  circle,  into  exercise,  such  as  re'^pect  for  all  ; 
If  I  have  nothing  that  I  can  call  my  fellow-feeling  ;  forbearance  ;  the  ab- 
own,  then  why  murmur  at  any  mode  sence  of  jealousies  and  heart-burnings  ; 
ofdistribution  which  Divine  Providence  and  that  charity  which  is  a  uniting 
is  pleased  to  make ;  God  is  only  dis-  bond  all  round. 


CHAPTER  V. 

THE  THANKSGIVING  SONO  OF  THE  REDEEMED  CHURCH.--VeT8ei  1-11. 

CritioaLt  Notes, —  The  subject  matter  of  this  song  is  an  ascription  of  praise  to  the  God  of 
Israel,  as  the  Deliverer  of  His  people  in  an  evil  day.  While  many  hands  were  at  work  to  bring 
out  the  happy  issue,  all  the  glory  is  reckoned  to  be  due  to  Jehovah  ;  or,  if  others  are  mentioned, 
it  is  as  being  instruments  in  His  hand.  This  is  the  uniform  manner  of  Scripture  ;  hence  the 
tone  of  piety  which  marks  all  its  histories  and  meditations  alike. 

The  definite  purpose  of  the  ode  is,  to  express  the  gratitude  which  Israel  owes  to  its  God,  for 
granting  so  sudden  and  complete  a  deliverance  from  the  calamity,  which  had  weighed  down  the 
spirit  of  the  nation  for  twenty  years,  and  had  at  last  become  so  oppressive  that  it  threatened  to 
extinguish  their  name  from  the  list  of  nations  in  the  earth.  This  expression  of  gratitude  is 
made  in  the  form  of  a  commemoration  of  God's  goodness,  such  as  might  live  for  the  benefit  of 
after  ages  ;  for  no  monument  is  so  sure  of  preservation,  or  is  of  such  wide-spread  publicity,  as  that 
of  a  poem  written  with  much  warmth  of  feeling  and  beauty  of  style  by  an  ardent,  enthusiastic 
spirit,  that  feels  devoutly  thankful  to  God  for  His  great  mercies  to  His  covenant  people. 

The  time  selected  for  raising  this  hymn  of  praise  to  Jehovah  was  at  the  moment  of  victory — 
after  the  work  was  done,  and  ere  the  people  had  retired  to  their  homes.  It  was  said  to  be  sung 
"  on  that  day,"  not  literally  so,  but  before  the  occasion  had  passed,  and  in  immediate  connection 
with  the  great  deliverance — while  the  flush  of  victory  still  mantled  the  cheek,  while  every  heart 
was  a-glow  with  gratitude,  and  while  every  tongue  was  attuned  to  song.  Delay  cools  down  ; 
indeed  it  indicates  that  the  feeling  is  not  irrepressible  (2  Chron.  zz.  26  ;  Isa.  xxxviii:  9-22  ; 
Luke  L  64-79) 

247 


OHAt.  v.  HOMJLETW  COMMENTARY:   JUDGES. 


Poetry  is  selected  as  the  fitting  form,  in  which  to  give  expression  to  the  adoration  and  thanks- 
giving so  due  to  God  on  such  an  occasion.  It  better  accords  with  the  exultatiju  of  the  national 
heart,  and  those  glowing  conditions  of  soul  which  are  kindled  by  the  sense  of  a  newly-won 
deliverance.  Pro^^e  usually  moves  within  a  fixed  frame-work  of  rules,  and  partakes  somewhat 
of  the  coldness  and  stiffness  of  artificialism  ;  while  poetry,  spurning  the  trammels  of  art,  rises  up 
to  a  sphere  of  its  own,  where  natural  instincts  are  the  only  guide,  and  where  the  utterance  is 
prompted  by  a  fervid  state  of  the  feelings.  The  freedom  of  the  poet  is  the  freedom  of  the 
eagle,  now  moving  along  the  smiling  fields,  now  soaring  in  mid-heaven  at  pleasure  ;  at  one  time 
frequenting  the  picturesque  valley,  at  another  wandering  at  will  among  the  frowning  crags,  or 
'lark  mountain  gorges.  But  while  inspiration  may  often  more  fitly  express  itself  in  poetic  than 
m  other  forms  of  speech,  it  woidd  be  wide  of  the  mark  indeed  to  identify  the  one  with  the  other 
in  any  way  whatever.  The  mountains  are  higher  than  the  plains,  but  we  never  commit  the 
mistake  of  identifying  the  highest  mountains  with  the  height  of  the  stars.  Human  inspiration 
and  Divine  inspiration  are  separated  by  an  immense  interval.  The  former  often  appears  in  the 
form  of  poetical  conception  and  expression,  and  is  identical  with  it  ;  the  latter  never  so.  Of  the 
former  there  is  very  little  in  chaps,  iii.  and  iv.,  while  chap.  v.  is  full  of  it  ;  but  all  the  chapters 
in  the  Book  are  pervaded  by  the  latter. 

The  order  of  thought  in  the  chapter  seems  to  be  as  follows  : — First,  comes  a  general 
announcement  of  the  subject  of  song  in  verse  2.  The  song  itself  is  then  divided  into  three 
sections,  each  containing  three  strophes,  and  each  strophe  consists  of  three  verbcs.  Thus 
section  first  extends  from  verses  3  to  11  inclusive — the  spirit  of  which  is,  to  show  the  immense 
value  of  the  victory  which  had  been  gained,  as  bringing  back  the  ancient  glory  of  the  sacred 
nation.  7 he  first  strophe  (verses  3-5)  refers  to  the  happy  times  of  old  when  Israel  was 
acknowledged  before  the  whole  earth  as  the  chosen  nation  of  the  living  God.  This  was  a  fact 
never  to  be  forgotten  ;  and  hence  it  forms  the  prelude  in  almost  every  sacred  hymn  that  was 
sung  by  that  people  in  all  their  generations.  This  is  attested  by  the  whole  Book  of  Psalms. 
2^he  second  strophe  (verses  6-8),  in  a  few  graphic  touches,  shows  how  far  the  nation  had  sunk 
from  its  former  pitch  of  prosperity.  And  strophe  third  (verses  9-11)  glances  at  the  state  of 
liberty  and  of  peace  that  would  now  be  enjoyed  by  the  people  in  the  transactions  of  daily  life, 
as  contrasted  with  the  terror  to  which  they  had  been  so  long  subjected.  After  a  pause,  section 
second  begins  at  verses  13-21,  and  presents  us  with  a  vivid  account  of  the  actors  in  tlie  battle, 
and  tne  means  by  which  victory  was  decided  for  Israel.  The  first  strophe  describes  the  enthusiastic 
assembly  of  the  good  men  and  true  who  gathered  themselves  together  to  fight  the  Lord's 
battle  (verse  13-15).  In  strophe  second  is  set  forth  the  faint-heartedness  of  those  who  would 
risk  nothing  in  fighting  such  a  battle  (verses  16-lS).  And  the  third  strophe  (verses  19-21) 
describes  the  forces  of  the  enemy,  and  the  mighty  powers  by  which  they  were  overwhelmed. 
Section  third  (verses  23-30)  describes  the  dreadful  fate  of  those  who  are  opposed  to  God  in  battle, 
beginning  with  the  frustration  of  hopes,  and  ending  in  utter  ruin.  First,  a  curse  is  pronounced 
on  the  men  of  indecision  (verse  23)  ;  next  the  enemy  meets  with  death  where  he  expected 
protection  to  life  (verses  24  27)  ;  and  finally,  a  contrast  is  drawn  between  high  expecta- 
tions formed,  and  bitter  experiences  reaped  (verses  28-30).  The  expression  of  a  wish  that  all 
God's  enemies  would  so  perish  (that  is,  the  stubborn  and  impenitent)  concludes  the  chapter. 

1.  Then  sang  Deborah  and  Barak,  etc.]  Not  equally,  or  together.  The  verb  for  "  sang  "  is 
singular,  and  of  feminine  gender.  Deborah  was  a  "prophetess,"  and  the  mains]>ring  of  the 
whole  movement.  We  may  naturally  suppose  that  she  composed  this  beautiful  lyric  hytnn, 
which  is  indeed  full  of  ihe  same  force  and  fire  that  we  see  in  the  other  glimpses  of  this 
remarkable  woman's  character.  Indeed  the  hymn  itself  indicates  its  authorship  (see  verses  3,  7, 
and  12).  But  Barak  is  associated  with  Deborah  in  the  work  of  thanksgiving,  for  he,  though 
guided  by  her,  was  yet  the  chief  actor,  and  also  represented  the  victorious  host.  A  similar 
case  occurs  in  Num.  xii.  1,  where  Miriam  and  Aaron  are  said  to  have  spoken  together  against 
Moses  ;  but  Miriam  took  the  lead  in  this  opposition,  and  Aaron  merely  went  along.  Hence  the 
verb  is  singular  and  feminine.  So  it  is  here  (~WP\\  Deborah,  with  probably  a  number  of 
female  choristers,  would  begin  the  song,  while  Barak,  with  a  company  of  men-singers,  would 
respond,  or  sing  the  antistrophe,  as  in  Ex.  xv.  1-21.  There  may  have  been  a  choir  of  priests 
and  Levites,  or  the  whole  congregation  may  have  joined  in  the  exercise,  returning  to  Mount 
Tabor  for  the  purpose  before  dispersing  to  their  homes.  They  had  had  no  jubilee  like  it  for  at 
least  twenty  years.  Every  heart  was  full,  and  the  difficulty  was  for  anyone  to  be  silent  on  such 
an  occasion.  And  not  only  then,  but  the  whole  year  round,  every  home  in  Israel  would  daily 
resound  with  similar  strains  of  joy  and  gratitude. 

A  vast  importance  attaches  to  this  song,  because  it  was  to  be  preserved  among  the  treasured 
archives  of  the  nation,  and  to  be  taught  to  the  children's  children  for  many  generations.  Thus 
it  would  not  only  be  a  permanent  memorial  of  God's  mighty  acts  on  behalf  of  His  people,  but 
would  form  part  of  the  public  instruction  of  the  nation  for  many  ages,  and  so  would  assist  in 
moulding  the  characters  of  myriads  of  minds,  so  that  those  who  were  not  yet  created  should  in 
due  time  praise  the  Lord.     This  truth  is  exemplified  by  the  whole  Book  of  Psalms. 

That  such  a  composition  should  have  had  its  birth  in  such  a  declining  age  is  indeed  a  marvel. 
We  do  indeed  believe  in  its  proper  inspiration  ;  for  if  it  were  not  inspired,  why  should  it  form 
au  integral  part  of  the  Book  of  Judges,  and  why  should  the  Book  of  Judges  form  part  of  the 
248 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES.  CHAP.  ▼. 


Canon  of  Scripture — to  which  the  Saviour  Himself  set  His  seal  by  so  frequently  referring  to  it 
as  the  sacred  Word  of  God.  Yet  the  literary  beauty  of  the  style  is  not  altogether  due  to  the 
Spirit  of  inspiration.  In  the  act  of  inspiration,  we  believe,  that  the  matter  to  be  communicated 
to  the  world,  through  the  medium  of  a  particular  human  mind  as  the  organ,  is  communicated 
by  the  Divine  Spirit,  but  there  is  no  interference  with  the  natural  organisation  of  that  mind,  its 
individual  characteristics,  or  even  the  measure  of  its  natural  gifts,  or  educational  accomplish- 
ments. The  Spirit  communicates  the  truth  through  that  mind  precisely  in  the  way  in  which  it 
is  natural  for  it  to  express  itself.  Hence  though  even  the  language  we  believe  to  be 
inspired,  it  is  lanyuage  selected  in  the  style  of  the  mind  that  is  inspired.  Thus  the  language 
that  dropped  from  the  pen  of  a  David,  or  an  Isaiah,  was  that  of  the  poet,  for  it  was  natural  for 
these  men  to  write  poetically.  Again,  the  language  employed  in  the  Books  of  "  Kings  "  and 
*'  Chronicles  "  was  natural  to  such  a  man  as  Ezra,  or  whoever  may  have  been  the  author  of  the 
Books  —one  accustomed  to  deal  with  records,  and  conversant  with  facts  and  figures.  In  like 
manner,  Deborah  was  not  made  a  poetess  tor  this  particular  occasion,  and  the  gift  withdrawn 
immediately  on  the  completion  of  tbe  ode.  Rather  do  we  regard  her  as  having  been  a  poetess 
by  natural  gifts  and  the  pi-oper  cultivation  of  them  ;  and  in  this  ode  we  see  the  appropriate 
exercise  of  those  gifts.  We  are  not  to  suppose  that  the  style  here  used  was  in  any  degree 
essentially  different  from  what  was  natural  to  her.  It  was  Deborah  speaking,  and  not  another 
mind  created  for  the  moment  under  her  form  ;  but  it  was  the  highest  form  of  Deborah's  style. 

If  such  a  style  were  natural  to  Deborah,  it  is  wonderful  to  meet  with  such  a  degree  of  literary 
refinement  in  an  age,  which  is  generally  reputed  to  have  been  so  barbarous  and  rude.  Such 
regularity  of  accents,  such  harmony  of  cadences,  and  such  attention  to  quantities,  render  this 
composition  one  of  the  most  beautiful  specimens  of  rhythm  we  have  on  record.  It  has  all  the 
perfection  of  art,  yet  all  the  freedom  of  nature — no  fetter,  yet  perfect  beauty.  Cassel  says, 
"There  is  no  want  of  finish  ;  but  the  pauses  subordinate  themselves  to  the  thoughts,  and  these 
unfold  themselves  free  as  the  waves.  The  peculiar  character  of  the  song  consists  of  the  boldness 
of  its  imagery,  and  the  force  of  its  unusual  language — the  most  interesting  feature  being  its 
alliteration,  which  appears  in  the  highest  development,  as  in  the  old  Norse  poems."  We  might 
add,  that  it  is  also  distinguished  by  its  abrupt  transitions  and  impassioned  appeals,  by  its 
apostrophising  both  of  the  absent  and  the  present,  by  its  quick  seizure  of  the  salient  features  of 
the  scene,  and  the  dramatically  vivid  picture  it  presents,  both  of  occurrences  and  of  persons. 

2.  Praise  ye  the  Lord  for  the  avenging  of  Israel,  etc.]  The  order  in  the  original  is  more 
emphcitic — "  for  the  avenging  of  the  avenges  of  Israel,  when  the  people  willingly  ojGfered  them- 
selves— Praise  ye  Jehovah  !  "  This  is  a  statement  of  the  subject  matter  of  the  poem.  The 
key-note  is  here  pitched.  The  spirit  of  the  meaning,  according  to  our  translation,  seems  to  be, 
*'  for  the  rolling  back  on  the  heads  of  the  enemy  the  long  series  of  injuries  which  God's  Israel 
had  received  from  them— Praise  ye  Jehovah."  Many  find  fault  with  this  sentiment,  as  being 
not  in  accordance  with  the  spirit  even  of  the  Old  Testament,  and  try  to  bring  a  different 
meaning  out  of  the  words.  The  difficulty  lies  in  the  rendering  of  the  phrase  nil7*^Q  ^*15. 
Gcsenius  takes  it  from  an  Arabic  root,  signifying  "to  lead."  So  also  does  the  Alexandrian  MSS. 
of  the  Sept.  and  some  modern  interpreters,  as  Bertheau,  Ewaldy  etc.  They  accordingly  make  it, 
"  for  the  bold  leading  of  the  leaders,  as  well  as  for  the  willing  offering  of  themselves  by  the 
people.  Praise  Jehovah  ! "  This  is  a  just  idea  in  itself,  but  it  does  not  express  the  ultimate 
sentiment  of  the  song,  which  refers  to  what  was  done,  and  not  merely  the  manner  of  doing  it. 
Besides  this  is  not  the  direct  meaning  of  the  word  l^'^Q,  which  originally  refers  to  the  hair  of 
the  head,  and  especially  to  the  long  waving  hair,  as  in  Ezek.  xliv.  20.  Keil  takes  this  sense  of 
the  word,  but  gives  to  the  meaning  an  unexpected  turn  by  saying,  that  as  luxuriant  hair 
is  the  sign  of  strength,  so  "  the  hairy  ones "  mentioned  here  mean  "  the  strong  in  Israel 
showed  themselves  strong."  The  champions  in  the  fight  went  forth  before  the  others  bravely. 
This  is  a  very  free  translation  indeed,  and  is  scarcely  adopted  by  any  others.  Cassel  makes 
the  word  signify  "to  make  loose,"  or  to  "become  wild,"  as  when  the  hair  flies  wihl  and 
loose  about  the  neck.  The  person  who  made  a  vow  of  consecration  to  God  was  directed  to  let 
his  hair  grow  (Num.  vi.  5) ;  and  the  loose  waving  of  his  hair  in  the  wind  was  a  visible  proof  of 
his  having  devoted  himself  to  the  service  of  God.  This,  he  says,  applies  to  the  whole  army  of 
Barak,  who  all  wildly  waved  their  hair  in  token  of  their  entire  consecration  to  Him.  The  praise 
was  due  for  the  appearance  of  so  many  persons  with  long  locks  to  fight  the  battle  of  their  God. 
He  renders  it  *^Thatin  Israel  wildly  waved  the  hair — In  the  people's  self-devotion  Praise  God  /" 
This  view  also  seems  to  be  more  ingenious  than  accurate.  The  most  natural  view  seems  to  us  to 
be  that  given  in  the  authorised  version.  The  head  is  uncovered,  and  the  hair  gets  loose  and 
disordered,  when  one  is  greatly  agitated  with  some  strong  feeling — especially  that  of  resentment 
for  great  injuries  received.  It  is  this  condition  of  the  hair  that  is  here  indicated  by  the  word 
17 HQ,  and  when  its  plural  goes  along  with  it,  it  means  the  highest  degree,  or  the  fullest  measure 
of  vengeance  toas  taken  on  behalf  of  Israel.  The  plural  form  of  the  word  is  only  used  here  and  in 
Deut.  xxxii.  42,  where  it  is  translated  "  revenges  "  upon  the  enemy.  In  what  sense  the  word 
*  avenges  *'  or  **  revenges  "  is  to  be  taken  is  very  important,  and  will  receive  due  notice  after- 
wardfl, 

249 


CHAP.    V. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES. 


When  the  people  willingly  offered  themselves.]  All  who  would  do  anything  acceptably  to  God 
must  first  give  themselves  a  free-will  offering  to  Him  (Rom.  xii.  1  ;  2  Chron.  xvii.  16  ;  Ps.  ex.  3  ; 
2  Cor.  viii.  5).  Deborah  praises  God  for  conferring  on  the  people  this  spirit  of  willingness.  An 
unwilling,  or  a  mechanical  service,  is  one  which  the  God  who  looketh  on  the  heart  cannot  accept 
of.  No  service  without  the  heart  can  be  pleasing  to  Him.  It  is  a  dead  service  ;  and  is  the  same 
with  laying  a  putrefying  corpse  upon  the  altar. 

3.  Hear,  0  ye  kings ;  give  ear,  0  ye  princes ;  I,  even  I,  will  sing  unto  the  Lord,  etc.]  Having 
announced  the  subject,  the  speaker  next  calls  for  the  close  attention  of  the  audience.  It  is  a 
tale  of  such  sacred  importance  as  might  well  have  kings  for  its  listeners  (comp.  Deut.  xxxii.  1  ; 
Isa.  i.  2  ;  xliv.  23 ;  Micah  vi.  2).  The  allusion  is  not  to  any  special  class  of  kings,  such  as  the 
kings  of  Canaan,  but  to  kings  in  general,  as  being  most  dignified  in  station.  Also,  perhaps,  as 
representing  the  powers  of  this  world — that  they  may  bow  their  heads,  and  confess  they  are 
nothing  before  Sion's  King.  Farther,  that  they  might  learn  the  sin,  danger,  and  folly  of  lifting 
themselves  up  against  Israel's  God.  To  magnify  Israel's  God  is  indeed  the  aim  of  the  whole 
history  (comp.  Ps.  ii.).  The  singer  says,  she  will  sing,  even  she — with  marked  emphasis,  to 
denote  that  she  will  make  a  special  point  of  doing  this  service,  and  she  will  give  her  whole  heart 
to  the  doing  of  it.  Not  only  would  she  sing  with  the  mouth,  but  she  would  add  praise  on  the 
^Hen-stringed  lute"  or  cithern — one  of  the  sweetest  lyres  or  harps  in  use.  Such  is  the  force  of 
"^<j?T — to  sing  to  an  instrument,  generally  a  lyre  or  harp.  Lias  says,  '*  The  word  is  onomatopoetic, 
and  denotes  the  buzz  of  the  chords  of  a  stringed  instrument."  Everything  in  the  externals  of 
worship  had  in  that  age  of  signs  a  deeper  meaning  than  it  has  with  us.  The  spirit  of  the  state- 
ment is — I  will  take  all  the  ways  of  praising  my  God,  so  that  the  work  may  be  done  in  the 
fullest  manner.  The  service  of  the  heart  shall  be  fully  given,  and  that  shall  be  expressed  by  the 
use  of  the  sweetest  stringed  instruments.  The  name  is  "  Jehovah,  the  God  of  Israel " — the 
covenant  name  of  God.  This  implied  that  all  that  God  had  done  for  Israel  was  done  on  account 
of  His  gracious  relations  to  that  people,  and  the  gracious  promises  He  had  made  to  them. 

4.  Lord,  when  thou  wentest  out  of  Seir,  etc.]  The  singer  here  breaks  off  abruptly,  and  goes 
back  at  a  bound  over  nearly  200  years  to  the  time  when  God  first  adopted  this  people  to  be  His 
own.  This  abrupt  manner  of  shooting  from  point  to  point,  selecting  the  chief  points  of  the 
ever  memorable  histoiy ;  and  graphically  grouping  them  together,  is  quite  in  the  style  of 
Hebrew  poetry.  Here  the  point  of  view  occupied  is  what  God  was  when  He  first  met  with  them 
as  a  nation.  What  He  showed  Himself  to  be  then  was  a  standard  for  them  to  reckon  by  in  all 
their  after  history.  They  might  count  with  good  reason  that  He  would  in  all  their  after  history 
be  to  them  the  same  God  that  ho  was  then.  What  was  He  then  ?  The  group  of  mountains 
which  are  usually  known  by  the  name  of  Sinai,  or  Horeb,  were  within  the  large  tract  of  country 
known  as  Edom,  or  Seir.  Indeed,  the  name  "  Seir "  was  sometimes  given  to  the  whole 
mountainous  district  which  included  Sinai  (Deut.  xxxiii.  2).  The  boundary  lines  of  the 
districts  in  the  wilderness  do  not  appear  to  have  been  very  sharply  defined.  The  scene  at  the 
giving  of  the  law  is  doubtless  referred  to,  with  all  the  displays  of  unequalled  majesty  which 
Jehovah  then  made.  He  then  made  a  revelation  of  Himself,  showing  what  kind  of  a  God  He 
was — infinite  in  power,  of  sovereign  authority,  most  jealous  of  His  great  name,  of  spotless 
purity,  of  inviolable  truth,  and  resplendent  in  righteousness  ;  while  at  the  same  time  merciful 
and  gracious,  long-sufifering,  and  abundant  in  goodness,  forgiving  iniquity,  transgression,  and 
sin,  etc.  This  character  was  most  impressively  displayed  at  Mount  Sinai,  and  the  memory  of  it 
was  to  be  kept  up  at  every  step  in  all  their  future  history,  that  they  might  have  vividly  before 
their  minds  the  character  of  the  God  to  whom  they  sustained  so  close  a  relation,  and  with  whom 
they  were  in  constant  dealing.  The  application  to  the  present  case  was,  that  the  same  glorious 
perfections  of  character  which  Jehovah  manifested  at  Sinai  were  now  displayed  against  Sisera 
and  his  host,  in  so  far  as  the  case  required,  and  that  God  was  faithful  in  keeping  His  word  to 
His  people  even  at  that  distance  of  time.  One  broad  feature  of  the  Sinai  scene  is  seized  on  as 
specially  fit  to  be  mentioned  in  connection  with  the  destruction  of  Jabin's  army — the  mighty 
power  of  the  God  of  Israel.  The  solid  earth  trembled  under  His  step  as  He  marched  out 
through  the  wilderness  at  the  head  of  His  people  ;  referring  to  the  fact,  that  when  God  came 
down  on  Mount  Sinai  to  enter  into  covenant  with  Israel,  "  the  whole  mount  quaked  greatly." 

The  heavens  dropped,  the  clouds  dropped  water.]  In  Exod.  xix.  we  read  of  a  *'  thick  cloud  " 
and  of 'thunders" — in  chap.  xx.  21  we  read  of  the  **  thick  darkness  where  God  was."  In 
Heb.  xii.  18  we  read  of  a  "  tempest "  as  well  as  of  "blackness  and  darkness."  In  Ps.  Ixviii.  8,  9, 
we  read  that  the  "  heavens  dropped  at  the  presence  of  God,  and  He  sent  a  plentiful  rain."  In 
Ps.  Ixxvii.  17,  18,  we  are  told  "the  clouds  poured  out  water,  the  sky  sent  out  a  sound,  etc." 
All  these  references  seem  to  point  to  the  Sinai  scene,  and  warrant  us  to  conclude  there  was 
a  thunder-storm,  with  a  deluge  of  rain  at  the  time  of  the  giving  of  the  law.  It  was  an  unheard 
of  thing  that  that  perpetually  clear  firmament  should  be  darkened  with  thick  clouds,  and  that 
that  ever-brazen  sky  should  pour  water  in  floods  on  the  arid  sands  of  the  desert. 

5.  The  mountains  melted  from  before  the  Lord,  even  that  Sinai,  etc.]  ^bT3  Many  render 
sJiooJc  or  staggered.  So  Sept.f  Keil,  Cassel,  Lias,  etc.  The  Greek,  Chald.,  Arab,  and  Syr.  This 
rendering  is  the  most  direct  meaning  of  the  word  employed,  and  is  supported  by  Isa.  Ixiv.  1-3, 

250 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES.  chap.  v. 


which  should  be  translated  "  might  tremble  at  thy  presence" — Even  that  Sinai,  etc.]  Bather 
"thi»  Sinai,''  as  if  it  were  actually  before  her  eye.  It  makes  the  account  more  vivid.  Full  of 
rocks  though  Sinai  was,  with  rock  piled  on  rock  all  the  way  to  the  summit,  and,  therefore,  mi<?ht  be 
supposed  firm  as  adamant,  it  yet  trembled  like  a  leaf  in  the  wind  1  No  wonder  that  Sisera 
with  all  his  iron  chariots  could  not  stand  before  such  a  God  as  this  ! 

6.  In  the  days  of  Shamgar,  etc.]  These  verses  (6-8)  were  probably  sang  by  a  responsive 
choir  to  those  who  sang  the  verses  going  before  (3-5).  The  sint^er  now  as  abruptly  returns  to 
the  times  of  Deborah,  as  at  first  she  left  them  to  sing  of  Sinai.  Nothing  is  lost  in  preface. 
Even  of  the  main  subject  only  a  few  strokes  are  given.  The  purpose  now  is,  to  put  the  present 
down-trodden  condition  of  I^iael,  when  lying  under  the  heel  of  the  oppressor,  in  contrast  with 
the  enviable  condition  in  which  they  stood,  when  so  highly  favoured  of  their  God  in  the 
wilderness  (Deut.  iv.  7,  32-38.) 

Some  would  read,  "  After  the  days  of  Shamgar,"  etc.,  or  since  his  daj's.  But  this  looks  like 
leaving  the  natural  inteipretation  of  the  phrase  in  order  to  get  quit  of  a  difficulty.  Why  not 
keep  l)y  the  usual  rendering  ?  "  In  the  days  of  Shamgar — and  of  Jael."  This  Jael  was  not 
another  Jael  then  the  wife  of  Heber.  Such  a  supposition  (see  Cassel)  is  purely  arbitrary,  and  is 
merely  adopted  to  escape  a  difficulty.  Why  not  suppose  these  two  persons  to  be  contemporary  ? 
And  why  not  regard  the  phrase  to  mean  simply— in  the  days  which  Shamgar  had  to  deal  with — 
the  Lard  times  which  he  had  to  contend  with  ;  and  so  of  Jael.  These  were  the  days  on  which 
their  lot  was  cast,  which  they  endured  for  a  time — it  might  be  for  some  years,  but  vvliich  at 
length,  they  were  the  means  of  entirely  changing  into  a  long  course  of  bright  and  sunny  days — 
so  that  all  around  them  had  the  privilege  of  singing,  '*  accoi-ding  to  the  days  wherein  thou  hast 
afflicted  us,  and  the  years  wherein  we  have  seen  evil,  so  do  thou  make  us  glad."  The  poem  may 
have  been  composed  very  soon — perhaps  within  a  day  or  two  after  the  terrible  slaughter  of 
Sisera's  army  ;  but  it  is  thrown  into  a  form  suitable  for  being  sung  in  after  ages.  We  believe 
Sham  gar's  ground  was  somewhere  in  the  South- West  of  the  land  ;  and  we  know  Jael's  home 
was  in  the  North  of  Israel. 

The  highways  were  unoccupied,  or  deserted.]  Z^^.  the  paths  ceased.  There  was  no  security 
on  the  public  highways  of  the  country — no  safety  for  life  and  property,  and  hence  no  one  could 
leave  his  house  in  peace,  and  go  along  the  public  roads  to  do  the  duties  of  business.  The  enemy 
were  prowling  in  all  directionf*,  and  tra\ellers  were  afraid  to  walk  in  the  usual  highways,  lest 
they  should  be  either  robbed  or  murdered — perhaps  both.  Reference  is  made  to  such  times, 
supposed  to  be  the  days  of  the  Judges,  and  to  no  times  more  fitly  than  the  present,  in  2  Chron. 
XV.  5.  And  the  travellers  walked  through  by-ways-]  Those  who  were  obliged  to  travel  at  all 
slunk  into  concealed  by-paths  to  elude  the  bands  of  the  oppressor.  They  are  called  "  twisted 
paths,"  or  circuitous  footpaths,  M'hich  turned  away  from  the  high  roads.  The  caravans  proper 
had  ceased  to  exist  ;  there  were  only  foot  passengers  anywhere  to  be  seen  moving  through  the 
land.  Trade  had  been  completely  driven  off  the  roads.  Business  was  at  a  standstill  everywhere. 
The  whole  population  were  in  hiding  !  They  were  afraid  to  show  themselves  in  public  at  any 
point. 

7.  The  inhabitants  of  the  villages  ceased.l  Rather  the  villages  ceased.  Cassel  makes  it,  the 
open  places,  the  hamlets,  which  were  unwalled,  and,  therefore,  liable  to  become  a  prey  to  the 
spoiler.  It  was  thus  in  Hungary  in  the  17th  century  when  it  was  overrun  by  the  Turks.  The 
dwellers  in  the  open  flat  country,  with  unwalled  villages  (the  farmers  and  others)  in  contra- 
distinction to  the  walled  towns  disappeared  (Deut.  iii.  5  ;  1  Samuel  vi.  18  ;  Ezek.  xxxviii.  11.) 
"  Lawlessness  and  terror  prevailed,  and  the  intercourse  of  commerce  was  unknown.  The  sons 
Were  afraid  to  traverse  the  plains  which  their  fathers  had  conquered,  and  stayed  shivering  at 
home."  {Wiseman),  Compare  the  times  of  the  captivity  as  pictured  by  Zechariah  in  chap, 
vii.  14  ;  or  that  seen  in  the  visions  of  Isaiah  as  the  natural  effects  of  sinful  times.  (Isa.  xxxiii. 
8).  That  there  should  be  villages  or  hamlets,  and  homesteads  unprotected,  scattered  all  over 
the  country,  is  the  indication  of  security  and  peace.  But  where  a  country  is  unprotected  while 
there  are  enemies  all  around,  the  people  feel  compelled  to  shut  themselves  up  in  walled  towns. 
So  it  now  was.  Many  indeed  had  no  other  homes  than  the  holes  of  the  rocks,  the  caves,  the 
thickets  or  jungles,  the  high  places,  and  even  the  pits,  in  which  that  picturesque  land 
abounded.  (1  Sam.  xiii.  6).  What  a  commentary  on  the  statement  that  "sin  is  the  reproach  of 
any  people  ! " — nntil  that  I  Deborah  arose,  a  mother  in  Israel.]  Not  meaning  so  much,  as  that 
Israel  was  born  again  as  a  nation  through  her  ;  though  it  might  be  said  that  Israel  recovered  its 
nationality  through  her  influence.  But  the  phrase  is  similar  to  that  applied  to  certain  patriots, 
who  on  account  of  their  noble  conduct  in  defending  and  acting  as  protectors  of  their  country, 
are  called  "the  fathers  of  their  country."  Deborah  was  the  deliverer  of  her  country,  and  so 
earned  the  title  of  "a  mother  in  Israel."  (2  Sam.  xx.  19).  The  phrase,  "a  father  to  the 
inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,"  occurs  in  Isa.  xxii.  21.  (Comp.  Job  xxix.  16).  Queen  Elizabeth 
was  accustomed  to  say,  she  could  believe  nothing  of  her  people  that  parents  would  not  believe 
of  their  children. 

8.  They  chose  new  gods.l  Hence  the  loss  of  all  their  strength.  The  real  "strength  of 
Israel  "  th&y  abandoned.     "  They  lightly  esteemed  the  rock  of  their  salvation."     They  had  no 

251 


CHAP.  T.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


desire  for  the  fellowship  of  a  holy  God.  They  chose  gods  with  a  character  like  their  own, 
gods  of  their  own  invention.  Not  one,  but  many.  **  The  serpent's  grammar  first  taught  men 
to  decline  God  plurally  :  **  Ye  shall  be  as  gods  "  {^Trapp) — "  new  gods  " — not  worshipped  by 
their  fathers.     (Deut.  xxxii.  17). 

There  was  war  in  the  gates-l  They  so  "  provoked  Him  to  jealousy  with  strange  gods,"  that 
He  allowed  the  enemy  to  press  even  up  to  the  gates  of  their  towns,  and  besieged  them  ;  so 
that  the  gates,  which  were  usually  the  seat  of  the  administration  of  justice,  became  the  scene  of 
war.  The  word  t-Hy  means,  as  Cassel  says,  "not  simply  war,  but  an  already  victorious  and 
consuming  oppression."  There  was  a  "  besieging  of  the  gates."  None  went  out  and  none  came 
in.  Quiet  was  completely  driven  out  of  the  land.  "There  is  no  peace  to  the  wicked."  As 
the  tide  of  idolatry  rolled  over  the  land  everywhere,  so  did  the  flood  of  national  misery. 
Resistance  in  the  open  field  there  was  not  anywhere ;  and  even  in  their  fortified  places,  the 
enemy  kept  clamouring  at  the  gates.  Their  manliness  had  vanished  ;  they  kept  skulking 
behind  their  shut  gates ;  while  outside  the  enemy  had  it  all  their  own  way,  and  were  ever  on 
the  point  of  breaking  through  I  All  the  bitter  fruit  of  sin. 

Was  there  a  shield  or  spear  seen  among  forty  thousand  in  Israel  ?1  Not  that  the  people  had  not 
any  such  weapons  (as  in  1  Sam.  xiii,  22),  for  if  so,  the  battle  of  Kishon  could  not  have  been 
fought.  The  reference  is  not  to  Barak's  army,  which  consisted  of  10,000  men.  The  meaning 
seems  to  be,  that  a  spirit  of  trembling  had  so  generally  seized  the  people  of  Israel,  that  not  a 
single  man  among  so  many  as  40,000  had  the  courage  to  stand  forth  to  fight  his  country's  battle 
in  the  field.  There  were  three  kinds  of  spears,  as  referred  to  in  the  Old  Testament.  The  first 
was  a  long  slender  lance  j  the  second  a  javelin  ;  and  the  third — that  referred  to  here  {romach),  a 
heavier  weapon. 

9.  Again  there  is  a  turn  in  the  song.  The  transition  is  abrupt,  as  all  transitions  are  here. 
There  are  no  prefaces,  and  no  connecting  narratives.  Central  statements  only  are  made.  They 
break  on  the  ear  without  warning  and  without  comment.  My  heart  is  toward  the  governors  of 
Israel,]  i.e.  is  drawn  to  them  in  admiration  of  their  conduct.  "  The  leaders"  came  to  the  front 
when  the  call  was  made  for  volunteers  to  fight  the  Lord's  battle.  They  had  all  the  more  merit 
in  doing  this,  because  on  them  lay  the  burden  of  the  responsibility,  and  on  them  fell  tiie  bruut 
of  the  danger.  Their  conduct  also  would  powex'fuUy  stimulate  the  rank  and  file.  God  was  to 
be  praised  for  this  ;  for  it  was  His  Spirit  that  rested  on  the  leaders,  and  put  such  courage  and 
self  devotion  into  them. 

10.  Speak,  ye  that  ride  on  white  asses,  etc.]  Hehearse  ye,  celebrate  in  a  song  of  praise.  Lit. 
meditate  ye.  Many  render  it,  sin^.  (Comp.  Ps.  cxlv.  5  ;  cv.  2).  "  White  spotted  asses."  There 
are  no  asses  white  all  over,  but  asses  with  white  spots.  Asses  in  Palestine  were  usually  of  a  red 
colour.  The  white  spotted  were  highly  prized  on  account  of  their  beauty,  and  were  rare, 
consequently  were  costly,  and  hence  were  used  by  the  upper  classes.  (Chap.  x.  4  ;  xii.  14). 
Ye  that  sit  in  judgment.]  Eather  that  sit  on  carpets,  or  coverings,  some  make  it  sadd/e-clotheSt 
such  as  are  put  on  asses.  (Matt.  xxi.  7).  These  are  the  rich  and  prosperous.  Those  who 
walk  by  the  way.]  Those  who  travel  on  foot  represent  the  middle  and  lower  classes,  who  have 
to  do  their  business  without  any  such  help.  Ktil,  liowever,  supposes  three  classes  are  referred 
to  :  the  upper  classes,  judges  and  otliers  who  ride  on  costly  animals  ;  the  rich  resting  at  home 
on  their  splendid  carpets  ;  and  the  poor  travellers  and  common  people  who  can  now  go 
quietly  along  the  high  road  again  without  fear  of  interruption  from  the  foe.  The  nobles,  the 
wealthy,  and  the  poor  alike  enjoyed  a  long-wished  for  security  in  going  abroad  through  the 
country  which  their  God  had  given  them, 

11.  They  that  are  delivered  from  the  noise  of  archers,  etc.]  This  verse  has  received  many 
different  renderings,  which  we  cannot  notice  in  detail.  It  seems  to  express  a  new  thought,  and 
to  refer  to  a  dreadful  hardship  which  was  daily  experienced  all  over  the  land.  People  could 
not  want  their  supplies  of  water,  and  the  wells  were  usually  situated  outside  the  towns,  so  that 
in  going  to  the  wells  there  was  always  exposure.  The  enemy  knowing  this  oftentimes  planted  a 
companv  of  skilled  archers  to  shoot  arrows  at  those  who  came  to  the  wells,  and  while  in  the  act 
of  drawing  water  many  were  either  wounded  or  killed.  But  now  such  as  had  this  duty  to 
perform  were  no  longer  in  danger.  They  were  delivered  from  '"  the  cry  of  the  sharp-shooters," 
or  the  tumult  of  the  archers  at  the  places  where  they  drew  waters.  And  now  having  no  fear  of 
any  sudden  attack  there,  and  of  being  wounded,  or  robbed,  or  carried  captive,  they  at  these 
spots  shall  henceforth  be  so  filled  with  gratitude  at  the  consciousness  of  their  profound  security, 
that  they  shall  there  rehearse  the  mighty  acts  of  the  Lord,  etc.  Strifes  at  these  places  were  not 
vmcommon.  (Gen.  xxvi.  18-21  ;  Ex.  ii.  17-19  ;  Jer.  iv.  29).  ^'Righteous  acts,"  because  they  were 
performed  in  truth  to  His  covenant,  and  were  in  themselves  righteous.  Then  shall  the  p  ople  go 
down  to  the  gates.]  The  people  could  leave  their  hiding-pla(!es  in  the  mountains  and  walled 
towns,  and  return  to  pass  through  the  gates  to  the  villages  and  the  open  plains,  to  pursue  again 
the  peaceful  work  of  commerce,  and  of  carrying  on  the  daily  business  of  life.  The  victory  so 
recently  gained  had  cleansed  the  land  of  these  marauders, 

252 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES.  chap  v. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS,— Verses  I-IL 

A  High  Starting  Point  and  a  Great  Downfall, 

1.  God's  people  have  sons^s  given  them  to  sing  in  the  night.  The  times  of 
the  Judges  were  for  the  most  part  a  night  season  in  the  history  of  the  Church, 
and  especially  the  period  to  which  this  chapter  refers.  But  no  night  is  so  dark 
as  to  he  without  its  stars,  or  so  cheerless  as  to  be  without  its  songs  in  God's 
dealings  with  the  children  of  the  promises.  This  effusion  of  the  person  chosen 
for  the  time  to  represent  Israel's  feelings  under  the  treatment  tliey  received  at 
the  hands  of  God's  Providence,  is  himg  up  like  a  torch  in  the  night  of  the 
national  history,  to  revive  faith  and  encourage  hope.  When  passing  through 
the  waters,  the  river  is  not  permitted  to  overflow,  neither  when  walking  through 
the  fire,  as  God's  people  must  sometimes  do,  is  the  flame  allowed  to  kindle  upon 
them.  "  Though  sorrowful  they  are  yet  always  rejoicing — though  persecuted 
they  are  not  forsaken — though  cast  down  they  are  not  destroyed."  "  When 
troubles  abound  their  consolations  do  much  more  abound  by  Christ."  They  are 
never  altogether  without  hope.  They  are  saved  by  hope.  Bunyan  rightly 
makes  his  Christian  sing  after  each  trying  episode  of  his  history — after  his  fight 
with  Apollyon,  his  s^etting  clear  of  the  Valley  of  the  Shadow  of  Death,  his 
deliverance  from  Vanity  Fair,  and  his  escape  from  Doubting  Castle. 

The  Church  of  God,  even  amid  the  dark  shadows  of  the  Old  Testament  age, 
had  her  times  for  the  use  of  the  harp,  and  every  instrument  of  joy.  There 
was  "a  time  to  laugh  as  well  as  a  time  to  weep."  And  these  times  would  have 
been  far  more  numerous,  and  greatly  more  exultant  liad  there  been  more  true 
penitence,  and  less  relapsing  into  sin  But  no  night  was  so  long  as  entirely  to 
extinguish  the  hope  of  returning  day,  or  so  dark  as  to  put  out  all  the  stars,  or 
so  destructive  in  its  effects  as  to  prevent  the  recovery  of  all  that  is  really 
valuable.  It  is  part  of  God's  arrangement  in  His  Providential  rule  over  this 
sorrowful  world,  to  give  men  songs  to  sing  in  the  night,  perhaps  lest  they 
should  become  demoralised.  Though  there  can  be  no  real  hearty  singing  and 
thorough  enjoyment  without  being  able  to  say  of  God  :  "  He  is  my  God  ! 
though  Thou  wast  angry  with  me.  Thine  anger  is  turned  away."  (Job  xxxv.  10.) 
True  heart-singing  in  the  night  of  trouble  is  exemplified  in  Ps.  xlii.,  Ivii.,  xxii., 
Ixxvii.,  and  cxvi. 

2.  The  duty  of  keeping   God's  works  in  everlasting  remembrance.     The 

object  of  composing  this  ode  was  not  only  to  make  it  the  matter  of  praise  on  a 
single  occasion,  but  especially  to  keep  up  the  memory  of  this  great  deliverance 
to  remote  generations,  for  the  honour  of  the  Divine  name.  The  same  sentiment 
pervades  most  of  the  Davidic  Psalms,  which,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  have  served 
this  purpose  in  the  past.  In  like  manner,  this  song  has  been  the  means  of 
preserving  to  the  Church,  for  many  generations,  a  most  instructive  chapter  of 
God's  doings  Jor  her,  and  His  dealings  with  her,  at  a  critical  stage  of  her 
history.  God's  mighty  acts  are  worthy  of  being  thus  remembered  for  many 
reasons  : — 

(1.)  They  are  marvellously  instructive.  The  two  points  on  which,  for  our 
own  benefit,  it  is  needful  to  have  the  fullest  instruction,  are  God's  character  and 
ways,  and  our  own  character  and  ways.  Instruction  on  these  points  is  of 
permanent  value  ;  and  it  is  the  light  which  is  thrown  upon  these  that  is  specially 
noticed  in  the  Book  of  Psa-lms,  when  the  writers  make  mention  of  God's  mighty 
acts.  What  an  instructive  revelation  is  made  of  man's  character  as  it  is 
exhibited  in  the  times  of  Deborah — the  perversity  of  his  nature  in  so  stubbornly 
taking  tho  wrong  course,  notwithstanding  all  the  Divine  teaching  given,  though 

253 


CHAP.  V.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


go  maii}^  remonstrances  were  used,  so  many  warnings  given,  so  many  chastise- 
ments up  to  this  point  inflicted.  And  after  the  cloud  of  vengeance  had  burst 
on  these  sinners,  how  long  do  they  continue  suffering  bitterly  before  they  will 
turn  to  Him  wlio  smites  thein,  or  acknowledge  their  offence  !  What  tenacity  of 
sin  belongs  to  the  depraved  human  heart !  What  blindness  of  mind  and 
hardness  of  heart !  What  depth  of  alienation  from  God  !  What  infatuation  in 
"kicking  against  the  pricks!"  What  daring  defiance  of  God's  authority! 
What  desecration  of  His  holy  covenant ! 

On  the  other  hand,  what  a  revelation  is  given  of  God's  long-suffering  patience 
in  dealing  with  this  people  !  How  long  does  He  remain  silent  while  they  go  on 
sinning  against  Him  !  We  see  Him  faithfully  warning,  earnestly  entreating, 
and  strongly  expostulating.  We  see  Him  loathe  to  smite  at  all,  and  for  a  long 
time  the  sword  remains  in  the  sheath.  When  at  last  it  must  come  forth,  it  is 
used  at  first  but  lightly  ;  very  reluctantly  the  severity  of  the  stroke  is  increased  ; 
but  the  moment  that  true  penitence  is  shown,  it  is  removed,  and  the  penitent  is 
dealt  with  as  a  child.  Even  when  the  sword,  or  rather  the  rod,  is  used  most 
severely,  it  is  still  "  in  measure  ;  "  it  is  always  to  correct,  and  not  to  destroy, 
or  make  a  full  end.  And  at  the  very  worst,  we  never  see  God  renouncing  His 
character  to  this  people  as  their  covenant  God  !  This  is  the  climax  of  the  whole 
revelation  of  God's  character  made.     How  rich  the  instruction  conveyed  ! 

(2.)  They  are  in  themselves  spectacles  of  great  beauty.  A  thing  of  beauty  is 
a  joy  for  ever.  And  here  the  beauty  is  absolutely  perfect.  The  eye  never 
wearies  with  looking  on  perfection.  The  soul  is  satisfied  with  it,  so  that  it  can 
demand  nothing  more  of  excellence  in  the  object  than  what  it  already  has.  All 
human  works,  however,  at  the  very  best,  are  only  relatively  perfect.  There  is 
something  both  on  the  surface  and  under  the  snrface,  which  indicates  decay, 
defect,  or  alloy.  The  sweetest  music  after  a  time  begins  to  i)all  on  the  ear. 
The  most  exquisite  picture  does  not  always  continue  to  charm  the  eye.  Man's 
works,  when  looked  at  in  different  lights,  will  always  present  some  feature  of 
imperfection.  Not  so  with  the  works  of  God.  The  most  minute,  even 
microscopical  examination,  will  only  reveal  their  absolute  perfection  more  and 
more. 

In  all  these  redemption-works,  on  behalf  of  His  people,  which  God  wrought  in 
the  days  of  the  Judges,  what  a  God-like  manner  of  working  do  we  see  in 
them  all !  How  tame  and  vapid  would  they  all  have  become  if  the  events  and 
means  had  been  left  in  the  hands  of  men  !  Have  they  not  all  a  sacred  touch 
about  them,  which  no  hand  can  give  them  but  God's  own?  What  a  marvellous 
perpetuity  of  freshness  belongs  to  everything  which  bears  that  touch  !  We  read 
the  tales  a  thousand  times,  and  yet  the  interest  continues  fresh.  The  print  of 
the  Divine  hand  on  the  page  preserves  it  so.  How  perfectly  is  every  work  done 
which  God's  hand  undertakes  to  do.  When  that  hand  begins  to  work,  how 
smoothly  does  every  wheel  go  round  to  accomplish  His  purpose  !  What  a 
complete  change  passes  over  the  land  in  an  incredibly  short  space  of  time ! 
There  is  no  hurry  or  bustle,  no  driving  in  hot  haste.  Everything  is  done 
calmly,  with  simplicity,  in  away  to  confound  human  reason,  but  with  irresistible 
efficacy.  The  most  unlikely  instruments  are  chosen  to  do  great  things.  A 
miglity  army  is  utterly  destroyed  by  the  strategy  of  a  woman  ;  and  the  most 
celebrated  general  of  the  age  is  brought  down  to  tlie  dust  of  death  by  the  hand 
of  another  woman  and  an  alien  !  Such  efficiency  can  God  impart  to  the  weakest 
instrumentality,  when  it  so  seems  good  in  His  sight.  He  can  make  everything 
converge  to  carry  out  His  purpose. 

What  a  magnificent  spectacle  of  beauty  there  is  in  the  display  of  God^s 
goodness  to  this  people  I     How  often  did  He  pardon  them  !     How  often  turn 
away  His  anger !     How  patient  in  waiting  for  their  repentance  !     How  long- 
suffering  in  bearing  with  their  provocations !     Each  of  these  features  is  a  perfect 
254 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDOES,  ohap.  v. 


study,  and  the  longer  each  is  studied  the  perfection  of  its  beauty  becomes  more 
and  more  visible.  So  with  the  glorious  display  of  power  made,  which  is 
unapproachable  in  its  grandeur.  The  manifestation  also  of  wisdom  surpasses 
man's  power  to  appreciate  it — of  His  justice,  which  is  "  like  the  great  moun- 
tains " — of  His  faithfulness,  which  "  reacheth  unto  the  clouds  " — and  of  His 
righteousness,  which  "is  very  high."  **  Who  can  utter  the  mighty  acts  of  the 
Lord  ?  Who  can  show  forth  all  His  praise  ?  His  works  are  honourable  and 
glorious  :  they  are  all  done  in  truth  and  uprightness." 

(3.)  They  are  nemr  fully  comprehended.  The  thought  of  God's  own  character 
is  something  too  vast  for  our  minds  to  comprehend.  It  is  not  true  philosophy 
to  take  no  higher  ground,  to  suppose  that  the  human  mind  can  adequately 
comprehend  any  of  the  thorghts  of  the  Infinite  mind;  God  alone  can  compiehend 
Himself.  Hence  God's  plan  of  salvation  is  called  "  a  mystery."  But  so  difficult 
is  it  to  comprehend  it,  that  the  angels  of  God,  so  remarkable  for  tlieir  wisdom, 
have  been  studying  it  with  rapt  interest  through  the  whole  history  of  time,  and 
still  have  not  made  it  out.  The  narrow  mind  of  a  creature  never  can  luUy  grasp 
any  of  the  thoughts  of  God.  Hence  He  must  always  remain,  more  or  less,  the 
Unknown  God.  The  same  grand  attributes  of  character  He  lias  so  often 
presented  to  our  view  we  have  never  yet  fully  comprehended,  and  never  can  ;  so 
that  every  time  we  come  again  to  look  at  the  great  perfections  set  before  us,  we 
feel  the  subject  is  perpetually  fresh,  in  a  greater  or  less  degree.  We  may  be 
always  forming  larger,  and  still  larger,  conceptions  of  God's  majesty,  and  every 
feature  of  His  character,  without  ever  exhausting  the  subject. 

(4.)  Ihey  are  of  such  vast  importance  to  our  interests.  What  an  infinitely 
valuable  privilege  to  have  this  God  for  our  God  ! — one  so  full  of  condescension 
as  to  come  down  and  hold  fellowship,  so  intimately  and  so  freely,  with  men  on 
the  earth — to  ally  Himself  so  closely  with  them — to  permit  such  freedom  of 
access,  and  to  promise  to  do  so  much  in  answer  to  humble  and  believing  prayer  ! 
Wliat  a  great  possession  it  is  for  the  soul  of  man  to  be  able  to  say — the  God  who 
can  do  such  mighty  works  is  my  God,  in  all  the  love  of  His  heart,  and  in  all  the 
strength  of  His  arm.  Whatever  else  is  overlooked,  I  cannot  for  a  moment  forget 
this  grand  truth  that  God  is  mine  1  God's  works  in  the  past  are  all  pledges  for 
the  future,  for  those  whom  He  begins  to  love  He  loves  to  the  end.  A  record  of 
His  mighty  acts  is  thus  virtually  a  treasury  of  exceeding  great  and  precious 
promises.  Every  good  thing  He  has  done  to  any  of  His  people  already  is  a 
proof  that  He  will  repeat  the  same  favour  to  the  same  person,  or  to  any  others 
of  His  people,  when  they  are  in  all  respects  placed  in  the  same  circumstances. 
His  right  hand  never  loses  its  power.  What  it  was  in  the  days  of  Barak  it  is 
still,  and  will  be  to  the  end  of  time.  These  mighty  acts  show  what  resources 
belong  to  our  God,  and  how  much  we  have  to  draw  upon  when  an  emergency 
arises. 

3,  The  high  starting-point  of  the  Divine  Love  never  to  be  forgotten. 
Ver.  4,  5.  Here  the  prophetess  looks  back,  as  the  eye  of  the  godly  Israelite  was 
always  instructed  to  do,  to  the  early  days  of  God's  church,  to  compare  what 
took  place  then  with  the  chequered  ex|)eriences  of  her  own  day.  That  light  of 
the  early  days  was  already  a  good  way  in  the  distance,  but  it  shone  as  a  fixed 
star,  an  object  of  hope  to  the  people  of  God,  in  all  the  future  stages  of  their 
eventful  history.  There  they  saw  the  high  pitch  of  that  Love  at  its  outset,  in 
dealing  with  this  people,  and  they  were  taught  to  regard  it  as  the  love  of  an 
unchangeable  God,  *' whose  gifts  and  calling  are  without  repentance"  or  any 
change  of  purpose.  However  obscured  the  future  manifestations  of  that  love 
might  be,  or  however  mysterious  it  might  seem  in  its  workinL;s,  it  was  always  a 
fact  that  it  was  pitched  high  at  first.  The  march  of  that  people,  as  the  people 
of  God,  was  first  seen  as  they  came  over  the  mountains,  or  along  the  desert  of 
Seir,  and  then  Jehovah  Himself  was  at  their  head,  acknowledging  them  as  His 

255 


OHir.T.  nOMILETIC  COMMENrARY:  JUDGES, 


own  people,  and  showing,  by  mighty  signs  and  wonders,  what  resources  of  power 
He  was  prepared  to  put  forth  on  their  behalf,  'i'he  solid  earth  trembled,  the 
heavens  dropped  rains,  yea  the  clouds  poured  out  a  deluge  in  the  arid  wilderness. 
The  mountains  also  melted  before  His  step.  These  phenomena  only  are  men- 
tioned, owing  to  the  rule  of  severe  brevity  which  is  observed  in  the  text.  But 
they  are  given  as  a  specimen  of  what  actually  occurred.  (See  Ps.  Ixviii.  7-9  ; 
also  Hab.  iii.  12. 

1.  The  sentiment  is  this,  that  as  that  love  was  when  it  first  took  them  hy  the 
handy  so  it  would  ever  continue  to  be  at  all  future  stages  of  their  history.  The 
question  for  them  to  determine  simply  was  how  high  did  that  love  rise  at  its 
beginning — how  did  it  show  itself?  d^vA  to  what  extent  did  it  manifest  itself ? 
The  answer  is  to  be  found  in  the  phenomona  of  Sinai,  when  God  first  formally 
adopted  them  to  Himself  to  be  His  people,  and  showed  how  far  he  was  prepared 
to  go  on  their  behalf — how  much  power  He  kept  in  readiness  to  fulfil  the 
promptings  of  His  love.  The  great  mark  of  His  love  to  these  children  of 
Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob  was,  that  He  made  use  of  them  and  their  history  as 
a  medium  to  reveal  His  own  glorious  character,  in  the  eyes  of  all  the  nations. 
Their  history  was  rendered  illustrious  at  every  step  by  the  glimpses  that  were 
given  of  His  glorious  perfections,  and  from  first  to  last  He  was  known  as  the 
Holy  One  of  Israel !  In  being  thus  brought  so  nigh  to  God  they  were  raised  to 
an  unspeakable  height  above  all  other  nations,  so  that  their  history  at  the 
outset  read  like  no  other  history. 

2.  These  antecedents  were  never  to  he  forgotten.  They  laid  the  foundation  of 
all  future  expectations.  However  low  at  any  time  they  might  sink,  there  was 
always  a  ground  of  hope,  that  they  would  sooner  or  later  rise  to  the  enviable 
height  of  being  a  people  "  beloved  of  the  Lord,  and  dwelling  safely  "  under  the 
shadow  of  His  protecting  wing.  **  For  there  was  none  like  unto  the  God  of 
Jeshuran,  when  He  rode  upon  the  heavens  in  their  help,  and  in  His  excellency 
on  the  sky  !  "  Throughout  the  whole  of  the  hazardous  journey  which  He  led 
them,  when  He  conducted  them  to  their  future  promised  home,  His  language 
was,  "I  bare  you  on  eagles'  wings,  and  brought  you  unto  myself'' 

3.  Hence  when  Israel  was  lying  among  the  potSy  with  soiled  garments,  and 
filthiness  was  in  all  her  skirts,  she  is  yet  called  upon  to  remember  Sinai  and  its 
manifold  glories — the  days  of  her  youth  when  she  stood  forth  as  the  Queen  of 
all  the  nations  of  the  earth  ;  and,  as  she  was  in  those  golden  days,  so  she  was  to 
think  she  might  become  still.  So  should  God's  people  in  every  age  act.  They 
are  to  look  at  the  terms  on  which  God  enters  into  covenant  with  all  who  truly 
repent  and  believe  the  Gospel.  However  low  they  may  sink  under  the  trials  and 
afflictions  of  this  life,  they  must  never  forget  that  they  are  **  the  sous  of  God" — 
and  are  therefore  **  heirs  of  God,  and  joint  heirs  with  Christ " — that  all  which  the 
promises  of  God  contain  is  theirs — theirs  by  good  legal  right — that  all  the  titles 
spoken  of  in  the  Gospel  are  theirs,  all  the  privileges,  all  the  hopes  and  prospects, 
all  the  immeasurable  advantage  of  being  the  brethren  of  the  Son  of  God,  all  the 
infinitely  valuable  possession  of  having  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God  to  dwell  in  the 
heart  as  His  proper  home — that  all  these  unspeakably  precious  things  are  theirs  ; 
and  though  concealed  as  yet  from  the  eye  of  the  world,  that  it  wiU  not  be  possible 
long  to  conceal  such  possessions ;  and  when  they  come  out,  their  possessor  will 
be  elevated  to  a  throne  in  the  heavens,  and  will  spend  a  glorious  life,  **  rejoicing 
with  joy  unspeakable,  and  full  of  glory." 

4.  Remember  the  starting-point — is  the  exhortation  addressed  to  every  soul 
that  embraces  Christ  as  its  Saviour,  in  all  the  future  stages  of  its  history.  That 
love  which  redeemed  you,  and  called  you  by  name  ;  which  brought  you  out 
of  darkness  into  light ;  which  first  you  saw  bleeding  on  a  cross,  bearing  the 
weight  of  Divine,    not   merely    human,  wrath   on    your   account,  and  which 

256 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES.  chap  ▼. 


j>rocured  for  you  tlie  means  of  getting  the  pardon  of  every  sin,  and 
acceptance  before  God  as  righteous  ;  that  love  which  presented  to  you  God's 
highest  possession — His  own  Son  in  human  form,  that  it  might  become  your 
possession ;  that  love,  as  you  first  met  it,  is  always  to  be  carefully  remembered 
as  the  measure  of  the  kindness  which  the  soul  may  always  expect  to  receive 
at  the  hands  of  the  God  to  whom  it  is  reconciled.  When  God  gives  Christ, 
He  gives  Himself  He  becomes  a  God  to  the  receiver  of  Christ.  He  opens 
out  His  glorious  perfections,  and  says,  "  Having  given  so  much  in  making  my 
first  gift,  I  will  now  keep  back  notliing."  There  is  the  fountain  out  of  which 
the  streams  of  your  souls*  supplies  are  for  ever  to  flow.  And  when  future 
and  further  wilderness  journeys  are  to  be  made,  remember  the  Rock  you  met 
with  at  the  beginning  of  the  way,  and  form  your  expectations  from  what 
you  saw  and  experienced  then.  The  streams  may  rise  as  high  as  the 
fountain  head.  Hii^her  they  do  not  need  to  rise.  There  will  be  consistency 
in  the  love  that  follows  thee  all  the  way ;  for  "  I  am  the  Lord  thy  God 
from  the  land  of  Egypt" 

What  a  comforting  memory  for  the  Christian  pilgrim  to  carry  in  his  bosom 
as  he  pursues  his  weary  journey,  often  finding  **  the  journey  to  be  too  great 
for  him,"  and  ''his  soul  much  discouraged  because  of  the  way  1"  God  never 
lorgets  the  first  high  pitch  of  His  love,  but  will  from  time  to  time  go  as 
high  again  in  its  manifestations,  to  prove  that,  notwithstanding  its  being 
occasionally  obscured  by  clouds  of  sin.  He  yet  really  loves  with  an  everlasting 
love. 

4.  The  desolation  produced  by  departure  from  God.  Vers.  6-11.  From  the 
days  of  Eve  and  downwards,  departure  from  God  ever  leads  to  a  great  fall. 
From  that  cause,  how  soon  did  every  leaf  in  paradise  wither  1  and  how 
quickly  did  paradise  itself  disappear  from  the  earth  !  Here  the  langnage — 
"  they  forsook  the  Lord " — is  the  constant  refrain  in  the  melancholy  dirge  of 
Israel's  history.  And  now,  through  Deborah,  as  the  mouthpiece  of  sinning 
Israel  in  her  day,  we  have  confession  made  of  the  terrible  downfall  from  the 
most  exalted  prosperity  to  the  lowest  adversity,  through  departure  from  the 
living  God.  The  enemy  is  seen  coming  in  like  a  flood,  and  overrunning  the 
land.  The  happiest  land  under  heaven  becomes  the  most  miserable.  Her 
tale  is  meant  for  posterity,  as  well  as  the  time  then  passing,  and  she  fixes 
the  date.  She  writes  the  history  of  her  own  times — the  times  of  her  youth, 
but  which  she  lived  long  enough,  to  be  the  means  under  God  of  changing  into 
something  bright  and  glorious.  Distress  unexampled  prevailed.  A  weighty 
incubus  pressed  down  every  energy.  The  humiliation  of  sin  was  complete. 
For— 

(1.)  There  was  no  liberty.  The  Israelite  could  not  freely  walk  through  his 
own  country.  That  land,  where  formerly  he  was  accustomed  to  sit  under  his 
vine  and  his  fig-tree,  none  making  him  afraid,  had  now  become  his  prison. 
"  The  public  roads  were  unoccupied.  They  that  travelled  at  all  skulked  along 
the  by-paths."  What  an  expressive  history  have  we  here  in  a  single  line  ! 
Those  whom  the  Lord  had  made  free  were  now  become  slaves.  The  inhabitants 
were  deprived  of  the  use  of  their  country,  so  that  all  business  had  practically 
come  to  a  stand-still.  Their  departure  from  God  had  led  to  His  departure 
from  them  ;  and  they  had  now  to  reckon  on  their  best  friend  as  become  their 
most  dreadful  enemy.  There  can  be  no  neutrality.  If  God  is  not  for  us,  we 
will  soon  find  He  is  against  us.     "  If  we  forsake  Him,  He  will  cast  us  off." 

(2.)  Ihey  led  a  life  of  danger.  They  could  not  even  go  to  the  wells  for 
water  to  drink.  Knowing  the  necessity  of  their  frequently  being  obliged  to  go 
there  for  supplies  of  the  refreshing  liquid  in  that  land  of  drought,  the  archers 
planted  themselves  in  the  thickets  around  these  wells ;  and  it  was  generally  at 

m  257 


CHAP.  T.  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDOBS. 


the  risk  of  robbery,  or  even  death,  that  the  precious  boon  could  be  gained 
Indeed,  the  enemy  might  appear  at  any  hour,  or  at  any  point,  all  over  the  land. 
From  unexpected  quarters  he  might  descend  without  a  moment's  warning, 
like  the  hawk  swooping  down  on  the  dove,  and  no  safety  to  life  or  property 
could  be  relied  on  anywhere.  It  was  a  reign  of  terror.  It  was  an  enemy  whose 
tender  mercies  were  cruel.  The  old  serpent  that  had  been  scotched,  not  killed, 
now  reared  its  head,  and  darted  its  venom,  against  the  hand  that  was  once  raised 
against  it.  Instances,  indeed,  were  of  daily  occurrence  to  show  what  Canaan itish 
malice  could  do  in  retaliation  for  the  past  attempts  which  Israel  made  to 
destroy  them. 

When  a  man  forsakes  his  God,  and  walks  after  the  lust  of  his  own  heart, 
dangers  quickly  rise  up  around  him.  His  cry  is,  "  Lord,  how  are  they  increased 
that  trouble  me  I  how  many  rise  up  against  me  !  "  On  the  other  hand,  "  when 
a  man's  ways  please  the  Lord,  He  maketh  even  his  enemies  to  be  at  peace  with 
him." 

(3.)  'I  hey  led  a  life  of  degradation.  They  were  in  the  position  of  a  people 
trampled  down,  and  unable  to  help  themselves,  while  no  one  cared  to  come  to 
their  assistance.  When  they  went  abroad  at  all,  tliey  durst  not  look  the  enemy 
in  the  face,  they  had  to  skulk  along  in  the  by-patlis.  They  made  their  most 
innocent  visits  furtively.  They  had  to  snatch  the  most  common  blessings  of 
life  by  stealth.  If  their  enemies  could  have  prevented  it,  they  would  have  been 
deprived  of  the  very  air  and  light  of  heaven  ! — 0,  sin  is  a  hard  master !  All  its 
service  is  a  '*  service  with  rigour."   **  The  way  of  transgressors  is  hard." 

(4.)  A  stop  was  put  to  the  industries  of  life.  Trade  ceased  on  the  public 
highways.  There  could  be  no  commerce.  Intercourse  of  one  part  of  the 
country  with  another  was  completely  blocked.  The  land  too  must  have  ceased 
to  be  tilled,  and  the  ordinary  harvests  would  be  nowhere.  Famine  must  have 
begun  to  stare  them  in  the  face.  The  acquisition  of  wealth  too  would  be 
impossible,  and,  in  the  case  of  the  great  majority,  the  means  of  supporting  life 
would  be  reduced  to  a  minimum. 

(5.)  There  was  no  peaceful  enjoyment  of  life.  "  The  villages  "  or  unwalled 
towns  ceased  out  of  the  land.  Those  models  of  peaceful  homes  which  are 
scattered  everywhere  over  our  own  land,  whether  in  the  valley,  on  the  plain,  or 
on  the  mountain-side,  especially  in  sequestered  districts,  had  one  after  one  in 
that  country  to  be  forsaken,  because  of  the  ruthless  assaults  made  on  their 
inoffensive  occupants  by  men  of  marauding  instincts.  Where  pillage,  and 
possibly  wanton  barbarities  became  general,  it  was  impossible  to  live  without 
protection.  Hence,  villages,  hamlets,  and  country  districts  were  deserted,  and 
the  refuge  of  walled  towns  was  universally  sought.  The  whole  nation  had  to 
live  in  hidingy  or  shut  up  within  walls  and  gates.  Quietude  throughout  the 
land  was  destroyed.  The  pleasures  of  home-life  were  unknown.  There  was  no 
home  at  home. 

(6.)  There  was  no  repose  Jrom  trouble.  It  was  a  state  of  perpetual  alarm 
The  enemy's  grasp  was  on  the  nation's  throat.  "  War  was  brought  to  the  very 
gates."  They  had  "  to  light  for  their  altars  and  their  firesides."  The  enemy 
was  a  stranger  to  pity.  The  spectacles  of  family  suffering  that  ever  met  the 
eye  made  no  impression  on  hearts  of  stone  ;  and  there  was  no  relaxation  of  the 
iron  grip.  From  day  to  day,  and  all  the  year  round,  thus  it  was  with  poor 
crushed  Israel,  whose  life  was  one  continual  moan.  It  was  not  life,  but  a  living 
death.  The  dreams  of  night,  and  the  waking  realities  of  day,  spoke  only  ot 
wretchedness  ;  while  a  dull  leaden  cloud  of  despair  seemed  to  close  over  their 
national  prospects  for  ever. 

(7.)  To  crown  ally  there  was  a  general  spirit  of  trembling.     The  manhood 
was  taken  out  of  them,  and  no  wonder.     They  had  become  a  nation  of  cowards. 
There  was  panic  everywhere.     Not  a  single  hand  was  raised  to  grasp  a  shield  or 
258 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES.  ohap.  1^. 


s^ear  among  so  many  as  forty  thousand  of  Israel.  It  was  an  absolute 
prostration  of  the  national  energies.  They  were  chicken-hearted,  crestfallen 
cowed  and  spiritless — a  community  of  poltroons  and  dastards. 

"  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  had  departed  from  them,  and  an  evil  spirit  from  the 
Lord  troubled  them."  To  depart  from  the  Lord  and  **  observe  lyini;  vanities, 
is  to  forsake  our  own  mercies."  When  the  Lord  departs  from  a  soul,  it  becomes 
stricken  with  fear,  and  trembling  seizes  upon  it.  "The  strong  man  becomes  as 
tow."  The  mighty  is  "  clothed  with  trembling."  Witness  the  great  ones  from 
whom  God  has  departed  (1  Sam.  xiii.  7  ;  Dan.  v.  6  ;  Acts  xxiv.  25).  What  a 
striking  commentary  does  this  pass  of  Israel's  history  read  on  the  sure  words  of 
prophecy  uttered,  respecting  the  evil  result  of  their  forsaking  the  Lord  God  of 
their  fathers !  **  77ie  Lord  shall  give  thee  a  trembling  hearty  and  soi^ow  of 
mind.  Thy  life  shall  hang  in  doubt  before  thee,  and  thou  shalt  fear  day  and 
nighty  and  shalt  have  none  assurance  of  thy  life.  In  the  morning  thou  shalt 
say,  would  God  it  were  even  I  and  at  even  thou  shalt  say,  would  God  it  were 
morning  I  for  the  fear  of  thine  hearty  and  for  the  sight  of  thine  eyes." 

5.  Thanksgiving  for  a  great  Deliverance.  Vers.  1-11.  This  is  the  entire 
purpose  of  the  song.  When  the  deliverance  had  been  accomplished,  "then  sang 
Deborah,"  etc.  And  the  subject  of  this  strong  heart-utterance  is  stated  to  be 
"  to  praise  the  Lord  for  the  avenging  of  Israel " — The  singer  is  most  explicit  in 
stating  the  object  in  view.  **  I  will  sing  unto  the  Lord — I  will  sing  praise  to  the 
Lord  God  of  Israel."  Again  she  breaks  out,  "  Bless  ye  the  Lord."  The  people 
who  are  delivered  "  shall  rehearse  the  righteous  acts  of  the  Lord,"  etc.  It  was 
customary  for  the  sweet  singers  of  Israel,  with  David  in  the  foreground,  to  call 
on  the  whole  people  at  fitting  times  to  give  thanks  to  the  God  of  Israel  for  His 
great  mercies  to  His  people  (Ps.  cv.  1,  2  ;  cvi.  1,  2  ;  cvii.  1-3  ;  cxi.  1,2;  cxviii. 
1-4).  Indeed,  the  whole  Book  of  Psalms  is  a  prolonged  exercise  of  thanksgiving 
and  praise  to  God  for  mercies  received,  along  with  confession  of  sin,  and  petition 
for  Divine  blessings.  Such  "  praise  is  comely  "  in  God's  redeemed  ones.  The 
merest  glance  at  God's  acts  towards  those  whom  He  has  delivered  from  sin  and 
wrath  justifies  the  expectation  of  never-ceasing  gratitude.  "  While  I  live  I  will 
praise  the  Lord  ;  I  will  sing  praises  to  my  God  while  I  have  any  being."  The 
obedience  of  the  Christian  life,  as  regards  means,  springs  entirely  from  this 
source  ;  for  it  is  out  of  gratitude  for  the  great  blessings  of  redemption,  so  freely 
and  richly  bestowed,  that  every  believer  runs  in  the  wa^s  of  new  obedience. 
The  gratitude  shown  here  was  genuine  and  acceptable  to  God,  because  : — 

(1.)  It  was  spontaneous.  It  was  not  required  by  any  command  given,  but  it 
came  unbidden  from  hearts  overflowing  with  thankful  feelings  for  the  mercies 
received.  This  spontaneous  character  of  the  thanksgiving  made  it  come  up  as 
a  savour  of  sweet  incense  unto  the  Lord;  for  gratitude,  if  not  a  free-will  offering, 
is  nothing.  In  the  present  case,  it  was  full-hearted  and  fresh  ;  it  was  warm  and 
enthusiastic;  it  was  suitable  for  the  occasion,  and  thoroughly  natural.  It  was 
altogether  up  to  the  mark ;  for  the  heart  comes  out  in  every  line,  and,  though 
more  than  three  thousand  years  have  passed  since  this  anthem  was  fir^t  sung,  it 
seems  as  fervid  and  glowing  as  if  it  had  been  sung  but  yesterday. 

{a).  N ature  of  gratitude.  Gratitude  is  love  responding  to  love.  It  is  the 
magnetism  of  love.  When  a  generous  heart  magnetises  another  heart  with 
something  of  its  own  nature,  the  effect  comes  out  in  the  form  ot"  gratitude, 

"  Which  makes  each  generous  impulse  of  our  nature, 
Warm  into  ecstasy." 

It  is  the  offspring  of  goodness;  the  acknowledgment  of  love's  conquests;  the 
homage  which  the  heart  presents  at  the  footstool  of  loving  kindness.  It  is 
something  more  excellent  than  ordinary  obedience.     The  latter  is  virtue  in  the 

259 


CHAP.  ▼.  nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES, 


positive  degree  ;  gratitude  is  the  same  in  the  superlative  degree  of  comparison. 
In  ordinary  obedience,  the  will  is  tranquil  and  moderate  in  its  action  ;  in 
gratitude,  it  is  enthusiastic  and  overflowing. 

{h).  Hence  the  superior  excellence  of  the  kind  oj  obedience  which  the  gospel  oj 
Christ  produces.  No  obedience  is  so  free,  for  it  springs  entirely  from  the  heart's 
own  promptings.  None  is  so  powerful,  for  it  has  in  it  the  full  force  of  the  will. 
None  is  so  unconstrained,  for  it  needs  no  command  to  call  it  forth.  None  is  so 
sure  in  its  action,  for  it  is  instinctive  and  irrepressible,  None  is  so  living  and 
buoyant,  for  the  deepest  and  finest  strings  of  the  soul  are  touched,  and  the 
highest  electric  life,  of  which  it  is  susceptible,  is  elicited,  flence  no  offerings 
are  more  acceptable  to  God  than  the  outi)ourings  of  grateful  hearts.  This  is 
the  kind  of  worship  rendered  in  heaven  by  the  redeemed  ones  before  the  throne  ; 
and  no  incense  is  so  grateful  and  precious,  as  the  boundless  gratitude  which  every 
one  of  that  vast  company  expresses  in  honour  of  the  Redeemer  s  name.  Even 
among  fellowmen  nothing  is  more  pleasant  to  receive  than  genuine  gratitude  ; 

"  Sweet  is  the  breath  of  vernal  shower 
The  bees*  collected  treasures  sweet, 
Sweet  music's  melting  fall,  but  sweeter  yet 
The  still  small  voice  of  gratitude." 

(2).  It  was  religious.  This  is  something  far  deeper  than  patriotism.  That 
Deborah  and  Barak  with  all  the  willing-hearted  volunteers  whom  they  led  were 
sterling  patriots,  we  cannot  for  a  moment  doubt.  The  very  dust  of  their 
country  was  dear  to  them,  and  had  that  been  the  only  impulse  under  which  they 
acted,  everyone  in  his  place  would,  we  believe,  have  well  earned  the  reputation 
of  a  hero.  But  they  felt  they  were  fighting  for  the  cause  of  their  God  on  the 
earth,  and  the  promotion  of  His  glory  in  the  eyes  of  the  nations,  much  more 
than  their  country's  renown,  was  the  motive  that  stirred  their  hearts.  Deeper 
was  the  patriotism  of  the  Jew  than  the  representative  of  any  other  nationality, 
for  his  country  was  a  gift  specially  bestowed  by  the  hand  of  his  God  in  token  of 
very  peculiar  favour  (Gen.  xvii.  4-8).  It  was  therefore  a  sacred  land,  and  on  it 
the  Divine  blessing  was  supposed  continually  to  rest,  unless  in  so  far  as  it  might 
be  prevented  by  the  people's  sins.  It  was  the  chosen  theatre  for  the  display  of 
the  Divine  perfections  on  the  earth.  It  was  occupied  by  God's  church — the 
people  with  whom  He  was  in  covenant  relationship  as  His  own  people.  It  was 
therefore  *'  God's  own  land."  (Ps.  Ixxxv.  1 ;  Ixxix.  1).  It  was  a  "  Holy  Land." 
The  patriotism  of  the  Israelite  therefore  had  necessarily  much  of  the  religious 
element  in  it,  in  a  maimer  and  on  grounds,  which  the  member  of  no  other  nation 
had.  Yet  it  was  ever  the  glory  of  the  Divine  name,  to  which  the  true  people 
of  God  had  regard,  as  that  which  was  most  dear  to  them  in  all  the  anxieties 
they  cherished,  and  in  all  the  sacrifices  they  made.  Their  thanksgiving  was 
strictly  a  religious  act. 

(3).  It  proceeded  from  a  due  sense  of  the  magnitude  of  the  favour  shown. — 
Knowledge  to  appreciate  the  excellence  of  the  Divine  blessings,  and  the  loving- 
kindness  of  God  in  best(;wing  them,  is  ever  regarded  in  Scripture  as  a  root 
principle  of  religious  character.  "  Whoso  is  wise,  and  will  observe  these  things, 
even  they  shall  understand  the  loving-kindness  of  the  Lord."  (Ps.  Ixiv.  9  ;  cxi. 
2  ;  xxxiv.  8).  It  is  set  forth  as  one  of  the  chief  barriers  to  all  real  improvement, 
that  the  professing  people  of  God  were  so  often  '*  a  people  of  no  understanding — 
sottish  children — my  people  are  destroyed  for  lack  of  knowledge."  (Comp.  Ps. 
Ixxiii.  20,  21 ;  xciv.  7-10;  xxxii.  8,  9  ;  Ixxviii.  34,  35,  also  11,  42  ;  and  Isa. 
xi.  3). 

That  the  faithful  Israelites  fully  appreciated  the  value  of  the  Divine  favour 

shown  them  in  this  deliverance  appears  in  the  whole  character  of  the  effusion. 

This  is  proved  indeed  by  the  very  fact,  that  it  should  have  been  determined  to 

hand  down  the  memory  of  the  event  in  the  form  of  a  national  ode  to  be  sung  to 

260 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES.  chap.  v. 


latest  generations.  The  stirring  nature  of  the  composition  too  shows  not  only  a 
state  of  warmth,  but  even  of  exultation.  Such  appreciative  worship  is  in  the 
highest  degree  glorifying  to  God.     I'hey  regarded  this  deliverance  as  : — 

(a).  Coming  from  God's  own  hand.  The  nation  was  so  spirit  broken,  that  no 
thought  of  resistance  arose  among  the  people  themselves.  The  idea  of  raising 
a  breakwater,  to  the  over-running  flood  came  from  Deborah,  and  to  her  as  a 
prophetess  of  the  Lord,  it  was  communicated  by  the  God  into  whose  ear  so  many 
penitential  confessions  on  the  one  hand,  and  cries  for  help  on  the  other,  came  up. 
**  His  soul  was  grieved  for  the  misery  of  Israel."  It  was  His  Spirit  that  rested 
on  Deborah,  and  that  passed  from  Deborah  to  Barak — and  from  these  again, 
first  to  the  princes,  and  then  to  all  the  willing  ones  among  the  people.  The 
scheme  of  obtaining  emancipation  by  means  of  a  battle  was  of  the  Lord.  The 
proclamation  to  assemble  for  the  fight  was  His — the  place  of  rendezvous  was  of 
His  appointment,  and  the  rule  to  be  followed  in  selecting  soldiers  for  the  army, 
in  clioosing  only  the  willing-minded,  was  expressly  ordered  by  Him.  The  spirit 
of  dauntless  courage  and  assured  confidence  ot  success,  which  animated  the 
little  army  of  Barak,  was  infused  into  them  by  Him  ;  while  the  mighty  forces  of 
nature  which  awoke  so  suddenly,  and  so  marvellously,  against  the  formidable 
host  of  Sisera,  producing  an  absolute  panic  among  their  ranks,  were  all  arrayed 
against  tliem  by  the  God  of  Israel.  Thus  it  ever  is  with  the  truly  pious.  They 
see  God's  wisdom  planning  and  directing,  and  God's  hand  controlling  and  bending 
all  things  to  carry  out  His  own  mind  and  will.  And  to  Him,  in  every  event,  they 
ascribe  all  the  praise. 

{b).  They  regarded  it  as  most  unexpected.  "  If  the  Lord  should  open  the 
windows  of  heaven,  might  such  a  thing  be  ?  '*  Nothing  seemed  more  remote 
from  all  bounds  of  possibility  than  the  lifting  up  of  the  heavy  incubus  which 
now  pressed  on  the  hearts  and  shoulders  of  the  people.  The  population 
generally  must  have  been  terribly  thinned  (ver.  13),  and  the  male  population 
appear  to  have  been  degraded  to  the  condition  of  slaves,  while  all  spirit  of 
heroism  seemed  to  have  died  out  in  Israel.  It  was  a  sky  full  of  dull  leaden 
clouds,  and  not  a  rift  could  be  seen  anywhere  to  relieve  the  gloom. 

(c).  Ihey  felt  it  was  most  opportune.  Things  were  going  from  bad  to  worse. 
It  was  impossible  that  the  energies  of  the  nation  could  much  longer  bear  the 
strain  to  which  they  were  put.  When  all  commerce  had  disappeared,  and  the 
fields  had  practically  ceased  to  be  tilled  ;  when  the  whole  people  were  shut  up  as 
prisoners  within  walled  towns,  or  lived  in  hiding  among  rocks  and  caves,  with 
the  most  precarious  means  of  subsistence,  it  was  inevitable  that  starvation  should 
soon  have  come  over  all  the  homes  of  Israel.  The  sands  of  the  national  glass 
were  fast  running  out,  and  that  once  mighty  people,  before  whom  all  the  nations 
of  Canaan  fell,  were  on  the  verge  of  becoming  extinguished,  through  the 
want  of  the  means  of  subsistence,  and  the  savage  cruelties  of  an  iron-hearted 
tyrant.  ''  If  it  had  not  been  the  Lord  who  was  on  our  side,  now  might  Israel  say, 
when  men  rose  up  against  us,  then  they  had  swallowed  us  up  quick  whe^i  their 
wrath  was  kindled  against  us  ;  the  waters  had  overwhelmed  us,  the  stream  had 
gone  over  our  soul ;  then  the  proud  waters  had  gone  over  our  soul.  Blessed  be 
the  Lord,  who  hath  not  given  us  a  prey  to  their  teeth.  Our  soul  is  escaped  as  a 
bird  out  of  the  snare  of  the  fowler." 

(d).  They  realised  it  as  most  complete.  The  defeat  of  Sisera  was  not  only  a 
rout— it  was  a  ruin.  The  elements  of  nature  were  awakened  against  them  in 
such  fury,  that  it  was  impossible  for  them  for  a  moment  to  stand  their  ground, 
It  was  as  if  the  chatf  should  try  to  make  headway  against  the  whirlwind.  They 
fell  before  the  sword  of  Barak  and  his  heroes  as  sheep  decoyed  to  the  slaughter. 
It  became  proverbial  in  the  songs  of  Israel  to  say,  "  Do  to  them  as  to  Sisera,  a.^ 
to  Jabin  at  the  brook  of  Kishon  ;  who  perished  at  Endor ;  they  became  as  dung 
for  the  earth."    "  The  river  of  Kishon  swept  them  away.    That  ancient  river — 

261 


CHAP.  T.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES. 


the  river  Kishon."  The  result  of  this  overthrow  was  not  only  to  weaken 
perceptibly  the  power  of  the  oppressor,  but  absolutely  to  extinguish  it.  The 
sky  of  Israel  was  cleared  in  a  single  day.  Not  a  cloud — not  a  speck — remained. 
Israel  was  free  as  on  the  day  when  they  stood  on  the  farther  shores  of  the  Red 
Sea  and  saw  the  Egyptians,  their  oppressors,  dead  on  the  strand.  "  The  Lord's 
work  is  a  perfect  work." 

(<?),  'Ihis  deliverance  was  reckoned  invaluable.  It  not  only  put  a  stop  to  the 
pining  away  of  the  nation,  and  acted  as  a  balm  to  their  patriotic  feelings,  but  it 
preserved  the  existence  of  the  only  people  in  all  the  eartli,  that  were  worshippers 
of  the  true  God,  and  bore  witness  to  His  name  among  the  nations.  Had  that 
people  .  jen  swept  away,  the  whole  earth  would  have  presented  an  unrelieved 
spectacle  of  idol  worship.  Degenerate  as  Israel  had  become,  there  was  still  a 
remnant  among  them  who  ''feared  the  Lord  and  thought  upon  His  name."  For 
the  sake  of  the  few  He  would  not  destroy  the  many.  Also,  the  system  of 
sanctuary  service,  which  had  been  established  among  this  people,  still  continued, 
though  greatly  neglected  and  overlapped  with  many  incongruities.  It  was  of 
vital  importance  to  preserve  that  system.  And  of  the  utmost  consequence  it 
was  to  keep  up  a  channel,  by  which  God's  truth  and  God's  promises  might  be 
handed  down  to  latest  generations.  Thus  the  gratitude  of  these  pious  singers 
sprung  from  a  due  appreciation  of  the  greatness  of  the  mercy  shown  by  this 
deliverance. 

(4.)  It  was  a  voluntary  tribute  of  the  hearths  love.  There  was  no  constraint 
put  on  any  one  to  get  up  such  an  effusion  as  this.  No  command  was  issued. 
It  rose  unbidden  from  hearts  that  felt  it  to  be  a  relief  to  pour  out  their  feelings 
in  thanksgiving.  Every  singer  seemed  to  say,  "  Bless  the  Lord^  0,  my  soul; 
and  all  that  is  within  me  bless  Ills  holy  name  !  Bless  the  Lord,  0,  my  soul,  and 
forget  not  all  His  benefits,"  "  My  mouth  shall  praise  Thee  with  joyful  lips — 
I  will  praise  Thee  with  my  whole  heart.  I  will  remember  Thy  wonders  of  old  ; 
1  will  meditate  on  all  Thy  works  and  talk  of  Thy  doings."  *'  How  excellent  is 
Thy  loving  kindness,  0  God  !  Tiow  precious  are  Thy  thoughts  to  me.  How  great 
is  the  sum  of  them"  etc.  And  again  he  says, '^/ti^zY/ jt?ra2S^  Thee  among  the 
people  ;  I  will  sing  unto  Thee  among  the  nations.  For  Thy  mercy  is  great  unto 
the  heavens,  and  thy  faithfulness  reacheth  unto  the  clouds.  Remember  the 
marvellous  works  that  He  hath  done — His  wonders  and  the  judgmeiits  of  His 
mouth."  **  /  love  the  Lord  because  Tie  hath  heard  my  voice  and  my  supplication. 
Blessed  be  my  rock  \  the  God  of  my  salvation  be  exalted"  **  iShe  loved  much; 
for  to  whom  much  is  forgiven  the  same  loveth  much." 

(5.)  It  was  the  confession  of  a  deep  obligation.  The  people  of  that  day  felt 
it  was  as  life  from  the  dead  to  have  so  great  a  deliverance  wrought  for  them. 
Between  the  murky  gloom  of  the  midnight  sky,  and  the  brightness  of  noon  day 
the  contrast  was  not  greater,  than  the  changed  face  of  things  produced  by  the 
destruction  of  the  oppressor,  from  what  the  land  groaned  under  before.  All 
that  realised  it  seemed  prepared  to  say  :  "  What  shall  we  render  unto  the  Lord 
for  all  His  benefits  towards  us  ?  Who  remembered  us  in  our  low  estate,  for  His 
mercy  endureth  Jor  ever ;  and  redeemed  us  from  our  enemies,  for  His  mercy 
endureth  for  ever  I  "  "  0  Lord,  1  am  thy  servant ;  truly  1  am  thy  servant — 
thou  hast  loosed  my  bonds."  **  1  will  publish  with  the  voice  of  thanksgiving  and 
tell  oj  all  His  wonderful  works"  "  We  will  bless  the  Lord  from  this  time  forth, 
and  for  evermore."  "  I  will  mention  the  loving  kindnesses  of  the  Lord,  and  the 
praises  of  the  Lord,  according  to  all  that  the  Lord  hath  bestowed  on  us,  and  His 
great  goodness  toward  the  house  of  Israel,  which  He  hath  bestowed  on  them 
according  to  His  mercies,  and  according  to  the  multitude  oJ  His  loving 
kindnesses" 

Remarks.    1.  Gratitude  is  often  at  a  great  discount.    One  says :  "  We  write 
262 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES.  chap.  ▼. 


our  blessings  on  the  water,  but  our  distresses  on  the  rock."  "  There  was  a  little 
city  and  few  men  within  it ;  and  there  came  a  great  king  against  it  and  besieged 
it,  and  built  bulwarks  against  it.  Now  there  was  found  in  it  a  poor,  wise  man, 
who  by  his  wisdom  delivered  the  city  ;  yet  no  man  remembered  that  same  poor 
man."  As  the  Dead  Sea  drinks  in  the  Jordan,  and  is  never  the  sweeter,  and  as 
the  ocean  receives  all  the  rivers,  yet  is  never  the  fresher ;  so  men  receive  the 
river  of  God's  daily  mercies,  and  yet  remain  entirely  insensible  of  them,  and 
ungrateful  for  them.  The  heath  in  the  desert  needs  rain  far  more  than  the 
water-lily.  But  let  the  showers  come  down  upon  the  heath — there  is  no  motion, 
no  sign  that  the  shower  is  welcomed,  or  is  working.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
moment  the  rain  begins  to  fall  on  the  water-lily,  though  it  is  rooted  in  water, 
and  has  its  chief  element  in  it,  its  leaves  seem  to  be  clapping  their  hands,  and 
the  whole  plant  rejoices  in  the  falling  of  the  rain. 

2.  Necessity  of  constant  thanksgiving.  It  was  a  beautiful  tradition  among 
the  Jews  :  That  when  God  created  the  world,  He  asked  the  angels  what  they 
thought  of  the  work  of  His  hands.  One  of  them  replied,  that  it  was  so  vast  and 
so  perfect,  that  only  one  thing  was  wanting  to  it,  namely,  that  there  should  be 
created  a  clear,  mighty,  and  harmonious  voice,  which  should  fill  all  the  quarters 
of  the  world  incessantly  with  its  sweet  sound,  day  and  night,  to  offer  up  thaid^s- 
giving  to  its  Maker  for  His  imcomparable  blessings.  "In  everything  give 
thanks,  for  this  is  the  will  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus  concerning  you."  "  Give 
thanks  always  for  all  things  unto  God  and  the  Father,  in  the  name  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  submit  yourselves  one  to  another  in  the  fear  of  God." 
Ps.  cxlv.  2  ;  XXXV.  28  ;  Ixxi.  8,  15,  24 ;  cxvi,  2  ;  civ.  33  ;  xxxiv.  1  ;  Ixxxi.  6. 

3.  Manner  of  showing  gratitude.  "  A  rich  youth  in  Rome  had  suffered 
from  a  dangerous  illness.  On  recovering  his  health,  his  heart  was  filled  with 
gratitude,  and  he  exclaimed,  *  0  thou  all-sufficient  Creator !  could  man 
recompense,  thee,  how  willingly  would  I  give  thee  all  my  possessions  T  Hermas, 
the  herdsman,  heard  this,  and  said  to  the  rich  youth,  *  All  good  gifts  come  from 
above  ;  thither  thou  canst  send  nothing.  Come,  follow  me.'  He  took  him  to  a 
hut  where  was  nothing  but  misery  and  wretchedness.  The  father  lay  on  a  bed 
of  sickness,  the  mother  wept,  the  children  were  destitute  of  clothing,  and  crying 
for  bread.  Hermas  said,  'See  here  an  altar  for  the  sacrifice  ;  see  here  the 
Lord's  brethren  and  representatives.'  The  youth  assisted  them  bountifully  ; 
and  the  poor  people  called  him  an  angel  of  God.  Hermas  smiled  and  said, 
*  Thus  turn  always  thy  grateful  countenance,  first  to  heaven  and  then  to  earth.' " 
[Krummac/ier.] 

4.  The  true  spirit  of  gratitude.  Two  elements  especially  enter  into  this 
spirit.  The  one  is  to  have  low  thoughts  of  ones  self.  This  was  exemplified  by 
Jacob  when  he  said,  "  I  am  less  than  the  least  of  all  thy  mercies."  The 
other  is  to  realise,  that  as  guilty  creatures,  we  deserve  wrath  not  favours. 
(1  Tim.  i.  12-16.)  A  mind  that  is  educated  to  gratitude,  and  has  become 
healthfully  sensitive  to  manifestations  of  the  Divine  goodness  thus  expresses 
itself : — 

**  When  all  thy  mercies,  O  my  God, 
My  rising  soul  surveys, 
Transported  with  the  view  I'm  lost, 
In  wonder,  love  and  praise." 

"  Looking  in  through  the  patched,  broken  window  of  an  humble  cabin  one 
day,  a  minister  saw  a  poor  gray-haired,  bent  son  of  toil,  at  a  rude  table,  with 
hands  raised  to  God,  and  his  eyes  fixed  on  some  crusts  of  bread  with  a  cup  of 
water,  in  all  humility  and  contentment  exclaiming.  This,  and  Jesus  Christ  U>o  I 
This,  and  Jesus  Christ  too ! "    \ Guthrie J\ 

263 


CHAP.  V. 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


COMMENTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.— Verses  Ull, 


1.  No  memorials  are  really  lasting, 
but  such  as  are  erected  to  the  glory  of 
God. 

1. '  Monuments  in  honour  of  human 
daring  when  the  purpose  is  pure  and 
noble,  as  in  the  case  of  the  patriot, 
or  in  honour  of  great  and  noble  deeds 
which  benefit  human  society,  or  which 
reveal  virtues  that  beloni^  to  the  social 
life  of  man  with  man,  have  their  place, 
and  are  universally  held  to  be  worthily 
reared.  Yet  how  few  even  of  these  go 
down  through  the  centuries !  With 
regard  to  the  mass  of  the  great  ones  of 
the  earth,  who  have  earned  distinction  at 
the  hands  of  their  fellow  mortals,  it  is 
by  an  extravagant  figure  of  speech  that 
they  are  said  to  be  immortalised.  The 
verdict  of  the  really  immortal  book 
holds  good,  "  all  the  glory  of  man  is 
as  the  flower  of  grass."  Monuments 
of  every  kind  erected  by  the  hand  of 
man,  whether  by  kings  or  princes,  to 
immortalise  themselves,  or  by  commun- 
ities for  the  glory  of  distinguished 
citizens,  gradually  crumble  under  touch 
of  the  hand  of  time,  so  that  not  only 
are  many  swept  entirely  away,  but 
those  reared  in  the  past  which  still 
survive,  are  found  only  in  a  state  of 
ruins.  They  do  not  serve  the  purpose 
so  much  of  commemorating  glory,  as 
that  of  intimating  that  the  glory  is 
departed. 

2.  These  monuments  were  fading 
memorials  of  subjects  of  fading  in- 
terest. They  all  belong  to  the  cate- 
gory of  man's  relations  to  his  fellow 
man,  and  therefore  must  be  limited  in 
duration.  Man  himself  is  short-lived, 
and  necessarily  his  aureola  must  soon 
fade. 

"  For  what  is  Life  ?  An  hour-glass  on  the  run, 
A  mist  retreating  from  the  morning  sun, 
A  busy,  bustling,  still-repeated  dream. 
It's  length  ?  A  minute's  pause,  a  moment's 

thought. 
And  happiness  ?    A  bubble  on  the  stream 
That  in  the  act  of  seizing  shrinks  to  nought." 

It  is  only  when  man  begins  to  work,  or  to 
live  for  the  gloryof  God,  that  he  becomes 
264 


really  immortal,  and  that  his  fame,  as 
well  as  himself,  live  for  ever.  God 
will  not  give  His  glory  to  another,  and 
He  will  see  to  it,  that,  under  His  provi- 
dence, all  the  glory  of  man  shall  sooner, 
or  later  be  abased. 

3.  But  the  ode  of  Deborah  and 
Barak  must  live.  Its  object  is  not 
merely  to  record  the  stirring  events  of 
the  battleheld,  or  to  celebrate  the 
heroism  of  the  actors  themselves ;  it 
is  not  to  speak  of  stars  and  medals  or 
fresh  titles  of  distinction  conferred 
on  the  handful  of  heroes  that  poured 
down  from  Mount  Tabor  when  the 
signal  was  given.  But  that  which  im- 
l)arts  a  deathless  interest  to  this  song, 
and  merits  for  it  a  place  on  the  page  of 
the  national  history  to  latest  genera- 
tions, is,  that  here  we  have  another  proof 
of  God's  covenant  love  to  His  people,  a 
fresh  illustration  of  His  faithful  shep- 
herd care  in  watching  over  their 
interests,  His  je.ilousy  in  saving  them 
from  the  hand  of  the  enemy,  and  His 
making  use  of  the  events  of  their  his- 
tory anew  to  illustrate  the  glory  of 
His  own  name  in  all  the  earth.  These 
considerations  raise  the  subject  of  this 
song  to  an  elevation  far  above  that 
which  belongs  to  the  most  famous 
battlefields  of  ancient  history.  The 
names  of  the  mighty  captains  that  led 
the  hosts  of  Egypt,  or  Assyria,  or 
Babylon,  or  Persia  to  battle,  are  already 
for  the  most  part  in  oblivion,  while  the 
far  humbler  names  of  Deborah  and 
Barak  are  engraven  for  everlasting 
remembrance  in  the  Book  of  God,  and 
shall  not  grow  dim  while  sun  and 
moon  endure. 

4.  This  ode  also  has  a  connection 
with  the  coming  Messiah.  The  de- 
liverance here  celebrated  was  literally 
a  redemption  of  the  church  of  God 
from  the  consequences  of  her  sins.  It 
was  one  of  many  deliverances  which 
God  wrought  out  for  His  church,  as 
preliminaries  to  the  glori(ms  and 
eternal  redemption  which  the  Messiah 


UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES,  chap.  t. 


was    to   accomplish   for  that    church  that  bad  been  forsaken  of  their  God. 

when  He  should  appear  in   "the  ful-  How  completely  had  the  strength  gone 

ness  of  time/'     It  was  the  kindling  of  out  of  the  nation!      It  was  as  if  a 

a  new  light  in  the  firmament  of  Israel's  paralysis  had  seized  upon  it,  and  every 

history,  the   appearance  of  an   addi-  faculty  harl  become  inert ;  or  as  if  a 

tional  star  in  the  dark  night,  to  keep  giant,  with  brawny  arms  and  muscnlar 

alive  hope  in  the  h.^art  of  the  despond-  limbs,  had  sunk  down  to  the  diminutive 

ing  church,  a  star  which  would  shine  form  of  a  sickly  dwarf.      That  which 

on  till  it  brought  in  Messiah's  day.  had  been  a  Samson  among  the  nations 

was  now  shorn  of  its  locks.     All  that 

II.    God's  dealings  with  His  Church  have  to  do  with  sin  become  terribly 

are  worthy  of  the  widest  publicity.  weakened,  for — 

A  place  is  given  to  this  song  in  the  1.    God's  frown  is  upon  such  from 

only  book  in   the   world  which   God  without.     The  external  aspect  of  His 

acknowledges  to  be  His,  and  the  cir-  Providence,  sooner  or  later,  is  against 

culation  of  which  is  destined  to  cover  them,  for  sin  must    always  bring  the 

the  earth  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea-  frown   of   the    Kuler    of    Providence, 

bed.  It  shall,  therefore,  become  known  That  frown  may  find  expression  in  a 

throu^^h  this  song  to  the  inhabitants  of  thousand  ways.     For  all  the  creatures 

the  whole  world  down  to  the  end  of  are  in  God's  hand,  and  He  can  move 

time,  what  great  things  God  did  for  them  at   will   to   act,    consciously  or 

His  people  in  this  age  of  great  declen-  unconsciously,  the  part  of  enemies  to 

sion  and  snffering.     And  this  is  ever  those    who    are    the    objects   of  His 

the  wish  of  the  Lord  of  the  church,  to  displeasure.       When    a    man's    ways 

glorify   Himself   in   the  eyes  of    the  displease  the  Lord,  He  can  make  even 

world   by   means   of  His   church,  for  his  bosom  friends  to  be  at  enmity  with 

even  "  unto  principalities  and  powers  him.     He  can  put  a  lion  in  his  path, 

in  heavenly  places  is  made  known  by  and  should  he  flee  from  the  lion,  He 

the   church   the   manifold  wisdom   of  has  a  bear  ready  to  meet  him,  or  if  he 

God."     What  took  place  in  this  dark  go  into  tlie  house,  and  lean  his  hand 

and  distant  age,  though  but  a  frag-  on  the  wall,  He  commands  the  serpent 

ment     of    history,    becomes    of    the  to  bite  him.    When  David  sinned,  God 

greatest  importance,  when   looked   at  raised  up  enemies  round   about    him 

as  a  link  in  the  chain  of  God's  dealings  "  like  bees,"  and  as  numerous  and  as 

with  His  Church.     It  repeats,  in  the  wasp-like  in  their  natnre  (Ps.  iii.   1  ; 

background,  the  story  of  the  Divine  cxviii.     11,     J  2).        When     Solomon 

faithfulness  and   love,  which  is  else-  sinned,    his    powerful    kingdom     was 

where   exhibited  so   conspicuously  in  rent   in    twain    (1    Kings  xi.  9-13) ; 

the  brighter  pages  of  the  church's  his-  and  adversaries  were  raised  up  against 

tory.     It   shows  that    His   Church   is  him,  notwithstanding  all  his  prosperity 

loved  by  Him  in  all  stages  of  its  history,  (1  Kings  xi.  14,  23,  26). 

that  "  His  work  in  it  and  towards  it  Events  too  are   turned  against  the 

is  honourable  and  glorious,"  that  *'  He  sinner.     Loose  as  events  seem  to  hang 

is  ever  mindful  of  His  covenant,  and  on  one  another,  they  are  yet  all  linked 

in  dne  time  sends  redemption  to  His  together  in  a  cliam,  and  even  heathen 

people."  The  history  of  God's  dealings  poets  tell  us  that  the  highest  link  of 

with  His  Church  hangs  together  as  a  that    chain    is  fastened    to    Jupiter's 

whole,  and  the  same  principles  of  truth  chair — that  the  chain  may  wave  and 

and  righteousness  are  conspicuous  in  shake  this  way  or  that  way,  but  that 

every  part.  the  hand  that  holds  it  is  steady,  and 

the   eye   that   guides  it  is   infallible. 

III.  Sin  terrible  weakens  all  that  The  brightest  pros]iects  of  the  sinner 

give  way  to  it.  may  end  in  disappointment ;  his  most 

Israel  had  now  for  many  years  been  skilfully- laid  plans  may  be  defeated  ; 

a  spectacle  to  the  world  of  a  people  and  all  his  prosperity  may  be  turned 

265 


CHAP.v.  nOMILETIO  COMMENTARY :   JUDGES. 


into  adversity,  by  a  single  turn  of  the  were  taken  away  from  behind  them, 

wlieel.     God  will  set  His  face  against  and   they  were  swept   away    by   the 

that  man,  and  follow  him  for  evil,  and  resistless   fury    of    the    hostile    wave 

not  for  good.      When  '*  he  flees  from  (Deut.  xxviii.  64,  65). 

the  iron  weapon^  the  bow  of  steel  shall  3.       Examples    of  the    weakening 

strike   him   through.      The  gin  shall  effects  of  sin.     When  Israel   took  of 

take  him  by  the  heel,  and  the  robber  the  *'  accursed  thing "  they  began  to 

shall  prevail  against  him.      Terrors  flee  before  their  enemies.     When  <S'aw2- 

shall  make  him  afraid  on  every  side,  son  sinned,  his  locks  were  shorn  and 

and  shall  drive  him  to  his  feet.     His  his  strength  went  from  him.     Ahab, 

strength  shall  be  hunger-bitten,    and  though  an  absohite  monarch  upon  the 

destruction  shall  be  ready  at  his  side."  throne,  yet  felt  himself  weak,  and  the 

He    puts    snares  in    all    his    mercies,  nation  brought  to  the  brink  of  ruin, 

crosses  in  all  his  comforts,  and,  in  the  because  of  his  vile  idolatries.     Though 

expressive      language     of    Scripture,  ably  succoured  by  the  energetic  Jezebel, 

'* curses  his  blessings.**    "There  is  no  he  yet  felt  himself  so  weak,  that  he 

peace  for    the    wicked."    (Ps.  xxxvii.  durst  not  lift  a  finger,  or  move  his 

1,  2  ;  Isa.  xlv.  9.)  tongue,  against  the  one  man  that  stood 

2.     God  takes  away  the  sources  of  forth   to    vindicate   the   character   of 

their  strength  from  within.      When  Jehovah.     When  Gehazi  treacherously 

Gofl  fights  against  a  man  it  is  not  only  took  the  money  and  raiment  of  Naaman 

in  the  way  of  meeting  him  outwardly  to  the  dishonour  of  Israel's  God,  he 

face  to  face,  but  He  also  attacks  him  became  enfeebled  for  life,  for  he  went 

eqnally    and    more    formidably  /rom  out  from  the  prophet's  presence  a  leper 

within.     He  dries  up  the  sinews    of  white  as  snow.     When  Saul  disobeyed 

his  strength  ;  He  takes  courage  out  of  the  comn)andment  of  the  Lord,  not- 

his  heart  and  nerve  out  of  his  arm.  He  withstanding  his  goodly  appearance  and 

goes  close  up  to  the  rebel  and  attacks  his  first  successes,  he  began  to  show  a 

him  at  the  very  seat  of  his  strength,  quaking  heart  in  face  of  the  formidable 

When  He  fought  against  Pharaoh  and  Philistines.      Before   Goliath   he    was 

his  host,  He  not  only  opposed  them  dismayed   and   greatly   afraid.     After 

with  the  waters  of  the  Red  Sea,  but  shedding  much    innocent   blood,   and 

He  "pulled  ofi  their  chariot-wheels,  so  wickedly  thirsting  to  take  the  life  of 

that  they  drove  them  heavily."  the    son    of    Jesse,    though    divinely 

Israel  had  now  become  "  a  silly  dove  anointed  to  occupy  the  throne  of  Israel, 
without  heart**  Its  strength  was  his  terrors  so  increased,  as  his  sins  in- 
emasculated.  When  they  went  out  to  creased,  that  he  abjectly  submits  to  ask 
battle  against  the  enemy,  not  only  guidance  in  his  dilemma  from  a  woman 
were  all  the  circumstances  and  acci-  with  a  familiar  spirit,  and  finally  he 
dents  of  the  occasion  turned  against  rushes  on  to  the  commission  of  suicide, 
them  by  the  overruling  of  Divine  When  King  Herod  had  barbarously 
Providence,  but  their  resources  within  murdered  the  holy  man  of  God,  peace 
themselves  were  withdrawn  —  their  forsook  his  pillow,  and  the  victim  of 
spirit  of  heroism,  their  skill  in  devising  his  violence  ever  floated  before  his  eyes, 
expedients,  and  their  harmony  of  as  a  spectre  of  which  he  could  not  get 
action.  A  spirit  of  poltroonery  seized  quit,  so  that  when  he  heard  of  .Jesus 
upon  them  ;  their  princes  became  as  he  said,  "  It  is  not  Jesus — it  is  John, 
children,  and  the  men  of  might  did  risen  from  the  dead  !  "  though,  being  a 
not  find  their  hands.  God  whispered  Sadducee,  he  believed  in  no  resurrec- 
to  conscience,  His  vice-gerent  in  the  tion.  When  the  band,  of  soldiers  from 
the  soul,  and  they  were  pursued  with  the  priests  and  scribes  came  to  take 
terrors,  even  as  the  dried  leaves  are  Jesus,  at  the  slightest  whisper  of  His 
tossed  by  the  wind.  When  their  stal-  voice  they  "  went  backward  and  fell 
wart  foes  met  them  in  the  field,  they  to  the  ground." 
fell,  as  if  the  rock  on  which  they  leaned  IV.  Dark  nights  are  followed  by 
266 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   JUDGES. 


CHAP.  V. 


bright  mornings  in  the    history   of 
God's  people. 

At  the  beginning  of  God's  dealings 
with  His  people,  we  are  told  that 
**  God  heard  their  groaning  (under 
Pharaoh),  and  remembered  His  coven- 
ant.'' Tills  is  the  secret  of  all  that  is 
peculiar  in  the  Divine  dealings  with 
them.  Here  we  find  a  differentiating 
principle.  Other  nations  were  left 
one  by  one  to  perish.  This  nation, 
after  many  a  dark  night,  has  always  a 
morning  of  joy  to  succeed  it.  They 
have  no  thorns  without  roses ;  no  tears 
shed  witbmt  being  followed  by  smiles. 
Threatenings  are  indeed  fulfilled,  but 
promises  are  also  remembered.  When 
the  tempest  has  blown  hard  for  a  while, 
the  sky  again  clears  up,  and  the  sun 
shines  with  wonted  warmth  and 
splendour.  The  life  of  the  people  of 
God  in  this  world  is  thus  a  perpetual 
paradox,  as  se«  forth  in  2  Cor.  iv. 
8-10 ;  and  vi.  8-10.     For 

1.  There  are  reasons  for  joy  as  well 
as  sorrow.  They  are  a  redeemed 
people,  and  the  price  is  Christ's 
precious  blood.  If  their  sins  deserve 
the  severest  marks  of  the  Divine  dis- 
pleasure, the  great  fact  is  always 
present  before  God,  that  for  them  an 
atonement  has  been  made,  and  these 
very  sins  have  already  been  punished 
for  on  a  substitute.  While  the  evil 
desert  of  the  siiis  must  be  made 
manifest  to  their  own  eye,  and  in 
their  bitter  experience,  the  fulness  of 
the  Divine  satisfaction  found  in  the 
atonement  made  for  them  must  also 
be  impressed  on  them  in  their  happy 
experience.  The  blood  of  His  own 
Son  is  sprinkled  upon  them  ;  therefore 
they  are  sacred  and  cannot  be  dealt 
with  as  refuse  or  castaways. 

2.  He  has  expressly  promised  to 
return  to  them  in  love  when  they 
repent.  Many  assurances  are  given  to 
this  effect  throughout  the  whole  of  the 
prophecies.  (Jer.  iii.  12-15;  xxx.  18-20  ; 
also,  8,  9 ;  Hos.  xiv.  1-5  ;  Joel  ii. 
12-20). 

8.   They  are  brought  into  endearing 


relations  to  God.  God  will  sometimes 
show  that  He  regards  them  with  a 
Father's  affection.  '*  He  will  not  he 
always  wroth,"  lest  it  should  be  sup- 
posed either  that  they  are  less  loved 
than  hated,  or,  that  if  once  they  were 
beloved,  they  are  so  now  no  longer. 
They  are  His  children  ;  they  bear  His 
image,  however  imperfectly  brought 
out  it  is  ;  they  are  His  inheritance ; 
they  are  the  brethren  of  His  Son,  and 
"joint  heirs"  with  that  Son  of  all 
that  belongs  to  the  common  Father. 
He  cannot,  therefore  be  always  show- 
ing His  anger  towards  them.  (Ps. 
ciii.  9,  etc). 

4.  A  continual  turning  of  the  hack 
would  he  more  than  they  could  hear. 
"  He  remembered  that  they  were  but 
flesh,"  etc.,  and  "  being  full  of  com- 
passion. He  forgave  their  iniquity  and 
destroyed  them  not."  (Ps.  Ixxviii. 
38,  39,  and  Isa.  Ivii.  16). 

5.  All  their  nights  are  destined  soon 
to  end  in  day.  Whatever  clouds  belong 
to  their  history  shall  pass  over  their 
heads  in  time.  Not  one  shall  darken 
their  sky  in  the  world  beyond.  It  is 
indeed  needful  so  long  as  sin  remains, 
that  they  should  drink  of  the  waters 
of  Marah,  and  that  sometimes  they 
should  **go  mourning  without  the 
sun  ;  "  but  it  is  not  seemly,  that  they 
should  never  be  allowed  to  taste  of  the 
first  fruits  of  the  land  of  promise, 
while  travelling  through  the  wilderness 
on  to  the  promised  rest.  It  must  be 
seen  that  they  are  the  beloved  of  God, 
destined  to  sing  and  to  shine  for  ever, 
and  therefore  objects  so  tenderly  dealt 
with,  that  a  kind  voice  must  now  and 
again  break  through  the  dark  clouds 
saying,  "  This  is  my  beloved  son,  in 
whom  I  am  well  pleased."  If  the 
'*  days  of  their  mourning  shall  soon  be 
ended,"  we  may  expect  that  some  rifts 
will  occasionally  be  seen  in  the  clouds, 
to  show  that  it  is  not  a  settled  rain  of 
sorrows  which  now  falls  upon  them, 
but  that  soon  there  will  be  a  breaking 
up,  to  be  followed  by  a  sunshine  that 
shall  last  for  ever. 


267 


CHAP.  V.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


CHAPTER  '^, --Verses  12-22. 
The  Thanksgiving  Song. — Continued, 

Ckitioal  Notes. — 12.  Awake,  awake,  Deborah,  etc.]  Having  adverted  in  the  above  paragraph 
to  the  high  pitch  of  prosperity,  which  Israel  might  naturally  claim,  as  the  nation  of  Jehovah — 
to  what  it  had  guiltily  lost  -  and  to  what,  through  God's  covenant  mercy,  had  been  won  back, 
the  singer  now  addresses  herself  to  the  thrilling  history  connected  with  the  regaining  of  this 
prosperity,  and  the  vast  importance  to  the  cause  of  God  of  the  remarkable  success  achieved. 

First,  she  is  careful  that  her  spirit  be  raised  to  the  proper  pitch,  while  engaged  in  celebrating 
so  lofty  a  theme.  She  calls  on  her  soul  to  bestir  itself,  to  brace  up  every  faculty,  to  shake  off 
drowsiness,  and  sing  with  morning  freshness  and  vigour  the  inspiring  theme  of  the  deliverance 
of  God's  Church.  Parallel  expressions  are  found  in  Ps.  ciii.  1,  2  ;  cviii.  2  ;  Ivii.  8  ;  Isa.  li.  9, 10. 
It  is  in  a  somewhat  similar  strain  that  our  great  epic  bard  begins  one  of  the  loftiest  songs 
of  all  time, 

"  Of  man's  first  disobedience,  and  the  fruit 
Of  that  forbidden  tree,  whose  mortal  taste 
Brought  death  into  the  world,  and  all  our  woe- 
Sing  heavenly  muse  —         ,         .         . 

.  what  in  me  is  dark 
Illumine  ;  what  is  low,  raise  and  support." 

It  implies  the  consciousness,  on  the  part  of  the  author,  of  the  greatness  of  the  theme  before 
him,  and  his  desire  to  have  his  spirit  elevated  to  the  highest  degree,  while  attempting  to  do 
justice  to  his  task.     Deborah  wished  to  sing  not  only  with  gratitude,  but  with  enthusiasm. 

Arise  Barak,  and  lead  thy  captivity  captive.l  While  Deborah  was  the  real  head  of  the  move- 
ment, and  gave  directions  in  all  that  was  to  be  done,  it  was  Barak's  part  to  take  the  field,  and  deal 
with  the  enemy.  The  call  is  significantly  given,  not  to  fight,  but  to  lead  captive  liis  prisoners — 
seize  tokens  of  triumph.  Tor,  in  fact,  it  was  not  so  much  a  fight  that  was  given  Barak  to  do,  as 
a  pursuit.  The  victory  was  gained  by  the  God  of  battles  ;  "  the  Lord  is  gone  out  before  thee." 
Barak's  work  was  merely  to  gather  the  fruits.  To  take  prisoners  was  always  regarded  as 
humiliating  to  the  other  camp,  and  a  sign  of  complete  triumph  to  the  conqueror.  (Num. 
xxi.  1  ;  Ixviii.  18). 

The  singer  next  proceeds,  in  section  second,  to  speak  of  the  actors  engaged  in  this  conflict,  and 
of  the  terrible  nature  of  the  conflict  itself.  In  the  first  strophe  (vers.  13-15),  she  holds  up  to 
honour  those,  who,  at  all  risks,  came  forward,  to  flght  the  battle  of  their  God.  In  strophe  second 
of  this  section  (vers.  16-18),  she  marks  out  for  reprobation  those  who  refused  to  take  part  in  the 
struggle,  from  considerations  of  what  was  agreeable  to  flesh  and  blood.  And  in  strophe  third, 
she  graphically  describes  the  battle  itself  (vers.  19-22),  ending  in  complete  victory  for  the 
people  of  God.  And  section  third  winds  up  the  whole  with  two  animated  and  sublime  stanzas, 
containing  a  blessing  on  her  who  destroyed  the  leader  of  the  enemy's  host,  and  describing  the 
bitter  disappointment  about  to  fall  on  that  leader's  home. 

It  is  not  wonderful  that  much  diversity  of  opinion  should  exist,  as  to  the  correct  rendering  of 
the  text,  and  the  interpretation  of  the  meaning.  The  style  is  singularly  abrupt  and  sententious, 
and  the  construction  is  highly  elliptical.  It  is  also  to  be  remembered  that  the  Hebrew  language, 
though  terse  and  forcible  in  expression,  in  the  use  of  such  words  as  it  has,  is  yet  greatly  defective 
in  compass  and  fulness,  compared  with  languages  of  more  mature  growth,  such  as  the  Greek  or 
the  English.  Hence  the  want  of  precision  in  fixing  the  cases  of  nouns,  and  the  moods  and 
tenses  of  verbs,  also  the  f.^rce  of  prepositions,  of  prefixes  and  aflixes,  and  indeed  the  exact 
reading  of  the  text.  The  same  word,  too,  has  often  some  difference  of  meaning  in  one  connection 
fi"om  what  it  has  in  another  In  addicion  to  these  general  considerations,  there  are  difficulties 
peculiar  to  this  ode.  The  account  given  is  of  the  most  condensed  character.  There  are  no 
prefatory  statements,  no  connecting  sentences,  no  filling  up  of  the  picture.  Of  subsidiary  matter 
there  is  none  ;  and  only  a  few  leading  strokes  are  given  to  bring  out  the  salient  features  of  the 
scenes  described,  from  which  details  are  left  to  be  inferred.  It  is  therefore  only  approximately 
that  we  can  arrive  at  an  accurate  reading  or  correct  interpretation. 

13.  Then  he  made  him  that  remaineth  have  dominion,  etc.]  It  is  difficult  to  make  a  good 
sense  out  of  the  translation  given  in  our  A.V.  The  meaning  depends  on  tho  rendering  we  give 
to  the  word  IT.t  which  our  translators  make  to  be  "  have  dominion,"  deriving  it  from  Hlfn,  to 
rule.  But  two  strong  reasons  are  against  this  acceptation.  A  word  exactly  similar,  occurring 
in  verse  14,  is  translated  "came  down  ;"  and  this  agrees  with  the  stream  of  thought  in  the 
paragraph,  which  describes,  not  the  result  of  the  battle,  but  rather  the  mustering  of  the  com- 
batants :  dominion  as  yet  was  not  gained  over  the  enemy.  There  is  also  good  reason  to  believe 
the  word  Tl'',  pointed  as  a  perfect,  is  really  the  word  used  here,  which  signifies  "  went  down." 

268' 


nOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES,  chap,  v. 


The  verse  will  then  read,  "  Then  (at  that  time,  on  that  occasion — as  if  the  speaker  were 
addressing  future  listeners)  came  down  (rushed  down  from  Mount  Tabor)  the  remnant  (those  wlio 
had  escaped — the  small  number  left  after  the  waste  of  life  for  twenty  years)  towards  the  mighty 
ones  of  the  people  (the  haughty  oppressors,  as  in  Ps.  cxxxvi.  18,  "  famous  kings  ")  :  Jehovah 
(Himself)  came  down  for  me  (for  my  help)  against  the  powerful  [i.e.,  the  renowned  heroes  in 
Sisera's  army)."  The  singer  regards  herself  as  entrusted  with  the  guiding  of  the  great  move- 
ment, and  speaks  as  the  responsilile  party.  It  was  only  a  handful  of  men  that  rushed  down  from 
the  Mount,  where  they  had  assembled,  to  throw  themselves  on  the  serried  ranks  of  the  foe,  and 
they  did  so  at  Deborah's  call.  They  had  confidence  in  her  as  commissioned  by  God,  and  hazarded 
their  lives  in  fighting  with  men  of  superior  strength,  when  she  gave  the  call.  This  fact  is 
first  stated  in  the  account  given  of  the  battle.    Next,  we  are  told  how  this  handful  was  made  up. 

14.  Out  of  Ephraim  was  there  a  root  of  them  against  Amalek,  etc.]  The  prophetess  is  glad 
to  be  able  to  say  that  her  own  tribe  was  well  represented.  Read — "/roTn.  out  of  Lphraim  came 
those  whose  root  is  in  Amalek'^ — referring  probably  to  the  spot  called  "the  Mount  of  tlie 
Amalekites '' (chap.  xii.  15).  For  while  the  larger  body  of  that  people  occupied  the  Sinaitic 
wilderness,  another  smaller  wave  of  them  moved  from  the  Ararat  district  westward  towards 
central  Canaan,  of  which  we  have  indications  in  Gren.  xiv.  7.  ;  Jud.  iii.  13  ;  xii.  15.  The 
tradition  is,  that  they  once  possessed  a  certain  stroDghold  in  Canaan,  of  which  a  portion  of  the 
Ephraimites  dispossessed  them,  and  settled  down  ia  their  place.  From  this  circumstance  they 
got  a  name  for  bravery,  and  were  known  as  the  men  who  settled  down  in  Mount  Amalek. 
After  thee,  Benjamin.!  Following  behind,  and  in  brotherhood  witli  thee  ;  Benjamin,  though 
small  (chap,  xx.),  sent  a  contingent.  Out  of  Machir  came  governors.l  Machir  was  Manasseh's 
eldest  son,  or,  as  some  think,  his  only  son  ;  and  so  his  name  is  applied  to  the  tribe.  But  it  is 
the  Cis-Jordanic,  or  west  side  of  the  Jordan  portion  of  the  tribe,  that  is  referred  to  here.  The 
Trans- Jordanic  portion  occupied  the  country  of  Gilead,  and  so  are  called  by  that  name,  along 
with  the  tribe  of  Gad,  with  whom  they  usually  acted  (vers«  17).  The  gist  of  the  statement 
appears  to  be,  th  t  this  half -tribe  sent  its  best  men.  Out  of  Zebulun  they  that  handle  the  pea 
of  the  writer.]  Rather,  those  that  handle  the  staff  of  the  military  officer,  i.e.,  those  who  keep  the 
muster-roll  of  the  army — who  superintend  the  recruiting  of  the  troops,  and  the  calling  over  of 
their  names.  These  ofl&cials  seem  to  have  been  known  under  the  name  of  '^  scribes,^'  and 
occupied  a  very  high  position  in  the  State,  so  few  in  those  days  apparently  being  qualified  to 
perform  their  duties  (2  Kings  xxv.  19  ;  2  Chron.  xxvi.  11  ;  2  Kings  xix.  2). 

15.  And  the  princes  of  Issachar  were  with  Deborah,  etc.] — in  Issachar,  not  of  The  meaning 
may  be,  that  while  Barak  led  on  the  forces  of  Zebulun  and  Naphtali,  out  of  whom  his  army 
principally  was  taken,  the  princes  in  Issachar  put  themselves  at  the  head  of  the  men  of  their  own 
tribe,  and  stood  shoulder  to  shoulder  with  Barak — even  Issachar,  and  also  Barak] — the  two 
acting  together — going  abreast  into  the  valley — with  Deborah] — on  her  side.  Cassel,  however, 
supposes  that  the  word  ]3  is  not  here  to  be  taken  as  the  adverb,  but  as  the  noun,  and  renders  it, 
not  "  as  also  Barak,"  but  was  "  the  base,  or  pedestal  of  Barak."  True,  the  territory  of  Issachar 
supplied  the  space  for  the  battle-ground.  It  was  also  the  chief  support  of  Baralc,  or  rather  was 
among  the  foremost  in  the  fight,  or  they  may  have  mustered  more  strongly  than  others,  the 
enemy  encamping  in  their  own  fields  But  this  interpretation,  though  possible,  does  not  seem 
BO  natural  and  simple  as  the  other.  He  was  sent  on  foot  into  the  valley.]  Supported  by  Issachar 
and  its  princes  he  was  sent,  etc.     The  original  word  is  much  stronger  than  simply  *'  was  sent ' 

r\VW  (Puhal)  has  the  force  of  was  shot,  as  an  arrow  from  the  bow — referring,  as  Cassel  says, 
to  "the  storm-like  rapidity  of  Barak's  movements."  Either  they  were  instigated  by  Deborah  to 
rush  with  impetuosity  into  the  valley  (or  rather  the  plain),  or,  being  impelled  by  their  own 
enthusiasm,  they  so  rushed  (Job  xviii,  8). 

At  the  close  of  ver.  15  begins  an  account  of  the  laggards  and  cowards,  in  this  great  day  of 
decision.  For  the  divisions  of  Reuben,  there  were  great  thoughts  of  heart.]  This  is  often  taken 
to  mean  :  on  account  of  the  divided  counsels,  and  the  consequent  heart-burnings  and  party  strifes 
which  prevailed  in  the  tribe  of  Reuben,  there  were  many  anxious  thoughts  and  much  concern 
experienced.  But  this  interpretation  is  not  justified  by  the  word  here  used,  ni3  75.  When  that 
word  is  translated  divisions,  it  signifies  divisions  into  classes  or  ranks,  or  division  of  a  whole  into 
its  parts,  and  not  by  any  means  division  of  heart  thoughts,  or  heart  purposes.  We  do  not  know 
from  this  word,  whether  there  was  variance  or  discord  in  this  tribe  or  not.  The  proper  rendering 
of  the  original  word  is  at  the  brooks  of  Reuben  (Job  xx.  17  ;  Ps.  i.  3),  there  were  great  resolutions 
of  heart  formed,  not  meiely  thoughts.  They  would  do  great  things — they  would  go  in  a  body  to  the 
war ;  they  would  not  be  behind  their  brethren,  nor  would  they  forsake  them  ;  they  would  stand 
firm  in  the  hour  of  danger  ;  as  became  the  tribe  of  the  eldest  brother,  they  would  set  an  example 
to  be  followed  by  all  the  otliers — with  many  such  thoughts.  The  country  of  Reuben  possessed 
rich  pasturage,  and,  lying  as  it  did  between  the  hills  to  the  East  of  Jordan  and  the  river  itself, 
it  naturally  abounded  in  springs  and  streams.  Hence  it  was  natural  to  speak  of  them  as  sitting 
by  their  brooks,  or  small  streams.  At  first  they  seemed  to  be  loud  in  their  professions  of  zeal 
and  resolved  to  do  great  things.     It  was  easy  to  do  so  by  the  water-courses,  sitting  at  ease,  with 

26J) 


OHAP.  V.  HO  MI  LET  10  OOMMENTARY:  J  U DOES. 


nothing  to  make  them  afraid.  But  as  they  continued  to  think  over  the  matter,  and  the  many 
dangers  and  sacrifices  they  would  have  to  make,  by  joining  in  the  war,  came  more  fully  into 
view,  they  began  to  hesitate,  and  at  length  preferred  to  remain  quietly  at  home  following  their 
comfortable  pastoral  pursuits. 

16.  Why  abodest  thou  among  the  sheepfolds] — the  enclosures  made  of  hurdles,  in  which,  during 
summer,  the  flocks  are  kept  by  night.  The  dual  number  is  used  because  the  folds  of  this  sort 
were  divided  into  two  parts  of  the  different  kinds  of  flock  "  (Gen.  xlix.  14).  Keil  gives  the  spirit 
of  the  passage  thus  :  '*  Why  didst  thou  remain  in  the  comfortable  repose  of  a  shepherd's  life,  to 
hear  the  bleatings  of  the  flocks — or  the  piping  of  the  shepherds,  instead  of  the  blast  of  the  war- 
trumpets  ? " — The  word  translated  "  great  searchings  of  heart,"  does  not  refer  to  close  self-exami- 
nation as  to  the  state  of  their  hearts,  to  find  out  secret  or  indwelling  sins,  but  rather  denotes 
anxious  ponderings  or  deliberations,  as  to  the  decision  to  which  they  should  come.  They  per- 
plexed themselves  how  they  could  both  preserve  a  name  for  loyalty  to  tlieir  God,  and  yet  save 
themselves  from  the  hazard  and  self-sacrifice  of  plunging  into  the  war.  They  racked  their  brains  to 
make  the  best  possible  compromise.  There  was  a  sifting  of  all  possible  ways  of  deciding,  so  as 
to  preserve  their  ease  and  comfort  on  the  one  hand,  while  yet  they  floated  high  the  banner  of 
allegiance  to  Jehovah  on  the  other — a  class  of  religious  professors  that  has  been  numerous  in  all 
ages.  To  make  high  professions  without  standing  firmly  by  them,  was  Reuben's  character  from 
the  beginning.  "  Unstable  as  water  thou  shalt  not  excel."  This  interpretation  corresponds  with 
the  call  of  the  prophetess,  chiding  them  for  their  want  of  decision. 

17.  Gilead  abides  beyond  Jordan,  etc.]  Gilead  was  the  grandson  of  Manasseh,  and  represented 
the  portion  of  the  tribe  that  lay  beyond  Jordan.  Hence  the  charge  of  neutrality  here  referred 
to,  is  brought  against  the  half-tribe  of  Manasseh  to  the  East  of  Jordan,  and  also  the  tribe  of 
Gad  ;  both  tribes  being  always  closely  associated  together,  probably  owing  to  their  common 
love  for  pastoral  pursuits.  They  both  occupied  the  country  of  Gilead.  The  use  of  the  present 
tense  in  these  verses  makes  the  picture  more  vivid.  The  poetess  describes  it,  as  if  she  saw  the 
scenes  passing  before  her  eye  at  the  moment  of  writing.  It  is  put  down  to  the  dishonour  of  the 
two  tribes  mentioned,  that  they  took  no  part  in  the  war.  The  same  is  said  of  Dan  and  iVsher. 
Why  did  Dan  remain  in  ships  1  Why  does  Dan  tarry  in  ships  f  i.e.  carrying  on  his  usual  trade. 
Dan  had  a  sea-board  of  some  considerable  value,  though  it  was  very  limited.  It  seems  to  have 
included  Joppa,  which  was  then,  and  long  after,  a  place  of  considerable  value.  (Josh.  xiv.  46  ; 
also  Ezra  iii.  7  ;  2  Chron.  ii.  16).  They  perhaps  traded  with  the  Phoenicians,  many  of  whom 
would  probably  be  in  Sisera's  army  ;  and  they  would  not  care  to  quarrel  with  their  customers, 
in  case  it  might  hurt  their  trade — a  miserable  policy  ! — for,  by  failing  to  assist  tlieir  brethren, 
they  undermined  their  own  security  and  freedom,  in  allowing  the  enemy  to  be  successful.  They 
thought  only  of  their  own  gains — or,  as  Trapp  puts  it,  "  they  cared  only  to  dress  up  their  own 
cabins,  when  the  whole  ship  was  in  danger."  Asher  sits  still  by  the  sea-shore,  and  abides  by 
his  breaches].  He  reposes  securely  in  his  creeks,  and  river-mouths.  He  will  not  leave  his 
comfortable  home  on  the  Mediterranean.  (Josh.  xix.  28,  29).  Tiie  word  "breaches"  refers  to 
incisions  made  on  the  coast,  or  indentations.     (Comp.  Gen.  xlix.  13). 

18.  Zebulun  and  Naphtali  were  a  people  that  jeoparded,  etc.]  In  contrast  with  those  just 
mentioned,  she  makes  most  honourable  mention  of  Zebulun  and  Naphtali.  They  not  only  came 
forward,  but  they  exposed  their  lives  in  the  unsheltered  or  open  places  of  the  field.  They  acted 
with  contempt  of  life,  when  the  honour  of  their  God  was  at  stake.  They  were  found  in  the 
forefront  of  the  fight,  and,  however  great  the  risk,  they  thought  only  of  doing  their  duty  when 
the  call  was  given.  Similar  contempt  of  life,  when  sacred  principles  were  at  stake,  was 
exemplified  by  the  apostles  before  the  Sanhedrim,  and  especially  by  Paul  and  his  coadjutors. 
(Acts  XV.  26  ;  xv.  24  ;  xxi.  13,  14  ;  Phil.  iii.  8  ;  Rev.  ii.  10.) 

19.  Here  begins  a  new  strophe,  giving  a  description  of  the  battle.  Kings  came,  and  fought, 
etc.]  As  in  the  days  of  Joshua,  the  Kiug  of  Hazor  seems  to  have  been  at  the  head  of  a  con- 
federacy of  kings  (Josh.  xi.  10.)  As  then,  so  now,  these  kini;s  fought  along  with  Jabin, 
showing  the  formidable  nature  of  the  array  that  was  set  against  Israel,  all  under  the  command 
of  Sisera  "  Taanach  " — "  the  name  is  still  preserved  in  a  village  on  the  slope  of  the  hills 
skirting  the  plain  on  the  south."  (Stanley).  "  Megiddo "  describes  yet  more  accurately  the 
spot  in  the  plain  where  the  battle  was  fought.  Both  are  mentioned  as  royal  cities  in  Josh. 
xii.  21.  Both  belonged  to  Manasseh,  though  just  within  the  territories  of  Issuchar  (Josh.  xvii. 
11  ;  1  Chron.  vli,  29).  In  these  passages  they  are  mentioned  together — also  in  1  Kings,  iv.  12. 
"  They  were  not  quite  five  miles  apart,  and  between  them  were  several  brooks  which  ran  into 
the  southern  arm  of  the  Kishon,  that  flowed  through  the  plain,  to  the  north  of  both  these 
towns"  {Keil).  They  took  no  gain  of  money.]  They  seized  no  spoil  of  silver — or,  not  so  much 
as  a  single  piece  of  silver.  Cassel  makes  it,  they  received  no  composition  money  to  buy  them 
ofif  without  fighting,  on  the  one  hand,  nor  did  they  secure  any  booty  after  it,  on  the  other. 
(Comp.  1  Kings  xiv.  26  ;  xv.  18  ;  2  Kings  xv.  20). 

20.  They  fought  from  heaven ;  the  stars  in  their  courses,  etc.]    Another  rapid  transition,  from 

270 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES,  chap.  V. 


the  kings  fighting,  to  those  that  fought  against  them.  It  was  not  the  Israelites  alone  that 
fought.  If  Sisera  had  confederates,  so  also  had  Israel.  And  these  were  from  heaven — the 
stars  in  their  courses.  There  were  visible  signs  that  the  niighty  hand  of  the  Ruler  of  nature  was 
at  work — probably  by  a  violent  storm  supernaturally  raised,  and  beating  full  in  the  face  of  the 
foe,  yet  not  such  as  to  prevent  Barak's  army  from  carrying  on  the  fight,  or  rather  the  pursuit — 
for  it  was  not  so  much  a  hattle  as  a  rout.  Whether  hailstones  beat  in  the  faces  of  the  Canaanites, 
driven  by  a  fierce  wind  (Josh.  x.  10,  11  ;  1  Sam.  vii.  10)  ;  or  whether  simply  a  black  thunder 
cloud  came  down  upon  them,  accompanied  by  heavy  drops  of  rain  dashing  in  their  faces,  and 
also  rendering  the  ground  slippery  and  swampy  (ver.  22),  or,  whether  there  were  also  threatening 
and  lurid  appearances  in  the  sky,  filling  them  with  deadly  terror,  at  the  thought  that  the 
invisible  powers  were  against  them — that  same  mighty  God  of  Israel  that  destroyed  their  fathers 
in  the  days  of  Joshua — we  are  not  informed.  But  that  the  nand  of  the  Almighty  was  displayed 
in  some  remarkable  way,  there  can  be  no  doubt ;  for  of  this  we  are  expressly  assured  in  chap. 
iv.  15.  (Comp.  Ex.  xiv.  24).  The  stars  have  all  along  been  supposed  to  rule  the  sky,  and  to 
exercise  either  a  benign,  or  a  disastrous  influence,  on  the  lot  of  men  on  the  earth  ;  so  much  so 
that  it  has  become  proverbial  to  speak  of  the  stars  as  "  propitious  "  or  "  unpropitious  "  (p.  234). 
(Comp.  Ps.  Ixviii.  1,  3-5  ;  xviii.  32-40  ;  xliv.  1-7  ;  also  Ps.  xviii.  7-17.) 

21.  The  river  of  Kishon  swept  them  away,  etc.]  "When  swollen  by  the  sudden  and  tremendous 
downpouring  from  the  skies.  Sisera's  army  seems  to  have  been  collected  to  the  south  of  the 
Kishon,  between  Taanach  and  Megiddo,  according  to  the  statement  in  chap.  iv.  7.  There  they 
Were  collected  as  in  a  trap,  for  there  was  the  greatest  confluence  of  the  waters.  Also,  when  the 
terrible  phenomena  of  the  heavens  came  around  them,  they  had  no  resource  but  to  retrace  their 
Bteps  across  the  river,  that  being  the  only  passage  northward  to  their  own  country.  But  lo  ! 
suddenly,  as  if  by  magic,  they  find  themselves  deluged  with  water  1  The  Kishon,  which  only 
two  hours  ago  was  a  small  brook  that  a  foot  traveller  might  easily  cross,  is  now  a  roaring 
torrent,  which  sweeps  away  man,  horse,  and  chariot  before  it.  It  overflows  its  banks,  and  the 
vast  "  multitude  "  of  the  great  captain  are  overwhelmed  amid  the  surging  waves  of  an  avenging 
Bea.  They  little  knew  what  resources  were  at  the  command  of  the  God  of  Israel,  and  least  of 
all  did  they  foresee,  that  that  diminutive  stream  was  in  a  few  hours  to  be  the  destruction  of  that 
mighty  host.  That  ancient  river,  etc.]  (p.  188),  that  river  so  famous  of  old.  Most  streams  are 
amongst  the  oldest  things  in  the  world,  realising  the  truth  of  the  poet's  lines  on  *'  The  Brook  " — 

"  For  men  may  come,  and  men  may  go, 
But  I  flow  on  for  ever." 

But  the  phrase  in  the  text  seems  to  refer,  not  so  much  to  the  existence  of  the  river  for  so  long  a 
time,  but  to  the  fact  that  it  was  well  known  in  past  times  for  its  remarkable  associations.  So 
recently  as  1799,  in  a  battle  between  the  French  and  the  Turks,  many  of  the  latter  perished  in 
the  sudden  rising  of  its  waters.  In  the  spring  season,  especially,  it  sends  down  a  flood  of  rushing 
waters,  and  hence  some  think  that  the  destruction  of  Sisera's  host  took  place  about  the  time  of 
the  Feast  of  Weeks—  end  of  April  or  beginning  of  May.  But  this  is  pure  conjecture,  and 
proceeds  on  the  supposition,  that  there  was  nothing  more  than  natural  influences  at  work  on  this 
great  occasion  when  Jehovah  threw  Sisera's  army  into  confusion,  and,  like  a  terrible  champion 
fighting  on  behalf  of  Israel,  smote  it  without  quarter.  Some  think  also  that  the  attack  made 
by  Israel  was  made  in  the  night  season.  This  also  is  mere  supposition — 0,  my  soul,  thou  hast 
trodden  down  strength !]  An  exclamation  of  exultant  gratitude  for  the  immense  victory  gained. 
Fancying  herself  the  spirit  of  the  storm,  riding  on  the  top  of  the  wave  of  victory,  and  seeing 
the  vast  image  of  might  presented  by  Sisera's  army  ground  before  her  to  powder,  which  she 
sweeps  like  dust  from  her  feet,  she  exclaims  in  adoring  rapture — "  O,  my  soul,  thou  hast  trodden 
down  strength!"  This  was  said  in  the  spirit  of  Mary,  when  she  uttered  the  memorable  words — 
**  He  that  is  mighty  hath  done  for  me  great  things  ;  holy  is  His  name  I  " 

22.  Then  were  the  horses'  hoofs  broken  by  the  means  of  the  prancings,  etc.]  It  was  not  customary 
to  shod  horses  in  the  east  on  any  occasion,  hence  their  hoofs  were  apt  to  get  broken  through 
their  plungings  in  the  mire,  or  their  wild  stampings  as  they  galloped  in  terror  to  get  away  in 
haste  from  the  scene.  The  word  here  transl  ited  "  prancings,"  refers  to  the  blow  given  by  a 
horse's  foot,  like  that  of  a  hammer  on  an  anvil  (Is.  xli.  7).  The  Canaanites  fled  with  the  utmost 
precipitation,  so  that  the  horse's  hoofs  might  in  many  cases  have  been  splintered,  battered, 
and  broken  by  the  roughness  of  the  roads.  "  Their  mighty  ones "  refers  to  the  horses,  as  in 
Jer«  viii.  16  ;  zlvii.  8. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS,^Vmes  12-22. 

The  List  of  Honour,  and  the  List  op  Dishonour. 

I.  Services  to  God  should  be  performed  with  alacrity  and  with  zeal. 

271 


CHAP.  V.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


In  all  service  rendered  to  God  everything  depends  on  the  spirit  in  which  it 
is  performed.  However  excellent  the  professed  object  of  any  service  may  be, 
such  as  prayer  or  praise,  it  is  nothing  with  God  if  it  is  a  dead  service.  The 
Pharisee  is  never  reckoned  to  have  prayed  to  God  at  all,  though,  from  the 
beginning  to  the  end  of  life,  he  may  have  faultlessly  gone  through  the  forms  of 
worship.  In  like  manner,  feeble  or  languid  service  is  an  unworthy  offering  to 
present  before  Him,  who  requires  "  to  be  worshipped  in  spirit  and  in  truth." 
The  requirement  of  the  law  of  duty  is  "  love  with  all  the  heart  and  soul."  Of  the 
same  character  ought  every  oblation  to  be  which  is  laid  on  the  altar  of  our  God 
Dull  or  sluggisii  devotion  resembles  the  presenting  of  ''  the  torn,"  '*  the  lame," 
or  ''  the  sick,"  in  sacrifice  to  God.  On  the  other  hand,  when  the  whole  soul  is 
awakened  to  the  performance  of  any  religious  service,  when  every  faculty  is 
stirred  up  to  do  its  part,  when  the  understanding  has  clearness  of  perception, 
and  fulness  of  appreciation,  of  both  the  matter  and  the  obligation  of  the  duty 
before  it,  when  the  will  gives  itself  with  full  force  and  without  any  drawback  to 
its  discharge,  when  the  conscience  is  implicity  obeyed,  when  the  affections  are 
in  the  highest  state  of  delight  and  fullest  sympathy  with  the  exercise,  and  when 
the  whole  soul  presents  itself  with  the  utmost  harmony  in  all  its  faculties  in 
rendering  the  services,  then  it  is  a  sacrifice  coming  up  with  a  savour  of  sweet 
incense,  acceptable  and  welhpleasing  unto  God. 

Such  was  the  character  of  the  service  which  Deborah  now  laid  upon  the  altar, 
in  offering  praise  to  the  God  of  salvation  for  all  that  He  had  done.  She  is 
anxious  that  her  tribute  of  thanksgiving  should  be  rendered  in  the  right  frame 
of  mind,  and  therefore  begins  with  calling  on  her  soul  to  rouse  itself  in  every 
faculty,  not  only  to  have  wandering  thoughts  called  in,  but  to  become  quickened 
all  through  to  go  about  the  work  before  her  in  the  most  efficient  manner.  On 
such  a  theme  she  feels  that  her  soul  should  be  in  a  state  of  rapture ;  she 
feels  that 

"  Passion  is  reason  ;  transport  temper  here.'* 

To  this  end  ought  we  to  begin  all  service  rendered  to  God,  with  earnest  supplica- 
tions for  the  all-quickening  Spirit  to  fill  our  hearts,  that  we  may  not  be  cold  or 
lethargic  in  the  performance  of  duty,  but  do  everything  with  appreciation  of 
the  excellence  of  the  service,  and  in  warm  and  cordial  sympathy  with  it 
(?s.  Ixxi.  22-24  ;  cviii.  2  ;  cxix.  16,  25,  47,  48,  etc.).  The  spirits  before  the 
throne  are  examples  of  the  services  that  are  most  glorifying  to  God,  and  that 
most  abundantly  receive  His  approving  smile.  "  His  will  is  done  in  heaven," 
not  only  nominally  and  universally,  but  with  fervent  and  exultant  hearts, 
cheerfully  and  with  alacrity,  promptly,  swiftly  and  unquestioningly.  The 
seraphim,  **  with  two  of  their  wings  do  fly,"  rather,  stand  in  the  attitude  of 
being  ready  to  fly  at  a  moment's  notice,  when  the  lightest  whisper  is  given  by 
Him  who  sits  on  the  throne.  **  The  living  creatures  in  the  wheels  ran  and 
returned  like  a  flash  of  lightning." 

II.  Redemption  seasons  are  testing  seasons. 

Deborah's  day  was  marked  by  a  great  redemption  wrought  for  Israel,  and  it 
was  pre-eminently  a  time  for  putting  the  whole  people  to  a  strict  test  of 
character  before  God.  This  paragra])h  is  occu])ied  with  a  stating  of  the  result 
brought  out  by  the  application  of  the  test.  Never  since  the  days  of  Joshua 
had  such  a  sifting  process  been  gone  tlirough  as  now.  The  touch-stone  was, 
"  Who  would  run  every  hazard  for  the  honour  of  God's  name  ?"  Some  were  ex- 
pressly called  on  to  devote  themselves  to  the  work,  as  in  the  case  of  Zebulun  and 
Naphtali.  Others  had  merely  the  opportunity  presented,  but  were  not  directly 
called.  This,  however,  sufficed  to  test  whether  the  heart  was  sufficiently  sensi- 
tive to  come  forward  to  uphold  that  honour,  or  whether  it  was  so  indifferent  as 
to  prefer  to  risk  nothing,  by  declining  to  move,  when  left  entirely  to  itself  to  decide. 
272 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES.  ohap.  v. 


So  it  was  with  most  of  the  other  tribes.  This  testing  of  character  was  made  in 
intimate  association  with  the  deliverance  wrought,  implying  that  it  was  most 
important,  and  indeed  essential,  that  the  two  things  should  go  together.    For  ; 

1.  God's  church  must  be  purified  when  she  receives  special  marks  of  His 
favour.  It  is  ever  to  a  pure  church  that  He  grants  His  blessings — ^penitent, 
trustful,  loyal.  When,  at  any  time,  much  idolatrous  impurity  has  gathered 
around  it,  with  the  *'  fan  in  His  hand.  He  thoroughly  purges  his  floor,"  separating 
the  wheat  from  the  chaff.  Any  circumstances  which  bring  out  whether  regard 
for  religious  principle  prevails  over  love  of  ease,  or  worldly  interest,  will  serve 
for  a  winnowing  process.  When  Christ  came,  there  was  a  thorough  sifting  of 
men's  characters,  by  the  strict  rules  which  He  laid  down  for  admission  into  His 
kingdom.  He  judged  everything  in  character  by  "  the  thoughts  and  intents  of 
the  heart."  Fair  appearances  without  that  were  nothing.  This  test  was  so 
sharp  in  its  operation,  that  it  cut  off  whole  classes  of  persons  who  reckoned 
themselves  most  sure  of  entering  the  kingdom — fulfilling  the  prophetic  words, 
**  Who  may  abide  the  day  of  His  coming  ?  for  He  is  like  a  refiner  s  fire,  and 
like  fullers  soap  ?  "  (Isa.  xxxi.  9  ;  Dan.  v.  27  ;  1  Cor.  xi.  19,  32  ;  Luke ii.  35). 
The  ocean  requires  storms  to  sweep  over  it  to  keep  it  from  putrefying. 

Different  in  appearance y  yet  similar  in  reality,  were  the  means  taken,  in 
Deborah's  days,  to  ascertain  whether  the  professing  church  possessed  the  true 
features  of  the  Divine  image — love  to  God  showing  itself  in  reverence  for  the 
Divine  name,  zeal  for  the  Divine  honour,  devotion  to  the  cause  of  God, 
obedience  under  trying  circumstances  to  His  call,  and  willingness  to  make  great 
personal  sacrifices  for  His  sake.  When  God  would  do  great  things  on  behalf  of 
His  church.  He  first  sees  to  it,  that,  in  character  and  conduct,  it  is  somewhat 
worthy  of  Him.  He  first  ^^  heals  Israel's  backslidings,"  and  then  *'  loves  him 
freely.  He  becomes  to  him  as  the  dew,  causing  Him  to  grow  as  the  lily,  and  to 
cast  forth  his  roots  as  Lebanon^  The  summons  to  do  battle  with  Sisera  was  a 
searching  test  of  character  for  the  tribes  of  Israel,  and  was  amply  sufficient  to 
prove,  that  every  man  who  stood  it  was  a  man  of  faith  and  an  Israelite  indeed. 
As  representing  Israel,  the  noble  band  who  presented  themselves  on  the  hill  of 
Tabor  was  the  sample  of  a  pure  church. 

Parallel  cases.  (1.)  In  the  wide-spread  idolatry  of  the  Ahab  and  Jezebel 
period,  the  people  as  a  whole  were  tested  on  the  question,  whether  they  would 
accept  of  Jehovah  or  Baal  to  be  their  God  ;  and  an  unanimous  response  was 
made  for  Jehovah.  Then  the  long-denied  blessing  of  rain  was  sent  on  the 
land. 

(2.)  Before  the  people  entered  on  the  possession  of  the  promised  inheritance, 
a  winnowing  process  of  solemn  dealings  had  been  carried  on  with  them  in  the 
wilderness,  resulting  in  the  disappearance,  by  plagues  and  otherwise,  of  the 
unbelieving  fathers,  and  the  burning  of  many  salutary  lessons  into  the  hearts  of 
the  children,  so  that  when  the  time  for  granting  the  blessing  came,  they  went 
forward  with  steady  trust  in  their  God  against  the  formidable  hosts  of  the 
Canaanites. 

(3.)  Previous  to  the  great  delivera7ice,  which  God  wrought  for  Israel  at 
Ebenezer  in  the  days  of  Samuel,  we  are  told  that  "all  Israel  lamented  after  the 
Lord,  put  away  their  strange  gods,  and  served  Jehovah  only." 

(4.)  When  God  promised  in  the  days  of  hzekiel,  that,  ere  long.  He  would 
deliver  His  captive  Israel,  and  bring  them  into  their  own  land.  He  also  promised 
to  "  sprinkle  them  with  cleansing  water,  and  purge  them  from  all  their  filthiness 
and  idols." 

(5.)  Before  the  first  Christian  Church  was  Javoured  with  the  remarkable 
Pentecostal  effusion  from  on  high,  proof  was  given  that,  though  small  in 
numbers,  she  was,  as  regards  character  before  God,  in  an  eminently  fit  state  to 

S  273 


OHAP.  V.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


receivi^,  the  promised  blessing  from  her  exalted  Lord.  All  were  Israelites 
indeed  ;  all  were  devotedly  attached  to  their  Lord  ;  all  were  full  of  the  spirit  of 
prayer,  and  were  strong  in  faith ;  and  all  had  much  of  the  spirit  of  love  and  unity. 

2.  Some  must  be  found  to  stand  the  test  when  deliverance  is  granted.  It  is 
only  on  account  of  such  that  deliverance  comes.  It  is  seldom  that  all  can  abide 
the  test  applied.  In  the  present  case,  several  whole  tribes  were  unrepresented 
in  the  day  of  decision,  while  some  others  sent  only  a  small  contingent.  But 
there  were  a  considerable  number  (more  than  10,000)  whose  loyalty  was 
unmistakable  ;  and  it  was  because  of  the  noble  decision  of  these  men,  in  coming 
forward  to  figlit  the  battle  of  the  Lord,  that  the  Divine  presence  and  protection 
were  extended  to  the  whole  nation  at  this  juncture.  Had  Israel  become  so 
corrupt,  that  none  had  been  found  iaithful  in  adherence  to  tiie  cause  of  Jehovah, 
there  had  been  no  deliverance  ;  for,  in  such  a  case,  there  would  have  been  no 
spot  in  the  picture  on  which  the  Divine  eye  could  have  rested  with  complacency  ; 
and  so,  the  vine  which  God  brought  out  of  Egypt  must,  like  the  barren  fig-tree, 
have  been  cut  down  as  a  cumberer  of  the  soil.  There  must  ever  be  sometliing 
to  justify  God  in  showing  marks  of  His  favour.  Had  even  Sodom's  walls 
contained  but  ten  righteous  persons,  that  number,  small  as  it  is,  of  men  who 
bore  the  image  of  God,  would  have  made  it  a  suitable  thing  for  God  to  have 
spared  the  whole  city  for  a  time.  But  the  principle  is,  that  the  wicked  are  only 
spared  for  the  sake  of  the  righteous.  Hence  the  propriety  of  asking  the  people 
to  give  themselves  as  volunteers  to  this  battle,  that  it  might  be  seeu  who  were 
faithful  to  the  covenant  of  the  God  of  Israel.  These  being  discovered,  the  blessing 
came  on  the  whole  land  for  their  sakes  (Ps.  xxv.  10  ;  Acts  xxvii.  24  ;  Job 
xlii.  8  ;  Gen.  xx.  17  ;  xix.  29  ;  Ex.  xxxii.  9,  10,  14). 

Parallel  cases.  (1.)  In  the  days  of  the  purgation  of  Jerusalem,  two-thirds  of 
the  people  were  to  be  destroyed,  but  the  remaining  third  were  to  be  purified  in 
the  fire,  and  preserved  as  a  people  to  keep  up  the  honour  of  Jehovah's  name  in 
the  earth  (Zech.  xiii.  9).  (2.)  At  the  time  of  the  iniquitous  worship  of  the 
golden  calf,  a  stern  test  was  applied.  In  reply  to  the  question,  "  Who  is  on  the 
Lord's  side?"  all  the  sons  of  Levi  stood  forward,  and  complied  with  the 
rigorous  requirement,  to  slay  every  man  his  brother  and  companion.  Because 
of  this  staunch  loyalty  to  the  sovereignty  of  their  God,  and  that  too  of  such  of 
the  people,  as  stripped  themselves  of  their  ornaments  and  mourned  for  their  sin, 
the  whole  people  were  spared  at  a  moment  when  they  were  in  imminent  risk  of 
being  consumed.  (Ex.  xxxii.  26-29  ;  xxxiii.  4-6,  14).  (3.)  When  the  spies 
returned  from  their  mission,  and  gave  depressing  accounts  of  the  difficulty  of 
subduing  the  land,  a  strong  test  was  applied  to  the  faith  of  the  people,  so  that 
we  hear  of  none  except  Caleb  and  Joshua,  along  with  Moses,  who  stood  fast  in 
their  allegiance  to  their  God.  The  result  was,  that  the  masses  perished  in  the 
wilderness,  but,  for  the  sake  of  the  few  who  stood  the  test,  another  generation 
more  believing  than  the  fathers  were  raised  up,  to  preserve  the  name  of  Israel, 
as  the  people  of  the  living  God.  (4.)  Out  of  regard  to  the  presence  of  one 
good  king,  Jehoskaphat,  the  armies  of  three  kings,  who  were  gathered  together  in 
the  land  of  Moab,  were  saved  in  a  remarkable  manner,  when  otherwise  they 
would  certainly  have  perished  of  the  miseries  of  thirst  (2  Kings  iii.  14). 

3.  A  testing^  process  is  needed  to  discover  fit  instruments  for  accomplishing 
thp  deliverance.  Israel's  present  needs  discovered  not  only  Deborah  and  Barak> 
but  also  the  whole  of  the  good  men  and  true,  who  formed  the  army  of  the 
deliverance.  The  fire  tries  every  man's  character  of  what  sort  it  is.  Times  of 
great  peril  bring  men  of  decision  to  the  front.  Ordinary  men  can  steer  the 
vessel,  so  long  as  there  is  only  a  gentle  ripple  on  the  surface,  but,  when  the 
waves  run  mountains  high,  it  takes  the  firmest  nerve,  and  the  most  skilful 
Beamanshi]i,  to  bring  it  safely  to  harbour.     When  an  army  of  children  are  in  the 

274 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES,  chap.  v. 


field,  there  are  no  circumstances  to  test  valour,  or  soldierly  bearing.  But  let  a 
legion  of  Anakim  appear,  and  instantly,  the  men  of  true  faith,  and  unshaken 
confidence  in  their  God,  are  discovered.  Thus  Joshua  came  to  be  known  as  one 
fitted  to  lead  the  people,  in  the  work  of  dispossessing  the  Canaan ites  of  the  ricli 
lands,  they  had  shown  tliemselves  to  be  so  unworthy  to  occupy.  It  was  thus 
that  the  Othniels  and  Shamgars,  the  Baraks  and  Gideons,  and  other  '*  saviours  " 
of  their  country  and  people  were  brought  to  light.  It  was  thus  too,  that  David 
had  such  remarkable  qualities  of  character  exhibited,  as  fitted  him,  not 
only  to  save  Israel  from  all  their  perils,  but  a-lso  to  raise  them  rapidly  to  the 
highest  pitch  of  prosperity.  Thus  too  Joseph  became  known  as  a  man  qualified 
to  rescue  multitudes  in  his  day,  from  the  horrors  of  general  famine,  at  a  time  of 
greatest  peril  to  all  lands. 

In  general  history,  such  names  as  these  might  be  mentioned,  as  persons  whose 
great  qualities  became  known,  through  the  perilous  character  of  their  times,  viz., 
Alfred,  Wallace,  Bruce,  fell,  Cincinriatus,  Julius  Ccesar,  Hannibal,  Napoleon 
Buonaparte,  Cromwell,  Columbus,  Washington,  and  many  others.  In  sacred,  or 
church  history,  such  names  might  be  given  as  the  twelve  apostles,  Paul  and  his 
companions,  the  Chrisfian  Martyrs,  Ghrysostom,  Augustine,  Luther,  Calvin^ 
Wesley,  Whitfield,  Knox^  the  ^Scottish  Covenanters,  the  English  Puritans, 
Carey,  Martin,  Brainerd,  etc. 

4.  Redemption  times  are  times  for  imparting  new  life  to  the  Church.  God 
accompanies  her  deliverance  with  His  blessing.  This  is  seen  in  various  ways  : 
(1.)  He  makes  the  testing  process  become  a  healthful  discipline.  To  have  a 
severe  test  applied,  such  as  that  which  the  people  of  Israel  now  experienced,  was 
to  suffer  a  great  disturbance  of  one's  natural  ease.  A  peremptory  call  was  made 
to  sacrifice  personal  feelings,  in  order  to  maintain  religious  principle.  A  strong 
act  of  will  was  required  to  be  put  forth  on  the  side  of  righteousness,  at  the 
expense  of  inflicting  deep  pain  on  natural  feelings.  There  was  indeed  a  call  to 
"  crucify  the  flesh."  But  this  was  really  a  blessing  in  disguise,  for  it  was  a  great 
step  taken  towards  self-conquest — the  point  of  obeying  implicitly  the  call  of 
religious  duty,  without  any  murmuring  from  "  flesh  and  blood."  It  implied  a 
destruction  of  those  elements  in  a  man's  nature,  which  would  resist  the  Divine 
voice. 

A  ny  strong  exercise  of  self-denial,  indeed,  is  a  most  healthful  discipline  when 
God  so  overrules  it.  From  the  want  of  this,  many  persons  get  settled  down  in 
their  old  de|)ressed  habits,  just  as  wine,  when  not  emptied  from  vessel  to  vessel, 
gets  settled  on  its  lees,  and,  as  the  result,  there  is  greater  weddedness  to  evil, 
and  greater  insensibility  to  good.  But  sharp  and  imperious  calls  for  making 
sacrifice  of  feeling  on  behalf  of  principle,  shake  the  soul  out  of  this  state  of 
spiritual  torpor,  and  clear  away  the  dangerous  crusts  which  would  otherwise 
soon  encase  it  in  a  state  of  hardness  (comp.  Jer.  xlviii.  11,  12  ;  Ps.  Iv.  19  ; 
Amos  vi.  1  ;  Zeph.  i.  12).  Great  storms  teach  a  man  to  take  the  helm  with  a 
firm  hand  amid  the  tossings  and  dashings  of  the  wave.  They  rouse  up  his 
spirit  to  guide  the  vessel  steadily  in  its  course,  shunning  the  rocks,  steering 
safely  between  Scylla  and  Charybdis,  and  at  last  reaching  the  desired  haven  on 
the  other  side.  Discipline  begets  courage,  presence  of  mind,  hardihood  in 
braving  dangers,  and  great  promptness  in  meeting  them.  It  requires  more  than 
the  mild  zephyrs  of  summer  to  make  a  great  character.  The  rough  Borean 
blasts  of  winter  are  more  likely  to  produce  the  thing  desired.  Discipline  moulds 
character.  A  beautiful  statue  lies  in  the  block  of  marble  ;  discipline,  like  the 
hand  of  the  sculptor,  brings  it  out. 

(2.)  He  fills  His  Church  with  gratitude  and  praise.  This  is  the  natural  effect 
of  obtaining  a  great  and  scarcely  expected  deliverance.  Nothing  is  better  fitted 
to  awaken  in  the  soul  a  sense  of  fresh  and  powerful  obligations,  than  when  such 

275 


CHAP.  V.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES, 


a  blessing  is  conferred.     Of  the  influence  of  gratitude  we  have  already  spoken 
(see  ^.  259,  260).^ 

(3.;  She  experiences  a  new  sense  of  liberty.  She  is  freed  at  once  from  a 
heavy  external  oppression,  and  from  an  inward  load  of  anxiety  on  the  heart. 
Hence  a  new  flush  of  zeal,  and  a  fresh  glow  of  ardour  in  the  service  of  God. 
Hence  a  "  pressing  forward  to  what  is  before,"  with  a  lighter  and  more 
buoyant  heart. 

(4.)  She  also  feels  that  a  new  and  brighter  hope  is  enkindled  within  her. 
Hope  is  one  of  the  mightiest  of  all  motives  in  stimulating  to  activity.  Some- 
times it  is  represented  as  "  an  anchor  of  the  soul,  keeping  it  sure  and  steadfast." 
At  other  times,  it  is  spoken  of  as  a  powerful  spring  of  influence,  causing  the 
soul  to  bound  forward  to  meet  a  joyous  future,  and  already  to  realise  that 
future.  The  dark  clouds  of  Israel's  coming  history,  so  long  lurid  in  their 
appearance,  were  now  tipped  all  over  with  golden  edgings.  They  were  "  saved 
by  hope  ; "  and  so  cheered  and  quickened  in  doing  their  great  work  as  a  Church. 

(5.)  Fresh  supplies  of  Divine  influence  are  also  given.  When  He  shows  His 
love  to  the  Church  by  granting  a  great  deliverance,  it  is  but  seendy  that  it 
should  also  receive  a  fresh  touch  from  His  gracious  hand,  to  make  it  more  like 
to  Himself  and  more  worthy  of  His  love.  Hence,  oftentimes  a  fresh  baptism 
of  the  Spirit  is  imparted,  and  a  quickening  of  the  Church  life  takes  place,  at 
the  same  time  that  she  is  delivered  out  of  the  hands  of  her  enemies.  It  is, 
indeed,  expressly  stated  that  He  would  redeem  His  people  out  of  the  hands  of 
their  enemies,  that  they  "might  serve  Him  without  fear,  in  holiness  and 
righteousness,  all  the  days  of  their  life."  When  the  time  for  rebuilding  the 
waste  places  of  Zion  should  come  round,  God  promises  to  *'  lay  her  stones  with 
fair  colours,  and  her  foundations  with  sapphires,  to  make  her  windows  of  agate, 
her  gates  of  carbuncles,  and  all  her  borders  of  pleasant  stones."  Frequently, 
on  the  pages  of  prophecy,  God's  visiting  His  Church  with  visible  and  temporal 
prosperity,  is  regarded  as  synonymous  with  granting  her  a  spiritual  revival 
(see  Isa.  Ix.  1,  etc. ;  lii.  1,  2;  xli.  10-20;  xxxii.  13-18;  xliii.  1-6;  xlix.  13-23; 
Zech.  xii.  8-10 ;  Jer.  xxxii.  37-44). 

III.  The  character  of  the  men  on  God's  list  of  honour.  The  matter  to  be 
decided  in  the  contest  between  Sisera  and  Israel  was  not  simply,  whether  Israel 
was  to  continue  any  longer  as  one  of  the  separate  nations  of  the  earth — though 
that  too  was  greatly  important,  the  preservation  or  extinction  of  a  nation — but 
it  was  the  far  larger  question,  whether  the  honour  of  Israel's  God  was  to  be  kept 
up,  by  showing  Himself  able  to  protect  the  people  that  were  called  by 
His  name,  and  whom  he  had  engaged  to  defend,  and  also,  whether  he  should 
henceforth  continue  to  have  a  people  to  represent  Him  on  the  earth  at  all. 
This  lifted  the  contention  to  an  infinitely  higher  pitch  than  an  ordinary  fight 
between  two  armies.  The  test  applied  to  Israel,  we  have  also  seen  was 
such,  as  to  make  a  thorough  sifting  of  religious  character,  sure  to  detect  the 
half-hearted  and  the  faint  hearted,  and  which  only  the  thorough-going  Israelites 
could  stand.  For  this  double  reason — that  the  occasion  was  one  of  such  vast 
importance,  and  that  the  terms  required  of  those  who  should  devote  them- 
selves were  so  crucial,  it  was  meet,  that  those  who  ranged  themselves  on  the 
Lord's  side  should  have  their  names  put  down  on  a  list  of  honour,  for 
remembrance  through  all  the  ages  of  time,  in  the  hallowed  circle  of  the  church 
of  the  living  God. 

What  names  were  put  on  this  list  ? 

(1.)  Not  all  who  were  '*  of  Israel"    For  "they  are  not  all  (counted  to  be) 

Israel,  who  are  of  Israel."  The  vast  majority  of  those  who  were  by  birth  the  seed 

of  Abraham,  in  this  age,  as  in  so  many  other  ages,  belonged  to  another  category. 

Only  those  who  could  take  their  life  in  their  hand,  and  do  their  duty  to  their  God 

276 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES,  chap.  ▼. 


at  any  cost,  were  counted  worthy.  Decision  of  religious  cliaracter,  and  not  the 
accident  of  natural  birth,  constitutes  the  differentiating  line.  Allegiance  to  God 
must  be  held  superior  to  all  other  considerations. 

(2.)  Not  merely  the  brave.  All  who  fought  on  the  side  of  Israel  this  day  were 
true  heroes,  and  were  on  that  account  deserving  of  an  honourable  place  in  the 
history  of  the  nation.  We  admire  a  spirit  of  true  courage  and  high-souled 
bearing,  wherever  it  is  shown  ;  and  never  does  such  a  spirit  shine  to  more 
advantage,  than  when  it  is  exhibited  in  defence  of  God's  truth,  and  God's  cause 
on  the  earth.  Yet  simple  bravery  is  not  in  itself  a  religious  virtue,  and  may  be 
possessed  by  those  who  have  neither  part  nor  lot  with  the  people  of  God.  It  is 
most  beautiful  when  associated  with  true  religion,  when  under  its  control,  and 
enlisted  in  its  service  ;  but  it  is  to  fall  down  to  a  heathen  Roman  standard  of 
virtue,  to  make  it  synonymous  with  religion  itself. 

(3.)  Not  merely  the  patriotic.  Not  a  few  make  so  much  of  the  qualities  of 
patriotism  and  bravery,  as  shown  in  these  days  of  the  Judges,  that  they  speak  of 
these  features,  as  that  on  which  the  claim  of  these  men  to  live  in  history  rests. 
It  is  spoken  of  as  the  heroic — the  iron  age — the  military  age  ;  the  age  of  great 
warriors,  and  great  feats,  accomplished  on  the  battle-field.  But  to  regard  that 
as  the  chief  thing,  fails  to  bring  out  the  true  interest  of  the  history.  To  confine 
the  narrative  to  this,  is  to  reduce  it  to  the  level  of  common  history,  and  to  put 
its  sacred  character  into  the  shade.  Love  of  one's  country,  according  to  a  mere 
human  standard,  is  a  feature  held  in  great  estimation.  We  account  the  true 
patriot  one  of  the  most  honourable  of  men.  And  patriotism,  in  the  case  of  the 
Jew,  had  a  specially  hallowed  character.  He  dwelt  in  a  "  holy  land,"  a  land 
which  was  the  gift  of  Jehovah  Himself  to  His  chosen  people,  as  a  pledge  of  His 
love,  a  land  which  was  sacred  to  the  cause  of  righteousness  in  a  world  of  sin, 
which  was  ruled  over  by  Jehovah  as  its  king,  and  which  was  the  spot  chosen  by 
Jehovah,  for  the  development  of  the  great  scheme  of  human  redemption  by 
Jesus  Christ.  Yet  something,  even  of  this,  the  Israelite  might  have,  in  the  way 
of  national  pride,  without  having  any  true  love  in  his  heart  to  God.  Patriotism, 
after  all,  is  but  the  second  thing.  That  which  entitled  any  to  have  their  names 
placed  on  God's  special  list  of  honour  was  : 

1.  Their  deep  concern  for  the  honour  of  the  Divine  name.  This,  more 
than  any  other  circumstance,  characterised  the  men  who  now  stood  forward  in 
the  defence  of  the  cause  of  their  God.  They  were  true  fearers  of  the  God  of 
Israel,  and  nothing  was  dearer  to  their  hearts,  than  to  see  His  name  worshipped 
and  honoured  throughout  the  land.  Though  not  possessed  of  the  bright  display 
of  the  Divine  character  which  we  now  have  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ,  they  did 
not  fail  to  prize  the  manifestation  of  that  character,  which  they  had  in  their  own 
jiational  institutions  and  history.  The  former  of  these  set  forth  a  wonderful 
subject  of  study,  in  a  system  where  *'  Mercy  and  Truth  did  meet  together, 
and  Righteousness  and  Peace  embraced  each  other."  And  in  the  latter — their 
national  history — they  saw  a  great  meaning  in  the  mighty  signs  and  wonders, 
which  had  been  wrought  for  them,  since  the  days  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  In 
both  these  together,  as  in  a  Bible,  they  found  a  treasury  of  materials, 
from  which  to  form  fit  conceptions  of  what  reverence,  love,  and  praise  were 
due  to  the  name  of  the  God  of  Israel.  And,  in  proportion  as  that  name 
was  most  dear  to  them,  and  hallowed  by  them,  were  they  concerned  and 
distressed  to  see  it  every  day,  for  so  long  a  time,  blasphemed  over  the  land. 
They  were  not  insensible  to  all  the  streams  of  mercy,  which  their  God  had  made 
to  follow  them  in  every  part  of  their  history,  to  His  Fatherly  watchful  care  over 
them,  and  the  costly  love  He  had  lavished  on  them,  in  so  many  forms,  as  the 
people  He  had  chosen  for  Himself;  and  now,  it  was  most  p>ainful  for  them  to 
look  on  the  dark  ingratitude  of  their  people,  their  infidelity  to  their  sacred 

277 


CHAP.  V.  HOMILETIO  OOMMENTARY;  JUDGES. 


engagements  to  follow  Jeliovah  only,  and  to  hear  the  shouts  of  triumph  on  the 
part  of  the  heathen,  in  celebrating  the  praises  of  their  dumb  idol  gods,  as  far 
superior  to  the  God  of  the  trampled  down  Hebrews  !  To  show  the  burning 
anxiety  of  their  hearts,  the  moment  they  got  an  opportunity  of  doing  something 
to  retrieve  the  dishonour  done  to  Jehovah's  name,  they  embraced  it  without 
delay,  counting  not  their  lives  dear  to  them,  if  only  they  might  well  perform  the 
deep  obligations,  under  which  they  felt  themselves,  to  speak  and  act  for  the 
glory  of  Israel's  God. 

Exam'ples.  In  this  they  resembled  the  good  in  the  days  of  Malachi,  who, 
amid  abounding  iniquity  ^'feared  the  Lord  and  thought  wpon  His  name — speak- 
ing often  one  to  another!^  as  to  what  might  be  best  to  be  done.  This  was  most 
pleasing  to  their  God,  who  ''hearkened  and  heard  and  a  hook  of  remembrance 
was  written  before  Him  "  on  their  behalf.  Similarly,  too,  did  the  good  in  Ezekiel's 
days  act,  "  who  did  sigh  and  cry  for  all  the  abominations  that  were  done  in  the 
midst  of  Jerusalem"  Their  names  were  taken  down  to  be  remembered  for  future 
honours  (Mai.  iii.  16,  17  ;  Ezek.  ix.  4,  etc.,  also  Ps.  cxix.  136,53,  158).  God's 
rule  is,  "  them  that  honour  me  I  will  honour  "  (see  Luke  xxii.  28-30  ;  Mai.  iv.  2  ; 
Ps.  Ixxxv.  9,  cxii.  1-3  ;  Zech.  i.  14,  viii.  1-8  ;  Ps.  cxlvii.  11  ;  Lev.  x.  1-3). 
Abraham  acted  for  the  honour  of  his  God,  when  he  said,  ''Let  there  be  no 
strife  between  thee  and  me" — for  the  Canaanite  is  in  the  land,  and  nothing 
will  be  so  much  to  the  discredit  of  our  religion  in  his  eyes,  as  to  see  those 
who  profess  the  name  of  God  falling  out  among  themselves  (Gen.  xiii.  7-9). 
Thus  did  David  show  jealousy  for  the  name  of  his  God,  when  he  uttered 
the  noble  words,  "  Who  is  this  uncircumcised  Philistine,  that  he  should  defy 
the  armies  of  the  living  God*s"  (1  Sam.  xvii.  26  ;  see  also  2  Kings  xxii.  19,  20  ; 
Gen.  xxii.  12,  16-18). 

2.  Their  self-dedication  to  uphold  the  Divine  honour.  *'  The  people  willingly 
offered  themselves."  Emphasis  is  put  on  this  as  the  principal  thing  worthy  of 
celebration.  It  is  indeed  the  text  of  the  ode — the  thing  to  be  sung  of,  along 
with  the  signal  defeat  of  the  enemy ;  for  verse  2  contains  a  statement  of  the 
subject  of  the  whole  chapter.  This  thought  is  again  alluded  to  in  verse  9,  and 
enlarged  inverses  13-18  and 23,  where  the  distinction  is  drawn,  and  the  greatest 
importance  attached  to  it,  between  those  who  spontaneously  offered  themselves 
to  the  great  work,  and  tliose  who  drew  back — the  one  being  mentioned  with 
special  marks  of  honour,  and  the  other  being  consigned  to  reproach,  and  even  to 
cursing. 

(1.)  Everyman  who  came  forward  at  Barak's  call  was  a  volunteer.  It  was 
the  act  of  his  own  free-will.  Barak  was  indeed  directed  to  raise  10,000  men 
out  ofZebulun  and  Naphtali ;  but  in  what  manner?  It  is  not  given  in  the 
form  of  a  peremptory  command,  either  to  the  tribes  as  such,  or  to  individuals, 
saying,  "  Go,  and  fight  against  this  company,"  but  **  Who  will  go  ?"  Hence  the 
careful  wording  of  the  charge  given  to  Barak,  "Go  d^wdi  draw  towards  Mount 
l^abor  "  (iv.  6) — implying  that  no  one  was  to  be  compelled,  but  the  act  was  to 
come  of  their  own  accord.  And  when  Barak  went  to  fulfil  his  commission,  he 
called  them — he  did  not  command  them  under  penalties.  Their  acceptance  of 
all  risks  was  their  own  spontaneous  act.  Barak  seems  to  have  found  no 
difficulty  in  finding  the  number  of  men  wanted ;  and  besides  these,  there 
seem  to  have  been  a  considerable  number  of  volunteers  from  the  other 
tribes.  With  men  of  true  principle,  though  not  expressly  called,  it  was  yet 
motive  enough  to  have  the  opportunity  offered.  They  required  no  farther 
inducement.  But  the  feature  in  the  account  to  which  God  calls  special 
attention  is,  that  those  who  came  forward  to  meet  this  aU-important  juncture 
for  God's  cause,  did  so  by  an  act  of  self-surrender.  It  was  in  the  highest  sense 
a  religious  act, 
278 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES.  ohap  v. 


(2.)  A  single  act  sometimes  sheds  a  flood  of  light  on  the  whole  character.  It 
reveals  the  motives  and  hidden  springs  of  action,  and  shows,  beyond  the  shadow 
of  a  doubt,  the  true  pole  to  which  the  heart  points,  le  indicates,  not  only 
whether  the  bias  is  towards  God,  but  how  strong  that  biab  is,  how  much  it  is 
willing  to  sacrifice  for  Him,  and  whether  its  affection  is  supreme.  In  the  present 
instance,  the  te«t  of  character  was  so  strong,  tliat  every  man  who  took  the  field, 
felt  he  was  endangering  his  life  ;  and  virtually  said,  he  was  prepared  to  make 
the  sacrifice  for  the  honour  of  His  God.  Translated  into  words  his  act  meant, 
**  it  is  not  necessary  for  me  to  live  ;  it  is  indispensable  that  I  should  be  loyal  to 
my  God!"  One  of  the  "six  hundred  "of  the  famous  Balaklava  cliarge,  on 
being  asked  by  the  writer  of  these  lines,  what  he  thought  when  the  order  was 
given  to  take  the  Russian  guns  in  front,  replied,  **  I  thought  of  nothing  but 
obeying  orders  ! "  Such  was  the  spirit  of  these  noble-hearted  Israelites.  They 
thought  of  nothing  but  vindicating  the  name  of  their  God,  when  an  opportunity 
offered. 

(3.)  This  spirit  of  free  self  consecration  makes  the  service  done  specially 
well-pleasing  to  God.  When  devotion  to  God  rises  higher  than  the  love  of  life 
itself,  it  is  pre-eminently  a  sacrifice  which  comes  up  with  an  odour  of  a  sweet 
smell  unto  God.  Never  did  any  single  act  we  read  of  in  all  history,  receive 
such  a  marked  commendation  from  God,  as  the  act  of  Abraham,  in  laying  his 
only  son,  whom  he  loved,  on  the  altar,  as  a  sacrifice,  in  obedience  to  God's 
command.  In  that  surrender,  he  sacrificed  his  tenderest  human  affections,  and 
his  brightest  future  hopes,  all  from  loyalty  to  his  God,  and  so  was  rewarded 
with  blessings  of  the  highest  mark  down  to  the  end  of  time.  When  Esther 
went  in  to  the  king,  she  took  her  life  in  her  hand,  rather  than  seethe  destruction 
of  the  people  of  her  God,  and  so  a  book  is  written  to  immortalise  her  memory. 
It  was  a  deep  heart-sorrow  to  Nehemiah,  when  he  heard  how  the  city  of  his 
God  lay  in  ruins,  and  was  a  reproacli  among  the  heathen,  and,  at  the  risk  of  his 
life,  he  sought  permission  of  his  king  to  rebuild  its  walls ;  for  which  act  his 
name  shines  like  a  star,  from  age  to  age,  in  the  firmament  of  the  Church. 
Other  examples  we  have  in  the  recorded  history  of  Moses  and  of  David  on 
many  occasions ;  of  Joshua  and  Caleb  (Num.  xiv.  6-lOj  ;  of  Zerubbabel,  and 
the  chief  of  the  fathers  in  his  day  (Ezra  iii.  and  iv)  ;  the  Apostles  (Acts  v.  41) ; 
Stephen  (Acts  vi.  vii.)  ;  also  John  the  Baptist  (Mark  vi.  17-20)  ;  and  Faul  on 
many  occasions.  These  men  were  noble  illustrations  of  the  principle  of  loyalty, 
which  the  Saviour  Himself  lays  down  as  the  rule  in  His  kingdom,  in  Luke 
xiv.  26. 

3.  Their  faith,  which  overcame  all  obstacles.  Their  distinctive  character 
was,  that  they  were  men  of  faith.  This  in  God's  sight  is  incomparably  more 
honourable,  than  to  say,  they  were  "  governors,"  "  princes,"  or  "  men  that  rode 
on  white  asses."  Some  of  them  were  such,  yet  not  because  they  were  so,  but 
because  they  acted  as  men  of  faith,  and  true  loyalty  to  their  God,  are  they  there 
enrolled  on  God's  list  of  honour.  Birth,  valour,  skill,  knowledge,  and  patriotism, 
in  their  place,  gain  distinction  among  men.  But  it  is  by  faith,  carried  out  into 
practice  amid  the  stern  difficulties  of  life,  that  the  names  which  live  through  all 
time  in  God's  Book  of  remembrance,  have  their  title  to  be  marked  out  as  those 
whom  God  delights  to  honour.  Had  they  gone  to  this  battle  merely  from  love 
of  adventure,  or  from  a  certain  love  of  romance,  which  some  people  find  in  the 
practice  of  war,  their  names  had  long  since  perished,  like  myriads  of  others  of 
whom  we  only  vaguely  know  that  once  they  were. 

(1.)  They  believed  in  the  face  of  naturalimpossibility.  Had  Barak's  handful 
of  men  calculated  the  probable  chances  of  war,  according  to  naturnl  appearances, 
they  must  have  unanimously  come  to  the  conclusion,  that  without  supernatural 
aid,  there  was  not  the  faintest  possibility  of  their  succeeding  against  the  masses  of 

27d 


CHAP.  V.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES, 


the  Canaanitish  host.  Nothing  could  be  more  foolhardy,  tlian  to  en|>age  the 
enemy  with  such  a  disparity  of  force.  So  few  in  number — the  want  of  discipline 
— the  want  of  arms — the  want  of  skill  and  prestige  ;  while  the  enemy  were  a 
numerous  host,  disciplined  in  a  high  degree — well  equipped  with  armour  and 
having  chariots  of  iron — also  stalwart  and  strong  in  physique — there  seemed  no 
proportion  between  the  two  camps.  There  was  the  clearest  proof,  that  they  were 
men  of  the  right  stamp  ;  that  they  could  trust  their  God  when  all  was  dark 
around  them,  as  well  as  when  the  way  was  clear  ;  that  God,  having  promised  to  go 
out  before  them,  would  find  ways  and  means  of  vindicating  His  own  cause,  though 
they  did  not  see  how.  They  believed  that  though  there  was  not  a  speck  of 
cloud  in  the  sky,  though  there  was  no  muttering  of  thunder,  or  sign  of  earth- 
quake, or  pestilence,  or  other  large  army  brought  to  their  assistance  ;  though 
they  knew  absolutely  nothing  of  the  means  by  which  God  was  to  fight  against 
Sisera,  and  saw  no  possible  natural  means  that  could  be  used,  they  yet  believed 
that  God  would,  in  some  way  known  to  Himself,  appear  on  their  behalf  at  the 
right  time,  and  would  effectually  dispose  of  the  enemy's  force,  simply  on  the 
ground,  that  He  had  given  his  word  for  it  that  it  should  be  so.  Through 
Deborah  He  liad  spoken.  The  whole  scheme  of  battle  was  of  His  appointment, 
which  amounted  to  a  series  of  testimonies  that  He  would  fight  for  them.  An 
express  assurance  was  also  given  by  Deborah  (chap.  iv.  14).  This  belief  in 
God's  bare  word,  in  the  face  of  apparent  impossibilities,  is  true  faith — the  faith 
which  overcomes. 

Abraham  believed  God's  simple  testimony  respecting  a  numerous  seed^  and 
waited  on  for  more  than  twenty  years,  though  all  ho})e  of  its  fulfilment,  in  the 
ordinary  course  of  nature,  had  passed  away.  Moses  believed  that  God  would 
supply  food  and  drink  to  His  people  in  the  wilderness  and  trusted  accordingly, 
though  he  knew  nothing,  when  he  entered  it,  about  the  descent  of  manna  daily 
for  forty  years,  or  the  water  gushing  out  of  the  rock  for  so  long  a  time.  He 
©nly  knew  that  God  had  commanded  him  to  conduct  the  people  through  the 
wilderness,  and  that  for  all  details  He  must  trust  Him  to  provide  everything 
when  the  time  came.  Every  sinner^  under  the  gospel,  is  required  to  believe  on 
God's  testimony,  that  all  his  sins  will  be  graciously  forgiven,  if  he  trusts  in  "Christ 
crucified,"  as  the  appointed  way  of  receiving  a  righteous  pardon,  and  if  he  also 
expresses  deep  sorrow  for  his  sins,  and  is  sincere  in  desiring  to  lead  a  new  life. 
It  is  faith,  too,  which  says,  "  I  know  that  God  will  hear  my  prayer  for  Christ's 
sake,  when  I  trust  in  Christ  and  have  sorrow  for  my  sins,  because  I  have  God's 
w^ord  for  it." 

(2).  They  trusted  in  God  to  bring  out  any  issue  that  He  pleased.  This  also 
is  part  of  the  province  of  faith,  and  it  is  a  higher  province  than  that  just 
mentioned.  They  believed  it  was  their  duty,  not  to  dictate,  or  suggest  anything 
as  to  the  best  issue,  nor  even  to  ask  questions,  but  to  leave  it  all  in  God's  hand, 
assured  that  He  had  a  perfect  knowledge  of  all  the  circumstances,  could  at  any 
moment  determine  what  was  best  to  be  done,  both  for  His  glory  and  for  their 
good,  and  that  He  would  infallibly  do  it.  Prayer  would  indeed  be  abundantly 
offered  in  expression  of  their  desires,  but  always  in  submission  to  His  will.  Their 
trust  in  Him  was  complete,  that  He  would  always  do  what  was  best ;  the 
ground  of  this  trust  being  God's  own  character,  because  He  is  what  He  is. 
Illustrations  of  this  are  everywhere  in  Scripture  (John  xvii.  11  ;  xiv.  31  ;  Luke 
xxii.  42;  1  Sam.  iii.  18;  Ps.  xxxvii.  5;  Isa.  xxvi.  3;  2  Sam.  xvi.  10-12; 
Job  i.  21  ;  Lam.  iii.  26. 

(3.)  They  believed  in  God's  glory  as  the  highest  and  most  sacred  of  all 
things.  Apart  from  all  consequences,  they  could  not  rest,  while  God's  glory 
was  tarnished,  and  His  honour  was  laid  in  the  dust.  That  one  fact  was  sufficient 
to  rouse  every  dormant  energy  they  possessed,  and  lead  them  to  acquiesce  in  any 
requirement  that  might  be  made,  for  retrieving  the  honour  of  the  Divine  name. 
280 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES,  chap.  v. 


They  had  indeed  the  expectation  of  deliverance  by  some  miraculous  means,  but 
independent  of  that,  simply  on  the  ground  that  God*s  name  had  been  profaned, 
and  that  reverence  for  it  must  be  restored,  they  offered  themselves  up  heart  and 
soul  at  the  call  of  duty.  Whether  they  should  die  or  live,  it  was  enough  for 
them  to  know,  that  the  way  was  opened  for  their  striking  a  blow  in  so  sacred  a 
cause. 

(4.)  They  believed  that  God  would  he  faithful  to  all  His  promises  and  gracious 
purposeSy  i.e.,  to  all  that  was  contained  in  His  covenant  with  His  people.  For 
His  covenant  contains  not  only  promises,  but  also  purposes  and  arrangements — 
the  promises  and  arrangements  being  the  unfolding  of  the  purposes.  The 
purport  of  the  whole  transaction,  on  this  occasion,  they  understood  to  be  the 
manifestation  of  Jehovah's  glory  before  all  eyes,  in  the  redemption  of  His  people 
from  the  hands  of  their  enemies.  This  redemption  they  believed  must  be 
accomplished,  because  it  was  in  the  line  of  the  fulfilment  of  the  Divine 
promises,  and  the  unfolding  of  the  gracious  purposes,  towards  the  chosen  people. 
These  are  mentioned  throughout  Scripture  as  the  grounds  of  many  a  deliverance 
(Ps.  cv.  42-45  ;  cvi.  41-46  ;  xxv.  10  ;  Ixxxv.  8-10 ;  Ixxxix.  3-5,  22-24,  33-36  ; 
Josh.  xxi.  45  ;  Isa.  liv.  7-10). 

Firm  in  this  faith,  these  true-hearted  Israelites  saw  no  difficulties  in  the  way. 
In  their  eyes,  the  mountains  had  already  become  a  plain.  It  was  for  them 
simply  to  await  the  call  of  their  God,  and  act  entirely  as  He  might  direct. 
Their  faith  could  "remove  mountains"  and  "overcome  the  world."  All  these 
belonged  to  the  list  of  honour. 

IV.  The  names  on  the  list  of  dishonour.  In  the  trial  of  character  now 
made,  while  some  nobly  stood  the  test,  many  more  were  found  wanting.  The 
rock  on  which  they  split  was,  their  unwillingness  to  sacrifice  their  own  personal 
ease  and  comfort  for  the  sake  of  their  relii^ious  principles.  Thus  it  was  with 
the  multitudes  who  came  around  the  Saviour,  desirous  to  become  His  disciples, 
but  who  stumbled  at  the  announcement,  "  if  any  man  will  come  after  me,  let 
him  deny  himself,  and  take  up  his  cross  and  follow  me."  Human  nature  is 
substantially  the  same  in  all  ages.  The  claims  of  flesh  and  blood  are  preferred 
to  God's  honour  and  the  interests  of  His  cause.  Men  think  of  their  own 
feelings  and  interests  first,  whatever  may  befall  God's  name  or  cause  in  the  world. 
In  opposition  to  this  the  Master  lifts  his  voice  in  the  solemn  and  oft-repeated 
formula,  "  Whosoever  will  save  his  life  shall  lose  it,  and  he  who  loseth  his  life 
for  my  sake  shall  find  it."  Illustrations  of  the  latter  part  of  this  statement 
have  been  given  above  ;  now  we  have  illustrations  of  the  former  part.  There 
are  four  classes  specified  here  who  cannot  stand  the  test :  1.  Those  who  are 
emotional  but  without  principle ;  2.  The  non-  emotional  and  indifferent ;  3. 
Those  who  are  engrossed  with  the  cares  of  this  life ;  4.  Those  who  stubbornly 
refuse  to  declare  themselves  on  the  Lord's  side.  The  first  three  cases  correspond 
with  the  three  classes  of  unprofitable  hearers,  whom  the  Saviour  describes  in  the 
parable  of  the  sower.  The  circumstances  are  different,  but  the  outlines  of 
character  are  the  same.     We  have  : 

1.  Those  that  are  emotional,  but  without  principle.     Of  this  Keuben  is  the 

illustration,  who,  at  once,  with  a  flush  of  impulsive  feeling  joyfully  responded  to 
the  call  made  to  arise  and  defend  the  Lord's  cause,  but  quickly,  as  they  began 
to  realise  the  stern  demand  of  self-denial  made  upon  them,  the  hopeful  feeling 
began  to  evaporate,  and  all  trace  of  their  heroic  professions  speedily  disappeared. 
So  it  was  with  the  stony-ground  hearers.  When  gospel  truths  were  brought 
before  their  minds,  instantly  they  were  aglow  with  love,  with  admiration,  with 
zeal,  or  warm  devotion,  according  to  the  representation  made,  and  they  are  forward 
to  make  great  professions  of  devotedness  to  the  cause  of  their  God.  But  there 
is  no  counting  of  the  cost :  there  is  no  fixed  principle  as  the  source  of  these 

281 


CHAP.  ▼  HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY :   JUDGES, 


feelings.  And  when  they  come  face  to  face  with  the  real  sacrifices  they  will 
have  to  make  by  entering  Christ's  service,  they  begin  to  cool  down,  and  try  to 
make  a  compromise. 

This  marks  the  character  of  Reuben.  (See  Critical  Notes,  verses  15,  16.)  At 
first,  "  hy  the  brooks  of  Reuben^  there  were  great  resolutions  of  hearth  High 
purposes  were  formed,  and  proud  protestations  were  made.  The  lions  were  seen 
only  in  the  imagination,  and  in  their  ardour  they  would  fight  and  overcome  a 
whole  army  of  them.  But  when  the  first  gush  of  zeal  was  over,  and  they  began 
to  think  what  it  would  really  cost  to  beard  the  lions,  their  impetuous  valour 
slackened  rein  and  became  more  discreet.  When  fear  was  aroused,  first  they 
c&me  to  a,  standstill ;  then  began  to  doubt;  then  to  be  irresolute;  next  to  be 
lukewarm  ;  and  finally  to  waver  ;  to  attempt  a  compromise  ;  and  end  in  drawing 
back.  Hence,  in  verse  16,  we  read,  "  By  the  brooks  of  Reuben  there  were  anxious 
ponderings  of  heart " — searchings,  debatings  with  themselves,  as  to  what  decision 
they  should  come  to,  to  get  out  of  the  dilemma.  They  loved  their  ease  too  well, 
reclining  on  the  green  pastures,  and  beside  the  purling  brooks  of  their  rich 
pastoral  country,  to  think  of  going  out  to  try  conclusions  at  arms  with  the  war- 
like Sisera.  Hence,  on  second  thoughts,  they  would  exercise  their  ingenuity  in 
endeavouring  to  discover  reasons,  to  justify  them  in  falling  from  their  first  mag- 
nanimous purpose,  to  go  manfully  forward  among  the  foremost  in  this  holy 
enterprise. 

What  were  the  resolutions  ?  '*  Let  us  go  boldly  forward !  Let  us  take  the 
lead  !  It  must  not  be  said  of  the  men  of  Reuben,  that  they  were  either  ashamed 
or  afraid,  to  do  battle  for  the  Lord  against  the  mighty.  Rather,  it  becomes  the 
tribe  of  the  eldest  brother  to  lead  the  van,  and  be  an  example  of  loyalty  to  all 
the  other  tribes.  Let  us,  as  of  old,  go  ready  armed  (Num.  xxxii.  17)  along  with 
our  brethren,  to  deliver  the  land  from  the  dark  shadow  of  the  oppressor.  Let 
but  the  arm  of  the  Lord  awake,  as  in  the  ancient  days — the  days  of  the 
renowned  Joshua,  when  Sun  and  Moon  stood  still  in  their  places,  when  hailstones 
fell  from  heaven  on  the  heads  of  the  enemies,  and  when  armies  of  hornets  made 
them  turn  their  backs.  Then  fear  shall  take  hold  on  the  Canaanitish  host, 
their  hearts  shall  melt  like  wax,  and  there  shall  not  be  spirit  in  them  any 
more."  But  when  the  fit  of  fervour  was  over,  and  they  began  to  look  calmly 
at  difficulties,  fears  came  trooping  up  like  dark  clouds  gradually  darkening  a 
bright  blue  sky. 

What  were  the  earnest  deliberations  ?  "  After  all,  we  have  not  been  called 
to  engage  in  this  conflict,  like  the  men  of  Zebulun  and  Naphtali.  If  any  others 
are  expected  to  assist  in  the  great  cause,  it  devolves  on  the  tribes  to  the  west  of 
the  Jordan  to  come  to  the  rescue.  Nine  tribes  and  a  half  are  Cis-Jordanic ; 
are  not  these  sufficient  to  meet  the  emergency  ?  Tke  remaining  two  and  a  half 
tribes  being  Trans-Jordanic,  may  well  be  exempted.  Besides  w^e  are  a  pastoral 
people,  unaccustomed  to  the  work  of  war,  and  could  do  little  against  iron 
chariots — surely,  we  should  be  excused.  Many  lives  w^ould  certainly  be  lost, 
and  our  dwellings  be  turned  into  houses  of  mourning.  During  our  absence  too, 
who  would  defend  our  hearths,  and  care  for  our  cattle  ;  and  when  there  are 
8uch  immense  flocks  and  herds  in  our  borders,  it  would  be  most  cul[)ab]e  in  us 
to  leave  them  without  shepherds  to  tend  and  provide  for  them.  Charity  and 
justice  alike  begin  at  home.  Our  first  duty  is  to  our  wives  and  children,  our 
domestics,  and  our  cattle.  And  then,  it  cannot  be  wondered  at,  if  a  pastoral 
people,  accustomed  to  dwell  in  fertile  meadows,  should  prefer  to  hear  the 
pipings  of  the  shepherds,  sitting  in  peaceful  security,  to  the  wild  blasts  of  the 
war-trumpets,  summoning  the  hosts  to  the  battlefields.  On  the  whole,  we  think 
it  better  to  remain  at  home." 

It  is  the  old  manner  of  the  deceitful  human  heart,  "  I  go,  sir  ;  and  went  not." 
'  Orpah  kissed  her  mother-iu  law,  and  went  back  to  her  people  and  her  gods." 

:^82 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES.  chap.  v. 


The  stony-ground  hearer's  good  resolutions  soon  "  withered  away."  The  aged 
apostle  confessed  that  with  the  lapse  of  time,  which  tries  all  things,  "  all  they 
that  were  in  Asia  had  turned  away  from  him,"  even  such  leaders  as  "  Phygellus 
and  Hermogenes."  The  Galatian  Christians  who  at  first  "  received  him  as  au 
angel  of  God,  and  would  have  plucked  out  their  own  eyes  and  given  them  to 
him,"  by-and-bye  began  to  forsake  him  for  the  Judaising  teachers  of  the  day. 
Such  conduct  is  not  only  contemptible  because  of  its  cowardice  and  selfishness, 
but  is  also  heinously  guilty,  because  it  trifles  with  the  honour  of  Jehovah's 
name,  and  turns  the  back  on  all  the  sacred  claims  of  duty  we  owe  to  Him. 
Against  all  such  frittering  away  of  sacred  obligations  of  duty,  "  the  day  of  the 
Lord  that  cometh  shall  burn  as  an  oven."     The  next  class  is  : 

2.  The  non-emotional  and  indifferent.  This  class  is  represented  by  Gilead, 
meaning  Gad,  and  the  portion  of  Manasseh,  that  was  beyond  Jordan.  They 
showed  little  or  no  feeling  in  the  matter,  but  remained  passive.  They  correspond 
somewhat  to  the  wayside  hearers.  These  the  Saviour  likens  to  the  hard  common, 
or  public  highway,  that  is  beaten  down  through  the  rush  of  traffic  upon  it — 
*'  the  constant  trail  of  the  waggons  of  business."  It  denotes  minds  that  are, 
through  ignorance,  or  want  of  receptivity,  insensible  to  gospel  calls,  and  deaf  to 
gospel  arguments  and  pleadings ;  that  in  fact  feel  nothing,  and  decide  nothing 
because  they  understand  nothing.  The  truth  produces  the  same  effect  on 
them  that  water  does  on  a  stone.  There  is  no  movement  of  the  conscience  and 
the  heart. 

**  Gilead  abides  beyond  Jordan."  They  were  simply  indifferent,  but  in  their 
case,  godlessness,  not  ignorance,  seems  to  have  been  the  cause.  Even  indifference 
at  such  a  crisis  was  a  most  serious  crime.  They  had  no  heart  to  the  cause  of 
their  God.  This  lay  at  the  bottom  of  their  indifference,  for  without  this  there 
was  no  propelling  power  to  move  them  forward.  And  having  nothing  to  urge 
them  on,  on  the  one  side,  there  was  much  to  keep  them  back  on  the  other.  They 
seemed  to  say—"  We  are  not  bound  to  enter  into  this  conflict.  It  is  no  concern 
of  ours.  We  live  on  the  Trans-Jordanic  side  of  the  country,  and  are  away 
from  the  scene  of  conflict.  It  belongs  to  the  tribes  whose  territories  are  exposed 
to  the  incursions  of  the  great  northern  power.  Barak  has  not  called  us  to  take 
part  in  this  struggle,  and  as  the  river  divides  us  from  the  battlefield,  it  cannot 
be  held  obligatory  in  us  to  move  in  the  matter.  It  is  purely  a  matter  of  option 
with  us,  and  being  so,  we  prefer  to  run  no  risk.  Why  should  we  rush  needlessly 
into  danger?  We  are  a  pastoral  people  and  care  little  for  the  work  of  war.  But 
w^e  trust  our  brethren  will  be  victorious,  and  we  shall  be  glad  to  see  them  freed 
from  the  grasp  of  the  cruel  oppressor." 

And  so  these  people  of  the  east  of  Jordan  lands  became  conspicuous  by  their 
absence.  But  by  tlieir  passive  attitude  and  stolid  indifference  they  contracted 
the  highest  degree  of  guilt.  It  is  as  if  a  man  could  look  on  and  see  a  friend, 
whom  he  was  under  the  weightiest  obligations  to  love  and  esteem,  openly  insulted 
and  foully  calumniated,  while  yet  he  did  not  speak  a  word,  or  show  the  slightest 
concern  for  his  friend's  honour  and  good  name.  When  a  man  acts  thus  by  his 
God,  it  becomes  incomparably  more  criminal,  for  it  implies  that  he  is  perfectly 
indifferent  to  the  honour  of  Jehovah's  great  name  !  Nothing  could  more  provoke 
God  to  anger,  or  excite  more  thorough  contempt  on  the  part  of  man.  It  is  an 
outrage  on  the  name  of  religious  brotherhood,  and  it  is  a  daring  defiance  of  the 
jealousy  of  Him  who  is  a  consuming  fire  !  (Kev.  iii.  14,  15.) 

3.  Those  who  are  engrossed  with  the  cares  of  this  life.  This  we  take  to 
be  the  spirit  of  the  allusion  made  to  Dan  and  Asher.  "  Why  does  Dan  tarry  in 
ships  ?  Asher  sits  still  by  the  sea-shore,  and  reposes  in  his  creeks  and  river 
mouths."  They  are  loth  to  leave  their  comfortable  home  on  the  Mediterranean. 
It  is  highly  probable,  that  a  large  number  of  the  Phoenicians,  and  the  grc  at  com- 

283 


OHAP.  V.  HOMJLETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


mercial  traders  in  the  north-west  of  Palestine,  were  in  Sisera's  army  ;  in  which 
case,  had  the  tribes  of  Dan  and  Asher  embarked  on  this  conflict,  they  must  have 
quarrelled  with  their  nearest  neighbours  and  best  customers.  For  it  would  appear 
that  the  principal  trade  of  these  two  tribes  was  by  sea.  By  going  to  war,  there- 
fore, with  the  populations  of  the  sea-board,  "  their  craft  would  be  in  danger." 
In  reply  to  solicitations  to  join  their  brethren,  they  would  doubtless  reply  as  many 
have  done  since,  and  still  do  from  age  to  age,  *'  Our  worldly  interests  will 
materially  suffer  should  we  dare  to  draw  the  sword  against  Sisera.  An 
embargo  will  be  put  on  our  ships.  Our  maritime  trade  will  be  annihilated. 
Terrible  reprisals  also  will  be  sure  to  come  from  the  enemy.  Besides  we 
have  ships  in  harbour  getting  ready  for  sea ;  and  we  have  a  fleet  of  small 
vessels  engaged  in  trade,  which  must  all  become  useless,  and  be  laid  up 
on  the  beach  as  so  much  rotten  wood,  if  we  venture  to  enter  into  battle 
with  those  with  whom  we  carry  on  transactions  in  business.  It  would  be 
madness  in  us  to  follow  Barak  in  this  conflict.  We  pray  you,  let  us  be  excused  ! 
We  are  extremely  sorry  it  should  be  so  ;  but  if  you  take  from  us  our  staple 
trade  we  shall  be  absolutely  ruined.  We  wish  aU  success  to  Zebulun  and 
Naphtali  in  this  unequal  contest ;  but  since  they  only  have  been  expressly 
called  to  come  forward,  let  the  matter  rest  as  so  arranged.  We  pray  you  again, 
hold  us  excused  !  "  Those  who  speak  thus  virtually  say,  "  when  our  worldly 
interests  are  touched,  ye  have  taken  away  our  gods,  and  what  have  we  more  ? " 
The  favour  of  God,  instead  of  being  the  all-important  motive,  is  put  into  the 
background,  and  scarcely  counts  for  anything,  while  men's  portion  of  good  in 
this  life  practically  becomes  the  only  consideration.  The  honour  of  God's 
name  touches  them  but  very  lightly,  if  at  all,  but  how  to  preserve  their  own 
worldly  interest  engrosses  their  whole  soul.  They  think  it  preposterous, 
when  their  temporal  business  is  in  danger,  that  they  should  be  expected  to 
do  anything  for  God's  cause  and  interest  in  the  world.  They  seem  never  to 
have  considered,  that  to  have  God's  favour  on  their  side,  is  to  have  the  best 
of  all  preservatives  of  their  prosperity,  and  the  most  effectual  security  against 
loss  of  any  kind. 

This  case  is  similar  to  that  of  the  thorny-ground  hearer.  "  The  cares  of  this 
world  choke  the  word."  Crowds  of  anxious  thoughts  fill  all  the  chambers  of  the 
soul,  so  that  no  leisure  is  left  for  attention  to  the  things  of  God.  It  is  impossit)le 
to  listen  to  messages  from  the  unseen  world,  when  the  eye  is  distracted  with  the 
sights,  and  the  ear  with  the  sounds,  of  the  world  of  sense.  As  well  might  a 
man  listen  attentively  to  a  serious  narration  of  facts,  while  a  flood  of  water  is 
being  poured  over  him,  as  give  ear  to  arguments  addressed  to  the  conscience, 
while  harrassed  with  the  worry  of  worldly  business  and  care.  "  There  was  no 
room  for  Jesus  in  the  inn."  Neither  is  there  room  in  a  heart,  which  is  already 
tilled  with  the  world,  for  the  things  of  God.  "  Demas  forsook  the  advocate  of 
Christianity,  having  loved  this  present  world."  "  All  seek  their  own,  not  the 
things  which  are  Jesus  Christ's."  The  idea  of  adding  a  little  more  to  the  stock 
already  gained  is  reckoned  the  cardinal  end  of  life.     The  worldling  indeed — 

"  Throws  up  his  interest  in  both  worlds, 
First  starv'd  in  this,  then  damu'd  in  that  to  come." 

"  His  life  is  one  long  sigh  for  wealth  ;  he  would  coin  his  life-blood  into  gold  ; 
he  would  sell  his  soul  for  gain."  How  many  would  sell  their  prospect  of 
immortal  happiness  for  a  mess  of  pottage  1  (Heb.  xii.  16  ;  Matt.  xxvi.  15 ; 
Isa.  Iv.  2  ;  Luke  xii.  18,  19  ;  Prov.  viii.  10.)  The  worldly  spirit  steals  away 
the  aff'ections ;  it  fosters  a  grovelling  taste  ;  and  it  hardens  and  enslaves  the 
heart.     It  is  the  voice  of  wisdom  that  says,  **  Love  not  the  world,"  etc. 

4.    Those  who  stubbornly  refuse  to  help  on  the  Lord's  side.    This  applies  to 
Meroz,  of  whom  the  prophetess  intimates  that  by  command  of  the  angel  of  the 

284 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES,  chap,  v. 


Lord  a  curse  must  be  pronounced  on  them  because,  when  they  were  so  near  the 
scene  of  the  battle-field — only  a  little  to  the  North — and  it  would  have  been  so 
exactly  in  their  way  to  have  intercepted  the  enemy  in  their  flight  homeward,  they 
seem,  from  some  unaccountable  reason,  to  have  positively  declined  to  give  any 
assistance.  When  they  might  have  turned  the  movement  of  Sisera's  army  into 
a  disastrous  retreat,  such  was  tlieir  strange  apathy,  that  a  'golden  opportunity 
was  lost  to  the  sacred  cause.  "  To  whom  much  is  given,  of  them  much  will  be 
required."  Whether  it  was  a  town  occupied  by  Canaanites  within  the  borders 
of  Israel,  or  whether  it  was  a  place  which,  though  belonging  to  Israel,  was  so 
steeped  in  idolatrous  practices,  that  it  had  lost  all  regard  for  the  name  and  the 
cause  of  Israel's  God,  we  are  not  informed.  But  it  seems  to  have  been  the 
latter.  It  is  supposed  that  Meroz  commanded  a  main  pass  among  the  hills,  to 
the  west  of  the  Hermon  range,  tlirough  which  a  considerable  portion  of  Sisera's 
army  required  to  make  their  escape. 

These  people  were  virtually  taking  the  side  of  God's  enemies  on  the  day  of 
decision.  They  would  rather  give  their  sympathies  to  Sisera,  the  despiser  of 
Israel's  God,  and  the  red-handed  oppressor  of  His  people,  than  to  Jehovah,  the 
covenanted  King  of  Israel.  This  was  an  act  of  treason  against  Him,  whom  they 
had  solemnly  sworn  to  revere  and  obey  as  the  one  living  and  true  God.  Hence 
their  guilt.     Neutrality  before  God  counts  for  opposition. 

The  curse  on  Meroz  was  not  pronounced  by  Deborah  out  of  any  feeling  of 
revenge  on  her  part.  Had  it  been  so,  we  do  not  see  how  it  could  have  been 
justified.  But  it  is  expressly  announced  that  the  curse  was  from  "  the  angel  of 
the  Lord" — who  acted  as  the  "  keeper  of  Israel,"  who  calls  them  "my  people," 
who  **  in  all  their  ajfflictions  was  Himself  afflicted,"  who  gives  a  special  charge 
to  kings  and  others  respecting  them,  saying,  "  Touch  not  mine  anointed,"  and 
who  added,  "  he  that  toucheth  you  toucheth  the  apple  of  mine  eye."  He  is 
called  *'  the  angel,  Jehovah,"  because  He  personates  Jehovah,  both  in  His  tone 
of  authority,  and  the  prerogatives  to  which  He  lays  claim  (chap.  ii.  1-5  ; 
Ex.  xiv.  19  ;  xxiii.  20  ;  xxxii.  34,  corresponding  with  xxxiii.  14,  not  xxxiii.  2 ; 
Josh.  vi.  14,  15  ;  Acts  vii.  38  ;  Mai.  iii.  1).  It  was  His  sacred  property,  the 
people  that  represented  Him,  whom  Sisera  had  dared  to  dishonour  and  to  tread 
down  as  the  mire,  so  that  complicity  with  him  on  the  part  of  the  inhabitants  of 
Meroz  was  a  heinous  offence.  And  this  was  the  day  of  reckoning,  when  justice 
ruled  the  hour. 

Cases  of  persons  who  stubbornly  refuse  to  perform  a  sacred  service  for  God's 
Church,  which  God  in  His  Providence  puts  in  their  way,  imply  great  guilt,  and 
occur  not  infrequently.  (Matt.  xxv.  42,  44 ;  James  iv.  17  ;  Matt,  xxvii.  23,  24 
and  26  ;  Acts  iii.  13,  etc  ;  Acts  xiii.  45,  also  vers.  7-10  ;  xxiv.  24-27 ;  2  Tim. 
iv.  14,  15 ;  John  xii.  42,  43,  also  48). 

COMMENTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.— Verses  1Z-2S. 

I.  The  mixed  state  of  the  church  of  grow  in  the  same  field  with  the  "wheat." 

God  in  the  present  world.  The  dross  is  largely  mixed  with  the 

When   God  applies   the  winnowing  jewels, 

shovel  to  His  floor  on  this  occasion.  The  thread  of  the  church's  history 

how  many  are  found  to  have  gone  back  is,  at  no  part,  free  from  the  coils  of  the 

from  the  covenant  of  their  God !    It  is  old  serpent,  and  his  brood.     "  When 

a  melancholy  fact,  that  so  many  false  the  sons  of  God  come  together,  Satan 

disciples    should   be  found    at   every  comes  also  among  them."   The  children 

sifting  time,  wearing  the  same  livery  of  the  Wicked  One  associate  themselves 

with  the  true.  In  every  age,  the  "foolish  with  the  children  of  the  kingdom.     An 

virgins  "  walk  with  the  wise.  "  Tares  "  Achan  is  found  in  the  pure  camp  of 

2S6 


CHAP.  V.  UOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES, 


Joshua;  a  Cain  in  the  family  of  Adam ;  of  the  tribes  was  found  wanting  in 

a  mocking  Ishmaelin  that  of  Abraham;  this  day  of  trial,  because  it  had  no 

a  Gejiazi  in  the  house  of  Elisha ;  and  foundation  of  principle.     They  appear 

an  Ananias  and  Sapphira  in  the  pure  to  have  had  some  sense  of  religious 

society  of  the  first  Christian  cluirch.  obligation,  and  rather  gave  the  calls 

Even  in  the  church  under  the  pastoral  made  on  them  the  go-by,  than  openly 

care  of  the  Apostle  John,  there  were  questioned  them.     "  They  had  no  roDt 

those  of  whom  he  said,  "they  went  out  in  themselves,  and  so  endured  but  for 

from  us,  because  they  were  not  of  us,"  a  time."    There  was  no  receptivity  for 

etc.      In   Paul's    days   "  many  made  the   claims   of    religion.      There   was 

shipwreck  of  faith."     And  even  in  the  nothing    in    them    to    bear  a  severe 

Master's  own  hallowed  circle  (though  strain  when  tried.     Like  reeds,  they 

not  undetected),  there  was  one  wrapped  bent   before  the   blast.      Just  as  the 

up  in  the  thick  folds  of  the  cloak  of  plants  must  have  a  hold  of  the  soil 

hypocrisy — "  Have  not  I  chosen  you  to  be  able  to  keep  their  places,  when 

twelve,  and  one  of  you  is  a  devil?"  the  winds  blow  around  them  on  all 

It  is  indeed,  so  common  to  hear  of  sides,  so  men  must  have  a  firm  grasp 

Christ  being  wounded  in  the  house  of  of  religious  truth  with  the  heart,  as 

His  friends  ;  and  so  frequently  is  the  well  as  the  understanding,  to  be  able 

form  of  the  wolf  seen  protruding  from  to  stand  true,  when  there  is  nothing 

under  the  sheep's  clothing,  that  one  to  encourage,  but  everything  to  shake, 

becomes  staggered  to   know   what  to  constancy. 

make  of  it.     That  men  should  every  This  root,  or  firm  setting  in  the  soil, 

day   be  calling    Christ,    Lord,    Lord,  is  that  which  many  want  in  every  age. 

while    yet   they    do    not    the   things  They  may  have — 

which  He  says,  looks  as  if  Satan  were  (1.)  Seriousness  of  religious  manner ^ 

making  a  desperate  effort  to  efface  the  but  nothing  more, 

distinction    between    Christ's   friends  (2.)   Strict  outward  morality y  but 

and   Christ's  foes.      But  when,   from  nothing  more. 

such  a  paragraph  as  this,  we  find  it  (3.)  Punctual  observance  of  religious 

has  been  so  from  the  beginning,  while  duties,  but  nothing  more, 

yet  that  distinction  is  never  lost,  we  (4.)  Benevolence  and  amiability  of 

are   led   to   conclude    that   God    but  disposition,  but  nothing  more, 

permits  this  confusion   of   characters  (5.)  Great  genius  and  high  mental 

to  be  made  for  a  time,  with  a  wise  end  culture,  but  nothing  more, 

in  view.     And  the  day  is  coming  on  (6.)  A    good  intellectual  knowledge 

when  that  line,  which  is  often  now  so  of  the  Scriptures,  but  nothing  more, 

dim  and  imperceptible,  will  be  made  (7.)  trequent  religious  impressions^ 

clear  with  the  light  of  beams  from  His  but  nothing  more, 

own  throne.    **  Then  shall  men  discern  The  heart  is  so  deceitful,  that  it  will 

between  the  righteous  and  the  wicked."  invent  seventy  times  seven  likenesses 

Even  now,  we  sometimes  meet  with  a  of  true  religion  rather  than  once  accept 

genuine  character — one  in  whom  is  no  the  reality, 
guile — a  man  true  as  steel,  about  whom 

there  is  no  mistake — who  is  the  same  III.  The  test    of  faith   separates 

whatever  wind  may  blow,  and  whose  between  the  false   and   the  true  in 

hands  and  heart  verify  the  sentiments  religious  character, 

and  professions  of  his  lips — ^a  reliable,  Those  Israelites  who  stood  on  God's 

out-and-out  Christian.  list  of  honour  were,  if  any  thing,  men 

of  faith.     By  this  they  were  marked 

II.    Many  have   no  root  to  their  out  from  others.      They   believed   in 

religion.  their  God.     Every  thing  about   Him 

Hence  the  reason  why,  "like  the  was   to   them  sacred.      Vvouid    they 

morning  cloud  and  the  early  dew,  it  venture  their  lives  for   Him  ?    Yes ; 

passeth  away."    Tiie  religion  of  several  they  said  they  would  even  count  life 
286 


BOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES,  chap.  V. 


less  dear.     Others  said,  no  ;  that  is  too  worldly  good,  is  merely   a  deduction 

much  to  hazard.     Would  they  leave  from  that,  smaller  or  larger,  but  the 

their  homes,  and  all  that  is  dear  there,  foundation  must  be  undisturbed.  They 

perhaps  never  to  return  ?     Yes  ;    for  do  not  believe  in  God,  they  believe  in 

they  loved  their  God  with  a  deeper  themselves. 

love,  than   that  which    they  bore  to  Faith  is  a  thorough  test.     Not  only 

father  and  mother,  wife  or  children,  is  God  put  on  the  one  side,  and  self  or 

Others  said,  that   is   a    hard  saying,  the  world  on  the  other,  when  the  soul 

who  can  hear  it  ?     Would  they  leave  is  making  its  choice,  lut  the  world  is 

behind  them  all   their  property   and  set  forward  to  the  greatest  advantage, 

gains,  and  let  their  worldly  affairs  take  It  is  seen,  it  is  felt,  it  is  present,  and 

care  of  themselves,  very  likely  to  be-  in  every  way  the  appeal  is  most  strong 

come  deranged,   if    not    entirely  de-  to  "  flesh  and  blood."     On  the  other 

stroyed  ?     Yes ;   they   could   do  that  hand  ;  the  things  of  God  are  unseen, 

too  ;  indeed  that  never  seems  to  have  are  unfelt,  and  are  absent.      And  in 

cost  them  a  thought.     Ah !   but  say  addition  to  this,   "  flesh  and   blood " 

others,   it  is  surely  madness   to   risk  must  be  subject  to  principles  of  right- 

everything  we  have  in  the  world.     We  eousness  and  truth  in  the  hands  of  a 

might  give  a  donation,  or  we  might  gracious    Father.       When    the    soul 

employ  a  substitute  to  do  something  under  these  circumstances  decides  for 

for  the  good  cause.  God,  it  must  be  held  to  be  thoroughly 

How  different  the  two  characters  I  tested.     This  is  faith. 
The  one  founded  on  entire  trust  in  the 

character  of  God,   and  some   proper  ^tt    »ii     i                   n  a        n  ji 

conception  of  His   claims    upon    us.  ./V*  All  who  are  enrolled  on  God  s 

The  other  on  a  vague  illusion  which  side  are  expected  to  do  Him  service. 

they  call  religion,  but  which  in  reality  The  first  practical  lesson  they  learn 

means  nothing.     The  stupendous  sacri-  is,   "We   are    no    longer    our    own." 

fice  which  God  makes  for  them,  is  not  "  We  live  to  Him  who   died  for  us 

with  them  a  matter  of  sincere  belief,  and  rose  again."     "  None  of  us  liveth 

and   helps  them  nothing  in  deciding  to  himself,"  etc.  (1  Cor.  vi.  19 ;  2  Cor. 

how  much  they  shall  sacrifice  for  Him.  v.  14, 15  ;  Eom.  xiv.  7,  8  ;  vi.  13,  19). 
Neither  can  they  trust  Him  with  any- 

thing,  as  children   could    entrust    a  ^   ^  acceptable  service  to  God 

lovnig  father  with  all  that  is  precious  _     4.  v^  «^  ;i;«ii«,  ^.^-^^-.i 

in  thf  world  from  first  to  last,  that  he  ^^«*  ^^  ^^^^^^^^^  ^^^^^• 

might  look  after  it  for  them.     The  one  First,  Deborah,  as  a  mighty  heart 

class    take   everything   from   God   on  gave  herself  with  buoyancy  and  fervour 

trust;  they  leave  all  decisions  in  His  to  the  work ;  the  same  spirit  she  infused 

hands,  believing  that  He  will  do  all  into  Barak.     Barak  and  she  together 

things  right— be  most  kind,  most  just,  inspired   the  governors   and   men    of 

most  wise,  and  most  true,  in  all  that  Zebulun  and  Naphtali  with  like  fer- 

He  decides  for  them  ;  for  He  is  their  vour.   These  again  influenced  Issachar, 

God,  self  i,aven  to  them  through  Christ,  Manasseh,    Ephraim,    and   Benjamin, 

even  as  they  are  self-given  to  Him.  The  Saviour  was  "clad  with  zeal  as 

They  live  entirely  to  God  and>r  God.  a  cloak."     Cordial  service  will  cliarac- 

For   the   other  class   this   is   far  too  terise  the  better  days  of  the  Church's 

thorouiih  work.     They  cannot  depart  history  (Ps.  ex.  3).      In   Neheraiah'^s 

from  the  fundamental  idea  of  living  days,  the  people  "  earnestly  repaired  "^ 

mainly   to  please  themselves.      Any-  the  wall ;  *' they  had  a  mind  to  work" 

thing  they  give  to  God,  of  their  affec-  (CoL  iii.  23 ;  2  Chron.  xxxi.  21). 
tions,  their  work,  their    time,  their 


S87 


OHAP.T.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES, 

CHAPTER  Y.— Verses  n-Zl. 
THE  MISERABLE  END  OP  THE  WICKED. 

Critical  Notes.— 23.  Curse  ye  Meroz,  etc.]  (See  above  p.  285.)  No  fellow  creature  may 
presume  to  pronounce  a  curse  on  another,  at  their  own  instance,  from  any  cause  whatever.  This 
passage  cannot  be  pleaded  as  an  example,  for  the  prophetess  expressly  declares  it  was  the  doing 
of  the  Angel- Jehovah.  The  sin  was  one  of  omission  ;  but  though  it  seemed  to  be  nothing  more 
than  neutrality,  it  implied  in  reality  covert  sympathy  with  the  enemy,  and  a  real  abandonment 
of  connection  with  the  covenant  God. 

24.  Blessed  above  women  shall  Jael  the  wife  of  Heber  the  Kenite  be,  etc  ]  This  is  put  in 
opposition  to  the  curse  on  Meroz.  Though  only  allied  to  Israel,  and  but  a  woman,  she  did  most 
material  service  for  God's  Church  in  destroying  its  worst  enemy  (see  on  chap.  iv.  11,  17,  IS). 
The  "  women  in  the,  tent  "  refer  to  those  in  her  circle  of  life— dwellers  in  tents,  or  shepherdesses. 
Women's  fitting  place  is  "  the  tent  "  (Prov.  vii.  11  ;  Titus  ii.  5),  as  men's  place  is  the  battlefield. 
The  name  of  her  husband  is  also  given,  to  distinguish  her  the  better.  She  is  praised  for  making 
the  fullest  use  of  her  opportunity. 

25.  He  asked  water;  she  gave  him  milk,  etc.]  Put  the  verb  in  the  singular,  "heasls—she 
gives."  She  must  have  known  it  was  Sisera.  For,  on  his  first  appearance,  she  hails  him  with 
the  address,  "  Turn  in,  my  lord,  turn  in  ;  fear  not."  Then  she  covered  him  with  the  sleeping 
rug  (chap.  iv.  18,  19).  And  now  when  he  asks  water,  she  not  only  gives  milk,  but' the  best 
the  house  could  afford.  She  brought  forth  butter  in  a  lordly  dish.]  She  carries  him  butter. 
ns^n — the  more  solid  forms  of  taiW— curdled  milk  (Oesenius) ;  cream  {Lias);  good  superior 

milk  [Keil),  who  says  the  word  is  here  synonymous  with  ^  vR  or  sweet,  rich  milk.  ^??P  a  costly 
bowl  used  by  nobles— one  reserved  for  distinguished  guests.  The  Chaldee  and  Sept.  render  it 
phial,  not  a  bottle,  but  a  shallow  drinking  bowl. 

26.  She  puts  her  (left)  hand  to  the  nail,  etc.]  or  "  tent  pin  "—the  peg  with  which  the  tent  was 
fastened.  It  was  most  likely  of  iron,  like  a  nail  driven  into  the  wall  (Isa.  xxii.  23,  25).  And 
her  right  hand  to  the  (heavy)  workman's  hammer.]  The  mallet  of  the  hand  workers,  obn — 
she  smites  with  the  hammer,  or  hammers  Sisera,  smites  off  his  head,  when  she  had  pierced  and 
stricken  through  his  temples.  Cassel  makes  it,  she  swings  it  over  Sisera,  smites  his  Icead,  crushes 
through  and  transpierces  his  temples.  "  He  who  sought  to  crush  Israel  with  nine  hundred 
chariots  was  himself  crushed  with  one  iron  naiL*' 

27.  At  (or  between)  her  feet  he  bows,  he  falls,  he  lies  down;  at  (between)  her  feet  he  bows,  he 
falls ;  where  he  hows,  there  he  falls  down  dead.]  There  is  an  accumulation  of  words  in  these  two 
verses  to  express  the  deed  now  done,  which  marks  it  m  ith  special  emphasis.  Not  that  the 
perpetrator  took  delight  in  gratifying  a  thirst  for  revenge,  but  it  brings  out  the  thought,  that  he 
who  had  been  so  long  the  terror  of  Israel,  now  falls  dead  at  a  single  blow.  {Keil.)  It  is 
graphically  rendered  by  Cassel — "  At  her  jeet  he  curls  himself  and  falls,  at  her  feet  he  lies,  curls 
himself  again  and  falls;  and  as  hecurls  himself  again,  falls — dead/"  Done  too  by  a  woman's  hand  I 

28.  The  mother  of  Sisera  looked  out  at  a  window,  etc.]  This  falling  of  the  curtain  on  the 
death- scene,  and  transferring  the  reader's  thoughts  the  next  moment  to  the  gorgeous  palace,  to 
tell  what  is  going  on  there,  tends  greatly  to  heighten  the  effect  of  the  picture.  An  event  so 
tragic  in  itself,  viewed  alone  or  from  any  point,  becomes  tenfold  more  terrible  in  the  light  of  the 
awful  contrast  here  presented.  The  abruptness  of  the  transition,  the  appalling  character  of  the 
contrast,  the  giving  only  of  bold  snatches  of  statement  in  the  narrative,  and  leaving  much  for 
the  imagination  to  fill  up  in  its  own  way,  all  combine  to  render  this  one  of  the  most  effective 
dramatic  representations  it  is  possible  to  conceive.  The  word  translated,  "  looked  "  means  she 
hent  forward  eagerly  in  looking.  Her  son  was  accustomed  to  return  a  conqueror,  and  doubtless 
she  thought  he  would  so  return  now.  But  her  thoughts  seem  to  have  troubled  her.  She  must 
have  heard  something  of  the  reports  that  went,  that  the  mighty  God  of  these  Hebrews  (of  whom 
all  the  Canaanites  knew  but  too  well  in  the  past),  was  on  this  occasion  to  put  forth  His  power 
in  fighting  on  their  behalf,  and  if  any  thing  were  to  occur  like  what  took  place  in  the  days  of 
Joshua,  she  felt  there  would  indeed  be  reason  for  alarm.  And  another  thing  now  disturbed  her 
— the  time  for  returning  was  fully  come,  but  there  was  no  appearance  of  her  son,  nor  any  tidings 
from  the  battlefield.  She  is  in  the  upper  airy  room,  standing  at  the  window  which  commands  a 
view  of  the  road  to  a  great  distance.  She  looks  keenly  and  listens,  but  no  object  is  seen,  and 
the  rolling  of  the  chariot-wheels  is  not  heard.  No  triumphal  procession  fills  up  the  view,  but 
silence  and  solitude  reign.  In  spite  of  her,  a  sad  presentiment  steals  over  the  heart  that  all  is 
not  right.  It  was  not  accustomed  to  be  thus.  She  cries  through  the  lattice.]  There  is  more  of 
an  anxious  heart  in  that  cry  than  she  cares  to  acknowledge  *'  Why  does  his  chariot  delay  its 
coming  t  Why  tarry  the  wheels  f  "  The  "  lattice  "  here  is  the  opening  through  which  the  cool 
air  is  admitted. 

288 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   JUDGES.  chap.  v. 


*'  She  cries."]  It  denotes  feverish  impatience,  as  if  she  had  said,  "  Is  he  never  coining  ? — why 
linger  the  steps  of  his  chariot  team  ?  '*  How  could  she  fail  to  be  anxious,  when  he,  the  pride  of 
his  mother's  heart,  in  whom  her  every  hope  was  built  up,  who  had  brought  such  renown  to  her 
house,  the  invincible  Sisera,  before  whom  the  wretched  Hebrew  people  had  cowered  in  abject 
submission  these  twenty  years,  not  daring  to  mutter  or  to  peep,  was  now  so  long  behind  his  time 
in  returning  from  battle,  and  not  a  single  hint  has  been  received  regarding  the  issue  of  the  great 
conflict  ?  Can  it  be  possible  that  a  stone  has  been  thrown  across  his  path,  or  that  a  spoke  has 
been  lost  to  his  wheel  ? 

29.  Her  wise  (used  ironically)  ladies]  or  honourable  ladies  in  waiting — not  princesses,  as  some 
make  it ;  for  Sisera  was  not  king.  These  courtly  sycophants  are  forward  to  offer  their  ingenious 
suggestions  to  account  for  the  delay.  It  is  caused  by  victory,  not  by  defeat.  What  else  in  all 
reason  could  it  be  ?  With  so  vast  an  army,  and  Sisera  at  their  head,  how  could  it  be  otherwise  ? 
Wliat  other  thought  could  be  entertained  ?  To  scatter  the  down-trodden  people  would  be  but 
the  work  of  a  moment.  It  is  the  taking  of  an  unusual  quantity  of  spoil  that  accounts  for  their 
non-appearance.  To  search  the  bodies  of  the  many  slain,  and  to  rob  the  homes  of  all  their 
treasures  must  occupy  time.  The  flattered  mother  allows  herself  to  be  persuaded,  and  her  own 
second  thoughts  rise  up  within  her  to  refute  her  first  fears. 

30.  Have  they  not  been  entirely  snccessful  t  Are  they  not  engaged  in  dividing  the  spoil  1 
To  every  man  a  damsel,  or  two  damsels.]  This  allusion,  especially  as  being  put  in  the  fore- 
ground when  describing  the  expected  booty,  casts  a  sad  reflection  on  the  character  of  the 
speakers,  themselves  females,  and  also  on  the  corrupt  state  of  the  age  when  such  things  were 
customary.  It  is  similar  to  the  picture  given  in  the  Iliad  ;  and  generally  among  those  nations 
that  knew  not  God.  To  Sisera  a  booty  of  dyed  (pnrple)  garments  -  nay  robes  of  double  embroidery 
where  gold  and  silver  threads  are  woven  upon  the  coloured  ground.]  On  such  a  subject  the 
female  mind  goes  into  minute  details.  "  Meet  for  the  necJcs  of  the  spoil  ;'*  not,  made  originally  for 
the  necks  of  the  spoiled,  but  now  they  are  stripped  of  all ;  nor  yet,  suitable  to  put  on  the  necks  of 
the  spoil,  in  reference  to  the  rich  garments  sometimes  worn  by  the  captives;  but,  as  in  A- V. 
costly  clothing  suitable  to  adorn  the  necJcs  of  the  conquerors. 

In  weaving  such  tinsel  day-dreams  as  fancy  might  suggest,  they  fill  up  the  time,  and  one  hour 
succeeds  another,  when  suddenly  all  is  changed.  A  messenger  of  doom  arrives,  and  brief  but 
terrible  is  his  report.  The  great  battle  is  lost,  Sisera's  mighty  army  is  destroyed  ;  while  Sisera 
himself  has  met  with  a  tragic  death,  and  that  too  at  the  hands  of  a  woman  1  So  the  curtain 
falls!     •     ♦     ♦ 

31.  So  let  all  thine  enemies  perish,  etc.]  The  prophetess  winds  up  with  an  expressive — Amen 
to  the  solemn  visitation  of  G-od'a  Providence,  on  the  heads  of  those  who  dare  to  oppose  His  holy 
designs.  It  is  prophetic  as  well  as  imprecatory,  implying  shall  as  well  as  let.  It  is  in  harmony 
with  such  passages  as  Rev.  xix.  3 ;  1  Cor.  xvi.  22  ;  Luke  xvi.  25,  26,  and  those  Psalms  which 
invoke  destruction  on  God's  enemies.  Such  retribution  is  the  appropriate  reward  of  the  iocorri- 
gibly  wicked,  and  but  for  the  great  propitiation  which  has  been  made  by  Christ  bearing  the  desert 
of  our  sins,  it  would  still  be  the  tone  adopted  by  the  God  of  Providence  in  all  His  dealings  with 
men.  But  the  language  implies  also  the  hopelessness  of  being  able  to  fight  against  God  and 
prosper,  on  the  one  hand,  while  on  the  other,  those  who  have  God  upon  their  side  shall  march 
on  their  course  after  all  trials  and  struggles  are  over,  with  the  brightness  and  strength  of  the 
morning  sun  mounting  up  to  mid-Heaven. 


Jael's  Act. 

Was  tbe  conduct  of  Jael  towards  Sisera  Justifiable  f 

The  deed  of  Jael  towards  Sisera,  and  that  of  Ehud  towards  Eglon,  are  so 
similar  in  character,  that  they  must  be  justified  on  similar  grounds.  Much, 
therefore,  of  what  has  been  said  on  the  narrative  in  chap.  iii.  15-30  will  apply 
here  (see  p.  162-166;.  The  case  as  regards  Jael  may  be  stated  thus  : — I?i  her 
conduct  towards  Sisera,  she  seems  to  have  been  guilty  both  of  treachery,  and  of 
murder ^  while  yet  her  deed  and  the  circumstances  attending  it  are  highly 
commended  by  Deborah^  when  speaking  under  the  influence  of  the  Spirit  of  God. 
Deborah  is  manifestly  not  speaking  of  herself.  In  verse  23,  it  is  the  voice  of 
*'  the  angel  of  the  Lord,"  that  is  heard  making  use  of  Deborah  as  the  medium 
for  pronouncing  the  curse  on  Meroz.  It  was  no  feeling  of  Deborah's  own  that 
was  expressed.  Neither  is  the  blessing,  that  was  now  pronounced  on  Jael,  to  be 
regarded  as  a  thing  done  at  her  own  instance.    She  was  a  prophetess,  and  was 

I  28d 


ottAP.  r.  BOMtLETiC  COMMENTART:  JUDQB8, 


acknowledged  in  tliis  whole  transaction  by  Jehovah,  as  the  medium  for  conveying 
the  intimations  of  His  will.  We  cannot,  therefore,  doubt  that  the  blessing  now 
conferred  on  Jael  was  really  from  God,  and  signified  not  only  that  her  act  was 
excusable,  but  was  even  meritorious  in  His  sight.  Besides,  it  is  admitted  on  all 
hands,  that  the  Book  of  Judges  forms  part  of  the  inspired  canon.  Why  then 
except  this  portion  of  it  ?  The  measure  of  commendation  is  most  marked^ 
**  /Uessed  above  women  shall  Jael  be,"  etc.  The  circumstances  are  detailed  in 
order,  from  verses  24  to  27,  as  if  her  conduct  described  in  those  verses  was 
matter  fitted  to  hand  down  her  name  to  the  praise  of  future  generations,  and 
the  whole  account  is  wound  up  with  the  expression  of  an  earnest  wish  by  the 
prophetess,  that  all  God's  enemies  should  in  like  manner  perish.  There  can  be 
no  doubt  that  the  prophetess  regarded  the  death  of  Sisera,  the  enemy  of  God,  as 
an  act  of  which  God  approved.  For  the  expression  in  verse  31,  was  practically 
saying — Amen — to  Jael's  act. 

'i'his  fact,  that  Jael's  conduct  was  approved  by  God,  is  sufficient  to  prove  that 
it  was  not  the  ruthless  act  of  a  bloodthirsty  woman.  The  account  must  be 
susceptible  of  some  other  interpretation.  Sisera  was  not  the  personal  enemy  of 
Jael,  so  that  the  putting  him  to  death  could  not  be  an  act  of  personal  revenge. 
As  such,  it  could  not  have  been  approved  of  by  God.  Nor  could  it  have  been 
an  act  of  pure  barbarism,  for  that  could  not  have  been  held  up  to  the  praise  of 
posterity.  It  was  indeed  truly  heroic,  but,  in  Scripture,  it  is  always  the  moral  or 
religious  aspect  of  a  thing  that  renders  it  praiseworthy.  At  first  sight,  indeed, 
it  seems  to  be  the  stronghanded  act  of  one  who  has  become  ferocious,  being 
stung  to  madness  with  a  sense  of  the  wrongs  inflicted  on  her  people  and  kindred, 
by  the  man  who  was  now  wholly  in  her  power.  In  some  such  light  do  most 
commentators  regard  it : — 

Jamieson  says  :  "  The  taking  of  Sisera's  life  by  the  hand  of  Jael  was  murder. 
It  was  a  direct  violation  of  all  proper  notions  of  honour  and  friendship,  and  for 
which  it  is  impossible  to  conceive  Jael  to  have  had  any  other  motive,  than  to 
gain  favour  with  the  victors.  It  was  not  divinely  appointed  nor  sanctioned. 
(How  does  the  speaker  know  ?) ;  and  the  eulogy  must  be  regarded,  not  as 
pronounced  on  the  moral  character  of  the  woman  and  her  act,  but  on  the  public 
benefits  which  God  would  bring  out  of  it.  Yet  Jael's  own  name  is  distinctly 
held  up  to  honour,  and  her  act  is  circumstantially  detailed  in  the  text." 

Fausset  holds,  that  **  Jael's  sympathy  with  the  oppressed,  her  faith  in  Israel's 
God,  and  her  bold  execution  of  her  dangerous  undertaking,  deserve  all  praise ; 
though,  as  in  Ehud's  case,  there  was  the  alloy  of  treachery  and  assassination." 

Keil  says  :  "  Though  Jael  acted  with  enthusiasm  for  the  cause  of  God,  and 
from  religious  motives,  regarded  her  connection  with  the  people  of  Israel  as 
higher  and  more  sacred  than  either  the  bond  of  peace  with  Jabin,  or  the 
dealings  of  hospitality  of  her  tribe,  yet  her  heroic  deed  cannot  be  acquitted  of 
the  sins  of  lying,  treachery  and  assassination."  But  how  can  we  suppose  that 
God  would  make  use  of  means,  which  implied  lying,  treachery,  and  assassination 
to  execute  His  holy  purposes  ? 

Lias  denounces  "  the  disgraceful  treachery  of  Jael,"  and  adds,  "we  need  not 
suppose  that,  because  Deborah  sung,  and  sung  under  the  influence  of  inspiration, 
we  must  therefore  accept  her  judgment  on  a  point  of  morals."  Indeed  !  Is  the 
weight  of  the  Divine  Spirit's  testimony  weakened  by  passing  through  a  human 
medium  ?  Can  we  suppose  a  person  to  speak  under  the  influence  of  the  Spirit 
of  God,  and  yet  be  in  error  on  a  point  of  morals  ? 

The  Speaker  s  Commentary  says,  "Deborah  speaks  of  this  deed  by  the  light 
of  her  own  age,  which  did  not  make  manifest  the  evil  of  guile  and  bloodshed ;  the 
light  in  our  age  does."     Was  this  deed,  then,  one  of  bloodtliirstiness  ? 

The  Pulpit  Commentary  calls  it  an  act  of  patriotic  treachery.     Oppression 
rouses  the  dark  passions  of  the  oppressed.    It  was  a  case  where  cruelty  was 
290 


MOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  JtTDOSS,  chap.  tr. 


rewarded  with  treachery.    Being  for  the  good  of  others,  the  act  was  less  wicked 
than  that  which  is  entirely  selfish  in  its  motives." 

iJr.  Cassel  terms  it  "  a  demon-like  deed,  done  in  the  spirit  of  a  woman's  violence 
which  knows  no  bounds.  It  also  showed  woman's  cunning.  Yet  her  motives 
were  mixed.  It  would  have  been  treason  against  the  covenant  of  her  house  with 
Israel,  had  she  spared  Israel's  sworn  enemy.  If  spared  he  might  have  raised 
fresh  troops,  and  continued  to  act  as  Israel's  destroyer.  Tlie  freedom  of  the 
sacred  nation,  with  which  she  had  cast  in  her  lot,  was  now  trembling  in  the 
balance,  and  so  she  makes  her  decision." 

Edersheim  calls  her  "a  fierce  woman  with  a  dark  purpose,  and  refers  to  the 
wild  and  weird  character  of  the  Kenites  her  people,  as  showing  the  instincts 
of  a  fierce  race.  To  her  every  other  consideration  was  nothing,  so  that  shel 
might  avenge  Israel,  and  destroy  their  great  enemy."  If  this  were  Jael's  rea 
character,  we  do  not  see  how  it  is  possible  for  the  Spirit  of  inspiration  to  have 
held  her  up,  as  one  to  be  blessed  by  all  future  generations. 

Far  otherwise  are  we  disposed  to  think  of  Jael  and  of  her  act.  At  the  first 
glance  of  the  case,  it  does  appear  surprising,  that  so  many  able  and  judicious 
writers  should,  when  speaking  of  this  case,  have  represented  Jael  as  little  better 
than  a  monster  of  wickedness,  while  Sisera  is  virtually  assumed  to  be  an  unfor- 
tunate and  very  ill-used  man.  Even  if  Jael's  act  had  been  one  of  bloodthirsti- 
ness  (which  we  decidedly  believe  it  was  not),  are  we  to  determine  her  character 
from  that  one  act,  done  in  a  moment,  under  very  peculiar  circumstances,  to 
have  been  ferocious  and  fiendish,  while  we  pass  over,  and  drop  only  a  word  of 
pity  for  her  victim,  though  he  had  been  guilty  of  bloodshed  and  atrocities  of  all 
kinds  for  the  long  period  of  twenty  years,  and  that  too  over  the  breadth  of  a 
whole  nation.  True,  the  fact  that  Sisera  should  have  committed  a  thousand 
murders  does  not  justify  Jael  in  committing  one.  But  we  protest  against  an 
unbroken  current  of  condenmation  coming  down  on  the  head  of  Jael  for  this 
one  act,  while  not  a  syllable  is  said  of  a  just  retribution  for  the  frightful 
villanies  committed  wholesale,  by  the  wretch  whom  Jael  now  crushed. 

Many  considerations  require  to  be  taken  into  account  in  order  to  form  a  just 
estimate  of  Jael's  conduct ;  some  general,  and  some  particular : — 

Z.    General  considerations. 

1.  The  character  of  the  times  ir  which  Jael  lived.  They  were  stern  times; 
when  in  private  life  men  had  to  "  scorn  delights  and  live  laborious  days,"  and 
in  more  public  life  it  was  customary  to  use  bloody  hands,  and  to  look  on  with 
unpitying  eyes.  It  was  a  time  when  oppression,  cruelty,  and  murder  were 
rampant  in  the  land,  and  human  life  had  lost  half  its  value.  "  The  ear  was 
pained,  the  soul  was  sick  with  every  day's  report  of  wrong  and  outrage,  with 
which  earth  was  filled."  And  stern  times  lead  to  stern  deeds.  It  was  Israel's 
*'  iron  age,"  and  the  "  iron  had  entered  into  the  soul."  "  Desperate  evils  lead 
to  desperate  remedies." 

These  Old  Testament  times  were  also  days,  when  as  yet  the  great  means  of 
propitiating  the  Divine  anger  had  not  been  found,  and  when,  in  consequence,  a 
certain  aspect  of  severity  characterised  all  God's  dealings  with  men.  The  whole 
tone  of  life  was  more  stern. 

2.  No  breach  of  God's  moral  law  can,  under  any  circumstances,  be  permitted 
Ri-ht  and  wrong  have  certain^  fixed  boundaries  in  all  ages,  which  are  not 
removable.  It  can  never  be  rii;ht  to  deceive,  or  to  utter  what  is  false.  It 
must  always  be  wrong  to  do  murder.  Treachery  cannot  at  any  time  be  justified. 
We  dare  not  "  do  evil,  that  good  may  come."     Neither  can  we  act  on  the 

Erinciple,  that  "  no  faith  is  to  be  kept  with  heretics."     Nor  may  any  creature  of 
imself  usurp  the  prerogative,  of  taki.ig  vengeance  on  a  man  for  his  sins  against 

291 


CHAP.  T.  EOMILETIC  COMM£MTAJtT:  JUDGES. 


his  God,  however  glaring  they  may  seem,  unless  he  is  specially  commissioned  by 
God  to  do  so.  It  may  be  as  clear  as  the  sun,  that  the  man  is  sinning  with  a 
high  hand  against  his  God,  and  deserves  to  be  cut  off  for  his  sins,  but  his  neigh- 
bour has  no  right,  out  of  zeal  for  his  God,  to  take  the  punishment  of  that  man 
into  his  own  hand.  '*  Vengeance  is  mine  !  I  will  repay  saith  the  Lord."  The 
question  is  not,  what  does  the  man  deserve  ?  but,  to  whom  is  he  responsible  ? 

3.  Look  now  at — The  special  character  of  Sisera's  sin.  That  Sisera  was 
counted  a  great  sinner  before  God,  and  that  his  tragic  death  was  a  retribution 
sent  upon  him  for  his  sin,  there  can  be  no  manner  of  doubt.  But  what  was  the 
particular  phase  of  his  conduct  that  made  his  sin  so  heinous?  It  was  not 
merely  that  he  was  a  tyrant  and  an  oppressor.  It  must  always  be  remembered 
that  the  standard  by  which  things  are  judged,  in  this  stirring  history  of  the 
times  of  the  Judges,  is  not  what  is  commonly  used  between  rival  nations  when 
they  have  their  victories  or  their  defeats.  Everything  in  the  history  of  this 
people  of  Israel,  was  connected  with  the  honour  of  Jehovah  before  all  the  nations 
of  the  earth.  They  were  the  people  of  Jehovah.  By  them  and  their  history 
His  name  was  known.  To  touch  them  for  wanton  mischief  was  to  lay  unhallowed 
hands  on  His  sacred  property.  It  was  to  meddle  with  His  jewels — those  whom 
He  was  bound  to  protect,  as  being  employed  to  set  forth  the  glory  of  His  name 
in  all  the  earth. 

Of  this  the  nations  were  fully  apprised,  from  the  days  of  their  deliverance 
from  Egyptian  bondage  onward.  Tiiey  were  all  duly  informed  by  the  wonderful 
history  which  God  gave  to  that  people,  that  His  name  and  their  name  were 
inseparably  bound  up  togetlier,  that  what  was  done  to  them  was  done  to 
Him,  and  that  any  act  of  dishonour,  oppression,  or  cruelty  shown  to  them, 
He,  as  the  head  feels  for  the  suffering  members,  felt  as  done  to  Himself. 
That  this  people  had  many  sins,  and  that  for  these  sins,  they  deserved 
chastisement  was  indeed  most  true.  But  that  did  not  alter  the  obligation  of 
the  nations  to  look  on  them  as  a  sacred  people  to  Jehovah,  while  He  Himself  so 
regarded  them.  If  the  jewels  had  got  rusted,  and  required  to  pass  through  a 
process  of  refining,  that  was  a  matter  for  their  owner  himself  to  decide.  But 
for  others  to  oppress,  and  grind  them  to  the  dust,  while  they  were  regarded  by 
Jehovah  as  His  own  people,  and  while  they  had  the  honour  of  His  name  to 
maintain  on  the  earth,  was  to  provoke  Him  to  anger  and  awaken  His  jealousy 
for  His  Holy  name. 

Hence  Sisera  s  sin  consisted  in  the  fact,  that  he,  though  fully  warned  as  to 
the  character  of  the  God  of  Israel,  and  of  the  relation  in  which  this  people 
stood  to  their  God,  did  yet,  to  serve  wicked  passions  or  wicked  purposes  of  his 
own,  dare  to  act  as  an  enemy  to  Israel  and  therefore  to  their  God,  under  whose 
protection  they  lay  ;  he  dared  to  touch  God's  property,  God's  jewels,  God's 
children  ;  he  dared  to  give  the  worst  of  treatment  to  a  people  so  sacred  in  the 
eyes  of  their  God,  to  treat  them  with  cruelty,  oppression,  and  spoliation,  and 
that  for  the  long  period  of  twenty  years — and  all  this  he  did  out  of  enmity 
to  the  God  of  Israel,  and  in  bitter  hatred  to  His  name. 

4.  Another  general  consideration  was  that  this  was  the  day  of  final  decision. 
The  time  of  Israel's  chastisement  was  over.  They  had  been  brought  to 
repentance  and  renewed  trust  in  their  God  ;  and,  according  to  His  promise,  God 
arose  for  their  deliverance.  In  the  Person  of  the  Angel-Jehovah,  He  takes 
His  place  at  the  head  of  Israel  and  their  army.  A  summons  is  given  to  all  to 
take  their  sides.  Israel's  God  and  His  people  are  on  the  one  side  ;  Sisera  and 
his  large  army  are  on  the  other.  All  who  opposed  Israel  this  day  also  opposed 
the  God  of  Israel,  and  were  counted  by  Him  as  His  enemies. 

Through  all  Israel  it  was  known  that  this  was  a  day  for  taking  sides.     From 
one  end  of  the  land  to  the  other  the  call  was  heard,  "  Who  is  on  the  Lord's 
292 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES,  chap.  v. 


side?"  There  was  an  express  command  for  ten  thousand  men  to  follow  Barak 
out  of  Naphtali  and  Zebuhin,  yet  many  more  went  of  their  own  accord,  for  all 
volunteers  were  accepted.  Nay,  many  who  did  not  volunteer  were  reproved  and 
put  in  the  list  of  dishonour  for  their  neutrality  or  indifference.  But  Sisera  and 
his  army  stood  in  direct  opposition.  To  sympathise  with  Sisera,  therefore,  or  in 
any  way  to  help  him  this  day,  by  allowing  him  to  escape,  or  otherwise,  was  to 
succour  the  enemy  of  the  God  of  Israel  wlien  he  was  taking  vengeance  on  him 
for  his  sins.  It  was,  indeed,  to  take  the  side  of  God's  enemy  against  God,  when 
He  was  vindicating  the  glory  of  His  great  name.  Hence  the  conduct  of  the 
people  of  Meroz  was  most  daring.  They  allowed  God's  enemy  to  escape,  while 
He  was  in  the  act  of  vindicating  His  character  against  His  enemies. 

IX.  These  general  remarks  will  prepare  us  for  now  looking  at  the  special 
considerations  and  motives  by  which  Jael  was  guided  in  acting  the  part 
which  she  did  on  this  important  occasion  : — 

1.  She  deeply  felt  the  responsibility  of  her  circumstances.  She  could  appre- 
ciate the  fact,  that  the  battle  was  not  merely  between  two  human  captains,  but 
was  really  between  the  Angel-Jehovah  and  His  enemies.  She  knew  that  God 
had  now  returned  to  His  people,  and  that,  through  Deborah,  He  had  given 
directions  about  the  whole  of  this  battle.  She  had  heard  of  the  terrific  thunder- 
storm, and  the  mighty  movement  of  the  elements  of  nature  against  Sisera's  host, 
the  very  "  stars  in  their  courses  fighting  against  Sisera  ; "  and  now  here  was  the 
very  man  put  in  her  way,  against  whom  all  this  artillery  of  the  Divine  anger 
had  been  directed — could  she,  dared  she,  let  him  go  in  peace  ?  It  was  no 
longer  the  day  of  forbearance  ;  it  was  the  day  of  the  Lord's  reckoning  with  His 
enemies,  when  He  was  "  laying  judgment  to  the  line,  and  righteousness  to  the 
plummet,"  when  every  loyal  subject  of  His  government,  as  well  as  every  element 
in  nature,  was  expected  to  act  as  an  instrument  in  His  hand  to  do  the  part 
assigned  him  to  do  in  accomplishing  the  Lord's  purpose. 

Jael  felt  that  she  was  now  solemnly  called  on  to  make  her  decision,  whether 
for  the  Lord,  or  for  His  enemy.  This  was,  at  the  moment,  the  supreme  consi- 
deration which  overshadowed  all  other  thoughts,  and  she  felt  that  whatsoever 
sacrifices  might  have  to  be  made,  all  other  things  must  give  way  before  it.  In 
reply  to  the  question  thus  imperiously  put  before  her — Be  for  the  Lord,  or  for 
His  enemy — she  goes  wholly  in  for  the  name,  and  the  people  of  her  God,  at  the 
expense  of  violating  the  ordinary  rules  of  hospitality,  of  having  abuse  poured  on 
her  name  for  the  commission  of  a  tragic  deed,  and  of  running  the  terrible  risk 
of  awakening  the  wrath  of  so  powerful  a  king  as  Jabin,  with  whom  too  her  house 
was  at  peace.  But  where  the  honour  of  her  God  was  concerned,  all  other  consi- 
derations were  of  no  account.  For  this  is  she  so  highly  commended.  She  did 
not  seek  this  position  ;  it  was  a  most  trying  one  ;  but  it  was  forced  upon  her  ; 
the  alternative  was  put  sharply  before  her,  without  the  possibility  of  her  avoiding 
it.  The  circumstances  had  to  her  the  force  of  a  call  of  duty,  and  she  nobly  rose 
with  the  occasion.  But  this  was  only  one  element  in  the  case.  We  believe 
that — 

2.  She  felt  she  was  commissioned  by  God  to  put  Sisera  to  death.    It  is  not 

so  expressly  said  in  the  narrative ;  but  many  things  must  have  taken  place 
which  are  not  expressly  mentioned  in  the  account  given.  It  is  the  principle  on 
which  Scripture  narrative  is  told,  to  give  it  in  a  very  abridged  form,  with  many 
details  left  out.  The  circumstance,  therefore,  of  its  not  being  mentioned  in  the 
narrative,  is  no  proof  that  Jael  was  not  commissioned  of  God  to  do  as  she  did. 
On  the  other  hand,  had  she  not  been  so  commissioned,  her  act  must  have  been 
one  of  murder ;  and  had  it  been  so,  it  could  never  have  been  held  up  to  the 
admiration  of  posterity,  as  this  deed  undoubtedly  has  been.     Jael's  act  also 

293 


OHAP.T.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   JUDGES. 


corresponds  with  tlie  now  well  known  fact,  tliat  the  Lord  would  "  deliver  Sisera 
into  the  hands  of  a  woman."  Now  when  he  had  been  thrown  in  her  way,  it  may 
have  seemed  to  her  as  if  this  was  the  finger  of  God's  Providence  pointing  out 
lier  duty.  That  alone,  however,  could  not  have  been  regarded  as  a  commission, 
it  was  but  a  confirmation  going  along  with  other  things.  Sisera's  day  was  now 
come.  It  was  the  Lord's  reckoning  day  with  him  for  his  oppression  of  His 
people.  And  all  the  arrangements  made  are  of  the  Lord.  The  sword  of  Barak 
is  turned  against  him,  and  all  the  instruments  that  might  be  of  use  in  his 
destruction,  all  along  the  course  which  he  took,  are  turned  against  him.  The 
hailstorm,  the  lightnings,  the  winds,  the  waters  of  the  district,  especially  the 
swelling  of  the  brook  Kishon,  and  now  the  house  of  a  friendly  tribe.  Jael  then 
felt  she  was  obeying  a  Divine  command  in  acting  as  she  did.  She  must  have 
been  instigated  by  some  "  instinctu  Dei  arcano  "  to  put  Sisera  to  death. 

3.  She  knew  that  Sisera  was  now  devoted  by  Israel's  God  to  destruction,  at 
the  hands  of  Israel.  Sisera's  destruction  was  synonymous  with  Israel's  deliver" 
ance.  It  was  really  God's  answer  to  their  prayers.  But  it  was  also  God's 
reckoning  with  His  own  enemy.  The  oppression  and  cruelty  which  this  proud 
heathen  had  exercised  towards  Israel,  though  made  use  of  by  God  for  the 
chastisement  of  His  people,  was  really  meant  in  a  very  different  sense  by  the 
oppressor.  His  only  purpose  was  to  bring  down  to  a  state  of  degrading  servitude, 
or  to  entire  destruction,  a  people  whom  he  hated  both  in  themselves  and  in  their 
God.  And  this  was  done  in  the  face  of  all  the  warnings  which  Jehovah  had 
given  to  the  nations,  not  to  touch  this  people.  At  first  God  reserved  His 
judgments.  He  made  use  of  Sisera,  first  as  a  scourge  to  chasten  His  people  ; 
but  now  the  time  was  come  to  deal  with  him  as  an  enemy.  The  day  of 
retribution  for  his  great  sin  had  come,  and  he  must  now  know  what  it  is  to  have 
the  God  of  Israel  for  his  enemy.  Hence  the  announcement  made  to  Barak  was, 
"  I  will  draw  unto  thee  Sisera  and  his  multitude,  and  I  vnll  deliver  him  into 
thine  hand." 

This  was  virtually  saying,  that  his  life  was  now  forfeited  to  Israel  by  God's 
oun  arrangement.  It  was  not  like  the  case  of  a  man  taking  his  chances  of  the 
battle  in  the  open  field.  Sisera  was  now  brought  forth  by  God,  that  he  might 
die  for  his  crimes  against  Israel  and  their  God.  It  was  in  some  respects  like  the 
position  of  Cain,  when  he  felt  that  everyone  around  him  was  at  liberty  to  slay 
him.  It  is  clear,  that  it  could  not  have  been  wrong  in  Barak  to  put  Sisera  to 
death.  But  Barak  only  represented  the  nation,  and  what  was  said  to  him  was 
virtually  said  to  the  whole  of  the  oppressed  people.  What,  therefore,  was 
not  wTong  for  Barak  to  do,  could  not  be  wrong  for  any  Israelite  to  do. 
Sisera  was  now  fighting  against  the  whole  nation,  and  their  God.  How  could 
it  be  wrong  in  the  nation,  or  any  one  in  the  nation,  to  fight  against  him?  It 
was  acting  in  self  defence  to  do  so,  when  his  purpose  was  to  reduce  every 
Israelite  to  a  state  of  bondage  or  death.  Had  Jael  now  spared  him,  how  much 
future  oppression  and  cruelty  might  have  resulted  to  Israel  from  the  act ! 

But  though  every  Israelite  had  some  justification,  in  taking  action  against 
Sisera  on  this  occasion,  on  the  ground  of  self-defence,  the  chief  consideration 
which  justified  Jael's  deed,  was  that  Sisera  was  doomed  to  destruction  for  the 
public  dishonour  he  had  poured  on  Jehovah's  name,  by  the  treatment  he  had 
given  to  His  people.  This  was  a  deeper  criminality  than  that  of  common  murder. 
It  was  a  defiance  of  the  God  of  Israel,  a  profanation  of  the  great  name — Jehovah, 
and  treating  with  insult  and  cruelty  wholesale  the  people  who  represented  Him 
on  the  earth.  Murder  is  taking  the  life  of  a  fellow  worm,  but  Sisera's  conduct 
was  an  attempt  to  rob  the  great  "  I  am  "  of  His  holy  name  !  For  this,  sentence 
was  virtually  passed  on  Sisera  by  the  Ruler  of  Providence,  and  he  was  delivered 
into  the  hands  of  Israel  to  receive  a  fit  retribution  for  his  sins. 
294 


BOMILETJC  COitMENTARY :  JUDGES,  chap,  v 


4.  We  believe  then  tliat  Jael's  principal  motive  in  this  deed,  was  to  vindicate 
the  honour  of  Jehovah's  name,  and  serve  the  interests  of  His  Church  in  the 
world,  by  setting  His  people  free  from  the  yoke  of  the  oppressor.  Her  act  was 
done  not  to  wreak  any  private  vengeance  of  her  own,  but  strictly  in  obedience 
to  a  Divine  commission  given  to  her,  so  that  she  was  not  at  liberty  to  harbour 
Si  sera,  or  to  do  otherwise  than  she  did,  for  it  was  the  day  of  the  Lord's  vindi- 
cation of  his  own  glory  in  the  sight  of  the  heathen.  The  very  existence  of  God's 
cause  on  the  earth  seemed  to  require  the  death  of  this  man,  for  had  he  lived  and 
carried  out  his  schemes  successfully,  the  issue  would  have  been  the  anniliilation 
of  that  cause.  Preferring  the  God  of  Israel  to  all  other  gods,  she  felt  that  by 
obeying  the  commission  given  to  her,  she  was  striking  a  blow  for  the  redemption 
of  His  great  and  Holy  name. 

One  question  still  remains — Did  Jael  mean  to  deceive  Sisera  ?     Why  did  she 

§0  out  to  meet  him,  and  receive  him  in  so  friendly  a  manner  into  her  tent  ? 
he  must  have  known  it  was  Sisera,  and  that  he  was  a  fugitive  from  the  battle- 
field. For  she  must  have  watched  with  intense  interest  how  the  day  went,  and 
had  the  earliest  information  that  could  be  supplied.  She  must  have  known  it 
was  Sisera,  from  having  seen  him  on  former  occasions,  and  now  he  would  very 
likely  have  given  the  information  himself  Why  did  she  bid  him  welcome  to 
her  tent,  and  even  encourage  him  not  to  fear  ?  Nay,  why  did  she  act  so  decidedly 
in  showing  him  the  rites  of  hospitality,  and  give  him  the  best  which  her  house 
could  afford  ;  and  so  offer  the  strongest  assurance,  which  the  ineniber  of  a  nomad 
tribe  could  give,  that  he  was  safe  while  under  her  roof?  The  chief  difficulty  is, 
that  all  these  circumstances  are  detailed  along  with  the  tragic  act,  and  on  the 
whole  put  together,  the  blessing  seems  to  be  pronounced.  Was  all  this  really 
sanctioned  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  that  now  rested  on  Deborah  ?  How  can  we 
possibly  justify  Jael  in  saying  what  she  did  not  mean,  or  speaking  falsely  to  gain 
the  confidence  of  a  man,  when  she  meant  to  take  his  life. 

If  the  narrative  had  been  given  in  full,  doubtless  the  difficulties  would  have 
been  areatly  relieved,  if  not  entirely  removed.  As  it  is,  some  explanations  may 
be  given. 

(1.)  It  is  not  said  that  she  agreed  to  tell  the  lie  that  Sisera  put  into  her  mouth, 
in  chap.  iv.  20.     She  made  no  reply  to  his  request. 

(2.)  She  acted  accordinq  to  the  custom  of  her  race  in  receiving  him  into  her 
tent.  It  was  a  fixed  custom  with  the  Arab  races  to  show  hospitality  to 
strangers,  especially  when  in  very  needy  circumstances.  "  No  one  can  repel  with 
honour  from  the  tent  a  stranger  who  claims  hospitality,  nor  usually  does  anyone 
desire  so  to  do."  [Pict,  Bible  in  loco.^  But  she  seems  to  have  impressed  on 
his  mind  that  he  was  secure  while  under  her  roof  How  does  this  consist  with 
her  intention  to  put  him  to  death  ?    The  only  explanation  is  to  suppose  that — 

(3.)  No  intention  to  put  him  to  death  was  yet  formed  in  her  mind.  This  is 
not  only  possible  but  probable.  How  many  surprises  come  upon  her  all  at 
once  1  How  proudly  Sisera  went  forth  in  the  morni.ig  !  What  a  huge  bannered 
host  gathered  around  him !  What  a  small  army  lay  on  Mount  Tabor  in 
opposition  !  How  hopeless  for  them  to  cope  with  such  a  formidable  host  as 
those  now  collected  by  the  waters  of  Megiddo  !  Yet  but  a  few  hours  pass,  and 
that  mighty  force  of  men  ranged  in  battle  array,  the  image  of  incalculable 
strength,  melts  away  like  the  baseless  pictures  of  a  dream.  A  hundred  elements 
as  m  a  moment,  come  down  upon  them  from  all  quarters,  and  a  frightful  and 
rapid  destruction  takes  place.  The  army  is  utterly  ruined,  and  the  general  is 
now  a  solitary  fugitive,  flying  across  the  hills  for  his  life.  Now  he  appears  full 
of  terror,  without  a  solitary  attendant,  hungry,  weary,  and  athirst,  glad  to  enter 
the  most  humble  dwelling  for  refuge.  What  a  series  of  striking  surprises  must 
Jael  have  experienced ;  Hrst  to  have  heai  d  so  much  of  the  terrible  disaster,  and 
then  to  have  seen  the  renowned  captain  of  the  great  army  himself  at  her  very 

295 


CHAP.  V.  HOMILBTIO  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


threshold  in  such  fearful  plight  ?  Is  it  at  all  likely,  that  she  should,  in  a 
moment,  with  those  mighty  rocking  changes  going  on  around  her,  have  formed 
any  plot  at  all  in  her  mind  ?  Had  she  any  time  to  weigh  in  her  mind  what 
was  the  best  course  to  pursue  in  such  unparalleled  and  altogether  unexpected 
circumstances  ?  Is  it  not  far  more  probable  that  she  would  take  the  usual 
course  adopted  towards  strangers  jflrst,  and  invite  Sisera  into  her  tent,  giving 
him  the  usual  rites  of  hospitality,  and  afterivards  reflect  more  at  leisure  as  to 
what  was  her  duty  to  do.  Having  got  a  little  time  to  reflect,  all  the  circum- 
stances, as  we  have  described  them,  would  rise  quickly  to  her  view,  pointing 
to  the  death  of  Sisera — the  enemy  of  the  Lord  and  his  people,  "  by  the  hand 
of  a  woman,"  as  an  event  arranged  by  God  Himself  to  take  place  in  connection 
with  the  issue  of  the  battle.  At  the  same  moment,  by  some  Divine  impulse, 
a  commission  may  have  been  given  her  by  God  to  execute  the  Divine  sentence. 
This  thought,  that  she  was  now  under  Divine  command,  would  supersede  all 
other  considerations  and  lead  her  with  calm  purpose  to  inflict  the  fatal  blow. 

There  seems,  in  fact,  to  have  been  no  premeditation  to  bring  about  this 
death  ;  and  it  is  only  in  this  way  that  we  acquit  Jael  of  treachery  in  her 
conduct.  But,  however  we  explain  it,  we  believe  that  she  herself  felt  at  the 
time,  there  were  overpowering  reasons  urging  her  to  act  as  she  did. 


MAIN  ffOMILETICS.^Verses  28-11. 

Contrasts  in  thb  Day  of  the  Lord. 

X.    Special  days  of  the  Iiord  are  needed. 

"  Days  of  the  Lord  " — a  phrase  so  often  used  by  the  prophets — are  different 
from  common  days.  They  are  days  when  God  makes  some  striking  manifestations 
of  His  true  character,  in  correction  of  the  erroneous  and  defective  views  into  which 
men  are  ever  falling,  from  the  remarkable  forbearance  which  he  usually  exercises 
towards  them  in  his  Providential  rule.  By  some  strong  act  or  acts,  God  rises  up 
and  declares  what  is  due  to  His  own  Holy  name.  Though  on  ordinary,  as  well 
as  special  occasions,  He  hates  sin  with  a  great  hatred,  He  is  by  nature  so  **slow 
to  wrath,"  that  even  when  men  sin  against  Him  many  times,  and  that,  too,  with 
a  high  hand,  there  are  for  a  long  while  no  signs  that  He  is  angry,  or  likely  to 
inflict  threatened  punishment.  He  acts  as  one  asleep  ;  though  all  the  time  the 
motive  is  one  of  the  richest  mercy.  He  has  no  delight  in  the  destruction,  or  the 
misery  of  His  creatures.  '*  He  wills  not  that  any  should  perish."  His  inclina- 
tion is  to  give  pardons  to  the  penitent,  rather  than  retribution  to  the 
incorrigible.  Hence  He  waits  long,  without  measuring  out  their  due  deserts  to 
the  wicked. 

But  men  misinterpret  the  Divine  silence,  and  wax  bolder  in  sin.  They  begin 
to  imagine  that  God  is  such  an  one  as  themselves,  and  is  practically  indiff"erent 
to  their  sins.  They  begin  to  regard  His  threatenings  as  a  dead  letter,  or  that, 
if  they  are  still  to  be  looked  at.  His  mercies  are  so  great,  that  they  will  not  allow 
Him  to  proceed  very  far  with  the  work  of  judgment.  Thus  they  go  on  adding 
sin  to  sin,  until  the  fear  of  God  becomes  dissipated  before  their  eyes.  There  is 
a  letting  down  of  what  is  due  to  the  name  of  God.  Men  get  settled  down  in  the 
idea,  that  God  does  not  practically  feel  towards  sin,  as  in  His  written  word  He 
declares  He  does  ;  and,  in  their  interpretation  of  the  threatened  penalty,  they 
either  greatly  minimise  its  meaning,  or  cast  it  aside  altogether. 

Days  of  the  Lord  are  thus  needed  for  the  vindication  of  the  Divine  character. 
His  Providence  must  sometimes  visibly  go  as  far  as  His  word.    It  must  be  seen 

2U6 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   JUDGES,  chap.  v. 


that  He  makes  no  abatement  of  His  claims,  because  of  His  long  silence,  while  His 
character  must  be  cleared  from  the  gross  misconceptions  which  men  have  formed 
of  it,  from  the  long  toleration  extended  to  them  in  the  past. 
In  the  present  case,  a  Day  of  the  Lord  was  needed — 

1.  To  bring  men  back  to  just  views  of  what  is  due  to  God.  {a.)  For  the 
Israelites^  the  long  oppression  of  the  Canaanites  under  Jabin,  was  a  day  of  the 
Lord.  Then  God  exhibited  practically  in  His  Providence,  what  He  had  long 
told  His  people  so  emphatically  in  His  word,  that  He  is  a  Jealous  God,  and  is 
much  displeased  with  the  sin  of  their  having  any  other  God.  He  then  showed 
that  He  could  cast  them  off,  notwithstanding  His  covenant ;  that  He  could  go 
over  to  the  side  of  the  enemy,  and  fight  against  them,  until  they  were  not  only 
defeated,  but  humiliated  and  crushed.  Yet  His  faithfulness  did  not  fail,  for  on 
their  coming  back  to  Him  in  penitence,  He  remembered  His  holy  covenant. 
The  end  however  was  gained.  They  felt  at  last,  and  acknowledged  it  fully,  that 
it  was  a  terrible  evil  to  depart  from  the  living  God,  that  He  alone  was  to  be 
feared  and  held  in  reverence,  that  all  the  gods  of  the  nations  were  but  dumb 
idols,  while  the  God  of  Israel's  favour  was  to  them  all  in  all.  Their  ideas  of 
the  sacred  character  of  their  God,  of  His  majesty,  holiness,  loving-kindness,  truth 
and  justice,  became  raised  to  the  old  standard  of  highest  reverence ;  and  they 
owned,  that  His  claims  on  the  love  and  obedience  of  the  whole  heart,  were  His 
simple  due. 

(b.)  The  oppressors  also  had  to  pass  through  a  very  rigid  discipline,  in 
getting  a  rectification  of  their  views  of  Israel's  God.  Long  had  they  railed  at 
His  name,  mocked  His  weakness,  sneered  at  His  laws  and  observances,  and 
persecuted  at  will  His  people.  But  now  what  God  so  great  in  power  as  the 
Kuler  of  Israel,  who  is  served  by  the  very  thunder  and  lightnings  of  heaven, 
by  the  sweeping  whirlwind,  and  the  rushing  mighty  waters  !  In  the  swift, 
overwhelming,  and  irremediable  overthrow  of  the  mightiest  army  which 
Canaan  could  produce,  and  that  too  through  means  of  a  mere  handful  of 
patriots,  aided  by  the  elements  of  nature,  a  grand  demonstration  was  made  of 
the  fact,  that  Jehovah  was  the  only  true  God,  and  that  He  was  infinitely 
superior  to  all  other  gods  which  the  nations  worshipped.  Then  men  learned  to 
say,  "Verily  there  is  a  God  that  judgeth  in  the  earth,  by  whom  the  actions 
of  men  are  weighed.'*  "  Let  the  God  of  Israel  but  arise,  and  His  enemies  shall 
be  scattered ;  as  smoke  is  driven,  so  are  they  driven ;  as  wax  melted  before 
the  fire,  so  do  they  perish.  He  cutteth  off  the  spirit  of  princes  ;  He  is  terrible 
to  the  kings  of  the  earth." 

(c.)  For  all  spectators  of  that  generation,  Ja.ow  greatly  was  the  standard  of 
the  fear  of  God  raised  !  The  shock  of  this  mighty  act  was  felt,  not  only  through 
all  Israel,  but  among  all  the  surrounding  nations.  The  God  of  Jacob  whom 
tliey  had  begun  so  generally  to  despise,  now  rose  up  before  all  as  the  one  great 
reality,  amid  a  countless  number  of  empty  nothings.  The  whole  earth  kept 
silence  before  Him.  There  was  no  God  that  could  deliver  after  this  manner. 
With  what  a  weight  of  sanction  was  the  name  Jehovah  surrounded  henceforth 
for  all  the  men  of  that  age  !  The  shadow  of  the  events  of  this  day  extended 
over  forty  years.     Ps.  ix.  20 ;  Ixxxiii.  18  ;  xciv.  15  ;  Ixxviii.  65,  66  ;  Ixxiii.  20. 

2.  Such  a  day  was  needed  to  grant  the  promised  deliverance  to  His  people. 
The  standing  promise  of  Jehovah  to  Israel  was,  that  He  would  be  their  God, 
and  on  this  footing  would  secure  them  in  possession  of  the  land.  For  their 
sins,  He  acted  for  a  time,  as  if  he  had  forgotton  this  promise,  and  allowed  the 
enemy  to  overrun  the  country,  and  practically  to  dispossess  Israel  of  their  own 
territory.  But  now  they  were  penitent  and  earnest  suppliants  at  His  footstool, 
and  it  was  in  the  spirit  of  the  covenant,  that  He  should  return  to  them,  when 
they  returned  to  Him  (Lev.  xxvi.  40-45  ;  Deut.  xxx.  i.  5).     Hence  a  special 

297 


CHAP.  V.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES. 


time  was  needed  to  make  a  public  display  of  tlie  Divine  favour  for  this  people, 
to  prove  that  they  had  not  been  cast  off,  but  that  their  God  was  faithful  as  ever 
to  act  the  part  of  their  Divine  Protector,  and  deliver  them  out  of  the  hands 
of  their  enemies.  "  Though  he  visit  transgression  with  the  rod,  yet  He  will 
not  suffer  His  faithfulness  to  fail." 

ZX.  Contrasts  of  character  and  destiny  in  the  day  of  the  Iiord. 

1.  Those  guilty  of  indecision  on  the  day  of  decision.  The  day  of  the 
Lord's  decision  was  virtually  a  day  when  all  things  were  taken  according  to 
the  strict  rule  of  justice.  The  acts  or  decisions  made  this  day  determined 
their  character,  and  as  they  now  showed  themselves,  so  would  they  receive 
treatment  in  the  future.  The  first  case  set  before  us  in  the  paragraph  is  that 
of  Meroz,  who  were  specially  noted  this  day  as  holding  their  hand,  when  they 
were  called  on  in  the  most  solemn  manner  to  join  in  the  discomfiture  of  the 
enemies  of  the  Lord.  They  draw  back  undecided  in  the  day  of  decision  ;  and 
by  that  step  they  had  their  character  fixed  for  the  future.  Though  so  strongly 
urged  to  decide,  they  yet  showed  no  disposition  to  do  anything  ;  which  proved 
in  the  most  decisive  manner,  that  they  were  not  on  the  Lord's  side  in  heart 
(see  pp.  284,  285). 

The  destiny  of  such  is  to  have  the  curse  of  the  Lord  resting  on  them — or  to 
be  "cursed  with  a  curse" — i.e.  emphatically  cursed.  As  the  effect  of  this 
curse,  the  city  has  long  since  ceased  to  be.  Its  very  site  is  unknown.  Its 
name  has  become  unknown  in  history  ;  and  the  only  vestige  of  it  which  remains 
to  tell  that  once  it  was,  is  this  curse  of  the  angel  of  the  Lord,  announcing  that 
it  should  no  longer  continue  to  exist  in  God's  world.  Such  is  the  fate  of  those 
who,  however  urgently  dealt  with  by  argument,  yet  doggedly  refuse  to  devote 
themselves  to  His  service.  These  people  virtually  turned  their  backs  on  the 
call  which  the  God  of  Israel  now  made  to  them.  And  the  higher  the  cause  is 
w^hich  is  to  be  served,  the  blacker  is  the  treason  which  abandons  it.  Like  the 
cursed  fig  tree,  Meroz  began  at  once  to  dwindle  away, 

2.  Those  who  are  zealous  for  God  at  all  risks.  This  we  believe  was  the 
spirit  which  Jael  now  exhibited.  The  principal  motive,  which  influenced  her 
to  do  the  deed,  was  the  Divine  commission  given  her,  and  the  end  which  she 
sought  to  gain  was  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  in  the  breaking  of  the  fetters  upon 
His  people,  and  the  establishment  of  the  reign  of  rigliteousness  in  the  land. 
For  this  motive  and  end,  kept  steadily  amid,  doubtless,  a  conflict  of  many 
other  motives,  is  she  marked  out  for  pre-eminent  honour.  It  was  at  a  moment 
of  great  peril  that  she  decided,  and  this  increased  the  virtue  of  her  meritorious 
act.     In  any  case,  we  dare  not  curse  those  whom  the  Lord  has  blessed. 

The  destiny  of  those  who  are  ready  to  risk  everything  for  God  is,  to  have 
a  special  Divine  blessing  resting  on  them.  As  Jael  highly  honoured  God  by 
her  conduct,  so  she  is  now  highly  honoured  of  Him.  For  the  stand  she  made 
this  day,  her  name  has  been  preserved  for  everlasting  honour,  in  the  one  really 
immortal  Book  of  Time.  Among  all  nations  shall  it  become  known,  and 
wherever  it  is  known,  it  will  be  with  blessings  heaped  upon  it.  "Them  that 
honour  me  will  I  honour."  For  the  sake  of  one  noble  act,  how  many  names 
have  found  a  niche  of  honour  in  the  Book  of  God !  The  good  king 
Melchizedeck,  who  shows  himself  for  one  short  hour,  and  then  retires  to  the 
darkness ;  the  unselfish  Onesiphoriis,  who  did  the  office  of  a  faithful  friend  to 
Christ's  servant  in  prison  ;  the  God-fearing  Ohadiah,  who  acted  similarly  by  the 
Lord's  prophets,  in  the  perilous  times  of  the  wicked  Jezebel ;  or,  to  take  one 
case  somewhat  similar  to  that  of  Jael,  Phinehas,  the  son  of  Eleazar,  who,  by 
one  stern  act,  in  a  time  of  public  sin,  turned  away  the  wrath  of  God  from  the 
people,  so  that  they  were  not  all  slain  (Gen.  xiv.  18-20 ;  2  Tim.  i.  16-18  • 
1  Kings  xviii.  13 ;  Num.  xxv.  7,8). 
298 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES.  chap.  v. 


3.  Defiant  enemies  of  the  Lord,  and  their  sympathisers.  Such  were  Sisera 
and  his  mighty  host,  together  with  Sisera's  household,  who  awaited  his  return. 
They  all  had  a  common  sympathy  in  the  humiliation  of  Israel,  and  in  showing 
contempt  for  Israel's  God.  In  Psalm  Ixxxiii.  there  is  mention  made  of  God's 
enemies  combining  together  against  His  name,  and  His  people  alike — to  cut  off 
the  latter,  so  that  the  very  name  of  this  people  might  cease  (verse  4),  and  in 
doing  this,  they  really  wished  to  show  their  hatred  against  Israel's  God. 
(verses  2-5,  12).  Among  these  enemies,  or  rather  as  a  parallel  case  to  theirs, 
are  mentioned  Sisera  and  Jabin  at  the  brook  Kishon  (verses  9,  10).  The 
kingdom  over  which  Jabin  ruled  had  already  felfc  the  power  of  Jehovah's  arm 
in  the  past,  when  Hazor  and  its  king  were  utterly  destroyed  in  the  days  of 
Joshua  (Josh.  xi.  10,  11).  Besides  this  crushing  blow  inflicted  on  themselves, 
there  was  the  long  series  of  similar  blows  inflicted  on  all  the  other  nations 
of  the  Canaanites,  North  and  South,  so  that  the  true  character  of  the  God  of 
Israel  could  not  be  misunderstood  by  them.  Yet  they  dared  to  attack  the 
people  of  God,  among  whom  God  had  set  His  name,  and  wickedly  treated 
them  as  slaves  and  the  very  refuse  of  the  earth.  Their  custom  probably  was, 
and  long  had  been,  to  blas[)heme  the  name  of  Israel's  God  and  strive  to  root 
it  out  of  the  earth.  And  now,  on  this  special  day,  when  it  was  given  forth 
by  public  proclamation,  that  Israel's  God  was  risen  up  out  of  His  place  to 
deliver  His  people,  and  that  He  was  about  to  put  Himself  at  their  nead  to 
fight  their  battle,  Sisera  shows  himself  a  defiant  enemy  to  the  last,  by  mustering 
a  huge  host  to  join  issue  with  Israel's  mighty  king. 

All  such  are  necessarily  doomed  to  destruction.  They  have  decided  to  treat 
God  as  their  enemy,  and  after  due  warning  given,  and  forbearance  exercised, 
the  only  possible  issue  of  such  a  conflict  is,  to  bring  down  the  Divine  wrath 
upon  them.  God  sets  His  face  against  them,  for  a  moment,  and  they  are 
ruined.  For  who  can  stand  before  His  anger  ?  "  He  looketh  on  the  earth 
and  it  trembleth  ;  He  toucheth  the  hills  and  they  smoke.  All  that  were 
now  gathered  against  the  Lord  and  His  anointed,  were  driven  like  chaff 
before  the  whirlwind."  "  The  enemies  of  the  Lord  became  as  the  fat  of  lambs  ; 
they  were  consumed  ;  into  smoke  did  they  consume  away."  (Ps.  vii.  11-17  ; 
xi.  6).  Sisera  fled  from  the  sword  of  Barak,  and  the  nail  in  tho  hand  of  Jael 
did  strike  him  through.  (Job  xx.  24). 


COMMENTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS,— Verses  23-31, 

I.  Crucial  Testing-days  are  hasten-  has  really  determined  to  be  for  God 

ing  on  for  all.  at  all  hazards,   and  whether  he   has 

(1.)  In  this  world  there  are  certain  cast  in  his  lot  with  the  Saviour,  at  the 
times,  when  God  in  His  Providence  expense  of  having  to  renounce  all 
applies  to  every  man's  character  a  other  friends  and  refuges.  Such  a 
crucial  test ;  when  he  is  searched  as  time  occurs  when  he  is  visited  with 
with  lighted  candles,  and  the  hidden  some  dangerous  illness,  which  brings 
state  of  his  heart  is  made  manifest,  him  to  the  borders  of  the  eternal 
The  very  channels  along  which  his  world,  and  he  feels  how  helpless  fellow- 
thoughts  flow,  are  seen  and  known  by  creatures  are,  in  view  of  possible  death, 
himself,  if  not  by  others,  and  he  stands  It  is  also  a  testing  season,  when  he 
discovered  before  his  own  eye,  as  to  meets  with  some  severe  reverse  of 
the  secret  motives  by  which  his  con-  fortune,  when  his  worldly  prospects 
duct  is  regulated.  All  props  are  taken  are  dashed,  if  not  altogether  blighted, 
away,  and  he  is  left  to  stand  solely  on  and  when  his  bright  sunny  hopes  all 
the  foundation  which  he  has  really  fade  like  a  dissolving  view.  Also, 
chosen.    Then  it  is  known  whether  he  when  for  the  first  time  he  makes  a 

^99 


OHAP.  V, 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   JUDGES. 


public  profession  of  religion,  and  begins 
to  wear  Christ's  Name.  Also,  when  he 
is  called  on  to  choose  his  appropriate 
companionships  —  religious  or  irreli- 
gious. And  once  more,  the  time  when 
he  feels  he  must  decide  what  habits 
he  will  form,  those  which  imply  self- 
denial  and  the  fear  of  God,  or  those 
which  include  self-indulgence  and  love 
of  the  world,  but  without  Christ  and 
with  the  loss  of  a  good  conscience. 

(2.)  In  the  great  future.  We  are 
informed  that  "  after  death  is  the 
judgment "  —  that  when  dead  the 
beggar  '*  was  carried  by  the  angels  into 
Abraham's  bosom,*' — and  that  "  the 
rich  man  in  hell  lifted  up  his  eyes 
being  in  torment."  We  are  also  told, 
that  the  penitent  thief  was  at  death  to 
"  go  with  the  Saviour  into  paradise," 
while  of  Judas  we  are  told,  that  when 
he  committed  suicide  **  he  went  to  his 
own  place."  Thus,  it  would  appear, 
that  at  the  moment  of  quitting  this 
world,  the  soul  has  its  sentence  passed 
upon  it,  according  to  its  character  for 
good  or  evil.  Also  at  the  end  of  time, 
we  are  assured  that  "  all  must  appear 
before  the  judgment  seat  of  Christ, 
that  every  one  may  receive  the  things 
done  in  his  body,"  etc.  Then  "  the 
fire  shall  try  every  man's  work  of  what 
sort  it  is." 

II.  The  prosperity  of  the  wicked  is 

short. 

It  seemed  a  great  triumph  for  the 
King  of  Hazor  to  grind  to  the  dust 
that  once  mighty  people,  who  under 
Joshua,  caused  all  the  nations  of 
Canaan  to  tremble,  and  all  but  an- 
nihilated the  Hazor  of  that  day.  Now 
he  could  wreak  his  vengeance  upon 
them  at  will,  for  many  years,  and 
doubtless  looked  forward  to  their  final 
extinction  under  the  iron  rule  of 
Sisera.  *'  But  He  that  sitteth  in  the 
heavens  did  laugh,  the  Lord  had  them 
in  derision."  How  soon  is  "  the  candle 
^f  the  wicked  put  out."  "  He  was 
jreat  in  power,  and  did  spread  himself 
'it  e  a  green  bay  tree."  The  day  of  the 
Lord  comes  round.  "And  he  has  passed 
away,  and  lo,  he  is  not ;  yea  he  is 
sought  for,  but  he  cannot  be  found." 
3Q0 


"How  are  they  brought  into  desola- 
tion as  in  a  moment !  they  are  utterly 
consumed  with  terrors."  Yet  these 
men  but  yesterday  were  "  compassed 
about  with  pride  as  a  chain,  their  eyes 
did  stand  out  with  fatness,  and  they 
did  set  their  mou  th  against  the  heavens. " 

When  they  think  themselves  secure 
from  evil  then  suddenly  destruction 
comes.  They  do  not  "  watch "  nor 
*'  number  their  days."  Witness  Bel- 
shazzar,  Herod,  and  "the  fool"  in 
Christ's  parable.  How  quickly  did 
Abel's  blood  cry  for  vengeance !  and 
that  of  Naboth  in  Jezreel  the  moment 
that  Ahab  went  to  take  possession  ! 
Jeroboam  was  stricken  while  he  spoke 
(1  Kings  xiii.  4).  "  The  pleasures  of 
sin  are  but  for  a  season." 

It  is  a  remarkable  fact  that  in  the 
history  of  Rome,  beginning  with  the 
period  after  the  Augustan  era,  over 
500  years,  as  many  as  74  emperors 
came  to  the  throne,  of  whom  only  19 
died  a  natural  death  and  55  were 
murdered — having  an  average  reign  of 
6  J  years  only  for  each ! 

"  Jlie  prosperity  of  fools  destroys 
them"  It  is  because  some  men  are  so 
prosperous,  that  their  life  is  more  brief 
than  otherwise  it  would  be.  Prosperity 
exposes  to  envy  and  hatred;  and  to 
this  cause  more  than  to  any  other  did 
the  wearers  of  the  Imperial  Purple  at 
Rome  hold  their  short  tenure  of  office. 
Sometimes  the  same  man  will  touch 
the  greatest  height  of  prosperity,  and 
the  lowest  depth  of  misery,  within  the 
space  of  a  few  hours.  Henry  the 
Fourth  of  France,  when  in  the  zenith 
of  his  power,  was  struck  by  a  blow 
from  a  traitorous  hand,  and  despatched 
in  his  coach ;  while  his  bloody  corpse 
was  forsaken  even  by  his  servants,  and 
lay  exposed  an  unseemly  spectacle  to 
all.  There  seemed  indeed,  but  a 
moment  between  the  adorations,  and 
the  oblivion,  of  that  great  prince,  "  all 
fle><h  is  grass." 

Prosperity  also  often  leads  to  habits 
of  self-indulgence y  which  speedily  ter- 
minate in  death.  Thus  Alexander  the 
Great,  could  conquer  the  world,  but 
could  not  subdue  his  own  evil  passions, 
and  quickly  they  conquered  him.    We 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   JUDGES, 


CfiAP.  V. 


knew  a  man  who  was  accustomed  to 
earn  his  bread  by  the  sweat  of  his 
brow  for  many  years.  Suddenly, 
through  the  death  of  a  friend,  he  came 
into  the  possession  of  a  large  fortune. 
He  gave  up  his  habits  of  industry,  got 
into  the  hands  of  evil  companions,  who 
led  him  rapidly  on  the  down  hill  path, 
and,  though  in  the  prime  of  life,  within 
two  years,  he  was  laid  in  his  grave. 

III.  His  supreme  folly. 

How  inexpressibly  foolish  is  it  for  a 
man,  who  has  the  power  of  casting  his 
thoughts  into  the  future,  and  foreseeing 
the  consequences  of  his  acts,  to  spend 
a  short  career  of  some  twenty  years 
like  Sisera,  in  acting  the  part  of  a  proud 
tyrant  over  a  helpless  people,  at  the 
risk  of  incurring  tiie  wrath  of  that 
terrible  God,  who  he  knew,  if  it  pleased 
Him,  could  at  any  moment  rise  from 
His  place  and  consign  him  to  irremedi- 
able destruction  !  "  Woe  unto  him 
that  strivech  with  his  Maker  !  "  How 
can  it  fare  with  him  that  striketh 
against  a  rock,  but  that  his  bones 
should  be  broken,  and  his  purpose 
utterly  fail  ?  "  Who  hath  hardened 
himself  against  God  and  hath  pros- 
pered ? "  What  infatuation  is  it  for 
men,  when  they  get  a  brief  moment  of 
power,  to  rush  against  the  "thick  bosses 
of  the  Almighty's  buckler!"  With 
one  ray  of  that  supernatural  glory  with 
which  He  was  surrounded,  could  the 
ascended  Jesus,  now  at  the  helm  of 
universal  government,  and  having  in- 
finite power  at  His  command,  have 
consumed  the  proud  horseman  that 
wasonhisway  to  Damascus  to  persecute 
those  whom  the  Saviour  loved.  Yet 
the  worm  dares  to  rear  itself  against  an 
Omnipotent  arm  !  In  tones  of  pity  it 
is  whispered  to  Ilim  that  it  is  hard  to 
strike  against  the  sob'd  rocks  ! 

In  the  grey  mist  of  an  early  summer 
morning y  a  troop  of  horse  are  seen 
stealing  over  a  stretch  of  Scottish 
moorland,  among  the  moss-hags  and 
wild  heath,  when  suddenly  they  came 
on  the  object  of  their  search.  John 
Brown,  of  Priesthill,  had  just  finished 
earnest  and  fervent  prayers  with,  and 
for, his  family  circle,  showing  more  than 


usual  of  the  wrestling  spirit,  and  had 
gone  to  a  little  distance  from  his  home 
to  begin  work  for  the  day.  He  was 
taken  back  to  his  house,  and  in  the 
presence  of  those  most  dear  to  him, 
was  told  by  the  bloody  Graham  of 
Claverhouse  to  go  to  his  prayers,  for 
instantly  he  must  die.  The  most  in- 
ofi'ensive  of  men,  most  loyal  to  his 
God,  most  just  and  true  in  his  dealings 
with  his  fellow  men,  with  nothing  to 
lay  to  his  charge,  but  the  one  circum- 
stance that  he  dared  to  worshiu  God 
according  to  his  own  conscience,  is  told 
by  a  representative  of  law  and  order, 
that,  for  this  great  offence,  he  must  die, 
and  at  a  moment's  notice  !  The  com- 
mand was  given  to  fire — but  not  a 
hand  was  moved  to  do  the  work. 
The  callous-hearted  leader  then  him- 
self walked  up  to  his  victim,  and  shot 
him  through  the  head  !  The  cruelly- 
used  widow  put  to  him  the  stinging 
question — "  How  will  you  answer  in 
the  future  for  this  day's  work  ? "  to 
which  he  replied — "  To  men  I  can 
easily  answer,  and  as  for  God,  I  shall 
take  Him  in  my  own  hand  ! "  We 
mention  this  incident,  because  the 
names  of  Sisera  and  of  Claverhouse 
are  fit  to  be  associated  together  on 
the  same  page  ;  and  to  show  the 
supreme  infatuation  of  both  in  run- 
ning such  a  monstrous  career  of 
wickedness,  and  raising  fearful  clouds 
of  wrath  against  them  in  the  future, 
with  scarcely  even  a  shadow  of  recom- 
pense in  the  present. 

rV.  His  present  misery.  We  cannot 
think  that  Sisera  could  have  been  a 
happy  man,  even  at  the  head  of  his 
magnificent  army,  with  myriads  of 
warriors  ready  to  obey  his  word  of 
command.  There  was  always  the 
consciousness  that  he  was  engaged  in 
the  work  of  bloodshed,  or  trampling 
down  the  rights  of  others — that  he 
was  carrying  bitter  grief  or  absolute 
desolation  into  the  homes  of  a  nation, 
and  that  he  was  running  up  a  fearful 
reckoning  with  the  God  of  the  Hebrews, 
if  He  should  ever  rise  up  and  call  him 
to  account.  It  is  impossible  to  have 
any  pure  happiness  within   a  man 'a 

301 


CHAP.  V. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY^  JUDGES. 


inner  nature,  while  there  is  a  giving 
way  to  the  darker  and  viler  passions 
of  the  heart.  Hence  it  is  said,  "  there 
is  no  peace  to  the  wicked."  Even  at 
the  best,  there  are  snares  in  all  tlieir 
mercies;  curses,  also,  and  crosses  attend 
all  their  comforts  ;  and  the  curse  of  God 
follows  them  in  every  avenue  of  wicked- 
ness. Tliey  carry  about  with  them 
their  prison  wherever  they  go,  so  that 
they  are  always  in  cliains.  And  when 
any  sudden  flash  crosses  their  path,  or 
when  any  threatening  sound  makes 
itself  heard  in  their  ears,  they  feel  as 
if  the  messenger  were  on  their  track, 
that  is  sent  to  summon  them  to  appear 
at  the  bar  of  the  Judge.  It  is  but  a 
troubled  happiness  which  the  wicked 
man  has  at  the  best :  he  draws  it  from 
im})ure  springs,  and  he  is  liable  to  be 
robbed  of  it,  at  any  moment,  by  forces 
over  which  he  has  no  control. 

V.  His  preparation  for  future 
misery. 

(1.)  He  lives  in  the  neglect  of  the 
great  end  of  life.  He  has  no  aim  in 
life  but  that  of  living  for  his  own 
pleasure  or  profit.  There  is  no  ever- 
present  conviction  with  him,  that  he 
has  to  spend  his  time  chiefly  for  God, 
and  that  lie  is  responsible  for  doing 
the  many  duties  which  God  has  set 
before  him  in  His  word. 

(2.)  He  is  every  day  provoking  God 
to  anger.  By  direct  and  positive  acts 
of  sin,  or  by  many  omissions  in  the 
discbarge  of  duty.  By  forge tfulness 
of  God,  casting  off  His  fear,  and  in 
many  ways  by  listening  to  the  world, 
instead  of  diligently  hearkening  to  the 
voice  of  His  word.  By  banishing  God 
from  his  thoughts,  as  far  as  may  be, 
and  giving  his  affections  to  a  thousand 
other  objects  rather  than  to  the 
greatest,  kindest,  and  best  of  Beings. 

(3.)  By  delaying  to  take  up  the 
great  question  of  the  soul's  reconcilia- 
tion  with  God.  Every  hour's  delay 
of  this  great  matter  is  a  slight  put  on 
the  infinite  sacrifice  which  God  has 
made  on  men's  bebalf.  It  is  making 
light  of  the  offer  of  boundless  love. 
It  is  this,  which  under  the  name  of 
unbelief,  or  not  believing,  is  said  to 
302 


form  the  main  ground  of  men's  con- 
demnation in  the  gospel  record. 

(4.)  Because  he  is  always  adding 
to  his  account  before  God,  without  in 
any  way  reducing  it.  Though,  as 
time  passes,  he  begins  to  forget  tlie 
old  sins,  not  one  of  them  is  really 
disposed  of,  while  he  hesitates  to 
accept  of  God's  terms  of  reconcilia- 
tion. When  a  man  is  hard  pressed 
for  money,  and  is  on  the  verge  of 
bankruptcy,  he  gets  his  bill  renewed, 
but  he  well  knows,  that  this  is  not  a 
real  payment ;  and,  if  it  should  be 
renewed  again  and  again,  there  is 
still  no  payment  made  but  only  more 
interest  added  to  the  capital,  making 
the  debt  larger  and  larger.  Thus  is 
it  always  till  the  Saviour  is  really 
embraced,  and  the  debt  is  finally  and 
really  paid,  on  condition  that  the 
sinner  gives  himself  entirely  into  His 
hands. 

(5.)  Because  he  is  wasting  on  trifles 
the  time  which  should  be  given  to  the 
saving  of  his  soul.  It  is  as  if  a  man 
were  to  cut  down,  into  chips,  a  strong 
oaken  plank  which  is  thrown  to  him 
to  enable  him  to  get  across  a  yawning 
gulf,  when  there  is  no  other  means  of 
escape.  Is  it  wise  for  a  man  to  busy 
himself  in  painting  the  door,  when  the 
house  is  on  fire?  or  to  spend  much 
time  at  the  toilet,  when  he  is  not  sure 
whether  his  head  shall  stand  on  his 
shoulders  another  day  ?  Is  it  fit 
that  he  should  spend  all  his  care  in 
deciding  what  kind  of  dress  he  should 
wear,  and  to  neglect  a  deadly  cancer 
that  has  already  begun  to  eat  into 
his  vitals  ? 

(6.)  Because  he  puts  worldly  enjoy- 
ment in  the  place  oj  the  enjoyment  of 
God.  Of  worldlings  it  is  said,  '*  they 
take  the  timbril  and  the  harp,  and 
rejoice  at  the  sound  of  the  organ  ; 
they  spend  their  days  in  wealth,  and 
in  a  moment  go  down  to  the  grave." 
But  there  is  "no  fear  of  God  before 
their  eyes,"  and  no  love  of  God  in 
their  hearts.  "They  do  not  submit 
themselves  to  the  righteousness  of 
God."  "The  world  is  in  their 
hearts."  God  will  not  dwell  in 
hearts    where    the  world  is  on   the 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:   JUDGES. 


dHAP.  V, 


throne.  "  If  any  man  love  the  world, 
the  love  of  the  Father  is  not  in  him." 
By  allowing  a  usurper  to  reign  over 
them,  the  wicked  thus  banish  God 
from  their  presence,  and  when  they 
cross  the  boundary  line  between  the 
present  and  the  future  world,  that 
condition  becomes  fixed,  and  so  they 
remain  for  ever  under  the  misery  of 
being  banished  from  God,  the  fountain 
of  all  life  and  joy. 

Thus  he  carries  with  him  the  seeds 
of  future  misery  wherever  he  goes,  in 
his  ungodly  habits  and  preferences, 
superadded  to  his  acts  of  transgression, 
or  his  omissions  of  the  performance  of 
duty.  His  only  future  must  be  to 
be  deprived  of  all  the  smiles  of  his 
God,  and  to  lie  under  His  frown. 
This  is  misery. 


w 


VI.  The  wicked»s  fearful  end.    "  I 

saw  the  wicked  buried,"  says  the  wise 
moralist — and  he  might  have  added 
(1.)  I  thought  of  his  fair  beginning 
— the  good  start  he  made  in  life ;  a 
bright  morning,  full  of  promise  ;  a 
buoyant  heart  and  mind  full  of 
joyful  anticipations.  (2.)  Next  of 
his  brilliant  opening  career.  How 
he  made  several  decided  successes,  as 
he  entered  into  public  life ;  how  the 
world  came  around  him  with  its 
smiles  ;  how  the  tide  of  good  fortune 
flowed  to  him  ;  how  he  was  flattered 
on  every  side,  and  marks  of  distinc- 
tion were  freely  conferred.  (3.)  Then 
I  thought  of  the  insidious  influence  of 
so  many  smiles  and  flatteries ;  of  the 
danger  of  carrying  so  full  a  cup  of 
temporal  good  things ;  of  the  many 
snares  that  Satan  planted  in  his 
path  ;  and  of  the  persistent  tempta- 
tions with  which  on  all  sides  he  was 
suriounded.  (4.)  I  thought  how,  a 
little  farther  on  in  his  career,  he  had 
already  become  the  slave  of  "  divers 
lusts  and  passions  which  war  against 
tlie  soul ; "  how  he  had  turned  a  deaf 
ear  to  the  warning  voice  of  wisdom  ; 
how  he  had  forsaken  the  uphill  path 
which  conducts  to  life  and  to  God,  and 
had  chosen  to  turn  aside  into  the  by- 
patiis  and  flowery  meadows  of  sin,  while 
fortune    yet    showered    her    favours 


upon  him  with  lavish  hand.  And 
finally  (5.)  I  thought  how  rapcJlii 
he  had  descended  from  a  lofty  height 
into  the  valley  of  years,  to  fall  among 
the  thorns  and  quagmires  that  lie 
at  the  close  of  a  worldling's  life.  I 
thought  of  his  desertion  by  the 
world,  his  abandonment  by  God,  his 
being  "held  by  the  cords  of  his 
sins,"  his  being  the  prey  of  an 
accusing  conscience,  and  at  last 
entering  the  dark  Jordan,  without 
any  provision  made  to  save  himself 
from  foundering  in  the  sullen  waters. 

1.  At  the  best  his  career  ends  in 
vanity. 

In  some  form  or  other,  he  substitutes 
the  world  for  God,  which  in  the  nature, 
of  the  case,  must  terminate  in  vanity. 

**  *Tis  no  hyperbole,  0  man,  if  thou  be  told 
You  delve  for  dross,  with  mattocks  made  of 

gold. 
Affections  are  too  costly  to  bestow 
Upon  the  fair-faced  nothings  here  below. 
The  eagle  scorns  to  fall  down  from  on  high 
(The  proverb  saith)  to  pounce  upon  a  silly  fly ; 
And  can  a  (  hristian  leave  the  face  of  Grod 
T'embrace  the  earth  and  dote  upon  a  clod?" 

"  The  Romans  painted  Honour  in 
the  temple  of  Apollo,  as  representing 
the  form  of  a  man,  with  a  rose  in  his 
right  hand,  a  lily  in  his  left,  above  him 
a  marigold,  and  under  him,  wormwood, 
with  the  inscription  (Levate)  *  consider.' 
Tlie  rose  meant  that  man  flourishes  as 
a  flower,  and  soon  withers  ;  the  lily 
denoted  the  favour  of  man,  which  is 
easily  lost.  The  marigold  showed  the 
fickleness  of  prosperity.  The  worm- 
wood indicated  that  all  delights  of  the 
world  are  sweet  in  execution,  but  bitter 
in  retribution.  Consider  what  a  lesson 
of  vanity  is  here  ?  " 

"  What  a  deal  of  pains  doth  the 
spider  take  in  weaving  her  web  to  catch 
flies!  She  runneth  much,  and  often  up 
and  down,  hither  and  thither;  she 
wastes  her  own  body  to  make  a  curious 
cabinet,  and  when  she  hath  finished 
it,  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye,  the 
sweep  of  the  besom  brings  it  to  the 
ground,  destroying  herself  and  it 
together,  with  one  stroke.  Thus  it  is 
with  worldly  men.  They  carp  and  care, 
toil  and  moil  in  this  world,  which  they 

303 


CHAP.  V. 


HOMILETW  COMMSNTARY:  JUDGES. 


must  soon  leave  for  ever.  They  waste 
time  and  strength  to  add  heap  to  heap, 
when  quickly  all  perishes,  and  they, 
too,  often  along  with  it." — Swinnock, 

2,  Often  it  ends  in  ang^uish. 

(1.)  It  comes  unexpectedly.  "  As  a 
thief  in  the  night — while  they  are  say- 
ing, peace  and  safety,  then  sudden  des- 
truction Cometh."  While  the  mind  is 
weaving  webs  of  schemes,  while  many 
agencies  are  set  to  work,  and  a  great 
object  in  view  is  on  the  point  of  attain- 
ment ;  while  a  great  acquisition  is 
about  to  be  made,  and  a  higher  plat- 
form is  almost  gained — at  this  particular 
moment,  when  least  expected,  the  last 
messenger  brings  His  summons,  '*  Thou 
fool  !  this  night  thy  soul  is  required  of 
thee."  "  At  midnight  a  cry  was  made. 
Behold  the  bridegroom  cometh,  go  ye 
out  to  meet  Him." 

A  bright  morning  broke  for  Sisera 
over  the  hills  of  Israel.  Expectation 
rose  high  as  he  surveyed  all  the  plain 
covered  with  masses  of  troops — sword 
and  spear,  helmet  and  buckler,  the 
image  of  colossal  strength.  The  sub- 
ject nation  would  become  more 
prostrate  than  ever ;  never  would 
victory  be  more  easily  won.  There 
was  only  one  issue  possible,  when 
such  a  huge  host  were  to  be  met  by 
only  a  handful  of  undisciplined  volun- 
teers under  a  man  who  was  no  general. 
Golden  dreams  of  new  accessions  to  for- 
mer glory  filled  the  brain  of  the  great 
commander,  as  he  marshalled  his  troops 
along  the  banks  of  the  Kishon,  while 
the  sun  rose  high  in  the  heavens. 
Three  or  four  hours  elapse,  and  that 
magnificent  spectacle  of  living  power 
becomes  one  vast  Aceldama,  while  the 
vaunting  general  himself  is  reduced  to 
the  plight  of  running  as  a  fugitive  be- 
fore the  pursuing  foe,  and  escaping 
death  on  the  battlefield  only  to  meet 
it  more  ignominiously,  at  the  hands  of 
a  woman  ! 

The  unexpected  character  of  this 
end  reminds  us  of  the  capricious 
cruelty  of  the  insignificant  puppet, 
who  ruled  over  the  millions  of 
ancient  Persia  (Xerxes),  who  some- 
times crowned  his  footmen  in  the 
304 


morning,  and  beheaded  them  in  the 
evening  of  the  same  day.  Also,  the 
Greek  Emperor,  Andromachus,  who 
crowned  his  admiral  in  the  morning, 
and  took  off  his  head  in  the  after- 
noon !  "  How  are  they  brought  unto 
desolation  as  in  a  moment  ?  They 
are  utterly  consumed  with  terrors." 

(2.)  It  comes  irresistibly.  God  is 
Almighty  to  punish  the  incorrigible,  as 
well  as  to  pardon  the  penitent.  **  The 
sinner  has  not  a  friend  on  the  bench 
on  the  day  when  he  is  summoned  to 
the  highest  tribunal.  Not  a  single  at- 
tribute will  be  his  friend.  Mercy  it- 
self will  sit  and  vote  with  its  fellow- 
attributes  for  his  condemnation." 
When  his  time  is  come,  "  the  wicked 
is  driven  away  in  his  wickedness." 
**  He  shall  fly  away  as  a  dream,  and 
shall  not  be  found  ;  yea  he  shall  be 
chased  away  as  a  vision  of  the  night." 
No  more  power  has  he  to  keep  back 
his  spirit  in  the  day  when  God  re- 
quireth  it  of  him,  than  has  the  dry 
leaf  power  to  defend  itself  against  the 
rushing  tempest.  When  death  comes 
his  soul  is  forced  from  him  by  power 
of  law.  "  His  soul  is  required  of  him." 
"  As  a  disobedient  debtor  he  is  deli- 
vered to  pitiless  exactors  ;  or  as  a  ship 
which  is  dragged  by  some  fierce  wind 
from  its  mooring,  and  driven  furiously 
to  perish  on  the  rocks."—  Jheophylact. 

•*  In  that  dread  moment,  how  the  frantic  soul 
Raves  round  the  walls  of  her  clay  tenement, 
Runs  to  each  avenue,  and  shrieks  for  help. 
But  shrieks  in  vain  !  how  wistfully  she  looks 
On  all  she's  leaving,  now  no  longer  hers  ! 
O  might  she  stay  to  wash  away  her  stains, 
And  tit  her  for  her  passage  !     But  the  foe, 
Like  a  staunch  murd'rer  steady  to  his  purpose. 
Pursues  her  close  through  every  lane  of  life, 
Nor  misses  once  the  track,  but  presses  on ; 
Till  forc'd  at  last  to  the  tremendous  verge, 
At  once  she  sinks  to  everlasting  ruin  !  ** 

"  Terrors  take  hold  on  him  as  waters ; 
a  tempest  stealeth  him  away  in  the 
night.  The  east  wind  carrieth  him 
away,  and  he  departeth  ;  and  as  a 
storm  hurleth  him  out  of  his  place. 
For  God  shall  cast  upon  him  and  not 
spare.  Men  shall  clap  their  hands  at 
him,  and  shall  hiss  him  out  of  his 
place."  On  this  occasion,  Sisera  was 
"  chased  as  the  chafif  of  the  mountains 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    J U DOES.  chap.  ▼, 


before  the  wind,  and  like  a  rolling  on  his  head  was  an  imperial  crown;  and 

thing  before  the  whirlwind."  a  royal   mantle   covered    his    lifeless 

(3.)  It  makes  a  mockery  of  hopes,  shoulders.      So  it  remained  for   180 

"  Their  inward  thought  is  that  their  years  !  At  length  the  tomb  was  opened, 

houses  shall   continue  for  ever,   and  The  skeleton  form  was  found  dissolved 

their  dwelling-places  to  all  generations:  and  dismembered  ;  the  ornaments  were 

they  call  their  lands  after  their  own  there,  but  the  frame  had  sunk   into 

names."     "  But  the  expectation  of  the  fragments,  and  the  bones  had  fallen 

wicked  shall  perish.     Like  sheep  they  asunder.     There  remained,  indeed,  the 

are  laid  in  the  grave  ;  death  shall  feed  ghastly  skull  wearing  its  crown  still — 

on  them.     Their  breath  goeth  forth  the  only  sign  of   royalty  about   this 

and  they  return  to  the  earth  ;  in  that  vain  pageant  of  death    in    its   most 

very  day  their  thoughts  perish."  What  hideous  form." 

a  mockery  did  the  act  of  Jael  make  of         (4.)   There  is  no  mixture  of  comfort 

all  the  hopes  cherished  by  the  proud  with  misery  in  their  death.      When 

leader  of  the  myriads  that  deployed  death  comes  to  the  wricked  the  day  of 

on  the  plain   of  Jezreel !    As  dreams  mercy  closes,  and  with  it  all  that  miti- 

of  the  night  they  vanished  away.  Like  gated  the  bitter  cup  of  life  is  taken 

the   illusions    of    the    mirage    with  away.     God  ceases  to  smile,  and  all 

its    visions    of    silver    streams    and  creature  sources  of  happiness  become 

laden    fruit    trees,     which    disappear  as  wells  dried  up.     In  God's  frown  the 

the     moment    the    enchantment    is  whole  universe  joins,  for  all  are  His 

broken,  so  is  it  with    the  miserable  servants.    Sometimes,  on  this  side  of 

worldling,    whom    Satan    has    duped  time,  the  dark  shadow  of  the  eclipse 

with  the  hopes  of  the  honours  and  joys  steals  over  a  man  ;  and,  as  in  the  case 

of  earth  in  days  to  come.     Every  hope  before  us,  we  see   him  entering    the 

perishes.    Bitter  '*  disappointment  re-  turbid  waters  without  a  single  reliable 

mains  their  only  comforter."     "  Dust  friend  to  lean  on,  and  without  a  ray 

is  the  serpent's  meat,"  and  the  same  of  hope  to  lighten  the  gloom.    The  day 

fare  have  all  the  serpent's  seed.  of  forbearance  lasted  long  ;  it  is  now 

How  can  it  be  otherwise  ?    To  the  over,   and  therej  is  no  longer   mercy 

wicked  man  who  clings  to  his  wickedness,  mingled  with  justice.     He  who  would 

"  No  ray  of  hope  Contend  with  the  Almighty  at  all  risks. 

Dispels  the  involving  gloom  ;  a  Deity,  must  now  accept  the  results  of  his  own 

With   all  the  thunder  of  dread  vengeance  decision.     **  The  wicked  man  must  now 

'round  hira  eat  of  the  fruit  of  his  own  way,  and  be 

Is  ever  present  to  ms  tortured  thoughts.  n^^   j      •,!    i  •  j      •        a 

^  ^  tilled  with  his  own  devices. 
Notwithstanding  all  the  diligence  and  Those  who  abuse  the  day  of  mercy 
cost,  all  the  art  and  industry,  which  often  die  without  a  single  friend  to 
the  wicked  put  out  in  order  to  per-  whisper  peace  at  their  pillow,  or  to 
petuate  their  names,  their  hope  is,  like  supply  a  single  consolation  in  the  hour 
the  spider's  web,  which  at  one  stroke  of  need.  There  is  no  Christian  friend 
of  the  besom  is  brushed  away,  and  in  a  to  point  them  to  the  Saviour,  to  offer  up 
moment  it  comes  to  nothing.  "A  great  prayer  to  Him  who  is  able  to  save 
king,  feeling  that  he  was  about  to  be  from  death  and  all  its  consequences — 
a])proached  by  a  greater  monarch  than  to  show  marks  of  sympathy,  to  close 
himself — t!ie  king  of  Terrors  —  gave  the  eyes  in  death,  and  take  charge  of 
orders  that  when  he  died  he  should  be  the  poor  body  when  the  spirit  has  fled, 
put  into  a  royal  position,  sitting  in  the  And  yet  this  is  but  a  trifling  element 
attitude  of  a  ruling  monarch.  In  a  in  the  case,  compared  with  that  which 
mausoleum  specially  erected  for  the  is  implied  in  doing  the  oftice  of  a  media- 
purpose,  and  in  a  tomb  within  this,  he  tor,  when  the  spirit  quits  its  clay  tene- 
was  placed  upon  a  throne.  The  Gospel  ment  to  answer  in  tlie  presence  of  the 
narratives  were  laid  upon  his  knees ;  Judge  for  the  deeds  done  in  the  body. 
by  his  side  was  his  celebrated  sword  ;  it  will  then  be  every  thing  for  a  man 

u  305 


OHAP.  ▼. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


to  have  provided  a  "  Day*s-man  "  to 
answer  to  God  for  him,  and  to  produce 
reconciliation  between  an  offended  God 
and  His  offending  creature.  It  is  the 
highest  wisdom  now  to  make  this  pro- 
vision without  the  least  delay.  '*  The 
prudent  man  foreseeth  the  evil  and 
hideth  himself." 

(5.)  It  comes  with  marks  of  dishonour 
and  degradation.  That  the  most  re- 
nowned warrior  of  his  age  should  die 
at  all  when  he  had  so  many  legions  to 
defend  him — that  he  should  not  be 
able  to  fight  a  stroke  on  the  battle- 
field— that  he  should  die  as  a  fugitive, 
all  alone  without  any  of  his  chosen 
friends  near  him,  in  the  dwelling  of  a 
supposed  friend  but  a  real  enemy, 
above  all,  that  he  should  die  a  tragic 
death  at  the  hands  of  a  woman  ! — all 
this  indicated  a  marked  degree  of  dis- 
honour and  degradation  in  his  death. 
"  Save  me  from  the  horrors  of  a  jail/' 
were  almost  the  dying  words  of  one  of 
the  most  gifted  men  of  genius.  A  pro- 
fligate nobleman  in  England,  who  long 
stood  on  a  lofty  pinnacle  in  the  world 
of  fashion,  and  was  master  of  an  in- 
come of  the  value  of  £50,000  per 
annum,  became  at  length  reduced  to 
the  deepest  distress  by  his  vice  and 
extravagance,  and  breathed  his  last 
moments  in  a  miserable  inn,  forsaken 
and  forgotten  by  his  former  companions. 
In  a  similar  manner  died  one  of  the 
greatest  statesmen  whom  England  ever 
produced — in  a  small  country  inn, 
without  a  single  attendant  or  com- 
forter, though  at  one  time  whole  na- 
tions were  entranced  by  his  eloquence. 
Now,  in  this  humble  dwelling,  with 
none  to  care  for  him,  or  sympathise  with 
his  sorrows,  he  dies  of  a  broken  heart ! 
Another  bright  genius,  who  long  gained 
the  most  flattering  distinctions  in  so- 
ciety, writes  in  old  age,  "  I  am  abso- 
lutely undone  and  broken  hearted. 
Misfortunes  crowd  on  me,  and  I  die 
haunted  by  fears  of  a  prison.  For- 
saken by  my  gay  associates,  dispirited 
and  world-weary,  I  close  my  eyes  in 
gloom  and  sorrow." 

•*  Life  ebbs,  life  ebbs,  and  leaves  me  dry, 
As  the  hot  desert,  empty  as  the  wind, 
And  hungry  as  the  sea. 
306 


How  many  leave  the  world  thus 
"fallen,  fallen  from  their  high  estate," 
who  have  lived  without  God,  and  with- 
out Christ  while  they  did  live !  "  Shame 
shall  be  the  promotion  of  fools."  At 
the  last  **  some  shall  awake  to  shame 
and  everlasting  contempt,"  and  even 
during  the  present  life  there  are  not 
wanting  illustrations. 

(6.)  It  comes  as  an  absolute  ruin.  It 
is  the  hour  when  every  thing  that  a 
man  has  becomes  lost,  finally  and  ab- 
solutely lost — his  property,  his  friends 
and  relatives,  his  fame,  his  character, 
his  works  in  this  life,  and  all  his  pros- 
pects for  the  life  to  come  !  He  stands 
between  two  worlds,  a  ruined  and  help- 
less man,  no  friend  near,  and  an  angry 
God  for  his  enemy — all  brought  upon 
him  by  himself '  It  is  of  all  sights  the 
most  wretched.  Warning  was  given 
that  the  "judgment  though  long  de- 
ferred lingered  not,  and  the  damnation 
slumbered  not."  And  now  he  is  in 
the  hands  of  irresistible  forces,  which 
inflict  upon  him  a  terrible  humiliation 
and  utter  ruin.  God  sets  his  face 
against  him  in  vindication  of  His  holy 
law,  which  he  has  so  deeply  trans- 
gressed ;  and  now  rebukes  him  in  the 
fearful  but  just  language  of  Prov.  i. 
24-30. 

His  end  is  ruin.  Every  thread  of 
life's  schemes  is  broken ;  warp  and 
woof  together  are  all  torn  to  shreds. 
Not  a  vestige  of  life's  doings  remains 
to  serve  as  a  memorial  of  the  past 
— nothing  save  what  may  serve  as 
material  for  an  accusing  conscience. 
Now  the  "  rains  have  descended,  the 
floods  have  come,  the  winds  have 
blown  and  beaten  against  such  a 
man's  honse  ;  it  has  fallen  and  great 
is  the  fall  of  it ! "  There  was  no 
foundation  of  rock.  He  tries  to  lean 
on  the  house  which  he  has  built  on 
the  sand,  but  it  does  not  stand  ;  he 
holds  it  fast,  but  it  does  not  endure. 
It  is  like  a  man  standing  upon  ice,  or 
on  slippery,  shelving  rocks.  It  is  now 
discovered,  that  during  life  the  wicked 
man  had  been  carrying  omens  of  sad 
import  in  his  breast ;  that,  though  he 
stood  well  before  men,  he  was  like  a 
book   that  is  well   bound   externally, 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


CHAP.  V. 


but  when  opened  was  found  to  be  full 
of  tragedies. 

What  a  frustration  of  plans  and 
purposes  do  we  see  in  the  example 
before  us !  How  many  webs  were 
being  spun  in  the  loom  of  fancy,  at 
the  time  when  the  awful  catastrophe 
took  place  !  How  many  vain  hopes 
were  buried  in  that  unknown  grave ! 
The  greatest  warrior  lies  down  as  the 
beasts  that  perish  ;  and  there  is  no 
blessed  resurrection.  The  name  is 
forgotten,  or  lives  to  rot  above 
ground  as  a  warning  to  others.  His 
destiny  otiierwise  is  to  be  forgotten. 
(Eccl.  viii.  10  ;  Ps.  xxxvii.  10,  36,  38  ; 
xlix.  19  ;  Prov.  xxiv.  20.) 

Melancholy  as  are  these  examples 
of  spiritual  shipwreck,  they  will,  we 
believe,  form  but  a  small  minority  in 
the  whole  population  of  the  globe  at 
the  end  of  time.  If  the  number  of 
the  saved  did  not  greatly  exceed  the 
number  that  shall  perish,  where  would 
be  the  victory  of  "  the  Son  of  God  in 
coming  to  destroy  the  works  of  the 
Devil  ?  "  Also,  now  that  a  highway 
has  been  opened,  clear  of  all  obstruc- 
tion for  sinful  man  to  come  back 
to  God,  where  would  be  the  broad 
evidence  that  *'  God  will  have  all  men 
to  be  saved  and  to  come  to  the 
knowledge  of  the  truth  ?  "  Meantime 
the  Saviour  Himself  warns  every 
man  to  strive  earnestly  for  his  own 
salvation,  rather  than  enquire  curiously 
ai)Out  the  number  of  the  saved.  (Luke 
xiii.  23,  24). 

N.B. — The  Church  in  every  age  has 
its  songs. 

The  bow  of  hope  that  is  set  over 
its  future  is  the  bow  of  an  everlasting 
covenant,  and  gives  assurance  against 
devastation  in  the  future.  The  well 
whence  its  contents  are  drawn  is 
deeper  than  can  ever  dry  up.  The 
army  that  is  engaged  to  defend 
it  night  and  day  is  incomparably 
mightier  than  the  united  force  of  all 


that  are  in  league  against  it.  When 
faith  is  strong,  its  bright  days  alvays 
exceed  in  number  those  that  are 
dark;  in  the  hardest  struggle  it  is 
never  more  than  brought  to  its  knees, 
and  in  the  end  it  never  fails  to  come 
off  '*a  conqueror,  and  more." 

Much  of  its  vocation,  therefore, 
even  in  this  world  is  to  sing;  and  its 
songs  are  lyrics  rather  than  elegies. 
Its  days  are  never  so  dark  as  to  be 
altogether  without  stars,  and  therefore 
not  without  songs.  In  the  timee  of 
Genesis,  the  Church  was  scarcely  yet 
old  enough  to  have  a  history,  but  the 
Book  does  not  close  until  we  have  a 
prophetic  song  on  the  brightness  of 
her  future  career  (Gen.  xlix.).  Then 
says  Wordsworth,  "  We  have  a  song 
of  victory  in  Exodus  (chap,  xv.)  ;  we 
have  a  song  of  victory  in  Numbers 
(chaps,  xxiii.  and  xxiv.) ;  we  have  a 
song  of  victory  in  Deuteronomy  (chap, 
xxxii.) ;  we  have  this  song  of  victory 
in  Judges ;  we  have  a  song  of  vic- 
tory in  the  First  Book  of  Samuel 
(chap,  ii)  ;  we  have  a  song  of  victory 
in  the  Second  Book  of  Samuel  (chap, 
xxii.) ;  we  have  also  the  song  of 
Zacharias,  that  of  the  Virgin,  that 
of  Simeon,  in  the  gospel  narrative ; 
and  all  these  songs  are  preludes 
to  the  new  song,  *  the  song  of  Moses 
and  of  the  Lamb,'  which  the  saints  of 
the  Church  glorified  from  all  nations, 
will  sing  at  the  crystal  sea,  when  all 
the  enemies  of  the  Church  shall 
have  been  subdued,  and  their  victory 
assured  for  ever"  (Rev.  xiv.,  xv.). 
He  might  have  added  that  from  the 
days  of  David  more  than  one- half  of  all 
the  sacred  writings  of  the  Church  of  God 
is  in  the  language  of  song — David  and 
others  in  the  Psalms,  and  Isaiah  and 
others  in  the  writings  of  the  Prophets. 
If  the  subject  is  not  that  of  victory,  ib 
is  for  the  most  part  that  of  victory 
in  the  days  to  come,  as  nob  lees 
certain  than  if  it  had  been  already 
accomplished. 


807 


CHAP.  VI.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES, 


CHAPTER  VI; 

ISRAEV8  RELAPSE  INTO  SIN,  AND  THEIR  OPPRESSION  BY  THE  MIDIANITES. 

Verses  1-10. 

Critioal  Notes. — 1,  Did  evU,  etc.]  Not  continued  to  do  evil,  though  that  is  implied 
(pp.  158,  186).  Deborah  and  Barak  were  now  dead,  and  their  personal  example,  the  influence 
of  their  names,  and  their  warning  voices  were  aU  buried  with  them.  The  shake  given  to  the 
idolatry  of  the  land  by  the  signal  manifestation  made  of  Jehovah's  jealousy  had  now  lost  its 
effect,  and  a  new  generation  had  sprung  up.  That  so  long  a  period  as  40  years  should  have  been 
influenced  by  the  shadow  of  the  great  event  of  the  destruction  of  Sisera  and  his  army  shows 
that  a  mighty  impression  had  been  made  of  the  character  of  Israel's  God,  both  on  Israel  them- 
selves, and  also  on  the  nations  around  them.  All  seemed  to  feel  that  "  great  fear  was  due  to  the 
God  of  Israel,"  for  "  there  was  no  God  that  could  deliver  after  this  manner."  The  hand  of 
Midian — descendants  of  Abraham  and  Keturah  (Gen.  xxv.  2).  Though  not  the  same  race,  they 
appear  to  have  been  in  close  affinity  with  the  Ishmaelites,  or  were  included  among  that  people 
as  a  part  is  included  in  the  whole  (chap.  viii.  22-24).  With  them,  too,  they  appear  to  have  been 
engaged  in  the  carrying  trade  across  the  desert  between  the  Euphrates  and  Egypt  (see  Gen. 
xxxvii.  25,  '28).  Some  regard  the  word  Midianites,  as  the  plural  of  the  old  Egyptian  Madi 
[Fausset].  They  were  a  nomadic  people  and  did  not  till  the  ground,  but  lived  in  tents.  They 
occupied  a  belt  of  desert  land,  extendiug  from  Horeb  in  a  line  extending  north-east,  passing 
Moala  on  the  east,  and  skirting  the  territory  of  Keuben.  While  Moses  was  at  Horeb,  he  dwelt 
with  his  father-in-law,  Jethro,  who  was  the  priest  of  Midian.  Their  territory,  therefore,  must 
have  been,  at  one  side,  near  by  Horeb.  But  being  unsettled  in  their  residence,  and  predatory  in 
their  habits,  there  was  probably  no  very  strict  delimitation  of  the  boundary  lines.  Wiseman 
caUs  them  "  wandering  corsairs  "  of  the  desert.  The  disposition  to  plunder  had  become  to  them 
almost  a  natural  instinct,  as  it  was  with  all  the  tribes  of  the  desert.  They  had  an  old  grudge 
against,  Israel  on  account  of  the  crushing  blow  that  had  been  inflicted  on  them  in  the  time  of 
Moses  by  the  express  command  of  God,  because  of  their  having  wickedly  enticed  Israel  into  sin 
on  the  plains  of  Moab  (see  Num.  xxv.  1,  6,  16-18  ;  xxxi.  7-12  ;  xxii.  4-7).  Quite  260  years  had 
elapsed  since  that  sweeping  desolation  had  passed  on  them  ;  and  now  they  had  recovered  their 
strength,  but  cherished  an  undying  hatred  to  their  destroyers.  They  would  be  readily  joined  in 
their  raid  against  Israel  by  the  Amalekites  (see  p.  158),  by  the  Ishmaelites  (Ps.  Ixxxiii.  6,  7),  by 
the  Arabs  and  wandering  hordes  generally,  along  the  south  and  south-east  border  of  Palestine, 
who  were  always  ready  for  any  work  of  pillage.  The  initiative,  however,  was  taken  by  Midian. 

Cassel  thinks  that  the  two  words  Midian  and  the  more  modern  Bedouin  are  really  one  and  the 
same — the  Hebrew  spelling  beginning  with  72),  while  the  Arabic  language  begins  with  li.  In 
this  last  case  the  word  would  spell  Bidian,  or  Bedouin.  In  the  Semitic  languages  there  is  a 
constant  interchange  of  these  letters.     The  word  comes  from  a  root  signifying  the  desert. 

2.  The  hand  of  Midian  prevailed-] — bore  heavily  upon  them  (p,  97).  They  had  no  power  to 
remove  it.  They  made  them  the  dens  which  are  in  the  mountains,  etc.]  Some  (Keil)  make 
the  word  (HinriDD)  to  signify  '^mountain  ravines"  hollowed  out  by  torrents;  being  thus 
found  they  were  fitted  up  by  men's  hands  in  such  a  manner,  as  to  make  suitable  retreats  from 
danger.  Others  (Cassel  and  Bertheau)  understand  by  it,  '*  Light  holes'^  ^,e.,  holes  with  openings 
for  the  light,  or  grottoes.  Wetzstein  says,  "  At  some  elevated  dry  place,  a  shaft  was  sunk  obliquely 
into  the  earth,  and  at  a  depth  of  twenty-five  fathoms,  streets  were  run  off  straight,  from  six  to 
eight  paces  wide,  in  the  sides  of  which  the  dwellings  were  excavated.  At  various  points  these 
streets  were  extended  to  double  their  ordinary  width,  and  the  roof  was  pierced  with  air-holes 
according  to  the  size  of  the  place.  These  were  like  windows.  Hence  the  meaning  is,  caves,  with 
air-holes  like  windows.  Watchers  were  employed  to  give  the  alarm  when  the  enemy  approached. 
Then  the  ploughmen  and  herds  hurried  quickly  into  the  earth  and  were  secure.  There  was  also 
a  second  place  of  exit,  for  the  most  part."  Similar  must  have  been  the  rock  dwellings  of  Potra. 
In  the  limestone  mountains  of  Palestine,  there  are  many  natural  "  caves,"  but  these  generally 
were  more  fully  excavated,  and  fitted  up  artificially,  when  used  as  human  dwellings.  The  remain- 
ing word  (ni"^i^^)  signifiea  fortresses,  or  (mountain)  "strongholds."  These  refuges  were  less 
used  for  purposes  of  personal  safety,  than  as  places  of  concealment  for  property  and  necessaries 
of  life.  Eor  the  propensity  of  the  Bedouin  always  has  been  rather  to  pillage  than  to  kill  (1  Sam. 
xiii.  6  ;  xxiii.  14,  19,  29  ;  1  Chron.  xi.  7)  These  were  memorials  of  the  dark  times,  when  the 
Bedouin  host  like  an  over-running  flood  swept  over  the  land.  Sin  like  a  leprosy  leaves  its  scart 
aud  its  baldness  behind  it> 


EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:    JUDGES.  chap,  tl 


8.  Children  of  the  East.]  This  phrase  seems  to  designate  the  various  Arab  tribes,  not  other- 
wise named,  who  roamed  over  the  open  country  between  the  Red  Sea  and  the  Euphrates.  We 
hear  of  "  the  men  of  the  east  "  (Job  i.  3)  ;  "  the  mountains  of  the  east  '*  (Num.  xxiii.  7) ;  "  the 
east  country  "  (Gen.  xxv.  6)  ;  "the  east"  specifically  (Gen.  xxix.  1).  (Isa.  xli.  2  ;  Matt.  ii.  1  ; 
vii.  12  ;  viiL  10).  These  hordes  seem  to  have  had  no  design  of  conquering  the  country,  nor 
yet  of  cutting  off  its  inhabitants.  Their  object  simply  was  plunder.  "  Their  visits  were  like 
the  incursions  of  the  Picts  and  Scots  into  Southern  Britain  during  the  latter  part  of  the  Eomau 
dominion  (a.D.  13H8) ;  or  the  raids  for  lifting  cattle,  which  were  common  from  the  Highlands 
of  Scotland  into  the  Lowlands  at  a  much  later  period  "  {Lias).  And  he  might  have  added, 
which  visits  were  returned  by  the  English  into  Scotland,  with  a  like  disregard  of  meum  and 
tuum,  when  they  could  get  a  safe  opportunity.  This  was  but  the  fulfilment  of  prophecy  upon 
Israel  (Dent,  xxviii.  31,  33,  43,  48). 

When  Israel  had  sown  they  came  up,  etc.]  i.e.,  They  chose  the  time  when  the  fruits  of  the  earth 
were  fast  ripening,  just  before  harvest  (about  March),  and  remained  for  weeks  or  months  on  the 
ground,  till  they  had  time  to  clutch  the  whole  produce  for  the  year  ;  and  when  they  had  stripped 
it  bare,  they  returned  to  their  own  country,  leaving  the  poor  Israelites  to  sow  the  land  for  a  new 
crop  in  the  following  season,  at  which  time  they  would  return  and  repeat  the  work  of  rapine. 
Their  route  would  be  along  the  east  bank  of  the  Jordan,  until  they  got  as  far  as  Bethshean  (now 
Beisan),  the  principal  ford  of  the  river,  when,  crossing  over,  they  would  have  before  them  to  the 
north-east,  the  rich  plain  of  Esdraelon  and  the  fertile  valley  of  Jezreel,  forming  together  the 
very  garden  of  Palestine,  whose  richness  of  soil  was  proverbial  everywhere,  and  formed  a  most 
tempting  prize  to  eyes  accustomed  to  look  on  the  sterility  of  the  desert — luxuriant  crops  of  corn, 
vineyards,  olive  trees,  fig  trees,  pomegranates,  milk  and  honey — all  found  in  profuse  abundance. 
Here  they  would  revel  until  feasted  to  the  full,  when  going  along  the  course  of  the  Kishon,  and 
passing  through  the  mountain  gorges  on  the  west,  would  then  turn  southward  along  the  rich 
belt  of  land  that  skirted  the  sea,  the  southern  part  of  which  was  occupied  by  the  Philistines, 
their  last  city  being  Gaza.  There  the  forces  of  the  marauders  necessarily  took  end,  for  there 
was  nothing  more  in  that  direction  to  seize.* 

4.  They  encamped  against  them] — ready  to  seize  their  plunder  by  force  of  arms,  if  they  could 
not  get  it  peaceably  (Ps.  xxvii.  3  ;  2  Sam.  xii.  28).  But  such  was  the  cowardice  of  the  God-for- 
saken people,  that  they  never  once  attempted  to  take  the  field  against  these  insolent  robbers,  far 
less  did  they  dream  for  a  moment  that  they  could  be  driven  out  of  the  country.  The  same 
course  was  taken  by  the  Turks  on  a  larger  scale,  when  they  first  made  their  appearance  in  the  east 
of  Europe,  and  seized  one  territory  after  another,  crushing  all  opposition.  The  increase  of  the 
earthl — the  annual  produce  of  the  soil  ;  such  as  wheat,  barley  and  grass  ;  wine,  honey,  milk  and 
oil  ;  all  fruit  trees'  produce,  and  such  things  as  are  alluded  to  in  the  following  passages  (Ex.  iii. 
8  ;  Dent.  viii.  8  ;  xxxii.  14  ;  2  Chron.  ii.  10,  15  ;  Ezek.  xxvii.  17  and  19  ;  Isa.  vii.  22,  23  ; 
Micah  iv.  4).  Till  thou  come  to  Gaza]— an  idiomatic  phrase  in  the  Hebrew  language  (Gen  x  19 ; 
Jud.  xi  33 ;  Gen.  xiii.  10  ;  1  Sam.  xvii.  52  ;  xxvii.  8).    Left  no  sustenance  for  Israel,  neither 


♦  It  has  long  been  the  practice  (till  recently  stopped)  of  the  marauding  Turkomans  of  Central 
Asia,  to  rob  the  long  caravans  of  camels,  laden  with  the  produce  of  the  countries  of  the  Far  East, 
passing  to  the  countries  of  the  Far  West  (and  vice  versa),  along  the  route  through  ancient  Media 
[Has  that  word  any  connection  with  Midian?]  which  has  the  Caspian  Gates  to  the  north  and 
Persia  to  the  South ;  These  tribes  also  have  long  been  in  the  habit  of  making  "  alamans,"  or 
raids  on  their  weaker  neighbours,  their  object  being  robbery  and  man-stealing,  including  woman 
and  child-stealing.  Their  favourite  hunting  ground  has  been  the  eastern  frontier  of  Persia.  The 
people  they  caught  were  carried  off  to  the  inhospitable  deserts  of  Central  Asia,  where  escape  was 
impossible.  For  prisoners  of  importance  a  heavy  ransom  was  expected;  the  others  were  made  to  work 
in  the  fields,  or  were  sold  as  chattels  where  a  market  could  be  found.  These  incursions  were  made 
sometimes  up  to  the  gates  of  Teheran,  while  so  strangely  imbecile  or  helpless  were  the  governors 
of  Persia,  the  country  once  ruled  over  by  a  Cyrus  and  an  Ahasuerus,  that  little  or  no  opposition 
was  offered  to  the  fierce  barbarians  who  came  plundering  and  murdering  to  within  a  few  miles  of 
the  capital.  No  wonder  that  all  the  towns  and  villages  are  walled  in  with  towers  and  gates 
which  are  shut  at  night.  Even  in  many  of  the  fields  were  towers,  as  refuges  for  the  people  at 
work,  in  case  of  sudden  alarm,  when  there  was  no  time  to  reach  the  village.  The  workers  by 
squeezing  themselves  through  a  narrow  opening  in  the  bottom,  which  could  be  closed  with  a 
stone,  might  thus  escape,  and  the  Turkoman  would  lose  his  prize.  To  complete  the  picture, 
occasionally  some  of  the  governors  on  the  frontier,  who  could  have  stopped  their  raids,  allowed 
them  to  pass  westwards  in  order  to  catch  them  on  their  return,  laden  with  the  spoil  they  had 
captured.  This  was  profitable  to  the  governor,  who  thus  bagged  everything.  Happily  Russia 
by  her  movement  into  Central  Asia,  during  the  eighth  decade  of  this  century,  has  laid  a  strong 
hand  on  this  system,  and  it  may  now  be  said  no  longer  to  exist.  That  movement  if  it  has  had 
few  other  beneficial  effects  seems  to  be  breaking  up  the  fallow  ground,  in  what  has  long  been  on« 
o|  the  wildest,  and  most  intractable  wastes,  both  of  the  moral  and  physical  worlds. 

309 


CHAP.  VL  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES, 


sheep,  etc.] — no  means  of  svpport,  whether  the  fruit  of  the  soil,  or  the  flocks  and  herds.  Not 
only  were  the  rich  plains  of  Issachar  devastated,  but  the  uplands  of  Manasseh  were  not  safe 
from  the  hands  of  these  rapacious  prowlers,  as  the  case  of  Gideon  illustrates.  Their  march  was 
"like  a  sweeping  rain  which  leaveth  no  food  "  (Prov.  xxviii.  3).  To  drive  off  the  cattle  has  been 
the  practice  of  the  Bedouins  all  along  unto  this  day  ;  and  it  is  customary,  in  some  parts  of 
Western  Asia,  to  make  a  compromise  with  the  invaders,  engaging  to  pay  them  a  heavy  tribute 
on  condition  that  they  shall  be  left  unmolested.  Even  powerful  communities  do  this  to  avoid 
perpetual  warf  re.  Besides  the  tribute,  the  chiefs  look  for  substantial  presents,  and  these  being 
received  as  gifts  in  one  year  are  exacted  the  next  year  as  a  matter  of  right.  Ere  long  the  pres- 
sure becomes  intolerable,  and  they  are  obliged  to  leave  the  settlements  altogether. — {Pict.  Bible.) 
Not  a  solitary  sheep,  ox  or  ass  which  came  in  their  way  was  left  to  the  Israelites  !  So  complete 
was  the  pillage.  Their  cattle^  comprising  beeves,  sheep,  asses  and  camels,  would  eat  up  all  the 
herbage  and  every  green  thing  which  they  did  not  require  for  themselves.  For  they  were  most 
numerous  (Num.  xxxi.  32-39). 

5.  They  came  up,  and  their  cattle  and  their  tents,  etc.] — they  and  their  cattle  is  emphatic — 
their  tents — those  who  lived  in  their  tents.  All  their  domestics,  as  well  as  fighting  men.  It  was 
not  a  sudden  assault  followed  by  a  hasty  retreat ;  but  they  came  to  remain  in  the  land,  for  a  time 
at  least,  to  fatten  themselves  on  its  rich  produce.  Came  as  grasshoppers.]  Rather  locusts — "^7.? 
in  like  abundance  to  the  locusts  ;  also  like  to  them  in  voracity,  of  which  it  is  said  in  Joel  ii.  3, 
"  the  land  is  as  the  garden  of  Eden  before  them,  and  behind  them  is  a  desolate  wilderness."  It 
was  a  deluge  of  human  robbers.* 

6.  Greatly  impoverished.] —  ^"1^  is  a  strong  word,  implying  more  than  that  they  suffered  a  great 
loss,  or  had  much  taken  from  them.  It  implies  that  they  felt  utterly  desolate  and  helpless.  "What 
a  spectacle  was  before  them  !  Their  beautiful  country  turned  into  a  vast  and  hideous  wreck  ; 
countless  marauders  roaming  at  will  all  over  the  land,  devouring  or  trampling  down  ruthlessly 
the  choicest  fruit  of  their  matchless  soil,  until  scarcely  a  stalk  of  grain  or  a  blade  of  grass  was 
left  in  Jezreel  itself.  As  far  as  the  eye  could  reach,  the  human  wolves  had  done  their  work  with 
absolute  completeness.  It  was  one  vast  sea  of  wreckage.  On  every  foot  of  the  sacred  land  was 
inscribed  "Ichabod."  The  curse  of  heaven  was  everywhere  marked.  They  were  a  people 
forsaken  of  their  God.  Hence  they  were  thoroughly  dispirited,  and  hung  their  heads  in  despair 
and  shame,  under  the  terrible  conviction  that  on  the  one  hand  they  had  deserved  it  all,  and  on 
the  other,  that  they  were  utterly  powerless  to  effect  a  remedy  for  their  condition.f 

But  this  conviction  was  not  arrived  at  all  at  once.  For  the  first  three  years  these  depredators, 
Josephus  tells  us,  repeated  each  year  their  terrible  visit,  with  such  disastrous  result,  that  a  large 
part  of  the  land  was  no  longer  sown,  while  the  miserable  inhabitants,  with  their  niimbers  thinned, 
partly  through  famine,  and  partly  through  oppression,  at  last,  in  great  numbers  quitted  their 
homes  and  sought  to  the  retreats  and  fastnesses  among  the  mountains  referred  to  in  verse  2. 
For  four  years  more  did  they  survive  the  terrible  humiliation  of  their  country  until  they  agreed 
by  general  consent  to  return  to  their  allegiance  to  the  God  from  whom  they  had  apostatized 
(Hos.  V.  15).  Now  they  were  virtually  saying  "  come,  let  us  return  unto  the  Lord,  for  He  hath 
torn  and  He  will  heal,  He  hath  smitten  and  He  will  bind  up." 

7.  They  cried  unto  the  Lord  because  of  Midian.l  (See  p.  159).  (chap.  iii.  9, 15 ;  iv.  3  ;  Fs.  ovL 
44,  45  ;  Ps.  cvii.  6,  19,  28). 

8.  The  Lord  sent  a  prophet.]  A  maUf  a  prophet  ;  not  an  angel.  An  unnamed  messenger 
(1  Kings  xiii.  1,  2  ;  xx.  13,  35  ;  2  Kings  ix.  1,  4).  God  would  send  a  prophet  before  He  sends 
a  saviour.  Before  giving  the  blessing  He  first  deals  with  that  which  keeps  back  the  blessing. 
They  were  beginning  to  use  the  language  of  penitence ;  they  must  learn  it  more  thoroughly. 
(Acts  ii.  37.,  yet  the  apostle  adds  ver.  38 — carry  your  repentance  farther).  The  message  itself 
etc.,  is  like  that  of  1  Sam.  x.  18,  or  Josh.  xxiv.  17  and  Jud.  ii.  1.— I  broug-htyou  up  from  Egypt, 
etc.]  It  was  strange  that  they  should  so  continually  require  to  be  reminded  of  one  of  the  very 
first  truths  in  their  national  history,  the  day  which  of  all  others  had  a  white  letter  mark  in  their 
calendar.  Then  they  for  the  first  time  rose  up  to  be  a  nation.  Then  was  laid  the  foundation  of 
everlasting  obligations  to  their  God,  to  whom  alone  they  owed  their  unparalleled  history  as  a 
people. 


*  From  p.  38  under  verse  5,  they  and  their  camels  were  without  number] — rather,  dromedaries 
(Isa.  Ix.  6)  which  are  peculiar  to  the  deserts  of  the  South  and  East.  Camels  and  asses  take  the 
place  of  horses  and  oxen  in  the  West.  Camels,  indeed,  were  not  unfrequently  used  for  ploughing. 

+  Many  think  it  was  about  this  time  that  the  great  famine  occurred  in  the  land  which  led 
Elimelech  and  his  family  to  remove  to  the  land  of  Moab  to  sojourn  there,  and  when  Kuth 
through  Naomi's  instrumentality  became  a  convert  to  the  faith  of  Israel's  God  (Buth  i.). 

310 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES.  chap,  vl 


10.  But  ye  have  not  obeyed  my  voice.l  These  words  contain  the  charge  which  their  God 
brings  against  them.  This  short  sentence  would  not  be  all  that  the  prophet  would  say.  It  was 
rather  the  theme  on  which  he  would  enlarge  ;  in  the  same  manner  in  which  we  have  an  account 
of  Peter's  sermon  on  the  day  of  Pentecost.  That  sermon  may  have  occupied  more  than  an  hour 
in  delivery,  and  yet  as  given  in  the  canon,  it  is  so  abridged  as  not  to  occupy  a  tenth  part  of  that 
time  in  the  reading.  The  line  of  thought  followed  by  the  speaker  alone  is  given  ;  so  here — 
The  gods  of  the  Amorites.] — This  name  is  put  for  the  Canaanites,  (as  in  Josh.  xxiv.  15,  18  ;  and 
Gen.  XV.  16).  "  In  the  Egyptian  monuments  of  Ramases  iii.,  Palastine  is  called  the  land  of  the 
Amori.  The  prophet  may  have  been  addressing  the  dwellers  in  the  mountains  where  the 
Amorites  (the  Highlanders)  dwelt.  (Gen.  xlviii.  22).  The  idolatries  of  that  race  were  specially 
abominable  (see  1  Kings  xxi.  26;  2  Kings  xxi  11)."  [Speaker^s  Com.']  It  has  well  been 
remarked  that  "  the  existence  of  a  class  of  men,  whose  duty  it  is  to  convict  men  of  moral 
declension,  is  peculiar  to  revealed  religion.  Other  religions  had  their  prUsti  ;  Judaism  and 
Christianity  alone  had  their  prophets.*'    [Lioui], 


MAIN  EOMTLETICS,— Verses  1^10, 

God's  DEALmas  with  the  Unteachable  Human  Heabt. 

Here  again  we  have  the  same  weary  go-round.  Fresh  outbreaks  of  depravity ; 
new  chastisements  of  the  Divine  hand  ;  the  treacherous  lieart  turning  again  to 
its  God  when  it  finds  that  it  must ;  and  God,  with  wonderful  tenderness  and 
slowness  to  anger  (at  every  new  stage  becoming  more  wonderful),  repenting  Him 
of  the  evil  and  granting  deliverance.     We  have— 

Z.  The  Picture  of  Sin  Presented. 

It  is  not  a  case  of  sinning  for  the  first  time,  but  a  case  of  repeated  sinning, 

and  that  accompanied  with  every  possible  aggravation. 

1.  The  form  of  their  sin  was  of  a  heinous  character.  Idol- worship  was  peculiarly 
offensive  to  their  God.  It  was  a  direct  rejection  of  Jehovah  as  their  God,  not- 
withstanding all  His  claims  to  be  so  acknowledged.  No  greater  insult  could  be 
offered  to  His  Majesty  and  His  Holiness.  It  was  to  cast  off  His  authority,  to 
deny  His  sovereign  rights,  to  refuse  Him  submission,  to  contemn  His  glorious 
perfections,  to  trample  under  foot  His  law,  and  to  reject  His  Divine  fellowship. 
It  was  to  do  all  this  in  the  most  offensive  manner,  by  preferring  to  worship  in 
His  place  beasts  and  fourfooted  things,  or  images  of  sinful  objects,  the  work  of 
their  own  hands.  It  was  to  go  lower  still — it  was  to  set  up  the  embodiments  of 
sin  in  the  place  of  God,  and  to  give  to  these  the  devotion  and  the  worship  which 
are  properly  due  to  God.  It  was  to  give  external  form  and  embodiment  to  the 
worst  ideals  of  wickedness  which  the  human  imagination  could  conceive,  and 
yield  up  to  these  the  homage  which  is  due  only  to  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  1  In 
this  matter  the  "  desperately-wicked  heart  "  seems  to  have  exceeded  itself  in  its 
ordinary  acting.  And  to  complete  the  picture,  it  must  take  away  the  one 
foundation  of  all  possible  good  (namely,  the  worship  of  the  Good  One),  and  to 
expose  the  heart  to  the  incursion  of  all  possible  evils. 

Idolatry,  indeed,  implies  the  creature  striking  out  for  itself  in  disregard  of  its 
Maker,  as  if  its  Maker  were  insufficient  to  it,  and  His  presence  were  a  burden 
ratlier  than  a  pleasure.  "  Have  I  been  a  wilderness  to  Israel  ? — a  land  of  dark- 
ness ?  Wherefore  say,  my  people.  We  will  come  no  more  to  thee  ?  What 
iciquity  have  your  fathers  found  in  me  that  they  are  gone  from  Me  and  have 
walked  after  vanity  ?"  This  reproach  applies  to  all  who  put  any  other  objects 
in  place  of  God,  and  give  to  these  the  homage,  the  affection,  the  interest  and 
the  obedience  which  are  due  to  Him  alone.  It  may  be  riches,  or  fame,  social 
distinction,  the  good  opinions  of  our  fellows,  or  any  prize  which  the  man  who 
lives  without  God  counts  dear  (see  pp.  110,  111,  123). 

31t 


CHAP.  VL  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


2.  They  sinned  against  the  clearest  light.  All  the  means  of  instruction  which 
that  age  could  furnish  in  the  matter  of  their  duty  to  their  God  were  employed 
to  press  His  claims  on  their  attention.  If  they  had  no  printed  Bible,  yet  at  the 
Red  Sea,  at  Mount  Horeb,  all  through  the  wilderness,  at  Jordan,  and  in  every 
city  of  the  Canaanites,  as  well  as  in  many  startljng  events  of  more  than  200 
years  afterwards — they  had  all  tlie  facts  and  revelations  of  the  Divine  character 
and  of  human  duty  which  go  to  make  a  Bible.  And  they  had  these  as  livini,^ 
facts — events  passing  before  their  eyes,  coming  with  the  freshness  of  personal 
experience — in  which  they  themselves  were  principal  factors.  They  had  an 
illuminated  Bible  given  them  to  read,  in  which  the  blindest  among  them  could 
see  a  great  meaning.  It  was  a  Bible  which  spoke  with  a  plainness  that  the 
dullest  could  appreciate,  and  with  a  loudness  that  made  the  most  stolid  fall 
down  and  worship.  But  they  had  no  eyes  to  read  such  a  Bible  ;  no  ears  to  hear 
its  remarkable  sayings,  for  "  they  did  shut  their  eyes  that  they  might  not  see, 
and  stop  their  ears  that  they  might  not  hear."  They  sinned  against  the 
clearest  light  as  to  the  claims  which  Jehovah  had  on  the  allegiance  and  love  of 
their  hearts.  "  They  would  not  come  to  the  light  lest  their  deeds  should  be 
reproved."  Hence  they  continued  as  "  sottish  children — a  people  of  no  under- 
standing "  (see  Dent,  xxxii.  5,  6,  28 ;  iv.  5-8,  32-36  ;  Luke  xii.  48 ;  Matt.  xi. 
21-23 ;  Num.  xv.  30,  31  ;  John  ix.  41  ;  Rom.  ii.  12-16). 

3.  They  sinned  in  abusing  the  highest  privileges.  They  had  the  continual 
presence  of  God  among  them  that  they  might  enjoy  His  fellowship.  A  way  of 
access  was  provided  through  the  appointed  sacrifices.  The  means  whereby 
individual  sins  might  be  pardoned,  and  personal  sanctification  secured,  were  set 
every  day  before  their  eyes  in  the  blood  of  sprinkling  and  the  water  of  purifica- 
tion. God's  own  glorious  character  as  a  God  of  truth  and  righteousness,  of 
holiness  and  love,  was  exhibited  very  strikingly  in  the  statutes,  ordinances,  and 
commandments  which  were  given  them  as  a  law  for  their  conduct.  They  had 
exceeding  great  and  precious  promises  made  to  them  from  time  to  time  as  to 
their  deliverance  for  the  present,  and  the  realisation  of  bright  hopes  for  the 
future.  They  had  very  endearing  and  very  honourable  names  given  them  by 
their  God,  and  they  had  continually  fresh  proofs  given  that  He  was  among  them 
on  all  occasions,  ever  ready  to  do  them  such  signal  service  by  the  events  of  His 
Providence  as  no  other  people  on  earth  ever  experienced.  Yet  all  this  was 
despised  and  put  aside  when  they  "  forsook  the  Lord  their  God  and  worshipped 
Baalim  and  the  groves."  This  comes  very  near  the  case  described  in  the 
terrible  passage  of  Heb.  vi.  4-6,  or  that  other  in  Heb.  x.  26-29,  making  allow- 
ance for  the  difference  of  the  dispensations  (Isa.  v.  4  ;  Matt.  xxi.  35-39-43  ; 
Acts  vii.  51-53;  2  Kings  xvii.  12-18  ;  John  xii.  35-37  ;  Luke  xii.)  {^See  pp. 
120,  121). 

4.  They  sinned  in  disregarding  the  most  sacred  obligations.  Never  were  a 
people  so  sacredly  bound  by  acts  of  kindness  shown  them,  by  great  deliver- 
ances wrought,  by  honours  conferred,  and  by  hopes  opened  up.  The  whole  Book 
of  Deuteronomy  is  a  record  of  the  extent  and  the  weiglit  of  the  obligations  laid 
on  that  people  to  love  and  serve  Jehovah  as  their  God.  *'  He  hath  not 
dealt  so  with  any  nation — the  children  of  Israel  are  a  people  near  unto  Him." 
They  were  set  forth  as  priests  among  the  nations,  to  make  "  mention  of  the 
loving  kindness  of  the  Lord,  and  the  praises  of  the  Lord  according  to  all  that 
the  Lord  hath  bestowed  upon  them,  and  the  great  goodness  to  the  house  of 
Israel,  which  He  bestowed  on  them  according  to  His  mercies,  and  according 
to  the  multitude  of  His  loving  kindnesses."  And  those  who  have  set  before 
them  the  rich  discoveries  contained  in  the  pages  of  the  New  Testament  truth  ; 
who  find  the  Son  of  God  standing  before  them  in  the  capacity  of  the  Son  of 

312 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   JVDQE8,  chap.  vi. 


Man ;  who  hear  from  His  own  lips  the  free  offer  of  eternal  life,  in  all  its 
immeasurable  fuhiess,  to  those  who  are  willing  to  be  reconciled  to  God  through 
His  precious  blood  ;  and  who  have  many  precious  promises  made  to  them 
both  for  the  present  and  the  future  life — these  have  obligations  laid  on  them  to 
love  and  live  for  God,  which  no  scales  can  weigh,  and  no  mind  can  appreciate, 
(see  Heb.  i.  1-3  ;  ii.  2,  3,  4 ;  x.  19-23  ;  Matt.  xii.  41,  42  ;  Ps.  kxxix.  15,  16  ; 
Prov.  i.  20-23,  with  24-28 ;  John  iii.  3G,  also  16-18 ;  Rev.  iii.  15-18). 

5.  They  sinned  in  breaking  the  most  solemn  engagements.  They  not  oily 
had  many  acts  of  kindness  shown  them,  and  great  things  done  for  them,  but 
they  had  entered  into  a  special  covenant  with  Jehovah,  and  pledged  themselves 
to  be  His  people.  They  were  formally  set  apart  by  the  sprinkling  of  blood  to 
be  His.  God  Himself  came  down  on  Mount  Sinai  to  enter  into  this  covenant, 
and  the  whole  proceedings  were  conducted  in  so  solemn  a  nianner  as  to  be 
memorable  to  all  future  generations.  To  break  this  covenant  (which  was  made 
for  all  their  generations)  was  to  perjure  themselves,  and  increase  their  guilt  to 
an  incalculable  degree.  To  break  one's  solemn  engafrement  made  to  a  fellow 
man  is  reckoned  a  sin  of  deep  dye,  but  how  shall  we  characterise  the  violation 
of  a  solemn  oath  made  to  high  Heaven  ?    (see  p.  121). 

6.  They  sinned  in  the  face  of  the  most  earnest  teachings.  Especially  the 
teachings  of  Divine  Providence.  What  did  the  fathers  gain  by  serving  other 
gods  ?  Had  not  the  experiment  been  made  once  and  again,  and  on  several 
occasions  ?  Did  not  the  history  of  two  centuries  and  a  half  prove  it  to  be  a 
palpable  folly,  and  a  terrible  evil  to  forsake  the  true  and  living  God,  the  only 
fountain  of  living  waters  ?  Did  not  all  the  figures  of  Israel's  history  since  they 
entered  into  Canaan,  each  one  in  his  place,  condemn  with  a  fearful  empliasis 
the  crime  of  forsaking  Jehovah  ?  What  a  long  tale  of  sorrow  and  degradation  was 
the  history  of  the  generation  that  went  before  the  present  one,  when  they  were 
so  grievously  oppressed  by  the  cruel  Jabin  i  Surely  twenty  years'  pressure  of 
that  iron  heel  might  have  read  a  lesson  sufficient  to  teach  for  a  whole  century 
the  sin  and  danger  of  idolatry.  And  the  mighty  acts  of  Israel's  God,  when 
He  rose  up  from  His  place  to  take  vengeance  on  the  oppressors  of  His  people, 
in  the  discomfiture  and  ruin  of  Sisera  and  his  army,  might  have  taught  for 
generations  to  come  that  there  was  no  god  but  Jehovah.  Yet  though  having 
these  and  many  other  lessons  of  instruction  and  warning  set  before  them,  this 
generation  fell  again  into  the  mire  from  which  their  fathers  had  at  such  cost 
been  drawn.  {See  pp.  121,  122). 

^  One  general  remark  we  must  not  omit  to  make  as  regards  this  melancholy 
picture  of  sin,  that  when  men  complain  of  the  awful  character  of  th.^  punishment 
which  God  sometimes  brings  down  even  on  His  own  professed  people,  the  wondei 
ought  to  cease  when  we  look  candidly  at  the  terrible  character  of  their  guilt 
God  is  just  when  He  smites,  as  well  as  when  He  smiles. 

ZZ.  The  state  of  heart  which  this  picture  indicates. 

1.  Its  inveterate  tendency  to  sin.  The  propensity  must  be  strong  to  make 
its  appearance  in  the  face  of  such  solemn  remonstrances,  and  such  weighty 
arguments  as  God  employs  to  make  men  desist  from  it.  Sin  has  a  deep  root  in 
the  heart.  "The  le])ro.sy  is  deeper  than  the  skin,"  " the  seal  1  spreads  in  the 
skin  "— "  it  is  a  fretting  leprosy."  '*  In  me,  that  is  in  my  flesh,  dwelleth  no 
good  thing."  (Lev.  xiii.  3,  36  ;  Rom.  vii.  18).  Facts  prove,  account  for  it  as 
we  may,  that  the  spirit  or  tendency  of  backsliding  is  incorrigible  among  God's 
people.  Indeed,  in  face  of  the  facts  that  meet  us  on  every  page  of  this  book, 
who  can  doubt  the  truth  of  God's  own  testimony — "  the  carnal  mind  is  enmity 

313 


CHAP.  VI.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   JUDGES. 


against  God;  it  is  not  subject  to  the  law  of  God,  neither  indeed  can  he  (Rom. 
viii.  7)."  (Jer.  xiii.  23  ;  ii.  22  ;  Matt.  xix.  24  ;  John  iii.  3,  6,  7  ;  Rom.  vii. 
23,  24  ;  viii.  8  ;  Eph.  ii.  1  ;  Ps.  li.  5). 

2.  The  hardness  of  the  heart.  This  is  the  feature  of  character  which  shows 
itself  in  refusing  to  be  impressed  by  any  dealing  which  God  may  liave  with  the 
heart.  This  was  strikingly  visible  in  Pharaoh's  case  (Ex.  vii.-xi,).  (Heb.  iii. 
8,  15  ;  iv.  7  ;  Josh.  xi.  20  ;  1  Sam.  vi.  6  ;  Jer.  vii.  26).  It  implies  that  the 
heart  offers  resistance  to  the  motive  by  which  God  would  impress  it.  It  is  not 
only  callous — impassive,  or  utterly  indifferent.  It  is  actively  opposing  the 
influence  by  which  God  seeks  to  move  it.     But  it  includes  the  want  ol  sensibility. 

3.  Its  boldness  in  sin.  There  is  a  recklessness  of  consequences  ;  a  defiance, 
wild  it  may  be,  yet  still  a  defiance  of  the  Lawgiver,  and  a  refusal  to  submit  to 
His  authority. 

4.  Its  obstinacy  in  sin.  The  heart  shows  a  pertinacity  in  clinging  to  its  sins. 
It  refuses  to  obey  God's  voice  (Neh.  ix.  17  ;  Ps.  Ixxviii.  10).  It  refuses  to 
repent  (Jer.  v.  3  ;  viii.  5).  It  refuses  to  receive  any  proper  knowledge  of  God 
and  His  ways  (Jer.  ix.  6  ;  xiii.  10).  The  stubbornness  of  the  heart  in  refusing 
to  receive  any  teaching  from  God's  judgments  is  strikingly  brought  out  by  the 
prophet  Amos  in  chap,  iv.,  verses  6,  8,  9,  10,  11 ;  Jer.  v.  2B. 

5.  Its  depth  of  enmity  against  God.  It  is  said  to  be  *  desperately  wicked," 
which  implies  wickedness  in  an  unusual  degree  (Jer.  xvii.  9).  If  the  human 
heart  does  not  constitutionally  consist  of  enmity  against  God,  it  is  magnetised 
with  that  enmity,  and  said  to  be  alienated  from  God  (Col.  i.  21  ;  Eph.  iv.  18  ; 
John  vii.  7  ;  xv.  23,  24 ;  1  John  ii.  15,  16. 

6.  Its  nnteachahleness.  Notwithstanding  all  God's  dealing  with  the  heart  in 
this  case,  and  for  so  long  a  time  there  was  no  reformation.  Patience  and  long 
forbearance  on  the  one  side,  to  show  how  reluctant  He  was  to  chastise  them  ; 
severe  scourging  employed  when  milder  treatment  had  no  effect,  to  show  that  God 
would  keep  to  His  word  of  threatening  as  well  as  His  word  of  promise  when 
necessary.  Yet  the  old  tendency  shows  itself  so  soon  as  the  pressure  of  trouble 
is  removed. 

Forty  years  had  elapsed  during  which  the  land  had  peace,  with  the  invaluable 
privilege  of  a  Deborah  and  a  Barak  at  the  iielm  of  affairs.  But  long  before  that 
time  was  expired,  the  mass  of  the  people  had  again  begun  to  forsake  Jehovah, 
and  to  follow  after  the  worship  of  idols.  No  sooner  are  these  zealous  defenders 
of  righteousness  in  their  graves  than  the  stream  of  evil,  which  had  been  sten)med 
for  a  time,  flows  on  as  before.  Israel  was  but  an  example  of  the  general  rule. 
Even  the  awful  catastrophe  of  the  destruction  of  a  world  by  a  universal  flood  did 
not  suffice  to  take  away  men's  depravity,  root  and  branch.  After  the  flood  as 
before,  the  account  still  is,  "  the  imagination  of  man's  heart  is  evil  from  his 
youth."  (See  Gen.  vi.  5,  with  viii.  21.)  In  the  days  of  David  the  account  was 
similar  (Ps.  xiv.  3).  In  Solomon's  time  the  same  (Prov.  xxvii.  22).  In  the  days 
of  Isaiah  matters  seem  worse  rather  than  better  (Isa.  i.  5,  6).  In  Jeremiah's 
age  the  report  is  as  dark  as  ever  (Jer.  xvii.  9).  After  all  the  plagues,  Pharaoh's 
heart  continued  as  hard  as  the  nether  mill-stone.  The  Sodomites  and  Canaanites 
though  forewarned  of  the  issue  of  their  high-lianded  sins  would  not  hearken,  and 
80  were  destroyed.  And  these  Israelites,  after  their  settlement  in  the  land 
promised  to  the  fathers,  though  dealt  with  in  the  most  solemn  manner  to  lead 
them  to  give  up  their  idolatrous  practices,  yet  clung  to  them  with  extreme 
obstinacy  during  all  the  period  of  the  Judges,  and  also  the  long  reign  of  the  kings, 
for  nearly  a  thousand  years,  until  the  nation  was  ground  to  the  very  dust  by  the 
heavy  calamities  which  such  apostacy  from  the  God  of  Israel  at  last  brought  on 
3U 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES.  chap.  vi. 


tlieir  heads.  "  My  ]  eople  are  bent  to  back-sliding  from  Me."  They  are 
"sliddeii  back  with  a  jierpetual  back-sliding  "  (Jer.  viii.  5  ;  Hos.  xi.  7,  iv.  16, 17; 
Jer.  ii.  32,  also  10,  11,  vii.  28).     (^ee  pp.  166,  186,  190.) 

III.    G-od  cannot  in  any  case  tolerate  sin. 

As  often  as  it  is  repeated,  His  anger  must  come  down  upon  it.  It  might  be 
said,  it  was  already  conclusively  proved,  that  sin  was  so  inwoven  into  the  very 
nature  of  this  people,  that  it  was  hopeless  to  get  it  extirpated  ;  for  so  long  as 
the  stubborn  propensity  of  their  hearts  to  apostatise  continued,  there  must  be 
a  continually  fresh  outbreak  of  sin,  when  these  hearts  were  left  to  themselves. 
That  might  be  a  good  argument  for  casting  off  such  a  people  altogether,  when 
it  was  fully  proved,  that  they  were  incorrigibly  treacherous  to  the  covenant  of 
their  God,  but  it  is  no  reason,  why  God  should  be  forgetful  of  what  is  due  to 
His  own  holy  name.  He  cannot  connive  at  sin,  and  be  true  to  Himself  That 
He  sometimes  may  seem  to  *'  wink  "  at  sin  has  been  inferred  from  such  a  passage 
as  Acts  xvii.  30.  But  it  is  one  thing  to  "  pass  over  "  sin  for  a  time — not  to 
take  it  up,  and  give  judgment  upon  it,  until  a  fit  period  come  round,  and  quite 
auother  thing,  expressly  to  tolerate  it,  while  dealing  with  it  iu  the  exercise  of 
His  Providential  rule.  While  men  sin,  God's  anger  ever  burns  agaiust  it,  even 
though  He  should  long  suffer  it  to  go  on,  and  remain  silent.  Wisdom  must 
come  in  to  decide  as  to  the  proper  manner^  and  the  proper  time,  for  showing 
His  anger. 

In  the  present  case,  this  long  forbearance  with  a  people  so  wedded  to  sin,  and 
the  purpose  not  to  cast  them  entirely  off  under  any  circumstances,  strongly  fits 
in  with  Messianic  arrangements.  The  utter  depravity  of  their  nature  shows  the 
great  need  of  adopting  some  method  out  of  ordinary  course,  to  cure  men's 
hearts  of  their  tendency  to  depart  from  God.  This  is  what  the  gospel  specially 
provides  (p.  191).  Meantime  proof  must  be  given  that  no  toleration  is  allowed 
to  sin,  that  though  ordinary  punishment  does  not  suffice  to  effect  a  cure  (Isa.  i. 
5,  6),  yet  evidence  must  be  given  that  sin  is  a  thing  which  must  be  frowned 
upon  under  all  circumstances.  If  the  heart  is  ever  turning  aside  like  the 
deceitful  bow,  then  it  must  ever  be  chastised  anew  (p.  170).     For, 

1.  God*s  nature  is  irreconcilably  opposed  to  sin.  Ps.  v.  4-6.  He  not  only 
hates  sin,  but  He  "  cannot  look  upon  it "  (Hab.  i.  13).  He  cannot  let  His  eye 
rest  upon  it  for  a  moment.  As  light  cannot  co-exist  in  the  same  apartment 
with  darkness,  so  God  cannot  dwell  in  the  same  heart  with  sin.  He  is  separated 
from  it  not  only  by  distance,  but  by  a  strong  antagonism  of  nature  (2  Cor.  vi. 
14,  15).  All  His  perfections  are  against  it.  He  is  so  /wli/,  that  "  without 
holiness  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord."  The  very  "  heavens  are  not  clean  in  His 
wght."  He  is  so  just  and  righteous  that  it  is  proverbial  to  say  *'  Shall  not  the 
Judge  of  all  the  earth  do  right  ? "  (Ps.  xi.  7  :  xcvii.  2).  He  is  so  true,  that 
**  heaven  and  earth  may  pass  away,  but  His  words  shall  not  pass  away  "  (Num. 
xxiii.  1 9  ;  1  Sam.  xv.  29).  "  His  Yea  is  Yea,  and  His  Nay  is  Nay  "  )  Rev.  iii. 
14).  He  is  so  unchangeable  in  the  principles  of  His  government,  that  He  is 
said  to  be  "  without  variableness  or  the  shadow  of  turning  "  (Mai.  iii.  6  ;  Job 
xxiii.  13). 

It  is  the  greatest  mystery  of  the  universe  that  sin  should  ever  have  been 
allowed  to  enter  it  at  all  under  the  government  of  so  holy  a  God  ;  and  the  next 
greatest  mystery  is,  that  it  should  have  been  allowed  to  continue  so  long.  For 
God  is  ever  irreconcilably  opposed  to  sin.  On  the  other  hand,  neither  can  a 
nature  under  the  dominion  of  sin  ever  be  reconciled  to  holiness.  How  often 
are  we  told  that,  under  all  the  chastisement  which  God  sent  upon  this  people, 
they  refused  to  return  to  him.  This  whole  book  is  the  historical  proof  (Jer. 
V.  3  ;  ix.  3  ;  2  Chron.  xxviii.  22  ;  Rev.  xvi.  9-11).  It  is  invariable  as  the  law 
by  which  water  runs  down  a  hill. 

315 


CHAP.  VI.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   JUDOES. 


2.  Sin  carries  its  own  punishment  in  its  own  bosom.  The  simple  hot  that  sin 
means  enmity  to  God  involves  a  terrible  penalty.  God's  favour  is  lost,  and  the 
life  of  the  creature  becomes  one  of  misery.  How  can  a  man  bear  to  be  at  war 
with  God  ?  He  has  the  whole  universe  against  him.  Sin  is  a  debt  he  never 
can  pay  ;  a  burden  under  whicli  he  must  groan  for  ever  ;  a  leprosy  for  which  in 
all  nature  there  is  no  cure  ;  a  poison  for  which  neither  man  nor  angel  can  find 
an  antidote  ;  a  serpent  that  shall  without  pity  sting  its  victim  for  ever.  There 
is  no  peace  to  tlie  man  who  clings  to  his  sin.  It  is  a  perpetual  disturber.  There 
is  no  rest  in  sin.  It  is  an  unresting  trouble.  "  Many  sorrows  are  to  the  wicked." 
So  many  miseries  accompany  sin  that  all  the  pleasure  it  gives  is  but  as  a  drop 
of  honey  in  a  sea  of  gall  {^outh).  Sin  and  punishment  go  together  as  substance 
and  shadow.  Thej^  grow  together  out  of  one  stem.  Punishment  is  a  fruit  that 
ripens  within  the  flower  of  the  pleasure  that  conceals  it  {Emerson).  ''  The 
genius  of  a  heathen  has  taught  a  striking  moral  on  this  subject.  He  made  the 
model  of  a  serpent,  and  fixed  it  in  the  bottom  of  a  goblet,  coiled  for  the  spring, 
a  pair  of  gleaming  eyes  in  its  head,  and  in  its  open  mouth  fangs  raised  to  strike. 
It  lay  beneath  the  ruby  wine.  Nor  did  he  who  raised  the  golden  cup  to  quench 
his  tliirst,  and  quaff  the  delicious  draught,  suspect  what  lay  below  till,  as  he 
reached  the  dregs,  that  dreadful  head  rose  up  and  glistened  before  his  eyes.  So 
when  life's  cup  is  nearly  emptied,  and  sin's  last  pleasure  quaffed,  and  unwilling 
lij)S  are  draining  the  bitter  dregs,  shall  rise  the  ghastly  terrors  of  remorse,  death 
and  judgment  on  the  despairing  soul  {Guthrie)* 

3.  God's  word  uniformly  condemns  it.  God's  word  is  His  written  law— a 
compendium  of  the  judgments  He  passes  on  men's  principles  and  actions.  On 
every  page  sin  in  every  form  is  condemned.  The  first  act  of  dis(jhedience,  it 
threatens  with  death  ;  the  same  tone  is  kept  up  throughout,  and  its  closing 
statement  shows  the  same  unalteral)le  attitude  towards  sin, — "  let  him  that  is 
unjust  remain  unjust  still,"  etc.  In  unequivocal  language  it  declares  that  "  the 
wages  of  oin  is  death,"  that  "  God  is  angry  with  the  wicked  every  day,  and  if  he 
do  not  turn.  He  will  whet  His  sword,  and  bend  His  bow,"  etc.  (Rom.  vi.  23  ; 
Ps.  vii.  11,  12).  He  wnll  ''set  His  face  against"  the  wicked  (Ps.  xxxiv.  16  ; 
Lev.  xxvi.  17  ;  xvii.  10  ;  xx.  3,  5,  6,  etc.)  and  in  the  day  when  He  visits  those 
who  sin,  He  will  visit  their  sin  upon  them  (Ex.  xxxii.  34).  "  He  will  by  no 
means  clear  tiie  guilty  "  (Ex.  xxxiv.  7).  Their  sin  "  shall  surely  find  them 
out"  (Num.  xxxii.  23).  Indeed  all  the  threatenings  of  the  Bible  are  a  mani- 
fold condemnation  of  sin  (Deut.  xxviii.  45  ;  Eph.  v.  6). 

4.  His  Providence  always  works  against  it.  He  may  not  indeed  visit  the 
sinner  with  instant  destruction.  Men  may  be  permitted  to  go  on  in  sin  for  a 
time,  while  the  thunders  of  justice  sleep,  yet  sin  does  not  pass  unpunished. 
Where  there  is  no  repentance,  sooner  or  later,  He  brings  down  the  rod  of 
chastisement,  or  the  sword  of  destruction.  At  the  proper  time,  "  He  will  lay 
judgment  to  the  line,  and  righteousness  to  the  plummet."  It  is  an  old  but  true 
proverb,  "  the  mills  of  the  gods  grind  slow,  but  they  grind  to  powder."  God 
came  not  to  Adam  till  the  evening,  but  He  came.  Though  the  deluge  was  de- 
layed for  120  years,  yet  at  the  appointed  time  it  came.  God  waited  on  the 
Canaanites  for  their  repentance  for  430  years,  but  as  they  continued  impenitent, 
the  sword  of  Joshua  was  commanded  to  do  its  work.  Joseph's  brethren  thought 
their  wicked  deed  was  forgotten,  as  year  after  year  slrpped  away,  and  no  whisper 
was  ever  made  of  it.  But  when  the  dungeons  of  Egypt  closed  around  them, 
and  they  received  unaccountably  rough  dealing  from  the  strange  man  who  was 
lord  of  the  country,  an  accusing  voice  was  awakened  within  them,  memory 
called  up  the  past,  and  the  old  sin  rose  up  as  a  spectre  before  them  in  all  its 
terribleness,  as  the  cause  of  their  accumulated  troubles.     Silently  had  that  sin 

816 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES.  chap,  vl 

dogged  their  steps,  while  they  slept  and  awoke  from  day  to  day,  and  much  of 
life  passed  on.  It  lay  forgotten,  but  not  dead.  At  the  fit  moment  God  held  it 
up  before  them,  and  they  cried  out  with  one  voice,  "  We  are  verily  guilty  con- 
cerning onr  brother,  in  that  we  saw  the  anguish  of  his  soul,**  etc. 

"  'I hough  a  sinner  do  evil  a  hundred  times,  and  his  days  be  prolonged^  yet  I 
know  it  shall  be  well  only  with  them  that  fear  the  Lord,''  etc.  *'  These  things 
thou  hast  done,  and  I  kept  silence."  The  silence  is  ominous.  "  A  dead  silence 
goes  before  the  earthquake.  Nature  seems  hushed  into  an  awful  stillness,  more 
dreadful  than  the  storm  would  be.  It  is  as  if  she  were  holding  her  breath  at 
the  thought  of  the  coming  disaster.  The  air  hangs  heavy  ;  not  a  breath  fans 
the  leaves  ;  the  birds  cease  their  music  ;  the  hum  of  the  insects  ceases  ;  there  is 
no  ripj^le  in  the  streams  ;  and  meanwhile  houses,  it  may  be  cities,  are  on  the 
brink  of  ruin.  So  it  is  with  God's  silence  over  the  wicked.  It  will  be  followed 
by  the  earthquake  of  His  judgments.  "  When  they  shall  say  Peace  and  Safety, 
then  suddeu  destruction,"  etc. — (Goulburn). 

5.  The  laws  of  a  man's  own  nature  cry  out  against  it.    Sin  is  a  kind  of 

boomerang  which  goes  ofi'  into  space  curiously,  but  turns  again  on  its  thrower, 
and  with  tenfold  force  strikes  the  hand,  or  the  person  that  launched  it,  after 
describing  singular  curves.  There  is  no  such  terrible  punishment  known  on 
earth  as  an  accusing  conscience.  It  is  like  *'  Tophet  of  old,'*  "  the  pile  of  which 
is  fire  and  much  wood,  and  the  breath  of  the  Lord  like  a  stream  of  brimstone 
doth  kindle  it."  Wilful  and  aggravated  sin  is  the  fuel  of  that  awful  fire. 
Examples  we  have  in  Belshazzar,  Lain,  Herod,  Pilate,  Judas,  and  others.  They 
prove  that  punishment  is  the  recoil  of  sin,  and  that  the  strength  of  the  back- 
stroke is  in  proportion  to  the  force  of  the  original  blow.  Conscience  is  a  clock 
that  strikes  loud  and  gives  warning,  in  one  man's  case  ;  in  another  the  hand 
points  silently  to  the  number  but  strikes  not.  Meantime  the  hours  pass  away, 
death  hastens,  and  after  death  comes  the  judgment. 

6.  T  e  cross  of  Christ  shows  that  sin  cannot,  under  any  possible  circum- 
stances, go  unpunished.  This  is  incomparably  the  highest  proof  that  can  be 
given  in  the  case.  The  Eternal  Father  spares  not  His  oidy  begotten  Son, 
because  He  cannot  spare  sin!  What  depth  of  hatred  to  sin  is  liere  ?  How 
supreme  the  necessity  for  inflicting  death,  as  the  due  desert  of  our  sins  when 
such  a  substitute  as  this  cannot  be  exempted  from  bearing  the  full  burden  of 
Divine  wrath  !  The  sufferings  of  mere  creatures  are  small  indeed,  and  of  very 
ordinary  consequence,  com})ared  with  the  groans  and  agonies  of  Him  who  made 
the  worlds,  and  who  wrought  all  the  mighty  works  of  Divine  power,  which  dis- 
tinguished His  life  in  this  world.  The  whole  human  race  are  but  as  a  grain  of 
dust  before  the  infinite  Majesty  of  the  Son  of  God,  who  yet  called  Himself  "  the 
Son  of  Man."  Yet  "  it  pleased  the  Lord  to  bruise  Him,"  because  He  became 
responsible  for  our  sins,  and  was  "  made  a  curse  for  us." 

Our  conclusion  is,  that  if  God  could  not  spare  our  sins,  but  was  so  strict  to 
mark  iniquity,  we  too  must  resolve  unalterably,  in  the  strength  of  God's  grace, 
not  to  spare  them  ourselves.  We  must  wage  ceaseless  war  against  them,  in  all 
the  Protean  forms  they  may  assume,  saying,  Thou  shalt  die — and  thou — and 
thou  !  The  whole  brood  must  be  cast  out ;  while  holy  thoughts,  devout  affec- 
tions, and  heavenly  longings  must  take  their  place.  Let  our  motto  be  Delenda 
sunt  peccata, 

ZV.  Repeated  sin  bring-s  heavier  cliastiseinent. 

God  warned  His  people,  that  if  they  would  not  listen  to  His  first  reproofs,  but 
would  obstinately  repeat  their  offences  afresli.  He  would  not  only  chastise  them 
again,  but  would  **  chastise  them  seven  times  more  for  their  sins."     (Lev.  xxvi. 

317 


CHAP.  VI.  nOMILETIC  COMMENTAHY:   JUDGES. 


18,  21,  24,  28).  He  beG:ms  with  whips,  but  by  and  bye  proceeds  to  the  use 
of  scorpions.  This  was  strikingly  exemplified  in  the  Midianitish  invasion — the 
most  overvvlielming  of  all  the  judgments  God  had  yet  brought  upon  the  land. 
As  Bp.  Ball  remarks,  "During  the  former  tyranny,  Deborah  was  permitted 
to  judge  Israel  under  a  palm  tree ;  under  this,  private  habitations  are  not 
allowed.  Then  the  seal  of  ju(^gment  was  in  the  sight  of  the  sun  ;  now  their 
very  dwellings  must  be  secret  under  the  earth.  They  who  had  rejected  the 
protection  of  God,  now  run  to  tiie  mountains  for  shelter ;  and  as  they  had 
savagely  abused  themselves,  so  they  are  fain  to  creep  into  the  dens  and  caves 
of  the  rocks  like  the  wild  animals,  for  safeguard.  God  had  sown  spiritual 
seed  among  them,  and  they  suffered  their  heathen  neighbours  to  pull  it  up  by 
the  roots  ;  and  now  no  sooner  can  they  sow  their  material  seed,  than  Midianites 
seek  to  devour  it." 

"  Jab{?i  might  ill/  oppressed  tJierri  for  twenty  years;"  but  now  the  distress 
occasioned  by  the  Midianites  was  only  for  seven  years.  Was  not  that  an 
alleviation  rather  than  an  ai^gravation  ?  Only  in  appearance,  for  it  is  possible 
to  suffer  more  in  one  year  than  in  twenty.  It  depends  on  the  treatment  given  ; 
and  it  is  generally  admitted  that  this  was  the  greatest  scourge  they  ever  had  in 
the  days  of  the  Judges.  What  a  frightful  calamity  to  be  robbed  of  the  whole 
harvest  prodnce  of  their  fertile  country,  year  by  year,  till  seven  years  had 
passed  over  them  !  only  a  few  scanty  gleanings  being  left  here  and  there  in 
corners,  or  bleak  spots,  as  sustenance  for  their  vast  population.  All  the  miseries 
of  famine  were  upon  them.  And  the  life  they  otherwise  led  was  like  that  of 
brute  beasts,  that  find  their  lairs  by  burrowing  in  the  ground  I  To  what  a  low 
ebb  does  sin  reduce  its  votaries  !  (comp.  p.  170). 

V.  The  cowardice  and  weakness  of  ^ullt. 

Henry  says,  "  Sin  dispirits  men,  and  makes  them  sneak  into  dens  and  caves. 
The  day  will  come,  when  chief  captains  and  mighty  men  will  call  in  vain  to 
rocks  and  mountains  to  hide  them." 

1.  Their  former  condition.  Here  was  a  people  who  traversed  the  ground  of 
the  wilderness  for  forty  years,  during  the  greater  part  of  which  they  were  crossing 
and  re-crossing  part  of  the  territory  occupied  by  these  marauders,  and  yet  only 
once  in  all  that  period  did  these  tribes  dare  to  encounter  them  in  the  open  field, 
and  that  not  alone  but  in  conjunction  with  Moab.  (Num.  xxii.  4,  7).  Again, 
when  God  sent  twelve  thousand  Israelites  to  punish  the  Midianites  for  their  sin, 
in  having  tempted  Israel  to  sin,  they  trode  them  down  with  ease  like  the  grass 
of  the  field,  and  Midian  was  by  a  single  blow  reduced  to  the  point  of  ruin. 
Still,  further  as  we  go  down  the  history,  beyond  the  date  referred  to  in  the 
chapter,  to  the  days  of  Saul,  king  of  Israel,  we  are  told  that  the  transjordanic 
tribes  (l\euben,  Gad,  and  half  Manasseh)  alone  made  war  on  the  whole  people 
of  the  Hagarenes,  or  Ishraaelites,  or  Midianites,  and  inflicted  on  them  a  signal 
defeat.  They  had  long  been  harassed  by  raids  made  by  these  freebooters  into 
their  country,  and  they  resolved,  after  asking  counsel  of  their  God,  to  take  the 
strong  step  of  rooting  them  entirely  out  of  that  part  of  the  country,  and 
colonising  the  whole  region,  as  far  as  the  Euphrates,  themselves.  This  scheme 
was  most  successfully  accomplished  (see  1  Chron.  v,  9,  10,  also  verses  18-22  ; 
comp.  1  Chron.  i.  31,  and  Gen.  xxv.  15,  16). 

2.  Their  present  condition.  But  now  Israel,  being  deserted  by  their  God, 
had  become  so  cowardly  and  weak,  that  all  their  tribes  united  dare  not 
meet  this  outlandish  and  despicable  people  in  the  open  field.  They  see  "  an 
undisciplined  mob"  come  up  in  the  most  arrogant  manner,  and  squat  themselves 
down  at  pleasure  amid  the  very  fat  of  their  land,  and  take  all  of  the  best  they 

318 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES.  chap.  vi. 

>^ ,  I  .JL|_..J MJ J I  II  ■   I  .ii,         --  ■-  - 

can  find,  while  they,  tlie  degenerate  descendants  of  a  once  conquering  nation, 
not  venturing  once  to  meet  them  in  the  open  country,  are  only  too  glad  to  skulk 
into  corners,  and  make  themselves  cavities  under  ground  for  habitations  !  And 
the  whole  country  is  left  at  the  mercy  of  the  enemy  !  Not  fifty  years  had  yet 
elapsed,  since,  on  this  very  plain  of  Jezreel,  Sisera's  mighty  army  had  been 
scattered  as  the  chaff.  Now  the  children  of  those  who  fought  under  Barak  have 
become  timid,  terror-stricken  fugitives.  "  These  crouching  slaves  that  timidly 
peep  from  behind  the  projecting  rocks,  or  shiver  in  the  damp  darkness  of  the 
caverns,  are  they  indeed  the  sons  of  the  men  who  vanquished  the  hosts  of  Sihon 
and  of  Og,  in  whose  sight  the  sun  and  moon  stood  still,  and  great  hailstones 
were  rolled  down  from  heaven  on  the  heads  of  their  enemies  ?  Where  are  now 
the  old  traditions  of  victory  ?  Where  is  now  the  shout  of  a  king  in  their  camp? 
Whence  has  gone  the  national  character — the  energy  of  this    once  invincible 

3.  Sin  brings  down.  Sin  degrades  (p.  104).  It  terribly  weakens  (p.  107, 
2fi5,  266).  The  basis  of  all  true  courage  of  the  highest  type  is  a  good  conscience, 
which  a  man  can  only  find  in  the  ways  of  righteousness.  But  where  there  is 
conscious  guilt,  the  foundations  of  all  real  strength  are  sapped.  "  The  wicked 
flee  even  when  none  pursue."  God  speaks  to  a  man's  imagination,  and  it 
becomes  to  him  the  bearer  of  fearful  tidings,  wherever  he  turns.  "  He  fears 
each  bush  an  ofiicer."  It  is  the  same  now  as  then.  There  is  no  mere  chance 
in  the  matter.  The  evil  comes  expressly  from  the  Lord.  "  He  scares  him 
with  dreams,  and  terrifies  him  through  visions  ;  terrors  make  him  afraid  on  every 
side."  Why  is  a  man  who  has  all  the  conditions  of  prosperity  in  his  life  yet 
a  stranger  to  happiness,  destitute  of  hope,  and  a  prey  to  groundless  fears  ?  It 
is  because  he  allows  himselt  to  be  enslaved  by  sin,  because  he  allows  sinful 
thoughts  to  swarm  and  settle  on  his  heart,  and  eat  up  all  its  strength  ;  or 
because  he  is  so  craven  in  spirit  as  not  to  resist  the  approaches  of  evil,  but 
gives  way  to  all  manner  of  temptation  with  which  the  wicked  one,  or  the 
wicked  world  may  surround  him.  0  what  need  for  Divine  keeping  for  such 
hearts,  in  such  a  world,  and  exposed  to  such  an  enemy  !  "Ye  are  kept  by 
the  power  of  God  "  (1  Pet.  i.  5).  "  Those  whom  thou  gavest  me  I  have  kept," 
etc.  (John  xvii.  12).  What  need  have  the  best  of  men  to  get  themselves 
purged  from  the  idols  of  the  heart ! 

VZ.  All  relief  at  G-od's  hand  beg>ins  with  earnest  prayer-^Ver.  7. 

(see  pp.  198-200,  202,  224,  225). 

We  do  not  say  that  God  never  confers  a  blessing  except  in  answer  to  prayer. 
He  may  sometimes  see  reason  to  bestow  some  spiritual  good  even  where  prayer 
has  not  been  offered  up.  He  gives  indeed,  "exceeding  abundantly  above 
all  that  we  ask  or  think,"  in  one  sense.  For  we  generally  have  a  poor  con- 
ception of  the  value  of  the  blessings  we  pray  for ;  but  when  He  gives  them, 
He  puts  far  more  meaning  into  them  than  we  do.  He  also  sometimes  confers 
blessings  which  we  do  not  ask  at  all,  according  as  He  sees  it  to  be  necessary  or 
fit,  just  as  the  kind  and  watchful  parent  would  give  to  the  child  what  was 
needful,  though  not  asked.  But  the  main  idea  is,  that  we  have  no  just 
ground  to  expect  deliverance  from  trouble,  or  any  other  blessing  from  God  till 
we  have  prayed  for  it.  The  direction  given  to  us  is,  "as^,  and  ye  shall 
receive ; "  "  ye  have  not,  because  ye  ask  not."  Our  warrant  for  expecting 
blessings  to  be  given  in  answer  to  prayer  is  (1.)  such,  is  the  rule  laid  down  in 
God's  word.  (2.)  Prayer  itself  is  in  many  ways  glorifying  to  God,  (3.)  True 
prayer  implies  a  spirit  of  penitence^  without  which  the  way  is  blocked  against 
all  blessing  from  the  Divine  hand.  Israel's  cry  seemed  to  be  earnest  and  deep 
— "  out  of  the  depths."  God  hears  the  prayer  of  the  destitute,  when  penitent. 
(Pa.  xxxiv.  4-6,  17 ;  cii.  17,  18).     (See  p.  173). 

319 


CBAP.  VI.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   JUDGES. 

VII.— God's  first  answer  is  a  call  to  thorough  penitence. 

1.  He  explains  the  meaning  of  His  Providential  dealing.  In  sending  His 
prophet  to  the  people,  He  leaves  them  in  no  doubt  as  to  tlie  meaning  of  this 
disastrous  Provideiice.  Disastrous  it  was,  and  very  grievous,  yet  not  mysterious. 
It  was  only  what  they  had  every  reason  to  expect  from  what  they  had  been 
told  all  along.  If  no  calamity  had  befallen  them,  then  they  mi^ht  have 
wondered  ;  but,  as  it  was,  the  natural  expectation  had  been  realised.  These 
events  did  not  happen  by  chance.  They  were  specially  sent  by  God  to  intimate 
His  high  displeasure  with  their  sins.  God  had  really  gone  against  them,  because 
they  had  abandoned  His  worship  and  dishonoured  His  name. 

2.  He  specially  reproves  them  for  ingratitude  and  breach  of  vows.  According 
to  the  excellence  of  the  spirit  of  gratitude  is  the  detestable  character  of 
ingratitude  (pp.  259,  260,  263,  with  p.  122).  No  people  had  had  the  one-half 
done  for  them  that  Israel  had,  and  more  was  justly  expected  of  tliem  than  of 
others.  Yet  they  had  turned  their  backs  on  the  kindest  of  Benefactors,  and 
had  wickedly  put  out  of  memory  the  sacred  doings  of  His  mighty  hand.  Their 
conduct  was  extremely  offensive  in  darino;  to  treat  so  slightingly  His  gracious 
deliverances  of  the  past.  And  it  was  terribly  intensified  by  their  doing  all  this 
after  solemnly  engaging  to  belong  to  Jehovah  and  to  serve  Him  from  the  land 
of  Egypt.  And  they  not  only  broke  their  covenant,  but  most  wickedly  went 
into  the  service  of  Amoritish  idolatry,  though  so  repeatedly  warned  against 
those  heinous  sins. 

3.  He  insists  on  penitence  before  deliverance  is  granted.  Far  more  stress  is 
laid  on  penitence  than  on  the  means  of  deliverance.  The  latter  was  easy  to  be 
found  if  only  the  former  were  thoroughly  gone  through.  Hence  the  prophet, 
with  his  reproof,  comes  before  the  anf]:el,  with  his  deliverance.  The  great 
difficulty  was  to  find  penitence  among  the  people.  God's  claims  are  set  forth, 
and  the  people's  backslidings  emphasised,  that  they  may  be  duly  repented  of,  and 
a  speedy  and  general  return  to  the  God  of  their  fathers  might  be  made. 
Penitence  was  the  first  step  in  the  process.  That  taken,  all  the  rest  will  come 
right,  as  happened  with  their  father  Jacob  when  he  wrestled  with  the  angel  and 
prevailed,  and  the  conquest  of  Esau  and  flight  of  all  his  troubles  followed. 
God  could,  indeed,  have  struck  down  the  Midianites  at  one  blow,  and  so 
saved  all  the  tantalising  and  harrowing  suspense  of  the  circuitous  course 
which  He  actually  did  take.  But  though  none  had  such  true  sympathy  with 
the  deeply  afflicted  Church  as  He  had,  His  love  was  far-seeing  and  wise.  Therefore 
He  delayed  for  a  time  until  the  most  useful  lessons,  which  the  rod  alone  can 
effectually  teach,  were  learned  by  His  erring  children.  It  was  only  under  great 
sufferings,  and  by  painful  experience  of  the  sad  fruits  of  sin,  that  they  could 
learn  effectually  true  sorrow  for  sin,  self-abasement,  submission,  fiiith,  patience 
and  entire  consecration  to  God.  To  get  the  backsliding  people  to  practise  the 
passive  virtues  of  the  religious  character,  was  a  valuable  purpose  to  be  gained, 
but  if  the  deliverance  had  been  accomplished  in  a  day,  there  would  have  been 
no  opportunity  afforded  for  gaining  it. 

This  seems  to  be  the  Divine  rule  under  all  circumstances,  to  send  first  a 
**  ministry  of  condemnation,"  to  produce  conviction  of  sin,  self-humiliation,  and 
the  casting  away  of  transgressions  ;  and  when  this  has  had  its  proper  effect,  then 
comes  deliverance.  Meantime  the  terrible  character  of  the  sin  might  be  read 
in  the  terrible  character  of  the  punishment.  In  this  case  the  prophet  would 
likely  travel  from  city  to  city,  or  to  those  places  where  he  might  find  an 
au<lience,  or  any  considerable  number  of  people  assembled  all  over  the  land.  "  It 
is  a  good  sign  when  God  chides  us  ;  His  severe  reproofs  are  ever  gracious  fore- 
runners of  mercy  ;  whereas  His  silent  connivance  at  the  wicked  argues  deep  and 
secret  displeasure.  The  prophet  made  way  for  the  angel,  reproof  for  deliverance, 
humiliation  for  comfort." — {Hall), 
320 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES,  chap,  ti. 


aOMMENTS  AND  SUQQESTIONS.—Verm  1-10. 

I.    Besetting  Sins. 

1.  Every  age  has  its  own  besetting  cution  for  non-comformity  of  religious 

sins.  belief.      In  the   seventeenth   century, 

The  besetting  sin  of  the  ancient  the  pendulum  swung  from  a  rigid 
Israel  undoubtedly  was  that  of  idol  austerity  of  profession  and  life,  to  the 
worship.  The  depraved  heart,  being  extreme  of  laxity  in  manners  and  even 
in  a  state  of  alienation  from  God,  does  to  open  pro^igacy  and  vice.  In  the 
not  like  to  retain  God  in  its  knowledge.  eighteenth  century  the  prevailing  spirit 
But  in  de[)arting  from  Him  it  cannot  was  that  of  Deistical  infidelity  on  the 
remain  in  a  state  of  neutrality.  For  one  hand,  along  with  daring  ridicule 
there  is  no  such  thing  possible  as  a  of  Bible  Christianity,  2^ndi  on  t\\Q  q\j\\qv 
negation  of  good.  The  feeling  that  nominal  religious  profession,  ^^ndi  empty 
could  reject  God  is  itself  a  positive  evil.  formality  of  worship. 
Hence,inleavingGod,itcomesunderthe  And  now  in  the  nineteenth  century ^ 
dominion  of  sin.  Besides,  being  made  for  the  most  strikingly  many-sided  age  in 
God,  all  its  deepest  instincts  cry  out  for  the  history  of  the  world,  we  have  not 
something  to  take  His  place.  A  god  one  besetting  sin,  but  many.  There  is 
of  some  kind  it  must  have,  and  avarice  or  the  lust  for  money,  in  the 
hence  it  devises  a  god  after  its  own  commercial  world,  carrying  many 
liking.  Thus  Jrom  within  do  we  ac-  breaches  of  the  eighth  and  ninth  corn- 
count  for  idolatry  ;  and  not  less  power-  mandments  in  its  track,  the  lust  for 
ful  was  the  influence  operating  from  power  in  the  political  world,  especially 
without.  The  universal  example  of  as  between  nations ;  the  lust  for  self- 
the  other  nations  was  always  acting  indulgence  in  many  forms,  though 
with  the  force  of  a  mighty  current  in  visibly  curbed  by  the  awakened  power 
the  same  direction.  It  was  like  the  of  Christianity;  the  spirit  of  liberty 
confluence  of  several  mighty  streams  becoming  a  rage,  and  running  into 
bearing  down  with  great  force.  licence  ;  the  spirit  of  infidelity  assum- 

Idolatry   continued  as    the    sin  to  ing  Protean  forms  and  appearing  sonie- 

which  the  Israelites  were  most  addicted  times  as  scepticism,  or  mere  question- 

for  centuries.     It  seemed  bred  in  the  ing    of    Christian    truths,    sometimes, 

bone.     Not  till  the  frightful  calamity  though  seldom,  as   Pyrrhonism,  or  ab- 

of  the   captivity   had   befallen    them  solute  doubt ;  again  as  ISpinozism,  or 

wiien  the  nation  came  near  the  point  Pantheism;     again    as   Agnosticism; 

of  being  annihilated,  were  they  cured  of  Atheism  proper;  Positivism  and  Na- 

it.     Even  then  depravity  was  not  ex-  turalism ;  Spiritualism;  and  Ration- 

tirpated    but    assumed   a   new    form,  alism. 
From  that  time  the  besetting  sin  was 

Pharisaism,  consisting  of  pride  in  re-  2.  Every  individual  man   has  his 

ligious  profession,  systematic  hypocrisy  besetting  sins. 

in  attending  to  externals,  and  cold  for-  Wherever    the    enemy  enters,    his 

malism  in  the  discharge   of  religious  desire  is  to  have  a  fortress  of  evil  in 

duty.     In  the  earlier  centuries  the  age  the  heart,  one  or  more,  so  that  if  other 

was  very  much  distinguished  by  the  parts  should  come  under  the  influence 

tyrannical  and  cruel  oppression  of  the  of  good,  he  might  still  hold  out  in  that 

weak  by  the  strong.     In  what  is  called  fortress,  and  possibly  from  thence  re- 

''  the  Dark   Ages "   the   characteristic  conquer  the  whole.     A  besetting  sin, 

feature   was   the   torpor  of  spiritual  or  one  to  which  the  man  is  specially 

slavery ;  and  when  the  human  mind  addicted,   is  such  a  fortress.     Or,    it 

began  to  shake  itself  free,  the  principal  might  be  regarded  as  that  side  of  the 

feature  of  the  times  was  that  oi perse-  defences  of  tlie  heart,  where  some  lurk- 

X  321 


CHAP,  vl  EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES, 


\vg  traitor  lias  got  command  of  the  reach  of  knowledge,  and  especially  he 

keys,  and  at  an  opportune  moment,  he  tried  to  over-reach  an  inferior  nature 

opens  the  gaies  to  the  enemy.  with    his    superior  intellect.      It   was 

Trench   describes  it   as    '*  that    sin  practically    assaulting     our    innocent 

which   gets   advantage  over   us   more  humanity  on  its   weak  side.      It  has 

easily  than  others,  to  which  we  have  a  been  so  all  along.     He  looks  for  the 

mournful  proclivity,  an  especial  pre-  weak  part  of  the  embankment,  where 

disposition  ;  it  may  bethrongh  natural  the  great  flood  of  waters  is  most  ready 

temperament,   through  faults    in   our  to  burst  forth,  and  he  tries  to  make  a 

education,    or   the    circumstances    in  breach  there. 

which   we   are   placed,  or   it  may  be         Every  man  has  a  handle.  This  Satan 

through  our  having  given  way  to  them  soon  finds  out,  and  deftly  uses  to  serve 

in  time  past,  and  so  broken  down  on  his  own  ends.     He  tempted  Judas  on 

that  side  the  moral  defences  of  the  the  side  of  his  covetousness,  and  in  the 

soul.  The  soul  in  such  a  case  resembles  same  manner  Ananias  and  ISapphiraf 

paper,  which,  where  it  has  been  blotted  Demas,  Lot's  wifey  Lot  himself  also, 

once,  however  careful  the  erasure  may  though  he  was  saved,  yet  so  as  by  fire, 

have  been,  there  do  blots  more  easily  He  tempted  the  Jews  on  the  side  of 

run  anew.     A  man  should  watch  and  their  expecting  a  Messiah  of  great  tem- 

pray  against  all  sin,  but  he  must  set  poral  glory  ;  Pilate  on  the  side  of  his 

a  double  watch,  and    *  pray  with  all  fear  lest  he  should  be  reported  to  CsBsar 

prayer*  against  an  easily  besetting  sin."  as  allowing   a   rival   to  the  throne  of 

Judea  to  escape  ;  Joseph's  brethren  on 

3.    It  is    through    easily-besetting  the  side  of  their  fear  lest  the  dreams 

sins  that   Satan  gains   most   of   his  of  their  envied  younger  brother  should 

victories.  one  day  be  realised  ;  and  guilty  Herod 

In  the  case  of  such  a  sin,  there  is  the  great  on  the  side  of  his  troubled 

usually  some  charm,  or  hallucinating  conscience,  that  God  would   one   day 

influence   exercised    over  the  soul  by  make  use  of  the  young  child  to  wrest 

which  it   is  more  easily  persuaded  to  his  kingdom  from  him  because  of  his 

listen   to  the  tempter.     A  man's  will  sins. 

as  it  were   acts   under   the  influence         It  is,  indeed,   almost  always  those 

of  an  intoxication.     He  is  allured  into  points  of  a  man's  character,  where  he 

a  kind  of  spiritual  debauch.     Though  is  specially  liable  to  fall  into  some  sin, 

our  first  parents  might  be  said  to  have  that  Satan  attacks.     Hence  Christians 

a    ])erfect   panoply  of   defence,  being  are  directed  to  "watch  and  pray  lest," 

entirely   innocent,    and    without   any  etc.,  and  to  ''  take  the  whole  armour  of 

seed  of  sin  in  their  natures,  yet  their  God  that  they  may  be  able  to  stand  in 

crafty  adversary  made  the  most  dex-  the  evil  day,"  i.e.,  the  day  of  tempta- 

terous  use  of  the  less  strongly  fortified  tion.     (See  also  1  Peter  v.  8  ;  Eph.  v. 

points  of  the  case.     He  attacked  the  15  ;  Rom.  xiii.  12-14  ;  1  Thess.  v.  8  ; 

weaker  vessel  first,  he  presented  to  the  1  Cor.  xvi.  13  ;  Heb.  iii.  12.)  "  Indeed 

eye  nothing  gross  or  impure,  but  what  Satan  baits  his  hook  according  to  the 

appeared  noble  and  most  fit  for  a  pure  appetite  of  the   fish." — Adams,  (pp. 

mind  to  attain,  as  the  highest  possible  168,  191.) 

II,   The  Sms  or  the  People  op  God. 

1.  A  man  may  sin  and  yet  be  a  child  any  account  given  in  Scripture,  have, 

of  God,  every  one  of  them,  some  spot  or  stain 

This  is  only  too  easily  proved.    For  pointed  out  in  his  character.     And 

"  there  is  not  a  just  man  upon  earth  there    is    scarcely    one    who    makes 

that  doeth  good,  and  sinneth    not."  reference  to  his  state  before  God,  but 

All  the  good  people  of  whom  we  have  laments  his  sinfulness  and    pollution 

d22 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    JUDGES. 


CHAP.  VI. 


(Ps.  li. ;  Isa.  vi.  5 ;  Job  xl.  4,  xlii.  5,  6  ; 
Ezra  ix.  6  ;  Dan.  ix.  5,  7  ;  Matt.  xxvi. 
31-35  ;  1  John  i.  8,  10).  A  good  man 
in  tliis  world  is  really  a  bad  man  in  the 
process  of  being  made  good.  His  heart 
resembles  a  muddy  well,  which  has  got 
a  spring  of  clear,  running  water  opened 
in  the  bottom  of  it.  The  purifying 
process  is  begun,  but  there  is  still  much 
of  I  he  muddy  element  in  the  well,  which 
requires  time  to  clear  it  away.  The 
process  of  sanctitication  is  gradual. 
The  "  motions  of  sins  which  are  by  the 
law  still  work,"  though  they  are  lan- 
guishing and  destined  to  die.  There 
is  "  the  old  man  with  his  deeds."  But 
the  fact  that  it  is  called  "  the  old  man  " 
assumes  that  it  is  destined  to  die  out. 
See  the  struggle  described  in  Rom. 
vii.  15-25, 

2.  The  sins  of  the  good  are  specially 

heinous. 

Sin,  in  place  of  coming  nearer  the 
point  of  toleration,  when  committed  by 
a  godly  man,  is  only  the  more  aggrava- 
ted and  offensive  to  God.  The  sins  of 
these  Israelites  implied  much  greater 
guilt,  than  the  same  sins  as  committed 
by  the  heathen.  There  were  many 
circumstances  of  aggravation.  They 
were  committed  under  much  clearer 
light ;  they  enjoyed  privileges  which 
the  Canaanites  never  had  ;  far  more 
tender,  more  loving,  and  more  sacred 
considerations  did  God  use  in  dealing 
with  their  hearts  than  ever  He  did  with 
the  native  idolaters  of  the  land.  Besides, 
they  violated  sacred  vows,  most  solemnly 
entered  into,  and  they  forgot  the  most 
extraordinary  acts  of  loving  kindness 
ever  done  to  any  people  in  the  history 
of  time.  The  sacred  position  occupied 
by  the  people  of  God  adds  incalculably 
to  the  evil  of  their  sins.  Just  as  a  sin 
connnitted  in  the  Holy  of  Holies  in- 
volves far  greater  guilt  than  a  sin 
conjuiitted  in  one's  private  dwelling. 
There  theft,  which  is  bad  in  itself, 
becomes  sacrilege. 

If  the  sins  of  God's  people  are,  not- 
withstanding this,  freely  forgiven  when 
repented  of,  it  is  not  because  they  are 
not  exceedingly  heinous,  but  because 
of  two  things  : — 1.  They  have  already 


accepted  Christ  as  their  sin-bearer, 
while  He  has  engaged  to  be  their 
Advocate  ;  and  2.  They  have  got  "  the 
heart  of  flesh,"  and  are  ready  to  con- 
fess and  forsake  their  sins. 

3.  These  sins  are  specially  dishonour- 
ing to  God. 

Because  they  represent  God  before 
the  world.  Tliey  are  His  children,  and 
the  Father's  likeness  is  expected  to  be 
seeu  in  the  child.  Though  sin  in  all 
cases  is  detestable,  yet  it  is  not  so 
surprising  to  be  seen  in  the  wicked. 
We  expect  to  see  more  or  less  of  it 
there.  But,  when  it  comes  glaringly 
out  in  the  case  of  a  child  of  God,  we 
say  it  is  scandalous,  and  "  gives  occa- 
sion to  the  enemies  of  the  Lord  to 
blaspheme."  If  the  sun  is  eclipsed  but 
one  day  it  is  more  talked  of  than  if  it 
were  to  shine  clearly  for  a  whole  year. 

"  It  is  terrible  when  a  Christian 
becomes  an  argument  against  Christia- 
nity. To  induce  anyone  to  sin  is  for 
Satan  a  conquest,  but  in  the  case  of 
a  Christian  it  is  a  triumph." — (South). 
God  specially  hates  sin  in  His  own 
people.  It  is  in  gardens  that  weeds  are 
most  noxious,  for  their  appearance 
there  shows  that,  after  all  the  pains 
taken,  the  work  is  still  marred.  '*  When 
the  Lord  saw  it,  He  abhorred  them 
because  of  the  provoking  of  His  own 
sons  and  daughters."  (Deut.  xxxii.  19). 

4.  Such  sins  are  soon  forsaken. 

In  the  case  of  a  wicked  man,  to  sin 
is  only  in  keeping  with  his  nature. 
He  acts  in  character.  In  the  case  of 
a  child  of  God,  it  is  quite  the  reverse. 
The  wicked  one  for  the  moment  has 
got  an  advantage  over  him,  but  he 
will  speedily  recover,  as  in  the  case  of 
Peter  (Luke  xxii.  31,  etc.). 

"  Whosoever  is  born  of  God  sinneth 
not.  .  .  and  he  cannot  siu  because  he 
is  born  of  God  "  (1  John  iii.  9).  "  He 
that  committeth  sin  is  of  the  devil," 
i.e.,  one  whose  nature  it  is  so  to  do. 
It  is  not  the  nature  of  a  man  who  is 
born  of  God  to  commit  sin.  The  Spirit  of 
God  within  him  prompts  him  otherwise 
and  he  is  now  "  led  by  that  Spirit." 
When  he  does  sin,  through  the  uprising 

323 


CHAP.  VI. 


HOMILETW  COMMEISTARY:    JUDGES, 


of  his  native  depravity,  his  better 
nature  rebels  against  it,  and  he  can 
give  as  the  explanation,  "  it  is  no  more 
I  that  do  it,  but  sin  that  dwelleth  in 
me  "  (Rom  vii.  17).  But  still  he  mourns 
at  the  victory  of  sin  over  him,  "  0 
wretched  man  that  I  am,"  etc.  (Rom. 


vii.  24).  A  good  watch  may  point 
wrong  for  a  season,  but  if  the  ownel 
has  paid  a  heavy  price  for  it,  he  will 
see  to  its  being  repaired  without  delay, 
when  it  will  get  into  its  natural  position 
and  point  right  as  before. 


III. — The  Worthlessness  of  Human  Character  before  God. 


1,  From  this  narrative,  and,  indeed, 
from  the  whole  book  of  Judges,  we 
learn  with  what  a  fatal  facility  the 
human  heart  can  forget  all  its  mercies, 
its  sad  experiences,  its  gracious  deli- 
verances, and  all  the  tender  dealings  of 
its  God  (pp.  95-101)!  How  strange 
that  God  should  accept  of  such  a 
people,  as  those  whose  character  is  here 
depicted, to  represent  Him  in  the  world, 
to  be  called  by  His  name,  and  to  hold 
up  His  standard  before  men  on  the 
earth  !  Most  strikingly  is  the  idea 
brought  out,  of  the  utter  worthlessness 
of  human  character  before  God.  The 
character  of  Israel  in  every  age  was  a 
continual  blot.  The  descendants  of 
those  holy  men  with  whom  God  entered 
into  covenant  —  Abraham,  Isaac,  and 
Jacob  —  in  almost  every  generation, 
turned  completely  round  from  the  at- 
titude of  allegiance  which  the  fathers 
occupied,  when  God  chose  them  and 
their  seed  to  be  a  people  to  Him  on 
the  earth. 

2.  What  a  harrowing*  spectacle  to 
the  spiritual  eye!  As  we  turn  over 
every  page,  it  is  to  find  some  sickening 
tale  of  disobedience,  treachery,  apos- 
tasy, and  everything  that  is  bad — the 
very  worst.  We  can  hardly  read  a 
single  paragraph  without  hanging  our 
heads  for  very  shame,  to  think  that  this 
is  the  people  who  are  taken  as  a  fair 
representation  of  the  race  to  which  we 
belong,  and,  that,  as  they  were,  so  we 
are  all  judged  to  be  in  the  roots  of 
character,  however  different  may  be 
the  soil  in  which  we  are  planted,  and 
however  more  genial  the  spiritual  cli- 
mate around  us  is.  What  a  blackening 
of  our  human  nature  is  here  !  Who 
"does  not  blush  and  hang  his  head  to 
324 


think  himself  a  man  ?  "  The  simple 
truth,  without  a  stroke  of  emphasis,  is 
a  melancholy  picture,  fit  only  to  he 
framed  in  black.  It  is  an  indelible 
disgrace  to  a  creature  made  after  the 
image  of  God.  We  dare  only  say,  with 
trembling  acquiescence  in  the  Divine 
verdict,  "  Ichabod  !  Ichabod  !  The 
crown  is  fallen  from  our  heads  ;  woe 
unto  us  for  we  have  sinned  !  We  smite 
on  our  breasts  and  cry,  God  be  merciful 
to  us  sinners!" 

3.  What  a  wonder  of  grace  that  God 
should  not  at  once  cast  us  off!  The 
natural  expectation  is,  that  He  would 
banish  us  from  His  presence,  and  con- 
sign us  to  endless  darkness,  raising  up 
in  our  place,  as  He  could  do  in  a  single 
moment,  another  race,  all  pure  and 
spotless,  of  nobler  rank,  of  more  gifted 
capacity,  and  more  faithful  in  their 
allegiance  to  the  Eternal  Throne.  That 
could  be  done  by  a  single  word.  But 
ere  the  old  sinning  race  could  be 
restored,  the  Son  of  God  must  die  ! 
The  Eternal  Light  must  be  shrouded 
in  darkness,  and  the  Eternal  Life  must 
sink  in  death.  How  stedfast  has  the 
Divine  love  been  to  its  tirst  idea  in  the 
covenantmade  with  Abraham  !  Man's 
faithlessness,  and  God's  truthfulness 
appear  in  striking  contrast. 

4.  The  humiliating  glimpse  we  here 
have  of  the  falsity  of  human  claracter 
in  all  ages. 

This  record  is  given  intentionally  as 
a  specim.en  of  human  hearts  in  every 
age.  What  crowds  came  around  Jesus, 
and  yet  all  melted  away  before  a  single 
spiritual  discourse  (John  vi.) !  How 
quickly  did  the  warmest  friends  of  the 
Saviour  show  treachery  when  exposed 


EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


CHAP.  VI. 


to  temptation  (Matt.  xxvi.  56)  !  How 
superficial  all  the  professions  of  friend- 
ship made  to  the  aged  apostle  when 
he  was  in  real  difficulty  (2  Tim.  i.  15, 
16) !  What  perjury  has  been  com- 
mitted by  those  who  have  solemnly 
engaged  themselves  to  be  the  Lord's 


people — \hQ^Q  Israelites  m  almost  every 
age,  with  good  words,  but  perfidious 
hearts,  all  apostates,  all  lukewarm  pro- 
fessors, all  unworthy  partakers  of  the 
Lord's  supper,  all  inconsistent  Chris- 
tians.    These  are  camp  followers  only. 


IV.   The  Unseen  Dangers  from  which  God  Delivers  His  People. 


"  He  is  the  Preserver  (not  Saviour) 
of  all  men,  especially  of  them  who 
believe''  Believers  have  a  special 
promise  of  protection  from  danger. 
"  Re  that  keepeth  Israel  neither 
slumbers  J  nor  sleeps''  Of  His  vine- 
yard, God  says,  "  I  the  Lord  do  keep 
it  .  ,  .  lest  any  hurt  it ;  1  will 
keep  it  night  and  day."  The  whole 
91st  Psalm  is  a  manifold  promise  of 
protection  from  unseen  dangers.  It  is 
a  most  singular  fact  in  the  history  of 
Israel,  that  though  they  were  always 
surrounded  by  enemies,  they  were  yet, 
on  the  whole,  very  seldom  attacked. 
The  fear  of  God  was  upon  the  nations, 
as  in  the  case  of  their  father  Jacob. 
(Gen.  XXXV.  5). 

By  all  the  nations  round  about  the 
people  of  God  were  hated.  Why  then 
did  they  not  oftener  combine  to  cut 
them  off  utterly,  when  at  some  mo  nent 
they  seemed  specially  weak  ?  In  place 
of  Chushan-rish-a-tliaim  coming  alone, 
Eghm  alone,  Jabin  alone,  and  the 
Midianites  in  like  manner,  why  did 
not  they  all  come  together,  or  such 
rulers  of  those  kin,L,^doms  as  were  con- 
temporaries— why  did  they  come  singly 
merely  ?  And  as  to  these  Midianites, 
why  do  we  not  read  of  their  coming  to 
attack  Israel  long  before  this  period, 
and  how  do  we  never  hear  of  their 
return?      And   why  should   not   the 


Philistines,  the  Moabites,  and  other 
nations  have  come  forward  now  ami 
crushed  Israel  to  the  very  earth  ? 
There  were  a  few  occasions  of  this 
kind  in  the  history  of  the  people  ;  but 
they  were  very  few  (see  Ps.  Ixxxiii.). 
"  The  Lord  is  a  wall  of  fire  round  about 
His  Church,"  etc. 

The  missionaries  to  the  Figi  Islands, 
when  threatened  with  destruction  from 
the  natives,  had  no  means  of  defence 
except  prayer.  The  savages  heard 
them  praying,  were  seized  with  trem- 
bling, and  fled.  They  said  afterwards, 
"  We  knew  that  your  God  was  a  strong 
God,  and  when  we  saw  you  crying  to 
Him,  we  were  afraid."  How  often  are 
praying  people  saved  just  in  time  from 
some  terrible  accident,  or  from  some 
fatal  epidemic,  or  from  some  evil  pur- 
pose of  wicked  men  !  (Ps.  xxxiv.  20, 
22  ;  1  Sam.  ii.  9).  Laban  durst  not 
carry  out  any  evil  design  against 
Jacob  (Gen.  xxxi.  24).  Neither  could 
Satan  himself  proceed  further  against 
Job,  or  Peter  ,than  he  was  permitted 
(Job  ii.  6  ;  Luke  xxii.  31,  32).  God 
guards  His  people  by  putting  a  muzzle 
on  the  lions'  mouths.  Sometimes,  in 
punishment  for  their  sins,  he  takes  off 
the  muzzle  and  they  rise  up,  and  fall 
upon  them  with  the  weight  of  an 
avalanche. 


V.  The  Readiness  with  which  the  Wicked  Unite  to  Attack  the 

Righteous. 

These  various  tribes  of  the  desert,  attack  Israel,  others  are  wonderfully 
all  had  frequent  quarrels  with  each  disposed  to  join  in  the  attack,  as  if 
other.  But  we  seldom  hear  of  two  of  they  had  s[)eoial  pleasure  in  doing  so 
them  uniting  together  to  crush  a  third,  (p.  70;.  (chap.  iii.  13).  This  seems  to 
Yet  when  one  of  them  is  about  to     be  a  special  part  of  the  reference  in 

325 


OHAP.TI.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   JUDGES. 


Ps.  Ixxxiii.      Pilot  and  Herod  had  a  agree  in  that,   though    differing  at  a 

bitter  feud   among  themselves.     But  thousand  points  with  each  other.     We 

they  could  ngree  in  pouring  contempt  see  generally  how  they  united  in  the 

on    the    Saviour      (Luke   xxiii.    12).  days   of    the   Judges,    from    chap.  x. 

When  Christ  was  crucified  it  was  by  a  11,  12,  also    ver.    7.     (Acts  iv,   27  ; 

combination  of  enemies,  who  could  all  John  xv.  19). 

CHAPTER  VI.—  Verses  1 1-24. 

THE  UNSEEN  FRIEND, 

Cbitioal  Notes.— 11.  There  came  an  angel  of  the  Lord.]  Father,  "  tJie  angel  of  the  Lord 
eame."  The  reference  being  to  one  particular  person  known  already  by  tliat  name  (ch.  ii.  1-5). 
He  almost  always  personated  Jehovah,  or  speaks  in  His  name  (Ex  xxiii.  20-2  ;  iii.  23  ;  xiv.  19). 
He  is  generally  supposed  to  have  been  the  Messiah,  the  Son  of  God,  anticipating  the  appearance 
He  was  to  make  in  human  form  in  the  fulness  of  time.  He  had  other  names,  sucii  as  "  angel  of 
His  presence  "  (Isa.  Ixiii.  9).  "Angel  of  the  covenant"  (Mai.  iii.  1),  Some  think  also  that 
the  *'  Shechinah,"  and  "  the  glory  of  the  Lord  "  are  names  of  the  Messiah. 

Sat  under  an  oak].  Sat  down  under  the  oak,  or  terebitith  tree — one  special  tree  of  that  kind, 
noted  perhaps  for  its  size,  its  umbrageous  character,  and  its  convenient  position,  so  that  it  formed 
a  suitable  public  meeting  place.  Some  think  there  was  a  grove,  or  cluster  of  trees.  Such  a  tree, 
of  ma'^niticent  proportions,  and  wide-spreading  bianches,  would  afford  a  most  grateful  shade  in 
a  land  of  so  much  sunshine  — comp.  the  ^^  palm-tree"  under  which  Deborah  sat  in  performing  lier 
functions,  as  a  prophetess  (ch.  iv.  5) ;  also  the  ^^  juniper  tree  "  under  which  Elijah  rested  (1  Kings 
xix.  4).  Certain  trees  were  certainly  of  great  importance  in  those  times  (Josh.  xxiv.  26  ;  Gen. 
XXXV.  4).  A  rf^ei'Z  was  also  an  object  of  great  importance,  as  in  the  case  of  the  well  "/irn'orf" 
(ch.  vii.  1) ;  the  well  of  "  Hagar  "  (Gen.  xvi.  14) ;  the  well  of  "  Bethlehem  "  (2  Sam.  xxiii.  15,  16); 
and  "  Jacob's  well  "  (John  iv.  6). 

Which  was  in  Ophrah].  So  described  to  distinguish  it  from  a  place  of  the  same  name  in 
Benjamin  (Josh,  xviii.  23  ;  1  Sam.  xiii.  17).  This  Ophrah  was  a  small  town  in  the  south-west 
of  Manasseh,  in  the  hill  country,  and  near  to  Shechem.  It  was  inhabited  by  a  branch  of  the 
Abi-ezerite  family,  or  clan.  It  appears  to  have  been  a  secluded  spot,  in  a  rugged  country,  with 
rocks  all  round.  Abiezer  was  a  son  of  Gilead's  sister  (1  Chron.  vii.  18).  The  name  is  given  as 
Jeezer  in  Num.  xxvi.  30,  but  Ahi-ezer  in  Josh.  xvii.  2,  and  also  here. 

That  pertained  to  Joash  the  Abi-ezrite.]  Joash,  the  father  of  Gideon,  was  head  of  the  clan  or 
house  of  Abiezer.  The  little  town  of  Ophrah  was  Gideon's  place  of  birth,,  of  residence,  and  of 
burial  (ch.  vi.  11-24  ;  viii.  32). 

His  son  Gideon.]  The  name  means  hewer  or  feller,  which  well  corresponds  with  what  he  did 
in  hewing  down  the  image  of  Baal ;  also  with  his  being  a  man  of  great  muscular  strength,  and  a 
warrior.  But  for  what  reason  he  got  the  name,  we  are  not  told.  Some  think  it  was  given  him 
prophetically,  He  was  the  youngest  son  of  the  family,  perhaps  the  only  son  now  left  (ch.  viii. 
18,  19).     He  was  the  fifth  judge  in  Israel. 

Threshed  wheat.]  It  was  customary  in  those  times,  and  in  early  times  generally,  for  those 
who  owned  property  to  engage,  both  themselves  and  the  members  of  their  family,  in  manual 
labour  connected  with  their  establishments.  The  ancient  Roman  senators  did  the  same, 
Cincinnatus,  Curius,  Scipio,  etc.  lODH  ifo  beat  out  with  a  stick — not  to  thresh  in  the  strict  sense 
(Deut.  xxiv.  20  ;  Isa.  xxvii.  12). 

By  the  wine-press.]  The  usual  manner  of  threshing  wheat  was  to  do  it  on  open  floors,  or  in 
places  in  the  open  field,  that  were  rolled  hard  for  the  purpose  with  threshing  carriages  or  thresh- 
ing shoes,  or  else  with  oxen,  which  they  drove  about  over  the  scattered  sheaves  to  tread  out  the 
grains  with  their  hoofs.  Only  poor  people  knocked  out  the  little  corn  that  they  had  gleaned 
with  a  stick  (Ruth  ii.  17),  and  Gideon  did  it  so  now,  showing  the  extreme  distress  which  prevailed 
in  the  land  when  a  family  such  as  his  were  reduced  to  adopt  such  an  expedient  as  this,  He  beat 
it  out  in  the  pressing  tub  HS  ;  which  like  all  wine-presses  was  either  sunk  in  the  ground  in  a 
hole  dug  out,  or  else  was  a  hollow  scooped  out  in  the  rock  {Keil).  In  either  case,  the  purposes 
of  concealment  would  be  served.  The  men  of  the  desert  would  not  expect  to  find  wheat  in  ihe 
wine-press  ;  being  in  a  pit,  or  hollow  of  the  rock,  it  was  not  likely  to  be  discovered  ;  oxen  not 
being  employed  in  the  process,  there  would  be  no  lowing  heard  ;  and  there  being  no  machine, 
there  would  be  no  hum-drumming  noise  such  as  it  usually  makes, 

326 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES,  chap.  vi. 


D^3n  to  make  it  safe  from,  lit.  to  mahe  it  Uy  from  (Ex.  ix.  20).  Threshing  was  usually 
performed  by  oxen  (Deut.  xxv.  4)  upon  floors  (2  Sam.  xxiv.  18)  prepared  for  the  purpose.  At 
this  season  the  operation  of  Gideon  could  be  done  in  the  wine-press,  for  the  vintage  season  was 
four  months  after  the  wheat  harvest. 

12.  And  the  angel  of  the  Lord  appeared  to  him.l  It  had  already  been  said,  "he  came  and  sat 
down  under  the  oak."  Now  it  is  said,  he  appeared.  This  implies  something  more  than  a 
stranger  coming  within  sight.  It  seems  to  intimate  that  he  made  a  revelation  of  himself  to  him. 
The  Hebrew  word  used  justifies  this  rendering  ;  for  Sn'^  is  only  used  when  the  invisible  Divine 
nature  becomes  visible  (Cassel).  It  also  corresponds  with  the  fact,  that  after  the  interview  he 
vanished  out  of  sight.  The  angel  who  came  forward  to  withstand  Balaam  was  for  a  time 
invisible  to  him  (Num.  xxii.  23,  25,  27  with  verses  31,  34  ;  2  Kings  vi.  17).  Gideon  was  the  only 
judge  to  whom  the  angel  of  the  Lord  had  yet  appeared  in  calling  him  to  his  special  work. 

The  Lord  is  with  thee,  thou  mighty  man  of  valourO  This,  though  a  common  form  of  saluta- 
tion (Ruth  ii.  4),  seems  to  have  been  spoken  with  significance  in  the  present  instance.  The  angel 
speaks  of  Gideon  in  a  manner  which  appearances  seem  to  justify.  He  was  a  young  man.  of 
noble  countenance,  of  muscular  build,  and  great  natural  strength  ;  like  the  son  of  a  king 
(ch.  viii.  1 8^.  Perhaps,  too,  in  this  statement  there  is  some  slight  intimation  of  the  destiny  or 
work  reserved  for  Gideon  ;  q.  d.,  Jehovah  has  marked  thee  out  as  His  instrument  for  doing  a 
great  work,  being  naturally  so  well  fitted  for  carrying  it  out,  and  he  is  now  with  thee  and  in  thee 
for  this  purpose. 

13.  0  my  Lord,  if  Jehovah  be  with  us,  why  is  all  this  befallen  us  1  Gideon's  heart  was  sad, 
because  of  the  loss  of  his  own  brethren  (ch.  viii.  18,  19),  as  well  as  because  of  the  national 
calamities.  But  one  thing  encouraged  him  to  speak  out  his  mind  with  confidence  to  this  stranger. 
He  struck  the  right  key-note  in  addressing  a  true  Israelite.  When  the  whole  land  was  full  of 
Baal,  it  was  a  relief  to  hear  a  voice  raised  in  honour  of  Jehovah ;  and  Gideon  thought  he 
recognised  in  this  utterance  of  the  stranger  the  true  ring.  It  was  the  vein  in  which  Gideon's 
heart  loved  to  go  out.  Doubtless  he  had  loved  to  think  of  the  bright  days  of  old  when  Jehovah 
was  held  to  be  Supreme,  and  all  went  well.  And  often  must  he  have  wished  to  find  some 
congenial  spirit  with  whom  he  could  hold  intercourse  about  the  melancholy  state  of  religion, 
throughout  all  the  coasts  of  Israel.  He  was  a  man  of  the  type  referred  to  in  Ezek.  ix.  4  ; 
Mai.  iii.  16,  17  ;  Isa.  Ixii.  1,  6,  7.  He  therefore  felt  that  this  stranger,  from  the  few  words  he 
had  let  fall,  was  a  friend  of  the  right  stamp.  But  he  did  not  know,  nor  suspect,  at  this  stage, 
that  he  was  addressed  by  a  person  of  mysterious  dignity. 

His  language  means  simply,  O  sir  !  how  can  you  say  Jehovah  is  with  us,  when  all  this  has 
happened  to  us  ?  It  is  impossible  that  our  true  King  can  be  among  us,  when  things  are  brought 
to  the  very  last  extremity  1  The  wave  of  desolation  th  it  is  passing  over  the  land  is  clear  proof 
of  the  absence  of  our  God  ;  for  what  god  can  contend  with  the  God  of  Israel  ?  His  arm  is  never 
shortened  that  it  cannot  save,  etc.  (Isa.  lix.  1).  But  it  is  as  He  threatened  in  Deut.  xxxi.  16,  17. 
How  can  we  for  a  moment  suppose  that  the  Lord  is  with  us,  when  "He  has  delivered  us  into  the 
hands  of  the  Midianites?"]  into  the  grasp  of  {lit.  the  palm  of  the  hands).  The  word  here 
translated  forsaken  means  the  same  as  castaway  (Rom.  xi.  2).  Because  they  were  brought  so 
low  as  to  burrow  in  the  ground  like  beasts,  and  hide  themselves  in  dens  and  in  caves.  Gideon's 
reply  is  significant,  as  showing  what  his  heart  was  full  of  at  the  time,  and  God,  who  looks 
especially  at  what  is  passing  in  men's  hearts,  saw  that  from  the  state  of  his  heart,  he  was  a  man 
of  the  right  stamp  to  undertake  the  work  of  the  people's  deliverance. 

14.  And  the  Lord  looked  upon  himl  i.e.,  He  turned  round  with  expressive  gesture,  and  said  in 
the  attitude  and  tone  of  giving  him  a  solemn  charge.  Not  the  angel,  but  Jefiovah  (as  in  Josh. 
vi.  2).  This  charge  to  go  and  deliver  Israel  manifestly  implied  the  assumption  of  a  prerogative, 
which  belonged  only  to  Israel's  God — the  Keeper  and  Shepherd  of  Israel.     The  closing  words 

specially  imply  this  (^bn)  "have  not  I  sent  theeV  (Acts  vii.  38).  This  phrase  is  a  strong 
assertion  of  the  fact,  that  the  speaker  had  commissioned  him.  It  is  the  same  as  saying,  "  Does 
not  my  statement,  now  solemnly  made,  bear  witness  to  the  fact  that  thou  art  commissioned  ?  " 
(ch.  iv.  14  J  Josh.  i.  9). 

From  the  hand  of  Midian.]    From  the  gi  asp. 

Go  in  this  thy  might,  and  thou  shall  save,  etc.]  This  is  the  formal  commission  given  by  the 
Keeper  of  Israel  to  him  whom  He  had  chosen  for  His  instrument  in  effecting  their  deliverance. 
He  now  has  a  duty  laid  down  for  him  to  discharge.  This  involves  a  responsibility  for  himself, 
and  a  call  to  others  to  assist  him  in  the  work.  Two  things  had  been  referred  to  as  constituting 
a  source  of  great  strength.  Jehovah  was  with  him,  and  as  regards  his  natural  equipment  as  a  man, 
he  was  a  mighty  man  of  valour.  Both  these  are  included  in  the  phrase,  "  this  thy  might."  It 
might  be  said  he  had  an  additional  source  of  strength  in  the  fact,  that  Jehovah  had  now 
formally  commissioned  him.      For  this  necessarily  conveyed  a  pronaisej  that  He  would  in  all 


CHAP.  VI.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    J V DOES, 


respects  qualify  him  sufficiently  for  the  performance  of  the  work.  He  sends  "  none  a  warfare  ca 
their  own  charges  "  (1  Cor.  ix.  7).  "His  God  would  command  his  strength,  and  would  make 
perfect  that  which  concerned  him."  His  own  natural  strength,  though  a  small  matter  compared 
with  the  special  Divine  resources,  which  would  be  open  to  him,  would  yet  not  be  despised  ;  for  it 
was  God's  natural  gift,  and  in  its  place  would  go  for  something. 

15.  0  my  Lord  1  wherewith  shall  I  save,  etc.]  Rather,  0  Lord  God.  He  now  addresses  the 
stranger  as  Jehovah  ;  believing  from  His  speech,  and  whole  manner,  that  he  is  a  Divine  person 
in  human  form.  As  such  an  idea  seems  too  grand  for  any  man  to  comprehend  in  a  single  moment, 
and  as  Gideon  expressed  no  great  surprise  at  the  discovery  made,  we  are  disposed  to  think  that 
here,  as  in  many  other  parts  of  Scripture  (as  Peter's  Sermon  ou  the  day  of  Pentecost,  Acts  ii. 
14-36  and  4^  ;  Peter's  Sermon  in  the  house  of  Cornelius,  Acts  x.  34-43  ;  Paul's  Address  on  Mars' 
Hill,  Acts  xvii.  22-31 — in  all  which,  as  well  as  other  places,  we  have  only  the  heads  of  the  sermon 
delivered,  and  not  the  full  verb  itim  report),  we  have  only  an  abridgment  or  outline  of  what 
was  actually  said.  It  is  enough,  if  the  statement  given  conveys  an  infallibly  accurate  conception 
of  what  took  place,  although  the  whole  of  what  was  uttered  is  not  recorded.  If  more  had  been 
said  on  this  occasion  than  is  here  given,  the  discovery  of  the  Divinity  of  the  speaker  may  have 
come  more  gradually  on  Gideon,  than  seems  to  have  been  the  case  from  what  we  read  in  the  page. 

Gideon  does  not  question  the  ability  of  the  speaker  to  accomplish  the  salvation  of  Israel.  He 
is  only  full  of  doubts,  about  his  own  miserable  qualifications  for  the  task.  '*  To  choose  me  for  so 
great  a  work  seems  passing  strange.  I  am  the  last  person  in  all  Israel  to  be  thought  of. 
Manasseh,  my  tribe,  itself  has  less  influence  than  the  others,  for  it  is  only  a  half  tribe,  to  the 
west  of  Jordan,  My  family,  or  house,  is  among  the  poorest  in  Manasseh.  And  I  am  the  least 
in  my  father's  house,  I  am  in  every  way  disqualified  for  so  vast  an  undertaking."  Doubtless 
the  thought  often  crossed  his  mind — *'  0  that  Israel  were  free  !  How  cheerfully  would  T  assist, 
were  but  an  opportunity  given,  for  lifting  the  nightmare  from  off  my  nation  !  I  would  lay  my 
life  on  the  altar,  did  I  but  see  how  the  Church  of  God  could  be  restored  to  freedom  and  honour." 
Now  the  answer  comes,  which  solves  the  difficult  problem,  "  /  will  he  with  thee,  and  thou  shalt 
smite  the  Midianites  as  one  man,"  i.e.,  as  easily  as  thou  couldst  smite  one  man,  or,  at  one  blow. 
This  was  He  who  had  been  a  wall  of  fire  around  Israel  hitherto,  and  who  had  wrought  all  the 
miracles,  which  the  fathers  spoke  so  much  of  to  thfe  children.  It  was  He  who  fainteth  not, 
neither  is  weary,  in  turning  round  the  wheels  of  Providence.  Thus  assured,  Gideon  questions 
no  longer  the  possibility  of  the  work  being  done. 

My  family  is  poor]  lit.  "  my  thousand  (Num.  i.  16)  is  the  humblest  in  Manasseh,"  referring  to 
the  divisions  and  subdivisions  made  in  Ex.  xviii,  25  ;  Micah  v.  2  ;  Deut.  xxxiii.  17.  These  were 
tens,  fifties,  hundreds,  and  thousands.  The  "  thousand  "  meant  the  expansion  of  the  family  so 
as  to  include  several  sub-divisions. 

I  am  the  least  in  my  father's  house.]  The  person  of  least  influence — as  being  the  youngest, 
and  his  name  therefore  coming  in  at  the  bottom  of  the  roll  on  all  occasions.  Also  perhaps 
because  of  his  singular  modesty  and  disinterestedness,  as  he  seems  to  have  underrated  his  own 
qualities,  and  spoken  highly  of  the  merits  of  others.  He  was  in  the  family  of  Joash,  what  David 
was  in  the  family  of  Jesse — the  least  respected  boy  in  the  family  circle.  But  God  chose  them 
both  to  do  His  work. 

Gideon  had  hesit;.tion,  but  it  was  the  hesitation  of  modesty  and  self-distrust,  not  the  hesitation 
of  unbelief.  He  did  not  question  God's  power,  but  his  own.  Compare  with  the  hesitation  of 
Moses  (Ex.  iii.  11,  etc.,  iv.  1-14)  ;  of  Barak  (ch.  iv.  8)  ;  of  Saul  (1  Sam.  x.  21,  22)  ;  of  Joshua 
(Josh.  i.  1-10);  of  Jonah,  (Jonah  i.  1-3)  ;  of  Jeremiah  (Jer.  i.  6)  ;  of  Amos  (Amos  vii.  14,  l.o). 
"The  least  fit  are  usually  the  most  forward,  and  the  most  fit  are  the  most  backward,  to  under- 
take great  offices  (ch.  ix.  8-15).  True  humility  is  the  usual  companion  of  true  greatness  (2  Cor. 
ii,  1 6,  iii,  5  ;  Eph,  iii.  8),"     (Pulpit  Com,.) 

17.  If  now  I  have  found  grace  in  Thy  sight*  show  me  a  sign.  niS] — A  miraculous  sign, 
Gideon  thought  if  the  mysterious  stranger  would  but  eat  and  drink  with  him,  it  would  be  a  con- 
clusive proof  of  two  things  :  first  that  he  was  really  human,  and  next  that  he  was  friendly  in 
his  intentions  (Luke  xxiv.  41-43  ;  Acts  x.  41  ;  John  xxi.  9-13).  But  beyond  that  he  was 
anxious  for  some  decided  proof  that  God  had  really  called  him  to  this  work.  He  wished 
doubtless  to  see  some  work  done  which  only  God  could  do,  to  prove  that  it  was  really 
Jehovah  that  was  calling  him  to  this  work,  and  it  was  no  delusion.  To  none  of  the 
other  judges  was  such  favour  shown.  But  the  circumstances  were  such,  as  to  necessitate 
a  special  degree  of  encouragement,  to  be  given  to  him  who  should  act  the  part  of  a  deliverer. 
The  tide  of  sin  was  strong,  and  the  infliction  of  judgments  was  heavy.  Gideon  would  have 
m  .ny  a  hard  battle  to  fight  all  around  him,  as  well  as  in  the  open  field  against  the  stern  foe.  He 
must  know  that  the  God  who  had  done  wonderful  things  for  His  people  aforetimes  still  lived, 
and  that  His  love  to  Israel  was  as  strong  as  ever  it  had  been  in  all  the  ages  of  the  past. 

The  phrase,  found  grace  in  Thy  sight,  is  common  in  Scripture  (Gen,  xviii.  3,  xxxiii.  10  ;  Ex. 
xxxiii.  13  ;  1  Sam.  xxvii.  6  ;  Esther  vii.  3), 

328 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES.  chap.  vi. 


18.  Depart  not  hence,  etc.,  till  I  come  and  bring  my  present] — offering,  or  sacrifice.  The  word 
minchah  may  stand  for  either.  The  Sept.  and  Vulg.  render  it  sacrifice.  We  understand  it  rather 
to  mean  a  gift  offered  to  God  as  King ^  a,  meat  offering— &wc\i  food  as  was  given  oidy  to  the 
specially  favoured  guests  {Speak.  Com.).  It  was  a  kind  of  eucharistic  gift  presented  to  G-od  as 
King  (Lev.  ii.  1-6)^  the  unbloody  meat  offering.  In  Gren.  iv  3-5  it  means  sacrifice  generally. 
To  have  accepted  a  meat  offering  at  Gideon's  hands,  would  have  been  to  confer  on  him  the 
honour  of  His  friendship,  and  the  favour  of  His  protecting  shield. 

19.  Gideon  made  ready  a  kid,  and  unleavened  cakes.]  Here  are  two  th  ngs  in  which  Gideon 
showed  especial  respect  to  the  stranger.  He  gave  him  a  hid.  Animal  food  is  never  provided 
except  for  visitors  of  superior  rank,  when  a  kid,  or  a  lamb,  and  sometimes  even  a  calf,  is  killed 
(Gen.  xviii.  7).  The  other  circumstance  is,  that  the  ephah  was  generally  the  quantity  used  for  a 
whole  household  of  ten  persons,  being  nearly  a  bushel  of  flour  (Matt.  xiii.  33).  It  was  equal  to 
tenomers,  yet  one  omer  was  the  daily  portion  of  manna  allowed  to  one  person,  as  being  amply 
suflficient  to  supply  all  wants  (Ex.  xvi.  16).  To  present  a  whole  ephah  to  one  person  therefore 
was  a  mark  of  the  deepest  respect ;  and  more  especially  at  such  a  time  as  this,  when  great 
scarcity  prevailed  all  over  the  land. 

Unleavened  cakes.]  Not  soured,  but  sweet.  Also  these  were  quickly  prepared,  and  were  best 
suited  as  an  offering  to  God  (Gen.  xix.  3  ;  Ex.  xii.  39  ;  1  Sam.  xxviii.  24  ;  Lev.  ii.  11). 

Presented  it,]  Set  it  before  the  stranger,  and  awaited  his  commands  (Amos  v.  25).  In  this 
interview  with  the  angel,  Gideon  did  not  wish  any  others  to  be  present,  and  so  to  dispense  with 
assistants  he  put  the  flesh  into  a  basket,  and  the  broth  into  a  pot,  and  brought  it  out  himself. 

20.  Angel  of  God.l  Elofiim,  not  Jehovah.  Yet  it  is  the  same  person  who  is  spoken  of,  implying 
that  both  are  one.  This  rock]  or  stone,  used  as  an  altar  on  which  any  thing  was  laid  that  was 
presented  to  God — an  unhewn  rock  (Ex.  xx.  25). 

Pour  out  the  broth]  as  a  d^-inh  offering  (Gen.  xxxv.  14).     {SpeaTc.  Com.) 

21.  End  of  the  staff  that  was  in  his  hand]  — that  which  a  traveller  carries  with  him  (Gen* 
xxxii.  10  ;  Ex.  xii.  11).  The  sign  of  fire  was  given  (Lev.  ix.  24  ;  1  Chron.  xxi.  26).  This  was 
the  answer  to  the  request  made  in  verse  17.  It  implied  the  acceptance  of  Gideon's  offering 
(Gen.  XV.  17  ;  2  Chron.  vii.  1  ;  1  Kings  xviii.  38).     It  had  also  a  deep  symbolical  meaning. 

22.  Alas !  0  Lord  God  !]  lit.  0  Lord  Jehovah — an  exclamation  sometimes  of  vexation  and  dis- 
appointment (as  Josh.  vii.  7),  and  sometimes  of  apprehension  that  some  terrible  issue  is  to  come 
out  of  what  is  happening  (Jer.  iv.  10  ;  Ezek.  iv.  14  ;  Jer.  xxxii.  17).  Here  it  expresses  dread 
atha\ing  seen  the  angel  Jehovah,  or  God  Himself,  which  according  to  the  popular  belief,  no 
man  could  do,  and  continue  to  live.  This  belief  seems  to  ha^  e  liad  for  its  foutidation,  Ex.  xxxiii. 
20.  But  what  was  really  seen  on  this  occasion,  and  indeed  on  all  other  occasions,  was  not  the 
actual  Person  of  Jehovah,  but  only  the  appearance  of  a  man  personating  Jehovah  (Gen,  xxxii.  24, 
30,  31  ;  John  i.  18 ;  xiv.  9 ;  oh.  xiii.  21).  (See  also  Ex.  xx.  19  ;  xxxiii.  20  ;  Deut.  v.  24-26  ; 
eh.  xiii.  22). 

For  because  I  have  seen.]  Lit.  for  therefore,  an  idiomatic  phrase,  which  is  only  a  strong  form 
of  using  the  word  because  (Lias).  Others  translate  it  for  to  this  end  have  I  seen  an  an^el — that  I 
might  die  (Keil).  The  former  sense,  which  indeed  is  that  of  the  A.  V.  seems  better 
(Gen.  xxxiii.  10). 

23.  The  Lord  said,  Peace  unto  thee,  etc.]  He  said,  probably  by  vision,  or  some  audible  voice, 
not  by  inward  suggestion  so  likely,  Peace  is  meant,  not  Trouble,  by  this  visit.  It  has  been  given 
to  comfort  you  (Jer.  xxix.  11).  You  are  mistaken  in  your  fears.  Comp.  John  xx.  21,  26  ; 
Gen.  xxi.  17  ;  xvi  ;  Dan.  x.  12,  19  ;  Matt,  xxviii.  5  ;  Luke  ii.  10  ;  xxiv.  36-38). 

24.  Built  an  altar  unto  the  Lord  etc.]  Partly  out  of  gratitude  for  the  sparing  of  his  life  ; 
partly  to  mark  the  spot  as  sacred,  where  so  glorious  a  Person  had  stood;  partly  to  express  his 
sense  of  the  honour  that  had  been  done  to  him  ;  and  chiefly  perhaps,  to  consecrate  the  place 
where  he  had  received  a  Divine  commission  to  become  the  saviour  of  his  people.  He  manifestly 
did  not  intend  to  make  this  altar  a  spot,  on  which  sacrifices  miglit  be  regularly  offered  in  Divine 
worship.  This  would  have  been  expressly  condemned  as  being  against  the  fixed  law  appointed 
for  Divine  worship  in  Israel.  Only  in  the  place  which  God  should  specially  choose  to  put  His 
name  there,  was  it  allowable  to  offer  sacrifices  in  the  way  of  regular  worship  (Deut.  xii.  5,  6,  11-14). 
The  mere  semblance  of  departure  from  this  rule  was  denounced  as  a  great  trespass  of  Divine 
law  (Josh.  xxii.  16,  19,  28).  But  any  place  where  God  appeared  was  in  some  s»nse  sacred,  and 
Gideon's  object  appears  to  have  been  as  described  above.  It  was  especially  a  memorial  and  witness 
of  the  theophany  vouchsafed  to  him,  on  the  occasion  of  God's  sending  him  forth  to  be  the  saviour 
of  His  people. 

329 


CHAP.  VL  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES, 


Jehovah—Shalom,]  Jehovah— Peace.  Comp,  the  names,  Jehovah-jireh,  (Gen.  xxii.  14); 
Jehovah-nissi  (Ex.  xvii.  15);  Jehovah- Tzidkenu  (Jer.  xxiii.  6);  Jehoiah-Shamiuah  (Ezek.  xlviii. 
85).  Here  the  phrase  means  simply,  '^  Trie  Lord  is  peace  ^' — or  peaceful.  It  is  similar  to  the 
New  Testament  name  of  God — "  the  God  of  peace,"  But  that  is  a  fixed  and  permanent  name, 
denoting  the  settled  attitude  of  God  in  dealing  with  guilty  men,  now  that  the  great  propitiation 
has  been  made.  In  Old  Testament  times,  the  light  shed  on  God's  character  was  more  flickering. 
The  force  of  the  title  on  this  occasion  was,  that  the  Divine  visit  made  to  Gideon  was  one  of 
peace — peace  to  himself,  and  peace  to  Israel.  Jehovah's  anger  was  now  turned  away,  and  now 
He  was  to  blesi  His  people  with  peace  (Isa.  xii.  1 ;  Ps.  xxix.  11). 


MAIN  HOMILETWS.— Verses  11-24 

The  Visit  of  the  Unseen  Friend. 

Israel's  darkest  night  had  come.  Her  last  star  had  gone  down,  and  a  pitiless 
storm  swept  through  all  her  borders.  The  enemy  had  come  in  like  a  flood,  and 
swallowed  up  her  every  possession.  Her  beautiful  land  was  turned  into  a 
wilderness.  Her  cornfields  were  wasted  ;  her  fig  trees  were  baric ed  ;  her  vines 
and  olives  stripped  bare ;  her  harvest  fruits  were  destroyed  ;  and  her  children 
were  compelled  to  burrow  in  the  ground  for  habitations,  or  to  flee  to  the  moun- 
tain crags,  or  to  dens  and  caves,  in  their  search  for  shelter  from  their  marauding 
foe.  For  seven  long  years,  this  sinning  people  lay  helpless  and  bleeding,  under 
the  heel  of  the  oppressor,  learning  the  sad  lesson,  that  the  greatest  enemy  of 
man  is  man. 

But  man's  extremity  is  God's  opportunity.  Though  no  sign  in  the  horizon 
indicates  that  help  is  at  hand  ;  though  the  heavens  do  not  thunder  against  the 
oppressor,  and  the  stars  in  their  courses  do  not  fight  against  him,   though  no 

Eowerful  army  comes  to  the  rescue,  Israel  is  yet  not  without  a  Friend  in  this 
our  of  extreme  peril.  One  who,  though  unseen,  has  been  a  deeply  interested 
witness  of  the  tragic  scene,  now  steps  forward  to  act  the  part  of  a  Friend  in 
this  emergency.  Silently,  as  the  dew  falls,  and  unobserved,  he  shows  himself. 
As  a  traveller,  staff  in  hand,  but  of  princely  form  and  expressive  countenance. 
He  enters  into  conversation  with  one  of  Israel's  disconsolate  sons  ;  a  few  simple 
words  are  spoken  ;  a  command  is  given  ;  a  flash  of  fire  springs  out  of  the  hard 
rock,  and  the  stranger  disappears.  But,  during  that  short  interview,  a  ri(t 
begins  to  appear  in  the  clouds  of  Israel's  distresses.  And  though,  for  a  moment 
the  secret  is  kept,  soon  it  appears,  that  a  movement  has  bej^nn,  which  will 
quicldy  put  another  colour  on  the  whole  course  of  events.  It  gets  whispered 
that  He  who  walks  on  the  waters,  and  gathers  the  winds  in  His  fists,  hMS 
already  sent  forth  the  word — Be  still !  and  ere  long  there  must  be  a  great  calm  ! 
Such  is  the  matter  we  have  now  to  consider.  Though  it  was  the  visit  of  only 
one  friend.  His  presence  to  Israel  at  this  time  was  invaluable.  The  sheep, 
however  numerous,  can  do  nothing  against  the  attack  of  the  lion  without  the 
Shepherd.  Little  children,  in  an  emergency,  are  helpless  without  the  presence 
of  father  and  mother. 

I.  The  Unseen  Friend. 

1.  Who  He  was.  "  The  angel  of  the  Lord  appeared  to  him  "  (verse  12).  It 
might  be  read,  the  angel-Jehovah.  It  was  manifestly  not  one  of  the  ordinary 
heavenly  messengers,  who,  however  superior  they  may  be  to  men,  and  however 
brilliant  they  may  be  both  in  wisdom  and  prowess,  yet  dare  not  assume  the 
prerogative  of  Deity,  or  speak  in  the  name  of  Jehovah.  But  this  is  always  done 
by  him  who  is  styled  the  angel-Jehovah.  The  name  Jehovah  is  given  him 
interchangeably  with  that  of  the  angel  of  the  Lord  (comp.  verses  11,  12,  20,  21, 
330 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES.  chap.  VL 


22  with  verses  14,  16,  15).  None,  however,  could  claim  to  speak  and  act  as 
God,  and  show  that  he  possessed  the  power  of  God,  but  He  who  re  illy  was  God. 
Only  one  Person  corresponds  with  this  description — the  second  Person  of  the 
glorious  God-head,  who  was,  in  the  fulness  of  time,  to  become  "  God  manifest  in 
the  flesh,"  and  who  now  by  anticipation,  at  special  seasons,  made  needful  revela- 
tions to  His  Ciiurch. 

He  is  sometimes  called  ''The  Messenger  or  Angel  of  the  Covenant"  (Mai. 
iii.  1),  "The  Angel  who  redeems  from  all  evil"  (Gen.  xlviii.  16),  and  "The 
Angel  of  His  Presence  "  (Isa.  Ixiii.  9). 

This  friend  of  His  people,  if  still  unseen,  is  no  lon^^er  unknown,  for  "  He  was 
made  flesh,  and  dwelt  among  us,  and  we  beheld  His  glory,  etc."  (John  i.  14).  In 
the  man  Christ  Jesus,  we  have  one  who  is  all,  and  more,  in  these  New  Testament 
times,  than  the  unseen  Guardian  was  to  the  church  of  old.  In  Him  we  have 
not  an  angel,  but  a  man  associated  with  the  Divine  name.  Who  is  at  once  "  bone 
of  our  bone  and  flesh  of  our  flesh,"  and  yet  is  also  "  the  Mighty  God,  and  the 
everlasting  Father," — whose  appearances  are  no  longer  shadowy  and  vanishing, 
but  are  for  ever  fixed  in  the  form  of  a  man  at  the  hehn  of  universal  power,  "  far 
above  all  principality,  and  power,  and  might,  and  every  naine  that  is  named, 
not  only  in  this  world,  but  also  in  that  which  is  to  come."  We  must  know  Who 
He  is,  where  He  is,  and  what  power  He  has  to  preserve  every  one  of  His  people, 
till  they  reach  the  world  of  glory. 

2.  The  relation  which  He  bore  to  Israel.  That  this  angel  was  something 
more  than  a  mere  spectator  of  the  sufferings  of  God's  people,  however  sym- 
pathetic, is  abundantly  manifest  from  the  accounts  given  of  Him  in  the  dif- 
ferent places  where  He  appeared.  (1.)  It  was  this  ani^el  Jehovah  that  appeared 
in  the  flame  of  fire  in  a  bush,  when  Moses  was  called  to  arise  and  deliver  Israel 
from  bondage  (Acts  vii.  30).  It  was  He  who  aimounced  His  presence  by  saying, 
"  I  am  the  God  of  the  Fathers,  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,"  and  who  gave 
as  the  reason  for  His  coming  down,  "  1  have  seen,  I  have  seen  the  affliction 
of  my  people,  and  I  am  come  down  to  deliver  them."  Thus  He  stands  to 
Israel  in  the  close  relation  of  being  their  God,  and  claiming  them  for  Himself 
as  His  special  property.  He  was  their  Owner  or  Possessor.  (2.)  But  He  was 
also  their  Bedeemer,  for  it  was  the  same  Divine  Person  who  spake  to  Moses  at 
the  bush,  who  also  sent  him  to  Pharaoh  with  the  message,  *'  Let  my  people  go 
that  they  may  serve  me  ;"  it  was  He  who  sent  all  the  plagues  on  Euypt,  who 
destroyed  the  first-born  of  that  country,  and  brought  out  Israel  with  a  liigh 
hand,  who  went  before  them  in  the  pillar  of  cloud,  dried  up  the  sea  for  them 
to  pass  over,  went  in  beliind  Israel  to  protect  them  from  the  Egyptians,  and 
finally  brought  the  waters  on  Pharaoh  and  all  his  host,  so  that  they  were 
drowned  in  the  sea  (Ex.  iii.  10 ;  vi. ;  vii.-xi. ;  xii.  29-42 ;  xiii.  21,  22 ;  xiv.  19-31). 
(3.)  He  also  became  their  Lawgiver.  For  we  are  told  (Acts  vii.  38)  it  was 
from  this  same  "angel  that  Moses  received  the  lively  oracles  to  give  unto  us, 
on  Mount  Sinai."  Then  He  appeared  clothed  with  all  the  Majesty  and  autho- 
rity of  the  Supreme  Jehovah,  and  exhibiting  a  special  jealousy  for  all  His 
Sovereign  rights  in  His  own  Person.  We  hear  of  Him  also  (4  as  their  Guardian 
Angel,  specially  appointed  to  take  charge  of  this  people,  during  theirwilderness 
journey,  to  conduct  them  to  their  journey's  end,  and  to  put  them  in  possession 
of  the  promised  inheritance  (Ex.  xxiii.  20-23).  The  language  is  used  by  God 
the  Fatlier,  "  My  name  is  in  Him,"  implying  that  He,  too,  is  God.  This  arrange- 
ment was  confirmed  in  Ex.  xxxii.  34  and  xxxiii.  2).  But  there  is  a  marked 
difference  in  the  two  passages  quoted  ;  in  the  one  case  it  is  "  Mine  angel  shall 
go  before  thee,"  in  the  other  it  is,  "  1  will  send  an  angel  before  thee."  In  the 
former  case,  it  is  the  special  angel,  the  angel-Jehovah,  that  is  referred  to,  who 
has  no  compeer  among  the  angels  of  God  ;  in  the  other  case,  it  is  one  out  of 

331 


CHAP.  VI.  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :   JUDGES. 


fche  common  class  of  angels.  Moses  fully  appreciated  the  vast  difference,  and 
prayed  earnestly  that  He  wJio  represented  God's  p7*esence  might  be  sent,  and 
no  other.  Only  one  could  take  this  place — the  Son  of  God,  the  Second  Person 
of  the  Godhead,  whose  office  it  is  to  reveal  the  Fatlier,  and  therefore  to  represent 
His  presence  (Ex.  xxxiii.  12,  and  14,  15).  The  language  "my  presence"  is 
emphatic  ;  it  is  the  same  as  saying,  "  He  who  represents  my  presence  shall  go 
with  thee."  Hence  the  reference  in  Isa.  Ixiii.  9,  "  The  Angel  of  His  presence." 
— (See  Henderson  in  loco.) 

It  was  specially  in  His  capacity  of  Guardian  Angel  that  He  now  appeared — 
as  ''  the  Keeper  of  Israel'' — their  great  Friend,  who  had  them  in  charge,  to  lead 
and  guide  them,  to  defend  them  from  all  enemies,  Gen.  xlviii.  16,  and  bestow  on 
them  all  the  blessings  of  the  covenant ;  but  also  to  see  that  they  should  act  as  an 
obedient  people,  and  keep  the  covenant  of  their  God.  The  relation  was  thus 
most  intimate  and  manifold. 

To  the  Church  of  God  on  earth  in  these  latter  times,  the  Saviour  is  intimately 
allied.  With  every  member  of  it.  He  becomes  personally  and  intimately  asso- 
ciated on  the  day  when  he  receives  Christ  as  his  Saviour.  He  then  gives  him- 
self to  Christ,  and  Christ  in  all  His  fulness  gives  himself  to  the  believing, 
penitent  sinner.  From  that  moment  they  become  one,  and  are  more  intimately 
allied  than  brothers  of  the  same  family  circle.  Jesus  is  ever  afterwards  known 
as  that  sinner's  friend,  his  Redeemer,  his  Lord  and  Master,  his  (^iuide  through 
Life,  his  Guardian  in  danger,  his  Keeper  at  all  times,  his  She[)herd  to  provide 
him  with  pasture,  and  prevent  him  from  wandering,  and  his  Bestower  of  all  the 
gifts  and  graces  contained  in  **  the  everlasting  covenant." 

.  3.  His  constant  presence  with  them.  Though  seldom  seen.  He  was  ever 
present  with  this  peo})le  to  bless  them,  and  to  do  them  good.  Being  His 
redeemed  ones,  and  chosen  for  Himself  as  His  peculiar  people,  He  took  the 
deepest  interest  in  them,  and  in  terms  of  the  promise  made,  followed  them  to 
the  place  of  the  aj^pointed  rest.  In  fidelity  to  the  trust  given  Him  by  Jehovah, 
He  watched  over  them  every  moment,  lest  any  hurt  should  arise  to  objects  so 
beloved  ;  and,  in  all  their  journeyings,  He  bore  tiiem  as  on  eagle's  wings  (Isa. 
xxvii.  3  ;  Deut.  xxxii.  9-11  ;  Ex.  xix.  4  ;  Isa.  Ixiii.  11-14).  All  through  the 
trackless  desert  He  guided  them,  with  sleepless  eye  caring  for  them,  Himself 
unseen  (Ps.  cvii.  2-7),  saving  them  at  one  time  from  such  enemies  as  the 
Amalekites  (Ex.  xvii.  13,  14),  again  from  the  fiery  flying  serpents  (Num.  xxi.  8), 
again  from  the  curse  of  Balaam  (Num.  xxii.  31-35  ;  xxiii.  5,  16  ;  do.  23),  and 
again  from  the  armies  of  two  mighty  kings  on  the  threshold  of  the  territories 
of  the  Canaanites,  Silion  and  Og.  He  also  dried  up  the  Jordan  before  them, 
and  appeared  as  the  Captain  of  the  Lord's  host,  when  the  wars  against  the 
Canaanites  were  about  to  begin  (Josh.  v.  13-15).  It  was  by  His  mighty  power 
also,  that  all  these  nations  were  slain  before  the  sword  of  Joshua  (Ps.  xliv.  3). 

Jesus  still  g(  es  personally  with  every  one  of  His  people,  every  step  of  the  way, 
on  to  the  place  of  the  promised  rest.  Himself  unseen,  but  not  the  less  really 
taking  charge  of  His  redeemed  ones,  treating  them  substantially  in  the  same 
manner,  and  acting  on  the  same  principles  as  of  old.  His  language  is,  "  Lo  !  I 
am  with  you  alway  unto  the  end."  He  is  "the  Beginner  and  the  Finisher  of 
their  faith  "  (Matt,  xxviii.  20  ;  Heb.  xii.  2  ;  xiii.  5  ;  Psalms  Ixxiii.  24  ;  2  Tim. 
iv.  18). 

4.  The  rarity  of  His  appearances.  It  might  be  thought  if  He  was  so  closely 
allied  to  this  people — more  intimately  related  than  father  to  children,  brother 
to  brother,  or  husband  to  wife — then  it  is  singular  He  should  so  seldom  show 
Himself  If  His  presence  is  so  essential  to  the  safe  conduct  and  the  comfort  of 
His  people,  why  does  He  not  oftener  look  througli  the  window,  showing  Himself 
332 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:    JUDGES.  chap.  vf. 


through  the  lattice  (Cant.  ii.  9)  ?  Nay,  if,  in  point  of  fact,  He  is  always  near, 
why  does  He  not  give  unmistakeahle  signs  of  His  presence?  How  much  might 
not  the  consciousness  of  His  presence  do  to  clieer  His  people  under  their  sorrows, 
to  lighten  their  burdens,  relieve  their  anxious  fears,  and  enable  them  to  run  with 
patience  the  Christian  race  !  Yet  we  hear  of  His  appearing  only  once  to  Joshua 
on  the  threshold  of  His  great  work,  ordy  once,  too,  at  the  time  when  the  people 
were  left  without  a  leader,  to  see  if  they  could  of  themselves  obey  the  covenant 
of  their  God  (ch.  ii.  1-5),  and  now  a  tiiird  time  after  a  lapse  of  more  than  200 
years  when  the  whole  nation  was  brought  to  the  brink  of  ruin.  Why  should  it 
be  so? 

(1.)  These  visits  were  too  precious  to  he  often  repeated.  It  is  but  glimpses  of 
glory  that  can  be  expected  on  earth.  It  is  not  the  normal  state  of  things  to 
make  revelations  of  the  Divine  brightness  in  such  a  world  as  this.  It  w^ould  be 
a  departure  from  the  fixed  rule  to  do  so.  The  cases  are  therefore  strictly 
exceptional ;  and  even  the  glimpses  which  are  given  are  made  only  to  the 
peo[)le  of  God.  There  was  only  one  Mount  of  Transfiguration  scene  permitted 
to  the  disciples  in  this  world,  and  that  quickly  came  and  quickly  vanished. 
This  earth  is  too  polluted  a  spot  for  any  long  continued  enjoyment  of  the  Divine 
presence. 

(2.)  The  rule  in  tJie  present  state,  is  to  walk  by  faith,  and  not  by  sight.  This 
rule  is  necessary  for  putting  the  soul  through  a  most  healthful  discipline,  and 
enabling  it  to  learn  lessons  which  it  could  learn  so  well  in  no  other  way.  It 
becomes  the  means  of  acquiring  a  degree  of  self  knowledge  from  experience, 
which  it  never  could  arrive  at  otherwise — the  knowledge  of  its  entire  spiritual 
helplessness,  its  want  of  a  righteousness  of  its  own,  its  innate  treachery,  its 
difficulty  of  loving  God,  and  trusting  in  Him  when  unseen,  and  many  other 
things  of  a  very  humbling  character.  It  leads  to  a  gradual  exposure  of  the 
human  heart  to  itself.  It  is  also  the  appointed  means  of  our  ju<«tification 
before  God,  through  the  merits  of  the  Saviour,  and  so  illuminates  the  fact,  that 
we  deserve  no  manifestations  of  God's  brightness  whatever.  Hence,  till  we  learn 
this  lesson  thoroughly  they  are  but  sparingly  made.  It  is  also  the  means  of 
producing  our  sanctification,  of  enabling  us  to  overcome  all  o])position  to  our 
entrance  into  heaven,  and  preparing  many  of  the  materials  of  the  joy  of  that 
state.  (1  Peter  i.  7  ;  2  Cor.  iv.  18). 

(3.)  Our  sins  and  backslidings  prevent  many  visits.  (Lsa.  lix.  2  ;  Hos.  v.  15  ; 
vi.  1,  etc.)  From  those  who  obey  not  His  voice,  but  cast  His  laws  behind  their 
backs.  He  hides  His  face,  and  they  receive  little  or  no  manifestations  of  His 
favour,  as  in  the  passages  quoted  (see  also  lsa.  Ivii.  17  ;  i.  15).  This  was 
realised  often  in  the  days  of  the  Judges,  and  never  more  than  during  the  period 
referred  to  in  this  chapter.  On  the  other  hand,  "His  secret  is  with  them 
that  fear  Him,"  etc.  (Ps.  xxv.  14) ;  to  the  man  who  walks  before  Him  with  a 
perfect  heart  He  reveals  Himself,  as  to  Moses  (Ex.  xxxiii.  11,  also  18-23). 
"  The  meek  He  will  teach  His  way."  "  To  that  man  will  I  look,  even  to  him 
that  is  poor,"  etc.  (Ps.  xxv.  9  ;  lsa.  Ixvi.  2).  **  To  the  man  that  keepeth 
His  commandments,  He  will  manifest  Himself  to  him"  (John  xiv.  21; 
Gen.  xviii.  17,  19). 


5.  His  appearance  at  the  proper  moment.  He  saw  all  His  people's  affliction 
at  the  hands  of  these  cruel  sons  of  the  desert,  and  though  they  were  punished 
less  than  their  iniquities  deserved.  His  heart  was  yet  touched  with  pity  for 
them,  and  long  ere  the  full  cup  of  merited  suffering  was  emi)tiod.  He  appeared 
as  He  did  to  Moses  in  the  bush,  to  tell  them  how  "  in  all  their  afflictions  He 
was  afflicted,"  and  that  now  in  His  love  He  was  come  to  redeem  them.  At 
that  point,  when  they  had  bitter  trial  of  the  severity  of  the  rod  on  the  one 
hand,  but  had  not  yet  experienced  any  wholesale  destruction  of  human  life  on 

333 


CHAP.  VI.  EOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  JIIDOES. 


the  other,  though  nearing  that  point,  the  an^^el  appears.  His  heart  yearned 
over  them,  as  if  they  had  "  received  at  the  Lord's  hand  double  for  all  their 
sins  "  (Isa.  xl.  2).  At  the  moment  when  the  metal  was  beginning  to  consume, 
He  at  once  snatches  it  from  the  fire.  Already  a  famine  seems  to  have  begun 
(Ruth  i.  1),  and  had  the  terrible  incubus  from  the  desert  continued  to  rest 
longer  on  the  hi  ml,  the  people  must  soon  have  perished  in  tens  of  thousands. 
But  just  then  He  appeared  for  their  rescue,  "according  to  the  multitude  of 
His  loving  kindnesses  "  (Isa.  Ixiii.  7).  He  wlio  **  sent  out  a  strong  west  wind, 
and  swept  off  the  swarms  of  locusts  tliat  covered  the  land  of  Egypt,  so  that 
there  remained  not  one  in  all  the  coasts  "  (Ex.  x.  19),  now  does  a  similar  thing 
with  these  barbarous  hordes  (Jud.  viii.  10,  12,  28). 

The  Jews  have  a  proverb  that,  *'  when  the  tale  of  bricks  is  doubled,  then  comes 
BJoses"  The  Redeemer  of  Israel  cannot  see  the  destruction  of  His  people.  He 
never  dei)arts  from  this  rule — "  I  will  correct  thee  in  measure.  I  will  not  make 
a  full  end  of  thee."  Other  nations  were  mere  common  property.  His  people 
were  His  jewels.  "  I  gave  Egypt  for  thy  ransom,"  etc.  "  I  have  engraven  thee 
on  the  palms  of  my  hands." 

6.  The  purpose  of  His  appearance.  He  came  to  rid  the  land  of  the  enemy 
and  grant  salvation  to  His  people.  In  that  people,  notwithstanding  their  present 
apostasy,  He  saw  the  church  of  the  living  God,  the  only  people  that  represented 
the  true  God  in  all  the  earth,  the  people  whose  history  carried  in  it  the  germ  of 
a  great  Divine  plan,  to  be  revealed  to  future  ages,  by  which  the  Divine  glory 
would  be  far  more  brightly  illustrated  than  in  any  other  manner,  down  through 
unending  time.  Through  this  people  the  name  of  Jehovah  should  become 
known  and  worshipped,  among  all  nations,  in  the  future  of  the  world's  history. 
But  now  all  their  prospects  as  a  nation  were  placed  in  great  jeopardy.  Where- 
fore "  He  looked,  but  there  was  none  to  help;  He  wondered  that  there  was 
none  to  uphold  ;  therefore  His  own  arm  brought  salvation,"  etc.  (Psa.  Ixiii.  5). 
He  appears  on  their  behalf,  according  to  the  jealousy  He  bears  to  his  great 
name.  Formerly  He  came  as  a  reprover  of  their  sins  (ch.  ii.  1-5).  Now  He 
comes  to  raise  up  a  deliverer,  whom  He  will  employ  as  an  instrument  to  save 
them  from  all  the  consequences  of  their  sins. 

The  land  has  first  to  be  purged  of  its  sins.  Till  that  is  done,  the  finger  of 
Jehovah  will  not  be  uplifted  for  salvation.  The  work  of  ref  )rmation  must  be 
proved  to  exist.  Baal's  altars  must  be  thrown  down,  and  the  altar  of  Jehovah 
erected  in  their  place.  It  must  be  made  visible,  that  the  name  of  Jehovah  is 
again  accepted  as  that  of  the  God  of  Israel.  Battle  must  also  be  bravely  given 
to  the  terrible  foe,  that  brooded  like  a  nightmare  over  the  rich  plains  of  Israel. 
For  an  undertaking  so  difficult,  no  ordinary  qualifications  were  required.  The 
whole  power,  indeed,  came  from  the  Divine  Deliverer  Himself  Yet,  as  God  is 
always  pleased  to  work  by  means.  He  employs  the  fittest  instrument  that  can 
be  found. 

Notwithstanding  all  our  sins,  it  is  wonderful  how  often  our  gracious  Re- 
deemer appears  for  our  salvation,  when,  for  many  strong  reasons,  we  might 
have  expected  Him  to  come  for  our  destruction  (see  Ps.  cvi.  43,  45  ;  Ps.  Ixxviii. 
37,  38). 

7.  His  manner  of  revealing  Himself,  He  comes  in  a  tene,  or  manner  suited 
to  the  conduct,  or  condition  of  the  people  at  different  times.  There  is  design 
and  meaning  in  the  manner,  as  well  as  in  the  expressed  purpose  of  revealing 
Himself.  Now,  there  are  no  lightnings  in  His  hands.  He  is  not  compassed 
about  with  dark  clouds.  No  earthquake  heralds  His  coming.  The  earth  does 
not  shake  and  tremble  at  His  goings.  The  pestilence  does  not  go  before  Him, 
nor  do  burning  coals  spring  up  under  His  feet.     He  cooies  like  the  small  rain 

834 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:    JUDGES.  chap,  vi 


ou  the  tender  herb.  As  a  wayfaring  man,  leaning  on  His  staff,  as  if  wearied 
with  His  journey,  and  sitting  down  to  rest.  He  comes  peaceably,  and  not  in 
anger.  He  disturbs  not  a  leaf  on  the  tree,  though  it  were  easy  for  Him  to 
scatter  the  everlasting  mountains,  and  cause  the  perpetual  hills  to  bow.  All 
the  power  of  omnipotence  slumbered  in  His  arm  ;  the  strength  of  many 
armies  lay  in  His  word.  But  He  keeps  back  His  resources  out  of  sight.  He 
hides  His  power  from  observation  to  see  whether  men  will  trust  His  word.  He 
will  make  no  vain  show  of  His  resources,  but  pub  forth  only  the  one  atom  of 
His  power,  which  is  needed  to  justify  faith  in  His  Divine  character. 

8.  His  personal  character.  (1.)  He  is  Almighty.  There  are  no  cases  of 
distress  too  hard  for  our  heavenly  friend  to  remove.  He  is  able  to  make  "  the 
worm  Gideon  thresh  the  mountains  and  to  make  the  hills  as  chaff."  "  Is  any- 
thing too  hard  for  the  Lord  ? "  Gideon's  faith  was  not  difficult  to  awaken.  It 
was  kindled  at  once,  when  he  saw  the  fire  spring  up  from  the  rock,  and  consume 
the  sacrifice.  He  believed  that  behind  that  there  was  infinite  strength — that, 
indeed,  this  was  He  who  had  done  all  the  wonders  from  the  days  of  the  land  of 
Egypt.  Neither  should  more  proof  be  needed  to  believe  in  the  resources  of  the 
"  Captain  of  our  Salvation,"  when,  besides  many  other  evidences,  we  behold  this 
one,  that  He  is  able  to  pour  out  the  Spirit  from  on  high,  the  universal  Comforter 
of  the  church  of  Christ.  This  is  the  greatest  of  all  the  forms  of  power  which 
God  puts  forth.     Then  he  creates  the  soul  anew. 

(2.)  He  is  faithful.  He  never  forgets  nor  forsakes  the  objects  of  His  charge, 
though  centuries  had  now  passed  since  first  He  received  it,  when  this  people 
became  a  free  nation.  During  that  long  period  His  faithfulness  did  not  fail, 
but,  amid  aU  the  lights  and  shadows  of  that  greatly  chequered  history,  this 
covenant-keeping  Friend  was  at  his  post,  and  brought  His  charge  safely  through 
every  peril  according  to  the  terms  of  his  trust.  "  Those  whom  the  Father  gave 
me  I  have  kept,  and  none  of  them  is  lost "  (John  x.  28,  29  ;  vi.  39  ;  2  Tim. 
i.  12  ;  iv.  8  ;  do.  18). 

(3.)  He  is  tender.  It  is  not  His  manner  even  to  "break  the  bruised  reed." 
He  does  not  now  break  forth  into  a  severe  reprimand  of  Gideon,  for  seeming  to 
find  fault  with  God's  Providence  in  allowing  His  people  to  suffer  so  much  while 
He  stood  aloof  from  them.  Though  Gideon  was  charging  his  God  foolishly,  He 
yet  knew  that  at  heart  he  was  an  Israelite  indeed,  but  was  overwhelmed  with 
sorrow  at  the  condition  of  affairs  in  the  land.  There  were  also  other  wounds 
made  in  Gideon's  heart,  and  now  bleeding  afresh,  arising  from  the  loss  of  his 
brothers  at  Mount  Tabor,  who  were  there  barbarously  slain  by  Zebah,  and 
Zolmunna.  These  wounds  he  now  tenderly  upbinds  (Ps.  cxlvii.  3).  Instead 
of  upbraiding.  He  speaks  to  him  "  good  and  comfortable  words."  "  The  Lord 
turned  and  looked  upon  Peter."  How  tenderly  He  deals  with  the  weak 
side  in  His  disciple's  character,  his  unsteadfastness  to  his  Master  in  the  hour 
of  peril ! 

(4.)  He  is  full  of  sympathy.  He  felt  the  afflictions  suffered  by  the  various 
tribes,  as  if  they  had  been  His  own.  **  His  soul  was  grieved  for  the  misery  of 
Israel."  He  was  now  virtually  saying  to  them  anew,  "he  that  toucheth  you, 
touclieth  the  apple  of  mine  eye."  The  pain  of  the  members  of  the  body  goes 
at  once  to  the  head,  the  fountain  of  sensation  (ch.  x.  16  ;  Zech.  ii.  8).  "  I  have 
seen  the  affliction  of  my  people,  have  heard  their  cry,  and  know  their  sorrows, 
and  now  I  am  come  down  to  deliver  them."  It  is  as  if  He  could  not  enjoy 
His  repose  in  heaven,  while  His  people  were  suffering  such  cruelties  on  earth. 
When  they  are  persecuted,  it  is  He  that  bleeds.  "  Saul,  Saul,  why  persecutest 
thou  Me  ?  "     This  truly  is  a  Friend  in  need,  and  a  Friend  indeed. 

(5.)  He  is  unchanging.  His  general  character  is  given,  as  being  "  without 
variableness,  or  shadow  of  turning  "    He  is  the  same  trustworthy  Friend  now 

335 


CHAP.  VI.  BOM ILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


that  He  was  in  tlie  days  of  Joslina,  when  He  brou<^ht  the  people  into  the  land, 
or  as  in  the  daj'S  of  Moses,  when  He  led  sucli  a  large  congregation  safely 
through  all  the  perils  of  the  wilderness.  "  Having  loved  His  own,  who  were  in 
the  world,  He  loved  them  to  the  end  " 

**  Nor  death,  nor  life,  nor  earth,  nor  hell, 
Not  time's  destroying  sway. 
Can  e'er  efface  us  from  His  hearty 
Or  make  His  love  decay.** 

**  Mine  is  an  unchanging  love, 
Higher  than  the  heights  above, 
Deeper  than  the  depths  beneath, 
Free  and  faithful,  strong  as  death." 

(6.)  He  is  undying.  "  He  carried  them  all  the  days  of  old,"  and  still  while 
generation  after  generation  dies,  He  lives  on  through  all  ages  the  ever-present, 
ever  interested,  ever-watchful  Protector  of  His  Churcli.  For  three  centuries 
already  He  had  led  this  people  through  all  changes,  and  still  to  this  day,  He  was 
as  much  as  ever  "  mighty  to  save."  His  name  at  first,  when  He  took  this  people 
by  the  hand,  was  given  as  the  great  *'  I  am  " — the  ever-living,  self- existent  One. 
And  now  as  far  on  as  the  days  of  Gideon,  He  is  still  "  the  Lord  of  Hosts,  strong 
and  mighty  in  battle."  David  sings  of  Him  as  One  "  of  whose  years  there  is 
no  fail."  Isaiah  adores  Him  as  "  The  Everlasting  Fatlier."  Jeremiah  rejoices 
in  ''  His  love  as  an  everlasting  love."  Micah  hails  Him  as  One,  "  whose  goings 
forth  have  been  from  of  old,  from  everlasting."  And  when  he  changed  His 
form  from  angel  to  man^  we  find  Him  in  the  latest  ages  of  the  sacred  record, 
"  walking  in  the  midst  of  the  seven  golden  candlestick>^,  as  One  like  unto  the 
Son  of  Man,"  proclaiming  as  He  looks  towards  the  limitless  future,  **  Behold,  I 
am  alive  for  evermore,  and  have  the  keys  of  hell  and  of  death  "  (Rev.  i.  13,  18). 
Through  all  time,  His  language  to  His  people  is,  "  Because  I  live,  ye  shall 
live  also." 

ZI.   Tlie  instrument  of  Kls  choice. 

Though  God  could  accomplish  His  purposes  among  men,  without  the  inter- 
vention of  any  human  instrumentality,  it  is  His  fixed  rule  to  act  in  all  ordinary 
cases  by  the  use  of  means.  Even  in  cases  where  miraculous  power  is  employed, 
this  rule  is  not  departed  from  ;  for  the  miraculous  power  is  employed  oidy  to  do 
what  ordinary  means  could  not  do,  or  it  is  put  forth  in  special  cases  to  prove 
that  the  power  comes  directly  from  God.  But  where  ordinary  means  can  serve 
every  purpose,  these  only  are  employed  ;  and,  when  selected,  they  are  always  of 
the  fittest.  God  always  honours  the  use  of  natural  means,  for  it  is  the  order 
He  has  laid  down  in  His  creation,  and  He  must  respect  His  own  arrangements. 
Miracle  is  therefore  the  exception  ;  natural  means  the  rule.  Hence,  on  this 
occasion,  Gideon  was  chosen  to  act  as  an  instrument  in  God's  hand  in  doing  the 
work.  He  was  chosen  because  of  his  natural  qualifications  fitting  him  for  the 
work  ;  and  other  qualifications  were  specially  given  to  him  to  render  him  still 
more  qualified. 

1.  He  was  selected  by  the  Angel- Jehovah  Himself,  (p.  143).  This  appears 
at  once  from  reading  the  narrative  without  any  confirmatory  statement.  It  was 
the  angel's  express  command,  that  gave  Gideon  the  right  to  act  as  a  saviour  to 
his  people,  and  this  too  made  him  responsible  for  fulfilling  this  mission.  He 
was  not  merely  an  extraordinary  character  created  by  extraordinary  times. 
Several  have  been  so  raised  up — such  as  Buonaparte,  Washington,  Alfred,  Crom- 
well, Knox,  and  others.  But  the  heroes  of  Israel  were  nothing  without  the 
Divine  aid  aud  guidance  of  Him  who  called  them  to  the  work.  They  were 
336 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES,  oBap.  VI. 


always  held  in  the  hand  of  another,  and  had  to  obey  the  will  of  that  other. 
There  was  only  one  real  Deliverer,  in  all  the  ages  of  that  unparalleled  history — 
the  Angel-Jehovah.  As  held  by  Him,  Israel's  heroes  were  invincible  under  any 
possible  circumstances  ;  as  acting  of  themselves,  they  were  weak,  and  as  other 
men.  If  then  all  the  power  really  came  from  the  Angel-Jehovah,  manifestly 
He  must  choose  His  own  instrument.  The  commonly  received  rule,  vox  populi, 
voas  Deiy'  does  not  apply  here. 

2.  He  was  taken  from  a  very  nulikely  place.  Othniel  was  taken  from  the 
tribe  of  Judah,  Ehud  from  Benjamin,  and  Barak  from  Naphtali.  For  the  most 
part  God  finds  His  instrument  at  hand,  where  the  danger  is  to  be  met.  He 
does  not  need  to  bring  him  from  afar,  for  anyone  close  at  hand  He  can  make 
serviceable  for  His  purpose.  The  Hanger  now  to  be  met,  was  partly  in  the 
tribe  of  Issachar,  and  partly  in  that  of  cis-jordanic  Manasseh.  Of  all  places  in 
the  land,  in  this  half-tribe  of  Manasseh  idolatry  was  the  most  rampant ;  and 
precisely  here  was  the  instrument  of  the  angel  found.  No  places  suffered  more 
from  the  inroads  of  these  spoilers,  than  those  which  formed  the  richest  jiortions 
of  this  tribe,  and  none  had  so  determinedly  put  aside  the  name  of  Jehovah,  and 
addicted  themselves  to  the  worship  of  Baal.  The  old  Canaanites  had  continued 
in  Megiddo,  DDr,  Ibleam,  Taanach,  and  Bethshean  (ch.  i.  27).  All  over  this 
district  the  altars  of  Baal  were  upreared,  and  there  were  none  zealous  enough, 
or  powerful  enough  to  deal  with  this  public  scandal,  among  the  people  who  were 
pledged  in  every  way  to  worship  only  Jehovah.  In  the  heart  of  this  country 
Gideon  was  found.  It  might  be  said,  can  any  good  thing  come  out  of  idola- 
trous Manasseh?  and  the  answer  might  well  be  given,  Come  and  see  !  It  is  like 
Saul  of  Tarsus  being  taken  from  among  the  Pharisees,  or  Dionysius  the  Areopagite 
taken  from  Athens.  He  who  could  raise  up  an  Obadiah  in  the  court  of  Ahab 
and  Jezebel,  can  also  bring  forth  a  man  to  fell  the  image  of  Baal  all  over  the 
land,  from  the  very  headquarters  of  idol- worship  in  his  day. 

3.  In  what  circumstances  did  the  Angel  find  him?  It  is  always  an  impor 
tant  question  to  ask,  where  a  man  is  found,  or  how  situated,  when  God  calls  him, 
in  the  case  of  conversion  from  sin  to  God,  at  the  day  of  death,  or  some  special 
occasion  of  duty  when  a  stern  act  of  self-denial  is  required.  Moses  when  called 
was  in  the  "  backside  of  the  desert,"  a  most  lonely  spot ;  David  was  found 
following  the  ewes  ;  Klisha  was  ploughing  in  the  field  with  oxen  ;  the  Apostles 
were  washing  and  mending  their  nets;  and  Gideon  was  threshing  wheat.  Similarly 
Cincinnatus,  Curius,  Scipio  (Roman  Senators)  were  called  from  agricultural 
pursuits  to  occupy  high  positions  in  the  State — Joseph  was  even  called  from  a 
prison  to  occupy  the  seat  next  the  throne  in  Egypt.  These  were  all  doing  tiieir 
duty  in  some  humble  station  meekly  and  uncomplainingly,  content  with  the  lot 
which  God  had  marked  out  for  them^"  faithful  in  that  which  is  least."  So 
it  was  with  Gideon.  But  his  thoughts  were  not  in  his  work.  They  were  wiih 
the  Church  of  God,  its  sorrowful  present  and  its  dark  future.  If  any  work  was  to 
be  done  for  that  Church,  he  was  just  the  man  to  throw  his  whole  heart  into  it. 

4.  The  immediate  reason  of  the  Divine  visit.  Most  probably  in  answer  to 
prayer.  In  the  severely  abridged  account  given  of  all  circumstances  in  the 
Book  of  God,  it  is  little  wonder  if  we  do  not  hear  much  of  Gideon's  private 
exercises  before  his  God.  But  we  can  hardly  suppose  such  a  man  of  faith  and 
zeal  for  the  cause  of  God,  to  be  other  than  a  wrestler  with  God  in  secret,  that 
he  "  would  arise  and  plead  the  cause  that  was  his  own."  Partly  in  answer  to 
these  prayers  did  the  angel  come  to  him.  Also  his  concern  was  deep  at  the  low 
state  of  true  religion  in  the  land.  Most  of  those  around  him  were  "  hasting 
after  other  gods."  Jehovah's  altar  was  deserted  ;  Israel  had  fallen  into  the  sins 
of  the  old  Canaanites  :  and  now  the  tide  of  judgment  had  come  up  in  all  her 

y  337 


CHAP.  VI.  HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES, 


borders  to  such  a  degree,  as  to  threaten  the  extinction  of  the  nation.  GideoLS 
heart  was  wrung  with  grief  when  he  saw  Jeh  wah's  name  so  much  dishonoured 
(Ps.  cxix.  136,  158).  Often  must  he  have  ''sighed  and  cried  in  prayer,  as  he 
thought  of  all  the  abominations  done  in  the  land."  If  he  could  but  see  a  way, 
he  was  heartily  prepared  to  lay  himself  on  the  altar,  to  devote  himself  for  the 
emancipation  of  his  country,  and  for  the  re-establishment  of  the  worship  of 
God  in  the  land.  On  the  principle,  therefore,  that  God  honours  them  that  honour 
Him,  he  is  now  chosen  of  God  to  do  the  greatest  work  which  that  age  admitted 
of,  in  rescuing  his  bleeding  country  from  ruin,  and  restoring  the  name  Jehovah 
to  honour  and  worship  all  over  the  land. 

5.  His  personal  fitness  for  the  work.  His  good  qualities  were  manifold,  all 
marking  him  out  as  a  suitable  agent. 

(1.)  I] is  physical  qualities.  These,  though  inferior  to  others,  are  yet  in  their 
place  important.  God  does  not  despise  any  gifts  or  faculties,  with  which  He 
Himself  has  endowed  a  man.  It  was  an  element  of  fitness  for  the  work  on  this 
occasion,  that  Gideon  was  a  "  mighty  man  of  valour  ;  "  that  he  was  of  princely 
appearance,  was  physically  strong,  and  able  to  go  through  much  bodily  hardship  ; 
and,  further,  that  he  was  skilful  in  the  use  of  weapons,  and  a  chivalrous  champion 
in  the  field.  That  a  bold  and  dauntless  spirit  was  needed  to  meet  the  emer- 
gency was  most  manifest.  One  who  would  skulk  behind  the  bush,  and  conceal 
liiniself  from  all  danger,  was  of  no  service  whatever.  Neither  could  he  be 
Israel's  leader  on  such  an  occasion  as  this,  who  could  not  bravely  set  his  face 
against  terrible  odds,  and  who,  though  faint  with  toil,  could  not  yet  pursue. 
But  Gideon  was  robust  and  muscular,  of  sinewy,  iron  frame,  and  firm  nerve. 
And  his  whole  bearing  in  this  remarkable  juncture  was  marked  by  intrepid 
courage  and  invincible  resolution. 

(2.)  His  mental  qualities.  These  are  of  a  higher  order,  and  pre-eminently 
needed  in  the  conducting  of  a  great  enterprise.  VVe  do  not  say  he  was  a  man  of 
more  than  average  learning,  just  as  he  was  not  a  king's  son,  nor  a  prince  of  the 
tribe  to  which  he  belonged.  To  be  pre-eminent  in  rank  or  learning  was  not 
essential.  But  the  possession  of  great  natural  shrewdness,  of  sound  judgment, 
and  quick  discernment ;  ability  to  grasp  at  once  the  full  magnitude  and  great 
difficulty  of  the  work  before  him  ;  the  possession  of  wisdom  and  tact  how  best 
to  lay  out  the  few  resources  within  his  reach  ;  constructive  power  in  arranging 
the  best  plan,  or  order  of  battle  ;  fertility  in  devising  expedients  and  manoeuvres, 
and  ways  of  taking  advantage  of  all  the  shifting  scenes  and  incidents  of  the 
crisis  ;  especially  the  power  of  managing  men,  inspiring  hearts  with  courage  and 
hope  to  which  they  had  long  been  strangers,  wakening  up  even  the  faint  hearted 
to  a  pitch  of  enthusiasm,  to  have  the  soldiers  thoroughly  in  harmony  with  their 
leader,  and  to  gain  their  entire  confidence,  and  to  be  able  to  bring  the  whole 
force  to  bear  as  one  man  on  the  object  which  is  sought  to  be  gained — all  these 
qualities  Gideon  did  possess  in  an  eminent  degree,  and  so  was  eminently  the 
man  for  the  occasion  on  this  side  of  his  character. 

(3.)  His  moral  qualities.  These  are  higher  still,  and  in  these  Gideon  yet 
more  excelled.  To  be  able  to  rise  with  the  occasion,  to  realise  the  worth  of  the 
precious  interests  with  which  he  was  entrusted,  to  appreciate  the  value  of  the 
right  moment  when  it  occurred,  and  to  lose  not  a  moment  in  seizing  it,  to  lose 
himself  in  the  greatness  of  his  duty,  and  have  no  other  thought  but  nobly  to 
discharge  it,  to  be  daring  and  dashing  in  his  movements,  while  yet  full  of 
caution  and  self-restraint — these  are  the  features  which  distinctly  mark  the  man 
of  God's  selection  on  this  occasion.  Who  could  have  thought  that  the  same 
man  should  have  been  so  humble,  diffident,  and  shrinking — so  overpowered  with 
a  consciousness  of  his  own  weakness,  putting  himself  down  as  less  than  the  least 
in  all  Israel,  and  entirely  losing  sight  of  himself  in  his  sympathy  with  his 
338 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES,  chap.  VI 


suffering  brethren,  and  the  sacred  cause  now  almost  lost,  which  had  been 
committed  to  their  iiands  ?  Yet,  these  are  the  very  features  of  character, 
whicli  fit  a  man  for  true  greatness  in  the  Church  of  God.  "  Before  honour  is 
humiiity." 

Though  so  disinterested  and  unselfish  as  to  suppose  that  the  angel's  salutation 
did  not  apply  to  him  personally,  when  He  said  "  The  Lord  is  with  thee"  but 
rather  to  the  peo[)le  of  Israel  as  a  whole,  and  so  he  replied — "with  us;"  and 
though  he  entirely  passed  over  the  flattering  allusion  to  his  being  "  a  mighty 
man  of  valour,"  yet,  with  all  this  low  estimate  of  himself,  when  summoned  to  do 
work  for  his  God,  he  rise.^  to  the  strongest  conviction  of  the  sacredness  of  his 
duty,  and  becomes  fearless  and  defiant  of  danger,  when  he  has  reason  to  believe 
that  his  God  is  with  him  ordering  the  battle. 

(4.)  IJis  religious  qualities.  These  are  highest  of  all.  Pre-eminent  among 
these  was  the  fact  of  Ms  deep  sorrow  for  the  sins  of  the  land.  This  was 
distinctive  of  such  men  as  Ezra,  Nehemiah,  Daniel,  and  David,  who  did  so  much 
in  their  day  to  bring  down  a  Divine  blessing  on  the  land  when  it  seemed  to  be 
forsaken  of  its  God.  Now  it  appears  to  have  been  so  with  Gideon.  That  there 
should  have  been  so  much  of  Baal,  and  so  little  of  Jehovah,  in  Israel  in  these 
past  years,  appears  to  be  the  undertone  of  his  lamentation  in  his  first  answer 
to  the  angel.  And  the  same  spirit  comes  out  more  decidedly  when,  in  obedi- 
ence to  the  Divine  command,  at  great  risk  to  himself,  he  cut  down  the  grove 
and  the  image  of  Baal.  His  readiness  to  obey  the  Divine  call,  when  assured 
that  he  really  was  called  of  God,  is  most  beautiful.  For  his  only  objection  is, 
not  that  the  sacrifice  was  too  great  to  make,  involving  in  all  probability  the  loss 
of  life  itself,  but  that  he  was  so  weak  an  instrument  to  be  taken  into  God's 
hand.  He  was  able  to  do  so  little.  So  glorious  a  cause  would  suffer  by 
being  put  into  such  unworthy  hands.  But  when  assured  that  he  was  really 
called,  he  readily  obeys — a  pleasing  contrast  even  to  the  case  of  Moses,  who 
seemed  for  a  time  most  unwilling  to  enter  on  the  duty  which  God  imposed 
upon  him  (see  Ex.  iv.  10-14).  Gideon  seemed  never  to  murmur  at  any  measure 
of  self-sacrifice,  which  his  call  to  this  duty  would  entail  upon  him.  His  whole 
manner  seemed  to  say,  "  Here  am  I  send  me !" 

He  had  true  loyalty  to  the  God  of  Israel.  Though  all  besides  should  follow 
Baal,  and  though  Baal's  altar  should  be  raised  in  his  father's  house,  and  be 
acknowledged  by  all  its  inmates,  he  would  bow  the  knee  only  to  Jehovah.  He 
was  not  ashamed  of  the  name  of  his  God,  neither  w  he  afraid,  though  he 
should  stand  altogether  alone.     If  it  must  be  so,  he  shall  be 

"  Faithful  found  among  the  faithless,  faithful  only  he." 

But  his  chief  characteristic  of  all,  was  \i\^  Jaith  in  the  God  of  Israel  as  his  own 
God.  It  was  the  entire  trust  he  placed  in  his  God,  and  the  full  confidence  he 
had  in  Him  that  enabled  him  to  face  the  huge  mountain  of  difficulty  that  lay 
before  him.  His  case  was  greatly  like  that  of  the  stripling  king,  who  was  first 
brought  into  notice  by  his  faith,  when  he  said  to  the  doughty  giant,  "Thou 
comest  to  me  with  sword  and  spear — I  come  to  thee  in  the  name  of  the  God  of 
the  armies  of  Israel,  whom  thou  hast  defied."  (1  Sam.  xvii.  4>).  Gideon's 
heart  was  given  to  the  God  of  Israel,  and  he  seemed  never  to  doubt  but  that 
He  could  repeat  in  his  own  day  all  the  wonders  of  the  old. time,  were  He  but 
to  decide  so  to  do.  It  was  certainly  a  splendid  illustration  of  faith,  and  one 
most  glorifying  to  God,  for  a  man  to  set  himself  to  the  task,  without  a  ik^'^rmur, 
simply  at  God's  call,  of  advancing  with  a  handful  of  300  men,  to  meet  a  host 
of  warriors  numbering  135,000,  and  hope  firmly  that  he  would  gain  a  complete 
victory  because  the  God  of  Jacob  had  promised  to  give  His  presence.  His  con- 
fidence in  his  God  carried  him  over  all  the  fear  he  might  naturally  cherish  from 
man. 

839 


CHAP.  VI.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 

1X1.  Xiessons  taug>ht  by  tlie  interview. 

1.  True  mourners  for  sju  are  sure  to  meet  with  God  as  a  Comforter  sooner  or 
later.    (Matt.  v.  4;  Isa.  Ivii.  18;  Jer.  xxxi.  18-20.) 

2.  No  case  of  suffering  in  this  world  is  so  extreme,  as  to  have  no  comforts  left. 
Gideon  lost  much  by  the  avalanche  of  ruffianism,  that  rolled  in  upon  him 
from  the  desert,  but  still  he  has  some  wheat  left  to  thresh,  and  still  has 
provision  enough  to  set  before  a  distinguished  stranger.  If  temporal  things 
were  all  swept  away  together,  God  is  still  left,  which  really  means  that  all  is 
yet  safe  (Ps.  xvi.  5,  6  ;  Hab.  iii.  18).  Elijah  was  for  three  years  without  house 
or  home,  without  friends  or  money,  and  yet  God  kept  him.  Many  can  still 
sing,  "  The  Lord  is  my  Shepherd — I  shall  not  want."  Look  at  the  ravtms 
(Matt.  vi.  26).  What  myriads  of  sea-fowl  are  seen  on  the  wing  amid  the 
inhospitable  climate  of  the  Arctic  regions  !  Where  do  they  all  find  food  among 
perpetual  snows,  fields  of  ice,  and  frost-bound  land  ? 

3.  All  practical  difficalties  in  Providence  should  be  carried  to  Grod  for 
solution.  Gideon  would  end  all  liis  soliloquies  by  committing  the  whole  case  to 
God  in  prayer.  "  Hezekiah  spread  out  the  letter  before  the  Lord  "  (2  Kings 
xix.  14).  *•  Judah  gathered  themselves  together  to  ask  help  of  the  Lord" 
(2  Chr.  XX.  4). 

4.  Privations  of  earthly  comforts  are  no  loss  in  the  end  to  God's  true  children. 
But  to  want  spiritual  blessings  is  a  dead  loss,  which  nothing  can  ever  com- 
pensate (1  Tim.  vi.  7,  8 ;  Ps.  xxxvii.  37,  38  ;  Prov.  xiv.  32).  Hence  the  wisdom 
of  Matt.  vi.  33. 

5.  God's  presence  is  the  bej^inning^  of  all  true  joy.  The  Angel- Jehovah's 
presence  was  really  the  presence  of  God,  which  implies  the  presence  of  all  peace, 
all  power  and  protection,  and  all  blessing  of  every  name,  but  only  to  God's 
children.    All  can  sing — 

"  God  is  the  treasure  of  mv  soul, 
The  source  of  lasting  ]oy, 
A  joy  which  want  shall  not  impair, 
Nor  death  itself  destroy." 

(Ps.  iv.  6,  7;  xvi.  11;  xvii.  15;  John  xvii.  24;  xiv.  23,  also  Isa.  xli.  10;  xliii.  2). 

6.  A  true-hearted  Christian  feels  for  the  whole  brotherhood,  as  well  as 
himself     Tiiis  is  the  spirit  of  all  Gideon's  utterances  to  the  angel. 

7.  The  best  of  men  sometimes  grievously  misinterpret  God's  Providences. 

Gideon's  logic  was  just  the  reverse  of  what  it  should  have  been.  Our  tears  often 
blind  our  judgment. 

8.  Correction  for  sin  is  a  sure  sign  that  God  has  not  left  us.  He  wishes  to 
save  us  from  the  precipice.  He  would  destroy  the  cancerous  root  while  it  is  yet 
time.  "  He  that  spareth  the  rod  hateth  the  child,  but  he  that  loveth  him 
chasteneth  him  betimes."  "  You  only  have  I  known,  ....  therefore  will 
I  punish  you  for  all  your  itiiquities"  (Prov.  xiii.  24;  Amos  iii.  2;  also 
Heb.  xii.  6-8).     "  Sins,  not  afflictions,  prove  God's  absence." 

9.  Sometimes  the  best  of  men  pass  through  tlie  world  unknown.    "  He  was 

in  the  world — and  the  world  knew  him  not " — though  it  may  have  benefitted  much 
by  his  prayers,  and  Christian  influence  in  a  small  circle  (John  i.  10,  26).  The 
martyrs  were  unknown — 

**'Till  persecution  dragged  them  into  famo^ 
And  chased  them  up  to  heaven." 

840 


HO  Ml  LET  10  CO  M  HE  NT  A  R  F  ;  JUDGES.  chap.  vi. 


Such  a  man  as  Gideon  would  have  remained  unknown,  had  not  that  God,  who 
seeth  not  as  man  seeth,  brought  him  to  light.  He  was  not  likely  to  come  to  the 
front  himself,  filled  as  he  was  with  humility  ;  and  he  was  little  appreciated  by 
those  around  him. 

10.  Despondency  is  always  unworthy  of  a  true  Christian.  His  true  motto 
is — "  I  can  do  all  things  through  Christ  who  strengtheaeth  me."  **  Is  any  thing 
too  hard  for  the  Lord  ? "  It  is  only  a  weak  faith  that  desponds.  "  AH  the 
promises  of  God  are  yea  and  amen  through  Christ."     What  a  fund  of  strength  ! 

11.  It  is  hig^hly  important  to  see  that  we  have  a  firm  foundation  to  our 
faith.  This  was  really  what  Gideon  wished  to  be  at,  and  his  request  was 
granted. 


CHAPTER  \L-^Verses  24-32. 

THE  REMOVAL  OF  THE  BARRIER  TO  DELIVERANCE, 

Critical  Notes. — One  thing  must  be  scrupulously  gone  about,  ere  a  step  can  be  taken  to 
secure  the  much-needed  emancipation  of  the  land.  The  deliverance  itself  it  would  be  easy  for 
God  to  accomplish,  were  the  banier  that  prevented  it  taken  out  of  the  way.  To  remove  that 
barrier  out  of  the  way,  was,  in  God's  dight,  the  great  thing  to  be  done.  Baal  stood  where 
Jehovah  alone  should  stand.  That  which  brought  all  this  misery  on  Israel,  was  their  preferring 
to  have  other  gods  in  place  of  Jehovah.  The  first  thing  to  be  done,  in  order  to  restore  peace 
and  comfort  to  the  land,  was  to  clear  away  all  other  gods,  and  make  Jehovah  supreme. 
Gideon's  first  duty  then,  as  the  champion  chosen  to  save  Israel,  was  to  deal  a  deadly  blow 
against  BaaU     It  is  at  this  point  where  the  directions  in  this  paragraph  come  in. 

25.  The  same  night,  the  Lord  said  unto  him,  etc.]  said  either  by  vision  or  dream  (Gen.  xx.  3  ;  xv. 
4,  5  ;  xxvi.  24  ;  xxviii.  12-15  ;  Num.  xii.  6  ;  2  Sam,  vii.  4  ;  1  Kings  iii.  5  ;  Job  iv.  13).  It  was  the 
night  following  the  day  of  the  angel's  visit ;  while  Gideon's  heart  was  still  all  aglow  with  many 
mixed  feelings  of  wonder,  love,  and  praise,  and,  while  a  strange  conflict  of  tlioughts  was  passing 
through  his  mind  about  the  very/esponsible  though  noble  position,  which  he  liad  just  been  called 
by  the  Angel  Jehovah  to  occupy — it  was  then  he  was  called  upon  to  take  the  first  step.  Delay, 
in  such  a  case,  would  beget  irresolution.  Besides,  on  general  grounds,  there  was  no  time  to  be 
lost.  Now  that  the  people  had  repented,  and  sent  up  a  cry  all  over  the  land,  it  was  fit  that 
God's  tender  mercy  should  show  itself.  Let  not  a  tear  too  many  be  shed.  Bring  the  axe  and 
cut  down  the  idol.  Let  an  altar  to  Jehovah  rise  in  its  stead.  The  idol  of  the  district — that 
which  stood  within  the  gr  mnds  of  Joash,  and  which  served  as  the  point  of  worship  to  all  the 
Abi-ezrites,  is  taken  as  a  symbol  to  represent  all  the  other  images  of  Baal  throughout  the  land. 

This  was  in  keeping  with  the  fact  that  Gi<leon  was  now  a  public  character,  chosen  of  God  to 
represent  the  whole  people  of  Israel,  so  that  what  was  done  by  him  was  understood  to  be  done 
in  the  name  of  the  whole  people.  When  he  cut  down  the  Asherah,  and  destroyed  the  altar  on 
his  father's  grounds,  much  more  was  done  than  merely  the  demolishing  of  the  idol  worshipped 
by  the  Abi-ezrites.  Being  done  by  him  who  was  now  Divinely  appointed  as  mediator  between 
God  and  all  Israel,  it  must  be  taken  as  a  blow  given  to  the  i  iolatry  of  the  whole  land.  The 
first  step  in  the  work  of  salvation  was  to  abolish  idolatry,  and  what  Gideon,  the  natural  leader, 
now  did  was  to  be  understood  as  striking  the  key-note  to  be  followed  by  the  whole  kingdom. 
His  act  in  erecting  an  altar  to  the  Lord,  in  a  place  different  from  that  chosen  for  permanent 
worship,  and  offering  a  sacrifice  thereon,  though  highly  irregular,  judged  by  the  ordinary  rule 
(Deut.  xii.  13,  14  ;  Num.  xviii.  7  ;  Heb.  v,  4),  was  entirely  justitiable  on  this  occasion,  first, 
because  it  was  a  Divine  command  that  he  was  fulfilling  (v.  25,  26),  and  next,  because  it  was  a 
necessary  part  of  the  special  office  for  which  he  was  chosen — viz.,  to  be  a  saviour  to  Israel.  To 
make  an  atonement  for  the  sins  of  the  people  by  a  sacrifice  of  burnt  offering,  was  indeed  the  most 
essential  part  of  all  that  was  required  of  Gideon  to  do,  as  the  saviour  of  his  people.  In  it  Gideon 
was  virtually  acting  as  the  high  priest  of  Israel. 

Take  thy  father's  young  bullock.]  Rather,  oa;-&w/^oc^  "^D  i.e.,  a  bullock  for  sacrifice  (como 
Hos.  xiv.  3) — "we  will  render  as  bullocks  our  lips,^'  i.e..  our  praises  as  our  sacrifice  (Fauiset) 

E^ven  the  second  bullock  of  seven  years  old]— not  and  the  second  bullock,  for  there  were  not 
fv)o  bullocks.  Mention  is  made  of  what  Gideon  was  to  do  with  one  such,  but  if  there  had  been 
two,  we  should  certainly  have  had  directions  given  as  to  the  other  also.      The  phrase,  the  second 

341 


OHAP.VL  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JUDGES. 


Sullock,  is  three  times  referred  to,  but  no  mention  is  marie  of  any  other  (vers.  25,  26,  28).  Bufc 
why  is  a  bullock  chosen  which  was  seven  years  old,  for  the  animal  was  reckoned  at  its  best  stat^ 
si'hen  it  was  three  years  ?  Tliis  can  scarcely  i  e  thougiit  woniltrful,  wluai  we  reine)nl)er  the 
extreme  difficulty  felt  all  over  the  land  in  getting  aaiiu;ds  for  sacriiice  at  all.  '*  The  Midiaintes* 
left  to  Israel  neither  sheep,  nor  ox,  nor  ass,"  There  was  no  choice.  Besides,  in  the  i<g^.  of  seven 
years,  there  was  a  significant  pointing  to  the  period  of  Israel's  severe  putdshment,  inflicted  fur 
their  flagrant  sin.     The  phrase,  second  bullock  may  indicate  its  age  as  comiiared  with  other*. 

Throw  down  the  altar  of  Baal  which  thy  father  hathl.  This  altar  was  usually  made  of  stone 
tliongh  sometimes  of  wood  or  earth  (2  Kings  xxiii.  15).  Being  massive,  various  materials, 
b  sides  the  axe,  would  be  needed  to  destroy  it  and  the  Asherah.  He  required  to  wrench  the 
altar  of  Baal  out  of  its  grooves,  and  throw  it  down.  His  duty  also  required  him  to  erect  an  altar 
to  Jehovah,  and  for  this  he  dare  not  use  the  polluted  and  broken  fragments  of  Baal's  altar.  He 
must  bring  fresh  stones  and  earth  with  him,  and  as  the  whole  must  be  done  in  one  night,  he 
recjuiied  considerable  help.  Accordingly,  he  took  ten  men  of  his  father's  servants  for  this 
purpose. 

Cut  down  the  grove  that  is  by  it] — wpon  it.  Not  "  grove  "  but  the  Asherah,  or  wooden 
pillar,  the  Canaanite  symbol  of  the  moon-goddess,  representing  nature's  passive  powers,  as  Baal, 
the  sun-god  represents  the  active  powers.  This  pillar  was  placed  in  upright  form  on  the  altar 
of  Baal.  In  Deut.  xvi.  21,  it  is  said  to  be  "planted"  on  it  (l?^n)  covered  with  all  manner  of 
symbols. 

26.  Upon  the  top  of  this  rock] — the  top  of  a  fortification,  or  fortress  built  as  a  defence  against 
the  Midianites.  It  would  be  near  to  where  the  altar  of  Baal  had  stood — the  highest  available 
spot  in  the  district,  to  make  it  as  conspicuous  as  possible,  and  to  show  that  it  must  be  held 
superi'-r  to  all  other  things  (Hence  Isa.  ii.  1,  2).  This  was  rec'iconed  to  be  honouring  to  Jehovah. 
S'  .me  think  it  was  on  the  top  of  the  hill,  the  highest  point  at  hand,  others  that  it  was  the  castle, 
or  citadel  of  Ophrah.     Baal's  altar  must  first  be  cast  down,  then  the  altar  to  Jehovah  reared. 

In  the  ordered  placed  This  is  an  expression  of  which  many  interpretations  have  been  given 
(nDll^DIl).  The  best,  as  it  appears  to  us,  is  that  given  by  Keil,  "  with  the  preparation,"  i.e., 
which  is  necessary  for  presenting  the  sacrifice.  The  specific  idea  is,  the  orderly  preparation  of 
every  thing  about  the  sacrifice,  a  circumstance  to  which  Grod  Himself,  in  all  offerings,  attached  the 
greatest  importance.  We  might  indeed  translate  the  sentence  thus  :  —  "Build  an  altar  unto  the 
Lord  .  .  .  putting  everything  in  due  order,"  etc.  Thus  did  Abraham  (G-en.  xxii.  9),  Thus 
too  did  Elijah  (1  Kings  xviii.  33).  The  word  tflV  is  often  used  to  express  the  idea  of  setting 
sacred  things  in  order,  connected  with  the  worship  of  God  (Ex.  xxxix.  37  ;  Lev.  i.  7 ; 
xxiv.  3,  4,  6).  But  this  orderly  preparation  for  the  sacrifice  did  not  refer  to  his  using  the 
materials  got  from  the  breaking  down  of  Baal's  altar,  for  building  up  the  altar  of  Jehovah. 
[Speaker's  Com.'\  The  case  quoted  in  confirmation  of  this  view  is  not  in  point,  viz.  :  1  Kings 
XV.  22,  for  in  that  transaction  there  was  nothing  sacred,  whereas  the  sacred  character  of  the 
erection  here  was  the  all-important  point.  The  materials  of  Baal's  altar  must  be  held  to  be 
polluted  ;  Gideon  therefore  must  build  with  new  materials  wherever  he  can  find  them.  The 
wood  of  the  Asherah,  however,  might  be  used  as  fuel  for  the  sacrifice,  implying  that  it  would  be 
consumed.     Hence — 

With  the  wood  of  the  grove  (Asherah)  which  thou  shalt  cut  down],  i.e.,  the  pieces  or  blocks 
of  wood  got  from  cutting  down  the  Asherah.  That  such  a  command  as  this  should  have  been 
given  at  all,  was  entirely  owing  to  the  exceptional  circumstances  of  the  national  history,  which 
required  a  provisional  arrangement  to  meet  the  emergency.  A  case  very  similar  occurred  in 
Elijah's  days  (1  Kings  xviii.  18-41). 

27.  Took  ten  men.]  The  number  required  to  form  a  Church,  or  to  perform  publicly  any 
religious  service  i.e.,  in  name  of  the  Church.  Every  part  of  altar  service  required  to  be  gone 
through  in  a  very  methodical  manner.  Being  now  the  only  son  left  in  the  family,  and  being 
high  in  his  father's  esteem,  as  well  as  his  affection,  he  had  probably  delegated  to  liini  such  a 
measure  of  authority  over  the  servants,  as  would  secure  their  obedience  to  his  orders  on  this 
occasion.  His  own  excellent  qualities  of  character,  must  also  have  gained  for  him  an  ascendency 
over  several  of  the  domestics,  as  David  did  at  the  court  of  Saul  (1  Sam.  xviii.  14-16).  But 
Gideon,  when  calling  the  domestics  to  such  a  work,  must  also  have  brought  forward  the  far 
more  powerful  consideration,  that  an  angel  had  appeared  to  him,  and  given  him  a  commi'^sion  to 
deliver  Israel  from  the  awful  scourge  that  desolated  the  land,  and  that  the  removal  of  Baal's 
altar  was  a  necessary  preliminary  to  anything  being  done.  Yet  with  all  these  arguments  to  en- 
courage them,  it  speaks  well  for  these  ten  men,  that  they  had  the  boldness  to  do  as  Gideon 
directed  them,  even  if  we  add  the  fact,  that  he  would  doubtless  assure  them,  that  he  would  take 
all  the  responsibility  of  the  iconoclastic  deed  on  hjmself. 

342 


EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:   JUDGES,  chap.  VL 


He  feared  his  father's  household,  and  the  men  df  the  city.]  This  shows  what  the  atmosphere 
of  Joash's  housa  was,  strongly  savouring  of  idolatry.  The  household  must  have  been  large,  for 
after  deducting  the  ten  men,  Gideon  still  "  feared  his  father's  household."  We  may  suppose  the 
ten  men  to  be  a  fractional  part  of  the  entire  number,  and  that,  with  the  exception  of  th  it  frac- 
tional part,  the  entire  number  were  "  wholly  given  to  idolatry,"  otherwise,  why  should  lie  fear 
them  ?  "The  men  of  the  city,"  were  proba1%  tlie  old  Canaanites  who  still  lingered  in  the  town- 
ships of  Manasseh,  and  who  were  naturally  special  patrons  of  Baal  worship  (ch.  ix.  28). 

He  did  it  by  night]— not  that  he  was  afraid  of  doing  the  work  itself,  for  he  knew  well  that 
whether  done  by  day  or  night,  it  was  sure  to  be  known  that  he  did  it  ;  but  he  feared  the  tumult 
that  would  be  raised  about  the  doing  of  it,  if  he  did  it  in  daylight,  with  all  eyes  upon  him.  He 
felt  that  there  must  be  an  uprising  against  his  doing  it  at  all. 

28.  And  the  grove  was  cut  down  that  washy  it]— upon  it.  The  Asherah  (wooden  pillar)  was 
cut  down.  The  second  bullock  was  offered  on  the  altar  that  was  built  (to  Jehovah).]  The  wood 
of  the  Asherah  had  been  used  for  the  burnt-ofifering,  and  traces  were  still  remaining.  The  altar 
of  Jehovah  then,  must  have  been  built  near  the  site  of  the  altar  of  Baal. 

29.  They  said  Gideon,  the  son  of  Joash,  hath  done  this  thing.]  Informers  are  always  forth- 
coming, and  Grideon  was  a  man  so  pronounced  for  Jehovah,  that  he  could  not  be  hid.  From  his 
past  proclivities,  many  would  suspect  him.  It  is  a  noble  thing  for  a  man  so  to  live  that  he  shall 
be  suspected  by  his  fellows,  of  doing  some  great  thing  for  the  glory  of  the  Eternal  God.  Some 
also  of  the  ten  men  would  inform  others,  that  it  was  Gideon,  to  save  themselves. 

30.  Bring  out  thy  son  that  he  may  die.]  It  is  not  certain  whether  Joash  was  the  owner  of  the 
altar  of  Baal,  or  merely  its  custodier,  in  name  of  the  district  over  which  he  ruled.  Some  think 
the  former  from  the  expression  in  ver.  25— "the  altar  of  Baal  which  thy  father  hath."  If  so,  it 
sliows  the  extreme  intolerance  of  the  Baal  party.  But  the  fact  that  such  an  outcry  should  be 
raised  at  all  in  an  Israelitish  city,  shows  into  what  a  deplorable  stupor  the  national  conscience 
had  sunk,  when  the  rankest  possible  insult  should  be  publicly  offered  to  Jehovah's  name,  without 
a  single  voice  being  raised  to  frown  it  down.  They  ask  a  father  to  take  the  life  of  his  son,  because 
that  son  had  dared  to  stand  up  for  Jehovah's  interest,  and  relegate  Baal  to  oblivion  in  Jehovah's 
land  ! 

31.  Joash  said  to  all  that  stood  against  him.]  vbl?  before  him,  i.e.,  as  chief  magistrate. 
Happily,  he  the  father  himself  was  now  fairly  aroused,  when  he  saw  that  the  life  of  he  only  sou 
left  to  him  was  in  danger.  It  is  probable,  from  all  the  circumstances,  that,  before  this,  he  had 
had  serious  doubts  in  his  own  mind,  as  to  the  propriety  of  giving  any  farther  support  to  idol 
worship,  when  he  saw  the  sad  results  in  the  destruction  of  his  country.  He  may  possibly  indeed 
have  had  secret  desires  to  see  a  general  return  of  the  public  mind  to  the  worship  of  Jehovah,  and 
now  seizes  the  present  occasion  to  speak  out  his  mind.  All  this  could  be  greatly  strengthened, 
by  the  detail  which  his  son  would  give  him  of  his  wonderful  interview  with  the  angel,  and  the 
Divine  command  to  throw  down  the  altar  of  Baal.  If  he  had  got  this  information  beforehand, 
doubtless  he  must  have  thought  very  maturely  over  the  question,  what  was  the  best  answer  to 
give  the  idolaters,  when  his  son  should  be  arraigned  before  him  in  public.  God  helped  him  with 
the  answer  which  he  gave.     It  was  most  admirable.     It  was  an  unanswerable  answer. 

"What !  "  he  says,  rising  to  the  full  height  of  his  position  as  magistrate,  "  will  ye  plead  for 
Baal  ? — ye,  and  not  Baal  himself  ?  Do  i/e  presume  to  come  forward  to  speak  on  his  behalf,  as  if 
h/j  could  not  speak  for  himself  ?  He  who  dares  to  insinuate  that  Baal  cannot  help  himself,  is 
putting  an  indelible  stigma  on  his  name,  and  deserves  to  die.  He  is  the  man  who  onght  to  be 
put  to  death,  and  that  without  delay,  while  it  is  yet  morning.  If  Baal  be  really  a  god,  surely  he 
can  defend  himself,  and  now  let  him  do  it,  since  one  man  has  cast  down  his  altar."  This  is  really 
the  spirit  of  the  few  but  energetic  words  of  the  very  capable  ruler  of  Ophrah.  The  clamour 
was  hushed  in  a  moment.  It  was  of  God  that  this  reply  was  given  ;  so  He  threw  His  shield 
around  the  man  of  His  choice.  Yet  we  may  also  say,  Joash  was  the  right  man  in  the  right 
place.     "  A  word  spoken  in  season,  how  good  is  it  1  " 

Not  a  few  Commentators  {Keil,  Cassel,  Edersheim,  Fausset,  and  others)  would  put  a  full  stop 
at  the  word  '^  death,"  and  read  what  follows  thus,  "  till  (next)  morning  let  Baal,  if  he  be  a  god, 
plead  for  himself,  for  now  surely  there  is  need  for  it,  since  one  has  cast  down  his  altar."  The 
A.  V.  seems  more  simple  and  natural— "he  who  (thinks  Baal  cannot  plead  for  himself,  and 
therefore)  stands  up  to  plead  for  him,  (is  doing  him  an  insult,  and)  ought  to  be  put  to  death  this 
very  morning.     If  he  be  a  god,  let  him  plead  for  himself,  since  one  has  overturned  his  altar." 

32.  Galled  him  Jerubhaal.]  Let  Baal  fight  with  him,  or  the  man  who  defies  Baal  to  fight  wit'i 
bim,  with  impunity  ;  as  David  defied  the  Philistine.  Var-^'-ions  of  the  name  afterwards  occur 
fts  Jeruhbesheth  (2  Sam.  xi.  21),  in  which  Besheth  or  Bosheth  ^shame)  is  a  nickname  of  Baal. 
This  variation  ako  occurs  in  Ishbosheth  (2  Sam.  ii.  8),  and  in  J?  V)aal  (1  Chron.  viii.  33  ;  ix.  39), 

343 


CHAP.  VI.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    JUDGES. 


MAIN  ROM ILETICS.— Verses  25-32. 

X.  All  grenuine  obedience  is  well  pleasing*  to  G-od. 

This  is  the  purport  of  the  present  paragraph.  It  speaks  of  the  first  test  to  which 
Gideon's  obedience  was  put,  and  how  he  stood  it.  The  obedience  which  Godrequires 
of  all  His  servants  is,  that  His  command  alone  be  taken  as  sufficient  reason  for  obe- 
dience, apart  from  any  other  motive,  and  that  it  be  regarded  as  sufficient  to  overrule 
all  other  considerations.  If  a  host  of  difficulties  and  objections  should  stand  in 
the  way,  the  obedient  servant  has  but  one  simple  question  to  ask,  Does  my  God 
require  it? — if  so,  he  has  no  other  thonght  but  to  obey.  This  is  what  may  be 
called  pure  obedience,  and  is  synonymous  with  the  description  so  often  given  in 
Scripture,  of  "  the  man  who  fears  tlie  Lord."  The  highest  expressions  of  the 
Divine  regard  are  made  to  such  a  spirit  of  obedience,  as  being  most  glorifying 
to  God,  and  showing  that  the  creature  is  nearing  the  true  pivot  of  his  being, 
which  is  that  of  instinctive  obedience  to  the  will  of  his  Creator,  "  He  that 
doeth  the  will  of  my  Father,  the  same  is  my  brother,  and  sister  and  mother." 
The  whole  Book  of  Deuteronomy  is  one  continued  enforcement  of  the  dnty  of 
reverential  obedience  to  the  commandments,  statutes,  and  judgments  of  Israel's 
covenant  God.  The  example  of  obedience  afforded  in  Gideon's  case  was  most 
beautiful,  on  whatever  side  we  look  at  it. 

1.  It  was  prompt.  There  was  no  hesitation.  The  command  of  his  God 
being  given,  he  has  no  other  thought  than  to  obey.  That  command  alone  rules 
him.  "  Speak,  Lord,  thy  servan.t  heareth  "  was  his  motto.  He  has  full  trust  in 
his  God  without  inquiring  whether  there  was  a  rational  pro-pect  of  carrying 
through  the  work.  Thus  did  Abraham.  The  command  being  given,  "he  rose 
up  early  in  the  morning,  saddled  his  ass.  .  .  and  went  to  the  place  of  which 
God  had  told  him"  (Gen.  xxii.  3;  xvii.  23;  xxi.  14).  So  did  David  ;  "1  made 
haste,  and  delayed  not  to  keep  God's  commandments"  (Ps.  cxix.  60).  So  did 
Paul ;  "  When  it  pleased  God  to  reveal  His  son  in  me,  immediately  I  conferred 
not  with  flesh  and  blood  "  (Gal.  i.  15,  16).  (Matt.  iv.  20,  22  ;  ix.  9  ;  Luke 
xix.  5,  6  ;  John  i.  48,  49). 

2.  It  was  done  under  great  difficulties.  He  had  no  sympathy  from  any 
around  him.  His  very  father,  so  loving  in  other  matters,  he  believed,  in  this 
case,  would  only  give  his  frowns,  or,  at  the  very  best,  must  witlihold  his  good 
wishes,  being  virtually  the  priest  of  Baal  himself.  Even  though  Gideon  might 
acquaint  him  with  the  Divine  commission,  it  could  only  lead  the  father  to  try 
his  best  to  save  his  son,  but  not  to  assist  him  in  the  work.  The  ten  men  whom 
he  employed  as  assistants  would,  doul-tlcss,  also  raise  many  objections,  and  need 
strong  arguments  to  induce  them  to  give  their  aid,  and  the  numerous  other 
domestics,  Gideon  felt  he  must  also  regard  as  strongly  opposed  to  the  very  idea 
of  offering  such  an  insult  to  the  deity  that  had  for  so  many  years  been  wor- 
shipped in  the  district.  There  was  no  sympathy  at  home  with  the  duty  he  had 
on  hand,  and  among  the  population  outside  there  was  only  an  unbroken  stream 
of  opposition.  Gideon's  obedience  was  boldly  done,  for  it  was  done  in  a  strongly 
idolatrous  centre,  without  a  single  friend  to  stand  by  him  in  the  work.  Yet 
he  shows  no  faltering,  or  fear  of  njan.  His  act  was  like  that  of  Luther  when 
lie  nailed  the  Theses  to  the  doors  of  the  Cathedral  at  Wittemberg,  or,  on  that 
other  occasion,  when  he  burned  the  Papal  Bull  in  the  midst  of  a  people  who 
had  been  under  the  influence  of  Popery  for  many  generations. 

There  are  many  formidable  difficulties  ever  occurring  in  the  way  of  religious 

duty  in  daily  life — difficulties  so  great  that  they  seem  to  render  the  fulfilment 

of  the  duty  an  impossibility.     Yet  all  may  be  conquered  by  a  strong  faith  or 

an  ardent  h)ve.      *'  Who  shall  roll  us  away  the  stone  from  the  door  of  the 

344 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    JUDGES,  chap,  vl 


sepulchre  ?  "  (Mark  xvi.  13).     Yet  an  ardent  love  in  Mary's  case  saw  no  such 

difficulty,  but,  on  the  contrary,  thought  that  she,  a  feeble  woman,  couM  remove 
the  body  itself  if  she  only  knew  where  to  find  it  (John  xx.  15).  "  Who  art 
thou,  oh,  great  mountain  before  Zerubbabel,  thou  shalt  become  a  plain  ?  " 

3  It  was  done  at  the  risk  of  life.  Gideon  understood  the  temper  of  his  people 
and  the  temper  of  the  times.  Notwithstanding  tlieir  terrible  calamities,  he 
knew  that  they  were  yet  in^  the  mass  of  them,  leavened  with  the  idolatrous 
spirit,  and  that  to  tamper  with  tlieir  God  was  to  commit,  in  their  eyes,  a  capital 
crime.  It  was  an  unpardonable  offence,  and  all  the  religious  frenzy  of  the 
district  would  be  aroused  to  demand  his  execution.  On  this  he  calculated, 
and  yet  he  quailed  not.  The  fear  of  God  in  him  was  strong  enough  to  overrule 
all  the  fear  of  man.  This  pass  of  mental  difficulties  which  he  had  to  go  through 
greatly  heightens  our  admiration  of  his  heroic  resolution.  He  was  willing 
even  to  lose  his  life  for  the  sake  of  his  duty  to  his  God  (John  xii.  25  ;  Matt, 
xvi.  25).  His  fidelity  to  his  God  could  stand  the  severest  test  (Luke  xiv.  26). 
All  that  he  counted  dear  in  life,  including  the  love  of  life  itself,  he  was  willing 
to  sacrifice,  but  he  could  not  disobey  his  God. 

4.  It  was  done  without  a  murmur.  We  hear  of  no  complaints  about  the 
severity  of  the  test.  Even  Moses  complained  in  similar  circumstances  (Ex.  iv. 
1,  10,  13).  Barak  raised  objections  (ch.  iv.  8).  But  not  a  murmer  comes  from 
the  lips  of  Gideon,  when  called  to  do  that  which  was  sure  to  endanger  life.  He 
asks  no  modification  of  the  command.  It  is  all  right  when  his  God  requires  it. 
Duty  is  his  ;  to  determine  results  is  God's.  It  was  an  unquestioning  obedience. 
Doubtless  he  saw  the  necessity  of  it,  for  sin  must  be  put  away  ere  deliverance 
could  come,  and  Baal,  he  well  knew,  was  the  root  of  the  evil.  But  manifestly 
it  was  not  his  own  sense  of  the  fulness  of  what  should  be  done  that  was  his 
guiding  motive  throughout  this  whole  transaction.  From  beginning  to  end  he 
regarded  the  whole  proceeding  as  coming  from  the  Lord,  and  therefore  to  His 
instructions  on  every  point  implicitly  he  gave  heed.  Oh,  for  more  of  this  high- 
toned  confidence  in  God,  as  our  own  God,  which  lifts  the  soul  far  above  both 
the  smiles  and  the  frowns  of  a  world  that  knows  us  notl 

XZ.  Gideon's  support  In  his  obedienoe. 

He  might,  at  first  sight,  have  said,  *'  All  things  are  against  mo."  Yet,  on 
reflection,  he  might  have  added,  "  they  that  are  with  me  are  more  than  they 
that  are  against  me."    For — 

1.  He  had  a  good  conscience.  He  was  sure  that  God  had  spoken  to  him 
and,  therefore,  that  what  he  was  about,  was  fulfilling  a  command  he  had  received 
from  God.  He  realised  the  fact,  that  this  was  tlie  first  and  necessary  step  of  a 
plan  of  action,  which  God  had  marked  out  for  him  to  do.  He  felt  that  he  was 
in  the  service  of  God  in  the  whole  matter,  and  that  all  the  steps  to  be  taken 
were  marked  out  by  God,  and  were  not  schemes  of  his  own  devising.  Thus  he 
had  all  that  inward  strength  which  a  good  conscience  always  gives.  Though,  in 
his  father's  house,  he  had  no  sympathy,  in  that  home  of  homes,  the  innermost 
home  of  his  own  heart,  all  was  with  him  ;  in  the  profoundest  convictions  which 
he  cherished  in  the  sanctuary  of  his  breast,  every  feeling  within  was  in  full 
support  of  the  action  without.  The  consciousness  of  righteousness  was  "  the 
girdle  of  his  loins."  When  he  broke  down  the  altar  of  Baal,  he  felt  as  if  at 
Mahaiiaim,  and  that  two  companies  of  the  angels  of  God,  in  two  crescents, 
were  acting  as  his  shield.  **  His  heart  was  established,  and  he  was  not  afraid  ; 
he  was  not  greatly  moved"  (Ps.  cxii.  6,  8  ;  Ixii.  5-7  ;  Ivii.  1).  "  Who  is  he 
that  will  harm  you,  if  ye  be  followers  of  that  which  is  good"  (I  Peter  iiL  13). 
345 


OHAP.VL  HOMlLETlL  GOMMENTARY :  JUDGES. 


2.  He  had  the  assurance  of  the  Divine  presence-  It  was  God's  work  he  was 
doing,  and  not  his  own.  That  alone  was  enough  to  foster  the  belief  tliab  he 
would  have  the  Divine  shield  thrown  over  him.  For  God  is  a  master  who 
*'  sends  none  a  warfare  on  their  own  charges."  His  language  always  is,  "  I  will 
be  with  thee."  It  was  so  now.  Gideon  was  expressly  assured  that  the  angel 
Jehovah  had  not  only  sent  him  (oh.  vi.  14),  but  also  that  He  would  Himself  be 
with  him  (v.  16).  More  than  that  under  no  circumstances  could  be  needed. 
For  what  were  all  the  men  of  Abi-ezer,  or  all  the  hordes  of  the  ruthless  invaders, 
in  comparison  of  the  mighty  God  of  Jacob?  Gideon  felt  like  David — "The 
Lord  is  on  my  side  ;  I  will  not  fear  what  man  can  do  unto  me.  Though  the 
people  compass  me  about  as  bees,  they  shall  be  quenched  as  the  fire  of  thorns, 
for  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  I  will  destroy  them."  "  If  God  be  for  us,  who  can 
be  against  us  ?"  It  is  because  we  do  not  realise  how  much  is  included  in  that 
— "  I  wiU  be  with  thee  " — ^that  we  get  fainthearted  and  irresolute,  in  the  day 
of  trial.  There  is  a  great  art  in  knowing  how,  when  weak  in  ourselves,  to 
become  **  strong  in  the  Lord,  and  in  the  power  of  His  might." 

3.  He  was  sustained  by  the  assurance  of  success  in  his  great  enterprise.  He 
felt  it  was  no  doubtful  project  in  which  he  was  engaged,  when  the  hand  of  God 
was  at  the  helm.  It  was  a  scheme  in  which  God's  own  glory  was  concerned,  and 
now  that  he  was  raised  up  out  of  His  place,  Gideon  felt  convinced  that  having 
begun  the  work.  He  could  accomplish  it  to  the  end.  And  so  glorious  a  con- 
summation it  would  be,  to  see  Israel  entirely  free  from  the  heavy  incubus,  that 
had  crushed  all  the  energy  out  of  the  nation  these  seven  years,  that  this  emi- 
nently successful  God-fearing  and  patriotic  man  was  willing  to  sacrifice  all  his 
personal  feelings  and  interests  in  order  to  its  attainment.  He  had  no  doubtbegun 
his  duties  by  arming  himself  with  earnest  prayer,  that  God  would  no  longer 
"deliver  the  soul  of  His  turtle-dove  unto  the  multitude  of  the  wicked — that  He 
would  remember  the  congregation  He  had  purchased  of  old — tiiat  He  would 
not  remember  against  them  past  iniquities,  for  they  were  brought  very  low — that 
He  would  turn  again  their  captivity  as  streams  in  the  south — that  the  Lord 
would  comfort  Zion — that  He  would  comfort  all  her  waste  places,  making  her 
wilderness  like  Eden,  and  her  desert  like  the  garden  of  the  Lord." 

4.  He  had  had  long  gathering  thoughts  of  revenge  against  Baal.  Many  strong 
purposes  have  their  roots  deep  in  the  soil  of  past  experiences.  Gideon  was  one 
of  those  who  had  discerned  where  the  true  source  of  all  Israel's  misery  lay.  And 
long  had  he  mused  how  the  idols  could  be  abolished.  Those  musings  would  lead 
to  a  deep  purpose  of  revenge  against  Baal,  so  soon  as  an  opportunity  occurred. 
It  was  the  thought  of  many  years,  matured  and  strengthened  by  the  ever  fresh 
calamities  which  occurred  at  every  new  visit  of  the  enemy.  When  at  length  the 
call  was  made  in  Providence,  *'  Who  is  the  man  that  shall  fight  again&t  Baal,  and 
destroy  his  power  throughout  Israel  ? "  Gideon  replied  in  his  heart—  '*  Here  am 
I,  send  me  ! "  God  knew  the  state  of  Gideon's  heart,  and  therefore  selected  him 
as  a  sort  of  agent  for  doing  His  work. 


The  General  Lessons  Taught. 

1.  Religious  duty  ought  to  begin  at  home.  When  Christ  taught  His  dis- 
ciples where  to  commence  their  great  work  of  preaching  the  gospel,  He  said 
**  Begin  at  Jerusalem."  Begin  where  you  are — at  home.  All  souls  are  precious 
alike.  Therefore  begin  at  the  point  nearest  you.  This,  at  least,  was  one  reason 
for  doing  so.  Abraham  began  at  home,  and  as  a  matter  of  fact  almost  every 
domestic  he  had,  of  whom  we  hear  any  account  was  a  fearer  of  his  God 
(Gen.  xviii.  19).  Jacob  when  about  to  draw  closer  to  God,  and  to  have  new 
manifestations  of  the  Divine  love,  begins  with  making  a  strict  religious  reforma- 
340 


ROMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   JUDGES,  chap.  vi. 


tion  in  liis  own  houseliold.  He  required,  that  all  his  household  should  "put 
away  the  strange  gods  that  were  amono-  them  "  (Gen.  xxxv.  2,  3).  And  now 
Gideon  is  required  to  begin  at  his  father's  house  the  important  duty,  of  cleansing 
their  hands  and  purifying  their  hearts.  The  church- office-bearer  is  required, 
before  entering  on  his  duties  in  superintending  the  spiritual  well-being  of  the 
church,  to  "  rule  well  his  own  house,  having  his  children  in  subjection  with  all 
gravity ;  for  if  a  man  know  not  how  to  rule  his  own  house,  how  shall  he  take 
care  of  the  church  of  God  ? "  (1  'J'im.  iii.  4,  5). 

2.  Obstacles  to  religious  duty  are  sometimes  found  amid  the  tenderest 
relations  of  life.  It  is  singular  that  Gideon  sliould  have  had  so  little  sympathy, 
and  have  been  even  exposed  to  so  much  danger,  in  his  own  father's  house,  for 
doing  his  duty  to  his  God.  Tlmt  father  was  the  most  influential  man  in  the 
district,  and  Gideon  was  now  his  only  son.  That  son  had  a  singular  combination 
of  good  qualities  of  character,  fit  to  call  forth  the  respect  and  even  the  love  of 
all  tlie  domestics.  Moreover,  the  work  which  he  was  now  doing  was  given  him 
by  the  God  of  Israel  to  do,  and  it  was  notorious  to  all  who  had  eyes  to  read  the 
signs  of  the  times,  that  the  overwhelming  distresses  under  which  the  land 
groaned,  were  owing  to  the  apostasy  of  the  people  from  the  God,  whom  they 
were  so  deeply  pledged  to  love  and  serve.  Yet  it  required  the  greatest 
heroism  on  Gideon's  part  to  fulfil  an  obviously  necessary  duty,  and  one  which 
was  divinely  commanded,  having  to  run  the  greatest  risk  of  losing  his  life.  So 
true  is  it,  that  for  the  sake  of  fidelity  to  religious  principle,  "  a  man's  foes  will 
sometimes  be  those  of  his  own  household." 

Even  Abraham  had  to  contend  with  an  idolatrous  opposition  in  his  father* s 
house,  before  lie  left  the  paternal  home.  His  father  and  brothers,  with  probably 
the  whole  family  circle,  at  first  "  served  other  gods."  This  must  have  led  to 
family  differences,  if,  as  we  must  suppose,  Abraham  was  even  then  a  devoted 
worshipper  of  the  true  God.  At  length  the  family  circle  broke  up,  God  directing 
Abraham  to  leave  his  earthly  friends,  however  dear,  and  promisingf,  probably  as 
a  reward  for  his  fidelity  in  being  found  "  faithful  among  the  faithless,"  to  bless 
him  and  make  of  him  a  great  nation.  With  Abraham  there  went  Sarai  his 
wife,  his  father  Terah,  and  his  nephew  Lot.  The  rest  appear  to  have  remained 
where  they  were,  and  we  hear  no  more  of  them  (Josh.  xxiv.  2,  3  ;  Gen.  xi.  27-32; 
xii.  1-3).  Jacob  had  much  difficulty  in  performing  his  duties  to  his  God  while 
living  in  the  same  family  circle  with  an  ungodly  brother,  thou  oh  it  must 
not  be  overlooked,  that  he  himself  greatly  increased  the  diffi(;ulty  by 
some  grievous  faults  of  his  own  (Gen.  xxvii).  The  same  difficulty 
followed  him  to  Padan-aram,  in  the  house  of  the  old  miser,  where  he 
passed  more  than  twenty  years  (Gen.  xxxi.).  We  have  a  similar  exanaple  in  the 
case  of  Korah,  Dathan  and  Abiram,  who,  as  members  of  the  Levitical*  tribe, 
ought  to  have  succoured  Moses  and  Aaron  in  every  possible  way,  in  the  dis- 
charge of  their  onerous  sanctuary  and  other  duties,  and  yet  raised  a  determined 
opposition  to  them,  while  only  fulfilling  the  trust  whicii  God  had  committed  to 
them  (Num.  xvi).  David  was  often  in  sucii  difficulties.  (1  Sanj.  xvii.  28,  29  ; 
Ps.  xli.  9  ;  1  Sam.  xxx.  3-6  ;  2  Sam.  xvi.  11)  ;  Job  also  (Job.  xix.  13-19)  ; 
and  Jeremiah  (Jer.  xii.  6  ;  xx.  10,  11)  ;  in  the  days  of  Micah  there  was  much  of 
it  (Micali  vii.  6)  ;  and  the  Master  Himself  leads  His  disciples  to  expect  it 
(Matt.  X.  21,  22,  34-37  ;  Luke  xii.  49,  51-53). 

3.  Without  the  shedding  of  blood  there  is  no  remission  of  sins.  This  truth 
is  taught  broadly  in  that  Epistle,  which  professes  to  interpret  the  Divine  noean- 
ing  of  the  whole  sacrificial  system  (Heb.  ix.  22).     We  find  the  great  truth  illus- 

*  Properly  speaking,  Korah  only  belonged  to  the  tribe  of  Levi,  while  Dathan  and  Abiram 
were  of  the  tribe  of  Reuben.  But  Korah  manifestly  took  the  lead  in  the  movement,  so  that  the 
remarks  made  above  are  substantially  correct. 

347 


CHAP.  VI.  HOMILBTW  COMMENTARY:    JUDGES, 


trated  in  Abel's  riays,  who  brought  an  animal  for  sacrifice  as  his  offering  to  God, 
in  contrast  to  Cain's  offering,  which  was  merely  of  the  fruit  of  the  ground,  and 
therefore  showed  no  thought  of  a  propitiation  for  his  sins  (Gen.  iv.  3-5).  Noah 
offered  sacrifices  of  blood  on  his  altar,  "  and  the  Lord  smelled  a  sweet  savour," 
(Gon.  viii.  20,  21).  Abram  reared  the  altar  regularly,  wherever  he  went  (Gen. 
xii.  8  ;  xiii.  4;  do.  18,  etc.).  Also  Jacob  did  the  same  (Gen.  xxxi  54  ;  xxxv. 
3).  Moses  by  Gt'd's  direction  laid  down  the  whole  system  of  sacrifice,  which 
was  to  be  sacredly  observed  by  all  God's  people  down  through  their  history,  till 
the  coming  of  the  true  Lamb  of  God,  who  was  for  ever  to  put  away  sin  by  the 
sacrifice  of  Himself. 

A  s  part  of  this  system,  we  here  find  Gideon,  by  God's  special  direction,  build- 
ing an  altar  to  God,  and  on  it,  shedding  blood,  as  a  symbol  of  that  which  was 
needed  to  atone  for  the  people's  sins.  Only  thus  could'God  righteously  pardon 
sin.  Sin  forfeits  the  life  of  the  sinner  (Rom.  vi.  23  ;  Gen.  ii.  17  ;  Ezek.  xviii. 
4,  20).  But  the  blood  is  the  life  ;  therefore  to  shed  the  blood  is  to  give  to  sin 
its  wagas.  This  must  be  done  because  it  is  God's  law.  It  is  both  just  and  true 
— it  preserves  God's  character  as  a  God  of  truth.  Hence  the  sinner  must  die, 
or  a  suitable  substitute  be  found  for  him  (Rom.  iii.  25,  26  ;  2  Cor.  v.  21 ;  Rom. 
viii.  3,  4  ;  Eph.  v.  2  ;  Col.  i.  20  ;  Heb.  passim). 

4.  God  greatly  honours  faithfulness  in  a  declining  time.  Fidelity  to  God's 
name  and  cause,  is  always  a  spectacle  well  pleasing  unto  God.  But  when  it  takes 
the  form  of  stedfast  endurance  under  sharp  sufferings,  in  the  face  of  stern 
opposition,  without  any  friendly  help,  and  at  serious  personal  loss,  it  rises  a 
hundredfold  higher  in  the  estimation  of  Him  toward  whom  it  is  shown.  And  a 
hundredfold  greater  will  be  the  reward  (Matt.  xix.  27-29).  The  Master  will  see 
to  it,  that  no  servant  be  a  loser  for  his  fidelity  to  Hini,  Hence  tlie  greatness  of 
the  reward  (Matt.  vii.  12).  The  reward  is  an  hundredfold  even  in  this  life 
(Mark  x.  30).  And  in  Paul's  history  we  see  it  exemplified  iu  the  extraordinary 
outpouring  of  the  gracious  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  when  under  the  greatest 
sufferings  connected  with  the  carrying  on  of  his  great  work  (Act  xiii.  52  ;  xviii. 
9,  20  ;  xxi.  13  ;  2  Cor.  i.  4,  5  ;  ii.  14). 

Thus  it  was  with  Gideon,  while  passing  through  his  difficult  work,  doing  it 
so  well,  and  doing  it  without  a  murmur,  though  Satan  stirred  up  opposition  to 
him  on  all  hands.  He  whom  he  served  looked  on  with  supreme  satisfaction, 
gave  him  all  needed  strength  to  persevere  till  it  was  accomplished,  gave  him 
complete  success  in  the  result,  and  prepared  for  him  a  great  reward  in  the  future. 
For,  conspicuous  as  a  star  of  the  first  magnitude,  shines  the  name  of  Gideon,  in 
the  Orion  nebula  of  the  New  Testament  heavens  (Heb.  xi.  32).  Gideon,  by  his 
fidelity,  was  now  making  history,  one  of  the  brightest  pages,  where  there  are  so 
many  bright.  He  was  the  iron  cable  that  would  not  break,  but  kept  sure  and 
stedfast,  when  so  many  others  were  snapping  asunder  at  the  pitching  and  heeling 
of  the  vessel,  as  the  waves  were  carrying  it  right  on  the  rocks.  Such  a  man 
deserves  to  be  esteemed  through  all  time  ;  and  there  never,  we  believe,  will  come 
a  time,  even  in  the  bright  ages  of  New  Testament  history,  when  such  a  man 
need  be  ashamed  to  show  his  face.  Already  he  has  a  place  among  the  fixed 
stars  of  the  Church's  sky.  And  this  motto  may  be  written  under  his  name  : — 
"Blessed  is  the  man  that  endureth  trial,  for  when  he  is  tried  he  shall  receive 
the  crown  of  life,  which  the  Lord  hath  promised  to  them  that  love  Him" 
(James  i.  12). 

5.  God  has  all  hearts  in  His  hand,  an:l  all  events  at  His  disposal.      How- 
ever hopeless  the  web  of  difficulties  with  which  God's  servant  in  this  matter  was 
surrounded,  the  great  Ruler  of  Providence  found  ways  and  means  of  extricating 
him  from  danger,  without  any  miraculous  interposition.     We  are  not  to  forget 
348 


HOMILETIQ  COMMENTARY:    JUD0B8,  chap.  vi. 


that  God  exercises  complete  control  over  the  workings  of  every  man's  mind, 
every  moment  of  his  life,  and  leads  him  to  form  this  or  that  impression,  this  or 
that  purpose,  this  or  that  idea,  without  in  the  least  interfering  with  the  full 
measure  of  liberty  which  belongs  to  him,  as  a  rational  and  voluntary  agent.  It 
was  not  in  any  way,  a  doing  violence  to  the  law  of  the  mind's  free  agency,  if 
God  should  (as  we  believe  He  did)  turn  the  minds  of  Joash's  household  to  think 
thus  on  this  occasion.  "  Well !  there  is  little  doubt  that  the  worship  of  Baal  is 
at  the  bottom  of  our  great  misery,  and  if  it  should  be  reckoned  by  these  old 
Canaaiiites,  such  a  terrible  affront  to  tlieir  god  to  do  as  Gideon  has  done,  still 
it  will  be  a  great  step  to  our  much  needed  relief,  and  since  it  has  been  done,  let 
it  so  remain,  for  we  cannot  lay  a  hand  on  the  noble  young  man  who  is  the 
pride  of  the  family,  and  himself  all  but  the  idol  of  the  district.  No,  we  will 
rally  round  him,  if  any  hostile  hand  should  be  raised.  "  To  think  thus  would 
be  not  unnatural — and  yet  it  would  be  all  of  God's  over-ruling. 

CHAPTER  Yh— Verses  33-40. 

PREPARATIOm  FOR  THE  CONFLICT, 

Obitioal  Notes. — 33.  Then  all  the  Midianites  and  the  Amalekites.]  As  to  the  Amalekites, 
see  ver.  3,  and  ch,  iii.  13.  God  puts  a  special  brand  on  the  name  of  Amalek.  He  would  "  blot 
out  the  remembrance  of  that  people  from  under  heaven  "  (Ex.  xvii.  14,  16).  They  were  in  the 
line  of  Esau,  and  carried  down  through  all  their  generations,  a  spirit  of  bitter  and  relentless 
malevolence,  such  as  the  elder  brother  at  first  cherished  for  the  younger.  They  were  the  first 
heathen  nation  to  make  war  on  the  kingdom  of  God.  (So  some  read  Num.  xxiv.  20).  Their 
fight  with  Israel  at  Rephidim  was  malicious.  They  had  no  reason  for  it,  but  bitter  hatred. 
They  strove  to  prevent  God's  own  people  from  partaking  of  the  sacred  blessing  of  water,  from 
the  smitten  rock.  They  also  cruelly  slaughtered  the  sick  and  feeble,  or  the  women  and  children, 
who  were  in  the  rear  of  the  camp  (Deut.  xxv.  17-19).  They  joined  with  the  Canaanites  in 
smiting  Israel  at  Hormah  (Num.  xiv.  45).  They  fought  against  Israel  along  with  Eglon,  king 
of  Moab  (ch.  iii.  1 3).  Now  they  did  the  same  with  the  Midianites.  They  invaded  the  South 
and  smote  Ziklag  in  David's  time  (1  Sam.  xxx.).  And  they  seem  to  have  had  wars  with  the 
tribe  of  Simeon  in  the  days  of  Hezekiah  (1  Chron.  iv.  43-45).  It  is  a  dangerous  thing  to  hate 
those  whom  God  loves. 

Valley  of  Jezreel.l  Some  read  plain  of  Jeareel,  for  a  large  portion  of  it  was  level  ground. 
But  the  Hebrew  word  (J)^V.)  signifies  deep  place^  or  valley.  A  small  portion  of  the  ground  was 
really  a  valley,  but  for  the  most  part  it  was  a  plain,  and  in  later  times  has  been  generally  known 
as  the  great  plain  of  Esdraelon,  which  is  indeed  the  Greek  form  of  the  name.  This  plain  is 
from  fifteen  to  twenty  miles  long,  and  about  twelve  miles  broad  from  north  to  south.  Though  not 
exactly  the  basin  of  an  amphitheatre,  it  has  hills  around  it,  nearer  or  more  remote,  on  every  si<le. 
It  stretches  the  larger  part  of  the  way,  from  the  Mediterranean  Sea  above  Carmel,  to  the  valley 
of  the  Jordan.  On  the  south  are  Mount  Carmel,  the  mountain  land  of  Ephraim  and  the  range 
of  hills  connecting  the  two,  on  the  north  are  the  mountains  of  Galilee,  on  the  west,  the  southern 
spurs  of  the  Galilean  highland,  and  on  the  east,  the  mountains  of  Gilboa,  and  Little  Hermon. 
The  soil  is  extremely  rich,  and,  though  less  than  fifteen  miles  square,  was,  at  one  time,  capable 
of  supporting  a  population  of  over  100,000  persons.  In  the  spring  season,  the  whole  plain  pre- 
sented the  appearance  of  a  vast  waving  com  field,  interspersed  with  olive  trees,  which  seemed  a 
charming  contrast  to  the  huge  bare  masses  of  hills  that  bound  it  on  either  side.  The  three 
portions  of  the  district  most  spoken  of  were  the  valley  of  Jezreel,  the  corn  fields  of  Issachar 
(this  principally)  and  the  slopes  of  the  Manasseh  hills.  It  was  the  great  "  battle  field  of  Pales- 
stine  ; "  from  Barak  to  Bonaparte.  Here  Sisera's  host  were  annihilated,  the  Midianites  were 
dreadfully  slaughtered,  Saul  and  Jonathan  fell  at  Mount  Gilboa,  thrilling  and  melancholy  scenes 
in  the  lives  of  Ahab  and  Jezebel,  Jehu  and  Joram,  occurred,  King  Josiah  fought  with  Necho  at 
Megiddo  and  was  slain,  the  tragic  scene  of  Holof ernes  and  Judith  took  place,  battles  were  fought 
by  the  Roman  General  Vespasian,  also  by  Saladin  the  Great  and  the  Knights  Templar,  Bonaparte 
and  Kleber,  and  we  might  have  included,  by  the  famous  Egyptian  conquerors,  Thothmes  III. 
and  Rameses  II.,  better  known  as  Sesostris,  who  invaded  Syria  by  this  route.  Warriors  of  every 
race  within  a  wide  range,  have  here  f>ught,  Jews,  Gentiles,  Egyptians,  Saracens,  Christian 
Crusaders  and  Anti-Christian  Frenchmen,  Persians,  Druses,  Turks  and  Arabs.  Here  Klijah  ran 
before  Ahab's  chariot  into  Jezreel,  and  here  the  tragedy  occurred  of  seizing  the  vineyard  of 
Naboth  the  Jezreelite,  by  the  cold-blooded  murder  of  the  owner.  It  presents  some  of  the  lovelies* 
and  most  picturesque  scenes  of  nature,  but  some  of  the  darkest  scenes  of  human  history. 

349 


CHAP.  VI.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    JUDGES, 


Pitched  in  the  valley]— encamped,  or  bivouacked.  This  was  now  the  eighth  annual  visit  of 
the  kind  they  had  paid  to  this,  the  garden  of  Israel.  The  moral  significance  of  this  visit  was, 
not  only  that  it  was  the  last,  but  that  while  the  enemy  had  no  other  thought  than  that  of  plunder 
and  feasting,  at  the  expense  of  God's  people  as  before,  God  was  now  really  bringing  them  forward 
for  a  signal  destruction,  because  of  their  daring  to  touch  His  anointed  ones,  in  like  manner  as  He 
drew  Sisera  and  his  army  to  the  very  same  ground,  to  deliver  th«m  into  the  hand  of  Barak 
(ch.  iv.  7). 

34.  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  came  upon  Gideon.]  As  on  Othniel,  and  afterwards  on  Jephthah, 
and  on  Samson  (see  pp.  97,  146-9,  150-158).  We  have  an  expression  nearly  parallel,  when 
describing  the  outpouring  of  the  same  Spirit  on  the  disciples — "  tarry  in  Jerusalem  till  ye  be 
endued  with  power  from  on  high  " — all  tiie  elements  of  moral  and  spiritual  power,  as  explained 
on  the  pages  referred  to.  The  Hebrew  word  (Hti?!}^)  means,  literally,  to  clothe  with.  Gideon 
was  clothed  with  the  Spirit,  or  was  enveloped  with  it,  wrapped  all  round.  It  is  the  same  also 
with  the  more  simple  expression,  "filled  with  the  Spirit"  (1  Chrun.  xii.  18  ;  2  Chron.  xxiv.  20). 
Gideon  had  now  a  baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Greater  honour  no  man  on  earth  could  possibly 
attain  to  than  this.  All  the  crowns  in  the  world  were  but  a  trifle  of  honour  compared  to  this. 
This  distinction  would  not  evaporate  in  time,  but  would  go  with  him  where  he  went  into  any 
department  in  the  world  of  spirits. 

Blew  a  trumpet] — to  convoke  an  army  of  volunteers.  Abi-ezer,  including  his  father's  house, 
and  the  c^w,  gathered  to  him.  The  clan  was  an  expansion  of  the  family,  through  several  gen- 
erations, something  like  "  the  genealogical  tree."  It  might  include  hundreds  or  thousands,  as 
the  case  might  be.  VnnS  a;fter  or  behind  him,  i.e.,  as  their  leader.  Though  not  a  king  or  a 
king's  son,  though  not  chosen  by  public  vote,  and  though  the  least  in  his  father's  household,  and 
his  family  connection  was  poor  in  Manasseh,  yet  he  had  gained  their  confidence  all  at  once  so 
much,  that  over  30,000  men  were  ready  to  follow  him  to  the  field.  This  surely  was  the  finger  of 
God.  The  exact  translation  of  the  phrase  about  Abi-ezer  is,  Abi-ezer  let  itself  be  summoned  after 
him  {Keil).  As  if  it  felt  that  a  Divine  call  to  follow  Gideon  was  in  the  air,  and  notwithstanding 
all  its  idolatrous  proclivities,  it  made  no  resistance  to  the  heavenly  voice. 

35  Manasseh,  Asher,  Zebulun  and  Naphtali.l  Only  Western  Manasseh  is  referred  to— the 
cis-jordanic  part.  Asher  was  behind  on  a  former  occasion  (ch.  v.  17),  lingering  among  its  ships, 
in  the  bays  and  creeks  of  a  good  mercantile  coast,  afraid  to  lose  its  commerce  with  the  Phceoici- 
ans,  who  formed  a  great  part  of  Sisera's  army.  But  now  it  is  among  the  first  to  join  the  ranks 
of  Gideon.  The  other  two  northern  tribes  well  sustain  their  high  reputation  for  zeal  in  the 
cause  of  their  God — Zebulun  and  Naphtali  (ch.  v.  18).  Nor  are  they  forgotten.  When  many 
generations  have  passed  away,  their  country  and  their  names  are  immortalized  by  the  appearance 
among  them  of  the  great  light,  which  came  down  from  heaven  to  chase  away  the  shadow  of 
death  from  the  abodes  of  men  (see  Matt.  iv.  15, 16). 

Came  up  to  meet  them.l  i.e.,  the  Manassites — the  nucleus  that  had  gathered  around  Gideon. 
But  these  northern  tribes  occupied  hilly  regions.     In  going  to  the  valley  of  Jezreel,  therefore, 

they* were  going  c?own,  not  up.  The  explanation  appears  to  be,  that  the  Hebrew  word  ("^^V) 
means  simply,  advanced  to  meet  them. 

36,  37.   If  thou  wilt  save  Jezreel  by  my  hand,  Sehold  I  put  a  fleece  of  wool  on  the  ground,  etc.] 

If  Thou  art  saving — intendest  to  save  Israel,  etc.,  I  know  (by  this)  that  Thou  wilt  save,  etc. 
172?^ n  n-T!l  what  is  shorn  of  the  wool.  The  word  occurs  here  only.  Some  think  this  to  be  too 
trivial  a  matter  for  a  miracle,  and  regard  it  as  unworthy  of  Scripture.  Rather,  we  think  it  a  clear 
proof  that  such  an  event  really  happened,  that  it  was  in  harmony  with  an  uncultured  age,  but 
less  adapted  to  the  standard  of  taste  in  refined,  modern  times.  It  was  in  harmony  with  the 
pursuits  in  which  Gideon  was  engaged,  as  a  tiller  of  the  ground  and  a  dealer  in  sheep.  The 
*'  floor  referred  to  was  the  threshing-floor,  or  what  was  used  as  »uch,  which  was  open  to  the 
eky. 

38.  Thrust  the  fleece] — compressed,  wringed] — squeezed.  That  so  much  dew  should  have  fallen, 
does  not  indicate  that  as  much  fell  on  the  wool  alone,  as  would  have  fallen  on  the  whole  ground 
in  the  ordinary  natural  way.  But  it  showed  that  the  dew  fell  as  copiously  on  the  fleece,  as  was  the 
custom  in  that  climate  of  heavy  dew-fall,  while  the  ground  on  both  sides  near  it  was  quite  dry. 
The  falling  of  the  dew  in  Palestine  is  most  abundant.  Maundrell  and  his  companions  tell  us, 
that  *'  their  tents*,  when  pitched  on  Tabor  and  Hermon,  were  as  wet  with  dew,  as  if  it  had  rained 
on  them  all  night  ;  an  1  others  speak  of  their  cloaks  in  which  tbey  wrapt  themselves,  while  they 
slept,  as  being  completely  wet,  as  if  they  had  been  immersed  in  the  sea."     {Eadie.) 

39,  40.  Let  not  thine  anger  be  hot  against  me.]  This  statement  is  important  as  showing  the 
state  of  Gideon's  mind,  that  it  was  most  reverential,  and  glorifying  to  God.     How  tender  is  God 

^^0 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :    JUDGES.  chap,  tl 


in  His  dealings  with  the  man  that  really  fears  Him  like  Gideon,  or  Abraham,  or  Moses  I  Where 
there  is  a  spark  of  true  faith,  He  is  tender  in  fanning  it,  till  it  rise  into  a  flame. 

The  wool  naturally  draws  the  moisture,  even  when  other  objects  remain  dry.  Gideon  there- 
fore, to  make  sure  in  so  great  a  crisis,  adds  one  request  more,  that  what  was  contrary  to  the 
natural  law  might  take  place,  namely,  the  fleece  might  remain  dry  over  night,  while  all  the 
ground  round  about  it  should  be  wet  with  dew.  And  in  both  instances,  it  happened  as  he  re- 
quested, a  sure  proof  that  God  was  listening  to  his  voice ;  for  none  save  H©  who  laid  down 
natore's  laws  coiild  thus  control  them  at  wilL 

GENERAL  LESSONS.— F^r^^s  33-40. 
Divine  Encouragement  and  Human  Weakness. 

X.  The  supports  of  Cbrlst's  service  far  exceed  its  anxieties. 

(1.)  'I  he  angel  proved  true  to  His  word.  "  I  will  be  with  thee."  Before  victory 
came,  before  the  thousands  of  Israel  came  around  him,  before  the  trumpet  blew 
Gideon's  fame,  while  as  yet  he  was  only  blowing  the  trumpet  of  duty,  there  came 
the  greatest  of  all  blessings  to  his  heart,  comforts  flowed  in  to  his  soul,  his  peace 
of  mind  passed  all  understanding,  and  f<  r  strength  he  felt  as  if  the  resources 
of  a  hundred  thousand  men  were  concentrated  in  his  single  person.  "  The 
Spirit  of  the  Lord  clothed  him."  No  mantle  fell,  like  that  of  Elijah  on  Elisha,  nor 
was  any  high  priest's  robe  of  office  specially  conveyed  to  him.  But  the  sublime 
reality,  of  which  that  costly  habit  vvas  but  the  poor  symbol,  now  comes  into  his 
spirit.  The  Divine  Spirit  took  possession  of  the  human  spirit,  and  his  heart 
rose  within  him  with  a  new  courage,  while  his  face  shone  as  if  it  had  been 
the  face  of  an  angel  of  God.  **  His  feet  were  made  as  hinds'  feet,"  while  his 
"arms  were  made  strong  by  the  mighty  God  of  Jacob."  He  felt  borne  as  on 
eagles'  wings  along  the  course  of  duty.  He  had  received  a  baptism  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  and  now  could  run  and  not  be  weary,  walk  and  not  faint.  He  that  could 
make  fire  to  spring  out  of  the  rock  to  consume  the  sacrifice,  could  also  fill  with 
fire  the  heart  of  the  desponding  disciple.  To  the  fullest  extent  did  he  realise 
the  fulfilment  of  the  promise,  "  they  that  trust  in  Me  shall  not  be  ashamed." 

(2.)  Ihe  sentiment  applies  generally.  Christ's  service  always  gives  more 
happiness  to  His  faithful  servants,  than  is  needed  to  compensate  for  its  sorrows 
and  sacrifices.  Who  would  not  rather  be  with  the  Master  on  the  raging  deep, 
assured  that  every  billow  is  subject  to  His  word,  and  that  no  wave  can  rob  Him 
of  any  of  His  redeemed  ones,  than  be  loitering  indolently  in  dereliction  of  duty 
on  the  shore  ?  It  is  better  to  be  with  Paul  in  prison,  than  to  be  with  the  wearer 
of  the  imperial  purple  in  the  palace.  Better  have  the  **  thorn  in  the  flesh,"  how- 
ever rankling  it  be,  than  be  without  it,  and  remain  ignorant  of  the  sustaining 
power  of  Christ's  grace.  Never  were  men  nearer  heaven,  while  still  outside  its 
gates,  than  were  those  who  could  "rejoice  that  they  were  counted  worthy  to  suffer 
shame  for  their  Master's  name." 

To  be  clothed  with  the  Spirit,  is  to  be  clad  with  it  as  the  sky  is  covered  with 
clouds,  or  the  earth  with  glory,  when  the  meridian  sun  shines  upon  it.  Or,  we 
might  speak  of  it  as  a  body  covered  with  a  coat  of  mail,  making  a  man  at  once 
invulnerable  and  invincible." 

ZZ.  Divine  Providence  co-operates  witb  human  fideliiT*. 

We  have  seen  how  Gideon  was  brought  through  his  first  great  trial 
of  duty,  by  God  inclining  first  the  heart  of  Joash,  his  father,  then  of  the 
men  who  had  helped  him,  then  of  all  the  household,  and  finally  overawing 
the  men  of  the  city — the  old  Canaanites,  who  would  dwell  among  the 
Israelites  to  the  last.  Now  we  find  the  circle  getting  wider  and  wider. 
For  all  would  soon  hear  of  the  visit  of  the  angel-Jehovah  to  Gideon,  that 
He   liad  announced  the    time  of   relief    from   oppression    to    be    at   hand, 

351 


CHAP.  VL  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    JUDGES, 


that  He  had  appointed  Gideon  to  be  the  leader  of  Israel,  and  that  all  this  was 
confirmed  by  the  working  of"  a  niiracle.  A  Divine  command  had  also  been  given 
to  Gideon  to  break  down  the  altar  of  Baal,  and  erect  an  altar  to  Jehovali  in  its 
stead,  which  Gideon  had  done,  and  no  harm  came  of  it.  Baal  was  thereby 
proved  to  have  no  power  to  defend  himself,  and  was  not  a  true  god.  A  convic- 
tion was  rising  among  the  people,  that  all  their  misery  was  owini^  to  their  worship 
of  Baal  and  the  displacement  of  Jehovah.  The  tliought,  therefore,  was  now 
getting  up,  of  making  a  general  return  to  Jehovah,  and  the  deserted 
spouse  was  now  saying,  "I  will  go  and  return  to  my  first  husband, 
for  then  was  it  better  with  me  than  now."  Gideon  had  done  well  to  get  his 
father  to  become  his  first  convert.  His  influence  would  ^o  far  to  determine 
others,  and  when  a  few  decisions  were  obtained,  it  would  be  easy  among  such 
a  people  to  multiply  them.  Thus  would  Abi-ezer  be  obtained,  by  the  use  of 
natural  means,  and  yet  by  the  controlling  influence  of  Divine  Providence. 
But  when  the  Spirit  of  God  came  on  Gideon,  a  mighty  impulse  was  given  to 
the  movement.  Everywhere  this  mighty  man  of  valour  instilled  his  own 
spirit  into  all  his  followers,  and  a  general  stirring  up  took  place.  **  The  weak 
became  as  David,  and  David  as  the  Angel  of  the  Lord."  All  received  life  as 
from  the  dead;  the  trumpet  sound  was  the  sound  of  a  jubilee  morning; 
emancipation  was  coming;  the  recovery  of  the  land,  and  the  breaking  of  the 
yoke.  An  electric  thrill  passed  through  all  hearts,  and  many  were  disposed 
at  once  to  come  forward  **  to  the  help  of  the  Lord  against  the  mighty." 

ZZX.  The  memories  of  the  trumpet-call. 

"  In  all  ages,  the  call  of  the  trumpet  has  been  associated  with  the  clang  of 
arms,  the  evolutions  of  troops,  and  the  "  pomp  and  circumstance  of  war." 
Often  has  it  aroused  the  slumbering  energies  of  patriotism,  rallied  the  courage 
of  those  who  have  conducted  the  attack,  and  animated  the  resolution  of  those 
who  have  stood  on  the  defence.  Its  heart-piercing  language  has  been  under- 
stood alike  on  the  walls  of  Troy,  at  the  gates  of  Rome,  among  the  hosts  of  the 
Crusaders,  and  on  the  fields  of  Waterloo  and  Inker inann. 

"  But  to  the  Israelite,  the  sound  of  the  trumpet  was  associated  not  more  with 
war  than  with  reli^aon.  When  the  fathers  were  journeying  through  the  wilder- 
ness, the  sound  of  the  silver  trumpets  blown  by  the  priests,  was  the  signal  for 
their  marches  and  for  their  convocations.  The  advent  of  the  new  year  was 
celebrated  by  the  feast  of  trunjpets,  also  days  of  gladness,  solemn  days,  and  the 
beginnings  of  nionths.  The  majesty  of  the  law  was  attested  by  the  voice  of 
the  trumpet,  the  walls  of  Jericho  fell  flat,  when  on  the  seventh  day  the  trumpets 
of  rams'  horn  were  blown  by  the  priests,  and  the  Midianites  themselves  when, 
two  centuries  before,  they  had  troubled  Israel,  had  been  dispersed  at  the  sound 
of  the  trumpet  (Num.  xxxi.  6). 

*'  For  years  the  trumpet  had  been  silent  in  Israel.  God's  ordinances  and  His 
Sabbaths  had  been  disregarded,  the  memories  of  Sinai  and  of  Jericho  had  slum- 
bered, the  orgies  of  Baal  had  ursurped  the  place  of  the  holy  convocations,  and 
now  that  its  sound  was  once  more  heard,  it  spoke  to  the  people  of  Him  whose 
covenant  they  had  long  forgotten,  but  whom  at  last  they  had  invoked  in  their 
anguish." — ( Wiseman.) 

IV.  BXisapprehension  in  judg-ing:  the  Character  of  others. 

Not  a  few  express  surprise  that  Gideon  should  have  thought  of  asking  any 
further  evidence  of  God's  presence  and  blessing  in  this  enterprise,  and  speak  of  it 
to  the  disparagement  of  his  faith.  Had  he  not,  it  is  said,  got  the  assurance  of 
of  the  angel,  '*  1  will  be  with  thee  ?  "  Had  he  not  successfully  destroyed  idol- 
worship  in  his  father's  house,  and  had  he  not  secured  the  confidence  of  the 
352 


H0M1L£TIC  COMMEMARY;  JIUQES.  chap.  vi. 


people,  so  that  they  came  flocking  to  bim  in  thousands  ?  What  further  need 
was  there  of  miracles,  to  attest  that  God  was  really  about  to  deliver  the 
Midianites  into  His  hands  ?  Thus  Gideon  is  judged,  and  thus  thousands  of 
excellent  men  are  judged,  not  indeed  harshly,  but  inconsiderately.  How  much 
more  tender  is  the  judgment  of  our  God  !  No  reproof  comes  from  Him  for 
asking  a  double  miracle  to  be  wrought  in  this  hour  of  trial,  but,  on  the  contrary, 
an  immediate  compliance  is  vouchsafed  to  the  request  marie. 

Gideon  would  ii. derd  have  been  more  than  human  if  he  had  had  no  doubts  at 
such  a  moment.  What  a  responsibility  lay  on  his  shoulders  !  The  whole 
interests  of  the  Church  of  God  at  this  perilous  crisis  were  in  his  hands.  The 
very  life  of  the  nation  was  at  stake.  Everything  was  to  rise  or  sink  according 
to  his  success  or  his  failure.  Besides,  the  situation  was  to  him  entirely  new. 
He  had  no  experience  what  it  was  to  be  a  general  at  the  head  of  an  army. 
He  had  no  disciplined  troops,  but  raw  levies,  indifferently  equipped,,  nnd 
without  trusted  officers  to  lead  them.  Was  it  strange,  if,  notwithstanding 
many  encouragements,  he  had  still  some  misgivings  ?  But  his  weakness  was 
tiiat  o^  nature,  rather  than  oi  faith  ;  it  was  physical,  rather  than  moral.  For  a 
moment  his  mind  sunk  under  the  strain  of  strong  events  to  which  it  was 
unaccustomed,  and  he  felt  himself  weak  as  a  child  in  holding  the  reins  when 
such  mighty  forces  had  to  be  controlled.  It  was  the  mind's  natural  inability, 
through  sheer  agitation,  to  look  calmly  at  the  evidence  set  before  it,  on  which 
faith  should  be  exercised.  Luther^  felt  this  weakness,  as  one  may  see  by  reading 
the  broken,  rugged  utterances  of  his  soul,  at  some  of  the  critical  passes  of  his 
history,  when  all  alone  with  his  God.  Knox  did,  Augustine  did,  and  doubtless 
many  others  did,  if  only  we  could  get  behind  the  scenes  and  witness  the  severe 
soul  struggles  through  which  the  men  of  faith  had  to  pass  when  girding  them- 
selves for  the  decisive  conflicts  of  life.  Then  the  good  man  prostrates  himself 
in  weakness  before  the  Divine  footstool.  He  feels  himself  a  mere  straw  in 
existence  !  a  broken  reed  !  weak  as  a  dry  leaf  in  the  grasp  of  the  whirlwind  ! 
This  is  a  necessary  part  of  the  training  of  those  whom  God  sends  out  to  fight 
His  battles.  Each  and  all  must  be  led  to  say  in  deep  sincerity  of  heart,  "I  will 
go  in  strength  of  God  the  Lord  ;  I  will  make  mention  of  thy  righteousness,  of 
thine  only." 

Closes  felt  thus  when  the  terrible  apostacy  of  the  golden  calf  occurred.  The 
solemn  and  stern  events,  which  followed  each  other  in  swift  succession  at  that 
period,  proved  too  much  for  the  intianity  of  a  human  nature,  and  he  cried  out 
in  earnest  prayer,  **  0  Lord  !  1  beseecli  thee,  show  me  thy  glory  !  "  He  wished 
to  have  a  glimpse  of  the  light  of  God's  countenance  to  calm  down  his  extreme 
agitation  when  painful  emotions  were  rolling  like  mountain  billows  through  his 
soul.  0  what  help  there  is  in  that  countenance  !  Even  the  Saviour  himself, 
all  perfect  and  sinless,  and  incapable,  under  any  circumstances,  of  being  lacking 
in  faith,  yet  being  a  true  and  proper  man,  showed  the  weaktjess  of  a  human 
nature  when,  under  the  av/iul  pressure  that  rested  on  His  human  spirit  in  the 
place  of  His  sorrows,  He  cried  out  earnestly,  "  0,  my  Father  !  if  it  be  possible, 
let  this  cup  pass  from  me!"  **And  there  appeared  an  angel  from  heaven 
strengthening  Him ! " 

it  might  be  near  the  mark  to  add  that  Gideon  did  not  for  a  moment  question 
God's  power  to  save  Jsrael,  but  in  the  whirl  of  his  thoughts,  he  had  doubts  as  to 
whether  he  rightly  understood  God's  intentions  in  using  him  as  an  instrument. 
His  request  seemed  to  be,  "Am  I  really  right  in  my  interpretation  of  God's 
meaning,  that  He  intends  to  save  Israel  from  these  Midianites,  through  my  poor 
instrumentality  ?  Does  He  really  intend  to  em))loy  one  that  is  confessedly  so 
weak  and  worthless  to  accomplish  so  mighty  a  work  ? 


353 


CHAP.  VL  HOMILETW  COM  MEN  TAR  Y :    J  UDQE8. 


The  Dew  on  the  Fleece — Its  Lessons. 

The  proposal  that  the  dew  of  heaven  should  fall  on  the  fleece  only,  while  the 
ground  remained  dry  during  one  night,  and  that  exactly  the  reverse  should  occur 
the  succeeding  night,  was  one  which  Gideon  himself  made,  and,  as  such,  it  might 
have  little  or  no  significance.  But  God  accepted  it,  and,  as  endorsed  hy  Him, 
we  are  warranted  in  regarding  it  as  conveying  important  instruction.  More 
especially  may  we  so  regard  it,  as  it  was  so  common  in  that  age  to  convey  moral 
and  spiritual  instruction  through  the  medium  of  signs. 

Nor  can  we  overlook  the  fact,  that  this  miracle  was  wrought  in  the  interest  of 
God's  church,  and,  therefore,  the  instruction  it  conveys  must  have  a  reference  to 
that  church — to  its  prosperity  or  decay,  for  this  was  the  matter  in  hand.  That 
a  fertile  imagination  could  find  many  meanings  wrapped  up  in  this  sign  is  what 
might  he  expected,  and  there  is  need  of  caution  not  to  put  meanings  of  our  own 
into  that  which  is  employed  as  a  vehicle  of  instruction  by  God.  We  put  aside, 
therefore,  all  meanings  of  mere  allegorising  ingenuity,  such  as  the  favourite 
theory  of  the  ohl  Fathers,  that  here  we  have  an  illustration  of  the  Incarnation 
in  the  descent  of  the  heavenly  dew  into  the  fleece  ;  and  even  that  other  theory, 
which  applies  the  sign  to  God's  dealings  with  the  Israelitish  nation,  in  contrast 
with  His  treatment  of  the  outlying  Gentile  world.  True,  in  the  early  ages, 
Israel  was  for  a  long  period  filled  with  the  dew  of  heavenly  blessings,  while  the 
heathen  nations  around  were  left  in  the  condition  of  a  moral  wilderness,  dry  and 
barren  of  all  good.  Now  this  state  of  things  is  reversed — many  Gentile  lands 
being  visited  with  the  dew  of  quickening  and  saving  grace,  and  bringing  forth 
the  fruits  of  righteousness,  while  the  highly-favoured  land  in  which  Jehovah 
once  dwelt  has  long  been  spiritually  **  as  a  salt  land  not  inhabited."  This  sign 
does,  indeed,  fitly  emblematise  the  past  and  present  condition  of  Israel  in  relation 
to  the  nations  around  them.  But  a  mere  likeness  does  not  amount  to  a  tiipe. 
A  type  is  a  designed  resemblance,  audit  is  going  too  much  away  from  the  subject 
in  hand  to  suppose  that  here  there  is  introduced  a  designed  resemblance  of  the 
Israelitish  nation  in  its  relation  to  the  outlying  world  during  its  long  history  of 
thousands  of  years.  Or,  if  we  admit  the  general  principle,  we  must  apply  that 
principle,  in  the  present  case,  to  Gideon's  age  in  its  direct  bearing. 

Before  this  apostacy,  Israel  had,  in  the  good  times  of  Deborah,  when  the 
nation  had  anew  "lamented  after  the  Lord,"  been  favoured  with  the  descent  of 
heavenly  blessings  on  the  land  in  copious  measure,  while  the  nations  all  around 
were  without  any  participation  of  the  fructifying  shower ;  and  now  things  are 
reversed.  Israel's  fields  are  left  dreary  and  desolate,  while  other  vineyards  are 
covered  with  blossom  and  teeming  with  fruit.  Thus,  indeed,  the  passage  might 
be  understood  to  apply  in  one  sense. 

But  a  more  important  meaning  is,  to  view  Israel  not  so  much  as  one  of  the 
nations,  as  being  the  Church  of  God  at  that' time  on  the  earth,  and  to  regard  it 
as  represented  b}^  the  fleece  of  wool,  while  the  dry  ground  represents  the  world 
as  heathen,  and  so  the  spiritual  meaning  of  the  passage  may  be  expressed  by 
three  ideas. 

I.  The  one  needful  Blessing  of  a  languishing  Church  is  the  Heavenly  Lew. 

The  dew  is  referred  to,  as  if  all  Israel's  needs  were  summed  up  in  that  one  item. 
For  a  large  part  of  the  year,  the  dew-fall  was  all  in  all  to  Israelitish  soil.  Hence 
its  regular  descent  was  looked  upon  as  an  expression  of  the  favour  of  heaven. 
But  for  a  copious  fall  of  dew  over  night,  during  the  hot  season,  every  tree  would 
wither — every  plant,  shrub,  and  flower  ;  indeed,  the  whole  vegetable  world 
would  die.  Hence  Isaac's  blessing — "  God  give  thee  of  the  dew  of  heaven  ; " 
and  Job's  acknowledgment — **  His  dew  lay  all  night  on  my  branch."  That,  of 
354 


MOMILETW  COMMENTARY:    JUDGES,  chap.  vi. 


which  the  natural  dew  is  the  emblem,  is  the  Divine  Spirit's  influences  coming 
down  on  the  Christian  Church  ;  and  the  aspects  of  the  blessing  are  manifold, 
such  as — 

1.  Freshness.  Under  the  heat  of  a  scorching  sun,  the  natural  world  becomes 
blanched  and  withered  in  appearance.  But  the  dew  falls  copiously,  and  the 
sickly,  languishing,  vegetable  world  looks  cheerful,  and  smiles  again.  The  face 
of  nature  sparkles  with  delight.  Each  flower-cup,  and  leaf,  and  heather-bell, 
partakes  of  the  general  joy.  Every  spire  of  grass  shoots  up  its  little  head  as  if 
in  gratitude  for  tlie  grateful  boon  of  heaven.  All  nature  is  in  tears,  but  it  is 
tears  of  joy  which  are  shed  ;  for  a  new  glow  of  life  is  felt  at  the  heart,  and  the 
pulse  beats  with  fresh  vigour  in  the  veins.  Nature  revives,  and  looks  green  af]^ain. 
The  seed  springs  in  the  soil,  rich  pasture  covers  the  fields,  "  the  valleys  are  filled 
with  corn,  they  shout  for  joy,  they  also  sing." 

When  the  Spirit's  influences  are  poured  out,  our  souls  become  "  like  a 
watered  garden  and  as  a  field  which  the  Lord  hath  blessed  "  There  is  more 
fervour  of  zeal,  more  ardour  of  love,  more  firmness  of  resolution,  and  greater 
energy  of  action.  There  is  enlargement  of  heart,  and  quickening  of  step  in 
running  the  race  set  before  us.  A  deeper  hue  is  given  to  personal  piety,  and 
soul  prosperity  is  advanced.  There  is  more  prayer  and  closer  watching  for  God. 
Faith  is  stronger,  hope  is  brighter,  humility  is  deeper,  joy  is  more  full,  and 
heavenly-mindedness  is  more  confirmed.  How  refreshing  to  a  drooping  church 
is  the  falling  of  the  heavenly  dew  ! 

2.  Tenderness  is  another  aspect  of  the  blessing.  *'  I  will  be  as  the  dew  unto 
Israel,  and  he  shall  grow  as  the  lily."  The  lily  was  a  flower  of  extreme  delicacy 
of  leaf  and  flower,  and  so  very  tender.  It  was  not  robust  as  the  thorn,  nor 
hard  as  the  oak,  nor  tall  as  the  cedar ;  it  was  simply  a  modest  unpretending 
flower,  all  the  more  attractive  because  of  its  lowliness  and  tenderness.  A 
picture  of  it  we  have  in  Mary  weeping  at  the  sepulchre.  Weak  faith,  weaker 
knowledge,  but  love  strong  as  ever.  "  They  have  taken  away  my  Lord  " — 
still  mine^  even  in  death.  There  is  no  cooling  of  the  affection  even  by  death. 
She  loves  on  as  before,  and  would  not  go  from  that  sepulchre.  Her  dead  Lord 
was  dearer  to  her  than  all  those  living  around  her.  To  find  Him,  though  in 
the  grave,  was  to  find  more  than  father  or  mother.  Ah  !  that  lily  had  a 
beautiful  and  tender  blossom,  though  wet  with  the  dew  of  tears— all  the  more 
beautiful  for  those  dewdrops. 

You  see  the  tender  blossom  of  the  lily,  in  the  poor  woman  who  elbows  her 
way  through  the  crowd,  saying,  "If  I  may  but  touch  the  hem,  etc.,  I  shall  be 
whole."  You  see  it  in  the  conduct  of  the  two  sisters  when  they  said,  "  Lord, 
if  thou  hadst  been  here  my  brother  had  not  died."  You  see  it  in  Nathanael 
(John  i.  48) ;  in  Ephraim  (Jer.  xxxi.  18-20)  ;  in  Peter  (Matt.  xxvi.  75) ;  in 
Josiah  with  his  "  tender  heart"  ;  in  the  publican  ''smiting  on  his  breast,"  etc.  ; 
in  David  (Ps.  cxix.  136)  ;  and  in  the  men  who  sighed  over  the  corruptions  of  the 
Church  in  Ezekiel's  days  (Ezek.  ix  4). 

All  this  tenderness  of  piety  proceeds  from  the  falling  of  the  Divine  dew. 

3.  A  new  rush  of  life.  "Or  ever  I  was  aware  my  soul  made  me  like  the 
chariots  of  Amminadib  "  (Song  vi.  12).  "  Did  not  our  hearts  burn  within  us," 
etc.  ?  (Luke  xxiv.  32).  This  dew  can  make  men  raise  the  shout  even  in  this 
world,  "  To  Him  that  loved  us  and  washed  us  from  our  sins  in  His  own  blood," 
etc.  (Rev.  i.  5).  One  feels  like  Bunyan  when  his  prison  walls  seemed  to  grow 
warm  around  him,  as  he  traced  the  progress  of  the  pilgrim,  on  from  the  City  of 
Destruction  up  to  the  realms  of  eternal  day.  The  house  of  God  becomes  the 
happiest  home  on  earth,  where  all  the  exercises  seem  like  the  ripplings  and 
dasi  lings  of  the  "  river  of  the  water  of  life"  Those  on  whom  the  dew  rests 
are  never  so  glad  as  when  it  is  said,  "  Go  ye  up  unto  the  house  of  the  Lord." 
Their  hearts  are   "lifted  up  in    the  ways  of  the  Lord,"    and  with  warmest 

355 


CHAP.  VI.  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


gratitude  tliey  exclaim,  "  Blessed  are  they  that  dwell  in  thy  house  ! "  No 
voices  are  more  grateful  than  those  of  the  shepherds,  while  they  walk  over  the 
"  delectable  mountains,"  and  i)oint  through  the  glass  to  the  celestial  gate  in 
the  distance. 

4.  Loveliness  of  piety.  Sometimes,  under  t  e  descent  of  this  dew,  the  church 
becomes  like  a  L^arden  of  lilies,  where  every  flower  has  the  beauty  of  the  lily. 
As  on  the  day  when  the  Spirit  was  first  poured  out  in  abundance,  after  Jesus 
had  been  gloiifit'd.  The  '*  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus"  was  seen  in  the  light  of  the 
morning  sun,  the  shadows  of  night  were  cleared  away,  and  the  words  of  the 
Master  came  all  true  at  last,  both  in  letter  and  spirit.  What  earnest  breathings 
of  prayer  then  rose  up  to  the  throne  !  What  enlargement  of  heart  and  liberty 
of  speech  in  setting  forth  the  newly-found  truth  of  the  cross  as  the  *'  power  of 
God  unto  salvation  to  every  one  that  believeth  ! "  What  entire  consecration  of 
every  one's  self  to  the  Saviour  Lord  !  What  warmth  of  brotherly  lorn  !  What 
boldness  in  "testifying  to  men  all  the  words  of  this  life  !  "  What  steadfastness  in 
receiving  the  teachings  of  the  despised  fishermen  !  What  singleness  of  heart  and 
what  unbounded  joy  in  all  the  relations  of  life  ! 

In  the  case  of  the  individual  this  character  is  seen  in  every  form  of  beauty. 
It  "  sits  at  Jesus'  feet  like  Mary,  and  listens  to  His  word."  It  "meditates  on 
God's  law  day  and  night."  Meditation  returns  home  to  her  bower  daily,  laden 
with  honey  culled  from  every  flower  she  has  visited.  It  is  a  character,  also,  that 
begins  with  making  nothing  of  self  and  everything  of  Christ.  It  adopts  the 
motto,  "  less  than  the  least ;  "  it  lies  low  in  the  dust,  crying  out,  unclean  !  etc. 
It  "  takes  the  lowest  room,"  "esteeming  others  better  than  itself."  Also,  wiien 
smitten  on  the  one  cheek  it  turns  the  other  as  well,  rather  than  retaliate.  It 
"  forgives  until  seventy  times  seven,"  "  bearing  all  things,  believing  and  hoping 
all  things."  "It  worketh  no  ill  to  its  neighbour,"  but  "  does  to  him  what  it 
would  wish  him  to  do  to  it."  In  one  word,  it  strives  to  live  above  the  world,  to 
cultivate  hcavenly-mindedness,  and  to  commend  the  gospel  of  Christ  to  all 
around.  It  strives  so  to  conduct  itself  that  all  who  look  upon  it  shall  see,  as  it 
were,  the  face  of  an  angel. 

5.  Stability.  "Rooted  and  built-up — grounded  and  settled  "  (Col.  ii.  7  ;  i.  23  ; 
Eph.  iii.  17).  "From  henceforth  let  no  man  trouble  me,"  etc.  (Gal.  vi.  17). 
"Stand  fast  in  the  faith,"  etc.  (1.  Cor.  xvi.  13).  Making  conscience  of  one's 
religious  principles,  and  not  a  matter  of  convenience  and  time-serving.  "  Holding 
fast  the  profession  of  the  faith  witliout  wavering."  Deeds  confirm  words. 
Speaking  for  Christ  before  kings  as  well  as  mean  men  (Psa.  cxix.  46).  Main- 
taining one's  principles  with  all  good  conscience  before  the  world  with  few  or 
with  many—"  faithful  among  the  faithless  ;  "  true  as  steel  ;  the  same  whatever 
wind  may  blow  ;  esteeming  it  a  "  small  matter  to  be  judged  of  man's  judgment, 
knowing  that  he  that  judLeth  us  is  the  Lord  " 

The  presence  of  the  dew  makes  every  root  take  a  deeper  hold  of  the  earth. 

6.  Purity.  The  more  strength  there  is  in  a  plant  the  better  it  tfirows  off  its 
impurities.  The  strength  is  given  by  the  dew.  Where  every  feature  of  the 
Christian  character  becomes  strong  through  the  Spirit  (Eph.  iii.  16),  the  wish 
becomes  stronger  than  ever  "  to  be  found  without  spot  and  blameless"  (2.  Peter 
iii.  14  ;  1.  John  iii.  3).  There  is  a  fixed  purpose  to  "  cleanse  one's  self  from  all 
filthiness  of  the  flesh  and  spirit,"  etc.  (2  Cor.  vii.  1).  The  command  looked  at 
is,  "Be  ye  holy  for  I  am  holy."  The  pattern  copied  is  one  "in  whom  there  is 
no  guile."  The  position  occupied  by  such  is,  to  be  "separate  from  sinners  "and 
to  belong  to  God,  while  "the  whole  world  lieth  in  wickedness  "  (I.  John  v.  19). 
The  twofold  aim  in  life  is  to  he  pure  in  heart  (Psa.  li.  7-10 ;  cxxxix  23,  24)  and 
to  keep  the  garments  clean  (Rev.  iii.  4  ;  xvi.  15). 

7.  Delight  in  Christ's  fellowship.  When  flowers  are  filled  with  dewdrops, 
they  put  forth  their  best  blossoms  under  the  shining  of  th©  sun.     Christians, 

356 


ttOMlLEflC  COMMSHTARY:  JIT  DOBS.  chap.  Tr. 


when  "  filled  with  the  Spirit,"  long  for  the  presence  and  fellowship  of  Christ. 
Then  Christian  character  unfolds  itself  most  beautifully,  when  beholding  His 
excellence,  basking  in  His  radiance.  When  the  soul  is  refreshed  with  the 
consciousness  of  the  Divine  love,  and  receives  new  proofs  of  its  being  in  covenant 
with  God  as  its  own  God,  it  instinctively  longs  to  possess  the  virtues  of  the 
Christian  character.  Christ  is  incomparably  more  precious  than  other  objects. 
Like  the  stars  disappearing  in  presence  of  the  sun,  all  rivals  sink  out  of  view. 

II.  The  granting  or  witholding  of  this  blessing  is  entirely  in  God's  hands. 
On  the  one  night  He  gave  the  dew  here  and  refused  it  there  ;  the  next  night, 
He  withheld  it  from  the  first  spot  and  gave  it  to  the  second.  Thus  he  showed 
that  the  giving  or  withholding  of  the  gift  rested  entirely  with  Him.  Tiie 
Holy  Spirit  is  said  to  be  *'  sent  from  the  Father,"  and  to  "  proceed  from  the 
Father  "  (John  xv.  26).  God  calls  Him  "  my  Spirit  "  on  many  occasions.  He 
is  generally  called  "  the  Spirit  of  God,"  or  "the  Spirit  of  the  Lord."  In  the 
Old  Testament  when  He  is  given,  God  is  said  to  '^ pour  Him  out"  (Isa.  xliv.  3; 
Joel  ii.  28;  Zech.  xii.  10;  Isa.  xxxii.  15),  or  to  put  Him  on  His  people 
(Ezek.  xxxvi.  27  ;  xxxvii.  13,  14).  In  the  New  Testament,  God  is  said  to  give 
His  Spirit  (John  iii.  34;  2  Cor.  i.  22  ;  1  Thess.  iv.  8,  etc).  Comp.  Phil.  ii.  13. 

III.  God  gives  this  blessing  in  answer  to  prayer.  It  was  at  Gideon's 
earnest  prayers  that  the  dew  was  given  or  withheld.  Thus  it  was  with  Idijah 
(see  1  Ejngs  xvii.  1  ;  comp.  xviii.  42-45).  When  the  land  was  scorched  throiit^h 
want  of  dew  and  rain,  the  King  of  Israel  supplicates  that  the  needed  blessing 
might  be  restored,  in  answer  to  penitence  and  i)rayer,  and  his  supplication  was 
heard  (1  Kings  viii.  35,  36,  with  2  Chron.  vii.  1).  So  it  is  declared,  **  our 
Heavenly  Father  gives  His  Holy  Spirit  to  them  that  ask  Him  "  (Luke  xi.  13). 
When  so  large  an  outpouring  of  the  Spirit  took  place  on  the  day  of  Pentecost, 
it  was  found  that  the  whole  company  of  Christ's  disciples  in  the  upper  room 
were  engaged  for  ten  days  together  in  prayer  and  supplication  (Acts  i.  14,  with 
ii.  2-4).    There  was  a  similar  scene  in  Acts  iv.  31-37. 


CHAPTER  VII. 

THB  ARMY  OP  THE  LORD'S  DELIVERANCE. 

I.  The  Diminution  of  its  XTumbers. 

Ver$e»  1-8. 

Cbitioal  Notes. — 1.  Then  Jerubbaal.l  The  name  is  given  as  the  challenger  of  Baal,  the  man 
who,  for  the  honour  of  God,  was  not  afraid  to  enter  the  lists  with  Baal.  This  name  was  putting 
a  mark  of  honour  on  Gideon,  the  same  as  if  a  star  were  put  on  his  breast. 

Rose  up  early  and  pitched  beside  the  well  of  Harod.l  The  first  flush  of  enthusiasm  was  still 
upon  them,  and  they  did  not  hesitate  at  once  to  approach  the  enemy.  Gideon  himself  was 
decided  by  many  proofs  given  that  God  was  with  him  ;  or  if  any  doubts  were  left,  these  had 
become  dissipated  by  the  sign  of  the  dew  and  the  fleece  of  wool.  And  the  people  were  decided 
by  the  victory  gained  over  Baal,  and  the  several  evi(iences  that  God  had  raised  up^  Gideon  to 
deliver  Israel.  Whether  there  was  any  depth  in  this  decision  was  soon  to  be  tried.  The  well 
means  the  spring,  inn  trembling — so  called,  probably,  because  it  was  the  spot  where  the 
volimteer  warriors  first  began  to  tremble  and  lose  heart  in  the  great  cause  they  bad  taken  in 
hand.     A  good  spring  of  water  was  an  important  spot  in  such  a  country,  and  especially  on  the 

eve  of  battle.  .      « ,      ,    j 

The  host the  camp— was  on  the  north  side  of  them,  etc.]     Some  would  render  it--    he  had 

the  camp  of  Midian  before  him  in  the  valley,  to  the  north  of  the  hill  Moreh  "  {Cassel).     This 


CHAP.  vn.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    JUDGES. 


would  make  Gideon  to  be  to  the  north  of  Midian,  for  he  had  that  camp  between  him  and  Moreh. 
But  Manasseh,  from  which  Gideon  came,  was,  both  in  its  hills  and  plains,  to  the  south  of  the 
valley  of  Jezreel,  so  that  when  Gideon  approached  that  valley  it  must  have  been  from  the  south. 
We  therefore  read  it — "  the  camp  was  to  him  in  the  north,  at  the  hill  of  Moreh,  in  the  valley.'* 
nn"!^ — pointer,  so  called  because  it  commanded  a  good  view  of  the  valley. 

2.  The  Lord  said  unto  Gideon.]  This  was  to  be  Jehovah's  own  battle,  and  He  therefore  makes 
a  disposition  of  the  forces.  The  people  with  thee  are  too  many,]  This  would  sound  strange  in 
the  hearing  of  all  the  people  Not  a  man  of  them  but  thought  their  numbers  were  all  too  few 
for  the  hazardous  task  before  them,  and  to  be  abruptly  told  they  were  too  many,  was  the  very 
thing  which  was  fitted  to  dishearten  them  for  the  hght  altogether.  They  were  but  32,000  all 
told,  while  the  enemy  was  135,000  at  the  very  least  (Ch.  viii.  10),  and  perhaps  more.  Now,  too, 
being  on  the  rising  ground  (at  the  foot  of  which  was  the  spring  of  Harod),  and  which  overlooked 
the  valley,  they  could  see  the  long,  interminable  spreading  of  tents  which  overshadowed  the 
whole  valley.  Many  a  one,  who  at  first  was  courageous  enough,  would  begin  to  feel  as  Peter  did 
**  when  he  saw  the  wind  boisterous,  he  began  to  sink."  According  to  ordinary  calculation,  the 
odds  were  all  against  Israel  had  the  numbers  not  been  reduced  (Luke  xiv.  30).  But  when  the 
army  of  deliverance  was  cut  down  from  32,000  to  10,000,  and  finally  to  300  men,  the  last  vestige 
of  hope  to  save  the  nation  by  human  prowess  was  taken  away. 

This,  however,  was  the  battle  of  the  church  of  God,  and  it  must  be  made  clear  to  all,  that  His 
hand  was  at  work  in  bringing  about  the  result.  It  was  the  age  in  which  Divine  Providence 
was  made  visible  in  protecting  the  church,  and  it  was  no  unwarrantable  thing  to  expect  then 
what  we  cannot  expect  now — a  visiljle  shield  thrown  around  those  whom  God  loved.  It  might 
be  a  great  trial  of  faith,  yet  faith  had  much  to  support  it  in  the  fact  that  God's  own  honour  had 
to  be  vindicated  in  the  sight  of  the  heathen,  and  the  covenant  engagements  to  His  own  people 
had  to  be  fulfilled.  All  the  church's  battles,  properly  speaking,  were  gained  by  her  God 
(Ps.  xliv.  3  ;  Zech.  iii.  6 ;  Deut.  viii.  10-18). 

3.  Whosoever  is  fearful  and  afraid.]  Deut.  xx.  1-8.  The  presence  of  the  faint-hearted  in  an 
army  was  a  source  of  weakness,  not  of  strength.  Mount  Gilead.  The  well-known  Mount  Gilead 
was  on  the  east  side  of  Jordan,  whereas  Gideon  was  now  on  the  west  side.  There  may  have 
been  a  place  of  that  name  on  the  west  side  also,  though  unimportant.  Or  it  may  have  been  a 
phrase  customary  among  the  Manassites,  meaning  Gilead,  the  rallying  point  where  the  people  were 
summoned  to  assemble  for  battle.  Early.  Depart  at  once.  There  was  a  tone  of  decision  in  this 
call.     There  was  indeed  no  time  to  be  lost. 

There  returned  twenty  and  two  thousand.]  More  than  two-thirds  proved  craven-hearted  when 
real  danger  was  faced,  How  many  at  first  stand  forward  on  the  Lord's  side  who  are  soon 
discovered  not  to  have  counted  the  cost  !  The  trial  was  upon  their  fears,  and  they  cowardly 
confessed  it  (Hos.  vii.  1).  But  what  a  stern  test  of  the  courage  of  those  who  remained  true 
to  their  colours  !  "l^D^  originally  signifies  to  twist  hair  or  ropes  ;  hence  it  means  here  to  return 
in  windings,  i.e.,  to  slink  away  in  by-paths.  \^Keil.'\  This  melancholy  spectacle  might  well 
have  filled  the  hearts  of  the  already  too  small  army  of  Gideon  with  dismay.  But  the  chief 
purpose  was  not  to  blow  away  the  chafif,  though  that  was  done.  Rather  the  design  was  to 
make  it  manifest  that  the  sole  arm  that  gains  victories  in  the  Lord's  battles,  is  that  of  the 
Lord  Himself.  No  arm  of  flesh  must  divide  the  glory  with  Him.  The  proneness  of  the 
human  heart  to  boast  of  its  own  resources  must  be  effectually  checked.  Hence,  even  the 
10,000  are  too  many,  though  scarcely  a  proportion  of  one  man  to  thirteen  of  the  enemy. 
God  meant  to  teach  the  lesson  where  the  real  strength  of  His  church  lay. 

4.  Bring  them  down  to  the  water  and  I  will  try  them  there.]  The  dross  was  already  removed 
for  all  the  10,000  seemed  prepared  to  enter  the  battlefield.  But  even  of  those  who  stood  the 
first  test,  some  were  more,  and  others  were  less,  eligible — the  difference  between  iron  and  steel. 
"  The  water  "  refers  to  the  purling  brook  that  was  formed  of  such  waters  as  flowed  down  from 
the  Harod  spriug.  ?1"1^  Separate,  or  elect  some  from  the  others — not  the  idea  of  purging  away 
refuse.     God  himself  selects  every  man. 

6.  Brought  down  the  people  to  the  water.]  As  if  to  quench  their  thirst  well  before  commencing 
the  battle.  The  great  mass  of  them  knelt  down  and  drank  of  the  stream,  regardless  of  the  danger 
of  being  in  the  immediate  proximity  of  the  enemy.  A  few  were  more  wakeful,  and  only  bending 
(without  lying)  down,  they  lapped  the  water  with  their  hand,  as  a  dog  when  using  his  tongue, 
but  ready  at  a  moment's  notice  to  start  to  their  feet,  and  face  the  foe.  Sometimes  little  things, 
the  very  fringes  of  manner,  indicate  the  sterling  qualities  of  a  man's  character — his  self-discipline, 
his  wariness,  his  manliness  and  heroism.  So  it  may  have  been  now  ;  and  thus  this  simple  incident 
furnished  a  test  sufficient  to  determine  the  selection.     C  omp.   the  self-restraint  of  David  in 

12  Sam.  xxiii.  16.  The  Jewish  interpretation  is  worthy  of  consideration.  Idolaters  were  accustomed 
to  pray  kneeling  before  their  idols.  Kneeling  had  thus  become  unpopular  in  Israel,  and  was 
studiously  avoided  on  all  occasions  by  the  worshippers  of  the  true  God.  On  this  occasion  all  the 
men  were  thrown  off  their  guard,  and  each  man  would  instinctively  act  according  to  what  was 
customary  for  him  to  do.  The  kneelers  would  presumptively  have  been  idolaters  in  the  past 
358 


HOMILBTW  COMMENTARY :    JUDGES,  OHAT.  vil. 


the  lappere  would  have  been  those,  who  through  long  opposition  to  idolatry,  never  bowed  the 
knee  (comp.  1  Kings  xix.  18).  To  bow  the  knee  was  the  sign  of  religious  worship,  and  was  an 
honour  due  to  God  alone.    Mordecai  refused  to  kneel  to  a  man  (Esth.  iii.  6 ;  Isa  xlv.  23).    [C^asseZ] 

7.  By  the  three  hundred  men  .  .  .  will  I  save  you.]  The  marshalling  of  the  little  army  under 
Gideon  was  entirely  God's  own  work,  for  he  was  the  real  commander.  Gideon  was  in  fact  but 
a  sub-lieutenant.  God  now  designates  the  300  as  a  fit  instrumentality  for  Him  to  use,  and 
requires  the  others  to  return  to  their  homes.  A  distinct  promise  is  made  to  give  victory  to  this 
small  handful— one  man  to  four  hundred  and  fifty  (1  Sara.  xiv.  6  ;  2  Chron  xiv.  11  ;  also  Acts 
xyiii.  9,  10  ;  xxii.  18-21).  The  board  was  now  clear.  By  means  of  Israel's  little  finger  a  si^Mial 
victory  was  to  be  gained  over  the  proud  hosts  of  the  vaunting  foe.  To  count  on  this  was  a  great 
act  of  Jaith.  There  was  nothing  of  sense  to  support  it.  All  stood  the  other  way.  Hence  Gideon's 
name  stands  high  on  the  roll  of  fame,  because  of  his  great  faith  (Heb.  xi.  32.) 

8.  The  people  took  victuals  in  their  hand,  etc.]  The  300  did.  The  9700,  though  willing  to 
fight,  submitted  to  the  arrangement  made  as  being  from  God,  and  went  (perhaps  reluctantly)  to 
their  homes.  But  they  willingly  supplied  the  small  detachment  who  were  to  give  battle  to  the 
foe  with  such  provisions  out  of  the  common  store,  and  such  instruments  as  were  needed.  Thus 
each  man  of  the  300  had  a  trumpet,  a  pitcher,  and  a  lamp.  The  word  "  retained  "  seems  to  be 
significant.  As  a  man  would  cling  to  a  small  boat  amid  a  world  of  great  waters.  They  were  a 
sacred  gift  put  into  his  hand  by  his  God — the  forlorn  hope  of  Israel  —a  solitary  star  in  a  sky 
black  with  clouds—**  a  little  flock  of  kids  while  the  Midianites  filled  the  country  1  "  He  would 
address  them  in  words  few,  but  from  the  heart.  **  We  few — we  chosen  few — we  band  of 
brothers  I " 

XZ.  Confidence  g^iven  in  the  midst  of  weakness* 

Yersei  9-14. 

9.  Arise,  get  thee  down  nnto  the  host,  etc.]  God  orders  everything — ^the  time  of  action,  as 
well  as  the  means.  The  call  now  given  meant — "  the  hour  is  come — go,  and  do  as  I  have  com- 
manded you. "     The  phrase,  '*  unto  the  camp  "  means  against. 

10.  But  if  thou  fear  to  go  down.]  The  fluttering  state  of  Gideon's  heart  was  seen  by  h 
God,  and  with  the  tender  consideration  of  a  father  for  a  child  in  peril,  he  opens  his  eyes  for  a 
moment  to  what  is  going  on  behind  the  scenes.  God's  hand  is  already  at  work.  One  of  the 
sleepers  in  the  enemy's  camp  is  made  to  dream  ;  his  fellow  interprets  the  dream — Gideon  learns 
from  this  that  his  name  is  already  a  terror  to  the  invaders,  and  that  God  has  begun  to  smite 
them  with  a  spirit  of  trembling.  Phurah,  thy  servant.]  A  young  man.  Even  a  mere  stripling 
is  some  consolation  to  a  hero  like  Gideon,  under  so  great  a  pressure  of  responsibility.  Here  is 
a  touch  of  the  weakness  of  our  humanity  !  The  Saviour  Himself  felt  it  as  a  man,  for  "He  was 
in  all  points  tried  like  as  we  are."  **  Could  ye  not  watch  with  me  for  one  hour  ?  "  Small  con- 
solation could  such  comforters  give.  Like  straws  in  withstanding  a  torrent.  But  they  were  the 
only  objects  at  hand. 

11  Then  he  went  down  vn.th  Phurah.]  In  like  manner,  Diomed,  according  to  Homer, 
entered  into  the  camp  of  the  Trojans  ;  and  Alfred  of  England,  according  to  Hume,  ventured 
into  the  camp  of  the  Danes  as  a  harper — the  outside  of  the  armed  men.  This  implies  that  besides 
the  families,  the  servants,  the  camp-followers,  and  others,  there  was  a  special  guard  for  the 
whole  camp,  consisting  of  well-trained  and  well-equipped  flighting  men.  The  word  chamushim 
means  those  who  acted  both  as  van  and  rear  guards,  especially  the  former  (Josh.  i.  14  ;  Ex. 
xiii.  18).  Some  make  it  the  foremost  of  the  outposts.  \_Ke'd)\  Others,  to  the  outermost  of  the 
ranks  by  Jive.  [Bush\  Others,  <o  those  who  were  girded  for  the  fight.  [P.  Cow.].  Others,  as 
far  as  the  line  of  the  van-guard.  [CJassel^  Yet  others,  those  who  sLood  in  battle  a/rray.  [Z^ias], 
It  meant  the  outer  rim  of  the  encampment,  and  that  portion  of  the  hostile  army,  where  their 
strength  lay.  The  invaders  were  not  absolutely  a  rabble,  but  were  so  far  organized  as  that, 
while  one  section  did  the  plundering,  and  another  attended  to  the  tents,  the  families,  the  baggage, 
and  the  flocks,  there  was  another  whose  special  work  it  was  to  tight  in  defence  of  the  whole. 

12.  Lay  along  in  the  valley  like  grasshoppers.]  (See  on  chap.  vi.  5).  The  relative  numbers 
of  the  two  armies  are  again  mentioned  to  show  how  completely  the  salvation  now  to  be  wrought 
was  of  God.  But  great  numbers  sometimes  lead  to  »,  false  security.  There  was  no  rampart,  or 
protecting  wall  round  about  the  encampment ;  so  that  Gideon  and  his  attend;int  found  no 
obstruction,  as  they  crept  stealthily  into  one  of  the  tents.  The  whole  multitude  had  gone  to 
sleep,  and  lay  along,  prostrate,  as  if  taking  their  night's  rest.  They  felt  secure,  for  there  wer« 
clouds  on  clouds  of  warriors,  and  dromedaries,  countless  as  the  sand  by  the  sea-shore. 

359 


CHAP.  VII.  HOMILETTC  COMMENTARY:    JUDGED. 


13.  I  dreamed  a  dream,  etc.]  This  was  something  sent  by  the  God  of  Providence,  equally  as 
in  the  case  of  Pharaoh,  or  Nebuchadnezzar.  It  was  no  sword  to  woiind  the  flesh.  God  has  a 
variety  of  instruments  to  use.  It  was  something  to  touch  the  spirit  and  arouse  the  fears. 
A  cake  of  barley-bread].  Circular.  "  A  round  barley-loaf  rolled  itself."  Barley-bread  was 
reckoned  a  vile  food,  suited  only  for  horses  and  dromedaries,  or  the  lowest  menials  among  men. 
It  stands  in  opposition  to  wheat  or  fine  flour.  The  point  of  the  dream  was  that  sometliing  came 
rolling  down  from  the  high  ground  in  among  their  tents — not  a  stone  but  a  mere  cake  of  bread, 
and  yet  when  it  struck  one  of  the  tents  it  turned  it  completely  over.  It  was  the  humblest  of  all 
cakes,  yet  it  sufficed  to  crush  the  tent,  the  tent  of  the  chief  captain  of  tlie  whole  host  too 
(as  many  read  it),  and  it  lay  in  ruins. 

14.  This  is  nothing  else  save  the  sword  of  Gideon.]  How  could  such  a  dream  have  been  dreamed, 
and  such  an  interpretation  have  been  given,  had  not  God  specially  ordered  it  ?  Nothing  could 
have  been  more  opportune  to  show  Gideon  that  God  was  beginning  to  fill  the  minds  of  the 
enemy  with  fears  for  the  issue  of  tlie  impending  conflict.  And  if  these  fears  were  but  to  increase 
far  enough,  it  was  easy  to  see  how  victory  could  be  obtained.  But  that  by  which  his  faith  was 
specially  confirmed  was  the  fact,  that  the  existence  of  these  fears  proved  that  God  was  already 
at  work  on  the  minds  of  the  enemy  for  their  destructicm,  and  if  so,  would  assuredly  complete 
His  work.  This  corresponded  well  too,  with  the  assurance  which  his  God  had  given  him  when 
the  call  came  to  arise  and  go  down  to  attack  the  enemy's  camp.  "  For,"  says  Jehovah,  "  I  have 
delivered  it  into  thine  hand."  It  is  already  doomed,  and  ray  hand  is  already  at  work.  The 
incident  of  the  dream  was  a  striking  proof  of  this.  God  was  touching  the  hearts  of  the  enemy, 
and  making  them  to  quake  for  fear.  This  instilling  of  a  spirit  of  terror  into  their  minds  was 
parallel  to  the  terror  with  which  the  Canaanites  were  inspired,  when  they  heard  of  the  coming 
of  Joshua  and  the  Divinely-shielded  people  whom  he  led  (Ex.  xxiii.  27  ;  Deut.  ii.  25  ;  xi.  2o  ; 
Josh.  ii.  9-11). 

"  The  tent  was  an  expressive  emblem  of  the  Midianites  as  nomads.  It  was  their  all  in  all. 
Their  wives  and  children,  their  cattle  and  goods,  their  vesture  and  treasure  were  all  collected  in 
it  and  about  it." — {Wordsworth).  It  contained  their  "altar  and  their  home."  Here  the  question 
is — what  led  the  dreamer's  comrade  to  interpret  the  dream  as  he  did  ?  Was  it  an  evil  conscience  ? 
And  was  it  felt  that  the  time  had  come  for  Israel's  God  to  arise  and  avenge  Himself,  as  He  had  so 
often  done  befoi-e,  on  those  who  had  dared  to  tread  down  His  people  as  the  mire  ?  We  cannot 
tell  the  exact  measure  of  the  knowledge  of  Israel's  God  which  prevailed  among  these  heathen 
invaders.  But  there  seemed  to  be  a  rumour  afloat  that  the  God  of  Israel  was  about  to  arise  for 
the  redemption  of  His  people,  and  that  a  special  messenger  had  been  sent  to  commission  Gideon 
to  act  under  Him  as  the  captain  of  His  host.  Doubtless  it  was  of  God's  overruling  providence 
that  such  an  interpretation,  as  we  here  find,  was  given  of  the  dream. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS.— Verses  1-14. 

In  the  battle  now  to  be  fought,  God  Himself  was  the  chief  actor.  In  all  that 
is  said  and  done  He  takes  the  initiative.  *'  The  people  are  too  many  for  Me 
to  give  the  Midianites  into  their  hand."  It  was  indeed  the  Battle  of  the  Lord's 
deliverancey  and  all  the  arrangements  must  be  regarded  in  this  light  ;  while 
means  are  used,  they  must  be  disposed  in  such  a  way  as  to  reveal  the  fact,  that 
He  is  the  great  actor. 

X.  The  objects  of  the  Battle. 

These  were — 

1.  To  reveal  the  Lord's  presence  on  the  earth  This  was  the  characteristic  of 
the  heathen  world  everywhere.  "  'I'hey  did  not  like  to  retain  God  in  their 
knowledge,"  and  so  they  soon  lost  sight  of  Him  altogether.  Hence  they  are 
spoken  of  as  those  that  hiow  llim  not  (Ex.  v.  2,  with  vii.  5  ;  viii.  20  ;  xiv.  4,  18  ; 
1  Sam.  xvii.  4,  6  ;  2  Kings,  v.  15  ;  xix.  19  ;  xvii.  26  ;  Ps.  Ixxix.  6  ;  Ixxxiii.  18). 
These  passages  speak  of  God's  revealing  Himself  in  the  way  of  judgment,  among 
those  that  know  him  not.  Israel  too  practically  showed  the  same  tendency 
of  heart  to  "  depart  from  the  living  God,"  when  they  forsook  the  Lord,  and 
served  other  gods  (chap.  ii.  10,  12  ;  1  Kings  xviii.  37,  39  ;  Jer.  ii.  32,  also  11  ; 
iv.  22  ;  V.  4  ;  viii.  7  ;  Hos.  ii.  8,  20 ;  Joel,  ii.  27  ;  Ezek.  xxxvi.  U,  23,  36,  38). 
In  the  book  of  Ezekiel,  the  expression — "  that  ve  may  know  that  I  am  the  Lord" 
360 


HOMILETIC  COMMEM'ARY :  JUDGES.  chap.  vn. 

— occurs  more  than  fifty  times.  It  is  always  by  what  He  does  that  this  becomes 
known.  Men  strangely  forget  God's  presence  in  His  own  world,  and  therefore 
sometimes  He  rises  up  and  proves  emphatically  who  is  at  the  helm  (Ps.  ix.  17  ; 
xliv.  7,  X.  11 ;  Isa.  v.  12  ;  2  Kings  i.  3). 

2.  To  vindicate  His  superiority  to  all  who  would  usurp  His  place.  (Dan. 
iv.  35).  He  has  but  to  show  Himself,  and  His  enemies  are  scattered  (Ps.  Ixviii. 
1,  etc.,  ix.  20  ;  Ex.  xii.  12  ;  1  Sam.  v.  ;  Ps.  cxv.  3,  4  ;  Isa.  ii.  18).  God's 
jealousy  for  the  glory  of  His  name,  as  being  alone  Jehovah,  is  seen  in  His 
making  this  the  first  commandment  of  the  Decalogue.  Yet  to  go  after  other 
gods  was  the  besetting  sin  of  all  the  nations,  and  Israel  but  too  readily  followed 
the  example  set. 

7 lie  heathen  would  hardly  allow  that  such  an  one  as  the  God  of  Israel  existed 
at  all ;  therefore  He  takes  means  to  show  that  He  not  oidy  exists,  but  is  the 
great  "  I  am,"  and  that  '*  there  is  none  besides  Him  "  (Isa.  xlv.  5,  6,  xlii.  8, 
xliv.  6,  8).  His  superiority  to  the  nations  and  their  gods  is  emphatically 
asserted  in  the  current  language  of  Scripture.  "  He  beheld  and  drove  asunder 
the  nations."  "  The  nations  before  Him  are  as  a  drop  of  a  bucket,  etc.,  less  than 
nothing  and  vanity"  (Hab.  iii.  6  ;  Isa.  xl.  15,  17).  He  is  the  *'  King  of  nations" 
(Jer.  X.  7).  He  is  "  terrible  to  the  kings  of  the  earth."  **  They  cannot  stand 
before  Him."  (Jer.  x.  10;  11-16  ;  Deut.  xxxii.  39-43).  He  deals  with  them 
as  responsible  to  Him  (Jer.  xxv.  31,  etc.).  He  disposes  of  their  lot,  putting  down 
one  and  setting  up  another  (Jer.  xxvii.  7,  etc.).  He  employs  them  as  His  instru- 
ments (Isa.  X.  5,  etc.  ;  xlv.  1,  etc.  ;  xliv.  28  ;  Jer.  li.  20).  He  is  angry  with  the 
heathen  for  their  evil  treatment  of  His  people  (Zech.  i.  14,  15). 

3.  To  show  the  sacred  estimate  He  puts  on  the  people  who  are  called  by 
His  name.  That  they  should  wear  His  name  with  His  permission,  alone  makes 
them  sacred  ;  not  to  speak  ot"  the  many  sacred  purposes  for  which  as  a  people 
they  existed.  His  peculiar  love  for  them,  and  the  right  of  possession  He  had  in 
them.  He  had  also  bound  Himself  by  a  solemn  covenant  to  be  their  God,  and 
to  do  everything  for  them  which  a  God  might  be  expected  to  do  for  His  people. 
AU  this  sacred  relationship  still  existed  notwithstanding  of  their  sins,  for  they 
had  not  yet  been  cast  off.  "  Israel  was  not  forsaken,  nor  Judah  of  his  God, 
though  their  land  was  full  of  sin  against  the  Holy  One  of  Israel."  It  was  still 
the  church  of  the  living  God  on  earth — the  one  people  who  were  called  by  His 
name  (Jer.  li.  5  ;  Isa.  xliii.  10-12,  21,  also  4,  7  ;  Jer.  xii.  17,  xlvi.  28,  1.  17-20, 
33,  34). 

By  these  marauders  of  the  desert  the  people  of  Israel  were  utterly  despised, 
and  exposed  to  the  most  cruel  treatment.  They  were  regarded  as  fit  only  to 
be  trampled  in  the  mire.  They  were  not  allowed  the  dignity  of  being  counted 
as  one  of  the  nations.  They  came  up  without  bidding  as  ruthless  rubbers,  with 
no  pity  or  remorse,  to  serve  themselves,  in  the  most  wanton  manner,  of  the  fat 
pastures  of  God's  heritage,  little  dreaming  of  the  awful  daui^er  they  were  incur- 
ring by  tampering  lightly  with  the  interests  of  so  sacred  a  people.  These 
Israelites  were  God's  redeemed  ones,  sprinkled  with  the  sacred  blood,  and,  anaid 
all  the  vicissitudes  of  their  history,  were  owned  and  jealously  guarded  by  Him. 
As  one  wounded  in  the  apple  of  his  eye,  Jehovah  now  appears  in  opposition  to 
these  enemies  of  His  people,  and  in  a  little  time  they  were  to  become  as  the 
"  whirling  dust "  in  the  wind  of  His  indignation  (Ps.  Ixxxiii.  13  li.  V). 

The  great  truth,  which  as  yet  lay  unrevealed,  that  these  children  of  the 
covenant  were  the  people  oj  the  Messiah^  and  were  intimately  related  to  Hinit 
threw  a  wonderful  colouring  of  interest  around  their  history,  and  accounted  for 
all  that  was  so  tender  and  jealous,  so  patient  and  forgiving,  so  altogether  peculiar 
in  God's  ways  of  dealing  with  them.     A  Messianic  current  of  truth  runs  under- 

361 


CHAP.  VIL  HO  Ml  LET  J  a  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


neath  the  whole  of  this  book,  and  gives  to  it  actually  a  far  more  sacred  character 
than  appears  on  the  surface. 

XZ.  God's  choice  of  an  arzuy. 

Gideon  is  but  a  sub-lieutenant.  It  is  God  Himself  who  inspects  the  forces 
and  determines  the  strength  of  the  army.  The  plan  of  the  battle  is  His,  and 
11^  issues  all  the  directions  Israel  had  little  more  to  do  than  to  stand  still  and 
see  the  salvation  of  the  Lord.     Notice  two  things  : — 

I.  The  principle  on  which  the  choice  is  made.  The  army  must  be  reduced 
in  number,  not  increased.  It  was  already  small  compared  with  the  numbers 
of  the  enemy.  Yet  in  God's  estimation  it  is  too  large  to  gain  the  ends  which 
He  has  in  view.  Had  the  Israelites  been  as  numerous,  man  for  man,  as  the 
Midianites,  there  would  have  been  no  need  of  any  special  Divine  intervention 
on  their  behalf,  and  all  the  story  of  thrilling  interest  to  after  ages  which  this 
chapter  contains  would  have  been  unwritten. 

When  men  war  with  each  other  it  is  the  dictate  of  wisdom  to  oppose  a  force 
on  the  one  side  equal  to  that  which  stands  on  the  other.  The  resources  of 
even  the  ablest  commander  are  so  limited  that,  when  contending  with  a 
disciplined  and  brave  enemy,  he  must  rely  on  the  numbers  as  well  as  the  valour 
of  his  troops  (Luke  xiv.  31).  Some  cases  there  are  in  history  where  a  general 
has  proved  victorious  when  fig) i ting  with  only  one-tenth  or  even  a  smaller 
proportion  to  the  numbers  of  his  opponent,  as  in  the  case  of  Miltindes  at 
Marathon,  Themistocles  at  Salamis,  Clive  in  India,  and  some  English  generals, 
in  both  North  and  South  Africa,  at  the  present  day.  But  the  circumstances  in 
these  cases  were  exceptional,  and  do  not  invalidate  the  maxim,  that  a  successful 
issue  is  not  to  be  looked  for  by  employing  a  very  small  force  against  one  that  is 
very  large.  Leonidas  with  his  300  Spartans  were  all  cut  to  pieces  at  Thermo- 
pyloe,  notwithstanding  their  deeds  of  incredible  bravery. 

The  300  men  that  followed  Gideon  were  not  more  brave  than  these  Spartans, 
and,  but  for  an  unseen  power  at  work,  they  must  have  shared  a  similar  fate. 
The  mighty  God  of  Jacob  had  now  placed  Himself  on  the  side  of  His  people^ 
and,  in  order  to  give  room  for  the  di.^play  of  His  inexhaustible  resources,  as  one 
who  has  all  hearts  in  His  hands,  and  all  events  at  His  disposal,  human  [)rowess 
must  disappear.  To  glorify  the  infinite  wisdom,  and  absolute  control  of  all 
circumstances  possessed  by  Israel's  God,  weakness  must  be  employed  to  conquer 
strength.  Israel's  little  finger  must  be  made  use  of  to  break  the  right  arm  of 
the  powerful  invader ;  and,  through  the  weakest  instrumentality,  an  army, 
numerous  as  the  sand  on  the  sea-shore,  who  vaunted  themselves  against  the 
God  of  Israel,  must  be  scattered  before  Him  as  the  chaff  of  the  summer 
threshing-floor.  Thus  the  character  of  Jehovah  is  vindicated  in  the  sight  of  the 
heathen  as  "above  all  gods,  strong  and  miglity  in  battle,"  able  to  "give  power 
to  the  faint,  and  to  them  that  have  no  might  to  increase  strength."  Also  from 
Israel  all  grounds  of  boasting  are  taken  away,  so  that  no  one  can  lift  up  his 
voice  and  say,  *'  Mine  own  hand  hath  saved  me  !  " 

7  his  principle  of  employing  weakness  against  strength  was  not  meant  merely 
to  clear  the  way  for  some  exercise  of  supernatural  power.  Such  pviiwer  was 
indeed  often  exercised  for  the  salvation  of  Israel ;  for,  being  the  people  of  the 
Messiah,  they  were  of  such  supreme  importance  in  God's  sight,  that  He  would 
make  every  law  of  His  natural  world  to  give  way,  when  necessary,  for  the 
preservation  of  His  "  peculiar  people."  But  that  He  should  accomplish  this 
great  end,  without  any  disturbance  of  natural  laws,  and  merely  through  His 
absolute  command  of  all  natural  agencies  and  circumstances,  so  as  to  make 
them  work  out  the  purposes  of  His  will,  is  a  still  more  wonderful  exhibition  of 
His  character  as  the  Supreme  Governor  of  the  world  than  could  have  been  given 
362 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    JUDGES.  chap.  vil. 


by  the  putting  forth  of  miraculous  power.  To  use  such  a  disparity  of  force,  as 
the  placing  of  one  Israelite  against  450  of  the  enemy,  made  it  clear  that  salvation 
could  not  in  this  case  come  from  "an  arm  of  flesh,"  but  from  the  infinite  control 
which  Jehovah  exercised  over  all  persons  and  events  in  the  course  of  His 
providential  rule.  He  could  bring  out  1000  issues  where  men  could  not 
accomplish  one.  He  has  but  to  touch  man's  heart  and  it  is  filled  with  fears,  or 
suspicions,  or  disquieting  thoughts,  and  a  whole  army  is  made  to  flee  before  the 
creations  of  their  own  affrighted  imaginations  (2  Kings  vii.  ;  2  Sam.  v.  24,  25). 
He  can  paralyse  a  man's  faculties  so  far  as  to  "  make  the  diviners  mad,  and 
turn  the  wise  men  backward."  The  counsel  of  the  most  astute  He  can  turn  to 
foolishness,  as  in  the  case  of  Ahithophel,  and  the  heart  of  the  most  courageous 
He  can  cause  to  melt  as  water.  He  can  introduce  confusion  into  the  counsels 
of  those  who  bear  rule,  and  produce  the  phenomenon  of  a  **  house  divided 
against  itself"  at  the  very  moment  of  assurance  of  victory.  Or  He  can  awaken 
any  element  in  nature  to  serve  His  purpose,  from  "  the  stars  in  their  courses," 
down  to  the  dewdrop  and  the  rain.  A  man's  own  mind  too  He  can  distract  by 
filling  him  with  fearful  apprehensions  by  day  and  scaring  him  with  dreams  by 
night. 

It  was  to  glorify  the  inexhaustible  resources  of  the  God  of  Israel,  that  He 
employed  a  mere  handful  of  men  to  put  to  the  rout,  and  utterly  consume  an 
army  of  the  enemy,  numerous  as  the  sand  on  the  sea  shore. 

2.  The  character  of  the  army  chosen.  Though  forcibly  taught  by  this  history, 
that  success  does  not  depend  on  the  extent  or  measure  of  the  instruraenta  ity 
employed,  yet  regard  is  had,  as  a  rule,  to  the  fitness  of  the  instrumentality. 
The  use  of  natural  means  to  accomplish  Divine  ends  is  an  arrangement  which 
God  Himself  has  established  ;  and  the  greater  fitness  there  is  in  the  means 
einployed,  we  are  warranted  to  expect  a  larger  success  in  the  result.  God  has 
respect  to  His  own  arrangement.  Even  in  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel,  while  *'  it  is 
ever  God  that  gives  the  increase,"  He  blesses  most  those  means  that 
are  in  themselves  best  adapted  to  produce  the  result  (Acts  xi.  24  ;  xiv.  1).  We 
n)ay  expect  therefore,  that  God's  army  would  be  chosen  according  to  the  personal 
fitness  of  the  men  to  occupy  the  post  of  peril. 

(1.)  They  were  picked  men.  They  were  chosen  out  from  others  as  being 
superior  to  those  with  whom  they  were  associated.  They  were  men  of  sterling 
character,  of  rock-like  intrepidity  in  the  presence  of  danger,  every  man  a  hero, 
and  all  **  of  the  stuff  of  which  patriots  are  made."  They  all  justified  the  choice 
that  was  made  of  them  at  this  eventful  crisis,  by  following  their  captain  into  the 
breach,  at  tiie  call  of  duty,  resolved  ;o  do  or  die  for  their  country  and  their  God. 
In  physical  features  they  were  men  of  Spartan  courage,  of  the  lion-heart,  and  of 
stalwart  frame.  No  weak  hands  or  feeble  knees  appeared  among  them,  but  all 
seemed  trustworthy  to  meet  the  great  emergency  that  had  arisen. 

This  class  of  men  are  specially  needed  at  any  crisis  of  the  church's  history. 
It  is  not  numbers  that  form  the  real  strength  of  the  Church  of  God,  but  men  of 
the  right  stamp.  Men  are  needed  who  are  "  rooted  in  the  faith,"  "grounded  " 
in  love,  and  **  established  "  in  the  hope  of  the  gospel — who  have  profound  con- 
victions and  strong  decision  of  character.  A  large  number  of  professing  Christians 
scarcely  rise  above  the  line  of  reproach  for  being  insincere.  They  wear  the  good 
name.  Charity  supposes  them  to  be  on  the  right  side  of  the  line,  but  is  not 
free  froni  doubts.  Tried  by  a  low  standard  they  pass  for  Christians,  but  they 
have  little  of  the  shining  lustre  which  indicates  the  genuine  seal  of  heaven. 

The  men  that  really  do  good,  however,  are  those  whose  piety  does  not  flicker 
in  the  socket,  but  burns  with  a  bright  and  steady  flame — those  who  have  fixed 
principles  as  the  basis  of  their  characters,  whose  eye  rests  not  below  the  horizon 
of  time,  but  is  fixed  on  the  grand  realities  of  eternity,  and  whose  hearts  "  rejoice 

363 


OHAP.  VII.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    JUDGES, 


daily  in  the  hope  of  the  glory  of  God."  Such  men  do  honour  to  the  cause  they 
espouse  by  their  character  and  conduct ;  and  they  are  the  men  who,  like  lightning 
rods,  are  fitted  to  draw  down  the  ble8sing  from  above. 

(2.)  They  had  faith  in  their  cause.  The  test  applied  to  tlieir  character  was 
so  severe,  that  nothing  but  true  belief  in  Israel's  God  and  conscientious  attach- 
ment to  His  cause,  could  have  so  entirely  stood  it,  as  these  men  did.  They 
were  the  faithful  **  remnant "  of  Gideon's  days  ;  men  who,  in  other  circumstances, 
would  have  suffered  as  martyrs  at  the  stake,  or,  for  the  sake  of  their  principles, 
would  have  "wandered  about  in  sheep-skins,  and  goat-skins,  being  destitute, 
afflicted,  tormented."  They  believed  in  Jehovah  as  sustaining  to  Israel  the 
relation  of  a  covenant  God,  who  had  made  many  gracious  promises  ;  and  they 
counted  '*  Him  faithful  who  had  promised."  They  had  iiope  therefore  in  Israel's 
future,  and  believed,  from  the  signs  before  them,  that  God  was  to  arise  even  now, 
and  vindicate  His  own  honour  in  the  eyes  of  the  heathen  nations  that  knew  Him 
not.  No  other  explanation  will  account  for  their  staunchness.  (Comp.  pp. 
279,  280). 

Such  men  make  a  church  strong,  because  on  them  the  Divine  smile  can  rest, 
and  like  true  Israelites  they  have  influence  at  the  throne  of  grace.  Men  of 
great  faith,  when  they  set  themselves  to  pray  importunately  for  the  blessing, 
as  these  men  doubtless  would  do,  "  moved  the  hand  that  moved  the  universe." 
This  has  much  to  do  with  the  success  of  the  church  of  God  in  overcoming  all 
opposition  to  her  cause  in  the  world.  When  she  reflects  most  brightly  the 
Divine  image,  and  is  filled  in  greatest  abundance  with  the  Divine  Spirit,  then  is 
she  most  likely  to  be  made  an  efficient  instrument  in  blessing  the  world  around 
her.     (Ps.  Ixvii.  1,  2). 

(3.)  Ihey  were  careful  in  the  use  of  means.  It  was  not  by  direct  miraculous 
agency  that  the  result  was  gained,  but  through  the  instrumentality  of  Gideon's 
band.  God's  blessing  rested  on  the  means  they  used,  and  rendered  them  effectual, 
so  that  the  enemy  was  routed,  'i^iey  made  the  fullest  use  of  the  means  at  their 
disposal,  and  left  the  issue  with  God.  There  were  no  idle  men  in  that  army, 
just  as  there  were  no  cowards.  There  were  no  supernumeraries,  none  that  could 
be  spared  from  their  post.  Every  man  was  required  to  form  a  line  long  enough, 
in  each  of  the  three  crescents,  in  order  to  produce  the  impression  intended.  Had 
but  a  few  of  the  trumpets  remained  unblown,  a  smaller  number  of  lights  been 
kindled,  and  only  a  half  of  the  pitchers  been  broken,  less  conHternation  and 
dismay  had  been  spread  in  the  camp  of  the  enemy.  There  was  no  reserve,  and 
there  was  no  fighting  by  proxy.  Every  man  was  so  sternly  required  at  his  post 
that  he  had  to  stand  firm,  as  if  on  him  depended  the  entire  success  of  the  hour. 

Thus  it  is  in  the  Christian  army.  None  can  plead  ( xemption  from  want  of 
capacity,  obscurity  of  station,  or  insignificance  of  personal  resources.  None 
dare  to  fold  his  arms  and  refuse  to  fight  because  he  cannot  bring  down  a  Goliath, 
or  turn  the  tide  of  battle  by  his  single  prowess.  None  dare  to  leave  the  battle 
ground,  because  he  is  only  a  private  soldier,  and  not  a  general.  None  dare  to 
sleep  at  his  post,  because  he  sees  not  any  great  good  that  can  be  accomplished 
by  all  that  he  can  do.  All  must  act,  and  act  simultaneously,  each  in  his  i)lace, 
if  complete  success  is  to  be  attained  in  any  field  of  the  Christian  warfare. 

(4.)  They  were  loyal  to  their  Leader.  They  knew  that  Gideon  did  not 
occupy  this  position  of  himself,  but  that  God  had  specially  called  him  to  it,  and 
as  they  would  be  found  faithful  to  God  Himself,  they  now  cleave  fast  to  him 
whom  God  had  chosen  to  become  the  Liberator  of  their  country.  There  was  no 
jealousy  or  envy.  Whoever  might  be  the  Lord's  anointed,  him  they  would 
follow  for  the  Lord's  sake.  The  story  of  the  angel's  visit  to  Gideon,  they  had 
heard  of,  and  the  promise  made,  "I  will  be  with  thee"  (vi.  16);  they  had 
witnessed  Gideon  as  the  successful  challenger  of  Baal ;  the  sign  of  the  fleece 
and  the  dew  they  had  heard  of ;  and  now  at  last  came  the  story  of  the  singular 
364 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   JUDGES.  chap.  vn. 


dream  about  the  "cake  overturnini]:  the  tent."  By  all  these  evidences  they 
were  confirmed  in  tlie  thought,  that  Gideon  was  a  man  called  of  God,  and  to  him 
as  the  one  that  God  had  sent,  they  became  ardently  attached  as  their  leader. 
Neither  the  numbers  of  the  enemy,  nor  the  falling  away  of  so  many  cowards, 
wrought  with  them  for  a  moment  to  make  them  swerve.  We  hear  of  no  murmurs, 
no  sinkings  of  heart,  no  thoughts  of  flight,  nor  laying  down  of  arms  in  pure 
despondency  at  the  hopeless  character  of  the  issue.  But,  fully  confident  of  the 
result,  they  were  all  eye  and  ear  on  Gideon  to  announce  the  line  of  duty  they 
should  take.  Hence  there  was  nothing  but  prompt  and  silent  obedience  through- 
out the  whole  camp ;  and  when  it  is  thus  in  the  Christian  camp,  success  will  be 
rapid  and  complete.     (Comp.  pp.  272-286). 

ZZX.  The  strong'  man's  time  of  weaknesSf  and  tbe  comforts  of 
his  God. 

It  appears  from  verse  10  that  Gideon  had  still  some  lingering  apprehensions 
in  this  great  extremity,  and  his  God,  in  tender  mercy,  supplies  him  with  another 
additional  comfort  (see  pp.  353-4).  All,  even  the  strongest,  have  such  periods 
of  weakness  in  the  hour  of  great  trial.  As  it  is  human  to  err,  so  it  is  human  to 
be  spiritually  weak. 

1.  Spiritual  strength  is  not  inherent  in  pious  men.  It  is  not  native,  but  given, 
and  given  as  an  act  of  grace.  Though  never  entirely  taken  away,  it  is  given  in 
a  greater  or  less  degree  according  to  the  manner  in  which  it  has  been  improved, 
or  according  to  the  measure  of  their  trust  in  their  God,  their  conscientiousness 
in  prayer,  or  their  leading  a  consistent,  God-fearing  life. 

The  Christian's  strength  differs  from  natural  courage.  It  consists  in  the  up- 
holding grace  of  his  Master.  He  is  "  strong  in  the  Lord  "  (Eph.  vi.  10).  So 
while  personally  weak,  he  may  yet  be  strong  (2  Cor.  xii.  10).  As  sustaining  grace 
is  given  or  withheld  he  is  strong  or  weak  (2  Cor.  xii.  9).  Each  day  anew  this 
grace  is  needed. 

2.  Faith  is  ever  apt  to  fail.  Faith  has  a  slender  root.  It  is  not  a  native 
growth  on  the  soil  of  the  human  heart.  Hence  those  who  are  comparatively  strong 
in  faith  sometimes  give  way  under  the  piessure  of  continued  trial,  and  become 
weak  as  other  men  {e.g.  Moses,  Num.  xi.  11-15  ;  Abraham,  Gen.  xv.  2.  ;  Elijah, 
1  Kings  xix  ;  the  Martyr  Church,  (Rev.  vi.  10  ;  Luther,  and  the  Iveformers  on 
many  occasions.  See  more  fully  above  at  pp.  353,  354).  It  is  "by  faith  that 
we  stand."  On  this  pillar  the  whole  of  our  spiritual  character  depends.  But 
when  through  long  continuance  of  trial,  our  frad  nature  yearns  for  repose  from 
the  strain  to  which  it  is  exposed,  faith  gives  way,  and  thestrong  man  becomes  weak. 

3.  Divine  comforts  are  opportunely  given.  "  Fear  not !  I  am  with  thee — 
I  will  not  fail  thee — Be  not  dismayed,  I  am  thy  God,  I  will  strengthen  thee,  I 
will  uphold  thee  with  the  right  hand  of  my  righteousness.  Though  thou  art  a 
'  worm,'  1  will  make  thee  thrash  the  mountams,  and  heat  them  small."  **  As 
thy  days  so  shall  thy  strength  be  "  (Josh.  i.  5  ;  Isa.  xii.  10, 14,  15  ;  Dent,  xxxiii. 
25  :  also  Isa.  xl.  29-31).  When  these  promises  are  realised,  a  great  accession 
of  strength  is  the  result. 

4.  These  comforts  are  given  with  kind  consideration.  As  in  the  beautiful 
expression,  "  thy  gentleness  hath  made  me  great"  (Ps.  xviii.  35).  The  Divine 
loving  kindness  is  manifested  in  God's  general  dealings  with  the  good  man  in  the 
hour  of  peril  (See  Ps.  ciii.  13  ;  "  the  cords  of  a  man,"  etc.  Hos.  xi.  4  ;  "  the  Lord 
beino:  merciful  to  him  "  Gen.  xix.  16).  Here  he  shows  His  finger  by  what  seems 
a  trifling  incident.  But  Gi«leon  is  quick  to  discern  it  as  the  finger  of  God 
(Ps.  xxxii.  8). 

365 


CHAP.  VIL  HOMJLETW  COMMENTARY:    JUDGES, 


COMMENTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

I,  The  apparent  hopelessness  of  And  if  in  any  one  individual  case  this 
success  for  the  cause  of  the  Church,  is  so  difficult,  how  impossible  to  expect 
The  Church  of  God  is  the  same  now  such  a  change  of  character  among  the 
that  it  was  in  Gideon's  days.  The  myriads  on  myriads  of  that  teeming 
great  purpose  of  its  existence  tJieu  was  population  !  "If  the  Lord  should  open 
the  promotion  of  God's  glory  in  the  the  windows  of  heaven,  might  such  a 
world  in  connection  with  a  Messiah  to  thing  be  ? "  Were  God  not  to  open 
come.  It  is  the  same  end  that  is  kept  the  windows  of  lieaven,  such  a  thing 
in  view  now  in  connection  with  the  would  not  be.  On  that  moral  wilder- 
Messiah  as  come.  He  and  we  live  but  ness  "nothing  but  briers  and  thorns 
at  different  periods  of  the  same  great  would  come  up,  until  the  Spirit  be 
contest.  The  weapons  used  in  the  poured  from  on  high." 
conflict  are  very  different ;  the  cause 

is  the  same  and  the  principles  are  all  II.  The  success  of  the  church  is  not 
the  same.  to  he  estimated  according  to  ordinary 
The  most  striking  feature  of  the  rules.  The  cause  of  the  church  is  of 
conMct  is  the  apparent  hopelessness  of  higher  origin  than  the  schemes  of  men. 
the  cause  that  is  God's.  To  re-intro-  It  is  in  a  peculiar  sense  God's  own 
duce  the  love  of  God  into  a  fallen  cause,  and  by  it  He  is  evolving  in  a  far 
world,  and  to  make  it  take  deep  root  more  illustrious  manner  than  by  any 
everywhere,  when  every  passion  and  other  method  the  moral  glory  of  His 
inclitiation,  every  thought,  disposition,  all-perfect  character.  Its  success,  and 
and  craving  of  the  human  heart,  are  the  maimer  of  its  success,  are  more 
all  dead  against  it,  seems  an  utterly  slowly  and  solemnly  revealed  than  those 
unattainable  object.  of  any  other  cause.  Everything  re- 
Take  any  of  the  "  dark  places  "  of  'garding  the  evolution  of  its  results  is 
the  earth  as  an  illustration.  Select  more  under  His  own  immediate  super- 
Western  Central  Africa.  In  1845  a  intendence,  and  when  success  is  effected 
mere  handful  of  missionaries  had  it  usually  comes  in  such  a  way  as  to 
begun  to  assemble  on  the  shores  of  call  forth  the  exclamation,  "  Is  not  the 
that  extensive  empire  of  Satan,  with  hand  of  the  Lord  in  all  this  ? "  The 
the  ultimate  view  of  bringing  the  vast  most  magnificent  results  are  accom- 
population  of  70  millions  of  human  plished  by  the  feeblest  instrumentality, 
beings,  that  stretched  far  and  wide  That  "  Satan  should  be  seen  falling  as 
over  that  large  part  of  the  continent,  lightning  from  heaven"  before  the 
to  the  knowledge  and  the  love  of  God.  proclamation  of  the  simple  tale  of  the 
To  the  eye  of  an  observer,  how  futile  cross  by  plain  unlettered  fishermen — 
the  attempt !  How  preposterous  the  that  the  Prince  of  Darkness  should  be 
expectation  of  success  !  To  hope  to  defeated  in  those  fastnesses  where  he 
Christianise  our  own  land  with  such  had  reckoned  himself  most  secure  by  a 
an  insignificant  instrumentality  would  mere  detachment  of  the  army  of  the 
indeed  appear  an  extravagant  dream.  Prince  of  Light — affords  a  far  higher 
And  are  the  difficulties  fewer  in  display  of  moral  grandeur,  than  could 
Western  Africa?  To  say  nothing  of  the  employment  of  means  equal  to  the 
the  difficulties  which  exist  there  and  greatness  of  the  result,  or  commensur- 
do  not  exist  here — to  say  nothing  of  ate  with  the  difhculty  of  its  accom- 
its  vertical  sun,  its  noxious  swamps,  its  plishment,  have  done, 
barbarous  rites,  and  strange  language — 

is  the  master  difficulty,  the  depravity         III.   The   strength  of  the  Church 

of  the  human  heart  more  easily  con-  is  not  to  be  estimated  by  numbers, 

quered  in  Africa  than  it  is  in  England?  Had   it    been   so,    what   would    have 

(Jan   any  of   these   Ethiopians    easily  become   of    her    interests  all    along? 

change  their  skin,  or  men  accustonied  From   the   beginning    until   now,    the 

to  do  evil  readily  learn  to  do  good  !  number  of  her    adherents  has  been 
366 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES.  chap,  viL 


small  compared  with  the  number  of  were  but  120  persons.     But  was  she 

her  foes.      Under  both  Dispensations  weak?    Let   tlie  events  of  that  day 

they  have  been  like  what  the  Israelites  answer.     Throngh  their  prayers,  at  the 

were  to  their  enemies,  in  the  days  of  preaching   of  a   single  sermon   about 

Aliab — "  like  two  little  flocks  of  kids,  Jesus  Christ  and  Him  crucified,  by  an 

while  the  Syrians  filled  the  country."  illiterate  fisherman,  no  fewer  than  3000 

Yet,  the  standing  promise  of  her  Head  souls  were  "  added  to  the  church  of 

is — "  Fear  not,  little  flock  ;  it  is  your  such  as  should  be  saved."     During  the 

Father's  good   pleasure   to  give   you  first  century  of  the  Christian  era,  the 

the  kingdom."     And  though  faithful  church  was  a  monument  to  after  ages 

soldiers  of  the  cross  do   fall,   though  of  the  power  of  that   religion   which 

standard-bearers  do  faint,  though  the  had  come  fresh  from  heaven — its  power 

ranks  of  the  stedfast  few  are  thinned,  to  overthrow  and  to  cast  down  every 

the  strength  of  the  Church  is  not  gone,  thing  that  might  exalt  or  oppose  itself 

for  her  strength  does  not  depend  on  against  God,  to  pluck  up  and  root  out 

her  numbers.  every  obstacle  that  might  impede  its 

The  Church  was  small  in   number  progress, 
at    a    time   when  her    enemies   were 

gathered  together  as  the  sand  by  the  IV.   The  true  streng^th  of  the  church 

sea-shore,  a  very  great  multitude,  and  lies  in  the  presence  of  her  Great  Head, 

when  but  six  hundred  men  followed  the  The  great  promise  is,  "  I  am  with  you 

guilty  monarch  of  Israel  trembling.  But  always  ;  "  and  the  first  sentence  of  the 

one  man  was  found  with  sufficient  con-  church's    history   reads,    "  they   went 

fidence  in  his  God  to  go  forth  alone,  fol-  forth  and  preached,  the  Lord  working 

lowed  by  his  armour-bearer,  against  the  with  them."    He  gave  them  "  power  to 

armiesof  theuncircumcised.  Trembling  tread  upon  serpents  and  scorpions,  and 

seized  the   mi^^hty  host,   and  victory  over  all  the  power  of  the  enemies."  For 

was  declared  for  Israel.     The  Church  the  good  of  His  church  He  holds  the 

was  small  in  the  days  of  Elijah  ;  yet,  at  reins  of  universal  government.      For 

the  prayers  of  that  one  man,  the  waters  "  He  is  Head  over  all  things  to  His 

of  heaven  were  stayed,  so  that  it  rained  Church  (Eph.  i.    22  ;   John  xvii.   2). 

not  on  the  earth  by  the  space  of  three  From  His  high  seat,  His  watchful  eye 

years  and  six  months.  Again  he  prayed  commands  the  entire  arena  of  the  con- 

and  the  earth  brought  forth  her  fruit,  test.     His  wisdom  and  resources  are 

In  those  days,  though  small  in  number,  equal  to  the  great  emergency  of  this 

was  the  Church  weak  ?     Let  the  event  world's  history,  now  that  it  has  become 

answer.      He  stood    forth  alone   the  the  battle  field  of  the  armies  of  light 

prophet  of  the  Lord,  while  the  priests  and  darkness  ;  His  counsel  shall  stand, 

of  Baal  were  450  men.      But  at  his  He  will  do  all  His  pleasure.      "  Before 

prayer,  the  fire  of  heaven  fell,  the  by-  Him  every  knee  shall  yet  bow,"  and 

standers  were  struck   with   awe,   and  "His   enemies  shall    lick  the  dust." 

the  wicked  priests,  who  had  led  the  "No  weapon  formed  against  His  church 

people  to  apostatise  from  the  true  God,  shall  prosper." 

were  put  to  death  as  the  real  cause  It  is  not  a  mere  imagination,  but  a 

of  the  desolation  that  overspread  the  matter  of  history,  on  His  own  word  of 

land.     The  Church  was  small  in  the  truth,  that  all  power  in  heaven  and 

days  of  Hezekiah  ;  but  was  she  weak  ?  earth  is  given  into  His  hands  ;  and  we 

At  the  voice  of  his  prayer  the  angel  are  sure  He  will  use  that  power  in 

of  the  Lord  went  forth  into  the  camp  defending  a  cause  for  which  He  shed 

of  her  enemies  and  slew  in  one  night  His  blood.     The  Lord  Jesus  is  on  the 

185  000  men,  throne,   therefore  let   the  Church   be 

If  we  come  to  New  Testament  times,  glad.     For  His  own  name's  sake  He 

the  church  was  small  in  number,  when  must  work,  until  His  Church  go  forth 

those  assembled  in  the  upper  room  at  "  fair  as  the  moon,  clear  as  the  sun, 

Jerusalem  waiting  the  day  of  Pentecost,  and  terrible  as  an  army  with  banners." 

367 


ORAP.  viT.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    JUDGES. 


CHAPTER  VII. 

DIVINE  PROVIDENCE  OVERRULING  THE  RESULT. 

Verses  16-26. 

Critical  Notes.  —16.  The  interpretation  thereof.]  Heb.  The  breaJcing  thereof.  A  metaphor 
from  the  breaking  of  a  nut  to  come  at  the  kernel ;  or  from  a  fowl's  beating  the  shell  with  her 
beak  to  get  out  the  fish.  [Trapp.]  Gideon  learns  that  the  enemy's  confidence  is  already  broken 
by  the  belief  that  Israel's  Lord  is  again  in  the  field,  [Cassel.]  His  mind  is  ready  to  believe  like 
that  of  Nathanael  (John  i.  49).  His  first  act  instinctively  is  to  worship  his  God  with  thanks- 
giving, and  his  next  is  to  bound  back  to  his  little  camp  (not  "  host  ")  with  a  resolute  purpose 
to  attack  the  foe.  'I'he  sky  was  now  clear  of  all  doubts.  The  victory  was  as  good  as  gained. 
Like  an  electric  spark  Gideon  communicated  his  own  spirit  to  his  followers. 

16.  He  divided  the  three  hundred  men,  etc.]  Not  a  moment  is  now  to  be  lost.  A  plan  of 
singular  shrewdness,  which  he  had  resolved  in  his  mind,  suggested  probably  by  his  God,  who 
was  closely  guiding  his  every  movement,  he  begins  at  once  to  put  into  execution.  Instructions 
are  given  to  all  his  men  as  to  how  they  should  act.  They  are  arranged  in  three  distinct  columns, 
to  have  the  appearance  of  three  armies  in  the  darkness  of  night.  Their  weapons  are  trumpets, 
pitchers,  and  torches  or  firebrands.  These  last  were  concealed  within  the  pitchers  till  the 
moment  came  for  their  blazing  forth.  This  division  of  the  men  was  meant  to  show  the  enemy 
that  their  camp  was  assailed  from  three  different  quarters  (comp.  1  Sam.  xi.  11  ;  2  Sam.  xviii.  2). 
All  were  to  be  bold,  prompt,  and  simultaneous  in  their  action.  On  one  supreme  moment  the 
whole  issue  depended.     Gideon  himself  was  to  give  the  signal. 

19.  The  middle  watch.]  The  Romans  divided  the  night  into  four  watches,  from  6  p.m.  to 
6  a.m.,  three  hours  on  each  watch,  and  the  Jews  when  conquered  by  the  Romans  followed  the 
same  reckoning  (Matt.  xiv.  25  ;  Mark  xiii.  35).  But  originally  tlie  Israelites  divided  the  night 
into  three  watches,  from  sunset  to  10  p.m.  (Lam.  ii.  19)  ;  from  10  p.m.  to  2  a.m.  (as  here)  ;  and 
from  2  a.m.  to  sun-rise  (Ex.  xiv.  24  ;  1  Sam.  xi.  11).  It  is  clear  that  in  this  case  it  is  the  old 
reckoning  that  is  referred  to,  from  the  expression,  "  the  middle  watch  "  (Ps.  Ixiii.  6  ;  xc.  4 ; 
cxix.  148  ;  cxxx.  6). 

Came  nnto  the  outermost  part  of  the  camp.]  To  the  border  of  the  camp,  Several  instances 
of  this  kind  of  stratagem  are  found  in  history.  The  famous  Hannibal  once  extricated  himself 
in  this  way  when  surrounded  by  Fabius  Maximus.  Also  an  Arab  chief,  during  last  century, 
made  his  escape  from  a  fortress  in  which  he  was  besieged  by  a  vastly  superior  force  through  the 
same  means.    [Niebuhr.]     By  a  like  stratagem  Pompey  overcame  Mithridates  in  Asia.    [Trapp.] 

Newly  set  the  watch.]  The  first  sentries  had  been  relieved,  and  the  second  posted.  Some  little 
time  must  have  been  occupied  in  Gideon's  making  a  disposition  of  his  men,  and  giving  them 
instructions  ;  so  that  now  it  must  have  been  probably  about  eleven  o'clock,  when  the  whole  camp 
had  given  itself  up  to  the  deep  sleep  of  the  night  season,  and  were  calculating  on  enjoying 
several  hours  of  an  unbroken  slumber  (1  Thess.  v.  3).  Some  little  time,  too,  would  be  occupied 
by  the  other  two  companies  going  round,  to  take  up  their  positions  at  different  places  near 
the  camp. 

19,  20.  They  blew  the  trumpets,  etc.]  It  being  pitch  dark,  every  man  being  in  his  place  and 
knowing  what  to  do,  stillness  reigning  throughout  the  valley,  and  the  enemy  being  fast  asleep  in 
the  vast  multitude  of  his  tents,  Gideon,  committing  himself  once  more  to  God  in  prayer,  puts 
the  trumpet  to  his  mouth,  and  with  one  loud  piercing  blast  gives  the  appointed  signal.  Instantly 
it  is  followed  by  the  terrific  noise  of  shrill,  strong  blasts  from  three  hundred  other  trumpets 
piercing  the  night  air,  and  the  next  moment  to  that  is  added  the  crashing  of  three  hundred 
yiitchers  among  the  rocks  close  by  the  camp  of  the  sleepers,  as  if  the  whole  heights  around  about 
had  become  vocal  with  fury  against  the  spoilers  of  Jehovah's  heritage.  And  while  terror  thus 
ft  11  on  the  ear,  the  moment  the  eye  looked,  there  were  three  hundred  torches  blazing  ominously 
full  in  view,  as  if  they  were  avenging  deities  come  to  execute  the  sentence  of  doom.  All  this 
was  followed  by  the  terrible  cry — The  sword  of  Jehovah  and  of  Gideon  / — the  two  names  which, 
of  all  others,  were  most  dreaded  by  the  conscience-stricken  Midianites. 

21.  All  the  host  ran,  etc.]  As  with  the  shock  of  an  earthquake  the  whole  camp  of  the  enemy 
was  startled,  and  awakened  from  sleep.  Alarm  filled  every  breast  ;  consternation  took  posses- 
sion of  the  myriads  on  myriads  that  8])read  themselves  for  miles  along  the  valley  ;  and  an 
affrighted  imagination  added  tenfold  creations  of  its  own  to  the  actual  realities  of  evil  around 
them.  Three  hundred  trumpets  were  blowing,  and  300  torches  were  blazing,  but  to  the  terrified 
onlookers  in  the  valley  they  seemed  to  be  thousands.  And  these  thousands  of  torch  bearers 
leemed  to  be  but  lighting  the  way  to  a  large  army  behind  tbenj.  There  was  running  hither  *n4 
368 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   JUDGES,  ohap.  VH, 


thither  as  among  those  who  are  distracted.  The  panic  was  universal.  None  thought  of  makiug 
a  stand  against  the  danger.     Terrors  swept  the  whole  valley  like  a  whirlwind. 

They  cried— in  terror.  Everything  was  lost.  Their  cattle,  their  spoil,  their  tents  and  baggage, 
their  wives  and  children,  and  dear  life  itself  were  in  jeopardy.  Being  in  darkness  they  supposed 
an  avenging  army  was  already  among  them,  and  they  mistook  friends  for  foes.  Suspicion  also 
arose  among  them,  that  one  part  of  the  camp  was  treacherous  to  the  other  parts— that  being  of 
mixed  nationalities,  the  one  race  began  to  plot  against  the  others.  And  so  from  different  causes 
"  the  Lord  set  every  man's  sword  against  his  fellow."  (1  Sara.  xiv.  20  ;  2  Chron.  xx.  23).  Hence 
arose  a  dreadful  slaughter  throughout  the  whole  camp.  In  blind  and  helpless  confusion  they  ran 
on  smiting  down  all  that  came  in  their  way. 

Beth-shittah.J  House  of  acacias.  The  course  of  the  flight  was  at  first  eastward,  along  the 
main  road  to  Bethshan,  and  the  Jordan,  then  southward  down  the  Arabah,  towards  Jericho, 
where  they  might  more  easily  cross  the  river.  But  it  was  a  headlong  route  without  thought,  or 
order,  or  object.     The  one  idea  was  to  save  life. 

Abel-meholah— the  birth-place  of  Elisha,  about  10  miles  below  Bethshan,  The  rising  sun 
beheld  them  turned  into  a  rabble  of  fugitives,  rushing  in  the  wildest  terror  towards  the  fords 
of  Jordan. 

23,  24.  Men  of  Israel  were  gathered,  etc.]  The  cowards  who  had  turned  back,  but  especially 
the  9700  who,  though  not  cowardly,  had  not  been  accepted  by  God  to  form  part  of  His  select 
army.  Also  all  who  had  any  spark  of  patriotism  left  in  their  bosoms  among  the  Northern  tiibes. 
Swift  messengers  too  were  sent  by  Gideon  to  the  hill  country  of  Ephraim,  that  they  should  come 
down  and  intercept  the  enemy  at  those  parts  of  the  Jordan  that  were  over  against  their  territory. 
The  Midianites  doubtless  fled  in  more  detachments  than  one,  so  that  Gideon  could  not  follow 
them  in  all  the  routes  they  took  without  help.  It  was  besides  highly  politic  to  give  the  Ephraimites 
some  share  of  the  honours  of  so  memorable  a  day. 

25.  They  slew  Oreb  on  the  rock  Oreb,  etc.]  The  two  princes  had  taken  shelter,  one  in  the 
cavern  of  a  rock,  the  other  in  the  vat  of  a  wine-press.  Both  these  places,  from  this  circumstance, 
were  afterwards  called  by  their  names  respectively.  Oreb,  signifies  a  raven,  and  Zeeb,  a  wolf, 
both  significant  names  of  the  rapacity  which  characterised  these  marauding  chiefs.  "  These 
princes  had  forced  Israel  to  hide  in  the  rocks,  and  had  robbed  them  of  their  provisions,  and  now 
the  God  of  Israel  makes  them  see  their  sin  in  their  punishment  "  (Judges  L  7).     [Trapp.l 


MAIN  HOMTLETICS.— Verses  16-25. 
Z.  The  Hand  of  the  Xiord  visible  in  this  deliverance. 

It  is  quite  manifest  that  the  overruling  Providence  of  God  was  at  work  in  all 
this  to  bring  out  the  result.     This  is  seen — 

I.  In  the  general  effect  produced.  Victory  was  gained  in  a  few  minutes, 
and  without  striking  a  blow — Israel  did  not  need  (o  lilt  sword  or  spear.  There 
was  no  battle — only  a  rout,  disastrous  and  complete.  Not  a  sin-le  man  was 
lost  of  Gideon's  men — not  a  wound  or  scar  was  ftiven.  They  did  not  need  to 
fight,  but  to  stand  still  and  see  the  salvation  of  God.  In  place  of  swords  we 
see  trumpets,  pitchers,  and  torches  ;  and  yet  throngh  the  whole  camp  of  Midian, 
such  was  the  state  of  terror,  that  "  none  of  the  men  of  might  did  find  their 
hands."  There  is  no  such  thing  possible  as  fi-hting  against  the  mi-lity  God 
of  Jacob.  Tliere  must  have  been  some  remarkable  influence  at  work  to  have 
produced  such  a  result  as  this. 

II,  In  the  use  of  the  particular  means  employed.  It  was  by  one  special 
cause  that  the  issue  was  brought  about — the  rousing  of  the  fears  of  the  enemy 
to  such  an  extent,  as  to  paralyse  all  regular  or  orderly  action.  This  was  done 
in  the  simplest  but  most  efi'ective  manner. 

(1.)  Gideon  was  directed  to  form  a  plan  fitted  to  produce  the  result.  In  this 
and  all  other  steps  he  seems  to  have  been  Divinely  guided.  At  this  moment, 
all  his  movements  seem  to  have  been  taken  in  hand  by  his  God,  for  he  was  the 
instrument  in  Uod's  hand  employed  to  carry  out  His  designs  ;  and  though  he 
was  left  a  free  agent,  as  at  other  times,  tliere  was  yet  an  overruling  of  the 

2  A  869 


CHAP.  VII.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JUDGES. 


workings  of  his  mind,  while  forming  his  plans  and  purposes.  There  is,  indeed, 
nothing  supernatural  in  the  plan  itself,  however  much  skill  and  natural 
shrewdness  it  may  indicate.     There  was  no  violation  of  natural  law. 

The  time  chosen  was  the  dead  of  night,  when  all  was  dark  around,  and  when 
the  whole  camp  was  sunk  in  slumber.  The  place  occupied  was  the  heights 
around  the  camp,  especially  at  three  different  points.  To  produce  a  hideous 
noise  all  round  the  camp  at  a  moment's  notice  while  profound  silence  reigned, 
and  to  keep  up  that  noise  with  the  blare  of  300  trumpets,  was  not  only  fitted  to 
startle  the  sleepers,  but  to  strike  them  with  terror.  The  effect  of  this  too  would 
be  vastly  increased  by  the  tossing  of  300  burning  torches  in  the  air,  right  in 
view  of  those  who  were  newly-awaked  from  their  slumbers.  To  make  use  of 
such  a  moment  for  a  fierce  attack  on  the  enemy  by  a  handful  of  resolute  men, 
was  certain  to  throw  them  into  hopeless  confusion. 

(2.)  Divine  support  was  given  in  carrying  out  this  plan.  The  best  laid 
schemes  often  prove  abortive  from  not  being  well  executed.  Nerve  is  required  ; 
precision  must  be  observed  ;  circumstances  must  be  anticipated.  Here  every- 
thing went  right.  There  was  unity  in  Gideon's  camp.  There  was  the  most 
perfect  discipline.  All  were  zealous  for  the  cause,  as  the  cause  of  God.  All 
acted  on  religious  principle,  and  there  was  more  than  natural  courage.  Much 
of  the  same  spirit  that  rested  on  Gideon  also  rested  on  his  followers.  It  was 
the  Lord's  battle  they  were  fighting,  and  He  "  sends  none  a  warfare  on  their 
own  charges."  He  gives  grace  according  to  the  day  (Deut.  xxxiii.  26).  There 
was  no  timidity  in  the  face  of  a  great  danger.  Not  one  was  feeble  in  all  the 
ranks  of  that  little  brave  army.  The  tone  of  true  courage  was  everywhere 
marked,  and  the  Leader  could  count  on  every  man  doing  his  duty  when  the 
moment  for  action  arrived. 

(3.)  The  enemy  s  feeling  of  security  remained  undisturbed.  There  are  so 
many  possibilities  of  information  leaking  out  before  the  time,  that  one  great 
danger  of  the  plan  miscarrying  lay  in  the  fear,  that  some  hint  might  be  given  to 
the  hostile  army,  that  a  desperate  attempt  was  to  be  made  to  surprise  theiu 
during  the  night.  But  the  God  of  Providence  so  overruled  matters,  that  no 
intelligence  was  carried  to  the  ears  of  the  Midianites  of  any  such  design.  They 
would  indeed  be  slow  to  listen  to  any  such  tale,  so  profound  was  their  contempt 
for  the  prowess  of  the  people,  whom  they  had  seven  times  trampled  down  in  the 
most  reckless  manner.  They  did  not  believe  in  their  capability  of  showing  a 
formidable  front  to  their  oppressors.  In  this  they  were  more  than  confirmed, 
when  they  saw  first,  how  many  thousands  flocked  to  Gideon's  standard,  and  yet, 
in  a  few  days,  the  great  bulk  of  them  began  to  return  to  their  homes  with  as 
much  haste  as  they  had  left  them. 

So  do  the  enemies  of  the  Church  often  imagine  that  all  is  over  with  the  Church 
of  God,  when  they  see  her  cut  down  to  the  very  roots,  and  no  means  of  restoration 
are  at  hand.  Thus  did  Ahab  and  Jezebel  feel,  when  the  prophets  of  the  Lord 
were  persecuted  out  of  the  land  (1  Kings  xviii.  4  ;  xix.  10).  Doubtless,  too,  the 
chief  priests  and  Pharisees  felt  sure  that  they  had  heard  the  last  of  Jesus  of 
Nazareth,  and  that  His  cause  was  for  ever  extinguished,  when  they  ujade  the 
sepulchre  sure,  sealing  the  stone  and  setting  a  watch.  The  Church  of  Rome  felt 
secure  from  all  that  Protestantism  could  do,  when  the  famous  proclamation  was 
made  from  the  Lateran  Church,  that  now  at  last  heresy  was  everywhere  subdued, 
and  that  there  were  none  that  did  even  mutter  or  peep  against  the  power  that 
reigned  supreme  in  the  Imperial  city. 

(4.)  A  foundation  was  laid  for  filling  the  enemy  s  mind  with  fears.  The 
mighty  deeds  which  had  been  done  by  Israel's  God  at  ditterent  periods,  since 
the  remarkable  deliverance  from  Egyptian  bondage,  had  made  a  profound  im- 
pression on  all  the  heathen  nations,  and  however  much  they  hated  that  God,  a 
salutary  fear  of  His  band  was  cherished  by  them  ail.  Ou  the  present  occasiou 
370 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES.  chap.  vn. 


it  got  rumoured,  that  that  God  was  again  about  to  appear  on  behalf  of  His 
people,  and  the  Midianites  appear  to  have  heard  of  it.  This  is  clearly  implied 
in  the  case  of  the  dream  and  the  interpretation  given  of  it,  which  Gideon  heard 
in  the  outermost  part  of  the  camp  of  Midian.  But  as  yet  they  slept  securely, 
because  no  danger  was  visible.  They  felt,  however,  that  danger  was  in  the  air, 
so  that  they  were  prepared  to  be  struck  with  panic,  when  tliat  dreadful  name 
Jehovah  was  ])roclaimed  over  their  heads  in  the  darkness  of  night.  Just  as 
Jehovah  looked  through  the  cloud  and  troubled  Pharaoh's  host,  and  took  off 
their  chariot  wheels,  so  now  He  was  beginning  to  produce  a  ground  swell  in  the 
Midianitish  heart,  by  the  terrible  suspicion  that  He  had  marked  them  out  as 
the  victims  of  His  strong  anger.  Hence  the  power  of  the  motto — The  sword  of 
Jehovah  and  of  Gideon  !    All  this  was  evidently  of  God. 

(5.)  Ike  sudden  alarm  produced  distracting  thoughts.  No  instrument 
sounds  so  loudly  as  the  trumpet ;  and  here  were  300  such  instrum«ents  blowing 
from  three  different  sides,  making  a  noise  sufficient  to  startle  the  heaviest  sleeper, 
and  fill  him  with  terror.  At  the  same  moment,  300  empty  pitchers  were  broken 
with  clattering  noise  among  the  rocks,  a  noise,  coming  as  it  did  so  unexpectedly, 
sufficient  to  shake  the  firmest  nerves.  The  two  noises  coming  together,  making 
such  a  volume  of  sound,  and  rending  the  midnight  air  in  the  most  unaccountable 
manner,  could  hardly  fail  to  produce  a  terrible  panic  among  the  vast  multitude, 
who  had  given  themselves  over  to  the  quiet  and  security  of  sleep.  It  added 
greatly  to  this  effect,  that  there  were  300  ominous  lights  flashing  in  the  dark 
back  ground,  in  three  crescents,  on  different  sides  of  the  camp.  All  this  was 
fitted  to  produce  not  only  alarm,  but  consternation  among  persons  suddenly 
awakened  out  of  the  dead  sleep  of  night. 

Yet,  but  for  the  overruling  Providence  of  God,  it  might  have  proved  a 
complete  failure.  The  enemy's  camp  did  not  all  consist  of  women  and  children. 
A  very  large  number,  probably  the  majority,  were  fighting  men.  We  hear  of 
the  chamushim  (ver.  11)  men  not  only  armed,  but  arrayed  in  divisions,  or 
quinquiped  men — marshalled  as  an  army  in  five  divisions,  the  centre,  two  wings, 
the  front  and  rear  guard.  This  is  suggestive  of  order  and  even  discipline.  Why 
should  an  organised  army,  that  occupied  the  part  of  the  camp  nearest  to  Gideon, 
become  all  at  once  so  penetrated  with  terror  ?  Did  they  not  know  that 
the  many  followers,  who  at  first  had  flocked  to  Gideon,  had  become  literally 
scattered  among  the  valleys  and  caves  as  before  ?  And  they  knew  of  no  other 
army  in  the  field  all  round.  Was  it  not  fairly  possible,  or  even  probable,  that 
after  the  first  startling  noise,  knowing  the  above  fact,  their  leaders  would  have 
sent  messengers  to  ascertain  the  strength  of  the  army  on  the  heights,  for  they 
were  themselves  an  almost  innumerable  host,  and  well  able  to  meet  in  the  field 
any  ordinary  army.  When  they  had  such  a  contempt  for  the  people  who  fled 
before  them  like  sheep,  and  hid  themselves  in  dens,  and  caves,  and  rocky 
strongholds,  why  should  they  all  at  once  become  frantic  with  terror,  and  run  in 
mad  haste  to  escape  the  swords  of  that  same  people  ?  It  does  seem  as  if  there 
were  a  Divine  ordering  of  the  means  used  to  bring  out  so  disastrous  an  issue. 

He  who  has  all  hearts  in  His  hand  made  use  of  the  means  which  Gideon 
employed  to  suggest  dreadful  thoughts  to  the  minds  of  the  enemy. 

(a.)  They  imagined  that  a  great  army  was  just  upon  them.  How  it  had 
been  raised  they  knew  not,  but  their  eyes  and  ears  told  them  it  was  there.  Sucli 
an  army  looked  like  a  dreadful  apparition,  a  thing  from  the  spirit  world,  a  legion 
of  spectres  and  weird  demons,  mysteriously  raised,  mysteriously  armed,  and 
possessed  of  mysterious  powers.  The  effect  on  superstitious  imaginations  must 
have  been  electric.  They  fled  as  men  would  flee  from  a  company  of  unearthly 
forms  issuing  from  the  pit  of  darkness. 

(J).)  They  were  afraid  of  the  God  of  Gideon.  That  terrible  sentence  which 
Bounded  in  their  ears — "  Th©  sword  of  Jehovah  and  of  Gideon  "  filled  them 

371 


CHAP.  vii.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    JUDGES, 


with  dismay,  as  they  reflected  that  so  great  a  God  was  about  to  repeat  His 
mighty  acts  of  the  past,  in  raising  all  the  elements  of  nature,  and  of  the  spirit 
world  as  well,  to  overwhelm  his  enemies.  As  the  Egyptians  said,  **  Let  us  flee 
from  the  face  of  Israel,  for  Jehovah  fighteth  for  them  against  us,"  so  did  the 
leaders  of  that  doomed  arnjy  say  to  each  other  ;  and  so  tliey  thought  of  nothing 
but  flight.  They  believed  they  were  to  be  a  mark  for  the  arrows  of  the  God  of 
Israel. 

{c.)  The  suspicion  of  treachery  rose  among  them.  They  were  a  mixed 
company,  several  armies  joined  in  one,  the  only  link  of  union  being  their 
common  hatred  and  contempt  for  the  people  of  Israel  (Ps.  Ixxxiii.  5-12) — 
Amalekites,  Moabites,  Midianites,  and  Arabs.  As  no  one  knew  how  it  was 
possible  that  a  large  army  could  rise  up  against  them  in  a  moment,  the  thought 
must  have  flashed  across  the  minds  of  many — "  there  is  treachery  in  the  camp.'' 
Some  one  or  two  of  the  races  must  have  laid  a  plot  to  massacre  all  the  rest,  to 
secure  the  whole  booty  for  themselves.  Distrust  thus  arose  among  them,  and 
we  are  told,  "  the  Lord  set  every  man's  sword  against  his  fellow."  A  frightful 
slaughter  of  each  other  began.  This  demoralisation  became  complete,  when 
they  feared  also  that  the  supposed  large  army  on  the  hei^^hts  was  already  among 
them.  In  the  pitch  dark,  and  amid  the  utter  confusion,  every  man  took  his 
neighbour  for  an  enemy,  and  so  smote  him  down.  All  the  while  the  panic 
urged  them  instinctively  to  flight.  Large  numbers  would  be  trodden  down, 
beause  they  impeded  the  progress  of  those  who  were  fl.ying  for  their  lives. 
Thus  thousands  on  thousands  would  perish  of  the  mutual  slaughter,  before  the 
swords  of  the  Israelites  were  among  them. 

Who  does  not  see  that  the  hand  of  the  Lord  was  in  all  this,  stirring  up  terror 
in  every  heart,  and  leading  to  a  ruinous  flight  ? 

(6.)  Pursuers  sprung  ttp  on  all  sides  with  the  morning  light.  When  God 
deals  with  His  own  people  for  their  sins,  it  is  in  chastisement,  and  He  corrects  in 
measure.  But  when  He  deals  with  His  enemies  for  their  sins,  it  is  for  their 
destruction.  Thus  it  was  now.  Means  are  taken  for  the  utter  overthrow  of  the 
whole  host,  that  had  dared  for  seven  years  in  succession  to  come  up  as  spoilers 
of  God's  heritage.  Besides  the  300,  the  9700  who  had  been  disbanded,  and  large 
numbers  of  the  Israelites,  north,  west,  and  south,  gather  in  swift  and  simultaneous 
concert  to  smite  the  common  enemy.  And  the  remarkable  fact  appears,  that, 
whether  it  was  that  their  flight  was  terribly  obstructed  by  their  families,  their 
dromedaries,  their  luggage,  and  possessions  of  various  sorts,  or  whether  special 
facilities  were  furnished  to  the  pursuers  for  coming  up  with  them,  it  happened 
that  eight  parts  out  of  nine  of  this  multitudinous  host  perishetl  before  they  could 
cross  the  Jordan  !  It  is  expressly  stated  that  120,000  men  out  of  135,000,  fell 
on  that  fatal  morning,  of  those  that  drew  sword  (ch.  viii.  10).  How  many  men 
of  a  different  class  there  may  have  been,  those  who  were  purveyors,  servants, 
cattle-drivers,  etc.,  as  also  how  many  women  and  children,  we  are  not  informed, 
but  the  number  must  have  been  much  larger.  Possibly  the  entire  army  of 
human  locusts  that  settled  down  on  the  rich  pastures  of  Israel  was  not  much 
short  of  half  a  million  of  persons  !  And  now  they  all  perished  !  "The  sword  of 
the  Lord  was  drunk  with  their  blood"  (Jer.  xlvi.  12).  Wicked  men  should  fear 
to  offend  the  great  Jehovah  (Zech.  ii.  13  ;  Ps.  ii.  12  ;  x.  13 ;  Ixxvi.  5-10 ;  Job 
xxi.  30  ;  xxii.  21  ;  Ps.  xxxiii.  8  ;  Isa.  iii,  10,  11). 

ZZ.  A  Picture  of  the  Church's  ZSxperience  in  every  Ag^e. 

At  all  periods  the  church  has  been  a  mark  for  the  rage  of  earth  and  hell.     It 

is  natural  that  Satan  should  do  his  utmost  against  an  institution,  whose  purpose 

is  to  overturn  his  throne  and  destroy  his  kingdom.     And  it  is  natural  that 

worldly  men  should  have  bitter  hatred  to  that  which  condemns  all  their  evil 

372 


HOMILBTIC  GOMMENTARY:   JUDGED,  oUap.  Vii. 


desires  and  cherished  lusts,  and  insists  on  the  practice  of  self-denial  as  a  leading 
virtue.  The  forms  of  attack  may  change,  the  weapons  nsed  in  the  warfare  may 
be  greatly  different,  and  the  conditions  may  become  greatly  modified  in  different 
ages,  but  the  warfare  itself  always  goes  on,  the  rancour  of  the  world  is  still  kept 
up,  and  the  same  malicious  treatment  is  given,  or  is  tried  to  be  given,  to  the 
church  now  as  vvas  given  to  it  in  the  days  of  the  Midianitish  invasion.  He  and 
we  live,  but  at  different  periods  of  the  same  great  contest.  He  fought  to  keep 
up  the  cause  of  God  on  the  earth  then,  as  we  are  called  on  still  to  propagate  and 
maintain  that  cause  under  the  form  of  the  gospel  of  Christ,  but  with  very 
different  weapons. 

For  what  is  the  picture  of  the  church's  experience  in  these  times  ? 

1.  She  is  still  surrounded  by  enemies  numerous  as  the  sand  on  the  sea-shore. 
If,  indeed,  there  is  no  actual  army  with  sword  and  spear,  as  in  Gideon's  days, 
there  is  yet,  even  in  so-called  Christian  lands,  a  vast  multitude  of  persons  who 
are  inveterately  opposed  to  the  essence  and  spirit  of  Christianity,  and  whose 
opposition  to  it  appears  in  a  variety  of  ways.  If  carnal  weapons  are  no  longer 
used,  and  if  instrnments  of  torture  are  laid  aside — if  Geshem,  the  Arabian,  no 
longer  lives,  nor  Sanballat,  the  Horonite,  there  is  yet  bitter  offence  taken  at 
the  Cross  of  Christ,  which  shows  itself  either  in  the  open  forms  of  infideUty  ;  in 
attacks  made  on  the  Book  of  God  ;  in  endeavours  to  secularise  the  day  of  God, 
and  to  abolish  the  worship  of  God,  and  in  sneering  at  those  who  profess  the 
truth  of  God  ;  or  which  shows  itself  in  the  more  covert,  but  still  more  dangerous, 
form  of  perverting  and  falsifying  the  truth  of  God,  of  inventing  a  substitute  for 
the  gospel  of  Christ,  of  mixing  it  up  with  the  traditions  or  philosophy  of  men, 
and,  as  far  as  possible,  passing  it  by  altogether.  Indeed,  every  human  heart, 
until  regenerated  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  is  characterised  by  a  spirit  of  eimiity 
against  God,  and,  except  in  so  far  as  bridled  by  powerful  moral  restraints,  is 
disposed  to  show  a  bitter  Midianitish  opposition  to  the  church  of  God.  Except 
those  who  have  given  themselves  up  to  the  belief  and  the  sway  of  Christian 
truth,  all  men  are  more  or  less  natural  enemies  to  the  church  of  God,  and  its 
high  spiritual  purpose. 

2.  The  enemies  are  a  heterogeneous  confederation.  First  comes  Science, 
with  her  lofty  air  and  many  tongues.  In  a  very  dogmatic  manner  she  attacks 
the  dogmas  of  the  sacred  book,  forgetting  that  science  itself  consists  almost 
wholly  of  dogmas.  Proud  of  her  acquisitions  in  useful  knowledge,  she  asserts 
more  peremptorily  than  ever,  that  the  laws  of  nature  as  now  discovered,  tell  a 
different  tale  from  that  which  we  have  in  the  historical  statements  of  the  Scriptures. 
And  in  their  extreme  haste,  a  host  of  savaus  already  proclaim,  that  Christianity 
has  been  reasoned  off  the  stage.  But  the  old  rock  keeps  its  place  amid  the 
lashings  of  the  waves.  Next  comes  Philosophy,  boasting  that  it  is  in  the  track 
of  some  great  discoveries,  by  which  the  doctrines  of  Christianity  may  be  dissi- 
pated, and  the  supernatural  element  taken  out  of  them,  so  that  they  will  soon 
come  under  the  proper  control  of  human  reason,  and  therefore  become  suited  to 
human  liking.  Next  rises  up  Criticism,  which  tells  us  there  are  ever  so  many 
discrepancies  between  what  is  now  known  outside  the  Scri[)tures  to  be  true, 
philological,  archaeological,  antiquarian,  and  otherwise,  and  the  affirmations  of 
the  old  volume  itself. 

Closer  at  hand  we  have  all  the  schools  of  our  modern  Areopagus  clamouring 
in  our  ears  more  insolently,  and  we  might  add,  more  discordantly  still,  than  the 
groups  of  learned  men  on  that  hill  of  wisdom  in  Athens — the  schools  of 
Atheism,  of  Agnosticism,  of  Positivism,  of  Deism,  7heism,  Pantheism,  of 
Rationalism,  Naturalism,  and  Spiritualism,  o^  Broad- (hurchism,  and  formal- 
ism— all  of  which  ardently  aim  at  getting  quit,  not  of  the  beauties  of  the  Bible, 

373 


CHAP.  VII.  BOM ILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


nor  its  good  morality,  nor  its  just,  pure  and  lofty  f^entiments  so  much,  as  first  its 
Q\iiViiQY\i  o{  {\\Q  supernatural ;  for  that  is  felt  to  be  terribly  humbling  to  man's 
pride  of  understanding,  and  puts  him  down  to  the  footstool,  when  be  would  iain 
climb  to  the  throne.  They  wish  to  get  quit  too  of  its  inspiration  and  oracular 
authority ;  for  that  binds  man  to  believe  what  he  is  taught  by  testimony,  and 
makes  his  reason  a  subject,  not  a  sovereign.  It  also  suggests  the  idea  of  a  Lord 
of  the  conscience.  They  wish  to  get  quit  too  of  the  doctrine  of  human 
responsibility  ;  for  that  makes  conscience  a  troubled  sea  in  the  soul,  at  the 
thought  that  man  will  be  judged  for  all  his  thoughts,  words,  and  actions. 
Especially  they  wish  to  get  quit  of  such  a  doctrine  as  human  depravity ;  for  that 
is  reproachful  to  man's  character  as  a  moral  being,  and  sinks  him  to  shame  and 
contempt  in  the  estimation  of  the  morally  pure  and  holy.  They  wish  above  all 
to  blot  out  from  the  page  of  history,  and  if  they  could,  from  the  page  of  human 
thought,  the  doctrine  of  the  death  of  the  Son  of  God  being  the  suffering  of  a 
substitute  endured  to  atone  for  the  sins  of  men  ;  for  that  is  to  intensify  incon- 
ceivably the  evil  of  sin,  reveals  the  alarming  condition  of  man's  prospect  for 
the  future,  and  proves  his  utter  powerlessness  to  help  himself  in  the  terrible 
emergency. 

All  these  enemies  of  the  Christian  Church  want,  in  one  word,  to  get  quit  of 
the  peculiar  doctrines  of  Christianity,  as  being  most  distasteful  to  man's  un- 
spiritual  nature,  and  most  humbling  to  his  imperial  and  stubborn  will.  They 
would  refit  the  Bible,  or  reconstruct  it  so  as  to  make  it  speak  in  quite  another 
tone.  Intead  of  being  governed  by  it,  they  would  govern  it,  and  transform  it 
into  a  Book  that  would  suit  the  convenience,  and  establish  the  glory  of  man. 

3.  The  attacks  are  persistently  made.  The  language  used  against  the  Book 
which  contains  the  doctrines  of  Christianity  was  never  more  bold,  we  might  say, 
audacious,  than  it  has  been  during  tlie  present  century.  Formerly,  it  may  have 
been  more  coarse,  and  ribald,  when  such  men  as  Voltaire,  Paine,  Rochester,  and 
Hume,  poured  their  vile  abuse  on  the  good  Book.  Yet  in  this  age,  far  more 
liberty  of  opinion  is  claimed  than  in  any  past  epoch.  Never  was  public  opinion 
stronger,  and  never  did  liberty  run  so  far  in  the  direction  of  laxity.  It  has  indeed 
become  a  rage — a  passion.  The  pendulum  has  swung  from  the  point  of  over- 
strictness,  to  that  of  over  looseness.  The  result  is,  that  never  has  there  been 
such  boldness  in  casting  aside  old  forms  of  belief,  and  even  the  beliefs  themselves. 
After  so  many  failures,  the  attacks  on  the  old  Rock  are  still  kept  up,  and  with 
renewed  confidence,  it  is  defiantly  asserted,  that  not  only  must  Christianity  moult, 
and  change  its  garb,  but,  in  these  advancing  times,  must  change  in  its  very 
substance.  Old  ships,  it  is  said,  do  not  weather  tempestuous  seas  so  well  as  those 
of  fresher  build.  So,  many  have  taken  to  imaizining,  that  the  old  vessel  of 
Christianity  will  not  hold  out  much  longer  amid  the  tremendous  seas  that  are 
now  lashing  over  her,  but  that  she  must  soon  go  to  pieces  and  become  a  total 
wreck.  Others,  who  do  not  take  this  extreme  view,  yet  think  the  time  has  come 
when  the  ship  must  be  laid  up  in  the  dock,  and  undergo  much  refitting  and 
reconstruction  to  prepare  her  for  future  service. 

These  attacks  have  been  most  numerous,  most  formidable,  and  most  envenomed. 
They  have  come  in  on  every  side,  and  been  made  with  united  force.  Notwith- 
standing all  the  falsification  of  past  predictions  respecting  the  defeat  of 
Christianity,  the  opposition  to  it  is  as  persistent  to-day  as  ever  it  was  in  any 
previous  age.  But  one  thing  is  always  strangely  forgotten,  that  He  who 
constructed  this  vessel  is  the  same  with  the  builder  of  heaven  and  earth,  who 
holds  the  waters  of  human  strife  in  the  hollow  of  his  hand,  and  without  whose 
permission  not  a  single  ripple  can  rise  or  fall.  The  raging  sea  of  human  opinions 
may  run  mountains  high,  yet  the  little  skiff  which  carries  the  Church  of  God 
cannot  be  swallowed  up  by  the  threatening  element,  while  the  Lord  of  the  Church 
374 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   JUDGES.  chap.  vii. 

walks  on  the  crest  of  the  waves,  able  in  a  moment  to  still  them  at  their 
wildest  fury. 

4.  Every  possible  advantage  is  on  the  side  of  the  enemy.  Here  the  Church 
fights  her  battle  with  300  against  135,000  men,  or  one  man  against  450.  In  the 
case  of"  Jouatlian,  it  was  two  men  against  many  thousands.  In  the  case  of 
Samson,  it  was  one  man  against  several  thousands.  In  the  case  of  Joshua  and 
Ids  followers,  it  was  one  nation  aizainst  many  nations,  for  the  Canaanites  were 
really  a  cluster  of  separate  kingdoms.  There  is  a  special  purpose  to  be  served 
by  this  arrangement.  The  Church  of  God,  representing  the  cause  of  religious 
truth  in  this  world,  is  far  too  mighty  for  error  to  stand  before  her  when  opposed 
on  equal  terms.  Error,  in  such  a  case,  could  no  more  maintain  its  ground,  than 
darkness  could  cope  with  the  rays  of  the  noonday  sun.  There  could  indeed  be 
no  battle  at  all,  and  all  the  moral  purposes  served  by  the  prolonged  opposition 
of  the  one  to  the  other  would  come  to  an  end. 

Error  needs  all  possible  resources  to  help  her.  The  subtleties  of  logic,  the 
splendours  of  eloquence,  powers  of  reasoning,  and  charms  of  literary  accomplish- 
ment ;  while  plain,  unadorned  straightforward  statement  stand  on  the  other  side. 
Erudition,  philosophy  and  science  plead  her  cause,  poetry  weaves  for  her  a 
many-coloured  robe  of  beauty,  while  fame  puts  a  crown  of  gold  on  her  head, 
gives  a  sceptre  into  her  hand,  blows  the  trumpet  before  her,  and  calls  on  the 
multitude  to  bend  the  knee  at  her  name.  But  truth  must  stand  alone,  in 
humble  garb,  and  mean  attire,  and  with  unsophisticated  speech  must  plead  her 
own  cause.  The  world's  dread  laugh  and  proud  supercilious  scorn  she  meets 
with  showing  her  native  majesty  of  mien  and  purity  of  tone.  The  cause  of 
truth  too  is  often  most  injudiciously  handled  by  her  defenders,  they  often  fall 
out  among  themselves,  and  do  irreparable  mischief  by  their  dissensions.  But 
tiie  advocates  of  error  have  generally  been  men  of  great  mental  grasp  and 
profound  scholarship.  Truth  in  one  word  is  placed  at  its  weakest  to  contend 
with  error  at  its  strongest,  that  so  a  far  more  illustrious  triumph  may  be  gained 
in  the  end,  than  if  the  advantages  enjoyed  on  either  side  had  borne  some  pro 
portion  of  equality  to  each  other. 

But  there  is  not  only  inequality  of  advantage.  Truth  has  always  been  exposed 
to  the  grossest  misrepresentation,  while  her  character  and  claims  are  miserably 
misunderstood.  We  see  Christian  truth  perverted,  parodied,  mystifiel,  and 
falsely  accused.  The  whole  treatment  of  the  cross  has  been  measured  out  anew 
to  the  truth  of  the  cross — she  has  been  betrayed  and  stabbed  in  secret,  and 
mocked  and  vilified  in  open  day.  A  whole  army  of  detractors,  scoffers,  and 
calumniators  have  kept  continually  dogging  her  steps,  until  slie  might  well  s  ly 
in  the  language  of  Him  whose  name  is  "  The  Truth," — "  Reproach  hath  broken 
my  heart ! " 

5.  The  inherent  power  of  Bible  truth  makes  victory  certain  in  the  end.   The 

little  finger  of  truth  is  thicker  than  the  loins  of  error. ^  With  that  little  finger 
she  has  gained  world-renowned  victories.  "With  the  jaw  of  an  ass  she  has  slain 
a  thousand  men."  With  the  blowing  of  rams'  horns  she  has  made  the  fortified 
cities  of  the  enemy  fall  down  flat.  With  sling  and  stone,  in  the  hands  of  a 
stripling,  she  has  felled  to  the  earth  the  proud  Goliath  in  the  camp  of  her 
opponents.  With  a  shepherd's  crook  used  by  a  fugitive  herdsujan,  from  the 
backside  of  the  desert,  she  has  routed  the  proud  Pharaoh  who  opposed  her,  and 
found  a  watery  grave  in  the  great  ocean  for  his  huge  bannered  host.  When 
Christian  truth  went  out  into  the  world  to  fight  her  way  to  victory,  she  was 
without  learning,  without  caste,  without  wealth,  and  without  a  particle  of 
influence  in  society.  I  see  Paul  and  Barnabas,  on  their  first  missionary  tour, 
floinff  across  the  mountains  of  Pisidia,  without  armies  and  without  arms,  having 
*  ^  876 


CHAP.  TIL  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


no  fame  or  prestige,  with  nothing  but  a  good  conscience  within,  the  word  of  God 
in  their  hands,  and  their  exalted  Master  looking  down  on  them  from  the  throne 
in  the  heavens.  It  was  weakness  employed  to  conquer  strength,  folly  to 
confound  wisdom. 

I  look  again,  and  see  the  advocate  of  Christianity  surrounded  by  the  learning 
and  culture  of  the  world,  and  treated  with  derision  and  scorn.  **  What  will  this 
babbler  say?  "  pitched  the  key-note  of  the  obloquy  which  Mars  Hill  thought  fit 
^•o  pour  on  the  doctrine  of  the  cross  !  The  wise  of  this  world  thought  it  too 
much  honour  to  give  it  a  hearing  at  all !  Again  I  see  him  a  prisoner,  answering 
for  himself  before  men  who  were  strangers  to  pity,  and  but  capriciously  acquainted 
with  justice,  yet  through  the  simple  force  of  truth,  he  causes  his  judge  to  tremble 
on  the  seat  of  power,  and  constrains  royalty  itself  to  exclaim,  '*  Almost  thou 
persuadest  me  to  be  a  christian  ! "  Once  more,  1  see  him  within  the  gloomy  walls 
of  the  martyr  s  dungeon,  with  life  and  all  that  men  count  dear  behind,  and  with 
the  dreary  horrors  of  a  barbarous  death  before  him — alone,  unhefriended, 
unsuccoured,  he  is  yet  the  happiest  man  in  Rome  !  Among  the  millions  within 
her  wide  walls,  not  another  heart  is  so  buoyant  with  hope,  so  lifted  up  with  joy. 
Nor  need  we  wonder.  His  prospects  at  that  moment  were  brighter  than  those 
of  any  other  man  on  earth.  That  dark  and  cheerless  cell  was  his  last  resting- 
place  on  earth.  Soon  his  feet  should  stand  within  the  gates  of  the  heavenly 
Jerusalem.  One  of  the  loftiest  seats  around  the  throne  should  soon  be  his.  One 
of  the  sweetest  songs  in  the  land  of  bliss  should  soon  be  raised  by  him.  As  he 
thought  of  this,  his  afflictions  became  light,  and  lighter  still,  until  he  felt  them 
not  at  all.  He  would  not,  at  that  moment,  have  exchanged  his  position  with 
that  of  him  who  sat  on  the  throne  of  the  world.  Nero  was  wretched  !  Paul  the 
prisoner  was  filled  with  joy  unspeakable  !  Terrors  reigned  in  the  soul  of  the 
tyrant  I  A  peace  passing  all  understanding  possessed  the  mind  of  his  captive  1 
He  that  stood  on  the  summit  of  earthly  greatness  was  afraid  of  all  {-round  him 
— afraid  even  of  himself !  His  unprotected  prisoner,  awaiting  a  vioient  death, 
stood  undaunted  amid  the  rage  of  earth  and  of  hell ! 

6.  Hope  for  Christian  Missions  everywhere.  This  does  not  admit  of  doubt 
for  a  single  moment,  when  the  attitude  of  Christian  Truth  to  Error  is  under- 
stood. The  reason  why  universal  success  has  not  been  attained  long  since,  is 
not  because  the  resources  of  that  Truth  are  not  equal  to  the  occasion.  But  there 
has  been  a  holding  hack  of  the  real  power  which  it  possesses.  Not  the  one- 
hundredth  part  of  its  resources  has  been  called  forth  ;  and  so,  many  fall  into  the 
mistake,  that  it  may  yet  die  out  and  be  overcome.  This  mistake  is  all  the  more 
easily  made,  that  opposing  systems  are  usually  so  demonstrative  of  their  apparent 
successes,  and  so  pretentious  and  confident  as  to  what  they  will  be  able  to  accom- 
plish in  the  future.  Hence  it  is  inferred,  that  the  two  forces  are  not  unequally 
matched,  or  that  the  one  at  least  bears  some  proportion  to  the  other  ;  so  that 
some  doubt  must  be  held  to  rest  over  the  final  result.  In  reality,  Error,  what- 
ever form  it  may  assume,  has  in  itself  no  power  at  all  to  contend  with  Christian 
Truth,  any  more  than  dark  clouds  have  power  to  prevent  the  rising  of  the  sun, 
or  than  men  have  power  to  contend  with  the  silent  irresistible  strength  of  a  law 
of  nature. 

(1.)  Christian  Truth  lays  its  hand  on  the  supreme  powers  of  a  mans  nature 
— his  conscieiice,  that  mysterious  faculty  whose  volcanic  force  when  awakened 
creates  greater  disturbance  in  the  soul  than  all  other  causes  combined  ;  his  will, 
that  kingly  faculty  which  decrees  with  the  force  of  a  Modes  and  Persians  law 
what  the  man  is  to  do  ;  his  desires  and  affections,  which  like  a  helm  turn  the 
soul  in  whatever  direction  they  are  pleased  to  take.  All  the  secret  springs  of  a 
man's  moral  nature  are  touched  by  this  Truth,  and  it  is  too  mighty  to  be 
shaken  o£f. 
376 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   JUDGES, 


CHAP.  VII. 


(2.)  This  truth  is  no  product  of  earth.  No  soil,  East  or  West,  of  this  barren 
world  could  produce  such  a  plant.  The  Everlasting  Father  Himself  did  plant  it. 
Long  before  the  cycles  of  Time  began  to  revolve,  this  Mighty  Truth  was  with  God, 
and  that  which  had  its  birth  in  Eternity  cannot  perish  among  the  rocks  and  the 
wildernesses  of  Time. 

(3.)  This  t7'uth  is  a  system  of  facts.  It  contains  the  history  of  persons  that 
lived,  and  of  events  that  occurred — "  things  seen  and  heard."  The  theories  of 
philosophers  are  nebulous  ;  tlieir  schemes  are  fancies  or  day-dreams,  nnd  however 
beautiful,  necessarily  pass  away.  Their  propositions  are  often  mere  abstractions 
which  cannot  be  realised  in  every-day  life.  No  entire  system  of  truth,  at  once 
plain,  full  of  substance,  and  adapted  to  man's  practical  needs  all  round,  has  ever 
been  presented  to  the  world  but  Cliristianity.  Hence  its  power  to  live.  It  has 
life  in  itself,  and  it  has  powder  to  give  life  to  others.  Thus  it  can  stand  the  tear 
and  wear  of  time  for  many  generations. 

(4.)  This  truth  is  an  instrument  in  the  hand  of  the  Supreme  Buler.  This  all- 
important  fact  must  never  be  forgotten.  The  power  of  Christianity  does  not 
consist  merely  in  its  being  what  it  is,  but  in  its  being  wielded  by  Him  who  has 
all  power  in  heaven  and  earth  to  accomplish  the  high  purposes  of  His  will. 
**  It  is  mighty  through  God  to  the  pulling  down,"  etc.  (see  John  xvii.  2  ;  Mark 
xvi.  20).  He  has  but  to  "pour  out  His  Spirit,  and  the  wilderness  should 
become  as  the  fruitful  field."  Every  day  would  be  as  the  day  of  Pentecost, 
until  the  whole  world  should  spiritually  bloom  in  every  part  like  a  second  Eden. 


COMMENTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS.— Verges  16-26. 


I.  The  great  men  of  the  Bible  are 
its  good  men. 

Judged  by  his  deeds,  and  the  spirit 
in  which  he  performed  them,  none  will 
refuse  to  Gideon  the  epithet  of  great. 
Yet  on  analysing  the  elements  of  his 
character,  we  do  not  so  much  emphasize 
his  great  daring,  his  heroic  spirit,  his 
shrewdness  and  skill,  nor  even  his  dis- 
interested devotion  to  his  country.  It  is 
rather  his  zeal  for  the  cause  of  his  God, 
his  sorrow  that  tlie  Church  of  God  should 
be  trodden  down  by  the  unhallowed 
foot  of  the  alien,  and  that  the  name 
of  his  God  should  be  every  day 
blasphemed,  on  the  one  hand,  that 
form  the  noblest  features  of  his 
character,  while  on  the  other  hand, 
he  holds  himself  ready  at  the  Divine 
call  to  perform  a  humanly  impossible 
task,  at  every  risk  to  his  own  interests, 
to  retrieve  the  dishonour  done  to  the 
Divine  name,  and  all  on  the  basis  of 
the  trust  he  has  in  the  God  who  made 
Himself  over  to  Israel  to  be  their  God. 
It  was  by  his  faith  that  he  became 
great  (Heb.  xi.  2,  32,  etc.),  and  that 
marks  him  out  equally  as  a  man  of 
piety.    But  for  his  faith,  he  never  had 


subdued  so  effectually  the  mighty 
army  of  the  desert  and  annihilated 
their  numerous  hordes.  It  was  not 
natural  courage  or  skill  in  disposing 
his  little  army,  or  indomitable 
patriotism  that  gained  him  such 
signal  success,  though  these  were  all 
in  exercise,  but  his  faith  in  his  (jiod 
— trusting  in  His  character  and  relying 
on  His  promises,  that  earned  him  his 
high  distinction. 

But  for  the  connection,  into  which 
true  faith  brings  a  man  with  his  God, 
his  deeds,  and  his  very  existence,  are 
at  the  best  an  ei)liemeral  phantom,  an 
airy  nothing,  which  soon  evaporates, 
not  to  be  heard  of  more  in  the  ages  to 
come.  But  the  touch  of  Divinity 
creates  around  a  man  an  immortal 
memory,  and  His  name  cannot  drop 
into  oblivion.  Hence  this  book  of 
Judges  cannot  be  classed  with  other 
records,  which  relate  the  deeds  of 
martial  prowess  performed  by  the 
heroes  of  olden  times,  for  in  these, 
we  merely  see  the  natural  qualities 
which  belong  to  the  heroes  themselves, 
and  are  entirely  of  an  inferior  cate-^ory 
to  that  faith  and  love    that  zeal  and 

377 


OHAF.  vn.  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


self-denial,  which  link  the  soul  to  its  in  their  respective  periods,  the  whole 

God.  history  of  Israel  would  have  come  to  a 

miserable  termination  ere  it  had  half 

II.  The  great  value  of  a  single  good  run  its  expected  course.      Truly  are 

man  to  the  age  in  which  he  lives.  they  called   the  "  saviours  "  of  their 

A  single  good  man  placed  in  the  people,  as  God's  instruments  raised  up 
foreground  gives  a  character  to  the  by  Him  for  this  ])urpose  (Neh.  ix.  27). 
whole  generation  to  which  he  belongs.  Over  the  whole  of  Old  Testament 
When  the  moon  goes  down,  were  all  times,  if  you  subtract  some  twenty 
the  stars  of  first  magnitude  abstracted  names  the  value  of  history  sinks  down 
from  the  sky  of  night,  what  a  miserable  by  fifty  per  cent,  Not  that  these 
appearance  would  that  sky  present  were  the  only  actors.  But  common 
when  shorn  of  its  brightest  beauties  !  men  could  not  have  taken  their  place, 
And  how  tame  would  this  book  read  and  these  inspired  common  men  with 
without  the  four  or  five  names  of  its  confidence  in  their  power  to  lead,  and 
men  of  faith  !  These  redeem  it  from  their  Divine  commission  to  lead  others, 
being  a  dull  heavy  record,  and  throw  so  that  they  formed  rallying  points  for 
a  splendour  over  the  page  which  makes  large  numbers  acting  in  unity.  How- 
it  shine  with  lustre  to  latest  ages,  ever  much  a  man  may  excel  his  fellows 
There  is  something  of  God  about  such  in  intellect,  and  fortitude,  and  general 
men,  for  it  is  not  their  own  glory  that  resources,  he  must  always  find  it  wise 
shines,  as  they  freely  confess  by  the  fact  to  have  many  co-workers  with  him  in 
that  they  live  and  do  all  by /aeY/^  It  is  doing  a  great  work,  unless  when 
truest  philosophy  this  faith,  as  well  as  specially  directed  and  assisted  by  his 
the  purest  piety.  Itis  the  unit  confes-  God.  The  great  Napoleon  gave  it  as 
sing  itself  nothing  before  the  Universal,  one  of  the  principles  of  his  tactics,  '*  I 
the  finite  laying  hold  of  the  infinite,  have  always  tried  to  march  so  as  to 
the  drop  losing  itself  in  the  ocean  !  It  have  a  u^illion  of  men  in  sympathy  with 
is  the  little  child  confessing  its  feeble-  me."  Often  however  the  great  men  of 
ness  and  its  foolishness,  in  the  presence  the  Bible  were  employed  by  God  to  do 
of  the  Possessor  of  boundless  power  and  His  work  with  but  few  followers,  for  He 
unsearchable  wisdom.  It  is  the  humble  himself  went  with  them,  and  His 
heart  opening  itself  out  before  the  presence  counted  for  a  thousand  armies, 
fountain  to  receive  promised  blessings, 

with  the  view  of  returning  these  bles-  III.    God's   severity  in  the  day  ol 

sings  again  in  songs  of  gratitude  and  reckoning. 

praise.      Thus  it  is  always  God  that  is  This  in  any  harsh  sense  is  more  ap- 

really  glorified,  the  creature  confessing  parent  than  real.   It  was  a  frightful  des- 

it  has  nothing  but  what  it  receives,  and  truction  of  human  life  that  took  place 

reflecting  as  a  mirror  all  the  glory  that  when  the  whole  of  that  huge  host  were 

falls  upon  it  from  the  infinite  source.  slaughtered,  leaving  none,  or  only  a  few 

The  good  man  having  God  with  him  stragglers,  to  return  to  their  country 

is  ever  invincible.     The  very  heavens  to  tell  the  tale.     It  was  very  nearly 

bend  before  the  prayers  of  Elijah.     He  the  annihilation  of  a  race  from  off  the 

is  felt  to  be  a  greater  power  in  the  land  earth.     Many  hold  up  their  hands  and 

than  Ahab  and  Jezebel.     In  that  hey-  utter  exclamations  of  horror  at  such 

day  of  idolatry,  a  louder  protest  was  terrible  cruelties  being  perpetrated  in 

uttered   against   the  worship  of  false  the  name  of  God.     Yet  they  cannot 

gods,  through  the   instrumentality  of  account  for  it  by  setting  it  down  to 

that  single  man,  than  had  been  known  the  barbarity  of  the  times.     For  it  was 

for  ages  in  the  history  of  Israel.     But  really  done   by  God's  own  direction, 

for  him,  though  standing  alone,  even  The  truth  is  that,  in  judging  of  God's 

Carmel  would  have  been  submerged  by  doings,  men  forget  the  extremely  ofFen- 

the  rising  tide  of  idolatry.     Who  does  sive  character  of  the  sin  which  draws 

not  see  tliat  but  for  Barak  and  Gideon  down  the  punishment,  the  length  of 
378 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


OHAP.  VII. 


time  during  which  the  sin  has  been 
going  on,  and  the  warnings  and  ex- 
postulations used  by  God  with  the 
Avicked  to  forsake  their  ways.  Were 
these  men,  who  profess  to  be  so  humane 
and  i)itiful,  while  they  look  on  so  awful 
a  destruction,  to  receive  themselves 
one-tenth  part  of  the  offence  which 
these  heathen  nations  gave  to  the  true 
God,  they  would,  without  doubt,  smite 
down,  and  not  spare,  every  man  who 
should  dare  to  act  so  wicked  a  part, 
and  would  wonder  if  any  should  cry  out 
for  mercy  to  their  victims. 

But  the  great  Jehovah  punishes  not 
like  man.  He  is  indeed  strict  to  mark 
iniquity  and  "every  disobedience  and 
transgression  receives  a  due  recompense 
of  reward."  But  it  is  not  from  uncon- 
trollable feelings  of  what  men  call  pas- 
sion and  revenge  that  He  acts  in  any 
case.  To  such  feelings  the  Divine 
bosom  is  an  absolute  stranger.  God 
knows  nothing  as  a  Moral  Governor 
but  the  calm  and  just  administration 
of  law.  It  is  justice  alone  with  which 
He  is  concerned  when  punishing  the 
wicked,  not  the  gratification  of  any 
vindictive  feelings  towards  the  trans- 
gressors. An}  thing  vindictive  is  an 
impossibility  to  the  nature  of  God. 
If  such  language  is  sometimes  used  in 
Scripture  it  is  only  as  a  figure  of  speech, 
when  His  acts  iiave  the  appearance  to 
men's  eyes  of  being  vindictive.  But 
nothing  more  is  given  to  the  vilest 
criminal  than  the  due  desert  of  his  sin. 
Men,  however,  strangely  underrate  that 
desert,  and  there  is  all  the  mystery. 

'Ihese  Midianites  had  heard  of  the 
mighty  God  of  Israel  in  the  past.  The 
deeds  which  He  did  on  behalf  of  His 
people  were  before  the  eyes  of  all  the 
nations,  and  they  ought  to  have  known 
it  was  a  wicked  and  dangerous  thing  to 
tamper  with  such  a  people  and  their 
God.  If  they  knew  but  little,  they 
ought  to  have  made  themselves  better 
acquainted  with  the  great  Jehovah,  for 
God  never  rejected  heathen  inquirers. 
Yet,  knowing  the  character  of  this 
God  to  be  different  and  immeasurably 
superior  to  all  gods,  they  dared  to 
spoil  His  heritage  and  to  blaspheme 
His  uama     Hence  their  punishments. 


IV.  God's  complete  control  over  all 
the  states  and  moods  of  men's  mina&. 

It  was  He  that  led  these  enemies  of 
His  people  to  imagine  themselves  to 
be  surrounded  in  a  moment  with  so 
many  unexpected  evils — a  large  army 
close  at  hand,  the  wrath  of  Jehovah 
gone  out  against  them  in  some  terrible 
manner,  and  treachery  sprung  up  in 
the  midst  of  their  own  camp.  So  true 
is  it,  that  by  the  mere  force  of  terrible 
thoughts,  God  can  bring  destructive 
judgments  upon  men. 

How  in  a  moment,  suddenly, 
To  ruin  brought  are  they  I 

With  fearful  terrors  utterly, 
They  are  consum'd  away. 

A  similar  calamity  of  terrible  imagi- 
nations was  the  means  of  routing  a 
large  army  of  enemies  in  one  of  Israel's 
evil  days  (2  Kings  vii.  6).  God's  access 
to  the  world  of  a  man's  thoughts  is 
abundantly  set  forth  in  the  139th 
Psalm  ;  for  He  who  made  the  human 
mind  must  know  it  in  the  fullest 
manner,  just  as  the  maker  of  any 
machine  must  know  intimately  all  its 
parts,  and  all  its  capabilities  of  move- 
ment. 

Millions  of  thoughts  pass  through  a 
mails  mind  almost  every  day.  Yet  not 
one  escapes  the  eye  of  God  !  Sometimes 
the  mind  feels  oppressed  with  the 
number  of  its  own  thoughts,  but  cannot 
reduce  the  number.  Yet  there  is  an 
antidote.  "  In  the  multitude  of  my 
thoughts  within  me  thy  comforts  de- 
light my  soul."  These  thoughts  come 
often  unbidden,  rushing  like  a  river 
through  the  soul. 

**  Thoughts  on  thoughts,  a  countless  throng. 
Rush,  chasing  countless  thoughts  along." 

These  may  be  all  pleasant  and  re- 
freshing, filling  the  heart  with  joy,  and 
spreading  the  bow  of  hope  over  the 
horizon  of  the  future,  as  in  the  case  of 
the  two  sweet  singers  in  Ps.  Ixxiii. 
23-26,  and  Ps  cxxxix.  17,  18,  also 
Ps.  civ.  34.  Or  these  thoughts  may 
be  all  gloomy  and  dreadful,  full  of 
foreboding  fears  and  disastrous  issues, 
so  that  a  man  may  be  reduced  to  the 
extremity  of  trouble  and  be  led  to  cry 
out,  "0  save  me  from  my  thoughts! 
for  thought  kills  me."     In  the  midst 

879 


OHAP.  vn.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES, 


of  peace  and  plenty  God  can  sometimes  much,  and  were  ever  rebelling  against 

make  a  wicked  man  feel  the  beginnings  Him,  He  could   not  forget  were    the 

of  future  woes  by  causing   "  terrible  same  people   whom  He  had  brought 

thoughts  take  hold  on  him  as  waters,"  out  of  Egypt  with  a  high  hand,  and 

and  surround  him  on  every  side ;  as  whom  He  had  graciously  been  pleased 

in   the   case   of   Nero,  of  Voltaire,  of  to  take  into  covenant   with  Himself, 

Paine,  of  the  French   Monarch,  who  and  to  call  Himself  by  the  name  of 

ordered  the  St.  Bartholomew  massacre,  their  God.     Hence  it  was  for  the  glory 

and  many  others.  of  His   unchangeableness,    that    they 

God  has  a  mighty  army  to  attack  a  should  always  be  loved  (Jer.  xxxi.  3.) 

man  from  within,  as  well  as  many  forces  He  would  show  by  their  history,  thongh 

to  set  in  array  against  him  from  with-  it  was  of  a  character  entirely  offensive 

out      He  can  also  give  comfort  against  to  His  holy  nature,  that  while  he  might 

all  grief  on  every  side  by  the  character  chastise  them  severely  for  their  mani- 

of  the  thoughts  which  He  makes  to  pass  fold  backslidings,  the  mountains  were 

through  the  mind   on  any  and  every  less    firm    in    their  places   than   His 

occasion.  pledged  love  to  those  whom  he  had  by 

a  fixed  agreement  taken  into  tender 

V.  God's  dealings  always  end  with  relations  with  Himself  (Isa.  liv.   10.) 

tender  compassion  for  His  own  people.  Indeed,  one  great  purpose  he  had  in 

They  may  have  sinned  long  against  view,  when  electing  this  people  to  be 

much  light,  and  in  the  face  of  much  for  ever  His  own,  was  to  show  how  far 

solemn    warning    and    expostulation.  His  love  could  go,  and  how  tenderly  it 

Yet   He  cannot  cast  away   His  own.  could   manifest  itself  under  the  most 

They  are  His  blood-bought  property —  testing  circumstances.      Through  His 

redeemed  at  a  great  price.     They  are  dealings   with   this  people.  He  takes 

sprinkled  with   the  precious  blood  of  every   opportunity   of    revealing    His 

atonement,  and  though  He  was  angry  glorious  perfections,  the  riches  of  His 

with  them.  His  anger  is  turned  away,  mercy,  the  hidings  of  His  power,  the 

and  He  uses  the  language  of  peace  and  depths  of  His  wisdom,  the  tenderness 

reconciliation;   He  forgives  their    in-  of  His  compassion,  and  the  inviolability 

iquities,  and  their  sins  He  remembers  no  of  His  truth  and   faithfulness   (Ezek. 

more.     This  people,  who  had  sinned  so  xxxvi.  32  ;  Isa.  xliii.  21.) 


CHAPTER  Vni. 

THE  COMPLETION  OF  TEE  LORD'S  DELIVERANCE  OP  HIS  PEOPLE. 

Verses  1-17. 

Critical  Notes. — 1.  And  the  men  of  Ephraim  said,  etc.]  i.e. — after  Gideon  had  reached  the 
trans- Jordanic  side  of  the  river,  and  when  the  heads  of  Oreb  and  Zeeb  were  brought  to  him. 
It  may  eitlier  have  been  while  he  was  still  pursuing  the  fiyii  g  foe,  or  after  he  had  returned  from 
that  pursuit ;  more  probably  the  former.  Tlunigh  the  Ephraimites  and  the  Manassites  were  the 
descendants  of  two  brothers,  and  might  have  been  expected  to  be  on  the  most  friendly  terms, 
the  former  people  had  long  been  characterised  by  a  spirit  of  jealousy  lest  they  should  not  have 
that  superiority  granted  them  which  had  all  along  been  predicted  of  them  from  the  beginning. 
Had  not  old  Jacob,  when  blessing  the  sons  of  Joseph,  set  Ephraim  before  Manasseh  ?  Had  not 
Moses,  in  his  last  blessing,  spoken  of  the  tea  thousands  of  Ephraim  and  only  of  the  thousands 
of  Manasseh  ?  Was  not  Joshua  of  the  tribe  of  Ephraim  ?  Was  not  the  tabernacle  for  a  long 
time  placed  in  Shiloh  which  belonged  to  the  tribe  of  P^phraim  ?  And,  for  a  long  period,  were 
not  their  numbers  very  great  so  as  to  justify  their  being  regariled  as  a  leading  tribe  ?  (Gen. 
xlviii.  19  ;  Deut.  xxxiii,  17  ;  Num.  xiii.  8  with  Josh.  xix.  50  ;  Josh,  xviii.  1,  etc.).  Thus  envy 
became  something;  like  a  besetting  sin  of  the  tribe  of  Ephraim  (Isa.  xi.  13  ;  Jud.  xii.  1). 

380 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    JUDGES,  chap,  viii 


Sharply  -strong  and  irritating  words.  Not  that  they  cared  for  any  part  of  the  booty,  but 
they  were  most  sensitive  that  they  should  have  the  traditional  priority  conceded  to  them,  and 
certainly  that  they  sliould  not  be  left  in  the  background.  It  was  really  a  question  of  pride, 
and,  while  this  is  offensive  at  all  tinaes,  it  was  especially  so,  to  introduce  it  in  the  midst  of  the 
Lord's  most  solemn  deliverance. 

2.  What  have  I  now  done  in  comparison  of  you?  Most  beautiful !  Gideon  at  once  concedes 
the  place  of  honour  to  them.  He  is  ready  to  underrate  his  own  doings,  when  put  in  comparison 
with  those  of  the  Ephraimites.  He  knew  the  sensitive  character  of  the  tribe,  and  where  the 
sting  really  lay.  Hence  without  arguing  the  matter,  he  at  once  yields  the  point  of  their 
superiority  to  Manas.-eh,  or  rather,  with  a  refirienient  of  delicacy,  he  will  not  commit  the  whole 
tribe  without  their  consent,  but  speaks  only  in  name  of  his  own  clan,  that  of  Abi-ezer.  He 
uses  a  proveibial  expression,  "  Is  not  the  (/leaning  of  the  gmpcs  of  Ephraim  better  than  the  viniaye 
{the  full  crop)  of  Abi-ezer  f  He  at  once  yields  the  p -int  which  they  were  most  anxious  to 
gain  — the  acknowledgment  of  their  superiority. 

While  the  proverbial  expression  employed  is  susceptible  of  a  general  application,  probably 
Gideon's  immediate  reference  was  to  the  signal  service  which  the  tribe  of  Ephraim  had  just 
performed.  Gideon  and  his  men  had  but  destroyed  the  rank  and  file  of  the  enemy,  while  they 
had  slain  the  two  leading  generals  of  the  enemy's  army,  and  doubtless,  in  doing  so,  had  made  a 
great  slaughter  of  their  followers.  The  first  slaughter  commenced  by  Gideon  and  his  men  was 
the  vintage,  and  the  smiting  down  of  many  afterwards  by  the  Ephraimites,  was  the  gleanings. 
But  these  gleanings  Gideon  was  willing  to  reckon  of  far  greater  consequence  than  all  that  had 
been  done  before,  both  because  the  two  princes  had  been  slain,  and  also  because  an  enormous 
slaughter  had  been  made  of  the  enemy  by  the  tribe  of  Ephraim  (Isa.  x,  26). 

Ihe  grapes.]  The  word  is  not  in  the  Hebrew  text,  and  should  be  omitted.  The  reading 
should  be,  "  Is  not  the  gleaning  of  Ephraim  better  than  the  vintage  of  Abi-ezer.  ?  "  [Pulp. 
Com.} 

3.  Their  anger  was  abated.]  Lit.,  their  spirit  was  slackened.  "  His  good  words  are  as  victorious 
as  his  sword  ;  his  pacification  of  friends  better  than  the  execution  of  enemies."     \Bp.  Hall.] 

God  hath  delivered  them  into  your  hands.]  Whether  they  should  take  it  well  or  not,  he  is 
faithful  to  his  God  in  reminding  these  proud  murmurers  that  the  glory  of  all  the  achievements 
of  that  memorable  day  really  belonged  to  God. 

4.  Faint  yet  pursuine.]  (comp.  1  Sam.  xxx.  10).  They  were  exhausted  partly  from  want  of 
sleep,  and  partly  from  want  of  food,  and  partly  from  their  great  exertions  in  runTiing  over  a 
distance  of  several  miles,  and  contending  with  the  flying  enemy  all  the  time.  The  Sept.  adopts 
the  word  frtivMvrts  but  that  does  not  cover  the  whole  meaning.  They  were  both  hungry  and 
thirsty,  and  also  greatly  fatigued.  They  were  greatly  in  need  of  physical  nourishment 
(Job  xxii.  7).  Keil  renders  it,  exhausted  with  pursuing  ;  but  the  English  rendering  seems  a  much 
happier  one,  and  gives  the  spirit  of  the  passage  better.  It  was  an  act  of  bravery  and  a  work  of 
faith.  [Lias.]  It  was  more,  it  was  a  sacred  duty,  stern  in  character,  yet  imperative  in  obligation, 
not  to  leave  a  man  alive  of  those  who  had  been  guilty  of  so  great  a  crime,  as  ruthlessly  to 
despoil  God's  own  vineyard.  Not  till  he  had  reached  the  most  eastern  extremity  of  Gilead,  did 
this  zealous  vindicator  of  the  name  of  his  God  feel  himself  at  liberty  to  regard  his  work  as  done. 

5.  Succoth.]  Booths  or  tents  (Gen.  xxxiii.  17).  This  town  was  in  the  tribe  of  Gad,  only  a 
little  way  south  of  the  point  whence  the  Jordan  emerges  from  the  Lake  of  Gennesareth,  and  not 
far  from  the  brook  Jabbok. 

Loaves.]  Cakes.  Such  as  might  be  soon  baked,  and  not  occasion  any  interruption  to  the 
pursuit.  It  was  also  a  modest  request.  He  asked  for  no  fruits  or  wines,  or  anything  costly. 
He  merely  wished  the  simple  necessaries  of  life.  And  he  gave  as  his  reason  that  which  true 
Israelites  ought  to  have  regarded  as  the  best  of  all  reasons.  /  am  pursuing  after  the  kings  of 
Alidian.     i.e.,  I  am  doing  God's  work  on  behalf  of  His  people.    I  am  acting  for  the  public  good. 

6.  Are  the  hands  of  Zebah  and  Zalmunna  now  in  thine  hand?]  Instead  of  showing  patriotic 
sympathy  suitable  to  the  occasion,  they  consulted  only  their  own  petty  selfish  interests.  They 
did  not  believe,  notwithstanding  all  the  wondrous  feats  of  that  nigVit  and  morning,  that  the  kings 
of  Midian  were  within  the  grasp  of  Gideon  and  his  handful  of  followers.  Just  as  many  who 
stood  around  the  grave  of  Lazarus,  and  saw  how  stern  death  yielded  up  his  victim  at  the  com- 
mand of  the  Lord  of  life,  did  not  believe  in  the  true  chai'acter  of  Jesus,  but  went  their  way  and 
told  the  Pharisees.  There  are  always  hardened  unbelievers  of  some  kind  in  the  midst  of  God's 
mighty  doings.  These  craven-hearted  men  of  Succoth,  overlooking  the  mighty  arm  of  God 
which  had  just  been  laid  bare  before  all  eyes  against  the  Midian  tish  oppressors  of  His  people, 
still  thought  it  was  absurd  to  think  of  15,000  men  being  at  the  mercy  of  300.  They  ratlier 
thought  that  these  kings  would  turn  on  Gideon's  men,  and  swallow  them  up,  in  which  case  it 
would  go  hard  with  themselves,  should  it  become  known  to  the  kings  that  they  had  succoured 
the  small  army  of  their  pursuers.  Kather  than  run  the  risk  of  falling  out  with  the  enendes  of 
their  God  and  their  people,  these  princes  will  not  move  a  fiiger  to  assist  the  man  whom  God  was 
employing  to  reckon  with  His  enemies,  and  the  enemies  of  His  people. 

381 


CHAP.  vnL  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES. 


The  reply  given  was  not  a  bare  refusal  to  grant  wliat  every  true  Israelite  should  have  heen 
forward  to  give.  It  was  not  even  the  language  of  common  respect,  but  a  scornful  taunt.  This  to  a 
man  who  was  performing  a  duty  on  which  his  God  had  sent  him,  was  a  contempt  not  so  much 
against  the  servant  as  against  the  master.  It  was  adding  insolence  to  unkindness,  and  that  in 
the  special  presence  of  God.  The  cowardice  was  the  least  of  it  ;  it  was  treason  to  Israel's  God. 
Compare  Nabal's  churlishness  (1  Sam.  xxv.  8-11)  and  by  contrast  the  conduct  of  Barzillai 
(2  Sam.  xvii.  27-'^9  ;  xix.  33-40). 

7.  Tear  your  flesh  with  thorns  (Amos  i.  3),  or  thresh  your  bodies  with  thorns  and  briers.  It  was 
a  cruel  mode  of  putting  to  death  which  was  practised  in  these  times.  "  Thorns  of  the  wilderness  '* 
meant  those  that  were  strong,  the  desert  being  the  natural  ground  for  yielding  thorns  and  thistles. 
When  captives  were  thus  put  to  death,  the  briers  and  thorns  were  laid  on  their  naked  bodies,  and 
then  some  heavy  implements  of  husbandry  were  drawn  over  them,  so  crushing  them  to  death. 
Or  sometimes  they  were  whipped,  stroke  on  stroke,  with  thorns  and  prickly  plants.  The  Chaldee 
version  has  it,  "  I  will  mangle  your  flesh  on  the  thorns,  and  on  the  briers."  It  was  an  old 
punishment  "to  tie  the  naked  body  in  a  bundle  of  thorns  and  roll  it  on  the  ground"  [R6berts\ 
(2  Sam.  xii.  31  ;  Isa.  xli.  15). 

The  word  tZ?^'^  here  used  means  to  punish  severely. 

When  the  Lord  hath  delivered  Zebah  and  Zalmunna  into  my  hand.  He  does  not  doubt  for  a 
moment  but  that  it  shall  be  so.  He  is  sure  of  victory,  though  he  has  only  300  against  15,000 — 
one  man  to  fifty  ! 

Gideon's  threat  seems  to  have  made  no  impression  on  the  men  of  Succoth.  They  remained 
stubborn  in  their  unbelief,  **  Keproof  entereth  more  into  a  wise  man  than  a  hundred  stripes  into 
a  fool." 

8.  Went  up  thence  to  Penuel.l  A  place  rendered  for  ever  sacred  by  the  fact,  that  it  was  the 
ground  where  Jacob  their  father  wrestled  with  the  angel  and  prevailed  (Gen.  xxxii.  30,  31)  It 
was  a  sad  indication  of  degeneracy,  when  the  very  ground  under  their  feet  spoke  of  the  victory 
of  faith,  that  they  should  distrust  the  God  of  Jacob,  as  if  he  would  not  be  mindful  of  His 
covenant !  Penuel  was  higher  up  towards  the  mountains  than  Succoth,  which  indeed  was  in  the 
valley.  The  *'  tower  "  was  built  to  repel  invaders  fi-om  the  east,  who  generally  came  along  the 
course  of  the  Jabbok.     It  was  a  town  in  Gad,  and  not  far  from  Succoth, 

10.  Karkor — a  town  on  the  eastern  frontiers  of  Gad — as  far  away  as  they  could  get  from  the 
Israelitish  army,  which  had  now  swollen  as  a  river,  from  the  rush  of  men  out  of  all  the  tribes.  It 
was  the  first  spot  of  ground  they  had  reached  since  the  frightful  panic  they  had  experienced  in 
Jezreel,  where  they  reckoned  themselves  safe,  for  being  now  almost  beyond  the  boundary  line  of 
the  country,  they  did  not  suppose  the  Israelites  would  care  to  pursue  them  farther.  The  host  was 
secure.  They  felt  they  could  now  draw  breath,  and  were  glad  to  take  some  repose,  after  the 
terrible  trouble  through  which  they  had  passed. 

11.  Gideon  went  up  by  the  way  of  them  that  dwelt  in  tents—by  the  usual  route  taken  by 
nomads  and  travellers.  He  seems  to  have  gone  round  about  somewhat,  so  as  to  come  upon  them 
from  the  north-east,  which  would  be  a  great  surprise,  and  being  the  season  of  night,  it  would 
renew  the  terror  of  the  previous  night.  Not  having  yet  recovered  from  the  panic,  they  would 
feel  as  if  new  terrors  would  spring  up  mysteriously  wherever  they  went,  and  so  they  would  be 
unnerved  for  fighting.  They  would  also  very  likely  be  unarmed  and  laid  down  to  sleep,  thus 
beinw  unprepared  for  battle.  The  strength  too  of  Gideon's  army  would  be  unknown  to  them  in 
the  darkness,  and  doubtless  they  thought  it  far  larger  than  it  really  was.  But  the  principal 
element  of  weakness  was  the  superstitious  dread  they  had  of  Gideon  and  of  Gideon's  God. 
A  mysterious  awe  fell  upon  them  in  connection  with  the  name  Jehovah,  and  with  the  name 
of  Gideon  as  His  servant. 

12-    Discomflted  all  the  host.l    Struck  terror  into  them.    In  the  previous  verse  it  is  said,  he 

smote  the  host,  implying  that  he  put  them  to  death. 

He  took  the  two  kings  of  Midian.l  Zebah  and  Zalmunna  were  the  kings  proper  of  Midian. 
Oreb  and  Zeeb  were  but  princes,  or  generals  of  the  army. 

13.  Returned  from  battle  before  the  sun  rose.l  The  word  fferes  here  translated  the  sun,  is  used 
with  the  same  meaning  in  ch.  xiv   18.  ;  comp.  Gen.  xix.  15,  when  the  morning  arose. 

14  Described  unto  him  the  princes  of  Succoth.]  Bather  he  wrote  down  the  names  of  the 
princes.     Seventy-seven  men,  so  that  there  would  be  no  mistake  in  punishing  the  right  persons. 

15.  Ye  did  upbraid  me.l  Te  loaded  mt  with  reproach  as  if  God  could  not  deliver  these  kings  into 
my  hand.     Now  behold  them  ! 

16.  He  taught  the  men  of  Succotli.]  The  elders,  or  chief  men  ^"f-**  caused  them  to  know  to 
their  cost,  or  by  personal  experience.  He  gave  them  a  severe  lesson,  viz.,  what  a  dangerous 
thino-  it  was  to  make  light  of  God's  works,  or  to  trifle  with  the  glory  of  His  name.  Some  think 
he  put  them  to  death,  as  he  did  the  leading  men  of  Penuel. 

382 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   JUDGES.  chap.  viii. 


17.  Beat  down  the  tower.l  Their  "tower"  was  their  pride.  Of  that  are  they  first  stripped, 
then  of  their  lives.  Gideon  was  no  doubt  acting  by  God's  directions  in  what  he  did.  It  was 
one  of  the  days  of  the  Lord,  when  He  rises  up  to  vindicate  the  honour  of  His  name,  and  when 
every  transgression  and  disobedience  receives  a  due  recompense  of  reward. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS.—  Verses  I-IZ. 
I.  The  hateful  character  of  envy  and  jealousy. 

The  view  here  given  of  Ephraim's  character  is  humiliating ;  yet  it  has  two 

redeeming  points.  (1)  This  tribe  did  respond  to  the  call  made  to  take  part  in  the 
Lord's  deliverance  from  the  presence  oi  the  oppressor,  and  they  did  materially 
contribute  to  the  great  triumph  that  was  gaineti  over  the  enemy.  For  they  not 
only  slew  Oreb  and  Zeeb,  but  they  effected  a  great  slaughter  of  these  foreign 
oppressors  at  the  same  time.  (2)  They  did  acknowledge  Gideon  as  tlie  captain 
of  the  Lord's  choosing  on  the  occasion,  for  it  was  in  obedience  to  his  call  that 
they  came  forth,  and  when  the  victory  was  gained  they  presented  the  heads  of 
the  princes  to  him.  These  were  two  important  features  in  a  picture  iiere  given 
of  Ephraim's  character  which  is  otherwise  dark.  Their  conduct  forms  an 
unseemly  exhibition  of  envy  and  jealousy  at  a  solemn  moment  in  the  history  of 
the  nation.  To  call  it  nothing  worse,  the  moral  meanness  of  their  present  action 
was  to  their  lasting  discredit. 

1.  They  cowardly  stood  aloof  in  the  moment  of  danger.  We  do  not  hear 
of  the  slightest  movement  made  in  that  tribe  when  Gideon  blew  the  trumpet  to 
summon  volunteers  to  light  the  Lord's  battle.  If  they  were  to  be  the  foremost 
in  wearing  the  honours  they  ought  to  have  been  the  foremost  in  meeting  the 
dangers.  Why  did  not  shame  fill  tlieir  faces  that  they,  the  so-called  mightiest 
tribe  tarried  at  home  till  the  victory  was  won,  and  then  only  they  bestirred 
themselves  to  help  their  brethren  ?  We  should  have  thought  tliey  would  come 
to  (jideon  on  this  occasion,  with  many  apologies  on  their  lips,  and  expressions  of 
regret  that  they  had  not  acted  a  more  manly  and  a  more  loyal  part  to  their 
God  than  they  did.  Yet  they  chid  with  Gideon  sharply,  as  if  they  were  the 
injured  parties  !  "  They  should  rather  have  cried  him  up  for  his  valour,  and 
blessed  God  for  his  victory." 

2.  They  made  little  account  of  Gideon's  Divine  commission.  They  over- 
looked the  fact  that  Gideon  was  but  a  child  in  the  hands  of  his  God,  and  that 
from  first  to  last  all  the  directions  as  to  the  steps  that  were  to  be  taken  were 
given  by  Him.  This  was  a  more  serious  blot  still.  The  first  particular  we  have 
mentioned  was  but  cowardice,  but  this  is  to  overlook  the  hand  of  God.  In 
finding  fault  with  Gideon  in  this  matter  they  were  really  complaining  of  the 
management  of  Him  who  guided  Gideon  in  all  his  movements. 

3.  Their  only  object  appeared  to  be  to  gratify  their  own  ambition.    To  do 

this  at  any  time  was  a  gross  breach  of  good  manners,  but  on  such  a  day  as  this 
was  for  Israel,  and  in  the  presence  of  such  striking  proofs  of  God's  gracious 
return  to  His  people,  who  had  so  long  been  lying  under  the  heel  of  the  oppressors, 
was  at  once  infamous  and  wicked.  Their  sense  of  God's  honour  was  unspeakably 
small,  and  their  desire  for  exalting  themselves  to  honour  was  all-absorbing. 

4.  They  sought  their  honours  at  the  most  serious  risk.  Had  they  not 
found  in  Gideon  a  man  of  great  moderation,  meek  as  regards  his  own  rights, 
and  forbearing  as  regards  the  conduct  of  others,  a  fire  might  now  have  been 
kindled  in  Israel  itself  at  the  very  critical  moment,  when  the  enemy  was  yet 

383 


CHAP.  vin.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDQES. 


only  partially  routed,  and  the  danger  was  not  all  past.  Thus  the  work  in  which 
God  Himself  was  taking  part  might  have  been  marred,  and  a  new  evil  of  civil 
war  might  have  sprung  up  in  Israel,  equally  if  not  more  disastrous  than  that 
which  they  had  with  Midian. 

5.  Envy  is  one  of  many  sister  evils.  Pride,  jealousy,  and  envy,  especially  go 
together.  Pride,  indeed,  was  the  first  sin — the  aspiring  to  be  a  god.  From  this 
a  whole  brood  of  sins  spring,  and  all  have  a  remarkable  family  likeness.  But 
the  parent  is  pride,  which  really  means  making  self  the  most  important  of  all 
things,  and  a  desire  that  all  things  should  become  subordinate  to  self.  The  true 
balance  of  things  which  God  has  established  is  that,  while  every  man  should 
cherish  self-res[)ect,  he  is  not  to  over- value  himself,  as  being  a  dependent  creature, 
and  occupying  a  certain  position  which  God  in  His  providence  has  assigned  to 
him. 

The  evil  of  this  sin  is  seen,  in  that  it  thrust  proud  Nebuchadnezzar  out  of 
mens  society,  proud  Saul  out  of  his  kingdom,  proud  Haman  out  of  court,  proud 
Adam  out  of  paradise,  and  proud  Lucifer  out  of  heaven.    [//.  Smith.l 

Remember  what  thou  wert  before  the  truth — nothing  ;  what  thou  wert  for 
many  years  after — weakness  ;  what  in  all  thy  life — a  great  sinner  ;  what  in  all 
thy  excellencies — a  mere  debtor  to  God,  to  thy  parents,  to  the  earth,  to  all  the 
creatures.  Surely  nothing  is  more  reasonable  than  to  be  humble,  and  nothing 
more  foolish  than  to  be  proud.     [Taylor,'] 

What  is  a  man  proud  of — money  ?  It  will  not  procure  for  him  one  night's 
sleep.  It  will  not  buy  him  back  a  lost  friend.  It  will  not  bribe  off  approaching 
death.  Land  ?  a  little  bit  of  it  will  soon  be  all  he  will  require.  Learning  ?  if 
he  be  equal  to  Newton,  he  has  gathered  one  little  pebble  on  the  ocean's  shore, 
and  even  that  one  he  must  soon  lay  down  again.     [*S'.  T,  treasury.] 

Those  trees  bend  the  most  freely  which  bear  the  most  fully.  As  a  proud 
heart  loves  none  but  itself,  so  it  is  beloved  by  none  but  itself.  Who  would 
attempt  to  gain  those  pinnacles,  that  none  have  ascended  without  fears,  or 
descended  without  falls  ?  Where  the  river  is  deepest,  the  water  glides  the  most 
smoothly.  Empty  casks  sound  most,  whereas  the  well-filled  vessel  silences  its 
own  sound.  As  the  shadow  of  the  sun  is  largest  when  his  beams  are  lowest,  so 
we  are  always  least  when  we  make  ourselves  the  greatest.     [Seeker.] 

Pride  is  an  evil  that  puts  men  upon  all  manner  of  evils.  Accius  the  poet, 
though  a  dwarf,  yet  would  be  pictured  as  tall  of  stature.  Psaphon,  a  proud 
Libyan,  would  needs  be  a  god,  and  having  caught  some  birds,  he  taught  them 
to  prattle  "  the  great  god,  Psaphon."  Menecrates,  a  proud  physician,  wrote 
thus  to  King  Philip  :  Menecrates,  a  god,  to  Philip,  a  king.  Proud  Simon,  in 
Lucian,  having  got  a  little  wealth  changed  his  name  from  Simon  to  Siinonides, 
because  there  were  so  many  beggars  of  his  kin  ;  he  also  set  the  house  on  fire 
where  he  was  born,  that  no  one  might  point  to  it.     [Brooks,] 

The  demon  of  Pride  was  born  with  us,  and  it  will  not  die  one  hour  before  us. 
It  is  so  woven  into  the  very  warp  and  woof  of  our  nature,  that  till  we  are 
wrapped  in  our  winding-sheets  we  shall  never  hear  the  last  of  it.     [Spurgeon] 

Like  a  snake  coiled  up  in  a  bed  of  flowers,  there  is  danger  lurking  under  our 
fairest  attainments  ;  like  the  inflammatory  attack,  to  which  those  are  most 
liable  who  are  highest  fed,  whose  bones  are  full  of  marrow,  and  whose  veins  are 
gorged  with  blood,  so  we  may  be  exposed  to  spiritual  pride  through  the  very 
fulness  of  our  graces  ;  therefore  we  ought  to  watch  and  pray  against  the  great 
evil,  and  study  to  be  humble.     [Guthrie,] 

A  minister  who  on  a  certain  occasion  had  preached  ably  and  well,  at  the  close 
of  the  service  was  accosted  by  a  hearer  with  the  exclamation,  "  That  was  a  noble 
sermon,  sir,"  "  Yes,"  was  the  reply,  "  the  devil  told  me  that  before  I  left  the 
pulpit." 

384 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JUDGES.  chap,  v 


6.  Envy  is  an  intolerant  evil.  "  Who  can  stand  before  it  ? "  It  grieves  that 
others  should  possess  the  good  in  which  it  does  not  share.  It  fired  the  breast 
of  Saul,  and  he  cast  a  javelin  at  David.  It  rankled  in  the  bosoms  of  Joseph's 
brethren,  and  they  first  cast  him  into  a  pit,  and  then  sold  him  for  a  slave  to 
strangers.  It  inflamed  the  mind  of  the  wicked  Cain  so  that  he  rose  against  his 
brother  and  slew  him.  It  burned  along  with  pride  in  the  heart  of  Haman,  and 
moved  him  to  seek  the  death,  not  only  of  Mordecai,  but  of  the  whole  race  to 
which  he  belonged.  It  grudges  even  to  give  that  to  a  man  which  he  has  fairly 
earned  by  his  skill  and  toil  (Eccl.  iv.  4).  It  refuses  even  to  the  closest  friends 
the  slightest  superiority  over  one's  self,  though  it  is  the  Master  himself  who 
confers  it  (Matt.  xx.  24).  From  its  envenomed  assaults  the  best  of  men  are  not 
exempted  (1  Sam.  xvii.  28).  It  is  one  of  those  *'  roots  of  bitterness  "  from 
which  spring  "  strifes,  railings,  evil  surmisings,  and  perverse  disputings  of  men 
of  corrupt  minds." 

ZZ.  The  nobility  of  meek  forbearance  under  false  accusation. 

What  a  refreshing  contrast  have  we  in  the  bearing  of  Gideon  to  that  of  the 
men  of  Ephraim  !  His  spirit  is  calm  and  morally  great,  beautifully  illustrative 
of  Prov.  xvi.  32.  He  stands  before  us  like  a  giant  in  the  midst  of  peevish 
children. 

1.  He  refrains  from  recrimination.  He  not  only  had  ground  for  self  vindi- 
cation, but  it  belonged  rather  to  him  to  find  fault  with  his  accusers.  Why  did 
not  the  men  of  Ephraim  come  forward  of  themselves  long  ago,  and  take  the  lead 
in  rescuing  the  country  from  oppression  ?  Why  did  they  need  to  be  called  for 
at  all  to  take  part  in  such  a  work  ?  There  was  no  refusal  of  volunteers  for  such 
a  cause,  and  why  come  in  now  to  raise  heart-burnings  in  the  very  midst  of  a 
solemn  Divine  interposition  on  behalf  of  the  sacred  nation,  when  they  ouj^ht  as 
one  man  to  be  prostrating  themselves  in  the  dust  before  Jehovah,  and  pouring 
out  their  gratitude  from  penitent  hearts  at  the  deliverance  of  their  land  from 
the  incubus  of  oppression  ?  But  this  true  man  of  God  refrains  from  rebuke. 
He  knew  that,  however  strong  his  case,  that  course  would  lead  to  strife 
(comp.  2  Sam.  xix.  41-43).  He  therefore  wisely  left  off  contention  before 
meddling  with  it. 

2.  He  had  regard  to  the  great  interests  that  were  in  his  hands.     It  was 

the  moment  of  Israel's  redemption,  when  everything  depended  on  union  au)ong 
themselves.  To  have  got  into  strife  now  would  have  been  a  suicidal  pnlicy  for 
the  best  interests  of  the  country.  It  might  have  led  to  civil  war,  and  plunged 
Israel  into  a  deeper  distress  than  that  out  of  which  they  were  just  euier^fing. 
Besides,  Gideon  felt  that  he  occupied  the  sacred  position  of  being  in  God's 
employment,  His  servant  appointed  to  carry  into  execution  a  great  work.  All 
controversy  among  themselves,  therefore,  was  not  to  be  thought  of,  but  gratitude 
and  praise  he  felt  should  absorb  all  their  attention.  It  was  these  things  present 
to  his  mind  that  formed  the  basis  of  the  answer  which  he  gave.  Public 
considerations,  not  personal  ;  God's  presence,  and  God's  authority  over  him  ; 
God's  cause,  and  Israel's  salvation — these  were  the  grounds  on  which  Gideon 
made  his  noble  reply. 

3.  He  yields  the  place  of  honour  to  those  who  accuse  him  (Phil.  ii.  3). 
"What  have  I  done  compared  with  what  you  have  done?  To  you  be  the  larger 
share  of  merit.  If  I  liave  been  first  in  the  field,  your  gleaning  has  been  more 
than  my  vintage.  God  has  given  to  me  to  break  up  the  enemy's  camp,  but  to 
you  He  has  given  the  heads  of  two  of  the  principal  leaders  in  that  great  army 

2  B  385 


CHAP.  Tin.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   JUDGES, 


along  with  a  great  slaughter  of  the  rank  and  file.  What  have  I  done  to  compare 
with  you  ? "  Here  is  an  instance  of  the  spirit  that  prefers  another  in  honour  to 
one's  self.  He  gives  up  his  own  claims  in  a  moment,  when  he  finds  that  they 
might  prove  an  offence  to  those  around  him.  No  man  was  more  humble  of  all 
that  fought  that  day  than  was  Gideon.  From  the  shoulders  and  upward  he  was 
higher  than  any  of  the  people  in  moral  greatness.  He  that  ruled  in  Israel  was 
willing  to  take  the  lowest  place.  He  proves  twice  a  conqueror,  first  over  the 
hosts  of  Midian,  and  then  more  signally  still  over  himself!  The  Macedonian 
monarch  conquered  the  world,  but  entirely  failed  to  subdue  himself.  The  Bible 
great  man  is  immeasurably  superior  to  the  world's  hero.  The  one  affords  a 
living  illustration  of  "  whatsoever  things  are  just,  pure,  lovely,  and  of  good 
report."  The  other  illustrates  the  case  of  a  man  sinking  to  the  level  of  the 
brute,  acting  like  a  savage  to  those  around  him,  and  at  last  dying  the  death  of 
a  debaucliee.  If  Gideon  is  a  picture  of  moral  greatness,  then  this  is  a  picture  of 
moral  infamy  ;  and  to  set  it  upon  a  throne  is  to  hold  it  up  to  the  scorn  and 
reprobation  of  all  time  1 

4.  The  spirit  which  he  showed  entirely  pacified  the  fault-finders.  **  Their 
anger  was  abated  when  he  said  that."  How  forcible  are  right  words !  Nothing 
more  wise  could  have  come  from  one  who  had  a  large  knowledge  of  human 
nature.  He  put  his  finger  on  the  spot  where  the  soreness  was  feit,  and  poured 
on  it  the  most  soothing  of  oils,  which  at  once  produced  the  desired  effect, 
"  A  soft  tongue  breaketh  the  bone."  "  A  soft  answer  turneth  away  wrath." 
It  was  as  if  some  spirit — perhaps  that  good  angel  that  called  him  to  this  work 
and  inspired  him  in  it — had  whispered  in  his  ear  the  words  which  He  long 
afterwards  spake  through  a  New  Testament  apostle.  **  Dearly  beloved,  avenge 
not  yourself,  but  rather  give  place  unto  wrath."  On  this  principle  he  acted,  and 
so  "  overcame  evil  witli  good,  and  poured  coals  of  fire  on  the  fault-finders' 
heads."  All  men  of  right  judgment  while  they  look  on,  involuntarily  exclaim, 
**  The  righteous  man  is  more  excellent  than  his  neighbour." 

The  practical  good  done  to  Israel  was  incalculably  great.  The  spark  was 
burning  dangerously  close  to  the  tinder,  and  frightfully  destructive  must  have 
been  the  explosion,  had  not  a  firm  foot  been  instantly  put  down  to  extinguish  it. 
A  bitter  internecine  war  was  prevented  just  in  time,  which  might  have  cost  the 
lives  of  many  thousands  of  the  sons  of  his  people,  have  kindled  a  spirit  of  deep 
hostility  among  brethren,  and  have  perpetuated  feelings  of  jealousy  and  malice 
for  many  generations.  On  Gideon's  brow  this  day  was  written  in  letters  of 
white  the  motto — "  Blessed  are  the  peacemakers,  for  they  shall  be  called  the 
children  of  God."  He  acted  from  tlie  force  of  moral  principle,  to  gain  })recious 
and  Divine  ends,  and  his  name  shall  not  die  from  the  page  of  true  fame. 
**  Blessed  are  the  meek,  for  they  shall  inherit  the  earth." 

XXX.  Tbe  condition  of  success  in  God's  service. 

A  great  work  was  now  being  done  for  God.  An  enemy  had  bidden  defiance 
to  the  God  of  heaven,  had  blasphemed  His  name,  and  not  only  wantonly  touched, 
but  threatened  to  extinguish  the  people  whom  He  had  taken  into  covenant  with 
Himself,  and  who  kept  up  the  knowledge  of  His  name  on  the  earth.  For  that 
enemy  the  day  of  reckoning  was  now  come.  He  must  be  destroyed,  and  that 
utterly.  The  jealousy  of  Jehovah  for  His  own  great  name  was  now  awakened. 
Gideon  and  his  300  men  were  the  instruments  chosen  to  fulfil  the  sentence  of 
Heaven  on  these  rebellious  ones  ;  and  till  the  work  was  finished,  not  a  man  was 
at  liberty  to  retire  from  his  post.  Though  they  were  all  in  greater  or  less  degree 
overcome  with  fatigue,  from  long  fighting,  want  of  sleep,  want  of  food,  and 
running  over  many  miles  of  ground,  yet  they  must  not  relax  their  efforts. 
386 


EOMIIETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES.  chap.  viii. 


The  sacred  call  of  their  God  was  to  persevere  till  their  work  was  done.  Thus 
only  could  success  be  legitimately  won.  It  is  in  this  condition  that  we  now  find 
Gideon  and  his  300  men  (ver.  4)  *'  faint,  yet  pursuing." 

These  words  contain  a  Paradox.  Tiiose  who  fight  the  Lord's  battles  often 
faint,  and  yet  they  pursue.  They  are  overcome,  and  yet  prove  victorious — 
their  strength  is  gone,  and  yet  they  are  more  than  a  match  ior  the  foe — they 
are  **  cast  down,  but  not  destroyed  " — the  cedars  become  reeus,  and  yet  are 
able  to  weather  the  storm — the  confessedly  iaint  do  the  work  of  heroes — each 
can  say,  **  W  hen  I  am  weak  then  am  I  strong" — and  can  add  in  explanation, 
"By  Thee  have  I  run  through  a  troop;  by  my  Gud  do  I  leap  over  a  wall." 
Or,  in  New  Testament  phrase,  "  I  can  do  all  things  through  Christ,  who 
strengtheneth  me." 

Here  an  important  principle  is  laid  down  for  those  who  would  enter  into  God's 
service.  It  relates  to  the  condition  on  which  success  is  to  be  gained.  Even 
when  strength  is  exhausted,  there  must  he  iJie  resolution  to  'persevere.  Wearied 
and  weak,  with  small  visible  resources,  while  difficulties  and  dangers  are 
numerous  and  formidable,  the  true  worker  for  God  must  resolutely  persevere. 
He  is  allowed  to  think  only  of  victory — never  of  defeat.  Even  should  his  arm 
become  feeble,  and  he  be  scarcely  able  to  drag  his  limbs  along,  he  must  ever 
keep  his  face  to  the  foe,  and  assume  the  certainty  of  his  being  a  conqueror 
in  the  end. 

The  idea  is  not  simply  that  of  perseverancSy  hut  perseverance  when  human 
wisdom  can  see  no  natural  means  of  holding  out  any  longer.  These  men  had 
fought  till  they  could  fight  no  more.  Yet  they  followed  on,  implicitly  obedient 
to  tlie  call  of  Divinely-appointed  duty.  Though  the  requirement  of  rest  and 
refreshment  was  imperative,  the  fear  of  God  was  upon  their  spirits,  and  not  a 
murmur  of  complaint  was  heard  along  their  ranks.  There  was  no  call  for 
substitutes  to  take  their  places,  which  could  easily  have  been  done.  The  rule 
was  distinct — **  By  these  three  hundred  will  I  save  you  ....  and  let  all 
the  other  people  go  every  man  unto  his  place  "  (vii.  7).  By  them  alone  they 
knew  the  work  must  be  done. 

This  rule  is  of  general  application  ;  for  the  principles  which  a])ply  to  any  one 
work  of  God  apply  to  all,  and  in  every  age,  regard  only  being  had  to  the  change 
of  circumstances.     For  general  use  the  following  particulars  are  to  be  noticed : — 

1.  The  condition  of  success  itself— what  it  is.    It  implies — 

(1.)  Every  atom  of  strength  must  he  put  forth.  Every  muscle  and  bone  in  his 
body  must  be  given.  Not  a  drop  of  blood  in  his  veins  must  be  withheld. 
Nerves  and  sinews,  all  that  hands  and  feet  can  do,  must  be  absolutely  surrendered. 
It  is  not  enough  that  there  should  be  a  little  zeal  and  some  honest  work  done, 
or  that  some  great  efforts  be  made,  and  a  man  show  himself  to  be  in  earnest, 
but  a  man's  whole  being  must  be  given  up  to  the  service  of  his  God  when  the 
call  is  given.  This,  indeed,  is  simply  coming  up  to  the  measure  of  what  is 
reasonable,  for  we  owe  to  God  our  whole  selves— every  faculty  we  have,  and  its 
fullest  exercise.  He  may  seldom  require  us  to  strain  our  energies  in  His  service, 
but  absolute  dedication  to  Him  of  all  we  are,  and  have,  is  simply  His  just  due, 
so  that  we  are  always  to  hold  ourselves  in  readiness  to  offer  to  Him  the  exercise 
of  our  faculties,  to  any  degree  that  He  may  require. 

Thus  as  regards  work.  As  to  suffering,  our  Saviour  himself  is  an  example 
of  the  absolute  surrender  of  every  limb  and  sensitive  part,  wh(;n  that  is  required 
to  illustrate  the  deep  designs  of  God's  moral  government.  He  submitted  to  be 
"poured  out  like  water  and  to  have  all  His  bones  out  of  joint— His  lu  art  made 
like  wax,  and  melted  in  the  midst  of  His  bowels  ;  His  strength  dried  like  a 
potsherd,  and  brought  down  to  the  dust  of  death"  (Ps.  xxii.  14,  15). 

387 


CHAP.  vin.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   JUDGES, 


All  this  is  greatly  intensified,  when  we  think  that  our  life,  which  was 
forfeited  by  sin,  has  been  given  to  us  anew  as  the  purchase  of  the  blood  of 
God's  own  Son. 

(2.)  When  strength  is  exhausted  the  fight  must  he  continued  by  faith.  When 
our  resources  are  exhausted,  and  the  work  is  not  done,  we  are  still  to  believe 
that  God's  resources  can  never  fail,  and  that,  if  the  work  in  hand  is  really  for 
His  glory,  and  needful  to  be  done,  it  shall  be  done  without  fail,  sooner  or  later, 
as  to  time,  and  in  the  manner  which  He  sees  to  be  best  as  to  means.  To  carry 
on  the  fight  by  faith  is  most  glorifying  to  God,  because  it  trusts  His  power  to 
bring  out  the  issue  though  the  steps  are  not  seen  ;  it  trusts  His  wisdom  to  find 
out  the  means  ;  and  it  trusts  His  faithfulness,  that  He  will  never  make  light  of 
His  word  of  promise.  The  dependence  of  the  creature  on  the  fountain  head  is 
more  distinctly  seen,  and  seen  to  be  absolute  ;  while  gratitude  flows  in  a  purer 
form,  and  from  a  deeper  well-spring  in  the  heart  (Isa.  xxvi.  4  ;  Gen.  xviii.  14  ; 
Ps.  cxlvii.  6  ;  Prov.  xv.  11  ;  INum.  xxiii.  19).  Hence  we  often  find  that  though 
God  does  not  despise  the  use  of  a  man's  natural  faculties,  for  they  are  His  own 
gift,  yet  He  often  blocks  up  our  way  that  we  may  see  what  a  short  way  one  can 
travel  when  left  to  themselves,  and  how  necessary  it  is  to  keep  close  to  Hi 
who  has  said,  "  As  thy  days,  so  shall  thy  strength  be,"  and  who  always  keeps 
His  word  (Isa.  xl.  30,  31). 

(3.)  We  must  never  lose  the  hope  of  victory.  The  true  soldier  in  God's 
service  must  assume  that  he  is  invincible  while  doing  God's  work  faithfully  and 
from  right  motives.  To  suppose  failure  would  be  to  distrust  Omnipotence,  or 
to  suppose  that  a  Divine  promise  could  be  broken.  When  God  undertakes  a 
work  it  cannot  prove  abortive.  He  is  the  "  Lord  of  hosts,  mighty  in  battle  " 
(Ps.  xlviii.  1,  etc.  ;  Job.  ix.  4  ;  Ps.  ix.  19,  20  ;  Dent,  xxxii.  30  ;  Isa.  xlvi.  9,  10). 
Yet,  notwithstanding  all  assurances,  faith  is  often  weak  and  gives  way.  Even 
the  conqueror  of  Goliath,  when  wearied  out  with  perpetual  harassment,  gave 
way  to  despondency,  and  said  "I  shall  one  day  perish  by  the  hand  of  Saul ; 
there  is  nothing  better  for  me  than  that  I  should  escape  into  the  land  of  the 
Philistines."  A  sad  illustration  of  the  weakness  of  faith  on  the  part  of  one  who 
had  been  solemnly  taken  under  the  protection  of  the  God  of  Israel,  through  his 
being  anointed  with  the  holy  oil,  and  who  had  already  for  several  years  been 
marvellously  delivered  from  the  malicious  designs  made  on  his  life  by  a  blood- 
thirsty man, 

(4.)  We  must  endure  every  possible  hardship  for  the  cause  of  God.  Gideon's 
men  of  faith  had  to  fight  all  the  night  long  without  intermission,  without  sleep 
or  refreshment,  and  to  travel  laboriously  over  hill  and  dale  for  many  a  weary 
mile,  while  they  cheerfully  submitted  to  the  lines  marked  out  for  them.  They 
were  required  not  to  "confer  with  flesh  and  blood,"  but  rather  to  " crucify  the 
flesh"  when  it  was  necessary  to  serve  the  ends  of  high  principle  (Heb.  xi.  36,  37  ; 
comp.  Acts  ix.  16  ;  xxi.  13).  Love  of  our  own  ease  must  never  exceed  our  love 
to  the  Saviour,  or  to  the  cause  of  our  God.  We  dare  not  take  up  the  cause  of 
religion  merely  when  it  is  comfortable,  but  turn  aside  when  we  meet  with  briers 
and  thorns.  Pliable  could  say,  **  come  on,  brother,  let  us  mend  our  pace,"  so 
long  as  his  ear  was  soothed  with  pleasant  talk  about  the  crowns  and  sceptres  of 
the  better  land  on  high  ;  but  when  the  Slough  of  Despond  came  in  his  way,  he 
very  quickly  turned  his  back  on  the  christian  pilgrimage.  The  man  that  is 
wanted  for  God's  service  must  work  on,  even  when  he  begins  to  faint,  must  keep 
to  his  oars  even  when  he  goes  against  the  stream,  and  must  go  resolutely  forward 
even  when  there  is  a  lion  in  the  way.  A  true  servant  of  our  Divine  Master 
must  be  content  to  bear  a  real  cross  for  His  sake,  never  to  keep  back  from  duty 
through  fear  of  man,  or  dread  of  the  world's  scorn,  but  at  all  times  to  **  endure 
hardness  as  a  good  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ." 
388 


MOMILETW  COMMEJSTARY:   JUDGES,  chap.  viii. 


(5.)  We  must  never  give  up  till  the  work  is  done.     It  was  not  enough  fot 

Gideon  to  read  the  enemy  a  lesson  by  crippling  his  strength  and  scattering  his 
army.  All  the  members  of  that  pioud  host  had  been  guilty  of  a  capital  crime, 
and  must  have  the  sentence  of  death  executed  npon  them  in  the  day  of  the 
Lord,  vvheu  judgment  was  being  laid  to  the  line  and  righteousness  to  the 
plummet.  Gideon's  commission  was  to  **  smite  the  Midianiies  as  one  man  " 
(ch.  vi.  16).  Their  sin  in  despising  the  God  of  Israel  was  very  offensive. 
All  had  been  guilty,  and  all  must  perish,  for  now  the  Divine  jealousy  was 
awakened.  So  it  was  in  other  cases  (Deufc.  xx.  16-18 ;  xxv.  17-19;  Josh.  xi.  20 ; 
1  Sam.  XV.  3). 

2.  The  difficulty  of  complying  with  this  condition.  Because  "fainting*'  is 
so  frequent  an  experience  of  those  who  are  resolved  to  persevere  at  the  line 
of  duty.     This  arises  from — 

(1.)  yke  weakness  of  the  natural  faculties.  "We  are  dust."  "  Our  spirits 
dwell  in  houses  of  clay,  and  we  are  crushed  before  the  moth."  "  All  flesh  is 
grass."  Many  of  those  who  are  enrolled  in  God's  service  are  "bruised  reeds." 
None  can  say—"  My  strength  is  the  strength  of  stones,  and  my  flesh  is  of 
brass."  ^  How  is  it  to  be  expected  that  such  persons  should  persevere  when  real 
difficulties  in  the  way  of  duty  arise  ?  The  most  intrepid  soldier  sometimes 
trembles;  the  most  robust  labourer  is  not  always  free  from  Innguor;  the  soul 
of  the  most  persevering  pilgrim  is  oftentimes  "  much  discouraged  because  of 
the  way."  So  in  the  discharge  of  the  duties  which  every  good  man  has  before 
him  in  his  place,  partly  through  their  toilsome  character,  partly  through  their 
multitude,  and  partly  through  their  long  continuance ;  his  strength  fails,  Ids 
spirit  droops,  and  he  feels  utterly  unequal  to  the  work  set  before  him.  "  The 
spirit  is  willing,  but  the  flesh  is  weak." 

(2.)  The  small  success  which  crowns  great  efforts.  This  produces  fainting. 
"I  have  laboured  in  vain,  I  have  spent  my  strength  for  nought."  "  We  have 
toiled  all  the  night  and  cauj^ht  nothing."  "  We  have  borne  the  burden  and 
heat  of  the  day,"  and  only  earned  a  penny.  Sometimes  the  Missionary  has  but 
a  single  convert  after  years  of  sacrifice  and  privation.  The  Christian  Minister, 
with  the  most  indefatigable  toil,  can  barely  keep  up  his  small  number  of 
adherents.  The  Christian  Teacher  of  the  young  cannot  sometimes  point  to  a 
single  case  of  a  striking  conversion. 

(3.)  The  opposition  of  those  who  know  not  God.  There  are  still  outside  the 
Christian  city  the  Sanballats  the  (Horonite),  and  the  Geshems  the  (Arabian),  to 
hinder  those  who  would  build  the  walls  of  Jerusalem,  and  the  race  is  scarcely  less 
numerous  than  of  old.  Moses  met  with  them  in  the  Egyptian  magicians  ; 
Hezekiah,  in  the  blaspheming  Sennacherib;  Daniel,  in  the  princes  and  presidents 
set  over  the  kingdom  of  Darius  ;  Paul,  in  Elymas  the  sorcerer,  and  in  Alexander 
the  coppersmith,  who  did  him  much  evil.  The  advocates  of  gospel  truth  still  meet 
with  them  in  those  who  would  exalt  reason  so  as  to  destroy  faith  ;  in  those  who 
would  magnify  charity  so  as  to  efface  the  distinctions  of  moral  character  ;  and 
in  those  who  would  stretch  out  liberty,  until  it  become  all  one  with  laxity. 
There  are  many  who  openly  oppose,  and  there  are  still  more  who  would  secretly 
undermine,  the  pillar  of  gospel  truth.  No  wonder,  if  those  who  are  in  charge 
of  the  building  of  Sion's  walls,  should  oftentimes  find  their  hearts  giving  way, 
and  their  souls  fainting  within  them. 

(4.)  The  hanging  hack  of  those  who  ought  to  he  friends.  Nothing  is  more 
helpful  to  the  Christian  cause  than  the  warm  sympathy,  and  timely  aid  of  true 
fearers  of  the  Lord.  How  greatly  was  Paul  comforted  hy  the  coming  of  Titus 
on  one  occasion  (2  Cor.  vii.  5,  6)  ;  and  how  much  were  his  hands  strengthened 
and  his  spirit  cheered  by  such  true  yoke-fellows  as  Timothy  and  Epaphroditua 
on  another  occasion   (Phil,  ii  19,  20  and  27).     But  how  many  hung  back. 

389 


OHAP.  viiL  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    JUDGES. 


Demas,  who  loved  this  present  world ;  Hymeneus  and  Alexander,  who  made 
shipwreck  of  the  f.iith  ;  Phyletus,  Piiygellus  and  Hermogenes,  with  nearly  all 
that  were  in  Asia,  who  left  their  spiritual  teacher  (2  Tim.  iv.  10 ;  1  Tim.  i.  20  ; 
ii.  17  ;  2  Tim.  i.  15),  and  a  large  number  undefined  (Phil.  ii.  21).  How  much 
greater  would  have  been  the  success  that  crowned  the  efforts  of  the  Apostles, 
if  those  who  at  first  did  run  well  had  continued  true  to  the  end ! 

(5.)  The  stream  of  circumstances  is  often  against  us.  It  might  be  supposed 
to  be  otherwise,  when  the  cause  is  God's  own,  and  His  glory  is  concerned  in  its 
progress.  Having  all  events  at  His  disposal,  why  should  not  the  Ruler  of 
Providence  arrange,  so  that  the  stream  should  ever  flow  in  favour  of  the  truth. 
Yet  the  balance  of  circumstances  seems  much  rather  to  favour  its  enemies  than 
its  friends.  So  many  occurrences  are  happening  to  hinder  the  cause  of  Christ, 
so  many  disappointments  take  place  when  there  was  a  fair  hope  of  success, 
breaches  of  engagements  happen,  rival  competitors  step  in,  the  interests  of 
selfishness  come  into  collision  with  those  of  God  and  His  cause,  changes  of 
opinion,  and  still  worse,  changes  of  feeling  among  friends  are  ever  occurring, 
we  are  constantly  being  surrounded  by  new  conditions  of  life,  old  friends  pass 
away,  and  new  friends  are  with  diflionlty  made,  strifes  and  divisions  arise,  and 
the  gospel  chariot  is  beset  with  hindrance  on  all  sides. 

(6.)  Anxieties  as  to  the  issue  of  our  efforts.  This  also  leads  to  fainting,  as 
they  are  long  continued.  This  anxiety  is  greater  or  less  as  natural  fear  gets  the 
better  of  faith.  This,  however,  has  in  it  more  of  weakness  than  of  unbelief. 
The  timid  spirit  exclaims — **  Who  shall  roll  us  away  the  stone?"  But  strong 
faith  calls  out — "  Who  art  thou,  0  great  mountain  ?  before  Zerubbabel  thou 
shalt  become  a  plain."  The  Israelites  of  Ezekiel's  days  gave  up  the  cause  of 
God  among  them  as  lost.  The  life  seemed  to  have  gone  out  of  the  Church,  and 
in  their  own  minds  they  were  likening  themselves  to  a  multitude  of  dry  bones, 
which  no  preaching  could  put  life  into.  "  Our  bones  are  dried,  and  our  hope  is 
lost ;  we  are  cut  off  for  our  parts."  But  God,  by  His  prophet,  shows  them 
that  when  the  **wind"  comes,  along  with  the  prophesying,  the  bones  come  together, 
and  they  stand  upon  their  feet  an  exceeding  great  army  (Ezek.  xxxvii.  11). 

(7.)  Struggles  ivith  indwellinq  sin  (Habak.  i.  2).  *'  0,  wretched  man,  etc." 
(Rom.  vii.  24).  Sin  is  ever  destructive  of  strength.  It  produces  the  hiding  of 
God's  countenance,  and  so  cuts  off  the  soul  from  the  supply  of  its  strength. 
No  calamity  is  so  great  as  to  lose  the  shining  of  that  countenance.  How  earnestly 
do  those  pray  for  the  help  of  that  countenance  who  know  from  experience  its  value 
(Ps.  Ixxx.  3  ;  xlii.  5  ;  Ii.  12  ;  Ex.  xxxiii.  18  ;  Ps.  iv.  6,  7).  But  there  is  only 
trouble  when  that  countenance  is  hid  (Ps.  xxx.  7  ;  Isa.  xl.  27).  Sin  produces 
fear,  and  so  unhinges  every  faculty.  The  soul  cannot  act  with  the  firmness  and 
resolution  of  one  who  has  well-grounded  hope,  but  is  more  than  half  paralysed 
at  the  thought  that  all  things  are  against  it.  Sin  acts  like  an  incubus  of 
mysterious  weight  upon  the  soul,  crushing  it  down  irresistibly  (Ps.  xxxviii.  4  ; 
xxxii.  3,  4  ;  xxxix.  10). 

From  all  these  and  many  similar  causes,  it  is  a  frequent  experience  on  the 
part  of  those  who  are  enga<2;ed  in  any  service  for  God,  to  faint  in  the  fulfilment 
of  their  duty.  Yet  the  rule  is  that  though  faint,  they  must  be  determined  to 
persevere. 

3  High  purposes  are  served  by  this  arrangement. 

(1.)  It  shows  the  worth  of  the  cause  in  which  GocTs  workers  are  engaged. 
The  excellence  of  the  cause  is  to  be  estimated  by  what  is  paid  for  its  mainten- 
ance. Here  every  atom  of  a  man*s  strength  is  first  required.  To  that  is  to  be 
added  his  faith,  that  God  will  put  forth  the  resources  of  o  nipotence,  in  so  far 
as  that  is  needed,  to  make  the  work  a  perfect  work.  The  work  is  supposed  to 
890 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARTt  JUDOES,  chap.  vm. 


be  so  sacred  that  nothing  must  be  wanting  that  man,  the  instrument,  or  God, 
the  worker,  can  do  to  have  the  end  accomplished.  That  end  is  really  the  honour 
of  God's  great  name.  For  this  the  universe  arose ;  for  this  it  stands.  The 
glor}^  of  tlie  heavens  above,  and  of  the  earth  around,  is  the  glory  of  Him  who 
made  them.  This  is  the  one  end  of  all  existence,  and  the  only  supreme  object 
for  which  man  lives.  Hence  all  the  toil  and  sacrifice  of  whicli  a  man's  nature 
is  susceptible,  is  not  too  much  to  give  for  the  keeping  up  of  the  honour  of  the 
Divine  name.  To  require  this  of  a  man  shows  the  tribute  of  reverence  which 
is  due. 

(2.)  Ft  is  a  test  of  loyalty  to  their  God,  This  condition  imposed  on  Gideon's 
men  showed  how  far  they  were  willing  to  go  in  fidelity  to  Him  whom  they 
accepted  as  their  God.  Were  they  resolved  that  nothing  whatever  would  turn 
them  from  their  allegiance  ?  The  taunts  and  sneers  of  their  fellows,  the  ease  and 
rest  which  they  would  have  secured,  had  they  obtained  substitutes  to  finish  the 
work  which  they  had  begun,  the  trials  arising  from  hunger  and  thirst,  exposure 
and  weariness,  from  which  they  intensely  suffered,  all  were  insufficient  to  make 
them  depart  by  a  single  hairbreadth  from  the  prescribed  path  of  duty.  Tne 
word  of  their  God  was  more  sacred  to  them  than  their  life  was  dear,  and  they 
were  prepared  to  die  at  their  post,  rather  than  show  slackness  in  their  reverence, 
or  fail  to  carry  it  out  both  in  letter  and  spirit.  Their  languaue  was — it  is  not 
necessary  for  us  to  live  ;  it  is  essential  tliat  we  be  loyal  to  out  God. 

Similar  examples — Paul  (Acts  xxi.  13),  Job  (ch.  xiii.  15),  Peter  and  the 
disciples  (Matt.  xix.  27-29),  Jonathan  (1  Sam.  xiv.),  Mary,  in  choosing  the 
teaching  of  Jesus  as  the  **  one  thing  needful  "  (Luke  x.  41,  42). 

(3.)  It  illustrates  the  power  of  God's  grace  in  sustaining  those  men  in  their 
heroic  resolution.  There  was  more  than  natural  courage,  and  power  of  natural 
endurance  in  that  splendid  example  of  self-sacrifice.  There  was  an  illustration 
given  of  what  Divine  grace  could  do,  to  sustain  the  soul  under  a  great  trial. 
Who  could  deny  that  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  came  upon  them  as  upon  Gideon 
(vi.  34),  for  they  shared  with  him  in  the  doing  of  this  work,  so  that  they  needed 
in  some  measure  the  same  qualifications.  The  very  fact  that  they  were  chosen 
specially  by  God  Himself  for  the  work  implied,  that  from  Him  they  would 
receive  the  qualifications  needed  (vii.  5-7). 

On  this  needful  sustaining  grace,  all  who  have  any  work  to  do  in  God's  service 
may  at  all  times  count.  The  constant  assurance  is,  "  I  am  with  thee.  I  will  not  fail 
thee.  My  grace  is  sufficient  for  thee."  It  gives  victory  over  '*  the  wicked  one  '* 
in  all  that  he  can  do  (Luke  x.  19  ;  Eph.  vi.  16 ;  I  John  v.  18 ;  Rom.  xvi.  20) 
victory  over  the  world  (1  John  v.  4;  John  xvi.  33) ;  victory  over  indwelling 
corruption;  which  is  in  some  sense  the  greatest  victory  of  all,  for  nothing  so 
binders  the  doing  of  any  work  for  God  as  the  working  of  sin  in  the  heart.  Sin 
is  essentially  a  rebellion  against  God,  and  kills  the  spirit  of  obedience.  It  draws 
harsh  inferences  from  God's  arrangements,  and  leads  to  the  cherishing  of  hard 
thoughts  about  God's  character  and  ways.  Yet  Divine  grace  can  make  the 
spark  of  spiritual  life  exist  in  the  soul  amid  a  sea  of  corruption,  and  though  it 
only  glimmers  like  a  feeble  taper,  it  must  continue  to  burn,  notwithstanding 
all  the  rough  winds  that  blow  upon  it  from  every  side. 

But  where  this  seed  of  the  new  life  exists  in  the  heart,  it  must  show  itself  in 
good  works  in  the  life  to  some  extent.  At  any  moment  too,  through  some 
special  quickening  of  God's  grace,  there  is  provision  for  enabling  a  man  to 
persevere  in  the  doing  of  God's  work,  even  though  he  is  at  the  point  of 
fainting.  , 

(4.)  This  arrangement  furnishes  strong  cases  of  unswerving  fidelity  to  God 
and  His  cause.  Strong  cases  are  needed  to  show  to  what  heights  true  piety  can 
reacL  The  garden  of  the  Lord  not  only  has  its  many  specimens  of  little  flowers, 
tender  saplings,  and  all  the  ordinary  growths,  but  there  must  also  be  the  noble 

391 


CHAP.  vm.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   JUDGES. 


elms,  the  tall  cerlars,  and  the  majestic  oaks.  So  also  in  the  Christian  church,  there 
must  not  only  be  the  cliildren,  the  feeble,  and  the  mass  of  the  inexperienced,  and 
the  undisciplined,  but  also  some  types  of  the  strong,  the  mature,  and  those  of 
princely  features.  There  must  be  those  who  can  represent  the  Christian 
character  to  advantage.  One  such  case  as  we  have  here  is  worth  more  than  a 
hundred,  or  even  a  thousand  examples  of  the  ordinary  type.  In  regard  to  these 
latter  cases,  little  impression  is  made  on  the  world  by  them.  Tliey  differ  so 
little  from  the  world's  own  type  of  a  devoted  character.  But  these  noble  300 
are  all  of  a  class  whom  the  world  cannot  match,  before  whom  it  bows  and 
confesses  its  marked  inferiority.  Here  are  a  handful  of  men  absolutely  overcome 
with  fatigue,  only  300  in  number,  all  told,  pursuing  an  army  still  15,000  strong. 
They  are  parched  with  thirst,  and  famishing  for  want  of  food,  while  they  have 
several  miles  to  traverse  on  foot,  ere  they  reach  the  enemy.  They  are  all  faint 
as  regards  their  bodily  condition,  though  not  one  of  them  is  faint  in  spirit. 
They  have  still  to  fight  against  fifty  times  their  number,  but  now  they  are 
utterly  exhausted  and  wearied  out,  whereas  then  they  were  fresh  and  vigorous, 
so  that  in  reality  they  were  now  fighting  a  more  unequal  battle  tlian  at 
first,  when  they  had  to  face  a  foe  nine  times  multiplied  in  number.  Faith  had 
need  to  be  strong  indeed,  that  could  take  victory  for  certain,  under  such  circum- 
stances as  these.     Truly,  "  these  elders  by  faith  obtained  a  good  report." 

(5.)  The  creature  s  insufficiency  without  Divine  aid  must  he  shown.  When 
human  resources  dry  up  like  the  wady  in  the  desert,  and  can  no  farther  go,  then 
is  brought  out  the  incomparable  superiority  of  the  ocean  with  its  exhaustless 
fulness. 

4.  Great  encouragements  to  persevere. 

(1.)  The  constant  presence  of  the  Captain  of  Salvation.  "Lo,  I  am  with  you 
always."  He  was  with  His  people  when  they  were  suffering  in  the  iron  furnace 
of  Egypt  earnestly  looking  on,  for  it  was  the  members  of  His  body  that  were 
suffering.  ''  He  was  with  the  Church  in  the  wilderness,"  to  protect  and  lead 
them  ;  and,  in  every  period  of  that  remarkable  history,  IKs  presence  was  made 
known  as  the  Saviour  of  His  redeemed  ones,  at  one  time  '*  taking  them  by  the 
arms  .teaching  them  how  to  go,"  at  another,  **  bearing  them  as  on  eagles'  wings," 
and  on  a  third  occasion,  rising  up  as  a  wall  of  fire  round  about  them.  They  are 
sacred  to  Him,  one  and  all,  as  those  who  are  purchased  by  His  blood,  and  whom 
He  has  received  in  charge  to  bring  home  in  due  time  to  glory.  He  utters  all  in  one 
word  when  He  says,  **  I  will  never  leave — never,  never  forsake  thee  "  (Is.  liv.  10). 

(2.)  Divine  assurance  is  given  of  victory.  **  I  will  contend  with  him  that 
contendeth  with  thee."  "  No  weapon  that  is  formed  against  thee  shall  prosper." 
"Fear  not,  thou  worm  Jacob,  for  thou  shalt  thresh  the  mountains,"  etc. 
(see  Is.  xli.  14,  15,  also  10).  The  enemy  at  most  shall  only  be  able  to  bruise 
the  heel ;  thou  shalt  bruise  his  head.  On  this  occasion,  not  one  of  the  300  men 
fell  down  slain  ;  nay,  not  one  of  them  was  wounded.  God  was  "  a  covering  to 
their  head  in  the  day  of  battle."  "  A  thousand  fell  by  their  side,  and  ten 
thousand  at  their  right  hand,  yet  to  them  it  did  not  come  nigh  ;  for  the  Eternal 
God  was  their  refuge,  and  underneath  them  were  the  everlasting  arms."  Not  a 
hair  of  their  heads  was  touched.  It  was  special,  as  when  at  tlie  exodus  from 
the  land  of  bondage  "  there  was  not  one  feeble  person  in  all  their  tribes " 
(Ps.  cv.  37).  "  Whosoever  will  lose  his  life  for  my  sake  shall  find  it  *'  (Matt, 
xvi.  25).  Nothing  is  more  uncertain,  in  most  cases,  than  the  issue  of  a  battle. 
Napoleon  said  at  the  battle  of  Waterloo,  '*  By  all  the  rules  of  war  I  ought  to 
have  won,  but  my  good  genius  forsook  me."  But  all  who  serve  under  a  greater 
commander  will  without  fail  be  able  to  finish  by  saying,  "  We  are  more  than 
conquerors  through  Him  that  loveth  us." 

•*  The  weakest  saint  shall  win  the  day, 
Though  earth  aud  hell  oppose  the  way.** 

392 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  :    JUDGES.  chap.  viii. 


(3.)  The  good  man  is  already  begun  to  he  victorious.  He  is  faint,  but  not 
dowD.  He  is  so  far  from  being  vanquished,  that  he  is  already  "  pursuing." 
The  tide  of  battle  is  turned  in  his  favour,  and  ere  long  the  field  will  be  his  own. 
The  enemy's  ranks  are  broken,  and  he  is  a  retreating  foe.  The  Captain  of 
Salvation  has  borne  the  brunt  of  the  contest,  and  has  decided  the  day  ;  all  that 
remains  for  His  followers,  is  to  follow  up  the  victory.  The  soldier  of  Christ  often 
fails  to  see  that  the  position  is  won,  for  he  feels  himself  grappling  with 
circumstances  that  threaten  to  overmaster  him,  and  with  influences  that  are 
ever  throwing  him  back  rather  than  forwarJ.  Forces  and  events  come  upon 
him  which  are  too  mighty  for  his  unaided  strength,  so  that  he  is  continually 
made  to  say,  **  0  !  when  shall  this  terrible  struggle  have  an  end  !  "  He  is  like 
a  straw  among  the  giant  billows.  But  all  is  meant  to  teach  the  lesson  of  absolute 
reliance  on  his  Saviour  God,  to  bring  him  through  the  conflict.  The  rule  is, 
that  where  Christ  has  already  overcome,  all  His  people  must  overcome  after  Him 
(John  xiv.  19  ;  xvi.  33  ;  Rom.  vi.  14,  4,  6  ;  Rom.  xvi.  20). 

4.  Many  others  have  fought  and  overcome  in  the  service  of  God.  All  the 
good  from  Abel  and  Abraham  downward  to  the  present  hour.  Many  have 
passed  through  a  hard  struggle,  but  there  has  been  only  one  termination  in  the 
end.  "  This  is  the  Father's  will  .  •  .  that  I  should  lose  nothing  "  (John  vi.  39). 
The  twelve  times  twelve  thousand  who  were  sealed  in  Rev.  vii.,  before  passing 
through  the  great  convulsions  recorded  in  subsequent  chapters,  all  re-appear  as 
the  complete  number  of  144,000  (not  a  single  unit  awanting)  standing  with 
the  Lamb,  safe  and  joyful,  on  the  heights  of  Mount  Sion,  free  for  ever  from 
all  the  assaults  of  enemies,  in  chap.  xiv. 

5.  The  reward  of  God's  service  is  unspeakably  great.  The  world's  hero  has 
for  his  prize  wealth,  honours,  high  station,  a  name  on  the  page  of  history,  an 
ovation  from  the  multitude  when  he  appears  in  public,  perhaps  a  monument  to 
tell  to  the  future  world  his  victorious  deeds.  Yet  all  that  is  but  the  apj)lause 
of  perishing  men.  The  faithful  good-doer  in  the  service  of  God  shall  be 
received  into  the  country  of  sinless  perfection  as  his  home,  shall  wear  an 
incorruptible  crown,  shall  have  angels  for  his  companions  and  ministering 
spirits,  shall  stand  for  ever  in  the  presence  of  his  Lord,  shall  receive  robes, 
palms,  sceptres,  and  harps  from  His  royal  hand,  and  shall  rejoice  for  ever  in 
His  gracious  smile. 

5.   Applications  of  this  rule. 

(1.)  7b  the  church  of  God  collectively,  in  the  great  work  of  keeping  up  a 
standard  for  God's  truth  in  the  world,  and  extending  it  to  the  ends  of  the 
earth.  God's  servants  are  often  "weary  and  faint  in  their  minds"  while 
endeavouring  to  fulfil  this  responsible  duty ;  yet,  though  surrounded  with  dark 
clouds,  and  disheartened  a  thousand  times,  their  resolution  must  be  to  pprsevere. 

(2.)  To  any  particular  church  or  congregation y  viho^Q  dxity  it  is  to  shine  as 
a  light,  holding  forth  the  lamp  of  the  Gospel  to  dispel  the  darkness  of  error 
and  sin,  and  to  persevere  in  doing  so,  even  if  the  flame  should  be  blown  out  by 
cold  easterly  winds,  and  nothing  be  left  but  **  smoking  flax." 

(3.)  To  any  pious  man  who  embraces  opportunities  for  working  among  the 
ungodly,  and  who  tries  in  the  strength  of  his  God  to  turn  the  wilderness  around 
him  into  a  fruitful  field,  but  who  finds  the  soil  to  be  very  hard,  so  that  his  work 
resembles  that  of  boring  through  solid  rock  ;  yet,  though  baffled  many  times, 
he  must  not  give  up,  but  continue  his  eff'orts,  hoping  on  against  hope,  and 
laying  hold  of  promised  Divine  resources,  a!id  at  last  a  great  success  shall  come. 
The  exhaustion  of  his  own  resources,  while  there  is  nothing  but  failure,  proves 
all  the  more  distinctly  the  need  of  prayer  and  the  exercise  of  faith. 

(4.)  To  all  individual  workers  in  the  Church — to  (christian  ministers,  to 
standard-bearers  and  oflice-bearers,  to  teachers,  benevolent  agents,  conductors 

393 


CHAP.  viiL  EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY  :   JUDGES, 


of  prayer  meetings,  spiritual  advisers,  messengers  of  comfort,  and  good-doers 
of  every  class  in  the  church  as  in  the  garden,  in  contrast  with  the  open  field 
whose  aim  is  not  only  to  bring  in,  but  to  build  up,  to  nourish,  to  lead  on,  to 
counsel  and  warn,  to  stimulate  and  cheer,  to  admonish  and  to  encourage. 
Though,  both  with  the  evangelist  and  the  instructor,  the  work  proceeds  but 
slowly,  and  "  all  day  long  "  they  complain  that  "  they  have  stretched  out  their 
hands  to  a  disobedient  and  gainsaying  people,"  yet  the  motto  ever  is,  Though 
faint,  still  pursue. 

(5.)  To  every  good  man  who  strives  to  live  a  consistently  righteous  life  in  an 
ungodly  world.  He  has  constant  sacrifices  to  make  for  the  sake  of  righteous 
principle,  living  among  those  who  know  no  such  principle,  or  who  practically 
disregard  it.  His  worldly  interest  suffers,  he  is  assailed  with  sneers  and 
reproaches,  he  has  to  count  on  the  world's  ill-will  and  persecution,  and  he  has 
to  fight  his  battles  for  the  most  part  alone,  except  such  help  as  he  gets  from 
the  Divine  countenance  smiling  upon  him.  Yet,  though  "rivers  of  waters  run 
down  his  eyes  while  men  do  not  keep  God's  law,"  and  though  he  often  raises 
the  complaint,  "  Woe  is  me  that  I  dwell  in  Mesech,"  &c.,  he  must  ever  resolve 
to  pursue. 

(6.)  To  the  fearer  of  God  in  carrying  on  the  work  of  his  personal  sanctifica- 
tion.  While  the  work  of  Christ  secures  to  every  one  who  rests  on  it  a  complete 
title  to  heaven,  a  change  of  personal  character  is  not  less  necessary  to  secure 
fitness  for  that  holy  world.  Every  expectant  of  heavenly  bliss  is  called  upon 
therefore  to  "  work  out  his  salvation  with  fear  and  treuibling,  for  God  worketh 
in  him  "  (comp.  2  Cor.  vii.  1,  and  1  John  iii.  3).  "  Without  holiness  no  man 
shall  see  tlie  Lord."  He  must  become  *'  conformed  to  the  image  of  God's  Son, 
and  so  made  meet  to  become  a  partaker  of  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  light." 
To  get  this  work  accomplished  requires  time,  many  wrestlings  in  i)rayer,  much 
diligence  in  the  use  of  the  means  of  grace,  and  much  of  the  Holy  Spirit's 
influences  to  work  on  the  heart ;  yet  all  the  while,  he  '*  sees  a  law  in  the 
members  warring  against  the  law  of  the  mind,"  &c.  He  is  faint  with  struggling 
against  the  native  depravity  of  the  heart,  and  yet  as  the  condition  of  success  he 
must  persevere. 

Brevities  on  Perseverance. — One  may  go  far  after  he  is  tired — French. 
Perseverance  is  rather  a  state  of  standing  still  than  going  on  ;  perseverance  kills 
the  game — Spanish.  *'  Hard  pounding,  gentlemen ;  but  we  will  see  who  can 
pound  the  longest " — Wellington  at  Waterloo.  It  was  perseverance  that  made 
Newton,  Columbus,  Washington,  Stephenson,  Wilberforce  what  they  were. 
Perseverando  vinces  is  a  time-honoured  motto. 

XV.  The  blindness  and  obduracy  of  unbelief* 

Blindness  of  mind  and  hardness  of  heart  always  go  together.  Those  who 
remained  deaf  to  all  God's  pleadings  with  His  people  in  every  age  are  generally 
said  to  be  a  "people  of  no  understanding."  The  men  who  came  around  the 
Saviour  during  His  public  ministry,  and  saw  most  of  His  mighty  works,  still 
remained  unconvinced  to  the  end  of  His  Divine  character.  After  they  had 
seen  all,  they  spoke  as  if  they  had  seen  nothing  ;  and  near  the  close  of  His 
ministry,  they  still  put  the  question,  "  What  sign  showest  thou  that  we  may 
believe  ? "     "  Having  eyes  they  did  not  see,  neither  did  they  understand." 

It  is  the  same  here.  These  men  of  the  tribe  of  Gad,  whose  ancestors  in  the 
days  of  Deborah  **  ftbode  among  the  sheepfolds  "  rather  than  step  forward  with 
their  brethren  to  the  "  help  of  the  Lord  against  the  mighty,"  now  show  them- 
selves utterly  unconcerned  about  the  great  deliverance  which  the  God  of  Israel 
was  working  out  for  His  people  with  a  high  hand  and  a  stretched  out  arm.  The 
394 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES,  chap.  vin. 


mighty  fact  which  smote  on  the  ears  of  men  with  the  force  of  thunder,  that  in 
one  night  120,000  of  the  dead  bodies  of  Israel's  eiiemies  were  scattered  all  tlie 
way  from  Jezieel  to  the  banks  of  the  Jordan  and  beyond  it,  seemed  to  make  no 
impression  on  these  callous-hearted  men  of  Succotli  and  Fennel.  They  could 
not  discern  from  this  stupendous  fact,  that  this  was  the  hour  of  Jehovah's 
jealousy  for  the  honour  of  His  name,  and  of  His  indignation  against  the 
oppressors  of  His  people. 

They  were  thus  blind  because  they  would  not  see.  They  had  long  been  Ihring 
in  the  habit  of  rejecting  the  God  of  Israel,  for  we  scarcely  ever  hear  of  any 
revival  of  the  old  spirit  of  loyalty  to  the  God  of  the  Covenant  (chap.  v.  17)  on 
the  eastern  banks  of  the  Jordan  up  to  this  period.*  They  seem  to  have  settled 
down  into  a  chronic  state  of  apostacy,  and  had  become  stone  blind  to  all  spiritual 
interpretations  of  the  events  of  Divine  providence.  Their  hearts  were  in  their 
pastures  and  their  flocks.  They  *'  loved  this  present  world,  and  the  love  ot  the 
Father  was  not  in  them."  The  flash  of  light  thrown  upon  their  characters  by- 
Gideon's  brief  interview  with  them  revealed  that. 

1.  2  hey  did  not  see  God's  hand  in  what  was  passing  be/ore  their  eyes. 

2.  They  were  callously  ungrateful  for  the  solemn  deliverafice  wrought  by  the 
Divine  hand, 

3.  7 hey  stubbornly  refused  when  called  upon  to  take  any  hand  in  helping  on 
God's  great  work. 

4.  They  measured  the  issues  qf  the  case  by  sight  and  not  by  faith. 

No  wonder  that  such  obstinacy  of  unbelief  should  become  a  mark  for  the 
outpouring  of  the  Divine  indignation, 

V.  The  stern  character  of  Old  Testament  panlshments* 

Admitting  that  the  daring  impiety  of  these  men  of  Succoth  and  Penuel  was 
eminently  provocative  of  the  Divine  anger,  there  is  an  aspect  of  severity  in  the 
punishment  to  which  they  were  subjected,  as  compared  with  the  dealings  in 
criminal  cases  in  New  Testament  times.  We  hear  of  no  formal  indictment 
drawn  out  against  the  evil  doers,  no  jury  is  empanelled,  no  witnesses  are  sum- 
moned, no  evidence  is  led,  no  impersonation  of  the  law  sits  in  the  place  of 
judgment  to  keep  the  balance  even,  and  there  is  no  passing  of  a  judicial  sentence 
founded  on  the  evidence  presented.  The  one  moment  records  the  act  of 
irreverence  shown  to  the  God  of  Israel,  the  next  moment  tells  of  the  sentence 
swift  and  irremediable,  which  is  to  fall  on  the  heads  of  the  guilty.  Where  God 
himself  is  judge,  and  where  conscience  is  at  work,  roused  from  its  sleep,  there  is 
no  need  for  any  forms  of  law. 

But  why  such  severity  of  punishment  ?  For  doubtless  Gideon  did  not  now 
give  way  merely  to  a  feeling  of  personal  revenge.  The  moment  was  too  solemn 
for  that.  In  this,  as  in  all  else  that  he  did,  in  conducting  this  sacred  trans- 
action in  the  service  of  His  God,  he  would  be  guided  by  the  secret  directions 
of  that  Spirit  of  God  that  rested  upon  him  till  his  work  was  done.  We  fear 
that  the  aggravated  evil  of  the  sin  is  not  sufficiently  appreciated  by  those  who 
imagine  there  is  too  much  rigour  in  the  sentence  inflicted.  All  sin  deserves 
death  ;  and  for  daring  and  defiant  sin  to  God's  own  face,  it  is  fit  that  there 
should  be  a  special  sting  in  the  penalty  to  correspond  with  the  sting  in  the  sin. 
It  is  farther  to  be  remembered  that  this  was  one  of  the  "  days  of  the  Lord," 
when  "judgment  is  laid  to  the  line  and  righteousness  to  the  plummet,"  in 
order  to  show,  on  the  one  hand,  what  is  due  to  the  majesty  and  holiness  of  God, 
and  on  the  other  what  is  due  to  the  evil  of  sin  (see  pp.  296,  29  7 J. 


*  Gilead  meam  Gad  and  a  portion  of  Mannasseh  (p.  283.) 

395 


OHAP.viiL  HOMILETJC  COMMENTARY:   JUDGES. 


The  difference  of  tone  and  attitude  in  the  Divine  dealings  with  sin  under 
the  Old  and  under  the  New  Testament  Dispensations  is  specially  to  be  noticed. 
Under  the  former,  there  had  been  as  yet  no  public  standard  vindication  made 
of  God's  claims  on  His  rebellious  creatures,  so  that  an  aspect  of  severity  in 
enforcing  these  claims  was  absolutely  necessary.  Now  that  the  Lamb  of  God 
has  been  laid  on  the  altar,  and  the  great  propitiation  has  been  made,  the 
jealous  God  becomes  "  the  God  of  peace,"  and  fie  speaks  of  repentance  and 
pardon  through  the  blood  of  Christ  (p.  165,  also  163-4,  138-9,  378-9). 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

FINAL  DEALING  WITH  THE  ENEMY^GIDEONS  LAST  DATS, 

Versa  18>3& 

Critioal  Notes. — 18.  Then  said  he,  etc.]    This  must  have  taken  place  when  Gideon  arrived 

at  home  ;  for  it  was  after  his  return  to  Penuel  and  Succoth,  and  the  boy  Jether  was  pie-ent, 
who  could  not  have  been  in  the  I  attlefield.  It  may  have  been  on  the  old  battlegr  und  in  Jezieel 
where  the  people  would  come  flocking  to  see  tlie  terrible  kings  in  fetters.  [CasseL]  If  so,  wl.ac 
an  impressive  lesson  it  must  have  read  to  the  captive  kings,  to  contrast  the  picture  they  looked 
upon  in  that  spot,  only  two  days  before,  with  the  position  they  occupied  now  1 

Whom  ye  slew  at  Tabor.]  The  incident  is  not  recorded,  but  it  would  appear  they  had  been 
murdered  in  cold  blood,  and  not  slain  in  battle  ;  and  Gideon,  as  next  of  kin,  now  reckons  it  his 
duty  to  act  the  part  of  an  avenger  of  blood  (see  Num.  xxxv).  Some  imagine  it  was  the  execntiou 
of  Gideon's  brothers,  by  the  command  of  those  kings  as  soon  as  Gideon's  purpose  to  attack  the 
invaders  was  made  known.  [Lias.]  Not  likely,  for  the  kings  did  not  know  they  were  Gi<lef)n's 
brothers  till  now.  Much  more  probable  is  it,  that  in  one  of  the  many  forays  male  by  these 
marauders  on  private  properties,  the  house  of  Joash  had  been  attacked,  and  while  fighiing  in  its 
defence,  Gideon's  brothers  had  been  taken  prisoners  and  carried  into  the  pre  ence  of  the  robber 
kings,  who  immediately  ordered  their  execution.  However  it  was,  the  tragedy  was  so  marked, 
that,  though  many  others  were  wantonly  put  to  death,  this  one  made  such  an  impression  as  to 
be  remembered  above  others. 

As  then  art,  so  were  they,]  in  stately  form  and  chivalrous  bearing.  They  wished  to  give  a 
complimentary  answer  as  being  the  only  chance  they  had,  though  a  small  one,  to  plead  for 
their  lives. 

19.  Sons  of  my  mother.]  A  customary  phrase  where  polygamy  was  so  common.  The  sons 
of  the  mother  had  also  the  same  father,  but  the  sons  of  the  father  oftentimes  had  not  the  same 
mother.  The  sons  of  the  mother  were  therefore  full  brothers,  and  hence  the  expression  "  t^ons 
of  my  mother  "  was  reckoned  specially  endearing  (Gen.  xliii,  29  ;  Ps.  Ixix,  8  ;  Deut.  xiii.,  6). 

If  ye  had  let  them  live,  I  would  not  slay  you.]  This  implies  that  it  was  by  a  word  from  them 
that  they  were  slain.  They  were  therefore  murderers,  and  justice  must  now  overtake  them, 
Gideon  here  shows  his  merciful  spirit.  He  had  no  pleasure  in  putting  them  to  death,  but  he 
was  constrai'  ed  to  do  it  from  considerations  of  justice,  and  the  law  of  his  God  in  acting  the  part 
of  an  avenger  of  blood.  It  was  all  but  universal  in  that  iron  age  to  put  prisoners  to  death,  and 
often  with  circumstances  of  revolting  cruelty.  Tamerlane  put  Bajazet,  the  celebrated  sultan, 
into  an  iron  cage,  and  treated  him  as  a  wild  beast,  until,  maddened  with  grief  and  mortification, 
he  dashed  out  his  brains  by  striking  his  head  against  the  bars  of  his  cage.  Sapor,  king  of 
Persia,  having  taken  the  Roman  Emperor  Valerian  prisoner,  put  him  to  death  by  flaying  him 
alive. 

On  a  higher  ground,  these  ruthless  men  deserved  to  die,  because  they  had  wantonly  touched 
the  Lord's  anointed,  and  vilely  desecrated  the  heritage  of  the  God  of  Israel ;  so  that  even  if 
Gideon  in  his  clemency  had  spared  them,  Divine  vengeance  could  not  have  suffered  them  to  livo 
(oomp.  I.  Sam.  xv.,  3,  8,  82,  33). 

396 


nOMILETIO  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES,  ohap.  viii. 


20.  Said  unto  Jether  his  first  born.l  It  was  reckoned  a  deep  disgrace  by  all  who  had  a  spark 
of  honour  in  them  to  be  put  to  death  by  a  woman,  or  a  slave  (ix,  54).  So  these  warriors  felt  it 
to  be  a  stigma  on  their  name,  to  have  their  death-stroke  at  the  hands  of  a  mere  boy.  Gideon 
also  wished  to  teach  his  son  in  his  youth  to  be  the  avenger  of  his  country's  enemies. 

2L  Rise  thou  and  fall  upon  us  (I.  Kings  ii.  46).  Escape  was  hopeless,  and,  knowing  that  the 
practice  of  holding  life  cheap,  which  they  had  so  long  applied  to  otheis,  was  now  to  be  applied 
to  themselves,  they  felt  it  would  be  the  less  of  two  evils  to  be  despatched  by  the  general  himself 
than  by  a  mere  stripling^.  It  was  also  less  horrible  to  die  by  a  few  effective  strokes  than  to  be 
hacked  and  hewed  by  hands  incompetent  to  the  task.  Gideou  complie  I,  and  so  ended  the  days 
of  the  brigand  kings.  Barbarous  and  revolting  work  !  excusable  only  when  meting  out  mt  rited 
punishment  to  flagrant  transgressors.  "  To  restrain  justice  at  the  proper  time  is  to  support  sin, 
and  not  to  correct,  is  to  consent  to  the  crime."    \Trapp.'\     " Bonis  nocct  qui  malts parcit." 

The  Omamentsl  (comp.  Num.  xxxl  48-54).  The  Hebrew  word  signifies  "little  moons."  They 
were  crescent-shaped  ornaments,  generally  of  gold  or  silver,  worn  on  the  necks,  sometimes  the 
foreheads  of  men  and  women  (Isa.  iii.  18),  and  frequently  on  the  necks  of  camels.  Some  think 
they  were  shining  plates  of  gold  in  crescent  form  suspended  from  the  neck  of  the  camel,  and 
hanging  down  on  their  breasts  in  front.  And  so  the  heads,  necks,  bodies,  and  legs  of  camels 
are  still  highly  ornamented  in  Eastern  countries  [Bush.]  The  use  of  the  crescent  as  a  symbol 
of  the  Ottoman  power  ia  widely  known  among  us.  The  ancient  Ishmaelites  were  worshippers 
of  the  moon. 

22.  Bule  thou  over  us.  When  the  heavy  incubus  was  removed,  and  things  were  beginning 
to  settle  down  into  a  state  of  rest,  the  uppermost  feeling  in  the  mind  of  every  reflecting  man 
was  that  of  gratitude  to  the  noble  man,  who,  through  the  aid  of  his  God  had  done  so  much  for 
his  country.  Partly  by  way  of  recompense,  and  partly  to  have  a  shield  of  protection  for  the 
future,  the  general  voice  of  the  nation  was  everywhere  heard  :  "  Let  us  make  Gi  icon  king  !  " 
Such  an  extraordinary  feat  of  heroism  they  were  ready  to  worship,  and  besides  it  did  them 
honour  as  a  nation.  J  heir  proposal  they  presented  in  de6nite  form  :  first,  that  he  himself 
should  be  their  ruler  for  life  ;  and  then,  that  his  sons  should  succeed  him  in  perpetuity.  They 
were  not  in  a  state  to  measure  their  words.  They  had  among  them  a  man  who  towered  above 
all  his  compeers  in  courage,  in  capacity,  in  practical  wisdom,  and  in  ability  to  rise  to  the  height 
of  great  occasions  ;  yet  one  who  was  as  humble  and  meek  as  any  of  theui  all,  who  was  great 
in  his  moderation  and  disinterestedness,  also  in  his  self  command  and  fairness  of  dealing. 
Such  a  man  had  not  been  seen  in  Israel  since  the  days  of  Joshua  or  Moses.  ' '  Come,"  said 
they,  "  let  us  make  him  king,  and  his  sons  after  him,  and  so  bring  back  the  golden  age  of  our 
history." 

Most  unreflecting  choice  !  Had  they  got  their  wish,  Gideon  himself  might  have  done  well ; 
but  what  a  broken  reed  they  would  have  had  in  Jether  !  Timid  now  as  a  boy,  and  bidding 
fair  to  continue  as  a  boy  all  his  life,  he  was  swept  away  as  a  straw  by  the  fir-t  brush  of 
Abimelech's  strong  hand.  "Woe  unto  thee,  O  Land,  when  thy  king  is  a  child!"  The 
people's  error  was  twofold — (1.)  In  supposing  that  Gideon's  success  was  entirely  of  himself  and 
not  of  God's  Spirit  resting  upon  him  ;  and  (2)  in  forgetting  the  fact  that  they  already  had  a 
King  in  God  Himself,  and  that  any  other  who  might  be  appointed  must  be  His  viceregent,  and 
also  must  be  appointed  by  God  Himself. 

23.  I  will  not  rule  over  you ;  the  Lord  shall  rule  over  you,  Gideon  keeps  them  right.  He 
saw  their  error  in  a  moment,  and  felt  that  if  he  complied  he  would  be  the  usurper  of  a  place 
which  Jehovah  had  reserved  for  Himself  as  King  in  Jeshurun.  As  the  principles  of  his 
character  had  been  deep  enough  to  withstand  the  blasts  of  adversity,  so  now  they  have  substance 
enough  not  to  become  evaporated  before  the  sunshine  of  prosperity.  These  are  brought  out  in 
1  Sam.  viii  6-7  ;  xii.  12-17  ;  Num.  xxiii.  21,  and  other  places. 

24.  Give  me,  every  man.  the  ear-rings,  &o.  Rather  the  ring  of  his  prey  or  booty,  for  the 
word  is  singular.  This  ring  was  of  gold  and  valuable.  1'he  booty  was  got  from  the  slain 
Ishmaelites,  who  seem  to  have  been  the  merchant  Midianites,  the  others  being  freebooters 
simply.  The  former  were  great  traders,  especially  with  Egypt,  where  they  sold  the  spices  ;ind 
balms  they  got  in  the  East,  and  were  paid  in  silver  and  gold.  But  ear-rings,  nose-rings,  chains, 
and  pendant  drops  made  of  gold  and  silver  seem  to  have  abounded  iu  Arabia  as  well  as  in 
Egypt.  Rings  of  gold  were  often  used  as  money  in  Egypt,  as  appears  by  the  monuments. 
[Speak.  Com,p.] 

Some  would  make  DT3  mean  nose-rings  instead  of  ear-rings.  The  word  is  susceptible  of 
either  interpretation,  but  nose-rings  were  chiefly  worn  by  women,  whereas  here  the  rings  were 
asked  of  men,  and  so  were  more  likely  to  have  been  ear-rings.  These  latter  were  often  worn 
by  men.  Probably  one  such  ring,  or  at  most  two,  were  worn  by  each  man.  Reference  is  made 
to  this  ornament  in  Gen.  xxxv.  4  ;  Ex.  xxxii.  2,  3  ;  Job  xlii.  11,  in  all  of  which  places  the  same 
word  is  used  (  qT3  ). 

W7 


CHAP.  viiL  HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES, 


25.  They  spread  a  garment.  Lit.  the  garment  {ha-sim.lah\  as  if  a  special  one  used  for  such 
occasions.     It  was  the  upper  or  outer  garment,  and  only  a  large  square  piece  of  cloth.   [^Keil.^ 

26.  The  weight  of  the  golden  ear-rings.J  Probably  the  weight  exceeded  his  request,  for  they 
were  in  the  very  enthusiasm  of  gratitude.  As  the  golden  shekel  was  a  little  more  in  weight 
than  two  English  sovereigns,  the  value  of  the  ear-rings  given  would  amount  to  upwards  of 
£3,400  (1700  X  2).  This  would  imply  that  at  least  3,400  Ishmaelites  were  slain  who  wore  golden 
ear-rings,  a  small  number  of  the  whole  army.  Those  who  wore  such  must  have  been  of  superior 
rank.  At  the  battle  of  Cannae  no  fewer  than  three  bushels  of  gold  rings  were  taken  from 
the  dead  bodies  of  the  knights  and  senators  that  fell  on  that  bloody  day. 

There  are  different  words  used  in  this  account. 

1.  Saharonim  are  the  "  little  moons,"  or  crescent-shaped  ornaments  of  silver  or  gold  which 
men  and  women  alike  wore  upon  their  necks  (ver.  21),  and  also  hxmg  round  the  necks  of  their 
camels. 

2.  Nezem,  the  ear-rings  of  gold  (ver.  24,  25,  26).* 

3.  Aetiphoth,  not  "collars"  but  pearl-shaped  ear-drops,  like  the  pendants  of  modem  ear- 
rings (ver.  '26).+ 

4.  AnaTcoth.  Necklaces  or  chains  around  the  neck  (Prov.  i.  9  ;  Cant.  iv.  9).  "They  put  a 
band  of  cloth  or  leather  round  the  animal's  neck,  on  which  are  strung  small  shells  called  cowries. 
Ttie  Sheiks  add  silver  ornaments  to  these,  which  make  a  rich  booty  to  the  spoiler"  [see  Welktedt 
Travels.^ 

5.  Aregaman  higedi,  purple  clothing,  op  garments  of  purple.  They  may  have  got  the  Tyrian 
dye  from  the  shores  of  the  Mediterranean.  "  This  is  the  first  indication  of  purple  as  a  royal 
colour."  [Bush.] 

Gideon  had  now  great  wealth  at  his  feet,  but  all  that  he  retained  for  himself  was  the  spoil 
which  he  got  from  the  Midianitish  kings.  His  aims  were  higher  than  those  of  Clive,  in  India, 
(pure  as  he  was  when  compared  with  others)  as  he  walked  a^id  heaps  of  gold  taken  from  the 
Nabobs  and  others. 

27.  Made  an  ephod  and  put  it  in  his  city.  Gideon  has  for  the  most  part  been  severely 
condemned  for  this  act,  as  if  his  uprightness  had  at  last  given  way  before  the  poisonous 
influence  of  the  idolatrous  atmosphere  around  him.  Rightly  interpreted,  his  cou'luot  indicates 
no  intention  whatever  in  the  direction  of  idolatry.  Being  civil  ruler,  his  privilege  was  to 
inquire  of  God  by  the  High  I*riest.  The  working  coat  of  the  High  Priest  was  the  ephod  (see 
Ex.  xxviii  6-12).  It  was  the  distinctive  priestly  garment.  It  had  no  sleeves,  but  went 
round  the  breast,  and  contained  the  Urim  and  Thummim,  which  were  essential  when 
inquiring  of  God.  His  object  was  then  to  inquire  of  God,  or  receive  instructions  fiom  Him 
in  all  matters  of  special  difficulty,  where  the  exercise  of  his  own  judgment  was  insufficient. 
Tliis  was  an  intention  wholly  consistent  with  true  piety. 

But  though  the  intentiou  was  good,  the  act  was  wrong ;  for  God  had  already  appointed  a 
High  Priest  in  another  place  to  discharge  these  very  functions.  His  act  was,  therefore,  equiva- 
leni  to  the  practical  setting  aside  of  what  God  had  already  dime.  In  Shiloh  was  the  ark,  and 
there  was  the  High  Priest.  But  Shiloh  was  in  the  tribe  of  Ephraim,  and  Gi<leon  felt  sore  under 
the  jealous  spirit  so  strongly  cherished  by  that  tribe.  He  might  also  think  that  they  had  sunk 
so  low  in  their  loyalty  to  the  God  of  Israel,  that  they  were  unwor  hy  to  be  the  custodiers  of  the 
Divine  oracle  for  all  Israel.  Therefore,  he  wished  to  have  an  oricc.  in  his  own  city,  and  under 
his  .,wn  care,  conscious  as  he  was  of  his  own  entire  loyalty  to  liis  God.  But  it  was  not  for 
Gideon  to  establish  rules  for  the  worship  of  his  God,  nor  for  any  mortal  man  to  assume  that  his 
jndim  nt  might  decide  anything  in  such  a  matter.  Whatever  was  wrong  in  the  existing  state 
of  things  it  was  for  God  Himself  to  put  right. 

"  A  good  aim  does  not  alone  make  a  good  action.  Gideon  must  have  a  good  warrant  as  well 
as  a  uood  motive"  [Trapp.]  If  Gideon  supposed  that  because  he  had  already  once  offered 
sacrifice  on  an  altar  in  Ophrah  and  been  accepted,  therefore  he  might  continue  to  do  so  as  a 
rule,  either  by  himself  or  by  a  priest,  he  entirely  forgot  that  the  circumstances  were  most 
special  and  not  to  be  repeated. 

An  ephod  thereof,]  i.e.,  he  made  the  gold  and  cloth,  &c.,  which  he  had  received  into  an 
ephod,  which  was  the  most  costly  part  of  the  High  Priest's  dress.  The  material  was  worked 
throughout  with  gold  threads,  and  there  were  precious  stones  set  in  gold  braid  on  the  shoulder- 
pieces,  and  chains  made  of  gold  to  fasten  the  parts.  But  there  was  no  image,  far  less  the  form 
of  an  idol  like  the  golden  calf  of  Aaron. 

All  Israel  went  thither  a  whoring  after  it,l  i.e.,  they  made  an  idol  of  the  ephod  itself,  giving  \ 
that  worship  to  the  mere  piece  of  dress  which  idol-worshippers  do  to  a  block  or  a  stone.     The    ' 

•"Those  golden  ear-rings  were  ill-bestowed  sn  such  uncircumcised  ears  as  Ishmaelites  had."    Trapp 

t  These  ear-pendants  made  of  pearls  were  peculiar  to  kings  and  persons  of  rank  as  compared  with  the  sirapla 
rings  worn  by  the  other  Midiauite«.    The  woitl  natap  means  a  dr<^ 

898 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   JUDGES,  chap.  viii. 


homage  of  the  heart  was  illicitly  bestowed.  That  was  perverting  Gideon's  well-intentiontid 
work  to  a  very  bad  use,  from  which  he  would  have  shrunk  back  with  abhorrence.  Jerubbaal, 
the  idol-destroyer,  could  never  have  knowingly  encouraged  the  idol-worshippers. 

The  country  was  in  quietness  forty  years,  &c.l  There  was  no  special  outbreak  of  sin  in 
public,  and  so  there  were  no  public  displays  of  Divine  judgment  made,  though  the  waters  of  sin 
might  be  rising  silently  over  the  land.  The  forty  years  may  be  dated  from  the  time  of  Gideon's 
call.  How  powerful  is  the  influence  of  a  great  name,  when  its  greatness  arises  from  its  goodness  ! 
Would  that  every  wearer  of  a  crown  might  notice  this  I 

29.  Went  and  dwelt  in  his  own  house.)  He  makes  himself  as  one  of  the  common  people, 
notwithstanding  that  no  man  before  or  after  him  had  better  title  to  live  in  a  palace  and  wear  a 
crown.  The  continuance  of  the  name  Jerubbaal  was  an  honour  to  his  memory  similar  to  that 
which  the  name  Isiael  was  to  Jacob. 

32.  Died  in  a  good  old  age.l  His  days  were  long  in  the  land  which  he  had  been  honoured  to 
restore  (Gen.  xv.  15 ;  xxv.  8  ;  I.  Chron.  xxix.  28 ;  Job  xlii.  17).  His  God  had  canied  him  to 
hoar  hairs  (Isa.  xlvi.  4),  **  though  his  last  evil  act  were  some  spot  to  his  white  head.''  [Trapp.'] 

33.  As  soon  as  Gideon  was  dead,  they  turned  again.]  The  breakwater  being  removed,  the  waters 
rushed  out.  Sin,  and  especially  the  sin  of  idolatry  was  with  them  a  passion.  Well  might  it  l:e 
said  to  them,  "  O  Ephraim,  what  shall  I  do  unto  thee  ?  O  Judah,  what  shall  I  do  unto  thee  ? 
for  your  goodness  is  as  a  morning  cloud,  and  as  the  early  dew  it  goeth  away  1  *'  After  all  the 
sharp  lessons  they  had  been  taught,  they  still  have  learned  nothing. 

"  Though  woo'd  and  aw'd. 
They  are  flagrant  rebels  still.'* 

34.  Remembered  not  the  Lord.]''  "  My  people  are  bent  to  backsliding  from  me.  They  have 
slidden  back  by  a  pei-petual  backsliding.     Ephraim  is  a  cake  not  turned." 

35.  Neither  showed  they  kindness.]  Where  there  is  no  right  principle  in  the  heart,  there  is 
no  foundation  for  trusting  that  the  most  solemn  engagement  will  be  kept,  when  a  man  casts  off 
ftll  fear  of  God,  be  is  not  likely  to  make  conscience  of  doing  his  duty  to  his  fellow  men. 


SPECIAL    QUESTIONS, 

Certain  questions  grow  out  of  this  narrative  which  deserve  particular  notice, 
and  which  apply  equally  to  all  the  heathen  adversaries  that  fought  against 
Israel  and  their  God.  It  is  distinctly  conveyed,  that  the  defeat  of  these 
adversaries  in  turn,  was  not  merely  an  accident  arising  out  of  the  fortunes  of 
war,  but  was  a  special  judgment  sent  upon  them  by  Jehovah  for  the  manner  in 
which  they  despised  His  great  name,  and  trampled  in  the  mire  the  people  whom 
He  had  redeemed. 

One  question  which  arises  out  of  this,  is— 

Z.  Can  the  Heathen  sin  agrainst  llgrht. 

Did  Zebah  and  Zalmunna  know  that  they  were  committing  great  sin,  in  doing 
what  they  did  to  Israel,  and  their  God  ?  Is  it  not  characteristic  of  the  heatlien 
that  they  do  not  know  the  true  God  ;  and  if  so,  how  could  they  be  held  guilty 
of  profaning  His  name,  and  contemning  His  authority  ?  They  had  no  Bible, 
no  sanctuary  service  for  Jehovah  established  among  them,  no  series  of  instructors 
among  tliem  like  the  prophets,  no  one  to  impart  to  them  in  proper  form  a 
knowlege  of  the  truth  about  the  true  God.  It  was  not  only  a  rare  event,  but 
almost  a  solecism  for  a  servant  of  the  Lord  to  be  sent  with  a  special  message  of 
penitence  to  the  king  of  Nineveh,  as  Jonah  was.  The  density  of  the  darkness 
might  be  gathered  from  the  answer  returned  by  the  men  of  Ethiopia  to  Philips 
question,  **  How  can  I  understand  except  some  one  guide  me." 

Indeed  the  heathen  universally  **  sat  in  darkness."  **  Gross  darkness 
covered"  the  multitudes  throughout  all  heathendom.    They  were  "without 

d99 


CHAP.  VTii.  HOMJLETIO  COMMENTARY:   JUDGES 


God,  and  without  hope  in  the  world."  Their  description  is  often  given  as  those 
that  "  know  not  God."  But  if  they  had  no  proper  knowledge  of  the  true  God, 
how  could  they  understand  the  nature  of  His  claims  upon  them,  and  if  they  did 
not  understand  these  claims,  how  could  their  condemnation  be  just?  It  is 
manifest  that  we  must  look  a  little  more  closely  into  the  subject  to  get  quit  of 
this  difficulty. 

Are  we  anywhere  told,  that  the  heathen  are  absolutely  ignorant  of  either  the 
existence,  or  the  character  of  the  true  God  ?  That  they  were  relatively  so,  as 
com])ared  with  the  seed  of  Abraham,  is  everywhere  said,  just  as  moonlight  or 
starlight  is  inferior  to  that  of  the  sun.  But  the  question  is,  "Had  they  any 
light  at  all  sufficient  to  constitute  a  foundation  for  responsibility?"  This 
question  we  unhesitatingly  answer  in  the  affirmative.  For  where  there  is 
responsibility  there  must  be  light  in  some  degree.  Guilt  lies  in  acting  contrary 
to  that  light. 

(1.)  There  is  the  light  of  nature.  By  looking  on  the  works  of  the  natural 
world,  the  first  candid  instinct  of  the  heathen  mind  is  not  to  w(^rship  the  works, 
but  Him  who  made  the  works,  and  to  see  glorious  features  of  character  shining 
through  the  works.  It  is  not  till  afterwards,  when  men,  disliking  the  presence 
of  God,  and  trying  to  get  quit  of  Him  altogether,  begin  to  give  that  homage  to 
the  objects  of  nature  which  ought  to  be  reserved  for  the  Framer  of  nature. 
This  we  take  to  be  the  meaning  of  the  important  paragraph  in  Rom.  i.  20  with 
its  connection.  That  the  heathen,  though  not  instructed  by  revelation,  know, 
or  ou^iht  to  know,  something  of  God  as  a  basis  of  their  responsibility  is  clear 
from  Rom.  i.  19,  21,  25,  28,  32  ;  Acts  xiv.  17.  They  are  said  to  be  "  without 
excuse." 

Nature  gave  them  light,  not  only  on  the  existence  and  character  of  God,  but 
also  on  the  code  of  duty  which  He  has  laid  down  for  human  conduct.  For 
*'  having  not  the  law  (written)  they  are  a  law  to  themselves,"  etc.  (Rom.  ii. 
14,  15).  This  applied  not  only  to  a  few  solitary  cases,  when  a  sheik  like  Job 
rose  up  to  instruct  the  people  among  whom  he  lived  ;  but  the  law  is  written 
more  or  less  legibly  on  every  man's  heart.  The  universal  conviction,  not  only 
that  sacrifices,  but  that  costly  sacrifices  were  expressly  needed  to  propitiate  the 
superior  powers,  proved  beyond  doubt  that  they  felt  they  were  guilty.  This  is 
confirmed,  too,  by  Rom.  i.  32. 

(2.)  There  was  also  the  light  of  the  history  of  God's  Israel.  The  history  of 
God's  Church  in  the  world  was,  to  these  heathen  nations,  a  kind  of  Bible  about 
God's  character  and  ways.  It  was  a  great  addition  to  the  light  of  nature. 
The  first  grand  display  of  His  character  given  by  means  of  His  Church  was 
when  He  smote  the  Egyptians  with  such  terrible  plagues,  and  redeemed  His 
people  from  bondage  with  a  high  hand  and  stretched  out  arm.  This  was 
pitching  the  key-note.  All  the  series  of  events  that  followed  were  such  as  to 
reveal  the  God  of  Israel  to  be  immeasurably  superior  to  all  others  that  were 
called  by  the  name  of  gods,  and  to  prove  distinctly  that  He  was  God  alone,  and 
there  was  none  else.  If  the  nations  were  not  convinced  of  this,  they  had  ample 
evidence  to  convince  them  of  the  sin  and  folly  of  choosing  any  other  god,  and 
of  daring  to  touch  the  people  that  were  called  by  His  name. 

This  two-fold  light  undoubtedly  these  kings  with  their  armies  had,  so  that 
though  their  privile<:;e  was  small  indeed  compared  with  that  of  Israel,  it  was  yet 
sufficient  to  make  them  conscious  they  were  committing  great  sin  in  rising  up 
against  the  God  of  Israel,  and  wantonly  destroying  the  people  who  were  dear  to 
Him  as  the  apple  of  His  eye  !  The  impression  made  on  all  the  surrounding 
heathen  nations  by  God's  remarkable  dealings  with  His  people  is  indicated  in 
such  passages  as  these  : — Deut.  ii.  25  ;  Josh.  ii.  9-11 ;  vi. ;  x.  1,  2  ;  1  Sam. 
iv.  7-9. 

400 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES.  ohap.  viii. 


ZZ.  Does  the  g-uilt  of  the  wicked  entirely  destroy  sympathy  for 
them  in  their  punishment? 

Are  we  to  have  no  pity  for  such  men  as  Zebah  and  Zalmimna  when  we  think 
of  their  terrible  fate,  or  must  the  fact  that  they  defied  the  God  of  Israel,  and 
put  to  death  in  cold  blood  so  many  of  His  chosen  people,  make  us  shut  up  all 
bowels  of  compassion  for  them  ?  When  we  see  innocent  persons  barbarously 
murdered  by  some  monster  of  cruelty,  we  instinctively  have  far  more  sympathy 
with  them  than  we  can  have  for  the  perpetrator  of  the  horrid  deed  himself, 
when  he  comes  to  suffer  the  last  sentence  of  the  law.  There  can  be  no  doubt 
that  puilt  lessens  sympathy  ;  but  does  it  entirely  close  it  up  ?  Or,  if  we  are 
affli  ;ted  at  seeing  a  criminal  suffer,  when  he  has  brought  it  down  on  himself  by 
his  evil  conduct,  does  not  that  seem  as  if  we  objected  to  the  due  reward  of  his 
deeds  being  measured  out  to  him  ?  Are  we  to  have  more  sympathy  with  the 
man,  than  with  the  administration  of  justice  ?  Men's  sense  of  the  evil  of  sin, 
and  its  awful  desert  is,  in  this  world,  so  small,  that  it  seems  harsh  and  cruel 
when  any  heavy  dispensation  is  inflicted.  But  the  time  is  coining  when  another 
light  shall  be  shed  upon  it,  and  when  what  now  appears  to  be  so  small  shall  be 
seen  to  reach  the  heavens,  and  to  call  for  the  awtul  frown  of  Him  who  is  the 
Guardian  of  righteousness,  and  purity  and  truth. 

On  this  side  of  the  subject  there  are  some  solemn  statements  in  the  Book  of 
God.  The  inspired  apostle,  when  closing  one  of  his  epistles,  says,  "If  any  man 
love  not  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  let  him  be  Anathema  Maranatha."  This  many 
interpret  to  mean — accursed  at  the  coming  of  the  Lord^  or  for  the  Lord  comes. 
But,  however  we  explain  it,  the  meaning  is  most  solemn.  If  anathema  had 
stood  alone  its  natural  force  is — devoted  to  destruction^  and  i^tco  implies  let 
him  be,  as  if  the  apostle,  speaking  on  behalf  of  all  the  good  were  to  have  no 
more  sympathy  with  him,  but  to  say — that  is  the  only  destiny  suitable  for  him. 
Not  to  love  Christ  will  then,  in  the  clear  light  of  eternity,  appear  so  tremendous 
a  crime  that  nothing  but  absolute  destruction  will,  in  the  judgment  of  all,  be 
regarded  as  the  only  fit  treatment  of  it.  Even  now,  speaking  through  the 
Spirit,  this  inspired  man  can  say — Let  it  be  so.  All  this  corresponds  with  the 
words  that  shall  come  from  the  lips  of  the  Judge  Himself,  "  Depart  from  me  ye 
cursed,  etc."  It  also  corresponds  with  the  phrase  "  the  wrath  of  the  Lamb," 
and  that  other  statement,  "Again  they  said,  Alleluia!  and  her  smoke  rose  up 
for  ever  and  ever."  Sympathy  with  the  claims  of  eternal  righteousness  will  in 
the  light  of  eternity  be  so  strong,  as  to  lead  the  righteous  to  acquiesce  in  the 
destruction  of  their  fellow-men  who  have  rejected  the  Saviour. 

But  are  we  then  to  drop  all  sympathy  with  the  wicked  because  of  their 
wickedness'^  We  do  not  read  the  teachings  of  scripture  so,  nor  yet  the  teachings 
of  our  own  hearts.  The  common  feeling  of  humanity  leads  us  to  grieve  at  the 
spectacle  of  a  wicked  man  suffering  misery,  though  we  know  and  admit  that  he 
deserves  it.  We  say,  it  is  not  his  misfortune  but  his  crime.  Yet  we  mourn  for 
the  man,  while  we  emphatically  condemn  his  conduct.  We  mourn  that  he 
should  be  of  a  wicked  spirit,  and  allow  himself  to  be  led  by  wicked  influences, 
so  bringing  down  upon  himself  the  righteous  judgments  of  God.  Our  sorrow  is 
not  alone  for  his  misery,  but  that  he  should  be  under  the  po  ver  of  sin,  and  so 
necessarily  be  miserable.  Grief  at  seeing  the  wicked  punished  by  the  hand  of 
justice  must  always  be  accompanied  by  abhorrence  of  the  guilt  which  has  made 
the  punishment  necessary. 

Thus  it  was  with  Him,  who,  in  this,  as  in  all  other  matters,  is  our  perfect 
example.  His  lamentation  over  unbelieving  Jerusalem  was  deep  and  sincere, 
"  0  Jerusalem,  Jerusalem,  &c."  (Matt,  xxiii.  37).  Yet  how  severe  His  condem- 
nation was  of  their  sin  may  be  learned  from  v.  33  of  the  same  chapter.  Such 
was  the  depth  of  His  compassion,  that  at  the  very  moment  when  He  was  bearing 

2  0  401 


OHap.  yUL  UOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  JUDOES. 


His  cross  on  to  Calvary,  He  seemed  to  forget  His  own  sufferings  at  the  sight  of 
theirs  (Luke  xxiii.  28).  Most  wonderful  of  all,  He  shed  tears  over  them  when 
He  thought  of  them  as  lost  souls  (Luke  xix.  41,  42).  Yet  he  abated  not 
any  of  the  heavy  calamities  that  were  impending  over  their  heads,  and  which 
He  Himself,  in  the  exercise  of  His  power  as  Ruler  over  all,  would  inflict  upon 
them  for  their  sins  in  due  time  (Matt.  xxiv.  4-28). 

Our  sympathies  then  should  go  out  to  the  wicked,  not  as  adhering  to  their  wicked- 
ness^hnt  in  the  way  of  earnestly  desiring  that  they  should  turn  from  theirevil  ways, 
and  receive  Christ  as  their  Saviour,  that  so  they  may  receive  deliverance  in  har- 
mony with  the  laws  of  righteousness  and  truth.  Our  feeling  towards  the  heathen 
world  all  over,  should  be  that  of  profound  sorrow,  that  so  many  of  our  fellow 
creatures  should  be  without  the  proper  knowledge  of  God,  and  the  means  of 
salvation  by  the  blood  of  Christ,  and  to  do  our  very  utmost  to  extend  that 
knowledge  to  the  ends  of  the  earth,  in  deep  sympathy  with  them  as  our  fellow 
men. 


ZZX.  Does  God  set  up  the  wicked  as  a  mark  for  punishment 
accordingr  to  the  deg^ree  of  their  g^uilt,  or  by  what  rule  7 

Were  Zebah  and  Zalmunna  greater  sinners  than  all  the  heathen  rulers  of  their 
day  that  they  should  be  singled  out  for  special  punishment?  If  Sisera  was  made 
an  example  of  the  divine  vengeance,  why  should  Jabin,  his  master,  be  passed  by  ? 
Why  should  Og  and  Sihon,  kings  of  the  Amorites,  be  slain  in  battle,  while 
Balak,  king  of  Moab,  is  spared?  Why  should  the  population  of  so  many  of  the 
towns  of  the  Canaanites  be  all  put  to  death,  while  those  that  dwelt  in  several 
others  were  left?  Is  it  always  the  greatest  sinners  that  are  thus  set  up  as  a 
mark  for  God's  judgments  ;  and,  if  so,  would  the  common  wicked  escape  such 
judgment,  on  the  ground  that  their  sins  were  not  so  great  as  to  warrant  such 
retribution? 

A  fatal  error,  we  believe,  it  would  be  to  suppose  that  any  sin  is  of  so  slight  a 
character  as  not  to  deserve  some  manifestation  of  the  Divine  frown,  for  sin  in  its 
very  nature  implies  that  the  creature  abandons  its  God,  renounces  His  authority, 
and  disobeys  His  laws.  And  as  God  is  jealous  for  His  own  character  He  must 
frown  on  such  a  creature.  If  God  were  therefore  to  inflict  on  men  the  full 
measure  of  their  desert  in  this  world.  He  would  send  some  visible  and  strong 
mark  of  his  displeasure  on  all  men  without  exception.  But  that  is  not  now  the 
rule.  It  is  only  in  rare  instances  that  special  inflictions  are  sent.  The  rule  is 
to  give  specimen  cases  of  how  God  regards  sin,  and  how  He  will  deal  with  it. 
Thus  Christ  warns  his  hearers  against  the  error  of  supposing,  that  those  on 
whom  severe  calamities  are  sent  were  sinners  above  all  other  men.  His  solemn 
language  is,  "I  tell  you  nay  ;  but  except  ye  repent,  ye  shall  all  likewise  perish." 
(Luke  xiiL  2-5).  He  informs  them  that  their  sins  deserved  similar  calamities, 
and  if  they  did  not  fall  on  them,  it  was  of  God's  mercy,  and  not  because  they 
were  not  equally  liable  to  receive  the  same  treatment. 

Though  it  is  often  those  that  sin  with  a  high  hand  that  are  dealt  with  most 
severely,  many  who  sin  in  this  manner  are  often  passed  by.  Sodom  was  a  city 
remarkable  for  its  wickedness  (Gen.  xiii.  13),  and  was  turned  into  ashes  by 
the  fire  of  heaven  falling  upon  it,  as  an  example  to  those  that  should  live 
ungodly  in  after  ages.  Yet  our  Saviour  speaks  of  some  of  the  towns  in  His  day 
as  if  they  were  worse  in  character,  though  they  had  no  such  vials  of  wrath 
poured  upon  them.  "  I  say  unto  you,  Capernaum,  that  it  shall  be  more 
tolerable  for  the  land  of  Sodom  in  the  day  of  judgment  than  for  thee." 
(Luke  X.  10-16). 
402 


no  MILE  TIC  COMMENTARY:   JUDGES,  chap.  viii. 


The  rule  then  by  which  special  visible  manifestations  of  the  Divine  anger  are 
made  against  comniunities,  or  individuals  in  this  world,  is  not  always  the 
greatness  of  their  guiit  above  otlier  places,  though  it  sometimes  is  so,  but  when 
the  case  chosen  is  suitable  to  serve  as  a  specimen  of  what  God  might  righteously 
do  in  similar  circumstances. 


MAIN  ffOMILETICS.--Verset  18-86. 
Z. — The  Troubled  Snd  of  tbe  Wicked. 

L— Preparations  for  his  Fall. 

(1.)  He  had  to  answer  for  his  sins  to  Israel's  God.  "God  reign eth  over  the 
heathen."  He  is  ** Judge  of  all  the  earth."  "Say  among  the  heathen,  the 
Lord  reigneth."  "  Every  one  shall  give  an  account  of  himself  unto  God." 
(1  Sam.  ii.  3  ;  Eccl.  xii.  14 ;  Heb.  iv.  13  ;  Acts  xvii.  31  ;  Eccl.  xi.  9  ;  Rom.  ii.  16.) 

This  is  God's  world  ;  and  all  its  inhabitants  are  His  creatures.  To  Him  and 
Him  alone,  are  they  responsible  for  their  conduct.  It  was  this  God — Israel's 
God — whom  these  kings  wickedly  dared  to  defy.  It  was  with  Him  they  were 
really  at  war.  It  was  with  His  power  they  dared  to  contend,  and  His  holy 
name  which  they  despised.  It  was  His  children,  on  whom  they  inflicted  so 
many  bleeding  wounds,  and  whose  lives  they  so  capriciously  destroyed.  For 
every  act  of  impiety,  therefore — for  every  wanton  exercise  of  power,  and  every 
barbarous  deed,  to  the  God  of  Israel  were  they  really  responsible  as  their  Judge. 
Thus  was  preparation  made  for  an  evil  day. 

(2.)  The  sinner  s  blindness  to  his  sin,  and  its  consequences. 

These  men  of  the  desert,  doubtless,  had  cheir  memories  filled  with  reports  of 
what  the  God  of  Israel  had  done,  and  how  superior  He  was  to  all  the  go, Is  of 
the  nations,  and  it  was  their  duty  to  have  prosecuted  this  knowledge  to  its  just 
conclusion.  But  when  they  saw  the  rich  valleys  and  smiling  plains  of  Israel, 
and  found  a  people  weak  as  children  only  defending  them,  their  lust  for 
possessing  so  valuable  a  prize  rose  within  them  ;  they  shut  their  eyes  to  every 
consideration  of  moral  right,  and  the  fear  of  God,  and  grasped  at  the  booty 
which  was  so  easily  within  their  reach.  Men  cannot  look  upon  sin  with  open 
face  so  long  as  their  moral  vision  is  not  impaired,  for  it  immediately  raises  a 
struggle  within  one's  own  breast.  The  will  strongly  desires  what  is  forbidden, 
and  conscience  thunders  against  it.  To  save  this  struggle  the  man  shuts  his 
eyes,  and  makes  himself  blind  both  to  sin  and  its  consequences.  By  getting 
into  a  habit  of  not  looking  at  sin  in  its  evil  nature,  and  not  reflecting  on  its  sad 
consequences,  a  man  gradually  becomes  practically  blind,  so  that  he  is  able  to 
commit  sin  with  little  remorse.  Satan,  meanwhile,  greatly  assi.sts  the  soul  in 
this  self-blinding  process,  by  the  fascinating  pictures  which  he  sets  before  it  of 
the  gratification  of  sinful  desires,  and  by  turning  away  the  attention  from  the 
voice  of  conscience.  Indeed,  that  tremendous  power  which  God  has  put  into 
the  soul  to  represent  His  own  authority  over  it,  he  attempts  to  silence  by 
drugging  it;  just  as  Mercury,  when  he  proceeded  to  the  tasi^  of  putting  Argus 
to  death,  found  that  he  could  not  succeed  on  account  of  that  monster  having 
one  hundred  eyes,  and  when  some  of  them  slept,  others  were  always  awake,  so 
that  he  could  not  come  near  him  to  effect  his  purpose.  He,  therefore,  thought 
of  drngfjiug  him  all  over,  and  having  at  last  got  all  the  eyes  to  shut,  he  speedily 
accomplished  his  object.  **  0,  sir,"  said  a  Christian  lady  to  a  young  nian  of 
noble  extraction,  who  was  going  on  thoughtlessly  in  a  wild  career  of  sin,  "  0,  if 
^ou  would  but  think — only  think  ?"     *'  I  cannot  think,"  he  replied  ;  '*  I  dare 

403 


CHAP.vni.  HOMJLETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


not  think — ihonglit  kills  me!"  When  conscience  is  stifled,  when  Satan  is 
listened  to,  wlien  a  deaf  ear  is  turned  to  Christ,  when  reason  is  kept  under  and 
passion  is  allowed  to  reign,  then  there  is  darkness,  and  ihe  works  of  darkness 
are  done.  {^See  2  Cor,  iv.  4  ;  John  xii.  37-40.)  On  the  Deceptive  Character  of 
Sin,  see  p.  197,  etc. 

(3.)  The  wicked's  persistent  continuance  in  sin.  These  heathen  marauders 
having  been  successful  for  one  year  in  the  work  of  spoiling  Jehovah's  vineyard, 
and  apparently  no  harm  coming  of  it,  they  returned  a  second  year,  then  a  third 
and  a  fourth,  until  seven  years  had  passed.  They  would  begin  to  think  that 
this  people  were  deserted  of  their  God,  or  possibly,  all  that  they  heard  of  Him 
and  His  doings  were  but  dreams  of  the  past.  At  any  rate,  there  was  no  cloud 
in  the  sky  to  make  them  afraid.  Why  should  they  not  continue  to  fatten  on 
these  fat  pastures,  and  gratify  themselves  to  the  full  ?  "  To-morrow  shall  be  as 
this  day,  and  much  more  abundant."  "  Because  sentence  against  an  evil  work 
is  not  executed  speedily,  therefore  the  heart  of  the  sons  of  men  is  set  in  them 
to  do  evil" 

While  they  were  thus  imagining  that  the  Lord  did  not  see,  neither  did  the 
God  of  Jacob  regard,  the  plans  of  Heaven  were  maturing.  He  who  is  angry  with 
the  wicked  every  day,  was  whetting  His  sword  and  bending  His  bow.  Time  was 
allowed  for  the  evil-doers  to  repent  of  their  conduct,  but  as  of  this,  after  seven 
years'  trial,  there  were  no  symptoms,  God  arose  from  His  place  and  executed 
judgment  on  His  adversaries.  This  persistence  in  sin  shows  an  advance  in 
blindness  of  the  understanding  and  hardness  of  heart. 

(4.)  The  certainty  that  the  wicked's  sin  shall  in  due  time  find  him  out. 
How  confounding  it  must  have  been  for  these  kings,  now  to  find  themselves 
helpless  prisoners  in  the  hands  of  tlie  very  brother  of  the  innocent  men,  whom 
in  the  wantonness  of  their  power  they  had  slaughtered  so  recently  at  Mount 
Tabor,  for  no  other  alleged  crime  than  that  they  had  endeavoured  to  defend  their 
property  from  the  spoliation  of  freebooters  !  Then  their  sin  seemed  to  them  a 
thing  to  mock  at ;  now  it  stands  out  so  serious  a  thing  as  to  cost  them  their 
lives.  Many  other  ruthless  deeds,  doubtless,  they  had  perpetrated.  Now  this 
one  sin  is  made  the  means  of  bringing  down  meet  punishment  for  all  the  rest. 
Every  perfection  of  Jehovah's  character  demands  that  every  sin  be  at  some  time 
visited  with  its  just  desert.  His  sovereignty  regards  it  as  an  outrage  of  the 
creature  a<;ainst  the  authority  of  the  Creator.  His  jealousy  will  not  suffer  that 
any  spot  or  stain  should  exist,  under  the  moral  government  of  One  who  is  so 
greatly  to  be  feared.  His  justice  will  not  allow  that  the  standard  of  righteousness 
be  in  any  degree  lowered,  beyond  the  point  of  absolute  perfection.  His  holiness 
will  not  permit  that  any  instance  of  sin  should  occur  in  any  part  of  His  pure 
universe,  without  some  fit  mark  being  put  upon  it  of  His  detestation.  His 
omniscience  searches  out  the  culprit — His  omnipresence  holds  him  fast  in  every 
place,  and  His  omnipotence  lays  him  for  ever  low  in  the  dust ;  while  Divine 
Providence  causes  every  gate  to  be  shut  against  him  among  the  creatures,  so 
that  he  shall  have  none  to  associate  with,  and  none  to  pity  him  in  the  universal 
creation  of  God.  How  much  do  we  owe  to  Flim  who,  to  every  believer,  prevents 
all  this  by  the  endurance  of  the  bitter  death  of  the  cross  1 

2.  The  greatness  of  his  falL 

This  is  measured  by — 

(1.)  The  height  from  which  he  fell.  Over  that  vast  host,  that  filled  the 
valley  and  covered  the  slopes  of  Jezreel,  these  men  bore  absolute  sway.  A 
whole  nation  living  in  tents  were  as  grasshoppers  before  them.  Whom  they 
would  they  slew,  and  whom  they  would  they  kept  alive.  To  one  they  said  Go, 
and  he  went ;  to  another  Come,  and  he  came  ;  to  a  third  Do  this,  and  he  did 
404 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES,  chap.  viii. 


it.  They  formed  the  double  helm  that  guided  the  movements  of  that  hn^e 
host.  Their  hearts  were  filled  with  proud  and  exultant  feelings,  as  they  looked 
on  the  magnificent  spectacle  of  men  and  camels,  crowding  on  each  other  over 
all  the  plain  as  far  as  the  eye  could  reach,  all  glittering  with  jewels  of  silver 
and  jewels  of  gold,  the  half  moon-shaped  ornaments  conspicuous  everywhere,  as 
became  the  worshippers  of  the  luminary  of  the  night  sky.  Nature  was  calm 
around  them,  as  they  cursed  the  (jod  of  Israel,  and  trampled  His  people  down 
before  them  as  dust  in  their  path.  For  days  and  months  the  sun  shone  on 
peacefully  as  before,  and  they  were  wholly  unconscious  of  danger  or  surprise. 

But  the  decree  had  gone  forth  ;  they  had  been  weighed  in  the  balances  and 
found  wanting  ;  their  days  of  sin  and  cruelty  were  numbered.  From  the 
watch-tower  in  the  skies  a  messenger  came  down  to  tell,  that  the  God  of  Jacob 
had  seen  the  wrongs  inflicted  on  his  chosen  people,  and  was  about  to  fell  the 
oppressor  to  the  dust.  As  in  a  momeat,  the  avalanche  fell  on  the  tents  of 
Midian  ;  the  host  ran,  and  cried,  and  fled.  But  who  could  escape  the  wrath  of 
Him  who  could  set  all  the  resources  of  nature  against  them  ?  They  were  cut 
down  as  the  grass  ;  they  withered  as  the  green  herb —  • 

Like  the  leaves  of  the  forest,  when  summer  is  green. 
That  host  with  their  banners  at  sunset  were  seen  ; 
Like  the  leaves  of  the  forest,  when  autumn  has  blown. 
That  host  on  the  morrow  lay  withered  and  strown. 

And  now  the  two  leaders  stand  all  alone,  stripped  of  everything,  not  a  man 
of  their  armies  left,  waiting  to  receive  their  death-stroke  at  the  hands  of  a 
mere  boy  ! 

(2.)  The  fall  came  irresistibly;  nothing  could  withstand  the  destructive 
agency  when  it  came.  Who  could  stop  that  panic  that  arose  in  a  moment  at 
the  midnight  hour,  when  the  signal  was  given  by  the  braying  of  so  many 
trumpets  and  the  breaking  of  the  pitchers?  From  that  moment  the  work  of 
death-dealing  went  on  till  only  a  speck  remained  on  the  distant  mountains,  of 
the  dense  cloud  of  men  that  obeyed  the  commands  of  these  mighty  chieftains. 
"They  were  chased  as  the  chaff  of  the  mountains  before  the  wind,  and  like  a 
rolling  thing  before  the  whirlwind."  It  was  a  precipitous  fall,  as  if  they  had 
been  hurled  violently  over  a  cliff. 

(3.)  They  were  utterly  helphss  in  their  fall  ;  they  seem  not  to  have  been 
able  to  use  a  single  stroke  in  beating  back  the  wave.  Not  a  man  of  Gideon's 
army  was  killed  nor  even  wounded  ;  the  300  remained  intact  to  the  end. 
"  None  of  the  men  of  might  in  that  hostile  camp  did  find  their  hands."  What 
a  picture  of  heli)lessness  when  15,000  men  should  have  allowed  themselves  to 
be  either  cut  to  pieces  or  scattered  by  300  men,  whose  strength  was  completely 
exhausted — that  is,  at  the  rate  of  every  fifty  men  allowing  themselves  to  be 
smitten  by  one  man  without  returning  a  blow  ! 

(4.)  The  fall  was  unexpected  and  rapid.  Nothing  seemed  more  preposterous 
than  to  su])pose,  that  a  few  stragglers  gathering  together  on  the  mountains  of 
Manasseh  should  inflict  any  serious  blow  on  the  myriads  of  Midian  ;  and  if  by 
any  means  some  advantage  had  been  gained  for  Israel,  the  natural  thought 
was,  that  it  must  have  been  only  by  slow  degrees  that  these  spoilers  could  have 
been  driven  out  of  the  country.  But  in  little  more  than  a  single  day  is  the 
work  done.  When  the  day  of  reckoning  comes,  it  is  "as  a  thief  in  the  night." 
"Blessed  is  he  that  watcheth."  ''The  wicked  are  chafed  away  as  a  vision  of 
the  night."  "  When  they  are  saying  Peace  and  safety,  then  sudden  destruction 
cometh."  When  a  wicked  man  has  been  reasoned  with,  has  been  implored  to 
repent  and  believe,  and  has  had  much  patience  exercised  towards  him  while  yet 
he  does  not  return,  then  he  is  "  driven  away  in  his  wickedness  " — he  "  dies  in 

his  sins." 

405 


OHAP.vm.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES 


5.  The  Fall  was  ruin — irremediable  and  final.  "  The  Midianites  lifted  up 
their  heads  no  more"  (ver.  28).  Forty  years  passed  away,  and  Gideon  was  still 
alive,  but  all  that  time  we  do  not  hear  a  single  sound  from  the  land  of  Midian 
against  Israel.  They  had  received  so  terrible  a  lesson,  that  they  trembled  at  the 
very  thought  of  contending  with  so  great  a  God  again.  The  Fall  here  recorded 
was  not  merely  a  reverse,  or  even  a  heavy  misfortune,  which,  as  the  wheel  turns 
round  might  be  again  reversed,  but  it  was  a  casting  down  to  destruction  ;  so 
that  while  contemplating  what  God  had  done  we  might  well  exclaim  with  the 
prophet,  **  0  wheel !  "  (comp.  the  Fall  of  Sisera  pp.  299-307). 

IZ.  The  honour  attending*  the  last  days  of  the  righteous  man. 

We  place  the  two  characters  in  contrast,  the  righteous  and  the  wicked.  They 
differ  in  character  and  conduct  in  active  life,  and  they  differ  in  the  end  of  life. 
The  wicked  we  have  seen  spend  life  in  fighting  against  God,  and  in  the  end 
they  have  many  sorrows.  But  the  righteous  go  through  life  walking  with  God, 
trusting  in  Him,  led  by  Him,  and  acknowledging  Him  in  all  their  ways,  and  in 
the  end  all  things  smile  upon  them  (see  Ps.  xxxii.  10).  There  is  much  instruc- 
tion to  be  g'''t  in  studying  the  history  of  both  characters,  each  of  them  taken  by 
itself.  But  there  is  much  additional  instruction  to  be  had  from  looking  at  the 
two  in  contrast,  and  hence  we  find  them  often  placed  together  in  scripture,  one 
against  the  other  so  as  to  be  contrasted.  We  sometimes  see  them  in  pairs 
as  Cain  and  Abel,  Jacob  and  Esau,  Saul  and  David,  and  others.  Again  we 
see  them  in  communities  generally,  the  people  of  God  on  the  one  hand,  and 
those  who  have  cast  off  God  on  the  other.  At  one  time,  we  see  promises  and 
many  gracious  words  spoken  to  the  righteous,  while  threatenings  and  fore- 
bodings of  future  wrath  are  held  out  to  the  other.  But  the  end  of  life  is 
generally  set  forth  as  the  time  wiien  the  contrast  becomes  most  complete.  The 
righteous  are  then  dealt  with  as  jewels,  and  the  wicked  as  dross,  '*  then  shall  we 
return  and  discern  between  the  righteous  and  the  wicked  "  (see  Mai.  iii.  17,  18; 
Matt.  iii.  12  ;  xiii.  30  ;  xxv.  34,  41,  46  ;  Luke  xiii.  28,  29.) 

Here  what  a  contrast  between  the  heads  of  the  Midianitish  army,  and  the 
head  of  the  army  of  Israel.  We  have  seen  the  one  go  down  under  a  dark  cloud 
never  more  to  appear,  but,  turning  to  the  other  side,  we  see  a  name  destined 
to  go  down  to  everlasting  remembrance.  "  Light  is  sown  for  the  righteous." 
"  His  horn  shall  be  exalted  with  honour."  What  was  the  kind  of  honour  which 
Gideon  had  in  his  last  days  ? 

1.  It  was  in  the  moral  greatness  of  his  character. 

It  was  not  the  honour  of  wealth,  though  he  had  that ;  not  the  honour  of  being 
a  great  patriot  though  he  had  much  of  that ;  not  the  honour  of  having  a  public 
ovation  from  the  people,  though  that  also  he  had  to  the  full ;  nor  was  it  that 
highest  distinction  which  any  people  could  offer  to  such  a  man,  when  with  one 
consent  they  asked  him  to  become  their  king.  No  ;  his  honour  lay  in  refusincf 
a  crown,  not  in  having  it  offered  him.  Moral  greatness  is  the  true  greatness  of 
a  man,  when  he  places  right  principle  higher  than  himself,  and  prefers  to  do 
what  is  best  to  be  done,  rather  than  what  might  suit  his  own  interests,  or  is  most 
ao^reeable  to  his  own  will.  Gideon  made  the  glory  of  God  his  chief  good,  and 
all  his  thoughts  continually  circled  around  that.  For  the  sake  of  the  name  of 
his  God,  he  braved  every  blast  in  the  rough  days  of  adversity,  and  now  in  the 
warm  sunshine  of  prosperity,  when  the  temptation  to  have  his  own  name  put 
forward  at  one  point,  in  place  of  his  God,  is  set  before  him,  he  meets  it  with  a 
*'  Get  thee  behind  me,  Satan  " — **  1  will  not  rule  over  you,  neither  shall  any 
son  that  I  have — the  Lord  shall  rule  over  you." 
406 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   JUDaES.  chap.  vin. 


Gideon  quite  comprehended  the  position,  which,  alas  !  few  or  none  else 
seemed  to  do.  Israel  was  the  Lord's  people.  They  belonged  to  Him  as  His 
redeemed,  His  chosen,  whom  he  raised  up  for  a  special  purpose  in  the  world. 
They  were  His  alone,  and  could  belong  to  no  other.  He  had  also  made  Him- 
self over  to  them  to  become  theirs.  He  was  their  God,  and  therefore  their 
King.  It  was  wrong  for  them  to  think  of  any  other  head.  All  this  was  settled 
once  for  all  at  the  outset  of  their  history,  and  it  was  settled  by  solemn  covenant. 
It  was  therefore  an  impious  thought  to  suggest  that  a  mere  man,  or  any  other 
than  the  Eternal  God  Himself,  should  be  their  Judge,  Lawgiver,  and  King 
(I  Sara.  viii.  5-7). 

Gideon's  act  was,  therefore,  far  above  that  of  a  Cincinnatus,  who,  after  his 
great  feat  in  accomplishing  the  deliverance  of  his  country  from  a  great  danger, 
cared  not  to  accept  of  any  high  rewards,  but  quietly  returned  to  his  farm  and 
his  plough.  Another  case  of  moral  sublimity  we  have  in  Washington,  who, 
though  he  permitted  himself  to  be  called  by  the  title  of  President,  yet  refused 
all  thought  of  royalty.  Julius  Csesar  was  thrice  presented  with  a  kin^dy  crown, 
and  this  he  as  often  refused  ;  but  policy  rather  than  principle  appeared  to  be 
his  motive.  Cromwell  reached  the  highest  pinnacle  of  success,  and  chose  to  be 
called  Lord  Protector  rather  than  king,  but  this  too  seemed  to  be  on  the  ground 
of  policy.  Gideon  alone,  of  all  the  characters  of  history,  was  by  the  unanimous 
voice  of  the  nation  hailed  as  king,  and  yet  at  once  and  with  decision,  on  the 
high  ground  of  a  Divine  arrangement,  he  rejected  the  tempting  proposal. 

2.  He  enjoyed  the  highest  respect  of  his  people.  So  many  things,  both  in 
his  character  and  conduct,  were  fitted  to  excite  admiration,  that  it  is  not 
wonderful  if  he  had  the  highest  respect  of  all  the  good  from  Dan  to  Beersheba. 
The  modesty  of  his  demeanour,  his  singular  meekness  in  dealing  with  the 
Ephraimites  (chap.  viii.  1-3),  his  implicit  obedience  to  the  instructions  given 
him  by  the  angel,  his  bold  opposition  to  Baal,  as  the  root  of  his  country's  evils, 
his  rising  to  the  height  of  the  great  occasion  when  the  Midianites  had  to  be 
fought  with  and  conquered,  and  the  amazing  success  which  in  less  than  two 
short  days  had  crowned  his  extraordinary  exertions — these  and  other  elements 
raised  him  so  high  in  the  people's  estimation,  that  the  whole  nation  felt  they 
never  could  do  him  enough  honour.  The  whole  land  was  full  of  his  fame  for 
forty  years.  In  fact,  even  in  Israel's  remarkable  history,  there  was  nothing 
brighter  to  speak  of  or  to  sing  of,  than  of  his  name  and  his  doings.  He  lived  in 
the  hearts  of  his  people.  If  he  asked  their  silver  and  their  gold,  he  miglit  have 
it  as  much  as  he  chose  to  name  (chap.  viii.  24-26).  If  he  wished  them  to 
carry  on  their  worship  in  his  city  Ophrah,  they  came  there  at  his  desire.  If 
they  even  abstained  from  the  rites  of  Baal  worship,  which  so  many  loved  in 
their  hearts,  it  was  out  of  respect  to  his  name  that  they  did  so,  for  so  long  as 
he  remained  with  them  no  altars  of  Baal  were  frequented  in  Israel. 

3.  The  whole  land  enjoyed  peace  for  his  sake.  "  The  country  was  in  quiet- 
ness forty  years  in  the  days  of  Gideon."  This  was  a  high  honour  conferred  on 
any  man  to  say  of  him,  that  for  his  sake  the  whole  land  enjoyed  the  inestimable 
blessings  of  peace  for  so  long  a  period.  Such  was  the  honour  put  on  him  by 
Divine  Providence.  For  doubtless  there  were  many  secret  causes  of  provoca- 
tion among  all  the  tribes,  during  the  most  of  that  period.  Idolatry  was  the 
besetting  sin  everywhere,  and,  but  for  the  strong  influence  of  Gideon's  name, 
it  must  have  broken  out  publicly  in  not  a  few  places.  Gideon,  too,  was  ever 
thought  of  as  the  Jerubbaal— the  conqueror  and  adversary  of  Baal,  and  this 
must  have  done  much  to  keep  back  the  rising  tide  of  idol  worship,  and  so  to 
ward  off  the  Divine  judgments.  He  lived  in  his  own  house  in  peace,  for  so  long 
a  time,  and  the  land  had  no  special  troubles  for  his  sake. 

407 


CHAP.  vin.  EOMILETIC  COMMENIARY:  JUDGES, 


4.  He  was  blessed  with  long  life—"  died  in  a  good  old  age." 

This  phrase,  which  is  used  also  of  Abraham  (Gen.  xxv.  8)  and  of  David 
(1  Chron.  xxix.  28),  and  the  similar  phrase  "full  of  days"  which  is  spoken  of 
Job  (ell a]),  xlii.  17),  implies  that  the  man  who  saw  such  a  length  of  days  was 
visibly  blessed  of  God.  In  that  age,  when  God  taught  his  peo})le  so  much  by 
emblems,  there  was  a  deeper  significance  in  the  enjoynient  of  temporal  prosperity 
as  the  sign  of  the  Divine  favour,  than  there  is  now  under  the  Disi)ensation  of 
the  S])irit.  In  nearly  all  the  descriptions  given  of  the  manner  in  which  God 
will  bless  the  man  whom  He  loves,  it  is  the  language  of  temporal  blessing  that 
is  used.  In  Job  v.  26,  the  man  who  submits  to  God's  correction,  after 
experiencing  many  deliverances  from  God's  gracious  hand,  is  promised  that  at 
last  he  "  will  come  to  his  grave  in  a  full  age,  like  as  a  shock  of  corn  cometh  in 
his  season."  And  among  the  numerous  proofs  of  the  Divine  favour,  which  are 
promised  to  the  man  who  makes  choice  of  God  as  his  own  God,  and  looks  to 
Him  as  his  refuge,  the  list  closes  with  the  blessing  of  long  life  (Ps.  xci.  16). 
The  mere  prolongation  of  life  itself  is  a  natural  blessing,  but  it  is  chiefly  of 
value  when  it  is  given  as  a  mark  of  the  Divine  favour. 

It  cannot  indeed  now  be  predicted  with  the  same  definiteness,  as  in  the  days 
when  the  teaching  of  the  Church  was  by  symbols,  that  external  prosperity,  or 
the  'prolongation  of  life,  is  an  indication  of  the  Divine  favour  to  the  possessor 
above  other  men  ;  indeed,  it  is  one  of  the  mysteries  of  Divine  Providence,  that 
the  way  of  the  wicked  prospers  more  frequently  than  that  of  the  righteous, 
though  not  so  much  in  the  matter  of  long  life,  as  in  that  of  external  prosperity. 
But  that  the  righteous  have  immensely  the  advantage,  both  from  the  nature  of 
the  case,  and  from  the  assurances  of  Scripture,  is  clear.  The  righteous  have 
always  God's  blessing  with  their  portion,  which,  even  if  that  be  small,  it  will 
yield  more  real  enjoyment,  than  would  a  princely  fortune  to  the  man  on  whom 
God  frowned  (Ps.  xxxvii.  16,  11,  25,  &c.).  In  Isa.  Ixv.  20,  we  have  a  remark- 
able statement  respecting  long  life  as  a  sure  indication  of  the  Divine  favour, 
implying  that  when  God  ri-es  up  to  bless  His  Church,  there  will  no  longer  be 
persons  who  have  only  an  infant's  age,  nor  any  man  called  "  old,"  who  has  not 
filled  up  the  days  of  an  old  man  (such  will  be  the  care  which  God  in  His 
Providence  will  exercise  over  him) ;  for  he  who  will  be  reckoned  only  a  child 
in  those  days  will  really  have  lived  100  years,  and  the  sinful  man  who  dies  at 
the  early  age  of  100  years  will  be  reckoned  accursed  of  God,  for  not  having 
nearly  reached  what  shall  then  be  the  common  limit  of  life.  An  eminent 
thinker  defines  the  word  ''sinner,"  to  mean,  one  who  misses  the  mark,  and 
translates  the  last  line  of  the  verse  thus :  *'  He  who  misses  the  mark  of  100 
years,  will  be  reckoned  accursed  of  God,"  because  his  life  will  appear  cut 
short,  so  that  he  does  not  live  half  his  days. 

5.  The  good  man's  grievous  errors.  However  bright  the  name  of  Gideon, 
though  it  shines  as  a  star  of  the  first  magnitude  in  the  Old  Testament  sky,  it 
is  not  without  its  spots  (Eccl.  vii.  20).  The  Bible  good  man  is,  in  this  world, 
one  who  was  originally  a  bad  man,  now  in  process  of  being  made  good.  God 
Himself  is  the  worker  ;  the  means  employed  are  of  His  choosing,  and  the  work 
wdll  in  due  time  be  made  perfect,  but  as  yet  it  is  only  in  process.  Hence  the 
struggles  of  the  "  old  man"  with  the  ''new  man,"  and  the  strivings  of  the 
"  Spirit  against  the  flesh"  (see  Gal.  v.  17  ;  Eph.  iv.  22-24).  The  extinguishing 
of  human  depravity  in  any  human  heart  is  not  effected  instantaneously,  but  is 
a  gradual  operation.  Hence  the  j)roper  light  in  which  to  look  at  any  good 
man  is  not  to  regard  him  as  of  a  different  mould  from  other  men,  or  taken  from 
a  different  stock,  but  to  regard  any  spiritual  excellence  of  character  which  he 
has  above  other  men,  as  wholly  due  to  the  grace  of  God  working  in  him. 

408 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES,  OHap.  vin. 


Gideon  was  guilty  of  the  sin  so  common  in  his  time  of  polygamy,  *'  He  had 
luany  wives."  This  was  a  distinct  violation  of  the  law  of  marriage  even  by  the 
light  of  nature  (Gen.  ii.  22,  24  ;  Mai.  ii.  14,  13),  and  more  emphatically  by  the 
light  of  the  written  law  of  Moses  (Ex.  xx.  14).  But  there  was  so  much  fog  in 
the  atmosphere  of  those  days,  before  the  glorious  sun  had  risen  in  the  sky,  that 
men  could  but  dimly  read  the  meaning  of  heaven's  laws.  Thus,  surrounded  by 
the  corrupt  practices  of  every  other  community  on  earth,  even  some  of  the  best 
of  God's  people  gave  way  before  the  evil  example  (1  Cor.  xv.  33).  But  the 
light  of  those  times  being  small  relatively,  certain  evil  practices  were  not 
condemned  so  strongly  as  they  are  in  the  clearer  light  of  gospel  times 
(Matt.  V.  31,  32).  It  is  said  with  regard  to  many  points  of  conduct,  "The 
times  of  this  ignorance  God  winked  at  "—passed  over.  The  sins  were  seen,  were 
hated,  were  condemned,  but  God  did  not  in  many  cases  execute  the  sentence 
they  deserved.  Yet  sin  in  every  case,  and  in  every  age,  is  condemned  by  God 
quite  as  much  among  His  own  people,  and  even  more,  than  among  others 
(see  on  this  whole  subject  pp.  322-4). 

Gideon  allied  himself  with  a  Canaanitish  family .  The  maidservant  whom  he 
married,  of  the  house  of  Shechem,  appears  to  have  belonged  to  the  idolatrous 
portion  of  that  clan  (see  v.  31  ;  ix.  18,  &c.)  This  was  the  sin  which  had  been 
forbidden  more  expressly  than  any  other,  and  which  led  to  many  a  dark  day  in 
the  homes  of  Israel  (Ex.  xxxiv.  16  ;  Deut.  vii.  3,  4 ;  Jud.  iii.  6,  7).  Bitter  con- 
sequences also  came  down  on  Gideon's  house,  as  the  sequel  will  show. 

Gideon  made  an  ephod  and  put  it  in  his  city,  as  a  point  of  worship  for  the 
people.  We  have  already  spoken  of  this,  and  pronounced  it  an  error  of  judg- 
ment, rather  than  of  ititention.  He  had  not,  so  far  as  appears,  the  most  remote 
intention  of  encouraging  idolatry.  That  was  at  the  very  antipodes  of  his 
thoughts  and  wishes.  But  as  Shiloh,  the  only  centre  for  the  worship  of  Israel's 
God  in  the  land,  was  in  the  tribe  of  Ephraim,  and  as  the  Ephraimites  had 
already  shown  themselves  so  sensitive  in  their  dealings,  both  with  himself  and 
with  the  men  of  Manasseh,  he  was  apprehensive  lest,  on  the  occasion  of  one  or 
other  of  the  frequent  visits  that  might  be  made,  from  persons  of  his  own  and 
other  tribes  in  the  north,  to  Shiloh,  some  spark  might  kindle  a  flame  of  resent- 
ment, which  would  both  put  an  end  to  the  worship,  and  envelope  the  country  in 
civil  war.  There  was  the  greater  reason  to  fear  this,  that  Ephraim  contained 
such  large  numbers  of  the  idolatrous  classes.  The  intention,  here,  we  believe, 
was  only  for  good,  for  Gideon  was  eminently  a  man  of  peace,  and  had  already 
shown  tliat  he  could  make  large  sacrifices  to  avoid  a  quarrel  with  brethren. 

But  he  was  in  serious  error.  He  tried  to  do  a  right  thing  in  a  wrong  way. 
God  had  already  appointed  the  place  of  His  worship,  and  also  the  men  who 
should  minister  to  Him  in  the  service.  And  not  even  a  Gideon  durst  interfere 
to  make  any  alteration  on  it  before  Him.  If  such  dangers  as  Gideon  feared 
actually  existed,  Jehovah  was  well  able  to  take  care  of  his  own  service.  But 
this  God-fearing  man  thought  that,  as  he  had  already  been  taken  into  the 
service  of  Jehovah,  he  was  not  acting  presumptuously  now  in  wearing  the 
priest's  ephod,  or  working  dress,  and  so  per^^onating  that  official  in  his  office. 
But  he  had  received  no  call  to  enter  into  that  office,  though  on  one  occasion  he 
was  specially  called  to  erect  an  altar  and  offer  sacrifice  (ch.  vi.  25,  &c.).  It  was 
therefore  a  false  step.  What  keeps  everything  right  in  the  matters  of  God,  i^ 
to  act  implicitly  at  His  command.  In  place  of  this,  Gideon  now  acted  according 
to  his  own  judgment.  Evil  results  followed.  The  first  step  taken  being  wrong, 
another  and  another  went  further  from  the  line  of  duty,  until  at  last  the  people 
fell  into  the  old  pit  of  idolatry — the  very  last  thing  which  the  good  man  who 
took  the  first  false  step  ever  dreamt  of. 

When  Epicurus,  the  founder  of  the  celebrated  school,  made  his  summum 
honum  consist  of  that  which  ministered  best  for  pleasure,  he  little  imagined  to 

409 


CHAP.  DC  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   JUDGES. 


what  lengths  of  impurity  and  bestiality,  many  of  his  disciples  would  carry  his 
system.  Neither  did  Socinus  seem  to  realise  at  first,  how  far  the  doctrine 
or  principle  would  carry  him,  of  making  reason,  the  judge  of  everything  tlie 
Bible  declared  about  God.  And  all  through  Church  History  especially,  we  have 
many  warnings  not  to  trust  to  human  reason,  when  it  would  determine  for 
itself  in  the  face  of  any  commandment  of  the  Lord. 

Yet,  with  all  these  serious  drawbacks,  there  are  so  many  elements  of  excellence 
in  Gideons  character,  that  it  shines  resplendent  on  the  page  of  Scripture  history, 
and  is  remembered  down  to  New  Testament  times,  where  again  it  is  taken  up 
(Heb  xi.  32,  &c.)j  and  held  up  as  a  bright  picture  to  be  looked  at  to  the  end  of 
time.  From  the  days  of  Joshua  to  those  of  Samuel,  no  such  full  account  is 
given  of  any  other  of  Israel's  heroes.  Through  the  long  decline  of  a  green 
old  age,  he  is  continually  pointed  to,  as  he  goes  out  and  in  among  the  people, 
as  Jerubbaal,  the  man  who  dared  to  fight  and  was  able  to  conquer  Baal.  And 
when  he  dies  at  last,  it  is  when  the  field  has  long  been  clear  of  enemies,  and 
when  he  is  surrounded  only  by  friends.  Amid  the  regrets  of  all,  with  the 
blessings  of  love  poured  on  his  head,  and  the  gifts  of  honour  laid  on  his  bier,  he 
is  put  into  his  father's  sepulchre,  and  laid  in  the  family  vault,  leaving  his 
praises  to  be  sung,  and  his  example  to  be  followed,  by  many  in  every  home  of 
the  land  he  loved  so  well. 

N.B. —  We  have  now  reached  that  stage  in  our  remarks  on  the  matter  of  this 
Book,  that  we  have  practically  discussed  all  the  more  important  principles  it 
contains,  so  that  in  what  follows  it  is  not  necessary  that  our  comments  should  be 
otherwise  than  hri^,  and  that  frequent  references  be  made  to  the  thoughts 
already  given. 


TEE  PREFACE  TO  CHAPTER  IX. 
Chap.  VIII.,  33-35. 


1.  The  immediate  result  of  Gideon's  death.  This  might  be  expressed  in  one 
short  line.  The  people  relapsed  into  idolatry.  Notwithstanding  all  the  long- 
continued  lesson  read  to  them  by  that  splendid  career,  and  notwithstanding  all 
the  warnings  of  the  past,  and  the  terrible  seasons  of  chastisement  they  had 
come  through,  tliey  still  spring  anew  to  that  sin,  the  moment  that  tlie  hand  that 
kept  them  back  from  it  is  removed.  The  good  judge  is  dead,  and  Israel  fly  to 
their  idols,  is  the  purport  of  the  story.  {See  the  character  of  the  unteachable 
heart,  and  God's  dealings  with  it,  on  pp.  311-318  ;  also  186,  189-192.)  This 
is  instructive. 

(1.)  It  showed  that  their  previous  penitence  wanted  root  Impressions,  how- 
ever strong,  made  on  the  human  heart  will  not  last,  unless  they  take  root  in 
the  understanding,  the  affections,  and  the  will. 

(2.)  The  sin  of  worshipping  other  objects  in  place  of  God  is  a  passion  with  the 
depraved  human  heart. 

(3.)  Inveterate  sin  is  without  shame.     Therefore  it  loses  self-respect, 

(4.)  It  is  blind,  and  regardless  of  consequences. 

(5.)  If  not  arrested,  it  leads  to  sudden  destruction.    (Pro v.  xxix.  1.) 

In  this  case,  happily,  the  covenant  stood  between  them  and  that. 

2.  The  people's  ingratitude  to  both  God  and  man.  (1.)  It  springs  from 
want  of  consideration.    How  often  does  God  complain,  "  My  people  do  not 

410 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES.  chap.  ix. 


consider  ?  "  **  They  are  sottish  children — a  people  of  no  understanding." 
There  is  no  weighing  of  claims,  or  taking  serious  facts  into  account. 

(2.)  It  implies  deadness  of  heart.  The  motives  on  God's  side  towards  all 
His  creatures  are  so  strong,  that  if  there  be  any  sensibility  left  in  the  heart  at 
all,  there  must  be  some  emotion  awakened.  That  there  should  be  none,  implies 
the  loss  of  the  capacity  for  feeling. 

(3.)  It  implies  aggravated  guilt.  How  offensive  such  a  spectacle  before  a 
holy  God.  That  such  a  worthless  object  should  be  embraced,  a  piece  of  dead 
matter,  a  thing  made  by  its  own  worshipper,  and  an  object  surrounded  with 
every  possible  vile  association,  that  such  an  object  should  be  preferred  as  a  thing 
to  be  embraced  and  worshipped  instead  of  the  true  and  holy  Jehovah,  is  indeed 
fitted  to  bring  down  some  awful  manifestation  of  the  Divine  anger. 


CHAPTER  IX. 

ABIMELECH    MADE    KINO. 

Verses  1-21. 

Critical  Notes. — ^1.  And  Abimelecli.]  Some  little  time  may  have  elapsed  after  Gideon's 
death,  so  that  the  air  was  again  filled  with  tendencies  to  idolatry.  Before  certain  acts  can  be 
done,  the  times  must  be  ripe  for  them.  Abi  signifies  "my  father,"  3/cZec^ '*  a  king."  The 
name  was  probably  given  by  the  mother,  who  was  probably  a  woman  of  energetic  or  aspiring 
spirit,  if  it  is  her  character  that  we  see  reflected  in  her  son.  Probably,  being  an  only  son,  she 
wished  to  make  the  most  of  the  situation  for  him  ;  and  as  her  husband,  though  not  dejure,  was 
yet  de  facto  king  over  the  land,  she  determined  to  keep  this  fact  as  a  mark  before  the  eyes  of 
her  son  day  by  day  in  his  being  always  addressed  by  the  words,  "  My  father  was  a  king." 

Son  of  Jernbbaal.]  How  strange  1  that  the  man  who  earned  the  proud  title  of  being  the 
destroyer  of  Baal,  should  have  a  son  who  promised  to  be  the  most  zealous  supporter  of  Baal's 
interests  in  the  land  ! 

"Went  to  Shechem.]  A  historical  city,  and  one  of  the  chief  cities  of  Ephraim,  from  its  central 
position  and  the  many  attractions  of  its  situation.  Here  God  first  appeared  to  Abraham  when 
he  arrived  in  Canaan,  and  here  Abraham  first  raised  the  altar  (Gen.  xii.)  ;  near  this  both 
Abraham  and  Jacob  lie  buried  ;  between  the  two  hills  on  which  the  city  was  built  all  Israel 
were  assembled  to  hear  the  law  read,  in  its  blessings  and  curses,  when  they  first  entered  the 
land  of  promise  ;  here  Israel's  greatest  captain  most  solemnly  called  on  the  people  to  stand 
firm  by  their  covenant  with  Jehovah  with  his  dying  breath  ;  and  this  was  the  place,  and  the 
well  of  Sychar  the  spot,  where  the  Saviour's  ever  memorable  conversation  with  the  woman  of 
Samaria  took  place.     It  is  one  of  the  oldest  towns  of  Palestine. 

The  house  of  his  mother's  father]  Blood  is  thicker  than  water.  Abimelech  reckoned  it 
better  to  have  a  surrounding  of  relatives  than  of  general  acquaintances. 

2.  Men  of  Shechem.  Not  the  inhabitants  generally,  but  the  leading  men — "*  7VI3,  the  heads, 
those  who  had  a  standing  in  the  town,  either  as  regards  property  and  therefore  owners,  or  as 
regards  guildry  and  so  citizens — the  guildry  or  burgesses.  Hence  we  read  elsewhere  of  "the 
men  of  Jericho,"  "  the  men  of  Keilah,"  etc.  Or  the  reference  may  be  to  the  Israelites,  as 
opposed  to  the  Canaanites. 

Beign  over  you.  He  assumes  that  the  people  wished  some  one  to  be  their  king,  and  also 
that  the  thirst  for  mle  was  in  the  breasts  of  all  Gideon's  sons  as  well  as  in  his  own. 

I  am  your  bone  and  your  flesh.]  This  is  a  subtle  argument ;  it  implies  two  things— (1)  that 
he  was  of  the  same  kindred  with  them  (Gen.  xxix.  14,  2  Sam.  vi.),  but  also  (2)  "I  have 
Ephraimite  blood  flowing  in  my  veins,  so  that  if  you  elect  me  to  be  king  you  will  be  giving 
Ephraim  the  sovereignty,  and  Manasseh  shall  no  longer  role.  Shechem  will  be  the  royal  city, 
and  Orphah  will  be  eclipsed." 

411 


CHAP.  n.  nOMlLETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES, 


3  For  they  said,  "He  is  our  brother."!  Abimelech  had  read  well  the  dominating  sentiment 
in  the  hearts  of  his  people,  for  the  bait  at  once  took.  They  knew  that  the  story  about  the 
brothers  wishing  to  reign  over  them  was  false,  but  the  pill  was  too  temptingly  gilded  to  be 
refused.     They  raised  the  shout  at  once  for  Abimelech, 

4.  70  pieces  of  silver]  or  shekels — the  shekel  being  two  shillings  of  our  money.  This  was  all 
the  price  at  which  each  head  of  Gideon's  sons  was  valued  !  The  money  was  given  by  the 
worshippers  of  Baal-berith,  and  doubtless  was  given  willin^^ly,  when  it  was  hinted  that  the  use 
to  be  made  of  it  was  to  destroy  utterly  the  house  of  liim  who  had  destroyed  Baal.  Temple 
treasures  were  indeed  often  applied  to  political  purposes  \^Bertheau\.  I  Kings  xv.  18  ;  II  Kings 
xviii.  16-16.     Small  sum  indeed,  yet  such  soldiers  might  be  got  for  trifling  wages. 

Vain  and  light  persons]  Vain  means  either  those  who  -were  fond  of  dash  and  show,  like 
Absalom's  fifty  men,  who  ran  before  him  (II  Sam.  xvi),  men  who  would  not  bear  the  yoke  of 
any  steady  employment  in  the  oecupatiens  of  life,  or  men  of  no  worth  of  character,  and  kept 
lounging  about  ready  for  any  dark  or  foul  deed  that  might  come  in  their  way.  Lujht  persons 
of  no  principle  or  conscience,  unscrupulous  desperadoes.  These  are  sometimes  called  "Men 
of  Belial "  (II  Sam.  xx.  i ;  I  Kings  xxi.  10). 

5.  Slew  his  brethr«  n]  in  cold  blood.  They  had  committed  no  crime,  but  the  usurper  feared 
lest  they  should  one  day  disturb  him  in  his  unlawful  possession  of  the  throne.  Thus  did 
Jehoram,  the  unworthy  son  of  the  good  Jehosaphat  (II  Chron.  xxi.  4).  So  did  Jehu  to  the 
70  sons  of  Ahab  (II  Kings  x.  7),  Athaliah  to  the  seed  royal  of  Judah  (II  Kings  xi.  1),  Baasha 
to  the  house  of  Jeroboam  (I  Kings  xv.  29),  and  Zimri  to  the  house  of  Baasha  (I  Kings 
xvi.  11,  12).  Timour,  on  his  conquest  of  Persia,  destroyed  the  whole  male  family  of  the  king. 
At  the  conquest  of  Bagdad  he  is  said  to  have  made  a  pyramid  of  90,000  human  heads.  Even 
in  modern  Persia,  it  is  said,  until  quite  of  late,  to  have  been  the  custom  for  the  new  king  either 
to  kill,  or  to  put  out  the  eyes  of  all  his  brothers  and  near  male  relatives.  Abimelech  did  indeed 
live  in  a  barbarous  age,  and  a  sterner  code  prevailed  then  than  now,  yet  we  dare  not  do  less  tlian 
brand  his  conduct  on  this  occasion  as  the  atrocious  act  of  an  inhuman  monster.  Dim  as  was 
the  light  which  the  Israelitish  religion  shed  on  the  value  of  human  life  compared  with  that 
which  we  now  enjoy,  it  was  suffio-ient  to  te.ich  its  worshippers  to  ostracise  such  a  man,  and  put 
him  beyond  the  pale  of  human  fellowship.  Tliis  system  of  wholesale  murder  of  the  innocents 
is  one  of  the  natural  results  of  polygamy,  and  the  lust  of  power. 

6.  House  of  Millo]  not  family  as  some  make  it,  \>\\\.  forlre^n.  It  was  in  fact  a  large  rampart 
or  castle.  Its  wa' Is  were  filled  in  with  st  >nes  and  earth.  We  hear  of  something  similar  in 
2  Sam.  V.  9,  also  1  Kings  ix.  15,  24  ;  2  Kings  xii.  20  (see  also  ver.  46).  The  house  of  Millo, 
means  probably  those  who  garrisoned  the  fortress. 

Gathered  together  and  made  Abimelech  king.  J    The  ruling  class  in  Shechem,  or  the  citizens, 

and  those  who  belonged  to  the  fortress,  assembled.  We  hear  of  no  dissentients,  though  such  a 
dark  tragedy  had  just  been  perpetrated,  but,  on  the  contrary,  this  assembly  are  unanimous  in 
electing  the  man  whose  hands  were  reeking  with  the  blood  of  so  many  of  his  brethren  to  be  their 
king,  that  is  to  occupy  the  most  exalted  post  of  hfmour  they  could  give  him.  What  a  picture  of 
the  times  in  even  God's  Israel !  If  anything  could  add  to  the  frightful  depravity  of  this  whole 
transaction,  it  is  to  be  told,  that  all  this  happened  on,  or  around,  the  spot  where  stood  the  oak 
of  the  'pillar  (not  "  the  plain  of  the  pillar  ")  or  monumental  stone  under  the  oak,  which  Joshua 
set  up  as  a  witness  of  the  solemn  covenant,  which  the  people  entered  into  to  take  Jehovah  alone 
to  be  their  God  (Josh.  xxiv.  1,  26,  27—  comp.  also  Gen.  xxv.  4).  As  to  the  custom  of  holding 
councils  under  wide-spreading  oaks  in  olden  times,  see  Pict.  Bible  in  loco.  That  the  men  of 
Shechem  aided  Abimelech  in  this  slaughter  of  Gideon's  family  is  manifest  from  ver.  24. 

7.  On  the  top  of  Mount  Gerizim.]  This  hill  stood  on  the  south-west  side  of  Shechem  as  a 
huge  rock,  about  800  feet  above  the  valley  below.  The  town,  however,  was  not  built  at  the 
bottom  of  the  valley,  but  on  one  of  the  sh  uklers  of  the  hill,  and  therefore  not  ^so  far  di.trvnt, 
but  that  a  person  speaking  from  the  top  of  the  rock  might  be  heard  by  those  in  the  town. 
The  facilities  for  a  person  being  heard,  who  might  speak  from  the  height  to  those  below,  were 
greatly  increased  by  the  fact,  that  there  was  another  rock-hill  immediately  opposite,  called 
Mount  Ebal,  which  threw  back  the  sound  and  sent  it  downwards  (see  Pict.  Bible).  (1  Sam. 
xxvi.  13  ;  2  Sam.  ii.  25,  26.) 

Jotham  was  told  all  that  had  taken  place.  The  cruel  blow  aimed  at  Gideon  s  house  called 
forth  no  protest.  It  was  clear  that  Israel  had  fallen  again  into  an  idolatrous  stupor.  Every 
nerve  of  gratitude  was  deadened.  Steps  were  taken  to  make  the  usurper  king.  He  has  only  a 
few  spirits  left  who  are  likeminded  with  himself,  but  the  spirit  of  his  father  is  still  in  him. 
The  instinct  of  self-preservation  is  strong  in  him,  but  he  will  speak  one  firm  and  faithful  word 
era  he  disappear  from  view.  He  chooses  bis  time  and  place— the  rock  Gerizim,  and  the 
412 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES,  ohap.  a. 


coronation-day  of  Abimelech.  There,  as  the  impersonation  of  conscience,  he  suddenly  appears 
to  the  masses  below  to  warn  them  of  the  heavy  retribution,  which  euch  high-handed  sins  must 
bring  down  on  their  heads  at  no  distant  day.  The  speaker  appeared,  probably,  on  some  projecting 
crag,  near  enough  to  be  heard,  j'et  distant  enough  to  be  not  easily  caught.  The  fact  that  he 
was  supposed  to  be  killed,  while  now  he  appears  suddenly  with  a  message  of  vengeance  on  his 
lips,  at  the  supreme  moment  of  the  coronation,  must  have  staggered  all  but  the  conscience- 
hardened  in  that  guilty  multitude. 

This  address  ought  to  be  called  a  fable,  not  a  parable,  for  that  never  transgresses  the  limits 
of  actual  occurrences.  [Douglas.]  It  is  the  oldest  of  all  known  fables,  and  was  spoken  700  years 
before  the  days  of  ^sop,  the  most  ancient  of  heathen  fabulists.  A  similar  one,  though  more 
brief,  occurs  in  2  Kings  xiv.  9.  Compare  also  the  Agrippan  fable,  in  Livy,  Book  2,  chap.  30,  as 
to  the  rebellion  of  the  members  of  the  body  against  the  belly.  Of  parables  there  are  examples 
in  1  Kings  xx.  39,  40,  and  especially  2  Sam.  xii.  1-4  ;  and  xiv.  5-11.  This  was  the  most  ancient 
instruction  of  any,  for  oftentimes  it  was  only  in  this  veiled  form  that  wholesome  truths  could  be 
conveyed  to  the  ears  of  men  of  power,  or  those  of  the  unreasoning  multitude.  Evils  were  thus 
reproved,  and  the  multitude  was  admonished. 

In  this  fable  two  things  are  put  in  contrast,  and  thus  a  severe  censure  is  passed  on  the  conduct 
of  both  Abimelech  and  his  friends.  The  high  character  of  Gideon's  sons  who  had  been  slain, 
and  the  strong  pretensions  they  might  have  put  forward,  while  yet  they  stood  quietly  in  the 
background,  are  contrasted  with  the  rough  character  and  worthless  pretensions  of  the 
illegiiimate  son. 

Jotham  we  lielieve  spoke  this  message  from  God,  so  that  we  are  to  regard  it  as  the  fruit  of 
Divine  inspiration  (see  Adam  Clarke  at  end  of  chap,  ix  ;  see  also  Dr»  Caa$el  on  chap.  ix). 

8.  The  trees  went  forth.]  This  states  the  matter  in  hand.  The  trees  are  supposed  to  want  a 
king,  and  tliey  go  first  to  those  that  might  respectably  wear  the  dignity  of  the  office.  They 
begin  with  the  olive,  but  the  olive  declines. 

9.  My  fatness  .   ,   .  they  honour  God  and  man.]  It  has  excellent  qualities,  the  one  specially 

referred  to  here  being  its  oil-producing  power.  This  oil  is  used  to  consecrate  both  kings  and 
piiests  ;  it  also  feeds  the  light  that  burns  in  the  sanctuary  of  God.  Thus  it  honours  both  God 
and  man.  Its  leaf  and  branch  are  also  signs  of  reconciliation  and  peace.  Strong  are  the  claims 
of  the  olive  to  reign,  but  it  aspires  not  to  that  distinction.  "Should  I  give  up  my  vocation  in 
bearing  oil,  that  I  might  wave  over  the  trees  ) " 

11.  Promoted  over  the  trees.]  The  fig-tree  is  also  invited  and  also  declines.  The  word  •*  pro- 
moted "  means  to  shake,  or  be  shaken.  It  seems  to  refer  to  the  instability  of  royalty  or  worldly 
greatness,  and  the  many  cares  and  distractions  that  attend  ii, 

13.  That  cheereth  God  and  man.]  This  is  hyperbolical  language.  The  wine  may  be  said 
to  give  delight  to  God,  because  He  was  always  well  pleased  with  the  offerings  of  His  people 
when  they  were  presented  in  a  right  spirit,  and  in  the  appointed  way.  The  hin  of  wine  as 
a  drink-offering  came  up  with  a  sweet  savour  unto  the  Lord  (Num.  xv.  7,  10).  The  purport 
of  these  verses  is,  that  should  these  trees — the  olive,  the  fig,  and  the  vine— comply  with  the 
request  made,  and  occupy  themselves  with  waving  their  branches  over  the  other  trees,  it 
would  take  them  away  from  the  far  more  useful  occupation  of  producing  oil,  and  figs,  and 
grapes. 

14.  The  bramble.]  The  largest  of  thorns,  with  dreadful  spikes  like  darts.  It  bears  no 
fruit,  has  no  leaves,  and  casts  no  shadow  under  which  one  might  shelter  himself  from  the 
burning  heat  of  the  sun.  It  is  indeed  not  a  tree,  but  a  mere  shrub,  prickly,  barren,  base, 
and  good  for  nothing,  save  to  bum  or  kindle  a  fire.  It  is  the  symbol  of  a  worthless  man, 
who  lives  only  to  do  harm.  At  the  moment  that  Jotham  was  speakini;,  these  trees  filled 
the  valley  in  profusion,  and  the  brambles  in  large  numbers  were  climbing  up  among  tha 
rocks. 

15.  The  thomhnsh  said  to  the  trees,  etc.]  Thorns  easily  catch  fire.  If  you  do  truly  anoint 
me  to  be  your  king,  then  put  your  trust  in  my  shadow.  Spoken  ironically,  for  shadow  it  has 
none.  It  refers  to  the  hard  character  of  Abimelech's  rule.  It  must  be  a  real  submission. 
If  not,  the  alternative  will  be  that  the  bramble  shall  set  fire  to  the  other  trees,  not  even 
excepting  the  noblest  of  them  all — the  cedars  of  Lebanon.  For  the  most  worthless  man  can  do 
much  harm  to  the  most  distinguished.     He  will  have  no  mercy  on  rebels. 

16  If  ye  have  done  truly  and  sincerely,  etc.]  Acted  honestly  and  fairly  with  Jerubbaal  and 
his  house,  then  take  your  fill  of  joy  over  your  newly  made  kin<^,  though  it  is  only  a  thornbujah  you 
have  gut.     This  u  huX  with  a  cauutic  irony  and  also  with  a  bitter  personal  grief. 

413 


CHAP,  IX.  HOMILMTW  COMMENTARY i   JUDGES, 


20«  But  if  not.]  If  you  have  not  acted  fairly  and  properly  by  that  house,  then,  as  a  righteous 
consequence,  let  fire  break  out  between  you  mutually,  from  Abimelech  to  devour  the  men  of 
Shechem  and  from  these  again  to  destroy  Abimelech.  There  is  a  recompense  which  is  meet  for 
compacts  which  are  entered  into  over  falsehood,  robbery,  the  shedding  of  innocent  blood,  and 
the  exalting  of  false  gods  to  the  place  of  the  true  and  only  Jehovah. 

21.  Beer.]  A  place  supposed  to  have  been  in  the  tribe  of  Benjamin.  Jothamis  not  heard  of  more, 
but  his  words  now  spoken  will  not  die  till  the  end  of  time.  It  was  something  of  the  spirit  of  his 
father  that  spoke  in  him.  How  truly  his  words  came  to  pass,  the  parties  concerned  ou  both 
sides  knew  to  their  dire  experience,  ere  they  were  three  years  older.  Abimelech  began  his  reign, 
not  on  principles  of  truth  and  honour,  justice  and  uprightness,  but  with  open  rebellion  against 
Israel's  Divine  King,  with  assassination  of  those  he  was  bound  most  sacredly  to  love,  and  with 
the  hxed  resolution  to  gain  his  own  aggrandisement  at  whatever  cost  or  ruin  to  those  around 
him.    With  such  a  beginning,  the  end  must  be  truly  disastrous ;  nor  was  it  long  delayed. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS.— Verses  1-21. 
TEE  ELECTION  OF  THE   USURPER  TO  BE  KINQ. 
Z.  Contrasts  In  the  history  of  God's  own  people. 

This  chapter,  though  a  long  one,  contains  a  miserable  history.  Apart  from 
names,  it  looks  like  the  career  of  a  roving  bandit,  who,  setting  the  laws  of  God 
and  man  alike  at  defiance,  could  commit  with  cool  barbarity  the  most  unnatural 
crimes,  to  gratify  an  inordinate  lust  of  power.  Yet  the  first  line  reminds  us  that 
Abimelech,  the  actor  in  this  tragedy,  was  the  son  of  Jerubbaal.  Wliat  a  de- 
plorable sequel  to  the  glorious  sun-setting  recorded  at  the  close  of  the  previous 
chapter  !  Tlie  "  gold  has  become  dim  indeed,  and  the  most  fine  gold  is  changed." 
As  the  gloomiest  of  nights  sometimes  follows  the  brightest  of  days,  so  does  the 
short  and  reckless  career  of  this  unprincipled  young  man  follow  the  long  and 
honourable  course  of  life  of  Israel's  greatest  hero.  In  passing  from  the  one 
chapter  to  the  other,  it  seems  as  if  we  had  dropped  all  at  once,  from  the  highest 
pinnacle  of  Solomon's  temple,  which  overlooked  all  the  glories  of  that  matchless 
building,  and  had  fallen  down  among  the  dead  bones,  the  disgusting  offal,  and 
many  abominations  of  the  valley  of  Hinnom,  which  required  the  constant  action 
of  fire  to  prevent  the  atmosphere  from  being  poisoned. 

Striking  contrasts  occur  also  at  different  intervals  in  the  history  of  this  people, 
both  before  and  after  this  period.  One  occurs  in  comparing  the  generation  that 
conquered  Canaan  under  Joshua,  in  the  exercise  of  a  strong  faith  in  their 
covenant  God,  with  the  degenerate  generation  of  their  descendants,  who  could 
not  drive  out  the  Canaanites,  from  the  want  of  that  faith,  but  permitted  them 
to  dwell  among  them,  and,  ere  long,  they  intermarried  with  the  idolaters,  and 
became  as  they  were.  We  have  another  case,  in  the  few  thousands  who  followed 
the  guilty  king  of  Israel,  trembling  through  the  land  in  the  days  of  Saul,  com- 
pared with  the  lion-like  host  that  gathered  around  David  shortly  afterwards, 
and  went  on  conquering  and  to  conquer. 

The  contrast  of  such  a  history  as  that  of  Abimelech  following  that  of  so 
excellent  a  man  as  Gideon,  teaches  several  lessons,  such  as — 

(1.)  It  was  a  punishment  on  the  people  for  their  misimprovement  of  so  just  a 
rule  as  that  of  Gideon.  To  have  had  such  a  man  bearing  rule  among  them, 
and  placed  at  the  top  of  society  for  so  long  a  time,  was  a  great  privilege  con- 
ferred by  the  God  of  Providence  on  His  chosen  people.  But  they  seem  to  have 
had  no  eye  to  see  the  Divine  mercy  extended  to  them.  They  did  not  realise 
that  there  was  any  favour  being  shown  to  them  ;  when  at  last  God  withdrew  His 
Gideon,  and  sent  them  an  Abimelech.  Between  these  the  people  soon  found,  to 
their  bitter  experience,  there  was  the  difference  between  an  angel  of  light,  and  a 
demon  of  darkness. 
414 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES,  chap.  ix. 


(2.)  7 he  thoroughly  corrupt  state  of  the  people  of  God  apart  from  renewing 
grace,  Israel  was  really  no  better  in  character  before  God  than  the  members  of 
any  other  nation.  "  By  nature  they,  too,  were  children  of  wrath,  even  as  others." 
There  was  "in  them  the  same  evil  heart  of  unbeh'ef,  departing  from  the  living 
God."  The  renewing  grace  of  God  alone  made  the  difference.  "  What,  then? 
Are  we  better  than  they  ?  No,  in  no  wise ;  for  we  have  already  proved,  both 
Jews  and  Gentiles,  that  they  are  all  under  sin."  {Bee  also  Eph.  ii.  3.)  It  was 
but  a  few  centuries  before  this  when  Job  wrote  these  words,  "  Who  can  bring  a 
clean  thing  out  of  an  unclean  ?  Not  one."  And  Bildad  responded,  "  How  can 
man  be  justified  with  God  ?  or  how  can  he  be  clean  that  is  born  of  a  woman  ?  " 
And  it  was  but  a  few  generations  subsequent  to  this  when  David  wrote  thus, 
"  Behold,  I  was  shapen  in  iniquity,  and  in  sin  did  my  mother  conceive  me. 
Create  in  me  a  clean  heart,  renew  a  right  spirit  within  me."  (Ps.  xl.  12 ; 
Ezek.  xxxvi.  26-7.) 

These  Israelites  proved  that  when  Gideon  was  no  more,  and  the  only  remain- 
ing barrier  removed  out  of  the  way,  they  could  run  on  headlong  in  the  old 
idolatrous  course  as  before,  keeping  pace  with  any  of  the  Canaanite  nations 
themselves.  As  for  Abimelech,  we  believe,  were  all  the  habitations  of  these 
native  idolaters  searched  to  find  a  character  worse  than  his  fellows,  it  would 
have  been  impossible  to  discover  a  monster  in  human  form  more  detestable 
than  we  have  in  this  son  of  Jernbbaal.  And  as  for  the  people  in  general,  we 
never  read  of  any  generation  among  them  growing  up  in  righteousness  and  the 
fear  of  God,  as  an  essential  part  of  their  character,  to  whom,  therefore,  it  was 
unnatural  to  be  guilty  of  sin.  There  was  no  generation  of  Israel  without  their 
sins  against  the  God  of  Israel.  Had  there  been  so,  how  meaningless  to  them 
would  have  been  the  elaborate  ceremonial  of  their  sanctuary  service  ! 

(3.)  GofVs  mercy  is  not  like  marts  in  the  measure  of  its  forbearance.  Were 
but  half  the  provocation  which  men  are  giving  every  day  to  God  to  be  given 
to  each  other,  they  would  instantly  bring  down  on  the  heads  of  the  trans- 
gressors the  full  vials  of  their  wrath.  Man's  patience  is  so  soon  exhausted ; 
God's  patience  is  like  Himself,  inexhaustible  (Mai.  iii.  6).  That  patience  is 
not  even  exhausted  when  He  leaves  the  sinner,  or  when  He  proceeds  to  inflict 
on  him  the  sentence  of  doom.  His  course  usually  is,  to  wait  long  enough  till 
mercy  has  had  full  display,  and  till  it  be  shown  that  He  is  not  willing  that  any 
should  perish,  but  rather  come  to  repentance,  and  live  ;  but  if  that  long  and 
patient  dealing  is  made  in  vain,  a  time  must  come,  when  reasons  of  righteous- 
ness and  wisdom  require  that  sin  be  dealt  with  as  it  deserves,  and  that  justice 
be  allowed  to  take  its  course.     Yet  patience  is  not  properly  exhausted. 

(4.)  The  deep  debt  of  gratitude  every  saved  man  owes  to  the  grace  of  God. 
It  was  a  wise  habit  of  the  good  John  Bradford  to  say,  when  he  saw  any  very 
striking  personification  of  human  wickedness  in  the  worst  of  men  around  him — 
"  There  goes  John  Bradford,  but  for  the  grace  of  God."  And  well  might  any 
believer  in  the  doctrine  of  renewing  grace  have  said,  when  he  saw  this  wicked 
young  man  going  on  in  a  career  of  unbridled  sin — "  There  goes  I,  myself,  but 
for  the  grace  of  God."  Meaning  that  he,  too,  has  a  wicked  heart  by  nature, 
and  that  it  requires  to  be  made  the  subject  of  God's  renewing  grace,  ere  it 
become  fit  for  entering  the  holy  world  above.  For  we  are  to  judge  character, 
not  by  the  measure  of  its  present  development,  but  by  the  direction  it  is  taking. 
The  development  is  now  rapidly  going  on,  and  ere  long  it  will  reach  a  point  or 
de^^ree  in  wickedness,  which  at  one  time  would  have  astonished  the  man  himself, 
could  he  have  foreseen  it.  Thus  it  was  with  Hazael,  when  the  prophet  foretold 
him  of  the  atrocities,  of  which  he  would  one  day  be  guilty  towards  the  people 
of  God.  "  Is  thy  servant  a  dog,"  he  exclaimed,  when  the  prophet  held  up  to 
him  the  picturd  of  his  future  deeds,  "  that  he  should  do  this  thing  ?  "    He  was 

415 


CHAP.  IX.  HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


at  that  time  horrified  at  the  thought  of  perpetrating  such  cruelties  ;  yet,  some 
years  afterwards,  as  his  wicked  character  became  developed,  he  showed  by  the 
fact,  tliat  he  could  do  all  that  the  prophet  predicted. 

To  every  saved  man  who  enters  the  world  of  perfect  purity  and  bliss,  it  will 
be  made  clear,  as  with  a  thousand  sunbeams,  that  it  is  not  to  any  supposed 
goodness  of  his  own,  or  to  any  worth  in  his  own  works,  that  he  owes  hia 
admission  to  that  bright  home.  All  the  outbreaks  of  depravity  of  which  he 
has  been  conscious,  from  day  to  day  during  his  whole  life,  and  these  occurring  in 
the  face  of  every  possible  restraint,  will  be  as  so  many  strong  lights  to  flash  on 
him  the  conviction,  that  it  is  by  grace  alone  that  he  is  saved — that  salvation  is 
not  the  thing  which  he  deserves,  but  that  which  God  is  loving  enough  through 
Christ  to  give. 

ZZ.  The  best  of  fathers  may  have  the  worst  of  sons.  This  is  another 
truth  suggested  by  the  paragraph  (see  pp.  95,  96). 

(1.)  No  good  father  can  impart  his  renewed  nature  to  his  son.  What  the 
father  is  by  nature,  he  may,  and  does,  more  or  less,  convey  to  his  son.  Tho 
conditions  of  his  body,  its  healthy  or  sickly  state,  whether  it  is  strong  or  weak, 
its  character  in  other  respects,  the  father's  temperaments,  his  likeness,  his 
natural  dispositions  and  tendencies,  his  constitutional  peculiarities,  with  other 
features,  but  above  all  his  fallen  spiritual  condition,  both  in  his  depraved  desires 
and  affections,  and  in  his  liability  to  condemnation  as  a  guilty  being — these  the 
parent  confers  more  or  less  on  the  child.  "Adam  begat  a  son  in  his  own 
likeness,  after  his  image  "  (Gen.  v.  3).  It  is  not  said  "  after  God's  likeness  and 
in  His  image,"  as  in  the  case  of  Adam  himself  (chap.  v).  To  grant  the  renewed 
nature  is  a  thing  in  God's  special  gift ;  and  so  we  are  expressly  informed,  that 
all  who  become  **  sons  of  God"  are  made  so  directly  by  God  Himself.  They  are 
"  born  not  of  blood,  nor  of  the  will  of  the  flesh,  nor  of  the  will  of  man,  but  of 
God  "  (John  i.  13).  Not  indeed  without  the  use  of  means ^  for  we  are  expressly 
told  in  the  previous  verse,  that  it  is  those  who  "  receive  Christ  and  believe  in 
His  name,"  that  are  honoured  with  the  privilege  of  being  made  sons  of  God 
(comp.  also  Gal.  iv.  4-6  ;  John  iii.  5). 

(2.)  A  good  father  may  often  neglect  the  training  of  his  child.  The  child  of  a 
pious  parent,  though  he  derive  no  advantage  directly  in  his  natural  birth,  is  yet 
open  to  many  advantages  otherwise — in  respect  of  example,  of  superintendence 
and  training,  of  prayers  many  and  sincere,  of  special  promises,  and  mixing  with 
the  fellowship  of  the  righteous,  to  which  might  be  added  a  fuller  and  more 
regular  enjoyment  of  the  means  of  grace.  Thus  a  good  man  may  have  the 
formation  of  his  son's  character  in  a  great  measure  in  his  own  hands  ;  that  is, 
so  far  as  means  are  concerned. 

Yet  we  often  know  that,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  a  pious  father  sometimes 
neglects  the  proper  upbringing  of  his  son  ;  as  did  Eli,  when  "  his  sons  made 
themselves  vile,  and  he  restrained  them  not;"  and  as  did  David,  when  he 
**  never  said  to  Adonijah,  what  doest  thou  ?"  If  the  tree,  when  it  is  young, 
is  permitted  to  grow  up  crooked  and  misshapen,  it  will  remain  crooked  and 
misshapen  during  its  whole  existence.  So  is  it  with  the  child,  *'  Trained  up  in 
the  way  that  it  should  go,  when  it  is  of  mature  age,  it  will  not  depart  from  it." 
But,  if  neglected  as  to  training  and  the  use  of  means,  the  result  desired  cannot 
be  expected,  even  if  many  prayers  from  a  godly  father  should  be  laid  on  the 
altar.     Thus  it  was  with  Absalom,  and  thus  it  was  with  Abimelech. 

3.  A  perverse  son  may    receive   a   wicked   training   away  from  his  pious 

father  s  eye.     Thus  it  was  apparently  with  Abimelech.     His  mother  seems  to 

have  had  most  to  do  with  his  training,  and  she  was  a  Canaanite  and  idolater. 

He  would  naturally  be  kept  separate  from  the  other  sons,  who  were  all  children 

416 


BOMlLETtC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES.  chap   ix. 


of  Israelitish  mothers,  and  must  have  regarded  Abimelech  as  a  son  of  the  bond- 
woman. Thus  he  was  cradled  in  an  idolatrous  circle  in  reality,  though  this  was 
concealed  from  the  public  eye  by  the  fact  that  Gideon  was  his  father,  and  that, 
during  the  season  of  his  youth  he  lived  in  his  father's  house.  Naturally  also, 
he  would  attract  to  himself  idolatrous  companions,  of  whom  there  were  only  too 
many  everywhere,  notwithstanding  all  that  Gideon  could  do  to  reduce  the 
number.^  These  were  the  circumstances  that  determined  the  general  aspect  of 
his  religious  character.  His  natural  force  of  action,  selfwilledness,  and  towering 
ambition  would  do  all  the  rest.  Hence  we  have  in  him  one  of  the  worst 
characters  in  Scripture  history.  We  do  not  find  in  the  picture  one  single 
redeeniing  element,  and  there  is  scarcely  a  single  element  of  wickedness 
awanting. 

4.  The  course  of  Gideon's  son  was  one  of  unmitigated  wickedness. 

(1.)  He  begins  with  casting  off  all  fear  of  God,  "  Conscience  must  be 
either  satisfied  or  seared,  if  a  man  would  act  with  thorough  decision,"  says  a 
wise  thinker.  Abimelech  chose  the  latter  course  ;  and,  as  the  most  effectual 
way  to  sear  it,  he  would  not  recognise  the  existence  of  the  true  God  at  all. 

(2.)  He  dares  to  usurp  the  sacred  §eat  which  was  reserved  for  Jehovah  alone, 
in  being  king  over  His  chosen  people.  Had  this  been  merely  a  vacant  secular 
throne,  like  one  of  those  on  which  any  of  the  other  kings  of  the  earth  sat,  it  had 
even  then  been  an  act  of  impertinent  presumption,  when  there  were  70  persons, 
of  far  more  legitimate  title  than  he  possessed,  ready  to  occupy  it  if  necessary. 
But  the  act  becomes  one  of  daring  irreverence,  when,  without  warrant,  and  in  the 
face  of  a  direct  prohibition  from  the  jealous  Jehovah,  he  thrusts  himself  into  the 
holiest  office  on  earth,  except  that  of  the  High  Priest  alone,  if  indeed  that  is  to 
be  excepted. 

(3.)  ^elf -aggrandisement  was  his  only  object  He  could  not  assign  a  single 
reason  of  right  or  of  merit  for  what  he  had  done.  On  the  contrary,  his  character 
was  so  full  of  blemishes,  that  to  exalt  him  to  a  throne  was  the  last  thought  that 
would  have  occurred  to  other  minds,  had  he  not  made  the  suggestion  himself. 
Self-worship  is  the  meanest  of  all  kinds  of  idolatry,  and  for  a  man  to  push  him- 
self forward  to  occupy  the  first  place,  when  he  ought  to  take  the  last,  only 
exposes  his  memory  to  infamy  in  the  future.  Yet  with  him  every  sacred 
interest  was  cast  to  the  winds  to  gratify  an  inordinate  ambition. 

(4.)  His  first  step  to  accomplish  his  purpose  is  falsehood.  He  insinuates  that 
Gideon's  sons  were,  each  and  all,  ambitious  to  become  king  in  Israel,  and  that 
matters  had  gone  so  far  that  the  men  of  Israel  must  make  their  choice — the  fact 
being,  that  in  no  breast  save  his  own  was  any  such  thought  cherished. 

(5.)  His  second  step  is  to  hire  money  from  the  headquarters  of  idolatry  to 
serve  his  wicked  purposes  (v.  4).  "  This  was  like  going  to  the  forge  of  Satan  to 
find  means  to  kill  the  servants  of  Jehovah  "  {Trapp). 

(6.)  His  third  step  was  to  make  bosom  friends  of  the  vilest  of  characters.  If  a 
man  is  to  be  judged  by  the  company  he  keeps,  what  can  we  think  of  the  son  of 
the  noblest  man  in  Israel  choosing  for  his  associates  the  desperadoes  of  society  ! 
In  place  of  saying,  as  a  true  son  of  Gideon  ought  to  do,  **  Gather  not  my  soul 
with  sinners,  &c.,"  we  see  him  looking  about  for  characters  vile  enough  to  assist 
him  in  accomplishing  his  Satanic  devices. 

(7.)  His  fourth  step,  and  the  darkest  of  all,  is  to  commit  murder  wholesale  on 
the  family  of  his  father.  As  if  it  were  a  light  thing  to  take  the  life  of  one  brother, 
another,  and  another  follow,  until  70  lives  are  taken — all  sons  of  his  father, 
and  every  son  he  had — every  one  of  them  innocent,  and  an  utter  stranger  to  the 
thought  of  aspiring  to  the  crown  of  Israel !     How  expensive  is  the  work  of  nis  1 

2]>  417 


CHAP.  K.  EOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


Blood  must  flow  in  streams,  and  the  nearest  relatives  must  be  sacrificed,  ere  its 
ends  can  be  attained  ! 

(8.)  Finally,  he  gets  himself  elected  King  by  an  apostate  city,  in  the  interests 
of  idolatry.  The  Shechemites  utter  no  protest  against  the  hydra-headed  crime, 
but  rather  strengthen  the  perpetrator's  hands  for  its  commission,  and  even 
regard  it  as  a  recommendation  for  their  suffrages,  that  he  had  destroyed  the 
house  of  him  who  had  destroyed  Baal.  Say  not  that  a  man's  religious  belief  has 
nothing  to  do  with  the  colour  of  his  conduct.     Like  king,  like  people  ! 

Examples  of  more  decidedly  opposite  cliaracters  are  not  to  be  found  in  the 
Book  of  God,  than  those  of  Gideon  and  his  son  Abimelech.  They  are  wide  as 
the  poles  asunder.  We  can  hardly  imagine  how  such  a  son  could  be  reared 
under  such  a  paternal  roof.  But  it  forms  a  palpable  condemnation  of  Gideon's 
sin,  in  having  married  a  Canaanite. 

III.  VseAil  purposes  are  served  in  recordings  a  wicked  man's 
life  in  the  Book  of  God. 

It  might  be  said,  such  a  record  would  only  be  a  blur  on  the  page.  And  it 
might  farther  be  objected,  that,  as  the  name  of  the  wicked  is  destined  to  rot, 
it  seems  inconsistent  with  this  to  inscribe  it  in  the  book  of  true  immortality. 
But— 

1.  The  record  is  given  as  a  curse  and  not  as  a  blessing.  Gladly  would  the 
wicked  man  hail  the  announcement  that  his  deeds  were  not  to  be  recorded. 
It  would  be  accepted  by  liim  as  a  valuable  boon,  that  his  name  were  allowed 
to  lie  in  perpetual  oblivion.  But  God  puts  a  brand  on  it,  and  holds  it  up  to 
the  execration  of  all  coming  time.  It  was  so  with  Cain,  when  a  mark  was  set 
upon  him  ;  so  with  Ahaz,  when  the  finger  was  pointed  emphatically  to  his  sm 
("2  Chron.  xxviii.  22) ;  so  with  Jezebel,  Pharaoh,  Judas,  etc.  Their  names  go 
down  to  posterity,  with  a  character  of  infamy  indelibly  stamped  on  them.  Thus 
they  are  made  a  mark  for  perpetual  hissing  to  the  whole  world  of  men  in  after 
times.  Gladly  would  the  wicked  dead  continue  to  lie  in  their  graves  if  they 
could,  when  the  great  voice  is  heard,  "  Let  the  earth  and  sea  give  up  their 
dead."  For  when  they  awake  it  will  be  "  to  shame  and  everlasting  contempt " 
(Dan.  xii.  2).  How  beautiful  is  the  reverse  experience  of  those  who  accept 
of  the  Saviour,  and  trust  in  His  glorious  redemption — "your  sins  and  iniquities 
will  I  remember  no  more,"  The  man  is  blessed  "  whose  sin  is  covered  " 
(Ps.  xxxii.  1). 

2.  Such  a  record  illustrates  the  truth  of  God's  testimony  respecting  human 
character.  It  is  put  down  "that  God  may  be  justified  when  He  speaks,  and 
clear  when  He  judges."  Has  He  said  that  '*  the  heart  of  man  is  deceitful 
above  all  things  and  de-perately  wicked  ;  "  in  this  dark  history  is  the  proof — 
has  He  said,  *'  there  is  no  fear  of  God  before  the  wicked  man's  eyes,"  "  his 
mouth  is  full  of  cursing,  deceit,  and  fraud,  etc."  (Ps.  x.  7-11);  in  such  a  history 
as  that  here  set  down  we  see  it  all  realised. 

3.  It  shows  by  practical  example  the  frightfully  evil  nature  of  sin  when 
allowed  to  develop  itself  unchecked.  It  is  a  frightful  thing  for  a  creature  to 
give  up  his  Creator,  as  all  sin  implies.  The  consequences  cannot  fail  to  be 
of  the  most  serious  character.  There  must  be  a  fearful  perversion  of  his  moral 
nature,  in  abandoning  a  fellowship  so  pure,  in  despising  a  friendship  so  essential 
to  his  happiness,  in  violating  an  authority  so  sacred,  and  in  wantonly  forsaking 
the  infinitely  Good  One.  The  immediate  effect  must  be  to  come  under  the 
Divine  frown,  and  to  lose  the  Divine  image.  According  to  the  excellence  of  the 
object  despised,  so  must  be  the  deep -rooted n  ess  of  the  evil  disposition  in  the 
heart  that  rejects  it.    And  as  the  law  of  progress  applies  to  character,  the 

418 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES.  chap.  ix. 


longer  this  disposition  is  cherished,  or  the  more  unreservedly  it  is  brought  into 
exercise,  it  must  become  more  and  more  inveterate.  "  Sin  becomes  exceeding 
sinful,'*  and  more  and  more  sinful  (Rom.  vii.  13). 

In  Abimelech  we  see  sin  developing  itself  unchecked.  He  throws  the  reins 
on  his  lusts,  especially  his  lust  of  power,  and  we  see  before  us  a  monster  ratlier 
than  a  man.  For  here  there  is  everything  to  shock  the  moral  sense.  An 
exhibition  is  made  of  what  sin  naturally  leads  to,  when  allowed  to  operate 
without  restraint.  It  turns  man  into  an  evil  spirit,  it  makes  a  fearful  wreck 
of  our  moral  nature.  This  illustrates  the  greatness  of  the  deliverance  wrouglit 
by  the  Saviour,  when  "  He  gave  Himself  for  us,  that  He  might  redeem  us  from 
all  iniquity  and  purify  unto  Himself  a  peculiar  people,  zealous  of  good  works." 

4.  Wicked  deeds  recorded  are  beacons  set  up,  to  warn  us  off  from  the  rocks 
and  whirlpools  of  sin.  They  show  that  a  course  of  sin  is  like  sailing  among 
sunk  rocks,  or  falling  under  the  destructive  sweep  of  a  vortex.  The  full 
malignity  of  sin  is  not  to  be  told  in  words,  but  has  to  be  seen  in  acts.  It  is 
a  headlong  rush,  a  maddening  rage,  "a  possession  of  seven  devils,"  a  bursting 
through  all  bounds,  a  rampant  and  reckless  career  of  treading  under  foot  the 
sacred  commands  of  the  Most  High — as  seen  in  the  chapter  of  life  here 
recorded.  Abimelech  is  a  finger  post  set  up  in  God's  Providence,  with  the 
words  inscribed,  *'  Beware  of  the  broad  road  that  leadeth  to  destruction  ! " 
When  allowed  full  scope,  it  becomes  so  virulent,  that  almost  every  word  in  the 
vocabulary  which  is  expressive  of  an  evil  quality  would  be  required  to  tell  its 
many  sides  and  degrees  of  evil.  It  is  venomous  and  baneful,  a  desolating 
scourge,  a  withering  blight.  It  is  savage  in  its  conceptions  against  the  innocent, 
and  merciless  in  carrying  its  designs  into  execution.  It  is  a  destructive  force 
marring  and  crushing  everything  that  comes  in  its  way — corrupting,  corroding 
and  polluting  whatever  is  most  fertile  and  beautiful  in  God's  world. 

All  this  exhibited  in  actual  life  is  a  most  emphatic  testimony,  that  "  the  end 
of  these  ways  is  death,"  and  ca'-ries  in  its  bosom  the  warning,  "  Avoid  the  evil 
way,  pass  not  by  it,  turn  from  it,  and  pass  away." 

IV.  G-od  can  bring*  accusers  ag>ainst  the  wicked  when  they 
fancy  themselves  most  secure. 

On  the  very  coronation  day,  when  this  vile  aspirant  to  the  throne  of  Israel 
had  just  got  the  consummation  of  all  his  \pishes  gratified,  and  saw  himself  hailed 
by  the  thousands  of  one  of  the  chief  cities  of  the  laud  as  their  king,  suddenly 
a  messenger  from  Jehovah  appears  on  the  scene  with  the  language  of  solemn 
warning  on  his  lips.  It  was  as  if  the  very  rocks  were  made  to  cry  out  against 
such  hideous  wickedness.  Had  his  heart  been  less  hard,  Abimelech  could,  like 
Herod  after  the  murder  of  John  (Mark  vi.  16),  have  exclaimed — "  This  is  one 
of  my  brothers  whom  I  have  put  to  death."  Standing  on  an  eminence  among 
the  rocks  which  overhung  the  valley,  one  of  the  seventy  sons,  all  of  whom  were 
supposed  to  have  been  massacred,  appears,  as  if  risen  from  the  dead,  to  act  the 
part  of  an  accusing  conscience.  The  occasion  was  so  strong,  that  the  very 
Mount  of  Blessing  (Gerizim,  where  Jotham  stood)  must  for  once  thunder  out 
a  curse,  against  the  perpetrators  of  the  awful  deeds,  which  had  that  day 
culminated  in  the  unheard  of  act,  of  an  impious  mortal  rushing  forward  to 
occupy  the  throne  which,  of  all  others,  was  reserved  for  the  God  of  Israel  alone  ! 

Tlius  did  God  meet  Adam,  on  the  very  day  when  he  sinned,  and  hid  himself 
among  the  trees  of  the  garden.  Thus  suddenly  was  Haman  caught  in  a  snare 
by  that  very  queen  who  had  honoured  him  by  inviting  him  to  a  special  banquet, 
where  none  but  the  king,  queen,  and  Haman  were  present.  At  the  moment 
when  his  proud  wishes  were  being  gratified  to  the  full,  his  fall  came  swiftly — in 

419 


CHAP.  IX.  HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES, 


the  twinkling  of  an  eye,  from  a  hand  that  he  least  of  all  expected.  So  did 
Ahah  encounter  Elijah,  at  the  very  moment  he  entered  to  take  possession  of 
that  long-coveted  vineyard  of  Naboth.  At  the  moment,  when  the  man,  who 
tried  to  crusii  the  Church  of  God  in  its  infancy,  was  receiving  honours  from  the 
people  as  a  god,  '*  the  angel  of  the  Lord  smote  him,  and  he  was  eaten  of  worms 
and  gave  up  the  ghost"  (Acts  xii.  21-23;  Job  xx.  23  ;  Hab.  ii.  11  ;  2  Kings 
V.  26  ;  Josh.  vii.  18-21). 

V.    Silent  nature  is  full  of  lessons  of  wisdom  for  irrational  men. 

It  needs  only  a  Jotham  to  bring  them  out,  and  apply  them.  Long  before  our 
poet  told  us  in  words,  there  were — 

"  Tongues  in  trees,  books  in  the  running  brooks, 
Sermons  in  stones,  and  good  in  everything." 

"  Ask  now  the  beasts,  and  they  shall  teach  thee — or  speak  to  the  earth,  and  it 
shall  teach  thee,"  etc.  (Job  xii.  7-9).  If  the  fable  (which  this  paragraph  is 
supposed  to  be)  be  the  work  of  fancy,  or  a  narrative  woven  by  fancy  from  the 
elements  of  nature,  in  order  to  press  home  some  important  truth,  it  is  not  the 
less  instructive  ;  for  nature  is  in  all  its  aspects  essentially  a  teacher.  It  not 
only  contains  illustrations  of  spiritual  truth,  happy  but  accidental  likenesses 
of  it,  but  its  very  framework  is  so  constructed,  as  to  furnish  emblems  to  the  e^e 
of  sense  of  the  great  spiritual  meaning  which  lies  in  the  background.  The  world 
of  spirit  which  is  unseen,  and  which  existed  before  the  material  world,  repeats 
itself  in  that  world  ;  so  that,  what  we  see  in  nature  is  the  counterpart  of  what 
exists  in  the  realm  of  spirits.  It  bears  witness  for  that  realm,  and  shadows  it 
forth.  Man's  body  is  so  fashioned,  as  to  shadow  forth  in  its  curves  and  features 
and  noble  upright  form,  especially  too  in  its  expression  of  the  countenance,  the 
higher  qualities  of  his  spirit.  In  some  sense,  **  the  things  of  earth  are  the  copies 
of  things  in  heaven."  The  objects  in  the  mart,  by  the  wayside,  or  in  the  field, 
are  instruments  through  which  man  is  educated  to  know  much  more  of  God. 
"  This  entire  visible  world,  with  its  kings  and  subjects,  parents  and  children, 
sun  and  moon,  sowmg  and  harvest,  light  and  darkness,  life  and  death,  is  a 
mighty  parable — a  great  teaching  of  supersensuous  truth,  a  help  at  once  to  our 
faith,  and  our  understanding," 

Lessons  Taught  us  by  the  Trees. 

1.  Humility.  None  of  the  really  good  trees  aspire  to  have  a  distinction 
above  the  otljers.  They  are  content  to  remain  in  the  place  where  their  Creator 
has  put  them.  The  lofty  and  umbrageous  tree  does  not  boast  itself  above  those 
that  are  small  and  tender,  but  rather  flings  its  arms  around  them  to  shelter  them. 

2.  ^ense  of  responsibility.  Each  tree  feels  it  has  an  office  to  fulfil,  which  is 
Sj-ecially  given  to  it  to  do,  and  which  it  must  not  leave  undone. 

3.  Obedience  and  submission.  There  is  no  rebellion  among  the  trees,  against 
the  authority  of  Him  who  appointed  them  their  places,  and  assigned  them  their 
duties.  That  which  is  scantily  laden,  or  bears  a  more  common  sort  of  fruit, 
does  not  murmur  because  it  is  not  covered  with  rich  clusters ;  but  each  seems 
content  to  bear  that  which  is  expected  of  it.     It  is  obedient  and  submissive. 

4.  Mutual  good-will.  No  tree  wishes  to  despoil  another  tree  of  its  glory. 
There  is  no  joining  together  of  those  that  are  less  favoured,  against  those  that 
are  renowned  for  fertility  and  beauty.  There  is  neither  a  strife  for  precedence, 
nor  do  the  others  show  jealousy,  if  any  one  is  likely  to  have  the  precedence.     So 

420 


BOMILBTIO  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES.  chap.  ix. 


ought  it  to  be  among  men  of  all  classes,  but  especially  among  those  who  form 
the  Church  of  God.  All  should  feel  they  have  the  same  nature,  are  trees 
planted  by  the  same  hand,  watered  by  the  same  clouds,  and  warmed  by  the 
same  sun  ;  and  so,  being  united  by  many  ties  in  common,  should  grow  peaceably 
together  as  one  vineyard  of  the  Lord  of  Hosts. 

5.  Entire  dependence  of  each  on  the  provision  God  has  made  for  it.  It  is  but 
in  a  secondary  manner,  that  any  one  tree  derives  benefit  from  another.  One  may 
to  some  extent  protect  anotlier  from  the  fury  of  the  blast,  or  contribute  to  it 
somewhat  of  heat.  But  all  the  primary  conditions  of  health  and  strength  to 
any  tree,  belong  to  the  soil  in  which  it  is  placed,  to  the  air  around  it,  to 
the  sun  that  shines  upon  it,  and  to  the  rairi  or  dew  that  falls  upon  it.  Its  root 
must  be  fastened  in  the  soil,  and  on  that  everything  depends  in  the  first 
instance.  The  soil  must  be  sufficient  and  rich  in  order  to  a  luxuriant  growth. 
The  rain  and  dew  must  fall  copiously,  and  the  sun  must  send  forth  heat.  In  the 
spiritual  vineyard  these  conditions  are  essentially  required.  Fellow  Christians 
may  in  many  ways  be  helpful  to  each  other,  but  each  one  is  dependent,  for  all 
that  is  primary,  on  God  alone.  Each  one  is  rooted  by  God's  own  hand  in  Christ, 
and  built  up  in  him  ;  it  is  from  Him  that  the  rain  and  due  of  spiritual  influences 
come  down  ;  and  it  is  he  who  causes  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  to  arise 
with  warmth  and  healing  in  his  beams  (Gal.  i.  15,  16  ;  Col.  ii.  6,  7  ;  Hos.  xiv.  5, 
xliv.  3,  4  ;  Mai.  iv.  2).  The  great  practical  lesson  taught  by  the  trees  therefore 
is,  that  the  Christian's  primary  duty  is  to  look  after  his  relations  to  his  God,  and 
see  that  these  are  all  right,  for  it  is  on  that  that  all  which  is  essential  to 
bis  growth  depends. 

VZ. — To  be  useful  Is  better  than  to  reig*!!. 

All  the  good  trees  gave  it  as  a  reason  for  their  refusal  to  wave  their  tops  over 
the  other  trees,  that  tliey  had  each  a  useful  vocation  to  fulfil,  and,  that  the  fulfil- 
ment of  that  vocation  was  a  far  more  important  thing,  than  to  reign  over 
others.  To  reign,  is  to  live  for  the  glorification  of  one's  self ;  to  be  useful,  is  to 
be  a  fountain  head  from  which  blessings  might  flow  out  to  others.  All  the 
objects  of  Nature  seem  to  say,  we  exist  not  for  ourselves,  but  for  the  benefit  of 
others  around  us.  The  sun  shines  not  for  itself,  but  to  enlighten  and  warm  the 
planets  that  revolve  around  him.  The  clouds  float  in  the  firmament,  not  on  their 
own  account,  but  to  distil  their  watery  treasures  on  the  ihirsty  ground.  The 
birds  sing  among  the  branches,  and  fill  the  grove  with  melody,  to  give  delight  to 
many  a  listening  ear.  The  flowers  put  forth  their  blossom,  and  convey  a 
pleasing  sense  of  view  to  the  eye  ;  while  the  trees  and  shrubs  grow,  and  wave 
their  branches  in  the  breeze,  not  on  their  own  account,  but  to  glorify  Him  who 
created  them,  for  the  gracefulness  of  their  form,  the  richness  of  their  hues,  the 
sweet  fragrance  they  emit,  or  the  excellent  fruit  they  bear. 

It  is  the  law  also  for  all  true  Christians — "  None  of  us  liveth  to  himself,"  &c  , 
''  Ye  are  the  salt  of  the  earth,"  *'  Ye  are  the  light  of  the  world."  And  the  rule 
they  have  to  follow  is,  "  It  is  more  blessed  to  give  than  to  receive  "  (Rom.  xiv. 
7,  8  ;  Matt.  v.  13,  14  ;  Acts  xx.  35)  He  who  lives  to  do  good  to  others 
around  him,  and  especially  to  advance  the  cause  of  God  on  the  earth,  has  the 
consciousness  that  he  lives  not  in  vain,  that  he  is  not  a  cypher  but  a  valuable 
integer  in  society,  that  he  is  spending  the  talents  given  to  him  to  a  profitable 
account — with  the  two  gaining  other  two — that  he  has  thought  more  of  God's 
glory  while  passing  through  the  world  than  of  his  own,  and  that  his  place  will  be 
missed  when  he  is  gone. 

421 


CHAP.  IX.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  :  JUDGES. 

CHAPTER  IX. 
ABIMBLECH'S  TRAGIC  BUT  BRIEF  BISTORT. 
(Verses  22-57.) 

Critioal  Notes. — 22.  Had  reigned]  ruled  hj  force  rather  than  by  natural  righty  implying  a 
hard,  as  opposed  to  a  mild,  rule.  Over  Israel].  Shechern  in  some  measure  represented  Epliraim, 
and  Ephraim  in  some  degree  represented  Israel.  Where  one  is  active,  and  has  a  strong  will, 
among  many  who  are  passive,  his  ascendency  is  practically  aclcnowledged. 

23.  Crod  sent  an  evil  spirit.]  not  evil  temper  or  disposition,  but  a  wicked  spirit,  which  stirred 
up  evil  dispositions,  discords,  and  insurrections,  ending  in  bloodshed  (comp,  I.  Sam.  xvi.  14,  15  ; 
xviii.  10).  In  what  took  place,  we  see  not  only  the  action  of  those  evil  passions  that  gender 
strifes,  but  also  the  controlling  and  directing  influence  of  the  JVioral  Governor  of  the  world. 
There  was  the  iutention  of  a  Personal  Ruler  to  punish  high-handed  crime  in  a  manner  suited  to 
its  character.  If  the  evil  feeling  which  led  to  the  sad  issues  were  in  men's  hearts  already,  it  was 
God  that  fixed  the  time  for  the  awakening  of  these  feelings,  and  directed  thetn  to  produce  these 
issues  in  the  end,  in  the  exercise  of  His  moral  government.  The  Shechemites  were  led  to  brealc 
their  oath  of  fidelity  to  him  whom  they  had  chosen  to  be  their  king.  Though  at  the  moment 
they  endorsed  the  strong  act  by  which  he  had  effectually  cleared  the  way  of  all  competitors  for 
the  throne,  yet  now  after  three  years'  experience  of  the  rigorous  rule  of  the  bramble  king,  they 
no  doubt  l)egan  to  feel  some  remorse  for  their  wicked  conduct,  in  having  been  co-partners  in  his 
infamous  deed. 

24.  That  their  blood  might  be  laid  upon  Abimelech  .  ,  ,  and  on  the  men  of  Shechem.  So 
it  usually  is  in  the  course  of  Providence  (comp.  I,  Kings  ii.  32  ;  Ps.  vii.  16  ;  IMatt.  xxiii.  35,  36  ; 
Esth.  ix.  25).  "  He  maketh  inquisition  for  blood."  "  He  beholdeth  mischief  to  requite  it  with 
His  hand."  All  the  events  that  followed  were  permitted  by  God,  and  overruled  by  Him,  to  bring 
down  suitable  retribution  both  on  Abimelech  and  his  partners  in  crime.  The  Shechemites 
wished  to  make  themselves  the  rallying  point  of  tlie  nation  by  making  Abimelech  king,  and  they 
had  other  interests  of  their  own  to  serve.  But  they  quickly  found,  that,  while  they  thought  they 
were  making  use  of  him  to  serve  selfish  purposes  of  their  own,  he  was  actually  making  use  of 
them  as  his  tools.  At  length  they  resolved  that,  as  he  had  played  falsely  by  them  in  his  general 
conduct,  they,  from  being  sworn  friends,  would  now  turn  round  and  become  deceitful  foes. 

25.  Set  liers  in  wait  for  him,  etc]  i.e.,  during  his  absence.  Probably,  he  was  at  that  moment 
trying  to  extend  his  rule  over  other  places.  Supposing  he  might  return  attended  only  by  a  few 
followers,  and  uususpicious  of  danger,  they  placed  a  number  of  men  in  ambush  so  as  if  possible 
to  take  him  prisoner,  for  they  were  afraid  to  face  him  when  on  his  guard  and  in  the  open  field. 
Meantime  these  "  liers  in  wait "  commited  acts  of  brigandage  on  all  travellers  as  they  pas.^ed 
along  the  mountains,  which  at  once  showed  tlieir  character,  and  also  perhaps  a  design  to  make 
it  known  that  the  country  was  getting  disorganised  under  Abimelech's  rule. 

26  Gaal,  the  son  of  Ebed,]  i.e.,  the  son  of  a  servant.  He  was  so  by  the  father's  side,  as 
Abimelech  was  by  the  mother's  side.  He  too,  like  the  latter,  was  a  Canaanite.  Both  were 
morally  and  socially  base  in  their  origin.  The  appearance  of  two  such  men  in  the  front  rank 
indicated,  that  in  these  days  "  vile  men  were  high  in  place."  It  was  a  case  of  bramble 
contesting  superiority  with  bramble.  Gaal  was  probably  something  of  a  linight  errant,  or  a 
chieftain  at  tlie  head  of  a  compaixy  of  freebooters,  or  brigand  chief.  That  such  an  adventurer 
should  now  turn  up  so  unexpectedly,  and  be  able  all  at  once  to  command  so  much  influence  with 
the  masses,  was  a  sign  of  the  evil  days  that  had  happened  to  Israel.  The  men  of  worth  and  of 
Weight  have  disappeared  from  society ;  such  nuisances  as  a  Gaal  or  a  Zebul  are  the  rival 
claimants  for  the  honours  of  the  day  ;  an  Abimelech  is  the  chosen  king  of  one  of  the  principal 
cities  of  Israel  ;  while  public  robljery,  treachery  and  disorder  overspread  the  land. 

Gaal  is  judged  unworthy  of  having  many  particulars  given  about  him,  and  so  he  quickly 
)as>es  across  the  stage  with  no  more  notice  taken  of  him  than  what  is  necessary,  to  show  how 
low  Israel's  history  at  this  period  had  sunk.  His  appearing  on  the  surface  only  proves  that 
when  base  deeds  are  to  be  done,  there  is  always  someone  starting  up  who  is  base  enough  to  do 
them.     In  this  upstart  the  men  of  Shechem  actually  put  confidence  as  a  leader. 

27.  Gathered  their  vineyards  and  trode  the  grapes.]  It  was  the  season  of  vintage.  At  such 
a  season,  it  was  customary  even  for  the  heathen  to  keep  some  festival  to  the  god  they  worshipped, 
as  an  act  of  thanksgiving  for  his  granting  them  a  bountiful  harvest.  The  literal  rendering  is, 
they  made  praise  offerings  or  thank-offerings,  along  with  praise  songs.    That  such  a  service  of 

422 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


OHAP.  B. 


joy  and  thanksgiving  was  required  to  be  observed  among  the  Israelites,  is  clear  from  such 
passages  as  Lev.  xxiii.  24  ;  Deut.  xvi.  10,  11 ;  Isa.  ix.  3.  The  offerings  were  of  the  fruits 
produced  by  the  vineyards  in  the  fourth  year.  But  the  Shechemites  transferred  to  their  god 
Baalberitb,  what  should  have  been  rendered  to  Jehovah. 

Went  into  the  house  of  their  god.]  The  history  of  Israel  in  its  deepest  meaning,  is  the 
history  of  the  true  God  fighting  against  all  the  false  gods  which  men  worship,  and  exposing  their 
utter  insufficiency. 

They  did  eat  and  drink  and  cnrsed  Abimelech.l  How  general  the  sin  of  drunkenness.  Even 
in  the  earliest  days  of  human  history  we  see  the  blighting  effects  of  it,  and  that  in  the  case  of 
Noah  himself,  ere  he  had  time  to  settle  down  after  coming  out  of  the  ark.  And  we  see  it  now, 
like  the  opening  mouth  of  a  volcano,  ready  to  pour  its  destructive  streams  on  every  side.  To 
curse  their  ruler,  in  defiance  of  the  law  laid  down  (Ex.  xxii.  28  ;  II.  Sam.  xix.  21  ;  Isa.  viii.  21), 
was  the  first  evil  effect  and  led  on  to  worse.  Thus  it  was  among  the  heathen  ;  at  the  feasts  of 
Bacchus  among  the  Komans,  and  at  similar  festivals  among  the  Greeks,  and  otlier  peoples.  The 
harvest  home  was  an  occasion  celebrated  with  banqueting  and  songs  of  rejoicing.  But  how  often 
did  those  occasions,  which  might  have  been  harmless  and  cheerful,  become,  through  indulgence, 
the  means  of  producing  the  deepest  sorrow  and  woe  I 

28.  And  Gaal  said,  who  is  Ahimelech,  etc  %\  What  is  to  be  noted  here,  is  the  contrast  between 
the  present  jubilant  strain  of  merriment,  and  the  tragic  issue  which  anyone  might  see  could  not 
be  far  off,  when  such  a  man  as  Abimelech  was  to  be  dealt  with.  What  a  difference  between  the 
lighthearted  braggartism  of  the  revellers  of  to-day,  while  the  enemy  was  at  a  safe  distance,  and 
the  pallid  terror  of  the  cowards  on  the  morrow,  when  the  lion  really  appeared.  Hitherto  they 
had  been  too  much  cowed  by  the  stem  spirit,  and  energetic  action,  of  their  tyrant  ruler,  to  do 
more  than  speak  in  whispers,  and  express  their  thoughts  by  signs.  But  now  being  treated  with 
wine,  and  the  object  of  their  dread  being  beyond  the  hills,  they  could  name  him  as  a  despot,  and 
utter  curses  both  loud  and  deep  against  bis  despotic  sway. 

Now  was  the  time  for  this  base  upstart  to  step  forward,  when  men  of  worth  were  hanging 
their  heads  with  shame.  If  Gaal  had  courage  for  nothing  else,  he  was  bold  enough  to  set  all 
laws  of  decency  and  propriety  at  defiance,  by  proposing  himself  to  be  ruler  in  place  of  Abimelech. 
It  was  time  to  strike  the  iron,  when  he  saw  them  begin  to  curse  Abimelech.  Accordingly  he 
shouts  out  defiantly,  "  Who  is  this  Abimelech,  whom  you  have  allowed  to  get  the  upper  band  of 
you — this  man  who  adopts  to  himself  the  title  of  Shechem,  as  if  he  were  the  only  person  who 
could  speak  or  move  there  ?  "  This  is  said  contemptuously,  and  when,  being  well  out  of  harm's 
way,  the  speaker  could  afford  to  use  treasonable  language.  Some  would  make  the  word  Shechtm. 
apply  to  the  people  of  the  town,  or  even  to  Zebul.  It  is  more  natural  to  suppose,  that  one  and 
the  same  person  is  alluded  to  in  the  language,  for  it  was  customary  to  address  the  same  person 
by  a  double  name,  as  may  be  seen  in  the  parallel  passages  (I.  Sam.  xxv.  10  ;  I.  Kings  xii.  16). 
"  Is  he  not  a  son  of  the  man  who  boasted  against  your  god,  and  though  he  proudly  usurps  the 
name  of  your  town  as  his  own,  was  not  his  mother  a  bondwoman,  and  no  true  descendant  of 
Hamor,  the  father  of  your  clan  ?  And  Zebul,  who  now  rules  over  you,  is  but  his  officer  in  his 
absence,  who  has  no  other  claim  to  advance.  Your  wisdom  is  to  serve  the  true  stock  of  the 
children  of  Hamor,  and  not  this  low  caste  usurper." 

29.  Would  to  God  this  people  were  under  my  hand.]  This  thought  was  what  was  uppermost 
in  his  heart  all  the  time,  but  he  did  not  dare  at  first  to  bring  it  out.  Probably  he  waited  to  see 
if  anyone  else  would  make  the  proposal,  but  as  none  diil,  he,  as  if  speaking  aloud  to  himself, 
ventures  the  proposal  himself.  He  puts  it  as  if  it  were  a  special  favour,  and  act  of  kindness  done 
to  the  Shechemites,  for  him  to  take  the  command  over  them,  and  restore  prosperity  to  their  city. 
Since  no  one  seemed  to  oppose  the  proposal,  he  takes  for  granted  that  it  is  carried,  and  proceeds 
to  act  accordingly.  The  great  thing  to  be  done  is  first  to  remove  Abimelech.  Accordingly  a 
message  of  defiance  is  sent  to  the  tyrant  king,  which  was  the  most  likely  thing  to  unite  the  men 
of  the  city  around  Gaal  and  his  company. 

30.  And  when  Zebul  heard  the  words  of  Gaal,  etc.]  Though  these  words  were  spoken  amid 
a  scene  of  dissipation,  they  were  resented  by  Zebul,  who  whether  a  warm  adlierent  of  Abimelech 
or  not,  was  deeply  offended  at  being  regarded  as  his  tool,  and  also  at  being  marked  out  for 
destruction  equally  with  his  master.  Hence  he  sends  secret  reports  of  how  matters  are  going  to 
Abimelech. 

32.  Up  by  night*  thoa,  and  the  people  that  are  with  theeO  Zebul,  from  these  verses,  and 
from  the  whole  account,  seems  to  have  been  a  man  of  considerable  shrewdness  but  how 
tfuue  any  character  becomes,  that  is  so  sadlv  wanting  in  the  higher  moral  qualities 

428 


CHAP.  IX.  HOMILETia  COMMENTARY:   JUDGES. 


36.  And  Gaal  went  out  and  stood  at  the  gate.]  Doubtless  he  would  suppose,  that  someone 
may  have  conveyed  information  to  Abimelech  of  what  was  going  on  ;  and  now  he  came  to  see 
whether  the  way  was  clear.  Besides  he  had  sent  a  challenge  to  Abimelech.  Meanwhile, 
Abimelech  was  acting  on  Zebul's  instructions,  and  was  lying  in  wait  to  enter  the  city,  so  soon  as 
Gaal  should  have  left  it.  But  the  latter  was  getting  more  cautious,  or  timid,  as  danger  approached, 
and  was  now  only  feeling  his  way. 

36.  There  come  people  down  from  the  top  of  the  mountains.]  Zebul  had  not  till  now  openly 
opposed  Gaal,  for  the  great  body  of  the  Sheshemites  appeared  to  be  opposed  to  Abimelech.  He 
therefore  thought  it  better  to  temporise  for  a  time.  Zebul  knew  very  well,  that  the  figures  on 
the  mountain  were  real  men,  but  wished  to  put  Gaal  off  the  tack  of  thinkiug  so  (who  was  a  man 
of  much  less  sharpness  of  discernment),  in  order  to  gain  time  for  Abimelech's  four  companies  to 
effect  a  junction. 

37.  There  come  people  down  by  the  middle— the  elevated  centre  of  the  land.1  Meonenim— 
the  Wizard's  Oak — a  place  where  these  idolatrous  soldiers  may  have  looked  for  omens  as  to  their 
success. 

38.  Where  is  now  thy  mouth,  etc.]  A  little  time  had  been  gained  for  the  approach  of 
Abimelech's  troops  while  Gaal  continued  inactive.  The  treacherous  Zebul  now  throws  off  his 
mask,  and  bitterly  taunts  his  rival  with  the  boastful  language  he  had  used  in  Abimelech's 
absence,  ending  with  a  challenge  to  him  to  fight  his  adversary  in  the  open  field,  now  that  he  was 
actually  come.  It  is  thus  that  Satan  deludes  his  dupes  in  making  them  ima<^'ine  there  is  no  such 
thing  as  a  pit  of  perdition.  It  is  only  a  "shadow,"  a  mere  figure  of  speech.  I'hus  he  temporises, 
until  the  time  comes  for  transfixing  the  culprit  with  the  arrow  of  an  accusing  conscience,  and 
then  he  taunts  him  with  a  malicious  sneer,  while  he  writhes  in  his  agony  (Matt,  xxvii  4). 

39.  Gaal  went  out  before  the  men  of  Shechem.]  At  the  head  of  the  men  of  Shechem,  for  his 
whole  drift  was  to  enlist  them  on  his  side,  and  having  already  publicly  dared  to  curse  Abimelech 
they  were  no  longer  neutral. 

40.  Unto  the  entering  in  of  the  gate!  but  could  not  pass  through  the  gates,  when  they  were 
shut  against  him  in  time. 

41.  Dwelt  at  Arumah.]  Remained  mi^.l  sat  down,  not  dwelt  for  any  length  of  time,  continued 
for  the  day  at  Arumah.  Zebul  thrust  out  Gaal  and  his  brethren-]  When  it  was  manifest  that  Gaal 
was  no  match  for  Abimelech,  the  Shechemites  fell  from  him,  and  Zebul  took  advantage  of  the 
moment  of  his  weakness,  to  thrust  him  out  of  the  town  altogether.  From  this  moment,  we  hear 
no  more  of  him.  He  disappears  as  one  who  goes  down  no  more  to  rise.  Zebul  also  is  seen  no 
more.     He  fades  from  public  view  the  moment  his  master  comes  to  the  front. 

42-  The  people  went  out  into  the  field]  probably  for  the  purpose  of  resuming  their  harvesting 
work.  They  supposed  there  could  now  be  no  longer  any  trouble,  seeing  that  Gaal  had  been 
thrust  out  from  their  midst,  and  Abimelech's  authority  was  restored.  But  the  wrath  of  the 
bramble  king  was  not  to  be  so  easily  pacified.  All  the  night  long  he  had  been  meditating  farther 
revenge  on  those  who  had  dared  to  revolt  from  him  ;  and,  expecting  that  the  people  of  the 
town  would  have  to  resume  their  field  operations,  he  laid  a  trap  for  them  accordingly.  Dividing 
his  men  into  three  companies,  with  one  company  he  seized  the  gate,  and  the  other  two  companies 
he  employed  to  make  a  regular  massacre  among  the  people,  as  they  fled  in  all  directions  across 
the  plain. 

45.  Slew  the  people,  beat  down  the  city,  and  sowed  it  with  salt  In  this  the  human  tiger 
went  beyond  his  usual  mark.  It  is  as  if  a  king  were  to  slay  all  his  subjects,  and  then  rase  his 
c.ipital  to  its  foundations,  that  it  might  not  be  known  ever  such  a  place  had  existed.  This 
meant  more  than  merely  condemning  Shechem  for  the  future  to  a  state  of  comparative  infertility. 
For  the  sowing  of  salt  on  the  surface  of  the  ground  could  not  absolutely  prevent  all  growth. 
But  salt  was  the  symbol  of  any  covenant  which  the  people  made  with  their  god,  and  when  for 
the  breach  of  that  covenant  salt  was  employed,  it  meant  that  such  a  people  came  under  the 
curse  of  their  god.  These  Shechemites  had  made  a  covenant,  in  the  house  of  their  god 
(Baalberith),  to  be  faithful  subjects  to  Abimelech  as  their  king  ;  and  now  that  that  covenant  wa 
broken,  he  iDrings  over  their  city  the  sign  of  the  curse.  Infidelity  to  such  covenants  was  reckoned 
the  greatest  of  crimes,  and  was  understood  to  mean  that  they  were  devoted  to  destruction. 

When  Milan  was  taken  (a.d.  1162)  it  was  sowed  with  salt.  At  the  massacre  of  St.  Bartholomew 
(a.d.  1572)  the  house  of  Admiral  Coligny,  after  he  was  murdered,  was  sown  with  salt  (see 
illustrations  in  Mic.  iii.  12  ;  Ps.  cvii.  34  ;  Jer.  xviL  6 ;  Deut  xxix.  23). 
424 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES,  chap  ix. 

46.  When  tlie  men  of  the  tower  of  Shechem  heard  that,  etc.3  t.«.,  the  same  with  the  "  house 
of  Millo  '*  in  ver.  6.  Their  numbers  were  now  so  retluced,  while  Abimelech  was  still  as  strong  as 
ever,  and  roused  to  fury  like  an  unchained  lion,  that  they  abandoned  all  resistance,  and  thouglit 
only  of  betaking  themselves  to  the  best  place  of  security  they  could  find.  There  was  only  one 
place  they  could  run  to  with  any  hope  of  getting  safety— the  house  of  their  god,  called  in 
Canaanite  language  Baalberith,  but  in  that  of  the  Israelites,  Elberith.  This  was  a  stronghold — 
in  the  special  sense,  that  those  who  were  in  it  were  understood  to  be  under  the  special  protection 
of  their  god.  But  there  was  also  a  fortified  enclosure  within  it,  which  might  be  called  their 
safe,  where  their  money  and  treasures  were  preserved.  This  was  the  upper  chambers  of  a  lofty 
tower.  The  same  word  is  used  in  I.  Sam.  xiii.  6,  where  it  means  the  topmost  portion  of 
inaccesible  rocks. 

48.  He  gat  him  up  to  Mount  Zalmon.l  Abimelech  now  supposed  that  he  had  got  a  fit  opportun- 
ity of  carrying  out  his  whole  thought  of  revenge  upon  the  rebels  at  once.  When  they  were  all 
brouglit  together  into  one  place,  and  in  a  helpless  condition,  it  was  easy  to  destroy  them  at  one 
blow.  Like  Nero,  afterwards,  who  wished  that  all  the  people  of  Rome  should  have  but  one 
neck,  that  he  might  have  the  pleasure  of  cutting  off  their  heads  at  one  stroke,  so,  now,  this 
human  fiend  was  glad  to  find  that  all  the  people  of  Shechem  who  were  left,  were  gathered 
together  into  one  bundle,  that  he  might  have  the  satisfaction  of  consuming  them  by  one 
holocaust. 

To  raise  a  conflagration  around  them  occurred  to  him  as  the  readiest  method  of  accomplishing 
their  ruin.  Hence  he  repairs  to  the  thicket  of  Zalmon,  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood,  a 
mountain  covered  with  wood,  which  has  been  called  a  "Black  Forest"  \^Luther\,  though  some 
have  identified  it  with  Ebal,  [Stanley'\.  (Ps.  Ixviii.  14).  The  reference  in  the  Psalm  is  to  the 
snow  which  sometimes  rested  on  its  top,  and  appeared  the  more  striking,  because  of  its  contrast 
with  the  thick  shade  of  wood  that  covered  its  sides.  There  was  no  difficulty  in  finding  fuel 
sufficient  for  the  purpose.  Each  man  had  but  to  carry  one  branch,  and  1,000  men  would  have 
brought  1,000  branches.  He  himself  set  the  example,  axe  in  hand,  cutting  down  his  branch  and 
setting  it  in  order.  Every  man  was  invited  to  do  the  same,  by  which  not  only  was  fuel 
provided,  but  also  a  test  was  applied  to  ascertain  whether  all  were  faithful  to  their  leader. 

49.  All  the  people  likewise  cut  down,  etc.]  All  complied,  for  where  there  is  a  strong  will  in 
action,  other  wills  naturally  yield  to  its  decisions.  The  wood  was  applied  to  the  hold,  and  as  a 
portion  of  it  appears  to  have  been  of  wood,  it  was  soon  enveloped  amid  the  flames,  and  every 
man  within  the  walls  met  with  a  horrible  death.  So  true  to  the  letter  was  Jotham's  curse 
fulfilled  (ver.  20). 

60.  Thebez]  now  called  Tubas,  a  small  town  about  13  miles  north  from  Shechem.  This  town 
seems  to  have  joined  with  Shechem  in  throwing  off  the  yoke  of  Abimelech,  and  as  this  ferocious 
despot  knew  no  limit  to  his  malice  short  of  extermination,  when  his  lordly  will  was  crossed,  he 
now  proceeded  to  do  to  Thebez  as  he  had  done  to  Shechem.  This  town  appears  to  have  been 
built  in  circular  form,  with  a  tower  in  the  centre,  many  missiles  being  gathered  on  the  top.  To 
the  highest  part  of  this  tower  all  the  inhabitants  fled  for  refuge,  fastening  every  entrance 
securely  behind  them.  Abimelech  himself  headed  the  attack.  Being  in  a  frenzy  of  rage  he 
became  regardless  of  the  danger  arising  from  showers  of  missiles  thrown  by  the  besieged.  So  it 
happened,  that  while  fighting  furiously  in  the  thickest  of  the  crowd,  he  was  struck  on  the  head 
by  an  upper  millstone  21.?  j  H^r  thrown  from  a  woman's  hand — the  hand,  the  moment,  and 
the  instrument,  being  all  determined  by  the  Disposer  of  all  events.  The  effect  was  **  all  to  break 
bis  skull,"  i.e.  entirely  to  break,  or  crush  in  his  skull.  [It  is  an  old  English  expression].  It  was 
the  upper  part  of  a  hand-mill  that  was  used,  that  which  revolves  when  grinding,  while  the  under 
part  is  fixed  (Deut.  xxiv.  6 ;  Luke  xvii.  35).  It  was  the  work  of  women  to  use  such  a  mill. 
Some  supposed  they  expected  to  be  imprisoned  several  days  in  the  top  flat  of  the  tower,  and 
therefore  would  need  to  grind  com.  It  is  singular  that  the  great  warrior  Pyrrhus  met  his  death 
in  a  manner  precisely  similar ;  a  large  tile  from  the  roof  of  a  house  being  thrown  upon  him  by  a  poor 
woman,  whose  son  was  engaged  in  combat  with  the  warrior,  and  in  danger  of  being  slain  by  him. 
At  length  we  see  the  **  violent  man's  dealing  come  down  on  his  own  pate."  "  The  wickedness 
of  the  wicked  has  come  to  an  end."  There  lies  proud  Abimelech,  and  a  woman  slew  him  ! 
This  was  the  last  arrow  he  received  from  a  world  which  he  bitterly  hated,  and  by  which  in  turn 
he  was  shunned  as  a  demon  in  human  form.  It  was  to  him  a  small  thing  to  die,  but  for  a  man 
of  such  lofty  pretensions,  it  was  bitter  gall  to  have  it  said,  that  a  woman  slew  the  proud 
Abimelech  1 

How  in  a  moment  suddenly 

To  ruin  brought  are  they  I 

With  fearful  terrors  utterly 

They  are  consumed  away. 

Even  like  unto  a  dream  when  one 
From  sleeping  doth  arise ; 
Bo  thou,  O  Lord,  when  thou  awakli 
Their  image  shalt  despise. 

425 


CHAP,  n,  ttOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES, 

54-57.  His  young  man  thmst  Mm  tlirongh  .  .  .  and  when  the  men  of  Israel  saw  that 
Abimelech  was  d^ad,  etc]  An  incubus  was  taken  off  the  land.  Everyone  breathed  more  freely. 
Not  a  single  tear  was  shed.  No  mourner  was  anywhere  seen.  The  young  man  is  glad  of  the 
opportunity  offered  to  put  his  master  to  death  (unlike  the  case  of  Saul,  I.  Sam.  xxxi.  4,5).  The 
men  who  composed  Abimelech's  army  will  not  do  another  stroke  of  the  bloody  work,  to  which  he 
had  called  them.  The  army  melted  away,  and  every  man  went  to  his  own  home.  We  hear 
nothing  of  a  funeral — nothing  of  a  successor — nothing  of  a  wind-up  ! — nothing  but  an  ominous 
pause  on  earth,  and  a  whisper  from  Heaven's  Justice  saying,  "  Thus  God  rendered  the  wickedness 
of  Abimelech  which  he  did  unto  his  father,  in  slaying  his  seventy  brethren  ;  and  all  the  evil  of 
the  men  of  Shechem,  did  God  render  upon  their  heads ;  and  upon  them  came  the  curse  of 
Jotham,  the  son  of  Jerubbaal." 

What  was  said  of  Pope  Boniface  VIII.  might  also  be  set  up  as  a  suitable  epitaph  for  this 
bramble  king  of  Shechem.  *'  He  entered  the  world  like  a  fox,  reigned  like  a  lion,  and  died  like 
a  dog." — (  Trapp).  O  unhappy  son  of  Gideon  ! — perhaps  the  child  of  many  prayers,  certainly  the 
child  of  a  noble  example  of  parental  piety,  perhaps  the  child  of  many  pious  counsels,  certainly 
the  child  of  great  religious  privileges,  would  that  the  hand  of  mercy  had  placed  a  protracted 
sick  bed  between  thee,  and  the  summons  to  appear  before  the  great  Judge,  that  so  an  opportunity 
might  have  been  given  for  repenting  of  thy  evil  deeds,  and  taking  refuge  in  the  "blood  whidbi 
cleanseth  from  all  sin  I " 


HOMILETIQAL  SUOOESTIONS,— Versa  22-67. 

The  Teachings  op  a  Dark  Night  in  Israel's  History. 

Z.  God  Boxnetimes  sends  wlnnowlng>  seasons  both  on  individuals 
and  on  communities. 

Ordinarily,  He  is  gentle  in  His  providential  dealings  with  men,  and  for  the 
most  part,  eveu  under  not  a  few  provocations,  there  is  little  of  the  frown  on 
His  face,  or  of  the  stern  in  His  voice.  He  would  allure,  rather  than  terrify 
them  into  repentance.  But  when  they  have  long  made  light  of  sin,  and  have 
turned  a  deaf  ear  to  gentler  warnings,  at  fit  seasons  He  brings  influences  around 
them,  which  thoroughly  sift  and  try  their  character.  Tlien  it  is  impossible  for 
a  man  to  refrain  altogether  undiscovered.  His  arts  of  concealment  will  no 
longer  serve  his  purpose,  his  heart  is  stirred  as  a  pool  is  by  the  application  of 
a  rod,  when,  from  the  surface  to  the  bottom,  all  that  it  contains  is  put  into 
a  state  of  agitation.  Circumstances  in  Providence  ferment  round  a  man,  and 
he  is  shaken  and  tossed  as  the  leaf  in  the  wind,  so  that  he  is  obliged  to  appear 
exactly  as  he  is.  The  false  is  then  discovered  from  the  true,  and  what  is  false 
in  any  character  is  detected  as  well  as  what  is  genuine. 

So  it  was  with  the  Israelites  as  a  community,  at  different  periods  of  their 
history ;  so  it  was  with  Gideon ;  so  with  Abimelech,  and  with  the  men  of 
Shechem.  This  is  one  of  those  lines  of  practical  instruction,  which  God  keeps 
up  in  every  history  from  age  to  age,  whether  of  individuals,  or  of  communities. 
To  bring  out  men's  characters,  and  show  what  they  are,  when  exposed  to 
different  fires  as  tests,  is  one  of  the  great  moral  uses  of  such  history  as  is 
contained  in  tho  word  of  God. 

Winnowing  seasons  are  intended  not  only  to  reveal  what  is  chaff,  but  to  clear 
it  away.  Such  a  history  as  that  of  Abimelech  resembles  the  raging  whirlwind, 
which,  however  destructive  it  may  seem,  has  usually  the  effect  of  clearing 
a  stagnant  atmosphere.  It  is  God's  voice  saying  solemnly,  "  Stand  in  awe  and 
sin  not.  Woe  to  the  wicked  man  !  for  it  shall  be  ill  with  him."  It  is  another 
kind  of  rod,  that  God  taJtes  into  His  band  to  chastise  His  people,  besides  the 
Moabites  or  Midianites. 
426 


HOMJLETIO  COMMENTARY :   JUDGES,  chap.  ix. 

M" T-       IHI      f-  IIIL  l_   T_l_lm L_LM__L_J__IJ-I_I    _        „  '  -      I         I  F      |— r^f-lTT^  1 — " ' ' 1 

ZZ.  The  Importance  of  cbooslng*  a  rlgrht  Klngr* 

(1.)  It  was  important  for  Israel  now.  While  Gideon  ruled  as  a  "judge  "  the 
"  peace  of  the  nation  flowed  as  a  river,  and  its  righteousness  as  the  waves  of  the 
sea."  But  when  Abimelech  was  chosen  to  occupy  the  place  of  power,  the  wheels 
went  rapidly  backwards,  and  at  last  by  leaps  and  bounds  rolled  downhill.  A 
greater  mistake  could  not  have  been  committed,  than  to  choose  a  fellow  mortal 
to  be  their  king  at  all,  when  the  King  Eternal  Himself  so  graciously  con- 
descended to  single  out  this  people  from  all  the  people  of  the  earth  to  reign  over 
them.  But  when  they  did  commit  this  sin,  and  cast  a  slight  on  the  wonderful 
love  of  their  God,  they  were  punished  by  being  left  to  choose  the  worst  man  in 
all  Israel  to  occupy  that  position.  "  Righteousness  exalteth  a  nation,  but  sin 
is  the  reproach  of  any  people." 

(2.)  It  was  so  in  their  after  history.  In  the  days  when  kings  ruled  over 
Israel  and  Judah,  the  colour  of  the  history  was  uniformly  given  by  the  character 
of  the  king.  When  a  certain  king  ascended  the  throne,  and  we  read,  that  "  he 
did  that  which  was  right  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,"  we  uniformly  find  that 
the  state  of  things  prospered  in  the  land.  But  when  we  read,  that  "  he  did  that 
which  was  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,"  all  things  begin  to  go  against  him. 
The  sovereign  in  those  days  had  it  in  his  power  to  give  a  tone  to  society,  which 
none  but  a  despot  can  wield  now.  Society  then  for  the  most  part  followed  the 
example  of  him  who  reigned  over  it.  But  there  was  in  the  case  of  the  chosen 
people  another  reason.  The  King  was  held  to  represent  the  people,  so  that  what 
he  was,  and  did,  the  people  were  reckoned  to  be  and  to  do.  Hence  we  see  :n  one 
reign  the  country  going  to  ruin  under  Saul,  and  in  the  very  next  rising  under 
David  to  the  very  climax  of  its  greatness. 

(3.)  It  is  important  for  any  people.  In  England,  we  see  the  Queen  of  the 
freest  and  most  enterprising  people  on  the  face  of  the  globe,  after  the  long  test 
of  fifty  years*  rule,  retaining  as  much  of  the  love  and  loyalty  of  her  subjects  as 
she  did  on  the  day  when  first  they  hailed  her  as  sovereign  ;  and  this,  notwith- 
standing the  fact,  that  the  intellectual  forces  were  never  more  strongly  brought 
into  collision  than  during  her  reign.  While  something  certainly  is  due  to  the 
excellent  constitution  of  the  realm,  by  which  the  sovereign  is  exempted  from  the 
responsibility  of  guiding  the  legislation  of  the  nation,  not  a  little  also,  is  due  to 
the  wise,  benevolent,  and  virtuous  character  of  the  Sovereign  herself. 

(4.)  And  there  is  a  King  in  Zion,  who  has  seen  not  one  jubilee  only,  but  all  the 
jubilees  that  are  contained  in  eighteen  centuries,  and  who  will  see  all  that  are  to 
come  through  unending  time.  The  Church  of  God  has  an  everlasting  King,  to 
whom  she  owes  all  her  vital  energy,  her  survival  from  a  thousand  dangers,  and  her 
future  prosperity,  until  she  become  a  blessing  to  all  the  nations  of  the  earth. 
Jesus  is,  under  the  Gospel,  the  rightful  King  of  all  individual  hearts,  and  they  are 
wise  indeed  who  allow  Him  to  reign  alike  over  their  thoughts,  words,  and  deeds. 
Where  He  is  allowed  to  reign,  there  order,  Heaven's  first  law,  is  set  up,  peace 
with  God  is  established,  peace  of  conscience  is  enjoyed,  and  the  joy  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  is  the  happy  atmosphere  breathed  by  the  soul.  Every  man's  heart  is  the 
chosen  seat  of  Government  for  this  King,  and  from  that  centre,  He  desires  to  rule 
the  whole  life. 

IZZ.    God's  delay  in  punishing^  hig>h-handed  sin. 

Why  should  three  years  be  allowed  to  pass,  ere  such  outrageous  conduct 
received  the  punishment  it  deserved  ?  The  principle  of  instant  retribution  for 
offences  committed  against  the  laws  of  righteousness,  under  the  government  of 
a  holy  and  righteous  God,  certainly  seems  the  most  aatural.    We  see  it  in  the 

487 


CHAP.  IX.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   JUDGES, 


remark  which  Shimei's  conduct  called  forth  from  Abishai  to  David,  '*Why 
should  this  dead  dog  curse  my  lord  the  king?  Let  me  go  over,  I  pray  thee,  and 
take  off  his  head."  Such  is  the  instinct  of  many.  And  the  first  threatening 
uttered  by  the  Lawgiver  against  the  first  sin,  required  instant  execution  of  the 
penalty  on  the  head  of  the  offender.  *'In  the  day  thou  eatest,  thou  shalt  surely 
die."  That  moment  the  sense  of  moral  turpitude  was  felt  for  the  first  time, 
separation  took  place  between  man  and  his  God,  and  his  body  became  mortal. 
But  here,  as  on  so  many  occasions,  judgment  is  deferred.  The  sun  does  not 
cease  to  shine,  nor  do  Heaven's  lightnings  flash  out  against  the  perpetrator  of 
so  many  awful  murders,  but,  for  three  long  years,  he  is  permitted  to  walk 
the  earth,  while  Heaven's  thunders  sleep,  and  he  is  not  consumed. 

Two  important  principles  are  illustrated  by  this  delay — 

1.  Without  such  delay  moral  government  could  not  be  carried  on.  Moral 
government  requires  that  tliere  be  the  fullest  liberty  for  the  exercise  of  the  will 
allowed  to  the  subject  of  moral  rule.  Were  the  transgressor  always  to  be  cut 
down  at  the  moment  of  transgression,  there  could  be  no  further  opportunity  for 
moral  dealing  with  him.  And  as  the  whole  race  of  men  have  within  them  a 
tendency  to  depart  from  God,  and  offend  against  the  laws  of  His  government, 
in  one  short  hour  their  history  would,  on  this  principle,  come  to  an  end.  For 
the  tendency  to  violate  the  laws  of  God  would  certainly  show  itself,  and  on 
every  occasion  it  did  death  must  happen,  so  that  in  one  day  the  world  would  be 
swept  clear  of  its  inhabitants.  Besides,  were  man  always  to  be  punished  with 
death  for  his  first  sin,  there  would  be  no  opportunity  of  bringing  out  his  charac- 
ter on  all  its  sides,  and  under  every  variety  of  circumstance.  Farther,  if  a  man 
saw  that  for  the  first  known  sin  he  might  commit  the  certain  consequence  would 
be  death,  he  would  be  put  under  a  system  of  terrorism  as  to  his  obedience,  which 
would  destroy  all  liberty  of  action,  and  it  would  not  be  known  what  his  charac- 
ter really  was,  until  he  were  left  free  to  act  according  to  his  own  disposition. 

2.  This  delay  shows  God's  unwillingness  that  men  should  perish.  If  it 
were  a  pleasure  to  Him  to  inflict  death  on  the  wicked,  we  might  suppose  He 
would  make  haste,  on  the  commission  of  sin,  always  to  carry  out  the  sentence. 
Had  even  His  love  for  men  been  according  to  an  ordinary  standard,  and 
measurable  by  a  man's  conception,  we  might  !>uppose,  that  the  heinous  character 
of  several  sins  would  be  such,  as  to  provoke  the  ofiended  Lawgiver  to  send  swift 
and  condign  punishment  on  the  heads  of  the  transgressors,  in  order  to  mark  His 
detestation  of  their  sins.  But  God  is  so  unwilling  that  men  should  perish,  that 
He  always  acts  as  one  reluctant  to  punish.  He  delays  and  defers,  and  defers 
and  delays,  until  men  begin  to  think  He  has  forgotten  their  sins  entirely. 
Though  opposed  to  sin  more  than  light  is  to  darkness,  His  patience  goes  far 
beyond  ^he  measure  of  a  man's  forbearance.  He  never  loses  the  absolute  calm 
of  His  holy  nature.  The  want  of  self-government  is  far  beneath  the  majesty  of 
His  august  character.  "  I  am  God — not  man, — therefore  ye  sons  of  Jacob  are 
not  consumed."  That  he  rises  up  so  slowly  to  do  the  work  of  the  Just  Judg^*, 
proves  His  reluctance  to  proceed  against  the  rebel,  even  when  the  argument  on 
the  side  of  justice  is  most  strong.  It  sliows  that  His  heart  is  at  the  farthest 
possible  remove  from  taking  delight  in  the  death  of  the  sinner,  and  that  no 
possible  motive  could  induce  Him  to  inflict  the  penal  sentence,  except  that,  on 
the  one  hand,  justice  requires  that  He  should  administer  to  sin  what  is  its  due, 
and  on  the  other.  He  jealously  requires  that  there  should  be  a  full  vindication  of 
His  own  holy  and  righteous  character  as  the  moral  Governor  of  the  universe. 

428 


BOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES,  chap.  ix. 


ZV.  God  remembers  all  the  sins  that  wicked  men  commit. 

Though  full  three  years  passed  since  the  great  crimes  were  committed,  which 
opened  the  way  for  Abimelech's  ascending  the  throne  of  at  least  a  part  of 
Israel,  nothing  had  been  forgotten  by  the  all-seeing  God.  Every  moment  of 
that  time  these  sins  were  present  to  His  view,  yet  He  did  not  de})art  from  the 
customary  method  to  act  with  deliberation,  in  bringing  round  the  time  and  the 
manner  of  the  punishment. 

Men  forget  that  "  with  the  Lord  a  thousand  years  are  as  one  day  J'  The  sins 
of  a  man's  whole  lifetime  are  as  present  to  "  that  faithful  witness,"  at  the  last 
hour  of  life,  as  they  were  at  any  previous  part  of  it.  Sins  which  he  has  left 
fifty  years  behind  him  in  the  past,  are  as  freshly  in  the  presence  of  Him  with 
wliom  he  has  to  do,  as  they  were  each  one  at  the  moment  of  commission.  God 
says  of  His  backsliding  people,  "  They  consider  not,  that  I  remember  all  their 
wickedness."  This  is  an  element  which  the  wicked  too  often  leave  out  of  con- 
sideration. For  there  is  ever  a  proneness  in  men  to  make  light  of  sin,  because 
it  is  not  visibly  and  solemnly  dealt  with  the  moment  it  is  committed.  So  far 
however  is  God  from  not  marking  it,  that  He  says  even  of  His  own  people, 
*'The  sin  of  Judah  is  written  with  a  pen  of  iron,  and  with  the  point  of  a 
diamond  "  (Jer.  xvii.  1).  It  is  impossible  that  sin  can  ever  fall  into  oblivion, 
until  satisfaction  is  given  for  it.  No  man  is  safe  from  the  sins  he  committed 
many  years  ago,  on  the  ground  that  possibly  they  may  now  be  forgotten.  Not 
a  single  sin  can  be  forgotten,  until  it  is  solemnly  dealt  with,  and  due  atonement 
made. 

For  the  final  account^  God  will  bring  every  secret  work  and  thought  into 
judgment.  And  to  represent  the  accuracy  and  particularity  with  which  the 
process  shall  be  gone  through,  we  are  told  there  are  *' Books  of  remembrance" 
which  shall  be  opened,  and  every  man  shall  be  dealt  with  according  to  what 
is  found  written  in  the  Books.  It  will  then  be  seen,  that  "  God  requireth  that 
which  is  past."  Not  only  the  acts  of  the  life,  but  the  springs  of  character  in  the 
thoughts,  volitions  and  purposes  of  the  inner  man — all  the  lines  of  a  man's 
conduct,  beginning  with  his  motives  and  aims,  his  judgments  and  decisions, 
and  going  out  to  the  spirit  which  he  dis[)layed,  the  principles  on  which 
he  acted,  and  the  whole  course  of  life  which  he  led.  It  is  clear,  therefore,  that 
no  sinful  man  can  build  any  hope  of  deliverance  from  condemnation  on  the 
ground,  that  any  of  his  past  sins  may  become  forgotten  through  lapse  of  time. 
Unless  some  abnormally  great  and  solemn  transaction  should  take  place  before 
the  end  of  life,  he  will  to  a  certainty  find  all  the  sins  of  his  life  then  meeting 
him,  in  the  same  measure  of  guilt  they  had  when  they  were  committed  (Eccl. 
xii.  14 ;  Ps.  1.  21  ;  Eom.  ii,,  16 ;  Ps.  xc.  8). 

What  a  relief  from  anxiety  does  the  Gospel  message  bring  at  this  point.  For 
1500  years  the  atoning  victim  was  laid  on  the  altar  year  by  year,  showing  that 
there  was  still  a  remembrance  of  sins.  At  last  came  "  the  Lamb  of  God  which 
bore  away  the  sin  of  the  world."  "Clirist  died  for  our  sins."  "Now  there  is  no 
condemnation  to  them  that  are  in  Christ  Jesus."  He  hath  "  finished  trans- 
gression, and  made  an  end  of  sin."  "  Christ  is  the  end  of  the  law  for 
righteousness  to  every  one  that  believeth."  So  great  is  the  change  wrought  in 
the  condition  of  those  who  accept  of  this  solemn  method  of  disposing  of  their 
sins,  that  we  read  in  one  place,  '*  In  those  days,  saith  the  Lord,  the  iniquity  of 
Israel  shall  be  sought  for,  and  there  shall  be  none ;  and  the  sins  of  Judah,  and 
they  shall  not  be  found  again."  *' Their  sins  and  their  iniquities  will  I  remember 
no  more."    And  yet  again,  "  They  are  without  fault  before  the  throne  ot  God." 

429 


CHA?.IX.  EOMJLETIO  COMMENTARY:   JUDGES. 

V.  The  miseries  which  befall  the  wicked  come  not  by  chance,  but 
as  the  result  of  God's  moral  grovernment  of  the  world. 

It  was  not  by  mere  accident,  without  any  directing  cause,  that  a  spirit  of 
disaffection  rose  between  the  Sliechemites  and  their  self-appointed  king.  It  was 
indeed  a  natural  expectation,  when  we  take  the  dispositions  and  proclivities  of 
the  parties  into  account.  It  was  natural  that  the  rule  of  a  man  so  imperious 
in  will,  so  selfish  in  aims,  so  capricious  in  tastes,  so  unprincipled  in  character, 
with  no  relaxation  in  his  rod-of-iron  treatment,  and  nothing  benignant,  or  even 
tolerant  in  his  bearing,  would  very  soon  cool  down  loyalty  in  any  hearts  where 
it  really  existed,  and,  in  spite  of  themselves,  the  men  of  Shechem  would  waken 
sooner  or  later  to  the  conviction,  that  they  had  been  made  dupes  of  by  a  bold 
and  aspiring  man,  whom  they  could  neither  love  nor  respect.  They  saw  that  he 
was  making  use  of  them  as  tools,  or  stopping-ladders,  to  something  higher.  For, 
not  content  with  remaining  at  home  in  Shechem,  he  seems  to  have  been 
making  occasional  excursions  to  other  places  ;  and  Thebez  is  mentioned  as  one  of 
the  towns  which  he  had  brought  under  his  authority.  Hence,  among  those  who 
elected  him  king,  there  would  be  coldness  first,  then  alienation,  and  by-and-bye 
hatred  and  resentment,  with,  at  last,  a  desire  for  revenge.  All  this  was  according 
to  the  working  of  natural  causes. 

But  this  Book  sees  God's  hand  in  everything.  So  we  read  that  **  God  sent  an 
evil  spirit  between  Abimelech  and  the  men  of  Shechem."  It  is  added  that 
there  was  a  special  design  in  view,  "that  the  cruelty  done  to  the  sons  of 
Jerubbaal,"  &c.  This  testimony  implies,  that  there  was  something  more  than 
the  blind  working  of  natural  causes.  Overruling  these  and  directing  these,  was 
the  will  of  the  Supreme  Ruler  in  Providence  at  work,  to  fulfil  a  purpose 
of  retribution  on  the  heads  of  perpetrators  of  a  great  wickedness.  We  dare  not 
deny  to  God  the  character  of  a  Moral  Governor,  nor  His  presence  in  His  own 
works.  We  cannot  resolve  the  whole  course  of  causes  and  consequences  in  the 
history  of  this  world  into  a  mere  system  of  naturalism,  nor  can  we  accept 
of  deism  as  the  true  philosophy  of  God's  relation  to  man,  and  at  the  same  time 
be  guided  by  the  teachings  of  this  Book.  Scripture  uniformly  recognises  God's 
presence  among  the  affairs  of  men,  adjusting  the  laws  so  as  to  reward  the 
righteous,  and  inflict  retribution  on  the  wicked.  God  could  have  brought 
a  hundred  different  issues  out  of  the  train  of  causes  that  were  at  work  in  this 
history,  had  it  so  pleased  him.  But  he  arranged  to  bring  about  that  which  did 
actually  happen,  that  the  object  might  be  gained  which  He  intended,  in  the 
righteous  punishment  of  evildoers. 

Via  Compacts  formed  in  sin  are  soon  broken* 

The  Shechemites  appear  to  have  sworn  to  Abimelech  to  be  faithful  to  him  as 
their  king,  while  he  on  his  part  engaged  to  act  similarly  by  them.  But,  at  the 
time  they  did  so,  their  hands  were  reeking  with  the  innocent  blood  they  had 
shed,  and  so  the  compact  was  formed  in  sin. 

(1.)  The  curse  of  the  Lord  rested  on  such  compact.  High-handed  sin  always 
brings  down  the  frown  of  Him  who  sits  on  the  Throne  of  Righteousness.  When 
men  "  walk  contrary  to  Him,  He  walks  contrary  to  them  ;  "  and  though  they 
"associate  themselves  together  they  shall  be  broken  in  pieces ;  though  they  take 
counsel  together,  it  shall  come  to  nought."  '*  The  face  of  the  Lord  is  against 
them  that  do  evil."  "  He  maketh  the  devices  of  the  people  of  none  effect." 
**  He  is  angry  with  the  wicked  every  day." 
430 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES,  chap.  ix. 


(2.)  There  is  no  principle  in  such  compact  which  conscience  can  respect. 
None  of  these  wicked  men  could  respect  either  themselves,  or  each  other,  for  tlie 
revolting  act  of  vvickedness  of  which  they  were  guilty,  in  having  slain  the 
seventy  innocent  sons  of  Jerubbaal.  On  the  contrary,  conscience,  as  the 
"  domestic  chaplain  "  of  the  soul  [Irapp],  in  so  far  as  he  was  allowed  to  utter 
his  voice,  must  have  loudly  condemned  the  iniquity,  and  this  must  have  led  to 
mutual  recrimination  against  one  another.  It  must  indeed  have  prc^duced  the 
constant  risk  of  an  explosion,  conscience  acting  as  a  sort  of  dynamitard  in  the 
camp.  Or,  if  conscience  were  seared  and  practically  inoperative  among  them, 
then  there  was  no  principle  of  right  to  hold  them  to  their  compact  ;  conscience 
being  the  faculty  which  acknowledges  the  existence  of  what  is  right  and  what 
is  wrong.  But  when  the  sense  of  doing  what  is  right  is  taken  away,  where  is 
the  security  for  continuing  faithful  to  the  compact  ? 

(3.)  Among  wicked  associations  there  is  no  real  cohesive  power.  The  parties 
here  concerned,  both  the  man  who  aspired  to  be  king  and  those  who  agreed  to 
elect  him  to  that  high  office,  knew  that  this  was  an  open  act  of  rebellion  against 
that  God  who  was  already  King  of  Israel,  and  who  wished  none  other  to  usurp 
the  seat.  And  there  was  the  terrible  aggravation  of  this  sin,  in  the  previous 
massacre.  What  then  could  have  led  them  to  associate  together  to  gain  such 
an  end  ?  It  could  not  possibly  have  been  any  desire  thereby  to  promote  the 
good  of  the  commonwealth.  It  could  only  have  been  some  selfish  and  interested 
purposes  of  their  own  which  they  believed  would  thereby  be  served.  Abimelech 
was  a  man  of  unbounded  ambition,  and  seemed  to  have  no  thoughts  but  those 
of  self-aggrandisement.  The  men  of  Shechem  were  nothing  to  him  but  tools 
to  serve  his  purpose.  They,  on  the  other  hand,  thougiit  they  saw  in  Abimelech 
one  who  might  form  a  suitable  rallying  point  for  the  scattered  tribes  of  Israel, 
and  one  who,  by  uniting  all  the  people,  and  going  out  before  them  to  fight  their 
battles,  might  make  them  become  respected  all  around,  as  one  of  the  great 
nations  of  the  earth — Shechem  being  the  capital  city.  It  was  an  additional 
consideration  to  this,  that  he  had  destroyed  the  house  of  Jerrubbaal,  who  was 
the  destroyer  of  their  god.  And  still  further  they  said  of  Abimelech,  **  Is  he 
not  our  brother — of  our  own  stock,  and  a  young  man  of  excellent  promise  ?" 

In  all  this  handing,  together  there  was  no  real  cohesive  power.  The  motives 
of  the  respective  parties  were  not  only  not  the  same,  but  were  strongly  in 
conflict ;  and  each  party  had  but  to  come  to  see  in  actual  history  what  the  aims 
of  the  other  were.,  in  order  to  become  at  once  jealous,  and  suspicious  of  deceit 
being  practised  by  their  partners  in  the  compact.  What  caied  Abimelech  for 
the  feelings  and  interests  of  the  men  of  Shechem,  if  only  his  iron  will  were 
fully  carried  out  anaong  them.  Was  not  he  their  master,  and  was  not  their 
whole  purpose  in  life  summed  up  simply  in  obeying  the  king  ?  Let  any  one 
tremble  if  he  should  dare  to  think  otherwise.  Such  was  the  spirit  of  the  ruler. 
Those  who  had  chosen  hiti  to  the  office  felt  that  they  were  as  birds  caught  in  a 
snare.  Their  eyes  were  opened  to  the  fact,  that,  in  place  of  being  exalted  in 
station,  and  realising  a  new  golden  age  of  their  history  as  a  people,  they  had  come 
under  a  reign  of  terror,  and  had  sunk  to  the  position  of  slaves,  to  be  trodden 
under  foot  and  made  to  do  all  kinds  of  drudgery  at  the  will  of  a  capricious  despot. 
Here,  surely,  was  nothing  that  was  attractive,  but  everything  that  was  repellent. 

So  is  it  universally  among  the  wicked — there  is  no  proper  cohesive  power. 
We  cannot  accept  the  line  of  the  poet  as  correct — 

"  Devil  Mrith  devil  damn'd  firm  concord  holds," 

The  only  point  in  which  the  wicked  entirely  agree  is,  their  common  hatred  of 
what  is  good.    Pilate  and  Herod  for  once  agreed,  when  they  both  had  occasion 

431 


« tt.\r.  IX.  UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES, 


to  oppose  the  Saviour,  The  nations  around  Israel  were  as  a  rule  ever  quarrelling 
with  each  other,  until  some  one  of  thein  began  to  oppose  Israel,  when  quickly 
tlie  others  joined  with  them  (Ps.  Ixxxiii.).  The  wicked  are  in  their  very  nature 
selfish,  proud,  jealous,  full  of  envy,  covetousness,  malice,  and  evil  lusts  and 
passions,  which  could  not  fail  to  break  up  and  disintegrate  their  unions  more 
or  less. 

(4.)  Where  there  is  no  strongly  uniting  force  y  mens  fickleness  tends  to  break 
up  compacts.  Nothing  is  more  capricious  than  the  human  will,  when  left 
entirely  without  the  restraint  of  right  principle.  All  history  proves  it.  We  see 
it  in  the  treatment  given  by  the  populace  of  the  Grecian  States  to  their  heroes 
in  the  field,  or  their  wise  men  of  the  senate  or  the  schools,  who  were  half 
worshipped  by  them  to-day  ;  yet  to-morrow,  for  some  freak  of  the  popular  will, 
were  either  banished  their  country,  or  had  a  deep  brand  of  odium  affixed  to 
their  names.  It  is  not  without  reason  that  our  essayist  has  said — "  The  head 
that  to-day  grows  giddy  with  the  roar  of  the  million  has  the  very  next  been 
fixed  on  a  pole."  Nearly  all  Oriental  history  proves  it;  portions  of  Roman 
history,  portions  of  the  history  of  nearly  all  the  other  countries  of  Europe,  and 
especially  France,  exemplify  it ;  nor  do  we  except  certain  periods  of  our  own 
English  history. 

VZX.    Our  Idols  often  prove  our  scourgresa 

The  men  of  Shechem  were  at  first  hero-worshippers  of  Abimelech,  in  which 
they  grievDusly  sinned,  when  they  made  him  king  in  place  of  Jehovah.  Now 
Ahimelech  becomes  their  scourge  in  the  terrible  tragedy  here  recorded 
(Jer.  ii.  19  ;  Pro  v.  i.  31).  Thus  David  found  it  with  Absalom  and  Adonijah  ; 
Jacob,  for  many  years  with  Joseph;  Jehoshaphat  with  Ahab  ;  and  the  Israelites, 
with  several  heathen  nations  with  whom  they  intermarried  and  had  too  friendly 
relations. 

VZXZ.    BKen  are  often  called  to  read  their  sin  in  their  punishment. 

(1.)  Abimelech  rose  to  influence  by  putting  forth  false  claims  as  an  adventurer, 
and  now  it  is  by  the  setting  forth  of  the  false  claims  of  another  adventurer 
(Gaal),  that  the  standard  of  revolt  is  raised  against  his  authority. 

(2.)  In  the  house  where  he  found  the  money,  that  enabled  him  to  carry  into 
execution  the  awful  deed  which  left  his  way  free  to  ascend  the  throne,  his 
subjects  met  to  pour  curses  on  his  head,  and  to  plot  his  ruin. 

(3)  The  man  who  made  it  his  boast  to  say,  "  My  father  was  a  king,"  is  at  last 
rejected  by  his  votaries  for  one  who  was  the  son  of  a  slave  (Ebed  means  a  slave). 

(4.)  By  a  woman  he  rose  to  power  (his  mother  ;  when  the  Shechemites  said. 
*'  He  is  our  brother  ")  and  by  a  woman  he  met  his  death. 

(5.)  He  slew  all  his  brothers  on  one  stone,  and  now  by  means  of  one  stone 
he  is  slain. 

(6.)  He  sinned  so  much,  that  he  might  get  the  crown  set  on  his  head,  and 
now  he  dies  through  his  head  being  crushed. 

(7.)  His  grand  ambition  was,  that  his  name  might  go  down  to  posterity  as 
Abimelech  the  Invincible,"  and  yet  the  last  thing  the  world  hears  of  him  is, 
*  A  woman  slew  him." 

ZX.    All  the  wicked's  confidences  are  refugres  of  lies. 

The  men  of  Shechem  who  swore  to  be  faithful  to  the  upstart  king,  soon 
rebelled  against  him  in  a  body,  and  followed  another  adventurer — Zebul  the 
432 


HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:   JUDGES.  OHap.  x. 


Tuler  of  the  city,  was  the  only  friend  that  stuck  to  his  master,  and  he  appears 
to  have  acted  from  selfish  motives.  The  men  of  the  tower  were  against  him. 
The  people  of  Thebez  to  a  man  rose  ao^ainst  him.  And  the  very  men  who 
followed  him  did  so  through  fear  ;  for,  tiio  moment  he  breathed  his  last,  every 
man  threw  down  his  sword  and  retired  to  his  home  ;  while  the  body  of  their 
cliief  was  left  to  the  vultures,  and  his  name  to  the  execration  of  posterity. 
(Ps.  xxxvii.  35  ;  Jon.  ii.) 

How  different  the  confidence  of  the  righteous  I  (Isa.  Ivii.  2 ;  xxvi.  3,  4  ; 
Ps.  cxii.  7  ;  cxxv.  1 ;  Isa.  xxxiii.  15,  16). 

X.  The  wicked  are  often  employed  to  be  the  instruments  of 
inflicting^  the  punishment  of  their  sins  on  each  other. 

Thus  it  was  conspicuously  here,  in  the  case  of  the  men  of  Shechem  and  their 
so-called  king.  Thus  it  has  been  in  nearly  all  ages,  in  the  wars  which  one  nation 
has  had  with  another.  How  often,  too,  in  Scripture  history  do  we  read  of  the 
king  of  Babylon  at  one  time,  of  Nineveh  at  another,  or  of  Egypt  at  still  another 
being  employed  by  the  Governor  among  the  nations,  to  punish  this  or  that 
people  for  their  long-continued  wickedness  in  the  sight  of  high  Heaven !  The 
wars  of  the  Saracens  and  Crusaders,  the  descent  of  the  Turkish  hordes  from  the 
heights  of  Central  Asia,  on  the  west  of  Asia,  and  the  east  of  Europe,  and  the 
wars  of  ancient  Rome,  when  the  Caesars  conquered  all  the  west,  the  north,  and 
the  east  of  Europe,  and  the  wars,  too,  which  led  to  the  fall  of  the  Roman  empire 
by  the  inrushing  of  Goths,  Huns,  and  Vandals  from  all  parts  of  the  north,  for 
the  destruction  of  the  city  that   had  so   long  sinned,  are  examples. 

It  is  on  the  same  principle,  that  the  evil  angels  are  said  to  be  the  instruments 
of  inflicting  wrath  on  the  wicked.  They  brought  the  plagues  on  Egypt 
(Ps.  Ixxviii.  49) ;  perhaps  they  brought  the  flood  on  the  old  world ;  some  sup- 
pose they  brought  the  hail,  the  lightning,  and  the  hornet  on  the  Canaanites  for 
their  destruction;  also  they  destroyed  the  property  of  the  Gadarenes  by  entering 
into  the  swine ;  Satan  himself  is  said  to  have  the  power  of  inflicting  death  on 
mankind  as  God's  messenger  (Heb.  ii.  14) — he  is  the  "  spirit  that  worketh  in 
the  children  of  disobedience"  (Eph.  ii.  2),  and  these  are  **led  captive  by  him  at 
his  will"  (2  Tim.  ii.  26). 


CHAPTER  X. 

FORTY-FIVE  YEARS  PASSED  OVER  IN  SILENCE, 

(Vers.  1-5.) 

Critioal  Notes. — !•   After  Abimelech.]    This  man  is  recognised  as  having  been  a  ruler  in 

Israel,  notwithstanding  his  scandalous  career.  Probably  he  was  permitted  to  occupy  this 
position  for  a  time,  as  a  new  method  of  chastising  the  people  for  their  extreme  tendency  to 
choose  another  king  than  Jehovah,  and  to  show  that  '*  their  sorrows  should  be  multiplied  that 
hasten  after  another  god."  The  rigorous  rule  of  the  bramble-bush  sovereign  was  as  severe  an 
affliction,  as  the  inrushing  of  a  marauding  foe  from  without.  By  this  course,  too,  means  were 
furnished  for  exhibiting  the  desperate  wickedness  of  the  human  heart ;  and  the  case  is  held  up 
as  a  beacon  to  warn  the  men  of  every  age. 

To  defend  Israel.]  Not  against  any  actual  assault  of  an  enemy,  but  he  stood  f<irth  as  the 
guardian  of  the  public  safety,  ready,  when  necessary,  to  ward  off  all  danger,  and,  by  his  very 
presence,  to  prevent  any  disturbance  of  the  national  peace  from  within  or  from  without.  He 
would  administer  justice  wisely,  and  provide  against  the  likely  or  possible  incursions  of 
•urrounding  foes. 

2  B  433 


CHAP.  X.  BOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:   JUDGES. 


Tola,  the  son  of  Puali,  the  son  of  Dodo.l  Puah  is  also  written  Pua  and  Phuvah.  This  time 
the  tribe  of  Issachar  is  chosen  to  provide  a  judge.  In  David's  time,  they  were  men  of  renown, 
"  that  had  understanding  of  the  times  to  know  what  Israel  ought  to  do"  (I.  Chron.  xil  32).  God 
chose  the  "  saviours  "  from  different  tribes,  to  show  His  readiness  to  honour  all  the  tribes  in 
turn.  This  was  a  proof  also  that  the  organic  unity  of  Israel  was  still  preserved.  Dodo— is  here 
a  proper  name,  and  is  not  to  be  taken  as  meaning  "  uncle,"  (Sept.)  (II.  Sam.  xxiii.  9). 

Dwelt  in  Shamir.]  When  he  entered  on  the  duties  of  his  oflfice,  he  found  it  more  convenient  to 
live  nearer  the  centre  of  the  country,  and  accordingly  he  went  to  Mount  Ephraim. 

2.  Judged  Israel.]  The  northern  and  eastern  tribes.  Twenty-three  years  and  died.]  Not  a 
single  particular  of  his  public  life  is  recorded.  But  it  was  not  therefore  unimportant.  To  secure 
peace  was  no  small  blessing.  To  be  a  check  on  the  outbreakings  of  idolatry  was  for  the 
covenanted  people  an  immense  benefit.  Though  no  fame  was  acquired,  "  the  Lord  had  need  of 
him"  for  a  time.  He  has  need  of  the  purling  brook  as  well  as  the  majestic  stream.  In  man's 
judgment  the  one  may  seem  insignificant  compared  with  the  other,  but  in  God's  estimation 
everything  is  beautiful  in  its  place.  The  family  line  of  Tola,  however,  appear  to  have  been 
distinguished  in  Israel  all  along,  beginning  with  the  ancestor  (Gen.  xlvi.  13  ;  Num.  xxvi  23), 
and  going  on  to  the  days  of  David  (I.  Chron.  vii.  1-5),  including  the  judge  mentioned  in  this 
chapter. 

3.  Jair  the  Gileadite,]  born  in  Gilead,  the  half  of  which  was  given  to  the  half-tribe  of 
Manasseh  (Deut.  iii.  1 3).  This  name  has  occasioned  much  discussion.  It  must  be  remembered 
that  family  names  were  a  feature  in  Israelitish  history — the  same  name  frequently  coming  in, 
in  the  same  line  of  descent,  through  different  generations.  Jair  was  the  name  of  the  ancestral 
head  of  one  of  the  most  influential  family  lines  in  Manasseh.  He  was  one,  apparently  the  chief, 
of  the  "  children  of  Machir,"  who,  in  the  days  of  the  dividing  of  the  land,  "  dispossessed  the 
Amorite  that  was  in  Gilead,"  and  first  "  took  some  of  the  small  towns,  calling  them  Havoth-jair" 
(the  abodes  of  Jair),  and  afterwards  accomplished  the  most  important  feat  of  taking  "  the  60  great 
cities  with  walls  and  brazen  bars  that  were  in  the  region  of  Argob,  a  part  of  Bashan."  This  was 
the  land  of  the  giants ;  and  such  a  victory  could  only  have  been  gained  through  faith.  To  perpetuate 
it  he  called  these  60  walled  towns  of  the  giants  by  the  name  of  Bashan-havoth-jair — meaning  the 
abodes,  or  towns,  which  Jair  conquered  for  himself  in  the  giant  country.  Hence,  honour  is  done 
to  this  ancestor  of  the  line  by  referring  to  him  frequently  (Num.  xxxii.  39-41  ;  Deut.  iii.  13,  14  ; 
Josh.  xiii.  30  ;  I.  Kings  iv.  13),  and  especially  as  the  possessor  of  these  Bashan  cities  by 
conquest. 

Reference  is  made  also  to  Jair  in  I.  Chron.  ii.  22,  who  cannot  be  the  same  with  the  first  Jair, 
for  "the  towns  of  Jair"  are  spoken  of  as  existing  before  his  time  (ver.  23),  i.e.,  the  towns  of 
the  first,  or  ancestral  Jair.  Some  suppose  the  allusion  is  to  Jair,  the  judge.  It  may  have  been 
so,  notwithstanding  the  statement  that  this  Jair's  grandmother  is  said  to  have  been  the 
*'  daughter  of  Machir  "  (ver.  21,  22),  and  as  hundreds  of  years  elapsed  between  the  days  of 
Machir  and  the  time  of  Jair  the  judge,  there  must  have  been  several  generations  during  the 
interval.  Yet  that  difficulty  could  be  solved  by  understanding  the  word  "  daughter  "  to  mean 
descendant  of  Machir,  which  is  so  often  done  in  the  accounts  given  of  family  lines  among  the 
Israelites.  But  where  the  accounts  given  are  so  meagre,  it  is  impossible  to  decide  definitely 
whether  the  Jair  in  I.  Chron.  ii.  22  was  the  same  with  Jair,  the  judge  here,  or  was  another 
person  of  the  same  name.  If  he  was  the  same,  then  he  had  at  first  23  cities,  and  must  have 
increased  them  to  30,  that  every  one  of  his  sons  might  have  a  city ;  or,  as  some  think,  he 
got  possession  of  the  60  cities  which  the  first  Jair  took  out  of  the  hands  of  the  Amorite 
(I.  Chron.  ii.  23).  It  is,  however,  probable  that  there  were  more  than  even  two  persons,  heads 
of  families,  called  by  this  name,  for  on  account  of  its  fame  many  would  be  desirous  to  hand 
it  down. 

Judged  Israel  twenty-two  years.]  From  this  long  period  of  peaceable  government,  we  may 
suppose,  he  was  a  very  capable  administrator  of  justice,  as  well  as  a  man  of  high  character  for 
piety  like  his  great  ancestors. 

4.  That  rode  on  thirty  ass  colts- 1  Horses  were  not  then  in  the  country.  To  ride  on  an  ass 
was  at  that  time  equivalent  to  a  man  keeping  his  carriage  now.  It  was  a  mark  of  wealth, 
which  few  could  afford,  for  nearly  the  whole  population  were  accustomed  to  go  from  place  to 
place  on  foot.  This  must,  therefore,  have  been  a  large  and  opulent  family.  The  ass  was  then 
a  superior  type  of  animal  to  what  it  is  and  long  has  been  in  these  more  recent  times.  This  was 
especially  true  of  the  "white  ass  "  (ch.  v.  10,  also  ch.  xii.  14  ;  I.  Kings  i.  33;  x.  28).  The  horse 
when  it  appealed  was  generally  associated  with  war,  while  the  ass  being  quiet  and  the  reverse 
Df  formidable,  was  regarded  as  the  symbol  of  peace.  Hence  Zion's  King  came  riding  on  an 
ass,  His  kingdom  being  one  of  peace  (Zech.  ix.  9). 

434 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES.  CHAP.  X. 


Thirty  cities  which  are  called  Havoth-jair  unto  this  day.]  Probably  the  same  towns  as  those 
in  Num.  xxxii.  41,  when  the  name  Havoth-jair  was  first  used  ;  also  in  I.  Kings  iv.  13  (second 
clause).  They  are  here  called  "  cities,"  though  in  reality  only  villages.  "  Villages  are  cities 
to  a  contented  mind  "  {Henry). 

5.  "Was  buried  in  Camon.]  Probably  on  the  west  side  of  Jordan.  It  deserves  to  be  noticed, 
that  of  all  whom  God  called  to  serve  Him  in  the  office  of  judge  or  king,  care  is  taken  to  say 
what  became  of  their  dust. 

A  Fresh  Course  of  Sin  and  Penitence. 

6.  Did  evil  again  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord.  1  (See  on  ch.  ii.  12-19  ;  iii.  7,  8,  12;  iv.  1-3;  vi. 
1,  2,  &c.).  They  continue  to  do  evil,  as  if  there  were  no  curing  of  this  plague  of  the  heart,  in 
departing  from  the  living  and  true  God. 

The  gods  of  Syria  (Aram),  of  Zidon,  of  Moab,  &c.]  Notwithstanding  all  the  expostulation  used, 
the  warnings  given,  and  the  severe  applications  of  the  rod,  they  still  persisted  in  apostasy,  nay, 
more,  they  are  worse  than  ever  ;  for  now  they  go  in  for  idolatry  wholesale.  Well  might  the 
prophet  call  on  heaven  and  earth  to  listen  to  the  tale  of  such  dreadful  impiety  (Isa.  i.  2-7  ;  Jer. 
chs.  i.-x.  ;  Hosea-jjassim.  The  heathen  being  left  only  with  the  dim  light  of  nature,  could  never 
rise  to  the  vast  conception  of  suppDsing  universal  power,  infinite  wisdom,  and  perfect  goodness, 
to  be  concentrated  in  one  God.  Hence  they  supposed  it  laid  a  broader  and  safer  basis,  to  have 
many  gods,  as  implying  greater  resources.  Even  Cicero,  though  he  set  forth  in  his  book,  De 
Natura  Deorum,  the  vanity  of  the  heathen  deities,  yet  declared  in  one  of  his  orations,  that  it  "did 
not  become  the  majesty  of  the  Roman  empire  to  worship  one  god  only."  But  on  this  point, 
Israel  had  the  most  precise  teaching,  and  therefore  sinned  against  the  clearest  light. 

The  gods  of  Syria,  or  Aram,  are  not  named,  but  one  of  them  was  Rimmon  (2  Kings  v.  18), 
They  were  worshipped  by  Ahaz,  as  the  gods  of  Damascus  (2  Chron.  xxviii.  23  ;  2  Kings  xvi.  10), 
Those  of  the  Zidonians,  or  Phenieians,  were  Baal  and  Ashteroth  ;  of  the  Moabites,  Chemosh  ; 
of  the  children  of  Ammon,  Moloch,  or  Milcom  ;  and  of  the  Philistines,  Dagon.  These  pro- 
bably had  all  substantially  the  same  features  of  character,  just  as  all  wicked  men  have  a  family 
likeness,  yet  there  might  be  many  varieties  owing  to  local  and  accidental  associations.  The 
great  fact  always  coming  out  was,  that  the  worship  of  Jehovah  was  set  aside  (1  Kings  xi.  6-8). 
This  amounted  to  the  plucking  up  of  religion  by  the  roots,  had  it  been  allowed  to  continue. 

7.  The  anger  of  the  Lord  was  kindled-]  After  the  modes  of  speech  used  among  men,  the 
£  rong  Divine  opposition  to  such  high-handed  sin  is  here  intimated ;  but  we  are  not  to  suppose 
there  was  any  ungovernable  emotion  in  the  Divine  mind,  such  as  we  always  asi=;ociate  with  anger 
in  human  bosoms.  Sold  them  into  the  hands  of,  &c-]  comp.  Deut.  xxxii.  30  (see  on  iii.  8  ;  iv.  2). 
The  idolatry  seems  to  have  been  on  all  sides,  and  so  one  enemy  is  raised  up  on  the  east,  and 
another  on  the  west.  The  Ammonites  oppressed  those  on  the  east  side  of  Jordan  principally, 
and  the  Philistines,  the  tribes  of  Judah,  Simeon  and  Benjamin,  being  nearest  to  them.  This 
oppression  by  the  Philistines  is  that  which  is  referred  to  in  the  days  of  Samson,  but  is  supposed 
to  have  been  coeval  with  that  of  the  eastern  tribes  by  the  children  of  Ammon,  so  long  as  that 
continued.     The  calamity  which  befel  the  trans-Jordanic  tribes  is  first  described, 

8.  That  year  they  vexed  and  oppressed  for  eighteen  years.  &c.l  We  take  it  to  be  the  year 
when  God  first  gave  them  up  helplessly  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy.  That  year  on  for  18  years. 
The  enemy  hated  that  people  above  all  others,  and  as  soon  as  they  got  the  opportunity  they  were 
not  slow  to  improve  it.  They  oppressed  with  a  will,  and  that  for  as  many  years  as  they  had 
permission.  Well  might  David  say,  "Let  me  not  fall  into  the  hands  of  man."  The  verbs 
^pn  and  \^^"1  have  much  the  same  meaning,  and  express  rough  and  violent  treatment, 
nearly  equivalent  to  Ps.  ii.  9  (last  clause).  They  were  crushed,  or  dashed  to  pieces.  The  use  of 
the  two  words  is  to  give  emphasis  to  the  statement  (comp.  ch.  iv.  3  ;  vi.  1-6. 

9.  Passed  over  Jordan  to  fight  against  Judah,  &c.]  Probably  they  had  laid  bare  all  the  country 
on  the  east  side,  and  now  they  wished  to  ravage  the  lands  <>n  the  west  side.  This  appears  to  have 
been  when  many  years  of  the  oppression  had  gone,  and  before  as  yet  the  weight  of  the  Philistine 
power  had  been  much  felt. 

10.  Cried  unto  the  Lord.  &c.l  Comp.  ch.  ii.  9-15  ;  iv.  S  ;  vi.  6.  This  was  no  doubt  a  cry  of 
distress,  which  is  little  more  than  an  instinct  of  nature,  but  it  also  contains  some  acknowledge- 
ment of  their  sins,  as  the  cause  of  their  misery,  and  so  is  better  than  the  mere  howling  of 
»n  animal  when  it  is  stricken  (Hos.  vii.  14).  The  connecting  particles  "^31  in  that^  is  a  specific 
putting  of  the  finger  on  the  cause  of  all  their  distress.  We  have  einned,  inasmuch  as  we  have 
forsaken  God  and  served  Balaam. 

435 


CBAP.X.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   JUDGES, 


11  Did  not  I  deliver  you  1]  This  is  supplemented,  but  most  justly  so.  From  the  Egyptians 
Ex.  i.-xiv.) ;  from  the  Amorites  (Num.  xxi.,  21-35) ;  from  the  children  of  Ammon  (ch.  iii.  12, 
13,  etc.) ;  from  the  Philistines  (ch.  iii.  31,  through  Shamgar).  [In  1  Sam.  xii.  9,  the  Philistines 
come  between  Moab  and  Sisera,  but  we  are  not  to  take  that  as  meaning  the  historical 
connection]. 

12.  The  Zidonians  also  (the  general  name  for  the  league  of  nations  to  the  north  of  Canaan 
whose  forces  were  commanded  by  Sisera) ;  the  Amalekites  (the  reference  here  is  chiefly  to 
ch.  iii.  13  and  vi.  3.  When  any  attack  was  to  be  made  on  Israel,  Amalek  was  always  ready) ; 
and  the  Maonites  (the  Midianites,  or  probably  that  section  of  the  Midianites  that  were  next  to 
Israel,  and  planned  the  invasion  of  ch.  vi.,  but  were  joined  by  the  great  mass  of  the  confederated 
people)  see  2  Chron.  xxvi.  7. 

13.  Yet  ye  have  forsaken  me,  etc-l  All  this  is  said  to  produce  deeper  conviction  of  sin.  For 
the  really  serious  thing  is  to  have  thorough  work  in  dealing  with  the  sin.  That  well  done,  it  is 
quick  and  easy  work  to  bring  round  the  deliverance.  "God  keeps  count  of  His  deliverances  ; 
much  more  ought  we  to  do  so" — {Trapp),  comp.  Dent,  xxxii,  5,  6  ;  Ezra  ix.  13,  14.  The  great 
deliverances  vi'hich  God  here  calls  to  mind  are  seven  in  number,  corresponding  witn  the  number 
of  the  different  national  idols  which  they  had  served,  every  one  of  which  had  brought  them  low, 
almost  to  the  point  of  destruction.  A  most  valuable  double  instruction  was  conveyed  by  these 
sevens.  A  seven  times  trial  (complete)  was  made  of  their  hearts,  and  they  were  found  capable 
of  casting  off  their  God  in  order  to  serve  any  idol,  no  matter  what,  all  round  the  compass  !  An 
equally  full  trial  was  made  of  the  character  of  their  God,  and  He  was  found  incapable  of  casting 
them  off  and  breaking  His  covenant,  notwithstanding  their  repeated  and  highly  aggravated 
sins  ! 

I  will  deliver  you  no  more-1  Speaking  after  the  manner  of  men,  this  was  the  treatment  they 
deserved.  They  could  not  reasonably  expect  anything  else.  It  is  the  language  of  upbraiding, 
and  partly  of  threatening.  But  even  in  Israel's  worst  days  the  assurance  is  held  out,  that  where 
there  is  true  penitence,  there  will  be  pardon  (Jer.  xxvi.  3,  13  ;  xxxi.  18-20 ;  Rev.  ii.  6).  For 
"  God  often  threatens  that  He  may  not  punish.  He  pardons  such  sin  too,  as  no  man  could  do 
(see  Jer.  iii.  1)" — (Trapp).  The  whole  of  this  remonstrance  is  parallel  to  the  case  of  Hos,  v.  15; 
vi.  1-3,  where  God  chastises  His  people  by  hiding  His  face  from  them  which  soon  brings  them 
into  deep  waters,  so  that  they  are  glad  to  return  to  Him ;  comp.  also  Isa.  Ivii.  17,  18. 

15.  Do  to  us  what  seemeth  good  unto  Thee-l  They  leave  themselves,  confessedly  guilty,  in 
God's  hands.  They  are  ready  **  to  accept  the  punishment  of  their  iniquity  "  (Lev.  xxvi.  41,  43). 
They  practically  say  "  we  will  bear  the  indignation  of  the  Lord,  for  we  have  sinned  against 
Him  "  (Micah  vii.  9).  Tids  was  the  very  best  thing  they  could  do — to  confess  at  once  they  were 
all  in  the  wrong  and  deserved  chastisement,  but  leaving  themselves  entirely  at  God's  disposal. 
No  sinner  can  t  'ke  a  safer  course  than,  while  confessing  his  sins  with  sorrow,  to  leave  himself  to 
the  promptings  of  God's  heart.  That  heart  never  fails,  if  only  the  obstruction  is  removed  to  the 
outflow  of  the  Divine  lovinuf  kindness  (Jer.  xxxi.  18,  19  with  ver.  20).  Their  confessions  are 
followed  up  by  deeds.  "They  put  away  the  strange  gods,"  and  so  the  sincerity  of  their 
penitence  is  crowned  (Prov.  xxviii,  13 ;  Hos.  xiv.  8 ;  1  Sam.  vii  2,  3 ;  Gen.  xxxv.  1-5  ;  Job. 
xxxiv.  31,  32). 

His  soul  was  (vexed)  grieved  for  the  misery  of  Israel-]  "i!?*^  '"^O'S  shoi'tened  or  impatient 
(Num.  XXL  4),  like  one  who  is  restless  or  uneasy,  and  so  is  moved  to  take  action.  "  My  bowels  ar« 
troubled  for  him  "  (Hos.  xi.  8,  9  ;  Isa.  xl.  2). 

17-  Gathered  together.]  Assembled  by  public  proclamation  (ch.  iv.  13  ;  vii.  23).  The  purpose 
is  stated  in  next  chapter.  Encamped  in  Gileadd  Here  it  refers  to  the  whole  territory  possessed 
by  Israel  on  the  east  side  of  Jordan,  but  sometimes  it  refers  only  to  that  part  which  was 
occupied  by  the  half  tribe  of  Manasseh.  The  children  of  Israel  assembled-]  No  longer  deserted 
by  their  God,  they  are  animated  with  fresh  courage  (Ps.  Ix.  11,  12  ;  cxviii.  8-12  ;  xviii.  29-34). 
In  Kizpeh.]  Mizpeh  (masc.)  is  said  to  be  the  town  ;  Mizpah  (fem.),  the  district  (Josh.  xi.  3,  8), 
Other  references  are  m  de  to  it  as  Ramoth-mizpeh,  or  simply  Ramoth  in  Gilead  (Josh.  xiii.  26  ; 
XX.  8  ;  I.  Chron.  vi.  80,  see  also  I.  Kings  iv.  13  ;  xxii.  3,  6.  It  was  a  convenient  centre  for 
rendezvous,  and  a  place  of  great  natural  strength.  With  the  article  it  means  the  wutch-tower, 
or  heap  of  witness  (Gen.  xxxi.  48,  49). 

18.  And  the  people  and  princes,  etcl  Rather,  and  the  people,  even  the  princes  of  Gilead,  i.e., 
the  heads  of  tribes  and  families  on  the  east  side  of  Jordan.  The  name  captain  is  used  in 
ch.  xL  6,  11,  where  it  means  the  chief  leader, 

436 


HOMILETIC  COMMENT! R Jr. '    JUDGES.  OHAP.  x. 


HOMILETIC  REMARKS.— Verse*  1-18. 

Quiet  Times. 

1.  These  come  undeserved.     On  the  priaciple,  that  there  is  "no  peace  to  the 

wicked,"  we  might  expect,  in  the  ordinary  exercise  of  justice,  that  troubles 
would  never  cease  in  a  community  where  sin  was  daily  committed.  The  exist- 
ence of  sin  is  always  a  cause  of  war  with  God,  and,  as  it  is  manifest,  that  in 
every  generation  of  Israel,  the  great  majority  of  the  people  were  idolaters  in 
heart,  the  natural  expectation  was,  that  there  would  be  no  modifying  of  the 
severity  of  the  Divine  dealings  with  them  a^  any  period  of  their  history.  Yet, 
in  fact,  mild  and  pacific  dealings  did  come  in  frequently,  and  so  must  be  set 
down  as  the  undeserved  loving  kindness  of  the  Ruler  of  Providence. 

How  erroneous  are  the  data,  on  which  men  form  their  judgments  of  God's 
ways  of  dealing  with  them.  They  forget  that  they  are  ever  provoking  God  to 
anger,  by  living  every  day  for  their  own  pleasure,  and  refusing  to  acknowledge 
His  claims  on  their  obedience,  or  even  recognising  His  presence  in  their  midst. 
They  habitually  banish  him  from  their  very  thoughts,  and  yet  murmur  if  He 
should  send  them  trouble  in  any  degree.  Tliey  take  for  granted  that 
immunity  from  trouble  is  their  due  ;  whereas  *'  it  is  of  the  Lord's  mercies  we  are 
not  consumed."  Were  justice  alone  the  rule  of  dealing,  we  could  look  for  no 
respite.     Quiet  times,  when  they  come,  are  entirely  undeserved  (Ezra  ix.  13, 15). 

2.  They  come  only  after  a  vindication  of  the  Divine  Righteousness.    In  the 

frightful  tragedy  wliich  came  like  a  sweeping  torrent  on  the  great  transgressors 
at  Shechem,  when  a  hurried  and  awful  death  overtook  Abimelech  and  the 
inhabitants  of  Shechem,  not  a  single  man  excepted,  the  whole  nation  were 
aroused  from  their  slumbers  to  read  the  lesson  of  God's  anger  against  the  idolaters. 
Every  man  seemed  to  hear  the  voice  for  himself,  *' Stand  in  awe  and  sin  not." 
It  was  G  »d  vindicating  His  own  character  as  the  righteous  Moral  Governor  of 
the  world.  This  being  done  in  the  sight  of  all  Israel,  it  was  fit  that  a  pause 
should  take  place  in  the  further  sending  of  troubles  on  the  land. 

3.  duiet  times  fill  the  large  spaces  of  human  history.  Even  in  this  Book  of 
Judges,  which  many  think  describes  a  tempestuous  period  of  Israelitish  history, 
the  calamitous  times  are  the  exception,  while  those  of  peace  and  quiet  are  the 
rule.  Israel's  first  oppression  was  for  eight  years.  This  was  followed  by  a  rest 
of  40  years,  or  five  times  as  long.  The  next  period  of  distress  lasted  18  years, 
and  then  the  land  had  respite  for  80  years.  Tiien  came  trouble  for  20  years, 
and  rest  for  40  years.  Again  we  read  of  seven  years'  oppression,  and  this 
followed  by  40  years  of  quiet.  Once  more,  we  have  the  cataract  of  bloodshed 
and  sin  for  three  years,  and  iiow  a  pause,  and  dead  stillness  for  45  years. 

So  it  is  in  human  life  generally,  notwithstanding  me. I's  high-handed  provoca- 
tions. Times  of  immunity  from  trial  form  by  far  the  larger  portions  of 
our  life.  Our  days  of  good  health  greatly  outnumber  the  days  of  sickness. 
Our  times  of  peace  and  comfort,  are  greatly  longer  than  the  periods  of  severe 
pain  and  great  calamity.  Our  seasons  of  sunshine  also  are  long,  compared  with 
those  when  our  sky  is  overcast.  Our  hopes,  as  a  rule,  by  many  degrees  exceed 
our  fears.  Cases  aUo  are  numerous  where,  if  we  be  true  Christians,  when  our 
troubles  abound,  our  consolations  do  much  more  abound.  Generally,  the 
ex[)ression  of  friendly  feeling  greets  our  ears  more  frequently  than  those 
of  anger  and  disaffection.  All  things  go  to  show  that  the  largest  spaces  in 
human  life  partake  of  the  character  of  quiet  and  goodwill,  notwithstanding  the 
provocations  we  give  to  the  Ruler  of  Providence, 

437 


CHAP.  X.  EOMILETIC  COMMENT AR  Y :  JUDGES, 


4.  Quiet  times  are  greatly  needed. 

(1).  To  preserve  the  benign  attitude  of  God  in  dealing  with  guilty  men. 

To  keep  up  this  attitude  is  essential,  for  without  this  view  of  the  Divine 
character,  men  would  never  be  brought  back  to  God.  "  We  love  Him  because 
He  loves  us."  A  free  and  full  revelation  of  the  loving  nature  of  God,  is 
necessary  to  remove  the  prejudice  which  is  natural  to  the  human  heart  against 
God,  that  He  is  hard  and  inexorable,  ever  disposed  to  say,  *'  Pay  me  that  thou 
owest  to  the  uttermost  farthing."  Happy  is  the  man  who  gets  entirely  free  of 
that  prejudice. 

By  often  sending  seasons  of  quiet  when  He  might  justly  appoint  times 
of  great  distress,  God  shows  that  he  will  not  be  always  frowning,  as  if,  like  weak 
man.  He  could  not  remain  self-controlled  in  the  face  of  so  many  provocations. 
But  as  He  must  show  Himself  jealous  for  His  own  great  name,  there  are 
junctures  when  he  comes  forth  to  vindicate  His  honour.  He  reserves  special 
occasions,  called  emphatically  *'  the  day  of  the  Lord,"  when  *'  He  lays  judgment 
to  the  line,  and  righteousness  to  the  plumbline,"  and  so  vindicates  His  own 
Majesty  on  the  one  hand,  while  He  visits  sin  as  it  deserves  on  the  other.  On 
these  special  occasions,  He  shows  what  he  might  do  at  any  time,  though  for  the 
most  part  he  forbears.  Thus  the  times  of  forbearance,  or  of  quiet,  are  many 
compared  with  the  times  of  smiting  :  "  His  tender  mercies  are  over  all  His 
works." 

**  He  will  not  chide  continually, 
Nor  keep  His  anger  still ; 
With  us  He  dealt  not  as  we  sinned, 
Nor  did  requite  our  ill." 

(2.)  To  allow  time  to  recover  from  the  effects  of  great  agitation.  After  the 
violent  spasm  to  which  the  country  was  subjected  by  Abimelech,  it  required  a 
period  of  calm  to  recover  from  the  shock  and  the  confusion.  Each  oppression  of 
the  land  through  the  in-rush  of  Vandalic  hordes  produced  a  disastrous  effect. 
The  country  was  desolated,  the  homes  of  Israel  were  broken  up,  the  bonds  of 
society  were  loosed,  the  administration  of  justice  ceased,  and  the  whole  nation 
was  "  scattered  and  peeled  "  (ch.  v.  6,  8.)  Quiet  times  were  needed  to  set  the 
nation  on  its  feet  again,  to  give  heart  to  its  people,  and  bring  back  days 
of  prosperity  and  of  hope.  The  operations  of  industry  must  be  resumed,  fields 
must  be  sown  and  reaped,  the  useful  arts  of  life  must  be  prosecuted,  channels  for 
trade  must  be  opened  up,  and  laws  for  the  security  of  life  and  property  must  be 
established.  God  never  wished  to  "  make  a  full  end  "  of  His  chosen  people,  and, 
though  they  were  often  brought  very  low  for  their  sins,  and  made  to  feel  how 
easy  it  would  have  been  to  dash  them  to  the  ground  beyond  all  possibility  of 
rising  again.  He  ever  remembered  that  they  were  the  people  on  whom  He  had 
set  His  love,  out  of  whom  should  arise  the  promised  **  seed  "  that  was  one  day  to 
bless  the  whole  earth,  and  so  they  were  restored. 

(3)  To  carry  on  all  the  useful  activities  of  life.  If  a  nation  is  to  live,  there 
must  be  scope  for  its  activity.  Freedom  of  action  must  be  allowed  to  the  mass 
of  its  people  to  carry  out  their  schemes  and  fulfil  their  duties.  And  it  is  in  the 
unfettered,  healthful  working  out  of  the  innumerable  small  schemes  and  duties 
of  life  that  the  temporal  wellbeing  of  a  nation  mainly  consists.  The  great  deeds 
of  its  heroes  are  things  to  dazzle  the  eye,  and  perhaps  enkindle  hope,  inspire 
courage,  and  excite  to  lofty  aspiration.  But  it  is  far  less  on  these,  that  the  true 
prosperity  of  a  people  depends,  than  on  the  industry  and  energy  of  the  myriads 
of  hands  that  are  ever  plying  the  loom  in  the  common  machinery  of  human  life. 

"  Niagara  excites  our  wonder,  and  we  stand  amazed  at  the  power  and  great- 
ness of  God  as  He  *  pours  it  from  the  hollow  of  His  hand.'  But  one  Niagara  19 
433 


EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY :   JUDGES.  chap.  % 


inough  for  a  continent  and  a  world,  while  that  same  world  needs  tens  of 
thousands  of  silver  fountains  and  gently  flowing  rivulets,  that  shall  water  every 
farm,  every  meadow,  and  every  garden,  and  shall  flow  on  every  day  and  night 
with  their  gentle  and  quiet  beauty.  So  with  the  acts  of  our  lives.  It  is  not  by 
great  deeds  only,  like  those  of  Howard,  nor  by  great  sufferings  only,  like  those 
uf  the  martyrs,  that  good  is  to  be  done.  It  is  by  the  quiet  and  useful  virtues 
of  the  Christian  character,  the  meek  forbearance  of  the  Christian  temper,  the 
spirit  of  forgiveness  in  the  husband,  the  wife,  the  father,  the  mother,  the  brother, 
the  sister,  the  friend,  and  the  neighbour  in  every  avenue  in  which  men  move, 
tliat  society  is  to  be  improved  and  its  bonds  strengthened." — [Barnes.] 

(4)  For  purposes  of  consideration  and  profitable  meditation.  Calm  thought  is 
always  needed  to  weigh  things  in  even  scales.  Amid  the  hurry  and  excitement 
of  strong  passing  events  the  mind  cannot  estimate  the  strength  of  the  forces  at 
work  around  it,  and  is  disturbed  in  its  judgments,  like  the  trembling  of  the 
needle  in  a  rolling  ship.  Quiet  hours  are  needed  to  consider  the  '*why"  and 
the  **  wherefore  "  of  God's  dealings.  Proper  meditation  on  what  has  happened 
is  apt  to  lead  to  self-humiliation  and  amendment  of  ways.  It  prompts  men  to 
say,  **  Let  us  search  and  try  our  ways,  and  turn  to  the  Lord."  The  broken  and 
contrite  spirit  is  cherished  (Lam.  iii.  28-36),  arguments  are  weighed,  motives 
and  aims  are  examined,  and  new  resolutions  in  the  strength  of  God's  grace  are 
formed.  Deeper  attention  is  paid  to  the  roots  of  character,  new  seeds  of  pro- 
fitable thought  are  deposited  in  the  mind,  and  a  more  careful,  more  mature,  and 
better-weighed  decision  is  come  to,  not  to  continue  the  war  any  longer  with  God, 
but  to  yield  up  everything  at  the  expression  of  His  will. 

The  Silences  of  History. 

Here  are  two  judges  mentioned  by  name,  as  having  occupied  the  posts  of  most 
public  observation  in  the  whole  nation,  and  in  charge  of  its  public  welfare  for 
the  long  period  of  close  on  half  a  century,  and  yet  not  a  single  deed  is  noticed 
that  either  of  them  did.  Their  family  circle  is  referred  to,  and  their  high  social 
position,  but  as  regards  the  share  they  took  in  the  public  events  of  their  time 
there  is  a  perfect  blank  in  the  narrative.     On  this  we  remark — 

li  The  silences  of  Scripture  history  are  sometimes  speaking  silences.  It  is 
so  in  the  case  of  Melchizedeck.  All  that  is  told  of  him  in  the  narrative  is  com- 
prised in  one  short  paragraph.  We  are  only  told  what  he  did  in  blessing 
Abraham,  when  he  returned  from  the  slaughter  of  the  kings  ;  but  not  a  word  is 
said  about  his  father  and  mother  on  the  one  hand,  nor  about  his  death  on  the 
other.  Yet  see  how  much  the  apostle  made  of  this  silence  in  Hel.  vii.  3  ;  also 
David  in  Ps.  ex.  There  is  silence  kept,  too,  in  regard  to  the  Rock  in  the 
wilderness  as  to  its  being  a  foreshadowing  of  Christ  in  being  a  Smitten  Rock, 
and  water  issuing  from  it  sufficient  to  preserve  the  life  of  God's  people  to  the 
end  of  their  wilderness  journey,  with  other  particulars.  But  we  should  hardly 
have  ventured  to  say  that  that  Rock  was  Christ  had  not  the  inspired  writer  told 
us  so  (1  Cor.  X.  4).  It  is  the  same  with  many  other  objects  in  Old  Testament 
history.  And  the  absence  of  any  statement  that  any  one  of  them  was  a  type  of 
Christ  has  the  significance  of  saying,  that  the  whole  framework  of  that  history 
was  made  up  in  such  a  way  as  to  foreshadow  Christ. 

Here  there  is  a  speaking  silence,  when  two  men  follow  each  other  as  chief 
magistrates  of  the  nation,  at  a  most  difficult  juncture  of  affairs,  when  public 
morality  was  low,  when  the  public  administration  of  justice  was  all  but 
paralysed,  when  the  tide  of  ungodliness  swept  over  the  land,  and  nothing  was  so 
likely  to  happen  as  a  series  of  the  most  tragic  occurrences,  and  yet  there  is 

439 


CHAP.  X.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES, 


nothing  to  say  !  This  fact  speaks  volumes  for  the  practical  wisdom,  the  tact 
and  prudence,  and  the  comprehensive  '*  understanding  of  the  times  on  the  part 
of  these  men  to  know  what  Israel  ought  to  do."  An  uneventful  age  means  a 
period  of  peace  and  contentment.  Hence  the  adage,  *' Happy  is  the  nation  that 
hath  no  history." 

2.  These  silences  are  nnmerous.  Over  the  history  of  the  whole  world  before 
the  Flood  the  veil  of  silence  is  spread.  Only  a  few  fragmentary  utterances  are 
given  respecting  the  lives  of  thouf^ands,  nay,  millions  of  actors  for  more  than 
sixteen  centuries  !  And  the  history  of  the  whole  heathen  world  is  left  out, 
except  some  black  edgings  of  history,  which  are  so  bad  that  we  scarcely  can 
desire  to  have  had  more  !  But  even  among  good  men  the  silences  are  many,  as 
in  the  case  of  Enoch,  and  Abel,  and  Seth  ;  of  Adam  himself,  also,  after  his  fall ; 
of  the  parents  of  Moses,  and  Jesse,  the  father  of  David  ;  of  Caleb,  and  Jethro, 
and  Obadiah,  and  Jabez,  with  many  more,  all  of  whom  are  dismissed  with  a 
comparatively  brief  notice,  and  yet  they  are  names  of  which  we  might  well 
desire  to  hear  more.  Indeed,  the  persons  selected  for  a  moderately  full  notice 
on  the  page  of  Scripture  history  are  very  few. 

3.  They  often  occur  in  tenderness.  This  is  specially  the  case,  in  the  infrequent 
notices  taken  of  the  sins  of  God's  people.  A  few  cases  of  aggravated  offences 
are  mentioned,  but  what  multitudes  are  passed  over  in  silence  !  David,  by  his 
own  account,  had  so  many  transgressions  to  confess  before  his  God  that  he  felt 
them  to  be  more  in  number  than  the  hairs  on  his  head  (Ps.  xl.  12).  And  of 
men  generally,  he  says,  **  Who  can  understand  his  errors  ? "  But  with  the  sins 
which  might  exist  with  David  before  his  God  men  had  not  to  do,  and  God  does 
not  speak  of  them  in  the  ears  of  men.  It  is  of  those  that  were  a  scandal  before 
the  world  and  the  Church  that  open  notice  is  taken  in  the  Book  of  God.  How 
many  sins  are  "covered"  (Ps.  xxxii.  1);  "removed  far  away"  (Ps.  ciii.  12); 
"blotted  out  as  a  thick  cloud"  (Isa.  xliv.  22);  "passed  by"  (Mic.  vii.  19); 
"  remembered  no  more ! "  (Heb.  viii.  12). 

4.  They  illustrate  the  sovereignty  of  God  in  giving  to  each  one  his  place 
in  history. 

Some  have  a  prominent  station  given  them,  while  to  others  an  obscure  or 
unconspicuous  post  is  assigned.  Some  receive  notice  only  as  "  hewers  of  wood 
and  drawers  of  water,"  while  others  stand  forth  in  the  foreground  like  Joshua, 
and  are  made  to  perform  deeds  which  require  a  whole  Book  to  preserve  a  record 
of  them.  Gideon's  life  occupies  three  long  chapters ;  Zola  and  Jair  together 
only  five  verses.  Ehud's  one  deed  fills  a  whole  page,  while  Shamgar's  feat  is 
dismissed  in  a  single  verse.  The  story  of  Deborah  and  Barak  runs  on  for  fully 
two  chapters,  while  Ibzan,  Ebon,  and  Abdon  all  three  scarcely  occupy  a  moderate 
paragraph. 

There  are  reasons  for  this  : — 

(1.)  God  has  apian  of  Providential  dealing  with  His  Chv/rch,  and  He  selects 
instruments  that  are  suitable  to  that  plan.  Hence  one  is  taken  and  another 
i^left. 

(2.)  He  has  a  right  to  make  use  of  His  own  creatures  as  it  pleases  Him. 
They  are  at  His  absolute  disposal,  but  men  forget  what  that  means.  It  means 
they  are  at  the  disposal  of  One  whose  character  is  the  reverse  of  that  of  man. 
He  is  One  who  is  so  just,  that  He  cannot  act  unjustly  by  any  of  His  creatures, 
so  kind,  that  He  cannot  act  by  them  unkindly,  so  wise  that  He  cannot  fall  into 
any  error  in  His  dealings.  No  creature  can  be  safer  than  to  leave  himself 
entirely  in  the  hands  of  his  God,  doing  His  wilL 
440 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES,  chap.  xi. 

(3.)  In  His  sovereign  disposal  of  mens  lot,  He  always  acts  from  wise  and 

just  reasons. 

(4).  Nom  have  a  right  to  claim  a  prominent  position  at  His  hands, 

(5.)  Grace  always  appears  with  sovereignty  in  God's  dealings  with  men  in 
this  world.  We  owe  that  to  the  essential  character  of  God,  whose  "  grace 
never  faileth." 

New  Sins  and  New  SoRROwa 
[See  Remarks  on  oh.  iii.  12 ;  It.  1,  etc. ;  vl  1,  etc] 

I.  The  human  heart  when  left  to  itself  is  capable  of  going  the  whole 
round  of  sin.  Here  are  seven  different  gods  bowed  to,  and  had  there  been 
otlier  seven,  or  even  seventy  times  seven,  it  would  have  made  no  difference  in 
the  result.     Well  might  Jehovah  say,  "  My  people  are  bent  to  backsliding  from 

2  There  is  no  possibility  of  serving  Jehovah  and  other  gods  at  the  same 
time.  Beginning  with  an  attempt  at  the  combination,  they  soon  gave  up  even 
the  semblance  of  worshipping  Jehovah  (Ezek.  xx.  39). 

3.  There  is  a  fascination  in  worshipping  false  gods.  The  bias  of  the  heart 
to  that  worship  must  have  been  strong,  when  such  solemn  arguments  were  used 
all  along  against  it,  but  in  vain.  What  was  the  magnetic  force  that  drew  them 
on  ?  (l)  There  was  a  charm  in  mere  scenic  representations.  Visibility  was 
given  to  one's  religion,  and  the  senses  were  exercised  rather  than  the  mind. 
There  was  music  and  dancing,  and  even  frivolity  mixed  up  with  their  religion. 

(2)  In  idolatry  they  had  the  power  of  making  gods  to  their  own  minds,  and  they 
ascribed  to  them  only  such  features  of  character  as  they  wished  them  to  possess. 

(3)  These  gods  permitted  indulgence  in  all  the  evil  propensities  of  the  depraved 
heart — those  "  lusts   and  passions  that  war  against  the  soul "  (Num.  xxv.). 

(4)  The  principle  of  imitation  is  strong-  All  other  nations  so  worshipped. 
They^  did  not  like  to  be  singular.  These  nations^  too,  were  prosperous 
and  rich* 


CHAPTER  XL 


OSOICB  OP  A  LEADER \  AND  SLAUGHTER  OF  THE  ENEMT, 

Verses  1-33. 

Critical  Notes.— 1.  The  Gileadite.  1     Many  regard  this  as  not  a  definite  patronymic,  but 

indicating  that  he  belonged  to  the  clan  of  the  Gileadites.  The  phrase,  Gilead  begat  Jephtkahy 
they  suppose  to  mean  that  the  son  of  Machir  was  his  ancestor,  and  add,  that  his  posterity  is  not 
more  distinctly  given  because  his  birth  was  illegitimate.  But  this  is  to  put  a  strain  on  the  passage, 
for  we  are  told  that  Jephthah's  father  had  other  sons  (ver.  2).  Gilead  here  spoken  of,  then,  must 
have  been  a  descendant  of  the  son  of  Machir,  wearing  the  same  name,  for  the  same  names  often 
recurred  in  Jewish  families  (see  the  genealogies  in  1  Chron.  ii.  and  iv.)  The  ancestor  of  the 
family  is  referred  to  in  Num.  xxvi.  29.    The  designation,  OUeadite,  by  itself,  may  be  regarded 

441 


CHAP.  XI.  EOMILETW  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES 


as  a  general  patronymic,  similar  to  "Elon  the  Zebulonite"  (ch.  xii.  11,  12),  signifying  that  he 
belonged  to  the  family  line  of  the  Gileadites,  and  that  one  of  the  line  of  the  same  name  with 
the  ancestor,  G-ilead,  was  his  father.     It  also  implies,  that  Gilead  was  the  country  of  his  birth. 

Amig'itymanofvalour]  comp.  Josh.  i.  14;  2  Kings  v.  1;  also  ch.  vL  12,  implying  great 
physical  strength,  boldness  and  courage.  "  A  man  able  to  endure  hardness  as  a  good  soldier," 
"  a  man  that  had  often  done  great  exploits  on  the  field,  and  that  had  looked  death  in  the  face  on 
great  adventures  in  the  field  '—{Trapp)  This  feature  is  mentioned,  as  it  gave  him  distinction 
in  such  an  age,  an  age  of  wars  and  fightings.  The  son  of  m  harlot  1  The  sacred  penman,  wibh 
evere  impartiality,  gives  the  actual  outlines  of  a  man's  history,  whether  for  honour  or  dishonour. 

2.  Thrust  out  Jephthahd  From  the  circumstance  of  his  birth,  he  was  not  entitled  to  share  in 
the  paternal  inheritance.  Not  even  the  children  of  the  secondary  wife  were  so  entitled  (Gen. 
xxi.  10  ;  XXV.  6).  It  is  probable,  that  Jephthah  from  his  bold  and  enterprising  spirit,  1>ade  fair 
to  take  the  lead  in  the  general  family  circle,  and  so  jealousy  -ras  awakened. 

3  Dwelt  in  the  lani  of  Tobd  2  SauL  x.  6.  Probably  some  part  of  Syria,  a  part  on  the 
borders  of  Gilead,  to  the  north,  or  north-east.  He  flees  thither  as  to  an  asylum,  and  by 
constraint.  ^^ITO  90od,  may  apply  to  the  land,  and  signify  that  the  land  was  fertile.  Such  a 
phrase  as  eretz  tob,  a  good  land,  is  used  in  Ex.  iii.  8.  Yet  some  suppose  it  may  have  been  owned 
by  one  who  was  called  Tob,  on  account  of  his  goodness,  as  Aristides  was  sumamed  "  the  Just,"  and 
Phocion  was  called  "  the  Good."  Of  Probus,  the  Emperor,  it  was  said  if  he  had  not  already  had 
Ptobus  (the  honest)  for  his  name,  he  would  certainly  have  had  it  given  him  for  a  surname,  for 
he  was  honest  all  over.    {Trapp). 

Wer«  gathered  unto  him  vain  men. J  Rather,  they  gathered  themselves  unto  Hitti  They 
were  prob  ibly  attracted  to  him,  partly  because  he  belonged  to  a  family  of  distinction,  but  still 
more  by  his  sterling  qualities  as  a  leader  of  men.     Courage,  enterprise,  and  decision  of  character, 

are  sure  to  make  a  following.      D'^P'H  vain  men.      Men  of  no  moral  restraint  (see  on  ch.  ix.  i), 

of  loose,  perhaps  infamous  character  ;  for  it  corresponds  with  the  term  "  Raca  "  in  Matt,  v., 
which  is  a  term  of  great  reproach.  In  fact,  Jephthah  now  became  an  adventurer,  not  of  choice, 
but  through  force  of  circumstances ;  and  "  adversity  makes  us  acquainted  with  strange  bed- 
fellows." These  were  not  chosen  associates  of  Jephthah,  as  was  the  case  with  Abimelech 
(ch.  ix.  4),  but  they  had  this  in  common,  that  they  were  driven  out  from  the  pale  of  constituted 
society,  and  were  compelled  to  lead  the  life  of  adventurers.  Jephthah,  however,  could  have  had 
no  sympathy  with  anything  that  was  ungodly,  or  dissolute  in  character. 

They  went  out  with  liim,l  i.e.  in  any  of  his  adventures.  These  were  necessary  as  a  means  of 
subsistence.  Nothing  would  be  more  to  the  taste  of  such  a  class  of  men  than  a  system  of 
freebooting,  without  regard  to  moral  principle.  But  to  a  man  of  conscience,  like  Jephthah,  such 
consi  derations  as  these  would  regulate  his  conduct :  The  heathen  all  round  were  the  enemies  of 
the  God  of  Israel,  and  of  the  people  of  Israel ;  they  were  long  ago  marked  out  for  destruction  ; 
most  of  them  had  already  oppressed  Israel  for  years  without  making  compensation  ;  and  at  the 
present  moment  (during  the  18  years  mentioned),  the  Ammonites  were  doing  their  very  utmost 
to  tread  down  the  tribes  throughout  Gilead  to  the  east  of  Jordan,  his  own  people.  Was  he  not, 
therefore,  justified  in  attacking  the  enemies  of  his  people,  and  of  his  God,  the  same  as  he  would 
be  in  fighting  a  battle  with  an  enemy  ?  Was  he  not  at  liberty  to  despoil  those  who  were  already 
doomed  to  destruction  by  Jehovah,  at  the  hand  of  Israel  ?  A  parallel  case  we  have  in  the  history 
of  David  (1  Sam.  xxii.  2).  David  made  raids  from  time  to  time  into  the  countries  of  the  Lord's 
enemies  (1  Sam.  xxvii.  8-10  ;  xxx.  ;  also  xxiii.  1-5).  Jephthah  was  very  successful  in  these 
excursions,  and  so  gained  a  great  name  as  a  warrior. 

4.  In  process  of  timed  After  several  years,  or  as  the  years  rolled  on.  The  meaning  seems 
to  be,  when  a  considerable  period  had  elapsed  after  Jephthah's  expulsion,  and  many  things  had 
come  and  gone.  When  he  was  expelled,  it  was  the  period  of  the  people's  sin  and  impenitence, 
and  not  at  all  unlikely,  one  of  the  special  items  of  dislike  to  him  on  the  part  of  his  brethren, 
was  his  staunch  loyalty  to  the  God  of  Israel,  while  they  at  that  time  were  idolaters.  That  he 
was  a  true  fearer  of  Jehovah  is  manifest  from  the  whole  account,  and  he  was  not  likely  to  learn 
that  lesson  in  Aram  while  living  ami^-ng  heathen  strangers.  He  must  have  learned  it  before 
leaving  his  father's  house  and  kindred,  for  in  the  darkest  nights  of  Israel's  history,  there  were 
always  some  glimmerings  of  the  true  light  left  unextinguished.  Jephthah's  brethren,  being 
now  penitent,  and  having  returned  to  the  worship  of  Israel's  Grod,  would  feel  that  his  piety, 
which  they  formerly  disliked,  was  one  of  the  best  qualifications  for  his  becoming  their 
leader  in  a  battle,  which  was  to  be  won  through  the  aid  of  Israel's  God. 

Made  war  against  Israel*]  The  historian  now  returns  from  his  digression  to  the  point  stated 
in  ch.  X.  17.    The  Ammonites  bad  for  years  made  many  desultoiy  and  desolating  excursion 

442 


HOMTLETTC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES.  -    chap.  xi. 


into  the  land  of  Israel,  but  now  they  were  collectinnr  their  forces  for  a  general  subjugation  of 
the  country.  It  was  about  this  period,  say  somei  that  the  Greeks  made  war  against  Troy,  and 
after  ten  years  took  it. — Trapjp. 

6.  Gome  and  be  our  captain.]  Because  of  his  fame  as  a  warrior,  and  also  because  of  hia 
loyalty  to  Israel's  God.       V^'P    a  leader  in  war  (Josh.  x.  24),  and  is  distinguished  in  ver.  11 

from  li^i^"i,  a  chief  in  peace  and  war.  The  former  word  seems  to  refer  to  a  temporary 
appointment,  the  latter  to  a  permanent  (  flBce  ;  hence  its  importance  in  ver.  9,  where  ^f^n  is 
used.  And  the  force  of  the  btaiement  is,  "  If  I  fight  with  Ammon  as  your  temporary  captain 
for  the  battle,  and  the  Lord  deliver  them  into  my  hand,  then  I  will  become  your  permanent 
head  or  judge,  or  shall  I  become  so  ?  "     To  this  they  agreed. 

?•  Did  ye  not  hate  me  and  expel  me,  etc.  1]  We  see  nothing  very  harsh  or  resentful  in 
these  words  as  some  do.  A  great  injury  had  been  done  to  him  in  forcing  him  into  exile,  and 
compelling  him  to  lead  the  life  of  a  guerilla  chief  for  these  eighteen  years,  and  the  language 
now  used  is  only  what  might  be  expected  from  a  man  of  proper  self-respect.  His  brethren 
really  did  the  wrong,  but  the  elders,  or  leading  men  in  Gilead  of  that  day,  seemed  to  have 
concurred  in  the  act,  or  at  least  could  have  prevented  it. 

8.  Therefore  we  turn  to  thee  now,  etc-]  We  now  come  to  make  amends,  and  we  not  only 
ask  thee  to  fight  with  us  against  the  children  of  Ammon,  but  to  be  head  or  ruler  over  all  Gilead. 

9.  And  the  Lord  deliver  them  before  me-]  He  speaks  of  God  under  his  covenant  name, 
Jehovah — not  Elohim,  which  last  refers  equally  to  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  world,  but 
the  former  relates  to  the  special  covenant  he  had  made  with  Israel  as  a  redeemed  people.  He 
also  looks  for  victory,  n<>t  as  coming  through  his  own  prowess  or  skill  as  a  general,  but  as  a 
blessing  coming  from  Jehovah. 

Shall  I  he  your  head  I]  Shall  I  become  your  permanent  ruler  or  head  (as  explained  in 
ver.  6)  ?     Or,  it  will  be  on  condition  that  I  become  your  permanent  head. 

10.  The  Lord  he  witness,  etc.]  The  enemy  was  at  the  gate,  and  there  was  no  time  for 
he.sitation.  They  were  glad  to  get  the  help  of  a  man  like  Jephthah,  on  any  terms.  They 
are  even  willing  to  make  the  agreement  with  the  solemnity  of  an  oath,  for  "an  oath  for 
confirmation  is  to  men  an  end  of  all  strife." 

11.  Uttered  all  his  words  before  the  Lord.]  He  does  everything  under  Jehovah's  immediate 
inspection  and  sanction.  He  generously  forgets  all  former  grievances,  and  forgives  as  he  hoped 
to  be  forgiven. 

In  Mizpeh.]  This  place  from  Jacob's  time  had  always  more  or  less  of  a  sacred  character. 
There  was  set  up  the  heap  of  stones  as  a  witness  before  God,  that  neither  Laban  nor  he  should 
pass  it  to  do  the  other  harm  (Gen,  xxxi.  49-53).  It,  afterwards,  b'^came  the  capital  of  Gilead. 
It  was  also  one  of  the  48  Levitical  cities  given  to  that  sacred  tribe,  among  all  the  other  tribes 
(Josh.  xxi.  38),  and  it  was  one  of  the  six  cities  of  refuge  (Josh.  xx.  8).  In  these  verses  it 
is  spoken  of  as  Ramoth-in- Gilead.  The  special  presence  of  God  was  supposed  to  be  with  the 
tabernacle,  with  the  ark,  or  with  the  priest  officiating  clothed  with  the  ephod.  This  latter  may 
have  been  the  case  here. 

12.  What  hast  thou  to  do  with  me  W  He  now  speaks  in  name  of  the  nation,  having  been  chosen 
their  captain.  His  first  step  is  to  try  to  settle  the  dispute  peacefully,  according  to  the  law  of  his 
God  (Deut.  XX.  10).     Even  the  Romans  held  that  all  things  ought  to  be  tried  first  before  war. 

13.  Israel  took  away  my  land,  &c-]  This  wa^  a  mere  pretext  for  a  quarrel.  A  district  of  fertile 
land  lying  between  Amon  on  the  south,  and  Jabbok  on  the  north,  enclosed  by  Jordan  on  the 
west,  and  the  wilderness  on  the  east,  did  at  one  time  belong  to  the  Moabites,  or  Ammonites,  or 
both  ;  for  being  both  sons  of  Lot  and  brethren,  they  are  often  spoken  of  as  if  they  were  but  one 
nation  (see  Num.  xxi.  26-30).  But  that  territory  was  taken  from  them  by  Sihon,  king  of  the 
Amorites,  so  that  when  Israel,  at  their  entrance  into  Canaan,  passed  along,  they  found  it  to  be 
a  part  of  the  kingdom  of  Sihon,  and  as  they  conquered  Sihon  in  turn,  it  naturally  fell  into  their 
hands  ;  yet,  in  no  sense,  as  a  portion  of  Moab  or  Ammon,  but  as  a  division  of  the  kingdom  of 
Sihon  (v.  22  ;  Deut.  iii.  16  ;  Josh.  xiii.  25).  "The  Arnon  (rushing  stream)  empties  itself  into 
the  Dead  Sea,  mid-way  down  on  the  east  side  (Num.  xxi.  13).  The  Jabbok  (pouier)  rises  iu  the 
mouutains  of  Gilead,  and  empties  itself  into  the  Jordan,  near  the  city  of  Adam  "  (Josh.  iii.  16) 
{Lias). 

14.  Sent  messengers  again.]  He  was  a  man  of  robust  intellect,  as  well  as  robust  body,  and 
saw  through  the  flimsiness  of  the  pretext  in  a  moment. 

15.  Thus  saith  Jephthah-l  He  recapitulates  all  the  facts  bearing  on  the  case,  and  shows  how 
fully  he  was  acquainted  with  all  God's  past  dealings  towards  his  covenant  people.     Like  Moses 

443 


CHAP.  XI.  nOMILETTC  COMMENTARY  :  JUDGES, 


in  the  desert,  or  like  David  in  the  cave,  he  must  have  occupied  much  of  his  time  in  that  foreign 
land,  in  meditating  on  the  mighty  acts  of  the  Lord  towards  His  chosen  people. 

17.  Sent  messengers  to  the  King  of  Edom  ...  and  to  the  King  of  Moab,  etcl  These  peoples 
were  descenc'ants  of  Esau  and  of  Lot,  and  the  Israelites  were  forbidden  to  attack  any  of  them 
(Deut.  ii.  5,  9,  19  ;  2  Chron.  xx.  10).  So  "  Israel  abode  in  Kadesh,"  when  these  kings  refused 
to  grant  them  liberty  to  pass  through.  They  took  no  step  to  force  a  passage,  though  they  were 
well  able  to  do  so. 

18.  Compassed  the  land  of  Edom  and  of  Mtyab-l  Took  a  long  and  fatiguing  journey  round  these 
territ(;rios,  that  they  might  not  come  within  the  borders  of  Moab  nor  yet  of  Edom  (Num.  xxi.  4, 
11,  13  ;  xxii.  36  ;  Dent.  ii.  1-12). 

19.  20-  Let  us  pass  through  thy  land  unto  my  place,  etc-]  Even  Sihon  was  not  attacked  by 
Israel,  but  the  Amorite  king  himself  brought  on  the  war  which  took  place  (Num.  xxi.  21-25  ; 
Deut.  ii.  26-34). 

22.  They  possessed  all  the  coasts  of  the  Amorites.  from  Arnon  to  Jabbok,  and  from  the  wilderness 
to  Jordan.]  This  v/a^  the  territory  in  dispute,  and  Jephthah  shows  how  it  came  into  Israel's 
possession.  It  was  not  taken  by  Israel  from  Moab,  for  at  that  time  Moab  had  it  not.  Israel 
too  showed  a  jealous  rare  not  to  touch  anything  that  belonged  to  Moab,  being  forbidden  by 
Jehovah  to  do  so.  What  took  place  before  that,  between  the  Amorites  and  Moab,  Israel  had 
nothing  to  do  with — it  was  a  piece  of  past  history.  But  Israel  took  it  from  a  king  by  whom 
they  were  attacked  in  war. 

23.  The  Lord  ^od  of  Israel  hath  dispossessed  the  Amorites,  etc.]  (Deut.  ii  32-37).  The 
blessed  and  only  Potentate  did  so.  There  could  be  no  higher  title  to  any  possession  than  this. 
"The  God  that  made  the  world  and  all  things  therein  .  .  .  determines  for  men  the  bounds 
of  their  habitation"  ^Acts  xvii.  24,  26  ;  Dan.  iv.  25).  At  the  first,  "the  Most  High  divided 
to  the  nations  their  inheritance"  (Deut.  xxxii.  8).  The  Lord  of  the  whole  earth  (Ps.  xxiv.  1) 
has  a  right  to  give  any  part  of  it  to  whomsoever  he  pleaseth.  The  complaint  now  made  was 
really  a  complaint  against  the  doing  of  the  God  of  IsraeL 

24.  That  which  Chemosh  thy  god  giveth  thee.]  He  appeals  to  their  own  principles  of  action. 
They  were  accu-tomed  to  hoLl  that  what  the  r  god  gave  them  they  had  the  fullest  right  to 
possess,  for  no  law  was  liiglier  with  them  than  the  decision  of  their  god.  Had  not  Israel  then 
the  same  liigh  title  to  possess  that  which  their  God  gave  them?  This  was  unanswerable 
reasoning  (Deut.  ix.  3,  6  ;  xviii.  12  ;  Josh.  iii.  10).  Ammon  and  Moab  got  possession  of  the 
territory  they  then  had,  by  forcibly  driving  out  its  previous  possessors  (Deut.  ii.  10-22). 

25.  Art  thon  anything  better  than  Balak.  etc  11  Jephthah  knew  the  whole  history  well,  and  could 
reason  upim  it  equally  well.  He  means,  art  thou  better  than  the  King  of  Moab  of  that  day? 
Yet  he  never  disputed  Israel's  title  to  the  possession  of  that  which  they  took  from  Sihon,  when 
they  had  conquered  him  in  battle.  And  if  Moab's  king  at  the  time  did  not  find  fault,  why 
raise  a  dit^pute  uow  after  the  lapse  of  300  years  ?  There  was  now  a  ]  rescriptive  right.  "A  title 
so  long  unquestioned,  was  to  be  presumed  to  be  unquestionable" — {Busk),  Balak  did  indeed 
hire  Baalam  to  curse  Israel,  but  not  because  he  wished  thereby  to  recover  tlie  lost  portion  of 
land,  but  his  object  was  to  save  his  crown  itself  and  the  kingdom  which  he  possessed.  Ammon 
and  Moab  went  together  in  this  nefarious  attempt  (Deut.  xxiii.  4).  They  were  brethren. 
"Moab  was  the  more  civilised  and  agricultural,  Ammon  the  more  fierce,  Bedouin-like  and 
marauding  half  of  Lot's  descendants  (Isa.  xv.,  xvi. ;  Jer.  xlviii.  ;  comp,  with  1  Sam.  xi.  2 ; 
Amos  i.  13  ;  2  Sam.  x.  1-5  ;  xii.  31)" — (Fausset). 

27.  Wherefore  I  have  not  sinned  against  thee,  &c.]  I  have  the  land  by  right  of  conquest^  the 
same  as  that  by  which  you  own  your  own  territory.  I  have  it  by  the  gift  of  our  God,  who  is  the 
Sovereign  Proprietor  of  heaven  and  earth.  And  I  have  it  by  the  right  of  long  unquestioned 
possession. 

The  Lord  be  judge,  etc]  He  leaves  the  matter  in  the  hands  of  the  Sovereign  "  Judge  of  all  the 
earth."  It  is  clear  that  throughout  this  chapter,  Jephthah  "  acknowledged  the  Lord  in  all  his 
ways,"  believing  that  "  He  woidd  direct  his  steps." 

28.  Hearkened  not  to  the  words  of  Jephthah.]  Though  the  reasoning  was  most  conclusive.  His 
purpose  to  fight  was  already  fixed.  It  was  a  case  of  the  wolf  and  the  lamb.  God  hardened  his 
heart,  for  He  purposed  to  destroy  him  for  lifting  his  hand  against  the  people  of  God. 

29-  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  came  upon  Jephthah.]  Already  he  had  the  spirit  of  grace,  now  he  got 
the  spirit  of  power  (see  on  ch.  iii.  10  ;  vi.  34).  The  effect  was  to  raise  him  above  his  natural  level 
Id  courage,  strength,  boldness,  and  wisdom.    This  was  the  crowning  proof  that  Jehovah  had 

444 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    JUDGES.  chap.  xi. 


chosen  Jephthah,  and  not  the  elders  of  Israel  merely,  to  be  the  leader  in  this  important  crisis.  It 
was  the  same  as  if  a  horn  of  oil  had  been  poured  on  his  head.  It  was  also  an  indication  of  the  fact, 
that  victory  was  to  come,  not  by  natural  energy  or  skill,  "not  by  might,  nor  by  power,  but  by 
my  spirit  saith  the  Lord." 

Passed  over  Gilead  and  Manasseh-l  To  collect  an  army,  in  Reuben,  Gad,  and  the  tribe 
of  Manasseh  east.  Mizpeh  of  Gilead  is  specially  mentioned  as  being  the  rendezvous  for  all  public 
assemblies  of  the  people,  on  the  east  side  of  Jordan.  The  reasons  are  given  above  imder  v.  11. 
It  is  called  Mizpeh  of  Gile&d,  to  distinguish  it  from  Mizpeh  of  Judah,  a  town  about  20  miles 
to  the  south  of  Jerusalem  (1  Sam.  vii.  5-7  ;  Jo  h.  xv.  21,  38 j,  but  some  place  ic  in  Benjamin 
(Josh,  xviii.  26). 

82.  The  Lord  delivered  them  into  his  hands-]  No  account  is  given  of  the  particular  means 
emploj'ed.  But  when  Goal's  hand  is  specially  en /aged,  it  is  ea'^y  with  him  to  set  100  »  springs  iu 
operation,  in  the  most  natural  way,  to  bring  oul  victory.  Whatever  was  fitted  to  hamper, 
to  enfeeble,  to  disconcert,  or  strike  with  panic  the  forces  of  the  enemy,  was  set  agoing.  What- 
ever was  needful  to  encourage,  to  emboldt  n,  and  to  give  fresh  strength  to  His  own  people,  was 
furnished  by  the  God  of  battles.  A  very  great  slaughter  followed,  and  twenty  cities  fell  into  the 
hands  of  the  victors. 

33  The  children  of  Ammon  were  subdued,  etc]  A  single  verse  is  reckoned  sufficient  to  tell  the 
great  decision,  whether  the  dark  cloud  which  had  hung  over  Israel  for  many  years  was  to 
continue,  and  grow  darker  still,  or  whether  light,  liberty,  and  joy  were  again  to  visit  the  homes  of 
the  children  of  the  covenant.  But  nearly  two  chapters  are  taken  up  with  getting  the  people's 
sins  disposed  of,  and  the  arguments  of  the  case  set  forth. 

The  word  ^l^DS"^*!  signifies  greatly  brought  down,  or  laid  very  low.  Their  pride  was  humbled, 
and  their  strength  was  utterly  broken  ;  so  it  usually  fared  with  those  who  dared  to  attack  tlie 
people  of  the  living  God.  They  were  not  merely  defeated,  but  the  defeat  became  a  rout,  and 
indeed  ruin.  None  of  those  who  oppressed  Israel,  after  God's  controversy  with  His  people  was 
closed,  could  lift  up  their  heads  a  second  time.  Here  the  word  might  be  translated  Canaanised 
{Bush), 

HOMILETIG    REMARKS. 

Verses  1-33. 

The  Exile  Leader,  and  a  Great  Triumph. 

Z.    Bvery  man  has  his  starting*  point  in  life  fixed  by  G-od* 

All  do  not  enter  on  tlie  race  of  life  with  the  same  advantages.  Some  are  born 
king's  sons,  and  have  the  prestige  of  royalty  at  every  step  they  take.  Others  are 
the  cliildreu  of  parents  ot  high  rank  and  great  wealth,  to  whom  many  doors  of 
ease  and  enjoyment,  as  well  as  an  lionourable  position  in  life, are  thrown  open.  But 
a  tar  larger  number  are  born  to  tread  more  among  thorns  than  flowers,  and  have  to 
climb  hard,  ere  they  reach  a  respectable  elevation  in  society.  Others  still  are  born 
under  the  shadow  of  reproach,  and  have  from  the  first  to  tight  their  way  through 
a  strong  prejudice,  which  it  may  take  many  years  to  dispel.  Thus  it  was  with 
Jephthah,  wlio  in  early  life  was  banned  even  from  the  society  of  his  own 
brethren,  because  of  the  illegitimacy  of  his  birth,  and  had  at  length  to  flee  into 
a  land  ut  strangers.  There  was  no  blame  on  his  part  ;  but  in  God's  Providence, 
this  cloud  came  over  him  through  the  sin  of  his  parents. 

Similar  are  the  disadvantages,  with  which  many  have  to  contend  in  figliting 
the  battle  of  life.  How  many  are  born  with  sickly  constitutions,  so  that  many 
things  are  a  burden  or  a  labour  to  them,  which  are  a  lii,dit  exercise  to  others. 
How  many  are  blind,  or  have  weak  eyesight  from  the  first,  or  are  maimed,  or 
deformed.  How  many  have  dissolute  parents,  have  uncomfortable  homes,  are 
clothed  in  rags,  and  see  only  spectacles  of  misery  and  squalor  from  dnv  to  day. 

445 


CHAP.  XI.  IIOMILETIO  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES, 


How  many  have  to  toil  hard  for  the  bare  necessaries  of  life,  want  the  means  of 
a  liberal  education,  and  have  no  influential  friends  to  take  them  by  the  hand 
in  climbing  up  the  ladder. 

In  one  aspect  of  the  case,  this  fixing  of  a  man's  starting  point  is  the  arrange- 
ment of  God,  for  it  is  He  who  determines  every  man's  lot.  Yet  it  is  also  true 
that  **when  a  man's  ways  please  the  Lord"  (whatever  his  station  in  life)  He 
not  only  gives  him  promotion,  but  "  maketh  even  his  enemies  to  be  at  peace 
with  him  "  (Prov,  xvi.  7),  Ps.  Ixxv.  6,  7. 

ZI.    ZHuch  of  a  man's  future  in  life  depends  on  himself* 

This  must  be  taken  in  connection  with  the  former  remark.  Jonathan  wasa  king's 
son,  but  he  had  a  wicked  father,  and  he  knew  from  his  youth  that  the  wicked  father's 
son  would  not  inherit  the  throne  of  Israel.  Yet  notwithstanding  this  blight  in  his 
early  hopes,  he  did  not  quarrel  with  the  position  which  God  had  given  him,  but 
nobly  turned  round  and  said  to  David,  "  Thou  shalt  be  king  over  Israel,  and  I 
shall  be  next  unto  thee."  That  honour  denied  him,  he  sought  another 
distinction,  that  of  being  a  man  of  strong  faith  in  his  God.  Such  deeds  did  he 
perform  through  that  faith,  that  his  name  illumines  some  of  the  brightest 
chapters  of  the  Book  of  God,  and  stands  higher  through  all  time  than  if  he  had 
worn  a  crr.wn. 

Had  Jephthah  sat  down  sullenly  as  an  ill-fated  man,  complained,  as  an 
ungodly  man  would  have  done,  that  the  fates  were  against  him,  or  that  God 
had  taken  a  grudge  against  him,  and  begun  to  cherish  a  gloomy,  perhaps  .a 
reckless  and  misanthropic  spirit,  he  would  never  have  risen  in  the  scale  in  after 
life.  Nor  would  Joseph  have  done  so,  if  he  had  given  way  to  hard  thoughts  of  God, 
when  cast  into  the  pit,  or  sold  for  a  slave,  falsely  accused,  and  immured  witliin 
the  walls  of  an  Egyptian  prison.  Nor  would  David  have  risen  to  eminence,  if, 
when  chased  like  a  roe  among  the  mountains,  he  had  lost  all  hope  in  God,  and 
become  demoralised.  Every  man  is  bound  to  make  the  most  of  his  position, 
and,  like  the  woman  of  Zarephath,  to  gather  the  two  sticks  that  are  left  to 
prepare  the  last  meal,  in  the  faith  that  the  covenant  God  will  not  let  the  barrel 
of  meal  waste,  nor  the  cruse  of  oil  fail,  till  the  day  that  He  shall  send  rain  on 
the  earth  (I.  Kings  xvii.  12-16). 

III.  Disaffection  in  a  family  circle  taring's  chastisement  sooner 
or  later. 

If  it  were  undutifulness  to  parents,  the  sentence  according  to  the  Mosaic  law 
was  most  severe.  It  was  the  first  commandment  in  the  Second  Table  of  the 
Law,  to  honour  parents,  and  often  breaches  of  that  commandment  were  visited 
with  death  (Ex.  xxi.  13,  17 ;  Deut.  xxi.  18-21),  or  some  severe  penalty 
(Prov.  XXX.  17  ;  I.  Tim.  i.  9  ;  Rom.  i.  30,  32)  ;  or  if  disaffection  break  out 
among  brethren,  we  have  a  strong  illustration  of  the  Divine  scourge  coming 
down  in  after  years,  in  the  case  of  Joseph's  brethren  (comp.  Gen.  xxxvii.  with 
ch.  xlii.  21,  22).  To  what  a  humiliation  had  Jephthah's  brethren  to  submit, 
when,  in  after  years,  they  had  to  journey  into  a  far  country  to  seek  out  him 
whom  they  had  driven  out,  and  implore  him  to  come  to  their  rescue  in  the  day 
of  their  extremity  !  What  earnest  charges  are  given  against  brethren  falling 
out  among  one  another  (Gen.  xlv.  24  ;  Matt.  xx.  24-28  ;  II.  Cor.  xii.  20,  21  ; 
James  iii.  16  ;  iv.  1,  etc.) 

IV.  Adversity  in  youth  is  often  a  blessing*  (Lam.  iii.  27-33). 

The  man  whom  God  sent  into  Egypt  to  provide  the  staflP  of  bread  for  His 
people  in  days  of  famine,  "  was  sold  for  a  slave  (while  yet  a  youth),  his  feet  were 

446 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES.  chap..xi. 


hurt  with  fetters,  and  he  was  laid  in  irons,"  etc.  (Ps.  cv.  17-22).  Joseph,  the 
indulged  child,  could  never  have  acquired  the  capacity  of  dealing  with  men 
with  firmness,  sagacity,  and  good  judgment,  as  ruler  over  all  the  land  of  Egypt, 
had  he  not  been  tal^en  by  God's  own  far-seeing  hand,  and  set  to  learn  hard 
lessons  in  the  school  of  sharp  affliction.  David  learned  much  during  the  years 
that  his  life  was  sought  by  the  envious  king  of  Israel,  and  also  while  he  was  in 
the  cave  of  AduHam,  and  living  actually  in  the  very  country  of  the  Philistines. 
Jacob,  Moses,  and  others,  would  never  have  been  the  men  whom  they  became, 
had  they  not  been  well  schooled  in  adversity,  at  the  beginning  of  their  public 
life.     Many  have  had  reason  to  say,  "  It  was  good  for  me  that  I  was  afflicted." 

Jepiithah,  too,  led  by  the  kind  hand  of  God's  Providence,  was  taught  to 
"  scorn  delights,  and  live  laborious  days  "  m  his  early  youth,  little  knowing  at 
the  time,  that  he  was  thus  really  being  sent  to  school,  to  learn  lessons  which  he 
could  learn  so  well  in  no  other  way,  and  which  were  essential  to  fit  him  for  the 
great  work  marked  out  for  him  to  perform,  and  the  high  position  he  was  to 
occupy  in  God's  Church  in  after  years. 

V.  The  rig-hteous  and  the  wicked  are  often  compelled  to  live 
tog'ether  in  this  world. 

When  driven  from  his  home  in  Gilead,  Jephthah  appears  to  have  gone  to  his 
mother's  country  in  Aram,  or  that  part  of  Syria,  which  is  just  across  the 
boundary  line  from  Israel,  in  the  north-east.  It  was  a  land  of  idols,  yet 
Jephthali  had  lived  long  enough  in  Israel  to  acquire  a  considerable  knowledge 
of  Israel's  God,  and  no  truth  makes  so  deep  an  impression  on  the  heart  that 
really  receives  it,  as  this  truth.  So  he  still  lived  an  Israelite,  while  surrounded 
by  i(iolaters.  Men  came  around  him  whom  he  did  not  care  to  seek,  and  with 
whose  spirit  he  had  no  sympathy — men  who  were  unprincipled  in  character, 
and  abandoned  in  their  conduct,  but  who,  being  outlaws,  like  himself,  and  in 
need  of  a  captain,  were  attracted  by  the  robust  strength  and  imperial  bearing  of 
this  stalwart  Gileadite.  They  would  naturally  also  acknowledge  him  all  the 
more  readily,  as  he  belonged  to  what  was  reckoned  a  good  family  in  Maoasseh, 
and  already  some  favourable  rumours  were  heard,  respecting  his  feats  in  arms 
against  the  neighbouring  nations. 

Thus  was  Jephthah  compelled  to  live  with  many  men  who  "  had  no  fear  of 
God  before  their  eyes."  On  his  part,  to  have  a  following  was  a  necessity,  both, 
like  David,  as  a  protection  for  his  person,  and  also  as  a  means  of  fighting  the 
hattles  of  his  country  and  his  God.  Thus  did  David  (1  Sam.  xxii.  2,  etc.  ;  xxiii. 
1-5  ;  xxvii.  8,  9).  Besides,  Jephthah,  like  David,  was  not  in  a  position  to 
choose  his  company.  Idolaters  were  round  him  on  all  sides.  These  exiles,  if 
they  were,  or  if  most  of  them  were,  desperadoes,  were  still  the  only  human 
beings  he  could  associate  with.  He  would  have  required  to  have  "  gone  out  of 
the  world,"  if  he  had  determined  to  keep  free  of  the  company  of  the  wicked 
altogether  (1  Cor.  v.  9,  10).  That  Jephthah  should  have  consented  to  act  with 
these  men,  was  not  a  matter  of  preference  or  of  choice,  but  of  pure  necessity.  If 
this  is  not  expressly  stated,  it  is  at  least  as  fair  an  inference  as  any  other,  and 
harmonises  well  with  his  general  character. 

While  a  good  man  is  on  earth,  he  will  always  have  something  in  his  surround 
ings,  to  remind  hiui  that  he  is  in  the  enemy's  country,  that  it  is  earth  and  not 
heaven.  While  the  people  of  God  are  yet  only  travelling  in  the  wilderness,  *'a 
mixed  multitude  "  travel  step  by  step  with  them.  But  when  they  c  me  to  cross 
Jordan,  only  the  circumcised  shall  be  allowed  to  enter  Canaan.  Tdere  they  shall 
have  only  their  "  own  company."  Here  we  must  act  as  far  as  possible  by  the 
rule,  *'  Thou  shalt  not  plough  with  an  ox  and  an  ass  together."     When  it  is 

447 


OHAP.  XI.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  :   JUDQB8, 


a  matter  of  desire,  our  prayer  should  be  :  "  Gather  not  my  soul  with  sinners." 
Bub  when  necessity  leads  us  to  perform  the  duties  of  life  in  company  with  the 
wicked,  our  prayer  should  be,  "  lead  us  not  into  temptation,  but  deliver  us  from 
evil." 

VZ.    The   same  actions  may  be  g>ood  or  evil,  as  they  are  done 
from  ri^ht  or  wrong*  motives. 

If  Jephthah  and  his  followers  were  exiles,  or  outlaws,  the  force  of  their 
circumstances  in  such  an  age,  would  naturally  lead  them  to  act  as  adventurers. 
That  they  made  raids  in  different  directions,  or  prosecuted  this  kind  of  life 
more  or  less,  seems  to  be  implied  in  the  statement,  "they  went  out  with  him." 
To  the  followers,  mere  pillage  or  robbery  would  doubtless  be  the  chief  impelling 
motive,  or,  we  may  add  to  that,  the  love  of  adventure.  But  to  a  man  of  con- 
science like  Jephthah,  the  guiding  motive  would  be,  to  do  battle  against  the 
enemies  of  Jehovah,  and  to  give  suitable  recompense  for  all  the  wrongs  they 
had  done  to  his  people.  All  the  nations  were  of  this  category,  so  that  wherever 
he  turned,  the  same  rule  of  action  would  hold  good  (see  Crit.  Notes  on  v.  3). 
Thus  the  same  action  was  to  Jephthah  the  fulfilment  of  a  sacred  duty,  while  to 
his  followers,  it  was  an  action  of  robbery  and  brigandage.  It  is  also  important 
to  remember,  that  the  whole  of  these  heathen  lands,  north  and  south,  east  and 
west,  were  gifted  to  Israel,  and  the  destruction  of  their  inhabitants  was  ap- 
pointed to  God's  people  as  a  duty  to  be  fulfilled.  All  this  would  be  present  to 
the  mind  of  Jephthah,  and  give  another  and  totally  opposite  complexion  to  the 
acts,  from  that  which  they  had  in  the  case  of  his  associates,  who  did  what  they 
did  as  mere  plunderers. 

In  like  manner,  any  offering  made  to  God,  good  in  itself,  may  become  an 
abomination,  when  the  motives  in  the  heart  are  those  of  hypocrisy,  or  other- 
wise displeasing  to  God(Prov.  xv.  8  ;  Isa.  i.  11-15).  The  kiss  of  salutation,  in 
the  way  of  acknowledgincr  each  other  as  Christian  brethren,  was  well-pleasing 
to  God,  but  the  kiss  of  Judas  in  betraying  his  Master  was  diabolically  bad. 
To  eit  flesh  that  had  been  offered  to  idols,  was,  to  an  enlightened  Christian, 
nothing  more  than  the  means  of  good  nourishment,  and  most  lawful  to  do,  but 
to  eat  such,  in  the  presence  of  one  whose  conscience  felt  such  an  act  to  be  a 
stumbling-block  to  his  faith,  was  positively  sinfuL 

VXX.  G-od*s  choice  of  Instruments  to  do  XZls  work  often  appears 
sing'ular  in  the  estimation  of  men. 

Who  could  have  looked  for  any  good  thing  coming  out  of  the  land  of  Tob — 
a  land  beyond  the  boundary  of  Israel,  and  where  idolatry  was  universal  ?  Who 
could  have  supposed  that  the  illegitimate  son  of  Gilead's  family,  whose  mother 
was  a  heathen  and  a  stranger  to  Israel's  God,  and  who  himself  in  early  boy- 
hood was  shunned  and  scowled  upon  by  all  the  family  circle,  and  was  at  length 
so  persecuted  at  home,  that  he  was  obliged  to  take  refuge  in  a  foreign  land — 
who  could  have  supposed,  that  he  should  become  one  day  the  only  man,  among 
all  the  thousands  of  Israel,  that  was  found  qualified  to  occupy  the  post  of 
Judge  in  Israel,  and  Leader  of  the  hosts  of  the  Lord  against  the  invasion  of 
the  enemy.  Truly,  this  was  a  rose  springing  up  among  thorns — staunch  loyalty 
to  Jehovah's  name  amid  surrounding  treason,  like  that  of  the  few  solitary 
faithful  ones  in  Sardis,  whose  undefiled  garments  do  not  escape  the  notice  ot 
Him,  who  walks  in  the  midst  of  the  seven  golden  candlesticks  (Rev.  iii.  4).  God 
saw  the  affliction  of  his  boyhood,  and  made  him  a  child  of  His  grace.  Having 
begun  the  good  work.  He  keeps  him  by  his  mighty  power  through  faith  against 
all  the  temptations  of  the  wicked  (Rev.  iil  10).    Thence  Jephthah,  when  called 

448 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JUDQES.  chap.  xi. 


for  to  do  God's  work,  is  found  to  be  a  man  of  decided  piety.  Despised  by 
all  around  him,  with  a  ring  of  marauders  hailing  him  as  their  captain,  and  an 
exile  from  his  people  and  home,  this  man  seemed  little  likely  to  be  of  any 
use  to  the  church  of  God  in  his  generation.  But  "  God  seeth  not  as  man 
seeth."  Under  the  unpromising  exterior,  He  beheld  the  germ  of  a  thoroughly 
religious  character,  and  in  His  holy  Providence  He  made  "  the  last  first,  and  the 
first  last."  Jephthah's  name  went  down  into  the  Book  of  God's  remembrance, 
and  that  of  the  Church's  remembrance,  as  a  good  name  (Heb.  xi.  32),  a  pearl 
among  dross,  a  child  of  God  among  children  of  the  wicked  one. 

How  like  is  this  picture  to  that  of  Jephthah's  great  antitype,  who  was 
"  despised  and  rejected  of  men,  a  man  of  sorrows  and  acquainted  with  grief," 
yet  in  due  time  was  exalted  to  be  "  the  man  of  God's  right  hand."  "  The  stone 
which  the  builders  rejected  became  the  head  of  the  corner." 

It  illustrates  also  the  difiPerence  between  God's  estimation  and  man's  estima- 
tion of  huuian  character  (i.  Sam.  xvi.  6-12;  Luke  vii.  37  50;  James  iv.  4; 
Mark  xii.  41,  &c. ;  Luke  xvi.  15  ;  Heb.  xi.  38,  39). 

VZZI.  God's  wisdom  and  love  in  seemtngr  to  forgret  Kis  people's 
suffering's. 

For  the  larger  part,  if  not  the  whole,  of  the  18  years  of  the  enemy's  oppression, 
and  perhaps  longer  still,  did  Jephthah  remain  in  the  land  of  his  exile.  It  must 
have  seemed  to  him  long,  very  long,  to  be  deprived  of  having  any  fellowship 
with  God's  people  in  their  religious  exercises,  and  he  must  often  have  prayed  very 
earnestly  for  a  restoration  of  his  captivity  in  language  similar  to  that  of  Psalm 
xlii  It  must  have  seemed  as  if  God  had  forgotten  His  word  (Ps.  cxix.  49). 
And  so  have  others  of  God's  people  often  felt  (Ps.  Ixxiv.  1,  10,  1]  ;  Ixxvii.  7-10). 
The  children  of  Abraham  were  kept  for  more  than  two  generations  in  the  iron 
furnace  in  Egypt,  yet  all  the  while  the  Divine  pity  was  felt,  and  kept  looking  down 
with  intense  sympathy  on  the  scene  presented.  "  I  have  seen,  I  have  seen  the 
affliction  of  my  people,  and  I  have  heard  their  groaning,  and  am  come  down  to 
deliver  them."  Wisdom  and  love  were  at  work  all  the  time,  deciding  the  best 
time  and  mode  of  deliverance. 

But  in  Jephthah's  case,  as  in  David's,  the  long  delay  previous  to  his  great 
public  work  was  needed,  to  buildup  a  character  suitable  to  the  greatness  of  that 
work.  The  seven  or  more  years  of  David's  wanderings  among  wildernesses,  and 
pits,  and  caves,  and  mountains,  and  valleys,  were  well  occupied  in  the  bringing 
forth  of  those  clear  crystal  effusions  of  a  pious  heart,  which  we  find  in  many  of 
the  precious  Psalms.  There  is  the  63rd  for  example  ;  we  have  to  thank  the  wil- 
derness of  Judah  for  that.  To  his  flight  beyond  Jordan,  and  its  long  continuance 
we  owe  the  42nd.  To  his  narrow  escape  from  Saul,  we  owe  the  57  th  ;  and  to 
his  danger  when  amon^  the  Philistines  we  owe  the  56tli  ;  so  with  others.  What 
a  loss  to  the  Cimrch  of  God  in  all  ages,  not  to  have  had  these  genuine  outpour- 
ings of  a  pious  heart,  in  the  midst  of  overwhelming  troubles.  Hence  the  far-seeing 
wisdom  and  love  of  God,  that  arranged  such  a  course  of  life  for  David. 

Thus  it  was  with  Jephthah.  His  many  years  in  the  land  of  Tob,  we  verily 
believe  he  spent  more  in  intercourse  with  his  God,  than  with  his  associates  in 
adversity.  It  would  be  a  relief  to  him  to  ponder  over  from  day  to  day  the 
marvellous  history,  which  Moses  and  Joshua  had  left  behind  them  of  God's  mighty 
acts  of  love,  and  power  on  behalf  of  His  people  ;  in  proof  of  which,  we  have  a 
specimen  of  the  accuracy  and  fulness  of  his  knowledge,  in  his  reasoning  with  the 
King  of  Ammon.  Little  is  indeed  recorded,  but  when  it  is  so,  we  are  to  tale  it, 
that  that  little  is  but  a  specimen  of  more  that  might  have  been  given. 

IX.  It  is  wise  to  make  tbe  best  of  one's  circumstances,  however 
adverse. 

nr  449 


OHAP.  XL  HOMILETtO  COMMENTARY:  JUDQEB. 


Many  would  have  said,  in  his  circumstances,  that  it  was  of  no  use  to  try  to  do 
anything  to  better  one's  position,  or  even  to  do  anything  for  the  glory  of  God, 
and  the  good  of  His  churcn.  But  this  man  of  faith  improved  such  opportunities 
as  he  had,  and  gained  such  a  name  for  zeal  in  vindicating  the  cause  of  Jehovah, 
and  such  fame  as  a  warrior  in  the  field,  that  all  eyes  were  turned  to  him  in  the 
day  of  Israel's  distress.  He  was  the  first  who  dared  to  attack  the  Ammonites  on 
this  occasion,  and,  according  to  a  public  resolution  come  to,  he  was  chosen  to  be 
the  captain  of  Israel's  army  (ch.  x.  18). 

X.  How  leg-lble  the  records  of  Scripture  history  are,  compared 
with  those  of  profane  history. 

How  clear  and  distinct  in  every  line  is  the  account  here  given  of  what  took 
place  in  Jephthah's  days  !  Yet  this  is  supposed  to  be  about  the  time  of  the 
Trojan  war,  ending  in  the  overthrow  of  that  famous  town  by  the  Greeks.  Tliat 
is  reckoned  to  be  about  the  dawn  of  general  history  outside  the  Bible  ;  and  yet 
even  that  is  so  much  under  a  haze,  that  it  is  difficult  to  say  how  much  of  the 
account  is  truth,  and  how  much  is  fable.  Even  before  this  time,  as  far  back  as 
the  days  of  Moses,  the  ink  seems  yet  scarcely  dry  on  the  page  (if  the  expression 
might  be  allowed),  everything  being  so  fresh  and  legible,  while  all  profane 
records,  even  of  a  date  less  remote,  seem  covered  with  lichen,  or  are  musty 
and  moth-eaten. 

XI.  The  unwisdom  of  despisingr  anyone  in  the  day  of  prosperity. 

The  brethren  of  Jephthah  were  foolish  enough  to  do  this,  and  lived  afterwards 
bitterly  to  lament  it.  God  has  so  dovetailed  society  together,  and  made  one 
part  so  necessary  to  another  (as  in  the  case  of  the  human  body),  that  in  many 
cases,  that  member  of  it  whom  we  think  we  may  frown  upon  or  injure  at  pleasure, 
may  turn  out  at  another  time  to  be  a  most  valuable  auxiliary.  God  has  it  all 
arranged  in  His  plan,  that  now  one,  now  another,  of  our  fellow  creatures,  shall 
serve  us  materially  at  certain  points  of  our  history,  and  as  we  do  not  know  who 
these  persons  are,  our  wisdom  is  to  despise  no  one,  but  live  in  amity  and  peace 
with  all.  This  is  only  in  conformity  with  the  great  law,  "  Tiiou  shalt  love  thy 
neighbour  as  thyself."  Jephthah  might  be  base  in  the  estimation  of  his 
brethren,  but  the  day  came  round,  when  both  they  and  the  brethren  of  Joseph 
found  it  was  a  capital  error  to  despise  their  brother.  "  Base  things  of  the 
world,  and  things  which  are  not,  hath  God  chosen  to  bring  to  nought  things 
that  are."  "  Kings  often  despise  their  soldiers,  until  such  times  as  their  crowns 
begin  to  hang  on  the  one  side  of  their  heads." — [Trapp.] 

A  good  many  years  aj^o,  a  young  man  who  had  been  brought  up  in  a  religious 
family  circle  in  Scotland,  went  out  to  India  to  join  the  army  there.  He  took 
with  him  all  the  peculiarities  of  the  somewhat  antiquated  and  austere  school 
of  religion  in  which  he  had  been  trained,  including  not  only  the  practice  of 
prayer  and  reading  of  the  Scriptures  twice  a  day,  and  his  strict  observance  of 
the  Lord's  Day,  but  also  such  matters  as  the  great  length  of  his  prayers,  the 
blessing  asked  before  meat,  and  the  thanks  returned  after  it  being  also  of 
unusual  length,  the  quaint  nature  of  the  language  used,  and  the  quaint  tone  in 
which  it  was  spoken,  his  manifold  scruples  of  conscience  to  joining  with  his 
comrades  in  any  practice,  important  or  unimportant,  which  he  thought  to  be 
wrong,  with  many  other  points  of  a  similar  character.  These  soon  drew  down 
upon  him  a  storm  of  ridicule  from  the  officers  of  the  regiment  to  which  he 
belonged.  He  became  the  butt  of  innumerable  taunts  and  jeers,  his  religious 
profession  was  treated  with  constant  derision,  and  every  day  for  years  the 
artillery  of  reproach  was  more  or  less  directed  against  him.  In  silence  and  in 
450 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES,  chap.  xi. 


meekness  he  endured  it  all.  After  some  years,  a  dreadful  plague  broke  out  in 
the  camp.  Many  were  laid  low  and  many  died.  So  virulpnt  was  the  nature 
of  the  malady,  that  none  had  the  courage  to  approach  the  victims  to  supply 
them  with  the  means  of  healing.  Now  was  the  opportunity  for  the  man  of 
prayer.  Fearlessly  he  entered  the  area  where  death  was  doing  its  work.  He 
alone  day  after  day  stood  at  the  bedsides  of  the  dying,  doing  the  duty  of 
physician,  nurse,  and  chaplain  ;  and  he  alone  had  the  courage  to  prepare  the 
dead  for  a  decent  sepulture.  At  length  the  plague  was  sta}  ed,  and  he  who 
formerly  had  been  the  object  of  so  much  insult  and  mockt  ry  now  rose  to  the 
rank  of  a  hero.  No  man  was  so  highly  honoured.  The  last  became  first,  and 
he  was  promoted  at  once  from  the  rank  of  cadet  to  that  of  captain  A  prayer 
meeting  under  his  auspices  was  opened,  which  soon  became  numerously  attended, 
and  ere  long  a  second  meeting  was  opened,  the  culmination  of  which  was,  that 
a  revival  of  religion  took  place  amid  signal  marks  of  the  Divine  blessing. 
"  Them  that  honour  me  I  will  honour." 

XZZ.   Confession  is  better  than  prevarication  (vers.  7,  8). 

It  is  nobler  to  confess  at  once  frankly  we  have  done  wTong,  and  are  come  to 
make  amends,  than  to  begin  partly  to  deny  and  partly  to  palliate,  the  unworthy 
act  of  days  gone  by  (Prov.  xxviii.  13  ;  Gen.  xxxvii.  31,  32  ;  with  xlii.  21,  22 ; 
1  Kings  xviii.  17,  18). 

XIZZ.  A  pious  character  formed  dilig'ently  in  secret  will  sooner 
or  later  be  justified  openly. 

Whatever  men's  first  impressions  might  be  about  this  young  man  who  was 
banished  from  his  home,  when  God's  time  came  for  a  revelation  of  his  true 
character,  there  could  be  no  mistake  about  the  spirit  of  loyalty  to  his  God 
which  he  had  cultivated,  when  there  was  no  eye  upon  him.  He  began  by  not 
fighting  with  his  brethren,  but  acknowledged  the  disadvantage  arising  from  his 
birth  (Deut.  xxiii.  2).  He  submitted  to  lead  the  life  of  an  adventurer.  He  did 
not  worship  strange  gods  in  a  heathen  land.  Afterwards,  when  it  was  in  his 
power,  he  did  not  take  revenge  on  his  brethren  by  refusing  to  agree  to  their 
requests.  He  looked  for  all  success  as  coming  only  from  the  God  of  Israel.  The 
fight  he  entered  into  with  Ammon  was  only  for  the  glory  of  the  God  of  Israel, 
and  not  for  showing  his  own  prowess.  He  puts  the  whole  transaction  before 
God  in  prayer,  and  by  a  solemn  service,  ere  he  takes  a  single  step  in  carrying  out 
his  mission.  All  these  and  other  points  come  out  at  last  in  connection  with 
this  n)an's  character,  and  show  how  high  it  stood  with  God  (Prov.  iv.  18  ; 
Job  xvii.  9  ;  Acts  vii.  35-38 ;  1  Sam.  xvii.  34-37). 

XZV.  To  look  for  God's  presence  and  blessing  in  all  our  work  la 
the  sure  way  to  success  (vers.  10,  11). 

He  acknowledges  that  all  victory  comes,  not  through  his  prowess  or  skill,  but 
solely  from  the  God  of  Israel ;  and  he  seems  to  hint  that  now,  when  the  people 
are  truly  mourning  for  their  sins,  there  was  a  good  hope  that  God  wcjuld  deliver 
the  enemy  into  their  hands.  This  spirit  of  Jephthah  is  yet  more  clearly  shown 
by  his  "  uttering  all  his  words  before  the  Lord  in  Mizpeh."  In  every  step  he 
took  in  so  solemn  a  transaction  he  called  God  to  witness.  David  did  this  con- 
tinually, and  Jephthah,  like  David,  has  prospered  whithersoever  he  went.  *'  I 
have  set  the  Lord  always  before  me  "  is  the  proper  rule  of  guidance  for  every 
good  man  (Prov,  ill  6  ;  Ps.  xxxvii.  5,  6,  Ixxx.  16,  17). 

FV  2  451 


CHAP.  XL  BOMILETIC  COMMENTAR  7 :  JUDGES. 


XV.  It  is  better  to  g-o  round  about  to  do  what  Is  rlg'ht,  than  to 
gro  straig^htforward  to  do  what  is  wrong*. 

To  have  gone  straightforward  through  either  Edom  or  Moab  forcibly,  on  their 
way  to  the  promised  land,  would  have  been  for  Israel  tlie  practical  breach  of  a 
Divine  command,  for  God  had  given  the  otiB  territory  to  the  children  of  Esau 
for  an  inheritance,  and  the  other  in  like  manner  to  the  children  of  Lot.  There 
are  many  things  in  life,  where  it  would  save  us  much  trouble  if  we  could  get  at 
them  directly,  instead  of  having  to  make  a  wide  detour  to  tlie  riglit  liand  or  the 
left.     Israel  made  a  long  journey  to  keep  by  the  right  (Deut.  ii.  5-9). 

XVZ.  Past  history  Is  full  of  instruction  for  the  actors  In  the 
present  (Verses  16-27  ;  Rom.  xv.  4 ;  1  Cor.  x.  11). 

XVIZ.  When  G-od  appoints  a  man  to  do  a  special  work,  He 
g-ives  him  special  qualifications  for  it. 

He  sends  none  a  warfare  on  their  own  charges.  **  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  came 
upon  Jephthah."  This  was  done  specially  to  endow  him  with  every  gift  and 
grace  that  he  might  require  for  the  fulhhnent  of  his  arduous  work.  Thus  was 
Joshua  endowed  (Josh.  i.  5,  7).  Jeremiah  (ch.  i.  17-19).  David  (Ps.  kxi.  16), 
and  even  the  Messiah  Himself  (Isa.  Ixi.  1 ;  xi.  2,  3). 


JEPHTEAWS  vow, 

(Verses  30,   31,    34-40.) 

Critical  Notes. — 80.  Vowed  a  vow  unto  the  Lord-]  He  looked  entirely  to  Jehovah  for 
victory  (Ps.  xviii.  2,  6,  29,  etc. ;  Ixii.  6-8  ;  xlvi.  1,2-7;  cxviii.  6-13  j  cxxL  1,  2).  From  first  to 
last,  He  sees  God's  overruling  Providence  preserving  His  cimrch.  He  recognises  this  when 
treating  with  the  elders  of  Gilead  (ver,  9,  10),  when  he  accepted  the  office  of  captain  (ver.  11), 
when  he  spoke  of  the  past  victories  of  Israel  (ver.  21,  2>{,  "24,  27),  and  now  when  about  to 
contend  with  the  enemy  in  battle  (ver.  30).  As  if  by  instinct  he  turns  to  his  great  refuge  in  the 
time  of  danger.  The  vow  was  an  engagement  that  \i  God  should  put  forth  His  power  on  his 
behalf  he  would  offer  something  as  a  sacrifice,  not  only  in  acknowledgment  of  Goti's  goodness 
but  of  his  own  increased  obligation  to  love  and  serve  Him  as  his  God. 

If  thou  Shalt  without  fail  deliver-l  lit.,  If  giving  ihou  shall  give.  The  doubling  of  the 
phrase,  so  common  in  the  Hebrew,  always  implies  additional  strength  of  statement. 

31.  Whatsoever  cometh  forth,  etc]  Heb.  That  which  coming  forth  shall  have  come  forth— a 
doubling  of  the  statement  as  in  ver.  30,  and  having  the  f ©rce  of  saying,  "  assuredly  what  comes 
forth,  etc.,  shall  be  the  Lord's."  Many  read  whosoever,  but  it  would  be  grammatically  proper  lo 
read  either  way.  The  text  does  not  determine  certainly,  whether  a  human  being  or  a  beast  was 
present  to  the  mind  of  the  speaker.  The  rendering  in  the  A.V.  appears  to  be  preferable,  because 
it  leaves  the  object  entirely  undefined,  which  was  the  real  state  of  the  vower's  mind.  To  get 
quit  of  the  difficulty,  some  would  render  the  1  by  or,  turning  the  copulative  into  a  disjunctive. 
We  cannot  agree  with  Keil,  who  says  that  it  never  has  this  sense,  for  see  Ex.  xxi.  15  ; 
2  Sam.  ii.  19.  It  is,  however,  a  rare  use  of  the  particle,  and  KeiVs  statement,  that  it  is  to  be 
taken  here  as  explanatory,  must  be  accepted  as  just.  To  offer  up  the  object  as  a  burnt  offering 
is  not  an  alternative  to  tlie  consecration  of  it  to  the  Lord,  but  an  explanation  of  the  manner  in 
which  the  purpose  of  so  consecrating  it  was  to  be  carried  out  (see  Bush).  Another  attempt  to 
solve  the  difficulty  is  that  made  by  Dr.  Randolph,  who  would  read  the  last  clause — and  I  vjould 
offer  {to  Him)  a  burnt  offering — an  ingenious  conjecture,  but  it  simply  amounts  to  the  foisting 
of  a  meaning  into  the  text,  instead  of  taking  one  out  of  it.  The  suffix  pronoun  '^n  added  to  the 
verb  in  Hebrew  is  always  the  objective  to  the  verb,  not  to  a  preposition,  unless  that  is  expressed. 
We  prefer  the  rendering  given  in  the  A.V.  to  any  other. 

Jephthah,  we  believe,  was  at  this  moment  greatly  agitated,  under  a  sense  of  the  vast 

responsibility  which  rested  on  him  as  having  to  "  order  the  battle."      He  was  in  deep  waters 

and  the  floods  were  overflowing  him.     It  would  be  a  strong  additional  obligation  to  him  to  be 

the  Lord's,  and  to  live  to  Him  a  more  devoted  life,  were  He  but  to  give  deliverauoe  at  such  • 

452 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES,  chap.  xi. 


crisis.  As  expressive  of  this  felt  obligation,  there  must  be  some  outward  sign.  That  sign 
naturally  took  the  form  of  a  sacrificial  offering  on  the  altar  ;  but  so  flurried  was  he  in  spirit, 
that  he  could  not  make  up  his  mind  as  to  what  the  object  should  be.  He  therefore  leaves  it  to 
God  to  "  provide  Himself  with  a  Iamb  for  a  burnt  offering."  The  object  was  thus  entirely 
indefinite  to  Jephtkah's  mind. 

34.  His  daughter  came  out  to  meet  him  with  timbrels.]  It  was  customary,  in  those  times, 
for  the  women  to  go  forth  to  meet  the  conquerors  on  their  return,  with  songs  of  joy  and 
with  dances  (1  Sam.  xviii.  6  ;  Ex.  x v.  20).  A  whole  choir  of  maidens  would  doubtless  come 
but  Jephthah's  daughter  was  the  leader.  She  was  his  only  child.]  A  term  of  special  endear- 
ment (Zech.  xii.  10  ;  Gen,  xxii.  2,  16).  His  wife  might  have  had  children  by  a  former  husband, 
but  this  was  the  only  child  whom  he  had.  The  phrase  ^S^p  seems  to  mean  "  besides  her,"  in 
which  case  there  must  have  been  no  other  family  in  the  household. 

35.  When  he  saw  her  he  rent  his  clothes.]  He  was  completely  taken  by  surprise.  He  had 
never  imagined  this  as  possible,  when  he  made  his  vow.  Whether  he  then  had  thought  of  any 
other  human  sacrifice,  it  is  clear,  it  had  never  crossed  his  mind,  that  his  own  daughter  miglit 
possibly  be  the  victim.  Indeed  it  suggests  the  doubt,  whether  he  had  the  idea  of  any  human 
sacrifice  in  his  mind  at  all.  Certainly  nothing  seemed  to  him  more  unexpected,  or  was  farther 
from  his  thouglits,  than  that  she  whom  "  he  most  tenderly  loved  should  be  laid  on  the  altar  as 
a  sacrifice  unto  the  Lord." 

He  rent  his  clothes]  He  tore  his  clothes  in  anguish,  the  usual  symptom  of  a  distract  d 
mind  (Lev.  x.  6  ;  Gen.  xxxvii.  29  ;  Job  i.  20).  "  Alas,  my  daughter !  thou  hast  brought  me  very 
low,  etc.")  Heb.  Bowing  thou  hast  made  me  to  bow.  The  repeating  of  the  word  a  second  tiine 
^ives  empasis  to  the  statement  ;  as  if  he  meant  to  say,  my  hopes  are  crushed  ;  my  spirit  is 
broken  ;  a  blacker  grief  has  come  down  on  me  than  that  from  which  I  have  just  been  delivered. 
Instead  of  returning  to  my  home  to  enjoy  peace,  thou  art  become  the  occasion  of  more  trouble 
to  me  than  the  Ammonites  have  been.  As  David  was  troubled  by  Absalom  ;  or  Jacob  by  his 
sons,  when  they  sold  their  brother  for  a  slave  ;  or  as  the  Saviour  himself  was  troubled  by  his 
own  people,  the  .Jews,  so  Jephthah  was  now  to  find  in  his  own  daughter,  the  greatest  trouble  of 
hit  life — in  perfect  innocence  on  her  part,  and  through  rash  presumption  on  his  part. 

"I  have  opened  my  mouth  to  the  Lord,  etc."  (Num.  xxx.  2  ;  Dent,  xxiii.  21-23  ;  Ps.  cxviii. 
14,  18  ;  Ixvi.  13,  14).     "I  cannot  revoke  it." 

36.  Do  to  me  according  to  that  which  hath  proceeded,  etc.]  The  whole  conversation  is  not 
here  sriven.  At  the  close  of  ver.  35  there  appears  to  be  a  hiatus  ;  at  which  point,  Jephthah 
would  explain  to  his  daughter  what  he  had  done  in  the  transaction  between  him  and  his  God. 
In  the  full  view  of  the  sacrifice  she  was  suddenly  called  upon  to  make,  she  uttered  the  noble 
words  of  this  verse.  She  would  doubtless  take  a  little  time  to  deliberate,  that  she  might  fully 
weigh  the  case  ;  and  then  she  shows  how  well  she  could  rise  with  the  occasion. 

There  is  no  wild  screaming  against  the  terrible  fate  that  was  so  suddenly  presented  to  her  ; 
no  positive  determination  to  resist  for  this  once  the  excessive  tax  made  on  her  filial  obedience  ; 
no  upbraiding  of  her  father  for  his  rash  vow  ;  no  proposal  to  obtain  a  substitute ;  and  no 
attempt  to  fly  for  her  life  to  a  foreign  land.  There  is  a  calm  willingness  to  accept  the  sad 
consequences  of  ht  r  father's  error,  since  now  it  cannot  be  altered,  and  a  noble  resolution  to 
sacrifice  all  that  was  dear  in  life  in  the  interests  of  God's  Church,  and  for  the  glory  of  God's 
name.  A  whole  cluster  of  virtues  opens  out  in  this  beautiful  character.  (1.)  Filial  dutifulnesa. 
"My  father  has  done  it;  I  will  submit  at  once."  (2.)  Zeal  for  the  cause  of  God.  *' I  am 
nothing;  the  cause  of  God  is  everything."  (3.)  A  complete  renunciation  of  her  share  of  worldly 
honours.  "  A  fair  morning  dawns  on  others  ;  I  am  willing  that  night  should  fall  on  me." 
(4.)  Unselfishness.  "  The  other  maidens  may  continuue  their  singing  and  dancing;  I  accept  ti  e 
lot  of  the  mourner,  and  the  forlorn."  (5.)  Willingness  to  lose  life  itself  at  God's  call.  "  It  is  my 
God  that  calls  me  ;  I  am  ready  to  surrender  every  prospect  I  have  in  life  to  please  Him." 
Comp.  the  case  of  Isaac  (Gen.  xxii.). 

37.  Let  me  alone  for  two  months  1  This  would  be  said  after  some  reflection.  Even  this 
proposal  is  mentioned  as  a  request  of  her  father.  Mizpeh  stood  on  an  eminence.  Hence  it  was 
proper  to  speak  even  of  going  down  to  the  mountains.  And  bewail  my  virginity.l  To  be  a  wite 
and  mother  was  the  supreme  desire  of  Israelitish  women.  Ever  from  the  time  that  it  was  said, 
the  great  Messiah  was  to  be  "  the  seed  of  the  woman,"  and  to  be  "  born  of  a  woman,"  it  was 
reckoned  the  blessing  of  Heaven  to  become  a  mother.  In  like  manner  to  be  barren,  or  to  die 
childless,  was  regarded  as  a  curse  (Ps.  Ixxviii.  63).  Compare  the  cases  of  Hannah,  Rachel, 
Sarah,  and  others.  Perpetual  virginity  was  among  the  Israelites  a  condition  of  deep  reproach, 
as  is  strikingly  pourtrayed  in  Isa.  iv.  1  ;  also  in  Luke  i.  25  ;  Jer.  xvi.  9  ;  vii.  34 ;  contrasted 
with  Ps.  cxxvii,  3-5  ;  Zach.  viii.  5. 

Go  up  and  down  among  the  mountains!  Heb.  go  to,  and  go  down^  meaning — go  to  the 
movntains,  and  down  to  the  valleys  between  them,  to  get  secliuiou  (rom  the  world     To 

458 


CHAP.  XL  nOMILETIO  COM  MEN  TAR  Y :  JUDGES, 


**  bewail  *'  is  to  weep  over,  and  the  cause  of  weeping  wat  the  perpetnation  of  her  virginity.  It 
is  not  said  her  sacrificey  which  is  important  to  notice.  The  word  used  comes  from  ^r\D. 
a  virgiriy  implying  that  she  was  to  remain  in  a  fixed  state  of  Tirginity ;  and  no  mention  is 
made  of  death. 

39.  Did  with  her  according  to  his  vowO  Heb.  he  did  to  her  his  vow — t.e.,  fulfilled  bis  vow 
in  regard  to  her,  but  not  a  word  as  to  the  manner,  except  the  clause  which  follows,  "  and  she 
knew  no  man."  Had  the  original  text  b«en  according  to  his  vow,  the  natural  interpretation 
would  have  been,  that  he  offered  ber  for  a  burnt  offering.  But  the  phrase  "did  to  her  his 
vow  "  simply  means,  that  he  carried  his  vow  into  execution,  without  saying  in  wh  >t  manner  he 
did  BO.  He  kept  his  word  to  his  God.  But  he  may  Lave  done  so  in  the  spirit  of  the  meaning, 
though  not  in  the  letter.  Had  he  done  so  in  the  letter,  we  should  have  expected,  when  the 
matter  was  so  imrortant,  that  the  narrator  would  have  said,  "he  executed  his  vow,  and  offered 
her  for  a  burnt  off*  ring  unto  the  Lord."  But  in  place  of  this,  we  have  the  statement,  "  he  did 
his  vow  to  her,  and  she  knew  no  man."  This  Jast  statement  looks  like  a  finger  pointing  to 
what  he  actually  did — in  which  case  the  interpretation  would  be,  that  she  was  devoted  to  a 
life  of  celibacy.     Knew.]    Perfect  tense,     l^oi  had  known.     It  refers  to  the /ufare,  not  the  j)a«<. 

A  custom  in  Israel-]     Lit.  an  ordinance,  or  an  established  custom. 

40.  Yearly.]  Lit.  from  days  to  daySf  or  from  year  to  year  (Ex.  xiii.  10).  It  was  an  annual 
practice. 

To  lament  the  daughter,  &c.]  The  more  correct  translation  would  be  to  praise,  or  to 
celebrate  the  praises  of — niSri  v  is  only  once  used  elsewhere  in  Scripture  (Jud.  v.  11),  where 
it  is  translated  "  rehearse,"  and  could  not  mean  "lament."  Some  make  it  "  talk  with,"  as  if 
they  condoled  with  her  in  her  hapless  state  [Kimchi\.  This  would  imply  that  she  was  s^till 
alive.  But  if  we  take  the  more  commonly  received  interpretation,  "to  celebrate  the  prnises 
of,"  it  implies  that  something  like  a  festival  was  kept.  Analogous  to  this,  the  Greek  Artemis, 
the  virgin  who  went  about  alone,  without  companions,  like  the  moon  in  the  sky,  had  her 
praises  celebrated  by  Greek  maidens,  because  she  lived  in  a  state  of  virginity.  In  many  places 
they  kept  festival  with  song  and  dance  in  her  honour,  not  because  she  died  as  a  virgin,  but 
because  her  life  was  spent  in  virginity. 


Interpretation  op  the  Vow. 

This,  like  many  other  questions  in  Scripture  history,  has  been  keenly  con- 
tested for  many  centuries,  without  an  explanation  being  arrived  at  in  which  all 
could  agree.  This  is  mainly  due  to  the  elliptical  character  of  the  account 
given.  It  is  plain,  that  if  only  one  or  two  sentences  of  information  had  bten 
added,  the  haze  would  have  been  removed  which  now  hangs  over  the  narrative. 
But  to  retain  that  haze  seems,  for  wise  and  holy  reasons,  to  be  intentional  on 
the  part  of  Him  who  gave  the  **  Holy  oracles.'*  Indeed,  it  appears  to  be  a 
principle  of  the  Scripture  record,  in  many  an  important  paragraph,  to  withhold 
irom  us  some  of  the  elements  of  the  case  narrated,  and  leave  the  points  not  given 
to  be  found  out  by  inference  from  the  details  which  are  given.  This  leads  the 
minds  of  the  readers  to  the  healthful  exercise  of  examining  more  minutely  all 
the  recorded  details,  and  sifting  more  carefully  their  exact  meaning,  gathering 
up  the  whole  information  and  comparing  part  with  part  in  the  most  thorough 
manner,  so  as  to  discover  the  unknown.  It  is  a  higher  wisdom  which 
conceals  a  part,  instead  of  leaving  nothing  to  be  found  out.  One  result  is,  a 
far  more  diligent  and  complete  search  of  Scripture  than  would  be  made,  if 
nothing  were  left  to  whet  the  appetite  for  discovery.  Another  result  is,  that 
Scripture  becomes  a  Book  of  continual  freshness,  according  to  the  great  variety 
of  lights  and  shades  which  fall  on  the  page  from  the  speculations  of  differently 
constituted  minds. 

But  the  enigma  in  Jephthah's  history,  we  humbly  think,  has  been  made  more 
of  a  riddle  than  it  really  is ;  and,  certainly,  it  has  received  a  measure  of  dis- 
cussion far  beyond  what  the  value  of  its  moral  teaching  would  justify  ;  though 
that  is  not  inconsiderable.  Its  interest,  at  fot  sight,  ues  in  the  touching  and 
454 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES,  chap.  xi. 


romantic  cliaracter  of  the  incident  itself.  It  sheds  also  a  strong  light  on  the 
religious  character  of  the  two  persons  chiefly  concerned  ;  and  we  cannot  wonder 
that  the  sacred  writer  should  have  thought,  that  the  unflinching  decision  to 
adhere  to  the  principles  of  true  piety  at  any  cost,  on  the  part  of  both,  was 
worthy  of  being  recorded  for  everlasting  remembrance.  Looked  at  deeper  still, 
an  important  lesson  is  taught,  about  the  necessity  of  the  heart  faithfully  ex- 
amining itself  before  it  ventures  to  be  tried  by  the  test  of  surrendering  all  that 
it  best  loves  at  the  call  of  its  God. 

We  shall  inquire  :— 

1.    Was  it  wrong*  to  vowt 

By  a  vow  in  such  a  case  as  that  before  us  is  meant,  a  solemn  promise  made 
to  God,  thaty  in  consideration  of  some  great  deliverance  granted  hy  Him,  the 
petitioner  would  acknowledge  that  the  glory  of  the  deliverance  was  Bis,  and  that 
out  of  deep  gratitude,  he  would  consecrate  himself  afresh  to  the  love  and  service 
of  God,  It  is  making  a  free-will  offering  of  one's  self  to  God,  in  a  formal  and 
solemn  manner.  It  was  customary  that  all  off'erings  presented  to  God  should 
be  laid  on  the  altar,  and  the  burnt  offering  implied  complete  consecration. 
This  was  the  form  in  which  Jephthah  meant  to  express  his  vow. 

Such  being  the  general  meauing,  how  could  it  be  wrong  for  Jephthah  to  vow  ? 
Some  regard  it  as  a  mere  bribe  offered  to  God  to  secure  His  help  in  a  great  d  ffi- 
culty ;  others  say,  it  looks  like  largainiug  with  God  for  His  aid,  and  has  a 
heathenish  savour  about  it.  We  do  not  see  much  force  in  these  objections.  Is 
it  not  right  to  express  gratitude  to  God  for  great  deliverances  wrought  ?  If  so, 
is  it  not  right  to  express  that  gratitude  by  a  fuller  consecration  of  one's  self  to 
Him  in  future,  than  has  been  the  case  in  times  past  ?  And  if  this  is  ri^ht  after 
the  deliverance  has  been  accomplished,  how  can  it  be  wrong  to  promise  the  same 
thing  beforehand,  in  the  event  of  deliverance  being  granted  ?  True,  we  should 
always  be  fully  devoted  to  God,  but  when  a  new  and  special  mercy  occurs,  is 
not  that  a  good  reason  for  a  new  and  special  self-dedication  ?  By  deliverance 
from  an  imminent  danger  our  life  is  virtually  given  to  us  anew,  and  so  furnishes 
a  new  reason  lor  the  consecration  of  our  lives  to  His  service.  It  amounts  to 
giving  new  pledges  of  our  lives  to  His  service.  It  amounts  to  giving  new  pledges 
of  our  love  and  obedience. 

The  heathens  did  indeed  vow.  The  mariners  who  were  in  the  ship  with  Jonah, 
in  their  terror,  made  vows  as  well  as  offered  sacrifices  (Jonah  i  16).  An 
eminent  Greek  vowed  to  Minerva,  on  the  occasion  of  Greece  being  invaded  by 
Darius,  that  if  she  would  grant  to  his  country  the  victory,  he  would  sacrifice  on 
her  altars  as  many  he-goats,  as  would  equal  the  number  slain  in  the  camp  of  the 
enemy.  It  was  a  common  thing  among  the  Bomans  to  vow  that,  if  the  Divinity 
complied  with  the  request  of  the  offerer,  he  would  do  some  signal  service  out  of 
gratitude. 

But  it  is  to  little  purpose  to  know  what  were  the  customs  of  the  heathen.  It 
is  sufficient  for  our  guidance,  that  God  has  always  approved  of  vows  when 
rightly  made,  and  has  accepted  them.  He  even  lays  down  rules  to  guide  us  as 
to  the  manner  in  which  they  should  be  made.  This  puts  the  matter  beyond 
dispute  (Num.  xxx.  1-16  ;  vi.  1-12  ;  Lev.  xxvii;  Deut.  xxiii.  21-23;  Eccl  v.  4). 
We  have  also  several  instances  of  pious  people  recorded,  who  vowed  to  the 
Lord  in  special  circumstances,  and  were  accepted.  Jacob  did  so  (Gen.  xxviii.  20), 
Hannah,  (I  Sam.  i.  11),  i)ai;ic?  frequently  (Ps.   Ixi.  3,  Ixvi.  13,  cxvi.   16,  &c.) 

The  mere  fact  of  making  a  vow  in  itself  is  not  wrong,  provided  it  is  made  in 
the  manner  God  requires.     It  is  indeed  an  act  of  deep  piety. 

ZX.    What  did  Jephthah  mean  by  his  vowf 

He  seems  to  have  had  one  great  object  in  viewc,    U0  wished  toiave  precious 

455 


CHAP.  XL  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES, 


interests  which  were  put  in  great  peril.  It  was  an  eventful  crisis  in  Israel's 
history.  The  good  of  the  whole  nation  was  involved  in  the  decision  which  now 
trembled  iu  the  balance.  Everything  was  on  the  point  of  being  won  or  lost ; 
should  Ammon  prevail,  a  long  dark  night  of  sorrow  must  inevitably  overspread 
the  land.  Should  victory  be  declared  for  Israel,  the  heavy  incubus  of  years  of 
oppression  would  be  lifted  up,  and  a  joyful  morning  of  liberty  would  dawn  on 
the  homes  of  the  chosen  people.  The  question  was  one  of  life  or  death  to 
Israel,  which  really  meant  the  rising  or  falling  of  the  church  of  God.  Was  so 
sacred  a  thing  as  a  vow  of  self-dedication  to  the  Lord  too  solemn  for  such  an 
occasion  ? 

By  making  this  vow  he  meant  two  things  : — 

1.  He  wished  to  ascribe  all  the  glory  of  the  salvation  of  Israel  to  the  Lord, 
He  knew  there  would  be  great  rejoicin^^s  among  the  people,  and  that  they 
would  be  ready  to  hail  the  victory  with  loud  acclamations.  There  would  be 
gifts  and  gai lands,  and  dances  ;  voices  of  song,  and  the  sounding  of  timbrels. 
Jephthah  will  be  celebrated  and  praised,  and  his  name  will  go  down  in  the  lists 
of  Israel's  mighty  warriors.  So  now,  he  will  at  the  outset  take  a  decisive  step 
to  secure  all  the  honour  to  Him  to  whom  it  was  due.  He  presents  himself  and 
all  that  he  has  at  the  feet  of  Jehovah.  And  as  a  proof  of  this,  he  will  lay  on 
the  altar  the  first  object  that  presents  itself  on  his  return  home.  That  object 
shall,  like  the  first  sheaf  representing  the  whole  harvest,  stand  for  the  whole 
property  which  God  has  given  him,  and  indicate  that  all  belongs  to  God. 
But  his  meaning  went  beyond  this.  He  confessed  that  it  was  impossible  to 
succeed  without  the  help  of  his  God — that  "salvation  belonged  unto  Him," 
that  only  through  Him  "  could  they  do  valiantly,"  and  therefore  that  "  their 
expectation  was  only  from  Him." 

2.  He  wished  to  put  a  new  seal  on  his  obedience.  It  is  obvious  that  we  can 
give  nothing  to  God  to  enrich  Him.  Ail  that  we  have  is  already  His.  **  Of 
thine  own  have  we  given  thee,"  said  the  man  who  spake  in  name  of  the  con- 
gregation that  made  the  largest  contribution  ever  laid  on  the  altar  for  sacred 
purposes  in  the  history  of  time  (I.  Chron.  xxiv.  14-16).  We  cannot  add  to 
God's  possessions  by  what  we  give  (Job  xxii.  2).  Our  gratitude  therefore  noust 
find  another  mode  of  expression  ;  and  that  which  the  heart  itself  instinctively 
suggests  is  deeper  love  and  more  implicit  obedience.  We  understand  Jephthah 
accordingly  by  laying  an  offering  on  tlie  altar  to  mean  that  he  bound  himself 
to  love  his  God  more  fully  than  ever  he  had  done  before,  and  in  proof  of  that, 
to  give,  Him  a  more  faithful  and  conscientious  obedience. 

Thus  far  all  appears  to  be  not  only  right  in  itself,  but  most  favourable  as  to 
the  judgment  we  are  to  form  of  Jephthah's  character. 

ZZZ.    The  choice  of  an  ofiering*  left  with  God. 

This  is  a  critical  part  of  the  case,  where  care  is^  needed  to  hold  the  balance 
even.  The  terms  of  his  vow  have  been  unduly  subjected  to  a  harsh  criticism. 
Reference  is  made  to  the  rude  and  barbarous  age  in  which  he  lived,  as  an 
a})ology  /or  him.  He  is  spoken  of  as  a  half  savage  chief,  or  a  bandit  leader  in 
a  heathen  country.  He  is  supi)osed  to  partake  somewhat  of  the  fierce  character 
of  a  robber  chieftain,  or  an  Indian  warrior,  from  his  long  sojourn  in  a  country 
where  tiiere  was  no  fear  of  God,  and  where  human  life  was  cheap.  He  is  also 
imagined  to  have  lost  the  knowledge  of  the  laws  and  institutions  that  were 
given  by  Israel's  God,  and  to  be  swayed  more  by  heathen  practices  than  by 
Divine  precept.  And,  accordingly,  he  is  credited  with  thinking  of  a  human 
eacrifice  to  be  laid  on  the  altar,  equally  with  an  animal  offering,  should  God 
456 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES,  chap,  xl 


SO  determine.  And  some  go  the  length  of  saying,  that  he  seems  prepared  to 
sacrifice  his  own  daughter,  if  she  were  the  object  whom  Providence  might  put 
in  his  way. 

Nothing,  we  believe,  of  all  that  line  of  thought  ever  entered  the  mind  of 
Jephthali — a  man  that  lived  continually  in  the  presence  of  his  God.     Such  evil 
suppositions  arise  from  putting  too  hard  an  interpretation  on  the  words  he 
uttered  when  making  his  vow.     We  have  already  said  on  ver.  31,  that  he  had 
no  well-defined  conception  before  his  mind  as  to  what  the  object  might  be.   We 
must  make  allowance  for  the  overwhelming  sense  of  responsibility  that  rested 
on  him,  while  he  was  ordering  his  words,  and,  at  the  least,  hold  it  probable  that 
his  thoughts  never  went  the  length  of  imagining  that  a  human  victim  might 
be  presented  to  him.     Such  a  victim  for  a  sacrificial  offering  had  never  been 
known  in  all  Israel's  history  ;  if  we  except  the  abnormal  case  of  Abraham  being 
called  to  offer  up  his  son — an  offering,  however,  which  was  never  made.    Neither 
we  believe  had  Jephthah  ever  dreamt  of  such  a  thing  in  all  his  past  life.     It 
would,  therefore,  never  occur  to  him  to  draw   a  sharp  distinction  between  a 
human  and  an  animal  sacrifice,  in  the  language  which  he  used.  All  his  thoughts 
seemed  to  be  swallowed  up  by  the  purpose  to  offer  any  object  that  God  Him- 
self might  choose  ;  and  so  he  uses  the  widest  latitude  of  expression,  "  whatso- 
ever Cometh  forth."     He  has  too  much  too  think  of  to  define  his  meaning  to  be, 
either  he  who  cometh  forth,  or  that  which  cometh  forth.     He  knew  that  a 
human  sacrifice  was  condemned  by  the  law  of  his  God,  and  therefore  never 
could  have  supposed,  when  the  choice  was  left  by  him  to  God  Himself,  that  He 
would   choose   such   a  sacrifice  as  that.     How  could  He  choose  that,  which 
instead  of  being  pleasing  was  an  abomination  in  his  sight  ?     If  Jephthah  thought 
of  the  matter  at  all,  that  must  have  been  his  thought. 

Yet  there  was  an  error  committed  in  the  way  he  took  to  make  choice  of  an 
offering.      He  was  in  fact  both  right  and  wrong.      (1.)  Ue  was  right  in  his 
motive.     His  heart  was  full  of  desire  to  give  all  the  glory  to  the  God  of  Israel, 
and  it  seemed  to  him  a  more  complete  surrender  of  himself  to  God,  if  he 
should  make  God  Himself  the  judge  of  the  kind  of  offering  he  should  make. 
He  felt  assured  that  he  could  make  no  improper  choice,  and  that  the  best  thing 
that  he  could  do  was  to  leave  himself  entirely  in  His  hands.      (2.)  He  was 
wrong  in  not  counting  the  cost.     He  did  not  consider  that  a  vow  once  made 
must  be  carried  out ;  for  it  was  equivalent  to  a  solemn  assertion  made  in  the 
presence  of  God,  with  the  lifting  up  of  the  hands,  and  calling  God  to  witness. 
It  was,  therefore  culpably  irreverent  to  promise  anything  in  this  manner,  which 
had  not  been  carefully  weighed.     No  speaking  at  random  is  allowed  before  the 
Divine  footstool  (Eccl.  v.  2  ;  Lev.  x.  3).     It  was  well  for  him  to  say  to  his  God, 
*'  I  place  all  that  I  have  before  Thee — choose  what  Thou  pleasest,  and  I  shall 
give  it  up  at  once.     I  solemnly  engage  to  keep  my  word."     But  it  was  wrong  to 
go  that  length,  before  he  had  carefully  examined,  whether  his  heart  was  prepared 
to  give  up  its  dearest  object,  at  the  call  of  his  God.     It  was  a  similar  rashne-s 
that  induced  Peter  to  say  to  his  Master  :  "  If  it  be  Thou,  bid  me  come  to  Thee 
on  the  water."     He  soon  began  to  sink,  and  so  did  Jephthah.     The  rule  laid 
down  by  Christ  Himself  is,  "If  any  man  come  to  me  and  hate  not  father  and 
mother,  wife  and  children,  brethren  and  sisters,  yea  and  his  own  life,  he  cannot 
be  my  disciple."     Similarly,  He  says,  "  He  that  loveth  son  or  daughter  more 
than  Me  is  not  worthy  of  Me."     It  was  trifling  with  God  for  Jephthah  solemnly 
to  profess  to  do  that  at  His  call,  which  he  had  never  settled  it  with  his  heart 
to  do. 

As  Jephthah  puts  it  there  was  no  reservation.  Anything  which  he  had  in 
the  world  God  might  choose,  and  he  would  yield  it  up.  This  was  true  piety, 
but  it  was  a  terrible  risk  for  a  human  heart  that  did  not  know  its  own 
weakness. 

457 


OHAP.  XI.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  :  JUDGES. 

XV.  The  choice  being-  left  with  God,  He  chooses  the  best. 

Everything  that  happens  is  of  God's  ordering.  It  was  He  who  arranged  in 
His  Providence  that  Jephthah's  daughter  should  be  the  object  to  go  forth  to 
meet  him  on  his  return,  instead  of  any  member  of  his  flocks  or  herds.  A  solemn 
promise  had  been  made,  as  the  price  of  a  great  deliverance  asked,  and  God 
virtually  says,  "  I  have  given  you  all  you  asked — the  salvation  of  the  whole 
people  of  Israel ;  now,  therefore,  I  ask  that  you  give  me  your  daughter  in 
return."  This  was  an  overwhelming  surprise,  and  most  harrowing  to  a  father's 
feelings.  Yet  by  two  considerations  it  is  justified.  It  was  simply  deciding 
according  to  Jephthah's  own  terms,  which  kept  back  nothing,  but  permitted 
anything  even  the  best,  to  be  taken.  Also,  when  the  choice  was  left  open,  it 
was  right  that  the  best  should  be  given  to  God.  This  was  simply  His  due.  It 
would  have  been  wrong  for  Jephthah  to  have  said  that  he  loved  the  creature 
better  than  his  God.  It  was  reasonable  to  give  up  to  God  the  most  precious 
jewel  he  had  :  for  all  that  he  had,  his  daughter  included^  had  been  given  him  by 
God. 

V.  The  selection  is  made  to  test  Jephthah's  oharaotera 

This  is  proved  by  the  simple  fact,  that  a  human  sacrifice  could  not  be  accept- 
able to  Jehovah.  It  was  condemned  as  one  of  the  worst  iuiquities  of  the  nations, 
that  were  driven  out  of  Canaan,  because  of  their  enormous  wickedness  (Deut. 
xii.  29-31  ;  Lev.  xx.  2,  3 ;  Deut.  xviii.  10,  12).  Such  a  thing  as  a  human 
sacrifice,  is  expressly  declared  to  be  an  abomination  to  the  Lord,  nor  was  such  a 
thing  ever  heard  of  in  Israel,  until  the  times  of  Ahaz  and  Manasseh,  not  even  in 
Jezebel's  time.  We  cannot  therefore  for  a  moment  suppose,  that  God  would  now 
take  delight  in  seeing  any  human  sacrifice  from  Jephthah's  house  laid  on  the 
altar  as  a  burnt  offering  before  Him.  It  must  have  been  with  another  intention 
that  He  put  his  daughter  in  the  way.  He  meant,  we  believe,  to  put  Jephthah 
to  the  test,  whether,  when  now  he  had  put  himself  entirely  in  God's  hand,  he 
would  yield  up  his  very  best  to  his  God,  without  a  murmur  when  called  upon  to 
do  so. 

There  is  only  one  other  instance  in  the  whole  of  Israelitish  history  where  a 

human  victim  was  laid  on  the  altar  for  immolation  by  God's  command ^  and 

that,  we  are  expressly  told,  was  to  test  the  character,  or  try  the  faith  and 

obedience  of  the  offerer  (Gen.  xxii.  1,  2).     But  to  show  that  actual  immolation 

was  not  intended,  we  are  informed  that,  at  the  extreme  moment,  Abraham 

was  kept  back  from  slaying   his  son,   by  the  appearance   of  an  angel  from 

Jehovah^  charging  him  not  to  proceed  farther,  for  the  purpose  of  the  command 

was  gained  by  his  showing  his  willingness  to  comply  with  it  (Gen.  xxii.  10,  &c.). 

In  like  manner,  an  opportunity  is  afi'orded  to  Jephthah  here,  to  show  whether 

he  was  willing  to  sacrifice  the  dearest  object  he  had  on  earth  at  the  call  of  his 

God.     Could  he  say,  "  There  is  none  on  earth  I  desire  besides  thee  "  ?     Having 

shown  his  willingness  to  go  this  length,  and  not  even  to  withhold  his  only 

daughter  from  his  God,  the  purpose  was  served,  and,  we  believe,  the  actual 

burning  on  the  altar  was  not  permitted.     If  he  had  gone  farther,  it  would  have 

been  a  complete  solecism  in  the  entire  history  of  God's  people.     There  is  nothing 

to  justify  it  on  any  side,  but  much  to  condemn  such  an  act.     It  is  against  the 

whole  spirit  of  the  divine  law,  which  treats  human  life  as  sacred,  and  which, 

as  we  have  said,  condemns  human  sacrifices  as  among  the  most  atrocious  crimes 

of  the  heathen  nations.     Looked  at  in  itself,  indeed,  it  is  difficult  to  distinguish 

it  from  the  act  of  murder,  taking  the  life  of  a  fellow  creature,  and  that,  not 

only  without  asking  her  consent,  but  it  was  for  a  father  to  imbrue  his  hands 

in   the  blood  of  his  own  daughter,  whose  life  he  was  bound  by  the  strongest 

obligations  to  preserve  I    What  pleasure  could  God  take  in  such  an  ofiering, 

458 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES,  chap,  xl 


where  so  many  of  His  laws  were  violated  ? — the  law  of  parental  love,  the  duty 
of  parental  i)rotection,  the  great  moral  commandment  **  Thou  shalt  not  kill," 
and  the  peremptory  prohibitiun  of  human  sacrifices. 

VZ.  The  vow  was  fulfilled  in  the  spirit,  not  in  the  letter. 

This  is  not  expressly  said.  But  the  account  is  manifestly  elliptical ;  for  it 
is  not  said  that  Jephtbah  informed  his  daughter  what  his  vow  actually  was. 
Yet  it  is  obvious,  tliat  he  must  have  informed  her,  for  her  whole  action  implied 
that  she  knew.  In  like  manner  we  are  not  told,  that  the  letter  of  his  vow  was 
exchanged  for  the  spirit,  though  that  seems  to  be  the  only  possible  way  in  which 
it  could  have  been  acceptable  unto  God.  The  very  fact,  that  to  lay  a  human 
victim  on  the  altar  as  a  burnt  offering  to  God,  is  so  eiitirely  opposed  to  divine 
requirement,  as  well  as  to  Israelitish  practice,  ou^ht  of  itself  to  be  sufficient, 
without  any  express  statement,  to  make  us  believe  that  the  vow  could  not  be 
carried  out  in  the  letter.  It  is  indeed  alleged,  that  his  vow  required  him  to 
put  his  daughter  to  death  in  the  manner  which  is  done  to  a  victim  laid  on  the 
altar.  For  did  he  not  solemnly  vow,  that  the  object  who  might  meet  him 
from  the  doors  of  his  house  on  his  return  "  would  surely  be  the  Lord's,  and  he 
would  offer  it  up  for  a  burnt  offering  "  ?  Also  in  ver.  39  is  it  not  expressly 
said,  that  "  he  did  with  her  according  to  his  vow  which  he  had  vowed  "  ? 
Many  think  these  statements  conclusively  prove,  that  she  was  offered  on 
the  altar  for  a  burnt  ofiering.  In  this  opinion  we  cannot  acquiesce,  far 
these  reasons  ; — 

(1.)  The  idea  of  a  human  sacrifice  was  not  in  his  mind  when  he  made  the 
vow.  It  is  clear  from  his  intense  surprise,  and  overwhelming  grief,  that  the 
thougbt  of  his  daughter  being  the  victim  never  entered  his  mind.  It  was  also 
matter  of  fact,  that  the  laying  of  a  human  victim  on  the  altar  was  unknown 
in  the  history  of  God's  people.  In  Jephthah's  conceptions,  it  was  taken  for 
granted,  that  the  victim  would  be  an  animal.  He  knew  of  no  other  in  the 
past,  and  could  never  imagine  anything  else  now.  Had  he  thought  of  the 
possibility  of  a  human  victim,  it  is  not  likely  he  would  have  spoken  of  ofFerii)g 
it  as  a  burnt  offering,  contrary  to  all  experience,  and  in  face  of  the  fact,  that 
such  an  offering  was  as  abomination  to  God  (Jer.  vii.  30,  31  ;  Dent.  xii.  30-32). 
He  might  bewrong,  and  we  think  he  was  wrong  in  expressing  himself  indefinitely, 
so  that  the  language  would  apply  to  any  object,  whether  human  or  animal. 
But  we  believe  he  thought  only  of  such  an  object  as  could  properly  be  laid  on 
the  altar.  The  meaning  he  attached  to  his  vow  we  apprehend  was  this  : — 
"  The  object  that  comes  to  meet  me  on  my  return,  if  it  be  suitable  for  laying 
on  the  altar,  I  will  offer  it  for  a  burnt  offering." 

(2.)  No  vow  could  make  that  w  til  pleasing  to  God  which  was  already  sinful. 
The  obligation  is  indeed  strong  to  pay  that  which  we  have  vowed  (Eccl.  v.  4,  5). 
But  that  applies  only  to  things  which  are  lawful.  Beyond  that  limit,  the  rule 
does  not  hold  ;  for  no  vow  of  ours,  however  solemnly  made,  can  make  that 
which  God  condemns  cease  to  be  a  sin.  And  if  it  be  a  sin  we  dare  not  commit 
it  by  way  of  fulfilling  our  vow.  To  do  so  would  only  bring  down  the  Divine 
frown.  God's  will  is  always  the  highest  law,  and  overrides  every  other  law. 
Jephtbah  could  not  carry  out  his  vow  literally  towards  his  daughter,  without 
doing  a  thing  which  was  an  abomination  to  Jehovah.  Yet,  in  so  far  as  it  could 
be  done,  consistently  with  what  God  approved  of,  he  was  bound  to  fulfil  it,  that 
is,  not  in  the  letter,  but  in  the  spirit. 

(3.)  Th^  hind  of  vow  which  he  made  did  not  absolutely  require  a  literal  fulfil- 
ment. The  Hebrew  word  used  in  ver.  30  is  not  cherem  but  neder.  The  former 
denoted  a  devotement  to  destruction,  and  was  accompanied  by  an  anathema,  or 

469 


CHAP.  XL  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES. 


execration.  There  was  no  power  of  redemption  from  this  vow  (Lev.  xxvii.  28). 
When  it  applied  to  animals,  it  meant  that  they  were  devoted  to  destruction  ; 
or  to  things,  that  they  were  to  be  utterly  consumed  with  fire,  or  to  be  held 
exclusively  reserved  for  God  in  their  use  for  all  time  coming.  When  it 
applied  to  persons,  it  was  usually  to  the  enemies  of  God,  or  the  heathen,  such  as 
the  Canaanites,  the  Amalekites,  and  all  aliens  (Deut.  xiii.  12-18;  1  Sam.  xv.  33; 
Num.  xxi.  2,  3).  The  neder  implied  a  milder  vow.  It  meant  simply  the  bringing 
of  any  offering  to  God,  and  dedicating  it  to  Him,  such  as  lands,  tithes,  beasts, 
both  clean  and  unclean.  These  might  be  redeemed  at  a  certain  rate.  In  the 
case  of  a  female,  it  was  30  shekels  of  silver  (Lev.  xxvii.  4).  It  is  this  word 
which  is  employed  here.  Neder,  indeed,  is  a  generic  word,  and  includes  chereniy 
but  the  very  fact  that  the  former  word  is  used  and  not  the  latter,  leaves  room 
for  supposing  that  there  might  be  a  fulfilment  in  the  spirit,  apart  from  the 
letter  of  the  vow. 

(4.)  In  fact  he  did  fulfil  his  vow,  hut  the  manner  in  which  he  did  so  is  not 
recorded.  Our  A.V.  says  **he  did  with  her  according  to  the  vow  which  he  had 
vowed."  but  the  original  has  it,  **he  did  to  her  the  vow  which  he  had  vowed." 
The  words  "according  to"  are  not  in  the  Hebrew.  The  averment  made  tliere 
is  simply  that  he  accomplished  his  vow  without  saying  m  t^jAa^  manner.  Looking 
a  little  closer,  what  is  the  substance  of  meaning  in  the  phrase,  "  I  will  offer  it 
up  for  a  burnt  offering  ? "  It  is  not  the  mere  act  of  slayino^,  or  burning  the 
victim  we  are  to  look  at,  but  at  what  that  implies.  Ceremonialism  was  nothing 
in  itself,  but  the  meaning  it  expressed  was  most  important.  The  meaning  here 
in  substance  is,  that  the  object  so  offered  is  entirely  and  absolutely  devoted  to 
God,  so  that  it  cannot  belong  to  anyone  else  but  Him.  All  connection  is  cut 
off  from  the  world  around.  If  then  this  substance  of  meaning  expressed  by 
the  vow  can  be  fulfilled  in  some  other  way  on  Jephthah's  daughter,  than  by 
immolation,  which  would  be  the  breaking  of  a  Divine  command,  it  is  natural  to 
expect  that  that  other  way  would  be  chosen.  And  if  so,  it  would  still  be  true 
that  he  had  kept  his  word  to  his  God  in  the  only  way  he  lawfully  could. 

yhat  mode,  we  believey  was  hy  devoting  her  to  perpttual  virginity.  This 
meant  directly  the  cutting  her  off  from  the  possibility  of  marriage,  and  so 
reii'oving  the  principal  link  by  which  she  might  be  bound  to  the  world.  But 
indirectly,  it  meant  also  the  removal  of  all  other  links  by  which  she  might  be 
bound  to  all  other  objects,  that  she  might  be  reserved  for  God  alone.  She  was 
thus  set  apart  exclusively  for  God.  A  husband,  a  father,  and  relatives,  were 
to  be  as  nothing  to  her,  because  of  the  completeness  of  her  consecration  to  God. 
To  suppose  that  this  was  the  form  which  the  fulfilment  of  the  vow  took,  is  no 
mere  tancy.  For  though  we  are  not  told  it  in  so  many  words,  in  the  narrative, 
neither  are  we  informed  that  he  placed  his  daughter  as  a  bleeding  victim  on 
the  altar.  On  the  mode  of  fulfilling  the  vow,  the  record  is  silent,  the  fact  that 
he  did  fulfil  it  is  explicitly  stated.  But  we  are  informed  that  what  she  bewailed 
for  two  months  was  her  "  virginity."  On  this  emphasis  is  put.  Why  not 
bewail  her  impending  sacrifice,  if  sacrificed  she  was  to  be.  If  she  were  so  soon 
to  die,  it  would  be  of  small  consequence  to  her  whether  she  should  die  a  virgin 
or  not.  But  if  she  were  bound  by  a  sacred  law  to  a  life-long  virginity,  it  would 
be  reckoned  to  her  a  perpetual  reproach,  in  view  of  the  stigma  put  upon  it  by 
Israelitish  society. 

Besides,  when  it  is  related  that  he  fulfiled  his  vow  upon  her,  it  follows  in  the 
same  sentence,  *'  and  she  knew  no  man  "  which  naturally  nie;»ns,  it  was  in  this 
way  that  the  vow  was  performed.  She  was  never  married  "  Her  life  was  dedi- 
cated to  the  Lord  as  a  spiritual  burnt  ofi'eriug,  in  life-long  chastity." — (Keil). 

To  put  the  tense  into  the  pluperfect  as  bome  do,  and  say  *'she  had  known  no 
man  "  is  a  gratuitous  gloss,  for  which  there  is  no  warrant.     The  whole  state- 
ment means  that  he  fulfilled  his  vow  through  the  fact  that  she  knew  no  man. 
460 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES,  OSap.  Xi. 


Other  arguments  confirm  this  interpretation. 

(a,)  To  he  given  up  to  a  life  of  perpetual  virginity  served  the  purpose  equally 
well  with  immolation  on  the  altar.  It  ought  to  be  remembered  what  the  pur- 
pose of  the  sacrifice  really  was.  It  was  to  express  tlie  offerer's  entire  consecra- 
tion of  himself  to  the  Lord.  This  he  would  symbolise  by  bringing  forward  an 
animal  as  a  substitute,  and  offering  it  as  a  whole  burnt  offering  in  his  stead. 
But  when,  to  his  surprise,  it  was  a  human  victim  that  was  brought  to  him,  he 
presents  her  as  an  object  to  be  separated  from  the  world,  and  dedicated  wholly 
unto  God  for  the  term  of  her  natural  life.  There  could  hardly  be  more  com- 
plete Consecration  to  the  Lord  for  any  daughter  of  Israel,  than  to  remain 
unmarried,  and  without  the  prospect  of  maternity,  to  be  shut  out  from  all 
society,  and  to  lead  a  life  of  solitude  and  seclusion. 

(h.)  Human  beings  were  to  he  redeemed,  not  sacrificed,  when  presented  to 
God.  (Ex.  xiii.  12,  13  with  15,  xxxiv.  20  ;  Num.  xviii.  15.)  Jephthah's 
daughter  was  his  first-born.  After  the  first  explosion  of  grief,  it  would  soon 
occur  to  Jephthah  himself,  as  well  as  to  those  around  him,  that  the  same  thiui^ 
could  not  be  done  with  a  human,  as  with  an  animal,  offering.  But  to  make 
good  the  vow,  something  must  be  done  to  the  object  that  met  him  at  the  door 
of  his  house  on  his  return.  To  appoint  her  to  perpetual  virginity,  and  life- 
long shutting  out  from  the  world,  would  either  naturally  be  suggested  to 
their  own  nainds,  or  would  be  dictated  by  Heaven  as  a  fitting  course  to  take 
in  carrying  out  the  spirit  of  the  vow.  She  would  thereby  become  dead  to 
the  world,  and  so  it  would  be  equivalent  to  an  actual  immolation. 

(c.)  If  she  were  to  die,  why  should  she  ask  to  spend  two  months  on  the  moun- 
tains? When  she  manifestly  loved  her  father  so  well,  and  was  so  thoroughly 
beloved  by  him,  it  seems  unnatural  for  her  to  ask  to  be  separate  from  him  for 
two  months.  We  would  rather  expect  that  they  would  both  be  too  anxious  to 
spend  the  time  in  each  other's  society,  and  think  it  all  too  short. 

(d.)  If  she  were  to  die,  why  seek  to  the  mountains  at  all  ?  The  same  tears 
might  have  been  shed  at  home.  But  it  was  her  virginity  that  she  was  to 
bewail.  "  She  was  to  remain  a  bud  that  had  not  been  allowed  to  unfold  itself, 
being  prevented  not  by  death  but  by  life."  '*  Lamentations  about  her  virginity 
could  not  be  uttered  in  the  town,  and  in  the  presence  of  men.  Modesty  required 
the  solitudes  of  the  mountains  for  these.  Only  in  sacred  silence  does  the 
virtuous  heart  of  the  maiden  pour  out  its  lamentations  of  love." — (Cassel). 

(e.)  The  act  of  Jephthah  is  not  disapproved  by  God^  but  on  the  contrary  seems 
to  be  recorded  to  his  honour.  The  smaller  transgression  of  Gideon  is  recorded 
with  an  express  word  of  censure  (Gdu.  viii.  27j.  '*  Which  became  a  snare  to 
Gi<leon  anrt  his  house."  Yet  here  is  no  word  of  disapprobation,  but  on  the  con- 
trary, the  tale  ends  with  a  celebration  of  praise  to  the  daughter  of  Jephthah  for 
many  a  long  year  thereafter.  If  a  human  sacrifice  had  now  been  offered,  why 
should  not  the  brand  of  reprobation  have  been  put  upon  it,  as  is  done  everywhere 
else  when  it  is  mentioned  in  scripture  ? 

if.)  IJ  Jephthah  had  been  guilty  of  such  a  scandal,  why  is  he  held  up  as  a 
pattern  of  faith  and  an  eminently  godly  man  ?  There  can  be  little  doubt  that 
the  men  in  that  list  were  men  of  God  and  heirs  of  salvation,  though  they  had 
their  imperfections  and  their  sins.  But  the  presumption  is  always  against  a 
really  good  man  being  deliberately  guilty  of  violating  a  solemn  rule  laid  down 
by  his  God.     And  Jephthah's  name  stands  in  that  honoured  list  (Heb.  xi.  32). 

(g.)  Once  more.  If  sacrifice  there  was,  it  is  difficult  to  explain  how  it  could 
have  been  performed.  Burnt  offerings,  those  cases  where  the  animal  was  first 
put  to  death,  and  then  had  its  body  burned  on  the  altar,  could  only  be  lawfully 

461 


CHAP.  XI.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES, 


presented  on  the  altar  at  the  tabernacle,  or  before  the  ark  by  the  priests,  unless 
when  some  extraordinary  occurrence  in  Provi  'ence  had  taken  place,  which  did 
not  apply  here.  But  could  any  priest  of  the  whole  number  be  found,  with  bold- 
ness enough,  to  commit  such  an  offence  against  the  jealous  God  of  Israel,  as  to 
immolate  a  human  being  on  the  altar  ?  And  Jephthah  was  no  priest,  so  that 
be  could  not  officiate  in  doing  such  a  work  himself.  Shiloh,  where  the  taber- 
nacle was,  was  in  the  tribe  of  Ephraim,  apart  of  the  land  whither  Jephthah  was 
not  very  likely  to  go,  when  the  feeling  was  so  hostile  between  him  and  the  men 
of  that  tribe.  "  If  then,  there  is  the  best  reason  to  believe  that  such  an  offering 
was  not  made  by  the  high  priest,  nor  by  any  priest — that  it  was  not  made  by 
Jephthah  himself,  and  that  it  was  not  made  at  Shiloh,  the  appointed  place  of 
sacrifice,  what  reason  is  there  to  suppose  it  was  made  at  all  ?  "^Bush), 


Practical  Lessons. 
(Vers.  30,  31,  34-40). 

X.  It  Is  possible  for  the  hig'hest  relig^lous  principle  to  exlstf 
with  irrelig'ion  in  its  worst  forms  all  around  it. 

Jephthah's  character  is  the  proof.  Who  can  doubt  the  sterling  principle  of 
the  man  who,  at  the  first  overwhelming  revelation  of  the  price  he  would  have 
to  pay  for  fidelity  to  his  God,  nobly  said,  "  I  will  rather  sacrifice  the  dearest 
object  I  have  on  earth  than  take  back  my  word  to  my  God."  Not  that  he 
loved  his  daughter  less  than  humati  instinct  prompts,  but  that  he  loved  his 
God  more.  Yet  he  lived  for  many  years  beyond  the  confines  of  Israel,  with 
no  fearers  of  the  true  God  around  him,  no  worship  of  the  God  of  Israel 
observed,  but  His  laws  transgressed,  and  other  gods  served  instead  1  This  was 
worse  than  even  the  position  of  David,  who  lived  for  a  shorter  time  an  outcast 
from  his  people,  and  was  not  so  entirely  an  outcast,  being  often  within  the 
boundary  of  the  sacred  land,  and  having  some  partial  access  to  its  privileges. 
Yet  Jephthah  was  full  of  the  law  of  his  God,  if  we  may  judge  from  this  chapter, 
had  the  fear  of  God  constantly  before  his  eyes,  and  made  no  great  decision 
in  life  without  His  approbation. 

The  Divine  promise  was  fulfilled  to  him,  "  I  will  keep  thee  in  all  places 
whither  thou  goest,"  not  only  from  temporal  dangers,  but  from  spiritual  con- 
tamination. Jesus  himself  living  in  a  world  of  sin  knew  no  sin,  and  He  is  able 
to  make  any  one  of  those  who  accept  Him  as  their  Redeemer,  to  live  a  "  holy 
and  harmless'*  life,  ''separate  from  sinners,"  Temptations  when  firmly 
resisted  tend  to  strengthen  the  character.  Greater  resolution  is  required  in 
adhering  to  one's  principles.  When  a  man  has  to  battle  with  a  fierce  wind  as 
he  proceeds  on  his  course,  the  more  he  sets  his  face  to  contend  with  it,  his 
muscles,  his  nerves,  and  his  whole  constitution  become  strengthened.  Wherever 
we  are,  we  may  always  live  near  to  God. 

IZ,    The  human  will  never  bends  to  the  Divine  will  at  a  loss. 

This  is  illustrated  by  the  case  of  both  father  and  daughter.  In  both,  we 
see  straightforwardness  and  decision  of  character,  and  when  what  seems  like  a 
towering  rock  rising  up  in  their  path,  neither  of  them  thinks  on  that  account 
of  "  going  back."  They  will  sacrifice  every  thing  for  their  God — the  father, 
his  dearest  treasure  on  earth  ;  the  daughter,  her  whole  interest  in  life.  Each 
bows  to  the  Divine  will ;  and  are  they  the  losers  ?  Of  much  of  earthly  comfort 
and  pleasure  they  may  be^  and  were  really,  deprivatl,  but  that  was  hr  more 
463 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES,  chap   xi. 


than  made  up  by  inward  peace  with  God  during  life,  a  high  reputation  for 
loyalty  to  their  God  in  future  ages,  and  a  true  immortality  of  fame  beyond 
death  and  the  grave.  They  lose  the  lesser  joys  of  time,  the  indulgences  of  the 
body,  but  they  gain  a  high  moral  fame  in  the  estimation  of  all  the  holy  and 
good  to  the  end  of  time.  In  the  world  to  come  the  gain  is  unspeakably  glorious. 
The  highest  piety  of  the  creature  is  to  have  no  other  will  but  that  of  its  God. 
That  will,  will  never  disappoint  in  the  long  run,  even  where  great  sufferings 
intervene  (Rom.  viii.  18  ;  John  xiv.  27  ;  xvi.  33  ;  L  Peter  i.  6-7).  It  is  a 
Christ-like  spirit  that  can  say,  with  %  bitter  cup  in  the  hand,  "  Not  my  will, 
but  thine  be  done  !  " 

III.    It  Is  oftentimes  love  that  dictates  our  severest  trials. 

Why  not  say  always  ?  "  Whom  the  Lord  loveth  He  chasteneth  "  is  one  of 
the  familiar  Christian  experiences  that  go  without  saying.  Jephthah's  daughter 
shone  out  all  at  once  as  a  star  of  the  first  magnitude,  just  the  moment  before 
it  seemed  to  become  extinguished.  But  it  is  one  of  those  lights  that  never  can 
be  extinguished.  It  has  shone  for  3,000  years  and  it  shines  still,  nor  will  it 
cease  to  shine  so  long  as  high  moral  virtue  and  spiritual  beauty  in  the  sight  of 
Heaven,  continue  to  be  admired.  But,  before  her  great  trial,  this  beauty  of 
character  was  unknown.  It  was  the  great  sacrifice  she  was  called  on  to  make 
that  made  her  famous,  because  she  rose  with  the  occasion.  She  was  like  those 
who  were  unknown — 

"Till  persecution  dragged  them  into  fame 
And  chased  them  up  to  heaven." 

If  we,  by  the  grace  of  God,  but  do  the  same,  we  shall  find  that  our  mountain 
waves  of  trouble  are  the  very  things  that  raise  us  nearer  to  heaven.  To  all 
eternity  will  the  afflicted  Christian,  who  has  profited  by  his  affliction,  have 
reason  to  bless  God  that  He  sent  the  affliction,  because  of  the  immense  accession 
it  brings  to  his  spirituality  of  mind,  and  heavenliness  of  character. 

XV.  The  closest  ties  of  tbe  earthly  state  are  often  suddenly 
ruptured  without  notice  g>lven. 

The  father  in  this  case  never  intended  for  a  moment  to  create  the  risk  of 
losing  his  daughter  by  the  vow  he  made,  nor  did  he  imagine  it  could  by 
possibility  have  any  such  effect.  Yet  this  separation  came  all  in  a  moment, 
nor  could  it  be  avoided.  Matiy  parents  strive  hard  to  build  up  bright  prospects 
for  their  children.  They  spend  a  fortune  to  get  them  well  fed  and  well  clad, 
to  make  their  home  comfortable,  to  supply  them  with  all  the  conditions  of  good 
health,  to  get  them  well  married  and  hopefully  started  in  life,  and  to  do  all 
that  can  be  done  beyond  themselves  to  advance  their  health  and  happiness. 
Yet,  at  any  moment,  God  has  a  thousand  means  before  him  for  breaking  the 
brittle  thread  of  life,  were  He  so  minded.  The  truest  wisdom,  therefore,  is  for 
father  and  daughter,  and  all  members  of  family  circles,  to  strive  to  become  one 
in  the  Lord  Christ.  That  tie  once  formed  nothing  can  break.  And  when 
sudden  rupture  is  made  of  other  ties,  that  link  of  connection  will  only  come  out 
tirmei  than  before,  and  prove  that  the  union  is  still  stronger  on  the  other  side 
of  death  than  now,  and  will  last  for  ever, 

v.  Works  of  rlg>hteousness  are  always  satisfactory  In  the 
retrospect. 

They  are  always  fresh  and  green,  because  possessed  of  moral  or  spiritual 
excellence  in  themselves,  and  they  are  always  accompanied  by  peace  of 
conscience.     "  They  make  us  not  ashamed."     We  can  look  bask  o  i  them  for 

463 


cfiAJ.  xn.  BOMIIETIC  COMMENTARY;  JUDGES. 


ever,  and  never  regret  having  done  such  works.  All  our  regrets  will  be,  that 
we  did  not  strive  more  earnestly  for  that  strength  from  on  high,  through  which 
such  works  can  be  done.  They  are  works  that  bear  the  light  of  day,  which  no 
one  made  after  the  image  of  God  shall  ever  regret  to  have  done.  They  will 
always  have  the  smile  of  heaven  upon  them. 

VZ.  Vows  should  first  be  settled  with  the  heart,  before  they  are 
broug-ht  out  in  form. 

It  ought  never  to  be  forgotten  that  we  have  to  deal  with  a  heart-searching 
God,  and  that  every  service  rendered  to  Him,  in  order  to  be  acceptable,  should 
arise  from  a  well-considered  purpose  of  the  heart.  Vows  are  the  free-will 
offerings  of  the  heart  unto  God,  prompted  by  a  consideration  generally  of 
some  special  act  of  His  goodness.  In  them  the  soul  steps  forward,  and 
solemnly  pledges  itself  to  a  greater  degree  of  loyalty  and  obedience  to  its 
God.  This  to  be  acceptable  implies  great  reverence  before  God.  It  is  no 
time  for  trifling,  or  incoherent  speech.  The  heart  ought  to  weigh  well  with 
itself,  whether  it  is  prepared  to  make  this  valuable  offering,  or  perform  that 
important  service,  before  it  come  forward  in  due  form  to  enter  into  a  special 
engagement. 

"  Just  prior  to  the  issue  of  the  September  proclamation  of  liberty  to  the 
slaves  in  the  United  States,  the  President  opened  the  business  of  the  Cabinet- 
meeting  by  saying,  that  the  time  for  announcing  the  emancipation  policy 
could  hQ  no  longer  delayed.  Public  sentiment  would  sustain  it,  many  warm 
supporters  demanded  it,  and  (speaking  in  a  low  tone)  I  have  promised  my 
God  that  I  will  do  it.  On  being  asked  by  Mr.  Chase,  whether  he  correctly 
understood  him,  *  Yes,*  he  replied,  '  I  have  made  a  solemn  vow  before  God, 
that  if  General  Lee  were  driven  back  from  Pennsylvania,  I  would  crown  the 
result  by  the  declaration  of  freedom  to  the  slaves.'  He  issued  his  proclamation, 
and  four  million  slaves  became  free  men." — Chase. 

"  Vows  are  easily  made,  but  more  easily  broken.  A  sea  captain,  while  resting 
on  a  single  plank  in  the  wide  ocean,  vowed  to  devote  his  life  to  God  if  he 
should  be  saved,  but  he  forgot  his  vow  as  soon  as  his  feet  were  on  the  solid 
earth.  If  a  child  is  sick,  his  ungodly  father  may  vow  amendment  of  life, 
and  attention  to  the  word  of  God,  on  condition  that  the  son  recovers. 
Sometimes  real  conversion  follows,  but  more  frequently  the  person  sodu 
returns  like  the  sow  that  is  washed  to  her  wallowing  in  the  mire." 

**  The  Archbishop  of  Coloojne,  being  asked  by  the  Emperor  Sigismund  how 
to  reach  true  happiness,  replied,  *  Perform  when  thou  art  well  what  thou  didst 
promise  when  thou  wast  sick.' " 


CHAPTER  XII. 

TffB  ARROGANT  EPHRAIMITES  AND   JBPHTHAH—THE  JUDGES    WITHOUT 

FAME, 

(Verses  1-15.) 

Crtttoal  Notes. — 1.  Gathered  themselves  together-!     Not  in  a  disorderly  or  tumultuous 
tnauner  as  some  would  take  it,  but  assembled  in  force,  for  the  purpose  of  fighting  if  necessary 
(ch.  vii  23,  24  ;  x.  17).     Pas&ed  over  (Jordan)  northward,  or  it  may  mean  to  Zaphon^  for  such  is 
the  Hebrew  word.    Zaphon  was  a  town  in  the  tribe  of  Gad,  mentioned  along  with  Sucooth. 
464 


BOMILEflC  COMMENTARY :  JVDQSB,  oHa?.  xn. 


"Wherefore,  etc,  didst  thou  not  call  ns  to  go  with  thee!]  This  was  nothing  but  the  old  haughty 
and  jealous  spirit  of  the  most  ambitious  of  the  tribes,  which  was  constantly  reappearing  when 
the  honours  seemed  to  be  going  in  the  direction  of  others.  We  see  it  in  Joshua's  days  at  the 
division  of  the  land  (Josh.  xvii.  14-18),  we  see  it  in  the  days  of  Gideon  (Jud.  viii.  1-3),  and  we 
see  it  now.  We  will  burn  thine  house  on  thee  with  fire-l  Such  was  the  depth  of  their  hatred. 
This  was  not  uncommon  in  that  rough  age  (ch.  xiv.  16  ;  xv.  6  ;  Josh  vii.  25  ;  Gen.  xxxviii.  24  ; 
Josh,  viii  8,  19  ;  Jud.  i  8). 

2'  When  I  called  you,  ye  delivered  me  not,  etc*]  This  is  not  told  before,  probably  because  they 
met  the  request  with  a  point-blank  refusal.  They  would  refuse  to  fight  under  the  leadership  of 
a  man  like  Jephthah,  who  had  not  the  pure  blood  of  an  Israelite.  Though  God  had  acknow- 
ledged him,  they  would  not.  Also  they  felt  that  the  danger  was  very  .serious,  and  so  they  kept 
within  their  own  borders  (Ps.  Ixxviii.  9-11).  Put  my  life  in  my  hands]  a  phrase  meaning,  I 
risked  my  life,  and  you  did  not  assist  me  (1  Sam.  xix.  5  ;  Job  xiii.  14  ;  Fs.  cxix.  109).  'i'his 
was  the  wolf  and  the  lamb  policy  on  the  part  of  the  Ephraimites,  but  they  found  Jephthah  a 
rough  lamb  to  deal  with.  His  language,  however,  is  not  defiant.  He  would  willingly  have 
taken  their  help,  but  when  they  did  not  give  it,  he  sought  the  special  help  of  his  God,  and  that 
was  not  refused. 

3.  Wherefore  then  are  ye  come  up  to  fight  against  met]  Since  God  Himself  has  succoured  me, 
why  do  you  come  to  fight  with  me  ?  Why  not  rather  be  grateful  that  the  whole  land  is  rid  of 
the  dark  shadow  of  the  oppressor  ?  There  was  nothing  here  to  give  just  cause  of  offecce,  and  if 
the  issue  was  tiagic,  compared  with  the  parallel  case  of  Gideon's  dealings  with  them,  the  cir- 
cumstances were  very  different.  Thus  in  Gideon's  days,  the  Ephraimites  had  really  done  much 
to  gain  the  large  success  of  the  occasion,  but  here  they  had  done  nothing.  Gideon  had  good 
reason  to  thank  them  for  the  share  they  had  in  the  defeat  of  the  common  enemy  ;  Jephthah 
had  not  a  word  to  say  of  any  good  they  had  done,  because  they  really  had  done  nothing. 
Gideon,  though  called  to  task  for  overlooking  these  proud  people,  was  not  threatened  with  any- 
thing against  his  personal  safety,  but  against  Jephthah  they  came  up  in  force,  and  vowing  the 
direst  vengeance.  They  would  indeed  not  wait  for  any  explanation.  The  attack  began  on  their 
side. 

4>  The  men  of  Gilead  smote  Ephraim,  etc]  It  would  seem  as  if  the  feeling  of  resentment  in 
this  case  were  cherished  more  by  *'  the  men  of  Gilead,"  than  by  Jephthah  himself,  For  what 
was  done  is  put  chiefly  in  their  name,  both  in  verse  4  and  verse  5.  Jephthah  led  them  in  self- 
defence  but  did  not  instigate  them.  The  supercilious  contempt  with  which  the  Ephraimites 
looked  down  upon  the  Gileadites,  and  their  disdaining  to  acknowledge  Jephthah's  leadership, 
notwithstanding  his  victorious  closing  of  the  war,  was  keenly  felt  by  the  Gileadites.  It  was  a 
sting  to  their  tribal  character,  and  led  to  a  spirit  of  bitter  retaliation.  They  thirsted  for  an 
opportunity  of  taking  revenge. 

Ye  are  fugitives  of  Ep>iraim,  etc.]  This  statement  is  not  very  dear  as  it  'stands ;  but  the 
meaning  seems  to  be — Ye  are  the  scum  of  Ephraim,  and  counted  as  such  both  among  the 
common  Ephraimites  and  Manassites — a  bad  lot,  who  have  no  position  as  good  citizens,  but  are 
nondescripts.  The  Gileadites,  in  fact,  were  not  a  tribe,  but  the  descendants  of  a  powerful  family 
in  IManasseh.  But  both  Manasseh  and  Ephraim  were  the  children  of  Joseph,  and  so  there 
ought  to  have  been  a  family  kindred  feeling.  Instead  of  this,  there  was  nothing  but  jealousy 
and  desire  for  superiority  on  the  side  of  Ephraim,  because  of  the  greater  blessing  which  the 
patriarch  Jacob  bestowed  on  hie  younger  grandson  (Gen.  xlviii.  17-19).  Presuming  on  this 
advantageous  position,  which  their  ancestor  left  them  in  legacy,  the  men  of  Ephra>m  claimed  to 
represent  the  whole  of  the  children  of  Joseph,  that  is — Ephraim  proper  and  all  Manasseh,  thus 
including  the  men  of  Gilead  as  welL  They  regarded  themselves  as  the  people  of  high  caste, 
the  Manassites  as  a  sort  of  plebeians,  and  the  Gileadites  as  nothing  better  than  pariahs.  In  the 
collective  mass  of  the  children  of  Joseph,  the  Gileadites  were  regarded  by  these  men  of  pride  as 
menials  or  cads,  because  they  were  properly  not  a  community  at  all,  but  only  a  **  set  of  fugitives," 
and  yet  they  presumed  to  hold  up  their  heads  as  if  they  were  a  tribe.  Hence  they  were  goaded 
on  to  be  resentfuL 

6.  Took  the  passages  of  Jordan.]  They  lived  on  both  sides  of  the  river,  though  chiefly  on 
the  east  side  (see  Num.  xxvi.  29,  30,  etc.).  They  seemed  to  be  better  acquainted  with  the 
crossings  than  the  Ephraimites ;  and  they  were  in  no  mood  to  give  quarter,  for  they  were 
high-spirited,  and  could  not  bear  the  taunts  that  were  flung  at  them. 

65  Say  now  Shibboleth,  etc.]  How  greatly  is  the  pride  of  the  Ephraimites  humbled,  that  now 
they  are  glad  to  renounce  the  tribal  connection,  and  to  say  they  are  not  Ephraimites,  to  save 
their  lives  !  This  too  was  said  to  Gileadites  !  But  the  dissemblers  were  discovered.  "  The 
wicked  is  snared  by  the  transgression  of  his  lips."  The  sound  of  «^  seems  to  have  been  common 
among  the  dialects  spoken  to  the  east  of  Jordan,  but  it  had  not  yet  got  a  place  in  the  spoken 
language  of  the  Ephraimite.     By  his  inability  to  pronounce  this  sound  an  Ephraimite  wan 

oa  465 


CHAP.  XXL  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES, 


easily  discovered.  In  the  day  of  reckoning,  what  a  variety  of  witnesses  can  God  bring  against 
a  guilty  mnn  !  They  lie  on  all  sides.  Every  stone,  every  straw,  the  very  winds  of  heaven,  or 
the  clods  of  the  dust  (Job  xx.  27  ;  xviii.  8-10). 

In  different  communities  among  the  same  people,  nothing  is  more  common  than  to  hear 
different  dialects  spoken.  The  guttural  sound  of  the  letters  ch  as  known  and  pronounced  in 
Scotland  is  impossible  of  pronunciation  by  an  Englishman,  as  in  the  words  Ecclefechan  or 
Auclitermuchty.  Again,  the  letter  r,  as  in  river  cannot  be  pronounced  by  a  native  of 
Northumberland.  The  sound  of  th  cannot  be  given  by  many  foreigners,  though  quite  easy  of 
utterance  to  the  English-speaking  race.  Many  German  Jews  pronounce  the  Hebrew  word  Beth 
as  Baiss,  and  Bereshiih  they  pronounce  as  Beresiss  or  Bereshiss.  Peter,  as  a  Galilean,  often 
brought  in  his  broad  inelegant  phrases  which  grated  on  refined  ears,  so  that  bystanders  knew 
him  to  be  a  Galilean  from  his  tongue.  "  Thy  speech  bewrayeth  thee  "  (Mark  xiv.  70).  So  is  the 
Arabic  tongue  different  as  spoken  in  Aleppo,  in  Cairo,  and  in  Bagdad.  The  word  Shibboleth 
itself  means  "  a  stream,"  or  sometimes  *'  ear."  But  the  sole  reference  here,  is  to  the  pronuncia- 
tion of  the  first  combination  of  letters  in  the  word.  When,  during  the  Flemish  war,  the 
insurrection  against  the  French  broke  out  (1302),  the  gates  were  guarded,  and  no  one  was 
Buffered  to  pass  out  except  those  who  were  able  to  say,  " Scitt  ende  friend"  which  words  no 
Frenchmen  could  pronounce. — (Cassel.) 

There  fell  of  the  Ephraimites  forty  and  two  thonsandO  Certain  numbers  had  a  special 
significance  among  ihe  Israelites.  Forty- two  mockers  of  the  prophet  Elisha  were  torn  to 
pieces  by  the  bears  (2  Kings  ii.  24) ;  when  God's  judgments  descend  on  Ahab's  house,  42 
brethren  of  Ahaziah  are  put  to  death  by  Jehu  (2  Kings  x.  14). 

7.  He  was  buried  in  one  of  the  cities  of  Gilead-l  God  takes  care  of  His  own — even  "  their 
dust  is  precious."  Jephthah  has  been  harshly  judged  by  many.  But  it  is  manifest  that  God 
makes  much  of  him,  according  to  His  own  rule.  "  Them  that  honour  me  I  will  honour."  How 
small  a  matter  to  be  judged — rather  misjudged  of  man  !     "  He  that  judgeth  us  is  the  Lord." 

In  his  city.]  So  the  Sept.  reads.  It  uses  1  for  **.  In  that  case  Mizpah  would  be  the  place 
where  he  was  laid,  for  it  was  the  city  of  Jephthah. 

8.  Ihzan  of  Bethleheml*  Some  think  this  was  the  same  with  Boaz,  for  it  seems  to  have  been 
in  Judah.  The  thought  was  common  among  the  Jews,  yet  it  rests  purely  on  supposition.  The 
eference  is  rather  to  a  town  in  Zebulun. 

y 

9-15.  The  lives  of  the  three  judges  mentioned  here  were  short  and  uneventful.  All  that  is 
said  of  them  is  that  they  lived  a  little  while,  they  passed  across  the  stage,  and  then  disappeared. 
Two  of  them  had  large  families,  but  no  names  are  given,  and  nothing  is  recorded  as  to  what 
they  did.  It  is  said  of  Abdon's  sons  and  nephews,  or  rather  grandsons,  that  they  rode  on  ass 
colts,  which  in  those  days  implied  wealth  and  high  station  alike  (Ch.  v.  10 ;  x.  4). 


COMMENTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS  ON  CHAPTER  XII. 

Z.    Zt  is  impossible  to  satisfy  the  craving's  of  pride  and  envy. 

They  are  like  the  daughters  of  the  horse-leach  that  continually  cry.  Give, 
give.  Nothing  would  please  these  Ephra  mites.  Jephthah  offered  at  the  outset 
to  give  them  a  large  share  of  the  honours  of  the  fight,  but  then  they  kept  in 
the  background  ;  for  it  was  by  no  means  certain  whether  they  should  overcome 
or  be  overcome,  and  now  when  the  battle  is  over  and  won,  they  turn  round  and 
murmur  because  they  were  not  called  (comp.  Matt.  xi.  16-19).  See  remarks  on 
chap.  viii.  IS. 

ZZ.    Deadly  results  flow  from  a  malicious  use  of  the  tong-ue. 

Malicious  words  sting  a  man  usually  in  his  character,  that  is,  in  **  the  apple  of 
his  eye."  For  nothing  about  him  is  so  sensitive  as  his  character.  Hence  the 
consequences  are  often  most  destructive  (James  iii.  2-8).  You  are  the  refuse 
of  Ephraim,y  worthless  as  the  rubbish  vnder  our  feet.  Such  was  the  taunt  of  the 
imperial  tribe  towards  the  poor  Gileadites,  who,  however,  could  as  keenly  resent 
a  barbed  arrow  thrown  at  them  by  the  tongue  as  any  other  class.  Their  raoje 
became  a  frenzy,  and,  those  who  had  so  thoughtlessly  flung  the  shaft  of  reproach, 
i66 


HOMJLBTIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGED  chap.  xii. 


little  reflected  on  the  terrible  rebound  their  evil  words  would  produce.  "  Th  re 
fell  at  that  time  of  Ephraimites  42,000  men."  Some  would  indeed  reduce  the 
number  to  2,040  men.  But  the  A.V.  is  most  generally  taken  as  correct. 
"Beliold  how  great  a  matter  a  little  fire  kindleth  ! " 

There  is  no  limit  to  the  ruinous  effect  of  au  evil  tongue.  "  It  is  tlie  instru- 
ment of  all  strife  and  contention,  the  inventor  of  law  suits,  and  the  origin  of 
wars.  It  is  the  origin  of  error,  of  lies,  of  calumny,  and  of  blaspliemies." 
[^sop\  A  large  manufactory  is  burnt  down  to  the  ground,  notwithstanding 
that  many  engines  are  employed  to  pour  water  upon  it.  That  fire  is  kindled  by 
a  rushlight.  A  splendid  farmyard,  with  hay  ricks,  corn  stacks,  stables,  and  other 
buildings,  is  reduced  to  blackened  ruins  by  a  destructive  fire  :  and  that  is  the 
doing  of  a  lucifer  match  !  "Life  and  death  are  in  the  power  of  the  tongue." 
What  need  to  offer  the  prayer,  "  Set  a  watch,  Lord,  before  my  mouth ;  keep 
the  door  of  my  lips." 

XZZ.  Sinful  passlonsi  longp-cberlslied,  will  in  the  end  bring:  dire 
punishment. 

The  same  pride  and  envy,  superciliousness  of  manner,  and  arrogance  of 
spirit,  with  resentfulness  of  feeling,  which  were  shown  on  this  occasion,  were 
exhibited  many  years  before  to  Gideon.  During  all  those  years  such  dispositions 
were  cherished  by  the  Ephraimites,  and  though  the  Kuler  in  Providence  per- 
mitted them  long  to  pass  with  impunity,  the  time  came  round  at  last  for  these 
wicked  to  receive  the  due  reward  of  their  iniquities  (II.  Peter,  ii.  3 ; 
Prov.  xxix.  1).  The  long  delay  to  bring  punishment,  means  that  **  God's  good- 
ness would  lead  men  to  repentance." 

XV.  The  Redeemer  cares  for  the  bodies  as  well  as  the  souls  of 
those  whom  Ke  redeems. 

The  very  burial  place  of  the  good  man  is  worth  mentioning.  His  dust  is 
precious,  however  great  may  be  the  humiliation  of  the  grave.  His  grave  is 
known  to  Him  by  whom  he  is  redeemed ;  and,  when  the  time  comes  for  the 
gathering  up  of  the  jewels,  there  will  be  no  difficulty  in  finding  out  the  spot 
where  every  jewel  is  to  be  found.  "  This  is  the  Father's  will,  that  of  all  which 
He  hath  given  me,  I  should  lose  nothing,  but  raise  it  up  again  at  the  last  day." 
" — We  wait  for  the  adoption,  to  wit,  the  redemption  of  the  body."  Every  part 
of  the  man  must  be  redeemed,  for  it  is  for  the  honour  of  Him  whose  the  work 
is,  that  it  should  be  done  with  perfection.  As  Moses  said  to  Pharaoh,  **  not  a 
hoof  shall  be  left  behind,"  so  will  a  greater  than  Moses,  who  is  the  author  of  a 
greater  redemption  require  from  Death,  that  he  yield  up  all  the  parts  and 
fragments  of  the  *'  vile  body,"  so  that  not  a  limb  shall  be  left  in  the  grave.  All 
now  sleep  under  the  eye  of  Jesus,  and  the  moment  is  advancing  when  at  His 
Almighty  whisper,  all  that  has  been  so  long  in  the  dark  charnel-house  held 
bound  in  the  sleep  of  death,  shall  awake  singing,  each  one  rising  on  the  wing 
like  the  lark,  but  with  sweeter  song,  to  meet  their  Lord  in  the  air,  and  surround 
his  throne  with  adorations  and  praises  as  their  never-ceasing  employment. 


467 


OHAf   XliL  BOMIIETIO  COMMEl^TARY :  JUDGES. 

CHAPTER  XIII 

New  Oppressors  and  a  New  Deliverer 

In  fixing  the  date  at  which  Samson  appeared,  it  must  be  remembered  that 
great  diversity  of  opinion  exists,  as  to  the  exact  chronology  of  the  whole 
period  between  the  exodus  from  Egypt,  and  the  building  of  Solomon's  temple. 
The  entire  duration  of  that  period,  we  are  informed  in  I.  Kings  vi.  1,  was 
spanned  by  480  years.  But  how  to  allot  the  various  sections,  into  which  it 
was  divided,  forms  a  puzzling  problem.  Upwards  of  50  different  calculations 
have  been  made,  and  most  of  them  differ  widely  from  each  other,  some  reducitig 
the  lapse  of  time  during  the  Judges  to  170  or  190  years  [l^wald  and  /Jertheau], 
whilst  others  lengthen  it  out  to  over  600  years  [Josepkus.] 

Without  entering  into  this  entangling  discussion,  it  may  suffice  to  remark, 
that  the  narrative  in  this  book,  in  the  opinion  of  several  of  the  best  authorities, 
such  as  Keily  Bachmann,  Vitringa,  Cassel,  Light  foot,  &c.,  gives  tlie  events  as 
they  followed  each  other  in  succession,  up  to  the  death  of  Jair,  which,  counting 
from  the  invasion  of  Chusan,  the  first  oppressor,  extended  over  a  period  of  300 
years.  After  that  date  most  of  the  events  related  seem  to  have  been  more  or 
less  synchronous.  Thus  the  oppression  by  the  Philistines,  and  that  by  the 
Ammonites,  are  spoken  of  as  occurring  together,  the  one  on  the  east,  chiefly 
affecting  the  tribes  beyond  Jordan,  and  the  other  on  the  west,  affecting  Judah 
and  Benjamin,  Simeon  and  Dan.  (ch.  x.  7.)  These  were  not  quite  simultaneous  ; 
the  one  preceded  the  other  by  some  years,  or  may  have  been  over  when  the 
other  began.  First,  an  account  is  given  of  the  Ammonite  oppression,  and  the 
deliverance  accomplished  under  Jephthah,  and  now,  in  what  follows,  an 
account  is  given  of  the  yoke  imposed  by  the  Philistines,  on  the  tribes  that  were 
nearest  to  them,  and  the  deliverances  wrought  by  the  mighty  Samson  on  their 
behalf. 

Part  of  the  time  of  Eli's  high  priesthood  must  have  been  coeval  with  the 
deeds  of  Samson.  It  is  scarcely  any  objection  to  say,  that  we  hear  nothing  of 
him  in  the  account  given  of  Israel's  great  hero.  For,  indeed,  we  hear  little 
or  nothing  of  the  priesthood,  or  of  sanctuary  service,  all  through  this  book. 
The  purpose  in  it  is  chiefly,  to  give  an  account  of  the  manner  in  which  the 
people  by  tlieir  conduct  kept  their  covenant  towards  their  God,  and  how  He, 
in  turn,  kept  his  covenant  engagements  to  them.  From  first  to  last  they  were 
uniformly  treacherous  towards  Him,  while  He  was  uniformly  faithful  and 
gracious  towards  them.  We  are  now,  therefore,  at  a  time  when  the  people  had 
been  already  for  some  time  oppressed  by  the  Ammonites  beyond  Jordan,  and 
when,  on  this  side  Jordan,  the  oppression  by  the  Philistines  was  just  beginning 
to  be  most  severely  felt,  while  to  the  north,  the  tribes  were  enjoying  a  season 
of  comparative  quietude,  under  the  administration  of  wise  and  righteous 
judges. 

Verses  1-26. 

Critical  Notes. — 1.  Did  evil  again]  or  continued  to  do  evil  (Jer.  xvil  9  ;  Heb.  iii.  12 ; 
Gen,  vi.  5  ;  Jer.  xiii.  23).  See  on  Ch.  iii.  12  ;  iv.  1 ;  vi.  1,  etc.  Into  the  hand  of  the  Philistines-] 
The  land  of  the  Philistines  (Ex.  xiii.  17)  was  on  the  coast  of  the  Mediterranean,  between  Joppa 
and  the  border  of  Egypt,  to  north  and  south,  and  between  the  mountains  of  Judah  and  the 
sea,  to  east  and  west.  This  was  one  of  the  most  fertile  plains  in  all  Palestine  ;  it  grew  richer 
crops,  and  supported  a  larger  population  than  any  other.  The  people  were  brave  and  warlike, 
and  at  their  hands  the  Israelites  suffered  longer  and  more  severely,  than  at  those  of  any  other 
of  the  heathen  nations.  We  first  hear  of  them  before  the  confusion  of  tongues  at  Babel 
(Gen.  X.  14),  where  Philistim  and  Caphtorim  are  spoken  of  as  grandsons  of  Ham,  the  son  of 
468 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES,  chap.  xiit. 


Noah.  Caphtor,  according  to  Jewish  tradition,  was  Cappadocia.  The  people  settled  first  in 
Crete,  which  is  also  called  Caphtor,  and  afterwards  they  went  to  Palestine.  Allusions  are  made 
to  them  in  Amos  ix.  7  ;  Zech.  ix.  5-7  ;  Jer.  xlvii.  4  ;  Deut.  ii.  23.  It  is  more  probable,  that 
they  belonged  to  the  Pali,  or  shepherd  race,  called  by  different  names — ^the  Pali,  Pelasgi, 
Palatines,  Philistines.  There  seem  to  have  been  different  immigrations  of  them  into  Palestine. 
First,  that  of  the  Casluhim  (Gen.  x.  14).  Next,  the  Caphtotim,  a  kindred  clan,  about  the  time 
of  the  Exodus.  The  place  where  they  settled  was  called  "  the  sea  of  the  Philistines."  Thirdly, 
the  Cherethites,  not  mentioned  till  the  time  of  Saul,  who  are  spoken  of  at  that  time  as  a 
Philistine  clan,  enjoying  territory  and  wealth  (see  Ex.  xxiii.  31  ;  xiii.  17  ;  1  Sam.  xxx.  14, 16). 
About  303  years  before  the  time  of  Samson  they  lost  three  of  their  great  cities  to  Israel,  but  by 
his  time  they  had  received  a  great  accession  of  power  and  had  recovered  them  again  (Jud.  L  18). 
The  Philistines  thus  consisted  of  different  tribes,  who  came  together  in  the  south-west  of 
Palestine  at  different  times,  and  took  a  name  suggested  by  their  habits  and  history,  signifying 
"  emigrants,"  or  ** strangers" — jut-t  as  Saxons,  Danes,  and  Normans,  immigrating  into  our  own 
isl  nd  at  different  epochs,  became  at  length  amalgamated  and  united  under  the  one  name  of 
Ei-glish.  This  mixture  of  blood  tended  in  both  cases,  no  doubt,  to  give  a  character  of  greater 
vigour,  enterprise,  and  general  superiority. 

2.  Of  Zorah.]  A  town  at  first  belonging  to  Judah,  but  afterwards  given  to  Dan  (Josh.  xix.  41), 
on  the  western  slope  of  the  mountains  of  Judah,  near  to  Eshtaol  (Josh.  xv.  33).  His  wife  was 
barren.]  But  for  a  special  design  to  serve,  Samson  had  never  been  brought  into  existence- 
It  was  the  same  with  the  whole  nation  of  Israel.  "  The  Lord  had  need  of  them,"  otherwise 
such  a  nation  had  never  been.  They  were  brought  into  existence  contrary  to  nature. 
The  family  of  the  Danit^s.]  Mishpachath  Dani  is  used  in  the  same  meaning  as  Shebet  Dani, 
the  tribe  of  the  Danites,  for  at  the  numbering  of  the  people  there  was  only  one  family  of  the 
Danites,  who,  however,  multiplied  greatly  (Num.  xxvi.  42,  43). 

3-  The  angel  of  the  Lord.]  This  name  usually,  if  not  always,  in  the  Old  Testament,  applies 
to  *'  the  Angel — Jehovah," — the  uncreated  Angel,  or  the  form  in  which  Chribt  appeared  to  His 
people  in  Old  Testament  times.  Thou  shalt  bear  a  son.]  God  " raised  up"  Ehud  and  Othniel, 
called  Barak  through  Deborah,  and  cal  ed  Gideon  direct.  Now  Samson  is  chosen  before  he  is 
born.  The  angel  comes  to  his  mother.  God  is  not  confined  to  one  mode  of  action.  It  is  some- 
thing to  know,  in  view  of  the  strange  character  which  Samson  exliibited  when  he  came  to  man's 
estate,  that  God  thought  of  him  when  as  yet  he  was  not,  and  specially  raised  him  up  to  do  His 
work.  Compare  the  special  messages  sent  to  the  parents  of  those  who  were  raised  up  to  be 
blessings  to  the  Church  and  to  society,  to  Abraham  and  Sarah  (Gen.  xvii.  19  ;  xviii  10,  14),  to 
Hannah  (1  Sam.  i.  17),  to  Elizabeth  (Luke  i.  13),  and  to  IMary  (Luke  i.  21). 

5.  The  child  shall  be  a  Nazarite  unto  God.]  Not  Naear,  but  Nazirite.  One  separated  to  God* 
or  specially  dedicated,  according  to  certain  external  observances,  namely,  to  drink  no  wine  or 
strong  drink,  to  eat  no  unclean  thing,  and  let  no  razor  come  on  his  head,  also  not"  to  touch  a 
dead  body,  or  attend  a  funeral  (Num.  vi.  1-8,  &c.)  Some  interpret  these  signs  to  indicate, 
self-denial,  holiness,  and  humility,  or  submission.  Ths  first  two  of  these  interpretations  may 
be  included,  but  the  general  idea,  is  that  of  entire  consecration  to  God  for  a  special  purpose. 
The  forbidding  of  wine,  is  not  so  much  here  a  prohibition  of  self-indulgence,  as  a  restriction  of 
that  which  would  produce  ceremonial  uncleanness  (Lev.  x.  9).  Hence  it  was  forbidden  to  the 
priests,  while  doing  duty  in  the  tabernacle.  The  priest  had  an  office  and  functions  which  did 
not  belong  to  the  Nazarite,  but  their  absolute  consecration  to  God  was  practically  the  same. 
The  latter,  was  always  to  look  on  himself  as  if  he  were  in  the  Sanctuary,  holy  in  himself  as  all 
things  around  him  were,  and  all  his  duties  holy  duties.  *'  The  Nazir  is  indeed  a  walking  altar 
of  God  ;  and  his  flowing  hair  is  the  visible  token  of  his  consecration."  Just  as  the  lifting  up  of 
iron  on  the  altar  would  be  a  desecration  of  it  (Ex.  xx.  25),  so  would  the  bringing  of  a  razor  on  the 
htad  of  the  Nazir  be  inconsistent  with  the  sacred  character  he  bears.  The  uushorn  hair  which  he 
wore,  was  as  much  his  specific  mark,  as  the  linen  garment  was  that  of  the  priest.  Probably, 
the  prohibition  again>t  cutting  the  hair  meant,  that  tht  re  must  be  no  interference  with  an  object 
so  entirely  consecrated  to  God  as  the  Nazir,  so  as  to  alttr  it  from  what  nature  has  m  de  it,  and 
that  as  the  hair  growing  to  its  full  length  is  nature's  protection  of  the  person,  it  must  be 
hallowed  and  remain  untouched.  Some,  indeed  many,  were  so  devoted  to  the  Lord  for  only 
eight  days,  others  for  a  month,  or  longer,  and  we  only  read  of  three  who  were  so  devoted  for 
life,  Samuel,  John  the  Baptist,  and  Samson  (1  Saml.  i.  11  ;  Luke  i.  15).  We  read  also,  that 
Paul  at  one  time  took  such  a  vow  (Acts  xviii.  18  ;  xxi  24-26). 

He  will  begin  to  deliver  Israel,  ftc]  This  implies  that  the  Philistine  oppression  had  been  felt 
for  some  time.  Let  va  Mippose  it  to  have  lasted,  as  yet,  but  one  year  ;  let  us  farther  suppose 
that  Samson  was  but  18  years  old  when  he  began  to  act  as  judge;  and  again  add  up  the 
20  years  that  his  judgeship  lasted.  This  would  amount  to  39  years  from  the  beginning  of  the 
oppression  ;  yet,  the  whole  period  of  that  oppression,  was  only  40  years.  There  would  thus  be 
only  one  year  left  for  the  inflicting  of  the  final  defeat  under  Samuel.  It  is  also  implied,  that 
Samson  was  not  to  complete  the  deliverance  ;  he  was  but  to  lift  the  yoke  partially  from  their 
neck,  and  inspire  them  with  the  hope  that  full  freedom  would  come  in  the  end. 

469 


OHAP.  xm.  EOMILETJC  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES, 


He  shall  be  a  "Fazarite  nnto  God.  and  shall  begin  to  deliver  Israel.]  There  is  certainly  a  con- 
nection between  his  being  a  Nazarite,  and  his  being  a  deliverer  of  his  people.  It  seems  to  be 
this.  In  the  case  of  the  other  *'  Saviours,"  such  as  Ehu>l,  Barak,  Gideon,  and  Je[)htliah,  the 
ground  on  which  God  gave  them  power,  and  the  special  fitness  for  delivering  the  suff.  ring 
people,  was  either  the  repentance  of  the  people,  or  what  is  practically  the  same  thing,  their 
crying  to  G'd  in  earnest  prayer.  But  we  hear  nothing  of  this  in  the  case  of  the  generation  of 
Samson's  age.  And  as  there  must  be  some  ground  of  righteous  procedure  brought  forward,  if 
God  is  to  grant  another  "  Saviour "  now,  He,  Himself,  appoints  a  special  capacity  to  be 
sustained  l)y  the  man  whom  He  raises  up  to  give  deliverance.  That  capacity  is,  to  be  a 
person  specially  set  apart  for  God,  ceremonially  free  from  all  defilement,  and  hallow,  d  for  the 
doing  of  any  service  that  God  may  require  at  his  hand.  On  a  man  occupjring  such  a  cai  acity, 
God  could  confer  His  Holy  Spirit  consistently  with  his  righteous  character,  and  make  him  strong, 
wise,  fearless,  and  successful  in  doing  the  work  set  before  him.  But  the  question  is  not  what 
the  man  is  in  himself,  in  his  own  personal  character,  but  in  what  he  represents.  Samson,  in  his 
heart  and  life,  was  not  the  spotless  person  which  the  theory  of  Nazaritism  required  him  to  be 
but  the  signs  which  he  bore,  were  a  standing  law,  pointing  out  what  the  character  andcondiicto 
those  should  be  whom  God  would  acknowledge  as  His  own,  and  whom  He  would  deliver  from 
all  evil.  His  Nazarite  profession  was  really  a  protest  against  the  iniquity  of  the  time-,  and  an 
illustration  of  the  principles,  which  the  "  holy  nation "  must  cultivate  anew,  if  they  were  to 
receive  the  Divine  protection. 

Being  a  Nazarite,  God  could,  consistently  with  His  holy  character,  bestow  on  Samson  the 
gift  of  superhuman  strength,  but  when  he  suffered  his  locks  to  be  shorn,  he  no  longer  retained 
the  principal  sign  of  his  consecration  to  God,  and  so  the  gift  which  was  conferred  only  out  of 
respect  to  that  consecration,  departed  from  him. 

6-  A  man  of  GodO  Usually  applied  to  "  a  prophet,"  or  a  man  who  is  authorised  to  speak 
mt  ssages  from  God,  such  as  Moses,  Samuel,  Elijah,  Elisha,  David,  and  others.  To  Manoah's 
wife  he  had  a  far  nobler  and  more  impressive  look  than  men  usually  have,  yet  she  does  not 
neem  to  have  recognised  him  as  Divine. 

8.  Manoah  entreated  the  Lord-]  The  name  signifies  **  Rest."  He  was  a  man  of  prayer.  Hov 
often  are  those  who  become  blessings  to  the  world,  children  of  praying  parents  ?  Isaac,  Jacob, 
Joseph,  Moses,  Samuel,  Solomon,  and  Timothy,  all  appear  to  have  been  the  chiMren  of  many 
prayers.  The  prayer,  on  this  occasion,  appears  to  have  been  acceptable  unto  God,  and  was 
heard.     The  same  instructions,  as  to  the  training  of  the  child,  are  given  as  before, 

15.  Let  ns  detain  Thee  nntild  Not  yet  having  discerned  the  Divine  character  of  his  visitor, 
Manoah,  full  of  gratitude  for  the  joyous  tidings,  would  offer  him  a  warm  hospitality 
(comp.  Gen.  xviii.  7  ;  Heb.  xiii.  2). 

18.  Why  askest  thou  after  my  name,  seeing  it  is  secret  fl  The  word  is  Peli,  the  same  with  Pelt,  in 
Isaiah  ix.  6,  which  is  translated,  wonderful.  Meaning,  that  all  about  Him  is  most  wonderful,  or. 
He  is  the  wonderful  one  beyond  comparison  with  all  others.  The  true  rendering  of  the  clau-e, 
therefore  is,  "seeing  it  is  wonderful."  That  is  not  really  telling  his  name,  but  describing  its 
character.  It  is  as  if  He  had  said,  "  Why  ask  after  my  name  ?  seeing  I  am  not  known  by  a 
mere  name,  but  by  a  character  and  mode  of  action,  which  belong  only  to  myself,  and  cannot  be 
devised  or  imitated  by  others.  Everything  about  me  is  essentially  wonderful," 
(comp.  Ps.  cxviii.  23 ;  Ex.  xvii.  ;  xxxiv.  10).  We  must  understand  it  to  have  the  force  of 
"absolutely  and  supremely  wonderful,"  which  can  only  apply  to  God.  Bertheau  tones  it  down 
to  mean  "neither  easy  to  utter,  nor  easy  to  comprehend."  Rather,  we  are  to  regard  it  as  one 
of  the  hints  which  He  always  gives  when  He  appears,  that  it  is  one  who  is  Divine  that  has 
appeared. 

19.  Unto  the  Lord.]  In  obedience  to  the  direction  given  in  ver.  16.  They  still  regarded 
their  visitor  as  a  messenger  from  God,  and  nothing  more,  or  as  they  express  it,  "  a  man  of 
God."  So  that  their  sacrifice  was  not  to  the  visitor  but  to  Jehovah.  It  was  offered  there 
and  then,  expressly  by  the  direction  of  the  visitor,  which  to  them  seemed  sufficient  to 
hallow  the  spot,  though  no  offering,  as  a  rule,  could  be  accepted  unless  laid  on  the  duly 
consecrated  altar. 

20.  The  angel  ascended  in  the  flame.]  This  was  pioof  positive  that  he  was  Divine. 
Fell  on  their  faces.]  Paralysed  with  fear  at  the  sudden  disclosure  of  the  fact  that  they  had 
been  talking  with  God  face  to  face  (Dan.  x.  9 ;  Num.  xiv.  6  ;  Lev.  ix.  24  ;  1  Chron.  xxi.). 

22.  We  shall  surely  di«>  because  ve  have  seen  God.]      They    regarded    Him   as  the   Angel 
Jehovah,  and   that  was   in   their  estimation    the    same   as  Jehovah   himself.       Many  such 
appearances  were  made  in  Old  Testament  times  (Gen.  xviii.  25,  26;    xix.  24;   xxii.  11-15  ; 
xxviii.   13-17;    xxxii.  30;    xxxi.  11,  13;   xxxv.  9-15;    Ex.  iii.  2-5;     xiv.  19;    xix.  17-20; 
XX.  21  22 ;  xxiv.  9-11 ;  xxxiii.  19-23 ;  xxxiv.  6-8,  etc.,  etc.).     That  the  visitor  in  the  present 

470 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES  chap.  xiii. 


case  was  Divine  appears  from  two  things  especially — He  brought  fire  out  of  the  rock  to 
consume  the  offering,  and  He  vanished  in  the  flame.  That  they  should  fear  death  to  come  to 
them  because  they  had  been  face  to  face  with  God,  is  the  natural  instiuct  of  a  guilty  mind, 
even  in  the  case  of  those,  in  whom  the  good  work  is  begun  (see  Gen.  xxxii,  30  ;  Ex.  xxxiii.  20). 

23  He  would  not  have  received  a  burnt  offering,  etcl  The  wife  proved  a  wise  counsellor  to 
her  husband  on  this  occasion.  It  is  a  specimen  of  excellerit  reasoning.  The  merei*  s  (Jod  had 
shown  to  them  were  proofs  that  he  regarded  them  with  favour.  Why  confer  such  honour  on 
them  if  He  meant  to  kill  them  ?  Why  pledge  His  word  in  promise  to  them,  aud  th^n  put 
them  to  death,  so  that  that  promise  could  not  be  fulfilled  ?  Why  did  He  accept  their  offr-rinys 
on  His  altar?  Surely  the  honour  of  the  Divine  truthfulness  requir^d  thai;  they  should  be 
preserved.  Were  not  the  mercies  they  had  received  pledges  of  the  Divine  love,  and  a  reison 
for  concluding  that,  since  God  had  begun  to  bless  them  with  promises  of  good.  He  would 
continue  to  bless  them  still  ?  (Ps.  cxv.  12  ;  xxxvi.  10  ;  Isa.  xxvi.  12). 

24.  Called  his  name  Samson-]  The  Hebrew  form  of  the  name  is  Shimshon  the  root  of  which 
is  Shemesh,  "the  sun."  The  meaning  in  that  case  would  be  sun-like,  or  little  sun,  or  hero  of 
the  sun.  Josephus,  however,  makes  it  shimshom  the  strong,  or  daring  one,  while  yet  others  make 
it  to  mean  to  minister,  in  allusion  to  the  Nazarites'  consecration  to  the  service  of  God.  The 
Jewish  expositors  speak  of  Samson  as  "  called  after  the  name  of  God,"'  who  is  the  "  sun  and 
shield  of  Israel"  (Ps.  Ixxxiv.  12).  "The  symbol  of  servitude  is  night  (a3  in  the  case  of  the 
Egyptian  oppression),  but  the  beginning  of  freedom  is  as  the  dawn  of  day,  or  the  rising  of 
the  sun."  One  of  the  Iggsads  places  at  the  head  of  its  narratives  "  the  powerful  knight, 
Samson,  dark  of  complexion,  like  an  Oriental,  with  *  hair  and  beard  black  as  pitch,'  and  from 
whom  the  mighty  race  of  the  Amelungen  springs." 

Tre  Lord  blessed  himO  This  could  hardly  be  said  of  a  man  who  had  nothing  good  in  his 
character  before  God  (Ps,  viL  11).  God's  blessing  and  God's  curse  cannot  rest  on  the  same 
man.  He  must  have  the  one  lot  or  the  other.  He  may  be  severely  chastised  on  account  of 
grievous  sins,  but  that  does  not  decide  the  point  that  he  is  an  ungodly  character.  God  may 
do  much  for  a  wicked  man.  He  may  give  him  long  life,  a  high  station  of  honour,  and  many 
titles  and  distinctions  ;  he  may  gratify  his  natural  wishes  to  the  full,  and  yet  give  these  things 
without  his  blessing  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  7-9).  Nay,  all  the  while  these  things  may  be  working  out  his 
ruin  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  18).  We  regard  this  statement,  if  not  as  decisive,  at  least  as  a  strong  point  in 
Samson's  favour  as  a  religious  character. 

25.  Began  to  move  him  in  the  camp  of  Dan.]  The  word  here  which  is  translated  "to  move ' 
^DPQ>  signifies  to  excite  to  action.  He  was  already  conscious  of  his  superior  strength  to  other 
men,  and,  in  view  of  what  he  saw  around  him,  he  was  stirred  up  now  and  again  by  the 
Spirit  of  the  Lord,  to  arise  and  use  his  power  on  behalf  of  his  oppressed  people.  Moses  was  so 
stirred,  though  not  so  specially  (Ex.  ii.  11-14).  Paul  also  (Acts  xvii.  16).  But  this  was  before 
his  actual  exploits,  such  as  slaying  the  lion,  or  making  great  slaughter  of  the  Philistines.  It 
seemed  to  be  certain  sudden  impulses  which  the  Spirit  made  him  feel,  to  indicate  that  he  had 
a  mission  before  him  in  breaking  the  power  of  the  oppressor.  As  the  root  of  the  word 
signifies  an  anvil,  some  think  that  these  impulses  were  an  intimation  to  him  beforehand,  that 
he  was  to  smite  the  Philistines  with  repeated  strokes  as  from  a  hammer  on  an  anvil.  But 
surely  it  was  also  an  intimation  that  when  the  time  came,  he  would  be  made  fit  for  his  work, 
according  to  the  promise,  *'  as  thy  days,  so  shall  thy  strength  be." 

In  the  camp  of  Dan]  or  Mahaneh  Dan.  This  was  an  encampment  formed  by  the  armed  600, 
who  formed  a  temporary  settlement,  which  afterwards  became  permanent,  in  a  district  near 
Kirjah-jearim,  when  they  went  out  in  quest  of  the  acquisition  of  new  territory.  The  account 
is  given  in  Chap.  xviiL  11,  12,  the  date  of  which,  was  more  than  300  years  anterior  to  the  days 
of  Samson.  This  place  was  somewhat  higher  up  the  sides  of  the  mountain  than  Zorah,  but  only 
a  few  miles  distant  from  the  young  hero's  home.  Thither  he  must  often  have  cHinbf  d  as  to  one 
of  the  centres  where  a  few  patriots,  still  left  in  the  land,  were  wont  to  congregate,  and  from 
them  he  would  hear,  from  time  to  time,  of  fresh  deeds  of  barbarity  and  oppression  that  were 
perpetrated  on  the  homesteads  of  Israel,  by  the  cruel  enemies  that  occupied  the  f)]ains  belt)W. 
Even  at  Zorah,  every  morning  as  he  looked  out  at  the  door  of  his  paternal  dwelling,  on  the 
western  slope  of  the  mountains,  his  eye  could  take  in  not  only  the  rich  garden  of  the  Shefelah, 
which  belonged  to  his  own  tribe,  but  also  a  large  sweep  of  the  fertile  fields  beyond  tlie  borders, 
all  over  which,  the  enemy  spread  their  tents,  or  built  their  cities,  and  which,  at  one  time,  had 
been  trodden  by  the  foot  of  the  dreaded  giants.  "  Many  a  band  of  tliese  cruel  plunderers, 
doubtless,  he  would  see  marching  up  the  glen  beneath  his  father's  house,  and  returning 
again  laden  with  the  spoils  of  his  brethren  ;  many  an  act  of  rapine  and  cruel  outrage,  or 
even  barbarous  murder,  left  a  deep  impress  on  his  mind,  and  stirred  within  him,  thoughts 
of  doing  mighty  deeds,  on  behalf  of  the  oppressed." 

Patriotic  thoughts  or  feelings,  however,  are  not  to  he  confounded  vnth  the  movements  occasioned 

471 


CHAP.  xiiL  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES, 


by  the  Divine  Spirit.  Any  supernatural  operation  of  the  Spirit  on  a  man,  is  indeed  ever  in 
harmony  with  natural  law,  yet,  is  quite  distinct  in  itself  from  natural  law.  We  believe  the 
Spirit  took  occasion  from  the  impulses  of  patriotism,  prompted  by  natural  causes,  to  produce  a 
higher  class  of  impulses,  that  were  peculiar  to  His  own  special  working  in  the  mind. 


HOMILETIC  REMARKS.— Verse*  1-25. 

An  Unthuught  of  Deliverer  raised  up. 

Z«  The  tlioug'litfulness  of  God's  mercy  to  a  backsliding  people. 

1.  In  sending  chastisement  at  all.  That  alone  shows  the  considerateness  of 
the  Divine  love.  If  the  stone  which  has  begun  to  roll  down  the  steep  be  not 
stopped,  and  stopped  soon,  by  some  effectual  means,  it  will  inevitably  dash  on 
to  the  bottom,  and  be  broken  in  a  thousand  splinters.  If  a  fire  be  kindled  in 
a  house,  it  must  be  extinguished  at  once  by  any  and  every  means,  or  it  will  soon 
envelope  every  object  in  the  house  in  flames.  So,  if  sin  is  left  to  do  its  natural 
work  in  the  soul  unchecked,  it  will  ere  long  lead  to  irretrievable  ruin.  Hence 
those  Divine  utterances  which  tell  us — "  You  only  have  I  known  of  all  the 
families  of  the  earth,  therefore  will  I  punish  you  for  all  your  iniquities."  **  He 
that  spareth  the  rod  hateth  the  child."  (Ps.  xciv.  12,  etc.  ;  Lev.  xix.  17  ; 
Heb.  xii.  6.)  The  confession  is  made  by  the  afflicted  person  himself  (Ps.  cxix. 
71,  75).  The  intention  of  the  chastisement  is  often  to  remove  what  would  be 
deleterious,  or  to  assist  growth  (John  xv.  2).  To  let  a  man  alone  while  he  is 
going  on  sinning,  is  a  heavy  judgment  to  him  (Hos.  iv.  17  ;  Jer.  xlviii.  11). 
Sharp  chastisement  is  incomparably  kinder  treatment.  When  a  man  is  asleep 
on  the  top  of  a  precipice,  the  kind  thing  is  to  awaken  him,  however  roughly 
rather  than  let  him  fall  over  into  ruin. 

Thus  did  God  with  His  own  people  when  He  gave  them  into  the  hand  of  the 
fierce  enemy  here  described.  He  only  fulfilled  the  terms  of  His  covenant 
(Ps.  Ixxxix  30-34).  Yet  it  remained  true,  that  "  all  His  paths  were  mercy  and 
truth  to  such  as  kept  His  covenant." 

2.  In  not  removing  the  chastisement  at  once.  Were  it  to  be  so  removed 
the  greater  part  of  the  benefit  to  be  gained  by  sending  it  would  be  lost.  There 
is  need  for  realising  the  bitterness  of  sin  from  the  bitterness  of  its  fruits 
(Jer.  ii.  19).  Nothing  teaches  like  experience,  especially  when  the  father  has 
to  deal  with  "sottish  children,"  a  people  of  no  understanding  (Jer.  iv.  22). 
When  the  mild  whispers  are  not  heard,  love  raises  her  voice  to  the  hoarse  notes 
rather  than  relinquish  her  object.  A  discipline  is  needed  to  make  the  heart 
become  broken  and  contrite.  *' He  subdues  its  iniquities,"  "heals  itg  back- 
slidings,"  and  then  "loves  freely."  It  is  like  driving  the  ploughshare  through 
the  hard,  beaten  ground,  and  breaking  it  up  by  way  of  preparing  the  soil  for 
the  good  seed.  We  must  *' suffer  awhile  "  ere  we  are  "made  perfect  "-—must 
know  someLhing  of  the  sorrows  of  the  sinful  state,  ere  we  enter  on  the  joys  of 
the  world  where  sin  is  unknown. 

8.  In  devising  deliverance  before  the  voice  qf  prayer  is  heard.  While  we  are 
told  in  this  chapter  of  the  people's  new  sins,  we  hear  nothing  of  their 
repentance,  or  their  earnest  cry  for  deliverance.  The  cry  of  distress  with  the 
Eymptoms  of  repentance,  referred  to  in  ch.  x.  10-16,  seems  to  refer  to  the 
experience  and  behaviour  of  the  people  under  the  oppression  that  was  then 
going  on  to  the  east  of  the  Jordan  (see  verses  8,  9),  and  not  to  the  men  of  Judah, 
Benjamin  and  Dan,  to  the  west.  Even,  therefore,  if  the  oppressions  were 
synchronous,  which  they  only  were  in  part  at  the  very  most,  we  cannot  take 
472 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES.  chap.  xiii. 


the  expression  of  penitence  given  in  ch.  x.,  as  applying  to  the  western  tribes 
that  were  now  crushed  under  the  tyranny  of  the  Philistines. 

We  are  left  to  believe  that  here  there  was  no  voice  of  pra}  er,  nor  turning  of 
the  heart  to  Him  from  whom  they  had  so  deeply  revolted.  They  were  still 
"enemies  of  God  in  their  minds  and  by  wicked  works."  Yet  in  these  circum- 
stances, thoughts  of  love  sprung  up  in  the  Divine  bosom,  solely  because  of  the 
great  goodness  that  dwells  eternally  there. 

God  is  so  disposed  to  bless  His  people ^  tliat  He  sometimes  hears  their  voice  as 
soon  as  they  begin  to  cry,  and  even  before  they  have  begun  to  do  so,  while, 
indeed,  they  are  only  purposing  to  do  it  (Isa.  Ixv.  24)  (comp.  Matt.  vi.  8). 
But  always,  sooner  or  later,  He  hears  them  when  they  cry  to  Him  with  their 
whole  heart  (Jer.  xxix.  12,  13).  Here,  however,  such  is  His  mercy,  that  He 
interposes  on  their  behalf  when  they  do  not  cry  at  all.  Suffering  has  been 
sent,  but  they  are  chastised  "  like  the  bullock  unaccustomed  to  the  yoke." 
They  do  not  know  the  why  or  wherefore  of  it  all.  They  seem  not  to  know  that 
it  is  the  hand  of  their  God  that  is  upon  them,  chastising  them  for  their  sins. 
Hence  there  is  no  prayer.  They  are  beaten  "  like  the  horse  or  mule,  whose 
mouth  is  kept  in  with  bit  and  bridle."  They  do  not  see  any  moral  instruction 
in  it  all,  whereas  those  who  have  understanding  of  God's  ways  see  a  salutary 
course  of  training  in  those  dealings,  dictated  by  the  loving  kindness  of  the  Lord 
(Psa.  cvii.  43). 

4.  In  providing  a  remedy  as  soon  as  He  begins  to  chastise.  This  is  specially 
to  be  noticed.  The  remedy  indeed  does  not  appear  at  once.  The  antidote  is 
not  applied  on  the  very  day  when  the  bane  is  sent.  For  some  considerable 
time,  it  looks  as  if  there  was  no  intention  to  remove  the  dreadful  scourge.  And 
yet  all  the  while  steps  have  been  taken  to  provide  a  remedy  suitable  for 
removing  the  evil.  The  birth  of  Samson  was  thought  of  at  the  very  beginning 
of  the  oppression  by  the  Philistines.  That  oppression  lasted  forty  years,  of 
which  time  twenty  years  were  occupied  with  Samson's  judgeship,  and  most  of 
the  other  twenty  were  filled  up  with  his  growth  from  infancy  to  manhood.  The 
Philistines  were  not  fully  driven  off  till  at  least  one  year  alter  Samson's  death 
(1  Sam.  vii.  13).  And  if  we  suppose  that  Samson  began  to  judge  Israel  at  the 
age  of  18  or  19,  then  it  follows  that  the  message  spoken  of  in  this  chapter  was 
coeval  with  the  date  when  the  oppression  began.  The  conclusion  is  manifest, 
that  on  the  very  day  when  the  wound  is  made,  steps  are  taken  to  furnish  a  balm 
for  healing  it ! 

What  a  touching  proof  we  have  in  this,  that  God  "  afflicts  not  willingly  " 
(Lam.  iii.  33;.  It  is  not  from  feelings  of  hatred  or  revenge  that  He  sends 
heavy  judgments.  There  His  nature  entirely  differs  from  ours.  He  bears  no 
grudge,  and  cherishes  no  ani;er,  against  any  class  of  men  merely  as  men,  as  we 
do  when  provoked.  His  anger,  which  is  most  strong,  is  directed  against  sin, 
so  that  all  who  determine  to  live  in  sin,  and  will  not  give  it  up,  mus^  take  the 
consequences.  It  is  then  according  to  laws  that  G'>d  acts,  and  not  as  we  do, 
according  to  passionate  feelings.  The  senditig  of  this  Pliilistine  opp  ession  on 
His  people  was  out  of  respect  to  righteousn^^^ss  and  truth,  and  not  because  He 
had  lost  His  loving  feelings  to  His  own.  For  at  the  same  moment  that  He 
applies  the  rod.  He  devises  means  to  alleviate  the  strokes  !  The  love  which 
thinks  of  deliverance,  is  at  work  in  the  same  breast,  where  jealousy  for  the 
honour  of  His  holy  name  burns. 

5.  In  doing  all  this  for  a  people  hardened  in  sin.  It  is  when  obstacles  are 
placed  in  the  stream  that  we  see  the  strength  of  the  current.  The  people  with 
whom  God  was  so  considerate  and  tender  in  His  dealings,  were  inveterately 
obstinate  in  clinging  to  their  wicked  ways.  Every  heart  was  determinedly 
barricaded  against  admitting  Him.     To  bestow  His  mercies  on  them  seemed 

473 


CHAP.  xra.  HOMTLETIO  COMMENTARY:  JUDOBS. 


like  castiDg  pearls  before  swine.  "  They  were  all  grievous  revolters,"  their 
hearts  like  "  brass  and  iron  "  for  hardness.  Yet  it  is  long  before  the  Divine 
mercy  goes  away.  "  How  shall  I  give  thee  up — thee — My  own  Israel,  whom  I 
have  redeemed,  with  whom  I  have  entered  into  covenant!  No!  I  will  not 
give  up.  I  will  not  execute  the  fierceness  of  Mine  anger,  for  I  am  God,  and 
not  man.  If  they  will  not  hear  the  gentle  zephyr,  I  will  bring  the  thunder 
cloud.     But  I  will  not  leave." 

IZ.    The  salvation  of  Israel  is  entirely  of  the  Z«ord. 

A  common  place  remark,  but  how  valuable  to  see  it  always  standing  out 
before  us  on  every  page  of  this  interesting  history  !  The  thought  of  it  ever 
begins  with  Him.  It  springs  from  the  abundant  j^^oodness  of  His  own  nature 
(1.  Peter  i.  3).  So  strong  is  the  welling  up  of  that  goodness  that  it  overflows 
the  mightiest  obstacles  which  sin  in  so  many  forms  is  ever  putting  in  its  way — 
by  its  stubbornness,  its  manifoldness,  its  malignity,  its  inveteracy,  its  intense 
antagonism  to  His  holy  nature,  its  mischievous  influence,  its  ingratitude,  and 
dishonour  done  to  all  His  sacred  perfections,  and  finally,  its  incurableness. 
How  sincere  and  cordial  His  pity  for  the  sinning  people  before  Him  !  To  the 
generation  that  has  provoked  Him  to  bring  on  them  the  terrible  calamity  of 
the  captivity.  He  said,  speaking  through  the  weeping  prophet  :  You  may  not 
think  me  sincere  in  professing  loving  kindness  towards  you  because  of  these 
troubles,  but  in  myself  **  I  know  the  thoughts  which  I  think  toward  you  ; 
thoughts  of  peace  and  not  of  evil,  to  give  you  an  expected  end."  In  all  the 
different  crises  which  occurred  in  Israel's  history  as  recorded  in  this  Book,  their 
refuge  in  the  background  when  things  came  to  the  worst,  was  their  God  ; 
though  they  had  cast  Him  off,  put  other  gods  in  his  place,  and  provoked  Him 
to  anger  daily  by  their  systematic  wickedness.  For  all  that,  "  He  only  was 
their  rock  and  defence — their  expectation  was  only  from  Him."  Let  it  be 
treasured  up  in  the  memory  of  every  reader  to  His  everlasting  praise. 

ZZZ  God's  honours  are  free  to  all  Kis  own  people  alike,  thoug-h 
not  to  strang'ers. 

It  was  the  highest  honour  in  that  age  which  any  Israelite  could  enjoy,  to  be 
raised  up  by  God  to  act  as  the  **  Saviour "  of  the  people,  in  a  great  crisis. 
This  honour  was  distributed  impartially  among  the  various  tribes.  From  Judah 
was  taken  an  Othniel ;  from  Ephraim,  an  Abdon  and  a  Samuel ;  from  Benjamin^ 
an  Ehud,  and  perhaps  a  Shamgar  and  a  Deborah  ;  from  Jssachar,  a  Tola  ;  from 
Zehulun,  an  Ibzan  and  an  Elon  ;  from  Gad  (if  the  same  with  Gilead),  Jair  and 
Jephthah  ;  from  Naphtali,  a  Barak ;  from  Manasseh,  a  Gideon  ;  from  DaUy 
a  Samson  ;  and  perhaps  from  Simeon,  a  Shamgar,  though  it  remains  undecided. 
The  only  two  tribes  omitted  are  Reuben  and  Asher,  and  that  may  well  be 
accounted  for  by  the  fact,  that  the  deliverer  was  usually  raised  up  near  the 
point  where  the  danger  was  greatest ;  and  the  tribes  just  named  seem  never  to 
have  been  in  such  risk  of  destruction  by  an  enemy  as  the  other  ten  at  some 
part  of  their  history.  But  we  never  hear  of  any  man  outside  Israel  being 
raised  up  to  be  a  defender  of  God's  Church.  All  God's  battles  were  fought  by 
men  of  faith.  All  others  were  rejected,  whatever  might  be  their  skill  and 
prowess.  The  Church  does  not  need  the  world's  help.  Her  resources  are 
within  herself. 

ZV.  The  real  g-uardian  of  the  Church  never  deserts  his  post. 

As  we  read  through  the  account,  one  naturally  inquires — Who  is  this  kind 
friend,  that  now  and  again  makes  His  appearance  in  the  darkest  nights  of  this 
474 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES.  Ohap.  XIit. 


people's  history,  to  save  them  from  threatened  ruin  ?  He  comes  unsought,  and 
even  unknown  ;  or  the  moment  that  He  is  known,  He  disappears  from  view. 
He  does  not  appear  before  the  public  gaze,  but  shows  himself  to  a  solitary 
individual,  whom  He  appoints  to  act  for  Him  in  carrying  out  plans  for  the 
redemption  of  the  people.  He  seems  always  to  be  in  the  background,  His  step 
noiseless,  His  voice  calm  ;  no  pomp  of  appearance,  and  no  retinue  surrounding 
Him.  But  He  is  there — with  this  people,  knowing  all  that  happens  to  them, 
knowing  all  their  provocations  and  sins,  but  never  losing  siglit  of  them  or 
ceasing  to  interest  himselt  on  their  behalf.  He  was  with  the  Church  in  the 
wilderness  ;  He  appeared  as  the  "  Captain  of  the  Lord's  host,"  when  the  Church 
was  about  to  fight  her  first  battle  with  her  enemies  ;  when  the  people  had  lost 
Joshua  and  were  about  to  pursue  their  course  without  a  leader,  again  He  appears 
to  reprove  them  for  the  symptoms  they  were  already  beginning  to  give  ot  their 
apostasy  (Jud.  ii.  1-5).  In  the  days  of  the  great  oppression  by  Midiau,  when 
the  land  was  groaning  under  the  weight  of  its  troubles,  He  appeared  to  Gideon 
and  gave  him  a  commission  to  become  "the  Saviour"  of  his  Church.  And  now 
here  we  see  the  same  never-forsaking  friend,  always  throwing  His  shield  round 
about  them  when  they  are  getting  under  the  paw  of  the  lion. 

No  other  people  has  such  a  protector.  They  stand  alone  among  the  nations. 
They  have  a  friend  that  never  dies,  and  his  love  never  cools.  He  lives  through 
all  the  ages  and  ever  sits  at  the  helm.  What  can  it  mean,  but  that  He  has  a 
special  charge  of  the  church,  never  resigning  his  post  and  never  permitting  her 
enemies  to  accomplish  her  destruction.  All  this  we  find  gloriously  realised  in 
the  guardian  care  exercised  over  the  church  of  the  New  Testament  era,  "  He  is 
head  over  all  things  to  the  Church  which  is  His  body,"  "  He  ever  liveth  to 
make  intercession,"  **  I  am  with  you  always  to  the  end  of  the  world,"  "  On  this 
rock  I  will  build  my  church,  and  the  gates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail  against  it," 
**  1  have  graven  thee  on  the  palms  of  Mine  hands,  thy  walls  are  continually 
before  me." 

V.  God  Is  g^lorified  by  the  diversity  of  tbe  instrumentality 
Ke    employs. 

The  deliverance  of  Israel  is  not  always  effected  by  one  uniform  method. 
Rather  there  is  every  possible  variety.  At  one  time,  a  member  of  one  of  the 
best  families  of  Israel  is  selected  to  lead  the  people  against  the  invader,  and  he 
is  driven  back.  At  another  time  a  left-handed  man  is  employed,  who,  by  a 
single  stroke,  smites  the  head  of  the  oppressor,  and  the  enemy  is  thrown  into 
confusion.  Again  a  single  man  with  an  ox-goad  makes  such  havoc  in  the  ranks 
of  the  foe,  that  their  inrush  is  arrested.  Now  it  is  a  man  from  the  woods  of 
the  north,  who  appears  at  the  call  of  a  woman,  with  a  handful  of  mountaineers 
to  meet  a  huge  host  with  iron  chariots  in  the  plain,  and  in  one  short  hour  the 
imposing  array  is  swept  from  the  field.  Again  it  is  a  man  of  sterling  worth, 
but  greatly  upappreciated  by  those  aroui  d  him,  that  is  found  out  by  th^ 
Searcher  of  hearts,  and  brought  from  the  operation  of  threshing  wheat,  to  lead 
a  small  band  of  lion-hearted  heroes  against  a  countless  multitude  of  invader;^, 
and  ere  the  next  sun  arose,  the  while  living  wave  has  passed  away.  Stdl  again 
it  is  a  refugee,  who  has  found  shelter  in  a  foreign  land,  that  is  recalled  and  put 
at  the  head  of  the  armies  of  Israel,  and  the  legions  of  the  enemy  ^.re  scattered 
as  the  chaff  before  the  wind.  Now  it  is  no  longer  a  leader  with  an  army  at 
his  back  that  stands  before  us — one  man  forms  an  army  in  himself,  and  an  arm} 
so  formidable,  that  the  enemy  fall  in  *'  heaps  on  heaps  "  before  him.  Before 
one  single  arm  a  whole  nation  is  kept  in  terror. 

What  an  illustrious  display  is  thus  given  of  the  resources  of  the  God  of  Israel. 
These  resources  are  never  exhausted.    What  is  the  practical  lesson  ?    "  Trust 

475 


CHAP.  xiiL  nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


in  the  Lord  for  ever,  for  in  the  Lord  Jehovah  is  everlasting  strength — resources." 
**  Is  anything  too  hard  for  the  Lord  ?"  On  and  on  indefinitely,  this  series  of 
diversity  of  ways  of  redemption  might  be  carried,  without  the  necessity  of 
repeating  the  old  forms.  Wliat  magazines  of  resources  are  at  the  disposal  of 
Him,  who  has  all  hearts  in  His  hands,  and  all  events  under  His  control !  Man 
as  God  has  made  him,  is  a  witness  to  this  })Ower  in  the  Divine  nature  of 
producing  an  infinite  diversity  of  expedients  to  accomplish  the  Divine  purposes. 
For  man  is  made  with  a  craving  after  perpetual  freshness  of  knowledge,  which 
can  only  be  met  by  the  inexhaustible  resources  that  are  stored  up  in  the  mind 
of  Him  who  made  him.  Whatever  brings  out  this  fulness  of  resources  glorifies 
God. 

Via    Israelites  indeed  are  found  In  the  most  deg-enerate  times. 

The  men  of  that  generation  appeared  to  be  sunk  in  what  might  be  called  the 
lethargy  of  sin.  It  seemed  as  if  nothing  could  quicken  them,  or  raise  them 
out  ot  their  stupor.  When  they  were  smitten  again  and  again,  they  could  not 
be  brought  to  see  that  it  was  for  their  sins.  They  were  of  that  doltish  nature, 
that  they  could  not  read  their  sin  in  their  punishment.  It  would  have 
required  a  Hosea  to  rise  up  and  describe  their  character.  The  terrible  Philistine 
scourge  could  awaken  no  other  sound  among  them  than  that  of  '*  howling  on 
their  beds  "  like  stubborn  beasts  under  the  smart  of  the  lash.  "  Their  root  was 
dried  up,  and  bore  no  fruit."  "  Ephraim  was  like  a  cake  not  turned."  Over 
the  length  and  breadth  of  the  land  God's  judgments  were  rolling,  yet  no  voice 
of  prayer  is  heard  in  the  high  places,  nor  is  there  any  symptom  of  the  heart  of 
the  people  turning  to  the  Lord.  There  is  no  confession  of  sin,  nor  are  any 
Bochims  found  among  their  cities  or  places  of  public  resort. 

Thus  it  was  with  the  masses.  But  God  never  leaves  Himself  without  a 
witness.  Here  is  one  family  known  to  the  all-seeing  eye  among  the  hills  of 
Dan,  where  in  the  two  heads  of  the  household,  both  faith  and  prayer  seem  to  be 
in  healthful  exercise.  The  fear  of  God  is  in  this  home,  the  knowledge  of  His 
laws  and  statutes  is  still  preserved.  His  word  is  law,  offerings  are  made  to  Him 
on  the  altar.  His  promises  are  trusted,  and  His  requirements  are  complied  with. 
Northward,  even  in  Ephraim  itself,  is  another  home  of  these  times  which  forms 
an  oasis  in  the  desert,  at  the  head  of  which  stand  an  Eikanah  and  a  Hannah, 
who,  like  Zacharias  and  Elizabeth,  "  walked  in  all  the  commandments  and 
ordinances  of  the  Lord  blameless  " — the  home  of  a  praying  mother  and  a  God- 
fearing father,  a  meet  birthplace  for  such  a  child  as  Samuel.  And  near  by  is 
old  Eli,  the  resident  priest  of  Shiloh,  whose  dwelling-place  was  the  tabernacle 
itself,  and  whose  heart  in  these  stormy  times  trembled  for  the  ark  of  God  all  his 
life.  There  were  also  others  in  that  age  to  whom  everything  about  the  name 
of  God,  and  the  service  of  God  was  dear.  The  daughter-in-law  of  Phinehas, 
who  gave  the  name  **Ichabod"  to  her  child,  because  the  ark  of  God  was  taken  ; 
Abinadab  in  the  hill  near  where  Manoah  dwelt,  and  his  son  Eleazar  ;  and  by 
and  bye  a  large  company  of  penitents  sprung  up,  doubtless  in  answer  to  the 
prayers  of  the  few  Israelites  indeed,  who  had  all  along  been  left  in  the  land 
(1  Sam.  vii.  1,  2). 

Ihus  it  has  been  in  every  age.  A  Noah  was  found  at  a  time  when  the  earth 
was  filled  with  violence,  a  Job  in  the  land  of  Uz,  and  the  family  of  a  Terah, 
when  the  twilight  of  heathenism  was  beginning  to  overspread  the  earth,  an 
Abraham  and  his  seed  for  many  generations  while  the  gross  darkness  of 
heathenism  prevailed,  and  many  striking  individual  cases  of  true  piety  were 
ever  coming  up  to  relieve  the  dreary  history  until  the  great  Light  at  last  arose, 
which  is  destined  in  due  time  to  dispel  the  darkness  for  ever.  For  it  cannot  be 
that  the  good  man  should  entirely  perish  out  of  the  earth.  (1)  Then  the  earth 
476 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES,  chap.  xiii. 


would  he  ripe  for  destruction,  and  the  thunders  of  heaven  could  no  longer  sleep. 
It  is  for  the  sake  of  the  righteous  in  it  that  the  world  is  not  destroyed,  aud 
were  they  all  removed  there  would  be  no  argument  to  plead  for  its  preservation. 
The  case  of  Sodom  is  the  proof.  (2)  It  would  he  too  great  a  triumph  to  allow 
Satan  to  win  over  the  cause  of  God  on  the  earth.  All  Satan's  triumphs  take 
place  only  by  permission.  The  little  finger  of  Him  who  defends  the  church  in 
this  world  has  more  power  in  it,  than  all  the  hosts  of  the  dark  empire  unitedly 
possess.  But  for  wise  reasons  that  hidden  power  is  meantime  held  back,  to 
allow  the  most  ample  liberty  to  the  powers  of  darkness  to  bring  forth  their 
boasted  strength.  It  is  really  weakness  placed  against  strength,  that  we  see  on 
the  spiritual  battlefield,  so  that  when  victory  comes,  as  it  is  sure  to  do,  the 
victory  may  be  all  the  more  glorious  on  the  one  side,  and  the  defeat  all  the 
more  crushing  on  the  other.  Were  the  side  of  Truth,  however,  to  become 
extinguished  altogether,  even  for  a  time,  it  would  be  allowing  one  real  triumph 
to  the  side  of  Error,  and  so  leave  a  stain  on  the  record  of  Truth's  victories  in 
the  long  run,  as  being  less  than  perfect.  (3)  It  would  he  contrary  to  the  promises 
made  to  the  church.  ''His  name  shall  endure  for  ever."  "  Tue  gates  of  hell 
shall  not  prevail  against  it."  *'  I  will  make  thee  an  eternal  excellency,  a  joy  of 
many  generations,"  etc.,  etc.  (4)  It  is  for  the  honour  of  Christ's  providential 
rule,  that  the  cause  of  unrighteousness  and  error  should  not  gain  a  single  real 
victory  in  their  conflict  with  truth.  The  Son  of  God  is  at  work  in  the  iiistory 
of  this  world  in  destroying  the  works  of  the  devil.  It  is  to  His  honour,  therefore, 
that  amid  all  the  seeming  defeats  of  a  Christian  cause,  there  should  not  be 
one  real  defeat.  As  He  loves  His  own  name,  He  will  see  to  it  that  the  cause  of 
evil  shall  never  really  conquer,  but  that  uniformly  in  the  end  "dust  shall  be 
the  serpent's  meat." 

VIZ.     In  all  Divine  deliverances  wroug^ht  there  must  be  respect 
paid  to  principles  of  rig>liteousness. 

No  repentance,  no  salvation — is  the  uniform  tone  of  New  Testament  teaching; 
and  throughout  the  Book  on  every  page,  we  find  it  was  the  same  in  the  days  of 
the  judges.  These  "  saviours  "  could  not  save  until  the  people  repented.  On 
the  occasion  before  us,  as  there  was  no  public  manifestation  of  penitence,  the 
man  who  was  raised  up  to  deliver  Israel  has  no  army  with  him,  for  it  would 
have  been  hard  to  find  an  army,  even  a  small  one,  of  men  of  faith  at  that  time 
in  the  land  ;  and  of  such  materials  usually  did  Israel's  conquering  armies 
consist.  Since,  however,  there  was  to  be  deliverance,  some  means  must  be 
found  to  show  respect  to  principles  of  righteousness  in  granting  it.  These  we 
have  in  the  conditions  laid  down  for  Samson  while  holding  his  office,  which 
have  been  already  explained.  It  was  as  a  man  professedly  dedicated  to  the 
Lord  and  His  service,  hallowed  in  his  person,  and  keeping  himself  separate  from 
the  world,  that  extraordinary  strength  was  given  him  through  the  power  of  the 
Divine  Spirit  resting  upon  him. 

This  was  indeed  hut  a  ceremonial  dedication.  Yet  it  was  a  picture  of  the 
principles,  out  of  respect  to  which,  the  holy  Lord  gave  to  sinning  Israel  the 
benefit  of  a  Samsons  strong  arm.  And  it  is  added.  He  only  "  began  to 
deliver  Israel."  In  point  of  fact,  the  crushing  defeat  of  the  enemy  only  took 
place  in  the  days  of  Samuel  (1  Sam.  vii.  10 — 13).  Full  deliverance  could  not 
be  granted  until  there  was  a  living  expression  of  penitence,  such  as  is  recorded 
in  1  Sam.  vii.  2 — 4.  The  whole  Bible  might  be  quoted  to  show  the  absolute 
necessity  of  repentance  where  there  is  to  be  salvation.  In  the  cross  of  Christ 
"grace  does  indeed  reign,  but  it  is  through  righteousness  by  Jesus  Christ." 
God  must  have  regard  to  His  character  as  a  just  God,  while  He  justifies,  in  place 
of  condemning  a  sinner.     And  so  '*  Jesus  Clirist  is  set  forth  as  a  propitiation 

477 


OHAP.  XIV.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES, 


through  faith  in  His  blood  to  declare  His  righteousness  in  order  to  the 
remission  of  sins."  Having  shed  His  blood  as  a  propitiation,  "  Christ  is  now 
the  end  of  the  law  for  righteousness,  to  every  one  that  believeth."  Every 
sinner  who  goes  to  Jesus  for  salvation  necessarily  repents,  for  he  admits  the 
supreme  necessity  of  the  vindication  of  the  Divine  righteousness,  ere  his  sins 
can  be  forgiven,  and  that  the  awful  sufferings  of  the  Cross  alone  can  do  that. 
To  take  salvation  on  that  ground  is  to  condemn  his  own  sins  in  the  most 
emphatic  manner,  and  to  admit  that  God  must  have  the  fullest  satisfaction  for 
them.  That  implies  conviction  of  sin,  and  naturally  leads  to  sorrow  for  it,  and 
turning  from  it  unto  God. 

VZII>  Man's  inability  to  see  God's  face  without  ceasing*  to  live. 

It  was  the  general  belief  at  that  time  that  no  man  could  see  God  and  live. 
This  may  have  been  due  to  what  Jacob  said  at  Peniel  (Gen.  xxxii.  30),  or  to 
what  God  said  to  Moses  at  Sinai  (see  Ex.  xxxiii.  20,  &c.).     In  three  ways  this 
is  true.     (1.)  On  account  of  guilt.     To  a  guilty  man,  God  out  of  Christ  is  "a 
consuming  fire."     So  it  is  expressed  in  Heb.  xii.  29.      Not  that   He  is  less 
loving  than  at  other   times,  nor  that  any  real  change  has  passed  over  His 
character.      But  so   intense  is  His  love  of  purity,  and  so  profound  is  His 
jealousy  for  the  glory  of  His  name,  in  the  eternal  calm  of  His  nature,  that 
without  the  slightest  discomposure,  His  attitude  to  sin,  and  all  that  cling  to  it, 
must  be  like  a  fixed  natural  law,  that  of  strong  antagonism — an  antagonism  so 
strong  as  to  mean  the  death  of  the  soul.     This  antagonism  of  an  infinite  nature 
to  one  that  is  finite  has  all  the  effect  of  an  irresistible  fire,  and  is  substantially 
the  same  with  that  which  is  called  "  everlasting  fire  "  in  the  New  Testament. 
It  is  the  frown  of  the  Lawgiver  on  the  transgressor  of  His  own  law.     Who  can 
doubt  that  that  will  come  down  on  those  who  die  impenitent,  precisely  accord- 
ing to  the  manner  in  which  they  have  sinned.     (2.)  On  account  of  a  creature's 
weakness.     When  any  strong  manifestation  of  God's  character  is  made,  a  man 
naturally  shrinks  from  it,  and  looks  f  )r  some  means  of  concealment.      This  is 
because  o^  guilt.  For  why  should  innocence  flee  from  purity  ?    The  holy  angels 
in  light  who  see  the  King's  face  are  not  afraid.      Neither  should  we  be  so  if 
perfectly  pure.     But  even  though  spotless,  the  full  blaze  of  the  Divine  glory 
might   be  overpowering  to  the   holiest  of  creature  natures,  simply  because 
of  its  transcendent  brightness.     No  human  eye  could  withstand  the  effulgence 
of  the  mid-day  sun,  so  with  a  human  soul  before  the  full  vision  of  God.      For 
this  reason  many  think  there  will  never  be  a  complete  display  of  the  glory  of 
God  made  to  the  redeemed  in  heaven  itself,  but  that  there  will  always  be  some 
veil  put  on  the  Divine  countenance,  perhaps  as  many  veils  as  there  were  curtains 
of  goats'  hair  on  the  tabernacle,  which  were  eleven  in  number.      The  general 
belief  is  that  t\\Qform  in  which  God  will  be  seen  by  us  in  Heaven,  will  be  the 
man  Christ  Jesus. 


CHAPTER   XIV. 
Samson's  First  Dealings  with  the  Philistines. 

(Verses  1-20.) 

Obitioal  Notes. — ^1.  Timn-'th.l  This  was  a  town  on  the  frontier  which,  like  many  other 
towns  had  been  at  first  assigned  to  Judah  to  subdue  and  occupy  (Josh  xv.  57),  but  as  Dan  had 
too  small  a  tc^rritory  for  its  people,  it  and  other  towns  were  transferred  to  Dan.     It  is  referred 

478 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JVDQE8.  chap.  xiv. 


to  in  Josh.  xiv.  43,  also  in  ch.  xv.  10.  It  was  only  a  few  miles  from  Samson's  mountain  home, 
»nd  though  it  should  have  all  along  belonged  to  the  Israelites,  the  tribe  whose  duty  it  was  to 
subdue  it,  failed  to  do  so  through  unbelief  :  and  now  the  usual  bitt^^r  fruits  are  reaped. 

2.  Get  her  for  me  to  wife.]  Heb.  Take  (pp^l)  Ex.  xxi.  9.  Though  Samson  may  have  come 
of  age  (18),  it  was  customary  for  the  parents  to  transact  the  arrangements,  as  they  had  the 
duty  of  paying  the  wife's  dowry  to  the  parents  of  the  bride.  What  is  here  recorded  is  a  bad 
beginning  for  the  public  life  of  a  man,  who  was  chosen  to  be  a  deliverer  of  God's  Israel  from 
their  bondage.  It  has  been  suggested  that  it  is  only  the  briefest  notices  that  are  here  given  of 
his  life,  and  there  "  may  (as  in  Jacob's  case),  have  been  in  him  many  exercises  of  true  pit^ty 
which,  if  told,  would  throw  another  light  on  his  character."  This,  indeed,  is  not  only  possible 
but  probable.  It  seems  at  any  rate,  that  the  reason  for  selecting  the  incidents  here  related  to 
be  put  on  record,  was  because  this  was  the  first  (-ccasion  when  he  had  the  opportunity  of 
showing  himself  as  the  public  opponent  of  the  Philistines.     Indeed  this  is  hinted  at  in  ver.  4. 

3.  That  thou  goest  to  take  a  wife  of  the  uncircumcised  Phil'stines-l  His  parents  remonstrated. 
They  were  astonished  at  the  propot-al  he  made,  and  began  to  reason.  It  was  unnatural  in 
itself,  and  it  was  in  express  opposition  to  the  Divine  law  (Ex.  xxxiv.  16  ;  Deut.  vii.  3,  4). 
But  Samson  being  an  only  son  wimld  in  all  likelihood  have  been  accustomed  to  carry  all  points 
his  own  way.     For  we  are  told  that  he  prevailed  on  his  parents  to  accompany  him  (ver.  6.) 

4.  Eis  father  and  mother  knew  not  that  it  was  of  the  Lord  that  he  sought  an  occasion  against 
the  Philistines. 1  This  applies  to  Samson.  Prob;ibly  what  took  him  down  to  Timnath  at  firsn 
was,  that  now  being  c<ime  of  age  it  was  time  for  him  to  begin  the  work  he  was  raised  up  to  do. 
For  he  had  frequently  felt  the  promptings  of  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  to  begin  the  work.  Now, 
therefore,  as  soon  as  he  was  entitled  to  go,  he  went  to  the  camp  of  the  enemy  to  "  find  some 
occasion  "  f  r  beginning  his  work.  Badly  as  the  story  t  lis  for  Samson,  it  would  be  to  put  a 
needlessly  harsh  construction  on  his  conduct  to  say  that  he  went  simply  on  an  idle  stroll,  or  that 
he  went  in  sportive  mood.  There  is  an  important  meaning  in  the  statement  that  "  he  sought  an 
occasion  against  the  Thilistines."  He  went,  not  knowing  what  might  turn  up,  but  his  object 
was  not  merely  to  enjoy  himself  or  have  a  little  pastime.  He  wished  to  rind  some  opportunity 
of  commencing  the  duties  of  his  high  vocation.  But  he  went  unguarded  against  temptation, 
both  as  to  eyes  and  ears  (Ps.  cxix.  37  ;  Job  xxxi.  1,  7). 

The  Philistines  had  dominion  over  Israel.]  The  crushing  character  of  this  dominion  audita 
infinite  degradation  may  be  learned  from  I.  Sam.  xiiL  6,  7  ;  also  19-21. 

5«  j6nd  his  father  and  mother*]  They  went  against  their  better  judgment,  being  overcome  by 
his  importunity. 

A  yourg  lion  roared  against  him-]  Being  near  the  vineyards,  probably  in  the  valley  of 
Sorek  (Ch.  xvi.  4),  famous  for  its  vines  (Jer.  ii.  21 ;  Isa.  v.  2),  for  the  word  Sorek  means  a  choice 
vine. 

6.  And  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  came  mightily  upon  him.]  Gave  him  superhuman  strength,  as 
a  pledge  of  what  he  might  expect  to  receive  when  fighting  against  men. 

And  he  rent  him  as  he  would  have  rent  a  kid.l  With  as  much  ease,  for  all  power  is  of  Crod 
and  He  can  make  the  human  arm  stronger  than  the  jaws  of  the  lion.  Samson  seems  to  have 
strayed  into  the  bush,  when  he  may  have  met  the  lion  perhaps  in  the  pursuit  of  jackals  or 
foxes,  that  were  often  found  in  vineyards  (Song  ii.  15).  His  father  and  mother  were  not  with 
him  there.  Hercules  was  most  f  rraidable  iu  his  wrestlings,  but  it  was  chiefly  with  beasts. 
Samson  was  laised  up  to  be  a  cimqueror  of  men.  This  passing  encounter  with  a  lion  would  never 
have  gained  him  a  high  name  in  Israel  even  if  frequently  repeated.  He  had  a  mission  to 
deliver  God's  Church.  It  is  to  be  noticed  that  the  word  used  here  for  lion  does  not  mean  a 
whelp,  but  one  that  has  attained  its  strength,  and  is  full  of  the  natural  fierceness.  "^"'2  means 
a  terrible  lion,  one  with  a  bloodthirsty  chara'  ter,  or  that  has  all  its  natural  fcavageness  of 
nature  fully  developed.  Yet  he  tore  its  jaws  asunder,  as  easily  as  he  would  have  rent  in 
pieces  so  slender  an  animal  as  a  kid. 

He  told  not  his  father  and  mother.]  With  all  his  self-will  he  seems  deeply  to  have  loved  his 
parents,  and  where  there  is  love  there  will  always  be  some  measure  of  respect.  Hence  he  would 
not  like  to  horrify  them  with  the  recital  of  so  wild  a  story  as  the  encounter  with  the  lion.  It 
might  fill  their  minds  with  troublesome  suspicions  as  to  what  he  might  do  next,  and  so  he 
would  forfeit  their  confidence.  Many  would  have  boasted  of  such  an  exploit,  and  blazoned  it 
abroad  through  the  world.  That  was  not  Samson's  weak  point.  No  one  seems  to  have  known 
of  it  for  many  months,  until  the  solution  of  the  riddle  brought  it  out  He  was  not  killed  with 
vanity.  The  exploits  of  other  heroes  in  their  lion  encounters  were  better  known.  Benaiah  was 
known  as  the  man  who  slew  a  lion  in  a  pit  in  the  time  of  snow.    Wicker  You  Schwabnr,  a  hero 

479 


CHAP.  XIV.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


in  the  time  of  the  Crusades,  killed  a  great  lion  with  the  sword  near  Joppa,  and  Godfrey,  of 
Bouillon,  stood  his  ground  against  a  bear  in  like  manner.  The  lion  fight  of  the  fabled  Hercules, 
in  Nemea,  is  also  well  known  The  Arabi  m  A.ntar  conquers  a  lion  although  the  hero's  feet  are 
fettered.  But  these  two  latter  aro  little  better  than  myths.  Tiiere  is  one  noble  exception  to 
the  vain  glory  which  accompanies  any  such  heroic  deed,  in  the  case  of  the  youthful  shepherd  of 
Bethlehem.  But,  indeed,  both  S  imson  and  David  might  well  have  been  afraid  to  boast  of  a 
power  which  was  supematurally  given,  and  which  showed  the  gracious  protection  of  their 
covenant  God. 

7.  Talked  with  the  woman-l  According  to  usage  free  conversation  between  the  parties  was 
not  allowed  till  the  affiancing  took  place.  With  the  interview  he  had  with  the  young  woman 
Samson  was  pleased,  and  wished  the  arrangem-^nt  to  p  oceed. 

8.  An    after  a  timel     Betrothing  means  giving  one's  troth,  or  faithful  promise  to  marry  a 
a  future  time.     This  time  was  at  least  six  m  )nths,  oftener  a  year,  or  more,  after  betrothal,  bu 
during  the  interval  the  woman  was  considered  as  the  lawful  wife  of  the  man  to  whom  sh-.  wad 
betrothed  (Matt.  i.  18  ;  Luke  i.  26,  27).     It  must  then  have  been  either  several   month*,  ora 
whole  twelvemonth,  after  this  ceremony,  th  <t  Samson  now  went  down  to  take  his  wife. 

He  turned  aside  to  see  the  circass  of  the  Hon.]  It  could  hardly  have  been  a  twelvemonth, 
when  the  carcass  lay  there  untouched  all  the  time,  even  though  it  was  not  in  the  beaten  path. 
As  the  hero  passed  near  the  spot  the  incident  came  into  his  miud,  and  under  some  pretext  he 
left  his  parents  for  a  little  that  he  might  look  again  on  the  scene  of  his  memorable  deliverance. 
This  trivial  circumstance  was  the  leading  of  God's  providence,  for  something  great  came  of  it. 
He  found  all  that  was  most  perishable  of  the  beast  long  since  gone,  and  nothing  hut  the  skeleton 
left,  in  which,  to  his  no  small  surpri-e,  was  a  swjrm  of  bees.  Bees  as  a  rule  avoid  both  dead 
bodies  and  carrion.  Bees  are  so  careful  to  select  clean  spots  f  ir  their  place  of  settlement,  that  a 
dead  carcass  was  about  the  last  place  where  they  might  be  expected  to  alight.  In  the  present 
case,  however,  everything  that  was  noxious  about  the  dead  body  had  become  long  since  dried 
up,  iDoth  through  lapse  of  time  and  the  intense  heat.  Nothing  of  an  offensive  odour  remained. 
There  was  no  putrefaction. 

Honey.]  Debash,  the  ordinary  word,  or  Dvash^  as  some  would  make  it.  Deborah  using 
r  for  8  is  the  word  for  bee. 

9.  He  took  thereof  in  his  hands.l  There  must  have  been  an  abundant  supply,  for  he  gave 
some  both  to  his  father  and  mother,  as  well  as  partook  of  it  liberally  himself.  Had  hie  parents 
known  where  it  was  found,  they  v\  ould  have  rejected  it  as  being  unclean. 

10.  His  father  went  down.]  He  only  is  mentioned  as  the  head  of  the  party,  but  the  mother 
and  other  friends  were  doubtless  there.  Samson  made  a  feast-1  "  There  is  a  time  to  laugh  and 
a  time  to  dance,  as  well  as  a  time  to  mourn  and  weep  "  (Eccl.  iii.  4).  This  feast  was  on  such  a 
scale  as  to  indicate  wealth  on  the  part  of  him  who  made  it.  It  lasted  seven  days  and  embraced 
a  lage  company.  But  it  was  customary,  and  to  observe  the  custom  was  reckoned  necessary  to 
respectability. 

11.  When  they  saw  him  they  brought  thirty  companions  to  be  with  him.l  These  were 
called  the  "children  of  the  bride-chamber"  (Matt.  ix.  15  ;  xxv.  1-12).  But  usually  it  was  young  . 
women  that  went  out  to  meet  the  bridegroom,  while  here  it  is  young  men  that  are  mentioned. 
Also  they  were  cho.sen  by  the  bride's  friends,  not  by  those  on  Samson's  side.  Hence 
Joseph  us  supposes  they  were  chosen  under  pretence  of  doing  him  honour,  while  in  reality 
they  were  meant  to  be  a  guard  upon  him  (Josephus,  Bertheau,  Trapp,  &c.,  &c.)  The  great 
strength  of  Samson  mi^st  already  have  been  begun  to  be  talked  about,  and  it  must  have  been 
known,  to  some  extent,  that  he  was  raised  up  to  be  a  deliverer  in  Israel.  This  was  quite  in 
keeping  with  the  phrase  "  they  were  with  him."  They  seemed  to  be  friends  of  the  bridegroom, 
yet  may  have  been  spies  upon  him  in  reality,  and  a  band  of  men  to  overpower  him,  if  anv 
hostility  should  be  displayed  by  him.  This  would  be  in  keeping  with  their  conduct  described 
in  verse  15. 

12.  I  will  now  put  forth  a  riddle  unto  you-1  Biddies  were  then,  as  now,  much  regarded  a« 
a  means  of  amusement,  or  exciting  interest  on  festive  occasions.  Thirty  sheets  (shirts)  meaning 
clothes  vorn  next  the  skin;  and  thirty  changes  of  garments.]  Costly  dresses  that  were 
frequently  changed  (Gt-n.  xlv.  22).  To  ]Topose  such  riddles  at  banquets  by  way  of  entertain- 
ment was  customary  among  the  ancient  Grecians.  Such  clothes  are  referred  to  in  II.  Kings  v. 
5,  22  ;  Isa.  iii.  6,  7  ;  Matt.  vi.  19  ;  Gen.  xlv.  22. 

14.  Out  of  the  eater  came  forth  meat,  &c.l  The  spirit  of  this  statement  which  is  antithetical 
U  **  Food  came  from  the  devourer,  and  sweetness  from  that  which  is  bitter." 

48Q 


EOMILETJC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES.  chap.  xiv. 


But  care  must  be  taken  not  to  push  the  antithesis  too  far.  We  must  be  guided  by  the  actual 
fact,  and  also  by  the  words  of  the  text.  The  lion,  to  which  the  propounder  of  the  riddle  referred 
is  distinguished  not  by  bitterness,  nor  by  sourness,  but  by  strength,  so  that  our  English 
translation  after  all  best  corresponds  with  the  fact  -  **  out  of  the  strong,  etc."  This,  too,  is 
confirmed  by  the  answer  given  in  the  solufion  of  the  riddle — "  what  is  stronger  than  a  lion  1 " 
Besides  the  word  in  the  text  (?37)  does  not  mean  "  bitter,"  or  "  sour,"  but  "strong." 

16.  On  the  seventh  day.]  For  three  days  they  tried  hard  to  solve  it  but  without  success. 
They  then  gave  it  up  till  the  seventh,  whei),  as  a  last  resort,  they  began  to  press  hard  on 
Samson's  wife,  threaten in'T  her  witlt  a  terriule  doom  if  she  di  1  not  get  the  solution  from  her 
husband.  "So  doth  the  devil  oftentimes  do  Many  a  man's  head  he  breaketh  with  his  own 
rib  ;  and  this  bait  he  hath  found  to  take  so  well,  tliat  he  has  never  changed  it  since  he  crept 
into  Paradise  "  [Trapp].  This  showed  at  once  the  baseness  of  their  spirit,  and  the  atrocious 
length  in  wickedness  to  which,  if  baffled,  they  were  disposed  to  go. 

Is  it  not  soil  Meaning  :  You  have  called  us  to  the  feast,  that  by  means  of  this  riddle  you 
might  get  from  us  all  that  we  have.     Your  object  has  been  to  plunder  us.     Is  it  not  so  ? 

17.  And  she  wept  before  him  the  seven  days.]  A  Jewish  mode  of  speaking,  meaning,  unto  the 
seventh  day,  or  as  some  would  make  it,  the  rest  of  the  seven  days.  It  might  simply  mean,  that, 
more  or  less  with  t<  ars  she  asked  him  to  tell  her  every  one  of  the  seven  days,  her  motives  being 
partly  curiosi  y,  and  still  more,  apprehensions  of  a  disastrous  issue  to  their  hilarity  should 
no  solution  be  found.  This  would  be  intensely  increased  when,  witli  loud  voices,  they 
threatened,  as  the  time  drew  near,  to  burn  her  and  her  father's  house  with  fire  unless  she 
should  find  out  an  explanation — hence  on  the  seventh  day  particularly,  "she  lay  gore  upon 
him  '"  until  he  told  her.  A  woman's  tears  are  her  argnm  nts,  which  oftentimes  prove  more 
powerful  than  all  the  logic  of  the  other  sex.  They  reach  the  heart  by  a  more  direct  route  thnn 
the  understanding.  Alexander  of  Greece  replied  to  one  who  sent  him  a  long  letter  complaining 
of  his  mother's  conduct,  "  One  tear  of  my  moiher's  will  blot  out  a  thousand  such  letters." 

She  told  it  to  the  chi'dren  of  the  peopled  In  this  she  proved  a  traitor  to  the  interests  of  her 
husband,  both  because  she  was  bound  to  consult  his  interests  first,  and  also  because  she  ought 
to  have  known  that  he  was  well  able  to  defend  her  from  all  evil.  Her  affection  was  manifestly 
a  mere  pretence  ;  but  she  was  a  true  Philistine. 

18.  Before  the  sun  went  down-]  Sunset  was  the  end  of  the  day,  and  so  they  were  within  the 
mark.  Their  statement  meant,  that  the  meat  came  from  an  animal  that  was  distinguished  for 
devouring  meat,  not  supplying  it,  and  that  the  meat  supplied  was  honey,  the  sweetest  of  all 
kinds  of  food. 

If  ye  had  not  ploughed  with  my  heifer,  etO-1  Samson  in  a  moment  detected  the  treachery,  for 
no  one  else  knew  anything  of  the  story  which  he  kept  studiously  concealed  ;  and  he  pointedly 
told  them  it  was  owing  to  their  plotting  with  his  wife  that  the  discovery  had  been  made.  In  a 
case  of  such  palpable  unfairness,  he  might  have  refused  to  acknowledge  himself  to  be  under 
obligation  to  stand  by  the  original  terms  proposed,  but  rather  than  incur  the  suspicion  of 
dishonour,  he  nobly  resolved  to  pass  by  the  affront,  and  to  pay  the  forfeit  agreed  on,  more 
especially  as  this  would  give  him  occas'on  to  fulfil  his  mission  for  the  smiting  of  the  Philistines. 
Tills  tends  to  raise  him  in  our  estimation,  if  we  could  get  over  his  capital  error  in  wedding  a 
Philistine  at  all. 

19.  Tbe  Spirit  of  the  Lord  came  upon  him.]  These  impulses  came  when  God  had  work  for 
him  to  do,  but  were  not  always  with  him.  The  prophets  had  not  always  the  gift  of  prophecy, 
nor  the  apostles  always  the  power  of  working  miracles. — {Trapp).  Samson  seemed  to  feel  that 
his  vocation  was  to  smite  the  Philistines  on  every  fit  opportunity  giTen.  Now  he  felt  he  had 
such  an  opportimity,  and  he  resolved  to  punish  the  enemy  that  had  dared  to  attack  the  people 
of  Jehovah,  and  to  pour  contempt  on  His  name. 

Went  down  to  Ashk*'lon.]  There  were  many  nearer  at  hand,  but  these  may  have  been  ring- 
leaders in  raids  made  on  the  homes  of  Israel,  or,  more  likely,  he  did  not  wish  to  create  too  great 
a  sensation  ab  ut  the  matter  by  destroying  members  of  families  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood. 
The  persons  killed  must  have  been  high  in  social  rank,  when  there  were  so  many  changes 
of  raiment.  That  which  Israel's  champion  flung  at  the  feet  of  these  vile  cheaters  was  the 
attire  of  their  own  countrymen. 

His  anger  was  kindled,  etc]  The  base  treachery  of  his  wife  on  the  occasion  of  their  marriage 
festivity,  the  fact  that  her  relatives  supported  her  in  her  infideUty  to  him,  and  the  apparent 
conspiracy  of  the  whole  Philistine  community  to  give  contemptuous  treatment  to  an  Israelitish 
family  ;  all  filled  him  with  indignation,  so  that  in  place  of  returning  for  his  wife  he  left  the 
whole  pack  behind  him,  and  directed  his  steps  to  his  father's  house,  a  sadder  but  a  wiser  man. 
How  sweet  is  home  after  a  taste  of  the  bitterness  of  the  world  1    His  home  was  in  Zorah,  which 

HH  481 


CHAP.  xiy.  HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES, 


but  for  him  would  scarcely  have  been  known  to  the  world,  just  as  Arpinum  was  known  from  its 
connection  with  Cicero,  and  Hippo  was  famous  through  Augustine. 

20.  Samson's  wife  was  given  to  his  companion,  etc]  As  soon  as  liis  back  was  turned  the 
unprincipled  Philistine  gave  his  daughter  to  be  the  wife  of  another  man — the  very  man  who 
had  acted  as  the  friend  of  the  bridegroom  !  Such  was  the  bitter  fruit  of  an  unhallowed 
alliance  (Jer.  ii.  19). 

Before  proceeding  to  examine  the  details  of  this  wonderful  hi>tory,  it  may 
serve  a  good  purpose  first  to  look  at  it  in  its  leading  outlines.  The  judgment 
to  be  formed  en  the  whole  character  of  any  man  cannot  be  correct,  if  founded 
only  on  one  or  two  acts  of  his  life,  and  pre-eminently  so  in  a  case  like  that 
before  us.  It  will  greatly  help  to  a  just  estimate  on  this  important  point,  as 
well  as  aid  us  in  a  correct  interpretation  of  individual  particulars,  if  we  first 
take  a  geceral  view  of  the  history  in  so  far  as  it  is  given,  aiid  then  take  the 
details  in  their  order. 

GENERA.L  View  of  Samson^s  History. 

Z«    It  presents  to  us  a  puzzling*  character. 

It  is  a  character  where  opposite  and  seemingly  contradictory  phases  are  con- 
tinually appearing.  In  every  page  of  the  account,  inconsistencies  occur  so 
painfully,  tiiat  we  are  perplexed  what  to  make  of  a  personality  so  unique. 
From  the  preliminary  statement  niade  in  chap.  xiii.  by  an  **  angel  of  the  Lord," 
we  are  prepared  to  expect  a  man  of  peculiar  sanctity  of  manner,  of  strong 
spiritual  life,  and  one  singularly  free  from  worldly  defilenjett,  to  make  his 
appearance  when  he  comes  forth  as  God's  servant  to  do  God's  work,  under  a 
more  than  ordinary  effusion  of  the  Divine  Spirit's  influence.  But  instead  of 
that,  the  man  who  actually  steps  forward  is  one  of  a  lower  tyjje  than  any 
name  in  the  whole  list  of  those  who  are  called  to  be  the  '* saviours"  of  God's 
Israel.  It  would  be  hard  to  say  whether  he  did  more  good  or  evil  when 
fulfilling  his  course,  though  by  profession  he  stood  strongly  on  the  side  of  ^ood. 
Instead  of  being  a  frequent  associate  of  the  righteous,  we  find  him  ahnost 
constantly  in  the  society  of  the  wicked.  For  those  who  look  on  he  is  more  a 
beacon  of  warning  than  an  example  for  guidance  and  encouragement. 

No  good  man  indeed,  is  entirely  free  from  faults  so  long  as  he  remains  "  in 
this  wicked  world''  (Eccl.  vii.  20).  Here,  however,  is  the  case  of  a  good  man 
with  great  faults,  but  without  correspondiui^^ly  great  excellence^.  It  was  not  so 
with  the  other  good  men  of  scripture  history.  If  David  sinned  once  very 
grievously  in  the  matter  of  Uriah  the  Hittite,  and  not  infrequently  said  and 
did  things  inconsistent  with  a  profession  of  genuine  piety,  he  left  behind  bim 
an  unmistakable  expression  of  heart-sorrow  for  his  great  sin,  besides  a  whole 
volume  ot  compositions  that  no  man  could  have  penned,  whose  bosom  was  not 
daily  filled  with  the  very  spirit  of  heaven.  If  Jacol?  showed  not  a  little  of 
cunning  and  deceit  in  the  early  portion  of  his  history,  the  vision  of  the  ladder 
and  the  angels,  his  wrestling  with  the  angel,  and  the  whole  of  the  latter  part  of 
his  career,  bring  out  strongly  redeeming  features  of  character.  But  with 
Samson  there  are  no  Alpine  heights  of  exoellence,  such  as  to  prove  beyond 
doubt  the  heaven-soaring  tendency  of  the  general  character.  There  is  only  a 
little  eminence  now  and  again  rising  above  the  plain,  to  set  over  against  the 
morasses  and  marshy  ground  which  shed  a  pestilential  vapour  over  the  surface. 

But  undoubtedly  Samson  had  his  good  points  of  character,  though  there  was 
much  in  his  conduct  to  be  condemned.     If  he  had  a  comparatively  low  place  in 
482 


EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES,  chap.  xiv. 


the  kingdom  of  God,  it  would  be  obviously  wrong  to  suppose  that  he  had  no 
place  there  at  all. 

Notice — 1.    The  good  features  of  bis  history- 

(1.)  He  was  specially  raised  up  hy  God  Himself.  His  very  existence  was 
owing  to  the  fact  that  God  had  a  special  work  to  do,  and  he  was  brought  into 
existence  to  do  it.  His  mother  was  barren,  so  that  he  could  n  ot  have  been 
born  without  a  special  Divine  interposition.  His  very  being  thus  partook  of  a 
sacred  character.  He  was  indeed  a  member  of  the  fallen  human  race  aud  liable 
to  sin  like  other  men,  yet  being  directly  provided  by  God,  being  commissioned 
by  Him  to  do  a  work  which  he  purposed  to  do,  and  being  specially  qualified  by 
Him  for  the  performance  of  that  work,  he  must  have  been  in  a  proper  sense 
approved  by  God.  John  the  Baptist  was  thus  raised  up  by  God  (John  i.  6). 
So  was  Isaac  TGen.  xvii.  19 ;  xviii.  14).  So  was  Samuel  (1  Sam.  i.  11,  20). 
All  these  were  noly  characters.  All  inspired  men  were  "holy  men,"  whether 
prophets  or  apostles  (2  Peter  i.  21).  Also  all  the  *' judges"  of  Israel  appear  to 
have  been  men  who  feared  God,  and  wrought  righteousness.  It  is  questionable 
whether  God  ever  called  any  wicked  man  into  His  service  to  do  a  work  which  had 
for  its  object  the  promotion  of  His  glory.  Balaam  was  indeed  a  wicked  man, 
but  he  was  not  raised  up  by  God,  nor  sent  on  a  commission  by  Him.  He  was 
allowed  to  go  to  meet  Balak  with  a  wicked  purpose  in  his  heart,  which  God 
checked  by  turning  the  curse  into  a  blessing.  Judas  was  not  honoured  with  a 
place  among  those  whom  Christ  commissioned  to  set  up  His  kingdom  on 
earth,  for  he  had  left  his  Master's  side  and  had  "  gone  to  his  own  place,"  before 
the  commission  was  given.  We  have  not  a  single  instance  of  a  really  wicked 
man  being  specially  raised  up  by  God  and  sent  to  bless  the  people.  This  alone 
is  a  strong  presumption,  if  not  a  decisive  proof,  that  Samson,  whatever  his 
faults  may  have  been,  was  at  heart  a  man  approved  of  by  God. 

(2.)  The  mission  on  which  he  was  sent  was  of  a  holy  character.  It  was  to  be 
the  Deliverer  and  Protector  of  God's  peculiar  people.  In  reality  he  was  sent  to 
be  the  preserver  of  God's  cause  in  the  earth  ;  for  the  office  of  that  people  was  to 
uphold  the  honour  of  God's  name,  and  to  set  up  a  standard  for  His  worship 
among  men.  Is  it  likely,  or  even  possible,  that  an  ungodly  man  could  be  chosen 
by  God  for  this  purpose  ? 

(3.)  He  was  a  Nazarite  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  his  life.  (ch.  xiii.  5.) 
This  implies  that  he  was  vowed  to  the  Lord,  and  that  his  life  itself  was  a  con- 
secration to  the  service  of  the  Lord  (comp.  i.  Sam.  i  11).  "This consecration 
had  its  roots  in  living  faith,  and  its  outward  manifestation  negatively,  in  absence 
from  everything  unclean,  positively,  in  wearing  the  hair  uncut."  [Keil].  The 
person  of  Samson  wearing  the  character  of  a  Nazarite  was  made  use  of  by  God 
as  a  picture,  to  show  to  His  people,  that  their  weakness  lay  in  losing  their 
character  as  consecrated  to  Him,  and  mixing  themselves  up  with  unclean  persons 
and  things,  whereas,  by  vowing  themselves  to  be  His  all  life  through,  and 
jealously  avoiding  everything  that  would  contaminate  them  as  a  holy  nation, 
they  would  acquire  a  strength  that  would  make  them  invincible.  Samson  was 
in  this  sense  a  parable  to  Israel.  One  put  into  this  position  by  God  Himself 
surely  must  have  had  the  roots  of  a  genuine  religious  character. 

(4.)  He  was  a  child  of  prayer,  and  had  a  pious  training.    From  ch.  xiii.  8,  9 

we  conclude,  that  his  father  was  accustomed  to  approach  his  God  in  prayer,  in 
such  a  manner  that  his  petitions  were  heard,  for  his  difficulty  he  referred  to  Him, 
and  his  desire  was  granted.  His  prayer  must  have  been  well  pleasing  to  God, 
and  its  being  so  on  this  occasion  is  a  proof  that  it  must  have  been  so  on  other 
occasions.     We  may  feel  justified  in  regarding  him  as  an  "  Israelite  indeed,"  for 

HH  2  483 


CHAP.  xnr.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


the  whole  account  bears  out  that  he  was  a  righteous  man.  Not  less  so  was  his 
wife  (v.  23).  The  honour  conferred  on  them  by  the  angel's  visit,  and  the  special 
gift  bestowed,  prove  this.  Probably  the  gift  of  a  son  was  in  answer  to  their 
[)rayers,  as  in  the  case  of  Hannah.  We  may  assume  then,  without  being 
expressly  told,  that  Samson  had  pious  parents  who  were  in  the  practice  of 
prayer,  and  that  they  prayed  much  for  their  only  son,  so  specially  given. 

As  to  his  training,  he  could  see  nothing  but  good  in  sucli  a  household.  The 
fear  of  God  was  in  that  home  habitually,  and  being  a  mountain  home  it  stood 
apart  from  the  outside  polluting  world.  The  name  of  the  true  God  alone  was 
worslji})ped,  and  His  laws  were  obeyed. 

(5.)  The  Lord  specially  blessed  him.  We  never  hear  of  God  conferring  a 
special  blessing  on  a  man  who  did  not  bear  something  of  God's  image. 
(eee  p.  471.) 

(6.)  The  Spirit  of  God  often  came  upon  him.  We  admit  the  important 
distinction  between  the  natural  and  the  ^r^aow5  operations  of  the  Divine  Spirit, 
the  latter  being  the  peculiar  privilege  of  the  righteous,  while  the  former,  not 
relating  directly  to  salvation,  might  be  given  to  those  whose  hearts  are  not  right 
with  God.  Yet  in  another  aspect  of  the  case,  nothing  is  more  sacred  than  God's 
own  character,  and  when  even  the  natural  iiifluences  of  the  Spirit  are  given  to 
preserve  that,  they  are  given  for  a  sacred  purpose,  and  scare  fitly  conferred  only 
on  those  who  are  '* chosen  vessels"  to  the  Lord. 

It  is  certainly  a  strong  presumption  that  that  man  is  himself  a  man  of  God,  on 
whom  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  should  descend  so  often  as  He  did  on  Samson,  for 
purposes  which  concerned  the  honour  of  the  Divine  name.  The  cases  referred  to 
in  1  Sam.  x.  11,  and  Matt.  vii.  22,  23,  are  exceptional,  and  do  not  imply  that  these 
persons  had  a  direct  commission  from  God,  to  vindicate  the  honourof  His  holy 
name  as  Samson  undoubtedly  had. 

(7.)  He  lived  a  life  of  faith  in  the  God  of  Israel.  This  was  the  whole  bearing 
of  his  life.  Though  having  so  much  to  do  with  the  worshippers  of  other  gods, 
it  underlies  his  whole  hist'-ry,  that  he  kept  his  trust  in  the  one  living  and  true 
God.  He  regarded  himself  as  the  "servant  of  the  God  of  Israel,"  and  the 
Philistines  whom  he  slew  in  such  nuuibers  he  looked  on  as  the  "  uncircumcised," 
who  had  put  forth  unhallowed  hands  against  the  people  who  were  under  special 
Divine  protection.  There  was  thus  a  tone  of  reverence  in  the  doing  of  his 
work.  It  was  done  to  God,  and  for  the  honour  of  His  name.  Besides,  he  did 
not  rely  on  his  own  arm  for  victory  or  deliverance,  though  that  was  exceptionally 
strong,  but  he  looked  to  God  as  his  buckler  and  shield,  and  ascribed  to  Him  all 
the  glory  of  the  victories  he  gained.  "Thou  hast  given  this  great  deliverance 
to  thy  servant "  (ch.  xv.  18)  Tliis  an  ungodly  man  was  not  very  likely  to  do. 
It  is  a  sure  proof  of  faith,  as  op])osed  to  mere  patriotism  The  one  has  respect 
to  God  and  His  glory,  wliile  the  other  is-  concerned  with  our  own  glory,  and 
that  of  the  community  with  whom  we  are  associated.  The  latter,  though 
praiseworthy  and  to  be  commended,  is  of  a  greatly  lower  mark  than  the  former. 

The  principle  of  his  life  was  that  of  faith  in  the  God  of  Israel,  and  hence  we 
find  his  name  put  down  in  the  list  of  those  that  are  to  be  had  in  everlasting 
remembrance  in  the  Church  of  God  (Heb.  xi.  32).  As  the  basis  of  his  conduct, 
he  believed  in  God  in  all  things,  and  took  direction  in  life  from  Him,  though 
frequently  his  practice  was  at  variance  with  his  profession, 

II.  The  bad  features  of  his  history. 

(l.)  He  became  the  intimate  and  frequent  associate  cf  the  wicked.     It  is 
indeed  a  modifying  element  in  the  case,  that  his  life-work  consisted  very  much 
in  bein<]:  a  scourge  to  the  enemies  of  God's  Israel,  and  therefore,  that  it  was  hia 
484 


BOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  JtJDOEB.  OttAP.  xiv. 


duty  to  look  out  for  occasions  when  he  might  discharge  this  work,  yet  it  is 
strange  that  we  never  hear  of  his  asking  counsel  at  the  mouth  of  the  Lord,  for 
direction  in  the  fulfilment  of  his  duty.  In  the  case  of  most  others  who  were 
sent  on  a  special  mission  by  God,  we  find  there  was  frequent  communication 
between  them  and  their  God  for  direction  in  the  way  of  duty,  before  they  started 
on  their  course.  This  was  the  case  with  Moses,  Joshua,  Gideon,  and  Jephthah, 
not  to  mention  other  names.  But  here  there  is  not  a  word  of  intercourse 
between  God  and  His  servant,  before  the  latter  embarks  on  his  iiazardous  course. 
There  is  no  prayer  of  any  kind,  by  way  of  committiug  his  steps  into  the  hands 
of  God,  as  in  the  case  of  Jacob  (Gen.  xxviii).  Nor  do  we  hear  of  any  precautions 
taken  to  avoid  the  sunken  rocks,  and  dangerous  whirlpools  of  the  voyage  of 
human  life  before  him.  The  instinct  of  a  man  whose  piety  had  a  healthful  tone 
would  have  suggested  the  propriety  of  doing  both  these  things  before  he  entered 
on  his  work. 

It  was  symptomatic  of  a  low  state  of  piety ^  when  Samson ,  a  young  man^ 
inexperienced  in  the  ways  of  the  worlds  went  out  alone  into  such  a  society  as  that 
of  the  Philistines,  without  special  prayer,  and  without  much  of  the  spirit  of 
watchfulness.  We  might  add,  he  seems  to  have  had  no  definite  plan  before  him, 
as  to  what  he  should  do.    The  lines  are  not  indeed  inapplicable — 

*'  Satan  finds  some  mischief  still, 
For  idle  hands  to  do." 

His  visit  to  Timnath  seems  to  have  been  aimless  and  censurable.  This  would 
make  him  all  the  more  likely  to  catch  infection  from  an  evil  atmosphere.  The 
best  supposition  we  can  make  is,  that  he  went  to  see  what  God  would  set  before 
him  to  do  among  these  oppressors  when  actually  on  the  ground.  But  he  seems 
to  have  heard  no  voice  calling  to  him  in  serious  tones  "  enter  not  into  the  path 
of  the  wicked,  and  go  not  in  the  way  of  evil  men."  (Pro v.  iv  14,  13  ;  xiii.  20 ; 
2  Cor.  vi.  14-16,  17). 

Two  things  are  specially  unfavourable  in  his  intercourse  with  these  wicked,  of 
a  general  kind.  One  is,  that  he  went  among  them  as  one  off  his  guard.  This 
he  must  have  known  to  be  wrong,  for  no  charge  was  given  to  parents  more 
impressively,  than  that  they  should  teach  their  children  to  avoid  the  companion- 
ship of  the  heathen  around  them.  And  Samson's  parents  were  least  of  all  likely 
to  forget  this  in  the  case  of  an  only  son,  and  one  who  was  a  Nazarite  from  his 
youth  up.  The  other  unfavourable  feature  is.  that  he  spent  the  most  of  his 
public  life  among  the  idol-worshippers,  A  healthful  spirituality  of  character 
repels  all  close  intercourse  with  moral  evil.  **  Gather  not  ray  soul  with  sinners, 
&c."  (Ps.  xvi.  3  ;  2  Cor.  vi  14  ;  Ps.  xxvi.  5  ;  cxix.  63,  158).  He  had  indeed 
much  to  do  in  the  way  of  chastising  these  people  as  a  matter  of  duty  ;  and  it  is 
to  his  credit,  that,  though  he  stood  among  them  alone,  he  was  never  tempted 
for  a  moment  to  renounce  the  God  of  Israel,  for  the  sake  of  joining  with  them 
in  their  idol-worship.  Yet  it  is  a  matter  of  sorrow,  that  we  never  hear  of  this 
champion  of  God's  cause  associating  with  any  other  class  of  men  but  tliese 
uncircumcised. 

(2.)  His  intermarriage  with  a  Philistine  family,  (a.)  This  was  a  breach  of 
a  solemn  law  laid  down  by  God.  Before  the  chosen  people  entered  Canaan, 
they  were  expressly  and  repeatedly  informed,  that  the  inhabitants  of  the  land 
were  to  be  destroyed  judicially  because  of  their  enormous  wickedness,  that  they 
must  not  associate  with  them  as  friends,  or  even  as  i  eighbours,  and  much  less 
were  they  to  think  of  associating  with  them  by  marriage  relationships.  This 
was  said  especially  of  seven  nations  that  are  specified  by  name  (Deut.  vii.  1-4  ; 
Josh,  xxiii.  12,  13).  See  above  on  ch.  iii.  6,  7.  The  Philistines  are  not 
mentioned  by  name  in  this  list,  yet  they  belonged  to  the  same  class  of  nations, 
and  were  guilty  of  the  same  sins.    All  the  reasons  for  keeping  aloof  from  the 

485 


CHAP.  XTV.  HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES, 


Canaanites  applied  equally  to  these  Philistines.  Intermarriage  with  a  Philistine 
therefore,  was  an  act  of  disobedience  to  a  Divine  command. 

(b.)  It  was  an  express  dishonour  done  to  the  name  of  God.  All  who  were 
jealous  for  the  honour  of  God,  were  bound  to  make  a  loud  protest  against  the 
manner  in  which  that  honour  was  laid  in  the  dust  by  these  profane  idol- 
worshippers.  To  stand  by  and  look  on  with  unconcern,  while  the  greatest 
indignity  was  done  to  the  name  of  the  great  Jehovah,  was  itself  to  incur  the 
heavy  expression  of  the  Divine  displeasure.  Much  more  heinous  was  the 
conduct  of  those,  who  should  join  hands  in  the  fastest  friendship  with  the 
blasphemers  of  that  holy  and  dreadful  name.  There  was  no  middle  course 
in  such  a  case.  "The  friendship  of  the  world  was  held  to  be  enmity  with 
God/' 

(c.)  It  was  to  bring  a  blight  on  ones  personal  religion.  It  exposed  one  to 
strong  temptations  every  hour  of  the  day — to  love  the  creature  more  than  the 
Creator.  The  situation  was  so  perilous  to  one's  stability  of  principle,  that  not 
even  the  strongest  built-up  religious  character  could  resist  the  aggressions  of 
evil  influence  constantly  coming  in,  without  the  help  of  the  grace  of  God  in 
keeping  the  feet  from  falling.  A  man's  greatest  enemy  in  such  a  ca^e  was  one 
of  his  own  house,  and  even  of  his  own  bosom.  True  piety  to  the  God  of  Israel 
could  not  possibly  flourish,  in  a  circle  where  a  believer  was  joined  in  wedlock 
with  an  idolater.  "  No  one  can  serve  two  masters."  And  so  it  turned  out, 
that  these  unnatural  intermarriages  always  led  to  apostasy  from  the  living  and 
true  God. 

(3.)  His  deeds  of  blood  and  revenge.  One  of  these  was  his  visit  to  Ashkelon, 
and  there  putting  to  death  thirty  men  in  cold  blood,  all  of  them  unknown  to 
him,  and  who  had  done  him  no  harm.  His  only  motive  was,  to  find  the  rich 
dresses  which  he  required  to  pay  the  costs  of  his  wager.  Again  we  see  him,  in 
mad  anger,  burning  the  standing  corn,  with  the  vineyards  and  olives,  over 
many  acres  of  the  best  part  of  the  country.  On  two  other  occasions  he  makes 
a  great  slaughter  among  the  Philistines,  the  motives  of  which  are  revenge.  In 
these  and  similar  deeds  which  are  recorded,  he  doubtless  fulfilled  his  vocation 
so  far  in  punishing  that  oppressing  people  for  their  cruelty  to  God's  Israel ; 
but,  in  most  cases,  the  immediate  reason  he  had  for  these  steps  was  his  desire 
for  revenge.  In  so  far  as  that  was  his  prompting  motive,  it  cannot  be 
justified. 

(4.)  His  licentiousness.  This  has  usually  been  reckoned  the  great  blot  in 
Samson's  character,  and  on  looking  at  all  the  facts  given  in  the  record,  we  see 
no  other  conclusion  possible  than  that,  to  a  certain  extent,  he  is  fairly  charge- 
able with  it  ;  not  that  he  was  a  habitual  libertine,  but  being  of  impulsive 
character  he  was  liable  to  fall  before  temptation.  The  account  given  in 
ch.  xiv.  is  not  conclusive,  for  though  he  lovea  a  woman  in  the  Philistine  city 
of  Timnath,  he  appears  to  have  acted  honourably  in  wishing  to  be  married  to 
her,  according  to  tlie  rules  of  propriety  then  generally  recognised.  His  error  in 
this  chapter  consisted  chiefly  in  wedding  a  Philistine.  But  his  conduct  as 
detailed  in  ch.  xvi.  is  altogether  inexcusable.  Impurity  between  the  sexes  is 
a  sin  condemned  alike  by  the  moral  instinct  of  every  rightly  constituted  mind, 
and  by  the  express  denunciations  of  the  word  of  God. 

That  this  is  one  of  the  grosser  sins  needs  no  proof.  In  regard  to  no  sin  has 
God  implanted  a  deeper  sense  of  shame  than  this,  nor  has  any  been  surrounded 
with  a  stronger  natural  restraint  to  prevent  its  commission.  It  implies,  too,  the 
subjection  of  the  spiritual  element  in  our  nature  to  the  animal,  or  the  ascen- 
dancy of  the  bestial  over  that  which  we  have  in  common  with  the  angelic 
nature.  No  wonder  that  a  deep  shadow  falls  on  the  name  of  Samson,  from 
what  is  here  recorded.  But  yet  serious  mistakes  have  been  made. 
486 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  JUDGES  chap.  rrr. 


ZZ.    Kow  are  we  to  Judg'e  this  character  t 

No  man's  sins  should  be  looked  at  in  the  abstract,  or  apart  from  the  cloud  of 
circumstances,  under  whicli  they  have  been  committed.  There  are  always 
considerations  which  will  either  deepen  or  lessen  the  criminality  of  the  case  in 
hand,  though  in  no  case  can  the  criminality  of  a  really  sinful  act  be  entirely 
taken  away. 

(1.)  It  is  but  a  specimen  of  the  conduct ^  not  the  whole  life  that  is  given  in 
Scripture.  We  have  indeed  but  nine  special  acts  recorded  from  first  to  last 
each  of  which  could  not  have  occupied  much  time  in  the  transacting.  But  he  had 
twenty  years  of  public  life,  and  from  these  nine  acts,  we  are  left  to  judge  of  the 
character  of  the  whole  life.  Doubtless,  in  so  far  as  such  a  small  number  of  acts 
could  indicate  the  spirit  of  the  man's  life,  we  must  hold  the  selection  to  be  well 
made  ;  yet,  we  must  not  forget,  that  in  so  long  a  history  many  things  must  have 
been  said  and  done,  which,  if  all  had  been  told,  would  have  presented  a  much  wider 
basis  of  judgment  than  is  actually  afforded.  The  severest  brevity  is  necessary 
in  a  book  like  the  Bible,  which,  touching  on  so  many  points,  must  yet  be  compact 
enough  to  be  portable.  What  is  selected  for  notice,  however,  is  always  such  as 
to  give  a  just  idea  of  the  real  character.  There  must,  however,  have  been  a 
much  larger  number  both  of  good  deeds  and  bad  deeds  in  the  whole  life. 

(2.)  We  must  remember  the  age  in  which  he  lived.  It  is  not  easy  to  ply 
one's  boat  against  the  stream,  and  especially  when  the  stream  has  become  a 
rapid  current.  Those  times  were  greatly  degenerate,  so  much  so  that  the 
moral  mainspring  of  the  nation  seemed  to  be  broken.  Though  severely 
smitten,  backsliding  Israel  kaew  not  how  to  return  to  their  God.  With  the 
exception  of  a  few  little  arks  of  preservation  here  and  there,  iniquity,  as  a 
mighty  flood,  had  overspread  the  land.  The  religious  light  was  dim  ;  indeed, 
in  some  places,  it  seemed  as  if  the  lamp  of  God  had  gone  out,  and  the  nation 
were  groping  in  darkness.  Immorality  of  all  kinds  was  so  common  that  it 
was  little  regarded.  It  is  manifest  that  temptations  to  sin  in  such  an  age 
were  far  stronger  than  when  the  moral  standard  stood  high,  and  powerful 
restraints  were  raised  up  on  all  hands  to  any  transgression  of  the  Divine 
law. 

(3.)  His  mission  led  him  to  associate  much  with  the  wicked.  We  believe  he 
was  too  often  and  too  long  in  the  atmosphere  of  evil,  and  all  too  little  in  the 
companionship  of  the  good.  For  though  the  pure  circles  were  few  and  tar 
between,  they  did  exist  as  "lights  shining  in  a  dark  place."  Yet  if  his  mission 
practically,  really  was  to  harass  the  oppressors  of  Israel,  and  to  be  a  bulwark 
against  their  attacks,  it  was  necessary  for  him  often  to  meet  with  them.  This 
exposed  him  to  much  danger,  and  required  much  prayer  and  much  watching  to 
protect  him  from  the  evil  influence.  His  error  seems  to  have  been  that  he 
placed  himself  too  little  under  the  Divine  guidance,  and  in  the  Divine  keeping. 
Going  down  to  Timnath  for  the  first  time,  a  perfect  stranger,  a  scene  rank  witli 
moral  malaria,  he  ought  to  have  "  prayed  without  ceasing,"  in  the  spirit  of  the 
words,  "lead  me  not  into  temptation,  but  deliver  me  from  evil."  In  an 
unguarded  moment,  through  the  eye  the  heart  is  led  captive,  and  quickly  he  is 
ensnared  to  enter  into  marriage  relationship  with  the  member  of  a  heathen 
family.  One  has  said,  "it  is  needful  to  set  a  strong  guard  on  our  outward 
senses,  for  these  are  Satan's  landing  places,  especially  the  eye  and  the  ear." 

(4.)  He  had  certain  weak  points  in  his  character.  Scripture  itself  speaks  of 
the  "  sin  which  easily  besets  us,"  it  may  be  on  account  of  our  natural  tempeni- 
ment  or  disposition,  or  on  account  of  training  or  force  of  temptation.  Some 
have  a  special  tendency  to  pride,  others  to  selfishness^  some  to  ambition,  others 

487 


CHAP.  liv.  BOMJLETIC  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES. 


to  avarice,  some  are  prone  to  jealousy  others  to  deceit  and  double  dealing, 
some  are  inclined  to  detraction,  others  to  stealing  and  circumvention,  some  are 
given  to  prevarication,  others  to  evil  speaking,  some  are  addicted  to  excess  of 
wine,  others  to  impurity.  This  last  appears  to  have  been  the  fatal  weakness  of 
Israel's  defender,  which  though  it  does  not  palliate  his  sin  accounts  for  its  com- 
mission. When  a  man  has  a  constitutional  tendency  to  any  sin  it  requires  a 
greater  effort  for  him  to  resist  the  downward  tendency.  "  Satan,  like  a  skilful 
angler,  baits  his  hook  according  to  the  appetite  of  the  fish." 

(5.)  He  did  not  realise  the  danger  of  his  position.  This  may  have  arisen 
partly,  from  his  youth  and  unacquaintance  with  the  lures  and  enticements  of 
the  world  ;  partly,  from  his  conscious  strength,  which  led  him  on  no  occasion  to 
fear  the  face  of  man  ;  partly,  from  a  certain  self-willedness,  owing  to  his  being 
an  only  son,  and  being  accustomed  by  his  parents  ever  to  have  his  own  way  ; 
from  various  causes  he  seems  not  to  have  realised  his  danger,  until  he  actually 
fell  into  the  traps  which  Satan  had  laid  for  the  unwary  bird.  How  differently 
it  might  have  fared  with  him  had  he  daily,  and  even  hourly,  come  to  the 
Throne  of  grace,  to  find  grace  to  help  him  in  the  measure  of  his  need.  But  he 
seems  not  to  have  reflected  that  he  was  on  an  "  Enchanted  Ground,"  that  the 
poison  of  the  old  serpent  hung  in  sparkling  drops  on  every  blade  of  grass,  and 
that  every  potion  he  put  to  his  lips  was  drugged.  May  God  grant  that  we  all 
have  both  eyes  and  ears  wide  open  while  we  are  still  treading  so  dangerous 
a  territory. 

ZIZ.    The  need  of  caution  in  judgring*  religious  character. 

To  judi;e  of  any  man's  moral  or  religious  character  is  to  tread  on 
extremely  delicate  ground.  The  right  to  pass  any  judgment  at  all  is  more  than 
questionable,  and  the  range  within  which  it  may  be  allowed  is  extremely  limited. 
*'  Who  art  thou  that  judgest  another  man's  servant  ?  To  his  own  master  he 
standeth  or  falleih."  '*  We  shall  all  stand  before  the  judgment  seat  of  Christ." 
But  where  the  right  is  exercised,  in  few  cases  we  believe  have  more  shallow, 
inconsiderate,  unjust,  and  unnecessarily  severe  judgments  been  formed  of  any 
one's  religious  character,  than  in  that  of  the  man  brought  before  us  in  these 
pages.  How  many  judge  him  as  if  he  had  passed  life  in  the  light  of  modern 
times,  as  if  he  had  no,  or  few  disadvantages,  and  as  if  there  were  nothing  trying 
or  peculiar  in  the  situation  in  which  he  was  pJaced  !  How  many  regard  him  as 
one  of  the  worst  of  men,  a  disgrace  to  the  nation  to  which  he  belonged,  one 
who  habitually  indulged  in  debasing  vices,  and  altogether  unfit  to  enter  into 
the  kingdom  of  God  !  Some  even  go  so  far  as  to  say,  that,  because  this  name 
stands  in  the  list  of  the  men  who  became  famous  through  their  faith,  therefore 
the  whole  list  must  be  condemned  as  not  necessarily  a  litt  of  religious  men. 
In  the  life  of  this  man  they  see  nothing  but  dark  passions,  foul  associations,  and 
ungodly  practices. 

That  Samson's  character  was  one,  which  in  many  respects  is  not  to  be 
imitated,  will  be  admitted  by  all  ;  that  many  of  his  acts  must  be  severely 
censured  is  at  once  conceded,  but  that  he  plunged  systematically  into  all 
manner  of  excesses  is  not  on  the  record.  It  is  overlooked  by  the  censors, 
that  he  was  commissioned  by  God  Himself  to  do  a  great  work  for  His  church 
and  people,  that,  though  he  was  severely  punished  for  his  sins,  his  last  cry 
for  help  was  granted,  and  that  it  is  a  dangerous  thing  to  denounce  a  man 
utterly  whom  God  does  not  cast  away.  That  he  had  certain  bright  sides 
of  character  is  also  undoubted. 

There  is  need  of  caution  in  this  matter,  because — 

(1.)   We  ourselves  are  transgressors.     This  circumstance  alone  should  make 
us  hesitate.     Were  we  pure  and  spotless  like  the  native  sons  of  light,  there 
488 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES.  chap.  xit. 


might  be  some  propriety  in  comiDg  forward  to  denounce  those  who  have 
blemishes  and  imperfections  of  character.  But,  as  the  case  stands,  with  what 
force  may  it  be  said  in  the  case  of  many,  "  Wherein  thou  judgest  another 
thou  condemnest  thyself."  If  we  staiid  clear  of  the  grosser  sins  in  the  cat- 
alogue, are  we  not  all  rebels  against  God's  authority,  and  wanting  in  love  to 
Him  with  all  the  heart,  soul,  strength  and  mind  ?  Have  we  not,  all  of  us, 
reason  to  be  ashamed  to  lift  up  our  heads  before  the  holy,  because  of  our 
spiritual  vileness  and  ungodliness?  Who  among  us  has  not  lost  character  in 
the  universe  of  the  holy?  What  presumption  is  it  then  to  come  forward  as 
critics  of  the  character  of  others,  when,  in  the  most  essential  features  we 
have  lost  our  own  ! 

(2.)  It  is  not  our  province  to  judge  others.  We  are  not  judges  but  subjects 
of  judgment.  This  is  true  of  all  men.  It  is  a  species  of  impertinence  of  the 
worst  kind.  It  is  more  heinous  still,  when  one  goes  the  length  of  daring  to  say 
what  ought  to  be  the  treatment  which  should  be  measured  out  to  a  man  by  the 
Judge  of  all  the  earth,  and  whether  he  should  be  admitted  into  the  kingdom  of 
the  holy  or  not.  We  fear  that  were  the  issues  to  be  according  to  the  verdicts 
which  men  pass  on  each  other's  characters  before  God,  the  final  heaven  would 
be  a  thinly-peopled  home  (James  iv.  11,  12).  God  alo'>e  is  Lord  of  the 
conscience,  and  it  is  "  by  Him  that  actions  are  weighed  "  (Matt.  vii.  1,  2). 

(3.)  It  is  sinful  to  judge  in  a  light  spirit  and  without  a  due  sense  of 
responsibility.  Many  thoughtless  people  find  it  so  easy,  and  indeed  so  congenial 
an  exercise  tor  heartless  natures,  to  sit  in  the  chair  of  judgment,  that  it  does 
not  occur  to  them  that  there  is  responsibility  in  the  opinions  they  expres-i. 
They  do  not  reflect  that  no  more  deadly  stab  can  be  given  to  a  fellow  creature 
than  when  they  throw  out  aspersions  against  his  moral  or  religious  character. 
Those  aspersions  may  be  utterly  futile  in  producing  any  injurious  effect,  but  it 
is  only  because  of  the  weakness  of  the  hand  that  throws  them,  and  not  that  the 
weapons  used  are  less  deadly  in  character,  or  that  there  is  any  lack  of  intention 
to  do  evil.  Such  persons  do  not  refl  ct  that  they  assume  the  unenviable  office 
of  being  the  murderers  of  the  characters  of  others,  who  are  not  only  unjustly 
accused  oy  them,  but  who  may  be  all  the  while  within  the  kingdom  of  heaven, 
while  the  accusers  themselves  are  standing  without.  In  all  cases,  great  is  the 
responsibility  of  using  an  unbridled  tongue  in  speaking  of  the  religious  character 
or  conduct  of  others.  What  should  we  think  of  a  man  taking  liberties  with  his 
neighbour  by  shooting  darts  into  the  apple  of  his  eye  ? 

(4  )  It  is  by  the  whole  character  that  a  man  is  to  be  judged.  In  every  good 
man  there  are  faults  and  also  redeeuiing  features.  There  is  the  '*  old  man,"  and 
also  the  *' new  man."  "  Men  are  to  be  estimated  by  the  mass  of  character. 
A  block  of  tin  has  often  a  grain  of  silver,  but  still  it  is  tin,  and  a  block  of  silver 
may  have  an  alloy  of  tin  but  still  it  is  silver.  The  mass  of  David's  character 
was  excellence,  but  with  alloy."  It  is  a  very  great  fault  in  any  man  himse'f 
when  he  can  see  nothing  in  his  neighbour  but  faults,  or  when,  because  of  the 
faults  he  sees,  he  presumes  that  there  can  be  no  excellences.  Those  who  busy 
themselves  in  finding  motes  in  the  eyes  of  others,  generally  have  a  beam  of  no 
small  dimensions  m  their  own.  Perfection  even  in  the  best  of  God's  people, 
does  not  exist  in  this  world.  Every  good  man  is  here  in  a  transition  state. 
The  leaven  of  holiness  has  begun  to  work,  and  in  due  time  will  leaven  the 
whole  mass,  but  not  as  yet ;  so  that,  however  much  to  be  deplored,  and  however 
great  the  guilt  implied,  sin  may  be  expected  to  break  out,  more  or  less,  through 
strong  temptation,  or  when  one  neglects  to  pray  and  be  on  his  guard. 

(5.)  We  have  a  very  partial  knowledge  of  the  character  of  others.  We  look 
only  '*on  the  outward  appearance,  the  Lord  alone  looketh  on  the  heart."     Our 

489 


CHAP.  XIV.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES, 


best  practical  rule  is,  "by  their  fruits  ye  shall  know  them."  Yet  that  rule 
applies  only  for  practical  purposes  in  our  dealings  with  men.  It  does  not 
reveal  the  motives  and  aims  of  action,  nor  tell  the  "  secret  thoughts  and  intents 
of  the  heart.'*  A  man's  character  is  often  misconstrued  by  his  fellow  men. 
There  is  an  inner  life  going  on  which  is  little  indicated  by  the  external  manner, 
until  a  special  time  comes  round,  when  particularly  testing  circumstances  occur, 
and  bring  to  light  what  was  never  supposed  to  exist.  The  secret  springs  of  a 
man's  character  are  known  only  to  the  all-seeing  eye.  Hence  the  great  need  of 
caution  in  forming  a  judgment,  lest  while  looking  only  at  what  appears,  we 
should  make  a  serious  mistake  as  to  what  exists  in  reality. 

(6.)  It  is  not  the  greatness  of  a  mans  sin  that  finally  decides  his  character^ 
hut  his  impenitence.  Sin  is  never  to  be  otherwise  than  severely  condemned,  and 
the  greater  the  sin  is,  the  more  emphatic  must  the  condemnation  be.  Yet, 
great  as  the  distinction  is  between  what  might  be  called  the  least  sin,  and  the 
greatest  sin,  that  distinction  is  small  compared  with  the  difference  between  the 
least  sin  and  no  sin.  The  former  is  a  difference  of  degree,  the  latter  is  one  of 
principle.  So  great  a  matter  is  it  to  find  an  expiation  for  sin  in  the  principle 
of  it,  that  when  that  is  found,  the  difficulty  is  got  over  in  expiating  sin  in  any 
degree  of  it.  Let  a  sin  be  ever  so  great,  it  can  be  expiated  by  that  which 
suffices  to  atone  for  the  principle  of  sin.  Hence  the  greatness  of  a  man's  sins, 
however  much  they  are  to  be  execrated,  will  not  block  his  way  to  receive  pardon, 
provided  there  is  suitable  penitence. 

But  we  fear  there  is  less  likelihood  of  penitence  in  the  case  of  wilful  and 
known  sin.  It  is  also  more  provoking  to  God,  and  it  puts  a  deeper  stamp  of 
reproach  on  the  character  in  the  eyes  of  fellow  man.  Yet  it  would  be  highly 
derogatory  to  the  value  of  Christ's  blood  to  say  that  it  could  not  wipe  out  the 
stain  of  the  greatest  sin,  if  the  sinner  takes  refuge  in  that  blood,  and  turns 
from  his  sin  unto  God,  with  endeavour  after  new  obedience.  It  is  not  the 
greatness  of  the  sin  that  finally  condemns  anyone,  but  the  not  repenting  of  sin. 
Neither  is  it  the  greatness  of  the  breach  a  man  makes  in  God's  laws  that  finally 
determines  what  his  state  is  to  be,  but  his  obstinate  continuance  in  impenitence. 

EOMILETIO  REMARKS  ON  CHAPTER  XIV. 

Z.  The  need  of  watchfulness  in  the  enemy's  country. 

(1.)  Because  the  enemy  himself  is  ever  awake.  Saul  would  not  have  slept  in 
the  trench  had  he  known  that  David  was  so  near.  Sisera  would  not  have  laid 
down  to  rest  had  he  seen  the  nail  and  the  hammer  in  the  hand  of  Jael. 
"  Hannibal  is  at  the  gates ! "  was  enough  to  keep  all  Rome  awake ;  and  so  the 
warning,  that  "  the  roaring  lion  goeth  about  seeking  whom  he  may  devour/* 
may  keep  us  all,  and  always  on  our  guard  (Matt.  xxiv.  43). 

(2.)  There  is  much  evil  latent  in  the  heart.  On  that  evil  within  a  man 
Satan  plants  his  temptations.  Here  was  his  difficulty  with  the  Saviour — "  the 
prince  of  this  world  cometh  and  hath  nothing  in  me  " — nothing  on  which  to 
plant  his  enticements  to  sin.  Were  there  no  traitors  in  the  camp,  the  danger 
would  be  less ;  but  there  is  gunpowder  lyinsr  all  about  in  our  case,  and  one 
spark  is  enough  to  create  an  explosion.  '*  There  is  a  secret  disposition  in 
every  man's  heart  to  sin.  Temptation  does  not  fall  on  one,  as  a  ball  of  fire  on 
ice  or  snow,  but  as  a  spark  or  tinder,  or  lightning  on  a  thatched  roof,  which  is 
at  once  on  flame  (James  i.  14.)  The  fowler  lays  the  snare,  but  the  bird's  own 
desire  betrays  it  into  the  net," 
490 


EOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES.  chap.  xtv. 


(3.)  The  beginnings  of  evil  lead  to  more.  A  few  drops  oozing  through  an 
embankment  n-ay  make  a  passage  for  the  whole  lake  of  waters.  Little 
sins  if  allowed  are  the  beginnings  of  great  ones.  In  robbing  a  house,  thieves 
put  in  a  little  boy  at  the  window,  whose  work  is  to  open  the  door  and  let 
them  in  ;  so  the  tempter,  in  rifling  the  soul,  employs  temptation  to  gome 
smaller  sin,  which,  little  though  it  be,  is  sufficient  to  unlock  the  bars  of 
conscience,  and  prepare  for  the  commission  of  gross  crimes.  A  pore  in  the 
body  may  be  a  door  wide  enough  to  let  in  a  disease. 

(4.)  The  path  of  duty  sometimes  leads  close  to  the  edges  of  sin.  It  was 
Samson's  duty  to  have  to  do  with  Philistines.  It  required  sharp  looking  round 
about  on  all  sides,  to  avoid  the  darts  of  the  wicked  one.  **  It  is  not  safe  to 
bring  gunpowder  within  the  reach  even  of  a  spark  ;  nor  is  it  wise,  however 
dexterous  your  driving,  to  shave  with  your  wheels  the  edge  of  a  beetling  preci- 
pice ;  nor  is  it  without  the  greatest  danger,  in  the  best-built  bark  that  ever 
rode  the  waves,  to  sail  on  the  outermost  rim  of  a  roaring  whirlpool."  "  Many 
a  duty  lies  between  Scylla  and  Chary bdis.  Faith  cuts  its  way  between  the 
Mountain  of  Presumption,  and  the  Gulf  of  Despair.  No  truth  but  has  some 
error  next  door."     Examples  in  Samson,  Joseph,  Jephthah,  David,  etc. 

(5.)  We  must  watch  all  round.  "  The  city  cannot  be  safe  unless  the  whole 
line  be  kept.  It  is  all  one  whether  the  enemy  breaks  in  at  the  front,  flank,  or 
rear  of  an  army  ;  or  whether  the  ship  be  taken  at  sea,  or  sink  in  the  haven  wlien 
the  voyage  is  over.  The  honest  watchman  doth  not  limit  his  care  to  the  hou^e 
or  street,  but  walks  the  rounds  and  compasseth  the  whole  town.  So  the  whole 
man  must  be  watched.  A  strong  guard  must  be  set  about  the  outward  sense, 
for  these  are  Satan's  landing  places,  especially  the  eye  and  the  ear."  Neglect 
of  this  was  bamson's  mistake  (Job  xxxi.  1 ;  Ps.  ci.  3,  cxli.  3,  4).  *' There  is  a 
white  devil  of  spiritual  pride,  as  well  as  a  black  devil  of  fleshly  lusts  ;  and  if 
only  Satan  can  ruin  us,  it  is  all  the  same  to  him  by  what  engines  he  does  it ; 
it  is  all  the  same  whether  we  go  down  to  hell  as  gross  carnal  sinners,  or  as 
elated  self-righteous  saints." 

(6.)  We  must  watch  at  all  times.  There  are  times  of  special  danger,  as  for 
instance  after  great  manifestations  of  the  Divine  love.  There  is  danger  of  being 
lifted  up  with  pride,  and  so  falling  into  the  condemnation  of  the  devil 
(2  Cor.  xii.  7  etc.;  Luke  xxii.  31,32).  "As  a  pirate  sets  on  the  ship  that  is 
heavily  laden,  so  when  a  soul  has  been  filled  with  spiritual  comforts,  the  devil, 
full  of  envy,  will  keep  shooting  at  him  to  rob  him  of  all.  After  great  services, 
honours  and  mercies,  there  are  critical  times  of  danger.  N(^ah,  Lot,  David  and 
Solomon  fell  in  these  circumstances.  Satan  is  a  foorpad  who  dares  not  attack 
a  man  going  to  the  bank,  but  when  returning  with  his  pockets  full  of  money." 

ZX.    Man's  sin  often  overruled  by  G-od  for  His  people's  grood* 

It  was  sinful  for  Samson  to  form  a  family  connection  with  these  God-despising 
heathens.  Yet  God  overruled  this  sinful  step  to  bring  ahoiit  the  deliverance  of 
Lrael  from  their  oppressors.  "  It  was  of  the  Lord  "  to  allow  Samson  to  follow 
his  own  natural  inclinations,  that  out  of  the  events  which  naturally  followed, 
occasion  might  arise  for  the  chastisement  of  these  cruel  and  ungodly  men. 
Joseph's  brethren  sold  their  brother  into  Egypt  as  a  slave.  They  **thought  evil 
towards  him,  but  God  meant  it  for  good,  etc."  (Gen.  1.  20).  Pilate  and  the 
Jewish  rulers  took  '*  with  wicked  hands  and  crucified "  the  Lord  of  glory,  to 
gratify  their  own  malice  and  sinful  purposes,  yet  God  overruled  this  greatest  of 
sins  for  the  purpose  of  fulfilling  what  had  been  spoken  by  all  the  prophets  from 

491 


OHAP  XIV.  HOMILEftQ  COMUENfARt:  jnt)GE8, 


the  beginning  of  time,  that  Christ  should  suffer  in  men's  stead  and  so  open  the 
way  for  their  becoming  reconciled  to  God.  All  the  calamities  which  befel 
Israel  from  time  to  time,  through  the  invasion  of  surrounding  nations,  each  a 
most  afflictive  scourge  while  it  lasted,  though  prompted  by  malice,  envy  and 
lust  of  power,  were  yet  overruled  by  God  to  discipline  His  people,  to  prevent 
their  falling  into  apostasy  and  to  preserve  them  on  earth  as  a  God-fearing 
nation. 

ZZZ.  The  difficult  battle  whlcb  some  have  to  fig>ht  In  fulfilling 
their  duty  to  their  G-od. 

Samson's  lot  was  to  fight  these  Philistines,  and  with  carnal  weapons.  At 
that  time  too  the  Philistines  had  the  upper  hand,  wliile  Samson  must  combat 
them  all  alone.  Every  man  has  his  post  assigned  him  all  over  the  field.  Some 
like  David  or  Jephthah  have  to  occupy  for  a  long  time  the  position  of  outlaws, 
and  to  show  their  fidelity  to  their  God  at  the  head  of  bands  of  lawless  men. 
Others  like  Jonathan  have  sometimes  to  meet  a  whole  army  in  the  field,  though 
all  alone.  Others  like  Elijah  have  to  stand  up  and  reprove  a  whole  nation 
with  their  kin^  at  their  head,  and  require  them  to  engage  in  immediate 
repentance.  Still  others,  like  Moses,  had  to  conduct  a  murmuring  and  stiff- 
necked  people  for  forty  years  through  a  barren  wilderness.  And  the  first 
preachers  of  the  cross  had  to  stand  forth  and  proclaim  in  the  ears  of  a  proud 
and  rebellious  world  the  most  humbling  and  unpalatable  of  all  truths,  as  the 
only  road  to  pardon  of  sin,  and  hope  for  the  eternal  future.  Indeed  no  lot  in 
Christ's  service  is  without  a  cross.  Self  denial  is  the  general  law  (Luke  xiv. 
26,  27) ;  but  there  is  a  blessed  compensation  (Luke  xviii.  28-80). 

ZV.  Those  who  are  in  Divine  keeping*  receive  special  streng'th 
amid  special  dangers. 

Just  as  God  encouraged  Moses  when  entering  on  His  service,  first  by  turning 
his  rod  into  a  serpent,  and  then  by  turning  the  serpent  into  a  rod  ;  and,  as  He 
encouraged  David  in  like  manner,  by  enabling  him  to  slay  both  a  lion  atid  a 
bear,  as  a  pledge  of  future  victories  in  God's  service,  so  now  is  Samson  fortified 
against  the  dangers  of  his  future  career.  He  was  destined  to  have  many 
encounters  with  human  lions,  and  now  a  picture  is  presented  to  him  of  the 
success  which  would  crown  his  efforts  in  the  fight.  **  The  beast  came  bristling 
up  his  fearful  mane,  wafting  his  raised  tail,  his  eyes  sparkling  with  fury,  his 
mouth  roaring  out  knells  of  his  last  passage,  and  breathing  death  from  his 
nostrils  at  the  prey  before  him.  But  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  came  on  Samson. 
He  that  made  the  lions  to  stand  in  awe  of  Adam,  Noah,  and  Daniel,  now 
subdued  this  strong  animal  before  Samson,  so  that  he  tore  him  in  pieces  as  he 
would  have  rent  a  slender  kid.  And  if  his  bones  had  been  brass,  and  his  skin 
plates  of  iron,  it  had  been  all  one  before  a  man  who  received  the  strength  of 
Omnipotence  for  the  moment."     [Hall.'\ 

"  If  the  roaring  lion  of  hell  should  find  us  alone  among  the  vineyards  of  the 
Philistines,  where  is  our  hope  ?  Not  in  our  heels,  he  is  swifter  than  we  ;  not 
in  our  weapons,  we  are  naturally  unarmed  ;  not  in  our  hands,  for  they  are  weak 
and  nerveless,  but  in  the  Spirit  of  that  God  by  whom  we  can  do  all  things,  who 
giveth  power  to  the  faint,  and,  to  them  that  have  no  might,  increaseth  strength. 
There  is  a  stronger  lion  in  the  believer  than  that  which  roars  against  him." 
[Hall'] 

God  gives  assurance  of  such  succour  to  all  His  people  (Deut.  xxxiii.  25). 
Thus  it  was  with  Paul  (2  Tim.  iv.  17,  18  ;  Phil.  iv.   13)  ;  with  David  (1  Sam. 
xvii.  34,  35);  with  Jeremiah  (Jer.  xx,  11);  with  Daniel  (Dan.  vi.  22)  ;  with 
the  Saviour  Himself  (Isa.  L  6,  7)  ;  with  all  Christ's  people  (Isa.  xl.  29-31). 
492 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES.  chap  xiv. 

V.  Those  who  do  the  mig-hty  deeds  of  faith  are  the  least 
disposed  to  boast  of  themselves. 

The  conquest  over  the  lion  was  gained  we  believe  through  faith.  "When  the 
Spirit  of  God  came  mightily  on  any  of  those  who  were  specially  commissioned 
to  do  God's  work,  it  was  always  accompanied  by  the  exercise  of  strong  faith  on 
the  part  of  the  choben  instrument.  He  looked  only  to  God  for  the  needed 
strength  (Ps.  cxviii.  6-14  ;  xviii.  29-36  ;  Ps.  Ixxi.  16).  Samson  himself,  though 
conscious  of  a  far  greater  than  the  ordinary  measure  of  a  man's  strength,  yet 
never  boasts  of  that  strength  as  his  own,  but  on  one  special  occasion  expressly 
ascribes  the  deliverance  given  to  the  hand  of  God  (ch.  xv.  18).  That  we  take 
as  an  example  of  what  he  always  did  ;  for  the  few  particulars  recorded  respecting 
him  are  always  to  be  understood  as  a  specimen  of  how  he  did  in  many  other 
cases  which  are  not  recorded.  Though  it  is  not  expressly  mentioned  in  other 
cases  that  he  did  his  exploits  through  faith,  or  immediate  application  to  his 
God  for  promised  strength,  the  fact  that  it  is  expressly  mentioned  in  one  case 
is  an  indication  of  what  it  always  was  with  him.  And  this  is  confirmed  by  the 
fact  that  his  name  is  given  in  the  list  of  those  who  **  obtained  a  good  report 
through  faith."  He  as  well  as  Daniel  may  be  said  to  have  "  stopped  the 
mouths  of  lions." 

Yet  he  did  not  tell  the  world  of  this  great  deed.  He  felt  that  the  glory  was 
not  due  to  him  but  to  his  God.  Therefore  he  was  silent,  not  telling  even  his 
parents,  but  keeping  the  matter  locked  up  in  his  bosom  as  a  profound  secret 
for  many  a  day.  Most  men  would  have  blown  the  trumpet  loud  and  long,  and 
used  every  means  to  get  their  names  inserted  in  the  roll  of  fame.  If  there  were 
some  degrading  elements  in  this  character  there  were  also  some  that  were  truly 
ennobling.  It  was  Christ-like  to  make  little  of  the  world's  applause.  Afier 
performing  His  mighty  works,  our  Lord  for  the  most  part  withdrew  into  a 
desert  place,  or  retired  to  the  mountain  side,  to  spend  the  night  in  prayer  to 
God — a  beautiful  index  of  the  direction  in  which  the  needle  of  the  heart 
pointed.  Deep  waters  make  the  least  noise.  Samson  probably  talked  of  this 
matter  to  his  God  also,  unseen  by  the  worlH.  (Compare  Paul's  keeping  as  a 
secret  for  fourteen  years  the  greatest  honour  ever  conferred  on  any  man  in 
this  life  as  detailed  in  2  Cor.  xii.  1-12). 

VZ.  Crod  sometimes  stores  up  comforts  for  Kis  people  where 
they  would  least  expect  to  find  them. 

In  that  typical  age  every  thing  was  full  of  instruction.  There  was  a  lesson 
in  the  discovery  made  so  unexpectedly  of  honey  in  the  carcass  of  the  lion. 
After  so  hard  a  struggle,  in  which  the  Spirit  of  God  came  to  his  help,  the  result 
is  a  feast  of  honey  !  Honey  is  honey  still,  though  found  in  the  lion's  carcass. 
In  God's  service  "  the  bitter  comes  before  the  sweet,"  and  that,  says  Bunyan, 
"  makes  the  sweet  the  sweeter."  Joseph's  hard  lines  in  being  sold,  and  in 
leading  a  prison  life  for  years,  with  all  its  privations  and  exhibitions  of  cold- 
heartedness  from  those  around  him,  brought  in  the  end  a  glorious  vindication 
of  character  and  improvement  of  circumstances.  David's  many  and  great  trials 
furnished  him  with  materials  for  writing  his  sweetest  psalms,  and  made  him  the 
comforter  and  counsellor  of  God's  people  in  every  age.  After  encountering  the 
fiercest  opposition  from  the  enemies  of  the  truth  at  Antioch,  the  disciples  were 
filled  with  joy  and  with  the  Holy  Ghost.  Some  severe  trials  are  made  to  turn 
men's  dispositions  into  sweetness,  and  all  features  of  excellence.  That  is  honey 
out  of  the  lion's  carcass.  "  How  precious  are  thy  thoughts  " — that  is  when 
taking  a  retrospect  of  God's  way  of  leading  us  1 

493 


OHAP.  XV.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES, 


VIZ.  The  perils  of  the  wicked's  fellowship. 

Samson  now  sat  at  a  Philistine's  board.  There  were  suspicious  glances  all 
round  the  table.  "  When  they  saw  him  " — how  strong  and  well-built,  how 
formidable  he  might  become  were  any  dispute  to  arise,  they  set  spies  around 
him,  consisting  o^  thirty  strong  youji^  men,  to  be  a  guard  over  him  in  case  of 
any  outbreak.  That  was  a  poor  stockade  of  defence  against  a  roused  Samson  ; 
but  the  wicked's  protection  is  always  a  mere  wall  of  reeds.  In  the  language  of 
deceit,  which  might  be  said  to  be  the  vernacular  of  Philistine  social  circles,  they 
called  these  young  men  '*  friends  of  the  bridegroom."  The  company  professed 
to  be  full  of  smiles,  while  their  hearts  were  full  of  deadly  thoughts.  It  was  an 
easy  transition  to  pass  from  the  friendly  query — **  Art  thou  in  health,  brother?" 
to  give  a  stab  under  the  fifth  rib.  It  was  an  atmosphere  of  treachery.  Their 
farther  conduct  in  stealing  the  solution  of  the  riddle  proposed,  in  extorting  it 
from  the  terrified  bride  by  threats,  and  in  actually  determining  to  burn  her  and 
her  relatives  with  fire,  showed  some  of  the  perils  of  the  wicked's  fellowship. 
But  it  was  worse  still  when  she,  whom  he  was  to  take  as  the  companion  of  his 
bosom,  actually  betrayed  her  husband  behind  his  back,  and  did  what,  to  an 
honourable  mind  like  that  of  Samson,  was  the  same  as  giving  him  a  stab  in  the 
very  heart.     So  it  is  with  those  who  have  no  fear  of  God  before  their  eyes. 

VZIX.  The  ways  of  deceit  end  to  the  injury  of  those  who  practise 
them 

Samson  did  indeed  act  the  part  of  honour  in  paying  the  forfeit  to  those  who 
had  nominally  won  it.  But  he  took  his  own  mod^3  of  fulfilhng  the  conditions 
of  the  riddle.  He  paid  the  forfeit  with  Philistine  blood  and  clothing  (ver.  19). 
He  virtually  said,  since  you  have  unrighteously  compelled  me  to  pay,  1  shall 
do  so  at  the  expense  of  your  own  countrymen;  and  so  begin  the  infliction  of 
the  heavy  blows  on  your  wicked  race  for  their  oppression  of  God's  chosen  people. 
Thus  the  ways  of  deceit  recoil  on  those  who  walk  in  them  (Ps.  v.  6 ;  x.  7-10 ; 
111  1-5). 


CHAPTER  XV. 

Revenge  Taken  and  Returned. 
(Verses  1-20.) 

Critical  Notes. — !•  Within  a  while  after.  1  After  some  time,  indefinitely ;  probably  a  tew 
months.  In  the  time  of  wheat  harvest]  About  the  month  of  May.  This  is  mentioned  on 
account  of  what  is  referred  to  in  ver.  5.  With  a  kid.]  A  customary  preseut  (Gen.  xxxviii.  17  ; 
Luke  XV.  29).  This  was  expressive  of  soci.il  good  feeling,  and  was  meant  to  be  a  means  of 
reconciliation.  This  indicated  a  generous  and  honourable  nature.  He  was  willing  to  forgive 
and  forget  the  past.     Go  into  the  chamber-]     The  woman's  apartment. 

2.  I  thought  thou  h  dst  utterly  hated  her]  No  idea  of  marriage  as  a  sacred  vow  made  by 
the  one  party  to  the  other  ;  and  no  consideration  of  the  fact  that  the  marriage  dowry  had  been 
paid.  So  loose  and  unprincipled  were  Philistine  ideas.  Take  her  younger  sister.]  This  ia 
worse  than  the  bargain  which  the  worldly  Labau  made  with  Jacob.  For  the  marriage  tie  is 
broken  witli  the  elder  sister  in  the  most  flippant  maimer.  Where  there  is  no  God  there  is  no 
conscience. 

494 


aOMlLETlC  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES.  chap.  xv. 


3.  Concerning  them]  i.e.,  the  whole  family  circle  and  their  friends  immediately,  but  also  the 
whole  people  of  the  Philistines. 

Now  shall  I  he  blameless  before  the  Philistines.]  Or  as  regards  the  Philistines,  if  I  do  them 
an  injury.  The  Philistines  in  the  neighbourhood  f^eemed  geierally  to  acquiesce  in  the  treatment 
which  had  been  given  to  Samson  by  his  wife  and  father-in-law.  It  was  the  feeling  of  race  that 
led  to  it.  Thus  Sam8<  n  iiiterprettd  it ;  and  against  the  race  as  such,  his  indignation  was 
awakened  accordingly.  Besides,  he  was  ever  seeking  o<  casion  to  harass  the  people  as  a  whole, 
for  that  was  his  coniuiiss^ion.  It  would  be  wrong  to  put  down  his  severe  reprisals  on  that 
people  as  altogether  due  to  personal  resentment  or  to  mt  re  patriotism.  Along  with  that  there 
always  minyled  the  consciousness  that  he  was  bound,  as  a  matter  of  duty,  to  avenge  Israel  upon 
them  in  the  name  of  the  God  whom  they  dishonoured.  The  words  he  now  used  were  almost  a 
declaration  of  war. 

4.  Caught  three  hundred  foxes]  shualim  (Heb.)  or  jackals.  The  Persian  word  is  shagal, 
which  is  not  vnilike  jackal.  Probably  the  fox  and  the  jackal  are  two  different  species  of  the 
same  genus  The  latter  seems  to  be  intended  here,  for  the  jackals  go  in  troops,  and  frequent 
the  vineyards.  Their  tails  also  look  like  red  burning  torches,  or  glowing  coals.  The  species  is 
the  canis  aureus.  Samson  fought  his  battles  alone  ;  of  his  people  none  were  with  him.  He 
had  not  even  300  men  like  Gideon.  He  now  therefore  repairs  to  the  beasts  of  the  forest  for 
assistance,  and  takes  thirty  jackals  into  his  service.  His  former  act  in  slaying  the  thirty  men  at 
Ashkelou  did  not  create  much  sensation.  But  now,  when  he  sets  a  large  part  of  the  country's 
harvest  in  flames,  the  whole  nation  is  roused.  He  needed  the  animals,  for  he  could  not  set 
whole  miles  of  material  on  fire  at  once,  and  if  the  fire  had  begun  only  in  one  spot  it  might  have 
been  extinguished  before  it  had  gone  far.  But  when  150  pairs  are  started  at  once  of  the 
swiftest-looted  creatures,  frightened  at  the  fiery  torches,  and  maddened  with  pain,  and  run  like 
the  wind  through  the  half-witliered  grain,  setting  fire  in  all  directions,  alike  to  shocks  and 
standing  crops,  and  going  even  among  the  vineyards,  it  may  be  imagined  how  suddenly  and  how 
widely  spread  the  conflagration  would  appear. 

The  creatures  might  be  easily  caught,  for  they  usually  herd  together,  and  the  word  here 
"  caught "  means  taken  by  snares  or  nets  (Cant.  ii.  13  ;  Ps  Ixiii.  10  ;  Amos  iii.  5  ;  Ps.  xxxv.  8  ; 
Isa.  viii.  14  ;  Jer.  xviii.  22).  They  would  naturally  run  forward,  and  also  run  to  cover,  tliat  is 
among  the  standing  corn,  for  such  is  their  nature — unlike  dogs  that  run  along  the  road.  The 
fields  being  ripe  were  just  in  a  state  to  catch  fire.  The  bushy  tails  of  the  foxes  would  make  it 
easy  to  get  them  tied  together,  and  also  to  get  the  firebrand  supported.  It  is  to  be  rememl  ered 
too,  that  there  would  be  no  intei'ruption  to  the  running  of  the  jackals,  for  the  fields  were  not 
enclosed  by  hedges,  or  walls  of  any  kind,  but  extended  over  a  vast  surface  continuously  fur 
twenty  or  thirty  miles.     The  whole  country  had  the  appearance  of  one  vast  cornfield. 

G.  Burnt  her  and  her  father  with  fire-]  This  was  returning  revenge  on  the  authors  of  the 
provocation,  which  led  to  the  revenge  that  Samson  took.  The  object  was,  not  to  do  justice  to 
Samson  (they  were  little  in  the  mood  of  thinking  of  that),  nor  yet  to  be  revenged  on  him  by 
destroying  his  relatives,  but  it  was  to  make  a  retaliation  on  those  who  had  raised  the  strife, 
and  so  h;.d  brought  down  on  them  a  terrible  calamity.  They  were  enraged,  and  wished  to 
make  way  for  their  anger  somewhere,  but  bein-r  afraid  to  attack  the  mighty  Samson,  they 
cowardly  made  it  burst  on  the  weaker  party.  Burning  was,  among  the  Jews,  the  punishment 
inflicted  for  adultery  and  sins  of  impurity  (Gen.  xxxviii.  24  ;  Lev.  xx.  14  ;  xxi.  9).  Thus  the 
fate  which  Samson's  wife  wished  to  avoid  by  proving  false  to  her  husband,  now  at  last 
comes  down  on  her  head.  They  probably  enclosed  her  father  with  the  whole  family  in  the 
building,  and  then  set  fire  to  it,  allowing  none  to  escape. 

7.  Though  ve  have  done  this,  etcd  Meaning  :  Since  you  have  chosen  to  act  thus,  I  will  not 
cease  till  I  have  fully  avenged  myself  on  you.  He  felt  that  such  barbarity,  shown  to  those 
whom  he  was  bound  to  protect,  quite  justified  him  in  making  strong  reprisals. 

8.  Smote  them  hip  and  thigh  with  a  great  slaughter-]  i.e.,  those  who  had  done  the  cruel  act 

which  roused  his  indignation.  The  phrase,  "  hip  and  thigh,"  is  proverbial  (^"l^'*''^  Pl^) 
thigh  upon  hip  or  shank  on  thigh.  These  are  the  parts  of  a  man  where  his  chief  strength  in 
opposing  a  foe  lies,  and  these  were  smashed,  or  broken.  The  sense  is,  he  inflicted  a  most 
thorough  and  crushing  defeat. 

Went  down  and  dwelt  on  the  top  of  the  rock  Etam-l  Rather,  the  cle/t  of  the  rock.  The 
rocks  of  Palestine  were  famous  for  their  fissures  and  cavities  suitable  as  temporary  dwelling 
places,  or  refuges  in  troublous  times.  Perliaps  he  felt  himself  no  longer  safe  in  Zorah,  or  he  did 
not  wish  to  bring  tiouble  on  his  father's  house  ;  therefore  he  retired,  to  "wander  in  the  dens 
and  caves  of  the  earth,"  making  his  God  his  dwelling  place  as  well  as  his  buckler  and  shield. 
For  very  probably  he  wished  to  go  "  apart  into  a  desert  place  and  rest  awhile,"  to  reflect  on 
the  tragic  houis  of  the  past  and  gird  himself  anew,  by  prayer  and  meditation,  for  the  stern 
work  before  him  in  the  future.    The  name  Etam  has  a  rough  signification — "wild  beasts  lair," 

495 


CHAP.  XV.  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


**  yet  not  altogether  unsuitable  for  the  lion  slayer  and  jackal  conqueror."  It  may  be  the  same 
with  the  Etam,  in  1  Chron.  iv.  32.  Rocks  as  refuL,'e8  are  often  referred  to  in  scripture 
(Isa.  ii  21  ;  1  Sam.  xiii  6  ;  xxiii.  19  ;  Jud.  vi.  2  ;  Heb.  xi.  38  ;  Ps.  Ixi.  2). 

9.  Pitched  in  Judah.J  A  presumption  that  Etam  was  in  Judah.  The  blow  which  the  hero 
had  inflicted  on  them  told.  It  was  unsafe  that  such  an  enemy  should  be  allowed  to  go  at  large. 
But  after  their  dire  experience  they  feared  to  attack  him  directly.  To  his  own  countrymen, 
h  iwever,  he  might  readily  capitulate,  and,  knowing  their  spiritless  condition,  these  craven 
Philistines  thought  that,  by  opposing  the  weak,  they  might  be  able  to  bind  the  strong. 

11.  Thiee  thousand  of  the  men  of  Judah  went  down  to  the  rock  of  Etamd  This  is  one  of  the 
meanest  and  most  cowardly  passages  that  is  recorded  in  the  miserable  history  of  the  days  of  the 
Judges.  Such  a  people  deserved  the  heavy  yoke  that  lay  up(.n  them.  A  golden  opportunity 
had  occurred.  One  single  arm  had  all  but  set  them  free.  They  had  but  to  rally  rouni  the 
champion  that  had  appeared,  and  there  was  a  moral  certainty  that  the  star  of  liberty  would 
again  be  in  the  zenith.  But  they  tamely  submit  as  hacks  to  the  oppressor.  Where  the 
Philistines'  power  over  them  might  have  been  broken  for  ever,  they  pusillanimously  do 
their  bidding  to  go  and  bind  the  man  who  had  fought  so  nobly  to  set  them  free  !  Could  base 
servility  farther  go  ?  The  loss  of  a  great  battle  were  a  less  melancholy  sight  than  this  spectacle 
of  a  nation  that  had  lost  its  self  respect  and  had  given  up  hope  for  the  future  1 

Fnowest  tbou  not,  etc.]  Right-minded  men  would  have  fallen  to  the  ground  with  shame  at 
using  such  words — to  have  accused  their  greatest  benefactor,  as  if  he  had  been  guilty  of  doing 
wrong  in  striking  a  blow  for  their  liberties  at  the  risk  of  his  life — and  also  to  have  shown  a 
preference  for  hugging  their  chains,  and  submitting  to  despotic  tyranny,  rather  than  rallying 
round  their  benefactor  and  gaining  an  easy  deliverance  from  bondage.  "  But  their  heart  was 
lost  in  idolatry.  No  one  can  raise  himself  to  freedom  who  has  not  first  repented — for  penitence 
is  courage  against  self,  and  confession  before  others — and  among  the  300U  there  were  not  three 
who  did  not  still  bend  to  Baal." — {Cassdl).  (See  this  servile  spirit  referred  to  in  Sam,  Agonist). 
It  was  a  thankless  task  to  restore  such  a  people  to  independence. 

12.  We  are  come  down  to  bind  thee,  etc.l  So  these  abject  tools  of  the  uncircumcised  had 
the  effrontery  to  tell  their  Heaven-provided  saviour  (comp.  Acts  vii.  25  ;  and  John  vii.  .^). 
Truly  they  were  trying  to  purchase  peace  at  a  costly  price.  "  How  htly  might  he  have  said 
to  them,  as  Themjstocles  once  did  to  the  Athenians,  *  Are  ye  weary  of  receiving  so  many 
benefits  by  one  man  ? '  "  {Trapp).  His  submitting  to  be  bound  was  one  of  the  noblest  acts  of 
his  life.  It  was  moral  greatness  bowing  to  the  request  of  moral  meanness.  He  is  a  lion  before 
the  Philistines,  but  a  lamb  when  dealing  with  the  men  of  Judah. 

14.  When  he  came  to  Lehi  the  Philistines  shouted,  etcd  Strongly  pinioned  with  new  cords, 
the  strongest  they  could  find,  the  men  of  Judah,  lost  to  all  srnse  of  shame,  drag  their  hero 
forward,  and  deliver  him  into  the  enemy's  hand.  The  customary  shout  of  triumph  over  a 
fallen  foe  arises  (1  Sam.  xvii.  52),  but  it  awakens  the  lion-power  that  slumbered  in  that  mighty 
arm.  Instantly  the  cords  become  as  flax  that  feels  the  touch  of  fire,  and  his  fetters  drop  from 
his  hand.  "  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  comes  mightily  upon  him,"  and  now  for  destruction  to  those 
who  had  defied  the  God  of  Israel !  With  the  weight  of  an  avalanche  he  falls  on  their  masses, 
crushing  and' felling  them  to  the  ground,  while  they  are  paralysed  with  terror,  and  have  neither 
power  to  fight  nor  to  flee.  Any  weapon  will  suit  the  hand,  wiien  there  is  such  force  of  purpose. 
The  jawbone  of  an  ass  recently  fallen  is  that  which  comes  first  to  hand.  This  he  seizes,  and  if 
it  had  been  the  sword  of  Michael,  it  could  hardly  have  done  deadlier  execution.  They  are 
mowed  down  in  crowds,  as  the  grass  goes  down  before  the  sickle.  In  an  incredibly  short  space 
of  time,  a  thousand  men  fall  to  the  ground  never  more  to  rue  ;  while  the  victor  exclaims — 

With  the  jawbone  of  an  ass. 

Heaps  upon  heaps 

(One  heap,  two  heaps). 

With  the  jawbone  of  an  ass 

I  have  felled  a  thousand  men* 

(1  Sam.  xviiL  7),  (Dent  xxxiL  80). 

17.  Bamath-Lechi.]  The  hill  of  the  jawbone. 

18.  He  called  on  the  Lord.]  Samson  was  a  man  that  went  to  God  with  his  difficulties,  and 
sought  relief  by  prayer. 

He  was  sore  athirst.]  Being  summer  weather,  and  therefore  very  hot.  He  was  exhausted 
also  from  the  long  continuance  of  the  conflict  (2  Sam.  xxiii.  10). 

Thou  has  given  this  great  deliverance  into  the  hand  of  thy  servant]   He  here  notices  4  things 
(1.)  Thou  has  done  it,  not  his  qw^  strong  arm.     (2.)  Xt  is  a  ^reat  deliverance.    Samson  was  in 
496 


DOMILETIC  COMMEISIAR  Y :  JUDGES,  chap.  xv. 


a  critical  Bitnation,  when  bound  with  those  cords,  and  hosts  of  enemies  all  around  him.  Besides 
it  was  the  deliverance  of  God's  name  from  disliononr.  For  it  might  be  read — "deliverance  by 
the  hand  of,  etc."  (3.)  He  owns  himself  God's  servant,  as  the  "  saviour  "  of  His  people.  (4.)  He 
acknowledges  himself  as  liable  to  perish  in  the  midst  of  victory — to  die  of  thirst.  He  prays 
thus  all  alone,  for  he  is  deserted  by  the  men  of  Judah.  Every  one  of  the  poltroons  betakes 
himself  to  f^iglifc,  though  their  diliverance  was  now  more  assured  than  ever  if  they  would  only 
follow  the  leader  God  had  sent  them  ;  Ihey  skulk  every  one  of  them  behind  backs,  and  leave 
Samson  to  do  as  he  best  can  for  hiniself  (Ps.  cxxiv). 

19.  God  clave  a  hollow  that  was  in  the  jaw,  etc.]  not  the  jaw  of  the  ass,  but  the  place  Lehi — 
rather  Lechi.  The  Hebrew  word  Makte.^h,  the  Kabbins  say,  means  the  socket  of  the  ass's  tooth, 
in  whijh  the  tooth  is  fixed  ;  but  the  spring  is  said  still  to  exist  for  a  long  period — "  it  is  in 
Lechi  unto  this  day."  The  reference  then  must  be  to  the  place  called  Lechi.  God  made  a 
hollow  at  that  place,  and  a  spring  to  issue  from  it,  just  as  was  done  at  Horeb  and  Kadesh 
(Ex.  xvii.  6  ;  Num.  xx.  8,  11).  The  name  given  to  the  spring  was  Enhakkore,  which  signifies, 
the  well  of  him  that  cried,  which  is  at  Lechi.  This  spring  was  known  as  Samson's  spring,  even 
in  the  time  of  Jerome  and  others  in  the  7th,  12tb,  and  14th  centuries.  The  name  Maktesh 
(mortar)  is  mentioned  as  a  place  in  Zeph.  i.  11. 

20.  Samson  judged  20  years.)  Some  think  that  now,  after  this  great  exploit,  he  began  to 
be  acknowledged  as  judge  \_Trapp],  for  he  was  yet  young.  The  larger  part  of  the  twenty 
years  is  passed  over  in  silence.  It  is  only  when  nearing  the  termination  of  his  course,  that 
we  again  hear  of  him  in  ch.  xvi. 

EOMILETIC  REMARKS.— Terses  1-20. 

Human  Passion  and  Divine  Purposes. 

X.  The  treachery  of  the  wicked's  coxnpanionshipt 

Though  filled  with  anger  at  the  momeDt,  Samson  was  not  wanting  in 
the  principle  ot  fidelity  to  engagements.  It  may  have  been  due  in  part 
to  his  attachment  to  her  whom  he  had  selected  to  be  his  wife,  but  also, 
in  part,  we  think,  to  liis  sense  of  the  obligation  under  which  he  had  come, 
that  after  his  anger  was  over  he  wished  to  have  a  reconciliation.  On  his 
side,  there  was  the  working  of  conscience,  as  well  as  natural  affection.  He 
soon  found  there  was  no  such  feeling  on  the  other  side.  Where  there  is 
no  fear  of  the  true  God  there  is  no  sense  of  responsibility,  and  consequently 
no  binding  moral  principle.  The  foundation  for  good  morality  does  not 
exist,  and  no  confidence  can  be  entertained  in  any  kind  of  dealing.  A  man 
no  longer  does  a  thing  because  it  is  right  to  be  done,  but  only  acts  from 
self  interest  or  from  convenience.  Thus  every  thing  becomes  loose,  and  the 
very  idea  of  moral  obligation  beci-mes  lost.  To  keep  faith,  even  in  so  binding 
a  case  as  the  marriage  contract,  was  a  thing  which  had  no  place  in  a  Philistine 
bosom.  And  so  the  covenant  between  Samson  and  his  wife  was  put  aside 
without  ceremony  the  moment  that  he  turned  his  back,  both  father  and 
daughter  taking  it  very  easily.  The  companion  of  the  bridegrnom  being  agreed 
himself  to  stand  as  the  bridegroom,  the  daughter  was  givin  to  him  to  be  his 
wife,  and  Samson  was  forgotten.  Examples  of  treachery— Laban  (Gen.  xxix.  23), 
and  Gen.  xxxi.  41)— Saul  (1  Sam.  xxv.  44) — Joab  (2  Sam.  iii.  27  ;  xx.  9, 10) — 
Absalom  (2  Sam.  xvi.  13) — Judas  (Matt.  xxvi.  13). 

ZZ.  God's  mercy  is  sometimes  seen  in  preventing*  our  wishes 
from  heing  carried  out. 

Apart   from    the   sinful   character  of  the  act,  it  was  a  great  folly  for  an 
Israelite  to  wed  with  a  Philistine.     It  was  laying  the  foundation  for  perpetual 
discord   and  vexation.      For  soon,   in  this  case,  would  the  bridegroom  have- 
discovered  that  he  had  taken  a  viper  to  his   bosom.      Nothing  could   have 
gone  on  satisfactorily  in  such  a  household.     "  What  concord  hath  Christ  with 

I  I  497 


■jt 


CHAP.  XV.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


Belial  ?  What  agreement  hath  the  temple  of  God  with  idols  ? "  Samson  was 
indeed  storing  up  misery  for  himself  all  the  days  of  his  natural  life.  Simply 
on  the  score  of  looking  after  his  own  domestic  interests,  he  could  not  have  taken 
a  step  more  destructrive  of  all  home-peace  and  comfort  than  to  have  formed  a 
conn$ction  so  utterly  incongruous,  and  so  certain  to  poison  every  spring  of 
happiness.     It  was  "  a  thorn  in  the  flesh  "  which  only  death  could  extract. 

But  God  saved  him  from  his  infatuation.  The  means  employed  seemed  to 
him  to  be  a  series  of  disasters,  but  they  delivered  him  in  the  end  from  disasters 
tenfold  greater.  And  so  it  is  in  all  God's  dealings  with  His  people  in  this 
world.  As  a  father,  who  is  wise  in  his  kindness,  He  oftentimes  refuses  to  give 
that  which  they  passionately  covet,  or  seem  to  be  justly  entitled  to,  because  in 
the  long  run  it  would  be  to  them  serious  injury  (Mark  x.  35-45).  Moses 
earnestly  wished  to  get  his  people  delivered  from  .slavery,  but  it  was  not  God's 
time  ;  and  he  had  to  flee  for  his  own  life  (Ex.  ii.  11-15).  Joseph,  no  doubt, 
was  delighted  to  continue  in  his  father's  house,  and  felt  it  the  greatest  misery 
to  lose  his  indulgent  parental  kindness  ;  but  God  saw  something  better  for  him 
in  the  future,  though  the  way  by  which  he  was  led  seemed  to  Joseph  the  reverse 
of  kind  (Gen.  xl.  14,  15  ;  Ps.  cv.  18).  Yet  every  step  of  the  way  was  right, 
for  it  was  necessary  to  wean  him  from  the  character  of  being  a  petted  child,  and 
lead  him  to  acquire  the  sterner  virtues  which  adversity  alone  can  teach.  We 
still  are  ever  striving  after  an  easier  life,  whert3  there  would  be  fewer  sacrifices 
to  make,  less  of  what  is  disagreeable  to  flesli  and  blood,  and  more  of  the  good 
things  of  this  world  put  into  our  cup.  But  our  Heavenly  Father  says  it  must 
not  be.  Not  from  indifference  to  our  interests,  but  in  mercy  to  our  real  well- 
being,  He  prevents  our  wishes  from  being  carried  out ;  and  so  He  defeats  our 
plans  and  disappoints  our  expectations.     He  saves  us  from  ourselves. 

ZZI.   Reveng-e  is  at  once  a  mistake  and  a  sin. 

It  is  an  evil  omen  that  there  should  be  such  a  ready  tendency  in  the  human 
heart  to  retaliation  and  revenge.  We  see  it  in  the  case  of  Samson,  as  well  as 
in  the  Philistines.  Tiie  shameful  treatment  he  had  received  awakened  in  him 
a  purpose  of  revenge  against  the  whole  tribe.  Fur  by  words,  looks,  whispers 
and  inuendos,  it  seemed  as  if  there  were  a  general  plotting  against  him,  so  that 
he  felt  the  ground  was  not  safe  under  his  feet.  While  he  stood  alone,  receiving 
scandalous  treatment  on  the  one  side,  thev  were  instinctively  drawing  together 
in  conspiracy  against  him  on  the  other.  Filled  with  the  spirit  of  revenge,  he 
resolved  to  make  reprisals  on  the  whole  class,  and  accordingly  used  means  to 
destroy  the  whole  year's  produce  of  food,  for  many  miles  round  the  district 
where  he  then  was. 

This  was  wrong  ;  for  it  is  always  wrong  to  cherish  any  unhallowed  passion  in 
the  bosom.  We  are  expressly  required  to  "  put  off  all  anger,  wrath,  and 
malice."  These  feelings  are  excited  within  us  by  the  wicked  one,  whereas  the 
Spirit  of  Christ  requires  us  "  to  pray  for  them  that  despitefully  use  us."  It  is 
also  an  express  command  that  we  are  "  not  to  avenge  ourselves,"  but  to  leave 
that  work  in  the  hand  of  God — that  we  are  rather  bo  pursue  the  course  of 
**  overcoming  evil  with  good." 

This  contest  was  also  unwise.  It  was  sure  to  provoke  retaliation.  The  com- 
munity were  roused  to  indignation,  and  with  burning  hearts  inquired  for  the 
perpetrator.  The  story  was  soon  told.  But  they  were  afraid  to  touch  the 
person  of  him  who  had  done  them  so  grievous  an  injury,  and  therefore  they 
vented  their  fury  against  those  who  had  goaded  him  on  to  do  it.  The  faithless 
wife  and  her  father  they  burned  with  fire.  This  act  anew  kindled  the  flames  of 
resentment  in  the  breast  of  Samson,  and  furnished  a  justification  for  a  new 
49d 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES,  ohap.  X7 


slaughter.  "  He  smote  them  hip  and  th'gh  with  a  great  slaughter."  Cromwell 
in  like  manner  said  of  the  enemy  before  his  Ironsi  ies,  *'  God  gave  them  as 
stubble  to  our  swords."  So  it  was  now  ;  he  mowed  them  down  as  the  grass. 
**  They  perished  as  the  fat  of  lambs/' 

The  spirit  of  revenge  is  against  the  whole  character  of  Christianity.  "  I  send 
you  forth  as  lambs  in  the  midst,  of  wolves."  We  are  "  not  to  allow  the  sun  to 
go  down  upon  our  wrath."  "  Anger  resteth  in  the  bosom  of  fools."  '*  Forgive 
not  till  seven  times,  but  until  seventy  times  seven."  We  are  to  put  off  "hatred, 
variance,  emulations,  stri'e,  seditions,  envyings"  and  to  put  on  "goodness, 
gentleness,  meekness."  We  are  indeed  "  nob  to  render  railing  for  railing."  We 
are  to  "  give  no  offence,  neither  to  the  Jews  nor  the  Gentiles,  nor  to  the  church  of 
God,"  and  "  if  it  be  possible,  as  much  as  lieth  in  us,  we  are  to  live  peaceably 
with  all  men."  "  When  a  quarrel  is  begun,  in  the  progress  of  the  contention, 
there  soon  come  to  be  faults  on  both  sides,  evil  surmisings,  undue  animosities, 
mutual  reflections,  indecent  sallies  of  passion,  and  scandals  multiplied,  and  the 
name  of  God  is  blasphemed."     \^Evans.'\ 

ZV.  Men's  sins  are  often  overruled  to  fulfil  the  holy  purposes 
of  God. 

Samson  was  again  and  again  roused  to  take  revenge  on  the  enemies  of  his 
people  on  account  of  their  detestable  conduct.  But  revenge  is  an  uniioly 
feeling,  and  cannot  be  approved  of  by  the  Holy  One  of  Israel.  Yet  that 
appears  to  have  been  the  principal  motive  that  urged  him  on  in  almost  every 
one  of  his  memorable  deeds.  These  deeds  were  notwithstanding  made  use  of  to 
accomplish  the  high  purposes  of  the  God  of  Israel  in  punishing  the  oppressors 
of  His  people.  Samson  himself  seemed  to  realize  this  and  felt  that  he  was 
justified  in  proceeding  so  often  against  the  enemies  of  his  people  and  his  God, 
because  they  were  really  marked  out  for  doom,  and  he  was  the  appointed 
executioner  of  that  doom.  Thus  there  was  ever  a  mixture  of  motives  in  all 
that  Samson  did.  He  was  constantly  giving  way  to  unhallowed  passion,  while 
God  was  ever  making  use  of  him  to  glorify  Himself  by  bringing  H's  people 
nearer  to  deliverance. 

So  it  ever  is  more  or  less,  all  through  the  history  of  this  troubled  and  sinful 
world.  God  is  ever  **  making  use  of  the  wrath  of  man  to  praise  Him."  He 
makes  use  of  one  wicked  ruler  to  be  a  scourge  to  another,  *'  though  he  means 
it  not  so,  neither  in  his  heart  doth  he  think  so."  For  many  centuries  has  God 
allowed  the  history  of  mankind  so  to  proceed  ;  the  wicked  actions  of  individuals 
and  of  nations  being  employed  contrary  to  men's  intentions  or  wishes,  to  serve 
the  high  and  holy  purposes  of  Heaven. 

V.  God's  wonderful  forbearance  in  saving  Kis  people  from,  their 
infatuation. 

We  have  noticed  above  the  mournful  apathy  into  which  the  men  of  Judah 
had  sunk,  that,  though  a  golden  opportunity  was  set  before  them,  they  had  not 
the  heart  to  strike  a  blow  for  their  deliverance  from  the  yoke  of  the  oppressor. 
On  the  contrary,  they  seem  so  much  in  love  with  their  chains,  that  they  find 
fault  with  their  Liberator,  when  he  sets  before  them  an  open  door,  and  bids 
them  go  free.  They  sell  their  champion  to  secure  a  false  peace  with  the 
enemy.  To  such  a  depth  of  baseness  do  those  sink  who  have  cast  off  their 
God  I  They  had  become  **  sottish  children,  a  people  of  no  understanding." 
**  They  were  stricken  but  they  did  not  grieve,  they  were  consumed  but  they 
refused  to  receive  correction."  **  Tliey  had  a  revolting  and  a  rebellious  heart." 
They  were  not  only  absolutely  helpless  in  themselves,  but  they  had  become 
objects  of  loathing  to  those  who  would  try  to  lift  them  up. 

II  2  499 


CHAP.  XV.  HOMILETIO  COMMEJSTARY :  JUDGES. 


Yet  amid  this  extreme  provocation,  God  had  compassion  on  them,  and  sent  a 
deliverer  to  fight  their  battle  singlehanded,  not  only  unaided  by  a  sinsjle  man  of 
them,  but  even  in  the  face  of  their  base  treachery  to  himself!  And  why? 
"  For  My  name's  sake  will  I  defer  mine  anger."  "  I  had  pity  for  Mine  holy  name. 
I  do  not  this  for  your  sakes,  0  house  of  Israel,  but  for  Mine  holy  name's  sake. 
1  will  sanctify  My  great  name  "  (isa.  xlviii.  9  ;  Ezek.  xxxvi.  21-23).  How  many 
still  will  rather  "  lie  down  in  their  shame "  than  seek  either  cleansing  or 
elevation  !  They  will  not  submit  to  the  trouble  and  sacrifice  necessary  for  their 
purification.  How  many  lose  their  souls,  because  they  dread  anything  like  a 
spiritual  cataclysm  taking  place,  in  order  to  their  passing  from  death  into 
life  ?  And  even  God's  own  people  have  their  sanctification  greatly  retarded, 
because  while  they  cannot  carry  on  that  work  without  God,  He  will  not  carry 
it  on  without  them  (Piiil.  ii.  12,  13). 

"  God's  most  wonderful  attribute  is  His  patience."  His  interference  at  all 
for  the  redemption  of  such  a  people  as  this  was  owing  to  these  causes — (1.)  lo 
illustrate  by  a  strong  case  how  far  His  mercy  could  go.  (2.)  Be  had  respect  to 
IJis  covenants  made  to  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  ana  their  seed  for  ever 
(Gen.  xvii.  7  ;  xxvi.  3,  4  ;  xxviii.  13,  14.  (3.)  He  was  moved  in  answer  to 
prayer.  For  there  still  was  a  handful  of  believing  people  left  in  the  land,  who 
"  kept  not  silence  and  gave  him  no  rest,  etc."  (4  )  He  wished  to  preserve  to 
Himself  a  people  on  the  earth — Apply  this  principle  to  the  spiritual  Lrael. 

VZ.  To  be  crushed  wltb  oppression  Is  unfavourable  to  the 
development  of  pious  principle. 

This  is  but  another  side  of  the  same  facts,  but  one  which  must  not  be  over- 
looked. The  men  of  Judah  beinj?  so  near  to  the  country  of  the  Philistines  were 
more  harassed  than  the  other  tribes.  Having  been  for  several  years  under  the 
heel  of  the  oppressor,  they  had  lost  all  heart,  their  spirit  was  broken,  and  they 
had  sunk  into  despair.  They  had  become  demoralised.  Their  power  of  resis- 
tance was  gone,  and  they  submitted  like  sheep  to  their  fate.  Even  Samson's 
noble  deeds  awakened  no  ]tatriotisin  in  their  hearts,  nor  fired  them  with  any 
impulse  of  gratitude.  Theirs  was  "  the  sorrow  that  worketh  death."  A  parallel 
case  of  heart  breaking  under  bondage  we  have  in  Ex.  vi.  9. 

Nor  is  it  at  any  time  other  than  a  disadvantaf^e  for  the  cultivation  of  a  man's 
religion,  that  he  should  be  heart-broken  with  adversity.  "  Oppression  makes  a 
wise  man  mad."  When  the  spirit  is  crushed  out  of  him,  it  makes  him  callous, 
and  dead  to  all  the  better  feelings  of  his  nature.  It  will  not  do  to  break  the 
mainspring.  Christianity  indeed  exerts  a  recuperative  and  counterbalancing 
influence  under  any  circumstances,  but  only  when  faith  is  called  into  exercise. 
Then,  indeed,  "  when  troubles  abound,  consolations  do  more  abound,"  and  it  is 
possible  even  to  **  glory  in  tribulations."  But  we  must  not  lose  hope,  and  allow 
ourselves  to  be  drifted  passively  with  the  tide.  Duty  is  not  to  be  performed 
mechanically,  and  without  spirit,  but  always  with  trust  in  God,  that  He  wdl 
*'  make  all  things  work  together  for  our  good."  To  be  even  sorely  afilicted  is 
often  a  most  healthful  discipline,  and  is  made  use  of  to  teach  some  of  the  best 
lessons  of  Christian  training,  but  it  must  always  be  on  the  basis  of  a  strong  and 
healthy  exercise  of  faith  (Ezek.  xxxvii.  11;  Isa.  xl.  27-31;  Ps.  Ixxvii.  7-9; 
xlii.  5,  11 ;  Job  xxiii.  8-10;  Ps.  cxliii.  3-8). 

VZX.  The  Destroyer  of  the  Church's  enemies  is  yet  the  mildest 
of  friends  to  his  own  people. 

It  would  have  been  alike  easy  for  Saujson  to  have  suntten  the  men  of  Judah, 
as  well  as  his  Philistine  foes.    But  they  were  his  couutrymeu,  and  they  were 
600 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  :  JUDGES.  chap,  a  v. 


God's  chosen  people.  He  both  felt  that,  he  must  not  lift  a  finger  against  the 
Lord's  an«  iiited,  and  also  his  heart  was  too  much  in  sympathy  with  his  down- 
tr(dden  Conn  try-men  to  think  of  hurting  a  hair  of  their  heads,  however  much 
he  might  abhor  their  conduct.  So  did  a  greater  and  a  trner  than  Samson  feel, 
when  He  l<K)ked  on  the  burdens,  and  heard  the  groanings  of  those  dear  to  Him 
as  I  lie  apple  of  His  eye.  Though  they  listened  not  to  the  message  sent.  He 
still  went  on  with  the  work  of  deliverance  (Isa.  Ixiii.  7-9).  *'  Though  I  make 
an  end  of  other  nations,  yet  not  of  thee"  etc.  (Jer.  xxx.  11  ;  Zeph.  iii.  17; 
Ps.  xci.  11-13  ;  Matt.  xiii.  30,  41-43  ;  2  Thess.  i.  6-10). 


VZZX>  The  cruel  intentiosB  of  the  wicked  often  lead  to  their  own 
grreater  punishment. 

Samson's  enemies  intended  first  to  bind  him,  then  to  torture  him,  and  finally 
to  put  him  to  a  cruel  death.  This  we  mav  suppose,  because  when  he  did  fall 
into  their  hands,  that  was  what  they  actually  did.  But  it  turned  out  to  them 
according  to  the  adage — *'evil  be  to  them  that  evil  think."  They  got  their 
enemy  into  their  hands,  and  got  him  fast  bound,  while  their  hearts  were  full 
of  all  manner  of  malicious  thoughts  against  him.  But  they  forgot  that 
mysterious  force  that  gathered  round  him  direct  from  his  God,  which,  in  a 
moment  unloosed  his  fetters,  and  left  his  enemies  defenceless,  and  caught  in 
the  very  act  of  meditating  vengeance.  With  their  guilt  staring  them  in  the 
face,  they  fell  before  him  in  heaps,  and  a  greater  carnage  took  place  among 
their  ranks  than  had  ever  yet  been  known  (Ps.  Iviii.  7,  cxviii.  12). 

Those  whom  God  seeds  to  do  any  special  work  for  Him  have,  on  that  very 
account,  a  sacred  character,  so  that  any  injury  done  to  their  persons  He  counts 
as  done  to  Himself  (Num.  xii.  8).  It  is  the  same  with  those  whom  God  chooses 
to  represent  him  before  the  world,  whether  it  be  a  numerous  people,  or  only  a 
handful.  They  are  under  the  Divine  protection,  and  woe  be  to  those  who 
rough  handle  the  people  on  whom  the  jealous  God  sets  His  seal !  If  they  sin, 
and  sin  heinously  against  Him,  that  is  a  matter  for  dealing  between  Him  and 
them ;  but  so  long  as  He  does  not  cast  them  off",  all  around  are  warned  to 
respect  His  sacred  mark  upon  them.  "  He  that  toucheth  you  toucheth  the 
apple  of  mine  eye  "  (Zech.  ii.  8  ;  i.  14,  15 ;  Ps.  cv.  14,  15).  Hence  the  many 
retributions  with  which  God  in  His  Providence  visited  the  nations,  who,  from 
time  to  time,  meditated  evil  against  Israel  (Ezek.  xxvi.  2-4  ;  xxxvi.  1-12  ; 
Jer.  xxxi.  5,  6,  10,  11,  24,  35,  49  ;  1.  17-20,  33,  34).  And  now  the  Phihstines 
are  so  visited.  The  massacre  that  took  place  on  this  occasion,  was  really  a 
vindicating  of  God's  great  name  against  those  who  trod  in  the  dust  the  people 
that  were  so  dear  to  Him.  It  is  indeed  a  fulfilling  of  what  He  has  said  should 
take  place  (Ps.  xxxiv.  21  ;  xxxvii.  12-14  ;  xxxi  v.  7).  The  issue  which  these 
men  of  blood  were  preparing  for  God's  servant  came  to  themselves  (Ps.  vii. 
15,  16).     The  triumph  of  the  wicked  is  short. 

XX.  When  God  is  helpings  us,  the  meanest  weapon  will  overcome 
opposition. 

When  we  are  really  doing  a  work  for  God,  either  to  speak  a  word  for  His 
honour,  or  perform  an  act,  or  fulfil  a  commission.  He  will  not  "  send  us  a 
warfare  on  our  own  charges."  He  will  always,  on  the  spot,  and  at  the  moment, 
find  means  to  serve  our  purpose — the  right  word  to  be  spoken,  a  suitable 
weapon  to  employ,  or  free  scope  for  the  discharge  of  duty.  The  rudest 
instrument  will  suffice  to  do  great  things  when  God's  hand  is  engaged.  "  The 
victory  lies  not  in  the  weapon,  nor  in  the  arm,  but  in  the  Spirit  of  God  who 
urields  the  weapon  in  the  arm,     0  God!   if  the  means  be  weak  Thou  art 

501 


CHAP.  XV.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES. 


Btrong  I  "  By  the  mouth  of  a  fisherman— a  man  taken  at  random,  we  mi^ht 
almost  say,  at  any  rate  without  any  care  to  use  the  naturally  best  qualified 
human  instrument — a  greater  result  was  achieved  on  the  day  of  Pentecost, 
than  on  any  day  of  the  whole  course  of  the  Samsonian  career.  And  through 
similar  instruments,  entirely  wanting  in  human  wisdom  and  human  eloquence, 
within  a  few  years,  the  strongest  fastnesses  of  Satan's  kingdom  in  this  world 
were  shaken,  and  every  throne  was  made  to  totter  to  the  fall. 

It  is  the  old  story  of  the  blowing  with  rams'  horns,  and  the  strong  walls  of 
Jericho  fell  down  flat.  David,  the  stripling,  killed  Goliath  the  giant  with  a  sling 
and  a  stone.  Moses  brought  the  ten  mighty  plagues  on  Egypt  through  the 
stretching  forth  of  the  shepherd's  rod.  And  the  mightiest  throne  ever  erected 
in  this  world,  that  on  which  the  Prince  of  Darkness  sits,  received  an  ii  recoverable 
blow  from  the  use  of  the  most  despicable  of  all  weapons — a  cross  !  (Col.  ii.  15). 
Sometimes  the  plainest  truth,  stated  in  the  boldest  form,  by  an  uncultured 
person,  pierces  through  armour  of  triple  brass  with  irresistible  effect.  The 
honest,  unpretending  spirit  in  wliich  a  thing  is  said,  tells  more  mightily  on  the 
heart  and  conscience  than  all  the  decorations  of  hmguage,  or  all  the  logic  of 
the  schools.  The  real  source  of  the  power  that  belongs  to  the  gospel  of  Christ 
lies  partly  in  the  peculiar  character  of  the  truth  contained  in  that  gospel,  and 
partly  in  the  presence  of  the  living  Spirit  of  God  going  along  with  that  truth 
to  make  it  effectual  (Zech.  iv.  6  ;  Hag.  ii.  5  ;  Mark  xvi.  '20  ;  Acts  ii.  47  ; 
John  xvi.  14  ;  1  Cor.  ii.  4  ;  \  Thf  ss.  i.  6  ;  Ps.  viii.  2).  God  puts  the  treasure 
into  an  "earthen  vessel  "  (2  Cor.  iv.  7).  Better  serve  Him  with  the  jaw  of  an 
ass  than  not  serve  Him  at  all. 

X>  The  strong'est  as  well  as  the  weakest  are  dependent  on  faith 
and  prayer. 

Samson,  with  all  his  herculean  powers,  was  yet  dependent  on  the  ordinary 
laws  of  nature  like  other  men.  Great  and  continued  exertion  in  a  warm 
atmosphere  led  to  the  miseries  of  thirst,  and  these  on  this  occasion  were  so 
great  as  to  endanger  life.  Precipitately,  he  fell  from  a  state  of  superhuman 
strength  to  a  state  of  absolute  weakness,  so  much  so,  that  he  felt  as  if  the  gift 
of  life  itself  were  about  to  be  taken  away.  Earnestly  he  cried  unto  the  Lord, 
and  confessed  his  dependence  as  if  he  had  been  the  weakest  man  in  Israel.  He 
had  the  witness  in  himself  that  the  power  he  exercised  was  not  his  own,  but  a 
talent  given  him  to  occupy  for  his  Lord.  It  served  the  purpose  of  a  "  thorn 
in  the  flesh,"  to  have  this  great  thirst,  for  it  prevented  his  being  "exalted 
above  measure."  Now,  all  his  thoughts  are  of  prayer  and  of  faith.  It  is 
believing  pra}  er.  '1  his  implies  :  (1.)  Trust  in  God  as  his  own  God.  Were  God 
his  enemy  he  could  not  trust  Him.  He  was  his  father's  God.  He  himself  had 
I  een  the  child  of  a  godly  upbringing,  and  had  made  choice  of  Jehovah  in 
jtreference  to  all  the  gods  of  the  heathen.  He  was  reconciled  to  God,  and  amid 
all  its  oscillations  his  heart  still  clave  to  Him,  (2.)  Trust  in  Him  as  the  God 
of  the  promises.  The  all-inclusive  promise,  '*  1  will  be  a  God  to  thee  " — was 
sure  to  every  true-hearted  Israelite.  Also  such  individual  promises  as,  "  I  will 
not  fail  thee" — "  I  will  keep  thee  in  all  places  whither  thou  goest  " — *'  as  thy 
days  so  shall  thy  strength  be,"  etc.  (3.)  Trust  in  Him  on  account  of  past  help. 
Otten  had  the  Spirit  of  God  come  mightily  upon  him,  and  tlirou^di  Him  great 
deeds  had  been  done.  It  was  a  proof  that  God  was  with  him.  Having  begun 
to  bless,  he  would  continue  to  bless.  For  ''  Mis  gifts  and  calling  ae  without 
any  change  of  purpose "  (Rom.  xi.  29  ;  Ps  cxv.  12).  And  now,  on  this 
occasion,  he  had  obtained  the  most  signal  of  all  the  proofs  of  the  Divine  favour. 
(4.)  It  was  in  God's  service  that  he  came  by  his  weakness.  God  has  enga<.ed  to 
uphold  His  servant  whom  He  may  call  to  do  His  work  (Isa.  xlii.l ;  xli.  9,  10, 
602 


HOMILETTC  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES.  chap.  xv. 


13-15;  2  Cor.  i.  8-10).  The  men  of  faith  "out  of  weakness  were  made 
strong  "  (1  Kings  xix.  4-18).  (5.)  To  preserve  the  honour  of  God's  name  is 
the  argument  he  pleads.  Let  it  not  be  said,  that  God  would  allow  His  servant 
to  fall  into  the  hands  of  tl  e  uncircnmcised.  'i'he  glory  of  the  triumph  was 
altoL'ether  due  to  God,  and  it  His  servant  should  fall  while  engaged  in  the 
work,  it  would  take  away  from  the  perfection  of  the  triumph.  Gideon  and  his 
300  men,  though  "  faint,"  were  yet  enabled  '*  to  pursue,"  till  their  work  was 
dcn^^,  and  not  a  man  was  lost.  Nor  do  we  hear  of  any  loss  among  Barak's 
10,000  men.     "  The  Lord  is  a  rock,  and  His  work  is  perfect." 

XZ.  God  will  not  fall  tbe  man  of  prayer. 

Samson's  cry  was  heard.  He  had  very  likely  continued  for  some  time  in 
prayer,  and,  what  is  recorded  in  a  single  verse  is  simply  the  substance  of  the 
prayer,  as  is  the  usual  manner  of  the  Scripture  record.  The  prayer  was  answered 
speedily,  for  that  was  necessary,  if  it  should  be  answered  at  all.  It  seemed 
consistent,  that  when  God  had  given  him  His  Spirit  to  enable  him  to  conquer 
the  Philistine,  He  should  also  **  continue  His  loving  kindness,"  by  granting  that 
supply  of  water  in  a  dry  place,  which  was  needed  for  the  preservation  of  his  life. 
That  was  given  miraculously,  by  the  opening  of  a  fountain  where  none  naturally 
existed,  in  Lechi — the  place  so  called,  not  in  the  jaw  itself — and  a  spring  issued 
from  it  as  in  the  rock  at  Horeb  (Isa.  xli.  17,  18).  "  Is  any  thing  too  hard  for 
the  Lord  ?  "  In  the  Book  of  Psalms  is  any  class  of  the  testimonies  of  Christian 
experience  more  frequent  than  this — that  God  always,  sooner  or  later,  heard  the 
believing  prayer  of  the  writer  ?  Why  does  He  take  to  Himself  the  name  of  the 
"God  of  Jacob,"  but  because  He  loves  the  man  of  praver  and  delights  to  hear  his 
cry  (Isa.  xlv.  19,  Ps.  xxxiv.  4-6,  J  5, 17 ;  xx.  1).  He  has  already  givei  up  Hi^  own 
Son  for  such  an  one,  and  that  gift  being  received,  the  receiver  is  henceforth  a 
sacred  object  in  the  eye  of  the  giver,  so  that  no  measure  of  blessing  is  reckoned 
too  high  to  bestow  on  one,  who  is  so  intimately  allied  to  the  Son  of  God.  Hence 
the  great  liberty  which  sush  an  one  may  use  in  prayer.  Also  the  gift  of  Christ 
when  received  opens  the  way  for  the  bestowment  of  all  other  blessings.  Every 
possible  obstacle  to  the  outflow  of  Divine  blessing  is  removed,  so  that  now  it  is 
most  glorifying  to  God  to  answer  prayer.  A  sinful  man,  though  in  himself  an 
object  of  abhorrence  to  God,  yet  receiving  Christ  as  God's  gift,  becomes  one 
with  Him,  and  is  "accepted  in  the  Beloved."  It  is  then  a  righteous  thing  to 
bestow  on  him  all  manner  of  blessing  for  Christ's  sake. 

XZZ.  Great  deliverances  should  ever  be  g-ratefully  remembered. 

It  is  singular  how  any  should  depreciate  Samson  at  this  point,  by  saying  that 
he  showed  no  gratitude  for  the  mercy  that  was  exhibited  to  him.  "  He 
erected,"  they  say,  "  no  altar,  he  offered  no  sacrifice,  but  forgetful  of  praise 
and  thanksgiving,  and  assuming  the  honour  of  the  conquest  to  himself,  he 
chanted  a  hymn  of  victory  and  a  poem  of  praise  to  himself,  and  consecrated  the 
place  to  his  own  name."  True,  Noah  built  an  altar  and  offered  sacrifices  after 
escaping  from  the  waters  of  the  flood — a  most  appropriate  thing  to  do,  for  the 
occasion  was  that  of  a  heavy  visitation  of  the  Divine  wrath  on  account  of  sin. 
Jacob  at  Bethel  erected  no  altar,  but  he  set  up  a  pillar,  and  he  made  a  vow, 
which  showed  his  deep  sense  of  obligation  for  benefits  conferred  ;  and  this  too 
was  appropriate.  Abraham,  after  being  spared  the  sacrifice  of  his  son,  gave  a 
significant  name  to  the  place,  and  this  was  all  he  did  by  way  of  commemoration. 
For  the  sacrifice  of  the  ram  on  the  altar  had  nothing  to  do  with  a  testimony  of 
thanksgiving  or  commemoration.  So  it  was  with  Hagar  (Gen.  xvi.  13,  14), 
with  Samuel  (1  Sam.  vii.  12),  with  Jacob  repeatedly  (Gen.  xxxii.  2,  30). 

603 


CHAP.  XV.  110 MILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES 


In  like  manner,  Samson  expressed  the  gratitude  of  his  heart,  by  giving  to  the 
place  of  his  deliverance  the  expressive  name  of  Enhakkore — meaning,  the  spring 
of  him  who  cried  in  earnest  prayer  to  God  and  was  heard.  Who  can  doubt 
that  here  there  was  both  thanksgiving  and  commemoration  ?  How  many  new 
names  of  consecration  have  we  given  to  certain  spots  in  our  earthly  pilgrimage 
which  have  been  to  us  as  the  house  of  God  and  the  gate  of  heaven.  Can  we 
recall  a  turn  of  the  road,  where  it  seemed  as  if  the  angels  of  God  met  us,  and 
we  were  comforted  and  cheered  beyond  expression — far  more  than  compensated 
for  the  hard,  gloomy,  scowling  countenances  of  many  a  Laban  or  Esau  that  we 
had  to  meet  with  in  our  wanderings  ?  Can  we  call  to  mind  some  remarkable 
answer  given  to  earnest  wrestling  prayer,  by  which  we  obtained  deliverance 
from  some  threatened  danger  that  we  thought  it  impossible  to  survive  ?  Or  can 
we  remember  some  season  of  Divine  communion,  when  our  thoughts  and 
feelings  were  raised  far  above  the  world,  when  we  were  alone  with  God,  and  felt 
strongly  the  hallowing  influence  of  His  presence,  and  when  Jesus  talked  with 
us  by  the  way  and  opened  up  the  scriptures — when,  indeed,  the  atmosphere 
around  us  was  so  pure,  thao  it  seemed  as  if  all  sin  had  already  disappeared,  and 
we  were  ready  to  fly  in  through  the  gates  of  the  holy  world,  where  Jesus  reigns? 
These  are  cases  that  call  for  the  soul's  best  tribute  of  thanksgiving,  and  most 
sacred  names  of  commemoration.  It  is  the  instinct  of  a  truly  pious  heart  to 
take  steps  that  they  shall  not  be  forgotten.  "  Bless  the  Lord,  0  my  soul,  and 
forget  not  all  His  benefits."  (Ps.  Ixxvii.  11,  12  ;  cxlv.  1,  2  ;  cxix.  16,  93  ; 
Isa.  Ixiii.  7).  God  Himself  requires  that  we  should  remember  His  gracious 
providences  and  dealings  with  us  (Gen.  xxxv.  1  ;  Deut.  vi.  6-9).  In  many 
places  He  calls  upon  us  to  *'  remember  His  marvellous  works,"  and  to  praise 
His  name  for  ever.  The  most  touching  of  all  memories  is  "The  Lord's 
supper." 

The  name  which  Samson  gave  to  the  spring  that  was  specially  opened  to 
give  him  drink,  so  far  from  being  the  taking  of  praise  to  himself,  we  interpret 
to  mean  the  very  opposite.  The  fit  paraphase  of  that  name  is  given  in 
Ps.  xxxiy.  6. 

XIIX.  All  power  Is  really  at  the  back  of  tbe  grood,  wbile  tbe 
wicl-ed  live  only  on  sufferance. 

At  first  sight  it  seems  quite  the  reverse.  These  Philistines,  like  an  over- 
running flood,  swept  over  the  land,  and  there  was  no  breakwater  to  stem  the 
torrent.  The  God  of  Israel  seemed  to  have  left  His  heritage  and  given  up  the 
dearly  beloved  of  His  soul  into  the  hands  of  her  enemies.  But,  in  a  manner 
unthought  of,  the  breakwater  at  last  appeared.  A  single  man  became  more 
powerful  than  a  whole  nation,  leaving  us  to  infer  that  a  nation  of  such  men 
could  be  more  powerful  than  all  the  nations  of  the  earth.  The  whole 
power  of  the  wicked  is  usurped  power ;  it  does  not  stand  on  right  but  on 
sufferance,  and  it  is  liable  at  any  moment,  by  a  word  from  the  throne,  to  be 
taken  away.  It  is  the  power  that  belongs  to  rebels  and  outlaws,  and  cannot 
last  (Ps.  xxxvii.  9,  10,  12-15,  35,  36).  But  the  righteous  are  the  children  of 
the  kingdom,  and  by  right  all  things  are  theirs  which  belong  to  their  Divine 
Father.  The  whole  force  of  the  Eternal  Law  is  on  their  side  (Deut.  xiuciii.  27  ; 
Ps.  xc. ;  Isa.  xxxiii.  16). 

XIV.  It  is  but  little  of  a  man's  life  tbat  is  told  to  Axture  a^es. 

Samson  had  a  public  life  of  twenty  years,  and  the  whole  government,  legislative 
and  executive,  rested  with  him  alone,  without  any  to  share  the  power.     The 
legislative  indeed  God  reserved  entirely  to  Himself,  though  of  that  there  was 
504 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES.  chap.  xvi. 


but  little  in  a  time  of  such  extreme  disorder.  One  man  stood  out  as  the  sole 
figure  in  the  history  of  all  Israel,  and  he  alone  made  that  history  for  so  long  a 
time.  Yet  how  little  is  told  of  him  !  Mere  snatches — half  an  hour's  reading — 
some  nine  or  ten  stories,  and  these  told  in  the  curtest  possible  manner,  and 
then — he  passes  off  the  stage  !  The  prolonged  story  of  his  thoughts,  words, 
and  actions,  which  was  every  day  being  told  for  the  long  period  of  twenty  years, 
and  which  was  known  in  part,  only  to  his  fellows,  in  full,  only  to  himself,  was 
never  heard  by  the  generations  that  followed  ! — and  yet  these  fragmentary 
hints  about  the  most  remarkable  life  of  that  a;j;e,  are  more  than  what  is  heard 
of  about  the  whole  nation  of  Israel  (Job.  xiv.  2,  3,  10  ;  Ps.  cxliv.  3,  4).  How 
many  are  constantly  sinking  into  oblivion,  their  names  never  more  to  come  up 
to  notice  till  the  great  day  of  account?  And  then  "many  that  sleep  in  the 
dust  shall  awake,  some  to  everlasting  life,  and  some  to  shame  and  everlasting 
contempt."  There  is  no  real  immortality,  but  that  which  Christ  gives 
(John  X.  28  ;  Matt.  xiii.  43 ;  xxv.  34).  How  supremely  foolish  it  is,  to  live 
now  in  such  a  manner  as  that  we  shall  deserve  to  be  forgotten  for  ever !  How 
unwise  to  be  filling  up  a  large  part  of  our  time,  or  the  whole  of  it,  with 
materials  that  must  be  scattered  like  chaff  before  the  winds  of  trial  1 


CHAPTER  XVL 

(Verses  1-31.) 

Samson's  Fall,  Captivity  and  Death. 

Critical  Notes. — 1,  Then-]  And — without  fixing  the  time.  A  \o\\g  gap  stands  between  the 
events  of  the  two  previous  chapters  and  those  of  the  present  one.  Those  refer  to  the  early  public 
life  of  the  Lei  o,  afterwards  many  stirring  events  may  have  taken  place  which  are  not  recorded,  and 
now  we  have  (certainly  from  ver.  4)  in  this  chapter  an  account  of  the  el  sing  scene.  We  are  to 
tinderstand  him  as  reappearing  after  a  term  of  silence,  l)ut  not  inactivity,  as  Israel's  "saviour," 
the  same  in  his  strength  and  in  his  weakness,  and  more  than  ever  the  terror  of  the  Philistines,  and 
a  check  on  their  oppression  of  Israel.  ^  ent  to  Gaza  ]  It  is  not  said  he  went  by  a  call  from 
God  (comp.  chap.  xiv.  4).  Nor  does  it  appear  to  have  been  on  account  of  any  previous 
relations  he  had  to  Gaza,  for  his  being  there  was  something  of  a  novelty,  being  the  town 
farthest  removed  of  any  from  his  usual  home  at  Zorah.  Probably,  his  reason  for  going  was  the 
same  with  that  which  took  him  to  Timnath  namely  to  discharge  his  duty  as  a  scourge  of  the 
Philistines,  by  mingling  with  them  and  waiting  opportunities  to  do  as  God  might  direct  him. 
1  he  word  " Gaza"  or  " Azzah"  means  the  strong,  fortified  city.  It  was  the  most  powerful 
border-city,  and  the  capital  of  the  Philistines  ;  one  of  the  few  places  where  some  of  the  giants 
remained  (Josh  xi.  22).  The  hero  was  not  afraid  to  go  into  this  stronghold  of  the  enemy. 
Already  they  had  often  measured  swords,  and  it  was  clear  that  his  single  arm  was  more  than  a 
match  for  the  whole  uncircumcised  race  around  him. 

"We  wish  we  could  draw  a  veil  over  what  follows,  both  in  verse  1  and  verses  4-20,  where  we  find 
flagrant  breaches  of  Gods  holy  commandment,  as  given  in  the  seventh  word  of  the  Decalogue. 
But  we  must  accept  the  record.  Scripture  is  faithful  in  drawing  the  exact  character  as  it 
stands,  and  we  must  take  what  is  given  without  attempting  either  to  soften  or  to  magnify  the 
features.  The  word  zonak,  here  translaterl  harlot,  some  would  interpret  to  mean  "a  female 
innkeeper,"  the  keeper  of  a  general  lodging  house  where  strangers  miglit  be  accommodated,  and 
so  they  render  it  in  Rahab's  case  (Josh  ii.  1),  for  the  spies  simply  wished  accommodation  for  the 
night.  But  the  truth  is,  the  zonah  in  those  corrupt  communities,  acted  both  in  the  one  character 
and  the  other ;  and  in  the  present  case  it  is  the  evil  sense  that  must  be  taken  from  the  last 
clause  of  the  verse.  What  a  pity  that  this  unsuspecting  Israelite  had  not  Job's  example  before 
him  !  (Job  xxxi.  1). 

Two  things  are  to  be  noticed  (1.)  He  did  not  come  to  Gaza  to  see  this  person.  He  did  not 
know  of  her  existence  until  he  entered  the  city,  but  seeing  her,  he  was  attracted. '  (2.)  He  does 
not  seem  to  have  been  habitually  licentious,  but  being  impulsive  and  ardent  in  temperament,  he 
the  more  readily  fell  before  temptation. 

505 


CHAP.  XVI.  HOMJLETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDQEB. 


2.  They  compassed  him  in.l    By  patrols,  and  liers  in  wait.    They  were  afraid  to  attack  him 

directly,  and  they  felt  they  must  all  do  it  together  with  united  strength.  The  gates  especially 
v^ere  securely  locked  and  barred,  whi  e  sentinels  were  placed  over  them,  and  then  they 
remained  quiet  all  the  night,  purposing  in  the  morning  to  kill  him.  Why  this  purpose  was 
Dot  carried  out  at  once  it^  strange,  for  it  was  as  easy  to  do  so  at  night  as  in  the  morning.  But 
they  were  nervous  about  the  task,  and  put  it  off  till  morning  should  dawn. 

3.  Samson  arose  at  midnight,  etc.]  He  bad  come  to  know  what  was  going  on  without, 
probably  from  his  hostess,  or  as  the  poet  suggests — 

"  He  heard  a  whispering,  and  the  trampling  feet 
Of  people  passing  in  the  silent  street." 

Impulsive  and  high  spirited  as  he  always  was,  he  felt  indignant  that  an  attempt  should  be 

made  to  confine  him  within  either  walls  or  gates.  He  therefore  resolved  to  show  the  futility  of 
such  .^cliemes.  Proceeding  to  the  gate,  where  the  watchers  were  either  asleep  or  glad  to  skulk 
out  of  the  way  as  they  saw  him  approach,  he  firmly  grasped  the  doors,  or  folding  wings  of  the 
city  u^dte  along  with  the  two  posts,  tore  them  out  of  the  ground  with  his  herculean  strength, 
with  the  cross-bar  on  them,  put  them  on  his  shoulders  and  carried  them  up  to  the  top  of  a 
mountain  that  is  before  Heliron.  Instead  of  forcing  the  door  open  he  tore  up  the  posts  by  the 
roots,  with  the  barrei  doors  attached  to  them  (comp.  the  shutting  of  the  gate,  the  town 
wall,  etc.,  in  Josh.  ii.  5,  7,  15).  Gaza  was  then  a  walled  town — it  is  not  so  now.  He  put  the 
whole  mass  on  his  bkck  and  "carried  it  up  to  the  top  of  a  hill  that  is  before  Hebron."  Some 
read  it,  to  a  hill  in  the  chain  that  runs  up  to  Hebron.  Foi  Hebron  was  at  a  distance  of  ten 
miles  or  more  from  Gaza,  ard  much  too  far  to  carry  such  a  load.  It  might  be  rendered — tJiat 
loolceth  towards  Hebron  —  and  U'  )t  a  few  name  El  Montar  as  the  place  in  question,  which  is  only 
forty  minutes'  distance  from  Gaza  on  the  road  to  Hebron. 

Hebron  is  mentioned  for  the  special  reason,  that  it  was  a  centre  or  rallying  point  in  the  tribe 
of  Judah.  Samson's  practical  jest  meant  much  more  than  the  assertion  of  his  own  personal 
liberty.  It  implied  the  greatest  dishonour  that  could  be  inflicted  on  any  town  of  the  enemy, 
for  its  mastery  was  symbolised  by  its  gates  (Gen.  xxii.  17  ;  xxiv.  60),  and  on  this  occasion  to 
have  the  gates  of  the  chief  city  of  the  Philistines  brought  even  within  sight  of  the  central  town 
of  Judah  was  to  imply  the  humiliation  of  subjection  to  Judah. 

4-  He  loved  a  woman  in  the  valley  of  Sorek.l  A  place  supposed  to  be  near  to  Zorah  or 
Eshtaol,  but  in  the  land  of  the  Philistines.  It  is  a  pity  he  had  not  got  married  into  one  of  the 
families  of  Israel,  for  thereby  much  temptation  would  have  been  removed,  his  character  stood 
high,  many  miseries  been  avoided,  and  his  days  been  prolonged.  He  was  still  young,  or 
scarcely  up  to  middle  lite,  and  had  time  and  strength  to  complete  the  redemption  of  his 
people  but  for  his  sin  and  folly,  which  brought  him  to  an  untimely  end.  Delilah!  the  weak 
or  languishing  one  ;  but  some  make  ifc  the  weaJcening,  or  debilitating  one.  In  either  case  the 
name  is  appropriate,  as  names  in  those  times  were  intended  to  be.  Sorek,  for  example,  signifies 
vineyard,  for  that  was  the  character  of  the  whole  district.  And  it  is  called  the  valley  (Heb. 
nachal)  of  Sorek,  for  valleys  were  noted  for  their  fertility. 

6.  Entice  him  and  see  wherein  his  great  strength  lies.]  "  They  knew  already  where  his 
weakness  lay,  though  not  his  strength."  Such  strength  had  never  been  heard  of,  not  even  in 
the  country  of  giants.  Yet  Samson  was  no  Cyclops.  He  was  not  a  man  of  preternatural  size, 
of  towering  height,  and  abnormal  strength  of  bone  and  musc'e  ;  or,  if  to  some  extent  so,  it  was 
not  such  in  appearance  as  to  account  for  the  extraordin  iry  feats  which  he  performed.  This  led 
them  to  suppose,  that  he  carried  about  with  him  some  amulet  or  charm,  and  that  if  that  could 
be  taken  from  him,  he  would  then  become  weak  and  be  as  another  man.  Hence  these  princes 
consulted  together,  and  agreed  to  offer  a  large  bribe  to  the  woman  who  had  acquired  a  great 
influence  over  him,  that  she  might  find  out  the  secret  of  his  power.  The  sum  mentioned  was 
eleven  hundred  pieces  of  silver  (shekels  probably)  amounting  in  all  to  over  £600 — a  much 
greater  sum  then  than  the  same  amount  would  be  now.  The  person  who  gained  it  might  be 
Baid  to  be  affluent. 

7.  If  they  bind  me  with  seven  green  withs,  etc-l  Allured  by  the  prospect  of  so  much  wealth, 
this  false-hearted  woman  begins  to  try  her  arts.  Her  request  in  ver.  6  probably  states  only 
the  object  she  had  in  view,  but  not  the  actual  manner  in  which  she  addressed  her  friend.  She 
would  bring  it  before  him  in  the  way  of  playful  toyi  g,  as  if  she  never  meant  to  be  serious,  and 
yet  as  if  she  wished  her  woman's  curiosity  to  be  gratified.  And  he  seems  to  have  responded  in 
the  same  half  serious,  half  jocular  mood.  The  "withs"  refer  to  sirin^s,  perhaps  bow-strings, 
or  strings  made  of  catgut  (Ps.  xi.  2).  It  might  be  tendrils,  the  tough  fibres  of  trees,  or  pliable 
twisted  rods.  These  are  stronger  than  common  ropes.  It  is  common  iti  some  places  to  tie  the 
legs  of  wild  elephants  and  buffaloes  newly  caught  with  bonds  of  this  sort.  But  the  Septuagint 
■upposes  these  bonds  to  be  made  of  the  sinews  of  cattle. 

606 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  :  JUDGES,  ohap.  xvl 


9.  Men  lying  in  wait,  etc-]  Spies  ;  men  ready  to  fall  on  Samson,  the  moment  that  his 
weakness  was  discovered.  Not  in  the  same  chamber,  but  in  an  inner  chamber,  hidden  there. 
He  snapped  the  strings  as  one  would  snap  a  cord  of  tow  *'  when  it  smells  tire." 

11,  Bind  my  feet  with  new  ropes. 1  In  her  playful  dalliance,  she  accuses  him  of  telling  her 
untruths,  and  again  urges  the  question  as  to  where  his  strength  lies,  *'  with  all  the  brazen 
effrontery  chara>  teristic  of  women,  whose  charms  are  great  and  whose  hearts  are  bad."  He 
?till  feels  that  he  must  not  tell  her  the  real  secret,  and  so  gives  an  evasive  answer  as  before. 
These  ropes  were  probably  twisted  twigs  but  thick  and  strong. 

13.  If  thou  weavest  the  seven  locks,  etc.]  Braids,  or  plaits.  He  wore  his  hair  plaited  into 
seven  tresses.  In  these  sugijestions,  at  each  step  be  approaches  nearer  the  point  of  divulging 
his  secret.  The  bow-strings  which  he  firs-,  menticms  are  further  away  from  the  mark.  The 
new  cords  with  which  no  work  has  ever  been  done  were  the  image  of  his  strength,  and  so  a 
step  nearer  the  truth.  But  now  he  speaks  of  the  locks  of  his  hair,  which  come  dangerously  near, 
the  point  of  revealing  his  Nazarite  character.  "  His  infatuation  was  like  that  of  the  moth 
approaching  gradually  nearer  and  nearer  to  the  flame,  which  at  last  destroys  it." 

14.  And  she  fastened  it  with  the  pin.]  It  would  appear  that  Del-lah  was  a  weaver,  and  had 
a  loom  in  her  apartment  at  which  she  wrought.  It  was  an  upright,  after  the  Egyptian  model, 
and  the  woof  was  inserted  not  from  below  upward,  but  from  above  downward.  There  was  a 
web  on  the  loom  at  the  time,  and  Samson  asked  the  woman  to  weave  his  locks  into  the  web  as 
woof.  This  she  did,  but  as  an  additional  security  she  fastened  the  web  (Avith  the  hair  woven  into 
it)  with  a  tent  pin  to  the  floor,  or  to  the  wall.  The  locks  were,  no  doubt,  strong  enough  to 
make  a  peifect  web,  and  he  must  have  laid  himself  down  close  to  the  loom,  that  the  process 
might  be  properly  gone  through.  But  it  was  of  no  avail.  The  word  *'  Philistines,"  acted  as 
an  alarm  bell.  He  awoke  in  a  moment,  and  with  one  wrench  tore  up  the  web,  unloosed  the 
pin,  and  shook  his  locks  free  of  all  encumbrances.  Several  days  probably  elapsed  while  this 
endeavour  was  being  made  to  ensnare  the  too  heedless  victim,  and  it  might  well  be  asked,  why 
one  that  was  usually  so  shrewd  did  not  discern  at  once  that  there  were  evil  designs  meditated 
against  him.  The  proverb  says,  love  is  blind.  That  probably  is  the  principal  explanation  to 
be  given.  But  it  is  also  to  be  uoticed  that  Samson  thought  his  temptress  was  all  the  while  in 
sport,  and  that  had  to  do  with  his  allowing  her  to  go  on  so  long  pestering  him  with  the  subject. 
To  this  it  must  be  added  that  love  is  not  only  a  blindness,  it  is  also  a  slavery,  so  that  when  one 
does  see  a  course  to  be  wrong  he  still  pursues  it.  When  it  reaches  this  length,  it  becomes 
illegitimate,  for  reason  should  never  be  made  captive  to  feeling,  far  less  should  conscience. 
Affection  for  the  creature  shouM  never  overrule  our  sacred  obligations  of  duty  to  our  God. 
But  this  is  only  one  aspect  of  the  case.  Samson's  whole  conduct  in  having  such  interviews 
with  one  that  was  not  his  wife  was  flagrantly  wrong,  and  leaves  a  deep  stain  on  his  name. 

16.  His  soul  was  vexed  unto  death.]  Her  reproaches  now  became  sharp  and  incessant.  The 
bribe  of  over  £600,  which  had  been  floating  before  her  eye?  seemed  to  be  vanishing  out  of 
sight ;  so  with  all  the  earnestness  of  one  who  was  expecting  to  gain  a  fortune  for  life,  she 
devoted  hertelf  to  the  use  of  every  art  and  blandishment  to  gain  her  purpose.  She  was 
mocked,  his  heart  was  not  given  to  her,  he  had  not  told  her  that  which  she  was  so  desirous  to 
know.  Every  day  she  returned  to  the  charge,  and  with  cutting,  stinging  words  continued  the 
persecuting  ordeal.  It  wa^j  a  vexation  unto  death.  And  yet  he  had  but  to  break  off  the 
fellowship,  and  he  should  be  free.  This,  however,  he  would  not  do.  At  last  he  gave  up  the 
battle.  Probably,  under  some  hypocritical  promise  on  her  part,  that  she  would  not  make  any 
improper  use  of  the  knowledge  communicated,  he  told  her  all  his  heart— he  let  her  into  the 
secret.  In  doing  this,  he  was  tamper  ng  with  that  which  was  sacred,  and  he  was  selling  away 
a  power  which  God  had  especially  given  him  for  accomplishing,  a  work  that  was  to  be  for  the 
honour  of  His  great  name  in  the  world.  The  only  palliating  feature  in  this  act  of  great 
wickedness  was,  that  there  was  much  struggling  of  conscience  before  he  capitulated. 

19.  And  his  strength  went  from  him.]  The  traitress,  with  true  Philistine  nature,  now  cast 
every  promise  she  may  have  made  to  the  winds,  and,  without  scruple,  at  once  proceeded  to  the 
execution  of  her  diabolical  purpose.  She  calls  to  the  princes  to  come,  for  at  last  she  had 
entrapped  the  bird  in  her  snare  ;  and,  when  they  lUade  their  appearance  with  the  money  in 
their  hands,  she  gets  him  to  sleep  on  her  knees,  and  calls  for  a  man  to  shave  off  the  seven  locks 
of  his  hair.  Then,  we  are  told,  she  beg  m  to  afflict  him.  His  strength  began  to  fail  as  he 
began  to  lose  hi&  locks.  His  real  strength  indeed  did  not  lie  in  his  liair,  but  his  hair  was  the 
sign  of  his  conseci  tion  to  Cod,  so  that  when  it  was  gone,  it  was  a  proof  that  God  no  longer 
was  with  him  to  acknowledge  him  as  His  servant. 

20.  He  wist  not  that  the  Lord  was  departed  from  him.  He  had  said  (v.  17)  if  my  hair  is 
taken,  my  str/m;/th  is  taken  ;  but  now  that  his  hair  is  cut  off,  it  is  said,  the  Lord  had  departed 
from  him.  The  fact  that  Jehovah  was  specially  with  him  constituted  his  great  strength,  and 
that  depended  on  his  keeping  the  sign  sacred,  namely,  his  hair.  That  gone,  his  vow  as  a 
Nazarite  was  broken. 

507 


CHAP.  XVL  nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES. 


He  wist  not!,  perceived  not,  or  was  not  conscious  of  it.  The  whole  of  these  days  of  sin,  for 
such  we  believe  is  the  fair  intepretation  of  tlie  record,  were  to  him  as  a  troubled  dream 
(Isa.  xxix.  8).  It  was  as  if  he  were  under  the  influence  of  an  intoxicating  drau2:ht.  His  sense 
of  the  evil  of  sin  was  like  that  of  a  man  who  was  looking  through  a  mist.  *'  The  god  of  this 
world  blinds  the  minds  "  of  his  dupes,  that  he  may  the  more  easily  make  them  his  prey.  But 
the  future  shows  that  Samson  was  only  for  a  time  suffered  to  be  his  prey. 

21.  Took  himl  in  a  savage  manner— as  when  Job  said  "mine  enemy  sharpeneth  his  eyes  upon 
me."  He  was  made  prisoner,  and  then  "  began  the  tempest  "  of  his  miseries.  *'  Sin  when  it 
is  finished  (full  grown — has  gone  its  natural  length)  bringeth  forth  death."  He  found  he 
could  no  longer  defend  himself,  and  so  he  was  laid  hold  of. 

Put  out  his  eyes.]  The  most  cowardly  and  the  most  cruel  of  ancient  customs,  and  sorry 
we  are  to  add,  the  most  common.  There  are  not  many  instances  in  scripture  history 
(2  Kings  XXV.  7  ;  Num.  xvi.  14),  but  it  was  very  common  in  Eastern  countries,  especially 
when  an  enemy  or  rival  was  to  be  deprived  of  all  power  to  do  harm.  Herodotus  says,  the 
Scythians  put  out  the  eyes  of  all  their  slaves.  In  many  countries  rivals  to  the  throne  had 
their  eyes  put  out.  In  Persia,  it  is  not  uncommon  for  the  king  to  punish  a  rebellious  district 
by  exacting  so  many  pounds  of  eyes,  and  the  executioners  go  and  scoop  out  the  eyes  of  those 
they  met  till  they  have  the  weight  required,  ^'ometimes  the  eyes  were  pulled  or  cut  out  ;  some- 
times a  red-hot  iron  was  drawn  before  them.  At  other  times  the  pupils  were  pierced,  or 
destroyed,  or  they  were  taken  out  whole  with  the  point  of  a  dagger,  and  carried  to  the  king 
in  a  basin.  In  some  cases,  when  unskilful  hands  are  employed,  the  mutilation  is  so  great  that 
the  victim  dies  [Burden^     Here,  the  phrase  put  out  means  bored  out. 

The  word  nechushtaim  (Heb.)  here  used  implies  double  brass  because  both  hands  and  feet  were 
fettered.     In  ordinary  cases  leather  was  used. 

He  r^id  grind  in  the  prison  housel  i.e.  grind  corn  with  mill-stones  worked  by  the  hands — the 
employment  of  menials  at  which  slaves  were  usually  set  to  work.  Women  were  also  so  employed 
(Luke  xvii.  35),  but  it  implied  the  lowest  state  of  degradation  (Isa.  xlvii.  2).  It  was  fatiguing 
as  well  as  servile  toil. 

22.  Began  to  grow  again,  etc.]  This  is  important,  as  it  implied  that  God  had  not  finally  left 
him.  There  was  still  hope.  The  hair  was  more  important  to  a  Nazarite  than  thews  and  sinews. 
He  repented  and  his  hair  grew. 

23.  The  lords  gathered  together  to  oflfer  sacrifice  unto  Dagon.]  The  Philistines  regarded  the 
fish-shaped  god-Dagoa,  as  the  god  of  the  cities  on  the  sea-coast,  while  the  God  of  Israel  was 
the  god  that  had  won  the  mainland.  They  regarded  this  decisive  victory  over  Israel  as  the 
action  of  their  deity,  and  therefore  they  v,  ished  to  do  sacrifice  to  Dagon,  and  to  offer  thanks. 
At  Ashdod,  and  at  Gaza,  were  great  temples  built  to  Dagon,  Ekron  and  another  sort  of  gjd 
('2  Kings  i.  2,  16),  and  at  Ashkelon  was  the  far-famed  temple  of  Ashtaroth,  the  Syrian  Venus, 
The  word  Dayon,  according  to  some  means  the  Fish-god,  as  the  symbol  of  water,  an  all  pervad- 
ing element  in  nature  ;  while  others  make  it  mean  growth^  as  if  the  idol  represented  the  fertility 
and  productiveness  of  nature. 

24.  Our  god  hath  delivered,  etc.]  "All  the  contest  is  now  'twixt  God  and  Dagon — He,  be 
sure,  will  not  connive  or  linger,  thus  provoked,  but  will  aiise  and  His  great  name  assert." 

25.  Call  for  Samson  that  he  may  make  us  sport.]  He  is  brought  in  like  a  chained  bear  to  be 
made  the  object  of  ridicule,  and  to  be  baited  by  the  populace,  to  be  reviled,  buffeted  and  jeered 
at,  as  well  as  to  dance  to  the  sound  of  music  (1  Sam.  xviii.  7  ;  1  Chron.  xiii.  8  ;  xv.  29.)  The 
Numidian  warrior,  Jugurtlia,  was  dragged  in  Rome  in  the  triumph  of  Marius,  and  became 
insane  under  his  inhuman  treatment.  Bajazet,  the  Turkish  Sultan,  being  enclosed  by  Tamer- 
lane like  a  wild  beast  in  an  iron  cage,  dashed  out  his  brains  againt  the  sides  of  the  cage.  But 
the  blind  lion  of  Israel  vvalks  calmly  on,  in  the  consciousness  that  his  sins  are  forgiven,  and 
that  his  God  is  still  with  him  after  all  that  has  happened. 

And  they  set  him  between  the  pillars-]  Without  the  slightest  thought  that  he  could  do  any 
harm  there,  or  indeed  anywhere,  wherever  they  might  place  him.  The  pillars  referred  to  were 
those  "  on  which  the  house  rf-sts,"  so  that  when  they  were  removed,  tlie  whole  structure  must 
necessarily  come  down.  If,  for  example,  we  suppose  that  the  two  pillars  were  placed  in  the 
centre  (for  it  is  likely  Sampson  would  be  put  in  the  centre,  so  as  to  be  visible  to  all)  of  the 
building,  that  from  these  pillars  beams  went  out  like  the  spokes  of  a  wheel  on  to  the  sides  of 
the  building  all  round  resting  on  smaller  pillars  there,  and  that  on  these  beams  all  round  the 
sides  the  galleries  were  placed,  it  is  manifest  that  the  removal  of  these  two  pillars  in  the  centre 
would  mean  that  all  the  leams  would  lose  their  support  at  the  one  end  and  fall  to  the  ground, 
and  involve  the  fall  also  of  the  galleries  all  round.  The  beams  might  be  strong  without  being 
thick,  so  that  the  view  would  be  little  obscured.  But  however  constructed,  the  fact  is  stated 
that  the  "  house  rested  on  the  two  pillan."  Samson  came  to  know  this. 
508 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES  CHAP.  xvi. 


28.  Samson  called  unto  the  Lord-1  The  prayer  would  extend  over  more  than  a  single  sentence 
as  spoken  by  him,  but  in  the  scipture  record  everything  is  extremely  abbreviated,  so  that  all 
we  have  here  U  the  substance  ot  what  he  prayed  put  into  a  single  sentence  j  and  it  contains 
much.     It  implies  — 

(1)  He  kasfaithin  the  God  of  Israel  to  the  last.  Though  Dagon  seems  to  triumph,  though  the 
many  thousands  around  him  are,  to  a  man,  w  >rshipp  rs  of  Dagon,  and  he  alone  is  left  the  solitary 
worshipper  of  Jehovah,  and  thougli  Jehovah  seems  to  have  left  him  uncared  for,  the  sport  of 
cruel  enemies — still  bi^  faith  is  unshaken  in  the  God  of  Israel. 

(2.)  He  lays  claim  to  God  as  his  own  God.  Jle  says,  "O  my  Lord  God."  As  if  neither  had  he  on 
his  side  given  up  Israel's  God,  nor  ha'l  he  been  ceased  to  be  acknowledged  by  Him.  It  is  like 
Jonah  ch.  ii  3,  4.  It  was  really  a  "fight"  to  own  (xod  as  his  God  in  such  circumstances.  Yet 
he  acknowledges  Him  by  his  three  names — Adonai,  Jehovah,  and  Elohim.  This  last  has  the 
article — the  true  God. 

(3.)  ffe  still  has  hope  in  God's  mercy.  He  does  not  give  way  to  despair.  Though  he  has 
sinned  and  grievously  sinned  he  yet  hopes  to  be  remembered  by  his  God,  for  His  mercies  are 
great.  That  mercy  is  his  trust  in  the  dark  hour.  If  it  but  act,  it  will  set  Divine  power  in  action. 
It  is  like  the  prayer  of  the  penitent  thief  (Luke  xxiii.  42). 

(4.)  He  prays  for  the  accomplishment  of  his  life's  object — the  destruction  of  God's  enemies. 
They  had  deprived  him  of  sight,  and  so  rendered  him  unfit  to  accomplish  that  object.  He 
prays  to  be  remembered  as  to  what  he  was  in  the  past,  the  scourge  of  the  oppressors  of  God's 
Israel,  specially  raised  up  for  that  purpose,  but  now  made  unable  to  fulfil  his  vocation.  He 
means,  let  my  strength  return  once  more  that  I  may  avenge  the  injury  done  to  me  as  thy 
servant. 

29.  Samson  took  hold  of  the  middle  pillars.]  Though  blind  he  had  got  from  others  a  knowledge 
of  what  the  consequence  would  be.     "The  very  conception  of  his  deed  is  extraordinary." 

30.  Let  me  die  with  the  Philistines-]  Not  that  he  wished  to  commit  suicide,  but  "since  it 
cannot  happen  otherwise  than  with  the  loss  of  my  own  life,  I  shall  yield  up  that,  to  get  the 
great  end  of  my  mission  accomplished."  It  is  the  langu  ige  of  a  brave  soldier  in  the  thick  of 
battle.  His  prayer  is  answered.  He  feels  his  streng  h  r  turn  as  before.  He  grasps  the  massy 
pillars,  as  when  he  tore  up  the  gate  of  Gaza.  Hj  drags  them  with  all  his  force  from  their 
position.  They  bend — totter — fa,ll !  The  roof  with  its  vast  load  of  spectators  comes  down  with 
a  mighty  crash.  In  a  moment  the  whole  building  becomes  a  pile  of  ruins.  When  laughter, 
and  shout,  and  drunken  revel  are  at  their  highest,  sudden  destruction  overtakes  the  entire 
mass  of  spectators.  The  sounds  of  revelry  are  exchanged  for  dying  groans  and  agonizing 
shrieks  —  Samson  himself  falls,  with  traitors,  tormentors,  tyrant?,  and  enemies  all  at  his  feet, 
or  heaped  up  over  him  as  his  grave  mound. 

31.  His  brethren— came  down.]  The  Philistines  were  too  terrified  to  hinder  them.  His  father 
was  dead,  for  his  burying  place  is  spoken  of  ;  but  the  relatives  of  the  family,  and  many  of  the 
men  of  Dan  to  which  tribe  he  belonged  came  down,  and  without  any  opposition  took  up  the 
dead  body  of  their  leader  and  gave  it  an  honourable  burial.  God  takes  care  of  the  dust  of  His 
people  ;  for  "precious  in  His  sight  is  the  death  of  His  saints." 

EOMILETIQAL    REMARKS. 

Verses  1-SL 

Lessons  on  the  Guilt  and  Danqer  of  Wilful  Sin. 

If  It  Is  dang-erous  for  one  in  G-od's  service  to  ta&e  tbe  sbapingr 
of  his  course  into  his  own  hand. 

It  is  singular  that  in  the  case  of  a  mission  at  once  so  important  and 
dangerous  as  that  with  which  Samson  was  entrusted,  we  never  hear  of  any 
prayer  he  offered  up  for  Divine  guidance.  In  David's  case  we  often  hear 
of  inquiry  made  for  Divine  direction  (I  Sara,  xxiii.  4,  10-12  ;  xxx.  8 ; 
2  Sam.  i.  1  ;  v.  23  ;  Ps.  v.  8  ;  xxv.  4 ;  cxix.  4,  5  ;  cxliii.  8).  Samson's  case 
was  pre-eminently  one  where  a  similar  course  should  have  been  taken.  He 
ought  in  all  his  visits  to  have  asked  counsel  of  G  jd,  Jer.  x.  23  ;  Acts  ix.  6  ; 
Ps.  xxxii.  8  ;  Prov.  iii.  6.  To  take  the  matter  into  one's  own  hand  is  to  fail 
in  giving  to  God  the  glory  which  is  due.     We  cannot  expect  God's  presence  to 

609 


CHAP.  XVI.  HOMILETIC  COMMENT  A  RY :  J  UDOES, 


direct  us,  when  His  presence  is  not  asked.  The  dangers  in  such  a  case  are 
manifold,  and  we  do  not  wonder  if,  when  there  was  no  prayer,  there  should  be 
much  turning  aside  into  forbidden  paths.  When  the  Israelites  were  about  to 
leave  Egypt,  God  took  them  by  the  hand  (Heb.  viii.  9).  He  led  them  shepherd- 
like (Isa.  Ixiii.  11-13)  more  tenderly  still,  as  a  nurse  (Hosea  xi.  3,  4).  He 
judged  for  them  what  was  best  (Ex.  xiii.  17  ;  Ps.  cvii.  7).  All  God's  children 
are  led  by  the  good  Spirit  (Rom.  viii.  14).  Not  a  step  should  be  taken  without 
asking  our  heavenly  Father — where  next?  His  hand  in  ours  and  ours  in  His — 
so  shall  we  avoid  the  snares  of  the  enemy. 

ZX.    Constant  exposure  to  temptation  naturally  leads  to  sin. 

(Comp.p.l67,&c.)  We  constantly  hear  of  Samson  as  being  among  the  Philistines, 
and  scarcely  at  all  of  his  being  with  the  Israelites.  It  is  most  unsafe  to  be  always 
breathing  an  atmosphere  that  is  full  of  contagion.  The  temptation  has  got  a 
friend  in  our  own  bosom.  "  Temptation  itself  is  but  a  spark,  and  if  the  spark 
fall  upon  ice,  or  snow,  or  water,  no  harm  is  done.  But  if  it  fall  on  powder,  there  is 
an  explosion  at  once."  ''  He  that  walketh  with  wise  men  shall  be  wise,  but  a 
companion  of  fools  shall  be  destroyed."  Sin  is  a  contagious  disease,  and  every 
man  is  more  or  les^  liable  to  catch  the  infection.  The  most  difficult  part  of 
Samson's  work  was  to  avoid  temptation  while  doing  his  duty.  Where  a  man 
can,  it  is  much  safer  to  flee  from  temptation  than  to  fight  it.  "  The  best  way 
to  conquer  sin  is  by  Parthian  war — to  run  away."  [Adams],  All  exposure  to 
sin  is  perilous.  "  More  than  if  they  had  the  plague  or  fever,  avoid  the 
company  of  the  infected.  Abjure  every  scene,  abstain  from  every  pleasure, 
abandon  every  pursuit  which  tends  to  sin,  dulls  the  fine  edge  of  conscience, 
unfits  for  religious  duties,  indisposes  for  religious  enjoyments,  sends  you 
prayer  less  to  bed,  or  drowsy  to  prayer.  Give  these  a  wide  berth,  and  hold 
straight  away  under  a  press  of  canvas  in  your  course  to  heaven."     [Guthrie], 

ZZZ.  God's  people  are  liable  to  fall  into  the  gri'eatest  sins  wlien 
left  to  themselves^ 

The  native  state  of  the  heart  of  every  good  man  in  this  world  is 
to  be  corrupt.  Even  Paul  made  the  admission,  **  in  me,  that  is,  in  my  flesh, 
dwelleth  no  good  thing."  All  that  is  good  has  to  be  imported,  and  whatever 
seeds  are  put  in  require  time  to  grow,  so  that  the  old  weeds  still  take  away 
much  of  the  strength  of  the  soil,  and  do  occasionally  show  very  noxious  fruit. 
Whatever  good  a  man  has  he  owes  it  to  the  grace  of  God,  so  that  if  that  grace 
were  but  a  little  withdrawn,  he  is  liable  to  be  thrown  over,  as  a  child  would  be 
before  a  strong  wind,  when  out  of  the  grasp  of  his  father's  hand.  Thus  it  was 
with  Noah,  Lot,  Jacob,  Aaron,  Judah,  David,  Solomon,  and  many  others.  So 
it  was  with  Samson,  when,  as  too  often,  he  was  ofi"  his  guard  (see  Notes  on 
p.  322,  etc.)  The  enemies  of  the  Lord  have  but  too  often  reason  to  blaspheme, 
owing  to  the  heinous  sins  of  God's  professedly  holy  people. 

ZV.  The  unseen  danglers  which  surround  those  who  are  guilty 
of  g'reat  sins. 

Here  was  Samson  all  alone  in  the  very  stronghold  of  his  bitter  enemies 
A  whole  city  was  arrayed  against  him ;  he  could  not  count  on  a  single  friend 
within  its  walls,  and  as  one  man  they  all  compassed  him  in  to  effect  his  ruin. 
*'  His  soul  was  among  lions."  Heavy  iron  gates  closed  him  in,  and  every  man 
inside  the  walls  breathed  vengeance  against  him.  Yet  all  the  while,  the  object 
of  so  much  danger  was  guilty  of  gross  sins,  and  was  turning  God  Himself  to  be 
his  enemy.  Could  anything  be  conceived  more  widely  opposite  to  all  true 
610 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTAR  Y  :  JUDGES.  chap,  xvl 


wisdom  of  conduct,  or  a  more  daring  provocation  of  the  divine  wrath,  tlian  for 
a  professedly  holy  man  to  be  indulging  in  sinful  abominations  at  the  moment 
when  he  was  in  the  greatest  peril  of  his  life  all  round?  If  at  first  sight  he  did 
not  know  his  danger,  sin  itself,  through  his  conscience,  might  have  awakened 
many  a  dark  whisper  of  evil,  and  suggested  that  the  very  air  all  over  was  full  of 
the  mutterings  of  offended  justice.  The  conscience  of  every  man  guilty  of 
daring  sin,  is  as  a  Urim  and  Thummim  set  in  the  heart,  to  give  warning  that  a 
thousand  dangers  might  burst  on  the  soul  at  any  moment. 

Unseen  dangers  were  around  Lot  all  the  time  that  he  clung  tenaciously  to 
Sodom  for  the  sake  of  gain,  notwithstanding  of  its  outrageous  sins  against  God 
and  man.  What  whispers  of  evil  must  have  long  been  heard  in  the  home  of 
Ahab  and  Jezebel,  because  they  banished  the  worship  of  Jehovah  out  of  His 
own  land,  and  set  up  a  hideous  system  of  idol-worship  in  its  stead !  A  dreadful 
sound  of  present,  as  well  as  coming  danger,  must  have  ever  been  in  the  ear  of 
the  unhappy  Saul,  who  was  so  often  transgressing  the  commandment  of  the 
Lord.  And  thus  it  is  with  ail  who  are  guilty  of  known  and  wilful  sin,  where 
there  is  no  penitence. 

V«   The  error  of  misinterpreting*  G-od's  forbearance. 

Samson  was  not  robbed  of  his  strength  through  his  sin,  but  on  the  contrary 
he  was  enabled  to  perform  a  feat  such  as  even  he  was  not  supposed  to  be  able 
to  accomplish.  But  it  would  be  fatally  wrong  to  conclude  from  that,  that  God 
was  indifferent  to  his  sin.  It  is  His  manner  to  give  time  and  place  for 
repentance.  Nor  is  it  consistent  with  the  ever  calm  majesty  of  all  His 
movements  in  Nature  and  Providence;  to  rush  forward  the  moment  that  any 
sin  is  committed,  and  execute  summary  vengeance.  Especially  is  it  His  glory 
to  be  slow  to  wrath,  and  to  make  it  clear,  that  "  Fury  is  not  in  Him— that 
judgment  is  His  strange  act  (something  foreign  to  Him  to  do  spontaneously,  or 
for  its  own  sake) — that  his  instinctive  tendency  is  to  show  mercy."  Yet  being 
essentially  holy,  all  sin  must  be  accounted  for  under  his  perfect  moral  govern- 
ment ;  all  the  sins  a  man  commits  stand  before  him  in  greater  or  less  accumu- 
lation, until  the  proper  time  comes  for  His  dealing  with  them.  And  this  sin  of 
which  Samson  was  now  guilty,  might  be  said  to  be  a  serious  addition  to  the 
mass  already  existing.  A  few  more  additions,  as  in  the  case  of  his  intercourse 
with  Delilah,  brought  round  the  day  of  reckoning. 

"  Samson  comes  off  from  his  sin  with  safety.  He  runs  away  lightly  with  a 
heavier  weight  than  the  gates  of  Azzah,  the  burden  of  an  ill  act.  Present 
impunity  argues  not  an  abatement  of  the  wickedness  of  his  sin,  or  of  the  dislike 
of  God.  Nothing  is  so  worthy  of  pity  as  a  sinner's  peace.  Good  is  not  therefore 
good  because  it  prospers,  but  because  it  is  commanded ;  evil  is  not  evil  because 
it  is  punished,  but  because  it  is  forbidden."     [Hall.^ 

VZ.  The  heinous  offence  gplven  by  adding*  sin  to  sin. 

The  sin  at  Gaza  not  being  repented  of  leads  to  the  sin  at  Sorek ;  for  sin 
unrepented  of  always  leads  to  deeper  sin.  The  tendency  of  sin  is  to  grow,  to 
develop  itself,  or  wax  stronger  if  it  is  not  checked  ;  and  in  this  case  there  is  no 
evidence  of  any  check.  If  it  is  wrong  to  sin  at  all,  it  is  more  than  doubly  wrong 
to  commit  sin  a  second  time.  For  it  is  not  only  to  commit  two  sins  in  place  of 
one,  but  it  is  to  sin  in  the  face  of  warning,  remonstrance,  and  the  mercy  shown 
in  forbearing  with  the  first  sin,  so  that  the  wonder  of  the  Divine  forbearance 
with  it  increases  not  so  much  in  arithmetical  as  in  geometrical  progression.  In 
the  same  progression  does  the  guilt  increase. 

"  One  sin  makes  way  for  more  ;  it  keeps  up  the  devil's  interest  in  the  soul  j 

511 


OHAP.  XTI  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES, 


it  is  like  a  nest  ^gg  left  there  to  draw  a  new  temptation."  [Manton]  We  are 
"  not  to  give  place  to  the  devil."  **  The  little  wimble  once  entered,  we  can 
then  drive  a  great  nail.  If  one  thief  be  allowed  to  get  into  the  house  he  will 
let  in  others.  Every  degree  of  entrance  is  a  degree  of  possession,"  These  two 
evils  arise  when  sin  is  not  checked  at  once  by  penitence.  Sin  itself  multiplies, 
and  its  guilt  increases.  (See  Rom.  ii.  5,  6  ;  1  Kings  xvi.  31-33?  2  Chron, 
xxxiii.  2-10  ;  xxviii.  22-25).     (Comp.  pp.  311-317). 

VIZ.  Tbe  infatuation  of  sin. 

By  infatuation  we  mean,  a  wilful  blinding  of  the  reason,  and  rushing  on 
without  thought  or  concern  to  indulge  in  sin.  The  cause  of  this  is  a  certain 
power  of  fascination  in  the  object  beloved.  Was  there  ever  more  brazen 
effrontery  shown  to  any  man  than  in  the  question  put  in  ver,  6  ?  Any  sane 
man,  or  one  who  was  not  spell-bound,  would  have  resented  it  in  a  moment. 
To  put  such  a  question,  was  to  tamper  with  his  life  and  with  the  great  mission 
he  had  in  life.  But  he  was  enslaved.  Sins  of  presumption  waste  the  conscience 
more  than  any  other  sins.  Guilt  upon  the  conscience,  like  rust  upon  iron,  both 
defile  and  consumes  it.  The  tenderness  of  the  conscience  becomes  lost,  and  its 
faculty  of  moral  vision  becomes  blind.  Its  sensibility  is  destroyed,  and  by  and 
bye  it  is  *'past  feeling,"  so  that  *'  seeing,  a  man  does  not  see,  and  hearing  he 
does  not  hear — neither  does  his  heart  understand." 

"  Though  he  saw  so  apparent  treachery,  he  yet  wilfully  betrays  his  life  by 
this  woman  to  his  enemies.  All  sins  and  passions  have  power  to  infatuate  a 
man,  but  lust  most  of  all.  Many  a  one  loses  his  life,  but  this  casts  it  away. 
We  wonder  that  a  man  could  become  so  sottish.  Sinful  pleasures,  like  a 
common  Delilah  lodge  in  our  bosoms ;  we  know  they  aim  at  nothing  but  the 
death  of  our  souls,  yet  we  yield  to  them  and  die.  Every  willing  sinner  is  a 
Samson.  Nothing  is  so  gross  and  unreasonable  to  a  well-disposed  mind, 
that  temptation  will  not  represent  as  fit  and  plausible.  Thrice  had  Samson 
seen  the  Philistines  in  the  chamber  ready  to  surprise  him,  and  yet  he  will 
needs  be  a  slave  to  his  traitor.  What  man  not  infatuated  would  play  thus 
with  his  own  ruin.  This  harlot  binds  him,  and  calls  in  executioners  to  cut  his 
throat.  Where  is  his  courage,  by  which  he  slew  1,000  of  them  in  the  field, 
but  now  suffers  them  to  seize  him  in  his  chamber  unrevenged  ?  His  hands 
were  strong,  but  he  is  fettered  with  the  invisible  bonds  of  a  harlot's  love,  and 
finds  it  more  easy  to  yield,  though  it  is  the  height  of  being  unreasonable." 
[Haiq. 

VXZZ.  The  utter  worthlessness  of  those  who  lead  an  impure  life. 

They  are  said  to  be  abandoned — Because — 

(1.)  Thei/  have  abandoned  all  fear  of  God.  They  live  in  open  opposition  to 
His  holy  commandments  (Ex.  xx.  14  ;  Gal.  v.  19,  etc.  ;  1  Cor.  vi.  9,  18  ;  Rom. 
xiii.  12-14  ;  Eph.  v.  3,  etc.  ;  1  Peter  ii.  11).  They  care  not  for  His  authority. 
Tliey  make  light  of  provoking  Him  to  anger.  They  pollute  the  body  which  He 
at  first  made  to  be  His  temple.  They  present  a  spectacle  of  moral  loathsome- 
ness and  corrupting  example  to  all  around  them. 

(2.)  They  have  abandoned  all  sense  of  shame.    Shame  is  vitally  associated 
with  respect  for  one's  own  character,  so  that  to  lose  shame,  is  to  trample  char- 
acter in  the  dust,  and  to  become  reckless.     "  She  forgetteth  the  covenant  of 
her  God." 
512 


EOMILETia  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES,  ctisv.  xvi. 

(3)  They  have  abandoned  respect  for  human  society.  They  wear  the  brazen 
face,  and  affect  the  regardless  attitude  of  those  who  despise  the  ban  which 
society  puts  upon  them. 

(4.)  They  have  abandoned  all  regard  for  moral  principle  in  the  general 
actions  of  life.  Sin  is  steep  and  slippery,  and  they  who  have  fallen  deeply  on 
one  side  of  the  hill,  have  come  to  the  bottom  on  every  side.  The  conscience  is 
vitiated  for  the  whole  conduct.  *'  Siie  who  lies  can  steal  ;  one  who  is  a  thief 
can  kill ;  a  cruel  man  can  be  a  traitor ;  a  drunkard  can  falsify  ; "  and  an 
impure  woman  can  be  perfidious,  as  Delilah's  conduct  to  Samson  emphatically 
proves.  That  character  is  to  be  trusted  in  nothing  that  leaves  out  conscience 
in  everything. 

But  while  that  class  occupies  so  low  a  place  in  the  scale,  those  who  come 
next  in  degree  are  the  persons  of  either  sex,  who  care  little,  and  do  nothing  for 
their  reformation  ;  who  gather  up  their  robes  to  free  themselves  from  the 
contaminating  touch ;  who,  instead  of  using  prayers  and  exertions  for  their 
recovery,  are  only  anxious  how  orthodoxly  they  can  speak  of  the  evil  of  such 
conduct,  and  with  what  infallible  certitude  they  can  consign  that  portion  of 
their  fellow  creatures  to  hopeless  perdition.  It  is  no  wonder,  if  such  persons, 
not  satisfied  with  denouncing  the  openly  vicious,  should  turn  their  attention 
to  tale-bearing  and  evil-speaking,  criminating  those  who  may  be  purer  than 
themselves,  and  imputing  to  them  thoughts  which  exist  only  in  their  own 
imagination. 

ZX.  Severe  ohastlsexnent  ever  follows  hl^h-handed  sin,  sooner 
or  later. 

Delilah  was  but  the  instrument  of  Samson's  punishment,  just  as  she  was  the 
instrument  that  ministered  to  his  unlawful  pleasures.  The  unmitigated  perfidy 
of  that  wicked  woman,  and  her  heartless  betrayal  of  a  confiding  nature  into  the 
hands  of  relentless  enemies  for  the  purpose  of  torture  and  death,  will  cover  her 
name  with  execration  to  all  future  ages. 

But  looking  at  God's  dealings  with  Samson's  sin,  we  see  Him  fulfilling  His 
own  threatening,  or  rather  His  promise,  for  His  threatenings  are  in  some  sense 
promises  to  His  own  people,  being  always  intended  to  have  a  merciful  issue 
(Ps.  Ixxxix.  30-32).  For  his  sin,  the  hero  who  had  never  lost  a  battle  for 
20  years,  though  his  single  arm  was  pitted  against  a  whole  nation,  was  at  last 
delivered  up  into  the  hands  of  his  enemies,  just  "  as  a  wounded  lion  succumbs 
to  a  pack  of  yelping  hounds."  *'  Not  only  is  he  fettered  heavily,  but  as  the 
most  cruel  thing  which  the  body  can  suffer,  his  eyes  were  gouged  out,  and  he 
was  made  hopelessly  blind."  Yet  now  when  he  had  lost  his  eyesight  he  saw 
more  clearly  than  ever  these  things  :  (1.)  The  greatness  of  his  folly  ;  in  having 
broken  his  Nazarite  vow  of  consecration  to  the  Lord ;  in  having  fraternised 
with  the  people  whom  he  was  sent  to  destroy  ;  and  in  having  repeatedly  been 
guilty  of  flagrant  sin  like  the  heathen,  notwithstanding  his  sacred  position  as 
the  appointed  saviour  of  Israel.  (2.)  The  depth  of  his  fall.  Great  Samson  fell ! 
0  what  a  fall  was  there  !  From  what  strength  to  what  weakness  !  From  the 
hill-top  to  the  deepest  valley  !  From  freedom  to  slavery  !  From  glory  to 
humiliation  !  From  the  brightest  prospects  to  the  darkest  gloom  !  "  Tell  it 
not  in  Gath,  etc."  The  man  who  gave  liberty  to  Israel  now  himself  grinds  at 
the  mill.  As  he  passes  along  the  street  every  boy  can  throw  stones  at  him, 
every  woman  can  laugh  and  shout,  and  anyone  of  either  sex  can  lash  him  at 
pleasure.  (3).  He  saw  also  the  abiding  mercy  of  his  God,  Quickly  He  made 
the  hair  of  liis  head  begin  to  grow  again,  which  was  the  first  streak  of  dawn 
appearing  after  a  dark  and  tempestuous  night.    God  was  not  like  the  men  of 

KK  613 


CHAP  XVL  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES, 


Israel.  He  did  not  forsake  His  erring  servant ;  He  did  not  allow  the  waters 
to  overflow,  nor  were  the  flames  permitted  to  kindle  on  his  person.  Never  is 
the  correcting  discipline  permitted  to  destroy. 

X.  There  Is  a  point  in  the  sinner's  course  when  the  Ziord  departs 
from  him. 

(Chap  xvi.  20  ;  1  Sam.  xvi.  14 ;  Ezek.  x.  18  ;  xi.  23.) 

XZ.  G-od's  departure  from  a  man  is  the  sig'nal  for  his  ruin. 

(Verses  21-22.) 

What  a  difl"erence  that  departure  makes !  He  might  in  some  respects  say 
with  the  poet — 

"  My  days  are  in  the  yellow  leaf, 

The  flowers,  the  fruits  of  love  are  gon^ 
The  worm,  the  canker,  and  the  grief 
Are  mine  alone." 

It  was  a  most  touching  sight  to  see  him  saying,  "  I  will  go  out  as  at  other 
times,  and  shake  myself,"  and  then  to  hear  it  added,  "  he  wist  not  that  the 
Lord  was  departed  from  him."  He  now  found  that  Prov.  xxix.  1  was  but 
too  true.  "  He  bad  ruined  himself  beyond  repair  for  this  life  ;  he  could  never 
be  the  man  he  was  ;  in  that  dark  prison  his  remorseful  thoughts  were  his 
companions,  his  own  past  life  his  only  view.  He  saw  his  ruinous  folly,  his 
betrayal  of  the  trust  his  God  had  reposed  in  him,  how  out  of  the  best 
material  for  a  life  of  glory  he  had  wrought  for  himself  a  life  of  shame  and 
a  degrading  end.  The  strong  man  was  crushed,  and  like  the  weakest  sinner 
he  cried  to  God  for  the  light  and  joy  of  His  own  presence,  and  to  be 
remembered  with  the  old  love.     And  he  prayed  not  in  vain." 

XXZ.  None  of  G-od's  people  are  ever  lost* 

(John  X.  28,  29  ;  vi.  39  ;  Isa.  liv.  8-10  ;  Ps.  xxxiv.  19,  20 ;  Ixvi.  12  ; 
2  Tim.  iv.  18.) 

XIXZ.    Men's  sins  are  seen  in  their  punishment. 

His  eyes  were  the  first  offenders  in  Samson's  case,  and  there  especially  he 
suffers.  Thus  it  was  with  Adonibezek  (Jud.  i.  7).  Lot's  sin  was  worldly  miud- 
edness,  and  he  lost  all  in  the  end.  Eve  listened  to  the  serpent,  and  her  lot  was 
that  there  should  be  perpetual  war  between  the  serpent's  seed,  and  her  seed. 
Jacob  deceived  Esau,  and  was  deceived  in  turn  by  Laban.  There  was  polygamy 
in  the  households  even  of  the  good  in  early  times,  and  the  chastising  rod  was 
seen  in  the  strifes  that  were  ever  breaking  out  in  their  family  circles. 

XXV.    The  mischievous  effects  of  the  sins  of  God's  people. 

The  world  judges  of  the  character  of  Christ's  religitm,  not  as  he  explains  it, 
but  as  Christ's  people  show  it  in  their  lives.  They  are  the  world's  Bible  ;  so 
that  their  inconsistencies  are  as  so  many  blots  in  that  Bible.  Pre-eminently  is 
this  the  case  with  a  man  high  in  place  as  Samson  was,  so  that  his  fall  gave  large 
occasion  to  the  enemies,  both  to  think  evil,  and  to  speak  evil  of  God's  cause. 
Tiius  with  David,  the  Lord's  anointed,  as  in  2  Sam.  xi.  and  xii.  Thus  with 
Moses  in  Numbers  xx.  12,  and  Deut.  iii.  26.  And  the  evil  done  in  Samson's 
case,  as  given  in  verses  23,  24,  was  to  show  to  both  Philistines  and  Israelites 
that  God's  servant  was  not  protected  by  Him  who  sent  him,  and  as  the  result 
the  enemy  triumphed  over  the  God  of  Israel 
5U 


ITOMILETW  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES.  chap,  xvt 


XV.  Genuine  repentance  and  believing*  prayer  may  restore  the 
grreatest  sinner. 

XV.  Da  at h  brlng-s  out  a  man's  real  character. 

XVXZ.  The  man  who  prays  is  strong>er  than  those  who  scoff. 

The  prayers  of  Samson  had  a  far  greater  effect  on  his  enemies,  than  all  the 
power  which  they  wielded  had  against  him. 

XVZXZ.  The  wicked  are  sometimes  sig^nally  defeated  in  the 
moment  of  their  supposed  triumph. 

Col.  ii.  15  ;  Acts  xii.  18,  19  ;  Dan.  vi.  22-24  ;  1  Sam.  xvii.  49  ;  Esther  vii. 
The  Philistines  regarded  Samson  as  now  hopelessly  disabled  from  doing  them 
any  harm.  Yet  he,  at  that  moment,  was  taking  bteps  to  secure  a  greater 
destruction  among  them  than  ever  before. 


N.B. — Was  Samson  a  type  of  Christ? 

We  believe  that  to  some  extent  all  the  judges  were  types  of  Christ,  generally  for 
the  reasoD,  that  the  whole  history  of  Israel  was  in  a  proper  sense  symbolical. 
The  people  were  brought  into  existence  in  a  special  manner,  to  serve  the  purpose 
of  prefiguring  Christ  in  many  ways.  Tiiere  can  be  no  doubt  at  all  from  the 
testimony  of  the  New  Testa-uent,  that  the  spirit  of  the  Old  Testament  was  a 
foreshadowing  of  Christ  (John  v.  39,  46  ;  Luke  xxiv.  27).  The  smitten  Rock 
is  expressly  said  to  mean  Christ  (1  Cor.  x.  4).  Tlie  lifting  up  of  the  serpent  on 
the  pole,  is  also  expressly  mentioned  as  an  emblem  of  Christ  being  lifted  up  on 
the  cross  (John  iii.  14,  15).  Christ  also  intimates  that  He  is  the  true  bread 
which  came  down  from  heaveu,  of  which  the  manna  of  old  was  but  an  emblem. 
Much  of  the  language  which  David  applies  to  himself  in  the  Psalms,  is  applied 
by  the  inspired  men  of  the  New  Testament  to  Christ. 

We  hold  then  that  the  whole  history  is  full  of  the  shadow  of  Christ,  as  our 
Saviour.  The  very  name  of  judge  is  in  the  original,  a  saviour.  Samson  is 
supposed  to  have  been  typical  of  Christ  in  such  respects  as  these  : 

1.  The  birth  of  both  was  miraculous.    Jesus  was  born  of  a  virgin,  Samson 
of  a  barren  woman. 

2.  Both  were  specially  given  to  act  the  part  of  Saviours. 

3.  Bjth  were  consecrated  to  their  work  by  the  Divine  Spirit. 

4.  All  their  work  was  done  through  the  influence  of  that  Spirit 

5.  The  great  need  of  the  age  in  which  each  appeared  was  penitence 

6.  Both  did  their  work  alone,  without  an  army,  and  even  witliout  arms. 

7.  It  was  God's  gracious  thought  to  raise  up  such  a  Deliverer  in  either  cas 

8.  Each  appeared  at  first  as  a  little  child. 

9.  Each  in  death  slew  more  than  in  their  life. 

10.  Each  had  an  encounter  with  a  lion,  at  the  beginning  of  their  course. 

11.  Each  was  received  with  indifference  by  his  own  people. 

12.  Each  was  betrayed  by  his  own  people  into  the  hands  of  enemies. 

13.  Each  was  faithful  to  the  interests  of  his  own  people. 

KK  2  615 


CHAP.  xn.  HOMJLETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 

14.  Each  submitted  to  be  bound  without  a  murmur. 

15.  Each  came  a  Light  into  the  world,  to  reveal  character. 

16.  The  nien  of  Judah  preferred  to  continue  under  the  Philistine  yoJce,  rather 
than  follow  Samson  to  liberty.  So  the  Jews  cried  aloud,  We  have  no  king  but 
Csesar. 

17.  Both  were  uniformly  successful  in  every  combat  they  had  with  their 
enemies,  though  they  fought  all  alone. 

18.  Both  endured  much  mockery  from  the  world,  while  fulfilling  their 
commission  received  from  heaven. 

19.  Each  proved  himself  able  to  destroy  the  gates  of  the  enemy. 

20.  From  first  to  last  each  9>ioodi  faithful  to  his  God  amid  surrounding  treason. 


EXPLANATION. 


With  the  death  of  Samson,  the  Book  of  Judges  proper  terminates.  Eli  and 
Samuel  did  both,  indeed,  act  as  judges,  but  the  proper  position  of  the  former 
was  to  be  the  high  priest,  and  that  of  the  latter  to  be  a  prophet  and  a  priest. 
Their  public  service  was  a  sort  of  interregnum,  between  the  period  of  the  judges 
and  that  of  the  kings.  What  follows  now  is  not  a  continuation  of  the  history, 
but  consists  rather  of  two  appendices,  the  first  in  ch.  xvii.  and  xviii.,  and  the 
second  in  ch.  xix.-xxi.  These  are  not  composed  of  general  materials  loosely 
attached  to  the  book,  but  form  part  of  its  organic  structure,  and  are  needed  to 
illustrate  the  private  life  of  Israel  in  a  degenerate  age. 

They  point  out  the  true  cause  of  the  declensions  of  Israel,  referred  to  in  the 
history  throughout,  in  the  strong  tendency  of  the  human  heart  to  go  away  froui 
its  God.  This  underlies  the  whole  course  of  the  history,  and  is  set  forth  in 
these  remaining  chapters  in  two  dark  pictures.     We  see : — 

Z.  The  lapse  into  error  of  belief  and  worship. 

We  see  in  the  case  of  Micah,  how  quickly  and  easily  a  family,  and  in  the  case 
of  Dan,  a  tribe,  may  fall  into  the  practice  of  image-worship.  The  time  must 
have  been  shortly  after  Joshua's  days,  for  Phinehas,  the  son  of  Eleazar,  was 
still  alive  (ch.  xx.  28),  the  tribe  of  Dan  had  not  yet  got  its  full  inheritance 
mapped  out,  and  it  was  only  idolatry  in  its  incipient  form  that  Micah  dared  to 
indulge.  Yet  modified  as  this  false  worship  was,  that  Micah  should  dare  in  his 
professed  worship  of  Jehovah  to  make  use  of  images,  notwithstanding  that  the 
stern  voice  of  Joshua  still  rung  in  his  ears,  as  it  must  have  done  in  the  ears  of 
many  generations  to  come ;  notwithstanding,  too,  the  solemn  appeals  of  Moses, 
the  express  messenger  of  Jehovah,  in  revealing  His  character  and  will,  and 
especially,  notwithstanding  the  great  voice  that  issued  from  amidst  the  thunders 
of  Sinai,  saying,  *'  Thou  shalt  not  make  unto  thee  any  graven  image  " — shows 
the  strong  bent  of  the  human  heart  to  get  away  from  the  idea  of  a  spiritual 
God,  and  to  think  of  Him  under  some  form  of  sense.  A  graven  image  implied 
the  germ  of  idolatry,  and  was  therefore  not  to  be  tolerated.  Though  it  might 
begin,  as  in  Micah's  case,  merely  as  a  form  of  worshipping  the  true  God,  it 
always  ended  in  the  worship  of  the  image  itself,  under  the  name  of  some  false 
god.  Even  while  the  true  God  was  professedly  worshipped,  to  conceive  of  Him 
as  set  forth  by  an  image  of  any  kind  was  infinitely  degrading  to  His  character, 
and  already  implied  a  great  descent  in  the  mind  of  the  worshipper 
(Rom.  i.  21-23). 
516 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES.  ohap.  xvi. 

Thus,  the  case  of  Micah  illustrates  how  easily  and  naturally,  a  man,  whose 
heart  was  not  right  with  God,  might  slide  down  into  idolatry,  deluded  with  the 
thought  that  He  was  worshipping  Jehovah,  and  Him  alone.  The  remembrance 
of  the  mighty  God  of  Israel  was  too  fresh  in  people's  mind  at  this  time,  for 
them  to  put  Him  aside  as  the  One  le_^itimate  Object  of  Worship.  Conscience, 
also,  was  too  strong  to  allow  a  man  peacefully  to  set  aside  all  idea  of  religious 
worship  whatsoever.  It  was  therefore  found  to  be  a  convenient  compromise,  to 
profess  to  worship  the  spiritual  Jehovah  under  a  material  form. 

The  other  picture  brought  before  us  is  :— 

ZZ.  The  lapse  into  flagrant  wickedness  of  conduct. 

See  chaps,  xix.-xxi.  Here  we  have  an  exhibition  of  the  extent  to  which  the 
flood  of  immorality  overflowed  some  parts  of  the  land,  when  all  check  on  the 
outburst  of  evil  passions  was  removed.  The  proof  is  made  out  that  were  all 
restraint  taken  away,  and  the  heart  left  free  to  follow  its  own  inclinations,  in 
place  of  becoming  virtuous  and  good,  it  would  soon  become  the  opposite  of  all 
that  God  would  have  it  to  be,  and  present  the  spectacle  of  falling  from  the 
greatest  heights  to  the  very  lowest  depths.  It  is  most  instructive  too,  that  this 
picture  comes  in  alongside  of  the  other,  as  if  to  show,  how  a  loose  morality  and 
loose  belief  go  hand  in  hand  together,  and  that  until  there  be  a  correct 
conception  established  in  men's  minds  of  the  sin-hating  character  of  God,  there 
cannot  be  any  pure  and  high-toned  excellence  of  conduct  prevalent  upon  the 
earth.    It  is  a  conveniently-worded  motto  to  say — 

**  For  modes  of  faith  let  graceless  zealots  fight, 
He  can't  be  wrong  whose  life  is  in  the  right,** 

But  the  argument  is  slender  as  a  gossamer  thread.  Who  ever  knew  of  a  man 
having  his  life  steadily  in  the  right,  while  his  faith  was  in  the  wrong  ?  When 
put  to  the  test,  he  is  uniformly  found  wanting.  The  evidence  here  is  clear 
that  the  huruan  heart,  when  released  from  all  restraint,  would  go  by  leaps  and 
bounds  into  the  commission  of  the  foulest  sins.  The  inference  is,  that  checks 
of  a  stringent  character  must  be  applied  to  it  meantime,  until  the  period  arrive 
when  the  only  effective  check  can  be  brought  forward  (Heb.  viii.  10). 

To  account  for  the  serious  errors  in  Divine  Worship,  and  the  enormities  of 
sinful  conduct,  which  characterised  that  age,  we  are  repeatedly  told  of — 

ZZZ.    The  great  want  of  those  times* 

**In  those  days  there  was  no  king  in  Israel,  but  every  man  did  that  which 
was  right  in  his  own  eyes."  Pour  times  this  statement  is  repeated,  and  in  such 
a  way  as  to  lead  us  to  believe  that,  if  there  had  been  such  a  functionary,  we 
should  not  have  had  such  melancholy  accounts  to  read.  (See  ch.  xvii.  6  ; 
xviii.  1  ;  xix,  1  ;  xxi,  25.) 

There  was  none  to  take  the  helm.  While  Moses  lived,  there  was  always  a 
finger  lifted  up  to  point  out  the  path  of  duty,  and  a  voice  heard,  saying,  *'  This 
is  the  way,  walk  ye  in  it."  While  Joshua  lived,  the  privilege  was  still  continued, 
and  Israel  wanted  not  for  counsel  to  direct,  and  for  authority  to  enforce  what 
was  good  and  right.  But  now  there  was  no  longer  a  public  guide  to  lead  the 
nation  on,  nor  any  power  to  act  as  a  national  conscience  to  cause  the  Divine 
laws  to  be  observed. 

Not  that  there  was  any  absence  of  plan  in  their  being  thus  left  without  a 
heady  or  that  there  was  any  defect  in  the  arra?igement.  Nothing  was  more 
marked  than  definiteness  of  plan,  in  all  God's  course  of  dealings  with  His 

63  7 


CHAP.  XVI.  HOMJLETIG  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 

people  throughout  their  history.  But  now  they  had  come  to  a  new  stage  of 
their  history.  They  had  had  a  course  of  instruction  under  Moses  and  Joshua, 
coupled  with  God's  own  direct  teaching  by  the  wonderful  acts  of  His  power 
and  grace  wrought  on  their  behalf,  that  might  by  this  time  have  enabled  them 
to  judge  for  themselves,  without  being  taught  by  a  leader,  that  it  was  their 
wisdom  and  their  solemn  obligation  alike,  to  fear  their  God  under  all 
circumstances,  and  with  all  good  conscience  to  keep  His  commandments.  A 
pause,  therefore,  takes  place  to  try  them  on  this  point,  and  ascertain  how  they 
would  act  when  left  to  themselves  ;  without  a  King,  a  Father,  a  Guide  ;  or,  at 
first,  even  a  Judge,  or  temporary  S  iviour.  Had  they,  or  had  they  not,  really 
profited  by  the  enjoyment  of  all  this  Divine  care-taking  and  wonder-working. 
If  there  had  been  the  least  disposition  in  their  heart  to  obey,  nothing  could 
have  been  more  easy  and  grateful  than  to  obey.  The  very  dimmest  mental 
eye  could  see  what  a  magnificent  privilege  it  was,  for  them  to  be  at  liberty  to 
say,  that  the  God  that  had  wrought  all  these  wonders  was  their  God.  Now, 
therefore,  was  the  solemn  moment  when  the  heart  of  Israel  was  called  on  to 
say — *'  Accept  or  reject  Jehovah!"     God  waited  for  a  reply. 

That  reply  was  not  long  in  being  given.  It  soon  appeared  that  the  tendency 
of  the  Israeli tish  heart  was  to  depart  from  the  living  God,  and,  when  left  to 
itself,  to  prefer  rather  those  substitutes  for  the  true  God,  which  the  heathen 
around  them  set  up  as  objects  of  worship.  The  proof  was  fully  made  out,  that 
they  were  not  in  a  fit  state  to  be  left  to  themselves.  They  had  indeed  a  law,  a 
most  complicate  and  comprehensive  law,  adapted  to  all  the  varieties  of  human 
experience  and  human  conduct,  and  this  law  was  laid  down  by  God  himself 
(Gal.  iii.  19).  But  it  was  one  thing  to  know  what  the  law  required,  and  another 
tiling  to  be  disposed  to  keep  it.  Hence  there  required  to  be  some  authority 
established,  by  which  obedience  to  Jehovah  would  be  enforced.  The  lack  of  a 
disposition  to  observe  the  holy,  just,  and  good  laws  of  the  Great  Supreme, 
has  been  sorrowfully  acktiowledged  in  all  ages.     Even  a  heathen  could  say — 

*  I  see  the  good,  but  I  follow  the  eviL" 

Israel  then  required  a  king,  or  ruling  authority,  to  enforce  the  carrying  out  of 
the  laws  and  commandments  appointed  by  its  covenant  God.  There  was  no 
such  ruling  authority  now  in  the  land.  Hence  the  people  were  fast  turning  to 
idolatry  in  worship,  and  to  immorality  in  practice. 

But  the  idea  in  this  descriptive  text,  is  not  so  much,  that  there  was  no  supreme 
civil  authority  in  Israel,  or  principle  of  law  recognised,  as  opposed  to  a  state  of 
anarchy  and  chaos.  If  there  had  been  that,  some  good  result  would  have 
followed.  For  law,  viewed  simply  as  a  chart  defining  the  lines  of  right  and 
wrong,  is  a  great  blessing  to  a  community,  when  justly  and  wisely  framed  and 
impartially  administered,  when  violence  and  evil  passion  are  repressed,  and  when 
order  and  righteous  dealing  between  man  and  man  are  duly  upheld.  Something 
more  important,  however,  is  meant  here.  The  king  of  Israel  was  not  an  ordinary 
king.  As  king  he  held  a  sacred  office.  God  Himself  was  the  real  King  of 
Israel,  and  every  legitimate  occupant  of  the  throne  was  his  vicegerent.  The 
nation  itself  was  a  "  holy  nation."  They  were  a  church,  the  only  church  of 
God  on  the  earth,  and  to  be  a  king  to  God's  church  was  to  hold  a  sacred  office. 
Hence  his  duties  covered  the  whole  area  of  religion,  and  it  was  his  special  duty 
to  see  that  God's  existence,  and  God's  authority  were  universally  acknowledged, 
that  the  laws  He  appointed  for  His  worship  should  be  faithfully  adhered  to,  and 
that  the  rules  He  had  laid  down  for  daily  life  should  be  reverently  observed. 

The  ordinary  olfice  of  king  was  confined  to  things  civil,  and  he  became  a 
usurper  when  he  intruded  into  the  sacred  ground  of  conscience  (Matt.  xxii.  21). 
518 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES,  chap.  xvu. 


But  the  Kiog  of  Israel  was  only  about  his  proper  work,  when  jealously  seeing 
to  it,  that  all  the  laws  and  ordinances  uf  God  were  duly  observed  by  his 
subjects.  The  whole  history  of  the  kings  goes  on  the  assuoiption,  that  the 
king  was  responsible  for  the  Divine  laws  being  respected  by  his  people. 
AcoordiDgly,  in  so  far  as  was  necessary,  express  instructions  were  given  to  him  for 
the  guidance  of  the  people,  and  he  ever  acted  by  Divine  direction.  Even  rules 
for  guidance  in  civil  and  social  life,  which  are  permitted  among  other  nations 
to  be  carried  out  according  to  the  judgments  of  men  were,  in  the  case  of  the 
"  peculiar  people,"  all  directly  laid  down  by  God  himself.  Hence  the  great 
significance  of  the  statement,  *'  there  was  no  king,"  as  applied  to  Israel. 


CHAPTER  XVII. 

Idolatry  in  its  Incipient  Stage — by  Image-worship, 

(Verses  1-13.) 

HOMILLCTIGS, 

Z.    Idolatry  beg'lns   with  those  who  are  not    uprlg-ht     in  moral 
conduct.    Ver.  1-4. 

Micah  himself  is  first  heard  of  as  stealing  a  large  sum  of  money,  and  his 
mother  is  first  mentioned  as  uttering  curses  on  the  head  of  the  offender, 
whoever  he  might  be.  Subsequently,  when  the  money  is  given  up,  and  the 
offender  is  discovered  to  be  her  own  son,  the  mother  entirely  loses  sight  of  the 
immoral  character  of  the  act,  and  though  no  sorrow  is  expressed  by  him  for 
the  evil  of  his  conduct,  she  at  once  proceeds  to  pour  blessings  on  his  head, 
simply  because  the  money  was  restored.  Further,  she  professes  to  have  devoted 
the  whole  of  the  money  to  the  service  of  God's  house,  yet  when  coming  to  the 
decision  as  to  how  much  shall  be  given  for  that  purpoe,  she  gives  really  less  than 
one-fifth  of  the  whole  to  that  service.  No  wonder,  if  those,  who  had  already 
made  a  god  of  their  money,  should  hold  very  cheaply  by  the  name  of  the  true 
God. 

XZ.  God  has  established  In  the  heart  of  every  criminal  the  nieans 
of  detecting*  his  own  crime.    Ver.  2. 

How  long  Micali  may  have  kept  his  theft  a  secret  is  not  said,  but  memory 
and  conscience,  as  two  detectives  working  together,  made  every  place  too  hot 
for  him,  until  he  made  a  full  confession  (Psalm  xxxii.  3,  4,  5).  The  work  of 
detection  was  done  most  effectively,  for  no  man  can  fiee  from  himself,  and  it 
was  done  directly,  without  any  slow  process  of  going  round  about  (Josh.  vii. 
16-21).  Fears  were  aroused  in  his  superstitious  mind,  lest  a  mother's  curse 
should  fall  upon  him,  and  disquieting  thoughts  like  wandering  ghosts  rose  up 
before  him  in  his  fancies  by  day  and  his  dreams  by  night,  to  scare  him  into  a 
full  disclosure  of  the  evil  act. 

ZXX.  The  powerlessness  of  human  cursing*.    Ver.  2. 

The  mother  cursed  the  thief  Was  there  anything  in  that  to  rouse  Micah 's 
fears  ?    Had  be  any  good  reason  to  fear  that  the  curse  would  really  come  ? 

519 


CHAP.  xviL  EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES, 

That  a  certain  power  both  of  blessing  and  cursing  was  vested  in  the  father,  in 
the  patriarchal  age,  is  undoubted  (Noah,  Laac,  Jacob,  etc.).  The  lather  was 
then  the  priest  and  propliet  in  the  family.  But  when  he  either  bestowed  a 
blessing,  or  pronounced  a  curse,  it  seemed  always  to  be  when  he  was  Divine'.y 
commissioned  to  do  so  (Gen.  ix.  25,  26).  Isaac  having  blessed  Jacob  could  not 
alter  it,  nor  confer  the  blessing  on  Esau  also.  There  were  limits  to  the  power 
of  blessing  ;  and  so  with  cursing.  The  blessing,  or  the  cur^e,  would  not  come 
at  the  mere  caprice  of  him  who  pronounced  it,  but  only  as  it  came  from 
the  Divine  Spirit,  resting  on  the  person  authorised  to  give  it.  Some  of  the 
female  sex  were  prophetesses,  but  only  as  such  could  they  either  bless  or  curse 
(Judges  V.) 

ZV.  Conscience  compels  a  tribute  to  relig'ion,  even  from  tba 
avaricious  heart  Ver.  3. 

What  the  leading  motive  may  have  been  for  erecting  a  sanctuary  in  their 
dwelling,  we  are  not  informed,  but  one  thing  is  clear  in  this  case,  that  though 
Micah  and  his  mother  were  both  avaricious,  they  felt  that  the  claims  of  religion 
were  strong,  and  must  have  large  external  respect  paid  to  them.  Where  any 
tenderness  of  conscience  is  left,  there  is  a  secret  instinctive  conviction,  that 
man  must  have  a  God,whom  he  is  bound  to  serve,  and  to  whom  he  owes  the  deepest 
homage.  So  the  mother  spoke  at  first  of  devoting  the  whole  1,10C  shekels 
(about  £140),  to  the  purpose  of  establishing  a  system  of  image-worship  in  their 
household.  Even  the  hard-fisted  Laban  had  his  gods  (Gen.  xxxi.  19,  30 ; 
Micah  vi.  7.) 

V.  The  deceitfulness  of  the  heart  in  thinking^  it  can  bribe 
conscience. 

So  much  is  parted  with,  that  the  heart  may  keep  all  the  rest  and  enjoy  it  in 
quietude.  An  opiate  is  given  to  conscience  in  the  religious  offerings  made,  to 
lull  it  asleep  or  to  blunt  its  sting.  Every  wicked  man  feels  that  he  must,  at 
any  cost,  still  that  stern  voice  and  buy  off  its  threatenings.  But  it  is  vain  to 
think  of  closing  up  the  black  and  yawning  gn If  of  fears,  which  conscious  guilt 
opens  in  the  soul,  by  casting  into  it  silver  and  gold,  prayers  and  penances,  deeds 
of  charity,  and  formal  observances  of  religious  worsliip  (Micah  vi.  7).  Nothing 
can  purge  conscience  but  the  blood  of  Christ  (Heb.  ix.  14). 

VI.  The  error  of  departure  from  the  rule  laid  down  by  God  for 
His  own  worship. 

Micah  departed  from  this  rule  broadly  in  making  a  graven  image,  which  is 
expressly  forbidden  in  the  most  solemn  language  uttered  on  Sinai  (Ex.  xx.  4), 
and  which  had  the  first  of  the  heavy  curses  pronounced  upon  it  at  Mount  Ebal 
(Deut.  xxvii.  15).  He  erred  also  in  following  only  the  thoughts  of  his  own 
heart,  without  asking  counsel  at  the  mouth  of  the  Lord  ;  whereas  it  is  the  very 
foundation  of  true  religion  to  acknowledge  Him  in  everything,  and  reverently 
observe  what  He  appoints.  For  a  man  to  try  to  carve  out  a  religion  for  himself, 
different  from  what  God  has  appointed,  ia  itself  an  act  of  irreligiou.  Again,  he 
appointed  first  his  son,  and  afterwards  a  Levite,  to  be  his  priest,  whereas  none 
but  the  sons  of  Aaron  could  lawfully  execute  the  duties  of  that  office.  The 
place  too  was  unlawful — his  own  dwelling,  for  all  acceptable  public  worship  was 
required  to  be  carried  on  before  the  ark  at  Sluloh.  All  this  was  highly 
presumptuous  and  irreverent.  It  was  for  a  man  to  tell  God,  that  he  would  take 
the  matter  of  His  worship  into  his  own  hands,  and  decide  for  himself,  when^ 
where,  and  how  he  would  discharge  his  religious  obligations. 
520 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES,  chap.  xvii. 

Besides  all  this,  it  was  an  express  refusal  to  accept  the  mode  of  worship 
already  appointed  by  God,  as  exhibited  at  Shiloh,  at  no  great  distance  from 
where  Micah  lived.  When  God  has  already  spoken,  it  is  for  every  right-hearted 
worshipper  to  obey.  To  bring  in  another  mode,  or  to  bring  in  a  modification  of 
His  mode,  would  indeed  be  most  irreverent. 

VIZ,  It  Is  dangerous  to  frame  a  religion  merely  according^  to 
one's  own  wishes. 

This  is  fir&t  of  all  to  insult  the  Divine  Majesty,  as  if  the  creature  might 
presume  to  dictate  to  the  Creator  what  duties  He  should  require  it  to  fulfil. 
This  of  itself  must  be  a  heinous  offence.  It  is  also  most  distrustful,  as  if  the 
Creator  were  not  infinitely  kind,  wise,  faithful  and  true,  and  worthy  of  the  most 
absolute  confidence.  But  it  implies  more  ;  it  amounts  to  a  casting  off  the 
authority  of  the  Creator  entirely,  at  the  moment  when  it  professes  to  acknow- 
ledge Him  as  the  Object  of  worship.  Besides,  a  religion  so  framed  will  be  a 
hideous  misrepresentation  of  all  that  God  is,  and  an  exhibition  of  what  the  vile 
and  wicked  heart  of  man  would  wish  him  to  be.  This  is  strikingly  exemplified 
in  all  the  religions  of  the  heathen  world,  without  a  single  exception. 

VZIZ.  Those  who  have  no  rellg^lon  in  the  heart  take  the  more 
pains  to  show  it  in  the  externals. 

This  is  one  of  the  many  phases  of  the  deceitful  workings  of  the  human 
heart.  By  making  a  bustle  about  external  forms  and  ceremonies,  a  man  persuades 
himself,  either  that  he  has  something  of  reality  about  him  after  all,  or  that  God 
will,  at  any  rate,  accept  the  very  ardour  of  his  manner  as  counting  for  so 
much.  But  all  the  while  the  heart  will  not  give  up  itself.  This  is  specially 
exemplified  among  those  who  attach  excessive  importance  to  form-:,  ceremonies, 
gestures,  intonations  of  voice,  and  the  like ;  also  among  those  who  rest  on  the 
regularity  of  observances,  the  mere  number  of  services  gone  through,  and  the 
amount  of  penance  self-inflicted.  Micah  gave  himself  a  great  deal  of  trouble 
with  the  externals,  but  we  do  not  find  any  evidence  to  prove  that  he  had  any 
real  love  to  God,  and  delight  in  communion  with  Him  in  the  heart.  Pretence 
of  religion  is  seen  in  such  cases  as  Hosea  vii.  14  ;  Mai.  iii.  14 ;  Matt,  vi,  5,  7, 16 ; 
I.  Kings  xviii.  26,  &c.  Opposite  examples  :  Mary  sitting  at^  Jesus'  feet.  The 
beloved  disciple  listening  with  breathless  attention  to  the  gracious  words  that 
came  from  the  Saviour's  lips.  The  publican  smiting  his  breast,  &c.  The 
long-afilicted  invalid  saying — "If  I  but  touch  Him  1  shall  be  whole."  "Lord 
lift  on  me  the  light  of  Thy  countenance."  In  these  cases  we  see  the  heart  at 
work  in  giving  itself  to  God. 

ZX.  Some  people  are  proud  of  having*  the  name  of  being  religious. 

Ver  5. 

Micah  wished  not  only  to  be  as  good  as  his  neighbours,  but  he  wished  to  have 
a  name  for  religion,  and  so  he  turns  his  dwelling  into  a  sanctuary.  "  The  man 
Micah  has  a  house  of  God."  This  is  how  he  was  spoken  of  in  the  world.  He 
seemed  to  wish  to  have  his  house  full  of  religion.  The  meaning,  however,  is  not 
a  house  with  many  gods  in  it.  The  word  J£lohim  seems  to  denote  God  simply. 
But  his  house  contained  a  regular  establishment  of  the  worship  of  God.  There 
was  the  image,  as  a  representation  of  the  object  of  worship  ;  the  epJiody  or 
sacred  dress,  without  which  no  acceptable  service  could  be  done  before  God  ;  the 
teraphim,  to  be  consulted  as  oracles ;  and  the  priest,  or  recognised  official  for 
conducting  religious  services.  Was  not  Micah  a  good  Pharisee  ?  Ought  not  his 
name  to  go  out  as  one  zealous  towards  God,  and  abounding  in  religious  services  ? 

521 


CHAP.  XVII.  HOMJLETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


Many  still  regard  a  religious  name  as  giving  respectability,  and  hence  they  do 
much  to  gain  it.     They  also  regard  it  as  a  source  of  influence  and  so  covet  it. 

X.  The  great  sin  of  using*  a  hlg'h  relig^lous  profession  as  a 
means  of  getting  g-ain. 

This  appears  to  have  been  the  chief  aim  of  Micah  in  building  up  his  idolatrous 
establishment.  He  thought  to  make  his  house  a  resort  for  religious  worshippers, 
or  a  shrine  where  offerings  would  be  presented,  and  fees  would  be  charged  for 
inquiry  at  the  oracle.  It  is  not  likely,  that  so  avaracious  a  man  would  put  out 
so  much  money  on  the  sacred  materials,  without  expecting  to  receive  as  much 
again  with  profit  superadded.  And  this  explains  the  agonising  wail  which  he 
raised,  when  his  establishment  was  broken  up  by  the  unceremonious  Danites, 
"  Ye  have  taken  away  my  gods,  and  what  have  I  more  ?  "  It  is  a  fearful  provo- 
cation to  a  holy  God,  when  His  great  name  and  hallowed  worship  are  prostrated 
to  serve  the  ends  of  covetousness. 

What  shall  we  say  of  gifts  presented  at  shrines,  of  the  sale  of  indulgences, 
of  the  sale  too  of  church  livings,  of  the  presenting  of  unholy  men  to  church 
benefices,  merely  for  the  sake  of  a  living,  and  such-like  practices  ?  Or  what 
can  we  think  of  those  who  take  the  name  of  Christian  professor,  and  connect 
themselves  with  a  certain  church  in  order  thereby  to  increase  their  incomes, 
or  advance  their  position  in  society,  with  many  varieties  of  the  same  principle  ? 
It  all  savours  much  of  the  Micah  spirit,  and  must  end  in  some  fit  manifestation 
of  the  Divine  frown. 

XX.   Xdolatry  is  a  most  God-dishonouring*  sin. 

(1.)  It  is  an  i'lconceivable  degradation  to  the  Divine  nature,  to  suppose  it  to 
be  represented  by  dumb  wood,  or  stone,  graven  by  art  and  man's  device,  the 
work  of  the  hands  of  the  worshippers  themselves  ! 

(2.)  Though  it  begins  with  the  professed  intention  of  worshipping  the  true 
God  through  the  image,  yet  the  constant  presence  of  the  image  in  the  act  of 
worship,  and  its  continual  association  with  the  giving  of  Divine  honours, 
insensibly  leads  after  a  time  to  the  worsJiip  of  the  image  itself.  Thus  another 
object  becomes  honoured  and  not  God,  and  the  substitute  is  merely  a  piece  of 
wood,  or  a  stone  ! 

(3.)  The  spirituality  of  the  Divine  nature  is  lost  sight  of. 

(4.)  God  Himself  is  lost  sight  of,  and  creations  of  mans  w^r.hfid  nature  take 
His  place,  leading  to  all  manner  of  sinful  deeds. 

XIZ.  The  heart's  power  of  self-deception  in  matters  of  relig'ion. 

He  supposed  that  now  God  would  do  him  good,  seeing  he  had  a  Levite  to  be 
his  priest.  What  miserable  logic  does  an  unrenewed  man  show,  when  trying  to 
make  out  a  favourable  case  for  himself  as  regards  his  personal  religion.  He  was 
not  right  even  in  the  one  point,  which  he  thought  to  be  so  good  that  it  would 
serve  for  all  the  rest.  It  was  not  the  right  thing  for  a  Levite  to  discharge 
priestly  duties.  Such  honour  belonged  to  Aaron  and  his  sons  alone.  And  then 
Micah  was  wrong  everywhere  else.  It  was  not  right  to  have  the  sanctuary  of 
God  in  his  own  private  dwelling.  It  was  not  right  to  have  an  image  representing 
God.  It  was  not  right  for  any  one  to  wear  the  epliod  except  at  Shiloh  in 
association  with  the  ark.  It  was  not  right  for  him  to  presume  to  carve  out  his 
religion  for  himself.  In  truth,  he  was  wrong  all  over,  and  yet  he  thought  he 
was  wonderfully  near  the  mark. 
522 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES.  chap,  xviir. 


What  a  small  vestige  of  evidence  will  suffice,  for  an  ungodly  man  to  think 
himself  "  almost  a  Christian."  A  short  formal  prayer  offertd  up  once  a  day  ; 
a  chapter  of  the  Book  of  God  read  once  a  week ;  one  attendance  at  Divine 
Service  on  the  Lord's  Day;  a  small  coin  given  for  religions  purposes ;  those, 
together  with  a  fair  reputation  for  good  morality,  are  held  to  be  a  sufficient 
proof  that  his  name  ought  to  go  on  the  Christian  list,  though  all  the  time  he  is 
a  stranger  to  the  power  of  religion,  and  has  had  no  experience  of  having  had  his 
heart  warmed  with  the  constraining  influence  of  the  love  of  Christ, 


CHAPTER  XVIIL 
The  Image  Worship  expanding  into  tribal  Idolatry. 

HOMILETICS, 

Z.  The  straits  to  which  unbelief  reduces  the  strong*.    Yer.  1. 

"The  tribe  of  Dan  sought  them  an  inheritance  to  dwell  in."  Not  that  they 
had  had  no  inheritance  till  now.  When  a  distribution  was  made  of  the  land  by 
Joshua,  a  considerable  territory  was  allotted  to  the  tribe  of  Dan  (Josh.  xix. 
40-47J.  The  other  tribes,  having  received  their  proportion  first,  a  small  area 
comparatively  was  left  for  this  tribe.  But  Judah  gave  up  to  them  several  of 
its  northern  towns,  such  as  Zorah,  Eshtaol,  Bethshemesh,  etc.  This  latter 
town,  however,  was  afterwards  given  to  the  Levites.  Ephraim  also  gave  to  Dan 
some  of  its  southern  towns.  Stretching  from  the  west  of  Benjamin  on  to  the 
Mediterranean,  the  territory  included  first  the  hill  country,  and  then  all  the 
lowlands,  or  the  shephelah,  being  a  large  part  of  the  extremely  fertile  plain  of 
Sharon,  having  in  it  such  towns  as  Jehud,  Bene-barak,  and  others,  all  the  way 
to  Joppa. 

But  a  large  part  of  this  terrestrial  paradise  was,  at  the  time  of  the  appointment, 
occupied  by  the  Philistines,  or  Amorites,  and  these  had  to  be  subdued  ere  the 
Danites  could  enter  on  possession.  Tliis  was  no  easy  matter,  for  the>e  enemies 
had  iron  chariots.  The  ail-conquermg  faith,  through  which  the  Israelites  gained  all 
their  victories,  was  awautiugin  this  tribe,  so  that  they  did  not  succeed  in  driving 
out  these  doomed  inhabitants.  On  the  contrary,  the  Amorites  forced  Dan  up 
into  the  mountains,  and  would  not  let  them  come  down  into  the  plain 
(Jud.  i.  34,35).  As  the  plain,  or  valley,  was  much  the  larger  part  of  their 
inheritance,  this  confined  the  Danites  within  very  narrow  limits  indeed,  and 
hence  the  great  straits  to  which  they  were  reduced.  Yet  that  tribe  was  strong 
in  numbers,  and  not  deficient  in  courage.  At  the  latest  enumeration,  previous 
to  this  date,  they  had  upwards  of  64,000  men  able  to  go  forth  to  war.  Their 
weak  point  was  their  unbelief.  They  could  do  nothing  without  their  God,  and 
He  would  do  nothing  for  them,  unless  in  so  far  as  they  trusted  Him.  If  they 
had  had  but  a  strong  faith,  not  an  Amorite  would  have  been  left  in  all  the  plain, 
and  the  whole  expanse  of  Sharon  would  have  been  theirs. 

In  the  Christian  life,  from  how  many  causes  of  trouble  and  disquiet  on  every 
side  would  the  Saviour's  friends  be  set  free,  were  their  trust  in  "  the  Angel  that 
redeems  from  all  evil,"  only  more  complete  I    Over  how  many  green  pastures 

523 


OHAP.  xviL  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES, 


would  they  roam,  and  beside  how  many  still  waters  would  they  sit  down,  telling 
to  all  around  that  one  day  spent  in  the  presence  of  the  Rose  of  Sharon  was 
worth  a  thousand  of  the  best  days  the  world  could  give ! 

ZI.  Discontent  with  a  Divinely  marked  lot  leads  to  evil.    Yer.  2. 

The  Danites  would  have  been  pleased  with  the  shepJielah^  or  rich  plains 
between  the  hill  country  and  the  sea.  But  with  the  conditions  attached,  that 
they  must  drive  out  the  Amorites,  they  were  greatly  offended.  It  was  not 
impossible  to  comply  with  that  condition.  The  fatiiers  of  that  generation  had 
conquered  the  larger  part  of  the  land  through  that  faith,  and  in  the  same 
manner,  they  might  have  finished  the  conquest  through  faith.  But  it  was 
irksome,  and  they  wanted  the  faith ;  so  that  they  refused  to  take  their  inherit- 
ance in  God's  appointed  way,  and  sought  another  way  of  their  own.  It  is 
always  dangerous  to  reject  the  lot  which  God  has  appointed  for  us,  and  instead, 
to  take  the  ordering  of  our  lot  into  our  own  hand.  The  consequence  in  tliis 
case  was,  that  God  left  them  to  fall  into  idolatry.  For  if  they  had  remained 
on  their  own  proper  soil,  they  would  not  have  entered  into  the  house  of  Micah, 
nor  have  been  tainted  with  his  forbidden  ima^e-worship  (Ps.  cxxv.  5; 
II.  Chron.  xv.  2).  We  cannot  walk  long  in  ways  of  our  own  devising,  without 
meeting  with  checks  to  show  that  we  are  wrong. 

ZZZ.  Trifling*  circumstances  often  lead  to  the  discovery  of  sinful 
schemes.    Yer.  3. 

"  They  knew  the  voice  of  the  young  man.**  Some  say,  it  should  be  "  the  sound 
of" — not  his  voicBy  but  of  the  bells  that  were  attached  to  the  priest's  dress,  and 
which  the  Levite  was  wearing  (ch.  xvii.  10).  The  reference  here  is  to  the 
passage  in  Ex.  xxviii.  35 — an  explanation  more  ingenious  than  accurate,  for  it 
was  not  at  all  likely,  that  there  was  a  supposed  need  for  bells  in  Micah's  house. 
Either  these  spies  had  known  the  Levite  before,  and  now  recognised  the  voice 
of  their  old  friend,  or  they  noticed  at  once  from  his  speech,  that  he  wanted  the 
peculiar  accent  of  the  Ephraimites.  This  led  to  the  r  questions,  and  those 
again  revealed  the  whole  truth  of  Micah's  evil  arrangement.  How  simply  it  is 
done  !  and  yet  how  complete  is  the  revelation !  What  an  illustration  of  the 
solemn  assurance,  *'  Be  sure  your  sin  will  find  you  out."  This  story  must  soon 
have  come  to  be  known  all  over  Israel.  Very  numerous  are  the  instances  where 
dark  plots  against  the  ways  of  righteousness  and  truth  are  unexpectedly  brought 
to  light,  aud  men  are  made  to  know  that  there  is  a  God  that  judge th  in  the 
earth. 

ZV.  Silent  neg^lect  at  firstf  leads  afterwards  to  open  rejection  of 
God's  ordinances.     Yer.  5. 

These  Danites  seem  never  to  have  given  one  thought  to  God's  appointed 
way  of  worship  at  Shiloh,  and  they  must  have  gone  near  to  it  in  passing 
through  Mount  Ephraim.  They  simply  entirely  neglected  the  worship  which 
God  liad  instituted  in  connection  with  His  people,  through  the  Ark  of  the 
Covenant,  but  the  moment  they  hear  of  an  illegitimate  method  of  worship  of 
Micah's  invention,  they  turn  aside  and  ask  counsel  at  this  new  shrine.  They 
practically  renounce  Shiloh,  and  place  their  confidence  in  Micah's  priest, 
and  Teraphim.  Tliis  was  an  advanced  step  in  the  downhill  road,  and  ere 
long  they  ceased  to  acknowledge  Shiloh  at  all,  and  set  up  a  system  of  idol- 
worship  systematically,  when  they  reached  their  new  settlement  in  the  north 
(vers.  30,  31).  Sin  growa, 
524 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES,  chap,  xviit. 


V.  The  most  inoffensive  people  are  not  safe  from  the  attacks 
of  evU  men.    v.  7,  9,  10. 

When  God's  claims  are  put  aside,  the  rights  of  fellowmen  are  but  lightly 
regarded.  The  fear  of  God  is  the  true  restraint  on  man's  lawless  passions 
everywhere,  and  in  every  form.  What  a  relief  to  Joseph's  brethren,  when  in 
the  hands  of  those  who  seemed  to  be  rough  men  they  heard  the  ruler  say, 
"  I  fear  God  I  "  (Geu.  xlii.  18).  How  uncomfortable  did  Abraham  feel  when 
residing  for  a  little  time  in  Gerar,  he  was  constrained  to  say  to  himself,  "  Surely 
the  fear  of  God  is  not  in  this  place  1 "  In  the  antediluvian  age,  "  the  earth  was 
filled  with  violence,"  because  all  fear  of  God  was  gone.  Lot  had  a  very  troubled 
life  in  Sodom  for  the  same  reason.  No  chain  is  so  binding,  no  clasp  is  so  secure 
on  its  victim,  as  the  fear  of  God  on  the  conscience  of  man.  Among  the  Danites, 
the  knowledge  of  the  God  of  Israel  had  already  become  very  faint  in  their 
minds,  and  placed  little  or  no  restraint  on  their  evil  desires.  On  how  many 
sides  is  the  wisdom  of  true  religion  as  a  benefit  to  man  vindicated. 

VZ.  Religrion  is  sometimes  invoked  to  aid  the  plots  of  the 
ongrodly.    Ver.  6. 

Though  there  is  no  real  reverence  for  God's  name  and  character  with  this 
class,  there  is  yet  a  secret  conviction  that  it  would  be  safe  to  have  Him  on  their 
side.  However  intense  the  wish  of  the  heart  to  get  away  from  the  thought  of 
God,  that  is  not  able  to  smother  the  conviction  of  the  understanding,  that  there 
is  a  God,  and  that  our  lot  and  life  are  really  in  His  hands.  So  strong  is  this 
conviction,  that  even  when  the  knowledge  of  the  true  God  is  lost,  false  godb  start 
up  in  the  mind  in  His  stead  (ii.  Kings  i.  1-16). 

VIZ.   Indirectness  is  a  character  of  the  world's  counsel.    Yer.  6. 

How  vague  the  reply  of  the  Levite  priest.  It  simply  said  nothing.  To  the 
ear  it  had  the  sound  of  success,  but  to  a  calm  analysis  it  might  be  construed 
into  either  success  or  failure.  But  this  is  a  feature  of  the  world's  speech  on 
religious  subjects.  It  seems  to  sound  well,  yet  it  wants  the  true  ring.  A  haze 
hangs  over  their  language,  and  there  is  no  direct  coming  to  the  point.  Instead 
of  plain,  straightforward  statement,  there  is  a  certain  indefiniteness  in  the 
expressions  employed;  you  see  the  crook  of  "  the  old  serpent,"  and  the  meaning 
is  left  in  doubt  and  uncertainty.  On  the  contrary,  when  the  heart  is  right  with 
itself,  and  with  its  God,  everything  is  distinct,  direct,  and  unhesitating.  These 
are  the  characters  impressed  on  truth. 

VZZZ.  False  worshippers  take  refugre  in  imitating^  the  appearances 
of  the  true.    Yer.  14,  17,  etc. 

The  symbols  of  worship  which  Micah  adopted  were  a  copy  of  those  made  use 
of  at  Shiloh.  The  ephod  was  the  most  important  part  of  the  priest's  vestments, 
the  graven  image  and  molten  image  corresponded  probably  with  the  Shekinah 
and  the  ark,  the  teraphim  answered  to  the  Urim  and  Thummim,  and  the  Levite 
belonged  to  the  sacred  tribe.  Now  he  felt  sure  of  the  Divine  blessing,  though 
everything  was  but  a  caricature  of  the  true.  Thus  multitudes  believe  that  if 
they  but  wear  the  semblance  of  religion,  keep  up  an  external  form  of  respect  for 
its  requirements,  show  reform  of  manners,  and  go  through  certain  observances, 
all  will  be  well  with  them,  though  there  is  no  real  giving  of  the  heart  to  the 
Lord.  They  retain  their  idols,  and  so  many  of  their  evil  ways,  but  because 
they  proudly  "  do  many  things,  and  hear  the  gospel  gladly,"  they  think 
themselves  in  a  good  way  for  the  Divine  blessing  here,  and  for  heaven  itself 

625 


CHAP.  XVIII.  nOMILETJC  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES, 


hereafter.  The  Jews  also  thought  that  because  they  had  Abraham  as  their 
father,  because  they  had  the  temple  of  God  amoug  them,  and  liaci  the  name  of 
beini(  God's  people,  therefore  it  wa^,  and  must  be,  well  with  them,  though  they 
lived  wicked  lives,  and  refused  to  walk  in  the  way  of  God's  commandments. 
Many  still  build  similar  hopes  on  their  having  pious  parents,  being  enrolled  as 
members  of  a  Christian  church,  and  enjoying  the  privileges  of  Christian  society, 
though  they  have  nothing  of  the  spiritual  life  in  their  hearts. 

ZX.  Divine  Providence  often  offers  no  interruption  to  the  execu* 
tion  of  the  desig-ns  of  the  wicked. 

We  assume  that  the  designs  of  the  Danites  were  wicked,  because,  first — 
the  district  of  Leshem  appears  to  have  been  beyond  the  doomed  territory  of 
the  Canaanites  that  was  marked  out  for  destruction  ;  and  second — because 
the  motives  by  which  they  were  actuated  were  simply  lust  of  territory,  with- 
out regard  to  any  question  of  title  or  right.  And  besides  Leshem  was  not  any 
portion  of  the  land  given  to  them.  They  were  therefore  guilty  of  robbery  on 
the  one  hard,  and  of  wholesale  murder  on  the  other.  Yet  no  thunders 
roll,  and  no  lightnings  flash,  to  show  the  anger  of  righteous  heaven  against  such 
conduct.  Thus  it  often  is  in  daily  life.  Men  are  allowed  to  go  on  in  their 
wickedness  meantime,  and  even  atrocious  deeds  are  done  while  God  keeps 
silence.  Yet  for  all  these  things  God  will  bring  them  one  day  to  judgment 
(2  Pet.  ii.  3  ;  Rom.  ii.  4-9  ;  Eccl.  xii.  14). 

X.  The  sudden  destruction  of  tha  man-made  relig-ion.    Vers.  15-20. 

Micah's  religion  was,  like  that  of  many  others,  only  an  appearance,  not  a 
reality.  It  had  no  foundation  of  principle  to  stand  on.  It  was  a  case  of 
building  on  the  sand.    Job.  viii.  11-16. 

XX.  Prayer  will  not  secure  the  Divine  blessing*  on  a  wrong* 
action.    Vers.  5,  6,  also  vers.  18,  19. 

The  Danites  wished  prayer  to  be  offered  for  them  bv  the  priest,  that  God 
might  prosper  their  journey.  Yet  that  journey  meant  high-handed  robbery  and 
murder.  How  could  they  presume  to  expect  that  G(  d  would  prosper  such 
villany  ?    How  could  they  dare  to  ask  God's  countenance  in  sin  ? 

XZX.  Worldly  minds  care  little  for  accuracy  in  spiritual  things. 

Ver.  17-19. 

They  would  stand  out  for  rigid  accuracy  as  to  the  measure  of  land  allotted  to 
them.  And  in  any  mercantile  transaction,  they  would  see  to  it  with  the  keenest 
particularity  that  the  exact  thing  stipulated  for  was  given.  But  when  it  is  a 
matter  of  paying  to  God  the  reverence  which  is  due,  they  make  small  inquiry 
whether  they  do  it  in  the  appointed  manner  or  not.  "  Those  that  are  curious 
in  their  diet,  in  their  purchases,  in  their  attire,  in  their  contracts,  are  yet  in 
God's  business  very  indifferent." 

XIIZ.  Neither  moral  principle  nor  sound  reason  can  be  expected, 
of  those  who  deny  to  G-od  His  natural  rightSi 

It  was  base  in  the  extreme  for  those  very  men  whom  Micah  had  so  hospitably 

entertained  to  turn  upon  him  and  callously  rob  him  of  all  tiiat  he  counted 

most  sacred  in  his  dwelling.      To  take  away  forcibly  his  graven  and  molten 

images,  his  ephod,  and  his  teraphim,  along  with  the  priest  himself,  was  a  rough 

526 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  :  JUDGES.  ohap.  xviil 


act  of  brigandage  at  the  very  least,  if  it  should  not  rather  be  called  sacrilege. 
Tiue  it  was  a  righteous  judgment  from  God  on  the  transgression  of  Micah,  but 
the  Danites  did  not  mean  it  so,  neither  in  their  hearts  did  they  know  it  to 
be  so. 

And  what  a  miserable  mockery  of  reason  was  it,  for  the  lawless  men  to  set 
up  as  gods,  objects  that  could  not  save  themselves  from  being  stolen  !  How 
could  they  expect  the  gods,  to  bless  the  men  that  stole  them— men  who  had 
virtually  been  guilty  of  sacrilege !  Why  make  so  much  of  objects  that  are 
graven  by  art,  or  man's  device  ?  Why  should  rational  creatures  worship  the 
work  of  their  own  hand? 

XXV.  Success  in  evil  Is  no  proof  of  the  Divine  approval. 

God  gives  temporal  gifts  (not  blessings)  or  successes  to  the  wicked — 
spiritual  good  things  only  to  His  own  children. 

XV.  True  service  is  not  to  be  expected  from  a  false  priest.    Yer.  20. 

The  Levite  priest  was  a  mere  mercenary.  Good  wages  were  all  that  he  cared 
about ;  and  having  no  religion  he  had  no  morality.  What  a  miserable  caricature 
of  a  priest ! 

XVZ.  The  excessive  importance  which  bjl  idolater  attaches  to 
his  grods.    Yer.  24. 

The  exclamation,  "  Ye  have  taken  away  my  gods,  and  what  have  I  more  ?  " 
was  the  truest  thing  to  which  Micah  gave  utterance  in  this  short  but  sad 
history.  It  may  have  arisen  from  two  causes.  (1.)  The  apparatus  of  images, 
ephody  terapJiim,  and  priest,  was  really  all  the  religion  he  had.  In  his  heart 
of  hearts  he  had  none.  When  the  externals  were  taken  away  he  was  left  absolutely 
bare.  He  had  the  delusion,  that  he  was  a  religious  man,  and  he  could  not 
afford  to  want  the  delusion.  Alas  !  how  many  are  in  the  same  predicament. 
It  is  a  fancy,  not  a  power.  It  is  all  paper  money  with  no  gold  in  exchange  ; 
or  rather  when  the  cheque  is  presented,  the  reply  is,  "  No  effects.'  But 
the  mere  name  of  having  something,  such  persons  cannot  want.  When  the 
consciousness  breaks  in  on  the  soul  that  it  is  utterly  religionless,  in  a  moment  the 
inward  monitor  is  aroused,  and  the  very  thunder  in  the  heavens  is  too  feeble,  to 
echo  the  voice  that  rolls  through  the  soul  of  the  poor  spiritual  bankrupt !  Also, 

(2.)  His  worldly  estate  was  invested  in  his  gods.  True,  only  200  shekels 
were  given  to  the  founder  for  making  the  images,  but  the  remaining  900,  spoken 
of  may  have  been  expended  on  the  ephod,  the  teraphim,  the  fitting  up  of  the 
house  as  a  temple,  the  support  of  the  priest,  and  other  matters  not  mentioned. 
But  the  main  idea  is,  that  for  the  future,  he  looked  to  the  proceeds  that  raiglit 
be  derived  from  consulting  his  oracle  as  his  real  income.  He  meant  in  fact  to 
trade  on  the  superstitious  fears  of  the  community  all  around  him.  His  **  house 
of  gods  "  was  his  mint.  He  coined  money  thereby.  How  easily  is  the  formalist 
deprived  of  his  religion  !  It  is  not  shut  up  in  the  iron  safe,  and  doubly,  trebly 
locked,  but  is  left  outside  the  dwelling,  exposed  to  the  fierce  winds,  and  a  prey 
to  the  passer  by.  Only  that  religion  we  can  keep  safely  in  all  circumstances, 
which  is  laid  up  in  our  heart  of  hearts,  and  which  gives  colour,  variety  and  force 
to  all  the  outgoings  of  the  life. 

How  different  from  Micah's  complaint  is  that  of  the  truly  pious  man  !  The 
light  of  God's  countenance  is  his  riches,  and  his  language  is,  ''  0  that  I  knew 
where  I  might  find  Him !  '*  "I  beseech  Thee,  show  me  Thy  glory !  "  ** Take  not 
Thy  Holy  Spirit  from  me ;  restore  to  me  the  joy  of  Thy  salvation,"  &c. 

527 


CHAP.  XII.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES, 


XVZZ,  The  extraordinary  development  of  an  evil  seed.  Vers.  SO,  31. 

Little  did  the  mother  and  son  think  that  day,  when  the  one  told  the  other, 
that  the  supposed  lost  money  was  after  all  safely  treasured  up,  and  when  the 
proposal  was  made  to  carve  a  graven  image  with  it,  that  the  litde  seedling 
would  in  a  few  months*  time  wax  into  a  wide-spreading  tree,  covering  hundreds 
of  homes  in  Israel  with  a  deadly  night-shade.  It  was  the  opening  of  a  littld 
poisonous  spring  which  soon  acquired  the  breadth  and  force  of  a  river,  and  for 
many  years  proved  a  curse  to  a  large  section  of  a  tribe  among  the  people 
of  GodL 


CHAPTER  XIX. 

ATbaqio  Chapter  in  Israel's  History. 

(Vers.  1-80.) 

E0MILETIC8. 

This  chapter  contains  the  history  of  an  unmitigated  abomination.  Perhaps 
the  best  comment  upon  it  is  to  pass  it  by.  But  nothing  in  human  life  does  God 
pass  by.  It  seems  to  be  needed,  that  there  should  be  a  few  specimens  recorded 
of  the  darkest  phases  of  human  depravity,  if  for  no  other  reason,  than  to  show  to 
what  depths  in  the  mire  of  sin  even  professed  worshippers  of  the  true  God  may 
sink,  when  given  up  to  the  lusts  of  their  own  hearts.  It  shows  also  how  far  the 
hand  of  redeeming  grace  has  to  stretch,  ere  great  sinners  can  be  received  back 
into  the  Divine  favour.  It  is  not  necessary  to  do  more  here,  than  to  take  a 
glance  down  the  page. 

What  we  have  got  here  is  a  specimen  of  the  low  morality,  which  existed  in 
the  only  church  of  God  on  earth  in  that  age.  Not  that  every  place  was  so  bad 
as  Gibeah,  but  that  such  a  scandal  was  possible  in  even  one  place,  so  soon  after 
\he  days  of  Joshua,  for  Phinehas,  who  was  for  some  time  contemporary  with 
Joshua,  was  still  acting  as  priest  before  the  ark  (ch.  xx.  28).  The  case  of  a 
Levite  is  selected,  one  of  the  sacred  tribe,  and  therefore  presumed  to  be  an 
exemplary  keeper  of  the  law.    We  hear  first  of — 

1.  His  unlawful  wedlock.  "  He  took  to  him  a  concubine."  This  tie,  what- 
ever it  was,  still  permitted  of  her  partner  being  called  her  **  husband  "  (ver.  3). 
But  it  was  essentially  a  doubtful  morality,  of  the  kind  described  in  Matt.  xix.  8. 
Such  a  connection  was  no  longer  tolerated,  when  the  Saviour  appeared  and 
brought  out  the  spirit  of  the  law  (Matt.  xix.  4-6). 

2.  The  unfaithful  conduct  of  the  woman.    Ver.  2.    A  heinous  sin  against 

God,  and  against  her  husband. 

3.  Little  is  made  of  so  great  a  crime.  Ver.  3.  The  husband,  though  a 
Levite,  appears  to  have  said  nothing  by  way  of  condemning  such  conduct. 
Had  the  sin  been  fully  and  faithfully  dealt  with,  and  suitable  penitence  been 
exercised,  there  might  then  have  been  reconciliation  with  God  through  the 
blood  of  atonement.  Till  that  was  done,  the  way  was  not  clear  for  a  proper 
arrangement  between  husband  and  wifa 

628 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES,  ohap.  xx. 

4.  To  cover  up  sin  will  not  bring  prosperity  (vers.  3,  4).  "  So  they  wrap  it 
up ''  (Prov.  xxviii.  13).  The  God  with  whom  we  have  to  deal  is  a  holy  God,  and 
"  evil-doers  shall  not  stand  in  His  sight." 

5.  The  greatest  sinner  is  invited  to  return  in  any  age*  However  great  God's 
abhorrence  of  sin,  it  is  the  uniform  testimony  of  His  word  that  "  all  manner  of 
sin  shall  be  forgiven  unto  men  "  on  due  repentance,  and  the  exercise  of  trust  in 
the  Lord  Jesus  as  our  Saviour. 

6.  The  great  harm  that  may  arise  from  indolence  and  indecision.   Vers.  6-8. 
The   fearful    tragedy  that  happened  might  have  been   prevented  had  the 

parties  in  the  case  shaken  off  their  sloth,  and  gone  their  way  at  an  early  hour. 
Love  of  ease  is  natural,  but  must  be  given  up  at  the  call  of  duty.  Delays 
are  dangerous. 

7.  The  people  of  God  in  this  world  live  in  the  midst  of  enemies, 
Ver.  10-13.     "  Woe  is  me  that  I  sojourn  in  Mesech." 

8.  Human  sympathy  is  dried  up  in  the  breasts  of  those  who  cast  off  God 
(ver.  15). 

How  different  the  case  of  Job  (ch.  xxxi.  32).  But  where  God  is  cast  out, 
there  is  no  room  for  man.  Where  there  is  no  fear  of  God,  selfishness  and 
inhumanity  reign  supreme. 

9.  7'he  value  of  one  friend  where  all  are  cold  (vers.  15,  20). 

Examples  :  The  thief  on  the  cross  (Luke  xxiii.  41)  ;  Onesiphorus  (2  Tim.  i. 
15-17)  ;  Timothy  (Phil.  ii.  19-21) ;  Epaphroditus  (Phil.  ii.  25,  27). 

10.  A  Canaamte  vice  found  in  an  Israelitish  city  (1  Cor.  xv.  33,  with 
Lev.  xviii.  22-25,  27,  28).  The  sins  of  Sodom  were  found  in  Benjamin,  showing 
how  ripe  they  were  for  ruin. 

11.  Radical  error  of  religious  belief  is  contemporaneous  with  grievous  lapse 
info  sin.  Wtien  the  Lord  of  the  conscience  is  denied,  the  chief  restraint  on  the 
depravity  of  the  heart  is  removed,  and  like  the  waters  of  the  lake  when  the 
barriers  are  burst  it  rushes  out  till  it  finds  its  lowest  depth, 

12.  The  doom  of  the  impenitent  offender  (ver,  25-27). 

13.  The  publication  of  the  horrid  crime  (ver.  29). 

14    The  sensation  of  horror  caused  throughout  Israel  (ver.  30)* 


CHAPTER  Xi 

ThB  ObT  for  VENaEANQB. 

(Vers.  1-48.) 


HOMILETIGS. 

1.  This  cry  was  universal  (ver.  1). 

'*  From  Dan  to  Beershebah,  with  Gilead."    There  was  not  a  dissentient  voice. 

LL  529 


OHAP   XXL  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 

2.  Tket/  were  in  earnest  (ver.  2).    Such  numbers.. 

3.  Their  desire  for  accurate  information  (vers.  3-7), 

4.  The  vengeance  must  he  summary  (ver.  8  etc.). 
6.  Ihey  were  united  in  their  purpose  (ver.  11). 

6.  A  whole  tribe  takes  part  with  the  wicked  city  (vers.  13,  14). 

7.  'Ihe  men  of  zeal  act  in  a  spirit  of  presumption  and  self  confidencBy  and 
are  defeated  (vers.  18-25j. 

The  first  step  was  wrong.  They  took  the  matter  into  their  own  hands,  and 
decided  for  themselves  to  punish  Benjamin.  And  then  having  settled  that, 
they  only  asked  God,  "Who  shall  go  up  first?"  Thus  to  put  God  out  of  His 
right  place,  and  decide  for  themselves  without  Him  was  a  very  grave  error. 
And  He  is  jealous  of  the  glory  which  is  due  to  His  great  name.  Even  on  the 
second  day  their  first  step  was  to  set  the  battle  on  array  against  Benjamin,  and 
then  they  come,  as  a  second  step,  to  ask  the  question  :  "Shall  we  go  up  at  all?" 
Which  means,  shall  we  do  that  which  already  we  have  decided  to  do?  God 
will  not  be  mocked,  so  He  again  left  them  to  themselves.  But  on  the  third 
day  they  were  full  of  penitence,  humiliation,  and  reverence,  and  left  themselves 
entirely  in  His  hands.     At  once  they  gained  their  point  (vers.  26-28.) 

8.  2  he  temporary  success  of  the  wicked,  no  proof  of  the  Divine  favour, 
Ver.  34,  35. 

The  Benjamites  being  twice  successful  in  pitched  battles,  thought  they  were 
to  be  successful  all  through,  and  that  God  was  not  frowning  on  their  conduct. 
So  is  it  with  many.  "  These  things  thou  hast  done,  and  I  kept  silence,  etc." 
(Eccl.  viii.  11).  Yet  suddenly  destruction  cometh;  "as  fishes  are  caught  in 
the  net,  or  birds  in  the  snare." 

9.  When  the  hour  of  the  wicked  comes  there  is  no  helper,    Ver.  40-45. 

Here  was  more  than  a  mere  chastisement.  It  was  almost  an  annihilation  of 
a  tribe  in  Israel.  It  was  the  "day  of  the  Lord,"  for  men  convicted  of  great 
crimes,  and  now  their  sins  came  into  remen  b  ance.  The  men  of  Gibeah  were 
swept  away  with  the  besom  of  destruction,  and  all  the  wicked  in  that  sinning 
land  were  "  cut  down  as  the  grass,  and  withered  as  the  green  herbs."  The 
sword  before,  the  fire  behind,  and  the  hosts  of  11  tribes  all  around  them,  there 
was  no  escape.  All  perished,  except,  a  very  small  reman t,  who  took  refuge  in 
one  of  Nature's  strong  fastnesses.  An  awful  beacon  to  warn  generations  to 
cornel 


CHAPTER  XXI. 

A  Great  Calamity  prevented^ 

(Verses  1-25.) 


HOMILETICS. 

1.  Zeal  ts  always  right  in  denouncing  sin. 

It  would  have  showed  a  lamentable  lack  of  the  reverence  dne  to  the  God  of 
Israel,  if  such  a  hideous  revelation  of  evil  as  that  which  was  discovered  at 
630 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES.  chap.  xxI. 


Gibeah,  had  not  met  with  a  loud  and  emphatic  protest  on  the  part  of  His 
covenant  ])e()ple.  The  Church  at  Ephesus  wos  commended  because  they  *' could 
not  bear  them  tljat  were  evil."  In  the  present  case,  tolerance  to  Benjamin 
would  have  been  treason  to  Jehovah — a  principle  too  often  forgotten.  Paul  at 
Athens  (Jude  iii. ;  Num.  xxv.  7,  8-11. 12).  Want  of  zeal  against  sin  condemned 
(1  Sam.  iii.  13  ;  Rev.  ii.  14,  15 ;  v.  20). 

2.  The  evils  of  rash  oath-making  (ver.  1).  Compare  with  rash  vowing — 
see  pp.  455,  457,  464. 

In  their  calm  moments  the  men  of  Israel  found  that  their  zeal  was  not 
according  to  knowledge,  for  they  practically  shut  themselves  up  to  exterminate 
the  tribe  of  Benjaojin.  Hence  a  backwave  of  great  sorrow  (vers.  2,  3).  "  There 
may  be  over-doing  in  well-doing.  That  is  not  good  divinity  which  swallows 
up  humanity." — Henry, 

3.  It  is  a  promising  sign  when  people  bring  their  difficulties  to  God  to  have 
them  settled  (ver.  2-3). 

It  was  doubtless,  He  who  suggested  to  them  the  question  in  v.  5,  the  answer 
to  which  led  to  a  solution  of  the  dilemma  that  now  stood  before  them.  The 
number  12  was  something  sacred  in  the  estimation  of  an  Israelite.  It  was 
mixed  up  with  the  promises  of  God,  and  with  the  whole  history  of  the  sacred 
people. 

4.  Great  rigour  characterised  the  expedients  of  Old  Testament  times. 
(ver.  10-12.) 

There  was  blood-shedding  in  the  punishment  of  the  sins  of  Gibeah.  Not 
only  on  one  town  did  the  sword  of  justice  fall,  but  from  Dan  to  Beersheba  all 
the  tribes  of  Israel  were  gathered  in  vast  numbers  on  the  field  of  battle.  In 
three  great  battles  did  the  blood  flow  till  65,000  men  had  fallen,  and  one  whole 
tribe,  the  children  of  the  youngest  brother,  was  left  in  desolation  before  the 
deadly  strokes  of  the  children  of  the  elder  brothers.  And  now  more  blood 
must  flow,  because  of  the  excess  of  blood  which  has  already  been  shed.  The 
men  of  Jabesh-Gilead  must  die  with  their  wives  and  chddren,  in  order  that 
the  young  women  may  be  got  for  wives  to  the  sons  of  Benjamin  that  are  yet 
spared.  We  might  almost  say  with  Jeremiah  (ch.  ix,  1,  2),  But  why  were  not 
the  virgins  in  Benjamin  itself  not  spared  ?  This  whole  history  is  a  specimen 
of  the  spirit  that  characterised  the  days,  when  as  yet  the  true  atonement  had 
not  been  made,  and  God  had  not  yet  become  the  *'  God  of  peace." 

5.  The  great  evils  which  flow  from  men  taking  the  vindication  of  God's 
honour  into  their  own  hands. 

The  instinct  of  every  true  man  of  God  would  say — Let  God  Himself  speak 
in  this  matter,  and  say  what  snould  be  done.  Man  is  not  fit  to  judge  for  the 
great  Jehovah.  This  was  the  great  error  of  the  Israelites  in  this  tragedy. 
They  decided  first  what  the  course  should  be,  and  then  asked  God  to  sanction  it. 
And  what  a  mess  they  did  make  of  it !  They  well  nigh  extinguished  the  name 
of  their  brother  Benjamin,  and  when  they  discovered  that  deplorable  mistake, 
how  much  rou>;h  soldering  work  did  they  go  through  to  put  matters  right  I 
Of  this,  the  manner  in  which  they  tried  to  find  wives  for  the  few  men  that  were 
left  of  the  desolate  tribe  is  a  melancholy  illustration  !  There  is  no  safety  but 
in  ever  asking  counsel  at  the  mouth  of  the  Lord.  "In  all  thy  ways  acknow- 
ledge Him,  and  He  will  direct  thy  paths." 

LL  2  631 


APPENDIX. 


ON  THE 


HIGHER  USE  OF  THE  BOOK  OF  JUDGES. 


It  Is  Important  to  inquire,  Is  there  any  distinctive  purpose  served  hy  the  Book  of  Judges 
as  one  of  the  sections  of  the  Sacred  Canon  1  Has  it  a  definite  aim  ?  and  if  so,  in  what  light 
should  it  be  read  so  as  to  reap  the  full  harvest  of  its  meaning  ?  Would  the  Scripture 
record  suffer  mutilation  were  this  part  of  it  left  out  ? 

This  question  is  the  more  pertinent,  that  not  a  few  writers  have  indicated  a  disposition 
to  underrate  the  value  of  this  Booh,  as  if  it  scarcely  deserved  a  place  in  the  Sacred  Canon  at 
all.  Its  authenticity  is  unquestionable,  yet  it  is  described  as  treating  of  the  most  secular 
view  of  Israelitish  history,  as  containing  matters  of  inferior  interest,  and,  in  spirituality 
of  tone,  as  falling  below  both  the  portions  which  precede,  and  those  which  follow  it. 
Its  morality  and  religion  alike  are  pronounced  to  be  of  a  declining,  not  an  ascending 
tendency.  The  Divine  purpose  is  less  obvious  in  the  succession  of  events,  while  the  darker 
shadows  of  the  narrative  are  unrelieved  by  devotional  compositions,  or  doctrinal  teachings, 
such  as  illuminate  and  elevate  the  writings  of  Moses,  and  the  annals  of  the  Jewish 
monarchy. 

Indeed  most  commentators,  if  they  do  not  speak  of  the  Book  in  a  positively  depreciatory 
tone,  yet  fail  to  iind  any  specific  purpose  served  by  it,  such  as  no  other  section  could  supply 
were  it  removed  from  its  place.     They  read  it  as  common  history,  and  look  too  exclusively 
at  the  immediate  bearing  of  the  events  recorded,  without  reference  to  ulterior  and  more 
sacred  ends.     Bachmann,  a  writer  of  great  critical  acumen,  sees  in  it  merely  a  time  of 
conflict  between  untamed  nature  and  the  discipline  enjoined  by  God.    Keil  views  this  as  a 
transition  period,  when  the  nation  was  taking  root  in  the  land,  and  familiarising  itself 
with  the  theocratic  constitution,  but  does  not  see  any  nexus  joining  it  with  the  other  books 
as  parts  of  one  scheme.    But  surely  400  years  was  too  long  for  a  transition  period.     Kitto 
says  the  people  were  now  placed  on  the  footing  of  acting  for  themselves  imder  the  reign 
of  the  theocracy,  but  that  the  record  is  simply  a  selection  of  facts  from  unconnected 
documents,  which  show  that  when  the  people  adhered  to  the  Lord  they  prospered,  but 
when  they  fell  away  they  suffered  great  afflictions,  and  again  when  they  repented  they 
were  delivered.     Lias  regards  this  as  a  period  of  collapse  of  the  theocratic  policy  of  Israel, 
which  was  so  pure  and  high-pitched  in  its  tone,  that  a  people  so  long  down-trodden  had 
not  the  moral  strength  to  bear  it.      Cassel  regards  this  as  the  first  period  of  the  nation's 
life  as  a  settled  people.      Formerly  a  minor,   it  now  takes  into  its  own  hands  the 
administration  of  its  God-given  constitution.     Unlike  other  nations,  it  knows  the  moral 
grounds  of  what  befalls  it,  and  on  obedience  it  knows  its  well-being  and  peace  depend. 
This  book  is  a  text-book  of  the  fulfilment  of  this  arrangement.    The  SjJeaher^s  Commentary 
regards  it  as  an  exhibition  of  the  moral  causes  which  led  to  the  fall  and  rising  again  of  the 
chosen  nation,  and  also  as  a  record  of  the  righteousness,  faithfulness,  and  mercy  of  God. 
The  preservation  of  Israel  through  this  period  was  not  an  accident,  but  part  of  God's 
eternal  plan  for  human  salvation,  and  therefore  the  record  forms  an  integral  portion  of 
scripture.     It  also  teaches  many  lessons.     The  Pulpit  Commentary  describes  it  as  a  heroic 
age  between  1500  and  1000  years  B.C.,  the  deeds  recorded  being  parallel  to  the  tales  of 
mythology  as  given  in  the  dim  twilight  of  history,  the  object  being  to  denounce  idolatry 
and  confirj!?  the  people  in  the  service  of  Jehovah,      Jamieson  regards  it  as  a  fragmentary 
history,  containing  a  collection  of  important  facts  and  signal  deliverances,  but  sees  no 
design  running  through  it.    To  give  only  one  other  name.  Bush  regards  it  as  a  filling  up 
of  the  gap  between  Joshua  and  the  kings,  describing  the  disorders  which  naturally  prevail 
where  there  is  no  magistracy  nor  settled  condition  of  society. 

All  these  verdicts  accurately  characterise  the  Book  in  certain  of  its  aspects,  yet  fail  to 
exhibit  its  whole  matter  brought  up  to  the  pro  er  stand  oiut  and  do  not  strike  the  vein  of 

533 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


instruction  which  specially  belongs  to  it  in  its  place.  There  are  considerations  on  tlie 
surface  which  should  do  more  than  redeem  it  from  the  charge  of  being  more  secular  than 
sacred,  and  comparatively  barren  of  the  elements  of  spiritual  profit.  It  is  no  trifling 
circumstance  that  it  should  be  selected  to  form  part  of  the  Sacred  Canon,  and  that  its  right 
to  occupy  that  place  should  have  remained  unquestioned  for  more  than  30  centuries.  On 
the  merest  glance  at  its  contents  too,  we  find  God's  hand  at  worJi,  and  God^s  voice  speaking, 
from  first  to  last  in  the  whole  series  of  events,  carrjang  on  a  course  of  dealing  with  His 
people.  It  is  a  history  full  of  displays  of  the  Divine  perfections  in  defending  His  people 
from  their  enemies,  and  still  more  in  His  marvellous  patience  and  forbearance  exercised 
towards  them  under  repeated  and  high-handed  rebellions.  It  also  contains  remarkable 
illustrations  of  faith,  and  true  nobility  of  religious  character  on  the  part  of  God-fearing 
men.  Not  a  few  of  the  brightest  names  on  the  roll  of  faith  in  Hebrews  ch.  xi.  are  found 
in  the  actors  whose  deeds  are  recorded  here.  It  is  to  the  Book  of  Judges  that  we  owe  a 
great  part  of  the  materials  of  the  noblest  prose-poem  that  adorns  the  page  of  Scripture. 
The  working  of  the  principles  on  which  the  Divine  Government  proceeds  runs  like  a 
thread  through  this  history,  and  we  see  in  real  life  the  practical  application  of  those 
principles  both  for  individuals  and  for  communities. 

Nor  is  it  unimportant  to  add,  that  this  the  latest  added  section  for  him  to  the  historical 
portion  of  the  holy  "Law  of  God,"  had  a  charm  for  the  sweet  singer  of  Israel,  while  he,  in 
name  of  all  the  spiritually-minded  of  every  age,  sings  with  deep  fervour,  not  only  of  the 
"statutes"  and  "judgments,"  and  "testimonies,"  but  also  of  the  "mighty  acts"  which 
it  recorded,  as  matter  of  exultant  thanksgiving  and  prai|>e.  In  the  Psalm  of  psalms,  the 
author  of  that  beautiful  ode  could  ill  have  wanted  this  portion  of  the  inspired  writings — ^an 
eighth  part  of  all  that  he  had,  as  illustrating  by  facts  the  principles  which  he  enunciated 
in  that  glowing  eulogy  of  the  Law  of  the  Lord.  In  apostolic  narratives  and  epistles,  we 
have  indeed  lamps  of  superior  splendour  shining  on  our  path  for  guidance  amid  the 
darkness,  yet  we  dare  not  refuse  those  lesser  lights  a  place  in  the  firmament  any  more  than 
we  should  think  of  blotting  out  the  stars  of  night,  because  of  the  greater  glory  of  the 
mid-day  sun. 

There  is,  however,  undoubtedly,  a  higher  view  of  this  portion  of  the  sacred  volume  than 
that  which  is  more  immediate.  There  are  considerations  which  impart  to  it  a  deep 
significance  of  meaning,  that  it  could  not  have  simply  as  a  repository  of  moral  teachings. 
Behind  all  these  actors,  and  these  acts,  there  is  a  large  design  sloidy  beivg  unfolded,  and  it 
is  in  tracing  that  design,  and  having  regard  to  its  aims,  that  we  find  the  principal 
instruction  contained  in  this,  as  in  every  other  section  of  the  Old  Testament  writings. 
This  will  appear,  if  we  reflect  on  the  following  points  : — 


I.  This  Book  has  a  relation  to  the  other  historical  Books  of  Old  Testament 
Scripture  as  part  of  a  great  plan. 

All  the  Boohs  of  the  Old  Testament  hang  together  as  links  in  a  chain.  None  of 
them  bring  out  their  principal  meaning,  when  isolated  from  the  others.  None  of 
them  contain  merely  desultory  history.  We  have  not  in  any  of  them  simply 
an  aggregate  of  facts,  selected  because  of  their  striking  character,  but  without 
regard  to  a  line  of  thought  and  intention,  running  on  from  the  beginning  to  the  end. 
However  disconnected  at  first  sight  the  compilation  may  seem,  the  moment  we  scan  the 
record  closely,  we  find  orderly  disposition  in  all  the  Books,  and  organic  connection  of  part 
with  part  in  a  symmetrical  whole,  in  a  manner  similar  to  the  regular  gradation  of 
geological  strata  in  the  crust  of  the  earth.  All  the  sections  are  pervaded  by  unity  of 
design,  and  each  in  its  place  is  needed  to  develop  that  design.  From  Genesis  to  Nehemiah, 
and  again  to  Malachi,  there  is  continuity  unbroken,  a  gradual  unfolding.  All  the  sections 
are  dovetailed  into  each  other  with  the  closest  fitting — a  unity  like  that  of  the  human 
frame,  M'hich  is  "fitly  joined  together,  and  compacted  by  that  which  every  joint  supplieth." 
Those  take  an  unwarrantable  liberty  with  the  record,  who  would  displace  its  parts,  under 
the  idea  that  the  relation  in  which  they  stand  to  (ach  other  is  purely  accidental.  Much 
of  the  force  and  significance  of  the  history,  and  especially  the  comprehensive  bearing  of 
the  whole,  lies  in  the  light  which  is  shed  on  the  whole  by  the  relative  adjustment  of  one 
part  with  another,  as  well  as  by  the  progressive  development  of  the  underlying  design. 

In  this  chain  the  Book  of  Judges  forms  a  link.  Were  it  a-wanting  a  gap  would  be  made 
which  none  of  the  other  sections  could  supply.  As  the  human  body  would  be  maimed  by 
the  loss  of  a  finger,  so  would  the  Old  Testament  Revelation  lose  its  symmetrical  complete- 
ness, were  this  portion  taken  away.  In  every  chapter  there  is  design,  and  a  great  purpose 
all  through.  Besides  the  immediate,  there  is  a  higher  teaching  from  its  being  part  of  a 
connected  plan  which  is  gradually  i3eing  unfolded  in  each  successive  Book,  and  which, 
when  completed,  constitutes  the  Revelation  made  in  the  former  times. 
634 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


No  formal  announcement  is  indeed  made  of  there  "being  any  such  carefully  devised  and  far 
rracliing  schcmy  in  the  first  part  of  the  sacred  volume,  nor  is  there  any  literal  detail  given 
of  it  on  the  writLcn  page.  Special  reasons  there  were  for  withholding  the  information. 
But  such  a  scheme  >8  everywhere  assumed  to  exist ;  it  underlies  the  whole  series  of  the 
writings,  and  impartb  a  hallowed  savour  and  deep  significance  to  the  whole.  The  scheme 
is  acted  upon  rather  thaM  openly  announced,  and  we  learn  of  its  existence  from  inference 
and  meditation  rather  than  from  direct  teaching.  We  see  the  shadow  of  a  substance 
which  has  not  yet  appeared  full  on  the  page.  Here  and  there  significant  utterances  are 
given  respecting  a  glory,  which  is  to  distinguish  the  ages  to  come,  and  bring  in  a  golden 
age  such  as  the  world  has  not  yet  seen.  For  the  time  present,  a  course  of  gracious  dealing 
is  kept  up,  notwithstanding  repeated  apostacies,  the  grounds  of  which  are  not  yet  apparent, 
but  the  key  to  which  future  ages,  it  is  predicted,  will  supply.  And  when  we  pass  down  to 
the  dawn  of  these  future  times,  constant  references  are  made  to  the  voices  that  were 
uttered  in  the  past,  and  the  prognostications  that  were  then  given  of  the  "  mystery  "  that 
is  now  revealed.  Thus,  alike  from  the  substratum  of  Old  Testament  Scripture,  and  from 
the  whole  surface  of  the  New  Testament  teaching,  the  testimony  converges  as  to  the 
existence  of  a  comprehensive  scheme,  which  the  inspired  writers  of  the  former  Dispensation 
were  commissioned  to  make  the  subject  of  their  narratives. 

II.  This  plan  is  wrapped  up  in  the  History  of  a  People, 

In  the  Old  Testament,  the  history  of  a  people  is  the  only  object  which  appears  in  the 
foreground.  An  account  of  the  seed  of  Abraham  from  their  origin  onwards,  the  more 
remarkable  events  that  befell  them,  the  history  of  unique  character  which  they  led,  its 
lights  and  shadows,  sins  and  chastisements,  their  wonderful  emancipation  from  bondage 
and  lifting  up  from  being  slaves  to  become  princes,  their  remarkable  wilderness  journey 
and  rest  in  the  promised  land,  the  many  changes  that  chequered  their  history  as  the 
generations  went  and  came,  with  all  the  bright  streaks  of  light  that  poured  down  on  them 
from  the  mountain-tops  of  prophecy,  as  they  came  nearer  the  sun-rising  of  the  golden  era  of 
the  future — all  this  fills  up  the  entire  foreground  of  the  Old  Testament  writings.  No  other 
topics  are  introduced,  not  even  the  histories  of  any  of  the  great  empires  of  the  remote  era, 
however  imposing  in  grandeur,  or  romantic  in  detail,  except  the  few  points  where  their 
history  incidentally  crosses  that  of  the  "  peculiar  people,"  to  whom  all  other  people  are 
ever  made  second.  Abstract  the  history  of  these  people  from  the  page,  and  you  have  an 
almost  perfect  blank.  And  when  narrative  gives  place  to  prophecy,  it  is  God's  dealings 
with  that  people  that  form  the  absorbing  theme  of  the  record. 

But  in  addition  to  this,  they  appear  in  the  foreground  under  a  peculiar  character.  They 
do  not  live  for  themselves.  It  is  not  to  invest  themselves  with  a  striking  aureola  of  glory, 
that  such  a  distinguished  position  is  assigned  them.  They  are  but  the  instruments  of 
bringing  glory  to  another.  They  are  a  public  people.  Their  history  does  not  belong  to 
themselves.     They  are  set  for  a  "spectacle,"     In  the  expressive  phrase  of  the  prophet,  they 

are  ^^men  wondered  at  "  (Zech.  iii.  8.)  (n^iC)  (Joel  ii.  30.)  men  of  5?^«5  to  others,  not  only 
types  but  men  of  instruction — a  people  whose  vocation  it  is  to  give  an  instruction  about 
God's  character  and  ways  such  as  is  given  in  no  ordinary  way.  They  are  to  be  regarded  as 
mirrors,  in  which  is  reflected  the  shadow  of  a  glory  that  is  not  yet  directly  visible.  They 
serve  in  fact  the  purpose  of  an  open  Bible  to  the  world.  Jehovah  Himself  says  of  them, 
"This  people  have  I  formed  for  myself,  &c."  "  Ye  are  my  witnesses."  When  God  called  them 
to  Himself,  he  said,  "  All  people  among  whom  thou  art  shall  see  the  work  of  the  Lord,  for 
it  is  a  terrible  thing  that  I  will  do  with  thee."  (Comp.  the  Church  of  the  New  Dispensation 
i.  Cor.  iv.  9  ;  Eph.  iii.  10;  ii.  Thess.  i.  10.) 

Since  then  no  other  material  stands  on  the  page,  we  are  shut  up  to  regard  this  history  as 
the  revealing  medium  of  God's  character  and  purpose  to  men  upon  the  earth.  From  the 
first  rise  to  the  latest  stage  of  that  history,  the  shapings  of  that  course,  the  complexion  of 
its  events,  the  exhibitions  of  character  made,  and  the  vicissitudes  of  condition  experienced, 
the  movements  of  the  Divine  hand  constantly  seen,  and  the  utterances  of  the  Divine  voice 
heard,  the  Divine  treatment  of  the  people,  and  their  treatment  of  their  God — in  the  whole 
panorama  of  life  presented,  we  see  the  photograph  of  a  heavenly  design,  which  God  chooses 
to  make  known  to  man  through  the  living  history  of  men. 

It  is  equally  clear  that  the  scheme,  which  is  by  this  history  foreshadowed,  is  the  same 
with  that  which  forms  the  chief  subject  matter  of  the  New  Testament  Dispensation. 
For  if  the  prominent  subjects  of  that  Dispensation  are  not  everywlierc  pointed  to  in  the 
history  of  that  people,  they  cannot  be  referred  to  in  the  Old  Testament  at  all.  seeing  it 
has  no  other  matter  of  which  it  treats  ;  yet  the  Messiah  Himself,  aud  all  New  Testament 
writers,  are  express  in  their  assurances  that  the  Old  Testament  throughout  is  just  a 
foreshadowing  of  what  was  to  take  place  under  the  New,  when  the  Messiah  should  come. 
We  are  therefore  shut  up  to  the  conclusion  that  this  history  is  in  some  sense  full  of  the 
scheme  of  the  Christian  Redemption,  unless  we  are  to  regard  the  whole  New  Testament 
testimony  as  a  lie. 

635 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


The  special  function,  then,  of  the  history  of  this  people,  was  to  g-ive  pre-intimation  of 

the  coming  of  '*  the  Christ,"  and  to  foreshadow  His  great  work.  This  they  were  to  fulfil, 
not  merely  by  formal  announcements  of  His  advent  in  "the  fulness  of  time,"  nor  by 
bearing  oracular  messages,  or  becoming  the  depositaries  of  Divine  communications,  nor  by 
having  a  system  of  sacred  laws,  and  Messianic  institutions  established  among  them  (though 
all  these  functions  they  fulfilled),  but  their  whole  history  as  a  people  was  to  be  a  living 
prediction  of  that  wonderful  Person  and  His  glorious  work ;  for  they  were  to  he  in  themselves 
living  embodiments  and  ilhistrations  fguratively  of  the  great  salvation-work  which  the 
Messiah  was  to  accomplish.  Their  kistory  was  to  be  the  ground  plan  of  what  that  work 
was  to  be.  Their  very  existence  was  a  sign  and  a  pledge  that  the  Messiah  would  come,  for 
if  there  were  no  Messiah  to  come  they  had  in  that  case  no  mission  to  serve.  The  very  fact 
that  there  was  such  a  people,  and  that  they  had  such  a  history,  was  virtually  His  casting 
His  shadow  before  Him  in  token  that  He  was  on  His  way. 

in.  The  history  of  this  people  takes  its  rise  In  a  Messianic  germ. 

The  bud  of  the  Messianic  scheme  we  find  in  the  few  pregnant  statements  which  God 
made  to  their  father  Abraham  when  choosing  him  out  from  the  rest  of  the  world.  It  was 
not  yet  time  to  do  more  than  show  the  scheme  in  embryo,  so  that  we  are  to  make  the  most 
of  the  slightest  indications  in  the  passages  referred  to  (Gen.  xii.  1-3  ;  xiii.  14-17  ;  xv.  5-7, 
18-21 ;  xvii.  1-8,  16,  19,  21 ;  xxii.  1-18).  From  a  somewhat  close  examination  of  these 
passages  the  following  points  are  made  out : — 

(1.)  This  people  (Abraham's  seed)  owe  their  very  existence  to  a  Messianic  purpose.  When 
first  spoken  of  they  had  as  yet  no  existence ;  they  were  only  a  seed  promised.  For  Abraham 
was  childless,  and  he  was  now  past  age  for  becoming  a  father  in  the  natural  course  of 
things.  Therefore  a  seed,  if  given  him  at  all,  must  be  a  special  gift — a  seed  that  would 
not  have  come  into  existence  at  all  but  that  a  great  Messianic  purpose  was  to  be  served. 
It  was  wholly  an  act  of  grace.  "  The  Lord  had  need  of  them  "  to  usher  in  a  scheme  of 
grace,  that  it  might  have  its  accomplishment.  Their  object  in  existence  was  not  to  serve 
the  common  ends  of  human  life,  but  to  be  the  medium  of  conveying  Messianic  blessings  to 
a  perishing  world. 

That  this  intimation  really  refers  to  the  Messiah  is  distinctly  afiB.rmed  by  the  inspired 
writer  in  Gal.  iii.  16,  where  notice  is  taken  that  the  word  '*  seed"  (3?~'l)  is  in  the  singular 
number,  meaning  one  person,  not  the  whole  people.  It  is  as  if  he  had  said,  "  in  the  seed 
of  thy  seed,"  i.e., '  in  one  illustrious  Person  of  thy  posterity,  who  shall  one  day  appear, 
shall  the  blessings  of  salvation  be  bestowed  on  all  the  nations  of  the  earth. 

(2.)  They  furnish  the  line  of  the  Messiah" s  ancestry.  This  salvation-bringing  seed  was 
not  to  appear  for  a  considerable  time.  It  was  not  fit  that  so  great  a  coming  should  take 
place  abruptly,  or  without  much  heralding.  A  very  elaborate  system  of  preliminariei 
must  be  gone  through,  in  order  to  usher  in  suitably  an  event  so  glorious,  and  so  mighty 
in  its  effects  on  the  history  of  mankind.  Large  time  must  be  allowed  for  preparation. 
A  wide  gap  of  history  must  be  filled  up  with  much  foretelling  of  the  great  future. 
The  history  of  Abraham's  natural  posterity  fills  up  the  gap  and  furnishes  a  line  of 
ancestry  from  whom  the  Messiah  should  come.  Had  this  people  altogether  ceased  to 
exist,  as  on  several  occasions  they  were  on  the  point  of  doing,  the  Messiah  could  not  have 
come  as  Abraham's  seed,  for  in  that  case  the  line  from  Abraham  would  have  been 
broken. 

This  fact  alone  imparts  a  sacred  character  to  the  history  of  the  nation,  leading  them  to 
be  separated  from  the  rest  of  the  world,  and  marked  out  as  a  people  holy  unto  the  Lord. 
It  was  an  honour  incomparably  higher  than  any  nation  ever  enjoyed,  and  raised  them  from 
the  lowest  level  to  the  height  of  becoming  a  "peculiar  people"  and  a  "holy  nation." 
Hence  the  greatest  care  is  taken  of  the  line  of  their  descent.  It  was  in  Isaac,  not  in 
Ishmael ;  in  Jacob,  not  in  Esau,  that  Abraham's  promised  seed  was  called.  The  whole 
people  are  reckoned  to  be  a  "  holy  seed,"  a  church  of  the  living  God,  and  the  strictest 
charge  is  given  against  their  intermarrying  with  any  of  the  heathen  nations.  Hence  they 
were  specially  protected  as  a  people,  amid  all  the  desolations  that  swept  over  their 
distracted  land. 

(3.)  A  yet  more  sacred  and  instructive  fact  in  their  history  was  their  intimate  union  with  the 
Messiah.  They  were  his  brethren  1 — children  together  of  one  father,  members  of  the  same 
family  circle  !  Descended  of  the  same  stock,  they  were  of  one  blood  with  Him.  He  was  bone 
of  their  bone,  flesh  of  their  flesh  !  He  was  one  of  themselves,  had  a  common  lot  with  them, 
a  common  history,  and  common  prospects.  What  icas  theirs  was  His,  and  what  was  His 
was  theirs  !  It  was  not  merely  a  union  after  the  flesh.  In  all  cases  where  there  was  faith, 
the  covenant  was  ratified,  and  union  after  the  spirit  was  enjoyed.  Where  there  was  no 
faith,  the  privileges  of  the  union  after  the  flesh  were  forfeited.  But  all  who  truly  believed 
were,  in  an  important  sense,  counted  as  the  seed,  and  reckoned  one  with  the  Messiah,  as  the 
head  is  with  the  members,  the  husband  with  the  wife,  and  the  tree  with  the  branches. 
536 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES, 


There  is  entire  commnnity  of  interest.  And  they  have  a  common  property  in  each  other. 
He  belongs  to  them,  and  they  belong  to  Him.  '*  They  are  all  of  one  "  (Heb.  ii.  11).  Hence 
He  often  calls  them,  "my  people,"  "my  chosen,"  "a  peculiar  treasure  unto  me,"  "He  that 
toucheth  you,  toucheth  the  apple  of  mine  eye."  Most  wonderful  language,  as  showing  the 
vast  stretch  and  inexpressible  tenderness  of  the  Divine  love  1  One  might  pause  for  hours 
in  contemplating  such  a  spectacle  of  loving-kindness  as  this.    0,  the  depth  ! 

There  is  not  only  intimacy,  but  identification.  As  in  the  New  Testament,  those  who 
believe  are  said  to  be  "  in  Christ,"  so  here,  the  word  "  seed  "  is  not  loosely,  but  advisedly, 
put  in  the  singular  number,  as  if  to  denote  alternatively,  either  the  one  Christ,  or  the  one 
people  of  Israel  (comp.  Acts  ix.  4,  5  ;  Eph.  v.  30).  This  oneness  between  the  Messiah  and 
His  people  lays  a  foundation  broad  and  deep  for  all  the  wonderful  outgoings  of  the  Divine 
love  towards  them  ;  also  for  putting  so  high  a  price  on  them  as  compared  with  others,  for 
the  extraordinary  tenderness  of  the  Divine  treatment  given  them,  and  for  the  watchful 
care  taken  of  them  through  all  the  lights  and  shadows  of  their  marvellous  history. 

(4.)  This  people  in  their  history  are  a  grand  illustration  of  the  blessings  the  Messiah  wa» 
to  bring  to  men.  They  present  the  picture  of  a  pejple  already  brought  nigh  unto  God. 
Instead  of  a  formal  announcement  that  the  Messiah  was  to  bless  men  by  "  bringing  them 
to  God,"  to  pardon,  reconciliation,  and  access  to  the  free  and  full  enjoyment  of  God's  favour 
and  friendship,  the  thing  is  set  forth  as  already  done  in  the  experience  of  this  people. 
They  are  seen  actually  taken  into  covenant  relationship  with  Him.  With  amazing  conde- 
cension  He  adopts  them  to  Himself  saying,  "  Israel  is  my  son,  my  firstborn."  And  again, 
"  Ye  shall  be  my  people  and  I  will  be  your  God  "  (Ex.  iv.  22  ;  vi.  7).  Thus  they  witness  to 
the  fact  not  only  that  Messiah,  the  healer  of  the  breach,  would  come,  but  that,  at  His 
coming.  He  would  clear  away  the  insuperable  obstacles  that  prevented  guilty  man  from 
enjoying  free  intercourse  with  his  God.  It  was  in  the  faith  that  the  Messiah  would  do  this 
when  He  came,  and  do  it  effectually,  that  God,  many  hundreds  of  years  before  it  was  done, 
admitted  this  people  to  be  near  to  Himself,  pardoned  their  sins,  and  gave  them  the  enjoy 
meut  of  the  Divine  fellowship.  When  He  did  come  He  not  only  made  an  eternal  redemp- 
tion for  men  in  the  future,  but  also  "  by  His  death  made  redemption  for  the  transgressions 
that  were  under  the  first  covenant  "  (Heb.  ix.  15). 

To  make  such  a  covenant,  transcendent  though  the  favour  was,  was  but  to  keep  up  the 
same  proportion  of  love,  as  to  give  them  the  Messiah  Himself  to  become  one  of  their 
number.  If  He  and  they  are  so  closely  united,  the  same  regard  which  is  felt  for  Him,  must 
also  be  extended  to  them,  and  so,  on  that  side,  we  account  for  this  stupendous  act  of  conde- 
cension.  "They  are  joint  heirs  with  Christ"  (Rom.  viii.  17).  "God  is  the  lot  of  their 
inheritance,  &c."  (Ps.  xvi.  5).  The  same  smiles  of  the  Divine  countenance,  and  the  same 
high  proofs  of  the  Divine  esteem,  which  are  bestowed  on  Him,  are  for  His  sake  shown  to 
those  with  whom  He  is  practically  identified.  Also,  because  they  are  the  people  of  the 
Messiah,  therefore  they  belong  to  the  Father,  and  with  Him  become  children.  "  All  mint 
are  thine." 

XV.  The  history  of  this  people  shows  the  scale  on  which  Messianic  blessings 
should  flow. 

Of  this,  in  one  respect,  the  history  recorded  in  the  Book  of  Judges  is  an  eminent  illus- 
tration. Had  there  been  no  Messiah  and  His  solemn  work,  not  a  paragraph  of  that  history 
could  have  been  written.  But  for  the  regard  had  to  His  act  of  "giving  Himself  an 
offering  and  a  sacrifice  unto  God  for  a  sweet-smelling  savour,"  how  could  the  purity  of  the 
Divine  administration  be  maintained,  in  passing  over  400  years  of  sinning  history  on  the 
part  of  the  covenant  people,  while  all  that  was  done  was  simply  to  give  them  occasional 
chastisements?  Though  more  than  1000  years  should  elapse  before  the  Messiah  came, 
it  was  the  respect  had  to  the  vindication  of  the  Divine  character  which  He  was  certain  to 
make  when  He  did  come  (Rom.  iii.  25,  26),  that  God  forgave  the  multitudes  of  transgressions 
committed  by  the  sinning  people.  That  glorious  offering  removed  the  obstacles  out  of  the 
way.  And  we  see  here  how  far  God  can  go  in  loving  His  creatures,  when  the  barriers  to 
the  outgoings  of  His  love  are  removed ;  how  much  He  can  forgive ;  how  long  He  can 
forbear  ;  how  tenderly  He  can  pity  ;  how  freely  He  can  receive  back  the  returning  penitent ; 
how  close  He  can  come  with  His  fellowship  ;  and  how  intimately  He  can  ally  Himself 
with  guilty  men,  while  yet  retaining  all  His  jealousy  for  the  vindication  of  His  spotless 
holiness,  and  unimpeachable  righteousness. 

Three  things  show  the  extensive  scale  on  which  Divine  blessings  flow  cut  through  the 
Messiah. 

1.  The  closenest  of  the  relation  to  Ood  established  through  the  Messiah.  Far  more  than  a 
promise  is  made.  An  act  is  done  ;  a  step  is  taken  ;  a  new  relation  is  formed.  God  places 
Himself  in  the  very  closest  intimacy  with  His  people.  He  makes  a  gift  of  Himself  to  His 
own  creatures,  all  vile  and  unworthy  though  they  be.    /  will  be  your  God  1    They  are 

537 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


warranted  to  claim  Him  in  all  the  glory  of  His  character,  and  in  all  the  fulness  of  His 
perfections.  This  is  a  reach  of  love,  that  goes  beyond  single  blessing-s.  It  is  an  inexhaust- 
able  storehouse  that  never  can  be  emptied.  All  the  names  of  friendship  and  love  are 
swallowed  up  in  this  all-comprehensive  phrase — your  God.  The  Godhead  is  pledg-ed  to 
provide  all  that  is  needed  to  constitute  a  happy  and  glorious  existence.  The  standard  of 
love  is  fixed  once  for  all.  Can  we  wonder,  if  a  people  with  whom  such  a  covenant  is  made, 
through  the  Messiah,  is  never  cast  away  1 

2.  A  fountain-head  of  Divine  Promises  is  opened.  God's  favour  does  not  go  out  in  single, 
isolated  blessings,  but  He  proceeds  by  system.  The  granting  of  one  blessing  pledges  His 
consistency  and  His  faithfulness  to  give  others.  These  again  become  an  ever  augmenting 
reason  for  going  on  with  a  course  of  blessing  without  measure  and  without  end.  His  own 
character  leads  Him  to  continue  to  love  those  whom  He  once  begins  to  love.  It  is  His 
manner  to  "  rest  in  His  love."  '*  I  have  loved  thee  with  an  everlasting  love."  "  Mercy  is 
built  up  for  ever."  The  period  for  blessing  is  their  whole  immortality  (Isa.  liv.  10).  He 
takes  up  ground,  in  granting  the  gift  of  the  Messiah,  from  which  He  cannot  draw  back. 
Were  any  different  course  followed  afterwards,  it  would  reflect  on  His  unchangreableness. 

3.  The  channel  being  opened,  Divine  love  flows  out  according  to  its  own  natural  riches 
(Eph.  ii.  4,  7  ;  Rom.  viii.  32).  God's  love  never  needs  to  be  awakened  nor  stimulated.  It 
never  slumbers  and  never  cools.  When  left  to  itself  it  never  flickers,  but  shines  forth  with 
noontide  strength.  "  All  things  are  yours  " — is  its  natural  tone.  "  Blessings  to  the  utmost 
bounds  of  the  everlasting  hills  ! "  No  blessing  left  ungiven.  All  that  men  can  hope 
for  on  earth,  and  all  they  can  enjoy  through  eternity  in  heaven.  The  ever  full  fountain  as 
well  as  the  flowing  streams — all  are  given. 


Without  going  further  into  the  explanation  of  the  Messianic  germ,  we  are  now  prepared 
to  answer  the  two  important  questions  which  are  pertinent  to  our  present  purpose,  namely. 
What  is  the  distinctive  character  of  this  Book  of  Judges  1  and.  What  is  the  place  which  it 
occupies  in  the  chain  of  the  sacred  history  ?      Our  reply  to  the  first  of  these  questions  is  :^ 

I.  It  exhibits  the  God  of  Providence  in  His  dealings  with  tlie  Israelitish 
people  as  a  Messianic  people. 

It  is  impossible  to  read  the  history  of  this  people  as  common  history.  It  is  clear  that 
they  are  a  sacred  people,  that  they  sustain  a  peculiarly  endearing  relation  to  the  great 
Jehovah,  that  their  history  is  made  use  of  as  a  medium  for  revealing  the  purport  and 
principles  of  a  great  scheme  beyond  themselves,  that  in  it  we  see  the  reverse  side  of  the 
picture  of  the  Messiah's  work  in  redeeming  His  people  out  of  the  hands  of  their  enemies, 
and  that  in  the  whole  history  we  have  the  shadow  of  a  great  substance.  It  was  under  the 
canopy  of  a  gracious  covenant  that  this  people  were  ushered  into  being.  That  was  the 
root  out  of  which  all  that  is  peculiar  in  their  history  springs.  Every  part  of  their  national 
life  has  the  presence  of  that  fact  in  it,  and  nothing  can  be  wanting  in  instructiveness 
which  has  so  sacred  a  shadow  spread  over  it.  It  lifts  up  the  whole  history  to  a  high  table- 
land of  interest  peculiar  to  itself.  Nothing  is  of  common  or  secondary  importance.  We 
see  God  in  close  contact  with  this  people  every  moment,  watching  over  them  with  a 
peculiarly  tender  interest.  They  are  never  out  of  His  sight.  He  is  ever  doing  marvellous 
things  on  their  behalf,  and,  through  His  dealings  with  them,  making  a  glorious  display  of 
His  Divine  Perfections. 

This  nation  personated  the  people  whom  the  Ifessiah  was  to  redeem,  and  exhihited  a 
pattern  of  the  Messianic  scheme  practically  applied.  This,  indeed,  is  not  directly  said. 
We  must  look  into  the  organic  life  of  the  people  to  find  it  out.  It  was  a  natural  human 
life  that  they  led,  and  we  are  to  interpret  it  according  to  the  laws  of  right  reason.  Yet  in 
and  through  that  life,  we  see  Messianic  principles  constantly  illustrated,  and  Messianic 
blessings  constantly  bestowed.  Gods  dealings  with  that  people  have  no  other  basis.  Their 
history  has  no  other  lines  on  wliich  to  run.  That  history  was  to  serve  the  purpose  of  a 
pictorial  representation.  It  was  really  God  in  Christ  dealing  with  His  people,  though  the 
revelation  of  the  Christ  was  not  yet  made.  But  the  whole  series  of  facts  and  dealings  in 
that  nation's  life  showed  there  was  something  great  waiting  to  be  revealed.  The  history 
served  all  the  purposes  of  a  parable,  without  ceasing  to  be  true  and  natural  history.  Hence, 
on  every  page,  we  see  the  Messiah's  footsteps,  though  we  do  not  hear  His  voice,  or  behold 
His  form.  A  picture  of  tlie  g-reat  work  He  was  to  accomplish  is  set  before  us  in  its  mani- 
fold details,  rather  than  a  description  is  given  in  words.  No  other  theory  will  explain  the 
facts  and  everywhere  New  Testament  testimony  bears  it  out. 

In  confirmation  of  this  we  specify  a  few  particulars  : — 

1.  Their  covenant  God  takes  the  direction  of  their  history  into  His  own  hand.     They  are 
Tiot  allowed  to  lead  ^tich  ^  life  as  they  themselves  might  desire — whether  to  go  in  this 
538 


EOmiETIC  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES. 


direction  or  that,  what  persons  they  may  associate  with,  or  must  avoid,  what  incidents  may 
happen,  what  peace  and  prosperity  they  may  enjoy,  or  adversity  they  may  suffer,  what 
changes  may  happen  in  their  career — all  this  God  keeps  expressly  in  His  own  hand.  He 
chooses  the  way,  appoints  the  sunshine  or  the  shade,  fixes  the  lot,  and  in  all  its  parts  maps 
out  what  the  life  is  to  be.  Nothing  is  left  to  accident,  or  to  the  people  themselves.  Who 
can  doubt  that  He  whose  fing-er  in  Providence  is  always  pointing  out  the  way  will  map  out 
their  history  in  harmony  with  that  Messianic  design  of  which  His  mind  is  full  ?  The 
moulder  will  make  the  plastic  materials  in  his  hands  take  the  shape  which  he  desires  for 
the  execution  of  his  plans.  Indeed,  the  entire  framework  of  this  history,  with  all  its 
details,  is  full  of  shadows  of  the  Messianic  scheme.  We  may  not  be  able  in  every  instance 
to  say  what  is  typical  or  not,  but  that  a  strong  typical  vein  runs  through  the  whole  we 
have  the  best  warrant  to  conclude  from  the  fact  that  the  God  of  the  Messianic  scheme 
takes  the  moulding  of  the  life  of  this  people  into  His  own  hands,  and  this  taken  in 
conjunction  with  the  other  fact,  that  He  raised  up  such  a  people  for  the  very  purpose  of 
making  them  the  medium  of  revealing  His  Messianic  thought. 

2.  He  cliooses  them  not  for  any  righteousness  of  their  own  (Jud.  ii.  15,  16,  18).  Their  own 
character  is  uniformly  denounced.  They  are  said  to  be  "  stiff-necked,"  "  rebellious,"  "  not 
obeying  God's  voice,"  "  provoking  God  to  anger,"  "  forsaking  the  Lord  and  serving  other 
gods."  The  covenant  containing  the  blessings  was  made  with  the  fathers,  Abraham,  Isaac 
and  Jacob,  who  were  men  of  faith.  Notwithstanding  the  repeated  and  continual  violations 
of  the  covenant  by  their  descendants,  God  made  no  breach  of  the  covenant  on  His  side  for 
the  sake  of  His  own  great  name.  This  is  everywhere  asserted  as  the  aim  kept  in  view  in 
bestowing  blessings.  But  that  which  was  really  to  preserve  the  honour  of  His  name  was 
what  the  Messiah  should  do  when  he  came.  By  His  death,  the  Christ  was  "  to  declare  the 
righteousness  of  God  for  the  remission  of  the  sins  that  were  past." 

3.  He  uniformly  regards  them  as  a  redeemed  people.  He  always  reminds  them  of  the 
fact  never  to  be  forgotten,  that  he  brought  them  up  out  of  Egypt,  which  was  to  them  a 
land  of  bondage  (Jud.  ii.  1,  12  ;  vi.  8,  13  ;  x.  11  ;  xix.  30).  By  reminding  them  of  this 
fact  He  means  to  say,  "  When  I  first  met  with  you,  you  were  *  not  a  people,'  but  a  multitude 
of  slaves,  groaning  helplessly  under  intolerable  burdens,  but  1  adopted  you  to  become  my 
own  people,  and  delivered  you  with  an  outstretched  arm  from  a  terrible  destruction.  I 
have  saved  your  life,  and  regard  you  as  redeemed  to  Myself.  Being  my  own  redeemed  ones, 
I  will  not  cast  you  off  "  (Ps.  xciv.  14).  The  endearment  which  this  implies  is  expressed 
in  Ps.  xliv.  1-4.  The  putting  this  fact  in  the  foreground  uniformly  is  not  an  accident,  but 
an  express  design. 

4.  From  the  first  they  are  regarded  as  an  accepted  people.  The  gift  of  the  land  of  which 
they  were  in  possession,  was  a  proof  that  they  were  accepted  by  Jehovah,  and  this  was 
emphasised  by  the  fact  that  great  and  mighty  nations  were  dispossessed  through  great 
displays  of  Divine  power,  that  the  accepted  people  might  have  it  for  inheritance.  Jehovah 
did  not  forget  that  the  blood  of  sprinkling  was  upon  them  (Ex.  xxiv.  5-8).  By  this  they 
were  cleansed  and  made  holy  unto  the  Lord,  and  by  this  they  became  a  consecrated  people, 
entitled  to  the  privileges  of  the  covenant.  All  His  dealings  with  them,  especially  the 
deliverances  He  wrought  for  them,  proved  that  He  acknowledged  them  to  be  His,  notwith- 
standing their  many  and  grievous  transgressions.  He  raised  up  all  the  Judges — it  was  He 
whose  Spirit  rested  on  the  Judges — and  it  was  He  who  really  discomfited  all  the  oppressors. 

5.  He  takes  to  Himself  the  name  of  the  God  of  Israel.  That  is  Messianic  ;  for  on  no  other 
footing  than  as  redeemed  and  made  nigh  unto  God,  through  a  Mediator,  could  this  name  be 
warrantably  used  by  them  (Jud.  iv.  6  ;  v.  3,  5  ;  vi.  8,  10,  26  ;  viii.  34  ;  x.  10 ;  xi.  21,  23,  &c.) 

6.  All  their  approaches  to  God  were  required  to  he  made  through  a  Mediator.  Moses 
at  first  was  such  a  Mediator,  as  the  giver  of  the  law,  and  the  constant  messenger  between 
God  and  the  people.  Aaron  was  such  as  high  priest.  All  the  priests  were  so.  The  Judges 
were  so  also,  though  their  work  was  temporary  for  the  most  part.  They  had  no  successors 
in  office.  In  all  public  approaches  made  to  God  there  was  either  some  person,  place  or 
altar  as  the  centre  to  which  the  approach  was  made  (see  Jud.  ii.  1,  5  ;  iv.  3-7  ;  vii.  7-12, 
25-27  ;  xi.  11  ;  xviii.  31  ;  xx.  1-3,  18,  23,  28  ;  xxi.  1,  2,  19).  The  essential  character 
of  Christ  is,  that  He  is  Mediator  for  ever.  He  wears  human  nature  on  the  throne.  "He 
appears  in  the  presence  of  God  for  us  "  (Heb.  viii.  6  ;  ix.  12  ;  x.  19,  20). 

7.  A  high  ideal  of  religious  character  and  life  is  set  before  them.  This  is  specially 
marked  in  the  pages  of  Deuteronomy,  where  the  great  Mediator  of  the  old  covenant  gathers 
into  one  view  in  sublime  language  the  stupendous  works  of  mercy  and  power  God  had 
done  for  this  people,  and  shows  in  the  most  impressive  manner  how  much  more  is  looked 
for  from  them  than  from  others,  by  how  much  their  privileges  were  greater.  Something 
similar  is  set  forth  in  Joshua.  It  is  less  so  in  Judges.  Yet  it  is  clear  everywhere 
that  more  is  expected  of  this  people  than  of  their  neighbours  round  about  them.  In  ch.  ii.  it 
is  reckoned  a  great  sin  for  them  to  mingle  at  all  with  the  society  of  thos(3  around  them,  and 
severe  complaint  ifl  made  against  the  incipient  forms  of  idolatry ;  while  no  reproof  or 

539 


HO  MI  LET IC  COMMENTARY :  JUDGES. 


correction  of  any  kind  is  sent  to  any  of  the  idolatrous  nations.  They  are  suffered  to  walk 
in  their  own  ways,  which  in  the  end  bring  ruin.  Israel  is  chastened  betimes  that  he  may 
not  be  condemned  with  the  world  when  it  is  too  late.  In  ch.  v.  high  commendation  is 
given  to  those  who  offered  themselves  willingly  to  fight  for  the  honour  of  Israel's  God. 
vers.  9,  14,  15 — while  strong  condemnation,  if  not  cursing,  is  directed  against  those  who 
kept  in  the  background  when  there  was  danger  to  those  who  rallied  round  the  standard  of 
Israel's  God,  vers.  16,  17,  23.  Great  blessing  and  honour  on  the  other  hand  are  awarded 
to  those  who  showed  zeal  and  courage  in  defending  the  good  cause,  vers.  18,  24,  &c.  All 
the  foremost  men  of  the  times,  too,  are  expected  to  be  men  of  great  faith,  of  self  denial, 
of  prayer,  of  humility,  and  of  courage.  And  the  masses  of  the  people  are  commended 
because  they  gathered  in  large  numbers  calling  for  summary  vengeance  because  in  one 
city  of  Israel  an  enormous  crime  had  been  committed  which  was  of  common  occurrence  in 
nearly  all  the  cities  of  the  heathen. 

8.  Their  remarkahle  nearness  to  God^  and  their  full  enjoyment  of  His  fellowship.  They 
saw  the  f  orth-puttings  of  His  mighty  power  against  the  nations  around  them,  and  saw  it 
all  done  on  their  behalf.  The  stars  of  heaven  and  the  waters  of  the  earth  fought  against 
their  Siseras  and  Jabins.  Besides,  in  Mizpeh  first,  and  then  in  Shiloh,  the  presence  of  the 
ark  implied  that  Jehovah  was  still  among  them,  and  that  access  to  Him  was  free  in  the 
appointed  way. 

9.  The  kind  of  treatment  they  received  at  the  Divine  hand.  This  treatment  was  so  kind 
and  considerate,  so  tender  and  patient,  so  wise  and  just,  so  faithful  and  true,  so  long- 
suffering  and  unchanging.  The  same  thing  is  seen  in  their  great  deliverances,  and  in  the 
extraordinary  interpositions  sometimes  made  on  their  behalf,  also  in  the  rich  provision 
made  oftentimes  for  the  supply  of  their  wants,  and  even  in  their  very  chastisements. 

10.  The  many  Judges  specially  raised  up  for  their  deliverance.  These  judges,  or  shoplietim 
were  really  saviours,  as  the  word  implies,  and  as  it  is  given  in  Neh.  ix.  27.  They  were  the 
gifts  of  Him  who  watched  over  this  people,  and  raised  them  up  in  special  emergencies  to 
save  the  people  from  destruction.  They  were  not  chosen  by  the  nation,  nor  did  they  enter 
the  office  by  hereditary  right.  They  were  men  selected  by  the  angel  Jehovah,  authoritatively 
commissioned  by  Him,  had  His  Spirit  resting  on  them  to  qualif}'  them  for  their  work, 
received  their  instructions  from  Him,  and  were  .helped  to  victory  by  His  presence  with 
them.  Who  can  doubt  that  they  were  miniature  resemblances  of  the  Messiah  to  come, 
seeing  it  was  Messiah's  people  whom  they  delivered,  and  it  was  the  Messiah  Himself  who 
sent  them  1 

11.  The  several  appearances  of  the  Angel  of  the  Lord  (ch.  ii.  1,  etc. ;  vi.  11,  etc. ; 
xiii.  3,  etc. ;  perhaps  v.  23).  There  can  be  little  doubt  that  this  Angel  was  really  the 
Messiah  Himself,  though  not  yet  revealed  in  proper  form,  for  the  proper  name  is  Angel- 
Jehovah,  and  He  personates  Jehovah,  speaking  in  His  name,  claiming  His  authority,  and 
acting  like  Him.  Through  the  whole  history  He  appears  at  different  times,  showing  His 
sleepless  interest  in  this  people,  and  indicating  that  He  was  the  real  guardian,  and  actor 
behind  the  scenes.  Our  limits  forbid  farther  expansion.  In  all  this,  however,  we  see  God 
making  use  of  this  people's  history  as  a  medium  dimly  to  foreshadow  His  great  Messianic 
purpose. 

II.  The  place  which  this  Book  occupies  in  the  chain  of  the  Sacred  History. 

The  entire  history  of  this  people  consists  in  the  unfolding  of  the  three  great  promises 
which  God  made  to  Abraham  when  He  called  him  out  of  the  world  that  He  might  establish 
a  church  in  his  family.  As  detailed  in  Gen.  xii.  1-3,  7,  these  promises  were — (1)  To  multiply 
his  seed  into  a  nation  ;  (2)  To  give  them  a  fertile  land  for  a  home  ;  (3)  To  make  them  the 
means  of  blessing  all  the  families  of  the  earth.  Hundreds  of  years  passed  away,  and 
Abraham  himself  went  down  to  the  grave  waiting,  but  believing  and  hoping,  though  not 
seeing.  But  God  did  not  forget  His  word.  Slowly,  at  first,  then  more  quickly,  afterwards 
rapidly,  the  seed  began  to  increase,  to  grow  and  multiply  until  they  seemed  to  become 
numerous  as  the  stars,  and  the  land  was  filled  with  them.  This  is  recorded  in  the  last  part 
of  Genesis,  and  first  part  of  Exodus,  and  constitutes  the  fulfilment  of  the  first  promise. 

The  history  proceeds  throughout  the  larger  part  of  Exodus  and  the  whole  of  Numbers, 
during  which  two  mighty  obstacles  have  to  be  overcome  in  order  to  the  fulfilment  of  the 
second  promise.  The  people,  though  numerous,  are  in  bondage  to  the  greatest  power  then 
on  earth,  and  must  be  set  free.  That  is  done  by  Jehovah  expressly  in  fulfilment  of  His 
promise  made  to  Abraham.  Also,  a  waste,  barren  desert  has  to  be  traversed  by  a  whole 
nation  of  people  on  foot,  more  than  one-half  consisting  of  women  and  children.  From  all 
the  perils  of  a  forty  years'  journey  through  that  desert  they  are  next  set  free,  and  this 
brings  them  to  the  borders  of  their  promised  possession.  But  another  obstacle  still 
interposes.  Tall  and  mighty  Anakims  are  in  possession,  dwelling  in  cities  walled  up  to 
heaven,  and  having  iron  chariots  and  formidable  heats  of  combatants.  These  must  be 
540 


EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  JUDGES, 


cleared  out,  and  the  land  left  empty  ere  the  true  heirs  of  the  inheritance  can  come  in. 
This  also  is  done  by  God  through  the  instrmentality  of  Joshua,  but  in  a  manner  that  only 
God  could  do.  At  the  same  time,  the  land,  one  of  the  fairest  countries  under  heaven,  is 
formally  distributed  among  all  the  tribes.  This  constitutes  the  fulfilment  of  the  second 
promise,  and  is  recorded  in  the  Book  of  Joshua. 

But  before  going  farther,  something  must  be  done  on  the  people's  side.  God  cannot  go 
on  blessing  the  people  till  they  show  themselves  worthy  of  it.  Laws  and  institutions  had 
meantime  been  given,  the  observance  of  which  was  to  be  the  test  of  loyalty  to  their  God. 
God  having  done  as  He  said,  having  first  increased  Abraham's  seed  as  the  stars  of  the  sky, 
and  then  given  them  one  of  the  most  beautiful  homes  the  earth  could  furnish,  it  was  time 
for  the  people  so  favoured  to  be  put  to  the  test,  as  to  whether  they  would  be  loyal  to  Him. 
The  Book  of  Judges  records  the  result  of  this  trial  of  their  character.  Hitherto  they  had 
not  been  in  circumstances  sufficiently  favourable  for  the  trial.  The  period  of  bondage  was 
not  suitable,  neither  was  the  wilderness  journey ;  but  now,  being  settled  in  their  lovely 
home,  and  a  magnificent  series  of  works  of  Almighty  favour  to  look  back  upon,  to  show 
the  fidelity  and  loving  kindness  of  their  covenant-God,  they  were  in  the  very  best  position, 
and  under  the  most  encouraging  inducements  to  show  their  fidelity  to  Him  in  return.  All 
that  had  been  done  was  done  for  them  as  a  matter  of  pure  favour,  and  they  themselves 
had  solemnly  protested  they  would  love,  serve  and  be  loyal  to  their  God  amid  surrounding 
treason. 

Now  for  the  answer.  Through  the  whole  Book  of  Judges  the  question  is  put,  were  they 
loyal  or  not  1  For  400  years  the  question  is  put,  that  the  answer  may  be  deliberate,  that 
it  may  be  given  by  many  generations,  in  case  the  verdict  of  one  should  not  be  sufficient. 
Moses  and  Joshua  too  are  removed,  and  they  are  left  entirely  to  themselves  that  the 
decision  may  be  all  their  own.  And  when  the  answer  comes,  it  is  humiliating.  We  will  not 
serve  the  God  that  brought  us  up  from  Egypt,  and  gave  us  this  land  to  dwell  in.  We  prefer 
to  serve  the  gods  of  the  nations  round  about  us,  who  will  allow  us  to  walk  after  the  lusts 
of  our  own  hearts,  and  pursue  our  own  ways.  The  whole  Book  from  the  first  page  to  the 
last  is  a  record  of  rebellion  and  apostasy.  There  is  nothing  but  broken  vows,  renunciation 
of  allegiance,  forgetfulness  of  obligations,  high-handed  treason,  and  hideous  crimes. 
Nothing  could  be  in  greater  contrast  than  the  infidelity  and  treachery  of  the  people  on  the 
one  hand,  and  the  sacred  regard  paid  by  their  God  to  His  word  on  the  other.  If  the  pre- 
vious Books  are  a  monument  of  the  uprightness  and  faithfulness  of  the  Divine  character, 
this  Book  of  Judges  is  a  record  of  the  worthlessness  and  untrustworthinesa  of  the 
covenant  people,  and  is  full  of  lessons  on  self  knowledge,  humility,  and  contrition  of  heart. 
What  a  coafirmation  of  the  deceitfulness  and  unteachableness  of  the  human  heart  I 
(Jer.  xvii,,  9.)  At  its  close  the  cry  is,  O,  for  priest  or  prophet,  or  king — anything  rather 
than  leave  the  people  to  themselves. 

Hence  the  connection  of  this  book  with  those  that  follow  in  the  series ;  but  had  this 
book  been  a- wanting,  a  most  important  proof  would  have  been  left  out,  of  the  necessity  of 
the  future  arrangements  which  God  made  for  the  guidance  of  His  people  in  their  onward 
history.  Above  all,  a  broad  foundation  ia  laid  for  the  everlasting  song  of  praise  to 
redeeming  grace. 


641 


INDEX    OF    SUBJECTS. 


Abel-meholah  :  its  site  and  associations, 
369. 

Abi-ezer  :  the  native  place  of  Gideon,  326, 
381. 

Abimelech,  son  of  Gideon  :  purport  of  name, 
411  ;  his  compact  with  the  men  of 
Shechem,  412  ;  his  followers,  412  ;  slew 
all  his  brethren,  412  ;  made  king,  412  ; 
severe  reprimand  from  Jotham,  413  ; 
his  course  one  of  unmitigated  wicked- 
ness, 417;  particulars,  417;  tragic  but 
brief  history,  422  ;  God  sent  evil  spirit 
between  Abimelech  and  Shechemites, 
422  ;  what  they  did  during  his  absence, 
422 ;  Gaal  leads  them  on,  422 ;  his 
artful  addresses,  422,  423  ;  Abimelech's 
sudden  return  and  steps  taken,  424  ; 
destroys  their  city,  424 ;  they  find 
refuge  in  the  tower,  425 ;  all  are 
destroyed  by  fire,  425 ;  Thebez  next 
attacked,  and  Abimelech  slain  by  a 
woman,  425  ;  no  sorrow  at  his  death, 
426  ;  why  so  wicked  a  man  allowed  to 
act  as  a  judge,  433. 

Acceptable  service,  must  be  cordially  given, 
287. 

Accusation  of  guilty  people,  311. 

Adoni-bezek :  his  sin  and  punishment,  13  ; 
his  acknowledgment  of  God's  justice,  13. 

Adversity  in  youth  often  a  blessing,  446. 

Auctions  of  God's  people  never  penal,  124  ; 
they  have  a  sin-bearer,  an  unusual 
arrangement,  124  ;  legal  punishment  of 
their  sins  already  borne,  125 ;  precise 
character  of  their  afllictions,  126 ; 
chastisement,    not    legal    punishment, 

126  ;  purpose  served  by  these  afflictions, 
to  keep  alive  a  sense  of  what  is  due  to 
God's  character  and  law,  126  ;  to  show 
the  offensive  nature  of  sin,  127 ;  to 
impress  the  duty  of  cultivating  holiness, 

127  ;  afflictions  from  God's  hand,  and 
from  man's  hand,  128  ;  on  God's  side 
much  cause  for  sending  them,  on  man's 
side  not,  129  ;  God  never  errs  in  sending 
affliction,  man  often,  129  ;  God  never 
has  an  unholy  spirit,  man  often,  129  ; 
with  God  is  always  a  wise  result,  not 
so  with  man,  130 ;  God  more  easily 
entreated  by  prayer,  130. 

All-seeing  eye  of  God,  56. 

Amalekites.  349,  158  ;  Ammon  and  Amalek, 
158  ;  Ammonites,  435. 

Ammon,  King  of,  and  his  pretext  for  fight- 
ing, 443. 


Angel  of  the  Lord,  and  Names  of,  31,  82,  33, 
38,  326,  469. 

Anger,  the  Lord's,  severity  of,  55 ;  effects 
of,  59  ;  the  Love  that  lingers  in,  67  j 
kindled,  435. 

Answer  to  prayer,  the  Lord's  gracious,  10 ; 
manifold  meaning  of,  10. 

Apostacy  renewed  by  the  people,  399 ;  Israel's, 
66  ;  tendency  to,  91 ;  least  expected,  91  ; 
causes — native  depravity  and  want  of 
faithful  parental  training,  92. 

Army  of  the  Lord's  deliverance,  The,  357  ; 
its  equipment,  359  ;  extreme  smallness, 
359  ;  God's  choice,  and  the  principle  of 
the  cboice,  362 ;  the  character  of  the 
army  chosen,  363  ;  picked  men,  faith  in 
their  cause,  careful  in  use  of  means, 
and  loyal  to  their  Leader,  363,  364. 

Askkalon,  re-occupied  by  the  Cananites,  6, 
also  481. 

Ashtaroth,  meaning,  32,  33,  96. 

Ass-colts,  why  these  used,  not  horses,  434, 

Asses,  white,  252. 

Baal :  how  the  word  applied,  32. 

Barak  :  his  name,  parentage,  place  of  birth, 
etc.,  187  ;  his  commission.  187,  188 ; 
weak  faith,  etc.,  188 ;  his  faith  sorely 
tried,  188 ;  good  heart  put  into  the 
people,  189  ;  his  army,  how  made  up, 
269,  270 ;  the  battle,  270 ;  how  God 
fought  for  him,  271. 

Barley- cake :  crushing  the  tent  of  the  chief, 
360. 

Battle,  The,  the  Lord's  only  while  fought 
with  Him,  18,  19. 

Battle  with  the  Midianites,  the  Lord's  own, 
hence  army  must  be  small,  358 ;  God 
gives  confidence  by  ordering  everything 
Himself,  359  ;  God  was  the  chief  actor 
in  the  battle,  360 ;  objects  of  the  battle, 
360,  361. 

Battlefield,  lessons  from  the,  235 ;  church's 
battles  first  fought  with  carnal  weapons, 
235  ;  yet  to  serve  a  spiritual  end,  236  ; 
often  a  commanded  duty,  237  ;  variety 
of  instruments  employed  by  God,  237 ; 
God  uses  men  unconsciously  to  them- 
selves, 238 ;  He  draws  Sisera  t«  the 
battlefield,  238,  239 ;  the  Lord's  battles 
gained  by  faith ;  He  honours  faith  be- 
cause faith  honours  Him,  239 ;  God's 
people  should  help  each  other  in  the 
day  of  battle,  240;  the  triumphs  of 
Gospel  owing  to  mutual  help-giving,  241. 


!L 


INDEX. 


Beer,  in  Benjamin,  414. 

Beginning  and  continuing",  11, 

Benjamin,  inactivity  of,  23. 

Bethel,  and  Luz,  25. 

Bethelite,  the  traitorous,  25,  26. 

Beth-shittah,  369. 

Bezek,  what  it  was,  6. 

Besetting  sins,  32 ;  every  age  has  its  own, 
321  ;  every  man  has,  321 ;  through  these 
Satan  overcomes,  322. 

Blood,  shedding  of,  without  Is  no  remission, 
347. 

Bochim,  49. 

Bodies  as  well  as  souls.  He  cares  for,  467, 

Bondage  renewed,  192. 

Book  of  Judges  :  purpose  served  by,  App.  533  ; 
its  value  underrated,  533 ;  many  do  not 
strike  the  right  vein  of  instruction,  533  ; 
proofs  on  the  surface  which  show  its 
importance,  534  ;  its  charm  for  David, 
and  connection  with  Heb.  xi.,  534 ;  great 
design  running  through  it,  534 ;  part  of 
a  great  plan,  and  all  the  Books  linked  in 
a  chain,  534 ;  plan  wrapped  up  in  history 
of  a  people,  535 ;  they  always  in  the  fore- 
ground and  New  Testament  testimony, 
535 ;  history  takes  rise  in  Messianic 
germ,  536,  537  ;  history  shows  the  scale 
on  which  Messianic  blessings  flow,  537 ; 
close  relation  to  God  through  Messiah, 
fountain-head  of  promises  opened,  and 
Divine  love  flows  out  according  to  its 
natural  fulness,  538;  exhibits  G-od  dealing 
with  His  people  as  a  Messianic  people, 
they  personated  those  whom  the  Messiah 
was  to  redeem,  with  particulars  which 
show  His  treatment  of  them  as  a  covenant 
people,  538,  539  ;  the  place  of  this  Book 
in  the  chain  of  history,  540  ;  the  people's 
answer  as  to  keeping  the  covenant,  a 
complete  failure,  541. 

Buried  :  why  is  a  good  man's  burial  so  often 
recorded?  435,  466  (Jud.  viii.  32  ;  ii.  9  ; 
xii.  7,  10,  12,  15  ;  xvi.  31). 

Calamity,  great,  prevented,  531,  532. 

Canaanites,  who  1  5,  6,  96 ;  marked  for 
destruction,  67 ;  the  area  they  occupied, 
68. 

Caves,  natural,  308. 

Character,  the  real,  revealed,  and  import- 
ance of  82  ;  human  character  worthless 
before  God,  324  ;  heart  forgets  mercies, 
324  ;  harrowing  spectacle  to  spiritual 
eye,  wonder  God  does  not  cast  us  off, 
falsity  of,  in  all  ages,  324. 

Character  of  others,  misapprehension  in 
judging,  352  ;  a  good,  formed  in  secret 
will  ere  long  be  honoured  openly,  451 ; 
death  brings  out  the  real  character,  515. 

Chastening  of  the  Lord,  73. 

Chastisement,  God's  and  man's,  14  ;  salutary 
effect  of  former,  132  ;  particulars,  132, 
133,  134,  135 ;  renewed  chastisement, 
158,  169;  in  faithfulness,  169;  uses  a 
new  rod,  170  ;  more  severe,  170  ;  helps 
enemies  against  own  people,  171 ; 
severely  chastises  but  not  destroys,  193  ; 
gevere,  follows  highhanded  sin,  513.^   .^ 


Christ's   service,    supports    of   exceed    its 

anxieties,  351. 

Church,  God's  dealings  with,  worthy  of 
widest  publicity,  265  ;  must  be  purified 
when  receiving  special  marks  of  Divine 
favour,  273  ;  mixed  state  of,  in  this 
world,  285  ;  in  every  age  has  its  songs, 
307 ;  Gideon's  case  a  picture  of  its 
experience  in  every  age,  372  ;  numerous 
enemies,  heterogeneous,  persistent 
attacks,  every  advantage  to  enemy, 
yet  inherent  power  of  truth — ^hope  for 
missions,  373-377. 

Chushan-rishathaim,  force  of  word,  97. 

City  of  palm-trees,  158. 

Classes  men  in  Deborah's  poem,  252. 

Comforts  stored  for  God's  people  where  least 
expected,  493. 

Commandments,  broken,  41. 

Confession  :  humble,  and  sorrow  for  sin, 
436  ;  better  than  prevarication,  451. 

Confidence  in  weakness,  359. 

Conflict,  preparation  for,  349. 

Conscience,  microphone  of  accusing,  16,  17. 

Co-operation  :  the  benefits  of,  and  the  limits 
of  ,9. 

Conscience  compels  a  tribute  to  religion, 
520. 

Contrasts  in  the  history  of  God's  people, 
414  ;  reasons  why  Abimelech  came  after 
Gideon,  414, 415;  contrasts  in  the  "day 
of  the  Lord,"  296  ;  of  character  and 
destiny,  298  ;  the  undecided  in  the  day 
of  decision,  298  ;  those  zealous  for  God 
at  all  risks,  298 ;  defiant  enemies  and 
their  sympathisers,  299. 

Control  over  all  states  and  moods  of  mind, 
God's,  379. 

Course  of  life,  to  take  into  one's  own  hands 
is  dangerous,  509. 

Cried  unto  the  Lord,  97,  159,  187,  435. 

Cry  for  vengeance,  629  j  particulars,  530. 

Dan  :  territory  narrowed,  7. 

Dangers  unseen,  delivered  from,  325. 

Dark  nights  and  bright  mornings,  266  ; 
reasons  for  joy  as  well  as  sorrow,  267; 
promise  to  return  when  they  repent, 
267  ;  endearing  relation  to  God,  could 
not  bear  continual  turning  of  back, 
267  ;  all  the  nights  of  the  good  end  in 
day,  267. 

Day  of  reckoning,  God's  severity  in,  878. 

Day  of  the  Lord  :  force  of  meaning,  296 ; 
such  days  needed  and  why,  296  ; 
reasons,  297. 

Dead  leaders,  7. 

JDeborah  :  her  name,  oflSce,  place  of  judg- 
ment, 187  ;  her  character,  188  ;  goes 
with  Barak,  189 ;  the  troops  rush  at  her 
call,  269. 

Dealing,  God's  change  of,  74. 

Dealings,  God's,  always  end  with  compas* 
sion  for  His  own  people.  380. 

Dealing  with  the  enemy,  Gideon's  final,  396. 

Deceit,  ways  of,  end  with  injury,  494. 

Deceitfulness  of  heart,  in  supposing  it  can 

bribe  conscience,  320. 
^Deliverance,  Divine,  and  the  human  instru- 


INDEX, 


iif. 


mentality,  140  ;  state  of  mind  to  which 
God  grants  it,  140  ;  sorrow  for  the  past, 
140 ;  prayer  to  God  as  their  own  God, 
141 ;  God's  readiness  to  give  relief  to 
the  appearance  of  penitence,  141 ;  before 
long,  142 ;  the  instrument  is  a  man 
of  God's  selection,  142,  143  ;  one  man 
only  employed,  143  ;  suitableness  of 
person  chosen,  144  ;  Spirit  of  the  Lord 
the  source  of  all  qualification,  146  ;  the 
qualifications  conferred  on  Othniel,  148  ; 
state  particulars,  148,  149  ;  new  deliver- 
ances in  answer  to  prayer,  173  ;  manner 
of,  174  ;  qualifications  of  the  instrument 
175,  176 ;  Providence  co-operates, 
177. 

Deliverance  again  provided,  226  ;  story  of 
sin  told  in  one  verse,  that  of  deliverance 
fills  the  page,  226,  190  ;  God,  the  author 
of  the  deliverance,  227  ;  the  Bible  is  the 
story  of  sin  and  of  a  great  deliverance 
from  it,  226  ;  Israel's  prospects  hopeless, 
227 ;  suitable  instruments  found  to  do 
God's  work  in  the  evil  day,  228  ;  fit 
means  and  Divine  power,  229  ;  a  strong 
faith  and  its  reward,  229  :  a  weak  faith 
and  its  chastisement,  230;  God's  ordering 
of  the  battle  a  presage  of  victory,  231  ; 
the  Lord  going  before,  232  ;  Sisera 
roused,  232  ;  his  great  host,  232  ;  the 
Lord  Himself  had  gone  out,  233 ;  account 
of  Sisera's  discomfiture,  233  ;  a  battle  of 
faith  and  Deborah  the  guiding  spirit, 
233  ;  the  people  all  men  of  faith  and 
Barak  rises  with  the  occasion,  233 ;  all 
filled  with  the  Spirit,  234  ;  visible  signs 
of  Jehovah's  presence,  234  ;  host  of 
Sisera  struck  with  terror,  234  ;  not  a 
man  left,  234  ;  Sisera  in  the  tent  of  Jael, 
235  ;  Arab  rites  of  hospitality,  235  ; 
covered  him  with  a  mantle,  235 ;  com- 
plete victory  for  Israel. 

Deliverance,  barrier  to,  removed,  341 ;  God's 
directions  for  removal  of,  341 ;  every 
particular  specified,  343  ;  Joash  defends 
his  son,  343. — The  Lord's  completion  of, 
380. 

Deliverance,  great,  to  be  gratefully  remem- 
bered. 503. 

Dens  in  the  mountains,  308. 

Departure  from  God,  desolation  produced 
by,  257  ;  no  liberty,  a  life  of  danger,  of 
degradation,  stop  to  the  industries  of 
life,  no  peace,  no  repose  from  troubles, 
a  spirit  of  trembling,  257,  258 ;  the 
signal  for  a  man's  ruin,  514. 

Departs  from  Him,  the  Lord,  a  point  in 
sinner's  course  when,  514. 

Desolation  of  the  land  by  the  Midianites,  810. 

Destroyer  of  church's  enemies  the  mildest 
of  friends  to  his  own  people,  500. 

Dew  on  the  fleece,  general  meaninjj,  354 ; 
the  needful  blessing  of  a  languishing 
church,  354  ;  the  qualities  whioh  this 
dew  imparts,  355,  356 ;  it  is  for  God  to 
give  or  withhold  this  blessing,  857 ;  He 
gives  it  in  answer  to  prayer,  357. 

Di£Glcultie3  brought  to  God  to  be  settled  is  a 
promising  sign,  631. 


Disaffection  in  a  family  circle  brings  chas- 
tisement, 446. 
Discipline  necessary  for  holy  ends,  72 ;  the 

uses  of,  84. 
Discontent  with  a  Divinely  marked  lot,  524. 
Dishonour :  God's  list  of,  281 ;  description 

of,  281-284. 
Diversity  of  instrumentality  glorifies  God, 

475. 
Divine  dealings,  reason  for  repeated,  70. 
Divine  truth  into  the  heart,  difficalties  of 

getting,  94. 
Doing  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  166. 
Doubts,  a  great  man's,  under  great  trials^ 

353. 
Dream,  and  its  interpretation,  360. 
Duty  to  God,  in  fulfilling,  to  some  a  hard 

battle,  492. 

Easily-besetting  sins,  special  force  of  evil  in, 
191. 

East,  children  of  the,  309. 

Eglon,  the  Lord  strengthened,  158 ;  they 
served  him,  159 ;  present  sent  to,  159 ; 
a  fat  man,  159 ;  his  sius  of  peculiar 
enormity,  164  ;  account  for  his  severe 
punishment,  164 ;  little  attention  paid 
to  the  greatness  of  his  sins,  1 65 ;  com- 
plexion of  God's  dealings  in  Old  Testa- 
ment times,  165. 

Ehud,  appears  in  the  difficulty,  159 ;  the 
dagger,  its  length,  concealed,  159  ;  offer- 
ing of  the  present  and  the  retinue,  159  ; 
his  tumirig  again  alone  to  the  King, 
160  a  secret  word,  160  ;  the  way  opened 
for  being  alone  with  the  King,  160  ;  the 
summer  parlour,  the  private  stair,  mes- 
sage from  God,  160  ;  why  this  said,  and 
the  manner  of  the  death,  161 ;  the 
lulling  of  suspicion  and  the  delay  which 
occurred,  161 ;  his  rapid  movements 
and  help  coming  from  all  quarters,  162  ; 
his  strategy  and  the  result,  162 ;  a 
special  event,  165  ;  Ehud's  conduct 
censured  by  many,  162 ;  different  views 
of  his  act  in  killing  Eglon,  163  ;  but  he 
acted  under  Divine  guidance,  163. 

Ekron,  re-occupied  by  the  Philistines,  6. 

Encouragement,  Divine,  and  human  weak- 
ness, 351 ;  in  Gideon's  case,  359 ;  the 
enemies  to  be  overcome,  359 ;  proofs 
that  God  was  at  work  to  save,  360. 

End  deplorable,  of  an  evil  course,  104. 

Enemy's  country,  need  of  watchfulness  in, 
490 ;  reasons  given,  490. 

Enemies,  the  Lord's,  threatening,  9;  no 
league  to  be  made  with,  43. 

Enhakkore,  the  spring  of  him  who  cried, 
504. 

Envy  and  jealousy,  their  hateful  character, 
883,  384,  385. 

Ephraim :  unbelieving  inactivity,  7, 2? ;  men 
of,  quarrel  with  Gideon,  380  ;  and  with 
Jephthah,  464 ;  their  biting  words,  465 ; 
and  fearful  punishment,  466. 

Etam,  the  rock,  and  Samson's  dwelling  there 
for  a  time,  495. 

Evil  seed,  extraordinary  development  ot^ 
623. 

MM 


ir. 


INDEX. 


Evils  flow  from  taking  vindication  of  God*B 
honour  into  our  ownihands,  531. 

Examples,  evil,  power  of,  29. 

Experience  personal,  the  effective  method  of 
teaching,  94. 

Explanation  as  to  last  five  chapters,  516. 

Exposure  to  temptation,  constant,  leads  to 
sin,  510. 

Face,  God's,  not  seen  without  ceasing  to 
live,  478. 

Failure  in  fidelity,  causes  of,  77, 

Faint,  yet  pursuing,  381. 

Faith,  obedience,  and  victory,  24,  25. 

Faith :  a  strong,  and  its  reward,  229 ;  a 
weak,  and  its  chastisement,  230 ;  a 
strong  faith  in  Barak's  army,  280 ; 
trusted  God  to  bring  out  any  issue, 
280 ;  held  God's  glory  to  be  the  most 
sacred  of  all  things,  280  ;  believed  God 
would  be  faithful  to  his  promises  and 
purposes,  281 ;  faith  draws  the  line 
between  the  false  and  the  true,  281. 

Faith :  great  trial  of,  for  Gideon  and  his 
followers,  358  ;  mighty  deeds  of,  those 
who  do,  boast  least,  493. 

Faithful  life,  a,  inheritance  which  comes  to 
53 ;  the  influence  exerted  by,  53  ;  the 
honour  which  men  render  to,  54  ;  the 
rebuke  which  is  given  by,  54. 

Faithfulness  in  a  declining  time,  God 
honours,  348. 

False  worshippers  take  refuge  in  imitating 
the  manner  of  the  true,  625. 

Fathers,  the  best  of,  may  have  the  worst  of 
sons,  416  ;  reasons,  416,  417. 

Fearful,  the,  presence  of,  a  source  of  weak- 
ness, 358. 

Find  out,  sin  sure  to,  112. 

Fleece,  Gideon's,  350. 

Forbearance,  meek,  nobility  of,  385  ;  details 
in  Gideon's  case,  385,  386 ;  of  God  in 
saving  His  people  from  their  infatua- 
tion, 499. 

Forget  His  people's  sufferings,  God's  wisdom 
and  love  in.  seeming  to,  449. 

Forsaking  God,  57  (comp.  27,  28),  54,  55. 

Future  in  life,  much  of  a  man's,  depends  on 
himself,  446. 

Gaal  :  the  son  of  Ebed,  422 ;  his  cunning 
address,  423 ;  throws  down  the  gauntlet 
to  Abimelech,  423. 

Gaza  :  re-occupied  by  the  Cananites,  6. 

Generation,  each,  requires  an  experience  of 
its  own,  93. 

Gera,  sons  of,  159. 

Gerizim,  Mount,  412. 

Gezer,  position  of,  29. 

Gideon :  flrst  named,  326 ;  meaning  of  name, 
326 ;  threshed  wheat  by  wine-press, 
326  J  angel  appeared — his  salutation, 
827 ;  sorrowful  reply ;  the  Lord  looked 
on  him,  327  ;  commission  given,  327 ; 
discovery  of  Divine  character  of  speaker, 
828  ;  Gideon's  humility,  and  asks  a  sign, 
328 ;  he  presents  an  offering,  329  ;  re- 
spect in  presenting  a  whole  ephah,  329  ; 
end  of  the  staff,  329 ;  Gideon's  dread  at 


the  sign,  and  the  Lord's  answer  of  peace, 
829 ;  an  altar  built,  329 ;  the  name 
given  to  it,  830;  Spirit  of  the  Lord 
came  on  him,  850 ;  tribes  that  helped 
him,  350 ;  the  fleece,  350 ;  his  army 
to  be  reduced  because  God  was  with 
him,  358 ;  great  trial  of  his  faith, 
858  ;  lapping  and  kneeling  down,  358  ; 
God's  promise  to  save  by,  300,  359 ; 
Israel's  little  finger  was  to  gain  vic- 
tory, 359 ;  the  equipment  of  Gideon's 
army,  and  confidence  in  the  midst  of 
weakness,  359;  proofs  that  God  was 
working  for  him,  360;  objects  of  the 
battle,  360,  361 ;  God's  chosen  army  and 
its  character,  363,  364 ;  the  strong  man's 
weakness,  365  ;  Gideon's  spirit  up,  368  ; 
his  interpretation  of  the  dream,  and 
instant  action,  368  ;  his  shrewd  strata- 
gem, and  the  time  of  attack,  368  ;  unity 
and  vigour  of  the  attack,  and  its  tre- 
mendous results,  368 ;  suddenness  and 
absolute  destruction  of  the  foe,  368, 
369 ;  his  moral  greatness  in  dealing 
with  Ephraim,  381 ;  he  ascribes  all  the 
glory  to  God  as  the  real  actor,  381 ;  his 
idea  of  his  duty,  381 ;  his  bad  reception 
at  Succoth  and  strong  threat,  382 ; 
victory  completed  and  his  threats  ful- 
filled, 382  ;  accuses  the  captive  kings  of 
murder,  396  ;  puts  them  to  death,  397  ; 
ornaments  of  Midianites,  397. 

Gideon's  call  to  be  king,  397 ;  his  refusal, 
397  ;  the  great  amount  of  jewels  given 
him,  397,  398 ;  his  error  in  making  an 
ephod,  398  ;  perversion  of  his  design  by 
the  people,  398,  399 ;  quietness  of  his 
last  days,  399,  400 ;  honour  attending 
his  last  days,  406-408 ;  his  grievous 
errors,  408, 409 ;  Gideon's  death,  and  the 
immediate  result,  the  people  sinned  anew, 
410 ;  ingratitude  of  the  people,  both  to 
God  and  man,  particulars,  410,  411. 

Gifts,  variety  of,  in  the  church,  241 ;  a 
necessity,  242 ;  granted  of  God's  good 
pleasure,  242 ;  wisdom  in  the  way  of 
bestowing  them,  243 ;  this  variety  a 
feature  of  beauty,  244 ;  ways  in  which 
it  is  so,  244,  245 ;  every  Christian  must 
make  his  own  contribution  for  the  good 
of  the  Church,  245  ;  reason  and  manner 
of  doing  so,  246  ;  brings  out  many  good 
features  of  Christian  character,  246,  247. 

Gilead,  what?  270,  283;  also  434,  436,  441, 
465. 

Gilead,  Mount,  358. 

Gilgal,  significance  of  angel  coming  from, 
31  ;  from  Gilgal  to  Bochim,  38. 

God's  ordering  of  the  Battle,  188  ;  a  presage 
of  victory,  188. 

God's  personal  choice  of  instruments,  153, 
159. 

God's  purpose,  advancement  of,  not  dependent 
on  any  one  life,  8. 

God's  side,  who  are  on,  expected  to  serve 
Him,  287. 

Gods,  the  many  heathen,  whom  Israel 
worshipped,  435 ;  fascination  in  worship- 
piQg  false  gods,  441. 


INDEX, 


Gods,  false,  excessive  importance  which  an 

idolater  attaches  to  his,  527 ;  changing 

gods,  58. 
Good  man,  single,  valne  of  to  his  age,  378. 
Good,  the,  all  power  is  at  the  back  of.  504. 
Godly,  seed  of  the,  special  advantages  of,  96, 
Gratitude   often  at  a  great  discount,  262  ; 

necessity  of  constant  thanksgiving,  263 ; 

manner  of  showing  it,  and  the  true  spirit 

of,  263  ;  exultant  gratitude,  271. 
Great  duties,  call  to,  and  God's  blessing,  9. 
Great  men  of  the  Bible,  its  good  men,  377. 
Guardian  of  the  church  never  deserts  his  post, 

474,  475. 
Guilt,  cowardice  and  weakness  of,  318  ;  their 

former  condition,  318 ;  present  condition, 

818;  sin  brings  down,  319. 

Hamath,  69. 

Hand  of  the  Lord  visible  in  deliverance,  369  ; 
in  the  effect  produced,  369  ;  and  in  the 
use  of  the  means  employed,  369, 370, 371, 
372. 

Harod,  well  of,  357. 

Harosheth,  significant,  187. 

Hatred  of  world  to  people  of  God,  130  ;  has 
always  been,  131  ;  has  a  deep  root,  131 ; 
Christ  gives  the  victory  over,  131. 

Hazor,  what  it  signifies,  187. 

Heart,  state  of,  indicated  by  the  picture  of 
sin  set  forth,  313  ;  inveterate  tendency, 
813  ;  hardness,  boldness,  obstinacy, 
depth  of  enmity,  unteachableness,  314  ; 
history  confirms,  314. 

Heart,  put  to  the  test,  one  of  the  leading  pur- 
poses of  this  book,  189. 

Heart  of  every  criminal  has  the  means  of 
detecting  its  own  crime,  519. 

Hearts,  all  in  God's  hand,  348. 

Heathen,  can  they  sin  against  light,  399. 

Heber  the  Kenite,  account  of  the  family,  189. 

Hebron,  gift  of,  to  Caleb,  22. 

Heinous  offence  given  by  adding  sin  to  sin, 
511. 

Help,  God's,  manifested,  times  of,  37. 

High  starting-point  of  Divine  love  not  to  be 
forgotten,  255  ;  as  it  was  at  first,  so  ever 
afterwards,  256  ;  antecedents  never  for- 
gotten, 256  ;  the  starting-point  to  be 
remembered,  256. 

Higher  use  of  the  Book  of  Judges,  App.  532. 

History  past,  full  of  instruction  for  the 
present,  452. 

History,  rewritten,  51  ;  value  of,  61  ; 
especially  of  God's  faithful  servants, 
52 ;  the  advantage  of  reviewing,  52. 

Hivites,  who,  68,  69. 

Honour  and  dishonour,  lists  of,  271 ;  charac- 
ter of  those  in  the  list  of  honour,  276 ; 
not  all  who  are  of  Israel,  276 ;  not 
merely  the  brave  nor  the  patriotic,  277 ; 
but  those  with  deep  concern  for  the 
honour  of  the  Divine  name,  277 ; 
examples,  278 ;  their  self -dedication  to 
uphold  the  Divine  honour,  278 ;  every 
man  a  volunteer,  a  single  act  sheds  a 
flood  of  light  on  the  whole  character, 
279 ;  the  spirit  of  self-consecration 
mal^  the  service  well-pleasing  to  God, 


279 ;  they  had  faith  which  overcame  all 
obstacles,  they  even  believed  in  the  face 
of  natural  impossibilities,  279. 

Honours,  free  to  all  His  people  alike,  God's 
but  not  to  strangers,  474, 

Hormah,  why  so  called,  6. 

Horses  in  Sisera's  army,  destruction  of,  271. 

Jabin,  who,  187. 

Jair  :  account  of,  434. 

Jael :  wife  of  Heber,  288  ;  her  treatment  of 
Sisera,  288 ;  was  she  justifiable,  289  ; 
different  opinions,  290,  291 ;  not  blood- 
thirsty,  290;   character  of  the  times, 

291  ;  must  be  no  breach  of  moral  law, 
291 ,   special  character  of  Sisera's  sin, 

292  ;  this  was  the  day  of  final  decision, 

292  ;  special  considerations  and  motives, 

293  ;  felt  great  responsibility,  293  ;  was 
commissioned  by  God,  293  ;  knew  he 
was  devoted  by  God  to  destruction,  294  ; 
did  it  to  vindicate  the  honour  of  the 
Divine  name,  295 ;  did  she  mean  to 
deceive  Sisera,  295. 

Idolatry,  monuments  of,  undestroyed,  80 ; 
other  allusions  to,  59. 

Idolatry,  in  the  incipient  stage,  519  ;  begins 
with  those  not  upright  in  moral 
conduct,  519 ;  a  God-dishonouring  sin, 
522. 

Idols,  put  away  the,  123  ;  God  good  in 
requiring  this,  123  ;  a  hard  experience 
to  do  it,  123. 

Jephthah:  why  called  the  Gileadite,  441  ; 
character  as  a  warrior,  442  ;  exile  in 
Tob,  442  ;  his  followers,  and  his  wars, 
442 ;  early  piety,  442 ;  sent  for  by 
brethren,  whom  he  upbraids,  443  ;  his 
terms  of  returning,  and  the  manner  of 
his  engagements,  443  ;  his  answer  to 
the  King  of  Ammon's  flimsy  pretext, 
443,  444  ;  Spirit  of  the  Lord  came  on 
him,  444  ;  his  complete  victory,  445 ; 
victory  told  in  one  verse,  but  takes  two 
chapters  to  tell  how  sins  put  away  and 
preparations  are  made,  445. 

Jephthah's  vow,  452 ;  was  to  the  Lord,  452 ; 
what  he  was  to  offer — ^the  object  in- 
definite, 452  ;  his  daughter  meets  him, 
453  ;  his  uncontrollable  grief,  453  ;  his 
daughter's  acquiescence  and  beautiful 
spirit,  453  ;  her  condition,  453  ;  how  he 
carried  out  his  vow,  454 ;  established 
custom  in  Israel,  454 ;  the  account 
elliptical,  454 ;  was  it  wrong  to  vow, 
465;  what  did  Jephthah  mean  by  it, 
455  ;  details,  456  ;  choice  of  an  offering 
left  with  God,  456  ;  where  he  was  right 
and  where  wrong,  457 ;  God  chooses 
the  best,  458  ;  selection  made  to  test 
Jephthah's  character,  458  ;  the  vow  was 
fulfilled  in  spirit  though  not  in  the 
letter,  459  ;  arguments  to  confirm  this, 
459-461 ;  Jephthah  and  the  Ephraimites, 
464 ;  their  haughty  spirit  and  strong 
threat,  465 ;  Jephthah's  defence  and 
anger  of  the  Gileadites,  465  ;  a  terrible 
revenge,  465  ;  Shibboleth,  465,  466. 

Jerubbaal,  343, 857. 

MM2 


INDEX. 


Jether,  Gideon's  first  bom,  897  ;  disgrace 
for  the  kings  to  be  slain  by  a  youth, 
397. 

Jezreel,  valley  of,  849 ;  the  enemy's  last 

visit  to,  850. 
Immunity  of  the  past,  from,  men  hope  for 

peace  now,  137. 
Indirectness  is  a  character  of  the  world's 

counsel,  525. 
Inheritance,  unconquered  parts  of,  28,  29. 
Infatuation  of  sin,  512. 
Inoffensive  people  not  safe  from  the  attacks 

of  evil  men,  525. 
Instruments,    God's    choice    of,    86 ;    God 

glorified  thereby,  89  ;  by  their  variety, 

89  ;  by  allowing  them  to  exercise  full 

liberty  of  action,  90. 
Instruments  raised  up  by  God,  159. 
Instruments,   God's  choice,   often   appears 

singular,  448. 
Inveterate,  why  sin  should  be  so,  195. 
Joshua,  length  of  his  government,  32. 
Jotham,  suddenly  appears  on  Gerizim,  412  ; 

his  parable,  413  ;  was  it  inspired,  413. 
Israel :  genius  of  the  history  of  a  Messianic 

people,  69. 
Israel's  little  finger  was  to  gain  the  victory, 

359. 
Israel,  salvation  of,  entirely  from  the  Lord, 

474. 
Israelites  indeed  found  in  degenerate  times, 

476. 
Judah  :  tribe  of  :  wars  with  the  Canaanites, 

5,  6. 
Judah,  men  of  :  Philistine  pressure  on  them 

to  get  Samson  made  captive,  496  ;  their 

craven  submission  to  the  enemy,  496  ; 

their  shameful  conduct  to  Samson,  496. 
Judge,  meaning,  97. 
Judges,  Book  of  :  authorship,  1 ;  date  of,  1 ; 

chronology,   3,  23 ;  plan  of,  4  ;    spirit 

and  purpose  of,  5. 
Judgment,  ministers  of,  14, 

Kabeob,  a  town  and  district  on  the  eastern 

frontier  of  Gad,  382. 
Kenites  :  who  they  were,  6. 
Kishon,  river  of,  188  ;  scene  of  great  battles, 

188  ;  turned  against  Sisera,  271 ;  rapid 

rise  of  waters,  271. 
Kitron  and  Nahalol,  29. 

Laggards  in  Barak's  army,  270. 
Lapping  and  kneeling  down,  358. 
Lapse  into  error  of  belief  and  worship,  516. 
Lapse  into  flagrant  wickedness  of  conduct, 

517. 
Leader  against  Ammon,  choice  of  a,  441. 
Left  handed,  159  ;  advantage  of,  161. 
Liable  to  fall  into  great  sins  when  left  to 

themselves,  God's  people  are,  510. 
Liberty,  limitations  of,  before  God  and  men. 

39. 
Lessons,  Divine,  incapacity  of  the  human 

heart  for  receiving,  93. 
Life  of  a  wicked  man  in  the  book  of  God, 

reasons  for  recording  the,  418. 
Little  of  man's  life  told  to  future  ages,  is 

but,  604. 


Lives,  good,  the  influence  of,  65. 

Lives,  great,  removed  that  others  may  feel 
their  responsibility,  8. 

Loaves,  381. 

Long  suffering,  God's,  199. 

Lord  God  of  our  fathers,  58. 

Loyalty,  hard  tests  of,  182 ;  fidelity  to  God 
costs  much,  182  ;  examples  from  Scrip- 
ture, 182  ;  general  examples,  183. 

Lost,  none  of  God's  people  ever,  514. 

Manasseh  :  unbelieving  inactivity  of, 
7,  27. 

Manoah :  his  wife  barren,  so  that  Samson 
was  a  special  gift  from  the  Lord,  469. 

Man's  sin  overruled  by  God  for  His  people's 
good,  491. 

Means,  use  of,  12. 

Memorials  which  are  lasting  or  not,  264  ; 
human  memorials  fading,  264 ;  ode  of 
Deborah  must  live,  264 ;  connection 
with  Messiah,  264. 

Men,  a  nation's  great  and  good,  64. 

Men's  sins  overruled  to  fulfil  God's  holy 
purposes,  499. 

Mercy,  God's,  conflict  of  with  man's  sin, 
60-63. 

Mercy  seen  in  preventing  the  carrying  out 
of  our  wishes,  497. 

Mercy,  God's,  thoughtfulness  of,  472,  473. 

Mercies,  God's  unappreciated,  66. 

Meroz,  curse  of,  288. 

Messages,  God's,  178  ;  of  different  kinds, 
178;  reconciliation,  repentance,  faith, 
life  and  salvation,  178,  179 ;  gospel 
privileges,  179 ;  special  tokens  of 
divine  favour,  deliverances,  179 ; 
warnings,  calls  to  duty,  commands, 
encouragement.  179 ;  doom,  180 ; 
Every  man  has  messages  sent  to  him 
personally,  180 ;  God's  messages  to  be 
received  reverently,  180  ;  dangerous  to 
turn  a  deaf  ear  to  them,  181  ;  of  good 
to  the  righteous,  181  ;  of  mercy  before 
messages  of  judgment,  182 ;  wise  always 
to  be  ready  to  receive  the  Lord's 
messages,  182. 

Midianites,  who,  308 ;  affinity  with  Bedouin, 
308 ;  plunder  of  the  Israelites'  soil,  309  ; 
also  cattle  and  property,  310 ;  vast 
numbers,  310,  359  ;  their  false  security 
and  sudden  destruction,  368 ;  their 
panic,  368,  869  ;  awe  upon  them  on  to 
Karkor,  382 ;  the  whole  host  destroyed, 
282. 

Millo,  house  of,  412. 

Misinterpreting  God's  forbearing  mercy  a 
great  error,  511. 

Mizpeh,  importance  of,  436  ;  the  Lord  was 
in  Mizpeh  in  some  manner,  443  ;  two 
places  of  that  name,  445. 

Moment  of  assurance  of  victory,  the,  189. 

Moral  principle  and  sound  reason  do  not 
belong  to  those  who  deny  to  God  Hia 
natural  rights,  526. 

Moreh,  hill  of,  358. 

Mount  Heres,  why  so  called,  7. 

Mountaineers,  independent,  1621 


INDEX. 


▼H. 


Nations,  thoughts  of,  about  Israel,  70; 
their  combination  against  Israel,  158. 

Nature,  silent,  full  of  lessons  for  irrational 
men,  420. 

Nazarite  child,  meaning  of,  469. 

Neglect,  silent,  of  God's  ordinances  leads  in 
time  to  open  renunciation,  524. 

Night,  dark,  in  Israel's  history,  teachings 
of,  426  ;  G-od  sometimes  sends  winnow- 
ing seasons,  426 ;  importance  of  choosing 
a  right  king — details,  427  ;  God's  delay- 
in  punishing  high-handed  sin,  427 ; 
reasons  for  delay,  428  ;  God  remembers 
all  the  sins  of  the  wicked,  429 ;  the 
miseries  of  the  wicked  come  not  by 
chance,  but  as  sent  by  God  as  moral 
Governor,  430  ;  compacts  formed  in  sin 
soon  broken,  430 ;  reasons  why,  430- 
432  ;  our  idols  often  prove  our  scourges, 
432 ;  men  often  read  their  sin  in  their 
punishment,  482 ;  the  wicked's  confi- 
dences are  refuges  of  lies,  432 ;  the 
wicked  often  employed  to  inflict  the 
punishment  of  their  sins  on  each  other, 
433. 

Noise  of  archers,  252. 

Oath-making,  rash,  evils  of,  531. 

Obedience  :  all  important  with  God,  84,  85  ; 
the  kind  of  obedience  due  to  God,  86 ; 
all  genuine  obedience  pleasing  to  God, 
344 ;  with  Gideon  was  prompt,  and 
done  under  difficulty,  344  ;  done  at  the 
risk  of  life  and  without  a  murmur,  345 ; 
support  in  obedience  a  good  conscience, 
845  ;  assurance  of  Divine  Presence,  346  ; 
assurance  of  success,  346  ;  long  gather- 
ing thoughts  of  revenge  against  Baal, 
346. 

Obstacles  to  religious  duty  found  among 
tender  relations  of  life,  347. 

Ode,  Deborah's,  peculiar  style  of,  247-249, 
268. 

Ophrah,  326. 

Oppression  of  enemies,  187,  808-310,  435, 
evokes  the  Divine  pity,  436 ;  when 
crushing  is  unfavourable  to  develop- 
ment of  pious  principle,  500. 

Oppressors,  new,  and  a  new  Deliverer,  468. 

Oreb  and  Zeeb,  369. 

Othniel :  who,  and  what,  97  ;  see  on  Divine 
deliverance. 

Paeents,  pious,  may  have  erring  children, 

95. 
Passions,  sinful,    in    the    end    bring    dire 

pimishment,  467. 
Past,  a  faithful,  demands  a  vigorous  future,  8. 
Peace,  long,  after  much  trouble,  150,  184, 
Penitence,  new,  171  ;    the  penitent  flee  to 

the  universal  refuge,  171 ;   they  had  a 

special  plea  as  children  of  the  covenant, 

172 ;    they  were    not    shut    out  from 

privilege  of  prayer,  173. 
Penitence,  God's  first  answer  to  prayer  is  a 

call  to,  320  ;   He  explains  the  meaning 

of    His     Providential    dealing,     320 ; 

specially  reproves  for  ingratitude,  320 ; 

insists  on  penitence,  820. 


People,  the  Lord's,  driven  to  prayer  by 
danger,  10  ;  left  helpless,  21  ;  different 
helpers  of,  27  ;  the  Lord  determinately 
following  them,  and  why,  33. 

People,  the  Lord's  thoughts  about  His,  73. 

Penuel :  382  ;  its  tower  broken  down,  383. 

Perrizzites  :  who  they  were,  6. 

Permission,  God's,  nothing  done  without,  71. 

Philistine  oppression,  468 ;  origin  and  power 
of  this  people,  468,  469  ;  their  shout 
against  Samson  when  bound  at  Lehi, 
his  spring  to  liberty  and  slaughter  with 
the  jawbone,  496. 

Philistines,  lords  of,  who,  68 ;  their  territory, 
68. 

Pity,  the  Lord's,  tenderness  of,  56. 

Phurah,  359. 

Prayer  :  for  Divine  guidance  when  human 
direction  fails,  8  ;  enticements  to,  10  ; 
prayer  and  co-operation  with  men,  11 ; 
resort  anew  to,  198  ;  gates  of,  still  open, 
198  ;  provision  for  keeping  gates  open, 
200  ;  baseness  of  praying  to  God  only 
in  adversity,  201 ;  specially  suitable  to 
times  of  great  distress,  202  ;  great  trials 
lead  to  earnest  prayer,  202  ;  excellence 
of,  203  ;  ascribes  to  God  the  glory  of  all 
His  perfections,  203  ;  in  it  the  creature 
takes  its  right  place,  204  ;  acceptable 
prayer,  205  ;  will  be  answered  some 
time,  in  some  form,  205  ;  personal, 
simple,  sincere,  reverent,  believing, 
using  all  the  arguments,  205,  206  ; 
fervent,  207 ;  without  ceasing,  im- 
portunate, 208  ;  submissive,  watchful, 
in  the  Spirit,  209  ;  advantages  of,  210  ; 
good  for  the  soul  to  be  in  God's 
presence,  210  ,*  is  the  channel  for 
receiving  spiritual  blessings,  211 ;  the 
warrant  is  to  expect  much,  211  ;  is  for 
spiritual  health  to  the  soul,  212 ; 
reveals  the  true  state  of  the  heart, 
213 ;  leads  to  fulfilment  of  Divine 
promises,  214 ;  cultivates  a  spirit  of 
dependence  on  God,  215 ;  strengthens 
for  great  duties,  215  ;    hindrances  to, 

215  ;  unsuitable  frames,  216  j  irritation 
of  feeling,   216  ;    want  of    sympathy, 

216  ;  wandering  thoughts,  want  of  pre- 
meditation, 217  ;  sin  wilfully  cherished, 
218  ;  cares  and  anxieties,  to  be  without 
the  Spirit,  218;  suitable  subjects  of, 
the  widest  range,  nothing  too  little  to 
ask,  219 ;  all  that  God  has  promised, 
220;  all  such  blessings  as  God  has 
already  given,  221  ;  all  that  is  agree- 
able to  His  will,  the  best  gifts  we  may 
freely  ask,  222  ;  all  that  would  be  for 
God's  glory  and  our  good,  223  ;  answers 
to  prayer,  true  prayer  certain  to  be 
answered,  224  ;  answer  often  delayed, 
224  ;  we  ought  to  look  for  answer,  225  ; 
trust  God  for  time  and  manner  of 
answer,  226. 

Prayer  :  the  strongest  and  weakest  alike 
depend  on,  602 ;  God  will  not  fail  the 
man  of  prayer,  503  ;  the  man  who 
prays  is  stronger  than  the  man  who 
gcoffs,  615  ;  prayer  will  not  get  the 


Tlii. 


INDEX. 


Divine  blessing  on  wrong   actions, 

526. 
Pride  and  envy,  cravings  of,  impossible  to 

satisfy,  466. 
Prophet  sent,  310. 

Proof,  God  Himself  puts  His  people  to  the, 
70 ;  necessity  of  this  process,  75  ;  to 
ascertain  allegiance,  75,  76  ;  to  show 
unreliableness  of  human  protestations, 
76  ;  their  responsibility  was  now 
greatly  increased,  78  ;  temptations  to 
indolence  were  also  greatly  increased, 
78. 
Proves  but  never  tempts,  God  often,  79. 
Providence,  Divine,  co-operates  with  human 
fidelity,  351 ;  overrules  the  result  in 
Gideon's  case,  368  ;  how  God  fought 
against  the  enemy,  368,  369  ;  Provi- 
dence of  God  allows  the  wicked  to 
execute  their  designs,  526. 
Proving  of  character,  done  because  of  the 

covenant,  71. 
Provocation,  fresh,  190. 
Punishment ;  without  amendment  of  life, 
36  ;  the  preliminaries  of,  108  ;  grounds 
stated,  long  waiting,  108 ;  warning, 
climax  of  forbearance,  109  ;  character 
of  God's  punishment  for  sin,  114  ;  with 
a  weighty  hand,  114  ;  calmly  inflicted, 
impartially.  116  ;  irresistibly,  sparingly, 
considerately,  117  ;  in  faithfulness,  118  ; 
set  over  against  the  sin,  119  ;  unbelief 
followed  by  rejection,  120  ;  sinning,  as 
a  holy  people,  and  treated  as  no  longer 
holy,  120 ;  sinning  in  violation  of 
solemn  pledges,  and  God  acting  as  if 
He  had  forgot  his  covenant,  121  ;  sin- 
ning in  resisting  repeated  warnings, 
and  God  hearing  not  after  repeated 
cries,  121  ;  sinning  by  ingratitude,  and 
God  acting  as  if  He  had  lost  all  love  for 
them,  122. 
Punishments,  in  Old  Testament  times,  stem 

character  of,  395,  396. 
Pursuers  of  Midianites,  369. 

Qualification  given  when  God  appoints 
to  a  work,  452. 

Quarries,  the,  what,  160. 

Quiet  times,  437 ;  come  undeserved,  after 
vindication  of  God's  righteousness,  and 
fill  large  spaces  of  history,  437 ;  are 
greatly  needed,  and  for  what  purposes, 
438. 

Rebuke,  the  Lord's :  beginning  of,  81 ; 
attending  on  sin,  34  ;  tears  accompany- 
ing, 35. 

Reckoning,  day  of,  certain  approach  of,  138. 

Records  of  scripture  history  legible  com- 
pared with  those  of  profane  history, 
450. 

Redemption  seasons,  testing  seasons,  272  ; 
times  for  imparting  new  life  to  the 
Church,  275 ;  are  a  healthful  discipline, 

275  ;  fill  the  church  with  gratitude  and 
praise,  275  ;  new  sense  of  liberty  given, 

276  ;  new  and  brighter  hope,  with  fresh 
supplies  of  Divine  influence,  276. 


Refuge,  all-suflBcient,  set  before  us,  140. 

Relapse  into  sin,  308  ;  impressions  die  away 
with  time,  308. 

Relief  at  God's  hand  begins  with  prayer, 
319. 

Religion,  no  root  to,  286 ;   fair  appearances 
of,  286. 

Religion,  a,  according  to  one's  own  wishes 
dangerous  to  frame,  521. 

Religion,  no,  in  the  heart  needs  more  care 
to  show  it  in  the  externals,  521. 

Religion  sometimes  invoked  to  aid  the  plots 
of  the  ungodly,  525. 

Religion,  man-made,  sudden  destruction  of, 
526. 

Religious  life  easier  to  begin  than  to  go  on 
with,  195. 

Religious  standard  not  to  be  lowered,  103. 

Religious  duty  begins  at  home  346. 

Religious  principle,  high,  may  exist  with 
irreligious  men  all  around,  462. 

Religious  name,  some  people  proud  of,  521. 

Religious  profession  as  a  means  of  getting 
money,  sin  in  using,  522. 

Remembrances,  divine,  38. 

Repentance  of  Israel,  310. 

Repentance  and  prayer  may  restore  the 
greatest  sinner,  515. 

Requital,  the  law  of,  17. 

Rest,  period  of,  184  ;  also  150. 

Reuben,  divisions  of,  269,  270. 

Revenge  taken,  and  returned,  494. 

Revenge  a  mistake  and  a  sin,  498. 

Righteous  and  wicked,  necessity  of  separa- 
tion between,  105. 

Righteous  man,  last  days  of,  406 ;  moral 
greatness  of,  406  ;  highest  respect,  407  ; 
the  land  in  peace  for  his  sake,  407 ;  long 
life,  408;  yet  his  grievous  errors — details,. 
408-410. 

Righteous  and  wicked  often  compelled  to 
live  together  in  this  world,  447. 

Righteousness,  principles  of,  respect  paid  to 
when  deliverance  is  given,  447. 

Rigour,  great,  characterised  the  expedients 
of  Old  Testament  times,  531. 

Robbing  the  harvests,  309  ;  Jezreel,  309. 

Root  sins,  special  brand  on,  110;  idolatry, 
110;  unbelief,  HI ;  other  root  sins,  112. 

Same  actions  good  or  evil,  as  they  done 
from  good  motives  or  bad,  448. 

Samson  :  when  he  appeared,  468  ;  his  native 
town,  469  ;  a  child  of  special  promise 
by  an  angel,  aNazarite,  469  ;  his  mission 
to  deliver  Israel,  469,  470  ;  a  man  of 
God,  Manoah's  request  for  the  visit 
being  repeated,  angel's  name  not  given, 
disappears  in  a  flame,  alarm  of  Manoah 
and  his  wife,  470  ;  the  wife's  sound 
interpretation  of  the  visit,  471  ;  why 
called  Samson — the  Lord's  blessing, 
471  ;  his  being  moved  in  the  camp, 
the  camp  of  Dan,  471  ;  first  dealings 
with  the  Philistines,  478  ;  asks  marriage 
with  a  Philistine,  479  ;  remonstrance  of 
his  parents,  it  was  of  the  Lord,  Samson 
and  the  lion,  the  modesty  of  his  victory, 
479  ;  swarm  of  bees  and  th(»  hon^y, 
betrothal  and  the  marriage  fe  st,  tho 


INDEX, 


Ix. 


80  companions    and   the  riddle,  480; 
stating  of   the  riddle,  and   the  seven 
days'  consideration  of  it,  480,  481 ;  his 
wife's  tears,  and   his  telling  her  the 
secret,    with  her  treachery,   481  ;   the 
solution  given,  and  his  retaliation  on 
the  Philistines,  481  ;  bitter  fruit  of  the 
alliance,  482. 
Bamson,  a  puzzling  character,  482  ;  his  good 
features,  483,  484  ;    his  bad   features, 
484-486  ;  elements  to  guide  us  in  form- 
ing a  judgment,  4S7,  488  ;  caution  in 
judging,  reason  for,  488,  489,  490  ;  his 
honourable  nature,  494 ;  a  true  Philis- 
tine answer,  494 ;  his  indignation  against 
the  whole  people,  and  the  use  of  300 
jackals,  by  which  the  whole  country  is 
set  on  fire,  495  j  reprisals  on  his  wife 
and  her  father,  and  Samson's  increased 
anger,  a  great  slaughter  of  them  and 
his  retirement  to  the  rock  Ebam,  495  ; 
his  capture  by  the  men  cf  Judah,  his 
bursting  the  cords,  and  slaughter  of  a 
thousand  men  with  the  jawbone,  496  ; 
his  thirst,  prayer,  and  deliverance,  496, 
497  ;  his  judging  Israel  20  years,  497  ; 
his  fall,  captivity,  and  death,  505  ;  a 
long  blank  between  chaps,  xv.  and  xvi., 
when  many  things  must  have  taken 
place,   505 ;  his  visit  to  Gaza  and  sin 
there,  505 ;   his  tearing  up  the  heavy 
gates,  and  carrying  them  up  to  the  top 
of  an  hill,  506 ;  humiliation  for  Gaza, 
506 ;    Delilah    and    money    offered   by 
Philistines  to  find  out  the  secret  of  his 
strength,  his  first  replies  to  the  traitress, 

506  ;  the  withs,  the  new  ropes,  and  the 
7  locks  woven  with  the  web,  507 ;  her 
stinging  words,  and  the  fatal  discovery 
made,  his  strength  went  from  him,  and 
the  callous  act  of  the  fiendish  traitress, 

507  ;  his  fearful  loss,  and  yet  blind  to 
it,  the  savage  treatment  of  his  enemies, 

508  ;  a  ray  of  hope  soon  appears,  the 
sacrifice  to  Dagon,  and  Samson  making 
sport,  set  between  the  pillars,  508 ;  his 
last  prayer  and  the  restoration  of  his 
strength;  he  removes  the  pillars  and 
the  whole  building  falls,  and  all  Dagon's 
worshippers  are  destroyed,  Samson's 
body  honourably  buried,  509. 

Self-deception,  heart's  power  of,  in  religion, 

522. 
Service,  true,  not  to  be  expected  from  a  false 

friend,  527. 
Services  to  God  with  alacrity  and  with  zeal, 

271. 
Shamgar  :  account  of,  185  ;  victory  by  faith, 

185  ;   was  he  a  judge,   186  ;   why  not 

further  mentioned,  186  ;  note,  and,  187. 
Shipwreck  of  faith,  or  faith  failing,  20,  21. 
Shechem :  the  phrase,  "  men  of  Shechem," 

411 ;  Abimelech's  agreement  with  them, 

411,  412 ;   the  money  that  they  gave 

him,  and  why,  412. 
Silence,  46  years  passed  over  in,  433. 
Silence,  Divine,  men's  misapprehension  of, 

138. 
Silences  of  history,  the,  439 ;  are  sometimes 


speaking  silences,  439 ;  numerous  occur 
in  tenderness,  440  ;  show  sovereignty  of 
God  in  giving  to  each  his  place,  440. 
Simeon,  tribe  of,  5,  6. 

Sin :  inevitable  consequences  of,  33  ;  God's 
reproof    of,    36 ;    inexcusableness,   41  ; 
sins  of  omission,  42 ;  punishment  of,  a 
punishment  in  kind,  43  ;  a  forsaking  of 
the  Lord,   54,   55 ;   and  serving  other 
gods,   55  ;   deceptive  character  of,  83  ; 
great  sin  and  severe  chastisement,  96 ; 
downward  course  of  sin,  98. 
Sin,  of  omission,  98 ;  tendency  to  multiply 
itself,    100 ;    unexpected    outbreak    of 
great  sin,  101 ;  fostering  causes  of  this 
sin,  102  ;    tendency  of  sin  to  seek  the 
lowest  level,   102  ;   leads  to  abandon- 
ment of  God,   104  ;  and  sinking  down 
to  level  of  heathenism,  104  ;  the  inevit- 
able issue  of,  106,  33  ;   high  promises 
106 ;  a  peace  disturber,  106 ;  an  essential 
weakness,   107  ;    a  great    humiliation, 
107  ;   sure  to  find  us  out,  112  ;  one  sin 
unconquered,    danger    of,   113;    added 
sin,  158 ;   new  sin,  a  painful  surprise, 
166  ;   deeper  guilt,  167  ;   a  perplexing 
problem  to  solve,  167  ;  how  account  for 
apostasy,  167-169.    The  history  of  sin 
continued,  186,  158  ;  casual  connection 
between  outbreak  of  and  the  death  of 
Ehud,  186 ;  ineradicable  nature  of.  190 ; 
special  force  of  evil  in  easily-besetting 
sins,  191 ;  cure  for  sin  must  be  abnormal, 
191  ;  sin  brings  sorrow,  192  ;  deceitful- 
ness    of,    197  ;    allurements    of,    198  ; 
avoid  beginnings  of,  198  ;  sin  terribly 
weakens,  265,  107  ;  God's  frown  on  the 
sinner  from  without,  265  ;  takes  away 
strength  from  within,  266  ;   examples 
266. 
Sin,  the,  which  brought  on  the  Midianite 
oppression,  308  ;  the  picture  of  sin  pre- 
sented, 311  ;   form  of  it  very  heinous, 
311  ;  sinned  against  the  clearest  light, 
312 ;  abused  the  most  precious  privileges, 
and  disregarded  the  most  solemn  obliga- 
tions 312 ;  broke  solemn  engagements, 
sinned  in  the  face  of  earnest  teachings, 
the  state  of  heart  showed  an  inveterate 
tendency  to  sin,  313  ;  the  hardness  of 
the  heart,  its  boldness  and  obstinacy  in 
sin,  depth  of  enmity  and  unteachableness, 
314  ;  God  cannot  tolerate  sin.  His  nature 
being  irreconcilably  opposed  to  it,  315  ; 
carries  its  own  punishment  in  it.  His 
word  uniformly  condemns  it,  and  His 
Providence  works  against  it,  316  ;  the 
laws  of  a  man's  nature  cry  out  against 
it,  the  cross  of   Christ  secures  that  it 
shall  not  go  unpunished,  317  ;  repeated 
sin  brings  heavier  punishment,  317. 
Sins  of  God's  people,  322  ;  a  child  of  God 
may  sin,  322  ;  his  sins  specially  heinous, 
they  are  specially  dishonouring  to  God, 
323  ;  but  they  are  soon  repented  of,  323 ; 
evil  effects  of,  514. 
Sin,  fresh,  and  penitence,  435 ;  wholesale 

sin,  435. 
Sins,  new,  and  new  sorrows,  441 ;  the  human 


INDEX, 


heart  goes  the  whole  round  of  sin,  tries 

to  worship  Jehovah  and  other  gods  at 

the  same  time,  441. 
Sin,  wilful,  guilt  and  danger  of,  509  ;  men's 

sins  seen  in  their  punishment,  514. 
Bisera,  who  and  what,  187  ;  his  tragic  death, 

288  ;  the  mother  waiting,  288  ;  feverish 
impatience,  289 ;  her  wise  ladies  and 
the  comfort  they    tried    to  give  her, 

289  ;  the  special  nature  of  his  sin,  292. 
Sold,  force  of,  97,  187,  435. 

Song    of  redeemed  Church,   thanksgiving, 

247  ,-  its  subject  matter,  247  ;  its  definite 
purpose,  the  suitable  time  for  singing 
it,  247  ;  in  the  form  of  poetry,  order  of 
thought,  Deborah  took  the  lead  in 
singing  it,  and  Barak  went  along  with 
her  in  it,  for  he  was   the  chief  actor, 

248  ;  who  may  have  joined  in  the  song, 
was  it  sung  once  only,  or  from  time  to 
time  as  the  ages  went  on,  and  was  its 
literary  beauty   owing  to   inspiration, 

249  ;  was  Deborah  a  natural  poetess, 
249  ;  beauty  of  the  ode  as  a  composition, 
statement  of  the  subject  matter,  and 
the  expressive  phrases  used,  249 ;  im- 
portance of  free  willingness  in  self- 
dedication,  250  ;  the  audience  appealed 
to,  a  whole-hearted  service,  God's  first 
great  acts  of  grace  to  His  people  called 
up  to  view,  and  with  these  His  present 
acts  compared,  250 ;  His  power  in 
redeeming  His  people  irresistible,  250, 
251  ;  misery  of  the  nation  of  which 
God  was  not  the  protector,  251 ; 
Deborah,  the  turning  point  of  the 
national  restoration,  251  ;  the  reason 
of  their  adversity,  the  cowardice  of 
the  people,  but  the  leaders  come  to  the 
front,  252. 

Songs  in  the  night  for  God's  people,  253. 

Special  strength  in  special  danger,  to  those 
in  Divine  keeping,  492. 

Spirit,  Holy :  His  indwelling,  155  ;  His 
work  silent  and  gentle,  156;  folly  and 
sin  of  grieving  Him,  157  ;  we  ought  to 
invite  Him  to  come  again,  157, 

Spirit  of  the  Lord  came  upon,  97,  146,  350  ; 
He  is  the  source  of  life  in  nature,  146  ; 
of  special  gifts  in  the  Kingdom  of 
grace,  147 ;  of  supernatural  gifts,  both 
gracious  and  supernatural  gifts  con- 
ferred on  special  grounds,  147  ;  Holy 
Spirit,  the  one  source  of  all  spiritual 
blessing,  150 ;  nature  of  the  Spirit's 
influence,  161  ;  fulness  of  blessing 
which  He  gives,  151 ;  The  Spirit  needed 
by  every  man,  152  ;  in  what  respect 
needed,  152-154  ;  Demonstration  of,  155. 

Starling  point  fixed  by  God,  every  man  has 
his,  445. 

Straightforward,  and  going  round  about, 
452. 

Success  in  life,  sure  way  to,  451. 

Success,  apparent  hoplessncss  of,  for  the 
Church,  366 ;  not  to  be  estimated  by 
ordinary  rules,  366 ;  not  according  to 
numbers,  366 ;  but  by  the  presence  of 
the  Church's  Head,  867 


Success  in  God's  service,  condition  of,  386 ; 
what  it  is,  387  ;  details,  387-389  ;  diffi- 
culty of  complying  with  it,  389  ;  reasons 
given,  389,  390;  high  purposes  served 
by  this  arrangement,  390  ;  details,  390- 
392 ;  encouragements  to  persevere,  ex- 
plained, 392,  393 ;  applications  of  this 
rule,  393  ;  instances,  393,  394. 

Success  in  evil  no  proof  of  the  Divine 
approval  527. 

Succoth,  men  of,  hardened,  381 ;  their 
heinous  conduct,  381,  382 ;  threat  ful- 
filled. 

Tabor,  Mount :  describe,  188  ;  the  point  of 
rendezvous,  188. 

"  Teach  them  war,"  what  it  means,  68. 

Tears  of  earth,  the,  and  the  tearless 
heaven,  49. 

Tent :  significance  of  in  Gideon's  case,  360. 

Test,  some  must  stand  the,  when  deliverance 
is  granted,  274  ;  a  testing  process  needed 
to  discover  fit  instruments  on  whose 
account  the  deliverance  shall  be  given, 
274,  358. 

Tests  and  chastisement  of  an  unfaithful 
people,  70. 

Testing  character,  God's  means  of,  67. 

Testing  of  character  made  in  love,  80 ;  in 
many  ways,  80-82. 

Testing  days,  crucial,  hastening  on  for  all, 
299. 

Thanksgiving  for  a  great  deliverance,  259  ; 
was  spontaneous,  nature  of  gratitude, 
259 ;  excellence  of  gospel  obedience 
because  it  springs  from  gratitude,  260  ; 
was  religious,  rose  from  a  sense  of  magni- 
tude of  the  favour  shown,  260;  coming 
too  direct  from  God's  own  hand,  most 
unexpectedly,  most  opportunely,  most 
complete  too,  261  j  invaluable,  262 ;  a 
voluntary  tribute  of  love,  with  con- 
fession of  deep  obligation,  262 ;  in 
thanking  God  the  spirit  must  be  raised 
to  the  proper  pitch,  268  ;  Milton's  great 
epic,  268  j  Barak's  work  was  only  to 
pursue,  the  Lord  fought,  268;  the 
terrible  nature  of  the  conflict,  and  the 
actors,  268. 

Thebez  :  is  attacked  by  Abimelech,  425 ;  who 
dies  there,  slain  by  a  woman,  425. 

Thoughtfulness  of  God's  mercy  to  a  back- 
sliding people,  472 ;  particulars,  472, 
473. 

Ties,  closest,  often  ruptured  without  notice 
given,  463. 

Timnath :  a  Philistine  frontier  town,  478. 

Tola  :  the  son  of  Puah,  etc.,  434  ;  a  judge. 

Tongue,  malicious  use  of,  deadly  results 
from,  466. 

Tower  of  Shechem,  a  powerful  stronghold, 
425. 

Transgression,  the  Way  to  and  from,  47. 

Tragic  chapter  in  Israel's  history,  528 ; 
details,  528,  529. 

Trees,  and  their  associations,  187,  326 ; 
1  Kings  xix.  4  ;  Gen.  xxxv.  4  ;  Josh, 
xxiv.  26 ;  Lessons  taught  by  the,  420 
(particulars). 

Trial,  God  Himself  Judge  of,  72. 


INDEX. 


TL 


Trial,  the  great,  of  the  future,  danger  of 
underrating-,  138 ;  the  wisdom  of  pre- 
paring for  the  strictest  possible  trial, 
139. 

Trials,  severest.  Love  dictates,  463. 

Tribes  that  helped  Barak,  189  269. 

Tribes  that  helped  Gideon,  350. 

Tribes,  God  chose  the  Judges  from  different, 
434 ;  the  life  of  some  was  quiet,  yet  not 
unimportant,  434. 

Trifling  circumstances  often,  lead  to  the 
discovery  of  sin,  524. 

Trumpet,  Gideon  blew  a,  350. 

Trumpet  call,  memories  of,  352. 

Turkomans  of  Central  Asia,  marauding,  309. 

Type  of  Christ,  was  Samson  a,  515  ;  points 
of  resemblance,  515,  516. 


Visitations,  Divine,  37. 

Unbelief,  blindness  and  obduracy  of,  394. 

Unbelief    reduces    the    strong    to   great 
straits,  523. 

Unconquered,  one  sin,  danger  of,  113. 

Undivided  heart,  true  religion  requires  an, 
194. 

Unseen  Friend,  326  ;  visit  of,  330  ;  who  he 
was,  330  ;  relation  he  bore  to  Israel, 
831 ;  constant  presence  with  them,  332; 
rarity  of  His  appearances,  332 ;  His 
appearance  at  the  proper  moment,  333 
the  purpose  of  His  appearance,  334 
manner  of  revealing  Himself,  334 
His  personal  character,  335  ;  the  instru- 
ment of  his  choice,  336  ;  selected  by 
the  angel,  336  ;  taken  from  an  unlikely 
place,  337  ;  circumstances  in  which  the 
angel  found  him,  337 ;  immediate 
reason  of  the  Divine  visit,  337;  Gideon's 
personal  fitness  for  the  work,  338  ;  his 
physical,  mental,  moral,  and  religious 
qualities,  338-9  ;  .lessons  taught  by  the 
interview  (11  such),  340. 

Unseen  dangers  around  those  who  are  guilty 
of  great  sins,  510. 

Unthought,  of  Deliverer,  an,  raised  up, 

Unteachable    human     heart,    the,     God's 
dealings  with,  311. 

Unwisdom,  the,  of  despising  anyone  in  the 
day  of  prosperity,  450. 

Vows  should  first  be  settled  with  the  heart, 
ere  they  are  brought  out  in  form,  464. 

Upbraiding  the  people  for  forgetfulness  of 
the  past,  the  Divine,  436. 

Useful,  to  be,  is  better  than  to  reign,  421. 

Usurper,  election  of,  to  be  king,  414. 


Want,  the  great,  of  the  times,  517,  618. 

Watch,  middle,  368. 

War,  the  Lord's,  faithfulness  and  unfaith- 
fulness in,  5. 

Wars  of  Canaan,  moral  purpose  of,  68,  69. 

Weapon,  meanest  the,  sufficient  when  God 
helps,  60. 

Weakness,  the  strong  man*8  time  of,  365 ; 
strength  not  inherent,  and  faith  apt  to 
fail.  Divine  comforts  given,  and  given 
with  kind  consideration.  365. 


Weakness,  spiritual,  causes  of,  44. 

Wicked,  the:  miserable  end  of,  288;  prosperity 
of  is  short,  300  ;  his  supreme  folly,  his 
present  misery,  301  ;  preparation  for 
future  misery,  302  ;  his  gloomy  end, 
303,  288  ;  at  the  best  it  ends  in  vanity, 
303 ;  often  in  anguish,  304 ;  comes 
unexpectedly,  irresistibly,  with  mockery 
of  hopes,  without  mixture  of  comfort, 
with  marks  of  dishonour,  and  as  ab- 
solute ruin,  304-306. 

Wicked,  no  pleasure  to  God  in  death  of,  22. 

Wicked,  the,  often  unite  against  the 
righteous,  325. 

Wicked,  the :  does  their  guilt  destroy  all 
sympathy  for  them,  401 ;  does  God  set 
them  up  for  punishment  according  to 
the  degree  of  their  guilt,  or  how,  402 ; 
troubles  end  of,  preparations  for  his 
fall,  details,  403,  404  ;  greatness  of  his 
fall,  details,  404-406 ;  God  can  bring 
accusers  against  the  wicked  when  he 
thinks  himself  secure,  419. 

Wicked's  fellowship,  perils  of,  494. 

Wicked's  companionship,  treachery  of,  497. 

Wicked's  cruel  intentions  often  lead  to  their 
own  greater  punishment,  501 . 

Wicked  sometimes  defeated  at  the  moment 
of  their  supposed  triumph,  515. 

Wickedness,  recompense  of,  12. 

Will,  the  human,  never  bends  to  the  Divine 
will  at  a  loss,  462. 

Wine-press,  326. 

Wise  to  make  the  best  of  one's  circumstances, 
449. 

Woman,  deliver  Sisera  into  the  hands  of  a, 
188. 

Word,  the  Lord's,  power  of,  45-47. 

Words,  sharp,  overcome  by  soft  words,  381, 

Work,  our  own,  passes  only  with  our  life. 

Work  of  faith  and  obedience,  union  in,  12. 

Work,  forsaking  the  Lord's,  27,  28. 

Works,  God's,  to  be  in  everlasting  remem- 
brance, 253 ;  they  are  marvellously 
instructive,  253 ;  are  spectacles  of 
beauty,  254  ;  never  fully  comprehended, 
255  ;  of  vast  importance  to  our  interests. 
255. 

Works  of  righteousness  satisfactory  in 
retrospect,  463. 

Worldly  minds  care  little  for  accuracy  in 
spiritual  things,  526. 

Worship  of  God,  error  in  departing  from 
rule  of,  520. 

Worthlessness  of  those  who  lead  an  impure 
life,  and  reasons,  512,  etc. 


Zalmon,  Mount,  425. 

Zeal  is  always  right  in  denouncing  sin,  530. 

Zebah  and  Zalmunna,  their  flight  and 
capture,  381,  382  ;  fearful  contrast  seen 
by  them,  396  ;  they  slew  Gideon's 
brothers  at  Tabor,  396 ;  real  reason  of 
their  death,  396  ;  their  ornaments,  397. 

Zebul,  a  lieutenant  of  Abimelech's,  his 
policy,  423,  424. 

Zorah,  a  place  given  by  Judah  to  Dan,  the 
town  of  Manoah.  469. 


SCRIPTURES   REFERRED   TO. 


OENERia. 

CHAP. 

e 

vnot 

rAOK. 

xlvi. 

••• 

•^    21 

•.• 

•#• 

... 

159 

OHAP. 

VXRSI. 

PAOS. 

xlviii 

••• 

...    16 

..• 

... 

•.« 

831 

ii. 

••• 

...    17 

... 

••• 

•M 

348 

ti 

••• 

...     19 

... 

... 

a.'i 

880 

II 

••• 

22,24 

••• 

••• 

•  •* 

409 

M 

••• 

17-19 

... 

... 

... 

465 

iii. 

••• 

...     16 

••• 

••• 

•  .. 

35 

tt 

••• 

...     2iZ 

... 

.•• 

... 

811 

II 

••• 

...    24 

.•• 

..• 

•  «. 

74 

xlix. 

••• 

...      4 

... 

.•• 

... 

270 

iv. 

••• 

...  3,  5 

..• 

... 

... 

848 

N 

... 

...8-10 

... 

... 

... 

5 

II 

••• 

10,11 

.*• 

... 

... 

35 

« 

... 

13,14 

... 

... 

... 

270 

n 

••• 

...     13 

... 

... 

••. 

107 

n 

.«• 

...     17 

... 

... 

••. 

113 

II 

••• 

...     16 

... 

... 

... 

102 

L 

••• 

•••    20 

... 

••• 

••• 

491 

▼. 

••• 

•..         o 

... 

••• 

... 

416 

•1 

••• 

...        2iTj 

..• 

••• 

... 

109 

vi. 

••• 

...      5 

... 

... 

167,  468 

EXODUS. 

viii. 

••• 

20,21 

... 

... 

167,  348 

ix. 

••• 

25,26 

... 

... 

... 

520 

a 

••• 

11-15 

M« 

•#• 

471,498 

X. 

••• 

...      4 

... 

... 

... 

26 

It 

••• 

23,24 

MM 

M. 

... 

56 

M 

••• 

...     14 

... 

... 

... 

468 

iii 

••• 

...       o 

... 

M« 

... 

809 

xii. 

••• 

...  1-3 

..• 

... 

... 

536 

iv. 

>.. 

10,13 

... 

.M 

... 

188 

II 

••• 

...        o 

.•• 

••• 

... 

25 

n 

••• 

...     22 

... 

... 

... 

536 

xiii. 

••• 

...      7 

... 

... 

... 

5 

It 

••• 

...     Zo 

.•• 

... 

... 

331 

II 

••• 

•  ••            «/ 

... 

... 

... 

183 

v. 

•#• 

...       2 

... 

... 

... 

360 

II 

••• 

14,15 

... 

... 

82 

535 

vi 

••• 

...  2-8 

..• 

... 

... 

33 

XV. 

••• 

...  5-7 

... 

... 

... 

635 

M 

••• 

...      7 

... 

... 

... 

536 

II 

••• 

...     18 

... 

... 

... 

67 

It 

••• 

•  ••                   V 

... 

... 

... 

500 

II 

••• 

...     19 

... 

•.. 

•.. 

6 

ix. 

••• 

2,11,12 

... 

... 

... 

96 

xvi. 

••• 

13,14 

... 

... 

... 

503 

N 

... 

...     11 

... 

... 

... 

144 

xvii. 

••• 

1-3, 16 

... 

... 

... 

635 

If 

... 

27,28 

... 

... 

... 

16 

•1 

••• 

...      7 

... 

... 

... 

96 

X. 

••• 

16,17 

•mm 

... 

... 

16 

n 

••• 

...7-14 

... 

... 

... 

34 

It 

••• 

...     26 

..• 

... 

... 

467 

ft 

••• 

...     19 

... 

... 

469,483   1 

xiii. 

.•• 

12, 13, 15 

... 

... 

... 

461 

xviii. 

••• 

...       7 

... 

... 

... 

470 

II 

•M 

...     17 

... 

... 

... 

510 

II 

••• 

...     19 

... 

... 

... 

93 

It 

•  •• 

...    21 

... 

... 

33,38 

II 

••• 

27-32 

... 

... 

... 

206 

xiv. 

••• 

...  8-8 

... 

... 

... 

232 

xxi. 

••• 

...     10 

... 

... 

... 

442 

11 

••• 

...     19 

... 

... 

33,38 

xxii. 

••• 

1-3,  10 

... 

... 

... 

183 

N 

••• 

24-30 

... 

... 

... 

38 

II 

••• 

...       o 

... 

... 

186, 

344 

II 

••• 

...     Zo 

... 

•a. 

... 

372 

It 

••• 

...     14 

... 

... 

•  •• 

330 

xvii. 

••• 

•..       6 

... 

... 

... 

497 

II 

••• 

17,18 

... 

... 

606, 

535 

xviii 

••• 

...       1 

•  •. 

... 

•.« 

189 

xxiii. 

••• 

17-20 

... 

... 

... 

26 

XX. 

... 

...       2 

... 

... 

... 

187 

xxiv. 

••• 

...         u 

... 

... 

... 

96 

ft 

.*• 

^       3 

... 

... 

... 

101 

xxvi. 

••• 

18-21 

... 

... 

... 

252 

M 

..• 

...     14 

... 

... 

... 

409 

It 

••• 

84,35 

••■ 

... 

••• 

96 

m 

•M 

...     21 

... 

... 

... 

250 

xxvii. 

••• 

...    46 

... 

•.. 

••• 

96 

ft 

••• 

M.     25 

... 

•  .. 

... 

469 

xxviii. 

••• 

...     19 

... 

a*. 

... 

24 

xxi. 

..• 

...     24 

... 

... 

... 

13 

xxxi. 

••• 

19,30 

... 

•.. 

... 

520 

xxii 

••• 

...     28 

... 

... 

••» 

423 

xxxii. 

••• 

24,  26,  eto. 

... 

207, 

329 

xxiii 

,^ 

20-23 

... 

...  Oo^  oo,  Zoo 

II 

••• 

...    30 

... 

... 

471, 

478 

It 

••• 

...     21 

... 

... 

... 

331 

xxxiv. 

■•• 

...    30 

... 

... 

•  •• 

6 

II 

... 

...     27 

... 

... 

... 

360 

XXXV. 

••• 

...      1 

... 

... 

••• 

504 

xxiv. 

... 

...  5—8 

... 

... 

... 

538 

II 

••• 

...  Z^  3 

... 

... 

•  •• 

847 

II 

... 

...      7 

... 

... 

... 

76 

It 

••• 

...  4,  5 

... 

... 

897, 

325 

xxviii 

... 

...6-12 

... 

... 

... 

398 

II 

••• 

...      8 

... 

•.• 

... 

187 

II 

... 

...     35 

... 

... 

... 

524 

xxxvii. 

••• 

31,32 

... 

... 

... 

451 

xxxi. 

... 

...       5 

..• 

... 

... 

187 

xxxviii. 

••• 

...     24 

... 

... 

... 

495 

xxxii. 

... 

...       1 

... 

... 

... 

76 

xl. 

••• 

14,  15 

... 

... 

... 

498 

It 

•  M 

...     10 

... 

... 

... 

220 

xlii. 

•■• 

...     18 

.«• 

... 

... 

525 

II 

... 

.-    34 

... 

... 

38, 

316 

II 

••• 

21,22 

... 

... 

17, 

446 

xxxiii. 

... 

...       2 

... 

... 

«•• 

233 

xliii. 

>•• 

...     29 

... 

... 

... 

396 

II 

... 

...     14 

... 

... 

33, 

332 

xlv. 

••• 

...     22 

... 

*•• 

... 

480 

If 

... 

...     18 

••• 

... 

390, 

527 

fi 

••» 

...     24 

... 

.*. 

... 

446 

ti 

•^ 

...    20 

••• 

329, 

471, 

478 

jdT. 


SCRIPTURES  REFERRED  TO. 


CHAP. 

zzziv. 

N 
N 

m 


Ix. 

z. 

II 

n 
XL 

xiii. 

XX. 

xxiii. 
xxiv. 
xxvi. 

II 
xxyii. 


IL 

n 
n 


111. 

N 
« 


VEB8I, 
•••  ••*      J.U      .•• 

•••  •••      JLt)      ••• 

•••  •••      XO      ••« 


LEVITICUS. 


^.  24 
«.  1-7 
^      6 

^      9 

^    44 

8,86 

...  w!,  o 

...     24 

...     20 

18,  21,  24 

41,42 

4,28 

•.    29 


.*• 
••• 


NUMBERS. 


N  ••• 

X.  ••• 

xii. 
xiii. 
xiv. 

1 

II 

n 
XV. 
XX. 

ti 

II 
xxi. 

II 
xxiii. 
xxiv. 

II 

XXV. 

xxvi. 


••• 
••• 


••• 
•*• 
... 
••• 
••• 
••• 
... 
... 
... 
... 


... 
••• 
... 


XXVll.         ... 

XXX.  ... 

•I  ... 

xxxi. 

n  ... 

xxxii. 

11  ... 

tl  ... 

••  ... 

xxxiii. 
xxxiv. 


.  1-8 

1-12 

29 

8 

29 

...6-10 

...     19 

...     34 

33,34 

7,10 

8,11 

...     12 

...     1() 

...      4 

4,11,13 

...     19 

...  V 

...     24 

...6-13 

29,30 

42,43 

...     18 

...       2 

...1-16 

32-39 

48-54 

...     17 

...       JiO 

...     41 

89-41 

...     55 

...  7-9 


••• 
••• 
••• 


... 
••• 


PAOK. 

...      470, 534 

...96, 409, 479 
•M        ...  461 


—  -.  470 
•••  ...  183 

—  ...  453 
...  «..  40«/ 
...  ...      oD 

...  ...    olu 

...  ...    40o 

...  ...    T.ZiO 

•••  ...        i-O 

...  169, 318 
...  201, 297 
460 


...  ...    40O 

...  ...    xov 

...        ...  501 

...         ...     ^o 

•  *•  ...  ^  It/ 
...  ...  ^^L 

...  ...  D  / 

...  ...  -It) 

...  ...      TilO 

...  497 

•••       oO 
•••  UUj  Oo 

•••  •••    ^O  I 

•••  •••     4^7 

•••  •••    OoO 

•  ••  •••  17 

26 

183,  298,  531 
...       441, 465 

•  ••  •••      a^U«7 

•  ••  •••  «/ / 

•  ••  •••     T-Do 

•••  •••    xOO 

310 

•••  •••    0«ji 

•  ••  •••     J.0/1 

•••  •••    LxZi 

...  484, 435 
23 
67 


... 

... 


...         ... 


DEUTERONOMY 


... 

...  5-9 

... 

5,  9, 19 

... 

...     25 

... 

...     30 

... 

5 

... 

13,14 

•M 

2^.26 

444 
149,  360,  400 
444 

>..  ...    JiOl. 

I..  ...     T.OT. 

>..  ...      ^UO 


OEIAP. 

iv. 

V. 

vi. 
vii. 

If 

n 
viii 

n 

n 

It 

ix. 

xi. 

II 

xii. 

II 

II 
xiii. 

II 
xvii. 

II 

II 

xxi. 
xxii. 
xxiii. 
xxiv. 

XXV. 
II 

xxviii. 

•I 

II 
xxix. 

II 

XXX. 

xxxi. 

II 
xxxii. 

II 

II 
xxxii. 

II 

tl 

tl 

tt 

II 
xxxiii. 

II 

tt 

tl 

H 

m 


i. 

N 
N 

n. 

V. 

II 

vii 

II 

viii. 

ix. 

X. 

n 

N 


2, 


.•• 
... 
... 
... 
... 
... 
... 
... 
... 
... 
... 
... 
... 
... 
... 
... 
... 
... 
... 
... 
... 


31, 

... 
... 
... 
... 
... 
... 
... 
... 
... 
... 
... 
... 
... 
... 
... 
... 


... 
... 
... 


VEBSS. 

If  82—38  ... 

•  ••      JiM  ... 
7-9, 20-25  ... 

...              tu  ... 

...      X— 7  ... 

...         o  ... 

...            z  ... 

...     /""•/  ... 

...         Jlv/  ... 

12-14  ... 

23, 24  ... 

•  ••         fJ\)  ••• 

•  ••    A^O  ••• 

6,  6, 11-14  ... 

Z\d~oZ  ... 

.«•           o  ... 

...1-11  ... 

14,15  ... 

...    10  ... 

16-18  ... 

18-21  ... 

...     i-\t  ... 

4  ... 

6  ••• 

•••      X  ••• 

17-19  ... 

83,  43,  etc.  ... 

47, 48  ... 

65, 67  ... 

10-13  ... 

...         £iO  ... 

...             ^  ... 

...9-13  ... 

16-18  ... 

•  ••             J>  *•« 
•••             *  ••• 

9-11  ... 

...  o,  o  ... 

...         o  ... 

...      xo  ... 

...         i^  ... 

...       X«/  ... 

...       0\)  ... 

...        9  ... 

...      Zo  ... 

...     26  ... 

...     z  I  ... 

...       ZiQ  ... 

...            ZlV  ... 


... 
... 


.«     14 

...      9 

16-21 

31,32 

...     24 

6-9,43 

.^     10 

..    U 


... 
... 


PAOB. 

•*•         ...  ^51 
...         ...     Vb 

...  ...       vZ 

98 
!."96, 409,  485 

96 

...         ...     0^ 

78, 309 
...  423 
...  102 
•••    ...  444 

...  ...  u  / 

...  ...  oZ 

...  ...  xJ-J. 

...  ...  oZu 

...   111,458 
67,  79 

...     ...  XXI. 

...     ...    o 

...       ...    X«7 

...       ...  44:0 

...  67,98,389 

446 

...   106, 447 

444 

...    ...  4^0 

...  827 
...  349 

...      ...  0\Jo 

170 

...  257, 266 

...  ...  'J  ^ 

...  ...  4Z4 

...  ...   vZ 

...  ...   ^z 

...  ...  00 

...  ...  Zo\j 

...  ...  ZoZ 

...  ...  ioZ 

...  ...  4oo 

444 

...   102,  133 
309 

...     ...  oZo 

97,  436,  496 

70 

492 

...   256,  370 

504 

...   105,  168 

..•     •..  xZL 


... 
... 


JOSHUA. 

M>       5     ...  M. 

...  Xv   ..  .•« 

...        V      ...  ... 

.«  13  .-  «. 


••• 

••• 


...  26 

.«  382 

...  442 

a—    y  y 

^  332 
^  38 
...  220 
17,  519 
37 
99, 160 
...  31 
...  233 
...  149 


SCRIPTURES  REFERRED  TO. 


XV. 


CHAP. 
XL 

N 

H 

ft 

t% 

xiL 

xiiL 

xiv. 

XV. 

II 
xvii. 
xix. 

II 
xxii. 
xxiii. 

II 
xxiy. 

N 

■ 


II 

ii 


1. 

ii. 

II 

II 

II 

iii. 

i> 

iv. 

ti 
n 

V. 

vi. 
II 
It 
viL 

M 
II 

viii 
•I 

II 
ix. 

X. 

II 

xi. 

xii. 

It 

xiii. 

xiv. 

II 

II 

II 
XV. 

II 

II 

xvi. 

II 

II 
xvii. 

N 


••• 


... 
••* 

••• 
••. 
.•• 
... 
••• 


PAGE. 
.       26 

.  31 
.  69 
.  889 
.  605 
.  69 
.  68 
.  144 
.  146 
.  469 
.  465 
.  469 
.  623 
.  329 
.  3 
.  67 
.  149 
.  103 
.  412 
.   3 


^        ...  834 

-.  282 

^        ...  826 


... 
... 


VERSB. 

«.       3  .« 

.••       <  ..• 

...    17  .- 

#••     zu  .•« 

•••      AZ  .•« 

••«        /  .«• 

...        o  .•■ 

11.12  .^ 
15,16  ... 

...     33  ... 

14-18  ... 

...     41  .« 

40-47  .« 

16, 19,  28  ... 

...       1  ... 

12.13  .- 

...  \A  MM 

...     19  «. 

1,26,27  — 

•••       OX  ••• 

RUTH. 

...      X  ... 

14,16  «. 

...    17  ... 

L  SAMUEL. 


11,20 483 

...      8  .«  «.      129,489 

...     16  ...  ...         ...  187 

26-34  ...  «.         ...  181 

••.         0\J  .••  »m»                •••     401 

...         lu  .••  •■■                •■•         OV 

^     18  .«  ...         -   280 

...  7-9  ••  —        ^  400 

...     17  ...  ^        ...  181 

21,22  ...  ^        ^42 

...6,11 114 

...       6  ,^  ...         ...  314 

...     18  ^  .^         ...  251 

4,12,16  .«         68 

...       2  .«  141,273,476 

10-13  ^        477 

...     12  ...  -.         ...  603 

.••             1  ...  fmt                •••            «> 

...  6, 7  .M  •••         ..•  397 

•*•  u,  o  ...  ...          ...     i/O 

...     Ax  ...  .«•         ...     ^4 

...        X  ...  ...          ...   A^O 

9»%          Xx  tma  »m»                  •••     4o4 

...       o  ...  ..«         ...       o 

...       M  .»«  ...          ...        o 

«.      9 97 

^       6  ...162,308,479,425 

...        o  ...  ...          ...  oo" 

1.0,    ^V  .*•  ...                   ...      14.7 

...         A\J  .••  •••                ...     00^7 

47,48 24 

...  1-7  .«  ...         ...     14 

...     22  ...  MM         ...     86 

...     33  «,  «.         .«     14 

...       1  ^  ...          ...   449 

12,13  ^         148 

...     14  .«  181,422,514 

...     26 278 

28,29  .^  .«         ...  347 

.»     46  M.  M.         ...  839 


CHAP. 

xviiL 

ti 
xix. 
xxii. 
xxiii. 

II 

II 

XXV. 

II 
II 

x\vL 

xxvii. 

II 
xxix. 

XXX. 

zxxi. 


u. 
ilL 
II 
▼. 

II 
II 

viii, 
xii. 

N 

It 
n 
It 
•I 
xiv. 

XV. 
XVL 
II 
•I 

II 

xvii. 

xix. 

xxi. 

xxiL 

xxiii. 

II 

xxiv. 

II 


1. 
ii. 
iv. 
II 

V. 

vi. 

viil 

II 

ix. 

II 

X. 

xi. 

II 
xii. 

XV. 

xvi. 
II 


... 

••• 


... 
... 


VERSB. 

...      7  ... 

14,16  .« 

...      6  .« 

...       ^  .«( 

4,10-12  ... 

..     17  ^ 

14,19,29  ... 

...8-11  ... 

...     22  .. 

...     44  .. 

...     13  .« 

•*.       1  ... 

...8-10  .« 

.«  2,  6  ... 

...       Iv  ... 

-  4.6  ... 


IL  SAMUEL. 

26,26  ^ 

...      9  ^ 

...     27  «. 

6-9, 10  ... 

...      Zo  .•• 

24, 26  «, 

...     16  ^ 

...  1-4  ^ 

...       9  ^ 

10-14  «. 

13,14  ... 

...     28  ... 

...     ol  ... 

...6-11  ... 

...     26  ... 

...     10  .« 

...9,10  ... 

...     13  ^ 

21, 22  ... 

27-29  .« 

...     Zt  .«• 

...      lo  .•• 

...       10  ... 

•M     10  ... 

•  ..      xl.  ..• 

...       14  ... 

—    26  ... 


I.  KINGS. 

^    33  ... 

M*  32  MM 

^      Z  ^ 

tm»         XO  .aia 

...     13  .« 

...       1  .«. 

35,  36  ... 

...     38  ^ 

...     15  .^ 

15,17  .- 

...       Za  ... 

...5,33  ... 

...  6-8  ... 

29 

»••  '-'^  •«• 

»•«      ^  o  ••• 

,•.     31  ... 

...       oi  .«( 


... 


... 
... 


PAGE. 

...  496 

...  342 

...  465 

442,  447 

...  609 

...  446 

...  308 

...  382 

...  193 

..  497 

...  412 

M.  388 

...  442 

.M  68 

...  381 

«.  426 


^  412 

...  193 

...  497 
...1,23 

...  509 

...  363 

•..  1 

...  413 

«.  187 

m,      85 

...  15 
...  309 
...  382 
...  41-3 
...  182 
17,72 
...  428 
...  497 
...  15 
M.  382 
...  423 
...  28 
...  233 
...  496 
...  6S 
72,  435 
...  32 


...  434 

...  422 

^  1 

...  434 

...  '29 

8,  4(18 

...  367 

...  118 

...  29 

...  28 

...  26 

.«  32 

...  435 

...  27 

...  412 

...  96 

...  168 


XVL 


SCRIPTURES  REFERRED  TO. 


CHAP. 

xvi. 
xviii. 

II 

II 

M 

xiz. 
If 

XX. 

xxi 
II 
n 

H 

xxii. 


N 

U. 

N 

iii. 
▼. 

n 
n 
n 

vL 
▼11. 

II 
viiL 
xiii. 

H 

xviiL 

II 
xix. 
xxiiL 
xxiv. 

XXT. 

■ 


ii. 
zv. 

H 

zvi. 
xvii. 


VERSB. 

31-33  . 

.^        4  . 

...     18  . 

^     26  . 

^     42  . 

•.4-18  . 

...     10  . 

^     30  . 

,..     20  . 

-.     10  . 

..     25  . 

27, 29  . 

19-23  . 

^    25  . 


IL  KINGS. 


••• 


L  CHKONIOLES. 


L 

^^ 

^      7 

ii 

M. 

...     22 

iv. 

.*« 

42,43 

V. 

...9, 

10, 18-22 

VIL 

...  1-6 

xi. 

»•• 

...      7 

XIL 

*•. 

^      2 

11 

«•« 

...     18 

II 

MM 

...     32 

XllL 

M« 

^      8 

XX. 

...       4 

xxiv. 

M« 

14-16 

IL  CHRONICLES. 


10-15    ... 


••• 
••• 


••• 
••• 


2 
5 
9 
16    ... 


PAGE. 

...  512 

...  370 

...  181 

521 

206,  218 

...  503 

...  370 

...  216 

16,97 

...  412 

...     68 

...  142 

...  188 

^  216 


^  ...1-16  —         « 

•■■  ...      X  ...        ... 

•••  ••*      iS4  .«.           .«• 

•••  13|  14  ...        M. 

■■■  ...Oy  ZZ  ...                  ... 

9m0  ...        ^*^  9mm              ... 

■■•  .■•     ^o  ...          ... 

...  ...     ^o  ... 

Z  Z  8-5  Z 

■••  ...    i-*i  ... 

^  ...     16  ... 

—  15, 19  ... 

mm,  15,  16  .« 

-  18,37  .- 
-.  ...     14  .« 

mm.  ...         13  -. 

2-4  ... 

Z  Z    19  Z 


mm.    861 

...  625 
...  32 
...  466 
216,  274 
...  480 
...  360 
...  435 
...  420 

25,  345 

26,  379 
...  206 
...  415 
...  97 
...  212 
...  412 
...  1 
...  340 
...  82 
...  16 
...  508 

242,  269 


26 

484 
158 
818 
434 
308 
159 
350 
434 
508 
28 
456 


•  •• 


••• 
•  •• 
••• 


...  809 

...  624 

...  251 

...  129 

...  250 


CHAP. 
XX. 

•I 

II 

II 

xxi. 
xxviiL 
xxxL 
xxxiL 

II 
xxxiii. 


••• 
... 
... 
... 
... 
... 

a.. 
... 
... 

••• 


VERSE. 

...       4 

...     12 

22,23 

...     26 

...4-17 

22 

•  ••  Zx 

...      7 

...     31 

12,13 


PAGE. 

340 

...  ...      J,Ot) 

149 

...  ...    ^4  / 

15 

...       135,418 
...         ...  287 

...  ...       ^o 

...  ...       I  v 

...  200 


iL 

iU. 

iv. 

iz. 

II 

II 

xiiL 


N 

ii. 

iv. 

viL 

viiL 

xiL 

xiiu 

xvL 

xvii. 

xviii 

XX. 

H 

•t 

II 
xxi 
xxii. 
xxiii 

II 
XX  vi 
xxvii. 

II 
xxxi 

II 

XXXV. 

xlii. 
II 

N 


EZRA. 


ix.        ••• 


—         18,16 


NEHEMIAH. 

...     18  ... 

6,  20  ^ 

•••       o  . •• 

...    17  ... 

26,  26  ... 

...     ^/  ... 

26,  28  ^ 


ESTHER. 


174,  323 
...  437 


-.97 

...  287 

-.         ...  287 

, 314 

...  102 

97,  147,  539 

-         ...  96 


vii 

,^ 

1-10    .^ 

mmm 

...  515 

IZ. 

^^ 

...    19    ^ 

.^ 

...       6 

N 

..• 

••.    26    ... 

M* 

...  422 

JOB. 


...  10 
.M  20 
...  6 
...  19 
...  8 
11-16 
...  7-9 
...  15 
.«      9 

8,  12 
...  8 
...  17 
...  24 
...  27 
12,  13 
...  2 
...  8 
8-10 
...  14 
...     20 

20-23 
1.  7 
...  32 
...  10 
6,  6 
...  8 
...    17 


«M 

71 

•  •• 

433 

•  •• 

325 

•  •« 

389 

•  •• 

114 

•  •• 

526 

•  •• 

420 

•  •• 

391 

•  •« 

508 

•  «  • 

451 

266, 

466 

•  •  • 

304 

•  •  • 

269 

266, 

299 

... 

466 

159, 

302 

•  •  • 

456 

•  •  • 

527 

•  •  • 

500 

•  •• 

114 

... 

107 

•  •• 

304 

•  •• 

479 

•  •• 

529 

•  •• 

253 

•  •• 

37 

•  •  • 

274 

399. 

408 

SCRIPTURES  REFERRED  TO. 


xvii. 


CHAP. 

ii 

II 

iii. 

iv. 

V. 

vii. 

H 

II 
II 


PSALMS. 

YXRSB. 
»••         ^      ... 
...       -L^       ... 

#•*  *■        tarn 

...  O        .•• 

^  1         ... 

•  ••       XJ       ••« 

11,  12  ... 
15,  16  ... 
...     16     ... 


iz. 

,^ 

...     12 

II 

... 

...     20 

X. 

,,, 

8,     4 

II 

... 

7,  11 

n 

... 

7-10,  15 

II 

M. 

...     14 

xi 

M. 

...      4 

II 

••• 

...      7 

xiv. 

M* 

...      1 

xvi. 

*•• 

••*       3 

II 

... 

.•     5 

xviiL 

•mm 

...     29 

II 

•  •• 

32-40 

n 

•  •• 

...     35 

xiz. 

M* 

^     12 

XX. 

•  •• 

...  7-9 

xxii. 

... 

14,  15 

XXV. 

... 

...       9 

If 

..• 

...     10 

XX  vi. 

..• 

.-.      2 

xxvL 

... 

...  5-9 

II 

... 

••*                 V 

XXX. 

•  •* 

...  4,5 

II 

... 

...      7 

xxxii. 

•  .. 

...  3,  4 

H 

*.  * 

...  3-5 

n 

... 

...  8,9 

•1 

... 

...       8 

xxxiii. 

... 

...     10 

xxxiv. 

... 

.«       6 

II 

... 

...7,21 

II 

... 

9, 10,  22 

II 

... 

...     16 

xxxvi. 

... 

...     10 

xxxvii. 

... 

...       3 

II 

... 

...  4,5 

N 

... 

...  5,6 

M 

... 

16,11,25 

N 

«•• 

...     20 

N 

..  1 

...     35 

II 

... 

35,36 

xxxviiL 

... 

...       4 

xxxix. 

,,, 

...       9 

II 

... 

...     10 

xL 

.** 

...       8 

II 

.M 

...     12 

xli. 

»M 

...       9 

(1 

••» 

...  1-3 

xlii. 

•M 

5,11 

xliv. 

... 

...  1-4 

II 

•M 

3,5,8 

M 

... 

10-14 

xlv. 

.. 

...       7 

xlix. 

•  •• 

...     14 

L  ... 

... 

...     15 

... 
... 
... 


... 


... 
... 


21 


PAGE. 

...  300 

...  372 

...  258 

...  521 

...  217 

...  471 

...  316 

...  601 

...  422 

...  4Zw 

...  297 
...  238 
...  418 
...  494 
...  422 
...  129 
...  118 
...  135 
...  485 
...  636 
...  146 
...  271 
...  365 
...  440 
...  68 
...  387 
...  333 
...  472 
...  79 
...  485 

417,  448 
...  47 
...  390 
...  390 
..  519 
94,  509 
...  365 
...  430 
...  504 
38,  501 
...  223 
...  430 
...  471 
...  223 
...  200 
...  451 
...  40S 
...  299 
...  433 
...  300 

118,  390 
...  72 
...  114 
...  86 
...  440 
...  347 
...  15 

211,  500 
...  538 
...  68 
...  121 
...  148 
...  305 
...  200 

.M  V 


... 
... 


CHAP. 

li. ...         ... 

II      .M 
II      .M 

Hi. 

liiu 

Iv. 

If 

Ivii. 

IviiL 

II 
Ix.... 
Ixi. 
Ixiv. 
Ixv. 
Ixvii. 
Ixviii. 

II 

n 

n 
Ixix. 
IxxL 

It 
Ixxiii. 

II 

N 

It 

Ixxiv. 

II 
IxxvL 

II 

N 

II 

IxxviL 

II 
IxxviiL 

II 

N 

N 
II 
M 

Ixxx. 

II 

Ixxxi. 


Ixxxiii.  ... 

II  ... 

II  ... 

n  ... 

n  ... 

Ixxxiv.  ... 


... 
... 


... 
... 


Ixxxv. 
Ixxxvi 
Ixxxix. 
II 
II 
xcL 
xciv. 

II  ... 

II  ... 

II  ... 

xcv. 
xcvii 

Cl.  ... 

ri  ... 

ciiL  ... 

II  ... 


VERSE. 

...      4  ... 

...5, 10  .« 

11,12  ... 

...       o  ... 

...           18  .M 

...        •>'•'  ••. 

...           4  ... 

...              /  ... 

...   11  ... 

11,12  .„ 

...       ^  ... 

...                V  »•» 

...       o  ... 

...       1,    Z  .M 

...                 ^  ... 

...     O—O  ... 

...     /— v  »•* 

...     14  ... 

...                8  .M 

...          16  .M 

22-24  ... 

...  4,5  .« 

...       I  ,    V  ... 

...            18  .M 

...     19  .« 

1, 10, 11  ... 

...          iv  ... 

...       o  ... 

...       I  .•• 

...     10  .« 

...      iZ  ... 

...  7-9  ... 

11,12  ... 

...9-11  ... 

...     34  ... 

37. 38  ... 

38. 39  .« 
...  49  ... 
...     63  .M 

3  ... 

...       5  ... 

11,12  ... 

...     12  ... 

13,14  ... 

2-5,  9-12  ... 

4,  etc. 

....^-12  .« 

...     13  ... 

...     18  ... 

...       2  ... 

...     12  ... 

...       1  ... 

...     15  ... 

...       2  ... 

30-34  ... 

...     39  ... 

...     16  ... 

...      7  ... 

...     12  ... 

...     14  ... 

...     19  ... 

10, 11  ... 

...     1.  i-  ... 

...       o  ... 

...    4    I  ... 

...       8  ... 


... 

... 
... 
... 


PAGE. 

129,418 
95,  415 
...  527 

...  494 
...     92 
25 
138,  275 
...  510 
...  501 
...  297 
...  436 
...  496 
.«         ...  260 

•M  ...       iZo 

••»         .M  364 

...  149 

271 

...      250, 256 

...  ...    4^0 

.M         .M  396 
...  353 

...         ...  Zi  it 

...  .M        \i'0 

.•      133, 471 

471 

...      300, 425 
...        ...  44y 

^  ...  346 
234 

89, 11 4 
...         ...     I  I 

...        ...  ^y/ 

.«         ...  500 

504 

465 

...         ...  loo 

...  334 
.•  ...  114 
.OT  ...  87 
•M         ...  453 

mm»  .M    390 

...  I  ..       Ii70 

...     15 

...  ...    xi'O 

76 

...  130 
...      872, 432 

.•        .«  361 

.•        ...  297 

203 

471 

...  260 

...         ••.  108 

537 

72, 119, 169,  220 

121 

408 

...  166 
...       123,  '72 

...  538 
.M  ...  3(  9 
181 

...  406 

...  491 

168 

108 

438 


XVlll. 


SCRIPTURES  REFERRED  TO. 


CHAP 

cv. 
II 

M 
II 

II 

cvi. 

11 
cvii. 

II 
ex. 
cxi. 


II 

cxii. 
cxv. 
cxvi. 

II 
cxviiL 

II 
cxix. 

II 

n 

N 
M 
M 
II 

cxx. 
cxxi. 

II 
cxxiv. 

II 

ex  XV. 

cxxxvi. 

II 
cxxxviii 
cxxxix. 

II 

cxli. 

czliii. 

cxlv. 

II 
cxlvii 

II 
cxlviiL 


L 

II 
ii. 

iii. 
II 

iv. 
II 

viiL 
ix. 

XI 

xii. 
xiii. 

II 

II 
xiv. 

•I 

XV. 

xvi 

II 


••• 

••• 

••• 

••• 

••• 

••• 

••• 

••• 

••• 

••• 

••• 

.•• 

••• 

••• 

••• 

•*• 

••• 

••• 

••• 

••• 

••• 

••• 

••• 

••• 

••• 

••• 

•«• 

••• 

••• 

.•• 

••• 

••• 

••• 

••• 

.*• 

••• 

••• 

••• 

••• 

••• 

••■ 

••• 

••• 


VERSB. 

•••          ^  ..• 

•••          4  .*• 

...           O  ..• 

17-22  ... 

...     o/  ... 

...          ^  ..• 

43-45  ... 

•••       o4  ••• 

...     43  ... 

...          o  ... 

...             ^  ... 

...    o,  o  ... 

...     / )  o  ... 

...  6,  8  ... 

...         i-^  ... 

•  ..                      id  ... 

•*.       J.0  •*. 

...     x^  ... 

16,*25, 47  .*." 

•••     o7  ••• 

•••      ^v  ••• 

...    71  ... 

71,75  ... 

63,158  ... 

136,  lo8  ... 

...                    V  ... 

...     O — O  ... 


■  •• 
..• 
... 

••• 
..• 
... 

•  •• 
... 
... 
... 

... 
... 
... 
... 
... 
... 
... 
... 

•  •• 


... 

... 
.«• 
... 


...  4 
1,  etc. 
2,3,4 
...  5 
...  18 
23,24 
...       8 

...  o 

...     17 

23,24 

...         o 

...  3-8 

...    J.,  JL 
...         0 

...       3 

10,11 

...     20 


PROVERBS. 


... 
... 


... 
... 


26 
31 
..  17 
..       6 

,..  35 
13-15 
...  18 
...  10 
...  12 
...  31 
...  13 
..     20 

...    n 

...  24 
...  32 
...     34 


•  •• 


7    ... 


PAGE. 

...  ...         /lO  i- 

...         ...  zxz 

...  ...      iJ-dX. 

447 

...  ...    ovl 

...         ...  zoo 

...33, 170,  334 

424 

260 

...         ...  /if^\} 

260 

•  ••  •••  ZiOD 

«••  •••  /  ^ 

•  ••  •••  o40 

•  ••  •••  4/  X 

•  ••  •••      iuX  ^ 

•••  •••    o\f^ 

...         ...  148 

470 

272 

«•*  •••    4  /  V 

•  ••  •••       *X^v 

127 

...       118,  472 

485 

...  ...   ooo 

...  ...     %)^*J 

...  ...      (U 

...  •••    ooJL 

...       497,261 
...       239,  261 

•••  •••    O^jt 

269 

...  ...  ^0^ 

...  ...  Z«7 

...        ...     56 

...73,  379,  493 

79 

...        ...  467 

500 

...  ...    OV/4 

...  ...    SD^ 

•••  ...    ooo 

...  68, 76 

•••  ••.  oi-Z 


•••  •••  x/Z 

...  ...  oQo 

...        ...  oxz 

...       451,509 
306 

...95,  419,  485 

•••  •••    4«JX 

284 

...         ...  181 

...         ...     ±0 

465 

...       168, 485 
...         ...     l/> 

340 

340 

...      107, 427 

448 

87 

...      258, 446 


CHAP. 

xvii. 

xxii. 

xxvi. 

xxvii. 

xxviii. 

II 
xxix. 

XXX. 
N 


YERSB. 
•••       lU       ... 
...  O       ... 


2     ... 


...     zz 

...         u 

«.    13 


... 


8,9     .«        ^ 
17     -. 


ECOLESIASTES. 


PAOB. 

...  yd 
...  96 

..  47 
93,  314 
...  310 
436,  529 
181,  410 
^  223 
...  446 


iii. 

mm. 

•m 

4 

« .. 

M. 

.«  480 

II 

,^ 

... 

11 

... 

M. 

...  302 

II 

M» 

^ 

15 

,^ 

•mm 

«-  429 

iv. 

,., 

... 

4 

... 

M. 

...  385 

V. 

M. 

,^ 

2 

I  •• 

.a. 

-.  217 

II 

... 

•  .. 

4 

... 

M. 

.^  455 

vii. 

.«. 

.M 

7 

.M 

M. 

...  500 

II 

•w 

.^ 

9 

,^ 

... 

...  499 

II 

.«. 

'  .  « 

20 

•  .« 

95, 

408,  482 

viii. 

M. 

... 

10 

... 

•  •  • 

...  303 

II 

... 

M. 

11 

,^ 

109, 

138,  404 

II 

... 

12 

.«• 

M. 

...  317 

ix. 

... 

■*. 

12 

,^ 

... 

.   530 

II 

M. 

14,15 

.M. 

... 

^  263 

X. 

M. 

... 

16 

•  .» 

.M 

...  397 

XL 

M* 

M. 

7 

..• 

•  •• 

...  211 

xii. 

M. 

M. 

13 

«^ 

•M 

...     84 

N 

M. 

... 

14 

«• 

110,429.526 

SONG. 


iL 

^, 

...      9 

... 

•M 

^  833 

If 

.^ 

...    12 

^ 

M. 

...  355 

n 

•~ 

—    15 

— 

... 

479,495 

ISAIAH. 

L 

.*• 

...  2-7 

••• 

... 

...  435 

II 

... 

...      ^ 

•  •• 

... 

...  250 

II 

... 

...       o 

•  •• 

... 

...   136 

II 

... 

6 

«•• 

82, 

108,315 

n 

... 

11-15 

•  •• 

... 

...  448 

It 

... 

...     15 

•  •• 

... 

122, 199 

II 

... 

...     25 

•  •• 

... 

...  119 

II 

... 

...     31 

•  •• 

... 

•••    ZiO*/ 

ii. 

... 

...     21 

•  •• 

... 

...  496 

iii. 

... 

10,11 

•  •• 

... 

...  182 

II 

... 

...     18 

•  •• 

... 

...  397 

iv. 

... 

...      1 

•  •• 

... 

...  453 

V. 

... 

...       2 

•  •• 

... 

...  479 

It 

... 

...       4 

... 

... 

...     78 

II 

... 

...     12 

... 

... 

...  361 

viii. 

... 

...     14 

... 

... 

...  495 

X. 

... 

...       3 

... 

...  133 

II 

...5, 

19,  20,  21 

... 

... 

...  181 

II 

...  6,7 

... 

... 

...     91 

II 

•  •• 

12,13 

... 

... 

...  144 

If 

•  •• 

...     26 

... 

... 

...  381 

xii. 

•  •• 

...       ] 

... 

... 

...  336 

II 

•  •• 

...      3 

... 

...  2!7 

xxiii. 

•  •• 

1,12 

... 

... 

...     26 

XX  vL 

•  •• 

...  3,  4 

... 

... 

...  433 

H 

•*• 

...       4 

... 

... 

...  888 

SCRIPTURES  REFERRED  TO, 


XIX. 


CHAP. 

VERSB. 

PAGK. 

JEREMIAH. 

xxvii. 

*•• 

•  •• 

3 

••• 

••• 

...  325 

xxviii. 

••• 

•  •• 

17 

••• 

••• 

139,316 

CHAP. 

VERSE. 

pAom. 

xxxix. 

•  •• 

•  •• 

8 

*•• 

••• 

...  508 

i. 

••• 

17-19 

..• 

•  •• 

...  452 

XXX. 

•  •• 

•  •• 

33 

••• 

••• 

...  317 

ii. 

••• 

••• 

5 

... 

•  •• 

...  311 

xxxi. 

•  •• 

•  •• 

3 

••• 

••• 

231,  334 

H 

M* 

••• 

10 

.*• 

•  •• 

...     26 

xxxii. 

•  •• 

•  •• 

2 

••• 

••• 

...  127 

N 

•  •• 

11. 

12 

... 

•  •• 

...     58 

II 

•  •• 

•  «• 

17 

*•• 

••• 

98, 150 

N 

••• 

••• 

19 

..• 

..• 

432,  482 

xxxiii. 

••• 

... 

1 

«•• 

••• 

...     15 

n 

•  •• 

••• 

21 

.•• 

••• 

...  479 

II 

.M 

15 

16 

••• 

••• 

504,  433 

II 

•  •• 

••• 

22 

•*• 

.«• 

...  190 

xxxviii. 

••• 

9- 

-20 

••• 

••• 

...  247 

II 

•  •• 

••• 

28 

••• 

•  •• 

...  133 

xL 

••• 

•  •• 

2 

«•• 

••• 

126,  334 

II 

•  •• 

••• 

31 

... 

•  •• 

73,  311 

ii 

••• 

•  •• 

15 

••• 

••• 

...  193 

iii 

•  •• 

••• 

1 

... 

... 

...  436 

M 

•  •• 

••• 

27 

••• 

••• 

...  390 

II 

•  •• 

12. 

15 

..• 

.•• 

...  267 

II 

••• 

«•• 

29 

••• 

••• 

...  362 

II 

•  •• 

••• 

19 

..• 

... 

...    73 

II 

••• 

•  •• 

31 

••• 

••• 

...  144 

iv. 

••• 

••• 

10 

.•• 

... 

...  329 

xll 

••• 

•  •• 

7 

••• 

••• 

...  271 

II 

••• 

••• 

22 

.•• 

•  •* 

...  472 

it 

••• 

9, 

10 

••• 

••• 

365,  602 

II 

••• 

••• 

29 

..• 

•  •• 

...   Atiit 

•1 

••• 

••• 

21 

••• 

••• 

...  207 

II 

•  •• 

••• 

27 

... 

*•• 

...  194 

iliL 

••• 

••• 

1 

«•• 

••• 

...  143 

V. 

••• 

8, 

23 

... 

... 

814,  499 

H 

••• 

••• 

21 

••• 

••• 

...  140 

vi 

•  •• 

29, 

30 

..• 

•  •• 

...  122 

xliii. 

••• 

••• 

3 

••• 

••• 

...  334 

vii 

••• 

••• 

26 

... 

••• 

...  314 

II 

••• 

••• 

10 

••• 

••• 

...  534 

':    II 

■  •• 

••• 

31 

... 

•  •• 

...  459 

It 

••• 

••• 

21 

• .. 

•  M 

141,  280 

viii. 

•  •• 

••• 

6 

... 

.*• 

...  316 

xliv. 

•  •< 

S 

S,  4 

... 

..   421 

II 

•  •• 

••• 

7 

... 

... 

...     9u 

II 

•  •• 

... 

22 

*•• 

••• 

...  440 

II 

•  •• 

••• 

16 

... 

.*• 

...  271 

II 

•  M 

... 

23 

*•• 

••• 

...  2o0 

ix. 

•  •• 

... 

3 

... 

... 

...  315 

xlv. 

•  •• 

£ 

,6 

••• 

•  M 

...  361 

II 

•  •• 

23, 

24 

... 

... 

...  144 

II 

•  *• 

•  •• 

9 

... 

•  •• 

...  301 

X. 

•  •• 

•  •• 

23 

... 

... 

...  609 

II 

•  •• 

•  •• 

19 

... 

•  •• 

...  603 

xi. 

•  •• 

•  •• 

11 

... 

... 

...  115 

xlvi. 

*•• 

•  •• 

4 

..• 

•  •• 

...  145 

xii. 

•  •• 

•  •• 

9 

... 

... 

...    70 

II 

«•• 

9, 

10 

.«• 

tt« 

...  383 

II 

•  •• 

•  •• 

5 

... 

*•• 

...  139 

xlviii. 

•  •• 

9, 

11 

..• 

•  •• 

227,  600 

xiiL 

«•• 

•  •• 

23 

... 

... 

191,  314 

II 

•  •• 

... 

18 

... 

•  •• 

...  427 

xvii. 

•  •• 

•  •• 

1 

«.. 

... 

...  429 

xlix. 

•  «• 

••• 

4 

... 

•  •• 

...  3*9 

II 

.«• 

•  •• 

6 

... 

... 

...  424 

II 

•  *• 

... 

16 

... 

.«• 

...  475 

M 

..• 

•  •• 

9 

... 

314, 

468,  540 

II 

•  •• 

... 

25 

... 

.•• 

...  392 

xxvi. 

..• 

3, 

13 

... 

... 

...  436 

1. 

•  •• 

... 

6,7 

... 

•  •• 

...  492 

xxix. 

•  •• 

11 

... 

73, 

329,  474 

Hi. 

•  •• 

1 

,  2 

... 

.•• 

...  276 

XXX, 

*•• 

12, 

13 

... 

... 

130,  473 

II 

«•• 

... 

12 

... 

.«• 

...  233 

II 

•  M 

11 

... 

... 

126,  501 

liii. 

*•■ 

... 

3 

..• 

.«• 

...  449 

xxxL 

••• 

•  •• 

3 

... 

... 

380,  537 

II 

.«• 

6 

... 

..« 

...  118 

xxxi. 

.  '  • 

••• 

18, 

etc. 

130 

,  340,  436 

II 

•  •• 

... 

10 

... 

... 

...  317 

XXXV. 

..  • 

...7-10 

... 

.». 

...  235 

Uv. 

•  •• 

8, 

10 

... 

... 

...  514 

xlvi. 

•M 

... 

28 

... 

.«• 

...  193 

II 

•  •• 

•  •• 

10 

... 

380, 

39  J,  537 

xlviii. 

.*• 

.. . 

11 

... 

M* 

..•    78 

It 

•  •• 

•  •• 

17 

... 

•  •• 

...  392 

L 

•  M 

17-20 

' .. 

•  *• 

...  601 

Iv. 

•  •• 

•  •• 

1 

etc. 

•  •• 

...  180 

II 

•• 

... 

20 

... 

... 

^  429 

II 

«•• 

•  •• 

3 

... 

•  •• 

...  220 

U. 

•  •• 

... 

6 

•** 

... 

...  361 

II 

•  *• 

•  •• 

8 

... 

•  •• 

...     73 

Ivi. 

... 

•  •« 

7 

... 

•  •• 

...  172 

Ivii. 

•  •• 

•  •• 

16 

... 

•  •■ 

72,  267 

LAMENTATIONS. 

M 

•  «• 

16 

-18 

... 

•  •• 

...  118 

II 

... 

... 

18 

... 

•  •• 

...  340 

L 

••• 

... 

15 

.M 

... 

...  121 

lix. 

«•• 

1 

,  '^ 

... 

•  •• 

...     76 

ii. 

... 

15, 

16 

... 

... 

...  121 

Ix. 

... 

•  •• 

1 

... 

•  •• 

...  276 

II 

... 

19 

.« 

•  M 

...  368 

ir 

... 

•  •• 

2 

... 

•  •• 

...  399 

iii. 

••• 

... 

22 

•  .. 

.•• 

...  437 

II 

... 

•  •• 

15 

>.. 

•  •• 

...  477 

II 

... 

27-33 

... 

.•• 

...  446 

Ixi. 

... 

•  •• 

1 

... 

•  •• 

...  148 

II 

••• 

28- 

-36 

... 

•  •• 

...  439 

u 

... 

•  •• 

1 

etc. 

•  •• 

...  452 

It 

••• 

32, 

33 

.•« 

*•• 

...  180 

Ixii. 

... 

•  •• 

1 

etc. 

•  •• 

...  3-27 

It 

•■• 

... 

33 

... 

..  • 

...  108 

Ixiii. 

... 

•  •• 

5 

... 

•  •• 

...  228 

%t 

•M 

34,36 

«.• 

#•• 

.-    72 

11 

... 

•  •• 

8 

... 

•  •• 

...     72 

II 

..« 

•  •• 

9 

... 

•  •• 

31,  33 

II 

7-9 

... 

•  •• 

122,  26-2, 

EZEKIEL. 

312,  381 

336, 

501,  504 

II 

•  •• 

11- 

-13 

... 

...  509 

L 

•  •• 

.•• 

14 

... 

... 

...  272 

Ixv. 

•  •• 

... 

20 

... 

... 

...  408 

iii. 

... 

... 

22 

... 

... 

...  216 

•1 

•  •• 

«*. 

24 

*•• 

••• 

...  473 

ix. 

•  •• 

... 

4 

... 

... 

145,  278 

xvi 

•  •• 

••• 

2 

••• 

••• 

99,  333 

X. 

•«• 

— 

13 

... 

... 

...  406 

LL 


xz. 


SCRIPTURES  REFERRED  TO. 


K. 

zi. 
zvi. 

xviiL 

II 
xix. 

XX, 

XXVL 

XXV  ii. 

xxxiii. 

xxxvi. 

II 

II 

II 
xxxvii 
Yzxviii* 


fr.  «. 


••• 

••• 


••• 
••• 
••• 


VERSK. 

..      18  , 

...     23  . 

20, 21  . 

28, 32  . 

31,32  . 

10, 12  . 

QQ 

•*«   ^~-i  • 

•  ••                             O  •! 

...                    11  . 

...1-12  . 

21, 23  . 

26, 26  . 

•••     ^1  » 

...     11  . 

...     11  . 


DANIEL. 


••• 

••• 
... 
••• 
••• 
.•• 
.•• 
••• 
.•• 
.«• 
... 
... 
... 


N 

iz. 

N 

z. 

XL 

siL 


80-34 
...  35 
...     10 

22-24 
...3-20 
...     24 

...  V 

^     30 
^      2 


HOSEA. 


PilOE. 

...  514 
...  514 

...  Ill 
...  108 
...  178 
...  133 
...  441 
...  501 
...  26 

108, 138 
...  501 
...  500 
...  123 
...  357 

890,  600 

«.    a 


...  144 

...  361 

...  216 
492, 515 

...  64 

...  429 

...  470 

...  26 

...  418 


CHAiP. 

iii. 

II 

II 

V. 

vi. 
ix. 


L 

iu 
iii. 


iii. 
iv. 

H 
V. 

vi. 
II 

vii. 
If 


... 
... 


AMOS. 

VERSB. 
2       ... 

5  ... 

6  ••• 

19  .^ 

1  .- 

9  .^ 


JONAH. 
...    16 
•»       9    ... 


MICAH. 

••        1^        ••• 

12, 13     .^ 


7    ... 

3    ... 

V     ... 


... 
... 


PAGE. 

74, 119,  340,  472 

495 

128 

107 

275 

.«         ...  194 


.«  455 
^  509 
...     oo 


424 

309 
188 
336 
520 
72 
529 
436 


... 
... 
... 
... 


NAHUM. 

««•    ...  ^,  9  ... 


199 


a 

•M 

... 

6 

7 

.- 

••• 

88, 136 

HABAKKUK. 

N 

•#• 

... 

.«• 

•m» 

... 

UJ. 

W 

•#• 

...5- 

-10 

... 

... 

... 

170 

i. 

2 

890 

14 

41 

••. 

... 

... 

•*• 

#•• 

N 

..• 

•  •• 

... 

... 

... 

13 

315 

iv. 

15 

17 

8 

27 
472 

27 

It 

..• 

... 

... 

••• 

... 

... 

••• 

... 

... 

... 

ii. 

••• 

•». 

11 

.M 

MM 

.•• 

420 

11 

V. 

•.. 

••• 

... 

... 

... 

iii 

M* 

... 

12 

..• 

••• 

..• 

256 

••• 

••• 

... 

... 

... 

18 

340 

It 

... 

•  •• 

15 

... 

... 

80, 

120 

It 

M* 

... 

.*• 

•.• 

... 

vL 

.•• 

•  •• 

4 

... 

... 

•  •• 

399 

II 

... 

5,17, 

14 

... 

... 

•  •• 

142 

vii 

... 

1 

... 

... 

•  •• 

358 

ZEPHANIAH. 

It 

... 

•  •• 

2 

... 

... 

110, 

429 

II 

... 

••• 

12 

... 

... 

•  •• 

108 

I 

•  .• 

... 

11 

... 

... 

... 

497 

II 

••• 

•  •• 

8 

... 

... 

•  •• 

476 

II 

•  .• 

••a 

12 

... 

... 

... 

275 

ix. 

... 

•  •• 

16 

... 

... 

•  •• 

476 

iii 

••• 

••. 

17 

... 

... 

501, 

537 

z. 

... 

•  •• 

1 

... 

... 

•  •• 

82 

II 

... 

•  •• 

5 

... 

•  •• 

•  •• 

27 

zi- 

... 

...  3,  4 

... 

... 

117, 

510 
157 

ZECHARIAH. 

w 

... 

•  •• 

4 

... 

... 

... 

II 

... 

•  •• 

1 

... 

... 

... 

441 

1. 

13 

... 

... 

... 

835 

II 

... 

...  8,9 

... 

... 

436, 

474 

n 

... 

14 

... 

... 

... 

72 

xiiu 

... 

... 

6 

... 

... 

... 

34 
102 

II 

12, 

17 

... 

... 

117 

M 

... 

... 

... 

... 

... 

II 

... 

... 

15 

... 

... 

126 

xiv. 

..• 

... 

1 

... 

... 

... 

41 

ii 

... 

... 

8 

... 

285, 

501 

H 

.•• 

... 

2 

... 

... 

... 

220 
355 

II 

... 

... 

13 

... 

•  •• 

373 

a 

•.• 

•.• 

6 

..• 

•M 

•*. 

iii 

... 

... 

6 

... 

•  •• 

358 

M 

... 

... 

8 

.. 

•  •• 

534 

iv. 

M« 

... 

6 

... 

••• 

174 

JOEL. 

II 

... 

... 

7 

... 

••• 

390 

vii 

,. 

... 

14 

... 

•  •• 

251 

L 

••• 

••• 

7 

..• 

••• 

•M 

72 

ix. 

... 

.. . 

9 

... 

... 

434 

u 

... 

•  •• 

3 

... 

... 

... 

310 

xii 

... 

...8- 

-10 

... 

... 

276 

II 

... 

12- 

--0 

..• 

... 

... 

267 

11 

... 

••• 

10 

.•• 

... 

209, 

453 

« 

•.• 

12, 

IS 

••• 

••• 

... 

178 

xiii 

•.. 

••• 

9 

.M> 

... 

119, 

274 

SCRIPTURES  REFERRED  TO, 


xxL 


MALACHL 

CHAP. 

VERSE. 

PAGE. 

ii. 

••• 

13,14 

... 

•  •• 

...  409 

iiL 

••• 

...      1 

.M 

33,  331 

If 

••• 

...      2 

...  273 

II 

••• 

...      6 

...  415 

II 

•  •• 

...     14 

...  5-21 

II 

••• 

16-18 

225,  278 

II 

••• 

...     18 

...  406 

Iv. 

••• 

•••      J* 

••• 

^  278 

111. 

II 

iv. 
II 

V. 

•• 
II 
tf 
II 
vi. 

ft 

II 
▼11. 

II 

II 

•I 
ix. 

II 

X. 

II 
II 

XL 

xii 

II 
xiii. 

II 

n 

N 

II 

II 

xvi. 

M 

xviii. 
xix. 
II 

XX. 
XXL 

xxii. 

(I 
xxiii. 
xxiv. 

II 

XXV. 

xxvi. 

n 

n 

n 

•I 

II 
xxvii. 
xxviii. 


MATTHEW. 


...     18 

...       V 
...     12 

...     10 

15,16 

...       4 

...  V 

...  13 
31,32 
...  48 
5,  7, 16 
...  19 
...     23 

...     X,  £ 

...     13 

...     16 

22,23 

...     15 

...     21 

...     36 

...     37 

...     42 

16-19 

...     31 

43-45 

...     13 

...     21 

22 

41,  42  with  43 

...     43 

...     58 

...     18 

...       *iO 

...        £ta 

...  4-6 
...  17 
20-24 
...  22 
...  12 
...  21 
...  37 
...4-28 
...  43 
42,43 
...  13 

15 

33,  35,  72,  74 
40 
41 
56 
4 
20 


••• 
••• 

••• 
••• 
■•• 
••• 
••• 
••• 
••• 
••• 
••• 
••• 
••• 
••• 
••• 
••• 
••• 


••• 
... 


... 

... 

••• 

... 

... 

... 

... 

... 

... 

... 

... 

... 

.*• 

.. 

... 

... 


... 
... 
... 


... 
... 


... 
... 
... 
... 
... 
... 
... 
... 
... 
... 


... 
... 
... 


••• 
•.. 
••• 
••• 
••• 
••• 

... 


... 
... 
••• 
••• 
••• 
••• 
••• 
••• 
•.• 
••• 
••• 
••• 
••• 
••• 
••• 
••• 
••• 
..• 
... 


... 
... 


... 
••• 
... 


... 
... 
... 

... 


... 
... 


...  480 
...  35 
84,  406 

...  86 
...  350 
...  340 
...  386 
...  4.^1 
...  409 
...  85 
...  521 
...  480 
...  104 
17,  489 
...  419 
...  490 
147,  484 
...  480 
...  365 
...  347 
...  457 
...  18 
...  466 

...   0Z<7 

...  104 
...  394 
...  286 
...  284 
...  182 
...  505 
...  21 
...  475 

...  OoJi 

...  499 
...  528 
...  84 

385,  446 
88,  405 
...  42 
...  508 
...  401 
...  402 
...  490 
...  285 
...  497 
...  284 
...  77 
...  240 
...  389 
...  325 
16,  424 

392,  475 


CHAP. 

iv. 

II 

y. 

vi. 

II 

X. 

II 

xii. 
xiii. 
xiv. 
xvi. 
II 

N 


i 

N 
II 

iL 
II 

V. 

If 
vii. 

X. 

II 
II 
II 

II 

xi. 

xii. 

II 

xiii. 

ff 
xiv, 
xiv. 

XV. 
fl 

xvi. 

II 

fl 
xvii. 

II 
xviii. 

II 
xix. 

If 
xxii. 

II 
xxiii. 

II 

II 

II 

II 
xxiv. 


i 
II 
II 
•I 
II 
il 


••• 
••• 
••• 
••• 
••• 
••• 
••• 
••• 
••• 
••• 
••• 
••• 


••• 
••• 
••• 
••• 
••• 
••• 
•.• 
••• 
••• 
••• 


••• 
••• 
••• 
••• 
••• 
••« 
••• 
••• 
••• 
••• 
••• 
••• 
••• 
••• 
••• 
..• 
..• 
.*• 
... 
.«• 
... 
... 
••• 


••• 
••• 
••• 
••• 


MARK. 

VERSE. 

...      OO  ... 

...      4-1  ..« 

...       ^o  ... 

...        -ID  ..f 

...        /i\)  ..a 

...     30  .. 

85-45  .., 

•  ••  O  JL  a*! 

•••       o*y  ••« 

...     70  ... 

...  O  ..4 

•*.     16  ..< 

•••     Z\)  ..I 


LUKE. 

•••     Zo  ••• 

•••      ^A'  ••• 

64-79  ... 

•••  (  ••• 

•  ••  T.V  ••• 

•••       o  ••• 

37-50  ... 

...       DO  ... 

...  O  ..• 

10-15  ... 

...     19  ... 

30-37  ... 

38-42  ... 

...       lu  ..• 

...       -1  o  ... 

...       ^\)  ... 

...    ^— o  ... 

...    t>— O  ... 

...     26  ... 

^O,    oi  ... 

...         iUX  ... 


^v  ... 

15     ... 
19  etc. 


etc. 


27,  29 

...  27 

...  35 

..  13 
28-30 

...  13 

...  41 

81,  32 

...  42 

...  12 

...  28 

...  39 

...  41 

42,  43 

...  o^ 


JOHN. 


••• 
••• 
••• 
••• 
••• 
••• 
••• 
••• 
••• 
••• 
••• 
••• 
••• 


PAGE. 
...  135 

...  449 

...  521 
16,419 
...  ozo 
...  348 
...  498 
...  430 
...  368 
...  466 

345,  390 
...  178 

877,  502 


453 
271 

247 
284 


••• 


... 
••• 


...  uo9 

...  449 

...  49 

...  499 

...  402 

...  391 

...  5 
223, 521 

...  357 

134,  182 

304 

402 

178 

103, 182,  492 

27 

...  17 

...  494 

...  449 

...  182 

...  183 

137,  182 

...  508 

206,  521 

.."  246 

...  402 

...  325 

...  209 

...  336 

...  402 

...  48 

14,  529 

201,  509 

...  355 


12 

13 
14 
48 
15 


••• 
... 
... 


...  483 

...  179 

...  416 

...  331 

...  216 

...  303 


LL  2 


XXll. 


SCRIPTURES  REFERRED  TO, 


CHAP. 

VERSK. 

PAGE. 

CHAP. 

VERSE. 

PAGE. 

iii. 

«, 

8, 

6,  7 

••• 

...    314 

xviii. 

... 

18 

•  •• 

...  469 

II 

.*. 

•«. 

19 

••• 

...  101 

XX. 

... 

21 

•  •• 

...  178 

II 

•»« 

•«. 

20 

..* 

...  312 

II 

... 

35 

•  •• 

...  421 

II 

••• 

••• 

36 

««• 

...  312 

xxi. 

... 

13 

•  •• 

...  391 

iv. 

... 

••* 

14 

•.. 

...  156 

xxvi. 

... 

28 

•  •• 

...  376 

V. 

... 

.*• 

14 

••• 

...  193 

XX  vii. 

••• 

24 

«•• 

...  274 

It 

.*• 

••• 

3a 

... 

...  515 

vi. 

... 

••• 

39 

335,  393 

510,  514 

II 

... 

.•• 

45 

... 

•  •• 

...  155 

ROMANS. 

II 

.•• 

.•• 

48 

••• 

•  •« 

...  515 

ti 

... 

••• 

66 

••• 

•  •• 

...  195 

i. 

... 

21-23 

•  •• 

•  •• 

...  616 

II 

••. 

••• 

68 

••• 

•  •• 

...  223 

It 

19, 21,  25 

&c. 

•  •• 

•  •• 

...  400 

vii. 

••• 

••• 

6 

••• 

... 

...  496 

n 

... 

26-28 

••• 

•  •• 

...     15 

viii. 

••• 

.•• 

31 

••. 

•  •• 

...  195 

•1 

... 

•  •• 

32 

•  •• 

•  •• 

...  400 

II 

... 

... 

34 

••. 

•  •. 

...  100 

ii. 

... 

••• 

4 

•  •• 

•  •• 

...  138 

ix. 

.*• 

... 

39 

••• 

•  •« 

...  103 

II 

... 

...5-11 

••• 

•  •• 

...  526 

X. 

... 

••• 

28 

••• 

... 

...     78 

It 

... 

14,15 

•  •• 

•  •• 

...  400 

xii. 

... 

••• 

25 

••• 

•  •• 

...  345 

II 

... 

•  •• 

16 

•  •• 

•  •• 

...  403 

II 

.•• 

35-37 

••• 

•  •• 

...  312 

iii. 

... 

•  •• 

9 

•  •• 

•  •• 

...  415 

II 

••• 

37 

,  41 

••• 

•  •• 

...     61 

II 

«•• 

25, 

&c. 

•  •• 

•  •• 

...  179 

xiii. 

... 

21 

,  30 

••* 

•  •• 

...     61 

V. 

... 

•  •* 

1 

.^ 

•  •• 

...  179 

xiv. 

••. 

13, 

14 

••. 

•  •• 

211,  219 

II 

... 

•  •• 

21 

•  •• 

•  •• 

...  186 

II 

... 

•  •• 

16 

••. 

•  •• 

...  173 

vi. 

... 

•  •• 

2 

•  •• 

•  •• 

...  127 

II 

... 

••• 

19 

... 

•  •• 

...  336 

II 

... 

•  •• 

23 

•  •• 

•  •■ 

118,348 

II 

... 

••• 

21 

••» 

•  •• 

...  333 

vii. 

... 

•  •• 

13 

•  •• 

•  •• 

...  419 

XV. 

••. 

•  •• 

2 

••• 

•  •» 

127,  472 

II 

... 

14-25 

•  •• 

•  •• 

...  191 

It 

••. 

•  •• 

18 

■*. 

•  •• 

...  131 

II 

... 

... 

17 

•  •• 

•  •• 

...  324 

xvi. 

••• 

•  •• 

14 

••• 

•  •. 

...     53 

It 

... 

... 

18 

•  •• 

••• 

...  313 

II 

... 

23 

24 

«•• 

•  •• 

...  211 

II 

••• 

... 

21 

•  •• 

•  •• 

...  102 

II 

... 

24 

... 

•  •• 

...  219 

II 

... 

... 

23 

•  •• 

•  •• 

...  394 

It 

... 

•  •• 

33 

... 

131, 

393,  463 

II 

*•• 

... 

24 

•  •• 

19] 

,  324,  390 

xvii. 

..• 

•  •• 

10 

... 

... 

...  536 

viii. 

... 

... 

3,4 

•  •• 

... 

...  348 

XX. 

••• 

21, 

26 

... 

••• 

...  329 

II 

... 

... 

6 

•  •• 

... 

92,179 

N 

•«. 

... 

7 

•  •• 

... 

...  314 

M 

... 

... 

9 

•  •• 

... 

...  155 

ACTS. 

n 

... 

... 

14 

•  •• 

... 

...  510 

N 

... 

... 

17 

•  •• 

... 

...  535 

L 

•mm 

••• 

IS 

.*• 

••• 

...  216 

ti 

... 

... 

18 

•  «• 

... 

...  463 

ii. 

••• 

••• 

38 

•.. 

... 

...  178 

n 

... 

... 

23 

•  •• 

... 

...  467 

II 

••• 

... 

47 

•.. 

... 

...  502 

tt 

... 

... 

26 

•  •• 

... 

...  208 

iii. 

... 

••• 

13 

••• 

... 

...  285 

tt 

... 

... 

28 

•  •• 

... 

...  500 

iv. 

... 

18, 

19 

••. 

... 

...     86 

tt 

... 

... 

32 

•  •• 

... 

...  537 

II 

... 

23, 

24 

••• 

••• 

...  241 

II 

... 

... 

33 

•  •• 

... 

125,  140 

•1 

... 

27 

•*. 

••• 

...  326 

X. 

... 

... 

4 

•  •• 

... 

125,  140 

V, 

... 

'*29 

-42 

••• 

••• 

...  241 

II 

... 

... 

21 

•  •• 

... 

...  394 

II 

••• 

•  •• 

41 

... 

••* 

...  351 

xi. 

... 

... 

29 

•  •• 

... 

...  502 

vii. 

... 

«•« 

25 

••• 

••• 

...  496 

xii. 

... 

... 

1 

•  •• 

... 

...  250 

tt 

... 

«•« 

30 

••• 

••• 

...  331 

II 

... 

... 

19 

•  •• 

... 

...     17 

II 

... 

•*• 

38 

••• 

•*• 

...  233 

It 

... 

19- 

-2L 

•  •• 

... 

...  386 

viii. 

... 

.•• 

31 

••• 

••• 

...  399 

xiv. 

.«. 

...  7,8 

•  •• 

... 

287,  421 

ix. 

... 

..• 

4 

•  M 

••• 

^  335 

II 

... 

...4, 

10 

•  •• 

... 

...  488 

II 

••• 

••• 

6 

,^ 

••• 

...  509 

II 

... 

... 

12 

•  •• 

... 

...  180 

II 

•  •. 

•••  4,  5 

•  M 

.*• 

...  536 

II 

... 

... 

17 

••• 

... 

...  156 

II 

••• 

•.• 

16 

•  a. 

••• 

...   ooo 

XV. 

... 

«•« 

4 

••• 

... 

...  452 

X. 

••. 

.•• 

41 

•  •. 

... 

...  328 

II 

... 

... 

5 

••• 

... 

...  199 

xi. 

... 

••• 

24 

•  •. 

... 

...  363 

xvi. 

... 

... 

20 

••• 

... 

...  oMo 

xii. 

... 

18, 

19 

•  *. 

••• 

...  515 

II 

... 

21, 

23 

•  .• 

••• 

...  420 

xiii. 

... 

••• 

20 

... 

••• 

...       o 

L  CORINTHIANS. 

II 

... 

... 

45 

•  •. 

•*. 

...  285 

II 

... 

.•• 

52 

•  •. 

••* 

...  348 

L 

•.• 

19- 

-29 

•  •• 

... 

...  144 

xiv. 

... 

... 

1 

•  •. 

•■• 

...  363 

II 

... 

27, 

28 

•  •• 

•  w 

•V.  2iZo 

It 

••• 

••• 

17 

•  •. 

••• 

....  400 

ii. 

... 

«•■ 

4 

•  •• 

... 

...  155 

XV. 

••• 

•.* 

26 

•  «. 

••• 

...  270 

II 

... 

•  •• 

14 

•  •• 

... 

95,  151 

xvi. 

••• 

24- 

-30 

«.. 

••• 

...     17 

iii. 

... 

•  •• 

13 

•  «• 

... 

139,  300 

xvii. 

••• 

•  •• 

16 

•  •• 

••• 

...  471 

II 

... 

21, 

23 

•  •• 

... 

...  537 

II 

••• 

•  •  • 

18 

*•. 

••• 

...  376 

iv. 

... 

9 

•  •« 

... 

...  534 

n 

••• 

24, 

26 

•  •• 

••• 

...  444 

V. 

... 

.*.*.*9, 

10 

•  •• 

... 

105,447 

m 

•»• 

••• 

31 

•  *• 

••• 

138,  403 

vi. 

••• 

...9, 

11 

•  •• 

•M 

...  513 

SCRIPTURES  REFERRED  TO, 


XXlll. 


OSAT. 

ix. 

X 

H 

M 

xL 
xiL 

N 

XY. 
XVi 

• 


L 

N 
If 

iii 

II 

iv. 

M 

M 

y. 

N 

vi. 
« 

N 

viL 

II 

iz. 

X. 

xii. 

N 
N 

xiii. 


L 

ii. 
iii. 

n 

iv. 

n 

N 

n 
n 
V. 
n 

IT 


••• 
••• 
•.• 

••• 
••• 
••• 
••• 


••. 
••• 
••• 
••• 
••• 


... 
••• 


VISBSB. 

7    ... 

4 

11 
82 
1 
17 
21 
33 
18 
22 


••• 
..• 
.«• 
.*• 
.•• 
... 
... 
••• 


PAGE. 
•••  •*•    O^o 

...      439, 515 
42,  452 

...  52 
...  242 
...  237 
...  168 
...  356 
188,289,401 


... 
••• 
••• 

•a. 
... 


n.  CORINTHIANS. 


... 
... 


... 
... 
.•• 
... 
••• 
... 


... 
••• 


n 

vi. 


L 

ii. 

n 

H 

II 

N 
W 

II 

iii. 

m 


... 
... 
... 
... 


«•• 
... 
•«. 
... 
... 
... 
... 
... 


6,8-10 

...     20 

21,22 

6 

18 

4 

7 

...     18 

18-21     ... 

•••      ^X      ••• 

•••       X4       ••• 

14,15    ... 

...      X  f      ... 
...         X      ... 

...  5,  6    ... 

...  w         ... 

...  4  ... 

• . •  I  ..• 

...  XU  ... 

...  ^U  ... 

•••  V  ..• 


GALATIANS. 


... 
... 


•— 

u 

Sl6 

... 

... 

... 

16 

... 

M. 

mmm 

16 

... 

m^ 

... 

19 

•^ 

•m* 

MM 

4 

•mm 

... 

... 

4-6 

... 

... 

••. 

6 

.M 

... 

14 

,15 

... 

... 

... 

29 

... 

... 

... 

16 

... 

... 

... 

17 

... 

... 

... 

19, 

eto. 

m— 

22,23 

... 

•#• 

... 

24 

... 

••• 

... 

17 

... 

...  600, 608 
...88, 145, 220 
148 

...         ...  oZo 

...  ...    XOx 

...  404 
602, 237 
...  ...  ooo 

...  ...   l7o 

...      125, 348 

100 

...         ...  oio 

...        ...  xuo 

•.•  ...  91/7 

...  ...  3 0*7 

...  ...  ^X«/ 

...  ...  9/7 

...  491, 502 
...         ...  365 

..•  ...  440 

•••  ...       iv 


844, 421 
...  179 
.^  635 
...  518 
...  143 
...  416 
..  179 
...  283 
...  131 
...  75 
...  408 
...  612 
...  179 
^  127 
M.  866 


EPHESIANS. 


i 

... 

... 

17 

... 

... 

... 

155 

U 

... 

... 

1 

... 

... 

... 

118 

iii. 

... 

... 

2 

... 

... 

... 

438 

iv. 

... 

... 

3 

... 

... 

... 

415 

II 

... 

... 

4-7 

... 

... 

... 

537 

V. 

... 

... 

12 

... 

... 

... 

400 

II 

... 

... 

18 

... 

... 

... 

179 

vi. 

... 

... 

22 

... 

... 

... 

155 

It 

... 

... 

8 

... 

... 

... 

328 

n 

••• 

... 

10 

... 

... 

... 

534 

N 

OHAP. 

iv. 

N 

N 

N 

It 

V, 

II 

II 

11 

Vi. 

It 

n 


1. 
ii. 

N 
II 
II 

iii 
iv. 
n 
II 


i. 

It 

ii 

It 

II 

iii 

n 


... 
... 
... 
... 
... 
... 
... 
... 
... 
... 
... 
•— 


Verse. 

18,19 
...     19 

22,24 
..  26 
..  27 
..  2 
..  11 
..  20 
..  30 
..  11 
..  16 
..    18 


•  •• 


•  •• 
••• 


•  •• 

•  •• 

•  •• 

•  •• 

•  •• 

•  •• 

•  •• 

•  •• 
••• 
••• 


PHILIPPIANS. 


OOLOSSIANS. 


I.  THESSALONIANS. 


n.  THESSALONIANa 

•M  M.6— 10         M.  — 

L  TIMOTHT. 


PAGE. 
...    103 

...     16 

...  408 
...  499 
...  512 
...  53G 
...  1G8 
...  2(53 
...  53 G 
...  322 
...  391 
...  209 


... 

...      6 

... 

... 

...  102 

... 

...       8 

... 

... 

...  385 

... 

12,13 

... 

... 

894,  500 

... 

19,20,27 

... 

... 

...  389 

... 

19-27 

... 

... 

...  529 

... 

...     18 

... 

... 

...  159 

... 

...  6,  7 

... 

... 

...  218 

... 

...       o 

... 

«■• 

...  386 

••• 

...    18 

... 

... 

887,492 

•.. 

... 

20 

... 

... 

... 

348 

... 

... 

21 

... 

... 

... 

314 

... 

... 

6,7 

... 

... 

... 

421 

... 

... 

7 

... 

... 

... 

3o6 

... 

... 

16 

... 

... 

... 

502 

•.• 

... 

8 

... 

... 

... 

498 

.•• 

.•• 

23 

... 

... 

... 

287 

i 

... 

...      6 

... 

••• 

155,  502 

V. 

... 

...      8 

... 

... 

...  182 

M 

... 

.-2,8 

... 

... 

...  304 

tt 

... 

...       o 

... 

... 

•■•    OZJi 

H 

•.• 

...    17 

.#• 

... 

...  208 

601 


••• 

... 

20 

... 

... 

...  390 

... 

... 

4 

... 

... 

...  10  s 

... 

... 

6 

... 

... 

...  45)1 

... 

... 

2 

... 

... 

...     16 

... 

•.. 

10 

... 

... 

172,  325 

... 

... 

8 

... 

... 

...  223 

..  1 

... 

10 

... 

••• 

...  245 

... 

... 

4,5 

... 

••« 

...  385 

... 

... 

7,8 

... 

... 

...  340 

... 

... 

10 

... 

... 

...  112 

..• 

...9, 10 

.*• 

••. 

...  223 

xxir. 


SCRIPTURES  REFERRED  TO. 


n.  TIMOTHY, 

CHAP. 

iiL 

... 

CHAP. 

VEKSK. 

PACK. 

iv. 

... 

i. 

•«• 

...       15 

... 

283,  390 

It 

... 

II 

••• 

...     12 

... 

...  335 

tt 

... 

II 

••• 

15-17 

... 

...  529 

It 

... 

II 

••• 

16-18 

... 

...  298 

V. 

... 

ii. 

•a. 

...     17 

... 

...  390 

N 

II 

••• 

...     24 

... 

...  179 

II 

••• 

...     26 

... 

...  433 

iv. 

••■ 

...  6-8 

... 

...  182 

n 

••• 

...     10 

... 

...  390 

I 

..• 

N 

••• 

14-15 

... 

...  285 

n 

... 

N 

MS 

17-18 

... 

492,  514 

n 
n 

iii. 

... 
... 
... 

TITUS. 

V. 

••• 

u. 

•M 

•••      6 

... 

••• 

...  288 

m 

•M 

...    14 

... 

••• 

...  419 

I 

•M 

HEBEEWS. 

II 

... 

tl 

... 

VL 

MM 

...      1 

... 

•..    95 

ii. 
iii. 

— 

If 

••• 

...  8, 4 

... 

...  813 

... 

II 

••• 

...    11 

... 

...  536 

II 

... 

II 

••• 

...     14 

... 

...  483 

II 

••• 

16,17 

... 

...  143 

iii. 

••• 

8-19 

... 

...  Ill 

II 

••• 

...     12 

... 

...     45 

L 

iv. 

*.** 

...     12 

45 

,  129, 159 

... 

II 

••• 

...     13 

... 

...  166 

It 
ii 

•M 

II 

••• 

14,16 

... 

173,  200 

... 

V. 

••• 

...       7 

... 

...  202 

It 

.•• 

vi. 

••• 

...  4-6 

... 

48,312 

II 

... 

II 

••• 

...     10 

... 

...     18 

tl 
iii. 

... 

viii. 

... 

...      6 

... 

...  538 

... 

n 

••• 

...      y 

... 

...  510 

II 

iy. 

.«• 

n 

••• 

...    10 

... 

...  517 

•  a. 

ti 

••• 

...    12  and  \ 

...  418 

11 

V. 

... 

Z. 

••• 

...    17 

{ 

... 

... 

ix. 

•M 

...    12 

•  •• 

... 

...  538 

n 

... 

It 

•M 

...     14 

•  •• 

... 

...  520 

n 

... 

n 

••• 

...     15 

•  •• 

... 

...  536 

M 

••• 

II 

••• 

...    22 

•  •• 

... 

...  847 

It 

••• 

...     26 

•  •• 

... 

...  200 

z. 

••• 

...     13 

•  •• 

... 

•  ••      ^JuO 

n 

••• 

•  ••         ^^^ 

etc. 

... 

173,  538 

It 

••• 

28,29 

... 

... 

...  139 

i 

... 

11 

—m 

86,37 

... 

.*• 

...  388 

tt 

... 

xi. 

••• 

...      ^ 

... 

... 

...  240 

It 

••• 

...       «5 

... 

... 

...  860 

It 

••• 

...       6 

... 

... 

...     10 

II 

•.• 

...       V 

... 

... 

...  199 

11 

... 

...      9«5 

... 

... 

...  493 

i 

zii. 

... 

...        1 

... 

... 

...  191 

.M 

II 

.•• 

...      6 

... 

... 

...     49 

tt 

ii. 

II 

iii. 

... 

II 
11 

... 

7,  8, 10 
...     16 

... 
... 

... 

... 

...  119 

...  284 

... 

...          1 

zm. 

••• 

...      2 

•M 

... 

...  470 

... 

tl 

... 

N 

... 

tl 

... 

JAMES. 

V. 

... 

. 

xvi. 

... 

▼KRRS 

PAGE. 

... ' 

5 

4 

8 

... 

... 

...  467 

... 

... 

... 

...  486 

... 

«« 

... 

...  218 

11 

,12 

... 

... 

...  489 

... 

17 

.IM 

•  M 

...  285 

...1 

-16 

... 

... 

...  141 

16 

-18 

.- 

— 

...  207 

I. 

PETER. 

... 

3 

... 

...  474 

... 

5 

... 

...  319 

... 

7 

... 

...     Ood 

... 

14 

... 

...     85 

... 

13 

... 

...  345 

... 

6 

... 

...  114 

II. 

PETER. 

... 

21 

... 

...  488 

... 

3 

... 

467,  526 

... 

8 

... 

...  108 

... 

12 
3,4 

... 

...  159 

... 

M. 

...  137 

... 

14 

••• 

•M 

...  356 

L  JOHN. 

... 

5 

•  *» 

... 

...  129 

8,10 

•  •• 

... 

...  oZc 

•  •• 

z 

•  •• 

... 

...  173 

•  •• 

19 

•  •• 

... 

...  195 

... 

20 

•  •• 

... 

...  148 

... 

27 

•  •• 

... 

...  155 

... 

8 

•  •• 

... 

...  323 

... 

9 

•  •• 

•  •• 

...  323 

... 

14 

... 

,». 

...  143 

... 

19 

... 

... 

...  438 

... 

8 

... 

... 

...     99 

... 

4 

... 

*•• 

...  391 

... 

14 

... 

... 

...  ZZ2 

... 

18 

•— 

•.• 

...  891 

JUDE. 
14    .. 


REVELATION. 


—  5  ... 

...  Xi0  ... 

...  14  ... 

...  U  ^ 


223 
...  848 
...  490 
...  508 


II 
xix. 

XX. 

xxi. 


...     13 

... 

•  •* 

...  200 

...     16 

... 

... 

...  159 

...      2 

... 

... 

...  531 

14, 15, 20 

... 

... 

...  531 

...     10 

... 

... 

...  448 

14,15 

... 

... 

...  283 

...     18 

c. 

... 

...  148 

...     19 

... 

... 

...     73 

...      6 

... 

... 

...  200 

14,16 

... 

... 

...  188 

...    15 

... 

... 

...  356 

.    ...      8 

... 

183, 

289,  401 

...     15 

... 

•  •• 

...  139 

6.7,8 

•*• 

••• 

...  182 

ERRATA. 


Page  139, 
n  158, 
If  166, 
n  166, 
m  175, 
m     175, 

m  179b, 

m  183, 

«  185, 

■  187, 

M  233, 

•  235, 
«  238, 
m  240, 

•  241, 

•  251, 
n  265, 

•  278, 
m  845, 
M  345, 
m  368, 
«  890, 

•  495, 
«i  495, 


line  5, 
II  50, 
II  22, 
•I  29, 
II  6, 
•I  27, 
22, 


for  "  terrible  **        ••• 

II  *'  subjugates  "    ... 

II  "is  is  done"     ... 

II  "judgement"    ... 

II  "  whose  sustenance 


read  "terribly.** 
II     **  subjugated.** 
n     "  is  done." 
n     "  judgment," 
It     "  for  whose  Ac.** 


•I     "  Objection,  as  to  the  charge."  n     "  Objection.    As  to  the  charge.*' 


11, 

5, 

11, 

17, 

40, 

9, 

26, 

14, 

6, 

50, 

25, 

1, 
4. 

10, 
4, 

52, 
29, 


n  "Pharoah" 

II  "Phineas" 

•I  "Ehud" 

II  "  besiege,** 

T    T 

n  "  presence 

II  "Kedish" 

II  "their" 

II  "  Zychicus 


II     "sang' 


II  "  terrible 
II  "God's" 
II    "13" 


11  "  Pharaoh.' 

n  "  Phinehas." 

n  "  Shamgar.** 

N  "  besiege.** 

w  "DHJ** 

n  "  pressure,** 

«  "Kedesh." 

N  **  there.* 

n  "Tychicos." 

If  "  sung." 

M  "  terribly,** 

If  "God." 

m  «3." 


n     "  Oh,  great  mountain  &c."        n     "  O  great  mountain,  4a* 

11     "resolved"       n    "revolved." 

.1    ««I.  Tim.  iL  17  '*  ...  N    «ii.  Tim.  IL  17.** 


«     "Cantii  IS"  •.• 


m    •'Cant.  iL  16.' 


3  1 1 97  00443  3840 


Date  Due 

Ml  library  tems  are  subject  to  recall  3  weeks  from 
fl,e  original  date  stamped. 


Brigham  Young  University 


:7r/ 


