LIBRARY 


TORONTO 


Shelf  No. 


Register  No.     6  3  t>  7 


..19 


Bible  Class  j£ypo0ition& 


THE    GOSPEL    OF    ST.    MATTHEW. 


WORKS  BY  THE  SAME  AUTHOR. 

COLOSSIANS     AND     PHILEMON 

(Expositors  Bible}.      Fifth  Edition.      Crown  8vo, 
cloth,  73.  6d. 

THE  LIFE  OF  DAVID  AS  RE 
FLECTED  IN  HIS  PSALMS  (Household Library 
of  Exposition).  Seventh  Edition.  Crown  8vo, 
cloth,  35.  6d. 


LONDON : 
HODDER  &  STOUGHTON,  27,  PATERNOSTER  Row.       I 


THE 

GOSPEL    OF    ST,    MATTHEW 


ALEXANDER    MACLAREN,    D.D 


VOLUME    I 


HODDER     AND     STOUGHTON 
27,  PATERNOSTER  ROW 


Printed  by  Hazell,   Watson,  &>  Viney,  Ld.,  London  and  Ayleslury. 


Lucr  /)  A  /L   /"--7  /^7  , 


CONTENTS. 


LESSON    I. 

PAGE 
THE    FIRST-FRUITS    OF    THE    GENTILES  ....  I 

LESSON    II. 

THE    KING    IN    EXILE,  .  .  .  .  .  .12 

LESSON    III, 
THE    HERALD    OF    THE    KING  .  .  .  .  .22 

LESSON    IV. 
THE    CORONATION    OF    THE    KING  .  .  .  '34 

LESSON    V. 

THE    VICTORY    OF    THE    KING          .  .  .  .  -43 

LESSON    VI. 
THE    EARLY    WELCOME     AND     THE     FIRST     MINISTERS    OF 

THE    KING  ...  ...       54 

LESSON    VII. 

THE    NEW    SINAI  .......       63 


vi  Contents, 

LESSON    VIII. 

PAGE 
THE    NEW    FORM    OF    THE    OLD    LAW       .  .  .  76 

LESSON    IX. 
TRUMPETS    AND    STREET    CORNERS  .  .  .  .86 

LESSON    X. 

WITHOUT    CAREFULNESS       ......       98 

LESSON    XL 

JUDGING,    ASKING,    AND    GIVING    .  .  .  .  .     Io6 

LESSON    XII. 
CLOSING    WARNINGS    .  .  .  .  .  .  .     Iiy 

LESSON    XIII. 
THE   CENTURION  AND  THE  CAPTAIN  OF  THE  LORD'S   HOST    126 

LESSON    XIV. 
THE    PEACE-BRINGER    IN    THE    WORLD    OF    NATURE  .    136 

LESSON    XV. 
THE    PEACE-BRINGER    IN    THE    WORLD    OF    CONSCIENCE      .     144 

LESSON    XVI. 

THE    TOUCH    OF    FAITH    AND    THE    TOUCH    OF    CHRIST        .     152 

LESSON    XVII. 
THE    KING'S    AMBASSADORS  .  .  .  .  .164 


Contents.  vii 

LESSON    XVIII. 

PAGE 
THE    KING'S    CHARGE    TO    HIS    AMBASSADORS  .     174 

LESSON    XIX. 
JOHN'S  DOUBTS  OF  JESUS,  AND  JESUS'  PRAISE  OF  JOHN   185 

LESSON   XX. 

CHRIST'S   VOICE    OF   JUDGMENT,    THANKSGIVING,  SELF- 
ATTESTATION,   AND   INVITATION    .  .  ,  .196 

LESSON    XXI. 
THE  PHARISEES'  SABBATH  AND  CHRIST'S     .         .         .207 

LESSON    XXII. 

FOUR    SOWINGS    AND    ONE    RIPENING      .  .  .  .217 

LESSON    XXIII. 
VARIOUS    ASPECTS    OF    THE    KINGDOM    .  .  .  .228 

LESSON    XXIV. 

MINGLED    IN    GROWTH,    SEPARATED    IN    MATURITY  .  .    238 

LESSON    XXV. 

THE    MARTYRDOM    OF    JOHN  .  .  .  .  .248 


INDEX    OF    SCRIPTURES. 


PAGE 

PAGE 

Matt.  ii.  i  -i  2 

I 

Matt.  viii.  18-27. 

.  136 

ii.  13-23      . 

.       12 

ix.  1-8 

.  144 

iii.  1-12 

.      22 

—  ix.  18-31     . 

•  152 

—  iii.  13-17     . 

•     34 

-ix.  35-38;  x.  1-8 

.   164 

—  iv.  i-ii 

•    43 

-  x.  32-42      . 

.  174 

iv.  17-25     . 

•     54 

--xi.  2-15 

.  185 

v.  1-16 

•        •    63 

—  xi.  20-30     . 

.  196 

v.  17-26 

.        .    76 

—  xii.  1-14      . 

.  207 

vi.  1-15 

.     86 

xiii.  1-9 

.  217 

"  vi.  24-34     . 

.        .     98 

-xiii.  31-33,44-52 

.  228 

vii.  1-12 

.  106 

xiii.  24-30  . 

.  238 

vii.  13-29    . 

.  117 

—  xiv.  1-12     . 

.  248 

-viii.  5-13     . 

.  126 

LESSON    I. 
The  First-fruits  of  the  Gentiles. 

MATTHEW  ii.   I -12. 


1.  ".Now    when    Jesus   was 
born  in  Bethlehem  of  Judaea  in 
the   days   of  Herod    the    king, 
behold,  there   came  wise    men 
from  the  east  to  Jerusalem, 

2.  Saying,  Where  is  He  that  is 
born  King  of  the  Jews  ?  for  we 
have  seen  His  star  in  the  east, 
and  are  come  to  worship  Him. 

3.  When  Herod  the  king  had 
heard    these    things,    he    was 
troubled,     and     all    Jerusalem 
with  him. 

4.  And  when  he  had  gathered 
all  the  chief  priests  and  scribes 
of  the  people  together,  he  de 
manded  of  them  where  Christ 
should  be  born. 

5.  And  they  said  unto  him,  In 
Bethlehem  of  Judaea:  for  thus 
it  is  written  by  the  prophet, 

6.  And    thou    Bethlehem,  in 
the  land  of  Juda,   art  not  the 
least    among    the     princes    of 
Juda  :    for   out   of    thee    shall 
come    a   Governor,    that   shall 
rule  my  people  Israel. 

7.  Then  Herod,  when  he  had 
privily    called    the   wise    men, 
enquired    of    them     diligently 
what  time  the  star  appeared. 


8.  And  he  sent  them  to  Beth 
lehem,  and  said,  Go  and  search 
diligently  for  the  young  Child  ; 
and  when  ye  have  found  Him, 
bring   me   word   again,   that    I 
may    come   and    worship    Him 
also. 

9.  When  they  had  heard  the 
king,    they  departed ;   and,    lo, 
the  star,  which  they  saw  in  the 
east,  went  before  them,   till  it 
came    and    stood    over    where 
the  young  Child  was. 

10.  When  they  saw  the  star, 
they   rejoiced    with   exceeding 
great  joy. 

11.  And    when     they    were 
come  into  the  house,  they  saw 
the   young    Child    with     Mary 
His    mother,    and    fell    down, 
and     worshipped     Him :     and 
when    they   had    opened   their 
treasures,  they  presented  unto 
Him  gifts ;   gold,  frankincense, 

.  and  myrrh. 

12.  And  being  warned  of  God 
in  a  dream  that  they  should  not 
return  to  Herod,  they  departed 
into  their  own  country  another 
way." 


MATTHEW'S  Gospel  is  the  gospel  of  the  King. 
It  has   a   distinctly  Jewish  colouring.     All  the 
more  remarkable,  therefore,  is  this  narrative,  which  we 

I 


2  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.     [Chap.  ii.  1-12. 

should  rather  have  looked  for  in  Luke,  the  evangelist 
who  delights  to  emphasise  the  universality  of  Christ's 
work.  But  the  gathering  of  the  Gentiles  to  the  light  of 
Israel  was  an  essential  part  of  true  Judaism,  and  could 
not  but  be  represented  in  the  Gospel  which  set  forth 
the  glories  of  the  King.  There  is  something  extremely 
striking  and  stimulating  to  the  imagination  in  the  vague 
ness  of  the  description  of  these  Eastern  pilgrims.  Where 
they  came  from,  how  long  they  had  been  in  travelling, 
how  many  they  were,  what  was  their  rank,  whence  they 
went, — all  these  questions  are  left  unsolved.  They  glide 
into  the  story,  present  their  silent  adoration,  "  and  as 
silently  steal  away."  The  tasteless  mediaeval  tradition 
knows  all  about  them:  they  were  three;  they  were  kings. 
It  knows  their  names ;  and,  if  we  choose  to  pay  the  fee, 
we  can  see  their  bones  to-day  in  the  shrine  behind  the 
high  altar  in  Cologne  Cathedral.  How  much  more  im 
pressive  is  the  indefmiteness  of  our  narrative  !  How 
much  more  the  half  sometimes  is  than  the  whole  ! 

I.  We  see  here  heathen  wisdom  led  by  God  to  the 
cradle  of  Christ.  It  is  futile  to  attempt  to  determine 
the  nationality  of  the  wise  men.  Possibly  they  were 
Persian  magi,  whose  astronomy  was  half  astrology  and 
wholly  observation,  or  they  may  have  travelled  from 
some  place  even  deeper  in  the  mysterious  East ;  but,  in 
any  case,  they  were  led  by  God  through  their  science, 
such  as  it  was.  The  great  lesson  which  they  teach  re 
mains  the  same,  however  subordinate  questions  about 
the  nature  of  the  star  and  the  like  may  be  settled. 
The  sign  in  the  heavens  and  its  explanation  were  both 
of  God,  whether  the  one  was  a  natural  astronomical 
phenomenon  or  a  supernatural  light,  and  the  other  the 


Less,  i.i        The  First-fruits  of  the  Gentiles.  3 

conclusions  of  their  science  or  the  inbreathing  of  His 
wisdom.  So  they  stand  as  representatives  of  the  great 
truth  that,  outside  the  limits  of  the  people  of  revelation, 
God  moved  on  hearts  and  led  seeking  souls  to  the  light 
in  divers  manners.  These  silent  strangers  at  the  cradle 
carry  on  the  line  of  recipients  of  Divine  messages  out 
side  of  Israel  which  is  headed  by  the  mysterious  Mel- 
chizedek>  and  includes  that  seer  who  saw  a  Star  arise 
out  of  Jacob,  and  which,  in  a  wider  sense,  includes 
many  a  "  poet  of  their  own  "  and  many  a  patient  seeker 
after  truth.  Human  wisdom,  as  it  is  called,  is  God's  gift. 
In  itself,  it  is  incomplete.  It  raises  more  questions  than 
it  solves.  Its  highest  function  is  to  lead  to  Jesus.  He 
is  Lord  of  the  sciences,  as  of  all  that  belongs  to  man  ; 
and  notwithstanding  all  the  appearances  to  the  contrary 
at  present,  we  may  be  sure  that  the  true  scope  of  all 
science,  and  its  certain  end,  is  to  lead  to  the  recognition 
of  Him. 

May  we  not  see  in  these  magi,  too,  a  type  of  the 
inmost  meaning  of  heathen  religions  ?  These  faiths 
have  in  them  points  of  contact  with  Christianity.  Be 
sides  their  falsehoods  and  abhorrent  dark  cruelties  and 
lustfulnesses,  they  enshrine  confessions  of  wants  which 
the  King  in  the  cradle  alone  can  supply.  Modern  un 
believing  teachers  tell  us  that  Christianity  and  they  are 
alike  products  of  man's  own  religious  faculty.  But  the 
truth  is  that  they  are  confessions  of  need,  and  Christianity 
is  the  supply  of  the  need.  At  bottom,  their  language  is 
the  question  of  the  wise  men,  "  Where  is  He  ?  "  Their 
sacrifices  proclaim  man's  need  of  reconciliation.  Their 
stories  of  the  gods  coming  down  in  the  likeness  of  men 
speak  of  his  longing  for  a  manifestation  of  God  in  the 


4  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.     [Chap.  H.  1-12. 

flesh.     The  cradle  and  the  cross  are  Heaven's  answer  to 
their  sad  questions. 

II.  The  contrast  of  these  Gentiles'  joyful  eagerness  to 
worship  the  King  of  Israel,  with  the  alarm  of  His  own 
people  at  the  whisper  of  His  name,  is  a  prelude  of  the 
tragedy  of  His  rejection,  and  the  passing  over  of  the 
kingdom  to  the  Gentiles.  Notice  the  bitter  and  scornful 
emphasis  of  that  "  Herod  the  king"  coming  twice  in  the 
story  in  immediate  connection  with  the  mention  of  the 
true  King.  He  is  a  usurper,  caricaturing  the  true 
Monarch.  Like  most  kings  who  have  had  "  great " 
tacked  to  their  names,  his  greatness  consisted  in  supreme 
wickedness.  Fierce,  lustful,  cunning,  he  had  ruled  with 
out  mercy ;  and  now  he  was  passing  through  the  last 
stages  of  an  old  age  without  love,  and  ringed  round  by 
the  fears  born  of  his  misdeeds.  He  trembles  for  his 
throne,  as  well  he  may,  when  he  hears  of  these  strangers. 
Probably  he  does  not  suppose  them  mixed  up  with  any 
attempt  to  unseat  him,  or  he  would  have  made  short 
work  of  them ;  unless,  indeed,  his  craft  led  him  to 
dissemble  until  he  had  sucked  them  dry,  and  had  used 
them  to  lead  him  to  the  infant  rival,  after  which  he 
may  have  meant  to  murder  them  too.  But  he  recognises 
in  their  question  the  familiar  tones  of  the  Messianic 
hope,  which  he  knew  was  ever  lying  like  glowing  embers 
in  the  breast  of  the  nation,  ready  to  be  blown  into  a 
flame.  His  creatures  in  the  capital  might  disown  it,  but 
he  knew  in  his  secret  heart  that  he  was  a  usurper,  and 
that  at  any  moment  that  smouldering  hatred  and  hope 
might  burn  up  him  and  his  upstart  monarchy.  An  evil 
conscience  is  full  of  fears,  and  shrinks  from  the  good 
news  that  the  King  of  all  is  at  hand.  His  coming 


Less,  i.]        The  First-fruits  of  the  Gentiles.  5 

should  be  joy,  as  the  bursting  spring  or  the  rosy  dawn  ; 
but  our  own  sin  makes  the  day  of  the  Lord  darkness, 
and  not  light,  and  sends  us  cowering  into  our  corners  to 
escape  these  searching  eyes. 

Nor  less  tragic  and  perverted  is  the  trouble  which 
"  all  Jerusalem  "  shared  with  Herod.  The  magi  had 
naturally  made  straight  for  the  capital,  expecting  to  find 
the  new-born  King  there,  and  His  city  jubilant  at  His 
birth.  But  they  traverse  its  streets  only  to  find  none 
who  knows  anything  about  Him.  They  must  have  felt 
like  men  who  see,  gleaming  from  far  on  some  hillside,  a 
brightness  which  has  all  vanished  when  they  reach  the 
spot ;  or  like  some  of  our  mission  converts  brought  to  our 
"Christian  country,"  and  seeing  how  little  our  people 
care  for  the  Christ  whom  they  have  learned  to  know. 
Their  question  indicates  utter  bewilderment  at  the  con 
trast  between  what  they  had  seen  in  the  East  and  what 
they  found  in  Jerusalem.  They  must  have  been  still 
more  perplexed  if  they  observed  its  effect.  Nobody  in 
Jerusalem  knew  anything  about  their  King.  That  was 
strange  enough.  But  nobody  wanted  Him.  That  was 
stranger  still.  A  prophet  had  long  ago  called  on  "  Zion  " 
to  "  rejoice  greatly  "  because  "  thy  King  cometh  "  ;  but 
now  anxiety  and  terror  cloud  all  faces.  It  was  partly 
because  personal  ends  bound  many  to  Herod,  and  partly 
because  they  all  feared  that  any  outburst  of  Messianic 
hopes  would  lead  to  fresh  cruelties  inflicted  by  the  relent 
less,  trembling  tyrant.  So  the  magi,  who  represented 
the  eagerness  of  Gentile  hearts  grasping  the  new  hopes, 
and  claiming  some  share  in  Israel's  Messiah,  saw  his 
own  people  careless  and,  if  moved  from  their  apathy, 
alarmed  at  the  unwelcome  tidings  that  the  promise  which 


6  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.     [Chap.  ii.  1-12. 

had  shone  as  a  great  light  through  dreary  centuries  was 
at  last  on  the  eve  of  fulfilment.  So  the  first  page  on 
the  gospel  history  anticipates  the  sad  issue,  "  They  shall 
come  from  the  east,  and  from  the  west,"  and  you  your 
selves  shall  be  thrust  out. 

III.  Then  comes  the  council  of  the  theologians,  with 
its  solemn  teaching  of  the  difference  between  orthodoxy 
and  life,  and  of  the  utter  hollowness  of  mere  knowledge, 
however  accurate,  of  the  letter  of  Scripture.  The  ques 
tions  as  to  the  composition  of  this  gathering  of  authorities, 
and  of  the  variations  between  the  quotation  of  Micah  in 
the  text  and  its  form  in  the  Hebrew,  will  not  be 
discussed  at  this  time.  We  may  remark  on  the  evi 
dent  purpose  of  God  to  draw  forth  the  distinct  testimony 
of  the  ecclesiastical  rulers  to  the  place  of  Messiah's  birth, 
and  on  the  fact  that  this,  the  most  ancient  interpretation 
of  the  prophecy,  is  vouched  to  us  by  existing  Jewish 
sources  as  having  been  the  traditional  one  until  the 
exigencies  of  controversy  with  Christians  pushed  it  aside. 
Notice  the  different  conduct  of  Herod,  the  magi,  and  the 
scribes.  The  first  is  entangled  in  a  ludicrous  contra 
diction.  He  believes  that  Messiah  is  to  be  born  in 
Bethlehem,  and  yet  he  determines  to  set  himself  against 
the  carrying  out  of  what  he  must,  in  some  sense,  believe 
to  be  God's  purpose.  "  If  this  Infant  is  God's  Messiah, 
I  will  kill  Him,"  is  surely  as  strange  a  piece  of  policy 
gone  mad  as  ever  the  world  heard  of.  But  it  is  perhaps 
not  more  insane  than  much  of  our  own  action,  when  we 
set  ourselves  against  what  we  know  to  be  God's  will,  and 
consciously  seek  to  thwart  it.  A  child  trying  to  stop 
a  train  by  pushing  against  the  locomotive  has  as  much 
chance  of  success.  The  scribes,  again,  are  quite  sure 


Less.  I.]        The  First-fruits  of  the  Gentiles.  7 

where  Messiah  is  to  be  born  ;  but  they  do  not  care  to 
go  and  see  if  He  is  born.  These  strangers,  to  whom  the 
hope  of  Israel  is  new,  may  rush  away,  in  their  enthusiasm, 
to  Bethlehem  ;  but  they,  to  whom  it  had  lost  all  gloss, 
and  become  a  commonplace,  would  take  no  such  trouble. 
Does  not  familiarity  with  the  gospel  produce  much  the 
same  effect  on  many  of  us  ?  Might  not  the  joy  and  the 
devotion,  however  ignorant  if  compared  with  our  better 
knowledge  of  the  letter  which  marks  converts  from 
heathenism,  shame  the  tepid  zeal  and  unruffled  com 
posure  of  us,  who  have  heard  all  about  Christ,  till  it  has 
become  wearisome  ?  Here  on  the  very  threshold  of  the 
gospel  story  is  the  first  instance  of  the  lesson  taught 
over  and  over  again  in  it,  namely,  the  worthlessness  of 
head  knowledge,  and  the  constant  temptation  of  substi 
tuting  it  for  the  submission  of  the  will  and  the  trust  of 
the  heart,  which  alone  make  religion.  The  most  im 
penetrable  armour  against  the  gospel  is  the  familiar  and 
life-long  knowledge  of  the  gospel. 

The  magi,  on  their  part,  accept  with  implicit  confi 
dence  the  information.  They  have  followed  the  star ; 
they  have  now  a  more  sure  word,  and  they  will  follow 
that.  They  were  led  by  their  science  to  contact  with 
the  true  guide.  He  that  is  faithful  in  his  use  of  the 
dimmest  light  will  find  the  light  grow.  The  office  of 
science  is  not  to  lead  to  Christ  by  a  road  discovered  by 
itself,  but  to  lead  to  the  Word  of  God,  which  guides  to 
Him.  Not  by  accident,  nor  without  profound  meaning, 
did  both  methods  of  direction  unite  to  point  these  earnest 
seekers,  who  were  ready  to  follow  every  form  of  guid 
ance,  to  the  Monarch  whom  they  sought. 

IV.   Herod's  crafty  counsel  need  not  detain  us.     We 


8  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.  ii.  1-12. 

have  already  remarked  on 'its  absurdity.  If  the  Child 
were  not  Messiah,  he  need  not  have  been  alarmed;  if 
it  were,  his  efforts  were  fruitless.  But  he  does  not  see 
this,  and  so  plots  and  works  underground  in  the  approved 
fashion  of  king-craft.  His  reason  for  questioning  the 
magi  as  to  the  time  was,  of  course,  to  get  an  approximate 
age  of  the  Infant,  that  he  might  know  how  widely  to  fling 
his  net.  He  did  it  privately,  so  as  to  keep  any  inkling 
of  his  plot  secret  till  he  had  got  the  further  information 
which  he  hoped  to  delude  them  into  bringing.  Like 
other  students  and  recluses  fed  upon  great  thoughts,  the 
magi  were  very  easily  deceived.  Good,  simple  people, 
they  were  no  match  for  Herod,  and  told  him  all  without 
suspicion,  and  set  off  to  look  for  the  Child,  quite  con 
vinced  of  his  good  faith ;  while  he,  no  doubt,  breathed 
more  freely  when  he  had  got  them  out  of  Jerusalem, 
and  congratulated  himself  on  having  done  a  good  stroke 
of  business  in  making  them  his  spies.  He  was  probably 
within  a  few  months  of  his  death.  The  world  was  already 
beginning  to  slip  from  him.  But  before  he  passes  to 
his  account,  he  too  is  brought  within  sight  of  the  Christ, 
and  summoned  to  yield  his  usurped  dominion  to  the 
true  King.  How  different;  this  old  man's  reception  of 
the  tidings  of  the  nativity  from  Simeon's  !  His  hostility, 
in  its  cruelty,  its  blundering  cunning  and  its  impotence, 
is  a  type  of  the  relations  of  the  world-power  to  Christ. 
"The  rulers  take  counse  together,  .  .  .  against  His 
anointed.  .  .  .  He  that  sitteth  in  the  heavens  shall 
laugh." 

V.  We  have  next  the  discovery  of  the  king.  The  re 
appearing  star  becomes  the  guide  to  the  humble  house. 
It  cannot  have  been  an  ordinary  star,  for  no  such  could 


Less.  I.]        The  First-fruits  of  the  Gentiles.  9 

have  pointed  the  precise  house  among  all  the  homes  of 
Bethlehem.  The  burst  of  joy  at  its  reappearance  vividly 
suggests  the  perplexity  of  the  recent  days,  and  the  sup 
port  given  by  it  to  the  faith  which  had  accepted,  not 
perhaps  without  some  misgivings  caused  by  the  indiffer 
ence  of  the  teachers,  the  teaching  of  the  prophecy. 
Surely  that  faith  would  be  more  than  ever  tried  by  the 
humble  poverty  in  which  they  found  the  King.  The  great 
paradox  of  Christianity,  the  manifestation  of  divinest 
power  in  uttermost  weakness,  was  forced  upon  them  in 
its  most  startling  form.  "  This  Child  on  His  mother's 
lap  with  none  to  do  Him  homage,  and  in  poverty  which 
makes  our  costly  gifts  seem  out  of  place, — this  is  the 
King,  whose  coming  set  stars  ablaze  and  drew  us  hither. 
Is  this  all  ?  "  Their  Eastern  religions  were  not  unfamiliar 
with  the  idea  of  incarnation.  Their  Eastern  monarchies 
were  splendid.  They  must  have  felt  a  shock  at  the  con 
trast  between  what  they  expected  and  what  they  found. 
They  learned  the  lesson  which  all  have  to  learn,  that 
Christ  disappoints  as  well  as  fulfils  the  expectations  of 
men,  that  the  mightiest  power  is  robed  in  lowliness,  and 
the  highest  manifestation  of  God  begins  with  a  helpless 
Infant  on  His  mother's  knee.  These  wise  men  were  not 
repelled.  Our  modern  "  wise  men  "  are  not  all  as  wise 
as  they. 

VI.  Adoration  and  offering  follow  discovery.  The 
"  worship  "  of  the  magi  cannot  have  been  adoration  in 
the  strict  sense.  We  attribute  too  much  to  them  if  we 
suppose  them  aware  of  Christ's  divinity.  But  it  was 
clearly  more  than  mere  reverence  for  an  earthly  king. 
It  hovered  on  the  border  line,  and  meant  an  indefinite 
submission  and  homage  to  a  partially  discerned  superi- 


io  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.     [Chap.  ii.  1-12. 

ority,  in  which  the  presence  of  God  was  in  some  sort 
special.  The  old  mediaeval  interpretation  of  the  offered 
gold  as  signifying  recognition  of  His  kingship,  the  frank 
incense  of  His  deity,  and  the  myrrh  of  His  death,  is  so 
beautiful  that  one  would  fain  wish  it  true.  But  it  cannot 
pretend  to  be  more  than  a  fancy.  We  are  on  surer 
ground  when  we  see  in  the  gifts  the  choicest  products  of 
the  land  of  the  magi,  and  learn  the  lesson  that  the  true 
recognition  of  Christ  will  ever  be  attended  by  the  spon 
taneous  surrender  to  Him  of  our  best.  These  gifts 
would  not  be  of  much  use  to  Mary.  If  there  had  been 
a  "  practical  man  "  among  the  magi,  he  might  have  said, 
"  What  is  the  use  of  giving  such  things  to  such  a  house 
hold  ? "  And  it  would  have  been  difficult  to  have 
answered.  But  love  does  not  calculate,  and  the  impulse 
which  leads  to  consecrate  the  best  we  have  to  Him  is 
acceptable  in  His  sight.  This  earliest  page  in  the  gospel 
history  is  a  prophecy  of  the  latest.  These  are  the  first- 
fruits  of  the  Gentiles  unto  Christ.  They  bear  "  in  their 
hands  a  glass  which  showeth  many  more,"  who  at  last 
will  come  like  them  to  the  King  of  the  whole  earth. 
"  They  shall  bring  gold  and  incense  ;  and  they  shall 
show  forth  the  praises  of  the  Lord."  There  were  Gentiles 
at  the  cradle  and  at  the  cross.  The  magi  learned  the 
lessons  which  the  East  especially  needed,  of  power  in 
weakness,  royalty  in  lowliness,  incarnation  not  in  mon 
strous  forms,  or  with  destructive  attributes,  but  in  feeble 
infancy,  which  pass  through  the  ordinary  stages  of 
development.  The  Greeks  who  sought  to  see  Jesus  near 
the  hour  of  His  death,  learned  the  lesson  for  want  of 
which  their  nation's  culture  rotted  away,  "  except  a  com 
of  wheat  fall  into  the  ground  and  die,  it  abideth  ajone." 


Less,  i.]        The  First-fruits  of  the  Gentiles.  1 1 

So  these  two  groups,  one  at  the  beginning,  the  other  at 
the  end,  one  from  the  mysterious  East,  the  other  from 
the  progressive  and  cultured  West,  received  each  a  half 
of  the  completed  truth,  the  gospel  of  incarnation  and 
sacrifice,  and  witness  to  the  sufficiency  of  Christ  for  all 
human  needs,  and  to  the  coming  of  the  time  when  all 
the  races  of  men  shall  gather  round  the  throne  to  which 
cradle  and  cross  have  exalted  Him,  and  shall  recognise 
in  Him  the  Prince  of  all  the  kings  of  the  earth,  and  the 
Lamb  slain  for  the  sins  of  the  world. 


LESSON    II. 


The  King  in  Exile. 

MATT.  ii.   13-23. 


13.  "And  when  they  were  de 
parted,  behold,  the  angel  of  the 
Lord  appeareth  to  Joseph  in  a 
dream,  saying,  Arise,  and  take 
the     young     Child     and     His 
mother,    and     flee    into    Egypt, 
and  be  thou  there  until  I  bring 
thee  word  :  for  Herod  will  seek 
the  young  Child  to  destroy  Him. 

14.  When  he  arose,  he  took 
the  young  Child  and  His  mother 
by    night,    and    departed    into 
Egypt : 

15.  And  was  there  until  the 
death  of  Herod  :  that  it  might 
be    fulfilled  which  was  spoken 
of  the  Lord  by  the  prophet,  say 
ing,  Out  of  Egypt  have  I  called 
My  Son. 

16.  Then    Herod,    when    he 
saw  that  he  was  mocked  of  the 
wise  men,  was  exceeding  wroth, 
and  sent  forth,  and  slew  all  the 
children    that    were    in     Beth 
lehem,    and    in    all    the   coasts 
thereof,  from  two  years  old  and 
under,    according    to    the    time 
which    he    had    diligently   en 
quired  of  the  wise  men. 

17.  Then    was    fulfilled    that 
which   was  spoken   by  Jeremy 
the  prophet,  saying, 


18.  In    Rama   was    there    a 
voice    heard,    lamentation,    and 
weeping,   and  great  mourning. 
Rachel  weeping  for  her  children, 
and    would    not    be   comforted, 
because  they  are  not. 

19.  But     when     Herod     was 
dead,  behold,  an   angel    of  the 
Lord  appeareth  in  a  dream   to 
Joseph  in  Egypt, 

20.  Saying,    Arise,   and    take 
the  young  Child  and  His  mother, 
and  go  into  the  land  of  Israel : 
for  they  are  dead  which  sought 
the  young  Child's  life. 

21.  And  he  arose,   and  took 
the  young  Child  and  His  mother, 
and     came    into    the    land    of 
Israel. 

22.  But  when  he  heard  that 
Archelaus  did    reign  in  Judaea 
in  the  room  of  his  father  Herod, 
he   was   afraid  to    go   thither  : 
notwithstanding,  being  warned 
of  God  in  a  dream,  he    turned 
aside   into   the   parts   of  Gali 
lee  : 

23.  And  he  came  and  dwelt 
in  a  city  called  Nazareth  :  that 
it  might  be  fulfilled  which  was 
spoken    by   the    prophets,    He 
shall  be  called  a  Nazarene." 


DR.  DELITZSCH,  in  his  «  New  Investigations  into 
the  Origin  and  Plan  of  the  Canonical  Gospels," 
tries  to  show  that  Matthew  is  constructed  on  the  plan 


Less.  II.]  The  King  in  Exile.  1 3 

of  the  Pentateuch.  The  analogy  is  somewhat  strained, 
but  there  are  some  striking  points  of  correspondence. 
He  regards  Matthew  i.  to  ii.  15  as  answering  to  Genesis. 
It  begins  with  the  "genesis  of  Jesus,"  and,  as  the  Old 
Testament  book  ends  with  the  migration  of  Israel  to 
Egypt,  so  this  section  of  the  Gospel  ends  with  the  flight 
of  the  Holy  Family  to  the  same  land.  The  section  from 
ii.  15  to  the  end  of  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount  answers 
to  Exodus,  and  here  the  parallels  are  striking.  The 
murder  of  the  innocents  at  Bethlehem  by  Herod  answers 
to  Pharaoh's  slaughter  of  Hebrew  children  ;  the  Exodus 
to  the  return  to  Nazareth ;  the  call  of  Moses  at  the  bush 
to  the  baptism  of  Jesus  ;  the  forty  years  in  the  wilder 
ness  to  the  forty  days'  desert  hunger  and  temptation  ; 
and  the  giving  of  the  law  from  Sinai  to  the  Sermon  on 
the  Mount,  which  contains  the  new  law  for  the  kingdom 
of  God.  Without  supposing  that  the  evangelist  moulded 
his  gospel  on  the  plan  of  the  Pentateuch,  we  cannot  but 
see  that  there  is  a  real  parallel  between  the  beginnings 
of  the  national  life  of  Israel  and  the  commencement  of 
the  life  of  Christ.  Our  present  lesson  brings  this  parallel 
into  great  prominence.  It  is  divided  into  three  sections, 
each  of  which  has  for  its  centre  an  Old  Testament 
prophecy. 

I.  We  have  first  the  flight  into  Egypt  and  the  pro 
phecy  fulfilled  therein.  The  appearance  of  the  angel 
seems  to  have  followed  immediately  on  the  departure 
of  the  magi.  They  were  succeeded  by  a  loftier  visitor 
from  a  more  distant  land,  coming  to  lay  richer  gifts  and 
a  more  absolute  homage  at  the  Infant's  feet.  The  angel 
of  the  Lord  who  had  already  eased  Joseph's  honest  and 
troubled  heart  by  disclosing  the  secret  of  Mary's  Child, 


i4  The  Gospel  of  St,  Matthew.     [Chap.  ii.  13-23. 

comes  again.  To  Mary  he  had  appeared  waking;  her 
meek  eyes  could  look  on  him,  and  her  obedient  ears 
hear  his  voice.  But  Joseph,  who  stood  on  a  lower 
spiritual  level,  needed  the  lower  form  of  revelation  by 
dream,  which  augurs  less  susceptibility  in  the  recipient, 
and  less  importance  in  the  communication.  It  is  the 
only  form  appropriate  to  his  power  of  receiving,  and 
four  times  it  is  mentioned  as  granted  to  him.  The 
warning  to  the  wise  men  was  also  conveyed  in  a  dream. 
We  can  scarcely  help  recalling  the  similar  prominence 
of  dreams  in  the  history  of  the  earlier  Joseph,  whose  life 
was  moulded  in  order  to  bring  Israel  into  Egypt. 

The  angel  speaks  of  "the  young  Child  and  His  mother," 
reversing  the  order  of  nature,  as  if  he  bowed  before  the 
Infant,  "Lord  of  men  as  well  as  angels,"  and  would 
deepen  the  lesson  which  so  many  signs  gathering  round 
the  cradle  were  teaching  the  silent  Joseph, — that  Mary 
and  he  were  but  humble  ministers  of  His.  The  partial 
instruction  given,  and  the  darkness  left  lying  over  the 
future,  are  in  accordance  with  the  methods  of  God's 
leading,  which  always  gives  light  enough  for  the  next 
duty,  and  never  for  the  one  after  that.  The  prompt  and 
precise  obedience  of  Joseph  to  the  heavenly  vision  is 
emphatically  expressed  by  the  verbal  repetition  of  the 
command  in  the  account  of  its  fulfilment.  There  was 
no  hesitation,  no  reluctance,  no  delay.  On  the  very 
night,  as  it  appears,  of  the  dream,  he  rose  up ;  the  simple 
preparations  were  quickly  made  ;  the  wise  men's  gifts 
would  help  to  sustain  their  modest  wants,  and  before 
the  day  broke  they  were  on  their  road.  How  strangely 
blended  in  our  Lord's  life,  from  the  very  dawning,  are 
dignity  and  lowliness,  glory  and  reproach!  How  soon 


Less.  Ii.j  The  King  in  Exile.  15 

His  brows  are  crowned  with  thorns  !  The  adoration  of 
the  magi  witnesses  to  Him  as  the  King  of  Israel  and  the 
hope  of  the  world.  The  flight  of  which  that  adoration 
was  the  direct  cause  witnesses  no  less  clearly  to  Him  as 
despised  and  rejected,  tasting  sorrow  in  His  earliest  food, 
and  not  having  where  to  lay  His  head. 

But  the  most  important  part  of  the  story  is  the  con 
nection  which  Matthew  discerns  between  it  and  Hosea's 
words.  In  their  original  place  they  are  not  a  prophecy 
at  all,  but  simply  a  part  of  a  tender  historical  resume  of 
God's  dealings  with  Israel,  by  which  the  prophet  would 
touch  his  contemporaries'  hearts  into  penitence  and 
trust.  How,  then,  is  the  evangelist  justified  in  regarding 
them  as  prophetic,  and  in  looking  on  Christ's  flight  as 
their  fulfilment  ?  The  answer  is  to  be  found  in  that 
analogy  between  the  national  and  the  personal  Israel 
which  runs  through  all  the  Old  Testament,  and  reaches 
its  highest  clearness  in  the  second  part  of  Isaiah's  pro 
phecies.  Jesus  Christ  was  what  Israel  was  destined  and 
failed  to  be,  the  true  servant  of  God,  His  Anointed,  His 
Son,  the  medium  of  conveying  His  Name  to  the  world. 
The  ideal  of  the  nation  was  realised  in  Him.  His  brief 
stay  in  Egypt  served  the  very  same  purpose  in  His  life 
which  their  four  hundred  years  there  did  in  theirs, — it 
sheltered  Him  from  enemies,  and  gave  Him  room  to 
grow.  Just  as  the  infant  nation  was  unawares  fostered 
in  the  very  lap  of  the  country  which  was  the  symbol 
of  the  world  hostile  to  God,  so  the  infant  Christ  was 
guarded  and  grew  there.  The  prophecy  is  a  prophecy 
just  because  it  is  history;  for  the  history  was  all  a  shadow 
of  the  future,  and  He  is  the  true  Israel  and  the  Son  of 
God.  It  would  have  been  fulfilled  quite  as  really, — that 


[6  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.     [Chap.  u.  13-23. 

is  to  say,  the  parallel  between  Christ  and  the  nation 
would  have  been  as  fully  carried  out, — if  His  place  of 
refuge  had  been  in  some  other  land ;  but  the  precise 
outward  identity  helps  to  point  the  parallel  to  unob 
servant  eyes.  The  great  truth  taught  by  it  of  the  typical 
relation  between  the  nation  and  the  person  is  the  key 
to  large  regions  of  Old  Testament  history  and  prophecy. 
Rightly,  therefore,  does  Matthew  call  our  attention  to 
this  pregnant  thought,  and  bid  us  see  in  the  Divine 
selection  of  the  place  where  the  young  life  of  God  mani 
fest  in  the  flesh  was  sheltered,  a  fulfilment  of  prophecy. 
Egypt  was  the  natural  asylum  of  every  fugitive  from 
Palestine,  but  a  deeper  reason  bent  the  steps  of  the  Holy 
Family  to  the  shelter  of  its  palms  and  temples. 

II.  The  slaughter  of  the  innocents,  and  the  prophecy 
fulfilled  therein.  Herod's  fierce  rage,  inflamed  by  the 
dim  suspicion  that  these  wily  Easterns  have  gone  away 
laughing  in  their  sleeves  at  having  tricked  him,  and  by 
the  dread  that  they  may  be  stirring  up  armed  defenders 
of  their  infant  King,  is  in  full  accord  with  all  that  we 
know  of  him.  The  cr'tics  who  find  the  story  of  the 
massacre  "  unhistorical,"  because  Josephus  does  not 
mention  it,  must  surely  be  very  anxious  to  discredit  the 
evangelist,  and  very  hard  pressed  for  grounds  to  do  so, 
or  they  would  not  co:  mit  themselves  to  the  extra 
ordinary  assumption  that  nothing  is  to  be  believed  out 
side  of  the  pages  of  Josephus.  A  splash  or  two  of 
"  blood  of  poor  innocents,"  more  or  less,  found  on  the 
Idumean  tyrant's  bloody  skirts  could  be  of  little  con 
sequence  in  the  eyes  of  those  who  knew  what  a  long 
saturnalia  of  horrors  his  reign  had  been ;  and  the  number 
of  the  infants  under  two  years  old  in  such  a  tiny  place 


Less.  II.]  The  King  in  Exile.  17 

as  Bethlehem  would  be  small,  so  that  their  feeble  wail 
might  well  fail  to  reach  the  ears  even  of  contemporaries. 
But  there  is  no  reason  for  questioning  the  simple  truth 
of  a  story  so  like  the  frantic  cruelty  and  sleepless  sus 
picion  of  the  grey-headed  tyrant,  who  was  stirred  to 
more  ferocity  as  the  shades  of  death  gathered  about  him, 
and  power  slipped  from  his  rotting  hands.  Of  all  the 
tragic  pictures  which  Scripture  gives  of  a  godless  old 
age,  burning  with  unquenchable  hatred  to  goodness, 
and  condemned  to  failure  in  all  its  antagonism,  none  is 
touched  with  more  lurid  hues  than  this.  What  a  con 
trast  between  the  king  de  jure,  the  cradled  infant,  and 
the  king  de  facto,  going  down  to  his  loathsome  death, 
which  all  but  he  longed  for !  He  may  well  stand  as 
a  symbol  of  the  futility  of  all  opposition  to  Christ  the 
King. 

The  fate  of  these  few  infants  is  a  strange  one.  In 
their  brief  lives  they  have  won  immortal  fame.  They 
died  for  the  Christ  whom  they  never  knew.  These 
lambs  were  slain  for  the  sake  of  the  Lrmb  who  lived 
while  they  died,  that  by  His  deo^i  they  rmjht  live  for 
ever.  These 

"Little  flowers  of  r  ..rtyrdom, 
Roses  by  the  whirlwind  shorn," 

head  the  long  procession  as  martyrs,  if  not  in  intent,  yet 
in  fact,  and,  we  may  be  sure,  are  .  amongst  the  palm- 
bearing  crowd,  "  being  the  first-fruits  to  God  and  the 
Lamb."  "  O  happy  little  ones  ! "  says  St.  Augustine, 
"  but  just  born,  not  yet  tempted,  not  yet  struggling, 
already  crowned."  Even  in  His  infancy  Christ  came  to 
bring  not  peace,  but  a  sword,  and  the  shadow  of  suffering 
for  Him  already  attended  the  brightness  of  His  rising. 


i8  The  Gospel  of  St,  Matthew.    [Chap.  ii.  13-23. 

But  even  in  His  infancy  His  coming  abolished  death, 
and  made  all  who  partook,  even  by  anticipation,  of  His 
sufferings  sharers  in  His  glory.  The  weeping  mothers 
of  Bethlehem  might  have  taken  for  their  own  the  com 
fort  which  the  prophet  addresses  to  the  weeping  Rachel, 
in  the  context  of  the  words  quoted  by  Matthew,  "  Refrain 
thy  voice  from  weeping,  and  thine  eyes  from  tears.  .  .  . 
Thy  children  shall  come  again  to  their  own  border." 

That  quotation,  from  Jeremiah  xxxi.  15,  requires  a 
brief  consideration.  The  original  is  still  less  a  prophecy 
than  was  the  passage  in  Hosea.  It  is  a  highly  imagin 
ative  and  grandly  weird  personification  of  the  mighty 
mother  of  three  of  the  tribes,  stirring  in  her  tomb,  and 
lifting  up  the  shrill  lamentation  of  Eastern  grief  over  her 
children  carried  away  to  captivity.  That  hopeless  wail 
from  the  grave  by  Bethlehem  is  heard  as  far  north  as 
Raman,  beyond  Jerusalem.  Once  again,  says  Matthew, 
the  same  imaginative  grief  might  have  been  heard  from 
the  long-silent  tomb  so  near  the  scene  of  this  pitiful 
tragedy.  And  the  second  ancestral  weeping  was  fuller  of 
woe  than  the  bitterness  of  that  first  lament ;  for  this 
bewailed  the  actual  slaughter  of  innocents,  and  wept  the 
miseries  that  so  soon  gathered  round  the  coming  of  the 
King,  so  long  waited  for.  Seeing  that  the  prophet's 
words  do  not  describe  a  fact,  but  are  a  poetical  personifi 
cation  to  convey  simply  the  idea  of  calamity,  which 
might  make  the  dead  mother  weep,  the  word  "  fulfilled  " 
can  obviously  be  applied  to  them  only  in  a  modified  and 
somewhat  elastic  sense,  and  is  sufficiently  defended  if  we 
recognise  in  the  slaughter  of  these  children  a  woe  which, 
though  small  in  itself,  yet,  when  considered  in  reference 
to  its  inflicter,  a  usurping  king  of  the  Jews,  and  in 


Less.  II.]  The  King  in  Exile.  19 

reference  to  its  occasion,  the  desire  to  slay  the  God-sent 
King,  and  in  reference  to  its  innocent  victims,  and  in 
reference  to  its  place  as  first  of  the  tragic  series  of 
martyrdoms  for  Messiah,  was  heavy  with  a  sorer  burden 
of  national  disaster,  when  seen  by  eyes  made  wise  by 
death,  than  even  the  captivity  which  seemed  to  falsify 
the  promises  of  God  and  the  hopes  of  a  thousand  years. 

III.  The  return  to  Nazareth,  and  the  prophecy  fulfilled 
therein.  They  who  patiently  wait  for  guidance,  and 
move  not  till  the  cloud  moves,  are  never  disappointed, 
nor  left  undirected.  Joseph  is  a  pattern  of  self-abnegat 
ing  submission,  and  an  example  of  its  rewards.  The 
angel  ever  comes  again  to  those  who  have  once  obeyed 
and  continue  to  wait.  This  third  appearance  is  described 
in  the  same  words  as  the  former.  His  coming  was  the 
appearance  of  a  familiar  presence.  His  command  begins 
by  a  verbal  repetition  of  the  former  summons,  "  Arise5 
and  take  the  young  Child  and  His  mother,  and  go,"  and 
then  passes  to  a  singular  allusion  to  the  command  to 
Moses  which  was  the  first  step  towards  the  former  calling 
of  God's  Son — the  nation — out  of  Egypt.  "All  the  men 
are  dead  which  sought  thy  life,"  was  the  encouragement 
to  Moses  to  go  back.  "They  are  dead  that  sought  the 
young  Child's  life,"  is  the  encouragement  to  Joseph.  It 
sums  up  in  one  sentence  the  failure  of  the  first  attempt, 
and  is  like  an  epitaph  cut  on  a  tombstone  for  a  man  yet 
living, — a  prophecy  of  the  end  of  all  succeeding  efforts 
to  crush  Christ  and  thwart  His  work.  "The  dreaded 
infant's  hand  "  is  mightier  than  all  mailed  fists,  or  fingers 
that  hold  a  pen.  Christ  lives  and  grows ;  Herod  rots  and 
dies. 

Apparently  Joseph's  intention  was  to  return  to  Bethle- 


20  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.     [Chap.  ii.  13-23. 

hem.  He  may  have  thought  that  Nazareth  would 
scarcely  satisfy  the  angel's  injunction  to  go  to  the  "  land 
of  Israel,"  or  that  David's  city  was  the  right  home  for 
David's  heir.  At  all  events,  his  perplexity  appeals  to 
Heaven  for  direction  ;  and,  for  the  fourth  time,  his  course 
is  marked  for  him  by  a  dream,  whether  through  the 
instrumentality  of  the  angel,  who  knew  the  way  to  his 
couch  so  well,  we  are  not  told.  Archelaus,  Herod's  son, 
who  had  received  Judaea  on  the  partition  at  his  father's 
death,  was  a  smaller  Herod,  as  cruel  and  less  able. 
There  was  more  security  in  the  obscurity  of  Nazareth, 
under  the  less  sanguinary  sway  of  Antipas,  whose  share 
of  his  father's  vices  was  his  lust,  rather  than  his  ferocity- 
So,  after  so  many  wanderings,  and  with  such  strange  new 
experience  and  thoughts,  the  silent,  steadfast  Joseph  and 
the  meek  mother  bring  back  their  mysterious  Charge  and 
secret  to  the  humble  old  home.  Matthew  does  not  seem 
to  have  known  that  it  had  been  their  home,  but  his 
account  is  no  contradiction  of  Luke's. 

Again  he  is  reminded  of  a  prophecy,  or  perhaps,  rather, 
of  many  prophecies,  for  he  uses  the  plural  "prophets," 
as  if  he  were  summing  up  the  tenor  of  more  than  one 
utterance.  The  words  which  he  gives  are  not  found  in 
any  prophet.  But  we  know  that  to  call  a  man  "a 
Nazarene  "  was  the  same  thing  as  to  call  him  lowly  and 
despised.  The  scoff  of  the  Pharisee  to  Nicodemus'  timid 
appeal  on  Christ's  behalf,  and  the  guileless  Nathanael's 
question,  show  that.  The  fact  that  Christ  by  His 
residence  in  Nazareth  became  known  as  the  Nazarene, 
and  so  shared  in  the  contempt  attaching  to  all  Galileans, 
and  especially  to  the  inhabitants  of  that  village,  is  a  kind 
of  concentration  of  all  the  obscurity  and  ignominy  of  His 


Less.  II.]  The  King  in  Exile.  21 

lot.  The  name  was  nailed  over  His  head  on  the  cross 
as  a  scornful  rednctio  ad  absurdum  of  His  claims  to  be 
King  of  Israel.  This  explanation  of  the  evangelist's 
meaning  does  not  exclude  a  reference  in  his  mind  to  the 
prophecy  in  Isaiah  xi.  i,  where  Messiah  is  called  "a 
branch,"  or,  more  properly  "a  shoot,"  for  which  the 
Hebrew  word  is  netzer^  connected  with  the  name 
Nazareth.  The  little  village  was  probably  so  called  to 
express  its  insignificance.  The  meaning  of  the  prophecy 
is  that  the  offspring  of  David,  who  should  come  when  the 
Davidic  house  was  in  the  lowest  depths  of  obscurity,  like 
a  tree  of  which  only  the  stump  is  left,  should  not  appear 
in  royal  pomp,  or  in  a  lofty  condition,  but  as  insignificant, 
feeble,  and  of  no  account.  Such  prophecy  was  fulfilled 
in  the  very  fact  that  He  was  all  His  life  known  as  "of 
Nazareth,"  and  the  verbal  assonance  between  that  name, 
"  the  shoot,"  and  the  word  "  Nazarene,"  is  a  finger-post 
pointing  to  the  meaning  of  the  place  of  abode  chosen  for 
Him.  The  mere  fact  of  residence  there,  and  the  conse 
quent  contempt,  do  not  exhaust  the  prophecies  to  which 
reference  is  made.  These  might  have  been  fulfilled  with 
out  such  a  literal  and  external  fulfilment.  But  it  serves, 
like  the  literal  riding  upon  an  ass,  and  many  other 
instances  in  Christ's  life,  to  lead  dull  apprehensions  to 
perceive  more  plainly  that  He  is  the  theme  of  all 
prophecy,  and  that  in  His  life  the  trivial  is  significant 
and  nothing  accidental. 


LESSON    III. 


The  Herald  of  the  King. 

MATT.  iii.   I -1 2. 


1.  "In  those  days  came  John 
the    Baptist,   preaching   in    the 
wilderness  of  Judaea, 

2.  And    saying,    Repent   ye : 
for  the  kingdom   of  heaven    is 
at  hand. 

3.  For   this  is   He   that  was 
spoken  of  by  the  prophet  Esaias, 
saying,  The  voice  of  one  crying 
in    the   wilderness,  Prepare  ye 
the  way  of  the  Lord,  make  His 
paths  straight. 

4.  And    the    same  John    had 
his  raiment  of  camel's  hair,  and 
a  leathern  girdle  about  his  loins ; 
and   his  meat  was  locusts   and 
wild  honey. 

5.  Then    went    out    to    him 
Jerusalem,  and  all  Judaea,  and 
all     the     region     round     about 
Jordan, 

6.  And  were  baptized  of  him 
in     Jordan,      confessing     their 
sins. 

7.  But  when  he  saw  many  of 
the   Pharisees    and   Sadducees 
come    to   his   baptism,  he   said 
unto    them,    O    generation    of 
vipers,  who   hath    warned  you 


to     flee     from     the    wrath    to 
come  ? 

8.  Bring  forth  therefore  fruits 
meet  for  repentance  : 

9.  And     think     not     to     say 
within    yourselves,     We    have 
Abraham  to  our    father  :  for    I 
say  unto  you,  that  God  is  able 
of    these    stones    to     raise    up 
children  unto  Abraham. 

10.  And  now  also  the  axe  is 
laid  unto  the  root  of  the  trees  : 
therefore     every     tree     which 
bringeth   not   forth    good    fruit 
is   hewn    down,   and    cast  into 
the  fire. 

1 1 .  I  indeed  baptize  you  with 
water  unto  repentance  :  but  He 
that  cometh  after  me  is  mightier 
than   I,  whose  shoes  I  am  not 
worthy  to  bear  :  He  shall  bap 
tize  you  with  the  Holy  Ghost, 
and  with  fire : 

12.  Whose  fan  is  in  His  hand, 
and    He    will    throughly  purge 
His  floor,  and  gather  His  wheat 
into    the   garner ;  but   He   will 
burn    up    the    chaff    with   un 
quenchable  fire." 


MATTHEW'S  Gospel  is  emphatically  the  Gospel 
of  the  kingdom.     The  key-note  sounded  in  the 
story  of  the  magi  dominates  the  whole.     We  have  stood 


Less,  ill.]  The  Herald  of  the  King.  23 

by  the  cradle  of  the  King,  and  seen  the  homage  and 
the  dread  which  surrounded  it.  We  have  seen  the 
usurper's  hatred  and  the  Divine  guardianship.  Now  we 
hear  the  voice  of  the  herald  of  the  King.  This  lesson 
may  be  conveniently  treated  as  falling  into  two  parts — 
the  first,  from  verse  i  to  verse  6,  a  general  outline  of  the 
Baptist's  person  and  work ;  the  second,  from  verse  7  to 
end,  a  more  detailed  account  of  his  preaching. 

I.  We  have  an  outline  sketch  of  the  herald  and  of 
his  work.  The  voice  of  prophecy  had  fallen  silent  for 
four  hundred  years.  Now,  when  it  is  once  more  heard, 
it  sounds  in  exactly  the  same  key  as  when  it  ceased.  Its 
last  word  had  been  the  prediction  of  the  day  of  the 
Lord,  and  of  the  coming  of  Elijah  once  more.  John 
was  Elijah  over  again.  There  were  the  same  garb,  the 
same  isolation,  the  same  fearlessness,  the  same  grim, 
gaunt  strength,  the  same  fiery  energy  of  rebuke,  which 
bearded  kings  in  the  full  fury  of  their  self-will.  Elijah, 
Ahab,  and  Jezebel  have  their  doubles  in  John,  Herod, 
and  Herodias.  The  closing  words  of  Malachi,  which 
Matthew,  singularly  enough,  does  not  quote,  are  the  best 
explication  of  the  character  and  work  of  the  Baptist. 
His  portrait  is  flung  on  the  canvas  with  the  same  startling 
abruptness  with  which  Elijah  is  introduced.  Matthew 
makes  no  allusion  to  his  relationship  to  Jesus,  has 
nothing  to  say  about  his  birth  or  long  seclusion  in  the 
desert.  He  gives  no  hint  that  his  vague  expression  "  in 
these  days  "  covers  thirty  years.  John  leaps,  as  it  were, 
into  the  arena  full  grown  and  full  armed.  His  work  is 
described  by  one  word, — "  preaching  " ;  out  of  which 
all  modern  associations,  which  have  too  often  made  it 
a  synonym  for  long-winded  tediousness  and  toothless 


24  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.     [Chap.  iii.  1-12. 

platitudes,  must  be  removed.  It  means  proclaiming,  or 
acting  as  a  herald,  and  implies  the  uplifted  voice  and 
the  brief,  urgent  message  of  one  who  runs  before  the 
chariot,  and  shouts,  "  The  king  !  the  king  !  " 

His  message  is  summed  up  in  two  sentences,  two 
blasts  of  the  trumpet, — the  call  to  repentance,  and  the 
rousing  proclamation  that  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at 
hand.  In  the  former  he  but  reproduces  the  tone  of 
earlier  prophecy,  when  he  insists  on  a  thorough  change 
of  disposition  and  a  true  sorrow  for  sin.  But  he 
advances  far  beyond  his  precursors  in  the  latter,  which 
is  the  reason  for  the  repentance.  They  had  seen  the 
vision  of  the  kingdom  and  the  King,  "  but  not  nigh." 
He  has  to  peal  into  the  drowsy  ears  of  a  generation 
that  had  almost  forgotten  the  ancient  hope,  that  it  was 
at  the  very  threshold.  Like  some  solitary  stern  crag 
which  catches  the  light  of  the  sun,  yet  unrisen  but 
hastening  upwards,  long  before  the  shadowed  valleys, 
John  flamed  above  his  generation,  all  aglow  with  the 
light,  as  the  witness  that  in  another  moment  it  would 
spring  above  the  eastern  horizon.  But  he  sees  that 
this  is  no  joyful  message  to  them.  Nothing  is  more 
remarkable  in  his  preaching  than  the  sombre  hues  with 
which  his  expectation  of  the  day  of  the  Lord  is  coloured. 
To  what  purpose  is  the  day  of  the  Lord  to  you  ?  "  It 
is  darkness,  and  not  light  " ;  it  is  to  be  judgment,  there 
fore  repentance  is  the  preparation. 

The  gleam  and  the  purity  of  lofty  spiritual  ideas  are 
soon  darkened,  as  a  film  forms  on  quicksilver  soon  after 
its  exposure.  John's  contemporaries  thought  that  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  meant  exclusive  privileges,  and  their 
rule  over  the  heathen.  They  had  all  but  lost  the  thought 


Less,  in.]  The  Herald  of  the  King.  25 

that  it  meant  first  God's  rule  over  their  wills,  and  their 
harmony  with  the  glad  obedience  of  heaven.  They  had 
to  be  rudely  shaken  out  of  their  self-complacency,  and 
taught  that  the  livery  of  the  King  was  purity,  and  the 
preparation  for  His  coming  penitence. 

The  next  touch  in  this  outline  sketch  is  John's  fulfil 
ment  of  prophecy.  Matthew  probably  knew  that  wonder 
fully  touching  and  lowly  answer  of  his  to  the  deputation 
from  the  ecclesiastical  authorities,  which  at  once  claimed 
prophetic  authority  and  disclaimed  personal  importance, 
"  I  am  the  voice  of  one  crying  in  the  wilderness."  The 
prophecy  in  its  original  application  refers  to  the  prepara 
tion  of  a  path  in  the  desert  for  Jehovah  coming  to 
redeem  His  people  from  captivity.  The  use  made  of 
it  by  Matthew,  and  endorsed  by  all  the  evangelists,  rests 
on  the  principle,  without  which  we  have  no  clue  to  the 
significance  of  the  Old  Testament,  that  the  history  of 
Israel  is  prophetic,  and  that  the  bondage  and  deliverance 
are  types  of  the  sorer  captivity  from  which  Christ  redeems. 

Our  evangelist  gives  a  vivid  picture  of  the  asceticism 
of  John,  which  was  one  secret,  as  our  Lord  pointed  out, 
of  his  hold  on  the  people.  The  more  luxuriously  self- 
indulgent  men  are,  the  more  are  they  fascinated  by 
religious  self-denial.  A  man  "  clothed  in  soft  raiment  " 
would  have  drawn  no  crowds.  A  religious  teacher  must 
be  clearly  free  from  sensual  appetites  and  love  of  ease, 
if  he  is  to  stir  the  multitude.  John's  rough  garb  and 
coarse  food  were  not  assumed  by  him  to  create  an  im 
pression.  He  was  no  mere  imitator  of  the  old  prophets, 
though  he  wore  a  robe  like  Elijah's.  His  asceticism 
was  the  expression  of  his  severe,  solitary  spirit,  detached 
from  the  delights  of  sense,  and  even  from  the  softer 


26  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.     [Chap.iii.  1-12. 

play  of  loves,  because  that  coming  kingdom  flamed  ever 
before  him,  and  his  age  seemed  to  him    to   be  rotting 
and  ready  for  the  fire.     There  is  no  need  to  bring  in 
irrelevant  learning  about  Essenes  to  account  for  his  mode 
of  life.     The  thoughts  which  burned  in  him  drove  him 
into  the  wilderness.     He  who  was  possessed  with  them 
could  not  "  come  eating  and  drinking,"  and  might  well 
seem   to  sense-bound   wonderers    as    if  some    demonic 
force,  other  than  ordinary  motives,  tyrannized  over  him. 
The  last  point  in  this  brief  resume  of  John's  work  is 
the  universal  excitement  which    it   produced.     He   did 
not  come  out  of  the  desert  with  his  message.     If  men 
would  hear  it,  they  must  come  to  him.     And  they  came. 
All  the  southern  portion  of  the  country  seemed  to  empty 
itself    into    the    wilderness.      Sleeping    national    hopes 
revived,   the   awe    of  the    coming  judgment    seized   all 
classes.     It  was  so  long  since  a  fiery  soul  had  scattered 
flaming  words ;  and  religious  teachers  had  for  so  many 
centuries  been  mumbling  the  old  well-worn  formulas,  and 
splitting  hairs,  that  it  was  an  apocalypse  to  hear  once 
more  the  accent  of  conviction  from  a  man  who  really 
believed  every  word  he  said,  and  himself  thrilled  with 
the    solemn    truths  which  he    thundered.     Wherever   a 
religious  teacher  shows  that  he  has  John's  qualities,  as 
our  Lord  in  His  eulogium  analyzed  them — namely,  un 
alterable  resolution,  like  an  iron  pillar,  not  a  reed  shaken 
with  the  wind,  conspicuous  superiority  to  considerations 
of  ease  and  comfort,  a  direct  vision  of  the  unseen,  and  a 
message  from  God — the  crowds  will  go  out  to  see  him  ; 
and   even  if  the  enthusiasm  be    shallow  and   transient, 
some  spasm  of  conviction  will  pass  across  many  a  con 
science,  and  some  will  be  pointed  by  him  to  the  King. 


Less,  ill.]  The  Herald  of  the  King.  27 

II.  The  second  portion  of  this  lesson  is  a  more  detailed 
account  of  John's  preaching,  which    Matthew    gives   as 
addressed    to    the  Pharisees  and    Sadducees.     We    are 
not  to  suppose  that  at  any  time  John  had  a  congregation 
exclusively  made  up  of  these  ;  nor  that  these  words  were 
addressed  to  them  only.     What  is  emphasized  is  the  fact 
that  among  the  crowds  were  many  of  both  these  parties, 
the  religious  aristocracy  who  represented  two  tendencies 
of  mind  bitterly    antagonistic,  and  each  unlikely  to  be 
drawn  to  the  prophet.     Self-righteous  pedants  who  had 
turned  religion  into  a  jumble  of  petty  precepts,  and  very 
superior  persons  who  keenly  appreciated  the  good  things 
of  this  world,  and  were  too  enlightened  to  have  much 
belief  in  anything,  and  too  comfortable  to  be  enthusiasts, 
were  not  hopeful  material.     If  they  were  drawn  into  the 
current,  it    must   have    run   strong   indeed.     These    re 
presentatives    of  the    highest  and    coldest  level    of  the 
national  life  got  the  very  same  red-hot  words   flung  at 
them  as  the  mob  did.     Luke  tells  us  that  the  first  words 
in  this  summary  were  spoken  to    the  people.     Both  re 
presentations  are  true.     All  fared  alike.     So  they  should  ; 
and  so  they  always  will,  if  a  real  prophet  has  to  talk  to 
them.     John's  salutation  is  excessively  rough  and  rude. 
Honeyed  words  were  not  in  his  line  ;  he  had  not  lived 
in  the  desert  for  all  these  years,  and  held  converse  with 
God  and  his  own  heart,  without  having  learned   that  his 
business  was  to  smite  on  conscience  with  a  strong  hand, 
and  to  tear  away  the  masks  which  hid  men  from  them 
selves.     The  whole  spirit  of  the  old  prophets  was  revived 
in  his  brusque,  almost  fierce,  address  to  such  very  learned, 
religious,  and  distinguished   personages.     Isaiah    in   his 
day  had  called  their  predecessors  "  rulers  of  Sodom  " ; 


28  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.     [Chap.  iii.  1-12. 

John  was  not  scolding  when  he  called  his  hearers,  "ye 
offspring  of  vipers,"  but  charging  them  with  moral  cor 
ruption  and  creeping  earthliness. 

The  summary  of  his  preaching  is  like  a  succession  of 
lightning  flashes.     We  can  but  note  in  a  word  or  two 
each   flash  as   it  flames    and    strikes.     The    remarkable 
thing  about  his  teaching  is  that,  in  his  hands,  the  great 
hope  of  Israel  became  a  message  of  terror,  the  proclama 
tion  of  the  impending  kingdom  passes  into  a  denunciation 
of   "  the  wrath   to  come,"  set  forth  with  a  tremendous 
wealth  of  imagery  as  the  axe  lying  at  the  root  of  the  trees, 
the  fan  winnowing  the  wheat  from  the  chaff,  the  destroy 
ing  fire.     That  wrath  was  inseparable  from  the  coming 
of  the  King  ;  for  His  righteous  reign  necessarily  meant 
punishment  of  unrighteousness.    So  all  the  older  prophets 
had  said,  and  John  was  but  carrying  on  their  testimony. 
So  Christ  has  said.     No  more  terrible  warnings  of  the 
certain  judgment  of  evil,  involved  in  his  merciful  work, 
have  ever  been  given,  than  fell  from  the  lips  into  which 
grace  is  poured.     We  need  to-day  a  clearer  discernment 
of  the  truth  which  flamed  before  John's  eyes,  that  the 
full  proclamation  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  must  include 
the  plain  teaching  of  "  the  wrath  to  come." 

Next  comes  the  urgent  demand  for  reformation  of  life 
as  the  sign  of  real  repentance.  His  exhortation  does 
not  touch  the  deepest  ground  for  repentance  in  the 
heart-softening  love  of  God  manifested  in  the  sacrifice  of 
the  King,  but  is  based  wholly  on  the  certainty  of  judg 
ment.  So  far,  it  is  incomplete ;  but  the  demand  for 
righteous  living  as  the  only  test  of  religious  emotion  is 
fully  Christian,  and  needed  in  this  generation  as  much 
as  it  ever  was.  All  preachers  and  others  concerned  in 


Less,  ill.]  The  Herald  of  the  King.  29 

"  revivals  "  may  well  learn  a  lesson,  and  while  they  follow 
John  in  seeking  to  arouse  torpid  consciences  by  the 
terrors  which  are  a  part  of  the  gospel,  not  forget  to  de 
mand,  not  merely  an  emotional  repentance,  but  the  solid 
fruits  which  alone  guarantee  the  worth  of  the  emotion. 

The  next  flash  strikes  the  lofty  structure  of  confidence 
in  their  descent.  John  knows  that  every  man  in  that 
listening  crowd  believes  that  his  birth  secured  him  joy 
and  dominion  when  Messiah  came.  So  he  wrenches 
away  this  shield  against  which  his  sharpest  arrows  were 
blunted.  What  a  murmur  of  angry  denial  must  have 
met  his  contemptuous,  audacious  denial  of  their  trusted 
privilege  !  The  pebbles  on  the  Jordan  beach,  or  the  loose 
rocks  scattered  so  plentifully  over  the  desert,  could  be 
made  as  good  sons  of  Abraham  as  they.  A  glimpse  of 
the  transference  of  the  kingdom  to  the  despised  Gentiles 
passed  across  his  vision.  And  in  these  far-reaching 
words  lay  the  anticipation,  not  only  of  the  destruction 
of  all  Jewish  exclusiveness,  but  of  the  miracles  of  quick 
ening  to  be  wrought  on  the  stony  hearts  of  those  beyond 
its  pale. 

Once  more  with  a  new  emblem  the  immediate  begin 
ning  of  the  judgment  is  proclaimed,  and  its  principles  and 
issues  are  declared.  The  sharp  axe  lies  at  the  roots  of 
the  tree,  ready  to  be  lifted  and  buried  in  its  bark.  The 
woodman's  eye  is  looking  over  the  forest ;  he  marks  with 
the  fatal  red  line  the  worthless  ones,  and  at  once  the 
swinging  blows  come  down,  and  the  timber  is  carried 
away  to  be  burned.  The  trees  are  men.  The  judgment 
is  an  individualizing  one,  and  all-embracing.  Nothing 
but  actual  righteousness  of  life  will  endure.  All  else 
will  be  destroyed. 


30  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.     [Chap.  iii.  1-12. 

The  coming  of  the  kingdom  implied  the  coming  of  the 
King.  John  knew  that  the  King  was  a  man,  and  that  He 
was  at  the  door.  So  his  sermon  reaches  its  climax  in  the 
ringing  proclamation  of  His  advent.  The  first  noticeable 
feature  in  it  is  the  utter  humility  of  the  dauntless  prophet 
before  the  yet  veiled  Sovereign.  All  the  fiery  force,  the 
righteous  scorn  and  anger,  the  unflinching  bravery,  melt 
into  meek  submission.  He  knows  the  limits  of  his  own 
power,  and  gladly  recognizes  the  infinite  superiority  of  the 
coming  One.  He  never  moved  from  that  lowly  attitude. 
Even  when  his  followers  tried  to  stir  up  base  jealousy 
in  him  at  being  distanced  by  the  Christ,  who,  as  they 
suggested,  owed  His  first  recognition  to  him,  "  He  must 
increase  ;  but  I  must  decrease  "  ;  he  was  glad  "  to  fade 
in  the  light  of  the  "  Sun  that  "  he  loved."  What  a  wealth 
of  suppressed  emotion  and  lowly  love  there  is  in  the 
words  so  pathetic  from  the  lips  of  the  lonely  ascetic, 
whom  no  home  joys  had  ever  cheered,  "  He  that  hath 
the  bride  is  the  bridegroom.  .  .  .  My  joy  is  fulfilled  "  ! 

Note,  too,  the  grand  conception  of  the  gifts  of  the 
King.  John  knew  that  his  baptism  was,  like  the  water 
in  which  he  immersed,  cold,  and  incapable  of  giving  life. 
It  symbolized,  but  did  not  effect,  cleansing,  any  more  than 
his  preaching  righteousness  could  produce  righteousness. 
But  the  King  would  come,  bringing  with  Him  the  gift  of 
a  mighty  Spirit,  whose  quick  energy,  transforming  all 
deadness  into  its  own  likeness,  burning  out  the  foul  stains 
from  character,  and  melting  cold  hearts  into  radiant 
warmth,  should  do  all  that  his  poor,  cold,  outward  baptism 
only  shadowed.  Form  and  substance  of  this  great 
promise  gather  up  many  Old  Testament  utterances. 
From  of  old  fire  had  been  the  emblem  of  the  Divine 


Less,  ill.]  The  Herald  of  the  King.  31 

nature,  not  only,  nor  chiefly,  as  destructive,  but  rather  as 
life-giving,  cleansing,  gladdening,  fructifying,  transform 
ing.  From  of  old  the  promise  of  a  Divine  Spirit  poured 
out  on  all  flesh  had  been  connected  with  the  kingdom  of 
Messiah ;  and  John  but  reiterates  the  uniform  voice  of 
prophecy,  even  as  he  anticipates  the  crowning  gift  of  the 
gospel,  in  this  saying. 

Note,  further,  the  renewed  prophecy  of  judgment- 
There  is  something  very  solemn  in  the  stern  refrain  at 
the  end  of  each  of  three  consecutive  verses, — "  with  fire." 
The  first  and  the  last  refer  to  the  destructive  fire ;  the 
second,  to  the  cleansing  Spirit.  But  the  fire  that  destroys 
is  not  unconnected  with  that  which  purifies.  And  the 
very  same  Divine  flame,  if  welcomed  and  yielded  to, 
works  purity,  and  if  repelled  and  scorned,  consumes. 
The  rustic  simplicity  of  the  figures  of  the  husbandman 
with  his  winnowing-shovel ;  the  threshing-floor  exposed 
to  every  wind ;  the  stored  wheat ;  the  rootless,  lifeless, 
worthless  chaff,  and  the  fierce  fire  in  some  corner  of  the 
autumn  field  where  it  is  utterly  burned  up, — needs  no 
comment.  They  add  nothing  but  another  vivid  picture 
to  the  thoughts  already  dealt  with.  But  the  question 
arises  as  to  the  whole  of  the  representation  of  judgment 
here, — does  it  look  beyond  the  present  world  ?  I  see  no 
reason  for  supposing  that  John  was  speaking  about  any. 
thing  but  the  sifting  and  destroying  which  would  attend 
the  coming  of  the  looked-for  kingdom  on  earth.  The 
principles  which  he  laid  down  are,  no  doubt,  true  for 
both  worlds ;  but  the  application  of  them  which  his  pro 
phetic  mission  embraced  lies  on  this  side  the  grave. 

Note,  further,  the  limitations  in  John's  knowledge  of 
the  King.  His  prophecy  unites,  as  contemporaneous, 


32  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew,     [Chap.  Hi.  1-12. 

events  which,  in  fact,  are  widely  separate, — the  coming 
of  Christ,  and  the  judgments  which  He  executes,  whether 
on  Israel  or  in  the  final  "great  day  of  the  Lord."  There 
is  no  perspective  in  prophecy.  The  future  is  fore 
shortened,  and  great  gulfs  of  centuries  are  passed  over, 
as,  standing  on  a  plain,  we  see  it  as  continuous,  though 
it  may  really  be  cleft  by  deep  ravines.  He  did  not  know 
"  what  manner  of  time  "  the  spirit  which  was  in  him  did 
"  signify."  No  doubt  his  expectations  were  correct,  in  so 
far  as  Christ's  coming  really  sifted  and  separated,  and 
was  the  rising  and  the  falling  of  many  ;  but  it  was  not 
attended  by  such  tokens  as  John  inferred.  Hence  we  can 
understand  his  doubts  when  in  prison,  and  learn  that  a 
prophet  was  often  mistaken  as  to  the  meaning  of  his 
message. 

Again,  while  we  have  here  a  clear  prediction  of  the 
Spirit  as  bestowed  by  Christ,  we  find  no  hint  of  His  work 
as  the  sacrifice  for  sin,  through  whom  the  guilt,  which  no 
repentance  and  no  outward  baptism  could  touch,  was 
taken  away.  The  Gospel  of  John  gives  us  later  utter 
ances  of  the  Baptist's,  by  which  we  learn  that  he  advanced 
beyond  the  point  at  which  he  stands  here.  "  Behold  the 
Lamb  of  God,  which  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world  " 
was  his  message  after  Christ's  baptism.  It  is  the  last, 
highest  voice  of  prophecy.  The  proclamation  of  a  king 
dom  of  heaven,  of  a  King  mighty  and  righteous,  whose 
coming  kindled  a  fire  of  judgment,  and  a  blessed  fire 
of  purifying,  into  one  or  other  of  which  all  men  must  be 
plunged,  contained  elements  of  terror,  as  well  as  of  hope. 
It  needed  completion  by  that  later  word. 

When  John  stretched  out  his  forefinger,  and  with  awe 
struck  voice  bade  his  hearers  look  at  Jesus  coming  to 


Less,  in.]  The  Herald  of  the  King.  33 

him,  prophecy  had  done  its  work.  The  promise  had 
been  gradually  concentrated  on  the  nation,  the  tribe,  the 
house,  and  now  it  falls  on  the  person.  The  dove  narrows 
its  circling  flight  till  it  lights  on  His  head.  The  goal  has 
been  reached,  too,  in  the  clear  declaration  of  Messiah's 
work.  He  is  King,  Giver  of  the  Spirit,  Judge,  but  He  is 
before  all  else  the  Sacrifice  for  the  world's  sins.  There 
fore  he  to  whom  it  was  given  to  utter  that  great  saying 
was  a  prophet,  and  more  than  a  prophet ;  and  when  he 
had  spoken  it,  there  was  nothing  more  for  him  to  do 
but  to  decrease.  He  was  like  the  breeze  before  sunrise, 
which  springs  up,  as  crying,"  The  dawn  !  the  dawn  !  "  and 
dies  away. 


LESSON    IV. 


The  Coronation  of  the  King. 

MATT.  iii.    13-17. 


13.  "Then  cometh  Jesus  from 
Galilee    to    Jordan    unto    John, 
to  be  baptized  of  him. 

14.  But    John     forbad     Him, 
saying,  I  have  need    to  be  bap 
tized  of  Thee,  and  comest  Thou 
to  me  ? 

15.  And      Jesus      answering 
said   unto  him,   Suffer  it  to  be 
so  now :  for  thus   it    becometh 
us    to    fulfil    all    righteousness. 
Then  he  suffered  Him. 


1 6.  And  Jesus,  when  He  was 
baptized,  went  up  straightway 
out  of  the    water  :  and    lo,   the 
heavens  were  opened  unto  Him, 
and  He  saw  the  Spirit  of  God 
descending    like    a    dove,    and 
lighting  upon  Him  : 

17.  And     lo     a     voice     from 
heaven,     saying,     This     is     My 
beloved    Son,    in    whom    I   am 
well  pleased." 


THE  place  where  Jesus  was  baptized  is  uncertain, 
but  the  traditional  site,  near  Jericho,  is  a  mistake. 
Whether  we  read  Bethabarah  or  Bethany  in  John  i.  28, 
we  must  look  for  the  scene  somewhere  much  higher  up 
the  stream  than  Jericho,  in  order  to  satisfy  the  conditions 
of  John's  narrative,  which  allow  only  a  day  for  reaching 
Cana  from  it.  We  are  to  think,  then,  of  Jesus  travelling 
a  day's  journey  from  Nazareth,  probably  alone,  and  not 
having  declared  His  purpose  to  any.  He 

"  Came  as  then  obscure, 
Unmarked,  unknown," 

with  thoughts  which  we  can  but  faintly  imagine  filling  His 
mind.     A  similar  tension  of  spirit  to  that  which  set  its 

34 


Less.  IV.]        The  Coronation  of  the  King.  35 

mark  on  His  face,  and  awed  His  disciples,  as  they  followed 
Him  up  the  rocky  road  on  His  last  journey  to  Jerusalem, 
urged  Him  on  His  solitary  path  from  the  peaceful  seclu 
sion  of  Nazareth  to  His  public  life  of  conflict,  sorrow,  and 
rejection,  with  the  cross  closing  the  view.  The  baptism 
was,  on  His  part,  the  assumption  of  His  Messianic  office  ; 
and  on  God's,  His  anointing  or  coronation  as  the  King. 
There  are  three  stages  in  this  lesson  :  The  preliminary 
dialogue,  which  explains  the  paradox  of  the  baptism  of 
the  sinless  by  and  with  the  sinful,  the  Divine  anointing 
of  the  King,  and  the  Divine  proclamation. 

I.  The  becomingness  of  the  apparently  unbecoming 
baptism.  It  was  a  baptism  of  repentance,  in  which  the 
subjects  confessed  their  sins.  The  stern  preacher,  who 
lowered  his  tone  of  denunciation  before  no  rank,  and 
refused  to  baptize  the  most  religious  Pharisees,  not  be 
cause  they  were  too  good,  but  because  they  were  too  bad 
for  the  rite,  bows  in  lowliest  abasement  before  his 
carpenter  Cousin,  and  feels  that  his  own  character  shows 
black  against  that  lustrous  whiteness.  The  Greek  puts 
emphasis  on  the  pronouns  in  the  sentence,  "  I  have 
need  ...  of  thee  .  .  .  thou  to  me."  It  is  like  "  Dost 
thou  wash  my  feet?"  in  its  consciousness  of  unworthi- 
ness  and  sin,  while  so  unlike  that  saying  in  its  recognition 
of  some  cleansing  virtue  in  Jesus,  for  which  the  preacher 
of  righteousness  yearned.  Who  would  have  thought, 
when  John  was  flashing  and  thundering  against  sin,  that 
such  sense  of  his  own  evil  underlay  his  boldness  ?  He 
clearly  feels  that  Jesus  is  his  superior,  and  needs  no 
baptism  of  repentance.  How  had  he  come  to  this 
conviction  ?  Difficulties  have  been  raised  as  to  the  con 
sistency  of  these  words  with  his  declaration  that  he 


36  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.     [Chap.  111.13-17. 

"  knew  Him  not."  But,  not  to  dwell  on  the  fact  that 
anticipations  and  expectations  are  not  knowledge,  why 
should  this  insight  into  the  character  of  Jesus  not  have 
then  been  granted  to  him  by  prophetic  intuition,  as  he 
gazed  on  the  gentle  face  ?  Why  should  not  the  Divine 
voice  have  then  for  the  first  time  sounded  in  John's 
heart,  "  Arise,  anoint  Him  :  for  this  is  He "  ?  It  is  a 
pure  assumption  that  John  had  previous  knowledge  of 
Jesus.  The  city  in  the  hill  country  of  Judaea,  where 
his  boyhood  had  possibly  been  passed,  was  far  from 
Nazareth,  and  he  had  very  early  betaken  himself  to  the 
desert  and  its  isolation.  The  circumstances  of  the 
nativity  may,  or  may  not,  have  been  known  to  him  ;  but 
there  is  no  reason  to  explain  this  conviction  of  the 
inappropriateness  of  his  baptism  of  Jesus  by  previous 
knowledge.  The  other  explanation  seems  to  me  both 
more  probable  and  more  accordant  with  his  prophetic 
office.  But,  however  that  may  be,  the  picture  of  the 
Baptist  melting  into  humility  before  the  only  soul  in 
which  his  keen  eye  had  detected  no  impurity,  and 
s  renuously  seeking  to  forbid  (for  the  Greek  gives  the 
notion  of  earnest  attempts  to  hinder)  the  incongruity 
of  his  polluted  hands  baptizing  so  pure  a  Being,  is  one 
of  the  most  pathetic  on  the  pages  of  Scripture. 

Christ  accepts  without  demur  the  place  which  John 
gives  Him.  He  always  accepted  the  highest  place 
which  any  man  put  Him  in,  and  never  rebuked  any 
estimate  of  Himself  as  enthusiastic  or  too  lofty.  Why 
did  He  not  say,  "  I  too  have  sins,  and  need  repentance 
and  remission "  ?  An  honest  man  would  have  said  so, 
if  he  knew  himself.  It  is  a  strange  way  for  a  "meek 
:  nd  lowly "  teacher  to  begin  his  career  by  allowing 


Less,  iv.]         The  Coronation  of  the  King.  37 

unblamed  the  ascription  to  himself  of  freedom  from  all 
need  of  cleansing.  If  Jesus  had  not  up  till  that  moment 
lived  a  perfectly  sinless  life,  He  committed  a  black  sin 
in  tacitly  endorsing  this  estimate  of  Him.  If  He  had 
lived  such  a  life,  on  what  theory  of  His  nature  is  it 
explicable  ?  A  sinless  man  must  be  more  than  man. 

The  same  consciousness  of  blamelessness  is  put  into 
plain  words  in  His  answer  to  John,  which  is  Jesus'  own 
explanation  of  His  baptism.  It  was  a  temporary  sub 
mission  to  an  apparent  inferiority,  which  was  speedily 
and  permanently  to  give  place  to  a  reversal  of  their 
relative  positions,  in  which  He  would  baptize  the 
Baptist  with  cleansing  fire.  It  was  an  act  of  obedience 
to  a  Divine  appointment,  and  therefore  it  "  became  " 
Him.  There  we  catch  the  first  accents  of  that  continual 
reference  to  a  Divine  "  must "  which  sounds  through 
His  whole  life.  "  Lo,  I  come  ...  to  do  Thy  will,  O 
God."  It  was  the  fulfilment  of  "  righteousness  "  ;  that 
is  to  say,  Jesus  did  not  confess  sin,  but  professed  sin- 
lessness  in  His  baptism,  and  submitted  to  it,  not  because 
He  needed  cleansing,  but  because  it  was  appointed  as 
the  duty  for  the  nation  of  which  He  was  a  member. 
Words  could  not  more  plainly  assert  that  His  past  life 
had  been  the  unbroken  fulfilment  of  the  law,  or  that, 
in  submitting  to  the  baptism  of  repentance,  He  was 
conscious  that  He  "  needs  no  repentance." 

Why,  then,  was  He  baptized  ?  For  the  same  reasoi. 
for  which  He  was  found  in  the  likeness  of  the  flesh  of 
sin,  and  submitted  to  other  requirements  of  the  law 
from  which,  as  Son,  He  was  free,  and  bore  the  sorrows 
which  were  not  the  issue  of  His  own  sins,  and  went 
down  at  last  to  the  other  baptism  with  which  He  had  to 


38  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.     [Chap.  iii.  13-17. 

be  baptized,  though  His  pure  life  had  for  itself  no  need 
to  pass  through  that  awful  submersion  beneath  the  black, 
cold  waters  of  death.  The  whole  mystery  of  His  identi 
fication  of  Himself  with  sinful  men,  and  of  His  being 
"  made  sin  ...  for  us,  who  knew  no  sin,"  lies  in  germ 
in  His  baptism  by  John.  No  other  conception  of  its 
meaning  does  justice  to  the  facts. 

II.  We  have  next  the  Divine  anointing  or  coronation. 
The  language  here  leaves  it  doubtful  whether  the  vision 
was  for  Jesus  or  John.  "  He  saw "  is  most  naturally 
referred  to  the  former,  but  "  He  saw  the  Spirit  .  .  . 
coming  upon  Him "  most  naturally  means  that  John 
saw  it  falling  upon  Jesus,  and  the  form  of  the  Divine 
proclamation  suggests  that  it  was  addressed  to  the 
Baptist.  In  Mark  and  Luke,  on  the  contrary,  it  is 
spoken  to  Jesus.  It  appears  from  John  i.  32-34,  that 
the  Baptist  saw  the  dove,  and  both  the  visible  and 
audible  tokens  were  probably  given  to  both  Jesus  and 
John.  It  is  useless  to  ask  whether  others,  if  present, 
would  have  perceived  either.  We  know  too  little  of  the 
external  "  realities  "  which  occasioned  prophetic  visions, 
and  of  the  real  nature  of  "  material  realities,"  to  dog 
matize.  The  voice  and  the  hovering  dove  were  no  less 
"  real,"  though  no  coarse  material  impact  set  air  or 
luminiferous  ether  vibrating,  or  even  though  ear  and  eye 
were  not  employed  in  producing  the  impression.  It  is 
enough  that  these  were  actual  communications,  having 
their  source,  not  in  the  recipients,  but  in  God's  miracu 
lous  action. 

The  symbol  of  the  dove  seems  to  carry  allusions  to 
the  grand  image  which  represents  the  Spirit  of  God  as 
"  brooding  "  over  chaos,  and  quickening  life,  as  a  bird  in 


Less.  IV.]         The  Coronation  of  the  King.  39 

its  nest  by  the  warmth  of  its  own  soft  breast ;  to  the 
dove  which  bore  the  olive-branch,  first  messenger  of 
hope  to  the  prisoners  in  the  ark ;  to  the  use  of  the  dove 
as  clean,  in  sacrifice  ;  to  the  poetical  attribution  to  it, 
common  to  many  nations,  of  meek  gentleness  and 
faithful  love.  Set  side  by  side  with  that,  John's  thought 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  as  fire,  and  we  get  all  the  beauty  of 
both  emblems  increased,  and  understand  how  much  the 
stern  ascetic,  whose  words  burned  and  blistered,  had  to 
learn.  He  knew  "  what  manner  of  spirit "  the  King 
possessed  and  bestowed.  Meekness  is  throned  now. 
Gentleness  is  stronger  than  force.  The  dove  conquers 
Rome's  eagles  and  every  strong-taloned,  sharp-beaked 
bird  of  prey.  "  The  Prince  of  the  kings  of  the  earth  " 
is  anointed  by  the  descending  dove,  and  His  second 
coronation  is  with  thorns,  and  a  reed  is  His  sceptre  ;  for 
His  kingdom  is  based  on  purity  and  meekness,  is  won 
by  suffering,  and  wielded  in  gentleness.  As  is  the  King, 
so  are  His  subjects,  whose  only  weapons  He  has  assigned 
when  He  bids  them  be  "  harmless  as  doves." 

The  purpose  of  this  descent  of  the  Spirit  on  Jesus 
was  twofold.  In  John's  Gospel  it  is  represented  as 
principally  meant  to  certify  the  Baptist  of  the  identity 
of  the  Messiah.  But  we  cannot  exclude  its  effect  on 
Jesus.  For  Him  it  was  the  Divine  anointing  for  His 
official  mediatorial  work.  A  king  is  king  before  he  is 
anointed  or  crowned.  These  are  but  the  signs  of  what 
we  may  call  the  official  assumption  of  His  royalty.  We 
are  not  to  conceive  that  Jesus  then  began  to  be  filled 
with  the  Spirit,  or  that  absolutely  new  powers  were 
given  to  Him  then.  No  doubt  the  anointing  did  mark 
a  stage  in  His  human  development,  and  the  accession 


40  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.     [Chap.  Hi.  13-17. 

to  His  manhood  of  all  that  was  needed  to  equip  it  for 
His  work.  But  the  Spirit  of  God  had  formed  His  pure 
manhood  ere  He  was  born,  and  had  dwelt  in  growing 
measure  in  His  growing  Spirit,  through  all  His  sinless 
thirty  years.  Since  He  was  a  man,  He  needed  the 
Divine  Spirit.  Since  He  was  a  sinless  Man,  He  was 
capable  of  receiving  it  in  perfect  measure  and  unbroken 
continuity.  Since  His  baptism  began  His  public  career, 
He  needed  then,  and  then  received,  the  anointing  which 
at  once  designated  and  fitted  Him  for  His  work  of  wit 
nessing  and  atonement. 

III.  We  have  finally  the  Divine  proclamation.  God 
Himself  takes  the  herald's  office.  The  coronation  ends 
with  the  solemn  recitation  of  the  style  and  title  of  the 
King.  We  need  not  stay  to  discuss  what  was  the 
objective  fact,  how  this  "  voice  "  was  audible,  whether  it 
was  meant  for  John,  as  Matthew  represents,  or  for  Jesus, 
as  Mark  and  Luke  suppose.  Two  Old  Testament 
passages  seem  to  be  melted  together  in  it :  that  in  the 
second  psalm,  which  says  to  the  Messianic  King,  "  Thou 
art  my  Son  " ;  that  in  Isaiah  xlii.  i,  which  calls  on  the 
nations  to  "  behold  .  .  .  mine  elect,  in  whom  my  soul 
delighteth."  Thus  the  originals  are  addressed  to  the 
King,  and  to  others,  just  as  the  varying  reports  of  the 
evangelists  represent  the  voice  to  have  been.  God  speaks 
from  heaven,  and  quotes  a  psalm  and  a  prophet.  Does 
that  seem  strange  ?  Is  it  not  natural  that  His  utterances 
to  men  should  be  conditioned  by  their  stage  of  know 
ledge,  and  should  attach  themselves  to  previous  revela 
tions  ?  Why  should  He  not  speak  from  heaven  an 
illuminating  word,  which  interprets  whole  regions  of  the 
Old  Testament  ?  This  Divine  testimony  touches  first  the 


Less.  IV.]         The  Coronation  of  the  King.  4 1 

mystery  of  our  Lord's  nature.  "  Son  of  God  "  is  not 
merely  a  synonym  of  Messiah,  but  it  includes  the  distinct 
conception  of  Divine  origin  and  of  consequent  Divine 
nature.  The  name  implies  that  the  relation  between 
Him  and  the  Father  is  unique.  It  is  not  exhausted  by 
reference  to  our  Lord's  supernatural  birth,  but  goes  back 
to  eternal  depths  when  "  in  the  beginning  the  word  was 
with  God."  His  designation  to  His  Messianic  work,  His 
supernatural  entrance  into  humanity,  are  consequences  of 
that  ante-temporal  and  extra-creatural  relation.  Jesus  is 
"  the  King  of  glory  "  because  He  is  the  everlasting  "  Son 
of  the  Father." 

The  voice  attests  the  Divine  complacency  in  Him. 
The  form  of  the  verb  in  the  Greek  implies  a  definite  past 
delight  of  the  Father  in  the  Son,  and  carries  back  our 
thoughts  to  that  wonderful  intercourse  of  which  Jesus 
lets  us  catch  some  faint  glimpse  when  He  says,  "  Thou 
lovedst  Me  before  the  foundation  of  the  world."  Silence 
is  best  in  the  presence  of  such  words.  From  eternity  the 
Father  mirrored  Himself  in  the  eternal  Son,  and  rejoiced 
in  the  perfect  likeness,  which  was  at  once  the  beam  from 
His  brightness  and  the  reflection  of  His  beauty.  From 
eternity  the  mysterious  depths  of  the  Divine  nature  moved 
in  soft  waves  of  love,  and  in  its  solitude  there  was  society. 
These  are  heights  where  we  cannot  walk  ;  but  on  the 
lower  levels,  such  words  teach  us  the  absolute  sinlessness 
of  Jesus,  and  are  the  Divine  attestation  of  the  truth  of 
His  own  claim,  "  the  Father  hath  not  left  Me  alone  ; 
because  I  do  always  the  things  that  please  Him." 

Nor  can  we  leave  out  of  view  the  thought  that  the 
Father's  delight  in  the  Son  is  through  the  Son  extended 
to  all  who  love  and  trust  the  Son.  In  Jesus,  God  is  well 


42  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.  iii.  13-17. 

pleased  towards  us.  That  complacent  delight  embraces 
us  too,  if  we  become  sons  through  faith  in  the  only 
begotten  Son.  The  dove  that  rested  on  His  head  will 
come  and  nestle  in  our  hearts,  and  brood  there,  over 
their  chaos,  if  we  have  faith  in  Christ.  Sonship,  Divine 
favour,  the  abiding  Spirit,  the  share  in  His  kingdom,  the 
inheritance  of  His  throne,  may  all  be  ours  if  we  listen  to 
that  voice  which  on  the  Mount  of  Transfiguration  re 
newed  its  witness  to  Jesus  with  the  added  exhortation, 
"Hear  ye  him."  If  we  anoint  Him  King  over  our  hearts 
we  shall  be  quickened  by  His  Spirit,  and  made  sharers  in 
His  royalty. 


LESSON   V. 


The  Victory  of  the  King. 


MATT.  iv.   I -I  I. 


1.  "Then  was  Jesus  led  up  of 
the  Spirit  into  the  wilderness 
to  be  tempted  of  the  devil. 

2.  And  when  He  had  fasted 
forty  days  and  forty  nights,  He 
was  afterward  an  hungred. 

3.  And    when    the    tempter 
came  to  Him,  he  said,  If  Thou 
be   the   Son  of  God,  command 
that     these    stones     be     made 
bread. 

4.  But  He  answered  and  said, 
It  is  written,  Man  shall  not  live 
by  bread   alone,   but   by  every 
word    that    proceedeth    out    of 
the  mouth  of  God. 

5.  Then  the  devil  taketh  Him 
up    into    the    holy     city,    and 
setteth    Him    on  a  pinnacle   of 
the  temple, 

6.  And    saith    unto    Him,    If 
Thou  be  the  Son  of  God,  cast 
Thyself  down  :  for  it  is  written, 
He  shall  give  His  angels  charge 


concerning  Thee  :  and  in  their 
hands  they  shall  bear  Thee  up, 
lest  at  any  time  Thou  dash  Thy 
foot  against  a  stone. 

7.  Jesus  said  unto  him,  It  is 
written   again,   Thou  shalt  not 
tempt  the  Lord  thy  God. 

8.  Again,     the    devil    taketh 
Him  up  into  an  exceeding  high 
mountain,  and  shewed  Him  all 
the  kingdoms  of  the  world,  and 
the  glory  of  them  ; 

9.  And   saith  unto  Him,  All 
these  things  will  I  give   Thee, 
if    Thou    wilt    fall    down    and 
worship  me. 

10.  Then    saith    Jesus    unto 
him,    Get    thee   hence,    Satan : 
for    it   is   written,    Thou    shalt 
worship  the  Lord  thy  God,  and 
Him  only  shalt  thou  serve. 

11.  Then    the    devil    leaveth 
Him,  and,  behold,  angels  came 
and  ministered  unto  Him." 


EVERY  word  of  the  first  verses  of  this  narrative  is 
full  of  meaning.     "  Then  "  marks  the  immediate 
connection,  not  only  in  time  but  in  causation,  between 
the  baptism  and   the   temptation.     The  latter   followed 
necessarily  on  the  former.     "Of  the  Spirit" — then  God 

43 


44  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.     [Chap.  iv.  i-u. 

does  lead  His  Son  into  temptation.  For  us  all,  as  for 
Christ,  it  is  true  that,  though  God  does  not  tempt  as 
wishing  us  to  fall,  He  does  so  order  our  lives  that  they 
carry  us  into  places  where  the  metal  of  our  religion  is 
tried.  "To  be  tempted" — then  a  pure,  sinless  human 
nature  is  capable  of  temptation,  and  the  King  has  to 
begin  His  career  by  a  battle.  "Of  the  devil" — then 
there  is  a  dark  kingdom  of  evil,  and  a  personal  head  of 
it,  the  prince  of  darkness.  He  knows  his  rival,  and  yet 
he  knows  Him  but  partially.  He  strides  out  to  meet 
Him  in  desperate  duel,  as  Goliath  did  the  stripling 
whom  he  despised ;  and  both  hosts  pause  and  gaze. 
To  a  sinless  nature  no  temptation  can  arise  from  within, 
but  must  be  presented  from  without. 

We  leave  untouched  the  question  as  to  the  manner  of 
this  temptation,  which  remains  equally  real,  whether  we 
conceive  that  the  tempter  appeared  in  bodily  form,  and 
actually  carried  the  body  of  our  Lord  from  place  to 
place,  or  whether  we  suppose  that,  during  it  all,  Christ 
sat  silent,  and  apparently  alone  in  the  wilderness.  We 
only  divert  attention  from  the  true  importance  of  the 
incident  by  giving  prominence  to  picturesque  or  question 
able  externals  of  it. 

I.  The  first  assault  and  repulse,  in  the  desert. 

Unlike  John  the  Baptist,  whose  austere  spirit  was 
unfolded  in  the  desert,  Jesus  grew  up  among  men, 
passing  through  and  sanctifying  childhood  and  youth, 
home  duties,  and  innocent  pleasures.  But  ere  He 
enters  on  His  work,  the  need  which  every  soul  appointed 
to  high  and  hard  tasks  has  felt,  namely,  the  need  for 
seclusion  and  communion  with  God  in  solitude,  was 
felt  by  Him.  Like  Moses  and  Elijah,  the  wilderness 


Less,  v.]  The  Victory  of  the  King.  45 

was  His  school ;  and  as  the  collective  Israel,  so  the 
personal  Son  of  God,  has  to  be  led  into  the  wilderness, 
that  there  God  may  "  speak  to  His  heart."  So  deep 
and  rapt  was  the  communion,  that,  for  forty  days,  spirit 
so  mastered  flesh  that  the  need  and  desire  for  food  were 
suspended.  But  when  He  touched  earth  again,  the 
pinch  of  hunger  began.  Analogous  cases  of  the  power 
of  high  emotion  to  hold  physical  wants  in  abeyance 
are  sufficiently  familiar  to  make  so  extreme  an  instance 
explicable. 

We  have  to  distinguish  in  the  first  temptation  between 
the  sphere  in  which  it  moves,  the  act  suggested,  and 
the  true  nature  of  the  act  as  dragged  to  light  in  Christ's 
answer.  The  sphere  is  that  of  the  physical  nature. 
Hunger  has  nothing  to  do  with  right  or  wrong.  It 
asserts  itself  independent  of  all  considerations.  In  itself 
neutral,  it  may,  like  all  physical  cravings,  lead  to  sin. 
Most  men  are  most  tempted  by  fleshly  desires.  Satan 
had  tried  the  same  bait  before  on  the  first  Adam. 
It  had  answered  so  well  then,  that  he  thinks  himself 
wise  in  bringing  it  out  once  more.  Adam,  in  his 
garden,  surrounded  by  all  that  sense  needed,  had  yielded, 
and  thereby  had  turned  the  garden  into  desert ;  Christ, 
in  the  desert,  pressed  by  hunger,  does  not  yield,  and 
thereby  turns  the  desert  into  a  garden  again.  At  the 
beginning  of  His  course  He  is  tempted  by  the  innocent 
desire  to  secure  physical  support ;  at  its  close  He  is 
tempted  by  the  innocent  desire  to  avoid  physical  pain. 
He  overcomes  both,  and  by  His  victories  in  the  wilder 
ness  so  unlike  the  garden,  and  in  Gethsemane,  another 
garden,  so  unlike  the  first,  He  brings  "  a  statelier  Eden 
back  to  man," 


46  The  Gospel  of  St,  Matthew.    [Chap.iv.  i-u. 

The  act  suggested  seems  not  only  innocent,  but  in 
accordance  with  His  dignity.  It  was  a  strange  anomaly 
for  "  the  Son  of  God,"  on  whose  head  the  dove  had 
descended,  and  in  whose  ears  the  voice  had  sounded, 
to  be  at  the  point  of  starving.  What  more  unbecoming 
than  that  One  possessed  of  His  mysterious  closeness 
to  God  should  be  suffering  from  such  ignoble  neces 
sities  ?  What  more  foolish  than  to  continue  to  hunger, 
when  a  word  could  spread  a  table  in  the  wilderness? 
John  had  said  that  God  could  make  children  of  Abraham 
out  of  these  stones.  Could  He  not  make  bread  out 
of  them  ?  The  suggestion  sounds  benevolent,  sensible, 
almost  religious.  The  need  is  real,  the  remedy  possible 
and  easy ;  the  result  desirable  as  preserving  valuable 
life,  and  putting  an  end  to  an  anomaly,  and  the  objec 
tions  apparently  nil.  The  bait  is  skilfully  wound  over 
the  barbed  hook. 

Christ's  answer  tears  it  away,  and  discloses  the  sharp 
points.  He  will  not  discuss  with  Satan  whether  He  is 
Son  of  God  or  no.  To  the  Jews  He  was  wont  to 
answer,  "  I  say  unto  you  "  ;  to  Satan  He  answers,  "  It 
is  written."  He  puts  honour  on  "  the  sword  of  the 
Spirit,  which  is  the  Word  of  God,"  and  sets  us  an 
example  of  how  to  wield  it.  The  words  quoted  are 
found  in  the  account  of  Israel's  miraculous  sustenance  in 
the  desert  by  the  manna,  and  are  applied  by  Christ  to 
Himself,  not  as  Son  of  God,  but  as  simple  man.  They 
contain  the  great  truth  that  God  can  feed  men,  in  their 
physical  life,  by  bread  or  without  bread.  When  He  does 
it  by  bread  or  other  ordinary  means,  it  is  even  then  not 
the  material  substance  in  itself,  but  His  will  operating 
through  it,  which  feeds.  He  can  abolish  all  the  out- 


Less,  v.]  The  Victory  of  the  King.  47 

ward  means,  and  still  keep  a  man  alive.  There  is  no 
reference  to  the  truth  which  is  sometimes  forcibly 
inserted  into  this  saying,  that  man  has  a  higher  than  his 
bodily  life,  which  needs  more  than  material  bread  to 
feed  the  hunger  of  the  soul.  The  whole  scope  of  them 
is  to  state  the  law  of  physical  nourishment  as  dependent 
at  last  on  the  Divine  will,  and  therefore  equally  capable 
of  being  accomplished  with  or  without  bread,  by  ordinary 
means  or  apart  from  these. 

The  bearing  of  the  words  on  Christ's  hunger  is  two 
fold  :  First,  He  will  not  use  His  miraculous  power  to 
provide  food,  for  that  would  be  to  distrust  God,  and  so 
to  cast  off  His  filial  dependence  ;  second,  He  will  not 
separate  Himself  from  His  brethren,  and  provide  for 
Himself  by  a  way  not  open  to  them,  for  that  would 
really  be  to  reverse  the  very  purpose  of  His  incarnation 
and  to  defeat  His  whole  work.  He  has  come  to  bear 
all  man's  burdens,  and  shall  He  begin  by  separating 
Himself  from  them  ?  Therefore  He  answers  in  words 
which  declare  the  law  for  "man,"  and  thereby  merges 
all  that  was  distinctive  in  His  position  in  a  loving  par 
ticipation  in  our  lot.  If  the  Captain  of  our  Salvation  had 
begun  by  refusing  to  share  the  privations  of  the  rank 
and  file,  and  had  provided  dainties  for  Himself,  what 
would  have  become  of  His  making  common  cause  with 
them  ?  The  temptation  addressed  to  Christ's  physical 
nature  was,  to  put  it  roughly,  "  Look  out  for  Yourself." 
His  answer  was,  "  As  Son  of  God,  I  hold  by  My  filial 
dependence.  As  Man,  I  share  My  brethren's  lot,  and 
am  content  to  live  as  they  live." 

II.  The  second  assault  and  repulse,  on  the  temple. 

We  need  not  touch  on  the  questions  as  to  whether 


48  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.     [Chap.iv.  i-n. 

our  Lord's  body  was  really  transported  to  the  temple, 
and,  if  so,  to  what  part  of  it.  But  we  may  point  out 
that  there  is  nothing  in  the  narrative  to  warrant  the 
usual  interpretation  of  this  temptation,  as  being  addressed 
to  the  desire  of  recognition,  and  as  equivalent  to  the 
suggestion  that  our  Lord  should  show  Himself,  by  a 
stupendous  miracle  before  the  multitude,  as  the  Messiah. 
There  is  nothing  about  spectators,  and  no  sign  that  the 
dread  solitude  wrapping  these  two  was  broken  by  others. 
We  must  seek  for  the  point  of  the  second  temptation  in 
another  direction. 

The  very  locality  chosen  for  it  helps  us  to  the  right 
understanding  of  it.  There  were  plenty  of  cliffs  in  the 
desert,  down  which  a  fall  would  have  been  fatal.  Why 
not  choose  one  of  them  ?  The  temple  was  God's 
house ;  the  fitting  scene  for  an  attempt  to  work  disaster 
by  the  abuse  of  religious  ideas.  The  former  temptation 
underlies  this.  That  had  sought  to  move  Jesus  to  cast 
off  His  filial  confidence  ;  this  seeks  to  pervert  that  con 
fidence,  and  through  it  to  lead  Him  to  cast  off  filial 
obedience.  Therefore  "the  devil  quotes  Scripture  for 
his  purpose."  What  could  be  more  religious  than  an 
act  of  daring  based  upon  faith,  which  again  was  based 
on  a  word  which  proceeded  "  out  of  the  mouth  of 
God  ? "  It  is  not  in  the  suppression  of  certain  words 
in  the  quotation  that  Satan's  error  lies.  The  omitted 
words  are  not  material.  What  did  he  hope  to  accom 
plish  by  this  suggestion  ?  If  Jesus  was,  in  bodily  reality, 
standing  on  the  summit  of  the  temple,  the .  tempter, 
profoundly  disbelieving  the  promise,  may  have  thought 
that  the  leap  would  end  his  anxieties  by  the  death  of  his 
rival.  But,  at  any  rate,  he  sought  to  lead  His  faith  into 


Less,  v.j  The  Victory  of  the  King.  49 

wrong  paths,  and  to  incite  to  what  was  really  sinful  self- 
will  under  the  guise  of  absolute  trust. 

Our  Lord's  answer,  again  drawn  from  Deuteronomy, 
strips  off  the  disguise  from  the  action  which  seemed  so 
trustful.  He  changes  the  plural  verb  of  the  original 
passage  into  the  singular,  thus  at  once  taking  as  His  own 
personal  obligation  the  general  command,  and  pointing 
a  sharp  arrow  at  his  foe,  who  was  now  knowingly  or 
unknowingly  so  flagrantly  breaking  that  law.  If  God  had 
bidden  Jesus  cast  Himself  down,  to  do  it  would  have 
been  right.  As  He  had  not,  to  do  it  was  not  faith,  but 
self-will.  To  cast  Himself  into  dangers  needlessly,  and 
then  to  trust  God  (whom  He  had  not  consulted  about 
going  into  them)  to  get  Him  out,  was  to  "tempt  God." 
True  faith  is  ever  accompanied  with  true  docility.  He 
had  come  to  do  His  Father's  will.  A  Divine  "must" 
ruled  His  life.  Was  He  to  begin  His  career  by  throwing 
off  His  allegiance  on  pretext  of  trust  ?  If  the  Captain 
of  our  Salvation  commences  the  campaign  by  rebellion, 
how  can  He  lead  the  rank  and  file  to  that  surrender  of 
their  own  wills,  which  is  victory  ? 

The  lessons  for  us  from  the  second  temptation  are 
weighty.  Faith  may  be  perverted.  It  may  even  lead 
to  abandoning  filial  submission.  God's  promised  pro 
tection  is  available,  not  in  paths  of  our  own  choosing, 
but  only  where  He  has  sent  us.  If  we  take  the  leap 
without  His  command,  we  shall  fall  mangled  on  the 
very  temple  pavement.  It  is  when  we  are  "  in  the  way  " 
which  He  has  prescribed,  that  "  the  angels  of  God " 
whom  He  has  promised  "  meet "  us.  How  many 
scandals  in  the  falls  of  good  men  would  have  been 
avoided,  and  how  many  mad  enterprises  would  have 

4 


So  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew,    [Chap.iv.  i-n. 

been  unattempted,  and  how  much  more  clearly  would 
the  relations  of  filial  faith  and  filial  obedience  have  been 
understood,  if  the  teaching  of  this  second  temptation  had 
been  laid  to  heart ! 

III.  The  final  assault  and  repulse,  on  the  mountain. 

Again  the  scene  changes,  because  the  stress  of  the 
temptation  is  different.  The  "  exceeding  high  moun 
tain  "  is  not  to  be  looked  for  in  our  atlases.  The 
manner  in  which  all  the  glories  of  the  world's  kingdoms 
were  flashed  in  one  dazzling  panorama,  like  an  instan 
taneous  photograph,  before  Christ's  eyes,  is  beyond  our 
knowledge.  We  note  that  Satan  has  no  more  to  say 
about  "  the  Son  of  God."  He  has  been  foiled  in  both 
his  assaults  on  Christ  in  that  character.  If  He  stood 
firm  in  filial  trust  and  in  filial  submission,  there  was  no 
more  to  be  done.  So  the  tempter  tries  new  weapons, 
and  seeks  to  pervert  the  desire  for  that  dominion  over 
the  world  which  was  a  consequence  of  the  Sonship.  He 
has  not  been  able  to  touch  Him  as  Son  ;  can  he  not  spoil 
Him  as  King  ?  They  are  rivals  ;  can  they  not  strike  up 
a  treaty  ?  Jesus  thinks  that  He  is  going  to  reign  as  God's 
viceroy  ;  can  He  not  be  induced,  as  a  much  quicker  way 
of  getting  to  His  end,  to  become  Satan's  ?  Such  a 
scheme  sounds  very  stupid  ;  but  Satan  is  very  stupid,  for 
all  his  wisdom,  and  the  hopeless  folly  of  his  proposal  is 
typical  of  the  absurdities  which  lie  in  all  sins.  There  is 
an  old  play  the  title  of  which  would  be  profane  if  it  were 
not  so  true,  "  The  Devil  is  an  Ass." 

His  boast,  like  all  his  wiles,  is  a  little  truth  and  a  great 
lie.  It  is  true  that  his  servants  do  often  manage  to  climb 
into  thrones  and  other  high  places.  It  is  true  that  beggars, 
and  worse  than  beggars,  ride  on  horseback,  and  that  for 


Less,  v.]  The  Tictory  of  the  King.  51 

princes,  and  better  than  princes,  walking  is  often  the  rule. 
It  is  true  that  the  crowned  saints  of  the  world  might  be 
counted  on  the  fingers.  But,  for  all  that,  the  father  of 
lies  was  like  himself  in  this  promise.  He  did  not  say 
that,  if  he  gives  a  kingdom  to  one  of  his  servants,  he 
takes  it  from  another.  He  did  not  say  that  his  gifts  are 
shams,  and  fade  away  when  the  daylight  comes.  He 
did  not  say  that  he  and  his  are,  after  all,  tools  in  God's 
hands. 

What  was  it  that  he  thought  he  was  appealing  to  in 
Christ  ?  Ambition  ?  He  knew  that  Jesus  was  destined 
to  be  King  of  the  earth,  and  he  blunders  to  the  conclusion 
that  His  reign  is  to  be  such  as  he  could  help  Him  to. 
How  impossible  it  is  for  Satan  to  penetrate  the  depths  of 
that  loving  heart !  How  mole-blind  evil  is  to  the  radiant 
light  of  goodness  !  How  hate  fails  when  it  tries  to 
fathom  love  !  If  all  that  Satan  meant  by  "  the  glory  "  of 
the  world  had  been  Christ's,  he  would  have  been  no 
nearer  his  heart's  desire. 

The  temptation  was  not  only  to  fling  away  the  ideal  of 
his  kingdom,  but  to  reverse  the  means  for  its  establish 
ment.  Neither  temptation  could  originate  within  Christ's 
heart,  but  both  beset  Him  all  His  life.  The  cravings  of 
His  followers,  the  expectations  of  His  race,  the  certainty 
of  an  enthusiastic  response  if  He  would  put  Himself  at 
their  head,  and  the  equal  certainty  of  death  if  He  would 
not,  were  always  urging  Him  to  the  very  same  thing. 

"  There  is  nothing  weaker,"  says  an  old  school-man, 
"  than  the  devil  stripped  naked."  The  mask  is  thrown 
off  at  last,  and  swift  and  smiting  comes  the  gesture  and 
the  word  of  abhorrence,  "  Get  thee  hence,  Satan," — now 
revealed  in  thy  true  colours.  Jesus  still  couches  His 


52  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.     [Chap.  iv.  i-u. 

refusal  in  Scripture  words,  as  if  sheltering  Himself  behind 
its  broad  shield.  It  is  safest  to  meet  temptation,  not  by 
our  own  reasonings  and  thoughts,  but  by  the  words 
which  cannot  lie.  As  He  had  held  unmoved,  by  His 
filial  trust  and  his  filial  submission,  now  He  clings  to 
the  foundation  principle  of  all  religion, — the  exclusive 
worship  and  service  of  God.  His  kingdom  is  to  be  a 
kingdom  of  priests ;  therefore  to  begin  it  by  such  an  act 
would  be  .suicide.  It  is  to  be  the  victorious  antagonist 
of  Satan's  kingdom,  because  it  is  to  lead  all  men  to  wor 
ship  God  alone  ;  therefore  enmity,  not  alliance,  is  to  be 
between  these  two.  Christ's  last  words  are  not  only  His 
final  refusal  of  all  the  baits,  but  the  ringing  proclamation 
of  war  to  the  death,  and  that  a  war  which  will  end  in 
victory.  The  enemy's  quiver  is  empty.  He  feels  that 
he  has  met  more  than  his  match,  so  he  skulks  from  the 
field,  beaten  for  the  first  time  by  having  encountered  a 
heart  which  all  his  fiery  darts  failed  to  inflame,  and 
presaging  yet  more  utter  defeat. 

The  last  temptation  teaches  us  both  the  nature  of 
Christ's  kingdom  and  the  means  of  its  establishment. 
It  is  the  rule  over  men's  hearts  and  wills,  swaying  them 
to  goodness,  and  the  exclusive  worship  and  service  of 
God.  That  being  so,  the  way  to  found  it  follows  of 
course.  It  can  only  be  set  up  by  suffering,  utter  self- 
sacrifice,  gentleness,  and  goodness.  Christ  is  King  of  all 
because  He  is  Servant  of  all.  His  cross  is  His  throne. 
His  realm  is  hearts  softened,  cleansed,  made  gladly 
obedient,  and  growingly  like  Himself.  For  such  a  King, 
weapons  of  force  are  impossible,  and  for  His  subjects 
the  same  law  holds.  They  have  often  tried  to  fight  for 
Christ  with  the  devil's  weapons,  to  make  compliance 


Less,  v.]  The  Victory  of  the  King.  53 

with  him  for  ends  which  they  thought  good,  to  keep 
terms  with  evil,  or  to  adopt  worldly  policy,  craft,  or  force. 
They  have  never  succeeded,  and,  thank  God !  they 
never  will. 

That  duel  was  fought  for  us.  There  we  all  conquered, 
if  we  will  hold  fast  by  Him  who  conquered  then,  and 
then  taught  our  "hands  to  war"  and  our  "fingers  to 
fight."  The  strong  man  is  bound.  The  spoiling  of  his 
house  follows  of  course,  and  is  but  a  question  of  time. 


LESSON   VI. 


The  Early  Welcome  and  the  First  Ministers  of  the  King. 


MATTHEW 
t 

17.  "From    that    time   Jesus 
began    to   preach,   and    to   say, 
Repent :    for    the    kingdom    of 
heaven  is  at  hand. 

18.  And  Jesus,   walking   by 
the    sea    of    Galilee,    saw    two 
brethren,    Simon    called    Peter, 
and  Andrew  his  brother,  cast 
ing  a  net  into  the  sea :  for  they 
were  fishers. 

19.  And  He  saith  unto  them, 
Follow    Me,   and    I    will    make 
you  fishers  of  men. 

20.  And     they     straightway 
left    their    nets,    and    followed 
Him. 

2 1 .  And  going  on  from  thence, 
He    saw   other   two   brethren, 
James  the  son  of  Zebedee,  and 
John  his  brother,  in  a  ship  with 
Zebedee  their  father,  mending 
their     nets  ;     and     He    called 
them. 

22.  And     they    immediately 


left  the  ship  and  their  father, 
and  followed  Him. 

23.  And    Jesus    went    about 
all    Galilee,    teaching    in    their 
synagogues,  and  preaching  the 
gospel     of    the    kingdom,    and 
healing  all  manner  of  sickntss 
and  all  manner  of  disease  among 
the  people. 

24.  And      His     fame     went 
throughout  all  Syria  :  and  they 
brought  unto  Him  all  sick  people 
that   were    taken    with    divers 
diseases     and     torments,     and 
those    which    were     possessed 
with  devils,   and    those   which 
were   lunatick,  and   those  that 
had  the  palsy  :  and  He  healed 
them. 

25.  And  there  followed  Him 
great  multitudes  of  people  from 
Galilee,    and    from    Decapolis, 
and  from  Jerusalem,  and  from 
Judaea,  and  from  beyond  Jordan." 


IN  these  verses  we  have  a  summary  of  our  Lord's  early 
Galilean  ministry.     The  events  are  so  presented  and 
combined  as  to  give  an  impression  as  of  a  triumphal 
progress  of  the  newly   anointed  Monarch.     He    sweeps 
through  the  northern  regions,  everywhere  exercising  the 

54 


Less,  vi.]  The  Early  Welcome.  55 

twofold  office  of  teaching  and  healing,  and  everywhere 
followed  by  eager  crowds.  This  joyous  burst  of  the  new 
power,  like  some  strong  spring  leaping  into  the  sunshine, 
and  this  rush  of  popular  enthusiasm,  are  meant  to  heighten 
the  impression  of  the  subsequent  hostility  of  the  people. 
The  King  welcomed  at  first  is  crucified  at  last.  It  was 
"  roses,  roses,  all  the  way  "  in  these  early  days,  but  they 
withered  soon.  There  are  three  points  in  these  verses, 
—the  King  acting  as  His  own  herald  ;  the  King  calling 
His  first  servants  ;  and  the  King  wielding  His  power  and 
welcomed  by  His  subjects. 

I.  In  verse  17  we  have  a  striking  picture  of  the  King 
as  His  own  herald.  The  word  rendered  "  preach  "  of 
course  means,  literally,  proclaiming  as  a  herald.  It  is 
remarkable  that  this  earliest  phase  of  our  Lord's  teaching 
is  described  in  the  same  words  as  John's  preaching. 
The  stern  voice  was  silenced.  Instead  of  the  free  wilder 
ness,  John  had  now  the  gloomy  walls  of  Machamis  for 
the  bound  of  his  activity.  But  Jesus  takes  up  his 
message,  though  with  a  difference.  The  severe  imagery 
of  the  axe,  the  fan,  the  fire,  is  not  repeated,  as  it  would 
seem.  Sterner  words  than  John's  could  fall  hot  from  the 
lips  into  which  grace  was  poured  ;  but  the  time  for  these 
was  not  yet  come.  It  may  seem  singular  that  Christ 
should  have  spoken  of  the  kingdom,  and  been  silent 
concerning  the  King.  But  such  silence  was  only  of  a 
piece  with  the  reticence  which  marked  His  whole  teach 
ing,  and  was  a  sign  of  His  wise  adaption  of  His  words  to 
the  capacity  of  His  hearers,  as  well  as  of  His  lowliness. 
He  veils  His  royalty  by  deigning  to  be  His  own  herald  ; 
by  substituting  the  proclamation  of  the  abstract,  the 
kingdom,  for  the  concrete,  the  King ;  by  seeming  to 


56  The  Gospel  of  St,  Matthew.    [Chap.  iv.  17-25. 

careless  hearers  to  be  but  the  prolongation  of  the  fore 
runner's  message ;  by  the  simple,  remote  region  which 
He  chose  for  His  earliest  work.  The  belief  that  the 
kingdom  was  at  hand  was  equally  necessary,  and  repent 
ance  equally  indispensable  as  preparation  for  it,  whoever 
the  King  might  be.  The  same  law  of  congruity  between 
message  and  hearers,  which  He  enjoined  on  His  followers, 
when  He  bade  them  be  careful  where  they  flung  their 
pearls,  and  which  governed  His  own  fullest  final  reve 
lations  to  His  most  trusted  friends,  when  He  said,  "  I 
have  yet  many  things  to  say  unto  you,  but  ye  cannot 
carry  them  now,"  moulded  His  first  words  to  the  excited 
but  ignorant  crowds. 

II.  The  King's  mandate  summoning  His  servants.  The 
call  of  the  first  four  disciples  is  so  told  as  to  make 
prominent  these  points, — the  brotherhood  of  the  two 
pairs,  their  occupation  at  the  moment  of  their  call,  the 
brief,  authoritative  word  of  Christ,  His  investiture  of 
them  with  new  functions,  which  yet  in  some  sense  were 
the  prolongation  of  the  old,  their  unhesitating  instant 
aneous  obedience,  and  willing  abandonment  of  their  all. 
These  things  all  help  the  impression  of  regal  power,  and 
do  something  to  explain  the  nature  of  the  kingdom,  and 
the  heart  of  the  King.  Matthew  does  not  seem  to  have 
known  of  the  previous  intercourse  of  the  four  with  Jesus, 
as  recorded  in  John  i.  His  narrative,  taken  alone, 
would  lay  stress  on  the  strange  influence  wielded  by 
Jesus  over  these  busy  fishermen.  But  that  influence  is 
no  less  remarkable,  and  is  more  explicable,  by  taking 
John's  supplemental  account  into  consideration.  It  tells 
us  that  one  brother  of  each  pair — namely  Andrew,  and 
probably  John, — had  sought  Jesus  on  the  Baptist's  testi- 


Less,  vi.]  The  Early  Welcome.  57 

mony,  and  in  that  never-to-be-forgotten  night  had  acquired 
the  conviction  that  He  was  the  King  of  Israel.  It  tells 
us,  too,  that  Andrew  first  found  his  own  brother,  Simon ; 
from  which  we  may  infer  that  the  other  one  of  the  two 
next  found  his  brother  James,  and  that  each  brought  his 
own  brother  to  Jesus.  The  bond  of  discipleship  was 
then  riveted.  But  apparently,  when  Jesus  went  up  to 
Jerusalem  on  that  first  journey  recorded  only  by  John's 
Gospel,  they  went  back  to  their  fishing,  and  waited  for 
His  further  call.  It  comes  in  the  manner  which  Matthew 
describes.  The  background,  which  John  enables  us  to 
fill  in,  shows  us  that  their  following  was  no  sudden  blind 
impulse,  but  the  deliberate  surrender  of  men  who  knew 
well  what  they  were  doing,  though  they  had  not  fathomed 
the  whole  truth  as  to  His  kingdom,  and  their  place  in  it. 
They  knew,  at  any  rate,  that  He  was  the  Messiah,  and 
that  they  were  called  by  a  voice,  which  they  ought  to 
obey,  to  be  His  soldiers  and  partisans.  They  could  not 
but  know  that  the  call  meant  danger,  hardship,  conflict. 
They  rallied  to  the  call,  as  soldiers  might  when  the 
commander  honours  them  by  reading  out  their  names,  as 
picked  for  leaders  of  the  storming  party. 

Was  this  the  same  incident  which  St.  Luke  narrates  as 
following  the  first  miraculous  draught  of  fishes  ?  That  is 
one  of  the  difficulties  in  harmonizing  the  synoptic  narra 
tives  which  will  always  divide  opinions.  On  the  whole, 
I  incline  to  think  it  most  natural  to  answer  "  no."  The 
reasons  would  take  us  too  far  afield.  But  accepting  that 
view,  we  may  note  how  many  stages  Jesus  led  this  group 
of  His  disciples  through  before  they  were  fully  recognized 
as  apostles.  First  there  was  their  attachment  to  Him  as 
disciples,  which  in  no  degree  interfered  with  their  trade. 


58  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.  iv.  17-25. 

Then  came  this  call  to  more  close  attendance  on  Him, 
which,  however,  was  probably  still  somewhat  intermittent. 
Then  followed  the  call  recorded  by  Luke,  which  finally 
tore  them  from  their  homes ;  and,  last  of  all,  their 
appointment  as  apostles.  At  each  stage  they  "  might 
have  had  opportunity  to  have  returned."  Their  vocation 
in  the  kingdom  dawns  on  them  slowly.  TJiey  and  we 
are  led  on,  by  little'^and  little  anch  little,  to  posts  and 
tasks  of  which  we  do  not  dream  at  the  beginning.  Duty 
opens  before  t^ie  docile^  Jieart  bit  by  bit.  Abram  is  led 
to  Haran,  and  only  there  learns  his  ultimate  destination. 
ObeSflnce  is  rewarded  by  the  summons  to  more  complete 
surrender,  which  is  also  fuller  possession  of  him  for 
whom  the  surrender  is  made. 

"The  word  of  a  king  is  with  power."  Christ's  call  is 
authoritative  in  its  brevity.  All  duty  lies  in  "  Come  ye 
after  Me."  He  does  not  need  to  use  arguments.  From 
the  very  first  this  meek  and  lowly  Man  assumes  a  tone 
which  in  other  lips  we  call  arrogant.  His  style  is  royal. 
His  mouth  is  autocratic.  He  knows  that  He  has  the 
right  to  command.  And,  strangely  enough,  the  world 
admits  the  right,  and  finds  nothing  unworthy  of  His 
meekness — a  meekness  of  which  He  was  fully  conscious, 
which  is  another  paradox — in  this  unconditional  claim  of 
absolute  submission  to  His  curt  orders.  What  is  the 
explanation  of  this  tone  of  authority  ?  How  comes  it 
that  the  kingdom  which  is  liberty  is,  from  its  very  founda 
tion,  an  absolute  despotism?  That  same  peremptory 
summons  reaches  beyond  these  four  fishermen  to  us  all. 
They  were  the  first  to  hear  it,  and  continued  to  hold 
pre-eminence  among  the  disciples.  For  they  make  up 
the  first  group  of  the  three  quaternions  into  which  the 


Less,  vi.]  The  Early  Welcome.  59 

list  of  the  apostles  is  always  divided.  But  the  very  same 
voice  speaks  to  us,  and  we  are  as  truly  summoned  by  the 
King  to  be  His  servants  and  soldiers  as  weie  they. 

Their  prompt  self-surrendering  response  is  the  witness 
of  the  power  over  their  hearts  which  Jesus  had  won. 
The  one  pair  of  brothers  left  their  net  floating  in  the 
water ;  the  other  left  their  father  with  the  mesh  and  the 
twine  in  his  old  hands.  It  was  not  much  wealth  to  leave. 
But  he  surrendeps  much  who  surrenders  all,  however 
little  that  all  may  be  ;  and  he  surrenders  nothing  who 
keeps  back  anything.  One  sweet  portion  of  their  earthly 
happiness  He  left  them  to  enjoy,  heightened  by  disciple- 
ship,  for  each  had  his  brother  by  his  side,  and  the 
natural  affection  was  ennobled  by  common  faith  and 
service.  If  Zebedee  was  left,  John  still  had  James. 
True,  Herod's  sword  cut  their  union  asunder,  and  James 
died  first,  and  John  last  of  the  twelve  ;  but  years  of 
happy  brotherhood  were  to  come  before  then.  So 
both  the  surrender  which  outwardly  gives  up  possessions 
or  friends,  and  that  which  keeps  them,  sanctified  by 
being  held  and  used  as  for  and  from  him,  were  exempli 
fied  in  the  swift  obedience  of  these  four  to  the  call  of  the 
King. 

"  I  will  make  you  fishers  of  men."  That  shows  a 
kindly  wish  to  make  as  little  as  may  be  of  the  change  of 
occupation.  Their  old  craft  is  to  be  theirs  still,  only  in 
nobler  form.  The  patience,  the  brave  facing  of  the 
storm  and  the  night,  the  observance  of  the  indications 
which  taught  where  to  cast,  the  perseverance  which 
toiled  all  night,  though  not  a  fin  glistened  in  the  net, 
would  all  find  place  in  their  new  career.  Nor  are  these 
words  less  royal  than  was  the  call,  They  contain  pro- 


60  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.  iv.  17-25. 

found  hints  as  to  the  nature  of  the  kingdom  which  could 
scarcely  be  apprehended  at  first.  But  this  at  least 
would  be  clear,  that  Jesus  summoned  them  to  service,  to 
gather  in  men  out  of  the  dreary  waves  of  worldly  care 
and  toil,  into  a  kingdom  of  stable  rest,  and  that  by 
summoning  them  to  service  He  endowed  them  with 
power.  So  He  does  still.  All  whom  He  summons  to 
follow  Him  are  meant  by  Him  to  be  fishers  of  men.  It 
was  not  as  apostles,  but  as  simple  disciples,  that  these 
four  received  this  charge  and  ability.  The  same  com 
mand  and  fitness  are  given  to  all  Christians.  Following 
Christ,  surrender,  the  obligation  of  effort  to  win  others, 
capacity  to  do  so,  belong  to  all  the  subjects  of  Christ's 
kingdom. 

III.  The  triumphal  progress  of  the  King.  Our 
evangelist  evidently  masses  together,  without  regard  to 
chronological  order,  the  broad  features  of  the  early 
Galilean  ministry.  He  paints  it  as  a  time  of  joyful 
activity,  of  universal  recognition,  of  swift  and  far-spreading 
fame.  We  do  not  exaggerate  the  impression  of  victorious 
publicity  which  they  give,  when  we  call  these  closing 
verses  the  record  of  the  King's  triumphal  progress  through 
His  dominions.  Observe  the  reiterated  use  of  "  all," — all 
Galilee,  all  manner  of  sickness  and  all  manner  of 'disease, 
all  Syria,  all  that  were  sick.  Matthew  labours  to  convey 
the  feeling  of  universal  stir  and  wide-reaching,  all- 
embracing  welcome.  Observe,  too,  that  the  activity  of 
Christ  is  confined  to  Galilee,  but  the  fame  of  Him  crosses 
the  border  into  heathendom.  The  King  stays  on  His 
own  territory,  but  He  conquers  beyond  the  frontier. 
Syria,  and  the  mostly  heathen  Decapolis,  and  Peraea 
("  beyond  Jordan  "),  are  moved.  The  odour  of  the  oint- 


Less.  VI.]  The  Early  Welcome.  61 

ment  not  only  fills  the  house,  but  enriches  the  scentless 
outside  air.  The  prophecy  of  the  magi  is  beginning  to 
be  fulfilled.  From  its  first  preaching,  the  kingdom  is 
diffusive.  Note,  too,  the  contrast  between  John's 
ministry  and  Christ's,  in  that  the  former  stayed  in  one 
spot,  and  the  crowds  had  to  go  out  to  him,  while  the 
very  genius  of  Christ's  mission  expressed  itself  in  that 
this  shepherd  King  sought  the  sad  and  sick,  and  "  went 
about  in  all  Galilee."  Observe,  too,  that  He  first  teaches 
and  preaches  the  good  news  of  the  kingdom,  before  He 
heals.  John's  proclamation  of  the  kingdom  had  been  so 
charged  with  threatenings  and  mingled  with  fire  that  it 
could  scarcely  be  called  a  "  gospel " ;  but  here  that 
joyous  wrord,  used  for  the  first  time,  is  in  place.  As  the 
tidings  came  from  Christ's  lips,  they  were  good  tidings, 
and  to  proclaim  them  was  His  first  task.  The  miracles 
of  healing  came  after.  They  were  not  "  the  bell  before 
the  sermon, "  but  the  benediction  after  it.  They  flowred 
from  Christ  in  rich  abundance.  The  eager  receptiveness 
of  the  people,  ignorant  as  it  was,  was  greater  then  than 
ever  afterwards.  Therefore  the  flow  of  miraculous  power 
was  more  unimpeded.  But  it  may  be  questioned 
whether  we  generally  have  an  adequate  notion  of  the 
immense  number  of  Christ's  miracles.  Those  recorded 
are  but  a  small  proportion  of  those  done.  There  were 
more  grapes  in  the  vineyards  of  Eshcol  than  the 
messengers  brought  in  evidence  to  the  camp.  Our 
Lord's  miracles  are  told  by  units  ;  they  seem  to  have 
been  wrought  by  scores.  These  early  ones  were  not 
only  attestations  of  His  claim  to  be  the  King,  but 
illustrations  of  the  nature  of  His  kingdom.  He  had 
conquered  and  bound  the  strong  man,  and  now  He  was 


62  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.  iv.  17-25. 

"  spoiling  His  house."  They  were  parables  of  His  higher 
work  on  men's  souls,  which  He  comes  to  cleanse  from 
the  oppression  of  demons,  from  the  foamings  of  epilepsy, 
from  impotence  to  good.  They  were  tokens  of  the 
inexhaustible  fountain  of  power,  and  of  the  swift  and 
equally  inexhaustible  treasures  of  sympathy  which  dwelt 
in  Him.  They  were  His  first  trophies  in  His  holy  war, 
His  first  gifts  to  His  subjects. 

Thus  compassed  with  enthusiasm,  and  shedding  on 
the  wearied  new  hopes,  and  on  the  sick  unwonted  health, 
and  stirring  in  sluggish  souls  some  aspirations  that 
greatened  and  inspired,  the  King  appeared.  But  no 
illusions  deceived  His  calm  prescience.  From  the  be 
ginning  He  knew  the  path  which  stretched  before  Him  ; 
and  while  the  transient  loyalty  of  the  ignorant  shouted 
hosannas  around  His  steps,  He  saw  the  cross  at  the  end 
and  the  sight  did  not  make  Him  falter. 


LESSON   VII. 
The    New    Sinai. 

MATTHEW  v.   1-16. 


I.  "And  seeing  the  multi 
tudes,  He  went  up  into  a  moun 
tain  :  and  when  He  was  set, 
His  disciples  came  unto  Him  : 

2.  And      He      opened      His 
mouth,  and  taught  them,  say- 

ing> 

3.  Blessed    are   the   poor   in 
spirit :  for  theirs  is  the  kingdom 
of  heaven. 

4.  Blessed     are      they     that 
mourn  :  for  they  shall  be  com 
forted. 

5.  Blessed  are  the  meek  :  for 
they  shall  inherit  the  earth. 

6.  Blessed  are  they  which  do 
hunger  and   thirst   after  right 
eousness  :  for  they  shall  be  filled. 

7.  Blessed  are  the  merciful : 
for  they  shall  obtain  mercy. 

8.  Blessed    are    the    pure   in 
heart ;  for  they  shall  see  God. 

9.  Blessed     are    the    peace 
makers  :  for  they  shall  be  called 
the  children  of  God. 

10.  Blessed   are   they  which 
are    persecuted    for    righteous 
ness'    sake :     for   theirs   is   the 
kingdom  of  heaven. 


11.  Blessed     are     ye,    when 
men  shall  revile  you,  and  per 
secute  you,   and    shall    say  all 
manner    of    evil     against    you 
falsely,  for  my  sake. 

12.  Rejoice,  and   be   exceed 
ing   glad  :    for    great    is    your 
reward  in  heaven  :  for  so  per 
secuted  they  the  prophets  which 
were  before  you. 

13.  Ye    are    the   salt   of  the 
earth  :  but  if  the  salt  have  lost 
his  savour,  wherewith  shall  it 
be    salted  ?    it    is    thenceforth 
good    for    nothing,    but    to    be 
cast    out,    and    to    be    trodden 
under  foot  of  men. 

14.  Ye  are  the  light   of  the 
world.     A  city  that  is  set  on  an 
hill  cannot  be  hid. 

15.  Neither  do  men  light    a 
candle,     and     put    it    under    a 
bushel,    but   on    a    candlestick; 
and  it  giveth  light  unto  all  that 
are  in  the  house. 

1 6.  Let  your   light  so  shine 
before  men,  that  they  may  see 
your   good   works,  and   glorify 
your  Father  which  is  in  heaven." 


THE  unnamed  mountain  somewhere  on  the  sea  of 
Galilee   is   the  Sinai  of  the  new  covenant.     The 
contrast  between  the  savage  desolation  of  the  wilderness 

63 


64  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.  v.  1-16. 

and  the  smiling  beauty  of  the  sunny  slope  near  the  haunts 
of  men  symbolizes  the  contrast  in  the  genius  of  the  two 
codes,  given  from  each.  There  God  came  down  in 
majesty,  and  the  cloud  hid  Him  from  the  people's  gaze  ; 
here  Jesus  sits  amidst  His  followers,  God  with  us.  The 
King  proclaims  the  fundamental  lawrs  of  His  kingdom, 
and  reveals  much  of  its  nature  by  the  fact  that  He 
begins  by  describing  the  characteristics  of  its  subjects, 
as  well  as  by  the  fact  that  the  description  is  cast  in  the 
form  of  beatitudes. 

We  must  leave  unsettled  the  question  as  to  the  relation 
between  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount  and  the  shorter  edition 
of  part  of  it  given  by  Luke,  only  pointing  out  that  in  this 
first  part  of  Matthew's  Gospel  we  are  evidently  presented 
with  general  summaries  ;  as,  for  example,  the  summary 
of  the  Galilean  ministry  in  the  previous  verses,  and  the 
grand  procession  of  miracles,  which  follows  in  chapters 
eight  and  nine.  It  is  therefore  no  violent  supposition 
that  here  too  the  evangelist  has  brought  together,  as 
specimens  of  our  Lord's  teaching,  words  which  were  not 
all  spoken  at  the  same  time.  His  description  of  the 
Galilean  ministry  in  Matthew  iv.  23,  as  "  teaching  "  and 
"healing,"  governs  the  arrangement  of  His  materials 
from  chapter  five  to  the  end  of  chapter  nine.  First 
comes  the  sermon,  then  the  miracles  follow. 

The  beatitudes,  as  a  whole,  are  a  set  of  paradoxes  to 
the  "  mind  of  the  flesh."  They  were  meant  to  tear  away 
the  foolish  illusions  of  the  multitude  as  to  the  nature  of 
the  kingdom ;  and  they  must  have  disgusted  and  turned 
away  many  would-be  sharers  in  it.  They  are  like  a 
dash  of  cold  water  on  the  fiery,  impure  enthusiasms 
which  were  eager  for  a  kingdom  of  gross  delights  and 


Less,  vn.j  The  New  Sinai.  65 

vulgar  conquest.  And,  no  doubt,  Jesus  intended  them 
to  act  like  Gideon's  test,  and  to  sift  out  those  whose 
appetite  for  carnal  good  was  uppermost.  But  they  were 
tests  simply  because  they  embodied  everlasting  truths 
as  to  the  characters  of  His  subjects.  Our  narrow  space 
allows  of  only  the  most  superficial  treatment  of  these 
deep  words. 

I.  The  foundation  of  all  is  laid  in  poverty  of  spirit. 
The  word  rendered  "poor"  does  not  only  signify  one 
in  a  condition  of  want,  but  rather  one  who  is  aware  of 
the  condition,  and  seeks  relief.  If  we  may  refer  to 
Latin  words  here,  it  is  mendicus  rather  than  "  pauper," 
a  beggar  rather  than  a  poor  man,  who  is  meant.  So 
that  to  be  poor  in  spirit  is  to  be  in  inmost  reality  con 
scious  of  need,  of  emptiness,  of  dependence  on  God, 
of  demerit ;  the  true  estimate  of  self,  as  blind,  evil, 
weak,  is  intended ;  the  characteristic  tone  of  feeling 
pointed  to  is  self-abnegation,  like  that  of  the  publican 
smiting  his  breast,  or  that  of  the  disease-weakened, 
hunger-tortured  prodigal,  or  that  of  the  once  self- 
righteous  Paul,  "  O  wretched  man  that  I  am  !  "  People 
who  do  not  like  evangelical  teaching  sometimes  say, 
"  Give  me  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount."  So  say  I.  Only 
let  us  take  all  of  it ;  and  if  we  do,  we  shall  come,  as  we 
shall  have  frequent  occasion  to  point  out  in  subsequent 
lessons,  to  something  uncommonly  like  the  evangelical 
theology  to  which  it  is  sometimes  set  up  as  antithetic. 
For  Christ  begins  His  portraiture  of  a  citizen  of  the 
kingdom  with  the  consciousness  of  want  and  sin.  All 
the  rest  of  the  morality  of  the  sermon  is  founded  on  this. 
It  is  the  root  of  all  that  is  heavenly  and  divine  in  cha 
racter.  So  this  teaching  is  dead  against  the  modern 

5 


66  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.  v.  1-25. 

pagan  doctrine  of  self-reliance,  and  really  embodies  the 
very  principle  for  the  supposed  omission  of  which  some 
folk  like  this  sermon  ;  namely,  that  our  proud  self-con 
fidence  must  be  broken  down  before  God  can  do  any 
good  with  us,  or  we  can  enter  His  kingdom.  The 
promises  attached  to  the  beatitudes  are  in  each  case 
the  results  which  flow  from  the  quality,  rather  than  the 
rewards  arbitrarily  given  for  it.  So  here,  the  possession 
of  the  kingdom  comes  by  consequence  from  poverty  of 
spirit.  Of  course,  such  a  kingdom  as  could  be  so 
inherited  was  the  opposite  of  that  which  the  narrow  and 
fleshly  nationalism  of  the  Jews  wanted,  and  these  first 
words  must  have  cooled  many  incipient  disciples.  The 
"  kingdom  of  heaven  "  is  the  rule  of  God  through  Christ. 
It  is  present  wrherever  wills  bow  to  Him  ;  it  is  future  in 
complete  realisation  in  the  heaven,  from  which  it  comes, 
and  to  which,  like  its  King,  it  belongs,  even  while  on 
earth.  Obviously,  its  subjects  can  only  be  those  who 
feel  their  dependence,  and  in  poverty  of  spirit  have  cast 
off  self-will  and  self-reliance.  "  Theirs  is  the  kingdom  " 
does  not  mean  "  they  shall  rule/'  but  "  of  them  shall  be 
its  subjects."  True,  they  shall  rule  in  the  perfected  form 
of  it ;  but  the  first  and,  in  a  real  sense,  the  only,  blessed 
ness  is  to  obey  God ;  and  that  blessedness  can  only  come 
when  we  have  learned  poverty  of  spirit,  because  we  see 
ourselves  as  in  need  of  all  things. 

II.  Each  beatitude  springs  from  the  preceding,  and 
all  twined  together  make  an  ornament  of  grace  upon  the 
neck,  a  chain  of  jewels.  The  second  sounds  a  more 
violent  paradox  than  even  the  first.  Sorrowing  is  blessed. 
This,  of  course,  cannot  mean  mere  sorrow  as  such.  That 
may  or  may  not  be  a  blessing.  Grief  makes  men  worse 


Less,  vii.]  The  New  Sinai.  67 

quite  as  often  as  it  makes  them  better.  Its  waves  often 
flow  over  us  like  the  sea  over  marshes,  leaving  them  as 
salt  and  barren  as  it  found  them.  Nor  is  sorrow  always  sure 
of  comfort.  We  must  necessarily  understand  the  word  here 
so  as  to  bring  it  into  harmony  with  the  context,  and  link 
it  with  the  former  beatitude  as  flowing  from  it,  as  well  as 
with  the  succeeding.  The  only  intelligible  explanation 
is  that  this  sorrow  arises  from  the  contemplation  of  the 
same  facts  concerning  self  as  lead  to  poverty  of  spirit, 
and  is,  in  fact,  the  emotional  side  of  the  same  disposition. 
He  who  takes  the  true  measure  of  himself  cannot  but 
sorrow  over  the  frightful  gulf  between  what  he  should 
and  might  be,  and  what  he  is,  for  he  knows  that  there 
is  more  than  misfortune  or  unavoidable  creatural  weak 
ness  at  work.  The  grim  reality  of  sin  has  to  be  reckoned. 
Personal  responsibility  and  guilt  are  facts.  The  soul  that 
has  once  seen  its  own  past  as  it  is,  and  looked  steadily 
clown  into  the  depths  of  its  own  being,  cannot  choose 
but  "  mourn."  Such  contrition  underlies  all  moral  pro 
gress.  The  ethical  teaching  of  the  Sermon  on  the 
Mount  puts  these  two,  poverty  of  spirit  and  tears  for 
sin,  at  the  foundation.  Do  its  admirers  lay  that  fact 
to  heart  ?  This  is  Christ's  account  of  discipleship.  We 
have  to  creep  through  a  narrow  gate,  which  we  shall  not 
pass  but  on  our  knees,  and  leaving  all  our  treasures  out 
side.  But  once  through,  we  are  in  a  great  temple  with 
far-reaching  aisles  and  lofty  roof.  Such  sorrow  is  sure 
of  comfort.  Other  sorrow  is  not.  The  comfort  it  needs 
is  the  assurance  of  forgiveness  and  cleansing,  and  that 
assurance  has  never  been  sought  from  the  King  in  vain. 
The  comfort  is  filtered  to  us  in  drops  here  \  it  pours  in 
a  flood  hereafter.  Blessed  the  sorrow  which  leads  to 


68  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.  v.  1-25. 

experience  of  the  tender  touch  of  the  hand  that  wipes 
away  tears  from  the  face,  and  plucks  evil  from  the  heart ! 
Blessed  the  mourning,  which  prepares  for  the  festal 
garland  and  the  oil  of  gladness  and  the  robe  of  praise, 
instead  of  ashes  on  the  head  and  sackcloth  on  the 
spirit ! 

III.  Meekness  here  seems  to  be  used  principally  as 
exercised  to  men,  and  thus  constitutes  the  first  of  the 
social  virtues,  which  henceforward  alternate  with  those 
having  exclusive  reference  to  God.  It  is  the  grace  which 
opposes  patient  gentleness  to  hatred,  injury,  or  anta 
gonism.  The  prominence  given  to  it  in  Christ's  teaching 
is  one  of  the  peculiarities  of  Christian  morals,  and  is  a 
standing  condemnation  of  much  so-called  Christianity. 
Pride  and  anger  and  self-assertion  and  retaliation  flaunt 
in  fine  names,  and  are  called  manly  virtues.  Meekness  is 
smiled  at,  or  trampled  on,  and  the  men  who  exercise 
it  are  called  "  Quakers,"  and  "  poor-spirited,"  and 
"chicken-hearted,"  and  the  like.  Social  life  among 
us  is  in  flagrant  contradiction  of  this  beatitude ;  and 
as  for  national  life,  all  "  Christian  nations "  agree  that 
to  apply  Christ's  precept  to  it  would  be  absurd  and 
suicidal.  He  said  that  the  meek  should  inherit  the 
earth ;  statesmen  say  that  the  only  way  to  keep  a  country 
is  to  be  armed  to  the  teeth,  and  let  no  man  insult  its 
flag  with  impunity.  There  does  not  seem  much  room 
for  "a  spirited  foreign  policy  "  or  for  "  proper  regard  to 
one's  own  dignity"  inside  this  beatitude,  does  there? 
But  notice  that  this  meekness  naturally  follows  the  pre 
ceding  dispositions.  He  who  knows  himself,  and  has 
learned  the  depth  of  his  own  evil,  will  not  be  swift  to 
blaze  up  at  slights  or  wrongs.  The  true  meekness  is 


Less.  VII.]  The  New  Sinai.  69 

not  mere  natural  disposition,  but  the  direct  outcome  of 
poverty  of  spirit  and  its  consequent  sorrow.  So,  it  is  a 
test  of  their  reality.  Many  a  man  will  indulge  in  con 
fessions  of  sin,  and  crackle  up  in  sputtering  heat  of 
indignation  at  some  slight  or  offence.  If  he  does,  his 
lowly  words  have  had  little  meaning,  and  the  benediction 
of  these  promises  will  come  scantily  to  his  heart. 

Does  Christ  mean  merely  to  say  that  meek  men  will 
get  landed  property  ?  Is  there  not  a  present  inheritance 
of  the  earth  by  them,  though  they  may  not  own  a  foot 
of  it  ?  They  have  the  world  who  enjoy  it,  whom  it  helps 
nearer  God,  who  see  Him  in  it,  to  whom  it  is  the  field 
for  service,  and  the  means  for  growing  character.  But 
in  the  future  the  kingdom  of  heaven  will  be  a  kingdom 
of  the  earth,  and  the  meek  saints  shall  reign  with  the 
King  who  is  meek  and  lowly  of  heart. 

IV.  Righteousness  is  conformity  to  the  will  of  God, 
or  moral  perfection.  Hunger  and  thirst  are  energetic 
metaphors  for  passionate  desire,  and  imply  that  right 
eousness  is  the  true  nourishment  of  the  Spirit.  Every 
longing  of  the  noble  spirit  is  blessed.  Aspiration  after 
the  unreached  is  the  salt  of  all  lofty  life.  It  is  better  to 
be  conscious  of  want  than  to  be  content.  There  are 
hungers  which  are  all  unblessed,  greedy  appetites  for  the 
swine's  husks,  which  are  misery  when  unsatisfied,  and 
disgust  when  satiated.  But  we  are  meant  to  be  righteous, 
and  shall  not  desire  it  in  vain.  God  never  sends  mouths 
but  He  sends  meat  to  fill  them.  Such  longings  prophesy 
their  fruition. 

Notice  that  this  hunger  follows  the  experience  of  the 
former  beatitudes.  It  is  the  issue  of  poverty  of  spirit, 
and  of  that  blessed  sorrow.  Observe,  too,  that  the 


70  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.  v.  1-25. 

desire  after,  and  not  the  possession  or  achievement  of, 
righteousness,  is  blessed.  Is  not  this  the  first  hint  of 
the  Christian  teaching  that  we  do  not  work  out  or  win, 
but  receive,  it?  God  gives  it.  Our  attitude  towards 
that  gift  should  be  earnest  longing.  Such  a  blessed 
hungerer  shall  "  receive  .  .  .  righteousness  from  the  God 
of  his  salvation."  The  certainty  that  he  will  rests  at  last 
on  the  faithfulness  of  God,  who  cannot  but  respond  to 
all  desires  which  He  inspires.  They  are  premonitions 
of  His  purposes,  like  rosy  clouds  that  run  before  the 
chariot  of  the  sunrise.  The  desire  to  be  righteous  is 
already  righteousness  in  heart  and  will,  and  reveals  the 
true  bent  of  the  soul.  The  realisation  in  life  is  a  question 
of  time.  The  progressive  fulfilment  here  points  to 
completeness  in  heaven,  when  we  shall  behold  His  face 
in  righteousness,  and  be  satisfied  when  'we  awake  in  His 
likeness. 

V.  Again,  we  have  a  grace  which  is  exercised  to  men. 
Mercy  is  more  than  meekness.  That  implied  opposition, 
and  was  largely  negative.  This  does  not  regard  the 
conduct  of  others  at  all,  and  is  really  love  in  exercise 
to  the  needy,  especially  the  unworthy.  It  embraces  pity, 
charitable  forbearance,  beneficence,  and  is  revealed  in 
acts,  in  words,  in  tears.  It  is  blessed  in  itself.  A  life 
of  selfishness  is  hell  ;  a  life  of  mercy  is  sweet  with  some 
savour  of  heaven.  It  is  the  consequence  of  mercy 
received  from  God.  Poverty  of  spirit,  sorrow,  hunger 
after  righteousness,  bring  deep  experiences  of  God's 
gentle  forbearance  and  bestowing  love,  and  will  make  us 
like  Him  in  proportion  as  they  are  real.  Our  merciful 
ness,  then,  is  a  reflection  from  His.  His  ought  to  be 
the  measure  and  pattern  of  ours  in  depth,  scope,  extent 


Less,  vii.]  The  New  Sinai.  71 

of  self-sacrifice,  and  freeness  of  its  gifts.  A  stringent 
requirement ! 

Our  exercise  of  mercy  is  the  condition  of  our  receiving 
it.  On  the  whole,  the  world  gives  us  back,  as  a  mirror 
does,  the  reflection  of  our  own  faces  ;  and  merciful  men 
generally  get  what  they  give.  But  that  is  a  law  with 
many  exceptions,  and  Jesus  means  more  than  that. 
Merciful  men  get  mercy  from  God,— not,  of  course,  that 
we  deserve  mercy  by  being  merciful.  That  is  a  con 
tradiction  in  terms  ;  for  mercy  is  what  we  do  not  deserve. 
The  place  of  mercy  in  this  series  shows  that  Jesus 
regarded  it  as  the  consequence,  not  the  cause,  of  our 
experience  of  God's  mercy.  But  He  teaches  over  and 
over  again  that  a  hard,  unmerciful  heart  forfeits  the 
Divine  mercy.  It  does  so,  because  such  a  disposition 
tends  to  obscure  the  very  state  of  mind  to  which  alone 
God's  mercy  can  be  given.  Such  a  man  must  have 
forgotten  his  poverty  and  sorrow,  his  longings  and  their 
rich  reward,  and  so  must  have,  for  the  time,  passed  from 
the  place  where  he  can  get  God's  gift.  A  life  incon 
sistent  with  Christian  motives  will  rob  a  Christian  of 
Christian  privileges.  The  hand  on  his  brother's  throat 
destroys  the  servant's  own  forgiveness.  He  cannot  be 
at  once  a  rapacious  creditor  and  a  discharged  bankrupt. 

VI.  If  detached  from  its  connection,  there  is  little 
blessedness  in  the  next  beatitude.  What  is  the  use  of 
telling  us  how  happy  purity  of  heart  will  make  us  ?  It 
only  provokes  the  despairing  question,  "  And  how  am  1 
to  be  pure  ? "  But  when  we  set  this  word  in  its  place 
here,  it  does  bring  hope.  For  it  teaches  that  purity 
is  the  result  of  all  that  has  gone  before,  and  comes  from 
that  purifying  which  is  the  sure  answer  of  God  to  our 


72  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.  v.  1-25. 

poverty,  mourning,  and  longing.  Such  purity  is  plainly 
progressive,  and  as  it  increases,  so  does  the  vision  of 
God  grow.  The  more  the  glasses  of  the  telescope  are 
cleansed,  the  brighter  does  the  great  star  shine  to  the 
gazer.  "  No  man  hath  seen  God,"  nor  can  see  Him 
either  amid  the  mists  of  earth  or  in  the  cloudless  sky  of 
heaven,  if  by  seeing  we  mean  perceiving  by  sense,  or 
full,  direct  comprehension  by  spirit.  But  seeing  Him  is 
possible  even  now,  if  by  it  we  understand  the  knowledge 
of  His  character,  the  assurance  of  His  presence,  the 
sense  of  communion  with  Him.  Our  earthly  conscious 
ness  of  God  may  become  so  clear,  direct,  real,  and 
certain  that  it  deserves  the  name  of  vision.  Such  blessed 
intuition  of  Him  is  the  prerogative  of  those  whose  hearts 
Christ  has  cleansed,  and  whose  inward  eye  is  therefore 
able  to  behold  God,  because  it  is  like  Him.  "  Unless 
the  eye  were  sunlike,  how  could  it  see  the  sun  ? " 
We  can  blind  ourselves  to  Him  by  wallowing  in 
filth.  Impurity  unfits  for  seeing  purity.  Swedenborg 
profoundly  said  that  the  wicked  see  only  blackness  where 
the  sun  is. 

Like  all  these  beatitudes,  this  has  a  double  fulfilment, 
as  the  kingdom  has  two  stages  of  here  and  hereafter. 
Purity  of  heart  is  the  condition  of  the  vision  of  God  in 
heaven.  Without  holiness,  "no  man  shall  see  the 
Lord."  The  sight  makes  us  pure,  and  purity  makes  us 
see.  Thus  heaven  will  be  a  state  of  ever-increasing, 
reciprocally  acting  sight  and  holiness.  Like  Him  because 
we  see  Him,  we  shall  see  Him  more  because  we  have 
assimilated  what  we  see,  as  the  sunshine  opens  the  petals, 
and  tints  the  flower  with  its  own  colours  the  more  deeply 
the  wider  it  opens. 


Less,  vii.]  The  New  Sinai.  73 

VII.  Once  more,  we  have  the  alternation  of  a  grace 
exercised  to  men.  If  we  give  due  weight  to  the  order 
of  these  beatitudes,  we  shall  feel  that  Christ's  peacemaker 
must  be  something  more  than  a  mere  composer  of 
men's  quarrels.  For  he  is  trained  by  all  the  preceding 
experiences,  and  has  to  be  emptied  of  self,  penitent, 
hungering  for  and  filled  writh  righteousness,  and  therefore 
pure  in  heart,  as  well  as,  in  regard  to  men,  meek  and 
merciful,  ere  he  can  hope  to  fill  this  part.  That  appren 
ticeship  deepens  the  conception  of  the  peace  which 
Christ's  subjects  are  to  diffuse.  It  is,  first  and  chiefly, 
the  peace  which  enters  the  soul  that  has  traversed  all 
these  stages  ;  that  is  to  say,  the  Christian  peacemaker 
is  first  to  seek  to  bring  about  peace  between  men  and 
God  by  beseeching  them  to  be  reconciled  to  Him,  and 
then  afterwards,  as  a  consequence  of  this,  is  to  seek  to 
diffuse  through  all  human  relations  the  blessed  unity 
and  amity  which  flow  most  surely  from  the  common 
possession  of  the  peace  of  God.  Of  course,  the  relation 
which  the  subjects  of  the  true  King  bear  to  all  wars  and 
fightings,  to  all  discord  and  strife,  is  not  excluded,  but 
is  grounded  on  this  deeper  meaning.  The  centuries 
that  have  passed  since  the  words  were  spoken  have  not 
yet  brought  up  the  Christian  conscience  to  the  full 
perception  of  their  meaning  and  obligation.  Too  many 
of  us  still  believe  that  "great  doors  and  effectual"  can 
be  blown  open  with  gunpowder,  and  regard  this  beatitude 
as  a  counsel  of  perfection,  rather  than  as  one  of  the 
fundamental  laws  of  the  kingdom. 

The  Christian  who  moves  thus  among  men  seeking 
to  diffuse  everywhere  the  peace  with  God  which  fills 
his  own  soul,  and  the  peace  with  all  men,  which  they 


74  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.  v.  1-25. 

only  who  have  the  higher  peace  can  preserve  unbroken 
in  their  quiet,  meek  hearts,  will  be  more  or  less  recognized 
as  God-like  by  men,  and  will  have  in  his  own  heart  the 
witness  that  he  is  called  by  God  His  child.  He  will 
bear  visibly  the  image  of  his  Father,  and  will  hear  the 
voice  that  speaks  to  him  too  as  unto  a  son. 

VIII.  The  last  beatitude  crowns  all  the  paradoxes  of  the 
series  with  what  sounds  to  flesh  as  a  stark  contradiction. 
The  persecuted  are  blessed.  The  previous  seven  have 
perfected  the  portraiture  of  what  a  child  of  the  kingdom 
is  to  be.  This  appends  a  calm  prophecy,  which  must 
have  shattered  many  a  rosy  dream  among  the  listeners, 
of  what  his  reception  by  the  world  will  certainly  turn  out. 
Jesus  is  not  summoning  men  to  dominion,  honour,  and 
victory ;  but  to  scorn  and  suffering.  His  own  crown, 
He  knew,  was  first  to  be  twisted  of  thorns,  and  copies 
of  it  were  to  wound  His  followers'  brows.  Yet  even  that 
fate  was  blessed  ;  for  to  suffer  for  righteousness,  which 
is  to  suffer  for  Him,  brings  elevation  of  spirit,  a  solemn 
joy,  secret  supplies  of  strength,  and  sweet  intimacies  of 
communion  else  unknown.  The  noble  army  of  martyrs 
rose  before  His  thoughts  as  He  spoke;  and  now,  eighteen 
hundred  years  after,  heaven  is  crowded  with  those  who 
by  axe  and  stake  and  gibbet  have  entered  there.  "  The 
glory  dies  not,  and  the  grief  is  past."  They  stoop  from 
their  thrones  to  witness  to  us  that  Christ  is  true,  and 
that  the  light  affliction  has  wrought  an  eternal  weight  of 
glory. 

These  eight  beatitudes  complete  the  series.  Verses 
1 1  and  12  apply  the  last  of  them  to  the  listening  disciples. 
The  remaining  verses  of  the  lesson  describe  the  relation 
of  His  followers  to  the  world,  under  the  two  figures  of 


Less.  VII.]  The  New  Sinai.  75 

salt  and  light ;  the  one  of  which  works  by  contact, 
preserving  from  corruption,  and  in  an  inconspicuous 
way  ;  the  other  illuminates,  scatters  darkness,  and  shines 
from  afar.  Space  forbids  my  dealing  with  these  two  em 
blems,  which  beautifully  supplement  each  other,  and, 
taken  together,  give  a  complete  exhibition  of  the  Christian 
duty  to  the  world,  and  the  manner  of  discharging  it. 


LESSON    VIII. 


The  New  Form  of  the  Old  Law. 

MATTHEW  v.   17-26. 


17.  "Think    not   that    I   am 
come  to  destroy  the  law,  or  the 
prophets :    I    am    not    come    to 
destroy,  but  to  fulfil. 

1 8.  For   verily    I    say    unto 
you,  Till  heaven  and  earth  pass, 
one  jot  or  one  tittle  shall  in  no 
wise  pass  from  the  law,  till  all 
be  fulfilled. 

19.  Whosoever       therefore 
shall  break  one  of  these  least 
commandments,  and  shall  teach 
men   so,  he  shall   be  called  the 
least  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven  : 
but   whosoever    shall    do    and 
teach  them,  the  same  shall   be 
called  great  in  the  kingdom   of 
heaven. 

20.  For  I  say  unto  you,  That 
except  your  righteousness  shall 
exceed  the  righteousness  of  the 
scribes  and   Pharisees,  ye  shall 
in  no  case  enter  into  the  king 
dom  of  heaven. 

21.  Ye  have  heard  that  it  was 
said  by  them  of  old  time,  Thou 
shalt  not   kill ;  and   whosoever 
shall  kill  shall  be  in  danger  of 
the  judgment : 


22.  But  I  say  unto  you,  That 
whosoever    is   angry  with   his 
brother  without  a  cause  shall  be 
in  danger  of  the  judgment :  and 
whosoever     shall    say    to    his 
brother,  Raca,  shall  be  in  danger 
of  the   council :  but  whosoever 
shall  say,  Thou  fool,  shall  be  in 
danger  of  hell  fire. 

23.  Therefore    if  thou  bring 
thy  gift  to  the  altar,  and  there 
rememberest  that    thy  brother 
hath  ought  against  thee  : 

24.  Leave  there  thy  gift  be 
fore  the  altar,  and  go  thy  way  ; 
first  be  reconciled  to  thy  brother, 
and    then  come    and    offer  thy 
gift. 

25.  Agree  with  thine  adver 
sary  quickly,  whiles  thou  art  in 
the  way  with  him ;  lest  at  any 
time  the  adversary  deliver  thee 
to  the  judge,  and  the  judge  de 
liver   thee   to    the   officer,    and 
thou  be  cast  into  prison. 

26.  Verily    I    say  unto  thee, 
Thou  shalt  by  no  means  come 
out  thence,  till  thou  hast  paid 
the  uttermost  farthing." 


THIS  lesson  falls  naturally  into  two  parts — the  former 
extending  from  verse  17  to  20  inclusive  ;  the  latter, 
from  verse  21  to  the  end.     In  the  former,  the  King  of 

76 


Less,  vin.]    The  New  Form  of  the  Old  Law.  77 

the  true  kingdom  lays  down  the  general  principles  of  the 
relation  between  its  laws  and  the  earlier  revelation  of  the 
Divine  will  ;  in  the  latter  He  exemplifies  this  relation  in 
one  case,  which  is  followed,  in  the  remainder  of  the 
chapter,  by  three  other  illustrative  examples. 

I.  The  King  laying  down  the  law  of  His  kingdom  in 
its  relation  to  the  older  law  of  God. 

The  four  verses  included  in  this  section  give  a  regular 
sequence  of  thought:  verse  17  declaring  our  Lord's 
personal  relation  to  the  former  revelation  as  fulfilling  it ; 
verse  18  basing  that  statement  of  the  purpose  of  His 
coming  on  the  essential  permanence  of  the  old  law ; 
verses  19  and  20  deducing  thence  the  relation  of  His 
disciples  to  that  law,  and  that  in  such  a  way  that  verse 
19  corresponds  to  verse  18,  and  affirms  that  this  per 
manent  law  is  binding  in  its  minutest  details  on  His 
subjects,  while  verse  20  corresponds  to  verse  17,  and 
requires  their  deepened  righteousness  as  answering  to 
His  fulfilment  of  the  law. 

The  first  thing  that  strikes  one  in  looking  at  these 
verses  is  their  authoritative  tone.  There  may,  even  thus 
early  in  Christ's  career,  have  been  some  murmurs  that 
He  was  taking  up  a  position  of  antagonism  to  Mosaism, 
which  may  account  for  the  "  think  not  "  which  introduces 
the  section.  But  however  that  may  be,  the  swift  transi 
tion  from  the  beatitudes  to  speak  of  Himself  and  the 
meaning  of  His  work  is  all  of  a  piece  with  His  whole 
manner ;  for  certainly  never  did  religious  teacher  open 
his  mouth,  who  spoke  so  perpetually  about  Himself  as 
did  the  meek  Jesus.  "  I  came  "  declares  that  He  is  "  the 
coming  One,"  and  is  really  a  claim  to  have  voluntarily 
appeared  among  men,  as  well  as  to  be  the  long-expected 


78  The  Gospel  of  St,  Matthew,     [Chap.  v.  17-26. 

Messiah.  With  absolute  decisiveness  He  states  the 
purpose  of  His  coming.  He  knows  the  meaning  of  His 
own  work,  which  so  few  of  us  do,  and  it  is  safe  to  take 
His  own  account  of  what  He  intends,  as  it  so  seldom  is. 
His  opening  declaration  is  singularly  composed  of 
blended  humility  and  majesty.  Its  humility  lies  in  His 
placing  Himself,  as  it  wrere,  in  line  with  previous 
messengers,  and  representing  Himself  as  carrying  on 
the  sequence  of  Divine  revelation.  It  would  not  have 
been  humble  for  anybody  but  Him  to  say  that,  but  it 
was  so  for  Him.  Its  majesty  lies  in  His  claim  to  "  fulfil  " 
all  former  utterances  from  God.  His  fulfillment  of  the 
law  properly  so  called  is  twofold :  first,  in  His  own 
proper  person  and  life,  He  completes  obedience  to  it, 
realises  its  ideal  ;  second,  in  His  exposition  of  it,  both 
by  lip  and  life,  He  deepens  and  intensifies  its  meaning, 
changing  it  from  a  letter  which  regulates  the  actions,  to 
a  spirit  which  moves  the  inward  man. 

So  these  first  words  point  to  the  peculiarity  of  His 
coming  as  His  own  act,  and  make  two  daring  assertions 
as  to  His  character,  which  He  claims  to  be  sinless,  and 
as  to  His  teaching,  which  He  claims  to  be  an  advance 
upon  all  the  former  Divine  revelation.  To  the  former, 
He  speaks  here  as  He  did  to  John,  "  thus  it  becometh 
us  to  fulfil  all  righteousness."  No  trace  of  consciousness 
of  sin  or  defect  appears  in  any  words  or  acts  of  His. 
The  calmest  conviction  that  He  was  perfectly  righteous 
is  always  manifest.  How  comes  it  that  we  are  not 
repelled  by  such  a  tone  ?  We  do  not  usually  admire 
self-complacent  religious  teachers.  Why  has  nobody 
ever  given  Christ  the  lie,  or  pointed  to  His  unconscious 
ness  of  faults  as  itself  the  gravest  fault  ?  Strange  in- 


Less,  vili.]    The  New  Form  of  the  Old  Law.  79 

augural  discourse  for  a  humble  sage  and  saint  to  assert 
his  own  immaculate  perfection,  stranger  still  that  a 
listening  world  has  said,  "Amen  !  "  Note,  too,  the  royal 
style  here.  In  this  division  of  the  lesson  our  Lord  twice 
uses  the  phrase,  "  I  say  unto  you,"  which  He  once 
introduces  with  His  characteristic  "  verily."  Once  He 
employs  it  to  give  solemnity  to  the  asseveration  which 
stretches  forward  to  the  end  of  this  solid-seeming  world, 
and  once  He  introduces  by  it  the  stringent  demand  for 
His  followers'  loftier  righteousness.  His  unsupported 
word  is  given  us  as  our  surest  light  in  the  dark  future, 
His  bare  command  as  the  most  imperative  authority. 
This  style  goes  kingly  :  it  calls  for  absolute  credence  and 
unhesitating  submission.  When  He  speaks,  even  if  we 
have  nothing  but  His  word,  it  is  ours  neither  "  to  make 
reply  "  nor  "  to  reason  why,"  but  simply  to  believe,  and 
swiftly  to  do.  Rabbis  might  split  hairs  and  quote  other 
rabbis  by  the  hour ;  philosophers  may  argue  and  base 
their  teachings  on  elaborate  demonstrations ;  moralists 
may  seek  to  sway  the  conscience  through  reason  ;  legis 
lators  to  appeal  to  fear  and  hope.  He  speaks,  and  it  is 
done ;  He  commands,  and  it  stands  fast !  There  is 
nothing  else  in  the  world  the  least  like  the  superb  and 
mysterious  authority  with  which  He  fronts  the  world, 
and,  as  Fountain  of  knowledge  and  Source  of  obligation, 
summons  us  all  to  submit  and  believe  by  that  "  Verily,  I 
say  unto  you." 

Verse  18.  Next  we  have  to  notice  the  exuberant 
testimony  to  the  permanence  of  the  lawT.  Not  the 
smallest  of  its  letters,  not  even  the  little  marks  which 
distinguished  some  of  them,  or  the  flourishes  at  the  top 
of  some  of  them,  should  pass, — as  we  might  say,  not 


8o  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.     [Chap.  v.  17-26. 

even  the  stroke  across  a  written  "  t,"  which  shows  that 
it  is  not  "  1."  The  law  shall  last  as  long  as  the  world. 
It  shall  last  till  it  be  accomplished.  And  what  then  ? 
The  righteousness  which  it  requires  can  never  be  so 
realised  that  we  shall  not  need  to  realise  it  any  more, 
and  in  the  new  heavens  righteousness  dwelleth.  But 
law  shall  cease  when  fulfilled  in  a  very  real  sense. 
There  is  no  law  to  him  who  can  say,  "  Thy  lawr  is  within 
my  heart."  When  law  has  become  both  law  and 
impulse,  it  has  ceased  to  be  lawr,  inasmuch  as  it  no  longer 
stands  over  against  the  doer  as  an  external  constraint. 

Verse  19.  On  this  permanence  of  the  law,  Christ 
builds  its  imperative  authority  in  His  kingdom. 
Obviously,  the  "kingdom  of  heaven  "  in  verse  19  means 
the  earthly  form  of  that  kingdom.  The  Kingrepublishes, 
as  it  were,  the  old  code,  and  adopts  it  as  the  basis  of  His 
law.  He  thus  assumes  the  absolute  right  of  determining 
precedence  and  dignity  in  that  kingdom.  The  sovereign 
is  the  "fountain  of  honour,"  whose  word  ennobles. 
Observe  the  merciful  accuracy  of  the  language.  The 
breach  of  the  commandments  either  in  theory  or  in 
practice  does  not  exclude  from  the  kingdom,  for  it  is, 
while  realised  on  earth,  a  kingdom  of  sinful  men  aiming 
after  holiness ;  but  the  smallest  deflection  from  the  law 
of  right,  in  theory  or  in  practice,  does  lower  a  man's 
standing  therein,  inasmuch  as  it  makes  him  less  capable 
of  that  conformity  to  the  King,  and  consequent  nearness 
to  Him,  which  determines  greatness  and  smallness  there. 
Dignity  in  the  kingdom  depends  on  Christ-likeness,  and 
Christ-likeness  depends  on  fulfilling,  as  He  did,  all 
righteousness.  Small  flawrs  are  most  dangerous  because 
least  noticeable.  More  Christian  men  lose  their  chance 


Less,  viii.]     The  New  Form  of  the  Old  Law.  Si 

of  promotion  in  the  kingdom  by  a  multitude  of  little 
sins  than  by  single  great  ones. 

Verse  20.  As  the  King  has  Himself  by  His  perfect 
obedience  fulfilled  the  law,  His  subjects  likewise  must, 
in  their  obedience,  transcend  the  righteousness  of  those 
who  best  knew  and  most  punctiliously  kept  it.  The 
Scribes  and  Pharisees  are  not  here  regarded  as  hypocrites, 
but  taken  as  types  of  the  highest  conformity  with  the  law 
which  the  old  dispensation  afforded.  The  new  kingdom 
demands  a  higher,  namely  a  more  spiritual  and  inward 
righteousness,  one  corresponding  to  the  profounder 
meaning  which  the  King  gives  to  the  old  commandment. 
And  this  loftier  fulfilment  is  not  merely  the  condition  of 
dignity  in,  but  of  entrance  at  all  into,  the  kingdom. 
Inward  holiness  is  the  essence  of  the  character  of  all 
its  subjects.  How  that  holiness  is  to  be  ours  is  not  here 
told,  except  in  so  far  as  it  is  hinted  by  the  fact  that  it 
is  regarded  as  the  issue  of  the  King's  fulfilling  the  law. 
These  last  words  would  have  been  terrible  and  ex 
cluding  if  they  had  stood  alone.  When  they  follow'  "  I 
am  come  to  fulfil,"  they  are  a  veiled  gospel,  implying 
that  by  His  fulfilment  the  righteousness  of  the  law  is 
fulfilled  in  us. 

II.  The  illustrative  example  in  the  case  of  the  old 
commandment  against  murder.  This  part  of  our  lesson 
falls  into  three — each  occupying  two  verses.  First  we 
have  the  deepening  and  expansion  of  the  commandment. 
This  part  begins  with  the  royal  style  again.  "  What  was 
said  to  them  of  old  "  is  left  in  its  full  authority.  "  But  I 
say  unto  you,"  represents  Jesus  as  possessing  co-ordinate 
authority  with  that  law  of  which  the  speaker  is  unnamed, 
perhaps  because  the  same  word  of  God  which  now  spoke 

G 


82  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.  v.  17-26. 

in  Him  had  spoken  it.  We  shall  not  refer  here  to  the 
Jewish  courts  and  Sanhedrim,  and  to  that  valley  of 
Hinnom,  where  the  offal  of  Jerusalem  and  the  corpses  of 
criminals  were  burned.  Nor  need  we  discuss  the  precise 
force  of  "  Raca"  and  "thou  fool."  The  main  points  to 
be  observed  are,  the  distinct  extension  of  the  conception 
of  "  killing  "  to  embrace  malevolent  anger,  whether  it  find 
vent  or  is  kept  close  in  the  heart ;  the  clear  recognition 
that,  whilst  the  emotion  which  is  the  source  of  the  overt 
act  is  of  the  same  nature  as  the  act,  and  that  therefore 
he  who  "  hateth  his  brother  is  a  murderer,"  there  are 
degrees  in  criminality,  according  as  the  anger  remains 
unexpressed,  or  finds  utterance  in  more  or  less  bitter  and 
contemptuous  language ;  that  consequently  there  are 
degrees  in  the  severity  of  the  punishment  which  is 
administered  by  no  earthly  tribunal ;  and  that,  finally, 
this  stern  sentence  has  hidden  in  it  the  possibility  of 
forgiveness,  inasmuch  as  the  consequence  of  the  sin  is 
liability  to  punishment,  but  not  necessarily  suffering  of  it. 
The  old  law  had  no  such  mitigation  of  its  sentence. 

Verses  23,  24.  The  second  part  of  this  illustration 
intensifies  the  command  by  putting  obedience  to  it  before 
acts  of  external  worship.  The  language  is  vividly  pictur 
esque.  We  see  a  worshipper  standing  at  the  very  altar 
while  the  priest  is  offering  his  sacrifice.  In  that  sacred 
moment,  while  he  is  confessing  his  sins,  a  flash  across 
his  memory  shows  him  a  brother  offended, — rightly  or 
wrongly  it  matters  not.  The  solemn  sacrifice  is  to  pause 
while  he  seeks  the  offended  one,  and,  whatever  the  other 
man's  reception  of  his  advances  may  be,  he  cleanses  his 
own  bosom  of  its  perilous  stuff ;  then  he  may  come  back 
and  go  on  with  the  interrupted  worship.  Nothing  could 


Less,  viii.]    The  New  Form  of  the  Old  Law.  83 

put  in  a  clearer  light  the  prime  importance  of  the 
command  than  this  setting  aside  of  sacred  religious  acts 
for  its  sake.  "  Obedience  is  better  than  sacrifice."  And 
the  little  word  "  therefore,"  at  the  beginning  of  verse  23, 
points  to  the  terrible  penalties  as  the  reason  for  this 
urgency.  If  such  destruction  may  light  on  the  angry 
man,  nothing  should  come  between  him  and  the  conquest 
of  his  anger.  Such  self-conquest,  which  will  often  seem 
like  degradation,  is  more  acceptable  service  to  the  King, 
and  truer  worship,  than  all  words  or  ceremonial  acts. 
Deep  truths  as  to  the  relations  between  worship,  strictly 
so  called,  and  life,  lie  in  these  words,  which  may  well  be 
taken  to  heart  by  those  whose  altar  is  Calvary,  and  their 
gift  the  thank-offering  of  themselves. 

Verses  25,  26.  The  third  part  is  a  further  exhortation 
to  the  same  swiftness  in  casting  out  anger  from  the  heart, 
thrown  into  a  parabolic  form.  When  you  quarrel  with  a 
man,  says  Christ  in  effect,  prudence  enjoins  to  make  it 
up  as  soon  as  possible,  before  he  sets  the  law  in  motion. 
If  once  he,  as  plaintiff,  has  brought  you  before  the 
judge,  the  law  will  go  on  mechanically  through  the  stages 
of  trial,  condemnation,  surrender  to  the  prison  authorities, 
and  confinement  till  the  last  farthing  has  been  paid.  So, 
if  you  are  conscious  that  you  have  an  adversary, — and 
any  man  that  you  hate  is  your  adversary,  for  he  will 
appear  against  you  at  that  solemn  judgment  to  come, — • 
agree  with  him,  put  away  the  anger  out  of  your  heart  at 
once.  In  the  special  case  in  hand,  the  "  adversary  " 
is  the  man  with  whom  we  are  angry.  In  the  general 
application  of  the  precept  to  the  whole  series  of  oifences 
against  the  law,  the  adversary  may  be  regarded  as  the 
law  itself.  In  either  interpretation,  the  stages  of  appearing 


84  The  Gospel  of  St,  Matthew,    [Chap.  v.  17-26. 

before  the  judge  and  so  on  up  till  the  shutting  up 
in  prison  are  the  stages  of  the  judgment  before  the 
tribunal,  not  of  earth,  but  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 
They  point  to  the  same  dread  realities  as  are  presented 
in  the  previous  verses  under  the  imagery  of  the  Jewish 
courts  and  the  foul  fires  of  the  valley  of  Hinnom.  Christ 
closes  the  grave  parable  with  His  solemn  "  Verily  I  say 
unto  thee  " — as  looking  on  the  future  judgment,  and 
telling  us  what  His  eyes  saw.  The  words  have  no 
bearing  on  the  question  of  the  duration  of  the  imprison 
ment,  for  He  does  not  tell  us  whether  the  last  farthing 
could  ever  be  paid  or  not ;  but  they  do  teach  this  lesson, 
that,  if  once  we  fall  under  the  punishments  of  the  kingdom, 
there  is  no  end  to  them  until  the  last  tittle  of  the  con 
sequences  of  our  breach  of  its  law  has  been  paid.  To 
delay  obedience,  and  still  more  to  delay  abandoning 
disobedience,  is  madness,  in  view  of  the  storm  that  may 
at  any  moment  burst  on  the  heads  of  the  rebels. 

Thus  He  deepens  and  fulfils  one  precept  of  the  old 
law  by  extending  the  sweep  of  its  prohibition  from  acts 
to  thoughts,  by  setting  obedience  to  it  above  sacrifice 
and  worship,  and  by  picturing  in  solemn  tones  of  para 
bolic  warning  the  consequences  of  having  the  disobeyed 
precept  as  our  unreconciled  adversary.  In  this  one  case 
we  have  a  specimen  of  His  mode  of  dealing  with  the 
whole  law,  every  jot  of  which  He  expanded  in  His  teach 
ing,  and  perfectly  observed  in  His  life. 

A  gospel  is  hidden  even  in  these  warnings,  for  it  is 
distinctly  taught  that  the  offended  law  may  cease  to  be 
our  adversary,  and  that  we  may  be  reconciled  with  it,  ere 
yet  it  has  accused  us  to  the  judge.  It  was  not  yet  time 
to  proclaim  that  the  King  "fulfilled"  the  law,  not  only 


Less,  viii.]    The  New  Form  of  the  Old  Law.  85 

by  life,  but  by  death,  and  that  therefore  all  His  believing 
subjects  "  are  justified  from  all  things,  from  which  ye 
could  not  be  justified  by  the  law,"  as  well  as  endowed 
with  the  righteousness  by  which  they  fulfil  that  law  in 
deeper  reality,  and  fairer  completeness,  than  did  those 
"  of  old  time,"  who  loved  it  most. 


LESSON    IX. 


Trumpets  and  Street  Corners. 

MATTHEW  vi.   I-I5- 


1.  "  Take  heed  that  ye  do  not 
your   alms   before  men,   to    be 
seen    of    them  :    otherwise    yc 
have  no  reward  of  your  Father 
which  is  in  heaven. 

2.  Therefore  when  thou  doest 
thine  alms,  do  not  sound  a  trum 
pet  before   thee,  as  the  hypo 
crites  do  in  the  synagogues  and 
in   the  streets,   that  they  may 
have   glory    of   men.     Verily   I 
say  unto  you,  They  have  their 
reward. 

3.  But  when  thou  doest  alms, 
let  not  thy  left  hand  know  what 
thy  right  hand  doeth  : 

4.  That  thine  alms  may  be  in 
secret :  and   thy  Father  which 
seeth   in    secret   Himself  shall 
reward  thee  openly. 

5.  And    when    thou   prayest, 
thou  shalt  not  be  as  the  hypo 
crites  are :  for  they  love  to  pray 
standing  in  the  synagogues  and 
in  the  corners   of  the  streets, 
that  they  may  be  seen  of  men. 
Verily   I   say   unto   you,    They 
have  their  reward. 

6.  But  thou,  when  thou  pray 
est,  enter  into  thy  closet,  and 
when  thou  hast  shut  thy  door, 
pray  to  thy  Father  which  is  in 
secret ;   and  thy  Father  which 


seeth    in    secret    shall    reward 
thee  openly. 

7.  But   when  ye   pray,   use 
not    vain    repetitions,    as    the 
heathen  do  :  for  they  think  that 
they  shall    be    heard    for  their 
much  speaking. 

8.  Be  not  ye  therefore  like 
unto   them :    for    your    Father 
knoweth  what  things  ye  have 
need  of,  before  ye  ask  Him. 

9.  After  this  manner  therefore 
pray  ye:  Our  Father  which  art  in 
heaven,  Hallowed  be  Thy  name. 

10.  Thy  kingdom  come.    Thy 
will  be  done  in  earth,  as  it  is  in 
heaven. 

11.  Give    us    this    day    our 
daily  bread. 

12.  And  forgive  us  our  debts, 
as  we  forgive  our  debtors. 

13.  And    lead    us    not    into 
temptation,  but  deliver  us  from 
evil :  For  Thine  is  the  kingdom, 
and  the  power,  and  the  glory, 
for  ever.     Amen. 

14.  For   if   ye    forgive    men 
their  trespasses,  your  heavenly 
Father  will  also  forgive  you  : 

1 5.  But  if  ye  forgive  not  men 
their    trespasses,    neither   will 
your  Father  forgive  your  tres 
passes." 


OUR  Lord  follows  His  exposition  of  the  deepened 
sense  which  the  old  law  assumes  in  His  kingdom, 
by  a  warning  against  the  most  subtle  foes  of  true  right- 

86 


Less.  ix. J        Trumpets  and  Street  Corners.  87 

eousness.  He  first  gives  the  warning  in  general  terms 
in  verse  i,  and  then  flashes  its  light  into  three  dark 
corners,  and  shows  how  hankering  after  men's  praise 
corrupts  the  beneficence  which  is  our  duty  to  our  neigh 
bour,  the  devotion  which  is  our  duty  to  God,  and  the 
abstinence  which  is  our  duty  to  ourselves.  Our  lesson 
includes  the  two  former,  and  certain  other  teachings 
which  are  loosely  appended  to  the  condemnation  of 
ostentation  in  prayer. 

We  have  first  the  general  warning,  given  out  like  the 
text  of  a  sermon,  or  the  musical  phrase  which  underlies 
the  various  harmonies  of  some  concerto.  The  first  word 
implies  that  the  evil  is  a  subtle  and  seducing  one.  "  Take 
heed"  as  of  something  which  may  steal  into  and  mar  the 
noblest  lives.  The  serpent  lies  coiled  under  the  leaves, 
and  may  sting  and  poison  the  unwary  hand.  The  general 
ity  of  the  warning,  and  the  logical  propriety  of  the  whole 
section,  require  the  adoption  of  the  reading  of  the  Revised 
Version,  namely,  "  righteousness."  The  thing  to  be  taken 
heed  of  is  not  the  doing  it  "  before  men,"  which  will 
often  be  obligatory,  often  necessary,  and  never  in  itself 
wrong,  but  the  doing  it  "  to  be  seen  of  them."  Not  the 
number  of  spectators,  but  the  furtive  glance  of  our  eyes 
to  see  if  they  are  looking  at  us,  makes  the  sin.  We  are 
to  let  our  good  works  shine,  that  men  may  glorify  our 
Father.  Pious  souls  are  to  shine,  and  yet  to  be  hid, — 
a  paradox  which  can  be  easily  solved  by  the  obedient. 
If  our  motive  is  to  make  God's  glory  more  visible,  we 
shall  not  be  seeking  to  be  ourselves  admired.  The  harp- 
string's  swift  vibrations,  as  it  gives  out  its  note,  make  it 
unseen. 

The  reason  for  the  warning  goes  on  two  principles  : 


88  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.  vi.  1-15. 

one  that  righteousness  is  to  be  rewarded,  over  and  above 
its  own  inherent  blessedness  ;  another,  that  the  prospect 
of  the  reward  is  a  legitimate  stimulus,  over  and  above  the 
prime  reason  for  righteousness,  namely,  that  it  is  righteous. 
The  New  Testament  morality  is  not  good  enough  for  some 
very  superfine  people,  who  are  pleased  to  call  it  selfish 
because  it  lets  a  martyr  brace  himself  in  the  fire  by  the 
vision  of  the  crown  athwart  the  smoke.  Somehow  or 
other,  however,  that  selfish  morality  gets  itself  put  in 
practice,  and  turns  out  more  unselfish  people  than  its 
assailants  manage  to  produce.  Perhaps  the  motive  which 
they  attack  may  be  part  of  the  reason. 

The  mingling  of  regard  for  man's  approbation  with 
apparently  righteous  acts  absolutely  disqualifies  them  for 
receiving  God's  reward,  for  it  changes  their  whole  cha 
racter,  and  they  are  no  longer  what  they  seem.  Charity 
given  from  that  motive  is  not  charity,  nor  prayer  devotion. 

I.  The  general  warning  is  applied  to  three  cases,  of 
which  we  have  to  deal  with  two.  Our  Lord  speaks  first 
of  ostentatious  alms-giving.  Note  that  we  are  not  to  take 
"  blowing  the  trumpets  "  as  actual  fact.  Nobody  would 
do  that  in  a  synagogue.  The  meaning  of  all  attempts, 
however  concealed,  to  draw  attention  to  one's  benefi 
cence,  is  just  what  the  ear-splitting  blast  would  be ;  and 
the  incongruity  of  startling  the  worshippers  with  the  harsh 
notes  is  like  the  incongruity  of  doing  good  and  trying  to 
attract  notice.  I  think  Christ's  ear  catches  the  screech 
of  the  brazen  abomination  in  a  good  many  of  the  ways  of 
raising  and  giving  money,  which  find  favour  in  the  Church 
to-day.  This  is  an  advertising  age,  and  flowers  that  used 
to  blush  unseen  are  forced  now  under  glass  for  exhibition. 
Nobody  needs  to  blow  his  own  trumpet  nowadays.  We 


Less.  IX.]        Trumpets  and  Street  Corners.  89 

have  improved  on  the  ruder  methods  of  the  Pharisees 
and  newspapers  and  collectors  will  blow  lustily  and  loud 
for  us,  and  defend  the  noise  on  the  ground  that  a  good 
example  stimulates  others.  Perhaps  so,  though  it  may 
be  a  question  what  it  stimulates  to,  and  whether  B's  gift, 
drawn  out  in  imitation  or  emulation  of  A's,  is  any  liker 
Christ's  idea  of  gifts  than  was  A's,  given  that  B  might 
hear  of  it.  To  a  very  large  extent,  the  money  getting 
and  giving  arrangements  of  the  modern  Church  are 
neither  more  nor  less  than  the  attempt  to  draw  Christ's 
chariot  with  the  devil's  traces.  Christ  condemned  osten 
tation.  His  followers  too  often  try  to  make  use  of  it. 

"  They  have  their  reward."  Observe  that  have  means 
have  received  in  full,  and  note  the  emphasis  of  that  their. 
It  is  all  the  reward  they  will  ever  get,  and  all  that  they 
are  capable  of.  The  pure  and  lasting  crown,  which  is  a 
fuller  possession  of  God  Himself,  has  no  charms  for  them, 
and  could  not  be  given.  And  what  a  poor  thing  it  is 
which  they  seek — the  praise  of  men  ! — a  breath,  as  un 
substantial  and  short-lived  as  the  blast  of  the  trumpet 
which  they  blew  before  their  selfish  benevolence.  Their 
charity  was  no  charity,  for  what  they  did  was  not  to  give, 
but  to  buy.  Their  gift  was  a  speculation.  They  invested 
in  charity,  and  looked  for  a  profit  of  praise.  How  can 
they  get  God's  reward  ?  The  true  benevolence  will  even 
hide  the  giving  right  hand  from  the  idle  left,  and,  as  far 
as  may  be,  will  dismiss  the  deed  from  the  doer's  con 
sciousness.  Such  alms,  given  wholly  out  of  pity  and 
desire  to  be  like  the  all-giving  Father,  can  be  rewarded, 
and  will  be,  with  that  richer  acquaintance  with  Him,  and 
more  complete  victory  over  self,  which  is  the  heaven  of 
heaven,  and  the  foretaste  of  it  now. 


90  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew,    [Chap.  vi.  1-15, 

In  its  coarsest  forms,  this  ostentation  is  out  and  out 
hypocrisy,  which  consciously  assumes  a  virtue  which  it 
has  not.  But  far  more  common  and  dangerous  is  the 
subtle,  unconscious  mingling  of  it  with  real  charity, — 
the  eye  wandering  from  the  poor,  whom  the  hand  is 
helping,  to  the  bystanders, — and  it  is  this  mingling 
which  we  have  therefore  to  take  most  heed  to  avoid. 
One  drop  of  this  sour  stuff  will  curdle  whole  gallons 
of  the  milk  of  human  kindness.  The  hypocrisy  which 
hoodwinks  ourselves  is  more  common  and  perilous  than 
that  which  blinds  others. 

II.  We  need  not  dwell  at  length  on  the  second 
application  of  the  general  warning— to  prayer;  as  the 
words  are  almost,  and  the  thoughts  entirely,  identical 
with  those  of  the  former  verses.  If  there  be  any 
action  of  the  spirit  which  requires  the  complete  exclusion 
of  thoughts  of  men,  it  is  prayer,  which  is  the  communion 
of  the  soul  alone  with  God.  It  is  as  impossible  to  pray, 
and  at  the  same  time  to  think  of  men,  as  to  look  up  and 
down  at  once.  If  we  think  of  prayer,  as  formalists  in  all 
times  have  done,  as  so  many  words,  then  it  will  not 
seem  incongruous  to  choose  the  places  where  men  are 
thickest  for  "  saying  our  prayers,"  and  we  shall  do  it  with 
all  the  more  spirit  if  we  have  spectators.  That  accounts 
for  a  great  deal  of  the  "  devotion  "  in  Mohammedan  and 
Roman  Catholic  countries  which  travellers  with  no  love 
for  Protestant  Christianity  are  so  fond  of  praising.  But 
if  we  think  of  prayer  as  Christ  did,  as  being  the  yearning 
of  the  soul  to  God,  we  shall  feel  that  the  inmost  chamber 
and  the  closed  door  are  its  fitting  accompaniments.  Of 
course,  our  Lord  is  not  forbidding  united  prayer ;  for 
each  of  the  worshippers  may  be  holding  communion 


Less.  IX.]        Trumpets  and  Street  Corners.  91 

with  God,  which  is  none  the  less  solitary  though  shared 
by  the  others,  and  none  the,  less  united  though  in  it  each 
is  alone  with  God. 

III.  Our  Lord  passes  for  a  time  from  the  more  imme 
diate  subject  of  ostentation  to  add  other  teaching  about 
prayer,  which  still  farther  unfolds  its  true  conception. 
Another  corruption  arising  from  the  error  of  thinking 
that  prayer  is  an  outward  act,  is  "  vain  repetition," 
characteristic  of  all  heathen  religion,  and  resting  upon  a 
profound  disbelief  in  the  loving  willingness  of  God  to 
help.  Of  course,  earnest,  reiterated  prayer  is  not  vain 
repetition.  Jesus  is  not  condemning  His  own  agony  in 
Gethsemane  when  He  thrice  "said  the  same  words." 
The  persistence  in  prayer,  which  is  the  child  of  faith, 
is  no  relation  to  the  parrot-like  repetition  which  is  the 
child  of  disbelief,  nor  does  the  condemnation  of  the  one 
touch  the  other.  The  frenzied  priests  who  yelled,  "  O 
Baal,  hear  us  !  "  all  the  long  day  ;  the  Buddhists  who 
repeat  the  sacred  invocation  till  they  are  stupefied  ;  the 
poor  devotee  who  thinks  merit  is  acquired  by  the  number 
of  paternosters  and  aves,  are  all  instances  of  this  gross 
mechanical  conception  of  prayer.  Are  there  no  similar 
superstitions  nearer  home  ?  Are  there  no  ministers  or 
congregations  that  we  ever  heard  of,  who  have  a  regulation 
length  for  their  prayers,  and  would  scarcely  think  they 
had  prayed  at  all  if  their  devotions  were  as  short  as 
most  of  the  prayers  in  the  Bible  ?  Are  we  in  no  danger 
of  believing  what  Christ  tells  us  here  is  pure  heathen 
ism, — that  many  words  may  move  God  ? 

The  only  real  remedy  against  such  degradation  of  the 
very  idea  of  prayer  lies  in  the  deeper  conceptions  of  God 
and  of  it  which  Christ  here  inves.  He  knows  our  needs 


92  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.  vi.  1-15. 

before  we  ask.  Then  what  is  prayer  for?  Not  to 
inform  Him,  nor  to  move  Him,  unwilling,  to  have  mercy, 
as  if,  like  some  proud  prince,  He  required  a  certain 
amount  of  recognition  of  His  greatness  as  the  price  of 
His  favours.  But  to  fit  our  own  hearts  by  conscious 
need,  and  true  desire  and  dependence,  to  receive  the 
gifts  which  He  is  ever  willing  to  give,  but  we  are  not 
always  fit  to  receive.  As  St.  Augustine  has  it,  the 
empty  vessel  is  by  prayer  carried  to  the  full  fountain. 

We  cannot  pretend  to  treat  the  prayer  which  teaches 
how  to  pray  in  our  limited  space,  but  must  content  our 
selves  with  the  slightest  touch.  "After  this  manner" 
may  or  may  not  imply  that  Christ  meant  this  prayer  to 
be  a  form,  but  He  certainly  meant  it  for  a  model.  And 
they  who  drink  in  its  spirit,  and  pray  seeking  God's  glory 
before  their  own  satisfaction,  and,  while  trustfully  asking 
from  His  hand  their  daily  bread,  rise  quickly  to  implore 
the  supply  of  their  spiritual  hunger,  do  pray  "  after  this 
manner,"  whether  they  use  these  words  or  no. 

We  may  briefly  point  out  the  structure  of  the  prayer, 
although  we  cannot  dwell  on  the  separate  petitions.  All 
begins  with  the  recognition  of  the  fatherhood  of  God. 
The  clear  and  fixed  contemplation  of  God  is  the  begin 
ning  of  all  true  prayer,  and  that  contemplation  does  not 
fasten  on  His  remote  and  partially  intelligible  attributes, 
nor  strive  to  climb  to  behold  Him  as  in  Himself,  but 
grasps  Him  as  related  to  us.  The  fatherhood  of  God 
implies  His  communication  of  life,  His  tenderness,  and 
our  kindred.  This  is  a  prayer  for  the  children  of  the 
kingdom,  and  can  only  be  truly  offered  by  those  who,  by 
faith  in  the  Son,  have  received  the  adoption  of  sons.  It 
gathers  all  such  into  at  family,  so  delivering  their  prayer 


Less.  IX.]        Trumpets  and  Street  Corners.  93 

from  selfish  absorption  in  their  own  joys  or  needs.  As 
our  Father  "  in  Heaven,"  He  is  lifted  clear  above  earth's 
limitations,,  changes,  and  imperfections.  So  child-like 
familiarity  is  sublimed  into  reverence,  our  hearts  are 
drawn  upward,  and  delivered  from  the  oppressive  and 
narrowing  attachment  to  earth  and  sense. 

The  perfect  sevenfold  petitions  of  the  prayer  fall  into 
two  halves,  corresponding  roughly  to  the  first  and  second 
tables  of  the  decalogue.  The  first  half  consists  of  three 
petitions,  which  refer  to  God  and  His  kingdom.  They 
are  three,  in  accordance  with  the  symbolism  of  numbers, 
which,  in  the  Old  Testament,  always  regards  three  as  the 
sacred  number  of  completeness  and  of  divinity.  The 
second  half  consists  of  four  petitions,  which  refer  to 
ourselves.  They  are  four, — the  number  which  symbolizes 
the  creature.  The  lessons  taught  by  the  order  in  which 
these  two  halves  occur  do  not  need  to  be  dwelt  upon. 
God  first  and  man  second,  His  glory  before  our  wants, — 
that  is  the  true  order.  For  how  few  of  us  is  it  the 
spontaneous  order  ?  Do  we  first  rise  to  God,  and  only 
second  descend  to  ourselves  ? 

Note,  too,  the  sequence  in  each  of  these  halves.  In 
the  first  we  may  say  that  we  begin  from  above  and  come 
down,  or  from  within  and  come  outwards.  In  the  second, 
the  process  is  the  opposite.  We  begin  on  the  lowest 
level  with  the  external  needs,  and  go  upwards  and 
inwards  to  removal  of  sin,  exemption  from  temptation, 
and  complete  deliverance  from  evil.  The  first  half  gives 
us  the  beginning,  middle,  and  end  of  God's  purposes  for 
the  world.  The  recognition  of  His  name  is  the  basis  of 
His  kingdom,  and  His  kingdom  is  the  sphere  in  which 
alone  His  will  is  done.  The  second  half,  in  like  manner, 


94  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.  vi.  1-15. 

gives  us  the  beginning,  middle,  and  end  of  His  dealings 
with  the  individual,  the  common  mercies  of  daily  bread, 
forgiveness,  guidance,  protection  in  conflict,  and  final 
deliverance. 

The  "  name  "  of  God  is  His  revealed  character.  He 
hallows  it  when  He  so  acts  as  to  make  His  holiness 
manifest.  We  hallow  it  when  we  regard  it  as  the  holy 
thing  which  it  is.  That  petition  is  first,  because  the 
knowledge  of  God  as  He  is  self-revealed  is  the  deepest 
want  of  men,  and  the  spread  of  that  knowledge  and 
reverence  the  way  by  which  His  kingdom  comes. 

God's  kingdom  is  His  rule  over  men's  hearts.  Christ 
began  His  ministry  by  proclaiming  its  near  approach, 
and  in  effect  brought  it  to  earth.  But  it  spread  slowly  in 
the  individual  heart,  and  in  the  world.  Therefore,  this 
second  petition  is  ever  in  place,  until  the  consummation. 
God's  rule  is  established  through  the  hallowing  of  His 
name  ;  for  it  is  a  rule  which  works  on  men  through  their 
understandings,  and  seeks  no  ignorant  submission. 

The  sum  of  this  first  half  is,  "  Thy  will  be  done,  as  in 
Heaven,  so  on  earth."  Obedience  to  that  will  is  the  end 
of  God's  self-revelation.  It  makes  all  the  difference 
whether  we  begin  with  the  thought  of  the  name  or  of 
the  will.  In  the  latter  case,  religion  will  be  slavish  and 
submission  sullen.  There  is  no  more  horrible  and  para 
lyzing  conception  of  God  than  that  of  mere  sovereign 
will.  But  if  we  think  of-Him  as  desiring  that  we  should 
know  His  name,  and  gathering  all  its  syllables  into  the 
one  perfect  "  word  of  God  "  ;  then  we  are  sure  that  His 
will  must  be  intelligible  and  good.  Obedience  becomes 
delight,  and  the  surrender  of  our  wills  to  His  the  glad 
expression  of  love.  He  who  begins  with  "  Thy  will  be 


Less,  ix.]        Trumpets  and  Street  Corners.  95 

done  "  is  a  slave,  and  never  really  does  tlie  will  at  all : 
he  who  begins  with  "  Our  Father,  hallowed  be  Thy 
name  "  is  a  son,  and  his  will,  gladly  yielding,  is  free  in 
surrender,  strong  in  self-abnegation,  and  restful  in  putting 
the  reins  into  God's  hands. 

The  two  halves  make  a  whole.  The  second,  which 
deals  with  our  needs,  starts  with  the  cry  for  bread,  and 
climbs  up  slowly  through  the  ills  of  life,  from  bodily 
hunger  to  trespasses  and  human  unkindness  and  personal 
weakness,  and  a  world  of  temptation,  and  the  double  evil 
of  sin  and  of  sorrow,  and  so  regains  at  last  the  starting- 
point  of  the  first  half,  Heaven  and  God.  The  probable 
meaning  of  the  difficult  word  rendered  "  daily  "  seems  to 
be  "  sufficient  for  our  need."  The  lessons  of  the  petition 
are  that  God's  children  have  a  claim  for  the  supply  of 
their  wants,  since  He  is  bound,  as  a  faithful  Creator,  not 
to  send  mouths  without  sending  meat  to  fill  them,  but 
that  our  desires  should  be  limited  to  our  actual  neces 
sities,  and  our  cravings,  as  well  as  our  efforts  for  the 
bread  that  perishes,  made  into  prayers.  Such  a  prayer 
rightly  used  would  put  an  end  to  much  wicked  luxury 
among  Christians,  and  to  many  questionable  ways  of 
getting  wealth.  "  Bless  my  cheating,  my  sharp  practice, 
my  half  lies  !  "  If  we  dare  not  pray  this  prayer  over 
what  .we  do  in  "  earning  our  living,"  we  had  better  ask 
ourselves  whether  we  are  not  rather  earning  our  death. 

Sin  is  debt  incurred  to  God.  .  So  Christ  taught  in  the 
previous  lesson  by  His  parable  of  agreeing  with  the 
adversary ;  and  in  the  other  parables  of  the  two  debtors 
(Luke  vii.  41)  and  of  the  unmerciful  servant  (Matt,  xviii. 
23).  As  universal  as  the  need  for  bread  is  the  need  for 
pardon  It  is  the  first  want  of  the  spiritual  nature,  but  it 


96  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.  vi.  1-15. 

is  a  constantly  recurring  want,  as  this  petition  teaches  us. 
Forgiveness  is  the  cancelling  of  a  debt ;  but  we  must  .not 
forget  that  it  is  a  Father's  forgiveness,  and  therefore  does 
not  merely,  or  even  chiefly,  imply  the  removal  of  penalty, 
but  much  rather  the  unimpeded  flow  of  the  Father's 
love,  and  consequently  the  removal  of  the  miserable 
consciousness  of  separation  from  Him.  The  appended 
comparison  "  as  we  have  forgiven  "  does  not  mean  that 
our  forgiveness  is  the  reason  for  God's  forgiveness  of  us. 
The  ground  of  our  pardon  is  Christ's  work,  the  condition 
of  it  our  faith ;  but,  as  we  saw  in  considering  the  beati 
tudes,  the  condition  on  which  the  children  of  the  king 
dom  can  retain  the  blessing  of  the  Divine  pardon  is  their 
imitation  of  it. 

The  next  petition  is  the  expression  of  conscious  weak 
ness.  The  forgiven  man,  though  in  his  deepest  soul 
hating  sin,  is  still  surrounded  with  sparks  which  may  fire 
the  combustibles  in  his  heart.  If  we  ask  not  to  be  led 
into  temptation,  because  we  want  a  smooth  and  easy  road, 
we  are  wrong.  If  we  do  so  from  self-distrust  and  fear  lest 
we  fall,  then  it  is  allowable.  But  perhaps  we  may  draw 
a  distinction  between  being  tempted  and  being  led  into 
temptation.  The  former  may  mean  the  presentation  of 
the  inducement  to  do  evil  which  we  cannot  hope  to 
escape,  and  which  it  is  not  well  that  we  should  escape. 
The  latter  may  mean  the  further  step  of  embracing  or 
being  entangled  in  it  by  consenting  to  it. 

We  do  not  need  to  dread  the  entrance  into  the  Valley 
of  the  Shadow  of  Death,  for  if  the  Lord  be  with  us  we 
shall  pass  through  it.  Our  prayer  may  mean,  lead  us, 
not  into,  but  through,  the  trial.  It  is  the  plaint  of  con 
scious  weakness,  the  recognition  of  God  as  ordering  our 


Less,  ix.]        Trumpets  and  Street  Corners.  97 

path,  the  cry  of  a  heart  which  desires  holiness  most  of 
all,  and  which  trusts  in  God's  upholding  hand  in  the 
hour  of  trial. 

Deliver  us  from  evil  is  a  petition*  which,  in  its  width, 
fits  the  close  of  the  prayer  better  than  the  translation 
of  the  Revised  Version.  There  seems  an  echo  of  the 
words  in  Paul's  noble  confidence  while  the  headsman's 
axe  was  so  near,  "  The  Lord  will  deliver  me  from  every 
evil  work."  Entire  exemption  from  evil  of  every  sort, 
whether  sin  or  sorrow,  is  the  true  end  of  our  prayers, 
as  it  is  the  crown  of  God's  purpose.  Nothing  less  can 
satisfy  our  yearnings ;  nothing  less  can  fulfil  the  Divine 
desire  for  us.  Nothing  less  should  be  the  goal  of  our 
faith  and  hope.  To  that  height  of  meek  assurance,  and 
that  reaching  out  of  our  souls  in  desire  which  is  the  pledge 
of  its  own  fulfilment,  Christ  would  have  us  attain  on  the 
wings  of  prayer.  They  can  have  no  narrower  bounds  to 
the  horizon  of  their  hopes,  nor  any  lesser  blessing  for  the 
satisfaction  of  their  longings,  whose  prayer  begins  with, 
"  Our  Father  which  art  in  heaven  ";  for  where  the  Father 
is,  the  child  must  wish  to  be,  and  some  day  will  be,  to 
go  no  more  out. 


LESSON  X. 
Without  Carefulness." 

MATTHEW  vi.  24-34. 


24.  "  No  man  can  serve  two 
masters  :  for  either  he  will  hate 
the  one,  and  love  the  other  ;  or 
else  he  will  hold  to  the  one,  and 
despise  the  other.     Ye   cannot 
serve  God  and  mammon. 

25.  Therefore  I  say  unto  you, 
Take  no  thought  for  your  life, 
what  tye  "sEaTTeat,  or  wh'aT'ye 
shall  drink  ;  nor   yet   for  your 
body,  what  ye  shall  put  on.     Is 
not  the  life  more  than  meat,  and 
the  body  than  raiment  ? 

26.  Behold   the  fowls  of  the 
air :  for  they  sow  not,    neither 
do  they  reap,  nor   gather  into 
barns;  yet  your  heavenly  Father 
feedeth  them.    Are  ye  not  much 
better  than  they  ? 

27.  Which  of  you  by  taking 
thought  can  add  one  cubit  unto 
his  stature  ? 

28.  And  why  take  ye  thought 
for    raiment  ?        Consider    the 
lilies    of   the    field,    how    they 
grow;    they    toil    not,    neither 
do  they  spin : 

29.  And  yet  I  say  unto  you, 


That  even  Solomon  in  all  his 
glory  was  not  arrayed  like  one 
of  these. 

30.  Wherefore,  if  God  so 
clothe  the  grass  of  the  field, 
which  to  day  is,  and  to  morrow 
is  cast  into  the  oven,  shall  He 
not  much  more  clothe  you,  Oye 
of  little  faith  ? 

3 l  •  JTherefore^  take  no 
thought,  saying.  What  sTTall 
we  eat?  or.  What  shall  we 
drink  ?  or,  Wherewithal  shall 
we  be  clothed  ? 

32.  (For  after  all  these  things 
do  the  Gentiles  seek  :)  for  your 
heavenly    Father  knoweth  that 
ye    have     need    of     all     these 
things. 

33.  But    seek    ye    first    the 
kingdom  of  God,  and  His  right 
eousness  ;  and  all  these  things 
shall  be  added  unto  you. 

34.  Take  therefore  no  thought 
f ( >  r  1 1 1 eTnbrrow  :  for  the  morrow 
shall  take  thought  for  the  things 
of  itself.     Sufficient    unto    the 
day  is  the  evil  thereof." 


WE    have    here    first  a   plain    maxim   of  common 
experience  applied  to  a  religious  purpose.     We 
cannot  serve — in  the  deepest  reality  of  that  word — two 

98 


Less,  x.]  « Without  Carefulness."  99 

masters.  A  servant  must  at  bottom  have  one  voice  from 
which  he  takes  orders.  If  there  be  two  who  have 
control  over  him,  one  will  have  the  real  sway  of  his  will. 
That  would  be  true,  even  if  the  two  pulled  the  same  way 
and  gave  parallel  orders.  What  if  one  forbids  all  that  the 
other  commands,  and  commands  all  that  the  other  for 
bids  ?  A  joint  service  will  be  a  hopeless  attempt  then. 
So  is  it,  says  Jesus,  with  God  and  this  world's  goods. 
God's  servant  may  have  these,  but  he  must  be  their 
master,  not  they  his.  If  they  are,  he  cannot  serve  God. 
This  sharp  denial  of  the  possibility  of  serving  both 
comes  into  view  mainly  as  the  foundation  of  the  exhorta 
tions  which  fill  the  remainder  of  the  chapter.  They  are 
Christ's  warnings  against  anxiety  about  material  good. 
Such  anxiety,  then,  is  one  form  of  mammon-worship. 
The  man  who  thinks  that  it  is  the  supreme  good,  and 
the  man  who  dreads  the  loss  of  it  as  the  supreme  evil, 
are  the  samejnan.  We  have  then  chiefly  to  consider  the 
sweet  persuasions  with  which  Christ  would  here  win  our 
timid  hearts  to  bold  trust.  The  whole  section  falls  into 
three  parts  of  unequal  length,  marked  off  by  the  repe 
tition  of  the  command  "  Be  not  anxious."  It  occurs  at 
verses  25,  31,  and  34,  and  on  each  occasion  introduces  a 
fresh  set  of  reasons  against  anxious  care.  If  we  look 
closely  at  these,  we  shall  see  that  they  may  be  briefly 
stated  thus :  Anxiety  is  opposed  to  thejteaching  of  nature,  as 
seen  in  the  lower  creation,  which  shows  it  to  be  needless  ; 
1|  to  the  teaching  of  revelation,  which  shows  it  to  be 
heathenism  •  and  to  the  teaching  of  providence,  which 
condemns  it  as  useless. 


I.  This  anxiety,  which  is  a  form  of  mammon-worship, 
and    therefore  inconsistent  with  true  devotion,  is    dead 


ioo  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew,    [Chap.  vi.  24-34. 

against  the  teaching  of  nature.  Our  Lord  puts  three 
facts  of  nature  before  us, — our  compelled  dependence  on 
God  for  bodily  life  at  all ;  the  way  in  which  the  birds  of 
the  air  are  fed  ;  and  that  in  which  the  lilies  grow, — and 
bids  us  see  if  these  do  not  condemn  our  anxieties. 

Take  that  first  thought,  "  Is  not  the  life  more  than 
meat,  and  the  body  than  raiment  ? "  That  is  in  effect 
equivalent  to  saying,  You  have  to  trust  God,  whether 
you  will  or  no,  for  your  body,  its  form,  its  growth,  its 
duration.  You  are  obliged  to  trust  Him  to  give  you  it, 
and  to  keep  you  in  its  possession;  trust  Him  to  clothe  and 
feed  it.  You  cannot  help  beingr  dependent.  All  that 
you  can  do,  with  all  your  carking  care,  is  but  to  adorn 
a  little  more  or  less  beautifully  the  allotted  span.  What 
is  the  use  of  being  careful  for  food  and  raiment,  when 
below  these  lies  the  question  for  the  answer  to  which 
you  have  to  hang  in  implicit  dependence  on  God, — shall 
I  live,  or  die  ?  Your  anxiety  does  not  go  very  deep, 
after  all,  but  is  like  a  passing  shower,  that  softens  an 
inch  of  the  hard-baked  ground,  and  never  gets  near  the 
seeds  that  lie  feet  below  the  reach  of  its  useless  moisture. 
You  must  trust  Him  for  the  greater  ;  you  may  as  well 
trust  Him  for  the  less.  God  gives  the  greater,  and  that 
binds  Him  to  give  the  less.  He  gives  royally  and 
liberally,  logically  and  completely.  When  He  bestows 
life,  you  may  be  sure  that  He  will  not  stultify  His  gift. 

Then  follow  the  exquisite  illustrations  of  the  fowls  of 
the  air  and  the  lilies  of  the  field,  .which  people  who 
know  little  else  of  the  Bible  know  by  heart.  I  need  not 
linger  over  their  beauty,  which  appeals  to  all.  Our  Lord 
points  to  them  as  specimens  in  the  lower  creation  of  the 
working  of  the  loving  care  to  which  we  ought  to  trust. 


Less,  x.]  « Without  Carefulness."  101 

• 
"  Solomon  in  all  his  glory  was  not  arrayed  like  one  of 

these," — there  is  an  instance  of  God's  giving  more  than 
barely  enough  ;  He  lavishes  beauty,  He  touches  the 
flower  into  grace,  and  decks  waste  places  with  fairness, 
and  "so  "clothes  the  grass  of  the  field  that  we  may 
learn  that  a  fair  spirit,  who  delights  in  a  fair  creation,  a 
bountiful  spirit  who  gives  with  both  hands,  presides  over 
all  things,  and  divides  His  gifts  to  men. 

Much  of  the  force  of  our  Lord's  words  here  depends 
on  the  inferiority  of  these  creatures.  Observe  the  points 
of  inferiority.  One  is  that  they  do  not  need  to  toil. 
"  They  sow  not,  neither  do  they  reap  "  ;  and  that  is  no 
privileged  exemption,  but  one  of  the  particulars  in  which 
we  are  "  much  better  than  they."  We  have  the  privilege 
of  work,  and  so  can  influence  to-morrow,  therefore  we 
need  not  fret  about  it.  We  have  hands  that  can  grasp 
the  tool  or  the  pen.  They  labour  not,  and  yet  are  fed. 
Much  more  will  He  feed  us,  whom  He  has  made  capable 
of  toil.  Again,  "  Your  heavenly  Father  feedeth  them  "  ; 
they  cannot  say  "  father,"  yet  they  are  cared  for.  Shame 
on  us  if  we  are  anxious  !  for  .every  lily  blows  and  every 
bird  carols  its  song  without  foreboding,  and  yet  there  is 
no  Father  in  heaven  to  them. 

Again,  they  are  inferior  in  their  brief  duration.  "  To 
day  it  is,  and  to-morrow  it  is  cast  into  the  oven."  They 
are  blessed  in  the  present.  The  oven  to-morrow  saddens 
not  the  blossoming  of  to-day.  We  have  nobler  and 
more  lasting  needs,  and  are  in  so  far  better.  The  same 
hand  which  supplies  the  more  transient  necessities  will 
not  grudge  or  forget  to  supply  the  wants  which  wrander 
through  eternity. 

II.  Verses  31-33  lead  us  to  another  line  of  thought, 


102  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    LchaP- vi-  24-34- 

which  tends  to  dispel  anxious  care.  It  is  contrary  to  the 
lessons  of  revelation,  which  show  it  to  be  at  bottom 
heathenism.  "  After  all  these  things  do  the  Gentiles 
seek."  It  is  the  very  characteristic  of  the  Gentile,  that 
is  to  say,  of  the  heathen,  that  earth  should  bound  his 
horizon  and  contain  all  his  desires.  If  a  Christian  is 
living  in  the  anxious  foreboding  of  some  worldly  disaster, 
or  is  unable  to  leave  to-morrow  in  God's  hands,  is  not 
the  very  root  of  such  a  temper  heathenish  worldly- 
mindedness  ? 

Again,  this  anxiety  rests  upon  a  misunderstanding  or 
lack  of  trust  in  the  character  of  God.  "  Your  Heavenly 
Father  knoweth  that  ye  have  need  of  all  these  things  "  ; 
the  heathen  thought  of  God  is  that  He  is  far  removed 
from  our  perplexities,  ignorant  of  our  struggles,  or  care 
less  about  them.  The  Christian  has  the  double  armour 
against  anxiety, — the  name  of  Father,  and  the  conviction 
that  His  knowledge  is  co-extensive  with  His  love.  He 
who  calls  us  His  children  thoroughly  understands  and 
sympathizes  with  our  wants. 

Further,  anxious  care  can  only  be  stilled  by  true 
religion.  "  Seek  ye  first  the  kingdom  of  God  ! "  It  is 
of  no  use  to  tell  men  that  they  ought  to  trust,  and  to 
point  them  for  teachers  to  birds  and  flowers  ;  nor  is  it 
enough  to  preach  to  them  that  distrust  is  heathenism. 
The  heart  must  be  filled  with  a  supreme  and  transcendent 
desire  after  one  supreme  object ;  and  then  there  will  be 
no  room  for  anxious  care  about  lesser  good.  If  our  souls 
are  stretching  out  towards  that  state  of  complete  and 
joyful  submission  to  God's  loving  will  which  is  the 
kingdom  of  God  within  us,  "  the  cares  that  infest  the 
day  "  will  steal  away  from  out  of  the  sacred  pavilion  of 


Less,  x.]  "Without  Carefulness."  103 

your  believing  spirit.  If  we  could  live  on  the  heights, 
sure  that  we  have  God,  and  sure  that  He  is  enough, 
come  what  darkness  of  sorrow  may  come,  then  we  should 
not  be  anxious  about  the  complexion  of  to-morrow,  for 
we  should  be  calm  in  the  possession  of  what  nothing 
that  has  power  over  the  changeable  goods  of  life  can 
touch  or  take  away. 

III.  Finally,  Christ  here  tells  us  that  anxiety  for  to 
morrow  is  contrary  to  the  scheme  of  providence,  which 
shows  it  to  be  vain. 

"  The  morrow  shall  take  thought  for  the  things  of 
itself."  It  will  have  anxieties  enough  of  its  own,  after 
and  in  spite  of  all  the  anxieties  about  it  to-day,  by  which 
you  try  to  free  it  from  care  when  it  comes.  Every  day, 
to  the  end  of  the  days,  will  have  its  own  evil,  and  the 
day's  portion  which  you  cannot  get  rid  of  will  be  enough 
for  all  the  strength  which  you  have  to  cope  with  it. 
And  anxiety  about  the  future  is  vain.  After  all  our 
careful  watching  of  the  heaven,  the  clouds  will  rise  in  an 
unwatched  quarter.  After  all  our  fortifying  of  the  citadel, 
there  will  be  some  little  postern  left  unguarded,  some 
weak  place  uncommanded  by  a  battery,  and  there,  where 
we  never  looked  for  him,  the  inevitable  assailant  will 
make  his  entrance.  After  all  the  dipping  of  the  hero  in 
the  waters  that  gave  invulnerability,  there  was  the  little 
spot  on  the  heel,  and  the  arrow  found  its  way  there. 
Nothing  is  certain  but  the  unexpected.  To-morrow  will 
have  its  cares  in  spite  of  all  that  anxious  care  and 
foreboding  can  do.  It  is  God's  law  of  providence  that 
we  shall  be  disciplined  by  sorrow,  and  to  try  to  escape 
from  that  law  by  forecasting  prudence  is  hopeless. 

And  what  does  our  anxiety  do  ?     It  does  not  empty 


104  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.  vi.  24-34. 

to-morrow  of  its  sorrows,  but  it  empties  to-day  of  its 
strength.  It  does  not  give  escape  from  evil,  but  it 
makes  us  unfit  to  cope  with  it  when  it  bursts  on  us.  It 
does  not  bless  to-morrow,  and  it  robs  to-day.  For  every 
clay  has  its  own  burden,  which  is  quite  heavy  enough 
for  the  day's  strength.  Sufficient  for  each  day  is  the  evil 
which  properly  belongs  to  it.  We  shall  be  wise  if  we  do 
not  add  to-morrow's  weight  to  to-day's  load,  nor  drag  the 
future,  wrongly  conceived  as  it  will  be  sure  to  be,  into 
the  present,  where  there  is  no  place  for  it.  The  present 
has  enough  to  do  in  looking  after  its  own  concerns. 

We  have  always,  or  we  can  always  get,  strength  enough  j 
to  bear  the  evil  when  it  comes.  We  have  not  strength  ,: 
to  bear  the  foreboding  of  it.  "As  thy  days,  so  shall  thy 
strength  be."  In  strict  proportion  to  the  God-appointed 
existing  exigency  will  be  the  God-given  power.  But  if 
we  crowd  both  the  sorrows  of  to-day,  which  we  actually 
feel,  and  those  of  to-morrow  which  we  anticipate,  into 
the  narrow  room  of  four-and- twenty  hours,  there  is  no 
promise  that  our  strength  will  be  as  that  day.  God 
gives  us  power  to  bear  all  the  sorrows  and  cares  of  His 
making  ;  but  He  does  not  bind  Himself  to  give  us  power 
to  bear  those  which  we  manufacture  with  perverse 
industry  for  ourselves  by  being  "  over-exquisite  to  cast 
the  fashion  of  uncertain  evils." 

Thus,  then,  our  Lord  would  teach  us  that  the  exercise 
of  that  anxious  care,  which  is  the  misuse  of  the  great 
faculty  of  looking  forward  and  picturing  things  to  come, 
is  contrary  to  nature,  revelation,  and  providence  ;  that  it 
weakens  and  distracts  ;  that  it  takes  the  sunshine  out  of 
every  landscape,  and  flings  a  shadow  over  all  good. 
Surely  God  gave  us  that  wonderful  faculty  for  better 


Less,  x.]  « Without  Carefulness."  105 

purposes  than  that  we  might  by  it  torment  ourselves,  and 
suffer  every  evil  twice  over.  Why  should  we  exercise 
our  power  of  imagining  the  future  chiefly  in  regard  to  to 
morrow's  possible  evils,  when  we  might  by  its  aid  fill  the 
winter  of  our  earthly  life  with  the  glorious  summer  of 
eternity,  and  bring  assurance  of  things  hoped  for  to 
lighten  the  dark  present  ?  We  cannot  but  look  forward  ; 
but  we  may  choose  whether  we  shall  look  but  a  little  way 
ahead  on  the  low  level,  or  beyond  and  above  all  the 
trifles  at  hand  to  "  that  one  far-off  divine  event  to  which 
the  whole  creation  moves." 


LESSON    XL 
Judging,  Asking,  and  Giving. 


MATTHEW  vii.  1-12. 


1.  "  Judge  not,  that  ye  be  not 
judged. 

2.  For   with    what  judgment 
ye  judge,   ye   shall   be  judged  : 
and  with  what  measure  ye  mete, 
it    shall    be    measured    to    you 
again. 

3.  And    why  beholdest    thou 
the  mote  that  is  in  thy  brother's 
eye,    but    considerest    not    the 
beam     that     is    in     thine    own 
eye  ? 

4.  Or  how  wilt  thou  say  to 
thy  brother,  Let  me  pull  out  the 
mote  out  of  thine  eye  ;  and,  be 
hold,    a   beam  is   in  thine  own 
eye  ? 

5.  Thou   hypocrite,  first  cast 
out  the  beam  out  of  thine  own 
eye;    and  then   shalt   thou   see 
clearly  to  cast  out  the  mote  out 
of  thy  brother's  eye. 

6.  Give    not    that    which    is 
holy  unto  the  dogs,  neither  cast 
ye   your   pearls    before  swine, 
lest  they  trample  them   under 


I. 


their  feet,  and  turn  again  and 
rend  you. 

7.  Ask,  and  it  shall  be  given 
you ;    seek,  and  ye  shall   find ; 
knock,  and   it  shall  be  opened 
unto  you  : 

8.  For  every  one  that  asketh 
receiveth ;  and  he  that  seeketh 
findeth  ;  and  to  him  that  knock- 
eth  it  shall  be  opened. 

9.  Or  what  man   is   there  of 
I*  you,  whom  if  his  son  ask  bread, 

;    will  he  give  him  a  stone  ? 

10.  Or  if  he  ask  a  fish,  will 
|    he  give  him  a  serpent  ? 

11.  If   ye    then,    being    evil, 
j    know  how  to  give  good   gifts 

unto  your  children,  how  much 
more  shall  your  Father  w7hich 
is  in  heaven  give  good  things 
to  them  that  ask  Him  ? 

12.  Therefore  all  things  what- 
:    soever    ye     would     that     men 

should  do  to  you,  do  ye  even 
so  to  them  :  for  this  is  the  law 
and  the  prophets." 


HOW  can  we  help  "judging,"  and  why  should  we 
not  "judge"?     The  power  of  seeing  into  cha 
racter  is  to  be  coveted  and  cultivated,  and  the  absence 

1 06 


Less.  XL]        Judging,  Asking,  and  Giving.  107 

of  it  makes  simpletons,  not  saints.  Quite  true :  but 
seeing  into  character  is  not  what  Jesus  is  condemning 
here.  The  "  judging  "  of  which  He  speaks  sees  motes  in 
a  brother's  eye.  That  is  to  say,  it  is  one-sided,  and 
fixes  on  faults,  which  it  magnifies,  passing  by  virtues. 
Carrion  flies  who  buzz  with  a  sickening  hum  of  satis 
faction  over  sores,  and  prefer  corruption  to  soundness, 
are  as  good  judges  of  meat  as  such  critics  are  of  cha 
racter.  That  Mephistophelean  spirit  of  detraction  in 
this  day  has  wide  scope.  Literature  and  politics,  as 
well  as  social  life  with  its  rivalries,  are  infested  by  it,  and 
it  finds  its  way  into  the  church  and  threatens  us  all.  The 
race  of  fault-finders  we  have  always  with  us,  blind  as 
moles  to  beauties  and  goodness,  but  lynx-eyed  for  failings, 
and  finding  meat  and  drink  in  proclaiming  them  in  tones 
of  affected  sorrow.  How  flagrant  a  breach  of  the  laws  of 
the  kingdom  this  temper  implies,  and  how  grave  an  evil 
it  is,  though  thought  little  of,  or  even  admired  as  clever 
ness  and  a  mark  of  a  very  superior  person,  Christ  shows 
us  by  this  earnest  warning,  imbedded  among  His  funda 
mental  moral  teachings. 

He  points  out  first  how  certainly  that  disposition 
provokes  retaliation.  Who  is  the  Judge  that  judges  us 
as  we  do  others  ?  Perhaps  it  is  best  to  say  that  both 
the  Divine  and  the  human  estimates  are  included  in  the 
purposely  undefined  expression.  Certainly  both  are 
included  in  fact.  For  a  carping  spirit  of  eager  fault-finding 
necessarily  tinges  people's  feelings  towards  its  possessor, 
and  he  cannot  complain  if  the  severe  tests  which  he 
applied  to  others  are  used  on  his  own  conduct.  A 
cynical  critic  cannot  expect  his  victims  to  be  profoundly 
attached  to  him,  or  ready  to  be  lenient  to  his  failings. 


io8  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.  vii.  1-12. 

If  he  chooses  to  fight  with  a  tomahawk,  he  will  be 
scalped  some  day,  and  the  bystanders  will  not  lament 
profusely.  But  a  more  righteous  tribunal  than  that  of 
his  victims  condemns  him.  For  in  God's  eyes  the  man 
who  covers  not  his  neighbour's  faults  with  the  mantle  of 
charity  has  not  his  own  blotted  out  by  Divine  forgiveness. 
This  spirit  is  always  accompanied  by  ignorance  of 
one's  own  faults,  which  makes  the  man  indulging  it 
ludicrous.  So  our  Lord  would  seem  to  intend  by  the 
figure  of  the  mote  and  the  beam.  It  takes  a  great  deal 
of  close  peering  to  see  a  mote  ;  but  the  censorious  man 
sees  only  the  mote,  and  sees  it  out  of  scale.  No  matter 
how  bright  the  eye,  though  it  be  clear  as  a  hawk's,  its 
beauty  is  of  no  moment  to  him.  The  mote  magnified, 
and  nothing  but  the  mote,  is  his  object ;  and  he  calls 
this  one-sided  exaggeration  "  criticism,"  and  prides  him 
self  on  the  accuracy  of  his  judgment.  He  makes  just 
the  opposite  mistake  in  his  estimate  of  his  own  faults,  i 
he  sees  them  at  all.  We  look  at  our  neighbour's  errors 
with  a  microscope,  and  at  our  own  through  the  wrong 
end  of  a  telescope.  We  see  neither  in  their  real  magni 
tude,  and  the  former  fault  is  sure  to  lead  to  the  latter. 
We  have  two  sets  of  weights  and  measures  :  one  for 
home  use,  the  other  for  foreign.  Every  vice  has  two 
names ;  and  we  call  it  by  the  flattering  and  minimizing 
one  when  we  commit  it,  and  by  the  ugly  one  when  our 
neighbour  does  it.  Everybody  can  see  the  hump  on  his 
friend's  shoulders,  but  it  takes  some  effort  to  see  our  own. 
David  was  angry  enough  at  the  man  who  stole  his 
neighbour's  ewe  lamb,  but  quite  unaware  that  he  was 
guilty  of  a  meaner,  crueller  theft.  The  mote  can  be 
seen ;  but  the  beam,  big  though  it  be,  needs  to  be  "  con- 


Less.  XI.]        Judging1,  Asking,  and  Giving.  109 

sidered."  So  it  often  escapes  notice,  and  will  surely  do 
so ;  if  we  are  yielding  to  the  temptation  of  harsh  judg 
ment  of  others,  every  man  may  be  aware  of  faults  of  his 
own  very  much  bigger  than  any  that  he  can  see  in 
another.  For  each  of  us  may  fathom  the  depth  of  our 
own  sinfulness  in  motive,  and  unspoken,  unacted  thought, 
while  we  can  see  only  the  surface  acts  of  others. 

Our  Lord  points  out,  in  verse  4,  a  still  more  subtle 
form  of  this  harsh  judgment,  when  it  assumes  the  ap 
pearance  of  solicitude  for  the  improvement  of  others, 
and  teaches  us  that  all  honest  desire  to  help  in  the 
moral  reformation  of  our  neighbours  must  be  preceded 
by  earnest  efforts  at  mending  our  own  conduct.  If  we 
have  grave  faults  of  our  own  undetected  and  uncon- 
quered,  we  are  incapable  either  of  judging  or  of  helping 
our  brethren.  Such  efforts  will  be  hypocritical,  for  they 
pretend  to  come  from  genuine  zeal  for  righteousness  and 
care  for  another's  good,  whereas  their  real  root  is  simply 
censorious  exaggeration  of  a  neighbour's  faults  ;  they 
imply  that  the  person  affected  with  such  a  tender  care 
for  another's  eyes  has  his  own  in  good  condition.  A 
blind  guide  is  bad  enough,  but  a  blind  oculist  is  a  still 
more  ridiculous  anomaly.  Note,  too,  that  the  result  of 
clearing  our  own  vision  is  beautifully  put,  not  as  being 
ability  to  see,  but  ability  to  cure  our  fellows.  It  is  only 
the  experience  of  the  pain  of  casting  out  a  darling  evil, 
and  the  consciousness  of  God's  pitying  mercy  as  given 
to  us,  that  makes  the  eye  keen  enough,  and  the  hand 
steady  and  gentle  enough,  to  pull  out  the  mote.  It  is  a 
delicate  operation,  and  one  which  a  clumsy  operator  may 
make  very  painful,  and  useless,  after  all.  A  rough  finger 
or  a  harsh  spirit  makes  success  impossible. 


no  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.  vii.  1-12. 

II.  Verse  6  comes  in  singular  juxtaposition  with  a 
warning  against  uncharitable  judgments.  Christ's  calling 
men  dogs  and  swine  does  not  sound  like  obeying  His 
own  precept.  But  the  very  shock  which  the  words  give 
at  first  hearing  is  part  of  their  value.  There  are  men 
whom  Jesus,  for  all  His  gentleness,  has  to  estimate  thus. 
His  pitying  eyes  were  not  blind  to  truth.  It  was  no 
breach  of  infinite  charity  in  Him  to  see  facts,  and  to 
give  them  their  right  names ;  and  His  previous  precept 
does  not  bid  us  shut  ours,  or  give  up  common  sense. 
This  verse  limits  the  application  of  the  preceding,  and 
inculcates  prudence,  tact,  and  discernment  of  character, 
as  no  less  essential  to  His  servants  than  the  sweet 
charity,  slow  to  suspect  and  sorrowful  to  expose  a 
brother's  fault.  The  fact  that  His  gentle  lips  used  such 
words  may  well  make  us  shudder  as  we  think  of  the 
deforming  of  human  nature  into  pure  animalism,  which 
some  men  achieve,  and  which  is  possible  for  all. 

The  inculcation  of  discretion  in  the  presentation  of 
the  truth  may  easily  be  exaggerated  into  a  doctrine  of 
reserve  which  is  more  Jesuitical  than  Christian.  Even 
when  guarded  and  limited,  it  may  seem  scarcely  in 
harmony  with  the  commission  to  preach  the  gospel  to 
every  creature,  or  with  the  sublime  confidence  that  God's 
word  finds  something  to  appeal  to  in  every  heart,  and 
has  power  to  subdue  the  animal  in  every  man.  But  the 
divergence  is  only  apparent.  The  most  expansive  zeal 
is  to  be  guided  by  prudence,  and  the  most  enthusiastic 
confidence  in  the  universal  power  of  the  gospel  does  not 
take  leave  of  common  sense.  There  are  people  who 
will  certainly  be  repelled,  and  perhaps  stirred  to  furious 
antagonism  to  the  gospel  and  its  messengers,  if 'they  are 


Less,  xi.]        Judging,  Asking,  and  Giving.  1 1 1 

not  approached  with  discretion.  It  is  bad  to  hide  the 
treasure  in  a  napkin  ;  it  is  quite  as  bad  to  fling  it  down 
without  preparation  before  some  people.  Jesus  Himself 
locked  His  lips  before  Herod,  although  the  curious  ruler 
asked  many  questions  ;  and  we  have  sometimes  to 
remember  that  there  are  people  who  "  will  not  hear  the 
word,"  and  who  must  first  "  be  won  without  the  word." 
Heavy  rains  run  off  hard-baked  earth.  It  must  first  be 
softened  by  a  gentle  drizzle.  Luther  once  told  this  fable  : 
"  The  lion  made  a  great  feast,  and  he  invited  all  the 
beasts,  and  among  the  rest,  a  sow.  When  all  manner  of 
costly  dishes  were  set  before  the  guests,  the  sow  asked, 
'  Have  you  no  bran  ?  '  Even  so,  said  he,  we  preachers 
set  forth  the  most  dainty  dishes, — the  forgiveness  of  sins, 
and  the  grace  of  God  ;  but  they  turn  up  their  snouts, 
and  grub  for  guilders." 

This  precept  is  one  side  of  the  truth.  The  other  is 
the  adaptation  of  the  gospel  to  all  men,  and  the  obliga 
tion  on  us  to  preach  it  to  all.  We  can  only  tell  most 
men's  disposition  towards  it  by  offering  it  to  them,  and 
we  are  not  to  be  in  a  hurry  to  conclude  that  men  are 
dogs  and  swine. 

III.  We  have  the  bountiful  law  of  Christ's  giving. 
The  connection  with  the  previous  verse  is  difficult.  It 
may  possibly  be  "  You  are  not  only  givers,  but  have  first 
to  receive,  and  this  is  how  you  may  receive."  Notice 
first  the  condition  on  which  we  obtain  the  divine  gift. 
The  three  words,  "  ask,  seek,  knock,"  are  obviously  a 
climax.  We  are  perhaps  not  intended  to  press  the 
difference  between  them,  but  still  it  seems  improbable 
that  there  should  be  no  meaning  in  the  studied  variety 
of  expression.  The  first  condition  is  desire,  addressed 


ii2  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap. vii.  1-12. 

to  Him  who  can  grant  it.  The  second  is  effort  in  the 
direction  of  our  desires.  The  third  is  persistent  con 
tinuance  of  desire  and  effort.  Experience  seems  to 
contradict  such  promises.  Is  there  any  region  in  which 
to  ask  is  to  have,  to  seek  is  to  find,  and  in  which  every 
door  flies  open  at  our  knock  ?  Certainly  not  in  the 
world  of  common  life,  where  bitter  disappointment,  vain 
wishes,  and  bootless  search  are  so  common.  Jesus 
Christ  did  not  mean  that  His  followers  may  have  what 
ever  they  like.  The  way  to  spoil  a  child  is  to  give  it  all 
it  asks,  and  He  does  not  mean  to  spoil  us.  Therefore  He 
must  thwart  our  wishes  till  they  run  parallel  with  His 
will,  and  are  fixed  on  higher  good  than  earth  holds.  So, 
of  course,  this  promise  is  true  only  in  the  spiritual  realm, 
or  in  regard  to  the  development  of  the  Christian  cha 
racter.  We  may  have  as  much  of  God  as  we  will. 
Christ  puts  the  key  of  the  treasure  chamber  into  our 
hand,  and  bids  us  take  all  that  we  want.  If  a  man  is 
admitted  into  the  bullion  vault  of  a  bank,  and  told  to 
help  himself,  and  comes  out  with  one  cent,  whose  fault 
is  it  that  he  is  poor  ?  Whose  fault  is  it  that  Christian 
people  generally  have  such  scanty  portions  of  the  free 
riches  of  God  ? 

This  climax  teaches  us  that  prayers  unaccompanied 
by  effort  are  not  answered.  Many  ask  who  do  not  seek. 
There  are  precious  things  which  cannot  be  given  to  a 
mere  wish.  We  have  to  seek,  not  as  though  we  do  not 
know  where  to  find,  but  like  gold-diggers,  toiling  on  their 
claims,  not  because  they  do  not  know  where  the  gold  is, 
but  because  they  do  know  that  it  is  there.  And  there 
must  be  continuous  desire  and  effort.  That  implies  that 
the  answers  do  not  always  come  immediately.  The  best 


Less.  XL]        Judging,  Asking,  and  Giving.  113 

gifts  grow  slowly, — more  than  forty-and-six  years  is  the 
temple  of  a  Christ-like  nature  in  building.  Therefore 
patient  continuance  in  waiting  on  the  Giver  is  the  final 
condition  of  receiving  His  highest  gifts.  Like  Peter  at 
the  gate,  we  must  "  continue  knocking."  Many  a  man 
prays  for  spiritual  gifts,  and,  like  a  rifleman  who  fires  and 
does  not  wait  to  see  whether  his  ball  has  struck  the 
target,  goes  away  before  the  signal  can  be  made  that  his 
prayer  is  heard. 

It  may  be  a  question  whether,  in  verse  8,  the  emphasis 
is  to  be  laid  on  "  every  one  "  or  on  "  that  asketh,"  or,  in 
other  words,  whether  it  is  an  assurance  that  the  universal 
law  will  be  followed  in  our  case,  or  a  statement  of  the 
universal  condition  without  which  no  receiving  is  possible, 
and,  least  of  all,  the  receiving  of  the  gifts  of  the  kingdom 
by  its  subjects.  In  either  case,  this  verse  gives  the 
reason  for  the  preceding  exhortation.  Then  follows  the 
tender  illustration  in  which  the  dim-sighted  love  of 
earthly  fathers  is  taken  as  a  parable  of  the  all-wise 
tenderness  and  desire  to  bestow  which  move  the  hand  of 
the  giving  God.  There  is  some  resemblance  between 
an  Eastern  loaf  and  a  stone,  and  some  between  a  fish 
and  a  serpent.  However  imperfect  a  father's  love,  he 
will  neither  be  cruel  enough  to  cheat  his  unsuspecting 
child  with  what  looks  like  an  answer  to  his  wish,  but  is 
useless  or  hurtful,  nor  foolish  enough  to  make  a  mistake. 
All  human  relationships  are  in  some  measure  marred  by 
the  faults  of  those  who  sustain  them.  What  a  solemn 
attestation  of  universal  sinfulness  is  in  these  words  of 
Christ's,  and  how  calmly  He  separates  Himself  in  His 
sinlessness  from  us  !  I  do  not  know  that  there  is  any 
where  a  stronger  scriptural  proof  of  taese  two  truths  than 

8 


ii4  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew,    [Chap.  vii.  1-12. 

this  one  incidental  clause,  "  ye,  being  evil."  I  wonder 
whether  the  people  who  pit  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount 
against  evangelical  Christianity  are  ready  to  take  this  bit 
of  it  into  their  creeds.  It  is  noteworthy,  also,  that  the 
emphasis  is  laid,  not  on  the  earthly  father's  willingness, 
but  on  his  knowing  how  to  give  good  gifts.  Our  Lord 
seems  to  think  that  He  need  not  assure  us  of  the  plain 
truth,  that  of  course  our  Father  in  heaven  is  willing,  just 
because  He  is  our  Father,  to  give  us  all  good  ;  but  He 
heartens  us  with  the  assurance  that  His  love  is  wisdom, 
and  that  He  cannot  make  any  mistakes.  There  are  no 
stones  mingled  with  our  bread,  nor  any  serpents  among 
the  fish.  He  gives  good,  and  nothing  but  good.  What 
if  a  foolish  child  should  ask  for  a  stone,  thinking  that  it 
was  bread,  or  for  a  serpent,  believing  it  to  be  a  fish  ? 
Will  our  Father  give  these  to  us  ?  Surely  not.  There 
fore,  in  the  region  of  earthly  good,  where  our  desires  are 
often  wrong,  His  love  and  wisdom  will  be  shown  by  His 
disappointing  our  wishes,  that  He  may  satisfy  our  wants. 
So  Luke,  in  His  version  of  these  words,  explains  "good 
thing  "  by  "  the  Holy  Spirit,"  the  one  certain  good,  which 
we  may  ask  for  and  not  be  disappointed. 

IV.  The  great  precept  which  closes  the  lesson  is  not 
only  to  be  taken  as  an  inference  from  the  immediately 
preceding  context,  but  as  the  summing  up  of  all  the 
duties  to  our  neighbours,  on  which  Christ  has  been 
laying  down  the  law  of  the  kingdom  from  Matthew  v.  17. 
This  general  reference  of  the  "  therefore  "  is  confirmed 
by  the  subsequent  clause,  "  this  is  the  law  and  the 
prophets  " ;  the  summing  up  of  the  whole  past  revelation 
of  the  Divine  will,  and  therefore  in  accordance  with  our 
Lord's  previous  exposition  of  the  relation  between  His 


Less.  XL]        Judging,  Asking1,  and  Giving.  115 

new  law  and  that  former  one,  the  summing  up  of  all  His 
teaching.  As  Luther  puts  it  in  his  vigorous,  homely 
way,  "  With  these  words  He  now  closes  His  instructions 
given  in  these  three  chapters,  and  ties  it  all  up  in  a  little 
bundle."  But  a  connection  may  also  be  traced  with  the 
preceding  paragraph.  There  our  desires  were  treated  as 
securing  God's  corresponding  gifts.  Here  our  desires, 
when  turned  to  men,  are  regarded,  not  as  securing  their 
corresponding  conduct,  but  as  obliging  us  to  action.  By 
taking  our  wishes  as  the  rule  of  our  dealings  with  others, 
we  shall  be  like  God,  who  takes  our  wishes  as  the  rule 
of  His  dealings  with  us.  Our  desires  sent  heavenward 
procure  blessings  for  us  ;  sent  earthward,  they  prescribe 
our  blessing  of  others.  That  is  a  startling  turn  to  give 
to  our  claims  on  our  fellows.  It  rests  on  the  principle 
that  every  man  has  equal  rights,  therefore  we  ought  not 
to  look  for  anything  from  others  which  we  are  not  pre 
pared  to  extend  to  others.  A  should  give  B  whatever  A 
thinks  B  should  give  him.  Our  error  is  in  making 
ourselves  our  own  centre,  and  thinking  more  of  our 
claims  on  others  than  of  our  obligations  to  them.  Christ 
teaches  us  that  these  are  one.  Such  a  principle  applied 
to  our  lives  would  wonderfully  pull  clown  our  expecta 
tions  and  lift  up  our  obligations.  It  is  really  but  another 
way  of  putting  the  law  of  loving  our  neighbours  as  our 
selves.  If  observed,  it  would  revolutionise  society. 
Nothing  short  of  it  is  the  law  of  the  kingdom,  and  the 
duty  of  all  who  call  themselves  Christ's  subjects. 

This  is  the  inmost  meaning,  says  Jesus,  of  the  law  and 
the  prophets.  All  the  former  revelations  of  the  Divine 
will  in  regard  to  men's  relations  to  men  are  summed 
in  this.  Of  course,  this  does  not  mean,  as  some 


u6  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.     [Chap.  vii.  1-12. 

people  would  like  to  make  it  mean,  that  morality  is  to 
take  the  place  of  religion,  but  simply  that  all  the  precepts 
touching  conduct  to  men  are  gathered  up  for  the  sub 
jects  of  the  kingdom  in  this  one,  "  Love  worketh  no  ill 
to  his  neighbour  :  therefore  love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the 
law." 


LESSON    XII. 


Closing  Warnings. 

MATTHEW  vii.  13-29. 


13.  "  Enter  ye  in  at  the  strait 
gate :  for  wide  is  the  gate,  and 
broad  is  the  way,  that  leadeth 
to  destruction,  and   many  there 
be  which  go  in  thereat : 

14.  Because  strait  is  the  gate, 
and   narrow  is  the  way,  which 
leadeth  unto  life,  and  few  there 
be  that  find  it. 

15.  Beware  of  false  prophets, 
which  come  to  you  in  sheep's 
clothing,  but  inwardly  they  are 
ravening  wolves. 

1 6.  Ye   shall  know  them   by 
their    fruits.       Do   men    gather 
grapes    of    thorns,    or     figs     of 
thistles? 

17.  Even  so  every  good  tree 
bringeth   forth  good  fruit ;  but 
a   corrupt    tree    bringeth    forth 
evil   fruit. 

1 8.  A  good  tree  cannot  bring 
forth    evil    fruit,   neither  can   a 
corrupt   tree    bring    forth   good 
fruit. 

19.  Every  tree  that  bringeth 
not   forth   good    fruit    is    hewn 
down,  and  cast  into  the  fire. 

20.  Wherefore  by  their  fruits 
ye  shall  know  them. 

21.  Not  every  one  that  saith 
unto  Me,  Lord,  Lord,  shall  enter 


j    into    the   kingdom    of   heaven  : 

'    but   he   that   docth   the  will  of 

my  Father  which  is  in  heaven. 

22.  Many  will   say  to   Me  in 
that  day,  Lord,  Lord,  have  we 
not   prophesied   in  Thy  name  ? 
and  in  Thy  name  have  cast  out 
devils  ?  and  in  Thy  name  done 
many  wonderful  works  ? 

23.  And  then  will    I   profess 
unto   them,   I  never  knew  you  : 
depart  from  Me,   ye  that  work 
iniqu:t\T. 

24.  Therefore       whosoever 
heareth  these  sayings  of  Mine, 
and    doeth  them,    I    will    liken 
him    unto    a   wise   man,    which 
built  his  house  upon  a  rock  : 

25.  And  the  rain  descended, 
and   the   floods   came,    and    the 
winds    blew,     and     beat    upon 
that    house   ;   and    it    fell    not : 
for    it    was    founded     upon     a 
rock. 

26.  And      every      one     that 
heareth  these  sayings  of  Mine, 
and   docth    them    not,   shall   be 
likened    unto     a     foolish     man, 
which    built    his    house    upon 
the    sand  : 

27.  And   the  rain  descended, 
and   the   floods  came,  and    the 

117 


n8  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.  vii.  13-29. 


winds  blew,  and  beat  upon  that 
house ;  and  it  fell  :  and  great 
was  the  fall  of  it. 

28.  And     it    came    to     pass, 
when  Jesus   had    ended    these 


sayings,    the    people    were    as 
tonished    at    His   doctrine : 

29.  For  He  taught  them  as 
one  having  authority,  and  not 
as  the  scribes." 


WE  have  reached  the  close  of  the  Sermon  on  the 
Mount,  and  the  verses  of  this  lesson  are  the 
concluding  warnings  and  exhortations.  They  fall  into 
three  parts  :  the  two  ways ;  the  test  and  end  of  false 
guides  ;  the  two  houses,  which  represent  the  two  lives 
of  the  true  and  the  feigned  disciple,  and  their  fates. 

I.  The  two  ways.  The  metaphor  of  a  path  signifying 
a  course  of  life  is  common  to  all  languages  and  teachers, 
and  needs  no  elucidation.  "  The  Way  "  was  one  of  the 
earliest  designations  for  the  Christian  life,  and  its  use 
may  probably  be  traced  back  to  these  words.  We  read 
in  the  Psalms  of  "  the  way  everlasting "  and  of  "  the 
way  of  the  wicked"  which  "perishes."  Similarly  our 
Lord  here  contrasts  the  two  courses  of  discipleship  and 
of  worldliness  in  four  particulars — the  entrance,  the 
breadth  of  the  way,  the  number  of  travellers,  and  the  end. 
If  we  adopt  the  reading  which  retains  the  "  for  "  at  the 
beginning  of  verse  14,  we  have,  first,  the  exhortation  in 
verse  13,  and  then  its  enforcement  by  two  co-ordinate 
reasons.  This  seems  better  than  to  suppose  that  the 
second  "  for  "  gives  the  reason  in  the  character  of  the 
narrow  way  for  the  preceding  character  of  the  broad 
one  ;  or,  than  the  adoption  of  the  other  reading  which 
substitutes  the  exclamation  "how  narrow  "  for  the  second 
"for." 

The  "  gate  "  is  simply  the  means  of  entrance  on  the 
path.  It  is  refining  too  much  to  recall  the  other  use  of 
the  figure,  which  sets  Christ  forth  as  the  door.  Such 


Less.  XII.]  Closing  Warnings,  119 

an  interpretation  would  require  to  be  applied  to  the 
other  half  of  the  contrast,  and  would  land  us  in  the 
monstrous  explanation  which  is  found  in  patristic  com 
mentaries,  that  the  devil  is  the  wide  gate  !  The  mean 
ing  is  simply,  it  is  easy  enough  to  get  into  the  road  of 
worldly  self-indulgence.  That  gate  is  open  wide  always. 
But  the  beginning  of  discipleship  is  not  easy  to  flesh 
and  blood.  The  entrance  is  through  a  narrow  wicket, 
which  can  only  be  passed  on  condition  of  leaving  a 
great  deal  outside  that  we  do  not  like  to  part  from. 
Nobody  can  get  in  there  in  a  carriage  and  pair,  nor 
carrying  a  high  head,  or  bearing  honours  and  posses 
sions.  These  will  catch  on  the  lintels,  and  have  to  be 
dropped.  In  plain  English,  a  man  cannot  be  a  Christian 
unless  he  is  willing  to  be  small,  to  give  up  self,  and 
forsake  the  world.  We  see  in  some  pre-historic  houses 
on  Scotch  moors  a  low  narrow  entrance,  a  foot  or  so 
square,  which  can  only  be  passed  by  lying  down  and 
squeezing  through  a  dark,  twisting  passage.  So  the  way 
into  the  kingdom  is  too  tight  to  admit  any  who  are  not 
humbled  by  conscious  sin,  and  ready  to  cease  from  self. 

"  But  easy  is  the  way  and  passage  plain 
To  pleasure's  palace ;  it  may  soon  be  spied, 
And  day  and  night  her  doors  to  all  stand  open  wide." 

As  are  the  gates,  so  are  the  ways.  The  one  way  is 
narrow,  the  other  broad — that  is  to  say,  the  course  of 
conduct  which  belongs  to  the  disciples  or  subjects  of 
the  kingdom  is  one  of  restraint,  and  limitation,  constant 
self-denial,  and  abstinence,  while  the  path  of  the  worldly 
man  is  pleasant  to  the  ignobler  self,  and  permits  him  to 
go  whithersoever  his  inclination  carries  him.  "Do  as 
you  like"  is  a  broad  road.  There  is  ample  room  to 


i2o  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.  vii.  13-29. 

expatiate  with  such  a  charter.  It  is  down  hill  too,  and 
the  down  grade  is  always  easy  travelling.  There  is  a 
pleasant  swing  when  we  shut  off  steam  at  the  top  of  the 
incline,  and  let  the  train  run  down  by  its  own  weight, 
very  unlike  the  laborious  puffing  of  the  locomotive  on 
the  up-track.  Self-indulgence  is  an  easy  prescription 
for  conduct,  and  self-denial  is  always  hard  to  the  worser 
self  who  is  denied.  It  would  be  all  very  pleasant  if  the 
roads  led  nowhither  ;  but  what  if  the  delightful  descent 
stops  short  at  the  top  of  a  cliff,  and  the  whole  rushing 
train  is  sure  to  go  over  ?  It  will  not  be  quite  so  pleasant 
then.  So,  our  Lord  puts  the  third  contrast  in  regard  to 
the  respective  ends.  The  narrow  path  goes  up.  That 
makes  it  hard,  but  it  leads  at  last  to  the  broad  table 
lands  where  God  is  the  light,  and  life  the  possession  of 
the  dwellers.  The  other  road  is  "  a  primrose  way," 
going  merrily  down, — but  to  "  the  everlasting  burning." 
Life  and  destruction  are  opposed.  The  nature  of  the 
one  defines  that  of  the  other.  Life  is  the  blessed  being 
of  the  spirit  united  to  God,  not  mere  existence.  De 
struction  is  the  miserable  being  of  the  spirit  separated 
from  God — a  living  death. 

Awful  and  strange,  then,  is  the  last  point  of  contrast 
between  the  crowds  on  the  one,  and  the  few  on  the 
other  way.  The  tragic  fact  that  there  are  few  who 
choose  the  harder  path  of  duty  and  discipleship  rather 
than  the  easier  one  of  self-indulgence  gives  the  real 
sombreness  to  life  as  seen  by  a  thoughtful  mind.  It 
is  not  so  much  that  men  are  miserable  and  mortal  as 
that  they  choose  to  be  sad,  which  makes  their  history 
such  a  bewilderment  and  mystery.  That  is  true  to 
day — as  it  was  when  Christ  looked  with  His  sad  heart 


Less,  xii.]  Closing  Warnings,  121 

on  the  multitudes  torn  and  wandering  like  lost  sheep. 
It  should  touch  all  Christian  hearts  with  Christ-like  pity  ; 
it  should  stir  them  to  efforts  which  would  put  to  shame 
the  feeble  work  of  the  Church  as  we  know  it.  Above 
all,  it  should  quicken  to  renewed  diligence  that  we  follow 
not  the  multitude  to  do  evil,  nor  ever  be  ashamed  to 
be  in  the  minority  which  aspires  and  endures,  and  denies 
self  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven's  sake. 

II.  The   test  and  end   of  false  guides.     The  warning 

against  the  broad  road  naturally  leads  to  a  warning  against 

guides  who  might  tempt  to  it.     By  "  prophets  "  is  meant 

not  merely  predictors,  but  persons  who  assume  to  speak 

as  Divine  messengers  ;  that  is  (as  Christ  takes  for  granted 

without  seeming  to  think  the  step  a  great  one),  persons 

who  speak  in  His  name.     They  look  like  sheep,  in  their 

meekness  and  apparent  innocence,  but  at  heart  they  are 

wolves,  and  their  work  is  to  tear  the  flock.     Two  things 

are  said  about  them — that  they  are  discovered  by  their 

fruits  (verses  16-20),  and  that  their  end  is  to  be  rejected 

by  Him  (verses  21-23).     The  usual  explanation  of  this 

section  is  that  it  refers   to   heretical  teachers,  and  that 

conduct  is   given   as   the   test  of  doctrine.     But  not  to 

raise  the   question   whether  it  is  true  that  the   lives   of 

teachers  who  have  departed  from  the  line  of  orthodoxy 

have  been   so  gross   as   to  discredit   their  teachings  —  it 

must  be   observed   that  such  an  explanation  makes  the 

doctrines  the  trees,  whereas  obviously  the  teachers  are 

the   trees ;  and  also  that,  throughout  the  whole  context, 

nothing  is  said  about  false  doctrines,  but,  on  the  contrary, 

the  false    prophets  are    represented   as    saying,    "  Lord, 

Lord,"  and  teaching  in  His  name,  and  are  condemned, 

not  because  their  teachings  are  untrue,  but  because  their 


122  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.  vii.  13-29. 

lives  are  not  in  accordance  with  their  teachings.  The 
application  of  this  test,  therefore,  comes  nearer  home  to 
orthodox  people  than  they  imagine. 

Put  into  plain  words,  it  is  that  a  teacher's  life,  like  any 
other  man's,  is  the  revealer  of  his  character.  Good 
fruit  comes  from  a  good  tree,  evil  from  an  evil.  The 
failure  to  bear  good  fruits  is  as  condemnatory  as  the 
fact  of  bearing  bad,  and  leads  to  as  certain  destruction. 
Therefore  all  Christian  teachers,  preachers,  writers,  com 
mentators,  and  the  like  are  "  false  prophets,"  however 
pure  their  doctrine,  if  they  are  not  good  men.  It  is  not 
a  test  to  detect  heretics,  but  to  unmask  hypocrites,  and 
the  worst  kind  of  them,  unconscious  hypocrites.  Many 
an  eloquent  preacher,  or  learned  theologian,  many  a 
dragon  of  orthodoxy  who  used  to  apply  these  words 
complacently  to  "  heretics,"  who  were  better  men  than 
himself,  will  find  out  some  day  that  he  would  have  been 
wiser  to  look  at  home,  and  see  how  they  flashed  a 
terrible  light  into  the  hollowness  of  his  own  religion. 
They  are  a  warning  to  the  flock  as  well  as  the  shepherds, 
and  bid  them  beware  of  any  man  however  golden- 
mouthed  and  sound  in  the  faith,  who  has  not  the 
credentials  of  a  holy,  fruitful,  Christ-like  life.  It  is  a 
solemn  thought  that  a  man  may  be  a  "  false  prophet " 
and  a  "  ravening  wolf,"  while  others  think  him,  and  he 
thinks  himself,  a  minister  of  Christ,  and  a  pillar  of  the 
Church.  Each  of  us  listening  to  such  words  should 
humbly  say,  "  Lord,  is  it  I  ? " 

The  end  of  the  false  guides  is  given  in  words  terrible 
when  we  think  what  lips  spoke  then.  Distinctly  does 
our  Lord  claim  in  them  to  be  the  Judge  of  the  world, 
whose  knowledge  of  each  heart  pierces  through  all  shows, 


Less,  xii.]  Closing  Warnings.  123 

whose  sentence  is  final,  from  whom  to  he  shut  out  is  to 
perish.  Do  the  admirers  of  "  the  pure  morality  of  the 
Sermon  on  the  Mount"  take  this  part  of  it  into  their 
creeds  ?  But,  apart  from  that,  observe  that  these  solemn 
words  distinctly  describe  not  heretical,  but  hypocritical 
teachers.  The  weight  of  their  condemnation  is  that, 
while  proclaiming  Christ's  name,  and  calling  Him  Lord, 
and  doing  mighty  deeds  for  Him,  they  had  no  real  union 
with  Him,  that  He  never  knew  them  with  that  knowledge 
which  is  friendship,  although  He  knew  them  only  too 
well,  and  that  they  are  still  perhaps  even  at  that  awful 
hour  workers  of  iniquity. 

So  profound  has  been  their  self-deception  that  they 
appear  before  the  Judge  with  confidence,  and  present 
the  deeds  which  had  won  them  credit  among  men  as  His 
messengers  in  evidence  of  their  claim  to  acceptance.  Is 
that  wholly  drapery,  or  may  it  not  teach  a  lesson  that 
may  well  make  us  all  tremble,  as  to  the  possible  surprises 
of  that  day  ? 

III.  The  two  houses  and  their  fates.  The  principles 
laid  down  in  the  preceding  words  do  not  apply  to  teachers 
only,  but  to  all  the  subjects  of  the  kingdom,  and  to  all 
who  hear  its  laws.  Therefore,  Christ  here  closes  the 
whole  with  the  solemn  extension  of  them  to  "  every 
one  .  .  .  which  heareth  these  sayings  of  Mine."  The 
same  contrast  is  still  presented  between  the  mere  hearer 
and  the  doer.  Obedience  it  still  set  forth  as  the  only 
safety. 

Consider  first  the  house  on  the  rock.  We  are  all 
builders.  Day  by  day  we  lay  fresh  courses  of  masonry. 
The  houses  we  build  are  our  characters,  or,  we  may  say, 
ourselves.  There  may  be  much  beauty  in  the  design, 


124  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.  vii.  13-29. 

much  convenience  and  grace  in  the  building.  We  do 
well  to  spend  pains  and  toil  on  it,  but  the  underground 
work  is  the  main  thing  in  estimating  stability.  No  house 
is  stronger  than  its  foundation.  The  rock  may  mean 
nothing  more  than  the  solid  foundation  laid  for  a  life  in 
obedience  and  submission  of  will  to  Christ's  commands  ; 
but,  when  we  remember  the  frequent  use  of  the  metaphor 
to  signify  Christ  Himself,  and  take  into  account  the 
passage  in  Isaiah,  which  gives  form  to  our  Lord's  words 
here,  and  in  which  we  read  of  the  "  sure  foundation," 
the  "  precious  corner  stone,"  we  can  scarcely  but  give  a 
deeper  meaning  to  the  emblem,  and  draw  the  lesson 
that  real  building  on  Christ  means  practical  obedience  to 
His  commandments.  Only  such  a  life  is  firm  whatever 
storm  comes.  The  description  of  the  tempest  is  singularly 
vivid,  whether  we  refer  it  to  the  calamities  of  life,  or  to 
the  last  judgment  regarded  as  a  test  of  the  stability  of 
the  structure.  All  parts  of  the  building  are  assailed  at 
once;  as  Bengel  says,  "Rain  on  the  roof;  flood  against 
the  foundation ;  winds  on  the  walls."  It  stands,  not 
because  of  the  strength  of  the  walls,  but  because  of 
the  immovable  firmness  of  the  foundation.  "  He  that 
believeth  shall  not  make  haste."  There  shall  be  no 
need  for  him,  at  the  last  moment,  while  the  storm 
is  raging,  to  run  from  the  tumbling  ruin,  to  try  to  find 
some  shelter  elsewhere.  That  last  judgment  shall  sift 
and  try  every  man's  work  of  what  sort  it  is,  and  if  ours 
stand,  it  will  be  because  we  built  on  Jesus,  and,  by  faith 
which  wrought  obedience,  reared  on  the  God-laid 
foundation,  other  than  which  can  no  man  lay,  the 
structure  of  a  holy  life. 

The  dark  contrasted  picture  is  with  solemn  emphasis 


Less,  xii.]  Closing  Warnings.  125 

given  in  almost  the  same  words.  The  uniformity  is 
broken  by  three  differences,  which  by  the  uniformity  are 
flung  into  startling  prominence.  The  man  is  "foolish" 
— alas  for  those,  whom  the  infinite  wisdom  must  call  by 
the  name  which  He  forbade  us  to  use  !  (Matt.  v.  22.) 
His  foundation  is  "  sand  " — the  loose  foundation  of  a 
mere  shifting  profession  which  will  all  be  swilled  away 
when  the  flood  comes.  When  the  house  is  built,  you 
cannot  see  the  foundation.  There  are  lives  which  look 
like  true  Christian  lives,  and  are  not.  The  houses  stand 
in  a  row  in  the  street,  and  nobody  can  detect  which  is 
which.  But  the  man  who  built  knows,  if  he  will  be 
honest,  and  take  the  trouble  to  examine.  We  can 
ascertain  what  our  foundation  is,  if  we  will.  Better  to  do 
it  now,  though  it  may  involve  pain  and  shame,  than  to 
have  the  discovery  flashed  upon  our  lazy  self-complacency 
by  the  wild  tempest.  "  It  fell  "  is  the  last  difference. 
One  little  "  not  "  left  out  expresses  the  awful  contrariety 
in  the  experience  of  the  two  men,  whose  houses,  perhaps, 
stood  side  by  side  in  the  same  row  for  years. 

So  the  sermon  ends.  These  two  pictures  are  burned 
in  on  our  imagination.  May  they  sink  into  our  hearts, 
and  lead  us  all  to  build  our  else  fleeting  and  unstable 
lives  on  the  "living  Stone,"  to  whom  coming,  we  also 
shall  share  in  His  nature  and  "  as  living  stones  "  be 
"  built  up." 

"  Lo  !  on  the  solid  rock  I  stand, 
And  all  beside  is  shifting  sand." 


LESSON    XIIL 


The  Centurion  and  the  Captain  of  the  Lord's  Host. 

MATT.  viii.  5-13. 


5.  "  And  when  Jesus  was  en 
tered    into    Capernaum,     there 
came  unto  Him  a  centurion,  be 
seeching  him, 

6.  And  saying,  Lord,  my  ser 
vant  lieth  at  home  sick  of  the 
palsy,  grievously  tormented. 

7.  And  Jesus  saith  unto  him, 
I  will  come  and  heal  him. 

8.  The    centurion    answered 
and  said,  Lord,  I  am  not  worthy 
that  Thou  shouldest  come  under 
my  roof:  but  speak  the  word  only, 
and  my  servant  shall  be  healed. 

9.  For   I    am    a    man    under 
authority,  having  soldiers  under 
me  :  and  I  say  to  this  man,  Go, 
and  he  goeth ;  and  to  another, 
Come,  and  he  cometh  ;  and  to 
my    servant,    Do    this,    and   he 
doeth  it. 


10.  When  Jesus  heard  it,  He 
marvelled,    and    said    to    them 
that  followed,  Verily  I  say  unto 
you,  I  have  not  found   so  great 
faith,  no,  not  in  Israel. 

11.  And  I  say  unto  you,  That 
many  shall  come  from   the  east 
and    west,    and   shall   sit  down 
with  Abraham,  and  Isaac,  and 
Jacob,  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 

12.  But   the  children   of  the 
kingdom  shall  be  cast  out  into 
outer     darkness  :     there    shall 
be    weeping   and     gnashing    of 
teeth. 

13.  And  Jesus  said  unto  the 
centurion,    Go    thy   way;    and 
as  thou  hast  believed,  so  be  it 
done  unto  thee.     And   his  ser 
vant  was  healed  in  the  selfsame 
hour." 


IN  chapter  iv.  23  Matthew  sketches  the  work  of  Jesus 
in  Galilee  as  "preaching  the  gospel  of  the  king 
dom,  and  healing  all  manner  of  sickness."  The  Sermon 
on  the  Mount  is  the  example  of  the  former,  and  the 
long  procession  of  miracles  in  chapters  viii.  and  ix.  are, 
in  like  manner,  specimens  of  the  latter.  They  are  nine 
in  number,  if  we  reckon  the  miracle  of  the  raising  of 

126 


Less. XIII.]  Centurion  and  Captain  of  the  Lord's  Host.  127 

Jairus'  daughter,  and  that  of  the  cure  of  the  woman 
which  is  narrated  in  the  middle  of  the  account  of  it,  as 
one.  These  nine  are  broken  up  into  three  groups  of 
three  each,  separated  by  narratives  of  their  effect  on  the 
bystanders.  The  present  lesson  is  the  second  miracle 
of  the  first  group.  The  key-note  is  the  great  word 
"  faith,"  which  is  used  here  for  the  first  time  in  the 
gospel. 

I.  Note  the  man  and  his  faith.  He  was  a  foreigner 
and  a  heathen.  The  Herod  who  then  ruled  over  Galilee 
had  his  troops  officered  by  Romans,  of  whom  this  cen 
turion  was  probably  one,  in  command  of  a  small  garrison 
at  Capernaum.  If  we  put  together  the  traits  of  character 
given  by  Matthew  and  Luke,  we  get  a  lovable  picture  of 
a  man  with  a  much  tenderer  heart  than  might  be  ex 
pected  to  beat  beneath  the  armour  of  a  mercenary 
soldier,  set  to  overawe  a  sullen  people.  Like  so  many 
of  the  better  spirits  of  that  strange  era,  he  had  been 
drawn  to  "love  our  nation,"  certainly  not  because  of 
their  amiability,  but  because  of  the  revelation  which  they 
possessed.  By  his  own  wealth,  or  by  the  exercise  of  his 
influence,  he  had  built  them  a  synagogue,  and  thereby 
expressed  his  adhesion  to  their  worship,  and  won  the 
confidence  even  of  the  suspicious  elders.  His  solicitude 
for  his  servant  bespeaks  a  nature  from  which  neither  the 
harshness  of  military  life  nor  the  natural  carelessness 
about  a  slave's  welfare  had  been  able  to  banish  the 
sweetness.  The  crowning  trait  of  his  character  is  his 
humility,  which  is  manifest  in  Matthew,  and  even  more 
conspicuous  in  Luke's  version  of  the  story,  where  he 
does  not  venture  to  approach  the  miracle-working  Rabbi, 
but  sends  the  elders  to  intercede  for  him.  Such  a 


128  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.  viii.  5-13. 

character,  springing  up  in  heathenism  like  a  rare  flower 
on  some  waste  unsheltered  open,  puts  to  shame  the 
results  of  centuries  of  patient  culture  by  the  great 
husbandman  as  shown  in  the  Jewish  nation.  One  can 
scarcely  help  noticing  the  common  type  of  character,  in 
different  degrees,  shown  in  the  centurions  of  the  New 
Testament,  this  man,  the  anonymous  one  who  stood  by 
the  cross,  and  was  more  open  to  its  teachings  than  rulers 
and  priests,  Cornelius,  and  the  kindly  Julius  who  had 
Paul  in  charge  on  his  voyage. 

The  centurion's  appeal,  as  given  by  Matthew,  does 
not  say  what  he  wants,  but  simply  tells  the  tale  of  suffer 
ing,  as  if  that  were  enough  to  move  Christ's  heart.  He 
will  not  take  upon  him  to  prescribe  by  requesting,  but 
casts  himself,  with  his  unspoken  desire,  on  a  compassion 
which  he  believed  was  ready  to  well  up  at  the  sight  of 
sorrow,  and  needed  no  entreaty  to  move  it  to  activity. 
The  sad  sisters  at  Bethany  sent  a  like  message  to  Jesus, 
but  their  confidence  was  the  growth  of  years  of  close 
friendship.  This  man's  was  greater  because  its  founda 
tion  was  less. 

Christ's  answer  is  full  of  consciousness  of  power,  as 
well  as  of  willingness  to  meet  the  unbreathed  prayer. 
He  volunteers  to  come  where  He  had  not  been  asked. 
He  refuses  to  go  when  His  going  seems  made  an  in 
dispensable  condition  of  His  miracle,  as  in  the  story  of 
the  healing  of  the  "  nobleman's  "  son  at  Capernaum, 
which  some  critics  perversely  make  out  to  be  the  same 
as  this  incident.  His  wisdom  may  be  trusted  to  decide 
when  it  is  best  to  exceed  and  when  to  fall  short  of  our 
washes.  In  both  cases  our  good  determines  His  action. 
Here  the  promise  to  come  is  spoken  to  evoke  the  noble 


Less,  xiii.]  Centurion  and  Captain  of  the  Lord's  Host.  129 

confession  which  follows,  and  so  to  give  the  centurion  a 
higher  blessing  than  his  servant's  healing,  even  a  self- 
conscious  and  uttered  faith. 

That  confession  begins  with  humble  acknowledgment 
of  unworthiness,  and  rises  to  perhaps  the  clearest  and 
deepest  conception  of  Christ's  authority  over  all  the 
forces  of  the  universe  which  was  ever  attained  during 
His  earthly  life.  The  centurion  had  learned  the  omni 
potence  of  the  word  of  command.  One  syllable  from 
the  general,  and  the  legion  moved,  as  animated  by  one 
mind,  and  each  man  in  its  ranks  was  ready  to  "go," 
though  it  were  to  death.  Prompt,  unquestioning  obedi 
ence  is  the  redeeming  virtue,  which,  amid  all  its 
devilishness,  war  promotes.  His  rough  trade  had  be 
come  to  this  man,  as  he  thought  about  it,  a  means  of 
reaching  this  wonderful  estimate  of  Christ.  Even  he 
himself,  though  but  captain  of  a  poor  hundred,  the 
sixtieth  part  of  a  legion,  and  having  himself  to  obey, 
could  secure  compliance  without  a  murmur  with  his 
orders.  Is  he  drawing  a  parallel  or  a  contrast  between 
himself  and  Jesus  ?  Does  he  think  of  Him  as  under 
authority,  or  as  supreme  ?  The  Revised  Version  has 
replaced  an  omitted  "  also  "  in  verse  ix.,  which  seems  to 
make  the  former  alternative  the  more  probable.  We 
could  scarcely  expect  from  the  centurion,  however  pro 
found  his  conception,  the  clear  recognition  of  Christ's 
Divine  sovereignty  which  His  closest  followers  had  not 
clearly  grasped.  It  is  much  more  in  accordance  with 
the  probabilities  of  the  case  that  he  should  have  thought 
of  Jesus,  as,  like  himself,  subordinate,  and  yet  clothed 
with  absolute  power  over  His  soldiers  and  servants,  or, 
in  other  words,  as  a  messenger  of  God,  to  whom  had 

9 


130  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.  viii.  5-13. 

been  c;iven  command  over  all  physical  agents.  Nor 
does  the  clearest  conception  of  our  Lord's  divinity  for 
bid  that  view :  for  the  Son  is  subject  to  the  Father,  and 
all  power  is  given  to  Him.  But  the  centurion's  con 
ception  of  the  manner  of  exercising  the  power  is  the 
remarkable  thing  here.  A  word  is  enough  ;  and  here 
he  anticipates  the  profoundest  teaching  of  theology  and 
science.  "  He  spake,  and  it  was  done,"  is  the  full 
statement  of  God's  way  of  working  in  creation,  and  in 
that  preservation  of  creatures  which  is  a  continued 
creation.  The  mere  forth-putting  of  the  Divine  will, 
without  media  or  other  Divine  act,  is  adequate  to  produce 
and  sustain  the  universe.  This  sign  manual  of  deity  is 
stamped  on  Christ's  works.  He  rebukes  diseases,  and 
they  cease.  He  speaks  to  howling  tempests  and  roaring 
billows,  and  there  is  a  great  calm.  He  flings  a  word 
into  the  grave,  and  Lazarus  stumbles  out,  dazzled,  into 
the  light.  All  creatures,  all  forces  of  the  universe,  are 
His  soldiers  ;  and  at  the  bare  word  of  that  great  "  im- 
perator  "  the  embattled  and  ordered  hosts  move  and  act. 
No  grander,  truer  thought  of  Christ's  sway,  its  sweep 
and  its  manner,  can  be  attained,  than  this  heathen 
soldier  had  learned  from  the  dreadful  instrument  of  war 
as  a  part  of  which  he  was  at  once  subordinate  and 
authoritative. 

II.  The  eulogium  on  faith.  The  confession  is  followed 
by  praise  from  Christ's  lips,  which  is  praise  indeed. 
Contrast  His  calm  acceptance  of  the  highest  place  which 
could  be  given  Him  with  Elisha's  "  Am  I  God,  to  kill 
and  to  make  alive  ? "  or  with  Peter's  "  Why  look  ye  so 
earnestly  on  us  ?  "  And  remember  that  Jesus  here  does 
the  very  thing  for  which  Moses  was  shut  out  from  the 


Less,  xiii.]  Centurion  and  Captain  of  the  Lord's  Host.  1 3 1 

land,  and  judge  whether  this  demeanour  is  consistent  with 
humility  or  reverence,  except  on  one  hypothesis  of  His 
nature.  "  He  marvelled,"  as  we  read  again  that  He  did  at 
the  Jews'  unbelief.  We  cannot  thread  the  mysteries  of 
His  participation  in  our  human  limitations,  but  it  is  more 
profitable  to  note  that  His  wonder  was  excited  by  the 
unbelief  of  those  who  had  so  much  light,  and  by  the 
swift  and  strong  faith  of  him  who  had  had  so  little. 
That  all-important  word  is  spoken  for  the  first  time  now. 
Faith  is  the  fruit  which  He  had  come  seeking.  What  a 
pathetic  tone  of  disappointed  search  echoes  in  the  sad 
close  of  the  sentence,  "  No,  not  in  Israel  "  !  That  vine 
which  had  for  so  long  been  the  husbandman's  care, 
offers  even  to  His  loving  eye  but  wild  grapes,  when  He 
looked  closely  beneath  the  leaves  of  profession  and 
ceremonial  for  grapes.  This  wild  vine,  left  to  grow  as  it 
would,  has  what  the  other  lacks.  Therefore  is  the  cen 
turion's  faith  praised  as  "great."  It  was  great  in  the 
clearness  of  the  belief  which  it  included ;  great  in  the 
difficulties  which  it  had  overcome ;  great  in  the  rapidity 
of  growth  on  so  slight  a  knowledge  of  Jesus  ;  great  in  the 
firmness  and  completeness  of  its  moral  part,  confidence 
great  in  the  humility  which  it  produced.-  Such  faith,  so 
self-distrustful,  so  clear  in  exaltation  of  His  power,  so 
child-like  in  its  reliance  on  Him,  is  what  He  seeks  for  in 
us  all ;  and  where  He  finds  it,  He  rejoices  as  a  thirsty 
traveller  who  "finds  grapes  in  the  wilderness." 

The  centurion  was,  in  some  sense,  the  first-fruits 
of  the  Gentiles,  and  our  Lord's  sad  prescience  sees  in 
him  the  forerunner  of  a  long  train  who  shall  exercise  a 
faith  which  puts  the  children  of  the  kingdom  to  shame. 
It  is'; remarkable  that  this  early  intimation  of  the  trans- 


T32  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.  viii.  5-13. 

ference  of  the  kingdom  to  the  Gentiles  should  not  be 
found  in  Luke's  Gospel,  where  we  might  have  expected 
to  meet  it,  and  should  be  in  Matthew's.  But  it  was 
distinctly  part  of  his  purpose,  as  the  evangelist  who  had 
most  to  say  about  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  to  make  sun- 
clear  the  condition  of  belonging  to  it,  as  being  faith, 
and  faith  only.  And  these  fateful  prophecies  were  even 
more  relevant  to  the  scope  of  his  Gospel  than  to  that 
of  Luke's. 

Mark  the  use  by  our  Lord  of  that  "  Come."  Then 
He  sits  King  at  the  head  of  the  table,  and  to  enter 
the  kingdom  is  to  come  to  Him.  The  metaphor  of  the 
feast  was  familiar  to  His  hearers,  as  expressive  of  the 
satisfaction  of  all  the  hunger  of  the  spirit,  and  of  the 
glad  companionship  of  the  future  days.  It  is  no  part  oj 
His  purpose  here  to  give  the  more  fully  developed 
teaching  which  He  associated  with  it  at  a  later  period. 
But  while  He  leaves  untouched  the  when  and  the  where, 
His  reticent  words  are  terribly  distinct  on  the  two  points 
which  Jewish  pride  and  trust  in  their  descent  from  Abra 
ham  needed  to  be  driven  into  their  unwilling  ears.  The 
Gentiles  from  every  corner  of  the  world  shall  be  there, 
and  recognised  by  Abraham  as  his  children.  Those  to 
whom  the  kingdom  was  offered  shall,  some  of  them,  not 
be  there.  What  could  be  plainer,  when  taken  in  con 
nection  with  the  immediately  preceding  eulogium  on  the 
centurion's  faith,  than  this  teaching,  that  the  one  con 
dition  of  entrance  into  the  kingdom,  whether  in  its 
imperfect  manifestation  on  earth,  or  in  its  complete  and 
final  form  hereafter,  is  just  that  which  the  centurion  had, 
and  Israel  had  not, — namely,  faith  in  Him  ?  This 
teaching  is  the  complement,  not  the  contradiction,  of 


Less,  xiii.]  Centurion  and  Captain  of  the  Lord's  Host.  133 

that  in  the  last  words  of  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount. 
There  the  condition  was,  "  Not  every  one  that  saith  unto 
Me,  Lord,  Lord  ;  .  .  .  but  he  that  doeth  the  will  of  My 
Father;"  and,  for  doing  that  will,  the  first  requisite  is 
faith,  without  which  there  may  be  the  formal  acknowledg 
ment  of  Jesus  as  Lord,  but  no  obedience. 

It  does  not  become  us  to  enlarge  on  the  terror  that 
lies  half  disclosed  in  the  awful  wrords  which  describe  the 
fate  of  those  who  do  not  belong  to  the  kingdom.  The 
lighted  banqueting-house  is  ringed  round  with  darkness. 
It  is  darkness,  because  it  is  outside  the  circle  of  the 
light.  The  darkness  is  but,  as  it  were,  the  externalising 
of  the  dispositions  of  those  who  are  in  it.  Darkness 
reigned  in  them  here,  the  darkness  of  sin  ;  and  now 
they  dwell  in  darkness  of  sorrow,  the  creation  of  their 
own  evil  natures.  They  are  "cast  out";  therefore  they 
were  once  in.  If  they  were  not  members  of  the  king 
dom  by  the  submission  of  their  wills,  and  the  glad 
acceptance  of  the  King,  they  were  in  it,  by  being  sur 
rounded  by  invitations  and  offers  of  its  blessings,  and  by 
being  in  close  contact  with  its  earthly  form.  The  nearer 
a  man  is  to  that  kingdom  here,  the  further  sunken  will 
he  be  in  the  darkness  hereafter.  Out  of  the  blackness 
come  sounds  of  woe,  —  "the  weeping,"  as  the  original 
has  it,  on  which  Bengel  makes  the  pregnant  remark, 
"The  article  emphatic.  In  this  life  sorrow  is  not  yet 
sorrow."  Nor  is  it  only  sorrow  that  broods  there,  but 
gnashing  of  teeth,  the  token  of  unavailing  passion.  The 
picture  is  darkly  shaded.  Let  us  remember  who  it  was 
that  spoke  it,  even  one  who  "  speaks  that  He  knows," 
and  whose  every  word  throbbed  with  love  ;  and  let  us 
take  heed  lest,  in  speculating  about  the  duration  and  the 


i34  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.  viii.  5-13. 

manner  of  future  retribution,  we  lose  our  sense  of  the 
certainty  and  awfulness  of  the  fact. 

III.  The  answer  to  faith.  "  Go  thy  way  ;  and  as  thou 
hast  believed,  so  be  it  done  unto  thee."  Christ  delights 
to  have  His  path  marked  out  for  Him  by  faith.  When 
distrust  prescribes  His  course,  it  is  presumption  ;  when 
faith  does,  it  is  but  putting  Him  in  mind  of  His  own 
character  or  promise.  These  great  words  of  Christ's  give 
the  key  of  His  storehouse  into  our  hands,  and  lay  down 
the  law  to  which  He  rigidly  adheres.  Our  faith  is  the 
measure  of  our  reception.  The  more  we  trust,  the  more 
we  can  contain  of  His  gift ;  and  the  more  we  can  contain, 
the  more  we  shall  surely  possess.  As  St.  Bernard  beauti 
fully  says,  "He  puts  the  oil  of  His  mercy  into  the  vase  of 
our  trust," — and  the  larger  the  vase,  the  fuller  the  stream 
which  He  pours  into  it.  As  long  as  we  bring  vessels, 
the  blessing  runs,  like  the  oil  into  the  widow's  cruse. 
When  we  cease  to  hold  up  our  emptiness  to  the  fountain, 
it  stays.  "  Ye  have  not,  because  ye  ask  not."  If  our 
Christian  life  be  shrunken,  and  our  graces  feeble,  it  is 
only  because  we  have  not  gone  to  Him  for  fresh  supplies. 
Little  faith  means  little  grace. 

Here  Christ  lets  the  man  prescribe  the  very  manner 
of  His  working.  When  the  "  nobleman  "  asked  Him  to 
come  down  ere  his  child  died,  He  wrould  not,  because 
the  request  spoke  of  a  low  conception  of  His  powrer 
which  He  elevated  by  the  refusal.  But  the  centurion's 
willingness  to  be  content  with  a  word  showed  a  strong 
faith,  which  He  confirms  by  demonstrating  that  it  had 
not  thought  too  loftily  of  Him.  So  He  often  disappoints 
our  expectations  of  the  manner  of  His  working,  when 
these  are  built  on  an  unworthy  or  tremulous  faith,  but 


Less,  xiii.]  Centurion  and  Captain  of  the  Lord's  Host,  135 

always  does  so  in  such  a  fashion  as  that  our  confidence 
in  Him  may  be  increased,  if  we  duly  consider  His  dealings 
with  us.  But  He  complies  with  the  desires  of  a  strong 
faith,  which  is  ready  to  do  without  visible  signs  of  His 
work,  and  does  so  in  such  a  fashion  as  that  we  can  always 
say,  "  I  did  not  trust  Him  too  much,  nor  think  Him 
able  to  do  what  I  find  He  cannot."  The  education  of 
faith  is  His  aim  in  all  His  dealings  with  us,  and  He  dis 
appoints,  or  answers,  or  over-answers  it,  in  subordination 
to  that  great  purpose. 


LESSON    XIV. 


The  Peace-bringer  in  the  World  of  Nature. 

MATTHEW  viii.   18-27. 


18.  "Now  when    Jesus   saw 
great  multitudes  about  Him,  He 
gave    commandment   to    depart 
unto  the  other  side. 

19.  And  a  certain  scribe  came, 
and   said   unto   Him,    Master,   I 
will  follow  Thee  whithersoever 
Thou  goest. 

20.  And  Jesus  said  unto  Him, 
The  foxes  have  holes,  and  the 
birds  of  the  air  have  nests  ;  but 
the  Son  of  man  hath  not  where 
to  lay  His  head. 

21.  And  another  of  His  dis 
ciples    said    unto     Him,    Lord, 
suffer  me  first  to  go  and  bury 
my  father. 

22.  But  Jesus  said  unto  Him, 
Follow   Me  :  and   let  the  dead 
bury  their  dead. 


23.  And   when    He   was   en 
tered  into  a  ship,  His  disciples 
followed  Him. 

24.  And,  behold,  there  arose 
a  great  tempest  in  the  sea,  inso 
much  that  the  ship  was  covered 
with  the  waves:   but   He  was 
asleep. 

25.  And  His  disciples  came  to 
Him,   and  awoke  Him,   saying, 
Lord,  save  us  :  we  perish. 

26.  And  He  saith  unto  them, 
Why    are  ye    fearful,   O  ye   of 
little  faith  ?   Then  He  arose,  and 
rebuked  the  winds  and  the  sea; 
and  there  was  a  great  calm. 

27.  But   the   men   marvelled, 
saying,    What   manner   of  man 
is  this,  that  even  the  winds  and 
the  sea  obey  Him  !  " 


WE  have  already  pointed  out  that  the  three  triads 
of  miracles  in  this  series  are  separated  by  para 
graphs  narrating  their  effects  on  the  bystanders.  This 
lesson  includes  the  landing-place,  if  we  may  call  it  so, 
between  the  first  and  second  group,  and  the  first  miracle 
of  the  second  triplet.  It  falls,  therefore,  into  two  distinct 
portions,  only  connected  in  time  with  each  other, — our 
Lord's  apparently  opposite  treatment  of  two  men,  and 
the  miracle  of  stilling  the  tempest. 

136 


Less.  XIV.]    Peace-bringer  in  the  World  of  Nature.     137 

I.  We  have  Christ  repelling  the  too  willing,  and  draw 
ing  to  Himself  the  half-reluctant.  The  miracles  of  the 
first  group,  and  many  others,  done  at  the  same  time,  but 
only  mentioned  in  the  gross,  had  caused  a  stir  in  the 
comparatively  small  town  of  Capernaum,  to  escape  from 
which  Christ  bade  His  disciples  get  the  boat  ready  to 
cross  the  lake.  The  prospect  of  His  going  affected  these 
two  men  in  opposite  ways.  It  stirred  the  scribe  to  a  too 
swift  and  lightly  formed  resolve.  He  could  not  bear  the 
thought  of  losing  Jesus  from  his  sight,  and  so,  in  a  fit  of 
well-meaning  and  perfectly  sincere  emotion,  he  volun 
teered  brave  words,  whose  very  unconditionalness  showed 
that  he  did  not  know  what  he  was  promising  so  glibly. 
The  other  man,  already  a  disciple,  perhaps  in  the  looser 
application  of  the  word,  shrinks  from  leaving  home, 
especially  after  what  Jesus  had  said  to  the  scribe.  He 
had  a  good  reason,  for  his  dither  lay  dead,  and  surely  a 
son's  first  duty  was  to  lay  his  parent  in  his  grave.  Clearly 
the  two  men  represent  opposite  types  of  character  which 
result  in  discipleship  imperfect  in  opposite  ways.  Appa 
rently,  too,  the  request  of  the  second  is  closely  connected 
with  the  prospect  of  a  wandering  life,  opened  by  the 
reply  of  Jesus  to  the  first.  The  former  is  a  man  of 
impulse,  sanguine,  enthusiastic  in  the  bad  sense,  ready 
to  promise  more  than  he  has  weighed.  The  other  is 
somewhat  slow  to  move,  deliberate,  very  conscious  of 
duties  which  keep  him  from  making  the  light  vows  of 
the  other  man,  and  influenced  by  ties  which  to  himself 
seem  of  prior  obligation.  It  would  not  be  fair  to  say 
that  he  belonged  to  the  great  class  who  always  say  to 
every  duty  in  turn,  "  Suffer  me  first  to  do  something 
else,  and  then "  and  so  postpone  for  ever  what,  all  the 


138  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.  viii.  18-27. 

while,  they  fancy  themselves  intending  to  do.  But  he 
was  on  the  road  to  join  that  useless  band.  Both  men 
were  sincere.  They  meant  what  they  said.  The  one 
quite  thought  that  he  could  follow  anywhere ;  the  other 
quite  intended  to  come  after  Christ  as  soon  as  the  stone 
was  rolled  to  the  door  of  his  father's  grave.  We  do  them 
injustice,  and  lose  the  value  of  Christ's  teaching,  unless 
we  recognise  that. 

But  Jesus  saw  deeper  than  they  did.  He  would  not 
have  poured  cold  water  on  enthusiasm  which  was  fervent 
enough  to  burn  on  ;  nor  have  forbidden  a  son's  heart 
the  solace  of  laying  his  father's  grey  hairs  in  the  grave, 
if  that  would  have  ended  his  preliminaries  to  disciple- 
ship.  The  scribe's  offer  is  precisely  what  Jesus  longs  to 
hear  from  us  all.  A  heart's  devotion  is  too  grateful  to 
Him  to  be  put  aside,  and  His  answer  to  the  scribe  is  no 
refusal  of  His  allegiance  nor  rebuke  of  His  enthusiasm, 
but  a  sobering  statement  of  wrhat  is  involved  in  his  offer, 
made,  not  to  drive  him  away,  but  to  dissipate  the  froth 
of  his  emotional  vow,  and  to  consolidate  his  lightly 
formed  intention  into  a  grave,  fixed  purpose.  He  tells 
him  plainly  what  the  conditions  of  His  life  are.  The 
lower  creatures  have  holes,  and  the  birds  roosting-places 
(not  nests) ;  but  Jesus,  who  is  the  Son  of  man,  whom 
Daniel  the  prophet  saw  as  Messiah,  and  in  whom 
humanity  finds  its  ideal,  has  no  home.  It  was  literally 
true  about  His  earthly  life.  He  was  born  in  a  hired 
manger,  He  slept  in  others'  houses,  His  head  was  laid  in 
a  borrowed  grave.  It  is  true  in  idea  of  all  His  followers. 
Man's  prerogative  among  the  creatures,  each  fitted  for 
their  environment,  is  to  be  a  wranderer,  smitten  with  the 
sense  of  disproportion  between  himself  and  his  surround- 


Less,  xiv.]    Peace-bringer  in  the  World  of  Nature.     1 39 

ings,  and  if  he  has  not  learned  what  that  means,  weighed 
upon  and  cursed  with  endless  unrest.  Christ's  followers 
had  to  share  His  roaming  life,  when  He  was  here.  They 
have  in  all  periods  to  be  sojourners,  declaring  plainly 
that  they  seek  a  country.  No  man  is  fit  for  Christ's 
army  who  has  not  made  up  his  mind  to  that  sort  of  life. 
So  this  scribe  had  to  be  taught  what  he  was  vowing  with 
so  light  a  heart,  and  how  much  weary  homeless  wander 
ing  he  was  accepting  by  his  "  whithersoever  "  thou  goest. 
Christ  did  not  wish  to  send  him  away,  but  to  knit  him  to 
Himself  by  this  for  ever.  It  is  often  the  best  way  to  draw 
men  to  a  course,  to  put  its  difficulties  plainly  before 
them.  The  kindest  treatment  which  a  too  easy  resolve 
to  high  and  noble  life  can  receive  is  to  cool  it  down ;  for 
cooling  is  condensation,  and  the  fleeting  vapour  may  there 
by  become  water  which  shall  flow  musically  through  a  life. 
The  other  man  in  like  manner  got  the  treatment  best 
suited  to  quicken  his  slowness  into  resolved  surrender, 
and  to  deliver  him  from  the  unsuspected  ties  which  held 
him  back.  Jesus  would  never  have  hindered  his  wish 
if  there  had  not  been  something  behind  it,  which,  very 
probably,  the  man  himself  did  not  suspect.  It  is  the 
"  more  than  me  "  which  lurks  unseen  in  pure  affections, 
that  He  wars  against,  because  it  wars  against  us.  There 
fore  the  sternness  of  the  command,  made  still  more 
severe  by  the  comparison  of  physical  death  with  the 
moral  death  of  those  who  are  not  His  disciples.  Who 
ever  is  by  the  purest  love  or  the  most  manifest  earthly 
duty  kept  away  from  Jesus,  had  need  ponder  this 
command,  and  leave  a  father  on  his  bier,  or  a  bride  at 
the  altar,  if  they  come  between  His  Lord  and  him. 
Thus  both  these  two  cases,  while  opposite  in  defects  and 


140  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.  viii.  18-27. 

in  mode  of  treatment,  run  up  at  last  to  the  one  principle, 
that  the  obligations  of  discipleship  are  of  paramount 
stringency,  calling  on  the  one  hand  for  the  most  sober, 
well-considered  forsaking  of  all  besides,  and,  on  the 
other,  for  the  most  complete  and  immediate  subor 
dination  of  even  the  sacredest  earthly  duties,  if  these 
push  themselves  in  before  our  surrender  to  Him. 

II.  The  stilling  of  the  tempest.  The  second  group 
of  miracles  shows  us  Christ  as  the  Prince  of  peace,  and 
that  in  three  regions — the  material,  the  superhuman, 
and  the  moral.  He  stills  the  tempest,  casts  out  demons, 
and  forgives  sins,  thus  quieting  nature,  spirit,  and 
conscience. 

Mountain-girdled  lakes  are  exposed  to  sudden  storms 
from  the  wind  sweeping  down  the  glens.  Such  a  one 
comes  roaring  down  as  the  little  boat,  probably  belonging 
to  James  and  John,  is  labouring  across  the  six  or  seven 
miles  to  the  eastern  side.  Matthew  describes  the  boat 
as  it  would  appear  from  shore,  as  being  "  covered,"  and 
lost  to  sight  by  the  breaking  waves.  Mark,  who  is 
Peter's  mouthpiece,  describes  the  desperate  plight  as  one 
on  board  knew  it,  and  says  the  boat  was  "  filling."  It 
must  have  been  a  serious  gale  which  frightened  a  crew 
who  had  spent  all  their  lives  on  the  lake. 

Note  Christ's  sleep  in  the  storm.  His  calm  slumber 
is  contrasted  with  the  hurly-burly  of  the  tempest  and  the 
fear  of  the  crew.  It  was  the  sleep  of  physical  exhaustion 
after  a  hard  day's  work.  He  was  too  tired  to  keep 
awake,  or  to  be  disturbed  by  the  tumult.  It  is  a  sign  of 
His  true  manhood,  of  His  toil  up  to  the  very  edge  of  His 
strength  ;  a  characteristic  of  His  life  of  service,  which  we 
do  not  make  as  prominent  in  our  thoughts  as  we  should. 


Less,  xiv.]    Peace-bringer  in  the  World  of  Nature.     141 

It  is  also  a  sign  of  His  calm  conscience  and  pure  heart. 
Jonah  slept  through  the  storm  because  his  conscience 
was  stupefied ;  but  Christ,  as  a  tired  child  laying  its  head 
on  its  mother's  lap. 

That  sleep  may  have,  a  symbolical  meaning  for  us. 
Though  Christ  is  present,  the  storm  comes,  and  He 
sleeps  through  it.  Lazarus  dies,  and  He  makes  no  sign 
of  sympathy.  Peter  lies  in  prison,  and  not  till  the 
hammers  of  the  carpenters  putting  up  the  gibbet  for  to 
morrow  are  heard,  does  deliverance  come.  He  delays 
His  help  that  He  may  try  our  faith  and  quicken  our 
prayers.  The  boat  may  be  covered  with  the  waves,  and 
He  sleeps  on,  but  He  will  wake  before  it  sinks.  He 
sleeps,  but  He  never  over-sleeps,  and  there  are  no  too- 
lates  with  Him. 

Note  next  the  awaking  cry  of  fear.  The  broken 
abruptness  of  their  appeal  reveals  the  urgency  of  the  case 
in  the  experienced  eyes  of  these  fishermen.  Their 
summons  is  a  curious  mixture  of  fear  and  faith.  "  Save 
us  "  is  the  language  of  faith  ;  "  we  perish,"  is  that  of  fear. 
That  strange  blending  of  opposites  is  often  repeated  by 
us.  The  office  of  faith  is  to  suppress  fear.  But  the 
origin  of  faith  is  often  in  fear,  and  we  are  driven  to  trust 
just  because  we  are  so  much  afraid.  A  faith  which  does 
not  wholly  suppress  fear  may  still  be  most  real ;  and  the 
highest  faith  has  ever  the  consciousness  that  unless 
Christ  help,  and  that  speedily,  we  perish. 

So  note  next  the  gentle  remonstrance.  There  is 
something  very  majestic  in  the  tranquillity  of  our  Lord's 
awaking,  and,  if  we  follow  Matthew's  order,  in  His 
addressing  Himself  first  to  the  disciples'  weakness,  and 
letting  the  storm  rage  on.  It  can  do  no  harm,  and  for 


142  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.  viii.  18-27. 

the  present  may  blow  as  it  listeth,  while  He  gives  the 
trembling  disciples  a  lesson.  Observe  how  lovingly  our 
Lord  meets  an  imperfect  faith.  He  has  no  rebuke  for 
their  rude  awaking.  He  does  not  find  fault  with  them 
for  being  "  fearful,"  but  for  being  "  so  fearful  "  as  to  let 
their  fear  cover  their  faith,  just  as  the  waves  were  doing 
the  boat.  He  pityingly  recognises  the  struggle  in  their 
souls,  and  their  possession  of  some  spark  which  He  would 
fain  blow  into  a  flame.  He  shows  them  and*  us  the 
reason  for  overwhelming  fear  as  being  the  deficiency  in 
our  faith.  And  He  casts  all  into  the  form  of  a  question, 
thus  softening  rebuke,  and  calming  their  terrors  by  the 
appeal  to  their  common  sense.  Fear  is  irrational  if  we 
can  exercise  faith.  It  is  mere  bravado  to  say  "  I  will 
not  be  afraid,"  for  this  awful  universe  is  full  of  occasions 
for  just  terror ;  but  it  is  the  voice  of  sober  reason  which 
says  "  I  will  trust,  and  not  be  afraid."  Christ  answers 
His  own  question  in  the  act  of  putting  it.  Ye  are  of 
little  faith,  that  is  why  ye  are  so  fearful. 

Note,  next,  the  word  that  calms  the  storm.  Christ 
yields  to  the  cry  of  an  imperfect  faith,  and  so  strengthens 
it.  If  He  did  not,  what  would  become  of  any  of  us  ?  He 
does  not  quench  the  dimly  burning  wick,  but  tends  it 
and  feeds  it  with  oil — by  His  inward  gifts  and  by  His 
answers  to  prayer — till  it  burns  up  clear  and  smokeless, 
a  faith  without  fear.  Even  smoke  needs  but  a  higher 
temperature  to  flame;  and  fear  which  is  mingled  with 
faith  needs  but  a  little  more  heat  to  be  converted  into 
radiance  of  trust.  That  is  precisely  what  Christ  does  by 
this  miracle.  His  royal  word  is  all-powerful.  We  see 
Him  rising  in  the  stern  of  the  fishing-boat,  and  sending 
His  voice  into  the  howling  darkness,  and  wind  land  waves 


Less,  xiv.]    Peace-bringer  in  the  World  of  Nature.     143 

cower  at  His  feet  like  dogs  that  know  their  master.  As 
in  the  healing  of  the  centurion's  servant,  -we  have  the 
token  of  divinity  in  that  His  bare  word  is  able  to  produce 
effects  in  the  natural  realm.  As  He  lay  asleep  He  showed 
the  weakness  of  manhood ;  but  He  woke  to  manifest  the 
power  of  indwelling  divinity.  So  it  is  always  in  His  life, 
where,  side  by  side  with  the  signs  of  humiliation  and 
participation  in  man's  weakness,  we  ever  have  tokens  of 
His  divinity  breaking  through  the  veil.  All  this  power 
is  put  forth  at  the  cry  of  timid  men.  The  storm  was 
meant  to  move  to  terror ;  terror  was  meant  to  quicken 
faith  and  lead  to  prayer ;  prayer  was  meant  to  bring  the 
miracle— the  result  was  complete  and  immediate.  No 
after-swell  disturbed  the  placid  waters  when  the  wind 
dropped.  There  had  been  "  a  great  tempest,"  and  now 
there  was  "a  great  calm,"  as  they  floated  peacefully 
to  their  landing-place  beneath  the  shadow  of  the  hills. 
The  wilder  the  tempest,  the  profounder  the  subsequent 
repose. 

All  this  is  a  true  symbol  of  our  individual  lives,  as  well 
as  of  the  history  of  the  Church.  Storms  will  come,  and 
He  may  seem  to  be  heedless.  He  is  ever  awakened  by 
our  cry.  which  needs  not  to  be  pure  faith  to  bring  the 
answer,  but  may  be  strangely  intertwined  of  faith  and 
fear.  "  The  Lord  will  help,  .  .  .  and  that  right  early,  .  .  . 
and  the  peace  that  He  brings  is  peace  indeed.  So  it 
may  be  with  us  amid  the  struggles  of  life.  So  may  it  be 
with  us  when  "  the  voyage  on  this  storm-tossed  sea  of 
time  is  done ! "  "  They  cry  unto  the  Lord  in  their 
trouble.  He  maketh  the  storm  a  calm,  so  that  the 
waves  thereof  are  still.  Then  are  they  glad  because  they 
be  quiet ;  so  He  bringeth  them  unto  their  desired  haven." 


LESSON    XV. 


The  Peace-bringer  in  the  World  of  Conscience. 


MATTHEW  ix.   1-8. 


1.  "And  He   entered  into  a 
ship,  and  passed  over,  and  came 
into  His  own  city. 

2.  And,  behold,  they  brought 
to  Him  a  man  sick  of  the  palsy, 
lying  on  a  bed  :  and  Jesus  see 
ing  their  faith  said  unto  the  sick 
of  the  palsy ;  Son,   be  of  good 
cheer  ;  thy  sins  be  forgiven  thee. 

3.  And,  behold,  certain  of  the 
scribes  said  within  themselves, 
This  man  blasphemeth. 

4.  And  Jesus  knowing  their 
thoughts  said,  Wherefore  think 
ye  evil  in  your  hearts  ? 


5.  For  whether  is  easier,  to 
say,  Thy  sins  be  forgiven  thee  ; 
or  to  say,  Arise,  and  walk? 

6.  But  that  ye  may  know  that 
the  Son  of  man  hath  power  on 
earth  to  forgive  sins,  (thensaith 
He   to  the   sick  of  the  palsy,) 
Arise,  take  up  thy  bed,  and  go 
unto  thine  house. 

7.  And     he    arose,    and     de 
parted  to  his  house. 

8.  But    when  the  multitudes 
saw    it,    they   marvelled,    and 
glorified  God,  which  had  given 
such  power  unto  men." 


IN  this  miracle  we  have  our  Lord  set  forth  as  the 
Bringer  of  peace  to  the  sin-laden  conscience.  It  is 
the  last  and,  in  some  sense,  the  highest  of  the  three 
miracles  of  the  second  group,  for  it  is  a  grander  work 
to  calm  the  agonised  conscience  than  to  still  the  tempest 
or  bid  demons  flee.  The  most  important  part  of  the 
story  is  not  the  mere  healing  of  the  bodily  disease, 
but  the  accompanying  forgiveness.  Our  Lord  Himself 
teaches  us  in  it  that  His  physical  miracles  are  secondary, 
and  that  that  work  which  He  is  ready  to  do  to-day  to  all 
is  far  greater  than  they. 

144 


Less,  xv.]  Peace-bringer  in  the  World  of  Conscience.   1 45 

I.  Note  the  apparently  irrelevant  answer  which  Christ 
gives  to  the  unspoken  petition  of  the  paralytic  and  his 
friends  ;  "  Son,  be  of  good  cheer ;  thy  sins  be  forgiven 
thee,"  seems  miles  away  from  their  want.  It  was  far 
from  their  wish,  but  yet  the  shortest  road  to  it.  Christ 
here  goes  straight  to  the  heart  of  the  need,  when  He 
passes  by  the  disease  and  speaks  pardon.  Probably 
the  palsy  was  the  result  of  fast  living, — "  a  sin  of 
flesh,  avenged  in  kind."  Perhaps,  too,  whatever  his 
friends  may  have  wanted  for  him,  the  poor  man  him 
self  dimly  knew  that  forgiveness  was  his  most  pressing 
want.  In  his  weary  languor  and  idleness,  sober  thoughts 
drawing  to  penitence  may  have  been  busy.  Christ 
would  not  thus  abruptly  have  offered  the  pearl  of  pardon 
to  an  altogether  unprepared  heart. 

So  the  first  lesson  of  this  incident  is  that  pardon  is 
man's  deepest  need.  The  most  important  relation  is 
our  relation  to  God.  If  it  be  wrong,  all  is  wrong ;  if 
it  be  right,  all  is  or  will  come  right.  Whatever  be  our 
surface  diversities  of  culture,  position,  and  the  like,  we 
are  all  alike  at  bottom  in  this,  that  we  have  sinned,  and 
need  forgiveness.  There  is  the  fountain  of  all  the  bitter 
sorrows  that  flow  in  every  life.  The  bulk  of  our  griefs 
come  from  our  sins,  and  the  remainder  are  needed 
because  of  our  sins,  in  order  to  discipline  and  purify. 
Hence  the  profound  wisdom  of  Christ  in  this  incident, 
and  in  that  wider  work  of  which  His  dealing  with  this 
single  poor  cripple  may  be  taken  as  a  symbol.  The 
gospel  cures  sorrow  second,  and  sin  first.  It  does  not 
potter  and  peddle  on  the  surface,  but  cuts  deep  down 
to  the  hidden  ulcer.  It  lets  secondary  symptoms  alone, 
and,  like  a  wise  physician,  deals  with  the  disease  in  its 

10 


146  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew,    [chap.  ix.  1-8. 

stronghold.  Its  remedies  pierce  to  the  centre,  and  work 
out  towards  the  circumference.  Grapes  and  easy  beds 
are  good,  but  a  cholera  patient  needs  something  more. 
The  first  thing  to  do  in  order  to  heal  men's  misery  is  to 
make  them  pure  ;  and  the  first  thing  to  do  in  order  to 
make  them  pure,  is  to  assure  them  of  the  Divine  forgive 
ness  for  the  past  impurity. 

We  must  go  a  great  deal  deeper  than  the  reformation 
of  manners  or  the  culture  of  the  intellect  or  the  taste,  or 
than  political  or  economical   changes,  before  we   touch 
the  real  reason  of  the  misery  that  is  in  the  world.     One 
would  not  say  a  word  even  to  seem  to  depreciate  the 
value  of  such  things,  or  to  breathe  a  whisper  against  the 
enthusiasm  of  many  earnest  workers  in  these  directions. 
The  dismal  swamp  which  threatens  to  engulf  so  much 
of  our  modern  civilisation  is  formidable  enough  to  call 
for  many  forms  of  attack  and  different  ways  of  draining 
it,  and  Christianity  should  be  full  of  ardent  interest  in 
them   all.     But  whoever  forgets,  Christians  should  not 
forget    that  the   fountain   from  which    its   bitter   waters 
come  is  sin,  and  that  we  shall  only  effectually  deal  with 
the    swamp   when   we    drain    off    the    sin.      The    true 
"  saviour  of  society  "  is  he  who  can  go  to  his  brother 
with  the  divine  declaration  of  pardon  on  his  lips.     That 
will  bring  new  energy  into  palsied  limbs — and  new  hope 
into  despairing  hearts. 

II.  The  next  step  in  the  story  brings  out  that  forgive 
ness  is  an  exclusively  Divine  act. 

A  crowd  of  religious  formalists  of  the  first  water  were 
sitting  by,  collected  together  as  a  kind  of  ecclesiastical 
inquisition  to  scent  heresy  in  Christ's  teaching.  They 
had  no  perception  of  the  dewy  pity  in  Christ's  looks,  nor 


Less.  XV.]  Peace-bringer  in  the  World  of  Conscience.  147 

of  the  nascent  hope  glimmering  in  the  paralytic's  dim 
eye,  but  fastened  upon  this  one  thing,  "  This  man  blas- 
phemeth," — the  blasphemy  consisting,  as  the  other 
evangelists  explain,  more  in  Christ's  assuming  authority 
to  pardon,  which  they  rightly  regarded  as  belonging  to 
God  only.  No  people  are  so  blind  to  the  radiant  beauty 
of  lofty  character,  or  so  coldly  insensible  to  the  wants  of 
sad  humanity,  as  religious  formalists,  whose  religion  is 
mostly  red  tape,  tied  round  men's  limbs  to  keep  them 
from  getting  at  things  they  would  like.  But  yet  these 
scribes  were  perfectly  right.  Forgiveness  is  an  exclu 
sively  Divine  prerogative  ;  for  sin  has  to  do  with  God 
only,  and  none  but  He  against  whom  it  has  been  com 
mitted  can  forgive  it.  The  same  deed  may  be  a  sin, 
a  vice,  and  a  crime,  according  as  we  regard  its  aspects 
towards  God,  towards  morals,  or  towards  law.  As  sin, 
God  can  forgive  it ;  as  a  breach  of  ethical  law,  there  is 
no  forgiveness,  for  ethics  cannot  pardon  ;  as  a  breach  of 
the  law  of  the  land,  the  supreme  power  may  remit 
penalties.  That  Divine  forgiveness  is  more  than  merely 
remitting  penalties,  or  shutting  up  some  more  or  less 
material  hell.  It  is,  in  its  deepest  meaning,  the  free 
flow  of  the  Divine  love,  unchecked  by  the  sinner's  sin. 
Pardon  is  love  rising  above  the  ice  dam  which  we  have 
piled  between  us  and  it,  and  pouring  over  it  into  our 
hearts.  When  we  forgive  our  child,  what  does  it  mean  ? 
Sometimes,  not  always,  the  remission  of  penalties,  but 
always  the  remission  of  the  worst  penalty,  the  frown  on 
the  father's  face,  the  sense  of  displeasure  weighing  on 
the  child's  heart,  and  the  unimpeded  flow  of  the  parent's 
love.  So  God's  pardon  often  leaves  some  of  the  natural 
consequences,  which  are  the  penalties  of  our  sins,  in 


148  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.     [Chap.  ix.  1-8. 

order  that  we  may  hate  and  avoid  the  evil ;  but  it  brings 
the  assurance  that  there  is  nothing  in  God's  heart  towards 
the  sinner  but  pure  and  perfect  love.  All  the  barriers 
to  its  flow  are  removed  by  God's  own  act.  None  but 
God  can  do  that. 

And  He  can  do  it,  though  we  hear  now  that  forgive 
ness  is  impossible,  because  a  man  must  reap  what  he 
has  sown.  It  is  true  that  the  consequences  of  evil  deeds 
considered  as  vice  or  as  crime  are  not  averted.  It  would 
be  too  bold  to  say,  if  we  believe  in  a  God,  that  He  cannot 
avert  them  ;  but,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  they  usually  remain. 
But  the  consequences  of  evil  considered  as  sin  are 
averted,  and  of  these  the  chiefest  is  the  alienation  from 
God,  and  the  exposure  to  His  righteous  displeasure. 
Why  such  forgiveness  as  consists  essentially  in  the 
restoration  of  a  sinner  to  the  Divine  favour,  and  in  the 
consequent  abolition  of  the  darkest  results  of  his  sin,  and 
the  modification  into  fatherly  chastisement  of  such  as 
remain,  should  be  impossible,  it  would  be  difficult  to  say. 

III.  The  next  step  in  the  narrative  teaches  us  that 
Jesus  Christ  claims  and  exercises  this  Divine  prerogative 
of  pardon.  Mark  His  answer  to  the  cavillers.  He 
admits  their  premises  entirely.  If  Christ  was  only  a 
man  like  us,  standing  in  the  same  relation  to  God's 
forgiveness  as  other  religious  teachers  do,  and  only 
declaring,  as  any  man  might,  that  God  forgives,  why, 
in  the  name  of  common  sense  and  veracity,  did  He  not 
turn  round  to  these  scribes,  and  say  so  ?  A  devout  and 
earnest  man  would  have  said,  "I  am  not  speaking 
blasphemies.  You  mistake  my  meaning.  1  know  that 
God  only  can  forgive  sins ;  and  I  am  only  telling  my 
poor  brother  he-re  that  God  forgives  his."  But  that  is 


Less,  xv.]  Peace-bringer  in  the  World  of  Conscience. 


149 


not  His  reply.     In  effect  He  says,  "  Yes,  you  are  quite 
right.     No  man  can  forgive  sins,  but  God  only.     I  forgive 
sins ;  who,  then,  think  you  I   am  ?     It   is  easy   to  say, 
Thy  sins  be  forgiven  thee,  far  easier  than  to  say,  Take 
up  thy  bed  and  walk,  because  you  can  verify  the  accom 
plishment  in  the  one  case,  and  not  in  the  other.     The 
two  sentences  are  equally  easy  to  pronounce.     The  two 
things,   pardoning    and   healing,   are    equally  impossible 
for  a  man  to  do;  but  the   difference  between  them   is 
that  you  can  see  with  your  own  eyes  whether  or  not  the 
one  is  done,  and  you  cannot  see  the  other.     I  will  do 
the  visible  impossibility,  and  then  you  can  judge  whether 
I  have  the  right  to  assert  that  I  can  do  the  invisible." 
These  words  of  our  Lord's,    then,   bring  us   up  to   a 
sharp  alternative.     I  know  that  it  is  not  the   best  way 
of  arguing  to  force  an  antagonist's  position  by  a  dilemma, 
but  sometimes  it  is  fair,  and  useful ;  and  it  is  so  here. 
We  hear  much  talk  about  the  beauty  and  lowly  devout- 
ness  of  Jesus  from  those  who  do  not  accept  His  Divinity. 
And  it  is  worth  while  to  insist  that  His  claims  to  Divinity 
were  urged  in  such  a  fashion  that,  if  they  are  denied,  it 
is  impossible   to  save  the  beauty  and  lowliness  of  His 
character.     Either  the  scribes  were  right,  or  Jesus  was 
Divine.     Either  He  was  a  blasphemer,  or  He  was  God 
manifest  in  the  flesh.     The  whole  context  forbids  us  to 
take  these  words,   "  Thy  sins  be  forgiven  thee,"  as  any 
thing  less  than  the  act  of  Divine  love  wiping  out  trans 
gressions  ;    and   if  Jesus  Christ  claimed  to  do  that,  no 
hypothesis  of  His  nature  can  save  His  character  for  the 
admiration  of  men,  except  that  which  sees  in  Him  God 
revealed   in  humanity,   the   world's  Judge,   from    whose 
hand  the  world  may  receive  Divine  forgiveness. 


150  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.  ix.  1-8. 

IV.  Christ  here  brings  visible  facts  into  the  witness- 
box,  in  attestation  of  His  invisible  powers.  Of  course, 
the  miracle  was  such  a  witness  in  a  special  way.  It  is 
less  than  that  which  it  witnesses.  Christ's  permanent 
work  of  forgiveness  and  sanctifying  is  higher  than  all 
signs  and  wronders,  and  these  are  honoured  when  they 
bear  witness  to  that.  But  we  may  make  a  more  general 
application  of  this  principle  of  the  visible  evidences  of 
invisible  powers.  Are  not  the  results  of  every  earnest 
effort  to  carry  the  message  of  forgiveness  to  men,  in 
homes  made  Bethels,  passions  tamed,  and  lives  elevated, 
witnesses  of  the  reality  of  Christ's  claim  to  exercise  the 
Divine  prerogative  of  forgiveness  ?  All  the  difference 
between  Christendom,  imperfectly  Christianised  as  it 
is,  and  heathendom,  attests  Him  as  the  Fountain  of  the 
invisible  good  which  has  passed  into  visibility  in  the 
secondary  results  of  the  gospel,  which  the  blindest  can 
see,  and  the  least  spiritual  can  appraise.  This  rod  has 
budded,  at  all  events.  Let  the  magicians  do  the  same 
with  their  enchantments.  The  world  takes  its  notions 
of  the  power  of  Christianity  from  the  lives  of  Christians. 
They  are  the  Bibles  which  most  men  read.  So  a  solemn 
responsibility  is  laid  on  them  to  take  care  that  they 
worthily  represent  the  redeeming  and  ennobling  power 
of  their  Master. 

The  greatest  lesson  of  this  narrative  is,  Do  not  waste 
time  trying  to  purify  the  stream  twenty  miles  down,  but 
go  to  the  Fountain-head.  Our  palsies  and  fevers,  the 
impotence  of  our  wills  towards  good,  and  our  diseased 
ardour  towards  evil,  with  their  consequent  misery  and 
restlessness  in  all  regions  of  life,  can  never  be  cured  till 
we  go  to  Christ,  the  forgiving  Christ,  and  let  Him  lay 


LOSS,  xv.]  Peace-bringer  in  the  World  of  Conscience.  151 

His  hand  upon  us,  and  speak  from  His  sweet  and 
infallible  lips  the  word  that  works  as  a  charm,  "  Son,  thy 
sins  he  forgiven  thee."  Then  shall  the  eyes  of  the  blind 
be  opened  ;  then  shall  the  lame  man  leap  as  an  hart; 
then  limitations,  sorrows,  miseries,  shall  pass  away,  and 
forgiveness  will  bear  fruit  in  joy  and  power,  in  health 
and  peace. 


LESSON    XVI. 
The  Touch  of  Faith  and  the  Touch  of  Christ. 


18.  "While  He  spake  these 
things  unto  them,  behold,  there 
came  a  certain  ruler,   and  wor 
shipped  Him,  saying.  My  daugh 
ter  is  even  now  dead  :  but  come 
and  lay  T.'by  hand  upon  her,  and 
she  shall  live. 

19.  And  Jesus  arose,  and  fol 
lowed     him,     and    so    did    His 
disciples. 

20.  And,    behold,    a    woman, 
which    was    diseased    with    an 
issue    of    blood     twelve    years, 
came  behind  Him,  and  touched 
the  hem  of  His  garment : 

21.  For  she  said  within  her 
self,    If   I    may   but    touch    His 
garment,  I  shall  be  whole. 

22.  But    Jesus    turned     Him 
about,  and  when  He  saw  her, 
He  said,  Daughter,   be  of  good 
comfort ;    thy   faith  hath    made 
thee   whole.     And   the  woman 
was    made    whole    from    that 
hour. 

23.  And    when    Jesus    came 
into  the  ruler's  house,  and  saw 
the    minstrels    and   the    people 
making  a  noise, 

24.  He  said  unto  them,  Give 


place  :  for  the  maid  is  not  dead, 
but  sleepeth.  And  they  laughed 
Him  to  scorn. 

25.  But  when  the  people  were 
put  forth,  He  went  in,  and  took 
her  by  the  hand,  and  the  maid 
arose. 

26.  And  the  fame  hereof  went 
abroad  into  all  that  land. 

27.  And  when  Jesus  departed 
thence,  two  blind  men  followed 
Him,  crying,   and  saying,  Thou 
Son   of  David,    have  mercy  on 
us. 

28.  And  when  He  was  come 
into  the  house,   the  blind   men 
came  to  Him  :  and  Jesus  saith 
unto  them,  Believe  ye  that  I  am 
able   to    do    this?     They   said 
unto  Him,  Yea,  Lord. 

29.  Then    touched    He   their 
eyes,  saying,  According  to  your 
faith  be  it  unto  you. 

30.  And     their     eyes     were 
opened ;      and     Jesus     straitly 
charged   them,  saying,  See  that 
no  man  know  it. 

3 1 .  But  they,  when  they  were 
departed,    spread    abroad    His 
fame  in  all  that  country." 


THE  three  miracles  included  in  the  present  lesson 
belong  to  the  last  group  of  this  series.     Those  of 
the   second   group   were    all    effected   by  Christ's  word. 

152 


Less,  xvi.]    Touch  of  Faith  and  Touch  of  Christ.      153 

Those  now  to  be  considered  are  all  effected  by  touch. 
The  first  two  are  intertwined.  The  narrative  of  the 
healing  of  the  woman  is  embedded  in  the  account  of  the 
raising  of  Jairus's  daughter. 

Mark  the  impression  of  calm  consciousness  of  power 
and  leisurely  dignity  produced  by  Christ's  having  time  to 
pause,  even  on  such  an  errand,  in  order  to  heal,  by  the 
way,  the  other  sufferer.  The  father  and  the  disciples 
would  wonder  at  Him  as  He  stayed  His  steps,  and  be  apt 
to  feel  that  priceless  moments  were  being  lost ;  but  He 
knows  His  own  resources,  and  can  afford  to  let  the  child 
die  while  He  heals  the  woman.  The  one  shall  receive 
no  harm  by  the  delay,  and  another  will  be  blessed.  Our 
Lord  is  sitting  at  the  feast  which  Matthew  gave  on  the 
occasion  of  His  call,  engaged  in  vindicating  His  sharing 
in  innocent  festivity  against  the  cavils  of  the  Pharisees, 
when  the  summons  to  the  death-bed  comes  to  Him  from 
the  lips  of  the  father,  who  breaks  in  on  the  banquet  with 
his  imploring  cry.  Matthew  gives  the  story  much  more 
summarily  than  the  other  evangelists,  and  does  not  dis 
tinguish,  as  they  do,  between  Jairus's  first  words  "  at  the 
point  of  death,"  and  the  message  of  her  actual  decease, 
which  met  them  on  the  way.  The  call  of  sorrow  always 
reaches  Christ's  ear,  and  the  cry  for  help  never  is  deemed 
by  Him  an  interruption.  So  this  "  man  gluttonous  and 
a  winebibber,"  as  these  Pharisees  thought  Him,  willingly 
and  at  once  leaves  the  house  of  feasting  for  that  of 
mourning.  How  near  together,  in  this  awful  life  of  ours* 
the  two  lie,  and  how  thin  the  partition  walls  !  Well  for 
those  whose  feasts  do  not  bar  them  out  from  hearing  the 
weeping  next  door ! 

As  the  crowd  accompanies  Jesus,  His  hasting  love  is 


154  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.  ix.  18-31. 

for  a  moment,  diverted  by  another  sufferer.  We  never 
go  on  an  errand  of  mercy  but  we  pass  a  hundred  other 
sorrowing  hearts,  so  close  packed  lie  the  griefs  of  men. 
This  woman  is  a  poor  shrinking  creature,  broken  down 
by  long  illness  (which  had  lasted  for  the  same  length  of 
time  as  the  joyous  life  of  Jairus's  child),  made  more 
timid  by  disappointed  hopes  of  cure,  and  depressed  by 
poverty  to  which  her  many  doctors  had  brought  her. 
She  does  not  venture  to  stop  this  new  rabbi-Physician, 
as  He  goes  with  the  church  dignitary  of  the  town  to  heal 
his  daughter,  but  lets  Him  pass  before  she  can  make 
up  her  mind  to  go  near  Him ;  and  then  she  comes 
creeping  up  behind  the  crowd,  puts  out  her  wasted, 
trembling  hand  to  the  hem  of  His  garment, — and  she  is 
whole. 

The  other  evangelists  give  us  a  more  extended  account, 
but  Matthew  throws  into  prominence,  in  his  condensed 
narrative,  the  essential  points. 

Notice  her  real  but  imperfect  faith.  There  was 
unquestionable  confidence  in  Christ's  power,  and  very 
genuine  desire  for  healing.  But  it  was  a  very  ignorant 
faith.  She  believes  that  her  touch  of  the  garment  will 
heal  without  Christ's  will  or  knowledge,  much  less  His 
pitying  love,  having  any  part  in  it.  She  thinks  that  she 
may  get  her  desire  furtively,  and  may  carry  it  away,  and 
be  none  the  wiser  nor  the  poorer  for  the  stolen  blessing. 
What  utter,  blank  ignorance  of  His  character  and  way 
of  working  !  What  gross  superstition  !  Yes,  and  withal 
what  a  hunger  of  desire,  what  absolute  assurance  of 
confidence  that  one  finger-tip  of  His  robe  was  enough  ! 
Therefore  she  had  her  desire,  and  her  Healer  recognized 
her  faith  as  true,  though  blended  with  much  ignorance  of 


Less,  xvi.]    Touch  of  Faith  and  Touch  of  Christ.      155 

Him.  Her  error  was  very  like  that  which  many  Chris 
tians  entertain  with  less  excuse.  To  attach  importance 
to  external  means  of  grace,  rites,  ordinances,  sacraments, 
outward  connection  with  Christian  organisations,  is  the 
very  same  misconception  in  a  slightly  different  form.  Such 
error  is  always  near  us ;  it  is  especially  rife  in  countries 
where  there  has  long  been  a  visible  Church.  It  has 
received  strange  new  vigour  to-day,  partly  by  reaction 
from  extreme  rationalism,  partly  by  the  growing  cultiva 
tion  of  the  aesthetic  faculties.  It  is  threatening  to  corrupt 
the  simplicity  and  spirituality  of  Christian  worship,  and 
needs  to  be  strenuously  resisted.  But  the  more  we  have 
to  fight  against  it,  the  more  do  we  need  to  remember 
that,  along  with  this  clinging  to  the  hem  of  the  garment 
instead  of  to  the  heart  of  its  Wearer,  there  may  be  a  very 
real  trust,  which  might  shame  some  of  those  who  profess 
to  hold  a  less  sensuous  form  of  faith.  Many  a  poor  soul 
clasping  a  crucifix  clings  to  the  cross.  Many  a  devout 
heart  kneeling  at  mass  sees  through  the  incense  smoke 
the  face  of  Christ. 

This  woman's  faith  was  selfish.  She  wanted  health ; 
she  did  not  care  much  about  the  Healer.  She  would 
have  been  quite  contented  to  have  had  no  more  to  do 
with  Him,  if  she  could  only  have  stolen  out  of  the  crowd 
cured.  She  had  had  but  little  gratitude  to  the  unconscious 
Giver  of  a  stolen  good.  So  many  a  Christian  life,  in  its 
earlier  stages,  is  more  absorbed  with  its  own  deep  misery, 
and  its  desire  for  deliverance,  than  with  Him.  Love 
comes  after,  born  of  the  experience  of  His  love.  But 
faith  precedes  love,  and  the  predominant  motive  impel 
ling  to  faith  at  first  is  distinctly  self-regard.  That  is  all  as  it 
should  be.  The  most  purely  self-absorbed  wish  to  escape 


156  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.  ix.  18-31. 

from  the  most  rudely  pictured  hell  is  often  the  begin 
ning  of  a  true  trust  in  Christ,  which,  in  due  time,  will  be 
elevated  into  perfect  consecration.  Some  of  our  modern 
teachers  who  are  shocked  at  Christianity  because  it  lays 
the  foundation  of  the  most  self-denying  morality  in  such 
"selfishness"  would  be  none  the  worse  for  going  to 
school  to  this  story,  and  learning  from  it  how  a  desire,  no 
nobler  than  to  get  rid  of  a  painful  disease,  started  a 
process  which  turned  a  life  into  a  peaceful,  thankful 
surrender  of  the  cured  self  to  the  love  and  service  of  the 
mighty  Healer. 

Observe,  next,  how  Christ  answers  the  imperfect  faith, 
and,  by  answering,  corrects  and  confirms  it.  Matthew 
omits  Christ's  question  as  to  who  touched  Him,  the 
disciples'  reply,  His  renewed  asseverations  that  He  was 
conscious  of  power  having  gone  forth  from  Him.  All 
that  belongs  to  the  loving  method  by  which  our  Lord 
sought  to  draw  forth  an  open  acknowledgment.  Womanly 
diffidence,  enfeebled  health,  her  special  disease,  all  made 
her  wish  to  hide  herself.  She  wanted  to  steal  away 
unnoticed,  as  she  hoped  that  she  had  come.  But  Christ 
forces  her  to  stand  out  before  all  the  crowd,  and  there,  with 
all  eyes  upon  her, — cold,  cruel  eyes,  some  of  them, — to 
conquer  her  shame,  and  tell  all  the  truth.  Strange  kind 
ness  that ;  strangely  contrasted  with  His  ordinary  desire  to 
avoid  notoriety,  and  with  His  ordinary  tender  considera 
tion  for  shrinking  weakness.  He  did  it  for  her  sake,  not  for 
His  own.  She  is  changed  from  timidity  to  courage.  At  one 
moment  she  stretches  out  her  wasted  finger,  a  tremulous 
invalid ;  at  the  next,  she  flings  herself  at  His  feet,  a  con 
fessor.  He  would  have  us  testify  for  Him,  because  faith 
unavowed,  like  a  plant  in  the  dark,  is  apt  to  become 


Less,  xvi.]    Touch  of  Faith  and  Touch  of  Christ.      1 5  7 

pale  and  sickly ;  but  ere  He  bids  us  own  His  name,  He 
pours  into  our  hearts,  in  answer  to  our  secret  appeal,  the 
health  of  His  own  life,  and  the  blissful  consciousness  of 
that  great  gift  which  makes  the  tongue  of  the  dumb 
sing. 

His  words  to  her  are  full  of  tenderness.  She  only 
receives  the  name  of  "  daughter."  Gently  He  encourages 
her  timidity  by  that  "  Be  of  good  cheer,"  and  then  He 
sets  right  her  error  :  "Thy  faith  " — not  thy  finger — "  hath 
made  thee  whole."  There  was  no  real  connection  between 
the  touch  of  the  robe  and  healing ;  but  the  woman 
thought  that  there  was,  and  so  Christ  stooped  to  her 
childish  thought,  and  allowed  her  to  prescribe  the  road 
which  His  mercy  should  take.  But  He  would  not  leave 
her  with  her  error.  The  true  means  of  contact  between 
us  and  Him  is  not  our  outward  contact  with  external 
means  of  grace,  but  the  touch  of  our  spirits  by  faith. 
That  faith  is  nothing  in  itself,  and  heals  only  because  it 
brings  us  into  union  with  His  power,  which  is  the  sole 
cause  of  our  healing.  Faith  is  the  hand  which  receives 
the  blessing.  It  may  be  a  wasted  and  tremulous  hand, 
like  that  which  this  woman  laid  lightly  on  His  robe.  But 
He  feels  its  touch,  though  a  universe  presses  on  Him, 
and  He  answers.  Not  the  garment's  hem,  but  Christ's 
love  is  the  cause  of  our  salvation.  Not  an  outward 
contact  with  it  or  with  Him,  but  faith,  is  the  condition 
on  which  His  life,  which  knows  no  disease,  pours  into 
our  souls.  The  hand  of  my  faith  lifted  to  Him  will 
receive  into  its  empty  palm  and  clasping  fingers  the 
special  blessing  for  my  special  wants. 

The  other  evangelists  tell  us  that,  at  the  moment  of 
His  words  to  the  woman,  the  messengers  came  bearing 


158  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.ix.  18-31. 

tidings  of  the  child's  death.  How  Jairus  must  have 
grudged  the  pause !  A  word  from  Christ,  like  the 
pressure  of  His  hand,  heartened  him ;  and  like  a  river 
turned  from  its  course  for  a  space,  to  fill  some  empty 
reservoir,  His  love  comes  back  to  its  original  direction. 
How  abundant  the  power  and  mercy,  to  which  such  a 
work  as  that  just  done  were  but  a  parenthesis  !  The 
doleful  music  and  the  shrill  shrieks  of  Eastern  mourning, 
which  met  them  as  they  entered  Jairus's  house,  disturbed 
the  sanctity  of  the  hour,  and  were  in  strong  contrast  with 
the  majestic  calmness  of  Jesus.  Not  amid  venal  lamen 
tations  and  excited  cries  will  He  do  His  work.  He  bids 
the  noisy  crowd  forth  with  curt,  almost  stern,  command, 
and  therein  rebukes  all  such  hollow  and  tumultuous 
scenes,  in  the  presence  of  the  stillness  of  death,  still 
more  where  faith  in  Him  has  robbed  it  of  its  terror,  in 
robbing  it  of  its  perpetuity.  It  is  strange  that  believing 
readers  should  have  thought  that  our  Lord  meant  to  say 
that  the  little  girl  was  not  really  dead,  but  only  in  a  swoon. 
The  scornful  laughter  of  the  flute-players  and  hired 
mourners  understood  Him  better.  They  knew  that  it  was 
real  death,  as  men  count  death,  and,  as  has  often  been 
the  case,  the  laughter  of  His  foes  has  served  to  establish 
the  truth.  That  was  not  worthy  to  be  called  death  from 
which  the  child  was  so  soon  and  easily  to  be  awaked. 
But,  besides  this  special  application  to  the  case  in  hand, 
that  great  saying  of  our  Lord's  carries  the  blessed  truth 
that,  since  He  has  come,  death  is  softened  into  sleep  for 
all  who  love  Him.  The  euphemism  •  is  not  peculiar  to 
Christianity,  but  has  a  deeper  meaning  in  it  than  when 
Greeks  or  Romans  spoke  of  the  eternal  sleep.  Others 
speak  of  death  by  any  name  rather  than  its  own,  because 


Less.  XVI.]    Touch  of  Faith  and  Touch  of  Christ.      159 

they  fear  it  so  much.  The  Christian  does  so,  because 
he  fears  it  so  little, — and,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  use  of 
the  word  to  imply  merely  the  separation  of  soul  and 
body  by  the  physical  act  is  exceptional  in  the  New 
Testament. 

This  name  of  sleep,  sanctioned  thus  by  Christ,  is  the 
sweetest  of  all.  It  speaks  of  the  cessation  of  connection 
with  the  world  of  sense,  and  "long  disquiet  merged  in 
rest."  It  does  not  imply  unconsciousness,  for  we  are  not 
unconscious  when  we  sleep,  but  only  unaware  of  externals. 
It  holds  the  promise  of  waking  when  the  sun  comes. 
So  it  has  driven  out  the  ugly  old  name.  Our  tears  flow 
less  bitterly  when  we  think  of  our  dear  ones  as  "  sleeping 
in  Jesus."  Their  bodies,  like  this  little  child's,  are  dead, 
but  they  are  not.  They  rest,  conscious  of  their  own 
blessedness  and  of  Him  "  in  whom  they  live,  and  have 
their  being,"  whether  they  "  move  "  or  no.  Then  comes 
the  great  deed.  The  crowd  is  shut  out.  For  such  a 
work  silence  is  befitting.  The  father  and  mother,  with 
His  foremost  three  disciples,  go  with  Him  into  the 
chamber.  There  is  no  effort,  repeated  and  gradually  suc 
cessful,  as  when  Elisha  raised  the  dead  boy ;  no  praying, 
as  when  Peter  raised  Dorcas  ;  but  the  touch  of  the  hand 
in  which  life  throbbed  in  fulness,  and,  as  the  other 
narratives  record,  two  words,  spoken  strangely  to,  and 
yet  more  strangely  heard  by,  the  dull,  cold  ear  of  death. 
Their  echo  lingered  long  with  Peter,  and  Mark  gives  us 
them  in  the  original  Aramaic.  But  Matthew  passes  them 
by,  as  he  seems  here  to  have  desired  to  emphasise  the 
power  of  Christ's  touch.  But  touch  or  word,  the  real 
cause  of  the  miracle  was  simply  His  will ;  and  whether 
He  used  media  to  help  men's  faith,  or  said  only  "  I  will," 


160  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.  ix.  18-31. 

mattered  little.  He  varied  His  methods  as  the  circum 
stances  of  the  recipients  required,  and  in  order  that  they 
and  we  might  learn  that  He  was  tied  to  none.  These 
miracles  of  raising  the  dead  are  three  in  number.  Jairus's 
daughter  is  raised  from  the  bed,  as  just  having  passed 
away ;  the  widow's  son  at  Nain  from  his  bier,  having 
been  for  a  little  longer  separated  from  his  body  ;  Lazarus 
from  the  grave,  having  been  dead  four  days.  A  few 
minutes,  or  days,  or  four  thousand  years,  are  one  to  His 
power.  These  three  are  in  some  sense  the  first-fruits  of 
the  gieat  harvest;  the  stars  that  shone  out  singly  before 
all  the  heaven  is  in  a  blaze.'  For,  though  they  died 
again,  and  so  left  to  Him  the  precedence  in  resurrection, 
as  in  all  besides,  they  are  still  prophetic  of  His  power  in 
the  hour  when  they  "  that  sleep  in  the  dust  "  shall  awake 
at  His  voice.  Blessed  they  who,  like  this  little  maiden, 
are  wakened,  not  only  by  His  voice,  but  by  His  touch, 
and  to  find,  as  she  did,  their  hand  in  His. 

The  third  of  these  miracles,  \vhich  Matthew  seems  to 
reckon  as  the  second  in  the  group,  because  he  treats  the 
two  former  as  so  closely  connected  as  to  be  but  one  in 
numeration,  need  not  detain  us  long.  It  is  found  only 
in  this  gospel.  The  first  point  to  be  observed  in  it  is 
the  cry  of  these  two  blind  men.  There  is  something 
pathetic  and  exquisitely  natural  in  the  two  being  together, 
as  is  also  the  case  in  the  similar  miracle,  at  a  later  period, 
on  the  outskirts  of  Jericho.  Equal  sorrows  drive  men 
together  for  such  poor  help  and  solace  as  they  can  give 
each  other.  They  have  common  experiences  which  iso 
late  them  from  others,  and  they  creep  close  for  warmth 
and  companionship.  All  the  blind  men  in  the  Gospels 
have  certain  resemblances.  One  is  that  they  are  all 


Less,  xvi.]    Touch  of  Faith  and  Touch  of  Christ.      161 

sturdily  persevering,  as  perhaps  was  easier  for  them 
because  they  could  not  see  the  impatience  of  the 
listeners,  and  possibly  because,  in  most  cases,  persistent 
begging  was  their  trade,  and  they  were  used  to  refusals. 
But  a  more  important  trait  is  their  recognition  of  Jesus 
as  "  Son  of  David."  Blind  as  they  are,  they  see  more 
than  the  seeing.  Thrown  in  upon  themselves,  they  may 
have  been  led  to-  ponder  the  old  words,  and  by  their 
affliction  made  more  ready  to  welcome  One  who,  if  He 
were  Messiah,  was  coming  with  a  special  blessing  for 
them, — "  to  open  the  blind  eyes."  Men  who  deeply 
desire  a  good  are  quick  to  listen  to  the  promise  of  its 
accomplishment.  So  these  two  followed  Him  along  the 
roacl,  loudly  and  perseveringly  calling  out  their  profession 
of  faith,  and  their  entreaty  for  sight. 

The  next  point  is  our  Lord's  treatment.  He  let  them 
cry  on,  apparently  unheeding.  Had,  then,  the  two 
miracles  just  done  exhausted  His  stock  of  power  or  of 
pity  ?  Certainly  His  reason  was,  as  it  always  was,  their 
good.  We  do  not  know  why  it  was  better  for  them  to 
have  to  wait,  and  continue  their  entreaty ;  but  we  may 
be  quite  sure  that  the  reason  for  all  His  delays  is  the 
same, — the  larger  blessing  which  comes  with  the  answer 
when  it  comes,  and  the  large  blessings  which  may  be 
gathered  while  we  wait  its  coming.  Christ's  question 
to  them,  when  at  last  they  have  found  their  way  even 
indoors,  holds  out  more  hope  than  they  had  yet  received. 
By  it,  Christ  established  a  close  relation  with  them,  and 
implied  to  them  that  He  was  willing  to  answer  their  cry. 
One  can  fancy  how  the  poor  blind  faces  would  light 
up  with  a  flush  of  eager  expectation,  and  how  swift 
would  be  the  answer.  The  question  is  not  cold  or 


i62  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap. ix.  18-31. 

inquisitorial.     It    is    more    than    half  a    promise,  and  a 
powerful  aid  to  the  faith  which  it  requires. 

There  is  something  very  beautiful  and  pathetic  in  the 
simple  brevity  of  the  unhesitating  answer,  "  Yea,  Lord." 
Sincerity  needs  few  words.  Faith  can  put  an  infinite  deal 
of  meaning  into  a  monosyllable.  Their  eagerness  to 
reach  the  goal  made  their  answer  brief.  But  it  was 
enough.  Again  the  hand  which  had  clasped  the  maiden's 
palm  is  put  out  and  laid  gently  on  the  useless  eyes,  and 
the  great  word  spoken,  "  According  to  your  faith  be  it 
unto  you."  Their  blindness  made  the  touch  peculiarly 
fitting  in  their  case,  as  bringing  evidence  of  sense  to 
those  who  could  not  see  the  gracious  pity  of  His  looks. 
The  word  spoken  was,  like  that  to  the  centurion,  the 
declaration  of  the  power  of  faith,  which  determines  the 
measure,  and  often  the  manner,  of  His  gifts  to  us.  The 
containing  vessel  not  only  settles  the  quantity,  but  the 
shape  assumed  by  the  water,  which  is  taken  up  in  it 
from  the  sea.  Faith,  which  keeps  inside  of  Christ's 
promises  (and  what  goes  outside  is  not  faith),  decides 
how  much  of  Christ  we  shall  have  for  our  very  own. 
He  condescends  to  run  the  molten  gold  of  His  mercies 
into  the  moulds  which  our  faith  prepares. 

These  two  men,  who  had  used  their  tongues  so  well 
in  their  persistent  cry  for  healing,  went  away  to  make  a 
worse  use  of  them  in  telling  everywhere  of  their  cure. 
Jesus  desired  silence.  Possibly  He  did  not  wish  His 
reputation  as  a  mere  Worker  of  miracles  to  be  spread 
abroad.  In  all  His  earlier  ministry  He  avoided  publicity, 
singularly  contrasting  therein  with  the  evident  desire  to 
make  Himself  the  centre  of  observation  which  marks  its 
close.  He  dreaded  the  smoky  flame  of  popular  excite- 


Less.  XVI.]    Touch  of  Faith  and  Touch  of  Christ.      163 

ment.  His  message  was  to  individuals,  not  to  crowds. 
It  was  a  natural  impulse  to  tell  the  benefits  they  had 
received  ;  but  truer  gratitude  and  deeper  faith  would  have 
made  them  obey  His  lightest  word,  and  shut  their 
mouths.  We  honour  Christ  most,  not  by  taking  our  way 
of  honouring  Him,  but  by  absolute  obedience. 


LESSON  XVII. 


The  King's  Ambassadors. 

MATTHEW  ix.  35-38;  x.   1-8. 


35.  "And  Jesus  went  about  all 
the  cities  and  villages,  teaching 
in  their  S3Tnagogues,  and  preach 
ing  the  gospel  of  the  kingdom, 
and  healing  every  sickness  and 
every  disease  among  the  people. 

36.  But    when    He    saw    the 
multitudes,  He  was  moved  with 
compassion    on    them,    because 
they  fainted,  and  were  scattered 
abroad,    as    sheep     having    no 
shepherd. 

37.  Then   saith  He  unto  His 
disciples,  The  harvest  truly  is 
plenteous,     but    the    labourers 
are  few  ; 

38.  Pray    ye    therefore    the 
Lord    of  the  harvest,   that    He 
will   send   forth  labourers   into 
His  harvest. 

I.  And  when  He  had  called 
unto  Him  His  twelve  disciples, 
He  gave  them  power  against 
unclean  spirits,  to  cast  them 
out,  and  to  heal  all  manner  of 
sickness  and  all  manner  of 
disease. 


2.  Now    the    names    of    the 
twelve  apostles  are  these  ;  The 
first,  Simon,  who  is  called  Peter, 
and  Andrew  his  brother  ;  James 
the  son  of  Zebedee,  and  John 
his  brother  ; 

3.  Philip,  and  Bartholomew ; 
Thomas,      and     Matthew      the 
publican  ;    James     the    son     of 
Alphaeus,  and  Lebbaeus,  whose 
surname  was  Thaddaeus ; 

4.  Simon  the  Canaanite,  and 
Judas    Iscariot,    who    also    be 
trayed  Him. 

5.  These   twelve   Jesus   sent 
forth,    and     commanded     them, 
saying,  Go  not  into  the  way  of 
the  Gentiles,  and  into  any  city 
of  the  Samaritans  enter  ye  not : 

6.  But  go  rather  to  the  lost 
sheep  of  the  house  of  Israel. 

7.  And  as  ye  go,  preach,  say 
ing,  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is 
at  hand. 

8.  Heal  the  sick,  cleanse  the 
lepers,  raise  the  dead,  cast  out 
devils  :   freely  ye  have  received, 
freely  give." 


THE  first  verse  of  this  lesson  is  a  verbatim  repetition 
of  Matthew  iv.  23,  which  introduced  the  Sermon 
on  the  Mount.     The  whole  of  the  intervening  portion, 

164 


Less.  XVII.]        The  King's  Ambassadors.  165 

therefore,  including  the  sermop  and  the  series  of  miracles, 
is  set,  as  it  were,  in  a  frame,  as  a  specimen  of  the  teach 
ing  and  works  of  the  King,  or,  as  we  might  say,  of  the 
laws  and  victories  of  the  kingdom.  Now  we  have  the 
King  sending  out  His  servants  and  warriors.  His  personal 
work  is  no  longer  to  be  the  sole  agency  for  establishing 
his  reign.  A  comparison  of  the  other  evangelists  makes 
it  probable  that  the  apostles  had  been  designated  to 
their  special  position  at  an  earlier  period,  but  that  they 
were  sent  forth  now.  Our  lesson  sets  their  mission  in 
a  touching  light,  as  being  the  direct  result  of  Christ's 
compassion,  stirred  by  the  sight  of  the  multitudes. 

Note  first  the  King's  pity.  Apparently  our  Lord's 
miracles  had  drawn  crowds  after  Him.  As  He  looked  on 
them,  He  saw  in  their  outward  appearance  a  symbol  of 
their  spiritual  state.  They  were  weary  and  worn  with 
travel,  and  had  flung  themselves  down  in  disordered 
masses,  utterly  exhausted,  without  leaders,  a  panting 
mob.  The  word  rendered  "  scattered  "  is  perhaps  better 
given  as  "  thrown  down,"  and  points  rather  to  sheep 
lying  huddled  in  helpless  weariness  than  to  the  disper 
sion  of  what  would  then  scarcely  be  called  a  "  multi 
tude."  Jesus  sees  beneath  the  apparent.  To  His  eye 
the  spiritual  condition  was  the  most  important,  and, 
quick  as  He  was  to  feel  all  sorrows,  yet  it  appealed  most 
strongly  to  His  compassion.  So  should  we  look  'on  men, 
not  neglecting  their  physical  and  outward  sufferings, 
but  ever  reminded  by  these  of  the  deeper  and  sadder 
sorrows  and  cravings  of  the  soul.  Apart  from  Christ, 
men  have  no  shepherd,  whether  we  mean  by  the  word 
a  ruler  or  a  teacher.  Both  ideas  are  included  in  it  as 
used  in  the  Old  Testament.  He  is  the  King,  and,  if 


1 06        The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.  ix. 35-38 ;  x.  1-8. 

we  serve  not  Him,  there  is  none  who  can  rule  the  will 
or  subdue  the  passions  ;  none  who  can  set  up  a  throne 
in  the  heart,  or  to  whom  it  is  honour  and  freedom  to 
submit.  Tyrants  we  may  have,  but  no  other  Shepherd- 
King,  who  cares  for,  and  guards  and  feeds  as  well  as 
rules.  We  have  teachers  many,  but,  apart  from  Christ, 
none  who  bring  certitude,  and  the  final  absolutely  true 
word  about  God  and  ourselves.  By  common  consent, 
it  is  Christ  or  no  one.  Either  He  is  the  King  whose 
reign  is  righteousness,  and  the  Teacher  whose  word  is 
truth,  or  the  race  of  men  are  left  to  grope  as  they  may 
after  duty  and  knowledge. 

Apart  from  Christ,  men  are  harassed,  or,  as  the  word 
literally  means,  "  lacerated,"  like  sheep,  struggling  in 
thorns  or  torn  by  enemies.  They  are  worn  out  by  long 
and  vain  search  after  green  pastures  and  right  roads, 
and  too  often  fling  themselves  down  panting,  in  a  dreary 
despair  of  ever  finding  them.  All  great  outbursts  of 
moral  earnestness  have  been  followed  by  times  of  cor 
ruption  and  apathy.  So  these  weary,  footsore  crowds 
that  lay  round  Christ  should  stand  to  us  as  a  picture 
of  what  the  world  is  without  Jesus,  and  Christ's  way  of 
looking  on  men  should  be  our  way. 

His  clear  vision  of  the  facts  touched  His  heart  at  once 
with  pity,  and  herein  He  was  our  Pattern,  and,  alas  ! 
our  rebuke.  He  had  the  eye  and  the  pity  of  a  God, 
and  the  sympathy  of  a  man.  The  result  of  His  gaze 
was  pity,  not  aversion,  nor  anger,  nor  curiosity,  nor 
indifference,  all  of  which  are  too  often  the  results  of 
our  looking  on  men's  miseries. 

Note,  next,  the  swift  action  that  followed  the  com 
passionate  look.  There  is  a  certain  kind  of  lazy  luxury, 


Less,  xvii.]        The  King's  'Ambassadors.  167 

by  no  means  unfamiliar  to  some  of  us,  in  contemplating 
men's  griefs,  and  letting  our  emotions  be  tickled  into 
not  unpleasant  action.  But  to  excite  emotion  and  give 
it  no  work  to  do  is  a  dangerous  proceeding,  and  sure  to 
end  in  "hardening  all  within"  and  "petrifying  the 
feeling."  On  the  other  hand,  the  most  genuinely  sym 
pathetic  work  is  apt  to  slide  away  from  its  true  founda 
tion,  and,  having  begun  in  the  spirit,  to  be  carried  on  in 
the  flesh,  and  to  become  mechanical  and  therefore  weak. 
So,  we  have  to  learn  from  this  close  connection  between 
knowledge,  pity,  and  action,  the  intended  law  for  our 
Christian  service,  and  to  give  heed  to  keeping  all  three 
elements  in  close  union,  as  the  only  means  of  keeping 
any  of  them  in  health. 

Our  Lord  bade  His  disciples  act  by  prayer.  The 
condition  of  the  people  which  moved  His  pity  is  regarded 
by  Him,  in  the  figure  of  the  harvest  waiting  to  be  reaped, 
under  a  different  point  of  view.  Men's  miseries  apart 
from  Him  are  part  of  their  fitness  for  receiving  Him. 
Among  so  many  wandering  sheep  there  must  be  many 
who  will  gladly  hear  of  the  Shepherd  and  the  fold.  So, 
we  should  regard  the  evils  which  afflict  humanity,  not 
with  despair,  but  as  hearing  in  them  a  summons  to  put  in 
the  sickle.  Few  indeed  were  the  labourers  in  that  field ; 
hitherto,  He  had  been  the  only  one.  Now,  the  pressure 
of  men's  need  had  determined  Him  to  send  forth  others 
to  toil.  But  before  He  sends  out  the  twelve,  He  bids 
them  and  all  the  disciples  pray  that  God  would  thrust 
out  labourers  into  the  field.  What  need  for  the  prayer, 
if  He  was  about  to  do  this  ?  The  same  need  as  there  is 
for  our  asking  any  of  the  blessings  which  He  has  willed 
to  give,  on  condition  of  our  asking  them.  A  man  would 


1 68       The  Gospel  of  St,  Matthew.    [Chap.  ix.  35-38;  x.  i-s. 

have  to  know  all  about  God,  and  about  the  relation  of 
the  Divine  to  the  human  will,  in  order  to  fashion  a 
"  philosophy  of  prayer  "  which  should  explain  the  Divine 
side  of  that  need.  Perhaps  our  ropes  are  not  quite  long 
enough,  even  in  this  system-spinning  age,  to  let  our 
buckets  down  to  the  bottom  of  that  well.  Jesus  Christ 
has  told  us  that  prayer  does  move  the  hand  of  God,  and 
possibly  He  knew  as  much  about  God  as  the  wise  men 
do  who  now  assure  us  that  it  does  not.  They  do  not 
explain  the  difficulty  by  taking  away  all  that  needs 
explanation,  and  asserting  that  the  influence  of  prayer 
on  ourselves  is  its  only  influence.  But  we  should  not 
leave  that  side  out  of  view  either.  Here,  part  of  Christ's 
purpose  was  to  impress  on  the  disciples  the  sense  of 
their  large  opportunities  and  responsibilities — to  teach 
them  and  us  that  prayer  to  God  is  our  best  way  of  further 
ing  His  merciful  purposes  for  a  world  of  wanderers,  and 
that  they  who  honestly  pray  that  God  would  thrust  forth 
labourers  must  be  ready  to  go  when  the  lot  falls  on  them. 

So  we  come  to  the  sending  out  of  the  twelve.  We 
may  observe  that  they  were  endowed  with  power  the  copy 
of  His  own.  The  language  descriptive  of  these  is  plainly 
intended  to  recall  the  almost  identical  terms  in  which 
His  miracles  have  been  spoken  of  in  verse  35.  In  like 
manner  their  message  is  the  same  as  His,  as  at  first 
reported.  (Compare  v.  7  with  Matt.  iv.  17.) 

Note  then,  first,  the  broad  fact  that  there  is  an  order 
in  the  enumeration  of  the  twelve.  The  number,  of 
course,  has  reference  to  the  twelve  tribes,  and  proclaims 
that  the  kingdom  of  which  they  were  the  ministers  is  the 
true  Israel.  The  list  is  divided  into  three  groups  of  four 
each.  In  each  group  the  same  apostle  is  at  the  head  in 


Less.  XVII.]        The  King's  Ambassadors.  169 

all  the  lists,  Simon  Peter  being  always  the  doyen  of  the 
first  quaternion,  Philip  of  the  second,  and  James  the  son 
of  Alphaeus  of  the  third.  Clearly  the  most  important 
come  first,  and  probably  the  most  important  in  each 
group  heads  it.  They  were  brethren,  and  in  some  sense 
a  pure  specimen  of  a  Christian  democracy ;  and  yet  the 
men  of  weight  came  to  the  front,  and  there  are  degrees 
among  them  dependent  on  their  force  of  goodness  and 
consecration,  as  well  as  on  natural  endowment. 

Note,  too,  the  smaller  groups  within  the  circle.  There 
were,  at  all  events,  two  pairs  of  brothers,  who  consti 
tuted  the  four  chief  apostles.  One  theory  makes  a  third 
pair  in  the  persons  of  James  and  Judas,  or  Thaddoeus  as 
Matthew  calls  him.  Philip  and  Bartholomew  (that  is, 
Nathanael)  were  friends.  All  the  first  six  were  closely 
connected  before  their  discipleship.  Further,  Matthew 
and  Luke — in  both  his  lists — give  the  names  in  pairs  ; 
and  Mark,  who  does  not  do  so,  mentions  what  was  no 
doubt  the  reason  for  the  pairs,  that  they  were  originally 
sent  out  by  twos.  So  we  learn  the  good  of  companion 
ship  in  Christian  service,  which  solaces,  and  checks 
excessive  individuality,  and  makes  men  brave.  One  and 
one  is  more  than  two,  for  each  man  is  more  than  himself 
by  the  companionship.  We  may  note,  too,  the  allow- 
ableness  of  special  friendships  among  Christian  workers, 
the  consecration  of  friendship,  and  the  beauty  of  the 
bonds  of  kindred  and  amity  when  they  are  heightened 
and  sanctified  by  yoking  us  to  Christ's  plow.  But  these 
lists  also  teach  us  that  Christ's  service  separates  and 
dissolves  natural  ties.  One  of  the  twelve  was  Thomas 
Didymus,  and  his  name  in  both  languages  means  "a 
twin."  Where  was  his  twin  brother? 


1 70       The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.  ix.  35-38 ;  x.  1-8. 

Note,  again,  the  variations  in  the  order.  Matthew 
belongs  to  the  second  group,  and  in  his  own  Gospel 
stands  last  in  it.  The  lowest  place  which  he  could  take 
he  modestly  takes.  In  Mark's  list  (Mark  iii.  16)  He 
comes  a  place  higher,  as  also  in  Luke's  first  (Luke  vi. 
14),  but  in  Acts  i.  13  he  drops  to  eighth.  Another 
little  touch  of  lowliness  lies  in  the  fact  that  he,  and  he 
only,  calls  himself  "  the  publican,"  and  that  in  no  other 
instance  is  the  occupation  of  any  of  them  mentioned. 
The  list  in  Acts  may  be  taken  as  giving  the  final  positions 
of  the  apostles  ;  and  in  it  the  pairs  of  brothers  in  the 
first  group  are  parted,  Peter  and  James  being  united,  as 
probably  the  more  active,  while  John,  whose  work  was 
"  to  tarry,"  and  Andrew,  are  placed  together, — the  latter 
being  last,  as  certainly  the  least  important  of  the  four. 
Then,  in  the  second  division,  Thomas  comes  up  from 
the  last  place,  which  he  occupies  in  Mark  and  Luke, 
and  probably  would  have  occupied  in  Matthew  but  for 
that  apostle's  modesty,  and  is  coupled  with  Philip, 
whose  companion  Nathanael,  whom  he  brought  to  Jesus, 
is  now  put  third.  So  we  may  learn  that  our  place  in 
Christ's  army  is  altered  by  our  diligence  and  faithful  use 
of  opportunities.  It  used  to  be  said  that,  in  Napoleon's 
time,  every  French  soldier  carried  a  field-marshal's  baton 
in  his  knapsack.  Every  Christian  soldier  has  the  possi 
bility  of  high  rank,  and  his  advance  will  injure  or  hinder 
none  of  his  fellows.  The  first  may  be  last,  and  the  last 
first. 

We  may  note,  too,  the  lessons  of  the  last  pair  of  names. 
Simon  the  zealot  had  been  a  member  of  that  fierce  party 
who  were  ready  to  draw  the  sword  against  Rome,  and 
in  whom  hot  passion  masqueraded  as  holy  zeal.  The 


Less,  xvii.]        The  King's  Ambassadors.  171 

impure  fire  had  been  clarified,  and  turned  into  holy 
enthusiasm,  by  union  with  Christ,  who  alone  has  power 
to  correct  and  elevate  earthly  passion  into  calm  and  per 
manent  consecration  and  ardour.  What  a  contrast  He 
presents  to  the  last  name  !  A  strangely  assorted  couple, 
these  two :  the  zealot,  and  the  cold-blooded,  selfish 
betrayer,  whose  stagnant  soul  has  never  been  moved  by 
any  breath  of  zeal  for  anything  !  The  lessons  of  that 
name  cannot  be  dealt  with  here.  Enough  to  draw  the 
warning  that  contact  with  Christ  hurts  where  it  does  not 
help,  and  maddens  to  malignant  hatred,  if  it  does  not 
soften  to  adoring  love. 

But  perhaps  not  the  least  important  lesson  to  be 
learned  from  these  names,  is  that  contained  in  the  plain 
fact  that  of  half  of  them  we  never  hear  again.  None 
of  them,  except  the  three  "  who  seemed  to  be  pillars," 
appear  to  have  been  of  much  importance  in  the  work  of 
the  Church.  Surely,  if  they  were  the  possessors  of  such 
extraordinary  powers  !as  the  sacramentarian  theory  im 
plies,  it  is  odd  that  we  should  hear  so  little  about  them. 
As  long  as  Christ  was  on  earth,  their  office  was  to  bj 
with  Him,  to  preach  the  kingdom  when  sent  forth,  and 
to  work  miracles.  After  His  ascension,  their  office, 
according  to  Peter's  notion  of  it,  was  to  be  witnesses  "  of 
His  resurrection."  The  qualification  for  that  was  simply 
that  they  should  "  have  companied  with  us  all  the  time  " 
of  Christ's  life.  Miraculous  gifts  they  had,  but  not  as 
their  peculiar  possession.  They  could  impart  the  Holy 
Spirit  to  believers,  but  so  could  Ananias  at  Damascus. 
Their  simple  task  was  witness-bearing,  and  there  can 
be  no  apostolic  succession  for  the  sufficient  reason 
that  there  is  nothing  to  succeed  to,  except  what 


172       The  Gospel  of  St,  Matthew.    [Chap. ix. 35-38;  x.i-8. 

cannot  be  transmitted,  personal  knowledge  of  Christ's 
resurrection. 

Note,  finally,  our  Lord's  charge  to  these  messengers 
of  the  kingdom.  The  first  trial-mission  is  confined  to 
Israel,  according  to  the  order  ever  observed,  that  to  it 
the  kingdom  should  be  first  brought.  The  yearning 
pity  of  Christ's  heart,  and  the  link  between  the  apostles' 
mission  and  the  sight  of  the  fainting  multitudes,  is 
suggested  by  the  echo  of  the  former  metaphor  in  "  the 
lost  sheep  of  the  house  of  Israel."  The  message  is, 
as  we  have  noticed,  the  same  as  that  of  John,  and  of 
Christ  at  the  beginning  of  His  ministry.  It  is  clearly  a 
temporary  one.  Neither  the  message  nor  many  of  the 
instructions  for  this  journey  were  meant  for  more  than 
the  time.  The  miraculous  powers  with  which  they  are 
invested  are  the  echo  or  reflection  of  His,  and  intended 
to  be  witnesses  of  the  reality  and  specimens  of  the 
blessings  of  the  kingdom.  Ambassadors  used  sometimes 
to  carry  the  king's  signet-ring,  and  sometimes  his  sword 
as  their  credentials.  These  twelve  bear  the  regalia  of 
their  Sovereign  in  these  acts  of  mercy. 

The  great  word  with  which  this  lesson  closes  is  not 
part  of  the  transitory  instructions  to  the  twelve.  "  Freely 
ye  have  received,  freely  give,"  contains  the  permanent 
law  for  Christ's  kingdom.  Do  not  sell  what  you  did  not 
buy.  It  is  an  appeal  to  chivalrous  generosity.  It  touches 
on  the  solemn  obligation  arising  from  possession.  To 
have,  binds  us  to  give.  What  should  we  say  of  a 
dweller  in  some  waterless  plain,  who  kept  a  well  in  his 
courtyard  locked  up,  and  let  neighbours  die  of  thirst  ?  It 
touches  on  the  even  stronger  motive  arising  from  the 
way  in  which  Christians  have  come  into  possession  of 


Less,  xvii.]        The  King's  Ambassadors.  173 

their  spiritual  blessings.  How  delicately  Christ  just 
glances  at  the  cost  to  Him,  and  the  consequent  weight 
of  our  obligations  in  that  one  word  "  freely  "  !  He  will 
not  dilate  on  His  sacrifice  and  pains.  Enough  is  said 
when  He  points  one  fingei,  as  it  were,  to  what  He  has 
done,  in  order  that  this  gift  might  be  freely  ours.  The 
deepest  ground  of  all  on  which  the  Christian  duty  of 
work  for  the  salvation  of  others  rests,  is  gratitude  to 
Christ.  Pity  for  men  is  less  holy,  and  will  prove  less 
powerful,  than  thankfulness  to  Jesus.  Christ's  own 
example  is  here  set  before  us  as  the  pattern  for  our 
giving.  His  self-oblivion,  His  unwearied  toil,  His  lowli 
ness,  His  patient  love,  which  refused  to  be  put  by,  and 
answered  all  unkindness  with  gentleness,  and  refusal 
with  renewed  and  more  pressing  beseechings,  are  meant 
not  only  for  our  trust,  but  for  our  imitation.  The  manner 
of  Christian  effort  for  others  is  prescribed  in  this  com 
mand.  Give  as  widely  as  you  can  to  all  whom  your 
outstretched  hand  can  reach.  Give  at  the  cost  of 
sacrifice  to  yourselves,  of  money,  time,  and  ease.  Do 
not  clog  your  gift  with  restrictions  and  shibboleths,  nor 
compel  the  observance  of  needless  conditions  ;  but  take 
pattern  of  the  Master  and  of  the  Divine  love  which 
dwelt  in  Him  bodily,  and  give  to  all,  and  that  liberally, 
and  without  souring  the  sweetness  of  the  offered  salvation 
with  the  bitter  flavour  of  upbraiding.  Those  who  freely 
give  are  they  who  truly  keep,  and  themselves  most 
enjoy  the  gift,  the  highest  result  of  which  is  that  the 
receivers  become  like  the  Giver,  and  in  their  poor  way 
echo  His  message  and  reflect  the  miracles  of  His  healing 
power. 


LESSON    XVIII. 


The    King's   Charge  to  His  Ambassadors. 

MATTHEW  x.  32-42. 


32.  "Whosoever  therefore 
shall    confess    Me    before   men, 
him  will   I  confess  also  before 
My  Father  which  is  in  heaven. 

33.  But  whosoever  shall  deny 
Me  before  men,  him  will  I  also 
deny  before  My  Father  which 
is  in  heaven. 

34.  Think  not  that  I  am  come 
to  send  peace  on  earth  :  I  came 
not  to  send  peace,  but  a  sword. 

35.  For  I   am  come  to  set  a 
man     at    variance    against    his 
father,  and  the  daughter  against 
her  mother,  and   the  daughter 
in   law   against   her   mother  in 
law. 

36.  And  a  man's  foes  shall  be 
they  of  his  own  household. 

37.  He  that  loveth  father  or 
mother  more   than    Me  is    not 
worthy   of    Me :    and    he  that 
loveth    son    or   daughter   more 
than  Me  is  not  worthy  of  Me. 


38.  And  he   that  takcth   not 
his    cross,    and    followeth   after 
Me,  is  not  worthy  of  Me. 

39.  He   that   findeth   his   life 
shall  lose  it :  and  he  that  loseth 
his  life  for  My  sake  shall  find 
it. 

40.  He   that    receiveth    you 
receiveth  Me,  and  he  that  re 
ceiveth  Me  receiveth  Him  that 
sent  Me. 

41.  He  that  receiveth  a  pro- 
peht  in  the  name  of  a  prophet 
shal  1  receive    a    prophet's    re 
ward  ;  and  he  that  receiveth  a 
righteous  man  in   the  name  of 
a  righteous  man  shall  receive  a 
righteous  man's  reward. 

42.  And     whosoever     shall 
give  to  drink  unto  one  of  these 
little  ones  a  cup  of  cold  water 
only  in  the  name  of  a  disciple, 
verily  I  say  unto  you,  he  shall 
in  no  wise  lose  his  reward." 


THE   first  mission  of  the  apostles,  important   as  it 
was,  was  but  a  short  flight  to  try  the  young  birds' 
wings.     The  larger  portion  of  this  charge  to  them  passes 
far  beyond  the  immediate  occasion,  and  deals  with  the 
permanent  relations  of  Christ's  servants  to  the  world  in 


Less,  xvili.]  The  King's  Charge  to  His  Ambassadors.  175 

which  they  live,  for  the  purpose  of  bringing  it  into  sub 
jection  to  its  true  King.  These  solemn  closing  words, 
which  make  our  present  lesson,  give  us  the  duty  and 
blessedness  of  confessing  Him,  the  vision  of  the  anta 
gonisms  which  He  excites,  His  demand  for  all-surrender 
ing  following  ;  and  the  rewards  of  those  who  receive 
Christ's  messengers,  and  therein  receive  Himself  and 
His  Father. 

I.  The  duty  and  blessedness  of  confessing  Him  (vv. 
32,  33).  The  "therefore"  is  significant.  It  attaches 
the  promise  which  follows  to  the  immediately  preceding 
thoughts  of  a  watchful,  fatherly  care,  extending  like  a 
great  invisible  hand  over  the  true  disciple.  Because 
each  is  thus  guarded,  each  shall  be  preserved  to  receive 
the  honour  of  being  confessed  by  Christ.  No  matter 
what  may  befall  His  witnesses,  the  extremest  disaster 
shall  not  come  between  them  and  their  crown.  They 
may  be  flung  down  from  the  house-tops  where  they  lift 
up  their  bold  voices,  but  He  who  does  not  let  the  sparrow 
fall  to  the  ground  uncared  for,  will  give  His  angels  charge 
concerning  them  who  are  so  much  more  precious,  and 
they  shall  be  borne  up  on  their  outstretched  wings,  lest 
they  be  dashed  on  the  pavement  below.  Thus  preserved, 
they  shall  all  attain  at  last  to  their  reward.  Nothing  can 
come  between  Christ's  servant  and  his  crown.  The 
tender  providence  of  the  Father,  whose  mercy  is  over  all 
His  works,  makes  sure  of  that.  The  river  of  the  con 
fessor's  life  may  plunge  underground,  and  be  lost  amid 
persecutions,  but  it  will  emerge  again  into  the  better 
sunshine  on  the  other  side  of  the  mountains. 

The  confession  which  is  to  be  thus  rewarded,  like  the 
denial  opposed  to  it,  is,  of  course,  not  merely  a  single 


176  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew,    [Chap.  x.  32-42. 

utterance  of  the  lip.  Judas  Iscariot  confessed  Christ, 
and  Peter  denied  Him.  But  it  is  the  habitual  acknow 
ledgment  by  lip  and  life,  unwithdrawn  to  the  end.  The 
context  implies  that  the  confession  is  maintained  in  the 
face  of  opposition,  as  the  denial  is  a  cowardly  attempt  to 
save  one's  skin  at  the  cost  of  treason  to  Jesus.  The 
temptation  does  not  come  in  that  sharpest  form  to  us. 
Perhaps  some  cowards  would  be  made  brave  if  it  did.  It 
is  perhaps  easier  to  face  the  gibbet  and  the  fire,  and 
screw  one's  self  up  for  once  to  a  brief  endurance,  than  to 
resist  the  more  specious  blandishments  of  the  world, 
especially  when  it  has  been  christened,  and  calls  itself 
religious.  The  light  laugh  of  scorn,  the  silent  pressure 
of  the  low  average  of  Christian  character,  the  many 
associations  in  trade,  literature,  public  and  domestic  life 
which  Christians  have  with  non-Christians,  make  many 
a  man's  tongue  lie  silent,  to  the  sore  detriment  of  his 
own  religious  life.  "  Ye  have  not  yet  resisted  unto 
blood,"  and  find  it  hard  to  fulfil  the  easier  conflict  to 
which  you  are  called.  The  sun  has  more  power  than 
the  tempest  to  make  the  pilgrim  drop  his  garment.  But 
the  duty  remains  the  same  for  all  ages.  Every  man  is 
bound  to  make  the  deepest  springs  of  his  life  visible,  and 
to  stand  to  his  convictions,  whatever  they  be.  If  he  do 
not,  his  convictions  will  disappear  like  a  piece  of  ice  hid 
in  a  hot  hand,  which  will  melt  and  trickle  away.  This 
obligation  lies  with  infinitely  increased  weight  on  Christ's 
servants  ;  and  the  consequences  of  failing  to  discharge 
it  are  more  tragic  in  their  cases,  in  the  exact  proportion 
of  the  greater  preciousness  of  their  faith.  Corn  hoarded 
is  sure  to  be  spoiled  by  weevils  and  rust.  The  bread  of 
life  hidden  in  our  sacks  will  certainly  go  mouldy. 


Less,  xviii.]  The  King's  Charge  to  His  Ambassadors.  177 

The  reward  and  punishment  of  confession  and  denial 
come  to  them  not  as  separate  acts,  but  each  as  the 
revelation  of  the  spiritual  condition  of  the  doers.  Christ 
implies  that  a  true  disciple  cannot  but  be  a  confessor, 
and  that  therefore  the  denier  must  certainly  be  one 
whom  He  has  never  known.  Because,  therefore,  each 
act  is  symptomatic  of  the  doer,  each  receives  the  con 
gruous  and  correspondent  reward.  The  confessor  is 
confessed ;  the  denier  is  denied.  What  calm  and 
assured  consciousness  of  His  place  as  judge  underlies 
these  words  !  His  recognition  is  God's  acceptance  ; 
His  denial  is  darkness  and  misery.  The  correspondence 
between  the  work  and  the  reward  is  beautifully  brought 
out  by  the  use  of  the  same  word  to  express  each.  And 
yet  what  a  difference  between  our  confession  of  Him  and 
His  of  us  !  And  what  a  hope  is  here  for  all  who  have 
tremblingly,  and  in  the  consciousness  of  much  unworthi- 
ness,  ventured  to  say  that  they  were  Christ's  subjects, 
and  He  their  King,  brother,  and  all  !  Their  poor,  feeble 
confession  will  be  endorsed  by  His.  He  will  say,  "Yes, 
this  man  is  mine,  and  I  am  his."  That  will  be  glory, 
honour,  blessedness,  life,  heaven. 

II.  The  vision  of  the  discord  which  follows  the  coming 
of  the  King  of  peace.  It  is  not  enough  to  interpret 
these  words  as  meaning  that  our  Lord's  purpose  indeed 
was  to  bring  peace,  but  that  the  result  of  His  coming 
was  strife.  The  ultimate  purpose  is  peace ;  but  an 
immediate  purpose  is  conflict,  as  the  only  road  to  the 
pe?ce.  He  is  first  King  of  righteousness,  and  after 
that  also  King  of  peace.  But,  if  His  kingdom  be 
righteousness,  purity,  love,  then  unrighteousness,  filthi- 
ness,  and  selfishness  will  fight  against  it  for  their  lives. 

12 


178  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.  x.  32-42. 

The  ultimate  purpose  of  Christ's  coming  is  to  transform 
the  world  into  the  likeness  of  heaven  ;  and  all  in  the 
world  which  hates  such  likeness  is  embattled  against 
Him.  He  saw  realities,  and  knew  men's  hearts,  and 
was  under  no  illusions,  such  as  many  an  ardent  reformer 
has  cherished,  that  the  fair  form  of  truth  need  only  be 
shown  to  men,  and  they  will  take  her  to  their  hearts. 
Incessant  struggle  is  the  law  for  the  individual  and  for 
society  till  Christ's  purpose  for  both  is  realised. 

That  conflict  ranges  the  dearest  in  opposite  ranks. 
The  gospel  is  the  great  solvent.  As  when  a  substance 
is  brought  into  contact  with  some  chemical  compound, 
which  has  greater  affinity  for  one  of  its  elements  than 
the  other  element  has,  the  old  combination  is  dissolved, 
and  a  new  and  more  stable  one  is  formed,  so  Christianity 
analyzes  and  destroys  in  order  to  synthesis  and  construc 
tion.  In  verse  21  our  Lord  had  foretold  that  brother 
should  deliver  up  brother  to  death.  Here  the  severance 
is  considered  from  the  opposite  side.  The  persons  who 
are  "  set  at  variance "  with  their  kindred  are  here 
Christians.  Perhaps  it  is  fanciful  to  observe  that  they  are 
all  junior  members  of  families,  as  if  the  young  would  be 
more  likely  to  flock  to  the  new  light.  But  however  that 
may  be,  the  separation  is  mutual,  but  the  hate  is  all  on 
one  side.  The  "  man's  foes  "  are  of  his  own  household ; 
but  he  is  not  their  foe,  though  he  be  parted  from  them. 

III.  Earthly  love  may  be  a  worse  foe  to  a  true 
Christian  than  even  the  enmity  of  the  dearest ;  and  that 
enmity  may  often  be  excited  by  the  Christian  subordi 
nation  of  earthly  to  heavenly  love.  So  our  Lord  passes 
from  the  warnings  of  discord  and  hate  to  the  danger  of 
the  opposite — undue  love. 


Less,  xviii.j  The  King's  Charge  to  His  Ambassadors.  179 

He  claims  absolute  supremacy  in  our  hearts.  He 
goes  still  farther,  and  claims  the  surrender,  not  only  of 
affections,  but  of  self  and  life  to  Him.  What  a  strange 
claim  this  is  !  A  Jewish  peasant,  dead  eighteen  hundred 
years  since,  fronts  the  whole  race  of  man,  and  asserts  His 
right  to  their  love,  which  is  strange,  and  to  their  supreme 
love,  which  is  stranger  still.  Why  should  we  love  Him 
at  all,  if  He  were  only  a  man,  however  pure  and  bene 
volent?  We  may  admire,  as  we  do  many  another  fair 
nature  in  the  past ;  but  is  there  any  possibility  of  evoking 
anything  as  wrarm  as  love  to  an  unseen  person,  who  can 
have  had  no  knowledge  of  or  love  to  us  ?  And  wrhy 
should  we  love  Him  more  than  our  dearest,  from  whom 
we  have  drawn  or  to  whom  we  have  given  life  ?  What 
explanation  or  justification  does  He  give  of  this  unex 
ampled  demand  ?  Absolutely  none.  He  seems  to  think 
that  its  reasonableness  needs  no  elucidation.  Surely 
never  did  teacher  professing  wisdom,  modesty,  and,  still 
more,  religion,  put  forward  such  a  claim  of  right  ;  and 
surely  never  besides  did  any  succeed  in  persuading 
generations  unborn  to  yield  His  demand,  wrhen  they 
heard  it.  The  strangest  thing  in  the  world's  history 
is  that  to-day  there  are  millions  who  do  love  Jesus 
Christ  more  than  all  besides,  and  whose  chief  self- 
accusation  is  that  they  do  not  love  Him  more.  The 
strange,  audacious  claim  is  most  reasonable,  if  we  believe 
that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God,  who  died  for  each  of  us, 
and  that  each  man  and  woman  to  the  last  of  the  genera 
tions  had  a  separate  place  in  His  Divine  human  love 
when  He  died.  It  is  meet  to  love  Him,  if  that  be  true  ; 
it  is  not,  unless  it  be.  The  requirement  is  as  stringent 
as  strange.  If  the  two  ever  seem  to  conflict,  the  earthly 


i8o  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.  x.  32-42. 

must  give  way.  If  the  earthly  be  withdrawn,  there  must 
be  found  sufficiency  for  comfort  and  peace  in  the 
heavenly.  The  lower  must  not  be  permitted  to  hinder 
the  flight  of  the  heavenly  to  its  home.  "  More  than 
Me  "  is  a  rebuke  to  most  of  us.  What  a  contrast  between 
the  warmth  of  our  earthly  and  the  tepidity  or  coldness 
of  our  heavenly  love  !  How  spontaneously  our  thoughts, 
when  left  free,  turn  to  the  one  ;  how  hard  we  find  it  to 
keep  them  fixed  on  the  other  !  How  sweet  service  is  to 
the  dear  ones  here  ;  how  reluctantly  it  is  given  to  Christ ! 
How  we  long,  when  parted,  to  rejoin  them  ;  how  little 
we  are  drawn  to  the  place  where  He  is  !  We  have  all 
to  confess  that  we  are  "  not  worthy  of "  Him ;  that  we 
requite  His  love  with  inadequate  returns,  and  live  lives 
which  tax  His  love  for  its  highest  exercise,  the  free  for 
giveness  of  sins  against  itself.  Compliance  with  that 
stringent  law,  and  subordinating  all  earthly  love  to  His, 
is  the  true  elevating  and  ennobling  of  the  earthly.  It  is 
promoted,  not  degraded,  when  it  is  made  second,  and  is 
infinitely  sweeter  and  deeper  then  than  when  it  was  set 
in  the  place  of  supremacy,  where  it  had  no  right  to  be. 

But  Christ's  demand  is  not  only  for  the  surrender  of 
the  heart,  but  for  the  giving  up  of  self,  and,  in  a  very 
profound  sense,  for  the  surrender  of  life.  How  enigma 
tical  that  saying  about  taking  up  the  cross  must  have 
sounded  to  the  disciples  !  They  knew  little  about  the 
cross,  as  a  punishment ;  they  had  not  yet  associated  it 
in  any  way  with  their  Lord.  This  seems  to  have  been 
the  first  occasion  of  His  mentioning  it,  and  the  allusion 
is  so  veiled  as  to  be  but  partially  intelligible.  But  what 
was  intelligible  was  bewildering.  A  strange  royal  pro 
cession  that,  of  the  King  with  a  cross  on  His  shoulder, 


Less,  xviii. ]  The  King's  Charge  to  His  Ambassadors.  181 

and  all  His  subjects  behind  Him,  with  similar  burdens  ! 
Through  the  ages  that  procession  has  marched,  and  it 
marches  still.  Self-denial  for  Christ's  sake  is  the  badge 
of  all  our  tribe.  Observe  that  word  "  take."  The  cross 
must  be  willingly  and  by  ourselves  assumed.  No  other 
can  lay  it  on  our  shoulders.  Observe  that  other  word 
"  His."  Each  man  has  his  own  special  form  in  which 
self-denial  is  needful  for  him.  We  require  pure  eyes, 
and  hearts  kept  in  very  close  communion  with  Jesus,  to 
ascertain  what  our  particular  cross  is.  He  has  them  of 
many  patterns,  shapes,  sizes,  and  materials.  We  can 
always  make  sure  of  strength  to  carry  the  one  which  He 
means  us  to  carry,  but  not  of  strength  to  bear  what  is 
not  ours. 

But  subordinated  affections  and  continuous  self-denial 
are  not  all  which  He  wants  from  us.  Life  or  self  must 
be  last  if  it  is  to  be  found.  That  profound  and  com 
prehensive  saying  would  afford  material  for  many  lessons. 
In  each  clause,  finding  life  and  losing  it  are  used  in  two 
different  senses.  He  that  finds  his  life,  in  the  sense  of 
keeping,  or  being  ready  to  keep,  his  bodily  life  by  for 
saking  Christ,  shall  lose  his  truest  life,  which  consists  in 
union  with  Him,  the  Source  of  all  life;  and  he  who  parts 
or  is  ready  to  part  with  that  bodily  life  for  the  sake  of 
keeping  Christ,  shall  find  that  true  life  which  is  increased, 
and  not  destroyed,  by  the  axe,  or  the  fire  of  martyrdom. 
But  the  words  are  not  only  a  lesson  for  times  of  persecu 
tion  ;  they  go  down  into  the  very  depths  of  Christian 
experience.  Death  is  the  gate  of  life.  To  die  to  self 
is  the  path  to  living  in  Christ.  We  possess  ourselves 
only  when  we  give  ourselves  away  to  Him.  We  live  by 
dying.  We  die  in  our  true  selves  if  we  seek  to  live  for 


182  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.  x.  32-42. 

and  by  ourselves.  He  only  truly  lives  the  motto  of 
whose  life  is,  "  I  live  ;  yet  not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in 
me." 

IV.  We  have  the  rewards  of  those  who  receive  Christ's 
messengers,  and  therein  receive  Him  and  His  Father. 
Our  Lord  first  identifies  these  twelve  with  Himself  in  a 
manner  which  must  have  sounded  strange  to  them  then, 
but  have  heartened  them  for  their  work  by  the  conscious 
ness  of  His  mysterious  oneness  with  them.  The  whole 
doctrine  of  Christ's  unity  with  His  people  lay  in  germ 
in  these  words,  though  much  more  was  needed,  both  of 
teaching  and  of  experience,  before  their  depth  of  bless 
ing  and  strengthening  could  be  apprehended.  We 
know  that  He  dwells  in  His  true  subjects  by  His 
Spirit,  and  that  a  most  real  union  subsists  between  the 
head  and  the  members  of  which  the  closest  unions 
of  earth  are  but  faint  shadows,  so  as  that  not  only  those 
who  receive  His  followers  receive  Him,  but,  more 
wonderful  still,  His  followers  are  received  at  the  last 
by  God  Himself  as  joined  to  Him,  and  portions  of  His 
very  self,  and  therefore  "  accepted  in  the  Beloved." 
Our  Lord  adds  to  these  words  the  thought  that,  in  like 
manner,  to  receive  Him  is  to  receive  the  Father,  and 
so  implies  that  our  relation  to  Him  is  in  certain  real 
respects  parallel  with  His  relation  to  the  Father.  We 
too  are  sent.  He  who  sends  abides  with  us,  as  the  Son 
ever  abode  in  God,  and  God  in  Him.  We  are  sent  to 
be  the  brightness  of  Christ's  glory,  and  to  manifest  Him 
to  men,  as  He  to  reveal  the  Father. 

And  then  our  Lord  passes  to  speak,  finally,  of  the 
rewards  of  receiving  His  messengers.  Note  the  three 
types  of  character, — "  prophet,"  "  righteous  man,"  and 


Less,  xviii.]  The  King's  Charge  to  His  Ambassadors.  183 

"  these  little  ones."  Are  we  to  see  intended  gradation  ? 
and,  if  so,  is  this  an  ascending  or  a  descending  climax? 
At  first  sight,  it  seems  that  we  go  down  from  prophets, 
honoured  with  Divine  words  to  speak,  to  righteous  men, 
and  from  them  to  the  humble  disciples ;  but  in  reality 
the  progress  here  is  upwards.  Righteousne'ss  is  more 
than  prophetic  inspiration.  Goodness  is  better  than 
shining  gifts.  In  Christ's  classification,  genius  is  less 
than  purity ;  and  if  there  could  be  a  prophet  who  was 
not  righteous,  as  in  Balaam's  case,  he  would  be  distinctly 
inferior  to  a  righteous  man,  whose  lips  had  never  been 
touched  with  prophetic  fire.  So,  above  these  highest 
types  of  the  old  covenant,  our  Lord  here  sets  His 
disciples,  the  little  ones  who  believe  in  Him.  Faith 
in  Him  is  better  than  genius,  intellect,  the  poet's 
imagination,  the  philosopher's  searching  reason,  and 
even  the  inspiration  which  makes  men  teachers  of  the 
thoughts  of  God.  In  like  manner,  there  may  be  much 
beauty  of  character  and  rectitude  of  conduct  apart  from 
discipleship  ;  but  all  that  is  on  a  lower  level  than  the 
faith  which  grasps  Christ. 

Note  also  the  variety  of  reward  according  to  character. 
Each  class  is  supposed  to  have,  because  each  is  capable 
of,  a  diverse  reward.  Here  and  now  every  course  of 
conduct  has  satisfactions  springing  from  it,  which,  of 
course,  can  only  be  realised  in  it.  And  so  in  the  future, 
while  we  are  not  to  conceive  of  heaven  as  given  to 
"  prophets  "  or  "  righteous  men  "  who  are  not  disciples, 
still  presupposing  faith,  then  according  to  the  character 
and  activity  here  will  be  the  heaven  hereafter.  Note 
the  sameness  of  reward  to  all  who  stand  on  the  same 
level  To  receive  a  prophet  in  the  name  of  a  prophet 


1 84  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.  x.  32-42. 

means  to  welcome  him  because  he  is  such ;  or,  in  other 
words,  it  expresses  recognition  and  sympathy.  So  in 
each  of  the  other  clauses.  The  power  of  appreciating 
a  certain  type  of  character  indicates  a  partial  possession 
of  that  character. 

A  man  may  be  morally  and  spiritually  on  the  prophet's 
level,  though  his  stammering  tongue  has  never  been 
loosed.  The  widow  of  Sarepta  had  some  spark  of  the 
prophetess  in  her,  though  Elijah's  task  was  to  beard 
Ahab  and  shake  Israel,  and  hers  was  only  to  bake  his 
bread.  There  must  be  some  similarity  for  sympathy. 
There  must  be  something  of  the  poet  in  the  man  who 
feels  the  majesty  of  the  organ  music  of  "  Paradise  Lost," 
though  he  be  but  a  "  mute,  inglorious  Milton."  So 
there  is  a  likeness  in  the  rewards,  because  there  is  a 
likeness  in  the  men.  All  actions  done  from  the  same 
motive  are  alike  in  God's  eyes.  We  are  not  all  called 
to  great  service,  but  we  are  called  to  sympathetic  interest 
in  those  who  are  so,  and  to  help  them  as  we  may.  It 
was  a  law  in  Israel :  "  As  his  part  is  that  goeth  down  to 
the  battle,  so  shall  his  part  be  that  tarrieth  by  the  stuff." 
It  is  the  law  of  Christ's  kingdom,  in  which  motives,  not 
deeds,  and  spiritual  susceptibility,  not  the  accidents  of 
the  mode  of  its  expression,  determine  place,  capacity  of 
receiving,  and  therefore  reward. 


LESSON    XIX. 


John's  Doubts  of  Jesus,  and  Jesus'  Praise  of  John. 

MATTHEW  xi.  2-15. 


2.  "Now    when     John     had 
heard  in  the  prison  the  works 
of  Christ,   he  sent  two   of  his 
disciples. 

3.  And   said   unto    Him,    Art 
Thou  He  that  should  come,  or 
do  we  look  for  another  ? 

4.  Jesus  answered   and   said 
unto  them,  Go  and  show  John 
again  those  things  which  ye  do 
hear  and  see  : 

5.  The    blind     receive     their 
sight,  and  the   lame  walk,  the 
lepers  are  cleansed,  and  the  deaf 
hear,  the  dead   are  raised  up, 
and  the  poor  have  the   gospel 
preached  to  them. 

6.  And  blessed  is  he,  whoso 
ever  shall  not  be  offended  in  Me. 

7.  And     as     they     departed, 
Jesus    began    to    say    unto   the 
multitudes     concerning     John, 
What    went    ye    out    into     the 
wilderness    to    see  ?      A    reed 
shaken  with  the  wind  ? 

8.  But  what  went  ye  out  for 
to  see  ?     A  man  clothed  in  soft 
raiment  ?  behold,  they  that  wear 
soft  clothing  arc  in  kings'  houses. 


9.  But  what  went  ye  out  for 
to  see  ?     A  prophet  ?  yea,  I  say 
unto    you,    and     more    than     a 
prophet. 

10.  For  this  is  He,  of  whom 
it  is  written,  Behold,  I  send  My 
messenger     before     Thy    face, 
which  shall   prepare  Thy  way 
before  Thee. 

11.  Verily,  I   say    unto    you, 
Among  them  that  are  born    of 
women  there  hath  not  risen  a 
greater  than  John   the  Baptist : 
notwithstanding  he  that  is  least 
in   the    kingdom   of   heaven    is 
greater  than  he. 

12.  And     from    the    days    of 
John  the  Baptist  until  now  the 
kingdom    of    heaven     suffereth 
violence,   and  the   violent  take 
it  by  force. 

13.  For     all     the     prophets 
and   the   law   prophesied    until 
John. 

14.  And  if  ye  will  receive  it, 
this  is  Elias,  which  was  for  to 
come. 

15.  He  that  hath  ears  to  hear, 
let  him  hear." 


THIS    lesson    falls    into    two   parts  :   the    first,   from 
verses  2-6  inclusive,  giving  us  the  faltering  faith  of 
the  great  witness,  and  Christ's  gentle  treatment  of  the 

185 


i86  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap. xi. 2-15. 

waverer ;  the  second,  from  verse  7  to  the  end  of  the 
lesson,  giving  the  witness  of  Christ  to  John,  exuberant  in 
recognition,  notwithstanding  his  momentary  hesitation. 

I.  We  do  not  believe  that  this  message  of  John's  was 
sent  for  the  sake  of  strengthening  his  disciples'  faith  in 
Jesus  as  Messiah,  nor  that  it  was  merely  meant  as  a  hint 
to  Jesus  to  declare  Himself.  The  question  is  John's. 
The  answer  is  sent  to  him  :  it  is  he  who  is  to  ponder  the 
things  which  the  messengers  saw,  and  to  answer  his  own 
question  thereby.  The  note  which  the  evangelist  pre 
fixes  to  his  account  gives  the  key  to  the  incident.  John 
was  "  in  prison,"  in  that  gloomy  fortress  of  Machserus 
which  Herod  had  rebuilt  at  once  for  "  a  sinful  pleasure 
house,"  and  for  an  impregnable  refuge,  among  the  savage 
cliffs  of  Moal).  The  halls  of  luxurious  vice  and  the  walls 
of  defence  are  gone  ;  but  the  dungeons  are  there  still, 
with, the  holes  in  the  masonry  into  which  the  bars  were 
fixed  to  which  the  prisoners — John,  perhaps,  one  of 
them — were  chained.  No  wonder  that  in  the  foul 
atmosphere  of  a  dark  dungeon  the  spirit  which  had  been 
so  undaunted  in  the  free  air  of  the  desert  began  to  flag ; 
nor  that  even  he  who  had  seen  the  fluttering  dove 
descend  on  Christ's  head,  and  had  pointed  to  Him  as 
the  Lamb  of  God,  felt  that  "  all  his  mind  was  clouded 
with  a  doubt."  It  would  have  been  wiser  if  commen 
tators,  instead  of  trying  to  save  John's  credit  at  the  cost 
of  straining  the  narrative,  had  recognised  the  psycho 
logical  truth  of  the  plain  story  of  his  wavering  conviction, 
and  had  learned  its  lessons  of  self-distrust.  There  is 
only  one  Man  with  whom  it  was  always  high-water  ;  all 
others  have  ebbs  and  flows  in  their  religious  life,  and  in 
their  grasp  of  truth. 


Less,  xix.j          John's  Doubts  of  Jesus.  187 

The  narrative  further  gives  the  motive  for  John's 
embassy,  in  the  report  which  had  reached  him  of  "  the 
works  of  Christ."  We  need  only  recall  John's  earlier 
testimony  to  understand  how  these  works  would  not 
seem  to  him  to  fill  up  the  role  which  he  had  anticipated 
for  Messiah.  Where  is  the  axe  that  was  to  be  laid  at 
the  root  of  the  trees,  or  the  fan  that  was  to  winnow  the 
chaff  out  ?  Where  is  the  fiery  spirit  which  He  had 
foretold  ?  This  gentle  Healer  is  not  the  theocratic  judge 
of  His  warning  prophecies.  He  is  tending  and  nurturing, 
rather  than  felling,  the  barren  trees.  A  nimbus  of 
merciful  deeds,  not  flashing  "  wrath  to  come,"  surrounds 
His  path.  So  John  began  to  wonder  if,  after  all,  he  had 
been  premature  in  his  recognition.  Perhaps  this  Jesus 
was  but  a  precursor,  as  he  himself  was,  of  the  Messiah. 
Evidently  he  continues  firm  in  the  conviction  of  Christ's 
being  sent  from  God,  and  is  ready  to  accept  His  answer 
as  conclusive ;  but,  as  evidently,  he  is  puzzled  by  the 
contrariety  between  Jesus'  deeds  and  his  own  expecta 
tions.  He  asks,  "  Art  Thou  He  that  cometh" — a  well- 
known  name  for  Messiah, — "  or  are  we  to  expect 
another  ?  "  where  it  should  be  noted  that  the  word  for 
"another,"  means  not  merely  a  second,  but  a  different 
kind  of  person,  who  should  present  the  aspects  of  the 
Messiah  as  revealed  in  prophecy,  and  as  embodied  in 
John's  own  preaching,  which  Jesus  had  left  unfulfilled. 

We  may  well  take  to  heart  the  lesson  of  the  fluctua 
tions  possible  to  the  firmest  faith,  and  pray  to  be  enabled 
to  hold  fast  that  we  have.  We  may  learn,  too,  the 
danger  to  right  conceptions  of  Christ,  of  separating  the 
two  elements  of  mercy  and  judgment  in  His  character 
and  work.  John  was  right  in  believing  that  the  Christ 


T  88  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.  xi.  2-15. 

must  come  to  judge.  A  Christ  without  the  fan  in  His 
hand  is  a  maimed  Christ.  John  was  wrong  in  stumbling 
at  the  gentleness,  just  as  many  to-day,  who  go  to  the 
opposite  extreme,  are  wrong  in  stumbling  at  the  judicial 
side  of  His  work.  Both  halves  are  needed  to  make  the 
full-orbed  character.  We  have  not  to  "  look  for  a 
different "  Christ,  but  we  have  to  look  for  Him,  coming 
the  second  time,  the  same  Jesus,  but  now  with  His  axe 
in  His  pierced  hands,  to  hew  'down  trees  which  He  has 
patiently  tended.  Let  John's  profound  sense  of  the  need 
for  a  judicial  aspect  in  the  Christ  who  is  to  meet  the 
prophecies  written  in  men's  hearts,  as  well  as  in  Scripture, 
teach  us  how  one-sided  and  superficial  are  representa 
tions  of  His  work  which  suppress  or  slur  over  His  future 
coming  to  judgment. 

Our  Lord  does  not  answer  yes  or  no.  To  do  so  might 
have  stilled,  but  would  not  have  removed,  John's  mis 
conception.  A  more  thorough  cure  is  needed.  So 
Christ  attacks  it  in  its  roots  by  referring  him  back  for 
answer  to  the  very  deeds  which  had  excited  his  doubt. 
In  doing  so,  He  points  to,  or  indeed,  we  may  say,  quotes, 
two  prophetic  passages  (Isa.  xxxv.  5,  6 ;  Ixi.  i)  which 
give  the  prophetic  "  notes  "  of  Messiah.  It  is  as  if  He 
had  said,  "  Have  you  forgotten  that  the  very  prophets 
whose  words  have  fed  your  hopes,  and  now  seem  to 
minister  to  your  doubts,  have  said  this  and  this  about 
the  Messiah  ? "  Further,  there  is  deep  wisdom  in 
sending  John  back  again  to  think  over  the  very  deeds  at 
which  he  was  stumbling.  It  is  not  Christ's  work  which 
is  wanting  in  conformity  to  the  Divine  idea  ;  it  is  John's 
conceptions  of  that  idea  that  need  enlarging.  What  he 
wants  is  not  so  much  to  be  told  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ, 


Less.  xix.  John's  Doubts  of  Jesus.  189 

as  to  grow  up  to  a  truer,  because  more  comprehensive, 
notion  of  what  the  Christ  is  to  be.  A  wide  principle  is 
taught  us  here.  The  very  points  in  Christ's  work  which 
may  occasion  difficulty,  will,  when  we  stand  at  the  right 
point  of  view,  become  evidences  of  His  claims.  What 
were  stumbling-blocks  become  stepping-stones.  Argu 
ments  against  become  proofs  of  the  truth,  when  we  look 
at  them  with  clearer  eyes,  and  from  the  proper  angle. 
Further,  we  are  taught  here,  that  what  Christ  does  is  the  I 
best  answer  to  the  question  who  He  is.  Still  He  is  / 
doing  these  works  among  us.  Darkened  eyes  are  flooded 
with  light  by  His  touch,  and  see  a  new  world,  because 
they  gaze  with  faith  on  Him.  Lame  limbs  are  endowed 
with  strength,  and  can  run  in  the  way  of  His  command 
ments,  and  walk  with  unfainting  perseverance  the 
thorniest  paths  of  duty  and  self-sacrifice.  Lepers  are 
cleansed  from  the  rotting  leprosy  of  sin,  and  their  flesh 
comes  again,  "  as  the  flesh  of  a  little  child."  Deaf  ears 
hear  the  voice  of  the  Son  of  God,  and  the  dead  who 
hear  live.  Good  news  is  preached  to  all  the  poor  in 
spirit,  and  whosoever  knows  himself  to  be  in  need  of  all 
things  may  claim  all  things  as  his  own  in  Christ.  He 
who  through  the  ages  has  been  working  such  works,  and 
works  them  still,  "  needs  not  to  speak  anything  "  to  con 
firm  his  claims,  "  neither  is  there  salvation  in  any  other." 
We  look  for  no  second  Christ ;  but  we  look  for  that 
same  Jesus  to  come  the  second  time  to  be  the  Judge  of  I 
the  world  of  which  He  is  the  Saviour. 

The  benediction  on  him  who  finds  none  occasion  of 
stumbling  in  Christ,  is  at  once  a  beatitude  and  a  warning. 
It  rebukes  in  the  gentlest  fashion  John's  temper,  which 
found  difficulty  in  even  the  perfect  personality  of  Jesus, 


190  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.  xi.  2-15. 

and  made  that  which  should  have  been  the  u  sure  foun 
dation  "  of  his  spirit  a  stone  of  stumbling.  Our  Lord's 
consciousness  of  absolute  perfection  of  moral  character, 
and  of  absolute  perfectness  in  His  office  and  work,  is 
distinct  in  the  words.  He  knows  that  "  there  is  none 
occasion  of  stumbling  in  Him,"  and  that  whoever  finds 
any,  brings  it  or  makes  it.  He  knows  and  warns  us  that 
all  blessedness  lies  for  us  in  recognising  Him  for  what  He 
is — God's  sure  foundation  of  our  hopes,  our  peace,  our 
thoughts,  our  lives.  He  knows  that  all  woe  and  loss  are 
involved  in  stumbling  on  this  stone,  against  which  whoso 
ever  falls  is  broken,  and  by  which,  when  it  begins  to 
move,  and  falls  on  a  man,  he  is  ground  to  powden 
like  the  dust  of  the  threshing-floor.  What  tremendous 
arrogance  of  assertion  !  Who  is  he  who  can  venture 
on  such  words  without  blasphemy  against  God,  and  uni 
versal  ridicule  from  men  ? 

II.  The  witness  of  Christ  to  John.  Praise  from  Jesus 
is  praise  indeed  ;  and  it  is  poured  out  here  with  no 
stinted  hand  on  the  languishing  prisoner  whose  doubts 
had  just  been  brought  to  Him.  Such  an  eulogium  at 
such  a  time  is  a  wonderful  instance  of  loving  forbearance 
with  a  true-hearted  follower's  weakness,  and  of  a  desire 
which,  in  a  man,  we  should  call  magnanimous,  to  shield 
John's  character  from  depreciation  on  account  of  his 
message.  The  world  praises  a  man  to  his  face,  and 
speaks  of  his  faults  behind  his  back.  Christ  does  the 
opposite.  Not  till  the  messengers  were  departing  does 
He  begin  to  speak  "concerning  John."  He  lays  bare 
the  secret  of  the  Baptist's  power,  and  allocates  his  place 
as  greatest  in  one  epoch  and  as  less  than  the  least  in 
another,  with  an  authority  more  than  human,  and  on 


Less,  xix.]          John's  Doubts  of  Jesus.  1 9 1 

principles  which  set  Himself  high  above  all 'comparison 
with  men,  whether  the  greatest  or  the  least.  The  King 
places  His  subjects,  and  Himself  sits  enthroned  above 
them  all. 

First,  Christ  praises  John's  great  personal  character  in 
the  dramatic  and  vivid  questions  which  begin  this  section. 
He  recalls  the  scenes  of  popular  enthusiasm  when  all 
Israel  streamed  out  to  the  desert  preacher.  A  small 
man  could  not  have  made  such  an  upheaval.  What  drew 
the  crowrds  ?  Just  what  will  always  draw  them  ;  the 
qualities  without  wrhich,  either  possessed  in  reality  or  in 
popular  estimation,  no  man  can  be  a  power  religiously. 
The  first  essential  is  heroic  firmness.  It  was  not  reeds 
swaying  in  the  wind  by  Jordan's  banks,  nor  a  poor  feeble 
man  like  them,  that  the  people  flocked  to  listen  to.  His 
emblem  was  not  the  reed,  but  "  an  iron  pillar."  His 
wrhole  career  had  been  marked  by  decisiveness,  con 
stancy,  courage.  Nothing  can  be  done  worth  doing  in 
the  world  without  a  wholesome  obstinacy  and  imper 
turbability,  which  keep  a  man  true  to  his  convictions 
and  his  task  whatever  winds  blow  in  his  teeth.  The 
multitudes  will  not  flock  to  listen  to  a  teacher  who  does 
not  speak  with  the  accent  of  conviction,  nor  will  truths 
feebly  grasped  touch  the  lips  with  fire.  The  first 
requisite  for  a  religious  teacher  is  that  he  shall  be  sure 
of  his  message  and  of  himself.  Athanasius  has  to  stand 
"  against  the  world  "  before  the  world  accepts  his  teach 
ing.  "  Though  there  were  as  many  devils  in  Worms  as 
there  are  tiles  on  the  house-tops,  go  I  will,"  said  Luther. 
That  is  the  temper  for  God's  instruments. 

The  next  requisite,  which  John  also  had,  is  manifest 
indifference  to  material  case.  Silken  courtiers  do  not 


192  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.  xi.  2-15. 

haunt  the  desert.  Kings'  houses,  and  not  either  the 
wilderness  or  kings'  dungeons,  are  the  sunny  spots 
where  they  spread  their  plumage.  If  the  gaunt  ascetic, 
with  his  girdle  of  camel's  hair  and  his  coarse  fare,  had 
been  a  self-indulgent  sybarite,  his  voice  would  never 
have  shaken  a  nation.  The  least  breath  of  suspicion 
that  a  preacher  is  such  a  man  ends  his  power,  and  ought 
to  end  it ;  for  self-indulgence  and  the  love  of  fleshly 
comforts  eat  the  heart  out  of  goodness,  and  make  the 
eyes  too  heavy  to  see  visions.  John  was  the  same  man 
then  as  they  had  known  him  to  be ;  therefore  it  was 
no  impatience  of  the  hardships  of  his  prison  that  had 
inspired  his  doubts. 

Our  Lord  next  speaks  of  John's  great  office.  He  was 
a  prophet.  The  dim  recognition  that  God  spoke  in  His 
fiery  words  had  drawn  the  crowds,  weary  of  teachers  in 
whose  endless  jangle  and  jargon  of  casuistry  was  no 
inspiration.  The  voice  of  a  man  who  gets  his  message 
at  first  hand  from  God  has  a  ring  in  it  which  even  dull 
ears  detect  as  something  genuine.  Alas  for  the  bewilder 
ing  babble  of  echoes  and  the  paucity  of  voices  to-day  ! 

So  far  Jesus  had  been  appealing  to  His  hearers'  know- 
•  ledge  ;  He  now  goes  on  to  add  higher  truth  concerning 
John.  He  declares  that  he  is  more  than  a  prophet, 
because  he  is  His  messenger  before  His  face  ;  that  is, 
immediately  preceding  Himself.  We  cannot  stay  to 
comment  on  the  remarkable  variation  between  the 
original  form  of  the  quotation  from  Malachi  and  Christ's 
version  of  it,  which,  in  its  substitution  of  "  thee  "  for  "  me," 
bears  so  forcibly  on  the  divinity  of  Christ ;  but  we  may 
mark  the  principle  on  which  John's  superiority  to  the 
whole  prophetic  order  is  based.  It  is  that  nearness  to 


Less.  XIX.]  John's  Doubts  of  Jesus.  193 

Jesus  makes  greatness.  The  closer  the  relation  to  Him, 
the  higher  the  honour.  In  that  long  procession  the 
King  comes  last ;  and  of  "  them  that  go  before  Me, 
crying  Hosanna  to  Him  that  cometh,"  the  order  of  pre 
cedence  is  that  the  first  are  last,  and  the  highest  is  he 
who  walks  in  front  of  the  Sovereign. 

Next,  we  have  the  limitations  of  the  forerunner  and  \ 
His    relative  inferiority  to  the  least  in  the   kingdom  of 
heaven.     Another   standard  of  greatness  is    here    from  ' 
that  of  the  world,  which  smiles  at  the  contrast  between 
the  uncultured  preacher  of  repentance  and  the  mighty 
thinkers,    poets,    legislators,    kingdom-makers,    whom    it 
enrolls  among  the  great.     In  Christ's  eyes  greatness  is  ' 
nearness   to  Him,  and  understanding  of  Him  and  His 
work.     Neither  natural  faculty  nor  worth  is  in  question, 
but  simply  relation  to  the  kingdom  and  the  King.     He 
who  had  only  to  preach  of  Him  who  should  come  after 
him,  and  had  but  a  partial  apprehension  of  Christ  and 
His  work,  stood  on  a  lower  level  than  the  least  who  has 
to  look  to  a  Christ  who  has  come,  and  has  opened  the 
gates  of  the  kingdom  to  the  humblest   believer.     The 
truths  which  were  hid  from  ages,  and  but  visible  as  in 
morning  twilight  to  John,  are  sunlit  to  us.     The  scholars ' 
in  our  Sunday-schools 'know  familiarly  more  than  prophets! 
and   kings  ever   knew.     We  "  hold   the  gray   barbarian 
lower    than  the  Christian    child  "  ;    and  not  merely  he, 
but  the  wisest  of  the  prophets,  and  the  forerunner  him 
self.     The  history  of  the  world  is  parted  into  two  by  the 
coming  of  Jesus  Christ,  as  every  dictionary  of  dates  tells, 
and  the  least  of  the  greater  is  greater  than  the  greatest 
of  the   less.     What   a  place,  then,  does    Christ  claim  !  ! 
Our  relation  to  Him  determines  greatness.    To  recognise  [ 

13 


194  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew,    [Chap.  xi.  2-15. 

Him  is  to  be  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  Union  to  Him 
brings  us  to  fulfil  the  ideal  of  human  nature ;  and  this 
is  life,  to  know  and  trust  Him,  the  King. 

Our  Lord  adds  a  brief  characterisation  of  the  effect  of 
John's  ministry.  It  was  of  mingled  good  and  evil,  and 
there  is  a  tone  of  sadness  perceptible  in  the  ambiguous 
words.  John  had  aroused  great  popular  excitement,  and 
had  stirred  multitudes  to  seek  to  enter  the.  kingdom. 
So  far  was  good.  But  had  all  the  crowds  understood 
what  sort  of  kingdom  it  was  ?  Had  they  not  too 
often  dragged  down  the  lofty  conception  to  their  own 
vulgar  level,  and,  with  their  dream  of  an  outward 
sovereignty,  thought  to  gain  it  for  their  own  by  violence 
instead  of  meekness,  by  arms  and  worldly  force  rather 
than  by  submission  ?  The  earnestness  was  good,  but 
Christ's  sad  insight  saw  how  much  strange  fire  had 
mingled  in  the  blaze,  as  if  some  earth-born  smoky  flame 
should  seek  to  blend  with  the  pure  sunlight.  Such  seems 
the  most  natural  interpretation  of  the  words  ;  but  they 
are  ambiguous,  and  may  possibly  mean  by  "  the  violent " 
those  who  had  been  roused  to  genuine  earnestness  by 
the  clarion  voice  which  rang  in  the  ears  of  that  slumber 
ing  generation. 

Then  follows  the  explanation  of  this  new  interest  in 
the  kingdom.  "  All  the  prophets  and  the  law  prophesied 
until  John."  The  whole  period  till  His  coming  was  of 
preparation,  and  it  all  converged  on  the  epoch  of  the 
forerunner.  The  eagerness  to  flock  into  the  kingdom 
which  characterised  His  time  would  have  been  impossible 
in  the  earlier  days.  He  closes  that  order  of  things, 
standing,  as  it  were,  on  the  isthmus  between  prophecy 
and  fulfilment,  belonging  properly  to  neither,  but  having 


Less.  Xix. j  John's  Doubts  of  Jesus.  195 

affinities  with  both,  and  being  the  transition  from  the 
one  to  the  other.  Then  our  Lord  closes  His  words  con 
cerning  John  with  the  distinct  statement,  which  He 
expects  His  hearers  to  have  difficulty  in  receiving, 
probably  from  the  contradiction  to  it  which  John's  present 
condition  seemed  to  give,  that  in  Him  was  fulfilled 
Malachi's  prophecy  of  the  sending  of  "  Elijah  the  prophet 
before  the  .  .  .  day  of  the  Lord."  The  fiery  Tishbite, 
gaunt  and  grim,  ascetic  and  solitary,  who  bearded  Ahab, 
and  flamed  across  a  corrupt  age  with  a  stern  message  of 
repentance  or  destruction,  was  repeated  in  the  lonely 
ascetic  wrho  had  his  Ahab  in  Herod  and  his  Jezebel  in 
Herodias,  and,  like  his  prototype,  knew  no  fear,  but 
flashed  out  the  lightnings  of  his  words  on  every  sin. 
The  two  men  were  brothers,  and  their  voices  answer  each 
other  across  the  centuries.  Christ  crowns  His  witness 
to  John  with  thus  pointing  to  the  last  swan  song  of 
ancient  prophecy,  and  thereby  at  once  sets  John  on  a 
pinnacle  of  greatness,  and  advances  a  claim  concerning 
Himself,  all  the  more  weighty  because  He  leaves  it  to 
be  inferred.  "  He  that  hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear," 
suggests  that  He  has  spoken  some  deep  truth,  which 
needs  reflection  ere  all  its  bearings  are  seen.  If  John  ; 
was  Elias,  the  day  of  the  Lord  was  at  hand,  and  "  the 
Sun  of  Righteousness  "  was  already  above  the  horizon. 
Jesus'  witness  concerning  John  ends  in  witness  con 
cerning  Himself. 


LESSON    XX. 


Christ's  Voice  of  Judgment,  Thanksgiving,  Self-attesta 
tion,  and  Invitation. 

MATTHEW  xi.  20-30. 


20.  "  Then   began   He  to  up 
braid  the  cities  wherein  most  of 
His  mighty  works  were  done, 
because  they  repented  not : 

21.  Woe  unto  thee,  Chorazin  ! 
woe  unto  thee,  Bethsaida  !   for 
if  the  mighty  works,  which  were 
done  in  you,  had  been  done  in 
Tyre    and     Sidon,    they    would 
have  repented  long  ago  in  sack 
cloth  and  ashes. 

22.  But  I   say   unto    you,    It 
shall  be  more  tolerable  for  Tyre 
and   Sidon  at  the  day  of  judg 
ment,  than  for  you. 

23.  And     thou,     Capernaum, 
which  art  exalted  unto  heaven, 
shalt  be  brought  down  to   hell  : 
for  if  the  mighty  \vorks,  which 
have    been    done    in   thee,   had 
been  done  in   Sodom,  it  would 
have  remained  until  this  day. 

24.  But  I  say  unto  you,  That 
it    shall    be  more  tolerable    for 
the  land  of  Sodom  in  the  day 
of  judgment,  than  for  thee. 


25.  And    at    that    time  Jesus 
answered     and     said,    I     thank 

:  Thee,  O  Father,  Lord  of  heaven 
and  earth,  because  Thou  hast 
hid  these  things  from  the  wise 
and  prudent,  and  hast  revealed 
them  unto  babes. 

26.  Even  so.  Father  :  for  so  it 
:    seemed  good  in  Thy  sight. 

27.  All  things  are    delivered 
unto  Me  of  my  Father  :  and   no 
man  knoweth  the  Son,  but  the 
Father ;    neither    knoweth   any 
man  the  Father,  save  the  Son, 
and  he  to  whomsoever  the  Son 
will  reveal  Him. 

28  Come  unto  Me,  all  ye  that 
labour  and  are  heavy  laden,  and 
I  will  give  you  rest. 

29.  Take  My  yoke  upon  you, 
and    learn    of    Me ;    for    I    am 
meek  and  lowly  in  heart :  and 
ye    shall    find    rest    unto   your 

I    souls. 

30.  For  My  yoke  is  easy,  and 
My  burden  is  light." 


MATTHEW  has  probably  brought  together,  in  this 
chapter,  several  incidents,  which  throw  light  on 
the    strange   variety  of  effects   produced  by  our  Lord's 

196 


Less,  xx.]        Christ's  Voice  of  Judgment.  197 

appearance.  The  verses  included  in  this  lesson  are  all 
closely  connected  by  definite  notes  of  time,  but  it  is 
doubtful  whether  they  are  in  their  chronological  place 
here,  or  in  Luke's  Gospel.  However  that  may  be,  it 
is  worth  noticing  how  this  whole  chapter  is  occupied 
with  showing  how  variously  Jesus  affected  men.  A 
gallery  of  swift  sketches  is  hung  in  it, — John  the  doubt 
ing  herald  ;  the  excitable  multitude,  with  their  eagerness 
too  genuine  for  wholesale  censure,  though  too  smoky 
and  carnal  for  unmixed  praise  ;  the  cynical  critics  who, 
with  inconsistent  impartiality  of  censure,  picked  holes 
in  John's  asceticism  and  in  Christ's  freedom.  Then 
follows  our  lesson,  which  gives  us  His  lamentation  over 
the  impenitent,  whom  more  light  had  made  more  guilty  ; 
and,  in  sharp  contrast,  His  joy  over  the  babes  who 
welcomed  His  message,  His  claim  to  be  the  sole  medium 
of  the  knowledge  of  God,  and  His  blessed  universal  call, 
which  is  addressed  to,  and  may  be  obeyed  by,  all  these 
varieties  of  men,  whose  different  attitudes  towards  the 
truth  do  not  make  the  truth  less  truly  meant  for  all. 

I.  The  voice  of  sad  upbraiding.  The  words  (vv. 
20-24)  are  weighed  down  with  the  sorrow  of  Christ's 
loving  heart,  and  stern  with  denunciations  of  judgment. 
He  weeps  in  pronouncing  the  dark  doom,  and  the  doom 
is  pronounced  that  it  may  not  be  fulfilled.  But  it  is 
false  kindness  to  hide  grim  facts  ;  and  the  gospel  is  a 
gospel  because  one  of  its  elements  is  the  proclamation 
of  judgment.  The  grace  poured  into  Christ's  lips  would 
not  be  the  grace  which  we  need,  unless  its  tenderness  left 
us  in  no  doubt  of  the  solemn  fact  of  retribution.  The  full 
chord  includes  the  deep  bass  note  of  loving  threatening 
as  well  as  the  clear  treble  of  lightsome  promise. 


198  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.  xi.  20-30. 

Besides  the  weightier  lesson  of  these  verses,  they 
suggest  two  thoughts  regarding  Christ's  miracles.  The 
one  is,  How  small  a  sheaf  of  these  has  been  harvested 
in  the  Gospels,  compared  with  the  large  number  un 
recorded.  Most  of  His  mighty  works  were  done  in 
these  cities,  but  Chorazin  is  only  twice  mentioned  in 
vScripture,  while  a  very  small  percentage  of  the  narrated 
works  are  allocated  to  either  of  the  other  two  places. 
The  earth's  path  lay  through  a  field  of  meteors  ;  but 
only  a  few  of  them  blaze  still  in  our  sky.  The  other 
thought  is  that  our  Lord  rated  highly  the  evidential  and 
spiritual  power  of  His  miracles.  In  modern  days  we 
are  too  apt  to  dwell  on  sayings  of  His  which  subordinate 
their  worth  to  that  of  the  self-evidencing  power  of  His 
personality  and  words.  But  that  is  one-sided.  His 
miracles  were  signs;  and  they  were  powers  not  only 
in  the  physical  realm,  but  in  leading  to  the  knowledge 
of  Him. 

The  great  lesson  taught  here  is  that  degrees  of  judg 
ment  correspond  to  degrees  of  light.  What  a  solemn 
thought  it  is  that  the  long  past  generations  of  Sodom 
and  Tyre  were  then  living  and  waiting  their  trial  !  With 
what  calm  certitude  of  knowledge  Christ  declares  what 
is  to  happen  at  that  future  day  !  Is  not  His  voice  like 
the  voice  of  the  King,  who  is  to  be  the  Judge  ?  He 
sees  all  and  says  little.  We,  who  see  nothing^  had  best 
listen  and  make  sure  that  we  weigh  and  feel  His  words. 
That  profound  and  mysterious  "  more  tolerable  "  can  be 
but  dimly  understood  by  us  ;  but  this  we  can  under 
stand,  that  it  clearly  indicates  degrees  in  retribution, 
as  infinite  as  the  moral  differences  between  men,  who 
may  all  do  the  same  thing,  and  yet  be  unequally  guilty 


Less,  xx.]        Christ's  Voice  of  Judgment.  199 

of  the  various  conditions  determining  the  amount  of 
culpability.  The  measure  of  knowledge,  against  which 
the  deed  was  done,  is  the  most  important.  The  glimmer 
which  shed  a  twilight  on  Sodom  was  enough  to  warrant 
the  fierce  blaze  of  the  destroying  fire  ;  but  the  light 
which  shone  from  Jesus  was  so  bright  that,  if  neglected, 
a  far  more  lurid  flame  must  flash  around  its  despisers. 
The  most  hopeless  people  are  gospel-hardened  formalists. 
Christ  here  claims  to  shed  a  clearer  light  for  guidance 
than  can  be  seen  anywhere  else  ;  and,  as  He  is  the  last 
and  fullest  revelation  of  the  mercy  of  God,  and  the 
strongest  motives  for  repentance  are  drawn  from  His 
work,  so  the  consequences  of  insensibility  to  these  are 
the  most  terrible.  The  brighter  the  summer  sunshine, 
the  louder  the  thunder.  Indifference  to  Him  is  the  sin 
of  sins.  The  men  of  Chorazin  had  not  actively  opposed 
Him,  but  had  simply  not  actively  accepted.  They  had 
not  been  bestial  in  their  profligacy,  like  the  foul  Sodom 
ites.  The  deadliest  poison  may  be  colourless,  and  look 
quite  innocent.  So,  not  these  long-dead  men  of  the 
villages  by  the  lake,  but  the  respectable  people  of  to 
day,  may  learn  that  the  worst  sinners  are  not  the  doers 
of  the  worst  things,  but  the  sinners  against  the  clearest 
light,  who  know  all  about  Jesus,  and  care  nothing  for 
it  all. 

II.  The  solemn  voice  of  thanksgiving.  The  vision 
of  judgment  which  lay  before  Christ's  inward  eye  drives 
Him,  as  a  relief,  to  the  contrasted  thought  of  the  humble 
souls  who  did  receive  Him.  "  He  answered  " — what  ? 
Apparently,  not  any  word  from  others,  but  the  emotions 
of  His  own  heart  at  the  sad  foresight  of  the  doom  of 
the  rejecters.  Who  arc  the  two  classes  spoken  of? 


200  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.  xi.  20-30. 

"  The  wise  and  prudent "  were,  no  doubt,  primarily  the 
scribes  and  Pharisees ;  but  the  designation  includes  all 
who,  like  them,  trust  in  their  own  superior  enlighten 
ment,  and  along  with  intellectual  eminence,  which  is 
a  good,  have  intellectual  conceit,  which  is  an  evil.  Just 
as  Christ  said  that  it  was  hard  for  the  rich  to  enter 
the  kingdom,  and  explained  the  saying,  when  misunder 
stood,  by  the  varied  form,  "  how  hard  is  it  for  them 
that  trust  in  riches  to  enter,"  so  here,  the  possession 
of  intellectual  wealth  is  not  a  disqualification,  nor  is  there 
any  discord  between  true  culture  and  Christianity,  nor 
any  natural  affinity  between  ignorance  and  religion ; 
but  the  exaggerated  estimate  of  the  value  of  culture, 
and  the  tone  of  mind  produced  by  pluming  one's  self 
on  it,  and  using  it  as  the  measure  of  ,all  things,  are 
fatal  disqualifications.  On  the  other  hand,  the  "  babes  " 
are  those  conscious  of  their  ignorance  and  need,  self- 
distrustful,  willing  to  obey,  docile.  These,  whether  they 
be  wise  or  foolish,  are  fit  to  receive  the  light.  A  child 
like  receptivity  will  not  look  in  vain.  The  reasons  for 
the  gospel's  being  hid  from  those  and  revealed  to  these 
lie  in  the  very  nature  of  the  gospel.  For  what  are  its 
characteristics  ?  It  addresses  itself  to  all  men,  not  to 
classes,  schools,  or  coteries.  It  appeals  to  beggars  and 
millionaires,  to  scholar i  and  to  barbarians,  with  the 
same  message.  It  knows  no  ranks  nor  distinctions. 
It  treats  all  as  utterly  helpless,  and  offers  to  all  redemp 
tion  as  their  most  pressing  want,  and  demands  from  all 
submission  and  trust.  That  being  so,  they  who  see  its 
beauty  must  be  the  persons  who  consent  to  its  estimate 
of  them,  and  are  willing  to  accept  its  terms.  Hence  the 
disqualification  of  the  "  wise  "  necessarily  results.  Wis- 


Less,  xx.]        Christ's  Voice  of  Judgment.  201 

dom  is  no  barrier  in  itself  nor  in  its  proper  use.  The 
organ  for  the  reception  of  the  gospel  is  the  heart,  not 
the  head ;  and  wisdom  becomes  a  barrier  because  its 
possessors  are  accustomed  to  think  it  the  master  key, 
and  do  not  care  to  go  in  at  a  door  which  it  does  not 
open.  If  the  wise  man  will  "  cease  to  glory  in  his 
wisdom,"  and  be  content  to  be  saved  on  the  same  terms 
as  the  poor  simpleton  who  cannot  read  a  line,  his  wisdom 
will  cease  to  be  a  hindrance  and  become  a  help.  "  Let 
him  become  a  fool,  that  he  may  be  wise."  The  ap 
parent  harshness  and  exclusiveness  of  this  saying  melt 
away  when  steadily  regarded,  and  it  is  seen  to  cover 
and  be  a  consequence  of  the  universal  adaptation  of  the 
gospel,  and  of  the  simplicity  of  its  conditions.  It  is 
"  hid  from  the  wise  and  prudent,"  just  because  it  is 
"  babes "  to  whom  it  is  "  revealed."  There  are  no 
special  entrance  doors  for  the  elite  of  the  race  ;  and  if 
any  set  of  men  are  so  enamoured  of  their  own  intellectual 
or  other  qualifications  that  they  want  differently  coloured 
tickets  of  admission,  and  a  private  entrance,  they  will 
have  to  stop  outside.  Not  their  superiority,  but  their 
insisting  that  it  shall  be  recognised,  keeps  them  out. 

III.  The  majestic  voice  of  self-attestation  (ver.  27). 
Jesus  turns  now  from  prayer  to  witness,  from  heaven  to 
earth.  His  spirit  had  passed  from  the  woes  of  the 
rejecters  to  the  contemplation  of  the  gracious  Divine 
purpose,  which  had  appointed  terms  so  possible  to  the 
humblest :  and  now  He  points  all,  be  they  wise  or  foolish, 
to  Himself  as  the  one  revealer.  The  words  sound  like 
a  verse  of  John's  Gospel  ;  and  their  occurrence  here 
may  serve  to  show  that  the  side  of  our  Lord's  teaching 
which  had  the  strongest  affinities  for  John's  deep  mystical 


202  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.  xi.  20-30. 

nature  was  not  unknown  to  the  other  evangelists,  though 
sparingly  reproduced  by  them.  What  tremendous  claims 
He  here  makes  for  Himself! — unlimited  power,  as 
universal  in  its  sweep  as  unbounded  in  its  sway.  Inter 
communion  with  the  Father  so  deep  that  perfect  know 
ledge  (for  the  word  rendered  "  know "  is  an  emphatic 
form,  and  implies  full  and  adequate  knowledge)  recipro 
cally  substitutes  between  the  Father  and  Him  ;  a  mystery 
in  His  being,  of  which  the  Father  alone  is  fully  cog 
nizant  ;  His  own  exclusive  and  complete  revelation  of 
the  Father,  without  which  every  eye  is  dark,  and  by 
which  any  eye  that  He  wills  may  be  enlightened, — all 
this  was  said  in  the  quietest  tones  by  a  Galilean  peasant, 
who,  in  almost  the  same  breath,  said,  in  His  next 
sentence,  "  I  am  meek  and  lowly  in  heart."  Strange 
meekness  !  And  stranger  still  that  men  have  taken  Him 
at  His  word,  seen  no  contradiction  between  His  claims 
and  His  humility,  though  that  humility  announced  its 
own  presence,  and  have  joyfully  found  that  He  does  all 
which  He  undertook,  and  shows  them  the  Father. 
Who  can  fathom  the  depths  of  this  saying  ?  It  pierces 
the  primeval  depths  before  time  and  "  all  things  "  were. 
It  plunges  into  the  Divine  abysses,  and  lets  us  dimly 
see  the  eternal,  ineffable  impartation  of  the  Father  to 
the  Son,  and  the  absolute  completeness  of  their  com 
munion.  On  these  transcendent  facts  of  the  eternal, 
super- sensual  world,  it  bases  the  exclusive  power  of  the 
Son  to  reveal  the  Father ;  whereby  the  paradox  comes 
to  be  true,  that  the  Son  is  to  us  more  of  a  mystery  than 
the  Father  whom  He  reveals,  and  that  He,  though 
unknown  with  perfect  knowledge  by  any  but  the  Father, 
nevertheless  imparts  to  us  a  knowledge  of  the  Father 


Less.  xx.         Christ's  Voice  of  Judgment.  203 

which  He  parallels  with  His  own,  inasmuch  as  it  is 
derived  from  Him,  and  He  \vill  not  cease  to  declare 
God's  name  unto  His  brethren  till  we  have  learned  all 
which  He  can  teach.  Is  this  insanity  ?  If  not,  who  and 
what  is  He  who  thus  speaks  ? 

IV.  The  pleading  voice  of  universal  invitation  (vv. 
28-30).  A  listener  might  have  asked  to  whom  the 
Son  willed  to  reveal  the  Father.  If  He  is  the  only 
Revealer,  does  His  merciful  desire  to  be  such  include 
"the  wise  and  prudent"  as  well  as  "the  babes,"  the 
sinners  of  Chorazin  as  well  as  the  little  group  of  followers  ? 
These  final  words  answer  all  such  questions.  Thorwald- 
sen  has  filled  the  pediment  of  a  great  church  with  figures 
representing  all  varieties  of  human  pains  and  woes,  and 
set  Him  in  the  centre,  calm  and  pure,  \vith  compassion 
and  conscious  power  in  His  look,  and  outstretched  arms 
expressing  invitation,  and  dropping  the  benediction  of 
rest.  The  artist  has  but  embodied  these  wonderful 
words. 

We  may  note  in  them  the  twrofold  designation  of  the 
persons  invited.  They  are  such  as  "labour  and  are 
heavy  laden. '  These  two  expressions  cover  the  active 
and  the  passive  sides  of  our  need.  The  former  refers  to 
work  which,  by  reason  of  excess  in  amount,  or  distaste- 
fulness  in  kind,  has  become  wearisome  toil.  The  latter 
points  not  so  much  to  the  burden  of  duties  or  tasks,  as 
to  the  heavy  and  painful  experiences  which  we  all,  sooner 
or  later,  have  to  carry, — the  burdens  of  sorrow  and  care. 
Most  men  have  to  stagger  under  both  these  sorts  of  evils, 
and  to  toil  and  sorrowr  at  the  same  time.  But  both  have 
a  deeper  significance  when  viewed  in  relation  to  God's 
law  of  righteousness.  There  are  painful  and  futile  efforts 


204  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.  xi.  20-30. 

to  keep  the  law,  which  weary  the  doers ;  and  there  is  the 
sore  burden  of  failure,  guilt,  and  habit,  which  bows  down 
men's  backs,  always,  whether  they  know  it  or  no.  So 
this  twofold  designation  embraces  every  soul ;  and  he  to 
whom  the  Revealer  wills  to  reveal  the  one  Light  is  every 
man,  whatever  his  culture  or  his  sin.  The  call  touches 
deep  chords  in  every  heart. 

We  may  note  the  twofold  invitation — "  Come  unto  Me," 
and  "Take  My  yoke  upon  you."  The  former  is  faith; 
the  latter,  practical  obedience.  The  former  is  the  call 
to  all  the  weary ;  the  latter  is  the  further  call,  which  they 
only  who  have  come  will  obey.  Faith  is  the  true 
approach  of  the  soul  to  Jesus.  It  has  Him,  not  mere 
doctrines  about  Him,  for  its  object.  It  is  the  movement 
of  the  whole  man  to  Him.  It  has  for  its  result  our 
continual  companionship  by  His  side.  It  is  the  initial 
Christian  act.  On  it  follows  "  Take  My  yoke  upon  you, 
and  learn  of  Me."  The  yoke  is  that  which  is  laid  on 
the  neck  of  the  draught  ox,  and  enables  it  to  draw  the 
burden.  The  load,  then,  is  the  whole  mass  of  duties 
and  services,  while  the  yoke  is  that  which  binds  them 
on  us  :  namely,  His  authority.  Obedience,  then,  to  His 
command,  and  a  consequent  active  performance  of  all 
which  He  wills,  is  Christ's  second  merciful  call  to  us  all. 
It  comes  second,  not  first ;  but  it  does  come.  Our 
relation  to  Him  is  not  exhausted  in  the  faith  which  has 
recourse  to  Him  for  healing  and  comfort ;  it  must  pass 
on  to  include  this  other  also.  The  whole  sum  of  practical 
obedience  is  further  set  forth  as  "learning  of  Him." 
The  imitation  of  Jesus,  is  the  one  commandment  of 
Christian  morals ;  but  it  should  never  be  forgotten  that 
such  imitation  is  only  possible  when  His  Spirit  dwells  in 


Less,  xx.]        Christ's  Voice  of  Judgment.  205 

us,  and  makes  us  like  Him.  There  may  be  as  much 
weariness  and  bondage  in  imitating  Christ  without  His 
life  in  us,  as  in  any  other  form  of  trying  to  work  out  our 
own  righteousness. 

We  may  note  further  the  twofold  rest.     Perhaps  the 
variation  in  the  form  of  the  promise  in  the  twro  clauses  is 
intended  to  carry  a  great  lesson.      "  I  will  give  you  rest," 
seems  more  appropriate  to  describe  the  rest  consequent 
on    our    first    coming    to    Christ,    which    is    simply  and 
exclusively  a  direct  bestowment,  and  "ye  shall  find  rest" 
more  fitted  to  describe  a  repose  which  is  none  the  less 
His  gift,  though  it  is  dependent  on  our  practical  obedience, 
in  a  wray  in  which  the  former  is  not.     There  is  an  initial 
rest,  the  rest  of  faith,  of  pardon,  of  a  quieted  conscience, 
of  filial  communion  with  God, — a  rest  involved  in  the 
very  act  of  trust,  as  of  a  child  sleeping  secure   on  its 
mother's   breast.     Nothing  less  than  Divine  power  can 
give  such  a  gift,  and  Christ  offers  it  to  all.     But  there  is 
a  further  rest  in  bearing  His  yoke.     Obedience  delivers 
us  from  the  unrest  of  self-will.     To  obey  an  authority 
which  we  love  is  repose.     He  that  "  hath  ceased  from 
his  own  wrorks  "  and  does  Christ's,  hath  entered  into  rest. 
It   brings   rest  from   the   tyranny   of   passion,   from   the 
weight  of  too    much   liberty,    from    conflicting    desires. 
There  is  rest  in  Christ-likeness.     He  is  meek  and  lowly  ; 
and  they  who  wear  His  image  find  in  meekness  tranquillity, 
and  some  quieting  from    His   deep  calm   hushes   their 
spirits.     Such  rest  is  like  God's  rest,  full  of  energy. 

His  yoke  is  easy,  and  His  commandments  are  not 
grievous,  not  because  He  lowers  the  standard  of  duty, 
but  because  He  alters  the  motives  which  enjoin  it,  and 
gives  the  powrer  to  do  them.  Christ's  yoke  is  padded 


2o6  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.  xi.  20-30: 

with  love,  so  it  rests  lightly  on  the  neck.  His  burden 
is  light,  because,  as  St.  Bernard  says,  it  carries  the  man 
who  carries  it.  The  true  rest  for  every  soul  lies  first  in 
coming  to  Christ  by  faith,  and  then  in  yielding  heart  and 
will  to  Him,  and  carrying  the  burden  of  our  lighter  cross 
after  and  for  the  sake  of  Him,  who  has  borne  the  heaviest 
cross  for  us. 

"  Here  giveth  He  the  rest 
Which  to  His  best  belov'd  doth  still  remain." 


LESSON   XXL 


The  Pharisees'  Sabbath,  and  Christ's. 

MATTHEW  xii.  1-14. 


1.  "At  that  time  Jesus  went 
on  the  Sabbath  day  through  the 
corn  ;  and  His  disciples  were  an 
hungred,    and   began   to    pluck 
the  ears  of  corn,  and  to  eat. 

2.  But    when    the    Pharisees 
saw    it,    they   said    unto    Him, 
Behold,  Thy  disciples  do  that 
which  is  not  lawful  to  do  upon 
the  Sabbath  day. 

3.  But    He    said   unto   them, 
Have  ye  not  read  what  David 
did,  when  he  was  an  hungred, 
and  they  that  were  with  him  ; 

4.  How  he   entered  into  the 
house  of  God,  and   did  eat  the 
shewbread,  which  was  not  law 
ful  for  him  to  eat,  neither  for 
them  which  were  with  him,  but 
only  for  the  priests  ? 

5.  Or  have  ye  not  read  in  the 
law,  how  that  on  the  Sabbath 
days  the  priests  in  the   temple 
profane    the    Sabbath,   and  are 
blameless  ? 

6.  But  I  say  unto  you,  That 
in  this  place  is  one  greater  than 
the  temple. 

7.  But  if  ye  had  known  what 
this  meaneth,  I  will  have  mercy, 
and  not  sacrifice,  ye  would  not 


have   condemned    the   guiltless. 

8.  For    the    Son   of    man    is 
Lord  even  of  the  Sabbath  day. 

9.  And    when    He    was    de 
parted    thence,    He    went    into 
their  synagogue : 

10.  And,   behold,    there    was 
a    man    which    had    his    hand 
withered.    And  they  asked  Him, 
saying,  Is  it  lawful  to  heal  on 
the   Sabbath   days?    that   they 
might  accuse  Him. 

U.  And  He  said  unto  them, 
What  man  shall  there  be  among 
you,  that  shall  have  one  sheep, 
and  if  it  fall  into  a  pit  on  the 
Sabbath  day,  will  he  not  lay 
hold  on  it,  and  lift  it  out  ? 

12.  How  much  then  is  a  man 
better  than  a  sheep  ?     Where 
fore  it  is  lawful  to  do  well  on 
the  Sabbath  days. 

13.  Then    saith    He    to    the 
man,  Stretch  forth  thine  hand. 
And  he  stretched  it  forth  ;  and 
it   was  restored  whole,  like  as 
the  other. 

14.  Then  the  Pharisees  went 
out,  and  held  a  counsel  against 
Him,  how  they  might  destroy 
Him." 


WE  have  had  frequent  occasion  to  point  out  that 
this    Gospel    is    constructed,    not    on    chrono 
logical,  but  on  logical  lines.     It  groups  together  incidents 

207 


2o8  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.  xii.  1-14. 

related  in  subject,  though  separated  in  time.  Thus  we 
have  the  collection  of  Christ's  sayings  in  the  Sermon 
on  the  Mount,  followed  by  the  collection  of  doings 
in  chapters  viii.  and  xix.,  the  collected  charge  to  his 
ambassadors  in  chapter  x.,  the  collection  of  instances 
illustrative  of  the  relations  of  different  classes  to  the 
message  of  the  kingdom  and  its  King  in  chapter  xi., 
and  now  in  this  chapter  a  series  of  incidents  setting 
forth  the  growing  bitterness  of  antagonism  on  the  part 
of  the  guardians  of  traditional  and  ceremonial  religion. 
This  is  followed,  in  the  next  chapter,  with  a  series  of 
parables. 

The  present  lesson  includes  two  Sabbath  incidents, 
in  the  first  of  which  the  disciples  are  the  transgressors 
of  the  sabbatic  tradition ;  in  the  second,  Christ's  own 
action  is  brought  into  question.  The  scene  of  the  first 
is  in  the  fields,  that  of  the  second  is  the  synagogue.  In 
the  one,  Sabbath  observance  is  set  aside  at  the  call  of 
personal  needs  ;  in  the  other,  at  the  call  of  another's 
calamity.  So  the  two  correspond  to  the  old  Puritan 
principle  that  the  Sabbath  law  allowed  of  "works  of 
necessity  and  of  mercy." 

I.  The  Sabbath  and  personal  needs.  This  is  a 
strange  sort  of  King  wrho  cannot  even  feed  His  servants. 
What  a  glimpse  into  the  penury  of  their  usual  condition 
the  quiet  statement  that  the  disciples  were  hungry  gives 
us,  especially  if  we  remember  that  it  is  not  likely  that 
the  Master  had  fared  better  than  they !  Indeed,  His 
reference  to  David  and  his  band  of  hungry  heroes 
suggests  that  "He  was  an  hungred "  as  well  as  " they 
that  were  with  Him."  As  they  traversed  some  field 
path  through  the  tall  yellowing  corn,  they  gathered  a 


Less,  xxi.]    The  Pharisees,  Sabbath,  and  Christ's.     209 

few  ears,  as  the  merciful  provision  of  the  law  allowed, 
and  hastily  began  to  eat  the  rubbed-out  grains.  As  soon 
as  they  "  began,"  the  eager  Pharisees,  who  seem  to  have 
been  at  their  heels,  call  Him  to  "  behold  "  this  dreadful 
crime,  which,  they  think,  requires  His  immediate  remon 
strance.  If  they  had  had  as  sharp  eyes  for  men's  neces 
sities  as  for  their  faults,  they  might  have  given  them 
food  which  it  was  "  lawful  "  to  eat,  and  so  obviated  this 
frightful  iniquity.  But  that  is  not  the  way  of  Pharisees. 
Moses  had  not  forbidden  such  gleaning,  but  the  casuistry 
which  had  spun  its  multitudinous  webs  over  the  law, 
hiding  the  gold  beneath  elaborate  dirty  net-work, 
decided  that  plucking  the  ears  was  of  the  nature  of 
reaping,  and  reaping  was  work,  and  work  was  forbidden, 
ergo — which  being  settled,  of  course  the  inferential  pro 
hibition  became  more  important  than  the  law  from  which 
it  was  deduced.  That  is  always  the  case  with  human 
conclusions  from  revelation ;  and  the  more  questionable 
these  are,  the  more  they  are  loved  by  their  authors,  as 
the  sickly  child  of  a  family  is  the  dearest. 

Our  Lord  does  not  question  the  authority  of  the 
tradition,  nor  ask  where  Moses  had  forbidden  what  His 
disciples  were  doing.  Still  less  does  He  touch  the 
sanctity  of  the  Jewish  Sabbath.  He  accepts  His  ques 
tioners'  position,  for  the  time,  and  gives  them  a  perfect 
answer  on  their  own  ground.  Perhaps  there  may  be 
just  a  hint  in  the  double  "  Have  ye  not  read  ? "  that 
they  could  not  produce  Scripture  for  their  prohibition, 
as  He  would  do  for  the  liberty  which  He  allowed.  He 
quotes  two  instances  in  which  ceremonial  obligations 
give  way  before  higher  law.  The  first,  that  of  Uavid 
and  his  followers  eating  the  shewbread,  which  was 

'4 


210  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.  xii.  1-14. 

tabooed  to  all  but  priests,  is  perhaps  chosen  with  some 
reference  to  the  parallel  between  Himself,  the  true 
King,  now  unrecognised  and  hunted,  with  His  humble 
followers,  and  the  fugitive  outlaw  with  his  band.  It  is 
but  a  veiled  allusion  at  most ;  but,  if  it  fell  on  good  soil, 
it  might  have  led  some  one  to  ask,  "  If  this  is  David, 
where  is  Saul,  and  where  is  Doeg,  watching  him  to 
accuse  him  ?  "  This  example  serves  our  Lord's  purpose 
of  showing  that  even  a  Divine  prohibition  which  relates 
to  mere  ceremonial  matter  melts,  like  wax,  before  even 
bodily  necessities.  What  a  thrill  of  holy  horror  would 
meet  the  enunciation  of  the  doctrine  that  such  a  carnal 
thing  as  hunger  rightfully  abrogated  a  sacred  ritual  pro 
scription  !  The  law  of  right  is  rigid ;  that  of  external 
ceremonies  is  flexible.  Better  that  a  man  should  die 
than  that  the  one  should  be  broken ;  better  that  the 
other  should  be  flung  to  the  winds  than  that  a  hungry 
man  should  go  unfed.  It  may  reasonably  be  doubted 
whether  all  Christian  communities  have  learned  the 
sweep  of  that  principle  yet,  or  so  judge  of  the  relative 
importance  of  keeping  up  their  appointed  forms  of 
worship,  and  of  feeding  their  hungry  brother.  The 
brave  Abimelech,  "  the  son  of  Ahitub,"  was  ahead  of 
a  good  many  people  of  to-day. 

The  second  example  comes  still  closer  to  the  question 
in  hand,  and  supplies  the  reference  to  the  Sabbath  law, 
which  the  former  had  not.  There  was  much  hard  work 
done  in  the  temple  on  the  Sabbath,— sacrifices  to  be 
slain,  fires  and  lamps  to  be  kindled,  and  so  on.  That 
was  not  Sabbath  desecration.  Why  ?  Because  it  was 
done  in  the  temple,  and  as  a  part  of  Divine  service. 
The  sanctity  of  the  place,  and  the  consequent  sanctity 


Less,  xxi.]    The  Pharisees'  Sabbath,  and  Christ's.     211 

of  the  service,  exempted  it  from  the  operation  of  the 
law.  The  question,  no  doubt,  was  springing  to  the  lips 
of  some  scowling  Pharisee,  "  And  what  has  that  to  do 
with  our  charge  against  your  disciples  ?  "  when  it  was 
answered  by  the  wonderful  next  words,  "In  this  place" — 
here  among  the  growing  corn,  beneath  the  free  heaven,  far 
away  from  Jerusalem — "  is  one  greater  than  the  temple." 
Profound  words,  which  could  only  sound  as  blasphemy 
or  nonsense  to  the  hearers,  but  which  touch  the  deepest 
truths  concerning  His  person  and  His  relations  to  men, 
and  which  involved  the  destruction  of  all  temples  and 
rituals.  He  is  all  that  the  tempte  symbolised.  In  Him 
the  Godhead  really  dwells ;  He  is  the  meeting-place  of 
God  and  man,  the  place  of  the  oracle,  the  place  of 
sacrifice.  Then,  where  He  stands  is  holy  ground,  and 
all  work  done  with  reference  to  Him  is  worship.  These 
poor  followers  of  His  are  priests ;  and  if,  for  his  sake, 
they  had  broken  a  hundred  Sabbath  regulations,  they 
are  guiltless. 

So  far  our  Lord  has  been  answering  His  opponents ; 
now  He  attacks.  The  quotation  from  Hosea  is  often 
on  His  lips.  Here  He  uses  it  to  unmask  the  real 
motives  of  His  assailants.  Their  murmuring  came  not 
from  more  religion,  but  from  less  love.  If  they  haci  had 
a  little  more  milk  of  human  kindness  in  them,  it  would 
have  died  on  their  lips ;  if  they  had  grasped  the  real 
meaning  of  the  religion  they  professed,  they  would  have 
learned  that  its  soul  was  "  mercy  "  ;  that  is,  of  course, 
man's  gentleness  to  man — and  that  sacrifice  and  cere 
mony  was  but  the  body,  the  help,  and  sometimes  the 
hindrance,  of  that  soul.  They  would  have  understood 
the  relative  importance  of  disposition  and  of  external 


2i2  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap. xii.  1-14. 

worship,  as  end  and  means,  and  not  have  visited  a  mere 
breach  of  external  order  with  a  heat  of  disapprobation 
only  warranted  by  a  sin  against  the  former.  Their 
judgment  would  have  been  liker  God's  if  they  had 
looked  at  those  poor  hungry  men  with  merciful  eyes, 
and  with  merciful  hearts,  rather  than  with  eager  scrutiny, 
that  delighted  to  find  them  tripping  in  a  triviality  of 
outward  observance.  What  mountains  of  harsh  judg 
ment  by  Christ's  own  followers  on  each  other  would 
have  been  removed  into  the  sea  if  the  Spirit  of  these 
great  words  had  played  upon  them  ! 

The  "for"  at  the  beginning  of  verse  8  seems  to 
connect  with  the  last  words  of  the  preceding  verse,  "  I 
call  them  guiltless,  for,"  etc.  It  states  more  plainly  still 
the  claim  already  put  forward  in  verse  6.  "  The  Son 
of  man,"  no  doubt,  is  equivalent  to  "  Messiah " ;  but  it 
is  more,  as  revealing  at  once  Christ's  true  manhood  and 
His  unique  and  complete  manhood,  in  which  the  very 
ideal  of  man  is  personally  realised.  It  can  never  be 
detached  from  His  other  name,  the  Son  of  God.  They 
are  the  obverse  and  reverse  of  the  same  golden  coin. 
He  asserts  His  power  over  the  Sabbath,  as  enjoined  upon 
Israel.  His  is  the  authority  which  imposed  it.  It  is 
plastic  in  His  hands.  The  whole  order  of  which  it  is 
part  has  its  highest  purpose  in  witnessing  of  Him.  He 
brings  the  true  "  rest." 

II.  The  Sabbath,  and  works  of  beneficence.  Matthew 
appears  to  have  brought  together  here  two  incidents 
which  were  separated  in  time,  according  to  Luke.  The 
scene  changes  to  a  synagogue,  perhaps  that  of  Caper 
naum.  Among  the  worshippers  is  a  man  with  "  a 
withered  hand,"  who  seems  to  have  been  brought  there 


Less,  xxi.]    The  Pharisees'  Sabbath,  and  Christ's.     2 1 3 

by  the  Pharisees  as  a  bait  to  try  to  draw  out  Christ's 
compassion.  What  a  curious  state  of  mind  that  was, — 
to  believe  that  Christ  could  work  miracles,  and  to  want 
one,  not  for  pity's  sake,  nor  for  confirmation  of  faith,  but 
to  get  material  for  accusing  Him  !  And  how  heartlessly 
careless  of  the  poor  sufferer  they  are,  when  they  use  him 
thus  !  He  for  his  part  stands  silent.  Desire  and  faith 
have  no  part  in  evoking  this  miracle.  Deadly  hatred 
and  calculating  malignity  ask  for  it,  and  for  once  they 
get  their  wish.  Having  baited  their  hook,  and  set  the 
man  with  his  shrunken  hand  full  in  view,  they  get  into 
their  corners,  like  hunters,  and  wait  the  event.  Matthew 
tells  us  that  they  ask  our  Lord  the  question  which  Luke 
represents  Him  as  asking  them.  Perhaps  we  may  say 
that  He  gave  voice  to  the  question  which  they  were 
asking  in  their  hearts.  Their  motive  is  distinctly  given 
here.  They  wanted  material  for  a  legal  process  before 
a  local  tribunal.  The  whole  thing  was  an  attempt  to  get 
Jesus  within  the  meshes  of  the  law.  Again,  as  in  the 
former  case,  it  is  the  traditional,  not  the  written  law, 
which  healing  would  have  broken.  The  question 
evidently  implies  that,  in  the  judgment  of  the  askers, 
healing  was  unlawful.  Talmudical  scholars  tell  us  that 
in  later  days  the  rabbis  differed  on  the  point,  but  that 
the  prevalent  opinion  was,  that  only  sicknesses  threatening 
immediate  danger  to  life  could  lawfully  be  treated  on  the 
Sabbath.  The  more  rigid  doctrine  was  obviously  held 
by  Christ's  questioners.  It  is  a  significant  instance  of 
the  absurdity  and  cruelty  which  are  possible  when  once 
religion  has  been  made  a  matter  of  outward  observance. 
Nothing  more  surely  and  completely  ossifies  the  heart 
and  blinds  common  sense. 


214  Tlie  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.  xii.  1-14. 

In  His  former  answer  Jesus  had  appealed  to  Scripture 
to  bear  out  His  teaching  that  Sabbath  observance  must 
bend  to  personal  necessities.  Here  He  appeals  to  the 
natural  sense  of  compassion  to  confirm  the  principle 
that  it  must  give  way  to  the  duty  of  relieving  others. 
His  question  is  as  confident  of  an  answer  as  the  Pharisees' 
had  been.  But  though  He  takes  it  for  granted  that  His 
hearers  could  only  answer  it  in  one  way,  the  microscopic 
and  cold-blooded  ingenuity  of  the  rabbis,  since  His  day, 
answers  it  in  another.  They  say,  "  Don't  lift  the  poor 
brute  out,  but  throw  in  a  handful  of  fodder,  and  something 
for  him  to  lie  upon,  and  let  him  be  till  next  day."  A 
remarkable  way  of  making  "thine  ox  and  thine  ass" 
keep  the  Sabbath  !  There  is  a  delicacy  of  expression  in 
the  question ;  the  owner  of  "  one  sheep  "  would  be  more 
solicitous  about  it  than  if  he  had  a  hundred ;  and  our 
Shepherd  looks  on  all  the  millions  of  His  flock  with  a 
heart  as  much  touched  by  their  sorrow  and  needs  as  if 
each  were  His  only  possession.  The  question  waits 
for  no  answer ;  but  Christ  goes  on  (as  if  there  could 
be  but  one  reply)  to  His  conclusion,  which  He  binds  to 
His  first  question  by  another,  equally  easy  to  answer. 
Man's  superiority  to  animals  makes  his  claim  for  help 
more  imperative.  "You  would  not  do  less  for  one 
another  than  for  a  sheep  in  a  hole,  surely."  But  the 
form  in  which  our  Lord  puts  His  conclusive  answer  to 
the  Pharisees  gives  an  unexpected  turn  to  the  reply. 
He  does  not  say  "  It  is  lawful  to  heal,"  but  "  It  is  lawful 
to  do  well,"  thus  at  once  showing  the  true  justification  of 
healing,  namely,  that  it  was  a  beneficent  act,  and  widen 
ing  the  scope  of  His  answer  to  cover  a  whole  class  of 
cases.  "  To  do  well "  here  means,  not  to  do  right,  but 


Less,  xxi.]    The  Pharisees'  Sabbath,  and  Christ's.     215 

to  do  good,  to  benefit  men.  The  principle  is  a  wide  one  : 
the  charitable  succour  of  men's  needs,  of  whatever  kind, 
is  congruous  with  the  true  design  of  that  day  of  rest. 
Have  the  churches  laid  that  lesson  to  heart  ?  On  the 
whole,  it  is  to  be  observed  that  our  Lord  here  distinctly 
recognises  the  obligation  of  the  Sabbath,  that  He  claims 
power  over  it,  that  He  permits  the  pressure  of  individual 
necessities,  and  of  others'  need  of  help,  to  modify  the 
manner  of  its  observance,  and  that  He  leaves  the 
application  of  these  principles  to  the  spiritual  insight  of 
His  followers. 

The  cure  which  follows  is  done  in  a  singular  fashion. 
Without  a  word  of  request  from  the  sufferer  or  any  one 
else,  He  heals  him  by  a  word.  His  command  has  a 
promise  in  it,  and  He  gives  the  power  to  do  what  He 
bids  the  man  do.  "  Give  wrhat  Thou  commandest,"  says 
St.  Augustine,  "and  command  what  Thou  wilt."  We 
get  strength  to  obey  in  the  act  of  obedience.  But 
beyond  the  possible  symbolical  significance  of  the  mode 
of  cure,  and  beyond  the  revelation  of  Christ's  power  to 
heal  by  a  word,  the  manner  had  a  special  reason  in  the 
very  cavils  of  the  Pharisees.  Not  even  they  could  accuse 
Him  of  breaking  any  Sabbath  law  by  such  a  cure.  What 
had  He  done?  Told  the  man  to  put  out  his  hand. 
Surely  that  was  not  unlawful.  What  had  the  man  done? 
Stretched  it  forth.  Surely  that  broke  no  subtle  rabbinical 
precept.  So  they  were  foiled  at  every  turn,  driven  off 
the  field  of  argument,  and  baffled  in  their  attempt  to  find 
ground  for  laying  an  information  against  Him.  But 
neither  His  gentle  wisdom  nor  His  healing  power  could 
get  to  these  hearts,  made  stony  by  conceit  and  pedantic 
formalism;  and  all  that  their  contact  with  Jesus  did  was 


216  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.  xii.  1-14. 

to  drive  them  to  intenser  hostility,  and  to  send  them 
away  to  plot  His  death.  That  is  what  comes  of  making 
religion  a  round  of  outward  observances.  The  Pharisee 
is  always  blind  as  an  owl  to  the  light  of  God  and  true 
goodness  ;  keen-sighted  as  a  hawk  for  trivial  breaches  of 
his  cobweb  regulations,  and  cruel  as  a  vulture  to  tear 
with  beak  and  claw.  The  race  is  not  extinct.  We  all 
carry  one  inside,  and  need  God's  help  to  cast  him  out. 


LESSON    XXII. 


Four  Sowings  and  One  Ripening. 

MATTHEW  xiii.   1-9. 


1.  "The  same  day  went  Jesus 
out  of  the    house,   and   sat   by 
the  sea  side. 

2.  And  great  multitudes  were 
gathered  together  unto  Him,  so 
that  He  went  into>a  ship,  and 
sat ;  and    the  whole  multitude 
stood  on  the  shore. 

3.  And  He  spake  many  things 
unto  them  in  parables,  saying, 
Behold,  a  sower  went  forth  to 
sow ; 

4.  And  when  he  sowed,  some 
seeds  fell  by  the  way  side,  and 
the  fowls  came  and   devoured 
them  up  : 

5.  Some      fell      upon     stony 


places,  where  they  had  not 
much  earth  :  and  forthwith  they 
sprung  up,  because  they  had  no 
deepness  of  earth : 

6.  And    when    the    sun    was 
up,    they   were   scorched  ;    and 
because  they  had  no  root,  they 
withered  away. 

7.  And     some     fell      among 
thorns ;  and  the  thorns  sprung 
up,  and  choked  them  : 

8.  But  other    fell    into   good 
ground,  and  brought  forth  fruit, 
some     an     hundredfold,     some 
sixtyfold,  some  thirtyfold. 

9.  Who    hath    ears    to    hear, 
let  him  hear.'' 


seven  parables  of  the  kingdom,  in  this  chapter, 
are  not  to  be  regarded  as  grouped  together  by 
Matthew.  They  were  spoken  consecutively,  as  is  obvious 
from  the  notes  of  time  in  vv.  36  and  53.  They  are  a 
great  whole,  setting  forth  the  "  mystery  of  the  kingdom  " 
in  its  method  of  establishment,  its  corruption,  its  out 
ward  and  inward  growth,  the  conditions  of  entrance  into 
it,  and  its  final  purification.  The  sacred  number  seven, 
impressed  upon  them,  is  the  token  of  completeness. 
They  fall  into  two  parts  :  four  of  them  being  spoken  to 

217 


218  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.  xiii.  1-9. 

the  multitudes  from  the  boat,  and  presenting  the  more 
obvious  aspects  of  the  development  of  the  kingdom  ; 
three  being  addressed  to  the  disciples  in  the  house,  and 
setting  forth  truths  about  it  more  fitted  for  them.  The 
first  parable,  which  concerns  us  now,  has  been  generally 
called  the  Parable  of  the  Sower,  but  he  is  not  the 
prominent  figure.  The  subject  is  much  rather  the  soils ; 
and  the  intention  is,  not  so  much  to  declare  anything 
about  him,  as  to  explain  to  the  people,  who  were  looking 
for  the  kingdom  to  be  set  up  by  outward  means,  irrespec 
tive  of  men's  dispositions,  that  the  way  of  establishing  it 
was  by  teaching,  which  needed  receptive  spirits.  The 
parable  is  both  history  and  prophecy.  It  tells  Christ's 
own  experience,  and  it  foretells  His  servants'.  He  is  the 
great  Sower,  who  has  "  come  forth  "  from  the  Father. 
His  present  errand  is  not  to  burn  up  thorns  or  to  punish 
the  husbandmen,  but  to  scatter  on  all  hearts  the  living 
seed,  which  is  here  interpreted,  in  accordance  with  the 
dominant  idea  of  this  Gospel,  as  being  "  the  word  of  the 
kingdom  "  (ver.  19).  All  who  follow  Him,  and  make  His 
truth  known,  are  sowers  in  their  turn,  and  have  to  look 
for  the  same  issue  of  their  work.  The  figure  is  common 
to  all  languages.  Truth,  whether  intellectual,  moral,  or 
spiritual,  is  seminal,  and,  deposited  in  the  heart,  under 
standing,  or  conscience,  grows.  It  has  a  mysterious 
vitality,  and  its  issue  is  not  a  manufacture,  but  a  fruit. 
If  all  teachers,  especially  religious  teachers,  would 
remember  that,  perhaps  there  would  be  fewer  failures, 
and  a  good  deal  of  their  work  would  be  modified.  We 
have  here  four  sowings  and  one  ripening, — a  sad  propor 
tion  !  We  are  not  told  that  the  quantity  of  seed  was  in 
each  case  the  same.  Rather  we  may  suppose  that  much 


Less,  xxii.]    Four  Sowings  and  One  Ripening.         219 

less  fell  on  the  wayside,  and  on  the  rocky  soil,  and 
among  the  thorns,  than  on  the  good  ground.  So  we 
cannot  say  that  seventy-five  per  cent,  of  it  was  wasted ; 
but,  in  any  case,  the  proportion  of  failure  is  tragically 
large.  This  sower  was  under  no  illusion  as  to  the 
result  of  his  work. 

It  is  folly  to  sow  on  the  hard  footpath,  or  the  rocky 
ground,  or  among  thorns  ;  but  Christ  and  His  servants 
have  to  do  that,  in  endless  hope  that  these  unreceptive 
hearts  may  become  good  soil.  One  lesson  of  the  par 
able  is,  Scatter  the  seed  everywhere,  on  the  most  unlikely 
places. 

I.  Our  Lord  begins  with  the  case  in  which  the  seed 
remains  quite  outside  the  soil,  or,  without  metaphor,  in 
which  the  word  finds  absolutely  no  entrance  into  the 
heart  or  mind.  A  beaten  path  runs  by  the  end  or 
perhaps  through  the  middle  of  the  cornfield.  It  is  of 
exactly  the  same  soil  as  the  rest,  but  many  passengers 
have  trodden  it  hard,  and  the  very  foot  of  the  sower, 
as  he  comes  and  goes  in  his  work,  has  helped.  Some 
of  the  seed,  sown  broadcast  of  course,  falls  there,  and 
lies  where  it  falls,  having  no  power  to  penetrate  the  hard 
surface.  As  in  our  own  English  cornfields,  a  flock  of 
bold,  hungry  birds  watch  the  sower ;  and,  as  soon  as  his 
back  is  turned,  they  are  down  with  a  swift-winged  swoop, 
and  away  goes  the  exposed  grain.  So  there  is  an  end  of 
it ;  and  the  path  is  as  bare  as  ever,  five  minutes  after  it 
has  been  strewed  with  seeds. 

The  explanation  is  too  plain  to  be  mistaken,  but  we 
may  briefly  touch  its  main  features.  Notice,  then,  that 
our  Lord  begins  with  the  case  in  which  there  is  least 
contact  between  His  word  and  the  soul,  and  that,  as  the 


220  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.  xiu.  1-9. 

contact  is  least  in  degree,  so  it  is  shortest  in  duration. 
A  minute  or  two  finishes  it.  Notice  especially  that  the 
path  has  been  made  hard  by  external  pressure.  It  is  not 
rock,  but  soil,  like  the  other  parts  of  the  field.  It  repre 
sents  the  case  of  men  whose  insensibility  to  the  word  is 
caused  by  outward  things  having  made  a  thoroughfare  of 
their  natures,  and  trodden  them  into  incapacity  to  receive 
the  message  of  Christ's  love.  The  heavy  baggage-waggons 
of  commerce,  the  light  cars  of  pleasure,  merry  dancers, 
and  sad  funeral  processions,  have  all  used  that  way,  and 
each  footfall  has  beaten  the  once  loose  soil  a  little 
firmer.  We  are  made  insensitive  to  the  gospel  by  the 
effect  of  innocent  and  necessary  things,  unless  we  take 
care  to  plow  up  the  path  along  which  they  travel,  and 
to  keep  our  spirits  susceptible  by  a  distinct  effort.  How 
many  hearers  of  every  teacher  are  there,  who  never 
take  in  his  words  at  all,  simply  because  they  are  so 
completely  preoccupied  ! 

Notice  what  becomes  of  the  seed  that  lies  thus  bare. 
u  Immediately,"  says  Mark,  "  Satan  cometh."  His 
agents  are  these  light-winged  thoughts  that  flutter  round 
the  hearer  as  soon  as  the  sermon  or  the  lesson  is  over. 
Talk  of  the  weather,  criticism  of  the  congregation,  or  of 
the  sower's  attitude  as  he  flung  the  seed,  or  politics,  or 
business,  drives  away  even  the  remembrance  of  the  text, 
before  many  of  our  hearers  are  out  of  sight  of  the  church. 
Then  the  whirl  of  traffic  begins  again,  and  the  path  is 
soon  beaten  a  little  harder.  If  the  seed  had  got  ever  so 
little  way  into  the  ground,  the  sharp  beaks  of  the  thieves 
would  not  have  carried  it  off  so  easily.  Impressions  so 
slight  as  Christ's  word  makes  on  busy  men  are  quickly 
rubbed  out.  But  if 'the  seed  sown  vanishes  thus  swiftly, 


Less. xxii.]    Four  Sowings  and  One  Ripening.         221 

the  fault  is  not  in  it,  but  in  ourselves.  Satan  may  seek 
to  snatch  it  away,  but  we  can  hinder  him. 

Our  Lord  uses  a  singular  expression,  "  This  is  he  that 
was  sown  by  the  way  side,"  which  appears  to  identify  the 
man  with  the  seed  rather  than  with  the  soil.  It  has  been 
suggested  by  some  commentators  that  this  expression  is 
to  be  regarded  as  conveying  the  truth  that  the  seed  sown 
in  the  heart  and  growing  up  there  becomes  the  life-spring 
of  the  individual,  and  that  therefore  we  may  speak  of 
him  or  of  it  as  bearing  the  fruit.  But  this  explanation 
will  not  avail  for  the  case  where  there  is  no  entrance  of 
the  word  into  the  heart,  and  so  no  new  birth  by  the  word. 
More  probably  we  are  to  regard  the  expression  simply  as 
a  conversational  shorthand  form  of  speech,  not  strictly 
accurate,  but  quite  intelligible ;  unless,  indeed,  we  sup 
pose  that  "  sown  "  is  used  in  the  same  double  sense  in 
which  we  speak  of  a  field  as  well  as  of  seed  being  sown. 

II.  The  next  variety  of  soil  differs  from  the  preceding 
in  having  its  hindrance  deep  seated.  Many  a  hillside  in 
Galilee — as  in  Scotland  or  New  England — would  show  a 
thin  surface  of  soil  over  rock,  like  skin  stretched  tightly 
on  a  bone.  No  roots  could  get  through  that,  nor  find 
nourishment  in  it ;  while  the  very  shallowness  of  earth 
and  the  heat  of  the  underlying  stone  would  accelerate 
growth.  Such  premature  and  feeble  shoots  perish  as 
quickly  as  they  spring  up ;  the  fierce  Eastern  sun  makes 
a  speedy  end  of  them,  and  a  few  days  sees  their  springing 
and  withering.  It  is  a  case  of  "  lightly  come,  lightly  go." 
Quick-sprouting  things  are  soon-dying  things.  A  shallow 
pond  is  up  in  waves  under  a  breeze  which  raises  no  sea 
on  the  Atlantic,  and  it  is  calm  again  in  a  few  minutes. 
Readily  stirred  emotion  is  transient.  Brushwood  catches 


222  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.  xiii.  1-9. 

fire  easily,  and  burns  itself  out  quickly.  Coal  takes 
longer  to  kindle,  and  is  harder  to  put  out.  The  persons 
meant  are  those  of  excitable  temperament,  whose  feelings 
lie  on  the  surface,  and  can  be  got  at  without  first  passing 
through  the  understanding  or  the  conscience.  Such 
people  are  easily  played  on  by  the  epidemic  influence  of 
any  prevalent  enthusiasm  or  emotion,  as  every  revival 
of  religion  shows.  Their  very  "joy"  in  hearing  the 
word  is  suspicious ;  for  a  true  reception  of  it  seldom 
begins  with  joy,  but  rather  with  "  the  sorrow  which 
worketh  repentance  not  to  be  repented  of."  Their 
immediate  reception  of  it  is  suspicious,  for  it  suggests 
that  there  has  been  no  time  to  consult  the  understanding 
or  to  form  a  deliberate  purpose ;  stable  resolutions  are 
slowly  formed.  It  is  the  sunny  side  of  religion  which 
has  attracted  them.  They  know  nothing  of  its  difficulties 
and  depths.  Hence,  as  soon  as  they  find  out  the  realities 
of  the  course  which  they  have  embraced  so  lightly,  they 
desert,  like  John  Mark,  running  away  as  soon  as  home 
comforts  at  Cyprus  were  left  behind.  The  Christian  life 
means  self-denial,  toil,  hard  resistance  to  many  fascina 
tions.  It  means  sweat  and  blood,  or  it  means  nothing. 
Whether  there  be  "persecution"  or  no,  there  will  be 
affliction,  "because  of  the  word,"  and  all  the  joyful 
emotion  will  ooze  out  at  the  man's  finger-ends.  The 
same  superficial  excitability  which  determined  his  swift 
reception  of  the  word  will  determine  his  hasty  casting  of 
it  aside,  and  immediately  he  stumbles.  All  his  acts  will 
be  done  in  a  hurry,  and  none  of  his  moods  will  last. 
Feeling  is  in  its  place  down  in  the  engine-room,  but  it 
makes  a  poor  pilot.  Very  significant  is  that  phrase  "  no 
root  in  himself."  His  roots  are  in  the  accidents  of  the 


Less,  xxii.]    Four  Sowings  and  One  Ripening1.          223 

moment.  His  religion  has  never  really  struck  root  in 
him,  but  only  in  the  superficial  layer  of  him.  His 
conscience,  will,  understanding,  are  unpenetrated  by  its 
fibres.  So  it  is  easily  pulled  up,  as  well  as  soon  withered. 
There  is  another  profound  truth  in  this  picture.  The 
hard,  impenetrable  rock  lies  right  under  the  thin  skin  of 
soil.  The  nature  which  is  over-emotional  on  its  surface 
is  utterly  hard  at  its  core.  The  most  heartless  people 
are  those  whose  feelings  are  always  ready  to  gush ;  the 
most  unimpressible  are  those  who  are  most  easily  brought 
to  a  certain  degree  of  emotion  by  the  sound  of  the  word. 
This  class  is  an  advance  on  the  former  in  that  there 
has  been  a  real  contact  with  the  word,  which  has  lain 
longer  in  their  hearts,  and  has  had  some  growth.  We 
may  regard  it  as  either  better  or  worse  than  the  former, 
according  as  we  consider  that  it  is  better  to  accept  and 
feel  than  not  to  accept  at  all,  or  that  it  is  worse  to  have 
in  some  measure  had  and  felt  than  not  to  have  received 
the  word  of  the  kingdom. 

III.  In  one  part  of  the  field  was  a  patch  where  the 
soil  was  neither  rammed  solid,  as  on  the  foot-path,  nor 
thin,  as  where  the  rock  cropped  out,  but  where  there 
had  been  a  tangle  of  thorns,  which  grow  luxuriantly  in 
Palestine.  These  had  been  cut  down,  but  not  stubbed 
up,  as  is  plain  from  the  very  fact  that  the  seed  reached 
the  ground,  as  also  from  the  description  of  them  as 
"springing  up."  The  two  growths  advance  together. 
In  this  case,  the  seed  has  a  longer  life  than  in  the  former. 
It  roots  and  grows,  and  even,  according  to  the  other 
evangelist's  version,  fruits,  though  it  does  not  mature  its 
fruit.  There  is  no  question  of  "falling  away"  here. 
Only  the  hardier  growth,  which  had  the  advantage  of 


224  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.  xiii.  1-9. 

previous  possession,  and  which  pushes  up  its  shoots 
above  ground  all  round  the  more  tender  plant,  gets  the 
start  of  it,  and  smothers  its  green  blades,  overtopping  it, 
and  keeping  it  from  sun  and  air,  as  well  as  drawing  to 
itself  the  nourishment  from  the  soil.  The  main  point 
here  is  the  two  simultaneous  growths.  The  man  is,  as 
James  calls  him,  a  "  double-minded  man."  He  is  trying 
to  grow  both  corn  and  thorn  on  the  same  soil.  He  has 
some  religion,  but  not  enough  to  make  thorough  work  of 
it.  He  is  endeavouring  to  ride  on  two  horses  at  once. 
Religion  says  "  either — or  "  ;  he  is  trying  "  both — and." 
The  human  heart  has  only  a  limited  amount  of  love  and 
trust  to  give,  and  Christ  must  have  it  all.  It  has  enough 
for  one, — that  is,  for  Him ;  but  not  enough  for  two,— 
that  is,  for  Him  and  the  world.  This  man's  religion  has 
not  been  powerful  enough  to  grub  up  the  roots  of  the 
thorns.  They  were  cut  down  when  the  seed  was  sown. 
For  a  little  while,  at  the  beginning  of  his  course,  the  new 
life  in  him  seemed  to  conquer ;  but  the  roots  lay  hid, 
and,  in  due  time,  showed  again  above  ground.  "  111 
weeds  grow  apace  " ;  and  these,  as  is  their  nature,  grow 
faster  than  the  good  seed.  So  the  only  thing  to  do  is  to 
get  them  out  of  the  ground  to  the  last  fibre. 

Christ  specifies  what  He  calls  thorns.  We  can  all 
understand  care  being  so  called ;  but  riches  ?  Yes,  they, 
too  have  sharp  prickles,  as  anybody  will  find  who  stuffs 
a  pillow  with  them.  But  our  Lord  chooses  His  words  to 
point  the  lesson  that  not  outward  things,  but  our  attitude 
to  them,  make  the  barrenness  of  this  soil.  It  is  not 
"  this  world,"  but  "  the  care  of  this  world,"  not  "  riches," 
but  "  the  deceitfulness  of  riches,"  that  choke  the  word. 
These  two  seem  opposites,  but  they  are  really  the  same 


Less.  XXII.]    Four  Sowings  and  One  Ripening-.         225 

thing  on  two  opposite  sides.  The  man  who  is  burdened 
with  the  cares  of  poverty,  and  the  man  who  is  deceived 
by  the  false  promises  of  wealth,  are  really  the  same  man. 
The  one  is  the  other  turned  inside  out.  We  make  the 
world  our  god,  whether  we  worship  it  by  saying  "  I  am 
desolate  without  thee,"  or  by  fancying  that  we  are  secure 
with  it.  Note  the  effect  that  the  issue  in  this  case  is 
— unfruitfulness.  The  man  may,  and  I  suppose  usually 
does,  keep  up  a  profession  of  Christianity  all  his  life. 
He  very  likely  does  not  know  that  the  seed  is  choked, 
and  that  he  has  become  unfruitful.  But  he  is  a  stunted, 
useless  Christian,  with  all  the  sap  and  nourishment  of  his 
soul  given  to  his  worldly  position,  and  his  religion  a  poor 
pining  thing,  with  blanched  leaves  and  abortive  fruit. 
How  much  of  Christ's  field  is  filled  with  plants  of  that 
sort! 

IV.  The  parable  tells  us  nothing'about  the  comparative 
acreage  of  the  path,  rocky  and  thorny  ground  on  the  one 
hand,  and  of  the  fertile  soil  on  the  other.  It  is  not 
meant  to  teach  the  proportion  of  success  to  failure,  but 
to  exhibit  the  fact  that  the  reception  of  the  word  depends 
on  men's  dispositions.  The  good  soil  has  none  of  the 
faults  of  the  rest  of  the  field.  It  is  loose,  and  thus 
unlike  the  path ;  deep,  and  thus  unlike  the  rocky  bit ; 
clean,  and  thus  unlike  the  thorn  brake.  The  interpretation 
given  of  it  by  our  Lord  seems  at  first  sight  incomplete. 
It  is  all  summed  up  in  one  word,  "  understandeth." 
Then,  did  not  the  second  and  third  classes,  at  all  events, 
understand  ?  They  received  the  word,  and  it  had  some 
growth  in  them.  The  distinction  between  them  and  the 
good-soil  hearer  is  surely  of  a  moral  nature,  rather  than 
of  so  purely  intellectual  a  kind  as  "  understanding " 


226  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.  xiii.  1-9. 

suggests.  Hence,  Luke's  keep  fast  "  in  an  honest  and 
good  heart "  may  seem  a  more  adequate  statement.  But 
biblical  usage  does  not  regard  "understanding"  as  a 
purely  intellectual  process,  but  rather  as  the  action  of  the 
whole  moral  and  spiritual  nature.  It  knows  nothing  of 
dividing  a  man  up  into  water-tight  compartments,  one  of 
which  may  be  full  of  evil,  and  the  other  clean  and  recep 
tive  of  good.  According  to  it,  we  "  understand  "  religious 
truth  by  our  hearts  and  moral  nature  in  conjunction  with 
the  dry  light  of  intellect.  So  the  word  here  is  used  in  a 
pregnant  sense,  and  includes  the  grasp  of  the  truth  with 
the  whole  nature,  the  complete  reception  of  the  word  of 
the  kingdom  not  merely  into  the  intellect,  but  into  the 
central  self,  the  undivided  fountain  from  which  flow  the 
issues  of  life,  whether  these  be  called  intellect,  or  affec 
tion,  or  conscience,  or  will.  Only  he  who  has  thus 
become  one  with  the  word,  and  housed  it  deep  in  his 
inmost  soul,  "  understands  "  it,  in  the  sense  in  which  our 
Lord  here  uses  that  expression.  "  Thy  word  have  I  hid 
in  mine  heart "  exactly  corresponds  to  the  "  understand 
ing  "  which  is  here  given  as  the  distinctive  mark  of  the 
good  soil. 

The  result  of  that  reception  into  the  depths  of  the 
spirit  is  that  he  "  verily  beareth  fruit."  The  man  who 
receives  the  word  is  identified  with  the  plant  which 
springs  from  the  seed  which  he  receives.  The  life  of  a 
Christian  is  the  result  of  the  growth  in  him  of  a  super 
natural  seed.  He  bears  fruit,  yet  the  fruit  comes  not 
from  him,  but  from  the  seed  sown.  "  I  live  j  yet  not  I, 
but  Christ  liveth  in  me."  Fruitfulness  is  the  aim  of  the 
sower,  and  the  test  of  the  reception  of  the  seed.  If  there 
is  not  fruit,  manifestly  there  has  been  no  real  under- 


Less,  xxii.j    Four  Sowings  and  One  Ripening.         227 

standing  of  the  word.  A  touchstone,  that,  which  will 
produce  surprising  results  in  detecting  spurious  Chris 
tianity,  if  it  be  honestly  applied  ! 

There  is  variety  in  the  degree  of  fruitfulness, 
according  to  the  goodness  of  the  soil ;  that  is  to  say, 
according  to  the  thoroughness  and  depth  of  the  reception 
of  the  word.  The  great  Husbandman  does  not  demand 
uniform  fertility.  He  is  glad  to  get  a  hundredfold,  but 
He  accepts  sixty,  and  does  not  refuse  thirty,  only  He 
arranges  them  in  descending  order,  as  if  He  would  fain 
have  the  highest  rate  from  all  the  plants,  and,  not  without 
disappointment,  gradually  stretches  His  merciful  allow 
ance  to  take  in  even  the  lowest.  He  will  accept  the 
scantiest  fruitage,  and  will  lovingly  "  purge  "  the  branch 
"  that  it  may  bring  forth  more  fruit." 

No  parable  teaches  everything.  Paths,  rocks,  and 
thorns  cannot  change.  But  men  can  plow  up  the 
trodden  ways,  and  blast  away  the  rock,  and  root  out  the 
thorns,  and,  with  God's  help,  can  open  the  door  of  their 
hearts,  that  the  Sower  and  His  seed  may  enter  in.  We 
are  responsible  for  the  soil,  else  His  warning  were  vain, 
"  Take  heed  therefore  how  ye  hear." 


LESSON   XXIII. 


Various  Aspects  of  the  Kingdom. 

MATTHEW  xiii.  31-33,  44~52- 


31.  "Another  parable  put  He 
forth   unto    them,    saying,    The 
kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  to  a 
grain  of  mustard  seed,  which  a 
man    took,    and    sowed    in    his 
field: 

32.  Which  indeed  is  the  least 
of  all    seeds :    but   when    it   is 
grown,  it  is  the  greatest  among 
herbs,  and  becometh  a  tree,  so 
that  the  birds  of  the  air  come 
and     lodge     in     the     branches 
thereof. 

33.  Another    parable     spake 
He   unto   them  ;  The   kingdom 
of  heaven  is  like  unto  leaven, 
which  a  woman  took,  and  hid 
in  three  measures  of  meal,  till 
the  whole  was  leavened. 

44.  Again,    the    kingdom    of 
heaven    is    like    unto    treasure 
hid  in  a  field  ;  the  which  when 
a   man   hath  found,  he  hideth, 
and   for  joy  thereof  goeth  and 
selleth    all  that    he   hath,    and 
buyeth  that  field. 

45.  Again,    the    kingdom    of 
heaven  is  like  unto  a  merchant 
man,  seeking  goodly  pearls  : 

46.  Who,  when  he  had  found 


one  pearl  of  great  price,  went 
and  sold  all  that  he  had,  and 
bought  it. 

47.  Again,    the    kingdom    of 
heaven  is  like  unto  a  net,  that 
was    cast    into    the    sea,    and 
gathered  of  every  kind  : 

48.  Which,  when  it  was  full, 
they   drew   to    shore,    and    sat 
down,    and   gathered   the  good 
into  vessels,  but   cast  the  bad 
away. 

49.  So  shall  it  be  at  the  end 
of  the  world  :  the  angels  shall 
come  forth,  and  sever  the  wicked 
from  among  the  just, 

50.  And  shall  cast  them  into 
the  furnace  of  fire  :  there  shall 
be    wailing    and    gnashing    of 
teeth. 

51.  Jesus   saith    unto    them, 
Have  ye  understood   all  these 
things  ?     They  say  unto   Him, 
Yea,  Lord. 

52.  Then  said  He  unto  them, 
Therefore   every   scribe   which 
is  instructed  unto  the  kingdom 
of  heaven  is  like   unto  a  man 
that  is  an  householder,  which 
bringeth  forth  out  of  his  trea 
sure  things  new  and  old." 


THE  parables  already  considered  might  suggest  that 
the  kingdom  was  destined  to  partial  and  shaded 
success.     The  first  spoke  of  three  parts  of  the  seed  as 

22b 


Less,  xxiii.]   Various  Aspects  of  the  Kingdom.        229 

coming  to  nothing,  and  the  second  of  the  fourth  part  as 
growing  up  amid  tares.  The  listeners  might  say,  "  Is 
this  all  ? "  Therefore,  in  the  next  two,  our  Lord  sets 
forth  a  brighter  aspect  of  the  future  of  the  kingdom, 
exhibiting  in  the  former  its  growth  from  small  beginnings 
to  great  magnitude,  and  in  the  second  its  transforming 
influence  on  the  mass  in  which  it  is  deposited.  They 
make  a  pair,  and  finish  His  instructions  as  to  the 
kingdom,  addressed  to  the  crowrds.  The  remaining 
three  parables,  spoken  to  the  disciples  in  the  house, 
consist  of  a  pair,  setting  forth  the  supreme  preciousness 
of  the  kingdom,  and  the  wisdom  of  acquiring  it  at  all 
costs,  and  of  a  single  parable,  which  repeats,  with  a 
difference,  the  lesson  of  the  separation  of  wheat  and 
tares. 

I.  The  twin  parables  illustrating  the  development  of 
the  kingdom  from  small  and  hidden  beginnings.  The 
parable  of  the  little  mustard  seed  still  takes  the  process 
of  vegetation  as  emblem  of  the  growth  of  the  kingdom  ; 
but  the  sower  barely  appears,  though  His  agency  is  still 
part  of  the  essence  of  the  representation,  and  the  field 
is  "  His  field."  But  the  seed  is  now  the  kingdom  itself, 
and  the  only  points  brought  into  notice  are  the  contrasted 
smallness  of  the  commencement  and  bulk  of  the  growth 
at  the  end.  We  need  not  spend  time  in  discussing  the 
correctness  of  the  statements  as  to  the  smallness  of  the 
mustard  seed  and  the  size  of  the  shrub.  Jesus  does  not 
speak  as  a  botanist,  but  in  popular  language ;  and  it  is 
enough  to  know  that  the  mustard  seed  was  a  common 
proverbial  illustration  of  extreme  minuteness,  and  that 
the  herb  was  a  miracle  of  height  and  substance  as  com 
pared  with  its -tiny  origin.  The  application  is  too  plain 


230      The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.xhi.  31-33, 44-52. 

to  need  any  interpretation.  It  strikes  home  at  once  to 
the  many  among  the  first  listeners,  who  had  recoiled  from 
the  (as  it  seemed  to  them)  dreadful  down-come  from  the 
long-cherished  national  hopes  to  this  obscure  Galilean 
peasant  and  His  handful  of  followers.  He  stole  into  the 
wrorld  in  a  despised  corner  of  a  despised  land.  He 
gathered  a  few  believers,  spoke  some  gentle  words,  laid 
his  hands  on  a  few  sick  folk,  and  then  died.  What 
proud  incredulity  would  have  curled  the  lips  of  the  men 
of  influence  and  culture  in  that  day,  if  they  had  been 
pointed  to  Him  and  His  disciples,  and  bidden  to  see  there 
the  mightiest  force,  destined  to  universal  dominion  ! 
The  lesson  is  not  less  needed  now  than  then.  God's 
great  things  have  ever  small  beginnings,  even  as  the 
seed  of  the  "  big  trees  "  in  California  is  smaller  than  that 
of  many  a  much  humbler  conifer.  The  world's  great 
things  begin  large,  and  dwindle  fast.  Enterprises 
launched  with  much  drum-beating  have  an  ugly  habit 
of  collapsing  rapidly.  We  have  to  learn  reverence  for 
the  smallest  seed  which  has  vitality,  and  confidence  that 
the  quantity,  and  still  more  the  quality,  of  the  life  in  the 
little  black  packet  of  latent  possibility  is  not  measured  by 
its  size.  So  we  shall  not  be  led  away  by  vulgar  admira 
tion  of  the  big,  which  we  mistake  for  the  great  and  divine, 
nor  discouraged  and  impatient  if  a  heritage  be  not 
"gotten  hastily  at  the  beginning."  The  parable  brings 
the  small  seed  into  sharp  contrast  with  the  large  result, 
and  implies  the  world-wide  spread  of  the  kingdom.  The 
picturesque  touch  of  the  birds  lighting  on  the  branches 
is  probably  an  allusion  to  Ezekiel  xvii.  23,  and  a  definite 
prophecy  of  the  coming  of  the  nations  to  partake  in  its 
blessings.  The  fowls  of  the  heaven  sing  among  the 


Less,  xxiii.]    Various  Aspects  of  the  Kingdom.        231 

branches.     Souls  weary  of  flight  fold  their  tired  wings, 
and  find  rest,  shelter,  and  joy  there. 

The  parable  of  the  leaven  completes  the  picture  of 
the  growth  of  the  kingdom  by  describing  its  inward 
operation,  as  the  former  does  its  outward  growth.  It 
spreads  in  space,  and  increases  in  bulk ;  but  it  trans 
forms  inert  matter  into  its  own  nature  and  thus  grows 
by  assimilation.  The  eccentric  interpretation  of  the 
leaven  as  the  emblem  of  evil  is  disposed  of  by  observing 
that  it  is  the  kingdom,  and  not  its  corruption,  which  "  is 
like  unto  leaven,"  and  by  remembering  that  the  meal  is 
improved,  not  spoiled,  by  it.  No  meaning  is  to  be 
attached  to  the  "  woman,"  nor  is  it  safe  to  find  the  three 
parts  of  human  nature,  body,  soul,  and  spirit ;  nor  the 
three  divisions  of  the  human  race  springing  from  Noah's 
sons  ;  nor  the  three  forms  of  society,  the  family,  the 
church,  and  the  state,  in  the  number,  which  probably 
was  chosen  simply  as  the  quantity  most  usually  leavened 
at  once,  or  as  the  definite  number  most  commonly  put 
for  an  indefinite.  All  such  trifling  hides  the  main  lessons. 
These  lie,  first,  in  the  addition  of  the  leaven  to  the  meal, 
teaching  that  the  quickening  influence  comes  from  with 
out  ;  that,  in  a  word,  if  human  society  is  ever  to  contain 
a  kingdom  of  heaven,  and  be  transformed  thereby,  it 
must  be  imported,  not  developed.  They  lie,  second,  in 
the  hiding  of  the  leaven,  by  which  is  taught  the  same 
truth  of  secret  beginnings  as  in  the  former  parable. 
They  lie,  third,  in  the  manner  of  the  leaven's  working, 
which  is  fermentation.  So  the  gospel  stirs  up  movement 
in  the  dead  mass.  Christ  comes  to  bring  peace  at  the 
end,  but  He  must  first  bring  a  sword.  Leaven  works 
from  within  outwards.  The  gospel  is  planted  in  the 


232      The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.  xiii.  3 1  -33, 44-52. 

depths  of  the  individual  spirit,  and  gradually  permeates 
the  whole  being.  It  works  underground  in  society,  and 
only  remodels  institutions  as  the  result  of  having  re 
modelled  men.  The  lesson  lies  further  in  the  assimilative 
power  of  the  leaven,  which  changes  each  particle  of  the 
meal,  and,  by  means  of  each  in  turn,  transmits  transform 
ing  power  to  the  outer  unleavened  particles.  It  lies, 
finally,  in  the  hopes  suggested  by  that  "  till  the  whole 
was  leavened,"  which  foretells  the  permeating  of  the 
mass  with  quickening  influence,  and  the  complete  assi 
milation  of  the  individual  to  it. 

II.  The  second  pair  of  parables  begins  the  short  series 
of  three,  addressed  to  the  disciples,  and  appropriately 
deals  with  the  supreme  worth  of  the  kingdom  and  the 
condition  of  attaining  it.  Observe  the  contrast  with  the 
group  addressed  to  the  multitude,  in  which  the  action 
of  the  sower  is  prominent,  and  simple  receptivity  is  the 
condition  of  becoming  a  child  of  the  kingdom,  while  in 
this  pair  of  parables  the  human  condition  is  emphatically 
insisted  upon  as  being  energetic  action  and  self-surrender. 
There  are  four  salient  points  in  the  two  stories  which 
run  parallel  to  each  other,  but  with  significant  differences. 
First,  note  man's  true  treasure.  The  kingdom  of  heaven 
means  most  simply  the  order  or  community  in  which 
God  reigns,  and  loving  obedience  is  rendered  to  His  will. 
Its  possession  by  the  individual  is  the  same  as  being  a 
child  of  the  kingdom,  or,  in  other  words,  as  the  personal 
possession  of  salvation.  This  condition  of  loving  obedi 
ence  is,  subjectively,  our  highest  good  and  our  true 
wealth.  Objectively,  God  in  Christ  is  our  treasure. 
This  alone  meets  our  deepest  poverty,  and  brings  the 
riches  of  pardon,  the  wealth  of  mercy,  which  cleanses 


Less,  xxiii.]    Various  Aspects  of  the  Kingdom.        233 

while  it  forgives.  Nothing  else  meets  this  deep  need, 
without  the  supply  of  which  we  are  miserable  and 
wretched  and  poor.  It  is  our  treasure,  because  it  is 
wealth  for  all  our  nature,  while  all  other  possessions  but 
satisfy  a  part  and  leave  the  rest  hungry,  as  in  a  menagerie 
at  feeding-time,  one  cage  is  quiet  because  it  has  its  meal, 
and  all  the  others  growling  unfed ;  it  is  so,  because  it  is 
all  wealth  in  one.  The  travelling  jeweller  had  a  bag  full 
of  small  pearls  ;  but  when  he  saw  the  one  great  one,  he 
knew  it  was  worth  far  more.  We  need  unity  in  what  is 
to  stay  the  soul.  The  one  is  more  than  the  many.  One 
sun  gives  more  light  than  a  million  stars.  Life  wants 
one  all-sufficient  portion,  one  refuge,  one  aim,  to  simplify 
and  ennoble  it,  one  love  for  the  heart.  It  is  so  because 
it  is  enduring  wealth.  All  that  remains  outside  of  us  is 
subject  to  circumstance  and  change.  It  often  leaves  us, 
and  we  have  to  leave  it  at  last.  But  the  true  treasure 
is  inwrought  with  the  substance  of  the  soul ;  and  he  only 
is  rich  who  can  say  of  his  wealth,  "I  shall  not  lose  thee, 
though  I  die." 

The  second  point  is  the  hiding  of  the  treasure.  The 
farmer's  man,  in  the  first  parable,  had  often  walked 
across  the  field,  and  never  knew  that  there  was  anything 
in  it  but  clods.  A  thin  film  of  soil  hid  the  glittering 
store.  The  merchantman,  on  the  other  hand,  had  a 
trained  eye,  and  as  soon  as  he  saw  the  pearl  he  knew  its 
value.  So  the  combination  of  both  pictures  teaches  that 
the  worth  of  the  kingdom  is  an  open  secret.  Much  in 
genuity  has  been  expended  on  assigning  a  meaning  to 
"  the  field,"  but  with  small  success.  It  is  better  to  rest 
in  the  general  thought  that  the  gospel  is  presented  in 
such  a  form  as  to  veil  its  inward  glories  from  dull,  sense- 


234      The  Gospel  of  St,  Matthew.    [Chap.xiii.  3 1-33, 44-52. 

bound  eyes  ;  or  if  we  seek  a  more  specific  interpretation, 
we  may  perhaps  find  it  in  Paul's  words,  "  In  whom  are 
all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge  hidden." 
The  lowly  form  of  the  king  was  a  stumbling-block  then, 
and,  in  some  measure,  has  continued  to  be  so.  But, 
without  pressing  this  suggestion,  one  has  only  to  look 
around  and  see  the  thousands  to  whom  the  outward  form 
of  the  gospel  is  so  familiar  that  its  spirit  and  power  are 
undreamed  of,  to  understand  how  the  treasure  was  hid, 
while,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  an  open  secret,  and  its 
preciousness  is  plain  to  every  instructed  eye. 

The  next  point  is  the  two  ways  of  discovering  the 
true  wealth.  The  rustic  was  not  looking  for  it.  A 
shower  of  rain,  or  a  chance  stroke  of  his  spade,  moved 
a  little  earth,  and  there  it  lay  before  his  unexpectant, 
astonished  eye.  He  is  the  type  of  those  of  whom  the 
Divine  Love  says,  "  I  was  found  of  them  that  sought  me 
not."  Of  such  were  Saul  on  the  Damascus  road,  Philip 
the  apostle,  the  woman  of  Samaria,  and  many  more. 
We  may  not  be  seeking  God,  but  He  is  seeking  us.  We 
may  have  no  sense  of  need,  no  dreams  nor  wishes  to 
find  the  treasure  which  we  know  not  that  we  have  lost ; 
but  He  seeks  the  coin  which  He  has  lost,  and  lights  a 
candle,  and  sweeps  the  house,  and  seeks  diligently  till 
He  finds  it.  Thank  God  !  the  kingdom  is  found  by  many 
who  seek  k  not.  But  the  travelling  jeweller,  who  has 
spent  his  life  in  the  search  for  fair  pearls,  represents  the 
better  class  of  souls  which  cherish  aspirations  after  truth, 
virtue,  wisdom,  and  whatsoever  things  are  lovely.  It  is 
a  noble  quest,  but  misdirected  so  long  as  it  looks  for 
many  separate  beauties  and  preciousnesses.  The  "  one 
entire  and  perfect  chrysolite,"  Jesus  Christ,  is  the  only 


Less,  xxiii.]    Various  Aspects  of  the  Kingdom.        235 

adequate  satisfaction  for  such  souls,  and   in   Him  they 
will  find  embodied  all  which  they  have  vainly  sought. 

The  last  point  is  the  one  way  of  obtaining  the  treasure. 
However  discovered,  there  is  but  one  method  of  possess 
ing  it,  and  between  the  recognition  of  its  worth,  and  the 
making  it  our  very  own,  is  a  deep  gulf,  over  which  the 
only  bridge  is  "  sell  all  that  thou  hast,  and  buy."  We 
sell  all  that  we  have,  when  we  recognise  that  all  is  worth 
less,  and  abandon  it  for  the  sake  of  the  higher  precious- 
ness.  Self  is  all  that  we  have.  We  sell  self  when  we 
forsake  all  self-reliance  and  self-righteousness.  We  buy 
the  kingdom  when  we  give  away  rags  for  a  robe,  sin 
for  righteousness,  ourselves  for  Christ.  That  purchase  is 
without  money  or  price.  It  is  but  the  same  self-surrender 
in  conscious  poverty,  which  is  faith.  It  is  a  glad  sur 
render,  for  the  rustic  was  moved  by  his  joy  to  part 
with  all.  It  is  a  reasonable  requirement,  and  they  who 
comply  with  it  are  wise,  however  their  action  may  look 
like  folly  ;  for  they  lose  only  what  it  is  death  to  keep,  and 
they  gain  what  it  is  life  to  win. 

III.  The  parable  of  the  draw-net  is,  at  first  sight, 
identical  with  that  of  the  tares,  but  a  closer  examination 
shows  differences  which  are  all  that  we  need  touch  on. 
Before  doing  so,  however,  note  the  picturesque  beauty 
of  the  representation  of  this  restless,  stormy  life  as  a  sea, 
contrasted  with  the  fertile,  stable  shore  of  eternity,  where 
the  toilers  sit.  Note,  too,  the  peculiar  force  of  the  par 
able  as  addressed  to  those  whose  calling  had  already 
been  taken  by  Christ  as  an  emblem  of  their  apostolic 
work.  Observe,  also,  that  the  net  is  cast  once  and  drawn 
once,  so  that  it  is  not  to  be  taken  as  a  figure  of  the  work 
of  the  ministry,  but  as  representing  the  historical  found- 


236      The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.  xiii.  31-33, 44-52. 

ing  of  the  kingdom  by  Christ,  its  continuance  in  human 
society,  and  its  final  withdrawal  to  the  eternal  world. 
Note  further  the  size  of  the  net,  which  is  a  great  seine, 
or  draw-net,  implying  the  wide  sweep  of  the  kingdom. 

As  compared  with  the  parable  of  the  tares,  this  one 
has  little  to  say  about  the  period  of  intermingling,  which 
makes  the  greater  part  of  that.  The  points  of  view  of 
the  two  are  different.  The  one  has  for  its  theme  princi 
pally  the  earthly  form  of  the  kingdom  ;  and  the  other, 
the  perfect  form.  The  one  deals  with  its  development, 
and  the  other  with  its  completion.  We  have  nothing  here 
corresponding  to  the  conversation  of  the  servants  with 
the  householder,  nor  to  his  command  of  forbearance  ; 
but  the  whole  stress  lies  on  that  leisurely  and  careful 
separation  of  the  evil  from  the  good.  Again,  the  destiny 
of  the  righteous  is  passed  over  lightly,  while  the  fate  of 
the  corrupt  and  unwholesome  fish  is  emphasised.  These 
characteristics  at  once  suggest  the  nature  of  the  differ 
ence  between  the  parables.  That  of  the  tares  was,  as 
we  have  seen,  addressed  to  the  multitudes,  and  gave 
them  instruction  in  the  form  and  growth  of  the  kingdom 
as  a  power  in  the  world.  It  was  meant  mainly  to  correct 
the  false  ideas  of  Christ's  mission,  as  if  He  was  to  begin 
with  a  process  of  separation.  But  this  parable,  addressed 
to  the  disciples,  was,  like  the  two  preceding,  which  were 
also  meant  for  their  ears,  mainly  intended  to  exhort  them 
to  the  conduct  required  of  those  who  would  be  His 
followers ;  and,  as  the  hidden  treasure  and  the  pearl 
inculcated  the  need  of  utter  self-surrender,  so  this  im 
presses  the  necessity  of  moral  purity  as  the  indispensable 
characteristic  of  the  true  children  of  the  kingdom,  it 
is  a  warning  to  all  who  are  held  within  the  sweep  of  the 


Less,  xxiii.]    Various  Aspects  of  the  Kingdom.         237 

net,  that  no  outward  connection  with  the  kingdom, 
nothing  but  righteousness,  ensures  their  standing  within 
it.  Therefore  the  dark  side  of  that  judgment  is  put 
forward  here,  that  all  professing  Christians  may  lay  to 
heart  that  "  they  are  not  all  Israel,  which  are  of  Israel," 
and  "give  diligence"  that  they  may  be  "found  in  peace, 
without  spot  and  blameless." 


LESSON    XXIV. 


Mingled  in  Growth,  separated  in  Maturity. 

MATTHEW  xiii.  24-30. 


24.  "  Another  parable  put  He 
forth    unto    them,    saying,   The 
kingdom  of  heaven   is    likened 
unto  a  man  which  sowed  good 
seed  in  his  field  : 

25.  But  while  men  slept,  his 
enemy  came  and  sowed   tares 
among  the  wheat,  and  went  his 
way. 

26.  But  when  the  blade  was 
sprung  up,   and  brought   forth 
fruit,  then   appeared   the  tares 
also. 

27.  So    the    servants   of  the 
householder     came     and    said 
unto  him,  Sir,   didst  not    thou 
sow   good   seed   in    thy  field  ? 
from  whence  then  hath  it  tares  ? 


28.  He  said   unto   them,  An 
enemy   hath    done    this.      The 
servants   said    unto    him,   Wilt 
thou    then    that    we    go    and 
gather  them  up  ? 

29.  But  he  said,    Nay ;    lest 
while  ye  gather  up  the   tares, 
ye  root  up  also  the  wheat  with 
them. 

30.  Let  both  grow    together 
until   the  harvest  :  and   in   the 
time  of  harvest  I  will  say  to  the 
reapers,  Gather  ye  together  first 
the   tares,    and    bind    them    in 
bundles     to    burn    them :    but 
gather    the    wheat     into     my 
barn." 


^"AHE  first  four  parables  contained  in   this  chapter 
were    spoken    to   a   miscellaneous   crowd   on   the 
beach,  the  last  three  to  the  disciples  in  the  house.     The 
difference  of  audience  is  accompanied  with  a  diversity 
of  subject.     The  former  group  deals   with   the  growth 
of  the  kingdom,  as  it  might  be  observed  by  outsiders, 
and  especially  with  aspects  of  the  growth  on  which  the 
multitude  needed    instruction  ;    the   latter,   with  topics 
more  suited  to  the  inner  circle  of  followers.     Of  these 
238 


Less,  xxiv.]  Mingled  in  Growth.  239 

four,  the  first  three  are  parables  of  vegetation  ;  the  last, 
of  assimilation.  The  first  two  are  still  more  closely  con 
nected,  inasmuch  as  the  person  of  the  sower  is  prominent 
in  both,  while  he  is  not  seen  in  the  others.  The 
general  scenery  is  the  same  in  both,  but  with  a  differ 
ence.  The  identification  of  the  seed  sown  with  the 
persons  receiving  it,  which  was  hinted  at  in  the  first, 
is  predominant  in  the  second.  But  while  the  former 
described  the  various  results  of  the  seed,  the  latter  drops 
out  of  sight  the  three  failures,  and  follows  its  fortunes 
in  honest  and  good  hearts,  showing  the  growth  of  the 
kingdom  in  the  midst  of  antagonistic  surroundings.  It 
may  conveniently  be  considered  in  three  sections  :  the 
first  teaching  how  the  work  of  the  sower  is  counter 
worked  by  his  enemy ;  the  second,  the  patience  of  the 
sower  with  the  thick-springing  tares  ;  and  the  third,  the 
separation  at  the  harvest. 

I.  The  work  of  the  sower  counter-worked  by  his 
enemy,  and  the  mingled  crops.  The  peculiar  turn  of 
the  first  sentence,  "  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  likened 
unto  a  man  that  sowed,"  etc.,  suggests  that  the  main 
purpose  of  the  parable  is  to  teach  the  conduct  of  the 
king  in  view  of  the  growth  of  the  tares.  The  kingdom 
is  concentrated  in  Him,  and  the  "  likening "  is  not 
effected  by  the  parable,  but,  as  the  tenses  of  both  verbs 
show,  by  the  already  accomplished  fact  of  His  sowing. 
Our  Lord  veils  His  claims  by  speaking  of  the  sower  in 
the  third  person ;  but  the  hearing  ear  cannot  foil  to 
catch  the  implication  throughout  that  He  Himself  is  the 
sower  and  the  Lord  of  the  harvest.  The  field  is  "  His 
field,"  and  His  own  interpretation  tells  us  that  it  means 
"  the  world."  Whatever  viewr  we  take  of  the  bearing 


240  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.  xiii.  24-30. 

of  this  parable  on  purity  of  communion  in  the  visible 
Church,  we  should  not  slur  over  Christ's  own  explana 
tion  of  the  field,  lest  we  miss  the  lesson  that  He  claims 
the  whole  world  as  His,  and  contemplates  the  sowing 
of  the  seed  broadcast  over  it  all.  The  kingdom  of 
heaven  is  to  be  developed  on,  and  to  spread  through, 
the  whole  earth.  The  world  belongs  to  Christ  not  only 
when  it  is  filled  with  the  kingdom,  but  before  the  sowing. 
The  explanation  of  the  good  seed  takes  the  same  point 
of  view  as  in  the  former  parable.  What  is  sown  is 
"  the  word  "  ;  what  springs  from  the  seed  is  the  new 
life  of  the  receiver.  Men  become  children  of  the  king 
dom  by  taking  the  gospel  into  their  hearts,  and  thereby 
receive  a  new  principle  of  growth,  which  in  truth  becomes 
themselves.  Side  by  side  with  the  sower's  beneficent 
work  the  counter- working  of  "  His  enemy "  goes  on. 
As  the  one,  by  depositing  holy  truth  ,in  the  heart,  makes 
men  "  children  of  the  kingdom,"  the  other,  by  putting 
evil  principles  therein,  makes  men  "children  of  evil." 
Honest  exposition  cannot  eliminate  the  teaching  of  a 
personal  antagonist  of  Christ,  nor  of  His  continuous 
agency  in  the  corruption  of  mankind.  It  is  a  glimpse 
into  a  mysterious  region,  none  the  less  reliable  because 
so  momentary.  The  sulphurous  clouds  that  hide  the 
fire  in  the  crater  are  blown  aside  for  an  instant,  and  we 
see.  Who  would  doubt  the  truth  and  worth  of  the 
unveiling  because  it  was  short  and  partial  ?  "  The  Devil 
is  God's  ape."  His  work  is  a  parody  of  Christ's.  Where 
the  good  seed  is  sown,  there  the  evil  is  scattered  thickest. 
False  Christs  and  false  apostles  dog  the  true  like  their 
shadows.  Every  truth  has  its  counterfeit.  Neither 
institutions,  nor  principles,  nor  movements,  nor  indi- 


Less,  xxiv.]  Mingled  in  Growth.  241 

victuals,  bear  unmingled  crops  of  good.  Not  merely 
creatural  imperfection,  but  hostile  adulteration,  marks 
them  all.  The  purest  metal  oxidises,  scum  gathers  on 
the  most  limpid  water,  every  ship's  bottom  gets  foul 
with  weeds.  The  history  of  every  reformation  is  the 
same :  radiant  hopes  darkened,  progress  retarded,  a 
second  generation  of  dwarfs,  careless  or  unfaithful 
guardians  of  their  heritage. 

There  are,  then,  two  classes  of  men  represented  in 
the  parable,  and  these  two  are  distinguishable  without 
doubt  by  their  conduct.  Tares  are  said  to  be  quite  like 
wheat  until  the  heads  show,  and  then  there  is  a  plain 
difference.  So  our  Lord  here  teaches  that  the  children  of 
the  kingdom  and  those  of  evil  are  to  be  discriminated  by 
their  actions.  We  need  not  do  more  than  point  in 
a  sentence  to  His  distinct  separation  of  men  (where  the 
seed  of  the  kingdom  has  been  sown)  into  two  sets. 
Jesus  Christ  holds  the  unfashionable,  "  narrow  "  opinion 
that,  at  bottom,  a  man  must  either  be  His  friend  or  His 
enemy.  We  are  too  much  inclined  to  weaken  the 
strong  line  of  demarcation,  and  to  think  that  most  men 
are  neither  black  nor  white,  but  grey. 

The  question  has  been  eagerly  debated  whether  the 
tares  are  bad  men  in  the  church,  and  whether,  conse 
quently,  the  mingled  crop  is  a  description  of  the  church 
only.  The  following  considerations  may  help  to  an 
answer.  The  parable  was  spoken,  not  to  the  disciples, 
but  to  the  crowd.  An  instruction  to  them  as  to  church 
discipline  would  have  been  signally  out  of  place ;  but 
they  needed  to  be  taught  that  the  kingdom  was  to  be 
"  a  rose  amidst  thorns,"  and  to  grow  up  among  antago 
nisms  which  it  would  slowly  conquer,  by  the  methods 

16 


242  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.  xiii.  24-30. 

which  the  next  two  parables  set  forth.  This  general 
conception,  and  not  directions  about  ecclesiastical  order, 
was  suited  to  them.  Again,  the  designation  of  the  tares 
as  "the  children  of  evil"  seems  much  too  wide,  if  only 
a  particular  class  of  evil  men — namely,  those  who  are 
within  the  church — are  meant  by  it.  Surely  the  expres 
sion  includes  all,  both  in  and  outside  the  church,  who 
"  do  iniquity."  Further,  the  representation  of  the  chil 
dren  of  the  kingdom,  as  growing  among  tares  in  the  field 
of  the  world,  does  not  seem  to  contemplate  them  as 
constituting  a  distinct  society,  whether  pure  or  impure ; 
but  rather  as  an  indefinite  number  of  individuals,  inter 
mingled  in  a  common  soil  with  the  other  class.  "  The 
kingdom  of  heaven  "  is  not  a  synonym  for  the  church. 
Is  it  not  an  anachronism  to  find  the  church  in  the  parable 
at  all  ?  No  doubt,  tares  are  in  the  church,  and  the 
parable  has  a  bearing  on  it ;  but  its  primary  lesson  seems 
to  me  to  be  much  wider,  and  to  reveal  rather  the  con 
ditions  of  the  growth  of  the  kingdom  in  human  society. 

II.  We  have  the  patience  of  the  husbandman  with  the 
quick-springing  tares.  The  servants  of  the  householder 
receive  no  interpretation  from  our  Lord.  Their  whole 
conversation  is  silently  passed  by  in  His  explanation. 
Clearly  then,  for  some  reason,  He  did  not  think  it 
necessary  to  say  any  more  about  them  ;  and  the  most 
probable  reason  is,  that  they  and  their  words  have  no 
corresponding  facts,  and  are  only  introduced  to  lead  up 
to  the  Master's  explanation  of  the  mystery  of  the  growth 
of  the  tares,  and  to  His  patience  with  it.  The  servants 
cannot  be  supposed  to  represent  officials  in  the  church, 
without  hopelessly  destroying  the  consistency  of  the 
parable ;  for  surely  all  the  children  of  the  kingdom, 


JA-SS.  xxiv.]  Mingled  in  Growth.  243 

whatever  their  orifice,  are  represented  in  the  crop.  Many 
guesses  have  been  made, — apostles,  angels,  and  so  on. 
It  is  better  to  say,  "  The  Lord  hath  not  showed  it  me." 
The  first  question  expresses,  in  vivid  form,  the  sad, 
strange  fact  that,  where  good  was  sown,  evil  springs. 
The  deepest  of  all  mysteries  is  the  origin  of  evil.  Ex 
plain  sin,  and  you  explain  everything.  The  question  of 
the  servants  is  the  despair  of  thinkers  in  all  ages. 
Heaven  sows  only  good  ;  where  do  the  misery  and  the 
wickedness  come  from  ?  That  is  a  wider  and  sadder 
question  than,  How  are  churches  not  free  from  bad 
members  ?  Perhaps  Christ's  answer  may  go  as  far 
towards  the  bottom  of  the  bottomless  as  those  of  non- 
Christian  thinkers,  and,  if  it  do  not  solve  the  meta 
physical  puzzles,  at  any  rate  gives  the  historical  process, 
which  is  all  the  explanation  of  which  the  question  is 
susceptible.  The  second  question  reminds  us  of  "  Wilt 
Thou  that  we  command  fire  .  .  .  from  heaven,  and 
consume  them?"  It  is  cast  in  such  a  form  as  to  put 
emphasis  on  the  householder's  will.  His  answer  for 
bidding  the  gathering  up  of  the  tares  is  based,  not  upon 
any  chance  of  mistaking  wheat  for. them,  nor  upon  any 
hope  that,  by  forbearance,  tares  may  change  into  wheat, 
but  simply  on  what  is  best  for  the  good  crop.  There 
was  a  danger  of  destroying  some  of  it,  not  because 
of  its  likeness  to  the  other,  but  because  the  roots  of 
both  were  so  interlaced  that  one  could  not  be  pulled  up 
without  dragging  the  other  after  it. 

Is  this  prohibition,  then,  meant  to  forbid  the  attempt 
to  keep  the  church  pure  from  unchristian  members  ? 
The  considerations  already  adduced  are  valid  in  answer 
ing  this  question,  and  others  may  be  added.  The  crowd 


244  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.  xiii.  24-30. 

of  listeners  had,  no  doubt,  many  of  them,  been  in 
fluenced  by  John  the  Baptist's  fiery  prophecies  of  the 
King  who  should  come,  fan  in  hand,  to  purge  His  floor, 
and  were  looking  for  a  kingdom  which  was  to  be  in 
augurated  by  sharp  separation  and  swift  destruction. 
Was  not  the  teaching  needed  then,  as  it  is  now,  that 
that  is  not  the  way  in  which  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
is  to  be  founded  and  grow?  Is  not  the  parable  best 
understood  when  set  in  connection  with  the  expectations 
of  its  first  hearers,  which  are  ever  floating  anew  before 
the  eyes  of  each  generation  of  Christians  ?  Is  it  not 
Christ's  apologia  for  His  delay  in  filling  the  role  which 
John  had  drawn  out  for  him  ?  And  does  that  conception 
of  its  meaning  make  it  meaningless  for  us  ?  Observe, 
too,  that  the  rooting  up  which  is  forbidden  is,  by  the 
proprieties  of  the  emblem,  and  by  the  parallel  which  it 
must  necessarily  afford  to  the  final  burning,  something 
very  solemn  and  destructive.  We  may  well  ask  whether 
excommunication  is  a  sufficiently  weighty  idea  to  be 
taken  as  its  equivalent.  Again,  how  does  the  interpre 
tation  which  sees  ecclesiastical  discipline  here  comport 
with  the  reason  given  for  letting  the  tares  grow  on  ? 
By  the  hypothesis  in  the  parable,  there  is  no  danger  of 
mistake  ;  but  is  there  any  danger  of  casting  out  good 
men  from  the  church  along  with  the  bad,  except  through 
mistake  ?  Further,  if  this  parable  forbids  casting  mani 
festly  evil  men  out  of  the  church,  it  contradicts  the 
divinely  appointed  law  of  the  church  as  administered  by 
the  apostles.  If  it  is  to  be  applied  to  church  action  at 
all,  it  absolutely  forbids  the  separation  of  any  man,  how 
ever  notoriously  unchristian,  and  that,  as  even  the 
strongest  advocates  of  comprehension  admit,  would 


Less,  xxiv.]  Mingled  in  Growth.  245 

destroy  the  very  idea  of  the  church.  Surely,  an  inter 
pretation  which  lands  us  in  such  a  conclusion  cannot 
be  right.  We  conclude,  then,  that  the  intermingling 
which  the  parable  means  is  that  of  good  men  and  bad 
in  human  society,  where  all  are  so  interwoven  that 
separation  is  impossible  without  destroying  its  whole 
texture ;  that  the  rooting  up,  which  is  declared  to  be 
inconsistent  with  the  growth  of  the  crop,  means  removal 
from  the  field,  namely,  the  world ;  that  the  main  point 
of  this  second  part  of  the  parable  is  to  set  forth  the 
patience  of  the  Lord  of  the  harvest,  and  to  emphasise 
this  as  the  law  of  the  growth  of  His  kingdom  ;  that  it 
is  amidst  antagonism,  and  that  its  members  are  interlaced 
by  a  thousand  rootlets  with  those  who  are  not  subjects 
of  their  King.  What  the  interlacing  is  for,  and  whether 
tares  may  become  wheat,  are  no  parts  of  its  teaching. 
But  the  lesson  of  the  householder's  forbearance  is  meant 
to  be  learned  by  us.  While  we  believe  that  the  scope 
of  the  parable  is  wider  than  instruction  in  church  disci 
pline,  we  do  not  forget  that  a  fair  inference  from  it  is 
that,  in  actual  churches,  there  will  ever  be  a  mingling 
of  good  and  evil ;  and,  though  that  fact  is  no  reason  for 
giving  up  the  attempt  to  make  a  church  a  congregation 
of  faithful  men,  and  of  such  only,  it  is  a  reason  for 
copying  the  Divine  patience  of  the  sower  in  ecclesiastical 
dealings  with  errors  of  opinion  and  faults  of  conduct. 

III.  The  final  separation  at  the  harvest.  The  period 
of  development  is  necessarily  a  time  of  intermingling, 
in  which,  side  by  side,  the  antagonistic  principles  em 
bodied  in  their  representatives  work  themselves  out, 
and  beneficially  affect  each  other.  But  each  grows 
towards  an  end,  and,  when  it  has  been  reached,  the 


246  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.  xiii.  24-30. 

blending  gives  place  to  separation.  John's  prophecy 
is  plainly  quoted  in  the  parable,  which  verbally  repeats 
his  "  gather  the  wheat  into  his  barn,"  and  alludes  to  his 
wrords  in  the  other  clause  about  burning  the  tares.  He 
was  right  in  his  anticipations ;  his  error  was  in  expecting 
the  King  to  wield  His  fan  at  the  beginning,  instead  of 
at  the  end  of  the  earthly  form  of  His  kingdom.  At  the 
consummation  of  the  allotted  era,  the  bands  of  human 
society  are  to  be  dissolved,  and  a  new  principle  of 
association  is  to  determine  men's  place.  Their  moral 
and  religious  affinities  will  bind  them  together  or  separate 
them,  and  all  other  ties  will  snap.  This  marshalling 
according  to  religious  character  is  the  main  thought  of 
the  solemn  closing  words  of  the  parable  and  of  its  inter 
pretation,  in  which  our  Lord  presents  Himself  as  direct 
ing  the  whole  process  of  judgment  by  means  of  the 
"  angels  "  who  execute  His  commands.  They  are  "  His 
angels,"  and  whatever  may  be  the  unknown  activity  put 
forth  by  them  in  the  parting  of  men,  it  is  all  done  in 
obedience  to  Him.  What  stupendous  claims  Jesus 
makes  here  !  What  becomes  of  the  tares  is  told  first 
in  words  awful  in  their  plainness,  and  still  more  awful 
in  their  obscurity.  They  speak  unmistakably  of  the 
absolute  separation  of  evil  men  from  all  society  but  that 
of  evil  men ;  of  a  close  association,  compelled,  and 
perhaps  unwelcome.  The  tares  are  gathered  out  of 
"  Plis  kingdom," — for  the  field  of  the  world  has  then  all 
become  the  kingdom  of  Christ.  There  are  two  classes 
among  the  tares  :  men  whose  evil  has  been  a  snare  to 
others  (for  the  "  things  that  offend  "•  must,  in  accordance 
with  the  context,  be  taken  to  be  persons),  and  the  less 
guilty,  who  are  simply  called  "  them  that  do  iniquity." 


Less,  xxiv.]  Mingled  in  Growth,  247 

Perhaps  the  "  bundles  "  may  imply  assortment  according 
to  sin,  as  in  Dante's  circles.  What  a  bond  of  fellowship 
that  would  be  !  "  The  furnace,"  as  it  is  emphatically 
called  by  eminence,  burns  up  the  bundles.  We  may 
freely  admit  that  the  fire  is  part  of  the  parable,  but  yet 
let  us  not  forget  that  it  occurs  not  only  in  the  parable, 
but  in  the  interpretation ;  and  let  us  learn  that  the 
prose  reality  of  "  everlasting  destruction,"  which  Christ 
here  solemnly  announces,  is  as  awful  and  complete. 
For  a  moment  He  passes  beyond  the  limits  of  the 
parable,  to  add  that  terrible  clause  about  "  weeping  and 
gnashing  of  teeth," — the  tokens  of  despair  and  rage. 
So  spoke  the  most  loving  and  truthful  lips.  Do  we 
believe  His  warnings  as  well  as  His  promises  ? 

The  same  law  of  association  according  to  character 
operates  in  the  other  region.  The  children  of  the 
kingdom  are  gathered  together  in  what  is  now  "  the 
kingdom  of  My  Father  " ;  the  perfect  form  of  the  king 
dom  of  Christ,  which  is  still  His  kingdom,  for  "  the 
throne  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb,"  the  one  throne  on 
which  both  sit  to  reign,  is  "  in  it."  Freed  from  asso 
ciation  with  evil,  they  are  touched  with  a  new  splendour, 
caught  from  Him,  and  blaze  out  like  suns  ;  or  so  close 
is  their  association  that  their  myriad  glories  melt  as  into 
a  single  great  light.  Now  amid  gloom  and  cloud,  they 
gleam  like  tiny  tapers  far  apart ;  then,  gathered  into  one, 
they  flame  in  the  forehead  of  the  morning  sky,  "  a 
glorious  church,  not  having  spot,  nor  wrinkle,  nor  any 
such  thing." 


LESSON    XXV. 


The  Martyrdom  of  John. 


MATT.  xiv.   I-I2. 


1.  "At  that  time   Herod   the 
tetrarch   heard    of   the  fame  of 
Jesus, 

2.  And  said  unto  his  servants, 
This  is  John  the  Baptist ;  he  is 
risen  from  the  dead  ;  and  there 
fore  mighty  works  do  shew  forth 
themselves  in  him. 

3.  For  Herod  had  laid  hold 
on   John,  and   bound   him,   and 
put  him  in  prison  for  Herodias' 
sake,  his  brother  Philip's  wife. 

4.  For  John  said  unto  him,  It 
is  not  lawful  for  thee  to  have  her. 

5.  And  when  he  would  have 
put  him  to  death,  he  feared  the 
multitude,  because  they  counted 
him  as  a  prophet. 

6.  But  when  Herod's   birth 
day  was  kept,  the  daughter  of 
Herodias   danced    before  them, 
and  pleased  Herod. 


7.  Whereupon   he    promised 
with  an  oath  to  give  her  what 
soever  she  would  ask. 

8.  And  she,  being  before  in 
structed    of    her    mother,    said, 
Give    me    here   John    Baptist's 
head  in  a  charger. 

9.  And   the  king  was  sorry: 
nevertheless  for  the  oath's  sake, 
and  them  which  sat  with  him  at 
meat,    he   commanded   it   to  be 
given  her. 

10.  And  he  sent,  and  behead 
ed  John  in  the  prison. 

11.  And  his  head  was  brought 
in  a  charger,  and  given  to  the 
damsel :  and  she  brought  it  to 
her  mother. 

12.  And   his  disciples  came, 
and     took    up    the    body,    and 
buried    it,    and  went   and   told 
Jesus." 


THE  singular  indifference  of  the  Bible  to  the  fate  of 
even  its  greatest  men  is  exemplified  in  the  fact 
that  the  martyrdom   of  John  is   only  told  incidentally, 
in  explanation  of  Herod's  alarm.     But  for  that  he  would 
apparently  have  dropped  out  of  the  narrative,  as  a  man 
sinks  in  the  sea,  without  a  bubble  or  a  ripple.     Christ  is 
248 


Less,  xxv.]         The  Martyrdom  of  John.  249 

the  sole  theme  of  the  Gospels,  and  all  others  are  visible 
only  as  His  light  falls  on  them. 

It  takes  a  long  time  for  news  of  Christ  to  reach  the 
ears  of  Herod.  Peasants  hear  of  Him  before  princes 
whose  thick  palace  walls  and  crowds  of  courtiers  shut 
out  truth.  The  first  thing  to  note  is  the  alarm  of  the 
conscience-stricken  king.  We  learn  from  the  other- 
evangelists  that  there  was  a  difference  of  opinion  among 
the  attendants  of  Herod— not  very  good  judges  of  a 
religious  teacher — as  to  who  this  new  miracle-working 
rabbi  might  be,  but  the  tetrarch  has  no  hesitation.  There 
is  no  proof  that  Herod  was  a  Sadducee  ;  but  he  probably 
thought  as  little  about  a  resurrection  as  if  he  had  been, 
and,  in  any  case,  did  not  expect  dead  men  to  be  starting 
up  again  one  by  one  and  mingling  with  the  living.  His 
conscience  made  a  coward  of  him,  and  his  fear  made 
that  terrible  which  wrould  else  have  been  thought  impos 
sible.  In  his  terror  he  makes  confidants  of  his  slaves, 
overleaping  the  barriers  of  position  in  his  need  of  some 
ears  to  pour  his  fears  into.  He  was  right  in  believing 
that  he  had  not  finished  with  John,  and  in  expecting  to 
meet  him  again  \vith  mightier  power  to  accuse  and  con 
demn.  "  If  'twere  done  when  'tis  done,"  says  Macbeth  ; 
but  it  is  not  done.  There  is  a  resurrection  of  deeds  as 
well  as  of  bodies,  and  all  our  buried  badnesses  will  front 
us  again,  shaking  their  gory  locks  at  us,  and  saying  we 
did  them. 

Instead  of  following  closely  the  narrative,  we  may  best 
gather  up  its  lessons  by  taking  the  actors  in  the  tragedy. 

I.  We  have  in  Herod  the  depths  of  evil  possible  to  a 
weak  character.  The  singular  double  which  he,  Herodias, 
and  John  present  to  Ahab,  Jezebel,  and  Elijah,  has  been 


250  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.  xiv.  1-12. 

often  noticed.  In  both  cases  a  weak  king  is  drawn 
opposite  ways  by  the  stronger-willed  temptress  at  his 
side,  and  by  the  stern  ascetic  from  the  desert.  How 
John  had  found  his  way  into  "kings'  houses  "  we  do  not 
know ;  but,  as  he  carried  thither  his  undaunted  boldness 
of  plain-spoken  preaching  of  morality  and  repentance,  it 
was  inevitable  that  he  should  soon  find  his  way  from 
the  palace  to  the  dungeon.  There  must  have  been  some 
intercourse  between  Herod  and  him  before  his  imprison 
ment,  or  he  could  not  have  shaken  the  king's  conscience 
with  his  blunt  denunciations.  From  the  account  in 
Mark,  it  would  appear  that,  after  his  imprisonment,  he 
gained  great  influence  over  the  tetrarch,  and  led  him 
some  steps  on  the  way  of  goodness.  But  Herod  was 
"  infirm  of  purpose,"  and  a  beautiful  fiend  was  at  his 
side,  and  she  had  an  iron  will  sharpened  to  an  edge 
by  hatred,  and  knew  her  own  mind,  which  was  murder. 
Between  them,  the  weaker  nature  was  much  perplexed, 
and,  like  a  badly  steered  boat,  yawed  in  its  course,  now 
yielding  to  the  impulse  from  John,  now  to  that  from 
Herodias.  Matthew  attributes  his  hesitation  in  killing 
John  to  his  fear  of  the  popular  voice,  which,  no  doubt, 
also  operated.  Thus  he,  "  let  I  dare  not,  wait  upon  I 
would,"  and  had  not  strength  of  mind  enough  to  hold  to 
the  one  and  despise  the  other  of  his  discordant  coun 
sellors.  He  was  evidently  a  sensual,  luxurious,  feeble- 
willed,  easily  frightened,  superstitious  and  cunning 
despot;  and,  as  is  always  the  case  with  such,  he  was 
driven  farther  in  evil  than  he  meant  or  wished.  He  was 
entrapped  into  an  oath,  and  then,  instead  of  saying, 
"  Promises  which  should  not  be  made  should  not  be 
kept,"  he  weakly  consents,  from  weak  fear  of  what  his 


Less,  xxv.]         The  Martyrdom  of  John.  251 

guests  will  say  of  him,  and  unwillingly,  out  of  pure 
imbecility,  stains  his  soul  for  ever  with  blood.  In  this 
wicked  world,  weak  men  will  always  be  wicked  men  ; 
for  it  is  less  trouble  to  consent  than  to  resist,  and 
there  are  more  siren  voices  to  whisper  "  Come ;'  than 
prophets  to  thunder,  "  It  is  not  lawful."  Strength  of 
will  is  needful  for  all  noble  life. 

We  may  learn  from  this  man,  also,  how  far  we  may  go 
on  the  road  of  obedience  to  God's  will,  and  yet  leave  it 
at  last.  What  became  of  all  his  eager  listening,  of  his 
partial  obedience,  of  his  care  to  keep  John  safe  from 
Herodias's  malice  ?  All  vanished  like  early  dewr.  What 
became  of  his  conscience-stricken  alarms  on  hearing  of 
Christ  ?  Did  they  lead  to  any  deep  convictions  ?  They 
faded  away,  and  left  him  harder  than  before.  Convictions 
not  followed  out  ossify  the  heart.  If  he  had  sent  for 
Christ,  and  told  Him  his  fears,  all  might  have  been  well. 
But  he  let  them  pass,  and,  so  far  as  we  know,  they  never 
returned.  He  did  meet  Jesus  at  last,  when  Pilate  sent 
him  the  Prisoner,  as  a  piece  of  politeness,  and  in  what 
mood? — childish  pleasure  at  the  chance  of  seeing  a 
miracle.  How  did  Jesus  answer  his  torrent  of  frivolous 
questions  ?  "  He  answered  him  nothing."  That  sad 
silence  speaks  Christ's  knowledge  that  now  even  His 
words  would  be  vain  to  create  one  ripple  of  interest  on 
the  Dead  Sea  of  Herod's  soul.  By  frivolity,  lust,  and 
neglect  he  had  killed  the  germ  of  a  better  life,  and 
silence  is  the  kindest  answer  which  perfect  love  can 
give  him. 

He  shows  us,  too,  the  intimate  connection  of  all  sins. 
The  common  root  of  every  sin  is  selfishness,  and  the 
shapes  which  it  takes  are  protean  and  interchangeable. 


252  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap. xiv.  1-12. 

Lust  dwells  hard  by  hate.  Sensual  crimes  and  cruelty 
are  closely  akin.  The  one  vice  which  he  would  not 
surrender,  dragged  after  it  a  whole  tangle  of  other  sins. 
No  sin  dwells  alone.  There  is  none  "  barren  among 
them."  They  are  gregarious,  and  a  solitary  sin  is  more 
seldom  seen  than  a  single  swallow.  Herod  is  an  illus 
tration,  too,  of  a  conscience  fantastically  sensitive,  while 
it  is  dead  to  real  crimes.  He  has  no  twinges  for  his  sin 
with  Herodias,  and  no  effective  ones  at  killing  John,  but 
he  thinks  it  would  be  wrong  to  break  his  oath.  The  two 
things  often  go  together ;  and  many  a  brigand  in  Calabria, 
who  would  cut  a  throat  without  hesitation,  would  not 
miss  mass,  or  rob  without  a  little  image  of  the  Virgin 
in  his  hat.  We  often  make  compensation  for  easy  in 
dulgence  in  great  sins  by  fussy  scrupulosity  about  little 
faults,  and,  like  Herod,  had  rather  commit  murder  than 
not  be  polite  to  visitors. 

II.  The  next  actors  in  the  tragedy  are  Herodias  and 
her  daughter.  What  a  miserable  destiny  to  be  gibbeted 
for  ever  by  half  a  dozen  sentences  !  One  deed,  after 
which  she  no  doubt  "  wiped  her  mouth,  and  said,  I  have 
done  no  harm,"  has  won  for  the  mother  an  immortality 
of  ignominy.  Her  portrait  is  drawn  in  few  strokes,  but 
they  are  enough.  In  strength  of  will  and  unscrupulous 
carelessness  of  human  life,  she  is  the  sister  of  Jezebel, 
and  curiously  like  Shakespeare's  awful  creation,  Lady 
Macbeth ;  but  she  adds  a  stain  of  sensuous  passion  to 
their  vices,  which  heightens  the  horror.  Her  first  mar 
riage  was  with  her  full  uncle  ;  and  her  second,  if  marriage 
it  can  be  called  when  her  husband  and  Herod's  wife 
were  both  living,  was  with  her  step-uncle,  and  thus 
triply  unlawful.  John's  remonstrance  awoke  no  sense  of 


Less,  xxv.]         The  Martyrdom  of  John.  253 

shame  in  her,  but  only  malignant  and  murderous  hate. 
Once  resolved,  no  failures  made  her  swerve  from  her 
purpose.  Hers  was  no  passing  fury,  but  cold-blooded, 
deliberate  determination.  Her  iron  will  and  unalterable 
persistence  were  accompanied  by  flexibility  of  resource. 
When  one  weapon  failed,  she  drew  another  from  a  full 
quiver.  And  the  means  which  are  finally  successful  show 
not  only  her  thorough  knowledge  of  the  weak  man  she 
had  to  deal  with,  but  her  readiness  to  stoop  to  any 
degradation  for  herself  and  her  child  to  carry  her  point. 
"  A  thousand  claims  to  abhorrence  meet  in  her,  as 
mother,  wife,  and  queen."  Many  a  shameless  woman 
would  have  shrunk  from  sullying  a  daughter's  childhood 
by  sending  her  to  play  the  part  of  a  shameless  dancing- 
girl  before  a  crew  of  half-tipsy  revellers,  and  from  teaching 
her  young  lips  to  ask  for  murder.  But  Herodias  sticks 
at  nothing,  and  is  as  insensible  to  the  duty  of  a  mother 
as  to  that  of  a  wife.  If  we  put  together  these  features  in 
her  character,  her  hot  animal  passions,  her  cool  inflexible 
revenge,  her  cynical  disregard  of  all  decency,  her  dead- 
ness  to  natural  affection  for  her  child,  her  ferocity  and 
her  cunning,  we  have  a  hideous  picture  of  corrupted 
womanhood.  We  cannot  but  wonder  whether,  in  after 
days,  remorse  ever  did  its  merciful  work  upon  Herodias. 
She  urged  Herod  to  his  ruin  at  last  by  her  ambition, 
which  sought  for  him  the  title  of  king,  and,  with  one 
redeeming  touch  of  faithfulness,  went  with  him  into 
dreary  exile  in  Gaul.  Perhaps  there,  among  strangers, 
and  surrounded  by  the  wreck  of  her  projects,  and  when 
the  hot  fire  of  passion  had  died  down,  she  may  have 
remembered  and  repented  her  crime. 

The  criminality  of  the  daughter  largely  depends  upon 


254  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.    [Chap.xiv.i-i2. 

her  age,  of  which  we  have  no  knowledge.  Perhaps  she 
was  too  mere  a  child  to  understand  the  degradation  of 
the  dance,  or  the  infamy  of  the  request  which  her,  we 
hope,  innocent  and  panting  lips  wrere  tutored  to  prefer. 
But,  more  probably,  she  was  old  enough  to  be  her 
mother's  fellow-conspirator,  rather  than  her  tool,  and  had 
learned  only  too  well  her  lessons  of  impurity  and  cruelty. 
What  chance  had  a  young  life  in  such  a  sty  of  filth  ? 
When  the  mother  becomes  the  devil's  deputy,  what  can 
the  daughter  grow  up  to  be,  but  a  worse  edition  of  her? 
This  poor  girl,  so  sinning,  and  so  sinned  against,  followed 
in  Herodias's  footsteps,  and  afterwards  married,  accord 
ing  to  the  custom  of  the  Herods,  her  uncle,  Philip  the 
tetrarch.  She  inherited  and  was  taught  evil ;  that  was 
her  misfortune.  She  made  it  her  own ;  that  was  her 
crime.  As  she  stands  there,  shameless  and  flushed,  in 
that  hideous  banqueting-hall,  with  her  grim  gift  dripping 
red  blood  on  the  golden  platter,  and  wicked  triumph 
gleaming  in  her  dark  eyes,  she  suggests  grave  questions 
as  to  parents'  responsibility  for  children's  sins,  and  is  a 
living  symbol  of  the  degradation  of  art  to  the  service  of 
vice,  and  of  the  power  of  an  evil  soul  to  make  hideous 
all  the  grace  of  budding  womanhood. 

III.  There  is  something  dramatically  appropriate  in 
the  silent  death  in  the  dungeon  of  the  lonely  forerunner. 
The  faint  noise  of  revelry  may  have  reached  his  ears,  as 
he  brooded  there,  and  wondered  if  the  coming  King 
would  never  come  for  his  enlargement.  Suddenly  a 
gleam  of  light  from  the  opened  door  enters  his  cell,  and 
falls  on  the  blade  of  the  headsman's  sword.  Little  time 
can  be  wasted,  for  Herodias  waits.  With  short  preface 
the  blow  falls.  The  King  has  come,  and  set  His  servant 


Less. xxv.]         The  Martyrdom  of  John.  255 

free,  sending  him  to  prepare  His  way  before  Him  in  the 
dim  regions  beyond.  A  world  where  Herod  sits  in  the 
festal  chamber,  and  John  lies  headless  in  the  dungeon, 
needs  some  one  to  set  it  right.  When  the  need  is  sorest, 
the  help  is  nearest.  Truth  succeeds  by  the  apparent 
failure  of  its  apostle.  Herodias  may  stab  the  dead 
tongue,  as  the  legend  tells  that  she  did,  but  it  speaks 
louder  after  death  than  ever.  Herod  kept  his  birthday 
with  drunken  and  bloody  mirth ;  but  it  was  a  better 
birthday  for  his  victim. 

IV.  It  needed  some  courage,  for  John's  disciples  to 
come  to  that  gloomy,  blood-stained  fortress,  and  bear 
away  the  headless  trunk  which  scornful  cruelty  had  flung 
out  to  rot  unburied.  When  reverent  love  and  sorrow 
had  done  their  task,  what  was  the  little  flock  without 
a  shepherd  to  do  ?  The  possibility  of  their  continued 
existence  as  a  company  of  disciples  was  at  an  end.  They 
show  by  their  action  that  their  master  had  profited  from 
his  last  message  to  Jesus.  At  once  they  turn  to  Him, 
and,  no  doubt,  the  bulk  of  them  were  absorbed  in  the 
body  of  His  followers.  Sorrowful  and  bereaved  souls 
betake  themselves  naturally  to  His  sweet  sympathy  for 
soothing,  and  to  His  gentle  wisdom  for  direction.  The 
best  thing  any  of  us  can  do  is  to  "go  and  tell  Jesus  "  our 
loneliness,  and  let  it  bind  us  more  closely  to  Him. 


END  OF  VOL 


Printed  by  Hazell,  Watson,  £  Viney,  Ld.,  London  and  Aylesbury. 


THE     EXPOSITOR'S     BIBLE. 

EDITED   BY   REV. 

W.     ROBERTSON     NICOLL,     M.A.,     LL.D. 

FIRST    SERIES. 
Price  js.  6d.  each    Volume. 

THE    BOOK   OF   GENESIS. 

By  the   Rev.  Professor  MARCUS  DODS,   D.D. 
SIXTH  EDITION. 

THE    FIRST   BOOK   OF   SAMUEL. 
THE    SECOND    BOOK    OF    SAMUEL. 

By  the  Rev.  Professor   W.   G.  BLAIKIE,  D.D.,  LL.D. 
FOURTH  EDITION,  Two  VOLS. 

"  Very  full  of  suggestive  thought." — English  Churchman. 
"A  solid  and  able  piece  of  work." — Academy. 

THE    GOSPEL    OF    ST.    MARK. 

By  the  Very  Rev.  G.  A.   CHADWICK,  D.D.,  Dean  of  Armagh. 
FOURTH  EDITION. 

"This  exposition  is  original,  full  of  life,  striking,  and  relevant.  He  has 
given  us  the  fruit  of  much  careful  thought." — British  Weekly. 

THE    EPISTLES   TO   THE    COLOSSIANS 
AND    PHILEMON. 

By  the  Rev.  ALEXANDER  MACLAREN,   D.D. 

FIFTH  EDITION. 

"  In  nothing  Dr.  Maclaren  has  written  is  there  more  of  beauty,  of 
spiritual  insight,  or  of  brilliant  elucidation  of  Scripture.  Indeed,  Dr. 
Maclaren  is  here  at  his  best." — Expositor. 

THE    EPISTLE    TO    THE    HEBREWS. 

By  the  Rev.    Principal   T.  C.  EDWARDS,  D.D. 
FOURTH  EDITION. 

"There  is  abundant  evidence  of  accurate  scholarship,  acute  criticism, 
patient  thought,  and  faculty  of  lucid  exposition.  However  thoroughly 
any  one  has  studied  the  Epistle  here  explained,  he  will  certainly  find  in 
Dr.  Edwards'  volume  fresh  suggestions." — Dr.  Marcus  Dods> 

I  I7 


THE     EXPOSITOR'S     BIBLE. 

SECOND    SERIES. 

Price  js.  bd  each   Volume. 

THE     BOOK     OF     ISAIAH. 

Vol.  I.  Chapters  I.-XXXIX. 

By  the  Rev.  GEORGE  ADAM  SMITH,   M.A. 

SIXTH  EDITION. 

"  This  is  a  very  attractive  book.  Mr.  George  Adam  Smith  had  evidently 
such  a  mastery  of  the  scholarship  of  his  subject  that  it  would  be  a  sheer 
impertinence  for  most  scholars,  even  though  tolerable  Hebraists,  to 
criticise  his  translations.  ...  A  lucid,  impressive,  and  vivid  study  of 
Isaiah." — Spectator. 

THE    EPISTLE    TO     THE     GALATIANS. 

By  the  Rev.  Professor  G.    G.    FINDLAY,   B.A. 
THIRD  EDITION. 

"In  this  volume  we  have  the  mature  results  of  broad  and  accurate 
scholarship,  exegetical  tact,  and  a  firm  grasp  of  the  great  principles 
underlying  the  Gospel  of  Paul  presented  in  a  form  so  lucid  and  attractive 
that  every  thoughtful  reader  can  enjoy  it."— Dr.  Beet. 

THE     EPISTLES     OF     ST.    JOHN. 

By  the  Right  Rev.  W.   ALEXANDER,  D.D.,  D.C.L.,  Lord 
Bishop  of  Derry  and  Raphoe. 

SECOND  EDITION. 

"  Full  of  felicities  of  exegesis.  .  .  .  Brilliant  and  valuable." — Literary 
Churchman. 

FIRST     EPISTLE     TO     CORINTHIANS. 

By  the  Rev.  Professor  MARCUS  DODS,   D.D. 
THIRD  EDITION. 

"  Dr.  Dods'  writings  are  always  excellent,  and  the  one  before  us  is  no 
exception  to  the  rule." — Record. 

THE    BOOK    OF    REVELATION. 

By  the  Rev.  Professor  W.   MILLIGAN,   D.D. 

SECOND  EDITION. 
"  Dr.  Milligan's  scholarly  and  attractive  exposition."— Aberdeen  Free  Press. 

THE    PASTORAL    EPISTLES. 

By  the  Rev.  ALFRED  PLUMMER,  D.D.,  Durham. 

THIRD  EDITION. 
"  The  treatment  is  throughout  scholarlike,  lucid,  thoughtful." — Guardian. 

2 


THE     EXPOSITOR'S     BIBLE. 

THIRD    SERIES. 

Price  is.  bd.  each   Volume. 

THE    GOSPEL    OF    ST.    MATTHEW. 

By  the  Rev./-  MONRO  GIBSON,   D.D. 
SECOND  EDITION. 

"This  running  commentary  upon  St.  Matthew's  Gospel  sets  before  the 
reader  our  Lord's  words,  deeds,  and  sufferings  as  recorded  by  that 
Evangelist  in  a  vivid  light." — Guardian. 

THE    BOOK    OF    EXODUS. 

By  the  Very  Rev.  G.   A.    CHADWICK,   D.D. 
SECOND  EDITION. 

"This  is,  to  a  great  extent,  a  model  of  what  an  expository  commentary 
should  be.  To  exhibit  the  Old  Testament  in  the  light  of  the  New,  and  to 
point  out  the  spiritual  and  permanent  truth  under  the  type  by  which  it 
was  in  that  early  age  expressed,  and  through  which  it  still  shines,  cannot 
fail  to  render  a  commentary  extremely  valuable." — Literary  Churchman, 

JUDGES    AND    RUTH. 

By  the  Rev.  R.  A.   WATSON,  M.A.,   Author  of  "Gospels 
of  Yesterday." 

<(This  is  an  unusually  attractive  volume.  His  pages  will  give  many  a 
valuable  hint  to  the  preacher." — Literary  Churchman. 

THE    GOSPEL    OF    ST.    LUKE. 

By  the  Rev.  HENRY  BURTON,   M.A. 

"  His  chapters  are  full  of  vivid  illustration,  and  fresh,  bright  exposition. 
— Record. 

THE     PROPHECIES    OF    JEREMIAH. 

With  a  Sketch  of  His  Life  and  Times. 
By  the  Rev.   C.  J.    BALL,   M.A.,  Chaplain  of  Lincoln's  Inn. 

"The  critical  portion  will  be  prized  most,  as  it  exhibits  deep  learning 
breadth  of  view,  and  clear  insight  into  the  prophet's  meaning."— Manchester 
Examiner. 

THE    BOOK    OF    ISAIAH. 

Vol.  II.     By  the   Rev.  GEORGE   ADAM  SMITH,   M.A. 
SECOND  EDITION. 

"The  results  of  thorough  scientific  study  are  here  presented,  not  as  the 
bare  and  wintry  stem  which  too  often  repels,  but  rich  and  attractive,  with 
the  foliage  and  fruit  which  sound  criticism  yields," — Dr.  Marcus  Dods, 


THE    EXPOSITOR'S     BIBLE. 

FOURTH  SERIES. 

Price  7s.  6d.  each    Volume. 

THE    GOSPEL    OF    ST.    JOHN.      VOL.    I. 

By  the  Rev.  MARCUS  DODS,   D.D.,    Professor  of  Exegetical 
Theology,  New  College,  Edinburgh. 

"An  excellent  contribution  to  the  series.  Dr.  Dods  has  the  gift  of 
lucidity  of  expression."— Guardian. 

THE    EPISTLES    OF    ST.   JAMES    AND 
ST.   JUDE. 

By  Rev.  A.  PLUMMER,  D.D.,  Master  of  University 
College,  Durham. 

"  It  is  even  a  better  piece  of  work  than  his  former  volume  on  the 
Pastoral  Epistles.  It  contains  ever3'thing  that  the  student  can  desire  by 
way  of  introduction  to  the  two  Epistles,  while  for  those  who  read  with  an 
eye  to  the  manufacture  of  sermons,  or  for  their  own  edification,  the 
doctrinal  and  moral  lessons  are  developed  in  a  style  redolent  of  books, 
yet  singularly  easy  and  unaffected.  Points  of  interest  abound."— Saturday 
Review. 

THE    BOOK    OF    ECCLESIASTES. 

With  a  New  Translation. 
By   the    Rev.    SAMUEL    COX,    D.D. 

"The  most  luminous,  original,  and  practical  exposition  of  Ecclesiastes 
which  is  within  the  reach  of  ordinary  English  readers." — Speaker. 

THE    BOOK    OF    PROVERBS. 

By    the    Rev.    R.   F.    HORTON,    M.A.,    Hampstead. 

"In  each  of  these  lectures  will  be  found  much  strong  and  vigorous 
thought,  firm  and  logical  reasoning,  and  the  results  of  high  culture  and 
ability." — Literary  CJiurchman. 

THE    BOOK    OF    LEVITICUS. 

By  the  Rev.  5.  H.  KELLOGG,  D.D.,  Author  of  "The  Light  of 
Asia  and  the  Light  of  the  World." 

"He  has  certainly  succeeded  in  investing  with  fresh  interest  this  old 
book  of  laws,  with  whose  spirit  he  seems  so  heartily  in  sympathy." — 
Scotsman. 

THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.    VOL.  I. 

By  the  Rev.  Professor  G.  T.  STOKES,  D.D. 

"  A  very  valuable  addition  to  Biblical  literature."— British  Weekly. 
4 


THE     EXPOSITOR'S     BIBLE. 

FIFTH  SERIES,   1891-92. 
Price  JS.  bd.  each   Volume. 

THE    BOOK    OF    JOB. 

By  the  Rev.   R.   A.   WATSON,   D.D.,   Author  of  "Gospels 
of  Yesterday,"  etc. 

[Ready. 

THE      EPISTLES      TO      THE      THESSA 
LONIANS. 

By   the   Rev  JAMES    DENNEY,    B.D. 

{Ready. 

THE    PSALMS.      VOL.    I. 

By  the  Rev.  ALEXANDER  MACLAREN,   D.D. 

[Preparing. 

THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.    VOL.  II. 

By    the    Rev.    Professor    G.    T.   STOKES,   D.D. 

{In  the  Press. 

THE     EPISTLE    TO    THE     EPHESIANS. 

By  the  Rev.    Professor   G.    G.    FINDLAY,    B.A. 

[Preparing. 

THE    GOSPEL    OF    ST.   JOHN.      VOL.    II. 

By  the  Rev.  Professor  MARCUS   DODS,   D.D. 

[Preparing. 
5 


foreign  Biblical  library 

NOW    COMPLETE. 
Price    75".    6d.    each     Volume. 

BY  PROFESSOR    DELITZSCH,    D.D. 


I. 

A    BIBLICAL    COMMENTARY    ON     THE 
PROPHECIES    OF    ISAIAH. 

Authorised  Translation  from  the  Third  Edition  by  the  Rev. 
JAMES   DENNEY,    B.D. 

In  Two  Volumes. 
II. 

A     BIBLICAL    COMMENTARY    ON    THE 
PSALMS. 

Translated  by  Rev.  DAVID  EATON,  M.A.,  from  the  Latest 
Edition  revised  by  the  Author. 

In  Three  Volumes. 

"  We  heartily  welcome  this  accurate  translation  of  an  indispensable 
work.  Delitzsch's  revised  editions  are  so  full  of  minute  and  interesting 
corrections  and  additions  that  his  exegetical  masterpieces  deserve  to  be 
retranslated."  —  Academy. 


SELECTED    SERMONS    OF    SCHLEIER- 
MACHER. 

With   a   Biographical   Sketch. 

Translated    by    MARY   F.    WILSON. 

In  One  Volume. 

"The  twenty-seven  sermons  chosen  include  fine  examples  of  Schleier. 
macher's  power."— Manchester  Examiner. 

6 


foreign  Biblical 

CONTINUED. 
Price  JS.  6d.  each  Volume. 

BY  RICHARD    ROTHE. 
STILL     HOURS. 

With  Introductory  Essay  by  Rev.  /.  MACPHERSON,  M.A. 
Translated  by  /.    T.    STODDART. 

In  One  Volume. 

"  It  is  a  book  of  the  first  order,  full  of  Rothe  himself,  and  of  which  one 
wearies  as  little  as  of  the  face  of  a  friend." — Dr.  Marcus  Dods. 

BY    PROFESSOR     KURTZ. 
CHURCH      HISTORY. 

Authorised  Translation  from  the  Latest  Revised  Edition,  by  the 
Rev.  JOHN    MACPHERSON,    M.A. 

In  Three  Volumes. 

"The  complete  work  of  Professor  Kurtz  is  now  translated,  and  it  really 
shows  itself  so  improved  in  form,  so  much  fuller  in  substance — in  fact,  so 
much  changed  in  mind,  body,  and  state,  that  it  may  claim  to  be  a  new 
history  altogether." — Scotsman. 

BY  PROF.   BERNHARD    WEISS,  Ph.D. 

A     MANUAL     OF     INTRODUCTION     TO 
THE     NEW     TESTAMENT. 

Translated   by  A.  J.   K.   DAVIDSON. 
In  Two  Volumes. 

"As  a  thoroughly  complete  and  satisfactory  introduction  from  the  point 
of  view  of  a  fairly  conservative  criticism,  no  book  can  compete  with 
Weiss.  It  is  throughout  full  of  knowledge,  of  sense,  and  of  vigour."— 
Expositor. 

7 


THE     CLERICAL     LIBRARY. 

Price  6s.  each   Volume. 


THREE  HUNDRED  OUTLINES  OF  SER 
MONS  ON  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

"  Will  come  as  a  godsend  to  many  an  overworked  preacher."  —  Ecclesias 
tical  Gazette. 


OUTLINES  OF  SERMONS  ON  THE 
OLD  TESTAMENT. 

"  Excellently  well  done.  The  discourses  of  the  most  eminent  divines  of 
the  day  are  dissected,  and  their  main  thoughts  presented  in  a  very  com 
pact  and  suggestive  form."  —  Methodist  Recorder. 


PULPIT  PRAYERS  BY  EMINENT 
PREACHERS. 

"  The  prayers  are,  in  all  cases,  exceedingly  beautiful,  and  cannot  fail 
to  be  read  with  interest  and  profit,  apart  from  the  special  purpose  in 
view." — Rock. 

IV. 

OUTLINE    SERMONS    TO     CHILDREN. 

With  Numerous  Anecdotes. 

"  Nearly  a  hundred  sermons,  by  twenty-nine  eminent  men.  They  are 
remarkabty  well  written,  and  most  interesting." — Rock. 


ANECDOTES    ILLUSTRATIVE    OF  NEW 
TESTAMENT    TEXTS. 

"This  is  one  of  the  most  valuable  books  of  anecdote  that  we  have  ever 
seen.  There  is  hardly  one  anecdote  that  is  not  of  first-rate  quality."— 
Christian  Leader. 

VI. 

EXPOSITORY    SERMONS    ON    THE 
OLD    TESTAMENT. 

"Sermons  of  very  unusual  merit,  requiring  from  us  emphatic  praise,"— 
Literary  Churchman. 


THE     CLERICAL     LIBRARY. 

Price  6s.  each   Volume. 

VII. 

EXPOSITORY     SERMONS     ON     THE 
NEW    TESTAMENT. 

"These  sermons,  collected  together  from  the  best  sources,  represent 
the  ablest  among  our  public  orators."— 1 risk  Ecclesiastical  Gazette. 

VIII. 

PLATFORM    AIDS. 

"  Just  the  book  to  give  to  some  overworked  pastor."— Christian. 
IX. 

NEW     OUTLINES     OF    SERMONS    ON 
THE    NEW    TESTAMENT. 

By  EMINENT  PREACHERS. 
Hitherto  unpublished. 

"They  have  a  freshness  and  vivacity  which  are  specially  taking."— 
Sword  and  Trowel. 

x. 

ANECDOTES    ILLUSTRATIVE    OF    OLD 
TESTAMENT    TEXTS. 

"An  excellent  selection,  likely  to  prove  most  useful  to  preachers."— 

English  Churchman, 


NEW     OUTLINES    OF     SERMONS    ON 
THE     OLD     TESTAMENT. 

"Not  only,  are  they  excellent  specimens  of  condensed  sermons,  but 
hardly  without  exception  they  are  striking,  vigorous,  and  fresh  in  treat 
ment  and  in  thought." — Literary  World. 

XII. 

OUTLINES  OF  SERMONS  FOR  SPECIAL 
OCCASIONS. 

By  EMINENT  PREACHERS. 

"Sermons  from  such  miscellaneous  sources  could  hardly  fail  to  be 
varied  and  comprehensive  as  these  undoubtedly  are,  nor  could  they  fail 
to  exhibit  eloquence,  originality,  or  spirituality." — Rock, 

9 


THE   ESSENCE  OF  THE   BEST  HOMILETIC   LITERATURE 
OF  THIS  GENERATION. 


THE     SERMON     BIBLE. 

Each  Volume  containing  upwards  of  Four  Hundred  Sermon  Out 
lines,  and  Several  Thousand  References. 

Strongly  bound  in  half  buckram.     Price  75.  6d.  each  Volume. 

VOLUME    I.     GENESIS    TO    2    SAMUEL. 
„      II.     i    KINGS    TO    PSALM    LXXVI. 

„     III.     PSALMS      LXXVII.      TO      THE 
SONG    OF    SOLOMON. 

„     IV.     ISAIAH    TO    MALACHI. 

„      V.     ST.    MATTHEW    I.    TO    XXI. 

„     VI.     ST.    MATTHEW    XXII.   TO    ST. 
MARK    XVI. 

„    VII.     ST.  LUKE  I.  TO  ST.  JOHN   III. 
„  VIII.     ST.    JOHN    IV.    TO    ACTS    VI. 

„     IX.     ACTS  VI.  TO  i  CORINTHIANS. 

10 


THE     SERMON     BIBLE. 


OPINIONS   OF   THE    PRESS. 

"  A  very  complete  guide  to  the  sermon  literature  of  the  present 
day." — Scotsman. 

"  The  most   practically  useful    work    of    its    kind." — Literary 
Churchman. 

"An   excellent  guide  to   the  best  English  sermons  of  recent 
time." — Methodist  Recorder. 

"  Admirable  epitomes  of  the  best  homiletic  literature." — London 
Quarterly  Review. 

"  Beyond  question  the  richest  treasury  of  modern  homiletics."— 
Christian  Leader. 

"  Rich  in  variety,  and  thorough  without  being  overloaded." — 
Rock. 

"A  rich  mine  of  homiletical  wealth." — Christian. 

"  A  truly  valuable  book  for  preachers." — Church  Bells. 

"  Of  unique  excellence  as  a  pulpit  help." — Baptist. 

"  The  editor  of  this  work  has  rendered  a  valuable  service  by  his 
keen  and  logical  analysis  of  the  sermons,  his  succinct  statement  of 
their  main  points,  and  his  effective  presentation  of  their  more 
striking  and  essential  thoughts." — Baptist  Magazine. 

"The  plan  has  been  carried  out  with  such  admirable  impartiality, 
and  such  excellent  taste,  that  the  student  who  wishes  to  ascertain 
how  a  given  text  has  been  handled  by  the  ablest  English-speaking 
pulpit  expositors  of  the  day  can  hardly  fail  to  find  here  what 
he  seeks  presented  in  the  briefest  form  possible." — Manchester 
Examiner. 

II 


Gbeological  je&ucator, 

Fcap.  8vo,  2s.  6d.  each   Volume. 

AN    INTRODUCTION   TO   THE    OLD 
TESTAMENT. 

By  the  Rev.  C.  H.  H.  WRIGHT,  D.D. 

"The  work  is  of  brief  compass,  and  covers  a  vast  field  of  study,  but  the 
necessary  compression  has  been  done  with  the  skill  of  one  experienced  in 
the  needs  of  students." — Scotsman. 

THE    WRITERS    OF    THE    NEW 
TESTAMENT. 

Their  Style  and  Characteristics. 
By  the  Rev.    WILLIAM  HENRY  SIM  COX,   M.A. 

"  One  of  the  choicest  productions  of  English  scholarship  in  recent  years." 
—Manchester  Examiner. 

THE  LANGUAGE  OF  THE  NEW 
TESTAMENT. 

BY  THE  SAME  AUTHOR. 
"  The  most  living  grammar  of  the  New  Testament  we  have." — Expositor, 

OUTLINES  OF  CHRISTIAN    DOCTRINE. 

By  the  Rev.  H.    C.    G.   MOULE,   M.A. 

AN    INTRODUCTION    TO    THE    NEW 
TESTAMENT. 

By  the  Rev.   Professor  MARCUS  DODS,   D.D. 

"Dr.  Marcus  Dods  has  packed  away  an  immense  amount  of  information 
in  a  very  small  space."— Methodist  Recorder. 

THE    TEXTUAL    CRITICISM    OF    THE 
NEW  TESTAMENT, 

An  introduction  to. 
By  the  Rev.  Professor  B.  B.    WARFIELD,   D.D, 

"  A  masterly  survey  of  the  whole  subject." — Expositor. 


{Theological  Ebucator. 

Price  2s.  6d.  each    Volume. 
A    MANUAL    OF    CHURCH    HISTORY. 

By  the  Rev.  A.    C.  JENNINGS,   M.A. 
In  Two  Volumes. 

Vol.    I.— From  the   First  to  the  Tenth  Century. 

Vol.  II. — From  the  Eleventh  to  the  Nineteenth  Century. 

"  They  are  small,  but  they  include  '  infinite  riches  in  little  room.'  "—Globe. 

A  MANUAL  OF  CHRISTIAN  EVIDENCES. 

By  the  Rev.  Prebendary  C.   A.   ROW,    M.A. 

"  A  veritable  multutii  in  parvo,  clear,  cogent,  and  concise." — Saturday 
Review. 

A  MANUAL  OF  THE  BOOK  OF 
COMMON  PRAYER. 

Showing  its  History  and  Contents.     For  the  use  of  those  Studying 
for  Holy  Orders  and  others. 

By  the  Rev.  CHARLES  HOLE,  B.A.,  King's  College,  London. 

"  It  is  not  overloaded  with  detail,  and  yet  supplies  in  an  admirably  com 
pact  shape  all  essential  information."— British  Weekly. 

A    HEBREW    GRAMMAR. 

By  the  Rev.  W.  H.  LOW,  M.A.,  Joint  Author  of  "A  Commentary 
on   the   Psalms,"  etc.,  etc. 

"A  brief  and  masterly  sketch  of  Hebrew  grammar."— Literary  Churchman. 

AN    EXPOSITION    OF    THE    APOSTLES' 
CREED. 

By  the   Rev.  /.    E,    YONGE,    M.A.,   late   Fellow  of  King's 
College,    Cambridge. 

"An  able  treatise."—  Church  Times. 

"A  handy  book  for  divinity  students,  which  will  give  them  all  the 
information  they  want  for  examination  for  Orders  on  the  subject  which 
it  handles."— Saturday  Review. 

13 


Ibouaebolb  Xibran?  of  lEypositicm, 

THE    GALILEAN    GOSPEL. 

By  Professor  A.   B.  BRUCE,   D.D. 

THIRD  THOUSAND. 

Price  y.  6d. 

"  We  heartily  commend  this   little  volume  as  giving  an  outline  ably 
drawn  of  the  teaching  of  Christ." — Spectator. 

THE    SPEECHES    QF    THE    HOLY 
APOSTLES. 

By  DONALD   PHASER,    D.D. 
SECOND  THOUSAND. 

Price  y.  6d. 
"  Exceedingly  well  done."— Scottish  Revieiv. 

THE    LAMB    OF    GOD. 

Expositions  in  the  Writings  of  St.  John. 
By    W.   ROBERTSON  NICOLL,   M.A.,   LL.D. 

Price  2s.  6d. 
"  A  volume  of  rare  beauty  and  excellence."— New  York  Independent. 

THE    LORD'S    PRAYER. 

By     CHARLES    STANFORD,    D.D. 

THIRD  THOUSAND. 

Price  y.  6d. 

"  For  spiritual  grasp  and  insight,  for  wealth  of  glowing  imagery,  and 
for  rare  felicity  of  style,  it  will  hold  a  first  place  in  this  valuable  series  of 
expository  monographs." — Christian. 

THE  LAST  SUPPER  OF  OUR  LORD, 

And  His  Words  of  Consolation  to  the  Disciples. 

By  /.  MARSHALL  LANG,   D.D.,   Barony  Church,  Glasgow. 

THIRD  THOUSAND. 

Price  y.  6d. 

"  With  a  rare  power  of  insight — the  result,  doubtless,  of  much  inward 
experience— Dr.  Lang  has  entered  into  the  very  inmost  spirit  of  the  scenes 
and  incidents,  the  words  and  feelings,  which  make  up  the  history  of  that 
night." — Scotsman. 

14 


1bou0ebolb  Xibran?  of  ^position, 

THE    LAW    OF    THE    TEN    WORDS, 

By/.  OSWALD  DYKES,  D.D. 

Crown  8vo.     Price  y.  6d. 

"His  style  is  a  singular  combination  of  strength  and  beauty."— Literary 
World. 

THE    LIFE    OF    DAVID. 

As  Reflected  in  His  Psalms. 

By  ALEXANDER   MACLAREN,   D.D.,  of  Manchester. 

SEVENTH  EDITION. 

Price  3-y.  6d. 

"Just  the  book  we  should  give  to  awaken  a  living  and  historical  interest 
in  the  Psalms."— Guardian. 

THE    TEMPTATIONS    OF    CHRIST. 

By  G.    S.   BARRETT,   M.A. 

Price  3_y.  6d. 
"  Marked  alike  by  careful  language  and  sober  thought." — Guardian. 

THE    PARABLES    OF    OUR    LORD. 

As  Recorded  by  St.  Matthew. 
By  MARCUS  DODS,   D.D. 

SEVENTH  THOUSAND. 

Price  3-y.  6d. 

"  There  is  certainly  no  better  volume  on  the  subject  in  our  language." — 
Glasgow  Mail. 

THE    PARABLES    OF    OUR    LORD. 

As  Recorded  by  St.  Luke. 

By  MARCUS  DODS,   D.D. 

SIXTH  THOUSAND. 

Price  y-  6</. 

"An  original  exposition,  marked  by  strong  common  sense  and  practical 
exhortation." — Literary  Churchman. 

ISAAC,    JACOB,    AND    JOSEPH. 

By  MARCUS  DODS,   D.D. 

SIXTH  THOUSAND. 

Price  3-f.  6d. 

"The  present  volume  is  worthy  of  the  writer's  reputation.  He  deals 
with  the  problems  of  human  life  and  character  which  these  biographies 
suggest  in  a  candid  and  manly  fashion."— Spectator. 

15 


Sunfca?  afternoon  Xtbran>  for* 
!?onmj  people* 

Crown  &vo,  elegantly  bound  in  cloth,  3^.  bd.  each; 
or  the  Four   Vols.,  in  case,  12s. 

TALKING    TO    THE    CHILDREN. 

By  the  Rev.  ALEXANDER   MACLEOD,   D.D. 

"An  exquisite  work.  Divine  truths  are  here  presented  in  simple 
language,  illustrated  by  parable  and  anecdote  at  once  apt  and  beautiful." — 
Evangelical  Magazine. 

4 

THE    GENTLE    HEART. 

By  the  SAME  AUTHOR. 

"We  have  been  fascinated  with  the  originality  and  beauty  of  its  thought, 
charmed  with  the  simplicity  and  elegance  of  its  language,  and  enriched 
with  the  store  of  its  illustration." — Mr.  Surgeon. 


THE    CHURCHETTE. 

A  Year's  Sermons  and  Parables  for  the  Young. 
By  the  Rev.  /.   REID  HOW  ATT. 

"  Mr.  Howatt  has  learned  the  knack  of  speaking  to  young  people.  Short, 
simple,  cheery,  colloquial,  imaginative,  impressive,  the  sermons  yield 
abundant  evidence  that,  as  he  says,  his  '  aim  has  been  to  speak  to  children 
in  the  sunshine/" — Literary  World. 

"  As  breezy  and  refreshing  as  the  breath  of  the  ocean." — Nonconformist. 


THE  CHILDREN'S  PORTION. 

By   the   Rev.    ALEXANDER    MACLEOD,   D.D. 

"As  a  preacher  to  children,  Dr.  Macleod  has,  perhaps,  no  living  equal. 
In  these  delightful  chapters  he  seems  to  us  to  be  at  his  best,"—  Christian. 

"  This  is  a  collection  of  short  sermons  addressed  to  children.    They  are 
well  adapted  to  strike  the  fancy  and  touch  the  heart  of  the  young."— Record. 

16 


THE    CRITICAL    AND    EXPOSITORY 
BIBLE    CYCLOPEDIA. 

By  the  Rev.  A.  R.  FAUSSET,  D.D.,  Canon  of  York,  Joint  Author 
of  "  The  Critical  and  Experimental  Commentary." 

Illustrated  by  Six  Hundred  Woodcuts. 
Cheap  Edition,  Unabridged.    Eighth  Thousand,    js. 6d.,  cloth,  red  edges. 

"This  is  a  work  of  prodigious  research,  labour,  and  minute  painstaking. 
The  book  is  a  rich  and  full  storehouse  of  Scripture  knowledge." — Guardian. 

"  I  am  glad  to  bear  testimony  to  its  accuracy  and  value.  It  accomplishes  the 
purpose  of  putting  the  results  of  modern  scholarship  in  a  popular  form." — Rev. 
Alex.  Maclarcn,  D.D. 

THE    NEWBERRY    BIBLE. 

Comprising  the 
English-Hebrew  Bible  and  the  English-Greek  Testament. 

Designed  to  give  as  far  as  practicable  the  Accuracy,  Precision, 
and  Certainty  of  the  Original  Hebrew  and  Greek  Scriptures  on 
the  page  of  the  Authorised  Version.  Adapted  both  for  the 
Biblical  Student  and  for  the  Ordinary  English  Reader. 

Edited  by  THOMAS  NEWBERRY. 
LARGE    TYPE    HANDY    REFERENCE    EDITION. 

2  is.,  255.,  355.,  and  a  very  superior  Edition,  in  best  Levant  Yapp 
kid  lined,  silk  sewn,  6os.     Portable  Edition,  i8s.,  285.,  355. 

Among  the  Prominent  Features  are  the  following  :  — 

AUTHORISED  VERSION  arranged  in  Paragraphs. 

Leading  Words  and  Emphatic  Pronouns  in  distinctive  type. 

Poetical  Portions  arranged  in  parallels. 

Parallel  passages  connected  and  references  given. 

Imperfect   translations  emended.     Original  Hebrew  and   Greek  words  in 
serted  in  margin. 

Divine  titles  distinguished  and  explained. 

Singular,  dual,  and  plural  numbers  distinguished. 

Important  words  traced  to  their  Hebrew  and  Greek  roots. 

Hebrew  and  Greek  tenses  marked  by  simple  and  uniform  signs. 

The  use  and  force  of  the  letter  "  vau"  or  conjunction  "  and  "  shown. 

Words  translated  by  two  or  more  words  connected  by  a  hyphen. 

The  signs  employed  are  of  the  simplest  possible  character. 

17  18 


WORKS  BY  DR.  R.    W.  DALE,   of  Birmingham.. 

FELLOWSHIP    WITH    CHRIST, 

And  other  Discourses  Delivered  on  Special  Occasions. 

THIRD  THOUSAND. 
Crown   8vo,    cloth,  price  6s. 

"These  are  certainly  among  the  most  massive,  and,  as  a  consequence, 
most  impressive  sermons  of  the  day.  Each  is  a  sort  of  miniature  theo 
logical  treatise,  but  the  theology  is  alive — as  it  were,  heated  through  and 
through  by  the  fires  of  a  mighty  conviction,  which  has  become  a  passion 
to  convince.  ...  In  these  sermons  there  is  a  fine  universalism  ;  they 
might  be  addressed  to  any  audience — academic,  professional,  commercial, 
artisan.  And  to  hear  them  would  be  to  feel  that  religion  is  a  thing  to  be 
believed  and  obeyed." — Speaker. 

THE     LIVING     CHRIST    AND    THE 
FOUR    GOSPELS. 

FIFTH  THOUSAND. 
Crown   8vo,   cloth,  price  6s. 

"  As  a  man  of  culture  and  eloquence  he  has  put  the  case  strongly  and 
well,  and  it  will  not  be  surprising  if  his  book,  which  is  not  written,  he 
tells  us,  for  Masters  of  Arts,  but  in  the  first  instance  for  members  of  his 
own  congregation,  and  then  for  all  ordinary  people  who  take  an  interest 
in  such  matters,  should  be  the  means  of  convincing  many  that  the  assump 
tions  sometimes  made  about  late  origin  of  the  Gospels,  etc.,  are  utterly 
unfounded." — Scotsman. 

LAWS  OF  CHRIST  FOR  COMMON  LIFE. 

FIFTH  THOUSAND. 
Crown   8vo,  price  6s. 

"Sound  sense  and  wholesome  Christian  teaching  conveyed  in  pure, 
idiomatic,  and  forcible  English." — Scotsman. 

"A  storehouse  of  wise  precepts,  a  repository  of  loving  counsels — 
shrewd,  practical,  and  fully  cognisant  of  difficulties  and  drawbacks ;  but 
informed  by  such  sympathy  and  a  sense  of  Christian  brotherhood  as 
should  do  much  to  make  it  acceptable  and  effective." — Nonconformist. 

18 


WORKS   BY   DR.    R.    W.    DALE. 
NINE    LECTURES    ON    PREACHING. 

Sixth  Edition.     Crown  8vo,  price  6s. 

"Admirable  lectures,  briefly  written,  earnest  and  practical."— Literary 
Churchman. 

"  Dr.  Dale's  lectures  arc  full  of  practical  wisdom  and  intense  devotion." 
—  The  Expositor. 

THE    JEWISH    TEMPLE     AND    THE 
CHRISTIAN    CHURCH. 

A  Series  of  Discourses  on  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews. 

Eighth  Edition.     Crown  Zvo,  price  6s. 

"  Wholsomer  sermons  than  these  it  is  almost  impossible  to  conceive. 
Mr.  Dale's  preaching  has  always  been  remarkable  for  moral  energy  and 
fervour,  but  here  this  characteristic  rises  to  its  highest  power." — Expositor. 

THE    EPISTLE    TO     THE     EPHESIANS. 

Its  Doctrines  and  Ethics. 

Sixth  Edition.     Crown  8vo,  price  js.  6d. 

"  The  terse  and  vigorous  style,  rising  on  occasion  into  a  manly  and  im 
pressive  eloquence,  of  which  Mr.  Dale  is  known  to  be  a  master,  gives 
lucid  expression  to  thought  that  is  precise,  courageous,  and  original."— 
Spectator. 

WEEK-DAY    SERMONS. 

Fifth    Edition.      Crown    8vo,  price    3^.    6d. 

"  Dr.  Dale  is  certainly  an  admirable  teacher  of  Christian  ethics.  He  is, 
perhaps,  the  greatest  living  successor  of  the  Apostle  James.  In  this 
volume  he  appears  at  his  best." — Christian. 

THE    TEN    COMMANDMENTS. 

Sixth  Edition.      Crown  8vo,  price  5.?. 
"  Full  of  thought  and  vigour"— Spectator. 

IMPRESSIONS    OF    AUSTRALIA. 

Crown  8vo,  cloth,  price  5.?. 

"  Dr.  Dale's  articles  .  .  .  constitute  one  of  the  most  sensible  books 
about  Australia.  .  .  .  The  book  is  readable,  and  indeed  excellent." — 
AtJienffiim. 

THE    NEW    EVANGELICALISM    AND 

THE    OLD. 

« 

Cloth,  price  is. 

"  It  has  more  in  it  than  many  an  elaborate  treatise  ;  it  suggests  by  every 
sentence ;  it  is  throughout  succinct,  pregnant,  masterly." — British  Weekly. 

19 


MISSIONARY    BIOGRAPHIES. 

Popular  Edition.      Complete  in  one  Volume. 

JOHN     G.     PATON,     D.D., 

Missionary  to  the  New  Hebrides. 

An  Autobiography. 
Edited  by  His  Brother,  the  Rev.  JAMES  PATON,    B.A. 

Sixth   Thousand.     Crown  8vo,  cloth,  price  6s. 
"  One  of  the  best  autobiographies  we  have  ever  read." — Daily  Chronicle. 

The  Life  of  Mack  ay  for  Boys. 

THE  STORY  OF  THE  LIFE  OF  MACKAY 
OF  UGANDA. 

Told  for  Boys. 
By  HIS  SISTER. 
With  Portrait  and  Illustrations. 
Fifth  Thousand.     Handsomely  bound,  price  5^. 
"  A  veritable  romance  of  noble  self-sacrifice." — Times. 
"Should  be  one  of  the  most  popular  boy's  books  of  the  season." — Record. 
"  Full  of  interest  from  beginning  to  end."— Daily  Chronicle. 

A.    M.    MACKAY, 

Pioneer  Missionary  of  the  Church  Missionary  Society 
to  Uganda. 

By  HIS  SISTER. 
With  Etched  Portrait. 

Eleventh  Thousand.     Crown  8vo,  cloth,  price  js.  6d. 
"  It  is  a  pleasant  thing,  after  all  the  horrors  we  have  lately  been  hearing 
in  connection  with  Africa,  to  come  across  such  a  very  bright  episode  in  its 
history  as  is  contained  in  the  life  of  Alexander  Mackay."— Spectator. 

Medical  Missions. 

THE    LIFE    OF    JOHN    KENNETH 
MACKENZIE, 

Medical  Missionary  to  China;  with  the  Story  of  the 
First  Chinese  Hospital. 

By  Mrs.  BRYSON,  Author  of  "  Child  Life  in  Chinese  Homes,"  etc. 

With  Portrait  in  Photogravure. 
Second  Edition.     Crown  8vo,  cloth,  price  6s. 

"The  volume  contains  much  that  is  fresh  and  interesting  bearing  on 
Chinese  customs  and  manners." — Scotsman. 


WORKS  BY  REV.  PROF.  MARCUS  DODS,  D.D. 
ERASMUS,    AND    OTHER    ESSAYS. 

Crown    8vo,    cloth,    price   $s. 

"  Professor  Marcus  Dods  is  a  theologian,  and  much  more.  The  essays 
in  this  volume  show  him,  not  for  the  first  time,  as  a  man  of  much  reading, 
of  broad  and  genial  sympathies,  refined  but  liberal  judgment,  possessed  of 
no  little  literary  culture,  and  keenly  appreciative  of  literary  and  mental 
power  in  other  men  even  when  they  do  not  happen  to  belong  to  his  own 
school."— Scotsman. 

MOHAMMED,    BUDDHA,    AND    CHRIST. 

SIXTH  THOUSAND. 

Crown  8vo,  cloth,  price  y.  6d. 

THE  PRAYER  THAT  TEACHES  TO 
PRAY. 

SEVENTH  EDITION. 

Crown    8vo,   price    2s.    6d. 

"It  is  highly  instructive,  singularly  lucid,  and  unmistakably  for  quiet 
personal  use." — Clergyman's  Magazine. 

ISRAEL'S     IRON     AGE. 

Sketches   from   the    Period   of  the  Judges. 

SIXTH  EDITION. 
Crown   8vo,  price  •$$.    6d. 

"  Powerful  lectures.  This  is  a  noble  volume,  full  of  strength."— 
Nonconformist. 

WORKS  BY  DR.   W.  M.   TAYLOR,  of  New   York. 
THE    PARABLES    OF    OUR    SAVIOUR. 

Expounded   and   Illustrated. 

THIRD  EDITION. 
Crown  8vo,  cloth,  price  js.  6d. 

"We  have  many  books  on  the  Parables  of  our  Lord,  but  few  which  so 
thoroughly  as  this  condense  within  their  covers  the  best  teaching  con 
tained  in  the  various  commentaries  written  to  elucidate  their  meaning."— 
English  Churchman, 

THE    MIRACLES    OF    OUR    SAVIOUR 

Expounded    and    Illustrated. 
By  the  Same  Author. 

Crown  8vo,  cloth,  price  js.  6d. 

"  Dr.  Taylor  takes  up  each  miracle  separately,  sets  forth  in  a  vivid  and 
graphic  manner  the  circumstances  attending  it,  and  then  proceeds  to  draw 
out  in  impressive  language  the  lessons  it  suggests." — Scotsman. 


WORKS    BY    THE    REV.    DR.     FAIRBAIRN. 

i. 
THE     CITY    OF    GOD. 

A    Series    of  Discussions   in    Religion. 

By  the   Rev.    A.   M.    FAIRBAIRN,   D.D.,    Principal   of 
Mansfield  College,   Oxford. 

THIRD  EDITION. 
Price  js.  6d. 

CONTENTS  : — Faith  and  Modern  Thought — Theism  and  Science 
—  Man  and  Religion — God  and  Israel — The  Problem  of  Job — 
Man  and  God — The  Jesus  of  History  and  the  Christ  of  Faith — 
Christ  in  History— The  Riches  of  Christ's  Poverty— The  Quest 

the  Chief  Good— Love  of  Christ— The  City  of  God. 

"  We  find  in  the  discourses  which  form  this  volume  much  able  statement 
and  much  vigorous  thought,  and  an  admirable  comprehension  of  the  great 
questions  which  are  being  discussed  in  our  day  with  eagerness  and  bated 
br  eath . "— Scotsman. 


STUDIES    IN    THE     LIFE     OF    CHRIST. 

FIFTH  EDITION. 
Demy  8vo,  price  gs. 

CONTENTS  : — The  Historical  Conditions — The  Narratives  of  the 
Birth  and  Infancy — The  Growth  and  Education  of  Jesus — His 
Personality — The  Baptist  and  the  Christ — The  Temptation  of 
Christ— The  New  Teacher— The  Kingdom  of  Heaven— Galilee, 
Judea,  Samaria — The  Master  and  the  Disciples — The  Earlier 
Miracles — Jesus  and  the  Jews— The  Later  Teaching — The  Later 
Miracles — Jericho  and  Jerusalem — Gethsemane — The  Betrayer — 
The  Chief  Priests— The  Trial— The  Crucifixion— The  Resurrection  . 

"There  is  ample  room  for  Professor  Fairbairn's  thoughtful  and  brilliant 
sketches.  Dr.  Fairbairn's  is  not  the  base  rhetoric  often  emploj^ed  to  hide 
want  of  thought  or  poverty  of  thought,  but  the  noble  rhetoric  which  is 
alive  with  thought  and  imagination  to  its  utmost  and  finest  extremities.' 
— Expositor. 

22 


WORKS  BY  THE  REV.  PROF.  A.  B.  BRUCE,  D.D. 

THE    MIRACULOUS    ELEMENTS    IN 
THE    GOSPELS. 

Second  Edition.     8j%>,  cloth,  price  i2s. 

"  It  displays  minute  acquaintance  with  the  modern  literature  of  the 
subject,  and  all  forms  of  attack  to  which  Christian  belief  in  the  super 
natural  has  been  subjected.  The  defence  is  able  all  round ;  and  the 
closing  chapters — in  which  the  miracle  implied  in  the  character  of  Jesus 
is  dwelt  on,  and  where  the  defence  is  for  a  moment  changed  into  attack — 
are  full  of  spirit  and  fire." — Methodist  Recorder. 

THE    CHIEF    END    OF    REVELATION. 

Third  Edition.     Crown  Svo,  cloth,  price  6s. 

"  Dr.  Bruce  has  given  us  a  contribution  of  very  great  value.  Like 
everything  else  that  has  come  from  his  pen,  this  series  of  lectures  has  the 
conspicuous  excellence  of  boldness,  vigour,  breadth,  and  moral  elevation." 
—  Professor  Salmond. 

THE    PARABOLIC    TEACHING    OF 
CHRIST  : 

A     Systematic    and    Critical    Study    of    the    Parables    of 
Our   Lord. 

Fourth  Edition.     8vo,  cloth,  price  i2s. 

"  Professor  Bruce  brings  to  his  task  the  learning  and  the  liberal  and 
finely  sympathetic  spirit  which  are  the  best  gifts  of  an  expositor  of 
Scripture.  His  treatment  of  his  subject  is  vigorous  and  original."— 
Spectator. 

THE    GALILEAN    GOSPEL. 

Third  Edition.     Price  y.  6d. 

"  The  product  of  a  rich,  imaginative  mind,  marked  by  scholar^'  analysis, 
subtle  insight,  and  the  suggestiveness  of  an  original  and  unconventional 
thinker." — Glasgow  Herald. 

"  We  heartily  commend  this  little  volume." — Spectator. 

THE    LIFE    OF    WILLIAM    DENNY, 

Shipbuilder,    Dumbarton. 

With  Portrait. 
Second  Edition.     8vo,  cloth,  price  i2s. 

"  A  most  interesting  biography."— Academy. 

"  Mr.   Bruce  has  done  his  work  exceedingly  well,  and  with  admirable 
reserve  and  good  taste.  .  .  In  every  popular  library  the  '  Life  of  William 
Denny'  ought  to  find  a  place  by  the  side  of  Helps'  'Life  of  Brassey.'"- 
MancJiester  Guardian. 

23 


DR.  THAIN  DAVIDSON'S  BOOKS  FOR  YOUNG  MEN. 

i. 
A    GOOD    START. 

FOURTH  THOUSAND. 

Crown  8v<y,  cloth,  price  y.  6d. 

"Books  which  are  confessedly  and  designedly  'improving,'  without 
being  dull,  are  not  very  common.  Such  books  Dr.  Davidson  has  already 
proved  his  capacity  to  write,  and  these  'homely  talks'  with  young  men 
are  not  inferior  to  his  previous  efforts." — Academy. 

"At  once  winning  and  stimulating." — Christian. 

II. 

SURE    TO    SUCCEED. 

SIXTH  THOUSAND. 
Crown  8vo,   cloth,  price  y.  6d. 

"An  excellent  present  for  a  youth  just  going  into  business  or  coming 
up  to  London.  It  consists  of  twenty  pithy  and  practical  lectures  to  young 
men." — Record. 


FOREWARNED— FOREARMED. 

SEVENTH  THOUSAND. 
Crown  8vo,  cloth,  price  y.  6d. 

"Weighty  counsels.  Dr.  Davidson  is  remarkably  at  home  in  talks  with 
young  men.  His  words  glow  with  an  intense  earnestness  which  demands 
and  obtains  attention  from  his  readers." — Sword  and  Trowel. 

IV. 

THE     CITY     YOUTH. 

SIXTH  THOUSAND. 
Crown  8vo,  cloth,  price  y.  6d. 

"A  volume  well  worthy  to  rank  with  his  previous  works  on  kindred 
subjects.  Dr.  Davidson's  matter  and  manner  are  alike  excellent."— Globe. 


TALKS     WITH     YOUNG     MEN. 

THIRTEENTH  THOUSAND. 
Crown  8vo,  cloth,  price  y.  6d. 

"For  sterling  common-sense  combined  with  true  spiritual  feeling,  they 
have  not  been  surpassed  for  many  a  day.  The  addresses  bristle  with 
telling  metaphors  and  illustrations,  and  the  book  can  be  read  from  cover 
to  cover  with  profitable  interest." — Literary  World. 

24 


