eater ere)
piste Tair
aad x B ea ent ebay
peers ano? hike rect ne Ast bytshcetese eth
aaly RAR eR ears yan)
ie n
EL ats ek :
; Pere MRD
Parte) aves ih de ak ;
te igd as thai th ty 0 we ’ s
Sn ART ee Mase wrote d : : ; \
‘ end ey eer Puente shies hie shee ake .
¢ ty tant cain aA ne ‘ As RAN : : titi tN
cet f “ EERE DE Pay LOY
BLM LN, \ ; Pes
i ere eva
Perris
viernnih wee waht habs
i Pep h Ta tat aM
dis PERSONNE
Seabank
stn hats ua
ape sek suTiaere nes


edd


Aine
Pe ek tahs
itive voa


eee aes Wy th 8, dy toda de dee StS
Neate he MRD tata

Hew ee eee 3

Ya oa fh aah

‘i renew:


tes
Iw x fo te fe ets ae a hte NSS
LANGE : : ees ist ; ‘ iawn neta
fe AMM ELe EY, X TA Naina y ce RSTRL PRM RLS
Up ig ae tae srtitaecna teach
ciabatta
Re iy


CELIA
ea AE Ah aS
TCP ILU atone ia
We A eh A tab dh fe Db ae te
HPP treater iia nm Ya telly thst rete ay say i ak Bd Sesh ak te Fe ad
Paricy We AS Mein PPT RRMA ae
eee cas adh th dh ts Lb de A Af 8s Fett e n th Joa SHAN Dh Se i A
trl ts acts ds sh do ti th bh TP AS A A A ata tes la dh ih tt ah EN SN ray heh
Le De pdt AABN ly SO se a a a A oo De AN syed dt rere titiy
oe ae REY Ranga gna Se Meaiak iu dk te At af 2 Nee SY ree 9
Ee in 2 0 he DD Bd Pd, : ee A de Ae Is AEN
BE a abe te te Ja th AM Meek ap ah 2h dh Ae ta fete
tray ee ae ae ae ee 7
Sa Oa ate ie nts a A th hie tote th
ae ee a ee an Sn nh Ih AS
Oats ah bs dh Be Teh “i OAK a he hee
i CREB OAD DAS, SAA Aa
se aD te te De a ah om "
Te tet de di de a A te Ph Se
Oe hd ho te Bb SDA f
ee pb bd bet, " ees tad th by be De df te dy y " .
pa er aera En i ate Hh abt D, Ae A a a Ahk 0 NA NTE
LER AES. aH Be te be fe he bd poh ae Na ok ek oh .!
ARK eM ave rere se ee tN 2 ak LA, Pee Wen
pn bere a8 ENA mB, ata I A AMS SL! Aaa to i ab rae ck ok htt
Tae Cee aa SN gs Rede Al BLY AO IT AS 1 an ea A te 0 fa fe 2 Hl 3 fires MCRL LY
Tawi rae Ores Sean a es oh A a ATS F : Peete Were Ne
Ure) Mt rk ah tu ih Jaan gk LN A \,
RA dA A Pee wae
Cees Sean hh Ae th
Tee ek ktate es


‘a
eh td kb ADB,

Pele RTT ID na
Ah as 4 Pee YS An ed aaa

SO PLU IG te ate trli ri
Ree eee Aa
Ae, nee
eae ee)


LL PRERL LD DB
ES ne bk he dh fh BB Sy SOs
PSTN ee ak at Aah AACR R ILE la
Fone eta WE SAS
NSORRAR RADAR
ere TOT MONS te in
eek Aa A IN


Spar wise)
Dp BD be ata de
aa ay
SOs A


eats

a aN
Ah ake
‘aA,
ce


ein aan OT td A St
pn A A Fh i  apcak ahah 2 Ba i se 48 Ih aN

Wea an hay te 2 gh te ta dh Sate
WA BD, nf Se au k aa Th at De dh de Pe St sdk

Pee eS ies A CK Belt tet AEA A tnd dha Th kh ih ok oh Ah Ie,
wae i te te by a oh thth fete th HN 8 a8 en TR ak te LAA INA
Wah ht Be Se Le Bo be Set rte Ta bs th th A PTE A INN ree

nt Ab 8 dB 2 A aS *

ae A
a
ra


a ts Bad
RK BDL S65 bo de
AA ob AA
aes
ented a,
Sak A ko Bok A
ee ah a ie IE,
An mB


EEDA DB
RI re OL NY ahaa a ee we
RII rae ere st Pa RR TTR ‘i Daan h
Fite edad tdi f deb DBL aug se NAN Da te te Le dh BAAS TH
Sep wate ee PER e eA Ww aA
te da Late Be bo Mh s aa a AS Pewee eI
° 4 On ek tate Fak PTR ASE eee UY tot tate!
‘~ Ca Bae Oe thctace aa elk UCONN NC ae nM
‘ A ak A EAN, CAC kee,
ie ts ab A Y Cote RRO a eI
OSI ee Te re ey CO tan
nh DH ef, Pen hb, 0 eS aN OI Ilo ‘* A a eka kA
Sepa ee ett Ne tateta a DE ey Sn it db Ak Ue HN a a eR Nk
A A ith tale atts ty Dy th TDP a i nh Dh Be A Pee Ter
ge BMA BAB TS RN a ts aes pee es
a a a rye a “Siok
a Re eee E Swit
eae de 2b ide SSA hk AO ks ae a
aD Be ‘Aah hah ies atk koh ae ek wh 8
PON eV Weer LE E rN renee eS
a ah te th dh "
nv ews
cn,
ey APY Se aa hah ih ek a ih is ee a A
nahh rare Iowa a A AAA eee ee,
Oey tebe tee Bo iD ie at eT ean th ty th te a8 a i SM, Le aA
ER DDE BM i EE nt bs An AA Ad eA aie Be A a
CE ae a, ah DB ts tte hi BAD, Oe PT ea Ray OO
SELB B EI AR nA RD SL AA LDN ARAL OS AON, aa ee
ght Ah tf Be tlh AO Oe Mei eivas sk dl a Ab A hs ds AM iso tk NAA
LEAR EDD DI OS. SO adh as A ANS Ne a I ‘Ak <x
Pre Oe an . Lee RM OO OU Ree, r
a te bd I ih de iM ‘as ee Oe ein hh te Bet th GPO ML i aaa R
na ah 2 hth Nah a Me Dh fa fe AT A nee
‘th ‘* wah a A vere wee aS
Re eS ry
: ‘6h AA,
_ aha


‘ae
“ain ts de dh de be

ae Aad

Cys


Pelee ote ateta pee
Pte ea WIL IA. Cra ge

i dn PM
an RR IG 1 ay


*


CLLR D
At dD ds Se
tes
res


A DD eR
Ab th ‘ae oh is 2 2 RAAKA
rere a, ne ARH
NAA nae WLW OCS na AAA
TREE CU RW eee
ae ak ak tn da a ON AAICK DA "1
PORT ROR tay nee “e
Pere wie ew) eae Aa
va NO A Pe eTe 9
ant an tha AAA oi
a AN A Rone ae AOS
That ho


Pap wie oN
POA
nae
SNA AO
a A
WA


One
Ed et let ti te bu DN Od Oh
ee eterna! LY FD LORS SR
sete ete ab DM are ee Tn oh
PEPRARER DS 8% Pw ree ee Renae ar TS
ee ee SEE erates
na eA h ah PIR at hetate tee
nh a
A


a i th be Be
ak a


Lye RDA ALD
Annan rt awn ee
ey, : 5
Sere TY CL 7 ne
aN ein te te a de Hh 2 Cha
ms ne . aaa RA
ere LLY Le .
Shieh Ae ‘
CY, 2 ?
een eR ree E . <
RN A, nn he “ a AAAS
Se a kak 4 3 r eee
Perea eek tos
See AAA ALA
AAR A


y at Claremont


RRS,

ake a4 8

En hb dh cn r
Serra ee SRN,

SA A Ae


Oa SA
area Ww)


re are)


School of Theolog





<3)


The Library


of the
School of Theology
at Claremont


1325 North College Avenue
Claremont, CA 91711











THE PREACHER’S
COMPLETE HOMILETIC


COMMENTARY


BOOKS OF PSALMS


VOL. I


THE PREACHER'S
COMPLETE HOMILETIC


COMMENTARY


ON THE


OLD TESTAMENT


ON AN ORIGINAL PLAN


WITH CRITICAL AND EXPLANATORY NOTES,
INDEXES, ETC., ETC.


By VARIOUS AUTHORS


In Twenty-One Volumes





FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY
NEW YORK AND LONDON


per
Pos A HOMILETIC


“COMMENTARY


ON THE BOOK OF


PSALMS


VOL. If


ON PSALMS LXXXVIII—CIX
By THE REV. WILLIAM JONES


ON PSALMS CX—CXxX
By THE REV. J. W. BURN


ON PSALMS CXXI—Cxxx
By THE REV. GEORGE BARLOW


ON PSALMS CXXxXI—CL
By THE REV. WILLIAM JONES





FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY
NEW YORK AND LONDON
Printed in the United States

















eae ae











TMS Pee








a


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY


PSALMS.


—_»>——.


PSALM LXXXVIIL


INTRODUCTION,


Superseription.— A Song or Psalm,” i.e., combining the properties of both a Psalm and a
song. ‘‘For the sons of Korah,” see Introduction to Psalm xlii, ‘The expression, ‘To the Chief
Musician,’ amounts to a notice that we have before us a proper Church gong.” ‘‘ Upon Mahalath
Leannoth.” On ‘‘Mahalath,” see Introduction to Psa, lili, “‘*Zeannoth’ is variously rendered,


according as it is derived from WY, to suffer, be affieed, or from WY, to chant, sing.


Gesenius, De Wette, Pr. Davies, and others take the latter view; while Mudge, Hengstenberg,
Alexander, and others take the former. Mudge translates, to create dejection ; Alexander
renders, mahalath leannoth, concerning affiictive sickness ; Hengstenberg reads, upon the distress
of oppression. The Septuagint (daoxpiOjvat) and the Vulgate (respondendum) indicate a
responsive song, and Houbigant translates the words in question, for the choirs that they may
answer, Many otymologists consider the primary idea of TY, to sing, that of answering.


The tone of the Psalm in question, however, being decidedly that of sadness and defection, it
appears more probable that leannoth denotes the strictly elegiac character of the performance,
and the whole title may read therefore, ‘A Song or Psalm for the sons of Korah, to the chief
musician upon the flutes (or the hollow instruments) to afflict (or cause dejection) a didactic Psalm
of Heman, the Ezrahite.’”—(F. G. Hibbard.) ‘‘ Maschil,” an instruction, a didactic Psalm.
“Of Heman the Ezrahite,” It is generally held that this Heman is the son of Joel, and
grandson of Samuel the prophet, a Kohathite, one of the famous musicians of the time of
David, who is several times spoken of in connection with Asaph and Ethan or Jeduthun,
1 Chron. vi. 33; xv. 17-19; xxv. 1, 3. ‘‘Ethan is the same as Jeduthun,” says Hengsten-
berg. But Lord A, C, Hervey in Smith’s Dict. of the Bible says, ‘‘ Whether or no this Heman
(i.¢., the above-mentioned) is the person to whom the 88th Psalm is ascribed, is doubtful.
The chief reason for supposing him to be the samo is, that as other Psalms are ascribed to
Asaph and Jeduthun, so it is likely that this one should be to Heman the singer. But on the
other hand he is there called ‘the Ezrahite;’ and the 89th Psalm is ascribed to ‘Ethan the
Ezrahite,’ But since Heman and Ethan are described in 1 Chron. ii. 6, as ‘sons of Zerah,’ it
is in the highest degree probable that Ezrahite means ‘of the family of Zerah,’ and con-
sequently that Heman of the 88th Psalm is different from Heman, the singer, the Kohathite,
In 1 Kings iv, 31, again we have mention, as of the wisest of mankind, of Ethan the Ezra-
hite, Heman, Chalcol and Darda, the sons of Mghol, a list corresponding with the names of
the sons of Zerah, in 1 Chron. ii, 6. The inference from which is, that there was a Heman,
different from Heman the singer, of the family of Zerah the son of Judah, and that he is dis-
tinguished from Heman the singer, the Levite, by being called the Ezrahite,... If Heman
the Kohathite, or his father, had married an heiress of the house of Zerah, as the sons of
Hakkoz did of the house of Barzillai, and was so reckoned in the genealogy of Zerah, then all
the notices of Heman might point to the same person, and the musical skill of David's chief
musician, and the wisdom of David's seer, and the genius of the author of the 88th Psalm,
concurring in the same individual, would make him fit to be joined with those other worthies
whose wisdom was only exceeded by that of Solomon. But it is impossible to assert that
this was the case,”

There is nothing in the Psalm which marks clearly the time and occasion of its composition.
The Psalm is very mournful and desponding in its character. There are other Psalms which
are the utterance of the troubled heart, but they have in them some rays of light, some gleam
of hope. But in this the darkness is unrelieved. It is, says Stier, ‘‘The most mournful of
all the plaintive Psalms, yea, so wholly plaintive, without any ground of hope, that nothing
like it is found in the whole Scriptures.”


PRAYER FROM THE DeprH or Misrry,


(Verses 1-9.)

». A great depth of affliction. In 1 His troubles were spiritual. “My
avery expressive manner the Psalmist  sow/ is full of troubles.”” The Psalmist
sets forth kis distresses, was probably suffering from some severe

?


feaLM LXIXXVIL.





and painful physical disease. He was
certainly suffering in spirit. There is
no trouble so sore and hard to bear as
trouble in the soul. “The spirit of a
man will sustain his infirmity; but a
wounded spirit who can bear?” The
poet’s mind was troubled, his heart was
sorrowful, he seems almost in despair.
The severest anguish is not that of the
body, but that of the spirit. When
cherished hopes are blighted, and fond
and worthy ambitions are destroyed,
and those we trusted prove untrue, and
those we love are summoned away
leaving us to tread life’s pilgrimage
without them, and our sins arise against
us 80 Many in number, so enormous in
guilt, and God seems to have forsaken
us, or to be smiting us in His wrath,—
who shall describe the anguish of such
experiences? Yet good men sometimes
pass through them.

2. His troubles were many. “My
soul is full of troubles,” He enume-
rates some of the many troubles with
which his soul was full. His acquaint-
ances were removed from him, he was
afflicted and ready to die, and God was
pursuing him as with the breakers of
an angry sea. He was satiated with
sorrows. The utmost limit of his endur-
ance he seemed to have reached. The
cup of his distresses would not contain
one drop more.

3. His troubles were bringing him
speedily to death. He uses various ex-
pressions setting forth this idea. ‘My
life draweth nigh unto the grave,” unto
Sheol, the abode of the dead. He felt
that unless he obtained speedy relief
he must die. “I am counted with
them that go down unto the pit. I
am a3 a man that hath no strength.”
He was so near death, his case seemed so
hopeless, that men reckoned him among
the dead. And his strength had de-
parted from him. “Free among the
dead, like the slain that lie in the
grave, whom Thou rememberest no
more.” There is a passage in Job
(iii. 17-19) which will help us to
elucidate the first clause, ‘ There the
wicked cease from troubling; and there
the weary be at rest; there the prisoners
rest together; they hear not the voice
of the oppressor; the small and great

3


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





are there; and the servant is free from
his master.” The dead are emancipated
from the cares and sorrows, the toils
and burdens of life. “The comparison
with the dead is followed by that with
the slain, because the Psalmist was
threatened with violent deprivation of
life. ‘To be cut off from the hand of
God,’ His helping and protecting hand
is to be made away with in a violent
manner.” . . . The idea which lies at
the foundation of the whole verse is
this, “that the dead are no longer
the objects of the loving care of
God.” Life and immortality were not
brought to light in the days of the
Psalmist as they are in the Gospel.
Men shuddered at, and shrank from,
that “land of darkness as darkness
itself; and of the shadow of death
without any order, and where the light
is darkness.” ‘Thou hast laid me in
the lowest pit, in darkness, in the
Geeps.” “The lowest pit” is Sheol,
deep under the earth, All these ex-
pressions are intended to set forth the
idea that the Psalmist was on the very
verge of the grave, that he was already
as one dead, and that hope had almost
or altogether forsaken him. Or, if it be
held that the language is to be figura-
tively understood, then we have before
us @ good man in the most appalling
trouble; the darkness which envelops
his spirit is like that of the grave itself,
his anguish is unsupportable, his griefs
are overwhelming, and he is brought to
the last extremity.

4. His troubles isolated him from
human society. “Thou hast put away
mine acquaintance far from me; Thou
hast made me an abomination unto
them: I am shut up, and I cannot come
forth.” In time of suffering and sor-
row the presence and sympathy of a
friend are very precious and helpful,
But the poet in his great affliction was
forsaken by his friends. Such desertions
are among the sharpest sorrows of life,
It would seem as though the Psalmist
was either suffering from some infec-
tious or defiling disease, or from the
attacks of slander. Men shrank from
him with loathing. In the Hebrew
the word which is translated “abomina-
tion” is in the plural. Men regarded


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


P@ALM LXXXVIII.





him ss though he were an assemblage
of abominations, or one great mass of
abominations. Hengstenberg interprets
“T am shut up, and I cannot come
forth,” as “shut up by public reproach,
which keeps me in the house like a
prisoner, I do not go out, I stir not
from the door.” Slander has been
truly called ‘the foulest whelp of sin.”
And “the worthiest people are the most
injured by slander, as we usually find
that to be the best fruit which the birds
have been pecking at.” Human friend-
ships, or the things which so often
degrade the high and holy name, are
most unreliable and unsatisfactory
things, True friendships are as rare
as they are precious. Prosperity at-
tracts to us a large number of so-called
friends, but adversity tests them, and
sometimes all fail in the trial, as did
those of the Psalmist. His acquaint-
ance all forsook him, and regarded him
with abhorrence or loathing.

5. His trouble was from the hand of
God. It seemed to the Psalmist that
all his distresses came to him from the
hand of God. ‘Thou hast laid me in
the lowest pit,” d&c. ‘“ Thou hast
afflicted,” &c. ‘Thou hast put away,” &.
When faith is in lively exerciseit is a relief
in trouble to know that the trouble comes
from God. Then the tried saintsoftly sings,

“Tt is Thy hand, my God;
My sorrow comes from Thee:
I bow beneath Thy chastening red,
Tis love that bruises me.
My God, Thy name is love,
A Father’s hand is Thine;
With tearful eyes I look above,
And cry,—Thy will be mine §
I know Thy will is right,
Though it may seem severe 5
Thy path is still unsullied light,
Though dark it may appear.”—. i
But not thus did the matter present
itself to the mind of the Psalmist.
That his troubles were from the hand
of God seemed to him a sore aggrava-
tion of those troubles. Evil from so
good a hand appeared quite intolerable
to him. So deep was his depression,
that while feeling acutely the adversity,
he could not perceive any of its “ sweet
uses.” The bitterness of his draught he
’ realised completely ; its medicinal pro-
perties he entirely lost sight of. Every-
thing seemed to aggravate his misery.


6. His trouble was an expression of
the wrath of God. “Thy wrath lieth
hard upon me, and Thou hast afflicted
me with all Thy waves.” So far was
the Psalmist from regarding his dis-
tresses as coming from the chastening
hand of a Father, that he looked upon
them as punishments from the hand of
an angry God. Like a huge and in-
supportable burden, God’s wrath was
crushing him to the earth; and as the
breakers of the stormy ocean dash in
thunder and fury upon the shore, so
God in anger seemed to be afflicting the
Psalmist. We have, indeed, a great depth
of affliction here, The deep darkness
of this picture of distress has not often
been equalled in the history of suffering
humanity. Before leaving this part of
our subject we shall do well to lay to
heart two facts. (1) That the best of
men in this life are exposed to severe
sufferings and trials. Suffering is not
necessarily a sign of the Divine dia-
pleasure. ‘ Whom the Lord loveth He
chasteneth,” &c. (2) That the best of
men in this life are liable to mtsinterpret
the meaning of suffering. Under the
burden of severe distresses “ even the
children of God’s love may sometimes
apprehend themselves children of wrath,
and no outward trouble can lie so hard
upon them as that apprehension.”

IL A great urgency of prayer. ‘‘O
Lord God of my salvation, I have cried,”
&c. His prayer was—

1, Directed to God, “T have cried
day and night before Thee: let my
prayer come before Thee,” &. With
steady aim he directed his complaints
and petitions to God. His appeal was
intended to reach the ear, and. move the
heart, of God. The notice or approba-
tion of men the Psalmist neithar sought
nor wanted; but his heart was set on
obtaining the regard of God. He is
the Hearer and Answerer of prayer.
“He is, and He is a rewarder of them
that diligently seek Him.” Moreover,
the Psalmist sought the Lord as the God
of his salvation, There is a tone of
confidence in the address, Bad as things
are with him, he is not without hope.
He looks for salvation, and he looks for
it to God. This is the only cheerfu!
beam which shines in the Psalm.

3





2. Karnest, “I have cried,” &e. “T
have stretched out my hands unto Thee,”
The Psalmist’s application to God was
not a half-hearted, listless thing. He
uttered an earnest “cry” for help, and
“stretched out his hands” in fervent
prayer. Jeremy Taylor says: ‘‘ When,
in order to your hopes of obtaining a
great blessing, you reckon up your
prayers with which you have solicited
your suit in the court of heaven, you
must reckon, not by the number of the
collects, but by your sighs and passions,
by the vehemence of your desires and
the fervour of your spirit, the apprehen-
sion of your need and the consequent
prosecution of your supply.”

3. Onceasing. “I have cried day and
night before Thee. I have called daily
upon Thee.” Without intermission he
sought the Lord in prayer. His afflic-
tions prevented him from resting, and in
his unrest he constantly sought God in
supplication. ‘‘Men ought always to


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : PSALMEB.


pray, and not to faint.” “ Praying
always with all prayer,” &c. ‘“‘ Pray
without ceasing.” Such importunity,
as the expression of earnest desire, is
well-pleasing to God. Yet the author
of this Psalm was like the Psalmist
David in this respect, that for a time
there seemed to be “neither voice nor
any to answer, nor any that regarded ;”
and he might have adopted his words,
“O my God, I cry in the day time, and
Thou hearest not; and in the night
season, and am not silent.” Fora time no
answer came to his earnest and unceasing
cry. Yet God will speedily “avenge His
own elect, who cry day and night unto
Him, though He bear long with them.”

Cono.usion. Let the distressed
child of God be encouraged to perse-
vere in prayer. In His own wise and
good time the Lord will appear for thee,
and “turn the shadow of death into
morning,” and change thy mournful »
complaint into a joyful Psalm,


ExposTULATION FROM THE DeprH or MISERY.
(Verses 10-18.)


From complaint and prayer the Pasal-
mist proceeds to very forcible expostula-
tion with the Lord God. And in this
expostulation he reveals—

I. His extreme distress. He speaks
of himself as,

1. Cast of by God. “Lord, why
castest Thou off my soul? Why hidest
Thou Thy face from me?” Through
suffering and sorrow he was unable to see
the face of God. The tears of his dis-
tress had for the time blinded his eyes,
so that he was unable to recognise the
gracious presence of God. But He had
not cast off his soul “For the Lord
will not cast off His people, neither will
He forsake His inheritance.” The mists
and clouds which obscure the sun, and
give to us dark and cheerless November
days arise from the earth. The sun
shines ever. And the hiding of God’s
face from His people is by reason of
their sins, and sorrows, and sufferings,
His faithfulness and love are unchange-
able. Nevertheless, when His people
feel abandoned by Him, unspeakably
sore is their suffering,


2 Almost deprived of reason, “Iam
4


distracted.” Pain and sorrow, doubt
and fear, had so wrought upon him
that he was unable to think or reason
calmly. His suffering and anxiety and
grief seemed to have disturbed the —
balance of his mind. Calmness he could
not command. He was trembling on the
brink of madness. As we know, there have
been instances in which extreme suffering
has led to insanity, and great spiritual
depression and anxieties have issued in
mental derangement. The Psalmist felt
himself to be in danger of this.

3. Terrified by the wrath of God. “I
suffer Thy terrors,” &, The idea that
God was pursuing him in wrath with His
plagues is a deep conviction with him,
That wrath seems to burn fiercely against
him, and he cannot escape from it. Or,
like an angry sea, it surrounds him, and
its wild billows course over and beat
upon him, Alas! for the child of God
passing through experiences like unto
these! Yet the Psalmist is not the
only one who has travelled through this
dark, distressing, dangerous valley. We
rejoice, however, to knowthat One, whose
“form is like the Son of God,” walketh


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


od


with them, though they see Him not.
While He is with them no real evil
shall befall them.

Ii. His misconception of God.
“Thy fierce wrath goeth over me; Thy
terrors have cut me off.” What he
regarded as the “ fierce wrath” of God,
was the loving though severe discipline
of a wise and kind Father. When he
thought that God had cast off his soul,
God was educating and enriching his
soul by means of suffering. When to
him all things appeared -sadly and
sternly against him, God was causing all
things to work together for his good,
A sense of sin, and much and severe
suffering, led him to misconceive the
character and dealings of God. He
spake hastily and unadvisedly as to
God’s “fierce wrath.” God does not
pour forth His fury upon His people.
If He chasten us sorely, it is not in
anger, but in love that He does sc. It
is the consciousness of sin and unscrip-
tural theological notions that lead us in
suffering to behold an angry God.

II. His nearness to death. “ Wilt
Thou show wonders to the dead ? shall
the dead arise and praise Thee?” &ec.
“Tam afflicted and ready to die from
my youth up.” In these verses, the
Psalmist speaks of himself as almost
dead, as on the very brink of the grave,
as swiftly passing into the land of dark-
ness and forgetfulness. He does this as
a reason why God should speedily appear
for his help. If deliverance came not
quickly, he would be beyond the reach of
it. (On his nearness to death, see our
remarks in the preceding sketch.)

IV. His belief that there are duties
and privileges, the discharge and en-
joyment of which are limited to the
present life. ‘‘ Wilt Thou show won-
ders to the dead?” dc. (vers. 10-12).
These verses have a despondent if not a
despairing accent. Yet it would be
rash to affirm that the Poet had no faith
in a future life, or that he regarded
death as the extinction of being. But
to him Sheol was a dark and gloomy
realm, where God’s wonders were not
made known, where His praise was not
celebrated, where remembrance had
ceased, and where destruction seemed
supreme. Such seem to have been the


PRALM LEX XVUI.





ideas which he then entertained of the
state of the dead. In that day life and
immortality were not revealed as they
now are in the Gospel, The great truth
for us to seize is this, that there are
duties to be done now which cannot be
done beyond this life, and privileges to
be enjoyed now which probably cannct
be enjoyed when we have passed hence
and are no more seen. This is true,

1. Of our own salvation. “ Behold,
now is the accepted time ; behold, now
is the day of salvation.” There is no-
thing in the Scriptures to warrant the
belief that God will show the wonders
of His saving power to the dead—

*¢ There are no acts of pardon past

In the cold grave to which we haste ;”
wherefore, “seek ye the Lord while He
may be found,” &e.

2. Of many ministries to others. It
is our privilege now to lead the lost to
the Saviour, to reclaim the wanderer,
and raise the fallen, to comfort the
sorrowful, and succour the distressed.
Such Christ-like ministries are probably
confined to this present world and life.
Wherefore, “ whatsoever thy hand findeth
to do, do it with thy might ; for,” &ec.

V. His faith in God. This is mani-
fest—

1. In His expostulations, and especi-
ally in that of the fourteenth verse,
“Lord, why castest Thou off my soul 1
why hidest Thou Thy face from me?”
In these and in his other inquiries the
Psalmist manifests his faith in (1) the
faithfulness, and (2) the righteousness of
God. Was He not a covenant-keeping
God? Was He not righteous in all His
ways “Shall not the Judge of all the
earth do right ?”

2. In his prayers. The Psalmist
would not have cried to God in prayer,
and resolved to have anticipated Him
in the morning with his supplications, if
he had not believed in—(1) The acces-
sibility of God. Though on the brink
of the grave, he knew that he could
draw near to the mercy-seat of God.
(2) The power of God to save him.
Extreme as his case was, he knew that
the God of his salvation was able to
meet and master it. He is “ mighty to
save.” He saves “unto the uttermost.”


(3) The mercy of God. Though it
6


PBALM LEXXIX.


seemed that His fierce wrath was going
over him, yet he knew that there was
usercy in the Divine heart, or he would
uutbave cried unto Him. Sad as was the
case of the Psalmist, it might have been
worse; for his faith had not utterly
failed him. He still turned in prayer to
the Lord as the God of his salvation.
ConcLusion.—Let great sufferers and
despondent souls take encouragement


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,





even from this most pensive of all the
pensive Psalms, It teaches us that in
the deepest distress and the greatest ex-
tremity—l. The Lord ts still the God of
our salvation, 2. The way ts still open te
the throne of grace. 3. Whale faith and
prayer are not utterly extinguished our case
may be extreme, but tt ts mot desperate.
From ‘above, the Lord saith, “I have
prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not,”


PSALM LXXXIX.


INTRODUCTION.


Buperscription.—"“ Maschil,” an instruction, a didactic poem. “Of Etham the Fzrahite,”
66 one of the four sons of Mahol, whose wisdom was excelled by Solomon (1 Kings iv. 31).
There is little doubt that this is the same person who, in 1 Chron. ii. 6, is mentioned—with the
same brothers as before—as a son of Zerah, the son of Judah.” See on “Heman the Ezra-
hite” in the Introduction to Psalm lxxxviii, ‘‘ There can be little doubt,” says Perowne,
**that this Psalm was written in the latter days of the Jewish monarchy, when the throne of
David had fallen or was already tottering to its fall, and when the prospect for the future was so
dark that it seemed as if God had forgotten His covenant and His promise,... The Psalm
opens by a reference to the Promise given to David (2 Sam. vii. 8, &c). This Promise, and the
attributes of God on which the Promise rests, and which are the great pledge of its fulfilmen
form the subject of the Poet’s grateful acknowledgment, before he passes to the mournf
contrast presented by the ruin of the house of David, and the blighting of his people’s hopes.
He turns to the glorious past, that by its aid he may rise out of the grief and discouragement
of the present. He takes the Promise, and turns it into a song. He dwells upon it, and
lingers over it. He dwells on that which is the ground and pillar of the Promise—the faith-
fulness of God—and then he first lifts his loud lament over the disasters which have befallen
his king and people, speaking out his disappointment, till his words sound like a reproach;
and next pleads earnestly with God that He would not suffer his enemies to triumph.”


A Nose CELEBRATION OF THE FAITHFULNESS AND Mrroy
OF THE LoRD.


(Verses 1-4.)


In this paragraph the Psalmist an-
nounces his determination to praise
God eternally because of His mercy
and faithfulness, which were promised
to David and to his seed for ever.
Looking at this announcement as in-
dicating, in brief, the praise itself, we
take as our subject, A noble celebration
of the faithfulness and mercy of the Lord.
The nobility of this celebration appears,

I. In the view of these attributes
which is presented. Two prominent
features are set forth by the Poet.

1. Perpetuity. ‘ Mercy shall be
built up for ever: Thy faithfulness
shalt Thou establish in the very
heavens,” The mercy and faithfulness
of God are thus presented to us as
abiding things. Look at the heavens
and the heavenly bodies,—how stable
and endurirg, how orderly and regular
they are! The sun with unvarying


regularity and absolutely perfect pune-
tuality sets forth on his course and
runs his race ; from the creation to the
present hour the moon has held on her
appointed way and performed her ap-
pointed rounds without a shadow of
turning, and with the most perfect
accuracy; the stars pursue their ap-
pointed orbits with undeviating pre-
cision, and with the utmost exactness
keep their appointed seasons. The
heavens and the heavenly hosts appear
now as they did in the beginning of
the world; they present no signs of
weariness or decay or change; they are
a fit emblem of the eternal and un-
changeable. The Psalmist pictures the
faithfulness of God as a part of the very
heavens in order graphically to set forth
its perpetuity and perfection. ‘But God's
faithfulness shall outlast the heavens
themselves, ‘ Heaven and earth shall


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


PGALM LXXXIZ,


0 CLI eee eee ee ee eee


pass away, but My words shall not pass
away.” “(God is not a man, that He
should lie,” &c., (Num. xxiii. 19), In
reference to His covenant with David,
the Lord said, by Jeremiah, “If ye
van break My covenant of the day,” &e.
(Jer. xxxiii. 20,21). God’s faithfulness
is perfect and eternal. ‘With Him is
no variableness, neither shadow of turn-
ing.” ‘The word of our God shall
stand for ever.” His mercy also is
perpetual, ‘The mercy of the Lord is
from everlasting to everlasting,” &c.

2. Increase, or growth. ‘ Mercy
shall be built up for ever.” ‘ Mercy
appears here,” says Hengstenberg,
“under the figure of a building in con-
tinual progression, in opposition to one
which, when still unfinished, falls into
ruins.” And John Howe well says:
‘‘Former mercies are fundamental to
later ones. The mercies that we enjoy
this day are founded on the mercies of
former days, such as we ought joyfully
and thankfully to recount with delight
and praise ; remembering the years of
the right hand of the Most High.”
And we may carry the idea further.
The mercies that we enjoy this day will
become the foundation for the mercies
of future days, and so onward in end-
less progression, The purposes of God
concerning our race are advancing to
perfect and splendid completion. The
edifice which was founded in mercy
shall in mercy be gloriously finished.
Thus “the multitude of His mercies”
is ever growing more multitudinous.
Every hour, ay, every minute, new
mercies are being added to the unspeak-
able and countless mercies of formerdays.

II. In the way in which they are
celebrated.

1. Conjidently. “Thave said.” By
these words he indicates that the state-
ment he is about to make is his clear
and fixed opinion. He believes; and
therefore speaks. There is the unmis-
takable accent of conviction in his
utterance,

2. Publicly. Not in his heart
merely does he celebrate the mercy and
faithfulness of God, but “ with his
mouth” he “sings” them. He will
sing to others and for others ; in words
which others may use as their own. He


cannot speak their praise ; for prose is
all too hard and cold for such a theme,
He will “sing” them; and even poetry
and music seem poor for this rich and
glorious theme.

3. Perpetually. “To all genera
tions.” When his voice was silent in
death he would still celebrate the Divine
mercy and faithfulness) He would
make a record of his praise; he would
write his Psalm, so that the Church
should continue the strain through all
ages, Surely this is a worthy spirit in
which to celebrate the Divine praises,
There is a heartiness, a confidence,
and an enthusiasm in the utterance of
the Psalmist which are well worthy of
admiration and imitation.

IIL In the basis on which the cele-
bration rests. The praise of the Psal-
mist springs from his faith in the cove-
nant of God. The faithfulness of God
is both the ground and the object of his
praise, His faith is rooted in that faith-
fulness, aad his praise celebrates it, His
praise rests on the word of God as its
basis. The Lord is the speaker in verses
3 and 4, Consider:

1. The covenant itself, ‘Ihave made
a covenant,” &c. This covenant is re-
corded in 2 Sam. vii. 10-17. Its grand
feature was the perpetuation of David’s
family and kingdom. “Thine house
and thy kingdom shall be established
for ever before thee: thy throne shall
be established for ever.” The family, the
kingdom, the throne should be estab-
lished eternally. The throne would be
built up, t.¢, the sovereignty would be
stable and increasing to all generations.
We know that this covenant did not
receive a material and temporal fulfil-
ment. The material crown has long
passed from the house of David; the
temporal kingdom has long ceased to be.
Yet the covenant abides, and is being
splendidly fulfilled. ‘ Jesus Christ, our
Lord, was made of the seed of David,
according to the flesh.” ‘‘ Of this man’s
seed hath God, according to promise,
raised unto Israel a Saviour, Jesus,”
He is at once “the Root and the Off-
spring of David;” David’s Son, and
David’s Lord. In Him and in His
kingdom the promise is being accom-
plished, the covenant is being fulfilled


PRALM LXXXIZ,





Of the increase of His government and
peace there shall be noend.” His king-
dom iseverextendingand increasing. His
spiritual seed ever grows more numerous.

2. The origin of the covenant. It
originated in the sovereign favour of
God. David was His “chosen.” How
completely was David’s elevation to the
throne a thing of Divine sovereignty |
David was the youngest son of Jesse;
and Jesse’s was not the senior house of
the tribe of Judah (Ruth iv. 18-22;
1 Chron, ii, 5-12), and Judah was not
the eldest son of Jacob ; yet God chose
the king from the tribe of Judah, from
the house of Jesse, and the youngest
son of that house. ‘“‘ He chose David
also His servant, and took him from the
sheepfolds,” &c. (Psa. Ixxviii. 70, 71).
In like manner our Lord is spoken of as
the chosen Servant of God. “ Behold, my
Servant, waom I uphold ; Mine Elect,
in whom My soul delighteth.” The
gift of Christ to our race was entirely
of the sovereign mercy of God. We
may well praise God for His spiritual
coverant, for the gift of His Son Jesus
Christ to save and reign over men, for
the promise to Him of universal domi-
nion, and for the way in which that
promise is being fulfilled.

IV. In the circumstances under
which the celebration is made. When
the poet chanted this Psalm one might


Vf


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


have thought, judging from its firet and
greater portion, that the kingdom waa
prosperous, the throne firm and un-
menaced, the royal house nemerous and
united, the future bright and full of pro-
mise. But widely different was the case,
as we may see by reading verses 38-45.
The covenant seemed to be on the very
verge of failure; the country was invaded,
their armies were beaten in battle, the
crown was profaned, the throne was cast
down to the ground, ruin was imminent,
Yet at such a time the Poet sang this
bright, confident, triumphant celebration
of the faithfulness and mercy of the Lord.
Brave, trustful Poet! Let us catch his
spirit, and imitate his example. When
sense is silent in consternation, let faith
be songful in the Lord. To the believing
soul, ‘God gives songs in the night.”
Even the mourner’s heart when turned
to Him He tunes to music. When ail
things appear todeny the faithfulness and
mercy of God, let us still believe them,
and, believing them, let us sing them.
Let us walk by faith, and we shall find
matter for praise, and a heart to praise
even in the midst of outward trouble.
“ As sorrowful, yet always rejoicing.”

Conclusion. Let the character and
covenant of God inspire us with confi-
dence, even in the most trying circum-
stances. Believe in Him, praise Him
Trust and sing,


Toe INCOMPARABLENESS or Gop,
(Verses 5-7.)


Hengstenberg heads these verses thus :
“The omnipotence and faithfulness of
God are devoutly praised even by the
angels, His heavenly congregation.” The
incomparableness of God manifested by
the relation of the heavenly hosts to
Him. We shall endeavour to set forth
the ideas of the Poet on this subject in
the following manner :—

I. Heavenly beings are mighty.
“The sons of the mighty.” In another
Psalm we read, “ Bless the Lord, ye His
angels, that excel in strength.” The
angels are always represented in the
Scriptures as “ far superior to us, as pos-
sessing powers to which, as it regards
their extent, we can make no pretensions,
and as able to perform operations which

8


may well fill us with astonishment, and
which are far above the reach of our
ability.” For illustrations of the great
power of angelic beings, see Exod. xxxiii.
2, where God promises to send an angel
before the Israelites to drive out the
seven nations of Canaan; 2 Sam. xxiv.
and 1 Chron. xxi, where an angel is
represented as smiting to death by means
of pestilence seventy thousand men, and
as having power to destroy Jerusalem ;
2 Kings xix, 35, where an angel is said
to have destroyed an hundred and
eighty-five thousand Assyrians in one
night. (See also Psa. xxxiv. 7; Dan.
vi. 22; Acts. v.19, xii. 7-10; Rev. xviii.
1; and xxii. 8.) “They are said to
‘excel in strength ;’ and it is evident that


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


POaLM LIXIRE


(2 SST pti = Bes Se Se ER i ea SS a, See ese


the Psalmist has in view chiefly intelleo-
tual and moral strength, which qualifies
them for the service of God; for ‘ they
do His commandments, hearkening unto
the voice of His Word ;’ though it does
not exclude what is equivalent to phy-
sical energy, or power over matter, to
mould, and influence, and render it sub-
servient to their will. They are also
denominated “ mighty angels,” 2 Thess.
i. 7, where the Apostle has in view an
occasion on which their might will be
put in requisition and manifested in the
most striking manner ; for the great pro-
bability is, that they will be employed
to effect many of the changes that will
take place, and to exhibit many of the
wonderful scenes that will be manifested
at the second coming of the Lord Jesus
Christ ; and we are assured that, at the
end of the world, ‘The reapers are the
angels,’ and that, ‘the angels shall come
forth, and shall sever the wicked from
among the just’ (Matt. xiii. 39, 49),
And it is evident from all the accounts
which are given us of them in the Bible,
that they excel in wisdom as much as in
strength ; or, rather that their strength
is principally the power of wisdom and
knowledge ; and that in these they are
far superior to men is plainly implied in
the la:.guage of the Saviour (Matt. xxiv,
36). Ti-«same fact is evident from Psa,
civ. 4, aud Heb. i. 7.”— Walter Scott.
IL Heavenly beings are holy. They
are here spoken of as “saints.” They
are designated by way of eminence
“holy angels” (Matt. xxv. 31). They
are entirely free from sin, have never
known sin. All their thoughts are true,
all their sympathies are pure, all their
principles are righteous, all their activi-
ties are blessed, all their services are
sacred, all their being is God’s. “We
are sure that their moral purity must be
complete, without the least imperfection
or stain, for they dwell in the immediate
blissful presence of God, they are the
constant inhabitants of those glorious
regions into which nothing that defileth
can possibly enter. Some of them may
have been for millions of ages employed
in contemplating the glories of God, and
in realising intellectual improvement ;
and still eternity is before them.” “The


dignity, the powers, of these celestial
beings are also plainly implied in the
names and epithets which are given to
them in the Scriptures, They are deno-
minated not only angela, or messengers,
by way of eminence, but also cherubim
and seraphim, thrones, authorities, domi-
nions, principalities, and powers.” Yet
great and glorious, mighty and holy as
they are, these

IIL Heavenly beings worship God.
“The heavens shall praise Thy wonders,
O Lord,” &c. These holy angels—

1. Stand tn awe of God. ‘God is
greatly feared” by them. Hengsten-
berg: “ God is very terrible in the confi-
dence of the holy ones,” And he gives,
what we regard as the true explanation of
the clause; “‘ The confidence of the holy
ones’ denotes the confidential commu-
nity to whom God vouchsafes to entrust
His secrets (Job i. 6, ii. 1) ; though not
His deepest ones(1 Pet. i. 12). Notwith.
standing this, there always remains an
infinite distance between Him and them
(comp. Job iv. 18, xv. 15). God does
not cease to be even to His holy ones
the object of fear.” Any one who
approaches God thougntfully must be |
awed in so doing. We cannot rightly
contemplate Him without very solemn
thought. The expressions of familiarity
and endearment which some men use in
their approaches to God in worship stand
condemned by the reverence of the Holy
angels, The seraphim worship with
veiled faces, crying, ‘‘ Holy, holy, holy,
is the Lord of hosts; the whole earth is
full of His glory.” ‘ God is very terrible
in the confidence of the holy ones, and
dreadful for all who are round about
Him.” If such are the regards which
are paid to Him by these high and holy
beings, surely unholy men should regard
Him with humble awe and solemn
reverence! These holy angela—

2. Pratse dod. ‘The heavens praise
Thy wonders, O. Lord ; Thy faithfulness
also in the congregation of the saints.”
(1) They praise Him for the wonders of
His power. They are deeply interested
in His mighty works. They sang the
anthem which celebrated the creation of
the world. ‘When the morning stars
sang together, and all the sie of God


PSALM LXXXIE,


shouted for joy.” They are represented
in Scripture as being deeply interested
in God's work in Providence, and as
taking part in carrying out its great
scheme, They are devoutly and admir-
ingly interested in God’s great work in
human redemption. At the time of the
Saviour’a advent, there appeared “a
multitude of the heavenly host praising
God,” &c. After the conflict between
the Saviour and the seducer of men in
the wilderness, angels ministered to the
triumphant Saviour. During the agony
in Gethsemane, “there appeared an
angel unto Him from heaven, strengthen-
ing Him.” Angels are represented as
taking part in the resurrection of our
Lord. They are represented by St.
Peter as “desiring to look into” the
things of human salvation. Our Lord
Himself says, “ There is joy in the pre-
sence of the angels of God over one
sinner that repenteth.” Yes, angels
praise God for His wondrous works.
They are acquainted with His mighty
and glorious deeds, they admire them,
they celebrate them in the worship
which they pay to Him. (2) They
praise Him for the truth of His Word.
“ Thy faithfulness also,” &c. The idea
of the Psalmist is that the angels would


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMA.


praise God for the fulfilment of Hin
promises made unto David. Doubtless,
by the heavenly host God is constantly
and heartily praised for His truth and
faithfulness, There are times when it
seems to us as though God’s faithfulness
were about to fail; but even at its best
our vision is dim, while the angels see
clearly ; our range of vision is extremely
small, while that of the angels is so vast
as to admit of no comparison with ours;
and they, with their clear vision and
wide range, praise God for His faithful-
ness, ‘He keepeth covenant and
mercy with His servants.” “ He
keepeth truth for ever.”

Conciusion.—l. How great ts God /
The most ancient and most mighty of
angels cannot be brought into compari-
son with Him, Angels are great, holy,
glorious, yet “the first-born sons of
light” pay to Him profoundest homage,
worship Him with deepest humility. 2.
How reverently should we regard Him,
All our thought of Him should be
humble and reverent. We should never
speak of Him except with profound
veneration. We should worship Him
with holy awe.


‘¢ The more Tur glories strike mine eyes
The humbler I shall lie.”


Gop IncomPARABLE.
(Verse 6.)


“Who in heaven can be compared
unto the Lord?” Mark—

I. The doctrine to which these
words point. God incomparable ; and
He is so—

1. Jn the glory He possesses, There
is in Him a glory of wisdom (Eph. iii.
10), power (Gen. xvii. 1), love (Rom. vy,
8), majesty (Psa. civ. 1), and grace (2
Cor, ix. 8, 11), before which every
created glory sinks into obscurity.

2. In the dominion He exercises.
Created beings have only a limited and
confined sway, but God’s kingdom ruleth
over all, and extends itself over tho
most distant places as well as the most
exalted personages,

3. In the blessings He bestows. The
ioc believer has a peace that


passeth all understanding (Phil. fv. 7),
his faith is accompanied with joy un-
speakable (1 Pet. i. 8), he abounds in
hope (Rom. xv. 13), and the glory re-
served for him is unrevealed (1 John
iii. 2).

IL The sentiments it should excits
in us. If God be incomparable, so that
none is like Him, a holy reverential fear ,
becomes us in His presence (ver. 7).
With this reverential fear we should also
feel in our hearts, and express in every
possible way, a fervent attachment to
Him (Psa. xviii. 1). Trust, too, must be
confidently reposed in Him, whatever
difficulties we have to encounter, and
though the dangers which encompass us
are great and imminent (Psa. xlvi. 1-7).
——W. Sleigh.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


POALM LEXXIS.


era es f-Sneesngepneernnnenenssposinn-snnsniatnsencis-e esmniesveseiaSsse wissen senior


Tax Hienzesr Worsar,
(Veree 7.)


“God ts greatly to be feared in the
assembly,” dc,

L The highest worship is offered to
God. Not unto saints, or angels, or the
_ Virgin Mary, but unto God. He is
Supreme. “There is one God.”

II. The highest worship is offered
by saints. Angels are called saints in
the text. The redeemed in heaven are
also called saints (1 Thess. iii. 13). The
term is frequently applied to the people
of God upon earth. When so applied
it indicates those who are, 1. Spiritually
regenerated, 2. Consecrated toGod. 3.
Imitators of Christ.

III. The highest worship is reve-
rent in spirit. “God is greatly to be
feared, . . . and to be had in reverence.”
This reverence is opposed, 1. To all
thoughtlessness in worship (Eccles. v. 1, 2).
2. To all formality in worship (John


iv. 23, 24). 3. To all unbecoming
Samisarity in worship. In the prayers
and praises which are recorded in the
Holy Book we find no trace of that
irreverent and gushing manner of ad-
dressing God, which is so prevalent with
some sentimental religionists of to-day.

IV. In the highest worship the
presence of God is consciously re-
alised. The worshippers feel that they
are “about Him.” They realise the fact
that God is present to accept the
worship and bless the worshippers who
worship Him in spirit and in truth.
1. God is present everywhere. 2. His
presence is realised only by those who
are spiritual and reverent. 3. He ts
specially present, and His presence ts
apecially realised in the gatherings of
saints for worship (Exod. xx, 24; Matt.
xviii. 20).


Tag StRexetH or Gop an EncouraGEMENnt to His Proriy
to Trust ix Him,


(Verses 8-14)


The Psalmist does not in these verses
lose sight of the faithfulness or truth
of God in respect to His covenant; but
he gives the greater prominence to the
might of God. He is not only a God
of truth, but also a God of power. He
is able as well as willing to keep His
covenant, The text teaches us that,—

I. The Strength of God is mani-
fested in His complete control over
nature. “Thou rulest the raging,” &c.

1. God rules over the sea. There are
times when the sea seems utterly beyond
control, Yet when it foams and thunders
in anger, when its waves, mountains
high, chase each other with awful
rapidity and fury, and destroy every-
thing that is at their mercy, when it
breaks with terrific violence upon the
shore, and when it seems to mock at
and spurn all control ; God can subdue
its angry ragings into calmness and
Fepose at once. Our Lord when He
stilled the tempest gave to us an illus-


tration of the Divine sovereignty over
the sea. ‘He arose, and rebuked the
winds and the sea; and there was a
great calm.” The Psalmist seems to
have regarded the tempestuous sea as a
symbol of the powerful foes who were
arrayed against them. David in one of
his Psalms speaks of “the floods of un-
godly men.” God has complete control
over the most proud and angry people,
He maketh the wrath of man to praise
Him, and the remainder of wrath He
restrains. To the mightiest and most
furious of peoples or nations God can
impose limits, saying, ‘Hitherto shalt
thou come, but no further: and here
shall thy proud waves be stayed.”

2. God rules over the heavens and the
earth, ‘The heavens are Thine, the
earth also is Thine,” &c. God is here
set forth as the Creator and Sustainer
of the heavens and the earth “ All
things were made by Him.” “By Him
all things subsist.” Therefore the

ll


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


heavens and the earth are His. Creator-
ship gives the most indefeasible right to


possession. If any person can create
anything, it is of all things pre
eminently his own property. “The


highest conception of property is that
which is derived from creation.” The
idea in the mind of the Psalmist seems
to be that as the Creator, Sustainer, and
Proprietor of all things, God has the
power and the right to control all things.
“He doeth according to His will in the
army of heaven and among the inhabi-
tants of earth: and none can stay His
hand, or say unto Him, What doest
Thou?” And therefore He was able to
keep His covenant which He made with
David and his seed, Notice the com-
pleteness of God’s rule over nature, The
Psalmist mentions ‘ the sea, the heavens,
the earth, the world.” Then he men-
tions “the north and the south, Tabor
and Hermon.” Tabor lying on the
western side of Jordan, and Hermon
on the eastern, are representative of
east and west. God rules over all
nature in heaven above and on the earth
beneath, from, east to west, and from
north to south, There is no province
of nature which is not under His
control, God’s sovereignty over nature
is frequently asserted in the Bible.. He
is at work in all its departments. He
is the Force of all its forces. (See Psa.
Ixv. 8-11; civ. 1-30; Isa. xl. 26.) The
doctrine of God’s sovereignty over and
agency in nature is philosophic. It is
unsatisfactory to explain the changes in
the phenomena of nature by “laws of
nature,” “nature’s forces,” “attraction,”
“gravitation.” Such explanations do
not satisfy my reason. A law of nature
is simply a “ generalisation of pheno-
mena.” When such a generalisation has
been made and named we have frequently
gained little more than a resting-place
for ignorance rather than a large increase
of knowledge. What are “ nature's
forces”? What is the secret of her
forces? By naming a process or a
phenomenon you do not remove the
mystery of the thing, even though the
name applied be ever so polysyllabic
and obscure. But when I am told that
the changing phenomena of nature are
12





the result of the agency of the omnipo
tent Creator and Sustainer of nature,
working through the wondrous arrange
ments and means which He has
ordained, my reason accepts the state-
ment as intelligent and satisfactory.
Moreover, this recognition of God’s
agency in and sovereignty over nature
is religious. The intelligent and devout
man sees the signs of the Divine pre-
sence and working in every department
and object of nature. ‘The heavens
declare the glory of God,” &e.

II. The strength of God is mani-
fested in His subjugation of His foes.
“Thou hast broken Rahab in pieces az
one that is slain; Thou hast scattered
Thine enemies with Thy strong arm.”
The name Rahab is used to set forth
Egypt the ancient foe of Israel. The
reference is to the emancipation of
Israel from bondage, and the plaguing
and destruction of their oppressors. On
that occasion, God’s sovereignty of the
sea was employed to secure the safety of
His people and the destruction of their
foes, When God makes bare His arm,
the proudest and mightiest nations fall
before Him. The remembrance of what
He had done to Egypt on behalf of His
people would be especially encouraging
to the poet and the people at this time.
His arm had lost none of its ancient
might. He was able at this time to
break their enemies in pieces as one that
is slain, or to scatter them, and so de
stroy their power. God is supreme over
the proudest and mightiest nations,
“His kingdom ruleth over all.”

Ill. The strength of God is ever
exercised in harmony with righteous-
ness, Mercy, and truth. ‘Justice and
judgment are the habitation of Thy
throne: merey and truth shall go be-
fore Thy face.” Justice and judgment
are the ground on which the throne of
God stands, The Divine government
is founded on righteousness, As its
basis, it rests neither on force nor on
fraud, but on truth and on right.
“Even omnipotent power could not
maintain permanently a throne founded
on injustice and wrong. Such an ad-
ministration would sooner or later make
its own destruction sure.” But God’s


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


RsSaALM LAsAXLA,


ES


power is never employed for unrighte-
ous ends, His justice is as great as His
strength. The exercise of God’s great
power is also in keeping with His
“‘mercy.” Even when it is employed in
destroying violent oppressors such as
Rahab, it is employed in mercy. Such
destructions are a kindness not simply
to the oppressed who are set free, but
to mankind at large, who are thereby
delivered from a tyrant and a curse.
God’s great power is acting beneficially,
mercifully. It is also exercised in har-
mony with His “truth.” What His
Word promises His power performs, He
is strong to execute His threatenings,
and to make good His promises, (God’s
power and righteousness, mercy and
faithfulness, are all exercised in beauti-
ful harmony and beneficence, so that an
afflicted people looking to Him for help
may take encouragement from them.
IV. The strength of God thus exer-
cised is an encouragement to trust
Him. So the Psalmist evidently thought
as he celebrated its praise in connection
with the faithfulness of God. We can-
not intelligently trust in God without
including His “‘ power as a concurrent
foundation with His truth. It is the
mainground of trust, and so set forth
in the prophet (Isa, xxvi. 4); ‘Trust ye
in the Lord for ever, for in the Lord
Jehovah is everlasting strength.’...
How could His mercy succour us with-
out His arm, or His wisdom guide us
without His hand, or His truth perform


Tus BLESSEDNESS OF
(Verses


In the preceding portion of the Psalm
the Poet has celebrated the faithfulness,
almightiness, and righteousness of the
Lord. And now he celebrates the
blessedness of the people who had such
a God; for He would surely deliver
and save them. He sets forth the
blessedness of the people of God as
found in their relations to Him, and
mentions several of these relations,
He speaks of them —

I. As worshippers of God. “Blessed
's the people that know the joyful


promises to us without His strength ?
... Though we value the kindness men
may express to us in our distresses, yet
we make them not the objects of our
confidence, unless they have an ability
to act what they express, Therevan be
no trust in God without an eye to His
power.” So said Charnock in one of
his great discourses; and so the Psalmist
seems to have thought as he penned this
portion of the Psalm; and as he called
to mind God’s great power in ruling the
raging of the sea and subduing the foes
of His people, he must have felt confi-
dent that He had power to keep His
covenant with His people.

Conotusion.—l. Let the ungodly take
warning. You may resist His grace and
the order of His laws; but when He
makes bare His arm for judgment, you
will find that you cannot resist His
power, ‘ Acquaint now thyself with
Him and be at peace: thereby good
shall come unto thee.” 2. Let the
anxious Christian be encouraged. Our
evils can never be so great to distress
us, as His power is great to deliver us,
He is able to perform all the great and
gracious things which He has promised.
3. Let all men fear God. As Charnock
says: ‘How should we adore that
power which can preserve us, when
devils and men conspire to destroy us!
How should we stand in awe of that
power which can destroy us, though
angels and men should combine to pre-
serve us |”


THz Propie or Gop.


15-18.)


sound.” We believe that by “the joy-
ful sound” we are to understand the
call to the religious festivals, In
celebrating the great festivals trumpets
were joyously blown, and there was
great rejoicing (Lev. xxiii. 24; Num.
x. 10; xxix. 1). To know the joyful
sound is to know and esteem the worship
of God. So the meaning of this clause
appears to us to be—“ Happy is that
people whose God is. the Lord.” They
who are the worshippers of the only
living and true God are indeed blessed.
13


FRALM LEXXIE.





1. Their confidence in Him shall be
honoured and rewarded. A man’s god
is that in which his supreme affection
and trust are reposed. Idolatry is really
rife amongst us to-day. Men worship
possessions and property, position and
power, honour and fame, relatives and
friends. Now any of these or all of
them must inevitably fail those who
trust in them, They are insecure and
transient: they are inadequate to meet
the needs of the soul, There is but
one Being in whom we may safely
place unbounded confidence. “ He that
believeth in Him shall not be con-
founded.” ‘O Lord of hosts, blessed
is the man that trusteth in Thee.” He
will make good His every promise. He
is sufficient to help us in all the needs
of life. In Him the soul may find satis-
faction for its deepest longings and its
highest aspirations, Trust in Him will
be amply rewarded.

2. Their worship of Him is in ttself
blessed. Much of the worship of heathen
deities was debasing and corrupting.
Many of the idolatries of our own age
are degrading the noblest powers of
our nature, dwarfing our manhood,
ruining souls, But the worship of
God is the worship of supreme and
infinite Perfection. His worship is
joyous. We do not approach Him with
terror, but with humble confidence ;
not with mourning and dirges, but
with gladness and psalms, ‘“ Let us
come into His presence with thanks-
giving,” &c. His worship is transform-
tng. As we worship Him in spirit and
in truth we become like Him, we “are
changed into the same image from glory
to glory as by the Lord the Spirit.”
Blessed indeed are they whose God is
the Lord.

TI. As conscious of His favour.
“They shall walk, O Lord, in the light
of Thy countenance.” They possess
the favour of God, and they know it,
and rejoice in it. The lovingkindness
of God they realise as their portion.
The figure is a beautiful one. Who
does not know the joy of looking into
the face of one whom we love when no
cloud of anxiety or sorrow or anger
darkens it, but when it beams with

14


‘is unchangeable,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : PSALMS,


en ee


affection for us! So the people of God
live in His smile. “In His favour is
life” His “lovingkindness is better
than life.’ They who walk in the
light of His countenance enjoy His
favour; their life is crowned with His
lovingkindness. Their life is marked
by aciivity and progress. The conscious-
ness of His favour does not produce
indolence, but it leads to exertion ; it does
not lull the soul into slothful security,
but stimulates it to diligent activity.
“They shall walk, O Lord,” dc. Walk-
ing is progressive motion from place to
place. So the godly soul advances in
the Divine life. ‘They go from
strength to strength,” from conquest to
conquest, from grace to grace, from
glory to glory. They “press toward
the mark,” &ec,

Til. As rejoicingin Him. “In Thy
name shall they rejoice all the day.”

1. Thetr joy ts religious, They rejoice
in God’s name, t.¢., in Himself as made
known to them. The good man has
ample reason for joy in the being and
perfections of God and His relation to
him. When we reflect upon His wisdom,
and goodness, and power, and holiness,
and truth, and love, and upon the fact
that they are “all engaged to make us
blessed,”——have we not reason for joy ?
When we call to mind our privileges
in the present, and our prospects for
the future, have we not cause for re-
joicing? “Now are we the sons of
God, and it doth not yet appear what
we shall be,” &c. Let no one regard a
godly life as gloomy andsad. Men may
be gloomy for want of religion, but not
because of it. A truly godly life is a
bright and joyous thing.

2. Their joy ts constant. “All the
day.” There is no reason why the
people of God may not rejoice continu-
ally in God. Circumstances may be
changeful, trial may overtake us, sorrow
may be our portion, and happiness may
abandon us; but even then we may
have a deep and holy joy in God. He
His promises cannot
fail, Having Him for our portion it is
both our privilege and our duty to re-
joice in Him always, “Rejoice in the
Lord alway; again I say, Rejoice.”


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


POALM LXXXIX,


eee,


IV. As exalted by Him. “In Thy
righteousness shall they be exalted,”
“The righteousness of God,” says Heng-
stenberg, ‘is here that property by which
He gives to every one his own, salvation
to His people.” We regard the clause
as intended by the Poet to set forth the
idea that under the righteous govern-
ment of God they would find salvation
and honour. He would deliver them
from their enemies and their dangers.
He would exalt them to honour. It
certainly is true that the people of God
are exalted by Him. They are exalted
now in their character and relations.
“ Now are we the sons of God.” They
are like God in character. They will be
exalted hereafter to heavenly glory and
dignity. To him that overcometh will
I grant to sit with Me in My throne,”
&c. ‘Before the throne of God, and
serve Him day and night in His temple.”
‘“‘Kings and priests unto God.”

V. Asstrengthened by Him. “Thou
art the glory of their strength: and in
Thy favour our horn shall be exalted.”
The glory of the strength of the people
of God is here set forth as consisting in
the fact that it is derived from God.
The “ horn” is a symbol of power. To
exalt the horn is to display the power.
The meaning of the verse is, that they
derived all their strength from God.

1. Phe strength of God ts all-sufictent.
“T can do all things through Christ
which strengtheneth me.” It is sufficient
to support us under the heaviest trial ;
and to empower us for the most arduous
duty.

2. The strength of God is always
available. Whenever we ask for it sin-
cerely and believingly it will be given to
us.
3. The strength of God ts our only
sufficient support. No one else is ade-
quate to sustain us in life’s trials, and
strengthen us for life’s duties. The
wise, the great, the powerful, the loving
* amongst men are not sufficient to our
need, ‘Apart from me,” said Christ,
“ye can do nothing.” If we draw our


strength from Him, we shall not fail in
life’s duties, or faint beneath its burdens,
“ As thy days so shall thy strength be,”

VI. As governed and protected by
God. ‘For the Lord is our defence ;
and the Holy One of Israel is our King.”
The marginal reading is, “ For our shield
is of the Lord, and our King is of the
Holy One of Israel.” ‘The true con-
struction of this verse,” says Barnes, “is,
‘For to Jehovah (belongs) our shield, and
to the Holy One of Israel our King.’
That is, all that they had, and all that
they relied on as a defence, belonged to
God, or was of God; in other words,
their very protectors were themselves
protected by Jehovah.” Undoubtedly,
the main idea of the verse is, that they
were protected by God. He was their
shield and defender, He was their
sovereign, and would therefore guard
their interests. We have three ideas in-
volved here—

1. The people of God are exposed to
danger. Their “adversary, the devil, as
a roaring lion, walketh about, seeking
whom he may devour.” ‘They are also
in danger from “ fleshly lusts, which war
against the soul.” And by reason of
temptation from the world.

2. The people of God are not able to
protect themselves from danger. They
are not, of themselves, wise enough to
baffle the deep designs of their enemies ;
neither are they strong enough to suc-
cessfully resist their power.

3. The people of God are securely
protected by Him from all danger. (See
Psa. xci., cxxi., cxxv. 1,2; 1 Pet. i. 5.)
They are inviolably and eternally secure.

Conctusion.—l. How great, then,
is the blessedness of the people of God!
“There is none like unto the God of
Jeshurun,” &c, (Deut. xxxiii, 26-29). 2.
How important that we should be found
among them/ Are we of the people of
God? If so, let us rejoice in our privi-
leges. If not, in the strength of
Divine grace “first give your own
selves to the Lord,” and thus seek
union with His people.


——


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,
eo" a ee eens


Biessepness or Knowine THE Jorrut Soump.
(Verses 15, 16.)


“ Blessed are the people, dc.

Whatever these words in their literal
sense refer to, they have undoubtedly
an ultimate reference to the gospel ;
and there are three particulars for our
consideration respecting it.

I. What itis. It is a joyful sound.
And why is it so? Because it pro-
claims—


1. Pardon to the condemned. And -


this pardon is complete, reaching to all
past offences, however aggravated or
multiplied they may be. It is free—
free of all obligation to and of all price
from the creature.

2. Freedom to the enslaved. Man by
nature is in a state of vassalage ; he is
far removed from his original condition ;
bound with the chains of his sins, and
yields to the requirements of Satan (2
Tim. ii. 26). In this state he was born ;
but the sound of liberty has not ceased
to be heard since it first saluted the ears
of Adam and Eve.

3. Victory to the oppressed. The sor-
rows of man are many; but the gospel
offers to rescue him, bringing to him a
full and sufficient remedy for them, so
that he may have peace within; the
reality, and not the shadow merely.

II, What it demands. We must
“know the joyful sound.” What is
implied in this? It includes three
things—

1. A proper apprehension of tt. Many
content themselves with hearing it; but
its import must be understood.

2. A sense of being personally in-
terested tn tt. We know it not aright,


if we do not know it experimentally and
savingly.

3. A life and conversation suited to tt.
Before we conclude too confidently that
we know the joyful sound, we should
ask ourselves: how our knowledge
operates? To possess knowledge will
be of little avail unless it produce a
practical effect (1 John i. 6, 7).

III. What it ensures. Blessedness.
The Psalmist’s testimony respecting this
is delightful, and shows how peculiar
and distinguished the felicity of such
people as know the gospel is.

1. They possess tranquillity of mind.
In their journey heavenward, they have
the light of God’s countenance to
encourage them in their distresses and
difficulties.

2. They have continual joy. “In
Thy name shall they rejoice all the day.”
His name comprehends those infinite
perfections by which He has revealed
Himself to us in His works, and in His
Word. These being all theirs, on their
side, united for their advantages, cannot
but afford them unspeakable enjoyment.

3. They are greatly dignified. “In
Thy righteousness shall they be exalted.”
By relying on the atonement, made by
the death of God’s only Son, they are
arrayed in His righteousness, and are
consequently justified and accepted.

Have we a saving knowledge of the
Gospel? If so, how exalted is our privi-
lege. But those who are strangers to the
heavenly message, whether they be more
or less wicked in respect of gross sina,
are in a truly awful state —W. Sleigh.


Gop’s Covenant witH Davi.
(Verses 19-28.)


“There follows,” says Hengstenberg,
“in prosecution of the subject entered
on in verses 3 and 4, a more full de-
velopment in two sections, of the
glorious promise made to the anointed,
and in him to the people (vers, 19-38).

first ie vera, 19-28), it is represented


that God had promised perpetual deliver.
ance to the people in him, perpetual
victory over its enemies,” and “perpetual
dominion.” The covenant undoubtedly
looks beyond David to the Anointed
Saviour and King of men, as will be
seen as we proceed with our exposition,


H()MILETIC COMMENTARY; PSALMS.


FS4LM LXIRIX,


re ee Re


The leading teachings of the paragraph
may be indicated under two main
“ heads,”

I The Election of David. The word
“then” with which the paragraph
begins connects it with verses 3 and 4.
In those verses the covenant is men-
tioned; in this paragraph it is more
fully stated. We prefer the reading,
“Thy holy ones” in verse 19 to “ Thy
holy one.” ‘All the old translators,
many MSS. and editions,” have “thy
holy ones,” “The singular,” says Heng-
stenberg, “owes its existence, as in
Psa. xvi. 10, to an exegetical incapacity.
It was felt to be impossible to reconcile
the plural with the application to David
or Nathan; and to one or other of these,
all interpreters, without exception, down
even to modern times, have applied the
expression, without observing that in
the following part of the Psalm it is
the people that complain that God does
not appear to be keeping His promise,
and that it is the people that pray that
He would fulfil His promise... . The
address cannot be made to David, for
he is never addressed throughout the
remaining portion of the Psalm.” And
it is incorrect to say that Nathan is
referred to as the “holy one,” for his-
torically the address was not directed
to him, but to David through him.
The promises, though originally directed
to David, are intended for all the people
of Israel, They are the “holy ones.”

But respecting the election of David
we are taught—

1. That he was elected from the people.
“Chosen out of the people.” David
had not descended from great kings or
heroic warriors; he was not of exalted
rank; he had grown up in humble life
among the people, and had lived in
lowliness and obscurity. Our Lord
Jesus Christ also was ‘‘chosen out of
the people.” He was “in all things
made like unto His brethren.” He, too,
was born into humble circumstances, and
so far as this world is concerned He
lived a lowly life of labour. He was
bone of our bone, and flesh of our flesh,
He had true human sympathies. He
endured most really severe human suf-
ferings. He was and is a true man.

VOL.


2. That he was elected to sovereignty.
“T have exalted one chosen ous of the
people. I have found David my ser-
vant,” &c. David was thrice anointed
king. Once by Samuel in his father’s
house at Bethlehem ; once at Hebron
as king over Judah ; and once again,
after seven years, as king over all Israel.
God called him from the sheepfolds to
the throne. Our Lord is called to
universal sovereignty. He is “ King of
kings, and Lord of lords.” “On His
head are many crowns.” ‘“ He made
Himself of no reputation, and took upon
Him the form of a servant, and was
made in the likeness of men,” dec. (Phil.
ii. 7-11).

3. That he was elected to service. “TI
have laid help upon one that is mighty.”
David was chosen by God for a great
work. God had invested him with
power that he might deliver Israel out
of the hand of her enemies, Hengsten-
berg translates, “‘I have laid help upon
a man of war.” And Alexander says
that the word “ chosen” has “allusion
to its specific use as signifying a young
warrior.” David was elected of God as
the champion of Israel to lead her
armies to battle and to victury. We
know how successful he was in this
respect, At the beginning of his career
the people cried, “Saul hath slain his
thousands, but David his tens of thou-
sands,” And at the close of his career
Israel was victorious over all her ene-
mies, and was at peace. So Jesus
Christ was elected by God to save man-
kind. He is the mighty One upon
whom our help is laid. He is “ mighty
to save.” ‘He is able to save them to
the uttermost that come unto God by
Him.”

4. That he was elected by God. “I
have laid help,...I have exalted,...
I have found,...I have anointed.”
In the fullest and strictest sense David
was chosen by God for his high position
and his great work. This accounts for
his pre-eminent fitness for his place and
mission. God knew his great qualifica-
tions, his courage, strength, wisdom,
faith, piety; and chose him to fill the
throne and subdue the foes of Israel,
David was indeed “king by the grace

17


PEALM LXXXIZ.


of God.” Our Lord was chosen by
God for His great work, “ Behold my
servant, whom I uphold ; mine elect, in
whom my soul delighteth.” He is the
Anointed, the Christ of God.

Il. The promises made to David
Here is a promise of

1. Constant support. ‘ With whom
My hand shall be established: Mine
arm also shall strengthen him.” De
Wette translates the first clause, “ With
him My hand shall be continually.”
The idea of the verse is that God would
grant unto David constant support. His
hand would be ever present to aid him,
and His strong arm would be ever out-
stretched to strengthen him. This
promise was remarkably fulfilled in the
case of David. Many were the trials of
his life, yet in all of them he was sup-
ported by God. Many and arduous
were his undertakings, yet he was
enabled to bring them to a successful
issue. The people now plead this pro-
mise for themselves. In their prostrate
and perilous condition they plead for a
fulfilment of this promise of the cove-
nant, The promise was also fulfilled
in the Saviour. He was ever upheld by
God. The Father was ever with Him
in fellowship, and ever with Him to aid
Him. He overcame all His difficulties,
He meekly and triumphantly bore all
His trials, because God was ever present
with Him. The great want of the
Christian Church to-day is spiritual
power. Here we have the covenant pro-
mise of the constant help of God. Let us
plead it in faith, and the life and power
that we need shall be given unto us,

2. Victory over His foes. This pro-
mise is twofold. (1) His foes should be
restrained. “The enemy shall not
exact upon him, nor the son of wicked-
ness afflict him.” The allusion, in the
fret clause, is to a harsh and unjust
creditor, who, regardless of the ability
of his debtor, exacts not only the just
debt, but an exaggerated demand,
The second clause is taken literally from
the words of the covenant as recorded
in 2 Sam. vii. 10. For some time
David suffered much from the persecu-
tions of Saul, Notwithstanding his oft-
repeated manifestations of affection and

18





HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMB.


1





loyalty, Saul was never satisfied. But
those persecutions came to an end,
those exactions all ceased. For many
years after the making of the covenant,
the enemies of Israel did not dare at-
tempt to oppress or exact upon them in
any way. (2) His foes should be van-
quished, ‘I will beat down his foes
before his face, and plague them that
hate him.” Here is complete victory
from the hand of God promised to
David and to the people. We know
how it was fulfilled. The reign of
David closed in peace, and that of
Solomon was peaceful. These promises
were fulfilled in our Lord. The malice
and power of men and devils against
Him were curbed by God. Satan
could only bruise the heel of the
Saviour, while his head was bruised by
the Saviour. What Christ said to
Pilate was true of all His enemies,
“Thou couldest have no power against
me, except it were given thee from
above.” All the enemies of our Lord
shall be destroyed. Ignorance, sin,
suffering, death, and the grave, shall
all be destroyed. His victory will be
complete and glorious, Every child of
God may claim these promises as his
own. Our foes are restrained. God
ever imposes upon Satan His, “Thus
far shalt thou go, but no further.” (See
Job i. 12 and ii. 6.) And He will van-
quish all our foes for us. Through faith
in Him we shall come out of life’s
battle “more than conquerors.” Here
is a promise of—

3. Conspicuous power through the
faithfulness and mercy of God. ‘ My
faithfulness and my mercy shall be with
him, and in My name shall his horn be
exalted.” In the commencement of the
Psalm the poet celebrated the mercy
and faithfulness of God, and here he
recurs again to them. They were
clearly displayed in the covenant, and
now that the covenant seems about to
fail, the hope of the Psalmist and the
people is in them. Mercy and faithful-
ness were granted to David, and to his
seed ; and though, by reason of their
sin, the temporal sovereignty passed
away and the kingdom was destroyed,
vet the line of David continued in un-


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.
ere





broken succession until Christ came, and
the spiritual and eternal kingdom was
established in Him. Through God's
blessing the power of the kingdom was
conspicuous in the time of David, and it
was especially so in the time of Solomon.
But the power of the kingdom of our
Lord is growing more and more con-
spicuous daily. “The stone that was
cut out of the mountain without hands”
is fast filling the whole earth. Here isa
promise of—

4. Enlarged dominion, “TI will set
His hand also in the sea, and His right
hand in the rivers,” The sea which is
here mentioned is the Mediterranean,
and the rivers are the Tigris and the
Euphrates. These were the boundaries
of the promised land as stated to
Abram (Gen. xv, 18). The kingdom
of David was of this extent. The
promise made to Abram was fulfilled
in his time and in the time of Solomon.
But “ David’s greater Son” “shall have
dominion from sea to sea, and from the
river unto the ends of the earth.” His
kingdom is ever increasing, and ever shall
increase, until the whole world bowg to
His sway. Here is a promise of —

5. Intimate and exalted relationship.
“He shall cry unto Me, Thon art my
Father, my God, and the rock of my
salvation, Also I will make Him My
firstborn, higher than the kings of the
earth.” David looked to God as “the
rock of his salvation,” but we have no

evidence to show that he regarded God
as a “Father.” Mr. Molyneux justly
inquires, “ When did David call God
his Father? It is striking that we do
not find anywhere in the Old Testament
that the patriarchs or prophets called
God their Father. They did not know
Him as such. This verse is unintel-
ligible in reference to David, but in
regard to the True David it is exactly
whai He did say—‘My Father, and
your Father; my God, and your God.’
Never until Christ uttered these words,
never until He appeared on earth in
humanity as the Son of God, did any
man or any child of humanity address
God in this endearing character.” The
27th verse was partly fulfilled in David,
but only in a very small degree. It is


PasLM LEXIE,


true that he is pre-eminent among kings
“alike in his own personal character
and his reign; in his relation to God:
and in the fact that he was the ancestor
of the Messiah.” Yet it was only a feeble
types of the fulfilment of this promise
that was witnessed in David. Our Lord
Jesus Christ is “the firstborn of every
creature.” He is “appointed heir of all
things.” “All kings shall fall down
before Him: all nations shall serve
Him.” He “is on the right hand of
God, angels and authorities and powers
being made subject unto Him.” But it
is the privilege of every member of the
seed of Christ to address God as ‘‘My
Father, my God, and the rock of my
salvation.” If by faith “we are made
partakers of Christ,” then is God our -
Father, and we may with confidence
draw near to Him, and rest in Him.

6. Perpetual establishment of the cove-
nant. ‘My mercy will I keep for him for
evermore, and My covenant shall stand
fast with him.” This promise also looks
onward to the Christ. In Him the
covenant is sure and lasting. But in
what way can God be said to keep His
mercy for Christ for evermore? Excel-
lently Matthew Henry elucidates the
point. “ My mercy will I keep for Him,
to be disposed of by Him, for evermore ;
in the channel of Christ’s mediation all
the streams of Divine goodness will for
ever run. Therefore it is the mercy of
our Lord Jesus Christ which we look
for unto eternal life. And as the
mercy of God flows to us through Him,
so the promise of God is, through Him,
firm tous: My covenant shall stand fast
with Him, both the covenant of redemp-
tion made with Him, and the covenant
of grace made with us in Him.” His
covenant made with Christ and His seed
cannot fail. His word abideth for ever,
The treasures of His crace are inexhaus-
tible. He will ful4l His promises to
Christ. And His mercy and grace to-
ward us shall be more richly imparted
and more conspicuously displayed to all
eternity.

Conctusion.—l. Let all who by faith
in Christ are interested tn this covenant
rejoice in the rich blessings tt secures unto
them. “All things are ours, Zi we are

}


POALM LXXXxIX.


Christ’s, and Christ is God’s.” 2. Let
all who are not by faith savingly interested
in this covenant believe tn Christ, and 80
share tts blessings. ‘Incline your ear,





HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





and come unto Me,” saith the Lord;
“hear, and your soul shall live; and I
will make an everlasting covenant with
you, even the sure mercies cé David.”


Tue Micuty Hevprer or Max,
(Verse 19.)


This assurance points first to’ David,
afterwards to Jesus Christ. In Him on
whom God hath “laid help” for the re-
storation of humanity it receives its
complete fulfilment. The text expresses
this truth, that man’s great need as a
sinner is met by Christ's great power as
a Saviour. Consider,

L Man’s Great Need as a Sinner.
The text teaches by implication that
none but a mighty Saviour was equal to
the work of human redemption ; that
man had fallen so low and sunk so
deeply in sin and misery that no arm
but that of the mighty One was able to
raise him. That we may obtain a clear
and correct impression of the greatness
of man’s necessity as a fallen being, let
us consider—

1. The greatness of the being that fell.
Much has been written and spoken of
the physical majesty of man when con-
trasted with other animals, There is
much of both truth and beauty in the
well-known words of our greatest drama-
tist : “ What a piece of work is man!
how noble in reason! how infinite in
faculties ! in form and moving, how ex-
press and admirable! in action, how
like an angel! in apprehension, how
like a god! the beauty of the world!
the paragon of animals!” And a more
ancient poet exclaimed, “I will praise
Thee; for I am fearfully and wonder-
fully made.” But the physical is not
the man, it is but the “earthly house,”
the costume of the spiritual. “There
is a spirit in man, and the inspiration
of the Almighty giveth them under-
standing.” This spirit is the man; and
as the inhabitant is greater than the
house, as the jewel is more precious than
the casket, so the soul is incomparably
greater and more precious than the
body... . Think of the greatness of
man’s mind, as seen in its astonishing

20


achievements, Mention briefly the
wondrous triumphs of the human mind.
. . . Now if man has done all this, and
much more than this, in his fallen de-
generate state, what could he not have
done had he not fallen? What could
he not have done had his arm never
been paralysed by sin, his mental vision
never been beclouded, and his constant
access to the Great Source of wisdom
and power never been interrupted ?
Moreover, if man has done alli this
when he is but in his infancy, in the
mere “ bud of being,” what will he not
be capable of accomplishing when he is
freed entirely from the impediments of
sin and in the unfolding of powers
much more mature? The exceeding
majesty of the human mind in heaven
far surpasses our conceptions, “It
doth not yet appear what we shall be.”
When we think of man as an immortal
tntelligence, we are struck into amaze-
ment at his greatness. He is capable
of companionship with angels and com-
munion with the Father of spirits, and
is destined for perpetual growth in all
that is true, holy, and beautiful,

2. The greatness of the Fall. Man's
greatness made his fall the more disas-
trous and terrible. The fall of man
was not as the wreck of some small
boat which is quickly destroyed and lost
sight of, but as the wreck of a great and
majestic vessel,—so great that even now


‘the vast ocean is strewed with its shat-


tered fragments, A once glorious angel
fell from his high position, and with
him multitudes of high and holy ones
rebelled, and lost their purity, their
happiness, their God; and now the
world is led captive at his will. Man,
who was mad only “a little lower than
the angels,” fell from his God-given
sphere, and with him fell all the race,
and the power which should have been


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.








exercised for the true and good is ar-
rayed in antagonism against them. And,
when all the powers of man’s being are
thus exercised for evil, who can measure
the extent and enormity of their evil-
doing? St. Paui has graphically de-
picted the enormities wrought by the
mighty but sadly perverted powers: of
man (Rom. iii. 13-18). Man’s greatness
has aggravated the terrible character of
his fall. His mind is mighty to devise
evil, and his arm to execute it. And
this ttate of things is not partial but
race-wide (Rom. iii. 10-12). Wherever
upon earth you find man you find sin,
and wherever you find sin you find
misery and death (Rom. v. 12). We
may picture man as a once splendid
temple now lying in ruins. Who shall
restore him? shall education? shall
science? shall schemes of social re-or-
ganisation? shall systems of political
economy? These have been tried and
found lamentably deficient. None but
God can restore man. Rejoice, for God
hath “laid help upon One that is
mighty,” &ec.

II. Christ’s great power as &
Saviour. ‘I have laid help upon One
that is mighty,” &. Notice—

1. Christ’s identification with huma-
nity. ‘Chosen out of the people”—one
of ourselves, Christ was a true man,
although not a mere man. ‘God mani-
fest in the flesh.” ‘God was in Christ
reconciling the world unto Himself.”
While bowing reverently before His
Godhood, we remember gratefully His
manhood. As a man wesee in Him our
Example, “Learn of Me,” He saith to
as, (1 Pet. ii. 21). Our sympathetic
Friend and Brother. (Heb. ii. 11, 14-18;
fv, 15, 16).

2. Christ’s exaltation above humanity.
“T have exalted One.” Mention the
spiritual exaltation of the whole earthly


PSALM LXXXIX,





life of Christ. Even while His feet
trod this earth He was “the Son of man
which is in heaven.” There was the
sublime exaltation of the cross, In
that voluntary self-sacrifice we have the
most glorious manifestation of the God-
like in human life that the world haa
ever seen. But the exaltation referred
to in the Messianic application of the
text is probably that of His resurrection,
and Hts ascension to heaven. In His
resurrection we have Divine honour
conferred upon Him, and the attestation
of His Messianic claims. In His ascen-
sion He resumed the glory which He had
with the Father before the world was, and
also entered upon the glories of Mediator.
“For the joy that was set before Him,”
&c. (Heb. xii, 2; Phil. ii. 8-12).

3. Christ's power to save humanity.
“T have laid help upon One that is
mighty.” Because Jesus was ‘chosen
out of the people” He possesses that
sympathy with us which is requisite to
render His help efficient, and to assure
us that it will be imparted. And the
exaltation of His miracles, resurrection,
and ascension declare Him to be “the
Son of God with power” to save man.
His manhood is evidence of His willing-
ness to save man; His Godhood is
evidence of His power to save man,
“The Son of man hath power on earth
to forgive sins.” He is “ mighty to save.”
“He is able to save them to the utter-
most that come unto God by Him,” &ec.

Conciusion.—1. If you have availed
yourself of the help of the Mighty One,
cleave to Him until you are entirely
freed from sin, and all your being is
holy to the Lord, 2. If you have not
availed yourself of the help of the great
Redeemer, do so at once. He waits to
save you. Trust His almighty power
and infinite love, and so rise to holiness
and God.


Tax Covenant oF Gop AND THE Sixs or Mex.
(Verses 29-37.)


May the covenant of God be made
of none effect by the sin of man? Shall
God’s covenant with David and _ his
seed be nullified by reason of their


transgression? May man frustrate the
purpose of God? This question is
answered in the paragraph before us.
I. The sins of men are opposed to
2]


PSALM LXXXIE,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


a a Na an a a ai a coe BL BA tn ey


the covenant of God. All the arrange-
ments of God are utterly opposed to sin.
1. His laws are against it. The laws of
the material universe are against it,
“Whoso breaketh an hedge a serpent
shall bite him.” God has annexed in-
evitable and stern penalties to every
breach of His laws in the material
realm, The laws of the moral universe
are all against sin. On all the dreary
region of evil the Divine “Thou shalt
not” is inscribed in letters of flame.
And on all the sunny realm of
righteousness the Divine “Thou shalt”
is clearly written. 2. His judgments
are against tt. Think of the stern
judgments recorded in the Bible which
were inflicted by reason of sin: the
expulsion of our first parents from
Eden, the deluge in the days of Noah,
the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah
by fire, the plague of the fiery flying
serpents in the wilderness, the terrible
overthrow of Jerusalem. 3. His re-
demption ts against tt, For this
purpose the Son of God was manifested
that He might destroy the works of the
devil.” ‘‘He appeared to put away sin
by the sacrifice of Himself.” His great
mission is ‘to save sinners.” The
covenant of God has no complicity with
evil. The goodness and merey of ‘God
are an encsuragement to penitence, but
they are hostile to sin. God regards
sin with unutterable abhorrence. ‘Oh,
do not this abominable thing that I
hate.” His ideas, His feelings, His
purposes, His arrangements, His opera-
tions, are all against it.

II. Yet men who in the covenant
of God are richly blessed may sin
grievously against Him. “If his chil-
dren forsake My law, and walk not in
My judgments; if they break My sta-
tutes, and keep not My commandments.”
Here are sins of commission. “If his
children forsake My law, .. . if they
break,” or profane, “My atatutes.”
Here are sins of omtssion. ‘Walk not
in My judgments, keep not My com-
maudments.” These sins may be com-
mitted by men who are enjoying many
blessings of the Divine covenant.

1. Such was the case with the Jews,
Ancient ee sadly forsook God and

2


wickedly rebelled against Him. Soma
members even of the seed of David
sinned grievously against Him.

2. Such is the case with many who are
in the enjoyment of Gospel privileges.
What multitudes in this land of religious
light and liberty and abounding spiritual
privileges, are living in utter disregard
of the Will of God!

3. Such is the case even with true
Christians, Even after we have tasted
that God is gracious, we may sadly sin
against Him, Nay, who is there of us
that is not sensible of frequent sins both
of omission and commission, and especi-
ally of the former? ‘“ Sins of commis-
sion may not, perhaps, shock the retro-
spect of conscience. Large and obtru-
sive to view, we have confessed, mourned,
repented of them. Sins of omission, so
veiled amidst our hourly emotions—
blent, confused, unseen in the conven-
tional routine of existence ;—alas ! could
these suddenly emerge from their shadow,
group together in serried mass and
accusing order, would not the best of us
then start in dismay, and would not the
proudest humble himself at the throne
of mercy?” The fact that even good
men may and do thus sin against God—

(1.) Keveals man’s moral freedom.
Saint and sinner are alike morally free,
God will not compel any one to obey Him.

(2.) The importance of watchfulness.
“Watch and pray that ye enter not
into temptation.”

3.) The necessity of trust tn God.
“Hold up my goings in Thy paths, that
my footsteps slip not.” “Hold Thou
me up, and I shall be safe.”

III. The sins of men will be pun-
ished by God. “I will visit their trans-
gression with the rod and their iniquity
with stripes.” If the people of God
sin against Him, they will be most
surely punished by Him.

1. The rod ts used for their correction,
not for their destruction. God some-
times inflicts upon His people pain of
body, or losses in business, or family
afflictions, or distressing bereavementa,
as a chastisement for their sins, He
would thereby impress them with the
heinousness of evil, that they may fear
to sin. The Divine hatred of evil is too


EOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PEALE LEXXIE,





intense for sin to go unpunished. God’s
iove of His people is too great for Him
to allow them to sin and not chastise
them for it. He visits them with the
rod of correction that He may reclaim
them from their evil ways, and establish
their goings in holiness.

2. The correction ts administered’ by
God. “I will visit their transgressions,”
&c. “Visitation implies oversight and
paternal care. The metaphor is taken
from those who undertake to watch
over the sick, or train up children, or
tend sheep.” God, who is wise and
gracious, bears the rod and inflicts the
chastisement ; we may, therefore, rest
assured that He will inflict that only
which is for our good.

IV. The sins of men cannot frus-
trate the covenant of God. ‘‘Never-
theless My lovingkindness will I not
utterly take from him,” &c., verses
33-37. Human sip cannot defeat the
Divine purposes. This is evident, for—

1. They are the purposes of an omnit-
ecient Being. No circumstance can arise
to disarrange them which has not been
foreseen and provided for by Him. His
plans are formed with a perfect know-
ledge of all events in all worlds and in
all ages.

2. They are the purposes of an omnt-
potent Being. Man’s purposes may be
defeated, or he may fail to carry them
out for want of power, but God is
almighty. He can subdue all opposition.
He canaccomplish all that He may please,
“With God all things are possible.”

3. They are the purposes of an immu-
table Being. In Himself He is un-
changeable. Man varies, as life advances,
and he grows in knowledge and wisdom
and holiness; his views of things often
change, and he may alter his plans or
his methods of action. But it is not so
with God. His purposes are eternal
and immutable, and He, being immu-
table, omnipotent, and omniscient, we
may justly conclude that His covenant
arrangements cannot be made void by
man’s sin. But let us ascertain the
teaching of the text on this point.
Hengstenberg’s note on the 37th verse
appears to us excellent, “ The alleviat-
ing limitation is here first given in verse





33, as it is in the fundamental passage
in verse 15, The alleviation, however,
is not to be misunderstood, as if it re-
ferred to individuals contrary to the
nature of the thing, and contrary to the
history, according to which annihilating
judgments did descend upon the rebel-
lious members of the family of David ;
but the opposition is of the punishment
of sin in the individual, and of grace
continually remaining to the family.
We must not fail to notice that in verse
33 it is not said: I will not withdraw
My mercy from them, the sinners, but
from him, the family as such. Now
that the kingdom has passed from the
sinful to the holy seed of David, the
direct application of this paragraph has
ceased. The case provided for in the
promise cannot again occur. Still there
exists between Christ and His Church a
case analogous to that between David
and his seed. As David’s family was
chosen in him (Comp. 1 Kings xi. 36;
2 Kings viii. 19; Isa. xxxvii. 35), so
that it always remained in possession of
the favour of God, notwithstanding the
fall and rejection of many of its indivi-
dual members, in like manner the Church
is chosen in Christ, and the sins of its
members may hurt themselves but cannot
injure 7. Notwithstanding the fall of
a whole generation, it always flourishes
again; and under the most inexorable
judgments which are not removed by
the appearance of Christ, but rendered
more severe, compassionate grace is
always concealed.” Individual members
of David’s family transgressed, and were
visited with the rod, but the mercy was
not removed from the family. Indivi-
dual Christians may fall into sin and
forsake God and be visited with stripes,
but “the new covenant” shall not fail;
the kingdom of Christ shall flourish
and increase. Man’s sin shall not frus-
trate God’s purposes. “ If,” saith the
Lord, “they profane My statutes, never-
theless My covenant will I not profane.”
Two things more remain to be noticed.
1. God is again represented as declaring
the stability and perpetuity of the cove-
nant. The sun and moon are stable,
orderly. Generations of men come and
go, but they remain. Incessant and


23


FOaALM LXEXXIZ,
—_————


sometimes great changes take place
upon earth, but the ordinances of heaven
remain unchanged, the sun and moon
are the same. So they are used as
symbols of the unchangeable and perma-
nent. And so the covenant of God is
immutable and eternal (See remarks
on verses 1-4.) 2. The solemn declara-
tion of the perpetuity of the covenant.
“One thing have I sworn by My holi-
ness, that I will not lie unto David.”
God, as it were, pledges His own holi-
ness for the fulfilment of the word which
He spake unto David, That attribute
which seems most precious to Him He
here stakes on the fulfilment of His
promise to them. This one thing, that
He will keep His word to His servant


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS


Cee ee eee eee eae pg a AT REA RE ee


David, He thus solemnly asseverates,
“ He abideth faithful: He cannot deny
Himself.”

Conciusion, — Our subject urges,
1. Confidence as to God's covenant.
Neither the unfaithfulness and sin of
man, nor the malice and rage of hell,
can frustrate the glorious purposes of
God. 2. Caution as to our conduct.
“Tf his children forsake My law,” &c.
Though “you cannot break God’s cove-
nant you may violate your own interest
therein.” ‘Take heed lest there be in
any of you an evil heart of unbelief,
in departing from the living God.”
“Grieve not the Holy Spirit of God,
whereby ye are sealed unto the day of
redemption.”


LaMENTATION AND EXPOSTULATION BY REASON OF THE APPARENT
FarLure oF THE CovENANT oF GoD.


(Verses 38-51.)


Confident proclamation of the firm-
ness of the covenant is here succeeded
by bitter lamentation of its seeming
failure, and upon the lamentation
an earnest expostulation with God is
founded, Consider,

I. The lamentation. The general
complaint of the Psalmist is that the
covenant has failed, ‘‘ Thou hast made
void the covenant of Thy servant.” In
his complaint the Psalmist mentions
several particulars in which it seemed
to be failing, or to have already failed.
Let us briefly glance at them :—

1. The king was dethroned, “Thou
hast profaned his crown to the ground ;
... and cast his throne down to the
ground.” Complaints like these show
that, if the king was not actually de
throned, his sovereignty was mutilated,
his throne tottering to ita fall The
crown, which had always been regarded
as sacred, the poet represents as having
been treated as though it were an un-
clean or despised thing to be contemp-
tuously cast to the ground. And the
kingdom had come, or was speedily
and painfully coming, to a ruinous
end.

2. Their defences were destroyed.
“Thou hast broken down all his hedges;

24


Thou hast brought his strongholds to
ruin.” In the former clause the king
and people are compared to a vineyard,
the fences of which were thrown down,
and which was open to the ravages of
wild beasts and to the depredations of
every intrusive passer-by. In the latter
clause, they are compared to a city
whose fortifications were destroyed. The
idea ix, that they were left defenceless
and helpless, and were completely power-
less before their enemies,

3. They were made the prey and
reproach of their neighbours. ‘All that
pass by the way spoil him; he is a
reproach to his neighbours.” By the
“passers-by,” the Psalmist probably
meant ‘‘the nations of the Asiatic kinga
who visited Judah in marching through
against the king of Egypt;” and by
“the ‘neighbours,’ the surrounding
nations who, on a former occasion, ap-
proached David and Solomon with
reverence and paid tribute (comp. 2
Sam. viii 2; 1 Kings v. 1). Now
they despise the anointed of the Lord
in his disgracefully degraded condition
(comp. Psa, Ixxx. 6 ; lxxxviii. 8),”

4, They were defeated in battle and
their enemies exulied over them. ‘Thou
bast set up the right hand of his ad-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





versaries,” dc, (vers, 42, 43.) Their
sword seemed to have lost its ancient
sharpness, as though its edge were
turned. Their weapons failed them in
the day of battle. And, which was much
worse, their spirit failed them in the
day of battle. They did “not stand in
the battle.” A courageous spirit will
achieve victories even with a blunt
sword; but a coward spirit will “not
stand in the battle” even though his
weapons be of the finest. They had
been driven before their enemies like
craven-hearted weaklings ; while those
enemies had by their victories over
them increased and made firmer their
own power, and exulted proudly in their
triumphs, ‘O Lord, what shall I say,
when Israel turneth their backs before
their enemies $”

5. Their vigour and glory had ceased.
“The days of his youth hast Thou short-
ened.” Youth is the season of strength.
Old age is marked by feebleness and
decay. So the period of their pros-
perity and power had been brought to an
unexpected and early close. Premature
_ old age had come upon them. Troubles,
calamities, reverses, and, above all, their
sins, had cut off their youthful successes
and triumphs, and left them weak and
decrepit. Their glory had ceased ; they
were covered with shame, The glory of
their sovereign was gone; their splendour
and might as a nation had passed away ;
their circumstances and condition were
such as put them to shame. If the
Poet and the people contrasted their
present state with their state under
David, and yet more under Solomon,
they must have bitterly felt the change,
and may well have bitterly bewailed it.
What a difference there was between
the then and the now/ and all to the
disadvantage of the now.

6. They attributed their sad condition
entirely to their angry rejection by God.
“Thou hast cast off and abhorred, Thou
hast been wroth with Thine anointed.”
They attribute all their calamities to
Him. He had wrought all their evils.
In His anger He had rejected both the
king and the people, as if they had been
regarded by Him with contempt or
loathing, Now, is this feature of the


PRALM LITEIX,





lamentation true and right? It is true
that their calamities came not without
the permission of God. He had with-
drawn His protection from them, or
their enemies would have been power-
less against them, and their own power
and glory would have remained unim-
paired. So far, at least, the Psalmist is
right. But why did God withdraw His
protection from them? Was it not be-
cause they had “ forsaken His law and
walked not in His judgments, had pro-
faned His statutes, and kept not His
commandments?” Their calamities
were the natural result of their crimes,
They had sown the seed of sin, and
were reaping a harvest of shame and
suffering. Yet in their complaint there
is no confession, They bewail their
sufferings, not their sins. Herein they
were wrong, ‘Their sins had landed
them in their present miseries, And,
in complaining to God, they should have
humbly confessed and repented of their
sins. As it is, there is too much reason
for the remark; ‘ The complainings of
the saints are so exaggerated, that
carnal feeling makes itself more apparent
in them than faith.” Is there not a
lesson here for Christian believers and
churches? Are there not churches to-
day in a reduced, feeble, inglorious con-
dition, which are bewailing their de-
pressed state, as though it were entirely
of the Lord’s doing? Let such churches
search for the sins, of omission or com-
mission, which is the root of their
failure and misery. Let them put forth
every accursed thing from amongst them,
and God will invigorate them with
power, enrich them with success, and
crown them with honour; and if any
Christian finds feebleness and failure
coming upon him as an individual, let
him not blame God, but examine his
own life, and renounce the secret sin or
the questionable practice, or take up the
neglected duty, which has caused the
spiritual loss and decline.

II. The Expostulation. ‘How long,
Lord? wilt Thou hide Thyself for ever f
shall Thy wrath burn like fire?” d&c.
In his expostulation with God the
Psalmist takes up several things and
turns them into effective pleas.


PeaLM LUXXIE,


1. The duration of their distresses,
“‘How long, Lord?” This verse teaches—
(1) That their distresses were very great.
The gracious presence of God was quite
hidden from them. All was darkness ;
and His wrath seemed to be consuming
them. (2) Their distresses had long con-
tenued. So long had God’s countenance
been hidden from them, that the Poet
inquires if it is always to be so, It
seemed as though their night would
never be succeeded by morning ;
their winter never pass into spring.
(3) Their distresses threatened thewr
uiter exiinction, It seemed to them as
though God’s wrath, like fire, would burn
on until they were utterly consumed ;
that their miseries would continue until
their national existence was clean gone.
But tke main thought in the mind of
the Poet in this verse seems to be the
long duration of their distresses, For
some time they had pressed heavily
upon them. No sign of relief for them
could they discover anywhere.

2. The brevity of their life. Re-
member how short my time is.” The
brevity of life is frequently stated in
the Sacred Scriptures. Human life upon
earth is compared to a flower, to grass,
to a shadow, to “a vapour which ap-
peareth for a little time and then
vanisheth away.” The Psalmist here
brings in the brevity of life as an
argument for the speedy interposition
of God. If the distresses were not
speedily removed life itself would be
gone. If the Divine mercy were to be
manifested, it must be manifested
speedily, or it would be too late for
them. Must their brief life be all spent
in misery? We may surely derive a hint
from. the Psalmist here. If life be so
brief, let us seek the favour of God at
once. If life be so brief, let us discharge
its duties as they arise. If life be so brief,
let us improve its opportunities and
privileges as they arise.

3. The vanity of their life. “ Where-
fore hast Thou made all men in vain 9”
Tae idea in the mind of the Psalmist
seezas to be, that if their distresses were
e-suiinued their life itself would be vain.
He seems to have had no clear idea of
a blessed life beyond death, That was

26


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





not clearly revealed until our Lord Jesus
Christ poured a flood of light upon it.
And, in his present troubled mood, the
Psalmist was not able to make the most
of the light which he possessed upon the
subject, and so the future appears dark
and cheerlessto him. In fact, he writes
as if he knew no future; as if all his
hopes were bounded by the grave’ So
man seems to him to have been made in
vain. Life seemed altogether shadowy,
unreal, worthless). He urges this char-
acteristic of life as a reason why God
should grant them speedy relief. His
plea seems to amount to this: Consider
how worthless the life of man is, and
relieve its darkness and vanity by sending
us prosperity, and by sending it quickly.

4. The certainty of death. “What man
is he that liveth, and shall not see death?
shall he deliver his soul from the hand of
the grave?” ‘There is no man that hath
power over the spirit to retain the spirit ;
neither hath he power in the day of
death ; and there is no discharge in that
war.” Death is no respecter of persons
or of characters. The rich and the poor,
the distinguished and the unknown, the
strong and the weak, the beautiful and
the deformed, the wise and the foolish,
the holy and the sinful, the useful and the
baneful are alike swept away by death.
The argument of the Psalmist seems to
be this: As all men, even the strongest,
even the king himself, must die, deliver
us speedily from the miseries which now
oppress us, and grant us prosperity
before we pass into dark Sheol.

5. The lovingkindness promised by God.
‘Lord, where are Thy former loving-
kindnesses which Thou swarest unto
David in Thy truth?” The former
lovingkindnesses are those which God
had granted in earlier and prosperous
times, and which were regarded as
pledges of future mercies. And God
had promised to David a continuance
of these mercies to his seed. The
Psalmist asks God: Where are Thy
promises? Art Thou not the Un-
changeable? Wilt Thou not make good
that which Thou hast spoken? Thus
may we in our distresses plead the
former mercies and the promises of God,
and we shall never plead them in vain,


ROMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


PSALM UXAXIE,


eect a eee ae Tn NE Eg Big ME Oe oe doe eu


What God has done, He will do again.
What He has promised, He will perform.

6. The reproaches which fell upon
them. ‘“ Remember, Lord, the reproach
of Thy servants,” &c, (vers. 50, 51).
Their enemies mocked them because of
their sore distresses ; and they pray God
to end their distresses, and so remove
their reproach. The Psalmist pleads
powerfully in these two verses. They
were His “servants” who were re-
proached, and they were reproached
for trusting and serving Him; and
would He not roll back the reproach
from them? This reproach was a great
sorrow to the Psalmist, and to all who
were concerned for the welfare of the
people and the honour of God. The
reproach of all the people, their troubles,
their complaints, the scoffs of their
enemies, all pressed upon the heart of
the Psalmist as # burden of deep
grief. Should he feel these things so
deeply, and would God be unmindful of
them? Would not God remove the
reproaches, and so relieve the heart of
His servant? The reproaches came
from the “‘enemtes” of God. They
were not only foes and mockers of the
covenant people, they were enemies of
the covenant God, would He not re-
member and silence them? They re-
proached the “anointed” of God.
“They have reproached the footsteps
of Thine anointed.” They, as it were,
followed the king, and wherever he
went and whatever he did they re-
proached him. Would the Most High
allow His enemies thus to deride the
anointed king of His own people? Thus
the Psalmist amidst the national dis-
tresses, when the covenant seemed on
the very eve of utter failure, pleads with


God for His saving interposition. His
pleading is not perfect. As we have
already indicated, there is no recogni-
tion of the fact that their distresses
arose from their sins; there is no con-
fession of the gross violation of the
covenant on the part of the people. It
was their sufferings and not their sins
that they bewailed before God. Yet we
may learn some useful lessons from the
pleadings of the Psalmist. In present
distresses we shall do well to plead (1)
Our weakness and the shortness of our
life. God is strong and merciful, and will
help and pity us. (2) We should take en-
couragement from and plead God’s former
mercies, He is unchangeable. Past
deliverances are reasons for hope and
confidence in present distresses. (3)
We should plead His faithfulness, By
relying upon His word we honour Him.
(4) We should plead our relation to
Him. We are His servants. His
enemies are also ours, Will He not
protect and save His own ?

Conetusion.—1. Learn the exceeding
sinfulness of sin. It was sin that had
profaned the crown to the ground, &c.
Let suffering deter from sin. 2. Learn
swt to judge by appearances. “ Things
are not what they seem.” The covenant
seemed to be utterly failing, yet God
was all the time fulfilling it, carrying it
forward to deeper, diviner, more glorious
issues than the people imagined when
this Psalm was written. God’s word
cannot fail, His promises cannot be
broken. He may fulfil them in ways
unexpected by and strange to us; but
He will fulfil them gloriously. Christ
and His seed shall be eternally blessed.
“His seed shall endure for ever, and
His throne as the sun before Me.”


Tue Vanity oF MAN APART FROM HIS IMMORTALITY.
(Verse 47.)


I purpose to show that, considered
merely in this present state, apart from
any reference to eternity and the pros-
pect disclosed by revelation, man is
made in vain.

I. The first thing that strikes us in
such a survey of our beingis the short-
ness of its duration. ‘Remember how


short my time is.” The transient
nature of his existence stamps an inex-
pressible meanness on man, if we con-
fine our view to the present life; and
forces us to confess that, laying aside
the hope of immortality, “Every man
at his best estate is altogether vanity.”

IL The same reflection must have

37


PUALM LXXXIE,





occurred to most persons of a thought-
ful character, when they have contem-
plated the general state of that world
in which we are placed; the mischief
and misery that pervade it; the disorder
and desolation which the unruly pas-
sions of men perpetually introduce ; the
wantonness with which they rush to
deeds of violence and injustice; the
almost incessant national contentions, in
which the destruction of one part of the
human race seems to become the busi-
ness and sport of the other. ... Viewed,
therefore, merely as they are here, and ex-
cluding the supposition of a future state,
all men will appear to be made in vain.

IIL When we recollect how many
thousands of our species are born the
subjects of some inherent, incurable
disease, or imperfection of body, such
as may be said to render their life a pro-
tracted malady,—when we call to mind
how many are constitutionally the
victims of dejected spirits and a morbid
melancholy, such as cast a gloom over
every surrounding object, and dim their
perceptions to the fairest scenes of life
and nature, we are compelled to aoc-
knowledge, of the multitude so circum-
stanced, that—if we consider them
merely as existing in that hypothetical
state which terminates with death—they
also are made in vain,

IV. When we take into the account
those millions of mankind who are con-
demned, through the whole of life, to
manual and mechanical labours;
whose day after day is consumed in a
constant round of the same unvaried
employment, ... who that limits his
view of man to this sublunary scene can
forbear to sympathise with the despond-
ing Psalmist in the text? In labours
like these millions of beings are em-
ployed, who are created with a mind
capable of looking backward and for-
ward with endless activity of thought,
capable of comprehending truth and
advancing in knowledge, capable of
enjoying a happiness commensurate with
its own vast desires. The inheritors
of such faculties are employed in labours
in which the mind is altogether passive
and dormant, nor is any exercise afforded
to the reason or the affections.......

24


MOMILETIC OOMMENTARY: PSALMS,





Without blaming the existing organize-
tion of society, I ask whether, if men are
condemned to terminate their existence
in these pursuits, and are not reserved
for another and higher state of being,
the great majority of mankind are not
made in vain?

V. But there are those, it may be
said, who do not fall under this melan-
choly representation ; men of wealth,
whose circumstances seem to be formed
by their will, and who appropriate what-
ever they desire. Surely, you will say,
such “men of this world, Aave their
portion in ¢hzs life ;” surely an existence
like theirs, even if we suppose it con-
fined to earth, apart from any ulterior
consideration, has a sufficient end in
itself ; and, though their existence is
short, they are exempt from a charge of
having been made in vain, Now there
is a delusion in this view; and if we
examine the advantages which men of
wealth possess over others, we shall find
that nearly all the pleasures peculiar te
superfluous opulence are reducible to
two classes ; the class of sensual gratifi-
cations and that of ambitious dix
tinctions,

1. How little the gratifications of
sense which the rich have at their com-
mand, can be said to redeem their pos
sessors from the lot of a vain existence,
will appear by the following considera-
tions—(1) The pleasures of sense can
never be proposed as an adequate end
of our creation; because, in pursuing
them, we always regard them as subor.
dinate to something of superior import
ance, our regard to which is allowed to
be the just rule of sensual indulgence.
A wise man advises a proper abstinence
from such pleasures for the sake of
health ; a good man for the sake of
virtue ; either of which is justly regarded
as an object superior to that which
it ought to regulate, But the true
end of existence must be something
beyond which nothing can be proposed
of superior magnitude, &c. (2) The
pleasures of sense pursued beyond a
certain limit, so far from tending to
create happiness, tend to destroy it, by
the very construction of those organs
which are the instruments of sensual


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


—a=





PeaLM LXEXIMX,





enjoyment. That craving after happi-
ness which every bosom feels, and the
satisfaction of which involves the per-
fection of our existence, cannot be sup-
posed to attain its proper object in any
of those animal pleasures, of which the
pursuit (unless kept in continual check)
leads to the extinction of happiness and
existence itself. (3) The enjoyment of
the senses cannot present to human
beings the appropriate and distinguish-
ing end of their extinction, because they
are only enjoyed by man in common
with the lower animals. That, what-
ever it be, which forms the true end of
human existence, must be something
which is adapted to the great peculiari-
ties of our nature as rational and moral
beings; but sensual fruition is received
in an equal, perhape a greater, degree,
by the brutes... . He who should
abandon himself, in the gratification of
animal propensities, to the neglect of
every higher aim, would be universally
allowed to have lived “in vain.”

2. But there is another class of
pleasures with the command of which
wealth supplies us—the pleasures of
ambition —the respect and homage
which are paid to high station and
splendid circumstances. Now, w 20
examination of these pleasures, it will
be found that they are unreal and
imaginary ; that they consist of nothing
more than a fiction of the imagination
by which we may be said to tdentify
ourselves, or to be identified by others,
with all those varied instrument of
pleasure which affluence commands, by
which we diffuse ourselves as it were
over the whole sphere in which we pre-
side, .. . Men of wealth are not, more
than others, exempt from the mournful
charge of the Psalmist.

VL Neither can we exempt from the
same condition men of knowledge, who
pass life in the cultivation of intellect
and the pursuit of truth, an object
better suited to the nature, and better
proportioned to the dignity of man as a
rational being than those before-men-
tioned. That the pleasures of know-
ledge and intellect are noble in their
nature. exquisite in their“degree, and
permanent in their continuance, will not


be denied by those who are competent
to estimate them.

1. But to how few are these pleasures
confined? Not one pergon in a thousand
has either the abilities or the opportuni-
ties requisite to their high enjoyment;
while to the rest, to the great bulk of
mankind, they are the hidden treasures
of a sealed book. And can that be sup-
posed the final object of our being, which
can be enjoyed but by a small proportion
of those who inherit that being?

2. Of the few who make knowledge
the aim of their engagements, none can
secure himself from the intrusion of dis-
turbing passions or distressing accidents,
The lights of philosophy are liable to be
broken by the waves of adversity and
darkened by the clouds of grief, dc.

3. We have it, on the testimony of
one of the greatest proficients in know-
ledge that ever appeared among men,
that “increase of knowledge,” far from
being increase of happiness, is “increase
of sorrow.” Certain is it that the mere
knowledge of things is something ex-
tremely different from the enjoyment of
things. Knowledge has its abode in the
understanding, while happiness is seated
in the heart. Knowledge cannot be sup-
posed to constitute that proper happi-
ness of man without which he is “ made
in vain.”

VIL There yet remains another and
a yet more elevated order of men, who
place the grand object of their being in
religion; who think of God, trust in
God, and, on all occasions, devote them-
selves to do the will of God, &....
What shall we say of such men? If this
were the only state of being ordained
for man, they, like others, would be
made in vain. “ Verily, they have
cleansed their hearts in vain,” do, “If
in this life only they have hope, they
are of all men most miserable,” most
worthy to be commiserated. For, accord-
ing to this supposition, they are the only
persons who are utterly disappointed in
their object; the only persons who (by a
fatal and irreparable mistake), expecting
an imaginary happiness in an imaginary
world, lose their only opportunity of
enjoying those present pleasures of whiob
others avail themselves... .

29


POALM LEXXIE.





But that supposition is not, for a
moment, to be believed: these men are
not thus deluded; they are not thus to
be disappointed ; it is impossible to con-
ceive that they are, The perplexity,
the inconsistency, the palpable absurdity
into which those are driven who argue
upon the non-existence of immortality,
the falsehood of revelation, proves, as far
as proof can be expected, that theirs isa
false hypothesis! Upon their hypothesis,
man is the greatest enigma in the
universe ; that universe itself is a
problem not to be solved: all is mystery,
confusion, and despair. Bring in the
light of revelation and immortality, the
clouds and thick darkness in which the
scene was enveloped disperse, and all is
clear and harmonious. We learn at
once the cause and the cure of that
vanity, in subjection to which “the
whole creation groans,” together with
man. The origin of our misery and
death, the recovery of life and immor-
tality, are alike brought to light.

To attain a share in this salvation, to
recover the true end and perfection of
our existence, in the resemblance and


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.








the favour of “the only happy God ;”
this is the great object of desire and
pursuit to those whose eyes are opened
te their real situation, and whose hearts
are awakened to a sense of their real
want. And “remembering how short
their time is,” they are the more in
earnest that, by a glorious reverse of
their naturally ruined state, they may
prove at last to have not been “ made in
vain,”

I infer the extreme folly and misery
of those who persist in the neglect of
this salvation, this immortality. What
must be our emotion should we discover,
at the last judgment, that we have lived
tn vain; that, so far as our own interest
is concerned, we have been made in
vain, that we have received the grace
of God in vain, that, having neglected
the one salvation, we are lost, lost in the
scale of being ; immortal creatures, lost
to the*great purpose for which our
Maker gave us existence, Jost to happi-
ness; irrecoverably and for ever lost /
.. . “Now is the accepted time,” &a.—
Robert Hall. Abridged.


Doxo.Ltogey.
(Verse 52.)


This verse, says Hengstenberg, “does
not at all belong to the Psalm, but con-
tains the doxology which concludes the
third book,”

L God is blessed in Himself. All
distracting and distressing elements are
entirely absent from His nature. Man
suffers much from guilt, from uncon-
trolled passions, and from dark forebod-
ings, Conscience accuses and condemns
him, evil passions lash his soul into fury,
the dread of suffering, and death, and
hell afflicts him. All these things are
utterly alien from the Divine nature;
while all those things which contribute
to the blessedness of spiritual being are
found in Him in infinite perfection,
Truth, holiness, and love essentially in-
here in Him in full perfection and infinite
degree. In terms such as these He is
represented to us in the Scriptures :—
“God is light,” “God is good.” “God

wv


is love,” “A God of truth and without
iniquity, just and right is He,” “the God
of peace,” “the God of hope,” &. Sucha
Being mustbe blessed by virtue of Hisown
character. God is an infinite ocean of life,
love, and blessedness, ‘ God blessed for
ever.” “ The God and Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ is blessed for evermore.”

Il. God is blessed by His creatures.
God blesses man by thé impartation of
benefits ; man blesses God by the ascrip-
tion of praise.

1. God is praised by His works. * All
Thy works shall praise Thee, O Lord.”
Nature in her beauty and bounty praises
Him. The birds and beasts also, when
unoppressed by man, seem in many
ways to praise God. Moreover, aa
God’s works answer the beneficent
ends for which they were created, they
speak forth the praise of His wisdom,
power, and goodnesa,


,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PaALM EQ


‘= SSE ae ae ne UIST ce emoemeerece cee ee ee ee


3. God ts praised by His people upon
earth. They praise Him for what He is
te» Himself; for His truth, purity,
power, mercy, love, spiritual beauty.
They praise Him for what He has done,
and ts ever doing for them (Psa. ciii,
1-12), But we must remember that
this doxology belongs to every Psalm
of this third book. And in this book
there are Psalms of the doubting and
of the distressed as well as of the be-
lieving and rejoicing ; there are cries of
misery and complaints of suffering as
well as songs of gladness and hymns of
praise. Thus the people of God would
praise Him in the varying scenes and
circumstances of life. In all circum-
stances He is good. Even in times of
darkness and distress faith will enable
the godly man to say, “ Blessed be the
Lord for evermore.” “The Lord gave,


be the name of the Lord.” The godly
soul 1s earnestly resolved thus to bless God.
The seal of faith is added twice to this
doxology, “ Amen and Amen.” “ Here
is a double Amen,” says Matthew Henry,
“according to the double signification.
Amen—=so it is, God is blessed for ever.
Amen—be it 80, let God be blessed for
ever,”

3. God ts praised by redeemed men
and angels in heaven. By angels (Isa.
vi. 1-3 ; Rev. vii. 11, 12). By the re
deemed in heaven (Rev. v. 9, 10; vii.
9,10; e al.)

4. God ts praised by all His creatures
everywhere (Rev. v. 9-14),

III. God is blessed for ever. “For
evermore,” His worship will occupy
His creatures through all eternity. In
heaven all our work will be worship,
and all our life praise, and all will be


and the Lord hath taken away ; blessed _ perpetual.


PSALM XO.


INTRODUCTION,


Superscription.—‘'A prayer of Moses the man of God.” ‘The Psalm is described in the title,”
says Hengstenberg, “asa prayer. This description shows, as Amyraldus saw, that the kernel of
the Psalm is the second part, and that the design of the first isto prepare the way for the second,
and lay down a basis on which it may rest. For j17 PF a) denotes only prayer in the proper
sense, supplicatory prayer.” On TDD) as used here Fuerst gays; ‘ npn is a peculiar
kind of song in the Psalter.” Its primary meaning he gives as prayer. _And on its use in
Psalm Ixxii, 20, he says: ‘‘ The first two books of the Psalter are termed in the subscription
ivan probably because they contain supplications for the most part.” Certainly the word


prayer better represents the character of this Psalm than the word Psalm, or hymn.

“Of Moses.” ‘‘ The correctness of the title which ascribes the Psalm to Moses,” says Professor
Alexander, ‘‘ is confirmed by its unique simplicity and grandeur ; its appropriateness to his trials
and circumstances ; its resemblance to the law in urging the connection between sin and death;
\ts similarity of diction to the poetical portions of the Pentateuch, without the slightest trace of
Imitation or quotation ; its marked unlikeness to the Psalms of David, and still more to those
of later date ; and finally, the proved impossibility of plausibly assigning it to any other age or
author.” And Amyraldus says; “‘ But as this ode is most ancient, so it bears strong marks of
the genius and character of antiquity. It is grave, full of majesty and authority, adorned
with various comparisons, splendid with figures, but these rare and little used, and for the
understanding of which there is needed extraordinary attention of mind.” The late Dr, James
Hamilton points out that ‘it is one of the oldest poems in the world. Compared with it
Homer and Pindar are, go to speak, modern, and even King David is of recent date. That is to
say, compared with this ancient kymn the other Psalms are as much more modern as Tennyson
and Longfellow are more moder# than Chaucer. In either case there are nearly five centuries

ue 5 see ’

othe man of God.” Moses ia thus described also in Deut, xxxiii. 1; Josh, xiv. 6 ; and
Kara iii. 2. The term is very appropriately applied to him because of his singularly noble char-
acter, his distinguished rank, and the great part which he played in carrying out the purposes
of God concerning our race, ‘‘ Moses was faithful in all his house, asa servant.” Luther
points out that the words ‘‘the man of God” give additional weight to the Psalm, He says:
‘* As one who has such a duty assigned to se God, so that we should believe in him and
in his i ions no less than in God Himeelf.

Occ pearls is impossible to decide upon what occasion the Psalm was ay Sip 3 but


PaaLM XO.





HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : PSALMS.


the probability is, that it was written towards the close of the forty years wandering in the


wilderness.


“It was written,” says F. W. Robertson, ‘evidently in the wilderness, after


years of apparently fruitless wandering ; its tone is that of deep sadness—retrospective ; ita
images are borrowed from the circumstances of the pilgrimage—the mountain flood, the grass,


the night watch of an army on the march.”


Divisions. The Psalm consists of a Meditation (vers, 1-11), and a Prayer (vers. 12-17),


Human Fraitty ann Divovz GREATNESS.
(Verses 1-6.)


In these verses, the Psalmist brings
before us—

I. The greatness of God. ‘ Before
the mountains were brought forth, or
ever Thou hadst formed the earth and
the world, even from everlasting to
everlasting Thou art God.”

1. He existed before the world. The
word “earth” is used by the Psalmist
to denote our world as distinguished
from the heavens; and the word
“world” signifies an inhabited fruitful
land, or a land fitted for habitation.
The ‘‘ mountains” are mentioned first,
because of all created things they appear
most ancient, stable, and enduring.
Upon all the generations that have ever
trod this planet, with all their anxieties
and cares, all their strifes and commo-
tions, the old hills have cast their calm
and silent shadows. They seem as
though they had ever been where they
ar2 and as they are, and that they would
for ever continue so. They are most
impressive symbols of the unchangeable
and the eternal. In the poetic diction of
the Bible they are spoken of as eternal.
Jacob spake of “the everlasting hills.”
And Moses, “of the ancient mountains,
and of the lasting hills.” And Habak-
kuk, of “the everlasting mountains,
and the perpetual hills” Yet they had
a beginning. There was a time when
they were not. However ancient the
earth may be, it has not been from ever-
lasting. The world is not eternal, God
existed before the mountains were
brought forth, before the world was
created,

2. He created the world. He is said
by the Psalmist to have “formed the
earth and the world.” As God’s exist-
ence before the world proclaims the
fact that it is not eternal, so His
creation of the world proclaims the fact
that it is not the product of chance.

32


The sublime mountains were not up-
reared, the smiling valleys were not laid
by any “fortuitous concourse of atoms.”
“God created the heaven and the
earth.” ‘ He spake, and it was done ;
He commanded, and it stood fast.”

3. He ts eternal, “ From everlasting
to everlasting Thou art, O God.” To
understand eternity is difficult ; to ex-
plain it is more difficult ; to compre-
hend it is impossible to all except the
Eternal. We are acquainted with crea-
tures which have a beginning, live for a
few hours, or days, or months, or years,
and then cease to be. We are also ac-
quainted with creatures who have been
called into existence and will never pass
out of existence. Such are we, and
probably such are tke angels. A little
while ago, and we were not. Now we
are called into being, and shall continue
to be for ever. Our bodies shall change
and pass away, our memory shall cease
from amongst men upon the earth. But
we shall never cease to be, To everlast-
ing Thou art, O man! But God has
never had a beginning, and will never
have an end. (1) He ts without begin-
ning. ‘From everlasting.” ‘ Time,”
says Charnock, “began with the foun-
dation of the world; but God, being
before time, could have no beginning in
time. Before the beginning of the crea-
tion and the beginning of time there
could be nothing but eternity ; nothing
but what was uncreated,—that is,
nothing but what was without begin-
ning. To be in time is to have a be-
ginning ; to be before all time is never
to have a beginning, but always to be;
for, as between the Creator and crea-
tures there is no medium, so between


time and eternity there is no medium.


It is as easily deduced that He that was
before all creatures is eternal, as He
that made all creatures is God. If He


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : PSALMS,





had a beginning, He must have it from .


another, or from Himself; if from
another, that from whom He received
His being would be better than He,—
so more a God than He. He cannot
be God that is not supreme ; he cannot
be supreme that owes his being to the
power of another. He would not be
said only to have immortality as He is
(1 Tim. vi. 16), if He had it dependent
upon another ; nor could He have a be-
ginning from Himself ; if He had given
beginning to Himself, then He was
once nothing; there was a time when
He was not. If He was not, how could
He be the cause of Himself 3” Ha is
without beginning of days. He is
‘from everlasting.” (2) He ts without
end. ‘To everlasting.” ‘The reason
that anything decays is either its own
native weakness, or a superior power of
something contrary to it. There is no
weakness in the nature of God that can
introduce any corruption, because He
is infinitely simple without any mixture,
nor can He be overpowered by anything
else. A weaker cannot hurt Him, and
a stronger than He there cannot be;
nor can He be outwitted or circum-
vented, because of His infinite wisdom.
As He received His being from none, so
He cannot be deprived of it by any: as
He doth necessarily exist, so He doth
necessarily always exist.” He is the
SELF-EXisTENT—the “I am.” “The
Father,” said Christ, “hath life in
Himself.” The idea of omnipotence is
associated with His eternity in the mind
of the Psalmist,—His omnipotence to
guard His people. Luther says, “If we
look at it” (His eternity) “in a right
way, it includes all the properties of
she Godhead. For, inasmuch as He is
eternal, it follows that He is immortal,
omnipotent, blessed, and wise.” And
Schleiermacher : “ The eternity of God
is to be understood only as the omnipo-
tent eternity, as that iv Ged which
sonditionates time itself, as well as all
that is temporal.” How incomprehen-
sibly great is God! When imagination
has done her utmost to picture His
eternity, it has failed in the attempt.
We may add ages to ages, and multiply
them by the leaves of the forest in “the
voL. o.





FaaLM x@,


— —


leafy month of June,” and multiply them
again by the blades of grass upon the
face of the earth, and again by the
grains of sand upon the seashore, and
again by the particles of dust on the
earth, and we shall be as far as ever from
the measurement of the ages of eternity.
‘Great God, how infinite art Thou!” .

IL The frailty of man. In the
verses in which the Psalmist sets this
forth there are three things which call
for notice—

1. The extreme brevity of man’s life
upon earth, This is variously repre-
sented. How short ts human life in the
sight of God/ ‘A thousand years in
Thy sight are but as yesterday when it
is past, and as a watch in the night.”
A day when it is past and gone appears
to us but a very short time. To Goda
thousand years are as brief as one past
day is tous. Nay, to Him a thousand
years are as brief as a watch in the
night is to us. The Jews divided the
night into watches, each watch repre-
senting the time during which a sentinel
remained on duty. Among the ancient
Hebrews there were three such watches ;
the first, or “the beginning of the
watches” (Lam. ii. 19) ; the second, or
“the middle watch” (Judg. vii. 19) ;
and the third, or ‘the morning watch ”
(Exod. xiv, 24), These would last
respectively from sunset to 10 p.m.,
from 10 p.m. to 2 a.m., and from 2 a.m.
to sunrise. A thousand years appear to
God as brief as a night watch to the
Israelites. Man lives not a thousand
years: “‘The days of our years are three-
score years and ten.” How short, then,
must man’s life upon earth appear to
God! To man a life of seventy years,
especially when it is in prospect, appears
very long. To God, who sees all things
clearly and truly, man’s life, even if it
should stretch to a thousand years, would
appear brief as a night watch does to us,
The Psalmist also speaks of human life
as “carried away as with a flood.” We
have seen the river swollen with heavy
rain rushing rapidly and irresistibly
onward to the ocean. So the human
family is carried away. Generation
after generation is hurried from time
into the vast ocean of eternity as by an


PRALM XC,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.








impetuous and roaring torrent. ‘‘ The
man of God” goes on to say that human
life is like “a sleep in the morning.”
Barnes suggests that the words “‘in the
morning” should be attached to the
middle clause of the verse, and expounds
the clause thus—‘ They are as sleep
appears to us in the morning, when we
wake from it—rapid, unreal, full of
empty dreams.” Martin Luther says:
““We know that sleep is such a thing
that it ceases ere we can perceive it or
mark it; for, before we are aware that
we have slept, sleep is gone and ended.
Wherefore truly our life is nothing else
than a sleep and a dream, for before we
are rightly conscious of being alive, we
cease to live.” There is much of un-
reality in human life upon earth,
“We are such stuff as dreams are made of,
And our little life is rounded by a sleep.”
Moses also compares our life to the
“grass.” The last clause in the fifth
verse is rendered in the margin—“ like
grass which is changed.” Hengsten-
berg translates, ‘It vanishes like grass,”
Barnes—“ Like grass, it passeth away.”
The sixth verse Hengstenberg renders—
“In the morning he blooms and—
perishes ; in the evening he is cut down
and withers.” The idea is clear: like
the grass or flower which in the morn-
ing is green or blossoming in beauty,
and in the evening is cut down and
withered by the sun, is man’s life upon
earth. ‘As for man, his days are as
grass; as a flower of the field so he
flourisheth ; for the wind passeth over
it and it is gone, and the place thereof
shall know it no more.” How frail is
human life, and how uncertain! Every
day many go forth in the morning in
apparent health and vigour, and before
night they are cut down by disease or
accident. And even at its longest our life
cannot be compared to the cedar oreven to
the oak, but to the frail grass of the field.
2. The mournful end of man’s life upon
earth. ‘Thou turnest man to destruc-
tion, and sayest, Return, ye children
of men.” Perowne: “ Thou turnest
frail man to dust.” There is without
doubt a reference here to the curse pro-
nounced upon our race, “ Dust thou art,
and unto dust shalt thou return.” The
34


human body must return to dust, how
ever noble or beautiful it may be. Kings
and the meanest of their subjects, mil-
lionaires and paupers, the learned and
the ignorant, the beautiful and the de
formed, the saint and the sinner, must
all alike, as regards their bodies, return
to the earth. Let the remembrance of
the fact humble us. Let those who are
proud of their stateliness or beauty re-
member that in a little time they will
have no pre-eminence over the most
deformed and repulsive-looking of their
fellow-mortals. Let the rich, who look
down with contempt and scorn upon the
poor, remember that, though after death
their bodies may be carried with pomp
and laid in some splendid mausoleum,
yet in this respect they have no advan-
tage over those who are buried in a
parish coffin and a pauper’s grave—the
bodies of all alike must return to dust.
3. The great sovereign of man’s life
upon earth, The Psalmist regards
human life as entirely under the con-
trol of God. ‘THov turnest man to de
struction,” &e. ‘ THou carriest them
away,” &c. It is not disease or chance
that removes men from this world. Man
returns to the dust not because of the
decree of fate, or the operation of some
inevitable or irresistible law, but because
God wills it, He has the keys of death
and hades, Man’s “days are deter-
mined, the number of his months are
with Thee, Thou hast appointed his
bounds that he cannot pass.” “All
the days of my appointed time will I
wait, till my change come.” In the
Lord’s “hand is the soul of every living
thing, and the breath of all mankind.”
“Thou changest man’s countenance and
sendest him away.” The time, the place,
and the circumstances of our death
are all determined by God. He is the
great sovereign of our life upon earth.
Ill. The relation between the great
God and frail man. “Lord, Thou hast
been our dwelling-place in all genera-
tions.” When Moses penned this Psalm


_ the Israelites were homeless wanderers,


Indeed, up to this time they never could
be said to have had any settled home,
Their father Abraham after his call
from his own country lived a wandering


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


—__


life, a stranger in a strange land. Isaac
and Jacob also had no settled dwelling-
place, but dwelt in tents, and con-
fessed that they were “strangers and
pilgrims on the earth.” Then the people
“went down into Egypt to sojourn
there,” and it was not long before their
lives were made miserable by the op-
pressions of the Egyptians, And after
their emancipation from Egypt there
followed their long, tedious, homeless,
and apparently fruitless wandering in
the wilderness. It was probably this
unsettled, homeless condition that led
_ them to estimate highly the worth of a
habitation, and which suggested the
employment of the figure in the first
verse. In their defenceless, homeless
state God Himself had been their home
and defence. By His providence He
had preserved them in existence as a
people, had supplied their wants, and
protected them from harm. Homeless
wanderers they were, yet they found
their home in God. ‘Here we have
no continuing city.” By many and
earnest voices God is calling to us—
“ Arise ye and depart, for this is not
your rest.” We crave a dwelling-place,
a lasting home, a permanent rest for the
woul; but we cannot find it here, Here
fairest things soonest fade, brightest
prospects soon are lost in darkness, the
most exquisite pleasures are speedily
succeeded by the most painful trials.
The home of the soul is not here. The
heart seeks rest and home in the love of
dear relatives and friends; but these
nay fail us in our time of need, or may
be summoned from us by death. The
best and truest of relatives or friends
cannot meet all the soul’s cravings for
protection, and rest, and home. The
home of the soul is not in the creature.
The home of the soul is in God.


PSALM IG.





1. We are weak, and rest in His om-
nipotence. The difficulties and dangera
which we encounter on our pilgrimage
overmatch us, but by the strength of
the Lord we are enabled to surmount
them. The soul that finds its home in
Him is inviolably secure.

2. We are short-lived and rest in His
eternity. ‘‘ We are but of yesterday and
know nothing, because our days on the
earth are as a shadow.”

‘Like cloude that rake the mountain

summits,

Or waves that own no curbing hand ;”
to generation follows generation “into
the land of the great departed.” We
are hastening after the great multitude
who have passed from earth for ever.
Nothing rests here. Here nothing
abides. Change, decay, death are
stamped upon all earthly things. Yet
we crave the permanent and the immu-
table. Oh, for some rock amid this
surging sea! Oh, for some thing or
being in which these restless, craving
hearts may find satisfaction and repose!
God is that Being. “ Lord, Thou hast
been our dwelling-place in all genera-
tions,” &c. He lives through all gene-
rations. He is the Sovereign of all
generations. He is the same through
all generations. Here we find rest.
Our permanent home is in Him, He
is supremely, unchangeably, eternally
great and good. In Him let us confide,
The generations that have passed away
have gone at His bidding. He is the
God of our life. Our age, our time of
residence here, our departure from here,
are all regulated by Him. And when
we pass hence He is still our home, our
refuge, and our rest. Then we need
not mourn the brevity of life or the
changes of time. We rest in the eternal
and unchangeable God.


Toe Home or THE SOUL
(Verse 1.)


i. The goul of man needs a home.
{ argue this from—

i. Our sense of weariness and longing
for rest. The heart often aches in lone-
ness, droops by reason of exhaustion,


and yearns unspeakably for repose.
Like worn and weary pilgrims we
long for rest,
2. Our sense of peril and longing for
protection. Like Israel in a wildex
3


OAL Ku


neas we are exposed to danger, and need
some strong defence, We crave the
shelter and the security of a home,

3. Our shrinking from death and
longing for immortality. The soul re-
coils from the idea of going forth from
this life unclothed and alone into the
unknown. What is there beyond the
mystery which we call death? Is there
anything? If there is, what is it that
is there? The mere thought of ceasing
to be is painful. We long deeply for
immortality, In the awful loneliness
and dread mystery of death where shall
we find a refuge and a home?

Il. The soul of man may find a
home in God. He has been the dwel-
ling-place of His people in all genera-
tions,

1. In Him alone can the soul find the
rest st craves, We want rest from the
accusations of conscience and the burden
of guilt. He alone can pardon. The
rest of satisfied affections ; the rest of
harmony and progress of being; rest


_of bliss is bliss.”


HOM! LETIO COMMENTARY ; PSALMS.


ea re a RP ee





from the dread of death ;—He alone cat
impart this fuli and blessed rest.

2. In Him alone can the soul find the
security it craves. He is our only sure
defence against spiritual perils; and
in the sorrows and trials of life He is
the only adequate support. Storms are
sure to fall; He only can shelter us
from their fury. He can even bring
strength and joy to us out of our griefs
and trials, His power, wisdom, and love
are the pledge of our security.

3. In Him alone can the soul find the
permanence it craves, “He only hath
immortality.” The continuance in being
and blessedness for which we long He,
and He alone,can impart. “A perpetuity
He gives “ eternal
At His “right hand there are
“So shall we


life.”
pleasures for ever more.”
ever be with the Lord.”

We enter this home through Christ.
By Him we rise into fellowship and
union with God. “No man cometh
unto the Father, but by Me.”


Gop’s AssoLuts ConrroL oveER Man’s Lirs
(Verse 3.)


We pass away at the command of
God. Not chance, not disease, not
accident, not war, but “ Thou turnest
man to destruction!” “ Thou carriest
them away as with a flood!” We are
a family whose members are separated
and summoned away only by the word
and hand of the great Lord of the
house, We regard this great power of
God over us as—

I. A reason for acknowledging Him.
As His power over us is irresistible and
righteous, we should bow to His will
It is madness to resist Him. ‘ Hast
thou an arm like God? or canst thou
thunder with a voice like Him?” “He
is wise in heart, and mighty in strength:
who hath hardened himself against Him,
and prospered?” His rule is a fact,
He is moving onward to the most com-
plete and universal supremacy. Let us
loyally acknowledge Him as our King
and our God. Let us move in the line
of His purposes,

IL A reason for seeking His favour.
Alis power over us being so absolute it


36


is surely our interest to seek friendship
with Him. He is condescending and
gracious, He is kind and merciful ; we
may obtain His favour. He calls us
to friendship with Himself. Through
Christ we may attain unto assured con-
fidence in His favour and friendship,—
may know Him not simply as the abso-
lute Sovereign of our life, but also as
our supreme Friend.

IIL A consolation in bereavement.
It is consolatory to know that our loved
ones who have passed from us were not
the victims of chance, Their departure
was in all respects ordered by a God of
infinite wisdom and kindness, They left
us by the appointment of His will, which
is ever good. He doeth all things well.

IV. An encouragement to labour,
Do not fear to attempt great things in
life. Let not the dread of death un-
nerve your spirit and paralyse your arm,
You are immortal till your work is done,
Until your education in these sublunary
scenes is completed, your life is invul
uerable against the shafts of death,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY :; PSALMS.


PeALM XG.


eee


V. An antidote against the fear of
death. If through Christ we are
brought into friendship with God, when
the body returns to dust, the spirit
will pass into the immediate presence
of God. To the good man death is the
voice of the Father summoning His


child home to Himself. Why should we
fear such a voice or such a summons ?

Conctusion. Let us be thankful
that our times are in His hand. Let us
tread the path of life with trustful and
fearless hearts, for we are safe in the
hands of the eternal God.


Homan Fraitry raz Resutt or Human Sms,
(Verses 7-11.)


In this section of the Psalm Moses
represents the brevity of the life of the
Israelites in the wilderness as the result
of the Divine anger with them by reason
of their sin. Their apparently fruitless
lives and their death in the wilderness
were the punishment of their sin, By
®ason of some heinous or aggravated
offence many were suddenly cut off by
God. See Num. xi. 31-35 ; xvi. 41-50;
xxi, 4-6. Moreover all those, from
twenty years old and upward, who went
forth from Egypt were cut down in the
wilderness because of their unbelieving
hearts and murmuring tongues, save
Caleb and Joshua, There they were
doomed to wander till the unbelieving
generation had passed away. Little or
nothing is recorded of them from the
second year of their departure from
Egypt until the fortieth year. The only
end of their wanderings during those
years seems to have been the consump-
tion of the faithless generation, Well
does Mr. Spurgeon say: “ Moses saw
men dying all around him; he lived
among funerals, and was overwhelmed
at the terrible results of the Divine dis-
pleasure.” The Psalm has “a solemn
and affecting interest, as a penitential
confession of the sins which had entailed
such melancholy consequences on the
Hebrew nation ; and as a humble depre-
_ cation of God’s wrath ; and as a funeral
dirge upon those whose death had been
pre-announced by the awful voice of
God.” So far all is clear, Concerning
those of whom Moses wrote it is literally
true that their frailty was the result of
their sin, They perished in the wilder-
ness because of their unbelief and in-
gratitude and rebellion. But is it true
ef mankind as a whole that human


frailty ts the result of human sint Ia
death the penalty of sin? Some pas-
sages of the Holy Word say, Yes, The
evidence of geology and other sciences
says, No, We firmly believe that both
are correct, In what way, then, and to
what extent, is death the penalty of sin ?
This is the subject suggested by this
portion of the Psalm, and upon which
we shall offer some suggestions,

“ What is death?” “Death,” says
ue, “is simply another name for dis-
continuance.” “Death,” says another,
“is the dissolution of the body.” But
the word is used to express quite dis-
tinct and different things. In the Bible
the word has at least three uses; in-
deed it has more, but let us look at
these. It is used to denote physical
dissolution. (See Gen. xxi. 16; xxvii.
7, 10; Deut, xxxiii 1; and many
others.) It is used to denote the moral
condition of unrenewed men. (See John
v. 24; Ephes, ii. 1; 1 John iii, 14;
et al.) It is also used to denote the
future punishment of the wicked. (See
Rev, ii. 11; xx. 14; xxi. 8.) No one
will dispute that many of the passages
which speak of death as the penalty of
sin speak of spiritual death, not of
physical dissolution. Thus; “In the
day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt
surely die,” cannot fairly be applied to
our first parents in regard to corporeal
death; for, according to the record in
Genesis, Adam lived for centuries after
his disobedience, and ‘begat sons and
daughters.” And if the words of St.
Paul to the Romans, “The wages of
sin is death,” be applied to physical
dissolution, then saint and sinner pay
the penalty alike, nay, in some cases,
the physica! dissolution of the saint may

37


POALM xd.


be more painful than that of thousands
of most hardened and corrupt sinners.
Still there are passages of scripture in
which corporeal death seems to be re-
presented as the result of sin. In the
punishment pronounced upon Adam for
his disobedience, it is said, “In the
sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread,
till thou return unto the ground, for out
of it wast thou taken: for dust thou art,
and unto dust shalt thou return.” St.
Paul, in writing to the Romans, says,
‘By one man sin entered into the world,
and death by sin; and so death passed
upon all men, for that all have sinned.”
But here we may not limit the meaning
of death to physical dissolution. It
signifies, says Alford, “primarily, but
not only, physical death : as Gwapria, so
. bdvaros, is general, including the lesser
in the greater, t.¢., spiritual and eternal
death.” (See also Stuart’s commentary
tn loco.) In no instance, we believe,
where the word death is used to express
the penalty of sin should its meaning
be limited to the dissolution of tne
body. For the dissolution of the body
is natural, and would have taken place
even if man had not sinned, We con-
clude thus—

1. Because of the testimony of geology.
“We are confronted,” says Mr. Froude,
“with evidence that death has reigned
through all creation from the earliest
period, of which the stratified rocks pre-
serve the record.” The world had been
familiar with death for ages before the
creation of man,

2. Because of the nature of the physical
constitution of man. “Birth, growth,
and arriving at maturity, as completely
imply decay and death as the source
of a river implies the termination
of it, or as spring and summer
imply corn-fields and reaping. Hence,
whatever the vigour and the powers of
repair that may pertain to any given
structure, whatever resistance it may
offer to the shocks of ages, ‘lime, sooner
or later, dissolves it; careful, however,
to renew whatever it takes away, and to
convert, invariably, every end into a new
beginning. There is not a grave in the
whole circuit of nature that is not at
the same moment a cradle.”

38


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : PSALMS.


a aaaaneEEEEEEEE Raa





8. Because of the limited accommoda.
tion which the world affords as a home
for man, “The command given both
to animals and man, to ‘be fruitful and
multiply,’ implies the removal of suc-
cessive races by death, otherwise the
world would long since have been over-
stocked ; plants, for their part, are
described as created ‘ yielding seed,’
which carries with it the same inevitable
consequence. The produce of so minute
a creature as a fly would, if unchecked,
soon darken the air, and _ render
whole regions desolate; the number of
seeds ripened by a single poppy, were
they all to grow and be fruitful in their
turn, would in a few years sufiice to
clothe a continent.”

4. Because the material body ts a
hindrance to man’s complete spiritual
freedom and perfection. The human
body as it is in this world seems to us
to imprison and impede the soul’s action
and growth. We have faculties which
cannot be fully developed here and
under our present conditions. ‘“ We
that are in this tabernacle do groan
ar burdened,” &c. (See 2 Cor. v.
1-4.

For these and other reasons which
may be adduced, we hold that tn itself
the dissolution of the body is not the
result of sin. How, then, are we to
regard death as the penalty of sin? In
what way is human frailty the result of
human sin? We reply: in the suffer-
ings with which death is associated.

L Death is associated with physical
sufferings, and these are the result of
sin. It is true that there are some who
die without any physical suffering. But
in the great majority of instances the
death of man is a thing of strange and
severe suffering. The diseases of which
men die are most of them very painful,
and death itself is a mysterious and pro-
bably a painful thing. But the suffer-
ings are the result of sin. If man had
not sinned, death would probably have
resembled sinking into an easy and
gentle slumber, and have been as sweet
as sleep is to the weary ; it would have
been that euthanasia to all men which
Augustus Csssar used so passionately to
desire, and which is predicated of the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





Christian in a well-known and beautiful
hymn—
‘* How blest the righteous when he dies!
When sinks a weary soul to rest,
How mildly beam the closing eyes,
How gently heaves the expiring breast !
So fades a summer cloud away,
So sinks the gale when storms are o’ef,
So gently shuts the eye of day,
So dies a wave along the shore !”
—Barbauld.


Had it not been for sin, the probability
is that no one would have died from
disease; dissolution would have been
entirely freed from physical sufferings,
and would have been as “a gentle waft-
ing to immortal life.”

IL Death is associated with mental
sufferings, and these are the result of
sin. ‘These sufferings arise from—

1. The dread of death. Inthe Epistle
to the Hebrews Christ is represented as
dying to “deliver them who through
fear of death were all their lifetime
subject to bondage.” We are travellers
in “the valley of the shadow of death.”
That shadow projects itself over life’s
fairest scenes. And the dread of death
seizes us sometimes even in our bright-
est hours. (1) This dread arises partly
from the mystery of death. Who knows
what strange anguish of body there may
be in death? What mental sufferings
utterly unknown to us may await us in
dying? In the separation of the soul
from the body may there not be an
awful sorrow? Millions have passed
through this experience ; but not one
has returned to tell us of the mysteries
through which they passed. And those
that were raised from death by our
Lord uttered no word as to its nature.
They removed none of the mystery.
Each man must solve the mystery for
himself, This mystery is distressing.
But had it not been for sin it would
probably not have existed. Man would
probably have had a clear knowledge of
the nature and meaning of the transi-
tion. And even if the mystery had ex-
isted it would certainly not have been
distressing, for man would have had
such firm and large faith in God as
would have enabled him to rise above
anxiety and fear, (2) This dread is
partly the dread of, non-existence. Man


PSALM ES,





shrinks from extinction. The thought
of passing into utter nothingness, of not
being, is full of pain to him, But is
there life after death? Is not death
the end of man? What is there but
darkness, oblivion, nothingness, beyond
this present and manifest life? Who
has not sympathised with the afflicted
patriarch in his meditations and ques-
tionings? ‘There is hope of a tree if it
be cut down, that it will sprout again,”
&c. (Job xiv. 7-14). Is there anything
after death but “a long, unconscious,
never-ending sleep”?

** When re spring visit the mouldering


urn
Oh, when shall it dawn on the night of the

grave?”
But this dread of non-existence is one of
the results of sin. Had man not sinned
he would have known that death was
but transition; nay, that it was the
birth of his spirit into a higher state of
being. (3) This dread is partly the
dread of @ méserable existence. The
consciousness of guilt leads man to
dread a future of misery and endless
woe. The guilty conscience arrays God
in aspects of terror, and pictures a
future of terrible suffering as the pun-
ishment of sin. But had man not
sinned, the future would have been to
him bright, beautiful, and inviting, rich
in enjoyment and rich in promise.

2. The sorrows of bereavement. In
the case of those who are called to die,
the greatest anguish which they suffer
frequently arises from having to leave
those whom they love as their own
soul. Inconceivable must be the anguish
of the loving mother when summoned
away from her tender, helpless babe.
And who can conceive the deep and
silent grief of the kind husband and
father who is leaving his wife and
children, widowed and orphaned, to
fight life’s battle without the aid of his
strong arm, or wise head, or loving
heart? The sorrow of the bereaved is
also very great. Tennyson has given
utterance to the feeling of thousands of
bereaved mourners :

‘© For this alone on Death I wreak

The wrath that garners in my heart 3
He put our lives so far apart,
We cannot hear each other speak.”


39


FUALM BG,


eT ee


Oh, the hearts that are almost breaking
in loneliness and unutterable distress
because of the bereavements of death !
But all this distress is the result of sin.
Tf man had not sinned the dying mother
would confidently leave her cherished
babe, and the dying husband and father
his wife and children, to the wise and
loving and all-sufficient care of the
Heavenly Father. If man had not
sinned we should not mourn the de-
parture of our loved ones, With clear
perceptions of the spiritual universe, we
should see that the separation was more
apparent than real, we should know that
they are in the enjoyment of a higher,
fuller life, a life of blessedness, and that
we should soon join them in their high
spheres and Divine services, Oh, it is
sin that makes bereavement painful!
The sting of death is sin.” Take away
sin, and though death remain, its repul-


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


ee


siveness and painfulness would be en-
tirely gone. Sin has made dissolution
physically painful; sin has shortened
men’s lives by diseases and crimes ; sin
has robed death in mystery; sin has
made man to shrink from death lest it
should lead to non-existence or miserable
existence; sin has caused all the anguish
of bereavements, all and everything that
is painful in death is the result of
sin. :

Conciusion. 1. Brothers, let us hate
sin. Let us have nothing to do with
sin except to resist it, oppose it, save
men from it. 2. Let us be thankful for
the Gospel. Christ is the conqueror of
death. He has taken away its sting.
He is the Saviour from sin. Those who
believe on Him shall become holy and
heavenly. ‘To them death is no longer
a foe, but the kind messenger of the
loving Father.


Sin EstimateD BY THE LiaHTr or HEAVEN.
(Verse 8.)


The appearance of objects, and the
ideas which we form of them, are very
much affected by the situation in which
they are placed with respect to us, and
by the light in which they are seen....
No two persons will form precisely the
same idea of any object, unless they view
it in the same light, or are placed with
respect to it in the same situation. ...
God sees all objects just as they are;
but we see them through a deceitful
medium, which ignorance, prejudice, and
self-love place between them and us.
Apply these remarks to the case before
us, ‘“ Thou hast set our iniquities,” &c.
That is, our iniquities or open transgres-
sions, and our secret sins, the sins of our
hearts, are placed, as it were, full before
God’s face; and He sees them in the
pure, clear, all-disclosing light of His
own holiness and glory. Now, if we
would see our sias as they appear to
Him, that is, as they really are ; if we
would see their number, blackness, and
criminality, and the malignity and de-
sert of every sin, we must place our-
selves as nearly as possible in His situa-
tion, and look at sin as it were through


His eyes. Recollect, that the God in
whose presence you are, is the Being
who forbids sin, the Being, of whose
eternal law sin is the transgression, and
against whom every sin is committed.
Keeping this in mind, let us—

1. Bring forward what the Psalmist,
in our text, calls our iniquities, that is,
our more gross and open sins, and see
how they appear in the light of God’s
countenance. Have any of you been
guilty of impious, profane, passionate,
or indecent, corrupting language? How
does such language sound in heaven ? in
the ears of angels, in the ears of that
God, who gave us our tongues for noble
purposes? . .. Is this fit language for
God to hear? Let every one inquire
whether he has ever violated the third
commandment, by using the name of
God in a profane or irreverent manner.
If he has, let him bring forward his
transgressions of this kind, and see how
they appear in the light of God’s pre-
sence... . Have any of you been
guilty of uttering what is untrue? If
so, bring forward all the falsehoods, all
the deceitful expressiona, which you


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PSALM XO,


Oa a ee ee ee ee


have ever uttered, and see how they
appear in the presence of the God of
truth; of that God, who has declared,
that He abhors a lying tongue, and that
all liars shall have their portion in the
burning lake, Oh, what is it to stand
convicted of falsehood before such a
God as this! After the above manner
treat the sins of perjury, Sabbath-
breaking, adultery, fraud, injustice or
dishonesty, and intemperance.

While attending to the preceding re-
marks, probably many of my hearers
may have felt as if they were not per-
sonally concerned in them, as if they
were guilty of none of those gross ini-
quities. 1 would indeed hope that of
some of them, at least, none of you are
guilty. But these are by no means the
only iniquities of which God takes
notice ; for our text further informs us,
that He has set our secret sins, the sins
of our hearts, in the light of His counte-
nance. Let us then—

IL Bring our hearts into heaven, and
there, laying them open to view, see
how they will appear in that world of
unclouded light and unsullied purity.

What a disclosure is made, when,
with the dissecting knife of a spiritual
anatomist, we lay open the human heart,
with all its dark recesses and intricate
windings, and expose the lurking abomi-
nations, which it conceals, not to the
light of day, but to the light of heaven |
Even in this sinful world, the spectacle
which such a disclosure would exhibit
could not be borne, The man whose
heart should thus be laid open to public
view would be banished from society ;
nay, he would himself fly from it, over-
whelmed with shame and confusion,
Of this every man is sensible, and there-
fore conceals his heart from all eyes
with jealous care... . And if the heart
laid open to view would appear thus
black in this dark, sinful world, who
can describe, or conceive of the black-
ness which it must exhibit, when sur-

‘rounded by the dazzling whiteness of
heaven, and seen in the light of God’s
presence, the light of His holiness and
love? How do proud, self-exalting
thoughts appear, when viewed in the
presence of Him, before whom all the


nations of the earth are less than no-
thing, and vanity? Speak of self-will,
tmpatience, discontent; angry, envious,
revengeful feelings ; and wanton, impure
thoughts. If all the evil thoughts and
wrong feelings which have passed in
countless numbers through either of our
hearts were poured out in heaven,
angels would stand aghast at the sight,
&c. To the omniscient God alone
would the sight not be surprising. He
alone knows what is in the heart of
man ; and what He knows of it He has
described in brief but terribly expressive
terms. “The heart is deceitful above
all things, and desperately wicked,” d&c.

IIT. Let us take a similar view of our
sins of omission. Our sins of omission
are by far the most numerous, and by
no means the least criminal offences of
which we are guilty. Speak of God’s
perfections, His glory, His goodness to
us, and of our obligations to Him.
Does He not deserve to be loved, and
feared, and served with all the heart,
and soul, and mind, and strength? Yet
from Him we have all withheld our
affections and services. Our whole
lives present one unbroken series of
duties neglected, of favours not acknow-
ledged. And, oh, how do they appear
when we review them in the light of
God’s countenance! ...

While God’s law requires us to love
Him with all the heart, it also requires
us to love our neighbour as ourselves.
And this general command virtually
includes a great number of subordinate
precepts, precepts which prescribe the
duties of the various relations that sub-
sist between us and our fellow-creatures.
How far have we obeyed these precepts ¢
. . - Oh, how much more might we have
done, than we actually have done, to
promote the temporal and eternal hap-
piness of all with whom we are con-
nected |

Nor do our sins of omission end here.
There is another Being whom we are
under infinite obligations to love, and
praise, and serve with supreme affection.
This Being is the Lord Jesus Christ,
considered as our Redeemer and Saviour,
who has bought us with His blood. We
are required to feel that we Bre our


POALM XG.





own, but His; to prefer Him to every
earthly object, to rely upon Him with
implicit confidence, to live, not to our-
selves, but to Him, and to honour Him
even as we honour the Father. Every
moment, then, in which we neglected to
obey these commands, we were guilty of
a new sin of omission. . . . How grossly
have we failed in performing this part
of our duty! How must the manner in
which we have treated the beloved Son
appear in the sight of God!

A day is approaching in which you





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; PSALMS.





will be constrained to see your sins as
they appear in the light of God’s
countenance. When that day arrives,
His eternal Son, the appointed Judge,
will be seen coming in the clouds of
heaven, dc. . . . Be persuaded now to
come to the light, that your deeds may
be reproved, and set in order before
you; exercise such feelings respecting
them, and so judge yourselves, that
you may not be condemned of the
Lord on that day.—Z. Payson, D.D.
Abridged.


Lirz an EXoLaMATION,
(Verse 9.)


“We spend our years as a tale that is
told.”

The word translated “tale” occurs
twice: in Job xxxvii. 2, “ Hear atten-
tively the noise of His voice, and the
sound that goeth out of His mouth ;”
and Ezek. ii. 10, “ And there was writ-
ten therein lamentations, and mourning,
and woe.” In the first passage the
reference is to the thunder, which is
the voice, the utterance, the grand
soliloquy of God. In the second pas-
sage the word describes the broken
accents of grief, the abrupt and incom-
plete exclamation of deep and over-
whelming sorrow. So when life is
described in the text, the meaning is
that it is a brief and broken exclama-
tion, a hurried voice, a short and start-
ling sound which is soon lost in the
silence of eternity.

I. The main idea of the text is the
transientness of life: it has the brevity
of a cry. And does not this accord
with fact? The utterances may be of
different lengths, but life is always short.
Some lives have only one word, some
several, yet is each an exclamation.
Some have the completeness of finished
sentences ; some fail in the midst ; some
have only a beginning, rather intimate
that there is something to be said than
say it. Then is life short, indeed, when
man dies, not because he has exhausted
a force so much as because he has met
with an obstruction. And yet how
often is this the case! The days are

43


“cut off:” “the sun goes down while it
is yet day:” “the flower fadeth.” Why
did they live at all? What was the
reason of their being ?

And then, also, is: life short when,
though its voice fails not at the com-
mencement of its utterance, it is broken
off in the midst, and gives no complete
expression to the deep meaning with
which it is charged. And yet how
often is it as an unfinished cry! How
often do men pass away before they
have half revealed the significance of
their being !

But the brevity assigned to life in
the text belongs to all life, and not to
any lives in particular, It is brevity
which marks it as a whole, marks it in
its longest term. ...

Things are long and short in com-
parison. The sense of duration is not
absolute. The insect that lives but a
day has, or might have, the feelings
with which we regard seventy years... .
And what those transient creatures are
to us, that should we be to others pro-
portionably longer-lived than we. Sup-
pose a being to live two millions of
years, he would look down on our ex-
istence of seventy years with the same
feelings as those with which we regard
the creature of a day. It is only eter-
nity that is really long — absolutely
long. Compared with that, all time is
short. Whatever can cease is as nothing
to that which never ceases ; it is simply
impossible to compare them... Life


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PSALM 16,





may seem long while it is going on, &
But wiat is life when put against inter-
minable years !

We may appropriate both terms, the
transient and the endless) We may
connect together the life that is but asa
broken exclamation, and the life that is
as an everlasting voice. I said we may
connect them together, but the solemn
truth is, that they are connected together
independently of our act or thought.
That besides which life is vanity will
take its character from life. Eternity
makes life nothing, and yet everything ;
sinks it to utter insignificance, and yet
invests it with inconceivable importance,
Consider the two as contrasted, and life
vanishes in the presence of eternity.
Consider the two as related, and life par-
takes of the augustness and awfulness of
eternity.

IL. If life is transient as a cry, it is
acry full of meaning. The importance
of utterances does not depend on their
length; it is not how long it takes to
express a thing, but the nature of the
thing expressed, which decides the great-
ness of the expression. A few words
may reveal a world of meaning.... It
is the fulness of the heart which seeks
relief in cries, and that which makes
them short makes them significant,
Then do fewest words suffice when many
words are felt to be too few. Life is a
cry, but what does it not reveal? The
broken speech of our earthly days is the
voice of souls, It shows what we are
as souls ; our principles, habits, dc... .
And, showing what we are, it shows also
what we shall be, what we shall be for
ever. And it does more than show what
we shall be, it helps to make us it,

This is the view of life I wish you to
take.... Regarded alone, we may despise
it; we may be angry with it; we may
say, “Let us eat and drink, for to-morrow
we die ;” we may give way to despond-
ency and depression; but, regarded
along with what it indicates and pre-
pares for, it will excite us to holy dili-
gence, gird up our loins for hope and
service. Thus regarded, its very vanity
will only make it more precious, and we
shall tremble to neglect the brief period
which is the seedtime of eternity. ..


I ask you, whose life is so evanescent,
yet so significant, what are you saying |
what is the meaning of that living word
which issues forth, consciously or un-
consciously, from your hearts? Many
different cries proceed from our com-
mon nature, Life in some is acry of
wonder, an expression of amazement at
this mysterious universe, and their own
mysterious being. Life in some is a
ery of pain, ... grief from physical
suffering, grief from adversities of lot,
grief from social pressure on the heart’s
affections, Life in some is a cry of joy,
the rapid, incoherent speech of ecstatic
feeling. I do not ask which of these
your life is, nor does it much signify in
relation to the most important of all
matters, Be it the expression of wonder,
pain, or joy, it may be sad or glorious ;
it may be the wonder of a believing
or a sceptical spirit; it may be the pain
of a patient or angry spirit ; it may be
the joy of a spirit whose portion is the
world, or whose portion is the Lord.
But I do ask you, what is the temper
and the form of your life? With many,
it is but an oath, a revelation of enmity
against God and godliness ; a forgetful-
ness of all that should be remembered,
a neglect of all that should be cared for,
a dislike of all that should be loved, a
disobedience of all that should be sub-
mitted to. But there are many with
whom life is a prayer ; its exclamations
are like ejaculatory supplications ; the
pouring out of the heart in adoration,
petition, praise; the expression of de-
pendence, desire, devotion, &c,

Let me ask you, what are you and
what are you likely to be in that
eternity which is so speedily to succeed
the days which are as a shadow?.. .
Life must be sinful if your heart be not
renewed by the Holy Ghost; must be
wretched if you be not reconciled to
God by the death of His Son. Time,
which is so short, is the season for con-
version, salvation; and without these,
when it is passed, you will find your-
selves in an eternity for which no pre-
paration has been made. Everlasting
life dates from regeneration, not from
death; we cannot have the life im-
mortal if we be not born again. Dying

4%


FOaLM XO.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


nn nnn nnn me


in sin, your destiny must be destruction ;
without God now, you will be without
God forever. Oh! if you have not yet
yielded your soul to the Gospel, ...
let me entreat you to awaken to the
transient nature of this probationary


Human Fraitty aN INCENTIVE
(Verses


The Psalmist passes from meditation
to supplication, Having meditated
upon the eternity of God and the
transientness and misery of man’s
life upon earth, and traced man’s suf-
ferings to his sins, he here proceeds to
implore the blessings of the eternal
and unchangeable God upon His frail
creature—man. He asks from God—_

L Help in forming a correct estimate
of life. “So teach us to number our
days, that we may apply our hearts
unto wisdom.”

It would have been reasonable to
have concluded, that since man’s life is
so short and sad he would form a true
estimate of it, Yet this he does not.
“All men count all men mortal but
themselves.” Though life is so un-
certain, yet every man acts as though
he had a certain future guaranteed unto
him, Though life is so brief, yet each
man acts as though he had a long
earthly future before him. A correct
estimate of life must include two
things—

1. That ¢ ts brief. “ Behold, Thou
hast made my days as an handbreadth ;
and mine age is as nothing before Thee:
verily every man at his best state .is
altogether vanity.” (See remarks on
“the extreme brevity of man’s life
upon earth,” verses 1-6.)

2. That ttts preparatory. This world
is a great school, and our life in it is
educational, We are here to prepare
characters for eternity; primarily and
pre-eminently, but not exclusively, our
own ; and to help others in the forma-
tion and development of noble char-
acters, What a vast and important
work of preparation for eternity has to
be done in this brief life! How much
have we to do tn and for ourselves/ In

44


period. This evanescent life is big
with the fortunes of eternity, and you
are deciding what they shall be. Be
wise, repent, accept the atonement, go
in the way of life, &.—A. J. Morris.
Abridged,


ro SEEK THE Divine Buessina.
12-17.)


us there are angry passions to be quelled,
evil habits whose power must be broken,
besetting sins to be conquered. And we
have so much to acquire; our deficiencies
and imperfections are 80 numerous, our
moral power is so feeble, our spiritual
aspirations are so irregular and weak.
Verily, our preparation for eternity is
advanced only a little way. We have
much to do before our spiritual educa-
tion will be anything like complete.
Then we have much to do for others.
The parent has many plans which he
wants to see carried out concerning his
children. The Christian minister feels —
that in the exposition and application
of Divine truth, and in the oversight of
the souls committed to his charge, he
has a vast and unspeakably important
work yet todo. Every man who takes
an interest in his fellow-man must feel
that he has much to do in helping to
remove the ignorance and sin and suffer-
ing of men, by helping them to acquire
knowledge, and by leading them to the
Saviour from sin and the Healer of
suffering. When life is thus estimated
men will “apply their hearts unte
wisdom.”


‘¢ "Tis not for man to trifle] Life is brief,
And sin is here,
Our age is but the falling of a leaf,
: A dropping tear,
We have no time to sport away the hours,
All must be earnest in a world like ours,


** Not many lives, but only one have wo—
One, only one;
How sacred should that one life ever be—
That narrow span !
Day after day filled up with blessed toil,
Hour after hour still bringing iv new spoil.”
— Bonar,


The Psalmist supplicates—
IL The mercy of God in life. He


SHOMILETIO COMMENTARY : PSALMS.


praye that God would exercise His
mercy towards them—

1. In the removal of His anger,
“Return, O Lord, how long? and let
it repent Thee concerning Thy servants,”
The Israelites in the wilderness were
visited with some severe expressions of
the wrath of God by reason of their sin,
Their long, and mournful, and apparently
fruitless wanderings in the wilderness
were a punishment from God because of
sin. For a long time they had been
bearing the heavy judgments ef the
Lord ; so they cry unto Him, “ How
long?” How long shall Thy wrath lie
heavily upon us? The petition of this
verse is very similar to a petition in a
former prayer of Moses: “Turn from
Thy fierce wrath, and repent of this
evil against Thy people.” “ According
to the usual phraseology of Scripture,”
says Calvin, “God is said to repent,
when, after dissipating sadness, and
giving again occasions for joy, He
appears as if He had changed.” Yet
really there is no change in God. Re-
pentance is impossible to Him. But
when man turns to Him in repentance,
He turns to man in mercy. When He
withdraws His anger it is not because a
change has taken place in Him; but
because man has changed, and taken a
different position in relation to His law
and government. So Moses prays that
God would turn in mercy to them, and
bring His judgments upon them to an
ena.

2. In the communication of satisfaction
to them. ‘“‘O satisfy us early with Thy
mercy.” Literally, “Satisfy us in the
moruing with Thy mercy.” In the
Scripture suffering and distress are fre-
quently set forth by the emblem of
night. Morning is an emblem sf salva-
tion and joy. (Comp, Job xii 17; Ps.
xxx. 5.) If God in mercy appeared to
the Israelites, that appearance would be
to them as the dawn of a joyous morn-
ing. They pray for satisfaction in the
mercy of God. Under the displeasure
of God there can be no satisfaction. If
any soul is satisfied out of God, that
soul is dead. In His favour is life,
Only in God can the human soul, with
its unutterable yearnings, ite quench-








PALM XO,





less aspirations, xad its profound craw
ings, find satisfaction and repose.

3. In granting gladness to them, In
the petitions for gladness three things
demand our attention, (1) They seek
gladness as a result of mercy. ‘Satisfy
us early with Thy mercy; That we may
Fejoice and be glad.” The night of
their mourning would end, and the day
of their joy would dawn, when God satis-
fied them with His mercy. From the
conscious possession of God’s favour the
deepest, highest, purest, divinest joy
springs. (2) They seek gladness as a
lifelong experience, “All our days,”
Much of sin, gloom, and suffering had
been in their past life; they desire that
in all their future life there may be
the Divine mercy and holy joy. It is
the privilege of the child of God “to
rejoice evermore,” “ Your joy no man
taketh from you.” (3) They seek glad-
hess in proportion to their afflictions,
“Make us glad according to the days
wherein Thou hast afflicted us, and the
years wherein we have seen evil.” It
is a principle of God’s providential deal-
ings that light and darkness, happiness
and distress, in human life shall bear
some proportion to each other, ‘In
the day of prosperity be joyful, but in
the day of adversity consider: God also
hath set the one over against the other.”
He balances the varying experiences of
our lives. The Israelites in the wilder-
ness had many days of His displeasure ;
they entreat as many days of His
favour. They had passed through
years of mournful wandering ; they
pray for a corresponding number of
years of peace and joy. The Psalmist
entreats—

III. The manifestation of God's
power and grace in life. “Let Thy
work appear unto Thy servants, and Thy
glory unto their children. And let the
beauty of the Lord our God be upon us.”
Here is a prayer—

1. That God would work manifestly on
their behalf. ‘Show to Thy servants
Thy doing,” is really a prayer for the
interposition of God on their behalf ;
that He would display His great power
in introducing them to prosperity. Moses
knew how mighty in working Jehovah

45


PALM XG.








ia, and so he prays that He would work
for them and for their salvation.

2. That God would grant unto them
of His grace. “Show Thy glory unto
their children, And let the beauty of
the Lord our God be upon us.” God’s
glory consists of His goodness, When
Moses prayed, “I beseech Thee, show
me Thy glory,” the Lord answered, “I
will make all My goodness pass before
thee.” He is “ glorious in holiness,”
glorious in grace. It is probable that
they prayed that God’s glory may be
manifested to their children, because
God had promised to lead their children
into the land into which by reason of sin
they entered not. That the glory of
Divine grace and strength may be
displayed to their children, even
though themselves may not see it, they
earnestly desire. It has been well
pointed out “that this prayer was
answered, Though the first generation
fell in the wilderness, yet the labours
of Moses and his companions weré
blessed to the second. These were the
most devoted to God of any generation
that Israel ever saw. It was of them
that the Lord said, ‘I remember thee,
the kindness of thy youth, the love of
thine espousals, when thou wentest after
Me in the wilderness, in a land that was
not sown. Israel was holiness unto the
Lord, and the first fruits of His in-
crease,’ It was then that Balaam could
not curse, but, though desirous of the
wages of unrighteousness, was compelled
to forego them, and his curse was turned
into a blessing.” ‘ And let the beauty
of the Lord our God be upon us” is also
a petition for the favour of God; that
the beauty of the Divine character may
be revealed in them, and be revealed by
them to others. If the grace of God
dwell richly in us, it will radiate from
us in lives of spiritual beauty and power.
The Psalmist prays for—

IV. The establishment of human


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY; PSALHE,


——


work in life, ‘Establish Thou the
work of our hands upon us; yea, the
work of our hands establish Thou it.”
This petition, in its relation to Moses,
has a very touching significance. He
was to die without seeing the result of —
the great work of his life. The millions
whom he led from Egyptian slavery
remained slaves in spirit throughout
life ; and, because they were slaves and
not men, they were not permitted to
enter the promised land. Moses him-
self may see it, but must not enter
therein. To a superficial observer his
work must have appeared useless, and
his life a failure of most magnificent
faculties, But his life was no failure;
his work was not in vain. That which
he had commenced was carried forward
to glorious completion, Dr. James
Hamilton has truly remarked, that “for
forty years it had been the business of
Moses to bring Israel into a right state
politically, morally, religiously ; that had
been Avs work. And yet, in so far as it
was to have any success or enduringness,
it must be God’s work. ‘The work of
our hands’ do Thou establish ; and this
God does when, in answer to prayer, He
adopts the work of His servants, and
makes it His own ‘work,’ His own
‘glory,’ His own ‘beauty.’” Human
efforts in a good cause, when they are
made earnestly and in humble dependence
upon the blessing of God for success, can-
not be in vain. God will establish them,
Cono.usion.— If man be ephemeral,
God is eternal.” And through Christ
man may dwell in God, and be made a
partaker of His character and blessed-
ness. In ourselves we are insignificant,
vain, worthless—bewildering and mourn-
ful enigmas; but in God we rise into
harmony, holiness, power, usefulness ;
life grows deep in significance, brilliant
in prospect, and divine in destiny.
Through our Lord Jesus Christ let
every man seek to become one with God,





An ALL-IMPORTANT NUMERATION,
(Verse 12.)


L The Teacher.
God.
1. He thoroughly wnderstands the
46


The eternal Lord


subject. “Our days,” their number,
their importance, d&c., He knoweth
periectly,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


POALM EG.





3. He ts thoroughly acquainted with
the pupils, Our circumstances, tempera-
ment, aptitude or inaptitude as learners,
He knoweth right well.

3. He has great influence over the
pupils. He can influence our under-
standing, direct our judgment, work
conviction in us,

IL The pupils. Frail men. Strange
that we should need teaching on this
subject. The remarkable frailty and
the anspeakable importance of human
life is constantly proclaimed by—

1. The voice of history. All the
generations of the past have gone “the
way to dusty death.”

2. The scenes and circumstances of
life. Crowded cemeteries, funeral pro-
cessions, bereaved families,

3. Our own experience, Infirmities,
pains, diseases, announce our frailty,
Yet we need that God should teach us in
this matter. This need indicates disorder
in our moral judgment, disinclination to
receive the fact of our frailty, &.

Ii. The lesson. “To number our
days.” “It is to take the measure of
our days as compared with the work to


Toe Meroy or


be performed, with the provision to be
laid up for eternity, with the preparation
to be made for death, with the precau-
tion to be taken against judgment. It
is to estimate human life by the pur-
poses to which it should be applied, by
the eternity to which it must conduct,
and in which it shall at last be absorbed ”
He numbers his days well who—

1. Mourns the time past which has
been misspent.

2. Diligently uses time present.

3. Trusts the time future entirely to
God.

IV. The end. “That we may apply
our hearts unto wisdom.” This wisdom
is not speculative, but practical ; not in-
tellectual, but moral.

1. True religion ts wisdom,

2. True religion requires application
of heart.

3. The remembrance of life’s transient-
ness 18 calculated to promote this ap-
plication.

‘Therefore, “So teach us to number
our days,” &c.

(See a fine sermon on this verse, by F.
W. Robertson. Sermons, vol. iv.)


Gop So.iciTEp.


(Verse 14.)


On these words the following observa-
tions may be founded :—

L All men have sinned against God,
and therefore need mercy.

IL The consideration that life is short
and uncertain, has a remarkable ten-
dency to impress this important truth
upon the mind,

IIl. It is the duty of every one to im-
plore the mercy of God by fervent prayer.


IV. The mercy of God is the only
satisfying portion,

V. We ought not only to desire that
this mercy may be granted, but should
pray that it may be imparted “early ”

VL. The possessor of God’s mercy is
qualified to rejoice and be glad all his
days. — “The Young Minister's Com-
panton.”


Tue THREE PETITIONS.
(Verses 16, 17.)


Here are three petitions, Let us look
at them in their logical order of thought,
rather than their poetic expression.

L The first petition asks for some
visible results from the work attempted.
“Tat Thy work appear.” Is not this a
_aost natural and lewfal netition? The


worker longs to see some fruit of his
work, some positive testimony that he
has not toiled in vain, Do not most
men ardently desire this, no matter what
the nature of their work} The states-
man wishes it, the merchant, the farmer,
the teacher, and why not the ee.


P@aLM XOL,








But the Christian is sometimes tempted
to carry his desire too far. God may,
therefore, think fit to withhold from his
sight no small portion of the actual
result, lest the servant forget whose the
work really is, and what is his true rela-
tion to it. He so deals with us that our
patience may take root and grow. He
disappoints our desire for visible results
to draw us nearer to Himself, to deepen
our trust, &c. He helps us to under-
stand what we are so slow to learn,
that, from the very character of our
work, we never can see in this world
more than a few conspicuous ears. Yet
“the work of our hands ”—all of it—
will hereafter “appear,” not a grain of
it lost, not a single product of that grain
hidden or obscured. We may, there-
fore, still continue to offer the petition
to the Lord of the harvest, for some
visible results of our sowing ; but do not
let us be discouraged if, for reasons best
known to Him, our prayer is not
answered here and now.

II. The second petition asks for the
stability of the work. And is not this
as natural as the desire that the work
should “appear”$ No one wishes that
the thing upon which he has bestowed
his deepest thought, his severest and
most conscientious labour, should be
scattered and lost It depends,
humanly speaking, upon the character
of the work, how long it will endure.
It is so in material works,... Good
honest work, even if it be not of the
highest type, is the only durable work.
But what work can compare in value
with “turning men to righteousness ¢”
Many Christian workers, however,
tremble for the future of their work.





HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY: PSALMS.


Losing faith in the power of its living
energy, they have, as they thought,
“ established ” it, lest it should die out
and be no more seen ; with what results
a hundred damaging facts patent to our
eyes declare, The work, in its root of
life, is not man’s but God’s ; hence the
appropriateness of the second petition,
“ Establish Thou the work of our hands,”
&c. The repetition of the prayer is for
the sake of emphasis, He began the
good work; He alone can make it con-
stant and firm. “Establish Thou it,”
set it up, as a throne is set up, as a city
is founded, as an altar is reared, &c.

UL The third petition asks for the
succession and expansion of the work, for
its widest possible influence. The beauty
and glory have come upon us Thy
servants, Let them also descend upon
our children, This is the parent’s wish
and continual prayer. We pray “ that
our sons may be as plants grown up in
their youth,” &c, The sons of Christians
are the hope of the Church, The
children of Christians are the best
workers in the Church to-day; in the
home, in the school, in the sanctuary, in
the mission-field.

But the petition is for our descend-
ants, near or remote ; for all who shall
follow us in that grand and never-broken
procession through the ages of living
men. Nothing less than this expresses
the fulness of the prayer, “ Thy king-
dom come; Thy will be done as in
heaven so in earth.”

Two cautions we shall all do well to
heed — 1. Prayer without work is
mockery. 2. Work without prayer is
vain, —J, Jackson (foadby. Abridged
from “ The Kvangelical Magazine.”





PSALM XOL


INTRODUCTION,


There {s no title prefixed to this Psalm, We know not who is the author of it,
Ths conjecture, which has been made by some, that it waa written by Moses, is very inade.-


quately sustained, Neither do we know the time or occasion of its composition,
is general in its character, and applies to the whole Church,


The Psalm


A remarkable feature of the Psalm is the frequent change of persons, from which some


have inferred that it was composed for singing b


alternate choirs. The explanation of Heng-


stenberg seems to us more reasonable: ‘That the Psalmist speaks at one time from his own
person to the soul of the righteous one who is in danger, and revives its courage, while at
another ee he expreases confidence from the soul of the righteous man; and thus in that


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PSALM X02,





pleasant alternation which forms the characteristic peculiarity of the Psalm, he employs ai
time the thou in the character of teacher, and at ahainer oo Z in the Soarien of ee
- «+. The call of instruction in Scripture (this is the meaning of the alternation), ought
always to be responded to by the acknowledgment of the hearer.” ;

For our homiletical purpose we shall divide the Psalm thus :—The safe hiding-place
the godly (verses 1 and 2), The inviolable security of the godly (verses 3-10), The angelic mi
sters of the godly (verses 11-13), The glorious privileges of the godly (verses 14-16).


Toe Sarg Hrpina-PLace or THE GopLy,
(Verses 1, 2.)


Into these two verses is condensed
the contents of the whole Psalm. ‘The
statement of the first verse expresses in
brief what is afterwards set forth with
some particularity,—the safety of him
who places his trust in God. And in
the second verse the Poet expresses his
own firm assurance of his safety in
Jehovah his God. We have in the
text—

I An implication of danger. That
the Psalmist was sensible of danger is
clear from the fact that he regarded
God as a “refuge” and a “ fortress.”
The godly are in peril by reason of —

1. The trials of life. Bodily pains,
mental perplexities, spiritual sorrows
and struggles, involve danger to those
who pass through them. The very
nature of trial, z.¢., testing, involves the
idea of possible failure. Bodily pain
may result in petulance or bitterness of
spirit, mental perplexities may lead to
a paralysing unbelief, spiritual conflicts
may issue in loss, and even in defeat.
The godly soul is in danger and needs a
“ refuge.”

2. Spiritual adversaries, The good
man has to contend with foea His
“adversary the devil as a roaring lion
goeth about, seeking whom he may
devour.” He is hated by the world.
Its spirit and’ principles, many of its
practices, many of its amusements, and
much of its literature, are opposed to
the interests and even the life of the
godly soul, Temptation to evil is a
great and sad fact in this world. More-
over, the good man finds that in himself
there are “ fleshly lusts which war against
the soul.” His life is a great moral
battle. Numerous and powerful forces
are arrayed against him. Seductive
influences also are brought to bear upon


vol.


him to lead him astray. His life is
one of peril. He needs a “ fortress”
from which he may hurl defiance at his
foes,

IL An assurance of safety. ‘He
that dwelleth in the secret place of the
Most High shall abide under the
shadow of the Almighty. Notice here:

1. The condition. To realise this
safety the godly man must “dwell in
the secret place of the Most High.”
“ND, which is here translated “ the
secret place,” signifies primarily a vedl,
a covering, then, what ts secret, then, a
hiding-place, protection, The latter we
take to be the meaning in this place,
The godly soul dwells in the hiding-
place, t.¢, in the protection of the Most
High. His trust he reposes in God.
He looks to Him for protection from the
fiery darts of the wicked, and for sup-
port and shelter in the storms of life.
To assure his safety the good man must
“dwell” in the hiding-place of the
Most High. The literal rendering is,
‘“ He that sitteth in the,” &c. He dwells
in quietude, he finds rest there, he is
settled there. ‘God’s children should
not come to God’s secret place as guests
to an inn, but as inhabitants to their
own dwellings.” Speaking without any
figure, the condition of spiritual safety
is constant trust in God as our Protec-
tor. “They that trust in the Lord
shall be as mount Zion, which cannot be
removed, but abideth for ever.”

2. The promise. ‘Shall abide under
the shadow of the Almighty.” The
rendering in the margin is “ shall lodge,”
Hengstenberg translates: “epends the
night.” The idea is, that that is his
home, the place where he passes his
nights, Under the shadow is explained
by some »y the bird who hides hes

49


PaaLM Dol,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : PSALMS.


ee
———EE—EE


young ones under her wings for their
protection, Others explain it as indi-
eating the great nearness of God to His
people, and their consequent safety. We
must be and continue very close to a
person for his shadow to fall constantly
upon us. Thus to abide under His
shadow is to realise His constant pre-
sence, and to be always secure in His
protection, The names of God which
are here used set forth the ground upon
which this assurance of the godly man
is based: “the Most High,” “the Al-
mighty.” What power can harm the
man who is protected by the constant
presence of the Supreme and Omnipo-
tent Being? In the time of tempta-
tion, affliction, and darkness, we shall
pass the night under His shadow. And
in the toil and battle of the day, with
its heat and burden, we shall rest secure
beneath the Almighty’s shade. In His
nearness to us our safety lies, While
we are under His shadow no evil can
befall us. Distance from Him means
danger. Closeness to Him means entire
security.

Tt. An expression of confidence.
“Twill say of the Lord, He is my re-
fuge and my fortress ; my God; in Him
will I trust.” Consider here—

1. The aspects in which God ts re-
garded. He is spoken of as a “ Refuge.”
God is the refuge of His people from
the storms of life. In times of suffering
and trial they find safety and comfort
in Him. He is also.a “ fortress.” The
idea of this word is different from that
of a refuge. The refuge was a quiet
and secure hiding-place ; the fortress is
a place of defence against foes, which is
strong to resist the attacks of opposing
forces. In life’s warfare God is the
stronghold of His people; He is their
shield. ‘O God the Lord, the strength
of my salvation, Thou hast covered my
head in the day of battle.” Having
His protection we are invulnerable, In
life’s storms He is the safe and quiet
shelter of His people “My soul


trusteth in Thee: yea, in the shadow


af Thy wings will I make my refuge,
until these calamities be overpast.” The
Psalmist also speaks of the Lord as his


“A


“God;” the object of His worship;
One who is worthy of all obedience and
affection, all reverence and confidence,
all praise and glory. Jehovah was to
the Psalmist all that a man expects in
his God.

2. The confidence which is expressed in
Him. The Psalmist’s confidence in
God is manifest (1) Im hts resolve to
trust Him. “In Him will I trust.”
The Psalmist confidently leaves His in-
terests in the hands of God, Believing
in His power, goodness, and faithfulness,
he trusts Him—confides in Him. (2)
In the appropriating nature of his faith.
He says, “ My refuge, my fortress, my
God.” There is little or no strength or
encouragement to be drawn from be-
lieving in the Lord as a refuge and a
fortress unless we realise our interest in
Him. But when faith is in vigorous
exercise and we claim God as our own,
then are we inspirited and strengthened,
Can we look to God and say, “ My re
fuge, my fortress, my God”? (3) Jn
the declaration of his confidence. “TI
will say of the Lord,” &. He was de-
termined to proclaim his confidence in
God. He believes, and, therefore, he
speaks, Men are ready enough now-a-
days to speak of their doubts. But he
is the noble. man and the useful man
who can intelligently and reverently
speak of his faith ; who says, ‘I know
whom I have believed,” &c.; and who is
“ready always to give an answer to
every man that asketh him a reason for
the hope that is in him with meekness
and fear.” Great was the confidence of
the Psalmist in God, and his great con-
fidence he declares unto others.

ConoLusion.—We also are exposed to
trials and dangers, and need a refuge
and a defence. Our safety is in God
alone. Having Him for our God we
are beyond the reach of any real harm.
We secure His protection by trusting in
Him. By faith we dwell in the secret
place of the Most High, and are ever
secure under His shadow. Do not fear
or hesitate to trust God fully and for
ever, Commit yourself with confidence
into His hands, and you shall dwell
safely by Him for ever,


~ ae


HIOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PSALM EGL





Tsz Isviotaste Sxovrrry or rae Gop y.
(Verses 3-10.)


Im these verses the Poet sets forth
with a measure of particularity what he
has already expressed briefly and gene-
rally. He expresses in joyous song his
strong confidence that he is safe from
dangers of every kind, because he is
protected by God. Zhe inviolable security
of the godly is here represented—

L As effected by God. “Surely He
shall deliver thee from the snare of the
fowler, and from the noisome pestilence,
He shall cover thee with His feathers,
and under His wings shalt thou trust:
His truth shall be thy shield and
buckler.” The Psalmist felt that he bad
for protector no less a being than God
Himself. Two features of the Divine
protection are here brought into view.

1. Its tenderness. ‘‘He shall cover
thee with His feathers, and under His
wings shalt thou trust.” The young
birds under the wing of their mother
are tenderly guarded. (See our notes
on Psalm lvii. 1, and Ixiii. 7.); Gott-
hold tells how that during a fire at
Delft, in Holland, certain storks, finding
it impossible to preserve their brood,
placed themselves upon the nest, spread
over them their wings, and so perished
with them in the flames. ‘‘ Under these
wings,” says Bernard, “four blessings
are conferred upon us. For under these
wings we are concealed; under these we
are protected from the attacks of the
hawks and kites, which are the powérs
of the air: under these a salubrious shade
refreshes us, and wards off the over-
powering heat of the sun: under these
also we are nourished and cherished.”

2. Its effectiveness. Wings and feathers
indicate the tender and loving character
of the Divine protection, Yet wings
and feathers are weak and may be easily
broken. But the Divine protection is
as strong as it is tender, as efficient as
it is gracious, ‘ His truth shall be thy
shield and buckler.” God’s word, and
His faithfulness to His word, are as
armour to His people, preserving them
from the onslaughts of their enemies.


In such a protector we do well to trust
and rejoice. He is wise to baffle the
crafty designs of the cunning fowler;
tender to shelter us from the storm and
tempest; and strong to defend us in
the day of battle.

IL As gloriously complete. The
Psalmist labours to set forth the com-
pleteness of the safety of the godly man.
He represents him as being—

1. Safe from all perils, It is per-
haps impossible to assert with certainty
what the Psalmist meant by each of the
phrases and figures he employed. “ The
snare of the fowler” indicates danger
arising from the craft and cunning of
enemies, The great enemy of God and
man is especially signified. The Lord
delivers His people from “the wiles of
the devil.” ‘The noisome pestilence.”
There is a difference in both the trans-
lations and the interpretations of this
clause. Perowne translates—‘ The de-
vouring pestilence.” Barnes—“ The fatal
pestilence ; the pestilence that spreads
death in its march.” Hengstenberg—
“The pestilence of wickedness.” And
Matthew Henry says—‘‘ The contagion |
of sin is the noisome pestilence.” We
think the latter view the correct one,
The first clause of the verse (ver. 3) we
regard as representing the subtle temp-
tations of Satan, and the second the
ruinous contagion of sin. God delivers
from both all who trust in Him. Heng-
stenberg, as we think with great pro-
bability, interprets verse 5 as setting
forth the safety of the godly from the
attacks of men, and verse 6 as setting
forth their safety from sickness, Per-
owne, on verse 5, says—‘“ Terror by
night (comp. Song of Sol. iii, 8, Prov.
iii, 23-26), in allusion, probably, to
night attacks like those of Gideon
(Judg. vii.), a favourite artifice of
Oriental warfare; or perhaps to a
destruction like that of Sennacherib.”
And it has been pointed out on verse 6,
that “the diseases of al] hot climates,
and especially where vegetation is highly -

51


PRALM XO,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





luxuriant, and marshes and miry swamps
are abundant, proceed from the accumu-
lating vapours of the neght, or from the
violence of the sun’s rays at mid-day.
The beriberi of Ceylon, the spasmodic
cholera and jungle-fever of India, and
the greater part of the fevera of inter-
tropical climates, especially that called
the yellow-fever, chiefly originate from
the first of these—‘the pestilence that
walketh in darkness ;’ while sunstrokes,
apoplexies, inflammations of the brain,
and liver complaints of most kinds,
proceed from the second, ‘the destruc-
tion that wasteth at noonday.’ And it
is in allusion to this double source of
mischief that the Psalmist exclaims most
beautifully on another occasion (Ps.
exxi, 6), ‘The sun shall not smite thee
by day, nor the moon by night.’” The
seventh verse seems to refer to warlike
relations, and to express the security of
the godly in battle. And in verse 10,
where the plague is mentioned as not
coming nigh the dwelling of the right-
eous, there is, perhaps, an allusion to the
exemption of the Israelites from the
plagues of Egypt. But, leaving the
examination of details, let us take hold
of the main idea of the Poet, that the
godly are safe from perils of all kinds
and from all perils. ‘The variety of
figures employed shows that the Psalmist
is thinking of peril of every kind, coming
from whatever source, and that he paints
all dangers and fears vividly to the eye
of his mind, in order to express the
more joyfully his confidence that none
of these things can move him, that over
all he is more than conqueror. It is St.
Paul’s fervid exclamation, ‘If God be
for us, who can be against us?’ ex-
pressed in rich poetry.” From all the
assaults of Satan, from the fatal con-
tagion of moral evil, from the attacks
of enemies both by night and by day,
from hurtful diseases, from every plague,
from all evil, the godly man is preserved.

2. Safe at all times. “By night, by
day; in darkness,” and “at noonday ”
the Divine protection is alike exercised.
“He that keepeth thee will not slumber.
Behold, He that keepeth Israel shall
neither slumber noraleep .. The sun
shall not smite thee by day, nor the

52


moon by night. ... The Lord shall
preserve thy going out and thy coming
in from this time forth, and even for
evermore.” The guardianship of God
is unremitting, constant, and unchange-
able. They who trust in Him are at all
times safe in His keeping.

3. Raised above the fear of danger.
“Thou shalt not be afraid for the terror
by night; nor for the arrow that flieth
by day; nor for the pestilence that
walketh in darkness; nor for the de-
struction that wasteth at noonday.” A
stout heart may well be excused if it
were afraid of perils such as these, and
especially when they approach us in
darkness and at night. In the darkness
of night evil is apt to assume an exag-
gerated character. Imagination increases
its terrors. If we could clearly see the
perils which threaten us they would lose
much of their terror-inspiring power.
But the godly man, trusting in the
Lord, shall not be afraid of the terrors
of the night or the perils of the day.
In the midst of dangers he shall walk
calmly because of his trust in the all-
sufficient protection of God,

But is all this true? Is it not a fact
that pestilence seizes the saint as well as
the sinner? Does not the plague entei
the dwelling of the good man as well as
that of the evil? It is unquestionable
that the godly are not exempt from “the
ills that flesh is heir to.” Loss, sick-
ness, suffering, death, fall to their lot
even as to others. What, then, does
the Psalmist mean in these verses ?
How are we to understand them #

“We must bear in mind that we are
interpreting poetry, not prose. The
sacred poets of the Hebrews, like all
other poets, used figurative and rhetorical
language. And to interpret their poems
in the same way as we interpret an his-
torical document, or a logical treatise,
or an apostolic letter, would be utterly
misleading. The plain truth expressed
in these verses is, that God is the Pro-
tector of His people, and that they are
secure who put their trust in Him. Nor


is it difficult to show that in times of


pestilence and peril the position of the
goaiy man is far superior to that of the
ungodly. We may mention at least


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.








three things in which this is clearly
menifest. (1) Sah wn God tsa great
safeyuard againss disease and danger.
Stier states that some years ago a dis-
tinguished physician in St. Petersburg
recommended this Psalm as the best
defence against the cholera’ And Tho-
luck admirably says— As the general
who carries within him the conviction
that he is called to a great work, whilst
the bullets fall thick as hail about him,
stands with calm eye and firm foot, and
says: I know that the bullet is not yet
cast which can strike me, so stands the
man of prophetic faith in the hour of
danger, with the conviction that the
thunderbolt will turn aside from his
head, and the torrent dry up at his feet,
and the arrows fall blunted from his
breast, because the Lord wills ut.” Faith
in God is the great condition of calm-
bess and courage in time of danger.
(2) The godly man observes the laws of
health. Pestilence and disease find their
victims chiefly amongst the intemperate
and licentious, who by their sinful habits
are predisposed to their attacks, and un-
able to resist their power. But the
godly man, by reason of his life of
virtue, temperance, and cleanliness,
often escapes the most deadly diseases
without any attack, or if attacked
frequently recovers. (3) Suffering and
death wear a different aspect to the godly
man from that which they present to the
wicked, He knows that suffering is
educational ; “that tribulation worketh





patience ;” that out of affliction and
conflict the saluts often bring great
spoil of spiritual treasures; that ‘these
light afflictions, which are but for a
moment, are working for him a far
more exceeding and eternal weight of
glory.” He has gracious support in all
his trials and afflictions ; and, being
sanctified by God, great blessings accrue
to him by means of them, And to the
godly men of this Christian age death
is not an evil; it signifies not loss, but
gain; it is the gate of life; it is birth
into a higher and diviner form of life.
It is true, then, that no real evil can
befall the godly soul who is trusting in
the Lord. And if suffering and sorrow
and loss should be his portion, God will
educe from them blessings of transcen-
dent and perpetual value. ‘We know
that all things work together for good
to them that love God.”

IT. As conditionated by trust in
God. The godly man is thus secure
because he has made the Lord his
refuge, and the Most High his habita-
tion, (See notes on the condition of
safety in the preceding homily.) This
verse (the 9th) is in substance a repeti-
tion of the first verse. If we would
secure the protection of God we must
trust Him fully and constantly.

Conciusion.—l. Let the godly ever
trust and rejoice in their Protector, 2.
Sinner, seek and secure this protection
while you may. “Let the wicked foz-
sake his way,” dc,


Tue Rewarp OF THE WICKED.
(Verse 8.)


These words suggest—

IL That there is a difference be-
tween the sufferings of the righteous
and the wicked. The same external
afflictions and trials may befall them ;
but to the righteous they are educational,
to the wicked they are punitive—“ the
reward,” d&c,

IL That the Divine rule in this
world is righteous. Under it the godly
sre protected by God, while the wicked
are punished,

OL That the righteousness of the


Divine rule is not always manifest in
this world. If the present were our
only state of being, there are many
things which we could not reconcile
with the fact that God reigns in
righteousness,

IV. That the righteousness of the
Divine rule will ultimately be clearly
manifest to all The godly with their
eyes “shall see the reward of the
wicked.” There is a state where all
the apparent inequalities of the moral
government of our world will be clearly

53





rectified. ‘Woe unto the wicked! it
shall be ill with him; for the reward
of his hands shall be given him.”

V. The weak and fearful believer,
notwithstanding his fears, shall not


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


perish with the wicked. ‘Only with
his eyes shall he see the reward of the
wicked,” while he himself shall enjoy
the glorious inheritance of the good.





Toe ANGELIC MINISTERS OF THE GODLY..


(Verses


In pursuance of the main topic the
Poet here speaks of angels as charged
by God to help and defend His people,
Literally the word angel signifies a
messenger, and may be used personally
or impersonally. It is used in the
Scriptures to designate ordinary mes-
sengers, prophets, Christian ministers,
&c. In this place it denotes super-
human spirits—angels, as the word is
commonly understood at present. From
the representations of the holy Word it
is clear that the angels rank high in the
scale of being. They are said to possess
great power. ‘Angels that excel in
strength.” ‘“ Mighty angels.” And
most astonishing achievements of power
are attributed to them. They also
possess great ntelligence. This is
plainly implied in the words of the
Lord—“ But of that day and hour
knoweth no man, no, not the angels
of heaven, but My Father only.” It
is also implied in the statement that
they are “full of eyes before and be-
hind,” and “full of eyes within.” The
amazing power that they wield is chiefly
the power of intelligence and wisdom,
They also possess complete moral purity.
They are spoken of'in the Bible as
‘“‘ saints,” ‘holy ones,” and “ holy
angels.” Dwelling in that world where
not even the shadow of moral defile-
ment can enter, and standing in the
immediate presence of God, they must
be entirely free from even the smallest
moral stain or imperfection, Their
power, intelligence, purity, differ from
ours in this, that they are perfect in
kind. They differ from those of God in
this, that they are imperfect in degree.
There is before the angels a career of
constant progress, both moral and intel-
lectual, through all eternity. Moreover,
they are represented as interested in the

54


11-13.)


affairs of this world, and: as actively
employed by God in connection with
those affairs, ‘‘ They are represented aa
being, in the widest sense, agents of
God’s providence, natural and super-—
natural, to the body and to the soul.
Thus the operations of nature are spoken
of as under angelic guidance fulfilling
the will of God. . . . More particularly,
however, angels are spoken of as min-
isters of what is commonly called the
‘supernatural,’ or perhaps more correctly
the ‘spiritual’ Providence cf God; as
agents in the great scheme of the
spiritual redemption and sanctification
of man.” “The angel of the Lord” is
said to “‘encamp round about them
that fear Him, and to deliver them.”
They are represented as watching over
Christ’s little ones ; as rejoicing over a
penitent sinner; as bearing the spirits
of the redeemed into Paradise; and as
“ministering spirits” for the spiritual
guidance and help of the heirs of salva-
tion. And in the text they are said to
be charged by God to uphold and aid
His people. That they should thus
minister to the godly is in the highest
degree reasonable, (1) From the inte-
rest which they take in man (Luke xv.
10; 1 Pet i. 12). (2) Inasmuch as a
fallen angel led man to his ruin, and
still by malign influences seeks our de-
struction, does it not seem appropriate
and reasonable that holy angels should
aid us in every virtuous and worthy
effort? (3) It is the law of God’s
universe that His creatures should
minister to each other. All things and
all beings are made for service. The
higher order of beings are made to
minister to the lower—the strong to
help the weak, the enlightened te
instruct the ignorant, &c. Our Lord
“came not to be ministered unto, but


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


—_ -_


to w4nister.” “I am among you,” He
said, “‘ as He that serveth.” God is the
Great Minister of all His creatures,
How reasonable then that angels should
minister to men! If we are asked in
what way angels minister to men? or,
how they serve us? we may with strict
fairness decline to reply. We may
accept a fact without being able to
explain its mode. All men, indeed, do
go in many things. So we accept as
true the statement that angelic beings
aid men, though we are unable to ex-
plain by what method they doso. But
may it not be that they aid us by sug-
gesting to our mind thoughts, reasons,
and motives to action, and by awaken-
ing emotions in our souls} &. Any
way, we thankfully accept and rejoice
in their ministry as a precious reality.
**Oh! th’ exceeding grace
Of highest God that loves His creatures 80,
And all His works with mercy doth embrace,


That blessed angels He sends to and fro,


To serve to wicked men, to serve His wicked
foe.


** How oft do they their silver bowers leave,

To come to succour us that succour want!

How oft do they with golden pinions cleave

The flitting skies, like flying pursuivant,

Against foul fiends to aid us militant!

They for us fight, they watch and duly ward,

And their bright squadrons round about us

lant ;

And all for love, and nothing for reward.

Oh! why should heavenly God to men have
such regard !”—<Spenser.

In the text the angelic ministers of the

good are said to be—

I. Commissioned by God. ‘He
shall give His angels charge over thee.”

1. They are “His angels.” He called
them into being. He sustains them.
The most mighty and glorious of their
number is dependent upon Him. He is
sovereign over them all, Loyally and
reverently they acknowledge His sove-
reign right over them.

2. They are commissioned by Him.
He allots to them their respective duties.
They “‘do His commandments, hearken-
ing unto the voice of His word.” They
are “ His hosts, ministers of His that do
His pleasure.” The “charge” which in
the text they are said to receive is more
than a mere direction or order; it is a
solemn command. All the angelic


PALM ACK,


ministers of the godly obey His behests ;
they serve under Him,—they are carry-
ing out His purposes.

This angelic ministry is—

IL Exercised for the godly as indi.
viduals. ‘‘He shall give His angels
charge over thee.” God is profoundly
solicitous for the well-being of each one
of His people. He does not overlook
the individual in the multitude. He
cares for every godly soul with a care as
complete and constant as though He had
no other soul to care for. So in the
ministry of His angels unto men He
gives them charge not simply of His
Church or of the communities which
compose it, but of every individual
member who trusts in Him. So that
every true believer may say, “In my
lonely labour, and sorrow, and conflict,
when far removed from human help and
fellowship, my angelic helpers still have
me in their charge, and are still near to
help me.” Thus an angel ministered
to Elijah (1 Kings xix. 4-8); to Daniel
(Dan. vi, 22); to Peter (Acts xii. 7-10).

This angelic ministry is—

III. Exercised for the godly only
when they are in their true path.
“To keep thee in all thy ways.” It ia
significant that when Satan quoted this
verse in the temptation of our Lord, he
omitted this clause, Had he quoted the
whole verse, his temptation would have
refuted itself. “The ‘ways’ spoken of
in the Psalm are the ‘ ways’ of obedi-
ence and duty, not the ‘ ways’ of pre-
sumption or self-seeking.” In the ways
which God has prescribed for us to walk
in we shall find safety and support even
when the way is roughest and we are
feeblest. But if we step out of the
way, we forfeit the help of the angel
ministers, If we are out of the way,
their business is not to help us but to
oppose us, if haply their opposition may
lead us to retrace our steps and re-enter
our true path. So long as we are in our
way we are sure of the Divine help and
protection, for His angels will not fail
in their charge; but if we are out of
our way, we are exposed to dangers
from every quarter. The path of duty
is the path of safety.

The angelic ministry is—

RR


PRALM XG.





IV. Exercised for the godly always
when they are in their true path
“To keep thee in all thy ways.” God
calls men to tread different ways. He
also calls the same person to tread
different ways at different times, There
are the ways of arduous duty, and of
severe trial, and of peaceful progress,
dtc, God’s way for one man is the way
of patient endurance, He calls him to
suffer; His way for another man is the
way of constant and perhaps difficult
service, He calls him to work ; His way
for vast numbers is that of quietly and
faithfully discharging “the daily round
and common tasks” of life, He calls
them to diligence and faithfulness, In
all the paths of life which He calls us to
tread our angelic ministers are near for
our help, When our path lies by the
rippling waters of gentle streams,
beneath azure skies, amid beauteous
scenes and with genial breezes, they keep
us in our way. And when we travel
the steep and rugged way, beneath
heavy clouds and amid furious storms,
they bear us up on their hands lest we
dash our foot against a stone. In the
thronged and dusty way of life’s busy
scenes, and in the retired and peaceful
paths of quiet service, they keep us
To keep thee in adl thy ways.”

V. By means of the exercise of this
angelic ministry the godly are enabled
to surmount all the hindrances and
conquer all the foes that beset their
way. “They shall bear thee up on
their hands, lest thou dash thy foot
against a stone. Thou shalt tread upon
the lion and adder ; the young lion and
the dragon shalt thou trample under
foot.” “By the ‘lion and adder,’”
says Perowne, “there is no need to
understand exclusively, or chiefly, the
powers of darkness, the evil spirits. As
by ‘a stone’ all hindrances, so by ‘the
lion and dragon’ all hostile powers are
denoted.” By means of this angelic
ministry the godly are—

1. Preserved from falling. “They
shall bear thee up on their hands, lest
thou dash thy foot against a stone,”
One great object of the ministry of
angels ia to guard the good Jest they
stumble and fall into sin. They aid us

56


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS. Ng


—


to overcome the hindrances of life. “ If
we cannot have the way smoothed, it
answers every purpose if we have angela
to bear us up on their hands.”

2. Enabled to conquer the most power-
ful foes. “The lion” and “the young
lion” represent enemies of great strength
and violence, Satan is said to go about
“as a roaring lion seeking whom he
may devour.” The most powerful ene-
mies of the good cannot cope with one
of the angels of God. One angel of the
Lord in one night smote one hundred
and eighty-five thousand Assyrians.
The man who trusts in the Lord, look-
ing upon the most numerous and most
powerful enemies, in full assurance of
victory may say, “ Fear not; for they
that be with us are more than they that
be with them.” Our helpers are more
numerous and more powerful than our
enemies,

3. Enabled to conquer the most cun-
ning foes. “The adder” and “the
dragon” repzesent enemies of great
secrecy and cunning. Satan is desig-
nated a serpent and a dragon. “ And
the great dragon was cast out, that old
serpent, called the Devil, and Satan,
which deceiveth the whole world.” St,
Paul speaks of the “ wiles of the devil.”
Many of the foes against which the
godly have to contend in society to-day
seek to gain their victory not by strength
but by subtlety, not by force but by
fraud. But our angelic helpers aid
us in this respect also. We have assur-
ance of complete victory over both
“the roaring lion” and the “old ser-
pent.” Triumphantly we shall tread
our foes under our feet. Over both the
might of opposition and the cunning of
temptation we shall be more than con-
querors,

Conoiusion. 1. Our subject affords
encouragement to trust tn God. How
numerous and efficient are the agencies
He employs to save us! 2. Our sud-
Ject reveals the dignity of the godly man.
Angels, the highest beings in creation,
the holy, the glorious, the powerful, are
employed by God to serve him. Child
of God. realise thy dignity, walk worthily
of it. 3. Our subject calls us to the
service of others. Angels serve us, Christ


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PSALM E01,





serves us now in heaven, the Holy Ghost
serves, the Heavenly Father serves, God
is the great servant of all. To serve
God by ministering to our fellow-crea-


tures is our duty and privilege. Let
us secure the blessedness of unselfish
and hearty service,


Tae Fors anp Vicrory oF THE Goon,
(Verse 13.)


L The foes of the good. These are—
1. Numerous, ‘The lion and adder,
the young lion and the dragon.”


** Angels your march oppose,
Who still in strength excel,
Your secret, sworn, eternal foea,
Countless, invisible.”
—O. Wesley.

The enemies of the good in human
society, in commerce, in amusements,
in literature, are very many. And to
these aud the countless evil spirits
must be added the “ fleshly lusts which
war against the soul,”

2. Various. ‘The lion,” whose
strength, courage, and ferocity are pro-
verbial, The word which is translated
“ adder” signifies “a poisonous snake.”
“The young lion” is mentioned as parti-
cularly fierce and violent. And the
word which is translated ‘the dragon,”
signifies here a “ land serpent of a power-
ful and deadly kind.” Thus varied are
the foes of the godly man. The world,
the flesh, and the devil are all arrayed
against him. He has to battle with the
syren enticements of temptation and the
fierce attacks of persecution, &c.

3. Terrible. “The lion, adder, young
lion, and dragon ” are very terrible foes
to the traveller. If once they have him
in their power, they will destroy him,
The foes of the godly soul are to be
dreaded for their malignity, subtlety,


and power. He is a fool who thinks
lightly of the forces of evil which are
working and fighting in this world.

Il. The victory of the good. This
(oS

1. Complete. (1) Over all foes,
“The lion and adder, the young lion
and the dragon” shail all be vanquished.
The world, the flesh, and the devil, per-
secutions and seductions, inward foes
and outward, shall all be overcome by
the man who trusts in God. (2) Over
all foes completely. ‘ Thou shalt tread
upon the lion and adder, the young lion
and the dragon shalt thou trample under
feet.” “His meaning is, thou shalt in-
tentionally tread upon them like a con-
queror, thou shalt tread upon them to
testify thy dominion over them, You
shall have power to overcome whatso-
ever may annoy you.” ‘The God of
peace shall bruise Satan under your feet
shortly.” The Christian will come out
of life’s conflicts “more than a con-
queror” through Christ,

2. Certain, (1) Because angels aid
us against our foes. They are intelligent,
powerful, swift, glorious allies. (2) Be-
cause God guarantees tt. “Thou shalt
tread,” &c. Here is no perhaps, but a
certain promise from Him who is the
truth. Take courage then, brother, in
life’s battles, Trust and fight, and a
glorious victory will be yours,


THe GLORIOUS PRIVILEGES OF THE GODLY.
(Verses 14 16.)


The inspired poet in these verses repre-
sents God Himself as declaring the high
privileges of His servants. We have
here—

I. Some features in the character of
the godly.


1. Love to God. “ Because he hath


set his love upon me.” The good man
loves God with the love of grati#tude—
loves Him because of what He has done
and is still doing for him. “We love
Him because He first loved us.” When
we reflect upon the evils from which He
delivers us, and the blessings He bestows
57


POALM XG,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALM.


LN


upon us, and the glory which awaits us
in the future, our heart glows with grati-
tude and affection to Him, The good
man loves God with the love of esteem
also,—loves Him because of what He is
in Himself. The love which springs
from gratitude is first in order of time
in the spiritual history of most men ; but
the love which springs from esteem is
first in order of excellence. To love
Him because of the divine beauty of
His character and life, is a far higher
thing than to love Him because of the
benefits which we have received from
Him, or which He has promised to
bestow upon us,
«* My God, I love Thee, not because
I hope for heaven thereby ;


Nor because they who love Thee not
Are lost eternally,


*¢ Not with the hope of gaining aught,
Nor seeking a reward,
But, as Thyself hast lovéd me,
O ever-loving Lord,


4 So would I love Thee, blessed Lord,
And in Thy praise will sing, ~
Because Thou art my loving God,
And my redeeming King.”
—Xavler,

The expression, “ Set His love upon
me,” indicates fixedness of affection, God
requires from us an intense single-hearted
love. ‘“‘Thou shalt love the Lord thy
God with all thy heart, and with all thy
soul, and with all thy strength, and with
all thy mind.” Our supreme love must
be fixed upon God, There is encourage-
ment for us in this verse, ‘It is not
because of perfect love that God will
deliver. It is to the will to love and
serve—it is to the setting the heart that
the promise is made—to the full pur-
ose of heart, that is se¢ to cleave unto
the Lord.” Do we love God supremely 4
2. Knowledge of God. “He hath
known my name.” Knowledge of God
and love to God are closely connected.
We must have some knowledge of God
before we can love Him. A true know-
ledge of God leads to trust in Him,
“They that know Thy name will put
their trust in Thee.” To know QGod’s
name is to know Himself. Proficiency
in this knowledge is attainable only to
the man who loves God, As we must


have some knowledge of God before we
58


“grant.”


can love Him, so we must love Him
before we can know much of Him.
“ Every one that loveth is born of God,
and knoweth God, He that loveth not
knoweth not God; for God is love.”
We can know the heart of God only as
we love Him. Where the keen intellect
fails to discover any trace of God, He is
clearly and preciously manifest to the
pure and loving heart.

3. Prayer to God. “He sball call
upon Me.” The godly soul cannot live
without prayer. In times of need he
calls upon God for grace to help him. In
the enjoyment of blessing He calls upon
God in grateful praise. At all times he
acknowledges his dependence upon God.
And there are seasons when prayer
grows into holy and blessed communion,
in which there are no petitions, but av
intense and blessed realisation of the
presence of God, and adoration of Him,
which humbles and purifies and streng-
thens the spirit.

It. Some of the glorious privileges
of the godly.

1. Deliverance from danger. The
assurance is twice given, “ I will deliver
him.” The good man has enemies to
contend with, but God will deliver him
out of their hands, and give him the
victory over them. The good man is
exposed to dangers, but God delivers
him safely out of them all.

2. Exaltation and consequent safety.
“JT will set him on high.” I will place
him out of the reach of danger. God
raises those who trust Him above the
stormy sea of this life, places them on
an immovable rock, where the threaten-
ing and thundering waves cannot reach
them. “He shall dwell on high; his
place of defence shall be the munitions
of rocks.” God thus exalts His people
above the perils of life, because they
know His name and confide in Him,

3. Answers to prayer. “I wilh
answer him.” The answer to prayer is
not necessarily the granting of our re
quests. “It may be a refusal, an ex-
planation, a promise, a conditional
Excellently says Matthew
Henry, “I will answer by promises
(ixxxv. 8), answer by providences,
bringing in seasonable relief. and answez


HAOMILETIC COMMENTARY : PSALMS.


PSALM XU.





by graces, strengthening them with
strength in their souls ; thus He
answered Paul with grace sufficient,”
True prayer is always answered by God,
end answered in infinite wisdom and love,

4. The presence of God in trouble.
“JT will be with him in trouble.” The
good man is not exempted from trouble,
but supported in the midst of trouble.
The celebrated William Dawson says,
“At other times God will leave them
in the hands of angels: ‘ He shall give
His angels charge over thee to keep
thee,’ &c. But when they are in trouble,
I will say to the angels, ‘Stand aside,
I will take care of them Myself. I will
be with them in trouble.” So He
speaks to His people: ‘When thou
passest through the waters, I will be
with thee,’ &c. When languishing in
sickness, He will make His bed and
his pillow ; when travelling through the
valley of the shadow of death, the Lord
will be with him, and enable him to
sing, ‘I will fear no evil; for Thou art
with me,’ &c. Thus He is with them
as their physician and nurse, in pain
and sickness ; as their strength in weak-
ness ; a8 their guide in difficulty ; their
ease in pain; and their life in death.”

5. The conference of distinguished
honour. “I will honour him.” God
honours His peuple in this life by de-
livering them from danger and trial, by
sustaining them in suffering and sorrow,
and by raising them into the most ex-
alted relationships. “Now are we the
sons of God.” In the life that is to
come God will honour them by raising
them to the highest dignities, the most
delightful fellowships, the most glorious
service, and to His own immediate pre-
sence. “To him that overcometh I will
give to sit with Me in My throne,” &c.
“We know that when He shall appear
we shall be like Him,” &c.

6. Satisfaction with the duration of
their life upon earth. “ With long life
will I satisfy him.” ‘The special promise
of long life at the close,” says Perowne,
“as a temporal blessing, is in accordance
with the general character of the Old
Testament. Still it is possible that men
like the Psalmist, full of faith in God,
attached a deeper and more spiritual


meaning to promises and hopes like
these, than was attached to them by
the majority of their countrymen.”
Matthew Henry’s exposition seems to
us admirable. (1) They shall live
long enough ; they shall be continued
in this world till they have done the
work they were sent into this world for,
and are ready for heaven, and that is
long enough. Who would wish to live
a day longer than God has some work
to do, either by him or upon him? (2)
They shall think it long enough; for
God by His grace shall wean them’
from the world and make them willing
to leave it. A man may die young, and
yet die full of days, satur dierum—satis-
fied with living, A wicked worldly
man is not satisfied, no, not with long
life ; he still cries, Give, give. But he
that has his treasure and heart in
another world has soon enough of this ;
he would not live always.” The good
man’s life upon earth is a completed
thing, whether he die young or live to
become a centenarian. He knows that
his life is ordered by infinite Wisdom,
and whenever it ends he is satisfied.

7. Full salvation. “ And show him
My salvation.” When the good man’s
life upon earth is ended, God will admit
him to the enjoyment of His complete,
glorious, and everlasting salvation in
heaven. Here we catch glimpses of His
salvation; there we shall see it fully
and clearly revealed. Here we know
its power and blessedness in part ; here-
after we shall know them in their com-
pleteness, Here we conquer and have
to battle again; there the warfare is
all over, and the victory is glorious and
endless. Here we partake of His salva-
tion in the kingdom of grace ; there in
the kingdom of glory.

Conciusion. 1. Have we these dis-
tinguishing characteristics of the godly }
Do we love, know, and pray to God!
2. Do you who have them, value and
rejoice in your exalted privileges? 3.
And you who do not bear the marks of
the godly man, what ts your hope?
Through Jesus Christ every man may
attain to this supreme love to God, this
blessed knowledge of Him, and this
hallowed communion with Him.

ya


PALM XCEL





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; PSALMS,


Lone Lire
(Verse 16.)


“With long life will I satisfy him.”
The present life is not a vain thing, but
a thing of solemn reality ; not a trifling
thing, but a thing of stupendous import-
ance; it ought not to be a mean thing,
but a thing of sublimity and honour.

I, Long life is desirable,

1. Because of the obedience which we
may render to God, In this world we
obey God in the face of many difficulties
and much temptation, In heaven all
influences combine to aid its inhabitants
in their joyous obedience and service.
But here, alas! it ia very different. Yet
obedience in a state like the present
develops some of the noblest elements
of character, and is specially well-pleas-
ing to God. ;

2. Because of the service we may ren-
der to our race. In heaven holiness is
universal and supreme. In hell evil
holds undisputed sway. Upon earth
good and evil are present, and in con-
flict. Here we may Isabour for the
cause of righteousness and truth as we
cannot in any other state of being.

“ Awake, my zeal; awake, my love,

To serve my Saviour here below,
In works which perfect sainte above,
And holy angela cannot do,
Awake, my charity, to feed
The hungry soul, and clothe the poor ;
In heaven are found no sons of need ;
There all these duties are no more,”

— Watts,

3, Because of the reward which we
may obtain. Obedience and service
rendered in this life will be appropri-
ately and proportionately rewarded in
the life to come. Therefore it is
natural and right to desire to live long
that we may obey long, and serve long,
and reap a rich reward.

IL The tendency of true religion is


to promote long life. “Keep My
commandments ; for length of days, and
long life, and peace shall they add to
thee, Length of days is in her (Wis-
dom’s) right hand.” The truly religious
man lives virtuously, temperately, culti-
vates cleanliness, and avoids all violent
passions, and such a life contributes in-

calculably to the prolongation of life.
III. A true estimate of the length
of life is not formed by simply num-
bering its months and years. ‘They
only,” said Sheridan, “‘have lived long
who have lived virtuously.” ‘ He lives
long,” said Fuller, “that lives well; and

time misspent is not lived, but lost.”
“We live in deeds, not years; in thoughts,

not breaths ;
In feelings, not in figures on a dial.
We should count time by heart-throbs. He
most lives


Who thinks most, feels the noblest, acts the
best,” — Bailey.


“ He liveth long who liveth well !
All other life is short and vain;
He liveth longest who can tell
Of living most for heavenly gaia,


“ He liveth long who liveth well!
All else is being flung away ;
He liveth longest who can tell
Of true things truly done each day.”
— Bonar.


IV. A truly godly man at the close
of life will be satisfied with its length
as determined by God, whatever that
length may be. ‘My times are in Thy
hand.” Our days are determined, the
number of our months is with Him;
and He orders all things well, ‘In
short measures life may perfect be.”

Conclusion.—Let us see to it that,
by the help of God, we live well and
earnestly ; and thankfully leave the
length of our life with Him,


PSALM XOIL


INTRODUCTION.
Buperseription.— “tA Pealm or Song for the Sabbath-day.” It so far combinse the properties


of both a psalm and a song that either name may be applied to it.


This psalm was appointed


for use in the temple service on the Sabbath-day. By reason of its contents it is well adapted


for use in the pubiic worship of God.


“It celebrates,” says Perowne, “in joyful strain the


greatneas of God's works, and especially His righteous government of the world, as manifested
in the need of the wicked, and the prosperity and final triumph of the righteoua The


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS,
nt ge
tted, but this is a mystery which worldly men,





success of the ungodly for a time is admi
whose understanding has become darkened, cannot penetrate (ver. 6)


PSALM XOIL,


The Psalm, therefore, touches upon the same great principles of the Divine government which
are laid down in such Psalms as the first, the thirty-seventh, the forty-ninth, and the seventy-
third. But here there is no struggle with doubt and perplexity, as in the seventy-third ; the
Poet is, beyond all doubt, above all perplexity ; he has not fallen down to the low level of the
brutish man (comp. Ixxiii. 22 with ver. 6 of this Psalm) ; he is rejoicing in the full and perfect


conviction of the righteousnees of God.”


Both the author of the Psalm and the occasion of its composition are unknown.
For our Homileticai purpose we shall divide the psalm thus :—The good man’s celebration of
the praise of God, vera. 1-7; and, The rejoicing of the good man in the government of God, vers.


8-15.


THE Goop Man’s CELEBRATION OF THE Praise or Gop.
(Verses 1-7.)


In these verses the Poet brings before
us the celebration of the praise of God,
and presents for our consideration
several of the principal features of this
celebration. We have—

L. The ground of this exercise, “ For
Thou, Lord, hast made me glad through
Thy works: I will triumph in the works
of Thy hands. O Lord, how great are
Thy works! and Thy thoughts are very
deep.” The works of which the Pasal-
mist is speaking are not God’s works in
creation, but His moral government of
the world; those doings by which He
brought salvation to His people, and
destroyed His and their foes God’s
works in creation are great, and His
thoughts which are embodied therein
are very deep; but these are not the
works of which the Psalmist here speaks,
“What kind of works and thoughts the
Psalmist means,” says Hengstenberg,
“is particularly intimated in verse 7,
which should be distinguished from
verses 5 and 6 as by inverted commas,
It is the works and counsels of God for
the deliverance of His people, a deliver-
ance which is secured by the destruction
of the wicked, their enemies” Now
concerning these works the Psalmist
says that they are—

1. Great in themselves, “QO Lord,
how great are Thy works!” The
Psalmist, as he contemplated God’s
doings in the moral government of the
world, was overwhelmed with a sense of
their vastness, and greatness, and depth
of significance. The greatness of the
works of God in providence appears from
considerations such as these: (1) Zhe
extent of the sphere in which He works.
His operations are not limited to any


country or countries, or ® any particular
race or class of men. His moral go-
vernment of our world extends over the
whole world and the entire human race.
(2) The duration of the time through
which He works, He began this work
with the beginning of time, He has
continued it through all the ages and
through all the vicissitudes of human
history, and He will continue it for
ever. To us, who “are but of yesterday
and know nothing, because our days
upon earth are as a shadow,” how in-
comprehensibly great are works which
are wrought in so extensive a sphere
and through so vast a period! (3) The
grandeur of the objects for which He
works. His aim is the eradication of
evil, the extinction of sin and suffering,
the universal reign of truth, righteous-
ness, and love. Glorious object! (4)
The wonderful methods He employs in
His worka, Out of evil he educes good,
He maketh the wrath of man to praise
Him. He overrules the evil designs
and doings of rebellious angels and men
for the accomplishment of His own
gracious and sublime purposes. By
means of suffering and sacrifice He
enriches the race with divine and ines-
timably precious blessings. He saves
mankind by means of the Cross of our
Lord Jesus Christ. When we consider
God’s moral government of the world in
the way we have so very briefly indi-
cated, we speedily receive overwhelming
impressions of its greatness; we grow lost
in wonder; we can but exclaim: Howvast
and wonderful and Divine are Thy works!
The Psalmist represents these works as—

2, Embodiments of profound thoughts,
“Thy thoughts are very ate God


GeAIM ROI,





governs the world by a wise and bene-
volent design. All His works existed
first as thoughts in His own infinite
mind. Creation, with its innumerable
wonders, and its glory and grandeur, is
an embodiment of ideas of the Divine
mind, And the moral government of
the world is an expression of the
thoughts of His mind and the determi-
nations of His will. ‘ God’s counsels
as much exceed the contrivances of our
wisdom as His works do the efforts of
our power.” ‘There is no sea so deep
as these thoughts of God.” He “is
wonderful in counsel and excellent in
working.” ‘As the heavens are higher
than the earth, so are My ways higher
than your ways, and My thoughts than
your thoughts,” “QO the depth of the
riches both of the wisdom and know-
ledge of God!” &c, Our puny minds
are speedily baffled in the attempt to
comprehend the thoughts of God. God’s
works are regarded by the Psalmist as—
3. An expression of His loving-kind-
ness and faithfulness. ‘‘To show forth
Thy loving-kindness in the morning, and
Thy faithfulness every night.” These
attributes of the Divine Being are con-
spicuously displayed in His moral go-
vernment of the world. He manifests
His loving-kindness in delivering His
people from oppression and danger, in
leading them during their earthly pil-
grimage, in making all things work to-
gether for their good, and in crowning
their life with His love. His mercy is
manifest also in His treatment of the
wicked, in His expostulations with them,
in His great patience with them, in His
provision for their salvation, and in His
desire to save them, He manifests His
truth or faithfulness in fulfilling His en-
gagements, in keeping His promises,
This He does in the government of the
world, There have been times when, to
the limited view of man, His promises
seemed to fail, hut in His own wise
time He has made good His word. We
cannot take a comprehensive survey of
His work without discovering abundant
illustrations of both His mercy and His
truth, And it is fitting that we should
make mention of them in our praises.
The Poet represents God’s works as—
62


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


4. Not understood by the wicked.
‘¢A brutish man knoweth not; neither
doth a fool understand this.” The
term “brutish man” (literally, a man-
brute) indicates a terrible degradation
of human nature. A man, as having
been created in God’s image; a brutish
man, because he has debased himself to
brutehood. Man must either soar or
sink. Possibilities of unutterable de-
gradation and possibilities of unspeak-
able glory are within each one of us.
As man degrades himself into brutality,
his power of recognising the Divine be-
comes ever less and less, until he is
utterly incapable of understanding the
ways and works of God. The wicked
man is spoken of here as “a fool.” Sin
is folly. Neither the “brutish man”
nor the “fool” can understand the
moral government of God. ‘Were
God’s thoughts less deep and glorious,
did He repay the wicked at every par-
ticular transgression immediately with
His punishment, and did He bestow
salvation immediately upon the righteous
according to the canon which Job’s
friends with their limited views lay
down, the government of the worla
would become plain even to the dark
eye of ungodliness, But its depth
makes it a secret, the understanding of
which very often in times of conflict is
withheld even from the pious, as is
manifest from the example of Job and
the author of the seventy-third Psalm,
and in which there is always much that
may be learned.” The Psalmist speaks
of God’s works as—

5. A source of gladness to the good.
“Thou, Lord, hast made me glad
through Thy work; I will triumph in
the works of Thy hands.” The godly
man rejoices in the moral government
of God. It appears to him in aspects
of righteousness and benevolence and
wisdom, which the brutish man and the
fool are totally unable to perceive.
Many a glorious chapter in the history
of God’s providential dealings with our
race fills the heart of His people with
gladness; and they exult in his sove-
reignty, and in His mighty and gra-
cious deeds,

II, The manner of this exercise,


\


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


—


“To give thanks unto the Lord, and to
sing praises unto Thy name, O Moat
High . . . upon an instrument of ten
strings, and upon the pssltery; upon
the harp with a solemn sound.” The
Most High was praised in holy song
with accompaniment of instrumental
music. There are persons who are so
prejudiced (as it appears to us) that they
would exclude all instrumental music
from the public worship of God. They
allege that it is mechanical, not spiritual ;
and, therefore, is not to be used in the
worship of Him who is a Spirit, and
who requires spiritual worship. But
may not the mechanical assist the
spiritual? To us it seems that instru-
mental music, when it does not super-
sede, but supplements vocal music;
when it is not a substitute for spiritual
worship, but a minister to it, is of great
service. It is certain that in the
temple-service of the Jews, the details
of which were of Divine appointment,
instrumental music was used. And in
the prophetic and symbolic descriptions
of the worship of heaven contained in
the Apocalypse, instrumental music is
introduced. Instrumental music un-
questionably aids us in our attempts to
give vocal musical utterance to our
praise ; and there is no reason whatever,
in the nature of things, why it should
in the smallest degree diminish the
spirituality of our praise.

III. The seasons for this exercise.

1. Zhe Lord’s Day. This Psalm is
entitled “a Psalm or Song for the
Sabbath-day.” The day of rest is a
season eminently suited to meditation
upon the great and glorious works of
God in providence, and to praise Him
because of them. In its quiet, in our
freedom from the demands and duties of
business, in its high and holy associa-
tions and enjoyments, in these and other
characteristics of the day, we see how
eminently suited it is for the celebration
of the praise of God.

2. The morning. ‘To show forth
Thy loving-kindness in the morning.”
There is no season more favourable to
worship than the morning. The air is
fresh and invigorating, and the spirit is
refreshed by the repose and sleep of the





PSALM XOCIL


night. Praise should be the natural
expression of the heart every morning,
because of God’s loving-kindness, We
read of our Lord that “in the morning,
rising up a great while before day, He
went out, and departed into a solitary
place, and there prayed.” :

3. The evening. “To show forth Thy
faithfulness in the evening.” As we
praise Him in the morning for the
mercies of the night, so in the evening
we should praise Him for His faithful-
ness during the day. When the work of
the day is done, and we have retired
from life’s strain and toil, it is fitting
that we should recollect the mercy and
truth of God to us, and praise Him for
them. Evening, with its quiet and re-
pose, is well suited for meditation, and
meditation should lead to grateful
praise,

IV. The excellence of this exercise.
“Tt is a good thing to give thanks unto
the Lord,” &c.

1, Because tt ts right. Our praise is
due to God. He has a right to our
worship. He is supremely great, and
therefore we should reverence Him ;
supremely gracious, and therefore we
should be grateful to Him ; supremely
excellent, therefore we should love Him;
supremely glorious, therefore we should
adore Him. Not to praise Him indi-
cates the basest ingratitude on our part,
and defrauds Him of His right.

2. Because tt tends to lessen life's
cares and sorrows. The man who ia
mindful of the mercies he receives in
life, and notes thankfully the truth of
God to him, will ever find matter for
praise. In every life, not excepting the
most tried and sorrowful, there are
many things to be thankful for. This
will be obvious in the case of the health-
ful and prosperous. But look at the
case of the afflicted and sorrowful, and
even here there are matters for thank-
fulness,—in the recollection of seasons of
health and joy, in the hope of that state
in which pain and grief are unknown, in
the presence of friends and the support
of God in affliction, and in the blessings
of salvation. To remember these things
with gratitude and praise, will lighten
life’s burdens and soothe life’s sorrows.


63


PRALM XOII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





3. Because it elevates the spirit of the
worshipper. Gratitude is strengthened
by expressing it. If our praise of the


mercy and truth of God be sincere, by.


the expression of it we ourselves shall
in a measure become like Him in these
respects, Worship is transforming, We
become like the object or being whom we
truly worship. Thus by the worship of
God we are being changed into His image.
“Tt is a good thing to give thanks unto
the Lord,” for it purifies, enriches, and
exalts our being.

4, Because tt 1s acceptable wnto God.
When our praise is sincere and spiritual,
the Lord takes pleasure in it. He loves
to be worshipped by His intelligent
creatures; not from any delight in
self-aggrandisement, mor for any other
selfish reason, but because such worship
calls into exercise the noblest faculties
of His creatures, and exalts and blesses
them. In this way our worship gratifies
the Divine Being. The Most High is
pleased to accept the praise of thankful
hearts,


Conotusion.—Is God’s moral go
vernment of the world to us a ground of
praise? There are many who, in their
short-sightedness and unbelief, perceive
little but inequalities and anomalies in
it, and criticise and complain of its
administration. They forget the vast-
ness of the sphere in which it operates,
and the long ages through which it
operates, and their own incompetence to
comprehend the work of the great God ;
and so when “the workers of iniquity
do flourish” they are offended, or at
least sorely tried and perplexed. But
to the devout believer this government
presents a very different aspect. The
flourishing of the wicked he perceives
to be only brief, very brief, and to be
followed by destruction. God’s works
are so great, and His thoughts so pro-
found, as to fill him with humble and
reverent wonder; and His mercy and
truth are so conspicuous as to enkindle
his gratitude and praise. Is this the
case with us? He doeth all things
well, Let us trust Him, praise Him,


ENcOURAGEMENTs To Hoty Sona.
(Verse 1.)


“Tt is a good thing to sing praises
unto Thy name, O Most High.”

I. Singing is the music of nature.
Isa. xliv. 23; Psa. Ixv. 13; 1 Chron,
xvi. 33. The air is the bird’s music-room,
where they chant their musical notes.

II, Singing is the music of ordi-
nances. The Rabbis tell us that the
Jews, after the feast of the passover was
celebrated, sang Psalm cxl. and the five fol-
lowing Psalms ; and our Saviour and His
apostles “sang an hymn” immediately
after the blessed Supper (Matt, xxvi. 30).

III. Singing is the music of saints,

1. They have performed this duty in
their greatest numbers (Psa, exlix. 1).

‘ In their greatest straits (Isa, xvi.
19


3. In their greatest flight (Isa. xlii,
10 and 11).

4, In their greatest deliverances (Isa.
Ixv. 14).

5. In their greatest plenties, In all
these changes singing hath been their
stated duty and delight.

IV. Singing is the music of angels.
(Job, xxxviii. 7; Luke ii. 13; Rev. v.
11, 12).

V. Singing is the music of heaven.
(Rev. xv. 3). Here the saints laboured
with drowsy hearts and faltering
tongues; but in glory these impedi-
ments are removed, and nothing is left
to jar their joyous celebration. Jouw
WELLS, abridged from The Treasury of
David,


Tue SuBJEcTs AND Szasons oF Praise.
(Verse 2.)


The Poet here sets before us,—
L The subjects of praise.
64


1. The “loving-kindness” of God.
The loving-kindness or mercy of God to


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


msn is manifest in His forbearance with
sinners, in His forgiveness of sinners, in
His compassion towards the sorrowful,
and in the rich provision He has made for
us in nature, providence, and redemption.

2. The “faithfulness” of God. The
faithfulness or truth of God is seen in
His performing the promises which He
has made, in keeping His covenant with
‘His people. We may observe its mani-
festations in the operations of nature,
in the administration of His moral
government, and in the salvation of
souls,

These subjects of praise are tnex-
haustible. The loving-kindness and
truth of God are infinite. We are ever
receiving additional illustrations and
expressions of them. These subjects of
praise are elevating in their influence
upon us. We cannot sincerely praise
God for His loving-kindness and truth
without growing ourselves in truthful-
ness and love,

II. The seasons of praise.

1. “Jn the morning.” Because (1)
The state of the mind is favourable. By
the mercy of God we have been pre-
served through the night, and should
therefore be grateful to Him. The
mind has been refreshed by the sleep
of the night, and is therefore fitted to
praise God with freshness and spirit.
(2) The time of the day ts suttable.
There is a freshness in the morning air
which stimulates us to worship. In the
morning, before we are immersed in the
business of the day, we can praise God
with freedom from interruption. (3)
It ts needful as a preparation for the
engagements of the day. We may have
difficulties to encounter, temptations to
battle with, disappointments to endure,
wud we need the calmness and strength


RELIGIOUS





which accrue from worship to enable us
to meet these things.

2. In the evening. ‘Every night.”
Because (1) Zé 18 helpful to the mind
and heart after the toils and triale of the
day. (2) Because the time is favour-
able. Evening, with its shade, and
stillness, and rest, is a favourable season
for reflection. (3) The blessings of the
day and the needs of the night incite to
tt, There is much in every day which
ought to be recollected at night with
gratitude; and such recollection will
help us to rest calmly in the protection
of God. And this we should do “ every
night.” New illustrations of faithful-
ness should be followed by new songs of
praise. ‘As thou wouldst have God
prosper thy labour in the day and
sweeten thy rest in the night, clasp
them both together with thy morning
and evening devotiona He that takes
no care to set forth God’s portion of
time in the morning, doth not only
rob God of His due, but is a thief to
himself all the day after, by losing the
blessing which a faithful prayer might
bring from heaven on his undertakings.
And he that closeth his eyes at night
without prayer, lies down before his
bed is made,”

There are some who interpret the
“morning” as signifying prosperity and
joy, and the “night,” adversity and
grief. And we shall do well in the
brightness of prosperity gratefully to
recognise and praise the loving-kindness
of God; and in the night of adversity
the thankful recollection of the faith-
fulness of God will encourage and
strengthen us,

“Praise ye the Lord; for it is good
to sing praises unto our God ; for it is
pleasant ; and praise is comely.”


GLADEESS.


(Verse 4)


LZ Gladness as the gift of God.
“Thou, Lord, hast made me glad.” All
true joy proceeds from the ever blessed
God. The gladness which comes not
from Him is illusory, short-lived, and
often leaves dissatisfaction and pain.


VoL. IL 8


II. Gladness as arising from the con.
templation of God’s works. “Through
Thy work.” God’s work is eminently
calculated to inspire gladness by reason
of the power, wisdom, goodness, and
delight in beauty which it reveals.

65


FeaLM XON,


This is true of creation, providence, re- joy, because,” &e.


demption.

IIL Gladness finding expression in
devout song. “I will triumph in the
works of Thy hands.” “I will sing for


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


Ee eee





Perowne: “I will
rejoice in giving praise, for,” &e. If
God has given us joy, it is meet that
we should give Him praise.


Tae TeMPoRAL PROSPERITY OF YHE “VICKED.
(Verse 7.)


I Temporal prosperity is not a cri-
terion of character. Rich man and
Lazarus the beggar. The prosperous
“ fool.”

II. Temporal prosperity is not an
evidence of the Divine favour.

IIL Temporal prosperity is of un-


certain duration. “Spring as the
grass,” which speedily perishes.

IV. The temporal prosperity of the
wicked is followed by eternal ruin
“That they shall be destroyed for ever.”
“The prosperity of fools shall destroy
them.”


Tue REJOICING OF THE Goop Man In THE GOVERNMENT OF Gob.
(Verses 8-15.)


The Poet, having celebrated the praise
of God because of His doings in the
moral government of the world, proceeds
to show what these doings are in rela-
tion to the righteous and the wicked.
In His just rule God destroys the wicked
and blesses the righteous, and this to
the Psalmist affords matter for rejoicing.
There are two leading ideas here:

I. God is the Supreme Ruler. “ But
Thou, Lord, art Most High for ever-
more.” Perowne: “ And Thou, O Jeho-
vah, art (throned) on high for evermore,”
“‘ This verse, consisting of but one line,
expresses the great central fact on which
all the doctrine of the Psalm rests. This
is the great pillar of the universe and of
our faith.” God is supreme, because-—

1. He ws the greatest Being. How
unspeakably great is God! We have
no words or symbols adequate to set
forth His greatness and glory. The
prophet Isaiah, in language of wondrous
sublimity, endeavours to set it forth
(Isa, xl. 12-31).

2. He is the best Being. He is not
only supremely great, but supremely
good. In every moral attribute He is
perfect. ‘God is good.” “God is
light.” God is love.”

3. He ts the Creator and Sustatner,
“Tt is He that hath made us, and not
we ourselves.” And He who created


66


still sustains His creations, ‘‘ By Him
were all things created ; and He is be-
fore all things, and by Him all things
consist.” Here, then, we bave the reason
of His supremacy. It is real, a thing
of being and character and doing. He
is the Supreme Ruler because He is
supremely great and good, and because
as Creator and Sustainer He has the
most absolute right over His creatures,
“ His kingdom mr leth over all.”

IL. God’s supreme rule is unchange-
ably righteous. Yo the Psalmist this
was a deep conviction. “The Lord is
upright ; my Rock in whom there is no
unrighteousness.” Hts rule ts righteous.
Though for a while the wicked may
flourish and the righteous be in adver-
sity, yet God’s great plan of government
and its administration are true and
righteous altogether. A God of truth,
without iniquity, just and right is He.”
His rule is unchangeably righteous. The
Psalmist says, He is “my rock.” Asa
rock He is firm, abiding, immutable,
** God can no more be moved or removed
from doing righteously than a rock can
be removed out of its place.” This un-


_ changing righteousness of God’s moral


government the Psalmist exhibits as
manifest in—

l, The destruction of the wicked.
“For, lo, Thine enemies, O Lord, for,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PSALM XOII,


SS ee a ee ee ee


lo, Thine enemies shall perish ; all the
workers of iniquity shall be scattered.
Mine eye also shall see my desire on
mine enemies, and mine ears shall hear
my desire of the wicked that rise up
against me.” Matthew Henry very pro-
perly points out concerning the eleventh
verse that “in the Hebrew it is no more
than this, My eye shall look on my-ene-
mies, and my ears shall hear of the
wicked. He does not say what he shall
see, or what he shall hear, but he shall
see and hear that in which God will be
glorified, and in which he will therefore
be satisfied.” Concerning the wicked
and their destruction let us note—(1)
The enormity of their character. They
are “enemies” of God and “ workers of
iniquity.” To be an enemy of God is
to be hostile to truth, righteousness,
love ; to oppose our highest Benefactor,
It implies extreme moral depravity.
The term “ workers of iniquity” im-
plies terrible activity in evil. (2) The
unity of their efforts. It is implied that
the wicked have banded themselves to-
gether in their hostility to the Lord. So
Milton represents fallen angela—


“Devil with devil damned firm concord holds.”


And the Psalmist says, “‘ The rulers take
counsel together against the Lord,” &ec.
(3) The utter dissolution of their unity.
“ All the workers of iniquity shall be
scattered.” The cohesion of the wicked
in the pursuit of any object is not of
long continuance. When God arises
against them they shall be scattered
like chaff before the tempest, or like a
demoralised and rabble army before a
mighty and disciplined host. (4) Their
certain destruction. ‘For, lo, Thine
enemies, O Lord, for, lo, Thine enemies
shall perish.” ‘The repetition of the word
“lo” is emphatic, and indicates the cer-
tainty of their destruction. Men must
either loyally submit themselves to God
or be crushed by Him.

2. The salvation of the righteous. The
Poet evidently dwells with delight and
triumph upon this part of his theme,
and gives to us several particulars of the
salvation and blessedness of the right-
eous. (1) Their strength and honour.
“My horn shalt Thou exalt like the


horn of an unicorn.” The horn is the
symbol of power. The righteous are
blessed with true strength, They
“walk in the strength of the Lord God.”
He upholds them and honours them.
(2) Their refreshment and comfort.
“T shall be anointed with fresh oil.”
“Fresh oil,” or green oil, is the best oil.
God by His grace will refresh His people
when they are weary, and comfort and
cheer them when they are depressed and
sorrowful, Our Lord gives “the oil of
joy for mourning.” The godly may be
sorely tried for a time, but in due season
they shall be visited by choicest refresh-
ment and joy. (3) Their Divine plant-
ing. They are “ planted in the house of
the Lord.” ‘‘To be planted in the house
of the Lord is to be fixed and rooted in
the grace communicated by the ordi-
nances of Divine worship. Unless we
are planted in the house of the Lord
we cannot flourish in His courts.” Heng-
stenberg’s note is excellent: “By the
house of the Lord we can only under-
stand the external sanctuary; in it,
however, the servants of God dwell
spiritually with him, and are cared for
by Him with paternal love. There lies
at the bottom an abbreviated compari-
son : these spiritual trees flourish in the
house of God as the natural trees when
they are planted in a rich soil (Isa. v. 1),
or by rivers of water (Ps. i. 3).” They
draw their supplies from God. They
live by Him and in Him. (4) Thesr
Jlourishing growth, “The righteous
shall flourish like the palm tree,” &c.
(verses 12-14). ‘The date-palm and
the cedar are selected as the loveliest
images of verdure, fruitfulness, unde-
caying vigour and perpetuity.” They
flourish perennially. ‘Throughout the
year, in the winter's cold as in the
summers heat, the palm continues
green.” The growth of the godly soul
is a continuous thing. “ He shall be as
a tree planted by the waters, and that
spreadeth out her roots by the river,
and shall not see when heat cometh, but
her leaf shall be green; and shall not
be careful in the year of drought, neither
shall cease from yielding fruit.” They
flourish notwithstanding oppression. “It
has been said of the palm tree, Sub
67


PaaLM XT.





pondere crescit—YThe more tt ts pressed
down the more tt grows; so the righteous
flourish under their burdens,—the more
they are afflicted the more they mul-
tiply.” “We glory in tribulations also,
knowing that tribulation worketh pa-
tience,” &c, They grow eternally. The
growth of the cedar must be counted not
by years, but by centuries. The godly
soul will continue to grow for ever.
God will ever have more of Himself to
reveal unto us. And we shall ever con-
tinue to grow in likeness to Him. The
soul has unlimited capacities for growth,
(5) Thetr continued fruitfulness. “They
shall still bring forth fruit in old age.”
The palm-tree yields about three hundred
pounds’ weight of dates annually. It
has been known to produce even six
hundred pounds’ weight. Age makes
other things decay, but the godly soul
fiourishes and is fruitfulin age. “They


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





have their fruit unto holiness.” Their
last days are rich in the results of a long
experience, and their efforts to do good
are wise, and are sustained by a deep
faith in God. Both in their life and in
their work they are fruitful. ,

ConcLusion.—1. Let us not waver wn
our faith in the wise and righteous and
beneficent moral government of God.
Under it evil men may flourish for a
time in temporal prosperity, but God
will destroy all workers of iniquity.
Good men for a time may be sorely
afflicted, but God will sustain them in
their afflictions, make their afflictions
the occasion of blessing, and crown them
with everlasting joy. 2. What is our
relation to this government? Are we
enemies or loyal subjects? Let those
who are enemies submit to Jehovah at
once, and let His subjects rejoice in
His gracious rule.


THe Patm TREE AN ANALOGUE OF THE RIGHTEOUS
(Verse 13.)


“The righteous shall flourish like the
palm tree.”

The palm is an analogue of the
righteous —

I. In its resolute upward growth
It is tall, slender, and erect. Dr. Thom-
son says that “neither heavy weights
which men place upon its head, nor the
importunate urgency of the wind, can
sway it aside from perfect uprightness,”
It seeks to rise as far as possible from
earth and as near as possible to heaven,
The good man’s affections are set “on
things above;” his “citizenship is in
heaven.” While He was yet in this
world our Lord spake of Himself as
“the Son of Man which is in heaven,”
And His followers are not of this world
even as He was not of the world.

‘¢ A man on earth devoted to the skies,

Like ships on seas, while in, above, the

world.”

IL In its growth despite of hind-
rances. It flourishes where other trees
would wither and die, “On the nor-
thern borders of the Great Desert, at
the foot of the Atlas Mountains, the
groves of date palms form the great

68


feature of that parched region, and few
trees besides can maintain an existence.
The excessive dryness of this arid tract,
where rain seldom falls, is such that
wheat refuses to grow, and even barley,
maize, and Caffre corn afford the hus-
bandman only a scanty and uncertain
crop. The hot blasts from the south
are scarcely supportable even by the
native himself, and yet here forests of
date palms flourish.” The palm “does
not rejoice overmuch in winter’s copious
rain, nor does it droop under the drought
and the burning sun of summer.” It
will grow, and grow upwards, even if
heavy weights are placed upon its head,
A picture this of the godly soul. The
influences that try him and threaten to
crush him are powerless to do so. By
the grace of God they even promote his
growth. He grows rich by loss, strong
by trial, patient by tribulation, joyous
by suffering.

IIL In its perennial verdure. It is
an evergreen, The godly soul shall
grow and flourish without intermission.
Progress is the rule of its life. The
goal attained to-day will be the start


AOMILETIO OOMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PaALM XOII.





ing-point of to-morrow (Psa. i. 3; Jer.
xvii. 8).

IV. In its fruitfulness. On an ave-
rage the palm yields from three to
four hundred pounds’ weight of dates
annually, and has been known to pro-
duce six hundred pounds’ weight. The
godly soul produces the fruits of
obedience, purity, charity, and helpful-
ness to others, ‘“ Fruit unto holiness.”
“Herein is My Father glorified, that
ye bear much fruit.” “They shall still
bring forth fruit in old age.”

“ But how to secure the realisation of
this promise? 1. Who ts the righteous?
(1 John iii. 7). Righteousness does not
consist in profession (Matt. vii. 21);
nor is righteousness a state of opinion ;
nor is it a state of feeling. It is a state
of character. The righteous man is
marked by this, that his settled prin-
ciples, his customary desire, is to do,


not what is pleasant, not what is ad-
vantageous to self, but what is right.

2. “But how are we to attain this
habit of mind and life? Not inherent
righteousness, but the possession of the
Holy Ghost indwelling; this puts us
into a condition to receive the blessing
(Rom, viii. 14; Gal. v. 16).

3. “ But how to obtain the possession of
this Divine indwelling power of becoming
righteous ? Is there not an obstacle
at the very threshold? What are we to
say to our past sin? How can that be
removed? It may have been com-
mitted long ago; but the guilt of sin
remains after the sin has been com-
mitted. That guilt can only be re-
moved by free pardon. It is only as
‘freely justified by grace’ that we can
enter upon the path of spiritual bless-
ing. So we are brought to the foot of
the cross.”


Tue Crepak aN ANALOGUE oF Sout GrowrTs.
(Verse 12.)


“He shall grow like a cedar in
Lebanon.”

Trees are a precious gift of God to us,
How useful/ They yield food, shade,
fuel, material for furniture, building,
&c. How beautiful/ What sym-
metry, sublimity, variety, we see in
them! They also present many spirt
tual analogies. Here the cedar is used
as an emblem of the progress of the
soul.

I The cedar grows not by repres-
gion, but by development. By develop-
ing its forces the cedar grows from the
little germ. Everything that aids
that development aids its growth. Bo
with the soul. We cannot grow by
attempting to crush our nature, our
desires, affections, &c., but by their
right development. Not by self-mor-
tification and fighting against the evil,
but by the cultivation of the good. In
ourselves we are to “ overcome evil
with good.” Wisely and harmoniously
developing our powers, we grow.

II. The cedar grows by the appro-
priation and subordination of the out-
ward elements. Rain, dew sunlight,


gases, minerals, all areappropriated by the
cedar, and used to promote its growth:
it assimilates them to its own substance,
It subordinates the outward elements.
Stormy wind and hail and rain and
froet all help its growth. The storm
that threatened to sweep it away
leaves it more firmly rooted and more
majestically spread than it found it.
The hurricane that tests it promotes its
stability and strength. So with the
godly soul,—to its own character it as-
similates thoughts, impressions, beauties,
&c. It makes all things help its pro-
gress, Gentle influences help its growth.
The ministry of prosperity,—success,
friendship, health, joy—promotes its
progress. Z'rying tnjluences also help
its growth and strength. The ministry
of adversity,— failure, desertion, sickness,
grief—promotes its firmness, strength,
and heroism. “Tribulation worketh
patience,” &c. We may make the most
adverse circumstances, by the grace of
God, aid us in the true development of
our souls.

III. The cedar grows slowly. We
may form some idea of the slowness of

69


Peale XCOL


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY ; PSALMS.


ae ee ee


its growth from the fact that it continues
to grow for centuries. Many generations
come and go, but it grows on. ‘The pro-
cesses of the Divine economy seem slow
to us. The preparation of the world for
man ; of the race of men for the Sa-
viour ; and now of the race for glory, —
all seem so slow. The greatest and best
of things mature very gradually. So
with the soul. Proneness to impatience
is a mark of imperfection. How im-
patiently the child awaits the promised
pleasure! Much less is the impatience
of the man. ‘The wise and good man is
truly patient, Patience with thyself,
my brother ; thy growth is not like that
of the gourd, but that of the cedar,—
very gradual,

‘We have not wings, we cannot soar 3

But we have feet to scale and climb,


By slow degrees, by more and more,
The cloudy summits of our time,


‘The heights by great men reached and kept
Were not attained by sudden flight;
But they, while their companions slept,
Were toiling upward in the night.”
—Longfellow.


IV. The cedar grows by ceaseless
activities. The sap, which is the life of
the tree, is ever active : from the roots it
passes through the trunk and through
every branch, leaf, and fibre; then from
the leaves it returns through branches and
trunk to the roots, bearing nourishment,


strength, &c. So with the soul. By
earnest thought, devout feeling, divine
worship, holy activity, &c., we grow.

V. The cedar grows to immense
size and magnificence. Very great and
grand they are. The soul is destined to
grow into great strength and beauty.
What great and glorious beings John
and Peter and Paul must have grown
into! How great and glorious are
Isaiah and David and Abraham and
Enoch by this time! And yet they
have not reached the goal. “It doth
not yet appear what they shall be.”
‘“‘ Perfect as our Father in heaven is
perfect,”—that is the end of our pro-
gress, We shall grow into spiritual
might, nobility, beauty, and glory.
Cedars are most royal trees: under the
smile of God we shall grow into royal
beings.

VI. The cedar grows during lo
eges. There are cedars growing now
that have been growing while scores of
generations of men have come and gone
from the earth, While they live they
grow. So withthe soul. Long as it lives
it grows. But the cedars are not ever-
lasting ; their life and growth must end.
But there is no end to the growth of
the soul! We shall live and grow for
ever. To advance from grace to grace,
from strength to strength, from glory to
glory for evermore,—that is our destiny.


Toe Otp AcE or Prrry.
(Verse 14.)


“They shall still bring forth fruit in
old age.”

The subject to which the text invites
us is, the old age of prety, as distinguished
from the old age of the worldling.

I. The old age of the Christian is
the old age of a life of faith and com-
munion with God. Amid the infirmi-
ties of decaying nature the good man’s
judgment may begin to fail, his active
energy for one work and another may
fail, but his faith fails not, and the
charity—the holy love—which is com-
munion with God, “ never faileth.”

II. The old age of the Christian, as
distinguished from the old age of the

70


ungodly, is characterised by hope. To
him, indeed, as to others, old age is the
evening of life, its dim light still fading
into darkness, But to him faith opens
a vista through which the soul looks
forth in hope beyond the deepening
shadows around him.

III. The old age of the Christian is
one of cheerfulness. How beautiful is
an unrepining, bright, cheerful old age !
How doubly beautiful when that calm,
bright cheerfulness, lighting up the
evening of life, is caught from heaven,
and is none other than the cheerfulness
of a mind at peace with God, and in com-
munion with His boundless blessedness!


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


——


IV. The old age of the Christian, as
distinguished from that of the un-
godly, is characterised by affection
The old man’s sympathies with those
around him are less easily awakened
than they once were; and, as he grows
older, he feels less and less interest in
‘any of his friends, save those who
happen to be essential to his comfort.
The Christian in his old age is not ex-
empted from this tendency. But in his
case there is a counteracting power. His
faith and hope, the habitual cheerfulness
of his spirit, and the communion of his
soul with the infinite love of God, are
like a constant cordial to his nature,
that keeps his mind elastic and quickens
his better sympathies,

V. The old age of the Ohristian is
characterised to the last by usefulness.
How many ways does God find to make
His children, amid the infirmities of de


PSALM XOIL,





clining age, useful to others! They
shall bring forth fruit in old age, to
show that God is faithful to them that
trust in Him. How persuasive is the
testimony which they give for God and
for godliness out of their long experi-
ence! How winning are their words of
counsel and invitation !

Lessons.—1. Zhe consideration of the
beauty and happiness of piety in old age
ts an argument to the young to remember
their Creator in the days of their youth.
2. Our subject addresses itself powerfully
to those who are old, or are growing old,
without piety. What a night is that
which is gathering around you! 3.
The subject should lead us all to a grate-
ful acknowledgment of the grace of God
tn the examples which we are permitted
to see of aged and venerable prety.—L.
Bacon, D.L., Abridged,


PSALM XOIIL


INTRODUCTION.


The author of this Psalm and the occasion on which it wes written are unknown,
‘The sum and substance of this Psalm,” says Perowne, ‘‘is contained in the eighth verse


of the preceding Psalm.
Creator of the world.
stayed by His might.


It celebrates the majesty of Jehovah as Ruler of the universe. i
He has been its King from everlasting: it rests upon Him and is
All the powers of nature obey Him, however lawless they may seem, as


He is


all the swelling and rage of men, of which those are but a figure, must obey Him. But Hia
majesty and His glory are seen, not only in controlling the powers of nature and whatsoevei
exalteth and opposeth itself against Him, but in the faithfulness of His word, and in the holiness


of His house,”


‘As to the date of the composition it appears from verse 5 that it was composed after tine
building of the Temple, and probably before ita destruction by the Chaldeans,


JEHOVAH


The opening words of the Psalm, as
Hengstenberg has pointed out, do not
refer to the constant government of
God, but to a new and glorious manifes-
tation of His dominion. ‘The Lord
reigneth ” is a similar form of expression
to that which the Jews used to announce
the ascent to the throne of a new sove-
reign (2 Sam. xv. 10; 2 Kings ix. 13).
It refers to the coming of the Lord in
His kingdom; and might have been
used with great propriety at the destruc-

-tion of Babylon and the emancipation of
Israel. But when His glory and sove-
reignty shall be fully displayed and ac-


THE KING.


knowledged, the expression shall be used
with an emphasis and fulness of mean-
ing unknown before. (See Rev. xi. 15,
17; xix. 6.) The Poet sets before us—

I. The majesty of the King. ‘“ The
Lord reigneth, He is clothed with ma-
jesty.” The glory with which Jehovah
clothes Himself forms the opposition
to the pomp and pride of earthly kings,
and is an antidote against the fear of
them. ‘The glory of earthly sovereigns
is as nothing in comparison with His.
His is the majesty of meekness, the glory
of grace, the beauty of holiness. He
reigns in righteousness and love to bless


71


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


ec


and save men, Yet He is terrible to
His foes, Let not His loyal subjects
fear the pomp and glory of their enemies;
for He has but to manifest His majesty,
and theirs shall vanish.

Il. The might of the King. “The
Lord is clothed with strength,” dc.
Perowne: ‘ ‘Jehovah hath clothed, He
hath girded Himself with strength.’ In
the second member of the verse, the
verb is rythmically repeated, and the
noun ‘strength’ really belongs to both
verbs.” The strength of the king is
manifested—

1. In the stability of the world. ‘The
world also is established that it cannot
be moved.” The stability of the world
is regarded as the effect of the Divine
rule and power. The same power which
created the world sustains it in its
regularity and stability. The ‘sure
and firm set earth” is an emblem of
the moral government of God in its
firmness and security. So in the time
of peril and opposition the people of
God need not fear, for no violence can
shake His throne. ‘That there is any
stability, either in the world or in the
Church, is the Lord’s doings, and He is
to be adored for it.”

2. In the subjugation of His enemtes.
“ The floods have lifted up, O Lord, the
floods have lifted up their voice,” &c.
(vers. 3 and 4). We have here (1) The
tumultuous opposers of His reign. ‘The
floods” are introduced as the symbol of
the tumultuous nationsand peoples which
lift themselves up against the govern-
ment of God. Like angry waves of the
sea men have raged against the anointed
King. As the breakers roar in thunder
and dash in fury against the shore, so
devils and men have hurled defiance at
the throne of God. The heathen still
rage against the Lord and against His
Anointed and against His Church. (2)
The calm Sovereign. ‘ The Lord on high
is mightier than the noise of many waters,
yea, than the mighty waves of the sea.”
The construction of the fourth verse is
not very clear. Perowne has a valuable
critical note on it. The translation which
he‘adopts is: ‘ More than the voices of
many waters, the glorious breakers of
the sea, Jehovah on high is glorious.”

72


Hengstenberg: “Than the voice of
many waters, than the glorious waves
of the sea, more glorious in the height
is the Lord.” However we construe the
verse the main idea is the same. As
the furious waves dash against the
rocky shore and fall back spent, while
the shore remains calm and unmoved,
so Jehovah is unmoved by all the fierce
opposition of all the rebels against His
government, He is greater, stronger,
more glorious than all the powers
arrayed against Him and His Church,
The Lord is calm in His assured right
to reign. He has no misgivings as to
the authority by which He governs,
Earthly sovereigns may doubt the
validity of their authority, but Jehovah
never can do so. The Lord is calm m
His assured power to reign. . With
infinite ease He can control and, if He
see fit, entirely quell every storm in
His universe. Let not the Church,
then, fear the might of the world.
High over it all, ruling it as He pleases,
is the Lord omnipotent and all-glorious,

Ill. The eternity of the King and
of His kingdom. “Thy throne is
established of old; Thou art from
everlasting.” Margin: “ Thy throne is
established from then.” Hengstenberg:
“The throne of wickedness has no
‘then’; it is of yesterday, like a mush-
room sprung out of the earth.” God’s
throne is eternal, In earthly kingdoms
and empires the throne is frequently
shaken to its base. By the death of
kings, or of their wise advisers, or be-
cause of the attacks of foes, earthly
governments and dynasties are some
times overthrown. But the throne of
God is from everlasting to everlasting.
The King also is eternal. ‘Thou art
from everlasting.” This eternity includes
omnipotence. He who is “from ever-
lasting” is also “to everlasting.” When
human crowns and thrones have crum-
bled into dust He shall reign in glory.
(See remark on Ps. xc. 2.)

IV. The truth of His testimonies,
“Thy testimonies are very sure.” Per-
owne: “The transition is abrupt, from
the majesty of God as seen in His
dominion in the world of nature, to His
revelation of Himself in His Word.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PSALM ECIV


a


At the same time there is a connection
between the two, as in Ps. xix. God who
rules the world, He whose are the king-
dom, and the power, and the glory for
ever, has given His testimonies to His
people, a sure and faithful word.” His
testimonies in this place are especially
His promises of salvation and victory to
His peaple. The promises of so majestic
and mighty a Sovereign cannot fail.
“The testimony of the Lord is sure.”
The truth of His testimonies is

1. A rebuke to the unbelief of His
subjects.

2. An encouragement to their faith.

3. A warning to rebels against His


government.


V. The purity of His court.
“ Holiness becometh Thine house, O
Lord, for ever.” The King has Him-
self come to dwell among His people,
making them and His house holy. The
Church of God should be cleansed from
all sin and fully consecrated to Him.
In His heavenly court the purity is
perfect and perpetual; and ultimately
the earthly court will be absorbed into
the heavenly, which will abide for ever.

Conctusion.—1l. Let the people of
God trust and rejoice in their King.
He reigns securely, gloriously, eternally,
for their salvation. 2. Let His enemies
submit themselves to Him, “Kiss the
Son, lest He be angry,” &e.


PSALM XOTIV.


InTRODUCTION,


“There is no superscription to this Psalm. There is no indication of its authorship, of
the period at which it was written, or of the circumstances to which it refers, There are many
of these anonymous hymns in God’s Book, nameless utterances, voices of the night of weeping,
shouts from the mountain tops of thought, prayers unto the God of Life, which belong to no
individual, can be fathered on no solitary period, but descend as an heirloom to successive
ages, and enrich every generation. As the circumstances, the victories, the shortcomings, and
the possibilities of man are continually being repeated, go the religious experiences of the Church
do often reappear in its history, and we may receive the inspired utterances of them in one age


as almost equally appropriate to the sorrows and joys of another age.”—Dr. H. R. Reynolds.

‘* This Psalm, as may be easily apprehended, is a prayer of all the pious children of God,
and o° spiritual people, against all their persecutors, so that it may be used by all pious godly
people um the beginning till the end of the world.”—Luther.


A Cry FOR JUDGMENT.
(Verses 1-7.)


Consider—

I. The complaint of the Church.
Tord, how long shall the wicked, how
long shall the wicked triumph?” &e.
(vers. 3-7). The poet complains to the
Lord of the enemies of the Church, and
mames mention of—

1. Their general character. “The
wicked . .. the workers of iniquity.”
They are depraved in character, and
diabolic in conduct. “Mark the ter-
rible energy implied in the designation,
“workers of iniquity.’ Reference is not
made to men who make a pastime of
iniquity, or who occasionally commit
themselves to its service, but to those
who toil at it as a business, As the
merchant man is industrious in com-


merce, as the philosopher is assiduous
in study, as the artist is indefatigable in
elaboration, 80 those slaves of iniquity
toil in their diabolic pursuits with an
ardour which the most powerful remon-
strance seldom abates. They are alwaya
ready to serve their master.”— Parker.
2. Their arrogant triumph (vers.
3, 4.) “How long shall the wicked
triumph? ‘They belch out, they speak
arrogant things ; all the workers of ini-
quity carry themselves proudly.”—
Perowne’s trans. In the first line of
verse 4, the two verbs have one noun as
the object—they pour forth hard, or,
proud speeches. The enemies of the
people of God were triumphant over
them, and were proud end insolent in


PsaLM XOIV.


————————


their triumph. It is not seldom that
the wicked in their prosperity and
power have arrogantly lorded it over
the righteous, Prosperity, apart from
Divine grace, engenders presumption,
and fancied self-sufficiency, and self-
boasting. ,

3. Their oppression and erwelty (vers,
5, 6.) The word which in the A.V.
is translated, “they break in pieces,”
Perowne and Hengstenberg translate,
“they crush.” The wicked oppressed
the people and heritage of the Lord.
How frequently was this the case in the
history of the chosen people! How
frequently has it been so in the history
of the Christian Church! The Psalmist
complains of cruelty as well as oppres-
sion. ‘They slay the widow,” d&.
“The widow and the fatherless are
mentioned, as often, as particular in-
stances of those whose misery ought to
excite compassion, but whose defence-
lessness makes them the easy prey of
. the wicked.”"—Perowne. This is in-
variably represented in Scripture as a
crime of great enormity, and especially
abhorrent to God. See Exod. xxii
21-24.

4. Their practical Atheism. “Yet
they say the Lord shall not see, neither
shall the God of Jacob regard it.” “The
Divine names,” says Alexander, “ are,
as usual, significant. That the self-
existent and eternal God should not see,
is a palpable absurdity ; and scarcely
less so, that the God of Israel should
suffer His own people to be slaughtered
without even observing it.” We need
not suppose that they uttered this blas-
phemy in words, but it was expressed
in their conduct. Their atheism was
not theoretical, but practical. This
practical atheism is very prevalent and
pernicious at the present time. Im-
mense numbers utter “the Apostles’
Creed” regularly, who exclude God
from almost every province of their life,
In the formation of their plans, in the
management of their business, in their
relations to society, &c., God is not in
ail their thoughts,

It The appeal of the Church.
“© Lord God, to whom vengeance be-
longeth,” dc. (vers. 1-3). Let it be

74





HOMILETIO COMMENTARY ; PSALMS,


noted at once and closely that the ap.
peal is for justice, not for revenge. “I
do not think that we sufficiently attend
to the distinction that exists between
revenge and vengeance, ‘ Revenge,’ says
Dr. Johnson, ‘is an act of passion, ven-
geance of justice, injuries are revenged,
crimes: avenged.’ . . . The call whicn
the Psalmist here makes on God, as a
God to whom vengeance belongeth, is
no other than if he had said, ‘O God,
to whom justice belongeth!’ Ven-
geance indeed is not for man, because
with man’s failings and propensities it
would ever degenerate into revenge. ‘I
will be even with him,’ says nature ; ‘I
will be above him,’ says grace! "=
Bouchier,

1. Judgment is the prerogative of God
alone. “O Lord God, to whom ven-
geance belongeth,” The two names of
the Divine Being which the Psalmist
uses, Hi and Jehovah, recognise God as
almighty, self-existent, and alone en-
titled to take vengeance. Literally it
is, ‘“‘ God of vengeances,” the plural in-
dicating that there is in God a fulness
of vengeance for His persecuted people ;
and the repetition of the appeal denotes
the earnestness with which it is made.
“To Me belongeth vengeance and re-
compense.” ‘ Avenge not yourselves,
but rather give place unto wrath ; for
it is written, Vengeance is Mine; I will
repay, saith the Lord.” The vindication
of His people and the punishment of
their enemies is His sole prerogative.
He will render righteous judgment to
the wicked. He alone has the right to
do 80.

2. Judgment ts sometimes apparently
long delayed. “ Lord, how long shall
the wicked, how long shall the wicked
triumph?” The persecution seems to
the Psalmist to have been of long con-
tinuance. He would fain know when
it would end. Our time of suffering
and trial always seems long and weari-
some. In the night of weeping and
waiting, wearily drag the hours, and we
cry, “ How long?” In due season God
will appear, &c.

3. Judgment ts earnestly invoked.
Here 1s a cry for the mantfestation of
God. “Show Thyself.” Margin, as in


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PSALM XOIV,





Heb., “Shine forth.” It is an appeal
to God to manifest Himself as a God of
righteous retributions. Here is a cry
for the judgment of God. “Lift up
Thyself, thou judge,” &c. God is con-
ceived as sitting at ease, and entreated
to arise and execute judgment, and to
give a just recompense to those enemies
of His people who, having got the upper
hand, exulted proudly over them. Here
is a cry for His speedy interposition,
“Lord, how long?” &e.
ConcLusion.—Deep in the heart of
man is the sense of justice, the convic-


tion that there is a judge of all the
earth who will do right. Oppressed
humanity in all ages and in all lands
has cried to heaven for judgment, That
cry will certainly, sooner or later, meet
with a full response,


** The sun of justice may withdraw nis beama
Awhile from earthy ken, and sit eoncealed
In dark recess, pavilioned round with clouds:
Yet let not guilt presumptuous rear her crest,
Nor virtue droop despondent: soon these

clouds,
Seeming eclipse, will brighten into day,
And in majestic splendour He will rise,
With healing and with terror on His wings.”
—G. Bally.


Tae Fouty or Practical ATHEISM.
(Verses 8-11.)


The Psalmist addresses not the theo-
retical, but practical atheists. He speaks
to men who acknowledged the existence
of God, and His creatorship, and His
government of the world; but who
thought that He did not see and would
not recompense their conduct. This is
the atheism which is the most prevalent
and perilous in the present day. The
folly of such atheists is seen—

I In supposing that God does not
observe their conduct. “He that
planted the ear, shall He not hear? He
that formed the eye, shall He not see?”
The principle upon which this interro-
gation is based is this, that an effect
cannot be greater than its cause. The
picture with the beauty of which we are
charmed is not greater than the concep-
tive and executive power of the artist
who produced it. He saw it mentally
long before we saw it visually. “This
argument,” says R. Watson, “is as easy
as it is conclusive, obliging all who
acknowledge a first cause, to admit His
perfect intelligence, or to take refuge
in atheism itself. It fetches not the
proof from a distance, but refers us to
our bosoms for the constant demonstra-
tion that the Lord is a God of know-
ledge, and that by Him actions are
weighed.” And Tillotson: “ We find
in ourselves such qnalities as thought
and intelligence, power and freedom,
&c., for which we have the evidence of
consciousness as much as for our own


existence. Indeed, it is only by our
consciousness of these, that our exist-
ence is known to ourselves, We know,
likewise, that these are perfections, and
that to have them is better than to be
without them. We find also that they
have not been in us from eternity. They
must, therefore, have had a beginning,
and consequently some cause. Now
this cause, as it must be superior to its
effect, must have those perfections in a
superior degree ¥ and if it be the First
Cause, it must have them in an infinite
or unlimited degree, since bounds or
limitations, without a limiter, would be
an effect without a cause.” If we see
and hear and know, then God does so
in @ much greater, indeed, in an infi-
nite degree. His knowledge is clear
and distinct, ours is dim and confused ;
His is intimate and thorough, ours is
partial and superficial ; His is universal
and infallible, ours uncertain and limited.
“The Lord knoweth the thoughts of
man.” How foolish, then, to imagine
that God does not hear the arrogant
speech, or see the oppressive deed, or
note the wickedness of men !

II. In supposing that God will not
recompense their conduct. ‘He that
chastiseth the heathen, shall not He
correct?” ‘There is,” says Perowne,
“a change in the argument. Before it
was from the physical constitution of
man ; now it is from the moral govern:
ment of the world.” The idea seemp

75


ALM KCIV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; PSALMS. °


pr


to be that even the heathen are governed
by God. He has revealed to them by
means of creation “ His eternal power
and Godaead ;” His law He has “ writ-
ten in their hearts; their conscience
also bears witness” for Him. They are
subject to His control. He visits them
in mercy; and He reproves them with
judgment. Is it not folly then to sup-
pose that He will overlook the injuries
inflicted upon His own people by those
who have a clearer and fuller revelation
than the heathen? Every additional
illustration of the judgment of God im-
parts increased force to the already con-
clusive evidence, that God will correct
those who break His law and oppress
His people.

The Psalmist mentions two things
which considerably strengthen his argu-
ment.

1. That the evil complained of was of
long continuance. “ Ye fools, when will
ye be wise?” The inquiry implies
that their folly had existed for a long
period. During that period they had
been “ treasuring up unto themselves
wrath against the day of wrath and re-
velation of the righteous judgment of
God.” If they repent not, that accumu-
lated wrath will surely burst upon them.

2. That God knows not only words
and actions, but thoughts and purposes


Tue BLEessEDNESS OF THE


also, “The Lord knoweth the thoughts
of man, that they are vanity.” He has
set “our secret sins in the light of His
countenance.” The thoughts that He
would not see and judge for these sins
He knew, All thoughts of arrogance
and oppression He kuew. Let them
not imagine that He did “not see” or
“regard” their conduct; for even
their hearts were known unto Him.
‘‘ Thoughts are words to God, and vain
thoughts are provocations.”

Concxusion.—1. Here ts warning to
practical atheists, You are acting as
though God had nothing to do with
some departments of your life and con-
duct. You do things in business, or in
politics, or in pleasure, which will not
bear His scrutiny. You say in prac-
tice, “The Lord shall not see, neither
shall God regard it.” But He does
see; and “ know thou, that for all these
things God will bring thee into judg-
ment.” Your practical atheism is utter
folly. 2. Here is encouragement to the
oppressed righteous, You cannot pass
beyond the region of God’s knowledge.

e is acquainted with all your afflic-
tions. His love and power are as great
as His knowledge. He will sustain you
in all your afflictions ; and when He
ariseth for judgment He will trium-
phantly vindicate you.


Drvrse_y—Instrvcrep Man.


(Verses 12-15.)


The Psalmist, having complained of
the enemies of the Church and appealed
to God for judgment, and having warned
the enemies of the folly of their conduct,
proceeds in these verses to speak of the
blessedness of the people of God, even
in the midst of the oppressions to which
they were subjected, “ Blessed is the
man,” &c. The good man is here repre-
sented as blessed,—

I. Because of the instruction which
he receives. ‘Blessed is the man
whom Thou chastenest, O Lord, é&c.”
(vers, 12, 13),
here rendered “chastenest” does not
mean to afflict or punish; but to in-
struct, a admonish, &c. Perowne ren-

7


The word which is


ders it, “instructest ;” and Hengsten-
berg, ‘‘admonishest.” He says, “ Those
who allow themselves to be admonished
and taught by the Lord stand in opposi-
tion to the foolish among the people,
who go to echool with the blind ungodly
heathen.”

1. The Teacher ‘Thou instructest,
O Lord.” As a Teacher, the Lord is
incomparable, supreme, perfect. (1)
In the extent of His attainments. All
things are known to Him. His re-
sources are inexhaustible. ‘‘ His under-
standing is infinite.” (2) In His method
of instruction. His knowledge of each
pupil is perfect. He knows the facul-
ties, capacities, attainments, &c., of each


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





one; and adapts His communications
and methods of instruction to each
one. The Lord is an infallible, perfect
Teacher.

2. The Text-book. “Out of Thy
law.” By means of His Word, God
teaches His people the great principles
of His government. “The law appears
here,” says Hengstenberg, “as the
means which God uses in this instruc.
tion, the fountain out of which He
draws it, and then satisfies with it by
His Spirit the thirsty soul. It comes
into notice in connection with tts doc-
trine of recompense, and its rich consola-
tory promises for the people of the Lord,
whose end is always salvation.” The
Word of God is the best expositor of
His Providence.

3. The end of the instruction,
“That Thou mayest give him rest,” &c.
Perowne, as we think, expounds truly :
“ This is the end of God’s teaching, that
His servant may wait in patience, un-
moved by, safe FROM THE DAYS OF EVIL
(comp. xlix. 5), seeing the evil all round
him lifting itself up, but seeing also the
secret, mysterious retribution, slowly but
surely accomplishing itself. In this sense
the ‘rest’ is the rest of a calm, self-pos-
sessed spirit, as Isa. vii. 4; xxx. 15; xxxii.
17.” The Divinely-instructed man has
such views of the Divine administration
as inspire him with confidence and calm-
ness, even when the wicked arrogantly
triumph over him. God has taught him
out of His law that the pit is being
digged, into which, if he repent not, the
wicked will fall and perish, So the
good man has inward rest in the midst
of outward affliction and persecution.
He is not the creature, but the con-
queror of circumstances. His enemies
may oppress him, but they cannot in-
vade his peace, &c,

II. Because of the faithfulness of
God. ‘For the Lord will not cast off
His people,” &, The Divinely-in-


A DeciaRATION OF
(Verses


The Psalmist now applies the general
doctrine of the Psalm to his own case,


8


PSALM XOIV.


structed man is in covenant relation
with God, by virtue of which he is both
secure and blessed. He is blessed, for
God will never forsake him. “The
Lord may perhaps forsake His people
for a time (comp. Jud. vi. 13; Isa. ii,
6), as a righteous punishment for forsak-
ing Him, Deut. xxxii. 15, but not for
ever.” —Hengstenberg. The righteous
are God’s “inheritance,” and He will not
give up His title to it, nor suffer it to
be wrested from Him. “For a small
moment have I forsaken thee ; but with
great mercies will I gather thee,” d&c.,
Isa. liv. 7, 8, Blessed, indeed, is the
man who has the assurance that what-
ever may befall him, God will not for-
sake him, Being sure of his interest in
God, he will want no good thing.

IIL. Because of the righteousness
of His judgments. “But judgment
shall return unto righteousness,” d&e,
There are times when judgment seems
turned aside from righteousness, such
as, when the wicked triumph and the
good are oppressed. But at the proper
time these apparent perversions will be
seen in their true light, and righteous-
ness will be seen to be supreme. Even
in appearance, judgment and justice can-
not always fail, It must sooner or later
appear in its true character as perfect
righteousness. In the judgment of the
great day this manifestation of the
righteousness of the Divine rule will be
on a grand scale, This manifestation of
the righteousness of God’s judgments
will be viewed with satisfaction by the
righteous, ‘All the upright in heart
shall followit.” They will approve of tt,
avow their attachment toit. They will
rejoice in tt, They shall follow it with
joyous hearts and triumphant songs.

ConcLusion.— Blessed, indeed, is the
Divinely-instructed man; for he has
rest in the midst of trouble, an ever-
lasting interest in God, and a glorious
prospect in the judgment,


Con¥FIDENCE mx Gop,


16-23.)


and the result is this clear declaration of
sublime trust in God. Here is—
17


#aaLM XIV.





I Confidence in the midst of for-
midable enemies. It is an easy matter
to declare a triumphant trust when we
are free from trial and danger. But the
Poet was threatened and afflicted by un-
scrupulous and powerful enemies when
he uttered these trustful and brave
words,

1. His enemies were evil in character.
“The evil doers,, . . the workers
of iniquity.” See remarks on verse 4.

2. His enemies were in positions of
authority. They occupied “the throne”
or judgment seat. They were “not
common assassins or thieves, but tyrants
who, under a false pretext of justice,
oppressed the Church. The throne of
the king, the seat of the judge, which is
consecrated to God, they stained or de-
filed with their crimes.”—Perowne. The
people of God have often had wicked
kings, and corrupt and cruel judges for
their enemies.

3. Hts enemies acted legally.
“Which frameth mischief by a law.”
They enacted wicked laws, or pro-
pounded wicked interpretations of the
law. Iniquity is never so daring as
when it is supported by the sanctions of
law. A thing may be right legally, yet
utterly wrong morally, and right morally,
yet wrong legally. We have a notable
example of this in the life of Daniel
(Dan. vi. 7).

4. His enemies were confederate in
council and action, “They gather them-
selves together,” &c. The enemies of
Daniel afford an illustration, Dan. vi.
6, 11,15. Surely the enemies of the
Psalmist were sufficiently formidable to
have aroused his fears. Yet he un-
falteringly declares his confidence,

Ii. Confidence in the midst of many
and anxious thoughts. The Psalmist
speaks of “the multitude of his
thoughts within him.” Perowne: “In
the multitude of my anxious thoughts
within me.” ‘ Anxious thoughts, or
‘ perplexities,’ lit. ‘ divided or branching
thoughts,’ whether doubts or cares,”
He was fully alive to the dangers of
his position. His thoughts were anxious
and perplexed. They were also multt-
tudinous. Luther: “ He speaks of the
many thoughts which one has in such a

78


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





state of despair, how he could or might
come out of it. Then he thinks this
way and that way, and visits all holes
and corners, but finds none.” Yet faith
triumphs over these anxious thoughts.
Notwithstanding his deep solicitude, he
expresses his firm confidence in God and
His Providence. He is anxious, yet
victorious,

IIL Confidence in the Divine sup-
port, ‘ Unless the Lord had been my
help, my soul had soon dwelt in silence,”
&c. (vers. 17, 18). Notice here—

1. The danger, and the need of help.
(1) He was in danger of death. His
soul was nearly dwelling in silence. The
grave is represented as a place of silence.
He was near to “the gates of death.”
(2) He was also in danger of falling.
He felt his feet slipping. When the
soul is painfully exercised as to the
Divine administration of human affairs,
there is danger of falling into unbelief
and rebellion, or of sinking into despair.
(3) The danger was imminent. His
soul was already near to the land of
darkness and silence, and his feet were
slipping.

2. The failure of human help. “ Un-
less the Lord had been my help,” &e.
There are times when human help fails
for want of faithfulness; and times
when it fails for want of ability. There
are experiences in life in which the
truest and most devoted of human
helpers are powerless to sympathise


with or aid us.


3. The sufficiency of the Divine help.
The Lord was the Helper of the
Psalmist, and His mercy held him up.
The help of the Lord was (1) sufficient,
It saved him from falling and from
death. (2) Seasonable. It was afforded
when he was near “the silent land,”
when his feet were slipping. (3) Gra-
cous. It was the expression of His
mercy. He saves us in His loving-
kindness. So the Psalmist proclaims
his confidence in God, &ec.

IV. Qonfidence in the Divine pro-
tection. “The Lord is my defence;
and my God is the Rock of my refuge.”
Perowne: “Jehovah hath been a high


tower for me.” The Psalraist is conf.
dent of—


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


POALM XCIV.





1. The Security of the Divine Protec-
tion. Jehovah was his “high tower.”
In Him he would be raised far above
the reach of danger. He was “ the Rock
of his refuge,” in the clefts of which he
may safely hide.

2. The Stability of the Divine Pro-
tection. “The Rock” is firm, strong,
immovable. It stands seeurely aed
calmly amid the driving winds, and
pelting storms, and surging, thundering
seas. The soul that trusts in Jehovah
may exult, for she is inviolably and
eternally safe.

V. Confidence in the Divine retri-
bution. “Shall the throne of iniquity
have fellowship with Thee? . . . .
He shall bring upon them their own
iniquity,” &c. Here is a threefold assur-
ance :—

1.. God has no fellowship with the
wicked. He will have no alliance with
injustice, even when it is sanctioned by
human laws. He has no complicity
with evil. All His arrangements are
utterly hostile to it,

2. God will cut off the persistently
wieked. ‘He shall cut them off in their
own wickedness,” &c. A terrible retribu-
tion awaits the workers of iniquity.

3. God will cut off the persistently
wicked by means of their own wickedness,
“He shall bring upon them their own
iniquity.” “It is an ill work wicked
ones are about; they make fetters for
their own feet, and build houses for to


fall upon their own heads; so mis.
chievous ia the nature of sin that it
damnifies and destroys the parents of
it."—Greenhill. “A man cannot be
more miserable than his own wickedness
will make him if God visit it upon
him.”—M, Henry.

VI. Confidence in the Lord a source
of joy, even in the midst of dangers
and anxieties. We have reserved this
consideration to the last, because it
seems to us the crowning triumph and
glory of confidence. Even in the midst
of oppression, peril, and multitudinous
anxieties, the trust of the Psalmist
brought joy to his soul. ‘ Thy com-
forts delight my soul.” Meditation on
the perfections of God, trust in His pro-
mises, and the realisation of His pre-
sence, are Divine comforts which ex-
ceedingly rejoice the soul. ‘They not
only pacify the mind, but they joy it ; |
they do not only satisfy it, but ravish
it ; they not only quiet, but delight it.
They not only take away the present
grief, but likewise put in the room and
place of it most unspeakable comfort
and ‘consolation, as the swn does not only
dispel darkness, but likewise brings in
a glorious light in the stead of it.”—7.
Horton. Thus, by faith in God, the
soul is “ more than conqueror” over all
hostile powers without, and anxious
thoughts and fears within. Let us cul-
tivate such faith. For such faith let
us pray. “ Lord, increase our faith.”


Tue Summons to Hoty Worg.
(Verse 16.)


We may regard these words as parallel
at least to those of the Judges and Law-
givers of Israel, who when the very exist-
ence of Israel as a nation was trem-
bling in the balance, and when devoted-
ness and loyalty were demanded by the
circumstances of the case, called with
trumpet-voice to the brave and true-
hearted among them to be “on the
Lord’s side,” and “cursed bitterly” those
who would not come “to the help of
the Lord against the mighty.”

L Let us review a few character-
istics of the evildoers.


1, Look at the number of the evil-
doers. Not more than one-seventh of
the human race is even nominally Chris-
tian ; and among these Christians are
reckoned all the populations of Austria,
France, Russia, America, and Spain ;
the Greeks, the Copts, and the Arme-
nians ; the priest-ridden inhabitants of
Brazil and Mexico, and all the crowds of
our English cities ; the Sabbath-breakers,
the despisers of God’s love, the haters of
God’s law, the drunkard, the harlot, the
miser, the dotard,and thefool . . .
Torn to the six-sevenths of this world’s


PSALM TOTv.


population, . . . We are passing
out of Goshen into Egyptian dark-
ness,

2. The variety of the evildoers. In
one place there is subtle speculation, in
another gross vice; here utter indiffer-
ence, there wild fanaticism ; in one tribe
crushing ignorance, in another daring
philosophy and luxuriant imagina-
tion. . . . The regiments of the
prince of this world wear various uni-
forms ; the mutineers in God’s army are
widespread and bear divers colours:
they speak a hundred dialects or
tongues, and are scattered over the
whole world,

3. They are closely organised. There
are subtle links of faith that bind the
millions of the East, and move them in
vast masses, InChina . . . there
is abundant organisation, and much coin-
cidence of action. In India, with all
the varieties of faith that prevail, there
are great and startling signs of combina-
tion against God and His Christ.

4. The depravity of these evildoers,
It is not the mere ignorance which
heathendom reveals which constitutes
their chief danger or our main responsi-
bility, but it is the fearful corruption of
man under these various forms of Christ-
less, Godless life. In these lands of
which we are speaking there is no public
opinion against sins of the foulest, most
unmentionable kinds,

II, Consider the course which God
has taken with these evildoers, and
also what is involved in the appeal
here uttered. ‘Who will rise up for
Me against the evildoers?” ‘ Who is
on the Lord’s side?” By these appeals
God seems to tell us that He is not
going to crush, or destroy, or convert,
or save these evildoers by any fiat of
omnipotence, by any touch of His im-
perial sceptre. His method has always
been to teach men by men ; to uproot
error by truth ; to conquer darkness by
light; to drive out hatred by love,
Nature has unveiled her charms, &c.,
to men first, and afterwards to nations,

80


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY ; PSALMS.


Nd OL lke AC ow mete BEERS es Tae





God's greatest acts of revelation have been
made through human minds, When He
intends to reach the hearts and conquer
the wills of men by His love, He calls
the sons of men to His help against the
mighty. It is not, however, that God
is weak and needs our help, but that for
infinitely perfect reasons He chooses
thus to conquer His enemies, dc. ‘“‘ Who
will rise up for Me against the evil-
doers!” The evildoing is done against
Him.

III. Examine the response which is
made to this appeal. Nature is ready
to rise up for God against the evildoers.
Tremendous ocean once heaved from his
rocky bed, and in the roaring of his
billows said, “ I will sweep the accursed
race of man from the face of the earth.”
sa And the lust of rule, the spirit
of conquest, the demon of war, have
come up before Him. And they have
said one to another, “ We will go and
make inroads on these hoary supersti-
tions ; we will bring the civilisation of
distant tribes together,” &. . . .
The enemies of the Lord have fought
against each other, and the wrath of
man has been made to praise Him. But
He needs other and nobler service,
Led by Death himself, Cholera, Plague,
Famine, and Madness have often risen up
against the evildoers, . And
now a peaceful group come smiling on,
confident in their strength, instinct with
hope and promise—they are Science and
Commerce, Civilisation and Law... .
But powers like these cannot reach the
root of the evil. In the Gospel of
Christ there is the only stay of human
corruption, the only rival to the world’s
fascinations, the only power which is
merciful to the sinner while it is just to
his sin. It is God’s method to over-
whelm and subdue the heart of man, to
change the evildoer, not by His threats,
bet by His amnesty—not by the thunder
of law, but by the sovereign pleading of
love. How shall we obey the summons
of the text Abridged from “ Notes of


the Christian Life,” by Dr. Reynolds.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PSALM XOIV,





A Common Inorxentr or THe Jovaney,
(Verse 18.)


“ My foot slippeth.”

The whole verse is, “When I said, My
foot slippeth ; Thy mercy, O Lord, held
me up.” Here we have one of the sim-
plest forms of prayer, the bare statement
of danger. The child’s cry, without in-
troduction or finis. The soul in peril can
seldom say much, but that which is said
is generally expressive, Take, for ex-
ample, these words: they imply faith in
the presence of One able to help—abhor-
rence of the sin to which he is tempted—
and confidence in His willingness to save.

This experience is 8 common one,
All of us are, at some time, found in
slippery places, They are of various
kinds, more or less dangerous. There
are many things incident to ourselves
which render them the more perilous,
And we have the same method for pre-
servation the Psalmist enjoyed, Let us
notice each of these points.

I. Some slippery places. We are
the more exposed to falling when we
are brought into circumstances of—

1. Poverty and want. Christ was
tempted when He hungered.

2. Of annoyance and veration, Moses
smote the rock in anger,


Tax ComrorTs or CHRISTIANS
SPIRITUAL


(Verse


Consider—

I. Some of the distressing thoughts
which are apt to oppress the mind of
a good man, They may be considered
as relating to—

1. The state of the world. When a
good man surveys the general prevalence
of irreligion and impiety, when he con-
siders how few there are, comparatively,
who seek after God, or are moved by
any impression of a serious nature, he
cannot but be affected. “I beheld the
transgressors, and was grieved,” &e.
(Ps. cxix. 158, 53). When, again, he
considers whither such a course must
tend, and in what it will possibly issue,

VoL, IL


3. Of dejection and perplexity. Pa.
AEX. 3,

4. Of sore bereavement and trial, Job.

II. Some things concerning the
traveller, rendering these the more
perilous.

1. The absence of the staff, or negli-
gence in tts use. Learn the promises
and use them,

2. The foot ill-shod.

3. Drowsiness. ‘“ Watch and pray,
that,” dc.

4. Carelessness,

5. The lantern untrimmed or insecure,
so that it goes out or burns dimly.

III. The sure means for preserva-
tion. We have simply to cry to the
Deliverer. How absurd would it be
for a traveller to wait a moment before
he cried for help, or took means to ex-
tricate himself from peril! Yet some
are content merely to cry, “ Lead us
not into temptation,” when the Sabbath
service is performed.

The secret of a secure and blessed
life is constant ejaculatory prayer. The
moment danger is even anticipated, to
ask for timely assistance.— R. A.
Griffin. ,


UNDER EITHER WORLDLY OB
TRIALS.


19.)


the prospect is still more alarming.
“ Wide is the gate,” &c. (Matt. vii. 13).

2. The state of the Church. The pal-
pable inconsistency between the lives of
numerous professors of religion, and the
real import of that profession, is the
subject of much distressing reflection to
the sincere follower of Christ. ‘‘ Many
walk of whom I have told you often,”
&ec. (Phil. iii. 18, 19).

3. His state asanindividual. “The
heart knoweth his own bitterness,” &c,
We may advert to—

(1) Trials of a worldly nature. Under
these religion neither demands nor boasts
a perfect insensibility. The Psalmist

81


P@aLy KOvV,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : PSALMS.


ee ec ee SEE


displayed great vicissitude of feeling,
arising from this quarter; he mourned
under the calumny and oppression of his
enemies, and gave utterance to cries and
tears under his affliction, Ps, xlii, 9,
10. Job is another example.

(2) Trials of a spiritual nature.
When we consider our low attainments
in religion, compared with our opportu-
nities, our latent corruption, and our
frequent miscarriages and failures, we
are often tempted to call in question
the reality of our religion, and to fear
that, after all, we are only “ almost
Christians,”

Under the hidings of God’s counten-
ance how many painful thoughts arise !

In the prospect before him; in the
contemplation of the dangers and temp-
tations which still await him ; while he
feels himself nothing but frailty and
weakness, how apt is he to apprehend
some fatal overthrow! He is ready to
ery, “I shall never see the King in His
beauty, nor behold the land which is so
far off.”

II. The consolations of God opposed
to these uneasy thoughts.

1. Such as arise from the disordered
state of the world, On this sudject great


consolation springs from the conviction
that the Lord reigneth. There sit at
the helm infinite power, wisdom, and
goodness, They are in perpetual opera-
tion ; and, in the final result, they will
appear with ineffable splendour and
beauty.

2.. Under painful apprehensions re-
specting the state of the Church, the com-—
forts of God are neither few nor small.
Reflect: it is incomparably more His
care than ours. As the Saviour bought
it with His blood, He will not fail to
guide and govern it in the best manner
possible. His interpositions in its favour
afford a pledge of what He will still
accomplish. Isa. xliii. 3, 4; Matt. xvi.
18. Afflictions are designed to purify
the Church.

3. Under the distressing thoughts
arising from the state of a Christian, as
an indwidual, the Divine comforts are
proposed. Affliction and privations are
all ordered in infinite wisdom, and pro-
ceed from the purest benignity; they
will issue in our advantage, and they
will be but of short duration. ‘‘ Weep-
ing may endure for a night, but joy
cometh in the morning.” — Robert
Hall.—A bridged,


PSALM XOY,


INTRODUCTION,


This Paslm is one of a series intended for the Temple worship, and possibly eompos
for some festal occasion. Both the joyfulness of its opening verses, its | Satis Biri
in which it resembles the 81st Psalm, would render it suitable for some of the great national


feast,


“* As to the date of its composition nothing certain can be said. The LXX call ita Psalm


of David ; and the writer of the Epistle to the


uses the expression ‘in David,’ but this ig evi


In the Hebrew it has no inscription.


“Tt consists of two very distinct parts :—
“I, The first is an invitation to a joyful public acknowledgment of God’s mercies, Vera,


Hebrews, in making a quotation from the Psalm,
dently only equivalent to saying ‘in the Psalms’


“II, The second (beginning with the last member of verse 7 to the end) is a warning to the


people against the unbelief and disobedience through which their fathers had perished in the


vilderneas,”—Perowne,


Aw Invrration ro Worsurp,
(Verses. 1-7.)


The Psalmist, in this invitation to
worship, brings before us—
L The method of worship. ‘Ocome,
82


let us sing unto the Lord,” &c. vers,
1, 2, 6. We are exhorted % worship—
1. Joyfuliy. “Let us make a joyful


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : PSALMS.





noise.” ‘Spiritual joy is the heart and
soul of thankful praise.” In drawing near
to God in worship we have many and for-
cible reasons for rejoicing in Him. By
holy delight in His worship we honour
Him, and commend His service to others.

2. Readily. ‘Let us come before
His presence.” Margin, as in Heb.,
“Let us prevent His face.” Hengsten-
berg: “‘ Let us anticipate His presence,”
Perowne: ‘Let us go to meet His face,”
He says, ‘‘Such is the proper and strict
rendering of the word. ‘Come before’
does not sufficiently express the forward-
ness, the ready alacrity, which are really
denoted by the verb.” The exhortation
of the Psalmist presupposes unreadiness
to worship, and implies that worship
should be offered with pleasure and zeal,

3. Gratefully. “ With thanksgiving.”
In worship we should gratefully recog-
nise God’s gracious dealings with us.
For all the blessings which God in His
mercy bestows upon us, He expects and
requires to be thanked. He bestows
them freely and generously for our good,
and He would have us give the glory
to Him. Thankfulness of heart is one
of the great impulses to worship.

4, Reverently. ‘ Let us worship and
bow down ; let us kneel before the Lord
our Maker.” ‘All the expressions here
employed denote a posture of profound
reverence in worship, and the passage
is a standing rebuke of all irreverent
posturesin prayer.”—Barnes. Reverence
of feeling should be expressed in reverent
attitudes. If we are duly sensible of
the immeasurable distance between us
and God, humility and sacred reverence
will fill our hearts and be expressed in
our words and attitude in worshipping
Him. In the worship of God joy should
be wedded to seriousness, gratitude to
humility, confidence to reverence, and
zeal to holy awe.

Il. The motives of worship. “For
the Lord is a great God,” &c. The
Psalmist invites to worship—

1. Because Jehovah is Supreme. ‘The
Lord is a great God, and a great King
above all Gods.” The word “gods” is
sometimes applied to angels, sometimes
to judges, and sometimes to heathen
deities. It is used in this place to


PSALM KOY,





designate the latter. We are not to
suppose that the Psalmist credited these
heathen deities with any real existence
or power. “For all the gods of the
nations are idols.” “ He is merely con-
trasting heathen objects of worship,
clothed in the imagination of their
worshippers with certain attributes, and
the one true supreme Object of worship,
who ¢s really all, and more than all,
which the heathen think their gods to
be.” — Perowne. Probably the sur-
rounding idolatrous nations regarded
Jehovah as some small local deity, far
inferior to their “ gods.” The Psalmist
here declares that in His perfections He
iz exalted far above the highest position
ascribed to the gods of the heathen,
Let us worship Him because He is sup-
preme over all, the Ruler over all,

2. Because He is the Creator and
Proprietor of all things. “In His
hand are the deep places of the earth,”
&c, The second clause of verse 4 is
variously rendered. Alexander says,
“The word translated ‘strength’ is
plural in Hebrew, and seems properly
to mean fatiguing exertions, from which
some derive the idea of strength, others
that of extreme height, which can only
be reached by exhausting effort.” Mar-
gin: ‘‘The height of the hills are His.”
Perowne: “ The heights of the mountains
are His.” Soalso Hengstenberg. ‘The
exertions,” or “heights of the moun-
tains” is parallel with “the searchings,”
or “deep places of the earth;” and it
“is a poetical expression for the highest
summits of the mountains, which can
be reached only by exertion.” Here
are two ideas (1) Jehovah ts Creator of
all things. Mountain summits and
cavern depths, sea and land, all were
made by Him. (2) He ts the Proprietor
and Sovereign of all things. Creator-
ship affords the highest and most valid
claim to Proprietorship and Sovereignty
By indisputable right Jehovah is the
absolute Owner and Ruler of all things.
“However deep man may penetrate
into the depths, or however high he may
ascend into the heights, he is still withiz
the dominions of God, and never comes
beyond His boundaries.”

3. Because of Lits relations to Hts

83


PeALM XOV.





people, (1) He ts their Creator, “Je-
hovah our Maker.” He has made us
eapable of worship, and to Him alone
our worship should be offered. (2) He
ts the Source of their salvation, “The
Rock of our salvation.” God is called
the Rock of salvation as being its un-
changeable foundation and faithful
author.” Our salvation is entirely
owing to Him. Its origin, its outwork-
ing, &c., are all due to Him, There-
fore gratitude urges us to worship
Him. (3) He is tn covenant relatwn
with them. “He is our God, and we
are the people of His pasture.” God had
covenanted with them that they should
obey Him, and promised them, saying,
“‘T will walk among you, and will be
your God, and ye shall be My people.”
We who have “made a covenant with
Him by sacrifice” are under special
obligations to worship Him. We have


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS. |


Or aa ree


special manifestations of His presence,
special communications of His loving-
kindness, dsc. We have made promises
of consecration and service, &. (4)
He exercises the most watchful care over
them. They are “the people of His
pasture, and the sheep of His hand.”
He is their Shepherd,—a relation involv-
ing guidance, government, protection, and
provision. (Seean outline on Ps. 1xx. 20.)

Conciusion. Worship such as this—
spontaneous, joyous, grateful, reverent—
is not only our duty, but our precious
and exalted privilege. It calls into
exercise the noblest faculties of our
being ; it engages the thoughts and af-
fections upon the most sublime themes ;
it brings the spirit into the presence of
the Supremely Great and Good ; and it
transforms it into the Divine image.
Therefore, “O come, let us worship and
bow down,” &c.


A Warnina aGamst UNBELIEF,
(Vereca 7 (last clause) to 11.)


The Psalmist, speaking by the Holy
Ghost, here holds up the unbelief and
disobedience of the Israelites in the
wilderness as a warning to their de-
scendants in his day. Consider—

I. The ensample of human sin.
“Your fathers tempted Me,” dc, Notice,

1. The sin itself. The root-sin of
which Israel was guilty in the wilder-
ness was unbelief. This is distinctly
stated by the writer of the Epistle to
the Hebrews. (Heb. iii. 18,19.) Here it
is spoken of as (1) 7'empting God. Two
instances of this are mentioned in verse 8.
‘‘ Harden not your heart, as at Meribah,
as in the day of Massah (trial) in the
wilderness.” “‘ Meribah, ‘striving’ or
‘provocation ;? J/assah, ‘temptation,’
or ‘trial.’ From Exod. xvii. 1-7 it
would appear that both names were
given to the same locality, But accord-
ing to Num. xx. 1-13, the names were
given to two different places on different
occasions, Comp. also Deut, xxxiii. 8.”
—Perowne. (See Alford on Heb, iii.
8.) “Your fathers tempted by way of
trial—‘ tempted My in trying’ or
Uae (Me.)’”"— Alford. ‘“Unbe-


lief of every kind and every degres
may be said to tempt God. For not to
believe on the evidence which He has
seen fit to give, is to provoke Him to
give more, offering our possible assent
if proof were increased as an induce-
ment to Him to go beyond what His
wisdom has prescribed. Andif in this,
and the like sense, God may be tempted,
what can be more truly said of the
Israelites, than that they tempted God
in Massah ?”—H. Melville. And Spur-
geon: ‘ Not to acquiesce in the will of
God is virtually to tempt Him to alter
His plans to suit our imperfect views of
how the universe should be governed.”
“They tempted the Lord, saying, Is
the Lord among ue or not?” (2) Dis-
obedience of God. “They have not
known My ways.” God’s ways are the
ways which He prescribed for them to
walk in. In matters of practical reli-
gion, not to know the ways of God im-
plies the not walking in them. The
Israelites were guilty not only of dis-
obedience, but of oft-repeated acts of re-
bellion in the wilderness. Unbelief is
the parent of disobedience.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : PSALMS.





2. Their persistency in sin. “It isa
people that do err in their heart.” Heb. :
** A people of wanderers in heart.” “I
understand xapdia here,” says Stuart,
“as used according to the Hebrew idiom
(in which it is often pleonastic, at least it
seems so to us), so that the phrase im-
ports simply, They always err, t.¢., they
are continually departing from the right
way.” Or, if it be taken to mean that
their sins were deep-rooted, not mere
errors of judgment, but the utterances
of a heart far estranged from God, still
their persistency in evil comes into view.
Disobedience and rebellious murmurings
were not exceptional in their case.
Strong, indeed, were their proclivities
to evil. Nor are we aware of any im-
provement, until the adult population
that came out of Egypt had passed
away by death.

3. The aggravation of their sin,
“Saw My work.” They had seen His
wonders in Egypt and His marvellous
doings for them at the Red Sea. In the
miraculous supply of manna, and in the
stream from the rock that followed
them, they had incontestable proofs of
God’s powerful and gracious presence
with them, and yet in their unbelief
“they tempted the Lord, saying, Is the
Lord among us, or not?” The works
of the Lord which they had seen should
have inspired them with an ali-conquer-
ing faith, But through their perversity
His works aggravated their sin, in-
_ creased their guilt, (Num. xiv. 22, 23.)

IL The ensample of Divine judgment.
The Lord was not unmindful of their
sin. He saw and was grieved, “ Forty
years long was I grieved with this gene-
ration.” The word rendered “grieved ”
is expressive of loathing and disgust.
Hengstenberg renders it “disgusted.”
For forty years their conduct was such
that the Lord could not but regard
them with displeasure and aversion.
And in His anger He sware that they
should not enter into the promised land.
In God’s wrath there is nothing re-
vengeful, passionate, or stormy. It is
a calm, just, holy anger against sin.
Their rebellions had been many and
heinous. All the means used for their
moral improvement had grievously failed.


PSaLM XOv,





Warnings and entreaties, the richest
mercies and the most startling and
solemn judgments, had produced no
lasting impression for good. So Jehovah
solemnly resolves and declares that they
shall not enter into His rest. (Num,
xiv, 21-23, 28-35; Deut. i, 34, 35.)
Meditate on this judgment. Think of
the wondrous works wrought on their
behalf, the design of which they en-
tirely frustrated, so far as that genera-
tion was concerned ; the years wasted
in apparently fruitless wanderings; the
expectations which perished ; the rest
which they forfeited ; rest from slavery
and from wandering, rest as a free
people in a goodly land, &e.

Ill. The improvement to be made
ef these ensamples. ‘To-day if ye
will hear His voice,” &c. Consider—

1, The import of hearing Hts voice,
It is not mere hearing; but hearing
with attention, faith, and obedience,
Hearing is of no avail without believing,
and faith which is not followed by
action in harmony therewith is unreal,
dead. Attend to, believe, and obey His
voice. The Holy Ghost, by the Psal-
mist, indicates one sin as particularly
incompatible with proper attention to
the Divine voice. ‘ Harden not your
heart.” In this case, to harden the
heart, is to disregard the Divine pre-
cepts and warnings, to neglect the Divine
voice, and persist in disobedience. ‘“ An
old man, one day taking a child on his
knee, entreated him to seek God now—
to pray to Him, and to love Him ; when
the child, looking up at him, asked,
‘ But why do not you seek God?’ The
old man, deeply affected, answered, ‘I
would, child ; but my heart is hard—
my heart is hard.’”—Arvine. “The
pirate Gibbs, whose name for many
years was a terror to commerce, was
firally captured, and executed in the city
of New York. He acknowledged before
his death, that, when he committed the
first murder, his conscience made a hell
within his bosom; but, after he had
sailed for years under the black flag, his
conscience became so blunted, he could
rob a vessel, murder all its crew, and
then lie down as peacefully to rest as
an infant in its cradle,”—Dict. of [us

a5


PSALM XOV,


9. The time for hearing His voice.
“Today.” Now. This day of grace,
which may be lost. ‘If we put off re-
pentance another day, we have a day
more to repent of, and a day less
to repent in.”—Mason, “ He that
hath promised pardon on our repent-
ance hath not promised life till we re-
pent.”— Quarles, ‘‘ You cannot re-
pent too soon, because you know
not how soon it may be too late.”—
Fuller,

3. The arguments for hearing Hts
voice. (1) Inattention to God’s voice ex-
cludes from His rest. A glorious rest is
provided for the people of God. Rest
from guilt, sin, sorrow, suffering, anxiety,
wearisome toil, The rest of holiness,


Arxwers ENTREATED


ferses 7, 8. “To-day, if ye will hear
His voice, harden not your heart.”

I would press the importance, the
necessity, of immediately becoming re-
ligious :-—

I, Because of the shortness and un-
certainty of life. You are mortal, it
is appointed to all men once to die,
You are fratl, and may die soon and
suddenly. Those who enjoy the most
vigorous health are most exposed to
many of those diseases which arrest their
victims by surprise, and cut short the
thread of life as in a moment, See the
risk of delay. You stake your soul
without any equivalent ; for if life should
be spared you gain nothing ; but should
it be cut short, you lose all, you are
ruined for eternity.

Il. Because you cannot properly, or
even lawfully, promise to give what is
not yourown. To-morrow is not yours;
and it is yet uncertain whether it ever
will be. To-day is the only time which
you can properly give to God.

I. Because if you defer the com-
mencement of a religious life, though
but till to-morrow, you must harden
your hearts against the voice of God,
God commands and exhorts you to
commence a religious life immediately.
If you do not compiz. you must refuse,
for there is no medium. And this act

86


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.
———





love, delightful activities, satisfied affec-
tions, &c. Heaven, Unbelief excludes
from this rest. ‘‘ There can be no rest
to an unbelieving heart.” Heb. iii 12,
18,19. (2) God ts deeply solicitous that
we should attend to His voice. He says,
“To-day, oh that ye would hear His
voice!” He knows the worth of the
soul, the blessedness and glory of the
rest, the loss and sin and woe involved
in exclusion from it; and hence His
solicitude that we should hear His voice,
&e.

Conotusion.—1l. Let the people of
God beware that they provoke Him not
by their unbeltef or ingratitude, &e. 2,

t the unbeltever hear God’s votce, be-
lieve, and be saved to-day, now.


to Heras Gop’s Voiox,


of disobedience to God’s commands
tends most powerfully to harden the
heart ; for after we have once disobeyed,
it becomes more easy to repeat the dis-
obedience. If you disobey, you must
assign some excuse to justify your dis-
obedience, or your consciences will re-
proach you and render you uneasy ; if
no plausible excuse occurs, you will seek
one ; if none can readily be found, you
will invent one. . . .. This tends
most powerfully to harden the heart.

IV. If you do not commence a re-
ligious life to-day, there is great reason
to fear that you will never commence
it. The very causes which induce you
to defer its commencement, render it
highly improbable that you will ever
become religious, You allege, perhaps,
that you are not able to become re-
ligious, or that you cannot give your
minds to it, or you know not how to
begin. Now, all these causes will operate
with equal force another day. . . . .
Every day’s delay will render it more
difficult.

V. Because, after a time, God ceases
to strive with sinners and to afford
them the assistance of His grace. He
gives them up to a blinded mind, a
seared conscience, and a hard _ heart.
Thus He dealt with the old world; the
wicked sons of Eli; the Jews in the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : PSALMS.





time of Isaiah (vi. 9, 10); and the in-
habitants of Jerusalem in our Saviour’s
time (Luke xix. 41, 42).

VI. Because you are, while you de-
lay, constantly making work for re-
pentance ; you are doing what you
mean to be sorry for ; you are building
up to-day what you mean to throw
down to-morrow. How irrational and
absurd is this! I will not now hear
God’s voice, but I mean to mourn, to be
grieved for it hereafter. Could you say
this to your fellow-creatures without


blushing ¢


PSALM EOVI,





VIL Because it is the express com-
mandof God. ‘“ God now commandeth
all men everywhere to repent.” And
the Holy Ghost saith, Obey God’s com-
mand, hear His voice to-day, and do not
harden your hearts against it, Dare any
of you trample on a known command of
God #

Conciusion.—What, after all, is
there so very irksome, or disagreeable,
in a religious life, that you should wish
to defer its commencement? If you
must begin some time, why not begin to-
day {—Dr. H. Payson,—Abridged.


PSALM XOVL


INTRODUCTION.


This Psalm has no superscription in the Hebrew. But in the Septuagint amd in the Vul-
hap it has the following, “‘ When the house was built after the captivity. An ode by David.”
here is a great similarity between this Psalm and the great festal hymn which ‘‘ David deli-
vered, to thank the Lord, into the hand of Asaph and his brethren” on the day when the ark
was brought into the sanctuary in Zion, It indeed almost exactly corresponds to that portion
of the Psalm, on the placing of the ark in Zion, which is contained in 1 Chron. xvi. 23-33. It
is probable that the original Psalm was composed by David, for use on the occasion mentioned
above, and that it is recorded in 1 Chron. xvi. 8-36, and that this Psalm was selected from it


for use at the dedication of the second temple.


We regard the Psalm as setting before usa picture of-—


Tor Wor.p’s most Joyous Day.


We have here a picture of a day of
blessing and glory for our world suchas
never yet has dawned upon it, but most
assuredly will dawn in God’s own ap-
pointed time. The Poet portrays two
grand features of the world’s most
joyous day. It will be—

I A day when the relations of
the Lord to the world shall be rightly
apprehended. What are those rela-
tions }

1. He alone ts God of the world.
This is clear from (1) The nothingness
of heathen deities and the reality and
power of Jehovah. “All the gods of
the nations are idols, but the Lord made
the heavens.” The heathen deities were
nonentities, nothings. They had no real
existence. They existed only in the
imaginations of their worshippers (Isa.
xli. 23, 24.) Even when the objects of
the worship of the heathen have a
real existence, such as the heavenly
bodies, yet they have no existence as


goda, no existence which renders them
fit objects of homage. But the Lord
is real and living and powerful. He
“ made the heavens.” In their creation
He has manifested His power and glory
to all the world, and given proof that
He is the true God and entitled to the
worship of His creatures. (2) The
greatness of Jehovah. “The Lord is
great, and greatly to be praised.” God
is great in His thoughts and purposes,
in power and action, in glory and domi-
nion. His greatness is so pre-eminent
that Masillon well said, God alone is
great.” (3) The glory of Jehovah,
“ Honour and majesty are before Him,
strength and beauty are in His sanc-
tuary.” Wherever He pleases to mani-
fest Himself there true glory is dis-
played. All that is really mighty and
majestic, glorious and beautiful, is found
in Him in full perfection, and flows
from Him. Holiness and wisdom, truth
and love constitute His ig i beauty,
8


YOALM XOVE, .





and majesty. He has displayed His
glory in the heavens which He created ;
but it shines most brightly “in His
sanctuary,” in the Church militant and
in the Church triumphant. In the
world’s most joyous day the Lord shall
be recognised throughout the world as
the only true God, incomprehensibly
great and glorious.

2. His salvation ts for all the world.
“Show forth His salvation from day to
day. Declare His glory among the
heathen, His wonders among all people.”
In the bright day which is drawing near,
His salvation will be published amongst
all nations and all peoples. ‘Salva
tion” from the night of heathen dark-
ness, from sin and all its terrible conse-
quences. ‘‘ Salvation ” to holiness, love,
life immortal, into the image of God,
and to the vision of God. “ Salvation”
for all the world as opposed (1) to the
restrictions of Judaism. Go ye into
all the world,” &e. (Mark xvi. 15, 16).
“God is no respecter of persons,” &.
(Acts x. 34, 35), (2) To the limitations
of human creeds. Our narrow systems
of theology cannot restrict the fulness
of the grace of God. The river of the
water of life refuses to be pent in the
limited channels which men _ have
scooped out for it. It flows in streams
broad and deep, for the life and refresh-
ment of all men. Salvation is free for
all men. “ Ho, every one that thirateth,”
dc. (Isa. lv. 1, 2). ‘“ Whosoever be-
lieveth,” &. “The Spirit and the
Bride say, Come,” &c. (Rev. xxii. 17).
In the glorious day approaching, the
freedom and universality of salvation
will be recognised, ec,

3. He ts the King of all the world.
“ Say among the heathen that the Lord
reigneth,” &e. ‘“‘ Jehovah is King,’ lit,
‘hath become King,’ hath taken to Him
self His great power and reigned.”


“He shall reign from pole to pole
With illimitable sway.”


Under His reign the earth will become

ealin and stable. Agitated and shaken

by the sins and strifes of men, it shall

become peaceful and orderly under the

sway of Jehovah. In the joyous day

of which our Poet sings, the reign of
88





HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : PSALMB.


the Lord shall be proclaimed in all the
world, recognised in all the world, and
its blessings enjoyed in all the world.

4, He is the Judge of all the world,
“ He shall judge the people righteously.
He cometh, He cometh to judge the
earth,” d&c. Judging is probably used
here for ruling, Two prominent features
of the Divine rule and judgment are
here specified—(1) Righteousness. The
laws of His kingdom and their admini-
stration harmonise with eternal truth
and equity. (2) Faithfulness. His
administration will accord with the
truth of His own character, and the
declarations of His will. “It isa judg-
ment which is to issue in salvation.”
“It is not a retributive, but a gractous
judging, by which controversies are ad-
justed and prevented, and the law of
love is introduced into the lives of the
people.” In the world’s most joyous
day the Lord will be heartily recognised
as the gracious Ruler and Judge of all
men,

It. A day when the relations of
the Lord to the world shall be duly
celebrated. In the day portrayed by
the Psalmist the gracious relations of
Jehovah to all men will not only be
understood, but appreciated and praised.


1. He will be universally wor-
shipped. “All the earth” shall sing
unto Him, “ All flesh shall come to


worship before Me, saith the Lord.”
“From the rising of the sun, even unto
the going down of the same, My name
shall be great among the Gentiles,” de,
(Mal. i. 11). “As I live, saith the
Lord, every knee shall bow to Me, and
every tongue shall confess to God.”

2. He will be enthusiastically wor
shipped. Three times the Poet calla
upon the people to “Sing unto the
Lord,” and three times to “ Give unte
the Lord glory.” The repetition indi-
cates urgency and zeal, The whole soul
of the Poet is in the exhortation. In
the grand coronation day the Lord the
King shall be worshipped with entire
heartiness, and with intensest enthu
siasm,

3. He will be joyously worshi
“O sing unto the lot new ee

The “new song” is “one which


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : PSALMS,





shall be the fit expression of all the
thoughts and hopes and triumphs of
vhe new and glorious age which is
about todawn. It is the glad welcome
given to the King when He enters His
kingdom.” So great is the joy of the
world that even the inanimate creation
is represented as sharing in it, “ Let
the heavens rejoice,” &c. (vers. 11, 12).
“ With the coming of Jehovah and the
setting up of His kingdom, all the broken
harmonies of creation shall be restored,
Not ‘the sons of God’ only, but the
whole creation, is still looking forward
to the great consummation (Rom. viii.
21).”—Perowne.

4, He will be reverseily worshipped.
“O worship the Lord in the beauty of
holiness, fear before Him, all the earth.”
“«Bow yourselves before Jehovah in
holy pomp, tremble before Him all the
earth.’ ‘ Pomp,’ or ‘array,’ but the word
denotes all that lent solemnity and im-
pressiveness to the service.” —Perowne,
In the glorious day which the Psalmist


PRaLM XOVL,





foresaw, the Lord will be worshipped
with all that is expressive of admiration
and veneration. There will be nothing
unbecoming in the worship offered unto
Him, All the earth will approach and
pay homage to Him in the beauty of
pure, loving, adoring spirits.

ConcLusion.—l. Here is a word of
Exhortation. For the advent of this
most joyous day for the world, let us be
untiring both in work and in prayer.
2. Here is a word of Inspiration. This
bright day will surely dawn. The world
advances not to the darkness of night,
but to the splendours of a glorious and
unfading noontide. Therefore, take
heart, ye faithful watchers, and brave
workers, and earnest suppliants, The
cause to which you are devoted must
triumph, The mountain tops are
already bathed in glory ; and soon the
whole world will be flooded with radi-
ance, and break forth into the tremendous
and exultant shout, “ Hallelujah, the
Lord reigneth.”


Tre Oszzct, OBLIGATION, AND Expression or WORSHIP,
(Verse 8.)


Consider—

L The grand Object of worship.
“The Lord.” He is the Creator and
Sustainer of all things. ‘The Lord
made the heavens.” He is the true and
rightful Preprietor of all things and
beings. He has a claim upon our wor-
ship. We ought to worship Him. He
is supremely great and glorious. His
glory consists of His goodness. His
worship should be attractive, delightful.
He is the only true Object of worship.
He alone is perfect. Worshipping any
other object our being will not be deve-
loped, or will be developed injuriously.
His worship is quickening, purifying,
exalting, &c.

IL The solemn obligation of wor-
ship. ‘The glory due unto His name.”
“ Due” is supplied by our translators.
But, if we omit it and read, “ The glory
of His name,” the text still sets forth
the obligatoriness of worship. Worship
is not optional, but binding.

L. It is due to Him because of what


He 1a. He is supremely great, and
should, therefore, be.reverenced ; su-
premely gracious, and should, therefore,
be loved ; supremely glorious, and should,
therefore, be humbly adored, dc, Think
of what He is, and then ask yourself,
How much is due unto Him ?

2. It is due to Him because of what
He does. His is the glory of creation,
providence, redemption. How much He
has done for us! How much of grati-
tude, &c., we owe to Him! “On His
head are many crowns.”

III. The appropriate expression of
worship. ‘Bring an offering,” d&c.
“<«Bring presents.’ ‘Presents’ (the
collective sing. for the plural), in allusion
to the Oriental custom which required
gifts to be brought by all who would be
admitted to the presence of a king.”—
Perowne. Hengstenberg : “The ‘ bring
offerings’ is used of the bringing of
gifts of allegiance to earthly sovereigns.”
The derivation and usage of the word


minchak—* offering ” — sae Fi that


PSALM XOVIL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.
a


3. Devoted service. (Acts xx, 24;
Phil. ii. 30.)
The great Sin-Offering has been made,
1. Grateful praise. “ Whoso offereth Our obligations to the Lord are im-
praise glorifieth Me.” mense. Let us heartily bring ous
2. Generous contributions, (Prov. xi. thank-offerings to Him.
24, 25; 1 Cor. ix. 6-11.)


idea of sacrifice, which represents it as a
Eucharistic gift to God our King. Let
us express our worship in offerings of—


PSALM XCVIL


INT2ODUCTION.


This 18 another of tne series of Psalms which celebrate the edvent of Jehovah as King,
There are seven in the series, the ninety-third being the first, and the hundredth the last,
The ninety-fourth is not one of the series. We know neither the author by whom, nor the
occasion on which, this Psalm was composed. The series may “have been composed with
reference to the same occasion, and may have been designed to be used together. They are
similar in their contents and structure; and they refer to the same thing—the sovereignty or
the supremacy of God.” This one may be taken as presenting two themes for Homiletic treat
ment,—The Features and Effects of the King’s Advent, verses 1-93 and The Character,
Privileges, and Duties of the King’s Subjects, verses 10-12,


Tae Features AND Errrcrs or THE Kine’s ADVENT,
(Verses 1-9.)


Let us notice—

I. The features of the King’s ad-
vent. ‘The description of the coming of
the King is full of poetic grandeur. It re-
presents Hisadvent as characterised by—

1. Awful Majesty. ‘Clouds and
darkness are round about Him. A fire
goeth before Him,” d&c., verses 2-5. The
images in these verses are suggested by
the theophany at the giving of the law
on Sinai. God is often represented in
the Holy Word as coming with clouds
and fire, and inspiring the world with awe
anddread. Ps. xviii. 7-15; 1. 1-6; Hab.
iii, 3-16. The object of these represen-
tations is to set forth the greatness, and
sublimity, and glory of God. More
over, the awful phenomena which ac-
companied the giving of the law were
designed to deeply impress the people
with the august and glorious presence
of the Divine Lawgiver and Judge.
So the coming of the Lord to reign and
judge in the world will be with such
majesty and glory, that the most exalted
amongst men will be as nothing in His
presence, and holy awe or unspeakable
fear will fill men’s hearts.

2. Widest conspicuousness, * All the

enple see His glory.” The glory of
the Lord here is the revelation of His
90


being and character through His works
of righteousness and grace. ‘The glory
of the Lord shall be revealed, and all
flesh shall see it together.”

3. Perfect righteousness. “Righteous-
ness and judgment are the habitation of
His throne... . The heavens declare
His righteousness.” Righteousness is
here represented (1) As the basis of His
government. It is the “ establishment,”
or “foundation of His throne.” This
affords a guarantee of the stability and
permanence of His rule. (See remarks
on Ps, lxxxix. 14.) (2) As clearly
manifested. ‘The heavens declare” it.
“It is as conspicuous and illustrious as
the heavens themselves.” (See remarks
on Ps, 1 6.) The advent of the King
will be in righteousness, with the ut-
most conspicuousness, and with awful
majesty.

“The Lord shall come! the earth shall quake;
The mountains to their centre shake ;
And, withering from the vault of night,
The stars withdraw their feeble light.
The Lord shall come! a glorious form,
With wreath of flame and robe of storm,
On cherub wings, and wings of wind,
Appointed Judge of all mankind.”—Heber,


Il. The effects of the King’s ad.
vent. ‘The Lord reigneth, let the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : PSALMS.





earth rejoice,” &c. The effects of the
reign of Jehovah differ in different
classes of character.

1. It should occasion joy to all. “Let
the earth rejoice, let the multitude of
the isles. be glad.” It should be a
source of inexpressible gladness to all
men that the world is not anarchic;
that it is not ruled by Satan, or by
heartless fate, or by blind physical
forces and laws, but by the Lord. He
rules all things in perfect righteousness
and wisdom and goodness. Rejoice;
for the Supremely Good is the Supreme
King.

2. It does occasion (1) Destruction to
His foes. “A fire goeth before Him,
and burneth up His enemies round
about.” When He comes to judge and
reign He will destroy all His foes, He
will put down all opposition. Men
must either bow to His sceptre, or be
slain by His sword. (2) Confusion to
tdolaters. ‘Confounded be all they
that serve graven images,” &, Per-
owne and Hengstenberg translate,—
“Ashamed.” “It is a shame,” says
the former, “arising from the discovery
of the utter vanity and nothingness of
the objects of their trust.” They boast
in nonentities and serve mere images;
and when the Lord cometh to judge and
reign in the earth, they will discover to
their shame and confusion the utter


PRALM XOVIL,





powerlessness and worthlessness of these
idols. In that solemn day, many will
find their gods—those things on which
their hearts are set—to be mere idols,
shams, and mockeries. (3) Gladness to
His people. “Zion heard, and was
glad,” &c. The people of God rejoice,
because of the utter abolition of idols,
and the supremacy of Jehovah. Some
expositors think that “the daughters of
Judah ” are introduced here, because of
“a custom familiar in Judea, of form-
ing choral bands of maidens after a
victory or some happy circumstance.”
(See Exod. xv. 20, 21; 1 Sam. xviii.
6, 7.) But the designation seems to us
to denote the smaller cities of Judah,
that surrounded Jerusalem as the
mother city. So that “Zion and the
daughters of Judah” represent the
whole of Judah. All the people of the
Lord rejoice in His coming to reign.
Two reasons are assigned for their joy.
His judgments. “‘ Rejoiced because of
Thy judgments.” (See remarks on Ps.
xlviii, 11.) Hts supremacy. “For
Thou, Lord, art high above all the earth,”
&c. (See remarks on Ps. xcv. 3.)
Conciusion.— What to us will be
the effect of the coming of the Lord as
King and Judge #
“ When Thou, my righteous Judge, shalt come,


To fetch Thy ransomed people home,
Shall I among them stand!”


Toe Reian or Gop.


Ver. 1. “The Lord reigneth ; let the
earth rejoice.”

The text calls us to consider—

I The subjects of the Divine
government. Everything that God
has made is subject to His government.
The universe of matter; and all the
beings, rational and animal, which He
has caused to inhabit it.... This
great work of sustaining and directing
all nature is called His natural govern-
ment. By virtue of this government
the powers of nature are made instru-
ments in the conduct of His moral
government, for the reward or punish-
ment of His creatures.

The moral government of God is that
which is principally contemplated in the


text; end by this is meant the direc
tion and control which He exercises
over moral agents, over every rational
being. The circumstances of trial in
which He places them, the assistance
He affords them, and the rewards or
punishments He assigns them, are all
comprehended in this. Angels are
under this government. . . . The
earth is the great theatre of their ex-
ertions, they are put under Christ, and
are employed both in judgment and
mercy. Devils are under the moral
government of God. They are not
finally judged, but suffered to mix with
human kind. Heavenand hell struggle
for the soul of man. Between these
orders of beings is sean, to whom the
91


PSALM XOVIE.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





Divine government seems to stand in a
special relation; and principally for
this reason, that he is the subject of
redemption, The earth is the great
theatre chosen for the display of the
Divine perfections in a course of moral
government, Here the grand struggle
of adverse powers and principles takes
place, &c. The human race, as subject
to the Divine government, are to be
considered as distributed into nations,
and as individuals, Nations are under
a peculiar kind of government. They
are considered as having a kind of unity
as collective bodies. They have their
rewards and punishments in this life.
The sins of one generation are visited
upon another. Yet nations are not
governed by a rigid law of works; for
Christ is an intercessor for them, The
good pray and prevail in behalf of the
wicked. Individuals are also under
the Divine government, “ Every man
must give an account of himself to
God.” Offers of mercy are made to
him. Rules of conduct assigned. Re-
tribution annexed to conduct. (Rom.
ji. 6-11.) Men are under direction and
influence, as well as control.

IL Certain characters which mark
Wis administration.


1. Jt ts sovereign and uncontrolled,
Dan. iv. 35; v. 21. This gives cer-
tainty to the Divine government, and
makes it the hope and joy of good
men,

2. It interferes not with human liberty.
We are so free from constraint, that
our actions are properly our own. We
have the freedom of moral agents, We
feel that we are free.

3. It ts a mediatorial government.
It is in the hands of Jesus, the Mediator
between God and man; and it is exer-
cised specially with reference to the great
end of His mediatorial office, the re-
demption of man, and the reconciling of
the world to Himself.

TIL The demand which is made
upon our grateful joy.

“ Let the earth be glad.”

1. As Christians, we shall rejoice
with holy joy, not with vain mirth. God
will be sanctified in His worshippers.

2. We should rejoice, too, with trem-
bling. Much is given to us, and much
is required,

3. Lf we are individually interested om
Him that reigneth, we may well rejoice ;
for all the perfections of the Godhead are
engaged im our behalfi—R, Watson.
— Abridged.


Gop’s Wars, rHouGH orreN InsoRUTABLE, ARE RIGHTEOUS AND JUBT.
(Verse 2.)


Two propositions are contained in this
text.

I. “Clouds and darkness are round
about God.” The appearances of God
to the saints in old times are the origin
of the figure in the text. These appear-
ances were all accompanied with clouds
and darkness. Exod. xiv. 19, 20; xix.
' 16, 18, 20; 1 Kings viii. 10, 11 ; Matt.
xvi, 5; 2 Pet. i 17. Clouds are
emblems of obscurity ; darkness of dis-
tress. The works of God’s providence
are often obscure and productive of dis-
tress to mankind, though “ righteousness
and judgment are,” &c. In the affairs
of nations we see the interference of
Divine Providence ; yet it is surrounded
with “clouds and darkness.” So it is


also + eee of a smaller kind ; it is


thus in the removal of the most eminent,
holy, and useful characters, that while
we acknowledge the hand of God, we
say “clouds and darkness are round
about Him.” If we look into the book
of history we shall perceive much dis-
order in earthly scenes, much confusion
in the affairs of men; and was this to
be expected from a God of order and
wisdom? Again, look at Christianity,
How little has been done by it com.
pared with what might have been anti-
cipated from its Divine principles, the
character of its Author, and from the
interest it possesses in the heart of
God! Paganism yet strikes deep its
roots in various lands, Even in Chris-
tendom, how little have the known and
blessed effects of the Gospel been manl


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,





fested! Where genuine Christianity is
taught, how small, how slow, has been
its progress ; how few converted to God !
dc. And persons of real piety give way
to prejudice and party zeal, which pre-
vent, in @ great measure, the operation
and effect of pure Christianity. A great
part of the world is no better than if
Christ had never come to save man-
kind, and the Gospel had never been
proclaimed, “Clouds and darkness are
round about Him.”

II. Righteousness and Judgment
are the habitation of His throne.
Righteousness is an essential perfection
of the Divine Being. If there had been
no creatures for Him to govern, He
would have had an unchangeable and
invincible love of rectitude. Judgment
is the application of the principle of
righteousness in His government of His
creatures and their actions; it is a
development of His rectitude in the
management of the affairs of His great
empire. The throne of God is built
and stands firm upon these principles ;
they are the place, the basis, and the
foundation of His throne. Though
much obscurity must necessarily en-
velope the government of an infinite
mind, yet some considerations may be
suggested, which will serve to quell all
our anxieties, and afford us repose under
all the darkness, beneath His protecting
power, His all-directing wisdom, and His
paternal goodness.

1. The dispensations of God towards
man are regulated by the consideration
of his being a fallen and disordered crea-
ture. This must be kept in view to
account for the severities in the Divine
dealings with him. Yet, notwithstand-
Ing the severities of God, there are mix-





Tue Kinepom


(Verses


From the Epistle to the Hebrews we
find “hat this Psalm is a prophetical de-
acrip\ion of the Messiah ; and from that
application of it we deduce two impor-
tant truths concerning the Christ ; one,
respecting the dignity of His person,
i he first begotten ;” the other, His


PeALM XOVinc.





tures of mercy which we have reason to
admire.

2. The Divine Being was not bound
tn justice, either to prevent the disordered
state of man, or to correct it when it had
taken place. From what we know of
the nature of God and of man, it may
be safely affirmed that it cannot be re-
quired of the Divine Governor to secure
the obedience of His creatures any fur-
ther than the law, as a motive, is cal-
culated to have an effect upon rational
minds,

3. The whole of those evils that form
clowas and darkness round about God,
are either the penal or natural effect of
moral evil.

4. Those that receive the grace of Jesus
Christ are still in such a situation as
renders a great part of their trials and
miseries necessary. Many of the evils of
a depraved nature still remain, and need
to be subdued and removed. Besidea,
the virtues and excellencies must be per-
fected in the same way in which the
Captain of our salvation was perfected :
he must be conformed to Christ, and have
fellowship with Him in His sufferings,

5. The moral evils of man, and the
depravity of human nature, are often, im
a great measure, corrected and subdued
by the natural evils of life, which thus are
made the means of conducting to repent
ance, reformation,and happiness, ‘ Our
light affliction * may work for us “a far
more exceeding and eternal weight of
glory ; while we look,” &c, (2 Cor. iv
17, 18).

6. The light’ of prophecy dispels mang
of those clouds which would otherwise
obscure, for the present, the government
and the throne of the Detty.— Rk. Hall.


— Abridged.


or CHRIS?


6-9.)


glorious exaltation as Messiah. It ts te
this latter truth that we shall now con
fine our attention.

I. The interesting fact to which the
prophecy refers.

The Psalm is introduced with a cele-
bration of the government of Jehovah

93


PSALM XOVIL.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY ; PSALEHS.








—


“The Lord reigneth.” The Psalmist
refers to the government of Him who is
God manifest in the flesh, and who is re-
ceived up into glory. His appearing in
our world was a veiling of His glory.
... » His resurrection was a reappear-
ing in glory ; in His ascension He ex-
hibited the dignity of His Goanead ;
and on entering heaven He sat down on
the throwe of His Father, to administer
the affairs of that kingdom which He
had now established, the duration of
which is to have no end.

1. In the exaltation of Christ we have
abundant proof of the acceptance of His
sacrifice, and that tt answered all the tm-
portant purposes for which tt was de-
signed, His death was sacrificial ; that
sacrifice was expiatory in its nature, and
was accepted by the Father. He is ex-
alted, but it is as a sacrifice—as High
Priest—as Mediator—as a Prince and a
Saviour, to give repentance and remis-
sion of sina.

2. Christ by His exaltation is invested
with mediatorial power and dominion.
In Phil. ii, 6-11, you have a proper
view of the dominion of Christ. It is
mediatorial dominion. All things are
put under Him ; there is not a creature
in the whole range of being who does
not yield a willing or an unwilling, a
conscious or an unconscious, homage to
Him. He employs all things to accom-
plish the purposes of His mercy. To
the salvation of men He subordinates
everything, human affairs, opposition of
devils, ministry of angels, the whole
universe |


I. The important events flowing
from the accomplishment of this pro-
phecy. ;

1. The Revelation of Messiah’s righte-
ousness. The heavens literally attested
Christ’s righteousness in the voice from
heaven at His baptism, and when He
appealed to His Father, saying, “Father,
glorify Thy Son.” The Gospel, which is
from heaven, displays the righteousness
of Christ,

2. The mantfestation of His glory,
mercy and truth here meet together. To
Christ belongs the glory of revealing the
Father to the world ; of opening a new
way of access to God; of peopling
heaven with new and holy inhabitants,

3. The conversion of tdolaters.
“ Confounded be all they,” &. This
is not a malediction, but a prediction of
the overthrow of idolatry by the Gospel
Let this light be diffused, and darkness
cannot remain.

4, The presentation of universal hom-
age. “ Worship Him all ye gods.” The
apostle quotes from the LXX., “ Let
all the angels of God worship Him.”
Christ shall receive the homage of ador-
ing multitudes. Rev, vii. 9-12.

5. The joyous exultation of the Church.
Zion heard, and was glad,” &c. The
triumphs of Christ are the glory and the
joy of the Church. When Be shall have
subdued the nations, then the whole host
of the redeemed, with all the ranks of
angels, will burst forth in one loud, pro-
longed, eternal song: “ Hallelujah | the
Lord God omnipotent reigneth.”—Ih
Abridged from “ Sketches of Sermons.”


Tax Cuaractrr, Paivineces, anp Dury or rox Krixe’s Sussxcrs,
(Verses 10-12.)


The Poet here brings into view—

L The Character of the King’s sub-
jects.

1. They are sincere and upright.
“The righteous,.... the upright in
heart.” “ There is nota just man upon
earth, that doeth good, and sinneth not.”


“ There is none righteous.” The Psalmist


siearly means the upright, the sincere

and single-hearted. Not the upright in

profession, but “the upright in heart.”
a4


2. They are devout, “ His saints,”
The idea of the word is not holiness, but
piety. ‘The pious, God-worshipping.”
The subjects of the Lord add piety to
sincerity. They are devout as well ag
true,

3. They “love the Lord.” Love to
God is with them not obedience to a
eommand ; but a holy privilege, a deep
and divine joy. They are loyal-hearted
subjects of Jehovah, They obey the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PSALM XOVIL.





King because they love Him. Are these
features of character found in us ?

II. The privileges of the King’s
subjects.

1. Preservation from evil. “ He pre-
serveth the souls of His saints” He
guards their lives. They are immortal
till their work be done, and His plan-in
their life be fully developed. He pre-
serves them also from sin, from apostacy,
and from despair even under the severest
trials,

2. Deliverance from enemies. “ He
delivereth them out of the hand of the
wicked.” The Lord frequently baffles
the designs of evil men against His
people. He will not allow their enemies
to do them any real harm; and ulti-
mately He will triumphantly deliver
them out of their power.

3. Bestowal of gladness. “ Light is
sown for the righteous, and gladness for
the upright in heart.” “Light” is
synonymous with joy. ‘To be ‘sown’
is to be scattered abroad, the point of
the comparison being only the rich-
ness of the gift.”—Hengstenberg. So
Perowne takes “the verb ‘sown’ in
the sense of ‘scattered,’ ‘ diffused.’”
And Venema: “Light is said to be
scattered when the rising sun spreads
his rays in every direction.”

‘*Now morn, her rosy steps in th’ eastern
elime

Advancing, sow’d the earth with orient

pearl.” —Jfilion.

“Sometimes through secular instru-
ments,” says Beecher, “ God makes us
joyful, for He employs the whole world
to work out His purposes; but some-
times, by simply breathing upon the
spirit of His people, He makes them
joyful. You cannot tell why you areso
musical at times. On some days you
are full of music, There are some hours


that seem radiant above all other hours,
when you are lifted up above the or-
dinary pattern of joy. And when these
appear among God’s people, it is not an
unfair thing to infer that they are signs
and manifestations of Christ’s presence
with them.” Again: “There are joys
which long to be ours, God sends ten
thousand truths, which come about us
like birds seeking inlet; but we are
shut up to them, and so they bring us
nothing, but sit and sing awhile upon
the roof, and then flee away.” Let us
open hand and heart for the reception
and enjoyment of ou vrivileges,

III. The duty of the King’s subjects.

1. To “hate evil.” “Ye that love
the Lord, hate evil.” Love to God must
be manifested in holiness of life and
hatred of evil. Love to God and the
love of sin, or even tolerance of sin, are
incompatible. Sin is the “abominable
thing which He hates,”

2. To thankfully “ rejoice in the
Lord.” “Rejoice in the Lord, ye
righteous,” &c. We have nere: (1)
Rejoicing in the Lord. Wot in gaiety,
riches, honours, &c.; but in the Lord,
—in His grace, in His friendship, in
His perfections, in Himself. He is the
wisest, the holiest, the most generous of
beings. (2) Rejotcing thankfully. “Give
thanks at the remembrance of His holi-
Hengstenberg: “ Praise His
holy memorial.” Perowne : “ Give
thanks to His holy name.” The holi-
ness of the Divine Being should com-
mand our adoring and grateful praise.
(3) Rejoieing as a duty. Phil. iii. 1;
iv. 4. ‘‘ Joy in the Holy Ghost” is one
of the “fruits of the Spirit.” By our
rejoicing we honour God, and commend
His religion tomen, Let us regard this
devout rejoicing as both our duty and
our privilege.


ness,”


Tux CHARACTER AND Portion or Gop’s PEOPLE.
(Verses 10, 11.) %


Walk through the Old Testament
with the light of the New. This whole
Psalm is a prophecy of Christ. The ex-
cellency and glory of His kingdom—the
character and blessedness of His people.


I. The character or description of
God’s people.

1. They are “the righteous.” A gene-
ral term, a righteous God will have a
righteous people, Equally Bee in the


POALM XOVIL.


sense of perfection and sinlessness, that
“there is none righteous, no, not one ;”
but as contrasted with the wicked, they
are righteous, and to be thus distin-
guished.

2. They are “His saints.” His
sanctified ones, set apart, dedicated to
Him. A term of reproach in the world,
to be “a saint” is to be a hypocrite, in
the cant of fashion, but it is “the highest
style of man.” ‘ His saints,” His own
chosen ones, “loved from the founda-
tion of the world,” called, converted,
&c, Made holy, sanctified by the Spirit,
&c. “Saint” is a term not peculiar to
the servants of God of the Old and
New Testament, but a definition of
every one who is in a state of salvation.

3. They are “upright tn heart.”
Christian integrity, how excellent! The
world affects it, talks much of honour,
virtue, justice, high-mindedness —a
shallow blustering spirit ;—and one of
their own has said, “ Every man has
his price.” But the Christian is “ up-
right ja heart,” in his inner man, sim-
plicity, self-denying integrity, which
seek’s not man’s applause, resisting
temptation, strong in the grace of God.

4. They “love the Lord.” Love,
glowing, tender, pure, as the love of
God—whence it springs—casting out
fear, terror, and everything that sepa-
rates from a loving Father, this is the
love of believers. (Matt, xxii. 36-38 ;
Rom. xiii. 10.) They love God, and
therefore love His people, His house,
His Sabbath, His Word, and all His
ordinances.

5. They “hate evil.” This follows
of moral necessity, they who love must
hate ; if they love God they must hate
evil, because they cannot serve two mas-
ters so different from each other (Matt,
vi. 24). In pr-portion as they love the
one they w:* Sate cha other (Rom, xii.
9). Sin is the enemy which disturbs their
peace, stops their mouth in prayer (Pa,
Ixvi. 18), separates from God ; so they
must ever hate it. ®

I. The blessed portion of such
people. This is indicated by their very
titles. But there are special blessings
here.

Be re preserveth the souls of His


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : PSALMS.





saints,” Not to the exclusion of their
bodies, which are His care in this world,
“the temples of His Spirit,” and in death
they sleep in hope of His resurrection
and final glory; but, because the soul is
the nobler part, “He preserveth them,”

This implies danger, many perils
here. to the soul. Jt implies that they
cannot preserve their own souls with all
care, vigilance, prayer, faith, love—the
soul is a helpless thing without God.

Many precious promises to this effect,
(See Ps, xxiii. 3 ; John xvii. 11; 2 Tim.
i, 12; iv. 17, 183-1 Peter 1.5.)

2.“ He delivereth them out of the hand
of the wicked.” This implies that they
are surrounded by the wicked, and as it
were in their hands—and so they are,
Satan, as a roaring lion, seeks to devour
them, desires “to have them and sift
them,” or he ensnares them with his
“wiles” and “devices,” he puts evil
into their hearts, and leads them astray.
His people, too, “the children of the
wicked one,” do his work on earth by
persecuting His people, tempting them
to sin, “ putting the bottle to them,” and
suggesting pollution, and then, if they
succeed, they mock them as the devils
do !

“He delivereth them out of their
hands,” That is enough, God looks
on, He sees all, He restrains the wrath of
the wicked, He makes a way by which
His people escape. (See Ps, exxiv.)

3. Their final blessedness: “ Light ts
sown for the righteous, and gladness for
the upright in heart.” Beautiful figure |
this life is often a time of darkness, but
it is the seed-time of light. When the
believer is sowing dark tears, sighs,
sorrows, trials, temptations, all is cheer-
lees; but these are seeds of light
“Light is sown for him,” it will come
up, it will shine forth by and by, it may
be a long winter, and a backward spring,
and even harvest time may be cheerlesa,
but it will come at last! (See Ps, xxx.
5, and John xvi, 20-22.)

If you would have the believer's


_ “portion,” you must bear the believer's


“ character.” Study these definitions
of the people of the Lord, rest not until
you can appropriate them, and then “ all
things are yours.” —F, Close, D.D.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; PSALMS. PSALM XCVIIL
SR


PSALM XOVIIL


INTRODUCTION,


“ This Psalm is little more than an echo of Psalm xevi. Its subject is the last grzat
revelation, the final victory of God, when His salvation and His righteousness, the revelation
of which He has promised to the house of Israel, shall be manifested both to His own people,
and to all the nations of the earth. The “inscription of the Psalm in the Hebrew is only the
single word Mizmor, ‘Psalm.’ Both the beginning and end of the Psalm are taken from Psalm
xevi. The rest of it is drawn chiefly from the latter portion of Isaiah.’’—Perowne. ‘*In the
first strophe, verses 1-3, after a short exhortation to praise the Lord, the object of the praise is
given—the Lord has redeemed His people in a wonderful manner, The second strophe, versea
4-6, shows how this praise is to be rendered: all means which, in every place, are within
reach, ought to be employed for the purpose. The third stanza says by whom the praise should
be given ; by the whole earth.” —Hengstenberg,


Aw Exvuttant Hymn.


We have here—

L Exultation for the most excellent
reasons. Regarding the Psalm as a
prophecy of the Messiah and His
glorious salvation, we have here an ex-
hortation to praise Him because—

1, His works are wonderful. “ He
hath done marvellous things,” The life
and work of our Lord upon earth were
marked by the most wonderful features,
His dife was marvellous in its spiritual
beauty and power. His character had
no flaw in it, it was perfect. His words
were marvellous. ‘Never man spake
like this man.” His works were mar-
vellous, Nature in her wildest moods
obeyed His word, At the expression
of His will diseases fled. At the utter-
ance of His command the dead started
into life again. How marvellous were
His death, resurrection, and ascension !
And the salvation which He has
wrought, in its design, in its accom-
plishment, and in its results, is gloriously
wonderful, ‘ His name shall be called
Wonderful.”

2. The Lord’s works are benevolent.
His works are designed not to surprise
and startle men, but to save them.
“The Lord hath made known His sal-
vation, His righteousness hath He
openly showed in the sight of the
heathen,”  ‘‘‘ Righteousness,’ parallel
with ‘salvation,’ as so frequently in the
latter portion of Isaiah.”——Perowne.
“For the people of the Lord, ‘salva-
tion ’ is the expression of ‘His righteous-
ness,’ which gives to every one His


voOL, IL


own: He has promised them salva-
tion.” —Hengstenberg. The great object
of our Lord’s mission was to save men
from sin. “The Son of Man is come
to seek and to save that which was
lost.” “Christ Jesus came into the
world to save sinners.” He imparts
pardon to the guilty, peace to the
troubled, holiness to the sinful, life to
the dead, joy to the miserable. He is
the Saviour. He “hath made known
His salvation” and “ openly showed His
righteousness.” Not only has He pro-
claimed His salvation, but gloriously
displayed it. He has proved Llimself
“mighty to save.” The triumphs of
the Gospel are countless in number,
gracious in character, surprising in their
magnitude, and ever growing in extent.

3. The Lord’s works are accomplished
by Himself alone. “ His right hand and
His holy arm hath gotten Him the vic-
tory.” Literally: ‘“ Hath wrought sal-
vation for Him.” Hengstenberg:
“Have helped Him.” Perowne: “ ‘Hath
gotten Him salvation,’ or ‘ the victory,’
asin E. V. (Comp. xliv. 4; Isa, lix. 16;
lxiii, 5.) I have preferred here the for-
mer rendering, because in the next
verse the noun occurs from the same
root, and there the rendering ‘ salvation’
is, I think, preferable to ‘victory,’”
Christ Jesus our Lord alone accom-
plished salvation for us. He alone
effected the atonement, He alone saves
the sinner. Inthe pursuit of holiness
He supplies the motive and imparts the
power. From beginning to end salva

97


POALM XOVIIE.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,





ton is His sole work ; and to Him alone
be all the praise,

4. The Lord’s works are accomplished
tn accordance with His covenant. ‘‘ He
hath remembered His mercy and His
truth toward the house of Israel.”
“Loving - kindness . . . faithfulness,’
the two attributes expressive of God’s
covenant relation to His people,”—
Perowne, ‘The salvation wrought by
the Lord is in fuifilment of His gracious
purposes and promises, His word can-
not fail, His promises are gloriously
reliable. He promises to save “ whoso-
ever believeth,” and He will do so. He
has covenanted “to save them to the
uttermost that come unto God by Him,”
and He will keep His covenant for ever,

5. The Lord’s works are accomplished
for the good of the whole human race.
“ All the ends of the earth have seen the
salvation of our God.” Not for the Jews
alone is salvation wrought, but for all
peoples. Christ “died for ali.” Sal-
vation is suited to the needs of all men ;
our Lord commissioned His Church to
proclaim it to all; and it is free for all.
Salvation is for man as man, without
distinction of nationality or race, &e

Here, then, we have surely the most
exce!lent reasons for exultation.

Il. Exultation with the fullest ex-


pression. Verses 4-6, The expres-
sion should be—
1, Joyful. ‘Make a joyful noise


unto the Lord, and rejoice.” Salvation
is a source of joy, and should be cele
brated in glad songs.

2. Hearty. ‘Make a loud noise,”
“The word here used is expressive of
irrepressible joy.” Our praise for sal-
vation should be the full-toned utter-
ance of thankful and rejoicing hearts,

3. Religious. “ Sing praise, sing unto
the Lord . .
Psalm . . . before the Lord, the King.”
The praise is to God ; the exultation is
because of His wondrous works; the
song is sacred as well as triumphant,
reverent as well as loud,

4, With all suitable aids. “With
the harp, with trumpets and sound of
cornet.” “ Trumpets,” Chatzotzeroth, the
straight trumpets used by the priests
for giving signals (Num. x. 2-10; 1

98


. with the voice of a”


Chron. xv. 24-28), “Cornet,” shophar,
a loud sounding instrument, made of
the horn of aram or of a chamois (some-
times of an ox), and used by the Jews
for announcing the Jubilee (Lev. xxv.
9), for proclaiming the new year, for
the purposes of war (Jer. iv. 5-19), and
for the sentinels at the watch towers to
give notice of the approach of an enemy
(Ezek, xxxiii. 4, 5). The joy of salva-
tion is so yreat that words and human
voices are inadequate to express it, and so
various musical instruments were used as
aids in its expression, Our celebration of
the great things which the Lord hathdone
for us should be with such intense and
ardent affection that all means will seem
inadequate duly to express that affection,
IIL Exultation in the widest ex-
tent. Verses 7-9, In verses 7 and 8
the Psalmist calls for universal praise ;
and in verse 9 he gives the reason for it.
(See remarks on Ps. xcvi. 11-13). “As
the whole creation, both animate and
inanimate, has groaned beneath the
weight of the curse, so shall the whole
creation partake of the great deliver-
ance,” and unite in the exultant cele-
bration, ‘The Psalm,” says Barnes,
“calls for universal praise. The very
reading of the Psalm, so joyous, so
jubilant, so animated, so exalting, is
fitted to awaken the mind to praise ; to
rouse it to thankfulness; to fill it with
joy. One cannot read the Psalm with-
out being a happier man ; without being
lifted above the world ; without lofty
views of God ; without a feeling that He
is worthy of this universal praise ; without
recognising that we are in a world where
the mind should be joyful; that we are
under the dominion of a God whose rei
should fill the mind with gladness.”
Conctusion,—1. Are we by faith per-
sonally interested in the salvation which
Christ has wrought ? Do we know Him
as our Saviour? 2. Are we REJOICING tn
His salvation? Salvation should fill our
hearts with music and our mouths with
song. 3. Are we doing all in our power
to diffuse throughout the world the know-
ledge of the Lord Christ and His salva-
tion? Let us never cease from our evan-
gelistic efforts till “all the ends of the
earth have seen the salvation of our God.”


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


PSALM XOIX,


RN ne ae ne ip ogc asa ean eumemdnnoniesmninceinns


PSALM XOIX.


INTRODUCTION.


This Psalm is one of the eeries of Psalms which celebrate the Kingship of Jehovah. ® All
these Psalms,” says Perowne, “ alike tell of the setting up of a Divine kingdom upon earth. All
alike anticipate the event with joy. One universal anthem bursts from the whole wide world
to greet the advent of the righteous King, Not Zion only and the daughters of Judah are


glad, but the dwellers in far-off islands and the ends of the earth,
the sea thunders her welcome, the rivers clap their hands, the


sympathises with the joy;


Even inanimate nature


trees of the wood break forth into singing before the Lord, In all these Psalms alike the joy
springs from the same source, from the thought that on this earth, where might has so
long triumphed over right, a righteous King shall reign, a kingdom shall be set up which shall
be a kingdom of righteousness, and judgment, and truth.

“In'this Psalm, not only the righteous sway of the King, but His awful holiness, forms the
subject of praise, and the true character of His worshippers aa consecrated priests, holy, set
apart for His service, is illustrated by the examples of holy men of old, like Moses, Aaion, and


Samuel.”


Tus Supremacy oF roe Lorp m rae CHURCH AND THE State,
(Verses 1-8.)


The Psalmist celebrates—

I. The supremacy of the Lord in
the Church. Verses 1-3,

1. The Lord dwells in the Church.
“He sitteth throned upon the cheru-
bim.” The sitting implies rest and
permanence; that Jehovah is not a
transient guest, but an abiding resident
there. “The Lord hath chosen Zion,
he hath desired it for His habitation.
This is My rest for ever; here will I
dwell, for I have desired it.” In a
special manner the Lord dwells in the
Church. He specially manifested Him-
self in the Holy of Holies in the Jewish
Temple, “ The Temple was the royal
palace, and the Holy of Holies was the
presence-chamber.” And in the Chris-
tian Church He is specially present.
Here He manifests the perfections and
glory of His character more fully than
elsewhere—(1) Jn the salvation of sin-
ners. (2) In the communications of His
grace which He makes to His people.
(See remarks on Ps, lxxvi. 2; lxxx. 1;
and Ixxxvii.)

2. Vhe Lord is Supreme in the Chureh.
“ The Lord reigneth ; He sitteth throned
upon the cherubim; the Lord is great
in Zion, and He is high above all the
people.” The Lord rules in His Church.
He is sovereign there. Hie will is


loyally obeyed there. And He is sup-


reme in the hearts of His people. He
has manifested His greatness in the
Church,—the greatness of His power,
wisdom, righteousness, and grace. And
He who rules in Zion rules in all the
nations of the earth. He is exalted
above all the peoples, The Psalmist
speaks of His “ great and terrible name,”
or, “great and fearful name.” The
Lord’s name is equivalent to the Lord
himself in His revealed holiness. His
name is “terrible” to His enemies,
“holy” to His people, “great” to both,
and should be held in awe and reverence
by all men, Let the Church of this age
ask herself two questions.

First. Does the Lord dwell in her
midst? Are the tokens of His presence
manifest? Are sinners converted to
Him? Do her members live as mem-
bers of a society in constant communica-
tion with and in the constant presence
of the Lord and King ?

Second. Js the Lord supreme in hert
In some Churches Acts of Parliament are
supreme, in others rigid creeds and for-
mule, in others respectability and
fashion, in others sacraments and cere-
monies. Oh, for the day when the
Lord Jesus Christ, in His spirit and
principles, shall be supreme in every
community of His professed followers !

IL The supremacy of the Lord in

99


OAL KCK.





pas TR


the state. Verses 4, 5. Two pro-
minent features of this supremacy are
mentioned by the Poet—

1. Power, “The King’s strength.”
“This verse, as regards construction, is
entirely dependent upon the preceding
one.”—Hengstenberg. Perowne says:
“ Others carry on the construction from
the last verse, taking the words ‘He
(or, it) is holy,’ as parenthetical, thus:
‘They shall praise Thy great and fear-
ful Name (it is holy), and the might of
the King who (or, which) loveth righte-
ousness.’ It must be confessed that,
but for the words of the refrain, which
it is awkward to take thus parentheti-
cally, the sense and the construction are
better preserved by this rendering.”
Christ is an almighty King both in
Himself, and in and for all who believe
in Him.

2, Righteousness, This is the great
thing. His strength is mentioned, be-
cause. it is perfectly righteous. His
omnipotence expresses itself only in


righteousness, We have here —(1)
Righteousness in the heart of tie
King. “Loveth judgment.” “He


loveth righteousness and judgment.”
“The Lord loveth judgment, and for-
saketh not His saints.” (2) Righteous-
ness in L/ts legislation, ‘Thou dost
establish equity.” He has established
rectitude as the great eternal law of
His government. “The law is holy.”
(3) Righteousness tm His administra-
tion. “Thou executest judgment and
righteousness in Jacob.” Under the
reign of Jehovah the executive is as just
as the legislative. All the laws and all
the administration tend to the establish-
ment of righteousness,

Learn here the Divine idea of reli-
gion in the state. The government of
@ country is religious when the king
rules in righteousness, when Parliament
strives to abolish all unrighteous laws
and to enact righteous ones, when magi-
strates and judges seek to administer


‘


100


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMB.


the laws justly, and when venality and
corruption are swept from all its de-
partments and offices,

There is one feature in the relation
of the King both to the Church and to
the State which is brought into pro-
minence, viz., Hts Holiness. ‘ He ia
holy.” Charnock well says: ‘As His
holiness seems to challenge an excellency
above all His other perfections, so it is
the glory of all the rest; as it is the
glory of the Godhead, so it is the glory
of every perfection in the Godhead ; aa
His power is the strength of them, se
His holiness is the beauty of them... .
As sincerity is the lustre of every grace
in a Christian, so is purity the splen-
dour of every attribute in the Godhead,
His justice is a holy justice, His wisdom
a holy wisdom, His arm of power a
‘holy arm,’ His truth or promise a ‘ holy
promise.’ ‘Holy and true’ go hand in
hand. ‘His name,’ which signifies all
His attributes in conjunction, is holy,’ ”

ITI. The holy supremacy of the Lord
as a reason for worship. ‘Let them
praise Thy name ; for it is holy. Exalt
ye the Lord our God, and worship at
His footstool ; for He is holy.” Holiness
is the summation of all moral perfec-
tions ; therefore we should worship the
Lord. He is supreme not only in posi-
tion, but in character; therefore we
should adore Him. We should exalt
Him—

1. With reverent fear. “Let the
people tremble ; let the earth be moved.”
Amyraldus points out that the fear
which proceeds from simple reverence,
as well as that which arises from appre-
hension of evil, produces trembling. So
the first verse may apply to the Church
as well as to the world. With awe ap-
proach THR Hoty Onr,

2. With profound humility. “ Wor-
ship at His footstool.” As weak and
dependent creatures, and especially as
sinful creatures, it behoveth us to draw


near to Him with deep self-abasement,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


‘PSALM XCIZ,


rr


Examries or raz Hory Sovereienty or Gop AND THE BECOMING
Worsuip oy His Peoria


(Verses 6-9..


The connection of these verses with
the foregoing is not very clear. It is
not easy to trace with certainty the con-
tinuity or the relation of thought. The
relation suggested by Perowne seems to
us the most probable with which we are
acquainted, ‘“ The great subject of the
Psalmist’s praise is the holiness of God.
It is a holy God whom he calls upon all
men to worship, It is ‘a holy foot-
stool,’ ‘a holy mountain,’ before which
they bow down ; it is therefore a holy
worship which they must render, Such
was the worship of His saints of old:
and then likewise Jehovah manifested
His holiness both in ‘ forgiving’ and in
‘taking vengeance.’” Consider—

I. The examples of the becoming
worship of man. “Moses and Aaron
among His priests, and Samuel,” &c, Of
these Aaron only was a priest in the
usual acceptation of the term. But
Moses discharged the priestly duties
before Aaron entered upon his office
(Exod. xl. 22-27), and he consecrated
Aaron and hissons, Samuelalso exercised
priestly functions (1 Sam. ix. 12, 13;
and vii. 9). But the feature of the
priestly office which is here brought into
view is intercession, calling upon God.
“Among them that call upon His
name,” is an explanation of ‘‘ among
His priests.” Examples of this calling
upon God in intercession by Moses are
recorded in Exod. xvii. 11, 12; xxxii,
80-32; Ps, cvi. 23; and by Samuel, 1
Sam. vii. 8, 9; xii. 16-19, 25. Anda
signal example of the efficacy of Aaron’s
intercession is recorded in Num, xvi.
47, 48. These distinguished saints
worshipped God—

1. In earnest prayer, Intercessions
and pleadings such as theirs—so bold,

et so reverent; so confident, yet so
Tblece: breatly honour the Lord.
Their living faith in Himself and their
sincere and deep trust in His mercy
were well-pleasing to Him. “He that
cometh to God must believe that He is,


and that He is a rewarder of them that
diligently seek Him,”

2. In holy lives. “They kept His
testimonies and the ordinances that He
gave them,” They gave to God the
praise not only of the lip, but of the
life “Thanksgiving is good, but
thanks-living is better.” A holy life is
the true expression of a reverent heart,
The worship of a holy life excels the
purest and most reverent worship of
prayer and praise; because (1) it is
constant, and (2) it is more influential.

Let us imitate these high examples
of worship.

Ii. The examples of the holy sove-
reignty of God. ‘‘ He answered them.
He spake unto them in the cloudy pil-
lar. Thou answeredst them, O Lord our
God,” &c. The Lord’s holy sovereignty
was manifest in His answers to the
prayers of His servants. He answered
them—

1. By His communications unto them.
“He spake unto them in the cloudy
pillar.” These words are strictly appli-
cable only to Moses and Aaron. But
the cloudy pillar may be taken as a
figurative expression denoting Divine
revelation generally, taken from one of
its original forms. The Lord frequently
communicated with Moses (Exod. xvi.
10-12; xxiv. 15-18, e¢ al) and with
Aaron (Num, xii. 5-8), Moreover the
Lord often spoke to Samuel, Even in
childhood the voice of the Lord was
addressed to him; and He continued to
communicate with him through a long
life, In thus responding to the wor-
ship of His servants the Lord mani-
fested His gracious condescension, &c.

2. By granting the forgiveness for
which they pleaded. ‘Thou wast a God
that forgavest them.” These ancient
saints interceded with the Lord on be-
half of the sinful people, when His
wrath was kindled against them (Exod.
xxxii, 11-14, 31,32; Num. xvi, 47, 48;
1 Sam. vii. 9), and in answer to their


101


POALM XOMX.





prayers He forgave the sins of the
people. In their own personal history
there are no remarkable examples of
the forgiving mercy of the Lord; but
there are in their intercessions for the
people. The Divine supremacy is merci-
ful and gracious. The King has “no
pleasure in the death of the wicked ;
but that the wicked turn from his way
and live.” Ps

3. By inflicting judgment on theur evil
doings. ‘Thou tookest vengeance of
their inventions,” or “doings.” There
is perhaps an allusion here to the punish-
ment of the whole adult population of
Israel for their murmurings and rebel-








HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALME.





lions. In that portion of their history
we see the intercession (Num. xiv. 13-
19), the forgiveness (20, 21), and the
judgment (22, 23). Thus God mani-
feated His grace in hearing prayer, His
mercy to the offenders, His anger against
sin, aud His holiness in all.

Conc.usion.—1l. How holy are all
the doings of God / Holiness has been
defined ‘the symmetry of the soul ;”
and all the attributes and operations of
God are gloriously symmetrical, they
harmonise ; the harmony is holiness.

2. How great is the power of prayer /
“Prayer is the slender nerve that
moveth the muscles of Omnipotence.”


PagpoN wiTHd PUNISHMENT,
(Verse 8.)


“Thou wast a God that forgavest
them, though Thou tookest vengeance
of their inventions.”

A very great and grave mistake about
the whole relations of forgiveness and
retribution, and about the whole cha-
racter of that Divine nature from which
they both flow, is implied and concen-
trated, as it were, in that little word
“though.” It is no part of the original
Psalm, and the rendering is a case of
interpretation, rather than of translation,
What the Psalm says is this: “Thou
wast a God that forgavest them, and
Thou tookest vengeance of their inven-
tions.” There is no apparent antagon-
ism here even hinted at between pardon,
forgiveness, and punishment, but they
are both regarded as parts of one great
whole, and as flowing from the holy love
of God, which the whole Psalm cele-
brates.

“Vengeance”! The modern notion
attached to revenge is by no means to
be found in the word which is here em-
ployed. What the Old Testament meant
by vengeance is precisely that public
justice to which the modern notion of
revenge is diametrically opposed.

Notice, —

I, That forgiveness is, at bottom,
the undisturbed communication of the
love of God to sinfulman. Weare far
too apt to think that God pardons men

103


in the fashion in which the sovereign
pardons a culprit who has been sen-
tenced to be hanged. Such pardon im- _
plies nothing as to the feelings of either
the criminal or the monarch. ‘There
need neither be pity on the one side nor
penitence on the other. ‘The true idea
of forgiveness is to be found not in the
region of law only, but in the region of
love and Fatherhood. The forgiveness
of God is over and over again set forth
in Scripture as being—a father’s forgive-
ness, “ Your heavenly Father will for
give you your trespasses.” Let us re-
member our own childhood, our chil-
dren, and how we do with them. ....
Not putting up the rod, but taking your
child to your heart, is your forgiveness,
The blessing of forgiveness is not fully
comprehended when it is thought of as
shutting up some outward hell, or the
quenching of its flames. It goes much
deeper than this, and means the un-
troubled communion of love and delight
between the reconciled father and the
repentant child. The slave may dread
the rod, but the child dreads the father’s
closed heart. And pardon is the open
heart of God, full of love, unaverted by
any consequences of my sin, unciosed by
any of my departures from Him.

II. That such pardon does neces-
Mary sweep away the one true
penalty of sin, I have been maintgin-


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS,





ing that the proper notion of pardon is
not the removal of penalty, and that is
absolutely true if you think of penalty
only as being external and arbitrarily
inflicted. But it is not true when we
come into the spiritual region. What
is the penalty of sin? “The wages of
sin is death.” What is “death”? The
wrenching away of a dependent soul
from God. How is that penalty ended %
When the soul is united to God in
the threefold bond of trust, love, and
obedience. The communication of the
love ts the barring of the hell. The
one true penalty of sin is to be torn
asunder from God by our own evil de-
sires, and therefore the outflow of His
love to us sinners is really the cancelling
of the sorest penalty and true wages of
unrighteousness. The real penalty passes
away where the love is welcomed and
received.

III. That the pardoning mercy of
God leaves many penalties unremoved.
“Thou forgavest them, and Thou
tookest vengeance of their inventions.”
Forgiveness and punishment are both
parts of one process, they both come
from one source, the One heart which
is all holiness and all love. Let me re-
mind you of historical illustrations that
may help to bring this idea out a little
more clearly, Aaron, see Num. xx. 24 ;
Moses, see Dent. xxxii. 48-51; David,
see 2 Sam. xii. 7-14. The old state-
ment, “ Whatsoever a man soweth that
shall he also reap,” is absolutely true,
universally true. God loves us too
well, not to punish His children when
they sin, and He loves us too well to
annihilate, were it possible, the secondary
consequences of our transgressions. The
two sides of the one truth must both be
recognised—that the deepest and the
primary penalties of our evil, which are
separation from God, and the painful
consciousness of guilt, are swept away


—and, also, that other results are allowed
to remain, which, being allowed, may be
blessed and salutary for the transgres-
sors. If you waste your youth, no re-
pentance will send the shadow back
upon the dial, or recover the ground lost
by idleness, or restore the constitution
shattered by dissipation, or give again
the resources wasted upon vice, or bring
back the fleeting opportunities.

IV. That pardoning love so modifies
the punishment that it becomes an
occasion for solemn thankfulness,
Whatever painful consequences of past
sin may still linger about our lives, or
haunt our hearts, we may be sure of two
things about them all—that they come
from Forgiving Mercy, that they come
for our profit. 1t is no harsh,—no, nor
even only a righteous Judge who deals
with us. We are chastened by a Father's
hand, ‘ When we are judged, we are
chastened of the Lord, that we should
not be condemned.” The stroke of con-
demnation will never fall upon our par-
doned hearts. That it may not, the
loving strokes of His discipline must
needs accompany the embrace of His
forgiveness, And so the pains change
their character, and become things to be
desired, to be humbly welcomed, to be
patiently borne and used, and even to
be woven into our hymns of praise,

Brethren ! you know where and how
the pardon is to be found. In Christ
is all the Divine forgiveness treasured.
Trust in Him, and there is no condem-
nation for you.

You have before you an alternative—
either you will be separated from your
sins by God’s pardon in Christ and
God’s chastisement of love; or, clutch-
ing your sins, refusing to let Him cast
them all away, you will be separated by
them utterly from God, and so fall into
the death which is the wages and punish-
ment of sin.—A. Afaclaren, D.D.


PSALM QO


’ INTRODUCTION.
This Pealm completes the series of Royal Psalms, and *‘may be regarded as the Doxology


which closes the strain.
the same gladness; it ia fi


We find lingering in it notes of the same great harmony.
iled with the same hope. that all nations shall bow down befors


Jehovah, and confess that He is God. ”__. Perowne.


It breathes


103


PRALM OG


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


Of all the Psalms in the collection this rises to the highest pitch of gladness; {t breathes


the broadest spirit of charity, and expresses the highest mood of devout joy.


On the ground


of our common humanity as the children of the one Creator-Father, all men are summoned to


the exultant worship of the Lord.


The superscription to the Psalm is mind a e)i0) , “A Psalm of praise,” Luther: ‘A


Psalm of thanksgiving.”


Perowne: ‘A’ Psalm for the thank-offering.” . . » ** To denote


that the Pealm was to be sung during the offering of thank-offerings,”


A Psaum or UNIVERSAL PRAISE,


We have here—

L The reasons of praise to the
Lord. These are of two classes—

1. Because of what He 1s in Himself.
“The Lord He is God,” is the grand
reason, ‘The gods of the nations were
idols, vanities, nonentities. Jehovah is
God, supremely great, supremely good ;
the self-existent, the fountain of being
and well-being, the infinitely perfect
and ever-blessed God. Therefore He
should be praised. It is right and
seemly that mental and moral greatness
should be reverenced, that goodness
should be loved, &. But the Poet
states some particulars of His character,

(1.) He ts good, ‘The Lord is good.”
“Heis benevolent.” Barnes. “Gracious,
kind.”—Perowne. ‘The word never
means kind ; and this sense is expressly
excluded here by the circumstance that
it is not only the mercy of the Lord;
but also His faithfulness towards those
who have received His promises, that
appears here as the expression of His
goodness. For the last two propositions
are merely the development of the
first.”—Hengstenberg. Fuerst gives the
primary meaning of JS), as xardg,
pulcher, beautiful. It seems to us that
the Poet intends to include in this word
“ good” all the meanings given above,
The Lord is gracious and righteous,
just and merciful, faithful and almighty,
Infinite perfection and beauty are His,
“To say that God is in Himself a com-
pacted universe of sweetnesses, beauties,
and splendours, is to speak very un-
worthily, for endless universes lie hidden
in the bosom of the Infinite nature.
The heavens must improve, and the
creatures must mature, in wisdom and
holiness, yet for ages of ages, before
they will be capable of reflecting the
higher, not to say the highest, beauties
of ‘the hie of lights.’ Beauty is the

1


robe of holiness: the more holiness the
more beauty. To all eternity we can
imagine the first and loveliest of all
God’s creatures praying: ‘Let the
beauty of the Lord our God be upon
us.” A being of such spiritual excel-
lence should receive the heartiest, holiest
praise of all creatures,

(2.) He ts merciful. “ His mercy is
everlasting.” This is included in His
goodness, God’s goodness in forgiving
offenders and relieving sufferers we de-
nominate His mercy. God’s mercy is
His goodness in relation to sinners,
This mercy is everlasting. The glorious
results of it will be enjoyed for ever.
Being sinners we should praise Him
for His mercy.

(3.) He is faithful, “His truth en-
dureth to al] generations.” He ts true
in Himself. “A God of truth, and
without iniquity, just and right is He.”
He ts true in His dealings with others.
He fulfils all His promises, And He
will be true for ever. No changes, how-
ever great, can produce any change in
Him. Here then we have another reason
for praise,

2. Because of what He ts in relation
to others. ‘‘ He hath made us, and not
we ourselves,” dc. (1) He made us
His people. He is our Creator. He
called us into being. But the Psalmist
Means more than that, as will be seen
if we read the verse without the words
interpolated by the translators: “He
hath made us, and not we ourselves,
His people.” Not merely has He
created us, but He has made us what
we are, viz., His people. “By grace
are ye saved through faith; and that
not of yourselves: it is the gift of God:
not of works, lest any man should boast,
For we are His workmanship, created
in Christ Jesus unto good works.” (2)
He shepherds us as His people. “The


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


PSALM 6.


SY Se Se a a A ae a


sheep of His pasture.” ‘The Lord is
my shepherd.” As a shepherd He rules,
guides, protects, and provides for His
people. It is theirs to trust, follow, and
obey Him. (See outlines on Ps. lxxvii. 20;
Ixxx. 1.) Here we have most sufficient
reasons for praise. He has made us
what we are; and He will not forget
the work of His own hands, or fersake
His people. He knows us intimately,
and cares for us, and provides for us, as
the shepherd for his sheep. And He is
supremely good, and merciful, and true ;
and He is so through all ages and
through all changes. Surely then it
becomes us to praise Him with glad and
grateful hearts,

Il. The extent of praise to the


Lord. ‘All ye lands.” Literally, as
in the margin: All the earth.” Not
simply the Jew, but all people. The


Lord is the Creator and Sustainer of all
men; the bountiful Benefactor of all
men ; therefore all should praise Him.
He is the Redeemer of all men. “He
died for all;” therefore by all should
His praise be celebrated. The glorious
day draws near when
“Barth, with her ten thousand tongues,
Shall fill His courts with sounding praise.”
III. The character of praise to the
Lord. It should be—
1. Joyous. “Make a joyful noise
unto the Lord.” Hengstenberg : “ Shout


Toe Sov ann Foy


for joy to the Lord.” Perowne; ‘ ‘Shout
aloud unto Jehovah:’ used of the wel-
come given to a king who enters his
capital, or takes possession of the throne,
as in xeviii, 46 ; Ixvi. 1.” “Serve the
Lord with gladness, come before His
presence with singing.” Our worship
of the Lord should be cheerful and song-
ful, the utterance of rejoicing hearts.
He is honoured by our joyous praise.
“‘ Cheerfulness credits religion.”

2. Grateful. ‘Enter into His gates
with thanksgiving, and into His courts
with praise; be thankful unto Him, and
bless His name.” The previous verse
contains abundant reasons for grateful
praise. And in this verse all nations
are invited to share in those glorious
privileges. “Bless the Lord, O my
soul; and forget not all His benefits.”

3. Practical. ‘Serve the Lord with
gladness.” “By serving Him here we
are not to understand merely the wor-
ship of God.” Weserve Him by loyally
obeying His commands, &c. Such ser-
vice we should render spontaneously,
heartily, joyously. “Thy statutes have
been my song,” &e.

Conotusion,—* The great lesson of
the Psalm is this,” says Mr. S. Cox,
“Be unselfish and catholic towards
man, trustful and reverent towards God,
and pure, deep, religious joy will be
yours,”


or BEING UNHAPPY.


(Verse 2.)


“Serve the Lord with gladness.”

Let us consider the sin and folly of
being unhappy, especially of rendering
unhappy service to God. His yoke is
easy, and His burden light.

I, God is happy. He is the blessed
God, in whom are the fountains of all
gladness, Hence that expression, “ the
joy of God,” is one denoting the joy that
is sx God, even more than the joy He
gives. Christ was a man of sorrows
during His earthly life, because He was
bearing our sins. But He sorrowed
that we might not sorrow, but rejoice.
He served the Father in sorrow, that we


wight serve Him with gladness.


II. The angels are happy. They
are the blessed angels. They only know
what sorrow is by seeing it in us when
they come to minister to us. They
drink always of the rivers of pleasures,
which are at the right hand of God.
Sometimes their joy rises higher, as
when they shouted for joy over the
new-made world, or a8 when they are
called on to join in the joy of God over
one sinner that repenteth. They serve
the Lord with gladness.

Ill. Forgiven men are happy. This
is David’s testimony: ‘‘ Blessed is the
man whose transgression is forgiven.”
These are a twofold ciass—(1) those


FOAL G.


who have departed aud are with Christ;
(2) those who are still here Of that
latter section of redeemed men we say
they are happy, though imperfect, be-
cause they are forgiven. ‘hey are in
an evil world, and have much evil with-
in them — many trials, sore warfare,
great feebleness,—yet they are happy.
Why? Because forgiven, The favour
of God rests on them. They know it,
and find that in His favour is life, Be-
ing forgiven, and knowing this, they
serve the Lord with gladness.

It would appear, then, not only that
there is happiness in heaven with God
and the holy angels, but that there is
happiness here on earth, and that we
may be partakers of it. The basis and
the beginning of that happiness must
be the forgiveness of sins and the
favour of God. These are attainable ;
they are presented to us as free gifts;
we are besought to accept them ; we
cannot reject them without sinning.
Let me notice then—

L We can only be unhappy by re-
fusing pardon. ‘I'he pardon is provided,
and it is preached to the sons of men—
(1) It is a free pardon; (2) a righteous
pardon ; (3) a present pardon; (4) a
comprehensive pardon, covering all sin ;
(5) it is to be had in simply believing
what God has told us about the pro-
pitiation of His Son... . Then must
not the absence of this pardon be the
fruit of our own rejection of it; and
not God's sovereignty or unwillingness }
We are unhappy, not simply because
we are sinful and foolish, but because
we are resolutely indulging in the sin
and folly of rejecting God’s gift, and so
of refusing to be happy.

II. We can only be unhappy by re-
fusing Christ. It is not Christ refusing
us (He never did so), but it is our refus-





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; PSALMS.





—


ing Christ, that keeps us unhappy. He
is God’s free gift to us; a gift which we
are not merely at liberty to accept, but
which we refuse at our peril. Persist-
ence in the rejection of Christ is the true
cause of all the unhappiness of earth.

ItI. We can only be unhappy by
determining not to turn. God says,
“Turn ye, turn ye; why will ye die?”
turn and live. It is vain for us to throw
the blame off ourselves, and say, “I
want to turn, but I cannot, and God
will not help me.” This is not true.
“T am most willing to be converted,
but God will not convert me,” is just as
if the drunkard were to say, “I am most
willing to give up drinking, but God
will not help me to be sober;” or the
swearer, “I am most anxious to cease
swearing, but I cannot, and God will
not give me the power.” Whatever,
then, the solemn truth of God’s sove-
reignty may be (and He would not be
God were He not Sovereign), it is not
that sovereignty that is hindering you
from turning, but your own determina-
tion not todo so. Your not turning is
the cause of your unhappiness; you
cannot be happy till you turn.

In like manner it is with all of us.
We might be always happy, were we
always receiving the gifts which Christ
presents to us; crediting the Divine
testimony as to the sufficiency of the
great sacrifice, and the freeness of the
great love.

Unhappiness thus is wilful
will not come to Me.” It profiteth
nothing. It does not liberate, or
strengthen, or sanctify, or comfort To
be unhappy is our folly and our sin.
When happy, no toil is irksome, no
trouble or annoyance is felt. Be happy
then in God, &e.—H. Bonar, D.D.—
Abridged from “ Light and Truth.”


“Ve


Taz ErernaL Trura or Gop.
(Verse 5, last clause.)


L God is true.

He ts true in His very nature. There is
no deceit, falsehood, norerror in the essen-
tial nature of God. Whatever makes men
untruthful, nothing of the kind can ope-
rate with God.

106


He is true to His nature. We are
not always true to ourselves, I have
known a generous man who, in a pet,
has acted very ungenerously. But the
Lord is always true to Himself,

He is true in action, He has been


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : PSALMS.





true to the making of the eternal cove-
nant,

He has been true to all His purposes.
Whatever God resolved to aes has
done. ‘“ Hath He said it, and shall He
not do it?”

He 1s true to His promises, There is
not a promise which God has made, but
what either He has kept it, or else, being
dated for the future, He will keep it
when the time appointed comes.

He ts true to all His published Word,
which He has made known te us in


PSALM Ol,





sustains, Asa King, a Judge, a Father,
a Friend, e¢ al.

He ts true to every man, to every
woman, in the world.

IL God is true in all generations.

He has been true in the past. The
whole of history, sacred and profane,
goes to prove that.

He ts true sttll—true to-night,

He will be true.

Since God is true, ye children of God,
why do ye mistrust Him? Ye sinners,
why do you belie Him by your unbelief ?


Holy Scripture, —C. H. Spurgeon.—A bridged,
He ts trus tm every relation that He ‘ad
PSALM OL
INTRODUCTION,


According to the superscription, this Pealm was composed by David. Three different times
im his life have been suggested as the occasion to which the Psalm refers, First, when, upen
the death of Saul, David began to reign in Hebron over Judah ; second, when he began to
reign ‘‘in Jerusalem over all Israel and Judah ;” and third, when he brought up the ark of the
Lord from the house of Obed-edom into the city of David, It is impossible to determine
which, or whether either of these suggestions, is correct. Perowne thinks that the Pealm was
written in the early part of David’s reign, whilst the ark was in the house of Obed-edom, The
Psalm has been entitled, ‘‘ The godly purposes and resolves of a king;” and “ Speculum
Regis,” a mirror for kings. Matthew Henry calle it “ The Householder’s Psalm.” In it David
gives us the rules which he laid down for the regulation of his household and court. In this
aspect the Psalm has a universal application; for the principles which are good in a palace
are good also in a cottage, and the virtues which adorn a peasant’s humble household will in-
erease the lustre of a king’s brilliant court.


A Piorurre or a Piovs Home.


voice of a Fathers Jove? For even


In this picture of a pious household
the Poet gives prominence to three of its
main features.

L Its worship. “I will sing of
mercy and judgment,” &c,

1. Praise for the Divine providence.
“J will sing of mercy and judgment,”
&c, Here are two ideas—(1) God's
providence ts varied in tts dispensations.
He visits us with both mercies and judg-
ments. He makes us acquainted with
“‘the dark and stormy day ;” and “ He
maketh us to lie down in green pastures,
and leadeth us beside the still waters.”
(2) God’s providence is benevolent tn tts
eharacter. Both “ mercy and judgment,”
rightly understood, are themes for praise.
“ What,” inquires Stowell, “is judg-
ment itself but mercy with a sterner
aspect? And what are the chidings of
Judgment but the sterner tones of the


jodgment is one of the ‘all things’ that
‘work together for good to them that
love God.’” :

2. Prayer for the Divine presence.
*¢Ob when wilt Thou come unto me?”
David longs for the presence and help
of God. ‘The question bursts forth
from the heart, moved and stirred to its
inmost centre, as it thinks of all the
height and depth of that resolve to
‘walk in a perfect way.’ How shall a
frail son of man keep his integrity $
The task is too great for his own
strength, honest and sincere as the
resolution is, and therefore he cries,
‘When wilt Thou come unto me ?’—
come to be my abiding guest—come not
only to dwell in Zion, in Thy tabernacle,
but with me Thy servant, in my house
and in my heart, giving me the strength

107


PALM Ol,


HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY: PSALME.








and the grace that I need.”—Perowne.
Great and blessed is the influence of
family worship, Thrice blessed is the
home in which the presence of God is
graciously realised,

IL, Its head, The head of the
family, as sketched by the Poet, mani-
fests—

1. Cireumspectness of conduct. “TI
will behave myself wisely in a perfect
way.” ‘And David behaved himself
wisely in all his ways; and the Lord
was with him.” He resolves to exercise
“‘ prudence, not sapience ; not wise con-
templation, but wise action. It is not
wise thoughts, or wise speaking, or wise
writing, or wise gesture and counten-
ance, will serve the turn, but wise be-
haviour: the former are graceful, but
the other needful.” It behoves heads of
families to ‘‘ walk circumspectly.”

2. Integrity of heart. “J will walk
within my house with a perfect heart.”
Literally : “ In the perfectness, or integ-
rity, of my heart.” Again he says:
“A froward heart shall depart from Me.”
Wpy = perverse, perverted ; with S53
(as here)=a corrupt heart.—Fuerst.
The heart in this place is the centre of
moral life, The Psalmist resolves not
to tolerate corruption in his heart; but
to walk within his house with an up-
right heart, “in the blamelessness of
his heart.” He who would order his
household wisely should cultivate purity
in his feelings, intentions, motives,

3. Righteousness of aim. “I will set
no wicked thing before mine eyes.”
Margin: “ Thing of Belial.” Perowne :
“ Vile thing, lit. ‘thing of villany.’ The
noun is that which is wrongly rendered
in the A, V. of the historical books)
‘ Belial,’ as if it were a proper name,
It is really a compound noun meaning
‘that which profiteth not.’” The head
of the pious home will not entertain
evil projects, or follow wicked aims, or
imitate morally worthless examples,
When the aims of the head of a house-
hold are righteous and noble, and are
worthily followed, his influence in this
respect is unspeakably and immeasur-
ably good.

4, Hatred of evil. “T hate the work
of them that turo aside; it shall not

108


cleave to me.” Perowne: “I hate the
sin of unfaithfulness.” The idea of the
words, and also of, “I will not know a
wicked person,” is hatred of evil, Sin
he abhors. ‘“ Hatred of sin is a good
sentinel for the door of virtue.” The
Psalmist knew that he might be tempted,
but resolved that he would not yield to
temptation, Evil might be presented
to him, but it should not cleave unto
him. He refuses to listen to the sug
gestions of the tempter, and frees him.
self from his hold. Such are the out-
lines of the portrait of the head of a
pious home. This is how he appears
in his own family. ‘“ How fares it
with your family? Do you sing in the
choir and sin inthechamber? Are you
a saint abroad and a devil at home?
For shame! What we are at home,
that we are indeed. He cannot be a
true saint whose habitation is a scene
of strife, nor he a faithful minister
whose household dreads his appearance
at the fireside.”— Spurgeon.

III. Its servants. Verses 5-7. We
have here—

1. The rejected, These comprehend
three classes. (1) Zhe Slanderer.
“ Whoso privily slandereth his neigh-
bour, him will I cut off.” ‘In order
to constitute slander,” says Robertson,
“it is not necessary that the word
spoken should be false—half truths are
often more calumnious than whole false-
hoods. It is not even necessary that a
word should be distinctly uttered; a
dropped lip, an arched eyebrow, a
shrugged shoulder, a significant look, an
incredulous expression of countenance,
nay, even an emphatic silerce, may
do the work ; and when the light and
trifling thing which has done the mis-
chief has fluttered off, the venom is
left behind, to work and rankle, to in-
flame hearts, to fever human existence,
and to poison human society at the
fountain springs of life.” The wise
householder will keep the slanderer out
of his family. The cowardice, malice,


and terribly pernicious influence of


siander are potent reasons for doing 20.
(2) The prowd, “Him that hath an
high look and a proud heart will not I
suffer.” Literally : ‘“ Whoso is wide of


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMB,


PeaLM SL


le Ss Se


heart,” ¢¢., inflated with pride, haughty,
arrogant. A man of overbearing con-
ceit and “ vaulting ambition” is foolish ;
he is ignorant, unreal, blown out with
empty pretensions, Hets wicked. Pride
is sin as well as folly. “ Every one
that is proud in heart is an abomination
to the Lord.” He is mischievous. “Only
by pride cometh contention.” There-
fore the haughty and ambitious are ex-
cluded from the pioushome. Humility
is essential both to piety and to peace.
(3) The deceiver. “He that worketh
deceit shall not dwell within my house,
he that telleth lies shall not tarry in my
sight.” Hebrew, as in margin: “ Shall
not be established.” Hengstenberg:
“Shall not continue beside me.”
“‘ Liars,” says Epictetus, “‘ are the cause
of all the sins and crimes in the world.”
From the pious home deceivers must be
excluded, whether they deceive by tell-
' ing lies or by acting lies, whether simu
lators or dissimulators, all insincere
persons must be kept without the sacred
precincts of the godly family.

2. The accepted. ‘‘ Mine eyes shall
be upon the faithful of the land, that
they may dwell with Me: he that
walketh in a perfect way, he shall serve
Me.” The servants of the pious home,
as described by David, are characterised
by (1) Fidelity. “The faithful of the
land ;” the true and trustworthy. It
is implied here that those who are
faithful to God will be faithful to man.
David says, “His eyes shall be upon
them.” “There is an eye of search, and
an eye of favour: the one is for the
seeking and finding them out, that they
may serve ; the other for countenancing
of their persons, and rewarding of their
service.” (2) Integrity. ‘He that
walketh in a perfect way.” This does
not signify a sinless or perfect man, but
one who is sincere and upright. There
is an obvious reference to the second
verse. The Psalmist would have for his
servants those who were actuated by the
same pure motives, and pursued the same
upright course as himself, “A godly


servant,” says Gurnall, “is a greater
blessing than we think on. He can
work, and set God on work also, for
his master’s good (Gen. xxiv. 12), ‘O
Lord God of my master Abraham, I
pray Thee, send me good speed this day,
and show kindness unto my master,’
And sure he did his master as much
eervice by his prayer as by his prudence
in that journey.”

IV. Ho who is the head of a pious
home will do his utmost to banish
wickedness from the world. This we
may fairly infer from the last verse.
Piety begins in the heart, extends to
the home, then goes out to bless the
world. ‘TI will early destroy,” says the
Psalmist, “ all the wicked of the land,”
&c. Perowne; “ Every morning will I
destroy,” &c. There is here probably
an allusion to the Eastern custom of
holding courts of justice in the morn-
ing. (2 Sam. xv. 2; Jer. xxi. 12;
Zeph. iii. 5.) The “every morning”
indicates the persistency of the efforts
of the Poet-King to uproot evil from
society. With unwearied zeal he would
seek to purge the land of its iniquities.

ConoLusion.—The Psalmist in this
Psalm sets us an example we shall do
well to imitate, 1. Jn his intolerance.
The Psalm “is full of a stern exclusive-
ness, of a noble intolerance, not against
theological error, not against uncourtly
manners, not against political insubor-
dination, but against the proud heart,
the high look, the secret slanderer, the
deceitful worker, the teller of lies,
These are the outlaws from king David's
court ; these are the rebels and heretics
whom he would not suffer to dwell in
his house or tarry in his sight.”— Deas
Stanley. Let us copy him in this re
spect, 2. In his piety. His was piety
in the heart, in the home, in the world
His religion was sincere and thorough,
Let us imitate him in this, especially in
showing piety at home. “To Adam,”
saya Hare, “ paradise was home. To
the good among his descendants, home


is paradise.”


PSALM CII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS





PSALM OIL


INTRODUCTION.


It is impossible to determine on what occasion and by whom this Psalm was composed,
Prof. Alexander and Hengstenberg regard it as s composition of David. But from internal
evidence, especially in verses 18-22, we should conclude that it was written during the Baby-
lonian exile, and probably near its close, when the faithful were animated by hopes of returning
shortly to their own land, It has been attributed to Nehemiah, Jeremiah, Daniel, and others
of the prophets of the period of the captivity. But attempts to determine the authorship of
the Psalm are vain, Perowne points out that the “ Psalm is clearly individual, not national,
and must have been intended for private rather than liturgical use, as the inscription seems
designed to inform us, This inscription is peculiar; it stands quite alone among the titles
prefixed to the Psalms, and marks the circumstances under which it should be used, In all
other instances the inscriptions are either musical or historical.” In the Epistle to the Hebrewa,
verses 25-27 of this Psalm are quoted as addressed to the Messiah,


Toe AFFLICTIONS OF LIFE AND THE ResouRcE oF THE GODLY.
The Superscription.


The superscription to this Psalm
suggests the following observations,—

I. Human life is characterised by
great afflictions. The text speaks of
“the afflicted, when he is overwhelmed.”
We are sometimes sorely distressed—

1. Jn ourselves, by reason of physical
disease and suffering, mental depression
and conflict, &,

2. In our families, by the sinful lives
of some of its members, ¢g., the pro-
digal son; by sorely straitened circum-
stances, by the bereavements of death,
do,


3. In our social circle, by the unfaith-
fulness of professed friends, &c,

4, In the Church, when its vitality
and power seem to decline, dc,

5. In the nation, by reason of national
sins, or calamities, or judgments, ¢g.,
the Jews in Babylon.

We do not speak of ordinary or trifling
afflictions, but of exceptional and severe
ones. The Psalmist speaks of himself
as “overwhelmed.” He was, as it were,
“covered with darkness, affliction, griaf,
His soul was enshrouded in gloom and
sorrow.” From such sufferings the true
and good are not exempt. Job, David,
Paul, e¢ al., are examples,

IL Great afflictions are characterised
by great needs. The Psalmist in his
sufferings felt a great need of utterance
of his trouble, He indicates this by the
words: “poureth out his complaint.”

110


His soul was full of affliction, like “
vessel overcharged with new wine of
strong liquor, that bursts for veut.”
Great sorrows must find expression, or
the brain would reel into madness, and
the heart would break or sink into
despair. The prayer of the Poet was
the cry of a bursting heart. In great
affliction we have need of patience, of
trust in God, of sustaining grace, de,
We obtain these by prayer.
** My ending ie despair,
Unless I be relieved by prayers


Which pierces so, that it assaults
Mercy itself, and frees all faults.”
—S


Il. In great afflictions the godly
man has a great resource. He pours
out his complaint before the Lord in
prayer.

1. The Lord hears the complaint of
His people (Ps. iv. 3; xxxiv, 4).

2. The Lord hears the complaint of
His people sympathetically. “The
Lord is very pitiful and of tender
mercy.”

3. The Lord graciously responds to
the complaint of His people. “Call
upon Me in the day of trouble: I will
deliver thee,” &c. His ear is ever
open; His heart always sympathetie;
His grace always all-sufficient, There-
fore, “Trust in Him at all times; ye
people, pour out your heart before Him
God is a refuge for us,”


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


Tae Lament oF a Distressep Parnrior.
(Verses 1-11.)


In these verses we have the wail of a
sadly: troubled soul. Let us consider
the miseries of the Poet as they are ex-
pressed in this bitter ery to the Lord.

IL His distress was very great.
This appears throughout the whole of
the lamentation, Every feature of the
distress makes manifest its intensity.
The more prominent of these features
we shall call attention to, In the
superscription he speaks of himself as
* gverwhelmed” with trouble, and in
verse 9, he says, “I have eaten ashes
like bread, and mingled my drink with
weeping.” He is smitten down to the
ground by the greatness of his grief, or,
like Job in his sore afflictions, he pro-
strates himself in dust and ashes by
reason of his great distress, and as an
expression of that distress, Persons in
great grief are frequently represented as
seated or prostrate on the ground.

“My grief’s so great,

That no supporter but the huge firm eart&

Can hold it up: here I and sorrow sit.”


—Shakespeare,

He uses another figure to express the
intensity of his misery. So full was
his heart of sorrow that his tears fell
copiously and constantly, so that they
were mingled with his drink. By his
posture and his tears he expresses the
depth of his distress,

IL. His distress was absorbing. ‘I
forget to eat my bread.” Many are the
recorded instances of persons in great
grief being altogether oblivious of meal-
time or of hunger. Grief takes away
the appetite for food. But that is not
the meaning of the Psalmist here. He
was so absorbed in grief, his distress
so completely engrossed his attention,
that everything else was forgotten (1
Sam. i. 7,8; xx. 34; Job. xxxiii. 20;
Ps. cvii. 18; Dan. vi. 18). His “sorrow
is so intentive to that it sorrows for, that
it cannot intend to think anything else.”
Great sorrows are so absorbing as to cause
those who are experiencing them to be
forgetful even of the needs of life.


DL His distress was consuming.


The Psalmist expresses this by several
figures, ‘“ My days are consumed like
smoke, and my bones are burned as an
hearth.” Hengstenberg and Perowne :
“Asa firebrand.” ‘The point of com-
parison with the smoke is the fleeing
past, the disappearing.” The bones are
mentioned as the most substantial part
of the body, and they were being con-
sumed asthe brand is when placed on
the fire. ‘My heart is smitten and
withered like grass.” Adam Clarke:
‘‘The metaphor here is taken from grass
cut down in the meadow. It is first
‘smitten’ with the scythe, and then
‘withered’ by the sun. Thus the Jews
were smitten with the judgments of
God; and they are now withered under
the fire of the Chaldeans.” ‘By reason
of the voice of my groaning, my bones
cleave to my skin.” Hengstenberg and
Perowne, literally: “‘ My bone cleaveth
to my flesh.” The expression describes
a state of weakness and relaxation of
the bones, brought on by severe pain,
in which they lose their force and power
of vigorous motion (Job xix. 20), The
Psalmist uses one other expression to set
forth the consuming nature of his dis-
tress, ‘ My daysare like a shadow that
declineth.” His time of life seemed to
him like the lengthening shades of even-
ing, which show the near approach of
night. The figure beautifully and
pathetically suggests the nearness of ad-
vancing death. To the Poet it seemed
that life was fast passing away under his
heavy afflictions,

IV. His distress was isolating. “I
am like a pelican of the wilderness, I
am like an owl of the desert,” dc. (verses
6,7). The pelican is a bird which dwells
in solitude far from the habitations of
men; it is most sombre and austere in
disposition, and is a most expressive
illustration of solitude and melancholy.
The “owl of the ruins” is also a striking
emblem of desolation.

‘From yonder ivy-mantied tower,
The moping owl does to the moon complain
Of such as, wand’ring near her secret bower,
Molest ber ancient solitary Mi


PsaLM OF.


“Sparrow” is not in this place a
good rendering of "ID¥, The sparrow
is not a solitary melancholy bird.
Naturalists state that the Blue Thrush
is the particular “iD¥, which sits
alone on the kouse-top. This bird is
of a dark blue colour. More than
a pair of them are scarcely ever seen
together. It is fond of sitting alone
upon the house-top, uttering its note,
which to a human ear is monoton-
ous and melancholy, Thus the Poet
represents the isolating power of his
miseries, Deep-rooted sorrow is natur-
ally reserved. ‘A small grievance
makes us beside ourselves ; a great sor-
row makes us retire within ourselves.”
— Richter.

V. His distress occasioned reproaches
from his enemies, ‘‘ Mine enemies re-
proach me all the day,” &. On the
reproaches of the enemies, see remarks
on Ps. xlii. 3. Perowne: “ ‘ dade
their oaths by me,’ t.e., when they curse,
choose ine as an example of misery, and
imprecate upon themselves or others my
misfortunes—say, ‘God do to me, to
thee, as He has done to this man.’”
And Hengstenberg: “‘ They swear by
me,’ inasmuch as they say, ‘May God
let it go with you as it does with that
miserable man’” (comp, Num. v. 21-27 ;
Jer, xxix. 22; Isa. Ixv. 15; Ps, xliv.
14), The distresses of the godly are
greatly aggravated when they are made
the occasion of revilings from their
foes,

VI. His distress was regarded as an
expression of the Divine anger. “ Be-
cause of Thine indignation and Thy
wrath ; for Thou hast lifted me up and
cast me down.” The figure of the second
clause is taken from a storm of wind,
which seizes and carries upward its ob-
ject, and then hurls it to the ground.
So God in wrath seemed to have seized
the Psalmist, borne him aloft, and then
dashed him down, In the opinion of
the Psalmist, it is sin which has thus
provoked the Lord toanger. It is note-
worthy, as Delitzsch points out, that the
two nouns “ indignation” and ‘ wrath ”
are in the Hebrew the strongest which
the language possesses. It is true that
the Chaldean captivity was permitted by

112


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMB.





God, because His people by their heinous
and oft-repeated sins had provoked Him
to anger. The Chaldeans were uncon-
sciously the instruments by which He
effected His purpose to chastise His
faithless people. But we are not to
suppose that in individual cases the
meaaure of suffering indicates the mea-
sure of sin and ill-desert. The bitterest
ingredient in the miseries of the Poet
arose from his impression that those
miseries were the expression of the
Divine anger.

VII. His distress was not hopeless,
He lifted his troubled soul to God in
prayer (verses 1, 2). He prays for,—

1. Divine audience. “Hear my
prayer, O Lord, and let my cry come
unto Thee. . . . Incline Thine ear
unto me.” (See remarks on Ps, Ixxxviii.


2. Divine acceptance, ‘ Hide not Thy
face from me.” (See remarks on Ps,
xxvii. 9; lxix.17.) It is a request that
God would look favourably upon him,
and regard his supplications,

3. Divine and speedy answer. “In
the day when I call answer me speedily.”
The Psalmist believed in answers to
prayer, and immediate ones too, Such
urgency of prayer, when united with
humility and patience, is well pleasing
to God.

The patriotic Poet was sore troubled
and distressed ; but he was neither de-
stroyed nor despairing. The night was
dark, but the stars were not all
quenched,

VIIL His distress was patriotic.
If we understand the Psalm aright, the
Psalmist does not lament his own woes
merely, but the woes of his people, the
desolation of his country, and the ruins
of their temple.


“Fallen is thy throne, O Israel |

Silence ig o’er thy plaina;

Thy dwellings all lie desolate,
Thy children weep in chaing!

Where are the dews that fed thee
On Etham’s barren shore ¢

That fire from heaven which led thee
Now lights thy path no more,


“Lord! Thou didst love Jerusalem-~
Once she was all Thy own;
Her love Thy fairest heritage
Her power Thy glory’s throne.


AHOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


——_—- —_.-


Pill evil eame and blighted
Thy long-loved olive-tree ;
And Salem’s shrines were lighted
For other gods than Thee.”—Moore,





These were the woes which distressed
the Psalmist. His was no selfish grief ;





but the sorrow of a pstrictic, philan-
thropic, and godly soul.

Conciusion.—While God continues
to hear and answer prayer, we may hope
for deliverance even from the deepest
distressea,


Tse Hors or a Distressep Parsion
(Verses 12-22.)


Consider—

L The object of his hope. What
is it that the troubled and patriotic Poet
hopes for 4

1. For the rebuilding of the Temple.
“ Thou shalt arise, and have mercy upon
Zion. When the Lord shall build up
Zion, He shall appear in His glory.”
The Temple which had stood upon Zion
was now in ruins, To the pious and
patriotic Jew, of all places in his Father-
land, Jerusalem was the most highly
esteemed, and of all places in Jeru-
salem the Temple upon Zion was the
holiest and dearest. Hence the great
longing for the rebuilding of the Temple
and the restoration of its services.

2. For the emancipation of the cap-
tives. “To hear the groaning of the
prisoner; to loose those that are ap-
pointed unto death.” By “ the prisoner ”
we understand the whole nation, whose
captivity is looked upon as an imprison-
ment. ‘Those that are appointed unto
death,” or “‘the sons of death,” “ may
mean either those who were sentenced
to death; those who were sick and
ready to die; or those who, in their
captivity, were in such a state of priva-
tion and suffering that death appeared
inevitable.”—Barnes. The verse clearly
points out the emancipation of the cap-
tives as one of the great objects desired
and hoped for.

3. The restoration of the people to their
own land and worship, They longed
to “declare the name of the Lord in
Zion, and His praise in Jerusalem,” and
to “ gather together to serve the Lord.”
The pious Jews longed to assemble again
in the city of their fathers, and there
celebrate the worship of the Lord their
God as in former days.

To the truly religious man the loss


Yok.


of national independence is great, sub-
jection to foreign rule is a galling yoke;
but the loss of religious privileges is felt
to be far greater, and the desire for their
recovery will be more intense than for
the recovery of national independence.

IL The ground of his hope. In
whom does the troubled and patriotic
Poet hopef Has he a good reason for
his hope §

1. Jt ts directed to God. Verses 12,
13, 16, 19. He hopes that God will
interpose on behalf of His captive and
afflicted people. For a long time it
had seemed as though God regarded
them not, but the Psalmist is confident
that He is now interested in their wel-
fare. From His holy height He was in-
tently viewing them; and speedily He
would arise and have mercy upon them.
When our hope in all others fail, we
may yet hope in God.

2. It rests in His character and per
fections, (1) In His eernal and un
changeable sovereignty. ‘‘ Thou, O Lord,
shalt endure for ever; and Thy remem-
brance unto all generations.” Heng-
stenberg: ‘‘Thou, O Lord, art en-
throned for ever, and Thy memorial
from generation to generation.” The
sitting,” he says, “fis no empty remain-
tng, but a sitting as king, a sitting on
a throne” (comp. Ps, ix. 7; xxix. 10).
And Perowne: “Thou, O Jehovah,
sittest throned for ever, and Thy memo-
rial is to all generations.” In this
thought the Psalmist found his great
consolation. His own life might pass
away, generations of men might pass
away; but the Lord would never pass
away. Man and his fortunes may
change, and all earthly things may ap-
pear unstable; but the Lord changes
not, and Bis throne is stable and per-


113


FUALM GFR,





manent. He is eternally and unchange-
ably supreme, and the covenanted God
and helper of His people, (2) Jn His
mercy. ‘Thou shalt arise, and have
mercy upon Zion; for it is time to
favour her.” The hope of deliverance
is built upon the grace of God. The
misery of their condition would move
the mercy of His disposition. (3) Jn
His regard for prayer “He will re-
gard the prayer of the destitute, and
“not despise their prayer.” Perowne :
“He hath turned to the prayer of the
poor-destitute.” He adopts the render-
ing of the P. B. V., “ poor-destitute,”
“because the word expresses utter
nakedness and destitution.” The Psal-
mist represents himself and others as
entirely destitute of all human means
of help, and expresses his confidence
that God would graciously attend to the
prayer of such suppliants. ‘“* Whomso-
ever God neglects, He will listen to the
cry of those who are forsaken and desti-
tute.” He will not only “not despise
their prayer,” He will favourably receive
and answer it. In all these respects the
confident hope of the Psalmist was cer-
tainly well founded. He who thus
trusts in the Lord shall never be put to
shame.

Ill. The strength of his hope. He
speaks of the interposition of the Lord
on their behalf in accents of steady con-
fidence. The strength of his hope is
manifest in—

1. His assured declarations of Divine
favour toward them. ‘ Thou shalt arise
and have mercy,” &c. He utters no
perchance or peradventure,

2. His declaration of the nearness of
that favour. ‘The time to favour her,
yea, the set time, is come.” There may
be a reference here to the seventy years
of captivity prophesied by Jeremiah.
The Psalmist himself states one reason
upon which his conclusion, that the set
time for the manifestation of the Divine
favour had come, was based, viz, the deep
interest manifested by the people in the
state of Zion. ‘ Thy servants take plea-
sure in her stones, and favour the dust
thereof.” Even the ruins of the Temple
were dear to them, and its very dust
was sacred, This affectionate interest the

114





present. Werses 16, 17.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


Psalmist regarded as a ‘oke that the
time of deliverance and restc~ation was
at hand. “ There are vsually some pre-
vious intimations or indications of what
God is about todo, ‘Coming events
cast their shadows bef>re.’ Even the
Divine purposes are accomplished
usually in connection with human
agency, and in the regular course of
events ; and it is frequently possible to
anticipate that God is about to appear
for the fulfilment of His promises. So
it was in the coming of the Saviour. So
it was in the destruction of Jerusalem
by the Romans.”— Barnes.

(3.) His declaration of tt as even then
“¢« Shall
build,’ ‘ shall appear,’ ‘ will regard,’ ‘ and
will not despise.’ These futures, in the
original, are all present ; ‘ buildeth, ap-
peareth, regardeth, and despiseth not.’
The Psalmist, in his confidence of the
event, speaks of it as doing.” —Horsley,
His confidence is so great as to annihi-
late time and make the future present
to him, and coming events accomplished
realities,

IV. The results anticipated from
the fulfilment of his hope.

1. Grateful joy to His people. Their
reverence and love for the holy city and
Temple, manifested by their interest
even in its ruins, would be gratified,
and they would “declare the name of
the Lord in Zion, and His praise in
Jerusalem.” ‘ When the Lord turned
again the captivity of Zion... our
mouth was filled with laughter, and our
tongue with singing . . . The Lord
hath done great things for us; we are
glad.”

2. Fear to the nations. “So the
heathen shall fear the name of the Lord,
and all the kings of the earth Thy
glory.” “When the Lord turned again
the captivity of Zion ... then said
they among the heathen, The Lord hath
done great things for them,”

3. Instruction and encouragement to
posterity. “This shall be written for


‘the generation to come ; and the people


which shall be created shall praise the
Lord.” The Divine deliverance and
blessing should be recorded, and future
ages should derive instruction therefrom.


 ——7


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


FReaLM ORL


———————


The manifestations of the faithfulness
and mercy of God in one age are helpful
to the faith of all_ succeeding ages, As
the evidence to His truth and grace
grows more voluminous and irresistibly
conclusive, His praise also should grow
in fulness and resonance and hearti-
ness,

4. Glory to God. In the restoration
of His people His glory would be mani-
fest to all,—both to His people and toall
the nations,—observed by all, respected
by all, and celebrated by Hispeople. The
restoration of His people and the re-


building of His Temple would be the
glorifying of His name.

ConcLusion.—1. When the Church
ts in the lowest condition, it may be re-
vived by the Lord. 2. When the Church
ts in a low condition, the faithful should
care for her the more solicitously, and
pray for her the more earnestly. Verses
14-17. 3. When the faithful are thus
solicitous and prayerful, the Lord will
speedily artse for the revival of His
Church. Verses 13,14. 4. The revival
of the Church will be followed by the most
blessed results.


A Revivat or rez Cuuron, ann SyMprous WHICH PRECEDE I.
(Verses 13, 14.)


By unanimous consent, Zion is con-
sidered a type of the Christian Church,
which is a body of Christly men; and
if we take these words as the Psalmist’s
statement with regard to the revival of
the Christian Church, we propose to
make two statements.

I. There is a favourable time to
promote the revival of the Church.
The revival of religion, important at all
times, is especially so at this period.

1. The source to which the Church
must look for a revival. ‘“ Thou shalt
arise, and have mercy upon Zion.” At
a suitable time, and in a wonderful
manner, God did arise and deliver His
people. “The Lord,” said they, “ hath
done great things for us.” The teach-
ings of the Bible, which relate to this
theme, are regular and uninterrupted in
setting forth this grand principle, that
the Lord alone can revive the Chuich,
and add to her such as shall be saved,
(Ps. Ixxx. 1-3; lxxxv. 6; Isa. li. 3;
Hab. iii. 2; Zech. iv. 6).

2. The nature of that revival which
the Church may expect. The words
“meruy” and “ favour ” suggest—

(1) Deliverance, Though the cha-
racter of the Church is of such tran-
scendent excellence that it ought to win
the admiration of every beholder, yet,
alas ! such is the depravity of the heart,
that opposition, violence, and blood, have
marked her progress ; but to the present
the Almighty hath been her helper.


(2) Union, There may be unity of
effurs with a great variety of name,
method, and form. The union of which
God is the Author is frequently spoken
of in the Bible (Ps, cxxxiii ; John xiii.
34, 35; xvii. 21).

(3) Prosperity, The conversion of
sinners. That Church is happy which
is favoured with deliverance, union, and
prosperity.

3. The time when the revival of the
Church may be expected. The text
speaks of a set or appointed season for
the salvation of Zion. “ The time to
favour her, yea, the set time, is come.”
The deliverance of the Jews from their
captivity was foretold (Isa. xiv. 1, 2;
Jer. xxv. 11, 12; xxxii. 36-39). How
wonderfully Jehovah brought about the
deliverance of His people from Babylon
at the set time! He influenced Cyrus
and Darius, heathen princes, to forward it,
He raised up Ezra and Nehemiah, &c.

II. That the revival of the Church
is always preceded by certain infal-
lible signs. “For Thy servants take
pleasure in her stones, and favour the
dust thereof.”

1. Solemn humiliation before God.
Before the Jews were delivered from
the Babylonish captivity, they were
humbled before God on account of
their transgressions. The nation was
ashamed and cured of its idolatry, and
never since then has it bent its knees at
an idol’s shrine (Ezra ey Laks

115


PALM OTL.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


/


a


Dan. ix. 7-11). Is there this spirit of


humiliation before God in modern
churches $ Lf.
2. Special, importunate,  belveving


prayer. What beautiful instructions
and examples we have in the Bible of
the value of such prayer (Isa. Ixii. 1 ;
Ezek. xxxvi. 37; Luke xi. 5-10).

3. Affection for the ordinances of God's
House. The principal evidence we have
that the Almighty was about to visit
His people in Babylon was the deep in-
terest they had in Zion, They loved the
very stones, and even the dust of their
beloved, though dilapidated Zion (Ps.


exxxvil. 5,6). So it is in a revival of
religion. When God is about to visit
His people in mercy, everything in re-
gard to the Church is loved.

4, Activity and selfdenying forts
in God’s cause. The Jews showed their
love to Jerusalem in a practical manner,
(Neh. iv. 6.) They work.despite the
scorn of their foes.

Let these signs exist in any church,
and the fruit will soon appear. She
shall increase in purity and influence,
“ Instead of the thorn shall come up the
fir tree,” dc. (Isa. lv. 13).—J. Wilemanm,
tn “ The Study.”


A Sunvay Scuoot SerMon—Ovurn REsPoNsIBILITY
TOWARDS THE YOUNG.


(Verse 18.)


“This shall be written for the genera-
tions to come.”

The antecedent to the word “ this”
are the truths contained in the verses
from 1 to 13.

1, That the Lord will have mercy
upon Zion,

2. That the heathen shall fear the
name of the Lord.

3. That He will build up Zion.

4. That He will regard the prayer of
the destitute.

These were the promises that were to
be written for the generations to come.
Why written? That they might be
preserved and handed down.

Tradition is uncertain, imperfect, dc,
The New Testament declares that these
things were written for our inatruction.

We have the fulfilment of this text
to-day. Nearly nine hundred years
before the coming of Christ an Aasyrian
monarch conceived the idea of a national
library of books or tablets of burnt clay,
Hundreds of years afterward the library
was @estroyed. Recently a London
newspaper, three thousand years after
the establishment of the library, and
many centuries after its destruction, has
explorations made, and many tablets,
and fragments of tablets, are recovered
and translated, and in them the Book of
Genesis has corroboration. That which
is written is permanent. Had those

y¢é


past ages known of our paper and ink,
what a wonderful preservation of know-
ledge we would have had !

I. What has been written ?

1. Observe the nature of this know-
ledge of God which was written. It
concerns God’s faithfulness and ability
in the performance of all He has pro-
mised. We cannot bear testimony to
faithfulness until we have tested it
When we have tested God, we can bear
testimony. Faithfulness implies obliga-
tion. He who makes a promise comes
under obligation. In this God differs
from man. He was under no obligation
to come under obligation; but having
promised, He has come under obligation,
and Christians everywhere bear testi-
mony to His faithfulness and His ability
to perform fully all He has freely pro-
mised,

2. What God has promised, The
great thing is the salvation worked out
through atonement; the establishment
of a Church ; that this salvation should
be made known unto the ends of the
world ; that the heathen people should
come to know Him. Salvation can be
wrought outonly through this atonement.
It is loose thinking that makes men
imagine that education, culture, political
economy, can lift up the world. The
fear of the Lord lifts up man. Christ
made little or nothing of the culture of


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


the Pharisees, but much of nghteousness,
and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost,
He builds up His Zion even as He has
promised.

II. Our duty.

What shall we, who have received so
much, do for the generations to come—
for the generation now coming? Fathers,
members of Churches, what record are
you making for the generation coming?
The special work of the Sunday-school is
to take care of the children of the nation.

1. Let us be faithful to our own
children, They are the jewels of the
Church, We draw the children into
Sabbath-school, not to render needless
the home instruction, but to supplement
this instruction, by bringing the weight
of the personal influence of others upon
your children.

2. We want to take care of the
children grown up into youth, The
most critical period in the life of man
is when he is breaking away from home,
How many of the children at this age
become vagrants among the churches,


rdALM OTL


wandering here and there, receiving but
little benefit and giving none. The
class most largely reached are the chil-
dren of believing parents.

3. We have a great work to do
among the children near us, those who
are to be our fellow-citizens. There is
enough of ignorance and criminality
around us, These evils must be re-
strained by knowledge, by virtue, or
social ruin is inevitable,

4. We must do all possible for the
children of the entire country. If we
would have the nation Christian, we
must work and bear the burdens. We
have the opportunity,

One practical additional word. How
many of you who are giving your
money, year by year, to the cause of
Christ, are giving yourselves, your love,
your tume# You who are young, I be
seech you dedicate the energies of your
youth to this service When you are
passing from earth, what then will be of
value save what Christ is to you \—John
Hall, D.D.


A Great Contrast AND CONSOLATION.
(Verses 23-28.)


We have in this section of the
Psalm—

L A great contrast. On the one
hand, we have the weakness and short-
ness of human life upon earth, and the
changefulness and transitoriness of
pature itself ; and on the other, we have
the eternity and immutability of God.

First : Let us look at man and nature.
And—

1. At man’s life upon earth.
here represented as—(1) Weak.
weakened my strength in the way.
In the journey of life the strength
even of the most robust in course
of time is diminished until it is
superseded by weakness. While others
by reason of afflictions are speedily
brought low. Probably the Peal-
mist speaks here in the name of the
chosen people. God had weakened their
strength, had reduced them by afilic-
tions, &c. How frail is human life upon


earth! (2) Brief. “He shortened my


It is
6é He


”


days.” It seemed to the Poet that God
was about to cut off his life speedily.
(On the brevity of human life upon earth,
see Homily on Ps, xc. 1-6.)

2, Let us look at nature. (1) It és
changeful. “Thou shalt change them,
and they shall be changed.” The heavens
and the earth seem unchangeable and
permanent, Sometimes they are so re-
presented in Scripture. “ He hath also
stablished them for ever.” ‘‘ The ever-
lasting mountains and the perpetual
hills.” Yet from the testimony of
geology and astronomy we know that
they change. And as compared with
the Lord, the most unchangeable and
abiding things are changeable and tran-
sient. In the future a stupendous
change awaits the entire material crea-
tion. (2) Jt istransitory. “They shall
perish.” (Comp. 2 Pet, iii. 10.)

‘‘Meited into air, into thin air:


And, like the baseless fabric of this vision,
The eloud-capp'd towers, the gorgeous palaces,
117


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


The solemn temples, the great globe itself,
Yea, all which it inherit, shall dissolve ;
And, like this insubstantial pageant faded,
Leave not a rack behind.” —Shakespeare,


Second: Let us look at the Divine
Being.

1. He existed before the world. This
is clearly implied in verse 25,

2. He created the world. “Of old
hast Thou laid the foundation of the
earth, and the heavens are the work of
Thy hands.”

3. He is eternal. ‘Thou shalt en-
dure.” “This” (says Stuart, on Heb,
i, 12) “ would be true, if it was spoken
merely with reference to the future, and
should be construed as having respect
only to eternity @ parte post, as it is
technically called, «.¢., eternity to come,
But as it stands here, in connection with
having created the heavens and the earth
nar’ apgyas, it can hardly be understood
to mean less than absolute eternity, or
eternity a parte ante et a parte post.”
(On each of these points concerning
“‘the Divine Being,” see Homily on Ps.
xc, 1-6.)

4, He is unchangeable. “Thou art
the same.” From everlasting to ever-
lasting there is no variation in God,
His vesture, that in which He manifests
Himself, may be changed by Him, but
He changes not, ‘Thou art the same
in essence and nature, the same in will
and purpose, Thou dost change all other
things as Thou pleasest: but Thou art
immutable in every respect, and receivest
no shadow of change, though never so
light and small.’—Charnock, Here,
then, is a tremendous contrast—

** Great God, how infinite art Thou }
What worthless worms are we!”

It, A great consolation.

1. As regards himself. “O my God,
take me not away in the midst of my
days; Thy years are throughout all
generations.” It is the lot of the wicked
to be cut off in the midst of their days,








eet —


“Bloody and deceitful men shal) not
live out half their days.” With such
men the Poet desired to have no part
either living or dying. He seems also
to long to be spared to witness the re-
storation of his people. And he finds
consolation in the eternity of God, which
he pleads. That eternity is introduced
“here for two reasons: (1) Asa ground
of consolation, that God was ever the
same; that whatever might happen to
men, to the Psalmist himself, or to any
other man, God was unchanged, and that
His great plans would be carried forward
and accomplished. (2) As a reason for
the prayer. God was eternal. He could
not die, He knew in its perfection the
blessedness of life—life as such; life
continued; life unending. The Psalmist
appeals to what God Himself enjoyed as
a reason why life—so great a blessing—
should be granted to him a little longer.
By all that there was of blessedness in
the life of God, the Psalmist prays that
that which was in itself—even in the
case of God—so valuable, might yet a
little longer be continued to him.”—
Barnes.

2. As regards the Church, “The
children of Thy servants shall continue,
and their seed shall be established hefore
Thee.” Because God is unchangeable
and eternal His purposes cannot be frus-
trated, and His Church shall abide, the
witness and the monument of His love,
“From the eternity of the Head we may
infer the perpetuity of the body.” The
stability and welfare of the Church are
guaranteed by the eternity and immut-
ability of the Lord. So the Poet finds
strength in his weakness; he rests in
the Everlasting Arms.

ConcLusion.—1. To us personally let
the greatness of God be both awe-inspiring
and trust-inspiring. Let us not only
fear, but hope in Him. 2. Let us rejoice
tn the security of the Church of Christ.
™ Because I live ye shall live also.”


Gop mw Nature
(Verses 25-27.)


This passage directly opposes two
popular errors :—
First : That matter ts self-originated.
118


“ Thou,”—all material’ forms are traced
to # spiritual creative agency.
Second: That matter ts eternal, “They


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


PSALM OF.





shall perish.” The destruction of the
material universe is placed as the anti-
thesis of the Divine duration—* but
Thou remainest ;” as surely, therefore,
as God shall continue to “remain,” the
heavens and the earth shall perish.

This passage I regard as presenting
the Divine Being in four sublime and
impressive aspects—

IL. The Divine Being as intimately
acquainted with all portions of the
universe. I take the words “ founda-
tion” and “ heavens” as representative
terms. The lowest depth and the loftiest
height are signified. There is not a
shadow in the caverns of solitude which
He has not projected, nor is there a curve
in the heavens which owes not its grace-
fulness to His touch. Not only is God
acquainted with places, but with the
most subtle daws which operate in the
minutest fibres of the stupendous fabric,

God’s perfect acquaintance with the
sniverse supplies :—

First: A guarantee of the perfect
safety of the good. They can never pass
beyond the sweep of His beneficent in-
fluence. He knows how every change
will affect them, and they know that all
agencies will be controlled with a view
to their final -security and happiness,
(Ps. xci. 5-7.)

Second: An unutterable terror to the
evil. They can never pass beyond the
acrutiny of God’s blazing eye.

The great practical deduction of the
argument is this, viz. :—The supreme
importance of being RIGHT with this dread
Spirit. You cannot escape Him, If
you are to spend eternity with any being,
mutual sympathy is essential to enjoy-
ment, You must spend eternity under
the eye of God, &e.

II. The Divine Being as the sove-
reign Proprietor of the universe.
He who created has a right to the pos-
session, Four deductions are obvious :—

First: That our possession 1s a mere
stewardship. Yours is a representative
ownership.

Second: That our possession involves
corresponding responsibility, Our five
talents are bestowed that they may be
self-multiplied.

Third: That our possession forms no


ground of arrogance, “ What hast thow
that thou hast not received ?”

Fourth: That our possession should
awaken earnest solicitude. ‘ Why hast
God trusted me with so much?” should
be the rich man’s anxious inquiry.

Seeing, therefore, that God is the one
Proprietor of all things, we should re-
member two great facts :—

First: That we are only tenants-at
will, We have no lease of life or pro-
perty.

Second: That God may justly remind
man of the Divine claim. Can you
wonder that the true Proprietor should
occasionally assert His right by sending
the hail-storm or the lightning to smite
the earth? Were the Divine Being
never to assert His claim, man might
indulge the thought that he was the ter-
minating centre of all things.

II. God as the all-transforming
Spirit of the universe. ‘Asa vesture
shalt Thou change them, and they shall
be changed.” You have marked the
spring as it has unfolded its mantle, and
hung it gracefully on the shoulders of
the hills, and spread its gift of flowers
on the lap of the grateful earth; that
is a manifestation of God’s all-transform-
ing power! You have marked the
blustering winter, as it has torn off that
verdant robe, and blown out the floral
lights ; that, too, is a display of God’s
all-changing power. This same Spirit
is also the Aeart-transforming agent. He
who garnishes the hesvens beautifies the
soul. . . . As no human skill could
beautify the earth with the treasures of
spring, 80 no mortal power could have
provided the robe of righteousness with
which every soul must be clad ere it
enter heaven.

IV. The Divine Being as the all-
surviving Spirit of the universe.
“‘They shall perish, but Thou shalt en-
dure; Thou art the same, and Thy years
shall have no end.”

From this assurance we may draw two
lessons—

First : That matter is not a necessary
condition of spirttual existence. All we
know of spirit now is associated with
matter. If we speak of the “ divinity
stirring within us,” it as ro &

9


FRaLM OIL.





tenement of clay. If we speak of God,
it is in connection with the material
forms of the outer universe; but the
plain meaning of our text is that spirit
may exist independent of such expres-
sion. Matter is dependent on spirit,
but spirit may survive the total anni-
hilation of the heavens and the earth.
Second: That the Divine existence is
tncapable of change. ‘Thou art the
same.” Simple words these, and yet
there is only one Being in the universe
to whom they are applicable. To Gop
alone can we truthfully say, ‘ THov
ART THE 8AME!” Other beings are not
the same in knowledge ; you are con-
tinually increasing your information, but
to the Divine knowledge no contribution
can be added. Other beings are not the
same in affection, your affection deepens


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY ; PSALMS.


—_—


or withdraws according to the current of
circumstances, but the Divine love knows
no mutation. Other beings are not the
same in enjoyment ; your joys are fickle
as an April day, but the ever-biessed
God can know neither increase nor dimi-
nution of felicity.

He who made the atonement fos
human guilt is the Being of whom our
text speaks: Cunrist is the all-renewing
and all-surviving Spirit!

Have I those before me who profess
to worship God in nature? Let me as-
sure you that admiration of nature will
not atone for the neglect of Christ. God
knows those only who have a living faith
in the merits of the Saviour’s sacrifice
—Joseph Parker, D.D. Abridged from
the “ Cavendish Pulpit.”


PSALM OIIL


INTRODUCTION,


This, as appears from the superacription, is one of David's Psalms It is a Psalm of great
beauty and preciousness, and has been a great favourite of devout souls in all aves. The ful-
neas of the mercy of God in the forgiveness of sins and the enrichment of the soul, and His
tender, fatherly pity for His frail and dying children, are here gracefully and gratefully cele-
brated. It must have been composed at « time when the Poet’s soul was filled with precious
and grateful recollections of Divine benefits, and with strong and tender confidence in God.


Gop BLEssiIna Man anp Man BLEssina Gop.
(Verses 1-5.)


L God blessing man. Verses 3-5.
The Psalmist mentions a number of bles-
sings which he has received from God.

1. Forgiveness, ‘ Who forgiveth all
thine iniquities.” “Thine iniquities,”
says John Pulsford, “are in-equities,
There is nothing just or right in thee,
Thy very nature is an in-equity, bring-
ing forth nothing but in-equities, In-
equities towards thy God, in-equities
towards thy neighbour, and in-equities
towards thyself, make up the whole of
thy life. Thou art a bad tree, and a
bad tree cannot bring forth good fruit.”
Notice the completeness of His forgive-
ness. Our iniquities are more than can
be remembe:d, and are very heinous,
but He forgiveth them a//. The con-
tenuousness of His forgiveness. “ He
forgiveth.” Within us are tendencies

130


to sin and around us are temptations.
Our life is sadly marred by transgres-
sions and shortcomings, we need re-
peated forgivenesses, multiplied par-
dons; and God bestows them. He con-
tinues to forgive.

2. Healing. “Who healeth all thy
diseases.” The primary reference is to
bodily sicknesses. (Comp, Exod. xv.
26; Deut, xxix. 22). But we cannot
regard that as the exclusive reference,
“ Corruption and disease have a spiritual:
origin. All material corruption was
preceded by spiritual corruption. All
diseases were, and are, spiritual to begin
with. Disease is a state of in-equity
in the body, but it is only the in-equity
that pre-existed in spirit, fulfilling itself
m matter. The Divine art of heuling
therefore lies in the forgivenese of the


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY ; PSALMS.


PSALM OIIL,





soul’s iniquities. Remove the iniqui-
ties of the soul, and universal healing
eomes in. Christ healeth add thy dis-
eases, by forgiving al/ thy iniquities.”—
Pulsford. Bodily “diseases are analogues
of spiritual disorders and infirmities,
He heals all these,

3. Redemption. “Who
thy life from destruction.” Hengsten-
berg: “From the grave.” Perowne:
“* From the pit, including death, the
grave, Hades.” David had many mar-
vellous deliverances from danger and
death which were worthy of celebration.
The Lord redeems the soul from sin,
and from the penalty of sin, spiritual
and eternal death. He will ransom His
people from the power of the grave, and
endow them with endless and blessed life.

4. Coronation. “ Who crowneth thee
with loving-kindness and tender mer-
cies.” “The love of God not only de-
livers from sin, disease, and death: He
makes His children kings, and weaves
their crown out of His own glorious
attributes of loving-kindness and tender

~mercies.”—Perowne. “ He heaps upon
redeemed sinners untold riches from His
full heart; and shows to them the
softest ways of His love. Mercies are the
softnesses of eternal love, but tender
mercies are unutterable endearments
from the heart of hearts,”—Pulsford.

5. Satisfaction. “ Who satisfieth thy
mouth with good things.” There is
diversity of opinion as to how ah ime
which is rendered “mouth” in the
A. V. and in the P. B. V.—should be
rendered. See Perowne’s critical note,
and Barnes tm loco. But there is no
dispute as to the meaning of the clause.
God satisfieth the souls of His servants.
He, and He alone, can satisfy the deep
needs, and respond to the boundless
desires of the soul. Out of God the
wants of man’s great and awful soul can
never be satisfied. By His presence and
grace He fills it with delightful satisfac-
tion, “He satisfieth the longing soul, and
dlleth the hungry soul with gooduesa.”
(Comp. Pa. Ixiii. 5 ; Isa. lv. 1, 2; viii. 11.)


redeemeth


6 Invigoration, “Bo that thy youth.


is renewed like the eagle’s.” There is
no reference here to the fable of the
eagle renewing its youth in old age.


There is perhaps an allusion to the
moulting of its plumage periodically,
whereby its strength and activity are
increased, As the Christian derives his
life from Christ, that life can never he-
come feeble or old. Living in Christ,
he will flourish in immortal youth. His
eternal life will be am eternal progression
towards the perfection of youthful vigour
and beauty,

Such are the great and inestimable
blessings which the Lord confers upon
His servants, It is important that we
should notice that these blessings—

l. Are adapted to man’s deepest
needs, Forgiveness, satisfaction, redemp-
tion.

2. Tend to promote his perfection
and blessedness, which can be found
only in connection with the loving-
kindness and tender mercy of the Lord,

IL Man blessing God. (Vers. 1, 2.)
God blesses man with gifts ; man blesses
God with praise. The Psalmist blesses
the Lord—

1. With his soul, “ Bless the Lord, O
my soul” Not merely with the tongue
or pen, but with the heart and soul,

2. With his entire spiritual being.
“ And all that is within me, bless His
holy name,” David “ would enlist every
thought, faculty, power, the heart with
all its affections, the will, the conscience,
the reason, in a word, the whole spiritual
being, all in man that is best and highest,
in the same heavenly service,” —Perowne.

3. With recollection of His bene/jits.
“Forget not all His benefits.” The
Psalmist thoughtfully recalls the bless-
ings he has received from God, and is
thereby the more urgently incited to
praise Him, We are sadly prone to
cherish the memory of injuries, and to
neglect the memory of benefits, Let
us, like the Psalmist, strive to recollect
the blessings we have received of the
Lord, that thereby our praise might be
more grateful and hearty.

4. With reverent admiration of His
character. ‘Bless His holy name,”
God’s holiness consists of all the perfeo-
tions of His character in harmonious
and beautiful union. David praised
the Lord not merely because of the
benefits he had received from Him, bus


131


PeALM COI,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





because of His own glorious perfections,
He praised His beneficence, and adored
His holiness,

ConoLusion.—Let us learn from this
sabject—

1. The motives of Divine praise. Why
should I bless the Lord? (1) Because
of what He does for me—“ benefits,”
(2) Because of what He is—“ holy.”

2. The model of Divine praise. How
shall I bless the Lord (1) Heartily.
(2) With all my powers and affections,


3. The means of Divine praise, By
what means can I thus bless the Lord?
Recall His benefits, and the heart will
grow warm with gratitude, d&c.

4. The blessediness of Divine praise.
It brings holy cheer to the troubled
spirit. It is a foretaste of heaven, To
the man whose soul is filled with praise
this world is a “scene of Divine mani-
festation, a temple filled with heavenly
voices and traces of the feet of


God.”


Man’s RememBrance or THE Lorp’s BENEFITS.


(Verse 2.


Consider— 7

L The benefits of God. Who can
enumerate them? He gives us physical
benefits; ¢g., food, raiment, health,
&c. Social benefits, ¢g., friends, &c.
Intellectual benefits, ¢e.g., His own reve-
lation in nature, history, and the Bible,
books, &c. Spiritual benefits, ¢g., par-
don, help, &c. His gifts are innumer-
able, They are also very rich. He
gives not only kindness and mercy, but
“loving-kindness and tender mercies.”
“ The difference between mere kindness
and ‘loving-kindness,’ between mere
mercy and ‘tender mercy,’ is the dif-
ference between a flower without frag-
rance and a flower that is fragrant,”—
Parker.

Rightly viewed the benefits of God
must call forth our wonder, admiration,
gratitude.

II. The benefits of God may be for-
gotten. In what sense? Not abso-
lutely. Memory treasures all things,
loses nothing, Like the records made
with invisible ink, not seen under ordi-
nary circumstances, invisible perhaps
for years, yet when brought under the
influence of heat appearing distinctly ;
so with memory, &c. But we treasure
that in our memory in which we are


“ Forget not all His benefits.”)


most interested. The miser remembers
anything that will assist him in accu-
mulating money. The grateful heart
remembers benefits. But in depraved
human nature there is a sad tendency to
forget benefits, Too frequently injuries
are treasured, benefits are forgotten. A
thankless heart receives benefits, and
does not recognise them as such, acknow-
ledges no obligation, &c. All are prone”
to fail somewhat in treasuring and keep-
ing in view the Divine benefits,

III. The benefits of God should not
be forgotten. é

1. Because of the gratitude we owe to
God for them. Hengstenberg: “He
who has been blessed and refuses to
bless has sunk from the state of a man
to that of a beast.” Has he not sunk
lower than some beasts? Every bless-
ing involves the obligation to gratitude
and praise,

2. Because of the confidence they are
calculated to inspire. Every benefit we
receive increases our obligation and en-
couragement to trust in the Lord,
Parker: “The atheism of anticipation
should be corrected by the gratitude of
retrospection. He who reviews the past
thankfully may advance to the future
hopefully.”


Sprrituat Diskaszs HEaep.
(Verse. 3.)


L Why sin is called a disease.
}. As tt destroys the moral beauty of
132


the creature, (Gen. i. $1, and vi. 5, com-
pared ; Job xlii. 1-6 ; Psa. xxxviii. 3-8.)


wag


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


2. As tt excites pain. (Psa. li. 8;
Acts ii. 37 ; 1 Cor. xv. 56.)

3. As it disables from duty. (Isa. 1
5; Rom. vii. 19.) To God. To man.

4, As it deprives men of good sound
reason. (Isa, v. 20.) It stupifies the
faculties,

5. As tt ts infectious,

6. As tt leads to death. m. v. 1
31; vi. 16, 23.) oe -

Il. The variety of sinful diseases to
which we are subject. “All thine
iniquities, all thy diseases.” (Mark vii.
21-23 ; Rom. i. 29-31 ; Gal. v. 19-21.)

Almost as many as the bodily diseases
mentioned in the bills of mortality.

TL The remedy by which Ged
heals these diseases.


PSALM OIE.





1. His pardoning mercy through ths
redemption of Christ. (See text. Isa,
hii. 5; Rom, iii. 23-26.)

2. The sanctifying influences of grace.
(Exek. xxxvi. 25-27 ; Heb. x. 16.)

3. The means of grace. (Ephes, iv,
11-13.)

4, The resurrection of the body. (1
Thess. iv. 16, 17; Phil. iii, 10, 11.)

5. The case of an ignorant, insensible
sinner ts very deplorable.

6. The case of a real Christian ts very
hopeful. His sinful disease is radically
healed. The completion of his cure is
certain.

7. The glory of Christ, as the physician
of souls, 1s great indeed. (Rev. i. 5, 6).
—F. ... R,in “ Skeletons of Sermons,”


Tae Inronty, Expressions, aND Ossects oF THE Divine Muncy.
(Verses 6-14.)


The Poet having celebrated the mercy
of God to himself, proceeds in these
verses to celebrate His mercy to Israel.
Consider—

L The Infinity of the Divine mercy.
“As the heaven is high above the
earth, so great is His mercy toward
them that fear Him.” The Psalmist
uses a figure of the greatest extent which
the world affords in order to set forth
the immensity of the mercy of God. It
is, like Himself, infinite. As we imagine
nothing higher or vaster than the
heavens, so the favour of God exceeds
our highest thoughts, and surpasses our
most extensive and expressive figures.
All the measures of the universe are in-
adequate to set forth the infinite love of
God. (Compare Ps, xxxvi. 5 ; lvii. 10).
He is “ plenteous in mercy.” “ Above
the mountains of our sins the floods of
His mercy rise. All the world testes of
His sparing mercy, those who hear the
Gospel partake of His inviting mercy,
the saints live by His saving mercy, are
preserved by His upholding mercy, are
cheered by His consoling mercy, and
will enter heaven through His infinite
and everlasting mercy.” Spurgeon.

II. The expressions of the Divine
mercy. It is manifest—

1. Js His vindication of the oppressed.


“The Lord executeth righteousness and
judgment for all that are oppressed.”
We have here (1) The sufferings of the
Church, The people of God have often ,
been grievously oppressed and per-
secuted, (2) Zhe champion of the
Church. The Lord defends the cause
of His people, interposes for their deli-
verance. He humbles the pride of the
oppressor, and exalts the oppressed into
safety and honour.

2. In His general dealings with His
people. “He hath not dealt with us
after our sins ; nor rewarded us accord-
ing to our iniquities.”"—See Homiletic
sketch on this verse.

3. In the long delay of His anger.
“Slow to anger.” The Lord has tong
patience even with the most’ provoking
sinners, He esstrains His wrath that the
wicked may save longer time and more
frequent opportunities for repentance.
Though His anger ever burns against
sin, yet in mercy to the sinner He bears
much, and bears long with him, that he
might yet be saved,

4, In the transient duration of His
anger. ‘He will not always chide,
neither will He keep His anger for
ever.” “TJ will not contend for ever,
neither will I be always wroth,” d&c.
(Isa, lvii, 16). “The second clause,”

123


PSALM CIII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





says Hengstenberg, “depends upon
Lev. xix. 18, ‘Thou shalt not avenge,
nor bear any grudge against the child-
ren of thy people.” Nahum i, 2 again
depends upon the passage before us:
‘The Lord will take vengeance on His
adversaries, and He keepeth wrath’
(not assuredly for His people, of whom
the declaration of the Psalmist holds
true, but still) ‘for His enemies.’”
God will manifest His displeasure
towards His people if they sin against
Him, and will punish them for their
sins ; but when chastisement has ac-
complished its mission, He will again
manifest His loving-kindness, His
“anger is so slow to rise, so ready to
ahkate.”

5. In the forgiveness of sine, “ As far
as the east is from the west, so far hath
He removed our transgressions from us.”
The great point here is the completeness
of the forgiveness of sin by God. On
this point see remarks o Ps, Ixxxv, 2.
“When sin is pardoned,” says Char-
nock, “it is never charged again; the
guilt of it can no more return than
east can become west, or west become
east.”

6. In His fatherly compassion. “Like
as a father pitieth his children, so the
Lord pitieth them that fear Him.”
Matthew Henry well says: “ The father
pities his children that are weak in
knowledge and instructs them, pities
them when they are froward and bears
with them, pities them when they are,
sick and comforts them (Isa, Ixvi. 13),
pities them when they have fallen and
helps them up again, pities them when
they have offended, and, upon their
submission, forgives them, pities them
when they are wronged and gives them
redress; thus ‘the Lord pities them
that fear Him.’” Nay, much more
than “‘thus;” “ for He is the ‘ Father
of all mercies,’ and the Father of
all the fatherhoods in heaven and
earth ”

7. In His fatherly consideration,
“He kuoweth our frame, He remem-
bereth that we are dust.” He is ao-
quainted with “our fashioning ;” the
manner in which we are formed, and the
materials of which we are made; He

Pe


knows how weak we are, and exercises
a kindly consideration towards us. He
is not exacting in His demands upon
us, but is pitiful to our weakness,

8. In the revelation which He made
to His people. “He made known His
ways unto Moses, His acts unto the
children of Israel.” This verse refers
to Exod, xxxiii. 13, where Moses says
to the Lord, “I pray Thee, if I have
found grace in Thy sight, show me now
Thy way, that I may know Thee, that
I may find grace in Thy sight; and
consider that this nation is Thy people.
And He said, My presence shall go with
thee, and I will give thee rest.” God
made Himself known in the guidance
and protection of His people, and in the
many mighty acts which He wrought
on their behalf. The children of Israel
saw His acts, His marvellous doings for
them. But Moses saw the principles
underlying those acts, and the methods
of the Divine administration. This
revelation the Psalmist rightly regards
as an expression of God’s mercy. Varied
and countless are the manifestations of
His mercy to us.

ITI, The objecta of the Divine mercy.
To all men upon earth the mercy of
God extends. Holy angels need not
the Divine mercy, apostate angels need
it, but receive it not. Man both needs
and receives it. Of al] men upon earth
we may say,—“ The Lord is slow to
anger, and plenteous in mercy. He
hath not dealt with us after our sins,
nor rewarded us according to our ini-
quities.” But in this Psalm the people
of God are specially mentioned as the
objects of His mercy. Thrice His
mercy is said to be upon “them that
fear Him.” And the Psalmist in the
eighteenth verse gives a further descrip-
tion of them: “To such as keep His
covenant, and to those that remember
His commandments to do them.” Holy
fear is expressed in obedience, Excel-
lently says Perowne on verse 17: * For
the third time God’s mercy and loving-
kindness is said to be upon ‘them that
fear Him,’ as if to remind us that there
is a love within a love, a love which
they only know who have tasted that
the Lord is gracious, who fear Him and


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMR,


 FGaLM con,


——— eee


walk in His ways, as well as a love
which ‘maketh the sun to shine, and
gendeth rain upon the just and the un-
just.’ In the next verse there is the
same limitation, ‘To such as keep His
covenant,’ and to those who not only
know but ‘do’ Hiswill, The blessings
ef the covenant are no inalienable right ;
mancipio nulls datur ; children’s chil-


dren can only inherit its blessings by
cleaving to it.” '

Conctusion.—Are we of those who
are thus designated? Do we reverently
“fear Him”? Let those who do re-
joice in the manifold expressions of His
mercy toward them. Let those who do
not, accept the offer of pardoning mercy,
trust His grace, &,


Taz Mrnoy or Gop m rue Arriicrions or Max.
(Verse 10.)


Consider—

L The views which this declara-
tion presents to us of the Divine cove-
nant.

1. He has not dealt with us as our
sins deserve, Do they not deserve
banishment from God, the forfeiture
of His parental relation to us, the exe-
cution of His righteous sentence upon
us? When ia it that afflictions appear
heavy ? When sin is felt lightly, When
is it that afflictions appear light? When
sin is felt to be heavy. ... We know
the light we have resisted, the convic-
tions we have disregarded, the mercies
we have received and forgotten, and the
impressions against which we have re-
be‘led. . . . And then in proportion to
our actual knowledge of God, our ex-
perience of the Divine mercy, our ac-
quaintauce with the Divine goodness, is
the ager vation of our guiltiness,

2. He xs not dealt with us as He has
dealt with omers, Look at the conduct
of a righteous and holy God towards
fallen angews,... the antediluvian
world; ... to cities of the plain ;...
the ancient la clites for their back-
slidings. Loox a others for the pur-
pose of deepening your gratitude and


raising your adiiration of the Divine.


mercy towards you.

3. His dealings towards us have
always been mingtd with mercy even in
the severest dispensctions. Had He “re-
warded us according to our iniquities,”
there would have been no mercy and no
hope—no termination, no diminution, no
alleviation of suffering. When we think
of the mercy, mmgled with all His
judgments aad chwtenings, have we not


reason to adopt the language of the
Psalmist in the text ?

4, There is mercy in the support we
have under affliction, He does not
allow us to suffer alone, . . . What
consolation is mingled in the cup of
suffering placed in our hands! what
promises! what supports! what pre-
cious, everlasting consolation and good
hope through grace !

5. There ts mercy in the removal of
afliction. How often do we find the
God of grace and of providence won-
drously interposing to remove affliction
by unexpected means, by unthought-of
alleviations, by circumstances of which
we had not the least conception, é&c.

6. The mercy which ts displayed in
the results of His dispensations. He in-
tends, by blighting the gourd, to bring
us to the shadow of the tree of life—by
cutting off the stream, to bring us nearer
to the fountain of living waters—by
putting the taint of bitterness in out
earthly comforts, to bring us to taste
that He is gracious, It is the end of
His dispensations to make us more
humble, more watchful, more spiritual,
more holy, more alive to God and eter-
nity, In the school of trial God pre-
pares His children for their inheritance,

IL The practical uses we should
make of this declaration.

1. Jt should lead us faithfully to in-
quire what has been the effect of chasten-
sng and trial on us? When the rod is
upon you, what is the course you pur-
sue}? Where do you get rid of your
troubles? Are you brought to God’s
throne? Are you brought to humility,
to self-abasement, to penitential sorrow #

125


POALM CEM,





Are you brought to feel there is no
mystery in the rod, that all the mystery
is in the mercy towards you?

2. It should excite adoring gratitude
for the love, the patience, the wisdom,
and the faithfulness of our Father tn
heaven,

3. It should teach us to cherish humble
confidence, ‘All things work together
for good to them that love God.” “ All
His paths are mercy and goodness.” “TI
will trust in Him, and not be afraid.”





HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


——


4. It should lead us to exercise wnre-
served submission. The submission of
patience, the submission of obedience,
ought to be the result of these views of
the Divine character.

5. Let there be practical imitation of
the Divine conduct in our temper towards
othera—in patience, forbearance, for-
giveness. “ Be ye imitators of God, as
dear children, and walk in love, as Christ
also hath loved us.”—Dr. Fletcher.—
Abridged from “ The Preacher.”


Gop’s Mrrcy anp Man’s Framtry—A ConrTEast.
(Verses 15-18.)


The contrast between man’s frailty
and transitoriness and God’s unchange-
ableness and eternity, which we found
in Ps, xe, 1-6, is here repeated. The
similarity of thought and expression is
so great that Hengstenberg says, “ That
David without doubt drew it from
Moses.” As most of the ideas occurring
in this passage were considered in our
Homily on Ps, xc, 1-6, it will be suffi-
cient to present the outline of our sub-
ject here, and refer the reader to that
homily. The chief points of the contrast
seem to be these—

L The frailty of man’s life upon
earth, and the mercy of God. How
frail is human life here! As the hot
and burning east wind destroys the grass
and the flower, so sickness, sorrow, suf-
fering speedily cut short man’s career.
The flower with its beauty and fragrance
soon fades and dies, and man in his
glory of corporeal beauty, mental ability,
geniality of temper, and holiness of heart
and life, soon passes away. But the
mercy of the Lord is not a weak, perish-
able thing. It is great, glorious, abiding.
Here is consolation and strength and
inspiration for man. He is frail; but
he may take refuge in the rich and all-
sufficient mercy of God.

Il. The brevity of man’s life upon
earth, and the eternity of the mercy
of God. As for the life of man, ‘the
wind passeth over it, and it is gone.
But the mercy of the Lord is from ever-
lasting to everlasting.” The loving-
kindness of the Lord is eternal as His

126


own Being. Maz, saddened with the
transciency of human strength and
beauty and life, here is rest for thee in
the eternal marcy of God! Here is what
we, a8 sinners, need; and it is here in
inexhaustible and unchangeable fulness
and freeness.

Ill. The final departure of man from
the earth, and the eternal mercy of God
present with him wherever he may be.”
“It is gone, and the place thereof shall
know it no more.” Man goes hence to
‘¢The undiscover’d country, from whose bourne

No traveller returns.”

It is a saddening and a solemn con-
sideration that at death we leave this
world never to return to it. The farm,
the shop, the office, the study, the home,
the Sunday school, the Church will
“know us no more” when we have trod
“the way to dusty death.” We shall
have gone from earth for ever. But
gone where? Ay, where? How shall
we fare when we have taken the last, the
lonely, the irretraceable journey ¢ These
considerations would be insupportably
mysterious and painful, but for this fact :
Wherever we may be, the loving-kindness
of the Lord will be present with us. “The
mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to
everlasting upon them that fear Him.”
We do not leave that behind us. Wedo
not travel into any region where it ceases
to be present and operative. Having
that upon us, all must be well, &c.

IV. The final departure of good men
from the earth, and the eternal mercy
of God resting upon their descendanta.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PSALM CIM,


eee


Good men pass away for ever, but the
loving-kindness of the Lord is continued
to their posterity. Church members die,
but the Church remains. God’s “ right-
eousness is unto children’s children.”
The covenant of mercy extends from
generation to generation, provided that
they do not violate their interest in it,
For here is the limiting condition: “To


such as keep His covenant, and to those
that remember His commandments to do
them.”

God will not forget or fail in His part
of the covenant ; let man also remember
and keep his; and then he may take to
himself the consolation, and inspiration,
and strength of the contrast we havebeen
considering.


Tue Gtoriovs Reign aND Praise or THE Lorp,
(Verses 19-23.)


L The glorious reign of the Lord.
“The Lord hath prepared His throne in
the heavens, and His kingdom ruleth
over all.” Here are three ideas—

1. The stability of His reign. ‘The
Lord hath prepared His throne.” Per-
owne: “Jehovah hath established His
throue.” His throne is firm and stable,
Ali the rage and rebellion of earth and
hell cannot shake it, ‘ His dominion is
an everlasting dominion.”

2. The majesty of His reign. “ His
throne in the heavens.” The heavens
are the most vast and sublime portion
of the universe. In them the glory of
the Lord is most conspicuously and
splendidly displayed. His throne is said
to be established there to indicate its
loftiness and majesty.

3. The universality of His reign.
“His kingdom ruleth over all.” He
rules in all places. The heavens, the
earth, and the seas are subject to His
sway. The regularity and order of the
universe proclaim His sovereignty. He
rules over all creatures. He is the
Creator, Sustainer, and Sovereign of all
creatures, He rules over all persons.
Holy angels delight to do His will. He
is supreme in the world of men. And
devils cannot sever their connection with
His authority. He controls Satan him-
self.

IL The glorious praise of the Lord.
The Poet began the Psalm by calling
upon His soul to bless the Lord for His
benefits ; he proceeded to celebrate His
goodness to all ‘“‘them that fear Him ” ;
now he summons the entire universe to
unite in ascribing blessing to Him ; and
he concludes by calling upon his own


soul to join in the praise. The praise of
the Lord is celebrated by—

1. Holy angels. “Bless the Lord, ye
His angels,” &c. (verses 20, 21). In
speaking of these angelic beings, the
Psalmist brings into view—(1) Their
great power, They “excel in strength.”
Margin and Perowne: “ Mighty in
strength.” Hengstenberg: “ Strong
warriors.” The deeds ascribed to them
in Scripture indicate their amazing
might. But in our text the strength
which is spoken of is clearly intellectual
and moral chiefly. They are mighty to
do the will of God, and grow stronger
by doing it. (2) Their ready obedience.
They ‘‘do His commandments, hearken-
ing unto the voice of His word.” They
wait and listen for the intimations of His
will, and then hasten to carry them out,
They are prompt in obedience to Him,
and eager to “do His pleasure.” (3)
Their immense numbers. “ All His
hosts.” God’s angels are multitudinous,
There are vast armies of them. (4)
Their Divine service. ‘Ministers of
His, that do His pleasure.” They are
His, for He made and sustains them;
His, for He employs them in His ser-
vice ; His, for they are reverently and
lovingly loyal to Him. These glorious
beings bless the Lord by revereutly cele-
brating His perfections and joyfully obey-
ing His behests, They praise Him both
by song and by service.

2. The unintelligent creation. “ Bless
the Lord all His works, in all places of
His dominion.” All His works praise
Him as they answer the end for which
they were created, Sun, moon, and
stars by diffusing light and heat, and by

137


PSALM CIV.





unfolding their beauty and glory, praise
Him. The earth by its verdure, fruit-
fulness, &c., praises Him, All His works
throughout the universe unite to bless
Him.

8. Redeemed men. “Bless the Lord,
O my soul.” The Poet ends the Psalm
as he began it by calling upon his own
soul to bless the Lord. We who know
His redeeming love have the most mov-
ing and mighty reasons for celebrating
His praise.

ConcLusion.—While the universe is


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY. PSALMS,


eee EE


songful in praise of the Lord, shall my
tongue be silent? While others are
glowing with. enthusiasm, shall my heart
be cold? “Bless the Lord, O my soul.”
While others gladly obey and serve
Him, shall my service be wanting?
Shall I praise Him in words and not in
deeds? Rather let my ears be attentive
to hear His commands, and my feet
swift and my hands dexterous to obey
them, Let us all praise Him, both in
song and in service, with lips and with
lives.


PSALM OLY.


INTRODUCTION.


“This Psalm,” says Calvin, ‘differs from the last, in that it neither treats of God's

mercies bestowed on His Church, nor lifts us to the hope of a heavenly life; but paint-

ing for us in the frame of the world, and the order of nature, the living image of God's

wisdom, power, and goodness, exhorts us to praise Him, because in this our frail mortal life

He manifests Himself to us as a Father.” In the former Psalm God is praised as the God of
grace, in this as the God of nature—the Creator and Sustainer of the universe.

‘¢In ita main outline the poem follows the story of creation contained in the first chapter
of Genesia, There manifestly is the source whence the Psalmiat drew. Meditating on that
sublime description, itself a poem, he finds in it hia subject aud his inspiration. And yet the
Psalm is not a mere copy of the original, Breathing the same lofty spirit, it has a force and
an originality of itsown. In some respects the Psalm, even more strikingly than the early
record, exhibits the infinite greatness, the order, the life of the universe. But the creation of
Genesis is a creation of the past; the creation of the Psalm isa creation of the present. The
one portrays the beginning of the eternal order, the other its perpetual, living spectacle,
Hence, too, the Ode has far more animation than the Record. The latter is a picture of still
life ; the former is crowded with figures full of stir and movement.” , .. In the Psalm ‘‘we
have a picture which for truth and depth of colouring, for animation, tenderness, and beauty,
has never been surpassed.””—Perowne.

In the Hebrew the Psalm has no guperscription ; and there are no means for determining
by whom or when the Pealm was composed.


THe Masesty or Gop um CrzEaTION.


(Verses 1-8.)
The Psalmist expresses his thoughts “ ~~ holy light, offspring of heaven first:
Orn 5


and feelings in a strain of poetry of
unsurpassed sublimity. Underlying
the glorious imagery of these verses is
the brilliant display in which Eastern
princes delighted, in their robes and
equipages and attendants) The majesty
of the appearance of the Divine King,
Jehovah, far exceeds their most gorgeous
displays. The Poet sets before us—

L The glorious vesture of the Lord.


,
Or of th’ Eternal co-eternal beam,
May I express thee, unblamed{! since God
is light,
And never but in unapproached light,
Dwelt from eternity, dwelt then in thee,
Bright effluence of bright essence increate,”


But the reference in the text is not to
the unapproachable, the concealing light,
but to the revealing light. In the light

- which daily shines upon us God unfolds


“Thou coverest Thyself with light as
with a garment.” St, Paul represents
the Lord as “dwelling in the light,”
And Milton—

133


to us glimpses of His glory. He ap-
parels Himself with light. There is
nothing in the universe so fitted to be
the robe of God as light.


8 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PaaLM OL,





1. Light is an emblem of His own
mature. “ God is light.” “ Light unites
in itself purity and clearness, and beauty
and glory, as no other material object
does ; it is the condition of all material
life, and growth, and joy ; and the ap-
plication to God of such a predicative
requires no transference, He is Light,
and the Fountain of light material-and
light ethical. In the one world, dark-
ness is the absence of light ; in the other,
darkness, untruthfulness, deceit, false-
hood, is the absence of God.”—Alford.

2. Light ts essential to life and
growth, Without it the earth would
speedily become one vast sepulchre.

3. Lnght is pure and purifying.
Milton : “‘ Light ethereal, first of things,
quintessence pure.”

4, Light is joy-insptring.

‘Prime cheerer, light !
Of all material beings, first and best!”
—Thomson,
How fitting, then, for to be the robe of
Deity.

IL, The splendid palace of the Lord.
“Thou spreadest out the heavens like a
curtain,” dsc. (verses 2and 3). The heavens
are the expanse or firmament which God
has spread to divide the waters which
are under it from the waters which are
above it, And in the waters which are
above it God is represented as laying
the beams of His chambers, the floor of
His palace, His palace He has built
above the expanse in the lofty and
glorious heavens, He has fixed His
abode in the most exalted and brilliant
place in the universe, The most stately
and magnificent of earthly palaces is
mean in comparison of this.

III. The sublime chariot of the
Lord. ‘‘ Who maketh the clouds His
chariot, who walketh upon the wings of
the wind.” “The clouds appear as the
chariot of God, because He drives them
about at His pleasure, as a king his


car.”—Hengstenberg. Jehovah came “in


a thick cloud” at Sinai. God appeared
in “a bright cloud” upon Hermon at
the Transfiguration. In the last day He
will “‘ come with clouds.” On the sub-
lime aspects of clouds, and their fitness
to inspire reverence towards God, see


a fine passage in Ruskin’s “ Modern
VoL. UL


Painters” (I. Pt. ii. sec. 3, ch. iv. §
35-38). He “walketh upon the wings
of the wind,” controlling and directing
them as He will, and they obey Him as
horses do an earthly king, except that
the winds never contest His authority or
deviate from His will.

IV. The wonderful messengers of
the Lord. Verse four is of disputed
interpretation. Some of the ablest com-
mentators renders it: “ Who maketh the
winds His messengers, the flaming fire
His ministers.” But in this rendering
the order of the wordsis inverted. Per-
owne; “The natural order in Hebrew,
as in English, is verb, object, predicate,
and no instance has as yet been alleged
in which the predicate stands after the
verb before the object. Unless the
grammatical difficulty can be removed,
we must render, ‘He maketh His mes-
sengers winds, His ministers a flaming
fire ;’ #.e., ‘He clothes His messengers
with the might, the swiftness, tre all-
pervading subtilty of wind and fire,’”
Alford advocates this view. See Per-
owne’s “Critical Note” tn loco, and
Alford on Heb. i. 7. The Lord has
countless messengers. He can use any
of His creatures as His servants ; and
He can clothe His messengers with
the attributes of wind and fire. His
attendants are characterised by power
and celerity, like the “wind;” by
purity, like the “fire;” and by per-
vasiveness, like both ‘‘ wind” and “fire.”
The most numerous and splendid re-
tinue of earthly princes, or all their re-
tinues combined, are as nothing when
compared with the countless and wonder-
ful messengers of the Lord.

V. The firm footstool of the Lord.
“ He laid the foundations of the earth,
that it should not be removed for ever.”
Margin: “ He hath founded the earth
upon her bases,” “The earth is held aa
firm by the omnipotence of God, with.
out a foundation, as if it had one; He
has given to the earth, which is propped
up by nothing, a firm existence, like a
building which rests on a solid foun-
dation.” —Hengstenberg. Job: “He
hangeth the earth upon nothing.” Mil-
ton: ‘ And earth self-balanced from her
centre hung.” Ovid: ‘“ Ponderibus

129


PGALM CIV.





kbrata suis,”—poised by its own weight.
Yet it is immovably firm and secure.
How unsearchable is His wisdom, and
how unlimited His power, who thus
wonderfully sustains the world! And
how glorious is His majesty as mani-
fested in the heavens and the earth !

Our text warrants the following re-
marks :—

First: The universe ts a Divine crea-
tion. It is not eternal, not self-origi-
nated, not the product of chance or fate ;
but it is the creation of the Almighty.

Second: Zhe creative energy of the
Lord is in continual exercise. The parti-
ciples denote continued action, and teach
us to regard the exercise of the creative
energy of the Lord as a present thing.
Every morning God, as it were, arrays
Himself anew in His robe of light, &c.
The Supreme Worker is ever working.
Creation is a continuous process,


AHOMILETIO COMMENTARY; PSALME.





Third: That the Divine creations are
effected with consummate ease. With the
game ease with which a man spreads out
a tent curtain, God spreads the expanse
of heaven—nay, with far greater ease:
“He spake, and it was done,” &c.

Fourth: The universe ts invested with
profound significance. To the devout
student it is a revelation of infinite wis-
dom, almighty power, Divine beneficence,

Ce

Fifth: The universe ts invested with
Divine sanctity. It is the garment of
the great God—a scene of Divine mani-
festation. Rightly understood the earth
is a temple, instinct with the presence
and resounding with the voice of God.
Therefore, ‘‘ Bless the Lord, O my soul.
O Lord, my God, Thou art very great ;
Thou art clothed with honour and ma


jesty.”


Tos Praisz oF THE LORD,
(Verse 1.)


L The Lord should be praised with
thesoul. “ Bless the Lord, O my soul.”
“The Lord looketh at the heart.”

II. The Lord should be praised be-
cause of His attributes. “O Lord, my
God, Thou art very great.” We should
honour Him not only from motives of
gratitude, but from motives of esteem.
In Himself He is worthy of all homage.

IIL The Lord should be praised be-
cause of His work in creation. This
is a great hymn of creation. His works
in nature are worthy of praise. We
should regard them with admiration and
reverence for the Great Worker. We do-
well to celebrate the glories of redemp-


tion, but not to the exclusion of the
glories of creation,

IV. The Lord should be praised
both for what He reveals and what
He conceals of Himself. ‘Thou art
clothed with honour and majesty.”
Creation is the vesture of Deity. “ Na-
ture half reveals and half conceals the
Sout within.” We should be thankful
for both the hiding and the disclosing.
Both are merciful.

V. That man is best qualified for
this service “ whose God is the Lord.”
“Q Lord, my God.” He who trusts
in and communes with God will find
praise a natural and joyous service,


CREATION A REVELATION OF THE LORD,


(Verses


These verses suggest the following
observations :—

L The work of the Lord in creation
displays His absolute power. ‘This
is manifest—

l. Over the waters.

130


“ At Thy rebuke


6-18.)


they fled, at the voice of Thy thundes
they hasted away,” &e. (verses 7-10).
His control over the waters is seen (1)
tn setting boundartes for them. The
Psalmist representa the earth as com-
pletely enveloped in water. ‘Thou


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.
— sss


coverest it with the deep as with a gar-

ment ; the waters stood above the moun-

tains.” And Milton—

‘* The earth was formed, but in the womb as yet
Of waters, embryon immature involved,
Appeared not : over all the face of earth
Main ocean flowed.”

At the command of God the water finds
its appointed place and is confined there.
This is very poetically represented as
“the effect of the Divine rebuke and
thunder: thrown into a state of tumul-
tuous excitement, the waters quickly
again ascend the mountains, their high
abode, from which the rebuke of God
had brought them down; but unable to
keep themselves there they go down to
the valleys, until they find themselves
in their proper situation, and enter into
the place where God designs them to
be.”—Hengstenberg. And there God
imprisons them. ‘Thou hast set a
bound that they may not pass over, that
they turn not again to cover the earth.”
Though the waters of the sea are higher
than the earth, yet is it confined in its
“decreed place” by the command of
God. He says, “ Hitherto shalt thou
come, but no further; and here shall
thy proud waves be stayed.” The
Lord’s control over the waters is seen (2)
in distributing them. ‘He sendeth the
springs into the valleys, which run among
the hills. God has wisely and wonder-
fully distributed the waters, and in so
doing has provided for the watering of
the earth and the creatures that dwell
thereon.” The way in which this is done
is among the most wonderful and most
benevolent in nature,—by that power de-
rived from heat, by which the waters of
the ocean, contrary to the natural law of
gravitation, are lifted up in small par-
icles—in vapour—and carried by the
slouds where they are needed, and let
fall upon the earth to water the plants,
and to form fountains, rivulets, and
streams—and borne thus to the highest
mountains, to be filtered through the
ground to form springs and streams be-
low.” — Barnes.

2. Over the earth, ‘He causeth the
grass to grow for the cattle, and herb for
the service of man.” The fruitfulness
of the earth is an effect of the Divine


PSALM Orv,





power. The earth, with its mountains
and valleys, barren rocks and fruitful
fields ; the seas and lakes, the rivers and
streams; and the heavens, with its
wind-driven clouds and its glorious orbs,
all display the almighty power of the
Creator.

Il. The work of the Lord in creation
displays His delight in beauty. In
this poem of creation the Psalmist brings
into view the mountains and’ valleys,
the seas and rivers, the fountains and
streams, the herbs and trees, the beasts
and birds; and all these contribute to
the beauty of the world. That God
delights in the beautiful in form and
in colour is clearly manifested in His
works. It is possible to conceive a
world in which utility alone was aimed
at, and beauty entirely ignored. But
such a world would form a complete
contrast to the creations of God. ‘To
take only one feature, think of the
wonderful beauty and sublimity of the
mountains, ‘“‘ Loveliness of colour, per-
fectness of form, endlessness of change,
wonderfulness of structure, are precious
to all undiseased human minds; and
the superiority of the mountains in all
these things to the lowlands is as
measurable as the riches of a painted
window matched with a white one, or
the wealth of a museum compared with
that of a simply furnished chamber.
They seem to have been built for the
human race, as at once their schools and
cathedrals; full of treasures of illumi-
nated manuscript for the scholar, kindly
in simple lessons to the worker, quiet
in pale cloisters for the thinker, glorious
in holiness for the worshipper. These
great cathedrals of the earth, with their
gates of rock, pavement of cloud, choirs
of stream and stone, altars of snow, and
vaults of purple, traversed by the con-
tinual stars!” (See the whole passage,
of which the foregoing is only a frag-
ment, in Ruskin’s “ Modern Painters,”
IV. pt. V. ch. XX. § 3, 4, 5,9). The
beauty of creation (1) tnereases our
obligations to the Creator; (2) should
tncite to holiness, which is spiritual
beauty. God’s delight in spiritual
beauty is greater than His delight im
material beauty.

131


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


EET SIE nEnInSnInEE Sanaa een


III. The work of the Lord in crea-
tion displays His great law of service.
Everything which He has made has its
uses, Everything has relations, is
dependent, and is designed to be minia-
trant. The sea is made to serve man
by supplying the air with ozone, man
with food, &c, Fountains and streams
water the earth, and quench the thirst
of men and animals, The earth pro-
duces food in abundance for man and
beast, and wine for the rejoicing of
man’s heart. And birds, trees, moun-
tains, rocks, all have their uses. Useful-
ness a8 well as beauty characterises all
the creations of the Divine Hand.


“Oh! not in vain doth He create
Aught from His affluent love proceeding 3
The meanest hath appointed state,
If only for the mightiest’s needing.
The meteor and the thunder-stone
Have use and miasion of their own.”
—Punshon.


Man is no exception to this rule. We
are created by God to serve others. A
useless man is a self-perversion of the
idea of the Creator. He frustrates the
Divine idea of his life. Are we ful-
filling our part in the universal law of
service ¢

IV. The work of the Lord in crea-
tion displays His regard for all His
creatures. Verses 11-18, There is no
uncared-for creature, The wild asses,
the fowls of the heaven, the cattle, the
wild goats, the conies, all are provided
for by God. The earth produces the
endless varieties and the immense
quantities of food required for the crea-
tures that dwell upon it. And in trees,
rocks, mountains, &c., they find suitable
homes. “Behold the fowls of the air;
for they sow not,” d&c, (Matt. vi. 26.)

V. The work of the Lord in crea-
tion displays His supreme regard for
man. ‘And wine that maketh glad,”
&c, God gives to man not only the
necessaries but the luxuries of life.


THe Uses or


Here is “bread” for his sustenance,
Here is “wine” for his enjoyment.
“Here is wine,” says Matthew Henry,
‘“‘that makes glad the heart, refreshes '
the spirits, and exhilarates them, when
it is soberly and moderately used, that
we may not only go through our busi-
ness, but go through it cheerfully. It
is a pity that that should be abused ta
overcharge the heart, and unfit men fo)
their duty, which was given to revive
their heart and quicken them in their
duty.” Here is “ oil” expressive of
gladness. On festive occasions they
were accustomed to anoint their heads
with oil. The face is said to shine
because the radiancy of joy is seen
there. The face shines not because of
the “oil,” but because the heart is glad.
God gives to man not only support in
life, but joy. He manifests special
regard for man’s interests. At the
Creation He gave him dominion over the
earth with all its tenants and all its
productions, In Christ He has dis-
played His interest in human well-being
in a still clearer and more conclusive
manner.

Conciusion. — The
plies—

1, An argument for humility. We
are dependent creatures. We have no
resources but such as are in God,

2. An argument for obedience. We
are parts of a great and orderly system,
having intimate relations and depen-
dencies, and designed for mutual service.
Let us not violate the order and har-
mony; let us fulfil our service, &c.

3. An argument for gratitude. The
Divine regards claim suitable and pro-
portionate acknowledgment.

4, Anargument for trust. The Lord
cares for “the wild asses” ; will He not
much more care for man who was made
in His own image ?—for man, redeemed
by the precious blood of His Son Jesus
Christ ?


subject sup-


THE SEASONS.


(Verses 19-23.)


The Psalmist here refers to the work
of creation on the fourth day, as stated
132


in the Mossic record. The sun and
moon were appointed not only to give


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY ; PSALMB,





light, but for the measurement and
division of time, and the indication of
seasons, Of these, two—night and day
—are mentioned, and their uses pointed
out.

L The uses of day.

1. The day is the season of work for
man. ‘‘Man goeth forth unto his work
and to his labour.” Labour is a Divine
institution, and the day is the fitting
time for engaging in it. (1) Man ts
urged to work by his necessities. He
needs food, raiment, a dwelling ; and to
obtain these he must work. He has
to encounter difficulties, he requires
knowledge and skill; and to acquire
these he must work. He needs pardon,
moral purity, and power ; and for these
also he must work. (2.) Man ts jitted
for work by his faculties, He has arms
and hands admirably adapted for labour,
brain for mental exertion, and the soul
with its wondrous faculties for spiritual
effort. (3) Man ts commanded to work
by his Maker. Unfallen man was placed
in a garden “ to dress it and to keep it.”
“Six days shalt thou labour” is a Divine
command. “This we commanded you,
that if any man would not work neither
should he eat.” God Himself is the
Supreme Worker. “My Faturr worketh
hitherto and I work.” “The law of
nature is,” says Ruskin, “that a certain
quantity of work is necessary to produce
a certain quantity of good, of any kind
whatever. If you want knowledge, you
must toil for it; if food, you must toil
for it; and if pleasure, you must toil
for it. But men do not acknowledge
this law, or strive to evade it, hoping
to get their knowledge, and food, and
pleasure for nothing ; and in this effort
they either fail of getting them, and
remain ignorant and miserable, or they
obtain them by making other men work
for their benefit; and then they are
tyrants and robbers.” And Carlyle:
‘All true work is sacred; in all true
work, were it but true hand-labour,
there is something of divineness. La-
bour, wide as the earth, has its summit
in heaven.” Again—‘“ The modern
majesty consists in work. What a man
can do is his greatest ornament, and he
always consults his dignity by doing it.”


PSALM GIY.


The day is the season for work. Our
Lord recognised this fact in His pregnant
utterance, “I must work the works of
Him that sent me while it is day: the
night cometh, when no man can work.”

2. The day ts the season of retirement
for wild beasts. ‘ The sun ariseth, they
gather themselves together, and lay
them down in their dens.” We see in this
(1) Anevidenceofman’soriginal sovereignty
“ over every living thing that moveth upon
the earth.” The wild beasts still hava
some dread of him, and hide themselve:
in their dens during the hours of the
day when he is most abroad. (2) An
arrangement for man’s safety. The
sluggard cannot excuse himself from
daily labour by saying, “There is a lion
in the way.”

Il. The uses of night.

1. Night is the season of rest for man,
“Labour until the evening.” Man was
not fitted for incessant toil, He needs
frequent reat. And night is the season
marked out by God for this, Its shade
is a relief after the brightness, and its
cool after the heat of the day. These
conduce to sleep; and go man is invigo-
rated for further toil.


‘* Night is the time for rest ;
How sweet when labours close,
To gather round an aching heart
The curtain of repose,
Stretch the tired limbs, and lay the head


)


Upon our own delightful bed.”
—J, Montgomery,


2. Night ts the season of activity for
wild beasts. ‘It is night, wherein all
the beasts of the forest do creep forth.
The young lions roar after their prey,
and seek their meat from God.” Ob-
serve: (1) Their dependence upon God,
They seek their food from Him, “The
roaring of the young lions, like the
crying of the young ravens, is inter-
preted asking their meat of God.”
“The natural cries of the distressed
creatures are in substance nature’s
prayer to its Maker for relief and help.”
Here we hsve a hint on prayer. If God
so interprets the cries of the young lions,
shall He not much more regard favour-
ably the broken cries of His children!
(2) God’s provision for them. He makea
the darkness in which they go forth in

133


PSALM CIV,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


ee eee ee SS ee


quest of food, and He provides the
food for them; otherwise they would go
forth in vain. Here is a hint on Prov-
dence. Shall the Lord provide for the
beasts of the forest, and shall He not
much more supply all the needs of His
people who trust in Him?

III, The moral uses of the seasons.
By them He teaches us—

1. The measurement of time. “ He
has made the very universe to be the
clock of the universe, and admonish
every mortal heart of the sure and
constant passage of time. We are not
left to our inward judgments. Time
has its measures without, in the most
palpable and impressive visitations of
the senses. Every twilight tells us that
a day is gone, and that by a sign as im-
pressive as the blotting out of the sun!
. « . One season tells us that another
is gone; and, when the whole circle
of seasons is completed and returned
into itself, the new year tells us that
the old is gone, And a certain number


of these years, we know, is the utmost
bound of life.”

9. The preciousness of time. He
appointed the sun and moon for signs
and for seasons to “declare to every
creature, in every world, the certain
flight of time, and signify its sacred
value. The gems He has buried in the
sands of His rivers; on the gold He
has piled His mountains of rock ; the
pearls He has hid in the depth of the
sea ; but time,—time is out on the front
of all created magnificence.” Thus He
silently proclaims to us constantly “that
time is the most precious of His gifts.”

3. The fitness of certain times for
certain duties. “ The tradesman ob-
serves the seasons, The husbandman
watches them for his life. Whatever we
do, must be done in its time. You can-
not plant in the winter, nor gather fruit
in the spring. God’s times are set, and
the seasons of His mercy all ordained
from the beginning. There is no time of
salvation but the time of God:” *


THe Lorp anp His UNIVERSE.
(Verses 24-30.)


In these verses there is allusion to the
work of the fifth day of creation; and
an expression of devout admiration of
the number of the works of the Lord, and
the wisdom displayed therein. The Poet
very clearly sets forth certain aspects of
the relation of the Lord to the universe.

L The Lord as the Creator of all
things. ‘“O Lord, how manifold are Thy
works!” &c. The Divine creations are
here represented as characterised by—

1. Their multitudinousness. “O Lord,
how manifold are Thy works!...
This great and wide sea wherein are
‘hings creeping innumerable, both small
and great beasts.” The earth, the air,
and the ,sea all teem with life, in end-
less variety. The sea with its life is
specially mentioned here. In its depths
there is abundant. life “of things small
and great, a life of the coral insect, as
well as of the whale, and also a life on
ite surface, where ‘ go the ships’ carrying


the thoughts and the passions, the skill
and the enterprise of human hearts.”

2. Their wisdom. “In wisdom hast
Thou made them all.” Every creature
which God has made, in its adaptations
to the ends of its existence, presents the
most admirable indications of the wis-
dom of its Creator. How immeasur-
ably great the wisdom represented in
the whole of His countless and infinitely
varied productions |

3. Their greatness. ‘‘ This great and
wide sea.” To us the earth seems vast,
the sea vaster. But when the astrono-
mer discourses to us, we are overwhelmed
with the vastness of the heavens, and the
earth and sea shrink into comparative
littleness and obscurity.

4, Their usefulness. To some persons
the sea seems a great waste, It is really
far otherwise. It is the great highway
of the world, and from its waters man
draws a great portion of his food. In


® See a very suggestive and striking Sermon by Dr. Bushnell on ‘‘ The Great Time-Keeper.”


Gon. i, 14,
134


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : PSALMS.





all the creations of God there is no use-
less creature, no useless thing,

5. Their continuity. ‘Thou sendest
forth Thy Spirit, they are created ; and
Thou renewest the face of the earth.”
The miracle of creation is constantly
going on in the world. Men die, but
man remains. “Generation passeth
away, and generation cometh.” Life suc-
ceeds death. Out of the grave of winter
ariseth the bright and blooming spring.

II. The Lord as the Proprietor of
all things. “The earth is full of Thy
riches ”—literally, “Thy possessions,”
All things in earth, air, and sea belong
unto the Lord. The fact of creatorship
establishes the most indefeasible claim
to proprietorship. The fact of the Lord’s
proprietorship of all things should—

l. Inspire us with gratitude. How
bountifully bas He enriched us out of
His storehouse !

2. Teach us humility. Our utter de-
pendence upon the Divine resources
should strip us of every vestige of pride,

3. Encourage our confidence, The
resources of the Lord are inexhaustible,
Depending upon Him we can never lack
support.

Il. The Lord as the Sustainer of all
things. “These wait all upon Thee, that
Thou mayest give them their meat in due
season.” All creatures are dependent up-
on His bounty. He supplieth the wants
of all creatures. The Divine support of
the universe is marked by three things:

1. Regularity. ‘He gives them their
meat in due season.” As want returns
the Divine provision is bestowed.

2. Hase. “Thou openest Thine hand,
they are filled with good.” The susten-
ance of the entire universe imposes not
the slightest strain upon His resources.
He has but to “open His hand,” and
the needy millions are satisfied.

3, Plenteousness, ‘‘ They are filled
with good.” In the dispensation of His


PSALM OIV.





gifts the Lord is bounteous. He giveth
to all His creatures liberally, and they
are satisfied.

IV. The Lord is the absolute Sove-
reign of all things,

1. In His hand are joy and trouble.
He opens His hand, and His creatures
are satisfied. “In His favour is life,”
and joy. He hides His “face, they
are troubled.” Let Him avert His face
and withdraw the tokens of His favour,
and His creatures are terrified ; they are
filled with consternation, as of one in the
presence of inevitable and utter ruin.
His smile is the joy and beauty of the
universe ; His frown would blast and
terrify it into death.

2. In His hand are life and death.
“‘Thou takest away their breath, they
die, and return to their dust. Thou
sendest forth Thy Spirit, they are
created.” When God withdraws His
support from any of His creatures,
death instantly supervenes, He is “ the
God of the spirits of all flesh.” All life
has its origin in Him, and is in His
hand. “In Him we live, and move, and
have our being.” Over the birth and
death of individuals, over the coming
and going of generations, He presides in
infinite wisdom and goodness.

Conciusion.—What is our acquaint-
ance with this great Being? To know
Him simply as Creator, Sustainer,
and Sovereign, is not enough for us.
We have violated the order of the
Creator, abused the bounty of the Sus-
tainer, and defied the authority of the
Sovereign. But blessed be His name,
He who is the Creator of all things is
also the Saviour of men. Do we know
Him as such? Our most urgent neces-
sity and imperative duty is first to ap-
proach the Redeemer by faith ; and then,
without any faltering of the tongue or
misgiving of the heart, we may join in
this Hymn of Creation.


Voices or CREATION.


(Verses 24, 27, 28.)


There are three preliminary points—
Wirst ; That this world ts not unfavour-


able to moral culture. The Psalmist is
holy on a planet which has been cursed,
135





and even through the darkness of the
Divine frown can see gleamings and
blazings of true glory.

Second: That all agencies are under
the control of an Infinite Intelligence.
All forces are under the management of
Divine wisdom and paternal love. Our
Father knows every tempest that sweeps
through the air—notes every dew-drop
that quivers on the opening flower—and
is acquainted with every breeze that
stirs the atmosphere.

Third: That the Divine resources are
equal to every exigency. The necessities
of nature are endless, In all parts of
the universe there are mouths opened,
eyes upturned, und hands outstretched
to a central Being. And what is His
reply to this million-tongued appeal
“Thou openest Thine hand, they are
filled with good.” Note the sublime
ease which is here indicated. Compare
it with the anxiety and fretfulness of
man when besieged with numerous
appeals. The Divine Benefactor simply
“opens His hand,” and the universe is
satisfied.

The Psalm suggests—

I, That the Divine existence is to
constitute the central fact in all our
contemplations of the universe. Gop
was the central fact in the Psalmist’s
contemplations. This fact serves three
purposes—

First: Jt disproves the speculations
of Pantheism. Pantheism teaches the
identity of God and nature ; but in this
Psalm we have more than fifty references,
by noun or pronoun, to the existence
and attributes of a personal agent. The
Psalmist distinctly teaches the existence
of a Being who is infinitely above the
powers and glories of nature, and for
whose pleasure they are and were
created.

Second: Jé undermines the material-
tstic theory. This theory teaches the
non-existence of mind, What we call
mind, it denominates a refinement of
matter. The entire Psalm, however,
proclaims and celebrates the presence of
Infinite Mind.

Third: Jt invests the universe with a
mystic sanctity. Everywhere we behold
the Divine handiwork. As the architect

136


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


TT


embodies his genius in the stupendous
temple or noble mansion, so has God
materialised His wisdom and power in
the physical creation, To me the wind
becomes sacred, as I remember that it
is written, “ Hk WALKETH UPON THE
WINGS OF THE WIND.”

IL That the principle of depen-
dence is everywhere developed in the
universe. “ These all wait upon Thee,”
&c. The Psalmist ignores the presence
of “chance,” or “accident;” in his
view Gop is enthroned, and the Divine
dominion is over all! We infer, then—

First : The existence of an absolutely
self-dependent power. Finite conception
is totally unequal to the comprehension
of such an existence... Our want of
comprehension, however, does not affect
the sublime doctrine of God’s infinite
independence.

Second: The spectal mission of each
part of the universe. The Psalmist in
his wide excursion and minute observa-
tion detects nothing that is wanting in
purpose,

Third : The profound humility by
which every intelligence should be charac-
tertsed. Seeing that we are dependent
on God for “life, and breath, and all
things,” it becometh us to dwell in the
dust of humility. Men of genius!
Men of money/ What have you that
ye have not received $

IIL That a devout contemplation
of the universe is calculated to in-
crease man’s hatred of sin. Having
beheld the symmetry, the adaptation,
and the unity of the Divine works, the
Psalmist directs his gaze to the moral
world, and, beholding its hideous de-
formity and loathsomeness, he exclaims,
‘‘ Let the sinners be consumed out of
the earth, and let the wicked be no
more ;” as though he had said, “There is
one foul blot on this glorious picture ;
one discordant note in this enrapturing
anthem, Let this spot be removed, and
the picture will be perfect; bring this
note into harmony, and the melody will
be soul-enthralling ”... I would con-
sume the sinner by consuming his
wickedness, Christ came to consume
the sinner by taking away the sin of the
world.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY. PSALMS.


PSALM OT.


SS en es


ConoLusion.—First : God must be
the central fact in your being. Second:
What ts the highest relationship you
susiain to the Creator? You must
sustain one relationship to God, viz,
that of a dependant. The worm beneath
your feet, if gifted with utterance, would
say, “I, too, am a dependant.” I call
you to be the sons and daughters of the
Tord Almighty. Third: This beneficent
Creator also reveals Himself as man’s


Saviour, You revere the God of
nature; I ask you to accept Him as
the God of salvation. Fourth: The
extinction of sin should be the good man’s
supreme object. ‘He who converteth
the sinner from the error of his way
shall save,” d&c. “They that turn many to
righteousness shall shine as the stars for
ever and ever.” —Joseph Parker, D.D.—
Abridged from “ The Cavendish Pulpit.”


Tae RENEWAL OF THE Face OF THE EARTH AN ILLUSTRATION
OF THE RENEWAL OF THE SOUL.


(Verse 30.


The renewal of the face of the earth
which takes place every spring speaks
to us (1) Of the presence of God. He
effects the great and beautiful change.
“ Thou renewest.” (2) Of the faithful
ness of God. (Gen. viii. 22.) Every
returning spring is an additional witness
to the Divine constancy. (3) Of the
tenderness of God. How tender are the
young leaf, the primrose, and the violet |
Faintly, yet truly, they mirror forth the
tenderness of God. ‘‘The Lord is very
pitiful and of tender mercy.” ‘ Thy
gentleness hath made me great.” (4)
Of th Divine delight in beauty. All
the bea..ty of the season is an outflow
of the Livine beauty; it tells us that
God loves beauty, that ‘God is beauty
and love itself.” We regard the renewal
of the face of the earth as an illustration
of the renewal of the soul,

I. The renewal of the face of the
earth succeeds to the dreary and
seemingly dead state of nature in
winter. Black, bleak, barren, and
lifeless is the aspect of the earth in
winter. The unrenewed soul is “ dead
in trespasses and sins,” Apart from
the renewing influence of the Divine
Spirit there is no beauty, no love, no
life in the human soul,

Il. The renewal of the face of the
earth is marked by life and freshness.
Buds, leaves, blossoms, grass, all are
fresh and new in spring. The man who
has passed from the winter of sin and
death into the spring of life and grace is
“a new creation, old things have passed


‘and the


“Thou renewest the face of the earth.”)


away, all things have become new.”
He is “created in Christ Jesus unto
good works ;” he enters upon a new
career, having new sympathies, new
purposes, new delights, new fellowships,
new conduct,

Iii. The renewal of the face of the
earth is very gradual. Only by slow
degrees does spring vanquish winter,
and cover the earth with the proofs of
her gracious reign. So is it with the
renewal of the soul. Though the soul
is quickened into divine life, yet the
full beauty and promise of the spiritual
spring will not be manifest until many
a battle has been waged with the sinful
tendencies and habits that formerly
ruled in us. The work of God both in
nature and in grace is very gradual,

IV. The renewal of the face of the
earth is irresistible. However reluc-
tant winter may be to relinquish his
reign in favour of spring, relinquish it
he must. So with the renewed soul.
Its progress may be very gradual, but it
is certain. If the life of grace is in
the soul, it will produce the flowers and
fruits of grace.

V. The renewal of the face of the
earth is initiatory to a glorious season
of maturity. Spring prepares the way
for the bright and beauteous summer,
bounteous and _ beneficent
autumn, This is the spring-time of
our spiritual life And God will
lead us on into the summer and
autumn, into the beauty and perfection
of our life. Only we must use the

137


POALM CIV.


spring-time and its opportunities well.
If we would reap bountifully we must
sow bountifully,

The most glorious of all renewals is
yet in the future. The spring-time of the


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : PSALMS.


a nnn ne EEE ESSERE





world is not yet, but it comes on apace,
(Isa, Ixi. 11; Ps. lxxxv. 11.) The whole
world shall be arrayed in the fresh-
ness and beauty of spiritual and divine
life.


Tas Harmony oF CREATION RESTORED.
(Verses 31-35.)


The Poet brings the Psalm to a close
with the expression of the desire that
the glory of God may be universal and
perpetual. In so doing he presents for
our consideration—

I. The glory of the Lord in His
works, ‘The glory of the Lord shall
endure for ever,” &c.

1. He manifests His great power in
His works, ‘ He looketh on the earth,
and it trembleth ; He toucheth the hills,
and they smoke.” When the Lord
came down upon Sinai “the smoke as-
cended as the smoke of a furnace, and
the whole mountain quaked greatly.”
So great are His majesty and power that
He has, as it were, merely to look upon
the earth, and it is awed and fearful
before Him; He has but to touch the
mountains, and they smoke as with His
wrath. By His omnipotence He sus-
tains the universe, and in a moment He
could blot it out of existence,

2. He realises joy in His works, “ The
Lord shall rejoice in His works.” When
He created the world, He looked upon
His works with complacency, and pro-
nounced them “very good.” He still
rejoices in the order, beneficence, and
beauty of His creations. In His re-
demptive works also He realises great
joy.

3. He is pratsed by His intelligent
and loyal creatures. ‘TI will sing unto
the Lord as long as I live ; I will sing
praise to my God while I have my be-
ing.” With joy the godly man resolves—


** Til praise Him while Xe lends me breath;
And when my voice is lost in death,
Praise shall employ my nobler powers:
My days of praise skall ne'er be past,
While life and thought and being last,
And immortality endures,” — Watis,


4. ob glovy ts perpetual, “The
8


glory of the Lord shall endure for ever.”
The glory of man and of his works
passeth away, but the glory of the Lord
shall continue and increase for ever.

If. The joy of the righteous in the
Lord. ‘My meditation of Him shall
be sweet ; I will be glad in the Lord
Hengstenberg: “ May my meditation be
acceptable unto Him.” Perowne: “Let
my meditation be sweet unto Him.”
The desire of the Psalmist is that his
meditation on the works of the Lord
may be an acceptable offering unto Him.
He rejoiced in the Lord. All his joys
centred in the Lord. Such joys are
pure. They are one of the fruits of the
Holy Spirit. (Gal. v. 22.) Strengthen-
ing. ‘The joy of the Lord is your
strength.” Constant. “That My joy
might remain in you, and your joy
might be full.” “Your joy no man
taketh from you.” Perpetual. “In
Thy presence is fulness of joy ; at Thy
right hand there are pleasures for ever-
more.” “This is the truest, highest
harmony of creation ; God finding plea-
sure in His creatures, His reasonable
creatures finding their joy in Him.”

Ill. The desire of the righteous
concerning the wicked. “Let the
sinners be consumed out of the earth,
and let the wicked be no more,” The
glorious harmony of creation “ has been
rudely broken ; the sweet notes of the
vast instrument of the universe are
‘jangled ont of tune.’ Sin is the discord
of the world, Sin has changed the order
(xé¢wo¢) into disorder. Hence the pro-
phetic hope that sinners shall be con-
sumed, that the wicked shall be no more,
that thus the earth shall be purified, the
harmony be restored, and God once
more, as at the first, pronounce His
creation ‘ very good.’”—Perowne. The
eradication of evil should be the earnest


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





desire of every good man. (See the re-
marks of Dr, Parker on this point in his
sermon on “Voices of Creation,” on a


PSALM OV,





ereation shall be restored. The “ Very
good” of ancient time shall again be
heard ; and heard over a world never


preceding page.) : more to be marred by sin. For the
Conctusion. Here is a glorious realisation of this prospect let us pray
prospect. The broken harmonies ef and labour.
PSALM OV.
INTRODUCTION.


“This Psalm,” says Perowne, “like the 78th and the 106th, has for its theme the early history
of Israel, and God’s wonders wrought on behalf of the nation ; but it differs from both those Psalma
in the intention with which it pursues this theme. The 78th Psalm is didactie: its object ia
to teach a lesson ; it recalls the past as conveying instruction and warning for the present.
The 106th Psalm is a psalm of penitential confession, The history of the past appears in it
only as a history of Israel’s sin. In this Psalm, on the other hand, the mighty acts of Jehovah
for His people, from the first dawn of their national existence, are recounted as a fitting subject
for thankfulness, and as a ground for future obedience. Those ‘interpositions of God are specially
dwelt upon which have a reference to the fulfilment of His promise, which exhibit most clearly
His faithfulness to His covenant. Hence the series begins with the covenant made with Abra-
han, tracing all the steps in its fulfilment to the occupation of the promised land.” Neither
the author of the Psalm nor the occasion on which it was composed is known.


Tue Works AND WorsHIP OF THE LORD,
(Veress 1-7.)


Let us consider— Lord.” Barnes: ** Let their heart re-


I. The worship of the Divine Being.
The Psalmist calls upon Israel to cele-
brate the worship of Jehovah, in—

1. Thankful praise. ‘Oh give thanks
unto the Lord, call upon His name.
Sing unto Him, sing psalms unto Him,
Glory ye in His holy name.” The rea-
sons for this praise are the Lord’s glori-
ous deeds, afterwards mentioned in the
Psalm, and His holiness. God should
be thankfully and joyfully praised be-
cause of His perfections and works,

2. Trustful prayer. Here is prayer
for Divine strength: “Seek the Lord
and His strength.” Only as we are
strengthened by the Lord are we able to
perform the duties and endure the trials
of life. For Divine favour: ‘“ Seek
His face evermore;” 4¢., Seek His
favour. (See a sketch on Ps, Ixxx. 3.)
Here is perpetual prayer: “ Ever-
more.” The godly soul will seek the
favour of the Lord through all time and
all eternity, and will progress in the en-
joymentof that favour evermore. Here
is prayer with gladness of heart. “ Let
the heart of them rejoice that seek the


joice, (a) because they are permitted to
seek Him, (6) because they are tnclined
to seek Him, (c) because they have such
a God to come to,—one so mighty, so
holy, so good, so gracious.” And, may
we not add? because of the encourage-
ment which His former deeds afford us
in seeking Him.

Il. The character of the Divine
works, The deeds to which the Psalmist
refers are those wrought on behalf of
His people. He represents them as—

1. Marvellous, ‘ His wondrous works,
- ». marvellous works that He hath
done.” The deeds mentioned in this
Psalm (verses 27-41) were fitted to ex-
cite wonder and admiration.

2. Significant. In verse 5, Perowne
does not translate “ His wonders,” as
in the A.V., but “ His tokens,” The
miracles which He wrought were not only
surprising but instructive, His doings in
the past were a foundation on which
to base a joyful hope for the future.
They abounded in encouragement and in
warning.

3, Judicial. “The judgments of

139





His mouth.” “ The wonders of God in
Egypt were exactly so many judicial
decisions of God in the case of Israel
against the Egyptians, or of the Church
of God against the world.”

III. The treatment of the Divine
works, The Poet calls upon the people
to—

1. Remember them. ‘ Remember His
marvellous works,” The doings of God
on behalf of His people, both pro-
vidential and redemptive, should never
be forgotten by them. To forget them
would involve (1) base ingratitude to
God ; (2) foolish disregard of the advan-
tage of remembering them. The recollec-
tion of them would tend to strengthen
faith, promote obedience, &c,

2. Ponder them. ‘Talk of all His
wondrous works.” Both Hengstenberg
and Perowne translate, ‘‘ Meditate,”
&e. Reflection must follow recollection.
(See a sketch on Ps, Ixxvii. 11, 12.)

3. Publish them. ‘“ Make known His
deeds among the people.” Declaration


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; PSALMS.


should follow reflection. (See on Pa,
Ixxvii. 11, 12.)

IV. The people of the Divine choice.
Ye seed of Abraham His servant, ye
children of Jacob His chosen. He is the
Lord our God.” “ Hs chosen, plural, refer
ring to the people, not to Jacob, It is on
this ground, because they are Jacob’s chil-
dren, heritors of the covenant and the
promises, that they are bound beyond
all others to ‘remember’ what God
had done for them.”—-Perowne, As the
chosen people of God, they were the
heirs of His promises, and so His
mighty deeds in the past were pledges
of His omnipotent help in the future,
Being the people of God, theirs was the
privilege of His protection and support
and salvation. And theirs was the
duty of praising His name, publishing
His deeds, and performing His com-
mands,

Let the people of God, in this age of
Gospel grace, be mindful of both their
privileges and their responsibilities,


SprrirvaL Joys,
(Verses 8, ‘Let the heart of them rejoice that seek the Lord.”)


Here is a generic term for God’s people
—-“‘they seek the Lord,”—definite, yet
compreliensive ; it may be applied to
the awakened sinner —he “seeks the
Lord,’—to the professing Christian—
all his life he is “ seeking the Lord,”—
and the matured, departing believer can
do no more; he dies, “ seeking the
Lord,” nor will he fally find Him until
he sees Him as He is in glory,—“I
shall be satisfied when I awake with
Thy likeness.” To such persons it is
that the Psalmist addresses the exhor-
tation of the text: “ Let the heart of
them rejoice,” &c. Observe—

I, That it is God’s will that His
people should be happy. We might
show that, notwithstanding all the
disturbing causes, the goodness of God
in desiring His creatures’ happiness
appears in the animate world and
among men in general, but the text
limits it to His own people.

1, Consider what God has done to
promote and secure the happiness of His

140


‘in them.


people. He has redeemed them from
sin, guilt, and corruption by the death,
and passion, and glorification of His
dear Son, That Son lives to intercede
for them, and supplies them with all
grace out of His fulness in glory. To
comfort, cheer, animate, as well as to
sanctify them, His Holy Spirit dwells
“All things are theirs,”
They have abounding consolation and
Divine joys, and “ peace which passeth
7 understanding.” See Ps. Ixxxiv.

2. The exhortations to joy and peace
abound tn Holy Scripture. It is a
duty, as well as a privilege, for believers
to be happy. See Pa xxxiii. 1; John
xvi. 22; 2 Cor. ii. 14; Eph. iv, 4.

Il. Still in all ages God’s people
have been for the most part a sad and
sorrowing people.

It ts often assumed that their portion
tn this world ts usually a sorrowful one.
Large portions of sadness were adminis-
tered to Jacob, to Joseph, to Moses, to


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PSALM GY,





David, Elijah, Jeremiah—to say nothing
of Job himself. See Acts xiv, 22,

- And of modern Christians tt ts con-
stantly alleged that they are gloomy and
melancholy,—and there is much in them
to justify the world’s accusation, as
happy and rejoicing believers are rather
the exception than the rule among per-
sons of piety.

Itt. How is this to be accounted
for? God has made a rich provision for
His people’s happiness, but they are not
happy,—why is this ?

May tt not be accounted for by their
trials, temptations, afflictions ? Certainly
not! because God sends corresponding
help and grace; all persons of experi-
ence would attest that the happiest and
most rejoicing Christians are to be found
among those who are most deeply afflic-
ted. See 2 Cor. i. 5.

Does not God sometimes withhold
spiritual consolations from Hs farth ful
and consistent people? He does so.
See Isa. lL 10. But such cases are rare,
end the time of shadows short, and
speedily lead to stronger exercises of
faith and surer joys. The absence of
religious joy and peace is chiefly to be
eccounted for—

1. Jn some instances by the hollowness
of religious profession. The heart is
not true and right with God,—some
secret passion, appetite, lust, desire, is
allowed or indulged in, There can be
ao real happiness in religion while an
idol is in the heart, See Matt. vi. 24;
} John iii. 21.

2. Where there ts not direct heart
treachery nor self-deception there may be
gn unsuccessful conflict with indwelling
tin. See Rom. vii; 2 Cor. v.4; Gal.
v. 17. Natural character, impure or
sceptical, or vain, passionate, and
revengeful—and the workings of these
destroy peace of mind.

3. Defective views of God’s all-sufficient
grace ;—labour as slaves, as hirelings,


as legalists—forgetting that He who
purchased forgiveness secured grace,
See John xv, 4; Rom, vii. 25; 2 Cor.
xii. 8, 9.

4, Errors as to the ground and source
of a believer's rejoicing. Our joy, peace,
comfort, &c., must spring not from our
growth in grace, nor from anything in
us nor done by us, but in and out of
Christ alone—and all our sorrows are
intended to drive us to this, (Ps. v.
11,12; Isa. xii, 1-3; Ilxi, 10, 11;
Hab. iii. 18.) So in the New Testa-
ment, (Phil. iv, 4.) God in Christ is
the only abiding source of happiness to
His people.

1. Let all sincere Christians believe
that a sorrowful experience is a defective
and imperfect condition of soul. Better
be sad than indifferent, slumbering, &c.
But a melancholy, gloomy, downcast,
doubting state is not the normal condi-
tion of a believer.

2. Let all search and see whether any
allowed sin, or inconsistency, or tdol,
remain in their hearts. There can be
no peace, no success, no joy, till this
Achan is stoned and burnt.

3. Let no one be satisfied until he ts
both happy and holy. Both within your
reach,

Are you afflicted?—no matter from
what source, rejoice. ‘ Suffer affliction
with people of God,” &e,

Consolation withheld # Wait, and
watch, and pray—and look for the
Spirit, and search for Christ until you
find Him.

Corruptions # “Nothing too hard
for the Lord.” Union with Christ by
His Spirit alone subdues them.

Confused ideas# perplexed views %
doubt? See Isa. liv. 13. Pray for
light, &c.

Happiness, present now, immediate, tn
store for you. ‘‘My soul doth magnify
the Lord, and my spirit rejoiceth in God
my Saviour.” ——/’. Close, D.D.


Tue FarruruL PRoMISER,
(Verses 8-15.)


The Poet here sings of the covenant
ef the Lord with His ancient people,


and the early stages of its fulfilment.
In doing this he brings ont several truths
ja)


POALM OV.





of universal applicatiuu as to God and
His engagements with map, on which
we may profitably reflect.

I. The Lord’s remembrance of His
promises. ‘He hath remembered His
covenant for ever.” God cannot forget
anything. All the things which He hath
promised He will perform, though tedious
ages may intervene between the giving
of the promise and its fulfilment. If
God were to forget His engagements He
would cease to be God. “If God were
to forget for one moment,” says Mac-
donald, “the universe would grow black
—vanish—rush out again from the realm
of law and order into chaos and night,”
His tnfinite intelligence, His wnchange-
ableness and His past doings afford
ample guarantees of the Lord’s unfailing
remembrance of His promises,

IL. The perpetuity of His promises.
“The word which He commanded to a
thousand generations.” Hengstenberg
translates: ‘The word which He or-
dained,” &c. Perowne: “The word
which He confirmed,” &c. ‘ A thousand
generations” means innumerable gene-
rations, always, As the Psalmist says,
the covenant is “an everlasting cove-
nant.” “For the gifts and calling of
God are without repentance.” ‘“‘ Heaven
and earth shall pass away, but My words
shall not pass away.” ‘The promises of
of God are to all generations. This is a
glorious truth. Promises of pardon,
sufficient grace, eternal and blessed life
to every believer in the Lord, are for
man in all ages and in all lands,

III, The confirmation of His pro-
mises. ‘The covenant which He made
with Abraham, and His oath unto Isaac,
and confirmed the same unto Jacob for
a law, and to Israel for an everlasting
covenant.” For the confirmation to
Isaac, see Gen. xxvi. 3-5 ; and to Jacob,
Gen. xxviii. 13-15 ; and to Israel, Gen.
xxxv. 9-12. In the experience of every
generation God confirms the truth of
His promises. Every age, as it passes
away from this world, leaves behind it
an additional volume testifying most
conclusively to the faithfulness of God.

IV. The recipients of His promises.
Concerning these the Psalmist indicates
three characteristica) They are—

142


HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY: PSALMS.





1. Believers of the Divine Word. Abra-
ham, Isaac, and Jacob were eminent fox
faith, (Heb. xi. 8, 9, 17-21.) God
required the Israelites to believe His
word and obey His commands. ‘The
blessings of salvation are promised to
those who believe.

2. Consecrated to the Divine service.
“Mine anointed.” The patriarchs were
not anointed; but the Poet uses the
language of his own day to set forth the
idea that they were called and conse-
crated to the service of God. Those
who truly believe the word of God, and
accept the offers of His grace, devote
themselves to His service. To them the
promises of protection, sanctification,
and the heavenly inheritance are made,

3. Recipients of Divine communica-
tions. ‘My propheta” “A good
instance,” says Perowne, “of the wide
signification of this word. It is derived
from a root signifying to botl, to bubble
up. The prophet is one in whose soul
there rises a spring, a rushing stream of
Divine inspiration. In the later language
he not only receives the Divine word, but
he is made the utterer of zt, the organ of
its communication to others. But in
the earlier instances, as in that of Abra-
ham, his official character does not
distinctly appear, though doubtless, like
Noah, he was ‘a preacher of righteous-
ness,’ and taught his own family (and
through them ultimately the whole
world) the way of the Lord. See Gen,
xviii, 19. Here the prophet means
little more than one to whom God
speaks, one with whom He holds con-
verse, whether by word, or vision, oF
dream, or inner voice. (Comp, Num.
xii. 6-8.) We approach nearest to what
is meant by styling the patriarchs pro-
phets when we read such paxsages as
Gen. xviii. 17; ‘And Jehovah said, Shall
I hide from Abraham that thing which
I do?’ or again, the pleading of Abra-
ham for Sodom, in verses 23-33 of the
same chapter. It is, indeed, as plead-
ing with God tn tntercession that Abra
ham is termed a prophet in Gen. xx. 7.
The title is thus very similar to that of
the ‘Friend of God’ (Isa. xli. 8; 2
Chron. xx. 7; James ii, 23). The
people of God, in whose experience His


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


gracious promises are fulfilled, are in
communication with Him. He speaks
to them by His Word and by His Spirit.
They have fellowship with Him. Such
are three of the characteristics of the
recipients of the promises of the Lord.
V. The fulfilment of His promises.
1. God's promises will be fulfilled how-
ever great the apparent improbability.
When God promised the land of Canaan
to the patriarchs, the fulfilment of the
promise seemed utterly improbable. At
that time they were (1) very “few tn
number.” Was it likely that they would
ever be able to take possession of the
land? or that their seed would ever be
“as the stars of the heaven” for multi-
tude? (2) They were strangers in that
land. They did not unite themselves
with the people of the land, or acquire
property there. (3) They were wan-
derers. ‘‘ They went from one nation to
another, from one kingdom to another
people.” They had no fixed residence.
They were exposed to frequent dangers.
How improbable that the land promised


HIstToRIcAu


to them should ever be theirs! Yet the
Lord fulfils His promise, and gives them
the land. The things which appear to
man improbable, or even impossible, God
accomplishes, if He has promised to do
so. Apply this to the perfection of tn-
dividual character, to the future triumphs
of Christianity in the world, &c.

2. God’s promises will be fulfilled
though their fulfilment may necessitate
the control of the greatest powers. “ He
suffered no man to do them wrong ; yea,
He reproved kings for their sakes.” See
Gen. xii. 10-20; xx. 1-7. The Lord con-
trols the mightiest as well as the meanest
powers, for the protection of His people
and the fulfilment of His promises,

Concuusion. 1. Warning to the
wicked. God will inflict the punishment
which He has denounced against sin.
2. Hncouragement (1) to the repentant
sinner. The promises of forgiveness and
grace are gloriously reliable. (2) Zo the
people of God. However improbable,
apparently, not one good thing of all that
He hath promised shall fail.


SURPRISES,


(Verses 16-24.)


From the 16th verse to the 38th verse
the Psalmist gives an outline of the
history of Israel in Egypt, exhibiting in
it the fulfilment of the Divine purposes
and the working of the Divine power.
In the verses under consideration at
present we have several surprises of the
Divine providence.

J. A famine driving the people from
the land promised to them, yet contri-
buting to their possession of it. ‘‘ He
called for a famine upon the land; He
brake the whole staff of bread.” The
famine referred to is that which occur-
red in the time of Jacob, and which
occasioned his migration into Egypt.
This famine was no chance occurrence $
it came not merely by the operation of
material laws; God called for it; He
ordered it. By reason of it “ Israel
also came into Egypt, and Jacob so-
jenrned in the land of Ham.” Thus
they departed from the promised iand ;


and so the fulfilment of the promise was
rendered apparently more unlikely than
ever. Yet in the providence of God their
absence from the land of Canaan contri-
buted to their ultimate possession of it.
While in Egypt they increased in num-
ber, in power, in intelligence, é&c.

II. A slave becomes the saviour of
a country and of the chosen people,
Notice here—

1. The sin of man, “Joseph was
sold for a servant,” or slave. Joseph's
position as a slave in Egypt was brought
about by the envy and jealousy, the
hatred and cruelty, of his brethren.

2. The providence of God. “He
sent a man before them.” God so or-
dered events that Joseph was taken into
Egypt, and there wondrously enabled to
preserve the people of that land from
perishing by famine, and to arrange for
the reception aud support of Israel and
his family Joseph’s position in Egypt

143


gGALM OV.





was not an accident or a freak of for-
tune. ‘“ Be not grieved, nor angry that
ye sold me hither ; for God did send me
before you to preserve life, Ye thought
evil against me ; but God meant it unto
good, to bring to pass, as it is this day,
to save much people alive.” The brethren
of Joseph were free in their wickedness
in selling him; they were guilty, in
the sight of God, of jealousy, hatred,
cruelty. God’s overruling of man’s sin
does not extenuate his guilt, ‘‘Surely
the wrath of man shall praise Thee,” &c.
In the providence of God, the detested
slave became the honoured saviour of
nations.

IIL A prisoner is made the ruler
over the land.

1.‘ Imprisonment as the result of the
wickedness of another. Joseph was im-
prisoned despite his own virtue, and by
reason of the sins of his master’s wife.
(Gen. xxxix. 7-20.)

2. Imprisonment painful to the suf-
ferer. ‘‘ Whose feet they hurt with
fetters ; he was laid in iron.” Margin,
as in the Heb. : ‘‘ His soul came into
iron.” P. B. V. : “The iron entered into
his soul” is a very expressive render-
ing, but it is incorrect. Perowne points
out that in this verse we have a picture
of an imprisonment much more severe
“than that given in Gen, xxxix. 20-23,
xl 4. But it may refer to the earlier
stage of the imprisonment, before he had
won the confidence of his gaoler, or it
may be tinged with the colouring of
poetry.” But even, under the least un-
favourable circumstances, imprisonment
is painful to an upright man. It is one
of the most severe trials to the soul of
such a man. Moreover, in the case of
Joseph, imprisonment was a trial of his
faith, “The word of the Lord tried
him.” (od had promised to the family
of which he was a member the posses-
sion of Canaan; and to him, in his
dreams, exaltation and honour had been
promised. So the saying or promise of
God is said to try him, because during
the years of his suffering and imprison-
ment it tested his faith and patience,
Would God make good His word and
raise him to honour? was an inquiry
which oe pressed itself upon Joseph


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : PSALMS,





3. Imprisonment Divinely overrvded.
Joseph’s imprisonment was overruled by
God to promote the accomplishment of
purposes the most important and bene-
volent. The Psalmist mentions (1) The
means by which his release was brought
about. ‘ Until the time that his word
came.” The “word” is the word of
Joseph by which he interpreted to the
servants of Pharaoh their dreams in the
prison, The verification of his inter-
pretation of the dreams and his release
from prison are regarded as cause and
effect. (2) The wisdom which he die
played, Joseph manifested such wisdom
in interpreting the dreams of Pharaoh,
and advising him as to the measures to
be adopted to provide for the people
during the years of famine, tliat the
elders of Egypt were instructed by him,
‘To teach his senators wisdom,” is not
to be interpreted that he literally in-
structed them in the art of politics, He
displayed a wisdom superior to theirs, by
which they were instructed. (3) The
power with which he was invested. Asa
result of the wisdom which he mani-
fested, Pharaoh “ made him lord of his
house and ruler of all his substance,”
&c. The administration of the affairs of
the kingdom was placed entirely under
his control, The most complete authority
was given unto him. (Gen. xli. 44.)
Wonderful are the changes brought about
in the providence of God, and wonder-
ful the means by which they are brought


‘about !


IV. A subject people growing
stronger than a sovereign people.
“He increased His people greatly, and
made them stronger than their enemies,”
(Exod, i. 7-9.) This increase in number
and power the Poet attributes to God.
The virtues of a godly character promote
the growth and progress of a people.
We have an illustration in the growth
of the Christian provinces of Turkey in
Europe, while the dominant Mahom-
medans are decaying.

Conciusion. From these surprises
in the outworking of the Divine Provi-
dence, let us learn to Trust Gop amid
its mysteries, 1. Let those who are con~
demned and suffer wrongfully trust Him
In good time He will vindicate them,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMB.


PBALM 6Y.


SS


even as He did Joseph. 2. When the
current of events seem opposed to His
avowed purposes and promises, let us
frust Him. He oft moves in a way that


is mysterious to ua, But He will ao-
complish His purposes and fulfil His


promises,


A Cruz. PrERszourion aNp a GuLoRious EMANCIPATION,


(Verses 25-38. )


In these verses the Psalmist gives us
& glimpse of—

ZL Israel persecuted in Egypt. We
see here

1. The root of the persecution. “He
turned their heart to hate His people.”
The hostility of the Egyptians to the
Israelites is here ascribed to God. Now
we know that God is not in any sense
the author of moral evil. “God is
light.” Hence the statement of the
Psalmist has occasioned much difficulty.
The difficulty is of the same kind as
when it is said that the Lord hardened
the heart of Pharaoh. (See Homiletie
Commentary, Critical Note, on Exodus
vii. 3.) We shall do well to bear in
mind three facts. (1) Pharach and
his people were free in what they did to
the Israelites, (2) The Lord mani-
fested His disapprobation of their con-
duct. (3) Yet, “nothing—not even
the human will, free as it is—is inde
pendent of God ; and not even the worst
passions of men are outside of His plan,
or independent in such a sense that He
does not afford the opportunity for their
development and display.” God so
ordered events that the Egyptians be-
came the enemies of His people, and
rendered their removal to another land
necessary. The goodness of the Lord
to the Israelites exasperated the Egyp-
tians against them. “Though God is
not the author of the sins of men, yet
He serves His own purposes by them.”
The root of the persecution was the
hatred of the Egyptians, The growing
number and power of the Israelites
aroused the jealousy, suspicion, and
hatred of the Egyptians, Hatred is
incipient murder.

2. The manner of the persecution.
“To deal subtilly with his servants.”
Tix s-~4 hich is here rendered “to


voL w


deal subtilly,” im Gen. xxxvii. 18,
is rendered “they conspired against.”
There is a reference to Exod. i. 10:
‘*Come on, let us deal wisely with them,
lest they multiply,” &. So, with
diabolic cunning and cruelty, the male
children were ordered to be slain as soon
as they were born, and the burdens of
the people were grievously increased.
Malice is crafty to destroy: Satan has
the serpent’s subtlety with his venom,”

IL Israel emancipated from Egypt.
God listened to the cries of His op-
pressed people and delivered them.
Their emancipation was effected by the
Lurd God—

1. By human instruments. He em-
ployed Moses and Aaron to accomplish
this great work. They were (1) Divinely
commissioned, “He sent Moses His
servant, Aaron whom He had chosen.”
They were not popular agitators, but
men of distinguished abilities, called of
God to a great work. (2) Divinely
authenticated, “They showed His signs
among them, and wonders in the land
of Ham.” (Comp. Exod. iv. 28, 30;
x. 2; Psalm Ixxviii. 43.) (3) Obedient
to the Divine commission, ‘They re-
belled not against His words.” At first
Moses was unwilling to undertake the
mission ; but afterwards he and Aaron
shrank not from the task, but faithfully
performed the bidding of the Lord.
Unmoved by fear of Pharaoh, or by pity
for his people, they did the work which
the Lord committed to them.

2. By overcoming the most persistent
reststance on the part of Pharaoh. Pha-
raoh would not obey the Divine com-
mand until the Lord had visited him
and his people and country with terrible
plagues. Verses 28-36. (See Homiletic
Commentary on Psalm Ixxviii. 42-53,
and Exod, vii.-xii.)


FeALM OV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


——_—————————————————— eee


3. In circumstances favourable to His
people. They were brought out of
Egypt with (1) Wealth. “He brought
them forth with silver and gold.” In
Exodus xii. 35 it is said, ‘‘ They bor-
rowed of the Egyptians jewels of silver
and jewels of gold.” “ Borrowed” is
an unhappy rendering, as the word—
Nw —signifies to penetrate, to ask pres-
singly, to require, to request, to beg, de,
(2) Health, ‘There was not one feeble
person among their tribes.” Perowne:
‘There was none among their tribes
that stumbled.” Notwithstanding their
afflictions, the people were healthy and
hardy when they left Egypt. (3) Re
spect. “Egypt was glad when they


departed; for the fear of them fell
upon them,” The Lord had so pleaded
their cause that they were regarded by
the Egyptians as under the special pro-
tection of God, The Egyptians were
afraid of them, and realised a great
feeling of relief when they had gone
out from amongst them. (4) Joy.
“He brought forth His people with
joy, His chosen with gladness” (verse
43). God exchanged their cry by reason
of their burdens, for glad songs by reason
of their deliverance.

Conctusion. Our subject speaks—

1. Encouragement to the oppressed.

2. Warning to the oppressor.

3. Hope for the future of the race
“The Lord reigneth,”


Divine Buirssmvas mv Homan Pitermaen
(Verses 39-45.)


In these verses the Psalmist briefly
refers to the goodness of God to the
Israelites in the wilderness, and their
inheritance of Canaan, and states the
reason why He had so dealt with them,
and His purpose in His dealings with
them. This portion of the poem may
be used as illustrating the blessings of
God in the pilgrimage of human life.
These blessings are—

IL Adapted to human needs. The
needs of Israel in the wilderness repre-
sent the needs of human life. The Divine
blessings were adapted to those needs,

1. Direction. ‘He spread a cloud
for a covering, and fire to give light in
the night.” ‘In the daytime He led
them with a cloud, and all the night
with a light of fire.” See Exodus xiii.
21. “The way of man is not in him-
self; it is not in man that walketh to
direct his steps.” “In all thy ways
acknowledge Him, and He shall direct
thy paths.” He does so—(1) by the
teachings of His Word; (2) by the
influences of His Spirit; (3) by the
indications of circumstances.

2. Protection. In the burning wilder-
ness the cloud was a protection to the
people against the heat of the sun by
day; and by night the fire shielded them
from the attacks of wild beasts, God

146


is the sure defence of His people. “Who
is he that will harm you, if ye be fol-
lowers of that which is good ?”

3. Proviston. “They asked, and He
brought quails, and satisfied them with
the bread of heaven. He opened the
rock, and the waters gushed out; they
ran in the dry places like a river.” (On
verse 40, see Homtletic Commentary on
Ps, Ixxviii. 24-29; and on verse 41,
see Homiletie Commentary on Ps. Ixxviii.
15, 16.) God provides for His people
all needful things for the body. Of the
righteous the Lord says, “ Bread shall
be given him, his waters shall be sure.”
“No good will He withhold from them
that walk uprightly.” (Matt. vi. 30-32).
Spiritually His provisions are adapted
to all our needs. ‘As thy days, so
shall thy strength be.” ‘My grace is
sufficient for thee; for My strength is
made perfect in weakness,”

4. Possession. ‘‘He gave them the
lands of the heathen, and they inherited
the labour of the people.” (See Homs-
letic Commentary on Ps. Ixxviii. 55.)
During the wanderings in the wilder-
ness the Israelites looked forward to
the possession of Canaan as the end of
their wanderings, their rest and home,
A glorious inheritance awaits the good
at the end of their pilgrimage, —“ an


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALHS.


—S


inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled,
and that fadeth not away, is reserved in
heaven” for them. This is an inspira-
tion during the pilgrimage, &c.

IL Adequate to human needs. “He
satisfied them.” “The waters ran in
the dry places like a river.” The Divine
provision for the Israelites in the wilder-
ness was abundant. No one lacked
anything. Having the Lord with them,
they had all-sufficiency. So in the pil-


grimage of human life the Divine pro- -


visions are adequate to every need,
“ God shall supply all your need accord-
ing to His riches in glory by Christ
Jesus.” ‘God is able to make all grace
abound toward you, that ye, always hav-
ing all-sufficiency in all things, may
abound to every good work.” “He is
able to do exceeding abundantly above
all that we ask or think.” His wisdom
is adequate to our direction; His wisdom
and power to our protection; His re-
sources for our provision, &c.

III. Guaranteed by Divine faithful-
ness. ‘For He remembered His holy
promise, and Abraham His servant.”
It is said of Israel in Egypt: “And
God heard their groaning, and God
remembered His covenant with Abra-
ham,” d&c. (Exodus ii. 24, 25), “ Be-
cause the Lord loved you, and because
He would keep the oath which He had
sworn unto your fathers, hath the Lord


PEALM OVE,





brought you out with a mighty hand,”
&c, They were unworthy and unfaith-
ful, but God did these great things for
them because of His word to their
fathers. The faithful promises of God
guarantee to us the blessings we need
during our pilgrimage. Harvest may
be blighted; fountains may be dried
up; all finite resources may fail,


**Tf this fail,
The pillar’d firmament is rottenness,
And earth’s base built on stubble,”


IV. Bestowed for the most worthy
purpose. The end of all God’s dealings
with the Israelites was “that they might
observe His statutes, and keep His laws.”
His design was that Israel should be a
holy nation, representing Him in the
world, and claiming the world for Him as
His own. The final cause of all the bles-
sings He confers upon His people now
is their conformity to His will. We
are redeemed, called, guided, guarded,
sustained, and animated with hopes
of heaven, all with a view to our holi-
ness.

The blessings of God in the pilgrimage
of life—

V. Call for devout praise. “ Praise
ye the Lord.” He has done, and is
ever doing, great things for us; and to
Him let us ascribe the praise, Halle-
lujah !


PSALM OVL


INTRODUCTION.


*¢ This is the first of a series of Hallelujah Psalms : Psalms of which the word Hallelujah ia,
as it were, the inscription (cvi., exi.-cxiii., exvii., cxxxv., cxlvi.—cl.), As in the last Psalm,
so here the history of Israel is recapitulated. In that it was turned into a thanksgiving; im
this it forms the burden of a confession. There God’s mighty acts for His people were cele
brated with joy ; here His people’s sin is humbly and sorrowfully acknowledged. Nothing ia
more remarkable in these great historical Psalms than the utter absence of any word or
sentiment tending to feed the national vanity. All the glory of Israel’s history is confessed to
be due, not to her heroes, her priests, her prophets, but to God; all the failures which are
written upon that history, all discomfitures, losses, reverses, the sword, famine, exile, are re-
cognised as the righteous chastisement which the sin of the nation has provoked. This is the
strain of such Psalms as the 78th, the 105th, the 106th. This is invariably the tone assumed
by all the divinely-instructed teachers of the people, by the prophets in their great sermons, by
the poets in their contributions to the national liturgy. ; ;

“<From verse 47 it may be fairly inferred that the Psalm is of the date of the Exile, or was
written shortly after the return of the first company of exiles.” —Perowne. é: a

Hengstenberg : ‘The situation 18 described axactly in verses 46 and 47 ; and “ia that
towards the end of the captivity.”

The author of the Psalm is not known.





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMB.


CHARACTERISTICS OF THE BLESSED PEOPLE.
(Verses 1-5.)


“The first five verses,” says Perowne,
“seem to stand alone, and to have little
or no direct connection with the rest of
the Psalm..... ‘The first verse, no
doubt, is of the nature of a doxological
formula, such as we find in some other
of these later Psalms. But the second
and third verses have an immediate bear-
ing on what follows, What so fitting
to introduce the confession of a nation’s
sin and ingratitude as the rehearsal of
God’s goodness manifested to it, and the
acknowledgment of the blessedness of
those who, instead of despising that good-
ness, as Israel had done, walked in the
ways of the Lord, keeping judgment and
doing righteousness (verse 3)? Or, again,
what more natural than that the sense
of the national privilege, the claim of a
personal share in that privilege, should
spring in the heart and rise to the lips
of one who felt most deeply the national
sin and ingratitude?”

We regard these verses as presenting
to us certain characteristics of the blessed
people,

L They are a worshipping people.

l. They have exalted views of the Divine
greatness and glory. “Who can utter
the mighty acts of the Lord? who can
show forth all His praise?” The acts
of the Lord are 80 many, so great, 80
marvellous, and so glortous, that man is
unable adequately to celebrate them.
“The transcendent greatness of the
deeds of God ought not to keep us back
from praising Him, but contains in it the
strongest motive to praise; the farther
off the goal is, the more earnestly must
we strive.” —Hengstenberg.

2. They appreciate the Divine benefits.
“He is good, His mercy endureth for
ever.” The goodness here meutioned is
not so much the excellence of His own
nature, as His gracious dealings with
man. The manifestations of His mercy
and generosity were 80 numerous, so con-
stant, so glorious, that the Poet was
moved by admiration, and desired to give
God the honour of them.

3. They wpratse the Divine’ Being.

148


Gladness to man.


“Praise ye the Lord. O give thanks
unto the Lord.” Worship—the adora-
tion of the Divine excellence, and bene-
ficence, and beauty—is an essential ele-
ment of the highest blessedness, The
true worship of the true God is the hea-
ven of the soul,

Il. They are a righteous people.
“ Blessed are they that keep judgment,
and he that doeth righteousness at all
times,” For moral beings there can be
no blessedness except that which is based
upon righteousness of principle and of
practice. Conscience will not admit of
blessedness on any other condition. The
Psalmist speaks of habitual righteous-
ness, If we would be truly blessed,
righteousness must be not an occasional
but a constant disposition of heart and
rule of conduct. The blessed man is one
who “ doeth righteousness at all times.”
Barnes points out that “the Psalm is
designed to illustrate by contrast, that
is, by showing, in the conduct of the
Hebrew people, the consequences of die-
obedience, and thus implying what would
have been, and what always must be, the
consequences of the opposite course ”

IIL They are the Lord’s people
We cannot be truly blessed without a
hearty recognition of our true relation to
God. When by faith and consecration
we are His people, great is our blessed-
ness, Concerning the people of God and
their blessedness the Poet indicates—

1. The source of all their blessings.
“Remember me, O Lord, with the favour
of Thy people.” All our blessings flow
from the unmerited and free “ favour”
of the Lord.

2. The sum of all their blessings. “Oh
visit me with Thy salvation.” ‘“ Salva-
tion” includes pardon for past sin, “grace
to help in time of need,” and eternal and
blessed life,

3. The result of all their blessings, (1.)
“That I may rejoice
in the gladness of Thy nation.” The
favour of God is joy-inspiring. (2.)
Glory to God. ‘That I may glory with
Thine inheritance.” The people of God


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; PSALMS.


PSALM OVI,


on errr eens epeieimapsbsiembensminerety, evwnsiaseiy ooereten es eases


glory not in their wisdom, wealth, or
power, but in their relation to Him.
In Him they make their boast, To Him
they ascribe their praise.


THE Favour or


Verse 4. “Remember me, O Lord,
with the favour of Thy people.”

I That the Lord has a people, who
in a different way from others are His.
They are so by adopting love, Rom. ix,
25 ; by renewing grace, Eph. ii, 10; by
voluntary consent, 2 Cor. vii. 5; by
public avowal, Isa. xliv. 5 ; by inward
testimony, 1 John v. 19, Rom. viii.
16; by divine appropriation, Zech. xiii,
9, and by open evidence, 2 Cor. iii. 2, 3.

IL. That to these He bears a peculiar
and distinguished favour. While others
are the recipients of common mercies,
they have blessings of a peculiar and
pre-eminent description, so that the
congratulation given by Moses to the
Israelites is applicable to the Lord’s
people in every age and place, (Deut,
xxxiii, 29.)


Coxciusion.—l. @od has a peopk
who are in aspectal manner His, 2. To
these people Le imparts special blessings.
3. Are we of the number of these people?


Gop Dxsrrep,


III. That to be remembered of God
with this favour is infinitely desirable,
And why is this the case? Because it
sweetens the comforts of life; because it
quickens us in the performance of duty ;
because it yields relief in scenes of sor
row and suffering ; and because it is the
ground of all our hope,

IV. That those who would have the
Divine favour must pray forit. ‘God
is ready to bestow His favour upon us
(1 John iv. 10, Rom. viii. 32), but
application on our part must be made
(Ezek, xxxvi. 37); and the reasonable-
ness of ‘the duty leaves without excuse
those persons who refuse to comply with
it. Let us never despise a favour so
freely offered, so greatly needed; a
favour which may be obtained on terms
80 easy. —W. Sleigh,


Tur Lor>’s Goopness anp Man’s Sm.
(Verses 6-13.)


In these verses the Psalmist begins
the confession of the sin of the Israelites
as manifested in their history. Let us
notice—

L Man’s sin notwithstanding the
Lord’s goodness. Verses 6-8. We


have here—
1. The sins acknowledged. (1)
Thoughtlessness. ‘ Our fathers under-


stood not Thy wonders in Egypt.”
Perowne: “Our fathers in Egypt con-
sidered not,” &c, The marvellous and
glorious deeds of the Lord in their
behalf they saw but did not consider,
and therefore did not understand them.
“They thought the plagues of Egypt
were intended for their deliverance,
whereas they were intended also for
their instruction and conviction, not
only to force them out of their Egyp-
tian slavery, but to cure them of their
inclination to Egyptian idolatry, by


evidencing the sovereign power and
dominion of the God of Israel above
all gods, and His particular concern for
them.”"—M. Henry. Want of con-
sideration is a sin frequently charged
against Israel, and to which men are
painfully prone in our own day. We
see the Divine wonders, receive the
Divine benefits, but do not reflect on
their significance, &e. (2) Forgetful-
ness, ‘ They remembered not the
multitude of Thy mercies.” Although
the wonders in Egypt were so many
and great, yet they made so small an
impression upon the people on whose
behalf they were wrought that they
were speedily forgotten by them.
“ Eaten bread is soon forgotten.” (3)
Rebellion. ‘* But provoked Him at the
sea, at the Red Sea. Hengstenberg and
Perowne translate: “rebelled at the sea.”


(See Exod, xiv. 10-12.) Notwithstand-
149


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





Ing all the mighty works that had
been wrought for their deliverance from
Egypt, on the first approach of danger
they distrusted the Lord, and, like
craven-hearted slaves, they murmured
against the servant of the Lord, They
distrusted the power, mercy, and faith-
fulness of God. Observe the gradation
and connection of their sins. Want of
reifection upon the mercies of God leads
to forgetfulness of those mercies, and
forgetfulness of His mercies leads to
distrust, &c, Evil is terribly pro-
gressive.

2. The aggravation of thetr sins.
Many were the “ wonders” wrought on
ther behalf, yet they failed to consider
them. The Lord bestowed upon them
a “multitude of mercies ;” it is sinful
to forget one of His loving-kindnesses ;
yet they forgot a “multitude ” of them.
The sin of their rebellion also was
aggravated by the place in which they
were guilty of it. It was “at the Red
Sea,” directly after their emancipation
from Egypt, when the wonders of
power and grace which God had
wrought for them should have been
fresh in their minds, and a powerful
inspiration to faith.

3. The confession of their sins.
“We have sinned with our fathers,
we have committed iniquity, we
have done wickedly.” Here is (1) A
deep sense of great and manifold trans-
gressions. This is impressively indi-
cated by the three verbs. (2) A sad
successtveness of sin. “ We have sinned
with our fathers.” The sins of the
fathers had been reproduced in the
children, generation after generation ;
so that the nation as a whole was
regarded by the Psalmist as guilty
before God.

In most of the points which we have
touched upon the sins of the Israelites,
notwithstanding the goodness of the
Lord, represent the sins of the men of
our age and country. (Show this,
and urge confession).

II. The Lord’s goodness notwith-
standing man's sin. Verses 8-12.
Though the sins of Israel were eo


150


aggravated, yet the Lord continued to
manifest His mercy to them.

1. His goodness was displayed in their
salvation, The deliverance here re
ferred to was a very remarkable one.
It was (1) A deliverance from extreme
danger. They were shut in by the
mountains, the sea, and the Egyptians.
There seemed to be no way of escape.
(2) A deliverance marvellously effected.
A path was opened through the sea,
whose waters stood as guardian-walls
on either hand of them. (3) A deliver-
ance effected with the utmost ease. The
Poet represents the sea as “dried up”
at the ‘“‘rebuke” of the Lord. Nature
is thoroughly loyal to the Divine will
(4) A deliverance gloriously complete,
Israel not only crossed over in safety,
but “the waters covered their enemies,
there was not one of them left.”

2. Hts goodness was displayed for
His own glory. ‘“ He saved them for
His Name’s sake, that He might make
His mighty power to be known.” WNot-
withstanding their offences He saved
them because of what He is in Himself,
—a being of unchanging truth and
mercy ; and that the glory of His power
might be manifested.

3. The display of Hts goodness awoke
them to a transient exercise of faith and
praise. “Then believed they His
words; they sang His praise.” (See
Exod. xiv, 31; xv. 1.) For a time
distrust gave place to faith, and mur
muring to praise. But it was only for
a little time ; for “ both the faith and
the song are mentioned, not in praise of
their conduct, but only as still further
proof that whatever impressions were
produced, whether by God’s judgments
or His mercies, were but temporary
and on the surface. The goodness of
Israel was like the dew, early gone.”—
Perowne,

Conciusion.—This scene from He-
brew history presents to us (1)
Admonition. Let us not sin against
that Being who is ever manifesting so
much goodness to us, (2) Hncourage-
ment, God does not “deal with us
after our sina,” &.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PSALM CVI.


eee


Smn In Irs Root, Expressions, AND PUNISHMENTS.
(Verses 13-23.)


We now come to the confession of the
transgressions of the Israelites in the
wilderness; and in the verses now
before us three of their offences are
mentioned. As the Homiletic sugges-
tions arising out of these sins and their
punishments will be brought out in
treating of their history as recorded in
Exodus and Numbers, we shall simply
deal with the points suggested by the
Psalmist.

I. Sin in its root. “They soon
forgat His works . . . They forgat God
their Savior, which had done great
things in Egypt; wondrous things in
the land of Ham; terrible things by
the Red Sea.” (See our remarks on
verse 7, and on Ps. lxxviii. II, 12.) The
small impression which the greatest
mercies and most marvellous deliver-
ances made upon them is astonishing.
Bad as men are, it is not often that
favours so extraordinary are forgotten
so quickly. “They made haste, they
forgat His works.” They, as it were,
manifested impatience to rid themselves
of the recollection of His glorious deeds
wrought for them. Even the mighty
miracles in Egypt and at the Red Sea
passed away from them as tales that
were told. Had they retained in their
mind the great things which God had
done for them, they would have had in
these things such a revelation of His
character as would have precluded the
committal of their offenses against
Him. Forgetfulness of deeds of marvel-
lous mercy and power wrought on their
behalf, and of Him who wrought them,
was the root from which their base
rebellion sprang.

II. Sin inits expressions. From the
root of forgetfulness of God there
sprang up some base and pernicious
branehes. Here are three heinous sins—

1. Their sin as regards the Divine
provision. “They waited not for His
counsel; but lusted exceedingly in the
wilderness,” &e. “They were not con-
tent,” says Perowne, “to exercise a
patient dependence upon God, leaving


it to Him to fulfil His own purposes in
His own way, but would rather rule
Him than submit themselves to His
rule.” (See Homiletic Commentary on
Ps ixxvilleel eel.)

2. Their sin as regards the Divinely-
appointed leaders, “They envied Moses
also in the camp, and Aaron the saint of
the Lord.” (Num. xvi. 1-3.) The re-
ference in this place is rather to the
rebellion which resulted from the envy,
than to the envy itself. Aaron is de-
nominated “the saint,” or “the holy
one of Jehovah,” because of his priestly
office. It is an official, not a personal
designation. The leaders of the insur-
rection claimed that the whole congre-
gation was “holy,” that they were all
set apart and consecrated, and were
therefore on an equality with Moses and
Aaron. Rebellion against the Divinely-
appointed leaders was equivalent to re-
bellion against Him who appointed
them.

3. Their sin as regards the Divine
Person. “They made a calf in Horeb,
and worshipped the molten image. Thus
they changed their glory into the simili-
tude of an ox that eateth grass.” (Exod.
xxxu.) “They made—contrary to the
prohibition in Exod. xx. 4. 5—a calf,
‘intended to represent an ox (comp. verse
20). They would gladly have made an
ox, but they were not able to get this
length, so contemptible was the whole
undertaking. Thename ‘calf’ is every-
where used in contempt ; the worshippers
without doubt called it a bull; according
to Philo they made a ‘golden bull.’ ”’—
Hengstenberg. “Their glory” was the
Lord God, and they changed Him for
the likeness “of an ox that eateth
grass.” (Comp. Rom. i. 23.) The inten-
tion of the people was to worship God
under the symbol of the calf, but as this
symbolising was utterly incompatible
with the nature of Jehovah, and op-
posed to His express command, it was
regarded by God as bartering Him forthe
image, the renunciation of Jehovah for
themodel of acalf. Miserable and terribly

151


PRALM CVL


sinful absurdity to exchange the Lord of
heaven and earth for a calf-like model of
a grass-eating ox! The sin which began
in forgetfulness of God ended in idolatry.
The development of evil is from bad to
worse, and is sometimes fearfully rapid.

IL Sininits punishments. We have
here—

1. Punishment corresponding with sin.
(On the punishment of those who lusted
for flesh in the wilderness see Homiletic
Commentary on Pa. Ixxviii. 30, 31).
‘He gave them their request, but sent
leanness into their soul.” The “soul”
here means the animal soul, the physical
life. The Lord gratified their sinful
desire, and in so doing and by the same
means punished their sin; for they ate
until there came on a wasting sickness
which led to alarming mortality. But
although the “soul” is here used with
its physical meaning, “the figurative
sense is equally true, and equally per-
tinent. The very heart and spirit of a
man, when bent only or supremely on
the satisfaction of its earthly desires
and appetites, is always dried up and
withered. It becomes a lean, shrunk,
miserable thing, always craving more
food, yet drawing thence no nourish-
ment, ‘magnas inter opes inops.’”—
Perowne.


‘* Heaven is most fast, and of our pleasant
vices
Makes instruments to scourge us.”
—Shakespear'e,


In the rebellion against Moses and
Aaron we note a correspondence between


FoRGETFULNESS OF


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY PSALMS. ;





the sin and its punishment. In the re-
bellion against Moses, who was the ruler
in all affairs of state, “ Dathan and
Abiram, as princes of the tribe of Reuben,
Jacob’s eldest son, would claim to be
chief magistrates, by the so-much-admired
right of primogeniture.” And for re-
belling against “the civil authority they
were punished by the earth, which opened
and swallowed them up, a8 not fit to go
upon God’s ground, because they would
not submit to God’s government.”—M.
Henry. In the rebellion against Aaron,
which took place among the Levites and
was headed by Korah, “a fire was
kindled in their company, a flame burnt
up the wicked.” ‘These had sinned by
fire and were punished by fire like the
sons of Aaron” (Lev. x. 2). (Comp.
Num. xvi. 1-35.)

2. Punishment averted by intercession.
When the people made and worshipped
the golden calf, God “said that He would
destroy them, had not Moses His chosen
stood before Him in the breach, to turn
away His wrath, lest He should destroy
them.” Moses is here compared to a
brave soldier who, when a breach has
been made in the walls of the fortress
which he is defending, plants himself in
the breach, and so keeps back the in-
vaders, (Comp. Exod. xxxii. 11-14.)
God would have destroyed the people, if
Moses had not interposed and interceded
for them. See here—

1. The power of prayer.

2. The greatness of the Divine mercy.

3. An illustration of the intercession of
Christ for our race


THE Diving Works.


(Verse 13.—“ But they soon forgot His works,”)


L That the works of God are
supremely worthy of an attentive
review, and a thankful remem-
brance.

1. What dtd they forget? His worka.
Review all their variety—the creation,
the appointment of a salvation, the work
of redemption, the works of Providence ;
they are to be considered in their peculiar
aspect, whether prosperous or adverse,
Review nas multitude ; they are to be

53


and heartfelt consideration.


considered in their meaning. Providence
is our daily preacher.

2. What sort of recollection should st
be # Not a mere notional recollection—
a recollection accompanied with suitah’s
emotions—astonishment, gratitude, love,
It must be
a devotional and practical recollection.

3. Why are these works to be remem-
dered # Because they are God’s works;
because they are all-important ; because


/


HOMILETIC COMMENTaXY : PSALMS,


the least of them is the purchase of in-
finite price,

I, That there is in human naturea
Btrange tendency to forget the works
of God.

This is no calumny on human nature.
It is the express statement of Scripture,
and is confirmed by daily experience, It
arises from—

1. The injury the memory has sus-
tained by the Fall; it retains what is
impure, but uot what is holy,

2. The bias of our mind ts directed to
earthly things.

3. The secret disinclination to con-
template a subject in which God is inti
mately concerned.

Ill. The sinfulness and danger of
thus forgetting the works of God.

1. Lt arises out of a sinful state of
mind, and tt ts culpable forgetfulness.

2, It ts an actual transgression of
God’s Word. (Deut.iv. 9; 1 Chron,
xvi. 12.) '

3. It involves in tt the commission of
other sins—inconsideration and ingrati-
tude,

4. They who forget thetr mercies for fest





fied


5. God has denounced fearful fudg
ments on such. (Ps, ix. 17.)

IV. What are the best means of pre-
serving in our minds a grateful sense
of the Divine goodness ?

1. Seek that you be renewed and sancts-


2. Attention will much assist in the
recollection of mercies. (Prov. iv. 20.)

3. Meditation cannot be done in a
crowd ; then seek solitude.

4. Order and arrangement are like
cells in which our mercies may be de-
posited and called out in order.

5. Strive to maintain lively affections
towards God ; for what we love we do
not easily forget.

Lessons: 1. How mistaken are those
who suppose that forgetfulness is not a
sin |

2. Here a wide field is opened for the
exercise of repentance.

3. Reprove those who have a good
memory for their calamities and a bad
one for their mercies,

4. Address those who will not re-
collect, God will not forget.—G@eorge
Clayton.—From “ The Homiletie Quar-
terly.”


Toe Granting oF SxzLiFisH Desires an Insury To THE SovuL,
(Verse 15.)


The history of the event referred to is
given in Num. xi.

L Many things which are good in
themselves may not be good for us
individually. Material wealth is good ;
but upon attaining it some men have
become spiritually bankrupt. (Luke xii,
15-21.) Popularity may be a good
thing ; but, having gained it, many a
man has lost his integrity, independence,
heroism. How this view of things cor-
rects the prevalent notion of success in
life! | “‘ Success in life,” says the world,
“ig getting on in business, making
money quickly, living well” (by which
is meant eating and drinking lJuxuri-
ously), “mixing in good society.” How
shallow, false, ruinous! These things
may not only consist with spiritual
poverty, imbecility, and ruin, but very
frequently lead to them.


II. Many things may be good for
us at one time and under certain cir-
cumstances which may not be good
for us at another time and under
other circumstances. The flesh which
the Israelites desired would have been
good for them when they arrived in
Canaan ; but in the wilderness, where
they should have been satisfied with the
Divinely-provided manna, it proved a
terrible curse.

It. The most fervent prayers are
not always most acceptable, The
motive and the character of the fervour
must be taken into consideration, Fer-
vent prayers are sometimes only the
passionate cries of selfish hearts—the
determined pursuit of an object of sel-
fish desire.

IV. God may grant the passionate
desire of @ selfish heart NE td

15


tener


PSALM OVI.


results. He may give the fancied good
which is so eagerly demanded, and it
may prove to be a direful injury. It
was so in the case before us. Instances
are numerous in which unsubmissive
requests have been granted with most
painful results,

V. God may refuse to grant the
request of even a good man, and the
refusal may be a blessing. It was in
love that the Lord refused the repeated
request of St. Paul for the removal of
the “thorn in the flesh,” That tor-
turing thorn was the means of prevent-
ing the spiritual pride which might


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : PSALMS.


ee er





otherwise have effected his overthrow.
(1 Cor. xii. 7-9.)
‘We, ignorant of ourselves,
Beg often our own harms, which the wise
powers
Deny us for our good ; so find we profit
By losing of our prayers.” —Shakespeare.

VI. The wisest, holiest, most accept-
able prayer is for conformity with the
will of God. ‘Not my will, but Thine
be done,” expresses the true spirit of
acceptable prayer.

“Covet earnestly the best gifts.”
Seek those things which are pure
blessings for all persons, at all times
and under all circumstances,


A Sap Proturr or Human PERVERSITY.
(Verses 24-27.)


The sinful perversity of the Israelites
appears here in several mournful aspects.

I. Despising the choicest inherit-
ance. ‘They despised the pleasant
land.” Margin: “A land of desire,”
Perowne: “They rejected the desirable
land.” (Deut. viii. 7-9; xi. 9.) The
Israelites frequently manifested a desire
to return to Egypt. The good land
before them had few attractions for
them. God calls men to holiness, com-
munion with Himself, heaven. All who
do not heartily respond to His call de-
spise the most glorious inheritance.

IL. Disbelieving the best authenti-
cated word. ‘They believed not His
word.” They had proved the reliable-
ness of the word of God ; yet they did
not believe it as regards the land which
He had promised to them. They pre-
ferred to accept the testimony of the
unbelieving and cowardly spies. (Num.
xiv. 1-6, 10.) We have here—

1. Unbelief dishonouring God.

2. Unbelief excluding man from his
inheritance. Man’s unbelief has kept
him out of many “a good land.”

III. Murmuring against the ar-
rangements of the wisest and kindest
of beings. They “ murmured in their
tents.) This they did repeatedly. (Num.
xiv. 2, 3, 27.) “They complained of
Moses, of their food, of the hardships
of their journey, of God. They did this

154


when ‘in their tents ;’ when they had
a comfortable home; when safe; when
provided for; when under the direct
Divine protection and care. So men
often complain; perhaps oftener when
they have many comforts than when
they have few.”— Barnes.

IV. Disobeying the commands of
the most sovereign authority. ‘ They
hearkened not unto the voice of the
Lord.” Unbelief of God’s word speedily
leads to refusal to listen to His voice
and disregard of His commands. They
disobeyed their Creator, Sustainer, Sove-
reign, and generous Benefactor — not
only the greatest, but the best being,
His will is supremely binding. Yet
they disobeyed it.

V. Receiving deserved punishment.
“Therefore He lifted up His hand
against them, to overthrow them in the
wilderness.” The lifting up of the hand
is the gesture of swearing. “ Ye shall
not come into the land which I lifted up
My hand to make you dwell therein”
(Num. xiv. 30). “TI lifted up My hand
also to them in the wilderness,” d&c,
(Ezek. xx. 23), ‘I sware in My wrath,
They shall not enter into My rest.” It
is fitting that they who despise their


inheritance shall not enter upon it.


VL Entailing misery upon their
posterity. ‘‘He lifted up His hand
to overthrow their seed also among the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,





nations, ami to scatter them in the
lands.” “The result of their rebellion
and murmuring would not terminate
with them. It would extend to their pos-
terity, and the rebellion of the fathers
would be remembered in distant genera-
tions. The overthrow of the nation, and
its captivity in Babylon, was thus one of





PRALM OVL





the remote consequences of their rebellion
in the wilderness.”— Barnes.

Conotusion. 1. Shun sin; for by
committing it you may hand down to
your descendants a heritage of woe. 2,
“ Take heed, brethren, lest there be in any
of you an evil heart of unbelief,” &e.
(Heb. iii, 12; iv. 1 and 11).


PassaGEs FROM THE History or A REBELLIOUS PEOPLE.
(Verses 28-33.)


The heart grows weary and sad as we
follow this narrative with its abounding
unbelief, ingratitude, meanness, and re-
bellion. The picture which the Poet
draws of Israel is painfully sombre, yet
it is true, In no portion of it has he
inserted too much shadow. We have in
these verses—

L An incorrigibly rebellious people.

1. Here ts tdolatry, “They joined
themselves also unto Baal-Peor, and. ate
the sacrifices of the dead.” “Baal was
the name of an idol ; Peor was the name
of a mountain in Moab where the idol
was worshipped.” “The sacrifices of
the dead” are the sacrifices offered to
idols, in contradistinction from the living
God (Num. xxv. 1-3).

2. Here ts adultery. The worship of
Baal-Peor was connected with licentious
rites, Fuerst: “ Baal of the shame
uncovering, in whose honour virgins
yielded up their innocence.” (Num.
xxv. 1-6.)

3. Here ts rebellious murmuring.

' “They angered Him also at the Waters
of Strife” (Num. xx. 1-5, 13). Here
in the fortieth year of their wandering
they are still an unbelieving, complain-
ing, rebellious people.

I. A brave man acting as minister
of justice in a critical time. ‘Then
stood up Phinehas and executed judg-
ment, and so the plague was stayed”
(Num. xxv. 5-8).

1. Here ts a@ brave act of justice.
Moses had commanded the judges of
Israel to stay the idolaters; but they
seemed to have been deficient in the
strength and courage necessary to enable
them to obey the command ; they only
stand and weep. Ag this critical mo-


ment, with zeal and courage and energy,
Phinehas rose up and slew two of the
offenders of the first rank,

2. A brave act of justice staying the
Divine vengeance. “ And so the plague
was stayed.” This act of justice was
propitiatory ; it appeased and turned
away the wrath of God. “ National
justice prevents national judgments.”

3. A brave act of justice recognised and
rewarded by God. “And that was
counted unto him for righteousness unto
all generations for evermore” (Num,
xxv. 10-13). Perowne says: “It was
looked upon as a righteous act, and re-
warded accordingly. . . . This verse has
given occasion to whole disquisitions on
the subject of justification, with which
it really has nothing to do, though at
least the language is in perfect accord-
ance with that of St. James (ii. 20-26).
The reward of this righteousness was
the perpetual continuance of the priest-
hood in the family.” Hereafter the
position of Phinehas and his posterity
was one of marked distinction and
honour.

III. A holy man sinning and suffer-
ing by reason of the sin of others, “It
went ill with Moses for their sakes ; be-
cause they provoked his spirit, so that
he spake unadvisedly with his lips.”
Through the sin of the people Moses loat
his self-control, was betrayed into the
utterance of unbecoming and rash worda,
and to undue assumption of power; and
in consequence was not permitted to
enter the promised land, (Num. xx.
7-12.)

1. Their provocation of Moses agra-
vated the guilt of the rebellious people,

2. Their provocation does not exonerate

155


FaaLM OVI,


Moses from guilt. Provocation is not
compulsion,

3. God punishes sin even in the best of
men, tn whom tt ts a great exception.

IV. The great God contending
against human sin,

1. By the plague, because of the idolatry
and licentiousness of the people. “The
plague brake in upon them.” ‘ Those
that died in the plague were twenty and
four thousand.”

2. By the exclusion of Moses from the
promised land, God is the determined


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





antagonist of moral evil. The arrange-
ments of the material universe, the work-
ings of Providence, and the grand aim
of redemption, are all utterly hostile to
sin, The voice of God to man concern-
ing sin in all history is, “ Oh, do not this
abominable thing which I hate!” From
the cross of the Lord Jesus Christ He
utters this entreaty in a manner that
ought to arrest the attention and secure
the compliance of all men. Let us
listen to His voice, and heartily strive to
comply with His entreaty.


Sor ox rrs Progress, PoLtution, AND PunisHMENr,
(Verses 34-43.)


In these verses we have—

L Sin in its progress. Here is—

1. Disobedience. ‘They did not de-
stroy the nations concerning whom the
Lord commanded them.” (For the com-
mand and its reasons see Homiletic Com-
mentary on Exod. xxiii. 27-33; xxxiv.
11-16; Num. xxxiii. 50-56.) Though
the command was express, solemn, and
repeatedly proclaimed, yet they did not
obey it by driving out or destroying the
Canaanites,

2. Evil associations, They “were
mingled among the heathen and learned
their works.” By intermarriage and
commerce they became mixed up among
the Canaanites, and conformed to their
evil customs and practices. Had they
not first been guilty of disobedience,
they could not have been guilty of enter-
ing into these prohibited and evil as-
sociations,

3. Idolatry, “They served their idols,
which were a snare unto them” (Judg.
ii, 11-13). God had warned them that,
if they did not drive out the Canaanites,
they would be snared by them and drawn
tnto their idolatrous customs. And this
result very speedily appeared.

4. Offering human sacrifices, “Yea,
they sacrificed their sons and their
daughters unto devils, and shed innocent
blood,” &c, Hengstenberg: “ And of-
fered their sons and their daughters to
the lords.” Perowne: “And they sa-
crificed their sons and their daughters
to false gods.” Heb, OYW = lords; it

186


is here used to designate the gods of the
Canaanites, God had strictly prohibited
the offering of these sacrifices (Deut. xii.
29-32; xviii. 10). Yet they offered
them, thus adding to their idolatry the
most unnatural and horrible murder.
Now, mark their progress in evil. ‘The
way of sin,” says Matthew Henry, “‘is
down hill; omissions make way for
commissions ; when they neglect to de-
stroy the heathen, the next news we
hear is, ‘They were mingled among the
heathen, made leagues with them, and
contracted an intimacy with them, so
that they learned their works.’ .. . The
beginning of idolatry and superstition,
like that of strife, is as the letting forth
of water, and there is no villany which
those that venture upon it can be sure
they shall stop short of, for God justly
gives them up to a reprobate mind.”.
Avoid the first step in evil courses,
These sing are still flourishing in dif-
ferent forms. The professed people of
God are still guilty of disobedience in
many things, and of conformity to the
world in many customs that are ques-
tionable, and in some which are unmis-
takably evil; they are often found bow-
ing at the shrines of mammon and
fashion, and still they sacrifice their
sons and daughters to idols, ‘ Among
us such sacrifices take place by careless
bringing up of children, when parents
encourage them, for example, in pride
and other sins, offer them to the go of
the world, carefully inculcate the maxims


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


of the world, and fill them with love of
vanity and show.”-—Berleb,

IZ. Sin in its pollution. ‘‘ The land was
polluted with blood. Thus were they de-
filed with their own works, and went a
whoring after their own inventions.”
The very soil itself is here represented
as polluted and accursed by reason of
the sin of the people. The religious
pra tices which they had adopted be-
came a source of terrible contamination
and corruption to their nature. Their
very worship was spiritual whoredom.
This corrupting tendency of sin is one
of its most fearful characteristics, It
effects a terrible deterioration in man’s
moral and religious nature,

III. Sin in its punishment. Verses
40-43.

1. Their punishment was long delayed.
“Many times did He deliver them.”
The reference is to the deliverances
effected on their behalf during the time
of the judges, and afterwards during the
time of the kings, Judges ii. 11-19
furnishes a clear exposition of verse 43.
The Lord was loath to leave them in the
hands of their enemies, or to send them
into captivity. He is ‘slow to anger,
and plenteous in mercy. He hath not
dealt with us after our sins, nor re-
warded us according to our iniquities.”

2. Their punishment was an expres-
sion of Divine anger. “Therefore was
the wrath of the Lord kindled against
His people, insomuch that He abhorred
His own inheritance.” God’s anger
burns against sin and against the work-
ers of iniquity. God pities the sinner
as a man, and secks to save him, but as
a worker of iniquity He abhors him.
Sin persisted in renders the people of
God an offence and abomination unto
Him. Nothing shows the enormity of
sin more than this, that it renders those





Peale OV.


who were once well-pleasing in His sight
loathsome unto Him.

3. Thetr punishment corresponded with
their sin. ‘He gave them into the
hand of the heathen,” dc. (verses 41,
42). This punishment the Lord had
threatened them with if they failed to
drive out the Canaanites, (Num. xxxiii.
55,56.) And it came to pass accord-
ing to His word. Their punishment
grew out of their sin, and was its
natural result. In opposition to the
will of God, they intermingled with the
heathen and adopted their worst cus-
toms; and, after long forbearance and
many deliverances, God at length aban-
doned them to the heathen, who led
them into captivity, and tyrannically
lorded itoverthem. They had forsaken
the Lord, and given their hearts ta
heathen customs, and after “ long pa
tience” the Lord forsook them, leaving
them to the heathens, whose ways
they so much admired. “ Sinuers often
see themselves ruined by those by whom
they have suffered themselves to be de-
bauched. Satan, who is a tempter, will
be a tormentor. The heathen ‘hated
them,’ Apostates lose all the love on
God’s side, and get none on Satan’s,”
Thus a man’s punishment is not a some-
thing tacked on to his sin, but ever growe
out of his sin. The wicked man collects
the fuel for his own hell-fire.

Conctusion. The chief Lessons of
our subject are :—(1) Do not enter upon
an evil course. (2) If any one find him-
self already in the way of evil, let him
retrace his steps at once. ‘Let the
wicked forsake his way,’ &e. (3) The
surest means of guarding against evil
courses 18 to walk diligently in the way
prescribed by God. He will give us wis-
dom and strength so to do, if we ask
Him.


Stages From Misery TO EXvLrarIoN,
(Verses 44-47.)


The Poet now presents to us another
. aspect of the dealings of the Lord with
His people. He visited them in anger,
because of their ungodly counsels and
iniquitous practices. But He never for-


gets His loving-kindness and His truth
concerning them. Soon as their suffer-
ings led them to cry unto Him, He sent
them relief. The Psalmist indicates the
stages from misery to exultation.

157


PSALM OVI.





I. Misery leading to a cry for mercy.
“He heard their cry.” In their pro-
sperity they had forgotten the Lord, had
forsaken Him for idols. In their misery
they cried to Him for relief. This is
common, Sometimes the cry is the
utterance of mere selfishness, In this
case, when the suffering is removed, men
pursue their old course of ingratitude
and rebellion, Sometimes the cry is
the utterance of penitence. In this case
the sin which caused the suffering is felt
more keenly than any outward affliction,
Reformation of life is the result, In
the former case the cry is worthless and
mean ; in the latter it indicates that
suffering has led to gracious results,

II. A ery for mercy securing the
Divine regard. ‘He regarded their
affliction when He heard their cry.”

1. God heard their ery. The cry of
distreas, the sigh of unutterable sorrow,
the whispered longing of the heart, the
reverent prayer of devout worship, all
are heard by God. This is a fact
fraught with consolation, inspiration,
and strength.

2. God graciously regarded thetr cry.
‘He remembered for them His cove-
nant, and repented according tothe multi-
tude of His mercies.” Perowne: ‘“ And
pitied them according to the greatness
of His loving-kindness.” ‘ God’s re-
pentance is not a change of His will,
but of His work. Repentance with man
& the changing of his will; repentance
with God is the willing of a change.
Mutatio rei, non Dei; effectus, non affec-
tus: facts, nox consiliz.” In answer to
their cry the Lord turned to them in
mercy. Man may forget Him. but He
naver forgets His covenant. Great i


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; PSALMS.





the sin of man; but the mercy of God
is incomparably greater. The reason of
His loving-kindness to the Jews, and to
all men, is to be found in the perfec-
tions of His own nature.

III, The Divine regard securing re-
lief from trouble. ‘‘He made them
also to be pitied of all those that car
ried them captive.” Notice here—

1. The power of God over all men,
He made the hearts of the oppressors of
His people to relent towards them, so
that they treated them with kindness.
“The king’s heart is in the hand of the
Lord, as the rivers of water: He turn-
eth it whithersoever He will.” Even so
can He turn the hearts of all men.

2. The kindness of God to His people.
He influenced the hearts of their oppres-
sorsintheirfavour. Heemploys His power
to promote the interests of His Church.

IV. Relief from trouble awakening
prayer for complete salvation. ‘Save
us, O Lord our God, and gather us from
among the heathen,” &c. “The graca
of God, already shown to His people,”
says Perowne, “leads to the prayer of
this verse—a supplication for which the
whole Psalm has prepared the way. The
language would seem to indicate that
the Psa‘m was written in exile, though
the same prayer might also have been
uttered by one of those who returned
in the first caravan, on behalf of his
brethren who were still dispersed.”

1. The beginning of the work of Divine
grace is an encouragement to expect and
pray for full salvation.

2. The Divine praise should ever be
regarded as the grand end of salvation.
The glory of redemption is. dua wholly
and solely to God in Christ


DoxoLo#y,
(Verse 48.)


This Doxology marks the ciose of the
fourth book of the Psalms, For its
Homiletic suggestions see a Sketch on


the Doxology to the first book, Paalm


ThA


xli. 135; on that to the second book,
Psalm Ixxii. 18-20; and on tat to the
third book, Psalm lxxxix. 63,


‘


“ PSALM OVIL


INTRODUCTION.


Many expositors are of opinion that this Psalm was written to celebrate the return of the
Jews from the Babylonian exile. This opinion is based chiefly on verges 2 and 8, But the
Psalm as a whole does not seem to us to favour such a conclusion, Perowne says: ‘*It is
obvious that this Psalm is not historical. It describes various incidents of human life, it tells
of the perils which befall men, and the goodness of God in delivering them, and calls upon all
who have experienced His care and protection gratefully to acknowledge them; and it is
perfectly general in its character. The four or five groups, or pictures, are 80 Many samples
taken from the broad and varied record of human experience. Such a Psalm would have beet
admirably adapted to be sung in the Temple-worship, at the offering of the thank-offerings.

“But, whatever may have been the circumstances under which the Psalm was written, or
the particular occasion for which it was intended, there can be no doubt as to the great lesson
which it inculcates, It teaches us not only that God’s Providence watches over men, but that
His ear is open to their prayer. It teaches us that prayer may be put up for temporal deliver.
ance, and that such prayer is answered. It teaches us that it is right to acknowledge with
thanksgiving such answers to our petitions. This was the simple faith of the Hebrew Poet.”

The author of the Psalm is not known.


DisTRESSED TRAVELLERS AND THEIR Divinz HELper,
(Verses 1-9.)


It is probable, as Perowne suggests,
that the first three verses are “a litur-
gical addition, framed with particular
reference to the return from Babylon,
and prefixed to a poem originally
designed to have a wider scope.” The
Psalm begins with the same liturgical
formula as the preceding ; and the
Poet proceeds to represent the people of
God as—

1. Redeemed by Him. “Let the
redeemed of the Lord say so, whom He
hath redeemed from the hand of the
enemy.” The allusion is probably to
the deliverance of the Jews from the
captivity in Babylon. The people of
God now are redeemed from sin by
the precious blood of Christ. They
have had precious experiences of the
goodness of the Lord, and are under
special obligations to praise Him.

2. Gathered by Him. “ Gathered
them out of the lands from the east,
and from the west, from the north, and
from the south.” The Lord gathered
the exiles out of all the lands into
which they had been driven in the day
of their distress. He gathers men now
into His Church. And He is gathering
His people to their home in heaven.
From all lands they are being assembled
xn our Father's home on high.

Then the Poet proceeds to represent the


people as distressed travellers, relleved
by Divine goodness, and calls upon
them to praise the Lord, Consider—

L The distressed travellers. “They
wandered in the wilderness,” &c.

1. They were travellers through a
pathless desert. ‘They wandered in
the wilderness in a solitary way.” “A
solitary way” is not a correct transla-
tion, Perowne: “In a pathless waste,”
Hengstenberg : “ The pathless desert.”
A wilderness is a scene of dreary deso-
lation ; and in this case the travellers
are represented as having no path along
which to travel through this dreary
desert. The track is lost, perhaps
obliterated by some violent sand-storm,

2. They were travellers through a
homeless desert, ‘They found no city
to dwell in.” There were no habitable
places in the wilderness through which


they journeyed.
3. They were travellers through an
inhospitable desert. “ Hungry and


thirsty, their soul fainted in them.”
Their life was faint and exhausted by
reason of hunger and thirst. We have
here a picture of the pilgrimage of life.
Apart from Divine guidance, man is a
traveller who has lost his way; the
track is clean gone; he is perplexed,
bewildered. In this world there is no
place of settled eee at man
59


PSALM OVI.


“ Here we have no continuing city, but
we seek one to come.” And unless
man look to God for support, he will
find in this world nothing to sustain his
spiritual nature, nothing to satisfy the
hunger and thirst of the soul.

Il. The all-sufficient Helper. The
Lord interposed in their need, and
delivered them from all their distresses,

1. The Divine help was granted in
answer to prayer. “Then they cried
unto the Lord in their trouble, and He
delivered them out of their distresses,”
Perowne: “So it ever is: only the
pressure of a great need forces men to
seek God. Prayer is not only the
resource of good men, but of all men
in trouble. It is a natural instinct
even of wicked men to turn to God at
such times.” The fact that all men
thus cry to God in their distresses
implies—Faith (1) in the existence of
God ; “that He is” (2) In His power
to help His creatures ; that He is able
to relieve the distressed. (3) In His
regard for His creatures; that He is
interested in their welfare. (4) In His
accessibleness to His creatures; that they
may approach Him in prayer; “that
He is a Rewarder of them that dili-
gently seek Him.” Prayer is a great
and glorious reality. There is ONE
who hears and answers prayer.

2. The Divine help was adequate to
their need. They were in a “ pathless
desert,” and He granted to them direc-
tion, guidance. “He led them forth by
the right way.” They were in a home-
less desert, and He directed them
homeward, “He led them forth by
the right way, that they might go toa
city of habitation.” They were fainting
in an inhospitable desert, and He gave
them abundant provision. ‘“‘ For He
satisfieth the longing soul, and filleth
the hungry soul with goodness.”
Both the hunger and the thirst He
effectually relieves. And still for all
who seek Him there is all-sufficient help


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





in Him, He is the infallible Guide

through life. His smile transforms a

barren wilderness into a richly provided.

banqueting house. And he has prepared
for us a home, peaceful and permanent,
beautiful and blessed.

III. The manifest obligation. ‘‘Oh
that men would praise the Lord for
His goodness, and for His wonderful
works to the children of men.”

1. God's gracious doings for man are
wonderful. ‘ His goodness, and His
wonderful works to the children of
men.” They are wonderful tn them-
selves, and in their object. ‘“ The
children of men” are unworthy of the
least of His favours. Yet He guides
them, sustains them, &c.

2. Men are prone to overlook the
gracious doings of God for them. His
mercies often “lie

Forgotten in unthankfulness,
And without praises die,”

Men have to be urged to the celebra-

tion of the praise of their Divine Bens-

factor. ‘Oh that men would,” &ec.

3. Men are under the most sacred
obligation to celebrate the gracious
doings of God for them. God rightly
expects that those who receive His
mercy will celebrate His praise. He
requires this, Gratitude urges to this.
Not to thank Him is to manifest ex-
treme baseness,

** The stall-fed ox, that is grown fat, will know
His careless feeder, and acknowledge too;
The generous spaniel loves his master’s eye,
And licks his fineers though no meat be by ;
But man, ungrateful man, that’s bornand bred
By Heaven’s immediate power; maintained

and fed

By His providing hand ; observed, attended,

By His indulgent grace; preserved, de-

fended

By His prevailing arm: this man, I say,

Is more ungrateful, more obdure than they,

Man, O most ungrateful man, can ever

Enjoy Thy gift, but never mind the Giver;

And like the swine, though pampered with

enough,

His eyes are never higher than the trough |"

—F, Quarles,


Tae Way oF THE REDEEMED,
(Verse 7. “ He led them forth by the right way.”)


L The way of the redeemed. 1. Long.
2. Difficult. 3, Lonely. 4. A desert way,
160


IL The rectitude of the way. It
is the “right way.” Consider—l. That


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





@ de the Divine way. “He led them
forth” as a shepherd his flock. 2. To
what it leads, ‘ The city of habitation,”

Two lessons. 1, Take an enlarged view
of the Divine conduct. Think of the
goal, as well as of the way which leads


Tue AFFLICTED CAPTIVES AND


to it. The way is painful ; but consider
why you are called to tread it. Remem-
ber the end of it all. 2. Ever seek the
Divine guidance. God goes before ; fol-
low, trust Him.—W. M., in The Pulpst
Analyst.


THEIR GLorious EMANOIPATOR.


(Verses 10-16.)


We have in these verses—

I, The picture of a painful capti-
vity. ‘Such as sit-in darkness and in
the shadow of death, being bound in
affliction and iron.” The Poet repre-
sents the captivity as characterised by—

1. Distress. They “sit in darkness,”
The dark prison-house is an emblem of
misery. To the patriotic and pious
Jews the Babylonian Captivity was a
source of much trouble and distress,

2. Apprehension, “In the shadow of
death.” Death seemed to stand fully
disclosed to their view, and to cast his
chilling and fearful shadow upon them.
The captives, in their distress, were as
men constantly menaced by death.

3. Painful restriction. “Bound in
affliction and iron,” The captives were
not literally bound thus; but their dis-
tress seemed to them like that of the
man who is held in iron fetters.

The most terrible captivity is moral
—the bondage of sin, ‘The wicked man
is in darkness ; the beauties of the spiri-
tual universe—of truth, righteousness,
love,—he sees not. “The second
death ” projects its dread shadow over
him. He is the slave of sinful appe-
tites, habits, and passions; is “holden
with the cords of his sina.” Physical
captivity is a calamity ; moral captivity
is accrime. Death will terminate the
former ; it has no power to affect the
latter. The man who dies in sin enters
eternity a manacled slave.

II. The reason of this painful cap-
tivity. ‘Because they rebelled against
the words of God, and contemned the
counsel of the Most High.” “The
words of God” are His commands de-
livered unto them in His law, and by
His servants the prophets. ‘The coun-
sel of the Most High” is the advice


VoL, IL


which was given to them by tne pro-
phets of the Lord. Their paiaful cap-
tivity was the result of their wilful
disobedience. The Poet in this verse
exhibits sin in two aspects-——

1. Sin in its guilt. At is rebellion
against the authority of the greatest and
holiest Being—the Supreme Being.

2. Sin in its folly. It is the rejec-
tion of the counsel of the wisest and
kindest Being. ‘God will command
nothing which He would not advise, and
which it would nut be wisdom to obey.”

III. The design of this painful capti-
vity. “He brought down their heart with
labour ; they fell down, and there was
none te help,” Their heart had proudly
risen up in rebellion against God and
contempt of His counsel, and their
captivity was designed by, its sufferings
to subdue their pride. JY here ren-
dered “labour,” signifies also afflic-
tion, trouble, God sought to humble
them for their sins, to show them their
own helplessness, and that their strength
and succour were in Him alone, Afflic-
tions are teachers, The man who is not
altogether foolish, when visited by them,
will strive to ascertain and appropriate
the lessons which they have to impart.

IV. The deliverance from this pain-
ful captivity—

1. Was effected in answer to prayer.
“Then they cried unto the Lord,” &
(See remarks on ver, 6.)

2. Was effected by the Lord. “Hn
brought them out,” &, “HR hath
broken the gates,” &c. In the deliverance
of the Jews from Babylon, the hand of
the Lord was clearly displayed. Our Lord
proclaims liberty to the captives of evil,
and the opening of the prison to them
that are bound by sin. There is no
power in the universe, but that of God

161


FOALM OVIL


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





—a








in Christ Jesus, that can emancipate the
slaves of sin.

3. Was gloriously complete. “ He
brought them out of darkness and the
shadow of death, and brake their bands
in sunder. He hath broken theggates
of brass,and cut the bars of iron in sun-
der.” The delivery was as great as the
distress. “‘‘The gates of brass’ refer
probably to Babylon ; and the idea is
that their deliverance had been as if the
brazen gates of that great city had been
broken down to give them free egress
from their captivity.” (Comp. Isa. xlv.
2.) The Poet mentions three features of
their deliverance, which taken together
strikingly exhibit its completeness,
Their fetters were riven asunder, they


were brought out of their cold and
gloomy prison, and the city gates were
broken down, so that they could go forti
entirely from the land of their captivity.

4. Demanded grateful acknowledg-
ment. “Qh, that men would praise the
Lord,” &c, (See remarks on ver. 8.)

Conciusion.—This subject has a
practical and urgent application to all
moral captives, all slaves of sin, Yours
is a bondage far more terrible than that
of Israel in Babylon. But from bon-
dage such as yours Jesus Christ is the
great and glorious Emancipator. From
your dark prison-house ery unto Him for
deliverance, and you shall speedily walk
fort « free man in the bright universe
of God.


Human Sickness aND Diving HEALING,
(Verses 17-22.)


Consider—

I. Human sickness. It is here set
forth—

1. In tts cause. ‘Fools because of
their transgression, and because of their
iniquities, are afflicted.” Perowne’s trans-
lation is better: “ Foolish men, because
of the way of their transgression and be-
cause of their iniquities, bring affliction
upon themselves.” The chief ideas here
are two: (1) Wickedness ts folly. The
transgressor is a “fool.” The foolish-
ness is not intellectual, but moral. The
wicked are “ fools” because of the moral
infatuation of their conduct; they de-
spise counsel ; they are heedless of warn-
ing; they betray their own interests ;
they will only be brought to reason by
chastisement. (2) Wuckedness leads to
sickness. The Psalmist expressively
indicates that the suffering was self-
produced ; the sufferers had brought it
upon themselves, Many physical afflic-
tions are the direct result of sin. Glut-
tony and drunkenness lead to untold sick-
ness and suffering. All suffering results
from sin. Abolish moral evil, and physi-
ea) evil would soon be utterly unknown.

2 In tts effect. ‘“ Their soul abhorreth
all manner of meat, and they draw near
nto the gates of death.” The Psalmist
éescribes the sufferer as loathing food,

162


turning from it in disgust, and drawing
near to death. Sheol, the realm of
death, he represents as a city which is
entered through gates. And the sufferer
is solemnly near to those gates; in a
little while, unless relief be imparted to
him, he will have passed through them
for ever.

II. Divine healing. This the Poet
exhibits as—

1. Effectedin answer to prayer. “Then
they cry unto the Lord in their trouble,”
&c. (See remarks on ver.6.) “ Prayer
is a salve for every sore.”

2. Effected with supreme ease. “ He
sent His word and healed them.” Per-
owne detects here “the first glimmering
of St. John’s doctrine of the agency of
the personal Word. The Word by which
the heavens were made (xxxiii. 6) is
seen to be not merely the expression of
God’s will, but His messenger mediating
between Himself and His creatures.” At
the command of the Lord diseases flee.
He has but to utter His word, and the
result is achieved. Doubtless many
have been “lifted up from the gates of
death” by God in answer to prayer,


_And in all cases of restoration from sick-


ness to health, “ whatever means may be
used, the healing power comes from God,
and is under His control.”


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY ; PSALMS.





8. Demanding grateful acknowledg-
ment, ‘Oh that men would praise the
Lord for His goodness,” &e, (See re-
marks on ver. 8.)

Conotusion.—This sketch of human
disease and Divine healing may fairly be
regarded as a parable of sin and salva-
tion, 1, Sin produces an awful deteriora-
tion tn human nature, and, “ when 4 ts


PSALM OVXL,





JSinished, bringeth forth death.” 2. The
Lord is the almighty and all-merciful
Saviour from sin. 3. Prayer ts the con-
dition of deliverance from sin. ‘ Who-
soever shall call on the name of the Lord
shall be saved.” “Seek ye the Lord
while He may be found, call ye upon
Him while He is near,”


DistREssED SEAMEN AND THE SOVEREIGN oF THE SEA.
(Verses 23-32.)


This “is the most highly finished, the
most thoroughly poetical, of each of the
four pictures of human peril and deliver-
ance. It is painted asa landsman would
paint it, but yet only as one who had him-
self been in ‘ perils of waters’ could paint
the storm—the waves running mountains
high, on which the tiny craft seemed a
plaything,the helplessness of human skill,
the gladness of the calm, the safe refuge
in the haven.”—Perowne. Notice—

I. God’s sovereignty over the sea.
“He commandeth and raiseth the stormy
wind, which lifteth up the waves thereof.”
Again: “He maketh the storm a calm,
so that the waves thereof are still.” The
force and fury of the storm are not blind,
irresponsible, reckless things, They are
not merely the outworking of natural
laws. Behind the laws there is the Law-
giver. Behind the force of the winds
and waves there is the Force of all forces
—the great God. The old Hebrew poets
and prophets spake literal truth when
they represented the ocean as entirely
under the sway of Jehovah.

“Who lifts up on high
The ae maddening waves, tremendous

8)

Or bids them sleep along the feeble sands?
*Tis God alone.”—Polok,


To regard God as the Ruler of the sea
le—


1. Philosophic. It is unsatisfactory
to tell me that certain laws, or forces of
Nature, or certain combinations of her
elements, are the cause of storms and
calms. But it is thoroughly reasonable
to attribute them to the Creator and
Lord of Nature, a Being of infinite
wisdom and almighty power.


2. Scriptural. The Bible ascribes all
the phenomena of Nature to the agency
of the Divine Being.

3. Assuring. It is some satisfaction
to know that the furious elements are
not governed by blind laws or stony-
hearted fate, but by the wise and holy
God. When the angry ocean engulfs
hundreds of human beings, much sorrow
and distressing mystery are the result,
Yet the sorrow and distress would be far
greater if, in the dreadful storm, we be-
held only the work of mere laws or
relentless fate. But God is wise, and
strong, and kind. We know His will
is good. We bow reverently before the
mystery, and wait for more light. It is
assuring to know that our Father rules
the winds and waves.

IL Man’s impotency when the sea
rebels against him. “They mount up
to the heaven,” &. (verses 26, 27).
Man has great power over the sea, Hoe
employs it in his service. To a great
extent he can control it even in its
angry moods, In its depths he hides |
the medium ef communication with far.
distant lands. He can navigate it in
almost all weathers. Yet there are limits
to man’s power over the sea, and when
he attains these limits, his impotence is
complete. There is a “ Hitherto shalt
thou come, but no farther,” and when
man has reached that boundary, if he
attempt to advance beyond, the sea will
whelm him.

How great ts man / See how he curbs
the elements and employs them in his
service.

How insignificant ts man! See how
the stormy waves sport with him, buffet

163


PEALW OVTI.


him, engulf him. When the ocean speaks
in thunder, and surges in might and fury,
men’s souls are “melted because of
trouble. They reel to and fro, and
stagger like a drunken man, and are at
their wit’s end.”

But even when impotent and defeated
by the warring elements, man is greater
than they ; for he is conscious of his im-
potence and defeat, while they know not
of their triumph.

IIL Man’s resource when the sea
rebels against him, ‘Then they cry
unto the Lord in their trouble.” In the
storm, when Jonah was fleeing from
Joppa to Tarshish, ‘the mariners were
afraid, and cried every man unto his
god.” In the storm on the sea of Galilee,
when the disciples of Christ thought
they were perishing, they cried, ‘ Lord,
save us; we perish.” Even the pro-
fessed atheist ceases the insane boast of
atheism and cries to God for mercy in
the storm when hope of deliverance by
mere human skill is gone. Ina heavy
storm, when wreck seemed inevitable,
the captain of a ship inquired anxiously
—‘Is there a praying man on board ?”
But no one responded. He inquired
again. And eventually it was found
that there was a person on board, who
had formerly been a Wesleyan, but who
had cast away his confidence. ‘Can
you pray #” said the captain to him. “I
could once, sir,” he tremblingly replied,


“but I have left off praying.” ‘Try
again,” said the captain. And all the


crew bowed down to that Almighty Being


‘* Who rides upon the stormy sky,
And calms the roaring seas ; ”


whilst the poor backslider tried to pray,
and did pray, fervently, powerfully, and
successfully ; for the storm subsided and
the vessel was preserved,

How affecting, in the wreck of the
London, to find the people gathering
round the Rev. Mr. Draper, and in prayer
to God learning how to sink into the
deep, not with the wild shriek of despair,
or the heartless indifference of stoicism,
or the atheistic excitement of epicure-
anism, but with the calm heroism of
Christian faith ! Prayer to God is the
resource of imperilled mariners, That


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; PSALMS.





men thus cry to God in their trouble, as
by an instinct of their being, suggests—

1. The absurdity of atheism. Atheism
is a contradiction of the consciousness of
man as man.

2. The reality of prayer. The existence
of the instinct which leads men to cry unto
the Lord in their distresses, suggests that
there is some One who hears prayer, that
the utterance of petition is not in vain.

But is it only when you are at your
wit’s end that you cry unto God? Do
you ignore Him when “the south wind
blows softly,” yet cry unto Him when
the wild tempest raves? Is such con-
duct worthy of you? What right have
you to expect that He whom you seek
only when you are in trouble will answer
your selfish cry 4

IV. God’s answer to man’s cry. “‘ He

bringeth them out of their distresses,”
&c. Sometimes this is true literally.
The heathen mariners on their voyage to
Tarshish in the storm, with their dim
lights as to religion, cried earnestly to
their gods, and the true God directed
them as to how they should proceed so
as to secure the allaying of the storm.
The disciples of the Lord Jesus cried to
Him in the tempest, and He hushed it
into peace. We could cite numerous in-
stances of modern times, in which earnest
prayer in the storm has been followed by
acalm. But God does not always liter-
ally allay the storm, and save from it
those who cryunto Him. He, however,
calms the inward tempest, so that the
waves of anxiety and terror are still,
He did 80 in those on board the London,
who sank in the act of worship. If He
does not avert the calamity in answer to
the prayer of the imperilled, He nerves
them for the calamity, in their case takes
away the sting and evil of it, and makes
it the occasion of blessing to them. In
answer to the cry of “ those in peril on
the sea,” God does not always bring the
ship into the desired haven; but “He
bringeth them unto their desired haven,”
—that calm haven where no storm raves,
but all is peaceful, serene, and blessed,
_ V. Man’s obligation for God’s inter-
position. “ Oh, that men would praise
the Lord for His goodness,” &c, (See
remarks on ver, 8.)


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


POALM OVIL.





TERRESTRIAL


(Verses


“The character of the Psalm,” says
Perowne, “changes at this point. We
have no longer distinct pictures as be-
fore: the beautiful double refrain is
dropped, the language is harsher and
more abrupt. Instead of fresh examples
of deliverance from peril, and thanke-
giving for God’s mercies, we have now
instances of God’s providential govern-
ment of the world exhibited in two
series of contrasts, The first of these is
contained in verses 33-39, and expresses
a double change—the fruitful well-
watered land smitten, like the rich
plain of Sodom, with desolation, and
changed into a salt-marsh; and anon,
the wilderness crowned with cities, like
Tadmor (of which Pliny says, vasto
ambitu arenis includit agros), and made
fertile to produce corn and wine. The
second is contained in verses 40, 41,
and expresses the change in the fortunes
of man (as the last series did those of
countries)—viz., how the poor and the
humble are raised, and the rich and the
proud overthrown.”

Here are three chief points for con-
sideration :—

I. Revolutions in countries. Verses
33-39. Here is—

1. A picture of a fertile land reduced
to barrenness. “ He turneth rivers into
a wilderness,” &c, (verses 33, 34). - (1)
This change was effected by God. “HE
turneth,” dc, He can dry up rivers,
and make the fruitful plain a salt waste
or sandy desert, (2) This change was
effected by God by reason of the wicked-
ness of itsinhabitants. “ For the wicked-
ness of them that dwell therein.” There
is an allusion here to the destruction of
Sodom and Gomorrah, and the change
of “the plain well watered everywhere,
as the garden of the Lord,” into a salt
sea and a salt soil on which nothing
grows. “If the land be bad, it is be-
cause the inhabitants are so.”

2. A picture of a barren land made
fertile, (Verses 35-38.) The 35th
verse is taken from Isa, xli. 18. The
arid wilderness is transformed into a


REVOLUTIONS.
$3-43.)


well-watered country, the barren desert
into a scene of fruitfulness and beauty ;
where solitude reigned, a populous city
is found ; and where no life was, both
human and animal life increases and
multiplies, This transformation is
brought about by—(1) The labour of
man. ‘They prepare a city for habi-
tation ; and sow the fields, and plant
vineyards, which may yield fruits of in-
crease.” Labour is an eternal and im-
mutable condition of prosperity both for
individuals and for communities, (2)
The blessing of God. The Divine bless-
ing precedes and prepares for human
labour. ‘He turneth the wilderness
into a standing water,” &c. The Divine
blessing succeeds and crowns human
labour. ‘He blesseth them also, so
that they are multiplied,” & Some
expositors have connected these verses
with certain historical events; but, as
Perowne points out, “the language em-
ployed is far too general to be limited
to one event, It describes what fre-
quently has occurred.. The histories of
Mexico and of Holland might furnish
examples of such a contrast.” Matthew
Henry says: “The land of Canaan,
which was once the glory of all lands
for fruitfulness, is said to be at this
day a fruitless, useless, worthless spot
of ground, as was foretold (Deut. xxix.
23). This land of ours, which formerly
was much of it an uncultivated desert,
is now full of all good things.”

3. A reminder that the temporal pros-
perity of communities is tnconstant and
uncertain. “ Again, they are minished
and brought low through oppression,
affliction, and sorrow.” (1) The most
prosperous communities are not exempt
from calamities, (2) The most pros-
perous communities are sometimes
brought low by calamities. Barnes:
“God so deals with the race as in the
best manner to secure the recognition
of Himself ;—not always sending pros-
perity, lest men should regard it as a
thing of course, and forget that it
comes from Him ;—and not making

165


PALM OVIII.





the course of life uniformly that of
disappointment and sorrow, lest they
should feel that there is no God pre-
siding over human affairs, He visits
now with prosperity, and now with ad-
versity ;—now with success and now
with reverses, showing that His agency
is constant, and that men are wholly
dependent on Him.” Matthew Henry :
“‘ Worldly wealth is an uncertain thing,
and often those that are filled with it,
ere they are aware, grow so secure and
sensual with it that, ere they are aware,
they lose it again.”

IL Revolutions in human life. Here
1s—
1. The humiliation of the highest.
“He poureth contempt upon princes,
and causeth them to wander in the
wilderness where there is no way.” If
men of exalted rank do evil and dis-
honour God He will bring them down
from their elevation, make them to be
scorned of men, and reduce them to
helpless embarrassment. ‘‘ He bringeth
the princes to nothing, He maketh the
judges of the earth as vanity.”

2. The exaltation of the lowest, “Yet
setteth He the poor on high from affic-
tion, and maketh him families like a
flock.” God exalts the poor above their
enemies, and out of the reach of their
troubles. He raises them from suffer-
ing and adversity into joy and prosperity,
He blesses them with large increase in
their families, —‘ maketh families like
a flock,” a figure denoting a great multi-
tude. Amongst the Hebrews large
families were accounted a_ blessing,


Over all these revolutions God presides.





HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


_——


‘¢ His kingdom ruleth over all.” “ dod
is to be acknowledged,” says Matthew
Henry, “both in setting up families and
in building them up. Let not princes
be envied, nor the poor despised, for
God has ways of changing the condition
of both.”

IIL The salutary impression of such
revolutions. The Psalmist represents
the result as threefold, )

1. To the righteous, joy. “The right-
eous shall see it and rejoice” ‘The
manifestation of God’s righteous govern-
ment of the world is a source of glad-
ness to the upright.

2. To the wicked, silence. “ All ini-
quity shall stop her mouth.” “The
Divine dealings shall be manifestly so
just, and so worthy of universal approval,
that even though the wicked are disposed
to complain against God, they will be
able to find nothing which will justify
them in such complaints,”—Barnes.

3. To the thoughtful, increased ac-
quaintance with God. ‘‘ Whoso is wise
and will observe these things, even they
shall understand the loving-kindness of
the Lord.” (1) Jn the revolutions in
human history there is a mantfestation
of the goodness of God, His rule is
beneficent. (2) This manifestation of
the goodness of God ts perceived only by
the attentive observer of those revolutions.
The significance of God’s works and
ways cannot be discovered by a glance,
or by the superficial observer. But he
who will consider them attentively and
reverently, shall find in them sufficient
reason for intelligent and hearty con-
fidence in Him,


PSALM CVIII.


INTRODUCTION.


“This Psalm consists of portions of two others, the first half of it being taken from the
57th Psalm, verses 7-11, and the latter half from the 60th, verses 5-12. It bears the name of
David, because the original passages both occur in psalms ascribed to him as their author.
But there is no reason for concluding that these fragments were thus united by David him.
self. Some later poet probably adapted them to circumstances of his own time ; possibly
wished thus to commemorate some victory over Edom or Philistia.”—Perowne.

As the whole of the Psalm has already been expounded in ‘‘ The Homiletical Commen.~
tary” on Psalms 57 and 60, it will be sufficient if in this place we suggest a method of de-


veloping its main homiletic ideas.


166


The Psalm affords an excellent illustration of—


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS








Tre Compiete TrIvMPH


The Christian life is a warfare.
Every spiritually-renewed man has to
do battle with fleshly lusts and evil
tendencies in his own nature, with
corrupt opinions and practices in
society, and with the temptations of the
devil. The renewed man is assured of
ultimate victory in this conflict, And
this Psalm very suitably represents the
spiritual attitude of the Christian
warrior, who, although he has gained
many conquests, is not yet completely
victorious, but in the strength of God
is pressing on to the full and final
triumph The complete triumph of the
Christian life is—

I. Promoted by praise to God. The
Poet begins his Psalm with praise to
God. Observe the main features of his
praise. It is—

1. Praise from a confident heart,
“O God, my heart is fixed.” A fixed
heart is one which is firm and fearless
by reason of its confidence in God. Its
praise would be unfaltering and fervent,

2. Praise with the noblest powers.
Even with my glory.” By his “glory”
the Poet means his soul, with all the
capacities and faculties which belonged
to him as an intelligent being, created
in the Divine image. The praise of
God should engage the noblest powers
of our being. Soulless worship is
repugnant to Heaven.

3. Praise in the most public manner.
‘I will praise Thee, O Lord, among
the people ; and I will sing praises unto
Thee among the nations,” The peoples
of the whole earth alone constitute a
sufficient auditory for the praise which
the Psalmist would offer.

4, Praise because of God’s covenant
relationship, ‘For Thy mercy is great
above the heavens, and Thy truth
reacheth unto the clouds.” The mercy
and truth of God are the attributes which
are celebrated by Hebrew poets and
prophets as marking His covenant
relationship with His people. These
are conspicuous, exalted, wast a8 the
heavens.

5. Praise of universal extent. “ Be


o¥r THE CHristTraAN Lire.


Thou exalted, O God, above the
heavens, and Thy glory above all the
earth.” The heart which is fixed to
praise God would exalt Him in the
highest degree and widest extent. He
is worthy the praise of the highest
intelligences of heaven, and of all upon
earth.

How does this praise promote the
complete victory of the Christian life?

First : It honours God, ‘ Them that
honour Me, I will honour.” If we
honour Him with sincere praise He
will honour us with courage, strength,
triumph,

Second : Jt strengthens faith, As
we heartily celebrate the Divine mercy
and truth, our faith in them will grow
stronger. And in moral conflicts
nothing nerves the heart with heroism
and the arm with power like faith in
God. In the warfare of the spiritual
life if we would “ wax valiant in fight,
and turn to flight the armies of the
aliens,” it must be “ through faith.”

II. Promoted by consideration of
the triumphs already achieved. The
Poet calls to mind the victories already
won. I will rejoice, I will divide
Shechem and mete out the valley of
Suceoth. Gilead is mine, Manasseh is
mine, Ephraim also is the strength of
mine head, Judah is my lawgiver, Moab
is my washpot.” Shechem on the west
of Jordan, and Succoth on the east ;
Gilead (including the region occupied
by the tribes of Gad and Reuben), and
Manasseh on the east, and Ephraim and
Judah on the west, are mentioned as
representing the whole land of Canaan.
The powerful tribe of Ephraim is
represented ag “the strength of his
head,” s.¢., the great protection of the
most vital interests in battle Judah
is spoken of as the lawgiver, probably
in reference to the ancient prediction,
“The sceptre shall not depart from
Judah, nor a lawgiver from between his
feet until Shiloh come.” All this land
of Canaan was subdued. Moab also
was conquered. “ Moab is my wash-
pot” expresses the oa ae of the

16


POALM CVI





Moabites to a state of utter servitude.
‘The Moabites became David's servants,
and brought gifts” (2 Sam. viii. 2).
But the victory of Israel was not com-
plete. Edom was still unconquered. But
its subjugation is anticipated. ‘ Over
Edom will I cast my shoe.” In the pre-
ceding clause Moab is described as a
mean vessel in which the feet are washed,
and now Edom is described as a servant
of the lowest grade to whom the sandals
are thrown to be removed orto be cleaned.
Or the figure may mean the placing of
the foot upon Edom in token of its com-
plete subjection, The idea undoubtedly
is that Edom should be completely van-
quished by, and subjected to, Israel.
But how would the consideration of
past triumphs promote the complete
victory 4
First: Thetr consideration reveals the
fact that many an enemy which seemed
too mighty for us has been vanquished by
believing effort. The Israelites had con-
quered the fierce and strong Canaanites,
Could they not also conquer the formid-
able Idumeans? In the Christian life
we look back upon many a difficulty over-
come, many a temptation successfully re-
sisted, many a foe slain, and are en-
couraged to hope and contend for the full
and final conquest. Past victories are
an earnest of future and entire triumph.
Second: Their consideration brings into
clear and impressive light the faithful-
ness and sufficiency of God asour Helper,
He had made good His promise to Israel
in their past triumphs, which they had
achieved by virtue of His help; and, as
He changes neither in His faithfulness
nor in His power to help, would He not
enable them to vanquish the Idumeans ?
In the past of our individual Christian
life He has been our unfailing Helper
and Supporter. “* Having obtained help
of God, we continue unto this day.” Our





HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS,





past triumphs are due to His assistance,
And as we review them, remembering
His unchangeableness, we are encouraged
boldly to encounter future difficulties and
enemies, John Newton very clearly ex-
presses this thought—
' “His love in time past
Forbids me to think,” &¢,


TI. Assured by God. We discover
this assurance in—

1. His interest in His people. David
speaks of Israel as His “beloved.”
“That Thy beloved may be delivered.”
God loves His people; and that love is
a guarantee of their ultimate and com-
plete triumph over all their foes.

2. His power to give Hts people the
victory. “Save with Thy right hand.
. +. Through God we shall do vali-
antly ; and He shall tread down our
enemies.” ‘The right hand of the Lord
doeth valiantly.” ‘No weapon that is
formed against thee shall prosper.” ‘The
God of peace shall bruise Satan under
your feet shortly.” To those who be-
lievingly prosecute this warfare God gives
the victory.

3. His promise to give His people the
victory. ‘God hath spoken in His holi-
ness.” The holiness of God is the pledge
that He will perform His promises. He
has promised to those who believe on
Him the victory over all their foes ; and
what He has promised He will perform,
for His word is both almighty and un-
changeable,

Conotusion. Here is encouragement
for the Christian soldier. Ours is not a
doubtful battle. The Lord is on our
side ; therefore we must conquer. Here
is counsel for the Christian soldier. If
we would conquer we must be found in
the way ofduty. Trust and fight, watch
and pray, so shall you come off at lasé
more than conqueror through Christ.


Tae Greatness oF Gop’s Mercy.


(Verse 4. —“ Thy mercy is great above the heavens,”)


A thing may be radically evil in itself,
and yet may by a superior power be made
the occasion of good. The entrance of
sin into the world was a most evil and

168


painful thing, yet under the glorious
government of God it is so overruled as
not to prove an unmixed evil. Some of
the most glorious representations of the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; PSALMB.


character of God have been occasioned by
the sin of mankind. This is true of His
mercy. Sin did not originate His mercy,
but was the occasion of its display.
Mercy is the form which the goodness of
God assumes to the sinful and wretched.
It is the disposition of God to pardon
sinners and to relieve sufferers. Our
text sets forth the greatness of the Mercy
of God. This is seen—

L In the blessings of daily life. The
use of the word “‘ mercy” implies suffer-
ing and sin on the part of those to whom
it is applied. Man is a sinner: sin
deserves misery, death. But there is
much enjoyment in the world. Every
day we receive innumerable blessings.
What a proof of His mercy! Life itself
is a gift of God’s mercy. His mercy
crowns the life of hell-deserving rebels
with joy! It becomes us to receive
every comfort and joy as a proof, not
only of God’s goodness, but of His
mercy. “It is of the Lord’s mercies
that we are not consumed,” &c.

IL In the grand end for which it is
manifested. Why, when sin entered our
world, did mercy also appear? Why does
God continue our life here? Why does
He in countless ways manifest His mercy
to men? In order that man may be de-
livered from sin, and be established in a


state of holiness. Salvation, the restora- .


tion of man to God, is the grand pur-
pose of Divine mercy. How transcen-
dently great! How Divine!

III. In the numerous and glorious
means by which it seeks to accomplish
this end. These are— ;

1. The incarnation, life, ministry,
sufferings, death, resurrection, and inter-
cession of the Son of God. The great
blessing of salvation could not have been
obtained apart from Christ. He is the
great Gift of mercy, the great Channel
of mercy, the great Minister of mercy.
This gift transcends that of salvation.
That our redemption should be through
the blood of Christ is a wonderful dis-_
play of mercy. Wonderful that mercy
should seek our salvation ; more wonder-
ful that such means should be employed
to secure it, Jesus Christ is the greatest
gift of the mercy of God.

3. The agency of the Holy Ghost. He


PSALM OVEZL


strives, calls, convinces, converts, estab-
lishes, sanctifies men—all in mercy, and
all with a view to their salvation. In
this we have a great display of mercy.
He is distinguished, glorious, divine ;
and He is the gift of God’s mercy to us.

3. The ministry of the Gospel preacher.
God hath sent forth ambassadors to be-
seech men in Christ’s stead to be recon-
ciled unto Him. Every true preacher
of the Gospel is a gift of Divine mercy
to men. Every Gospel sermon is a proof
of God’s mercy to those who hear it,

4, The arrangements of Providence.
God’s providence is a great institution
of mercy, @ vast organisation of mercy
in constant operation to secure the salva-
tionofmen. Allthecircumstances, scenes,
and events of life are ordered or controlled
by mercy for the salvation of men.

How various and glorious, then, are
the means and agencies which God in
His mercy uses to secure the salvation
of mankind! These means and agencies
are devised by Mercy, bestowed by
Mercy, employed by Mercy, for a most
merciful end.

IV. In the vast multitudes to whom
it extends. It extends to all men.
God in mercy gave Christ a Saviour for
all men. His salvation is adequate to
the needs of all, suited to the needs of
all, offered to all, and free for all. Like
the heavens which encompass all, and
pour their light and warmth on all and
freely, so God’s mercy embraces all, and
freely offers to all her ample provisions.
Countless multitudes have been saved
by mercy. The trophies of her saving
power are ever passing into the realms
of the blessed. This great mercy is
equal to all the sin and misery of our
sinful and suffering race—nay, it tran-
scends the sin and suffering. It meets
the needs of the worst sinners, Manas-
seh, Mary Magdalene, the dying male-
factor, Saul the persecutor, found mercy,
and through mercy entered heaven. At
present it is more than sufficient for the
vilest. It is sufficient for alJ sinners
that are now and will yet arise, until its
grand end is accomplished, the race re-
stored, and God glorified in man. His
mercy is infinite. “He delighteth in
mercy.” He “is rich in said “ Oh.


“ PSALM CIx. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : PSALMS.





gation to God. Accept this mercy; in
sin and weakness trust in it; rejoice in
it: praise God for it.


give thanks unto the Lord, for He is
good, for His Merey endureth for ever.”
This great merey increases our obli-


PSALM OIZ


INTRODUCTION,


This,” says Perowne, ‘is the last of the Psalms of imprecation, and completes the terrible
climax, In the awfulness of its anathemas, the Psalm surpasses everything of the kind in the
Old Testament, Who the person was who was thus singled out for execration, it is in vain to
conjecture. Those who hold, in accordance with the Inscription, that the Psalm was written
by David, suppose that Doeg or Cush, Shimei or Ahithophel, is the object of execration.

“Tn Acts i, 20, St. Peter combines a part of the 8th verse of this Psalm, ‘ His office let another
take,’ with words slightly altered from the 25th [Heb. 26th] verse of the 69th Psalm, and ap-
plies them to Judas Iscariot. Hence the Psalm has been regarded by the majority of expositors,
ancient and modern, as a prophetic and Messianic Psalm, The language has been justified not
as the language of David, but as the language of Christ, exercising His office of Judge, or, in
so far as He had laid aside that office during His earthly life, calling upon His Father to accom-
plish the curse. It has been alleged that this is the prophetic foreshadowing of the solemn
words, ‘ Woe unto that man by whom the Son of Man is betrayed; it were good for that man if
he had not been born’ (Matt. xxvi. 24), The curse, in the words of Chryzostom, ‘is a prophecy
in form of a curse.’

' The strain which such a view compels us to put on much of the language of the Psalm
ought to have led long since to its abandonment. Not even the woes denounced by our Lord
against the Pharisees can really be compared to the anathemas which are here strung together.
Mnch less is there any pretence for saying that those words, so full of holy sorrow, addressed to
the traitor in the Gospels, are merely another expression of the appalling denunciations of the
Pealm, But, terrible as these undoubtedly are—to be accounted for by the spirit of the Old
Dispensation, not to be defended by that of the New—still let us learn to estimate them
aright. This is the natural voice of righteousness persecuted. These are the accents of the
martyr, not smarting only with a sense of personal suffering, but feeling acutely, and hating
nobly, the triumph of wickedness,”


Tue PITIABLE, THE COMMENDABLE, AND THE REPREHENSIBLE, IN THB
TROUBLED Lire or A Gopiy Man,


(Verses 1-20.)


L The pitiable in the troubled life And again—
of a godly man. The Psalmist is to ‘6 Be thou as chaste as ice ag pure a8 Enov,
be commiserated because of the cruel thon shalt not escape calumny,” s
treatment he received at the hands of


unprincipled enemies, He complains of
their—

1. Slander. “The mouth of the
wicked and the mouth of the deceitful
are opened against me ; they have spoken
against me with a lying tongue.” (See
“Hom. Com.” on Ps. xlii 5-8, and
ci, 5.)

“No might nor greatness in mortality
Can censure ‘scape; back-wounding calumny
The whitest virtue strikes: what king so strong,
an tie the gall up in the slanderous tongue?”
—Shakespeare.
Again—


“ Virtue itself scapes not calumnious strokes.”
0


2. Malignity. ‘They compassed me
about also with words of hatred, and
fought against me without a cause.”
Hengstenberg says: “The words of
hatred are malignant accusations. The
swords with which they fight are their
tongues, The language used in the
Psalm refers only to false accusations,
not to deeds.” Their bitter hostility to
the Psalmist was unprovoked. He had
given them no cause for it. He had
done them no wrong.

3. Ingratitude, He had done them
good, and they injured him in return,
“For my love they are my enemies,
And they have rewarded me evil fos


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY; PSALMS.


SSS a a ec heel


good, and hatred for my love.” This
is base and atrocious wickedness, yet
David often suffered from such conduct.
“At the battle of Alma, in September
1854, a wounded Russian was calling
piteously for water. Captain Edding-
ton, whose heart was kind and charitable,
ran to him, and, stooping, gave him the
much-desired beverage. The wounded
man revived. The captain ran forward
to join his regiment, when the wretch,
who had just been restored by his kind-
ness, fired, and shot him who had been
his friend in the time of need.”


“Blow, blow, thon winter wind,
Thou art not so unkind
As man’s ingratitude 5
Thy tooth is not so keen,
Because thou art not seen,
Although thy breath be rude.”
—Shakespeare.


Kind and godly men are still exposed
to the slander, malignity, and base in-
gratitude of the wicked, When they
suffer from these they should be sus-
tained by the sympathy of all true men.
A good man smarting under the un-
merited assaults of the wicked should be
encouraged and defended by all upright
men.

IL. The commendable in the troubled
life of a godly man. The troubled
Psalmist is to be commended because he
committed his cause to the Lord in
prayer. Notice—

1. The object of his prayer. He
prayed that God would vindicate him
from the slanders of his enemies,
* Hold not Thy peace.” Hengstenberg
and Perowne: “ Be not silent.” The
desire of the Psalmist was that God
would interpose for his help, and so
witness for him against his adversaries.

2. The intensity of his prayer. “‘ But
I give myself unto prayer,’ lit. ‘I (am)
prayer,’ s.e., one who prays, having re-
course to no other means of defence.” —
Perowne, Matthew Henry, Barnes, and
others are wrong in representing him as
praying continually for his enemies.
The spirit which breathes through the
Psalm is utterly irreconcilable with such
a view. In the most terrible manner he

rays against his enemies, not for them.
He devoted himself entirely to prayer ;


his supplications were continuous end
absorbing,

3. The ground of his prayer. “O
God of my praise,” se, the God whom
I praise. This title contains the ground
of the prayer. In former times the Lord
had given the Psalmist reason to praise
Him, and He will now interpose for
him, and so give him fresh reason
for praise, Hengstenberg : “The repre-
sentation of all that the Lord has al-
ready done for us, and the appeal to it,
form a sure ground of answer, and 8
mighty quickening of hope. He cannot
be unlike Himself.”

For thus committing his cause to
God in prayer, the Psalmist is to be
commended, His example is well
worthy our imitation. Let the good
man who is slandered and calumniated
by the wicked commit his cause to God,
and in due time he shall be amply vindi-
cated.

III, The reprehensible in the
troubled life of godly man. Vers,
6-20. Various attempts have been
made to free the Psalmist from the
charge of revengefulness, Some have
said that in these verses he speaks as
a prophet, and simply declares what
would come upon his enemies, and not
what he desired concerning them.
Others seek to get rid of the difficulty
by regarding the Psalm as Messianic,
and Christ as the speaker ; others by
supposing the words to be merely re-
eorded by him as the words of his eno-
mies, We have met with no satisfac
tory explanation which seeks to exone-
rate the Psalmist from blame, To us
these laboured and strained attempts to
exculpate the Psalmist do not seem very
creditable to their authors, or in any
way necessary. Religious experiencea
find utterance in the Psalms which are
not commendable. In them the poeta
express their doubts as well as their con-
fidences, their depressions as well aa
their exultations. Many things are re-
corded which are also condemned. The
Bible faithfully records the defects and
sins of the best men. One of the chief ele-
ments of the worth of the Psalms is that
in them we have a faithful utterance of
the varying religious experiences of im-

171


PRALM Li,


perfect yet unquestionably godly men.
But it is essential to bear in mind that
it is not Just to judge David by the
principles and spirit of this Christian
dispensation, His utterances must be
estimated in the light of the Decalogue,
not in that of the Sermon on the Mount.
But, after we have made every legiti-
mate allowance tending to mitigate the
harshness and bitterness of spirit here
manifested, still the Poet appears to us
here as a beacon, not as a pattern, His
spirit and its expressions are to us
things not to be imitated, but to be sedu-
lously avoided. Without entering into
a detailed exposition of these verses
we would call attention to three consi-
derations which they have suggested
to us.

1. To pray for the wrath of God on
any one is (to say the least) unbecoming
in man. A due sense of our own sin
and demerit ought effectually to re-
press such petitions. ‘lf Thou, Lord,
shouldest mark iniquities, O Lord, who
shall stand #”

2. T'o pray that even a man’s prayer
might ‘become sin” is much worse than
unbecoming. Let his prayer become
sin.” Perowne: “ His prayer, not ad-
dressed to the human judge for mitiga-
tion of the sentence, but here, as always,
prayer to God, The criminal, looking
in vain for pity or justice at the hands
of man, turns in his extremity to God;
but even there, at the very fount of
mercy, let mercy fail him, let his prayer


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; PSALMS.





aggravate his guilt. The utterance of
such a wish is the most awful part of
the imprecation. That prayer may thus
draw down not forgiveness but wrath,
see Isa i 15; Prov. xv. 8, xxi 27,
xxviii, 9. But it is one thing to recog-
nise this as a fact in the Divine govern-
ment of man, it is another thing to
imprecate it.”

3. To pray for such curses as are here
invoked on the wife and children of an
enemy 18 to us unspeakably dreadful.
We shudder as we read verses 10 and
12, and are reminded of the words of
Shakspeare :—

‘Oh that the slave had forty thousand lives ;

One is too poor, too weak for my revenge !

I would have him nine years a killing.”

So unappeasable seems the revenge of
the Psalmist. Antoninus well says,
“The best sort of revenge is not to be
like him who did the injury.” But
David resembled his enemies in this,
that they “fought against him without
a cause,” and he invokes the most dread-
ful injuries upon those who had done
him no wrong, because they were related
to one who had. Let good men as they
read this portion of the Psalm take
warning. The holiest of men in the
present state may be tempted into the
manifestation of a most unbecoming and
sinful spirit. There is a revenge which
is noble and God-like. Let us greet
our enemies with it. “If thine enemy
hunger, feed him,” &. (Rom. xii 20,
21).


Complaint, Prayer, aND CoNFIDENOE.
(Verses 21-31.)


In this portion of the Psalm we have—

L A mournful complaint. The Poet
complains of—

1. Mental distress, “Iam poor and
needy, and my heart is wounded within
me.” He was miserable and in need
of help. His troubles had pierced his
heart as with a sword. It is trying to
be troubled in our circumstances, or to
be afflicted in body, but the sorest trials
are those of the heart. “ The spirit of
a man will sustain his infirmity; but a
wounded spirit who can bear t”

172


2. Physical exhaustion, “ My knees
are weak through fasting, and my flesh
faileth of fatnesa” “Or it may be
rendered, hath fallen away from fat.”—
Perowne. The fasting spoken of is pro-’
bably that of penitence, because of sin;
or humiliation, because of suffering. It
was a voluntary, not a compulsory
fasting. By reason of this the Poet's


strength had failed. The knee joints


no longer afforded him firm support,
and his boay was wasting to mere skin
and bones.


HOMILET/C COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





3. Approach to death. “I am gone
like the shadow when it declineth; I
am tossed up and down as the locust.”
Henstenberg: “I must go hence like
the shadow when it declineth, I am
carried away like the locust.” Perowne:
“As a shadow, when it lengtheneth,
am I gone hence, I have been driven
away as the locust.” As the lengthen-
ing shadows of evening show the near
approach of night, so the afilictions of
the Psalmist seemed to indicate his
searness to death and the grave. The
Poet gives special prominence to the
srresistibleness of his approach to death,
He says literally, “I am made to go
hence.” And as the locusts are seized
and carried away by the wind, being
powerless against its force, so he was
being urged towards the gates of death
by a force which he was unable to resist.

4, The reproach of his enemies. “I
became also a reproach unto them, they
looked upon me, they shaked their
heads.” ‘The wicked reviled the Poet
as a bad man, and shook their heads in
insult and mockery. Or it may be, as
Henstenberg says, that they shook the
head to express the desperateness of the
Poet, saying by the movement, “It is
all over with him.”

Such is the mournful complaint of
the Psalmist, It is sometimes a relief to
express our afflictions and griefs to God.
It lightens the burden of the heart, &e,
This is especially so when complaint is
followed by prayer.

IL An earnest prayer.
here—

1. The objects sought in his prayer,
The Psalmist petitions God for (1)
Salvation from his afflictions. “ Deliver
Thou me, Help me, O Lord my God;
O save me according to Thy mercy.”
He seeks support from God in his
trouble, and deliverance from his
trouble. The Lord can turn the
shadow of the darkest night into the
light of joyous day. (2) Vindication
from reproach, “That they may know
that this is Thy hand, that Thou, Lord,
hast done it.” In the view of the
Psalmist, if the interposition he sought
from God were granted unto him, it
would completely silence the reproaches


Consider


PALM OFX,





of his enemies, (3) Confusion for his
enemies, ‘ When they arise, let them
be ashamed, let mine adversaries be
clothed with shame, and let them cover
themselves with their own confusion as
with a mantle.” Baffle their dark de-
signs, and clothe them with shame from
head to foot.

2. The pleas by which he urges hes
prayer. “Do Thou for me, O God the
Lord, for Thy name’s sake; because
Thy mercy is good, deliver Thou me,
O save me according to Thy mercy.”
The grace of God is the grand plea of
the Psalmist. He urges his petition
not on the ground of his own merit,
but of God’s mercy. This he sets forth .
(1) As the reason of salvation. ‘“ Do
Thou for me, for Thy name’s sake ; be-
cause Thy mercy is good,” &e. The
originating cause of salvation is the
infinite generosity of God. (2) As the
measure of salvation. ‘Save me ac-
cording to Thy mercy.” The salvation
that is measured by the infinite grace
of God will be gloriously complete.
The pleas urged by the Psalmist (a)
Indicate confidence in God. (8) Hon-
our God. (y) Are mighty with God
We shall do well to imitate them.

Ill, An encouraging confidence.
The Poet expresses—

1. An assurance of salvation from God.
“For He shall stand at the right hand of
the poor, to save him from those that
condemn his soul.” He shall stand at the
right hand of His afflicted people, to plead
their cause against those who would un-
justly judge them, and to deliver them.
Take heart, ye tried and true, ye suffer-
ing and godly souls, for your Deliverer
is mighty and your salvation sure.

2. A determination to offer praise to
God. ‘I will greatly praise the Lord
with my mouth, yea, I will praise Him
among the multitude.” He resolves that
he will offer praise, and that it shall be (1)
Hearty. “Iwill greatly praise the Lord.”
(2) Expressed, “With my mouth.” (3)
Public, “ Among the multitude.”


‘¢ Awake, my soul! not only passive praise
Thou owest | not alone these swelling teara,
Mute thanks and secret ecstasy | awake,
Voice of sweet song! awake, my bear

awake 1” t
173


PSALM CX.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


A Partrren Prayge.
(Verse 21, ‘* But do Thou for me, O God the Lord, for Thy nsme’s s2ke.”)


This is a brief yet a model prayer for
A good man,

I, It is true in its direction. It is
addressed to “God the Lord.” There
is but One all-sufficient being to whom
we can address our prayers. Think
what is requisite to be able to answer
prayer at all times—infinite intelligence,
unlimited goodness, universal sove-
reignty, &c, The petition of the Psalm-
ist indicates his belief that he was
upproaching such a being ; if he could
_ but secure the help of God, he would
leave everything else to Him. Hecould
do so only in approaching @ being of
whose perfection he had no doubt. Only
the Lord God can hear and answer
prayer,

II. It is personal in its aim. ‘ Do
Thou for me.” Man’s first business is
to secure the blessing of God for him-
self. We should not keep the vineyard
of another and neglect our own. We
should not attempt to lead others unto
Jesus Uhrist until we know Him as our
own Saviour. Unless we are assured of
the Divine blessing, we should seek it first
for ourselves, and then for others, This
is not selfish, but benevolent. Show this,


IIL It is submissive in its spirit,
The Psalmist leaves everything to God,
only praying that His interposition may
be “for” him. He leaves the manner
of the interposition to God. God de
livers His people by different methods ;
sometimes by removal of their afflictions,
and sometimes by increase of their
strength. He blesses His people by
different means; sometimes by adver-
sity, and sometimes by prosperity. The
wise and goo’ man leaves the means
and the manner of the blessing to God,
He leaves the time also to Gou. Now
or in the future, early or late, as may
seem good unto Him. This submissica
is both wise and pious.

IV. It is powerful in its place
“For Thy name’s sake.” The name
represents the character of God. The
honour of the Divine name is bound up
with His treatment of His people. If
any one trusting in God were to perish
the glory of His name would be sullied,
This is a plea which prevails with God.

This prayer is suitable for all occa-
sions; it is brief and comprehensive.
And if it is answered in our experienca,
we shall “have all, and abound,”


PSALM OX


InTRODUOTION.


I. A Measfanic propheey, 1. From internal evidence, 9. From the unan!mous eoresnt
of Jewish expositors. 8, From the testimony of Christ (Matt, xxii, 41, &c. 3; Mark xii. 35).
4, From the silence of the Pharisees (Luke xx. 41), 5. From the witness of the Apostles
(Acts ii. 34; 1 Cor, xv. 25; Heb. i 13). 6. And the Early Church (Justin Martyr, Tertull.,
Oyp., Chrys., &c.). II, Its Messianic character denied, 1. Ewald refers it to David. 2.
Hitzig, &c., to a Maccabean priest. Without foundation, for (1) verse 1 can acarcely be ap:
plied to a mere man ; (2) verse 4 could certainly not apply to David or any human priesthood,
III. Of Davidie authorship, 1, From internal evidence. 2, Almost universal tradition,
Our Lord’s testimony,


Tue Soverzianty or Curis.
(Verse 1 and last clause of verse 3.)


Our subject occupies a foremost place
In the Old Testament, The first pre-
diction (Gen, iii. 15) asserta it; the
promise to Abratcs™ (Gen. xxii. 17)

174


implies it ; the destiny ef Judah (Gen.


xlix. 10) involves it. It all but com-
mences the Psalms (ii.), which indeed
teem with it (xlv., lxxii., ex., dc.). Pro


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY ; PSALMS.





pheey proper opens with it (Isa. ii. 1-4),
and closes with it (Luke i. 33).

Our Lord’s ministry was a proclama-
tion of His Kingdom, but He did not re-
veal His own sovereignty till at the close.
Then His sentiments are those of our
text (John xvii. 2; Matt. xxv. 31, 32;
xxvii. 8). Afterwards the glorious
company of the Apostles (Acts ii. 33,
34; Phil. ii, 9; Eph. i. 22, 23), the
goodly fellowship of the Prophets (Rev.
xix. 16), the noble army of Martyrs
(Polycarp: ‘* How can I blaspheme my
Kine”), and the holy Church through-
out all the world (Rev. vii. 9-12), ac-
knowledge Him to be the King of glory.

L Christ reigns by divine appoint-
ment. ‘‘ The Lordsaid.” The Psalmist
is admitted into the council chamber of
the Trinity. There God the Father and
God the Son occupy one throne (Eastern
thrones are extended benches, “Sit
on my throne at my right hand”—
Schnurrer), and are in communion,

1. God assigns to Christ coequal
authority. “At My right hand” (Ps.
xlv. 9; Mark xvi. 19; Eph. i. 20, 21).

2. God assigns to Christ coequal
honour. “Sit” (Ps. xxix. 10; 1 Kings
i, 46, ii. 19).

IL, Christ reigns by divine right.
“My Lord,” °}TN a divine name,

1. By an inherent divine fitness. His
attributes of wisdom, justice, power,
and goodness, qualify Him for universal
monarchy.

2. By an essential divine prerogative.
He has created all, He preserves and
sustains all, He has redeemed all, there-
fore He has a claim on the obedience
and fealty of all.

IIL Christ reigns by a devout ac-
knowledgment. ‘My Lord.” Christ's
monarchy is not elective, and therefore
does not depend on fluctuating human
opinions and passions; but, having been
divinely established, His authority and
fitness to rule have received ample re-
cognition.

1. Kings in the political world have
been proud to acknowledge their ser-
vitude to Him :—David, Constantine,

&e,

2. Kings in the world of scholarship

and philosophy have submitted their


giant intellects to His sway, and laid
their conquests at His feet :— Origen,
Bacon, &c,

3. Kings in the world of science have
employed their genius and implements
in widening His domain. Explorers,
astronomers, d&c.—Livingstone, Newton,
Faraday, &c.

4. Kings in the world of morals, who
have achieved conquests over human
souls, have presented to Him their
trophies, Philanthropists, missionaries,

5. Kings in the world of spirits
acknowledge His royalty, and crown
Him Lord of all “ Angels, principa-
lities, and powers are made subject to
Him.” Redeemed and glorified hu-
manity casts its crowns before Him,
and sings, ‘Worthy is the Lamb that
was slain to receive power and riches,
and wisdom and strength, and honour
and glory and blessing.”

IV. Ohrist reigns over a disputed
empire. “Rule Thou in the midst of
Thine enemies.” There are countless
multitudes who revel in the enjoyment
of their Lord’s bounty, who, alas! deny
His crown rights, —

l. Christ reigns in the midst of
infidel enemies. The Atheist, the Ma-
terialist, the Socialist, and the Unitarian
all say, “‘ We will not have this man to
reign over us,”

2. Christ rules in the midst of a
heathenism that is ignorant of or hostile
to His claims. All idolatry, whether
sesthetic like that of ancient Greece, or
absurd and barbarous like the fetish wor-
ship of the modern Hottentot, or like the
debasing idolatry of self, is an usurpation
of His rights.

3. Christ rules in the midst of a devil-
ridden and death-stricken world. Never-
theless, the words stand true (Ps
ii, 1-6). The usurpation of traitors
is a standing witness to the rights of
kings.

V. Christ reigns by the onforced
service of His foes. “ Until I make
Thy foes Thy footstool.” All in His
dominions, whether willingly or unwil-
lingly, are constrained to subserve His
interests.

1. Taeitly. (1.) Infidelity serves
Him by its inability to satisfy the crav-

178


POALM CZ.


Ings of the human heart, Man cries out
for God. Infidelity says, “ No God,” and
drives man to Him who said, “ He that
hath seen Me hath seen the Father.”
Man cries out for immortality. Infidel-
ity says, “No hereafter,” and compels
man to go to Him who has “ the words
of eternal life.” Infidelity has no moral
guide, and thus sends man to Him who
has given “an example that we should
do as He has done.” Infidelity has no
solace for man’s remorse and sorrow, and
thus drives man to Him who alone can
give peace through purity. Atheism
serves him by trying to repress man’s
instincts for God, which effort can only
intensify those instincts, and send men
to Him who alone can satisfy them.
Pantheism serves him by its doctrine of
the divine presence in the universe, and
sends men to Christ, who alone can
reveal that presence, and bring man into
ita conscious fellowskip. Unitarianism
serves him by maintaining the Divine
Fatherhood and the perfect humanity,
and sends men to Christ’s Godhood,
which can alone explain the perfection
of His humanity, and bring the prodigal
back to his Father's arms. (2.) /dolatry
serves Him, inasmuch as it is the parent
of ignorance, vice, and superstition, and
creates in the human heart a craving after
the wisdom, holiness, and moral light
and power, which are derived from Him
alone. (3.) Selfishness and sin serve
Him, because, in spite of their fascinat-
ing seductions, men see that underneath
them lie debasement, ruin, death. (4.)
Yes, even the devil, wary though he is,
serves Him. His hard service and his
fearful wages drive men to Him whose
yoke is easy, and whose burden is light,
and who gives a hundredfold in this
present world, and in the world to come
life everlasting. (5,) And death serves
Him, for it carries into His presence
His servants, and removes all impedi-
ments to their perfect service.

2. Haplicitly. Testimonies to Christ’s
supremacy, from those least disposed to
ackuowledge it, show that Christ reigns,
and that His enemies have become the
support of His feet. (1.) Paganism
sends its testimony through Julian, “O
Galilean, thou hast conquered.” (3.)

176





HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMA,


Devils. (Mark i. 23-26.) (3) Athetsm.
“The most valuable part of the effect
on the character which Christianity has
produced by holding up, in a divine
person, a standard for excellence, and a
model for imitation, is available even to
the absolute unbeliever, and can never
be lost to humanity... It is the God in-
carnate more than the God of the Jew
or of nature, who, being idealised, has
taken so great and salutary a hold on
the human mind, And whatever else
may be taken away from us by rational
criticism, Christ is still left, a unique
figure.”—J. & Mill. (4.) Rationalism,
Kant says He is “the union between
the human and the divine.” Strauss
speaks of Him as the “highest object
we can possibly imagine with respect to
religion, the Being without whose pre-
sence in the mind perfect piety is impos-
sible.” Renan exclaims, ‘‘ Rest now in
thy glory, noble initiator; thy work is
completed, thy divinity is established ;
fear no more to see the edifice of thy
efforts crumble through a flaw. ... For
thousands of years the world will extol
thee ,.. a thousand times more living,
a thousand times more loved, since thy
death. ... Thou wilt become to such a
degree the corner-stone of humanity,
that to tear thy name from this world
would be to shake it to its foundations,
Between thee and God men will ne
longer distinguish.” Lecky says that
Christianity has presented “an ideal
character which, through all the changes
of eighteen centuries, has inspired the
hearts of men with an impassioned love,
and has shown itself capable of acting
on all nations, ages, temperaments, and
conditions . , . has done more to regene-
rate and soften mankind than all the
disquisitions of philosophers, and all the
exhortations of moralists.” (5.) Pan-
theism, Spinosa thought Him “ the best
and truest symbol of heavenly wisdom,
or ideal perfection.”  (6.) Selfishness.
Napoleon: “ Alexander, Cessar, and
myself, founded great empires ; but upon
what? Force, Jesus alone founded His
empire upon love, and to this day millions
would die for Him. I know man; Jesua
Christ was more than man.”

VL Christ will reign over an um


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


PRALM CH.


ee


disputed universe. This is the sense
of our text. The prophets, without a
dissentient voice, predicted this. Christ
Himself foreshadowed it. The souls
under the altar groan for it. The Uni-
versal Church waits for it.

“ What successes did the Jews anti-
cipate from their Messiah $ The wildest
dreams of their rabbis have been far
exceeded. Has not Jesus conquered
Europe, and changed its name into


Christendom’ All countries that refuse
the Croas wither. .., And the time will
come when the vast communities and
countless myriads of America and Aus-
tralia, looking upon Europe as Europe
now looks upon Greece, and wondering
how small a space could have achieved
such mighty deeds, will still find music
in the songs of Zion, and still seek
solace in the parables of Galilee.”—J.
Disraels,


Toe Roya, ARMY.
(Verse 2, clause 1, and verse 3,)


This is a vivid sketch of the Church
and its prerogatives, inserted in the midst
of the king’s coronation hymn. What
is this but a foreshadowing of the union
between Christ and His people. In ver.
1, Christ is glorified with “the glory
which He had with the Father before the
world was.” In vers. 2, 3, that glory
“ He gives them.” In ver. 4, He is a
priest ; in ver. 3, His people are arrayed
in sacerdotal robes. The influence of
Christ’s character on the world is to
quicken and refresh it; so here His
people are as the dew. Christ’s years
do not fail; so here His people are
endowed with perennial youth, and out
of their midst the “rod of His strength”
goes forth.”

I. Church weapons. “The Lord
shall send the rod of thy strength out of
Zion.” The King first equips His chosen
ones, and then sends them forth to war,
The rod of Christ’s strength may be any
one or all of those points of Zion’s pan-
oply catalogued in Eph, vi. The girdle
of truth, the breastplate of righteous-
ness, the sandal of peace, the shield of
faith, the helmet of salvation, and the
sword of the Spirit. In vain does the
Church go forth when unprovided with
them. Notice these weapons are—l,
Of divine manufacture ; 2, Of tried tem-
per; 3, Of invincible strength; 4, Of
irresistible power.

Il. Church character. Threefold—

1. The Church belongs to Christ
“Thy people.” (1.) By the terms of the
everlasting covenant. (2.) By the re
demption of the Cross, (3.) By Hes

VoL, 11.


own declaration, “My Church.” (John
xvii. 6-10.) (4.) By tts own free con-
sent. (Rom. xiv. 8.)

2. The Church ts of priestly dignity.
“In the beauties,” lit. robes, “of holi-
ness.” (Chron. xx. 21; Ps. xxix. 2;
Exod. xxviii. 2.) The splendid vest-
ments were symbolical of the majesty,
purity, and power of sacerdotal service,
The fitness of this character is seen from
the fact that the Church follows the
royal priest. (Cf. verse 1 and 4.) (1.)
The quality of this priesthood is like
that of the great high priest, royal.
(1 Pet. ii, 5; Rev. i 6.) (2.) The
functions of this priesthood are—(a.)
Sacrificial, not however expiatory, but
eucharistic. (Rom, xii, 1; 1 Pet. ii. 5);
and (6,) Intercessory. (Phil. iv. 6, &e.)
(3.) The appearance of this priesthood
is beautiful, Everything in God’s world
is beautiful. It is fitting, therefore, that
His people should be so, The Church
is a bride adorned with her jewels, She
is called to cultivate not orly purity but
grace. And thus here the gorgeous ves-
ture of the Jewish priest is a fit emblem
of his beauty and attractiveness who has
“ put on the Lord Jesus Christ.”

3. The Church ts ever youthful,
“ Youth” here means young men.
Christ’s followers possess the secret of
perpetual youth, (1.) Individually.
Time, work, and strife, may age the
outer man, but they cannot touch tne
spirit, that is renewed continually day
by day. (Ia. xl. 30, 31; 2 Cor. iv. 6.)
That continues fresh and vigorous through
wrinkles and material decay.

iff


Peale Ox.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


Pe a en Se a TERS aa IEE


(2.) Collectively. The Church was never
more mighty in her numbers and in her
influence than she is in this the 19th
century of her history, Human insti-
tutions fail from internal weakness, or
for the want of external support, and
lose their influence in the lapse of years.
Not so with Christ’s people. “ They
flourish in perpetual youth,” and “ go
from strength to strength.”

III. Church spirit. ‘“ My people
shall be willing.” It is not without
significance that M373 willingness, or
free-will offerings, is derived from 373


prince, or noble one, Hence the Chris-
tian esprit de corps is

1. Unmercenary. Christ’s people are
actuated by no sordid motives. The
reward before them is splendid if they
win, but their all-absorbing aim is to
“please Him who called them to be
soldiers.”

2. Unconstrained. Christ’s soldiers
are volunteers, They are called, but
tiey may disobey. They may enlist,
but ure at liberty to retire.

uk Free by a glad surrender of the
wil. “If any man will come after Me,
let tim take up his cross and follow
Mea”

4. Princely ; and princely because free.
The spicit of willing consecration raises
these pmesis into “kings unto God.”
As the servaats of kings are noble, and
as the suxerainties of emperors are
governed by naonarchs, so is the fol-
lower of the Kiag of kings and Lord of
lords a “ prince with God.”

IV. Church opportunity. ‘In the
day of thy pow.” There are two in-
terpretations of this expression. ‘The
day of thine own might ;” and “ the day
when thou dost muster thy forces and
set them in battle array.” The text in
its present application implies both, for
they are both characteristic features of
the Gospel dispensation. The spectators
of Christ’s miracles were wmazed at the
mighty power of God, (Huke ix. 43.)
Christ’s promise was that Ais Church
should receive power then, and when He
who is the power of God should '’ascend
far above all principalities and po @er and

178


might” (Eph, i. 21). Then He strength-
ened His disciples “according to Hia
glorious power,” and made their faith
stand “by the power of God.” Thus
the Church is made strong “in the
Lord, and in the power of His might.”
“The kingdom of God is not in word
but in power.” What is this but to
prove that Church opportunities are
ever present. Let her not wait then in
indolence for special outpourings of the
Spirit, but be faithful to the power she
already has, Christ is the same in
power “ to-day, yesterday, and for ever,”
and is with the Church alway ; and every
day is the Church under marching orders
for expeditions against her foes.

V. Church influence. ‘From the
womb of the morning thou hast the dew
of thy youth.”

1. Abundant. It covers the whole
earth. Every nation, rank, and order
of intelligence have felt its power.

2. Marvellous. The influence of Chris-
tianity has never been, and can never be,
accounted for by natural hypotheses,
Its only explanation is that, like its
Divine Author, it “ proceeded forth and
came from God,”

3. Refreshing. It pours new life into
dead humanity, and culture and civi-
lisation follow in its train. The desert
under its influence rejoices and blossoms
like the rose, and becomes as the garden
of the Lord. Contrast the world eighteen
hundred years ago with what it is to-day.
Fiji fifty years. ago.

4. Gentle. Not with the force of arms
or pride of learning. Yet before it
tyranny, serfdom, and superstition flee.

Concerning its influence as a whole,
hear the words of an impartial witness :
“ By the confession of all parties, the
Christian religion was designed to be a
religion of philanthropy ; and love was
represented as the distinctive test or
characteristic of its members. As a
matter of fact, it has probably done
more to quicken the affection of man-
kind, to promote piety, to create a pure
and merciful ideal, than any other
influence that has ever acted on the
world.” (Lecky’s “ Rationalism,” vol
iL. p. 358 *


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; PSALMS.








Tax Onper or Mr.onmEpEs.
(Verse 4.)


No character has been more fruitful
of speculation than that of Melchizedek.
Some have conjectured that he was a
theophany of Christ or the Holy Ghost.
The Gnostics considered him an aon,
or a man formed before the creation out
of spiritual matter. Origen said he
was an angel Others, Ham, Shem,
Arphaxad, or Job, With theories we
are not concerned. The fact before us
is that Messiah is a priest after the
order of Melchizedek, and that His
appointment is held from God.

I. Christ is a priest after the order
of Melchizedek.

1. That order was untque. (1.) In
its loneliness, Melchizedek stood alone.
Other priests sacrificed to idols or the
powers of nature; he to the “Most High
God.” He was the one true priest
before the Mosaic dispensation. Christ
is the one true priest after it, and He
stands alone. ‘One mediator.” No
other order but His is found in the New
Testament, or is now possible, or neces-
sary. (2.) In that it was underived and
wntransmiutted. Melchizedek did not
follow, nor was he succeeded by, a
priestly line. So Christ’s priesthood is
“not after the order of a carnal com-
mandment ;” nor does it “ pass over to
another.” (3.) In its efficacy. The
priesthoods contemporaneous with Mel-
chizedek were founded on superstition ;
his only on divine revelation. So all
other priesthoods but that of Christ are
now effete or vain. His alone is
efficacious,

2. That order was righteous. His
very name “ King of righteousness” is
significant of that. But in a far more
real and valuable sense is this so with
Christ. (1.) He is absolutely righteous
in Himself. He of all the sons of men
alone could say, “Which of you con-
vinceth Me of sin?” As such He was
predicted (Isa. liii, 11; Jer. xxiii. 5).
As such He was by the confession of
both friends and foes (Luke xxiii. 4;
1 Pet. ii, 28), (2.) As the King of


righteousness, He makes His subjects
righteous (Isa. liii, 11). By cleansing
away their unrighteousness and impart-
ing his Holy Spirit, and encouraging
and directing their holy lives.

3. That order was peaceful. He waa
“ King of Salem which is King of peace.”
In this the order was a strong contrast
to the order of Baal, and indeed to the
warlike sons of Aaron. Not more so
does the priesthood of Christ contrast
with the arrogant assumptions, worldly
ambitions, devilish craft, and cruel per-
secutions of the orders of paganism and
Rome. Christ is (1) absolutely peace-
ful tn Himself. As such He was pre-
dicted and acknowledged. “The Prince
of peace.” “ He shall not cry,” &. (2)
As King of peace Christ gives peace,
promotes it, and reigns over peaceful
subjects. ‘‘ My peace I leave with you,”
&c. “Blessed are the peacemakers,”
&c, “The fruit of the Spirit is...
peace.”

4. That order was royal, He was
king as well as priest. So is Christ a
“priest upon His throne.” These two
orders are seldom found united. Once
when a king arrogated priestly func-
tions he was smitten with leprosy. Ter-
rible calamities have invariably resulted
when political power has been wielded
by sacerdotal hands, But in Christ their
union is an unmixed blessing. Why!
Because Christ’s royalty is based upon
the great offering of Himself, whereas
other priestly rules have invariably
been founded on arrogant assumptions
without corresponding service. Christ
rules from His Cross: “I, if I be tifted
up,” &e. And adoring Christendom
says, ‘Thou art the King of glory, O
Christ,” because “when Thou hadst
overcome the sharpness of death Thou
didst open the kingdom of heaven to
all believers,”

5. That order was superior, (1.) In
ita antiquity. It was before the autho-
rised priesthood of Aaron. So Christ
is. “the Lamb alain from before the

179


POALM OX.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : PSALMS.


ne


foundation of the world.” (2.) In its
perpetuity. “For ever.” Christ “con-
tinueth ever,” and “ever liveth to
make intercession.” (3.) In its univer
sality. Heathen priests sacrificed for
their particular tribes; Aaron’s priest-
hood was for the Jews; but Melchizedek
offered for Abraham, and also for the
Gentiles among whom he lived. So
Christ is “a propitiation for our sins,
and not for ours only, but also for the
sins of the whole world.”

IL Ohrist’s appointment to this
priesthood is held under Divine au-
thority. “The Lord hath sworn, and
will not repent.” Persons occupying im-
portant offices must show their creden-
tials; kings, their insignia; ambassadors,
their lettera patent; Christians, their
holy life, So we demand from priestly
pretenders their authority. In vain do
we seek these warrants from any priest
but the Son of God. He holds office,
not by a transitory and human com-


Curist’s TRIUMPH
(Verses


The union between the Father and
the Son is still sustained. In verse 1,
the Father gives the Son authority.
In 2 and 3, followers, In the verses
before us, He helps Him to conquer, and
sustains Him in His rule. Notice—

L That all tyranny is the foe of
Christ. “Kings.”

1. All political tyranny. Despots of
whatever denomination are enemies of
Christ, whether their tyranny take the
form of oligarchy, monarchy, aristocracy,
or mobocracy; wherever freedom is
repressed, and wrong perpetuated under
the name of law or no law, there is the
seat of Christ’s war.

2. All soctal tyranny. The tyranny
exercised by the ascendant caste,
whether noble, or middle, or working
class. Sometimes the rich oppress the
poor; sometimes the poor, the rich.
Now it is the squire who tramples on
the peasant, now the peasant who sets
the squire’s ricks on fire, Fashion
tyrannises, and so does institutionalisma.
But one and all are foes of Christ.

180


mission, but by the perpetual oath of
God. And His credentials are “ His
hands, His feet, His side.”

In conctusion, ‘To-day we need
these truths. ... And thank God we
can believe that for every modern
perplexity the blessed old words carry
the same strength and consolation. If
kings seem to have perished from among
men, if authorities are dying out, and
there are no names of power that can rally
the world—yet there is a Sovereign.
If old institutions are crumbling, and
must still further decay ere the site for
a noble structure be cleared,” Christ's
altar and Christ’s throne remain. “If
priest be on some lips a name of super-
stitious folly, and on others a synonym
for all that is despised and effete in
religion, yet this Priest abideth for ever,
the guide and the hope for the history
of humanity and for the individuel
spirit.”— Maclaren.


OVER TYRANNY,
5, 6.)
3. All domestic tyranny, whether


exercised by parents over children,
guardians over wards, yes, and children
over parents, which crushes or restrains
the free play of domestic virtue or affec-
tion or action, is in irreconcileable an-
tagonism to Christ. When the parent
forces the child to wrong its conscience
or deny its God, or when the child brings
its parent’s head with sorrow to the grave,
both are calling down upon themselves
sure vengeance. When masters oppress
their servants, yes, and when servants,
getting as they sometimes do the upper-
hand, oppress their employers, they pro-
claim themselves the enemies of Christ.

4, All spiritual tyranny. ll priest-
craft, ancient or modern, heathen,
Romish, or Anglican. All forces,
whether they proceed from politics,
literature, science, or religion; all in-
quisitions employed for the purpose ot
shackling the human mind, or terror
ising over the human fears, or violating
the sanctities of the human heart, all
are the antagonists of Christ,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS





PALM OX,





5. All moral tyranny (2 Tim. ii, 26).

IL All tyranny is subject to the
wrath of Christ.

1. Because of His own inherent right-
eousness, He, the King of men, does
not break the bruised reed, &c., and He
will not permit them who wield His
delegated authority to do so,

2. Because His government is based
upon the freedom of the subject. All
His great blessings are free. The great
end of His coming was to make men
free. The great legacy He bequeathed
to man is the “freedom of sons,” His
express command is that man should

“stand fast in liberty.” Any attempt,
therefore, to unsettle or overthrow this
foundation principle does and must ex-
cite His righteous indignation.

3. Because the well-being of man, the
ereature whom He loves and has taken
into his own brotherhood, can only be
maintained by political, social, domestic,
and religious liberty. Of what value are
national institutions unless man as man
is free to enjoy them? Of what use
are spiritual blessings if enforced on
unwilling minds? Where is the benefit
of domestic blessings if doled out or en-
forced by the iron rule of adespot? The
only bond which keeps society together
is the liberty of its individual members ;
and moral tyranny destroys the soul.
Despotism is the upas blight which
has ruined more institutions and more
men than any other evil that has ever
issued from hell. And therefore does
it excite the anger of Christ.

Til. All tyranny will be destroyed
by Christ. “Shall strike through kings
. .. fill the places with dead bodies.
He shall wound the head over many
countries.”

1. Christ's policy in the past, ts a
‘promise, of what it will be in all time to
come. Every species of despotism has
been destroyed by Him, Awutocracy in
those terrible oriental and western
tyrannies which have left behind them
but the phantom of a name. Egypt,
Assyria, Babylon, Persia, Rome, have
all been destroyed by the “stone cut
out of the mountain without hands ;”
Democratie tyranny in the overthrow
of the republics of Greece and Rome,


and the bloody rule and bloody end of
French socialism ; tntellectual despotism
in the extirpation of an overweening
philosophy and a no less overweening
priesthood. Domestie tyranny in those
nations where women were but chattels
and slaves of less account than beasts.
Moral slavery in his subjection of “ him
who has the power of death which is
the devil.” All these despotisms seek
to revive and propagate themselves to-
day, but let them be assured that, as
sure as Christ lives and reigns, their
doom is sealed.

2. Christ's policy is pursued for the
benefit of humanity at large. All souls
are on an equality before Christ. They
have all shared a common creation and
@ common redemption. Heaven is not
imposed upon by coronets and thrones.
All mankind have crown rights, and woe
to those who injure them, Those who
do so must and will be removed, The
tyrant must be hurled from his throne
before the subject can breathe the free
air of liberty. Pharaoh must be engulfed,
that Israel may pursue her path of
progress.

3. Christ's policy presents an alter-
native. Despots may cease to be des-
pots, tyrants may cease to oppress.
Those guiltless of the crime will not
then inherit the curse.

IV. All tyranny will be supplanted
by Christ. ‘Tyrauny is better than
anarchy. But, having destroyed the
tyrant, Christ assumes His sceptre and
His throne, and reigns over a diviuely-
liberated people. “He shall judge
among the heathen.” ‘On His head are
many crowns.” Christ’s right and fit-
ness to rule may be judged by what that
rule when acknowledged has achieved.
1. The Christian Sabbath, the great
barrier to the tyranny of toil, 2. The
Bible, the grand charter of moral free-
dom. 3. Liberty for the soul from
Satan’s power, 4. Liberty of thought.
5. Liberty, equality, and fraternity for
all ; for woman, for the child, and for
the slave, for “One is your Master ; even
Christ, and all ye are brethren,

Men and brethren—(i.) Prize your
freedom, and let no man entangle you
again in the yoke of bondage. (ii.)

181


Thank Christ for your freedom, It is
He who has made you free  (iii.)


HOMILETIO OGMmENTARY: PSALME.,





Employ that freedom in Christ’s service,
that is, in making others free.


CurisT REFRESHING HIwsE.y,
(Verse 7.)


The picture is that of the conqueror
pursuing his foes, and partaking of mo-
mentary refreshment at some wayside
brook; then in the strength of that
refreshment pursuing his joyful and
victorious way. The scene is typical of
those encouragements which are His
support who is contending for rightful
and universal empire.

L The Divine refreshment. “ He
shall drink of the brook in the way.”

1. Christ is encouraged by the sense of
His Father's approval. The kingdom
for which He fights is His Father’s gift
(Ps. ii. 8). In fighting for it He always
does the things which please Him. In
the hottest conflict He is cheered by the
voice from heaven: “This is My be-
loved Son in whom I am well pleased
(John x. 17).

2. Christ is encouraged by the justice
of His cause and the beneficence of His
work, Those engaged in selfish projects
have to look away from the work for
encouragement. Those who know they
are working for the bettering of the
world can afford to despise obloquy and
persecution. Christ knows that His
work through crosses and conflicts will
end in the regeneration of the world.
He “sees of the travail of His soul and
is satisfied.”

3. Christ is encouraged by the enthu-
siasm of His followers. Around no other
name do such affections cluster, and
behind no other banner do such earnest-
ness and determination range. “ Alex-
ander,” remarked the great Napoleon,
“Cesar, and myself have founded
empires, But upon what do we rest
the creations of our genius? Upon force,
Jesus Christ alone founded His empire
upon love ; and at this moment millions
of men would die for Him, I die before
my time, and my body will be given
back to the earth to become food for
worms. Such is the fate of him who
has ete dlrs the great Napoleon.


What an abyss between my deep misery
and the eternal kingdom of Christ, which
is proclaimed, loved, and adored, and
which is extended over the whole earth?”

4, Christ is encouraged by the con-
quests He has already achieved, and by the
certain triumphs which yet await Him.
Behind is the cross, around is His
redeemed and adoring Church, and on-
ward isthe millennium. (Heb. xii. 2; Is.
xlii 4.) “TI, if I be lifted up, will draw
all men unto Me.” All His past vic-
tories are prophetic of His success in
time to come. Witness the trophies of
the Cross in the first three centuries.
Witness what it is doing in the realms
of infidelity and heathenism to-day. On
Himself He builds this Church which
‘triumphs o’er the gates of hell.”

IL The consequence of that refresh-
ment. Invigorated and encouraged the
conqueror pursues his path to victory.
“Therefore shall He lift up His head.”

1. Christ’s conquests are progressive,
He does not complete His work at once.
His work in the world is gradual and
growing. Having achieved one success,
He passes on to another, and will do so
till “‘every knee shall bow, and every
tongue confess that He is Lorp.”

2. Christ’s conquests are permanent.
That is to say, no hostile power shall
ever win them back again. “They
shall never perish.” True, His subjects
may revolt. They may say, “We will
not have this King to reign over us.”
But they resign the fealty to Christ by
their own free-will, and not by any
power of the adversary. Then they
become Christ’s enemies, and, if they
will not let Him win them back again,
in their destruction He displays His
glorious power.

3. Christ's conquests are glorious
(1.) Christ lifts up His head over re.
deemed and consecrated souls. To con-
quer inert matter and to sway blind
forces were easy work for Omnipotence,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


PRALM OXE,


Oe eee


But to convince the intellect, subdue
the will, invite the affections and draw
out the forces of the life, this is glorious
indeed. (2.) Christ lifts up His head
over the defeated and destroyed powers
whose energies have been inimical to the
inisrests of heaven and earth. The joy
which was set before Him, and for
which He endured the cross and despised
the shame, was victory over the devil,
sin, the world, and death. These He has
vanquished, Sin has no more dominion
over His people. They have the faith
He gives, and have overcome the world,


and through Him they can now say,
“O grave, where is thy victory ? O death,
where is thy sting?”

4. Christ's conquests will have an end.
The time will come when Christ shall
lift up His head over a regenerated uni-
verse. When all His enemies shall be
subdued under His feet then (Cor, xv.
24-28.)

Learn (i.) That all the sources of the
Saviour’s encouragement are ours, (ii.)
That if we are faithful we shall partici-
pate in His final triumph and share
His throne,


PSALM CXL


INTRODUCTION.


1. Authorship unknown, probably late. 2. One of the ten alphabetical Psalms, the clauses
beginning with the letters of the Hebrew alphabet in succession. This ia no more artificial
than the measure, rhyme, or rhythm of other poetry, 8. One of the ten Psalms which begin


with Halldujah.


PRAISE,
(Verse 1, Clause 1.)


“Praise ye the Lord.” (Heb. Hatur-
Lusau.) Worship is an universal instinct
of humanity. In all places where we
find men we find religious exercises,
Polytheism, Pantheism, and even Posi-
tivism testify to the necessity of gratify-
ing the religious instinct by providing
objects for worship. “The man who
has nothing else above him has self,
that ugliest, most obscene of deities:
Belial, and Mammon, and Beelzebub in
one. Self is the deity of millions, and
its worship is as vile, as brutalising, as
ever were the rites of Chemosh, or
Milcom, or Ashtoreth. In general, even
fallen man has something besides him-
self above him ; even where self presides
in the worship, it is rather as priest
than idol."—Dr, Vaughan. Our text
sets before us—

L The true object-of worship.
Lord.”

1. The only rightful object. (1.) On
the grounds of creation and providence,
(2.) On the ground of express revela-
tion: “ Him only shalt thou serve,”


2. The only satisfying object. (1.)


6c The


Idols are nothing in the world. (2.)
Nature and humanity are only abstrac-
tions, (3.) None but God is good,
strong, and therefore willing and able
to accept our worship.

3. The only ennobling object, All
other objects, because of their vanity,
inability, or degradation, are unworthy
of man’s adoration, and therefore their
worship is debasing. But the worship
of God (1) Hlevates the mind. The
imagination and reason are lifted up
above the mean or petty considerations
of sense and time to the contemplation
of the boundless perfections of the
infinite and eternal, (2) It elevates
the will above the debasements of selfish-
ness, to free consecration to the authority
of the noblest being and the execution
of the noblest purposes. (3) Jé lifts
the heart above all ignoble objects of
affection, and reposes it on inimitable
beauty and eternal loveliness, (4) It
exalts the whole man intellectually,
morally, socially, and even physically,
into an atmosphere of holiness and
purity.

183


PeaLM OXI.





II. The true character of worship.
Praise,” All other elements of worship
condense themselves into this. Prayer
is a form of praise, because it tacitly
acknowledges that God has answered it
before, and is worthy of our grateful
homage. Communion is a form of praise,
inasmuch as it confesses that God is
worthy of the time that we snatch from
other engagements to consult His will.

1. Praise implies gratitude, It ex-
presses thankfulness for past aud present
mercies.

2. Praise implies self-forgetfulness,
Self is in oblivion when we contemplate
and are thankful for those blessings
which have made self possible.

3. Praise implies an adoring and
strong recognition of God's claims upon
our practical service, who has showered

‘those benefits which are the subject of
our thauksgivings,

4, Pratse is the result of the combined
operation of all our faculties, The mind
contributes its thought, the emotions





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS. —





their rapture, the will its volitions, the
spirit its fervour, and the body its acti-
vities,

IIL The true spirit of worship.
“Ye.”

1. Personal. God is no respecter of
proxies. Incense, beads, and other ritu-
alistic paraphernalia, and even men of
unquestionable piety and spiritual power,
can be no substitute for the personal
homage of the soul

2. Yet not so personal as to exclude
all reference to or company with others.
God’s blessings are like stones cast into
the water. The ripples and influences
are felt far and wide. The mercy @
parent receives extends more or less to
his family, dependants, and connections.
Let him, therefore, praise the Lord for
those who have felt the influence, and in
their company.

IV. The true medium of worship:
Christ. “No man cometh unto the
Father but by Me.”


Cuurce AND CoNGREGATIONAL WorsaHip.
(Verse 1.)


L Distinctions in worship. The ex-
pressions,“ assembly of the upright ” and
“ congregation,” are not synonymous,
They express the modern ideas of publie¢
and private ; church and congregation.

1. Public worship as against the specious
sophistries of Plymouthism, d&c,, may be
defended (1.) On the ground of conve-
nience. No private dwelling can afford
the facilities presented by houses set
apart exclusively for that purpose. (2.)
On the ground of fraternity. “The
Church in the house ” if the onty Church
must necessarily be narrowand exclusive,
and be confined in most cases to the
family dwelling there, in all cases to the
nearest neighbours, (3.) On the ground
of unrepealed law. Man has not yet out-
grown this provision for his spiritual
nature provided under the old dispensa-
tion, and therefore the laws concerning it
are still binding. (4.) On the ground of
Christ's example, in the use of temple
and synagogues, (5.) On the ground of
zpostolic precedent, Paulin the “ School

184


of Tyrannus,” &e. (6.) On the ground of
universal custom in all ages, from the
churches in the Catacombs till now.

2. Private worship, as against formal-
tsm or latitudinarianism must be pro-
vided for and practised by the Church,
(1.) On the ground of conventence. In
public a certain amount of restraint is
necessary. In private the Church is
away from critical eyes and ears, and can
unbosom herself without fear of being
misunderstood. (2.) On the ground of
Christian fraternity. The Church being
a family should have opportunities of
family worship. (3.) On the ground of
universal custom. In all ages the Church
within the Church, “The upright,”
“Those that fear the Lord,” have had
their separate assemblies The Jews,
our Lord and His disciples ; the early
Church, Reformers, Puritans, Methodists,


‘&e,


Il Places of worship. “In the
assembly of the upright and in the con
gregation.” This suggests to us—


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : PSALMS.
— ees


1. That the Church and congregation
should not be confounded. “'Lhe up-
right ” is a designation of God’s covenant
people as such. ‘ Congregation,” a
general term for all who attend God’s
ordinances, Gentiles were admitted
within certain precincts of the Temple,
but the inner enclosures were for Israel
alone. A body of people assembling for
worship or adhering to the tenets of a
given communion may, for convenience
sake, be called achurch. But, strictly
speaking, that term belongs to the mys-
tical body of Christ. And while all are
entitled to the privileges of congrega-
tional worship, yet there are certain
specific privileges which belong to the
Church as such alone,

3, That the Church should strive to
make itself conterminous with the congre-
gation, (1.) By a willing fraternity. Let
not the member of the Church say di-
tectly or by implication to the member
of the congregation, ‘‘ Stand by, for I am
holier than thou ;” or thank God that he
is “not as other men.” (2.) By an earnest
and edifying testimony to the grace of
God, and energetic evangelism (1 Cor.
xiv. 24, 25). (3.) By generous invitation
and genial encouragement. But not (1)
By a lax and miscalled charity, cheap-
ening church privileges and bringing
them into contempt. (2) By mere de-
sires of numerical increase; or (3) By the
resignation of divinely conferred and re-
sponsible rights. Churches should demand
and obtain moral qualifications for mem-
bership. It will be an evil day for the
Church when she relaxes her discipline,
but a happy day when all congregations
are churches in the fulfilment of their
duties and the blamelessness of their
lives,


POALM OXL





3. That Church and congreqatwnal
duties are alike obligatory, The mem.
bers of our congregation have much te
be thankful for, and are the heirs of
many hopes, Let them praise God for
what they enjoy. The members of the
Church have every cause for gratitude.
Let that gratitude be expressed in the
presence of the congregation, publicly
and emphatically,

I. Manner of worship. “I will
praise the Lord with my whole heart.”
Which suggests—

l. That praise should be earnest. In-
difference or perfunctoriness is a gross
offence to God. Where warmth, fervour,
glow are wanting, the very elements of
praise are wanting.

2. That praise should be complete.
“ Whole heart.” Wandering thoughts
must be checked, vagrant affections and
interests must be reined in. “ Glorify
God in your bodies and spirits, which are
God’s.”

3. That praise should be spontaneous.
It should well up freely and naturally
from the thankful heart,

In concLusion. (i.) Are you a member
of the Church of Christ? If not, why !
From indifference? Shrinking from
public testimony to the power of God 4
From the lack of moral qualifications 4
Brethren, the worship of such must be
lacking in many elements desirable in
the sight of God. (ii) Are youa mem-
ber of the Church of Christ? If so,
what are you doing for the community
to which you belong? Are you enjoying
its privileges without contributing to
its strength? Are you at ease in Zion?
Remember, worship without work ia
hypocrisy (1 Pet. ii. 9).


Tax Worxs or Gop, rae Sussect or Sovul-sarTisyyina SEARou.
(Verse 2.)


These words, summing up God’s works
in general, and describing our proper
attitude towards them, and the fruits of
their patient study, suggest—

L That God’s works are great. They
ere great—


l. In the mystery of their origin.
Like Him who made them they are past
finding out, Even if the statements of
modern scientists be true, viz., that all
life may be traced back to one primordial
germ, yet, as Professor Fieri has said,


PRALM OXY,


AOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





“The present state of knowledge fur-
nishes us with no link between the living
and not living.”

2. In the length of their duration.
Astronomy and geology tell us some-
thing of the time which must have
elapsed since they first came into being,
and the Bible does not attempt to limit
it. About their future science can say
nothing, and about their absolute ter-
mination God’s Word gives no hint.

3. In the vastness of their extent. The
most moderate computation of the dis-
tance between the sun and other
planets, and our earth, to say nothing of
realms of matter beyond, loses us in
wonder and awe.

4. In the wisdom of their arrange-
ment, Subject to unvarying law ; exqui-
sitely adapted for their various purposes ;
regularly serving their appointed ends.

5. In the beneficence of their intention.
“All things working together for ‘ the
general’ good.”

IL That God’s works should be the
subject of study. The popular religious
outcry against science is (1) unreason-
able ; (2) contrary to God’s Word ; (3)
condemned by the example of the best
spirits in all ages. The psalmists and
prophets were profound natural philoso-
phers, and many of their revelations have
anticipated the discoveries of modern
times. Our Lord revelled in nature, and
Paul had a keen eye for its beauties,
(4) It is fatal to the interests of truth.
But God’s works should be studied—

1. Cautiously, None but facts
should be acknowledged. Probable
hypotheses should be considered and re-
spected, but conclusions should only be
built upon unquestionable certainties,

2. Fearlessly. God cannot deny or
contradict Himself. All that He has
revealed in nature should be explored ;
and genuine discoveries, however much
they may shock our prejudices or ex-
plode our preconceived convictions,
should be welcomed and acknowledged.

4, Reverently. Nature is the revela-
tion of “the invisible things of God,”
explain many of the truths of God’s
Word, and should be made the hand-
maid of piety.

1. 8 God’s works are promotive


of soul satisfaction. “ Exquisitely ex-
cellent, and fully satisfying all those
who delight in them; te, excellent,
precious, incomparable, in the judgment
of those who best understand them—
His faithful worshippers” (see Ps. xii. 1),
—Speaker’s Comm.

1. The believer finds there revelations
of hts own dignity. Surveying the
magnificent expanse above him, he will
say, “Iam greater than all that; for that
gorgeous canopy has no mind.” Con-
templating the immense ages which have
elapsed since the world came into being,
he will say, ‘“ All those ages were neces-
sary to fit the world for me.” Watch-
ing the operation of inexorable laws, he
will say, “I am free,”

2. The believer will find there inti-
mations of his relation to God and his
smmortality. Man stands alone in the
universe. ‘Communion with nature”
is all very well as poetry; but be-
tween man’s soul and the material
universe there is nothing in common,
and therefore there can be no com-
munion. He is thus driven to the
Author of nature, and with Him man
finds that he has some affinity, and can
therefore have communion, Again, man
lives in the midst of things that are ever
changing and passing away. But when
man turns within himself he is conscious
of something that will “survive the
wreck of matter and the crush of
worlds.”

3. The believer will there find ample
confirmation of all that is revealed tn
God's Word respecting his Maker's
wisdom and power and goodness, He
will there see the truth of the declara-
tions: “Behold, it was very good;”
“Thou hast done all things well.”

4. The believer will there find abundant
cause for thankful and adoring gratitude.
The more he becomes acquainted with
God’s works the more he knows of his
Father’s beneficence towards Him, and
will concerning him.

In conotusion.—{i.) Let nature be


_ the subject of your studious search.


(ii) Let the design of your search be
to find harmonies between God’s Word
and God’s works, (iii.) Let the result
of your search be thankful praise,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


Narvure’s Beauty anp THE RigHreousness oF Naturnn’s Gop.
(Verse 3.)


The union of the useful and the
beautiful in nature is perfect, The
two cannot be separated as is the case
with the works of man. If you were
to deface a Phidian statue, the useful
marble would remain. Again, man uses
beauty to conceal deformity. Not so
nature. Man is the only blot on her
fair surface. Nature’s beauty and
utility are one and the same. The
gorgeous tints which decorate the
region of the setting sun are but the
result of a certain combination of the
laws by which we live. The same lines
which make up the beauty of the land-
scape are the measure of distances and
the guide of motion. We shall consider
the utility of nature further on. Here
observe—

L Nature's beauty. ‘Honourable
and glorious” TIT THN, Shining and
glittering, majestic and splendid.

1. Nature exhibits herself in beautiful
positions. The starry heavens, the dis-
tant landscape, alternations of moun-
tain and plain, land and water, meadow
and garden, forest and plateau.

2. Nature exhibits herself in beauts/ul
forms. This is seen by the naked eye in
the graceful foliage, the rippling stream,
the foaming cataract, the raging sea; in
flowers, fruits, herbs, dc. But the tele-
scope and microscope open up the won-
drous splendours of a new world.

3. Nature exhibits herself in beautiful
operations, The march of the seasons,
progress of the earth, dawn, meridian,
sunset, night,

4, Nature teaches beautiful lessons of
grace, dignity, generosity, order, de-
pendence on God.

5. Nature is full of beautiful per-
fumes and beautiful sounds,

II. Nature is beautiful, says the
Psalmist, but nature’s God is righteous,
Is there any break in the thought? No.


1. Nature's beauty ts but a reficetion
of that eternal moral beauty which we
call the divine righteousness, Nature is
beautiful, because it is the expression ot
the established will of heaven.

2. Conversely, nature teaches us thar
the mind which clothed her in those
beautiful forms ts beautiful. No effect
can be greater than its cause. No water
can rise above the level of its source.
Order only can produce order, beauty —
only can evolve beauty.

3. Nature exhibits her harmony with
her Maker, This is so complete that
certain theologists have identified the
two, and have regarded the universe as
the splendid robe of deity.


*¢ Thus time’s whizzing loom unceasing I ply,
And weave the life-garment of deity,”
— Goethe.


4, Nature exhibits by contrast the
causes of the moral deformity of man.
Man is out of harmony with the uni-
verse, because out of harmony with
God. When that harmony is restored
man puts on the beautiful garment of
holiness, and grows in grace,

IIL Nature is beautiful, as the ex-
pression of the everlasting righteous-
ness of nature’sGod Then beauty is the
permanent order of things, for moral
beauty is eternal. Some day nature
will put off her splendid vestments, but
that will only be preparatory to the
creation of the new heaven and the new
earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness.
Those who exhibit themselves in con-
trast with her now, being then in har-
mony with her God, will be in harmony
with her. It is not without significance
that all the visions vouchsafed to man
of the life to come are exquisitely
beautiful. Beautiful scenes, forms,
sounds, fragrance, food; because all
righteous (Rev. xxii, 1-6),


P@aLM OXI





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





Tas Purrosz or Narurg, AND THE Goopness or Naturr’s Gop.
(Verse 4.)


L The purpose of nature, “ He
hath made His wonderful works to be
remembered.”

1. Their wonderfulness adapts them to
man’s memory. The “ Speaker’s Com-
mentary” paraphrases thus: ‘He has
done such wonderful deeds that a remem-
brance of them abides for ever” (Ps,
Ixxviii. 3, 4; Num. xvi. 40; Josh. iv.
6, 7). Those things are most easil
remembered which strike upon man’s
sense of wonder. ‘Trivial incidents we
forget, great things we call memorable.
God’s works are wonderfully great,
wonderfully mysterious, wonderfully
old, wonderfully novel and _ fresh,
wonderfully grand.

2. The memory stands as the result of
the operation of all the faculties of the
mind. We must study, apprehend,
reason, and compare, if we would re-
member. Memory is but the treasure-
house of the things we put into it; and
we can only store it with the facts of
God’s universe by the exercise of all
the intellectual powers. But memory is
fickle, hence the necessity of constantly
examining it to see if its contents are
still there and in their right places,

3. The retention of God’s marvellous
works ennobles memory.

(1.) By the exercise which st gives.
Memories enlarge and grow by exercise,
Rad memories, as a rule, are idle and
unexercised memories,

(2.) By the love which they impart.
How debasing are the contents of most
memories! Recollection of wasted op-
portunities gives a tone of remorse.
Recollection of sins gives a tone of vice.
God’s works are pure and good, and
must give a pure and good tone to that
which stores them up.

(3.) By «alten recollections which they
expel. A memory that is full of God's
wonderful works must have emptied
itself of all base subjects.
they take hold of the mind they cast
out things unworthy of retention.


188


And as.


True, this is a process largely depen-
dent on habit, Let then the habit be
cultivated, and all base and unworthy
memories will gradually fade.

Il. The purpose of nature is to be
remembered: why? ‘That we may
have a perpetual evidence of the good-
ness of nature’s God.

1. God’s works show that He is gra-
cious :—REMEMBER THEM. All nature
shows that God is mindful of man and
visits him. Creation is no testimony
of a creator distant from and indiffer-
ent to its operations, It postulates the
presence of One who watches the move-
ments of all its laws and processes, and
whocontinually prevents ita going wrong.
And what for} The whole universe re _
plies, “For man.” All things work to-
gether for his good. Natural forces have
other ends to serve, but emphatically
and pre-eminently they serve him. The
sun by day, and the moon and stars by
night, afford him light and regulate
his time. Birds, beasts, fishes, vege-
tables, &c., serve him for labour,
clothing, or food. All this evidences
the fact that God is gracious to man.
Above all, there is God’s gracious work
of Redemption, the operations of the
Holy Ghost, the Church, the Word, the
Sacraments.

2. God’s works show that He is “ full of
compassion :” —REMEMBER THEM. Com-
passion is the sentiment of a higher
and richer to a lower and more needy
creature. God’s works contemplate
the alleviation of human wants, Man
suffers from exhaustion: “God giveth
His beloved sleep.” Man suffers from
cold: God has laid up for him a
treasury of coal. Man suffers from
heat: God has provided healthy and
refreshing breezes. Man suffers from
disease ; God’s works are full of heal-
ing medicines and curative appliances,
Man suffers from sin, and, behold, all
heaven is opened and placed at his dis
posal


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PSALM OXL


rg sernenerierneemn ae ese neieenieeeeins


Tam Bounty ayp Farruroness or Gop.


( Veree 5.)


Old and New Testament alike re-
eognise the Fatherhood of God. In
that Fatherhood all the divine perfec-
tions inhere. As a Father, God is just
and holy as well as merciful and kind.
Consequently the results of that
Fatherhood do not spring from mere
spasms of affection, but are based upon
eternal principles. Hence our text re-
cognises the provision for our daily
wants as the result of God’s fidelity to
His covenant engagements,

L God’s bounty. “He has given
meat, t.¢., prey, contemplating a noma-
dic life, or Israel’s wandering in the
wilderness,

1. God's gifts are as varied as man’s
need,

(1.) Man’s material blessings are
God's gifts, not his own earnings. The
health, strength, and physical force by
which he acquires them are loans from
God to enable him to acquire them.

(2.) Man’s intellectual blessings are
God's gifts. Information, learning, and
all mental wealth necessary for the nour-
ishment and support of the intellect.

(3.) Man’s moral blessings are God's
gts. Man is entirely destitute of
the means of making spiritual pro-
vision. God gives the power to repent
and believe, and on the exercise of
these saving instrumentalities depend
all God’s mercy by Christ, by the
Holy Ghost in regenerat{on, sanctifica-
tion, &c.

2. God’s gifts are as plentiful as man’s
need.

(1.) Wherever man exists he ts found
to be a needy creature, but everywhere
his needs are met. When it is cold,
animals are found with skins which
afford him suitable clothing and food,
which contributes to warm his blood.
In hot climates, suitable vegetable and
fruits preponderate. In temperate zones
both abound as and when he needs
them. Political economists borrow
from providence their law of supply and
demand,


(2.) Wherever man is found, he is full
of need. Physically, intellectually, and
morally, but everywhere the promisa
holds good ; “ My God shall supply all
your need according to His riches in
glory by Christ Jesus.”

3. God’s gifts are equal to all the
emergencies in which man through sin
is plunged. Everywhere “man’s ex-
tremity is God’s opportunity.” Tlus-
trations—Marah, water out of rocks,
quails, &c. In business perplexities,
“alin any of you lack wisdom let him
ask of God.” In family worries, “ Cast-
ing all your care on Him.” In painful
sickness, “My grace is sufficient for
thee.”

IL God’s bounty is based upon God’s
faithfulness, ‘ He will be ever mind-
ful of His covenant,” which covenant
binds Him over to care for His people.
The Psalmist wrote this with reference
to the Sinaitic covenant alone. Chris-
tians base their hope in its frequent
repetition, (Jer. xxxi.; Ezek. xi; 2
Cor. vii. ; Rev. xxi. 7.)

1. God's bounty ts not capricious.
Faithful in opposition to fickle.

2. God’s bounty ts not administered
by favouritism. Faithful as opposed to
unjust.

3. God's bounty ¢s exactly suited to
man’s need, Faithful as opposed to
sentimental,

4, Therefore man’s supplies are sure.
Is not this contradicted by facts? No.
(1.) We must take aux the facts into ac-
count. The poorest Christian has more
than the richest worldling, (2.) We
must give God the eternity He demands
in which to work out His purposes
“ He will ever be mindful of His cove
nant.” (3.) If God withholds one gift
ts only to gwea greater. (4.) Men can
aford to watt for the “eternal weight
of glory.”

III. God’s bounty is conditional on
man’s piety. ‘‘ Unto them that fear
Him,” go says our Lord; “Seek ye first,”
&, Paul: “ ar eaaerpalinaty

9


waalLl CXL.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


J


1. Piety is necessary to secure the
WHOLE of God’s bounty — intellectual,
material, moral. If a man loves his
neighbours better than himself, and pro-
motes their wellbeing to the neglect of
that of his family and himself ; if, while
fervent in spirit, he is slothful in busi-
ness; if, while devotional and philan-
thropic, he is neglectful of the laws of
health, let not God be charged with the
result.

2. Without piety none of God's bless-
ings will be secured. The semblance


or shell may be, but not the substance,
To look at riches, luxury, &c., is to take
an inadequate view of the case. In
themselves they are unsubstantial, tran-
sitory, may be a curse, and are only
valuable for results which without piety
are never obtained.

3. True piety is the sure means of
securing God’s blessings, (1.) Love of
God. (2.) Proper love of self. (3.)
Love of others. Fidelity to these laws
is the basis of everlasting prosperity.


Tuas PunPose oF THE REVELATION or Gop’s PowER.
(Verse 6.)


While we study God’s revelations in
the Bible, in nature, and in the course
of providence, and read of His goodness
there, never let us overlook the fact
that they contain records of His glorious
power, The thought in the Psalmist’s
mind was the conquest of Canaan, whicn
(see the narrative) could only have been
effected by the miraculous arm of God.
Notice—

L That God’s people have acquired
the heritage of the heathen.

1. Materially. God did not more
give Canaan to Israel than He did the
Roman Empire to the early Church, than
He has done India, &., to the modern
Church. Witness the progress of those
nations who have been true to God—
England, Scotland, America. Contrast
the decay of the great Oriental powers
and superstitions, and Italy and Spain.

2. Intellectually. Christianity wields
the sceptre over the world of mind.
She has passed whatever precious metal
there was in heathen philosophy through
her mint. Whatever revolutions there
have been in human thought she has
impressed them into her service, and it
is a remarkable fact that nothing that
has not been received by the Church is
acknowledged as unquestionable truth.
And for many centuries it is the Church
that has given to the world its explorers,
seientists, and teachers.

3. Morally. The Christian wave
moved by the breath of God has swept
away ay an idolatry, superstition,


and vice, and is doing so wherever it
rolls. There is much of each form of
evil still, but compare the world to-day
with the palmiest era of ancient Rome.
Contrast the moral deserts with the
Christian oases in the midst of them in
Africa and Hindostan, What was Fiji
a century ago? What is it to-day?

IL That this acquisition is the re
sult of divine power.

1. From the extreme unlikeliness of
the result. Imagine Nero's smile if
Paul had predicted to him the changes
which would take place in his empire
within three centuries. Imagine Philips’
incredulity if he had been told of the
probable or even possible destruction of
the invincible Armada. Who would
have looked for such a development of
Scotland’s scanty resources, and the
progress of the United States? Equally
unlikely was it that the sayings and
writings of a Nazarene peasant and His
disciples should shake the schools of
philosophers, and produce such thinkers
as Augustine, Aquinas, Bacon, and
Newton. Yet the simple preaching of
Christ crucified has been the power by
which God has changed the face of the.
world.

2. From tts complete success. Wher-
ever Christianity has gone, heathenism
has receded, and the idols have been
given to the moles and the bats; and it
still goes on conquering and to eonquer.

IIT. That this acquisition is for the
benefit of humanity at large. It is not


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


PSALM OXL


eas ets


for the exclusive good of those who
make the acquisition in the first in-
stance, but for the good also of those
from whom the acquisitions are derived.
A good and wise conqueror contemplates


Tae Rectrrupz or Gon’s





the good of the vanquished. And so
Christian conquests are achieved that
the heathen may also become the
children of God.


WorKS AND THE STABILITY


or Gop’s Worp.
(Verses 7, 8.)


The Bible goes upon the assumption
that both nature and itself are the work
of the same hand and the revelation of the
same being. That being the case there
can be no contradictions between them.
(See Butler’s “Analogy,” chap. I.)

I The characteristics of God’s
works.

1. They are true, “verity.” They are
real and genuine, and contrast with
many of the works of man. In work-
ing out an end God employs the right
materials. From the star to the grass-
blade every means is adapted to its
proper end in the best possible way.

2. They are just, “judgment.” (1.)
God uses right materials in the right
way. He does not trench on the in-
terests of any of His creatures. Every-
thing is found in its proper and there-
fore best place, and is working out its
best and therefore proper destiny. (2.)
God uses right materials to subserve
right ends, and seeks the good of all that
He has made.

3. Therefore God's works endure.
The second member of verse 7 certainly
applies to God’s Word. The application
of verse 8 is uncertain. Perhaps this
is intentional, that it may apply to both.


REDEMPTION :


From the analogy of things we gather
that what is good will stand. Man's
works decay, many of them for the
want of rectitude and justice. God’s
works stand fast for ever; they will be
transformed, but not destroyed, because
God has made them very good.

I. Characteristics of God’s Word.

It is “sure” for the same reason as
His works. As Matthew Henry says,
it is “straight and therefore steady.”
It is founded no less upon the justice
and truth of God than upon His mercy.
“‘My word shall never pass away.”

1. God’s COMMANDMENTS are sure.
There is no repeal for them. ‘God is
not a man that He should repent.” Let
the wicked tremble.

2. God’s PROMISES are sure. They
are part of the “everlasting covenant.”
Let the righteous rejoice.

3. God’s COUNSEL ts sure. ‘Thou
shalt guide me with Thy counsel, and
afterward receive me to glory.” Let all
men hope, Learn—(1) That the qualt-
ties of God’s works and word are the
qualities of tts Author. Truth, recti-
tude, immovableness, (2) That these
qualities afford an unshakable founda-
tion for faith and hope (Matt. vii. 24, 25).


Irs Surz Founparions AND Its AWFUL SANCTIONS.


(Verse 9.)


It is to be feared that the doctrine of
redemption is underestin:ated and un-
dervalued, from an inadequate conception
of the majesty of its Author, and of the
fulness of its obligation. God’s justice
had as much to do with it as His love,
and its intent is not only to deliver men
from hell, but from sin ; and not only to


privilege, but to duty. The Israelites
were redeemed, not only by the visitation
of God’s compassion, but by His cove-
nant ; and not only out of Egypt, but to
the promised land; and in that land
they were to be a holy nation. The Re-
deemer of man is the “holy one;” and
the end of His work is to “ od em unte
191


PeALM OXI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





himself a peculiar people, zealous of good
works.”

I, Redemption. The redemption out
of Egypt, to which this undoubtedly
refers, was very suggestively typical.
Egypt representing human bondage in
general ; the blood sprinkled on the door-
post, the ransom price ; and the promised
land in every respect the antithesis of the
land of serfdom, the duties and privileges
of God’s believing people.

Il. The sure foundations on which
this redemption rests are “ His cove-
nants.”

1. God undertakes by virtue of this co-
venant to redeem all who will be redeemed,
and confirms that covenant with His
oath (Heb. vii. 13-20).

2. Redemption by price is secured for
all, Redemption was made possible for
all Israel, but it was open to any to re-
ject the privileges it involved. So Christ
has died for all, yet the benefit of that
death will be secured only to those who
believe in Him.

3. Redemption by power ts only effected
tn those who fulfil the covenant conditions,
God has fulfilled all the conditions on His
side that are possible, and waits to fulfil
the rest. Man must fulfil his, and re-
pent, and believe.


4. To those who fulfil the conditions
of that covenant, the covenant ts made sure
for ever. ‘Unbelief may perhaps tear
the copies of the covenant which Christ
has given you; but He still keeps the
original in heaven with Himself. Your
doubts and fears are not part of the co-
venant ; neither can they change Christ.”
—Rutherford.

5. The covenant of God ts the ground
of the expectation of final and perfect
redemption, ‘The strong hope of our
fastened anchor is the oath and promise of
Him who is eternal verity ; our salvation
is fastened with God’s own hand and
Christ’s own strength to the strong stake
of God’s unchangeable nature.” — Ruther-
Sord.

III. The awful sanctions by which
the duties of the redeemed are enforced,
“Holy and fearful” is the name of Him
who has redeemed us and to whom we
owe allegiance. Redemption therefore
involves—

1. Our holiness.

2. Our reverence for, as well as our love
of God. ;

In conctuston, (i.) Redempgvion gives
God the absolute right to our service, (ii)
Selfishness and sin are sacrilegious thefts.


Toe Narurk awp Apvanrages or True Prery,
(Verse 10.)


Both the character and advantages of
religion have been sadly misrepresented,
This authoritative declaration is therefore
appropriate and valuable.

1. Religion has been misrepresented
as athing of the emotions, without vigour
or intelligence ; as that which is fit only
for the Sunday exercise of those who
have declined or lost the battle of life.

2. Its advantages have been misrepre-
sented as belonging exclusively to another
sphere, and to belong only to the future
life; and therefore

3. Secularists and others have con-
demned tt as emasculating the human
powers and imposing drawbacks on human
progress.

In opposition to this the authoritative
document on the question d

193


L What true piety really is,

l. It ts “the fear of the Lord.” Not
slavish terror or alarm, but such re-
spectful reverence as a good son will
afford a good parent on his recognition
of superior mental and moral qualities,
Surely there is nothing degrading in this,
On the contrary, it is sublimely elevating
inasmuch as it involves (1) The contem-
plation and love of infinite wisdom and
holiness, (2) The careful avoidance of
those things which infinite wisdom and
holiness have condemned. (3) Such
studies and practices which will bring man


tanto harmony with infinite wisdom and


holiness, and which will secure the ap-
proval of whem to whom those attributes


2. It ts “to do His command nents,”


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


_





Is there anything degrading in this?
(1) We have nothing to do with those tra-
ditions which human folly has elevated to
the dignity of divine commands. Nor
(2) with the unworthy conduct of so-called
Christian men, (3) But we have to do
with the moral law of the Old and New
Testaments, which the greatest moralists
and statesmen have all but unanimously
pronounced perfect.

Il. What the advantages of true
piety really are.

1. True piety ts “ the beginning of wis-
dom.” Wisdom may be defined as the
choice of the best end, and the employ-
ment of the best means to secure that end.
What is man’s best end? Is it not the
complete good of his complete nature,
and that of his neighbour? What is the
best means of gaining it? How can we
know in the first instance and do in the
second? (1.) Bytnsight? Insight has
never discovered the answer to these
questions, as is proved by heathenism.
(2.) By learning # Witness the moral
degradation which preceded the down-
fall of the wisest nations of antiquity.
(3.) By experience? History shows that
man, except under Christian conditions,
has never enjoyed such experiences as
could help him to come to a right conclu-
sion. (4.) How then? By that temper of
mind induced by the fear df God which
leads men to “love the Lord their God
with all their heart and soul,” dc.


2. True piety, being the beginning of


PSALM OXE





wisdom, grows with tts growth and
strengthens with rts strength. Having
the true wisdom all other wisdom follows
in its train, Fearing God (1) J shall
study Hts character. That character is
infinite. Therefore its study will en-
large my mind, train it for prolonged
and patient efforts, for deep and abstruse
subjects, secure its balance, safety, and
sanctity. (2) I shall study Hts works,
Hence follows all science. I am for-
bidden to investigate nothing. But my
fear of God will prevent me indulging
in unprofitable speculations and push-
ing my researches beyond desirable
limits, (3) Z shall study His ways.
All history is open to me; and by re-
garding it as a development of God’s
providence I shall have a key to unlock
its mysteries which merely human wis-
dom would not afford me. All politics
are open to me, all commercial enter-
prises, all discoveries and explorations.
3. True prety ts the harbinger of suc-
cess, 22v would appear to mean the


success which the exercise of wisdom
implies, and the respect which wisdom
commands, (1.) Those who fear God
and keep His commandments make the
best of both worlds. It implies pru-
dence, as translated (2 Chron. ii. 12),
sense (Neh. viii. 8), knowledge (2 Chron.
xx. 22), policy (Dan, viii, 25). (2.)
They gain respect and esteem; not the
hypocrite, but the truly godly.


ETERNAL PRAISE.


(Verse 10,


The occasional glimpses which we get
of the service of angelic beings in the
past eternity is singularly corroborative
of our text, ‘ The morning stars sang
together,” &c. ‘When He brought
His first-begotten into the world He
saith, Let all the angels of God wor-
ship Him.” ‘The ample revelations of
the eternity to come confirm the same.
The one theme upon the lips of un-
fallen beings in the past, and unfallen
and redeemed beings in the present


VOL, I.


last clause.)


and future, is the praise of God
Notice—

L The object of praise is eternal,
God in His being and perfections is
ever the same,

II. The subjects for praise are
eternal Man has always been re-
ceiving benefits, These will ever be
remembered in grateful song, For
creation, Rev. iv. 11; redemption,
Rev. v. 9, 10. For benefits that will
ever accumulate, Rev. xxi., xxii.


193


PSALM OXI.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


we


IIL. The worshippers are endowed
with “life eternal” (Rev. iii. 2). The
mind will be keener than ever for the
appreciation of the divine wonders and


goodness. The heart will be warmet
than ever in its gratitude and affection.
The organs of praise will be clearer and
more powerful than ever,


PSALM CXIL


INTRODUCTION,
1. An alphabetical and hallelujah Psalm. 2. Author unknown; ascribed by Vulg. to Haggai


and Zachariah after the exile.


conciuding verse of cxi, and the first verse of cxii, form the point of union,
righteousness has its root in the righteousness of God,


3. A hymn on the excellence and reward of piety.


4. The
« All human
It is not merely man striving to copy


God ; it is God’s gift and God’s work. There is a living connection between the righteousness
of God and the righteousness of man, and therefore the imperishableness of the one pertains


to the other also.” —Perowne.


Tor CHARAOTERISTICS AND BLESSEDNESS OF TRUE RELIGION.
(Verse 1.)


This verse may be taken as a text
of which the Psalm is an exposition.
True religion consists of (1) Love of
God’s commandments, (2) Righteousness,
(3) Grace, (4) Compasston, (5) Discre-
tion, (6) Firm Trust tn God, (7) Bene-
volence. Its blessedness involves (1)
The superiority of the offspring of the
religious man, their (2) happiness,
(3) temporal prosperity, (4) spiritual
establishment, (5) everlasting remem-
brance, (6) confidence. In contrast
with all this is the misery, destruction,
and disappointment of the wicked. To
restrict ourselves to the text, notice—


I. The characteristics of true
religion.

1. The “fear of the Lord.” “The
Old Testament lays great stress on the
fear of God. Everywhere it is the
cardinal virtue, the corner-stone of the
saintly temple—the root of grace out
of which, if it be fully planted in a
man’s heart, all the other graces, all
the varied fruits of righteousness, will
be sure to grow.”—C. Vince, This
sentiment is peculiar to the godly ;
for the wicked have “no fear of God
before their eyes.” It is not a dread
of consequences, but a dread of sin as
alien to God and to man made in the
image of God.

2. Great delight in God’s command-
ments. “‘* All that fear God are well
pleased that there is a ible, a revela-

194


tion of God, of His will, and of the
only way to happiness in Him.”—M.
Henry.

1.) Those COMMANDMENTS warrant
our delight. Theyarethe revelation of His
will who is the subject of man’s filial reve-
rence, and are the only means whereby
the well-being of man may be secured,

(2.) The stupy of those command-
ments should be our delight, Their
wisdom and suggestiveness expands the
intellect; their goodness excites the
best feelings; they brace the will by
their firm and resolute sanctions, they
elevate and give a spiritual tone to all
the faculties.

(3.) Zhe PRACTICE of those command-
ments should be our delight. Their
yoke is easy; their duties are pleasures ;
and in the volume of the book it should
be written of the servant as well as of
his Lord: “I delight to do Thy will,
O my God.”

3. Dimne praise. “Praise ye the
Lord.” Fear and obedience are worth-
less without this supreme symptom of
love.

IL The blessedness of true religion.
“The word WN is properly, in the
plural form, blessednesses; or may be
considered as an exclamation produced
by contemplating the state of the man
who has taken God for His portion.
1, God made man for happiness, 2.
Every man feels a@ desire to be havoy.


HOMILBTIO OOMMENTARY : PSALMS.


3. All human beings abhor misery. 4.
Happiness is the grand object of pursuit
among all men. 5. But so perverted is
the human heart that it seeks happiness
where tt cannot be found; and in things
which are naturally and morally unfit
to communicate it. 6. The true way of





PeALM G&EH,


obtaining st is here laid down.”—A,
Clarke. Learn—(1.) That blessedness
ts God’s gift. (2.) That duty is God's
path to blessedness. (3.) That religion
ts the truest blessedness, because tt involves
relationship with God and fulfilment ef
duty.


Tae Postuumous Resutts or Re igion.
(Verse 2.)


A conspicuous feature of the Old dis-
pensation was that the blessings of the
righteous were also the inheritance of
their children. And those promises
which were conferred on the posterity
of the righteous Jew have not only
never been recalled, but are among
the express provisions of the Christian
covenant. The second command is still
unrepealed. Isa. xliv. 3 never received
its fulfilment till Pentecost; ef, also
Joel ii. 28-32, Actsii. 17. Notice—

I. What our text presupposes.

l. True piety, which, consisting as
it does in true wisdom, fearing God,
greatly delighting in His command-
ments, and praising Him, (1) will,
by the cultivation of healthy physical,
intellectual, and moral qualities, through
the well-known law of heredity, will
transmit the same. (2.) Will strive to pre-
dispose the child to the choice and recep-
tion of piety. A good parent will care-
fully attend to the circumstances which
surround his child, shielding him from
temptation, and facilitating his choice
of the good, at home, at school, in the
selection of a profession, &c. (3.) Will
“train up a child in the way he should
go,” ‘‘in the nurture and admonition of
the Lord;” will not neglect things
spiritual in favour of things temporal ;
will strive to implant the fear of God,
and the love of God’s commandments,
on the plastic character wisely and
well; not making religious exercises
burdensome but delightful.

2. Firm faith that God will help and
crown tts efforts with success, (1.) It
leans on the divine power. It will pray,
therefore, for the continual exercise of
that power. (2.) Jt relies on the divine
promises, which makes it hopeful of the
result.


fluence. He will excite confidence,


3. Patience, (1.) In training, A child
has naturally a free and wayward will
To mould that will requires time and
perseverance. (2.) Jn wanting for results,
Seeds do not germinate all at once. The
good seed may lie dormant for a con-
siderable time, and the wise pareut
will not hurry it,

4. The possibility of fatlure tn certain
cases. ‘“‘He who would share in the
blessings of pious ancestors must follow
after their faith.”—Starke. A child
may be proof against all piety and care,
in which case the divine promises, which
are all conditional, will not be fulfilled.

II, What our text declares.

1. That ‘his seed shall be mighty tn
the earth.” (1.) He will act upon
mighty princi; He will “seek first
the kingdom of God,” é&e., and will
exercise his father’s prudence, patience,
and piety. (2.) He will overcome mighty
difficulties. He has God behind him
to help him through all his perplexities,
over all his impediments, to guide him
by His counsel, and assist him with His
arm. (3.) Undaunted, he will achieve
mighty successes. Adopting his father’s
principles he will win victories on the
field of mind; he will rule his own
spirit; and be “not slothful in busi-
ness.” (4.) He will wield a mighty in-
His
word will be taken, his opinion re-
spected, his patronage courted, his ex-
ample followed. Knowing the value
and responsibility of his principles he
will propagate them in his family,
society, country ; and neglect no oppor-
tunity to get the “ Will of God done
on earth as it is done in heaven.” (6.)
He will leave behind him a mighty name,

2. They shall be blessed. All the


wirtuss are theirs,—Temperance, purity ;
195


Paar M OXIT.


that diligence which makes fat; that
prosperity which is conducive to
spiritual good. All moral privileges
are theirs,—the love of God, the grace of
our Lord Jesus Christ, the indwelling
and communion of the Holy Ghost, the
means of grace, the hope of glory, and
perhaps an early heaven.

Il. What our text implies,

1. That parents have a control over
the destiny of thetr offspring. If parents
do not put these revealed laws concern-
ing their children into operation, let
them not blame God or fortune for the
sad result. The promises still hold good;
let parents plead them, and employ the
means of securing their fulfilment.


2. That as the result ts in the hands


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


of God, and might and blessedness Hi.
gifts, let not parents be anxious about
the result. If the conditions have been
fulfilled, the bread cast upon the waters
will return, though after many days.
The great Augustine is a case in point.
(See Confessions, Book IIL, par. 19-21.)

3. That children incur grave re-
sponsibilities for the blessing of pious
parents, This is one of God’s choicest
privileges, Therefore children should
yield their parents (1) Love and reve-
rence, (2) Obedience. ‘Honour thy
father and thy mother” is the first
commandment with promise. To de
spise this gift is to forfeit the title to all
the rest,


ProsPERITY AND ITS QUALIFICATIONS.
(Verse 3.)


It has been said that prosperity is the
blessing of the Old Testament and ad-
versity of the New. Nothing could be
more untrue. The New Testament
never elevates poverty into a virtue.
Its poverty is that of spirit. With re-
gard to the injunction addressed to the
young ruler, notice—(1) Provision for
his wants would have been made ; (2) by
his poverty many would be enriched.
Warnings are uttered against the danger
of riches. But there are other ways of
avoiding danger than fleeing from it,
It is dangerous to embark on the ocean
in an open boat. So riches without
corresponding protection are dangerous.
Both testaments promise this protection.
(Matt. vi. 33; Tim. iv. 8.)

L What is prosperity? This de
mands a large definition. The miser is
not prosperous, nor the man who amasses
wealth and does not know what to do
with it, or uses it for his own harm.
To be prosperous is to have that which
will promote the well-being of man’s
whole nature and which has that end
secured. Material, moral, and intel-
lectual wealth and its results,

IL What is calculated to produce
it? The Psalmist, our Lord, and St.
Paul are at one as to the qualification,
“ Righteousness.” This alao demands a

196


large definition. It is not profession,
emotion, or devotional exercises. It is
the harmony of a man’s whole nature
with the will of God.

1. When that ts the case, a man ts
moderate, temperate, observant of natural
laws, and (supposing of course no con-
stitutional ailment) therefore healthy.
Thus righteousness affords a physical
basis for success.

2. He holds in check the feverish desire
to succeed, and thus godliness with con-
tentment becomes great gain. Every
day affords instances that making haste to
be rich is but making haste to pauperise
the health, the intellect, or the soul.

3. He holds those passions in check
which cloud the. understanding and tm-
patr the vision. He avoids all excess,
either in self-aggrandisement or self-
indulgence; the first of which dries
up the sources of prosperity, and the
second of which throws them away.
Righteousness holds the golden mean,

4, He respects the rights of others.
Hence, those whose rights you respect,
will respect yours. No one cares for
him who cares for nobody. While


selfishness is everywhere condemned


and scouted, those who are generous
and helpful will not fail to find the
same qualities in others,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


_~


5. He will be frugal of his time, his
money, &c., in recognition of God’s
claims upon both, and, as God’s steward,
will put them out to usury, and strive
to be prosperous, that he may advance
God’s interests in the world.

IIL What objections can be urged
against all this ?

l. That the righteous are not better
of than others. But (1) Do those who
are called righteous answer to the law
of righteousness tn tis entirety? (2)
Without controversy it is all true re-
specting communities, All history proves
that they prosper in proportion to their
righteousness. Theatres, taverns, houses
of ill-fame, never exalted a nation.
But that which promotes temperance
and industry does, and that is righteous-
ness, (3) It is so by the common con-
sent of the world. How often do we
hear the expression that such an one is
“worth his weight in gold.”

2. That men prosper who violate the


PSALM OXIt.


laws of righteousness, But (1) Are
these men prosperous? (2) Supposing
them to have all that heart could wish,
“what shall it profit a man?” &. (3)
Supposing it true of an individual,
when was tt ever true of a nation? To
CoNcLUDE—“ A man who is in possession
of his whole manhood, so that every
part is developed and harmonised and
carried up into a beautiful symmetry, a
perfect man in Christ Jesus; such a
man is better adapted to develop pros-
perity than any other man in a lower
sphere can be. ... Manhood as con-
templated by the Word of God: the
Christian character made up of all ele-
ments, largeness of soul, wise judgment,
reverence for God and His laws, love
to man and kindly sympathy, belief in
divine providence, hope of immortality,
judgment of earthly values by the
golden rod of the sanctuary ; all these
elements form a sure basis for prosperity
in the world,”—H. W. Beecher.


Liagnt: tro WHOM AND WHEN ?
(Verse 4.)


Light and darkness, as symbols
of moral conditions, are of frequent
use in Holy Scripture. “God is
light, and in Him is no darkness at
all.” The process of conversion is “from
darkness into light.” The wicked “ love
darkness,” &c. The righteous “ walk in
the light,” &c. These figures have pecu-
liar force in the East, where the light of
day is splendid, and the darkness of night
intense. These illustrations are generally
descriptive. There are breaks in the dark-
ness of the most depraved, or their lot
would be hopeless, There are clouds
resting on the most pious, or their proba-
tion would be at an end. Our text

I. Characterises those to whom it
applies. Not the perfectly sinless, but
the upright. The figure is appropriate.
Light descends, and those who stand erect
are the most likely to catch its rays.
The morally upright are those whose
posture is straight, elevated towards God
and towards heaven, Their attitude.
therefore, is most calculated to catch the
beams of the Sun of righteousness, 8.


They are upright in heart (Ps. xcvii. 1).
Their desires and emotions are pure. 2,
They are upright in mind ; candid, un-
prejudiced, welcoming light from all
quarters, 3. They are upright in will;
inflexible, just. 4. They are upright
in life; examples, models, guides.

IL Implies that those whom it charac-
terises have their seasons of darknesa

1. The character of this darkness, (1)
Religious perplexity. Temptation to
doubt God’s providence, promises, and
word. The mysteries of life, duty, and
destiny will sometimes press upon the
mind and dim the clearness of its vision.
(2) Domestic trials, bereavements, sick-
nesses, disaffections, difficulties respecting
the education and prospects of children
will sometimes cast a gloom upon the
heart, (3) Business anxieties, duties,
failures, (4) the sense of personal sinful-
ness, and (5) slander, misrepresentation,
and persecution will overcast the soul.

2 The purpose of this darkness. Being
abnormal, and yet of divine ordination,
there must be some reason for it, (1.)
i 197


PSALM OXT.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





It ts merciful. Night is a necessary ad-
junct to day. The eye cannot bear the
unclouded lustre of the sun, (2.) Jt ts
disciplinary. The repose of the eyelids
during night prepares for the strain of
daylight. (3.) Z¢ ts testing. Darkness is
a trial of our faith in God, d&e.

IIL Declares that, to those it charac-
terises, light ariseth in the darkness.

1. Observe, light ariseth in the darkness.
It was so with our Lord, Luke xxxii. 43 ;
St. Paul, 2 Cor. xii. 8-10. In neither
case was the darkness entirely removed.
There was enough light, but not super-
abundant.

2. But it is light in the darkness.
There is the light of innocence in the
darkness of slander ; the light of forgive-


ness in the darkness of sin; the light of
divine comfort in the darkness of sorrow ,
the light of revelation in the darkness of
perplexity. “They shall be delivered
in due time and perhaps when they least
expect it ; when the night is darkest the
day dawns; nay, at evening time, when
night was looked for, it shall be light.”
—H., Henry.

In conotusion. (i.) The upright have
all their darkness here and mitigations
even of that, but they travel to a land of
perfect light. (ii.) The perverse and crooked
have darkness too, but enough illumination
to lead them to perfect light, neglecting
which, tt gradually fades into outer dark-
ness.


Toe ATTRIBUTES OF THE UPRIGHT.
(Verse 4, second clause.)


The upright will be able to bend with-
out breaking. Like true steel, pliant
enough to accomplish its purpose with-
out injury to its temper.

L The upright bend,

1. In graciousness, They are not
distant, cold, haughty, harsh in their
judgments, or critical in their estimates.
They are ready to consider all cases of
need, and in such a spirit as shall not
deprive their benevolence of all value.
It will be a bending that does not seem
to bend ; a stooping of genial familiarity,
“seeking not its own.”

2. In compassion. The proud see no
misery. The upright stoop that they
may see it, and pity as they see. In
that position compassion becomes prac-


tical and develops into active mercy
and benevolent generosity.

II. Yet the upright maintain their
integrity. They love, but it is the love
of dignity and righteousness,

Illustration,

1. When the Queen visited the London
Hospital, a poor little Irish girl ex-
pressed a wish to see her. Her Majesty
went and encouraged the child by words,
and smiles, and gifts. Did she lose her
dignity by so doing? Far from it,
majesty there bent in the right direo-
tion.

2. When “ God so loved the world”
did He drag His justice in the dust?
Nay, His justice bent to provide justifi-
cation for the sinner.


Toe Gotpen Mean.
(Verse 5.)


The golden mean is much needed in
those matters which concern justice on
the one hand and generosity on the
other. How to do good with money,
time, influence, &c., without inflicting
an injustice on self and injury on others
is often perplexing, The Psalmist
shows that it is possible to “ show
favour and lend,” and yet “ guide one’s
affairs with discretion.” An alternative
translation is, “ Happy is the man that

198


showeth favour and lendeth, he main-
taineth his cause in the judgment,”
showing that the golden mean is the
happy medium and the golden rule, and
that an apright man will not show such
favour, d&c., as will bring down upon
him the disapprobation of the just. Our
text teaches us—

L That such circumstances will
arise as to need and justify favour
and loans. All are liable to reverses of


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


POALM OXI,


eee


fortune. The sudden failure of a cre-
ditor, the dishonesty of a subordinate,
ill health, family bereavement, may put
any man in circumstances that require a
temporary loan.

Il. That that man is happy who so
guides his affairs as to be able wisely
‘o afford those favours and loans.

1, Happiness will spring from the
possession of those things which makes
this possible. It presupposes in the
lender comfort and affluence, which
have been the result of honesty, dili-
gence, and frugality.

2. Happiness will spring from the
disposition to show favour and lend.
“ Mercy

is twice blessed,
It blesseth him that gives and him that takes.”

It That that man is happy who
can so guide his affairs as to do good
and no evil by his favours and loans.

1. Jt ts no small source of misery all
round when a man through a benevolence
has done harm. He isa loser himself, and
his self-denial has been used for unworthy
ends ; and thus good becomes evil spoken
of, and charity brought into disrepute.


3. It ts no small cause for satisfac-
tion where beneficence secures good and
profitable ends. It will secure (1) In-
dividual gratitude; (2) The benediction
of heaven; (3) The approbation of the
good, LEARN (i.) That generosity should
be the outcome of a careful consideration
of means. As God hates robbery for
burnt-offering, we may be sure that He
is displeased with the charitable use of
other people’s money. (ii.) That gene-
rosity should be the result of a careful
study of the merits of the ease. To en-
courage the professional beggar or the
vicious person were sorry work indeed.
(iii.) That generosity should be exhibited
tn a discreet and just way. To entrust
money to the needy but improvident.
or careless, is to waste it. Actual need
may be relieved by gifts in kind or the
proffer of employment. (iv.) But let no
man screen himself behind the dictum,
“just before generous,” so as to be netther.
The good man will seek for oppor-
tunities. (v.) Woe unto the man twho
seeth his brother in need and shutteth up
hés bowels of compassion against him.


Tae STABILITY aND Memory or THE Riaurrous.
(Verse 6.)


Only that which is stable is memor-
able. Monuments which crumble are
soon forgotten. Memorials are built of
durable materials. So the good man
standing firm on unmovable founda-
tions will be had in everlasting remem-
brance.

L, The Stability of the righteous,

1. He rests upon immovable founda-
tions. God and His righteousness, love,
and power.

2. On. that foundation he maintains
a steady course. He is not tossed
about. Hestands “foursquare to every
wind that blows.”

3. From that foundation he hurls
with steady aim. He does not sin
(audgria), and thus miss the mark of
his high calling.

II. The memory of the rignteous.
They shall be in everlasting remem-
brance, because—


1, They are stabie, and therefore
endure (Ps, i. 1-3).

2. They are made of enduring ma-
terials. Righteousness and goodness,
like charity, can “never fail.”

3. They are worth remembering. “The
world has no interest in keeping up the
memory of bad men, and, as soon as it
can be done, hastens to forget them.
Wicked men are remembered only when
their deeds are enormous, and then their
memory is cherished only to admonish
and to warn. The world has no interest
in keeping up the memory of Benedict
Arnold, or Alexander VI, or Cassar
Borgia, except to warn future genera-
tions of the guilt and baseness of treason
and profligacy. It has an interest in
never suffering the names of Howard,
Wilberforce, Henry Martyn to die, for
these names excite to noble feelings
and to noble efforts wherever they are

199


PaaLM OX.


ee


known.”— Barnes, They are held in
grateful remembrance; in instructive
remembrance, examples, dec. ; in celestial
remembrance, for in heaven they re-
ceive “a crown of glory that shall never
fade away.”





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.








*- But atrew his ashes to the wind,
Whose sword or voice has served mankind,
And is he dead, whose glorious mind lifta
thine on high? ;
To live in hearts we leave behind is net te
die.”


FrarLessness, Fixepness, amp Farrs.


(Verse 7.)


Three great and closely allied quali-
ties, always needed and always the
heritage of God’s people, The three
stand or fall together. Where there is
fear there is no fixity ; and where there
is no fixity there is no faith. But he
who has a strong faith in God, will not
fear “though mountains be removed,”
dc. (Ps. xlvi. 1-5).

I. Fearlessness consists—

1. In not being afraid of evil tidings
before they come. The fearless man has
no carking care, or harassing anxieties,
He will wait patiently and courageously
till evils arrive before he pronounces
them fearful (Matt. vi. 34).

2. In not being afraid of evil tidings
when they come, but a manful determina-
tion to make the best of them. The
fearless man will face them, examine
them, and conquer them.

3. In not being afraid of evil tidings
after they have come. The fearless man
does not fear consequences, but carves
® new career out of misfortune, and
educes good out of evil.

I. Fearlessness is impossible with-
out fixedness. Fear is trepidation,
wavering, retreat. Fearlessness implies
settledness and steadfastness. Fixed-
ness is—

1. A steady preparation to meet pos-
sible fears; a concentration and con-
solidation of forces around weak points
that may be attacked, a gathering up of
solidity and strength. Our faith may be
attacked: let us examine its evidences,
and purge its weaknesses, and fortify
ourselves with irrefutable arguments,
Our virtue: let us surround it with
mpregnable fortifications, Our intel-
ligence: let us brace it by healthful

200


thought and reading. Our property.
let us by prudence and diligence pre
pare,

2. A strong determination to resist
the shock of evil when tt comes. “ None
of these things move me,” said Paul.
“A man who has not learned to say
‘no'’—who is not resolved that he well
take God’s way in spite of every dog
that can bay or bark at him, in spite of
every silvery voice that woos him aside,
will be a weak and a wretched man till
he dies. . . . Whoever lets himself be
shaped and guided by anything lower
than an inflexible will, fixed in obedience
to God, will in the end be shaped into
a deformity and guided to wreck and
ruin, .. . We need a wholesome ob-
stinacy in the right, that will be neither
bribed, nor coaxed, nor bullied. ...
‘Whom resist steadfast in the faith.’ "—
Maclaren.

TIL No fixedness without faith
“There is no stability and settled per-
sistency of righteous purpose possible
for us, unless we are made strong, be-
cause we lay hold of God’s strength,
and stand firm because we are rooted in
Him. Without that hold, we shall be
swept away by storms of calamity or
gusts of passion. Without that....
there will not be solidity enough in our
character... .. To stand amidst...
earthquakes and storms we must be
built upon the rock, and build rocklike
upon it. Build thy strength upon God.”
— Maclaren.

This faith is exercised—(1.) In the
divine existence, power, goodness, and
promise. (2.) In our own God-given
strength. (3,) In our ultimate victory
(1 John v. 4, 5).


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY; PSALMS,


POALM OF rd.





Tae Nexp, Succovr, ann Traivmes or THe Soun.
( Verse 8.)


LX The soul in need.


1. The soul needs szpport in times of


weakness. It is like the body, debilitated,
when out of health. Physical conditions,
eircumstances, temptations, sometimes
engender spiritual weakness, and make
the soul cry out for some support.

2. The soul needs Aelp in times of ex-
haustion. Its strenuous efforts against
its many foes frequently exhaust it.
Those foes are strong, relentless, vigi-
lant. The soul must be recruited by
forces outside itself, or it will fail.

3. The soul needs protection in time
of danger. There are some tempta-
tions which we must resist; some
against which resistance is unavailing.
Our only chance in this latter case is a
strong refuge, or a powerful auxiliary.

IL The soul succoured. “He shall
not be afraid.” | Weakness, helpless-
mess, and danger will engender fear.
Courage will be stimulated by timely
succour. Such succour is afforded by
Ged.
1. God ts the secret of the soul's
strenoth. When in weakness and de-
bility, tet the soul flee to Him. He
has promised to “heal our sicknesses,”
He is the “health of our countenance,”


“They that wait upon the Lord,” &«
And with strength will come fearless
ness,

2. God ta the support of the soul in
times of exhaustion. ‘My flesh and
my heart faileth,” d&c. ‘Come unto Me,
all ye that are weary,” &c. “God is a
very present help in time of trouble,”
“Greater is He that is for you,” &.
And, conscious of the upholding of Om-
nipotence, all fear will flee.

3. God ts the refuge of the soul in
times of danger. ‘The Lord God isa
-... Shield.” “The name of the Lord
is a strong tower,” dc.

IIL The soul triumphing. “ Until
he see his desire upon his enemies.”

1. God has promised not only timely
succour, but ulitmate victory. He has
promised, ‘‘ grace to help,” that “ we
shall withstand in the evil day,” that
we shall “overcome all,” and to “ give
us the victory through our Lord Jesus
Christ.”

2. That victory shall be complete.
We shall come off “more than con-
querors,” and have “an abundant en-
trance.” Difficulties, doubts, sin, Satan,
and death shall be beaten down under
our feet,”


LIBEBALITY,
(Verse 9.)


There ig a great deal of pseudo-
liberality. Reckless almsgiving, need-
less charity, and benevolences from an
unwilling heart, are not genuine libera-
lity. That must have righteousness
for its basis, need for its object, and
usefulness for its end. The Christian
law is based upon this (2 Cor. ix.
6-15).

I. True liberality must have right-
eousness for its basis, and constant
righteousness, te, not righteousness
and favouritism mixed.

1. It must proceed from a righteous
motive—not to secure praise, &c., as the


hypocrites.


2. It must be done tn the right way,
fe, on a just principle of selection,
which implies investigation ; by a just
method—loans, when loans would be
helpful; money, clothes, employment,
food, as the case may require.

Il. True liberality must have need
for its object.

1. Not (1) Sloth, (2) Drunkennesa,
(8) The misery of vice. But

2. Real poverty. (1.) The tempo-
rarily distressed. These are frequently
the most needy and the most worthy,
and require the most righteousness
to find out and relieve. (2.) Widows
and orphans. (3.) Charitable oe inetiter


PRALM OXIT.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





tions, (4.) Those depending upon us.
To neglect them is worse than infi-
delity.

Itt. True liberality must have use-
fulness for its end. ‘He hath dis-
persed.” St. Paul (2 Cor. ix. 6~15)
applies it in the sense of seed-sowing.
Liberality contemplates a harvest of
usefulness.

1. God has made us treasurers of His
bounty. He has not given, only entrusted
to us for special purposes what we have.
A “man has made a sovereign honestly ;
it is his in point of fair service, by what
is called right. If he wills it away, or
spends it on himself, or keeps it, he vio-
lates no law. . . . Yet he says in effect,
‘The money is mine, but I myself am
not my own, I have no property in my-
self. Iam God’s agent. I have given
society an equivalent for this sovereign ;
but the strength and skill by which
I gained it are the gifts of God. I will
hold what I have as Christ’s, Holding
it so, I instantly yield it at His call,
saying, “ Thine is to right.”’”—Dr. J.
Parker.

2. That purpose ts useful dispersion.
(1.) A timely gift to a poor man will
enable him to weather the storm and
start afresh. (2.) A seasonable donation
to a charitable society will be a means of
boundless usefulness. (3.) Ample pro-
vision for those depending upon us will
enable them to follow out and multiply
our own schemes of usefulness. True
liberality will plant roses in the desert,
and turn the wilderness into the gar-
den of the Lord. Barren wastes will
smile with genial harvests, and solitary
places will be made glad.


IV. True liberality will have succes
and honour as its reward. All expe
rience shows generosity to be the best
policy. Both have been tried. The
miser is not only not really enriched, but
positively impoverished. ‘ Horn” is the
symbol of power and influence.

1. The liberal man will be enriched by
the blessing of God. He scatters only to
increase. ‘‘The very act of scattering
breaks up the mastery of selfishness, en-
larges the circle of kindly interests, shows
that there is something in the world
beyond our own personal concerns. It
were better therefore for man, better as
a discipline, better for his heart, better
for every quality that is worth having,
that a man should throw some of his
money into the river than that he should
never give anything away.... Even
if a man should get nothing back “he
always increases in heart volume, in joy,
in love, in peace ; his cup of comfort is
sweetened, he walks on a greener earth,
and looks up to God through a bluer
sky. Beneficence is its own compensation,
Charity empties the heart of one gift that
it may make room fora larger. ‘Give
and it shall be given you, good measure,
shaken together, and running over.’
‘The liberal soul shall be made fat,’ &c.”
—Dr. J. Parker,

2. His “ horn shall be exalted” in the
estimation of mankind. Who is it that
the world delights to honour? the Bona-
partes and the Rothschilds, or the Pea-
bodys and the Wilberforces? Learn—

(i.) That selfishness isa bad policy. (ii.)
That liberality extends not only to money,
but to time, life, influence, and work.


Tae WIoKep Sprrir,
(Verse 10.)


Our text is a most admirable exposi-
tion of what is termed the “bad” or
“wicked” spirit. No tendency meets
with more emphatic condemnation than
that which sets in the direction of re-
gret and annoyance at the well-being
of others. Those who are the subjects
of such feelings may well be styled
“ wicked.”


202


L The character of the wicked. YW


would seem to signify one who lies in
wait, a mischievous and injurious person,
and an oppressor. Hence the main
points in his character are craft and
cruelty. “Sin” and so the sinner, “ like
a ravenous beast, as crafty as it is cruel,
is crouching outside the door, . . . only
waiting for opportunity to be given to


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





spring in and devour.”—Samuel Coz,
(Ps. xxxvii. 12.)

IL The inspection af the wicked.
“Shall see.” SIN, te see critically,


1. The wicked look carefully for every-
thing that ts bad. They would if they
could be blind to everything that is good.
They are keen hunters for slips, discre-
pancies, and falls,

2. The wicked, however, find everything
that ts good. They are compelled by
their very search for inconsistencies to
see the true character of the righteous.
When they slander him, plunder him,
and do all manner of harm to him, he
returns good for evil. These are but so
many opportunities for his righteousness,
stability, compassion, and trust in God,
and so many coals of fire for his enemies’
heads,

IIL The disappointment of the
wicked.

1. Jt ts twofold. (1.) At not finding
what they wish to find. (2.) At finding
the exact opposite of what they wish to
find, Eg. Balak.

2. It ts intense. (1.) Tt takes the
form of vexatton. Their machinations
have been frustrated, and instead of
working evil their worst attempts have


worked together for good. (2.) It takes


PROLM OXT.





the form of furious but ineffectual wrath.
“Gnash their teeth” (Ps. xxxv. 16,
xxxvii. 11).

IV. The fate of the wicked. ‘Shall
melt away.” Instead of calamity falling
on the righteous it falls upon them.
The figure is very expressive and is often
used,

1. In Ps. lviii. 7, they are described
as melting away as “waters which run
continually,” t.e.. running to waste in
the sand or evaporated by the sun. So
the wicked waste away physically, intel-
lectually, morally,

2. In Ps. lviii. 8, they are like “‘ the
snail which melteth away.” (See Tris-
tram’s Natural History, p. 295, for pecu-
liarities of snails in the East.) “The
heat often dries them up by a long
continued drought, or by the sun’s rays
penetrating into their holes,” §o all
the resources of the wicked shall be
dried up.

3. In Ps. xviii. 2, they are likened
to “melting wax ;” so they form no real
obstacle to the good.

(i.) 4 word of warning. (1.) “Be
vigilant,” de. (2.) Beware lest you give
the enemy an occasion for his spirtt. (ii.)
A word of comfort. ‘No weapon that .
is formed against thee shall prosper,” &.


Tae Desire or THE WICKED.
(Verse 10, last clause.)


The Bible is full of statements and
illustrations of the instability of sin.
The righteous stand—ere held in ever-
lasting remembrance, while the wicked
are tossed about, moved from their
foundations, and finally melt away.
The text points out the perishable
character of the desire of the wicked.
That desire perishes—

IL Because it is selfish. It breeds so
to speak in and in, and thus first vitiates
and then destroys production. This is
illustrated by the fate of innumerable
cravings. The lust for gain, drink, &c.,
literally dies out, and becomes a morbid
habit which is never satisfied. So the
soul that is greedy of the reputation of
the righteous shall not be satisfied not-
withstanding all it may get.


II. Because it hes nothing to fall
back upon in case of disappointment.
The righteous, if disappointed in a given
end, have always the desire for duty
and God’s glory to fall back upon, and
thus they have a continual source of
satisfaction. On the contrary, the frus-
tration of wicked schemes ends in utter
despair.

ITI. Because it has no resources om
which to rely. The desire of the
righteous is supported by God, con-
science, and humanity. That of the
wicked only by feeble and unsubstantial
self. Their colleagues only afford assist-
ance up to a given point.

IV. Because set on unsatisfactory
objects. Those objects are sinful, and,
as games says, “ Desire, when it has con-


PSALM CXIIL. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





This favour rests upon the desire of the
good; but turned aw: ay fr om the wicked
their ‘‘ desires perish.”

In Concuusron (Is. xxix. 8).


ceived, bringeth forth sin; and sin, when
it is finished, bringeth forth death.”

V. Because the frown of God is
upon it. Desire can only live under
the smile and with the favour of God.


PSALM OXIIL


INTRODUCTION.


1. Another of the Hallelujah Psalms, 2 Date and authorship unknown. 8. The first of
six Psalms in the Jewish liturgy (cxiii.—cxviii.) termed Hallel, or the Egyptian Hallel, ag
distinguished from the great Hallel, ‘‘ This Pealm continued to be recited while the temple
stood, and is atill recited in Palestine eighteen times a year, apart from its customary, though
not legal use, at the new moon, Outside of Palestine it is now yearly recited twenty-one timea

. . At the family celebration of the Passover Psalms exiii. and exiv. were sung before
the meal, and indeed before the emptying of the second cup, and the others after the meal, and
after the filling of the fourth cup,”—Afold.


A Nose Peorie anv a Nosiz Szevice.
(Verse 1.)


Nobility consists in those endowments 3. God's servants have the noblest


which render the possessors worthy of
honour. Nobility of service consists in
the consecration of those endowments
to the best being, for the best ends.
This is nowhere fully the case except in
the service of God.

I. The servants of God are a noble
people. All God’s servants are noble-
men. Abraham, Moses, Caleb, Job,
Isaiah, Zerubbabel, and the promised
Messiah, God speaks of as “ My ser-
vants.” Christ’s designation of Him-
self is, “I am among you as one that
serveth.” Nebuchadnezzar and Darius
saw that Daniel and the three Hebrew
youths were “servants of God.” Paul,
Peter, Timothy, James, and Jude called
themselves servants of God. All Israel
was such tdeally ; all Christians are so


actually.
1. God’s servant realises the noblest and
most perfect tdeal of life. (1.) Some men


live for pleasure. (2.) Some for intel-
lectual effort. (3.) Some for moral ex-
cellence, (4.) But God’s servanis live
for Him. And here they have what
they can never otherwise have, a power-
ful motive for virtue, full mental cul-
ture, and all legitimate enjoyment, for
the education and completion of their
whole being, hence God’s service is the
noblest ideal of life.
204


master. It ennobles the proudest peer
in the land to be in the service of his
sovereign,

3. God’s servants yield to the noblest
claims. “I have made thee for My-
self.” This was not based upon any
merit in us, but upon His free love and
mercy. And therefore God’s claims
rest—(1.) Upon the right of property.
We have rights over the products of our
hand and brain. So has God. (2.)
Upon the right of sustenance and pre-
servation. The basest ingratitude is
that which ignores the right of those to
whose generosity we owe our all. (3.)
Upon the right of redemption. Note
the price by which it was effected, the
curse from which it rescues, the digns-
ties to which it elevates.

4, God's servants have the noblest war-
rant for their service. (1.) The warrant
of reason. Their service is a “ reason-
able service.” (2.) The warrant of com
science. (3.) The warrant of love.

5. God’s servants are promised and
enjoy the noblest rewards, God Himself.
“T will be their God.” There are many
subordinate rewards, but this compre-
hends and crowns them all.

IL God’s service is a noble service,
“Praise the name of the Lord.” This
injunction no doubt refera to acts of


utOMILETIC COMMENTARY; PSALMS.


PSALM OXITI.


ES a ee ee es ed ee


religious worship as such. But it sug-
gests much more, for all the acts of
religious life are worship, “That ye
should show forth the praises of Him,”
&c. “ Glorify God in your bodies and
spirits which are His.”

1, Jt ts noble in the dignity of tts
sphere. It links man with God Him-
self. Man becomes a “ worker together
with God,” with Christ, who accom-
plishes His mighty undertakings by
human agency; with the Holy Ghost,
who uses man as His mouthpiece for
conviction of sin, &.

3. It ts noble in the motive from which
# springs. All life is noble or ignoble
according as it is actuated by noble or
ignoble aima, God’s servants aim at


“ pleasing God.” This motive animated
our Lord, John viii. 29; Enoch,. Heb,
xi. 5; Solomon, 2 Sam. vii. 29,

3. Jt ts noble in the instruments by
which st ts accomplished. All that is
morally worthy is pressed into this ser-
vice; the mind purged from error;
the will freed from prejudice; the heart
emancipated from irregular passion and
sin; the body a temple of the Holy
Ghost.

4, It ts noble in the freedom of tts con-
secration, It is not pressed service, it
is purely voluntary under the “ royal
law. of liberty.”

5. It ts noble tn the uses which
serves, Doing the “will of God on
earth as it is done in heaven.”


GRariTtuDE
(Verse 2.)


Onur text suggeste—

IL. That there are grounds for grati-
tude. We bless God for blessing us,
These grounds are universal. ‘“ What
hast thou that thou didst not receive }”
From Him descends “every good and
perfect gift.” 1. Physical. The body
with its organs, senses, members, sus-
ceptibilities of pleasure, provision for
clothing, shelter, food, &c. 2. Mental.
Literature, science, art, authors, poets,
artists, are giftsfrom God. 3. Spiritual.
The Bible, Gospel, means of grace, d&c.
4. Political, Government, liberty.

II. That these grounds are often
ignored.

1, dfen lose sight of their benefactor.
This may be (1) Delsberate. Men die
like to be under an obligation. The
Emperor Basil was saved when hunting
by a courtier, and all Constantinople
was speculating about the reward, when,
to the astonishment of all, the preserver
of his sovereign was ordered out to
execution on the ground that the debt
could never adequately be repaid. So
men owe so much to God that the
sense of obligation becomes burdensome,
and they therefore endeavour to banish
Kim from their minds. (2) Careless.
Like the conduct of many childrer t~
wards their parents. The blessings are


so very regular that we forget their
source,

2. Men make light of their blessings.
(1.) Of their physical gifts. Sin pro-
stitutes them, and the attendant misery
is charged upon God. (2.) Of their
mental gifts. The mind has wandered
into unprofitable speculations, and is
forthwith made responsible for the
doubts and errors into which men fall.
And men wish themselves dogs, without
the power of thought. (3.) Spiritual
gifts, from their fancied sufficiency. (4.)
Political gifts, from love of lawlessness.

& Men deny the utility of thankful-
ness. ‘If man serves us we repay him,
4n kind if he needs it; or by gratitude
which gratifies his spirit. But what
kind of repayment or gratification can
(Jod receive?” True, the divine bene-
factor is not dependent on man’s grati-
tude or gifts; but this overlooks the
duty of acknowledging a gift whether it
advantages its giver or not,

II. That these grounds should be
acknowledged by present thankful-
ness. The obligation commences the
moment the gift is conferred, and should
therefore be acknowledged forthwith.

1. Circumstances should not be allowed
to interfere. Those circumstances are
Gad’s gifts, and should not he turned

205


PRALM OXITI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


nnn nnn n eee EEE nn ESSERE EREEEnENISEENEnnE NRO


into instruments for robbing Him of His
rights.

2. Persons should not be allowed to
interfere. The dearest human relative
ought not to be so close as God. Debts
incurred to man are not to be compared
with those we owe to God.

3. Inclination should not be allowed
to interfere, They do not interfere with
our service to man, nor should they
with our duty to God.

IV. That these grounds should be


acknowledged by perpetual thankful
ness. ‘I have loved thee with an ever-
lasting love.” “His mercy endureth
for ever,” therefore, &c. Learn—

(i) The evils of ingratitude, It nar-
rows the intellect, contracts the heart,
restricts the sphere of gervice, and en
genders a cold, hard, barren selfishness,
(ii.) The advantages of thankfulness. It
secures further blessings from God, en-
larges the volume of manhood, and pre
pares for the service of heaven,


UniversaL WorsuHipP,
(Verse 3.)


L God’s name ought to be praised
everywhere, because—

1. Huerywhere He is worthy of prarse.
(1.) God's government is everywhere
founded and administered on principies
of righteousness. (2.) His beneficent
provision for His ercatures’ want—His
sun, His showers, His fruits, dc.—is
made everywhere. (3.) His almighty
protection, wpholding the universe and
protecting His creatures, ts afforded
everywhere. (4.) His offers of mercy
extend, without distinction of race or
order, everywhere. His Son died for
all, His Spirit strives with all, His
Church welcomes all, and His heaven
was made for all,

2. Hverywhere He ts acknowledged to
exist. Sometimes this belief has been
adulterated with error, but the sub-
stratum of the truth everywhere re-
mains, and nothing can eradicate it. In
all the great civilisations it has uni-
versally obtained. It has been said
~ recently that a few savave tribes are
without it, which, if true, is very un-
fortunate for atheism; for that would
prove that unbelief in God is only
possible to the most degraded and
brutal barbarism. In all ages God has
been the trust of mankind.

3. Hverywhere, that is the end of God’s
providential plan, “All shall know
the Lord from the least even unto the
greatest.” “All nations shall do Him
service.” That is the grand destiny of

206


the human race (Mal. L 11; Rev. v.
8-14),

4, Everywhere, that is the law of
man’s true dignity. The history of the
world shows that men are elevated and
civilised in proportion to their recogni-
tion of the Most High. Everywhere it
ennobles and sanctifies.

II. God’s name ought to be praised
under all circumstances. Under all
the various conditions revealed by tbe
progress of the sun, should man render
grateful homage.

1. In the business of the day, for He
makes it possible.

2. In the family affairs of the day,
for He controls them.

3. In the vicissitudes of the day. In
prosperity or adversity, for He is the
author of both.

4, In the transactions of government,
for He is King of kings and Lord of
lords,

5. And, since “‘ He giveth His beloved
sleep,” in the repose which follows the
setiing sun.

III. God’s name ought to be praised
at all times.

1, In the beneficent march of the
seasons, for they are led by Him,

2. In the gracious division of day and
night, for it was fixed by Him,

3. “ Harly in the morning,” at noon
(Daniel), at night (our Lord on Olivet) ;
for all departments of the day are or.
dained by Him.


BHOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


PeALM OXI,


a ere cra re


Tse Divint Goverxment or Nations,
(Verse 4, clause 1.)


The figure is that of God seated on
His throne as King of kings and Lord
of lords.

L The divine government is personal.
“The Zord is high.” Human govern-
ments are institutional. But, while God
usually works through natural laws,
&c., He can work without them, and is
always superior to them, ‘He maketh
His sun to shine.” ‘“ He doeth accord-
ing to His will,” &.

IL The divine government is exalted
“above all nations.” Superior in its
basis, aims, methods, to the best human
government. It is superior in wisdom,
comprehensiveness, sympathy, goodness,
and resources, because directly adminis-
tered by supreme wisdom, goodness, and

wer.

II. The divine government, from
its exaltation, is suitable to the eir-
cumstances of all nations.

1. It is absolute perfection. Human
legislation is made up of caprices, mis-
takes, changes. The great task of
human governors is to alter, modify, or
improve on the legislation of their pre-
decessors, and thus it cannot be suited to
all the circumstances of mankind. On
the contrary, God’s laws are unalterable,
because incapable of improvement, and
because promulgated by the all-perfect
mind,

2. It is founded on the reason of
things, and, therefore, is not arbitrary,
It does not contemplate classes, &c. ; it
ls perfect equity, and all nations may
expect even-handed justice from the
hands of God.

IV. God’s government is bensvolent
towards all nations. Many societies are
founded on tke supposition that men


were made for governments, and not
governments for men. God rules for
the express benefit of nations, They
require, and so they receive, His control
and care, But is this borne out by
facts? Look at the miseries of nations.
Answer—

1, Much of this misery is self-inflicted.
If men will break God’s laws they must
take the consequences, All nations who
are faithful to God are blessed.

2. These miseries are insignificant
compared with their blessings. Our years
of tyranny or depression must be balanced
by the years of prosperity and freedom,

3. These miseries subserve benevolent
and righteous ends. How often have
famines been sent to drive a nation to
its God. How often has God used a de-
structive war to expel a tyrant from his
throne. Famine brought free trade.
The Marian persecution inaugurated the
Elizabethan reformation. The American
war abolished slavery.

V. The divine government is admi-
nistered by Christ. ‘The Father hath
committed all judgment into His hands.”
(Daniel vii. 13, 14, Phil. ii. 9.) Christ
is qualified for this office. 1. By a per-
sonal acquaintance with His subjects, (2.)
By a personal relation with His subjects,
He is a true King, not only the “ able”
but the “kinsman” of the race, born
out of the bosom of humanity. (3.) By
an intense sympathy with His subjects.
(4.) By His accessibility to His subjects.

In conciusion. Let men and nations
beware how they rebel against this go-
vernment, Can they produce a better 1
They rebel against omnipotent goodness
when they throw off their allegiance to
God.


Tae Divinzt GoveRNMENT oF HEAVEN.
(Verse 4, clause 2.)


God rules in heaven; and the differ-
ence between His government there and
His government here is, that here men
break its laws and thwart its beneficent


designs; yonder all is harmony and

obedience, ‘The Lord is high above

ail nations,” but His glory is above the

heavens. Here that glory is but faintly
207


reaLM CXIM.


Mustrated amidst the partial obedience
of the best of His creatures and the re-
bellion of the rest ; there fully. This
government is based on the same prin-
ciples, conducted by the same methods,
and contemplates the same ends among
glorified spirits as among men, and is ac-
knowledged and obeyed ;—

I. Universally. Rev. v.

Il. Reverentially. Is. vi.2. “ With
twain he covered his face.”

Ill. Swiftly. Is. vi. 2.
twain he did fly.”

IV. Comprehensively. The ends of
the divine government are the sole ob-
ject of their service; they have no


“ With





HOMILETIC OOMMENTARY: PSALMS.





personal aims to secure, because in doing


God’s will they secure all.

V. Continually. “They rest not day
nor night.”

VL Willingly. Their wills are in
complete harmony with the will of God.
Sin does not warp their inclination, and
they are under no powerful restraint
towards wrong.

VII. Perfectly. No sin blears their
vision or blights their faculties. They
see what is the perfect will of God, and
do it with all the completeness of their
being.

Let all Christians pray, ‘Thy will be
done on earth as it is done in heaven.”


THe ABSOLUTE
(Verse 5.)


Verses 5 and 6 in the original present
@ parallelism which is not preserved in
the English version, As Hebrew poetry
they would stand thus :—


Who is like unto Jehovah, our God,
Who sits throned on high,
Who casts looks so low,

In the heavens and in the earth!


The italics of A. V. are of course supplied
by the translators to make what appeared
to be the best sense. We propose to treat
the second and third lines (with Bunsen,
Delitzsch, Hengstenberg, dc.) as a paren-
thesis, Our subject, therefore, is The
Absolute; the incomprehensibleness of
Deity. “ Who is like unto Jehovah, our
God, in the heavens and in the earth ?”
Notice—

I. That the incomprehensibleness of
God is generally acknowledged. Ob-
serve—

1. How tt ts presented in the Bible,
(Exod. iii. 14, xv. 11 ; Deut. iv. ; 1 Sam.
ii, 2; 1 Kings viii. 12-27 ; Job v. 9, xi.
7-9, xxxvii. 5, 23; Psalms lxxxix. 6,
exlv. 3; Eccl. xvii 21; Is, xl, xliii. ;
Rom. xi. 33, 34.)

2. How tt is presented by philosophy.
Socrates maintained that “he only
knew this, that he knew nothing.”
Plato: “The Maker and Father of the
worlds, it is difficult to discover, and
ahen ore impossible to make him

408


known to all.” The Eleatte school held
that “we ought not to assert anything
concerning the gods, for we have no know-
ledge of them.” So the Stoics. Modern
schools assert the same. Schelling says,
“ God is that which is in itself and only
from itself can be conceived.” So in-
deed Hamilton, Mansel, Spenser, and
Matthew Arnold. “A God all known
and comprehended is no God. That
which I fully know and understand,
is below, not above me, for I have
mastered it, I have not to worship it,
it must bow down to me. That which
towers immeasurably above me, which
I cannot scale and cannot fathom, be-
fore which I am as nothing, that and
that alone, I fall down to and adore—
not ignorance, but knowledge is the
mother of devotion, Nevertheless, the
sense of ignorance in the created mind,
of immeasurable ignorance and infirmity,
is preliminary and essential to all true
adoration.”—Dr. J. Young.

3. How it 18 presented by heathen
religions. “Seek fellowship with Zeus
and Epictetus.” Alas! it was the Zeus
that was wanting... . There was a
yearning for God, for personal fellowship
with God, for personal likeness to God,

. . » ‘But who is the Zeus, the god of
whom you talk, that I may believe on
Him,’ was the cry which grew more
hopeless and agonising generation by


ROMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PSALM CXTTL,





generation . . . to which religion had
no answer.”— Baldwin Brown.

Ii. That men have universally
striven to solve the mystery, by
taking up the challenge of our text. Sir
W. Hamilton says, ‘‘ From Xenophanes
to Leibnitz the infinite, the absolute,
th unconditioned formed the highest
principle of speculation.” And, as the
only way in which man can define any-
thing is by a process of more or less
adequate comparison and illustration,
he has endeavoured to figure God, and
thus much of theology in all ages has
been but the projected shadow of
human thought. ;

1. Much of natural theology has been
constructed in this way. It assumes
that God is, and then undertakes to
show what God is like. Man is capable
of fashioning and combining existing
materials, aud directing them to the
accomplishment of new results. So he
thinks of a God like himself, a creator.
He is capable of directing his materials
to serve a definite and intelligent end.
So he ascribes skill and design to the
creator, and by his observation of the
adaptation of means to ends in the
world, that belief is confirmed. He is
a father or king ruling by laws which
he enforces by rewards and punishments.
So his maker is argued to be his governor,
who will bless his obedience and punish
his sin.

2. Much of both so-called orthodoxy
and heterodoxy has been constructed in
this way. Arianism arose out of the
transfer of human paternity to the divine
nature. Calvinism starts with a sove-
reignty of God built upon the idea of
remorseless human despotism. Many
other theories, particularly some prevalent
- in the present day, proceed upon the
assumption that God’s thoughts are as
our thoughts, and His ways as our ways.

3. The various heathen mythologies
have been built up in this way. Very few
are disposed to deny that the spiritual
unity of God was the primitive belief
of mankind. St. Paul shows the pro-
cess from this to the most debasing
forms of idolatry (Rom. i. 18-32), Sin
darkened man’s understanding and led
his reason astray. It is easy to see

VoL.


how the divine attributes might have
become dissociated, then made to repre-
sent independent divine forces, and
then separate divine persons. It is a'so
easy to see how these independent
persons could be symbolised by natural
powers and objects supposed to be most
like them ; and it is only a step further
to manufacture a permanent symbol;
and hence idol worship. Thus the pro-
gress of symbolism was first downwards
from God, then upwards to Him,
Nature worship was the earliest form
of idolatry, Then human. The gods of
nature were endowed with human
attributes and forms, and heroes and
ancestors were deified. The process
went on till not a natural object, beauti-
ful or monstrous, good or malign, and
not a single human quality, good or
bad, wise or ridiculous, but had ita
temple, peculiar, and in many cases con-
sistent, worship, and its symbolical form.
The difficulty became to distinguish
what was not divine. What an ex-
position of “Thou thoughtest I was
altogether such an one as thyself” !

4. “The fundamental position of
rationalism is, that man by his own ©
reason can attain to a right conception
of God.” ‘Fools, to dream that man
can escape from himself, that human
reason can draw aught but a human
portrait of God! They do but substi-
tute a marred and mutilated humanity
for one exalted and entire; they add
nothing to their conception of God as
He is, but only take away a part of
their conception of man.”—ZJ/ansel.

IIL That the Bible gives us a revela-
tion of all that may be known of God
in a manner suited to our faculties and
saving to our soul. ‘The infinite
cannot be grasped within our thoughits,
nor within any limits, for on all sides
it has no limits. To know God i Jlis
infinity is impossible, but to know
much respecting the God who is infinite
is quite another thing, and may be
grandly possible."—Dr. J. Young. The
Biblical representations of God are very
bold, but they are carefully guarded ;
and the difference between the sym-
bolism which is the result of human
speculation and that of divine revelation

209


POALM XEIU,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


a Se na ne ee ee


is, that the former degrades the Deity,
the latter guides the human mind to
transcend itself and lifts it up to the
idea of infinite perfection, We may
see notably in the mystery of the In-
carnation, “the light which was mani-
fested, that He the Eternal Son might
reveal to men the Father whom no man
hath seen or can see. . . . Parable after
parable led men from earthly relations
to those of the kingdom of heaven .

the sower, the householder, the bride-
groom, the father, the king. ... But
it was much more in Himself. ... It
was through His human nature as the
Son of Man that men were to approach
to a knowledge of the divine mind. .. .
We who believe that the Word was in
the beginning with God and was God,
became flesh and tabernacled amongst
us, ... can enter into the meaning of
the words, ‘ The only begotten Son which
is in the bosom of the Father He hath
declared Him,’ and listen with awe and
adoration to that which, if it were not
true, would have been a blasphemy to
make us shudder : ‘ Have I been so long
time with you, and yet hast thou not
known me, Philip? He that hath seen
Me hath seen the Father.’ ”—Plumptre.

IV. These considerations lead us to
the following conclusions.

1. That the question of our text must
remain unanswered. (od, like every
other great truth, is incapable of full
definition, whether by words or illustra-


tions. The most perfect painting con-
veys no adequate idea of the sun. The
most perfect model only faintly resem-
bles a flower. The ablest disquisition
leaves the mystery of life unsolved.

2. That God has given us similitudes
of what is best and holiest within the
grasp of man’s feeble intelligence, that
every one may be able to form some
conception of His character and will.
The hem of the garment was enough
for the poor woman in the gospels; so
our notions of power, wisdom, love, &c.,
are permitted faintly to illustrate the
infinite perfections of God.

3. That God has given us these tllus-
trations to lead us up to Himself. He
tells man what He is like, that man may
know by spiritual apprehension and in-
dwelling what He ts.

“One day Martin Luther was cate-
chising some peasants, ‘Say thy creed,’
he said. ‘I believe in God, the Father
Almighty.’ ‘What is it to be al-
mighty?’ asked Martin. ‘Indeed, I
cannot tell,’ and Luther, with rugged
beautiful honesty, said, ‘ Neither indeed,
friend, can I; and if I were to tell you
truly there is not a doctor in all Europe
who could tell you what it is to be
almighty; but if you will always re-
member that He is your Father Almighty,
high enough to rule you, wise enough to
teach you, strong enough to help you,
kind enough to love you, it will be well
and enough.’ ”—Coley.


THe Masesty aND CoNDESOENSION OF Gop.
(Verses 5, 6.)


The two extremes of God’s infinite
perfections are exhibited in our text:
“Who sits throned on high, who casts
looks so low.” He is infinite in majesty,
and demands our adoration; yet He is
infinite in condescension, thus making
our worship possible. The first attri-
bute alone would appal us by its awful
grandeur. The second alone would lead
us to presume.

I. The majesty of God.
throned on high.”

1. Above the realm of space. There is
nothing more sublime than the idea of in-

210


“ Who sits


finite space. Of this we can understand
little amid the contracted landscapes
of our own country. We must stand
where the mighty hills rear their cloud-
capped pinnacles to heaven, But what
is the grandest mountain range compared
with the world of which it is but an
excrescence! And what is the world
itself but a speck in the system to which
it belongs) And what is that system
in comparison with those eighty millions
of systems in the vast universe. And
“these are part of His ways; but how
small a portion is heard of Him.”


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


Draw the line where we will, the im-
measurable lies yet beyond, and above
that immeasurable God sits throned.

2. Above all duration. Equally with
the conception of space is that of time
sublime. We cannot fix the mind on a
continuous succession of periods with-
out a corresponding elevation. 1.)
Look at the history of our own nation,
We can trace it back till it is lost in
hoar antiquity. But compare it with
the history of the neighbouring con-
tinent. When Britain emerged from
obscurity, Rome after a long and splen-
did history was approaching its fall.
When Rome arose, the fortunes of As-
gyria were beginning to decline, and the
monuments of Egypt were worn by the
elemental battles of centuries; and before
that comes patriarchal history and the
years before the flood. Yet what is
all this compared with scientifically
recorded time? Millions upon millions
of years may have elapsed between the
creation of the first man and the begin-

*ning in which God created the heavens
and the earth. And beyond that, “ be-
fore the mountains were brought forth,
or ever Thou hadst formed the earth or
the worlds—from everlasting to ever-
lasting Thou art God.” (2.) But this ts
only half the conception. How much
there is of life remaining to us we
know not. But beyond the limits of
the longest life possible to us there is a





PRALM OX1E,


vast ocean of time measurable only by
the infinite mind; and beyond that is
boundless eternity. ‘ Time reaches not
to the steps of the eternal throne. No
law of succession narrows in His doings.
All things are ever beforeHim. He is the
Everlasting now—past, present, future ;
time and space, these creatures of His
hand, are not, in relation to His infinite
perfection.” —Bishop Wilberforce.

3. In the sense of exalted spirituality.

II. The condescension of God,
“ who casts looks so low.” God does
not dwell in solitary and indifferent
grandeur in the high and lofty place.
He is the Governor of the universe ; its
Father and its Friend.

}. God condescends to look on physical
laws and employs them.

2. God condescends to look upon man
and visits him. Adam, Enoch, Noah,
Abraham, David, the Jewish nation,
and at last through His Incarnate Son.

3. God condescends to look upon
human governments and employs them.
“* He doeth according to His will,” é&c,
‘By Him kings reign,” d&c.—


“ He sees with equal eye, as God of all,
A hero perish, or a sparrow fall ;
Atoms and systems into ruin hurled:
There a bubble burst, and here a world.”


Learn (i.) The danger of antagomtem
to God; (iL) The blessedness of the
Diwine condescension,


Human Exaurarion,
(Verses 7, 8.)


1. Verses 7-9 are almost word for
word from the song of Hannah. (Cf.
Bong of Mary, Luke i. 46-48.) 2.
Human exaltation is the result of the
Divine benignity. Had God never
noticed our lost race it had remained
for ever in misery and degradation.
But God’s notice was God’s redemp-
tion. The sentiment of our text may
be illustrated—

L In the various spheres of daily
life, the poor have been lifted out of the
dust, and have sat with princes.

1. In the scientific sphere,—Sir Wm.
Arkwright, the inventor of the spin-


ning jenny, was once a_ barber's
apprentice. Brindley, the engineer ;
Hugh Miller, the geologist; Johw
Hunter, the physician, were day
labourers, hos. Hdwards, the natur-
alist, was a shoemaker; Bewick, the
engraver, a coalminer; Herschell, a
bandsman; Jaraday, the son of a
poor blacksmith; Sir Isaac Newton,
the son of a farmer; Davy, a country
apothecary’s assistant, 2. In the
artistic sphere,—Turner, the painter,
was @ barber; Chantrey, a journey-
man carver; itty, ® journeyman
printer; Sir Thomas eee the
21


PGALM OXIIL.


son of a tavern-keeper; Inigo Jones,
John Gibson, Romney, and Opie were
labourers. 3. Jn the literary sphere,
—Shakespeare was the son of a
butcher; John Foster, a weaver ;
Ben Jonson and Allan Cunningham,
day labourers; Drew, a shoemaker ;
Adam Clarke, the son of a poor school-
master; Hlihu Burritt, a blacksmith ;
Dr, Lee, the great Hebrew scholar, a
carpenter, 4. In the judicial sphere,—
Lord Tenterden was once a barber's
boy; Talfourd, the son of a brewer;
Baron Pollock, son of a saddler ; Lord
Eldon, the son of a coal-fitter. 5. In
the army and navy,— Bonaparte rose
from the ranks ; Sir Cloudesley Shovel
was a shoemaker, and Warren Hast-
ings was an East India clerk. 6. In the
Church, Adrian IV. was a swine-
herd; Wolsey, the son of a butcher;
Thomas a Beckett, of obscure origin,
Bunyan a tinker; Whitfield, the son
of an innkeeper; Martyn, the son
of a miner; and Carey and Mor-
rison were shoemakers. 7. Jn the
field of discovery,—Cook was a day
labourer; afin, a man before the
mast; Livingstone, a weaver; and
Layard, a solicitor’s clerk. Many
more might be adduced in the politi-
cal, social, and commercial spheres, but
these are sufficient to show that God
blesses the diligent use of the powers
He has given. Would that they all
had been employed for Him.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; PSALMS,





IL In God’s method of Redomp:
tion. All men are by sin sunk in
moral degradation. They are lust to
self, lost to destiny, lost to God,
When God looks upon them He raises
them from their fall, and by the rege-
nerating power of His Spirit they be
come God’s heirs, joint-heirs with
Jesus. Christ, and are anointed kings
and priests unto God, and look for-
ward to a crown, @ sceptre, and a
throne.

III. In the history of the Chris-
tian Church. Its beginnings were of
the humblest possible character. Isa
Founder was the reputed son of a
carpenter ; its first officers peasants or
fishermen. For the first century, the
“wise and noble” were conspicuous
by their absence. Its beginnings every-
where are the same. It aims to seek
and to save the lost, and it is the
lost and degraded that it welcomes.
Its beginnings are humble, but its pro-
gress is ever mighty. Philosophers
and statesmen are proud to partake of
its privileges on a level with the pea-
sant and the slave, and kings receive
their crowns from its hands.

IV. In the resurrection of the
body. (1 Cor. xv.)

In concLusion.—(i.) All true greatness
ts the gift of God. (ii.) All true greatness
commences with the recognition of God.
(iii.) All greatness fails if tt does net
secure the consecration of God.


MorHerHoop: rrs Biesstnas AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
(Verse 9.)


There is no sweeter name to a child
than mother, and no sweeter name to a
mother than her child’s, The two great-
est curses of mankind are bad mothers
and thankless children. Our text sug-
gests—

I, That children are the subject of
fond and prayerful desire.

1. This desirableness is in certain
quarters denied. (1.) By a false political
economy. Children beyond a certain
number are said to be the fruitful cause
of misery and pauperism. So thought
the TaeeteN and till recently the waters

212


of the Ganges and the jaws of the alli.
gator were the all-sufficient check.’
So thought the Spartans, and the
“check” with them was wholesale in-
fanticide. Not more unnatural and not
less vile are the artificial checks of
modern civilisation (1), But that civili-
sation forgets that the miseries of the
world proceed not from large families,
but from the parental vices which it
permits and sanctions. (2.) By a false
sentiment. Children are said to be a
trouble and expense, and men blasphe-
mously treat the advent of children with


ATOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





humorous resignation, if not with posi-
tive chagrin, and feel that society re-
quires that demeanour. What makes
children a trouble and expense but the
indolence, hardheartedness, or extrava-
gance of parents #

2. This desirableness is recognised
by (1) The nature of things. “There
is nothing addressing itself to nature to
which the response is so quick, so uni-
versal, and so joyful as the coming of
the young into the world. . . . There is
almost nothing possessing a spark of
intelligence which has not this inward
preparation for rejoicing at the birth of
offspring. .. . It is a bright day, or
should be, in every household, in every
neighbourhood, when a child is born,
and a member added to suciety.”—H,
W. Beecher, (2) By the barren mother
(see 1 Sam. 1, 2). Vain are all well-
meant consolations, Tell her that they
are but “careful comforts,” that she
has her husband, and immunity from
family cares, and she will tell you that
she is willing to bear every anxiety, if
she can only be the joyful mother of
children. (3) By a just moral senti-
ment, and a sound political economy.
The object of existence can be but im-
perfectly attained without children. A
family is a great incentive to industry.
How many a wife has saved her husband
from drunkenness and crime by the
light and joy which children bring! (4)
By the word of God. Sarah, Rebecca,
Rachel, Hannah, Manoah’s wife, dec.
3. This desirableness ts ennobling.
Because it is (1) tn harmony with the
will of God (Gen. i, 28). (2) A desire
to live for another. (3) An evidence of
the paternity of God, and in conformity
with tt.

IL That children are a mother's
joy. This is now happily, thanks to
the Bible, passed into a proverb, and
children in all healthy circles are now
regarded as a necessary element in the
happiness of life. There is—

1, The joy of expectation.

2. The joy of new maternity (John
xvi. 21).


PRALY OXITL


a








3. The joy of giving birth to citizens
of the kingdom of heaven. They are
the Lord’s heritage under both testa
ments (Ps. exxvii. 3).

4, The joy of training.

5. The joy of a nature ennobled and
enlarged by maternity.

6. The joy of a HOME.

IIL That children are a mother’s
care. ‘‘He maketh a barren woman
to keep house.” He “not only builda
up the family, but thereby finds some-
thing for the heads to do.”—/. Henry.
That being the case—-

1. Value them. ‘Take heed that
ye despise not one of these little ones.”
Their value does not lie altogether in
their charms, d&c., but in the fact that
they are rational immortal beings, lent
that you may enable them to realise the
fact that they are “sons and daughters
of the Lord Almighty.”

2. Study them. Constant watchful-
ness, careful discrimination, It is not
& virtue, but a vice that you are not
guilty of to horses or dogs, to treat them
all alike.

3. Provide for them (1 Tim. v. 8)
(1) Sufficient maintenance, (2) A good
education. (3) A bright prospect.

4, Consecrate them to, and train them
up in the nurture and admonition of, the
Lord.

IV. That children are divine gifts,
“He maketh.” Thus are they uniformly
regarded in the Bible.

In concLusion.—“ God is on the side
of little children, and He is on the side
of parents who wish to bring up their
children right . . . and with some de-
gree of teaching, and some degree of
trust in God, you are adequate to lift
your children from the plane of animal-
ism, to the plane of social beings, and
from that again to the plane of moral
and spiritual beings; and when that is
accomplished, the next change is to drop
the animal altogether, and rise to the
realm above, and be as the angels of
God.”"—H. W. Beecher,


218


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMB.





PSALM OXIV.


INTRODUCTION.
Date end Authorship unknown ; ascribed to the three Hebrew childrum, Esther and Mordecai.


BonpDAGE AND DELIVERANCE,
(Verse 1.)


LL The bondage was degrading.
“Tsrael,” “Egypt.” The descendants
of the “ prince with God ” making bricks
for Pharaoh. So is the bondage of sin.
All men are princes, They have crown
rights by virtue of their divine parentage
and royal brotherhood. They should
oceupy thrones, All their faculties are
regal, Yet how are they employed? In
a bondage that is humiliating because of
(1) The master that is served ; (2) The
nature of the service, (3) The wretched-
ness of the remuneration.

IL The bondage was unnatural.
“ The house of Jacob.”

1. Once a free and independent tribe,
who previously to this had never been in
bondage to any man. So man was once
independent and free. No evil forces
were permitted to exercise dominion over
him, (1.) His reason was free. All God’s
vast domain was open to its scrutiny.
(2.) His will was free. No power was
permitted to tamper with it, and no pre-
destination fettered it. (3.) His affec-
tions were free. (4.) His soul was free.
All this shows that the bondage under
which he groans is not natural to man.

2. A family of a long, ancient and
honourable lineage. They were not a
people of yesterday, yet they were slaves.
Man is a member of a household which
dates its origin from before the founda-
tion of the world. The eternal God is
his father, and Christ his elder brother.
With an ancestry compared with which
the oldest dynasty on earth is but of yes-
terday, man is enslaved. Surely this is
the climax of unnaturalness. For the
heirs of the Mowbrays, the Bourbons, the
Guelphs, the Hohenzollerns, the Haps-
burgs, to be in bondage were enough to
strike the world dumb with astonishment,
Man is a child of God, and yet he is a
slave.

214


III. The bondage was exasperating.
“From a people of strange language.”
These are circumstances which mitigate
that “execrable sum of all human vil-
lanies ”—slavery. These obtained largely
among the Jews, Often the slave spoke
the same language, was protected by tha
same laws, and was of the same blood
as his master. Not so with the poor
Egyptian slave.

1. There was no community of feeling
and sentiment. Hence terrible oppression
and thankless service. Between man and
his oppressors there is nothing naturally
in common. Man knows it. Satan
knows it. Hence the terrible burden of
sin and woe, and the terrible insurrections
of reason and moral sense against the
tyranny.

2. There was no community of language
between the Egyptian and the Jew. Hence
misunderstanding and distress, Man
does not take altogether naturally to
the language of hell. Facility in the
understanding and use of that language
requires long practice, and that practice
never makes perfect. Hence constant
misunderstandings, Good is represented
by evil; evil by good. Ignorance ex-
changes places with knowledge, and
knowledge with ignorance. Pain is sub-
stituted for pleasure, and pleasure for
pain, And amidst these conflicting dia-
lects man is bewildered ; and it is of that
bewilderment that Satan takes advan-
tage.

3. There 4s no community of law.
There is a show of one. Liberal terms
are offered. Emoluments, honours, re-
wards, are promised. But there is nothing
to make Satan keep his own terms ; and,
after years of painful and nnremunera-
tive toil, the “wages of sin is death.”
All these circumstances combine to make
the sinners’ bondage most exasperating.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


FUALM GXIV.





IV. This bondage was followed by a
Divine Redemption.

1. That redemption was an histori-
eal fact, “ Whent” Israel looked back
upon it as such. So is the redemption
of the world by Christ. The Church
can be traced back to it without a
missing link. Institutions were con-
nected with it, date from it, and are
still commemorative of it. In the one
case, the Passover, &c., Scripture re-
ferences and doctrines. In the other,
all evangelical preaching commenced
with it and refers to it. One day in
the year is set apart for its contempla-
tion, and one rite most impressively sets
it forth.

2. That redemption was not an int-
guitous proceeding. “Went out.” They
were not driven out or stolen out, but
went out, through the divinely supported
claim of their national rights. Pharaoh
had no claim upon them. His service
was robbery. Contrast and analogy.

(1.) Contrast. Man is subject to the
rightful claims of law on his service,
Those claims have been deliberately dis-
regarded, and the law imposes a curse
and @ penalty. Man is redeemed from


the law by Christ bearing that curse
and suffering that penalty.

(2.) Analogy. Satan has no right to
man’s service. When that ceases Satan
suffers no wrong, When man is released
he is not stolen or driven, nor does he
flee. He marches forth in honourable
triumph, because Satan is overthrown
and the law satisfied.

(3.) That redemption was the begin-
ning of their national life. “When
Israel. . . . House of Jacob.” Before
they were merely a tribe; in Egypt
merely a caste; when redeemed, a na-
tion. By Christ’s redemption those who
were not a people became the people of
God and a holy nation. Before men were
disintegrated members of the human
race; afterwards brothers, friends, one
in life, one in feeling, one in aim. Let
political rulers, social agitators, and
moral philanthropists note this. The
redemption of Jesus Christ has suc-
ceeded in social purification and unity
where every other scheme has failed.

In conciusion.—(i.) If the Son has
made us free, we are free indeed. (ii.)
Stand fast in that liberiy, dea


Tre TEMPLE AND THE KINGDOM.
(Verse 2.)


God dwelis among His people in a
twofold character: as an object of wor-
ship, and as a monarch to rule. Hence
in the sanctuary He secures His people’s
reverence and love. On His throne and
over His dominion He secures their
obedience and homage. Both the sanc-
tuary and the throne are combined (1)
in the human heart; (2) the Christian
Church ; (3) the materzal universe.

I. The Temple. “Judah was His
sanctuary.” The name is singularly
appropriate. ‘ The praise of Jehovah.”
In the sanctuary—

1. God dwells, His presence makes
the temple what it is. “Nature” would
be no “temple ” if God were absent from
it. Christ in the midst makes the
Christian Church a temple; and the
indwelling of the Holy Ghost the human
heart.


2. God manifests Himself. In nature
(Rom.i. 20). In the Church by the means
of grace. In the soul (John xiv. 23).

3. God communicates His will. In
nature (Rom. i. 19} In the Church,
which is the depository of His written
word and the organ for its dissemina-
tion. In the heart (Heb. viii. 10, 11).

4, God must be adored. In nature.
“ All Thy works praise Thee.” In the
Church (1 Cor. xiv. 25). “Bless the
Lord, O my soul.”

IL The Kingdom. ‘Israel His do-
minion.” The term again is appro-
priate. God is not the despotic master
of a number of slaves, but King of
kings and Lord of lords. His people
are “ princes with God,” “a royal priest-
hood.” It is the acknowledgment of
His rule that ennobles nature, the
Church, and the individual soul.

215


PSALM 6XIV.








1. God reigns in His dominion. His
presence pervades infinite space, and
nature’s orderly movements betoken the
indwelling of nature’s King. The Church
in its spiritual powers, extension, work-
ing out of the divine plans, witnesses to
the all-pervading presence of her Lord.
The soul, in the provision that is made
for its wants, and its power to withstand
its foes, bears testimony to the presence
of its Master.

2. God reigns over His dominion.
The forces of nature emanated from Him,
and He guides them to the fulfilment of
their various destinies. The Church is
under His command. It is “Go ye
into all the world.” ‘ Ye are My friends,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,








if ye do whatsoever I command you.”
The soul is His, and is subject to His
authority.

3. God reigns for the good of His
subjects, In nature everything serves
benevolent ends. Philosophy and legis-
lation have not improved on the laws
Christ gave to His Church. Ouly by
keeping God’s laws can the benefit of
the soul be secured.

4. God reigns that His dominion may
be universally acknowledged. It is so
acknowledged in nature. It will be in
the moral world by His Church. Christ
“shall reign,” &c. God yearns for the
homage of each individual heart, and
says, “ Be ye reconciled to God.”


Toe REMOVAL OF OBSTACLES,
(Verses 3, 4.)


“The sea (the Red Sea) saw the
mighty movement—the marshalled hosts
—the moving masses—the cattle—the
pursuing enemies—the commotion—the
agitation on its usually quiet shores.
We are to conceive of the usual calm-


ness of the desert—the waste and lonely:


solitudes of the Red Sea; and then all
this suddenly broken in upon by vast
hosts of men, women, children, and
cattle, fleeing in consternation, followed
by the embattled strength of Egypt,—
all rolling on tumultuously to the shore,
No wonder the sea is represented as
astonished at this unusual spectacle, and
so fleeing in dismay.”— Barnes.
L Antagonisms are quelled.
sea saw it and fled.”
Chureh has advanced—
1. Sin and Satan have receded. Where
it has not been so the Church is to
blame. The promise depends on the
proper spirit and the use of proper
means, It is only when she loses her
spirituality, or fights with carnal wea-
pons, or depends upon the arm of flesh,
that she has failed. When clad in her
armour, she encountered the vices and
follies of Roman civilisation, she was
“fair as the moon, bright as the sun,
and terrible as an army with banners.”
2. Idolatry has receded. Christianity
simply annihilated the classical, Druidi-
316


“ The
Wherever the


cal, Saxon, Tartar, and Scandinavian
mythologies, the bloody rites of the
South Seas, and is now doing the same
for the debasing superstitions of Africa
and the foul abominations of Hindostan.
If not Christianity, what has? Not
civilisation: it boasts that religion is
out of its sphere, Not philosophy: in
its palmiest days it gave itself to its
exposition and was glad of its alliance,
Not legislation : it has been the aim of
human governments to protect it on
utilitarian and other grounds. Clearly
no other theory will account for it.

3. Infidelity has receded. For all
the ancient philosophies she proved an
overmatch. From her infancy she has
given birth to giant intellects, who
have saved the world from intellectual
anarchy. She has vanquished the infi-
delity of the Renaissance, the French
Revolution, the elder Deism, and Tom
Paine. Socialism and rationalism have
been weakened, and scientific material-
ism is met by an array of learning
and acuteness without a parallel, and it
will pass away.

IL Boundaries are removed.
dan was driven back.”

1. Christianity levels all class distino-
tions. To all castes, Jewish, Roman,
Indian, &c., it is a formidable foe. “In
Christ Jesus there is neither bond nor


“ Jor.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


PEALM OXTV





free,” &c. It reduces all mankind to
one common level of crying need, for
which but one provision has been
made,

2. Christianity obliterates all physical
barriers. It goes into all the world and
preaches the Gospel to every creature.
It was not made for home consumption,
but is the property of all nations

3. Christianity fills up all intellectual
chasms. No greater remove could pos-
sibly be than that between the old
philosopher and the common people,
Christianity appeals to both. Its truths
are the food of the scholar and the re-
freshment of the slave,


II. Difficulties are overcome. “The
mountains skipped,” de,
1. All difficulties of nature. Wher-


Wary Ossracirs
(Verses


L Because of the omnipotent pre-
sence of the Lord. “ Nothing is too
hard for the Lord” in the physical,
intellectual, or moral world. He is the
Author of nature, and can either suspend
her laws or give His people strength to
overcome them. He is the Lord of
mind. He can bring to naught the
understanding of the proud, or give His
servants wisdom to expose their sophis-
tries. He is the Lord of soul. He can
subdue its sinfulness, or enable His
ministers to bring that moral influence
and suasion to bear upon it which shall
turn it from darkness to light, &c. He
has done, does, and will do so (Is. xL,
liv. 14-16).

II. Because of the covenant presence
of the Lord. “The God of Jacob.”
He has pledged His gracious presence
with His people to lead them on to vic-
tory (Is. liv. 17 ; Rom. viii). It was by
virtue of the covenant made with Abra-
ham, Isaac, and Jacob, and renewed to
them, that Israel overcame their obstacles
and inherited the promised land. And
by virtue of a new and better covenant,
God is on the side of His Church and
against her numerous foes, and prepares
her rest in heaven when her work is done,


ever Christianity has appeared “ tha
valleys have been exalted,” dc, Crooked
ways have been made straight, No
mountain has been too high, no sea tce
broad, no continent too wide, for the
pioneers and missionaries of the faith.

2. All difficulties of human prejudice,
Armies have been levied to extirpate it,
Fires have been kindled to burn it,
Learning has been accumulated to refute
it, but in vain.

In conciusion.—This history is pro-
phecy. Fulfilled prophecy in some
instances, It holds good through the
ages. Let the Church in the strength of
it redouble her efforts, brighten her hope,
perfect her faith, and go om conquering
end to conquer.


ARE REMOVED,
5-7.)


ITI. Because of the merciful pre-
sence of the Lord. God rules in mercy
as well as in power. It was good for
Israel, good for the world then and
through all time, that the sea should
flee and Jordan should be driven back,
The Canaanites were a curse to God’s
earth. It was in mercy that they were
cut off. God established His people
in their place, that through them all the
nations of the earth might be blessed,
This end has been answered, for of them,
“as concerning the flesh, Christ came.”
The same applies to the Church.

IV. Because of the righteous pre-
sence of the Lord. ‘Tremble, thou
earth,” &c. Since God rules in right-
eousness He holds the power of retribu-
tion. The measure of the iniquities of
the enemies of His people became full
before the judgment fell. Righteousness
still characterises God’s rule. And be-
cause of that nations fall and are swept
away when they disrespect His covenant
and disobey His law.

ToconcLupz.—The Lord Omnipotent,
covensnt, merciful, and just, is with His
Church. Let the Church be encouraged,
humbled, energised, brave,


ali


PSALM @KIV,





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; PSALMS,


Drivin Provisiows,
(Verses 7, 8.)


Verse 7 is the point of connection
between verses 3-6 and verse 8. God’s
presence enabled His people to overcome
their difficulties, and guaranteed a per-
manent provision for their need, God
employs the Church to accomplish His
magnificent designs, and His presence in
its midst assures it constant blessing.
Divine provisions are—

I. The result of the divine presence.
God in His works is the source of their
continual stability and strength. The
fountain of their life and fruitfulness is
there, and by His supports they flourish.
God in His word is the source of its
continual inspiration and suggestiveness,
and because He is there, there is ever
more “light to break forth from” it.
God in His Church is the guarantee
that the means of grace shall be efficient,
and in consequence of this she grows in
strength as she grows in grace. So in
the soul.

II. Contemplate real need. God
does not promise the luxuries or super-
fluities, but the necessaries of life ; not
confections or things merely grateful to
the palate, but things necessary for
refreshment, strength, and life, God
does not undertake to pamper His
people with worldly grandeur and mere
material success ; but He does promise
that all things necessary for life and god-
liness shall be secured. Men can dispense
with wine, but they cannot dispense
with water. And so the Church can
dispense with State alliances and popular
applause, but cannot dispense with the
water of life.

III. Come in unexpected forms.
Even the faith of Moses would hardly
have looked to the hard granite of Horeb,
or the basalt of the desert, for refreshing
streams. Yet at the command of God
the rock was turned into standing water.
And so invariably with the operations
of providence and grace. Israel was led
out of Egypt and to the promised land
under the guidance of a shepherd. By
a shepherd she was consolidated into a

218


permanent kingdom, The prophets and
apostles, as a rule, were drawn from the
lowest. stratum, and the foolishness of
preaching has silenced the rhetoric of
the schools, The good things of the
world’s redemption came outof Nazareth,
and the power that has moved the world
emanated from a malefactor’s cross,
Gain has come out of loss, life out of
death, prosperity out of suffering “at
the presence of the Lord.”

IV. Flow with abounding fulness
—a fountain of waters.” Wealth and
prodigality characterise the divine gifts.
Men minimise and contract them, but
not God. The air, light, showers, sun,
the magnificence of the heavens, the
beauty of the landscape, and the grandeur
of the mountains and the sea, all witness
to the bounty which is at the disposal
of needy man. But “these things are
an allegory” of “the riches of His
grace.” ‘Ask whatsoever ye will;”
‘“My God shall supply all your need ;”
&c. “God is able to do exceeding
abundantly,” &e. God “multiplies to
pardon,” gives “ plenteous redemption,”
and finally vouchsafes “an abundant en-
trance into His everlasting kingdom.”

V. Are constantly permanent
“Fountain.” “Standing water.” As
God changes not, His bountiful provi-
sions do not change. Man’s need is abid-
ing, 80 is God’s gift. Man always needs
water—at all times His water is sure.
The Church needs a perpetual applica-
tion of the benefits of Christ’s death.
His “eternal redemption” supplies the
eternal need. The Spirit abides ever
in the soul to confirm its faith, soothe
its sorrow, and brighten its hope.

Finatiy.—It is to this and other
passages (Exod. xvii. 6, 7; Num. xxviii.
11) that the Apostle (1 Cor. x. 4) draws
his spiritual inferences respecting the
support and refreshment Christ gives to
His people. In the wilderness Israel
(i) Were supplied without money and
without price. So Christ offers the
water of life freely. (ii.) Were indsbted


HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY : PSALMS,





to the cleaving of the rock at the word of
Moses. So Christ, the Rock of ages,


was cleft for us, and from His riven side
flowed those streams which are for the


PGALM OXV,





cleansing and refreshment of the world.
(iii.) Now, as then, the blessings are per-
manent, to stimulate our courage aad
confirm our faith,


PSALM OXY,


INTRODUCTION.


1, Date and authorship uncertain.


quotation of Isaiah,


The iterations (verses 9-13) suggest Temple service,


Has been ascribed to the immediate exilée
psalmists, and to the poets of the time of the Maccabees, ee


Allusion to or
3. Ewald conjectures


2. Characteristics.


that the Psalm was sung while the sacrifice was offered, and that verses 12-15 were spoken by
the priest declaring the acceptance of it ; verses 1-11 and 16-18 sung by the congregation.


Taz SoLtz Giory or Gop, anp THE ABNEGATION or Max.
(Verse 1.)


The Bible everywhere gives bold pro-
minence to the glory of God. That
glory is said to be the end of all the
divine works and ways. ‘‘ Ths heavens
declare the glory of God.” ‘“‘ The whole
earth is filled with His glory.” Says the
Old Testament Psalmist : “ Give unto the
Lord, ye kindreds of the people, give unto
the Lord glory and strength ; give unto
the Lord the glory due unto His name.”
Says the New Testament Apostle : “Now
unto God and our Father be glory for
ever and ever.” Notice—

I. That God’s glory consists in His
own supreme and solitary perfection.
“Thy name.” OW denoting internal
essence, authority, rank, and dignity.
When Moses inquired, ‘“‘ What is Thy
name?” the reply was, “I am THaT I
4M.” The divine glory consists in God
being Himself. There is no glory in
imitation, The glory of man consists in
his being a man. When he becomes a
child or a beast he loses his glory. So
God’s glory consists in His being what
He is and nothing else; perfect and in-
capable of improvement in dignity, by
time or through the homage of His crea-
tures.

IL That God’s glory is expressed
in the mercy and truthfulness of His
works and ways. These two expressions
sum up the divine perfections, and illus-
trate two sides of the divine character.
Their harmony in action—forgiving, yet


not so as to violate the law of righteous-
ness ; truthful, yet not so as to deprive
the guilty of hope—is God’s glory, re-
vealed to and manifested towards His
creatures, This receives ita full ex-
pression only in Christ, who is the
‘‘brightness of His glory,” &c., in His
ministry and death.

III. That God’s glory should be ap-
prehended and acknowledged by man.
It must be apprehended before it can be
acknowledged. No man can glorify God
till he has some sense of His perfections
as revealed in Jesus Christ. He must
see the King in His beauty before he can
admire Him. He must feel, in penitence
and faith, that God is “ just and the Jus-
tifier,” “a just God and a Saviour,”
before he can adore Him. Then the
honour due unto God’s name will be a
thankful and spontaneous tribute, and
herein will God “be glorified that we
bear much fruit.”

IV. That God’s glory is not the
object of God’s solicitude, but man’s.

1. God has no need to seck His own
glory. That comes in the nature of
things, Even evil in some mysterious
way subserves this end. 2. When God
is spoken of as doing this or that for His
name’s sake and for His glory, it means
that He ts not indifferent to what we think
of Him, and that it is only by our right
thoughts and actions towards Him that
our well-being can be secured. 3. When

319


FaaALM CX.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; PSALMS.


le et


man is solicitous to promote (Fod’s glory,
God’s object is secured. 4. Mwn’s blessed-
ness. ‘ The glory which thou gavest Me
Ihave given them,” dc. (Rev. vii. 9-12.)

V. That God’s glory removes all
ground of boasting on the part of man.
“Not unto us.” Boasting is here for
ever excluded, . . . All the good we do


is done by the power of His grace, and
all the good we have is the gift of His
mercy, and therefore He must have ak
the praise. . . . All our songs must be
sung to this humble tune... . All our
crowns must be cast at the feet of Him
that sitteth on the throne.” —M. Henry.


A Gopuizss Ixqurry axp A GopLy Response.
(Verses 2, 3.)


This is an everyday question, asked by
various people and on various grounds,
and should be met every day with its all-
sufficient answer. While a Christian man
should not court controversy for its cwn
sake, he should be ready to give an
answer for the hope that is in him.

I. The question, “Where is now their
God?”

l. Why is tt asked? (1.) Because of
the spirituality of God. God is invisible,
and beyond the reach of man’s physical
sense, (2.) Because of the fancied tnde-
pendence and power of man. Pharaoh in
his vain pride asked a similar question,
So did Sennacherib, Surrounded by
marshalled hosts, or protected by mate-
rial forces, man sees no need of God ;
hence this question. (3.) Because of the
disinclination of depraved humanity to
serve God (Job, xxi. 14,15). Man is a
sinner, and feels if there be a God that
God must have vengeance ou his crimes,
and that that God has strong claims upon
his gratitude and service. (4.) Because
of the folly of the human heart. If the
evidences written on the heavens above
and in the earth beneath are not enough,
the question of our text must be regarded
as the outcome of mental incapacity or
moral obliquity, (5.) Becanse of the
apparent inequalities of Goa’s provi-
dential rule, (See Asaph’s mournful wail,
Ps. 1xxiii.)

2. By whom ts st asked? By (1)
The Atheist who,as the Antetheist, dogma-
tically denies the divine existence; or, as
the Agnostic and Posttivist, maintains that
God is unknown and unknowable. (2)
The Pantherst, who denies tiie divine per-
zonality, and if God be impersonal He
must be unintelligent and uneonscions,

420


and therefore virtually non-existent. (3)
The Deist, who would acknowledge the
existence of God as an hypothesis to ac-
count for the universe, but would deny
his power to interfere with His works or
the laws by which they are controlled,
As Sir I. Newton remarked: “ A God
without dominion, providence, and final
causes, is nothing but fate and nature,”
(4) Unitarian; for the only God we
know of is He whom Christ reveals. (5)
By the Jdolater. All these sections of
modern heathenism are asking the ques-
tion to-day.

Ix To this question there is an all-
sufficient answer (ver. 3). The answer
to the taunt of the heathen, who, seeing
no image of Jehovah, mocked at His ex-
istence, is “ (1) He is in heaven, invisible
indeed, yet thence ruling the universe;
(2) He docth what He will, in fine con-
trast to the utter impotence of the idols of
the heathen. (3) God’s almighty power
and absolute freedom. This, truthfully
accepted, does away with all @ priori
objections to miracles,”— Perowne,

1. God exists ; as against the non-ex-
istence of idols, The world is full of
thought and beauty and design which
bespeak an intelligent mind and a
powerful will The universe is without
a rational explanation on any other
theory ; and the human heart and mind
are vacant without the thought of God,

2. God exists in the heavens, That
accounts for His spiritual invisibility,
God’s being is too great to be within
the comprehension of our poor faculties,
and too holy to be perfectly manifested
to our sinfulness. It is irrational


to question the unseen because it is
mnseen


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


$. God does according to His pleasure,
not according to MAN’s. This accounts
for (1) the fact that men question His
existence. He permits it that He may
ultimately show its vanity, and confirm
His people’s faith. “A grand old Me-
thodist preacher, called John Nelson, was
obliged to become a soldier, and as he
was arrayed, a mocking, bad woman
came to him and said, ‘ Nelson, where is
now thy God? Thou didst say at Shent’s
door that thou hadst no more fear of all
His promises failing than thou hadst of
falling through the centre of the earth.
Where is now thy God?’ Nelson, in





whom the Word of God dwelt richly, said,


_* You will find the answer in Micah vii.


8-10: ‘“Rejoice,”’ &c. I havesome reason
to believe that the answer was literally
fulfilled."—Dr. J. Parker. (2) For the
apparent inequalities of His providential
government. God bears with tyrants,
hoping that their repentance may avert
His vengeance (Luke xvii. 1, &c). God
permits the suffering of His people as
the chastisement for their sin, the trial
of their faith, or because His just de-
signs for the whole of mankind could
not be otherwise fulfilled.


“TIpors aND THE Livine axp Truz Goa.”
(Verses 3-7.)


The Psalmist having replied to objec-
tors now carries the war into the heart
of their camp. Nothing can exceed the
contempt which the old Hebrew prophets
poured on the various systems of idolatry.
(Deut. iv. 28 ; 1 Kings xviii. 27-29 ; Isa,
xxxvii. 19, xl. 19-24, xliv. 9 20; Jer.
x. 3-5, &c.) The irony of Juvenal is very
fine : “ Dost thou hear, O Jupiter, these
things? Nor move thy lips when thou
oughtest to speak out, whether thou art
of marble or of bronze? Or why do we
put the sacred incense on thy altar from
the opened paper, and the extracted liver
of a calf, and the white caul of a hog?
As far as I can discern there is no dif-
ference between thy statue and that of
Bathyllus.” Bathyllus was a fiddler.

I. Idols vary in every age and among
various nations. God remains the same.
The inhabitants of the old Pantheon
grew in number with the years, First
the elements, then deceased heroes, then
good things, then evil things, and finally
everything. Idolatry still lives on
Men worship themselves, their friends,
wealth, pleasure, power, &c. But all
fluctuate and die. Only God lives on.

II. Idols are numerous and con-
flicting; God is one and in harmony
with Himself. Olympus was a house
divided against itself, The great Jove
was supreme only in name. The sug-
gestions of the patrons of all the virtues


were met by the counter suggestions of
the patrons ofall the vices. The decrees
of the goddess of wisdom were neutra-
lised by the passions of the god of war;
and so with the idols of modern England.
The living and true God, on the other
hand, is one, and eternally self-consistent.

IIL Idols are the work of men’s
hands; God is eternal and uncreated.
The same power which could make an
idol can unmake it. An image can be
worshipped one moment, used as a foot-
stool the next, and destroyed the next.
The living and true God is untouched
by His creatures, and from everlasting
to everlasting is God.

IV. Idols at best can occupy only
“temples made with hands.” ‘ God ig
in the heavens.” Men may erect their
splendid temples and fashion their golden
shrines. They may adorn them with the
magnificent conceptions of human gen-
ius, with breathing canvas and speaking
marble, and celebrate their worship with
grand and costly ritual. But all is of
the earth, earthy, The living God from
His high and holy place looks down with
pity and contempt on all,

V. Idols are senseless (5-7) ; but God
is keenly sensitive of the wants ot
His creatures, and kindly attentive to
their prayers.

“ Little children, keep yourselves from
idola”

221,


ASOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


Toe Moran Consequences or IpoLaTRY.
(Verse 8.)


Men read into nature their own im-
perfect views of the supernatural, and
thus their pods were like themselves ;
with the same bodies, parts, and passions.
The gods again found their reflection in
the hearts of their devotees, Both gra-
dually grew worse and worse, till no
passion was too vile for a god to feel, and
no vice too bestial to be in some measure
sanctified (Rom. 1), And now a man’s
character is formed by the god he wor-
ships. ‘‘Those that make them, and
trust in them, are like unto them: ”—

1, In mental incapacity. It would
be hard to conceive the utter blindness of
the idolater to the utter blindness of his
god 1f it were not too sadly true. Wealth,
personal appearance, pleasure, é&c., are
worshipped, in spite of the universal fact
that they can of themselves do nothing
for man ; and yet man continues his mad
and stupid idolatry. This worship blinds
man to the inevitable result. He goes
on till some rude shock wakens his mind
into activity, and sometimes that shock
comes too late.

II. In moralinsensibility. The miser
is as hard against moral impressions as
his gold. The Midas fable is only too
true. The self-worshipper is hardened
in his conceit. The power-worshipper
is encased in an ambition which few
things can pierce. This insensibility is
not of sudden, but gradual growth. The
miser may have been tender at one time,
but by degrees his love of gold has de-
stroyed it all. Beware lest any of you
be hardened by the deceitfulness of sin.

II. In deep degradation. All myth-
ologies have deities which are the proper
object of execration rather than worship.
In the elegant (1) classical mythology the


father of the gods was a buffoon and a
sensualist, his father devoured his off-
spring ; the god of valour was an example
of domestic treason ; and the patron of
commerce was the special favourite of
thieves, The Egyptian and Oriental
gods are even worse, Their worship is
consistent with their character, and
makes their votaries like themselves.
What degradation does the worship of
Isis, Bacchus, Venus, Vishnu, Baal, and
Astarte, d&c., reveal. And so with the
idols of a mis-called Christian civilisa-
tion. Gold and pleasure are hardly less
animalising.

IV. In malign harmfulness. Idols
can of course do nothing of themselves,
But the influence of their supposed ex-
ample can have but one effect. What
the effect is heathenism in all ages
abundantly shows, Bloody, impure, and
implacable deities have produced mem
who rivalled them in debauchery and
crime. And the influence of the lust of
power, pleasure, or gain, is to wither
the affections, blight the intellect, and
blast the soul.

V. In spiritual death. Idols having
no life cannot nourish or sustain it. The
soul goes to them in vain for pardon and
purity. The mind finds no base for its
operation, no satisfaction for its craving ;
the life no authoritative rule, no guide
in perplexity, no encouragement in duty.
Everything upon which this Upas casts
its shadow, dies. Learn—

(i.) The danger of idolatry. In itself
and in the condemnation that rests upon
it. “Ephraim is joined to his idols,
LET HIM ALONE.”  (ii.) The missionary
duty of the Churches towards heathenism
abroad and at home,


Trust m Gop.
(Verses 9-11.)


L The nature of trust. M2 is
used in two senses, (1.) To hang upon
something, to rely, to trust. (2.) To


live secure, careless, and
222


1. The believer depends fully om th
help and protection which God affords,
and avails himself of them at all times
and everywhere, He feels that there is


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : PSALMS,


PSALM OXV.





no other security or strength but in the
power and goodness of God,

2. Consequently he abandons all other
refuges, and fearlessly casts himself on
God’s care, and lives calmly in the midst
of all his foes.

IL The grounds of trust.
their help and their shield.”

1. The divine help is omnipotent, and
therefore sufficient ; wisely made, and
therefore to be depended upon; ever
present, and therefore available; willingly
vouchsafed, and therefore fearlessly ac-
cepted. This help is offered when wanted,
and therefore never superfluously ; in sin,
to pardon it; in perplexity, to remove
it ; in physical distress, to alleviate it ;
in trials, to safely conduct us through.

2. The divine protection. This was
specially God’s covenant character (Gen.
xv. 1, Deut. xxxiii, 29). (1.) The be-
liever wants provision for his safety in
his warfare, and not simply help. The
mightiest warrior is at the mercy of his
weakest foe without a shield. So while
the Christian wields the “ sword of the
Spirit,” he wears other accoutrements,
and “over all” the “shield of faith.”
(2.) The believer needs protection in
time of exhaustion. The strength of the
stoutest warrior must give way in time,
and woe to him if the fortified camp or


“He is





citadel is not within reach. So, for the
exhausted believer, “the name of the
Lord is a strong tower, the righteous
runneth into it and is safe.”

III. Those who trust. “Israel.”
“House of Aaron.” “ Ye that fear the
Lord.”

1. The whole body of God’s people.
Because (1) they are warranted in their
trust. (2) J¢ is their duty to trust. (3)
Their trust 1s necessary to their safety.

2. God’s ministers. In whatever
sphere, let those who are working for
God (1) Trust in the help of God, in the
study and proclamation of His word ; in
their contest with infidelity ; in their
conflict with sin, (2) Trust in the protec-
tion of God against temptations, spiritual
monotony, indolence, doubt, and fear.

IV. The consequences of trust.

1. The believer is confident.
knows whom he has believed,” &e.

2. The believer 1g TRUSTY. He is faith-
ful; full of faith. Fulness of faith means
full reliance on God, which guarantees
fulness of sufficiency, hence fidelity.

In concLusion.—(i.) A warrant,
“The Lord God is a sun and shield.”
(ii.) A command. “ Trust ye in the Lord
forever,” de. (iii.) A promise. ‘‘ Be
thou faithful unto death,” &, (iv.) A
prayer. ‘Lord, increase our faith.”


66 He


Gop Miyprvut oF Max,
(Verse 12.)


This is a continuation of the con-
troversy between the believer and the
idolater. In answer to the question,
‘Where is now your God?” the Psalmist
replies, “In heaven, where yours is not.
Your gods are silver and gold, articles of
human manufacture, devoid of both sym-
pathy and sense ; but our God has been
mindful of us, and will bless us.”

This is one of the many proofs that the
Hebrew faith was not an abstract mono-
theism, and that the Incarnation was its
logical development, Jehovah was not
some grand inaccessible power. He was
their Father, brought into familiar con-
tact with them, careful of their wants,
and joyful when they were glad. This
doctrine is followed by the revelation of


Him who is the great expression of the
mindfulness of God.

L Why is God mindful of man?
Scepticism scoffs at the idea as it did of
old. Religious men sometimes wonder
at it. The vastness of the universe, the
enormity of man’s guilt, the apparent in-
significance of his age, size, actions, ever
suggest the question, “‘ What is man, that


Thou art mindful of him,” &c. God is
mindful of man—
1. Because He is God. (1.) He ts the


Father of man, and naturally solicitous

of the interests of His children. (2.) He

ts the ruler of men, and it therefore be-

hoves Him to protect and regulate His

subjects. (3.) Lets the creator of man,

and it is but natural that He es care
23


PSALM OXV,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





for that which He was at the trouble to
make.

2. Because of man’s dignity. When
He created him He pronounced him to
be very good. Alas! it is not so now.
Nevertheless, compared with the rest of
the universe, he is still “crowned with
glory and honour.” “ There is but one
object greater than the soul, and that one
is its Creator.”—Augustine, “ Man is
a feeble reed trembling in the midst of
creation, . . . It does not need the uni-
verse to arm for his destruction. A
breath of wind, a drop of water, would
suffice to kill him. But, though the
universe were to fall on man and crush
him, he would be greater in his death
than the universe in its victory ; for he
would be conscious of his defeat, and it
would not be conscious of its triumph.”
—Pascal,

3. Because of man’s sinfulness. Sin is
the disturbance of the moral order of the
universe. The moral governor cannot be
indifferent to this disturbance, and must
as such endeavour to restore harmony.

4. Because of man’s needs. Man comes
into existence and continues a creature
with wants which Omnipotence only can
satisfy,

TI. When and how is God mindful of
man ?


1. Zn need. This indeed covers the
whole of his life. From the moment of
his birth to that of his death. God pro
vides for helpless infancy by natural love
and paternal strength ; for nakedness by
the skins of animals, and the flax and
cotton of the field; and for his food,
drink, habitation, sickness, d&c., all crea-
tion seems to have reference.

2. In sin. He has come so near to him
as tobe born of awoman. He has given
His Son to be a sacrifice for his guilt ;
His Spirit to regenerate his heart ; and ©
His means of grace to support and
strengthen the new spiritual life, so that
he may resist sin and triumph over it.

3. In His moral capacity. Man cries
out for the living God. God has given
a revelation of Himself in His Werd.
Man needs laws, hopes, guidances, and
God’s Word is revealed as a lamp unto
his feet and a light unto his path.

4. In trouble. God has given him
the Comforter and the consolations and
promises of His Word.

5. For ever. “O Lord, Thou hast been
our dwelling-place,” &c. ‘This God is
our God for ever and for ever,” &c.,

III. For what purpose is God mindful
of man? That man may be mindful of
Him. “TI have created thee for Myseif.”


Divine BEeneEpIcrTIons.


(Verses 12-14.)


The Psalmist, drawing upon past ex-
perience, looks forward into the future
and sees it lum‘nous with the presence
and blessing of God. So may the be-
liever, God has been mindful of him;
he may expect that God will bless
him

I, The subjects of the blessing.

1. Hts covenant people as a whole,


That is God’s part of the covenant, The


Church undertakes to fulfil the divine
commands, and God undertakes to crown
that fulfilment with success and bene-
diction.

2. His chosen ministers, Those whom
He has called to arduous duty.

3. The great among His people. Those
distinguished by extraordinary talent

924 +


may expect that blessing without which
all their talents are vain,

4. The small among Lis people.
weak. The lambs of the flock.

_ IL The characteristics of the bless-
ing.

I. Jt ts a blessing. The pure, spon-
taneous gift of God, which can neither
be merited, purchased, nor earned.

It 18 a suitable blessing. Given with
exact references to need. His ministers
may expect blessings which will helpthem
in their work ; enlarged views of truth,


The


. deep insight into the Word, power and


success in its proclamation, strength in
weariness, comfort in depression, and
the crown of righteousness at the close,


His people may expect spiritual enrich-


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS,
Soe a Ai a Be





ment and establishment ; power to re-
sist sin, subdue it, and triumph over it
The great among His people may expect
special consecration for special talents,
and special help in putting them to ac-
cgant. The small among His flock may
expect help in their weakness ; and as
for the lambs, did He not “ take them up
in His arms, and bless them”? He does
ao still.

3. It ts an increasing blessing. (1.)
It increases those and theirs upon whom
it falls, It enlarges every capacity, and
widens every sphere of influence and
usefulness, (2.) It increases in propor-
tion to the enlargement of their capacity.


PSALM Oxy,


It is grace upon grace, blessing upon
blessing, until the whole nature is filled
with the fulness of God.

4, It #s a mersonal blessing. “ He
will bless,” All mediatory benedictions,
except in His name and declaratory of
His promise, are an impertinence, The
blessings fall direct from God’s hands,

5. It is an hereditary blessing. “ Your
children.”

IIL The conditions of tke blessing.
“Tifem that fear Him.” The God-fear-
ing man is the God-blessed man, and as
long as he fears God, and no longer, is
he warranted in expecting the divine
blessing.


THe CREATOR, THE CREATION, AND THE CREATURE,
(Verse 15.)


A leading tenet of Jewish belief was
the creatorship of God. This, too, is
@ foundation article of the Christian
creed. All the blessings that man has
enjoyed under all the dispensations may
be traced to this,

I. The Creator. ‘“ The Lord.”

1. The Creator ts One. The dualis-
tic theory is here answered by anticipa-
tion. “God saw everything that He
had made, and behold it was very good.”
The evil that is in the world has been
introduced by the creature, and not ky
an equal or subordinate deity.

2. The Creator ts yet the Divine
Trinity. ‘Lord, Thou art God which
hast made heaven and earth, the sea,
and all that therein is” ‘One Lord
Jesus Christ, by whom are all things.”
“The Spirit of God moved on the face
of the waters.”

It. The creation.
heaven and earth.”

1. Everything, Himself only excepted
(1 Cor. xv. 27; Col.i. 16; Heb. iit 4;
Exod. xxxi. 17, d&c.). “‘ Whatsoever
hath any being is either made or not
made ; whatsoever is not made is God;
whatsoever is not God is made. One
independent, uncreated essence, all
others depending on, and created by
it ; one of eternal and necessary exist-
ence ; all others indifferent either to be
or not to be, and that indifferency de-


voL i


“Which maade


termined by the free and voluntary act
of the first cause.”—-Pearson.

2. “ The action by which the heaven and
the earth were made was the production
of their total being, so that whatsoever
entity they had when made, had no real
existence before they were so made, a
manner of production we usually term
Creation, as excluding all concurrence of
any material cause, and all dependence
on any kind of subject, as presupposing
no privation, as including no motion, as
signifying a production out of nothing.”
—Pearson. (Rom. iv. 17; Heb. xi. 3.)

3. The manner of creation. (1.) Abso-
lute (Gen. i. 1). (2.) The adaptation of
existing materials to special ends (Gen.
i 11, 12; ii. 7).

III. The Creator’s benediction on
the creature. ‘ Ye are blessed of the
Lord.” God’s end in creation was the
enjoyment of the creature. ‘The earth
hath He made for the children of men.”
There is no natural gift from which
man is debarred, and none but will in
some way promote his wellbeing, It is
nature’s gifts polluted and perverted
that are the cause of misery. ‘To the
Christly man nature becomes a wonder-
ful organ, and the opening of every stop
can yield some tone of joy. The beauty
of the wild flowers, the stars — ‘the
forget-me-nots of the angels,’ the loveli-
ness of the butterfly’s wing, the glory of

225


PRALM CKV.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


nen nscetn ce a es eae


the forest foliage, the music of the bee
as it hums, of the birds as they warble,
of the wind as it sings among the trees
and hills, or of the sea, in ‘the everlast-
ing thunder of the long Atlantic swell,’
will make him feel that all that beauty,
all that music, is the gift and revelation


of ‘God the Father Almighty, maker of

heaven and earth;’ and, overborne by

emotions utterly unknown to others, he

will—

“ Lift to heaven an unpresumptuous eye,
And, joyful, say, My Father made them all,”


Toe Divine Dweimnc-PLAce.
(Verse 16, clause 1.)


Norr.—" The heavens (are) heavens
(i.e, a dwelling-place) for the Lord”
(Acts xvii. 24).

I. The divine dwelling-place is ex-
alted. The exact locality of heaven the
Bible has nowhere chosen to reveal.
The expressions “high,” “lifted up,”
&c., are probably to be interpreted
morally. God dwells at an infinite re-
move from the constant mutations and
moral imperfections of the children of
men.

IL The divine dwelling-place is hely.


It is emphatically the “holy place.”
Nothing that is defiled can enter there,
Those who enter there have either never
sinned, or have been purged from sin,
and share the holiness of Deity.

III. The divine dwelling-place is to
be the dwelling-place of man.

1. Now spiritually. “Set your affee-
tions on things above,” &e.

2. Hereafter perfectly. “In My Fa-
ther’s house are many mansions,” &c,
“Father, I will that them which Thou
hast given Me be where I am,” &c.


Tur Earta: Gop’s Girt, aNp Man’s INHERITANCE,
(Verse 16, clause 2.)


The earth is man’s inheritance. No
one disputes this. But how and why he
came by it has been fiercely contested.
He did not have it always, and science
seems to prophesy a time when it will
be no longer his. Why is earth his
more than the heavens? And how?
Most property has been either purchased
or won by conflict. But how did it
become theirs who had neither money,
strength, nor arms? The Bible affords
the only solution. God made man out
of the dust of the earth, and therefore
earth, and not heaven, became his sphere.
God then gave him that with which he
had so much in common, and told him
to replenish and subdue it.

L The earth, then, is God’s gift to
man.

1. It ts an equitable gift. Belonging
to God by the right of creation, God
could do as He chose with His own. In
doing this the right of no other creature
was invaded. No other creature had
the capacity for this possession, Birds

226


and beasts can enjoy the harvests, but
they cannot till the soil or sow the seed,
Upon man’s possession of it, therefore,
largely depends the good of the inferior
creation.

2. It is @ magnificent gift. Com-
pared with the largest planet and the
universe, the earth may be very small.
But with his faculties, it is all that he
can enjoy, and God has given him that
all, If he cannot enjoy the fruits of
other worlds, yet this earth is a platform
upon which he can enjoy the warmth
and splendour of the sun, the light of
the stars, and the influence of the moon,
and his mind can be uplifted and en-
larged by all that astronomy reveals.
But in and of itself it is a magnificent
gift. It affords science for his mind,
beauty for his taste, trade for his prac-
tical instincts, material produce for his
material wants ; yes, and if he has eyes
to see it, religion for his heart.

3. It is a prepared gift. “They
were necessary those enormous stretches


HOMILETIC OOMMENTARY: PSALMS.





of time, during which matter was con-
solidating into worlds; those vast geo-
logic periods of fire and flood, of
volcanic fury, of awful convulsion, of
slow subsidence, of slow upheaval ;
those dark mysterious epochs of conflict
between the inferior types of life ;—in
order that at last I might have a clear
heaven above my head, a firm earth
beneath my feet; that I might have an
atmosphere to breathe; that I might
have rivers to fish, and fields to plough ;
that I might have wood and iron for
use, and flowers and precious stones for
beauty.".—t. W. Dale.

4. Ittsan universal gift. “To the
children of men.” Not to the children
of the noble, &c. Nowhere more than
in this sphere has man been robbed of
his natural rights. Sometimes he has
robbed himself, and by a succession of
degenerate descendants the wide acres
which thrift has gained, have been drunk,
gambled, or idled away. Sometimes
others have plundered him, or outwitted
him. But all the inequalities intro-
duced by sin will be re-adjusted in that
new earth wherein dwelleth righteous-
ness.

II. The earth is God’s gift to man
for certain definite uses. Man is not
the’absolute owner of the earth. True,
within certain limits, he may do what
he likes with it, but he is morally
bound to consider the ends for which it
was given, It is let to him on lease,
That lease expires with life ; and then
he will have to render an account of his
stewardship,


PSALM OXV.





1. The world has been given to pro-
mote religious ends, ‘The invisible
things of God are clearly seen,” d&c, and
thus the soil which man treads is holy
ground.

2. The earth has been given for the
enlargement and edueation of his mind.
“The Astronomer has learned the
thoughts that are written in that starry
universe. The Geologist goes down and
reads many thoughts in the rocky crust
of the earth, The Botanist unveils the
structures of flowers, and explains the
actions and peculiarities of living plants ;
but all these things were written before
he examined them. So with the Anato-
mist: he has discovered volumes of
thought in this body which is fearfully
and wonderfully made; but every
thought was there before ever man
looked within, . . . This vast uni-
verse exhibits thoughts in every leaf
and every grain of sand, in every drop
of water, in the mountains and in the
heavens. Whence came those thoughts?”
—Alezx. Stewart,

3. The earth has been given for man’s
use and enjoyment, The air for his
lungs ; food to supply his bones with
strength and his veins with blood ;
occupation for his exercise; stones,
metals, wood, for the necessities and
elegancies of life, d&c.

4. The earth has been given to be
evangelised for Christ. Since the ori-
ginal donation man has become marred
by sin, But Christ has died for him,
and now He says, “Go ye into all the
world,” dec.


Lore as THE Spazre or Diving BERvICE.
(Verses 17, 18.)


A part of this text has been quoted
to support the opinion that the Old
Testament saints were in the dark on
the subject of immortality. The whole
text goes to prove the very opposite,
The Psalmist contemplates man in his
material sphere, The earth has been
given him ; and on that earth it is his
duty to serve the only living and true
God. . That ministry is over when he
dies. ‘Nothing is move impressive


than the utter silence of the grave. Not
a voice, not a sound is heard there—of
bards or men, of song or conversation,
of the roaring of the sea, the sighing of
the breeze, the fury of the storm, the
tumult of the battle. Perfect stillness
reigns there; the first sound that
shall be heard will be the archangel’s
trump.”—Barnes. The dead, as such,
do not praise God. But who are the
dead? The physical aye limbs


FBALM OFV,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; PSALM 8.





&c. These cannot praise God, because
they have no object to praise, ‘God
is not the God of the dead, but of the
living.” But worship may go in with
different organs, and in a different
sphere. The Psalmist goes on to say,
“But we will praise the Lord from this
time forth and for evermore.” Diy


is a word of very frequent use and has
but one meaning, and that meaning is
Eternity. When our Lord said, “TI
must work,” &., He did not imply
surely. that He had no work to do bee
yond the grave. Notice—

L The characteristic features of
divine service. “Praise.” ‘“ Bless,”

1. Praise. >it throws light on


the moral character of this service; to
be bright, to shine. This splendour is
borrowed from Him in whom is no
darkness at all, Those who worsbip
“walk in the light as He is in the
light,” &c. Hence (again true to the
original) the Christian doasts not of his
own excellences, but of the divine ex-
cellence which illuminates him (2 Cor.
xii, 1-21), Through them his soul makes
her boast in God: “God forbid that I
should glory,” &c. The Piel of our text
49977 means (1) to diffuse brightness.
The beauty of Christian holiness, and the
splendour of Christian life and worship,
are so that we may be “lights of the
world” and “show forth the praises
of Him who hath called us,” &c. (2)
Hence a large portion of worship consists
tn the most beautiful art ; viz, music,
the only art as far as is revealed to us
in the upper and better world,

2. Blessing, FDI Piel of TI. To
bow, to do homage, to utter blessing, (1.)
Our blessing must be based upon our hom-
age. Religious rhapsody is often profane,
To bless God is a very solemn thing.
A benediction on the King of kings
and Lord of lords should be pronounced
with bared head and on bended knee,
and should not degenerate into mere
ejaculation. (2.) Our homage should
be acknowledged by joyous gratitude,
Solemnity is not inconsistent with joy.


238


As we acknowledge God’s sovereignty
we may remember that that sovereignty
is the basis of all our blessings,

I, The sphere of divine service.
Life. ‘‘The dead praise not the Lord.”
With the occupation of their glorified
spirits the Psalmist has here nothing to
do. His ministry is for living men,
and suggests that the sphere of religious
activity is—

1. The whole of the man, His living
entity. The aim of the Bible is to
bring all the faculties of man into sub-
ordination to the will of God, and into
full consecration to His service (1 Thess,
v. 23, Mark xii. 29, &c.). And what is
worship but the harmonious action of
all man’s powers, Music is harmony,
One note by itself, or clashing with an-
other note, the treble only, or the bass
only, is not perfect music. §o intellec- ~
tual, or ethical, or emotional religion
exclusively, is not perfect, much less so
when the mental belief clashes with the
ethical action,


“Let Knowledge grow from more to more,
But more of reverence in us dwell,
That mind and soul, according well,

May make one music as before.”


—Butvaster,
2, The whole of man’s time. Every


moment there are reasons and oppor
tunities for service. (1.) “ This time.”
Here and now God supplies our need ;
here and now the fact should be acknow-
ledged. (2.) Zo eternity.

Ii. Exceptions to divine service.
(Ver. 17.) The exact reference is not to
the morally dead, yet the whole Bible is
full of the doctrine that spiritual life
is necessary to spiritual service. The
morally dead are incapable of divine
service for ever. Now they lack the
motive, the will, and the power. And
no new faculties, and no stronger de-
sires, and no brighter opportunities will
be vouchsafed beyond the grave. Our
text may be used as (i.) a plea for de-
liverance, (ii.) a call to instant decision,


(iii) an expression of full consecration,


(iv.) an expectation of future blessedness,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PSALM OXTL


eA eSEeSasoenssoninccniteiascinmnemet pet


PSALM CXVL


INTRODUCTION,


“ This Psalm is an evidence of the truth and depth of the religious life in individuals after


the return from the Exile. . ,


It reminds us of earlier Psalms, and especiall y of the Psalms


of David. His words must have laid hold in no common de :

: _His : gree of the hearts of those who were
heirs of his faith, and have sustained them in times of sorrow and suffering; and Apia
would be more natural than that later poets would echo his strains, and mingle his words with
their own, when they poured forth their prayers and praises before God.” —Perowne.


Prayer: Its Ossecr aNp ITs VALUE.
(Verse 1.)


The exact rendering would be, “I
love, because the Lord heareth my
voice,” d&c., and brings before us the
proper object and the ethical value of
prayer.

L Characteristics of prayer.

1, “ My voice.” Prayer should, as far
as possible, be vocal. The conditions of
prayer are hardly fulfilled when it is
merely a current of devotional thought
passing through the mind. ‘True, there
are circumstances under which sighs,
unexpressed desires, are acceptable to
God; but expression (1) gives definite-
mess, prevents the mind from wander-
ing ; (2) gives completeness ; the sacrifice
of the heart is then accompanied by the
sacrifice of the lips,

2. “My supplications.” Which
teaches us that prayer should be (1)
humble. We are simply beggars at the
throne of grace, and are absolutely
dependent for every gift on God’s free
bounty. (2) Full. One supplication
is not enough, We must multiply our
supplications, as showing our need, and
our confidence in God’s infinite resources,
We fail because we do not ask enough,
or for enough. (3) Zarnest. Cold for-
malities never reach the ear of God,


II. The object of prayer. “The
Lord heareth.”
1. God can hear prayer. ‘He that


planted the ear shall He not hear?”
God made man for communion with
Himself, which would be impossible un-
less God could hear when man prays.

2. God ts willing to hear prayer. (1.)
His commandments prove tt. ‘“ Make
your requests known unto God.” (2.)


His promises prove tt, “Call upon Me
in the day of trouble,” &c. (3.) Dirent


revelations to this effect prove it. (Jer.
xxix. 11-14., Zech. xiii 9.)
3. God does hear prayer. (Isaiah


xlv. 19.) All the Bible proves it; all
Christian experience has proved it,
“ This poor man cried,” é&c.

IL. The value of prayer.

l. Prayer secures the object for which
tt asks, ‘The Lord heareth.” For God
to hear is for God to answer, and His all-
comprehending answer is Himself.

2. In securing this grand object tt
secures all that tt wants, To answer
some petitions would be harmful. The
promise is, “ My God shall suppiy all
your need,”

3. The effect of prayer “is to put the
affections in motion, Its object is the
uncreated love, the eternal beauty ;
He of whose beauty all that moves love
and admiration here is at best a pale
reflection. To be in His presence is to
be conscious of an expansion of the
heart, and of the pleasure which accom-
panies it, which we feel in another
sense, when speaking to an intimate and
loved friend or relative, And _ this
movement of the affections is sustained
throughout the act of prayer. It is in-
vigorated by the spiritual sight of God ;
but it is also the original impulse which
leads us to draw near to Him. (Matt,
xv. 8, 1 John iii, 21, 22.) In true
prayer: ‘Out of the abundance of the
heart,’” d&c.—Liddon.

In concLusion.—“How vain and
foolish is the talk ‘To love God for His
benefits is mercenary, and cannot be pure

229


POALM CIVIL


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





love!’ Whether pure or impure, no other
love can flow out of the heart of the crea-
ture towards its creator. ‘ We love Him,’
said Christ’s holiest apostle, ‘ because


He first loved us ;’ and the increase of
our love and filial obedience is in pro-
portion to the increased sense of our
obligation to Him.”—Dr. A. Clarke.


Tue Motive ror Perskverina PRAYER,
(Verse 2.)


There can be no reasonable objection
to motives as long as they are pure, and
so long as they are adequate for the pur-
pose for which they are employed. The
motives in God’s Word are worthy and
sufficient, We have a very beautiful
one in the text. God has heard the
particular request of the Psalmist, and
he takes that as a guarantee of His
willingness to hear and answer in all
time tocome. In the strength of this he
vows to pray without ceasing. Notice—

L This motive reveals God’s conde-
scension and anxiety to hear, “ The
Psalmist represents himself an so sick
and weak that he could scarcely speak.
The Lord is here considered as bowing
down His ear to the mouth of the feeble
suppliant, that He may catch every word
of His prayer.”—Dr. A. Clarke.

IL The determination that is based
upon this motive, “TI will call,” d&e.

1. What? “I will call,” implying
(1) Resolution: “TI will.” Prayer re-
quires effort. ‘No man is likely to do
much govud in prayer who does not
begin by looking upon it in the light of
a work, to be prepared for, and to be
persevered in with all the earnestness
which we bring to bear upon subjects


SPECIAL


which are, in our opinion, at once most
interesting and most necessary.”—
Bishop Hamilton. (2) Confidence. Un-
less there is an expectation of being
heard the voice will falter. (3) Zar-
nestness. Not a feeble whisper, but a
loud cry. (4) Publicity.

2. When # “ As long as I live.” Heb. :
“In my days,” (1.) Whenever oppor-
tunities occur, These occur constantly,
(2.) As long as life lasts. Not by fits
and starts. (3.) Jn the hour of death,
(4.) In eternity.

Ill. The divine intention that is
suggested by the ground of this mo-
tive, and the warrant for this deter-
mination. God answers. prayer—

1. That we should believe that He
hears and answers tt.

2. That we may have “boldness of
access with confidence.”

3. That He may surround Himself
with a royal priesthood, who shall “ show
forth the praises of Him who hath
called them,” &. Learn—(i.) For our
encouragement that God desires our
prayers, and is anxious to hear them.
(ii.) For our warning. Unless we call,
God will not hear. A prayerless people
are a godless people,


~*~


PRAYER


(Verses 3, 4.)


Prayer must be the Christian’s atmo-
sphere. As long as there is necessity for
prayer we must pray. But there are
special seasons which require special
prayer. Our text indicates some of
them.

I The time for special prayer.

1. Jn the pangs of disease, either
hopeless or apparently so. Heb.: ‘The
cords of death encircled me.” In the
Old Testament death is represented as

230


a hunter with a cord and net. In con-
sumption or any lingering sickness the
cord gets tighter and tighter, and the
meshes more and more intricate, until
all possibility of escape is cut off. One
by one hopes fade, and encouraging
symptoms disappear. Step by step does
the fell malady march to conquest, and
then the time comes when there is but a
step between manand death. The Psalmist
would appear to have been in the death


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : PSALMS,


PRALM OXVL





struggle. Whether the affliction was
physical disease, overwhelming trouble,
or extreme danger, does not appear, but
the expression is suggestive of all.

2. Ln the painful anticipation of the
future. Heb. : “ The pangs of the under-
world discovered me.” “As if they
had been searching for me, and had
found my hiding-place. Those sorrows
ever in pursuit of us will soon find us
all. We cannot long escape the pursuit.
Death tracks us, and is on our heels ”—
Barnes. (1.) The pain of leaving those
we love. (2.) The pain of unfinished
work, (3.) The sorrowful contemplation
of sin. (4.) For some, the fearful appre-
hension of wrath to come.

3. In bitter disappointment. “ Death
found me, and J found trouble and sor-
row. I did not seek it, but in what I
was seeking I found this. Whatever we
fail to ‘find’ in the pursuits of life, we
shall not fail to find troubles and sor-
rows ”"— Barnes.

4. In any kind of trial. Whole text.

Il. The subjects of special prayer.
*O Lord, deliver my soul.”

1. The Psalmist’s prayer literally was
for life. This value of and desire for
life runs through the Old Testament.
Not that we are warranted in believing
that the Jew held that death was the


extinction of the soul’s life. But life
that was spared was ever viewed in the
light of consecration to God. The rest
of this Psalm, and the conclusion of the
previous, bears this out. He wished for
life that he might pay his vows.

2. The Psalmist’s prayer admits of a
spiritual interpretation. Soul deliver-
ance is deliverance from sin, Sin is
the soul’s death. All other aspects of
death are comparatively insignificant.
Of all legitimately special subjects this
isthe sum. If the soul is saved from
death, physical dissolution can be appre-
hended calmly.

3. The Psalmist’s prayer suggests that
subordinate details should be left in the
hands of God. His subsequent path is
a matter of unconcern. If God spares
his life, he knows that God will support
it. “Is not the life more than meat ?”
All God’s larger blessings include the
lesser. (Rom. viii. 32.)

IIL. The manner of special prayer.

1. Earnestly. “Called.” The case is
urgent,

2. Resignedly. “TI beseech Thee,” %.¢.,
if it be Thy will.

In concLusion.—God sometimesallows
His servants to approach extreme peril,
that they may experience His extreme near-
ness, and the extreme efficacy of prayer.


ENCOURAGEMENTS FOR PRAYER,
(Verse 5.)


Under certain circumstances prayer
would be impossible. If its object were
unbending, and therefore incapable of
hearing it, it would be useless ; if capri-
cious, or too easily moved, it would be
worthless ; if severe and implacable, we
should have no heart to pray. The
Christian is encouraged by the fact that
God is gracious, righteous, and merciful,
“He is righteous, He did me no wrong
in afflicting me ; He is gracious, and was
very kind in supporting and delivering
me. Let us speak of God as we have
found ; and have we ever found Him
otherwise 1”"—M. Henry. “Instead of
saying, ‘Jehovah answered me,’ he
magnifies those attributes, which, from
the days of His wonderful self-revelation


to Moses (Exod, xxxiv, 6) had been the
joy of every tried and trusting heart.”
—Perowne.

I. Pray because God is “the Lord.”
Jehovah, the Unchangeable One, who
has eternity with its wealth and in
its duration, in which and by which to
supply all our need.

II. Pray because the Lord is “our
Ged.” Our dwelling-place, inheritance,
and covenant possession. Hence all
He is and ‘has is ours, (Rom. viii. 32,
1 Cor. ii. 22, 23.)

IIf. Pray because the Lord is “ gra-
cious.” i307

1. Condescending. God stoops to
hear prayer, and comes down to answer
it,

231


7 MLM OXVI.


—


2. Favourable to prayer. He has
commanded it and promised to bless it,
His Son has taught men how to pray,
and ever lives to mingle their prayers
with His, His Spirit helps men to pray.

3. Kind to those who pray. Does
not lay upon them heavy burdens,
Does not impose heavy penances or long
liturgies. Hears the faintest sighings
of the broken and contrite heart.

4. Beneficent is His answers to prayer.

“Ye know the grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ,” dc.

IV. Pray because the Lord is
“righteous,”

1. God ts just in all His dealings.
Nothing that is right will be withheld ;
nothing that is wrong, bestowed.

2. God is truthful in all Hts words,
His promises can never fail, because “ He
is not a man that He should lie,” &ec.

3. God ts reliable tn all His ways,
We may depend upon the principles of
His government as on an unshakable
foundation,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY; PSALMS.





4. “God is faithful and just to forgtve
ws our sins, and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness.”

V. Pray because “our God is merci-
fal.” D1},

1. God interests Himself in our case.
He is perfectly acquainted with it.
“He knoweth our frame,” &c.

2. God ts tenderly solicitous of our
interests. We are His “ inheritance ;”
the “ apple of His eye ;” the “ sheep of
His pasture,” &.

3. God ts compassionate of our sorrows.
“Tn all our afflictions He was afflicted.”
Christ is “touched with a feeling of our
infirmities.”

4. God ts friendly towards our persons.
We are His “ children,” His “ friends,”
“loved with an everlasting love,” and
“loved unto the end.”

In concLusion.—Notice (i.) The crime
and folly of unbelieving despondency.
(ii.) Let the considerations urge you to
earnest and believing prayer.


Toe Timety Hetp or HELPLESSNESS,
(Verse 6.)


I. Who are the helpless? “The
simple.” 15 has three meanings :—

1. Zo be open in the sense of being
foolish and thus simple. The immature
in experience, the weak in understand-
ing or will. God does not despise the
poor imbecile, nor those who, through
no fault of their own, are peculiarly
open to the craft of those who “ lie in
wait to deceive.”

2. To be open in the sense of being
frank, trustful, and ingenuows. One
who yields readily to truth and duty ;
without cunning, trickery, or guile. A
Nathaniel.

3. T'o be open, as in the case of little
children, which is indeed the rendering
of nearly all the versions. Such, being
members of tne Kingdom of Heaven,
are under the special care of its King.
“Take heed how ye offend,” &c.

4. To be open, as tn the weakness of
sickness and old age.

Ti. When are they helped? In
their extremity. 27, to wave, to

232


totter, to be loose; to be dried up,
drained, to fail; to hang, to swing from
side to side, as miners letting themselves
down (Job xxviii. 4); Wt, they hang,
they swing, far from men.

1. Ln their insecurity. The simple of
all kinds are open to crafty and un-
scrupulous foes. How often are the
weak of intellect or will outwitted in
trade, opportunity, or health! How
often does the guileless honesty and un-
suspicion of the man who is determined
to do right lay him open to intrigue |
How often is the trustfulness of little
children, and the semi-imbecility of old
age, imposed upon! How often is sick-
ness taken advantage of ! But let their
foes beware; for the Almighty has
pledged Himself to be on their side.

2. In their exhaustion. (1.) Zn the
exhaustion of their natural resources.
(2.) In the failure of their understand-
mg ‘God will guide them by His coun-
sel.” (3.) Jn the abortion of their pre-
ventive eforts the Lord will fly to their


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PSALM CXVI.


er a a es ee AD


succour, (4) Jn the decrepitude of their
physical strength, in the feebleness which
harassing anxiety has engendered, and
in the failure of power at the hour of
death. “His rod and His staff shall
comfort ” them,

IIL How are they helped ?

l. “The Lord preserveth.” WW,
To pierce, to be wakeful and active as a
gatekeeper or shepherd, to protect and
to attend to strictly. Then (1) God
keeps a vigilant watch over the weakness
of the simple and the strength and subtlety
of their foes. ‘He that keepeth Israel
neither slumbers nor sleeps.” (2) God
throws an omnipotent protection round
the simple. “The name of the Lord is
a strong tower,” &e ‘The Lord God
is a sun and shield.” “Underneath are
the everlasting arms,” But are the
weak thus cared for? Notice (1) Do
the weak trust in God, or lean to their
own understanding? (2) Have the TRUE


interests of the weak, in so fox as theg
have trusted in God, been pes manently
assailed? Have their lusses, sufferings,
been real? Unsuspect‘ag persons have
been robbed of their vemporal rights,
perhaps, but has not the soul been safe,
and is there not treasure in heaven?
Children have been slaughtered, but
they have passed to their crown without
the pain and dangev of the conflict.

2. “He helped ne ” yw (1.) God
will SAVE the simple in their extremity.
Let them be assured that if they will
trust in Him they are safe. (2.) God
will SUPPORT them tn their weakness,
““My grace is sufficient for thee.” (3.)
God will ult mately give them victory
(Eph. vi, 13, Rom. viii. 35-37).

In concLus.on.—(i.) “ Man's extremity
ts God’s oppo. tunity.” (ii.) The enemies of
the sumple ave the enemies of God. (iii )
Is. xl. 27--34.


Tex Sovw’s Rerurn To :78 Res,
(Verse 7.)


The many afflictions of the Psalmist
had agitated his soul and shaken his
confidence in God. He had been bound
by the cords of death. He had felt the
painful straitening of the tomb. Trouble
and sorrow were the discovery of his
search for good. His enemies had over-
matched and exhausted him. In the
midst of his affliction miraculous help
had been vouchsafed. The Lord saved
him, and now he returns to the rest of
joyous confidence in God which stills for
ever the tumult of his soul.

L The soul is commanded to return to
tts rest. Therefore this rest is its
rightful heritage. ‘Thy rest.”

1. This rest is not (1) the rest of mere
local habitation. The soul may be ina
state of the greatest disquietude on the
most comfortable couches, and in the
most splendid dwelling-place. It refuses
to be stilled by the tenderest caresses,
and by the enchantment of the richest
music, and is proof against slumber on
beds of thesoftestdown. Heaven itself
would afford no repose to a soul in cer-


tain moral conditions, (3) Insensilility.


When the soul veases to feel it is not at
rest, iu is diseased or dead. Better the
keenest anguish than this. (3) Inactivity,
if, indeed, that were possible. An in-
active soul would be a soul exhausted of
its powers.

2. This rest ts, the harmony, health,
and tranquil action of all the forces of
the soul. (1.) The soul’s rest consists in
pure affection for a worthy object. The
soul was made for love : “Thou shalt love

. with all thy soul.” There can be no
rest where there is no love, where that
love is impure, or where it is fixed on
unlovely objects. Hell is the state where
irregular passions rage and clash with one
another aud cause agony, because there is
no Jove and no object forlove. Unholy
love is feverish and insatiable lust. Love
of the unlovely is the cause of more un-
rest than all other causes combined, The
soul returns to its rest when it sets its re-
yenerated affections on the things above.
(2.) The soul’s rest consists in satisfying
Jfatth in an all-sufficient power. Man was
made for trust. No man is conscious of
independence. He is therefore at unrest

233


PSALM OXVL.


until he finds some one on whom his
faith can utterly repose itself. He is at
unrest if he is trusting to a broken reed ;
and when that has given way he trembles
to trust again, The doubtful mind
(Luke xii. 29, wsremgsZso0s) is that which
is tossed about in the open and stormy
sea, The soul can only be at rest when
its anchorage is in God. Only as we
can say with Paul when the blast of
Euroclydon was on the vessel, “I believe
God,” can we have peace. (3.) The soul
ts at rest when tts volitions are in harmony
with a will higher than tis own, and
stronger, Self-willis the cause of per-
petual unrest. It is constantly thwarted
and disappointed, and therefore never
at peace. Only as far as the soul is in
harmony with Him whose will rules the
universe, and cheerfully assists in the
fulfilment of the counsel of that will, can
it beat rest. Its rest is this, “I delight
to do Thy will,” &e. (4.) The soul ts at
rest when engaged in that work for which
wt is divinely fitted. Ignoble callings,
vulgar ambitions, and immoral pleasures,
have no affinity with that which is the
image of the great Creator. The soul was
made to fight the good fight of faith, to
work the works of Him that sent it ; and
only in such occupations can it be at
rest. (5.) Therefore, only as the soul is
free from the periurbations of sin can t
beat rest, Sin has destroyed the moral
balance of the soul, and introduced dis-
cord where all was harmony. ‘That,
thank God, can be removed. Peace
follows pardon. Purity precedes refresh-
ment. And the soul pardoned and
refreshed, with its love fixed on God, its

faith reposing on God, its will governed


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMB.


nn ee etna EERE





by God, and its work directed by God, it
realises the promise to the full; “I will
give you rest.”

II. The soul is commanded to return
to its rest ; there is hope for weary
man, that his lost rest may be
regained. Man has lost his rest.
Furrowed brows, blasted hopes, ruined
fortunes, early graves, all bear witness
to this.

“ Art thou weary, art thou languid,

Art thou sore distressed ?
Come to Me, saith One, and coming,
Be at rest.”


“For the Lord hath dealt bountifully
with thee.” The details of that bounty
are specified in the following verses.
Those details may be summed up in one
word, Gop. Elsewhere the soul may
seek rest, but it will find none. God
provides the soul with (1) a lovely object :
He is “the King in His beauty ;” (2)a@
trusty object: “Casting all your cares
on Him ;” (3) agoverning will : so that
the soul can say, “Thy will be done;” (4)
an appropriate work; “ Workers together
with God ;” (5) purity, harmony, peace.

IN concLUSION,—(i.) Seck the true rest,
God. (ii.) Seek tt tn the proper place,
God, (iii.) Seek it by the best means, God.
“ God is the centre to which all immortal
spirits tend, and in connection with whom
they can find rest. Everything separated
from its centre is in a state of violence ;
and if intelligent cannot be happy. All
human souls, when separated from God
by sin, are in a state of violence, agita-
tion, and misery. From God all spirita
come ; to Him all spirits must return, in


order to be finally happy."—-4. Clarke.


DELIVERANCE,
(Verse 8.)


I. Of “the soul from death.” We
are warranted in taking this in its most
comprehensive sense. Of the life—

1. From physical death. The Psalm-
ist had been brought to death’s door
and was restored to health and strength,
There are few men who cannot say the
same, Most have passed through dan-
gerous sicknesses, or just escaped what

234


might have been fatal accidents but for
the interposition of a higher power.
And, indeed, subtle perils lurk in the
atmosphere we breathe, and the circum:
stances by which we are surrounded
every moment, and yet we are spared.
2. From intellectual death. How near
men are to that let our asylums show.


The brain has a limit to its power, and


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


excess, the anxieties of life, and the
grapple with great intellectual problems,
sometimes brings us to the very margin
which bounds sanity from madness.
But God has interposed His “ hitherto
shalt thou go,” &e.

3. From social death. How near are
many men to ostracism from the friends
who love them and the homes that
cherish them! Many a man has up-
lifted a hand, which, had it fallen, he
would thenceforth Lave been an outcast
from his fellowmmen, Many a man has
entertained thoughts, which, had he
uttered in the feeblest breath, men
would have shunned him as a wild
beast. Many a man has spoken five
words, which, had they been six, the
very wife of his bosom and the children
of his heart would have spurned him.
There have been men whose emotions
have risen fifty degrees, and one degree
more the brand of Cain would have
been written on their forehead for life.
God has saved their soul from death,
Some men have committed social suicide,
and God has given life to the dead.

4. From moral death, the real death
of the soul. The soul is now dead in
trespasses and sins, Those who live in
sin are dead while they live. God can
and does raise the soul into newness of
life. Sinners, remember that there is a
death, which, while it never dies, admits
of no resurrection. This is “the second
death.”

Il. Of the “eyes from tears.”

1. God sometimes delivers us from the
occasions of sorrow. Many things which
would have caused us helpless grief, God
has mercifully checked. Friends have


PSALM OXVL,


been spared, losses averted, sharp arrows
of pain missed their mark.

2. God sometimes gives us grace to
bear our sorrows, so that we can say
with more than resignation, more than
acquiescence, with adoring gratitude
even through our tears, “The Lord
gave, the Lord hath taken away,” dec.

3. God sometimes wipes the tears from
our eyes. He “comforts those who
mourn,” d&c., sends the Comforter, whis-
pers the promises, and assures of the
time when there will be no more pain,
and when “ He will wipe al/ tears from
all faces,”

IIL. Of his “feet from falling.”

1. Preservation from snares and pit-
falls, enabling us so to thread our way
as to avoid those dangers which, if en-
countered, would be perilous to the soul,

2. Firm establishment. On a rock,
so that nothing shall shake us. Ona
broad basis, so that looking down from
the lofty pinnacle we shall not be made
giddy, and fall,

3. Sudden rescue. The Psalmist’s feet,
like Asaph’s (Ps, lxxii.), may have well-
nigh slipped, one foot over and the
other going, but God interposed. We
have all had times like this,

In cono.usion.—Notice (i.) This de-
liverance was personal. “ Thou,” “ My.”
Not law, chance, providence, (ii.) This
deliverance was conscious, It was uvt
a beautiful theory, or a clever specula-
tion. It was a fact. These two ideas,
a personal relationship with a personal
God, constitute the charm of the Psalms.
Let us not break it. Speaking thus the
Psalmist speaks for man,


WALKING BEForE Gop.
(Verse 9.)


® We mean by men’s ‘ walking’ their
conduct, the mode in which they carry
themselves, and the progress they make
as men. All men have ‘ ways,’ all men
‘walk’ somehow. ‘The difference be-
tween men spiritually is not between
walking and not walking, but between
walking rightly and wrongly, walking
to heaven and to hell. Activity, inces-


sant activity, is impressed upon all, It
is the universal law. But some walk
after the spirit, and others after the
flesh ; some in darkness, others in light.
True religion is walking with God.”
—A. J. Morris.

% What walking before God im-
plies.
i. That man ts a social being. Man

235


PHALM OXVi.





was made for companionship. Hence
marriage. “ It is not good for man to
be alone.” Man seldom cares for a
solitary walk. Hence, in the journey of
life, some “ walk with the wise,” others
“ go with the evil.”

2. That man was made for social in-
tercourse. Without this companions are
useless or a burden, Man must have
fellowship and interchange of thought
and feeling. Without this his best life
is sapped. His mind will be dwarfed
by narrowness, His affections will be
consumed in their own fires,

3. That man’s social instincts find
their full development in intercourse
with God. Only by this means can
the mind be fully fitted for man who
is made in the image of “tod. His
love for God, whom he kas not seen,
will qualify him for loving his brother,
whom he has seen.

4. That this bringing of God and
man together in social intercourse +s the
end of providence and grace. This was
man’s natural privilege as having affinity
with God. By sin he forfeited it. God
became offended, and man careless. But
in the fulness of time Emmanuel came,
and through Him God and man are
reconciled and made at one.

IL What walking before God means.

1. Conscious companionship. Not
mere intellectual belief in God’s exist-
ence, nor a consciousness of God’s om-
nipresence, but the nearness of God
experienced and enjoyed.

2. Spiritual sympathy. ‘Two walk
together because they are agreed, There
must be unity of purpose, of taste, a
correspondence of circumstances, and a
harmony of will. We can admire a
man, converse with him, receive favours
from him, confer favours on him, dwell
in the same house, exchange the cour-
tesies of life with him, without walking
with him, There is a general benevo-
lence or humanity that engenders polite-
ness, #.¢., kindness seasonably offered
‘in form or reality.’ But the man I
walk with is my friend. I have proved
his character, and I find is sound, I


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





have noted his conversation, and not
only approve his opinions, but imbibe
his spirit. I have watched the issues
of his heart, and I find their counterpart
in my own bosom. He may be separate
from me, his profession may be opposite
to mine, his attainments, rank, look
down upon mine, I still walk with him.
. .. I doubt whether a man or an angel
could commune with so entire a union.
Then how are we to conceive of a man
walking before God?” Gen. i. supplies
the answer.— JZ, H. Jenkins.

3. Moral progress. Going on to that
perfection to which God leads.


4. Careful circumspection. “As ever


in the great Taskmaster’s eye.”


IIL Where walking before God takes
“In the land of the living.”

1. Not tn the other world.

2. Not tin the contemplative sphere.
Men have considered this as presenting
unusual facilities Alas! they have
found as many hindrances as they have
escaped. Men now frequently look for-
ward to the time when, retired from the
turmoil and business of the world, they
will be enabled to walk before God
without distraction. But before that
time arrives disinclination sets in, powers
are demoralised, and walking before
God fully becomes next to impossible.

3. But in the land of the living. In
the midst of the living; in the engage-
ments of the living ; consecrating living
activities to His services,

In concLusion.—“ What a glorious
life is this! Who loves not to walk
with a dear friend {—and the more if he
be very wise and pure and good. Who
that had to travel a doubtful road would >
not rejoice if that friend were a safe
guide as well? and still more, if there
were fear of evil, one of a strong and
skilful arm? And further yet, if, being
poor himself, that friend were able to
meet all the possible charges of the
way? We ‘walk with God,’ who can
supply ‘all our need,’ who ‘ guides us
with His eye,’ encompasses us with
favour as a shield; and ‘we joy im
God,’ *"—A. J. Morris.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PSALM OXVE,





THe Nature AND Power oF Farra.
(Verse 10.)


L The nature of faith, ‘NIONT
Hiphil preterite of JX, To make fast
or strong; to build) Hence, fig., to
maintain, foster, bring up. The Hiphil
(text) signifies to hold fast, to stand
firm, to trust. ‘“ Powerful as is the
effect of these words (Gen. xv. 6, where
same word is used) when we read them
in their first untarnished freshness, they
gain immensely in their original lan-
guage, to which neither Greek nor
German, much less Latin or English,
can furnish any full equivalent ‘He
supported himself, he built himself up,
he reposed as a child in his mother’s
arms (such seems the force of the root
of the Hebrew word) in the strength of
God ; in God whom he did not see,
more than in the giant empires of earth,
and the bright lights of heaven, or the
claims of kindred or country which were
always before Him.’”—Dean Stanley.
Hence the Psalmiast’s faith was not a mere
intellectual assent to certain truths ; but
the conscious experience and actual
realisation of certain facts, “The true
living Christian faith . . is @ sure
trust and confidence in God, that
through the merits of Christ his sins
are forgiven, and he reconciled to the
favour of God.”— Wesley.

IL The power of faith ‘I be-
lieved, therefore have I spoken.” Every-
where faith and speech should be inse-
parable. The man who speaks what he
doesn’t believe is a hypocrite; the man
who does not speak what he believes is
a coward.

1. The power of faith ts to find ex-
pression for téself. Hence this Psalm
becomes a creed, and from this fact
springs the vitality of creeds, The
three great confessions of the Christian
Church are @ witness to the heroic faith
of those who composed them. May
they long continue the same for those
who use them.

2. The power of faith ts to constrain
those who believe to confess their belief:


The Psalmist had the burden upon him,
He could not help but speak (Acta
iv. 20). And so the Christian who ia
conscious of the great salvation will not
only proclaim it, but do so under an
irresistible impulse,

3. The power of fatth ts to inspire
loyalty to the truth we believe, This
saves from (1) narrowness, which con-
tracts the truth and conceals part of it,
A sound Christian faith holds “ all the
truth” and proclaims “all the counsel
of God.” (2) From latitudinarianism.
The Psalmist’s was not only a compre-
hensive, but a eorrect faith. Latitudin-
arianism mixes error with truth, or
softens its rigour by a spurious charity.
A sound Christian faith takes hold of
and proclaims “the truth, the whole
truth, and nothing but the truth.”

4. The power of faith ts te impress us
with the necessity of tts declaration. He
felt his confession to be not only truth,
but the only truth. The Lord, and the
Lord alone, helped him ; the Lord, and
the Lord alone, could help others,
Mighty is the obligation which rests on
Christian men. Christian faith takes
the facts of humanity and of God as
they stand. Man sinful and helpless,
Christ not one Saviour among many,
but alone sufficient. It will brook the
presence and pretentions of no rival in
the work of man’s regeneration, and de-
clares again and again that without ita
efficacy man must perish. Hence the
“‘ woe ia me, if I preach not the Gospel ”
which rests on the Christian man.

5. Faith ts the power of loyalty to the
Lord of faith, The Psalmist believed
God, and was thereby strengthened in
his submission to God’s will. Faith
empowered him to declare what God
had done for his soul, And if we be-
lieve Christ as the Psalmist did God we
shall keep that command, “ Go ye into
nll the world,” &c., disobedience to
which is disloyalty to Christ.

6. Faith is the power of confidence,
and confidence & the power of successful

237


PSALM OXVIL


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY ; PSALMS.





enterprise. This faith has moved and
still will move the world. Men who
have faith in themselves succeed every-


where. What, then, must that faith be
which has as it object the Lord God
Omnipotent %


OrnioiIsm.
(Verse 11.)


The Cynics were a sect of Greek phi-
losophers founded by Antisthenes, who
from his morose and disagreeable procli-
vities was termed “the dog.” He with
his more famous disciple, Diogenes, are
representatives of a class of men all
through the ages who cultivate and ex-
hibit a feeling contemptuous of or hos-
tile tewards their fellow-men. All are
more or less subject to this, and all
should strive against it. The Psalmist
fell into it in his trouble, but soon got
out of it,

I, The Psalmist’s cynicism consisted in
a hasty conclusion and an uncharitable
verdict, On the spur of the moment,
“T was greatly afflicted, and then I said
in my haste,” &c. ; somewhat rashly and
inconsiderately in my amazement (so
some) ; when I was in a consternation—
in my flight (so others). Observe the
faith of the best of saints is not perfect,
nor always alike strong and active.
When the Psalmist believed he spoke
well ; but now through unbelief he spoke
amiss.—M. Henry. ‘‘ The Psalmist, on
reflection, felt that he had said this with-
out due thought, and that he was now
disposed to think better of men than he
did on the day of affliction and trouble.
The world is much better than what we
think it is when our minds are morbid
and our nerves unstrung.”— Barnes.

It. That the Psalmist’s cynicism
was natural under the circumstances,
although not justifiable. He had been
brought low, near to death, and was
greatly afflicted. We may suppose that
a great deal of his affliction was the
result of treachery and bitter disappoint-
ment, The words seem to imply the cry


of one who fled from men in ambush,
But such a hasty generalisation, although
natural, was not justifiable, because not
true.

III. That the Psalmist’s cynicism was
only a passing mood. ‘“ He does not
seem to have cherished this mood; on
the contrary, he seems to have been con-
scious of its wretchedness. . . . Most of
us must have known what it is to have
oursympathies and affections temporarily
soured in times of vexation and disap-
pointment, .. . The great danger is lest
it should pass into a habit—lest we
should nurse it until it becomes a chronic
attitude of mind, and take a morbid plea-
sure in indulging it.... The fully-
developed cynic prides himself on his in-
different tone. Like Iago he is ‘ nothing
if not critical.’ It is simply his ‘ way’
to pick faults and sneer. We find the
culmination of cynicism in Mephi-
stopheles ; and indeed the word ‘ devil’
means ‘accuser,’ slanderer of God and
man.” — Finlayson.

IV. That the Psalmist’s cynicism was
successfully resisted and overcome.
The spirit of cynicism is abroad, how
shall we resist it?

(i.) By a charitable estimate of human
infirmity ; (ii.) By a generous recognition
of human excellencies ; (iii.) By a modest
estimate of our own worth. “ Wounded
vanity and disappointed ambition and
trouble coming on an intense egotism
are fruitful sources of cynicism. ... A
humble recognition of our own faults and
defects will help to keep us from it ;”
(iv.) By looking at all men through
Christ. ‘This is the great antidote to
the cynical spirit.” Finlayson,


SrrrituaL REQuiTaL.
(Verses 12, 13.)


The Psa)Jmist is overwhelmed with
a sense of the divine benedictions. He
QAR


asks what return he can make. He feels
that no return is so appropriate as ac-


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PSALM OXVI,


a aS erent eceereeneaeinisiinoenent aie


knowledging them in devout and public
thanksgiving, and in asking God for
more. A later custom of the feast of
Tabernacles was to form a grand proces-
sion from the Temple to the Pool of
Siloam, and for the high priest to hold
aloft a golden goblet full of water from
that pool, and pour it out as an oblation
to God for His goodness. It was on
that occasion, and probably in reference
to that ceremony, that our Lord said, “If
any man thirst,” &c. After the Passover
the master of the house lifted up the
cup of wine, and blessed God for His
mercy, and then passed it round. To
this the Apostle referred when he said,
’ “The cup of blessing which we bless,”
&c. ; and the Evangelist when he tells
us that Christ took the cup which was
the cup of the New Testament in His
blood ; so typifying to us the sacrifice of
thanksgiving, which becomes us until, as
His guests, we shall sit down with Him
in heaven and drink the cup of full sal-
vation, which He, the Master of the
house, shall pass round to all who shall
be with Him there. Notice—

I. That God requites His saints for
their prayers. “All His benefits to-
wards me.” These benefits were the
salvations for which he had prayed
(ver. 4), and the answers he had received
(vers. 6,7). This requital is based on

1. The goodness of God.

2. The fidelity of God to His promises.
“Call upon Me in the day of trouble,”
&e.

3. God’s approbation of the use of
divinely-prescribed means (2 Chron. vii.
14).

5 That the divine requital is ample
and sufficient. There is not enough in
God's benefits to intoxicate ; they are not
dealt out at random; but they exactly


meet, and to the full, the creatures’ need.


1. Temporal benefits. God has favoured
each one of us with that which is suffi-
cient for our good. The sorrowful and
suffering are the first and moss, earnest
in their acknowledgments, that, as their
necessities have arisen, God’s supplies
have been adequate.

2. Spiritual blessings. These have
been full and overflowing. God’s gift
of Himself, by His Son and through His


Spirit ; the means of grace, the hope of
glory, &c. ll are as rare and costly as
they are rich and full.

3. Mitigated sorrows, “It is good
for me that I have been afflicted.” They
are benefits from the beneficent hand of
God. They are mitigated by the fact
that they are not penal, but disciplinary ;
that they are shared by the “ Man of
Sorrows ;” that they are the subjects of
the ministry of the precious promises and
the consoling Spirit.

4. Holy joys. God’s benefits are for
the purpose of making us happy ; they
are earnests of our inheritance, and hea-
ven begun below.

III. That the divine requital of
man’s prayers should be reciprocated
by man’s requital of God’s love,

1. How should man requite God for
benefits received #? (1.) By a cheerful re-
ception of what God has gwen. The cup
of salvation is of God’s filling. We re-
quite that by drinking it. There is
nothing more wounding to @ generous
heart than to slight his gifts. And to
refuse to make our own the things
which are freely given us of God is to
slight and affront His love. And yet,
alas! although God spared not His own
Son, and that Son spares not His own
Spirit, and that Spirit spares not Him-
self in providence and the means of grace,
yet the great mass, not merely of man-
kind, but of professing Christians, stand
stolidly indifferent, and allow divine
blessings to run to waste. (2.) By a
correct appreciation of the contents of our
cup. We must recognise that whatever
of bitterness there is in it, that it is of
God’s filling; and that, however nau-
seating it may be to our depraved palate.
its contents are salvations. Let us take
care that we know our blessings, or the
empty cup will be eloquent of the mer-
cies of which it once was full—


‘‘That which we have we prize not to the
worth
Whiles we enjoy it; but being lacked and
lost,
Why then we rack the value, then we find
The virtue that possession would not give us
While it was ours,’’—Shakespeare.


(3.) By a thankful recognition of the
fact that all our benefits are from Hum.
239


PeALM OXVL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





Call upon the name of the Lord.”
Only he who enjoys life in Him enjoys
it at all This is the true infusion that
gives sweetness to the bitter, and more
sweetness to the sweet. Without this
religion will be but a drudgery, and life
an empty void.

2. Why should we requite God tn this
way, viz., by a thankful reception of His
gifts? (1.) Because we are already so
much in debt to His mercy. “One

2»ason why we should never come to a
fellow-mortal for a favour is, that we
have received so much already, Yet
this is the only way in which we can
discharge our debts to God; and,
strange to tell, every such attempt to
discharge the debt only serves to in-
crease it."—A. Clarke. (2.) Because God
delights tn no recompense, except “in the
payment of a heart won to His love and
melted by His mercies. His deep heart
is glad when we taste the full cup of
‘His blessings, and as we raise it to our
lips and call on the name of the Lord.”
—Maclaren. (3.) Because this will test
the contents of every cup profered to us


in life. “There is an old legend of a
cup full of poison put treacherously in-
toa king’s hand, He signed the cross
over it, and it shivered in his grasp.
Take this name of the Lord as a test.
Name Him over many a cup which you
are eager to drink, and the poison will
be spilled on the ground. What you
cannot lift before His pure eyes, and
think of Him while you enjoy, is not
for you. Friendships, amusements, &.,
can you call on the name of the Lord
while you put these cups to your lips?
If not, fling them behind you ; for they
are full of poison, which, for all its
sweetness, at last will bite like a serpent
and sting like an adder.”—Maclaren.

In concLusion,—There is another
cup. “In the hand of the Lord there is
a cup, and the wine is red—it is full of
mixture, and He poureth out the same ;
but the dregs thereof all the wicked of
the earth shall wring them out and
drink them.” Why should you drink of
that cup while God offers to you the
cup of salvation %


Verse 14, see Verse 16.
Gop’s Estimate or Dears.
(Verse 15.)


L A high estimate, “Ip is applied


to things of (1) Substantial importance.
(2) Considerable dignity or magnitude.
(3) Rare and costly value. (4) Majesty,
splendour, beauty. (5) To things held
dear, beloved, and precious.

Il An unusual estimate. This
value is placed upon death. Death is
usually regarded as loss, and with dread.
He is called the great robber. It de
prives the body of animation.

“ Absorbs me quite ;


Steals my senses, shuts my sight,
Drowns my spirit, draws my breath,”


Takes ruthlessly that which is most
near and dear to the weeping wife,
child, husband, friend. Yet, according
to our text, “ To die is gain.”
III. An unexpected estimate.
the sight of the Lord.”
have thought it otherwise,


6c In
One would
Death is a


blast upon God’s fair creation, and
blights all on whom it falls. It takes
the bloom from the pictures which the
divine artist has pencilled, withers the
majestic tree which the divine gardener
has planted, crumbles the monument
which the divine architect has reared,
and curses him into whom God breathed
the breath of life. Yet God says,
“ Death is precious,”

IV. A specific estimate. Precious
is the death of saints. Their death is a
thing of (1) Substantial importance to
God, to the final result of the universe,
to the deceased himself. (2) Consider.
able dignity. ‘‘God took him,” “ With
Christ.” (3) Great value. It is a release
from the uncertainties, cares, and paina
of life. (4) Majesty. It is the portal
of immortality, (5) Zo be held dear.
It unites us to our friends and to the
noblest of our race forever, And above


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





all, “ We shall be like Him, for we shall


see Him as He ia.”
In conoLuston.—How precious it is
may be scen. Ignatius, Polycarp, Husa,


Two Virws





PBALM OXVI,





Latimer, Jerome of Prague, Baxter,

Scott, Wesley, Halyburton, Payson.

pace me die the death of the righteous,”
0,


or Drats.


(Verse 15.)


1. The Psalmist had been snatched
from the very jaws of death. He there-
fore may have meant that it was too
costly to be given to the foe. 2. The
Psalmist’s life had been lengthened that
he might fulfil the Divine purposes;
death was too costly a thing to be given
him till his work was done. Both views
are true.

IL Death is very prezious, therefore
God spares life. No weapon can touch
God’s people till their appointed time
has come,

1. In the family. The great Father
sees how far a parent, a child, a friend
are necessary, and the reason why so
many are spared is because of the pre-
ciousness of death.

2. In the nation, The great Gover-
nor sees how far, and for how long,
princes and citizens are necessary, and
the reason why He stays His hand is
because of the unspeakable value of
death.

3. Jn the Church, The great Shep-
herd and Bishop of souls spares as many


of His ministers as can be spared, be-
cause of the costliness of their death.

Ii. Death is very precious, therefore
God gives it.

1. It ts the fitting reward of a saintly
tife (2 Tim. iv. 6),

2. It $8 the soul’s movement towards
perfection,

3. lt ts a stage in the direction of the
completion of God’s plans in the universe.

4. It sllustrates the triumphs of re-
deeming grace to those who are left be-
hind.


In ConcLUsIOon.—These two views are
one theory. Death is too precious to
be given without deliberation. Death
is so precious, that at the appointed
time it must not be withheld. It was
Paul’s theory, ‘To me to live is Christ,
and to die is gain.” There ts another.
A precious life makes a precious death,
a worthless life a worthless death. If
to me to live is self, then death is loss
and despair. ‘‘ Died—as a fool dieth”
—is the epitaph on the lost soul.


Divinr RELATIONSHIPS.
(Verses 14, 16-19.)


This is the appropriate conclusion of
the Psalm. The Psalmist has all along
recognised a relationship between him-
self and God, by which God has given
certain benefits and he rendered certain
services. This relationship is so close
that its termination is too costly to be
lightly entertained. God cannot spare
him just yet, but when He does it will
be to dismiss him to his reward. This
relationship is now fully disclosed. He
is God’s servant, yet God’s friend. God’s
friend, but His servant still. As His ser-
vant God spares his life, as his friend
God walks with him. And while he


VOL, I. a


feels that God has loosed his bonds, he
feels that he must not relax his service.

L This relationship is one of obe-
dience, yet friendship. “I am thy
servant. . . . Thou hast loosed my
bonds.”

1. This relationship ts characterised by
generous devotion. We obey God not as
a hireling toils for wages, but as a friend
gives himself to promote the interest of
his friend.

2. This devotion ts based upon an in-
terest in our friend's wishes. Every word
of our text displays the Psal:ist’s in-
terest in what he waa doing. And why!


24]


FRALM OXVI.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





Because he felt that God had taken an
interest in him. Could he fail to see that #
Can wet

3. This interest ts based upon love of
our friend. “TI will offer Thee the sao-
rifice of thanksgiving.”

II. This relationship is one of friend-
ship, yet obedience, Friendship must
not degenerate into over familiarity or
presumption, Remember—

1. That this relationship ceases with
our obedience. The moment we forget
the special conditions on which this di-
vine friendship is based, that moment
God ceases to be our friend.

2. That thts relationship is not merely
human choice, but Divine election. “ Thou
hast loosed my bonds.” We have not
gained this liberty by our own might
and by our own power. God has freed
us from the thraldom of sin, that He
might bind us by the loving cords of the
royal law of liberty.

3. That the power to fulfil the duties
of this relationship comes from God. “I
will call upon the name of the Lord. I
will pay my vows unto the Lord.” Our
divine friend shows Himself friendly in
hearing our prayers. He hears them
that He may empower us to fulfil our
obligations,


III. This relationship must receive a
formal and public acknowledgment,

1. In personal consecration. “ Twili
pay.” So august a friendship, and so
noble a service, must not be passed by
with the informalities of our ordinary
life and friendship. And yet ifa friend
is worth having he is worth marking out
before all others; and if our worldly occu-
pations deserve our attention at all, they
deserve special attention. Much more
God and His service.

2. In union with His people. “In
the court of the Lord’s house.” He who
is God’s friend and servant will associate
gladly with God’s friends and servants,
(1.) He will gladly unite with them in
their public worship, (2.) He will let
not a little hinder him in showing who and
what he is by formal membership. A
Christian, and yet amember of no church,
is an anomaly.

3. Before the world. “Inthe midst
of thee, O Jerusalem!” He is no true
friend whose friendship is for private and
home consumption.

IV. This relationship should be sought
and professed at once. ‘“ Now.” Every
hour’s delay is a loss of privilege and a
neglect of duty. If not done soon, it
will be done never.


PSALM CXVIL


INTRODUCTION.


1, Authorship, &., unknown. 2. Probably a liturgical introduction to, or dismissal from,
@ aervice, either by separate choirs or the whole people. 8. “The lyrical expression of tha
consciousness of the Old Testament Church, that it was the object of the special and everlasting
care of God; that the former proceeded from His mercy, the latter from His truth; and that
for this very reason Jehovah is the worthy object of praise for all peoples."— Moll. ‘‘In Rom. xv.
11, the Apostle developes the idea which is the germ of the Psalm ; it calls upon the heathen to
praise God for His mercy and truth exhibited to His chosen, in which the heathen will one day
share. (Deut. xxxii. 43.) It expreasesall the elements of a Messianic Paalm,”—Speaker’s Com,


Man’s Recognition or Gon’s Goopnzss.
(Verses 1, 2.)


“Some of the Jewish writers confess
that this Psalm refers to the Kingdom of
the Messiah ; ... that it consists of two
verses to signify that then God would
be glorified by two serts of people—by
the Jews according to the law of Moses,

242


and by the Gentiles according to the


seven precepts of the son of Noah—which


should make one Church, as these two
verses make one Psalm.” Notice—

I. That God’s goodness is manifested
to meet man’s need. Men everywhere


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





need mercy and truth, All need is re-
presented here,

1. Man needs God’s mercy. Jew and
Gentile alike need forbearance and re-
demption; for “all have sinned and
come short of the glory of God.” God’s
merciful kindness is great (1) in for-
bearing to punish; (2) tn the gift of His
Son ; Ce the mission of His Spirit ;
(4) sn the establishment of His Church;
(5) in tts comprehensiveness ; (6) tn sts
regenerating and glorifying power.

2. Man needs God’s truth, The pro-
vision for that is, ‘‘ His truth endureth
for ever.” This may mean God’s word,
or God’s fidelity to His word. Both are
true. Consider the state of the world
without the Bible. Natural religion is
only known when Bible light is thrown
upon nature. Man needs (1) the true
knowledge of God ; (2) guidance in his
duty ; (3) comfort in his trouble; (4) a
revelation of his hereafter. Nothing sup-
plies that need but God’s truth, From
that truth God has never swerved. He
has never repealed it, He has ever ful-
filled it. What was truth to Adam,
Abraham, Moses, David, Paul, is truth
to us, and will be throughout the ages,

II. That the divine goodness shall
be universally recognised.

1. Why? Because (1) tt deserves to
be. (2) Because the order of things
destines tt to be. It was so at the be-
ginning ; it must be so at the end.

2. By whom? (1.) By the Jews.


PSALM OXVIII,


and “all Israel will be saved.” (2.) By
the Gentiles, to many of whom both the
Cross and its revelation are foolishness.
They shall yet confess it to be the
wisdom of God. ‘‘At the name of
Jesus every knee shall bow,” and every
tongue shall confess that Christ is “ the
Light to lighten the Gentiles, and the
glory of His people Israel.”

3. How? By praising God. (1.)
Gratitude. (2.) Consecration.

IIL That universal recognition will
characterise the redeemed and glori-
fied Church for ever. (Rev. vii. 4-12 ;
xix. 5, 6.)

In concLusion.—(i.) When ts the tm-
plied prophecy of our text to be fully
realised ? Apart from the speculations
of ingenious commentators, and the
tabulations of prophetic almanacs, it
will be (1) In God’s own time. (2) In
the right time. And (3) “ J+ ts not for
us to know the times and the seasons,”
&ec. (ii.) How ts the prophecy of our text
to be fulfilled? By earnest Christian
testimony. The means are efficient;
“The Gospel is the power of God unto
salvation,” d&c. The means are conse-
erated: “Go ye into all the world,”
&c. The means are permanent ; “The
everlasting Gospel.” We have no war-
rant for the belief that the presence of
the King will effect that for which the
power and influence of the crucified and
risen Saviour are not equal. Christian
men, put on your strength. Vitalise


The Cross is now a stumbling-block be- and increase your agencies. Work in
cause the veil is on their hearts (Rom. faith. ‘Jesus shall reign,” &o,
xi). But that veil will be removed,
PSALM CXVIIL
InTRODUCTION.


1. The Isst of the group (cxiil—cxviii.) constituting the Hallel. 2. Certainly a temple Psalm,


most probably composed for a great occasion.


he was anointed king, when he brought back the ark, or after (2 Sam. xxi. 16),
Others, after the exile, in celebration either of Feast


Hezekiah (cf, v.17 with Isaiah xxxviii. 1).


**Some incline to the Davidic authorship, when


Others to


of Tabernacles (Ezra iii. 1-4), or Founding of the Temple (iii. 8-13),or its Dedication (vi. 15-


18), or Feast of Tabernacles (Nehem. viii. 14),


8. Often quoted in New Testament. Many


Rabbins interpret the Psalm of Christ ; and Jerome says that the ancient Jews so interpreted
it, which is borne out by Matt. xxi. 9. This was Luther's favourite Psalm.”


Toe Divine MeEroy.
(Verses 1-4.)


Our text forms an appropriate intro-
duction to, and is a miniature of, the


whole Psalm. It contains the germ of
all God’s goodness, and the ground for
243


PSALM OXVIIL





all human gratitude. Next to the
phrase, “ Praise ye the Lord,” the ex-
pression of verse 1 is of most frequent
use in the Book of Psalms.

I The nature of divine mercy.

1. Jt is divine. “ His mercy.” It is
therefore perfect. It is not liable to the
fluctuations and temptations to which
human mercy is exposed. The divine
character is not only perfect as a whole,
but in its parts. The divine perfections
characterise each other, The divine
mercy is omnipotent and all wise, bene-
ficent, yet just. It always goes far
enough, it never goes too far. Man’s
mercy sometimes stops at the boundary
of self-interest, and thus leaves its object
unattained ; sometimes goes beyond
both and defeats its object. Not so
with perfect mercy. It ascertains accu-
rately the measure of our need, and
powerfully supplies it.

2. It ts the outcome of the divine good-
ness. Man’s mercy is often the result
of weakness. Thus it rests on unworthy
objects, encourages sin, and manifests
itself in unproper ways. God’s mercy
is ever governed by sound motives,
manifested in good ways, to worthy
objects and beneficent results.

3. It ts everlasting. Man’s mercy is
frequently a matter of mood, tense, and
ability. God is always in a merciful
mood, and always powerful to bless,

II. The objects and manifestation
of the divine mercy.

1, Nations ; “ Israel.” God, as King
of kings, cares for national life. Illus-
trations of this are plentiful in the
history of Israel and in the history of
England. The divine mercy is seen (1)
In the planting of nations, with due
regard to wants and peculiarities. The
characteristics of a nation may be due
to the circumstances in which they are
placed, but it may also be due in the
divine adaptation of circumstances to
temperament —eg., Greece, art and
poetry ; England, commerce, &c. (2)
In the growth of nations. Wars, revolu-
tions, reforms, &c. (3) The decline of
nations. When a nation has lost its
virtue and its vigour it is a mercy to


346


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


itself and to other nations that it should
fall Israel, Rome, &c.

2. Ministers: ‘“ House of Aaron.”
(1.) In their call (1 Tim. i. 16; Gal. i
15, 16). (2.) In their preparation for
their work. (3.) In their encouragement
tn the midst of difficulties and dangers.
(4.) In their spiritual enrichment. (5.)
In their moral success. (6.) In thew
eternal reward.

3. The Church. ‘Them that fear the
Lord.” (1.) As a whole, a. In its marvel-
lous preparation ; the gradual consoli-
dation of the world into a political
brotherhood by the Persian, Alexan-
drian, and Roman conquests; the dis-
persion of the Jews; the spread of the
Greek language and Roman civilisation;
the yearning for spiritual life and unity.
B. In the merciful gift of Jesus Christ
to be its living head, and of the Spirit
to guide it into all the truth. y. In
the persecutions which dispersed it, and
the blood which watered it. & In its
marvellous preservation when the whole
world was against it. «s In its enrich-
ment by the stores of learning and art.
g. In its Pentecostal baptisms in all ages,
n. In its continual progress. 9, In the
promise of its glorious close, (2) As
individuals ; in conversion, the means of
grace, &c.

III. The recognition of the divine
mercy. “Qh, give thanks unto the
Lord.”

1. This merey ts often unrecognised.
Nations attribute their blessings to for
tunate circumstances, patient persever-
ance, or martial prowess ; ministers to
their learning, eloquence, or zeal ; the
Church to its orthodoxy, political alli-
ances, or enthusiasm; individuals to
happy cbances, or human sympathy and
help.

2. This recognition ts a matter of im-
perative obligation. Without this recog-
nition (1) the evils of selfishness and sin
can never be extinguished, (2) the merey
will be withdrawn, and (3) retribution
follow.

3. This recognition should take the
form of devout, grateful, and earnest
prasse,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


POALM OXVIIL,





“* Man’s Extremity Gop’s Opprorruniry.”
(Verses 5-7.)


L Man in distress. TWAT “ Out


of straits.” The figure is that of a fortress
surrounded by a beleaguering army, or
of soldiers hemmed in on every side
(see ver. 10), or of a torrent dammed up
by the pass through which it rushes;
imprisoned, constrained. This applies
to—

1. The Church. How often is it sur-
rounded aud hemmed in by infidelity,
ungodliness, superstition, persecution,
want of opportunity, political restriction,
and popular opinion !

2. The individual. In business,
family, society, by temptations, hostility
of friends, personal weakness, malignity
of foes.

IL Man’s duty in distress,

1. Prayer. Without this we shall
slways be in distress, Our own resources
are soon expended. Friends are often
unwilling or helpless, Let us “call upon
the Lord.” (1.) Jé ts our duty to God,
for He has commanded st, (2.) It ts our
duty to ourselves, A prayerless man is
a moralsuicide, ‘‘ Not ait by thyself, or
lie upon thy bench, hanging and shaking
thy head, and letting thy thoughts bite
and devour thee ; but rouse up, thou in-
dolent fellow ! fall upon thy knees, raise
thy hands and eyes to heaven, and pre-
sent thy distress before God with tears.”
—Luther,


2. Courage, “Iwill notfear.” Fear
blanches the courage, exhausts the
strength, and diverts the aim. As long
as courage lasts, hope is not extinct ;
but the moment fear comes in, defeat
supervenes,

IIL Man’s consolations in distress.

1. The Lordis onhis side. The Lord
has pledged Himself (1) to be with His
Church always ; (2) with His individual
children. What is there then to fear?
“Greater is He that is for you” (Isa.
xliii. 1, 2),

2. The Lord consecrates all His con-
Sederates for Hts good (ver, 4). Whether
they be friends or instrumentalities.

IV. Man’s deliverance in distress.

1. Victory over foes, This has been
the realisation of the Church in all ages,
(Rom. viii. 35, 39).

2. Perfect liberty. “The Lord set me
in a large place.” The misery of the
Psalmist was that he was straightened.
His deliverance was liberty in a large
open plain. This may be applied (1) to
Missionary enterprise. The Lord is ever
opening doors for His Church, loosing
her bonds, and enlarging the field of her
operations. (2) Zo spiritual life. We
are “called unto liberty, ” freedom, from
sin, of thought, of mental and moral
cultivation, philanthropy.


CovRAGE.
(Verses 6, 7.)


Courage is a very complex and diffi-
cult subject. We speak of physical
courage, mental, moral courage, courage
of convictions, &c. Many a man who
could walk up toa cannon’s mouth could
not facea public audience. Many aman
who has planted his country’s flag in the
thick of her foes has betrayed his most
cherished convictions. rue courage is
described in our text.

L Initssource, “The Lord is on my
aide.” Courage is supposed to spring


from self-reliance, That man {s counted
brave who scorns all allies and dares to
face the enemy alone. Hence much of
human courage is reckless hardihood,
True courage is the courage of trust in
God.

IL in its manifestations,
not fear,” &c.

1. It trusts God to do for tt what tt
cannot do for stself. It wisely dares to
acknowledge that by itself it is unequal
to certain enterprises, This of itself re-

24h


“T will


POALM OXVIII.





quires a great deal of courage, because
it requires so much self-abnegation, is 80
unpopular, and is often apparently not
warranted by circumstances.

2. This trust produces fearlessness of
consequences. Who can fear who has
taken this initial and most formidable
step of declaring himself on the side of
God? Young men, take this initial step;


ROMILETIO COMMENTARY : PSALMS.





for who can fear who knows that God is
on his side,

3, Fearlessness of consequences produces
the true courage of fidelity. Why is it
men are unfaithful # Consequences, un-
popularity, poverty, dc. ‘The fear of
man bringeth a snare.” ‘‘ Fear Him, ye
saints, and you will then have nothing
else to fear.”


Trust, Human anp Divine.
(Verses 8, 9.)


L Man must trust. All experience
proves this. Like the creeping parasite,
the soul must throw its tendrils round
some support.

IL Whom should man trust? Some
one whose qualities warrant that trust.

1. He must be all-suficient, able to
provide for all actual and possible neces-
sities, To trust for wisdom to the foolish,
for strength to the weak, d&c., nothing
but disappointment can follow.

2. He must be of supreme moral excel-
lence. If we trust to the suspected or
the worthless we shall be in a state of
perpetual unrest.

3. He must be the same at all times.
Trust in the feeble is ruin. Man must
have as the object of his trust one whose
omnipotent resources and spiritual per-
fection are beyond the mutation of this
world and abide for ever.

IIL Who warrants that trust?

1. Do men generally? No; (1) man
ts weak in wisdom and material resources ;


SPIRITUAL


(2) morally imperfect ; (3) ever change
ul,

: 2. Do princes? Least of all. They
are but men, sometimes the weakest,
worst, and most fickle of men, What
they have done let the followers of Con-
fucius, Buddha, Mohammed, the Pope,
and Priestcraft everywhere tell. One
thing : ruin.

IV. God offers Himself as the object
of human trust. It is better that man
should trust Him—

1. Because He warrants that trust.
“He is ableto do exceeding abundantly,”
&c. He is “ glorious in holiness.” He
is “the same yesterday, to-day,” d&c.

2. Because man’s confidence can thereby
be secured. That confidence has been
sadly shaken. Hence man’s distress. In
God it will stand firm.

3. Because of the blessed consequences
which will follow. (1.) salvation; (2.)
inward peace; (3.) human brotherhood ;
(4.) heaven.


WARFARE,


(Verses 10-13.)


L Danger.

1. A surrounding danger, ‘‘com-
passed.” The foes of the Christian are
not all in the front or in the light,
They are subtle, and everywhere. A
sudden temptation may reveal a weak-
ness hitherto unobserved. They assail
us at all points, at home and abroad, at
work and at rest, in the Church and in
the world.

2. A formidable danger. (1.) In point
of numbers, “like bees.” We wrestle

246


with principalities and powers, Count-
less multitudes are waiting for every
weakness, and plotting for every fall.
(2.) In point of pertinacity. The four-
fold repetition of the phrase, “ They
compassed me,” indicates assiduity and
perseverance. (3.) In point of weapons.
The sting of the bee is formidable from
its very insignificance. So it is not at
first by great temptations, but by small,
that we are assailed. The sting of the
bee is sharp, so the weapons arrayed


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; PSALMS.


PSALM OXVIG.


A


against us can pierce body, affections,
temper, intellect, and soul. (4.) In the
point of dexterity. It is difficult to
strike the bee when on the wing.
Happy the man who has transfixed the
tempter with the sword of the Spirit,
and has him under his feet.

3. A fatal danger. “They thrust
sore at me that I might fall.” Their


aim is not to weaken, but to destroy.


Hence quarter is neither given nor taken.
Victory or death is the only issue for
either side.

I. Help. ‘The Lord helped me.”

l. By jighting Himself where and
when we are helpless. There are certain
antagonists we can never cope with.
Sin, Satan, and death have to be en-
countered by Him first, and their power
crippled and themselves chained. In
effecting this Christ becomes “the Cap-
tain of our salvation.”

2. By animating us with the warlike
spirit, ‘God has not given to as the
spirit of cowardice (diAeas), but the
spirit of power.”

3. By arming us for the conflict.
(Eph. vi. 13-17).


4, By assurances of victory and re-
ward.

IIL Victory. ‘In the name of the
Lord, I will destroy them.”

1. The victory will come swiftly.
Like the dry thorns, they shall consume.
It remains very much with the Chris-
tian, with his faith, courage, and fidelity,
when the victory shall be won.

2. The victory shall be complete.
“Destroy.” “Sin shall have no more
dominion over you.” ‘The God of
peace shall bruise Satan under your
feet shortly.” ‘‘ Death shall be swal-
lowed up in victory.”

3. The glory of the victory shall be
given to him to whom tt is due. “In
the name of the Lord.” Note :—This
takes all the malevolence out of this
determination. It was a judicial ven-
geance of which the Psalmist was only
the instrument. God takes all the re-
sponsibility. Let persecutors see to it
that they have God’s warrant. We
know we have it in our war of exter-
minativun against sin. “ Not unto us,
but to Thy name,” &e,


Persona, AND Faminy Prery,


(Verses 14, 15.)


Notice :—

L That plety {s sadly wanting.
There are men to whom these words are
unintelligible. They know nothing of
God’s strength; they are strangers to His
salvation ; no song wells up from their
thankless hearts. Sad is their condition;
sad the condition of their homes. In
many homes all is vice, misery, want,
and broken-heartedness, as the result of
the parent’s irreligion. In all houses
which are not sanctified by the Word of
God and prayer, the deepest wants of
the family are unsatisfied.

Ii. That the want of piety is sup-
plied. “The Lord... has become,” &c.
Piety consists of three things,

1. Salvation. “The Lord is become.

. . He is my salvation.” Not simply
personal rescue or divine blessing, but


indwelling God. This involves every


other phase. It drives out sin, rescues
from impurity and death, gives heaven.

2. Salvation employed. “My strength,”
for use, of course. Strength unemployed
will be strength dissipated. If we do
not “ work out our salvation,” vis., that
which God has worked in, “ to will and
to do of His good pleasure,” spiritual
loss and death will supervene.

3. Salvation acknowledged. ‘“ My
song.” Salvation will and must express
itself. The praiseless lip argues the
thankless heart, and the thankless heart
is the heart from which God has fled.

III. That piety must be personally
appropriated. “My.”

1. Prety is a matter between the per-
sonal soul and its personal Saviour.
There can be no mediation or proxy.
No man can either get or keep our re

igion for us.
Ee 247


P@aLM CXYN,





2. The means of its appropriation ts
personal faith. ‘Believe on the Lord
Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved.”

3. The test of tts appropriation ts per-
sonal experience. “Is become.” The
Psalmist’s experience was no fiction.
He knew that there was a time when he
felt nothing of the sort. He knew that
now that time was over. He had
entered on a new phase in his career,
and of that phase he was sensible.

IV. That piety is appropriated to
be diffused. The sphere of its diffusion
here is the home (ver. 15), Piety may
be diffused at home by

1. Personal example,

2. Careful self-discipline,

3. Intelligent and patient training.

4. Interesting and constant worship, do.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


a Ye emcee +


V. That piety, and piety alone, will
make a home happy. “The voice of
rejoicing .... is in the tabernacles of the
righteous.”

1. Some pious homes, tt ts satd, ave not
happy. Does true piety reign there!
or cant, laxity, or severity ?

2. True piety must make a happy
home, because it is ‘‘ alway rejoicing.”

VL A happy home is a miniature
of and a nursery for heaven.

In concLusion.—(i.) Parents, st rests
with you whether your home ts a heaven
or a hell. (ii) Children, value your
homes, The time may come when you
will want them. (iii.) Children of pious
parents, make your future home what
your past has been,


Tur Lorp’s TRIUMPH.
(Verses 15, 16.)


These words may be applied (1) to
God’s sovereignty over the material uni-
verse and His power over its laws; (2)
to national deliverances, such as Moses,
David, elsewhere acknowledged, yes,
and such as we ought to acknowledge,
But (3) it suggests (and we will consider
it as suggesting) the triumphs of Christ
and His Gospel in the world,

IL. The personal triumph of Christ.

1. Over Satan. This began in the
wilderness, continued without intermis-
sion during His life, and ended by the
victory of the Cross.

2. Over the world, Our Lord con-
fronted the world in all its formas,
provincial, metropolitan, social, political,
upper, lower. ‘‘ He measured the world
and condemned it. And it fully under-
stood Him. It recognised His aim; it
quailed before Him, and it hated Him;
and it rested not till it had led Him to
His Cross; but He said, ‘I have overcome
the world.’”—Liddon,

3. Over sin, by bearing its penalty on
Calvary.

4. Over death, by His resurrection.

5. This fourfold triumph condensed
into one at His ascension (Col. L 15,
Eph. iv. 8).

248


IL The triumphs of His Gospel in
the human heart.
1. In tts conversion from sin to holiness,


‘Every other means has been tried and


has failed, human efforts, education,
moral philosophy. But Christ has
subdued the will, cleansed the soul,
introduced a powerful motive, and
imparted a new life.

2. Ln empowering the soul to resist sin,
strenuous opposition, favourable circum-
stances, human encouragement have been
in vain.

3. In promoting the growth of moral
excellence.

4. In giving us victory over the world,
tribulation, and death.

Il. The triumphs of His Ohurch in
the world.

1. Over persecution. Its early years
were years of blood.

2. Over old heathentsm, supported as
it was by poetry, learning, and extensive
popularity.

3. Over heresy, e.g. (1) Arianism, in
spite of its wide influence and royal
patronage ; (2) Popery, that giant super-
stition, still reels under Luther’s blow,
aud will yet fall.

4. Over religious indifference. Nothing


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.
eee


ever nas, or ever will excite such interest
and move so much as the simple preach-
ing of the Gospel. Where are the crowds
80 nunierous as at our churches ?

5. Over human hearts. Witness Pen-
tecost, the preaching of Luther, Latimer,
Wesley, Whitfield, dc. Nor are its tri-


PRALM OXVIII,





umphs confined to one class, In its early
ages the illiterate fisherman, the intelli-
gent publican, and the learned rabbi were
charmed and subdued. And the same
Gospel has since exerted its influence
over Bunyan the tinker and Newton the
philosopher,


CHASTISEMENT
(Verses 17, 18.)


The first of these verses was hung up
by Luther in his study, as his favourite
verse of his favourite Psalm. “It has
come to my aid again and again, and
supported me in heavy trials, when Kaiser,
king, philosopher, and saint could do
nought,” Chastisement—

L Its nature. ‘The Lord hath
chastened me sore.”

1. lt was the Lord’s chastisement,
therefore sovereign, fatherly.

2. By human instrumentality. His
enemies were permitted to “thrust at
him sore.”

3. Thorough, “Sore.” Not too much,
not too little, but sufficiently to accom-
plish the divine purposes (Job, xxx. 11).

IL Its limits. ‘He hath not given
me over to death.”


1. Physical death,

2. Intellectual death, Despair.

3. Moral death. Destruction.

IIL Its consolations. ‘I shall not
die, but live.”

1. Jt was corrective, remedial, and
therefore not simply punitive (Jer. x. 24).

2. Hopefulness against the worst. ‘I
shall not die.”

3. Confidence for the best. “ But live ”


“And declare the


(Acts xxvii. 22-25).


IV. Its effects.
works of the Lord.”

1. Devout gratitude.

2. Personal smprovement.

3. Religious earnestness and testimony.
“No affliction for the present seemeth
to be joyous but grievous, but after-


ward,” &c.


Toe Sacrep ENoLOsURE
(Verses 19-21.)


L The enclosure.

1. Literal. Our text primarily refers
to the sacred enclosure that was acces-
sible to true Israelites aiure, (Isa. xxvi.
2.) That enclosure was the house of God,
where His glory was manifested, His
name worshipped, and His people’s right-
eousness confirmed and strengthened. So
the Christian Church is where God’s pre-
sence is felt, His word proclaimed, His
worship celebrated, &e.

2. Moral. Christian life is a temple
of the living God and the sphere of right-
eousness, A way of holiness where God
dwells and walks with His people.

3, Heavenly (Ps. xxiv. 7), Heaven
is the sanctuary of God, and the dwelling-
place of righteousness.


IL The gates of that enclosure, “The


gates of righteousness.” “The gate ot
the Lord,”

1. The gate which belongs to the Lord.
The Lord keeps the gate ; not Peter, not
His ministers, but Himself.

2. The gate is of the Lord’s appoint-
ment. All who enter by any other climb
over the wall and are thieves and robbers,
There is only one way opened. “ There is
only one name given under heaven,” d&c.

3. The gate 1s the Lord Himself. “I
am the way.” “Iamthe door.” Christ
alone is the entrance to God’s righteous-
ness,

IIL The keys to that enclosure.

1, Ardent supplication. ‘ Open,”
implying need of entrance, desire to en-
ter. ‘“Ask;” “seek ;” “knock, and it
shall be opened unto you.”

349


PSALM OXVIIL


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





2. The divine willingness. ‘Thou
hast heard.” God has a sovereign right
to admit or exclude all He chooses ; but
we know that He will be guided by
righteousness, and will not select on
arbitrary principles.

3. Salvation. ‘“ Art become my sal-
vation.” Nothing that is defiled or
maketh a lie can enter. Only “the re-
deemed shall walk there.” They “enter
in and find pasture.”

IV. The privileges and duties of that
enclosure,


1. Worship. “ I will praise the Lord.”

2. Righteousness.

In concLusion.—(i.) The outer courts
are opentoall. (1.) Many privileges of
the material sanctuary. But let the
Church beware how she throws all her
privileges open. (2.) Opportunities for
righteousness. (3.) Opportunities for
qualifying for heaven. (ii.) The inner
court is open to all who are qualified to
enter, (1.) All the means of grace ; (2.)
the fulfilment of all righteousness; (3.) all


the hopes and fruits of glory.


Curist THE CorneR-SToneE.
(Verses 23, 23.)


Whatever literal application these
verses may have had, that application is
now merged into the richer, larger, and
undoubted application to the Messiah,
No text is more frequently quoted in the
New Testament. Six or seven times it
is quoted word for word, and in innu-
merable instances is it unquestionably
referred to where Christ is made the one,
true, and only foundation of the Church.
“ Must we, in opposition to the perverted
and obstinate exegesis even of believing
commentators, begin to prove that this
Psalm is Messianic—that the corner-stone
is a real prophecy of theSpirit concerning
Christ ? We frankly confess ourselves to
be so often vexed by such contentions
with brethren who do not understand the
scripture, that we lose patience; and,
however unscientifically, are inclined
rather to rebuke them with Christ (Luke
xxiv. 25) until their hearts burn, and
their burning hearts begin to read in the
light of the Pentecostal fire what is
written.” —Stier. Observe—

I, That Christ is the corner-stone.

1. What the corner-stone ts not. (1.)
Feelings towards Christ. These are most
unsubstantial and shifting. (2.) Doctrines
concerning Christ. These merely tell us
about the corner-stone. (3.) The ex-
ample of Christ. This is simply the
character of the corner-stone. (4.) The
Church of Christ, That is the building
reared on the corner-stone.

2. What the corner-stone ts. ‘“‘ Jesus
Christ Himself being the chief corner-

250


stone.” This only is solid, constant,
und eternal, All else is sand. This is
rock, Jesus Christ in His divine-human
personality. Incarnate, crucified, risen,
glorified, and reigning.

3. What the corner-stone ts for. (1.)
For beauty. Corner-stones are the most
costly, choice, and adorned. Other
stones derive their excellency from them,
So the Christian building derives its
beauty from Him who is “ full of grace
and truth.” “Of His fulness all we
have received, and grace for grace.” (2.)
Stability. They are chosen for firmness,
strength, and durability. They uphold
and maintain the building which without
them would crumble and fall.. So Christ
supports the individual believer and the
collective Church, in weakness, triais,
hour of death, day of judgment. (3.)
Unity and compactness. Take away the
corner-stone and the sides of the house
become separate buildings. This unity
ts not uniformity. The other stones are
of various sizes, value, colour, material.
The corner-stone gives harmony. So
different men have different capacities,
preferences, modes of thought and feel-
ing. Christ binds them into a mighty
whole—His Church.

II. That Christ is the only corner-
stone. There have been many rival
corner-stones. They have been tried,
but they have failed, and so have those
who have built upon them. Paganism,
Unbelief, Socialism, Philosophy, Ethics,
“Other foundation can no man lay than


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PSALM OXVIiI.





that is laid,” &c. He is the only corner-
stone by which God and man can be
brought together on terms that are at
once honourable, amicable, strong, and
abiding. He alone can bring the dispensa-
tions together into a harmonious whole
and make them anenduring basis forfaith
and morals. He is the only means by
which the disintegrated masses of man-
kind can find their principle of cohesion,
“One is your Master, even Christ, and
all ye are brethren.” He is the only
means whereby the disorganised faculties
of our nature can be reduced to order
and compacted in strength and “‘so make
our new man.”

IIt. That Christ is the divinely es-
tablished corner-stone. “This is the
Lord’s doings.” It is no myth or specu-
lation. It is not the doing of men or
angels, but of —

1. The Holy Trinity. The Father
“sent forth His Son,” and consecrated
Him. ‘“ Him hath God the Father
sealed.” The Son “came,” and by His
own power laid “ down His life and took
it again.” The Holy Spirit takes of the
things of Christ and imparts them to us.

2. The divine attributes. Wisdom de-
vised it ; justice instituted it ; love gave
it ; and power laid it.

3. The divine providence. (1.) By
@ wonderful preparation. Moral: the
Jews ; intellectual: the Greeks; politi-
cal: the Romans. (2.) In an age which
by its peculiar fitness was “‘the fulness
of the times.”

IV. That Christ is the rejected
corner-stone. In all ages since His
advent He has been the despised and
rejected of men, The Jewish people


and the whole heathen world combined
at first to resist His claims. He was a
stumbling-block to the one, and fool-
ishness to the other. Persecution and
controversy since have proved that the
human heart is alien to Him. Sin, infi-
delity, heresy, and worldliness all refuse
to build upon Christ.

V. That Christ is the marvellous
corner-stone.

1. Marvellous when we consider who is
the corner-stone. (1.) In tts unlikelihood.
The man Christ Jesus, born in a manger ;
the Man of Sorrows, crucified as a male-
factor. (2.) In its condescension. The
brightness of the Father’s glory, creator
of the universe, governor of angels, Lord —
of man.

2. Marvellous when we consider the
means by which He has become the corner-
stone. By the simple preaching of truths
alien to natural inclinations, political in-
stitutions, moral usages ; demanding the
resignation of pride of intellect, indepen-
dence of will, pleasure, profit; by men,
weak and unlearned in the world’s esti-
mation, whose weapons were not learning
or swords,,but holiness, suffering, zeal,
and prayer.

3. Marvellous when we consider the
numbers and quality of those who have
made tt their corner-stone. Countless
millions have eschewed beliefs conse-
crated by the profession of unnumbered
ages, have thrown off their allegiance to
priesthoods armed with every terror and
device, have resisted the fascinations of
philosophy, and have left darling vices
and besetting sins, These have been from
all ranks—monarchs, nobles, warriors,
statesmen, poets, &c,


Tur Lorp’s Day.
(Verse 24.)


L The day—

1. Of temporal deliverance. God has
made that. By a variety of providential
dispensations. Indirectly, through men
and other instrumentalities, ¢g., in
sickness, through the physician ; in per-
plexities, by friendly advice and help.
Directly, by the interposition of His
mighty power.


2. Of salvation. The whole Christian
dispensation is the time accepted byGod
in which to bless mankind. It is the
time acceptable to man in which his pres-
sing spiritual wants may be supplied.

3. Of conversion. The day when God
gives, and we personally take, Jesus
Christ to be our chief corner-stone. Let
that “happy day ” never be ies

1


POALM OXVIII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : PSALMS.








4. The sabbath day, by Jehovah's rest
and Christ’s resurrection,

IL. The duties of that day.

(1.) Rejotcing. Implying intense gra-
titude, cheerful consecration, holy zeal,


(2.) Gladness. Let no man say that
religion is a thing of gloom, God blessea
us that we may be happy. Let the day
of rest be the gladdest of all the seven.


BEnEDICTIONS,
(Verses 25, 26.)


This passage received its fulfilment
only in Him who came in the supremest
sense in the name of the Lord (Matt. xxi.
9). Here, however, it admits of a human
and general interpretation.

L The blessing supplicated.

1. This supplication ts the expression
ofa want, “Save.” “Send prosperity.”
“Save,” implying moral evil and degra-
dation ; “ Prosperity,” loss and misery.

2. This supplication was earnest. “ Be-
seech.” Our need is great, so must be
our cry. Listless prayer implies uncon-
sciousness of need.

3. This supplication was urgent.
“Save now.” “Send now.” Need is
always present. Blessings are ever
wanted.

Il. The conditions of blessing ful-
filled.

1. Coming. (1.) This ts inexorable.
“Come, now, let us reason ;” “Seek ye


PERSONAL
(Verses


I. Personal religion consists in the
acknowledgment of a personal God.
Religion must rest on a dogmatic and
theological basis. Whatever definition
we give to the term religion, this is pri-
marily involved. If it consists in the
bond which unites the soul to the Sup-
reme Being, then we must know who
that Supreme Being is. If it consists
in duty, then with reference to whom are
those duties performed. Toresolve God
into a “stream or tendency which makes
for righteousness ” does not avoid theo-
logy or dogma.

II. Personal religion consists in the
acknowledgment of a personal God ac-
eessible toman. God is accessible, be-
cause He is “ good.” If He is not good,

252


the Lord,” &e. (2.) Can only be fulfilled
through Christ, ‘ Noman comet: unte
the Father but by Me.” (3.) Js equs
valent to Christian faith. Faith is the
soul’s approach to God through Christ.

2. Coming in the name of the Lord.
(1) Not in our name, or (2) by our own
merits, but (3) in the name of the Lord,
Self-distrust, resignation, confidence.

IIL. The blessing vouchsafed.

1. Salvation ; from the guilt, power,
pollution, and punishment of sin.

2. Prosperity. The great gift of God
through His Son and Spirit Regene
ration, sanctification, indwelling peace,
joy, power, heaven.

IV. The place of blessing.
house of the Lord.”

1. All the means of grace are there com
centrated.

2. The vast majority of Christians re-
ceive their highest blessings there,


“ The


RELIGION.


27-29.)


He is unapproachable, and must be the
object of man’s fear. God is permanently
accessible, because His mercy endureth
for ever. Religion must have an object
who can be approached through all the
vicissitudes of life,

III. Personal religion consists in the
apprehension of apersonal God. ‘“ My
God.” ‘This is a truth unknown be-
yond the precincts of revelation, The
Almighty and Eternal gives Himself in
the fulness of His being to the soul that
seeks Him, Heathenism, indeed, in its
cultus of domestic and local duties, of its
penates, of its deo’ érrweier, bare witness
to the deep yearning of the human heart
for the individualising love of a higher
power. To know the true Goc ia to


HOMILET.C COMMENTARY: PSALMS,





know that such a craving is satisfied.”
Tiddon. .

IV. Personal religion consists in the
acknowledgment ,and enjoyment of a
divine revelation “‘ which hath showed
us light.” 1f God is to be approached
and apprehended, He must reveal Him-
self. If man is to receive his Maker's
blessing, be united to his Maker’s person,


and fulfil his Maker's will, he must be


PHALM OXIX,


told who that Maker is and what He
would have him do. God hath showed
us light in the Bible and in the revela-
tion of Him who said, “ He that hath
seen Me hath seen the Father.”

V. Personal religion consists in per
sonal sacrifices (ver. 27).

VI. Personal religion consists in de-
vout, worship, thanksgiving, and praise
(vers. 28, 29),





PSALM OXIX


INTRODUCTION,


1. Date and authorship, Some ascribe the authorship to * David, before his accession to
the kingdom, in exile and peril (vers. 9, 23, 46, 141, 161). Others (of chief authority), from
the language and contents, imagine it te be of much later date. Jebb thinks, Daniel; others,
Ezra ; Dean Stanley says that the rhythm seems to mark the age of Jeremiah ; Kay supposes it
to depict the mental state of those who have passed through the discipline of the captivity ;
Hitzig, as usual, refers it to the days of the Maccabees (see Macc. xii. 48).”—Speaker'a Com.

2. Character, There are twenty-two sections in this Psalm, arranged according to the
Hebrew alphabet, each consist of eight verses, and every eight begins with the same letter.
Thus, there are eight initial Alephs, eight initial Beths, &e. Im nearly every verse the divine
law is mentioned, and the sacred name of Jehovah is brought in twenty-two times onee for each


letter.


*« Tt contains many repetitions and imitations of earlier Psalms. . . . No part of Scrip-


ture is more suggestive of edifying trains of thought, or more saturated with a spirit all but
Christian, of humility, trust, devoted love to God, and realisation of His near presence, . . . It
is an epitome of all true religion, and must be studied by any one who wishes to fathom the
meaning of the law, and the elevation, hope, joy, confidence, felt in presence of kings and princes


by pious Jews.”—Speaker’s Com.


3. Contents, “There is no grouping or arrangement of the subjects of this Psalm, and little


or no connection between the sentiment of its verses.
ible to make an arrangement under particular heads—such ag the following


»-. It might be


—under the general title of the Word of God :—1. In youth. 2, In trial.


Much in it is proverbial or aphoristie,


8. In duty. 4. In


Meditation. 5. At night. 6, Im public, 7. In private. 8. Im prosperity. 9, In adversity,
be,” —Barnes,
Tae BuEsseD
(Verses 1-3.)
Notice— equilibrium of his being, a0 that intellect,


L That all men are not happy. Our
text specifies those who are, and implies
that all else are unhappy.

1. All men desire happiness. The
heathens were ever in quest of the chief
good, Bad men and worldly men are
ever pursuing their vices and follies to
this end.

2. This happiness ts not attained—(1)
Because the end aimed at ts only mis-
taken for happiness. Riches, honour,
pleasures, &c., when secured are fre-
quently found to be misery rather than
bliss (Luke xvi. 25), That which makes
a man happy must exactly answer all
the cravings of his soul and secure the


conscience, will, d&c., shall cry in har
mony, “ It is enough.” Again, that
which makes a man happy must be en
during, but the things of the world perish
in the using (1 Cor. vii. 30, 31), and
the pleasures of sin are only “ for a sea
son.” (2) Because the means employed
are not adequate. Some are ignorant of
the true means, and some dislike them
(John vi. 34., of. 66); (3) and vf ade
quate means are not employed, and the
right end not secured, all becomes
‘vanity and vexation of spirit.”

1. That all men can secure happiness
only by a right state of the heart.
“ That seek Him with their whole heart.”

253


PGaLM OXIX,





1. A right state of the heart contem-
plates the true end of happiness, “Him.”
God alone is the soul’s satisfying por-


tion. The completest worldly abundance |


leaves some craving unsatisfied. When
the soul is “filled with all the fulness
of God,” it can ask no more,

2. A right state of the heart seeks hap-
piness in the right way. ‘ With the
whole heart.” The sensualist seeks phy-
sical gratification; the intellectualist,
mental ; the moralist, ethical. <A right
state of the heart seeks complete hap-
piness, the satisfaction of adl its higher
cravings, so as to leave none unblessed.

IIL. That all men can maintain hap-
piness only by a right state of the life.
The blessed are those who

1. “Are the undefiled in the way.”
(Marg. Sincere; not absolutely perfect
men, but men with a clear conscience and
an upright intention.)

2. “ Walk in the law of the Lord.”
The inconsistent, the lawless, are un-
happy. The law of God is so exactly
suited to all our faculties, that only by
keeping it can their well-being be secured,

3. “ Do no iniquity.” “ The way of
transgressors ia hard.”


HOMILETIO COMMBNTARY: PSALMS.


IV. That provision is made for
man’s happiness in the Word of God.

l. That word indicates what true
happiness is, It tells us that mau was
originally happy; that angels and the
spirits of just men made perfect are
happy ; that God only can make men
happy, and that He does so by the gift
of Himself and the “ unsearchable riches
of Christ.”

2. That word is an infallible guide to
true happiness, There can be no hap-
piness where there is uncertainty as to
means or ends. Man left to this world’s
fluctuating rules of good intentiom, cus-
tom, desire, &c., adopts measures which
land him in disappointment. The Bible
is the perfect and authoritative counsel
of God. Guided by that we shall be re-
ceived into glory.

3. That word afords us a powerful
help towards true happiness. It is God’s
“testimony.” It testifies to the facts of
God’s fatherhood, goodness, and power;
to Christ’s atonement and intercession ;
to the Holy Spirit’s regenerating, con-
soling, and sanctifying influences ; and te
heaven.


Law, Prayrr, Dury,
(Verses 4-6.)


L Law.
us,” d&e.

1. The Bible ts based upon the per-
sonal authority of God.” ‘‘ Thou. (1.) Not
man's. The obligaticn to attend to its
precepts does not rest upon the fact that
great and good men wrote it, acknow-
ledged it, and kept it. (2.) Not tts own.
The inherent excellence of its doctrines
and morals would be enough if only in-
tellectual or moral assent and admiration
were demanded, But (3.) God's. This
accounts for its moral excellence and
commanding influence, But let it be em-
phasised that primarily it rests upon His
sovereign will, There are many things
that transcend reason and run counter to
merely human interests ; but we believe
and obey them, because “ God spake all
these words.”

2. The Bible comes to we om the per
sonal authority of Ged. ‘ Thou haat

254


‘hou hast commanded


commanded.” (1.) The Bible ts not a re-
commendation from God, which man may
or may not accept either as a whole, or
on @ principle of eclecticism in its parts.
The Bible as a whole and in its parts
being the charge of sovereign will and
the revelation of the only, remedy for
human sin, therefore man must keep it
as a whole. (2.) The Bible ts not the
product of man’s intellect in a high spi-
ritual mood. Its philosophy and virtue
were not the discovery of good men
studying and sympathising with the need
of their fellow-men. But (3.) the Bible
ts the collection of certain “ precepts,” ex-
hibited in the form of doctrine, history,
example, &., binding on the heart and
conscience of men, direct from the coun-
sels of the Most High,

3. The Bible must be diligently kept.
(1.) Jt must be kept In the mind. It
is necessary first to have it, so “he that


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PSALM CXIX,





receiveth the word into good ground is
he that heareth the word and under-
standeth it.” Dy the will, in assenting
to it. By the heart, in loving it. By
the life, in practising it. “If ye know
these things, happy are ye if ye do them.”
(2.) Comprehensively ; Heb. : very much,
all of them. In small duties, as well as
great, must we exercise ourselves to have
a conscience void of offence, &e. At all
times. ‘‘ Blessed is he that doeth right-
eousness at all times.” “ Blessed are
they that sow beside all waters.” With
all our powers. (3.) Diligently.

Il. Prayer. The Psalmist contemplat-
ing the exceeding breadth of God’s com-
mandments, and his own weakness, im-
plores divine help (ver. 5), This shows
us—

1. The necessity of prayer. The Heb,
particle, “O that!” is an intense sigh,
indicative of earnest desire. This neces-
sity is based upon (1) Our tgnorance.
We know not what to do till we are told.
Religion does not come to us by instinct.
(2) Our forgetfulness, Anxiety and self-
conceit often drive the most necessary
things out of our mind, we therefore
need and must pray for what is promised
(Isa. xxx.21). (3). Our moral weakness
and indisposttion. Our hearts are natu-
rally averse and our feet prone to wander
from God’s statutes, ‘These people do
err in their hearts,” d&c,

2. The substance of prayer. ‘‘ Were
directed.” (1.) Generally by the Bible, the
course of providence, and the example of
good men. (2.) Specifically by the Spirit,
in the various ways which we from time
to time have to tread. “The Lord di-
rected his steps.” ‘O Lord, I know
that the way of a man is not in himself;
it is not in man to direct his steps.” (3.)
Literally, “ Thy word is a lamp unto my
feet, and a light to my path.” “In all thy
ways acknowledge Him,” &e. (4.) Hffec-
tually by the Holy Ghost applying to the
heart and disposing it. “ The Lord direct
your hearts into the love of God,” &c.


3. The end of prayer. “To keep Thy
statutes.” (1.) It is to be remarked that,
of all the ends desired in this long Psalm,
the first is holiness, (2.) That end ia
practical holiness, not contemplative or
ascetic “ways,” “statutes.” (3.) That
ts the best and most desirableend. “Seek
ye first,” &e.

Ii. Duty. The Psalmist looks for-
ward to the result of answered prayer,
and feels that under divine guidance he
will not be ashamed when he has respect
unto God’s commandments,

1, Duty contemplates a regard for God's
law; implying (1) moral susceptibility.
The wicked are callous, their hearts being
hardened, and their wills set. (2) Mental
respect. Unless we respect God’s law, we
can never acknowledge it. (3) Practical
observance.

2. Duty consists in an universal obedi-
ence to God’s law. “ Unto all Thy com-
mandments,” whether (1) tts precious
promises, (2) tts elevating precepts, or (3)
sts stern obligations.

3. Duty ts rewarded by the approbation
of God’slaw. ‘Shall not be ashamed,”
t.¢., shall have no reason to be ashamed.
(1.) God's law will approve a clear con-
science (Rom. viii. 1). (2.) God’s law
will appreve us so that we may dispense
with the judgment of man. “With me
it is a very small thing to be judged with
man’s judgment,” for “God will bring
forth thy righteousness as the light, and
thy judgment as the noon-day.” (3.)
God’s law will approve us at the great
day. ‘And now, little children, abide
in Him, that when He shall appear we
may have confidence and not be ashamed
at His coming.”

In conciusion.—(i.) God's command-
ments are commandments with promise ;
tf we keep them we shall not be ashamed.
(ii.) We are unable to keep them without
divine help ; let us pray for that help.
(iii.) When that help 1s vouchsafe! let us
use it diligently, comprehensively, and per-
petually.


Goop REsoLUTrIONS.
(Verses 7, 8.)


Our text shows—
L That good resolutions depend on


the presence of God for their fulfilment,
“O forsake me not utterly.” Therefore—
355


CALM OXIX,





1. God's presence should be earnestly
eupplicated. (1.) Because of our tm-
potence. “Without Me, ye can do
nothing.” (2.) Because of our instability.
Nothing is more fluctuating than mere
resolutions, Peter said, “Though all
should forsake Thee,” &c, (3.) Because
tt is of God to give grace to help,” dk.
(Eph. vi. 10).

2. God’s presence will be vouchsafed.
Not always sensibly, but always effec-
tually. “Lo, I am with you alway.”
Therefore (1) Be not discouraged when
God seems to be away. When the bird
is away from her young, she is in search
of food. When pioneers are away from
the army, they are preparing the way for
it. So God sometimes fulfils the promise,
‘*T will go before thee, to make crooked
vlaces straight.” (2) Be not discouraged
when God withdraws His comforts. We
may sometimes lose our sense of God’s
fove, as Asaph did. But is God neces-
sarily away? No (Ps. lxxxiii. 23).
But (3) Be encouraged to resolve under
the inspiration of the promise, “Cer-
tainly, I will be with thee.”

3. God’s presence may be withdrawn,
“ My Spirit shall not always strive with
man.” And nothing will drive Him
away more than selfish, conceited, or
hypocritical resolutions,

IL. That good resolutions have respect
to divine law. “TI will keep Thy sta-
tutes.” All other resolutions are vain
which omit this as their great and com-
manding aim.

1. God demands tt.

2. Our new nature demands tt.

3. Our desire for blessedness demands


III, That the fulfilment of good
resolutions depends on the right state


A Srriovs Worp


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





of the heart and life. With upright-
ness of heart, when I shall have learned
Thy righteous statutes.” Good resolu-
tions are easily formed ; their fulfilment
isa very different matter. God’s presence
is easily supplicated ; but God’s power is
exerted in the employment of adequate
means, There must be—

1. A right state of the heart. Before
God’s statutes can be kept, the heart
must be disposed to keep them. The
heart naturally inclined from the law of
God, must be re-bent and inclined to-
wards it.

2. A learning of “the judgments of
righteousness” concerning our state,
Matt. xvi. 6; thoughts, Heb. iv. 12;
actions, Eccl. xii. 14; the way of justi-
fication, Rom. iii. 22. We must ascertain
the things we ought to resolve, and then
trust to God’s Spirit to enable us to
carry them out.

IV. That the fulfilment of good reso-
lutions should be followed by gratitude.
“T will praise Thee.”

1. Duty binds us tort. The fulfilment
of resolutions that are really good has
been by the help of God, and has secured
our highest good,

2. The permanent result depends upon
tt.

3. Fresh resolutions are strengthened
by tt.
In conoLuston.—{i.) Let your life be
characterised by strong and noble resolu-
tions. Don’t be discouraged if you fail
at first. Resolve, by the grace of God,
not rashly, but firmly. (ii.) Compare
your resolutions with the Word of God.
(iii) Carry them out at all costs (Matt,
xvi. 24). (iv.) Crown and glorify them
all by profound gratitude,


york Youna Mzx,


(Verse 9.)


“The case supposed is that of a young
man pondering the question how he may


be saved from the corruptions of his own -


heart, and escape the temptations to

which he is exposed in early years, and

lead a pure and upright life. There can

be no more important inquiry for one
286


just entering on the journey of life ; there
can be found nowhere a more just and
comprehensive answer. All the precepta
of ancient and modern wisdom, and all
the results of the experience of mankind,
could furnish nothing in addition to what
is here suggested.”— Barnes,


HOMILETIC COMMINTARY: PSALMS.


L A serious question asked.

1. The importance of away. “A way
has a direction, and leads some whither.
A way is continuous, and if we are in it
we are advancing in it. A way differs
in its-direction from other ways, and
diverges more and more from them the
farther one travelsuponit, There are in
our lives no isolated acts, but only ways.
Every present has its closely affiliated
future. We are moving on in character
as in years. The wrong of which you
say, ‘Only this once,’ provokes its own
repetition and starts you in its own
direction. The violation of truth, &c.,
involves you in a labyrinth of mole paths,
You meant an act, you have found ita
way; a precipitous way, too, in which
you gain momentum at every step.”—
Dr. Peabody.

2. Thedangerof having an impure way.
Our text “is a metaphor which appeals
to our experience. What is more dis-
heartening than the necessity of treading
muddy streets. There is a consciousness
of unfitness for society. There are miry
soul paths, miry they are to every eye in
their more advanced stages ; for there is
no evil course that does not tend by sure
and generally rapid steps to open shame,
squalor, and misery.” —Jbid,

3. The special appropriateness of this
geestion, MTN, “a track, a rut, such
as are made by wheels, &e. A young
sinuer has no broad beaten path; he has
his private ways of offence, his secret
pollutions ; and how shall he be cleansed
from these? how can he be saved from
what will destroy body and mind and
soul?”—Dr. A. Clarke. The future,
too, depends on the young; upon the pure
or impure paths they follow depends the
intellectual, social, and political life of
the future.

I. A satisfactory answer given.
‘By taking heed thereto according to
Thy Word.”

1. God's Word ts the only rule of right-
eousness. All other rules njust, in the
long run, lead astray. Conscience will
never give a wrong direction, but it some-
times fails to give a right. You can’t
bribe it into falsehood, but you can drug
it into silence. When on the judgment
weat you can depend on its decisions; but


voL, ©


PSaLK OXYZ.


it is not always there. So with senti-
ments of honour, self-respect, self-twterest,
&c, ; there is no security in any of them.
Only the Word of God is pure. It alone
exhibits the sum of all perfection in the
holiness of God and the character of
Christ. ‘I have given you an Example.”
“ Be ye holy, as He who has called you
is holy.”

2. The Word of God ts the only means
by which we can be cleansed.‘ Sanctify
them by Thy truth,” dc. (1.) Lé ts the only
clear revealer of the character of sin. (2.)
It alone urges upon us the necessity of
holiness. (3.) It alone encourages us to
seck holiness by its exceeding great and
precious promises (2 Cor. vii. 1, 2 Pet, i
4). (4.) It alone reveals the all-suffictent
remedy for sin.

3. The Word of God must be studied
and applied. “By taking heed.” (1.)
A careful study of tts principles. (2.) A
careful reference of tts precepts to our
special requirements, (3.) A careful
walking according to tts rule. ;

IL. Sufficient reasons suggested.

1. Because God demands it. (1.) God
should not be long kept out of His rights.
“ Remember now thy Creator.” The ves-
sel should as soon as possible be made
meet for the master’s use, God has made
everything ready, so there need be no
delay. (2.) God should have our best at
tts best. All we enjoy we owe to Him.
The Mosaic law recognised this (Lev. ii.
4). Youthis the best time. Health and
vigour belong to it. Shall the best be
devoted to the devil, and when you are
no longer of use to him will you offer
God the dregs ? (Rom. xii. 1.)

2. Because reason demands it, (1.)
Youth is the time of special temptations
(2 Tim. ii. 22.) Children are of no use to
the devil. The aged he has done with.
But he loves to get hold of young men
(1 Tim. iii. 6.) (2.) Hvtl habits grow and
strengthen by every indulgence. A twig
may be easily bent, but the branch is
fixed; a sapling may be transplanted,
anoaknever, (3.) The longer you delay
the more useless you are for God and good.

3. Because self-interest demands ¢,
(1.) Life ts uncertain, Such a momen-
tous question must not be trifled with,
Warning is not always given, Nadab


257


PSALM OXIX,


and Abihu were young men. There is
but a step between us and death, (2.)
God is provoked to anger by delay, and
retribution accumulates both in this life
and the next (Job, xiii. 26). (3.) Divine
blessings aredelayed. It is good for aman


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


In concLusion.—You are beginning
life, begin it with God. You have great
temptations, but you have great help
(Job. ii, 28, 29) and bright prospects
(Mark x. 14). There are only two ways,
the way of life and the way of death—


to bear this yoke in his youth. where are yout
ARGUMENT wiTH Gop.
(Verse 10.)


God offers to reason with man. He
offers to reason with the sinner, permits
him to state his own case and to “ bring
forth his strong reasons” in support of
it, He offers to reason with the saints ;
and the saint here takes up the chal-
lenge. The Psalmist presents before
God’s notice a fact. He then bases an
argument upon this fact, and then turns
the fact and argument into a prayer.

L The fact, “With my whole heart
have I sought Thee.”

1. What ts tt to seck God ? (Ps. xxiv.
6). It is an earnest and diligent en-
deavour to find God in certain definite
characters for certain definite purposes,
(1) As our God, Sovereign, Father,
Friend ; (2) as our Guide by His Word
and Spirit ; (3) as our exceeding great
reward. c

2. Where should we seek God? (1.)
In sinfulness, notwithstanding Adam's
flight from Him and Peter’s desire that
He should depart. That is the one
reason why we should desire God's
presence to pardon it, and help us out
of it, (2.) In difficulties. In doubt
for His direction ; in weakness for His
strength ; in sickness for His health;
in trouble for His consolation ; as Paul
(2 Cor, xii, 7-9). (3.) In our daily life.
The heathen consulted their penates ;
Laban, his teraphim; Balak, Balaam.
Shall God’s people be behind these #
Seek God’s permission, counsel, blessing.
(4.) In personal communion, not when
we are obliged to go, and simply be-
cause we are obliged to go, but because
we love to go (Ps. xxii. 26).

3. How should we seek
the whole heart”—(1.) Personally.
“Thee with my.” Men sometimes
profess to seek God, when they are

358


“With


mess to wander.


but. seeking their own interests (John
vi. 26). When we seek from God
other than Himself, or send others
with our requests, we fail. We can-
not find God by proxy. (2.) Com
prehensively. “ Whole.” The combined
faculties of the soul. Intelligently by
the study of His Word and works;
morally, by faith and love, (3.) Har-
nestly and uniformly, not by fits and
starts. Such, then, is the fact that the
Psalmist lays before God, and which
forms the premises of his argument.

IL The Argumentative value of the
fact.

1. The Psalmist does not offer it (1)
Boastfully—the plea goes side by side
with confessions of unworthiness — or
(2) Meritoriously. No one can argue
with God on that basis. ‘“ What hast
thou that thou didst not receive?” We
can only glory that we are in debt to
God (1 Cor. i. 31).

2. The Psalmist does offer tt as a rea
son why God should help him. (1.) He
wants to find God. He is using the
means. God is implored to bless those
means, (2.) He wants further blessing.
God has already commanded and
wrought in him the desire to seek. He
now asks that he may find.

III. The prayer founded on the
argument and fact. This is worthy of
special note. He does not ask for
temporal advantages, but for steadfast-
ness in God’s ways. Notice—

1, Man's proneness to wander (Jer.
xiv. 10, Isa. liii., Luke xv.).

2. The saint’s sensibility of this prone-
The more we desire to
seek God, and are on the way to find
Him, the keener will be our sensibility
of error,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; PSALMS.





3. The saint's conviction of God's abi-
lity to keep him from wandering.

FinaL_y.—Those who seek God shall
find Him. Those who have arguments


PRALM OXIX,


to plead will find those arguments
valued. Those who pray shall have
their prayers answered.


Taz Worp or Gop, its SPHERE AND ITs SERVICE.
(Verse 11.)


The Word of God is the revelation of
His person and will. It is the duty of
man to treasure it up where it can be
preserved most safely. If it is only on
our shelves or in our heads, it may be
stolen or forgotten; but if it is in our
hearts, cherished by our affections and
guarded by our will, and embodied in
our spiritual life, it is safe from loss or
decay. But once in the heart it is not
only kept by the heart, but keeps the
heart. “Thou bearest Caesar and his
fortunes.” The fortress keeps the
granary, but the granary keeps those
who man the ramparts.

L Whatisdone? ‘Thy Word have
I hid in my heart,” which implies—

1. Understanding it. Thoughts must
pass into the heart through the mind
(Prov. ii, 10). Not that it is necessary
that it should be fully comprehended.
Water does not always fill the channel
through which it flows. It is enough
if it fills the vessel into which it flows.
Many mysteries baffle the intellect, but
the heart is the proper organ for their
comprehension.

2. Believing tt. Until unbelief is
broken down, the Word appeals for
entrance in vain. When, however, it
is welcomed by the hand of faith, it
enters in and dwells there. It did not
profit the ancient Jews, because it was
not mixed with faith.

3. Loving it. The heart is the seat
of the affections, and where there is no
love the Word cannot enter. ‘‘If ye
love Me, keep My commandments.”

4. Appropriating st. There may be
understanding faith and even love, and
yet no hiding of the Word. These are
but means to an end; its reception into
our very heart’s life, so that we may
become a law unto ourselves, walking
Bibles, living epistles,

IL How it is done.


1. By reading & continuously, con-
stantly, and systematically.

2. By searching tt: as the miner does
for hid treasures, as the workman does
for the best materials and the best tools.
Superficial work will produce only super-
ficial results,

3. By meditating upon tt. If we
simply read it, we shall forget it. If we
merely search, we may treat what we
find as subjects of interest or curiosity.
But if we meditate, what we have found
in our search will become seed-corn in
our hearts, to bring forth fruit to the
glory of God.

Itt, The advantages of doing it. In
the heart the Word of God is—

1. Safe (1) from the fluctuations of me-
mory ; it has become part of ourselves,
and is as unchangeable as our identity.
(2) From the assaulis of unbelief. It has
passed out of the region of speculative
belief and tentative hypothesis into the
region of facts, (3) From the depriva-
tions of affliction. We may be unable to
hear the Word of God or even to read
it, but if it is stored up in the heart we
can dispense, if necessity demand it, with
external means, (4) From the hand of
the persecutor. Said that lad of whom
Foxe speaks, when the Marian persecu-
tors tock his Bible from him, “ Thank
God, you cannot take away those chapters
He has written on my heart.”

2. Ready for every emergency. The
most powerful remedy and the most valu-
able blessings are nothing worth if not
close at hand when required. ‘ Every
scribe that is instructed unto thekingdom
of heaven bringeth forth out of his trea-
sures things new and old.” It is ready
(1.) Zo comfort in distress, (2.) To pro-
vide arguments against unbelief. (3.) To
furnish us with pleas in prayer. Our
prayers are effectual in proportion as
the word of Christ dwells in us richly

259


PALM CX1X,





(4.) Zo make spiritual intercourse more
sweet and edifying, Col. iii. 6. (5.) To
afford instruction, stimulous, sanctity, and
diligence in the concerns of daily life.
IV. The grand purpose of doing it.
“That I might not sin against Thee.”
Bhe Word of God hid in the heart safe
from attack, but ready to attack will :—
1, Hapel sin. The heart “abhors a
vacuum.” It will be filled with some-
thing. If not with the Word of God,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,





with sin. But both will not dwell to
gether there. Divine principles, however,
will extirpate sin.

2. Preserve from falling into sin,
“The law of the Lord is in his heart,
none of his steps shall slide.”

3. Enable us to overcome sin. In this
great warfare all other weapons but the
sword of the Spirit will fail (1 Joba i.
14).


Tue Sovromw anp Means or BLEssEDNESS.
(Verse 12.)


IL. God is the source and fountain of
all blessedness. ‘“‘ Blessed art Thou, O
God.”

1. God ts absolutely blessed in Himself.
He is “the blessed God,” “the blessed
and only potentate.” ‘Over all, God
blessed for ever ;” free from all misery,
enjoying all good, all-sufficient in Him-
self, contented with Himself, delighted
with Himself, neither needing any good
or fearing any evil from the work of His
hands (Ps. xvi. 2).

2. God communicates all blessings from
Himself (P. cxlv. 16, Eph. i. 3). He is
the most conspicuous illustration of His
own saying, “ It is more blessed to give
than to receive” (John i. 16).

3. God appropriates all blessings to
Himself (Ps. cxlv. 10, Rev. v. 13).

TL. Man’s blessedness consists in the
enjoyment of God. “Happy is the peo-
ple whose God is the Lord.” God, being
absolutely blessed, has enough for Him-
self, and therefore enough for us. He is
“ God all-sufficient,”

1. Man misses happiness if he seeks tt
from any source short of God. Everything


else is (1) tmperfect. Let the world’s
contributions be ever so copious they
leave some void. Solomon, Ahab, Na-
both, &c. (2) Tllusive. The happiness
they bring is only apparent. They can-
not quell one unquiet passion, or still
or satisfy conscience (Prov. xiv. 3). (3)
Transient, An immortal soul can only
be satisfied with “pleasures for ever-
more.”

2. Man gains happiness when he secks
st in God. (1.) God ts “able to supply all
our need.” “In His presence is fulnesa
of joy.” (2.) God's blessings are real.
Sin is cleansed, passions subdued, cun-
science satisfied, soul fed, and the whole
man kept in perfect peace, (3.) God's
satisfactions are charged with His own
tmmortality.

III. Man’s blessedness is secured
through instruction in God’s statutes.

l. They teach us the way to God.

2, They teach us how to partake of the
blessed nature of God (2 Peter i. 4).

3. How we may live the life of God
and engage in His blessed work.

IN CoNcLUSION.—Prov, viii, 34, 35.


TESTIMONY.
(Verse 13.)


This verse {s closely connected with
the two preceding. In verse 11 the
Word is hid in the heart, now it finds
expression on the lips, To express what
we do not feel is hypocrisy ; and what is
seally in the heart will find an outfiow.

260


In verse 12 God is asked to teach Hia
statutes: the prayer is now answered,
and, mentally and morally qualified, the
Psalmist teaches others.

L The subject of this testimony.
“ All the judgments of Thy mouth.”


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


PSALM OXIX,





1. God’s fudgments are divinely re-
vealed, Not human discoveries or specu-
lations.

2. God's judgments are the divine
eriteria whereby to decide in all matters
affecting truth, duty, and destiny (Isa.
viii. 20). Not reason, interest: what
man thinks or feels ; but God’s infallible
judgment.

3. God’s judgments are the rule by
which He judges the world, Now (John
v. 45, 46). They are not arbitrary and
capricious, but fixed, written down. By
them He will adjudicate at the last day.
(John xii. 48), Notice, then, that what
God has said, and said in His sovereign
and official character, is the subject of
our testimony. ‘

IL The manner of this testimony.

1. Clearly. “ Declared.”

2. Fully. “ All the judgments ” (Acts
xx. 27).

3. Faithfully. “All the judgments
of Thy mouth,” Not oar own opinions,
speculations, or doubts (1 Peter ii. 2).
a&édovoy yaaa, unmixed milk. “To mix
it with sugar and the luscious strains of
human evil disguises it and hides it from
a spiritual taste, To mix it with lime
(as Jerome says of heretics) makes it
baneful and noxious.”—¥M. Henry.

IIL. The reason for this testimony.

1. Jt ts a duty we owe to God. He
gave us the organs of speech (Ps. xii.


Gop’s TESTIMONIES


4). When we give our bodies a living
sacrifice we must not reserve our tongue
(Jas, iii, 9).

2. Because the lips should be in har
mony with the character. “The tongue
of the just is as choice silver.” The
sensualist will talk of his pleasures, the
man of business of his trade, the student
of his books, and shall the righteous re-
strain their testimony? (Matt. xii, 35.)

2. Because the tongue ts the most im-
portant member in the propagation of
divine truth. Perhaps example is over-
valued. True Christianity is not pro-
fession, but life. But how can example
influence without a declaration of those
judgments upon which it is based? The
preference of life over testimony may
perhaps spring from a shrinking from an
arduous duty,

IN conoLusion.—Let the example of
the Psalmist stimulate us to a more per-
fect fulfilment of this much-neglected
or badly-discharged obligation. How
much there is of mere speculation and
laboured rhetoric in preaching! How
much of foolish talking and jesting, to
say no more, in the family and social
circle! Let the preacher prepare him-
self by the more diligent study of the
judgments of God, and let private Chris-
tians remember Coloss. iv, 6, and let
the Church in its private gatherings re-
member Heb, iii. 13, and Ps, xxxvii. 30.


a Grovunp or Joy.


(Verse 14.)


L What the Psalmist did. ‘Ihave
rejoiced in the way of Thy testimonies
as much as in all riches.” The testi-
monies themselves are a “ way.” God’s
Word is a progressive revelation. And
the life to which it bears testimony and
for which it is a guide is the “ way of
holiness.” Thus the Psalmist rej iced
in the study and practice of the Word of
God. Looking around him he observed
that riches were the main elements in
human joy, and that men considered
themselves happy in proportion to their
wealth, But his conclusion is, that all
riches could afford him no greater joy
than that which he had in the Word of


God. He rejoiced in the way of God’s
testimonies.

1. As truth, which was good for his
understanding (Prov. xxiv. 13, 14).
When any capacity is filled with that
which is suitable to it, joy and satisfac-
tion will naturally arise. The mind ia
disordered by perplexities and errors,
but is satisfied with truth.

2. As the highest and most absolute
truth (Deut. iv. 6, 7). What man
calls truth is not always certain truth.
The so-called truths of philosophy and
science to one generation are often
errors to another, and the mind is often
bewildered by the degmatism of ita

261


FUaLM OLIZ,


teachers, What men have taught most
certainly has frequently been exploded
or revised. Only the truth of God is
immutable, and subject to no revision.
The mind can, therefore, rest upon it
without fear.

3. As truth which could satisfy the
higher cravings of his soul. All truth is
more or less satisfying. More or less,
because there are degrees of value even
in truth. A truth which shall guide a
man to a right destination is of more
value to him than a scientific curiosity.
Truth which makes a man better and
nobler, is of more value than that which
tells the number of the stars, God’s
truth is of the supremest value, because
it guides the soul to Gud and immor-
tality, and “converts the soul,”

IL Why he did it. The Psalmist re-
joiced in God’s testimonies as much as
in all riches, because—

l. Of their exact suitability to his
need. Joy is that which inevitably
results from the reception of a suitable
blessing. Food rejoices the hungry
soul, not the full one. The parched
ground rejoices after a shower, not the
saturated morass, So riches are good
in their way, they bring bread to the
starving, clothes to the naked, &c. In
that way do the testimonies of God
“rejoice the soul.” There is a class of
need which they alone satisfy. They
are God’s great spiritual treasure-house
of food, raiment, &c., which fully meet
all the requirements of our nature,

2. Because the greater covered the less.
Profit and pleasure, the sum of the
worldling’s store, and the result of his
expenditure of his wealth, are these his
alone? Nay, verily. God’s people have
these and a hundredfold beside if they
fulfil the conditions (Ps. xix. 10, 11).


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : PSALMS.





The distinction between God’s people
and others is that the former seeks true
riches and true happiness and gets them,
the others false riches and false happi-
ness and do not always get them. (1.)
They get the true profit. True wealth
makes not the surroundings but the
man more valuable. The value of a
picture does not consist in its frame,
neither does that of a man in the abund-
ance of the things which he possesses.
True wealth relieves in the greatest ex-
tremities. Money is of no use in the
day of sickness and the hour of death.
True wealth purchases things of the
highest value. True wealth is that
which is so estimated by those who are
best capable of judging. The savage
may think himself wealthy, and be
thought wealthy by his fellow-savages,
by his accumulation of shells and beads,
but what doescivilised man think of him?
Sotrue wealth is that which is pronounced
so by God (Luke xii. 20, 21). Know-
ledge (Col. ii. 2, iii. 16). Fatth (James
ii, 5). Good works (1 Tim. vi. 17, 18).
The favour of God (Rom. x. 12). (2.)
True pleasures. The pleasures pur-
chased by wealth are transient; those
that lie on the path of God’s testimonies
are “for evermore.” The one by over-
indulgence leads to sin and death (Luke
xii. 19); the other to joy unspeakable
and fulness of glory.

In concLusion.—Seek the way of
God’s testimonies. Riches and joy are
there. It is a calumny to speak of
religion as an unprofitable or gloomy
thing. Riches even of the baser sort
are sanctified, and pleasures.so far from
being abrogated are perfected. The way
of God’s testimonies is our way home,
Does not that thought generate strength,
lighten labour, and ease pain ?


A Fovurrotp DrrerMinarTION.
(Verses 15, 16.)


The Psalmist has been mainly speak-
ing of the past; upon that he builds
the future. He had sought, hid, de-
clared, rejoiced ; now he will meditate,
observe, delight, remember, These
different determinations suggest to us
the refreshing changes of spiritual life

262


Rest consists more in the variation than
in the cessation of employment. So


the Psalmist, while his love for all the


departments of his work is the same, yet
changes his exercise. Now it is medita-
tion, now observance, now recreation,
now the exercise of memory. Observe


HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PSALM OXI,





the twofold order in these verses, The
precepts point to the ways, the ways are
regulated by the statutes, and the Word
covers the whole. Again, meditation on
God’s precepts results in respect unto
God’s ways. To have respect unto God’s
ways is to see the pleasure and profit
of God’s statutes; and, finally, rejoicing
in God’s statutes is the best protection
against forgetfulness of God’s Word.

L “I will meditate in Thy pre-
eepts.” Meditation is the contempla-
tion, digestion, and spiritualisation of
truth, The heart sanctified by the
grace of God is an alembic in which
those noble and profitable thoughts are
distilled which are necessary to the spi-
ritual life, God has enforced upon us this
duty (Josh. i. 8), and promises His appro-
bation and blessing upon it (Ps. i. 2).
If we would maintain our spiritual health
we must meditate. Without it faith,
the evidence of things not seen, becomes
weak ; things hoped for vanishaway ; love,
forgetiul of its trueobject, consumes itself
in its own fires; and prayer, lacking both
thought and verbiage, droops and dies,

II. Those that meditate in God’s pre-
cepts will have respect to God’s ways.
Meditation will show that God’s ways
are right ways; that God’s ways are the
only profitable and useful ways. Medi-
tation will open up the whole way. It
will therefore lead to—

1. Deliberate chotce of God's ways.
He who meditates will not decide to
serve God simply because his fathers
did so, or because it is the fashion to do
so, or for fear of hell, &c., but from intel-
ligent and conscientious conviction.

2. Avoidance of every other way.
Meditation will show a man the im-
possibility of walking in God’s path
and the devil’s at one and the same
time. He will be able to resist the
fascinations of those ways which diverge
on both sides from the way of God, and
will elect to keep in that way alone.

3 Firm, steady, and persevering pro-


gress tn that way. Meditating on his
chart, and communing with his divine
companion, he will not pursue his jour-
ney by fits and starts, with sudden pro-
gresses and equally sudden declensions,
but will run with patience and walk
without faintness,

III. Respect for God’s ways will be-
get delight in God’s statutes. By keep-
ing to those ways alone and by continuous
progress in those ways it will be seen—

1. That God’s statutes deserve delight
(1.) Because of Him who ts their Author,
and the substance of what they teach
about Him. The further we go the
more we shall see of His tender father-
hood, His mighty helpfulness, His bene-
ficence and grace, what He is to us,
what He does for us, what He will make
of us. (2.) Because of their own intrinsic
excellence. The further we travel the
more we shall know of their elevating doc-
trines, their interesting history, their pre-
cious promises, and their mighty hopes.

2. That God’s statutes must be our
delight. (1.) They are our charter (Heb.
vi.18), (2.) Our infallible directory on
the way (ver. 105). (3.) Our encourage-
ment and support (ver. 54). They are
God’s storehouse of riches for our
poverty, comfort for our afflictions, life
for our death.

IV. Delight in God’s statutes will
be helpful to the memory of His
Word. The mind most easily fastens
on and treasures up that in which it
is most delighted. ‘‘ Where the trea-
sure is,” &e. That which is displeasing
is gladly forgotten, but it is an increased
and increasing delight to be able to
remember the delightful. If a student
has no delight in his book he will soon
forget it; but, taking pleasure in it, his
comfort will be promoted by his recollec-
tion. There are two ways of forgetting
God’s Word—(l.) Forgetfulness of tts
literal precepts. (2.) Forgetfulness to
obey those precepts. Delight in God's
statutes is the sure corrective of both,


Lire: 17s ScsTENANCE AND AIM,
(Verse 17.)


Everything depends upon true and
edequate views of life. It is perilous


to entertain false or one-sided views,
The worldling views life as a field fer
263





pleasure, the soldier for military prowess,
the student for learning, the merchant
for wealth, the statesman for politics, the
Psalmist as a sphere for divine service,

I. Life. The Psalmist’s idea of life
was servitude. He was God’s servant.
This conception runs through the Bible.
The proud distinction of Patriarchs,
Psalmists, Prophets, and Apostles was
that they were servants of the King of
kings, This view implies honourable
acceptance, dignified privilege, and ex-
ceeding great reward,

IL The sustenance of life. God’s
bounty. Notice that this bounty is—

1. Unmerited. We can lay no natural
claim to it,

2. Adequate. By it God is able to
supply all our need.

3. Everlasting.


IL The aim of life. The Psalmist


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





prays that life thus sustained may keep
God’s word. This aim is—

1. The divinely-ordained aim. God
has made man for Himself. It is His
will, therefore, that man should keep
that which shall enable him to fulfil
that design.

2. The highest, noblest, and truest
aim.’ It is that which angels con-
sciously reach, and (od’s inanimate
universe unconsciously,

3. The soul-satisfying aim. The Word
of God is the law of our being, and in
the keeping of that there is great re
ward. Learn— ‘

(i.) That the life spiritual is of more
value than the life natural. (ii.) That
if the latter ts of God’s bounty, so ts the
former, (iii.) That the sustenance of
both should be supplicated, that the true
aim of both may be reached.


Wonprovus Tunes, anD How To Sze THE™.
(Verse 8.)


The law was a very small portion of
what is now the Word of God. Yet
the Psalmist saw and hoped still to see
in that narrow compass vastly more
than we do in the large and complete
revelation of God’s will. This is ac-
counted for from the fuct that he made
the very best use of what he had, and
that God, in answer to his prayer, had
enabled him to do so, Notice—

IL That man by himself cannot see
wondrous things. The Hebrew phrase
is, “ Unveil mine eyes ;” implying—

1. That man ts spiritually blind (Rev.
ii. 17, Job. xi. 12) 1.) By sin (Eph.
iv. 18). (2.) By reason of ignorance.
@) By reason of self-conceit (1 Cor. viii.

, 2). (4.) By reason of prejudice and
disaffection (Luke xvi. 14, 2 Cor. iv. 4),

2. That man is not only thus naturally
blind, but lacks that divine light which
can alone reveal and tlluminate the sacred
mysteries, Man is both blind and in the
dark. His therefore is ‘gross darkness.”

3. That this blindness and darkness are
universal. The Psalmist’s case before his
prayer was not the exception, but the
rule.

IL That there is a process by means

264


of which man may not only see, but
see wondrous things. The Psalmist
did not complain of the inherent ob-
scurity of the law, but of the darkness
which rested both on him and it. So
he does not ask for another law, nor for
a new faculty, just as a blind man would
not wish for a new sun, or for new or
gans. All he asks is that that which was
hidden might be brought to the light, and
that in that light he might see light
This process is—

1. The unveiling of man’s eyes (2 Cor.
iii, 14, 15, Luke xxiv. 45).

2. The diffusion of spiritual light.

3. The employment of the faculty
which has been unveiled in the contempla-
tion of that upon which supernatural light
has been thrown. By this means a clear
and experimental knowledge of the word
of God will be obtained (Heb. viii. 10).

III. When this process is complete,
bie things are seen in God’s

Ww.

1. “ Wondrous things.” The Bible ia
a register of facts, Myths are wonderful,
Prodigies are wonderful. But the plain
truths of the Word of God are more
wonderful than the strangest fiction.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





3. “Wondrous things.” The things
of God’s law are (1) Wondrously beauts-
ful. No poets have ever had so exquisite
a sense of the beauties of nature. No
histories are so charming, no examples
so sublime, no eloquence so grand. (2)
Wondrously surprising. The Bible is
full of surprises. This is so if we con-
sider the way and the form in which the
Bible has at length reached us. Every
successive step in its development opens
up new wonders, and every book has
something fresh to say about the won-
derful works of God. Then what a
history it bas had! What escapes,
what triumphs ! (3) “ Wonderfully mys-


PSALM OXIX,


terious, Its aim is, all through, to lead
us to such subjects as the soul and God,
and the eternal world, and sin—the great
mystery and root of mysteries—and the
marvellous remedy which has been pro-
vided for it in the descent of the Divine
nature into the human, that great mys-
tery of godliness—* God manifest in the
flesh.” . . . If the “ powers of the world
to come” have anything in them to ex-
cite wonder and awe, the Bible, beyond
all other books, holds them in his hand.”
—Ker. (4) Wondrously perfect in its
wisdom (Deut. iv. 6), purity (ver. 49),
equity (Rom. vii 12), power (Rom. i
16), unity.


STRANGERS AND Piuernm,
(Veress 19, 20.)


“ When a child is born into the world
{t is spoken of as a ‘little stranger.’
Strangers indeed come from far, out of
immensities from the presence and touch
and being of God, and go into the im-
mensities again, into and through all the
unreckonable ages of duration. But the
little stranger takes vigorous root...
and life goes on deepening and broaden-
ing in its flow, ... and then after
elaborate preparations, opening into a
great, restful, sunny plain, lo! the sha-
dows begin to fall... and a voice
speaks and calls for the ‘little stranger’
to go through that door men call death ;
and the stranger is not ready, the pil-
grim’s staff is not in hand, and his eye,
familiar enough with surrounding things,
is not accustomed to the onward and
ascending way... . Alas! he has made
one grand mistake. He has been look-
ing at the things which are seen and
temporal, and not at the things which
are not seen and eternal ; and so there
is hurry and confusion and distress in
the going away, all which may be helped
and throughly hindered if a man will
but say, ‘I am a stranger in the earth.’”
—Dr. Raleigh.

I, The stranger, “‘ A stranger is ver7
well known, not perhaps in’ the great
city where there are always thousands
of such, but in a country town or on a
country road. See him as he enters the


village at nightfall: you can see at once
he is not of the place. The dust is on
his raiment ; he is footsore and weary ;
yet he has no mind to stay—he will be
away again before the inhabitants are
up. His language is different; his
questions are those of one who has but
a superficial and momentary interest in
the answer that may be given ; his very
look is the life spelling of the word
‘onward ;’ his home, wherever it may
be, is not here.”—Dr. Raleigh.

1. All men are strangers. Good or
bad alike, whether they will or not, are
fast travelling to “that undiscovered
country,” &c. ‘“ One generation passeth
away and another generation cometh,
but the earth abideth ever.” “The
pavement we walk upon, the coals in our
grates—how many millenniums old are
they? The pebble you kick with your
foot—how many millenniums will it out-
last? Go into a museum and you will
see hanging there, little the worse for
centuries, notched swords and gaping
helmets—ay, but what has become of
the bright eyes that once flashed the
light of battle through the bars? what
has become of the strong hands that
once gripped the hilts? . . . The money
in your purses now will some of it bear
the head of a king that died half a
century ago? It is bright and useful
—where are all the people that in turn

265


WaALM OXiX.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


ED


said they ‘owned’ it? Other men will
live in our houses and preach from this
pulpit waen you and I are far away.”—
Maclaren.

2. Specially are the children of God
strangers. Those who are not the
children of God would be at home here
if they could; but God’s children are
conscious of being and willing to be
strangers, because (1) Their native
country ts elsewhere, Everything tends
towards the place of its origin, All
men love their native soil. Christians
are “born from above.” “Jerusalem
which is from above is the mother of us
all,” and therefore we “seek those things
which are above.” (2) Thetr tnherit-
ance is elsewhere (Eph. i. 3). (3) Their
kindred are elsewhere. Father, elder
brother, d&c. (Matt. viii. 11; Heb. xi).
(4) All the endowments of their nature
point to a fuller and unrestricted exer-
cise elsewhere.

IL The stranger's prayer. ‘Hide
not Thy commandments from me,”

1. God’s commandments are man’s
chart and directory on his way to heaven.

2. Those commandments are hicden


from the natural man ; their dialect is
altogether foreign to him.

3. Prayer should be offered that these
commandments may be made intelligible.

4. When made known, they should
become a “lamp unto our feet and @
light unto our path” till our pilgrimage
48 o'er.

IIL The stranger’s longing. “ My
heart breaketh for the longing that it
hath unto Thy judgments at all times.”

1. The more cur hearts are bent on
the end of our journey, the more shall we
desire fully and accurately to know the
way.

2. The more we know of the way, the
more ardent will be our desire to know all
about it at all times.

3. The more we desire to know of the
way, the more diligent and practical will
be our study of that which can alone
guide us to our destination,

IN CoNCLUSION,—

(i.) What provision are you making
for your journey ?

(ii.) Are you astray on your ptlgré-
mage §


PROVIDENTIAL INEQUALITIES READJUSTED.
(Verses 21-24.)


The Psalmist here and elsewhere
states the standing problem of the
apparent prosperity of evil and adver-
sity of good, and solves it. He was
seemingly in great misery, while his
enemies flourished; but it was not
really so, The Psalmist had privileges
to which his oppressors had no title.
He had God’s testimonies as his de-
lights and counsellors ; while those who
oppressed him were of a debased moral
character, and were under the condem-
nation of God. This solution satisfied
him ; may it satisfy us.

I. The problem stated.

1. The prosperity of the wicked, (1.)
“ Princes.” The wicked are often in
the ascendant as regards power, wealth,
position, popular esteem, &c (2.)
“ Proud.” The wicked are always,
when they cam be, arrogant and self-
sufficient.

266


2. The adversity of the righteous.
(1.) They are “reproached” tor their
conscientious scruples, integrity, en-
deavours, and aims. (2.) TZhey are
treated with ridicule and “ contempt,”
because of those things that they hold
most dear; God’s Word, Christian cha-
racter, hope of heaven. (3.) They are
unjustly gudged (ver. 23), because man
cannot estimate the worth of godliness,

IL. The problem solved.

1. The adversity of the wicked. Our
real state is what we are in the sight of
God. (1.) They stand rebuked of God,
and are therefore cursed. (2.) They
err from God's commandmenis, and thus
miss the true end of their being and
the full glory and perfection of their life.


Can theirs, therefore, be true prosperity 1


9


2. The prosperity of the righteous,
(1.) ZLheir reproach and contempt ts
that of man, and therefore removable,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : PSALMS.


and will be removed by the justice and
compassion of God. (2.) They have
a certain and infallible guide. God's
testimonies tell them of God’s will and
how to submit to it with resignation





PSALM OXTR.





and patience. (3.) They have perennini
sources of delight. God’s Word testifies
of God’s presence, God’s comfort, God’s
heaven. Can there be any real adver-
sity with all this?


“TENEO ET TENEOR.”
(Verse 22, clause 2, and Verse 24.)


Those who keep God’s testimonies
shall be kept by them.

I. How do we keep God’s testi-
monies }

1. By remembering them. To forget
is to lose. To have them kept in the
memory is to have them ready for every
time of need.

2. By obeying them. Every act of
obedience is an additional stone in the
fortress, in which they are kept, Every
duty formed strengthens habit and con-
firms steadfastness.

3. By propagating them. Giving is
the condition of keeping all through life.
The vitality of a tree is conditional upon
its yielding fruit and leaves. Material
wealth depends on the outlay of money.
So unless we give in proportion as it is
given unto us of the word of life, even
that which we have will be taken away.

IL How do God's testimonies keep
us?

1. By ministering to our delight.


God’s Word brings that light and glad-
ness Which saves the world from suicide.
It testifies of God, who is the health of
our countenance; of Christ, who cleanses
us from the source of all misery ; of the
Holy Ghost, who comforts us in the day
of trial; of the precious promises which
buoy us up with hopes of better things
to come; of heaven, where all tears are
wiped away.

2. By guiding us with their infallible
counsel, They keep us in the path of
truth, guide us in the way of holiness,
direct us in the road to heaven, and as
we go shield us from all harm.

In concLusion.—The principle of
our text holds good everywhere. Those
who hold good or bad principles are
kept or lost by them and with them.
The man who knows how to keep his
temper, his money, é&c., will find that
they will keep him, Hold, then, the
best things, the firmest things, and you
will be ever safe,


Taz Bexerrir or Gop’s TESTIMONIES,
(Verse 24.)


The Psalmist in his trouble and dis-
tress, under the contempt and reproach
of the proud, and under the oppression
of princes, turns to God’s Word, and
there finds direction and joy.

L “Thy testimonies are my delights.”
Notice—

1. That there are joys AND joys.
Worldlings have their joys, but they
are unsubstantial and evanescent. ‘The
delight engendered by God’s testimonies
is (1) Divine and powerful. It is the
“joy of the Lord,” and zs God’s people’s
strength. (2) Real (2 Cor. vi. 10). (3)
Great (1 Pet. i. 8). (4) Hndless, “ Ever-
lasting joy.”


2. That God’s people are commanded
to rejoice—(1) Not merely permitted ;
(2) Not merely suggested on reasonable
grounds ; (3) But enjoined asa necessary
duty. It is not a matter of indifference
or choice, We must rejoice (Phil. iv.
4; Matt. v. 12; James i, 2).

3. That this rejoicing ts founded on
and derived through the Word of God
(Rom. xv. 4; Heb. xii. 5). Joy is par-
ticularly needful in affliction, as in the
Psalmist’s ease. God’s testimonies tell
us (1) Who permits tt (John xviii. 11) ;
(2) The benefit of tt (Isa. xxvii, 19,
Heb. xii. 10); (3) The bremty of tt
(Isa. liv. 7, 8); (4) Helps im tt, Cor
267


FRALM O2TK.


soling help (Rom. vy. 3), Effectual help
(Ps. cxxxviii, 3, Heb. xiii 5); (5) ts
end (2 Cor, iv. 17).

II, “ Thy testimonies are my coun-
sellors.” As a divine rule in all mat-
ters of faith and practice it is sufficient.
Man cannot improve upon it, let him
not tinker with it, It is an unerring





/


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





guide in all perplexities. It will help
us toa right decision in all matters of
right and wrong, Its counsel is safe
for good thinking, good speaking, for
the prudent management of out affairs
to successful issues (James i, 6), and
supporting in all painful or difficult
duties (Prov. xvi. 3, Ps. xxxvii. 5).


AFFLICTION AND ITs Remepy.
(Verse 25.)


Our text teaches us—

i. That God’s children are afflicted.
This affliction may be a sorrowful in-
ward experience (Ps. Ixxxviii. 3-7 ;
Ixxvi. 1), or an extreme outward pres-
sure (2 Sam. xii. 16, 17; xv. 30). We
know that “God dves not willingly
affiict.” Why then do His people’s
souls sometimes cleave to the dust?
(1.) To humble them (2 Cor. i. 7-9).
(2.) To correct for past transgressions.
The righteous have their evil things in
this life. God punishes them now that
it may not be necessary to do so by
and by. (3.) Zo test the strength of
their character, their faith in the pro-
inises, their hope in His mercy, the depth
and sincerity of His love. (4.) Zo
awaken the spirit of prayer (Ps. cxxx. 1).
To show more of the riches of His grace
in their recovery (Ps. lxxi, 20, 21).

IL That affliction should drive us
to God for help. Notice—


1. The unwisdom of any other course.
Man cannot help us.

2. The disastrousness of any other
course (Dan. ix. 13). To choke sorrow
is to be choked by it, whereas if we go
to God the burden can be thrown off.
To depend upon the charlatan or to
neglect proper means is suicide.

3. The wisdom and blessedness of this
course, God sends the tempest of afflic-
tion after His Jonahs, that out of the
depths they may cry to Him to be
delivered. Because God is powerful,
able, and willing to help. Let us (Heb.
iv. 16).

ne That God undertakes to apply
the remedy for affliction, not according
to our merits, or merely according to
His compassion, but according to His
pledged and covenant “word.” The
remedy must therefore be adequate, firm,
and everlasting.


Diving Epvoarion.
(Verses 26, 27.)


L The Psalmist presents himself for
examination. He puts his whole case,
his qualifications and disqualifications,
before God, and God hears him.

II. The result of this examination
is @ consciousness and confession of
ignorance and error. His prayer to be
taught God’s statutes, to understand
the way of God’s precepts, implies igno-
rance of the one and departure from the
other.
the throne of grace with any other con-
sciousness has been there in vain.

IJL His iguorance and error leads

368


And he who comes away from |


him to ery to the great Teacher for
instruction. This instruction was two-
fold. Intellectual, “Teach me Thy
statutes ;” and practical, ‘‘ Make me to
understand the way of Thy precepts.”
First the information, then its correct
and proper application, Remember
that the instructor is God, not man ;
and the instruction is not in human
guesses and speculations, but in divine
truth and holiness.

IV. Upon this instruction being
vouchsafed and his education complete,
he feels that he will then be in a posi-


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PSALM OXIZ,





Mon to instruct others, “So shall I
talk of Thy wondrous works,” 1. God's
works, not hisown or man’s. 2, God’s


wondrous works, in revelation, provi-
dence, redemption. This in our case ia
due to God, due to ourselves, due to man.


STRENGTH IN WEAKNESS,
(Verse 28.)


L The Psalmist’s case. It was one
of extreme trouble, His very soul
“dropped away.” Why so extreme?
Just as the sorrows of a man are greater
than the sorrows of a beast, from his
superior knowledge and keener suscepti-
bility. So the knowledge of the spiritual
man is clearer and more accurate, and his
susceptibilities keener, than those of the
natural man. He knows the character of
sin and the claims of God, and his con-
science responds to the slightest touch
of evil.

IL The Psalmist’s prayer. Not for
the removal of his affliction, but for the
strength of grace to bear it, “ Strengthen
me.” This implies a recognition of the
need and benefit of this disciplinary and
sanctifying affliction, and a desire to be
sustained until it should have accom-


plished its perfect work. We would do
foolishly with our afflictions what a child
would do with its restraints ad the dis-
cipline of school or home, Better far to
be able to say, “ Thy grace is sufficient
for me.”

IIL. The Psalmist’s plea. “ According
to Thy word.” Prayer avails in pro-
portion to the power and prevalence of
its pleas, No plea is like that of God’s
own pledged word. And what does God
promise? Not to deliver us as we wish,
but always either to deliver or to give us
that grace and strength which renders
deliverance a matter of comparative
indifference. What God then has pro-
mised let man plead, and if prayer is not
answered it is not from indifference or


unwillingness on the part of God,


Toe Two Ways.
(Verses 29, 30.)


Onur text teaches us—

L That there are two ways, and two
ways only, which determine the character
and decide the destiny of mankind, The
way of lying and the way of truth. The
false and the true. There is no third
way, and there are no characteristics com-
mon to both. A man must either walk
in the way of truth or the way of error.

II. That these two ways are open to
man’s deliberate preference and choice.
God does not urge us towards the one or
the other by the force of a predestined
and inexorable necessity. Neither is the
force of any circumstance such as to leave
man no option but to be untrue to him-
self and to his God. The practical com-
mon sense and experience of man laugh
at all metaphysical endeavours to deprive
him of the freedom of his will.

II. That the false way is most
natural to man. The Psalmist felt so,
or why his urgent request that it might
he removed! All Scripture is emphatic


on this point. “They go astray from
the womb, speaking lies,” This way is
very broad, and many elements enter into
its composition. Hypocrisy, insincerity,
error, false religions, false maxims, false
customs, as well as deliberate lying.
Experience is as emphatic as Scripture.
No evil habit is so strong, so general, 80
growing, as the habit of untruthfulness,
It is the one habit more than another
that grows upon the young.

IV. That in order to walk firmly
in the true way divine assistance is
indispensable.

1. God must “remove the way of lying.”
He alone can break the force of evil
habits and check the evil tendency,

2. God must vouchsafe the chart by
whose guidance alone we can walk tn the
way of truth, “Grant me Thy law
graciously.” This God has answered in
the case of every man. The heathen
have the law written on their heart, and
their conscience accuses them when they

369


PaaLM Oxi.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.








do wrong, and excuses them when they
do right. For Christians there is the
written law and the living law of the
life of Christ in addition, and guided
by this threefold law the wayfaring man
though a fool shall not err therein.

V. That continuance in the way of
truth is conditional on the use of
divinely-appointed means. “ Thy judg-
ments have I laid before me.” Only by
a diligent, careful, and accurate study of
the judgments of God can our feet be


kept in the way of truth, “As he who
learns to write lays his copy before him,
that he may write according to it ; as the
workman lays his model and platform
before him, that he may do his work
exactly ; as we must have the word in
our heart by an habitual conformity to
it ; so we must have it in our eye by an
actual regard to it upon all occasions,
that we may walk accurately and by
rule.”"—M. Henry.


PensxvRRANCR
(Verses 31, 32.)


Having chosen the way of troth, the
Psalmist does not regret his choice, but
adheres steadfastly to it, and makes
steady but rapid progress in it, This
was perseverance,

L Steady. “I have stuck.” It was
not a restless and fitful movement, but
s firm and consistent adhesion to fixed
principles. The race is not to the swift,
but to the steady. The battle is not to
the strong, but to the steadfast. “It is
hard pounding, gentlemen,” said Wel-
lington at Waterloo, “ but we shall see
who will pound the longest.” The man
who runs, till he is out of breath, for one
hour, and is obliged, panting, to rest for
the next, will not win the prize. And
so the Christian who is very earnest on
set occasions and makes great efforts at
certain times, but who tires of service,
and is forgetful of his principles on
ordinary occasions, is not the man who


“TI will run.” Steady
perseverance is not necessarily slow. It
certainly is not slow in the long run.
The man who steadfastly runs by rule
and with self-restraint, although he may
be distanced by him who is careless of
rule and impulsive for the moment;
time will show who has made the greatest
progress, But the perseverance of the
Christian life is rapid in its attainment
of results, and ought to be. Consider
how soon the course is traversed, the
number of obstacles overcome, the cha-
racter of the help vouchsafed, the nature
270


of the incentives offered, and how quickly,
comparatively speaking, habitsare formed
and graces developed and strengthened |!
In view of all this, it is appropriately
likened to the swift flight of the eagle,
and to the short, eager race for the incor-
ruptible crown.

Ill. Shameless. “O Lord, put me
not to shame.” There is a perseverance
which can only bring shame. Persever-
ance in an inconsistent, insincere, lying
course can only bring contempt on those
who run there. The path of truth is the
only one in which it is possible to run’
secure from shame, Circumstances may
arise which may prevent us in other
paths from so persevering as to win that
towards which we reach forth the hand,
and thus, for want of success, others are
ashamed of us and we are ashamed of
ourselves, Here, however, if we are
faithful we shall win, and thus be secure
from shame.

IV. Divinely assisted. “ Lit., ‘For
Thou wilt enlarge my heart.’ Expressing
confidence that God would do this, so
that he would be thus inclined and
enabled to keep His commandments. It
is an acknowledgment of dependence
and confidence. The phrase means, to
make the heart jree from all hindrances
to what is right; to fill it with noble and
holy purposes; to stimulate and animate
it. The heart is contracted by selfish-


‘ness, pride, vanity, ambition, covetous-


ness; it is made large by charity, love,
hope, &c, Sin narrows the eoul ; religion
enlarges it.”— Barnes.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


ee


PALM OXIK,








CHRISTIAN PROGRESS.
(Verees 33-35.)


Our text suggests—

L That the way of Christian progress
ls divinely revealed. “Teach me, O
Lord, the way of Thy statutes.” The
way of life is not @ path discovered by
study, intuition, or speculation. Nor is
it a path upon which it is possible to
light by happy accident. As it is
not human learning, scientific know-
ledge, or even ethical development, but
the knowledge and practise of God’s
statutes, God must make those statutes
known.

IL. That Christian progress is possible
only under certain definite conditions.
The racer in the old Greek games was
not crowned except he had striven
according to fixed and stringent rules,
So with this and every other path in
life worth traversing, the conditions are
twofold—

1. Knowledge of the way. “Give me
understanding.” This is the prime con-
dition. Ignorance is the fruitful source
of failure everywhere. No man can
wake progress in business, unless he
knows his business ; in scholarship, un-
less he is acquainted with his books ;
in politics, unless he is conversant with
affairs of State. So Christians can
make no progress without understand-
ing God’s law. Notice—(1) God gives
this understanding. God reveals not
only the entrance of the way, or the
panorama of the way as a whole, but
the details of the way, its dangers,
duties, difficulties, blessings, losses, and
rewards. And not only so, but also
that spiritual enlightenment without
which progress is impossible. With
this we “shall not walk in darkness,
but have the light of life.” But (2)
Man must use the understanding that
God gives. Scholarship is of no value
unless turned to practical account.
Letters are useless unless employed in
the formation of words; words are of
no service except they convey thought;
thoughts are of no use unless ade-
quately expressed. And so all theoretie


knowledge in the way of Christian pro-
gress is of no effect unless applied “ with
the whole heart.” Alas! many men know
every step of the way tu heaven who,
from the want of this, fail to get there,

2. Harnestness in the way. “TI shall
observe it with my whole heart.” An-
other univers# condition. Unless men
give “earnest heed” to the securing of
a given object, they “let it slip.” This
earnestness implies (1) ove. The
“heart” is the seat of the affections,
Unless a man loves his career, he will
not be successful in it. So our love
must be fixed on ours, There is every-
thing in it to excite affection. Christ
is at once the entrance and the goal,
To “me to live is Christ,” being “ built
up into Him our living Head, in all
things,” who is “the fairest among ten
thousand, and altogether lovely,” is the
inspired description of the: Christian
way. Love to Christ, again, is the
motive force of Christian progress. (2)
Onited effort. The earnest man is he
who gives his “whole heart” to his
work. His mottois, “ This one thing I
do.” We say a man is not in earnest
when his efforts are desultory or divided ;
and such men never succeed, Alas! there
are many Christian men who, for the
same reason, come short of the prize.

3. Absorbing interest in the way.
“Therein do I delight.” Again, noman
will succeed who does not delight in his
work. If heentertainsignoble views about
it, or depreciates it, or shows he can afford
to treat it with carelessness, he will never
make himself proficient. Those men
who have succeeded in politics, learn-
ing, &c., have been the men who have
counted their callings most worthy of
their supreme interest. And shall we
depreciate or be careless about “the
high calling of God in Christ Jesus,” so
grand and delightful, and leading to
such issues? No, the Christian man,
of all men, should take pride in his
career ; for is it not “ ways of pleasant-
ness and paths of et”

ance an


PSALM OxIx.





4. Constancy in the way. “TI shall
keep it unto theend.” Most failures are
due to the want of this, If a man lacks
this one thing needful, in spite of genius
_ and practical ability, he will run in vain
and labour in vain, And many well-
meaning Christians fail because they
make no sustained effort. “He that
endures to the end shall be saved.”
“ Wherefore” (1 Cor. xv. 58).

III. That Christian progress is im-
possible without divine assistance.
‘Make me to go.”

1. God must supply the stimulus,
“Make me to go.” A stimulus is
needful, for Christianity is not natural
to man. No effort can be made without
a force behind and an attretion in
front. Thank God, these are not want-
ing. The promises and comforts of
God’s Spirit are ever near us lest we
should be weary and faint in our souls,
Heaven is set before us to gain; hell for
ustoshun. Yea, “ The young men shall
faint, and be weary,” dc. (Isa. xl. 31).

2. God must supply the qualifications,
“Makeme.” Not certainly in the sense
of compulsion, but in the endowment
of the requisite ability. As He gives


HOMILSETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS,





us the knowledge of the way, so He
will supply all its requirements. He
will give us the elements of moral ear
nestness, shed abroad His love in our
hearts, supply the principle of cohesion
which will enable us to serve Him with
our whole heart; make us interested in
our work, and enable us to continue
steadfast unto the end.

3. God must supply the fact. “To
go.” He must make us Christians, and
thus empower us to begin our progreas.
He must sow the seed of grace before
we can grow in it. It is only by “ look-
ing unto Jesus” that we can lay aside
every weight, &c. At every stage He
must guide us by His counsel, go
before. us, making ‘crooked places
straight,” d&c., and afford us the sup-
port and discipline of His rod and staff
in every dark ravine. Man cannot go
without this great Leader. But our
comfort is that we are continually with
Him, &c. (Ps, lxxiii. 23).

Men and brethren, we are all going.
Whether we like it or not, we must all
go (1.) How are we going ; with God,
or without Him? (2.) Where are we
going, to heaven, or to hell§


Toe Servant or Gop.
(Verses 36-38.)


Notice—

L That God qualifies His servants
by a special fitness. “Incline my
heart ;” which suggests—

1. That man is naturally disqualified
for divine service. His heart is inclined
in the opposite direction. It is warped
and twisted from the straight line of
God’s law. Consequently there is a pre-
ference for that which is averse from
God,

2. That man, tf qualified at all, must
be qualified by God. No force within
a man is capable of doing this, nor any
force without, either of example, instruc-
tion, or compulsion. But God does so
incline the hearts of those who are wil-
ling, that, like the great servant of the
Lord, they can say, “I delight to do
Thy will.” God does not break the will;
Ye softens it, and then stretches it back
ngain. ae never compels, but draws


by the persuasion of His entreaties, the
allurement of His promises, by reason
and affection ; and then when the heart
is prepared He moves it back again by
His Spirit into conformity with His
will and way. And when man’s heart
is inclined to do the will of God, not
for what can be got, but because it is
felt to be right and joyous, then is man
qualified for divine service.

IL That those whom God qualifies
for, He consecrates to His service.
These two ideas overlap, as indeed do
all the Christian doctrines and _privi-
leges, Consecration not only implies
fitness, but supplies it. It separates
ae sin, and imparts the power of divine
ife.

1. God's servants, by virtue of their
consecration, are separate from sin. (1.)
The eyes are turned away “ from behold-
tng vanity.” Sin loses its attractiveness


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : PSALMS,


PSALM OXIX,





and becomes an object of abhorrence.
(2.) The eye turned away, the whole man
ts turned away. Men walk in that
direction on which their eyes are set.
(3.) The eyes and the whole man turned
away from the vanities of sin are glad
to look on the realities of God.

2. God's servants, by virtue of their con-
secration, are made instinct with divine
life. “Quicken Thou me in Thy way.”
This life of consecration is (1) divine.
God’s servants are born of His Spirit,
born into His house, born from above.
They are not slaves or hirelings, but
sons; and their duties those of filial
affection. (2) A special gift for a special
service: “In Thy way.” Not for our
spiritual gratification, or for our safety
and blessedness merely, but in and for
His way. (3) Progressive. “In” all
departments and stages of “Thy way.”
We need moment by moment the divine
quickening, and that constant quicken-
ing continually enlarges, develops, and
intensifies all the powers and faculties
of our being.

ITI. Those whom God consecrates He
supports by, special encouragements,
“‘Stablish Thy word unto Thy servant.”

1. God's servants are the subjects of
spectal promises. God undertakes to
preserve them from evil in the prosecu-
tion of their tasks, and empower them
to overcome all their difficulties.

2. God establishes those promises. He
fulfils His undertakings, No servant of
His, while trusting in His Master's


strength and doing His Master’s work,
has ever suffered harm or lacked any
good thing.

3. God’s promtses established afford a
basis for future hopefulness. Since no
word of God has failed, man has solid
ground to rest upon. Were His word
untrustworthy, or His promises broken,
nothing but disappointment could result.

IV. Those whom God qualifies, con-
secrates, and encourages, are expected
to exhibit certain traits.

1. Negatively - Not to covetousness.”
That the servant of God should not be
inclined to covetousness is seen from
the fact that covetousness (1) Disposes
the soul to occupations that are averse
Srom the service of God. It is the root
of all evil (1 Tim. vi. 10); leads to
violent theft and oppression (Micah ii.
2) ; to treason, as in the case of Judas;
dishonour of God, in the case of Ge
hazi; dishonesty, in that of Achan;
murder, in Ahab; apostasy, in Ananias
and Sapphira, (2) J¢ utterly incapact-
tates for the service of God. It destroys
the principle of obedience, which is love
of God (1 John ii. 5), is contrary to all
the commands of God (Matt. vi. 14),
and it slights all the encouragements of
God’s grace by seeking other rewards,

2, Positively. Devotion to God’s fear.
(1.) Zo fear God is to revere Him and
adopt that posture which befits Hts service.
(2.) Devotion to that fear saves us from
sinning against God, and stimulates us to
His service,


Fras AND ITs REMEDY,
(Verses 39, 40.)


God’s people are the subjects of a two-
fold fear: the fear of God and the fear
of sin. The former fear is dealt with
in the previous verse, the latter in this.
“Guard me from the reproach which
(alone) I fear of sinning against Thee ;
for Thy judgments, t.¢., revealed laws,
are good, and happy is he that keeps
them.”—Speaker’s Com. Observe—

I. That the Christian has nothing
to fear but sin, and the only reproach he
need deprecate is that of having sinned,

1, Because sin ts the only evil. No-


VoL, ©


thing is evil except from its alliance
with sin. ‘Trial, persecution, sickness,
poverty, pain may be good, and under
certain circumstances are to be desired
rather than deprecated. But sin can
only work harm, It saps the foundation
of spiritual life, deteriorates the quality
and diminishes the volume of true man-
hood, blinds the intellect, befouls the
heart, destroys hope, kills usefulness,
and blasts the soul.

2. Because sin has terrible and eternal
consequences. Sin deliberately rejects


S 273


PSALM CXEZ.


the sources of the soul’s life and blessed-
ness, and therefore fixes its own destiny,
which is the death and misery of hell.
Sin, too, entails a terrible “reproach ”
which man may well fear, (1.) The
reproach of the good. (2.) Self-reproach.
An active conscience will not let the
sinner rest, for persisting in his own
destruction and wronging his Master
and his Friend. (3.) The reproach of
God. God reproaches in love now.
“What iniquity have you or your
fathers found in Me?” “Why will ye
die?” But, by and by, in anger and
judicially will He utter that reproach
which shall never be wiped away, and
dismiss the sinner to “ shame and ever-
lasting contempt.”

I. That the only safety from ein and
its reproach is the life of righteous-
ness.

1. There ts no other safety. Watch-
fulness and resolution may save us from


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


ng nn





gross and palpable sins; pardon may
remove its guilt, but only a quickening
in the divine righteousness can save us
permanently from its power.

2. With this we are secure. God does
not simply cease to impute sin, He
regenerates. So quickens, that sin has
no more dominion over us,—quickens
us in a new mould, so that we “live
unto righteousness.” Thus the cause
and the reproach are both rolled away,
and God’s approbation secured.

III. That the danger and the
safety are revealed by the Word of
God. . “Thy judgments are good.” Sin
is a vague consciousness, and its conse-
quences a vague dread without the judg-
ments of God; and nowhere but there
do we read, “ Repent ye, and believe the
Gospel.”

IV. That the danger is to be depre-
cated, and the safety sought by prayer.
“T have longed after.”


SALVATION.
(Verses 41, 42.)


The primary object of this prayer was
doubtless providential deliverance. The
Psalmist was afflicted, God had pro-
mised deliverance. He trusted in that
promise, yet salvation stayed. Now
the enemy began to reproach, “ Where
is now thy God?” This led to the
passionate entreaty of our text. He
prayed for salvation that he might give
the enemy to see the stability of “the
confidence wherein he trusted.” Learn
that salvation is—

I. The outcome of the divine mer-
cies. “ Let Thy mercies... even Thy
salvation.” Man is lost and ruined—
has lost and ruined himself—not by
chance, but deliberately. To salvation,
therefore, he can lay no moral claim.
By disobedience and rebellion he has lost
all title to the divine regard. He can,
therefore, be saved only by an act of'
mercy. But his sins are so many, and
his depravity so deep, that multiplied
mercies can alone meet his case. So
thought the Psalmist when he said, ‘Let
Thy mercies,” &c, So thought God
when He offered to “multiply to pardon.”

274


So we must think when we consider the
wealth and variety of divine grace: the
Mosaic and prophetic dispensations, the
work of Christ, the operation of the
Spirit, the Gospel ministry, and the
means of grace. So in every individual
case, forbearing, prevenient, saving,
sanctifying grace. ‘‘ Not according to
our works, but according to His own
mercy.”

II. Not a human effort, but a divine
visitation. ‘‘ Let Thy mercies come
unto me.” Salvation is not the effort
by which the sinner lifts himself out of
one moral atmosphere into another, and
loosens his hold of vice, and educates
himself into virtue. It is altogether an
act of God upon the sinner, and an act
which, being essentially supernatural,
does not admit of the co-operation of
natural agencies. True, these are con-
ditions, but repentance and faith merely
put man into a salvable condition.
‘* Mine own arm brought salvation.”

II, The subject of divine promise.
“ According to Thy Word.” The pro-
mises of salvation in God’s word are the


———


ee ne


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS





most numerous and the most emphatic.
It is the subject of the first promise and
of the last.

IV. A witness to the steadfastness
of the divine word. Professor Tyndall’s
proposed experiment was manifestly un-
fair. There may be reasons, however in-
scrutable, whereby the sovereign of the
universe may see fit not to relieve physi-
cal affliction, or save from physical death.
Great moral purposes may be in the pro-
cess of evolution, and for their accom-
plishment individuals may have to be re-
moved to anothersphere. But here the
challenge may be taken up, God has


POALM OXIK,





promised to save on the condition of be-
lieving prayer. Let the vicious try it,
pleading God’s promises, and if refor-
mation does not follow the experiment
has failed. But it has been tried, and
again and again men have had “ where-
with to answer” them that reproached
them, Learn—

(i.) The value of salvation. The mighty
and merciful visitation of God. (ii) The
necessity of trusting in God's Word for
salvation. (iii) The duty of the public
exhibition of that salvation for the glory
of God, and the refutation of unbelief.


PREACHING AND PRACTICE,
(Verses 43, 44.)


Observe :-—

I. The Psalmist’s prayer. ‘‘Teke
not the word of truth utterly out of
my mouth.” He regards it both es a
duty and a privilege to declare God’s
truth. How many, alas, forget this ob-
ligation! They have been saved them-
selves through hearing and obeying this
declaration, and that is their only con-
cern. There are others who look upon
it merely as a burden to be borne with
resignation. God, however, would have
us regard the command to testify of His
grace as a commandment with promise.
We must preach if we would be true to
our convictions, and fulfil the divine
plan for the conversion of the world.
But consider the honour of being am-
bassadors from God, the blessedness of
conveying the tidings of God’s love to
sinful and sorrowing men, the glory of
the reward. Let this therefore be every
Christian’s prayer. If he does not feel
called, let him pray God to call him.
If circumstances render the practice of
this duty and the enjoyment of this
privilege difficult, let him ask that the
word of truth may not be taken utterly
out of his mouth.

II. The Psalmist’s purpose. The
Psalmist felt that lip service alone was
a mockery. No one would listen to a
man whose practice gave the lie to his

reaching. Ornate eloquence, profound
ing, or subtle logic are useless gifts


if the life be wrong, But he felt, too,
that living without preaching was but
mutilated service ; so he wishes to com-
bine the two, and determines to make
his preaching not merely subordinate to
his practice, but helpful to it. ‘ So
shall I keep Thy law.” What he
preaches to others he will preach to
himself. He will water others and
himself at the same time. Preaching
shall strengthen his own convictions
and promote his own growth in


grace. This shall be not occasional,
but continual and “ for ever and
ever.”


III. The Psalmist’s consolation, ‘I
have hoped in Thy judgments,”

1. In the strength of this consolation
he goes to God in prayer. He felt that
God’s judgments were his only hope.
He prayed that he might preach them
and keep them lest that hope should
die.

2. This consolation 18 the strength of
all powerful preaching, A man who
is not hopeful cannot preach at all,
But if a man has a well-founded hope
on the power of God’s Word, and in
the effects of its proclamation, he must
preach, and his preaching will be intense
and successful,

3. This consolation ts the power of
holy living. Unless a man has a strong
hope that the basis on which he stands
is strong and enduring, ge the

276


réaALM OXIX,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


ee ee See ee ee


end at which he is aiming is attainable,
he will all his lifetime be the subject
of anxious fears. But if he hopes in


God’s judgments he will be sure that
he is on a rock, and that success will
attend all his efforts.


FREEDOM.
(Verse 45.)


Nothing is more precious or desir-
able than liberty. Yet there is no
thing about which men make more
mistakes, or enjoy so little, What
passes for liberty is frequently the
basest servitude. And what men call
thraldom is often the finest liberty.
Notice—

L That man’s natural condition is
one of bondage. He has deliberately
resigned and rejected his title to liberty
by transgressing the terms on which it
is based. Scripture everywhere repre-
sents the unredeemed man as sold under
sin, led captive by the devil, desiring
good but unable to reach it. This
bondage is painful and degrading in
its nature, and terrible in its conse-
quences,

II. That man walks at liberty when
he seeks and’ finds God’s precepts.
God’s Word is the charter of man’s free-
dom.

1. It defines true liberty. The sub-
ordination of the soul to God (James i.
25). The soul is free only when it
moves unhampered in that sphere where
its true interests lie. Restraints are not


BIsie


(Vers.


L To seek for it. If we seek for the
word of God literally, or for that word
which has special reference to us in
given circumstances, we shall find it,

Il. To meditate upon it. Finding
it, our first duty is to see what it is,
what it means, what it is for, and to
make it subserve those circumstances
which led to our search for it. Medi-
tation does all these.

IIL To love it. Meditation will
show its infinite beneficence and beauty,
its exact suitability to the needs and
aspirations of the soul, instruction for
the mind, direction for the will, cleans-

276


laid on the soul, but on those passions
and preferences which hinder its full
activity. When a command is imposed
upon it, it is implied that its breach or
negligence would militate against our
freedom.

2. It confers true liberty. It is the
only revelation of the great redemption,
and alone shows how through the death
of Christ and the work of the Spirit we
may enjoy the liberty of the children of
God.


IIL That man walks permanently
and securely at liberty only as long as
he seeks and finds God’s precepts.

l. They must be sought and found by
God's help, for they are God's precepts.

2. They must be applied by God's


; 3. Their requirements must be rigidly
ept.

In conoLusion.—{i.) The exchange of
servitude for freedom ts an exchange of
masters and an exchange of services.
(ii) Serve the new Master who has
emancipated you from a terrible tyranny
ae the same diligence as you did your
0.


Doris.
45-48.)


ing for the heart, guidance for the life,
comfort for affliction, strength for duty,
peace for distraction, hope for death,
and will beget as it must, love.

IV. To delight in it. The heart
that loves the Word will delight in it
(Ps. i, 2, cxi. 1; Rom. vii. 22), Thus
the study and practice of God’s Word
is not a matter of dry duty, but of joy.
Who can help rejoicing in that which ia


the revelation of God’s character, will,


helpfulness, redemption, heaven? Let
the soul love these revelations and it
will delight in them.

V. Not to be ashamed of it. Sus-


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY ; PSALMS.





picion and dislike are at the root of
shame, Those who suspect the autho-
rity or dislike the teaching of the Word
of God are ashamed of it. But those
who delight in it say, “‘ God forbid that
I should glory,” &c. What are the
promises or laws or dignities of earthly
monarchs in comparison with it? Even
the reproach of Christ is greater riches
than the treasures of Egypt. We who
delight in God’s commandment are not
ashamed to stand with Moses before
Pharaoh, Daniel in Babylon, Peter and
John in the presence of the Sanhedrin,
and Paul at Cmsar’s bar.

VL To earnestly practise it. What
we are not ashamed of we should “lift
up our hands to.” It is not enough to
seek, find, meditate, love, delight, and
glory in God’s Word. The servant who
knew his 'ord’s will but did it not was


PAALM OXIX,





beaten with many stripes. “If ye know
these things, happy are ye if ye do
them” (1 John ii. 4; James i. 22),
Everything depends upon this. If we
do not practise God’s commandment
with both hands earnestly, our ardour
will cool, our love diminish, our medi-
tation cease, and our Bible be with-
drawn, But if we practise it, our
weakness and ignorance will drive us
to its wisdom and strength, finding
which our affections will be stirred and
our delight and boasting stimulated.

In conotusion.—Seek God’s Word
diligently. While you are musing on
it, let the fire burn. That fire will
kindle joy. That joy will give us holy
boldness before princes and governors,
and help us in the prosaic application
and practice of it in our daily life.


AFFLICTION: ITs Comrorts, Durizs, anp Dancers.
(Verses 49-53.)


Notice—

I. That God’s servants are permitted
to suffer affliction. This Psalm, the
whole Bible, and all experience testifies
to this. “They that are godly in the
world shal: suffer persecution.” The
glorified “ have come out of great tribu-
lation.” “ Ye shall have tribulation.’

1. These afflictions are aggravated by,
or in some cases mainly consist in, the dert-
sion of ungodly men (ver. 51), ‘“ They
ridiculed him, bantered him, did all they
could to expose him to contempt ; they
laughed at him for praying and called it
cant, for his seriousness and called it
mopishness, for his strictness and called
it needless preciseness. They were the
proud who sat in the scorners’ seat and
valued themselves in so doing. — i.
Henry.

2. Whether despised or not, the godly
man ts always afflicted by the prevalence
of sin (ver. 53), ‘The LXX. render the
word déuusa, by “depression ;” Arab, and
Syr., “sadness ;” Jerome, “horror;” Cal-
vin, “terror.” (See Ps, xi. 6.) “ Probabiy
a burning wind or simoom is meant,
which scorches up snd destroys vegeta-
tion in a moment ; and, metoph., a sharp


penetrating pain or horror.”— Speaker s
Com. Other aspects of affliction are as
nothing when compared with man’s
treatment of God and His Word. A
sure mark of grace is extreme sensitive
ness to the exceeding sinfulness of sin.

II. That God has special comforts
for His afflicted servants.

1. His word ts the repertory of ex-
ceeding great and precious promises for
those who are in affliction. All our vicis-
situdes are divinely provided for. “I
remember Thy judgments of old.” God
does not wait for His servants’ extremi-
ties, The provision for them is antedated
by eternity. When the believer goes to
the Word of God he finds waiting for
him all he wants.

2. His Word quickens (ver. 50). The
worst feature of affliction is the exhaus-
tion it engenders, and that is intensified
sometimes by the thought that it is hope-
less. But God tells us that our sickness
is not unto death, and thus immortal
hope and new life are kindled in the
breast.

Ill. That affliction should lead us to
call upon God to fulfil His promises


277


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : PSALMS.


a


1. We should plead the promise ttself,
This is an appeal to God’s faithfulness,
We must go to God’s Word to find what
promise meets our case and then plead
it. Is our case that of sinners; God’s
promise is to abundantly pardon, _Dis-
tress; God has promised peace. Dark-
ness: light. Pain: sufficient grace,

2. We should plead the hope that the
promise has excited. This is an appeal
to the divine justice and goodness, if
God could give rise to groundless expec-
tations, all faith in Him would fail.
This we know to be impossible.

8. We should plead God's fulfilled
promises and man’s answered hopes. ‘The
Psalmist remembered that the principles
of the divine administration were always
the same.” In the trials of life, &c., it
is well for us to think of the unchanging
principles which mark the divine deal-
ings. Under such an administration
those who trust in God mus¢ be safe.


IV. That affliction should not lead
us to decline from God’s law (ver. 51).

1. Pain should not lead us to doubt
God's goodness, ‘Pain is not an evil in
itself. The physician and parent have
often to inflict pain.

2. Adversity should not lead us to
swerve from our principles, Remember
the compensations. It is something to
suffer for the right. God is always on
the side of the right. God will always
reward the right.

3. Derision should not lead us from
an open avowal of our piety (Ps. xliv.
12-22). This is a temptation to which
the young are most susceptible. Many
a man can face death who quails before
sarcasm. Peter. Happy the man in
the scoffing world who can say, “I have
not declined from Thy law.”

In concLusion,—(James i. 2-5; 1
Peter i. 6, 7; Rom. vy, 3, etc.).


Tue Earraiy PIne@RimMaGk AND THE HEAVENLY Sona@s.
(Verse 54.)


“When the Eastern traveller takes
shelter from the scorching heat or halts
for the night at some caravansary which
is for the time the house of his pilgrim-
age, he soothes his rest with a song—a
song it may be of war, romance, or love,
But the poet of Israel finds his theme in
the statutes of Jehovah. These have
been my pastime, with these I have
refreshed myself onward through the
wearisome journey, and across the scorch-
ing deserts of life. Not songs of old
tradition, &c., have supported me, but
these have been the solace of my weary
hours and the comfort of my rest.”—
Bushnell.

I. God’s people are on a pilgrimage.

1. They have here no continuing city
(Heb. xiii. 14), This life is but the pas-
sage of the soul to its eternal inheritance,
All things here are fleeting, are partaken
of in haste, while the traveller is moving
onward. All things change, avocations,
pleasures, friends, &c., but this, that we
are journeying to the grave.

2. They have here no home. They
sojourn here for a time. Soon they

278


strike their tents for the last time and
enter into their rest. All the journey is
characterised by the discomfort incident
to homelessness, There is nothing to
give harmony, satisfaction, or repose.

3. They are ever seeking their country
and their home. This implies patient
employment of the means at their dis-
posal ; the temporary rests and refresh-
ments of the way; the supports and
charts of the way; and the compauions
of the way.

4. This being the case they are not
ashamed of the character of strangers and
ptlgrims, but gloryinit. There is nothing
here worthy of their inheritance (John
xv. 19, 1 Peter iv. 4).

I. Delightful provisions are made
for God’s people on their pilgrimage.
“Thy statutes have been my songs.”
“ Mul!titudes of men have a very diffe-
rent conception of this matter. Divine
law, divine obligation, responsibility in
any form, authority under any conditions,
they feel to be a real annoyance.”—
Bushnell, God's statutes are delightful
nevertheless, because—


HLOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PSALM OXIX,





l. They clearly reveal the end of our
sousney. While other books give only
asm hopes or shrewd guesses, God's
Word is most explicit. It is full of as-
surances of our future home. It tells
us of its many mansions, its splendid
cities, its wide domain, its freedom from
sin, pain, and death; its Fatherly Sove-
reign ; and of the joys which are at His
right hand for evermore,

2. They contain directions how we may
reach our journey’s end. It is no small
joy amidst the questionable maxims and
the halting speculations of the world to
have a light shining in a dark place, a


chart which maps out every day’s march,
and indicates every danger, and follow-
ing which it is impossible to go astray.

3. They contain the history of our
ancestors and fellow-countrymen who
have gone the way before us and have
entered into rest, and encourage us to
emulate their patience and heroism.
(Heb. vi. 12, xii. 1).

4. They contain the precious promises ;
assure of the leadership and companton-
ship of God ; provide comfort for the
anxiety, and solace for the pain, we meet
with by the way.


Tue Nicutty Occupations oF THE GODLY.
(Verses 55, 63, 148.)


That God has given the light is a
reason why we should dedicate the day
to Him and make Him the end of all
our active services, But God has also
given the night, and that blessing of
blessings, sleep. Should not that be
recognised, and at its appropriate season ¢
The Psalmist thought so and then medi-
tated on God’s Word, remembered God’s
name, and rose to give thanks to Him.

L The duties of the night.

1, Meditation on God’s Word. Mea-
suring by that the actions of the day, and
composing our thoughts for the night,

2. Remembrance of God’s name;
who has preserved us during the day,
and under whose protection we hope to
be preserved during the darkness and
solitude of the night.

3. Celebration of God’s praise. Thank-
fulness for the blessings of both seasons,

II. How these duties are to be per-
formed.

1, With alacrity (ver. 148).

2. With self-forgetfulness, At mid-
night. Remembering only the grati-
tude we owe to God.


3. With joy (ver. 62).

IIL Why these duties are to be per:
formed.

1. Night ts most suttable for profit-
able meditation on the Word of God.
Amidst the distraction of worldly cares
the mind is unfitted for the sustained
effort that is required.

2. Night is most suitable for remem-
bering God’s name. The mind is then
unoccupied. The bustle of life often
drives away thoughts of God,

3. Night ts most suitable for thanke-
giwing. The time most suitable to
thought is most suitable for gratitude.

IV. These nightly occupations will
prepare us for the exercise of daily
duties.

1. Nightly meditation will prepare us
for daily obedience, The task learned
overnight will be easily repeated on the
following day.

2. Nightly remembrance of God will
stimulate daily thoughts about Him.

3. Nightly thanksgiving will be a
healthy preparation for the recognstion of
daily mercies,


Tue Buzssines oF OBEDIENCE.
(Verse 56.)


Some expositors refer the “this”
literally to the blessings enumerated in
the preceding verses, It is better, per-


haps, to view the expression indefinitely.
Taking a review of his whole experi-
ence, the Psalmist bursts out in the joy-


279


FUALM OXIX,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALM.


aan ey eee


ful exclamation, “ All is mine, because
I kept Thy precepts.” The evangelical
results of obedience are—

I. Protection in the further course of
obedience (Ps, xxxi, 19, 20; Jobi. 10;
Zech, ii. 5).

Ii. As much of success in life as God
may see good for us (Matt. wi 33; Ps.
Ixxxiv. 11).

IIL. Gracious manifestations of God’s


presence and favour (Ps. rvil LE ; John
xiv. 21).

IV. Growth in grace (Ps, lrrxiv.
7; Prov. iv. 18; Rom. vi. 19).

V. Peace. Verse 165. (Isa. xxxii.
17; Gal. vi. 16; Phil. iv. 8.)

VI. Joy. Verse 14. (Rum v. 3,
xiv. 17.)

VIL Heaven (Rev. iii.)


Tax Sovux’s Portion.
(Verses 57, 58.)


L What the soul’s portion is.
“Thou art my portion, O Lord.” Not
His ordinances, or Word, or Church, or
anything about Him, or from Him, but
Himself, Heb., ‘‘ Jehovah (is) my por-
tion, s¢., Mine inheritance more precious
than any other.” (See Ps, xvi. 5,
exiii, 5; Josh. xvii, 14, xviii 10.)
The soul’s portion is—

1. Accessible with them who are of a
contrite heart.

2. Ever present.
you alway.”

3. Unchanging. “The same yester
day, to-day, and for ever.”

4. Soul-satisfying. “ In Thy presence
is fulness of joy.”

5. Eternal (Ps. xxiii. 26).

IL How the soul’s portion is at


“Lo, I am with


tained. ‘I entreated Thy face (Heb)
with my whole heart.”

1. Not by bribes of benevolence. But

2. By earnest supplication.

3. By the undivided aspirations of our
whole nature, ;

4. By the effective pleading of the
divine promise, “ According to Thy
word.”

ITY. On what grounds the soul’s
portion is given. “ Be merciful,” &c.

1. Not on the ground of merit. But

2. On the ground of the divine mercy.

3. On the ground of the divine pro-
mise.

IV. For what purpose the soul’s
portion is vouchsafed (ver. 57):

1. Consecration, “I have said,”


2. Obedience, ‘‘I will keep Thy words.”


Tort Hraventy Roan,
(Verses 59-61.)


The author of this Psalm reviews
the way in which God had been lead-
ing him. He looks back on the time
when he was on another road, and con-
templates with gratitude the thought
which induced him to change his des-
tiny. Having changed the tenor of his
ways, he sped with joyful haste along
the path of God’s commandments and
was not driven therefrom by the malice
of his foes, These words suggest—

I, That man is naturally in the
wrong way. ‘I thought on my ways.”

1. The wrong way ts a hard way.
“The way of transgressors is hard,”
Christian men are too prone to complain


of the difficulties of God’s way. Let them
think of the perils they have escaped.

2. The wrong way is an unsatisfying
way. No sinner can give a reasonable
account of himself. To speak of its
pleasures or profits is but irony. They
are husks which the swine do eat.

3. Jt ts a ruinous way. It weare
out the spiritual energies, and leads to
everlasting destruction.

4. It 1s a selfish way.

5. Its away peculiar to the tndi-
vidual transgressor. “ We have turned
every one to his own way.”

II, That reflection will lead men
into the right way, ‘I thought.”


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





Sin is a reckless absence of thought.
In order to sin, a man cannot, must not,
think. The sinner is beside himself, and,
as in the case of the Prodigal, when he
comes to himself and contemplates his
own misery and degradation, and the
comfortand honours of his father’s house,
he turns his feet in a homeward direction.

Itl. That the choice of the right
way must be followed by a deliberate
change of habit. ‘“‘ And turned my feet.”
“ He does not say that he wazted for God
to turn him, or that he could not turn of
himself. Man is always active in con-
version. He changes, repents, believes,
turns, not God. Itis indeed by the grace
and help of God,—but the effect of that
grace is not to make him idly wait ; it
is to rouse him to act.”—Barnes.


PSALM OXIX.





IV. That the right way is to be
pursued with alacrity. ‘1 made haste.”

1. Auch time has been lost.

2. Many dangers are pursuing,

3. Much has to be done ere we reach
the end, and the day is far spent.

V. That this alacrity is not to be
lessened by the dangers and privations
of the road (ver. 61). The surrounding
perils, so far from discouraging us, should
hasten us. Does the dispoiled traveller
sit down and bemoan his losses when he
knows his home is in sight? No, he
hastens on, lest worse accidents should
happen him. So let our losses and dan-
gers drive us nearer to God, and quicken
our pace towards that heavenly country
“where thieves do not break through nor
steal,”





Toe CommMuUNION or Sarnts.
(Verse 63.)


Manisa social creature, God has said,
“Tt is not good for men to be alone”
(Eccl. iv. 9-12). For the purposes of
mutual help God has set the solitary in
families. This being the case for the
promotion of spiritual life man should
not rush into monasticism, but should
seek fellowship with those with whom
he has moral affinity (Rom. i. 11, 12).
This can be safely neglected by none.
Our text suggests—

I. That religious communion must
have a religious basis. The fear of God
and the keeping of His precepts,

1. The Bible knows of no basts that is
not in some sense theologica/, The fear
of God implies a belief in the person to
be feared. We cannot fear an abstrac-
tion, or a ‘stream or tendency which
works for righteousness,” nor love it,
which indeed is included in that fear.
To keep God’s precepts is to believe in
their divine inspiration and authority,
or we shall deem keeping them optional.
To fear God necessitates fearing Him
through the divinely-appointed means,
through the grace of Christ and in the
power of the Holy Ghost. If we keep
God’s precepts we must not omit those
which demand a full intellectual assent
to certain doctrines. It is impossible
for the man who believes that the only


way to the Father is through Christ, to
worship with the Unitarian or the Deist,
It is impossible for the man who when
he prays believes it is with the help of the
Spirit, to pray with the man who believes .
in no such Spirit. To do so argues either
hypocrisy on the one hand, or the sup-
pression of cherished convictions on the
other, ‘“ What part hath he that be-
lieveth with the infidel ?”

2. The Bible knows of no basis that
ts not practically religious. Profession
without practice is everywhere sternly
condemned. There are no words in the
whole Bible stronger than those used by
St. Paul to the Corinthian Church for
its admission of a known profligate to
its communion, The original covenant
with the Jews was on the condition of
their “ circumspection ” and their separa-
tion from the people and customs among
whom they lived. Creed and conduct,
therefore, 1s the broad basts for the com-
munion of saints,

II. That religious communion is the
spiritual intercourse between spiri-
tual men, and between spiritual men
and God, through the divinely-ap-
pointed means. It involves—

1. The common profession of a common
faith and obedience. Christian faith,
salvation, love and service, are common to

281


PSaLM OXTE,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





all believers, and form the bonds by
which Christendom holds together,

2. Common communion with a common
God, through a common Saviour, by
means of the help of a common Spirit.

3. Participation in a common lot
(Rev. i. 9). In its fullest extent it
involves a communion of suffering as
well as of fellowship (Rom, xii. 15;
Heb. x. 33, xi. 25).

4, The exercise of a common spiritual
help (Ps. xv. 4, xvi. 2; Rom, i. 12).

III. That religious communion is
reasonable and natural, when on this
basis, ¢.9.,


1. Religious men are members of the
family of God. They are begotten by
the same Father, regenerated by the
same Spirit, share the same life, are
washed in the same blood, and are
travelling to the same heaven.

2. The inclinations of the members of
this family all flow im this direction
(1 Thess, iv. 9; 1 John v. 1).

In concLusion.—(i.) Religious com-
munion ts necessary to maintain the faith
once delivered to the saints. (ii.) Rels-
gious communton is profitable as promot-
ing the interests of charity and growth


in grace.


Gop’s Goopnzss: Irs Nature AnD ITs RELATION TO Prayer axp Lirz
(Verses 64, 66, 68.)


I, The nature of the divine good-
ness.

1. It is divine. ‘ Thou art good.”
God is good in Himself. All the attri-
butes of love, truth, and justice, which
go to make up perfect goodness, inhere
in Him.

2. Itis operative. “Thou doest good.”
It is not a negative or passive goodness ;
it is positive and active. God is good
in (1) Creation. ‘“ The earth is full of
Thy mercy.” No perfection is more
resplendently exhibited in the universe
than this, and the universe teems with
its manifestation. The cheering sun,
the shining stars, the singing birds, the
waving corn all proclaim that the earth
is full of the goodness of the Lord.
(2) In human experience. The course
of individual history tells the same tale,
His wings have overshadowed us, His
arm has upheld us, and into our hearts
He has caused to flow the ceaseless bene-
dictions of His grace, Well may we
say with the Psalmist, “Thou hast dealt
weil with Thy servant.” (3) In the
Word, This is the one theme of all the
precepts and all the promises. All our
wants are there anticipated and fully
met. There is light for our understand-
ing, government for our will, cleansing
for our conscience, guidance for our life,
help for our weakness, comfort for our
trouble, God for our portion, and heaven
for our home,

282


I. These views of the divine good-
ness encourage us to pray.

1. Without them prayer would be tm-
possible, To be uncertain about God, or
to know Him only as indifferent or im-
placable, would stifle prayer. Prayer
implies confidence, freedom of access,
expectation of answer. But wa should
not be so foolish as to approach one
whom we were sure could not or would
not hear us, or so courageous if we knew
He would frown upon us or gpurn us.

2. But with this assurance we have a
sure ground for confidence and expecta-
tion, and a mighty plea, God is good,
and does good to the fowls of the air,
the grass of the field ; shall He not much
more be good to us? Plead His good-
ness, His promise to do good, and you
will not plead in vain.

Ill. Our prayer, based upon such
sure warrant and such glad encourage-
ment, should be of the largest kind
and for the best things. We cannot
ask too much, for our text tells us that
God is willing as well as able to supply
all our need, “Teach me Thy statutes

- - good judgment and knowledge.”
The Psalmist felt that instruction was
the best thing to be desired, and he
prayed to be instructed in the best thinga

1. God’s statutes. The Bible is the
best book, because “ given by inspiration
of God, and profitable,” &c. Some
books are good, others bad, others in-


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


—


different. He prays therefore that the
contents of this best book may be ex-
pounded to him by their true interpreter.

2. Good judgment. This is another of
the best things to which all should
aspire. To bad judgment may be traced
all the evils that are in the world, and
to good judgment all that is good. A
good judgment will (1) Accurately dis-
tinguish between truth and error, good
and evil (1 Cor. ii 15, x. 15; Heb. vy,
14). (2) Determine and decide (Pa
xxxix, 1; Acts xi. 23; 2 Tim. iii. 10)





PSALM OXIX,





(3) Guide in the right direction, which is
indeed its main end and use (Ps, 1. 23;

3. Knowledge. God’s statutes are the
sources of true and saving knowledge.
Good judgment will guide us to them,
and apply them, digest them, and use
them. Upon these three things thus
hang all spiritual good. Having these
all the rest will follow.

In conoLusion.—{i.) Entertain large
views of God’s goodness. (ii.) Come for
the provisions of that goodness with large
petitions,


Togs PurposE aNp Benerrit oy AFFLicrion,
(Verses 67, 71.)


At first sight we are startled by the
apparent contradiction, good to be
afflicted. Good to be afflicted because
driven to the painstaking study of a
book whose revelations humble us and
imposes further hardships? Good be
cause driven from having our own way
to walking in God’s? Even so a
storm drives a vessel into harbour when
she should be nearing her destination,
and the sailors deem that storm a
calamity. Not so; they find while in
the harbour a leak that would have
given them a watery grave, and there
they repair the leak, and then proceed
on their way. It was good for them to
be afflicted. So God tosses us in a sea
of trouble to drive us to the harbour of
His Word, where our defects may be
ascertained and remedied. A traveller
bent upon a given destination, through
forgetfulness, or self-conceit, or indo-
lence, neglects to consult either way-


or charta, He resumes his way,


CoNTRASTS AND


but still blindly pushes on. He meets
with an accident, and can go no further
for the time. Was that a calamity |
No. It brought him to his senses.
Now he examines his chart, makes in-
quiries, and finds that he is on the
wrong road, and can never that way
reach his journey’s end. It was good
for him to be afilicted. Soa man errs
from the way of happiness, the way of
truth, the way of his true destiny, the
way of God. The Bible is too dry for
him, how can he with his sublime
genius condescend to examine its tedi-
ous details? Ah! that book is the only
itinerary to heaven. He goes madly on
till he comes to disaster and to ruin.
Then he is glad to consult that book,
and then he finds how far he has gone
wrong and how he may get right.
Truly may such use these words, “ It
is good for me that I have been afflicted.
Before that I went astray ; but now have
I kept Thy word.”


CoMPENSATIONS,


(Verses 69, 70.)


The lesson to be learned here is the
old one, “Things are not what they
seem.” There was a great contrast
between the Psalmist and his perse-
cutors, to all appearances in favour of
the latter. They were in a position
which lifted them up with pride; he in
@ position which cast him down in


sorrow. But below the surface the con-
trast is reversed. Their heart was as
fat as grease, unsusceptible to spiritual
impressions, and incapable of spiritual
enjoyment. He had both the appetite
and the privileges, for he delighted in
God’s law. Again, he had that which
enabled him to triumph over their
283


PAALM CXIK,


ee


slanderous accusations, the answer of a
good conscience towards God.

L The contrast.

1. Apparent. Pride and affliction.
To his enemies, to the world generally,
evil prospered, aud goodness played a
losing game. So it appears to many
now (Ps, lxxiii. 4-12).

2. Real. Down below the surface,
and in the sight of God, there is a con-
trast which tells altogether the other
way. Hearts as fat as grease—delight
in God’s law. “ Their heart is dull and
brutal (Isa. vi. 10; Ps. xvii. 10, Ixxxiii.
7), 80 that they understand not Thy
statutes, in which I delight; yea, I
love them with my whole heart, and
above all price.” — Speaker's Com.
“ Senseless, secure, and stupid, sensual
and voluptuous ; they roll themselves
in the pleasures of sense and take up
with them as their chief good; and
much good may it do them. I would
not change conditions with them.”—
M. Henry.

IL The compensation.

l. “The wicked have forged a le


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


_


against me.” Heb., To patch together.
“It is applied to accusations made up
of shreds and patches,—units, small
matters, things having mo necessary
connection, words dropped here and
there which, being artfully woven to-
gether, seem to make out a case against
a man. Most slauders are formed in
this \way.”—Barnes, “All the false-
hoods which men smeared, or smeared
all at once over him, making the true
nature of things undiscernible by daub-
ing them over with false colours, or
pasting on deceit.”—Moll.

2. The compensation consisted in the
Sact that they were lies, and that the
Psalmist had and would keep God's
precepts with his whole heart. This,
with the consequent sense of God’s ap-
probation, supported and cheered him.
Learn—

(i) To judge accurately and not by
appearances. {ii.) The needful thing w
not to be rich and prosperous, but to be
right and good. (iii.) Those who are right
and good will have abundant consclation
tn the midst of trial.


Toe BIBLE BETTER THAN RIcH#s,
(Verse 72.)


This, like all great truths, is a most
difficult thing to believe. The real
value of wealth has been estimated over
and over again, yet men cling to it as
the best possible if not the best con-
ceivable thing. But the testimony of
those who could best judge the relative
value of both, pronounces God’s Word
to be the best conceivable and the best
possible thing in the world, e.g., David
(Ps. xix. 10), Solomon (Prov. iii. 14,
viii. 11).

I. What wealth can do the Bible
can do better.

1. Wealth brings honour. Mammon
has never wanted worshippers. No title
is refused, and no door closed, to tne
millionaire. The magisterial bench is
reached by golden stairs, fashion wields
a gilded sceptre, and coronets adorn
the brow of gold, But the Bible confers
higher dignities than these. By it man
obtains the peerage of heaven, enjoys the

284


Ss:


companionship of God, and obtains a
crown of glory that shall never fade
away.

2. Wealth can purchase what is sup-
posed tu constitute happiness. It lifts a
man above the privations of poverty ;
may give magnificent mansions, costly
furniture, gorgeous attire, and luxuri-
ous diet. All the arts and adornments of
life are open to those who can purchase
them. But what are these in compari-
son with what the true riches of the
Bible can purchase ; the house not made
with hands, the robe of righteousness,
the wine of the kingdom, the heavenly
manna, fulness of joy, and pleasures for
evermore }

3. Wealth may purchase learning,
buy books, found libraries, pay school


fees, and open the doors of colleges,


But no money can purchase what the
Bible offers freely. True wisdom, the
saving knowledge of God in Christ,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


PSALM OXIX.





understanding of the will of God, and
immortality. Granted, then, that riches
can do much, the Bible can do more,
and du it without money and without
price.

II. What wealth cannot do the
Bible can.

1. Money cannot purchase pardon for
sin. If it could, many would part with
their all for it. It has been tried.
Under a debasing superstition it is tried
to-day. But no priestly fees, no costly
masses, have or can ease the burdened
conscience or cleanse its guilty stains—
“Vainly we offer each ample oblation ;

Vainly with gifts would His blessing
implore.”
But the Bible leads us to Him “ who is
faithful and just to forgive us our sins,”
&e.

2. Money cannot purcnase a clear and
safe guide in the practical paths of lésfe.
It can lead astray, but it cannot lead
back again, and cannot train man in the
way he should go. Much has been
spent in the supposition that it can;
_ but it has been spent on blind guides,

The Bible, on the contrary, is “a lamp
unto our feet,” &c.

3. Money cannot purchase dignities of
character. It has purchased the op-
posite. Many a man has been weighted
down by it into the lowest abysses of
moral degradation. The best it can do
is to gild the exterior. But the Bible
ennobles man. It endows him with the
Spirit of God. It enables him to live
the life of Christ. It has trained states-

men, heroes, and philanthropists. It has


given scholars their wisdom, martyrs ta
progress their fortitude, and saints their
sanctity,

4. Money cannot purchase the needful
blessing in time of trial. It straightens
no crooked path, It may intensify
trouble, but can never remove it; it can
wipe no tear from the eye; and in the
hour of death man turns to his gilded
idol in vain, It can destroy, but it
cannot save. And in that land where
gold is not the currency the miser has
no place. But the Bible gives to the
afficted, the promises ; to the poor, the
unsearchable riches of Christ; to the
dying, the hope and consciousness of
heaven. Therefore, “The law of Thy
mouth is better,” dc,

Il. What wealth will do the Bible
wont. Wealth must bring anxieties
and cares. Every penny brings its
additional solicitude. With increased
riches comes the disquieting question,
What is to be done with them’? In-
creased possessions mean  iucreased
oversight and responsibility. With
fresh social honours comes fresh and
inexorable demands, And all this
means gray hairs, brain exhaustion,
heart straining, with no adequate re-
turn. But the Bible will not fret the
heart ; it will comfort it. It will not
wear the brain; it will soothe it. It
wil) not injure the-nerves; it will brace
them, It will not impair the moral
sense ; it will sanctify and invigorate it,
Therefore, because what wealth will do
the Bible will not, is “the law of God's
mouth better,” do.


CREATION A PLEA IN PRAYER.
(Verse 73.)


This Psalm is remarkable for its
spiritual aspirations, and the pleas by
which their fulfilment is urged. The
Psalmist is here seeking the highest
moral good. He seeks it in the best
and shortest way, by praying for under-
standing that he may learn God’s com-
mandments, The argument he employs
why his prayer should be answered is
simple, practical, powerful—viz., that
God had created him, and created him


thet he might seek and gain the end
he now desires to reach. Note then—

I. That man is the creation of God
“Thou hast made me.” LEither the
original creation (Gen. i. 26, ii. 7), or
the creation of the individual himself
(Ps. cxxxix.), or both.

Il. That man was created for divine
service (Prov. xvi. 4; Isa, xlix. 5; Rom.
xi. 36). God has “fashioned” man foy
that purpose. With mind, va Hi may


PRALM OXIX.





apprehend and remember Him; with
hearing, that he may listen to Him; with
speech, that he may testify of Him; with
hands and feet, that he may do His will ;
with a heart, that he may love Him;
and a spirit, that he may enjoy Him.
Man is full of marks of design. What
is that design? That he may eat, and
drink, ard sleep? Nay, the animals
do that; but that he may know God
and enjoy Him for ever.

III. That man is not now as he
was when he was created. He not
only does not fulfil his Maker’s design,
but is incapable of doing so (Eccl. vii.
29; Rom. iii, 23). By some great
injury and loss, and by the infusion of
some new principles, he falls short of
the divine glory, and is bent on fulfilling
precisely opposite ends, All his facul-
ties so exquisitely adapted for divine
purposes are prostituted to base and
injurious works. His understanding,
will, affections, &., are engaged in war-
fare against God, the devil’s service,
and self-destruction.

IV. Hence the necessity of a new
creation. A new heart, a new under-
standing that can grasp the wisdom, duty,
and necessity of God’s commandments,
and a new nature that will render the
learning and practice of those com-
mandments easy and possible (Deut. v.
29; John vi. 5, 6; Rom. viii. 10, 11;
Col. iii. 9, 10).

V. Desiring this new nature, so that
we may answer the divine purposes, no


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





plea is more appropriate and powerful
than the fact that we are God’s crea
tion.

1. It te natural that God should take
an interest in His own work; and if it
come to grief, that He should desire to
repair and perfect it (Job x. 3, xiv. 15;
Isa. lxiv. 8, 9).

2. The divinely-ordatned order is that
we should ask God to multiply His
blessings (Ps. cxvi. 12, 13; Matt. vi.
25; Rom. viii. 32). The more God
gives, the more He delights to give,

8. The fact that God has created us
is strong ground for the belief that He
will not forsake us, We may reasonably
suppose that the same hand which im-
poses the obligation will help us when
we endeavour to discharge it.

4, This prayer implies a state of the
heart which God will own and bless. It
is the expression of a strong and ardent
desire to fulfil a divine obligation.

IN concLusion.—Come as creatures
to the great and beneficent Creator, and
ask Him, your Father, to help you His
offspring. (i.) Let the unconverted come.
Although you cannot call God Father
by the spirit of adoption, yet He has
created you. Make this your plea,
that you should receive that filial spirit
which will enable you to learn and
obey your Father's will. (ii.) Let be-
lievers under trial come for both reasons.
Plead creation old and new, and you
will not plead in vain.


Re.icious FELLOWSHIP,
(Verses 74, 79.)


IL Is possible only to religious per-
sons. Fellowship implies a common ex-
perience, bond, and purpose. There is
family fellowship, social fellowship, fel-
lowship between those engaged in trade,
science, or art, requiring similarity of
nature, taste, and aim. ‘“‘ How can two
walk together except they are agreed 1”
So there can be no religious fellowship
except between those who fear God and
have known His testimonies, That is,
the qualities of sainthood are essential
to the communion of saints,

286


IL Is to be desired by religious per-
sons. “ Let those that fear thee turn
to Me.” Man feels as God felt for
Him, that it is not good for him to be
alone. He is a social being and longs
for society. So God has “set the soli-
tary in families.” This feeling is de-
veloped in fraternities, guilds, trades’
unions, &. So the spiritual man
yearns for communion with those who
have been baptized into the same spirit.
But it is noteworthy how the Psalmist
desires this fellowship to be broughs


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


PALM OXIX,


2-5 i wa a ER a i


about, not by “the selective action of
spiritual affinities,” but by the provi-
dence and grace of God. Verse 79 is
not merely the expression of a want,
it is a prayer (Jer. xv. 19), This is
just the New Testament idea of the
Church, It is not merely a congrega-
tion of people who for mutual profit,
spiritual or otherwise, have left other
things for it. It is a company, every
member of which God “has called out
of darkness into His marvellous light.”
Christians do not simply gravitate to
each other, God calls them to Himself,
and then the Church finds its true unity,
A shade of thought worthy of note is
found in the expression, ‘‘ Let them that
fear thee turn to Me,” and shadows forth
the principle of Christian evangelisation.
“‘ Here am I, yearning for fellowship. Let
Thy people in their search for lost
members of their fold find me.” What
a striking condemnation does the ex-
ample of this old Jew afford those who
shrink from and must be urged to
membership in Christ’s Church! The
Psalmist’s absorbing desire and prayer
is, that the faithful may find him and
take him into fellowship.

Iil. Is profitable to religious per-
sons. “ They that fear Thee will be glad
when I,” &c. Weare glad when we finda
fellow-cuuntryman on a foreign shore.
The scholar is glad of the company of
his fellow-scholar, &c. Converse over
identical callings is healthful and stimu-
lating.

1. The Church ts glad when st finds
one lost member of its body and can
bring it back again into union with tt-
self, There is joy not only in heaven
but on earth, The members of the
Church have been increased, its territory
and spiritual life and power augmented,
one more jewel is added to its Re-
deemer’s crown.


3 The Church is glad when one of tts


RESIGNATION :


members can testify to God’s special grace,
The Psalmist had been afflicted, but
God had sanctified his affliction and had
delivered him, He felt that those who
feared God would be glad when they knew
that, particularly the sorrowful, whom it
would lead to resignation and hope.

3. The Church is glad when one of ite
members contributes to the common stock
of knowledge. The Psalmist had prayed
for understanding and had been answered.
We can imagine the gladness of the God-
fearing company as he would open up
the new and enlarged views of truth
which had been vouchsafed, him,

4, The Church is glad when one of tts
members can strengthen the common com-
jidences, “They . . . will be glad
because I have hoped in Thy Word.”
Nothing is more depressing to a society
than for one of its members to lose his
hope.

In conciusion.—Why do some re-
ligious men shrink from religious fellow-
ship? This question is of vast import-
ance when we consider that the members
of our congregations vastly outnumber
the members of our churches, There is
something wrong, we may depend upon
it, when members of a family or class
are out of fellowship with each other,
If it is natural and healthy for men in
their social or professional capacity to
meet together, and if they have no hesi-
tation in speaking to one another about
matters which affect their common inte-
rest, much more so should the travellers
of Zion meet together and comfort and
edify one another by the way. Religious
fellowship, it is true, may degenerate
into sentimentality and unreal sameness,
but a thing is not to be neglected be-
cause it is abused. The great want of
the world is men and women of the
type before us. Pentecost, the Refor
mation, Puritanism, and Methodism. re-
sulted from such.


Its Duties anp USEFULNESS.


(Verses 75, 79.’


I. The Psalmist expresses his resig-
nation to the divine will, This is based
on two grounds—


4. God’s judgments are right. God
is holy in His nature, and wise and just
in all the acts of His government, ar

287


PEALM CXIX,


therefore His judgments are right in
general, though there may be in some
particular instances difficulties which we
cannot easily resolve." —M. Henry,

2. God’s judgments are the expression
of the divine faithfulness. They are not
arbitrary or cruel, but they are necessary,
that the divine and beneficent schemes
which God has in hand may be worked
out.

IL Resignation does not preclude, but
rather presupposes and includes prayer
for comfort and support. It is impos-
sible without special grace to see and
acknowledgathe righteousness and faith-
fulness of God’s dispensatious. The
heart is naturally prone to resist and
rebel against all discipline. We must
therefore cry for help in our time of
need. This is based on three things,

1. The divine mercy. ‘Thy merciful
kindness.” We may plead that God is
too kind to withdraw or not to bestow
His help, the thought of which will en-
courage us under the heaviest trials.

2. The divine promise. ‘ According
to Thy word.” God is not only dis-
posed but bound by covenant promise
to help. Plead ¢hat promise that secins
most to suit your case,


3. The divine ownership, “ Thy ser-


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY ; PSALMS,





vant.” Despondency, éc., will unfit us
for our duties, and we my therefore ask
for help because we want to work.

IIL Prayer for life is not only not
incompatible but consistent with resig-
nation. ‘ That I may live.” Letit be
remembered that the Psalmist does not
express that desire for life that is com-
mon to all men for its own sake. Life
may be a blessing or a curse as it gaing
or fails in gaining the end for which it
was given. The prayer here is for a
life of holy joy and holy usefulness,
“ For Thy law is my delight.” Yet he
would not wish for it except as the ex-
pression of the mercy, aud therefore by
the will, of God.

IV. Prolonged life is to be desired
for the twofold influence that it may
wield.

1. The conviction of gainsayers. Life
is desired (1) That imputations of the
ungodly may be repelled (vers. 6¥Y 78);
(2) Thas thetr aikesstrcal arguments may
be confuted (cxv. 2), and (3) Themselms
put to shame (ver. 72).

2. The comfort and confirmation of
God’s people (ver. 29). It will stimu-
late to (1) stronger confidence in God,
(2) resignation, (3) hope. What God
can do in one case He can do in all,


OrTHODOXxY.
(Verse 80.)


L Orthodoxy implies a correct appre-
hension of the meaning, purpose, and
authority of God’s statutes. How can
the heart be sound in that about which
the mind is ignorant, uncertain, or hesi-
tating? A law must be known before it
can be obeyed. So with God’s statutes,
I must know what they are, and assent
to their necessity and utility, before they
can become governing forces in my life,
These statutes “are exceeding broad,”
and cover the whole field of doctrine
and morals, God’s statutes are, ¢.g., the
Ten Commandments; but they are more,


We read, “ Believe also in Me,” “ Re- -


ceive ye the Holy Ghost,” “ Repent ye

and believe the Gospel,” &c., and these

are as much statutes as, “Thou shalt

got steal.” Why then should orthodoxy
289


in the former be of less moment than
orthodoxy in the latter? The only
difference is that heterodoxy in the
latter is an offence against man, and in
the former is a dishonour put upon
God, which man naturally prefers. True
enough orthodoxy by itself is of little
value, just as true ideas of health avail
nothing except they are practically ap-
plied. But we never hear of objections
to orthodoxy in science, &c., objected
to on these grounds,

II. Orthodoxy consists in soundness
of heart in God’s statutes—de, experi-
mental piety. As it is not merely cor-
rectness of intellectual belief on the one
hand, neither is it simply correctness of
life on the other, A man may have all
the elements of the form of godliness


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





his morality may be very exact, his
duties may be performed with the most
scrupulous punctuality, and yet he may
be like a whited sepulchre or an apple
of Sodom, full of rottenness for the
want of spiritual life and power,—e.g.,
the Pharisees. But for a man to be
sound at heart, God’s statutes must dwell
in him (Heb. viii. 10); they must be at
the root of the governing forces of his
life, transforming him into the image of
God, moulding and assimilating him in
the form which God would have him
take, expelling sin, testifying of the
divine favour, and subjecting his whole
nature to the will of God. Then is a
man orthodox—a living practical rule of
faith and practice, If the tree is good
the fruit will be good, and if a man is
sound at heart he will be sound in his
life, and pure and undivided in his
allegiance to God and man.

IIL The result of orthodoxy is that
a man whose heart is sound in God’s
statutes will not be ashamed. Unsound-
ness is the source of shame everywhere,
except in those whose faces are steeled
against shame. It is very sad when
men glory in their shame, and make a
boast of their heterodoxy in life, heart,
or creed. But those who are sound
have—

1. No occasion of shame before God.
Soundness of heart will give us con-
fidence in His presence (1 John iii. 21)


+ PSALM OXEX.
;





and boldness of approach to the throne
of grace (Heb. xiii. 18, Rom. viii. 1),
and before the throne of judgment by
and by. It is quite otherwise when
the heart is unsound.

2. No occasion of shame before our-
selves, An unsound heart rouses the in-
dignation of conscience (Rom. vi. 21).
Assoonas Adam sinned he wasashamed
ofhimself. Butthe righteous man can
approach the tribunal of conscience
without fear of shame (2 Cor. i. 12).

3. No occasion of shame before our

fellows. We shall neither be stumb-
ling-blocks to them, nor be exposed to
the contempt of those whose opinion
we value.
In ConcLusion.—Let those who would
be orthodox, in its fullest sense, learn—
(i.) God alone can make them so (Isa. li.
10, Eph. iv. 24). (ii.) That it should be
sought with prayer and earnest pur-
pose, and will be vouchsafed (Ezra viii.
10, Ps. exxxix. 23, 24). Let not the
man of sceptical opinions nurse them
under the impression that they evidence
soundness of intellect, and are therefore
desirable, or the man of unsound life
under the impression that it is manly.
(iii.) That a constant sense of Goa’s pre-
sence and a careful watchfulness 0) our
ways 1s necessary to the maintenance of
a sound creed, a sound heart, and a
sound life (ver. 168, Jer. xvii, 9, Heb
xii, 13).


Man’s Apversiry AND Gop’s SALVATION.
(Verses 81-88.)


Our text teaches us—

I. That man’s adversity is often
extreme

1. In its intensity. “ My soul faint-
eth,” “Mine eyes fail,” “When wilt
Thou comfort me?” No figures could
convey more powerfully than these the
Psalmist’s extremity. When man’s com-
fort is gone and dimness covers his
sight, and when his heart sinks within
him, his case is extreme indeed.

2. In sts duration. “I am like a
bottle in the smoke.” “As wineskin
in the smoke, my heart is sere and
dried.”—Keble. So long have I been


VOL, IL Tt


afflicted thut I have become dried and
wrinkled. God allows many a saint to
cry out in his trouble, “When wilt Thou
comfort me $”

3. In its danger. “The proud have
digged pits for me.” “They had almost
consumed me.” They were not successful
in their snares and temptations, so they
turn to active persecution and almost
consume him, This is most frequently
the order in which tribulations come.
If the wicked are successful in their
machinations, they are satisfied; if re-
sisted, all their active malice is aroused.

IL That God’s salvation is the

289


PALM OXIX.





remedy for man’s adversity. This
salvation is presented under four as-
pects—

1. “Comfort” ts sometimes salvation.
Paul, the martyrs, all reformers are
saved in this way. It is not always
necessary to be actually delivered.
Timely comfort is timely succour.

2. The execution of judgment on op-
pressors (ver. 84). This is sometimes
God’s way, but not often. Sufficiently
often, however, and conspicuous to strike
terror in the heart of tyrants, Satan,
Pharaoh, the Philistines, Herod, &c. ;
but not often and conspicuously enough
to lead His people to look too much
for sanguinary vengeance on their foes,

3. Personal rescue. ‘Help Thou me.”
Sometimes immediate. By the direct
exercise of His omnipotence, God effects
a complete deliverance for His people,
It was so with Israel’s redemption from
Egypt. It is so in some of those mys-
terious cases when long sources of
trouble are suddenly dried up, and paths
of prosperity suddenly opened. Some-
times with the use of means. By medi-
cine in diseases, by industrious exertion
in poverty. Sometimes God saves con-
spicuously by the unbaring of His arm ;
sometimes invisibly in the course of His
providence.

4. Divine quickening (ver. 88). The
infusion of the divine life of His Spirit,
by means of which man is continually
renewed and strengthened either to bear
his afflictions or to overcome them.

IIL That man’s adversity should


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


oi Se ee


lead him to cry mightily for God's
salvation. Powerful pleas are here
presented and. urged why God should
save. The Psalmist here— te

1. Eapresses his hope in the dine
promises. “I hope on Thy word.” This
is presented as a reason why God should
not disappoint him.

2. Confesses that God is his only com-
fort. ‘When wilt Thou comfort me?”
God sometimes waits till we have ex-
hausted every other resource. But when
man is led to cry to his soul, ‘“ Hope
thou in God,” that cry will not be in
vain.

3. Urges the brevity of his life (ver.
84). “Are my days so many as to ad-
mit of delay in the manifestations of
Thy righteous judgments ? ”—Speaker.
“This is not a desire to be told how
long he was to live, as if it were an
object of desire to know this, but it is
a method of saying that He could not
live long under these circumstances,
and therefore asked that God would
save him soon.” —Barnes.

4, Mentions the divine faithfulness and
loving-kindness (vers. 86, marg., and 88).

5. Reminds God of His own steadfast-
ness (vers. 83, 86, and 87). Happy the
man whose adversity has not impaired
his memory or loosened his hold of
God’s law !

IV. That this remedy should be
sought for holy ends. The Psalmist
did not pray for salvation that he might
be happy, but that he might be holy
(ver. 88).


Gop’s Works anp Gop’s Worps,
(Verses 89-91.)


To the devout and intelligent student
there is a very close relationship and
analogy between God’s Word and God’s
works. Both proceed from the same
Author, both teach truth, both answer
moral ends, both appeal to man’s faith,
hope, and love. The Psalmist traces
some features of this analogy.

I, The heavens and the earth rest
upon immovable foundations: so do
the promises of God. All have a com-
mon Larrea the divine faithfulness,


If the universe came into existence hy
chance, or continued to exist by chance,
it might cease by chance, and thus our
confidence in its stability would end,
and the gravest apprehensions would
arise. So, if the promises rested on any
other basis but God’s fidelity and truth ;


_if they were merely imaginations or


guesses, or the result of a devout and
elevated enthusiasm ; our spiritual foun-
dations, all the bases of moral hope and
life would be shaken or removed, and


>


HIOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS,





wiat then would the righteous do?
But, thank God—


“* His every word of grace is strong
As that which built the skies,
The voice that rolls the stars along
Speaks all the promises,”


TL The heavens and the earth con-
Ginue: so do the promises of God, be-
cause held together by the divine faith-
fulness. Many changes have taken
place since matter was first consoli-
dated into worlds, but all these changes
have been superintended and controlled
by the gracious hand of Him “ who up-
holds all things by the word of His
power ;” and nctwithstanding all those
changes it is the same universe. So
with the promises. Some have been
made to one generation, and some to
another; some are of one quality and
some of another; but they remain the
same in power and beneficence to-day.
The Psalmist trod the same soil under
the same heavens as we do, and the same
kind words which supported him are for
our service, because maintained by the
faithfulness of God.

III. The heavens and the earth are
gervants of the divine faithfulness: so
are the promises. They all acknow-
ledge one common Lord, and God em-
ploys them all for His children’s benefit.
The heavens give cheering light, and
send down refreshing showers. By the
moon our tides are regulated, by the
planets our time. The earth yields her
increase for the children of men, and
all the elements are ministers of the


PGALM OXIXK,


divine pleasure, and hearken unto the
voice of His word. Much more so the
promises, God has given man a spiritual
nature, which requires food, support, and
encouragement, and to this end in faith-
fulness as well as mercy are the divine
p:omises sent on their errands,

IV. The heavens and the earth now
80 stable, according to the divine faith-
fulness will some day cease to be; not
so the promises, which by virtue of
the same faithfulness “for ever are
settled” and are made to “all genera-
tions.” The universe was made to ac-
complish a divine but temporary pur-
pose. “Towards that grand far-off
divine event the whole creation moves.”
Having reached it they will have ac-
complished their mission, and will pass
away to make room for that “new
heaven and new earth wherein dwelleth
righteousness.” ‘‘Heaven and earth
shall pass away, but My word shall
never pass away.” ‘The words of man,
like him who makes them, and his
works are subject to revision ; but God’s
word is above all change, being the un-
alterable decree of the ever-faithful Je-
hovah. Learn—

(i.) Zo trust in God when the fulfil-
ment of His promises ts delayed (Heb.
vi. 12). (ii.) To trust in God as the
sure anchorage of the soul amidst the
mutations of earthly things and when
its vanities would entice us away. (iii.)
To trust in the Lord as here revealed 80
faithful and true, and not lean to the
intuitions of our own fickle and faithless
hearts (Luke xxiv. 25, Rom iv. 20).


Tse BENEFIT AND OBLIGATION OF THE WorD OF Gon.
(Verses 92, 93.)


Learn—

I. That in the order of divine pro-
widence God’s people are a/filicted.
This is the teaching of all the Bible and
all experience.

II. That affliction unsanctified will
damage and destroy the spiritual life.
God seads it for beneficent purposes,
but man may misapply the means and
thus defeat the end. The Psalmist
was perilously near doing this, and was
thus (ver. 92).


Ill. That God’s law delighted in is
the means of sanctifying affliction and
saving the soul from death.

1. Jt shows the reason for and the
beneficence of affliction.

2. It affords comfort and support in
affliction.

3. It reveals and leads us to that
life which saves from destruction, and
quickens us with ws own vitality.

IV. That these benefits involve
duties and a eae ee 93).


PSALM OXIX,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





Many a man who has made the Word
his constant study in affliction, forgets
it altogether in his prosperity.

1. Don’t forget to read tt.

2. Don’t forget what it says either by
command or promise.

3. Don’t forget to be grateful for what
tt has done.

4. Don’t forget to practise what t&
enjoins.


Remember what help it afforded you
and the vows you made respecting it
during your affliction, now you are well,

In concLusion.—(i.) Jf our delights
are in God’s Word while we are tll, much
more should they be when we are well.
(ii) If it can quicken us in affliction,
% can maintain us in our health and
qualify us with living power for service
day by day.


An ALL-PREVAILING PLEA,
(Verse 94.)


L The plea. “I am Thine.” No
plea is so universally prevalent as this.
It is the plea of all properties, the
plea of all relationships. The reason
why things are saved from destruction
is because they say to their owner,
“We are thine.” The reason why @
father is solicitous about his offspring
is because they cry, “ We are thine.”
And the plea most powerful with man
is most powerful with God, and can
never be urged in vain. How can we
urge this plea? We are God’s—l. By
ereatton (1 Chron. xxix. 11). 2. By
redemption, “Ye are not your own.”
3. By covenant (Hosea ii, 23). 4. By
re-creation (Eph. ii, 10), and adoption
(Rom. viii.). 5. By conquest. 6. By
self-dedication to His tes 6 7. By
assimilation to His likeness.

IL The prayer based upon this plea.
“Save me.” Having this plea use it,


urge it as a reason why God should
save from (1) Sin, (2) Despair, (3) Foes,
(4) Onfatthfulness, (5) Hell.

III The sources of the Psalmist’s
information both as to plea and
prayer. ‘For I have sought Thy pre-
cepts.” From no other ‘source could
he have known that he was God’s, and
that God was willing to save.

In concLusion.—(i.) Can we all say
when asked, ‘To whom belongest thou
and whence art thou?” “I am thine.”
(1.) When did you take the oath of
allegiance (Deut. xxvi. 17, 18.) (2.)
Have you the seals and signs of the
divine possession ? (ii.) Acknowledge God's
full authority. God gave Himself for
you, and the least you owe Him is
yourselves, and by giving Him yourselves
you lose nothing but gain everything.
(iii) Seek upon this basis God’s full
salvation.


Tus ATTITUDE OF THE WICKED TOWARDS THE RIGHTEOUS, AND THB
ConDITION OF THE RIGHTEOUS UNDER OPPRESSION.


(Verses 95, 110, 121


This Psalm is of peculiar value as
exhibiting the characteristic features of
wickedness in all ages, and the attitude
which evil men will everywhere assume
in their opposition to the good. It will
be profitable to view all the references to
thissubject at one glance, and then intheir
relation to each other. By that means
we shall catch many shades of. thought
we should otherwise miss. In these
verses the Christian is informed all
that he may expect from the enemies
of God and man, and instructed how

292


. 122, 134, 157, 161.)


he should comport himself under this
special form of trial

I The wicked are here described.

1. Who they are. (1.) The wicked, a
general term covering all the rest.
Godless, transgressors of God’s law and
therefore transgressors of man’s. (2.)
The oppressors, Those who put bur-
dens on the helpless, and take advan-
tage of, and crush the little strengta of
the weak. (3.) Enemtes of the rig
vecessarily and perpetually, (4.) Proud

2. Whit they are. (1.) “Many” in


ee


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.
eee








number, (2.) Powerful tn influence,
* princes.” (3.) Malicious in designs.
{4.) Subtle in methods of operation.

3. What they do. (1.) They wait for
the righteous for their destruction. (2.
They lay snares for their ruin. 3)
They oppress. (4.) They persecute,

IL The righteous are here by the
example of the Psalmist counselled—

1. To pray. (1.) For protection (vers,
121, 122). (2.) For deliverance(ver. 134).


PSALM OXIX.


2. To consider God's testimonies, (1)
of His goodness, faithfulness, and power,
(2) against their enemies. 5

3. Not to err from God’s statutes by
falling into the snare of the wicked.
Hence watchfulness,

4. To keep God's statutes in spite of
oppression.

5. Not to decline from God's testi-
montes,


6. To stand in awe of God’s word.


Tae Finire anp THE INFINITE,
(Verse 96.)


The Psalmist relates what was a matter
of experience to him. He had seen the
end of all “‘ perfection,” so may we. All
finite things are perishable and perish be-
fore our eyes—empires, majesty, learn-
ing, art, pleasure, life. The first man and
the last, and all those and their belong-
ings who have come between, are of the
earth earthy, and fadeaway. Butin the
midst of all these mutations the word
of God lives on. “ All flesh is grass,” &c,
It has seen the rise and fall of many
idolatries, superstitions, infidelities, and
persecutions, but it stands to-day un-
moved and unshakable. The truth of
our text holds good with regard to

L Earthly life. There isa limit to its
perfection. “The days of our years are
threescore years and ten,” &c, Beyond
that it cannot pass, It is bounded by the
bourne of an undiscovered country, which
it cannot pass, But God’s commandment
is exceeding broad. It covers not only
time, but the eternity which bounds it on
both sides, It wasin God’s mind innu-
merable ages before man breathed the
breath of life, and willsurvi the wreck
of matter and the crush of worlds,

IL Earthly greatness and grandeur.
The limitations to that we see day after
day. The popular favour which has
built it up may be withdrawn, the
frie.ds who contributed it may fall
away or die, the enemies who are wait-
ing their opportunity to undermine it
may succeed, health may fail, and life.
But God’s commandment is exceeding
broad. It can confer honours which are
supernatural and immortal, “ crowns of
glory which can never fade away.”

IIL The development of human cha-


racter. There is a point to which a man’s
character without God may reach, beyond
which it is impossible to go. And how
often do men reach that point and then
utterly break down in the line of wisdom,
goodness, or charity! But God’s com-
mandment is exceeding broad. There is
no “hitherto shalt thou go and no far-
ther” to those whose character is based
upon that. By following the lines indi-
cated there, and securing the power of-
fered there, a man who has scaled the
loftiest height of saintliness there known
could still say, “I count not myself to
have attained it.”

IV. The acquisition of human know-
ledge. ‘he mind has limitations be-
youd which, “ madness lies” It can
be stretched to a certain tension, but
if stretched further it breaks, But
God’s commandment is exceeding broad.
It provides for the indefinite expansion
of the mind it has sanctified, and offers
subjects which shall occupy without
wearying it to all eternity. The swd-
jects of human knowledge are bounded,
and it is not impossible when scientific
instruments reach the perfection that
they promise, to imagine the time when
the circle of human information will be
complete; when our telescopes shall
have swept every star, and our micro-
scopes revealed every molecule, and our
natural philosophy the details of every
element. But God’s commandment
contains things into which we shall
desire to look for ever, The records of
human knowledge perish ; inscriptions
become illegible; books and parch-
ments wear out ; but God’s command-


ment will endure for ever.
293


PRALM OX!IZ,





V. Human pleasures and satisfac-
tions. Sensual gratifications soon pall
upon the taste. Sinful appetites are
soon jaded. The worldling sooner or
later comes to the old conclusion, ‘ All
is vanity and vexation of spirit.” The
“pleasures of sin are for a season.”
Even innocent enjoyments lose their re-
creative power. They must be changed
again and again, for without variety they
cease to satisfy at all. When over in-
dulged, or sought as an end and nota
means to an end, they lose their pleasur-
ableneas altogether. But God’s com-
mandment is exceeding broad. It con-
tains and leads us to fulness of joy and
pleasures for evermore.

VL Human institutions, These are
mostly local. As a rule the institutions
of a country are confined to that country.
The manners and customs of a race or
clime usually belong only to that race
or clime. But God’s commandment is
exceeding broad. Its institutions and
principles are adapted to the whole
world, Human institutions are all


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


—_—_—


temporary. They are founded to an-
swer passing needs, The institution of
God’s word will last through the eternity
of man’s spiritual want. They are the
bread and water of his life by which he
shall be satisfied for evermore.

In concLusion.—Why? Because all
things merely human are confined to
time. ‘ God’s commandment, covers time
and eternity. Things human cannot
touch the immortal life and satisfy it,
cannot cleanse the sinful conscience,
soothe the troubled heart, or give peace
to the agitated soul. They cannot aid
us in our great concerns, cannot tell
us about God, duty, acceptance with
heaven, death, preparation for a life to
come. God’s commandment can and
does all this, and therefore is it ‘ex-
ceeding broad.” Therefore our text is
a solemn word for everybody. It is an
encouragement to the weak, a warning
to the great, a comfort for the old, an
exhortation to the young. All perfection
has an end, but God’s commandment is
exceeding broad.


Toe Sams EnJorMent oF THE Law or Gop,
(Verses 97 and 103.)


L The law of God is lovable. It is
worthy of notice, that the Psalmist’s
appreciation was not only of its pro-
mises (ver. 103), but of its injunctions
(ver. 97).

1. Because of tts author. It is our
Father's legacy. The commandment and
promises of Him who sticketh closer than
a brother. It is the counsel and loving
assurance of our best and truest Friend.

2. Because of tts subject-matter. (1.) /t
is truth divine and infallible. ‘Thy
word is truth” (Ps. xix. 9, Eph, i, 13).
It is necessary truth that would never
have been discovered by the unaided use
of our understandings. All truth should
excite affection, because of its suitability
to the mind and its power to satisfy it,
(2.) It ts the revelation of perfect love
and goodness. ‘Tells us of our Father’s
character and the beneficence of His in-
tentions, how sin may be pardoned, the
soul sanctified, the whole nature blessed,
and heaven gained.

3. Because of the benefit tt confers,

394


It convinces the sinner of the error of
his ways (Jer. xxiii), Paul before Felix,
It converts the soul from sin (Ps. xix. 7).
It promises comfort in all times of dis-
tress, It is a safe guide in the affairs of
life. It initiates and increases in the
knowledge of God, and is able to make
us perfect in every good word and work
(2 Tim. iii. 7, 2 Pet. i 19).

IL. God’s saints possess a» spiritual
taste which enables them to appreciate
the law of God. The soul has faculties
which perform the same functions for it
as the senses do for the body (Heb. v.
14), Thus it is said to hear, see, handle,
feel, speak ; and as here and in Psalm
xxxlv. 8, taste. These are the most
acute >f allsenses. The higher the life,
the keener the sense. Animals feel more
than plants; men more than animals;
spiritual men more than carnal men,

1. What this taste presupposes. Soul
hunger. A jaded or satisfied appetite
more or less impairs the sense of taste.
Taste, too, has frequently to be creatad.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


Things which before were noxious then
become enjoyable. And to the hungry
soul, whose taste has been quickened by
God, is God’s law sweet (Prov. xxvii,
Rom. viii. 5).

2. What this taste involves, a relish
for the word of God (Jer. xv. 16, Ezek.
iii, 3, Rev. x. 10). No man who does
not relish God’s words can use the
language of our text.


PRALM CX1X,





IT. Uod’s saints exercise that taste
continually. ‘It is my meditation all
the day.” This is but natural. What
we love most, we most desire. What we
most delight in, we seek most familiarity
with. This holds good all the world
over. Fame, pleasure, business, war,
&c., so here the saint loves God’s
Word, delights in it, and hence “ medi-
tates upon it al the day.”


Suprerion UNDERSTANDING.
(Verses 98-102, 104.)


L What in! Pre-eminently in holi-
ness. “I have refrained ‘ny feet from
every evil way ;” ‘I have not departed
from Thy judgments.” The Psalmist
does not mean simply in intellectual
matters, although that may hold good.
The man who prays is most likely to
keep his intellect clear, He who re-
cognises his mental faculties as a solemn
and responsible gift of God is most
likely to be industrious in their employ-
ment, He who devoutly seeks for
divine assistance is most likely to gain
it, and thus distance his compeers. But
the Psalmist seems to contemplate both
superiority of subject, and superiority of
attainment in that subject.

II. Over whom 1

1. “ Mine enemies.” That is most
likely from their qualities as mentioned
in this Psalm. A man who entertains
enmity in his heart is not likely to be
an adept in the knowledge of God.

2. “ My teachers.” Because of his
more diligext se of means. It is not
seldom tha- scholars outstrip their
teachere by this method. The Psalm-
ist’s teachers may have been mere sur-
face or fanciful expositors of the Word
of God, or mere sinecurists or cere-
monialists.

3. “The ancients.” Those older than
himself (Job xxxii. 7, 8), because he
meditated where they only skimmed,
and practised where they only theorised.
Or his predecessors, because he possessed


more of the word of inspiration than
they. Can we with “all Scripture” use
the words of the text ?

Ill. Through what power? “Thou
hast made mewiser ;” ‘Thou hast taught
me.”

1. Not by the use of his unaided
faculties, or any superiority of intellect,
insight, or industry. The one thing
which he and his brethren earnestly
disclaim is originality. But—

2. By direct divine instruction, To
attain this superiority now we, must
have it from the same source, All that
the unaided understanding can do in
this direction has been achieved, and
that is nothing. No reflection, thought,
or study even of the divine oracles can
make us “wise unto salvation,” except
through “the faith and love which is
in Christ Jesus.” They shall be all
taught of God.”

IV. By what instrumentality.
“Through Thy precepts.”

1. Continual meditation, “They are
ever with me.” Kwyowledge, like life,
must be continually fe.

2. Consistent practice, “I keep Thy
precepts.” Theories can only keep their
hold in so far as they are consistently
reduced to practice,

3. Harnest continuance.
departed,” &e.

V. With what results?

1. Distaste for falsehood (ver. 104).


2. Unswerving integrity.


“T have not


Gop’s Worp a Lamp AND A Lieut.
(Verse 105.)


The Psalmist here


employs two


the enlightening power of the Word of


powerful and familiar figures to express God, In the day it isa sire ore


PSALM OXI£,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,





us the direction, course, peculiarities,
and dangers of our path. At night,
when the sun has set and the gloom has
settled, and we have to pick our way, it
shall be a candle, not perhaps illumi-
nating the entire course, but sufficient to
guide our footsteps clearof the stumbling-
blocks and difficulties of the way. In
the day its light is delightful, displaying
all the beauties of the landscape and
cheering our onward tread, In the night
it is useful, showing us where we may
err, where we should tread, and how it
is possible to fall.

L The Word of God is a light.

1. Jt claims to be a light (Prov. xvi.
23,2 Pet.i. 19). Certain types power-
fully shadow it forth as such (Exod. xiii,
21, xxvii. 20, 21; Neh. ix. 10).

2. Reason supports this claim. It is
God’s Word (1 John i. 5), Holy men
wrote it (2 Pet. i. 21). Moral enlighten-
ment and guidance is the design of it,

3. Haperience warrants it. Bad men
fear and hate it (John iii, 20, 21).
Good men have loved and enjoyed it
(Ps. xix. 8). Those who have gone
without it or rejected it have stumbled.
Those who have accepted its guidance
have had the light of life.

II. The Word of God is a clear light.
It is not twilight, or starlight, or moon-
light, but daylight.

1. It ts a clear light tn the right way
(Ps. xliii, 3). The wisest men have
wandered without it,

2. [tts aclear light on the wrong way.
It not only tells us what to do, but what
not to do, Warns us against going
astray. Informs us where sin and mad-
ness lie, Urges us to beware of and
shun the magic music of the syren’s voice
and the pleasant pastures of sin. And,
thank God. it shines to lead us back


RELIGIOUs


again, It isa revelation of God’s way
to bad and fallen men (1 Cor. xiv. 24).

3. It is a clear light tn the dark way.
Clouds may settle on the path of God.
The sun may hide itself. Our way may
lie through dark ravines and the valley
of the death-shadow. Trouble may
overcast the soul and lead us to say,
“Hath God forgotten to be gracious t+”
But even under circumstances such as
these, light breaks forth from God’s holy
word which makes it a lamp to our path
(Isa. 1. 10).

Il. The Word of God is a full and
perennial light. It guides by day and
it guides by night. It illumines our
path, but it enables us to pick each indt
vidual step,

1. Generally it tells us the course of life
we should pursue, the grand choice we
ought to make, and the sublime destiny
we ought to reach (Ps. xxv. 12),

2. In particular. Many men are wise
in a general way, but sadly fail when
they come to details, A man may bea
very good mathematician, yet a very bad
accountant. A great statesman may be
utterly unable to grasp the minor and
subordinate details of state policy. So
many a man has taken the Bible as the
guide for his general course of conduct,
who for want of attention to its details
has stumbled and fallen. The Bible not
only unveils the whole way, but lights
up every successive step of the way (1
Pet. i. 15). No man need err respecting
any duty, responsibility, or privilege
in his path. This applies to men of all
ages, and conditions everywhere. This
being the case— :

(i.) How thankful we ought to be for the
Word of God /

(ii.) How diligently we ought to study
and practise it |


PROFESSION.


(Verse 106.)


Onur text suggests—

L That the profession of religion
should be of the strongest and most
binding character.

2. This has been the practice of the
godly in all ages (Job xxxi. 1; 2 Chron.
xv, 12-14, xxxiv. 31),

296


2. The weakness of owr own natune
demands it, Our mere purposes and re-
solutions are like the morning cloud, &ec.,
and require to be bound down under the
most solemn obligations,

3. The character of the subject requires
#¢, God has sworn with an oath to fulfil


|
}
,


;


ROMtLETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


PSALM OXIE,





His engagements towards us (Heb. vi.
18), and requires a responsive oath from
us (Exod. xxiv. 3). The beneficence
and necessity of the laws, in the keeping
of which religion consists, demand it.

II. That the profession of religion
should be the result of serious thought.
The resolution to keep God's righteous
judgments implies a study of those
judgments which has resulted in the
conclusion that theyare righteous. When
a man determines to be a Christian, he
should know what he is about. He is
making a throw for time and for eternity.
God Himself demands that the cost
should be counted, so that there may be
no afterthoughts, for He has no pleasure
in the sacrifice of fools.

Til. That the profession of religion
should be madewith a free but resolute
will The individual himself should of
himself and for himself say, “I will.”
Let parents beware how they compel
their children to appear religious. Many
@ moral wreck has been stranded on the
shores of eternity through this, Compul-
sion will breed distaste. Rather guide
the judgment, reason, and affections.
Show the duty, need, and lovableness of


religion, and lead the child to say of
himself, “I will keep Thy righteous
judgments.” The will once bent, fix it,
Let nothing alter your decision or make
you swerve,

IV. That the profession of religion
once made should be faithfully and con-
sistently kept. “I will perform it,”
The strength of the Psalmist’s accumu-
lated expressions will be seen at once.

1. Zo break our oath is to aggravate
our sin. Better not swear at all than
swear and not perform (Eccl. v. 5).

2. The same motives that urged us to
take the vow hold good all the way
through. After the most protracted test
and trial of religion, the godly man sees
no reason to repent his choice, God is
the same, and His judgments lose none
of their righteousness by lapse of years.

3. God ts the severe and just avenger
of broken fidelity, Young man! (i)
Resolve to be religious. It is the noblest,
most reasonable, and safest thing to do,
(ii.) Resolve and fulfil your resolutions,
not in your own strength, but in the
strength of God. (iii.) Resolve and ex-
pect God’s blessing and reward,


AFFLICTION,
(Verses 107, 109, 120, 124, 135, 143, 153, 154, 156.)


This Psalm is emphatically a psalm
for the afflicted. Sorrow and trouble
are here delineated in every form in
which they may be expected to occur.
But not only so: all the consolations and
remedies that are at the disposal of the
afflicted are here opened up, and also
all the obligations which comfort or re-
storation imposes, and all the results
which may be expected to follow. It
will be profitable, therefore, to survey
the whole field displayed in these verses
as briefly as possible.

I. The characteristics of affliction.

1. It is sometimes extreme (vers, 107,
143).

2. It is sometimes perilous (ver. 109).
“The image is taken from a traveller
carrying precious jewels in his hand
through dangerous paths, or from soldiers
who carry their lives in their hands, in


that their lives depend upon their val-


our in fight, or perhaps from a game of
chance. ‘ Though I play with my life
and risk it always,” &c. Waihnger in-
terprets “my soul is in, or upon my
hand, apt to fall off and perish, as any-
thing in or upon the hand easily falls
off.” —Speaker’s Com.

3. It 1s sometimes a judicial infliction
(ver. 120; Lam. iii, 39). (See also
Job iv. 15; Isa. ii, 10; Jer. li 27;
Exod. xxxiv. 7.)

II. The consolations of affliction.

1. That God permits tt, This is the
assumption of the whole Psalm, and
what quiets and comforts the Psalmist’s
soul. If God permits it, it must be for
the bringing about of some beneficent
end.

&. That tt does not produce forgetful-
ness of God's law (ver. 109). When
men do forget God’s law, let them not
eharge affliction with this pag dis-


PRALM CxXIZ,


HOMILETIO COhRMENTARY: PSALMS.


a nn


comfort, In many cases it is sent to
stimulate memory.

3. That it has opened to him the sup-
ports and pleasures of the Word of God
(ver. 143). Happy the man whose
affliction has given him time for, and
driven him to, the study of God’s law.

TI. The remedy for affliction.

1. The divine favour (vers. 124,
156).

2. The divine promise (ver. 154).

3. The divine wisdom (ver. 156).

4. The divine assistance (Ps. xxxv. 1,
xliii, 1, Ixxiv. 22). ‘The expression
belongs properly to judicial proceedings.
The Psalmist is wrongfully accused, and
prays to God to be his advocate ; but
inasmuch as the cause is carried on, not
in a court of justice, but in the battle-
field, the advocate must be also a cham-
pion.”—Speaker’s Com.

IV. The results of affliction.

1. Quickened vitality (vers, 154,
156). Painful operations sometimes
save life, and life is all the stronger for


these operations, The cancer must be
cut out, that the life that is being con-
sumed may be spared and made more
healthy.

2. Instruction in God’s statutes. Afflic-
tion is what we run into sometimes in
our flight from the divine ways. It is
beneficial for a child to feel the pain of
fire that he may avoid it, and so God’s
child is made to feel the bitterness of
sin, that he may value and be faithful to
his Father’s law.

3. The special favour of God (ver.
135). A parent regards with peculiar
complacency and love his child who has
been rescued from peril and disease.

Lessons—

(i.) Let affliction drive us tn prayer to
God (ver. 153).

(ii) Let no affliction drive us to trans-
gress God’s law (ver. 109, &c.).

(iii) Let affliction stimulate us to
expect quickened life, a more earnest
jidelity, and double favour.


SprritvuaL SACRIFICES.
(Verse 108.)


This verse appropriately follows the
Psalmist’s contemplation of his affliction,
God had afflicted him in mercy and with
judgment. God had wonderfully de-
livered him. He feels as the Apostle
felt. centuries afterwards (Rom xii. 1),
that in recognition of the Divine bene-
ficence it was incumbent upon him to
offer spiritual sacrifices to God. Note
comparisons and contrasts, and the word
beseech in both. We have here—

L A recognition of the spiritual
priesthood of believers. The offering
presupposes the priesthood. God’s
people throughout the ages have been
members of a royal priesthood. The
Jewish nation was such (Exod, xix. 5,
6). The prophets contemplated the
time when pious Gentiles would be such
(Isa. lxi, 6, Ixvi. 21; Mali 11). The
New Testament recognises al] Christians
as such (1 Pet. ii. 9; Rev. i. 6).

II. Spiritual priests must have a
spiritual preparation. Under the law,
the priests were to be separate from the
commonalty. Under the Gospel, they

298


are a holy nation and a peculiar people.
Under the law they received a special
anointing ; under the Gospel they re-
ceive the unction of the Holy One (1
John ii. 20), Under the law the priests
were prepared for their office by a lustra-
tion; Christians are baptized with the
Holy Ghost (Titus iii. 6). All priestly
orders, whether received from Greece or
Rome, are invalid, except those con-
ferred by Him who alone can “ make”
“ kings and priests,”

IIL Spiritual priests must offer and
can only offer spiritual sacrifices. Not
expiatory, but eucharistic ; not sin offer-
ings, but peace and thank offerings (Heb.
vii. 27, x. 14, xiii. 15). As the priest-
hood is purely spiritual so must be the
sacrifices (John iv. 24; Ps. 1. 13-15,
lxix. 30, 31). The particular offering
here specified includes or presupposes
all the rest. Prayer (Ps, cxli. 2). Praise
(Ps. liv. 6). Thanksgiving (Ps. 1. 1,


4). The body (Rom. xii. 1). Body
and spirit (1 Cor. vi. 20). Ourselves


(2 Cor. viii, 5). Almsgiving (Phil.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PeaLM OXTs.


enero


iv. 18; Heb. xiii, 16). Notice, further,
that these are sacrifices because they are
true to tue laws which underlie the
whole doctrine of sacrifice — wiz, self-
denial, recognition of what is due to
God (Ps, 1. 5), contrition for sin
(Ps. li. 17), trust in the Redeemer’s
sacrifice (Eph. v. 2), acknowledgment
of individual undeservedness of the
divine favour.

IV. Spiritual offerings must be free-
will offerings.

1. Because God deserves a service that
is free,


2. Because the spiritual man ts upheld
by “a free spirit,” and has been made
“willing in the day of God’s power.”

3. Because free-will offerings are those
which are most likely to be permanent.

V. Free-will offerings are most ac-
ceptable to God. “God loveth the
cheerful giver” (Isa, lx. 7; Malachi
iii. 4).

VI. God’s gracious acceptance of free-
will offerings must be regarded as a great
blessing, and as therefore incurring cor-
responding obligations, ‘Teach me
Thy statutes” (Ps, xix. 14),


(Verse 109), see verse 107,
(Verse 110), see verse 95.


Gop’s Worp tHE Heritage or His Peoria.
(Verses 111, 112.)


Notice—

I. That God’s Word is a heritage.
A heritage is that which has been
specially bequeathed. Heritages are
not purchased, but testated. So the
Word of God has not been made or pur-
chased by man, but has been freely
given to us by our Father God.

II. That God’s Word is a valuable
heritage. ‘They are the rejoicings of
my heart.”

1. Jt ts an undeserved heritage. We
can lay no natural claim or title to it.
When made out for us we were “alien-
ated and enemies in our mind by wicked
works.”

2. [tis a full heritage. Nothing can
be added to it. It contains all things
necessary and profitable to life, godli-
ness, and eternity. The ever-blessed
Trinity, providence, grace, earth, heaven,
all are there ; and all are his to whom
the testimonies of God belong (Ps.
xvi. 5; 1 Cor. iii, 21; 2 Cor. vi. 10).

3. /t 1s a sure heritage. There are
no flaws in the title (Heb. vi. 17).

4, It is an abiding heritage, Estates
are valuable in proportion to the time
they last. God’s Word is not reasenold
ws are all His temporal gifts. They
are the saints’ freehold (Ps, Ixxiii.
26).


IIL. It is a responsible heritage.

1. It ts offered to our choice. “Ihave
taken.” It is not forced upon us, We
may reject it. If other things are more
rejoicing to the heart we are welcome
to them—if we can get them—with the
consequences.

2. That choice ts the result of a pre-
paration. “Thave inclined.” A’child’s
faculties must be developed before he is
fit to become the responsible owner of
property. Soman must incline himself
by Divine grace for the duties and re-
sponsibilities which devolve upon him
as the proprietor of the Word of God.

3. That choice involves the agent tn
grand and eternal responsibilities. ‘To
perform Thy statutes alway even unto
the end.” Free as is our heritage there
is a tax upon it. The same tax that is
upon all property—viz., right use, It
this is not observed within certain limits
in worldly estates, the right is lost. The
profligate and sprendthrift neglecting to
pay this tax squanders an ample portion
and is reduced to beggary. The care-
less heir who neglects it, finds it
squandered for him. He who uses it
to violate the law of the land has it
taken from him. So those who do not
carefully and responsibly use this great
heritage of God will lose it.

299





HOMILETIOC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


Love anp Hatr
(Verses 113, 128, 163.)


These verses view the two great and
influential affections in their relation to
one another. Let us view them first
together and then separately. Together
observe—

L Affection is set against affection;
hatred against love. Love and hatred
are good or evil according to their ob-
jects. Nothing is worse than love of
the world, sin, and vanity, or hatred of
God and holiness; but set upon proper
objects, hatred upon evil, and love upon
good (Amos v, 15), they exhibit the
soul as divinely constituted at the first.
For as has been well said, “ Man fallen


is but an anagram of man In innocency ;
we have the same affections, but they
are misplaced. Love was made for
God ; hatred for sin. Hatred was put
on us that we might fly from evil
Love was given us that we might attach
ourselves to God and the things which
lorify Him.”

IL Object is set against object. As
love is opposed to hatred, so are vain
thoughts and lying to God’s law, and
every false way to God’s precepts. For
as God’s Word is solemn, practical, and
necessary truth, so it requires solemnity
and truth in those who would observe it.


Love ror Gop’s Worp.
(Verses 113, 127, 128, 140, 159, 163, 165, 167.)


We have already considered love in
contrast with hate, and God’s Word in
contrast with vain thoughts, lying and
every false way. Let us now isolate
those passages which regard the supreme
affection of man’s heart as set upon God’s
Word,

L What is it to love God’s Word ?

1. Negatively. Not (1.) The bare
acknowledgment of tts divinity. This
many do from the force of external
evidence. (2.) Nor a bare approval of
tts excellence, Many admire where they
do not trust and follow. (3.) A mere
spasm of delight, as Herod rejoiced in
John’s light for a season (Mark vi. 20).

2. Positively. (1.) Such a love as is
rooted in the heart (Jas, i. 21), and
stirs all the affections to their inmost
depths. (2.) Such a love as leads us to
consult it on all occastons (Ps. i. 2, xix.
10, 11). (3.) Such a love as lays its
sweet constraint on our obedience (1
John ii, 4; Rom. vi. 17),

II. What degree of love ought we
to have for God’s Word ?

1. Supreme, “above gold, yea even
fine gold.” We ought to love God’s
Word more than riches, because it is
more valuable than riches. Wealth is
not prized for its own sake, but only

300


for what it represents and can do, The
Word of God contains “the unsearchable
riches of Christ.” This love, then, is such
as will render us willing to sell all we
have, so that we may obtain ‘‘the pearl
of great price” (ver. 72).


2. Intense and abundant, “Con-
sider how I love Thy laws.” God only
can measure the depth of it. “I love


them exceedingly.” Not with the tran-
scient affection of children for things
which excite their passing inclinations,
but with a love whose power cannot be
broken, and whose ardour many waters
cannot quench (vers, 48, 97; 1 John
ii, 5).
IIL Why should we love God’s
Word ?

1. Because its precepts concerning all
things are right” (ver. 128), All
things, all) persons, considered every
way, universally, God’s Word is right,

2. Because tt ts “very pure” or
“purifying.” (1.) Pure in ttself (Ps.
xix. 8). Refined from all dross, error,
or falsehood. (2.) Pure in the examples
tt presents (Heb. vi. 12; 1 John iii, 3;
1 Pet. i. 15). (3.) Purifying tn the
influence it exerts (ver. 9; John xv. 3,
xvii, 17). Showing us our impurity
(Matt. xvi. 19; Jer. iv. 14). Exhort


oe ee ee


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : PSALMS.


ing us to be clean (ver. 1; Isa. i; Jam
iv. 8). Revealing the cleansing foumtain
(Eph. v. 26; Ezek. xxxvi, 25-27), En-
couraging to purity (Matt. v. 8; 2 Cor.
vii. 1).

2. Because it 4s trangutllising (ver.
165). (1.) Zt reveals the “ peace of God”
which ‘keeps the heart and mind.” (2.)
Christ the Prince of Peace there confers it
(John xiv. 27). (3.) The Spirit of Peace
through tt breathes His own tranquillity
(Rom. xv. 13; Gal. v. 22, vi. 16),

IV. How should we show our love
to God’s Word ?

1, By hating “vain thoughts,” “false
ways,” and “ lying.”

2. By loving obedience (ver. 167).

3. By prayer for more lively servios
{ver. 159).





PSALM OXIX,


—


V. What results will follow our
love of God’s Word?

1. It will afford a powerful plea tn
prayer (ver. 159), This was the con-
fident appeal of one who was conscious
that he was truly attached to God (John
xxi. 17).

2. It will stimulate to active service
(ver. 140).

3. It will afford a powerful protection
(165, marg.). ‘No event of providence
8 be an invincible temptation or
powerful affliction, they shall hold fast
their integrity and preserve their tran-
quillity. Nothing shall offend or hurt
them, for everything shall work for their
good, They will not perplex themselves
with needless scruples, nor take offence
at their brethren” (1 Cor. xiii. 6, 7).


Hoty Harrep.
(Verses 113, 128, 163.)


L In its nature. Hate is that passion
which is aroused by the presence and
antagonism of that which is repugnant,
and which is excited to injure or ex-
terminate that to which it is irrecon-
cilably opposed. This is strong lan-
guage, but justifiable and appropriate
when applied to the believer's attitude
against sin, Note a few of its attri-
butes—

1. Implacability. It is not a passing
spasm of indignation ; it aims at nothing
short of extermination. Those who hate
sin pursue it with relentless vigour.

2. Universality. Anger is aroused
against individuals; hatred against spe-
cies. So the Christian hates all sin.

3. Growth. It isa principle which de-
velops with our own spiritual strength
(Acts xxiv. 16; 1 John iii. 9).

4. Intensity (ver. 163). Mere de
testation isnotenough. Anything short
of abhorrent hatred will not meet the
necessities of the case, Resolution will
not, nor fear, nor dislike,

II. Iv its causes,

1. Spiritual knowledge (vers. 11, 104 ;
Jer, xxxi. 19),

2. The love of God (Ps, xcvii. 10).

3. Filial fear of God (Prov. viii. 13).

4. A spiritual sense of self-preserua-
tion,


IIL. In its specific objects.

1. “Vain thoughts.” The original
word with a different punctuation occurs
in 1 Kings xviii. 21, “opinions.” LXX
here have wagavimoug, “lawless men ;”
Syr., ‘‘ Perversely-minded men ;” Chal.,
“Thinkers of vain thoughts.” ‘ The
Psalmist describes mischievous specu-
lations, subtle, useless, and perilous ;
heterodox pernicious teachings ; opposed
to truth revealed, and likely to interfere
with its acceptance in its simplicity,”—
Geter. “The word is probably con-
crete and not abstract, ‘doubters,’ ‘ scep-
tics,’ ‘double-minded men’ (Jas. i. 8),
ane dinpuyog, a double-minded man di-
vided between two opinions.—Speaker’s
Com.

2. “ False ways.” “Every course of
life not based on truth or a right view of
things.” —Barnes.

3. “Lying.” (1.) The speaking of
that which is false with an intention to
deceive. (2.) The suppression of truth
that should be told (John xii. 42, 43).
(3.) Hypocrisy. (4.) Disobedience to
the law which we profess to believe and
obey. Lies can be acted as well as told
(Hosea xi. 12; 1 John i. 6, ii. 4).

In concLusion.—We should hate all
sin, because it is what it is, and because
of what it does, It is the contempt of

301


PUALM OXIX.








God’s authority (Exod. v. 4). It is a
breach of His righteous law (1 John iii.
4). It separates from God (Isa. lix. 2).
It defaces the divine image (Pa. xliv.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


A Ree a


12). It is the abominable thing which
God hates, and works ruin and damna-
tion to the soul,


Toe Driving PROTECTION.
(Verse 114.)


L The divine protection.

1. A need implied. The soul is in
continual danger (Eph. vi. 12). It is
beset by enemies who excel in craft,
malice, pertinacity, numbers, and power,
Hence it needs a shield to protect it in
active warfare and a hiding-place to
render it secure when at rest.

2. Protection vouchsafed. God is a
shield to keep us in danger, and a hiding-
place to keep us out of it. This promise
guarantees that danger shall be en-
tirely warded off, or if not, it shall not
overwhelm us, but shall the rather make
us sensible of the divine defence. (1.)
“Thou art my hiding-place.” When
sorely beset by danger, or unable to de-
fend themselves, or wanting rest from
conflict, men run to a hiding-place (1
Sam. iii. 6; Ps. xxxii 7; Prov. xxxii.
3). A hiding-place must have capacity.
God has room for us (Ps, xxxi. 20; 2
Tim. i 12). Secrecy (Ps. xxvii. 5);
God’s protection of His saints is a mys-
tery, hidden from the eyes of men.
“Your life is hid with Christ in God.”
Comfort (Ps, xxxiv. 22, xci.1). Safety
till trouble is over (Ps. lvii. 1 ; Isa. xxvi.
20). (2.) “ Thou art my shield” (Ps. v.
12, xxvili. 7, xci. 4), For a shield to
afford safety it must have sufficient
breadth (Ps. v.12). Resistance, impene-
trability, and power to repel the missiles
that are hurled against it, back upon the
foe (Ps. lix. 11),

IL Where the divine protection is
revealed. In God’s Word—


1. It sets God forth as His people's
sure defence (Ps. lxxxiv. 11; Gen. xv.


2. It gives infallible assurance of the
Divine protection, Prov. xxx. 5; Ps.
xviii. 30).

3. It invites and encourages us to
avatl ourselves of that protection.

4, It tells us what qualifications he
must have who would avail himself of
that protection, Faith (Prov. xxx. 5;
Ps, xviii. 30). Obedience (Ps. lxxxiv.
11; Prov. ii. 7; Isa xxxiii. 15, 16).

5. It tells us how to enjoy that protee-
tion (Zeph. ii. 3).

III. The comfort this revelation
brings. ‘I hope in Thy word.”

1. It tranquillises the soul while 4
warts for God’s own time (Ps. xxxiii. 20.
Isa. xxviii. 16).

2. It fortifies the heart in present dif-
culties, and when danger ts, or promises
to be extreme. Moses in the wilderness
(Ps. xc. 1), David in exile (Ps. iii. 3).

3. It empowers us cheerfully to do what
God would have us do, and go where God
would have us go, fearlessly trusting in
God’s goodness and power (Ps. xxxi. 5).

IN concLusion.—(1.) A word of com-
fort. No hurt can happen to us without
God’s leave. (ii.) A word of warning.
There is no safety for us except behind
God’s power. (iii.) A word of exhorta-
tion. Acknowledge God at all times as
your protector, and seek Him in every
time of need.


SEPARATION AND CONSISTENCY,
(Verse 115.)


These two ideas stand or fall with
each other. . It is impossible to be
obedient to the law of God while asso-
ciating with wicked men, and equally
impossible to keep bad company while
doing good works, Observe—

302


I. The necessity of separation from


evil doers.


1, és limitations. (1.) Not in mere
matters of business (1 Cor. v. 5), nor while
it is possible to do them good. Nor
should we renounce Church fellowship


— =


——


eS 2


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PsaLM OXIXZ,





because evil or inconsistent men are
there—a most absurd, but, alas! frequent
course. There are black or unsound
sheep in every flock, tares in every har-
vest, chaff in every threshing-floor, “TI
fly from the chaff that I may not be it ;
but I fly not the floor lest I be nothing.”
—Augustine. But (2) We are required
not to be unequally yoked with them tn
cordial friendship or matrimontal alli-
ances (Exod, xxxiv. 15, 2 Cor. vi, 14),
not to imitate their mannersand customs,
and not to partake of their sins (Eph. v.
11). But by virtue of our new nature,
our spiritual sonship, our moral inherit-
ance, our communion with God, and our
hope of heaven, we are enjoined to come
out from among them and be the saintly
and peculiar people of God.

2. Its reasons. (1.) Our love of God
should prevent us being on terms of amity
and fellowship with those who are at
enmity with Him, It would argue but
poor patriotism for a soldier to be on
terms of cordiality with a rebel or a foe
(Ps. cxxxix. 21, 22; 2 Pet. ii, 8). (2.)
Evil communications corrupt good man-
ners (Ps, i. 1 ; Isa. vi. 5; Prov. i. 10, 15;
1 Cor. v. 6.) (3.) Our familiarity will
harden them in their sins, while our sepa-
ration from them may promote reflection
(2 Thess. iii, 6-14), (4.) Friendship

_ with them will bring a blemish on our fair
fame. A man is known by the company
he keeps (2 John ii, Heb. xii. 15, Pas,


118). (5.) We stand in danger of shar-
ing their ruin (Gen. xiv. 12, Prov. xiii,
20, Rev. xviii. 4).

Il. The duty of keeping God’s com:
mandments.

1. We are under the most solemn obliga-
tions to doso, They are the command-
ments of our God. Ours by covenant
engagement. He has promised to be
ours only on the condition of the fulfil-
ment of our duty (Deut. xxvii. 9, 10).

2. We owe it as a debt of gratitude to
God for revealing them. Since God has
been at the trouble of revealing them,
holy and just and good as they are, we
ought to be at the trouble of keeping
them.

3. Upon keeping God's commandments
our wellbeing absolutely depends. To
transgress them is to transgress the fun-
damental laws of spiritual life,

4. Upon our constant obedience depends
our hope of heaven. ‘‘Be thou faithful
unto death,” &c.

III. The importance of prompt and


decisive resolution. “Depart.” “TI
will.”

1. God has no pleasure in an unstable,
double-minded man.


2. Without resolute determination all
desires are vain,

3. Unless we are prompt and decisive,
evildoers will take advantage of us and
easily win us to their ways.


Gop’s ATTITUDE TOWARDS THE RIGHTEOUS AND THE WICKED.
(Verses 116-119.)


L God’s attitude towards the right-
eous.

1. What that attitude ts. Twofold.
Something to hold. Some one who holds.
Teneo et teneor, (1.) God ts something
to hold. A prop, a rock, a sure founda-
tion; something clinging to which we
shall not be swept away by the surging
billows. (2.) God ts some one who holds.
The Psalmist thinks of the strong and
tenacious grasp of God; “ They shall
never perish,” &c, This double idea is
expressed in Ps, lxxiii, 23

2. Upon what that attitude depends,
Twofold again. The divine promise
and cheerful obedience. (1.) “ According


to Thy word.” The Bible is full of pro-
mises in this direction too numerous to
quote. (2.) “I love Thy testimonies.”
“Twill have respect unto Thy statutes
continually.”

3. What this attitude implies. (1.)


Life. (2.) Glorious hope. (3.) Safety.
IL God’s attitude towards the
wicked.


1. What that attitude ts. (1.) Con-
tempt. Sept. and Vulg., “Thou dost
despise (ver. 118). (2.) Rejection (ver.
119). “There is no true metal in them
when they are tried by the refining fire,
they are burnt up ; they fly off in fumes,
There is probably an Samaue to the


PSALM CXIX.








scum or scoriz at the surface of melting
metals, whichis swept off previously to
casting the metal into the mould.”—
Clarke.

2. Why that attitude is assumed, (1.)


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





Because of their falsehood. (2). Be
cause of their worthlessness: ‘‘dross.”
3. What that attitude implies. One
word describes it all. . ‘Everlasting
destruction from the presence of the
Lord and from the glory of His power,”_


(Verse 120), see verse 107.
(Verse 121), see verse 95.
(Verse 122), see verse 95.


Lorty ASPIRATIONS.
(Verses 123-125.) ;


L The objects of these aspirations.

(1.) Salvation. (2.) The words of
God’s righteousness. This may refer to
some precious promise, some solemn
injunction, or some righteous law. (3.)
Divine teaching. The Word of God isa
sealed word without the illumination of
the Divine Spirit.


IL The quailty of these aspirations.

1. Intensity, “ Mine eyes fail.”
“The idea here is that of looking out
for a thing—of ‘ straining the eyes’ so
that their power becomes exhausted.”

2. Resignation. ‘ Deal with Thy ser-
vant according to Thy mercy.” What is
bestfor me grant. If lask amiss withhold.


Tur Lorp’s TimE AND OURS
(Verse 126.)


The Hebrew literally rendered is,
“Time to do for Jehovah,” and means
either that it is time for the Lord to
work, or time for us to work for the
Lord. As expositors are divided, its
vagueness warrants us to learn the
blessed truths taught by both interpre-
tations; for are not we “workers to-
gether with God”? Notice—

L A time common to both to work.
When man makes void the law of God.
When is this time? Alas! when is it
not? Men make void the law of God
every day, every moment. The time,
then, for God and man to work together
is now. Not to-morrow, not on special
days or special occasions, but “now is
the accepted time, now is the day of
salvation.”

IL A work common for both to do.
The work of salvation. Man saves tn-
strumentally, by example, by exhorta-
tion, by influence, in leading men toa


knowledge of their sins, to repentance,
and to trust in Christ. God saves effec-
tually by the restraining influences of
His grace, by the convictions and regene-
ration of the Holy Ghost, by cleansing
in the precious blood, by pardon.

IIL. A time for God alone to work.
Where men have made void God’s law,
without repentance or remedy. Such
a time has often occurred in human
history. The iniquities of men and
nations have become full, and God has
visited them with vengeance. This
time occurred to Sodom, Assyria, Baby-
lon, Israel, Rome, &c. Such a time
will occur when human history has
closed. Of this time and season it is
not for man to know.

IV. A work for God alone to do.
Vengeance aud destruction. In this
man can and must play no part except
as the merest instrument in God’s hands.
“ Vengeance is Mine.”


A DANGER AND ITs REMEDY,
(Verses 126-128.)


The force of “therefore” in verses
127, 128, may be taken in three different
804


ways, 1. It may mean that as @ con-
sequence of the evil of the times, the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; PSALMS,


PSALM OXI,





superior value of God’s Word was shown
by contrast, and that, therefore, the Psal-
mist loved it intensely. 2. That as the
times were so evil, therefore he would
do all that he could to counterbalance
that evil by a superior religious excel-
lence. But 3. There seems to underlie
these latter verses the reason fdr the
general ungodliness of the times as de-
scribed in verse 126; and viewed in
connection with the thought that runs
through the whole Psalm, the danger
of the Psalmist from the number of his
powerful enemies, the therefore seems
to point to love of God’s Word, &c., as a
sure protection and remedy from the evil.

IL The danger. A time of great
religious declension is a time of great
danger, because of the difficulties and
temptations that are in the way of
religious consistency. The question of
time now-a-days resolves itself into a
question of space. Whenever men live
in a neighbourhood of intense ungodli-
ness, they are always in great danger.
This danger consists in—

1. The lust of gain (ver. 127). To
this danger all business men are exposed.
In the midst of a community to which
“ gold” is the one thing needful, there is
great danger of succumbing to the pre-
valent fever, and pursuing the popular
but godless course.

2. Infidelity (ver. 128). To this
danger all reading and thinking men
sre exposed, Just now the very at-
mosphere is charged with unbelief.
Newspapers and periodicals are pub-
lished, and societies are founded for the
express purpose of trying to show God’s
precept concerning all things to be
wrong, and there is a great danger of
even Christian men running with this
giddy multitude.

3. Sin, alas! abounds everywhere, The
false way in which men make void
God’s law is a very broad way, and many
men are in it. False sentiments, false
judgments, false practices are extremely


prevalent, and men are strongly tempted
to live down to the times and avoid the
singularity of walking in the true and
narrow way.

This danger is a present danger, an in-
creasing danger, and oftena subtle danger

IL The remedy is not at all times
or usually flight from danger, but by
the “expulsive force of a new affection”
to make danger flee. “ Therefore,” &e.


The remedy—
1. For lust of gain, ts to love God’s
commandments above gold. Wealth


will then sink into its proper and use-
ful place, We have not to be taken
out of the world, but to be kept from
its evil, and this will doit. It is better
to be good than to be rich; for by be
coming good a man often makes the best
of both worlds, and only the love of God’s
commandments can make men good.

2. For infidelity, is to esteem all God's
precepts concerning all things to be right.
Let a sincere and intelligent study of
those precepts decide. Let history de-
cide, Let the lives of those men who
have been without, or who have rejected,
God’s Word decide; and the lives of
those men who have followed its coun-
sels and commands.

3. For sin, ts to hate every false way.
That which we hate we endeavour to
injure or destroy; and when this is
impossible we avoid it.

IIL The danger is avoided and the
remedy applied by earnest prayer
for God to work and by earnest co-
operation with God in working (ver.
126). See previous outline.

1. God only can work in us to will
and to do, &e.

2. But we must work out what God
has worked tn, and (1) apply ourselves
to the earnest love of God's command-
ments, dc. (2) Apply ourselves to the
work of grappling with selfishness, in-
jidelity, and sin. The more we work
with God for man’s salvation, the mors
we shall lessen our danger.


Gop’s Worp: Dzsirep. Instructive, WonprErroL, Kept.
(Verses 129-131.)


L Desired (ver. 131). ‘ When under
an enforced absence from God’s ordi-
VoL IL


nances he longed to be restored to them ;
when he enjoyed them he greedily sucked
305


PSALM OXIX.


in the Word of God as new-born babes
desire the milk."—M. Henry, “A
metaphor taken irom an animal in the
chase, He runs open-mouthed to take
in the cooling air, the heart beating high
and the muscular force nearly expended
through fatigue. The Psalmist sought
for ‘God’s commandment’ as he would
run from a ferocious beast for life,” —A.
Clarke.

II. Instructive (ver. 130). ‘As a
beam of light illumines a dark chamber.
But MND lit opening, unfolding, or reve-
lation, LXX. and Vulg. 87).wor¢, decla-
ratio, means not so much entrance of the
word into the soul, but rather its being
made open to ws so that we may perceive
its beauty, or may ourselves “enter ” into
its meaning, its mysteries, and its beau-
ties. Simple, means those who are open
to persuasion, or who are easily enticed or
seduced. Then it refers to the credulous
(Prov. xiv. 15), and then to the tneape-
rienced.” —Speaker’s Com. and Barnes.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : PSALMS.





II. Wonderful (ver. 129).

1. In the character of tts revelations.
God, the soul, and the future state.

2. In its forbearance and benignéty
towards the lost and the erring.

3. In the self-consistency of its separate
books, dispensations, cc.

4, In tts sin-convincing and soul-con-
verting power.

5. In its purity and sublimity.

6. In tts supporting and comforting
promises and helps and hopes.

IV. Kept (ver. 129). “ ‘As a treasure
of inestimable value that I cannot be
without.’ Wedo not keep them to any
purpose unless our souls keep them.
They must be deposited, as the tables of
testimony were in the ark; there they
must have the innermost and uppermost
place. Those that see God’s Word to be
admirable, will prize it highly and pre-
serve it carefully, as that which they
promise themselves great things from.”—
M. Henry.


PRAYER.


L The character of prayer. Per-
sonal intercourse with a personal God.
“Look Zhou upon me.” We cannot
worship an abstraction at all. And we
cannot worship the living and true God
by proxy,

IL. The matter of prayer.

1. Supplication of the divine mercy
(ver. 132). (1.) A sense of personal
unworthiness, (2.) A recognition of the
divine beneficence. (3.) An ardent expec-
tation of the divine salvation.

2, Petition for practical direction.
‘Order my steps in Thy word,” “Teach
me Thy statutes.” (1.) A confession of
tgnorance and departure. (2.) A desire
for restoration. (3.) A high valuation of
obedience,

3. Request for personal deliverance
(ver. 134)...

4, Desire for divine favours (ver. 135).


(Verses 132-135.)


IIL The manner of prayer.

1. Humble and reverent. ‘ Look
Thou upon me.” Permit me to pray.

2. Confident. These verses breathe
an intense hopefulness,

3. Sincere. “So will I keep Thy
precepts.”

IV. The plea to be used in prayer
(ver. 132). Marg., “ According to the
custom towards,” &c. Heb., “ According
to the judgment.” What is right, “what
is due ; or of what is usually determined;
t.¢., a8 God usually determines, judges,
acts towards those who love Him. The
idea is according to the rules which
regulate the treatment of Thy people.”—
Barnes,

V. The purpose which should sustain
prayer (ver. 133). Holiness. For verse
134 see also verse 95. For verse 135 see
also verse 107.


Tax Proper ArrirupE or THz RighTEouS TOWARDS THE UNGODLVY.
(Verses 136, 139, 155, 158.)


Whatever interpretation we attach to
the “Imprecatory Psalms,” certainly the
306


Psalmista do not indiscriminately cures
all ungodly men. That David could be


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





susceptible of such forbearance towards
his great and influential enemies, and
that this Psalmist could be instinct with
such evangelical charity as to weep over
sinners, and to be consumed with zeal for
their reclamation, seems to point to a
meaning in the above-named Psalms
which perhaps does not lie upon the
surface, At any rate the meaning of
these verses is clear.

L The ungodly are described as—

1. Malignant. ‘“ Mine enemies.”
Opposers of righteous words and perse-
cutors of godly people. They are known
everywhere by their antagonism to God's
children. The carnal mind being at en-
mity against God is at enmity with tlfe
family of God. Let it not be overlooked
that this is not a general classification
here. The Psalmist had particular per-
sons in his eye.

2. Wicked. From yw’, To make a
wilful mistake, This fixes on the sinner
conscious and deliberate guilt.

3. Transgressors. NII, Faithless to
God and man.

Let these powerful expressions be
particularly noted as bringing out the
Psalmist’s large-hearted charity.

II. The ungodly are the subjects of
the tenderest compassion and the
bitterest grief. ‘Mine eyes descend
in rivers of waters because men despise
Thee and destroy themselves. Most of
the Easterns shed tears much more copi-
ously than Europeans. I have myself
seen Arabs shed tears like streams,”—
Speaker's Com.

1. This attitude has always charac-
terised the righteous, Jeremiah (ix. 18,
xiii 17, xiv. 17; Lam. i, 16, it 18, iii,
48); Our Lord (Mark v., Luke xix.
41): Paul (Phil. iii, 8, Rom. ix, 2,
8


2. This attitude ts right. Nothing
should stir our hearts so deeply as the
ruin and degradation of our fellow-men.
God’s Word singles it out as a conspicuous
mark of grace (Ezek. ix. 4, 1 Cor. v. 2).
“ There is nothing which more certainly
indicates true piety, and which is cer-
tainly more connected with a work of
grace or a revival of religion, than when


PSALM OXTX,





such deep compassion for men as sinnera
pervades a church.”—Barnes.

3. This attitude ts necessary. (1.)
How is it possible for us to contemplate
with dry eyes and unmoved heart such
sights as are every day seen! Drunken-
ness, Swearing, dishonesty, &c. To see
men bent on thwarting the divine provi-
dence and damning their own souls. (2.)
Because the prevalence of sin deprives
God of glory, and spreads ruin and
desolation over God’s fair world. (3.)
Because this is the first step in the
direction of zeal for the sinner’s reclama-
tion. “Then Christians will pray,
labour to save sinners, feel their depen-
dence on God, and then the Spirit will
descend and bless the effort put forth.”
— Barnes,


I, The ungodly are the subjects of
sealous evangelisation.

1, All the compassion in the world by
ttself will not only do the sinner no
good, but rather perhaps excite his con-
tempt.

2. Compassion must receive a practical
expression in intense and all-consuming
seal (ver. 139). This word is elsewhere
rendered consumed, cut off, vanished,
destroyed. ‘He pined away; his
strength was exhausted ; he was sinking
under the efforts he had put forth,”—
Barnes, (Ps. lxix. 9; 1 Kings xix.
10.)

IV. The ungodly are pitied and
evangelised not for sentimental but
for practical reasons. Note—‘“‘It was
not because they were His foes,—not
because He was endeavouriag to destroy
them, or take vengeance upon them. It
is a great triumph when in looking at
persecutors and slanderers, —we are more
grieved because they violate the law of
God, when our solicitude turns from
ourselves to God.”

The reasons are because—

1. They have not kept God's laws.
Hence his tears,

2. They have forgotten God's works
and despised His salvation. Hence His
zeal. Would to God, these considerations
would produce the same effect in every
Christian now.


307


PeALM OXIX,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS,





Tox Divine R:G@HTEOUSNESS.
(Verses 137, 138, 142, 144.)


The Psalmist here deals with the
righteousness of God from a fourfold
poiut of view. First he declares God to
be absolutely and inherently righteous ;
then the judgment of the righteous God
to be righteous, t.¢, God is actively
righteous ; then that God has revealed
both His active and passive righteous-
ness is His testimonies, t.e., God is decla-
ratively righteous. This being the case,
he points out that those testimonies are
a faithful record of that righteousness,
and therefore are to be depended upon
by man,

L God is absolutely righteous (ver.
137). From the fundamental principles
of His nature the conception is impos-
sible that God in thought, word, or deed,
should swerve from the lines of strict
and immutable equity.

II. God is relatively and actively
righteous. ‘Upright are Thy judg-
ments.” This follows upon His absolute
righteousness. He cannot do unjustly,
but must award every man according to
his work (Rom. ii. 5-9; 1 Pet. i. 17),
forgiving on confession of sin (1 John
i. 9), approving obedience (Heb. vi. 10),
rewarding (2 Tim. iv, 8), punishing
(Rom. ii 9 ; 2 Thess. i 8 ; 1 John iii, 18,


19). Hence His active righteousness
is everlasting. ‘“‘ Human governnents
change. New laws are enacted under
new administrations, Old dynasties
pass away. Custom, opinion, the world,
men, all change. But as God Himself
never changes, so it is with His law.
Founded on eternal truth it can never
change.” — Barnes.

III. God is declaratively righteous
through those testimonies which are
(Marg.) righteousness, No truer or
sublimer definition could be given of
God’s Word. It is a perfect delineation
of the righteousness of God’s character
and ways, without admixture of error.
“ Thy law is the truth.” It is founded
not on mere arbitrary will, but on the
reality of things, and can therefore never
change.

IV. Therefore those testimonies
which declare God’s righteousness are
to be depended on by man. Thy testi-
monies are very faithfulness,

In CONCLUSION (ver. 144).—(i.) Those
who would see and enjoy the divine right-
eousness must pray for understanding.
(ii.) Those who have that understanding
shall leve. How? The just shall live by
faith, Faith in what? Rom. iii, 24-26.


(Verse 139), see verse 126,


Gop’s Worp a Trizp Worp anp a Lovep Worp.
(Verse 140.)


The margin renders “tried.” P. B.
version, ‘Tried to the uttermost.”
These words describe the test to which
the Word of God in every age has been
subjected, and the result. It has come
out of the fire as refined gold (Ps. xii.).
No error has been proved to be in it or
cast from it. Therefore God’s people
love it. In this age everything is put
upon its trial, Modern criticism sub-
jects every institution and relic of anti-
quity to the keenest tests. Our philoso-
phers place everything in thoir crucibles,
and subject everything to their dissecting
knives. Every day we hear of history

308


which has proved to be myth, and be
lief but exploded superstition. But
into whatever alembic the Word of God
has been plunged, it has come out with-
out diminution and very pure.

L The trial to which the Word of
God has been subjected.

1. The conflict with sin.

2. The contradictions of unbelief.

3. The inconsistencies of its apparent
friends.

4. The experience of saints and sinners.

IL The love with which it is received,
“‘T use the Scriptures not as an arsenal
to be resorted to only for arms and


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMA.





weapons. . . but asa matchless temple,
where I delight to contemplate the
beauty, the symmetry, and the magnifi-
cence of the structure; and to increase
my awe and excite my devotion to the
Deity there preached and adored... .
Whereas at my entrance I took even
the choicest to be at best but like some
Indian province, wherein though mines
and gems were more abundant than in
other countries, yet they were but
sparingly to be met with, here and
there ; after a competent stay, my en-
suing perusals presented it to me, if not


POALM OXIX,


as & royal jewel made of gold and
precious stones, yet (which is more
glorious) like Aaron’s breast-plate, a
sacred jewel, the particular instructions
for which were given by God Himself,
and which besides the various number
of flaming gems set in fine gold and
placed in a mysterious order, was en-
nobled by that Urim-ve-Thummim
wherein God vouchsafed to reveal Him-
self... . This experiment keeps me from
wondering to find that the poet attributes
blessedness to ‘ delight in the law of the
Lord,’”—The Hon. Robert Boyle.


TravrE GREATNESS,
(Verse 141.)


Notice—

I. That trne greatness may be con-
sistent with external humiliation. A
man may be very poor and mean in the
world’s estimation. He may be small
because he does not aim at political and
social greatness. He may be despised
because all his principles are against
that wholesale murder which men de-
nominate valour. He may be afraid to
do what is wrong and sin against God,
and thus be open to the scoffs of the
profligate and the sneers of the bravo,
But if he does not forget God’s precepts
he has the essentials of true greatness.
True greatness does not consist in those
external exhibitions which pass off as
such, A man may be a great philoso-


pher and yet be morally small as Bacon.
A man may be great in war as Bona-
parte and yet have a little soul. True
greatness is greatness in the sight of
God. And that greatness has he who
does not forget God’s precepts. He will
have power with God, and in the long
run with man, as well.

II. That external humiliation should
not be-little a man. This is a sad and
prevalent tendency. When a man is
esteemed small and despised, he aspires to
what is termed greatness and honour by
trying to forget God’s precepts. Whena
man is ashamed of his father’s Bible and
his mother’s piety, he is on the true road
to be-little himself in the sight of God,
and in the long run, in the sight of man.


(Verse 142), see verse 137.
(Verse 143), see verse 107,
(Verse 144), see verse 137.


ErrrctTuaL, FERVENT, aND BELIEVING PRAYER,
(Verses 145-152.)


L Its object. “O Lord,” “TI cried
unto Thee.” The Psalmist entertained
no idea of intervening or interceding
saints or angels, He had been taught
and believed that worship must be di-
rected to God alone. Therefore all his
aspirations ascended to the personal
God.

IL, Its reasons.


1, Affliction, The whole of this


clause breathes out a spirit that was in
sore distress.

2. Personal and imminent danger
(ver. 150). This holds good with every
Christian. Satan and all the forces of
evil are ever near to work damage to the
soul,

3. Inability to do the will of God.
All Christians share this consciousness.
God’s “statutes” cannot be kept witb-

309


POALM OXIx,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





out the help of God’s Spirit, whose pre-
sence must be supplicated in prayer.

It. Its petitions.

1. “ Hear me.” This should be the
primary petition. Without God’s con-
descending attention all supplication is
vain,

2. “ Save me.” Those whom God
hears He saves. Unless God saves, all
ground for hope and prayer is taken
away. Salvation is the most urgent
petition that man can offer.

3. “ Quicken me.” Those whom God
saves God quickens, and without this
quickening, salvation is vain. Salvation
is a rescue from danger; quickening is
the invigoration of new life, and unless
that takes place the end of prayer is
unattained.

IV. Its characteristics.

1. Harnestness. “I cried.” Unless
God sees our eagerness and our intense
desire to prevail, He will not listen to
our prayer,

2. Undividedness. ‘ With my whole
heart.” Unless our whole nature is
bent upon securing the answer to our
prayer God will not save. The worship
of the lips is a mockery in the sight of
God. Mind, emotions, will, tongues,
must all be engaged in this service,

3. Importunity (vers. 147, 148).
Sometimes God delays His quickening
to test this importunity and to draw it
forth (Luke xviii). The ten days which
preceded Pentecost: Morning, noon,
and night must be spent directly or
indirectly in this service.


_ Morne
(Verse


“TI cried unto Thee early, ¢.¢., before
others, in the gloom, before the dawn-
ing of the morning: my fixed hope in
Thy promise suffered me not to rest,”—
Speaker's Com.

L Tho Bible speaks much of morn-
ing prayer (Exod. xxxii. 4; Mark i. 35),
“Tt is full of morning. ‘My voice shalt
Thou hear in the morning, O Lord ; and
in the morning will I direct my prayer
unto Thee, and will look up.’ ‘The Lord’s
mercies are new every morning.’ Of
eld ‘the morning stars sang together.’

310


4. Faith, “T hoped in Thy word.”
Hope based on the promises and exe
pectant of their realisation is the sub-
limest faith, —

V. Its warrants.

Ll. The divine loving - kindness (ver.
149). If God is not gracious and kind,
we have no warrant to approach His
august and terrible majesty.

2. The divine nearness (ver. 151).
If God is not near He cannot hear. The
Psalmist held this to be one of the
primary tenets of the faith (Ps, cxxxix),
So do Christians. ‘“ Lo, I am with you
alway.”

3. The truth of the divine promise
(ver, 147, cf. 151). Man may break
his promise, There may be no sincerity
in his promise. But when God says,
Call upon Me in the day of trouble,”
&c., we know that He means what He
says,

4, Past experience (ver. 152). What
God has done He can still do; and
therefore the Psalmist argues what He
did for me of old He will do for me
again, and thus—

** Old experience doth attain
To somewhat of prophetic strain.”

VI. Its resolutions.

1. Obedience “I will keep Thy
statutes.”

2. Witness-bearing.
Thy testimonies,”

VI. Its basis (ver. 148). By con-
tinual meditation on God’s Word he was
instructed how to pray, what to pray for,
and when to pray.


“TI will keep


PRAYER,


147.)


‘I, Jesus, am the bright and morning
Star.’ Truly the day declines; but at
‘eventide there is light,’ when in the
morning there has been converse with
God. The morning makes the day,
A morning misspent is a day ruined;
a morning saved is a day completed.
Lord, awake me at sunrise, and by the
beauty of the coming light give hope


for the whole day."—Dr. J. Parker.


II. Morning is the most favourable
time for prayer. It is calm. The
¢ares and anxieties of the day have not


HAOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





broken upon us, Our mind is then
clearest ; and away from our families
and our businesses, we can be alone.
III. Morning is the time God de-
mands for prayer. “The morning is
the time fixed for my meeting with
God. What meaning there is in time
as well as place! In the morning—then
God means me to be at my best in
strength and hope. In the night I have


buried yesterday’s fatigue, and in the
morning I take a new lease of energy.
Give God all thy strength. In the
morning—then He may mean to keep
me long that He may make me rich.” —
Dr. J. Parker.

IV. Morning is the most appropriate
time for prayer. The day is before us,
and the day will be wasted if not sancti-
fied by God.


THe ConsTITUENTS OF A ComPLETE aND Hoty Day.
(Verses 146-148.)


L The day begins with prayer. “The
first thing he did in the morning, before
he admitted any business, was to pray
when his mind was most fresh and in
the best frame. If our thoughts in the
morning be of God, they will help to
keep us in His fear all the day long.”—
M. Henry. Observe that this morning
prayer stimulated his hope in God’s pro-
mises, and thus braced and encouraged
him for the exercises of the day.

IL The day continues with practical
obedience. ‘‘I shall keep Thy statutes.”


Beginning well it continues well. Prayer
secured the fulfilment of the divine pro
mises in the divine guidance and the
divine protection. Hence consistency
and holiness,

Ill The day closes with meditation
on God’s Word. The crown and com-
pletion of a good day. All anxieties are
over. The time due to our fellow-men
has been spent, and well spent; and
now the man of God recognises God’s
claim upon his eventide.

See also for verse 148 on verse 55.


Gop’s NEARNESS AND Man’s,
(Verses 150, 151.)


1. Man is near to harass; God is near
to help.

2. Man is near to hurt; God is near
to protect.

3. Man is near to discourage; God
is near to comfort.

4. Man is near to tempt to sin ; God
is near to save from sin.


5. Man is near to cast doubts; God
is near to resolve doubts,

6. Man is near to drag down to the
world, flesh, and devil; God is near to
lift up to heavenly things, where Christ
sitteth at the right hand of God.

7. Man is near to kill; God is near
to give life and immortality.


Toe Divine ConsIDERATION.
(Verses 153-157.)


I. The Psalmist’s need of it.

1. Personal affliction.

2. Numerous persecutors.

II. The Psalmist’s estimate concerning
it—

1. Contemplation of his case. ‘“ Take
it into thy thoughts and all the circum-
stances of it, and sit not by as one
unconcerned,” —U, Henry.

9. Pleading his cause (ver. 154). “ Be
Thou my patron and advocate, and take
me for Thy client.”


3. Deliverance from his affliction.

4. Quickened life.

III. The Psalmist’s pleas for it.

1. His remembrance of the divine law
(ver. 153).

2. His trust in the divine promsses
(ver. 154),

3. The fact that salvation was for such
as he (ver, 155).

4. The manifold character of Gods
tender mercies (ver. 156).


31)


PRALM CXIX,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





5. His love for God's precepts (ver.
158).

6. The immutability of the divine word
(ver. 160),


See also for verses 153, 154, 156, see
verse 107 ; for verses 155, 158, see verse
136; for verse 157, see verse 95; for
verse 159, see verse 113.


Toe TrRuTrH aND EnpURANCE OF Gop’s WorD.
(Verse 160.)


“Literally, ‘The head of Thy Word is
truth,’” probably meaning that its prin-
ciples and basis were truth. It was not
made truth by the mere will of God, but
it was founded on essential truth. —
Marg., The beginning of Thy Word is
true,’ Its origin, foundation, and essen-
tial nature is truth.”—Barnes. ‘“ Does
he refer to the first word in God’s Word,
NWN. ‘In the beginning, WN is
the root of that word. Every word that
Thou hast spoken from the first in
Bereshith to the end of the law, and all
Thou wilt yet speak, as flowing from the
fountain of truth, must be true, and all
shall have in due time their fulfilment.”
—A. Clarke.

L God’s Word is based upon truth,
and therefore endures, It does not rest
on tentative hypotheses or speculations,
but upon the infallible and immutable
declarations of God. Every thing not
built on this solid foundation will not
bear the tear and wear and fret of
time.

IL God’s Word had its beginning in
truth, and therefore its righteous judg-


ments endure for ever. As the spring
so the stream. If the source is tainted
so will be the river. But God’s Word
sprang from Him who is “the Truth,”
and therefore it continues true all along
its course,

III. God’s Word is true all through,
and therefore endures. Man’s building
may be upon unstable foundations, may
be of defective materials, and be erected
on a false plan. Earthly rivers may be
pure in their source, but may receive
poisoned waters from tributary streams,
But the Word of God is built on, com-
posed of, and designed by truth, and
with its waters errors will not mix.
Delitzsch says that truth “is the total
number of all the items in the reckoning.
The Word of God is reckoned over in its
parts and as a whole. Truth is the
grand denominator, and truth the result.”

In concLUsION.—God’s Word is the
truth, the whole truth, and nothing but
the truth, (i) Are you based upon it?
(ii.) Are you drinking from it? (iii.)
Are you moulded by # (iv.) Will you
continue with vt?


(Verse 161), see verse 95.


Gop’s Worp THE Ossect or REVERENCE AND Joy,
(Verse 161, last clause, and verse 162.)


L God's Word the object of joy. The
expression is as true as it is remarkable.

1. The joy of victory tr conflict. To
gain spoil, fighting is necessary, and suc-
cess over the foe. So we do not find the
ansearchable riches of Christ without
contest. We must battle with doubts,
drawbacks, disinclinations, &c. The mere
obtaining a victory is @ cause of joy even
when no substantial result is achieved.

2. The joy of enrichment after wctory.
(1.) Victory over unbelief gains stronger
ground for faith. (2.) Victory over dis
inclination 1s rewarded by some new truth.


312


(3.) Victory over darkness is the acquist-
tton of light. (4.) Victory over tribula-
tion secures fresh comfort. (5.) Victory
over sin finds the great spoil of holiness,

IL God’s Word the object of rever-
ence. ‘The two clauses are to be united
as in cxii. 1. Sometimes the gaining of
spoil is worse for an army than defeat.
Men are demoralised. Nations become
arrogant. And lest man should be lifted
up by pride with the knowledge he has


of the Word of God, let it be remembered


that it is the Word of God, and stand in
awe of it.


(Verse 163), see verse 113.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; PSALMS.


PaaLM OXIX.


a Ee ne eS ea ee


Constant PRAISE
(Verse 164.)


“Not only morning and evening, not
thrice only (Ps. lv. 17), but seven times,
s.c., again and again, and many times
(Ps. xii 6, lxix. 12; Lev. xxvi. 18,°24;
Gen. iv. 15; Prov. xxiv. 16), each day,
so as to hallow the day, the Psalmist
thanks God for His word.”—Speaker’s
Com. “ Rabbi Solomon says this is to
be understood literally, for they praised
God twice in the morning before reading
the decalogue, and once after; twice in
evening before the same reading, and
twice after; thus making seven times.
The Roman Church has prescribed a
similar service.”—A, Clarke.

L Constant praise is demanded, be-
cause of the constancy of the divine


judgments. They never fail. By them °


the universe is held together, society
made possible, and human blessedness
secured,

II. Constant praise is due to God
for the beneficence of His judgments.
They are given in mercy, not in wrath.


They are not impracticable, nor burdens
too heavy to be borne. They are made
for and given to man for his safety and
peace.

IIL Constant praise is due to God
for the clearness of His divine judg-
ments. ‘They are not enveloped in a
cloud of mystery, or hidden behind per-
plexing technicalities, or in such a way
as to be out of the reach of the common
people. ‘The way-faring man, though
a fool, cannot err therein.”

VI. Constant praise is due to God
for the help He vouchsafes to keep
His righteous judgments. The Holy
Spirit is given to help our infirmities.
We are invited to approach the throne
of grace, to obtain grace to help in time
of need,

V. Constant praise is due to God
for the forgiveness He offers when we
have broken His righteous judgments.
“Tf we confess our sins,” &e, “If any
man sin we have an Advocate,” &,


PEACE.
(Verse 165.)


Peace is man’s highest hope and best
inheritance. All other blessings are
valued only as they promote it, and the
loftiest dignity and wealthiest affluence
are worth nothing without it, Obstacles
to peace abound, and the largest part
of life is spent in overcoming them.
Offences and stumblingblocks are the
greatest obstacles, Genuine difficulty and
hard work promote peace. Let a man
know there is a difficulty in the way, or
a work to be done, and he composes his
mind to grapple with them. But when
he meets with a stubborn obstacle, or
stumbles over it, his mind is hurt and
his peace is gone. So the believer may
be unmoved amidst the greatest afilic-
tions and trials, and yet through some
unforeseen and insignificant impediment
he may stumble and lose all his tran-
quillity. Notice—

L A qualification. Love of God’s


law. “To love a law may seem strange ;
but it is the only true divine life, To
keep it because we are afraid of its pen-
alties is only a form of fear or pruden-
tial consideration. To keep it to pre-
serve a good name may be propriety
and respectability. To keep it because
it is best for society may be worldly
self-interest. To keep it because of
physical health may be the policy of
epicurean philosophy, To keep it be-
cause we love it is to show that it is
already part of us—has entered into the
moral texture of our being. Sin then
becomes distasteful, and temptativns lose
their power.”—Statham.

IL A process. ‘‘ Nothing shall offend
them,” t.¢,, nothing shall be a stum}ling-
block to them and sohurt them. Those
whose hearts and minds are embued
with and thus protected and directed by
God’s law, although there must needs

313


POALM OXIX.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; PSALMS.





be stumblingblocks in their way, yet
they shall not stumble over them nor
be hurt by them.

1. They will not stumble over appa-
rent discrepancies in God's law. He who
loves God’s law will not go to God’s
Word to find or make them. When
they come across his path, the Divine
Interpreter explains them, and a saucti-
fied insight and experience will discover
their true harmony.

2. They will not stumble at tempta-
tions. Those who are protected by the
law of God are safe. ‘Temptations find
nothing in common with them on which
they can take hold. The world has no
equivalent to offer for the pleasures and
profit of the law of the Lord.

3. They will not stumble at circum-
stances. If adversity comes, those who
love God’s law are prepared for that.
They know it to be necessary for them
or it would not come. If prosperity
comes, that prosperity is sanctified by
the sanctity of those in whom it meets.
God’s law teaches that “ all things work
together for good,” &ec.

4. They do not stumble at death. The
law of God has robbed death of its


terrors. That law shows that Christ
has withdrawn death’s sting, that i¢ is
now not only harmless, but is pressed
into the service of the people of God.
“ Death is yours.” Now your friend to
conduct you toa place where its office
is at anend. Those wko love God’s law
know.that Christ has vanquished “ him
that bad the power of death, and delivered
them who through the fear of death were
all their lifetime subject to bondage.”
Ii. The result. Having no fear of
stumblingblocks, and not being hurt by
them, the lovers of God’s law have great
peace. Not mere peace, but great peace.
1. Great, because divine. It is the


* peace of God.” “ My peace.” ‘ Not
as the world giveth.”
2. Great, because powerful. It keeps


the heart and mind.” It eases tremen-
dous anxieties, removes perturbing fears,

3. Great, because incomprehensible,
“Tt passeth all understanding.” It
cannot be defined. The Christian only
knows he has it.

4. Great, because eternal. “ Peace
shall flow as a river,” unexhausted,
always running, yet never running to
waste Or away.


Gop’s SaLvaATION,
(Verses 166-175.)


The closing verses of this long Psalm
are in harmony with all that has gone
before. The themes are the same,
the prayers are the same, the purposes
are the same, The Psalmist’s one desire
is to taste the fulness and sweetness of
God’s salvation, to know more of His
Word, and to praise His name. Taking
as our leading thought God’s salvation
we have—

I. The nature of that salvation (vers,
166-174).

1. Personal rescue (ver. 170).

2. Divine teaching. It is quite a
mistake to suppose that salvation is ex-
clusively a single act. It is a process
as well, Man is delivered out of dark-
ness into God’s marvellous light ; and to
be saved from lapsing into darkness
again, he must have the Divine Teacher
near him, showing him how to walk in
the light (ver. 171).

314


3. Divine help (ver. 173). Teaching
alone is insufficient. Countless multi-
tudes of even Christian people know
the way, who, from lack of the help they
ought to have, do not walk with firm-
ness and consistency. Vain is the at-
tempt to work out our own salvation
without divine help. Thank God, that
help is abundantly vouchsafed,

4. Soul life (ver. 175). This is the
prime vital and all-essential character-
istic of salvation, It is the synonym
for it both in the Old Testament and
the New. The unsaved soul is like
the valley of dry bones, and dead in
trespasses and sins. Salvation is not
only deliverance from sin. It is the
perpetual indwelling of the Divine and
quickening Spirit.

I. The conditions upon which God
saves.

1. Obedience to God’s commandments


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; PSALMS.


PAALM CXIX.





(ver. 166). But this is mere legality !
Is it? Who said, “ Repent ye and be
lieve the Gospel.” “Ye are My friends
if ye do whatsoever I command you.

2. Keeping and loving God’s testd-
montes (vers. 167,168). What do they
testify? God’s love, God’s mercy, God’s
willingness to save. How can God
save? how can man be saved, unless it
is the rejoicing of his heart to know
and to keep the testimony that “ God
so loved the world,” &., “that God
willeth not the death of the sinner” #

3. Thankfulness for God's promises
(ver. 172). Unless man has these pro-
mises, and is grateful for them, he is
unwilling to be saved, and even God
eannot save the thankless soul. “The
goodness of God” should lead to repen-
tance and trust (Rom. ii. 4, 5).

4. Chowe of the right way and love
of i (vers. 173, 174). Our salvation
largely depends on our own choice.

will not force it upon us. This
choice must have respect to the ulterior
duties of salvation. This choice must


not be determined by fear, interest, but
intelligent appreciation of what is best
and love of it for its own sake.

III. The characteristics of the prayer
for God to save, Those who desire sal-
vation must pray, will pray. How?

1. Hopefully (ver. 166), Faith enters
largely into the composition of evangeli-
calhope. They have the same attributes
as well as the same objects. Hope longs
(ver. 174) with confident expectation,

2. Sincerely (ver. 168). The prayer
of the hypocrite is an abomination to
God. The man who prays for salva-
tion must be prepared to display all his
ways before God. He must conceal
nothing, omit nothing.

3. Intensely (vers. 169, 170). ‘ Cry.”
“ Supplication.”

4. Availingly (ver. 170). The divine
promise was never pleaded in vain.

IV. The obligations of God’s salva-
tion. The one word twice uttered by
the Psalmist reveals them all, “‘ Prazse,”
(vers, 171, 175). It was not personal
blessing so much as the Divine glory.


THe Lost SHEEP,
(Verse 176.)


“The Psalmist begins with, ‘ Blessed
are the undefiled in the way,’ &c. He
concludes with, ‘I have gone astray,’
&c. And thus conscious of the blessed-
ness of those who are in the way of
righteousness, he desires to be brought
into it, that he may walk in newness of
life. Verse first. It isa good way, and
they are blessed who walk in it. Verse
the dast, ‘Bring me into this way that
I may be blessed.’ And thus the Psalm
in sentiment returns into itself; and
the latter verse is so connected with the
former as to make the whole a perfect
circle.” —Dr. A. Clarke.

The text may be applied with equal
propriety to sinners and backsliders,

L The wandering. Men, like sheep,
have broken through the hedge of God’s
law, have forsaken the Shepherd and
Bishop of their souls, and have gone
astray into the paths of error and sin.
“Like a sheep,” 1.¢, like a beast, an
animal ; for sin appeals to the lower in-
stincts of humanity, and develops them,


and so man ainks to the level of a brute
Mark, not like a lion or a horse, some
noble or gifted creature, but like a poor,
silly, unintelligent sheep, Why? Be-
cause sin is stupidity, and the sinner ia
no more a criminal than he is a fool.

1. The wandering sheep displays the
greatest folly. Its safety, food, very
existence, depends upon the shepherd’s
presence.

2. The wandering sheep displays the
deepest ingratitude. It owes everything
to the vigilance, sympathy, and activity
of the shepherd.

3. The wandering sheep displays but
one symptom of intelligence, that of going
astray. If there be but one gap in the
hedge he will find it, If the chances
are a thousand to one against his stray-
ing, he will avail himself of it.

4, The wandering sheep displays per-
severance tn straying. If found to-day
it will lose itself again to-morrow if it
can, And once out of the fold it wan-
dera °n and on and never dreams of

315


PeaLM OE,


returning till sought, found, and brought
back.

Brethren, each one of us must say,
“T have gone astray like a lost sheep.”
We have all gone astray ungratefully
and foolishly from Him who alone can,
and who alone has, vouchsafed all the
benefits that we want and enjoy, In
departing from God we have displayed
an ingenuity worthy of a better cause.
We have wandered where it has been
perilous to wander, and have gone far-
ther. and farther from God, and from
worse to worse, till we have become lost,
Straying, men lose their owner, lose their
fellows, lose themselves.

IL The search. The sheep having
gone astray, what more natural than that
the shepherd should go in search of it?
So God is in search of lost men. ‘‘Christ
came to seek and to save that which
was lost.”

1. This search was the prompting of love.
The relation between the eastern shep-
herd and his sheep is very different from
the western, and is fitly typical of God’s
relation to man. God loves man with an
everlasting love, and cannot afford to lose
him, the latest born in His vast house-
hold, and therefore preserves him with a
love which many waters cannot quench.

2. This search was pursued by the most





HOMILETIO COMMENTARY; PSALMS,


wonderful self-sacrifice. The shepherd
seeking the sheep far from home, amidst
winter snows, and among prowling
beasts, and on dark and dismal nights, is
very feeble as a symbol of God’s search
forman, Christ came to “ lay down His
life for Hissheep.” Such was His fixed
intention, and such His accomplished
purpose. “He loved me, and gave
Himself for me.”

3. This search was rewarded by success,
Such was the case with the Psalmist.
Such is the case of all who will be found.
Here man is unlike a sheep. Its will
cannot resist the more powerful will of
its owner. Alas! man can resist God.

TI. The recollection ‘In all my
wandering, with my consciousness of
error, with my sense of guilt, I still do
feel that I love Thy laws. They are
the joy of my heart, and I desire to be
recalled from all my wanderings that I
may find perfect happiness in Thee and
in Thy service evermore, Such is the
earnest wish of every regenerated heart.
Far as suchan one may have wandered
from God, yet he is conscious of true
attachment to Him and His service ; he
desires and earnestly prays that he may
be ‘sought out’ and brought back and
kept from wandering any more,”—
Barnes.


THE SONGS OF DEGREES.
PSALMS CXX-CXXXIV.,


GENERAL INTRODUCTION,


The principal hypotheses on which to account for the “Songs of Degrees,” ‘Songs of
Ascent,” ‘‘ Pilgrim Psalms,” and to each of which great names are attached, and each of which
has something to say for itself, are as follows :—1, The songs of the pilgrims returning from
exile (Syr. Chrysostom, Theodoret), 2. The songs chanted by the Temple worshippers on each
of the fifteen steps of the Temple (The Radbins, Gospel of Mary, Vulg.—Luther, Grotius). 8. Denot-
ing some peculiar structure, a gradation of thought approaching a climax (Gesenius, Delitzsch). 4.
A musical term denoting some peculiarity of rhythm or music (Aichaelis, &c.). 5. And most sup-
ported songs for pilgrims making their periodical journeys to Jerusalem (Ewald, Perowne
Hragstenberg). he true interpretation probably is yet to be given, none of the above hypotheses
ie ae anevetae the bik lacoste, of the case, Characteristica—‘‘ Sweetness and tender-
ness; a sad pathetic tone ; an absence generally of the ordinary paral i
& guick trochaie rhythm.’—Speaker's cn : i tee ea


PSALM OXX


INTRODUCTION,


This Psalm carries on its face the notion of individual and hardly bearable trial, more
than moe ‘ Prmehes distress (opposition ef foreigners to the rebuilding of the Temple, &.). The


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





PSALM O2x,





trial is like that of David (1 Sam, xxi. 7, xxii. 9, &., mentioned in the contents of A. V.),


and is inflicted by a slanderous tongue,


It is soothed by the recollection that God hears the cry


of the suppliant, and answers it always, A difference of opinion exiats respecting almost every


word and verse,—Speaker’s Com,


THe GopLy UNDER MISREPRESENTATION.
(Verses 1, 2.)


L That the godly are not exempt
from misrepresentation. Rather are
they most subject to it, They of all
men have characters to lose, and from
their guilelessness and sincerity are most
open to attack. A greater than the
Psalmist said, “In the world ye shall
have tribulation,” and one of the keenest
forms of tribulation comes from “lying
lips and the deceitful tongue” (Matt. x.
24-28). The motives of the godly are
misrepresented, their words, their actions,
Misrepresentation exists in many forma,
direct lying, suppression, innuendo, &c.
No man can expect to be entirely free
from it. The thing itself might be
endured but for the senseless minds who
take it in, and the bad hearts who re-
joice to believe it. Misrepresentation
in its worst form is that which is covered
by professions of friendship to the person
misrepresented.

II That the godly are distressed
by misrepresentation, and, humanly
speaking, they may well be. No cir-
cumspection can guard against it. No
force can destroy it. Its origin cannot
always be traced. Some will even be-
lieve it to be true. It reaches those who
can never be reached by its refutation,
Alwaysleaves itsobject open to suspicion.
“ Whose edge is sharper than the sword;


whose tongue [breath
Outvenoms all the worms of Nile; whose


Rides on the posting winds, and doth belie

All corners of the world ; kings, queens, and
atates,

Maids, matrons; nay, the secrets of the grave,

This viperous slander enters,” —Shakespeare.


III. That the godly should cry to
God in misrepresentation.

1, Because God knows all the facts of
the case, and therefore judges righteously.
Slander should not affect a man whose
conscience is clear in the sight of God,
He is the Master to whom man standa
or falls. Let men, therefore, commit
their case to Him (1 Pet. ii. 24).

2. Because the slandered and suspected
soul naturally yearns to unbosom itself.
This it often dares not do to its dearest
friend, Vehement vindication some-
times only gives rise to suspicions that
there must have been something in it
after all. The soul can tell its troubles
to God without fear of this,

IV. That God clears the godly from
misrepresentation.

1. God enables His people tolive slander
down. This is the only effectual refuta-
tion. Men who refuse to listen to the
clearest vindication are compelled to
recognise the mantfestation of the truth,
and the commendation of ourselves to
every man’s conscience (2 Cor. iv. 2, i. 12).

3. God will vindicate them before t
assembled universe, when all shall be
made manifest; and throughout eternity,


Tae Seir-RETRIBUTIVE CHARACTER OF SLANDER,
(Verses 3, 4.)


«What punishment shall be assigned
thee, or what shall be done or added to
thee, in recompense for misery caused 9’
cr, ‘What shall (God) give unto thee,
and what shall (He) add unto thee?’
Answer—‘Sharp arrows (Ps. xlv. 5)
wielded by a mighty one (Ps. exxvii. 4 ;
Jer. 1, 9), and burning coals of juniper’
(Ps. cxl. 10; Prov. xxv. 22). Thus the


punishment of the slanderous tongue is
appropriate; for itself is a sharp sword
(Ps. lvii. 4), a pointed arrow tye ix,
8), and it burns like hell fire (Jas. iii.
6). The root of the retem or broom is
used for fire in the desert, and retains
its heat for a year.”—Speaker’s Com.

IL The work of slander. Like that
which shall destroy it,

317


FOALM OXX.





1. Zo sting. It is always hurtful,
harassing, and annoying. It will always
more or less damage the reputation, and
inflict a wound on the mind or temper
which will take some time to heal. © Its
sting often remains.

2. To burn. It sometimes blasts
and utterly destroys. It has frequently
undermined a man’s character beyond
recovery, and brought him down with
grief, affliction, and poverty to an
untimely grave.

IL The retribution of slander. The
law of requital holds terribly good here,

1. It ts stung in return. God’s
arrows fly thick and sharp upon the


HOMILETIC COMMENTANY: PSALMS.





_


slanderous soul. He is ever in fear
lest the lio should be traced back to ita
source, lest it should be proved to be a
lie, and lest his calumny should miss its
mark, He bears about him, too, the
sharpest javelin in God’s armoury—
CONSCIENCE !

2.. It is consumed. Society consumes
the evil speaker and his speech. It
sternly condemns him whether his mis-
chievous tales are true or not, and
avoids his company and leaves him in
contempt to perish. His accumulated
fears consume him ; and he that maketh
a lie inherits the hottest fire of God’s
wrath.


Tur TRIALS OF THE GODLY.
(Verses 5-7.)


L Uncongenial neighbours The
Psalmist’s residence in Mesech and
Kedar is probably not to be understood
literally, as Mesech (Gen. x. 1) inhabited
the mountain ranges south of and adjoin-
ing Caucasus, and the south-coast borders
of the Black Sea, and Kedar was pro-
bably an Arabian tribe. They evidently
stand for Barbarians. A man can hardly
be subjected to a greater trial than to be
compelled to mix in society with which
he has no sympathy and which has no
sympathy with him,—e.g., a scholar with
those who despise learning, an artist
with those that have no taste, the pure
with the impure, the sober with the
profligate, and vice versa. So the
Psalmist felt himself unhappy amongst
men with whom he had no spiritual
affinity, This is the case with the
godly through all time. They dwell in
a world that does not acknowledge their
God, and with men who cannot appre-


ciate their worth. Heaven is the place
where all is harmony, and whose pur-
suits, &c., are congenial to all. Hell is
the opposite.

II. Unrighteous contradictions.
“They will listen to nothing. They
are for discord, variance, strife. All
my efforts to live in peace are vain.
They are determined to quarre’, and I
cannot prevent it. (a) A man should
separate himself in such a case as
only way of peace. (0) If this cannes
be done, then he should do nothing to
irritate and keep up the strife. (c) If
all his efforts for peace are vain, and he
cannot separate, then he should bear it
patiently as divine discipline. There
are few situations where piety will shine
more beautifully. (d) He should look
with the more earnestness for the world
of peace ; and the peace of heaven will
be all the more grateful after such a
scene of conflict and war.”—Barnes,


THE NATURE AND Doom or CAaLumny.
(Verses 1-4.)


The Israelites had returned from
Babylon, and were engaged in rebuild-
ing the demolished Temple at Jerusalem,
The Samaritans—heathens by extrac-
tion, and still continuing heathens at
heart — wished to join in the work.

318


The devout Jews, thinking it out of


- place for any who did not fully acknow-


ledge Jehovah to take part in so sacred
an enterprise, quietly but firmly de-
clined their overtures. Exasperated
with the repulse, the Samaritans em-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





ployed every means to annoy the
workers, and to hinder the work.
They concocted the vilest slanders, and
sought to prejudice the mind of the
Persian king, by whose permission the
liberated Jews were allowed to rebuild
the Temple. The Church of God is
still assailed by the malice of -the
wicked. What they cannot accomplish
by open violence, they seek to effect by
the subtlety of the tongue,

Observe :—

L That calumny is a terrible in-
strument of mischief. 1. Jt 7s subtle
in tts insinuations, “A deceitful
tongue.” It affects a reluctance to tell
all it knows. It implies more than it
openly states. It deals in half truths,
or in a small modicum of truth, which
it makes the pivot on which a whirl-
wind of the most pernicious slander
revolves. It is eloquent in facial ex-
pression, A wink, a shrug of the
shoulder, a little hieroglyphic finger-
writing on the viewless air, a whispered
innuendo, will insinuate more evil into
the midst of a community than the
most outspoken declamation. Calumny
is cheating with the tongue. 2. Jt 1
false in tts representations, “ Lying
lips.” A liar does his mischief openly
for the most part. Stung by a well-
deserved rebuff, or prompted by a
feeling of spontaneous hatred, he
circulates the most flagrant falsehoods.
The more barefaced the falsehood the
less harm it does among the thoughtful.
The consummate liar rings his own
alarm bell, and the unprejudiced are
sufficiently warned. But there is
always a large class of people who
will believe the most abominable lies;
the more confidently and unblushingly
they are uttered, the more firmly are
they credited. The splenetic detractor
is never at a loss for defamatory material,
A word is falsely reported, an act mis-
construed, a motive misread, and the
whole plan of life misconceived, When
all else is exhausted, the vile calum-
niator falls back upon the endless fab-
rications of a corrupt imagination.
3. Zt ts dangerous in its use. It pol-
lutes and debases those who traffic in
it.


PSALM OXX,





“ Let falsehood be a stranger to thy lips;

Shame or the policy that first began

To tamper with the heart to hide its

thoughts |

And doubly shame on that unrighteous

tongue

That sold its honesty and told a lie |”

—AHavard,

It is pernicious in its effects on indivi-
duals, societies, and commonwealths, “A
lie,” says Carlyle, “should be trampled
on and extinguished wherever found. I
am for fumigating the atmosphere when
I suspect that falsehood, like pestilence,
breathes around me.” The march of
calumny is invisible as the wind, and
often more terribly destructive.

II. That calumny is productive of
acute suffering. 1. Jt fills the soul with
anguish, ‘In my distress,” It wounds
the soul as with the barb of an enve-
nomed arrow, and inflicts incredible
pain. The distress is aggravated when
we discover that the javelin is thrown
by the hand of a professed friend. The
discovery of treachery in human nature
is a painful shock to the confiding.
Calumny is not easily traced to its
source, and is often difficult to refute,

2. It mars the happiness of a life.
“ Deliver my soul” — my life. The
Psalmist felt that his whole life was
endangered, Calumny has ruined the
fairest reputation, embittered many a
life, blasted its prospects, diverted its
influence, and injuriously affected its
destiny.

III. That calumny drives the soul
to seek redress in prayer. 1. The
refuge of the calumntated is in God. “In
my distress I cried unto the Lord.
Deliver my soul, O Lord, from lying
lips.” No man is safe from the shafts
of falsehood, He cannot always refute
it. He cannot prevent its effects on his
reputation. Slanders may penetrate
into regions where its refutation never
comes, The sufferer can do nothing
but commit his case to God, and trust
to his own conscious integrity, the lapse
of time, and the operations of Divine
providence to clear his character. 2.
The cry of the calumniated ts not in
vain. “He heard me.” Prayer is the
surest method of relief. The soul is
comforted. Grace is given to act cir-

319


. POALM OxX.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSaLMS.





eumspectly, and to live down the false
imputations, When Plato was told how
his enemies slandered him, he quietly
replied, “I tear them not. I will so
live that no one shall believe them.”
In His own way, and at His own time,
Jehovah vindicates His suffering people,

IV. That calumny involves its
perpetrators in severest vengeance.

“What shall be done unto thee, thou
false tongue? Sharparrows of the mighty,
with coals of juniper.” The juniper
_ sparkles, burns, and crackles more vehe-
mently than any other wood, and is of
such a nature that, if covered with
ashes, it will continue alive the whole
year. Fiery arrows, or arrows wrapped
round with inflammable material, were
formerly used in sieges to set the place
on fire. The Chaldee has it :—‘* The
strong sharp arrows are like lightning
from above, with coals of juniper kindled


in hell beneath.” The tongue of the
calumniator was often like a sharp, fiery
arrow shot by. a strong hand, causing
intense and prolonged pain; but now
the fierce, burning arrow of vengeance,
shot by the Mighty One, has pierced
the soul, and will rankle there in ever-
increasing torture. The future retribu-
tive sufferings of the wicked will infin-
itely exceed anything they ever inflicted
on their most helpless victims, Beware
of indulging revenge. We may safely
leave our oppressors to their merited
punishment, ‘“ Speak not of vengeance;
tis the right of God,”

Lessons :—1. Calumny ts the source
of many evils. 2. The best of charac-
ters are liable to tts most distressing
assaults, 3. God will defend, sustain,
and vindicate His people, and stgnally
puntsh their calumniators,


Tas Frroorry oF tHe Wioxrep a Source or Disrress
TO THE Goop.
(Verse 5-7.)


Mesech refers to a barbarous race in-
babiting the Moschian regions between
Iberia, Armenia, and Colchis. From
this people the Muscovites descended.
Kedar describes the wild, restless, no-
madic offspring of Ishmael, who occupied
the territory of Arabia Petrwa. The
Psalmist did not personally reside in
either Mesech or Kedar. The sixth
verse gives the key to the sense in
which the words are to be understood.
He dwelt in the midst of a people as
rudely barbarous, and as fiercely conten-
tious, as those in Mesech and Kedar. The
Church of God is now situated in the
midst of a mass of gross wickedness
that surrounds and assails it like an
angry sea.

I. That the Good are brought into
Unavoidable Contact with the Wicked.

There is no spot under heaven into
which evil cannot penetrate. Go where
we will it presses in upor us from every
quarter. The eaxigenctes of life will
sometimes lead the godly i:to the com-
pany airy wicked, But for this, not


only would commercial extension be
impossible, but the humanising influence
of social intercourse be lost to the world.
The Providence of God may conduct His
people into the midst of the wicked—
vo testify against their pernicious prac-
tices, to moderate their violence, to
present a holy and beneficent example,
to attract to a better life. The residence
of the good among the habitations of the
wicked is sometimes compulsory. With-
out any fault of their own they are
banished from home and temple, and
compelled to mingle with people whose
principles they disapprove, and whose
practices they detest. It is possible to
be encompassed with evil, and yet not
participate in it. As the fire-fly will
pass through the flame without being
singed, as fresh water currents circulate
in the sea without partaking of its saline


_ property, as the pearl is unimpaired by


the unsightly shell in which it is clasped,
so the good may move about in the


midst of abounding wickedness without
contamination.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PSALM CXKY,





IL That the attitude of the wicked
is one of fierce antagonism to the
good.

They hate peace—they are for war.
The presence of the good is a perpetual
rebuke to the wicked. Their simple
transparency of character makes them
conscious of the duplicity and blackness
of their own; their pacific temper, in-
stead of soothing, is made an occasion
of ungovernable irritability. 1. The
antagonism of the wicked 1s prompted by
a spwrit of intense hatred. “My soul
hath long dwelt with him that hateth
peace.” Hatred is the great mischief-
maker. It sets man against himself;
against society ; against God ; against
the universe. ‘ A man,” says Plato,
“should not allow himself to hate even
his enemies ; because if you indulge this
passion, on some occasion it will rise
of itself on others; if you hate your
enemies, you will contract such a vicious
habit of mind, as by degrees will break
out upon those who are your friends,
or those who are indifferent to you.”
Hatred in the heart of the wicked is a
fiend let loose. 2. The antagonism of
the wicked is unreasonable, ‘‘I am for
peace, but when I speak, they are for
' war.” There are some restless, quarrel-
some spirits, whom nothing will pro-
pitiate or pacify. If no provocation is
given, they will invent one. Whatever
efforts are made to promote peace, they


construe into causes for new hostilities,
They are like the Macedonians, of whom
it was said, in the time of Philip, “To
them peace was war, and war was
peace.” Such conduct is senseless and
unreasonable,

Ill. That the ferocity of the
wicked is a source of distress to the
good. ‘“ Woe is me.”

There is no greater pain to a tender,
sensitive spirit, than to be brought in
contact with prevalent wickedness, The
most pathetic lamentations of Jeremiah
were uttered when he beheld the moral
degeneracy and violent discord of his
countrymen, Evil is abhorrent in any
aspect ; but when it assumes the fierce-
ness of a reckless, impetuous, and fiend-
ish aggression, it is intolerable. To be
compelled to dwell in the midst of the
quarrelsome is a miniature pandemo-
nium. Such an experience is often the
means of discipline to the good. It
teaches forbearance, patience, and self-
control, It calls for the exercise of a
spirit of god-like forgiveness and charity.
It reveals the diabolic character of sin,
and its inevitable tendency to transform
men into demons,

Learn—l. The universality of sin.
2. The greatest troubles of life are the
result of sin 3. A time ts coming
when the good will be for ever delivered
from the assaulis of sin,


PSALM OXXL


INTRODUCTION.


This “ Song of the Ascents "—a title slightly varying from thst of each of the other Gradual
Psalms—is as suitable as any for the Iaraelite’s use when not leaving his home for the
earthly Jerusalem, but only meditating on the circumstances and prospects of his spiritual
progress, especially when life is drawing toa close; but its beauties are more apparent if we
regard it as bursting from the lips of the pilgrims as after their long, weary, and dangerous
march, in spite of Mesech and Kedar, though not yet beyond their reach, they come at last in
sight of the mountain range of Moriah and Zion. O joyful! Yonder is Jerusalem! There ig
the sheen of the Temple! Our journey is nearly over! Jehovah is appealed to by the Church
or gaint in the first three verses, and in the remainder answers and confirms His believing
people.— The Caravan and Temple


JEHOVAH THE ReFvuGE OF THE DISTRESSED,


(Verses 1-4.)


Wherever the devout Hebrew wan- mountain heights of his native Judea,
dered, and whatever might be his con- In the distance those heights assumed
lition, his eyes turned towards the the appearance of one vast mountain,


VoL. iL $21


POALM OXXI,


on which there was a particular emi-
nence that arrested the gaze of the eager
worshipper, as if held by the spell of
an irresistible fascination, This was
Mount Zion, the consecrated hill of the
Lord—the foundation on which He had
built His Church, and the symbei of
its permanency—the charmed circle of
divinest manifestation — the central
fountain from which streams of bless-
ing have issued for the healing of the
“nations. As the mountaineer, pressed
and worsted in the conflict, fled to his
native hills for refuge and defence, so
the suffering Israelite sought comfort
and protection from Him “ whose
righteousness is like the great moun-
tains.”

Note.—I. That the soul is often
placed in circumstances of distress.

Suffering is the commonest, yet most
mysterious, feature of our human life.
None are exempted. Heaven has no dis-
pensations to grant to special favourites.
Whatever differences there may be in
mental endowments, wealth, or social
position, there is, among all the de-
scendants of Adam, an unavoidable,
all-levelling communism in suffering,
Apparent and numerous as may be the
physical sufferings of mankind, there is
a depth of mental distress of which the
outer world knoweth not, and with
which a stranger may not intermeddle.
The hope deferred that maketh the
heart sick ; the collapse of undertakings
that have cost days and nights of
anxious thought and devoted labour;
the wounds inflicted by unjust and mean
insinuations, or by words barbed with
envy and dipped in the venom of a
heartless cruelty ; the nameless pang of
disappointment occasioned by the faith-
lessness of one we trusted, and to whom
we knew not how far we had surren-
dered our heart till he flung it from him
a pierced and bleeding thing—all these,
and infinitely more, are hidden from
the great world outside; they are be-
yond its power to assuage, or even to
appreciate,

IL. That in every time of distress
Jehovah is an ever-available Refuge.

1. His power is unbounded, “My
help cometh from the Lord, which

222


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : PSALMS.





made heaven and earth.” The Creator
of all can succour and defend all. The
great forces of both worlds are under
His control, He restrains their malig-
nant, and multiplies their beneficent,
ministries. However complicated our
straits and pungent our grief, His power
is all-sufficient. With such a refuge
despair would be madness.

2. His defence is invincible. ‘‘ He will
not suffer thy foot to be moved.” The
sliding of the foot is an emblem of mis-
fortune frequently used, and a very
natural and suggestive one to the
dweller in the Hebrew mountains, where
a single slip of the foot was often
attended with great danger (Psalm
xxxviii. 16; lxvi. 9). The foundation
on which the believer rests —the Divine
power and goodness—is immovable,
and while fixed on this basis his foot
shall not be moved. The giddy whirl
of pleasure; the artful devices of the
tempter; the sombre tempest of cala-
mities will, alike, be powerless to harm
while he is circled by the Divine
defence.

3. Hts vigilance is unwearied. “ He
that keepeth thee will not slumber.
Behold, He that keepeth Israel shall
neither slumber nor sleep.” Sleep is
necessary to repair the waste occasioned
by toil. It is an indication of weak-
ness and limitation. All mundane
creatures sleep, God never sleeps. He
knows no weariness, To Him there is
no night ; the darkness and the light
are both alike to Him. Nothing can
escape His eye. No enemy can secrete
himself unnoticed ; no ambush can sur-
prise Him. The sentinel may slumber
at his post ; the steersman at the helm ;
the mother by the sick-bed; but God
never slumbers. He is never exhausted :
never inattentive to the condition of
His people, or the wants of the uni-
verse.

III. That the most signal mani-
festations of Divine help are realised
in the sanctuary.

“The hills from whence cometh my


help.” On those hills the Temple


stood—the pride of the Hebrew, the
marvel of the ages. There Jehovah
localised His presence; there the in-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ;: PSALMS,


PSALM OXZI.


I a a


effable glory hovered ; there the people
held sublime communion with their
God ; there were witnessed the brightest
visions of His face ; there were realised
the strongest consolations of His love.
The fondest, dearest memories of life
cluster around the experiences of the
sanctuary. The sad heart has there
lost its burden; joy has been raised into
& purer passion; the holy resolution
been confirmed ; and the future lit up
with the kindling radianecy of hope.
Who can estimate the loss to the wor-
shipper of a single careless neglect of
the service of the sanctuary !

IV. That the soul is delivered
from its distress only as it turns to
Jehovah.


“T will lift up mine eyes unto the
hills.” Help is not to be found in
man, We cannot look to idols, or to
the mighty, who, like hills, fill the
earth, and raise their heads towards
heaven, Truly, in vain is salvation
hoped for from these hills (Jer. iii, 23),
When all human help fails, with God
nothing is impossible, To brood over
our distress is to increase it. Our
greatest distress comes when we wander
farthest from God, and vanishes when
we turn again to Him with a sincere
heart.

Lussons :—1. Distress is never far to
seck, 2. The Divine Refuge is open for
all, 3. To receive timely help be always
in your place in the sanctuary.


Divinz Protection.
(Verses 5-8.)


A celebrated traveller—after an ab-
sence of three years, during which he
had walked across the continent of
Africa from east to west, through vast
regions never before trodden by the foot
of the white man—recently received an
enthusiastic welcome home. As he ap-
proached the quiet Kentish village where
he had spent his boyish days, his first act,
before entering his much-loved home,
was to pass through the portals of the
church where his aged father minis-
tered, and, humbly kneeling, offer his
devout thanksgiving to that God who
had watched over and preserved him in
all his wanderings. Among other ap-
propriate Scriptures, this Psalm was
read. It wasatouching scene! Many
hearts heaved with emotion, and many
tears were shed, as the reader, in
trembling accents, uttered the words,
“The Lord is thy keeper. The Lord
is thy shade upon thy right hand, The
sun shall not smite thee by day, nor the
moon by night. The Lord shall pre-
serve thy going out and thy coming in
from this time forth, and even for ever-
more.” It was.a graceful and fitting
acknowledgment of that Divine Good-
ness which had safely conducted the
weary, sun-burnt traveller through all
the perils of his great and adventurous
Journey. We should be ever ready to


acknowledge and adore the Gracious
Power that shelters and protects us
every moment. Observe—

I. The Divine protection is ample
and efficient.

1. Jt is ample. “The Lord is thy
shade.” He surrounds His people, and
guards them at every point of attack.
Without His encompassing shadow they
are exposed to the fierce onslaught of
numberless enemies, and must become
an easy prey to their violence. Where
the danger is greatest, there the Divine
shade is thickest. The foe must be
able to pierce the invulnerable, and
conquer the invincible, before he can
touch the feeblest saint who is sheltered
by the wings of God. 2. It ts efficient.
“Upon thy right hand.” The right
hand is the organ of action, either in
aggression or defence. If that is para-
lysed, man is shorn of his main strength.
As the enemies of God’s people are ever
standing at their right hand to frustrate
all their efforts in well-doing, so Jeho-
vah is at their right hand to encourage
and sustain those efforts, and restrain
their enemies. At the point where the
forces of evil most thickly concentrate,
there the Divine protection operates
most powerfully.

I, The Divine protection shields
from the most open assaults. ‘The

323


PALM OXXL





sun shall not smite thee by day.” To
the inhabitants of the East, where the
fierce rays of the sun are sometimes
fatal in their effects upon the incau-
tious traveller, these words would have
a special significance. They also in-
dicate figuratively the open dangers
which threaten God’s people every day,
and the flagrant, cruel, persecuting
hatred of their most furious enemies,
“Dangers stand thick through all the
_ ground ;” but God is present to defend.
The worker in the dismal mine, the
traveller by road, or rail, or sea, the
toiler surrounded by the most destruc-
tive materials, is alike under the shadow
of the Divine protection,

III. The Divine protection guards
from the effects of the most secret
treachery. ‘Nor the moon by night.”
The moon is the ruler of the night ; and
everything belongs to it which happens
during its reign, so that it is not neces-
sary to trace all the evils of the night
directly to the influence of the moon.
The Lord will protect from all the
subtle and invisible attacks of the
wicked, though they come upon His
people as silently and unseen as the
penetrating cold of the moonlight night.
He sees the approach of the least sus-
pected danger, estimates the force of
the subtlest influence, smiles at the
treachery of His enemies, and discon-
certs their cleverest combinations, The
Divine Sentinel’ never slumbers, He
can never be outwitted by the cunning
of the most malicious.

IV. The Divine protection is a
defence against every evil. ‘The
Lord shall preserve thee from evil:
He shall preserve thy soul” He pro-
tects from the evil of sin and of suffer-
ing. He turns away the evil that
is feared, and alleviates and sanctifies
the evil He permits. He will preserve
the life (the soul) of His saints in war or
peace—when the weapons of destruction
hurtle through the air, or when disease
silently sheds around its noxious poison.
He will keep the soul from doing evil,
cleanse it from all pollution, and invest it
with a purity immaculate and fadeless.

V. The Divine protection is real-
fed amid the active duties of lifa

424





HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





‘“‘The Lord shall preserve thy going
out.” The good man is directed in
the beginning of his undertakings, and
shielded by the Divine presence during
their active prosecution (Deut, xxviii,
3-6). He is safe wherever his duties
carry him—in the workshop, the street,
the busy mart, on the restless sea, or in
strange and distant countries.
“Tn foreign realms and lands remote,
Supported by Thy care,
Through burning climes they pass unhurt,
And breathe in tainted air.
When on the dreadful tempest borne,
High on the broken wave,
They know Thou art not slow to hear,
Nor impotent to save.” ;
—Addison.


A moment comes when there shall
be the last going out—the ebb of life
when the soul shall go out with the
tide, to return no more! Then shall it
be enfolded with the Divine protection,
and preserved in endless bliss.

VI. The Divine protection over-
shadows the rest and quietness of
home. ‘“Andthycomingin.” Better is
the end of a thing than the beginning
thereof. The Divine protection is not
less exercised in the conclusion of any
undertaking than in its commencement,
Evening brings all home; and the
weary one, after the toils and dangers of
the day, enjoys the peace and rest of his
home all the more because he knows he
is encircled by the Divine guardianship.
And when the shadows of life’s eventide
gather round him, he fears not. The Lord
will preserve his coming in—his tranquil
entrance into the heavenly home!

VII. The Divine protection is un-
remitting. ‘From this time forth and
even for evermore.” He is the continual
portion and defence of all who trust in
Him, in all places, at all times, in all
actions, in life, in prosperity, in adver-
sity, in death, in time, in eternity. No
evil shall befall them to endanger their
present and ultimate good. The safety
of the Church and of every individual
member is insured.

Lessons :—1. Offer grateful praise
Sor the protection of the past. 2. Fear
not the most furious assaults of the
enemy. 3, Put all your confidence tn
the Divine Protector.


te


ZOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMA&,


PSALM OCXXIL


INTRODUCTION,


This Psalm, which the title ascribes to David, was probably composed by him after he had
settled the Ark in Mount Zion, to encourage the people to resort to Jerusilem to the three
annual feasts, or to express his pleasure in observing that they did assemble there in great


numbers,


With how much greater joy ought Christians to embrace all opportunities of


approaching God and assembling with His people in the more rational, spiritual, and edifying


worship of the New-Testament Church!


Tue Joy or Divine WorsHIp,
(Verses 1, 2.)


This Psalm is a song on the entrance
of the Church and State of Israel into
s superior habitation. It seems to have
been originally written in the interval
between the translation of the Ark -to
Zion by David and the erection of the
Temple there by Solomon. We may
picture the multitudes of eager wor-
shippers singing this song as they
journeyed in companies from different
parts of Palestine to the holy sanctuary
of Zion. As they leave their homes, as
in the morning they resume their march,
as they approach the gates of the city,
or as they pause within them and pre-
pare to go up in solemn procession with
music and song to the sanctuary, they
unite in singing these words of joy and
gladness. Observe—

I. That the joy of Divine worship is
realised in anticipation. ‘I was glad
when they said unto me” (ver. 7). The
invitation to worship is met with an
eager and joyous response, as though
the soul had been pleasantly musing on
the theme and was longing for the time
of public worship to return, Much of
our happiness in life, and of our misery
too, are realised by anticipation, The
same power by which we forecast the
future and fill the mind with sombre
pictures of coming calamities, may also
be used to portray with the vividness
of reality the exquisite pleasures which
are yet to come. Prolonged absence
from the sanctuary, whether from sick-
ness or distance, gives piquancy to the
spiritual appetite, and adds an additional
charm to the prospect of soon joining
again with the happy worshippers. The
joy of the devout emigrant as he returns


once more to his native village, is inten-
sified by the hope of again worshipping
God in the rustic temple with which
are associated the happiest moments of
his youth.

IL That the joy of Divine worship
is enhanced when shared with others.
“Let ws go.” Man can worship God
alone, but he can worship Him better
in company. The song of the solitary
bird does not create such a tempest of
tumultuous rapture as when it is blended
with the summer-morning chorus of a
thousand merry choristers, rising over
brake and woodland. The journey of the
pilgrim is not so long and tedious when
it is prosecuted in the society of kindred
spirits and enlivened with songs of glad-
ness. Our worship of God will reach
its highest joy when it is rendered in
fraternal union with that great multi-
tude which no man can number (Rev.
vii. 9-12),

III. That the joy of Divine worship
is most fully realised in the sanetuary.
“Into the house of the Lord.” Here
Jehovah dwells, making His home in
the hearts of the sincere worshippers,
Here His majestic glory is displayed
with overwhelming splendour. Here
the mysteries of His providential deal-
ings are explained. Here His will is
made known with unmistakable plain-
ness and emphasis, illustrated with the
commentary of passing events. Here
the worshipper has received his most
memorable blessings—his fears have
been banished, his murmurs silenced,
his false ideas corrected, his faith invi-
gorated, his soul tuned to harmony and
love. The blissful associations of the

325


POALM O¥XII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


ec


sanctuary in the past assist the wor-
shipper every time he visits the loved
and sacred shrine. Many are thankful
in the recollection of those whose advice
and example led them to the sanctuary.
The Christian mother of Gregory Nazi-
anzen often begged her Pagan hus-
band to join the Lord’s people in their
worship, but had to go without him for
a long time. At last her remembered
words were irresistible music to his
spirit. In a dream, he repeated the
first words of the Psalm: “I was glad
when they said unto me, Let us go into
the house of the Lord.” The opposite
had been the fact; but the dream would
come to pass. Such happiness was soon
his lot. He felt a longing to accept the
Christian religion, and was soon able,
when wide awake, to say the same words
with literal truth.

IV. The joy of Divine worship is
abiding. “Our feet shall stand within
thy gates, O Jerusalem” (ver. 2). The
joy of worship is satisfying and per-
manent; it remains with us when other


joys have vanished—vanished like the
bloom of a short-lived flower, like the
picture of a pleasant dream, like the
delicate tints of a lovely scene, like the
sweet strain of an entrancing melody.
David governed with his harp as much
as with his sword and sceptre ; and the
songs of Zion which he taught his peo-
ple to sing were a potent and constant
influence in the formation and solidify-
ing of the national religious life. The
unceasing praise of Jehovah in the
Heavenly Jerusalem will be an occasion
of unceasing joy.
“In thy gates, O Jerusalem bright,
Have our feet often stood with delight:


And again shall they measure the way,
Till within them, enchanted, we stay.”


Lessons :—1. The true praise of God
ts the highest worship. 2. The worship
in the Church below begets a preparedness
and fitness for worship in the Church
above, 3. The highest worship ts the
unfatling source of the highest rapture,
4. Much spiritual loss ts suffered by
changing or neglecting the sanctuary.


JERUSALEM A TyPz OF THE CHURCH OF GoD.
(Verses 3-5.)


I. Because it is securely founded.
& Jerusalem is builded as a city that is
compact together” (ver. 3). It was
situate on a lofty eminence: it was
strengthened till it became an impreg-
nable fortress: it was beautified by a
series of princely palaces: it was
crowned by the most magnificent
Temple: it was circled and invested by
the Divine presence. So the Church of
God has its basis in invulnerable truth :
it is defended by the ablest intellects: it
embraces the good of all ages: it has
survived the wreck of the mightiest
empires, and the rage of the most
formidable enemies: it is overshadowed
with the glory of God: it is dowered
with a fadeless immortality.

II. Because it is the place of general
assembly. ‘‘ Whither the tribes go up,
the tribes of the Lord” (ver. 4). 1. There
the will of God is made known. “ Unto
the testimony of Israel.” The ark was
there, grey the tables of the law,

26


the testimony of God’s will and Israel’s
duty (Exod. xxv. 21, 22). In the
Church of God, as in the Temple of
Jerusalem, the Word of God is expounded
and the individual path of duty clearly
marked out. Obedience is encouraged
by promises of blessing, and its failure
threatened with corresponding punish-
ment; and the law of God is an awful
and imperishable testimony of the
Divine faithfulness in each sphere. 2.
There the Name of God is worshipped.
“To give thanks unto the Name of the
Lord.” The Divine Name is the embo-
diment of the Divine perfections; and
that mysterious Name is the legitimate
object of all true worship. Thanks-
giving is the essence of acceptable wor-
ship. ‘To give thanks” becometh a
creature who is so absolutely dependent
on the Divine bounty as man. Thanks-
giving should be offered humbly, fer-
venily, constantly.

IIL Because it is the seat of uni:


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


Gale OXXIL.


rr


versal government. “For there are
set thrones of judgment, the thrones of
the house of David” (ver. 5). It is a
picture of combined and quiet strength.
The pilgrims do not look upon a solitary
throne, exposed and insecure; but see
thrones, firm and safe, beneath and
around David’s, occupied simultaneously
by his advisers, administrators, and
magistrates, including his sons, all in
his royal name and service (2 Sam. viii,
18; 1 Chron. xviii. 17). They behold
a broadly organised and settled govern-
ment. (Vide “The Caravan and the
Temple.”) From this metropolis of
power all civil and ecclesiastical man-
dates must issue, and to it all classes


were taught to look for justice, So the
Church of God is the seat and centre
of government. If justice is not found
here, it can be found nowhere, And
not justice only, but all that which
government exists to promote and con-
serve—righteousness, peace, joy, love—
these are the stable constituents and
ornaments of the Divine throne.

Lessons :—1. The Church of God t
the repository of the greatest mental and
moral wealth. 2. A secure place in th
true Church is gained only by a Divinely
implanted moral fitness. 3. A member
of the true Church ts amenable to the
Divine laws.


PEACE AND PROSPERITY.
(Verses 6-9.)


I That peace and prosperity
should be subjects of earnest prayer.
“Pray for the peace of Jerusalem:
they shall prosper that love thee”
(ver. 6). It is not in mortals to com-
mand success, nor is it always in the
power of man to maintain peace in
either Church or State. It is an Apos-
tolic direction—As much as lieth in
you, live peaceably with all men. But
the best intentions are often misinter-
preted, and, such is the perversity of
the human mind, the very efforts made
to promote peace are often the occasion
of strife. The baffled mediator finds
his readiest and most potent resource
in prayer, All who truly love the
Church of God will be constant and
fervent in supplication for its peace and
prosperity, Prayer succeeds when the
most astute diplomacy fails.

Il. That peace and prosperity are
correlative blessings. ‘‘ Peace be
within thy walls and prosperity within
thy palaces” (ver. 7). When peace
takes its flight from a community or
nation, prosperity soon follows : one de-
pends upon the other, Nothing is pros-
perous with the man who is not at
peace. The prosperity of the wicked
is but temporary and apparent: it is
for the present life only. It sows the
seeds of discord and rebellion, and in-
volves thousands in suffering and adver-


sity. The man who strives to promote

peace is a benefactor to the race. We

should strive with others, as Lord

Bacon says, “as the vine.with the

olive, which of us shall bear the best

fruit ; not as the briar with the thistle,
which is the most unprofitable.”

‘6 A peace is of the nature of a conquest :
For there both parties nobly are subdued,
And neither party loses,” —Shakespeare.

Peace is the condition of a permanent
and increasing prosperity.

III. That peace and prosperity are
necessary for the cultivation of fra-
ternal intercourse and affection.
“For my brethren and companions’
sakes, I will now say, Peace be within
thee” (ver. 8). The unity of a nation
depends upon its loyalty to the Church
of God ; and the welfare of the Church
is the measure of a nation’s prosperity,
Let Jerusalem be secure and blest, and
the population generally will be secure
and happy. How often is the peace of
a home wrecked by the absence of love
and harmony. A drunken husband, a
scolding wife, a dissipated son, make sad
havoc of what might be the happiest of
homes, ‘“ As hatred by quarrels ex-
poses the faults of others, so love covers
them, except in so far as brotherly cor-
rection requires their exposure. The
disagreements which hatred stirreth up,
love allays; and the offences which are

327


Rese


FRALM CXXIT1L


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


Henne Tr Etna


usually the causes of quarrel it sees as
though it saw them not, and excuses
them. It gives to men the forgiveness
which it daily craves from God.”


«+ Love is the happy privilege of mind ;
Love is the reason of all living things,
A trinity there seems of principles,
Which represent and rule created life—
The love of self, our fellows, and our God,”
—Festus.


IV. That peace and prosperity
should be sought for the sake of the
Church of God. “ Because of the
House of the Lord our God I will seek
thy good” (ver. 9). In promoting the
good of the Church, we promote our
own best interests and those of ali
mankind. If we love God, we love His
Church. We stand very much in the
estimation of God according to our
worth to His Church. The character
of Eli is redeemed from much of its
weakness and blame-worthiness, when
we discover the tenderness and strength


a]


of his attachment. The brave old man
bore up- heroically when he was told the
astounding news from the battle-field,
that Israel was defeated and his own
sons were among the slain; but when
the messenger announced as the ciimax
of his doleful tidings, that the Ark of
God was taken, a deeper chord was
touched than that of the patriot and
the father, and, smitten to the heart, he
fell backward and expired; and the
sublimity that massed itself around the
close of the aged prophet’s career seemed
to overshadow the feebleness and imper-
fections of his previous life. God will
forgive a great deal to the man who
helps—in gifts, in work, in witness
bearing. in sacrifices, in suffering—-to pro-
mote the peace and prosperity of Zion.
Lessons :—1. Sin 1s the fruitful
source of war and poverty. 2. It is the
mission of Christianity to confer a unt-
versal and permanent peace. 3. He
prospers best who prays the most,


PSALM CXXIIL
INTRODUCTION.


Since the time when it was produced by its now unknown autho», when was not this hymn


of hope a favourite with God's people?


The pensive individual might use this form of medita-


tion and prayer with comfort and edification in view of his private distresses; the tuneful
company might probably beguile the way to or from Jerusalem with its plaintive cry ; and it


was fit to be chanted in the courts of Zion, in the name of the Chureh universal.


After the


afflicted pilgrims of Israel, in their sy«-9ssive generations, troubled Christians have repeated it
in all countries ; and it still describes the griefs and aspirations of the tampted servants of the
oe as, in their various degrees, they ‘‘climb the steep ascent to heaven,”—The Caravan and


emple,


THe HEAVENWARD GLANCE,
(Verses 1, 3.)


I Is directed to One who is en-
throned in glorious majesty. ‘ Unto
Thee lift I up mine eyes, O Thou that
dwellest in the heavens” (ver. 1). From
God’s footstool of hills and altars the
suppliant looks up into the face of the
Master. “The Lord’s throne is in
heaven: His eyes behold, His eyelids
try, the children of men” (Ps. xi. 4),
All the glories of the upper world circle
round that lofty throne, and borrow
their meaning and their lustre from
Him who sitteth thereon. To Him
cherubim and seraphim continually do


328


ery, “Holy, holy, holy ts the Lord of
Hosts.” The starry constellations render
Him ceaseless homage, and obey His
mandate, The heavenly intelligences
live in His smile, and rejoice in His
service. The splendour of the greatest
earthly monarch is extinguished by the
glory of the Heavenly King. And it is
to this glorious Ruler that man is per-


mitted to direct his inquiring gaze, and


ef whom he must derive his mightiest
elp.

II. Is directed to One who has
supreme government and power. “ Be-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY,» PSALMS.


POALM OXXKIE.





hold, as the eyes of servants look unto
the hand of their masters, and as the
eyes of a maiden unto the hand of. her
mistress” (ver. 2). The Divine Hand
—(1) Guides. The Eastern ruler, reti-
cent and sparing in words, directs his
attendants and agents by signs, and
they are his best servants and least
likely to incur sorrow who, not from
fear but love, are swift to notice and
obey the slightest movements of his
speaking hand. The heart must be in
the eyes that wait upon Jehovah.
** Leave to His sovereign sway
To choose and to command,
So shalt thou wondering own His way,
How wise, how strong His hand.”

(2) Supplies. Servants look to their
masters for sustenance (Prov. xxxi. 15).
So must we look to God for daily bread,
and for needed grace (Ps. cxlv. 16).
(3) Protects, If the servant meet with
opposition in his work, if he is wronged
and injured, he looks to his master for
protection. God is the shield of His
people, not like the martial shield cover-
ing @ portion of the person, but guard-
ing every part (Gen. xv. 1, Ps. v. 12).
When threatened by our spiritual foes,
we look to God for shelter and protec-
tion. (4) Corrects. God smites with
the same hand with which He guides
and protects. Harmer observes—“ As
a slave ordered by a master or mistress
to be chastised for a fault turns his
imploring eyes to that superior till the
motion of the hand appears which puts
an end to the punishment, so our eyes
are up to Thee, our God, till Thy hand
shall give the signal for putting an end


to our sorrows; for our enemies, O
Lord, we are sensible, are only executing
Thy orders, and chastening us accord-
ing to Thy pleasure.” It is wise for
us humbly to submit to the mighty
Hand of God. (5) Rewards, The hand
of the world is filled with tempting
rewards, but, like the fabled fruit of
Sodom, they turn into bitter dust and
ashes between the teeth of its votaries.
But the faithful servants of Jehovah
are rewarded with satisfying and end-
less pleasures.

III. Is directed to One who is rich
in mercy. ‘The Lord our God, have
mercy upon us” (ver. 2). Stung with
a sharp sense of guilt, oppressed with
the burden of multiplied troubles, and
conscious of utter helplessness, the
sinner turns @ piteous gaze to Him
whose mercy as well as righteousness
endures for ever. ‘Lord, in trouble
have they visited Thee; they poured
out a prayer when Thy chastening was
upon them” (Isa. xxvi. 16). The
severity of God is tempered with mercy.
“He delighteth in mercy.”

IV. Is persevering and triumphant,
“So our eyes wait upon the Lord our
God until that He have mercy upon
us” (ver. 2), The believing soul fixes
its eye upon the Divine mercy, and
keeps it there t// the gracious answer
ciues, We remain unblessed for lack
of steady fixedness in our faith. Per-
severing faith is ever triumphant.

Lessons :—1. Man must look heaven-
ward for all true help. 2. God never
disappoints the humble and sincere sup-
pliant.


Sarcasm THE CAusE OF PunGcENT SUFFERING,
(Verses 3, 4.)


L That sarcasm is a common
weapon of the enemies of God.
1. Jt is used by the worldly-minded.
“The scoruing of those that are at
ease.” When the Jews, who had re-
turned from captivity, were engaged in
rebuilding the Temple and city of Jeru-
salem, they were much tried by the
interference of certain dwellers in Sama-
ria, who seemed ready to declare them-


selves Israelites or Pagans, as it might
suit their interests; and when they
were rejected as unfit to engage in so
sacred a work, they did all they could
to hinder and annoy. They misrepre-
sented the motives of the Jews to the
Persian king, who then held rule over
Palestine; and poured contempt and
derision on the struggling patriots
(Comp, Ezra iv. 1-3; Neh. oe 20;


PRALM OXXIvV.





fv. 1-4). “In every succeeding age
the protesting and conservative faithful,
the heart and bone of the undying
Church, have been first courted, and
then bantered and baffled by their
worldly-minded and semi-heathen neigh-
bours. The world about and among
them, divided by rival idolatries, is
united in jealousy, hatred, and scorn of
the true Israel. The Samaritans will
join the working church, if in so doing
they may carnally benefit themselves;
but when their help, which would be
ruin, is not accepted, they unscrupu-
lously hinder, misrepresent, and de-
spise God’s children” (The Caravan and
Temple). 2. It ts used by the intellectu-
ally proud. “ And with the contempt of
the proud.” The scorner is deluded by
the most despicable vanity. He assumes
@ superiority of knowledge, of virtue,
and of authority over all others, of
which all the time he is most lament-
ably destitute. Pride of intellect is the
most dangerous form of self-deception,
and the most hopeless of reformation.


‘* He that is proud eats up himself. Pride is
His own glass, his own trumpet, his own
chronicle ;
And whatever praises itself but in
The deed, devours the deed in the praise.”


—Shakespeare.


It is easier to sneer than to argue
and to scoff at goodness, than to imi-
tate it,

II That sarcasm is the cause of
pungent suffering to God’s people.
“We are exceedingly filled with con-
tempt.” It is hard to bear the blame
of a wrong of which we are wholly


PSALM


HOMILBTIO COMMENTARY : PSALMS.





innocent, to have our holiest motives
misinterpreted, our failings exaggerated,
our best actions maligned, and our God
insulted and blasphemed. The suffer-
ing is increased when the injured one is
powerless to respond or retaliate, and
when a sensitive and passionate nature
is to be held in check while writhing
under a sense of injustice and cruelty.
When John Nelson, a vigorous and suc-
cessful lay-helper of Wesley, was im-
pressed as a soldier, he was subjected
to very aggravating insults from a pom-
pous young ensign, “It was very
difficult to bear,’ said the stalwart
Yorkshire mason, “ when I knew how
easily I could tie the head and heels
of the young stripling together.” But
suffering endured for Christ’s sake is a
very potent element in moral discip-
line, and in the perfecting of the Chris- ©
tian character.

III. That the suffering occasioned

by sarcasm is counterbalanced by the
consolations of the Divine mercy.
“O Lord, have mercy upon us.” The
mercy of God never fails’ From the
inhumanity of man the tortured soul
turns to the Divine mercy for comfort
and strength. It then learns that the
suffering occasioned by sarcasm is only
brief in duration, and that it is made
the means of attaining a higher righte-
ousness and an ampler reward (Rom.
viii. 28).

Lessons :—1. The holiest do not escape
the attacks of the adversary. 2. The bit-
terness of sarcasm ts its unscrupulous-
ness, 3, The Divine mercy should be
sought in every time of suffering,


CXXIV.


INTRODUCTION.


This jubilant song speaks of a sudden peril and narrow escape, and praises God for the


great deliverance,


We take it to be, according to its title, a Psalm of David, not a h
founded upon his character, writings, ‘and history. H avid, not a hymn


It is full of his force and fire, suits not a


few situations in which he shared the lot of Israel as herein described, and contains expressions


parallel with words occurring in compositions of which he is the undoubted author.


The


figures employed describe the situation of God’s people in any place or age, when they suddenly


find themselves overtaken by calamity as if in


them like the mountainous waves on a ship, wh


they seem to feel in their flesh the teeth of


the earthquake’s jaws, when sorrow bursts upon
en floods of ungodly men make them afraid, when
slander and malice, when they are unexpectedly


sr le = perplexities and difficulties, like the bird in the snare.—The Caravan and Temple.


HOMILETIC OOMMENTARY: PS8ALMS.


PEALM GXRIV.





THe InsaTIABLE VoRACITY OF THE WICKED.
(Verses 1-6.)


I. That the wicked are ever ready
to devour the righteous. ‘They had
swallowed us up quick” (ver. 3). ‘‘The
Lord hath not given us as a prey to
their teeth ” (ver. 6). 1. The righteous
are assailed with the anger of the wicked.
“ Men rose up against us; their wrath
was kindled against us” (vers. 2, 3).
The sight of virtue, however modest
and inoffensive, will inflame the anger
of the wicked. It is said of a certain
lady that when the mirror revealed the
wrinkles in her face she dashed it to
the ground in a fury. So is it with
the wicked ; they are enraged with the
transparency of a character in which
they see reflected the moral deformities
of their own. The anger of the wicked
is unreasonable, It springs from the
basest passions, and scorns all attempts
to control it. It is like a rudderless
vessel tossed about in a tempestuous
sea. The anger of the wicked recoils
upon themselves. Says the proverb,
“Anger is like ashes which fly back
in the face of him who throws them.”
Pope pithily observes, “To be angry is
to revenge others’ faults upon our-
selves,” 2. The anger of the wicked is
insatiable. ‘Then the waters had over-
whelmed us, the stream had gone over
our soul: then the proud waters had
gone over our soul” (vers. 4, 5). As
the advancing tide carries everything
before it, and sucks it back again into
the capacious throat of the stormy sea,
so the wicked pour out their anger like
a flood, and would fain swallow up the
righteous, on whom their fury is spent.


But the anger of the wicked, though
insatiable, is impotent to destroy the
good, It is limited by power Divine,
and may be made to minister to the
Divine praise (Ps. Ixxvi. 10).

II. That the Lord is the Delivere:
of the righteous. “The Lord was on
our side” (vers. 1, 2). More tha
ordinary help was needed on this occa
sion. The enemies were too fierce and
too formidable for any human power
to withstand, Jehovah champions the:
cause of the helpless; and when taa
last moment of extremity is come, Ife
strikes in for victory. There is n\
waste of power with Him. When the
sinner sinks down in despair, and gives
up all for lost, then the Lord stretches
forth His hand and saves, In this way
He demonstrates the salvation to be
Divine.

III. That thanksgiving should be
offered to the Lord for His delivering
power. “Blessed be the Lord, who
hath not given us as a prey” (ver. 6).
This is the leading sentiment of the
Psalm. Let God have all the glory.
He only is the Deliverer, and His help
is all-sufficient, The grateful heart
rejoices in rendering its praise to God :
and in proportion to the depth of distress
from which we are lifted up will be the
reality and fervour of our thankfulness.

Lessons :—1. Jf the wicked had their
way, every vestige of righteousness would
be utterly destroyed. 2. The power of
the wicked 1s divinely restricted. 3, The
righteous have always some cause for
grateful prarse.


Tue Sovuu’s Esoare From DANGER,
(Verses 7, 8.)


YL That the soul is surrounded by
many dangers. “ Asa bird, the snare
of the fowlers” (ver. 7). 1. Jt $s
ensnared by worldliness. One of the
most gigantic dangers against which
God’s people have specially to guard—
an enemy to all spirituality of thought
and feeling. 2. It is ensnared by selfish-


ness—a foe to all simple-hearted charity,
to all expansive generosity and Chris-
tian philanthropy. 3. Jt ts ensnared
by unbelief—the enemy of prayer, of
ingenuous confidence, of all personal
Christian effort. These are not ima-
ginary dangers. We meet them in
every-day life, They threaten us at
331


PSALM OXXV.





every point, and often have we to
lament over the havoc they make in our
hearts.

IL That the dangers surrounding
the soul are not invincible. “The
snare is broken, and we are escaped”
(ver. 7), 1. May be overcome by watch- ,
fulness. 2. By prayer. 3. By obedience.
And yet all our endeavours will fail, if
we depend on them rather than on God,
We cannot boast of our natural powers,
‘What pride has a bird in its wings
and feathers when once caught in the
silken thread, or fast in the golden
wire? However splendid their endow-
ments, only God can deliver souls from
evil, and keep them free.”

IIL That a way is divinely provided
for the escape of the soul from all
danger. ‘Our help is in the name of the
Lord, who made heaven and earth” (ver.
8). Here we learn that the nameof Jeho-
vah is the source of help, and that this
help is omnipotent. He “who made
heaven and earth” is infinite in re-
sources; all the forces of the universe


PSALM


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS. |





are within His view, and obedient te
His nod. “ We may not see any peril,
when our safety is to let our Saviour
see for us, We only see beautiful
shrubs and shadowy trees. He who is
on our side sees the foe behind them
in ambush, We only see the pleasing
bait on a bosom of shining grass and
showy flowers. Our constant Friend
sees there the hidden trap. We only
see the smooth turf inviting our feet,
tired of ruts and stones. He who is
yet for us sees the pit artfully con-
cealed. We only see the glancing water
and the smiling sky. Our Keeper sees
the hurrying squall, and cries, ‘‘ Beware!
take in sail” (Zhe Caravan and Temple).
As we look back upon the past, we see
that our help in extremity has come
from Jehovah. In Him, therefore, may
we place implicit confidence for the
future.

Lessons :—1l. Our greatest dangers
are those we least suspect. 2. The ut-
most vigilance does not always avail,


3. The only reliable help ts from God,


OXXV.


INTRODUCTION,


This Psalm belongs most probably to the times after the Captivity, and has been applied,
with apparent propriety, to the opposition which Sanballat the Horonite, Geshem the Arabian,
and Tobiah the Ammonite gave to the Jews while employed in rebuilding the walls of Jerusalem
and restoring the Temple. It is designed to encourage and comfort God’s people in all ages
against the plots and malice of their enemies. The three prominent themes are danger,
defence, and duty ; and every verse contains a word descriptive of those for whom the Songs
of Degrees were intended, and of the militant Church in every age and country. They are
called Israel, the good, the upright in their hearts, the righteous, the people of Jehovah, they
that trust in the Lord.


THE PrivILE@E AND SEouURITY OF THE Goon.
(Verses 1, 2.)


L. It is the privilege of the good to
trust in the Lord. “They that trust
in the Lord.” Man cannot trust him-
self; he is too conscious of personal
weakness and infirmity. He cannot
trust in others; he has been too often
disappointed and deceived. He finds


true rest, comfort, and peace by trusting -


in the Lord, the All-Perfect, the All-
Powerful, the All-Sufficient One. This
trust should be unhesitating and com-


plete.
332


“Thy God hath said ’tis good for thee
To walk by faith and not by sight:
Take it on trust a little while,
Soon shalt thou read the mystery right,
In the bright sunshine of His smile.”
—Keble.
IL It is the security of the good to
be guarded by the Divine Presence.
1, The Divine Presence is the guarantee
of stability. “Shall be as Mount Zion,
which cannot be removed, but abideth
for ever” (ver. 1). Zion was a moun-


tain, built upon and surrounded by


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PSALM OXXV.


a a


other mountains : to all natural appear.
ance it was immovable, But the spiritual
Zion is still more stable and enduring,
It rests on the mountains of unehal-
lengable truth, and is bound together by
the invisible bands of Divine safeguards,
2. The Divine Presence is an tmpreg-
nable defence, “ As the mountains are
round about Jerusalem, so the Lord is
round about His people” (ver. 2),
Jerusalem was fortified by nature; it
was situated on a rocky elevation, and,
with the exception of a small space to
the north, was encircled by deep valleys,
and these again were protected by an
amphitheatre of hills’ The situation
was such as to be easily rendered im-
pregnable ; but the most impenetrable
rampart was the Divine presence,
While this hovered over the city, it
defied the skill and prowess of the
mightiest armies; when it was with-
drawn, the hills and valleys were of no


avail; Jerusalem was laid low by the
hand of the Assyrian and the Roman.
Jehovah surrounds His people with an
unpierceable shield, He is above, be-
neath, around them ; they defy the fury
of the foe.

III. The security of the good is per.
petual. “From henceforth, even for
ever” (ver. 2). Mountains may crumble
and come to nought, and the rocks be
removed out of their place, but God’
promise to His obedient people cannot
be broken, nor will His protecting care
be withdrawn, (isa. liv. 10). While
they keep within it their fortress is im-
pregnable, and they can suffer no evil,
The security of the good reaches its
highest realisation in the heavenly Jeru-
salem.

Lessons :—l. There is no true good-
ness apart from trust in God. 2. Faith
tn God will give strength tn temptation
and wictory in conflict,


THe TYRANNY OF THE WICKED TRANSIENT,
(Verse 3.)


I That the rule of the wicked is
one of tyranny. ‘The rod of the
wicked upon the lot.” When Israel
reached its highest point of wealth and
influence under David and Solomon,
there were many who coveted possession
of its rich inheritance, The sceptres of
the Babylonians, Romans, and Moham-
medans often fell upon Zion, like the rod
of a merciless oppressor. ‘ What was
signified in their assaults and successes 1
The rod of sin, in the power and autho-
rity of the outward oppressor, often
answered to the ascendancy of iniquity
in the heart of Jerusalem. The preva-
lence of spiritual wickedness within
Israel attracted the earthly tyranny of
heathenism outside, God was working
in every instance, using the rods of
wickedness for the probation and pun-
ishment of those who ought to have
been righteous ; and He still chastises
sinners by means of sin; their own in-
viting wrath, and that of aliens inflicting
it—thus extirpating iniquity, purifying
and preserving the Church, and making
unfaithfulness and apostacy praise Him.”
—The Caravan and Temple.


IL That the tyranny of the wicked
is transient. “The rod of the wicked
shall not rest upon the lot of the
righteous.” The righteous may not
always escape the rod of the oppressor.
‘“‘They that will live godly in Christ
Jesus must suffer persecution.” The
mailed hand that smote shall not rest
on its victim, The triumph of the
wicked is short. The reign of terror
cannot be permanent. It wearies and
disgusts its most brutal agents. It
breeds a rebellion which erelong over-
throws its power. The fierceness of
tyranny consumes itself.

IiL That the unchecked tyranny of
the wicked would be a serious dis-
couragement to the righteous. “ Lest
the righteous put forth their hands unto
iniquity.” If the wicked had absolute
sway religion would soon become ex-
tinct. The professor would become
weary of a cause that involved unmiti-
gated suffering, and would be tempted
to give it up. His faith would become
demoralised, and he would cast off God,
thinking he was forsaken of Him. Ina
moment of despair he would adopt un

333


PSALM OXXV.
lawful means to rid himself of his
misery (Eccles. vii. 7). But the Lord


proportions trial according to the
strength of the sufferer, and never per-
mits it to remain longer than required
to accomplish a beneficent purpose (Isa.
x. 24-26).


Toe OBEDIENT AND THE


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALME.


Lessons:—l. The policy of the
wicked ts short-sighted, and defeats ttself.
2. True goodness cannot be crushed by
oppression. 3. The Lord knows the
right moment in which to deliver from
the tyranny of the wicked,


APOSTATE CONTRASTED,


(Verses 4, 5.)


L That the obedient are sustained
by a consciousness of personal recti-
tude. ‘Them that are upright in their
hearts” (ver. 4). The holy principle
imparts uprightness of heart and prompts
to uprightness of life. The way of holi-
ness is straightforward; there are no
windings and turnings in it. Job was
an upright man, one who feared God
and eschewed evil; and his conscious
integrity bore him up under the un-
paralleled trials that fell upon himself,
his family, and his possessions, When
the sense of right becomes dim in the
soul, the man gives way and is lost.

II. That the obedient enjoy the
Divine aid and blessing. 1. Their
goodness is Divinely strengthened. ‘ Do
good, O Lord, unto those that be good”
(ver, 4). Goodness intensifies the de-
sire for more; it claims the fulfilment
of the Divine promises ; it lays hold on
the power of God. “Truly God is
good to Israel, even to such as are of a
clean heart” (Ps, Ixxiii, 1), The rod of
the oppressor has been used as a trowel
by the wise Master Builder in restoring
and strengthening His spiritual temple.
2. Their very troubles shall result in

ce. “But peace shall be upon
Israel” (ver. 5). While those who
apostatise from God meet with punish-
ment and ruin, the faithful shall find
that their distresses will issue in a per-
manent and more hallowed peace. The
ealm that succeeds the furious tempest
is all the more soothing and refreshing
because of the terrors and tumults of the


previous storm. The prayer for peace
in Psalm cxxii. is here answered. This is
what comes of serving God, and trusting
in His defence, Peace is an unspeak-
able blessing to the empire, the church,
and the individual. Peace in its widest
range of meaning and blessing is the
special gift of Christianity (Eph. ii. 14).

III. That the apostates will be cer-
tainly punished. 1. By their own tor-
tuous policy. “As for such as turn
aside unto their crooked ways ” (ver. 5).
The unfaithful get into the spirit of the
world, and are warped into its crooked
and winding ways. They twist about
to conceal their base intentions, to ac-
complish their sinful purposes, or to elude
punishment for their crimes; but dis-
appointment, confusion, and misery over-
take them. “No sufferings in God’s
service are reasons for unfaithfulness
and apostacy. His grace makes us able
to drink whatever cup His providence
administers, At the worst, it is death ;
and then the worst is best.” 2. By an
act of Divine justice. ‘The Lord shall
lead them forth with the workers of
iniquity ” (ver. 5). As malefactors are
led to the place of execution. The jus
tice of God binds Him to punish sin,
The apostate will exchange the lot of the
righteous for the heritage of evil-doers.

Lessons :—1l. There is an eternal dis-
tinction between right and wrong. %
Jehovah ts the friend of the upright, and
the foe of every worker of iniquity. 3
The most consummate hypocrite will be
exposed and punished,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


POALM GXKXVI,





PSALM


CXXVIL -


INTRODUCTION.


This Psalm was penned with reference to some great deliverance of the people of God out of


bondage and distress, most likely their return out of Babylon in Ezra’s time.


It is ver,


beautiful and highly descriptive of the circumstances which it represents, The liberation of
the captive Hebrews was a type of the redemption of the human race, and the return to Zion
of such as improved their opportunity a figure of the salvation of believers,


DELIVERANCE A THEME FOR Joyous Sona,
(Verses 1-4.)


L. Because of the misery from which
{t emancipates. ‘The Lord turned
again the captivity of Zion” (ver. 1).
To a free and privileged people it isa
painful indignity to be robbed of liberty
and treated as slaves, Though the
captivity of the Jews in Babylon might
not be marked by any acts of cruelty, it
was suffering keen enough to feel they
were in bondage at all. But,lo! how
real, how degrading, how miserable is
the slavery of sin. To liberate from sin
is a Divine work. The Lozp must turn
again our captivity.

IL Because of its unexpectedness.
“We were like them that dream” (ver.
7). The deliverance was so unlooked
for, and came upon them with such a
surprise that it seemed more an illusion
than a reality. But when the full mean-
ing of the event dawned upon them,
their joy knew no bounds, A similar
incident is recorded by Livy, when the
Romans, having conquered Philip of
Macedon, restored liberty to all the
Grecian cities. The proclamation was
made by the herald in the midst of the
circus when a vast multitude of the
Greeks were assembled to witness the
Isthmian games. The people were so
stunned with the news that they could
scarcely believe their own ears. They
“‘were like them that dream.” But
when, at their request, the proclamation
was repeated, and the glad tidings thus
confirmed, they shouted and clapped
their hands with such vigour as showed
how heartily they appreciated the bless-
ing of liberty. The Lord often surprises
and gladdens His people with His
marvellous deliverances,


IIL Because of its reviving effects.
“Turn again our captivity, O Lord, as
the streams of the South” (ver. 4),
Accomplish our deliverance, as we! in
delivering of our brethren which are yet
remaining in Babylon, as in fulfilling of
ours, who yet lie languishing under
grievous burdens; that it may be such
a comfort and refreshing to us as water-
ing is to dry and desolate places, which
are refreshed and flourish again by the
coming in of running streams (Diodatt).
Drought and barrenness disappear under
the showers of Divine blessing ; and the
Church is quickened with new life and
hope.

IV. Because of the irrepressible
gladness it occasions. ‘‘ Then was our
mouth filled with laughter, and our
tongue with singing” (ver. 2). It was
like being in a new world. Our deliver-
ance came upon us with such a surprise,
that we could not contain ourselves. We
burst into a transport of rapture, and
laughed and sung in turns with delirious
joy. The heathen, who had rejoiced in
our captivity, noticed the gladness occa-
sioned by our deliverance, and acknow-
ledged its Divine source. ‘Then said
they among the heathen, The Lord hath
done great things for them” (ver. 3),
How much more is our deliverance from
sin and death the theme of endless re-
joicing and praise !

V. Because of its evidence of the
Divine mightiness. “The Lord hath
done great things for us; whereof we
are glad” (ver. 3). The predictions of
Isaiah and Jeremiah were fulfilled (Isa.
lii. 9, 10; Jer. xxxiii, 10, 11). The
‘Lord has more pleasure in exerting His

335


PSALM OXXVL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





power to deliver His people than in
creating a world, or in sustaining the
whole fabric of existing things.


‘owas great to speak a world from nought,
"Twas greater to redeem.”


Lessons :—1. God ts not unmindfel
of His captive people. 2. Deliverance
18 near when we least suspect tt. 3. Hvery
act of Divine deliverance t¢ an occasion
Sor joyous praise,


Sowina AND REAPING,
(Verses 5, 6.)


Sowing and reaping, tears and laugh-
ter, are never far asunder in a world like
this, The Jews who escaped the cap-
tivity of Babylon were not without their
trials. The joy of deliverance was
sobered by their toils and difficulties.
Their journey to Zion was long, weari-
some, and full of peril. When they
reached their beloved country it was to
find it a wilderness waste—Jerusalem
and its Temple in ruins. How great
must be the labour and sacrifice, and
how long the period before the city could
be restored and the Temple once more
erected. Pestered by violent enemies,
and invaded by bands of roaming rob-
bers, it was with trembling the Hebrew
husbandman ventured into the field and
hastily buried the grain, not knowing
whether he or the enemy would reap the
harvest.

It is ever so in every work we do
for God—the tears of anxious labour
give place to the gladness of success.
“Toiling, rejoicing, sorrowing; onward
through life we go,” Observe—

I. That the time of sowing is often
attended with anxiety and sorrow.
“They that sow in tears; he that goeth
forth and weepeth, bearing precious
seed.”

1. Because of the high estimate we have
formed aj the value of the seed sown,
“ Precious seed.” The teacher of God’s
holy Word, whether from desk or pulpit,
cannot be too strongly imbued with the
unspeakable value of the Divine treasure
which is thus put into earthen vessels,
The views that are sometimes caught of
the grandeur and appropriateness of the
Divine Word are overwhelming; and
the human vehicle trembles with fear
lest the truth should lose any of its
Divine force and meaning in tranemis-
sion—in the act of sowing.

2. Because of the totl involved in be-

336


coming possessed of the seed. The greatest
prizes of life are not obtained without
pains. The blessing that does the most
in elevating and perfecting the buman
soul, and in conferring the greatest good
on others, is secured only after numberless
failures and infinite efforts. No wonder
that is “precious” to man which has
cost him so much. The gardener values
the plant the more which has involved
80 much care in bringing to its present
state of perfection and beauty.

3. Because of the meagre results wt-
nessed in comparison with the effort put
forth. True worth is not always appre-
ciated. It is the fate of every man who
raises himself by his talents and industry
above the common level to be abused
and hated by those whom he has eclipsed,
Joseph was envied by his brethren,
and David was persecuted by Ais. Jere-
miah, the weeping prophet, who be
wailed the fallen fortunes of Jerusalem,
and whose fate was like Cassandra’s,
always to speak truth but never to be
believed, pathetically exclaimed, “QO my
mother, ‘thou hast borne me a man of
strife!” (Jer. xv. 10). And it is often
cause of bitterest sorrow to the Christian
worker that so few accept his testimony,
or understand the nature and drift of
his most unselfish labours,

IL That the time of reaping is one of
inexpressible joy. ‘Shall reap in joy:
Shall doubtless come again with rejoic-
ing, bringing his sheaves with him,”

1, Because it 4s the realisation of
patient hope. The man wk» blossoms
suddenly into a genius has often been
toiling and suffering for years in ob-
scurity, though assured in himself his
day of triumph would come. There is
a kind of prophetic instinct in great
minds that tells them of the bright pro-
spects in reserve for them, and whispers
to them the secret of their after great-


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: P8ALMS.


_—


ness. In early youth, Joseph saw by
auticipation his sheaf higher than all the
sheaves of the field, and the sun and
moon and the eleven stars bowing down
to the soles of his feet. Nelson, stung
by the neglect of his superiors to his
professional claims, said, “TI shall one
day have a gazette to myself”—and he
had, Raffaeile, in youth, triumphantly
exclaimed, “I, too, am a painter ;” and
posterity endorsed the estimate he had
formed of himself. It is with every true
work, as with every true worker : patient


PSALM





PSALM CXX Vii,





waiting and working will bear fruit in
joyous success.

2. Because tt bringa blessing to many
Sor whose welfare we have been painfully
concerned.

3. Because it ts an additional evidence
of the Divine faithfulness (Isa. lxi. 11),

Lessons :— Here is encouragement—
1, To the Christian thinker ; 2, the true
patriot ; 3, the faithful preacher ; 4, the
Sunday-School teacher; 5, the anxious
parent,


CXXVIL


INTRODUCTION,


Various considerations taken together require the opinion that this middle Song of


Degrees was composed by Solomon,


It suits the time of peaceful house-building and civil
settlement and progress during which he reigned.


It uses a word answering to his name


Jedidiah, meaning beloved of the Lord, and seems in connection with it to refer to the
promise made to him of wisdom, riches, honour, and length of days. ‘So He giveth His be-
loved sleep,” or to His beloved in sleep (2 Sam. xii. 25; 1 Kings iii. 5-15), It appears to
suggest that the claims of the ‘l'emple to the efforts of builders are superior to those of any
other intended erection, And it agrees with Solomon’s sententious style in his proverbs, The
ambitious may not boast of their own wisdom and might; and the prosperous may not
suppose they are self-sufficient, It is God who gives skill to plan and ability to execute. He is
the Source of blessing.—The Caravan and Temple.


Tun Happiness or Society DEPENDENT ON THE Divinz Buixssina.
(Verses 1, 2.)


L That family greatness should be
founded in the Divine blessing. ‘“ Ex-
cept the Lord build the house, they
labour in vain that build it” (ver. 1).
It has been the ambition of many to
found a family and to hand down a
name to posterity. The love of posthu-
mous fame is a mania with some men,
But if God be ignored and the law of
righteousness disobeyed, the most. co-
lossal efforts to raise a distinguished
and enduring house, though protected
by all the laws that the ingenuity of
the legislature can invent, will prove
futile. The history of the changes that
have taken place among the families of
some of our old nobility furnishes some
of the saddest ard most humiliating
revelations of social life,

Il. That the safety of civil society
fs secured by the Divine biessing.
“Except the Lord keep the city, the
watchman waketh but in vain ” (ver. 1).


VOL, IL,


It is sometimes a marvel with some how
the vast populations of our large cities
are fed: it is no less a marvel how
they are protected. Around the masses
of society is drawn the strong cordon
of Divine law, and over all there reat
the ample wings of the Divine protec-
tion. If the Lord were to withdraw
His presence, the vigilance of the police
and the utmost alertness of the civic
authorities would not avail. Society
would be unendurable, indeed impos-
sible, as at present constituted, but
for the action of our Divine Guardian,
How much less can a spiritual common-
wealth be reared or preserved without
the blessing of God !

III. That the prosperity of society
is dependent on the Divine blessing.

1. Labour ts useless without the Divina
blessing. “It is vain for you to rise
up early, to sit up late, to eat the bread
of sorrows” (ver. 2). Labour is the


337


PALM OXXVII.


prime necessity of man and the first
condition of prosperity. The most
princely fortunes have sprung from
toil, and are kept together by it, A
wealthy farmer when asked why he
should trouble himself to rise so early
as he did, replied—“If you want the
world you must rise and seek it, and
if you have the world you must rise
and keep it.” Often more anxious
labour is involved in taking care of
this world’s goods than was spent in
first acquiring them, And yet no amount
of labour, no amount of parsimonious
care will suffice, if God withhold His
blessing.
“Except the Lord conduct the plan,
The best concerted schemes are vain,
And never can succeed ;
We spend our wretched strength for
nought ;
But if our works in Thee be wrought,
They shall be blest indeed.”


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





2. Rest is a Divine gift. “For se
He giveth His beloved sleep” (ver. 2).
Sleep is half meat; it is the most bene-
ficent medicine of wearied and suffering
humanity. “The sleep of a labouring
man is sweet, whether he eat little or
much; but the abundance of the rich
will not suffer him to sleep” (Eccl. v.
12): if he eat much when he ought to
eat little, or if his plenty be a load
upon his conscience, or if his godless
puzzle day and night be how to retain.
The man loved of God may lie down in
peace and sleep. Prosperity brings no
joy to him who cannot sleep.

Lessons :—1. Jehovah ts the founder,
defender, and preserver of the family, the
State, and the Church. 2. The happiness
of society rests, not on the wisdom and
toil of its most gifted members, but om
the Divine blessing.


CHILDREN THE Girt or Gon
(Verses 3-5.)


L That children are the gift of God.
“Lo, children are an heritage of the
Lord ; and the fruit of the womb is
His reward” (ver. 3). This view is fre-
quently and emphatically stated (Gen.
xxx. 2,18; xxxiii 5; xlviii. 9; Deut.
vii. 13; Prov. xix. 14). The gift of
children is an evidence of the Divine
favour. They are to be welcomed with
joy and affection, and not to be regarded
as an encumbrance and a burden. The
childless pair, whatever worldly affluence
they possess, feel that one of heaven’s
choicest gifts is withheld, It is a most
unenviable home, if home it can be called,
where a child is unwelcome,

IL That children are to be firmly
and judiciously trained. ‘As arrows
are in the hand of a mighty man ; 80 are
children of the youth ”(ver. 4), They
are a sacred trust and solemn responsi-
bility: not to be weakly fondled or
foolishly spoilt; but to be wisely,
kindly, and strictly discipiinea te
obedience and duty, ‘‘ Parents must
not trifle with their children, like idiots
playing with sharp tools; but as the
bowman straightens and polishes his
arrow, gives it a solid point and wings

338


it with proper feathers, they must
educate their sons and daughters in the
name, and with the help of the Re
warder of them that diligently seek
Him.” The arrows that are not pre-
pared and directed when in the hand,
may, when they are gone abroad into
the world and all parental training is too
late, prove arrows in the heart.

III. That a large family is a source
of domestic joy. ‘‘ Happy is the man
that hath his quiver full of them” (ver.
5). The parents live over again the
happy period of their youth in the
gambols and laughter, and the indescrib-
able ‘little ways” of their children. It
is a dismal house where there is a silent
nursery. It may be scrupulously clean
and faultlessly prim, but there is a
strangely felt absence of life, of voice, of
genial humanity. When the father of
John Wesley received his son unscathed
from the window of the burning pareon-
age, he exciaimed, ‘* Come, neighbours.


let us kneel down; let us give thanka


unto God: He has given me all my
eight children ; let the house go, I am
rich enough.” The good children of a
large family help one another, and are »


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





source of comfort and support to their
aged parents.

IV. That children are the strength
and defence of the home. “ They shall
not be ashamed, but they shall speak
with the enemies in the gate” (ver. 5),
The parents shall courageously plead
their cause in courts of judicature, which
were held at the gates of cities, not fear-
ing to be crushed by the might of their
adversaries, as weak and helpless persons
frequently are, Or, as some understand
the words, the children shall not be
ashamed to plead for their parents in the
gates, but will be ready at all times to
appear for them, to answer any charge,
and to vindicate them in their persons,


PSALM OXXVIIL





their good name, or their property. The
Chinese have a proverb—“ When a son
is born into a family, a bow and arrow
are hung before the gate.” In Easterm
books sons are spoken of as the arrows
of their fathers. People fear to offend a
family where there are many sons, lest
the arrows should be sent at them. The
training of children has a reflex influence
for good upon parents. Many a hint is
unconsciously given as to “training up
& parent in the way he should go.”
Lessons :—1. A large family has tts
eares, but tthasalso tts special rewards, 2.
The training of children ts also a training
of the parents, 3. Children may become
the greatest blessing, or the greatest curse.


PSALM OXXVIIL


INTRODUCTION,


This, like the former, is a Psalm for families. In that, we were taught that the prosperity of
our families depends upon the blessing of God: in this, we are taught that the only way to


obtain that blessing which will make our families comfortable, is to live in the fear of Go
It is thought by many to have been sung at the marriages of the


in obedience to Him.


and


{araclites, as it is a part of the matrimonial service used in modern times.


Toe BLESSEDNESS OF THE Goon.
(Verses 1-6.)


I That the blessedness of the good
is the result of a holy life. 1. A holy
life begins in the fear of God. “ Blessed
is every one that feareth the Lord” (ver,
1). Not the shuddering fear of con-
scious guilt. Not the fear of the hypo-
crite, or the formalist. But the fear
that arises out of a profound reverence
and love of God. This fear of the Lord
is the beginning of wisdom. 2, A holy
life ts maintained by constant obedience.
“That walketh in His ways” (ver. 1).
As Comber remarks—“ He only truly
fears God who is afraid to displease Him
by forsaking the paths of His command-
ments.” Loving fear is the strongest
motive to obedience ; and obedience is
the practical manifestation of true piety.
That is a happy home indeed where the
fear of God is the regulating principle.

II. That the blessedness of the good
consists in a happy and contented
livelihood. ‘‘For thou shalt eat the
labour of thine hands ;: happy shalt thou
be, and it shall be well with thee” (ver.


2). Some men labour and worry, and
all in vain, They are never any better
off, and they have no enjoyment in the
fruit of their labour, But the good man,
though not exempt from toil, is happy in
his daily work, and enjoys what he earns,
The fruit of his labour is not taken from
him and possessed by others, as was
threatened to the disobedient Israelites
(Deut. xxviii. 33, 38-40; Lev. xxvi. 16).
“Noble, upright, self-denying toil,”
wrote Hugh Miller, “who that knows
thy solid worth and value would be
ashamed of thy hard hands, thy soiled
vestments and thy obscure tasks, thy
humble cottage and hard couch and
homely fare!” Religion gives dignity
to labour, and transmutes what was
originally a part of man’s curse into a
blessing.

III. That the blessedness of the good
is found in the joys of domestic life.
“Thy wife shall be as a fruitful vine by
the sides of thine house: thy children
like olive plants round about thy table”

339


PSALM OXXTX,





(ver. 3). The woman pictured in the
Bong is not to be seen lounging at the
door, an idle gossip, with something to
say to every passer-by, but attends to
her duties in the interior of the dwell-
ing, and, like her husband, fears the
Lord (Prov, ix. 13, 14; Amos vi 10),
The clinging vine is a symbol of attach-
ment, grace and fruitfulness, dressing
the props and walls to which its curling
tendrils hold with leaves that shade the
verandah and cool the house, and en-
riching them with clusters of juicy fruit
that maketh glad the heart of man, The
pious and loving wife, the screen, adorn-
ment, and crown of the God-fearing hus-
band, who is her support and strength,
so smiles and speaks and acts that the
master is happy everywhere because most
happy when athome. The children are
like olive-plants—vigorous, able to stand
alone and separate, bright with the pro-
mise of goodly fruit and rivers nf oil.
Rooted to the spot, glad to stay at home,
“round about thy table,” loving and
dutiful, they shall abundantly delight
thy heart.— Zhe Caravan and Temple.


PSALM


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY ; PSALMS.


— ee


IV. That the blessedness of the good
is augmented by witnessing the ad-
vancing prosperity of Zion. “ Behold,
that thus shall the man be blessed,” &c,
(vers, 4-6), The good man is not only
blessed by the Church, he is also a bless-
ing to it. He becomes identified with
all its interests ; mourns over its reverses
and rejoices in its success. A happy
home is a blessing both to the Church
and to the nation. “It is a circle of
blessing, the Lord, the saint, and the
neighbour ; closet prayer, family wer-
ship and temple service ; the Home, the
Church and the State. Like the cloud
falling upon the earth, the river ranning
to the sea, and the ocean rising to the
sky, it is a perpetual round of fertility,
beauty, and thanksgiving, regarded with
complacence by the radiant Artificer
enthroned in the heavens.” The chief
concern of the good is the peace and
prosperity of Israel.

Lxssons :—1. There ts no blessedness
apart from goodness, 2. None are
excluded from this blessedness—ét ts for
“every one that feareth the Lord.”


OX xXIx,


InTRODUCTION,


This Psalm was written after the Captivity, and contains a reference to the many tribula
tions which the Jews passed through from their youth—i.e., the earliest part of their history,—


their bondage in Egypt.


The intent of the Psalmist is to comfort the Church in affliction, and


to stir her up to glorify God for His providence over her, always for her good, and bringing her
enemies to confusion and sudden ruin.—A. Clarke,


THE AFFLICTIONS OF THE GoopD,
(Verses 1-4.)


I. That the good in all ages have
been greatly afflicted.

1. The afflictions of the good are mant-
fold. “Many atime have they afflicted me
from my youth” (ver. 1). The Jews had
been oppressed by Pharaoh in Egypt, by
the tribes north of the wilderness, by the
Canaanites, Philistines, and Ammonites,
by the Assyrians and Babylonians; and
now they were harassed by the time-serv-
ing Samaritans, So has it been in all
ages. The Church has suffered from a
variety of enemies—from the reigning
powers for the time being, from the envy

340


and hatred of unbelievers, from the false-
ness and apathy of professed friends,

2. The afflictions of the good are
marked by unusual severity. “The
plowers plowed upon my back; they
made long their furrows” (ver. 3). The
sufferings of God’s people have been
unparalleled, They have been torn as
the husbandman tears the ground with
his ploughshare. Many martyrs for the
truth have been “first lashed with the
terrible scorpion and loaded whips ; and
then, as they hung on the little horse,
torn with the hooked rake, which lite.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; PSALMS,





rally dug deep, long furrows in their
bleeding and quivering flesh.” But
there is One in whom we see all Israel,
and in whose sufferings the words of the
text received a remarkable fulfilment.
The incarnate Son of God gave His
back to the smiters (Isa, 1. 6).

II. That the good have always sur-
vived the cruelty of their tormentors.
“Yet they have not prevailed against
me” (ver. 2). The combined powers of
evil have not been able to destroy the
Church. A Swedish captain has recently
invented a fire-proof dress, the wearer of
which is enabled to walk up and down
in the fiercest furnace without being in-
jured. So the people of God have out-
lived the fiery assaults of the wicked,
because clothed in “he unconsumable
panoply of the Divine protection. The
afflictions of the Church have tended to
its purity and strength. When Ignatius,
Bishop of Antioch (a.p. 107), was taken
to Rome and cast to the lions, he ex-
claimed, ‘‘I am God’s wheat, and must
be ground by the teeth of the wild
beasts that I may be found His pure
bread.” The Church of God is uncon-
querable. “It is,” says Trapp, “as the
palm tree, which spreadeth and springeth


PSALM OXXIE,








up the more it is oppressed: as the
bottle or bladder that may be dipped
but not drowned: as the oak that
sprouts out the thicker from the maims
and wounds it receiveth,”

IIT. That the afflictions of the good
are Divinely limited.

1. Zhe character of God is a pledge of
timely deliverance. “The Lord is righte-
ous” (ver. 4). As His people become
worldly and unfaithful, He permits them
to be afflicted; but when they cry to
Him in penitence and faith, he delivers
them out of their distresses, They suf-
fer not a moment longer than may be
necessary for their more complete conse-
cration to God and holiness.

2. The power of the wicked to harm ts
limited. “He hath cut asunder the
cords of the wicked” (ver. 4), Evil is
not omnipotent, and it is restrained and
defeated by the strong hand of God.
The very instrumentalities by which the
wicked sought to destroy the rising
Church have been used to frustrate their
cruel designs, and to effect their own ruin.

Lessons :—1l. The holiest are not ex-
empt from suffering. 2. Affliction may
prove a blessed moral discipline. 3. The
good are Divinely rescued from trial.


Tae LamMENTABLE Fate or THE CHUROH’s ENEMIES.
(Verses 5-8.)


L They are signally defeated.—
Let them all be;” or, “They shall all


be confounded, and turned back that hate -


Zion” (ver. 5). Though advancing in for-
midable and threatening array, they shall
be thrown into confusion and driven into
ignominious retreat. They are engaged
in an unequal conflict. They are allowed
to gain some unimportant conquests,
and while full of boastful daring, and
reckoning upon certain and final victory,
they are “ melted like snow in the glance
of the Lord” (Job xxxiv. 20, 21; Ps.
Ixx. 2).

II. Their wicked life-purpose is abor-
tive. ‘‘ Let them be as the grass upon
the house tops, which withereth,” &,
(vers. 6, 7). On the flat roofs of Kastern
houses it is not uncommon to see grass
growing, but for want of proper nourish-


ment and soil, it cannot grow to maturity,
and speedily withers away. It is sad to
see one’s life-purpose suddenly collapse
and hopelessly perish. But so must it be
with the designs of the wicked, after a
lifetime of plotting and toiling ; so must
it be with the wicked themselves (Isa.
xxxvii. 27).

III. Theyremainunblessed. “Neither
do they which go by say, The blessing
of the Lord be upon you: we bless you
in the name of the Lord” (ver. 8). An
emblem of Israel blessed by the Lord is
a wide field of thickly growing corn
stirred by gentle breezes under a ripen-
ing sun. As the labourers, humming
or shouting snatches of cheery song,
bind the sheaves and earry load after
load away, they receive friendly saluta-
tions from people passing by (Ruth

341


FOAL OXEX,


li. 4) The thought is ridiculous of
house-top harvesting occasioning such
benedictions Equally out of question is
it for the Church’s adversaries to be
blessed by God or man. (The Caravan
and Temple.) It is impossible for
nature to furnish an emblem that can
sufficiently express the utter confusion,
disaster, and misery that will certainly


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSAL US.





overtake the enemies of God. It is the
highest aggravation of their sufferings
that they remain for ever unblest.

Lessons :—1. A life of sin ts a serics
of disappointments and defeats, 2. The
enemies of God cannot escape His righteous
vengeance, 3, The haters of Zion ignore
the hope of salvation, which st alone
offers,


PSALM OXXX


INTRODUCTION.


The Psalm before us, like the other pilgrim-songs, implies circumstances of bitterness ; but
it is, as in truth is each of them, more than a cry occasioned by outward hardship and danger.
The sixth of the seven penitential Psalms, so atyled by way of eminence, and not with a mean-
ing that there are no other Psalms of penitence—this is intensely spiritual. It is at oncea
soliloquy, a petition, a statement, and an exhortation, a hymn for private use and public
service, the voice of the soul and of the congregation, The former half is an address to the
Lord : the latter is, first a profession of hope and expectation in His mercy, and then an
argued invitation to the mind and course described as happily adopted. Throughout it is the
language of deep distress on account of sin, a prayer for compassion and forgiveness, and am
expression of trust in the promises and provisions of God's leve.—The Caravan and Temple


Dz PRoFuUNDIsS.
(Verses 14.)


L That a consciousness of sin sinks
the soul into depths of penitential
sorrow. The Psalmist is penetrated
with a sense of personal defilement, and
measuring sin according to the standard
of Divine purity, is plunged as into an
abyss of humiliation and despair, “ If
thou, Lord, shouldest mark iniquities, O
Lord, who shall stand?” The light
makes manifest the darkness, the beau-
tiful in nature reveals by contrast the
ugly and repulsive ; so an exalted purity
brings out the loathsomeness and de-
formity of sin. Better to be over-
whelmed with a genuine sorrow for sin
than with the wrath of God that will
certainly overtake the impenitent (2
Thess, i. 7-9).

II. That from the depths of peni-
tential sorrow the soul cries earnestly
for pardon. “Out of the depths have
I cried unto thee, O Lord. Lord, hear
my voice ; let Thine ears be attentive to
the voice of my supplications ” (vers, 1,
2). The distressed soul finds relief in
cries and tears. The heart would break
if it found no outlet for its pent-up grief.
In the darkest, deepest sorrow, it is our

342


privilege to cry to God and to be heard,
To cry to God in sorrow for sin is to
pray to be delivered from it: it is an
appeal for mercy. It is only when we
taste the bitterness of sin, only when we
are surrounded by its black horrors and
the terrible vengeance it merits, that we
are truly in earnest in pleading for for-
giveness. The wail of despair is trans-
formed into a song of hope when assured
that pardon is attainable. “There is
forgiveness with Thee.” But for this,
the soul might cry in vain: answered
only by its own mocking echo ; despair
recoiling upon yet deeper despair.

III. That the penitent soul seeks
pardon in order to serve God accept-
ably. “But there is forgiveness with
Thee, that Thou mayest be feared” (ver.
4). True religion is justly defined as
the fear of God, Not the cowering terror
of the slave, not the sullen, pouting fear
of the culprit, not the half-hope and half-


dread of the awakened sinner, but the


loving, reverential, obedient fear of the
forgiven and accepted child. Pardon is
absolutely necessary for acceptable and
useful Christian work. God forgives,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : PSALMS.





not simply to deliver from the depths of -


penitence, not to give license for indul-
gence in wickedness; but to create a
moral fitness for exalted and extensive
aervice (Psalm li. 12, 13).

Lessons :—1. From the deepest depths





of misery the ery of penitence reaches the
heights of heaven. 2. The more vid
our sense of sin, the more appreciative are
we of the blessing of forgiveness, 3, The
Lord delivers from sin that we may serve
Him with loving fear.


THE Horr or REDEMPTION,
(Verses 5-8.)


L Is based on the revelation of the
Divine Word. “I wait for the Lord,
my soul doth wait, and in His Word do
I hope” (ver. 5). Hope must have a
solid foundation to rest upon, else it is
mere dreamy conjecture, the rosy bloom
of fancy that is shrivelled up by the
first rude blast of trial. The Word of
God is the foundation of the soul’s hope
of redemption; and that redemption is
the theme which pervades every page of
revelation. The word translated to wait,
properly signifies the extension of a cord
from one point to another. The Word of
God is one point, the soul the other;
and the extended cord between both is
the earnest believing desire of the soul.
This desire, this hope, strongly extended
from the heart to God, is the active
energetic waiting which God requires
end which will be successful. God
Jever disappoints: His Word never fails.
Myriads have looked to Him for re-
demption, and not in vain.

IL Rouses the most passionate long-
ings of the human soul. “My soul
waiteth for the Lord more than they
that watch for the morning: I say,
more than they that watch for the
morning” (ver. 6). It is an emphatic
repetition, indicating that the whole
soul is waiting and watching for re-
demption. “The priest staying in the
temple for the moment of the early
oblation, the warder on the tower look-
ing for the first streak of day, the be-
nighted traveller unable to take another
step till the long darkness shall be over,
the sick man sleeplessly longing for the
family to be astir, the mariner wanting
the light that he may examine the
doubtful coast,— not one of them 80
earnestly hopes for the morning which
will end his watch as my soul waits


for the Lord, who forgives repented
iniquity.” The nearer a great blessing
appears to us the more eager are we to
possess it, The blessing of redemption
is worthy of the most ardent and
patient hope.

IIL Is encouraged by reflecting on
the amplitude of the Divine mercy.
‘Let Israel hope in the Lord: for with
the Lord there is mercy, and with Him
is plenteous redemption” (ver. 7). The
first conception of redemption was the
offspring of the Divine pity and com-
passion. The Lord yearns to deliver
man from sin: He delighteth in mercy.
(Compare Jer, xxxi. 20; James v. 11;
Exod. xxxiv, 6, 7). There can be no
true peace, no moral safety, without
pardon. How great and condescending
is that act of Divine mercy by which
the sinner is pardoned, and his soul,
wearied and distracted with long and
anxious waiting, is set at rest and filled
with unutterable peace !

IV. Is strengthened by the assur-
ance of the completeness of redemp-
tive blessings. ‘And He shall redeem
Israel from all his iniquities” (ver. 8),
It is no temporary, or indistinct, bless-
ing that is so anxiously sought ; it is
nothing less than a complete deliverance
from all iniquity. Redemption from
sin includes redemption from all other
evils : it is the greatest and most perfect
work of God, and bestows the most
exalted blessings on man. “A sacred
presence in this Psalm asks the con-
science a succession of important ques-
tions. Have you been in depths of
distress on account of sin? Did you cry
to the Lord to deliver you from the
deep waters? Have you given up all
thought of escaping by your own right
eousnessy Is all your appeal to God’s

343


PSALM OXXXI.


redeeming mercy? Are you contentedly
waiting and watching till He shall give
you His promised blessing? Is your
heart set upon the full daylight of holi-
ness to the Lord #”


PSALM


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


ee (ee





Lessons :—1. Redemption ts a Divina
work. 2. The most degraded soul ts not
beyond the hope of recovery. 3. Redemp-
tion must be eagerly and prayerfully
sought.


CXXXL


INTRODUCTION.


“A Song of Degrees.” See introduction to Psalm exx. In the superscription this Psalm is


ascribed to David, and althongh it is so short, it contains marks of its Davidie origin.


“* This


short Psalm,” says Perowne, ‘‘ one of the most beautiful in the whole Book, assuredly breathes


David’s spirit.


A childlike simplicity, an unaffected humility, the honest expression of that


humility as from a heart spreading itself out in conscious integrity before God—this is what
we find in the Psalm, traits of a character like that of David.”


Asprcts AND Expressions oF HoMILITY.


We have here—


I, Humility in certain of its
features. ‘‘ Lord, my heart is not
haughty, nor mine eyes lofty: neither
do I exercise myself in great matters,
or in things too high for me.” Here are
three negative features of humility.

1. The absence of the proud heart,
“Jehovah, my heart is not haughty.”
In the heart of the truly humble man
all high thoughts of self-righteousness,and
all notions of self-reliance, are effectually
abased, He is “poor in spirit,” conscious
of spiritual poverty and deep need, and
consequently humble before God.

2. The absence of the “high look.”
“ Nor mine eyes lofty.” Hengstenberg :
“Pride has its seat in the heart, and be-
trays itself especially in the eyes.” (Com-
pare Ps, xviii. 27; ci. 5; Prov. vi. 16,
17.) The man of proud heart will look
disdainfully upon his fellow-man, as the
Pharisee did upon the Publican, in the
parable of our Lord. That Pharisee
may fairly be regarded as an illustration
of spiritual pride, and the Publican of
sincere humility.

3. The absence of ambitious projects.
“Neither do I exercise myself in great
matters, or in things too high for me,”
The marginal reading is the correct one,
The Psalmist did not strive with or after
things that lay beyond his power or his
sphere. (1.) He did not seek to know
the mysteries of the humanly unknow-
able. Even if we could “ understand
all mysteries and all knowledge,” that
would not give rest to our soul. (2.) He

344


did not attempt to do that which was
beyond his power, Rest is not attained
through the efforts of daring and
‘vaulting ambition.”
“T would not have the restless will
That hurries to and fro,
That seeks for some great thing to do,
Or secret thing to know ;
I would be treated as a child,
And guided where I go.”
—A, L, Waring.
Il. Humility as connected with con-

tentment and rest. “Surely I have
behaved and quieted myself as a child
that is weaned of his mother; my soul
is even as a weaned child.” Perowne’s
note is excellent: “J have stilled my
soul, t.e., the pride and passions which
were like the swelling waves of an angry
sea. The word is used in Isa, xxviii. 25,
of leveling the ground after the clods
have been broken by the plough. The
E. V. uses ‘ behaved ’ in the old sense of
restraining, managing, as for instance in
Shakespeare’s T’tmon of Athens, ‘ He did
behave his anger ere ’twas spent.’ The
next two clauses of the verse would be
more exactly rendered :—

‘As a weaned child upon his mother,’
(te, as he lies resting upon his mother’s
bosom) ; ‘ As the weaned child (I say),
lies my soul upon me,’ The figure is
beautifully expressive of the humility of
a soul chastened by disappointment. As
the weaned child when its first fretful-
ness and uneasiness are past no longer
cries, and frets, and longs for the breast,
but lies still and is content, because it is
with its mother ; so my soul is weaned


ATOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.








from all discontented thoughts, from all
fretful desires for earthly good, waiting
in stillness upon God, finding its satis-
faction in His presence, resting peace-
fully in His arms.

“« The weaned child,’ writes a mother,
with reference to this passage, ‘ has for
the first time become conscious of grief.
The piteous longing for the sweet
nourishment of his life, the broken sob
of disappointment, mark the trouble of
his innocent heart: it is not so much
the bodily suffering; he has felt that
pain before, and cried while it lasted ;
but now his joy and comfort are taken
away, and he knows not why. When his
head is once more laid upon his mother’s
bosom, then he trusts and loves and
rests,but he has learned the first lesson of
humility, he is cast down, and clings with
fond helplessness to his one friend,’”

And M. Henry: ‘Thus does a gra-
cious soul quiet itself under the loss of
that which it loved, and disappointment
in that which it hoped for, and is easy
whatever happens, lives, and lives com-
fortably, upon God and the covenant-
grace, when creatures prove dry breasts.”
Pride is never satisfied, never restful, but
fretful and discontented. Humility is
content with the Divine allotments, and
restful in the Divine love. The child-
like spirit is simple, docile, modest, and
lowly. Such a spirit was the Psalmist’s,

Ill. Humility growing into hope.
“ Let Israel hope in the Lord from hence-
forth and for ever.” The ancient Hebrews
were animated bygreat hopes. But greater
and more exalted are the hopes of the
Christian. He hopes forcomplete triumph
over evil, for utter purity of heart, for the
vision of God, for transformation into
His image, &c, ‘“ We are saved by hope.”
But mark the characteristics of this hope.

1. tts Divine. ‘Hope in the Lord.”
The Christian’s hope rests not in any-
thing transient, changeable, or limited ;
but in the eternal, unchangeable, infinite,


PSALM OXEXL


holy God, A true hope resting in Him
maketh not ashamed.”

2. lt is common. “Let Israel hope
in the Lord.” It was not the exclusive
privilege of the poet, the priest, the pro-
phet, or any oneclass. The whole nation
is here called to exercise it, and rejoice in
it. In the inspiring and glorious hope of
the Christian believer all men may share,

3. Zt ts present. ‘ From henceforth,”
If we have not cherished this hope
hitherto, we may begin todo so at once.
We should cherish it at all times and
under all circumstances,

4. It ts perpetual. ‘ From hence.
forth, and for ever.” Hope, like faith
and charity, is an abiding thing. Earth
and time cannot exhaust the hope of
the Christian. His being will eternally
rest in God. His expectation will be
directed to Him for ever. In heaven it
self the child of God will have much te
hope for; further discoveries of the perfec
tion and glory of God, and further growtk
of the faculties and capacities of his owr
being, will for ever invite him onward,

Now, this glorious hope grows out of
humility. The humble soul claims no
thing, yet hopesfor everything, from God,
Humility is the root of all Christian
graces,


“ Humility, that low, sweet root,
From which all heavenly virtues shoot,”
—WMoore.


Humility is becoming in us, agreeable ta
others, and acceptable to God. Prayer.
fully and diligently let us cultivate it,


“ The bird that soars on highest wing
Builds on the ground her lowly nest;
And she that doth most sweetly sing
Sings in the shade when all things rest
In lark and nightingale we see
What honour hath humility.


«6 The saint that wears heaven's brightest
In deepest adoration bends; [crows
The weight of glory bows him down
The most when most his soul ascends 5
Nearest the throne itself must be
The footstool of humility.” —Montgomery.


Exempiary Huvumi.iry.
(Verse 1.)


If good men cannot always use this
language of David, it is their prevailing
desire to be able to do so; and if at
auy time they have been “exalted above


measure,” like Hezekiah, they will
humble themselves for the pride of thedz
hearts (2 Chron. xxxii. 26).
L The humility he displayed.
845


PALM OXXXit,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : PSALM








1. This is a grace of the Spirit—the
fruit and product of inward religion,
Humility is not a plant that grows in
Nature’s garden. Of all the evils in
our corrupt nature there is none more
natural than pride: this is the grand
wickedness—self-exaltation in our own
or others’ esteem. St, Augustine truly
said: “That which first overcame
man is the last thing he overcomes.”
Nothing can effectually overcome it but
Divine grace. If we imagine that we
can humble our own proud hearts by our
own strength, we shall be disappointed.
That pride, which is the curse of our
nature, has struck its roots too deeply
within us for any human arm to pluck
it thence. We are not able to plant a
single grace in our hearts, nor to pre-
serve it when planted ; but every spirit-
ual good is God’s gift, a gift as freely
bestowed as the rain that comes down
from heaven, But though we are thus
weak and worthless in ourselves, the
Holy Spirit generally works His pur-
poses of grace by the use of means, and
through these He allows and commands
us to seek His grace. He is ready to pour
down His richest spiritual gifts, d&c.

2, It ts peculiarly acceptable in the
sight of God. The Lord “ giveth grace
unto the humble.” He gives grace to
make them humble,
humble, and then honours the grace
He has given. There is no mansion
He loves so well as a sinner’s humble
heart. (Comp. Isa. lvii, 15.) “ He giveth
grace to the humble;” pours it out plen-
tifully upon devout and humble hearts.
His sweet dews and showers of grace
slide off the mountains of Pride, and fall
on the low valleys of humble hearts to
make them fertile and prosperous. The
law of God’s procedure is, that ‘“‘ before
honour is humility.” He pours the oil
of grace into none but broken hearts,
God first humbles, then exalts, So David,
Abigail, Moses, Luther. As the lower


to keep them .


the ebb the higher the tide, so the
measure of our humility is often the
measure of our exaltation : the lower the
foundation of our humility, the higher
is the crown of our glory (1 Pet. v. 6).

3. This grace has shone most brightly
in the most eminent saints. Specify
Moses and Elias under the Law; Isaiah
and Daniel among the Prophets; and
John the Baptist and Paul under the
Gospel. But Christ is the great
Exemplar and Pattern.

IL Some of the methods in which
the possession of this grace will be
shown and attested.

1. It will regulate our inquiries after
truth, “Ido not exercise myself in
things too high for me,”

2. It will be seen in the exercises
of devotion. The Pharisee stood and
boasted ; the publican smote upon his
breast and prayed.

3. It will prepare us to receive the
principles and doctrines of the Gospel as
the basis of our acceptance with God, It
led Paul to a simple dependence upon
Christ — renouncing everything else.
(Comp. Phil. iii 4-9.) He neither de-
pends upon his graces as a Christian,
his attainments as a man, his labours
as an Apostle, nor his success as a
minister. Dependence on Christ must
flow from humility of heart. Nothing
but a heartfelt sense of our sinfulness
will lead us to the Cross, or keep us there,

4. It will be seen tn practical submis-
ston to God’s will.

III. Some of the means of produc-
ing it—

1, Meditate upon the greatness and
holiness of God.

2, Keep near to the Cross of Christ.

3. Frequently review your transgres-
stons and sins.

4, Think of your obligations to Divine
grace.

5. Anticipate the Judgment Day.—
The Late Samuel Thodey.


PSALM OXXXIL


INTRODUOTION,


The author of this Psalm and the occasion upon which it was composed are both unknown.
The opinion of M. Henry, Perowne, and others, is that it was composed for the dedication of
Solomon’s Temple. Many ancient expositors held that it was composed by David, either at the
time of the bringing of the Ark te Zion, or at the time when it was in his heart to build the


346


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : PSALMS.


PSALM COXXXRH.


nse
Temple of the Lord, Many modern expositors hold that it was composed for the dedication of


the Second Temple.


It is quite impossible to arrive at any certain conclusion on the question.


“This Psalm,” says Perowne, ‘‘is a prayer that God’s promises made to David may not fail
of fulfilment, that He will dwell for ever in the habitation which He chose for Himself in
Zion, and that the children of David may for ever sit upon His throne, It opens with a recital
of David's efforts to bring the Ark to its resting-place; it ends with a recital of the promises


made to David and to his seed.”


Homiletically we shall view it as presenting Lessons for Church-Builders, and Encourage


menis for Church-Builders,


Lxssons FOR CHoRoH-BUILDERS.
(Verses 1-10.)


From these verses we learn—

IL That when churches are needed
their erection is of great importance
vers. 1-6). Previous to the bringing
of the Ark to Mount Zion, the arrange-
ments for religious worship were most un-
satisfactory. “The sacred tent was with-
out the Ark of the covenant, a body
without a soul; and the Ark was at
Kirjath-jearim, deposited as in its grave,
without any rites of worship, well-nigh
lost sight of.” David himself said,
“Let us bring again the Ark of our
God to us; for we inquired not at it
in the days of Saul.” He was deeply
solicitous for the revival of the national
religion, and that arrangements should
be made for the worship of Jehovah,
with suitable dignity and magnificence,
The Psalmist represents him as torment-
ing himself with anxiety to prepare a
becoming dwelling-place for the Lord.
The intensity of his concern was mani-
fest in—(1.) The solemnity of his decla-
ration concerning it. ‘He sware unto
the Lord, and vowed unto the mighty
One of Jacob.” This solemn vow is
not recorded in the history. Nor do we
know whether it was made concerning
the removal of the Ark to Zion, or the
fixing the site of the Temple and the
preparation of materials for its erection
{1 Chron, xxii. 1-5), But that it was
made is an evidence of the anxious care
of David that appropriate provision
should be made for the worship of the
people. This care was manifest in—
(2.) The promptitude of his declaration.
“Surely I will not come into the
tabernacle of my house, nor go up into
my bed,” &c. (vers, 3-5) So in 1
Mhron, xxii, 5 David says, ‘I will now
moake preparation for it.” The matter


was too important and urgent to admit
of any delay; so he resolved to make
it his first business and to set about it
at once.

Now the lesson we deduce from this
is, that when adequate and appropriate
provision is not made for religious wor-
ship, the building of churches is of great
importance, This will appear from the
following considerations ;—

1. The religious element in man ts the
grandest portion of his nature. Reason,
conscience, affections, and that in us
which wonders, admires, adores—these
are the highest things in us.

2. The religious element in man needs
worship for sts right development and
growth. The worship of the Highest
humbles, purifies, exalts, enriches our
being. Worship transforms the wor-
shipper into the image of the object of
worship. The complete and harmonious
development of our being is impossible
apart from worship,

3. That churches are needed for the
becoming and profitable exercise of wor-
ship. We need the absence of distract-
ing scenes and circumstances, the aid
of quiet and of hallowed associations, in
order to worship in a becoming manner
and with spiritual advantage, These are
secured by the erection of churches,

But are not the temple of nature and
the sanctuary of home sufficient for the
worship of man? They would be if man
were not a social being ; but man ts a
social being. ‘It is not good that man
should be alone.” In work and play, in
enjoyment and sorrow, man needs and
delights in fellowship. Private and
family worship is not enough ; we need
public worship also to help us to realise
our relation to our ace that we

347


PSALM CXXXM,





are members of one great family, children
of one Divine Father. We need both
the closet and the temple, both the quiet
and solitude of private worship, and the
fellowship and iuspiration of public
worship. Where adequate provision is
not made for the public worship of the
people, the building of Christian churches
is a work the importance of which it is
impossible to exaggerate,

IL. That churches should be erected
for the worship of God. ‘“ We will go
into His tabernacles ; we will worship
at His footstool.” We fear that all
persons who are zealous in the building
of churches do not always regard the
worship of God as the great purpose for
which they are to be used. The grand
use of Christian churches is—

1. Not the propagation of any eccle-
stastical system. The laudation of “ the
church,” or of “ our denomination,” or
of “our body,” seems to be the object
for which some churches are built. This
is misleading and injurious.

2. Nor the propagation of any theo-
logical system. Some churches seem to
be built chiefly for the propagation of
Calvinism, Arminianism, Sacramen-
tarianism, &c. But our interpretations
of God and His Word are one thing,
while God and His Word are other
and sometimes very different things.
Even at best “our little systems are but
broken lights” of the Most High.

3. Nor for the deliwery of religious
addresses or theological lectures, however
able or eloquent they may be. We are
far from undervaluing the importance of
the preaching of the Word, but it seems to
us that the worship of God is a higher use
of Christian churches than even that.

4, Nor for ritualistic display however
brilliant, or musical performances how-
ever perfect, When forms and cere-
monies, processions and pageants, are the
great things in what ought to be Chris-
tian churches, intelligent and earnest
Christians cannot but regard such a
state of things as a prostitution of such
edifices.


5. But for the worship of God. The


grand use of churches is to worship the

Lord God in spirit and in truth, This

worship should be humble and reverent.
~48


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,





We are not worthy to approach His
throne or look into His face, but we
may “‘ worship at His footstool.”

IIL That in the worship of God in
His Church the manifestation of His
presence should be earnestly sought.
“ Arise, O Lord, into Thy rest,” &e.
(vers. 8, 9). The Lord is here en-
treated to dwell in His Church—

1. As an abiding presence. “‘ Arise,
O Lord, into Thy rest.” This may have
been spoken when the Ark was brought
to Zion, and certainly was spoken at the
dedication of the Temple. The Ark was
no more to be removed from place to
place, but was to be fixed there, We
need the abiding presence of God in our
churches; for without this, however
stately and beautiful they may be, they
will be but as beautiful corpses.

2. Asa strengthening presence. “Thou,
and the Ark of Thy strength.” The Ark
was the symbol of the Divine presence
and power. When it was taken with
them into battle, the people were nerved
to courage and endurance and conquest,
When God by the Holy Ghost dwells
among His people, they are “strength-
ened with might in the inner man.”

3. As a sanctifying presence. “ Let
Thy priests be clothed with righteous-
ness.” One of the effects of the abiding
presence of God in the Church will be
that His ministers will be holy in heart
and life. Righteousness is the best
ornament of a minister.” It is an essen-
tial qualification for the office.

4, As a joy-inspiring presence. “ Let
Thy saints shout for joy.” Sincere
worshippers of Jehovah are here desig-
nated His “‘saints.” They find their
highest blessedness in the realisation of
His presence. They sing, “In Thy pre
sence is fulness of joy.”

Here is the great want of religious
assemblies and of the Church of God as
a whole in this day—the realisation of
His abiding presence. Having this, she
will be nerved with might, clothed with
righteousness, and inspired with joy.

IV. That in seeking the manifes-
tation of the presence of God in His
Church, we have powerful pleas which
we may urges. We may, like the
Psalmist, nleee~


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


POALW OXXXIL





1. The solicitude of our pious ancestors
for His worship. ‘ Lord, remember
David, and all his afflictions.” David’s
anxiety to provide for the becoming
celebration of the worship of God is
here urged with God on behalf of his
descendants. And as we seek the
Divine blessing we may surely make
mention of the devotion of our god'y
forefathers,

2. His covenant relation with our pious
ancestors and with us. “For Thy servant
David’s sake, turn not away the face
of Thine anointed.” Perowne: “The
anointed here must be Solomon, or some
one of David’s descendants, who pleads
David and the promises made to David
as a reason why his prayer should not be
rejected,” And we in this age plead—


** God of our fathera, be the God
Of their succeeding race,”

God will ever be mindful of His
covenant, and we shall ds well to en-
courage ourselves in prayer by the re
membrance of this.

ConcoLusion.—To build churches for
the seeking of the manifestation of the
Divine Presence, and for the offering of
humble and reverent worship to the
Divine, Being, is to engeze in a work of
sacred siynificance and great importance.
Churches consecrated to such purposes
are blessings of incalculable worth to
society ; they aid the spiritual education
and growth of the race towards perfec
tion; they promote in a high degree the
wellbeing of man, and they honour the
Lord God.


BLEssINGs ON THE SANCTUARY.
(Verses 8, 9.)


Notice two or three thoughts—

I, The Temple is here called the
place of rest, or the abiding place of
God. “Arise, O Lord, into Thy rest,”
&c. The words mark a transition from
the nomadic condition of the tribes to
the compacted life of the nation, and a
transfer of obligation that was suited
to the change. In the free, wild life of
the desert, with its perpetual migrations,
the Sacred Tent might be pitched and
struck like the others, But when the
city was laid out for man, God would
have His honoured house chiefest and
costliest of all. . The Christian
dispensation, although it is a dispensa--
tion of universality, and bases all its
promises and sanctions upon the fact of
spiritual service, has not annnlled the
seemly and the sacred in cunnection
with the worship of God. It nowhere
approves the idea that all places are
equally sacred, or that God has ceased
to visit Zion, and to dwell in its taber-
nacles with His manifestations of peculiar
regard. If you want to know whether
God can manifest His Spirit and His
power in connection with the houses
that are set apart for Him, you have but
to think of the building of the Temple.
“Tt seems as if God had built a Solo-

‘mon on purpose that Solomon might


build a house,” And then, underneath
that, how all inferior forces were brought
into tribute! . . . Has not the Lord
Himself proclaimed it,—“The Lord
loveth the gates of Zion more than all
the dwellings of Jacob”?

IL The Temple, gorgeous as it was,
was altogether incomplete and value-
less without the Ark. In all ages the
Ark in the Temple is its life. Still the
quick heart within the man, and you
will have the stately skeleton soon,
Withdraw the magic vapour, and the
wheels whirr no longer, and the most
exquisite contrivances are mute and
motionless machinery. Take the breath
from the great organ’s heart, and in vain
you bid it discourse its harmonies, And
as the heart to the man, as the engine to
the machinery, and the breath to the
instrument of sound, so is the Ark to
the Temple, because it is the symbol of
the presence of the Lord.

There is no age that needs to be more
impressed with this truth than the age
in which we live. Our organisations are ‘
multiplied, &c. We are too apt to vaunt
of our institutions, of our efforts, of our
sacrifices, and thus damage our useful-
ness fatally by putting the instrument
in the place of the power.

Il. Leok at the other blessings

349


PSALM CXXXII.


which are asked for, either obviously
or by direct implication in the Psalm.
The presence of God is the chief, the
all-absorbing object of desire; but then
that presence is manifested by the diffu-
sion of itself in blessing.

1. The Ark of God’s strength in the
Temple implies that God’s power is in the
Temple, and He waits to exert it in the
Word, in the ministers’ appeals, in the
people’s prayers, God’s power is always
in the Temple when God’s presence is
there. Power “to make the sinner
quail,” and to “sound the unbelieving
heart ;” power to send healing to the
spirit of the wounded ; power to make
the selfish bountiful, d&c.

2, The prayer proceeds to ask that
the priests may be “ clothed with righte-
ousness,” which is, in fact, a petition for
universal purity, There is no priest-
hood now except the priesthood of the
Saviour in heaven, and the priesthood
of the whole community of the faithful,
who are “kings and priests unto God.”
It is a prayer, therefore, not only for us
who minister, but for you who hearken,
that we may, all of us, be robed always,
robed already, in the new linen, clean
and white, in which the saints were seen
in heaven, Righteousness is a word of


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





comprehensive import, and it includes
all that is alleged of it touching the puri
fication of the soul before God. . . .
It is, in fact, Paul’s Thessalonian sup-
plication, embodied in a solemn litany,
“And the very God of peace sanctify
you wholly,” &c, (1 Thess. v. 23). If
we are to be a strong church, we must
be a pure church,

3. The third blessing that is asked for
is holy joy in God, which has its founda
tion in oneness with God, both in favour
and feeling, and which has its outlet in
the appropriate expressions of praise.
This will, indeed, be a natural result of
the blessings already asked, for if we
take hold of God’s power, and if we
reflect God’s purity, be sure we shall
never lack materials for praise.

I cannot dwell, except for a moment,
upon the beautiful answer which the
prayer received —so prompt, so gene-
rous, so full, In every case the answer
is more large than the request. The
prayer is contained in the first ten verses
of the Psalm ; in the eleventh the answer
begins. It is worth looking at... .

Mark the ineffable wealth with which
He fulfils the promises He makes to His
people.—W. M. Punshon, LL.D,


ENOOURAGEMENTS FOR CHUROH-BUILDERS.
(Verses 11-18.)


The Psalmist, for the encouragement
of the people, recalls certain promises
which were made to David. The Lord
had promised him that the government
should be perpetuated in his family (2
Sam. vii. 12-16). But the promise was
conditional, The great majority of the
Divine promises are so. It was dis-
tinctly intimated to David that if the
conditions were not fulfilled, though the
promise would not be withdrawn, yet
its operation would be suspended. The
descendants of David failed to comply
with the conditions ; they violated the
covenant; and the sovereignty for a
long time passed away from the house
of David. But that sovereignty in a
higher form, on a vastly wider scale,
and with more glorious signifieance, was
resumed by “the Root and Offspring of

350


David,” even by Jesus Christ the Lord.
In Him the promises made to David
have their full and splendid realisation.

Here, in this section of the Psalm,
are promises which are richly fraught
with encouragement for those who are
engaged in the building of churches, or
in any other work for the extension of
the Redeemer’s kingdom. We have here
& promise of—

I. The presence of God in His Church.
“For the Lord hath chosen Zion,” &,
(vers. 13, 14). (See Hom. Com. on Pa.
xlviii. 1, 2; and Ixxvi. 2.)

1. He dwells there by His own choice,
“The Lord hath chosen Zion; He hath
desired it,” &c, ‘I have desired it.”
Henstenberg translates: “He has se-
lected it for His habitation. . . . I have
selected it” God dwells in the Church,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PUALM OXXXHL,


—__—_—_—_—_—_————————


not because of the excellence or worthi-
ness of the members thereof, but because
of His own good pleasure,

2. He dwells there perpetually. “This
is My rest for ever.” “Shiloh,” says
Perowne, “had been abandoned; for a
time the Ark was at Bethel (Judg. xx.
27); then at Mizpah (Judg. xxi. 5);
afterwards, for twenty years, at Kirjath-
jearim (1 Sam. vii. 2); and then for
three months in the house of Obed-Edom,
before it was finally brought to its last
resting-place.” The Ark and the Temple
have long since passed from Zion; but
this Divine assurance finds its fulfilment
in the Christian Church. In the darkest
days of her history His presence has not
been withdrawn ; nor will He ever with-
draw from His Church. Here then isa
most inspiring assurance for all who are
interested in His Church. Here is con-
solation for Christians in the dark and
stormy day. Here also is inspiration
for the Christian worker.

It, The blessing of God in His
Church.

1. Hts blessing as an accompaniment
of her ordinances, “TI will abundantly
bless her provision; I will satisfy her
poor with bread.” M. Henry interprets
this as provision for both body and
soul, and applies it to both “ the poor
of this world” and “the poor in spirit.”
And Barnes says: “A strong affirma-
tion, meaning that He would do it in
every way; that every needed blessing
would be imparted; that God would
provide abundantly for their support.”
But it seems to us to refer to spiritual
provision. God by His blessing will
vitalise the ordinances of the Church ;
He will make her services means of
grace indeed to His people,—channels
by which pardon shall flow to the guilty,
comfort to the mourner, strength to the
weak, holiness to those who long for it,
&e.

2. His blessing upon her ministers,
“T will also clothe her priests with
salvation.” This is an assurance that
the petition in verse 9 should be granted.
(See on that verse.) Perhaps tha
change of the word “righteousness”
for “ salvation ” is meant to indicate that
God will not only bless them with holi-


ness of heart and life, but also make
them instrumental in saving souls, Use
fulness is a result of holiness,

3. His blessing upon her members,
“And her saints shall shout aloud for
joy.” This also is a promise that the peti-
tion in verse 9 should be granted. (See on
that verse.) M. Henry : “ It was desired
that the saints might shout for joy; it
is promised that they shall shout aloud
for joy. God gives more than we ask,
and when He gives salvation He will
give an abundant joy.” Here then is
encouragement, d&ec.

Itl. The triumph and glory of the
Head of the Church. “There will I
make the horn of David to bud,” &c.
(vers. 17,18). David is here put for
the house of David. And we must
look to the Christ for the complete ful-
filment of these promises. The horn is
the symbol of power. To “ make the
horn to bud” is to make it shoot forth
and grow. In Christ God “raised up an
horn of salvation in the house of His
servant David.” He is “mighty to
save.” We have here an assurance of—

l. The subjugation of His enemies.
“ His enemies will I clothe with shame.”
God will frustrate their deepest designs,
and overthrow their mightiest forces,
“He must reign till He hath put all
enemies under His feet.”

2, The success and glory of His reign,
“T have ordained a lamp for Mine
Anointed.” (On the application of this
to David, comp. 1 Kings xi. 36.) But
the lamp is frequently used in the
Scripture as an emblem of prosperity.
And so we regard it here in its applica-
tion to the kingdom of our Lord. We
have the same idea in the last clause of
tne Psalm: “ Upon Himself shall His
crown flourish,” or blossom. The glory
of the Redeemer’s crown shall never
fade ; amaranthine are the flowers which
adorn His brow.

*«Q’er every foe victorious,
He on His throne shall rest 3
From age to age more gloriow,
All-blessing and all-bleat.
The tide of time shall never
His covenant remove;
His name shall stand for ever 3
That name to us is—Love.”
—Hontgomery.
351


HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY: PSALMS.


a





Cono.usion.—1. Here ts warning to
the enemies of the Lord. If you persist
in your opposition to Him He will
clothe you with shame, and crush you
by His power, 2. J/ere ts exhortation
to the enemies of the Lord. Submit
yourselves to Him, ere His anger wax
hot against you, 3, Here ts amplest en-


couragement to His people, and especially
to those who heartily labour in His cause,
According to. His promise He is ever
present to enrich His Church with grace
and power; and all who labour for the
extension of His kingdom will find in
the end their labour crowned with com-
plete and glorious success,


Tur Sona oF THE BUILDERS,
(The whole Psalm.)


Our Psalm has been universally and
wisely applied to the Church of these
Christian days, and its invocations and
promises claimed as expressive of the
desires and confidences of Christian
people in their work for God. We are
God’s building, and we are God’s
builders too. The Psalm is full of
strength and encouragement for us in
both characters, ... We may call it
the Song of the Builders. . . . For our
present purpose it will be most con-
venient to divide the whole into three
sections, in the first of which, extending
to the close of the seventh verse, the
Church pleads with God the many
thoughts and long toil that had laid the
foundation for His house.

I. Let us gather from this portion
some lessons
work. “Lord, remember David, and
all his afflictions.” The Psalmist looks
upon the fair dwelling, reared at last for
God, and goes back in thought to the
days when the design thus happily ac-
complished was first conceived. It was
David’s thought which was the parent
of this holy and beautiful house, though
Solomon was its builder ; and his name
springs first to the singer’s lips... .
Not the toil of hand and arm which car-
ries out, but the mind which conceives
the plan is its true author. ‘ Lord,
remember Dawd.” Look at the picture
which is given of the aged king setting
himself to his task, (Comp. 2 Sam. vii. 1
and 2 with vers. 3 and 4 of the Psalm),
He was an old man now, wearied with


* all his afflictions,” &c, And he had .


the other excuse for repose that he had

fone much work, as well as suffered

many changes. . . . But not so does a

trae man think, , , , He will put his
352


touching preparatory


own comfort second, God’s service first,
The picture may be a rebuke to the
slothfulness of us all, &c. But it should
come with a special message to men and
women of comparative leisure and free
dom from corroding frets and consuming
toils, whose lives are ouly too apt to be
frittered away in trifles and dissolved in
languid idleness, or corrupted by self-
indulgence. To such the lesson from
that picture of the old soldier-king is,
Brace yourselves for continuous ser-
vice, &e.

Notice, too, that David’s devotedness
does make a plea with God. The prayer
goes upon the supposition that his toil
and self-sacrifice will not, cannot, be all
in vain. And the prayer is answered.
God does not require perfect faithful-
ness in us ere He blesses us with His
smile; He does not need that the
temple shall be all complete ere He enters
in. He receives, and pardons, and
loves an imperfect faith ; a wandering
heart He stili blesses and welcomes;
stained services, in which much of the
leaven of earthly motives may be fer-
menting, and maay a taint of sloth and
selfishness may be found. are not there-
fore rejected of Him.

And consider, too, how God’s remem-
brance of such preparatory work is shown.
David saw no result from all his toils to
build the Temple. He got together the
great store, but it was reserved for
another to mould it into completeness,
and to see the cloud of glory fill the
house. But none the less was it true
that God remembered David, and ac-
cepted and crowned his work. We all
receive unfinished tasks from those who


go before; we all transmit unfinished


tasks to them who come after, Oug


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : PSALMS.


POALM OXXXIL





vocation is to advance a little the
dominion of God’s truth, and to be one
of the long line who pass on the torch
from hand to hand. ‘“ One soweth and
another reapeth,” &c. You may never
see the issues of your toils. If you can
see them, they will generally not be
worth looking at. We work for eter-
nity. We may well wait for the scaffold-
ing to be taken away.

It. The prayer for God’s blessing on
the builders’ work (vers. 8-10). Pic-
ture to yourselves the moment. The
Temple is finished, shining in its new
beauty on its hill top. (See 2 Chron.
v.—vii.) The Psalmist asks first that God
would dwell in the completed Temple,
and that the symbol of His presence
may now at last, after so many wander-
ings, rest there, &c.

May we not, from all this, draw needful
lessons for ourselves? And first, as to the
one great blessing which all builders for
God should desire. The Temple may be
finished. But something more is needed.
Not till the Ark is in the Holiest of all,
and the cloud of glory fills the house
could they say, “It is finished.” The
lesson is of everlasting importance. We
need to guard ourselves most jealously
lest we come to put the instrument in
the place of the power. You may per-
fect your machinery, but all its nicely-
fitting parts stand motionless—a dead
weight ; and not a spindle whirrs till
the strong impulse, born of fire, rushes
in, .. . When we have done all, we
have to pray, “ Arise, O Lord, into Thy
rest,” dc,

That presence will surely be given, if
we desire it.

And that presence is all which we
need to make ourselves strong and our
work effectual,

From this fundamental petition all
the other clauses of the prayer flow. I
can only glance hastily at them,

There is first power—‘ The ark of


Thy strength.” They in whom God
dwells will bestrong. . . . There is next
righteousness, with which the Psalmist
prays that the priests may be clothed.
In the new Israel all the people are
priests. Righteousness is to be the robe
of every Christian soul... Thank
God for that “fine linen, clean and
white, the righteousness” with which
Christ covers our wounded nakedness,
Remember that growing purity in life
and deed is the main proof that Christ’s
righteousness is indeed ours, If we are
to do God’s work in the world we must
be good, true, righteous men. . .

Further, the prayer desires that glad-
ness from God’s presence and the pos-
session of His righteousness may burst
into the shout of praise. All true re-
ligion is joyful. . . . Finally, the Psalmist
prays that the king of Israel and his
people with him may be heard and ac-
cepted when they pray. Such are his de-
sires for his nation. What do we desire
most for our brethren, and for ourselves 4

Itl. The Divine answer, which more
than fulfils the Psalmist’s desires
(vers. 11-18). ‘lhroughout these verses
there is constant allusion to the preced-
ing petitions. The shape of the response
is determined by the form of the desires.
(Comp. ver. 2 with ver. 11, and ver. 5
with ver. 13), Not in us, but in Him,
lies the motive for His grace, and so it
car never change.

Then, notice, that each single petition
is enlarged in the answer to something
much greater than itself. (Comp. ver.
8 with vers. 14, 15; ver 9 with ver. 16;
and ver. 10 with vers. 17, 18.) Put
this in its widest form, and what does it
come to but that great law of His grace
by which He over-answers all our poor
desires, and, giving us more than we had
expected, shames us out of our distrust ?
And the law holds for us in all our
works and in all our prayera—A. Mao
laren, D.D.


Zion A TYPE OF THE CHURCH.
(Verses 13-16.)


L God’s delight in Zion.
1. There He dispensed His ordi-


hances,
VOL. H.


2. There He vouchsafed His presence,
3. There he communicated His
blessings.
353


PSALM OXXXIII. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


eer ar er a


IL. God’s promises to Zion. (i) Th a ate
se featrentt . at formalists do not re
1. In respect to its institutions, belong to the Chureh, (2) That
the Church cannot be overthrown. (3.)
That Christians are bound to serve and
honour God.—George Brooks.





2. In respect to its ministers,
3. In respect to all its worship-
pers.


PSALM OXXXIIL


INTRODUCTION.


In the superscription this Psalm is attributed to David. It has been thought by some that
it was composed on the occasion of the coming of the elders of Israel to Hebron to anoint him
king over all the tribes of Israel (2 Sam, v. 1-3; 1 Chron, xii. 38-40). Others have opined
that the assembling of the people in great multitudes at Zion to celebrate the great religious
festivals gave rise to the Psalm. But it is impossible to come to any certain conclusion as to
the date or occasion of its composition,

Herder says that this Psalm “‘ has the fragrance of a lovely rose;” and Perowne : ‘* Nowhere
has the nature of true unity—that unity which binds men together, not by artificial restraints,
but as brethren of one heart—been more faithfully described ; nowhere has it been so gracefully
illustrated, ag in this short ode, True concord is, we are here taught, a holy thing, a sacred
oil, a rich perfume which, flowing down from the head tothe beard, from the beard to the
garments, sanctifies the whole body. It is a sweet morning dew, which lights not only om


the lofty mountain-peaks, but on the lesser hills, embracing all, and refreshing all with ite
influence.”


Toe Excr.LeNnce anp Beauty or Frarernat Uniry.


By unity we do not mean uniformity,
or the harmony which is brought about
by regulationsand restrictions. We are
unable to discover any beauty worth
speaking of in the unity which is the
result of artificial and mechanical ar-
rangements. It is the unity of life and
activity and variety which is here cele-
brated. Uniformity is monotonous,
wearisome ; but unity is refreshing and
beautiful. The only unity worth con-
tending for is “the unity of the Spirit,”
We have seen an orchestra with five
thousand musicians and singers playing
and singing magnificent choruses with
the most inviolate and enrapturing har-
mony. There was a great diversity of
instruments, and of performers upon
them, and of voices, yet there was a
sublime and splendid unity. Unity of
spirit and aim it is that is insisted upon
in the Scriptures. (See Eph. iv, 1-16.)

The Psalmist sets before us—

I. The propriety of this unity.
“ Behold how good and pleasant it is
for brethren to dwell together in unity.”
Those who form pert of one family,
should surely live ‘ogether in peace and
harmony. Ali mankind are children
ef ome father, and are “made of one

354


blood,” and should therefore live in
peace and harmony. The words of
Abram to Lot are applicable between
man and man all the world over: “ Let
there be no strife, I pray thee, between
me and thee; for we be brethren.”
‘He that soweth discord among breth-
ren” is “an abomination unto the
Lord.” This unity is specially binding
upon and appropriate amongst Christian
brethren. Barnes: “They are redeemed
by the same Saviour; they serve the
same Master; they cherish the same
hope ; they are looking forward to the
same heaven; they are subject to the
same trials, temptations, and sorrows ;
they have the same precious consolations.
There is, therefore, the beauty, the
‘ goodness,’ the ‘ pleasantness’ of obvious
fitness and propriety in their dwelling
together in unity.”

II. The comprehensiveness of this
unity. Perowne holds that it is this
which the poet intends to set forth by
the figures of the anointing oil and the
dew. He says, “‘ The first figure is taken
from the oil which was poured on the
head of the high priest at his consecra-
tion (Exod. xxix. 7; Lev. viii. 12, xxi.
10). The point of the comparison does


HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY: PSALMS.


not lie in the preciousness of the oil, or
in its all-pervading fragrance; but in
this, that being poured on the head, it
did not rest there, but flowed to the
beard, and descended even to the gar-
ments, and thus, as it were, consecrated
the whole body in all its parts, Add the
members participate in the same bless-
tng. (Comp. 1 Cor. xii) This is the
point of the comparison. . . . If, as is
commonly assumed, the point of com-
parison lay in the all-pervading fragrance
of the oil, the addition to the figure,
which descended upon the beard . . .
which descended to the edge of his gar-
ments, would be thrown away. But
understand this as typifying the conse-
cration of the whole man, and the exten-
sion of the figure at once becomes appro-
priate, and full of meaning.” Luther
remarks :—“In that he saith ‘from the
head,’ he showeth the nature of true con-
cord. For like as the ointment ran
down from the head of Aaron, the high
priest, upon his beard, and so descended
unto the borders of his garment, even so
true concord in doctrine and brotherly
love floweth as a precious ointment, by
the unity of the Spirit, from Christ, the
High Priest and Head of the Church,
unto all the members of the same, For
by the beard and extreme parts of the
garment, he signifieth that as far as the
Church reacheth, so far spreadeth the
unity which floweth from Christ, her
Head.”  Perowne holds that in the
figure of the dew, the same idea is con-
spicuous, “Here, again, it is not the
refreshing nature of the dew, nor its
gentle, all-pervading influence, which is
the prominent feature. That which
renders it to the poet’s eye so striking
an image of brotherly concord, is the
fact that « falls alike on both moun-
tains; that the same dew which descends
on the lofty Hermon descends also on
the humbler Zion, High and low drink
in the same sweet refreshment. Thus
the image is exactly parallel to the
last; the oil descends from the head
to the beard, the dew from the higher
mountain to the lower.”

Ill. The joyousness of this unity.
Anointing with oil was practised by
the Jews on occasions of rejoicing and





PSALM OXXXINZ,


festivity. From this custom it became
an emblem of prosperity and gladness.
(Comp. Ps. xxiii. 5, and Isa. Ixi. 3.)
As Perowne thinks that the comprehen-
siveness of the unity is the chief feature
in the comparison, so Barnes regards
the joyousness of the unity. He says,
‘There is no other resemblance between
the idea of anointing with oil and that
of harmony among brethren than this
which is derived from the gladness—
the joyousness—connected with such an
anointing. The Psalmist wished to give
the highest idea of the pleasantness of
such harmony ; and he, therefore, com-
pared it with that which was most beau-
tiful to a pious mind —the idea of a
solemn consecration to the highest office
of religion.” Discord and strife are
painful things; peace and concord are
delightful,

IV. The influence of this unity.
This is represented as—

1. Delightful. The anointing oil was
beautifully perfumed, and, when it was
poured forth, it diffused its fragrant
odours to the great delight of all who ©
were near. Unity is not only good and
pleasant in itself, but it agreeably affects
all who behold it. When the world
beholds a truly united Church, it will
speedily be won to Christ. (John xvii. 21.)

2. Gentle. “As the dew.” Quiet,
yet most mighty, is the influence of
unity. We may apply to it the words
of Tennyson—

‘Right to the heart and brain, though unde-
acried,

Winning its way with extreme gentleness

Through all the outworks of suspicious

pride,”

8. Refreshing. “As the dew.” In
eastern climes, because of its refreshing
effects upon vegetation, the dew is ines-
timably precious. So unity cheers and
invigorates the heart.

4, Powerful. ‘Union is strength.”
“A threefold cord is not quickly broken.”
‘Separate the atoms which make the
hammer, and each would fall on the
stone as a snowflake; but welded into
one, and wielded by the firm arm of the
quarryman, it will break the massive
rocks asunder. Divide the waters of
Niagara into distinct and syed


POALM OXXXIV.


drops, and they would be no more than
the falling rain; but, in their united
body, they would quench the fires of
Vesuvius, and have some to spare for
the volcanoes of other mountains.” —Dr,
Guthrie.

5. Securing the Divine blessing. Where


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





true brotherly unity is, “the Lord com-
mands the blessing, life for evermore.”
A life of peace and love is Divine and
everlasting.

Cono.usion. — “ Behold, how good
and pleasant it is,” &e. 1. Behold, and
admire. 2. Behold, and imitate. -


Curistian UNION.
(Verse 1.)


Christian union is my theme on this
occasion, Christian union—not simply
the union which should prevail among
the members of any particular denomi-
nation of Christians, but the love and
unity which ought to exist among all
the real people of God.

I Its nature.

1. Unity in sentiment.

2. Union of feeling.

3. Union of effort.

II, The desirableness, or importance,
of Christian union.


1. The teachings of Scripture.

2. The example of the early Christians,

3. The evils of division.

4. Christians are engaged in the same
cause,

5. Union is strength,

6. Union is promotive of happiness,

7. It ts only by the exercise of that love,
which ts the substratum of union, that
one can resemble God and become imbued
with the spirit of heaven.—W. C. What
comb, in “ The Preachers’ Treasury.”


PSALM OXXXIV.


INTRODUCTION.


“ Three things,” says Delitgach, ‘‘are clear with regard tothis Psalm. First, that it con
sista of a greeting, verses 1, 2, and a reply, verse 8. Next, that the greeting is addressed te
those priests and Levites who had the night-watch in the ‘l'emple. Lastly, that this Psalm is
purposely placed at the end of the collection of Pilgrim Songs in order to take the place of a
final blessing.” The words of verses 1 and 2 were probably addressed by the people to the priests
and Levites, and those of verse 8 by the priests to the people. Both the author of the Pealm
and the occasion of its composition are unknown.


DoxoLoGgy AND BENEDICTION,


I. Doxology. In verses 1 and 2 the
people exhort the priests and Levites to
praise the Lord. Consider—

1. The offering to be presented. “ Be-
hold, bless ye the Lord.” The ministers
of the Temple are called to offer the
sacrifice of thanksgiving unto the Lord.
Here are two points, (1.) The nature
of this offering. Praise. ‘ Bless ye the
Lord.” ‘his should be presented (a)
because of what He does for us, Grati-
tude urges—“‘ Bless the Lord, O my soul,
and forget not all His benefits.” And
(6) because of what He zs in Himself.
He is “ glorious in holiness.” Admira-
tion and reverence urye us to “ Bless His
holy Name.” (2.) The stmportance of
this offering. ‘“ Behold.” This word

356


calls attention to the exhortation which
follows as a thing of importance and
urgency. Worship is an engagement of
the utmost moment to man. The obli-
gations to it are most binding. And
the exercise of it is essential to the right
development and to the perfection of the
human spirit.

2, The persons by whom itt ws to be
offered, ‘All ye servants of the Lord,
which by night stand in the house of
the Lord.” The priests and Levites are
here addressed. But in this Christian


dispensation priesthood is a thing of


character, not of class. Every believing
and reverent soul is a priest unto God
by virtue of the highest and holiest con-
secration, Every Christian is exhorted


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : PSALMS,


POALM OXEXY,





to “ offer’ the sacrifice of praise to God
continually, that is, the fruit of lips giv-
ing thanks to His Name.”

3. The time at which it ts to be offered.
“ By night.” Some of the ministers of
the Temple were in attendance there all
night. (Compare Exod. xxvii. 20, 21;
1 Chron, ix. 33.) They were there to
guard the sacred and precious things of
the Temple, and to keep the lamps alight
and the fire upon the altar burning.
Hengstenberg thinks that when the
Pilgrim bands arrived at the Temple in
the evening they addressed this exhorta-
tion to the servants of the Lord. The
rest and quiet of the night render ita
suitable season for praising God. When
the duties of the day are done, and its
busy and confused noises are silenced,
the soul may be lifted up in adoration to
God without interruption.

4, The place towards which tt ts to be
offered. ‘Lift up your hands in the
sanctuary.” Margin: “in holiness.”
Hengstenberg and Perowne regard WI)
as “the accusative of direction,” and
translate, “‘to the sanctuary.” The
most holy place was regarded as the
audience-chamber of the Most High,
the place where God hears prayer, and
whence He communicates answers to
His people. The Lord Jesus Christ is
the true Shekinah and Holy of Holies.
We draw near unto God through Him.
He is the meeting-place between God
and man. Thus, then, let us offer to
God the sacrifice of praise from grateful
and adoring hearts.


made heaven and earth bless thee out £
Zion.” This benediction is taken in part
from the form used by the high priest
in blessing the children of Israel. This
accounts for the use of the singt.lar,
“thee,” not the plural, you. Notic3j—

lL. The power of God to bless. © The
Lord that made heaven and eartu” is
omnipotent. He “is able to do ex.ceed-
ing abundantly,” &c.

2. The means by which God bSlesses
man, ‘Bless thee out of Zion.” God
blesses the world through the (,hurch,
He employs the Church in comn.anicat-
ing spiritual blessings to mankird.

3. The authority of the servants of God
to pronounce Lis blessing. The poet re
presents the priests as authoritatavely pro-
nouncing the blessing of God apon the
people. And the ministers of the Lord
Jesus Christ still possess this wuthority,
not because they are priests, Lat because
they are Christians. Every Christian
has the right to pronounce the benedic-
tion of God upon devout worshippers ;
and the minister of Christ hus this right
not only as being himself @ Christian,
but as the representative of the Church,

ConoLusion.—Here are two of the
highest privileges to which any created
spirit can aspire. Througa Christ we
may draw near to the graat God with
ascriptions of honour and praise, being
confident of audience, acceptance, and
blessing. And by our voice the Divine
blessing may be conveyed to the ear
and heart of our fellowanen. Let us
endeavour to live in the grateful and


reverent exercise of these privileges,


IL Benediction, “The Lord that


PSALM CXXXYV,


INTRODUCTION,


*¢ We have now,” says Hengstenberg, “a group of twelve Paalme, sung afier the prosperous
completion of the Temple, and probably at its dedication, consisting of three mew Psalms at
the leginning, and one at the end, Ps. cxlvi,, which enclose in the middle eight Psalms of
David. . . . No period was more suitable for the appropriation of this Davide cycle of Psalms
than that in which the Davidic stem was, poorly enough, represented by Zerubbabel, whose
humbled condition also gave occasion to the prophets of that period, Haggai and Zechariah, to
lay a firmer and deeper hold on the rich promises given to the race of David.”

This is one of the Hallelujah Psalms; it was intended for use in the Temple service ; it ia
general in its character, and consists of exhortations to praise Jehovah, wivh reasons for 80
doing. This Psalm has much in common with the preceding one. Both are exhortations to
worship; both are addressed to the priests and Levites engaged in ministering in the Temples,
But this Psalm differs from the preceding in that in it the exhortation to praise the Lord ia
enforced by several reasons, There is no euperscription to the Psalm; and we know ne’ ther
ita author nor the date of its composition. sey


HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY : PSALMS.





INCITEMENTS TO Praise THE LORD,
(Verses 1-7.)


In this strophe we have a fervent ex-
hortation to celebrate the praise of God,
supported by weighty motives to do so,
Consider—

I. The persons to whom this exhor-
tation is addressed. ‘“‘ Praise ye the
Lord. Praise ye the Name of the Lord,”
dc. (vers. 1, 2). (See the Hom. Com.
on Ps, cxxxiv. 1.) The exhortation is
addressed “to the Levites who sang
psalms and piayed on the different musi-
cal instruments which were used in the
service of God, and to the priests who
blew with the trumpets and repeated the
liturgical prayers and the blessings.” In
this age we have no priestly class, for all
Christians are priests, and the exhorta-
tion of the text is applicable to all Chris-
tians. ‘Two characteristics of those to
whom it is addressed are here specified—

1. They have access to God. They
“‘ stand in the house of the Lord, in the
courts of the house of our God.” Every
believer in Jesus Christ may “ enter into
the holiest by His blood.” ‘Through
Him we have access unto the Father.”

2. They serve God. “ Servants of the
Lord, that stand in the house of the
Lord.” They stand ministering in His
Temple. They wait His behests, and
then hasten to obey them. The Chris-
tian looks to Christ not only as a Savi-
our to be trusted, but as a Sovereign to
be obeyed. They who are thus admitted
into the presence and service of God are
ander special obligations to praise Him,

Il. The reasons by which this ex-
Rortation is enforced.

1. Because of the holiness of God.
* Praise the Lord ; for the Lord is good,”
{n Himself God is absolutely perfect.
"God is light, and in Him is no darkness
at all.” In Him the conscience finds the
Supremely Righteous ; the intellect, the
Supremely Intelligent; the heart, the
Supremely Kind ; the soul, the Supremely
Beautiful. Therefore it is fitting that
He should be praised, and that with all
our powers,

2. Because of the delight which the
exercise yields, “Sing praises unto His

358


Name; for it is pleasant.” Sincere
praise to God exalts and exhilarates the
spirit of him who presents it, strengthens
his faith, increases his strength, and
transforms him into the image of God.
The reverent and hearty praise of the
Divine Being is the heaven of the godly
soul,

3. Because of His special relation te
Israel. (1.) In a special sense they were
His people, “For the Lord hath chosen
Jacob unto Himself, Israel for His
peculiar treasure.” As His people they
enjoyed special privileges, He guided
them, sustained them, gave to them a
goodly inheritance; many a time He de-
livered them, &c. As His people they
had special obligations. They were called
to be witnesses to the great truths of
His unity, spirituality,.and holiness, to
the heathen nations. By their civil and
religious institutions, and by their life
and conduct, they were to testify for the
Lord God amongst men. (2.) In His
esteem they were specially precious.
“His peculiar treasure.” ‘The Lord
taketh pleasure in His people.” ‘If ye
will obey My voice, indeed, and keep
My covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar
treasure unto Me above all people; for
all the earth is Mine.” ‘God is good
to all;” but to His people He manifests
His special regard. He—

“Keeps with most distinguished care
The man who on His love depends.”


(3.) He had chosen them for this posi-
tion, They did not attain it by their
own effort, or merit it by their own ex-
cellence ; but were selected to it by Him
in His sovereign favour. This special
and privileged relation te Him supplies
most cogent reasons for praising Him.
And the argument applies with still
greater force to the people of God
to-day.

4. Because of His sovereignty in na-
ture. ‘For I know that the Lord ia
great, and that our Lord is above all
gods,” &. (vers. 5-7). The poet repre
seats this sovereignty as (1.) Absolute.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS,
soe ee I a 2


“ Whatsoever the Lord pleased that did
He.” “He does what He pleases, because
He pleases, and gives not account of any
of His matters.” (2.) Omnipotent. What-
soever in His sovereignty He willed, that
by His power He effected. (3.) Univer-
sal, “In heaven, and in earth, in the
seas, and all deep places.” By these
expressions the Psalmist intends to set
forth the entire universe.
** He everywhere hath sway,
And all things serve His might.”

The poet represents the Lord as abso-
lutely supreme over all the forces and
phenomena of nature. And this repre-
sentation we regard as (a) Philosophics


THe Greatness oF Gop AN


FOALM OXXXV.





(8) Scriptural ; (y) Assuring. (See the
Hom. Com, on Ps, evii. 23-32.) As
the universal Sovereign, He has a right
to universal praise,

Cono.usion. —Let us offer to God the
sacrifice of praise continually. Let us
praise Him not only with the lip, but
with the life ; not only in church, but
everywhere ; not only on the Lord’s day,
but every day. Let us seek for a heart
of constant praise—


“ Not thankful, when it pleaseth me;
As if Thy blessings had spare days:
But such a heart whose pulse may be

Thy praise.”
—Her


INCENTIVE TO Praisze Hr,


(Verses 8-14.)


In this strophe the poet presents illus-
trations of the greatness ana supremacy
of the Lord to invite the people to praise
Him. He illustrates His greatness by—

L His judgments upon the heathen.
‘Who smote the firstborn of Egypt, both
of man and beast,” &c. (vers, 8-11).

1. His judgments fall upon all classes
of men, and even upon the brute creation.
‘““Who smote the firstborn of Egypt,
both of man and beast. Who sent
tokens and wonders into the midst of
thee, O Egypt, upon Pharaoh, and upon
all his servants.” Servants suffer for
their masters’ sins, The consequences
of a king’s obstinate tyranny over man,
and rebellion against God will fall
heavily upon his subjects. And even
the brute creation feel the smart of the
penalty of human transgressions, When
the Divine judgments fall upon the land,
all classes, from the sovereign to the
serf, fee] the weight of the stroke.

- 2. His judgments reach the mightiest
powers. “Who smote great nations, and
slew mighty kings,” &c. ‘“Sihon king
of the Amorites,” was a man of great
courage and audacity, and a distinguished
military leader, “And Og king of
Bashan,” was a man of gigantic size and
stature, the ruler over sixty proud fenced
cities, inhabited by a brave and powerfui
people: Yet, these great and warlike
kings, with their valiant armies, were
smitten and slain when the Most High


arose against them, His frown strikes
with dismay the heart of the most
courageous, and the strong arm falls
nerveless, and great and powerful nations
are brought to nought,

3. His judgments are lessons, They
are “tokens and wonders,” ‘ Wonders”
—things calculated to beget surprise and
amazement, “Tokens,” or “signs ”—
things calculated to excite inquiry, and
to teach inquirers important truths. The
plagues of Egypt were significant of im-
portant truths concerning the Divine
Being and His government. To the
“earnest listener” they announced the
almighty power of God, His hatred of
tyranny and oppression, His regard for
the oppressed, &c. These miracles of
judgments were parables of the Divine
character and procedure towards men.
In this great power which is arrayed
against tyranny and oppression we have
a motive for celebrating the praise of the
Lord.

Il. His regard for His people.

1. He makes His judgments upon the
heathen an advantage to His people.
He “ gave their land for an heritage, an
heritage unto Israel His people.” (See
Ps, cxi. 6.) In His government of the
world the Lord has special regard to the
interests of His loyal subjects. He
makes “all things work together for
their good.”

2. He defends the cause of His people

359


POALM OXXXV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


eee ree ree


“ For the Lord will judge His people.”
(See Deut. xxxii. 36.) He will see that
they have that which is right, and in
due time will rid them of their op-
pressors, and avenge them of their ad-
versaries,

3. He pities them in their distresses.
“He will repent Himself concerning
His servants,” (See the Hom. Com. on
Ps, xc. 13.) He will not suffer them to
be oppressed beyond their power of en-
durance, but in His mercy He will visit
them in their afflictions and ‘“ compass
them about with songs of deliverance,”
Here then is a stirring incentive to praise
the Lord ; an incentive that should move
the dullest heart to joyous and reverent
strains.

Ill. His eternity and unchangeable-
ness. ‘Thy Name, O Lord, endureth
for ever; Thy memorial, O Lord, through-
out all generations,” God’s eternity
involves His immutability. It is the
omnipotent and unchangeable eternity.


All earthly things are transient and mut-
able; but God abides for ever, and He
is for ever the same. In this we have—

1. An encouragement to faith, He is
still the same as when He wrought
mighty wonders and signs on behalf of
Israel. Age does not diminish His
interest in His people, or His faithful-
ness to them, or His power to aid them.
Therefore they may sing, “ Behold, God
is my salvation; I will trust, and not
be afraid.”

2. An argument for praise, The con-
stancy of God’s love for His people and
of His great and glorious doings for
them, should constrain them to offer to
Him the lowliest adoration and the
heartiest praise,

Here, then, in these illustrations of
the greatness of God, we have what
ought to prove to all who are loyal to
Him, irresistible incentives to exalt and
maguify His holy Name,


Tue Vanity or Ipots aN Incentive To Praisz THE Lorp Gop,
(Verses 15-21.)


“To show more fully the propriety of
praising God, and Him alone as: God,
the Psalmist institutes a comparison
between Him and idols, showing that
the gods worshipped by the heathen
lacked every ground of claim to divine
worship and homage. They were, after
all that could be done to fashion, to de-
corate, and to adorn them, nothing but
silver and gold, and could have no better
claim to worship than silver and gold as
such.”—Barnes. - Verses 15~20 corre-
spond almost exactly to Ps. exv. 4-11.
And as that passage has already engaged
attention in this work, it will be suffi-
cient in this place to indicate briefly a
homiletical method of treatment. Here
are four main points for consideration—

I. The innate religiousness of human
pature. The manufacture of idols indi-
tates the religious tendency of human
nature. Man must have a god of some
kind; he must worship, Without an
object of worship there are instinctive
desires and cravings of the human soul
which find no satisfaction,

1. Man wants an object of trust. Man

360


is conscious of insufficiency for the deep
meanings and momentous issues of life,
and looks for help from beyond and
above himself. If he find nothing
higher, he will trust even in a dead
idol (ver. 18).

2. Man wants an object of worship,
He has instincts which urge him to pay
homage and reverence to a being or
beings higher than himself. Worship
is not imposed upon human nature, but
the development of some of the deepest
instincts of that nature. If it be ob
jected that peoples have been discovered
amongst whom there was no sign of the
religious element, the reply is obvious,
ie such extreme exceptions prove the
rule,

IL, The sad perversion of the reli-
gious element in human nature
(vers. 15-18). That which should
find its exercise and satisfaction and
blessedness in the holy and ever-blessed
God is here exhibited as turning to dead
idols—vain simulacra—in trust and
reverence,


1. This perversion indicates amasing


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





stupidity. How irrational ! how absurd
to suppose that a wooden, silver, or
golden thing can be worthy of homage
or of trust ! :

2. This perversion indicates moral de-
rangement. If the conscience and the
affections were in their normal con-
dition, idolatry would be impossible,
Idolatry is sin as well as folly.

3. This perversion ts deplorably de-
grading inits effects, ‘They that make
them are like unto them, so is every
one that trusteth in them.” “They
who, turning away from God’s witness
of Himself in the visible creation, wor-
shipped the creature rather than the
Creator, received in themselves the sen-
tence of their own degradation. ‘ Their
foulish heart became darkened.’ They
became blind, and deaf, and dumb, and
dead, like the idols they set up to
worship.”—Perowne, Worship is trans-
forming. Man becomes like his god.
These remarks are applicable to the
idolatries of our own land,—the wor-
ship of wealth, social status, &.

IIL The grand Object of worship for
man as a religious being. ‘Bless the
Lord,” &c. (vers, 19, 20). Here is an
Object—

1. Suited to the needs of man. We
have pointed out that man wants in his
god an object of trust and of worship,
The Lord is supremely trustworthy. He
is unchangeable and infinite in power,


PRALM OXXXVE.





kindness, and faithfulness, He is sup.
remely excellent. He is “ glorious in
holiness.” God is light,”

2. Suited to the needs of man as man
and of all men. The “ house of Israel,”
the “house of Aaron,” the “ house of
Levi,” and all “that fear the Lord,” are
here called upon to praise Him, The
Lord is the God not of any one class or
race, but “the God of the spirits of all
flesh.”

Here is the grand object of wor-
ship for all men. All others are false
and vain. Let all men worship the Lord
God, and in so doing they will find the
satisfaction, perfection, and blessedness
of being.

IV. The chief place of worship for
man as a religious being. ‘Blessed
be the Lord out of Zion, who dwelleth
at Jerusalem. Hallelujah.” ‘ As in
exxviii. 5, cxxxiv. 3, Jehovah blesses
out of Zion, so here, on the other hand,
His people bless Him out of Zion. For
there they meet to worship Him; there
not only He, but they may be said to
dwell (Isa, x. 24); and thence accord-
ingly His praise is sounded abroad.”—
Perowne, The church, though not the
exclusive, is the chief place of worship.
There devout souls meet ; there He has
promised to meet with them, &ec.

To the Lord God, and to Him alone,
let the hearty and reverent praise of all
men be given, “ Praise ye the Lord.”


PSALM CXXXVL


INTRODUCTION.


“This Psalm,” says Perowne, “is little more than a variation and repetition of the
receding Psalm, It opens with the same liturgical formula with which the 106th and 118th
Peatcis open, and was evidently designed to be sung antiphonally in the Temple worship.


Its structure is peculiar.


The first line of each verse pursues the theme of the Psalm, the


second line, ‘ For His loving-kindness endureth for ever,’ being a kind of refrain or response,
like the responses, for instance, in our Litany, breaking in upon and yet sustaining the theme
of the Psalm: the first would be sung by some of the Levites, the second by the choir as a
body, or by the whole congregation together with the Levites, We have an example of a
similar antiphonal arrangement in the first four verses of the 118th Psalm ; but there is no
other instance in which it is pursued throughout the Psalm. The nearest approach to the
game repetition is in the ‘Amen’ of the people to the curses of the Law as pronounced by the
Levites (Deut. xxii, 14).”

The subjects mentioned as the ground of the praise of the eternal mercy of God have so
frequently engaged our attention im previous Psalms as te require but little additional
Hlustration,


361


PRALM OXEXVI.





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


ne nA


Meroy in Gop AND IN CREATION.
(Verses 1-9.)


I. Mercy in the Divine Being and
Character (vers. 1-3). We have here—

1. A revelation of God in the names
applied to Him. (1.) “O give thanks
unto Jehovah.” Jehovah=é a= the
Self-Existing, the Continuing, the Per-
manent, the Everlasting. (2.) “O give
thanks unto the God of gods,”— the
Most High God, the Supremely Power-
ful, who is far above all that is called
God or worshipped as God. (3.) “O
give thanks to the Lord of lords,’— the
Ruler of rulers, whose authority is sup-
reme over all governors, princes, and
kings. Such, then, are the ideas of God
embodied in the names which are applied
to Him by the poet—the Self-Existing,
the Supremely Powerful, and the Sup-
remely Authoritative,

(2.) A revelation of God in His char-
acter. “QO give thanks unto Jehovah ;
for He is good.” (See Hom. Com. on
Ps. evi. 1, and exxxv. 3.) He is good
both in Himself and in His dealings
with His people.

3. A revelation of God in His relation
to men. ‘‘ His mercy endureth for ever.”
Mercy is a modification of goodness, It
is goodness in its relation to the sinful,
the ill-deserving, and the miserable. To
men ‘God is rich in mercy.” He de-
lights in showing mercy to them.
Connect the merey of God with those
aspects of His Being which are brought
into view in the names applied to Him,
“‘ Jehovah,” the Self-Existing, is essenti-
ally merciful. His mercy is eternal as
His Being. “The God of gods,” the
Supreme Deity, the Omnipotent, is
merciful. We cannot reverence mere
power. Might is sometimes terrible.
But the Most High is as tender as He
is strong. He is infinite in mercy as in
power. ‘The Lord of lords,” the Sup-
reme Ruler over all kings and magi-
strates, is a merciful Being. His com-
passion is as wide and deep and lasting
as His authority. For these reasons
let us praise Him.

I Mercy in the Divine work in
Te re 4-9). To the Psalmist


the universe was neither eternal, nor
self-originated, but a creation of God,

1. Creation is a work of wonder to
man. ‘ “To Him who alone doeth great
wonders.” The contrivances and com
structions of the universe are wonderful
in their skill and in their strength. The
more thoroughly man becomes ac-
quainted with the heavens and the
earth, the more astonishing are the
evidences which he discovers of infinite
intelligence in designing and almighty
power in creating them.

2. Creation is an embodiment of the
wisdom of God. ‘To Him that by wie
dom made the heavens.” The scientific
student discovers design and the most
benevolent and beautiful adaptations
in every department of nature. Only
a being of infinite intelligence could
have designed the universe with its in-
describable wonders, beauties, and uti-
lities.

3. Creation ts am expression of the
mercy of God. It exhibits the benevo-
lence as well as the wisdom of the
Creator. In the devout student it ex-
cites not only wonder and admiration,
but gratitude and praise. His mercy is
manifest tn the heavens, In their order
and harmony and beauty, and in their
benign influences, we discover indica
tions of His mercy. It is manifest also
in the earth, In making the earth fit
for human habitation, and.a pleassxt
habitation ; in making it so fruitful, so
safe, and so varied and beautiful in ap-
pearance, we,see His kindness. It is
manifest tn the sun and the day. The
sun is the source of light, warmth, life,
and beauty. The reign of darkness
would soon lead to the reign of death.
By its light and warmth the sun sustains
life and promotes joy. In a great mea-
sure the beauties of the universe are
produced by his influence, and without
his light no gleam of beauty would be
discernible. So we see in the sun and
the day the kindness of the Creator.
His mercy is manifest tn the night
and the moon and stars. Night with


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





its darkness and silence so eminently
adapted for sleep and rest, with its
enchanting and refining beauties of
moon and stars in the heavens, and their
reflection on the rippling surface of
rivers and the restless waves of the
sea,—for these we have felt deep thank-
fulness times innumerable. But, the
Psalmist represents the sun as ordained
“to rule by day,” and “the moon and
stars to rule by night.” (a.) They rule
by determining the duration of day and
night. (See Hom. Com. on Ps, civ.
19-23.) (6.) Their rule is an illustration
of the principle taught by our Lord that
he who is chief in service shall be chief
in sovereignty,—the true ruler most
diligently and heartily serves thuse
whom he governs, (Luke xxii. 25-27.)

The mercy of God which is manifested


in creation is eternal, ‘His mercy en-
dureth for ever ;” literally : “ For unto
eternity His mercy.” When the heavens
and the earth shall have passed away, the
mercy which was manifested in them shall
continue, We shall need mercy through-
out this life, in the hour of death, and
in the day of judgment; and mercy will
still endure and meet our need. The
generations that shall tread this globe
in the future will need mercy as much
as we do, and for them also mercy shall
remain as free and plenteous as ever,
“Unto eternity is His mercy.”
Let us—


** Make life, death, and that vast for-ever,
One grand sweet song”


of praise to Him whose mercy, like
Himself, is eternal.


Mercy IN THE REVOLUTIONS OF PROVIDENCE.
(Verses 10-22.)


There is no difficulty in discovering
the kindness of the dealings of God with
Israel. But where is mercy manifest in
His treatment of the people of Egypt,
of Pharaoh, Sihon, and Og? This we
will endeavour to show. There was—

I Mercy in the judgments upon
Egypt. ‘‘O give thanks to him that
smote Egypt in their firstborn ; for His
mercy endureth for ever.” The Egyptian
oppression of the Israelites was unjust,
wicked, cruel; they had reduced them
to slavery; they treated them with
brutality; they refused to liberate them,
although the command to do so was
authenticated by extraordinary wonders
and signs; judgments of less severity
had produced only a transient and brief
effect upon them; and so the Lord
brought upon them the severe stroke of
the death of the firstborn, both of man
and beast, and of small and great. It
is not only right but merciful to compel
the strong to respect the rights of the
weak, if they will not do so without
compulsion. It is merciful to insist
upon the doing of justice amongst men.

IL Mercy in the destruction of
tyrannical kings. “O give thanks to
Him who overthrew Pharaoh and his
host in the Red Sea; for His mercy en-


dureth for ever. To Him who smote
great kings,” d&c. (vers. 15, 17-20).
(See Hom. Com. on Ps. exxzyv. 8-11.)
We hold that it is in mercy that tyran-
nical and oppressive rulers are swept
from the earth,

1. [tts a mercy to themselves. (1.) Sup-
posing there be no retributory state in
the future, then it is a mercy to terminate
their existence ; for their life must be
tormented by the passions which they
cherish in their breasts. Ambition, lust
of power, cruelty, impoison their life at
its very springs. (2.) Supposing there
be a retributory state in the future (and
the evidence for the existence of such a
state is to us irresistible), then it is a
mercy to terminate the earthly existence
of the incorrigibly evil; for while it
continues, they are increasing their guilt,
and “treasuring up unto themselves
wrath against the day of wrath and re-
velation of the righteous judgment of
God.” For them prolongation of life in
the present will involve corresponding


increase of misery in the future, therefore


it is merciful to them to cut short their
wicked career.

2. It ts a mercy to mankind. The
existence of cruel and tyrannical oppres-
sors afflicts humanity like some terrible

363


POALM OXXXVi.


HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY: PSALMS.





nightmare. When they are removed the
race breathes freely once again. Such
ambitious tyrants, if unchecked, would
convert the fair world into a slaughter-
house reeking with human gore. The
peace and progress of mankind unite in
demanding the removal of ambitious
tyrants and cruel oppressors from the
face of the earth. To destroy such men
is a mercy to the entire human race.
Therefore let us “give thanks to Him
who smote great kings; for His mercy
endureth for ever.”

III. Mercy in the history of Israel.
It was manifest—

1. In their emancipation from Egypt
and its bondage. This was not accom-
plished by a single act or effort, It in-
volved a series of Divine interpositions,
The poet here mentions:—(1l.) Their
deliverance from slavery and from the
land of Egypt (vers. 10-12). It was in
mercy to them and to mankind that the
Israelites were rescued from the crushing
burdens which their oppressors imposed
upon them. The greatness of the mercy
may be approximately estimated by the
severity of the sufferings from which it
rescued them, and by the persistency
and power exerted in doing so, Bless-
ings have flowed to the entire human
race through the deliverance of Israel
from Egypt. (2.) Their deliverance
from peril at the Ked Sea (Exod. xiv.).
Point out their extremely perilous posi-
tion, Can they be rescued from it}
And how? Jehovah answers (a) By
dividing the waters of the sea. “To
Him that divided the Red Sea into
parts.” (8.) By nerving them to pass
through the watery walls, “ And made
Israel to pass through the midst of it.”
He manifested His power over the waters
in dividing them, and over the hearts
of the dismayed people by giving them
sourage to travel through a passage so


unprecedented, and apparently so peril-
ous, (y.) By the destruction of their
enemies by the same sea, “ And over-
threw Pharaoh and his host in the Red
Sea.” Thus the Lord completely and
gloriously delivered them from the hands
of their enemies, and conspicuously dis-
played His mercy to them.

2. Jn leading them through and sup-
porting them tn the wilderness, ‘To
Him which led His people through the
wilderness ; for His mercy endureth for
ever.” For the space of forty years He
protected them from their enemies, pro-
vided for their necessities, and guided
them in their wanderings by super-
natural agencies; and He did this not-
withstanding their oft-repeated unbelief
and rebellion against Him. In His
dealings with them in the wilderness, we
have a most impressive display of His
mercy to them.

3. In giving to them the land of Canaan
for an inheritance, He “slew famous
kings; and gave their land for an heri-
tage unto Israel, His servant; for His
mercy endureth for ever.” (See the
Hom, Com. on Ps, exxxv. 12.) The
land had been defiled by the wars, the
crimes, and the idolatries of the ancient
Canaanites, so God overthrew and dis-
inherited them, and gave their land for
an heritage to the people of His choice.
God manifests His mercy to His people by
a special regard to their interests in His
providential government of the world,

Conctusion.—Inasmuch as the mercy
of the Lord is perpetual—l. Let op-
pressors take warning. The constancy
of His mercy towards His people is a
pledge of the constant course of His jus-
tice against their enemies. 2. Let the
oppressed and afflicted take encourage
ment. His mercy is far greater than
their misery ; it is infinite, and it “em
dureth for ever,” }


Mercy 1x Human RepEMpTion AND PRovisIon.
(Verses 23-26.)


The poet refers in the 23rd and 24th
verses tu the deliverance of the Jews
from the Babylonish captivity, But this
section of the Psalm may appropriately

364


a


be applied to the spiritual redemptioa
and sustentation of man. Consider—

L The mercy of God in redemption
(vera, 23, 24).


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : PSALMS.


PSALM OXEXVE





1. The need of redemption, This arose
from (1.) Man’s depressed condition.
“ Our low estate.” From his high estate
man fell by sin; the crown and glory of
his being are gone; the completeness
of his moral power is broken ; he is a
degraded, ruined being. (2.) Afan’s op-
pressed condition. He is troubled from
without as well as from within. He is
begirt by “enemies.” The Chaldeans
had taken the Jews into captivity and
oppressed them. Man is enslaved by
sin, led captive by the devil; his
spiritual enemies are many and subtle
and strong; and he is unable to cope
successfully with them. He needs an
emancipator, a redeemer,

2. The stages of redemption. The poet
mentions two steps in the process of the
redemption of man. (l.) The exercise
of Divine thoughtfulness, He “remem-
bered us in our low estate.” It is un-
speakably assuring and encouraging to
know that the Lord thinketh upon us
in our helplessness and need. He is
interested in us. He careth for us, We
never pass beyond His kindly notice and
care. (2.) The exertion of Divine power.
“ He hath redeemed us fromourenemies.”
He set free the Jews from their captivity
in Babylon. He has redeemed sinful
and lost men by the power of His love,
manifested in the teaching and work,
the life and death, of the Lord Jesus
Christ. “Ye were redeemed with the
precious blood of Christ.” “ We have
redemption through His blood,” &c,

3. The source of redemption. “ For
His mercy endureth for ever.” In the
heart of God our redemption took its
rise. The streams of mercy by which
we are refreshed, strengthened, and


saved, flow from the throne of God,
Our redemption must be traced to the
loving-kindness of the Lord God. “O
give thanks unto the Lord; for He is
good ; for His mercy endureth for ever.”’

IL The mercy of God in provision.
“He giveth food to all flesh; for His
mercy endureth for ever.” ‘“ At length,”
says Calvin, “ He extends the fatherly
providence of God indiscriminately, not
only to the whole human race, but to
all animals, so that it might not appear
wonderful He should be so kind and
provident a Father towards His own
elect, since He does not reckon it a
burden to provide for oxen and asses,
ravens and sparrows,” (Comp, Ps. civ.
27, 28.) Two inquiries may fairly be
proposed here—

1. If He giveth food to the beasts, will
He be unmindful of the needs of man
who ts madein His own image? ‘‘ How
much then is a man better than a
sheep?” ‘Ye are of more value than
many sparrows.” (Ps. xxxiv. 9, 10.)

2. If He provides food for man’s
bodily necessities, will He not much more
provide for His spiritual needs? He
who has redeemed us from sin has also
promised us strength to empower us for
life’s duties, and grace to sustain us in
life’s trials. ‘The Lord will give grace
and glory; no good will He withhold
from them that walk uprightly.” The
mercy to which we owe so many and
great blessings, both in the past and in
the present, will never fail us. Through
all eternity it will continue to enrich us
with purest and most precious treasures.
“O give thanks unto the God of heaven ;
for His merey endureth for ever.”


Human Wretourepness AND Diving Compassion,
(Verses 23, 24.)


Any one would remember us in a high
estate; but Jesus remembers us in a
low one.

I, To take a view of the wretched
condition of mankind, in consequence
of their apostacy from God,

Language does not afford a more em-
phatic description of complete wretched-


ness than to say of a man that he {s lost
—a captive—a subject of corruption—-
dead /

1. Man has gone astray from the path
of life and happiness, Apart from Re-
velation, human nature itself bears wit-
ness to itself by evident marks of de-
generacy and corruption, The passions

365


PRALM OXXXVI.


which enslave our minds; the diseases
that afflict our bodies ; the disorders in
the natural and moral world around us;
the various wretchedness of man; and
the universal law of mortality, all pro-
claim that some unhappy change has
passed on our nature since its original
formation, Various conjectures have
been formed to account for this state of
things. But the Bible alone solves the
appearances so difficult to be reconciled
by unassisted reason. Here we are
taught that man, by transgression, has
debased himself below the rank origin-
ally assigned him in the creation of
God ; and that the consequences of the
sin of our first parents attach to all their
offspring, in the evils which arise from a
sinful, sorrowful, and mortal condition,
Our steps are now voluntarily turned far
away from the only path of happiness,
(See Job xxi. 14; Jer. ii. 13; Rom, iii.
11, 12.) For this is the habitual state
of mind, not of the more grossly profli-
gate and abandoned only, but of man-
kind generally, however improved by
culture and enlightened by education—
the active principle of rebellion against
God, which Grace alone can subdue.

2. Man has not only left the path of
life, but stands exposed to the fatal effects
of Divine displeasure, by actual transgres-
ston. The sentence of the broken law
holds in full force (Gal. iii, 10; Col.
iii. 6), And who knoweth the power of
God’s anger? Who can imagine the judg-
ments which God has in store against
the enemies of truth and righteous-
ness? (Job xxxiv. 29, xxviii, 22, 23; Ps.
xxxix. 11), If such be the effect of His
fatherly chastisement under a dispensa-
tion of mercy, how dreadful must His
fiery indignation be when Guilt has run
its full course, and Justice is compelled
to take its unrestricted sway! (Heb. x,
31.) There is not a part of these fleshly
tabernacles which He cannot visit with
exquisite anguish ; and if but a spark
of His wrath {fall upon the soul, how
dreadful is the ruin! Witness Cain,


Judas, Simon Magus, Ananias, and.


Sapphira,
3. That we are unequal to our own
deliverance,
IL Flpcapaet: the method of Divine
6


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





compassion to man in his rescue from
this state of guilt and misery.

1. By the incarnation and death of the
Son of God. Throwing a veil over the
dazzling glories of Divinity, He came
among us in great humility, bearing the
attractive character of a kinsman and a
friend. He is a Physician to heal, a
Shepherd to seek, and a Saviour to re-
store. (Luke xix. 10.)

To see the nature and importance of
His work, look back to the Old Testa-
ment. See what a space our redemption
has occupied in the Divine counsels;
see how all events in Providence were
made to prepare for it ; see what lofty
representations are given of it by the
ancient prophets ; see how all the types
and institutions of the law prefigured
His approach, and how all these aucient
prefigurations are accomplished in His
death,

You become convinced of His high
qualifications for this important work,
when you observe the perfection of His
mediatorial nature, blending the attri
butes of earth and heaven—all the ten-
derness of suffering humanity with all
the glory of the unapproached Divinity.
In magnitude the work of redemption
has no rival ; and none but the Lord of
life and glory was equal to such a work.
We know that Infinite Wisdom would
not make choice of a weak and ineffec-
tual instrument, or appoint to so import
ant an office one unqualified to perform
it. All objections vanish and all fear
are banished when we read of Him a
“Emmanuel, God with us.” (Matt. i.
23 ; John i. 14; 1. Tim. iii, 16). You
may see the ability of Christ to save
in the high attestations He received,
Thrice did the Voice from heaven pro-
claim, “This is My beloved Son,” &e.
On the Cross, when He offered Himself
a sacrifice holy and acceptable, all nature
was convulsed, and the veilof the Temple
was rent in twain. At His resurrection
the stone was rolled away from the door
of the sepulchre, and He was declared
to be the Son of God with power, By
His ascension He rose victorious to
heaven, that he might fill all things,
And He is now exalted at the right
hand of power as a Prince and a Savious,


HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY: PSALMS,





(Heb. vii. 25). Meditate much, there-
fore, upon His equal ability and willing-
ness to save. As the merit of His
atonement exceeds by infinite degrees
the guilt of your sin, so does the power
of His grace surpass the strength of your
eorruption,

2. By the work and agency of- His
Blessed Spirit. He who made your
hearts can surely renew them ; and He
who glorified Christ in the days of the
Apostles can glorify Him still in your
experience, by applying the testimony
of the Word, and raising you from the


POALM OXXXViL





death of sin to the life of holiness,
Commit yourself to Christ, therefure, as
the great Physician. He will purify
your souls by His Spirit, &e.

3. By the combined influence of His
Providence and Grace, Christ is engaged
to bring many sons to glory; and He
overrules all the scenes of their earthly
lot and mortal history, to guide theis
footsteps through time and discipline
their hearts for the purity and bliss of
heaven, (Isa, xxvi. 7; Psa. xvi. 11.)—
Samuel Thodey.


PSALM OXXXVIL
INTRODUCTION.


“There can be no doubt whatever,” says Perowne, ‘‘as to the time when this Psalm was
written. It expresses the feeling of an exile who has but just returned from the land of his
eaptivity. In all probability the writer was a Levite, who had been carried away by the
armies of Nebuchadnezzar when Jerusalem was sacked and the Temple destroyed, and who was
yae of the first, as goon as the edict of Cyrus was published, to return to Jerusalem. He ig
again in his ownland. He sees again the old familiar scenes, the mountains and the valleys
nat his foot trod in youth are before him. The great landmarks are the same, and yet the
ehange is terrible. The spoiler hag been in his home, his vines and his fig-trees have been cut
down, the house of his God is a heap of ruins, His heart is heavy with a sense of desolation,
and bitter with the memory of wrong and insult from which he has but lately escapea.

‘* He takes his harp, the companion of his exile, the cherished relic of happier days,—the
harp which he could not string at the bidding of his conquerors by the waters of Babylon; and
wow with faltering hand he sweeps the strings, first in low, plaintive, melancholy cadence
pouring out his griefs, and then with a loud crash of wild and stormy music, answering to the
wild and stormy numbers of his verse, he raises the psean of vengeance over his foes,

‘¢ What a wonderful mixture is the Psalm of soft’'melancholy and fiery patriotism! The
hend which wrote it must have known how to smite sharply with the sword, ag well as how to
tune his harp. The words are burning words of a heart breathing undying love to his country,
undying hate to his foe. The poet is indeed—


“*‘Dower'd with the hate of hate, the scorn of scorn,
The love of love,’ ”


Precious, yEtT SORROWFUL, REOOLLECTIONS.


(Verses 1-6.)
The poet here expresses the deep sympathy, and excites our imagination.
eorrow of Israel during their exile from But our business is to elicit its


the land of their fathers, and their
solemn vow never to forget the holy
city. No song of praise was heard
amongst them, their harps were hung
upon the willows, and their recolleo-
tions of Zion filled them with sadness,
Attracted by a common sympathy, a
fellowship of suffering, they assembled in
companies upon the banks of the Baby-
lonian streams, and expressed their deep
grief in sighs and tears, The scene
is intensely poctie; it awakens our


teachings,

I. They wept at the recollection of
lost privileges. “We wept when we
remembered Zion,”

1. Their tears express their patriotism,
“If I forget thee, O Jerusalem,” é&e.
(vers. 5, 6), We all know something of
love of country. Whatever may be the
natural, political, or moral characteria-
tics of the country which gave us birth
and education, there is none like unto it
in heart attractions, In everything else

367


PSALM CXXXVIL


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


it may be greatly surpassed by other
countries; but in its hold upon our
heart it stands unrivalled. “ No power
can sever our heart from the land of our
birth.” But if a country be beautiful
or sublime in its scenery, fertile in its
soil, wise and liberal in its institutions
and government, and rich in historical
associations, then its hold upon the
heart of its people is more intense and
close. Thus stood the case in respect of
the Jews and their country. To them
there was no land like Canaan. It wasa
magnificent country, with grand old moun-
tains towering sky-ward, and delicious
plains fertile and flower-clad, and watered
by delightful streams, “A good land,
a land of brooks of water,” &c. (Deut.
viii, 7-9). Moreover, it was sacred to
them by immortal and precious memo-
ries,—memories of Abraham and Moses,
Joshua and Samuel, David and Solo-
mon, Elijah and Elisha,—memories of
the glorious doings of God on behalf of
their fathers Well may these Jews
love such a country. But this country
they had lost; and these tears bewail
their loss.

2. Their tears express their yearning
for freedom. Once they were free under
their glorious theocracy. But their free-
dom they had lost. They had lost their
civil liberty, and were captives; their
religious liberty, and were in the land
of idolaters, Their tears expressed their
sorrow for the loss of their liberty, and
their longing for its recovery. Their
tears expressing their yearning for liberty
tell us that man was not made for bond-
age, that in proportion to the force and
fulness of his manhood will be his un-
willingness to submit to bondage in any
form. In the same proportion he will
feel the degradation and smart of the
yoke of the oppressor, and pine and
strugrle for liberty. God made man to
be free, Freedom is the birthright of
man as man, and of every man,

3. Their tears express their love for the
house of God and the ordinances of wor-
ship, The loss of their country and of
their political privileges was great, and
was deeply felt by them; but their
spiritual deprivation in being sundered
from Zion =e a greater loss, and was

36


more deeply felt by them. “We wept
when we remembered Zion.” (On Zion
and its associations, see Hom. Com. on
Ps. xlviii. 1-3, lxxvi. 2, cxxxii. 13, 14.)
Zion was inseparably connected with the
supply of their spiritual requirements,
aud the development of their moral and
religious nature. The loss of those
things which tend to ennoble and de-
velop our higher nature—our true self—
is the greatest of all losses, Having those
things upon which the growth and pro-
gress of our soul depend we are rich,
though in other respects we may be
as destitute as Lazarus: without those
things we are abjectly poor, though ia
other respects we may be as rich as he
at whose gate Lazarus was laid. These
most costly things, these divinest things,
the Jews had lost. From Zion, with all
its sacred mementoes, and delightful
associations, and divine ordinances, and
religious privileges, they were ruthlessly
torn, They had lost all, Country lost,
liberty lost, the Temple lost, the manifes
tation of God lost,—all lost /_ Well may
they weep! Two facts are suggested by
this portion of our subject :—(1.) True
love 1s independent of bodily presence or
nearness. When far removed from Zion
the love of the captive Jew for the
sacred place became not cold, but more
fervent. Material distance cannot quench
the holy flame, Moral distance is the
only thing which can, (2.) True love
endures through time and all its changes.
Seventy weary years of deprivation and
sorrow failed to extinguish the love
of the pious and patriotic Jew for Zion.
Neither duration nor change can exhaust
genuine affection: it is a growing and
abiding thing.

IL They wept at the recollection of
privileges which they had lost by
reason of their non-appreciation of
them. They were removed from their
country and their home because of their
sins, ‘They were carried to Babylon in
consequence of their neglect of Divine
ordinances, their idolatry, rebellion
against God, and spiritual apostacy. No
people were more favoured, or were
so favoured as they were, They had
been warned, exhorted, entreated, en-
couraged, d&c, (Comp. Jer. vii. 25, 26,


HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY: PSALMS,


| BPOALM OXXXVIT,


a i Sng


xxv. 1-11.) They were thoughtless, dia-
obedient, stiff-necked, determined to pur-
sue their own course; and it led them


to Babylon with all its sorrows. And -


now in the sufferings of exile they begin
to consider, now recollection plays its
part, now their eye is turned upon them-
selves, and reflection brings self-reptoach
and added sorrow. How painful must
have been their recollections of Zion!
Zion which they had neglected, dis-
honoured, despised’; and from which
they were justly exiled ;—Zion which
once in the beauty of its situation they
had regarded as “the joy of the whole
earth,” now ruined and desolated by
their Pagan foes, the fertile vales of
Palestine all dreary and neglected, the
walls of Jerusalem levelled to the ground,
the city destroyed, the Temple desecrated
—painful, indeed, must have been their
recollections! Yet, could they forget
their country and Zion? Never! Re-
collection constantly led them there, and
their sins rose darkly before them. When
they had their privileges they failed to
appreciate them, neglected them; when
they lost them they saw their value, “The
well is never prized until it is dry.”
Observe here three important factse—
1. We are prone to disparage the ordt-
nary and regular blessings of life We
see this as regards the blessings of the
kind and pious home, the Christian
ministry and means of grace, the Bible,
and even salvation and the Saviour.
Familiarity engenders neglect.

2. The disparagement of these blessings
tsan ample cause for their withdrawal,
The Jews disparaged their privileges,
and for seventy years God withdrew
from them some of His most precious
gifts, Let those who neglect the fami-


¢


depreciated! d&e.


liar blessings of this Christian land and
age be warned. God may withdraw His
most precious gifts from you, é&ec.

3. Should these blessings be withdrawn
their value would then be felt—be felt
when tt ts too late. The privileges of
Zion were valued by the Jews in
Babylon ; they were valued when lost.
“Like birds whose beauties languish, half

concealed,
Till mounted on the wing, their glossy plumes
Expanded shine with azure, green, and gold ;
How blessings brighten as they take their
flight!” — Young.

Let us be wise and appreciate Heaven’s
gifts while we have them.

What a solemn view of life this sub-
ject presents / Every circumstance and
action of life by the operation of memory
is endless in its influence. Memory
eternalises the records of life. Memory
makes the fleeting present everlasting.
How important then is life! Do you love
Zion? Are you wisely estimating and
using your religious advantages and
opportunities? Or are you penittently
sorrowing at the recollections of the past ?
What opportunities neglected, blessings
Thank God! the
blessings are not yet withdrawn ; salva-
tion is still offered, &c, Look from the
guilty past to Jesus for pardon and life,
Then take your harp from the willows,
and join in the song of the ransomed,
“Unto Him that loved us,” &. Our
responsibilities are proportivned to our
privileges, The Jews were banished
from their Temple and country for
neglecting their privileges. This was
the most bitter ingredient in their
sorrow by the rivers of Babylon. How
great, then, are the responsibilities of the
people of this land and age}


Harps on THE WILLOWS,
(Verse 2.)


This is a beautiful and pathetic picture
of the captive Jews and their sorrows in
the land of Babylon. ...

And is not that a picture of many con-
ditions of your human life? Sorrow has
invaded our lives. We wander by the
side of some Babylonian stream. We
hang our harp upon the willow that


VOL, IL


bends above it. We weep when we
remember the happier moments tha
have fled.

There are three things that we would
learn from this picture of sorrow,

L Every man has a harp.

The harp was the well-known instru-
ment for the accompaniment of song,


PSALM CXXXVIL


Its music was sweet and delightful.
When calamity fell upon the nation
their harps were silenced, &c.

And thus it is with all our lives, We
have the elements of joy in them, the
powers of song and gladness, and there
is no man who has not the capacity and
the occasion for delightful mirth.

1. Just think of the constitution of our
nature, wherein a place is secured for
joy. The body is attuned to pleasure,
God might have made us with organisa-
tions fitted for life, for recreation, for
intelligence and activity, and yet alto-
gether without the capacity of experiene-
ing pleasure. Consider the sense of
hearing. Sounds might have been so in-
distinct that to hear would have required
the constant exercise of attention,- the
strain of effort painful and wearying ; or
they might have been so powerful that
& whisper would be shocking, whilst the
natural speech of our friends would be
like the explosion of cannon close to the
ear. And yet how exquisitely has God
harmonised the sound and the sense !

2. What a harp man possesses tn
physical nature if he would only let its
music be heard. Every sight and sound,
every scene and action, all things fair
and good, bright and godly, are but
fingers of Nature’s skilful hand, which
will touch the strings of the harp of our
being, and wake their perfect tones of
rapture.

3. Man has the harp for pleasant ac-
companiment of happy song tn the region
of the immaterial and the intellectual.
What delights there are in intellectual
operations! The joy of learning—when
it is indeed learning worthy of the
name ; the discovery of the unknown ;
the pursuit of the law which underlies
obscure phenomena; the search for
causes; the enumeration of effects—
these and others afford keen and lasting
delight.

4, The pleasure which belongs to the
still higher spherewhich we are privileged
to enter. I forbear to pursue the de-
lights of our soul in its affections—the
raptures of home ; the loves of children,
&c. Let me now only remind you of
that sacred melody which ts attuned when
the joys es the spirit are experienced The

370





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS. —


sinner seeks his Saviour, and finds the
pardon of Father and of Friend. You
remember the hour of forgiveness.
Heaven’s clouds were cleared, the storm
was hushed, the dread was dissipated,
and a Father's love received you through
the mighty merits of a Saviour’s death,
The best music of all the Christian poets
falls far short of the rapture which
dwells within the forgiven heart.

And with what language shall we tell
of the occasions for harping that have
occurred so often since the first forgive-
ness} Have there not been Bethels of
a Divine covenanting, Horebs of refresh-
ment, and Red Sea passages of deliver-
ance and triumph’? Prayer has had its
blessed answers, and meditation its holy
raptures. Nothing but song could ex-
press our heightened feeling; and we
felt as if angel-hands were sweeping the
cords of our harp of life, and making
the glad accompaniment to our joyous
mood. (Comp. Isa. li. 11.)

Remember, this harp must be tuned
and practised on. And yet it is the
last thing some Christians think of—
tuning their harp. Let Zion re-echo
with your songs.

IL But sometimes the harp has to
be hung upon the willows. In the
land of Babylon the Israelites had no
heart to sing. Tears were the only out-
pourings of which they were capable.
And so it is with the harps of life. We
have to lay them aside or hang them
upon willows that droop over rivers of
sadness, by whose banks we sit and
wail.

1. It is thus when disease invades our
bodies or sorrow smttes the soul. Songs
are not suitable to funerals, and harp-
ings in the house of mourning are out
of place and impertinent.

2. There are some silences still more
profound that fall upon the music of our
life. The father whose eldest son for-
swears his father’s faith, and throws
away his father’s virtues, and wins only
a name that will be a dishonour among


‘men—such a father has little heart for


harpings, and is, indeed, in a silent land
of bitter exile,

3. And then how useless is the harp
when we ourselves are in the hours of


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : PSALMS.





spiritual distress. God is absent, and
we know no gladness till He shows His
face again, They sang a hymn when
the Master was among them, even
though when they rose from the supper
it was to pass to Gethsemane, and
Pilate’s bar, and Calvary. But their
hearts had no desire for singing in.the
suspense and numb agony of the hour
when the Christ lay dead. And so it is
with the Christian still, &c.

Itt. But though there is no heart or
place for song, and the harp must be laid
aside, it needs not to be cast away.

They had been foolish and wicked
men of Israel if they had flung their
harps beneath the running river, and
thus deprived themselves aitogether of
the means of melody when the days of
joy came back again. (See Ezra iii. 9-13.)

So, brethren, cast not away your harp.
The weather will clear and the soul will
awake to gladness when the sunshine
comes.

And the sickness will depart, and the
strengthened frame shall recover its
wonted sense of health and vigour.
Not always the darkened room, &,


PSALM CXXXVIL


—


Yea, and there shall be some hours
of gladness even for the wailing weary
heart that sickens over the sinfulness of
child and friend. It was a sad home
when the prodigal was far away. But
one day the father saw the returning
son, ragged, worn, and disgraced, and
that night there was music and dancing
in the long silent homestead. Keep
your harp, my friend, &c.

And thou, too, depressed and cast
down Christian, throw not away thy
harp. There shall be peace and joy and
fulness of blessing yet for thee. God
shall show Himself, and Christ will yet
return,

The time when the harp shall be
needed may not come until the moment
of death. A life of sorrow, doubt, or
conflict may not have one hour of leisure
or delight, and only swan-like can be
the song; and yet, then the harp will
be needed, though only one chord may
be struck from it upon earth—its strains
sounding amid the music of heaven,
Then, for all a harp will be gained, for
all shall sing the new song of Mosea


and the Lamb.— Lil. D. Bevan, LL.B.


Tae Dirroutty or Sinerwva Sones In EXILe.
(Verse 4.)


IL What the world is to the Ohris-
tian. “A strange land.” Like Babylon
to the Israelites, There they had many
comforts; for God “ made them to be
pitied of all those that carried them cap-
tives.” They were treated more like


colonists than captives; and many of -


them grew wealthy and were even loth
to return. But it was not their home.
What Babylon was to Israel such is the
present evil world to the Christian. Like
a man born in a cottage, the son of a
prince, to whom a rich inheritance be-
longs in another country, when he comes
to know the secret of his birth, the rank
he sustains, and the possessions that
belong to him; then that which was his
home ceases to be so, and he longs to
cross the river, or climb the mountain,
or set sail for his true country : so it is
with the Christian who, though born a
worldling, and once satisfied with his


portion, now learns the secret of his true
and nobler birth. Many of the sons of
the captives were born in Babylon; but,
having the heart of an Israelite, felt it
not a home: it was “a strange land” to
them.

On earth the Christian feels himself
to be an exile—distant from his Father's
home—distant from near and beloved
connections and friends who have got
home before him. True, he has many
comforts, &c, But still this is not his
rest; not his birthplace; not the con-
dition for which his faculties and affec-
tions were originally designed. There
are times in which his hope is full of
immortality, and he has bright glimpses
of the better country in his hours of
faith and devotion ; and then he feels
indeed a stranger and a pilgrim; he
spurns the yoke; he mourns the chain ;
and, like a captive minstrel, hangs his

871


POALM OXXXVI,


harp upon the willows, and cries, “ Oh,
that I had wings like a dove,” &ec,

IL Whence arises the difficulty of
singing the Lord’s song in a world like
this? It may be done; it is important
that it should be done; provisions are
made for doing it, for they had harps and
they had the subject of their song, just
as Christians have now the means, the
materials, and the elements of their
spiritual joy. Yet there are obstruc-
tions to the full enjoyment of the peace
which the Gospel brings, Whence arises
the hindrance 3

1. From want of sympathy in those
around ws. Their oppressors did not ask
for the song from love to the religion,
or sympathy with the captives, but to
add insult to their misery by holding up
their religion to contempt, and mocking
at the hope and promise it contained.
Here we admire the captives. They did
not forget to take their harps with them
to Babylon. They did not refuse to sing
because they were ashamed of their reli-
gion, or would make a secret of it.
They did not hide their harps, as if they
were afraid of their avowal; and they
did not break their harps, as if they were
abandoned to despair; but they hung
them upon the willows in sight of the
foe, and only refused to sing because the
company was uncongenial.

And is it not so still? Are not the peace
and happiness of the children of Zicn
grievously diminished by the uncongenial
society with which they are called to
mingle—sometimes in their own families,
when a believing wife is yoked to an un-
believing husband, or a religious husband
to an irreligious wife? ‘Can two walk
together, except they be agreed ” (Amos
iii, 3). How much less can two sing
together? When Christians mingle with
irreligious persons in the same house, the
same shop, the same workroom, &c.





HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





9. From the pressure of outward trial
and of mental grief. I know that all the
troubles of the wilderness ought not to
put us out of tune for singing the songs
of Zion; but they sometimes do. We
have often observed a counter-effect pro-
duced for a season by the calamities of
life—-that whereas they are both designed
and adapted to lead us at once and
directly to God, yet under the first and
immediate pressure an opposite effect is
produced, till principle has time to rally
and grace obtains her triumph. The
cup intoxicates; the blow stuns. David
expresses this in Ps, lx. 3,

But even then the Christian does not
break his harp; he only suspends it;
and if he cannot find a song, he will at
least hush the breath of murmuring and
complaint. David corrects his despon-
dency, and at the very worst anticipates
brighter times (Ps. xlii, 11). Yet the
Lord Jesus anticipates even His suffer-
ings with a song (Matt. xxvi. 30.)

3. Because our hearts are out of tune
for the exercise. Under the conscious
ness of spiritual declension it is very
difficult to “sing the Lord’s song.”

UL What answer shall be returned
to the inquiry—“ How shall we sing
the Lord’s song”$ &c.

1. Jf you would sing the Lord's song
tn adversity, make yourself well ac-
quainted with tt tn prosperity. It is bad
to have our comforts to seek when we
want to enjoy them; our anchor to pro-
vide when we want to use it; our song
to learn, &c. (Isa. xii. 1).

2. Live close to God, and exercise re-
newed acts of faith in Christ. Retrace


your steps if you have wandered, “ Re-
pent, and do thy first works,”
3. Be much tn prayer. “Open Thou


my lips,” de.
4, Honour the work and agency of the
Holy Spirit.—Samuel Thodey.


Sones In A Srranae Lanp.
(Verse 4.)


L The Ohristian on earth is in a


strange land—
1. As to his feelings.
2. As to his supplies,
& As to his dangers


87%


Il. The Christian on earth, althouga
in a strange land, has songs—

1. Of gratitude.

2. Of penitence,

&. Of resignation.

4, Of hope.—George Brooks.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PRALM OXXXVIL





RETRIBUTION.
(Verses 7-9.)


We have in these verses—

I. An important feature of the
Divine government of the world. The
designs of God are sometimes wrought
out by wicked men, but this affords no
excuse to such men, nor will it secure
to them any exemption from the just
consequences of their deeds. In the
Babylonish captivity this is strikingly
exemplified. The Jews were carried
into Babylon by the permission of God
as a punishment for their many sins,
particularly their idolatry, And in one
respect, at least, the captivity accom-
plished its purpose; for the Jews have
hever since relapsed into idolatry. So
far the Babylonians did the work of
God. But they did it unintentionally,
unconsciously. They had no thought of
working out the purposes of God in so
doing, but simply of fulfilling their own
proud and lawless designs) The cap-
tivity was overruled by God for the
accomplishment of His designs, yet on
the part of Babylon it was unjustifiable
and wicked. And did she go unpunished}
No. The hour of retribution struck,
the strange fingers appeared in the royal
banquet hall, the letters of doom with
appalling distinctness and mystery were
inscribed upon the wall, the enemy even
then was close upon the city: “in that
night was Belshazzar king of the Chal-
deans slain,” and Babylon, “the lady of
kingdoms,” was a kingdom no longer.
We see the same principle in operation
in the life of Joseph (Gen. 1. 20; Ps.
Ixxvi. 10).

How magnificent is this aspect of the
Divine government! All things in the
universe are under the control of the
Almighty, and the most malignant
powers are used for the accomplishment
of His glorious purposes, There is no
real triumph of falsehood and evil, Their
victories are only brief appearances, All
things in the universe are aiding to
enthrone the True and the Good.

IL A cry for retribution. “Re-
member, O Lord, the children of Edom,”
kc, “Deepest of all,” says Dean


Stanley, “ was the indignation roused by
the sight of the nearest of kin, the race
of Esau, often allied to Judah, often
independent, now bound by the closest
union with the power that was truly the
common enemy of both. There waa
an intoxication of delight in the wild
Edomite chiefs, as at each successive
stroke against the venerable walls they
shouted, ‘Down with it! down with
it ! even tothe ground!’ They stood in
the passes to interrupt the escape of
those who would have fled down to the
Jordan valley ; they betrayed the fugi-
tives ; they indulged in their barbarous
revels on the Temple hill, Long and
loud has been the wail of execration
which has gone up from the Jewish
nation against Edom. It is the one
imprecation which breaks forth from
the Lamentations of Jeremiah; it is
the culmination of the fierce threats of
Ezekiel ; it is the sole purpose of the
short, sharp cry of Obadiah; it is the
bitterest drop in the sad recollections of
the Israelite captives by the waters of
Babylon ; and the one warlike strain of
the Evangelical Prophet is inspired by
the hope that the Divine Conqueror
should come knee deep in Idumean
blood (Lam, iv. 21, 22; Ezek. xxv.
12-14; Obad. 1-21; Jer. xlix. 7-22;


Isa. xiii, 1-4).”


This cry to the Lord for retribution
to Edom implies—

1. The existence of the sense of justice
in the human soul.

2. Belief in the righteous government
of God.

3. Belief im the efficacy of prayer
to God.

Il. An illustration of the nature of
retribution. ‘“O daughter of Babylon,
who art to be destroyed, happy shall he
be that rewardeth thee as thou hast
served us.” Margin: “That recom-
penseth unto thee thy deed which thor
didst to us.” Perowne, literally : “‘ The
requital wherewith thou hast requited
us.” ‘ Agreeably to His justice,”
says Tholuck, “God exercises the jus

378


PSALM OXXXVIIL





talionis, Justice is elastic; the unjust
blow I inflict upon another, by the
order of the moral world, recoils upon
myself.” (Comp. Judges i. 6,7; Jer.
li, 54-56.) “ God has undertaken,” says
Bushnell, ‘‘to dispense justice by a law
of natural consequence. He has con-
nected thus, with our moral and phy-
sical nature, a law of reaction, by which
any wrong of thought, feeling, dispo-
sition, or act, provokes a retribution
exactly fitted to it, and to the desert of
it. And this law is just like every law
of natural order, inviolable, not subject
to suspension, or discontinuance, even
by miracle itself. And justice is, in
this view, a fixed principle of order, as
truly as the laws of the heavenly bodies.”

IV. The desire for retribution is
prone to develop into vindictiveness
towards those who have injured us.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





“Happy shall he be that taketh and
dasheth thy little ones against the rock.”
In ancient warfare the indiscriminate
slaughter of persons of all ages and of
both sexes was common. Perhaps the
Psalmist in this utterance “only acts
as a Divine herald to confirm former pre-
dictions.” As a matter of fact Cyrus,
the conqueror of Babylon, is reckoned
amongst the heroes of history. But
“there is great need to have the heart
well guarded with the fear of God, for,
otherwise to allow the dashing of little
ones against the stones, might make a
man guilty of savage cruelty.” Guard
earnestly against a vindictive spirit.

“¢ Consider this, —
That, in the course of justice, none of us
Should see salvation: we do pray for mercy ;


And that same prayer doth teach us all te
render


The deeds of merey.”—Shakespeare.


PSALM OXXXVIIL


INTRODUCTION.


“This,” says Barnes, ‘is the first of a series of eight Psalms (Ps. xxxviii.—cxlv.)
placed together in this part of the book, and ascribed to David. They appear to be of the
nature of a supplement to the Book of Psalms, composed of Psalms unknown to the original
collector and arranger of the Book, and subsequently discovered and ascertained to be the
works of David. It is not to be regarded as strange that there should be Psalms of this nature
composed by David at different periods of his life, which might have been preserved in dif-
ferent branches of his family, and which might not have been generally known to exist. It is
rare that the works of an author, especially a poet, are collected and published, and that things
of this kind—fugitive and occasional pieces—are not subsequently found ; nor is it very un-
usual that such pieces may, after all, be amongst the most tender, touching, and beautiful of his
compositions. Burn’s ‘Highland Mary,’ so much admired, and his, ‘When wild War's deadly
blast was blown,’— a poem which no one can read without tears,—with not a few others of hia,
are of this description, They are eaid, in his Biography, to have been ‘extracted from the
correspondence of Burns.’

“The occasion on which this Psalm was composed cannot now be determined.”


A Devout ResoLuTion, GRATEFUL RECOLLECTION, AND AN ENCOURAGING
ANTICIPATION.


(Verses 1-5.)


We have here—

IL A devout resolution (vera. 1, 2).
The poet resolves to celebrate the praise
of God, and to do so—

1. Jn the most excellent manner. (1.)
Hearttly. “TI will praise Thee with my
whole heart.” It is remarkable that he
does not say whom he will praise until
he comes to the fourth verse, This is
significant. “It is as though in the

374


Pzalmist’s heart there could be but one
object of praise, whether named or un-
named.” Whole-heartedness and fer-
vour in worship are acceptable unto
God. (2.) Confidently. ‘Before the
gods will I sing praise unto Thee,”
“The gods,’” says Perowne, “are the
false gods, the objects of heathen wor-
ship, in the very presence of whom, and
to the confusion of their worshippers,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


ee ee ees


the Psalmist will utter his praise of the
true God.” When our faith in God is
strong we shall be neither afraid nor
ashamed to praise Him before any per-
son. (3.) Becomingly. ‘I will worship
toward Thy holy temple.” The Psalmist
was not allowed to enter the interior of
the tabernacle, which he here designates,
“Thy holy temple.” The tabernacle
was regarded as the special residence of
the Most High, Because He specially
manifested Himself there, the pious
Israelites turned their faces towards it
when they worshipped. Thus Daniel
in his exile prayed with “ his windows
open in his chamber toward Jerusalem.”
There are certain forms and arrange-
ments for worship which are reverent
and seemly, and these every devout wor-
shipper will endeavour to conform to,
“Keep thy foot when thou goest into
the house of God,” &, We must wor-
ship reverently through the mediation
of Jesus Christ.

2. For the most excellent reasons, “I
will praise Thy Name for Thy loving-
kindness and for Thy truth; for Thou
hast magnified Thy word above all Thy
Name.” The poet resolves to praise the
Lord because of the kindness and
faithfulness which He had manifested
according to His Word. The final clause
in the second verse has occasioned con-
siderable difficulty to some expositors,
The interpretation of Barnes, Hengsten-
berg, Henry, Perowne, and others seems
to us undoubtedly correct,—that the
revelation of Himself which God has
given to man in His Word surpasses in
clearness and preciousness all the other
manifestations which He has made of
Himself. Thus Perowne: “ Thy word,
or promise.’ (Comp. Ps, lvi. 10, lx. 6,
Jxii. 11.) No particular promise is
meant. The same word occurs fre-
quently in Ps, cxix. Above all Thy Name.
The expression seems to mean that to
the soul waiting upon God, and trust-
ing in His word, the promise becomes
so precious, 80 strong a ground of hope,
that it surpasses all other manifestations
of God’s goodness and truth ; or in the
promise may here also be included the
fulfilment of the promise.” In His Word
God has given many exceeding great


PSALM OXXXKVITi,





and precious promises, and they are all
worthy of acceptation ; for God in His
fulfilment is better even than in His
promises. Here then is an excellent
reason for praising God, because He has
manifested so much of Himself, and
especially of His loving-kindness and
faithfulness to us in His Word. Our
revelation is much fuller and richer than
was that of David. ‘“ We see Jesus,”
“ And, in His face a glory stands,

The noblest labour of Thy hands;

The radiant lustre of His eyes

Outshines the wonders of the skies.”

— Watts,

Therefore, our praise should be more
hearty and confident than was that
of David.

II. A grateful recollection. “In
the day when I cried Thou answeredst
me, and strengthenedst me with strength
in my soul,” Perowne: “ ‘Thou madest
me courageous with strength in my
soul.” In time of need the Psalmist
had sought the Lord in prayer, and the
Lord had heard and graciously answered
him. God had answered him—

1. Speedily. “In the day when I
cried Thou answeredst me.” ‘ Before
they call, I will answer ; and while they
are yet speaking, I will hear.” (Comp.
Dan. ix. 20-24.)

2. Spiritually, “Thou madest me
courageous with strength in my soul.”
We pray in time of difficulty, and He
gives us wisdom and courage to meet
and surmount the difficulty ; in time of
affliction, and He gives us patience and
strength to bear the suffering. “ My
grace,” saith He, “ is sufficient for thee.”
Recollections such as this one of David’s
stimulate the heart to grateful and joy-
ous praise,

Il, An encouraging anticipation.
The Psalmist confidently anticipates a
time when all the kings of the earth
shall recognise Jehovah as God, and
render to Him devout homage and
cheerful obedience.

1, All kings shall be made acquainted
with the highest revelation of God and
with His glory. They shall “hear the
words of His mouth,” and see that
“great is the glory of the Lord.” The
Gospel shall be preached in al) the

375


PRALM JXXXVIEL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.








world, and the glory of the Divine grace
shall be exhibited to all peoples. God in
Christ shall be made known to all men.
2. When all kings are acquainted
with “the words” and “the glory of
the Lord” they will heartily praise and
cheerfully serve Him. “Shall praise
Thee, O Lord,” &c. “ Yea, they shall
sing in the ways of the Lord.” “The
ways of the Lord ” are those of obedience
and worship ; the ways of reverence to-
wards God and righteousness towards
men. ‘They shall tread them with
cheerfulness, Obligation will be re
garded as a privilege. Duty will be


transformed into delight. Statutes willl
be translated into songs, and set to
joyous music, A true acquaintance
with the highest revelation of God ts cal-
culated to lead to such a result. The
revelation of God in Christ is fitted to
inspire our trust, to captivate our affee-
tions, and to secure our enthusiastic
obedience. Let the world heartily ac-
cept Christ—the Christ not of the
creeds and the churches, but of the
Evangelists—as the supreme Revelation
of God, and it will speedily bow to His
authority, resound with His praise, and
delight in His service.


Gov’s Worp Exatrep.
(Verse 2.)
“Thou has magnified Thy word above all Thy Name.”


I. As the medium of His self-mani-
festation.
II. As the exposition of His govern-
ment.


Tl. As the record of His will
IV. As the instrument of His power.
V. As the revelation of His love,
—W. W. Wythe.


An Earnest PrayreR, AND AN IMMEDIATE ANSWER.
(Verse 3.)


Consider—

IL. The earnestness of his prayer.

“T cried unto Thee.” Beautiful de-
scription of prayer—crying unto God,
“Prayer,” says Mrs. More, “is the cry
of want, to Him that can relieve it ; of
guilt, to Him who is able to pardon it ;
of sorrow, to Him who is able to relieve
it.” (So Ps. cxix. 145.)

1. Lt supposes the pressure of distress,
under the frowns of the world ; under
the temptations of Satan; under the
difficulties of the way; under the
exigencies of the Christian conflict,
The day of trial, a long day—a dark
day—a stormy day—a day that brings
God and the soul together. The time of
affiction is the time of supplication,
God afflicts us that He may hear from
us.
2. It sepposes the ready recourse of
the Christian to God tn prayer. No
sooner does the storm of danger come
down than the cry of faith and fervour
goes up. It is this spirit of heartfelt
continued instancy in prayer that keeps

376


the Christian in the hour of temptation,
or in the floods of adversity, and main-
tains the spiritual life within. But often
is the Christian constrained to acknow-
ledge that his heart has little to do with
the cry of his lips. Yet in danger still
he cries—sometimes with a cry which
no words could fully express, that vents
itself only in “ groanings which cannot
be uttered ”—a cry that “enters into
the ears of the Lord of Sabaoth.”

3. It supposes previous habits of ae
guatntance with God; for we do not run
to a stranger in distress, much less to an
enemy, but to a known and tried friend.

4. It supposes the union of prayer and
thankfulness. Praise should always fol-
low where prayer is answered. A gra-
cious man is a praising and a grateful
man, As answers come down, praises
should go up.

IL. The effectual relief he gained.


God is a prayer-hearing and a sin-


pardoning God,
1. He obtained an immediate answer.
“In the day when I cried Thos


.*) a


SOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





answeredst,” dc. Moses cried at the
Red Sea, and had instant help. No
needless delay: no indifference to the
state and condition of the Church on
the part of God. (Compare Ps. xxxii.
3-5.) . . . While the voice of penitent
confession was suppressed, his cries and
lamentations were disregarded; but upon
the first utterance of prayer from his
lips, or rather on the first purpose of
contrition formed in his heart, the
pardon, the full and free pardon, is
granted, “TI said, I will confess, ...
and Thou forgavest.” How prompt was
the answer to Jacob’s prayer at Jabbok
(Gen. xxxii. 24-30) ; to Gideon’s (Judges
vi. 36-40 ; to Daniel’s (Dan. ix. 20-23).

2. He was replenished with inward
grace. “ Thou strengthenedst me with
strength in my soul.” Strength to bear
troubles ; strength to overcome tempta-
tions ; strength to war with the powers
of evil. Especially was he strengthened
in the actings of faith—led to renewed
exercises of dependence upon the power
and grace of Christ. Weak indeed are
our purposes without grace to strengthen
them, and worthless our good resolu-
tions without grace to carry them out ;


PSALM OXXXVIZL,


ae


but when the grace is enjoyed, difficulties
give way, enemies are overcome, and in-
ward peace is attained amidst outward
trials, This is God’s way of putting
life into the soul, when by an inexpres-
sible sweetness and power He allures the
soulto Himself. Every step, indeed, to
the very end will be a conflict with be-
setting sin or with remaining enmity
and unbelief. But in answer to prayer
there will be a continual drawing of the
Spirit of God towards high and holy
things. The same Hand that gave a
new bias to the soul in a heavenward
motion, will confirm and strengthen it
to the end,

3. The principle of hope was tself
reinvigorated, that he was not only
strengthened for the present, but en-
abled to anticipate the future. “Though
I walk in the midst of trouble, Thou
wilt revive me.”

IIL The force and inspiration of
his example upon other minds.

“ All the kings of the earth shall
praise Thee, O Lord, when they hear
the words of Thy mouth,” &. We not
only must be religious ourselves, but help
others to be so.— Samuel Thodey.


Gop’s TREATMENT oF DIFFERENT CLASSES OF CHARACTER.
(Verses 6-9.)


L God’s treatment of the humble,
“Though the Lord be high, yet hath He
respect unto the lowly.”

l. The character, “Thelowly.” Not
the lowly in outward condition merely,
but in inward disposition—the humble.
Humility is not a thing of circumstances,
but of soul,

2. The treatment. ‘‘The Lord hath
respect unto the lowly.” He “looks
upon” them. He not only sees them,
but regards them graciously. He views
them with approving interest, and affords
them kindly aid.

3. The reason. ‘ Because the Lord
is high He hath respect unto the lowly.”
The A. V. in giving the impression that
the Lord looks upon the humble notwith-
standing His greatness does not repre-
sent the poet’s meaning, God graciously
regards the poor in spirit because He is


so great. A more correct rendering is,
“For the Lord is lifted up, and looks
upon the lowly."—Hengstenberg. Or:
“For lofty is Jehovah, and the humble
He sees.”— Barnes. God is a great
Being, and therefore He is condescend-
ing. Hengstenberg: “ The lofty eleva-
tion of the Lord forms the ground, on
account of which He lifts up the lowly,
brings down the proud ; not: and yet ;
but : and therefore.” “ Thus saith the
high and lofty One that inhabiteth
eternity, whose name is Holy; I dwell
in the high and holy place, with him
also that is of a contrite and humble
spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble
and to revive the heart of the contrite
ones.”

IL God’s treatment of the proud
“The proud He knoweth afar off.”

1. Thecharacter. “The proud.” Not


377


POALM OXXXVIIL


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





the exalted in station, but the haughty,
the arrogant. Pride is unbecoming,
foolish, sinful. “Pride,” says Sidney
Smith, “is not the heritage of man;
humility should dwell with frailty, and
atone for ignorance, error, and imperfeo-
tion,”

2. The treatment, Jehovah knoweth
the proud afar off. He regards them
only at a distance. Pride is an insuper-
able barrier between God and man, A
haughty man is not regarded by God
with favour, nor can he have any com-
munion with Him. “Every one that
is proud in heart is an abomination to
the Lord.”

IIL God’s treatment of His afflicted
people. ‘Though I walk in the midst
of trouble,” &. We have here—

1. A depressing possibility in the life
of good men. The life of a good man
may be—(1.) Surrounded by trouble—
a journey “in the midst of trouble,”
Piety does not secure a man from the
afflictions of life. The godly man is
exposed to infirmities and diseases of
the body, to losses and difficulties in
temporal affairs, to family and social
trials and bereavements, to spiritual
conflicts and distresses. Like Job, the
godly man is sometimes almost over-
whelmed with trouble, The life of a
good man may be—(2.) Imperilled by
angry enemies. The Psalmist seems to
have been exposed to the wrath of his
adversaries when he wrote this Psalm.
The godly soul is exposed to the assaults
of spiritual foes, The lusts of the flesh,
the. cares and anxieties, pomps and
vanities, shams and dissipations of the
world, and the subtlety and power of
the devil are arrayed against him. The
good man is acquainted with both
trouble and peril; he has trials and
enemies,

2. An encouraging confidence in the
life of good men. David was confident
of—(1.) Revival in trouble. “Thou wilt
revive me,” He had an unfailing hope
that the Lord would quicken and
strengthen him to bear his triala, He


sustains and comforts His afflicted
people. David was confident of—(2.)
Deliverance from enemies. ‘‘ Thou shalt
stretch forth Thine hand against the
wrath of mine enemies, and Thy right
hand shall save me.” God exerts His
almighty power for the protection and
salvation of His people. The good are~
shielded by Omnipotence.

IV. God’s treatment of His trustful
people. ‘The Lord will perfect that
which concerneth me,” &c. Notice :—

1. The inspiring assurance. The poet
was confident that the Lord would
accomplish the work which He had
begun concerning him. God does not
abandon His work in an incomplete
state. We are “confident that He
which hath begun a good work in you
will perform it until the day of Jesus
Christ.” “Grace will complete what
grace begins,” :

2. The firm basis of this assurance,
The confidence of the Psalmist was
grounded on the unchangeableness of
God’s everlasting mercy. “Thy mercy,
O Lord, endureth for ever.” He who
bases his trust of complete and glorious
salvation on this foundation will never
be put to shame,

3. The humble dependence of this
assurance, “ Forsake not the works of
Thine own hands.” The poet here
translates into a prayer what he had
just before expressed as a conviction of
his soul. Prayer is one of the means
whereby the completion of the Divine
work in us and for us is secured. The
good man is sensible of his own weak-
ness and waywardness, and depends
upon God to perfect His own work in
his salvation. In the material universe
there are no unfinished worlds or sys-
tems ; no half-made and forsaken works
of His hands. And His work in the
soul that trusts Him He will continue
until it attains full and glorious perfec-
tion.

Here, then, is encouragement to His
people to trust in Him at all times.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.








THe Masrsty anp ConpEScCENSION or Gop.
(Verse 6.)


“Though the Lord be high, yet hath He respect unto the lowly.”


L The majesty of God. IL The condescension of God.

1. Consider His eternity. 1. Consider the persons to whom His
2. Consider His immutability, preference is shown.

3. Consider His power. 2. Consider the special blessings with
4, Consider His goodness, which He honours them.—Geo. Brooks


PSALM CxXXXIX,
INTRODUCTION.


** Nowhere,” says Perowne, ‘‘are the great attributes of God—His omniscience, His
omnipresence, His omnipotence, set forth so strikingly as they are in this magnificent Psalm,
Nowhere is there a more overwhelming sense of the fact that man is beset and com passed about
by God, pervaded by His Spirit, unable to take a step without His control; and yet nowhere is
there a more emphatic assertion of the personality of man as distinct from, not absorbed in the
Deity. This is no pantheistie speculation, Man is here the workmanship of God, and stands
in the presence and under the eye of One who is his Judge. The power of conscience, the
sense of sin and of responsibility, are felt and acknowledged, and prayer is offered to Oue who
is not only the Judge but the Friend; to One who is feared as none else are feared, whe is
loved as none else are loved.

** Both in loftiness of thought and in expressive beauty of language the Psalm stands
pre-eminent, and it is not surprising that Aben Ezra should have pronounced it to be ‘the
crown of all the Psalms.’ ‘he Psalm both in the Hebrew and the LXX. is ascribed to David.

‘*The rhythmical structure iz, on the whole, regular. There are four strophes, each con-
sisting of six verses; the first three atrophes containing the proper theme of the Psalm, and
the last the expression of individual feeling.

“‘T, In the first strophe the poet dwells on the omniscience of God, as manifested in His
knowledge of the deepest thoughts and most secret workings of the human heart, vers. 1-6,

‘«TI, In the second, on His omnipresence, inasmuch as there is no corner of the universe
go remote that it is not pervaded by God’s presence, no darkness so deep that it can hide from
His eyes, vers. 7-12.

“TIL The third strophe gives the reason for the profound conviction of these truths of
which the poet’s heart is full. No wonder that Ged should have so intimate a knowledge of man,
for man is the creature of God : the mysterious beginnings of life, which none can trace ; the
days, all of which are ordered before the first breath is drawn,—these are fashioned and ordered
by the hand of God, vers. 13-18,

“TV. In the last strophe the Psalmist turns abruptly aside to express his utter abhorrence
of wicked men—an abhorrence, no doubt, deepened by the previous meditation on God and
His attributes, and called forth probably by the circumstances, in which he was placed ; and
then closes with a prayer that he himself may, in his inmost heart, be right with that God who
has searched him and known him and laid His hand upon him, and that he may be led by Him
in the way everlasting, ver. 19-24.”


Gop’s Perrect KNow.epcs or Max.


(Verses 1-6.)


strophe the omniscience of God as re-
lated to human life.

IL God knows all men. David does
not write of himself alone. That the
Psalm is addressed “ to the chief musi-
cian” is a proof that it was intended to


Onur purpose is not to write on the
omniscience of God in general, or to
make an attempt to set it forth with com-
pleteness and show its relations and
bearings ; but to call attention to those
aspects of it which are mentioned by


the Psalmist, and to indicate the prac-
tical bearing of these aspects upon
buman life. The noet sets forth in this


be set to music for use in public wor-

ship, The entire congregation was to

use tha Psaim. [te nttarancea wong 2g
379


PUALM OXXXIEX,





be adopted by every member of the con-
gregation, Every person in the world
may say with truth, “O Lord, Thou
hast searched me and known me,” &c.
Neither is there any creature that is not
manifest in His sight ; but all things are
naked and opened unto the eyes of Him
with whom we have to do.”

II. God knows all men thoroughly.

1. He knows all their words and
actions, ‘Thou art acquainted with
all my ways, for there is not a word
on my tongue, but lo, O Lord,
Thou knowest it altogether.” The
entire course of every human life, and
every step in every individual course,
are perfectly known to God, and not
a@ word that is uttered by human
tongues escapes His ear.

2. He knows all their thoughts. “ Thou
understandestmy thought afar off.” How-
ever great the distance between God and
man may seem to be, yet He is “a dis-
cerner of the thoughts and intents of his
heart.” Calvin: ‘‘God is not shut up
in heaven, as if He delighted in an idle
repose (as the Epicureans feigned), and
neglected human affairs; but though
we live at a great distance from Him,
still He is not far from us.” All worthy
thoughts and pure and generous feelings
He knows, and all evil thoughts and
impure and malignant feelings He also
knows, “ Before men we stand,” says
Beecher, ‘‘as opaque beehives’ They
can see the thoughts go in and out of
us ; but what work they do inside of a
man they cannot tell. Before God we
are as glass beehives, and all that our
thoughts are doing within us He per-
fectly sees and understands,”

Ill. God knows all men constantly.
At all times and under all circumstances
He is perfectly acquainted with us. He
knows us in work and in rest, in our
daily walk and in our nightly repose,
‘Thou knowest my downsitting” for
rest, “and mine uprising” for action.
“Thou compassest my path and my
lying down.” Perowne: “ My path and
my bed Thou hast examined.” Lit,
“Thou hast winnowed,” or “sifted.”
Hengstenberg : “iT, properly, to sift,
then poetically, to prove, to know.”
God ae our “path,” our way of


_ HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : PSALMS,


SR AMR CSL PS RE ASE TD ESI in SRI i el


active life, and our “couch” or “ bed,”
our thoughts and feelings in our place
of rest. We are altogether and always
perfectly known unto Him. God’s know-
ledge of us differs from our knowledge
of each other not only in its extent and
completeness, but in other respects,

First, His knowledge is underived
and independent. We receive instruc-
tion from tutors and information from
books. But He receives not his know-
ledge from anything without Him. His
knowledge is as independent as Him-
self and His own essence. Who hath
directed the Spirit of the Lord, or, be-
ing His counsellor, hath taught Him 4”
“Our knowledge,” says Charnock,
“depends upon the object, but all
created objects depend upon God’s
knowledge and will: we could not
know creatures unless they were; but
creatures could not be unless God
knew them.”

Second, His knowledge ts clear and
perfect, “We see through a glass,
darkly ;” and only “know in part.”
He knows all things clearly and dis
tinctly, intimately and thoroughly, in-
fallibly and perfectly. ‘God is light,
and in Him is no darkness at all”
“ His understanding is infinite.”

Let us endeavour to point out the
practical bearing of this knowledge ez
us and on our life. It ought to prove—

1. An antidote to the pride of tntel-
lect, ‘Such knowlege is too wonderful
for me; it is high, I cannot attain
unto it.” We cannot comprehend the |
Divine omniscience. Our attempts to
do so end in ignominious failure. We
can but cry, “Oh, the depth of the
riches both of the wisdom and know-
ledge of God!” &c. How vain and
ridiculous it is for any man to pride
himself in his intellectual attainments
or acquisitions! What we know is al-
most as nothing in contrast to what
we do not know. ‘“ We have a drop
of knowledge, but nothing to the
Divine ocean, What a vain thing is
it fo a shallow brook to boast of its
streams before a sea, whose depths are
unfathomable !”

2. An effectual restraint from sins
both of heart and of action. The eye


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMA.





of man often imposes a restraint upon
the evil-doer; and shall the eye of
God, which is ever upon us, be disre-
garded? Men seek to hide their evil
doings by the darkness of night, say-
ing, “‘How doth God know? can He
judge through the dark cloud?” But
darkness cannot hide from Him. He
knows the evil thought, the dark de
sign, the impure feeling. Secret sin
is impossible. Let the fact of God’s
omniscience check evil in its first
beginnings.

3. A solemn warning to the sinner.
Secrecy does not hide from God, hypo-
crisy does not deceive Him, the lapse of
time does not cause Him to forget, all
sins are known to Him, and will be visited
upon the sinners unless they are par-
doned. ‘ What a terrible consideration
is it to think that the sins of a day are
upon record in an infallible understand-
ing, much more the sins of a week:
what a number, then, do the sins of a
month, a year, ten or forty years arise
to!” Sinner, take warning,

4. The utter impossibility of any man
justifying himself in the sight of God,
God knows all and everything. “Our
secret sins are in the light of His coun-
tenance.” He sees defects and imper-
fections even in our best deeds, “ Enter
not into judgment with Thy servant ;
for in Thy sight shall no man living be
justified.”

5. A comfort to the people of God when


FOALM OXXXIZ.





misjudged by man. Men frequently mis-
take the motives of their fellow-men and
judge them harshly, But how comforting
it is to turn from man unto God. “ Behold,
my witness is in heaven, and my record is
on high. He knoweth the way that I
take,” é&c. Our cause is in the hands of
the Omniscient and All-Merciful.

6. A guarantee of the well-being of the
people of God. God not only knows,
but also cares for His people. ‘As pro-
vidence infers omniscience as the guide
of it, so omniscience infers providence as
the end of it.” He knows them in their
weakness to sustain them, in their need\
to provide for them, in their dangers to
rescue them, in their sorrows to comfort
them, &c. Our Lord Himself set forth
the Divine knowledge as an encourage-
ment to His people to trust in God,
Your Heavenly Father knoweth that
ye have need of all these things,” &e.
(Matt. vi. 31, 32).

7. A pledge of the triumph of the
Divine government, All the dark and
cunning designs of His enemies are
known to Him. Their most secret plans
cannot surprise Him. Their most subtle
plans cannot baffle Him. He will make
their counsel of no effect, and frustrate
their deepest schemes. His omniscience
assures us of the triumph of His cause.
All things are under His control. He,
and He alone, can say, ‘‘My counsel
shall stand, and I will do all My plea
sure,”


Gop’s OMNIPRESENCE.
(Verses 7-12.)


The Psalmist here treats of the omni-
presence of God, not as a metaphysical
conception, but as a momentous prac-
tical truth, This truth he sets forth in
language of great force and beauty. In
other portions of the Holy Word this
truth is clearly and forcibly expressed,
1 Kings viii 27; Jer. xxiii, 23, 24;
Amos ix. 2,3. According to the repre-
zentation of David—

_ L God is personally present every-
where. The Psalm was not written by
a Pantheist. He speaks of God as a
Person everywhere present in creation,


yet distinct from creation, In our text
He says, “ Thy Spirit, . . . Thy pre
sence, ... Zhowartthere, ... Thy
hand, .. . Zhyrighthand, . . . dark
ness hideth not from Thee.” Qod is
everywhere, but He is not everything,
All things have their being in Him, but
He is distinct from all things. He fills
the universe, but is not mingled with it,
He is the Intelligence which guides, and
the power which sustains; but His per-
sonality is preserved, and He is inde-
pendent of the works of His hands, how-
ever vast and noble. Charnock : “ Where


#)


POALM OXXXIX.


light is in every part of a crystal globe,
and encircles it close on every side, do
they become one? No; the crystal re-
mains what it is, and the light retains
its own nature, God is not in us as a
part of us, but as an efficient and pre-
serving cause.” “In Him we live, and
move, and have our being.” ‘We live
and move in God, so we live and move
in the air; we are no more God by that
than we are mere air because we breathe
in it, and it enters into all the pores of
our body.”

II. God is infiuentially present every-
where. The Psalmist felt that where-
ever he was—in heaven, in Sheol, or on
the utmost verge of creation—he would
be led and sustained by God. “ Even
there shall Thy hand lead me, and Thy
right hand shall hold me.” He is every-
where present in His sustaining energy.
“OQ Lord, Thou preservest man and
beast.” ‘By Him all things consist.”
“ He upholds all things by the word of
His power.” He is everywhere present
by His controlling energy. He restrains
and overrules all evil. He originates
and fosters all good. ‘‘ This influential
presence may be compared to that of the
sun, which, though at so great a dis-
tance from the earth, is present in the
air and earth by its light, and within the
earth by its influence in concocting those
metals which are in the bowels of it, with-
out being substantially either of them.”

Til. God is intelligently present
everywhere. The poet felt that, wherever
he was and in whatever circumstances,
he would be fully known to the Lord.

“ And should I say : Only let darkness
cover me, and the light about me be
night ; even darkness cannot be too dark
for Thee, but the night is light as the
day; the darkness and light (to Thee
are) both alike.” “The eyes of the
Lord are in every place, beholding the
evil and the good.” ‘ With one single
look He beholdeth the whole universe,
As I am accounted present in this audi-
tory, because I see the objects that are


here, because I am witness of all that.


passes here ; so God is everywhere, be-

cause He sees all, because veils the most

impenetrable, darkness the most thick,

distances the most immense, can conceal
382


HOMILETYO COMMENTARY : PSALMS.





nothing from His knowledge. Soar to
the utmost heights, fly into the remotest
climates, wrap thyself in the blackest
darkness, everywhere, everywhere, thou
wilt be under His eye.”—Saurin.

IV. God’s presence is everywhere
realised by the godly soul. To the
Psalmist the Divine omnipresence was
not a@ mere opinion, not a mere article
of a creed, but a realised fact. “ Whither
shall I go from Thy Spirit? or whither
shall I flee from Thy presence?” He
felt the presence of God everywhere,
At every step and in every circumstance
of life he felt himself in that presence.
In all the phenomena of nature he re-
cognised that presence. To him all
things are full of God, “ yet all distinct
from Him. The cloud on the mountain
is His covering ; the muttering from the
chambers of the thunder is His voice;
that sound on the top of the mulberry
trees is His ‘going;’ in that wind,
which bends the forest or curls the
clouds, He is walking; that sun is His
still commanding eye.” The godly soul
is possessed by an intense consciousness
of the constant presence of God.

“God is a sphere or circle, whose
centre is everywhere, and circumference
nowhere.” So far is His presence from
being bounded by the universe itself,
that, as we are taught in our text, were
it possible for us to wing our way into
the immeasurable depths and breadths
of space, God would there surround us,
in as absolute a sense as that in which
He is said to be about our bed and our
path, in that part of the world where
His will has placed us. As He is larger
than all time, so He is vaster than all
space.

Let us now point out the practical
bearings of this great truth.

1. It should restrain us from evil.
The eye of a child will effectually check
the execution of some evil purposes;
more the eye of man or woman; yet
more the eye of a holy man or woman.
Men chose darkness and secrecy for the
perpetration of evil, But “there is no
darkness nor shadow of death where the
workers of ‘iniquity may hide them-
selves.” God’s eye sees all things every-
where, He is in the darkness by the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : PSALMS.


PSALM OXXEIX,





side of the worker of iniquity.
He is perfectly holy.

2. It should lead us to hold humble
thoughts of ourselves and exalted ideas of
God. How small are we to God! Our
existence seems almost as non-existence
when placed beside Hisimmensity. Let
His greatness excite our reverence. * Let
our littleness lead us to constant lowli-
ness,

3. It should comfort and strengthen
the people of God in severe trial, in pain-
ful loneliness, and in arduous duty. He
accompanies His people into the furnace
of affliction, and preserves them from
injury. ‘When thou passest through
the waters, I will be with thee,” &ec. (Isa.
xliii, 2). When exiled from friends,
or forsaken of friends, or bereaved of
friends by death, His presence is never
withdrawn. If He call us to some diffi-
cult task, He assures us, “ My presence
shall go with thee.” His realised pre-
sence is the secret of the success of
Moses, Paul, &c.

4, It should be an tncentive to holy
action. The athletes of Greece and
Rome were inspired to run or wrestle
by the knowledge of the fact that they
were surrounded by a vast assembly of


And


spectators. It is said that, at the battle
of Prestonpans, a Highland chief of the
noble house of M‘Gregor was wounded
by two balls and fell. Seeing their chief
fall, the clan wavered, and gave the
enemy an advantage. The old chieftain,
beholding the effects of his disaster,
raised himself up on his elbow, while
the blood gushed in streams from his
wounds, and cried aloud, “I am not
dead, my children: I am looking at you
to see you do your duty.” These words
revived the sinking courage of the brave
Highlanders, and roused them to put
forth their mightiest energies ; and they
did all that human valour could do to
stem and turn the dreadful tide of battle,
Oh! if we but realised God’s presence,
felt Him near to us, our life would be-
come brave and beautiful and holy.
God is not only present everywhere, but
everywhere present to inspire, and aid,
and bless.

5. It ts of vital importance to all
worshippers of God. The consideration
of the Divine omnipresence is calculated
to destroy formality, to inspire reverence,
and to strengthen faith. ‘ Where two or
three are gathered together in My name,
there am [ in the midst of them.”


THE OMNIPRESENCE OF GOD AND Its IMPRESSIONS UPON Man.
(Verses 7-12.)


There is one circumstance in the text
which directs a humble mind how it
ought to be treated, and that is with
the utmost humility of devotion ; for it
is a direct address to God Himself.
However discursive the imagination
might be on other texts, on this it is
quite out of character.

If this thought be powerful on the
mind of your preacher, there is another
which ought equally to affect the minds
of the hearers ; and that is, that you are
now in a place where you ought to feel
yourself most exposed to His survey.
God indeed is about your bed and about
your path; but in the house of prayer
you voluntarily expose yourself to His
immediate notice, you court His scru-
tiny. Recollect that God is present;
the King is now come in to see His


guests: He knows with what motives
you have come hither; whether you
prayed before you came; whether you
listened to the reading of the Scriptures
as to the Word of God; whether you
prayed in prayer; whether you sung
with devotion, ‘ making melody in your
heart to the Lord.” Yes, my brethren,
even now you are weighed in the
balances of the sanctuary, God grant
that you may not be found wanting.

I. Let us endeavour to realise the
grand sentiment which the text con-
tains.

God is everywhere present. The first
thought of the sinner is how he may
escape. ‘‘ Whither shall I go from Thy
Spirit?” &c. How vain! A reflection
upon human nature. Grace is wiser ; it
teaches us to seek His presence, “ Let

383


PRALM OXXXIXx.





him take hold of My strength,” d&e.
‘‘When shall I come and appear before
God hd

How many present have never re-
flected upon the subject; and though
always surrounded by God, have never
derived comfort from His presence!
Without hope, without God— awful
thought !

1. How great must be the Being who
possesses such an empire/ ‘These are
His attributes; these are not limited.
A wing that never tires: an eye that
never sleeps.

2. How melancholy the reflection that
the great thought that occurs to the sinner
is how he may escape Him/ ‘ Whither
shall I go from Thy Spirit?” &c, This
is not natural: sin is the cause of it.
How false the hope! How miserable
the condition |

3. How valuable ts that religion which
teaches us to hope in His mercy; which
tells us that over all worlds He exercises
a Father’s care ; that His fostering wing
extends to the minutest object ; and that


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





He especially discerns the returning
sinner.

IL. Let us trace some of the impres-
sions which it ought to produce on
individual character.

1. The utter hopelessness of a career
of crime or of indifference to God.
Wherever you are engaged in guilt, God
is there to interrupt, to record, to dis-
appoint, to vex the soul. Think of this
in your plans of life, in business, in your
families. Examples: Achan (Josh, vii.
16-26), Gehazi (2 Kings v. 20-27).

2. The strong consolation afforded to
the humble penitent. He sees every de
sire, hope, effort. ‘“ Why sayest thou,
O Jacob?” d&c. (Isa. xl. 27-31).

3. The absolute necessity of making
this God our Friend.

4. The glory of heaven, where His pre-
sence is felt only to bless.

5. The dreadfulness of that world in
which His mercies are “clean gone for
ever,” and Hts influence is felt as an
unmitigated and insupportable curse.—
Samuel Thodey.


Man a Wonprrrut Creation or Gop.
(Verses 13-16.)


The connection of these verses with
the preceding seems to be this—God
must needs have a perfect acquaintance
with man because He created him,
Hengstenberg suggests that verse 13
refers back to verse 2. ‘ Thou knowest
my downsitting and mine uprising, Thou
understandest my thought afar off...
For Thou hast formed my reins,” &c,
The Psalinist here states that—

I, Man is acreation of God. “Thou
hast formed my reins, Thou didst weave
me together in my mother’s womb.”—
Perowne’s translation.

Man was created—

1. According to God’s design. “In
Thy book all my members were written,”
&c. What the architect is to the edifice
God is to man. We existed first as an
idea in the Divine mind, And if we
read, ‘In Thy book all of them were
written, the days which were ordered
when as yet there was none of them,”
we still vite the idea of the Divine

38:


design in the life of man. Man’s entire
being is prearranged by God.

2. Under God’s inspection. ‘My
substance was not hid from Thee, when
I was made in secret,” &c. The great
Creator superintended the formation of
man’s bodily frame in the secrecy and
obscurity of the womb.

3. By God's power. “Thou hast
formed my reins, Thou didst weave me
together in my mother’s womb.” God
is the Author of our being: our parents
are but the instruments thereof. Every
human being is a creation of the Divine
power.

II. Man is a wonderful creation of
God. ‘‘I am fearfully and wonderfully
made ; marvellous are Thy works, and
that my soul knoweth right well.” This
is manifest—

1. In hts body. ‘The frame of man’s
body, and the cohesion of its parts,”
says Lord Herbert, “are so strange and
peradoxical, that I hold it to be the


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PSALM OXXXIL,





greatest miracle of nature.” “An ana-
tomist, as Dr. Paley observes, who
understood the structure of the heart,
might say beforehand that it would
play; but he would expect, I think,
from the complexity of its mechanism,
and the delicacy of many of its parts,
that it should always be liable to derange-
ment, or that it would soon work itself
out. Yet shall this wonderful machine
go night and day, for eighty years to-
gether, at the rate of a hundred thou-
’ sand strokes every twenty-four hours,
having at every stroke a great resistance
to overcome; and shall continue this
action for this length of time without
disorder and without weariness, Each


«ventricle will at least contain one ounce ~


of blood. The heart contracts four
thousand times in one hour, from which
it follows, that there passes through the
heart every hour four thousand ounces,
or two hundred and fifty - pounds, of
blood. Now the whole mass of blood
is said to be about twenty-five pounds,
80 that a quantity of blood, equal to the
whole mass of blood passes through the
heart ten times in one hour; which is
once every six minutes When we
reflect also upon the number of muscles,
not fewer than four hundred and forty-
six in the human body, known and
named ; how contiguous they lie to each
other, as it were, over one another ;
crossing one another; sometimes em-
bedding in one another ; sometimes per-
forating one another; an arrangement
which leaves to each its liberty, and ita
full play ; this must necessarily require
meditation and council. Dr. Nienentyt,
in the Leipsic Transaction, reckons up
a hundred muscles that are employed
every time we breathe: yet we take in,
or let out, our breath without reflecting
what a work is hereby performed—what
an apparatus is laid in of instruments
for the service, and how many such con-
tribute their assistance to the effect.
Breathing with ease is a blessing of
every moment; yet of all others, it is
that which we possess with the least
consciousness,” — Buck,

“The human body is ever changing,
ever abiding ; a temple always complete,
end yet always under repair; a mansion

VOL. ii.


which quite contents its possessor, and
yet has its plans and its materials altered
each moment; a machine which never
stops working, and yet is taken to pieces
in the one twinkling of an eye, and put
together in the other; a cloth of gold
to which the needle is ever adding on
one side of a line, and from which the
scissors are ever cutting away on the
other. Yes: Life, like Penelope of old,
is ever weaving and unweaving the same
web, whilst her grim suitors, Disease and
Death, watch for her halting ; only for
her is no Ulysses who will one day in
triumph return.”—Dr. G, Wilson.

Truly we are ‘fearfully and wonder-
fully made,”

2. In his rational soul. That which
thinks, feels, desires, resolves, we call
the soul, The soul is wonderful tn tteclf.
We do not know what it is; we cannot
apprehend it by any of the senses ; it has
neither shape nor size; it is a mystery.
It is wonderful tz ts powers. How
great and marvellous are its powers of
memory, reflection, reasoning, anticipa-
tion, imagination, &c, And these powers
are capable of endless development and
increase. How fearfully and wonder-
fully are we made,

3. In the union of soul and body.
How dissimilar they are; yet they are
united! Man “is sure that he is dis-
tinct from the body, though joined to
it, because he is one, and the body is
not one, but a collection of many things,
He feels, moreover, that he is distinct
from it because he uses it; for what a
man can use he is superior to. No one
can mistake his body for himself. It is
his, it is not he, . . . When two things
which we see are united, they are united
by some connection which we can under-
stand. A chain or cable keeps a ship
in its place. We lay a foundation of a
building in the earth, and the building .
endures, But what is it that unites
soul and body? how do they touch?
how do they keep together? So far
from its being wonderful that the body
one day dies, how is it that it is made
to live and move at all? how is it that
it keeps from dying a single hour?

“ Again: the soul is in every part of
the body. It is nowhere, yet every-

385


POALM OXXXIE.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,





where. Since every part of his body
belongs to him, a man’s self is in every
part of his body. The hands and feet,
the head and trunk, form one body
under the presence of the soul within
them, Unless the soul were in every
part, they would not form one body ; so
that the soul is in every part, uniting
it with every other, though it consists
of no part at all."—J. H. Newman,
This seems contradictory, yet it is true.
How mysterious is our being! How fear-
fully and wonderfully we made!

III. Because man is a wonderful
creation of God he should celebrate the
praise of his Creator. “1 will praise
Thee ; for I am fearfully and wonderfully
made.” Man as a creation of God pre-
sents many and remarkable illustrations
of the wisdom, power, and goodness of
his Creator, and these should excite
his wonder, admiration, gratitude, and
praise,


The highest praise we can offer to our
Creator is to fulfil His design in ovr
creation, He who most completely
embodies and most clearly expresses the
will of God presents to Him the truest
and highest worship.


Verses 1-16 may be taken as the text of
one homily and its teachings developed
under an arrangement of this kind :-—

I. The Statement of God’s perfect
knowledge of man (vers. 1-6).

II. The Proof of God’s perfect know-
ledge of man. This is drawn from—
1. His Omnipresence (vers. 7-12); 2.
His Creatorship (vers. 13-16).

III. The Effect of this knowledge


" upon the godly man. 1. A deep wails


sion of intellectual limitation (ver. 6);
An inspiration to celebrate Hts a:
(ver. 14).

IV. The Practical uses of this great
truth.


Tur PreciousNgess AND NumsBer or Gop’s THOUGHTS.
(Verses 17, 18.)


In feamiga so wonderful a being
as man there must have been much
thought. Many thoughts and deep
are embodied in man. Yet man is only
a small portion of the creation of God.
Looking at the universe ag an embodi-
ment of Divine ideas, we are almost
overwhelmed at the number, profundity,
and preciousness of God’s thoughts,
The thoughts of a being indicate his
character. ‘As a man thinketh in his
heart so is he.” But in order to be
known, thoughts must be expressed.
Men express their thoughts by means of
speech, writing, and action. Action is
embodied thought. God has unfolded
some of His thoughts. What a reve-
lation of wisdom, goodness, beauty we
have in the universe! QGod’s thoughts
in relation to the human race as sinners
are expressed in the Bible. Jesus Christ
is a Revelation and Revealer of the
thoughts of God. What purity, tender-
ness, love, righteousness, majesty shine
forth in Him! David rejoiced in God’s
thoughts. We have more of His
thoughts and more precious ones than

386


David had; how much more then
should we rejoice ! Consider—

I. The preciousness of God’s thoughts.
* How precious also are Thy thoughts
unto me, O God.” God’s thoughts are
precious—

1. Because of their originality. If a
man be the originator of some new and
useful process or machine, or the author
of a clever or able book, he is honoured
as a genius and a benefactor of the race.
But absolute originality is not in man,
The most original thinkers can only
make new groupings of old ideas, or
bring old thoughts into new associations
and applications. But God’s thoughts
are absolutely original. The astonishe
ing ideas of the moral restoration of
man and the mode of effecting it are
God’s own original thoughts. There is
originality in God’s thoughts in nature,
in the superintendence of human affairs,


_and in the great redemptive plan and


work,

2. Because of their moral excellence.
Distinguish between great thoughts
and good ones. The devil is a great


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : PSALMS.


PALM OXXXIX,





thinker, but his thoughts are not pre-
cious. Thoughts must be good to be
precious. God’s thoughts combine the
highest intellectual power with supreme
moral excellence. All the ideas of the
Divine Mind that have been revealed are
perfectly true, righteous, and beautiful.

3. Because of their practicableness.and
utility. Amongst men there are many
original and morally excellent thinkers
whose ideas are utterly impracticable—
they will not work, But God’s thoughts
are all practicable. See this in nature,
in history, in redemption. Ultimately
His every plan will be fully developed,
His every thought perfectly embodied.
His ideas are useful in themselves,
and they stimulate others to usefulness.
They arouse men to thought and action.

4, Because of their influence upon our
thoughts. God’s thoughts quicken ours,
See how His thoughts in the Bible have
stimulated the minds of men. Poets
and artists have obtained from it their
grandest subjects and their mightiest
and holiest inspirations, Nature and
the Bible are of exhaustless significance.
They are replete with germs of thought.
God’s thoughts correct ours. Without
the thoughts of God ours would be wild,
chaotic, conflicting. Our ideas of God,
the soul, truth, &c., are regulated by the
revealed thoughts of God.

5. Because of their generosity. For-
giveness for the guilty, holiness for the
depraved, rest for the weary—these are
some of His thoughts. “I know the
thoughts that I think toward you, saith
the Lord, thoughts of peace, and not of
evil.” “As the heavens are higher than
the earth, so are My thoughts higher
than your thoughts.”

II. The number of God’s thoughts.

‘* How great is the sum of them! If
I should count them, they are more in
number than the sand.” Many of His
thoughts are revealed, and we see them.
Many others may be revealed, but we
have not yet the capacity to perceive
them. And many more may be revealed
by Him in the future, His mind is in-
finite, ever active, ever productive, ever
revealing. His thoughts are not only
multitudinous in number, but profound


in meaning. In our present state we
have neither the time, the facilities, nor
the capacity fully to number and com-
prehend the thoughts of God. But in
the future, with quickened faculties, in-
creased facilities, and everlasting exist-
ence, some of the great thoughts of God
will probably be perceived in their com-
pleteness by us. ‘‘ Now we see through
a glass darkly, but then face to face,”
&c, If one of God’s ideas is so precious
as that of redemption is, how infinitely
valuable must be the whole of His
thoughts! “Many, O Lord my God,
are Thy wonderful works which Thou
hast done, and Thy thoughts which are
to us-ward,” &c.

TIL The realisation of God’s presence.
“When I awake, I am still with Thee.”
‘As often as he awakes from sleep, he
finds that he is again in the presence of
God, again occupied with thoughts of
God, again meditating afresh with new
wonder and admiration on His wisdom
and goodness.” —Perowne. The poet had
an abiding sense of the presence of God
with him, which was a comfort, and re-
freshment, and strength to his soul.

Conctusion.—1. Endeavour to under-
stand G'od’s thoughts. Examine them,
meditate upon them as you find them in
nature, the Bible, and Christ.

2. Rejoice in the prectousness of God’s
thoughts, Rejoice in them notwithstand-
ing that many of them are mysterious,
and perhaps even painful at present.
David said, “Such knowledge is too
wonderful for me,” &c, Yet he rejoiced.
His thoughts may be too great for us,
yet they are all wise and kind, Think
of a few of His thoughts. Here is
one of His thoughts for the guilty:
“ Let the wicked forsake his way,” &.
(Isa. lv. 7). For the suffering: “ Our
light affliction which is but for a
moment,” &c. (2 Cor. iv. 17, 18). For
the perplexed: “In all thy ways ao-
knowledge Him,” &c. (Prov. iii, 6). For
the bereaved : “I would not have you
to be ignorant, brethren, concerning
them which are asleep,” &c, (1 Thess. iv.
13, 14).

3. Seek to become embodiments of God's
thoughts. Live them.


$87


POALM CXXXIX,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





Tue Port's View or tHe WIcKED,
(Verses 19-22.)


“How strangely abrupt,” remarks
Perowne, “is the turning aside from one
of the sublimest contemplations to be
found anywhere in the Bible, to express
a hope that righteous vengeance will
overtake the wicked. Such a passage is
startling—startling partly because the
spirit of the New Testament is so dif-
ferent ; partly too, no doubt, because
‘our modern civilisation has been so
schooled in amenities’ that we hardly
know what is meant by a righteous in-
dignation. It is well, however, to notice
the fact, for this is just one of those
passages which help us to understand the
education of the world. Just because it
startles us is it so instructive. The 63d
Psalm presents us with a similar con-
trast. There, however, the feeling ex-
pressed is of a more directly personal
kind, David is encompassed and hard
pressed by enemies who are threatening
his life. He has been driven from his
throne. by rebels, and the deep sense of
wrong makes him burst forth in the
strain of indignation and of anticipated
victory. ‘They that seek my life to
destroy it shall be cast into the pit,’ d&c.
Here, apparently, the prayer for the
overthrow of the wicked does not arise
from a sense of wrong and _ personal
danger, but from the intense hatred of
wickedness as wickedness, from the deep
conviction that, if hateful to a true-
hearted man, it must be still more in-
tensely hateful to Him who searcheth
the hearts and trieth the reins. The
soul, in the immediate presence of God,
places itself on the side of God, against
all that is opposed to Him. Still, the
prayer, ‘Oh that Thou wouldest slay
the wicked,’ can never be a Christian
prayer.”

I, The character of the wicked de
scribed. They are—

1. Cruel. ‘ Bloody men.” Perowne:
‘“‘Bloodthirsty men.” (Comp. Pas, v. 6,
xxvi. 9, lv. 23.)

2, Kebellious, “They speak against
Thee wickedly .... Those that rise
up against Thee.” Wicked men rebel

388


‘ of iniquity.


against the most righteous and benevo
lent authority.

3. Enemies of God, ‘ Them that hats
Thee.” It is a terrible thing to hate
a Being of infinite wisdom and truth,
righteousness and love, Men may, and
sometimes do, grow so wicked that they
hate the God whose holy law condemns
them.

IL, The end of the wicked predicted.
“Surely Thou wilt slay the wicked, O
God.” We may interpret this in three
ways, 1, As expressing the assurance
of the Psalmist that God would destroy
the wicked, that he would “slay” them,
bring them to an utter end. Or, 2. As
expressing the assurance of the Psalmist
that God would severely punish the
wicked. He might perhaps have used
the word “slay” figuratively, to denote
the punishment which would be inflicted
on cruel and rebellious haters of the
Lord. Or, 3. May we not say that
God will “ slay the wicked” by slaying
their wickedness? You destroy an enemy
when you make him your friend.
“He must reign till He hath put all
enemies under His feet.”

iI. The companionship of the
wicked avoided. ‘Depart from me
therefore, ye bloody men.” The Psalmist
seeks to separate himself from theworkers
He is moved to this by—

1. Desire for his own safety. Dark
and threatening are the prospects of
evildoers, and therefore David shunned
association with them (ver. 19).

2. Sympathy with God. “Do not
I hate them, O Lord, that hate Thee?”
&c. The man who sincerely loves God
will find the society of the wicked re
pugnant to him.

3. The influence of divergent charae-
ters. ‘“ What fellowship hath righteous-
ness with unrighteousness? and what
communion hath light with darkness 3”


 &o,


Conotusion.—" Let the wicked fore
sake his way,” é&c. (Isa. lv. 7), “As I
live, saith the Lord God,” &c, (Ezek.

Hi. 11),


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALME,


F6ALM OIXEIZ,





A Prayer or toe UPpnriaur,
(Verses 23, 24.)


We have here—

IL A request for Divine examination.
“Search me, O God, and know my
heart ; try me, and know my thoughts.”
This request implies—

1. Consciousness of sincerity. It is
not the request of one who was ignorant
of his true character and inflated with
presumption, but of one who was con-
scious of his freedom from hypocrisy
and of his integrity of heart. To make
an appeal like this unto the great
Searcher of hearts a man must be tho-
roughly conscious of his own sincerity,
or must have fallen very low indeed.

2. Distrust of self. David felt his
liability to error, and to self-deception,
and therefore he appealed to the Omni-
scient and the Infallible.

3. Confidence in God. We would not
that our heart should be completely ex-
posed, that all our thoughts should be
fully revealed even to our most trusted
friend. “That man,” says Calvin,
‘must have a rare confidence who of-
fers himself so boldly to the scrutiny of
God’s righteous judgment.” There are
many things we would not disclose to
any fellow-creature, and yet we are
thankful that God knows them. This
thought is beautifully expressed in
Keble’s Hymn for the “ Twenty-fourth
Sunday after Trinity,”

IL A desire for entire freedom from
evil. This seems to be implied in the
request, “and see if there be any wicked
way in me.” The poet was not aware
of any wicked way in him. But if any
evil tendency or way had escaped his
scrutiny, it could not escape that of
God. And if God discovered such, the


clearly implied desire of the Psalmist
was that he might be delivered from it,
“ Any wicked way.” Margin: “ Way of
pain or grief.” ‘The way of pain is
the way which leads to pain.” The
wicked man causes pain. Fiirst says
that the idea here is the way of “ affie-
tion, wmjury which one causes,” The
wicked man suffers pain, ‘The way of
transgressors is hard.” David wishes
to be free from every evil way. One
unguarded entrance to the beleagured
city may admit the invading hosts; one
wicked way may ruin a soul.

III. A request for Divine guidance
in the way of righteousness. “ Lead
me in the way everlasting.” “The one
true abiding way which leads to the
true and everlasting God.” “The way
which leads.to everlasting life” ‘The
way which leads to the blessed eternity.”
“The way everlasting” is in contrast
to “the way of pain.” The one leads to
misery ; the other leads to joy. Here
are two points—

1. Man’s need of guidance. David
felt this. We are exposed to tempta-
tion, prone to go astray, &c,

2. Man’s infallible Guide. David
sought the Divine lead. The Lord is
perfectly acquainted with both the tra-
veller and the way.


*¢ Lead us, O Father, in the paths of right;
Blindly we stumble when we walk alone,
Involved in shadows of a darksome night,
Only with Thee we journey safely on.


*¢ Lead us, O Father, to Thy heavenly rest,
However rough and steep the path may be,
Through joy or sorrow, a8 Thou deemest best,
Until our lives are perfected in Thee.”


Burleigh.


A Neeprot PRAYER,
(Verses 23, 24.)


This is a very honest prayer—a very
practical prayer. The text before us
is a very personal text. “Search me, O
God, and know my heart,” &c. We will
consider—

I, The need there is for such a prayer


as this. Yon have not te travel far to

find out the need for such a prayer,

You have but to look within,—to con-

sider the motives and the thoughts and

the desires and the purposes which are

conunually working within your own
389


PeaALM OXXXLL


hearts, and you will find out, if you be
honest, the need for such a prayer as
this, ‘There may be some amongst you
who know that you are cherishing sin in
the heart, and who have no desire to
part with it, Does not that prove the
necessity for such a prayer as this, that
God would search your heart, and make
you so feel your need of repentance and
of a Saviour that you might forsake that
sin this very night?

But the prayer is rather the prayer of
a true servant of God. There may exist
in the heart of a genuine Christian much
undetected evil. A conviction of the
omniscience and omnipresence of God is
quite consistent with the presence of evil
in the heart. We have no grander de-
scription of those great attributes of
Jehovah than in this Psalm; and yet
the Psalmist recognised the possibility
that evil was lurking within. A convic-
tion of the evil of sin, a deep abhorrence
of iniquity, is quite consistent with
the presence of evil in the soul. ...
Again, a deep sense of our acceptance in
Christ, of our reconciliation to God, of
our pardon, and of our blessedness in
Christ, is consistent with the presence
of evil in the heart, Our acceptance in
Christ does not destroy the old nature.
That nature remains, and shall be de-
stroyed, but not yet. Once more, We
may say also, that an earnest purpose
and determination to get rid of all evil
is consistent with its presence. The
man of God longs for the complete deli-
verance which shall be the perfect answer
to the prayer before us. There is need,
then, for such a prayer as this.

II. The manner in which such a
prayer as this receives its answer.
Let us be well assured that God knows
the heart. But the question is, How
does God make that known to us which
is known so perfectly to Him? How
does God search the heart? Take an
illustration. After David’s great fall, sin
certainly was in his heart. For months,
apparently, he lived without confession
and without forgiveness. ... (See 2 Sam.
xii. 1-14.) “Thou art the man. Thus
saith the Lord God.” It was God’s autho-
ritative word that brought conviction,—
which revealed and detected the evil.

390





HOMILETIO COMMENTARY ; PSALMS,





David confessed his sin, was pardoned,
and restored, Peter denied his Lord, &.
“ And Peter remembered the word,” &.
(Matt. xxvi. 75). That word searched
him, and he went forth and wept bit-
terly. The Word, then, is that instru-
ment which the Lord God uses to search
the depths of the human heart; and
bringing home that Word by the power
of the Spirit, He reveals the sinner to
himself, and so teaches him his need of
repentance,

There is no one present who has not
a history. There are facts in every life,
perhaps, which we would not tell to
those nearest and dearest to us, There
have been sins cherished in the heart,
if not practised in the life. There are
secrets unrevealed, scarcely, perhaps,
remembered, seldom dwelt upon; but
there is a history in each one of us
Now, the Word of God has a wonderful
power of fastening upon some critical
point in that history, so as to detect the
evil—to lay bare the secret—to drag it
out, as it were, into light, and, letting
the light of truth shine in upon it, te
lead the man to know himself. Take,
for example, the secret of sin. Ilus-
tration: Our Lord and the woman of
Samaria (John iv. 1-42).

Or, again, a case the very opposite to
the woman of Samaria, a man upright,
moral, devout, religious, learned, admired,
honoured, respected. You have it in
Nicodemus; and how does the Lord
meet that man’s conscience ? (John iii.
1-13). Or one who was wedded to one
particular idol, though all the rest of
his life was fair and good and upright
(Matt. xix. 16-22). And would you
have an example of one who was up-
right, who feared God, and who eschewed
evil, and who yet was brought to com
fess that he was a grievous sinner? You
have it in the well-known case of the
patriarch Job, . . . And how are those
convictions wrought? By the suspicioug
silence of his friends? No, By the
blunt and open charges of those same
friends? No. By the wiser counsel and
the more truthful accusations of Elihu 4
No; but by the solemn word of Jeho-
vah, &c, (Job xxxviii-xli.), And what
is the result? (Job xl. 3-6; xlii. 5, 6),


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PSALM OXXXIX.


a


There are probably few Christians
present who do not feel the pointed
application of these words to their own
hearts. You know that there is evil
lying within. What you want to know
is how to get rid of that evil. You
must get rid of the evil within by the


application of the very same principle
of faith as that by means of which you
have become established in Christ. We
are justified by faith; we are sanctified
by faith in the Lord Jesus,— Str Emilius
Bayley.


Tae WIcKED WAY WITHIN US, AND THE PRAYER PREFERRED.


(Verse 24)—“ See if there be any wicked way in me.”


This a beautiful and impressive prayer
for the commencement of every day.

It is, also, a great sentiment to ad-
monish us at the begirming or close of
each day.

“The law of sin in our members,”
warring against the law of truth, of
holiness, and of God, is still very
powerful, and often very painfully
exemplified.

There is the way of unbelief within,
to which we are very prone.

There is the way of vanity and pride,
to which we often accustom ourselves—
vain of something in connection with the
body, the accomplishments of the mind,
&c. And then how frequently we show
a proud and inflated spirit, instead of
the temper of deep humility.


There is the way of selfishness in ,


which we frequently walk. We are
sometimes quite absorbed in considera-
tions which relate only to our personal
advancement or happiness.

There is the way of worldliness we
often pursue. The empty pleasures, the
shadowy honours, &c.

There is the way of sluggishness, by
which we are often marked, and in con-
nection with which we are sadly injured.
What apathy in prayer, in the examina-
tion and application of God’s Word, we
manifest !

There is the way of self-dependence,
by which we often dishonour God and
injure ourselves. There is not simple,
unhesitating, unbroken reliance on the

erfect work, the infinite merits of
ur Divine Redeemer always unfolded,


which we are bound invariably to
exercise.

There is, unhappily, the way of dis-
obedience in which we often walk. At
any rate, our obedience is cold, reluc-
tant, uncertain—not distinguished by its
simplicity, its entireness, its fervency.

Now, each of the “ ways” to which
reference has been made is radically
unsound, radically bad,—to every one
of which we are individually prone, and
from which we require to be delivered.

How necessary is it, then, to go to
God at once, and, with the utmost
earnestness, to prefer the petition,
“ Lord, see if there be any wicked way
in me.” Anything dark to enlighten,
anything erroneous to correct, anything
injurious to remove, anything degrading
to elevate, anything impure to cleanse,
anything deadening to quicken. Let
nothing that is wrong, that is opposed
to Thy character, repugnant to Thy
Word, or injurious and debasing to
ourselves, remain, or be harboured with-
in us.

Can anything be more consistent than
this? Anything be wiser than this?
Can any prayer issue in a larger, richer,
or more abiding blessing ?

Let us remember that if there be
what is holy within, there will be
nothing that is unholy without; if
there be irregularity within, there must
be irregularity and confusion without.
If the heart be unsound, the life must
inevitably be unsound also,

Can you prefer, with the utmost sia-
cerity, this fine prayer!—Z. Wallace.


391


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; PSALM.





PSALM OXL


INTRODUCTION.


“This Psalm is @ prayer for protection against enemies who were at oace violent and rai
and unscrupulous in the use of their tongues, The general strain of the Psalm is like that o
many which occur in the earlier books, and like them it is ascribed to David. In tone and
language it resembles Psalms lviii, and Ixiy. The ehief peculiarity of the Psalm is, that it
has several words which occur nowhere else.” —Perowne. ie

In ascribing the Psalm to David, the superscription is confirmed by the Davidie style and
spirit of the Psalm. The Psalm is addressed ‘‘To the chief musician,” which shows that it
was intended to be set to music for use in the public services. The uccasion on which it was
composed is not known,


TROUBLE IN Lirz, PRayeR 1N TROUBLE, AND CoNFIDENOB IN PRAYER,


L Trouble in life. It is quite clear
that the occasion on which the Psalm
was written was one of trouble, and
that this trouble arose from the enemies
of the Psalmist. From what he says of
them in the first part of the Psalm we
have a clear idea of the character of his
enemies. They were—

1. Malignant. “Theevilman;...
which imagine mischiefs in their heart ;
. .. the wicked.” Their hostility arose
not from any misapprehension, but from
malice; not from the suggestions or
force of circumstances, but from their
depraved souls, Many of the troubles
of life spring from the mischievous
devices of wicked hearts.

2. Confederate. ‘Continually are
they gathered together for war.” They
had banded themselves into an organi-
sation for the accomplishment of their
wicked designs. The archleader of the
forces of evil aims at unity of design
and effort in the great struggle against
the right and true

3. Slanderous ‘They have shar-
pened their tongues like a serpent;
adders’ poison is under their lips.” They
invented and published malicious lies
against the poet to ruin his reputation.
The words of the slanderer are like the
poison of the bite of the adder, which is
among the most poisonous of serpents,
The slanderous tongue is the virulent
weapon of the malignant heart.

4. Violent.
violent man.” They used not only the
slanderous tongue, but the strong arm
against the Psalmist. The tongue, the
pen, and the sword have all been used

392


“ Preserve me from the .


at times against the people of God.
The reviler, the controversialist, and
the persecutor have set themselves
against the Church of God.

5. Determined. “Who have pur-
posed to overthrow my goings.” Their
evil thoughts and feelings had led to
the formation of an evil design. Their
attempted injuries to the poet were the
expression of their firm determination
to effect his ruin. Men sin not only
through weakness, but by settled pur-
pose, There are men who “do evil
with both hands earnestly.”

6. Proud. ‘The proud have hid a
snare for me.” They were haughty and
arrogant, “‘conceited of themselves and
confident of their success; and herein
they resemble Satan, whose reigning
ruining sin was pride. Ths pride of
persecutors, though at present it be the
terror, yet may be the encouragement
of the persecuted, for the more haughty
they are the faster are they ripening
for ruin. ‘Pride goes before destruc-
tion.’”

7. Cunning. ‘The proud have hid
a snare for me, and cords; they have
spread a net by the wayside; they have
set gins for me.” They employed fraud
against him as well as force, They not
only made open war against him, but
they plotted and schemed to overthrow
him suddenly and unawares, “ Great
persecutors have often been great poli-
ticians, which has indeed made them
the more formidable.” Such is the
description which David here gives of
his foes. We cannot wonder that they
troubled his life. The good man is


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PSALM CXL.





still troubled in his life upon earth by
outward enemies and inward fears, by
bodily sufferings and mental distresses,
by social trials and spiritual conflicts,
“In the world ye have tribulation,”

IL Prayerintrouble. The Psalmist
prays for—

l. Preservation from his enemies.
“Deliver me, O Lord, from the evil
man; preserve me from the violent

-man; keep me from the hands of the
wicked.” His enemies were endeavour-
ing to blast his reputation, to rob him
of his throne, and to take away his life;
he knew their malice and cunning and
power, and his own peril, and he en-
treated the Lord for deliverance and
looked to Him for protection.

Prayer is the great resource of the
righteous in the troubles and perils of
life. When every other refuge fails,
there is safety at the throne of grace.
He whom God protects is inviolably
secure. ‘Call upon Me in the day of
trouble: I will deliver thee,” &c. ‘God
is our refuge and strength,” &c. The
Psalmist prays for—

2. The overthrow of his enemies, He
asks that this may be accomplished by
(1.) Zhe recow of their evil designs. “ As
for the head of those that compass me
about, let the mischief of their own lips
cover them,” His wish is that the mis-
chief which they had designed against
him might fall upon their own heads.
The cruel and cowardly calumniator, the
violent persecutor, and the crafty plot-
ter of the overthrow of his fellow-men,
will each find the injury which he has
inflicted upon others falling with fury
upon himself. There are many Hamans
who to-day are building gallows for many
Mordecais upon which they will be hung
themselves. (2.) By the inflution of
Divine judgments. ‘“ Let burning coals
fall upon them; let them be cast into
the fire, into deep pits, that they rise not
up again. Let not an evil-speaker be
established in the earth: evil shall hunt
the violent man to overthrow him.”
Instead of, ‘into deep pits,” Hengsten-
berg translates, “into water-floods,” and
Perowne, “into floods of water.” We are
by no means certain that a retaliative
and sinful spirit did not give rise to the


tenth verse, But it is inspiring to know
that an evil-speaker shall not be estab-
lished in the earth or anywhere else. A
lie cannot live always, ‘lhe slanderer
builds on the sand, and his building
shall fall into ruin upon the builder.
“<Evil shall hunt the violent man,’ as
the blood-hound hunts the murderer to
discover him, as the lion hunts his prey
to tear it to pieces. Mischievous men
will be brought to light, and brought to
ruin; the destruction appointed shall
run them down and overthrow them.
‘Evil pursues sinners.,’”"—M. Henry.

III. Confidence in prayer. The
prayer of David was neither the cry of
despair nor the entreaty of doubt or fear,
but a confident appeal to the Lord God.
The confidence of the Psalmist was based
upon—

1. His relation toGod, “T said unto
the Lord, Thou art my God.” In the
time of trouble, when we approach God
in prayer, it is snost inspiring to be able
to claim personal relationship to Him,
and to cling to Him by faith. If He is
“my God,” He will not leave me to the
might and malice of my foes.

2. His ideas of God. “O God the
Lord, the strength of my salvation.”
His appeal is to Jehovah Adonat. Jeho-
vah is the Self-Existent One ; Adonai is
the Supreme Ruler, the Governor of all
things and all beings, The possession
of an interest in such a Being may well
inspire confidence. S80 the Psalmist
looks to Him as the strength of his sal-
vation. ‘“ Behold, God is my salvation :
I will trust and not be afraid ; for the
Lord Jehovah is my strength,” &c.

3. His experience of the protection of
God, ‘Thou hast covered my head in
the day of battle.” As the helmet
shields the head (that vital part) amid
the perils of the battle-field, so God had
guarded him from the assaults of his
enemies, The experience we have had
of God’s protecting care in the past
should inspire us with confidence in the
present, and with hope for the future.
“Behold, the Lord’s hand is not shortened
that it cannot save; neither is His ear
heavy that it cannot hear.” He is “the
same yesterday, to-day, and for ever.”

4. His faith in the Lass rule of


PSALM OXL,


God. ‘I know that the Lord will main-
tain the cause of the afflicted, the right
of the poor. Surely the righteous shall
give thanks unto Thy name; the up-
right shall dwell in Thy presence.” The
Psalmist was convinced that the govern-
ment of God was opposed to wicked op-
pressors, God is the Champion of His
oppressed people. He will vindicate
their cause, and give them abundant
reason to offer unto Him grateful praise,
The wicked shall shrink in dismay from
His frown; but the upright shall dwell
in His presence, and rejoice in His
favour, (Comp. Ps. xi. 7, xvi. 11, lxi.


_ HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





7.) A faith like this in the government
of God is one of the truest and greatest
supports of man amid the trials and
difficulties of life.

ConcLusion. — Learn, —1. That the
true and good are sometimes exposed to
severe trials and extreme perils. 2. That
the true and good have no adequate reason
for fear at any time. 3. That the re-
sources of the true and good are more than
adequate to every trial and peril.
security is guaranteed by ONE who is
infinite in wisdom, almighty in power,
and unchangeable in truth.


Tue Day or BattLe aND THE ProtecTion oF Gop.
(Verse 7.) :


Consider :—

L The period spoken of.

“ The day of battle.” Heb. lit. “ ar-
mour,” as in 1 Kings x. 25; 2 Kings x.
2; Ezek. xxxix. 9,10, ‘The day of
armour’ is not the day of preparation
for battle, but the day on which the
armour is carried for the battle, conse-
quently the day of battle.”—J/oll,

David had been in many battles; he
was well acquainted with their toils and
dangers, their excitements and horrors.
But let us notice—

1. What the battle implies. (1.) Ene-
mics. The Psalmist had many foes; and
they were bitter and violent, crafty and
combined, in their hostility to him. The
godly soul has to contend against “ the
world, the flesh, and the devil ”—against
evil in society (John xv. 18-21; 1 John
iii, 13; iv. 4,5; v. 4,5), in our own
nature (Rom. vii. 21-23; Gal. v. 7),
and in malignant spirits (Eph. vi. 10-18;
1 Pet. v. &). Our enemies are many,
subtle, and strong. (2.) Peri. The field
of battle is a scene of danger. The day
of moral battle has its perils, The godly
soul may be injured. There is danger
that we may yield to the subtle sugges-
tions, or be overpowered by the vigorous
onslaughts of our foes. Good men
have received injury in this battle ; eg.,
Moses and Aaron (Num. xx, 12); David
(2 Sam. xi, xii, 7-12; Peter (Matt,
xxvi. 69-75). Few, if indeed any, come
out of this battle without some wounds

394


or scars, (3.) Hffort. There is no battle
without strenuous exertion. The godly
soul has to resist the attacks of his ene-
mies ; to watch and ward that he be not
surprised by his fues, and to endeavour
to overcome them. We have to act not
only on the defensive, but on the offen-
sive; not only to guard ourselves, but
to conquer the world for Jesus Christ.
The maintenance and growth of the
Christian life cannot be attained by
merely wearing the uniform and carry-
ing the weapons of a soldier, or by
appearing in the army on review days
only. We must fight if we would con-
quer; we must fight if we would not
sustain defeat.

2. How long the battle lasts.
day of battle.”
a brief season.


“The
The conflict is only for
It is severe, but short.


“The strife will not be long ;
Thia day the noise of battle,
The next the victor’s song.”


The battle is but for a day; the
triumph is eternal. Therefore, Christiaa
soldier, fear not, faint not. “ Fight the
good fight of faith,” dc.

IL The protection acknowledged.

“O Jehovah Lord, the strength of
my salvation, Thou hast covered my
head in the day of battle.” God had
defended David in many battles, kept
him in safety amidst many perils. Grate-
fully and hopefully he calls this protec
tion to mind in his present dangers.


Their -


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY. P8ALH A.





1. Protection of a vital part. “Thou
hast covered my head,” t.e., as with a
helmet. (Comp. Psa. lx. 7.) In the battle
of life we may suffer in many things,
but our vital interests are safe; we may
be wounded, but we shall not be slain:
we may suffer loss, but we shall not fall
& prey to our adversaries. -

2. Protection by an all-sufficient Being.
“ Jehovah, the Lord, the strength of my
salvation.” Here is a Being of—(1.)
Independent existence. ‘ Jehovah,” the
Self-Existing, the Permanent, the Ever-
lasting. He ever lives to guard and save
His people. (2.) Soveretgn authority.
“The Lord,” the Supreme Governor.
“His kingdom ruleth over all.” (3.)
Saving power. “The strength of my
salvation.” He is “ mighty to save,”

Ill. The encouragement to be de-
duced.

l. Jo trust in Him for protection.
What He has done is an earnest of what


P@ALM OXLi,





He will yet do. David was accustomed
to argue from the past to the future,
“The Lord that delivered me out of the
paw of the lion,” &c. (1 Sam. xvii. 37).
“ Because Thou hast been my help,
therefore in the shadow of Thy wings
will I rejoice.” He who has protected
us in the past still lives, still He is
sovereign in authority, and still He is
strong to save, therefore let us trust
Him.

2. To pray to Him for protection. The
Lord will ‘‘ be inquired of by the house
of Israel to do for them,” Sincere and
believing prayer is a Divinely-appointed
condition of blessing. Let His protec-
tion in past times inspire our petitions in
the present. ‘‘ Because He hath inclined
His ear unto me, therefore will I call
upon Him as long as [ live.” Let our
own experience stimulate and strengthen
our confidence in Him and our prayers
to Him as the God of our salvation,


PSALM CXLL


INTRODUCTION.


“This Psalm presenta,” says Perowne, ‘‘some peculiar difficulties of interpretation, which,
however, are due neither to the words employed nor to the grammatical construction, but to the
extreme abruptuess with which im vers. 5-7 the thoughts follow one another, and the extreme
obscurity which hangs over the allusions. To translate each sentence by itself is no difficult
matter, but it is almost hopeless either to link the sentences plausibly together, or to discover
in them any tangible clue to the circumstances in which the Psalmist was placed, As all the
ancient versions must have had substantially the same text, the deviations in any of them being
very slight, it is hardly probable that, as Oishausen and Hupfield maintain, the text is corrupt:
it is more likely that our entire ignorance of the circumstances under which the Psalm wag
written prevents our piercing the obscurity of the writer’s words,

‘*It has been usual to accept the inscription which assigns the Psalm to David, and to

assign it to the time of his persecution by Saul. Verse 5 has generally been supposed to allude
to David’s generous conduct in sparing the life of his foe when he was in his power (see 1 Sam.
xxiv.) ; but it is quite impossible on this supposition to give any plausible interpretation to
ver. 7.
‘* Delitzsch, with more probability, refers the Psalm to the time of Absalom’s rebellion. He
sees an allusion to David’s distance from the sanctuary and the worship of the sanctuary in ver.
2, and he explains ver. 6 of the punishment which shall overtake the rebel leaders, and the
return of the people to their allegiance,”’

It is unmistakably clear from vera, 7-10 that the Psalm was written at a time of trial and
peril, And it brings before our notice—


Tur Conpuct oF a Goop Man iw a TIME oF TRIAL


David lifted up his voice and his heart
to God in prayer. He asks—
1. For Divine audience. “ Give ear


We can trace in this Psalm with con-
siderable clearness the spiritual mood
and exercises of the Psalmist in this


time of trouble and danger. We have unto my voice, when I cry unto Thee.”
here— Not even the whisper of sincere prayer
L Earnest prayer. In his distress escapes the ear of God; yet it is becom


395


FHALM OXLI,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


EE


Ing in us humbly to entreat Him to
hear favourably our prayers. Our ask-
ing tends to strengthen our faith in His
hearing.

2. For Divine acceptance, “ Let my
prayer be set forth before Thee as in-
cense, the lifting up of my hands as the
evening sacrifice.” ‘The sacrifice here
meant,” says Perowne, “is strictly the
offering consisting of fine flour with oil
and frankincense, or of unleavened cakes
mingled with oil, which was burnt upon
the altar (Heb. minchah, E. V. ‘ meat-
offering :’ see Lev. ii, 1-11). This,
however, like the ‘incense,’ was only
added to the burnt-offering, the lamb
which was offered every morning and
evening (Exod. xxix. 34-42; Num.
xxviii. 3-8), It would seem, therefore,
that these two, ‘the incense’ and ‘ the
offering wf fine flour,’ &c., stand for the
morning and evening sacrifice; and the
sense is, ‘Let my daily prayer be ac-
ceptable to Thee as are the daily sacri-
fices of Thine own appointment.’” The
incense which ascended in a fragrant
cloud was asymbol of acceptable prayer.
And the lifting up of the hands was a
symbol of the lifting up of the heart.
The poet offered his heart to God in
prayer. And he asks that his prayer
may find acceptance with God.

3. For speedy Divine assistance, ‘‘Lord,
I cry unto Thee, make haste unto me,”
The burden of his trouble was heavy,
and his peril was imminent and his need
urgent; therefore he entreats God to
appear quickly for his help.

4, For preservation from sinful speech.
“Set a watch, O Lord, before my mouth;
keep the door of my lips.” He asks to
be kept from the utterance of foolish or
bitter words in his time of trial. (See
the Hom. Com. on Ps. xxxix. 1.)

5. For preservation from sinful con-
duct. ‘Incline not my heart to any
evil thing, to practise wicked works with
men that work iniquity ; and let me not
eat of their dainties.” Not for one
moment can we entertain the idea that
God ever exerts any positive influence to
induce men to sin. His holy nature,
His revealed will, and all His arrange-
ments are utterly opposed to such an
{dea, The prayer of the Psalmist is in

39€


effect that God would not leave him to
himself to go astray, or to any evil in-
fluence that. would lead him astray.
He seeks preservation from (1) sinful
practices, that God would keep him
from the wicked doings of the workers
of iniquity. And from (2) sinful
pleasures, that God would keep him
from the easy, luxurious, sensual life of
the wicked who have their portion in
this world, that he may “‘not eat of their
dainties.” Two points are worthy of
notice here—

First: Zhis sense of dependence on
God, which the Psalmist manifested, would
ensure his safety. ‘They that trust in
the Lord shall be as Mount Zion, which
cannot be removed, but abideth for
ever.”

Second: In thus taking his trouble to
God by prayer the Psalmist would find
relief. The mere utterance of our
anxieties or griefs to a Being of perfect
love and faithfulness affords us relief.
The exercise of prayer to God is itself a
helpful and blessed thing.

IL Noble resolutions. David ex-
presses his resolution—

1. Zo welcome the rebukes of the
righteous. ‘Let the righteous smite
me, it shall be a kindness ; and let him
reprove me, it shall be an excellent
oil, which shall not break my head.”
Perowne more correctly translates thus :
“Tt shall be as oil upon (my) head, let
not my head refuse (it).”. The rebuke
of the righteous may be painful, but
it promotes our well-being. The pain
which it causes is, like that which is in-
flicted by the knife in the hand of the
skilful surgeon, for the good of the
sufferer. The true friend who, because
of his regard for us, faithfully reproves
us when we are in fault, is a great bless-
ing. And the man who, like David, is
wise and good will welcome his reproofs
with joy, though they are painful. He
will not only not refuse them, but will
receive them as the oil which was poured
on the head on festive occasions, “ the
oil of gladness.” “Faithful are the
wounds of a friend.” “It is better to
hear the rebuke of the wise, than for a
man to hear the song of fools.”

2, To defend himself by prayer against


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; PSALMS.


FeALM OXLI,





hés adversaries. It appears to us that
our translation of the last line of ver. 5
does not give the true meaning. Heng-
stenberg renders it: “If still, then, I
shall pray against their wickedness,”
And Perowne: “ For yet is my prayer
against their wickedness.” The idea
seems to be that he would have recourse
to prayer as the best defence against
the wickedness of his persecutors. He
would not seek to retaliate upon them,
or meet their wickedness towards him
with wickedness towards them, but he
would commit his cause unto the Lord
in prayer. Surely these resolutions in-
dicate a true and great soul,

IiI. Confident expectation. The
Psalmist expresses his assured hope of
deliverance from peril and of the tri-
umph of his cause. His statement of
his expectation presents three points :—

1. That the chief men among his
enemies would be overthrown, and that
their overthrow would promote his tri-
umph. “ When their judges are over-
thrown in stony places, they shall hear
my words; for they are sweet.” Per-
owne: “ This verse, difficult in itself, is
still more difficult, because it has no
very obvious connection either with
what precedes or with what follows,
The allusions are so obscure that it is
impossible to do more than guess at
their meaning.” The interpretation
which he proceeds to suggest seems to
us the most probable. ‘“( When) their
judges have been hurled down the sides
of the rock, then they shall hear my
words that they are sweet.” Thetr judges
must be the rulers or princes of the
wicked adversaries of the poet. The
verb hurled down is the same which is
used of the throwing down of Jezebel
from the window (2 Kings ix. 33) ; and
it indicates a puaishment which David
anticipates will be inflicted upon these
rebel rulers (see 2 Chron. xxv. 12), The
words they shall hear refer not to the
judges, but to their followers who have
been led astray by them. If the Psalm
refers to the rebellion of Absalom or
any similar occasion, the sense will be,
“‘when the leaders in the insurrection
meet with the fate they deserve, then
the subjects of the king will return to


their allegiance.” And the expression,
“they shall hear my words that they
are sweet,” would be a thoroughly ori-
ental mode of describing the satisfaction
with which they would welcome the
gracious amnesty pronounced by their
offended sovereign.

2. That his present sufferings would
promote his triumph. ‘ Our bones are
scattered at the grave’s mouth, as when
one cutteth and cleaveth wood upon the
earth.” The explanation of this verse
also is difficult, It seems quite clear
that the supplying of the word “‘ wood”
as the object of the verb, as in the A,
V., is both unnecessary and misleading.
Perowne translates: “ As when one fur-
roweth the earth (with the plough), our
bones have been ssattered at the mouth of
the grave.” The interpretation of Deli-
tesch and Hengstenberg seems to us cor-
rect. It is thus stated by the latter: “ As
in ploughing the tearing up of the earth
is not the ultimate design, but only the
means of a fruitful result, only serves
the purpose of making the earth yield
its produce ; therefore, with an equally
beneficent design, or in order that,
through the present injury, new life may
arise, our bones also are scattered about,
While the enemies are conducted from
life to death (ver. 6), we are conducted
from death to life.” “The sufferings of
the present were as the seed from which
would grow a plenteous harvest of pros-
perity and joy. This truth is taught
frequently and clearly in the New Testa-
ment (Rom. v. 3-5; James i. 2, 3).

3. That his confidence was reposed in
God, ‘But mine eyes are unto Thee,
O God the Lord ; in Thee is my trust.”
His expectation of deliverance and tri-
umph was fixed in God, — not in the
skill of his strategy, or the strength of
his forces, but in Jehovah the Lord.

The poet closes the Psalm as he began
it, with—

IV. Earnest prayer. He prays—

1. That he may be protected from his
enemies. ‘‘ Leave not my soul destitute,
Keep me from the snares which they
have laid for me, and the gins of the
workers of iniquity.” Here are three
points :—(1.) His enemies had cunningly
devised his overthrow. (2.) God was

397


PRALM CXL.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; PSALMS.


——— eae ee Nan aE A


able to protect him against their deepest
designs. (3.) For this protection he
prays, in it he trusts. The all-wise and
Almighty One will baffle the most
subtle plots that are formed against His
people.

2. That the designs of his enemies may
be turned against themselves, “Let the
wicked fall into their own nets, whilst
that I withal escape.” The sinner digs
the pit for his own destruction, builds
the prison for his own incarceration,


collects the fuel for his own hell-fire.
The blow which he aims against othera
recoils upon himself. “No law can
be more just than that the architects
of destruction should perish by their
own contrivances.” (See the Z/om. Com.
on Ps, cxl. 9.) When the wicked are
overthrown, like Pharaoh and his host,
by the waters of that sea into which
they have presumptuously and wickedly
adventured, the righteous shall pass im
safety and triumph unto the other side.


Tax Surrzrincs or Gop’s SERVANTS, AND THE RELIEF WHICH
THE GOSPEL AFFORDS.


(Verses 7, 8.)


L That God’s most favoured ser-
vants have often been exposed to the
utmost extremity and danger.

“ Our bones are scattered,” d&c. It is
‘an expression denoting the extreme of
suffering — hopeless calamity. When
the prophet Ezekiel would express the
overwhelming ruin under which Israel
was sunk, he compares their case to a
valley of dry bones, many, and exceeding
dry; and explains the allegory thus—
“‘ Our bones are dried, and our hope is
lost” (Ezek. xxxvii. 11).

A similar destitution of hope and
happiness has often characterised God’s
people. David was hunted like a part-
ridge upon the mountains, whilst Saul
was on the throne. Moses was a fugi-
tive and outlaw from Egypt. Paul was
in bonds, whilst Festus was on the
bench. Job was onthe dunghill. Those
“‘of whom the world was not worthy”
were “destitute, afflicted, tormented.”
Christ was a prisoner at the bar, whilst
Herod, in royal apparel, sat on the
judgment-seat. More remarkable still,—
they who possessed miraculous powers
could not employ them for the relief of
their own wants. Peter's shadow could
heal the diseases of others; but he
could not release himself from prison.

But why is all this suffered? Cer-
tainly not from indifference to their
interests ; for He calls them His jewels,
His children, His flock. Not from in-
ability to help or save; for He has all
power in heaven and earth—and He

398


who conducts them to thrones of glory
in the next world could equally enrich
them with the treasures of this,

1. To lead the soul to God, in the tm
mediate exercise of faith and dependence,
for better treasure than the world can
give. This was the immediate effect
here: ‘Our bones are scattered; ...
but mine eyes are unto Thee.” God
reveals Himself as the Refuge: He loves
to be known and trusted under that
character, He is never more present
with His people than when the world
forsakes. Nothing is more delightful
than the view afforded by the Cross of
Christ of the revealed character of God.

Every creature has its refuge—some
place of defence to which it can betake
itself in the hour of threatening danger.
The lion has its den; the hunted deer
betakes itself to the running stream;
the dove flies to the clefts of the rock,
&c.; the good man turns to God.

2. To prove principle and purify
character. These trials are necessary to
prove grace and to tmprove it. “That
the trial of your faith being much more
precious,” &c. (1 Pet. i. 7). God often
chooses His people in the furnace of
affliction, but always refines them in it.
Whilst you are under affliction you are
under a process of cure. The true
thought is, that sin introduced suffering,
but God, superior at all points to evil,
employs suffering as an instrument by
which sin may be destroyed in His own
people.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; PSALMS,


PSALM OXLE


LT


Tt is one means of fulfilling the
prayer: “Keep me from the snares
they have laid for me” (ver. 9).

3. To prepare for greater usefulness
here, and for endless happiness here
after.

Il, That in the most hopeless cir-
cumstances the Gospel affords relief.

1. From the fact of Divine appoint-
ment. HE causes grief; not an enemy,
They come not from the enemy of souls,
but the Friend of sinnera) The same
hand that opens the fountain of our
joys opens that of our sorrows too.
God administers them. They are the


signs of His love, They shall not
exceed the measure of your strength,
nor be continued a moment longer than
needful.

2. From the sympathy and compase-
ston of Christ.

3. From the promises of the Gospel.

4, From the bright prospects of future
glory.

Tit. That in proportion to the hap-
piness and safety of God’s children
must be the misery and wretchedness
of His enemies.


Samuel Thodey,


PSALM CXLIL


INTRODUCTION.


** A maschil of David,” ¢¢., an instruction ora didactic poem by David. ‘* A prayer wher
he was in thecave;” “That is,” says Barnes, ‘‘eithera prayer which he composed while there,
or which he composed afterwards, putting into a poetic form the substance of the prayer which
he breathed forth there. The reference may be either to the cave of Adullam (1 Sam. xxii,
1), or to that in Engedi (1 Sam. xxiv. 3). In both cases the circumstances were substantially
the same, for David had fled to the cave to escape from Saul. It is a cry of distress when there
was no refuge—no hope—but in God; when there seemed to be no way of escape from his
enemies; and when, forsaken by his friends, and pursued by an enemy who sought 4is life, he
seemed now to be in the power of his foe. It may also be used to express the feelings of one
now in danger,—as of a sinner under condemnation, seeing no way of escape, exposed to ruin,
and shut up entirely to the mercy of God. Suc a one feels as David did on this occasion, that
there can be no escape but through the interposition of God.”

Many of the Psalms give utterance to the same feelings. Over and over again we have
Psalms containing an expression of trouble, prayer for relief, and believing expectation of deli-
verance. With such similarity of sentiment, variety of homiletic treatment is very difficult, if
the main points in each Psalm are to be indicated in such treatment. The chief characteris.
ne of oa Pgalm—distressa, prayer, and hope—we have met with repeatedly in our survey of

is boo


A Prayer or THE Gopty Man rrom THE Derrus or DISTRESS.


We have here :—

L <A picture of deep distress.
Several features of the distress of the
poet are here set forth.

1. Zhe persecution of his enemies,
“In the way wherein I walked have
they privily laid a snare for me...
Deliver me from my persecutors ; for
they are stronger than I.” His enemies
were (1) cunning. In his path they
had hidden a snare for him, with a view
to entrap and injure him. Their per-
secution was not open and manly, but
secret and artful. Even in the path of
his duty they had concealed their
snares for his overthrow. They were
(2) powerful, “My pereecutors are


stronger than I.” Saul and his emis-
saries are here referred to. They were
more in number, better equipped, and
better fitted for warfare than David and
his party were. He felt that he was
no match for his enemies. There were
times in which David suffered the deep-
est dejection and distress of spirit by
reason of the persecutions of Saul (1
Sam. xx. 1, 3, 41, 42; xxvii. 1). Of
ourselves we are unable to cope success-
fully with the enemies of our spiritual
life and interests. Our foes are too
subtle and too strong for our unaided
efforts ; but, like David, we can seek
help from on high.

2. The failure of human help “1

399


PSALM OXLII.


HOMILETIC OOMMENTARY: PSALMS.





locked on my right hand and beheld,
but there was no man that would know
me ; refuge failed me ; no man cared for
my soul,” These words are not to be
taken as a literal description of the cir-
cumstances of David either in the cave
of Adullam or in that of Engedi. The
meaning is that there was no one to
whom he could look for protection, no
one on whom he could rely. Those
who were with him were not able to
protect him; those who were able to do
so cared not for his life. Deep and
painful was his sense of loneliness. He
was in constant peril, yet of those who
might perhaps have rendered him effec-
tual aid none were concerned for him.


There are times in the life of almost.


every man when he seems bereft of
human sympathy and help. There are
some cases in which man might render
aid if he would, but he will not. There
are others in which man would render
aid if he could, but he cannot. There
are needs to which only He who is both
God and man can minister.

3 The depression of his outward cir-
cumstances and tnward condition. In
his outward circumstances he seems to
have been greatly reduced. “I am
brought very low.” And his spiritual
state was that of deep distress, ‘‘My
spirit is overwhelmed within me.”
His outward condition was almost des-
perate, and the deep prostration of his
spirit corresponded thereto. Darkness
seemed to be settling down upon both
his soul and his circumstances, Many
@ godly soul has passed through similar
experiences. Darkness and trial to some
extent fall to the lot of every good man
in this life. It is well that it is so. The
gloom of the night is as needful as the
glory of the day. “Sweet are the uses
of adversity.”

II. A prayer of strong confidence,
The Psalmist manifests his faith in—

1. God's accessibleness to him. “I
cried unto the Lord with my voice ;
with my voice unto the Lord did I make
my supplication. I poured out my com-
plaint before Him; I showed before
Him my trouble.” The fact that he
thus unfolded the tale of his woes to
God, and entreated His mercy, is con-

400


¢
.


clusive evidence that he believed that
God may be approached by His creatures
in prayer.

2. God’s interest in him. Unless the
Psalmist had believed in God’s kind
interest in him, he could not have
poured out his complaint before Him as
he does in this Psalm. God is both
accessible to us and interested in us.
“The righteous cry, and the Lord
heareth, and delivereth them out of all
their troubles.” “The Lord heareth
the prayer of the righteous.” “If we
ask anything according to His will, He
heareth us,” ‘“‘ He careth for you.”

3. God’s knowledge of him. “ When
my spirit was overwhelmed within me,
then Thou knewest my path.” The
dangers that beset the poet and the
troubles that distressed him were all
known to God. The conviction of this
must have been a source of unspeakable
comfort and strength to David. This
assurance was precious to the afflicted
Patriarch of Uz. “ He knoweth the way
that I take: when He hath tried me I
shall come forth as gold.” Be com-
forted, my distressed brother ; the Lord
knoweth thy path, He is watching over
thee, He careth for thee, &.

4. God's protection of him. “I cried
unto Thee, O Lord; I said, Thou art
my refuge, my portion in the land of the
living.” The Psalmist found security
and comfort in the Lord, who was the
source of his help and the God of his
salvation. The Lord was his only re-
fauge. There is a well-known picture of
a large cross hewn out in the form of a
rock standing in the midst of a wild and
raging sea to which a struggling form
clings with the tenacity of despair, Our
Lord is that rock, The floods of this
world’s strife and sorrow and pain may
well-nigh overwhelm us, the seething
waves of sin may lash wildly about us, but
if we have found Him, He will be to us a
sure refuge and rock of defence. God
is the only sure refuge in the storms of
life, and He is a refuge which is invtol-
ably secure and ever available.

5. Upon this confidence in God the
Psalmist bases his prayer to Him for de-
liverance. ‘Attend unto my cry, for I
am brought very low ; deliver me frona


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


my persecutors, for they are stronger
than I Bring my soul out of prison,
that I may praise Thy name.” David
seemed imprisoned by difficulties and
jangers, encompassed with enemies, and
unable to effect his escape, and he cried
with well-founded confidence to God for
emancipation. We know how glorious
an answer he received to his prayer.
God granted him complete deliverance
and high distinction—translated him, in
His own time and way, from the cave of
the outlaw to the throne of the king, In
this we have an illustration of the way
in which He ever answers sincere and
believing prayer.

It. An anticipation of a happy
issue of his distress.

The poet anticipates—

1. That God would completely deliver
him, ‘Thou shalt deal bountifully with
me.” He anticipated not mere deliver-
ance, but such a deliverance and such
blessings as would result from the boun-
tiful dealings of the gracious Lord.

2. That he would praise God. “ That
I may praise Thy name.” In the com-


FealLM CXL,





plete deliverance which he anticipated
he would have occasion to praise the
name of the Lord, and he would joy-
fully improve the occasion. The benefit
of the salvation being his, its glory he
would heartily ascribe to God.

3. That the righteous would refoice in
his deliverance. ‘The righteous shall
compass me about, for Thou,” &e. David
anticipated that the righteous would be
encouraged by his salvation, and would
resort unto him with gladness and with
congratulations. Thus in his distress
the poet anticipates complete and joyous
deliverance,—a deliverance that shall
awaken his own heart to glad and grate-
ful praise, and call forth the congratu-
lations of all the godly,

Conctiusion.— Distress is a common
experience in this life. But the resources
of men when in distress greatly differ.
There is but one true and adequate Re-
fuge. To Him David turned in confi-
dence, and found safety and relief. Let
all distressed souls look to Him, and
they shall not be disappointed,


Taz Sorrows oF THE SoUL AND THE KNOWLEDGE oF Gop.
(Verse 3.)
* When my spirit was overwhelmed within me, then Thou knewest my path.”


We have here—
I. A figure indicating great sorrow.
“My spirit was overwhelmed within
me.” The expression sets forth the
sorest distress. ie
1. Distressin that part of man’s nature
where it ts most severely felt. “My
spirit.” “The spirit of a man will sus-
tain his infirmity ; but a wounded spirit
who can bear?” If the spirit be peace-
ful and blessed, if it be inspired by joy
and hope, it enables man to triumph
over the severest physical sufferings.
Paul and Silas at Philippi, in the inner
prison, with their feet fast in the stocks,
and their backs torn and tortured by
many stripes, rose superior to their cir-
cumstances and their sufferings, and
caused the prison to resound with their
songs of praise. Christian martyrs have
exulted in the flames which were con-
suming their bodiea) St. Stephen, who
VOL. IL


was stoned to death, “fell asleep.” Phy-
sically his death was a cruel and painful
thing ; but the faith and hope and vision
which animated his spirit made his death
a euthanasia. But who can rise above
the sorrows of the soul? When the
epirit suffers, the man himself suffers ;
when it is overwhelmed, the whole
nature is overwhelmed.

3. Distress of the severest kind, “ My
spirit was overwhelmed.” | Sorrow had
submerged him. Great afflictions are
frequently represented by the figure of
overwhelming floods, “ Deep calleth
unto deep,” &c. (Ps, xlii 7), ‘“ Let
me be delivered out of the deep waters,”
&e, (Ps, lxix, 14, 15). “ Thou hast
afflicted me with all Thy waves” (Pa
lxxxviii, 7). ‘ When thou passest
through the waters, I will be with
thee,” &c. (Isa. xliii. 2), Such sore
distress sometimes befalls the servants


401


PALM ORLIT.








of God, Great saints have great sorrows.
“Whom the Lord loveth He chasten-
eth,” &c, (Heb. xii. 6, 7).

Il..A fact affording great consola-
tion. ;

“Then Thou knewest my path.” All
the painful and perilous wanderings of
David were known to God. (Comp.
Ps. lvi. 8.)

1, This fact may be abundantly con-
firmed. An infinite Being must know
all things. Nothing is so great as to
exceed His comprehension; nothing so
small as to elude His notice. The Bible
asserts God’s omniscience (2 Kings xix.
27; Ps. cxxxix. 1-4; Heb. iv. 13).
How strikingly our Lord declared God’s
perfect knowledge of His people! (Matt.
vii 32; x. 30.) The history of good
men illustrates it. In the lives of Joseph
and Moses, David and Daniel, Paul and
John, how clearly does this truth shine
forth,—‘“ Thou knewest their path.”

2. This fact is very comprehensive, It
implies much more than it expresses.
The knowledge which is here affirmed
implies approbation and guidance, pro-
tection and provision, kindness and care,
Thus David Dickson says: ‘‘‘ Thou
knewest my path;’ that is, Thou ap-
provedst my part, who was unjustly
pursued.” And Charnocke: “ This
knowledge adds to the simple act of
the understanding, the complacency and
pleasure of the will, ‘The Lord knows
who are His,’ that is, He loves them;


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMB.





He doth not only know them but ao
knowledge them for His own. It notes
not only an exact understanding, but a
special care of them. . . . On the con-
trary, also, whom God doth not approve,
He is said not to know (Matt. xxv. 12),
‘I know you not,’ and (Matt. vii. 23),
‘IT never knew you;’ He doth not ap-
prove of their works, It is not an
ignorance of understanding, but an
ignorance of will; for while He saith
He never knew them, He testifies that
He did know them, in rendering the
reason of His disapproving them, because
He knows all their works: so He knows
them, and doth not know them in a
different manner: He knows them so as
to understand them, but He doth not
know them 80 as to love them.” ‘ Thou
knewest my path” implies, Thou didst
approve and direct, sustain and secure,
my way.

3. This fact ts very consolatory. That
it was so to David appears from our
text, and from Ps. lvi. 8. It was so
to the sorely-afflicted Job: “ He know-
eth the way that I take,” &c. (Job xxiii.
10). Amid misrepresentation to be able
to make our appeal to Him; amid per-
secution to be assured of His protection;
amid sorrow of soul to know that we
have His sympathy; in loneliness to
realise His friendly presence,—these
afford the richest consolation and the
most effective help. To possess these is
the privilege of every child of God,


THe Dury or Carina ror Souls.
(Verse 4.)


“No man cared for my soul.” |


Let us inquire—

I. What it is to care for the souls
of others. The care of the soul in-
volves—

1. A deep and heartfelt conviction of
tts worth, The care of an object is
generally in proportion to its value,
The soul is spiritual in its nature, noble


in its capacities, and eternal in its dura- -


tion.

2. A deep and thorough sense of the
danger to which wt ts exposed. We are
not in the habit of caring for that which

402


is invaluable if it is secure; but here is
an object of inestimable worth exposed
to danger the most imminent—to a de-
struction the most severe,

3. Tender solicitude for tts welfare.
Examples of tender solicitude for souls
are not wanting in the inspired volume
(Ps. cxix. 136; Jer. ix. 1), But if we
want to see true solicitude for souls, we
must look for its manifestation in the
conduct of Him who, when He beheld
the city, wept over it, &c.

4. Zealous exertion for their salvation.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PSALM OXLDL


a ELE


If love to souls really exist, it will mani-
fest itself in ardent and continued effort
to diffuse the knowledge of Christ among
men. In solemn warning, affectionate
entreaty, earnest prayer, and liberal
contribution.

It, On whom this duty devolves.

1. Lt ts incumbent on the heads” of
families. God holds them, to a certain
extent, accountable for the souls under
their care.

2. On all the members of the Church.
Collectively and individually. To these
is committed the evangelisation of the
world.

3. Pre-eminently on ministers. The
“care of souls” is the minister’s pro-
wince. His studies in private, his dis-
courses in public, his prayers, his visita,
his time, his talents, ought all to be de-
voted to this object.

Iil. The great evil of neglecting
this duty.

1. Zt ts cruel. A man would be con-
sidered cruel who saw one of the “ beasts
that perish” in danger, and did not


attempt its rescue. He is cruel, who,
having it in his power to relieve the
necessitous, or save the perishing, does
not do it. But the cruelty of the man
who, knowing the danger of souls, does
not care for them, is beyond expression.

2. It is ungrateful. If others had
not cared for us, we must have perished,
And shall we refuse to feel and labour
for those who are now what we were
once, and for whom the Saviour has, as
well as for us, shed His own precious
blood #

3. Lt ts eriminal. We cannot neglect
the salvation of others and be innocent.
Disobedience to God, and cruelty to
men, are joined in neglecting to care for
souls,

4, It is fatal. Fatal to those who
are perishing, and fatal to those who
have a name to live; fatal to all genuine
piety, fatal to all ardent love to the
Saviour’s cause, fatal to zealous exer-
tions for others, but especially fatal to
our own souls.—N. in Sketches of Sor-
mons. Abridged,


Homan Imprisonment and Diving Emancipation.
(Verse 7.)


“ Bring my soul out of prison, that I may praise Thy name.”


We shall use these words to illus-
trate—

I. Man’s imprisonment as a sinner,
Man asa sinuer is in bondage, oppressed
with guilt, enslaved by carnal passions
and evil habits; he is in “prison.” Now
imprisonment implies—

1. The criminality of the prvsoner.
The prisoner is either awaiting bis trial
on a charge of crime, or enduring his
punishment as a criminal. Man has
sinned and is guilty before God. The
voice of God, both in the Bible and in
his own conscience, condemns him,

2. Deprivation to the prisoner. The
prisoner is deprived of (1.) Liberty. He
is confined by massive walls, strong
bolts and bars, &. The sinner is
bound by the chain of his sins, (2.)
Light. Darkness is almost entirely sup-
reme in the prison cells, The soul
which is dominated by sin is blind to


the beautiful light of the spiritual uni-
verse : its “ understanding is darkened.”
(3.) Society, The prisoner is secluded
from society. The unrenewed soul is a
stranger to the highest fellowship; he
is self-exiled from the society of true
and holy souls,

The imprisonment of the soul is a
far greater evil than that of the body.
When the body is imprisoned, the soul
may be free and joyous. When the
bodies of Paul and Silas were in prison
at Philippi with “their feet fast in the
stocks,” their souls went forth in wor-
ship, &c. When the body of Bunyan
was in Bedford jail, his soul went forth
on that glorious pilgrimage to the cele-
stial city. His body was in the jail,
but his soul—himself—was in the inter-
preter’s house, and the house beautiful,
on the delectable mountains, &c,


403


PRALM OXLIIL


“*Stone walls do not a prison make,

Nor iron bars a cage ;

Minds innocent and quiet take
That for a hermitage,

If I have freedom in my love,
And in my soul am free,

Angels alone that soar above
Enjoy such liberty.” —Lovelace,

But the imprisonment of the soul is
the imprisonment of the man himself.
Death terminates the imprisonment of
the body, if it is not terminated before,
But death has no power to liberate the
soul from the prison and the fetters of
corrupt passions, sinful habits, dc. “If
ye believe not that 1 am He, ye shall
die in your sins.”

II. Mans emancipation by the
Saviour. “Bring my soul out of pri-
son.” This prayer implies—

1. A consciousness of the misery of tm-
prisonment. This is the first step, and
an essential step, to liberation.

2. A desire for emancipation “O
wretched man that I am! who shall de-
liver me }” &c.

3. A consciousness of inability to effect


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





his own deliverance. Man is too com-
pletely and securely fettered to be able
to liberate himself. He must feel this
before he can obtain his freedom,

4. Confidence in the Lord Jesus as the
great Emancipator. He was “ anointed
to proclaim liberty to the captives, and
the opening of the prison to the bound.”
“Tf the Son shall make you free, ye
shall be free indeed.”

IIL Man’s praise to the Emanci-
pator. “That I may praise Thy name.”

1. Imprisonment restrains true pratse,
Sin crushes the affections and aspira-
tions of the soul towards God.

3. Emancipation gives occasion for
praise. It would be such an expression
of the goodness of God as would merit
grateful and hearty acknowledgment.

3. Emancipation imparts inspiration
to praise. The sense of freedom, the
beauty of light, the pleasures of society,
to which the liberated soul is introduce'l,
will constitute an irresistible impulse co
praise the Emancipator,


PSALM CXLIIL
INTRODUCTION,


This is the lest of what are called the Seven Penitential Psalms, In the Hebrew it has the
guperscription, ‘‘A Psalm of David.” And in the Septuagint and the Vulgate there is added,
‘When Absalom, his son, pursued him.” Yet many expositors regard the Psalm as written
in subsequent times, after the manner of David. Thus Delitzsch views it as ‘‘a later effort to
copy after the Davidic Psalm-poetry.” And Moll doubts ‘‘ whether such a poet as David would
have go copied himself, as would be the case if the Davidic authorship were proved. One might
pray in the same language, but would not repeat himself in different poems.” Perowne regards
the Psalm as having been written after the exile, ‘The spirit and the language,” he gays,
“it ia true, are not unworthy of David; yet the many passages borrowed from earlier Psalms
make it more probable that this Psalm is the work of some later poet.” This objection loses
sight of the fact that “there are many instances of repetitions in Psalms in the earlier portion
of the Psalter, which are acknowledged to be those of David, and they do not occasion any diffi-
culty. . .. At all events, the poem, even with the familiarity of its ideas, forms a complete
whole, which is worthy of David, and which no critic need on that score hesitate to assign to
him.” Alexander, Barnes, Hengstenberg, Henry, Wordsworth, and most English commenta-
tora, accept the Davidic authorship,

‘The Psalm,” saya Perowne, ‘‘consiats of two parte, each of which is of six verses, the
conclusion of the first being marked by the Selah, he first portion contains the complaint
(vers. 1-6); the second, the prayer founded on that complaint (vers. 7-12).”

Homiletically we regard the Psalm as presenting to us The cry of a distressed servant of
God (vers. 1-6), and Zhe prayer of a distressed servant of God (vers. 7-12).


Toe Cry or a Distressep Servant oF Gop,


(Verses 1-6.)


In this cry of the troubled poet to the
Lord, we have—
L A picture of great distress,
404


“For the enemy hath persecuted my
soul; he hath smitten my life,” &e,
(vers. 3, 4). He was distressed by—


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PRaLM CELI,


——— eee


1. Malignant outward persecution.
“The enemy hath persecuted my soul ;
he hath smitten my life down to the
ground ; he hath made me to dwell ir
darkness, as those that have long been
dead.” ‘The Psalmist,” says Moll,
“evidently means to say that his enemies
are intent upon his utter destruction,
and that he would remain without deli-
verance, unless God in mercy were to
take up his defence,” With what ter-
rible malignity and untiring persistence
did Saul persecute David! And how
bitterly David suffered from the rebel-
lion of his son Absalom! (2 Sam. xv. 30.)
And the servants of God still suffer from
without,—from the persecutions of the
world (2 Tim. iii. 12); from the treachery
of those whom they had trusted, as
David did from Ahithophel; from tem-
poral losses, &c. “‘ In the world ye have
tribulation,”

2. Insupportable inward suffering.
“Therefore is my spirit overwhelmed
within me; my heart within me is deso-
late.” Thus the poet expresses (1.) Hts
sore sorrow. ‘ My spirit is overwhelmed
within me.” (See a sketch on Ps. exlii.
3a.) (2.) His painful perplexity. “My
heart within me is desolate,” “ or rather,
‘is full of amazement,’ lit., ‘ astonies
itself ;’ seeks to comprehend the mystery
of its sufferings, and is ever beaten back
upon itself in its perplexity: such is the
full force of the reflexive conjugation
here employed.”—Perowne.

The mystery of suffering is to many
minds, and those not the least noble, its
most painful element. The experience
of the poet was not a solitary or excep-
tional one. Good men are still liable to
outward persecution and inward anguish ;
they still suffer both in their circum-
stances and in their souls, “Beloved,
think it not strange concerning the fiery
trial which is to try you, as though some
strange thing happened unto you,” &ec,
“My son, despise not thou the chas-
tening of the Lord,” &c, (Heb. xii
5-11).

IL An exercise indicating great
wisdom.

“T remember the days of old; I medi-
tate on all Thy works; I muse on the
work of Thy hands.”


1. The distinguished mental powers
exercised, (1.) Recollection, “I re-
member the days of old.” The poet
recalled the past; made it live again
before his “ mind’s eye.” (2.) Medita-
tion. He reflected upon the scenes
which recollection reproduced; and thus
endeavoured to ascertain their signifi-
cance, learn their lessons, &c.

2. The great subjects on which these
mental powers were exercised, (1.) “ Tha
days of old.” What a wondrous volume
is the past! How marvellous are its re-
velations ! how instructive its contents |
how wise its lessons! To this volume
the poet turned his attention, (2.) The
doings of God. All Thy works, . .
the work of Thy hands.” How vast a
theme for meditation is this! and how
sublime | how fitted to inspire the soul
with confidence and hope! (For a fuller
treatment of the hints given under this
head, see on Ps, Ixxvii. 3-6, 11, 12:
vol. i, pp. 431-437.) Now, in all this
the Psalmist seems to act with great
wisdom, In turning his mind from the
restless present to the calm past, and
from the cruel doings of his enemies and
the sore troubles of his heart to the
glorious deeds of ancient date which God
had done, he adopted a course calculated
to calm his fears, strengthen his faith in
God, arouse his courage, and inspire his
hope.

IiI. An appeal of great power.

“ Hear my prayer, O Lord ; give ear
to my supplications,” &c, This appeal
$e


1. Directed to the best Being. “O
Jehovah, hear my prayer,” &c. He
never turns away His ear from the cry
of the troubled heart; He is merciful
and gracious; He is able to succour all
suffering and needy souls; and “ His
love is as great as His power.”

2. For rval blessings. He solicits from
Jehovah—(1.) Acceptance of his prayer.
“Hear my prayer, O Jehovah ; give ear
to my supplications: in Thy faithfulness
answer me, and in Thy righteousness,”
No utterance of man escapes the Divine
ear. The Psalmist prays not for a mere
hearing, but for a gracious audience, and
a favourable answer to his appeal. (2.)
Forgiweness of his sins, ‘‘ And enter not

405


POALM OXLITI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : PSALMS.





into judgment with Thy servant ; for m
Thy sight no man living is righteous.”
The poet here manifests—(a) His con-
sciousness of sin. ‘ He traces his suffer-
ing to his sin: the malice of his enemies
is the rod of God’s chastisement, calling
him to repentance.” (8) His conviction
of the Divine holiness. He who appears
quite righteous before man, appears sin-
ful before the infinite purity of God.
‘‘ What is man, that he should be clean ?”
&c. (Job xv. 14-16). “How can man
be justified with God?” dc. (Job xxv.
4-6). (y) His belief in the Divine
judgment of man. “Enter not into
judgment,” &c. “God shall bring every
work into judgment,” &. (8) His
earnest desire for Divine forgiveness,
The petition that God would not enter
into judgment with him implies his
longing for merey and pardon of his
sins. Here is a need which is common
to all men in this world, Our hope
must ever be in the forbearing and for-
giving mercy of God, (3.) Deliverance
from his enemics and dustresses. This,
though not directly expressed in this
section of the Psalm, is the great object
of the Psalmist’s appeal to God. Such
were the blessings which the distressed
poet sought, de,
3. Enforced by the strongest pleas.
1.) The sore need of the suppliant
Be, 3, 4). (2.) The relation sustained
by the suppliant to God. “Thy servant.”
The phrase, “Thy servant,” in ver. 2, “is
not a mere oriental circumlocution for the
person speaking, and not merely a term
of polite address,” as appears from the
way in which it is used in ver. 12.
“The expression, ‘with Thy servant,’
contains,” says Hengstenberg, “ the
grounding of the prayer; with His
servants God cannot go into judgment ;
He chastens them indeed, but He does
not give them over to death.” (3.) The
revealed character of God. “In Thy
faithfulness answer me, and in Thy
righteousness,” ‘The faithfulness of


God,” says Moll, “is His faithfulness to


His promises, or the truthfulness of His
nature, in conformity with which every-
thing that He has spoken or ordained is
reliable and unchangeable. His right-
eousness is the corresponding course of
action by which His ordinances are
firmly established and fulfilled in the
world, so that there is rendered to every
man according to his works, God’s
faithfulness and righteousness are thus
assured, as in 1 John i. 9, and the re-
penting receive the forgiveness of their
sins, but the impenitent, judgment.”
This.is the most powerful plea that we
can use with God. He cannot be untrue
to His promise or to His character.
“ He cannot deny Himself.”

IV. A desire of great fervour.

“T stretch forth my hands unto Thee ;
my soul thirsteth after Thee asa thirsty
land.” Notice :—

1, The Object of his desire. “Unto
Thee;... after Thee.” ‘“ Observe how
he binds himself to God alone, cuts off
every other hope from his soul, and, in
short, makes his very need a chariot
wherewith to mount up to God.” (On
this and on the next point see on
Ps, xiii. 1, 2; lxiii. 1; vol. i pp. 206,
207, 314.)

2. The fervour of his desire. “I
stretch forth my hands unto Thee,” “ as
the weary child stretches forth its hands
to its mother, that on her bosom it may
be hushed to rest.’—Perowne, “ My
soul thirsteth after Thee as a thirsty
land.” ‘As a parched land,” says
Hengstenberg, “ stands related to the
rain, 80 my soul to Thee, and to Thy
salvation.” And Calvin : “ In great heat
we see the earth cracking and gaping, as
though with open mouth she asked for
the rain from heaven.” So fervently
the soul of the poet craved the help and
joy of the presence of God.

ConcLusion.—Exhibit the Psalmist
in this cry to God in his distress as
an example to the servants of God in
times of (1) severe spiritual n@frwing,
and (2) tribulation from without.


.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PSALM OXLITE,





Divine Jupament DerprREocaTEp.
(Verse 2.)


Let us consider —

I. The truths which are here im-
plied.

l. That the Psalmist was conscious of
sin. So far as his enemies were con-
cerned he felt that they were persecut-
ing him without cause ; he was innocent
in relation to them ; but in relation to
God he felt that he was not innocent,
The persecutions of his enemies he
regarded as the chastisement of God
because of his sins,

2. That the Lord ts the Judge of man,
The poet regards Him as having autho-
rity to enter into judgment with His
creatures. This truth is frequently
expressed in the Psalms. “God is
Judge Himself.” ‘God is the Judge;
He putteth down one,” &c, “ Lift up
Thyself, Thou Judge of the earth,” &ec.
“The Lord will judge His people,” &c.

3. That the Lord ts a righteous Judge.
He cannot pass by unrepented sin. If
sin be not forgiven and forsaken, He will
visit with His judgments because of it,
and His judgmentsare true and righteous,
“ He shall judge the world in righteous-
ness; He shall minister judgment to
the people in uprightness,* “ He shall
judge the people righteously.” ‘ He
shall judge the world with righteous.
ness, and the people with His truth.”

IL The petition which is here of-
fered.

“Enter not into judgment with Thy
servant.” This is a petition for—

1. Forbearing mercy. It is a request
that God will not call him to render a
strict account for his offences against
Him. “If Thou, Lord, shouldest mark
iniquities, QO Lord, who shall stand?”
We need the forbearance of God, because
of our imferfections, omissions, and
transgressions.

2. Forgiving mercy. Though not
directly expressed, this is sought by
implication in this petition. Even a
faithful servant of the Lord needs the
forgiveness of sins arising from remain-
ing depravity and moral weakness. And
{t is an encouragement to know that


“there is forgiveness with Him; ...
with the Lord there is mercy, and witk
Him is plenteous redemption.” “He
will abundantly pardon.” Freely, gra-
ciously, and completely He forgives all
those who in sincere penitence seek Him,

IIL The reasons which are hers
urged.

“With Thy servant; for in Thy
sight shall no man living be justified.”
Perowne more correctly translates : “ For
before Thee no man living is righteous.”
Here are two pleas by which the Psalmist
strengthens his petition—

1. The universal sinfulness of man.
“Before Thee no man living is right-
eous.” ‘No one of the race, no matter
what his rank, his outward conduct,
his gentleness, his amiableness, his
kindness—no matter how just and up-
right he may be towards his fellow-men,”
he is not righteous before the holy God.
Before man we may appear righteous;
but not before a Being of infinite holi-
ness. Most clear is the testimony of
the Bible on this point. ‘There is no
man than sinneth not.” “There is none
that doeth good, no, not one” “ Who
can say, I have made my heart clean,
I am pure from my sin?” ‘There is
nota just man upon earth that doeth good
and sinneth not.” “If we say that we
have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and
the truth is not in us.” Hence if God
were swift to judge and strict to punish,
ail men must perish.

2. The relation of the Psalmist to God,
“Thy servant.” David was a distin-
guished servant of God, vet he felt that
he was a sinner before Him. Even a
sincere and faithful servant of God
cannot stand before Him in judgment ;
cannot plead any merits of his own, or
appeal to God on the ground of His
justice, ‘When ye shall have done all
those things which are commanded you,
say, We are unprofitable servants ;” dc.
But when a man can sincerely speak of
himself to the Lord as His servant, he
has good ground upon which to base
his hope of protection and salvation

407


POALM OXLUI,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


i pe


from Himin His mercy, ‘“ When a man
resolves with heart and soul to be and
remain a servant of God, God will not
forsake him; but where He is, there
will also His servant be.”

CoNncLUSION :—

1. If a true servant of God cannot
stand before Him in judginent, how shall
the wicked appear at His bar? “The
ungodly are like the chaff which the
wind driveth away,” &c. (Ps. i. 4-6).


2, Let every man seck an interest in
the infinite mercy of God. “Let the
wicked forsake his way,” &c (Isa
lv. 7). “Return, thou backsliding Is
rael, saith the Lord,” d&c. (Jer. iii. 12).
“Qod is rich in mercy.” “The Lord
is merciful and gracious,” dc. (Ps, citi.
8-12). “Who is a God like unto Thee,
that pardoneth iniquity,” &c. (Mic. vii.
18, 19).


Tae Prayer or A Distressep SERVANT oF GoD,
(Verses 7-12.)


Notice :-—

L The blessings which are here
sought.

The Psalmist first solicits the Divine
favour in general, and a speedy answer
to his prayer: “Hear me speedily, O
Lord ; my spirit faileth: hide not Thy
face from me,” &c, (ver. 7). He then
proceeds to specify certain blessings in
particular, and to entreat the Lord to
bestow them. He asks for—

1. The lovingkindness of God. ‘Cause
me to hear Thy lovingkindness in the
morning.” It is a petition for an early
assurance of the mercy of God. Divine
lovingkindness is the root of which all
other blessings are branches—the foun-
tain from which all other blessings fiow.
It is also the crown of all other blessings.
“Thy iovingkindness is better than
life.”

2. Deliverance from his distresses. (1.)
From outward enemies. ‘‘ Deliver me,
O Lord, from mine enemies, .. . And
of Thy mercy cut off mine enemies, and
destroy all them that afflict my soul.”
Perowne translates: “ And of Thy lov-
ingkindness cut off mine enemies, and
destroy all the adversaries of my soul,”
On this verse Barnes says, “The
destruction of the wicked is a favour to
the universe; just as the arrest and
punishment of a robber or a pirate is a
mercy to society, to mankind; just as


every prison is a display of mercy as”


well as of justice ——mercy to society at

large ; justice to the offenders.” There

is truth in this ; but the prayer for the

destruction of our enemies is not becom-

ing in the lips of a Christian. “I say
408


unto you, Love your enemies, bless them
that curse you,” dc. (Matt. v. 44, 45).
“Bless them which persecute you,” &«
‘“‘Tf thine enemy hunger, feed him,” &.
Such is the Christian rule. But we
may petition God for deliverance from
our adversaries. (2.) From inward
sufferings. “For Thy righteousness’
sake bring my soul out of trouble.”
The poet was in sore distress of soul ;
he looks to the faithfulness and mercy
of God for deliverance from the same,
Let the godly in all times of spiritual
trial and sorrow direct their prayer to
the same gracious Being. “Call upon
Me in the day of trouble ; I will deliver
thee,” &.

3. Inward and spiritual blessings. In
the view of the Psalmist his sa» ‘ion
requires both external deliverance. and
internal communications of Divine grace,
“The way of deliverance,” says Moll,
“is to the servant of God no external
one, but a way of salvation, which the
commandments of God point out, in
which the Spirit of God, who is good,
is the Guide.” So the Psalmist petitions
for—(1.) Divine teaching ;—(a.) That
he might know the way which God
would have him to pursue, “Cause
me to know the way wherein I should
walk.” Even the most experienced and
holy of men need the direction of God
in life. (8.) That he might do the will
of God. ‘Teach me to do Thy will.”
Correct knowledge alone cannot save
man from sin or suffering ; correct con-
duct must be added thereto, Mere
theories, however true and good, never
raised a life into sanctity and strength.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY; PSALMS.


=


To do this, theories must be reduced to
practice—embodied in life. Most need-
ful and important is the petition, “Teach
me to do Thy will.” (2.) Divine help.
“Thy Spirit is good; lead me into the
land of uprightness.” Perowne: “ ‘ Let
Thy good Spirit lead me in a plain
country,’ lit., ‘in a level land,’ or ‘on
level ground,’ where there is no fear
of stumbling and falling.” Conant
translates: “Let Thy good Spirit guide
me on even ground.” The poet desires
to be led into a way of safety. It is a

west not simply for enlightenment ;
but for the Holy Spirit’s help, His
guiding, guarding, and strengthening
influence. Hengstenberg’s note is to
the point: ‘‘David’s proper regard is
directed to the obtaining of deliverance,
which is the object of all his prayers in
the preceding and following verses, But
he shows himself throughout deeply
penetrated with the conviction, that the
foundation of the deliverance is right-
eousness—that it never can come, where
this foundation is wanting, but that
it of necessity must come where this
foundation exists. He knew, also, that


nothing could be done here by one’s:


own power (Comp., for example, Ps.
xix. ; li.) Hence he prays here, expand-
ing his views farther, that the Lord
would (internally) teach him to do
His will, convinced that this first gift
must necessarily draw the second in its
train, that of salvation; so he prays
that the good Spirit of God would make
him good, and consequently would guide
him upon the path of salvation... .
The good Spirit works good in those
who partake of the gift.” (3.) Dune
life. “Quicken me, O Lord, for Thy
name’s sake.” Here the poet prays for
an increase of spiritual life and strength.
In the way of the Divine commands
there is salvation ; and the teaching, the
guidance, the life, and the strength
which are necessary to tread that way,
God alone can bestow. Like the
Psalmist, let us seek them from Him.

IL The grounds upon which these
blessings are sought.

1. The sore need of the Psalmist.
“Hear me speedily, O Lord; my spirit
faileth ; hide not Thy face from me, lest


PSALM OXLITL





I be like unto them that go down inte
the pit” “The pit” is’ the grave.
Apart from the help of God, the Psalmist
despairs even of life itself. The great-
ness of his misery is a touching and
forcible appeal to the tender and infinite
mercy of God. :

2. The personal relations of the Psal-
mist to God. (1.) Confidence in God. In
various ways does the Psalmist give
expression to this; “ For in Thee do I
trust. . . . I flee unto Thee to hide me.”
Margin: “ Heb., ‘Hide me with Thee,’”
Perowne: “‘Unto Thee have I fled to
hide me ;” lit., ‘Unto Thee have I hidden
(myself).’ But the phrase is very pecu-
liar, and its meaning doubtful.” Conant:
“With Thee I hide myself.” “The
notions of covering and refuge,” says
Moll, “are united in the intermediate
one of hiding.” The expression un-
doubtedly indicates strong confidence,
(Comp. Ps. xxvii. 5; xxxi 20.) Heng-
stenberg says admirably, “ The allusion
points in this direction, that God must
conceal those who conceal themselves
with Him.” Could He fail to deliver
one who so utterly confided in Him ?
(2.) Prayer to God. “For I lift up my
soul unto Thee,” This language denotes
earnest desire and confident expectation.
“Prayer is the ascent of the soul to
God.” “ Where the soul is really directed
towards God, it is full of seeking for help,
and longing for salvation.” “To lift
up the soul to God is to begin the lift-
ing of the entire man out of all need.”
Could God disregard such a desire, or
disappoint such an expectation as this 1
(3.) Consecration to God, “¥or Thou
art my God;... for I am Thy servant.”
If we have sincerely taken the Lord for
our God, and consecrated ourselves to
Him as His servants, we may be sure
that He will guide and defend us, sus-
tain and save us, (See on ver. 2.)

3. The revealed character of God. The
Psalmist pleads (1.) His righteousness.
‘For Thy righteousness’ sake, bring my
soul out of trouble.” (See notes on ver.
1.) (2.) His grace, “And of Thy
mercy cut off mine enemies.” He pleads
that, in the lovingkindness which He
had declared to His people, He would
interpose for his deliverance. Ne His


PoALM CXL.


honour. ‘Quicken me, O Lord, for
Thy name’s sake.” This is a bold and
powerful plea, Moses used it with re-
markable results (Exod, xxxii, 11-14;
Num, xiv. 13-20). So also did Joshua:
“What wilt Thou do unto Thy great
name?” (Jos, vii. 6 seg.) And fre-
quently David urged it with God. As-
suredly God will not fail to maintain
the honour of His holy name. Thus
cogent are the arguments with which the
Psalmist entreats God for salvation.

III. The urgency with which these
blessings are sought. ‘“ Hear me
speedily, O Lord; my spirit faileth,”
&c. Perowne translates; “ Make haste


HOMILETICO OOMMENTARY: PSALMS,





to answer me, O Jehovah; my spirit
faileth,” dc. ‘‘ Matters had now come
with the Psalmist to an extremity.
Where this is the case with the servants
of God, there the Divine help cannot be
longer withheld.” The poet manifests
similar urgency in the petition, ‘“ Cause
me to hear Thy lovingkindness in the
morning,” #.¢., soon, speedily, “ The idea
is not that He would wait for anotherday,
but that He would interpose as the very
first act,—as when one enters on a day.”
A prayer like unto this, with such
powerful pleas and such urgency of en-
treaty, is itself a sign of the nearness of the
interposition and salvation of the Lord,


A Goop Man’s Prayer FoR GRACE AND GUIDANCE.
(Verse 8.)


Value of the Book of Psalms as pre-
senting a test of religious character and
experience. Shows what religion is—
what religion can do: what it once was,
it always is—what it has once done, it
can always do,

I. David prays for God’s distinguish-
ing favour asa God of grace. “Cause
me to hear Thy lovingkindness,” &c.

1. The blessing itself 1s very empha-
ttc, “Thy lovingkindness,” Not God’s
general benevolence as it shines in
nature ; not His general protection as it
is seen in Providence; but His special
manifestation of mercy as it shines in
the covenant of grace, “ Remember me,
O Lord, with the favour of Thy people.”
“Look Thou upon me, and be merciful
unto me, a8 Thou usest to do unto those
that love Thy name.”

This he desires beyond created good—
beyond his crown as a monarch—beyond
his eminent distinction as a man of
genius—beyond his highest estimation
as a gifted prophet, he values God’s
favour; just as Moses did “the good-
will of Him that dwelt in the bush”
beyond “the chief things of the ancient
mountains and the precious things of the
lasting hills.” These desires are com-
mon to all the saints. In New Testa-
ment phrase—the love of the Father, the
grace of the Son, and the fellowship of
the Spirit. Judge of your character by
your habitual desires,

410


2. The period in which i is desired,
“In the morning.” It is sought first in
point of téme—first in point of tmport-
ance. “Seek ye first the kingdom of
God,” &c. “In the morning” of the
day, that we may begin it with God.
“In the morning” of the week—the
Sabbath. “In the morning” of life—
youth. “In the morning” of the resur-
rection. “Cause me:” Divine influence
needful.

It. For God’s daily guidance as a
God of Providence. ‘Cause me to
know the way,” &c.

1. Prompted by a sense of our weak-
ness and ignorance. How much we
need a guide! We have as much need
of daily guidance as of daily bread. We
cannot get safely through a world of sin
and danger without the Presence and
Grace of Christ. It is not a matter of in-
difference to the Christian how he passes
through life. Not enough to say, “ What
shall I eat?” &e.; but, “ Lord, lift Thou
up the light of Thy countenance upon
us.” The soul has wants as well as the
body. The Christian has moral interests
to secure; he has a race to run—a
battle to fight—a prize to gain—a God
to glorify—a soul to be lost or saved,
He is in a world where the great de
stroyer has his seat. He knows that the
interests of others are linked in with his
own; cannot stand or fall alone. Hence
he prays, “Cause me to know,” &a


AHOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PSALM OXLEEL


Ee cc a a a a er ae ee


2. Prompted by knowledge of the charac-
ter of Christas a Guide, Wise, powerful,
gracious. “The Shepherd and Bishop
of your souls.” Having had large ex-
perience of the conduct of sinners,

Ii. Por the constant acceptance of
his devotions asa prayer-hearing God.

“in Lhee-do 1 trust; , ..-. I litt
up my soul unto Thee,” This is partly


a profession of his daily faith and ex-
perience, and partly a plea for the
exercise of God’s mercy. “In Thee do
I trust:” Thou wilt not disappoint.
God is a perfect circle of wonders and
miracles; a good perfectly adapted to
our moral nature, They who know any-
thing of Him are anxious to know more,


—Samuel Thodey.


Divine GUIDANCE,
(Verse 8.)


“ Cause me to know the way wherein I should walk ; for I lift up my
soul unto Thee.”


Life is like a heath with paths stretch-
ing in various directions. Many appear
pleasant and safe that lead astray. Man
is often bewildered. He often chooses
wrongly. How important this prayer.

I. This was the prayer of one who
felt his need of Divine guidance.

Many will be their own guides. They
are self-reliant ; like wayward children,
or foolish Alpine travellers, forgetting
their own ignorance and liability to
error. Some are wise; they will not
take a step without God. They feel
their need of His guiding hand. This
sense of need may arise—

1. From seeing the errors of others.
Men, however, are seldom wise enough
to learn from the sorrows that attend
the wanderings of others Second-hand
experiences do not teach much.

2. From bitter experiences gained tn
self-chosen paths. God does not always
save us from erroneous ways, but often
through them. Our freedom is part of
our discipline.

3. From Divineenlightenment, Seldom
will a man be humble enough to seek
God until he sees what he ts by the light
of God’s Spirit. Bitter experiences fail
to teach us without grace.

II. This was the prayer of one who
believed that God had a way marked
out for him.

Life is not a pathless wilderness. God
has a way laid down for every man,
He regards the individual life. Laws
are general, but the progress of each life
ia a speciality. There is a way in which
every man should walk.


1. This ts true morally, Right is
straight, wrong is zigzag, Right is dis-
tinct from wrong,—a Divine way, clear
to those who will see it,

2. This ts true intellectually. Truth
is the Divine path for the intellect.
Truth, as a narrow way, lies often in the
midst of the devious windings of error ;
but they who are guided by God shall
not fail to discover it.

3. This 1 true circumstantially.
From the cradle to the grave God haa
a way for every man, The prayerless
miss it ; the prayerful find it.

III. This was the prayer ef one who
believed that God could reveal His
way to him.

The days of Divine revelations are not
over, ‘There is @ spirit in man; and
the inspiration of the Almighty giveth
him understanding.” He-causes us to
know His way—

1, By His Holy Spirit. God is nigh
to every man. He can act directly upon
each man’s spirit. He often leads men
when they know it not. His saints are
often conspicuously guided.

2. By His Word. Its precej ts in-
struct, its revelations enlighten, its ex-
amples encourage and warn us,

3. By the incarnate life of Hise Som,
He is the way. Those who follow Him
do not walk in darkness,

4, By the force of events. Way after
way is hedged up, and only God’s way
is left to us. By this God causes us
to know the way wherein we should
walk.

IV. This was the prayer of one who

411


PSALM OXLIV


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


ee rere ee er cl a Se ee


had placed himself in the right atti-
tude to receive Divine guidance.

Attitude is important. Some are
listless, others fanatical, others unbeliev-
ing. This was—

1. An attitude of expectancy. Faith
was stretching out the soul-hands to re-
ceive (ver. 6). Every faculty was awake
and eager. God would find a receptive
nature, a waiting heart.

2. The attitude of ardent desire. De-
sire had raised the soul out of its ordi-
nay life. It was rising to meet God. It


He would not be denied the light he
sought. He would continue before Him
until the mists rolled away, and the
Divine path shone out as light in the
midst of obscurity. Such an attitude
is sure to obtain a knowledge of God’s
way.

Learn :—

1. Zo distrust self.

2. To take no step until God makes
known His way.

3. For in His way there will be found
safely, peace, and ultimately heaven.—


was lifted up to take hold of Him. W. O. Lizzy. From “ The Homiletio
3. The attitude of tmportunate prayer. Quarterly.”
PSALM CXLIV,
INTRODUCTION.


“This is s singularly composite Psalm. The earlier portion of {t, to the end of ver. 11,
consists almost entirely of a cento of quotations, strung together from earlier Psalms; and it is
not always easy to trace a real connection between them. ‘The latter portion of the Psalm,
vers, 12-15, differs completely from the former. It bears the stamp of originality, and is
entirely free from the quotations and allusions with which the preceding verses abound. It is
hardly probable, however, that this concluding portion is the work of the poet who compiled
the rest of the Psalm : it is more probable that he has here transcribed a fragment of some
ancient poem, in which were portrayed the happiness and prosperity of the nation in its
brightest days, under David, it may have been, or at the beginning of the reign of Solomon.
His object seems to have been thus to revive the hopes of his nation, perhaps after the return
from the exile, by reminding them how in their past history obedience to God had brought with
it its full recompense,”

Thus Dean Perowne writes—rejecting the Davidic authorship, and bestowing no notice
whatever on the superacription, which ascribes the Psalm to David. And Moll says, ‘‘It is
doubtful whether it should be assigned to David himself.” But Hengstenberg says ‘‘ that it is
one of David's peculiarities to derive from his earlier productions a foundation for new ones,
. .« This Psalm can only have been composed by David.” And Alexander : ‘‘ The Davidie
origin of the Psalm is as marked as that of any in the Psalter.” And Perowne, notwith-
standing the passage above quoted, says, ‘‘ The language of vers. 1-4, as well as the language
of ver, 10, is clearly only suitable in the mouth of a king, or some powerful and recognised
leader of the nation ; and it is diffcult to find a person of rank in the later history in whose
mouth such a Psalm ag this would be appropriate.” For ourselves we are inclined to accept the
superscription, and regard the Psalm as a composition or compilation of David's,

‘‘The Psalmist recounts glorious victories in the past, complains that the nation is now
beget by strange, z.e., barbarous enemies, go false and treacherous that no covenant can be kept
with them, prays for deliverance from them by an interposition great and glorious as had beem
vouchgafed of old, and anticipates the return of a golden age of peace and plenty.”


Insprring AsPEcts or THE Divine Bema.
(Verses 1, 2.)


These verses are taken almost ver-
batim from different portions of Pa
xviii. We regard them as presenting to
us the Divine Being in certain inspiring
aspects,

LAs the Author of human skill.

“He teacheth my hauds to war, my
fingers to fight.” The skill which the

412


poet had in the use of the weapons of
war, he attributes to the Lord. The
abilities by which battles are planned
and victories won come from Him. All
beauty of design, and dexterity in
labour, and success in achievement in
human works, must be attributed to the
Great God.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PSALM OXLEY,


$A


Il As the Protector of human life.

In several different forms the poet
expresses this, ‘Jehovah my rock.”
Two Hebrew words, which slightly differ
in meaning, are translated by the word
rock. The one which is employed here
(18) suggests the ideas of strength and
fixedness ; Jehovah is a strong and stead-
fast refuge. ‘ My fortress,” t.¢, a strong
place, generally difficult of access, and
thus a secure retreat. “ My high tower,”
te., a place so high as to be out of the
reach of danger, or some almost inacces-
sible crag affording safety to those who
reached it. “ My deliverer,” who rescues
me from the power of my enemies,
“My shield,” protecting me from the
arrows of the enemies on the field of
battle. Now these figures set forth a
protection which is—

1. Unchangeable, as a rock.

2. Enduring, as a rock.

3. Inviolable. The various figures
which the poet employs suggest this
fact. ‘On the heaping together of epi-
thets and titles of God Calvin remarks,
that it is not superfluous, but designed
to strengthen and confirm faith; for
men’s minds are easily shaken, especially
when some storm of trial beats upon
them. Hence, if God should promise
us His succour in one word, it would
not be enough; in fact, in spite of all
the props and aids He gives us, we con-
stantly totter and are ready to fall, and
such a forgetfulness of His lovingkind-
ness steals upon us, that we come near
to losing heart altogether.”— Perowne,
So these various figures are used to im-
press us with the invincibility of the
Divine protection, and to inspire our
confidence therein.

4. Ever available, ‘‘The name of
the Lord is a strong tower; the right-
eous runneth into it and is safe.” By
prayer, by the exercise of faith in Him,
we can at any time avail ourselves of the
inviolable protection of Jehovah. “If
God be for us, who can be against us 1”

IIL As the Source of human autho-
rity.

“Who subdueth my people under
me.” “ The Psalmist is not triumphing
in the exercise of despotic power, but
gratefully acknowledges that the autho-


rity he wields comes from God.” David
was chosen to be king by God, and in
His providence all the tribes were led
to submit to his government. ‘“ Let
every soul,” saith St. Paul, “ be subject
unto the higher powers, For there is
no power but of God: the powers that
be are ordained of God.” “ For promo-
tion cometh neither from the east, nor
from the west, nor from the south. But
God is the Judge; He putteth down one,
and setteth up another.”

IV. As the Object of human trust.

“And He in whom I trust.” Perowne
translates ; “‘ He in whom I find refuge,”
The idea is that the Psalmist confided
in Him, sought unto Him for protection
in times of peril, fled unto Him as His
refuge in trouble. The Lord is an ade-
quate object of trust for man, and the
onlyone. “ They that trust in the Lord
shaJl be as Mount Zion, which cannot
be removed, but abideth for ever.”
“Blessed are all they that put their
trust in Him,”

V. As the Supreme Good of human
life.

“ My goodness.” Margin: “ My
mercy.” Perowne: “ My lovingkind-
ness.” So also Conant. The idea seems
to be that the Psalmist regarded the
Lord as his Chief Good, as the Source
of all his blessings. David frequently
gives expression to this sentiment,
“There be many that say, Who will
show us any good? Lord, lift Thou up
the light of Thy countenance upon us,”
“Tn His favour is life.” “Thy loving-
kindness is better than life” And
Asaph also: “ Whom have I in heaven
but Thee?” &. In Him we have the
supreme truth for the intellect, the
supreme righteousness for the conscience,
the supreme love for the heart, the
supreme beauty for the soul.

VI. As the Recipient of human
praise.

“ Blessed be Jehovah my rock,” we.
The Psalmist here praises Jehovah for
what He is to him, and for what He
does for him.

1. Gratitude urges to this. Its lan-
guage is, ‘ What shall I render unto the
Lord for all His benefits toward me?”

2. Reason urges to this, It is in tha

413


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : PSALMS.





- highest degree rational that He who is
Supremely Good should be reverenced
and loved; that our greatest Benefactor
should be praised by us, &c.

3. This 1s blessed. He who sincerely
blesses God finds blessing in so doing.
True worship tends to purify and
strengthen, to sanctify and gloriously
transform the worshipper.


Conciusion.—The people of God in
this world are still a militant people;
but the Lord their God is still their
omnipotent Protector and their Supreme
Good. Let them loyally trust Him,
and heartily worship Him, and soon and
for ever they shall become a triumphant
people over all foes.


Tur INSIGNIFICANCE AND GREATNESS OF MAN.
(Verses 3, 4.)


The connection of these verses with
the preceding is correctly pointed out
by Calvin: “ David remembers all that
God has done for him, and then, like
Jacob, thinks: Lord, I am too little for
all Thy lovingkindness, and so contrasts
his own nothingness and that of man-
kind generally with the greatness of
such a gracious God.” .Thus the good-
ness of God produced humility in the
poet ; and the truest, deepest humility
is always produced by the grace of God.
The poet sets before us—

IL. The insignificance of human life,

“Lord, what is man?... Man is
like to vanity ; his days are as a shadow
that passeth away.” Here are two
ideas :-—

1. Human life ts unsubstantial. It
is here compared to “ vanity ”—more
correctly, ‘a breath”—and “a shadow.”
St. James also speaks of human life as
“a vapour.” How unsubstantial are a
“breath” and a “shadow”! So is
human life. We may see this—(1.) Zn
the objects for which men live. “ All the
fret and stir,” says Perowne, “all the
eager clamour and rivalry of men, as
they elbow and jostle one another to
obtain wealth and rank, and the enjoy-
ments of life, are but a breath.” “ With
what idle dreams, what foolish plans,
what vain pursuits, are they for the
most part occupied! They undertake
dangerous expeditions and difficult en-
terprises in foreign countries, and they
acquire fame ; but what is it }—Vanity/
They pursue deep and abstruse specula-
tions, and give themselves to that ‘much
study which is a weariness of the flesh,’
and they attain to literary renown, and
garvive in their writings; but what is

414


itt—Vanity/ They rise up early, and
sit up late, and eat the bread of anxiety
and care, and thus they amass wealth;
but what is it?—Vanity/ They frame
and execute plans and schemes of ambi-
tion—they are loaded with honours and
adorned with titles—they afford employ-
ment for the herald, and form a subject
for the historian; but what is it ?—
Vanity/ In fact, all occupations and
pursuits are worthy of no other epithet,
if they are not preceded by, and con-
nected with, a deep and paramount re-
gard to the salvation of the soul, the
honour of God, and the interests of
eternity. . . . Oh, then, what phantoms,
what airy nothings are those things
that wholly absorb the powers and oc-
cupy the days of the great mass of man-
kind around us! Their most substantial
good perishes in the using, and their
most enduring realities are but ‘the
fashion of this world that passeth
away.’ —Dr. Raffles. The great majo-
rity of those who seek these things do
not attain them; and the few who do
attain them find them utterly unsatis-
factory. (2.) In life ttself. How un-
substantial is our life as it appears here |
How easily is the vital flame extin-
guished! A breath of air laden with
disease may soon lay the most robust
frame low in death. A draught of tainted
water may quench the vital spark in the
most beautiful body. A very little
accident may still for ever the brain of
the wisest man. Men “ dwell in houses
of clay, whose foundation is in the dust,
which are crushed before the moth,
They are destroyed from morning to
evening ; they perish for ever without
any regarding it. Doth not their excel-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PSALM OXLIV,





lency which is in them go away? They
die, even without wisdom.”

2. Human life ts transitory. “As a
shadow that passeth away.” ‘Come
like shadows, so depart,”’ seems to be a
law of human life, (1.) “A shadow
passeth away” constantly. It is never
stationary. As the sun advances ‘the
shadow moves onward. It cannot rest
So is it with human life


‘¢ Whate’er we do, where’er we be,
We're travelling te the grave,”


(2.) “ A shadow passeth away” rapidly.
How soon the sun sets, and the shadow
is gone! But the sun may be obscured
by clouds long before his setting ; then
also the shadow is gone A striking
illustration of the brevity of human life.
If, like Jacob, a man lived an hundred
and thirty years, like Jatub hé would
say, “ Few and evil have the days of the
years of my life been.” But the great
majority of men do not live half so long
as that. Much mere rapidiy Uo they
pass away. (3.) “ A-shadow passeth
away” completely. The depzrting shadow
leaves not a trace behind.
with almost all men?/ How few> of /all
the millions that have liveé in the “past
have any memorial upou earth fow L


** Some gink ouu
O’er them and o’er their names Asi hy
close, poe (Wh
To-morrow knows not they were eve)assest
Others a short memorial leaye behind, 2),
Like a fiag floating when the bark’s ca,
gulfed,
It floats a moment, and is seen no more.
One Cesar lives; a thousand are forget.” |
— Young.


This aspect of life should humble humati
pride.
tery, as a mere “ breath” or a passing


Is # not go.


Life is unsubstantial and-transi-_


“shadow.” “It is even a vapour, that
appeareth for a little time, and then
vanisheth away.”


** Life’s but a walking shadow—a poor player,
That struts and frets his hour upon the
stage,
And then is heard no more: it is a tale
Told by an idiot, full of sound and fury,
Signifying nothing.” —S, eure.

IL The greatness of human life.

“ Lord, what is man, that Thou takest
knowledge of him? A son of man, that
Thou makest account of him?” Man is
thought of, cared for, graciously regarded
by God. This invests human nature
with great importance and dignity.
God’s regard for man is manifest—

1! In the provision which He has made
Jor us in nature. He has created all
nature to minister to man’s needs,
‘Earth and sea, air and sky, all serve us,
(Comp. Gen, i. .28, 29.)

2. In His care over us in Providence,
vl, . . ° ya
at’ was this protecting and sustaining


_ pravidential vare which led the Psalmist


td’ inquire, “ Lord, what is man?” &e.


~ Hs guides aud guards and sustains with


‘enderest care and infinite wisdom,
(Coup. Ps, xl. 17.)

3. In the redemption which He has

rought for us, ‘‘He remembered us
in our low estate,” &c. (Ps. cxxxvi. 23,
24)... “God 30 loved the world,” &e,
“God.commendeth His love,” &c.

4, Ln the home which He has provided
for us “In My Father’s house are
Many mansions,” &c. “He hath be


- gotten us again unto an inheritance


‘acorruptible,” é&c, When man passeth

away like a shadow, it is to enter upon

sn immortal and glorious life.

J . .
ConcLusion.—Let our lives harmonise

with God’s regard for ua,


Man,
(Verse : 3.)


“ Lord, what is man?”
I What was man as he came from
the hands of his Creator ?
1. Rational.
2, Responsible,
. 8. Immortal
4, Holy and happy.


' IL What is man in his present com
dition ?

1. He is fallen.

2. He is guilty.

8. He is sinful.

4, He is miserable, and helpless in
his misery.

415


POALM OXLIV.


HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY: PSALMS.





III. What is man when he has be-
lieved in Christ ?

1. He is restored to a right relation
to God.

2. He is restored to a right disposi-
tion toward God,

3. He enjoys the influences of the
Holy Spirit.

4. He is in process of preparation for
the heavenly world.


IV. What shall man be when he is
admitted into heaven ?

1. Free from sin and sorrow.

2. Advanced to the perfection of his
nature,

3. Associated with angels.

4.. Near to his Saviour and his God,

—George Brooks,


Homan Lirz a Ssapow.
(Verse 4.)


Man and his days are here compared
to “a shadow ;” and the propriety of
the similitude is attested by the experi-
ence of all mankind, The resemblance
lies in the following particulars :— —

I. A shadow is compounded of light
and darkness ; for when no object inter-'
cepts the light.of the sun,’ or when the


and is contracted in its dimensions,
From thence to sunset it gradually be
comes less distinct, and at last suddenly
and wholly disappears. Man, survey in
this emblem thy life! How lively and
affecting’ the description! (Comp. Job
xiv. 1, 2; James iv, 14.)

IV. A shadow cannot exist longer


light of the sun is withdrawn, no shadow than the sun’s continuance above the
is produced. In like manner, the statel ‘horizon, and is every moment liable
of man in the present world is msdeip . to annihilation by the intervention of
of joy and sorrow; while, as in the em- } cloud. Io like manner, human life
blem, the latter greatly prépondiratest ~ generally lasts "but three score years and


II. A shadow seems to be some-
thing, when in reality it is* nothirg.


If you grasp it, you prove its"emptiness, ©


The pleasures, riches, and honours of
the present world seem important to thd*
eye of the carnal mind when viewed at


a little distance; they attract attentien, -


excite desire, and are eagerly pursued. }
But when, the object being attaiued,a


they are closely examined, how empty™_


and unsatisfactory do they prove !

Ill. A shadow is the subject of cone
tinual changes, till at length it finally
and suddenly ceases. In the morningts


ten, or four score years ; and may, by a


sudden’ accident.or the power of disease,
be mich curiailed. We have no security
for-the-dvrotraction of life through an-


_othpy the-or hour; and the probability


kind ap lifg will not reach its customary
good js a3-g»eat as that the shadow will
mos"before the evening arrives.

fay. A shadow, when gone, leaves no
tack of its existence behind. This


~. wlso is the case with the riches, pleasures,


and honours of the world. “ We brought
sothing into the world, and it is certain
we can carry nothing out.” This world


when the sun first rises above the hori-' is no further substantial, or of import-


zon, it is weak and extended to a great
length. Towards noon it gains strength, ;


ance, than as it stands connected with
the next,—“ The Christian Guardian.”


A PrRaYeER OF THE GODLY FoR D¢LIVERANCE FROM THEIR ENEMIES.
(Verses 5-11.)
y


In these verses we have the Psalmist’s
prayer for the overthrow of his enemies,
and for his own victory. Let us notice—

L His description of his enemies.

1. They were foreigners. The Psal-
mist speaks of them as “strange chil-
dren ;” or, taking Perowne’s rendering,


“sons of the alien” (ver. 7), and
“strange persons” (ver. 11). It seems
that at this time David was engaged
in warfare with some of the heathen
nations; but with what people or
peoples we know not. The spiritual
enemies of the people of God are


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


PSALM OXLIV.


ey


strangers both to Him and to them. “If
ye were of the world, the world would
love his own,” &c. (John xv. 18-21;
xvi. 1-3.)

2. They were deceivers. “ Whose mouth
speaketh vanity, and their right hand
is a right hand of falsehood.” “ Decep-
tion,” or “falsehood,” would be a better
rendering of the Hebrew than “ vanity.”
The right hand amongst the Jews was
uplifted towards heaven in taking an
oath, These enemies swore falsely ;
they were covenant-breakers ; their moat
solemn engagements were not reliable.
In the present day falsehood is rife,
On every hand and in almost every pro-
vince of life we are confronted with
shams, The great enemy of God and
man is the original liar, the arch
deceiver, ‘‘The devil abode not in the
truth, because there is no truth in him,”
&c. (John viii. 44). “Satan himself is
transformed into an angel of light.” Let
the godly be on their guard, “ lest Satan
should get an advantage of us; for we
are not ignorant of his devices.” Let
them be true in word and deed and life.

3. They caused him great trouble,
The Psalmist represents himself as in
“great waters.”
figure for deep distress “All Thy
waves and Thy billows are gone over
me” ‘Thou hast afflicted me with
all Thy waves.” “When Thou passest
through the waters,” d&c. (Isa, xliii. 2).
The people of God sometimes suffer
sorely from their spiritual enemies.

II. His prayer for deliverance from
his enemies. This is expressed in lan-
guage which is vigorously and strik-
ingly poetical; and which is very
natural in so strong-winged a poet as
David. ‘ Bow Thy heavens, O Jehovah,
and come down,” &. “The Psalmist
longs for a Theophany, a coming of God
to judgment, which he describes in lan-
guage again borrowed from xviii. 9, 14—
16.” These poetic figures having been
dealt with there, we need not dwell
upon them here. He prays that he may
be delivered—

1. With Divine majesty. “Bow Thy
heavens, O Jehovah, and come down,” &c.
(ver. 5). The ideas are doubtless those
of awful majesty and irresistible power.


YOL. U.


This is a Scriptural .


2D


2. By Divine power. “Cast forth
lightnings, and scatter them; shoot out
Thine arrows, and destroy them. Send
Thine: hand from above,” &. The
lightnings are the Lord’s arrows, The
poet prays that his deliverance may be
accomplished by Divine power, as verily
effected by the immediate presence and
finger of God as if He had come down
in visible form to accomplish it.

3. With Divine completeness. “ Scatter
them ; . destroy them,” or “ dis-
comfit them.” They whom God scatters
and discomfits are utterly overthrown ;
they whom He delivers are triumphantly
saved. The Lord is the glorious Deli-
verer of His people from their spiritual
foes, “The God of peace shall bruise
Satan under your feet shortly.” “ We
are more than conquerors through Him
that loved us.” ‘Thanks be to God,
which giveth us the victory through
our Lord Jesus Christ.”

IiI. His resolution to praise God for
deliverance from his enemies.

“T will sing a new song unto Thee,
O God,” &e. (vers. 9,10). Notice here—

1. Zhe assurance of deliverance. He
speaks of God as a present Deliverer
to him (ver. 10), and he looks forward
with confidence to singing the new song
for the new victory, The people of God
may well be assured of victory in their
moral conflicts ; for the purposes, the pro-
mises, and the power of God in Christ
Jesus, unite to guarantee it unto them,

2. The basis of this assurance of de-
liverance. The Psalmist seems to have
grounded His confidence upon God’s
wonted doings. “He giveth salvation
unto kings ; who delivereth David His
servant from the hurtful sword.” God
was the great giver of victory to kings ;
many a time had He delivered David
from the sword of his enemies. What
He has done in the past, we may expec
Him to do again in similar circum-
stances and to similar characters, Let
His past deliverances be to us so many
pledges of our full and final triumph.

3. The promised song of deliverance.
“T will sing a new song unto Thee, O
God ; upon a psaltery, an instrument of
ten strings, will I sing praises unto Thee.”
More correctly: “Upon a ten-stringed


417


YOALM OXLIV,


lute will I make music unto Thee.”
The goodness of God in the new victory
shall be celebrated in a new song; and
the new song shall be accompanied with
the sweet strains of music.

Let new mercies evoke new gratitude ;


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





and let the new gratitude be expressed
in new songs. Let us through our Lord
Jesus Christ anticipate with confidence
the new song of heaven: “And they
sang a new song, saying, Thou art
worthy,” &c. (Rev. v. 9-14).


A Picture or A Happy PROPLE.
(Verses 12-15.)


We regard these verses as presenting
a picture of prosperity which the poet
desired for Israel. Let us look at its
main features—

I. The blessing of a noble offspring.

1. Sons characterised by strength.
“That our songs may be as plants
grown up in their youth.” The idea
is that of young men of vigorous
and well-proportioned growth. But
the Psalmist certainly could not mean
strength of body simply. We inter-
pret his meaning to be vigorous young
manhood, including physical, mental,
and moral strength. (1.) Physical
strength is good. (2.) Intellectual
strength is better. (3.) Moral strength
is best. The strength of righteous
principles, virtuous habits, holy attach-
ments, and devout aspirations—this it
is which ennobles manhood. What
greater blessing can be desired for any
nation than that its manhood should be
of this order ?

2. Daughters characterised by beauty.
“Our daughters as corner - stones
polished after the similitude of a
palace.” Conant translates: “ Our
daughters as corner- pillars, sculp-
tured after the structure of a palace.”
And Perowne : “ Our daughters as corner-
pillars, sculptured to grace a palace.”
Some expositors discover here the idea
of usefulness + useful as pillars support-
Ing a building, or as _ corner-stones
uniting an edifice. But the main
idea is undoubtedly that of the grace-
fulness and beauty of the maidens,
The Psalmist cannot mean external
beauty merely. (1.) Beauty of feature
and of form is desirable. It is a gift
of God. (2.) Beauty of mind and of
manner is much more desirable. It is
of a higher order, and more lasting than

418


that of feature and form (3.) Beauty
of soul and temper is pre-eminently
desirable, This is the highest, the
divinest, the unfading, and immortal
beauty. This is an unmixed, a pure
blessing. Beauty of form aud feature,
whenassociated with mental weaknessand
vacuity, appears misplaced and incon-
gruous; when associated with moral
deformity it becomes repulsive and
loathsome even. The highest visible
beauty is that of the soul manifesting
itselfinthe “human facedivine.” ‘‘ Ihave
come to the conclusion,” says Professor
Upham, “if man, or woman either,
wishes to realise the full power of
personal beauty, it must be by cherish-
ing noble hopes and purposes; by
having something to do, and something
to live for, which is worthy of human-
ity, and which, by expanding the capa-
cities of the soul, gives expansion and
symmetry to the body which contains it,”


* What’s female beauty, but an air divine
Through which the mind’s ail-gentle graces
shine #
They, like the sun, irradiate all between ;
The body charms, because the soul is seen.”
— Young.


Who does not wish that our daughters
may shine in the beauty of meekness,
gentleness, purity, piety, and love ?

It, The blessing of secular pros-
perity.

“That our garners may be full,” &.
(vers. 13,14). Several rare expressions


——-, ..


occur in these verses, which are of very


doubtful interpretation, It is certain
that it is intended to set forth great
temporal prosperity ; and the entire
picture contains three prominent fea
tures :—

1. Well-stored granaries. ‘* Our gar-
ners full, affording all manner of store.”


AHOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS,





Heb. as in Margin: “From kind to
kind.” Conant: “Supplying of every
kind,” The idea is, abundance of all
kinds of produce,

2. Fruitful flocks, ‘Our sheep bring-
ing forth thousands and ten thousands in
our streets.” More correctly, “In our
fields.” A great part of the wealth of
eastern peoples consisted of flocks of
sheep.

3. Laden oxen, “Our oxen strong to
labour.” Margin: “ Able to bear bur-
dens, or loaden with flesh.” The Hebrew
is simply : “ Our oxen laden.” But with
what? (1.) With fat and flesh, say some,
and therefore strong to labour. (2.}
With young, say others, and interpret
the clause as descriptive of the fruitful-
ness of the herds, (3.) With the abun-
dant produce of the fields, say others,
‘Laden oxen presuppose a rich abun-
dance of produce.” The exact meaning
is doubtful ; but the interpretation last
named appears to us the most probable,
This however is certain, that the poet
is setting forth the great temporal pros-
perity of an eastern people.

Ill. The blessing of settled peace.

“‘No breaking in, nor going out, and
no complaining in our streets.” Perowne
translates: “ No breach and no sallying
forth, and no cry (of battle) in our
streets.” He says, “‘No_ sallying
forth,’ lit, ‘going out,’ which has
been interpreted either of ‘going forth
to war,’ or ‘ going forth into captivity.’
This and the previous expression, taken
together, most naturally denote a time
ef profound peace, when no enemy lies
before the walls, when there is no need
to fear the assault through the breach,
no need to sally forth to attack the





besiegers.” There are other interpreta-
tions of these clauses; but this seema
to us the most probable, “The image
is that of security, peace, order, pros-
perity.”

IV. These blessings are viewed ag
flowing from the favour of God. ;

“‘ Happy is the people that is in such
a case ; happy is the people whose God
is Jehovah.” It was common amongst
the ancient Hebrews to regard temporal
prosperity as an evidence of the Divine
favour. “National piety,” aays Matthew
Henry, “ commonly brings national pros-
perity; for nations, in their national
capacity, are capable of rewards and
punishments only in this life.” And
Barnes: “The worship of Jehovah—
the religion of Jehovah—is adapted
to make a people happy, peaceful,
quiet, blessed. Prosperity and . peace,
such as are referred to in the previous
verses, are, and must be, the result of
pure religion. Peace, order, abundance,
attend it everywhere, and the best
security for a nation’s prosperity is the
worship of God; that which is most
certain to make a nation happy and
blessed, is to acknowledge God and to
keep His laws,”

But the Christian view of the evi-
dences of the Divine blessing is truer,
deeper, nobler than that of the ancient
Hebrew. God has granted unto us a
fuller and clearer revelation of Divine
truth. We look for the evidences of
His favour in our souls rather than in
our circumstances ; in inward joy rather
than in outward happiness; not in well-
stored granaries, but in the abounding
“ fruit of the Spirit, in all gooduess and
righteousness and truth,”


SoLicIrupE oN BEeHAatr or Sons anp DAvGHTERS.
(Verse 12.)


L The objects of this solicitude.

First : Our sons are objects of solict-
tude. ‘‘ That our sons may be as plants
grown up in their youth.” The desire
1is—


1. That our sons may be as plants of
the right kind. We desire that they


may possess right knowledge, right


principles, right habits, and be found
truly righteous in all they think, say,
and do.

2. That our sons may be as plants tn
a good situation, There are honourable
situations: such are the lawful callings
of life, all stations of virtuous industry.
There is one situation we covet for ous


419


POALM OXLIV.


_ HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; PSALMS.





sons, We mean that described in Pa,
xcii, 13. We desire that our sons may
value and enjoy religious ordinances, dc.

3. That our sons may be as plants
rightly cultivated, Our sons, left to
themselves, will grow wild, and bring
forth the fruit of a depraved heart. A
change of heart is indispensable before
our youth can grow up as plants of
righteousness, Training is absolutely
necessary (Prov. xxii. 6), And with their
training pruning is requisite.

4, That our sons may be as plants that
flourish well, A good profession, with
consistency, is a great ornament to
character. They will flourish most who
make God’s Word their study, &c. (Pa.
Liao):

5. That our sons may be as plants
most fruitful and useful. The plants
most admired are fruit-bearing. We
would have our sons abound in good
works, ready to distribute, willing to
communicate, doing good to all men as
they have means and opportunity.

6. That our sons may be as plants of
perennial verdure and perpetual stability.
The Psalmist speaks of the blessedness
of those whose “ leaf shall not wither.”
He speaks also of the righteous bringing
forth fruit in old age. So the prophet
Jeremiah says, “ Blessed is the man that
trusteth in the Lord,” &c. (Jer. xvii. 7,
8). Here is the perennial verdure and
stability we desire, We would have
piety adorn both youth and age. We
would haye our sons grow in grace as
they grow in years,

Second : Our daughters are objects of
solicttude, “That our daughters may


be as corner-stones, polished after the


similitude of a palace.”

1. That our daughters may be polished
with sound education, “If either of the
sexes ought to have superior training,
that privilege should be especially ceded
to women, If you have ignorant women,
you must have a large mass of foolish
and depraved men; but, on the con-
trary, make the female portion of any


nation intellectual, and the other sex


must also be mentally improved.”

2. That our daughters may be polished
with good manners, Beauty of person,
without good manners, is worthless.

420


“ Favour is deceitful,” &e (Prov. xxxi
30). Grace and affability are adorm
ments to the female character. Ur-
banity, tenderness, sympathy, charity, a
constant desire to promote universal
happiness,—are embellishments above
the most splendid attire,

3. That our daughters may be polished
with true piety. Piety is an adornment
which all our daughters may possess, A
polished education,and polished manners,
in the sense in which these terms are
understood in the fashionable and polite
world, can be the lot of but few. But
true piety is open to all (James ii,
5). Religion refines and elevates the
character when all merely secular educa- .
tion fails. It adorns with a meek and
quiet spirit, de.

4. That our daughters may, as corner~
stones, cement and adorn our families,
Benjamin Parsons observes justly: “In
the character of companions, friends,
sisters, wives, mothers, nursemaids,
nurses, and domestic servants, there is a
sphere of usefulness assigned to women
which angels might envy. In a majority
of cases the minds of youth of both
sexes are formed by females. Girls are
generally educated by their own sex,
and boys, in most instances, have their
character stamped before they leave the
guardianship of mothers and gover-
nesses,” Sisters may make home to be
home to our sons, &c.

5. That our daughters may, as corner-
stones, support and beautify the fabric of
the state. ‘Verily, it is of more im-
portance to have an intelligent and
moral population, than to have great
capitalists or landowners. Wealth can-
not make any nation great. Enlightened
moral principle is the true glory of any
kingdom or empire; but this dignity
cannot be obtained apart from the due
cultivation of all the powers of the
human soul, and to accomplish this we
must have the agency of mothers.”

6. That our daughters may be as corner-
stones in the Church of the living God.
Our Sabbath-schools, our ignorant and
destitute neighbourhoods, our sick-
chambers, our walks of benevolence, can
all yield spheres of usefulness for our
daughters. . . . But all this is prepara-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


PSALM OXLIV.





tory to a higher state. The stones that
are polished here are preparing to be
built up in the heavenly Temple, Whilst,
therefore, we may aim to promote their
temporal interest, let us not overlook the
infinitely more valuable inheritance of
personal salvation and eternal glory.

IL ‘he subjects of this  solicti-
tude. This desire may be considered
as,—


First : The cherished anxiety of all
right-minded parents.

Second: That of the friends of the
young, Among these are the Sabbath-
school teachers of our land, d&ec,

Third: That of true patriots and
genuine philanthropists.

Let us remember that without the
Divine blessing all our efforts are in
vain.—J, Sayer.


THe Gop my WHom Man 18 Buxsszp.
(Verse 15.)
“Happy is that people whose God is Jehovah,”


Our text warrants two observations—

L That all peoples have a god.

This is*clearly implied in the text.
Man must have a god. The need of a
god is constitutional, it is innate, in the
case of man.

1. Man must trust. Every man does
trusti n some being or in some thing.
The credulousness of man is amazing ;
and is often a great curse. Men are
trusting in idols, in wealth, in friends,
in priests, in themselves, in Jehovah.

2. Man must love. “Some one to
love” is perhaps the deepest cry of the
human heart, Every man loves, at
least, some person or some thing,—«..,
wealth, honour, self, friends, God. Every
man loves some person or something
pre-eminently ; has some object of sup-
reme love.

3. Man must worship. There are in
each of us at times feelings of wonder,
awe, and reverence, which compel us to
worship. You hold your breath in the
felt presence of mystery ; you are silent
in the presence of death ; the realisation
of the sublime fills you with awe—these
are signs of the working of the religious
element and instincts of your being.
Now, that which man chiefly trusts,
supremely loves, and truly worships, is
his god, All history testifies with unmis-
takable clearness to the fact that man
must have a god.

Il. That that people only is blessed
whose God is Jehovah.

“Happy is the people whose God is
Jehovah.”


1. He ts the only adequate Object of


trust. Idols, wealth, friends, priests,
ourselves, each and all are terribly in-
sufficient as objects on which the soul
may repose its confidence. They are
unstable, transient, and equal only to
very few of the emergencies of life.
Jehovah is all-sufficient ;—eternal, un-
changeable, equal to every emergency,
infinite in His resources, &c.

2. He ts the only worthy Object of our
supreme love, To love material things
is degrading to the lover. To love re-
latives or friends or any created person
supremely, is to seek our own disap-
pointment and sorrow, because they are
changeable, mortal, imperfect, &c, The
object of our chief love should be a
person perfectly lovable, true, good,
beautiful, unchangeable, and ever-living,
Jehovah is all this,

3. He is the only worthy Object of our
worship. The worship of Jehovah is the
only worship which purifies, strengthens,
ennobles, and crowns our nature. The
old idolatries were terribly degrading ;
they produced terror, cruelty, unclean-
ness, and other evils in the worshippers,
Worship wealth, and you will degrade
your being, &c. Make a relative or
friend your god, and you are lost to
progress, &c, Make self your god, and
you forego all that is noble, &c. The
object of our worship should be such as
tends to educate, exalt, satisfy, and per-
fect our spiritual nature. In Jehovah,
and in Him alone, have we such a
God.

“Happy the people whose God is
Jehovah ;” because He is supremely

421


PRALM OXLY,


HOMILETIOC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


rr


good, unchangeable, and eternal, and
He stands in covenant relation with
His people. His wisdom and power,


His goodness and faithfulness, are ail
pledged to them. “If God be for ua,
who can be against us 1”


Tur Happy Proruzg
(Verse 15.)


“ Happy is that people whose God is
Jehovah.” Let us—

L Examine what is comprehended
in the relation referred to. It refers—

1. To God as the Object of religious
worship.

2. To Him as the Author of every
blessing.

3. To the covenant relation in which
He condescends to stand to His people—
including Divine acceptance, delightful
intercourse, pleasing satisfaction,

II. Confirm and illustrate the de-
élaration itself. They are happy—

1. Because all the Divine perfections
are engaged in their behalf. Mercy to
pardon their sins, and deliver them from
guilt, Wisdom to direct and guide them
through the intricate mazes of the world
to heaven. Omnipotence to guard and
defend them. Omnipresence to survey
them in all conditions. Consummate


PSALM


goodness to supply their needs. And
faithfulness to perform all that He has
spoken.

2. Because in Him they are assured
of finding a refuge in time of need.

3. Because they are warranted to ex-
pect every needful supply.

4. Because in Him they have “a
Friend that sticketh closer than a
brother.”

5. Because all the promises of the
Gospel are “yea and Amen” in Christ
Jesus.

6. Because they have a sure prospect
of being with Him for ever.

Lxagn.—1. How mistaken the men
of the world are with respect to the
people of God. 2. How insignificant is
the worldling’s portion. 3. How dan-
gerous is the condition of those who
have not the Lord for their portion,
—L cece &


CXLV.


INTRODUCTION.


s¢This {9 the last of the Alphabetical Psalms,” says Perowne, ‘*of which there are eight in
all, if we reckon the ninth and tenth Psatms as forming one. Like four other of the Alphabe-
tical Psalms, this bears the name of David, although there can in this case be no doubt that the
inscription is not to be trusted. As in several other instances, so here, the acrostic arrangement
is not strictly observed. The letter nun (9) is omitted.” In the Septuagint, a verse which
begins with 3 is supplied between vers. 13 and 14. But this is unquestionably an interpola-
tion, and is borrowed from ver. 17, with the exception of the first word, which is taken from
the nun-atrophe of the Alphabetical Psalm cxi,

While Perowne, in the passage quoted above, pronounces g0 positively against the trust-
worthiness of the superscription, Hengstenberg is equally firm in asserting ‘‘ the originality of
the superscription,” which, he holds, does not admit of doubt, Barnes, David Dickson, M,
Henry, and others, accept the Davidic authorship.

‘¢ This is the only Psalm which is called a Tehillah, ¢.e., ‘Praise’ or ‘Hymn,’ the plural of
which word, Yehillim, is the general name for the whole Psalter.” The word is admirably
descriptive of the contents of the Psalm, which is laudatory throughout.

‘*The Ancient Church employed this Psalm at the mid-day meal, and ver. 15 at the Passe
over. The Talmud assures us (Berachoth, 4 b.) that every one who repeats this Psalm three
times daily may be satisfied that he is a child of the future world. The Gemarra adduces in
support of this the curious reason, that it is not only written in Alphabetical order, like Ps.
exix, and others, and not only praises the Divine care over all creatures, like Ps, cxxxvi. 25, but
combines both these important characteristics in itself,”

This Psalm ‘‘admitsa of no analysis, being made up of variations on a single theme, the
righteousness and goodness of God to men im general, to His own people in particular, and
more especially to those that suffer.”

422


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


PSALM OXLV.





Toe Praisk or THE Divine GREATNESS.
(Verses 1-7.)


Here are two main lines of thought for
us to pursue—

IL. The reasons of the Divine praise.
The grand reason of praise in this sec-
tion of the Psalm seems to be the great-
ness of God. ‘Great is Jehovah, and
greatly to be praised; and His great-
ness is unsearchable.” Jehovah is great
in Himself; His being is underived,
independent, eternal, infinitely perfect.
“God's greatness—His infinity—is in
itself a just ground of praise, for we
should rejoice that there is One Infinite
Eternal Being ; and as all that greatness
is employed in tlie cause of truth, of
law, of good order, of justice, of kind-
ness, of mercy, it should call forth
continued praise in all parts of His
dominions.” — Barnes.

1. He 1s great in His deeds, ‘Thy
mighty acts;,.. Thy wondrous works ;
. .- The might of Thy terrible acts.”
“We must see God,” says Matthew
Henry, “acting and working in all the
affairs of this lower world. Various in-
struments are used, but in all events
God is the supreme director; it is He
that performs all things, Much of His
power is seen in the operations of Provi-
dence (they are ‘mighty acts,’ such as
cannot be paralleled by the strength of
any creature), and much of His justice—
they are ‘terrible acts,’ awful to saints,
dreadful to sinners. These we should
take all occasions to speak of, observing
the finger of God, His hand, His arm,
in all, that we may marvel.”

2. He is great in His majesty. “I
will speak of the glorious honour of
Thy majesty.” “ By this accumulation
of words,” says Geier, “the incompar-
able glory and majesty of God are set
forth.” The Psalmist is “striving after
& suitable mode of expression for his
exuberant feeling.” Or, as Barnes
puts it: “This accumulation of epithets
shows that the heart of the Psalmist
was full of the subject, and that he
laboured to find language to express his
emotions, It is beauty; it is glory ; it


is majesty ;—it 1s all that is great, sub-
lime, wonderful—all combined—all con-
centrated in one Being,”

3. He is great in His goodness. “They
shall abundantly utter the memory of
Thy great goodness.” “Great good-
ness,” says Moll, “is not referred to in
the sense of abundant mercy (most), but
in the sense of the universal excellence
of His attributes, His goodness in every
relation.” Hengstenberg: ‘ The essen-
tial goodness.”

4, Heisgreatin righteousness. “They
shall sing of Thy righteousness,” The
goodness of God is not that weak,
molluscous quality which is sometimes
called goodness in man: it is a strong
thing, a righteous thing. He ever
manifests the strictest regard for justice
and truth, How great is God! sup-
remely, infinitely great!

II, The characteristics of the Divine
praise.

1, It ts constant, “Every day will I
bless Thee.” Hengstenberg translates :
“Continually will I praise Thee.” The
translation of the A. V. is more faithful
to the letter ; but Hengstenberg seems
to us to present the idea of the poet,
that he will offer to God constant wor-
ship, Praise with the godly man is not
an occasional exercise of the voice, but
a continual disposition of the soul.
“ Praising God must be our daily work;
no day must pass, though ever so bus
a day, without praising God. We ought
to reckon it the most needful of our
daily employments, and the most de-
lightful of our daily comforts, God is
every day blessing us, doing well for
us; there is therefore reason that we
should be every day blessing Him,
speaking well of Him.”—Henry.

2. It is perpetual. “I will extol
Thee, my God, O King; and I will blees
Thy name for ever and ever,... I
will praise Thy name for ever and ever.”
Here are two aspects of the perpetuity
of the praise of God:—(1.) The devout
soul will praise God for ever. “Sa

423


POALM CXLV.





long as his being lasted in the loving-
kindness of God, he must also continue
to give praise,”
‘*Through all eternity to Thee
A joyful song I’ll raise :
But oh! eternity’s too short
To utter all Thy praise.” —Addison,


(2.) Every succeeding generation shall
praise God. “One generation shall
praise Thy works to another, and shall
declare Thy mighty acts.” “The
generation that is going off shall tell
them to that which is rising up, shall
tell what they have seen in their days
and what they have heard from their
fathers; and the generation that is
rising up shall follow the example of
that which is going off: so that the
death of God’s worshippers shall be no
diminution of His worship, for a new
generation shall rise up in their room
to carry on that good work to the end
of time, when it shall be left to that


Toe Praise oF Trve.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


eee EEE EERE EERE


world to do it in in which there is no
succession of generations.”

3. It is fervent. “Greatly to be
praised. .... They shall abundantly
utter the memory of Thy great good-
ness,” dc. Conant translates: “ Let
them pour forth the memory,” &. The
idea is that the heart is filled to over-
flowing with thoughts of the great
goodness of God, and that it pours
forth its feelings in grateful and fervent
praise. God shall be praised with
glowing enthusiasm.

4. It is songful. “They shall sing
aloud of Thy righteousness.” His praise
is celebrated by His people openly and
publicly ; not in cold and measured
prose, but in glowing and rapturous
poetry; not in ordinary speech, but
with music’s highest and sweetest strains,
Their adoring joy pours itself forth in
holy and exuitant songs.

Let our hearts and voices be much en-
gaged in this holy and delightful service,


(Verse 4.)


We may consider this—

I. As the decree of God.

He who made the world has willed
that it should praise Him. The works
of God carry out His decree. The sun
and moon proclaim His power. Day
and night utter His wisdom. The
seasons declare His bounty and His
faithfulness, And the Aistory of man,
even yet more strikingly, sets forth
God’s glory, This truth is ever written
—“The Lord is King.” He rules.
“None can stay His hand, or say unto
Him, What doest Thou?” Look at
Pharaoh; . . . Nebuchadnezzar. Or
call to mind the history of Joseph,
Balaam, Jonah, Sennacherib, Cyrus, Saul
of Tarsus. Or the Jewish rulers who
crucified the Lord of glory, &c, (Acts iv,
27,28). The mysteries of affliction teach
the same lesson. The erring has been
thus brought back, or the faithful con-
firmed, or God’s power displayed (John
ix. 3). And the Church of Christ is a
standing witness of the same great truth,
“The gates of hell shall not prevail

424


against it.” Man's opposition has
proved the wave that has wafted the
truth onward (Acts iv. 31; xi 19; xiii,
oh xiv. 20; xvii. 15; xxv. 11; xxviii.

What a contrast is there in all this to
the name and acts of men! How does
every annual revolution of time find
human propositions annulled, human
names forgotten, human _ greatness
brought low. But each succeeding year
finds one Name unchanged ; one arm
still mighty to deliver ; one King ruling,
as ever; one Lord still faithful to His
promise ; one memorial enduring through
all generations. The decree of God is
kept. All time sets forth His praise.

It. As expressing the resolution and
work of Christ’s Church.

Praise is the rightful attitude of the
redeemed (Ps. cvii. 2). Mercy felt,
love appreciated, salvation embraced
and enjoyed, is sure to beget true
thanksgiving. God hath chosen His
people to praise Him (Isa. xliii 21; 1
Pet. ii, 9). And even angels cannot


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : PSALMS.


PSALM OXLV.





sing the new song which belongs to the
saved from earth alone (Rev. xiv. 3).
And the people of God have ever claimed
their holy privilege. They have sung
of creation and of providence, and the
wonders of redeeming love. God has
never left Himself without this witness
in the world. In every age, however
corrupt, there have been those who re-
joiced to declare His mighty acts. Even
before the Flood, there was Noah; in
the time of idolatrous Ahab, Elijah; in
Babylon, Daniel In New Testament
days we have the same history. Every
martyr, from Stephen onward, bore in
his blood the testimony of praise. If
Job said, “ Though He slay me, yet will
I trust in Him,” Paul answered, “I am
willing . . . to die for the Name of the
Lord Jesus.” If David said, “I will
bless the Lord at all times,” Paul, again,
added, “ Rejoice in the Lord alway.”
If Elijah showed himself to Ahab,
Luther did not shrink from meeting
those who sought to take his life. If
the Apostles went forth, in obedience to
the Lord’s command, and preached the
Gospel, hazarding their lives for the


Saviour’s Name, this noble act of praise
has been re-echoed in later days in Sierra
Leone, in New Zealand, in India, in the
Sandwich Islands, in Central Africa, by
those who have gone forth to brave every
danger in making known the same good
tidings. Thus in all time the resolution
of the Church of Christ is one and the
same, ‘“Qne generation shall praise
Thy works to another.”

Three thoughts seem to arise in con-
clusion :—

}. What are we doing to make our
generation one of praise? We have
received from the generations before a
glorious light ; are we sending it onward
and around ¢

2. Do we possess in ourselves that
salvation which alone enables us truly te
praise? Have we tasted that the Lord
is gracious }

3. How glorious shall be the praise of
heaven/ Now one age to another, one
land to another, praise God. What shall
be the glory of the song when every age
and every land shall jot in the song of
Moses and theLamb!— W.S. Bruce, M.A.
From “ The Homiletic Quarterly.”


Tux PRaAisz or THE Divine GoopNzss.
(Verses 8-10.)


In these verses the poet celebrates the
praise of God as a good or benevolent
Being. Three leading considerations
slaim our attention :—

I. The various manifestations of
God’s goodness.

The goodness or benevolence of God
is here clearly stated. “Jehovah is
gracious . . .; Jehovah is good to all.”
And it seems to us that the expressions
used by the Psalmist suggest certain
manifestations of this goodness. Here
is an indication of His—

1. Pity for suffering men. “ Jehovah
is full of compassion.” Perowne: “Of
tender compassion is Jehovah.” It pre-
sents to us the goodness of God in its
attitude towards the wretched. How
great and manifold are the sufferings
and sorrows of human life! God re-
gards all sufferers with tenderest pity.
In all their afflictions He is afflicted.


He is “ touched with the feeling of our
infirmities ;” and touched deeply, for He
is “full of compassion.” ‘ The Lord is
very pitiful, and of tender mercy.”

2. Patience with sinful men. “Slow
to anger.” He holds back the outgoings
of His wrath. He has great patience
with perverse rebels, ‘The Lord is
long-suffering to ua-ward, not willing
that any should perish, but that all
should come to repentance.”

3. Pardon for penitent men, “Of
great mercy ;” or, “great in mercy.”
How freely and fully in His great mercy
does God forgive all who penitently
seek Him! His “‘merey is great unto
the heavens.” ‘ His mercy is ever-
lasting.” The greatness of His mercy
is seen—(1.) In the immense numbers
to which it extends. ‘ His tender mer-
cies ace over all His werks.” He is
“not willing that any should perish.”

425


POALM OXLV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


SS ear eee,


(2.) In the characters to which it ex-
tends. It reaches to the chief of sin-
ners. It offers pardon to the most
guilty. It “saves unto the uttermost.”
(3.) In the sacrifice which its exercise
involved. ‘God commendeth His love
toward us, in that while we were yet
sinners Christ died for us.” ‘‘ God who
is rich in mercy, for His great love
wherewith He loved us,” &. ‘He
spared not His own Son,” &. (4.) In
the blessings which flow from it, The
free and full forgiveness of sins is but
the beginning of its blessings. Holiness,
peace, joy, heaven, are all bestowed upon
believers in Christ Jesus, in the exercise
of the Divine mercy. The blessings
which flow from it are rich, inexhaus-
tible, everlasting, and unspeakably pre-
cious. Truly God is “ great in mercy.”
“ He delighteth in mercy.”

If. The universality of God’s good-
ness.

“Jehovah is good to all, and His
tender mercies are over all His works,”
It has been well observed that “ this is
a saying which does not seem as true in
the winter as in the summer of life.
Spoken in the quiet church, amid all
the accompaniments of prayer and praise,
with the quietude of the holy place to
calm us, and music and memory and
hope to bear us company, it is a saying
that men will let pass as something
they do not think of questioning ; but,
spoken to a poor woman who has just
lost the stay of her home; spoken to a
hard-working man who has just seen
the hopes of years disappear ; spoken to
little children who have just been thrown
on the world without father, or mother,
or friend, or home; spoken to a good
man whose reward seems nothing but
disappointment and trouble and loss,—
T do not wonder that it sounds to some
like a mockery: and I do not wonder
that men have turned away and said
that these things are all very well in the
church, but that they break down when
men go into the open world,

“Let us look at these words, then,
that we may, if possible, find some solid
ground for this saying that God is ‘good
to all’ And here the fact we have to
master is this:—That we must judge of

426


God's dealings towards us with refr-rence
to some system or order under which we
live. The system under which we live
is something like this :—

“1, A vast, complicated, and beneji-
cent sct of laws are at work, which apply
in common to all, We are in a world
the central principle of which is the
universality and certainty of every pre-
vailing law—this necessitating that God
shall not come forth to accommodate the
facts and the laws of the universe to
every individual need, but that He shall
provide for the steadfast abiding of
everything in its place, and for the con-
stancy of that thing to the law of its
being. In this very thing, then, which
has seemed so hard, inexorable, and
cruel; in this steadfastness of the laws
of the universe, I find the first proof of
the universal goodness of God—a good-
ness which would not be increased,
which would indeed be marred and
spoiled and thwarted if He made the
connection between cause and effect un-
certain ; and if, by special interferences
on behalf of individuals, He brought
uncertainty into the common life of the
race. For if He specially came forth,
to interfere in particular cases, to reverse
or suspend the ordinary laws of life, or
to save men from the effects of causes,
every man would look for such interfer-
ences on his behalf; and recklessness,
and presumption, and indolence, with
all their attendant miseries and disap-
pointments, would be increased a thou-
sandfold. Here, then, where QGod’s
goodness seems to be defective, we find
an abiding proof of it.

“2. We see that in the Divine admi-
nistration of the laws of the universe,
there is no partiality: all these great
laws are steadfast, whoever applies to
them. God is good to all in working by
beautiful and beneficent laws that are aa
generous and as steadfast as Himself
A man who has just denied the very
existence of God goes into his field, and
sows his seed; and, in a moment, all
the wonderful laws of God leap to obey
and bless him, and to give him the result
of his seed-sowing, quite as readily, quite
aa speedily, as in the case where the
sower thanks God and sows his seed


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : PSALMS,


PSALM CXLY,


eee


with prayer. God is clearly no partial
administrator of His laws. His sun
shines and His rain falls on the evil and
on the unthankful. He holds all the
myriad laws of the universe to their
appointed place, for He is ‘ good to all.’

‘3. Then, closely connected with that,
is His impartial bestowment of all the
common mercies of life for all. God dis-
tributes His mercies, not to bless this
man or that, any more than He main-
tains His beautiful laws to advantage
this man or that; but He scatters His
mercies a8 men scatter seed, as though
He reflected not which should prosper,
this or that, or which was good or which
was thorny ground, God’s sun shines;
but if the sinner opens his eyes first, he
will first behold it. God’s pure air
comes on the wings of the morning ; bat
if the impious.one goes out first to
breathe it, he will first be invigorated by
it. God’s rain falls on every field, and
if the sinner’s seed is in, it will first get
the sweet enrichments of it. It is the
same with everything. The mercies of
God come to all, are open to all. It is
only when sin makes a man naturally
unable to find or keep a mercy of God
that he finds the mercy disappear ; but
in every case there is a natural connec
tion between the sin and the depriva-
tion. Thus, again, if a man be pure,
and wise, and good, he may be blest
above the man who is impure, and fool-
ish, and debased; but if so, it will be
because there is a necessary and natural
connection between his virtue and the
blessing he finds, the one growing out of
the other, and not because God selects
him for rewards,

“4, We may find His universal good-
ness in that wonderful law of our being,
by which, as a rule, men are so easily
and insensibly adapted to thetr condition.
Thus, we find that a condition of life
which would be insupportable to one,
has become quite bearable or even satis-
factory to another. The back adjusts
itself to the burden; and the mind, the
temperament, the tastes, the habits, the
hopes, the likes and dislikes of a man,
all, as a rule, naturally fall into harmony
with his state; and this without his
knowing it, or planning it, or striving


after it. Thus, it is really quite an open
question, whether men who are very rich
enjoy life more than men who are mode-
rately poor ; or whether the palaces have
contained more pleasure than the cottages
of the world. You have heard men
express their love for occupations that
you would despise, and their content-
ment in habitations that made you
shudder, and even their delight in per-
sons from whom you shrink. You won-
der how they can do without this or
that— how they can bear with this
or that; but the want is not felt by
them, the burden galls them not, To
this I might add the touching and
most significant fact, that time seems to
have a gentle healing virtue in it to
soothe and comfort men; so that not
only to our general condition in life,
but to our special griefs, this blessed
law applies, It is not that we forget ;
for often, as time goes on, memory
only brightens and deepens with the
passing years; but a_ gracious hand
seems to steal over us, smoothing down
the wrinkles of the spirit, and healing
the wounds of the heart, and in this we
may see a touching proof that God is
‘good to all,’

“5, We may look for a closing proof of
this statement to the results that follow
much of what we call not good and not
merciful in this world, Much that seems
not good, much that s:ems not merciful,
isthe best part of the discipline of life—
or sometimes even the best guide to the
‘still waters’ and the ‘ green pastures,’
A vast number of the ills of life are
incentives to action, calls to duty,
motives for exertion, wonderful school-
masters to give us the needed mastery
of the knowledge of good and eyil.
Many of the results of hardships are
beneficent.

“God is indeed good to all; to every
creature—to the lowest, the saddest,
the meanest, the sinfullest; and His
tender mercies are over all His works.”

IIL. The praise of God’s goodness.

“All Thy works shall praise Thee,
O Jehovah ; and Thy saints shall bless
Thee,” Concerning this praise two
points require notice :—

1. Jts universality, “All Thy worka

427


FAALM OXLV.


praise Thee, O Jehovah.” “ All God’s
works do praise Him, as the beautiful
building praises the builder, or the well-
drawn picture praises the painter.” All
His works combine in setting forth His
perfections; they manifest His power,
and wisdom, and goodness. ‘ The hea-
vens declare the glory of God,” &ec,

2. Its diversity. ‘“ Thy works praise
Thee ; and Thy saints bless Thee.” “‘ His





Errors REsPecorine


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





saints praise Him actively, while Hia
other works praise Him only objec-
tively.” Angels and glorified saints in
heaven, and His people upon earth,
praise Him with their will and affeo-
tions, their reverence and loving obe
dience.

“ Bless the Lord, O my soul ; and all
that is within me bless His holy name,”
&e.


THE Divixt Berna,


(Verse 9.)


Right views of God are most im-
portant. Our religion will necessarily
be a reflection of them. Our spirit, our
hopes or fears, will be influenced, &e,
Nations always are as the gods they
worship, For the moral character of
God we must go to His Word, Our
text is. an epitome.

I, Let us see what it means.

The goodness or benevolence of God
is that which makes Him the source of
blessing to His creatures. It takes in
kindness, goodwill, love, benignity, &c.
In our text it includes mercy, kindness
to the guilty and miserable. Now,
observe, this view of God is the doc-
trine of all dispensations-—

1. See God as man’s creator (Gen. 1
26-28).

2. Hear God under the law (Exod.
xxxiii. 18,19; xxxiv. 6).

3. In the age of Solomon and the
Temple (2 Chron, v, 13).

4. The prophet Nahum saying, “‘ The
aN is good ; a stronghold,” &c, (Nah.
i 7).

5. Now, hear the Apostles, John:
“God is love.” Paul: “God is rich
in mercy ” (Eph. ii, 4). James: “The
Lord is very pitiful and of tender
mercy” (James v. 11). Peter: “If so
be ye have tasted that the Lord is
gracious,” &c. (1 Pet. ii, 3-9). Now,
before we leave this view of God, see
the extent of the Divine goodness,
“To all.” “Over all.” It must be
so. God is infinite, and His goodness
and love are thus unbounded, “A
sea without a bottom, or a shore,” &c,
And see its duration. “From _ ever-

428


lasting to everlasting.”  Endureth
for ever.” Unchanging and eternal.

II. What views of God are incom
sistent with this portrait, and there-
fore necessarily erroneous.

1. The view that represents God as
possessing implacable wrath, This is
the opposite pole; never can harmo-
nise ; and thus is, of necessity, false
He hateth all evil; but His mercy
embraces all sinners,

2. Views which represent God's good-
ness as partial and limited. Flatly con-
tradicting the text and the passages we
have quoted.

3. Views of the Divine reprobdative
decrees. By which men have been
unconditionally appointed, or left by
God, to perish for ever. This is at
total variance with the text.

4, Views which represent God’s good-
ness as only attainable through sacrifice.
That God would not be good to sinners
until Christ appeased His wrath, &e,
“God so loved the world, that He
gave His only begotten Son,” &
Christ is the effect, not the cause, of the
Divine mercy. The channel through
which it flows, not the spring from
whence it rises,

5. That God can be made good by
some acts or ceremonies of ours. Tears,
penance, &c, How futile! We may
come to it by tears, repentance, and
faith ; but there it was in God before
we wept, dc,

6. That God will only be good im
the highest sense to a very few. But
the Scriptures say : “The earth is full
of His goodneas.’’ “ He deliyhteth in


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


POALM OXLV


iene ppt sor nneneeneinmmenecnasssiniginancnaaguns®>


mercy.” “ Not willing that any should
perish.” ‘Such, then, is the great good-
ness of God; His true merciful char
acter.

Application. If so—

1. Then even reason says, Adore Him.

2. Gratitude says, Love, praise, and
serve Him, We say to all—

3. Come to Him by faith. Trust
Him with all your hearts, and ever
more, &.


4. Love says, Delight in Him; be
filled with His complacent favour.

5. Wonder marvels at tt. ‘Herein
is love,” &c. “God commendeth His
love tous,” &c. It “ passeth knowledge.”
Here is redemption’s rock — eternal,
immutable, &c. ‘ Oh give thanks,” d&c.

6. Jesus ts the grand unspeakable
mantfestation of tt. “God in Christ
reconciling the world unto Himself,” &,
(2 Cor. v. 19, seg.).— Jabez Burns, D.D.


Toe Praise or THE Divine Reren.
(Verses 11-13.)


The Psalmist here celebrates the
greatness and goodness of God as a
King in His kingdom. The suggestions
of this part of the Psalm may be grouped
under two heads :—

IL The characteristics of the reign
of the Lord.

The poet here speaks of it as—

1. Glorious. ‘They shall speak of
the glory of Thy kingdom;.. . to
make known to the sons of men the
glcrious majesty of His kingdom.” The
glory of Jehovah’s kingdom is not in
external pomp and pageantry, but in its
moral perfections. In its goodness, its
righteousness, its beneficence; in the
fact that He reigns to bless His subjecta,
‘“ Where,” asks Perowne, “is the con-
spicuous excellence of that kingdom
seen! Not in the symbols of earthly
pride and power, but in gracious con-
descension to the fallen and the crushed,
in a gracious care which provides for the
wants of every living thing.” (See our
remarks on “ the blessings of His reign”
in vol. i. pp. 383, 384.)

2. Mighty. ‘ They shall talk of Thy
power ; to make known to the sons of
men His mighty acts.” Barnes refers
this to His power ‘‘as put forth in the
works of creation ; a8 manifested in the
dispensations of His providence; as
evinced in the conversion of sinners ; a8
displayed in carrying His truth around
the world; as exhibited in sustaining
the sufferer, and in giving peace and
support to the dying.” The might of
the reign of Jehovah is moral, the power
of truth, righteousness, goodnesa,


3. Perpetual. “Thy kingdom is an
everlasting kingdom, and Thy dominion
endureth throughout all generations,”
(On ‘the perpetuity of His reign” see
vol. i. pp. 224 and 385.)

II. The conversation on the reign of
the Lord.

“They shall speak of the glory of
Thy kingdom, and talk of Thy power;
to make known,” &c. Three homiletical
points are here :—

1. Delight in Hisreign. This is here
clearly implied. “Out of the abun-
dance of the heart the mouth speaketh.”
We talk of the things in which we are
interested, and of those which afford us
pleasure. The reign of the Lord is to
His people a delightful theme of medi-
tation and discourse.

2. Praise of His reign. The poet
here celebrates its perfection and per-
petuity. The saints speak of it because
they feel that it is worthy of praise and
honour. It is one of the reasons for
which His saints do bless Him. (On
‘‘the praise of His reign” see vol. i. p.
385.)

3. Desire for the extension of His
reign. The saints speak of its glory
and power “to make known to the
sons of men His mighty acts, and
the glorious majesty of His kingdom.”
They are solicitous that others should
understand and appreciate the per-
fections of His reign; that they
might be led “to yield themselves
His willing subjects, and so put them-
selves under the protection of such
a mighty potentate.” “The Lord,”

429


#84LM OXLV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; PSALMS.


ee aan, a nC


says David Dickson, ‘will have His
saints to instruct such as are not con-
verted to know His glory, power, and
majesty, that they may be brought in


and made subjects of His special king:
dom of grace.” :

What is our relation to this glorious
King ?


Tur Guory or Carist’s Kinepom,
(Verse 11.)


As the kingdom of Christ is so con-
spicuous an object in both Testaments,
and is the only one among men by
whose government their happiness can
be secured, it cannot be improper, from
the words before us, to direct your atten-
tion to some particulars relating to the
nature, extent, and durability of its
glory.

I. The glory of this kingdom is
manifested in its origin.

It had its origin in infinite mercy and
grace. It entered into the councils of
the Eternal before the foundation of the
world was laid.

In order to establish this kingdom,
it was necessary that the Son of God
should become incarnate, . . . The
foundation of the kingdom was laid in
the incarnation and atonement of the
Son of God; a foundation proportionate
to the grandeur and beauty of the edifice
that was to be erected.

The doctrines of the Gospel were, and
are, the grand instruments in the hand
of the Lord Jesus for bringing souls into
subjection to His sceptre. The warfare
is entirely spiritual ; it is carried on by
the light of truth and the burning of
conviction, This is a glorious manner
of raising a kingdom, worthy of Him
who is a Spirit, and who reigns by
spiritual and intellectual means in the
hearts of His people.

II. The glory of Christ’s kingdom is
manifested in the manner and spirit of
its administration.

The last words of David describe the
manner of administering this govern-
ment; ‘‘The anointed of the God of
Jacob,” &e, (2 Sam. xxiii. 1-4).

The most essential quality in the ad-
ministration of any government is justice;
and justice ig most conspicuous in this
administration, “ With righteousness
shall He judge the poor,” &c. (Isa. xi

430


4,5). He will render to each of His
subjects, not for their works, yet accord-
ing to their works.

The administration of His kingdom is
also benign and gracious—it is indeed
a kingdom of grace. He revealeth His
grace, which is His glory ; and thus He
captivates the hearts of His people.
“He delivers the poor when he cries,
the needy, and him that hath no helper.”
‘“‘ When the poor and needy seek water,”
ac. (Isa. xli. 17, 18).

In earthly kingdoms the subjects are
governed by general laws, which must
necessarily be very inadequate to the
variety of cases and occurrences. But
our King is intimately acquainted with
all hearts, and being present in all ©
places, He can apply His acts to indi-
vidual examples, and appropriate smiles
and frowns to each, as if there were no
other beings that participated in His
attention. In human administrations,
the law extends only to outward acts ;
it relates only to objects of sense: but
the kingdom of heaven’ is a spiritual
one—it extends to the heart; it is
“within you,” and relates to “right-
eousness, peace, and joy in the Holy
Ghost.”

It is justly considered a high excel-
lence in a ruler, that he is disinterested,
that he pursues no interest of his own
apart from the general good of the
empire. But never was any one so dis-
interested as the King of Zion, who laid
down His life for His people, while
they were yet enemies. The glory of
the Father, and the good of man: these
engaged His heart, these brought Him
from heaven, &c.

Til. The glory of the kingdom of
Christ appears in the character of His
subjects.

1, These subjects are enlightened.
They form right estimates of objects, as


HOMILETIOC COMMENTARY; PSALMS.


PaaLe OXLY,





they are holy or sinful, temporal or
eternal, &c,

2. The subjects of this kingdom are
renewed, They are made, imperfectly,
yet truly holy. It is in this kingdom
that patience, purity, humility, faith,
and love to God and men, reside.

3. The subjects of this kingdom have
tn them a preparation for perfect blessed-
ness. They have that which renders
them meet “to be partakers of the in-
heritance of the saints in light.” All
the love and joy that glow with celestial
fervour before the throne of the Heavenly
Majesty, is only the consummation of
seeds like those which are sown in the
hearts of believers,

IV. The glory of the kingdom of
Christ is manifest in the privileges
that are attached to it.

1. Peace is a peculiar blessing of this
kingdom. This begins in reconciliation
with God. The consequence of peace
with God is peace with one another.

2. The dignity of the subjects of this
kingdom is another privilege. To “as
many as receive Him,” &c. (John i. 12;
Rom. viii. 16, 17; 1 John iii. 1, 2).


3. Immortality shall be the blessing
of this kingdom ; the subjects shall par-
take of endless life (John vi. 54, 58).
Believers receive in them the embryo of
eternal life; the spiritual life rises up
into eternal life, and will be displayed
in its perfection in the world of glory.
These terms include everlasting felicity
in the presence of God.

I might mention other properties of
this kingdom, which, though they do
not enter into the essence of it, are very
important,

It is a growing kingdom.
increase there shall be no end.”

The perpetuity of this kingdom must
endear it to a good man. It shall never
be taken away to be given to any other
people.

Let us, while we live here, sincerely
pray and labour for the advancement
and glorious increase of this kingdom.

Finally, let us look to ourselves, that,
while we hear these things, we may
possess a personal interest in this glori-


“Of ita


ous and happy kingdom.—Zobert Hall,
A.M.


Tue Praise or THE Divine Revation Tro Dirrerent CHARACTERS.
(Verses 14-21.)


In these verses Jehovah is praised
because of the attitude He sustains and
the blessings He bestows upon persons
in different classes of character,

L His relation to the weak and
the burdened.

1, He sustains the weak, “Jehovah
upholdeth all them that fall.” The
weak and the sinking are here meant ;

_those who by reason of their feebleness
are ready to fall, Many are ready to
sink beneath life’s sorrows, many are
almost falling before temptations to sin;
but the Lord is their Sustainer: He up-
holds them.

2. He relieves the burdened. “ And
raiseth up all those that be bowed down.”
The Psalmist means those who are heavily
laden with the duties, the cares, and the
trials of life ; to whom these things are
a heavy burden, bowing them down.
Such persons the Lord relieves :—(1.)


By removing the burden. In answer to
prayer He sometimes takes away the
load of care or trial. (2.) By increasing
the strength of those who are burdened,
By giving more grace the weight and pain-
fulness of the burden are taken away—
the burden ceases to be aburden, Let the
weak and the heavy-laden trust in Him,

II. His relation to the dependent.
“The eyes of all wait upon Thee,” &,
(vers. 15, 16). We have here—

1. Universal dependence, ‘The eyes
of all wait upon Thee; . . . Thou satis-
fiest the desire of every living thing.”
Every creature in the universe is a depen-
dent one. God alone is independent.
All creatures depend upon Him, “ By
Him all things consist.” Dependent
creatures should be humble,

2. Divine provision. “Thou givest
them their meat in due season,” &.
Here are three points—(1.) The scason-

431


PUALM CXLY.





ableness of the Divine provision. “In
due season.” God’s gifts are always
timely. He will not bestow them too
soon; He will not withhold them one
moment after their due time, (2.) The
ease of the Divine provision. To supply
the needs of the universe does not tax
the resources of God, or cause Him any
anxiety or effort, He has but to open
His hand, and the countless and end-
lessly diversified needs of His creatures
are supplied, ‘Thou openest Thine
hand,” &, (3.) The sufficiency of the
Divine provision. ‘And satisfiest the
desire of every living thing,” “This,”
says Barnes, “is to be taken in a general
sense. It cannot mean that absolutely
no one ever wants, or ever perished
from want, but the idea is that of the
amazing beneficence and fulness of God
in being able and willing to satisfy such
multitudes ; to keep them from perish-
ing by cold, or hunger, or nakedness,
And, in fact, how few birds perish by
hunger; how few of the infinite number
of the inhabitants of the sea; how few
animals that roam over deserts, or in vast
plains; how few men; how few even of
the insect tribes—how few in the world
revealed by the microscope—the world
beneath us—the innumerable multitudes
of living things too small even to be
seen by the naked eye of man!”

All this implies unlimited resources
in God; and should inspire the hearty
confidence of man in Him.

TI. His relation to the prayerful. ~

‘The Lord is nigh unto all them that
call upon Him,” &c, (vers, 18, 19).
Notice—

1. The character indicated. This is
marked by—(1.) Prayerfulness. “‘ Them
that call upon Him.” Here we have not
simply dependence, but dependence felt
and acknowledged ; dependence rising
into prayer. We have also an interest-
ing and true view of prayer; it is here
presented to us as expressed longing, the
cry of desire. ‘‘ He will fulfil the desire
of them that fear Him; He also will hear
their cry,” &c. (2.) Sincerity, ‘All
that call upon Him in truth.” Sincerity
is utterly indispensable to acceptable
approach unto God. (3.) Reverence.
“Them that fear Him.” This fear is

432


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





not the terror of a slave, but the filial
reverence of a child.

2. The blessings promised. (1.) The
manifestation of His presence. ‘“Jeho-
vah is nigh unto all them that call upon
Him,” &c, He is near unto all men;
but His true worshippers feel Him near
unto them, they have communion with
Him, “The Lord is nigh unto them
that are of a broken heart,” dc, (2.)
The granting of their desires. “ He will
fulfil the desire of them that fear Him,”
“Delight thyself in the Lord, and He
shall give thee the desires of thine
heart.” The desires of godly souls ac-
cord with the holy will of God. (3.)
The bestowment of His help. “ He also
will hear their cry, and will save
them.” Perowne: “And when He
heareth their cry He helpeth them.”
“Call upon Me in the day of trouble,
and I will deliver thee,” d&c. The
unanimous testimony of the history of
His people confirms these assurances.

IV. His relation to His saints.

“The Lord preserveth all them that
love Him.”

1, The human character. “Them that
love Him.” They have confidence and
complacency in Him; they have given
their hearts unto Him. Their language is,
““Whom have I in heaven but Thee 1”
&e. “The chiefest among ten thousand

. . . He is altogether lovely.”

" 9, The Divine keeping. “Jehovah
preserveth,” or “keepeth them.” It is
implied that they are exposed to danger.
They are beset by spiritual enemies;
they are weak and liable to receive in-
jury ; their spiritual interests are threat-
ened. But Jehovah keepeth them.
They “are kept by the power of God,
through faith unto salvation.” “ He
preserveth the souls of His saints; He
delivereth them from the hand of the
wicked.” By curbing the power of
temptation; by restraining from evil
by His Holy Spirit ; by quickening the
conscience, and strengthening the will,
and increasing the spiritual life and
activity by the same Holy Spirit, the
Lord keepeth His people.

V. His relation to the wicked.

“ But all the wicked will He destroy.”
See here—


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


POALN @ZLY,





L. A ead character. This character is
the opposite of the godly in all those as
pects which have come under our notice.
The wicked do not love God, do not re-
verence Him, do not pray to Him; but
the evil of their character is positive
and deep rooted ; they have fitted them-
selves for destruction.

2.4 dread destiny. “Will He
destroy.” ‘The enemies of the Cross
of Christ; whose end is destruction.”
They ‘shall be punished with ever-

lasting destruction from the presence
of the Lord, and from the glory of His
power.”

VI His righteousness and kindness
in all His relations.

“ Jehovah is righteous in all His
ways, and holy in all His works.” In-
stead of “holy,” the Margin has “ mer-
ciful, or bountiful.” Conant: “kind.”
Perowne: “loving.” In His relations
to all His creatures, whatever may be
their character, He is just and merciful,


righteous and kind. He wrongs no one;
He requires of no one services which
would be unjust. Even to the rebellious
and wicked He is kind, ‘He maketh
His sun to rise on the evil and on the
good, and sendeth rain on the just and
on the unjust.” He is slow to anger
even with the greatest sinners, and swift
to save them when they turn to Him.

VII. His praise because of all His
relations.

“My mouth shall speak the praise of
the Lord ; and let all flesh bless His holy
name for ever and ever.” We have here—

1. A resolution to offer personal praise.
“My mouth shall speak the praise of
Jehovah.”

2. A desire that He might be praised
universally. ‘Let all flesh bless His
holy name.” The godly soul intensely
desires that all men should worship the
Lord.

3. A desire that He might be praised
perpetually. ‘‘ For ever and ever.”


UnIvVERSAL DEPENDENCE AND Driving Support.
(Verses 15, 16.)


The Psalmist here teaches—

I, The universality of dependence
amongst creatures.

“The eyes of all wait upon Thee.”
We depend upon God for “ life, and
breath, and all things.” ‘“ He giveth
breath to the people upon earth, and
spirit to them that walk therein.”
“ Every good gift and every perfect gift
is from above,” &c, Entire dependence
should beget deep humility. ‘“ What
hast thou that thou didst not receive?
now if thou didst receive it, why dost
thou glory, as if thou hadst not received
it?”

II. The infinitude of the Divine
resources.

“Thou givest them their meat in due
season; ... and satisfiest the desire
of every living thing.” This indicates
the possession of resources—

1. Infinitely vast, “Every beast of
the forest is Mine, the cattle upon a
thousand hills.” ‘The silver is Mine,
and the gold is Mine, saith the Lord of
hosts.” His resources are adequate to


von, I.


the abundant supply of all the wants of
all creatures, His riches are unsearch-
able,

2. Infinitely various, They are not
only more than sufficient for all neces-
sities, but adapted to every variety of
need,

IIL The timeliness of the Divine
communications.

‘In due season.” The Divine Being
is punctual in the fulfilment of every
engagement. His gifts are bestowed at
that time which infinite wisdom and
infinite goodness adjudges to be the
“due season.” In this we have a
reason for patience if His interpositions
or communications seem to be delayed.

IV. The sublime ease of the Divine
communications,

“Thou openest Thine hand, and
satisfiest the desire ‘of every living
thing.” To satisfy the innumerable
needs of the myriads of His creatures
does not tax His resources, or challenge
an exertion of His power. He has but
to open His hand, and the countless


433


PRALM OXLY.





needs of the universe are satisfied.
What an encouragement is this to
believing prayer! He “is able to do
exceeding abundantly above all that we
ask or think.”

V. The sufficiency of the Divine
communications.

“ And satisfiest the desire of every
living thing.” “God giveth to all
liberally.” The provisions of His table
are both bounteous and free. He gives
“bread enough” for all His creatures,
“and to spare.” So in spiritual things,
His “ grace is sufficient.” “God is able
to make all grace abound toward you;





HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





that ye, always having all sufficiency im
al things, may abound to every good
work: being enriched in everything to
all liberality.”

Our subject urges all men to—

1. Gratitude. Constant provision
should lead to constant thankfulness
and consecration.

2. Trust. (1.) For temporal supplies.
“Be not careful for your life, what ye
shall eat, and what ye shall drink,” &c.
(Matt. vi. 25-34.) (2.) For spiritual
supplies, ‘Grace to help in time of
need.” will surely be given to all who
look to Him. ‘


ATTRIBUTES AND ADVANTAGES OF ACCEPTABLE PRAYER.
(Verses 18, 19.)


What is prayer? According to ver,
18, it is a sincere calling upon God.
According to ver, 19, it is the cry of
the desire of the godly soul, In our
text we have—

I. Some attributes of acceptable
prayer.

1, Sincerity. ‘‘ All that call upon
Him in truth.” “ God is a Spirit; and
they that worship Him must worship
Him in spirit and in truth.” All un-
reality is known unto Him, and is ab-
horred by Him. Words and forms of
prayer without the heart are an abomi-
nation in His sight.

2. Reverence. “‘Them that fear Him.”
This is not dread, but reverence,—a
devout, trustful, filial spirit. Religious-
ness of spirit is an essential condition of
acceptable prayer.

There are other attributes of accept-
able prayer, which are not expressed
here, although they are perhaps implied.
Of these, two are of prime importance,
viz,,—Farth. ‘ Without faith it is im-
possible to please Him.” And, Accord-
ance with the Divine will. ‘If we ask
anything according to His will, He
heareth us; and if we know that He
hear us, whatsoever we ask, we know
that we have the petitions that we de-
sired of Him.”

II. Some advantages of acceptable
prayer.

l. The realisation of Hts presence.

434


“ Jehovah is nigh unto all them that call
upon Him,” &c. In His omnipresenceand
omnipotence He is near unto all men, but
in gracious fellowship He is near only to
devout souls, Locally, He is everywhere
present ; but sympathetically, He is pre-
sent only with the truly pious. “To
this man will I look, even to him that
is poor and of a contrite spirit,” &c. In
gracious interest and tenderest regard
He is nigh unto them ; they realise His |
blessed presence. ‘ Our fellowship is
with the Father, and with His Son Jesus
Christ.”

2. The fulfilment of thetr desires,
“He will fulfil the desire of them that
fear Him.” God does not promise to
grant the desire of the irreligious, the
worldly, or the wicked. It would be
neither kind nor right to do so. But He
pledges His word to grant the desire of
the godly. Their desires are pure, un-
selfish, spiritual, in harmony with His
will; and to fulfil them will promote
both His own glory and the good of His
universe, This truth is very clearly
stated in the book of Job xxii. 21-23,
26, 27; and by David: “ Delight thy-
self in the Lord ; and He shall give thee
the desires of thine heart.” (See also
John xv. 7; Jas, v. 16.)

3. The obtainment of Hts salvation.
“He also will hear their cry, and will
save them.” ‘There is no rhetoric,
nothing charming, in a cry, yet God’s


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PSALM OXLVI.





ears are open to it, as the tender mother’s
to the cry of her sucking child, which
another would take no notice of.” In
answer to prayer He helps His people in
all their need, and ultimately saves them
from all evil into perfect purity and joy.


PSALM


- them that fear Him.”


Concriusion.—-“‘ Oh, fear the Lord,
ye His saints ; for there is no want to
“© Trust in Him
at all times; ye people, pour out your
heart before Him; God is a refuge for
us.”


CXLVL


INTRODUCTION,


In the Hebrew this Psalm has no superscription. The Septuagint has the superscriptio
* Hallelujah. Of Haggai and Zechariah ;” and is followed in this reapect by the Vulgate an
the Syriac, This is based perhaps on ancient tradition ; but has no higher authority. Modern
expositors are generally agreed that the Psalm was composed after the exile, Thus Perowne.
‘The Psalm bears evident traces, both in style and language, and also in its allusions to other
Psalms, of belonging to the post-exile literature,” All that can be determined concerning the
occasion of its composition is well expressed by Hengstenberg: ‘‘ That the Psalm was composed
in a period of depression for the people of God, ia indicated by the predicates given to God,
which are all of a kind fitted to elevate the distressed, to console the afflicted, and give them
confidence in their God,”

This is the first of a series of five Hallelujah Psalms, with which the Psalter is closed. Ata
later time this series was used in the daily morning prayers, in conjunction with portions of
other Psalms and Books of the Old Testament,


The Psalm is chiefly an exhortation and an argument to trust not im man, but in


Jehovah.


TRUST AND PRAISE.


Let us notice—

L The trust prohibited.

“Put not your trust in princes, in a
gon of man, in whom there is no help,”
dc. Trust even in the most exalted and
powerful of men is here prohibited ; and
reasons are given for the prohibition.
Trust them not, because of—

1. Their inability, ‘Put not your
trust in princes, in @ son of man, in
whom there is no help,” or “salvation.”
We are prone to confide in the great and
the high ones of the earth, who seem
able to do for us, able to help us, to pro-
mote us to rank and wealth, and to estab-
lish our state, therefore the Psalmist
declares that no man, not even the
mightiest, has power to save either him-
self or others. Prince and pauper are
alike destitute of salvation in themselves ;
alike they must receive it from God, or
remain without it. ‘He giveth salva-
tion to kings.”

2. Their mortality, “ His breath goeth
forth, he returneth to his earth; in that
very day his thoughts perish.” Here are
three points :—(1.) The termination of
bodily life. ‘His breath goeth forth.”


Without respiration, ¢e, without in-
spiration and expiration, we cannot live.
While there is breath there is life. But
the time comes when expiration takes
place, and is not followed by inspira-
tion; when “his breath goeth forth”
and returns not again, and life has
ceased. Death


«Ts the cessation of our breath;
Silent and motionless we lie,
And no one knoweth more than this,
I saw our little Gertrude die ;
She left off breathing, and no more
I smooth’d the pillow beneath her head.”


(2.) The destiny of the. body. “He
returneth to his earth.” Barnes says,
“The earth—the dust—is his:-—(a.) It
is his, as that from which he was made:
he turns back to what he was (Gen.
iii, 19). (.) The earth—the dust—the
grave is his, as it is his home—the place
where he will abide. (c) It is his, as it
is the only property which he has in re-
version, All that a man—a prince, a
nobleman, a monarch, a millionaire—
will soon have will be his grave—his
few feet of earth. Zhat will be his by
right of possession ; by the fact that, for
439


POALM OXLVI


the time being, he will occupy it, and
not another man. But that, too, may
soon become another man’s grave, 80
that even there he is a tenant only for a
time; he has no permanent possession
even of agrave. How poor is the richest
man!” (3.) The failure of temporal
projects. “ In that very day his thoughts
perish,” All man’s plans and purposes
which relate only to time and this world
are cut off by death. The patriarch Job
gives striking utterance to this truth:
“My days are past, my purposes are
broken off, even the thoughts of my
heart.” When the breath goeth forth,
“however grand the conception, how-
ever masterly the execution, all come to
anend. The science, the philosophy, the
statesmanship of one age is exploded in
the next. The men who are the masters
of the world’s intellect to-day are dis-
crowned to-morrow. In this age of
restless and rapid change they may sur-
vive their own thoughts: their thoughts
do not survive them.” This truth has
a very dread aspect to those whose
thoughts and. purposes are wholly or
even chiefly of the things of sense and
time ; and this aspect our Lord brings
into prominence in Luke xii, 16-21.
But the practical aspect of this truth
with which we have now to do is that
which shows the utter vanity of man as
an object of human trust. All the kind
purposes and designs which man has for
us come to an end when he dies; and
all the hopes that are placed on him
perish at his death. Therefore, “ Trust
not in princes, in a son of man, in whom
there is no help,” & “Cursed is the
man that trusteth in man,” dc. (Jer. xvii.
-§-8),

II. The trust encouraged. ‘“ Happy
is he that hath the God of Jacob for his
help,” dc. (vers. 5-10). We regard the
word “ Jacob” as denoting in this place
the whole people of Israel; and ™ the
God of Jacob” as the Lord Jehovah
whom they worshipped, in contradistinc-
tion to the gods of the heathen, The


position of the Psalmist is, that they are


blessed who trust in Him ; and that for
the following reasons :—because of—
1. His almighty power. “Who made
heaven and earth. the sea, and all that
436


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY . PSALMS.





therein is.” The creation of the world
manifests the omnipotence of God, and
this is engaged on behalf of them whose
hope is in Him. The Divine name
which is here used (9X = God) is also
expressive of strength. He is strong to
succour and help His people.

2. His unchangeable fidelity. “ Who
keepeth truth for ever.” Perowne holds
that this is “the central thought of the
Psalm. For on this ground beyond all
others is God the object of trust. He
is true, and His word is truth, and that
word He keeps, not for a time, but for
ever.” “Heaven and earth shail pass
away, but My words shall not pass
away.”

3. His righteous judgment, ‘Who .
executeth judgment for the oppressed.”
“The Lord executeth righteousness and
judgment for all that are oppressed.”
By His Providence He calmly and stead-
fastly works for the vindication of the
injured. And in the last judgment He
will redress every wrong, &c.

4. His bountifulness to the needy.
“Who giveth food to the hungry.”
“He satisfieth the longing soul, and
filleth the hungry soul with goodness.”
“The hungry,” says Hengstenberg, “ re-
presents generally all who stand in need
of help.” Jehovah is the liberal bene-
factor of all the necessitous, and espe-
cially those of them who trust in Him.

5. His compassion for the afflicted.
The poet mentions several classes of dis-
tressed or troubled men, and of God’s
gracious dealings with each class. (1.)
‘Jehovah looseth the prisoners.” By
the prisoners we understand captives—
those that are bound, and those also
who are in the prison of distress, He
thus set Israel free from their bondage
in Egypt, and afterwards from their cap-
tivity in Assyria. Christ is the great
Emancipator. It is His “to proclaim
liberty to the captives, and the opening
of the prison to the bound.” “If the
Son shall make you free, ye shall be free
indeed.” (2.) “Jehovah openeth the
eyes of the blind.” Heb., lit.; “Jeho-
vah openeth the blind.” Hengstenberg:
“The blind are the naturally blind, and
such as cannot discern the way of salva-
tion without wisdom and help; blind-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PSALM OXLVI1,





ness Occurs as an image of want of wis-
dom and support in Deut. xxviii. 29;
Isa. lix. 10; Job xii. 25.” (Comp. also
Ps, exix. 18; Isa, xxxv. 5.) (3.) “Jeho-
vah raiseth up them that are bowed
down.” Those who are weighed down
and crushed by the burden of anxiety,
trial, or sorrow, He sustains and cheers.
(See our remarks on Ps. exlv. 14.) (4.)
“Jehovah preserveth the strangers, He
relieveth the fatherless and widow.” In-
stead of “ relieveth ” Hengstenberg tran-
slates, “raises up ;” and Perowne, “set-
teth up.” “The stranger, the widow, and
the fatherless are representatives of per-
sons in a miserable condition ;” they are
“the three great examples of natural de-
fencelessness.” The Lord succours all
the helpless; He has a gracious regard
for all who stand in special need of His
care; He espouses the cause of the desti-
tute and the weak. “A Father of the
fatherless, and a Judge of the widows, is
God in His holy habitation.” In Him
“the fatherless findeth mercy.”

6. His complacency in His people.
‘‘ Jehovah loveth the righteous.” Starke
says, ‘‘ What a sweet word: the Lord
loves thee! I would not take a king-
dom for that word. Love unites God’s
heart to mine.” And how broad and firm
is the basis of trust which it supplies |

7. His righteous retribution to the
wicked. ‘‘ The way of the wicked He
turneth upside down.” Perowne: “ He
turneth aside.” Conant: “ He subver-
teth” The projects of the wicked
Jehovah defeats. Under His govern-
ment their way leads down to ruin.
Moll: “The crooked way of the wicked
in which death lies (Prov. xii. 28) is
turned by Jehovah down towards hell
(Prov, xv. 24; comp. ii 18, Ps. i,
6).” Delitzsch ; ‘ There is only a single
line devoted to Jehovah’s punitive jus-
tice. For He rules in love and wrath,
but delights most to rule in love.”

8. His everlasting reign. ‘The Lord


shall reign for ever ; thy God, O Zion,
unto all generations.” No opposition
can shake His throne. All the subtlety
and strength of His enemies are utterly
powerless against Him. (On the everlast-
ing reign of Jehovah, see vol. i. pp. 224
and 385.) In the perpetuity of His
reign we have another evidence of the
blessedness of those who trust in Him.
Surveying all these reasons for con-
fidence, are we not prepared with the
accent of conviction to say with the
Psalmist, “ Happy is he that hath the
God of Jacob for his help, whose hope
is in the Lord his God”? (Comp.
Ps, ii. 12 ; lxxxiv. 12 ; Jer. xvii. 7, 8.)

Il. The praise celebrated.

“Praise ye the Lord. Praise the
Lord, O my soul,” &c. Here is—

1. A declaration of personal praise,
The poet determines to praise God—
(1.) Spiritually. “ Praise Jehovah, O
my soul.” “ For discharging the duty
of praise,” says David Dickson, “all
the powers of the soul must be stirred
up ; the mind, to meditate ; the memory,
to bring forth former observations ; the
heart and affections, for discharging the
duty of praise in the best manner.” (2.)
Perpetually. “While I live will I praise
Jehovah ; I will sing praises unto my
God while I have any being.”

“ T’ll praise my Maker with my breath,

And when my voice is lost in death,

Praise shall employ my nobler powers 3

My days of praise shall ne’er be past,

While life and thought and being last,

Or immortality endurea,”— Watts,

* Not in this song only will he utter
his praise, but ‘ his life shall be a thanks-
giving unto the Power that made him.’”

2. A summons to others to praise Him,
“Praise ye the Lord.” Heb, as in
Margin : “ Hallelujah.” Thus the Psalm
begins, and thus also it closes, “ As one
light kindles another,” says Starke, “so
a believing heart seeks to awaken others
and excite them to the righteous praise
of God.”


THe PuinosopHy or D£rarE.
(Verses 4, 5.)


The text refers—
L To the destiny of all.
1. To a special day. “In that very


day.” This is the day of death. There

are many important days in a man’s

history. Often days of great moment.
437


PSALM OXLVIL


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : PSALMS,





Each perhaps the crisis of some eventful
period of our history, But the day of
death is peculiarly momentous; it is
invested with unusual solemnity. It is
the termination of probation, and the
entrance on the unchanging realities of
a future world,

The aspect of this day depends en-
tirely on the moral condition of the in-
dividual, whether it be bright or dark—

-a day of bliss or woe—of exaltation to
heaven or degradation even to the lowest
abyss of hell. It would be well to read
and meditate on this day; to look at it
in all lights, and in all its consequences ;
and especially for this reason,—it is a
day which we, every one, must personally
realise, “It is appointed unto men
once to die,” d&e, ‘I know Thou wilt
bring me to ceath,” &e

Our text refers—

2. To a striking view of death, “ His
breath goeth forth.” When God made
man, He “breathed,” &. Life is a
succession of breathings, By the act of
inspiration we take in the air, which
supplies the blood with a fresh supply
of oxygen, and thus makes it wholesome
and nutritious to the system. By the
act of expiration, the breath which has
become impure is thrown off. Now,
this ceasing to breathe is the extinction
of life, and this may be produced by a
variety of causes,—impure air, organic
disease of the heart, affections of the
lungs, &. Oh think of this, and re-
member every instant there is but one
step between us and death, The text
refers—

3. Z'o man’s last earthly home. “He
returneth to his earth.” From that our
first parents sprung. On that we move


and live, It yields our supplies of food.
We at length return to it. ‘* Dust thou
art,” &c. “ His earth”—every man has


a claim on the earth for a sepulchre,
The poorest have this, and the richest
only this, “I know Thou wilt bring
me to death, and to the house ap-
pointed,” dc. “If I wait, the grave is
mine house,” &c, The text refers—

4, To the cessation of mental activity.
“In that very day his thoughts perish.”
His worldly plans and schemes; his
anxieties and cares; his purposes and

438


projects; even his religious thoughts of
repentance and serving God. His reso-
lutions and vows, &c., all perish—all die
with him. Whether king or peasant,
philosopher or rustic. Not his soul—
no, that still lives, Our text refers—

IZ. To the peculiar privileges and
happiness of a certain description of
character.

The character introduced is repre
sented under two interesting features.

l. As sustained by the God of Jacob,
“The God of Jacob for his help.” Man
requires Divine help. This help Jesus
obtained by His obedience and sacrifice.
Even the Old Testament saints enjoyed
this help by prospective faith in the
Redeemer. How God helped Jacob!
delivering him from the wrath of his
brother, and the oppression of Laban.
Helped him to sustain his domestic
troubles ; helped him in all his trials
and difficulties, and led him at last to
dwell in the rich and fruitful land of
Goshen. God is the help of all the
spiritual posterity of Jacob—all who
like Jacob are distinguished for prayer,
faith, and obedience to His word. God
is a help at hand; all-sufficient ; un-
changeable ; everlasting. This charac-
ter is represented—

2. As expecting all good tn and from
God. “ Whose hope is in the Lord his
God.” The hope of the ‘pious has re-
spect to God’s wisdom, truth, goodness,
mercy, fidelity, dc. Hope is the balm
of life, the very joy of existence. What
would man do in the sorrows and trials
of his present state, or what in looking
towards the eternal future, without
hope? He alone can sustain, deliver,
bless, and save. Hence, notice—

3. The blessedness of this character.
“Happy is he,” &c, We are often struck
most forcibly by contrasts, Contrast the
godly man who hath Jehovah for his help
with the poor benighted pagan, dwel-
ling in the region of death—anxious,
wretched, despairing. Contrast him with
the sceptic, who is all doubt and uncer-
tainty, With the worldly, whose hope
and happiness are identified with gold
and silver, With the neglector of re-
ligion, who trifles away opportunities,
and mercies, and privileges, until “ the


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


FSSEX CXLVE,


St


harvest is past,” &c. Oh, yes, the godly
man is happy—happy in the enjoyment
of heavenly knowledge—happy in the
enjoyment of Divine peace, internal
tranquillity—happy in the prospect of
immortality and eternal life, “They
shall return and come to Zion with
songs,” &e. ;
Our subject contains matter—


1, For solemn admonition. Think of
the day of death, &ec.

2. For rejoicing, to those who have God
for their help. What a privilege! Qh,
value it—often praise God for it.

3. For exhoriation. Who will con-
secrate himself to the Lord }—~Jabes
Burns, D.D.


THe Lorp rHEr LIBERATOR


(Verse 7.)
“The Lord looseth the prisoners.”


The text suggested to the preacher
to go through the corridors of the great
world- prison in which prisoners were
confined.

I. The common prison—the ward of

sin.
IL The solitary cell—the place of
penitence, where was a secret spring,
called faith, which, if a man could touch,
he could go forth.

IIL The silent cell, where he met
with people who could not pray.


IV. The cell of isnoranca

V. The prison of habit,

VI. The hard-labour room.

VII. The low dungeon of despon-
dency,

VIII. The inner prison—the hold of
despair.

IX. The devil’s torture-chamber.

X. The condemned cell.—C. JZ.
Spurgeon. From “ Lamps, Pitchers, and
Trumpets,” by #. P. Hood,


PSALM CXLVII.


INTRODUCTION.
Vike the last Psalm, and like those which follow it, thie is evidently an anthem intended


for the service of the Second Temple.


It celebrates God’s almighty and gracious rule over


His people and over the world of nature, but mingles with thie a special commemoration of
His goodness in bringing back His people from their captivity and rebuilding the walls of


Jerusalem.


be justified in seeing the occasion of the Psalm.


In the allusions to these events in vers. 2,3, and vers, 13, 14, we shall probably


It may have been written for the dedication


of the wall at Jerusalem, which, as we learn from Neh. xii. 27, was kept ‘with gladness,


both with thanksgivings and with singing, with cymbals, psalteries, and with harps,’


It is


indeed not improbable, as Hengstenberg suggests, that not this Psalm only, but the rest of
the Psalms to the end of the Book, are all anthems originally composed for the same occasion.
The wall had been built under circumstances of no ordinary difficulty and discouragement
(Neh. ii. 17; iv. 23); its completion was celebrated with no common joy and thankfulness 3
* for God had made them rejoice with great joy ; the wives also and the children had rejoiced ;
so that the joy of Jerusalem was heard even afar off.’ (See Neh. xii. 27-43.)

‘©The Psalm cannot be said to have any regular strophical arrangement, but the renewed
exhortations to praise, in vers. 7, 12, suggest a natural division of the Psalm. It is a Trifo-
lium of praise.” —Perowne.


THE EXceLLENCE OF Praise TO Gop,


(Verses 1-6.)


The Psalm opens with the summons 1. The praise of God is excellent in
to praise Jehovah, and proceeds to itself.
adduce motives for praising Him. We ‘Praise ye the Lord, for ”"—


may arrange these under two heads :— 1, “ It ts good to sing Bees unto
439


HOMILETIC COMMENTRY : PSALMS.





our God.” The adjective here used is a
very comprehensive one— iQ, xaArée,
pulcher, beautiful; or, dyads, bonus,
good; or, useful, profitable, beneficent.
The same word is applied to the praise
of God in Ps. xcii. 1. (See our remarks
on that verse, vol, ii. pp. 63, 64.)

2. “It ts pleasant.” To the godly
soul praising God is a delightful thing ;
a thing affording purest satisfaction,
and real joy to the heart, This truth
is expressed also in Ps. cxxxv. 3:
“Sing praises unto His name, for it is
pleasant.”

3. It “ts comely.” This clause is
probably taken from Ps, xxxiii 1.
“Praise is comely for the upright.”
To praise God is a most seemly thing.
Nothing can be more appropriate than
that man, who owes to God so much,
and is to some extent capable of ap-
preciating the perfections and glories
of His character, should pay to Him
humble and hearty worship. It is a
becoming thing in man; an honour and
an ornament to him.

II. The praise of God is excellent in
its reasons,

‘Jehovah doth build up Jerusalem,”
&c, (vers. 2-6). God is here praised
because of —

1. His relation to His Church.
“ Jehovah doth build up Jerusalem;
He gathereth together the outcasts of
Israel.” There are references here to
the rebuilding of the walls and the
city of Jerusalem after the Captivity,
and to the restoration of the exiled
people to their own land. (Comp.
Isa, xi. 12; lvi. 8.) The Lord is the
builder of His Church. ‘Upon this
rock will I build My Church.” “Ye
are God’s building.” He hews the
stones out of the quarries of nature,
cuts them into shape, works them into
the glorious edifice, and carves them
into grace and beauty. “The Lord
added to the Church daily such as
should be saved.” He will carry on-
ward the building to splendid com-
pleteness, And when His people have
been scattered by persecution, or fa-
mine, or strife, He brings them to-
gether again. ‘“ Asa shepherd seeketh
out his flock in the day that he is among

440


his sheep that are scattered, so will I
seek out My sheep, and will deliver
them out of all places where they
have been scattered in the cloudy and
dark day.”

2. His relation to troubled souls. “He
healeth the broken in heart, and bindeth
up their wounds.” There is much sorrow
of heart in the world, It is probable
that broken hearts are more frequent
amongst men than is generally supposed.
Broken hearts are not paraded; they
are rather carefully concealed. Hearts
are broken by sorrow for sin, by painful
disappointments, by wicked calumnies,
by distressing bereavements, by severe
afflictions, by heavy losses, The Lord
is the comforter and healer of such
suffering souls. He heals the troubled
penitent with His gracious forgiveness
of sin ; to the disappointed He presents
new and brighter and well-assured
hopes ; to the calumniated He gives the
assurance of a splendid vindication (Ps.
xxxvii. 5, 6); before the bereaved He
holds out the prospect of everlasting
and joyful reunion with the beloved
departed in our Father's house; He
transforms afflictions into angels laden
with blessings; and out of temporal
losses He evolves eternal gains. ‘ He
heals the broken in heart,” &c. It is
His “to comfort all that mourn, to
appoint unto them that mourn in Zion,”
&c. (Isa Ixi 2, 3). “As one whom
his mother comforteth, so will I com-
fort you,” &c.

3. Hts relation to heavenly hosts. “He
telleth the number of the stars; He
calleth them all by their names,” dsc,
(vers. 4, 5). “This is adduced,” says
Perowne, “asa proof of the omniscience
and omnipotence of God, and hence as
a ground of consolation to His people,
however they may have been scattered,
and however they may have been
oppressed. Surely He must know, He
must be able to succour, human woe, to
whom it is an easy thing to count those
stars which are beyond man’s arithmetic
(Gen. xv. 5). The argument is precisely
the same as in Isa xl. 26-29; ‘ Lift
up your eyes,’ &. ... Evidently the
words of the prophet were in the mind
of the Psalmist.” It is stated that in


HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY PSALMS.





our sky there are one hundred millions
of stars visible by the aid of a telescope,
each of which is the centre of a cluster
of tributary stars, making altogether
“a great multitude which no man can
number.” “Tf we ask,” says Dr.
Chalmers, “ the number of suns and of
systems, the unassisted eye of man can
take in a thousand, and the best teles-
cope which the genius of man has con-
structed can take in eighty millions.*
But why subject the dominions of the
universe to the eye of man, or to the
powers of his genius? Fancy may take
its flight far beyond the ken of eye or
of telescope. It may expatiate in the
outer regions of all that is visible—and
shall we have the boldness to say, that
there is nothing there? that the wonders
of the Almighty are at an end, because
we can no longer trace His footsteps ?
that His omnipotence is exhausted,
because human art can no longer follow
Him? that the creative energy of God
has sunk into repose, because the ima-
gination is enfeebled by the magnitude
of its efforts, and can keep no longer on
the wing through those mighty tracts,
which shoot far beyond what eye hath
seen, or the heart of man hath conceived
—which sweependlessly along, and merge
into an awful and mysterious infinity ?”

Yet God counts all these stars;
marshals all these stars. What an
illustration we have in this of—(1.)
His unlimited might / What power is
involved in marshalling the countless
hosts of stars, in guiding and keeping
them in their spheres! “Great is our
Lord, and of great power.” (2.) His
infinite knowledge. ‘He calleth them
all by their names.” Perowne: “ He
giveth nomes unto them all.” The
expression indicates ‘the most intimate
knowledge and the most watchful care,
as that of a shepherd for his flock (John
x. 3).” Or the figure has been inter-
preted thus: “‘ He calleth them all by
their names’—as if each one had a
name, and God could call them forth
one by one by their names, like the
muster-roll of an army.” ‘His under-
standing is infinite.” Margin: “Of
His understanding there is no number.”


PSALM OXLVII,


In the Hebrew there is a play upon the
word which is translated “ number” in
ver. 4. Unlimited is the number both of
His understanding and of the stata,
Lhe limit of human knowledge is soon
reached, but “there is no searching of
His understanding.” Now this infinite
intelligence and almighty power of God
should prove an encouragement and an
inspiration to all who trust in Him.
The idea has been well expressed by
Dr. Chalmers: “The God who sitteth
above, and presides in high authority
over all worlds, is mindful of man;
and though at this moment His energy
is felt in the remotest provinces of
creation, we may feel the same security
in His Providence as if we were the
objects of His undivided care. It is not
for us to bring our minds up to this
mysterious agency. But such is the in-
comprehensible fact, that the same Being,
whose eye is abroad over the whole unm
verse, gives vegetation to every blade of
grass, and motion to every particle of
blood which circulates through the veins
of the minutest animal ; that, though His
mind takes into its comprehensive grasp
immensity and all its wonders, I am as
much known to Him as if I were the
single object of His attention—that He
marks all my thoughts—that He gives
birth to every feeling and every move-
ment within me—and that with an exer-
cise of power which I can neither describe
nor comprehend ;: the same God who sits
in the highest heaven, and reigns over the
glories of the firmament, is at my right
hand to give me every breath which I
draw, and every comfort which I enjoy.”

4, His retributwe relation to men.
“Jehovah lifteth up the meek; He
casteth the wicked down to the ground.”
He who “ rules the stars in their courses,
rules also the world of man.” (1.) He
exalts the humble and the oppressed.
“ Jehovah lifteth up the meek,” or “the
afficted.” (See our remarks on Ps, exlv,
14; cxlvi. 8.) (2.) He abases the wicked.
(See our remarks on Ps. cxlvi. 9.) ‘‘ His
rule and His order are @ correction of
man’s anarchy and disorder,”

“ Praise ye the Lord ; for it is good,”
&c.


* The aumber is now said to be one hundred millions or more.


441


FRALM CXLVIL,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS,





Tos GREATNESS AND GENTLENESS or GoD.
(Verses 2-5.)


The text reveals the constructive side
of the Divine government.

I. As shown in the building of the
Church.

“The Lord doth build up Jerusalem,”
&c. That He should do so shows Fi
that the Church is self-demolished ; (2)
that it is self-helpless; and (3) that
God is the Gatherer, the Redeemer, and
the Builder of the Church.

It is not God’s purpose to destroy. It
is His very nature to preserve, extend,
complete, and glorify. He does destroy,
but never willingly, His arm does not
become terrible until His heart has been
grieved, until His patience has been ex-
hausted, and until the ‘vital interests of
the universe have been put in peril.

II. As seen in the gentle care of
human hearts.

“ He healeth the broken in heart, and
bindeth up their wounds,” Still, you
see how constructive and preservative is
God. His work is edification, not de-
struction, Who cares for broken-hearted
men? Who has patience with the weak
and faint? The greater the nature, the
greater the compassion. ‘It is better
to fall into the hands of God than into
the hands of men.” Learn from this
gentle care of human hearts—

1. The personality of God’s knowledge,
He knows every bruised reed. Hearts
suffer in secret ; there is nothing hidden
from God!

2. Lue infinite adaptations of Divine
grace. Every heart, whatever its grief,
may be healed! There is ‘“‘a sovereign
balm for every wound.” Are we
wounded on account of sin? Are we
writhing under the agonies of penitence ?
Are we tortured by circumstances over
which we have no control—the way-
wardness of children, physical prostra-
tion, the opposition of bad men, and the
like? For every wound there is healing
in the grace of God.

3. The perfectness of Divine healing.
Other healers say, “‘ Peace, peace, when


443


there is no peace.” Others, “‘ Heal the
hurt of the daughter of My people
slightly.” We are not healed until God
heals us. God offers to heal us; our
disease and our sorrow are challenges te
prove His grace. What of the responsi-
bility of refusal ?

III. As seen in the order, the regu-
larity, and the stability of creation.

“ He telleth the number of the stars ;
He calleth them all by their names.”
Creation is a volume open to all eyes,
Read it, and see the might and gentle-
ness, the wisdom and patience, of God.
“ Lift up your eyes on high, and behold
who hath created these things, that
bringeth out their host by number: He
calleth them all by names by the great-
ness of His might, for that He is strong
in power; not one faileth.” Jesus
Christ taught us to reason from the
natural to the spiritual; “‘ Consider the
lilies,” d&c.; ‘‘ Behold the fowls of the
air,” &e.

(1.) God takes care of the great uni-
verse, may I not trust Him with my life?

(2.) Where God’s will is unquestioned,
the result is light, beauty, music: why
should I oppose myself to its gracious
dominion ?

Let the Church be of good courage.
“When the Lord shall build up Zion,
He shall appear in His glory.” “ The
gates of hell shall not prevail.”

Are we truly broken in heart? Hear,
then, the Saviour: “ He hath sent Me
to bind up the broken-hearted,”—sent
His Son to heal us,

Are we contrite, humble, penitent?
“Thus saith the high and lofty One
that inhabiteth eternity, whose name is
Holy: I dwell in the high and holy
place, with him also that is of a contrite
and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of
the humble, and to revive the heart of
the contrite ones.” Our brokenness
attracts Him. The cry of our sorrows
brings Him down from heaven.—Joseph
Parker, D.D,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


POALM OXLVI.





Tae Supremety Great.
(Verse 5.)


Here are three aspects of the Divine
greatness :-—
I. God is great in His essence.


“Great is the Lord.” He is great by
reason of— :

1. His spirituality, “God is a
Spirit.” Spiritual substances are more -


excellent than material, ‘The more
perfect anything is in the rank of
creatures, the more spiritual and simple
it is, as gold is the more pure and perfect
that hath least mixture of other metals.”
So God is a pure and perfect Spirit: He
“is light, and in Him is no darkness at
ell.” In Him there is “spirituality
without any matter, perfection without
any shadow or taint of imperfection.”

2. His self-existence. His Being is
underived and independent, With Him
life is essential. He isthe “I Am.” His
name is Jehovah, the Self-Existent One.

3. His infinity, (1.) He is infinite
as regards duration. ‘From everlast-
ing to everlasting Thou art God.” He
is eternal in the largest sense of that
word. He endures always. He “in-
habiteth eternity.” (2.) He is infinite
as regards space. He is present every-
where, from infinity to infinity, ‘There
is no part of the universe, no portion of
space, uninhabited by God, none where-
in this Being of perfect power, wisdom,
and benevolence is not essentially pre-
sent. Could we with the swiftness of
a sunbeam dart ourselves beyond the
limits of the creation, and for ages con-
tinue our progress in infinite space, we
should still be surrounded with the
Divine presence, nor ever be able to reach
that space where God is not.” (Comp.
Ps. cxxxix. 7-12 ; Jer. xxiii. 23, 24.)

4. His unity. There is but one God.
“The Lord our God is one Lord.” “If
God be an infinitely-perfect Being,” says
Bishop Wilkins, “it is impossible to
imagine two such beings at the same
time, because they must have several
perfections or the same, If the former,
neither of them can be God, because
neither of them has all possible perfec-
tions. If they have both equal perfectiona,


neither of them ean be absolutely per-
fect, because it is not so great to have
the same equal perfections in common
with another as to be superior to all
others.” Well did Masillon exclaim,
* God alone is great !”

II. God is great in power.

“ And of great power.” ‘ The power
of God is that ability and strength
whereby He can bring to pass whatsoever
He please ; whatsoever His infinite wis-
dom can direct, and whatsoever the in-
finite purity of His will can resolve,”
This power is manifested—

1. In the creation and sustentation of
the universe. “He spake, and it was
done,” &. “ He is mighty in strength,”
&e. (Job ix. 4-10). “He stretcheth
out the north over the empty place,”
d&c, (Job xxvi. 7-14). “By Him all
things consist.”

2. In the government of the wniverse.
He rules over holy angels. ‘ He maketh
His angels spirits,” d&c. He presides
over human governments. He “bringeth
the princes to nothing,” &e. (Isa. xl 23,
24). ‘‘ He putteth down one, and setteth
up another.” ‘He doeth according to
His will in the army of heaven, and
among the inhabitants of the earth,” dc,
He rules even over His enemies, “ Surely
the wrath of man shall praise Thee,” dsc,
“The angels which kept not their first
estate,” dc, (Jude 6).

3. In the redemption of mankind. We
see here the power of infinite wisdom
and truth and love overcoming the anta-
gonism of rebellious wills, the alienation
of estranged hearts, &c. This is the
grandest, sublimest display of the power
of God. He is “ mighty to save.”

The consideration of the almightiness
of God should (1.) prove a warning to
the wicked. He has power to fulfil His
threatenings, ‘Hast thou an arm like
God?” (2.) Awaken awe tn all men.
We should reverently fear so great a
Being. (3.) Encourage faith in His
people, Omnipotence is pledged for their
help and keeping, “The Lord is the
strength of my life; of whom shall I be

443


PSALM OXLVEL


HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY: PSALMS.





afraid?® “If God be for us, who can
be against us?”

IIL. God is great in knowledge.

“His understanding is infinite.”

1. He knows Himself. “The Spirit
searcheth all things, yea, the deep things
of God,” d&e, (1 Cor. ii. 10, 11).

2. He knows all creatures, Angels,
men, and even the meanest creatures,
(Comp. Job xxxviii. 41 ; Pa. 1.11; Luke
xii. 6, 7.) And He knows them clearly
and completely. Thus He is perfectly
acquainted with man’s thoughts (Ps.
exxxix. 2; Ezek. xi, 5), and secret sins
(Ps. xc. 8), and necessities (Matt, vi. 32),
and circumstances, and works, and ways


(Pa cxxxix. 1-6).

3. He knows all events. (1.) All past
events. He never forgets anything,
This knowledge is clearly implied in
Eccles, xii. 14; Rev. xx. 12. (2.) All
present events. Nothing escapes the
vigilance of His eye (Heb. iv. 12, 13),
(3.) All future events (Isa. xli, 21-26 ;
Acts xv. 18). (4.) All possible events.
All the possibilities of all things, and be-
ings, and worlds must be present to Him
“ whose understanding is infinite.”


The consideration of this infinite know-
ledge of the holy God should (i) Check
sin both in thought and in deed. You
cannot sin in secret, ‘ There is no dark-
ness nor shadow of death where the
workers of iniquity may hide them-
selves,” (ii) Humble all pride of tntel-
lect. As compared with God, what does
even the most intelligent man know?
“We are but of yesterday, and know
nothing,” &c. (iii) Destroy all notions
of our self-righteousness. In the pre-
sence of this holy and heart-searching
Being, “ Who can say, I have made my
heart clean, I am pure from my sin?”
(iv.) Inspire confidence in the triumph of
His cause, His enemies cannot outwit
Him. His designs are formed in infinite
knowledge and wisdom. “The gates
of hell shall not prevail against” His
Church. (v.) Inspire confidence in His
providential dealings with us, His in-
finite knowledge is pledged to all who
trust in Him, He knows their trials
and dangers and sorrows, their wants
and ways; and He will guide and sup-
port them, d&c, “He knoweth our
frame,” &ec,


Toe PROVIDENCE AND PLEASURE OF Gop A Reason ror Praisine Him.
(Verse 7-11.)


Let us consider—

L The providence ef God. The
Psalmist exhibits the providential agency
of God in—

1. Presiding over the elements, ‘‘ He
covereth the heaven with clouds, He
prepareth rain for the earth.” (Comp.
Job v. 10; xxviii. 25, 26; xxxvi. 27,
28; Ps. civ. 13.) The clouds do not
cover the heavens, neither does the rain
descend upon the earth by chance; both
are governed by fixed laws; and these
laws were appointed and are controlled
by God. He is sovereign over all the
arrangements and forces of nature,

2. Creating vegetation. ‘ He maketh
grass to grow upon tke mountains.”
The mountains are mentioned because
Palestine was a mountain-land. “A
land of hills aad valleys, and drinketh
water of the rain of heaven” (Deut, xi.
11). And these, which are not watered
by the rivers, God clothes with verdure

444


and beauty. (Comp. Ps. civ. 14; Acta
xiv. 17.)

3. Providing for the wants of His
creatures, ‘‘ He giveth to the beast his
food, and to the young ravens which
cry.” (See our remarks on Ps. civ. 21,
27, 28; cxlv. 15, 16.) The ravens are
mentioned here rather than other birds
probably because they are offensive
birds, in order to show that no creature,
however regarded by man, is uncared
for by God. Seeing that He supplies
the needs of the ravens, is not the con-
clusion irresistible that He will provide
for His children? (Comp. Matt. vi. 26;
Luke xii. 6, 7.) :

IL The pleasure of God

1. Jt 18 not in those who trust in thetr
own resources. “He delighteth not in
the strength of the horse; He taketh
not pleasure in the legs of a man.”
Horse and foot soldiers are here meant ;
the cavalry and infantry of an army


aes


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.
a pt a


God has no delight in armies great and
strong, or in those who trust in them.
Perowne expresses his idea of the mean-
ing of the verse thus: “His delight is
not in those who trust in their own
strength and swiftness.” It is one thing
to trust in great and mighty armies and
skilful generals; it is another, and in
the sight of God a far nobler thing, to
say with Jehoshaphat, “ O our God, we
have no might against this great com-
pany,” &c. (2 Chron. xx, 12).

2. It is in those who reverence and trust
in Him. “The Lord taketh pleasure
in them that fear Him, in those that
hope in His mercy.” ‘A holy fear of
God,” says Matthew Henry, “and hope
in God, not only may consist, but must
concur. In the same heart, at the same
time, there must be both a reverence of
His majesty and a complacency in His
goodness, both a believing dread of His
wrath and a believing expectation of
His favour; not that we must hang in
suspense between hope and fear, but we
must act under the gracious influences
of hope and fear. Our fear must save
our hope from swelling into presumption,
and our hope must save our fear from
sinking into despair.” God delights in
the man who looks to Him for all good,
who reverences Him in all things, and
who leans upon Him at all times and in
all circumstances. Man’s confidence in
God is a pleasure to Him. He loves to
be trusted by His creatures,

IIL The praise of God.-


PSALM OXLVE,


“Sing unto Jehovah with thanks
giving; sing praise upon the harp unto
our God.” The praise which man offers
unto God is here represented as—

1. A response jor Divine favours,
“Sing unto the Lord.” The funda-
mental signification of the word here
translated “sing” is to reply, to
snuswer; and, according to First, as
used here it means “always to sing tn
reply, not to sing merely.” Conant
translates: Answer Jehovah with
thanksgiving.” And Moll: “‘ Answer
to Jehovah.’ There is no allusion here
to an antiphonal choral song, as in
Exod, xv. 21, but a song of praise is
called for as the answer of grateful men,
to the honour of the Divine Giver (Exod.
xxxii. 18 ; Num. xxi. 17 ; Isa. xxvii. 2).”
The idea seems ‘to be, that we are te
make a suitable response or answer to
the manifold favours which we have
received at the hand of God.” God
blesses man by the beatowal cf His gifts,
and man responds to God by the pre
sentation of praise to Him.

2, An expression of gratitude for Di-
vine favours. “Answer unto Jehovah
with thanksgiving,” &. A grateful re-
collection of the goodness of God to us
should find expression in our songs to
Him. In our hymns of praise His bless-
ings to us should be thankfully acknow-
ledged, and the glory of them should be
given to Him alone,

In the spirit of such worship let us
endeavour to live.


Grass, AND ITS Moran ANALOGIES.
(Verse 8.)


He maketh grass to grow upon the mountains.”


Mr. Ruskin in his Modern Painters
(IIL. Pt. iv. ch. xiv. § 51, 52) says
some beautiful and suggestive things
concerning grass,

“ Gather a single blade of grass, and
examine for a minute, quietly, its nar-
row sword-shaped strip of fluted green.
Nothing, as it seems there, of not-
able goodness or beauty. A very little
strength, and a very little tallness, and
a few delicate long lines meeting in a
point—not a perfect point neither, but


blunt and unfinished, by no means a
creditable or apparently much-cared-for
example of Nature’s workmanship ;
made, as it seems, only to be trodden
on to-day, and to-morrow to be cast into
the oven ; and a little pale and hollow
stalk, feeble and flaccid, leading down
to the dull brown fibres of roots. And
yet, think of it well, and judge whether
of all the gorgeous flowers that beam
in summer air, and of all strong and
goodly trees, pleasant to the ee or good


PRALW OXLVIL,





for food—stately palm and pine, strong
ash and oak, scented citron, burdened
vine—there be any by man so deeply
loved, by God so highly graced, as that
narrow point of feeble green, ... .
Consider what we owe merely to the
meadow grass, to the covering of the
dark ground by that glorious enamel, by
the companies of those soft, and count-
less, and peaceful spears. The fields !
Follow but forth for a little time the
thoughts of all that we ought to recog-
nise in those words. All spring and
summer is in them—the walks by silent,
scented paths—the rests in noonday
heat—the joy of herds and flocks—the
power of all shepherd life and meditation
—the life of sunlight upon the world,
falling in emerald streaks, and failing
in soft blue shadows, where else it would
have struck upon the dark mould, or
scorching dust— pastures beside the
pacing brooks—soft banks and knolls
of lowly hills—thymy slopes of down
overlooked by the blue line of lifted sea
—crisp lawns all dim with early dew. or
amooth in evening warmth of barred
sunshine, dinted by happy feet, and
softening in their fall the sound of
loving voices : all these are summed in
those simple words ; and these are not
all. We may not measure to the full
the depth of this heavenly gift, in our
own land; though still, as we think of
it longer, the infinite of that meadow
sweetness, Shakespeare’s peculiar joy,
would open on us more and more, yet
we have it but in part. Qo out in the
spring time, among the meadows that
slope from the shores of the Swiss lakes
to the roots of their lower mountains,
here, mingled with the taller gentians
and the white narcissus, the grass grows
deep and free; and as you follow the
winding mountain paths, beneath arch-
ing boughs all veiled and dim with
blossom,—paths that for ever droop and
rise over the green banks and mounds
sweeping down in scented undulation,
steep to the blue water, studded here
and there with new-mown heaps, filling
all the air with fainter sweetness,— look
up towards the higher hills, where the
waves of everlasting green roll silently
into their long inlets among the shadows
446





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





of the pines; and we may, perbaps, st
last know the meaning of those quiet
words of the 147th Psalm, ‘ He maketh
grass to grow upon the mountains,’

“There are also several lessons sym-
bolically connected with this subject,
which we must not allow to escape us.
Observe, the peculiar characters of the
grass, which adapt it especially for the
service of man, are its apparent hums
lity and cheerfulness.”

e discover in the grass an illustra
tration of —

L Ohristian humility.

It illustrates—

1. The usefulness of humble service,
Grass ‘‘seems created only for lowest .
service,—appointed to be trodden on
and fed upon.” Yet of what great use
and value it is! In like manner the
lowly services of humble souls are
indispensably necessary and unspeak-
ably precious.

2. The beauty of humble service. To
@ person of pure and refined taste grass
is very beautiful. To gaze upon it is
in the highest degree restful and grate-
ful to the tired eye. How beautiful is
a life of humble service! Our Lord
“came not to be ministered unto, but
to minister.” He said, “I am among
you as He that serveth.” He “ made
Himself of no reputation, and took
upon Him the form of a servant,” d&c.

3. The divine acceptance of humble
service. ‘Whosoever shall give to
drink unto one of these little ones a
cup of cold water,” &. The Most
High has declared His special regard
for the humble. (See Prov. xvi. 19;
xviii, 12; xxii, 4; xxix. 23; Isa. lvii
15 ; 1 Pet. v. 5.)

Let us cultivate lowly thoughts of
ourseives ; tor—(1.) They are most likely
to be true. (2.) They will promote our
usefulness, (3.) They attract the Divine
regard.

IL Christian cheerfulness.

Grass illustrates—

1. Cheerfulness tn the prosperity of
others, When spring comes the grass
“ rejoices with all the earth,—glowing
with variegated flame of flowers,—wav-
ing in soft depth of fruitful strength.”
The Christian rejoices with them that


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


Fejoice ; he looks “not on his own
things, but also on the things of
others ;” he is animated by the charity
which ‘“seeketh not her own.”

2. Cheerfulness in the midst of adver
sity. When winter comes, the grass,
“though it will not mock its fellow-
plants by growing then, it will “not
pine and mourn, and turn colourless or
leafless as they. It is elways green,
and is only the brighter and gayer for
the hoar frost.” In like manner the
Christian “glories in tribulation,” &c.
(Rom. v. 3-5). He “reckons that the
sufferings of this present,” &c, (Rom.
viii. 18), Thus the truly pious are
eheerful in the midst of adversity.

3. Cheerfulness increased by adver


PeALM OXL VIL.


sity. Grass “seems to exult under all
kinds of violence and suffering. You
roll it, and it is stronger the next day ;
you mow it, and it multiplies its shoots,
as if it were grateful; you tread upon
it, and it only sends up richer perfume.”
Thus afflictions increase the serenity and
cheerfulness and strength of humble
souls. The proud are hardened and
embittered by them; the humble are
enriched and blessed. Their “ chastening
yieldeth the peaceable fruit of righteous-
ness.” (Comp. James i, 2, 3; 1 Pet.
i, 6-9.)

Let us learn the lessons which the
grass may teach us (Matt. vi. 28-30),

Let us cultivate humility of spirit,


Praisz FROM EXxcre.Luentr SooirTy AND FoR ExceLtent Reasons,
(Verses 12-20.)


We have here another paragraph in
this hymn of praise, in which the poet
appeals especially to Jerusalem to cele-
brate the praise of Jehovah ; and men-
tions the special reasons which its in-
habitants had for doing so. Here are
two main lines of thought—

L Praise from excellent society.

“ Praise Jehovah, O Jerusalem ; praise
thy God, O Zion.” By Jerusalem and
Zion the Psalmist means the chosen
people of God, the ancient Church. The
people of God are under special obliga-
tions to praise Him.

1. They have a clearer knowledge of
Him than others, They have His re-
vealed mind and will. He manifests
Himself unto them as He does not unto
the world. He bestows upon them His
Holy Spirit for their instruction and
eanctification.

2. They have a closer relation to Him
than others. “Thy God” (ver. 12).
Jehovah was in covenant relation with
Israel. He speaks of them as “ My
people Israel.” “I will walk among
you, and will be your God, and ye shall
be My people.” “Say unto Zion, Thou
art My people.” Christians, in like
manner, are now spoken of as the people
of God. (See Acts xv. 14; Tit. ii. 14 ;
Heb. viii 10; 1 Pet. ii 9, 10.) Into


this relationship they were called witha
view to the praise of God, as Peter dis-
tinctly states (1 Pet. ii. 9).

3. They recewe richer blessings from
Him than others. This is a result of
their closer relation to Him. It was so
in the case of Israel (Lev. xxvi. 1-13).
It is so in the case of Christians, They
are guided by Him (Rom. viii. 14);
heirs of Him (Ibid. 17) ; interceded for
by His Spirit (Ibid. 26) ; have all good
guaranteed by Him (Ibid. 32); have
communion with Him (1 John i. 3); are
called and kept by Him unto a glorious
inheritance (1 Pet. i. 3-5). Therefore
they are under special obligation to
praise Him.

IL Praise for excellent reasons.

1. For the blessings of His providence,
‘He hath blessed thy children within
thee.” Three of these blessings are
specified by the poet, (1.) Protection.
‘*‘ He hath strengthened the bars of thy
gates.” The reference is to the restora-
tion of the walls of Jerusalem and the
setting up of the gates by Nehemiah
(Nek. vii. 1-3). God had enabled
them to succeed in this, notwithstand-
ing crafty and determined opposition.
“‘God’s almighéy protection is the true
defence of a country; without it all
other defences can neither help or en-

447


PRALM OXLYEL


dure.” God is the guardian of His
people and of His Church. (2.) Peace.
‘He maketh peace in thy borders.” The
Margin is correct: “Who maketh thy
border peace,” (Comp. Isa. lx. 17, 18:
“T will also make thy officers peace,”
dc.) “If there be trouble anywhere,”
says Matthew Henry, “it is in the
borders, the marches of a country; the
frontier towns lie most exposed, so that,
if there be peace in the borders, there is
a universal peace, a Mercy we can never
be sufficiently thankful for.” Peace in
the sonl, in society, and in the world is
the gift of God. The universal supre-
macy of the spirit and principles of
Christ would result in universal peace,
(3.) Plenty. “ Hea filleth thee with the
finest of the wheat.” The literal render-
ing is, “‘ He satisfieth thee with the fat of
wheat.” (Comp. Ps. Ixxxi 16.) God
gave them abundance of provisions, and
those of the best kind. Here, then, we
have reasons for praising God.

2. For His agency in nature, “He
sendeth forth His commandment upon
earth,” &c. (vers. 15-18). He is here
represented as—(1.) The controller of
Nature. All its changes are ordered and
effected by Him. And they are effected
with ease. “ He sendeth forth His com-
mandment,” and it is at once fulfilled.
“ He spake, and it was done,” &c. (Pa.
xxxiii. 9). They are effected also with
rapidity, ‘His word runneth very
swiftly.” Snow, frost, ice, cold, warmth,
wind, all obey Him without reluctance
and without delay. (2.) The proprietor
of Nature. Itis “ Hisice, His cold, His
wind.” God is still the sovereign Pro
prietor of His universe. (3.) The in-
structor of man by means of Nature. («)
His sovereignty over the changes of
Nature illustrates His control over the
changes of the life of His people.
Hengstenberg: “In vers) 15-18 there
is probably not only an allusion to the
omnipotence of God as manifested in
Nature not less than in the government
of His people, but at the same time an
allegorical representation of this govern-
ment, so that the Psalmist perceived in
the operations of God in Nature the
image of His administration in Grace—
im the snow, hoar-frost, and frost, an

448


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY; PSALHA





image of the now no longer existin
time of trouble; in the spring (ver. 18
an image of the returning salvation,
(Comp. the similar figurative representa-
tions in Ps, cvii.)” He regulates the
vicissitudes of their life, and causes them
to “work together for good to them
that love God.” (8) His agency in ~
nature shows the futility of opposing
Him. ‘Who can stand before His
cold?” “If we cannot stand before
the cold of His frosts, how can we stand
before the heat of His wrath?” (y) The
ready obedience of Nature to Him
is both a rebuke and an example to
man. The immediate and universal
obedience of Nature is a reproach to
disobedient man. He alone is rebel-
lious, &c. He may profitably imitate
winds and stars, heat and cold, in
their prompt fulfilment of the Creator’s
will,

3. For the blessings of His revelation,
“He showeth His word unto Jacob,”
&c. (vers. 19, 20). ‘God’s works in
Nature,” says Perowne, “are for all
men; ‘He maketh His sun to rise on
the evil and on the good, and sendeth
rain on the just and on the unjust’
(Matt. v. 45); but there is a special
privilege belonging to His chosen people.
They, and they alone in the world,
have received the lively oracles of His
mouth. (Comp. Rom. iii. 1, 2.)” De-
litzsch: “The joyful Hallelujah is not
sounded because these other nations do
not possess such a positive knowledge
of God’s judgments, but because Israel
does possess it. It is declared abun-
dantly in other places that this know-
ledge of Israel shall be the means of
making salvation the common property |
of the whole world of nations.” And
Barnes: ‘There is no nation now 80
favoured as the nation that has the
revealed will of God—the Bible. The
possession of that Book gives a nation a
vast superiority in all respects over all
others. In laws, customs, morals, in-
telligence, social life, purity, charity,
prosperity, that Book elevates a nation
at once, and scatters blessings which
can be derived from nothing else. Tha
highest benevolence that could be showed
to any nation would be to put it in pos


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS,





session of the Word of God in the lan-
guage of the people.”

Here, then, we have abundant and
excellent reasons for uniting in the


P@sLM CXLVM,





praise of God. Let us praise Him not
only occasionally with our voice, but
constantly by the loyal obedience of our
life.


WINTER, AND ITs Morau Svuagestioxs.
(Verses 16, 17.)


The Psalmist believed in God’s sup-
remacy over Nature. He saw His hand
in all its various changes, The more
we discover of law and order in Nature
the more should we be impressed with
the wisdom and power of God; and so
we should render to Him a more intel-
ligent worship, and exercise in Him a
firmer trust.

The Psalmist also believed in the
moral significance of Nature. So also
did David: “The heavens declare the
glory of God,” &c. Our great dramatist
speaks of finding
Ee eam in trees, books in the running

roo

Sermons in stones, and good in everything.”
And the Supreme Teacher read and
pointed out the significance of Nature:
“‘ Consider the lilies of the field,” d&c.

The seasons of the year are full of
instruction, Spring is a manifestation
of the beauty and tenderness and love
of God; summer, with its light and
heat, speaks of His glory; autumn
proclaims His bountifulness ; and winter
indicates the stern aspects of His char-
acter. Let us consider some of the
suggestions of winter.

I, Winter indicates the severity of
God.

It hints that there is wrath as well
as love in God, Nor is it alone in its
testimony in this respect. Earthquakes,
floods, storms, also testify to a terrible
power in Nature, and to something
answering to it in the God of Nature.
(Comp. Rom. xi. 22; Rev, vi. 16, 17.)

IL Winter suggests the retributive-
ness of the Divine arrangements.

Many of those who during the pre-
ceding seasons have been guilty of in-
dolence, intemperance, or extravagance,
will find the bitter result now. It is
In winter that the defective garment
is painfully felt, and the dreary home


von.


seems utterly intolerable, ‘ Whoso
breaketh an hedge, a serpent shall bite
him.” These retributive laws are at
work in the spiritual realm also,

III. Some of the things which are
peculiar to this season have special
instruction for us.

1. Snow illustrates the wisdom and
tastefulness of God. “Snow is congealed
vapour formed in the air by the vapour
being frozen there before it is collected
into drops large enough to form hail,
In the descent of the vapour to the
earth it is frozen, and descends in the
numerous variety of crystallised forms
in which the flakes appear. Perhaps
there is nothing more fitted to excite
pleasing conceptions of the wisdom of
God—not even the variety of beauty
in flowers—than the various forms of
crystals in which snow appears. These
crystals present an almost endless
variety of forms. Captain Scoresby,
who gave much attention to the subject
and to other Arctic phenomena, says
that, ‘The extreme beauty and the
endless variety of the microscopic objects
perceived in the animal and vegetable
kingdoms are perhaps fully equalled,
if not surpassed, in both particulars of
beauty and variety, by the crystals of
snow. Some of the general varieties in
the figures of the crystals may be referred
to the temperature of the air; but the
particular and endless modification of
the same classes of crystals can only be
referred to the will and pleasure of the
First Great Cause, whose works, even
the most minute and evanescent, and in
regions the most remote from human
observation, are altogether admirable.’”
The Divine wisdom and love of beauty
are everywhere manifest,

2. Snow tlustrates the power of God.
“Not the thunder itself speaks God’s
power more than the snow. It bears

449


POALM CXLVIL


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY ; PSALMS,





His omnipotence, soft and beautiful as
it seems, While it is yet in the air, it is
lord of the ocean and the prairies. Ships
are blinded by it. It is a white dark-
ness, All harbours are silent under this
plashy embargo, The traveller hides,
The prairies are given up to its behest,
and woe to him that dares to venture
against the omnipotence of soft-falling
snow upon those trackless wastes! ...
But when flake is joined to flake, and
the frosts within the soil join their forces
to the frosts descended from the clouds,
who shall unlock their clasped hands?
Who shall disannul their agreement? or
who shall dispossess them of their place 4
Gathered in the mountains, banked and
piled till they touched the very clouds
again in which once they were born and
rocked, how terrible is their cold, and
more terrible their stroke when, slipping,
some avalanche comes down the moun-
tain-side, the roar and the snow-stroke
loud as thunder and terrible as light-
ning! God gives to the silent snow a
voice, and clothes its innocence and
weakness with a power like His own.”

3. Snow also illustrates “the power of
littles,” Small, insignificant, and feeble
in the extreme is the snow-flake when
alone; but when multitudes of them are
united and firmly frozen, their power is
dreadful—sometimes irresistible and ter-
ribly destructive.

IV. Winter is an emblem of old age.

Poets and artists in personifying win-
ter have generally pictured it as an aged


man or woman, Spring is an emblem
of youth; summer of young manhood ;
autumn of mature manhood; and then
our life passes into the winter of old age.
How frequently does old age seem like
winter—cold, cheerless, barren! But as
spring is being prepared in winter, and
winter shall pass into spring, so the aged
Christian is preparing for eternal youth,
and the winter of his age shall pass into
the “everlasting spring” of heaven.

V. Winter is an emblem of the pre-
sent state of the bodies of the departed.

In winter Nature is not dead; it
only seems so, It is full of life and
activities ; and the result will be mani-
fest in spring. So also with the bodies
sown in ‘‘ God’s acre.” God shall awake
them from their deep wintry slumbers.
“ All that are in the graves shall hear
His voice,” d&c.

VI. Winter is an emblem of the
present moral state of the world as it
often appears to us,

We see much of evil and suffering,
much of darkness and mystery, much of
madness and more of sin amongst men.
But it will not be so always. God is at
work ; and out of the darkness He will
educe light, &e,


“*Ye noble few who here unbending stand
Beneath life's preasure, yet bear up awhile,
And what your bounded view, which only

saw
A little part, deemed evil is no more;
The storms of wintry time will quickly pass,
And one unbounded spring encircle all.”


Tae Diving Goopnzss mx Narurz, PRovipEence, anp GRAcE,
(Verse 18.)


We owe much to Divine revelation for
the more exalted views we entertain of
the character, the perfections, and the
grace of God. It was the distinction of
the Jews that they possessed “the lively
oracles.” Hence the superiority of their
faith and worship over those of neigh-
bouring nations,

Men mould their idols in their own
shape and image; and the worshipper
soon reflects the character of the idols
he adores, God condemns thi The
controversy between Him and man has

450


been,—“Thou thoughtest that I was
altogether as thyself.”

I. We see much of the Divine good-
ness in the vast economy of Nature
and Providence,

“He sendeth out His word, and
melteth them,” &, God changes the
times and seasons—

1. In an unexpected moment. When
the frost was at its height.

The wintry season was sometimes very
severe in Judea and Palestine; usually
lasted about six weeks; though some-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


PSALM OXLVII.





times intermingled with casual mitiga-
tions, Severe about Jerusalem—having
both hail and snow. But when the sky
is agitated by those tempestuous winds
called Levanters, the cold is so piercing,
the conflict so great of hail, ice, snow,
and rain, that many of the poor people
and their cattle perish. And it is dread-
ful to be at the mercy of armed bands
at those times. An Oriental describing
a defeated army near Ascalon says: “In
haste they threw away their armour and
clothes, but soon sunk under the cold,
together with want of food, slippery and
rugged roads, which were everywhere
furrowed and broken up by torrents, that
they were taken captives in the woods
and on the mountains, and threw them-
selves into the hands of their enemies
rather than perish” How welcome,
then, the sudden and unexpected change
in the text! ‘He causeth His wind,”
&c.

2. By very simple means. The south
wind particularly ;—for then the waters,
before still and motionless, flow abun-
dantly. So itis by very slight means
that God in His Providence relieves
trial and restores peace. (Comp. Ps.
exxvi. 1, 4.) A word of advice from a
friend may change our plans—a letter
—or an accidental interview with a
stranger, d&c,

II. We owe much to God in the
sconomy of Grace.

God has His softening dispensa-
tions,


1. In the conversion of the sinner it ia
not all terror, but much milduess, The
Lord opened the heart of Lydia. By
nature the heart of man is hard and
impenetrable, like the earth beneath
the frost; cold and stubborn; without
any wirmth of love to God and Christ
and spiritual things, But when God
sends His word, accompanied with
Divine power, it melts them, When
the south wind of His blessed Spirit
penetrates the heart, they are con-
vinced of sin and righteousness and
judgment.

2. In the edification of believers it is
not all terror, They owe much to Bar-
nabas the son of Consolation, as well as
to Boanerges the son of Thunder. The
strong wind, earthquake, and fire were
succeeded by the “still small voice,”
When the Sun of Righteousness arises
on them, it is with healing in His
wings, ‘ Awake, O north wind; and
come, thou south”... to show that
every wind may blow kindly to the
Christian,

3. In the descent of the Dark Valley
it is not all terror, Death comes with
gentle step. We tread on _ velvet.
Stephen pleading, &. (Acts vii. 59,
60.

ve We shall owe much to God ina
future world.

The curse banished. A more favour-
ing constitution of things. “ Long nighta
and darkness dwell below.” — Samuel
Thodey.


PSALM CXLVIIL


INTRODUCTION,


*¢}n this splendid anthem the Psalmist calls upon the whole creation, in its two great divi-
gions (according to the Hebrew conception) of heaven and earth, to praise Jehovah. Things
with and things without life, beings rational and irrational, are summoned to join the mighty
chorus. The Psalm is an expression of the loftiest devotion, and embraces at the same time
the most comprehensive view of the relation of the creature to the Creator. Whether it ia
exclusively the utterance of a heart filled to the full with the thought of the infinite majesty of
God, or whether it is also an anticipation, a prophetic forecast, of the final glory of creation,
when, at the manifestation of the sons of God, the creation itself shall also be redeemed from the
bondage of corruption (Rom. viii, 18-23), and the homage of praise shall indeed be rendered by
ell things that are in heaven and earth and under the earth, is a question into which we need
not enter The former seems to my mind the more probable view; but the other is as old es
Hilary, who sees the end of the exhortation of the Psalm to be, ‘Ut 0b depulsam sacult vani-
tatem creatura omnis, ez magnis oficiorum suorum laboribus absoluta, e in beato aa Sea


PO4LM CXLVI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; PSALMS.


rr


aliquande respirans, Deum suum et leta prodioat o quicta, & ipsa secundum Apostolum €3


ploriam beate eternitatis assumpta.’


‘The Psalm consists of two equal parts—
6], The praise of God in heaven (vers, 1-6).


“II, The praise of God on earth (vera, 7-12).”—Perowna


Gop’s Praisk IN THE HEAVENS,
(Verses 1-6.)


The opening verse of the Psalm “is
not to be restricted merely to the angels.
It is the prelude comprising all after-
wards enumerated, angels, sun, and
moon,” stars, highest heavens, and
waters above the heavens. Notice—

I. The praise of God by heavenly
beings.

“Praise ye Him, all His angels;
praise ye Him, all His hosts.” “His
hosts” we understand as signifying His
angels, as in 1 Kings xxii. 19. The
expression indicates (1.) Their immense
number. ‘The number of them was
ten thousand times ten thousand, and
thousands of thousands” (Rev, v. 11).
(2.) Their disciplined order. Like a
vast army they execute the commands
of the Lord, their great Leader. The
praise which they offer to God is—

1. Voluntary. They are intelligent
beings, and possess moral freedom; and
their worship is free, fervent, and joy-
ous. The hosts of stars praise God
without will ; the hosts of angels praise
Him in full and hearty exercise of their
will.

2. Constant. The praise of God is
the vital breath of their being. ‘“ Their
worship no interval knows.” “ They
have no rest day and night, saying,
Holy, holy, holy,” &. And yet they
ever rest ; for all their service is refresh-
ing and rapturous.

3. Thorough. They praise God with
all their powers,—with their songs and
their services ; with their lips and their
lives; with their reverent adoration
(Isa, vi. 2, 3), and their ready obedience
(Ps, citi, 20, 21; Dan. ix. 21-23),

Ii. The praise of God by heavenly
bodies.

“Praise ye Him, sun and moon,” &e.
(vers, 3-6). ‘The heaven of heavens ”
is the highest heavens. “The waters
above the heavens” are, we think, the
clouds, (Comp. Gen, i. 7.) Thus in

452


the first member of ver. 4 the highest
region of heaven is spoken of, and in
the second member the lowest region of
heaven. These heavenly bodies and
places are called upon to praise Jehovah
because they were,

l. Created by Him. “Let them
praise the Name of Jehovah; for He
commanded, and they were created.”
How great is the power that created alt
these, and that with such perfect case /
He merely uttered His commands;
and they came at once into existence,
(Comp. Gen. i. 3; Ps. xxxiii. 6, 9.)

2. Sustained by Him. ‘He hath
also stablished them for ever and ever.”
Perowne: “And He made them to stand
(fast) for ever and ever.” The stability
and permanence of the heavenly bodies
are owing to the omnipotent will of
God. He commands, and they stand
fast. ‘'‘ By Him all things consist.”

3. Governed by Him. ‘He hath
made a decree which shall not pass.”
Perowne: “ ‘He hath given them a de
cree, and they transgress it not:’ lit.
‘ And none of them transgresses it ;’ for
the verb is in the singular, and therefore
distributive. . . . The verb is never
used elsewhere of the passing away of a
law, but always of the transgression of
a law.” “The law,” says Hengstenberg,
“is the sphere of being which is ap-
pointed to each part of creation, and in
which it is held by the Divine omni-
potence ; as, for example, the stars must
pursue their course, the upper and lower
waters must remain continually distinct.”
He has marked out the orbits in which
the heavenly bodies “move; He has so
bound them that they perform their re-
volutions with unerring accuracy in the
very path which He has prescribed. So
accurate are their movements that they
can be predicted with exact precision ;
and so uniform, that any succession of
ages does not vary or affect them.”


: HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PSALM OXLVINL


et


In thus fulfilling their course, and
answering so perfectly the design of their
Creator, they praise Him. As a faith-
ful and masterly rerdering of The
Messiah is the most eloquent tribute
to the splendid genius of Handel; as
St. Paul’s cathedral is the grandest
memorial of Sir Christopher Wren ; so
the stability and order, the serviceable-
ness and beauty of God’s creations
praise Him, They exhibit His power,
and wisdom, and guodness, &e. “ All
Thy works shall praise Thee.” “The
heavens declare the glory of God,” &e.
(See Exposition of Ps, xix. 1-6; cxlv,
10.)

III. The interest of godly men in
God’s praise in the heavens.


The devout Psalmist calls upon the
heavenly beings and bodies to praise
Jehovah. We may not infer from this
that they need any incitements from us
to awaken their praise to God ; but it is
an evidence that pious souls would have
Him praised universally. ‘When we
call upon the angels to praise God,” says
Matthew Henry, “we mean that we de-
sire God may be praised by the ablest
hands and in the best manner,—that we
are sure it is fit He should be so,—that
we are pleased to think He is so,—that
we have a spiritual communion with
those that dwell in His house above and
are still praising Him,—and that we have
come by faith, and hope, and holy lova,
to the ‘innumerable company of angela’”


Gop’s Praise on THE EARTH.
(Verses 7-14.)


Let us consider—

I. The varisty of God’s praise on
earth.

“Praise Jehovah from the earth, ye
dragons, and all deeps,” &c, The
Psalmist calls upon every province of
our world and every variety of life to
celebrate the praise of God. He sum-
mons—

1. The tnorganie creation. “Fire
end hail, snow and vapour, stormy
wind fulfilling His word; mountains
and all hills.” ‘“ Mountains and hills”
are mentioned probably because they are
the most conspicuous objects on earth,
and rise nearest to the heavens. The
“stormy wind” is named, because in its
wild course it seems to spurn all law,
and to defy all control, and yet it fulfils
the will of God and faithfully performs
His behests, The “fire” is probably
the lightning, and the “vapour” is not
mist, but smoke, answering to fire as
snow answers to hail.

2. The vegetable creation. “ Fruitful
trees, and all cedars.” FF ruit-trees are
mentioned in distinction from forest
trees, and because .of their usefulness,
“The cedars are named because they
especially proclaim the creative power
of God through their greatness and
majesty; on which account they are
ealled the cedars of God in Pa, lxxx. 19.”


3. The animal creation, “ Praise Je-
hovah from the earth, ye dragons and
all deeps, . . . Beasts, and all cattle,
creeping things, and flying fowl.” The
sea-monsters are named in particular, be-
cause “by their gigantic size they more
especially proclaim the omnipotence of
God’s creative power. The same end is
served by the description of leviathan in
the Book of Job.” By “ beasts and all
cattle” the poet probably intended to
set forth wild and tame beasts ; “those
which roam the forests, and those which
have been domesticated for the service
of man.” “ Creeping things and winged
fowl” “are grouped together for a
reason similar to that for which fruitful
trees and cedars, and beasts and cattle,
are grouped together, to embrace the
whole. The expression embraces the
loftiest and lowest; those which ascend
farthest above the earth, and those
which creep upon its surface,”

All these—the whole of the inorganic,
of the vegetable, and of the animal
creation—are summoned by the Psalmist
to praise God. According as they fulfit
the purposes for which they wee
created they may be said to unite in
the great chorus of praise to God, inas-
much as in their sphere and measure
they manifest the power, and wisdom,
and goodness of God. (See Exposition

453


PaaLM OXLVIIL





of the preceding verses, and of Ps, xix.
1-6 ; cxlv. 10.)

4. The rational creation, ‘ Kings of
the earth, and all peoples,” d&c. (vers. 11
-13) Perowne: “Man is mentioned
last, as the crown of all, ‘The first step
(see ver. 7) and the last are the same
as in Gen. i.” The Psalmist clearly in-
tends to include all men in His sum-
mons to praise God. (1.) Persons of all
ranks, “Kings of the earth, and all
people; princes, and all judges of the
earth.” The rulers and the ruled ; those
who have much authority and those
who have none; the high and the low.
Those high in position and in authority
are under special obligations to praise
God, and those in the lowest position
are not exempt from this obligation. (2.)
Persons of both sexes, ‘Young men
and maidens.” Men by their strength
and skill, women by their trust and
tenderness, &., must praise God. (3.)
Persons of all ages, “ Both young men
and maidens; old men and children.”
“Those in the morning of life,” says
Barnes, “ just entering on their career ;
just forming their character — with
ardour, elasticity, cheerfulness, hope ;—
let them consecrate all this to God :—let
all that there is in the buoyancy of their
feelings, in the melody of their voices,
in their ardour and vigour, be employed
In the praise and the service of God,
Old men, with what remains of life, and
children, with all that there is of joyous-
ness—let all unite in praising God. Life
as it closes, life as it begins, let it all be
devoted to God.”

As the unreasoning creation praises
God unconsciously, the rational creation
should praise Him intelligently and
voluntarily, By the songs of their
voices, by the affections of their hearts,
by the adoration of their spirits, and by
the obedience of their lives, all men
should praise God.

IL The universality of God’s praise
on earth.

The Psalmist calls for universal praise.
In the first part of the Psalm he sum-
mons all the heavens and the heavenly
bodies, and in the latter part of the
Psalm everything upon earth, to join
the grand anthem to the honour of God.

454


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY ; PSALMS.





The lower ranks of creation never fail
to praise God. ‘The material world,
with its objects sublimely great or
meanly little, as we judge them; ita
atoms of dust, its orbs of fire; the rock
that stands by the seashore, the water
that wears it away; the worm, a birth
of yesterday, which we trample under
foot ; the streets of constellations that
gleam perennial overhead ; the aspiring
palm-tree fixed to one spot, and the lions
that are sent out free ;—these incarnate
and make visible all of God their
natures will admit,” and thus they praise
Him. Man alone fails in the tribute
of praise to God. But this summons to
universal praise may be regarded as a
declaration of—

1. God's right. The homage of the
universe is due to Him.

2. The good man’s desire. The cry of
the heart of the godly man is, “Be
Thou exalted, O (od, above the heavens ;
Thy glory above all the earth.” ‘Give
unto the Lord, O ye kindreds of the
people,” &c. (Ps. xcvi. 7-9).

3. A fact which will be realised tn the
future. ‘All the ends of the world
shall remember,” &c. (Ibid. xx. 27).
‘“ All the earth shall worship Thee,” &c.
(Ibid. Ixvi. 4). “The earth shall be
full of the knowledge,” &c. (Isa. xi. 9).
“Unto Me every knee shall bow,” &c.
(Ibid. xlv. 23; Rom. xiv. 11).

If. The rationality of God’s praise
on earth.

It is manifestly and sublimely reason-
able that universal worship should be
offered to God. The Psalmist adduces
certain reasons for praising Him.

1. The glorious majesty of God, ‘Let
them praise the Name of Jehovah; for
His Name,” dec. (1.) His majesty is
supreme, ‘His Name alone is exalted,”
“Who ia the heaven can be compared
unto Jehovah?” &c, (Ps. Ixxxix. 6).
(2.) His majesty is universal. ‘His
glory is above the earth and heaven.”
As His majesty is universally manifest,
His praise also should be universal.

2. The great goodness of God. (1.)
In bestowing prosperity upon His people,
“He also exalteth the horn of His
people,—the praise of all His saints.”
The lifting up of their horn is the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PaaLM OXLVIL





bestowment of power and prosperity
upon His people, The line, “a praise
for all His saints,” is of doubtful inter-
pretation. Perowne: ‘This may either
be (1) in apposition with the whole
previous sentence, viz., the lifting up of
the horn is ‘a praise,’ a glory to His
beloved (comp. Isa. lxi. 3-11 ; Ixii. 7);
or (2) in apposition with the subject of
_the previous verb, God Himself is ‘a
praise (7.¢., object of praise) to,’ &c. So
the LXX., buvos, Jerome, laus. So the
P. B. V. gives the sense: ‘All His
saints shall praise Him.’” The latter
seems to us the more probable inter-
pretation, God had so blessed His
people that praise to Him was especially
binding upon them, and appropriate


from them. (2.) In bringing His
people near to Himself, ‘The children
of Israel, a people near unto Him.” The
Israelites were blessed spiritually above
other nations. ‘Unto them were com-
mitted the oracles of God.” ‘ Israelites ;
to whom pertaineth the adoption, and
the glory,” &c. “But now in Christ
Jesus ye” (Gentiles) ‘who sometimes
were far off are made nigh by the blood
of Christ.” In these things we have the
most cogent reasons for praise to God,
That man should praise Him is more
than reasonable ; it is obligatory; it ia
sacredly binding. Not to praise Him
is to manifest an utter want of reverence,
and to be guilty of basest ingratitude,
“Praise ye the Lord.”


A Summons To UNIvEeRsAL PrRalsz.
(Verses 11-13.)


We regard these verses as suggesting
three aspects of God’s revelation of
Himself :—

I As adapted to persons of all
ranks, and of the most varied duties.

“‘ Kings of the earth, and all people;
princes, and all judges of the earth.”
God’s revelation of His mind and will
must be adapted to these, or this
summons to praise Him would be
unreasonable. It is so adapted—

1. Because of its provision for the
needs which they have in common, Kings
and their subjects alike need pardon,
long for immortality, &c. God reveals
these, and the conditions upon which
they may be obtained.

2. Because of tts provision for the needs
which pertain to their respective ranks
and duties. It has messages for both
kings and subjects, rich and poor, &c.

Il. As adapted to persons of all ages.

‘‘Both young men, and maidens ; old
men, and children.” He reveals Him-
self as moral Governor, wise and kind


Father, infallible Guide, abiding and
unchanging Friend, &. ‘ Children”
can understand fatherhood; ‘young
men and maidens” need guidance ;
“old men” can appreciate the Friend
that knows neither change nor death ;
and to all beings of conscience moral
government is intelligible.

III. As fitted to inspire the praises
of persons of all ranks and ages,

“Letthem praisethe Name of Jehovah;
for,” &c. Men of all ranks and ages are
here called to praise God, because of —

1. The incomparable excellence of His
character, “For His Name alone is
exalted.”

2. The conspicuous display of His
majesty, ‘ His glory is above the earth
and heaven.” And, we may add—

3. Because He confers rich and abun-
dant blessings upon persons of all ranks
and ages. Noman can refuse to praise
Him without incurring the guilt of
blackest ingratitude, With heart, and
voice, and life, let us praise the Lord,


A Prortz Near Unto THE LORD.


(Verse 14.)


“A people near unto Him.”


L They are near to Him because
they are reconciled to Him by faith in
Christ.


Il. They are near to Him because
they live in habitual communion with
Him,


455:


P@ALM OXLIK. FOMILETIO OOMMENTARY: PSALMS8,





V. They are near to Him becaage
they shall be with Him fos ever.—
George Brooks.


IIL They are near to Him because
they seek conformity to Him.

IV. They are near to Him because
they enjoy His protection.


PSALM CXLIX.


INTRODUCTION.


This Pealm, like the others of the series of which it forms a part, bears evident traces both
fm style and language, and in the feelings which it expresses, of belonging to the post-exile
fiterature. It was probably composed soon after the return from the captivity in Pabylon,
*¢Tt breathes,” says Perowne, ‘‘ the spirit of intense joy and eager hope which must have beem
im the very nature of things characteristic of the period which succeeded the return from the
Babylonish captivity. Men of strong faith and religious enthusiasm and fervent loyalty must
have felt that in the very fact of the restoration of the people to their own land was to be seen
go signal a proof of the Divine favour, that it could not but be regarded as a pledge ef a glorious
future yet in store for the nation, ‘The burning sense of wrong, the purpose of a terrible revenge,
which was the feeling uppermost when they had first escaped from their oppressors (as in Ps.
eXXXvii.), was soon changed into the hope of a series of magnificent victories over all the nations
of the world, and the setting up of a universal dominion. It is such a hope which ix expressed
here, The old days of the nation and the old martial spirit are revived. God is their King
(ver, 2), and they are His soldiers, going forth to wage His battles, with His praises in their
mouth, and a two-edged sword in their hands. A spirit which now seems sanguinary and
revengeful had, it is not too much to say, its proper function under the Old T'estament, and was
not only natural but necessary, if that small nation was to maintain itself against the powerful
tribes by which it was hemmed in on all sides, But it ought to require no proof that language
like that of vers. 6-9 of this Psalm is no warrant for the exhibition of a similar spirit in the
Christian Church.”


Tue JUBILANT Propie or Gop,
(Verses 1-5.)


The summons to praise in this Psalm
is addressed to the people of God, He
is to be praised ‘in the congregation of
saints. Let Israel rejoice in Him,” &e.
The tone of the Psalm is intensely joy-
ous. Let us notice—

I. The reasons of their rejoicing.

1. The mercies recewed by them from
God, That they had received recent and
great mercies from God is implied in the
summons to “sing unto Him a new
song.” The new song was for some new
and special occasion for praise, Probably
the mercies to be thus celebrated were
the return from captivity, and the re-
building of the walls of Jerusalem and
of the Temple. And these blessings had
awakened new hopes which were also to
find expression in the new song. In the
life of the people of God new mercies
are ever calling for new songs, His
goodness should enkindle the gratitude
and joy of His people.

2. The relationships sustained by them
to God, (1.) They are His subjects.
“Let the children of Zion be joyful ig

456


their King.” Barnes: “In God as their
King. (a,) That they have a King, or
that there is One to rule over them. (&)
That they have such a King; One so
wise, 80 powerful, so good. (c.) That
He administers His government with
so much efficiency, impartiality, equity,
wisdom, goodness.” Perowne: “Such
a King will not leave them under foreign
rule; He will break the yoke of every
oppressor from their neck.” Let the
Christian rejoice that he is a subject
of the Lord Jesus. (2.) They are His
saints. “The congregation of saints,
Let Israel rejoice in Him that made
him. Jehovah taketh pleasure in His
people, Let the saints be joyful in
glory.” They are His people and His
saints because He has made them what
they are. He selected and called the
Israelites to their high spiritual privi-
leges ; He made them His own covenant-
people. Christians are now made by
Him, “All that they have and are is
to be traced to Him, as really as the
universe of matter is to be traced to His


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


power. Their condition is not one of
development, or one which is the result
of their own wisdom, grace, or power ;”
but of His grace and power, (3.) They
are His delight. “Jehovah taketh plea-
sure in His people.” He regards them
with complacency. He taketh pleasure
) in their progress and prosperity ;
6) in their worship and service ; (c) in
their future destiny. He has provided
heaven for them, and He is preparing
them for heaven. “So shall we ever be
with the Lord.”

3. The adorning wrought in them by
God. “He beautifieth the meek with
salvation.” The primary significance of
these words is well expressed by Moll:
“The help which God vouchsafes to His
oppressed people against their oppressors
is not merely manifested to the world as
deliverance and salvation generally, but
serves also as an ornament aud honour
to that people themselves, so that, coming
forth arrayed in it, they gain for it re-
cognition and praise (Isa. lv. 5; Ix. 7,
9,13; lxi. 3; lxii. 7).” God’s spiritual
salvation is a beautifying of the human
character and life, The lowly and meek
He clothes with Divine grace. ‘ The
beauty of the Lord our God is upon
them.” -“ Beholding as in a glass the
glory of the Lord, they are changed into
the same image, from glory to glory, as
by the Spirit of the Lord.” For all these
reasons let the people of God rejoice in
Him.

IL The character of their rejoicing.

l. Z ts religious, They are called
to “sing unto Jehovah ;” to “ rejoice
in Him;” and to “praise His Name.”
Their exultation is not sinful or selfish,
but holy and in honour of God.

2. It ts constant. Both by day and
“in the congregation of saints,” and also
by night and “upon their beds.” They
are to cultivate an abiding spirit of pious
gladness; to “rejoice evermore.”

3. [tts intense. The number of times
and the various forms of expression em-
ployed by the Psalmist in calling upon
them to rejoice, and the various modes
in which he calls upon them to express
their joy, show that the joy is deep and
full, active and abounding,

Ill. The expression of their rejoicing.





PSALM OXLIZ.


The poet calls upon Israel to express
their joy—

1. With “a new song.” The exultant
soul naturally speaks the language of
poetry in the tones of music, New mer-
cies demanded “a new song.” ‘They
required “a new song” also to express
“all the new hopes and joys of a new
era, a new spring of the nation, a new
youth of the Church bursting forth into
a@ new life,”


‘*Thus far His arm hath led us ong
Thus far we make His mercy known:
And while we tread this desert land,
New mercies shall new songs demand,”


2. With music and dancing. “Let
them praise His Name in the dance; let
them sing praises unto Him with the
timbrel and harp.” “The dance,” says
Dr. Hayman, “is spoken of in Holy
Scripture universally as symbolical of
sume rejoicing, and is often coupled for
the sake of contrast with mourning, as
in Eccles. iii. 4, ‘a time to mourn and
a time to dance’ (comp. Ps. xxx. 11;
Matt. xi. 17). In the earlier period it
is found combined with some song or
refrain (Exod. xv. 20; xxxii 18, 19;
1 Sam. xxi. 11); and with the tam-
bourine (A. V., ‘timbrel’), moreespecially
in those impulsive outbursts of popular
feeling which cannot find sufficient vent
in the voice or in gesture singly... .
Women among the Hebrews made the
dance their especial means of express-
ing their feelings.” But, as Barnes re-
marks, ‘‘there is much in the Hebrew
mode of worship which cannot be trans-
ferred to the forms of Christian worship
without an obvious incongruity and dis-
advantage ; and because a thiug has been
done, and is not in itself wrong, we
should not infer that it should always
be done, or that it would be always
best.” Yet whatever is seemly and suit-
able in music may be employed as an aid
in the expression of religious joy.

3. Both in public and tn private.
“Tn the congregation of saints,” and
“upon their beds.” In the public as-
semblies for religious worship we should
extol our King and our God. And in
the quiet of the night our holy joy may
rise to Him in songs of praise, The


PRALM OXLIX.


godly man praises God both in the
chamber and in the church,
Let Christians see their privilege, and


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMB.


es


cultivate and exhibit a spirit of religious
thankfulness and joy. ‘ Rejoice in the
Lord alway: again I say, Rejoice.”


THE Pxorpte AND PLEASURE OF THE LORD.
(Verse 4.)
“ For the Lord taketh pleasure in His people.”


L The people.

1. They have a special relation to God,

2. They are regenerated and sancti-
fied by His Spirit.

3. They are conformed to His image,

4, They are zealous for His glory.

I, The pleasure.

1. In their persona,


2. In their welfare,

3. In their services,

4. In their graces,

5. In their fellowship.

(1.) Are we the Lord’s people? (2.)
Do we realise our privilege as the ob
jects of the Divine delight? (3.) De
we delight in God —George Brooks,


66 Tar BEravtTies OF Houiness.”


(Verse 4.)
* He beautifieth the meek with salvation.”


“ Salvation” is a word which is used
by men to represent very different things,
The lowest conception of it is that
miserably selfish one of deliverance from
punishment and the realisation of hap-
piness. The highest is perhaps this,
the attainment of spiritual beauty, be-
coming like Christ, finding our heaven
in God. Salvation beautifies human
character and life. I fear we are not
sufficiently alive to the importance of
beauty in the culture of character.
God has made the soul receptive of the
beautiful, capable of appreciating it,
and profiting by it; and “He hath
made everything beautiful in its time,”
to minister to man’s thirst for beauty.
The beautiful in character is for many
reasons the highest beauty. This God
promises to the meek, How many
blessings come to the meek which the
proud never receive! “The meek will
He guide in judgment, and the meek
will He teach His way.” ‘The meek
shall inherit the earth, and shall delight
themselves in the abundance of peace,”
‘The Lord lifteth up the meek.” “ The
High and Lofty One that inhabiteth


eternity dwelleth with him that is of’


a contrite and humble spirit, to revive

the spirit of the humble and to revive

the heart of the contrite onea” ‘“ Thus

gaith the Lord, To this man will I look,
458


even to him that is poor and of a con-
trite spirit.” ‘ Blessed are the meek, for
they shall inherit the earth.” “Jehovah
beautifieth the meek with salvation.”

Meekness in ttself is beautiful. Whe
does not love the modest violet? ‘‘ The
ornament of a meek and quiet spirit is
in the sight of God of great price.” Our
Lord Jesus is ‘‘ meekand lowly in heart.”
Haughtiness repels ; meekness attracts,

Meekness is further beautified with sal-
vation. Salvation is the transforming of
our morally disfigured natures into glo-
rious and unfading beauty.

L Salvation promotes physical
beauty.

Sin is moral ugliness ; and it tends to
produce physical ugliness, The sins of
the drunkard, and glutton, and sen-
sualist, banish refinement, purity, and
beauty from the features, and make
them coarse, vulgar, and brutal. Every
debauch thickens the lips, dims the fire
of the eye, effaces something of the
spiritual from the countenance, and
stamps it with something animal or
even brutal. Now, as salvation pro-
motes temperance, chastity, and spi-.
rituality, it also promotes physical
beauty. Purity of heart will gradually
and silently mould even coarse features
into refinement and comeliness, Agai
evil passions deform their victims i


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS,
san et i els Se ae ae 8s a ee





once saw three portraits of one man,
taken at different periods of his life,
There was that of youth—fair, bean-
tiful, and apparently ingenuous; there
was that of young manhood, still fair
and beautiful, but with more of matu-
rity and less of ingenuousness ; there
was that of the man still young in
years, but old in passion, old in sin ;
and now the features are hard, cynical,
bitter, repulsive, reminding one of his
own words—


** To be thus—
Grey-hair’d with anguish, like these blasted


pines,
eo of a single winter, barkless, branch-
ess,
A blighted trunk upon a cursed root,
Which but supplies a feeling to decay—
And to be thus, eternally but thus,
Having been otherwise!”


But while evil passions darken and
scar the features, salvation, which
curbs and conquers evil passion, and
imparts calmness and peace and love,
gives repose and sweetness and beauty
of countenance. If truth and purity,
spirituality and meekness, peace and
love are ours, they will inform the
features with a spiritual and divine
beauty.

II. Salvation is sviritual beauty.

“‘ Beauty is the robe of holiness: the
more holiness, the more beauty.”

1. The beauty of salvation resembles
the beauty of God Himself. Moses
prayed, “Let the beauty of the Lord
our God be upon us.” Meekness
and patience, truth and righteousness,
purity and love,—these constitute the
infinite loveliness of the ever-blessed
God ; and these are the beauties with
which He adorns the meek. All
human beauty is but a reflection of
“the beauty of the Lord our God.”
Every grace that adorns human char-
acter is a ray from the splendours of
the loveliness of the Infinite.

2. This beauty is varied. The beauty
of creation is varied. Each of the seasons
has its own peculiar charm. ‘There are
the beauties of the sea and shore, the
beauties of wild mountain districts,
and the beauties of quiet, fertile,


POALM OXLIR,


pastoral scenes, So spiritual beauty is
varied, In Mary we have the beauty of
a receptive, meditative, deep, deathless
love ; in Martha that of an active, care-
ful, ministering, and equally deathless
love; in Job we have the beauty of
trust in God sorely tested and sub-
limely triumphant; in Paul the beauty
of a self-surrender and earnestnesa
which has never been surpassed by
man, &c.

The totality of beauty is found only
in Jesus Christ, He isthe “ Altogether
Lovely.”

3. This beauty ts tmmortal. The
beauty of flowers soon perishes. The
beauty of “the human face divine” ia
short-lived even at the longest. As ous
great dramatist says—


** Beauty is but a vain and doubtful goed,
A shining gloss that fadeth suddenly ;
A flower that dieth when first it gins to bud;
A brittle glass that’s broken presently 3
A doubtful good, a gloss, a glass, a flower,
Lost, faded, broken, dead within an hour.”


But spiritual beauty is a pure good,
and it never perishes, “Truth, love,
and holiness are Divine, and always
young and beautiful, The beauties with
which they invest the soul have nothing
temporal about them; they are the
beauties of eternity.” The beauties of
salvation are unfading.

4. This beauty is ever-increasing. The
meek, rejoicing in perpetual youth, will
increase in loveliness through all eternity,
The redeemed soul will become invested
with more and more of the Divine
beauty for evermore,

Let us seek to be beautified with
salvation. We have not sufficiently
thought of salvation as an adornment, a
thing of light and loveliness, We have
not sufficiently sought to add sweetness
to strength, and tenderness to integrity
of character. Too often the thought of
our safety has filled our mind to the
exclusion of the nobler solicitude to be
beautiful with Divine grace and radiance,
Yet we are being saved only “so as by
fire” if we are not growing in amiabi-
lity and loveliness, Oh, seek to be
“‘ beautified with salvation ” 1


459


POALM OXLIX.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS. —


i


Tae Mitrrant Prorie or Gop.
(Verses 6-9.)


In interpreting this portion of the
Psalm we shall do well to heed the
words of Delitzsch: “The dream that
it was possible to use such a prayer as
this, without a spiritual transubstantia-
tion of the words, has made them the
signal for some of the greatest crimes
with which the Church has ever been
stained, It was by means of this Psalm
that Casper Sciopius in his ‘Clarion of
the Sacred War’ (Classicum Belli Sacri),
a work written, it has been said, not
with ink, but with blood, roused and
inflamed the Roman Catholic Princes
to the Thirty Years’ War. It was by
means of this Psalm that, in the Pro-
testant community, Thomas Miinzer
fanned the flames of the War of the
Peasants. We see from these and other
instances that when in her interpretation
of such a Psalm the Church forgets the
words of the Apostle, ‘the weapons of
our warfare are not carnal’ (2 Cor. x. 4),
she falls back upon the ground of the
Old Testament, beyond which she has
long since advanced, — ground which
even the Jews themselves do not venture
to maintain, because they cannot alto-
gether withdraw themselves from the
influence of the light which has dawned
in Christianity, and which condemns the
vindictive spirit, The Church of the
Old Testament, which, as the people of
Jehovah, was at the same time called to
wage a holy war, had a right to express
its hope of the universal conquest and
dominion promised to it, in such terms
as those of this Psalm ; but, since Jeru-
salem and the seat of the Old Testa
ment worship have perished, the national
form of the Church has also for ever
peen broken in pieces. The Church
of Christ is built up among and out of
the nations; but neither is the Church
@ nation, nor will ever again one nation
be the Church, xar’ é&éynv, Therefore
the Christian must transpose the letter
of this Psalm into the spirit of the New
Testament.”

We may use these verses as suggest-
ing certain features of the spiritual war-
fare of the Church of Christ,

460


I. The true spirit of the Church mili-
tant.

The people of God in this world are
a combatant people. They have enemies
which they must war against. They
have to contend against evil (1) in
themselves. ‘The fiesh lusteth against
the spirit,” &e “I keep under my
body, and bring it into subjection,” &c.
Starke: “ Wage a good warfare against
thyself above all; take vengeance and
inflict punishment upon the heathenish
desires of thy heart ; strike down with
the sword of the Spirit what contends
against God and His honour.” They
have to contend against evil (2) in the
world, Satan is active in human society.
Wicked men are arrayed against the
cause of God. Sinful principles and prac-
tices are mighty upon earth. Against
these Christians have to do battle, They
have to conquer the world to Christ by
the power of His grace and truth. The
spirit in which they should wage this
warfare is indicated in the text: With
“the high praises of God in their mouth,
and a two-edged sword in their hand.”
Let them go into the conflict with songs ;
let their spirit be that of triumphant
trust in God. The victories of truth
and grace are never won either by
cowards or by the self-confident, but by
those whose strength is in God, and
whose courage is inspired by Him. Not
with craven fears, but with confident
hopes, let the soldiers of Christ war their
warfare,

IL The trusty weapon of the
Church militant.

“A two-edged sword in their hand,”
The grand weapon in Christian warfare
is “the sword of the Spirit, which is
the Word of God.” “The Word of God
is quick and powerful, and sharper than
any two-edged sword.” The only wea
pon which can slay error is truth, The
only power which can convert men to
God is His own power in the Gospel.
“The weapons of our warfare are not
carnal, but mighty through God,” de.
Many and glorious victories have al
ready been won by this weapon, and


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMA


PSALM Gz,





yet wider and more brilliant triumphs
will be achieved by it in the future.

Il. The Divine warrant of the
Church militant.

“To execute upon them the judg-
ment written.” Various interpreta-
tions have been given to these words;
some of which we need not mention
here. The correct view, we think, will
be found in this brief quotation from
Perowne: “Others understand by ‘a
judgment written’ one in accordance
with the Divine will as written in
Scripture, as opposed to selfish aims and
passions (so Calvin). But perhaps it is
better to take it as denoting a judgment
fixed, settled—as committed to writing,
so as to denote its permanent, unalter-
able character—written thus by God
Himself, As in Isa, lxv. 6, God says,
‘Behold, it is written before Me,’ &.”
Christians have a Divine commission
for their holy warfare. That warfare
accords with the purposes and plans of
God. ‘As Thou hast sent Me into the
world, even so have [J also sent them
into the world.” “Go ye, make dis-
ciples of all the nations,” &ea “Go ye
into all the world, and preach,” &c.
And He who thus sends them forth,


promises to be with them, and to con-
duct them to complete victory.

IV. The grand design of the Church
militant.

“This honour have all His saints.”
More correctly, “It is an honour for all
His saints.” “That is,” says Perowne,
“the subjection of the world described
in the previous verses. But perhaps it
is better to take the pronoun as referring
to God: ‘He is a glory toall,’ &c.: te,
either (1) His glory and majesty are re-
flected in His peopie; or (2) He is the
author and fountain of their glory ; or
(3) He is the glorious object of their
praise.” The latter seems to us the true
interpretation. The glory of the victory
of the Church in the subjection of all
the world to God will be entirely His in
the eyes of all His people. All the praise
and honour they will ascribe to Him,
The glory of God is the grand end of
the work and warfare of the Church.
God shall “be all in all.” ‘ It should
lead us to shout ‘ Hallelujah,’ that we
are permitted to be employed in any way,
however humble, in carrying out the
Divine plans, or in accomplishing those
great designs which He contemplates to-
ward our race,” Praise ye Jehovah.”


PSALM oC.


INTRODUCTION.


Dean Perowne speaks of this Psalm as ‘‘ the great closing Hallelujah, or Doxology, of the
Psalter, in which every kind of musical instrument is to bear its part as well as the voice of
man, in which not one nation only, but ‘everything that hath breath,’ is invited to join, It
is one of those Psalms which ‘ declare their own intention as anthems, adapted for that public
worship which was the glory and delight of the Hebrew people; a worship carrying with it the
goul of the multitude by its simple majesty and by the powers of music, brought in their utmost
force to recommend the devotions of earth in the ears of heaven.’ ‘Take it,’ says Isaac Taylor,
‘as a sample of thia class, and bring the spectacle and the sounds into one, for the imagination
to rest in. It was evidently to subserve the purposes of music that these thirteen verses are put
together ; it was no doubt to give effect first to the human voice, and then to the alternations of
instruments,—loud and tender and gay,—with the graceful movements of the dance, that the
anthem was composed and its chorus brought out,

“¢ Let everything that hath breath praise the Lord !
Praise ye the Lord !


**© And so did the congregated thousands take up their part with a shout, even as the voles
of many waters.’ ”


THe DoxoLoey.


L. The sphere of the Divine praise. 1. In His temple upon earth, “Praise

“Praise ye the Lord. Praise Godin Godin Hissanctuary.” We understand
His sanctuary, praise Him in the firma- this of the earthly temple, the place
ment of His power.” which He had chosen for is special
4


PGALM Ci.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMB,


ems


manifestation of Hia presence and be-
stowment of His grace.

2. In the heavens, “ Praise Him in
the firmament of His power ;” or “in
the expanse of His power.” ‘The call
here is on all that dwell above that ex-
panse, in heaven, to unite with those on
earth in His praise. It is called ‘the
expanse of His power’ because it is in
the heavens—in the sun, the moon, the
stars—that the power of God seems to
be principally displayed.” The earthly
temple and heaven are mentioned to-
gether probably to indicate the uni-
versality of His praise. (Comp. 1 Kings
viii. 39, 43, 49; Ps, xi 4.)

IL The reason of the Divine praise.

“Praise Him for His mighty acts.”

1. In creation, “By the word of
Jehovah were the heavens made,” &.
(Ps, xxxiii, 6-9).

2. In providence. What marvellous
and mighty acts He had wrought on
behalf of the Israelites |

3. In redemption. In this the power
of His wisdom and grace is most clearly
and impressively displayed.

IT. The measure of the Divine praise.

“Praise Him according to His excel-
lent greatness.”
tude of His greatness.” Conant: “ His
abundant greatress” We are to en-
deavour to praise Him in a manner
which shall be in proportion to His
greatness and glory. #Man’s praise
should correspond with God’s perfec-
tions, as far as this is possible, But
when the most perfect praise is offered
by the whole universe to God, it will
still fall below His infinite greatness and
glory. ‘“ He who will review only his
own life will discover so many of God’s
deeds that he will not be able to thank
Him sufficiently through eternity.”

IV. The manner of the Divine praise.

“Praise Him with the sound of the
trumpet,” &c. (vers, 3-5). These verses
suggest the following observations as to
the manner in which God should be
praised :—

1. The praise of God should be
joyous. ‘“‘Beyond doubt,” says Heng-
stenberg, “the pipe” (A. V., “organ”),
“which otherwise did not belong to the
Temple service, was brought into requisi-

462


Hebrew: “The multi- ©


tion here only because the feast had at
the same time the character of a popular
rejoicing. In like manner also timbrela
and dances. . . . The cymbals were
used only at festivals of a joyful kind,
(Comp. 2 Sam. vi. 5; Ezra iii, 10;
Neh, xii. 27.)” Joyful worship is accept-
able to God and honours Him.

2. The praise of God should be as per
fect as possible, “ Everything pertain-
ing to worship should surely indicate a
reverent solicitude to bring to God the
best that we can proffer—an offering
perfect in every appliance that can give
emphasis to its adoration, intensify its
rapture, or beautify its love. Hence, the
devoutest worshippers will provide for —
their praise hymns of the highest poetry,
and music of the richest harmony.” —Dr,
H. Allon.

3. The praise of God should thoroughly
engage the powers of our spirits. It be-
hoves us to stir up our warmest and
holiest affections to praise God. Where
these are not engaged, the most perfect
poetry and music will not find accept
ance with God. “The finest music
before God is the harmonious praise and
glorifying of God by the soul united in
all its powers, with all the senses and all
the members.”

V. The offerers of the Divine praise.

“Let everything that hath breath
praise the Lord.” ‘The very ambiguity
of ‘all breath’ gives,” says Alexander,
“an extraordinary richness of meaning —
to the closing sentence, From the
simple idea of wind-instruments men-
tioned in the context, it leads us by
a beautiful transition to that of vocal,
articulate, intelligent praise, uttered by
the breath of living men, as distinguished
from mere lifeless instruments, Then,
lastly, by a natural association, we
ascend to the idea expressed in the
common version, ‘everything that hath
breath,’ not merely all that lives, but all
that has a voice to praise God. There
is nothing in the Psalter more majestic
or more beautiful than this brief, but
most significant, finale, in which solem- —
nity of tone predominates, without, how-
ever, in the least disturbing the exhilara-
tion which the close of the Psalter seems
intended to produce, as if in emblemati-


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





eal allusion to the triumph which awaits
the Church and all its members, when,
through much tribulation, they shall
enter into rest.” All living creatures
are summoned to unite in celebrating
the praises of God,—all ih the air and
im the waters, all on earth and all in





heaven,—let everything according to its
capacity and power join in the universal
anthem. “ Ali creatures,” says Moll,
“should join their voices to the praise
of God; but the members of His Church
should lead the choir.”


THe SvuBJECTS AND EXprREssIONS oF PRAISE.


Gospel worship should be joyful wor-
ship. “ Speaking to yourselves in Psalms
and hymns and spiritual songs.” The
Gospel was sung at Bethlehem before it
was preached. We may well say with
Greg. Nazianzen: “ Lord, I would be a
musical instrument for Thee to touch,
that I may show forth Thy praise.”

I. Some subjects of praise in which
we should unite, derived from these
closing Psalms. Praise the great Head
of the Church—

1. For what Hetsin Himself. “Praise
Him according to His excellent great-
ness;” and according to the display of
that greatness in each succeeding dispen-
sation. (1.) Rejoice in the plenitude of
His Divine perfections. The inspired
writers always speak of Christ as of One
who was far greater than any description
that could be given of Him. God has
given Him as Mediator, “‘a Name which
is above every name”—above every name
on earth or in heaven. For power: He
has all power in heaven and on earth.
For wisdom: in Him are hid all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge.
For love: His love passeth knowledge.
For unchanging truth and faithfulness :
His righteousness is like the great
mountains. ‘‘ Thy faithfulness hast thou
established in the very heavens.” (2.)
Rejoice in the tenderness of His human
sympathies, It is remarkable that those
who have suffered the most for the cause
of Christ, replete with His consolations,
have spoken the most loudly of His
name, As David’s Psalms in the wilder-
ness are the sweetest of his psalms, so

’ Paul’s letters in prison are the most de-
lightful of his epistles,

2. For the wonders of His Providence
in the defence and preservation of His
Church, “Praise Him for His mighty
acta.” Some of these are enumerated in


these last five Psalms ; ¢.., the bringing
back of Israel from the Babylonish cap-
tivity ; the rebuilding and the fortifica-
tion of Jerusalem; the erection of the
second Temple, which was a wonderful
thing for a colony of returned exiles to
attempt. All Providence is subordinated
to the interests, and to the Church, of
the Messiah. The government of earth
and heaven is upon His shoulder. (Comp.
Isa. ix. 6.) The world was built by
Him and for Him, for this very purpose,
that it might be the scene and theatre
of His Divine and gracious government
in the great economy of human salvation.
(Comp. John i 1-3, 16.) With the
work of Redemption in promise, the
Psalmist might well say, and with the
work of Redemption in fulfilment, we
may well add with him, “ Praise Him
for His mighty acts; praise Him accord-
ing to His excellent greatness.”

3. For the special relation in which
He stands to us ; that is, to all who bow
to His sceptre, and experience the efficacy
of His redeeming grace. He is their
King ; and they have the greatest reason
to rejoice in Him,

Il. In what way our love and
loyalty to Christ shouid be made
manifest.

1. In a@ more full and frequent con-
templation of Hts infinite excellence, His
tneffable love. In Pa, cxlviiii 14 He
is said to be ‘‘The praise of all His
saints,—a people near unto Him.”
Especially should this be the case
with us when we are called to contem-
plate the great mystery of redemption,
“wherein He hath abounded toward us
in all wisdom and prudence.” In other
events and providential deliverances
we see the putting forth of the power
of His arm ; but here we see unveiled
the movements of His heart. Think

463


FRaLM Ci.





then of the mighty acts of our all-
glorious Redeemer, &c. . . . These are
the trophies of Chyist’s power ; these the
putting forth of the resources of His
boundless and ineffable love.

2. By a careful study of His Provi-
dences—towards the Church in general,
or towards ourselves in particular, A
great c’uster of Providences is referred
to in these Psalms, Great and signal
revolations of empire among the Persians,
the Babylonians, and the Medes, brought
about their return from captivity ;—
their conquerors being moved only by
political considerations, as our public
men are this day, and not at all about
God’s designs. He girded Cyrus with
his might, though Cyrus knew Him not
(Isa, xlv. 5). So the great Reformation
in Germany was backed by reasons of
state, aa they are called; it being the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : PSALME.
ee


interest of many princes there to counte-
nance Luther’s doctrines to stop the
growing greatness of Charles V., who
designed to enslave them. How wonder-
ful that the building and the fortifica-
tion of Jerusalem should have been
consented to and brought about by
their original enemies and enalavers,
and even at the cost of their conquerors i
... How much we may see the hand
of God in our national history! in the
Norman Conquest—the encouragement
of the Reformation by Henry VIIL—
the defeat of the Spanish Armada—and
the glorious Revolution by William IIL.

3. In zealous efforts for the extension
of His kingdom. “‘ Let everything that
hath breath praise the Lord.”

III. What great losers they are
who have no part in these benefits !

—Samuel Thodey. .


UNIVERSAL PRAISE.
(Verse 6.)


This summons to praise Jehovah with
which the Book of Psalms closes, is not
Jewish, but human; not narrow or
exclusive, but broad and catholic. Let
us look at universal praise—

IL. As the grand prerogative of God.

Praise is due to Him from all His
creatures because—

1, Of the perfections of His Being.
We should praise Him for what He is
in Himself—the Supremely Great and
Good. His character is fitted to awaken
the devout admiration, and inspire the
reverent affection, and enkindle the
hearty praise of all His intelligent
creatures.

2. Of his relations to the universe. (1.)
Creator. “ Of old hast Thou laid the
foundations of the earth, and the
heavens are the work of Thy hands,”
‘All things were made by Hivn, and
without Him was not anything made
that was made.” ‘We are also His
offspring.” (2.) Sustainer. Constantly
and completely all things depend upon
Him. “By Him all things consist.”
“ Everything that hath breath” draws
that breath from Him. “He giveth to
all life, and breath, and all things... .

464


For in Him we live and move and have
our being.” (3.) Sovereign. All things
are ordered by Him. ‘‘ He doeth accord-
ing to His will in the army of heaven,
and among the inhabitants of the earth ;
and none can stay His hand, or say unto
Him, What doest Thou?” Therefore,
“everything that hath breath” should
praise Him. The lower orders of crea-
tion praise Him as embodiments of His
ideas, and by fulfilling in their existence
His purpose concerning them, And the
intelligent orders of creation should
praise Him by their loyal obedience,
reverent worship, and supreme affection.
This is due to Him. He has a most |
righteous and powerful claim upon thia,

3. Praise ts due to Him especially from
man. Man’s creation is a higher thing
than that of other creatures, and brings
him into closer relations with God.
“‘ Man’s origin as to his essential inward
being, the intellectual, moral, and spi-
ritual, is not so much a creatton as an
outbirth.” “The Lord God breathed
into his nostrils the breath of life, and
man became a living soul” ‘“ There
is a spirit in man; and the inspiration
of the Almighty giveth them under-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


FeALe GL





standing.” “The God of the spirits or
all flesh.” Hence man’s increased obli-
gation to praise God. The position as-
signed to man still further increases his
obligation to honour God. The Creator
made man sovereign over the lower
ranks of creatures; and gave the earth
to him for his sustentation and ser-
vice (Gen. i 28, 29; Ps, cxv. 16).
And man, as a sinner, was redeemed
by God at an immense cost, “Ye
were not redeemed with corruptible
things,” &c (1 Pet. i 18, 19), The
obligations of man to praise God are of
the most sacred and binding character,
Universal worship belongs by right to
God: it is His prerogative, ‘Give
unto the Lord the glory due unto His
Name,” &c.

IL As the precious privilege of
mati.

To contribute to the universal wor-
ship of God is not only the binding
duty, but the exalted privilege of man.

1. Because of the acceptance of our
praise by Him. That we are permitted
to approach God with our praises, and
assured of a gracious welcome, is surely
great condescension on His part, and a
great privilege on ours. Holy angels
worship Him with intensest ardour and
humblest reverence (Isa, vi. 3); yet He
deigns to hear and receive the praises of
such ignorant and sinful beings as we are,

2. Because of the wmfluence of our
pratse upon us, The worship of God
has the most blessed effect upon the
true worshipper. (1.) Worship is jey-
giving. It affords richest and purest
delight to the devout spirit. One of
the highest joys of heaven is the joy of
worship. (Comp. Rev. iv. 10, 11; v. 9-
14; vii. 9-12.) (2.) Worship is trans-
forming. Man becomes like unto the
thing or the being whom he really
worships. The worship of God pro-
motes in the worshipper the attributes
of humility, reverence for all that is
twue aud holy, self-furgetfulness, sanctity,


and the highest spiritual beauty. Th
who worship God in spirit and in trut
are changed into lixeness to Him “ from
glory to glory, as by the Spirit of the
Lord.”

Brothera, behold your privilege! To
worsnip God doubtless is your duty ;
but it is much more than that: more
beautiful and blessed than a mere duty ;
it is a sacred, precious, exalted privilege.
Regard it as such; practise it as such.

YT. As the fervent desire of the
good.

It is the wish of all godly souls that
“everything that hath breath would
praise the Lord.” They manifest their
desire by—

l. Praising Him themselves. To
praise Him is to them a rich delight,
By their sengs and by their services, by
their profession and by their practice,
they honour Him,

2. Calling upon others to praise Him.
“ Let everything that hath breath praise
Jah. Praise ye Jah.” The godly soul
would incite others to join in this blessed
service, and would have all creatures
to unite in the melodious and mighty
chorus to the praise and glory of God.

This is the best mode of attaining to
this universal praise to God. The time
advances when “everything that hath
breath will praise the Lord.” We may
contribute to its advent by sincerely
praising Him ourselves, and by induc-
ing others to join us in praising Him.

** Dear pee, our God and Saviour! for Thy
ilts

The woul were poor in thanks, though every


soul

Should nought but breathe them; every
blade of grass,

Yea, every atomie of earth and air

Should utter thanks like dew,


Wherefore let us Him ceaselessly adore ;

Praise Him, ye chosen of the earth and akies,

Ye visible rayleta of invisible Light,

Blend with the universal Heavens your lays {

Immortal leaflets of Love’s holy flower,

Breathe forth the perfume of eternal praise,”
— Bailey.


“LET EVERYTHING THAT HATH BREATH PRAISS Ja}
HALLELUJAH |”





INDEX OF SUBJECTS,


————
PAGE PAGH
ApgotuTs, the, . .« . « + 208 Human life is characterised by great
the incomprehensibleness of God is afflictions, . 150
generally acknowledged, A » 208 Great afflictions are characterised by
men have universally striven to solve great needs, . . 110
the mystery, . » 209 In great afflictions the godly man
the Bible gives usa revelation of all has a great resource, . 110
that may be known of God in a Afflictions of man, the os of God
manner suited to our faculties and in the, . - 125
saving to our soul, . » 209 Affliction of ‘the good, ‘the, . . » 340
Acceptable prayer, attributes and ad- The geod in all ages have been
vantages of, : 434 greatly afflicted, .: - 340
Advent, the features and effects of the The good have always survived the
ng’s, go Mie alietiom their tormentors, . - 341
the features of His " advent—awfal sn z the good are
a i widest conspicuousness, Divinel - 34%
ect righteousness, . . « go | Affliction, the spusrose and benefit of, . 283
thee effects of His advent, . Age of piety, the ond, . 7O
it should occasion joy to all; it does is the old age of a life ef faith and
occasion destruction to His foes, communion with God, . . 7O
confusion to idolaters, and cee irk is characterised by hope, .. . Jo
to His people, Ql is one of cheerfulness, ' e » 7o
Adversity and God" 8 salvation, man ‘a. ee is characterised by affection, . . 71
man’s adversity is often extreme in and to the last by usefulness, , - 71
its intensity, duration, and danger, 289 | All-important enumeration, an (See
God’s salvation is the remedy for NUMERATION), 46
man’s adversity, Analogies, grass and ite moral (See
Man’s adversity should lead him to GRass),. . » 445
cry for God’s salvation, - 290 | Answer, an earnest prayer and an im-
This remedy should i sought for mediate (See PRAYER), . ; . 376
holy ends, . .« « -« - 290 | Apostate contrasted, the obedient and
Affliction, . . 297 tae, A . ° a4
The characteristics and consolations Argument with God, . 258
of, . 297 e fact; the argumentative ‘value
The remedy for and the results of, . * 208 of the fact, and the ne founded
Affliction anditsremedy, . . . 268 on the argument ai tas 5 . 258
God’s children are a icted, 5 . 268 | Army, the royal, . 197
“or bata should drive us to God for Church weapons and ‘character, 17


help,
God undertakes to apply the remedy


for affliction, . 5
Affliction: its eka duties, and
dangers, . 277
God's” servants are. permitted to
suffer afflictio: A 277
God has spe comforts for His


affiicted servants, .
Affliction should lead us to call upon
God to fulfil His promises, . 2
Affliction ehould not lead us to de-
cline from God’s law, . . 278
Afflictions of life, the, azd the resource
of the godly, . - ° . 110
voR.


- 277


spirit, opportunity, and influence. 17
Aspects and expressions of humility


(See HUMILITY), . 344
a of the Divine Being, inspiring

(See cet aes . . . . 412

irations, loft . : 2 304
ry eism, the folly of


practical, eine 9s
in supposing that God does not ob-
serve human conduct, and will not
recompense it, 75
Attitude of the righteous towards the
ungodly, the proper, .
the ungo ly are the subjects of the
tenderest compassion and the


bitterest grief, . ° ° + 307





INDEX.


PAGE


the subjects of zealous ing eae
tion,
are pitied and evangelised not for sen-
timental but for practical reasons,
Attitude of the wicked towards the
righteous, the, and the condition


of the righteous eee oppression,
the wicked describe : ° .
the righteous crane z ;

Attitude towards the righteous and the

wicked, God’s, 5
Attributes and advantages "of accept-
able prayer, .
Attributes of the upright "(See Up.
RIGHT), 4) te) eclee ir ee ee
BATTLE, the day of, and the protection
of God, . . ° ‘
the period spoken of, fi
the RO oe acknowled ed, . : 3
the encouragement to be deduced, .

Beauties of holiness, the, .
salvation promote ot ter beauty,
salvation is spiritu nate Rig
this beauty resembles the beauty of

God Himself, is varied, immortal,
and ever-increasing, . : .

Benedictions, : . e °
the blessing sup licated, . . .
the conditions of blessing fulfilled, :
the blessing vouchsafed, " P
the place of blessing, . Aes ar

Benedictions, Divine, . . -
the subjects of the blessing, 5 5
the characteristics of the blessing, .
the conditions of the blessing,

Benefit and obligation of the Word of

God, the, b :

Bence: 7 man’s remembrance of the
the teachte of God, : : Pats
may be forgotten, . fs : 5
should not be forgotten, . ° °

Bible better than riches, the, 5


what wealth can do the Bible can do
better, . '
hab’ wealth cannot do “the


wines wealth will do the Bible
Bible duties, . :

to meditate upon it, . .

to love it, . fe ° .

to delight in it, . : A

net to be ashamed of it, ,

to earnestly practise it, ,
Blessed life, the (See LIFE), «
Blessed, the God in whom man is (See


Gop
Blessedness of knowing the jo
sound (See SOUND), ° i yfal
spiny of the Divinely-instructed


because of the instruction which he
receives, . : : ;

the faithfulness of God,

and the righteousness of His ‘judg.
ments, .


394


394
395


458
~ 459


291





PAGE


Blessedness of the good, the, Phe emi
is the result of a holy” life, .
consists in a happy livelihood, .
is found in the joys of domestic life,
is augmented by witnessing the ie

perity of Zion, .

Blessedness of the pee of “God, the, . -
as worshippers 0:
as conscious of His rao:
as rejoicing in ee ° .
as exalted by 3 ee
as omen a Him, .
as governed and tebeected by Him, ;

Blessedness, the source and means of, .
God i is the fountain of all blessedness,
man’s blessedness consists in the en-

joyment of God, . .

and is secured through instruction in
His statutes, . A

sighs jae vere and man biessing


God blessing man, with forgivencas, -
healing, .

redemption, coronation, satisfaction,
and invigoration, .

man blessing God with His soul,
with His entire spiritual being,

with recollection of His benefita,
oe rabies admiration of His cha


Blessings hee ha appiness of society de-
pendent on the Divine (see HAPPI-
NESS),

Blessings in human pilgrimage, Divine,


adapted to human needs, CIns
direction, protection, Erovisius,
possession, . She


adequate to human needs,
Seren by Divine faithtalneadt -
stowed for the most worthy oid nn.
call for devout praise, 5 :
Blessings of obedience, the, c ;
protection, success, .
manifestations of God's presence and
favour, 5 A z ° ‘
growth i in grace, 5 5 : :
peace, joy, heaven, .

Blessings on the sanctuary (See SANC-
TUARY),. ° ° .
Bondage and deliverance, : . .
the bondage was degrading, . .
unnatural, exasperating, ‘ . j
fons by 8 Divine redemption, .

ithfulness of God, the, ;


as 's bows need, C ‘. 5
as plentiful as man’s need,
equal to all the petit te of man’s


need,
God's bounty is based | ‘upon His faith


and is conditional on man’s piety, 0
ilders, the song of the, .

lessons touchin, ee Sater work,

prayer for lessing on
builders’ wake

the Divine answer to the prayer,


339
339
» 339
339


120
120


I2I
121
121
1at


12i


- 337
46


. 189
352
352


, 38





INDBX, od
PAGE PAGS
CaLUMNY, the nature and doom of, . 318 its nature, limits, consolations, and
calumny is a terrible instrument of yok oy Sualeer wees 249
mischief, ; A - 319 | Children the gift of God, 5 C © 338
productive of acute suffering, SEC SIO are to be judiciously trained, . - 338
ves the soul to seek redress in are a source of domestic joy, . » 338
prayer, . - 319 are the strength and defence of home, 339
involves its perpetrators in severest Christ refreshing Himself (See ReE-
vengean « 320 FRESHING), . 5 ; ' « 182
Captives, the vaittioted, and their glorious Christ the corner-stone, 5 Oat eR
Emancipator, . 161 the only corner-stone, : 250
& picture of a ee ul captivity, . 161 the Divinely established corner-stone, 251
the reason of t captivity, . 161 the rejected corner-stone, . : . 251
the design of this Painful captivity, . 161 the marvellous corner-stone, . . 251
ved oe m this painf Christ, the kingdom of, 5 5 » 93
vity, ° - 161 | Christ, the soverei, ty, of; » 174
Caanai i ‘souls, the duty of, tt 402 Christ reigns by Divine pet aha 175
what it is, eye + 402 by Divine right, - 175
on hae’ it "devolves, Ae ee + 403 by a devout acknowledgment, : ar7S
the great evil ofneglecting it, . . 403 over a disputed empire, . - 175
Cedar, the, an analogue of soul enw 69 by the enforced service of His foes, . 175
it grows not by repression, but by and will reign over an ea es,
development, . 69 universe, - 176
by the 2 Saco "and subordina- Christ’s triumph over tyranny, +  « 180
tion of the outward elements, - 69 all Lena is the foe of Christ, - 180
slowly, as nb as is subject to the wrath of Christ, . 181
by. ceaseless activities, . 5 fe will be destroyed by Christ, . . 181
to immense size and magnificence, . 70 will be supplanted by Christ, : - 181
during long ages, 70 | Christian progress, 27%
Celebration, a aed of the faithfulness the way of, is Divinely revealed, . 271
and mercy of the Lord, : 6 is possible only under certain definite
in the view of these attributes which conditions, . 5 EYR:
is presented, . 6 is aeons without Divine assist-
in the way in which they are cele- ance, seen27 2
brated, . 7 | Christian union (See Unton), ; - 356
in the basis on which the celebration Church and congregational worship (See
rests, . 7 WORSHIP), . 184
in he circumstances in which it is Church, a revival of the, and aymptoms
made, 8 Ww pe prec tye. wanes 5 UE
Palsbiation of the praise of God, the Church-builders, encouragements for, . 350
good man’s (See PRAISE), 61 the presence of God in ris Church, . 350
Character, the, and portion of God's the blessing of Godin His Church, . 351
people, . - 95 the triumph and glory of the Head of
the character of God’s people, . . - 95 the Church, . ; + 35%
the portion of God’s people, . 96 | Church- builders, lessons for, :
Character, the, privileges, and duty of when churches are needed their erec-
the King’s subjects, . . - 94 tion is of great importance, .
their character, 3 94 churches should be erected for the
they are sincere and upright, devout, 94 worship of God, _. > 34
they love the Lord, . ° . © 94 in the worship of God in the church
their privileges, zs A = BeOS the manifestation of His presence
reservation from evil, . = - 95 should be earnestly sought,
Balivarance from enemies,. - 95 in seeking this manifestation of His
bestowal of gladness, rs 5 > 95 presence we have powerful pleas
their duty, which we may urge,
to hate evil, and uate. mospioe Church of God, Jerusalem a type of the
in the Lord, 5 95 (See J ERUSALEM), : : e320
Characteristics of the blessed eople, . 148 | Church, Zion atypeofthe,. 353
they are a worshipping people, . - 148 Comforts of Christians, the, under trials, qi
they area righteous people, . . 148 the distressing thoughts which are
they are the Lord’s peop : 148 apt to oppress the mind of a good
Characteristics, the, and lessedness of man, 81
true religion, : 194 the consolations of God opposed to
the characteristics—fear of the Lord, 194 these uneasy thoughts,.  . . 8a
delight in His commandments, . . 194 | Communion of saints, the, . «  « 251
Divine praise, . > 4 2 » 194 must have & religious basis, . . 283
the blessednesa, . e ° 2 194 is the spiritual intercourse between
Chastizement, peewee #6249 spiritual men, and between spiritual





vit IN DEX,

PAGE PAGE
men and God, through the Divinely- the changefulness and transitoriness
appointed means; . . 281 of human life and nature, . 117

is ee and natural when on the eternity and immutability of God, 118
. 282 a great consolation, . . 118
Com nssion, Pianas wretchedness and as regards the Psalmist and the
Divi » 365 Church, . « \« 138
the wretched condition of mankind Contrasts and compensations, Pree
in consequence of their apostasy Control over man’s life, God's absolute, 3
from God, » + 365 # reason for acknowledging Him, . 36
the method of Divine compassion to # reason for seeking His favour, 7a
man in his rescue from this state a consolation in bereavement, . - 36
of guilt, &, . . : » 366 an encouragement to labour, . 36
Compensations, contrasts and, 5 » 283 an antidote against the fear of death, 37
Complaint, prayer, and contidence, - 172 | Corner-stone, Christ the (See Cone 250
A pea al com laint of mental Courage, : + 245
distress, physical exhaustion, . 172 its source and manifestations, . : + 245
nd Hi te death and ad bya of Covenant of ee the, and the sins of
ks - 173 men, ar
an earnest prayer, 173 the sins of men are “opposed to the
the o spe sought ‘and ‘the ‘pleas covenant of God, . a1
urge Ak: yet men who in the covenant of God
an encouraging g confidence, : sanz are richly blessed may sin grie-
assurance of salvation from God, . 173 vously against Him, . 23
determination to offer praise to God, 173 the sins of men will be punished by
Condescension of God, the majesty and, 379 23
Condition of the nenerons under oppres- 292 the sins of men cannot frustrate the
sion, the, A . 292 covenant of 23
Conduct of a good man in a time of Covenant of God, the, lamentation and
trial, the, 4 atye oe 9395 expostulation by reason of the ap-
earnest prayer, . A 4 Re ee parent failure As . ° . ° 24
noble resolutions, . Sieciate « 390 the lamentation, . » 24
confident expectation, ; a Rely, the king was dethroned, . « 124
and earnest prayer repeated, .  . 307 their defences were destroyed, . rend
Confidence, complaint, prayer, and (See they were the prey of their neigh-
COMPLAINT), . sige bours, : » 24
Confidence in God, a declaration of, . 77 they were defeated i in battle, ; ey
in the midst of enemies, . ys their vigour and glory had ceased, . 25
in the midst of anxious thoughts, eGR they attributed their aad condition
in the Divine support, . et) to their rejection by God 25
in the Divine protection, . : 6 OEE the expostulation 1 is based upon the
in the Divine retribution,. . 79 duration of their distresses, , 20
source of joy even in the midst of the brevity of theirlife, . : » 26
dangers and anxieties, . 79 the vanity of theirlife, . . . 26
Consequences of idolatey, the moral the certainty of death, . 26
(See IDOLATRY), . ; » 222 the loving-kindness romised by God, 26
Consideration, the Divine, . + 311 the reproaches which fell upon them, 27
Consistency, separation and (See SEPa- Covenant with David, God's, Si eaeXG
RATION), 3 302 the election of David, .. 17
Consolation, a great contrast and (See he was elected from the people, o 17
CONTRAST), . 5 - ‘117 to sovereignty and service, by God,. 1
Constant praise (See PRAIS®), “ + 313 the promises made to David, . . 1B.
Contrast, a, God’s mercy and man’ 3 constant sup . . . . 8
frailty, : 126 victory over fie foes, : A - 18
the frailty of man’s life upon “earth canapiGatun power, . ‘ 5 - 18
and the mercy of God, . . 126 enlarged dominion, . . 9
the brevity of man’s life upon earth intimate and exalted relationship, . Ig
and the eternity of the mercy of ‘ perpetual establishment of the cove-
God, 12 nant, . . . - tI
the final departure of man from the Creation a plea i in prayer, : s : 28s
earth, and the eternal mercy of God man is the creation of 5 . 285
resent with him wherever he may a Nha created for Divine service, « 285
12 not now as he was when crea . 286
the final departure of good men from the necessity of a new condos we . 286
the earth, and the eternal mercy of desiring this new nature, no plea is
God resting upon their descendants, 126 more appropriate and powerful
Contrast and ear alle a great, 17 than the fact that we are God’s
&® great contras . - 117 | creation, Rp amnel ote 286


INDEX, ts





PAG
Creation s revelation of the Lord (See
REVELATION), 5 > - 130
Creation, the, and the creature, the
Creator,
Creation of God, man a wonderful (See
MAN), .

Creation, the majesty of God in (See
MAJESTY), , : e
Creation, voices of, . : 135

the Divine existence is to constitute
the central fact in our a
eee of the universe, :
spel pee of dependence i is every-
ere developed in the universe, .
a devout contemplation of the uni-
verse is calculated to increase
man’s hatred of sin, 136
pered By be mention: and the crea-
Me het : . 225
ae oe Foden ent, a. es 73
the complaint of the Church, ; sO 73
of its enemies, their character and
triump. mee . SEDO EF
omer he oppression and abestsg


225


136
136


74
the a Seal of the Church for justi
spp ie


gment is the prerogative o
ion) . 74
is sometimes apparently long delayed, 74
is earnestly invoked, 14
Cry, the, a distressed servant of
God, 5 - 404
a picture of. great distress, - + 404


an exercise indicating great wisdom, 405

an appeal of great power, » 405

a eng of great fervour, . . . a
5 ee


the y Panlnlet’s consisted in a hasty
conclusion and an uncharitable
verdict, . - 238
was natural under the circumstances,


although not justifiable, - - 238
was only a passing mood, . 238
was successfully resisted and over-

come, . A . 5 . - 238

DANGER and its remedy, a,
the aR ee consists in aie lust ae
infidel: J . ». . . 304
delity, sin, . . © 395


the remedy is “the expulsive

force of ‘4 yey to make
danger flee, . » 305

the danger is avoided and the remedy
applied by earnest prayer, . + 305

Danger, the soul’s escape from (See
SCAPE), ‘ A e 331

David, God’s covenant with (See
CovVENANT), . F 16

Day, the constituents of a complete


: a. hol By  SONR wa) ° . gil
¢ begins with prayer, . o 31I
continues with obedience, » 311
closes with meditation, . ce ete


Day, the Lord’s, and its duties,
Day, the world’s most joyous,
a day when the relations of the Lord


° aa *


PAGER
te the world shall be ri ed ap-
prehended, . .

He alone is God of the world, , :
His salvation is for all the world,
He is King of all the world,
He is J udge of all the world, :
a day when the relations of the Lord
tothe world shall be duly celebrated,
He will be worshipped universally, .
enthusiastically, joyously, :
and reverently,

De Profundis (See PROFUNDIS), . A
Death, God's estimate of (See ee
MATE), * 5
Death, the philoso hy of, = 2

the destiny of all,

the peculiar privileges of the godly, ay
Death, two views of,
Declaration of confidence in God Beat


oo oO
ba Te |


g See BES


Be
NIN


CONFIDENCE), . . oH
Deliverance, . ‘ . 234
of the soul from death, Saar + 234
of the eyes from tears, . 2 » 235


of the feet from falling, . 0 FES
Deliverance a theme for joyous song, » 335
tes


because of the gel it emancipa
from, . e ° ° e 335
its unexpectedness, . Spo Pec Fre GEES


its reviving effects, : . © 335


the gladness it occasions,. . . 335

its svidenes of the Divine power, . 335
Deliverance, bondage and ON-

DAGE) Cee re wee 1 |
Deliverance from their enemies,a prayer

of the godly for, . : ° » 416

his description of his enemies, 416


his prayer for deliverance from them, 417
his resolution to praise God for de-
liverance from them, . - 417


Dependence, universal, and Divine sup-
port, + 433
he universality of de ependence, » 433
ee Ea ie of the Divine re-
« 433


tha: Gecevenk of the ‘Divine gifts, ARS
the ease of the Divine gifts, . + 433


the sufficiency of the Divine 4

Deprecated, Divine fadgmens (Bee *
JUDGMENT), . ‘ ‘ : + 407
Desire of the wicked, the, . e » 203
erishes because it is selfish, + 203

ins nothing to fall back upon in case
of disappointment, ‘ 203
has no resources on which to rely, + 203
is set on unsatisfactory objects, » 203
the frown of God is upon i, ; » 204

Desires, the ting o: tit an in-
jury to hese woul soul FO Late:
Determination, a fourfold, . ae aah ie 20%
to meditate on God’s Epona . 263
to have respect to God’s ways, + 263
to delight is in God’s statutes, . » 263
to remember God’s Word, . — « 263

Difficulty of singing songs in pene (ee
SONGS), . z . 372
Diseases healed, s iritual, ; 5 . . 122
why sin is adisease, , . a


ee ce a LL


PAGE
the variety of these diseases, . . 123
the remedy by which God heals them, 123


Distress, a prayer of the godly man
from the depths of (See dima ye 399
Distress to the good, the ferocity of the
wicked a source of (See FEROCITY), 320
Distressed seamen and the Sovereign
of the sea (See SEAMEN), . .
Distressed servant of God, the cry of a
(See CRy), . ‘ - , - 4
Distressed servant of God, the prayer


of a (See PRAYER). S J - 408
Distressed travellers and the Divine

Helper (See TRAVELLERS), . » 159
Divine Being, errors respecting the, . 428


Divine Being, inspiring aspects of the, 412
the Author of human skill, . .
the Protector of human life, . ray 65}
the Source of human authority, 6
the Object of human trust, Ars


the Supreme Good of human life, 413
the Recipient of human praise, - 413
Divine benedictions (See BENEDIC-
TIONS), . - - 5 - wna24:
Divine dwelling-place, the (See DWELL-
ING), . Q : ° . 226
Divine education, : : 268


Dinine mercy, the (See MERCY),
Divine protection (See PROTECTION),
Divine protection, the (See PROTEC-
TION), . ° ° . ; + 302
Divine provisions (See PROVISIONS), . 218
Divine relationships (See RELATION-


Divine guidance (See Guancz), : 4il


SHIPS), . : 5 : . . 241
Doxology, . é 5 : . 30
God is blessed in Himself, C ee)
God is blessed by His creatures, . 30
God is blessed forever, . . Hees}
Doxology, . ° ° : a - 158
Doxology, the, . ¢ . A . 401
the sphere of the Divine praise, . 461
the reason of the Divine praise, . 462


the measure of the Divine praise, . 462
the manner of the Divine praise, . 462
the offerers of the Divine praise,
Duties, Bible (See BIBLE), . > 270
Duty, law, prayer, 2 . .
Dwelling-place, the Divine, - 2 226


.

bo
wm
aN


is exalted, C 5 : . : 226
Be holy, é : C 4 : . 226
is to be the dwelling-place of man, . 226
EARTH, God’s praise on the (See
PRAISE), «Dunes 5 - 453
Earth, the, God's gift and. man’s in-
heritance, A é : 4 » 226
the earth is God’s gift to man, . 226
it is an Hh oear gs @ Magnificent, 226
a prepared, and, 3 ° - 226
an universal gi 227


itis God’s gift to man for definite uses, 227
forreligiousends, .  . a heey
for the education of man’s mind, . 227
for man’s use and enjoyment, , ‘
to be evangelised for Christ, , -2
Education, Divine, , : e 5 268


—-—


PAGE
Effectual, fervent, and believing prayer
(See PRAYER), ° » 309
Emancipation, a glorious, a cruel per-
secution and (See PERSECUTION), 145
Emancipation, Divine, human impris-
onment and (See IMPRISONMENT), 403
Emancipator, the afflicted captives and


° .


their glorious (See CAPTIVES), . 161
Enclosure, the sacred, . ; ; - 249
the enclosure, its gates and keys, . 249
its privileges and duties, . . » 250
Encouragement to His people to trust
in Him, the strength of God an
(See STRENGTH), . ; F oD
Encouragements for church-builders
(See CHURCH), . 5 z . 350
Encouragements for prayer (See
PRAYER), « ° ° . . 231
Encouragements to holy song (See
Song), . “ . > : 5
Enemies, the lamentable fate of the
Church’s (See FATE), . - - 341
Enjoyment, the saint's, of the law of
Go 4 A , é 3 - 294
the law of God is lovable, ° 2 294


God’s saints possess a spiritual taste
which enables them to appreciate
His law, ; f é A « 294

they exercise that taste continually, 295

Errors respecting the Divine Being, .


Escape from danger, the soul’s, . 3 331
the soul is surrounded by eer soar
these dangers are not invincible, . 332


a way is divinely provided for the
escape of the soul from all danger, 333
Estimate of death, God’s, . e:
a high, unusual, unexpected,
specific estimate, . : : . 240
Estimated by the light of heaven, sm, 40


and


Eternal praise, . : : 5 - 193
the object and subjects of praise are

eternal, . : = : : . 193

the worshippers have “‘ life eternal,” 194

Exaltation, human, . - “ WZ

in the spheres of daily life, . . 2i1

in God’s method of redemption, . 212
in the history of the Christian

Church, . : : : : . 212

in the resurrection of the body, . 212


Exalted, God’s Word, . - ° - 376
Examples of the holy sovereignty of


oe and the becoming worship of
is


ople, . : . . + 10%
examples of the becoming worship
“ of man, . ones ; 5 . IOr
in earnest prayer, in holy lives, . IOI


examples of the sovereignty of God
in His answers to His servants’
ol


54


prayers, cool en SOs
Excellence and beauty of fraternal
unity (See UNITY), : . 3
Excellence of praise to God, the (See
PRAISE), e . . ‘ + 439
Exclamation, life an (See LiFK), . 42
Exemplary humility (See HUMILITY), 345
Expostulation from the depth of misery
(See MiszRy), ' : . » @


Expostulation, lamentation and, by
reason of the apparent failure of
the covenant of God (See CovE-


NANT), .
Extremity, man ‘a, God's opportunity,
man in distress, : :


man’s duty in distress, . .
man's consolations in distress, . °
man’s deliverance in distress, , °
Exultant hymn, an (See HYMN), °


FAILURE of the covenant of God, la-
mentation and expostulation by
reason of the apparent (See CovE-


NANT), .
Faith, fearlessness, fixedness, and (See
FEARLESSNESS), 5 - .


Faith, the nature and power of, . ie:
the nature of faith, . «

the power of faith is to find expres-
sion for itself,

constrains those who believe to confess
their belief, .

inspire loyalty to the truth we believe,

pops us with the necessity of its
claration, .

is oe verre “of loyalty to the Lord of


9 e


and the power ‘of successful enter-


waithin Promiser, the (See PROMISER),
Faithfulness and mercy of the Lord, a
noble celebration of the ee CELE-
BRATION), .
Fate of the Church’s enemies, the la-
mentable, 2
they are signally defeated, °
their life-purpose is abortive, .
they remain unblessed, . °
Favou~ «f God desired, the, ;
Fear a.d its remedy, °
oe Christian has inthis ‘to fear but


the only safety ‘from sin and its re-
proach is the life of righteousness,
the danger and the safety are revealed
by the Word of God,
the danger is to be deprecated, and
the safety sought by prayer, . -
Fearlessness, fixedness, and faith, ,
Fearlessness, what it consistsin, .
is impossible without fixedness, ’
no fixedness without faith, : .
Features and effects of the King's ad-
vent, the (See ADVENT), " :
Fellowship, religious, . .
is possible only to religious persons,
is to be desired by religious persons,
is protitable to religious persons, .
Ferocity of the wicked, the, a source of
Seer to the good, ‘
ood are brought into unavoid-
ble contact with the wicked,
the attitude of the wicked is one of
fierce antagonism to the good,
the ferocity of the wicked is a source
of distress tothe good,. . .


INDEX.
on See ee Me ls Sa A a SG on es eS
PAGE


24
245


. 245


245
245
245

97


24


200
237
» 237
237


237
237


237
+ 237
237
141


6


341
341
341
341
149
273


ans
274


go
286
286
286
287
320
320
321


3a1


ai
PAGE
Finite, the, and the infinite, 203
with regard to earth] life, 5 » 293
earthly { greatness aed grandeur, . 293
the development of human character, 293
the acquisition of human know-
ledge, . + 293
luman pleasures and satisfactions, » 294
human institutions, , 294
Fixedness and faith, fearlessness (See
FEARLESSNESS), . . 200
Foes, the, and victory of the good, . 57
the foes of the good, 5 + 57
are numerous, various, terrible, « 957
the victory of the good, . ° 3
is coe lete and certain, . - $7
Folly, the, of practical atheism (See
ATHEISM), . ah
Forgetfulness of the Divine works, » 152
tle works of God are wor thy of an
attentive review and thankful re-
membrance, . 0 . 152
there is in human nature a tendency
to forget the works of God, . . 153
the sinfulness and danger of forget-
ting them, .. 153
the best means of remembering them, 153
Frailty, human, and Divine greatness, 32
the greatness of God, . + 32
He existed before the world, enn 34
He created the mee é 5 - 32
He is eternal, . . ° - 32
the frailty of man, . : 233
the brevity of his life upon earth, . 33
ape mournful end of his life a
eee Re ele 34
they cat Sovereign of his life upon
earth, 34
the relation between the great God
and frail man, 34
we are weak, and rest in His omni-
potence, 35
we are short-lived, and rest in His
eternity, ° . 35
Frailty, human, an incentive to seek
the Divine blessing, . 44
the Psalmist seeks for help in form:
ing a correct estimate of life, » 44
the mercy of God in life, . , 44
the manifestation of God’s power and
grace in life, . 45
the establishment of human work in
life, 46
Frailty, human, the result “of human
sin, 37
death is associated with phy sical
sufferings, and these are a result of
sin, ; 38
with mental sufferings, and these are
a result of sin, i 30
Frailty, man’s, God’s mercy and (See
CONTRAST), 5 7 . ; . 126
Freedom, i 276
man’s natural condition is one of
bonda 276
man malice at liberty when he seeks
and finds God’s precepts, . . 276


man walks permanently and sec


God in creation, the ma jest of See
: jesty of (


fae . . . . 128
God in nature, . . 118
four aspects of the Divine Bein ig—as
intimately acquainted with all por-
tions of the universe, - 119
the Sovereign Proprietor of the “uni-
verse, . 119
the all-transforming Spirit of the
universe, . 119
the all-surveying Spirit of the uni-
verse, 11g
God, mercy in, and in creation (See
MERCY), = 303


God mindful of man (See MINDFUL),
God, the bounty and faithfulness of
(See Bounty), 189
God, the eternal truth of (See TRUTH), 106
God, the goodness of nature’s, the pur-
pose of nature and (See NATURE),
aod, the greatness and gentleness of,
the text reveals the constructive side
of the Divine government, as seen
in the building of the Church, . 442
the gentle care of human hearts, :
the order, regularity, and stability of
creation, ° ° ° ° e 442


223


188
442





ei INDBX,
PAGE PAGE
at liberty he as long as he seeks God, the incomparableness of (See Lx-
and finds God’s precepts, 5 . 276 COMPARABLENESS), ‘
God, the, in whom man is blessed, . 421
GurT of God, children the (See Cuu- Gott peoples have a God, sl 4a
DREN), . 5 5 i 5 - 338 man must trust, love, and worship, . 421
Gladness, religious, Ree that ne ae only is blessed whose
gladness as the gift of God, f 65 is Jehovah, . - 421
arisin tiles C) contemplation of Hel is the only worthy object of man’s
God’s works, i ‘ F \ trust, . . 421
finding expression in ‘devout song, . 66 supreme love and worship, . 421
Glance, the heavenward, . . . 328 | God, the living and true, id and (See
is directed to One who is enthroned Twoxs), : ‘ . 221
in majesty, . 2 . 328 | God, the majesty and condescension of, 210
who has supreme government, A Hee) the majesty of God, . 2 210
who is rich in mercy, : + 329 He is throned above the realm of
this glance is persevering and tri- space, . 60 dew “ey uate
umphant, : F » 329 above all duration, A « . « SII
Glory oi Christ's kingdom, . . + 430 the condescension of God, . a wl peed
is manifested in its origin, 4 » 430 He looks on physical laws, and em-
in the manner and spirit of its ad- ploysthem, . re eo ii
ministration, . . 430 upon man, and visits him, ) ee SE
in the character of His subjects, » 430 upon human governments, and em-
in the privileces attached to it, . 431 ploys them, . f . 233
Glory of ae e sole, and the abne- God, te mercy of, solicited, 47
getion of man, =. . 219 God, the omnipresence of, and its im-
God's glory consists in His supreme pressions upon man (See OmMNI-
perfection, . 219 PRESENCE, . . : ‘ ; - 384
is righ cca in the mercy ‘and truth- God, the reign of (See REIGN), . cagt
fulness of His works and ways, . 219 God, the rejoicing of the & man in
should be apprehended and acknow- = Seeha alny of (See GOVERN-
ledged by man, 219 ENT), . . - 66
is not the object of God’s. solicitude, God, the ghteousnesa of nature’ 8,
but man’s, . . 219 nature's eauty and (See NATURE), 187
removes all ground ‘of boasting on God, the servant of (See SERVANT), . 272
the part of man, . . 220 God, the sole glory of, and the abnega-
God, argument with (See ARGUMENT), 258 tion of man (See GLory), - 219
God blessing man and man blessing God, the Word of, its sphere and its
God (See BLESSING), ‘ 3 . 120 service (See Ww ORD), » 259
God desired, the favour of, . . - 149 | God, the works of, the subject of ‘goul-
God incomparable, . 10 satisfying search (See WORKS), - 185


God, trust in (See TRusT), . . 224

God, walking before (See WALKING), ="235

God’s absolute control over man’s life
(See CONTROL), . 36

God’s attitude towards the righteous
and the wicked, .

God’s estimate of death (See EsTIMATE), 240

God's gift and man’s inheritance, the
earth (See EARTH), .

God’s goodness, its nature, and its re-
lation to prayer and life (See Goop-
NESS), .

God’s mercy, the greatness of (See
MERCY), :

God’ La seenlproaenge (See “OMNIPRE-


NCE), .
God's 8 pee the character and portion
of),
God's perfect knowledge of man (See 2
KNOWLEDGE), z + 379
God’s salvation (See SALVATION), 314
God’s testimonies a ground of jay (See
TESTIMONIES), . . 261
God’s treatment of different classes of
character (See TREATMENT), - 377
God’s ways, though often inscrutable,
are righteous and just, : » ga





INDEX, aa
/
PAGE PAGH
God’ id Sif a tried word and a loved Grass and its moral analogi C

: =) 82308 in we have an ceaok of

God's Word desired, arts 305 istian SAY a cheerful-
instructive, wonderful, kept, A + 306 ° . : . 446
God's works and God's words (See Gratitude, . e . » 205
Works), 290 there are grounds for, 2 + 205
Godly, the angelic ministers of the (See these grounds are often ignored, . 205

MINISTERS), . 54 these grounds should acknow-
Godly, the glorious privileges of the ledged by present thankfulness, . 205
(See PRIVILEGES), 57 and by perpetual thankfulness, » 206
Godly, the inviolable security of the Great, the supremely, . ; c « 443
(See SECURITY), . . su God i is great in His essence, . » $43
ee safe hiding- place of the (See An His power a cae on at 90 443
DING-PLACE), . 49 in His knowledge. F 444

Godly, the trials of the (See TRIALS), . 318 | Greatness and gentleness of God, the
Godly under misrepresentation, the (See Gop), 442


{See MISREPRESENTATION), . weory
Golden mean, the (See MEAN), . :

Good resolutions (See RESOLUTIONS), .
Good, the afilictions of the (See AFFLIC-


TIONS), . 340
Good, the blessedness of the (See oe
EDNESS),
Good, the foes and victory of the (Seo *
Foss), :
Goodness, God’s, its nature and its re-
lation to prayer and life, . . 282
its nature, it is Divine, and opera-
tive, ° . 282
it is an encouragement to prayer, . 282


our prayer having such encoura e-
ment should be of the largest kind


and for the best things, . 282
Goodness in nature, ercedanice and
ce, the Divine, . 450


Goodness, man’s recognition of God’s
(See RECOGNITION), S . 242
Goodness, the Lord’s, and man’s sin, 149
man’s sin notwithstanding the Lord’s_


goodness, 149

the Lord’s goodness notwithstanding
man’s sin, Shy RO
Goodness, the praise of the Divine, + 425


the manifestations of God’s goodness, 425
the universality of God’s goodness, . 426


the praise of God’s goodness, . mae
Government of God, the rejoicing of the
good man in the, ; ° oe
God is the Supreme Ruler, . 66


His rule is unchangeably righteous, . - 66
this is manifest in the be soueag 2


the wicked, .
the salvation of the righteous, . ; OF
Government of heaven, the Divine, 207
is acknowledged and obeyed univer-
sally, reverentiaily, swiftly, . . 208
comprehensively, continually, . . 208
willingly, perfectly, . : = . 208
Government of nations, the Divine, . 207
is personal, exalted, benevolent, . 207
suitable to the circumstances of
nations, « 207
administered b by Christ, .
Grace and guidance, a good man’s
prayer for (See PRAYER), . 410
Granting, the, of selfish desires an in-
jury to the soul, see ee Me ES3


Greatness, human frailty and Divine
(See FRAILTY), . 32
Greatness of God’s mercy, ‘the (See


MERCY),
Greatness of God, the, 1 an incentive to
praise Him, - 359
An oet Gtinetezies God's greatness
by sugeren eurontns heathen, 359
Hie’ regard for His people, » 359
His eternity and unchangeableness, . 360
Greatness, the praise of the Divine
(See PRAISE), A . °
Greatness, true, .
may be er ‘with external
humiliatio


external humiliation’ should not be- ie


little a man, . 309
Growth, the cedar an analogue of soul
(See CzDAR),. : . A
ne. Divine, 4il
Moe dinike of me who felt his need
Divine guidance, r 4rt
believed that God had a way marked
out for him, . 4ii
believed that God could reveal —
Pere to Him, .


rein pares himself i in the’ n ht pee:
e to receive Divine guidance, . 412


HaAPriness of society, the, dependent
on the Divine blessing, . 337
family greatness should be foraded
on the Divine blessing,
the safety of civil society ‘ts peed
by the Divine blessing, . 337
the prosperity of society is dependent


on the Divine blessing, . 337

Happy people, a pare of a (See Pic-

“ TURE), Ae . . . , se
appy people, e .
armony of creation restored, the, Sak 138
the glory of the Lord in His works, . 138
the joy of the righteous in the Lord, 138
the desire of the righteous concern-

ing the wicked, =. .  . - 138

Harps on the willows, . : - : a
every man has a ha
sometimes the harp fas 4 to be ang

on the willows, . 370
yet it needs not a be cast away, . 371
Hate, loveand, . . . ‘ » 300





PAGE
Hatred, holy, eens + 6 . + 30%
in its nature, causes, and specific
objects, . ° : A ‘ :
Headed, spiritual diseases (See Dis-
ASRS) cok pees ch «Vee ls eels Sine
Healing, human sickness and Divine
(See SICKNESS), . A : °
Hear God’s voice, sinners entreated to, 86
Heaven, the Divine government of
(See GOVERNMENT), 4 . *
Heavens, God’s praise in the (See
PRAISE), . : : ° ¢ .
Heavenward glance, the (See GLANCE), 328
Help of helplessness, the timely, .
who are the helpless ? ° °
when are they helped? .
how are they helped ? .
Helper of man, the mighty, .
man’s great need as asinner, .«
Christ’s great power asa Saviour, . 21
Helplessness, the timely help of (See


HELP), . : : : :
Heritage of His people, God’s Word the, 299
a heritage valuable and responsible, .
Hiding-place of the godly, the safe, . 49
an implication of danger, . . .
an assurance of ey : ; .
an expression of confidence, . ,. 50
Historical surprises (See SURPRISES), .
History of a rebellious people, passages
fromthe, . : . ° .
an incorrigibly rebellious people, .
a brave man acting as minister of
justice in a critical time, : c
a holy man sinning and suffering by
reason of the sin of others, . S
the great God contending against


human sin, . , - 0 A
beauties of (See


jor


eee
2 See). os:
is)
poe)
WwW


Holiness, the


BEAUTIES), . A ; . - 458
Holy hatred (See HATRED),. : . 301
Home of the soul, the,.- . © «© 35

the soul of man needs a home, . » 35
pre peal of man may find a home in

9 e . e e ° e 6

Home, the picture ofa pious, . . ps

ita worship, e ° ° e e 107

ite head ar.e) © a) ae. @i swears eee aTOS

its servants, . 5 c : - 108
the head of a pious house will do his
utmost to banish wickedness from

the world, . . : : e 109
eee of a distressed patriot, the,  . 3113

e object and seennd of his hope, . 113

the strength of his hope, . . - 114
the results anticipated from its fulfil-

: ee heap ° ° - 114
ope of redemption, the, . a
2 based. rs the revelation of the st

Divine Word, 5 - : + 343

rouses the most passionate longings

of the human soul, 5 343


is encouraged by reflecting on the
amplitude of the Divine mercy, . 343

fa strengthened by the assurance of
the completeness of redemptive


blessings, . « + + +» 343


INDE.





PAGE
Human exaltation (See EXALTATION), 211
Human frailty and Divine greatness
(See FRAILTY), . * anwngs
Human frailty an incentive to seek the
Divine blessing (See FRAILTY), . 64
Human frailty the result of human sin
(See FRAILTY), . : 4 a SF
Humility, aspects and expressions of, . 344
humility in certain ofits features, . 344
as connected with contentment and


rest, : . . : ° - 344
growing into hope, .  . . + 345
Humility, exemplary, . + 345


the humility which the poet dis-
played, . ° . F - + 345
the methods in which the possession
of this grace will be shown and
attested, . P : : . - 346
the means of producing it, . » 346
Hymn, anexultant, . 3 ; » 97
we have here exultation for the most
excellent reasons, . - : Za OT
with the fullest expression, . .
in the widest extent, . ; fs - 98


IDOLATRY, the moral consequences of, 222


the idolater becomes like his idols in
mental incapacity,. . e - 222
in moral insensibility, . ° a 222
in deep degradation, . - e . 222
in malign harmfulness, s . e222
in spiritual death, . : = 222


Idols and the living and true God, 22k
idols vary, God remains the same, . 221
idols are many and conflicting, God is

one and in harmony with Himself, 221
idols are the work of men’s hands,
God is eternal and uncreated, F
idols can only occupy temples made
with hands, God 1s in the heavens, 221
idols are senseless, God is keenly sen-
sitive of the wants of His creatures, 221
Idols, the vanity of, an incentive to
praise the Lord God, . ° :
the innate religiousness of human
nature, . e 4 ° ° °
the sad perversion of the religious
element in human nature, . - 36c
the grand Cbjest of worship for
man, . . . ° . - 361
the chief place of worship for man, . 361
Illustration of the renewal of the soul,
the renewal of the face of the
earth, an (See RENEWAL), . » 137
Imnortality, the vanity of man apart
from his (See VANITY), . . 29
Imprisonment, human, and
emancipation, sages . » 403
man’s imprisonment asasinner, . 403
man’s emancipation by the Saviour, . 404
man’s praise to the Emancipator, . 404
Incentive to praise Him, the greatness
of God, an (See GREATNESS), « 359
Incentive to praise the Lord God, the
vanity of idols, an (See IDOLS), . 360
Incentive to seek the Divine blessing,
human frailty an (See FRAILTY), . 44


360


Divine


INDEX. fe)


PAGE
Incident of the journey, a common, . 81


Incitements to praise the Lord, 358
the persons to whom the exhortation
is addressed, . - 358
they have access to and serve God, - 358
the reasons by which the exhortation
is enforced, » 358


because of the holiness of God | é
the delight which the exercise yields, 358


His special relation to Israel, . - 358
His sovereignty in nature, ore 355
Incomparable, God, __. te FO
Incomparableness of God, the, ° ns
heavenly beings are 5 ci . 8
heavenly beings are holy, ° a)
heavenly beings worship God, . a)
Inequalities readjusted, providential, . 266
the problem pated: * . . 266
the prosperity of the wicked, : 266
the adversity of the righteous, . 266
the problem solved, . - ° 266
the adversity of the wicked, , 266
the prosperity of the righteous, 266


Infinite, the finite and the (See Fours), 293
infinity, the, expressions and o,.jects of


the Divine mercy ee septs ning
Ingratitude, . . 1971
Inquiry, a godless, ‘anda 5 godly’ response, 220
e question, . + 220
why and by whom is ‘itesked?. | 220
an all-sufficient answer, . 220
God exists; He exists in the hee-
vens, 220
He does according to "His pleasure, . 231
Insignificance, the, fy greatness of man
(See MAn + 414


\s
Invitation to worship, an (See Wor-
SHIP), e . e . ° °


JEHOVAH the King (See KING), . » yi
Jehovah the refuge of the distressed (Zee


REFUGE), 4 . . 321
Jerusalem a ane of the Church, . » 326
because it is securely founded, . 2 326
the place of general assembly, .  .
the seat of universal government, . 326


Journey, 8 common incident of the, . 81
Joy of divine worship, the, , . © 325
1s realised in anticipation, 4 + 325
is enhanced when shared with others, 325
is most peed realised in the sanctuary, 32 25


Bee intel. ; < 2 ° ° » 326
oys, 8 140
Eh Batt iat tipet should

be hap - 140


His reeves 2 "have been for the most


. 140

Do carte snoelint > « 141
Jubilant people of God, the,. . . 456
reasons of their rejoicing, . . 456


the character of their rejoicing,. - 457


the expression of their rejoicing, . 457
Asati acry for (SeeCRY, . . 73
depreca . «7

the cake implied, ° ° e e 407
the petition esky - ° 2 407
the reasons urged, . = 8 QF


= PAGS

agree Jehovah ae < 3 ee A
© majesty of the King, . 5 as

the might of the King, , . Ja


seen in the stability of the world, ey he
in the subjugation of His enemi 7a
the eternity of the King and of his


kingdom, . 74
the truth of His ‘testimonica, . . 73

Kingdom of Christ, the, : 9%

Kingdom, the glory of Christ's (Bee
GLORY), ; . . 430

Kingdom, the temple and the, ° 215

King’s advent, the features and
of the (See ADVENT),

King’s sabjects, the character, 'privi-
eges, and duty of the (See Sup-
JECTS), %

Knowledge of God, the sorrows of the
soul and the (See SORROWS), . re

79


God knows all men, .

God knows all men thoroughly,
God knows all men constantly, :
the practical influence of this know-


on us and on our life, . . yc


LAMENT of a distressed patriot, the, . 101
his distress was very great, F + UUe
absorbing, consumi reset oan ge . oan
occasioned aero:

enemies,
was regarded as ‘an expression of ha
Divine anger, .
was not hopeless, 4 °
was patriotic, .
Lamentation and expostulation by
reason of the f cab Mar failure ef
the covenant o See CovE-
NANT), .
Law of God, the saint's enjoyment of the
(See ENJOYMENT), ‘. ; °
Law, prayer, duty,
Lessons for amareh ‘urch-builders "ee
CHURCH), , °

Liberator, the Lord the, - ® A

Liber: ality, : .
true liberalit must have righinons

ness for its is, . °
need for its object, P
usefulness for its end, °
will have success and honour | ao its
reward, . ° °

Life a shadow, human, . °

Life an exclamation,
life has the brevity of » cry,
life is a cry full of m

Life as the sphere of Di

(See SERVICE), . ’

Life, its sustenance and aim,

Life, long, . .
is desirable ‘
is promo ry true religion,
is not to be estimated by the pum ber

of its months and years,
a ts man will be satisfied with
length of his 2 as determined


Knowledge of man, God’s perfect. ; a
3


boHEE 8S £2 5


8 eect


g ret


~?





acs) SEP EX
PAGE
Life of a godly itiable, the Majesty and condescension of God, the, 379
commendable, ind ent reprehen- Mat est; of God in creation, the, .
sible in the troubled, . 170 glorious vesture of the Lord, .
the pitiable ; he complains of slander, the splendid palace of the Lord, “ pe
ity, and in the sublime chariot of the Lord, . 129


titude, . . 170
his


the commendable ; committed


cause to the Lordin prayer,. . matt
pe reprehensible ; he manifesta
vengeful spiri ere
Life, che ictions © and the resource
of the ea (See ATER: 110
the b 5 . - 253
At men are zi happy, 253


men can secure happiness only by a
right state of the heart,

and maintain it only tf a right atate
of the life, ¢

provision is made for man’s happiness
in the Word of


ep the complete triumph of the
Christian (See TRIUMPH), . . 167
ht, God’s Word a lamp and a, » 205
e Word of Godisalight, . . 296
a clear, full, and perennial light, 296
isan to whom and when? . . + 107
to the upright, . . 197
who have their seasons of darkness, 197
in which light ariseth, . : . 198
Long life (See Lirz), . c ; » 60
Lord and His universe, the, 134
the Lord is the Creator of all things, 134


the Lord is the Proprietor of all things,
the Lord is the Sustainer of allthings, 135
the Lord is the Sovereign of all things, 135


Lord, creation a revelation of the, - 130
displays His absolute power, . . 130
displays His delight in beauty, A ey
displays His great law of service, . 132


displays His ene for all His crea-


turea, 132
displays His supreme regard for man, 132
Lord in the Church and the atate, the


supremacy of the (See SUPRE-
MACY), . ee)
Lord, the glorious reign and praise of
the (See REIGN), . - 5 '
Lord, the liberator, the, ~ 4 « 439
Lord, the praise of the,
Lord, the works and worship of the


(See WorRKs), . é a » 139
Lord’s day, the, . 251
Lord’s goodness and ‘man’s sin, the

(See GOODNEss), . . 149
Lord's time and ours, the (See Tim), 304
Lord’s triumph, the (See TRIUMPH), . 248
Lost sheep, He (See RERRES = + 315
Love and A * . » 300
Love for God’ r Word, . 2 A « 300

what is it? A » 300
what degree of it should we have? . 300


why should we love it? . 300
how should we show our love to it?” 301
what results will follow our love of


it?. c ° ° ‘ . « jor
sangre and Ae Saas of God,
the (See Gop), . 210


the wonderful messengers of the
Lord, . ; ; ; A . 129
the firm footstool of the Lord, . » 129
Man, . ° - . P - + 415
Man a wonderful creation of God, 2 384
man is a creation of
man is a wonderful creation of God, . 384
therefore, man should —- the

praise of his Creator, .

Man blessing God, God pléening man,
and (See BLESSING), 120

Man, the blessedness of the Divinely-
instructed (See BLESSEDNESS), . 76
Man, the insi, cance and greatness of, 414
the insignificance of human life, . 414
human life is unsubstantial, . » 414
human life is transitory, . . - 415
the greatness of human life, . + 415

a by the regard of God for
415


ma
the mighty helper of (See
HELPER), : 20
Man, the vanity of, apart from his im-
mortality (See VANITY), : 27
Man’s remembrance of the Lord's bene-
fits (See BENEFITS), , : A :
Mean, the golden, >
such circumstances will arise as to
need and ead favour and loans,.
that man is happy who is able wisely
to afford those favours and loans, .
that man is happy who can do good
and no evil ee his Bs and
loans, . . 199
Melchizedek, the order of, . : ohh
Christ is a priest after, . = - 179
that order was unique, righteous, . 179
Pe eaceful, royal, superior, . ; 179
Jhrist’s appointment to — priest-
hood is Divine, . 180
Memory of the righteous, the stability
an
Men, a serious werd for young (See 3
WwW ORD), . : 256
eer and man’s frailty, God's (See
NTRAST), . : . . 126
Mercy in God and in creation, ; 362
in the Divine being and character, . = oo


123
» 198


19?
199


in the Divine work in creation, - 362
Mercy in human redemption and pre

vision, . 364

the mercy of God in redemption, . 364

the mercy of God in provision, 365


Mercy in the revolutions of providence, 363


in the judgments upon E . 36
in the thle of ye kings, aan
in the history of Israel, . 364
Mercy of God in the eT of man,
the, . . . 12
Mercy of God solicited, the, : 4 i:
Mercy, the Divine, : 2 » 243
the nature of, . . ° : . 244


INDEX.





PAGE

the objects and manifestation of, . 244
the recognition of, . : - 244

Mercy, the greatness of God’ Res 168
this i > seen in the blessings of daily


169
in the grand end for which it is


manifes 169
in the means by which it seeka to
accomplish this end, . . 169
im the multitudes to whom it ex-
tends, 169
Mercy, the infinity, expressions, and
objects of the Divine, , : » 123
the infinity of the Divine mercy, . 123
the expressions of the Divine mercy, 123
in His vindication of the oppressed, . 123
in His general dealings with His
people, . 7-123
fin the long delay of His anger, 123
in the transient duration of His
anger, . : “ » 123
in the forgiveness of sins, : + 124
in His fatherly compassion, s oer24
in His fatherly consideration, . 124
in the revelation which He made to
His people, . 124
' the objects of the Divine mercy, 124
Militant people of God, the, 460
the true spirit of, r . 460
the trusty weapon of, zs : . 460
the Divine warraut of, ° ° . 461
the grand design of, . . ° . 461
Mindful of man, God, . : “ 7 (223
why is God mindful of man? . 223
ot v4 how is God mindful of
2
for ena purpose is God mindful of
man? . 224
Ministers of the godly, the angelic, eed.
are commissioned by 55
exercise their me ed for the godly
as individuals, 55
ealy when the godly are in their true
path, 55
always when the godly are in their
true path, . 56
by means of the exercise of their
ministry the godly are enabled to
surmount all the hindrances and
conguer all the foes that beset
their way, . 56
Misery, expostulation from the depth of, 4
the Psalmist’s extreme distresa, Sr!
his misconception of God, . F z 25
his nearness to death, 5


his belief that iy idee are duties and

ivileges the discharge and enjoy-

ais ah. which are poe to the

present life, . : . :

his faith in God, ;

Misery, prayer from the depth ot, :
@ great depth of affliction, :

the Psalmist’s troubles were spiritual,

his troubles were many,


hi dily to death,
Shela ig Beg om homan society,
were from the hand of God, . °


Go BO Mm ew minin


were an expreion of the wrath of
God,


& great urgency of pra er, A . ;
his prayer was directe to God, 3
earnest and unceasing, . 4
Misery to exultation, stages from. (See
STAGES), ; . 157
Misrepresentation, the godly under, 317
the godly are not exempt from mis-
representation, . - 317
are distressed by misrepresentation, 317
should cry to God in mop are
tion, - 317
God clears the godly from misrepre-
sentation, 7 + 387
Morning prayer (See PEAYER), A 310
Motherhood, its blessings and respon-
sibilities, 4 ‘. 212
children are the subject of fond and
prayerful desire, . : 212
children are a mother’s joy, 3 5 | 213
children are a mother’s care, . . 213
children are Divine gifts, . 253
Motive for persevering prayer, the, 230
this motive reveals God’s condescen-
sion and anxiety tohear, . 230
the determination based bes this
motive, . 230
the Divine intention that is s suggested
by the ground of this motive and
the warrant of this determination, 230
NATIONS, the Divine government of
(See GovE RNMENT), . 207
Nature and advantages of true piety,
the (See PIETY), . 192
Nature and power of faith the (Bee
FAITH), . » 2337
Nature, God in (See Gop), A 118
Nature, the purpose of, and the good
ness of nature’s God, . 188
the purpose of nature is to be remem-
ered 188
why? That we "may ‘have pe tual
evidence of the goodness oe 188
Nature’s beauty and the righteousness
of nature’s God, ., . ‘ . 187
nature is beautiful, . ’ . . 187
nature’s God is righteous, ; , 187
nature is beautiful as the expression
of the righteousness of God, . . 189
Near unto the Lord, a people, » 455
Nearness and man’s, God's, ’ . 311
Need, the, succoar, and triumph of the
soul (See SouL), . : , 201
Needful prayer, a ( See PRAYER), 389
Nightly occupations of the godly, the
(See OCCUPATIONS) ; » 279
Noble people and a noble service, Ss 204


the servants of God are a noble


people, 204

they Eeintalne the noblest ideal of life, 204

have the noblest Master, . < » 204

ield to the noblest claims, . . 204
“ the noblest warrant for their ser-

° » 204

iy vibe noblest rewards, . » 304





INDEX.


PAGE


God's service is a noble service, F
in the dignity of its sphere, .
in the motive from which it pprings,
in the instruments by which it Pees
accomplished, - .
im the freedom of its consecration,
in the uses which it serves,
Numeration, an all-important,
He teacher, .


uu m4
the pope
the ana é


OBEDIENCE, the blessingsof (See BLEss-
INGS);s 95 re A ‘i Sa
ae and the apostate cleadoieg


e
° ® ®
e » © e
. ° e


the obedient are sustained by a con-
sciousness of personal rectitude, .

enjoy the Divine aid and blessings, .

the apostates will be teas pun-


ishe
Object, obligation, and expression of
worship, the, ‘ 5
Obstacles are removed, ‘why ioe :
because of the omnipotent ora
of the Lord, .
covenant presence of ‘the Lord, |
merciful presence of the Lord, .
righteous pee of ie Lord,


Obstacles, the removal of, . ;
antagonisms are quelled, . :
bheundaries are removed, . *


itticulties are overcome, .
@vcupations of the godly, ha nightly,
ae duties of the night, . :
how they are to be performed, . 5
why they are to be performed, .
prepare us for the exercise of daily
duties, :
Omnipresence, God’s, ;
He is personally present everywhere,
influentially present everywhere, .
intelligently present everywhere,
His presence is everywhere realised
by the godly soul, .
Omnipresence of God, the, and its im.
pressions ube man, .
endeavour to realise God’s omni-
presence,


De


205


334
334


334


383


- 383
trace the i impressions which it ought


to Pe pus onus, .
Opportunity, man’s extremity, God’ iB,
er of Melchizedek, the (See MEL-
CHIZEDEK), .
Orthodoxy, .
what it implies, |
what it consists in,
the result of, .


PALM-TREE an analogue of the eck


eous, the, 5
in ita resolute upward prowth, dl
in its growth despite of hindrances, ,
in its etre, verdure, . : Aj
im its fruitfulness, . . . .
Pardon with punishment, . 5 ‘


-3
245





PAGE
forgiveness is the undisturbed com-
munication of the love of God to
sinful man, . 104
such pardon does necessarily sweep
away the one true penalty of sin, .
yet leaves frat penalties unre-
moved, 103
pardonin love so modifies the punish-
ment that it becomes an occasion


5 ii


for thankfulness, . 103
Passages from the history of a rebel-
lious people (See HISTORY), . . 155
Pattern prayer, a (See PRAYER), . - 174
Patriot, the hope of a distressed (See
Hops), 5 113
Patriot, the lament of a , distressed (See
LAMENT), ne Sie “ers rane
P eace, . ° ° ° ° ° + 313
@ qualification, . Fy . - - 313
a process, . e . ° e « 313
the result, . ° ~ . . « 314
Peace and prosperity, . C . 327


should be subjects of earnest prayer, 327
are correlative blessings, . » 327
are necessary for the cultivation of
fraternal intercourse and affection, 337
should be Waeaes for the sake of the
Church of God,
People and a noble service, anoble (See


OBLE), . A
People and pleasure of the Lord, the, F as
People, a picture of a happy (See Pic-


TURE), . 418
People, characteristics of the blessed
(See CHARACTERISTICS), . - 148
People near unto the Lord, a, . : 3 55
People of God, the blessedness of th
(See BLESSEDNESS), 13
Mes oe of oe the jubilant (See JuBI-
+ 4
Pane oH Goa, the militant (See Muu “
TANT), oo) te
he cee ne character and ‘portion of
People, te hap y, : . a
Persecution and a glorious emancipa-
tion, a cruel, . : - 145
Israel persecuted in E - 145
the root and manner ert, persese-
tion, ; + 145
Israel emancipated from Egypt, + 145
by human instruments, . - 145


by overcoming persistent resistance, 145


in favourable circumstances, . » 146
Perseverance, . . . . + 270
steady, . c : i oe - 270
rapid, 5 3 A » 270
pis i a ‘ ; 5 ‘ 3 » 270
Porson Gad feo es rETY), 247
ersonal an piety (See Prsry), 24
Personal religion (Bee RELIGION), : aa
Lotvemsty a sad picture ef human, 154
aspiring g the choicest inheritance, . 154

oe nets the best authenticated


word, 5 '


murmuring against the Divine ar.
Tangementa, . . - 154





IN DBX, at
PAGE PAGS
the commands ef the ada to of all ranks and
Lor : . 154 of the most varied dutiea, - 455
receiving deserved punishment, Sore adapted to persons of all ages, . - 455
entailing misery upon their posterity, 154 fitted to inspire = praises of persons
Petitions, oe three, . eh} of all ranks and ages, . : - 455
for visible results from the work, - 47 | Praise, constant, . . 313
for the stability of the work, . 48 is due to God for the constancy of
for the succession of the work, . 48 His judgments, __. - 313
Philosophy of death, the (See DEATH), 437 the penahoene of His judgments, 313
Picture of a happy people, a. - 418 the clearness of His judgments, 313
a noble offspring, - - : + 418 the help He vouchsafes to keep His
secular prosperity, . . = 418 judgments, . 5 313
settled peace, . A + 419 the forgiveness He offers where we
flowing from the favour of. God, + 419 have broken His judgments, . BANS
Picture of a pious home, a (See Praise, eternal (See ETERNAL), . 193
HOME), . 107 | Praise from excellent society and for
Picture of human perversity, a nad (See excellent reasons, . - 447
PERVERSITY), 154 praise from excellent society, : 447
Piety, personal and family, - aoe s + 247 they have a clearer knowledye of God, 447
piety is sadly wanting, . . » 247 they have a closer relation to God, . 447
the want of piety is supplied, 247 they have richer blessings from God, 447


piety must be personally appro-
priated, - 247
piety is appropriated to be diffused, .
piety alone will make home happy, .
a happy home is a miniature of and
a uursery for heaven, .
Bey a nature and advantages of
- 192
Piety, aa old i age of (See AGE), < 3 FO
Pilgrimage and the heavenly ares,
the earthly, .
God’s people are on 8 ‘pilgrima,
delightful provisions are for
them on their pil age,
Pilgrimage, Divine blessings in human
(See SO iaoatnua), j . 146
, strangers and (See STRAN-


GERS
_ Pitiable, the commendable, and the re-
feof go the, in Feta troubled
ife of a y man ( = -
all-prevailing, . ;
heed teks : . 292
the prayer based upon this plea,
the sources of the Bealmist’s informa-


tion as to both plea and prayer, . 292
Pleasure of the Tans the people and, . 458
Portion, the soul’s, é ° ; .

what it is, . = 5 : ; . 280
how it is attaine 280
on what grounds it is ‘given, 3 . 280
for what purpose it is given, . 280
Power, the ose of the revelation of

God’s (S (Sce REVELATION), 6 . 190
Practice, preaching and oe PREACH-

ae ee “ - 275

° . 183

the true object of worship, e . 183
the true character of worship, . —._ 184
the eel af etal reese Lod

of unive . 104

the reasons of praise to the Lord, . 104
the extent of praise to the Lord, . 105
the character of praise to the Lord, . 105
Praise, a summons to universal, . . 455


aspects of God’s revelation of Himself ;


oe for excellent reasons, » 447
or the blessings of His providence, . 447
for His agency in nature, . : . 448
for the blessings of His revelation, . 448
Praise in the heavens, God’s, . 452


Wy. heavenly beings, .
raise which they offer to God is
+ untary, constant, and thorough, 452


by heavenly bodies, . , 452
they are summoned to praise God be-
cause they were created by Him, . 452
they are sustained by Him, 452
they are governed by Him, 452


the interest of godly men in God's


praise in the heavens, . 453
Praise of God, the good man's colebre
tion of the, . A 61
the ground of this exercise, Ae rey
the manner of this exercise, . . 62
the seasons of this exercise, . 63
the excellence of this exercise, . 63
Praise of the Divine goodness, the (Bee
GOODNESS), . . 425
Praise of the Divine greatness the, . 423
the reasons of the Divine praise, . 423
God is great in His deeds, 0423
God is great in His majesty, . 423
God is great in His goodness, . w42 3
God is great in His righteousness, . 423
the characteristics of the Divine
raise, . es 423
it is constant, perpetual, . . + 423
fervent and songful, . . 424


Praise of the Divine reign, the (Bee
REIGN), . . 429

Praise of the Divine relation to different
characters, the ee RELATION), . 431
Praise of the Lord, the, ; 130

the ator should be praised with the


ees 30

sith of His attributes. . 130

because of His work in creation,  . 130
both for what He reveals and what

He conceals of Himeelf, 130
he is best qualified for this service

“whose God is the Lord,” . . 130


ER FNDEX.





PAGB

Praise of the Lord, the glorious im

and (See REIGN), . F . 127

Praise of time, the, s : ‘ » 424

as the decree of God, 424
as expressing the resolution and work


of Christ’s Church, : A + 424
Praise on the earth, God's, : A » 453
the variety of, . + 453
the _ Psalmist summons the " inor-
ganic creation to praise Him, » 453


t summons the vegetable
creation to praise Him, .
the Psalmist summons the animal
creation to praise Him, .


453
453


the Psalmist summons the rational
creation to praise Him, . 4 . 454
the universality of, . . 454


universal praise is God’s right, . + 454
the good man’s desire, _. 454
a fact which will be realised in the
future, : » 454
the eiuenality of, » 454
iti e ae and sublimely reason-
454


Praise the Lord, incitements to (Bee
INCITEMENTS), . - 358
be the subjects and expressions


Prabal the subjects and seasons of,
the subjects of praise, 4 : » 64


the loving-kindness of God, . 64
the faithfulness of God, . 5 . 65
the seasons of praise, : i, ae OS
in the sree = ° ° - 65
in the evenin: . 2, 65
Praise to God, he excellence of, . 439
it is excellent in ye - o 439
it is good, . 5 i » 439
leasant and comely, : 4 . 440
it is excellent in ried reasons, F « 440
His relation to His Church, . - 440
His relation to troubled souls, . . 440
His relation to heavenly hosts, . . 440
His retributive relation to men, - 441
Praise, trust and (See TRUST), . + 435
Praise, universal, . 464
the grand prerogative of God, ; - 464
the precious privilege of man, , 465
the fervent desire of the » 465
Praising Him, tke providence snd
leasure of God a reason for (See
BOVIREACE); nah oe : » 444
Prayer, . : 2 . = » 306
the character of, “ 5 + 306
the matter of, . : + 306
the manner of, . . 3 . 306
the plea to be used in, 5 - 306
the purpose which should sustain, 306
Prayer, a needful, » 389
the need for such a rayer as this, 389
the manner in which such a prayer
as this receives its answer, . 390
Prayer, a pattern, é : 174
true in its direction, . . . . 274
personal in its aim, . 5 ‘ . 194
subinissive in ita spirit, . . - 194
pewerful in its plea, . 5 * . 174








P.
Prayer and confidence, complaint (See


COMPLAINT), . 172
Prayer, an earnest, and an immediate

answer, . - 376

the earnestness of his prayer, . 376


the effectual relief he gained, . . 376
the force of his example upon other


minds, 377
Prayer, attributes aud advantages of
acceptable, - 434


some attributes of acceptable prayer, 434
sincerity, reverence, faith, i
some advantages of acceptable prayer, 434


the realisation of God's presence, 434
the fulfilment of their desires, . 434
the attainment of His salvation, 434
Prayer, creation a plea in (See CREA- ;
TION): 7s - ~ : , 285
Prayer, duty, law, é : . 354
ee er, effectual, fervent, and baliev-
ae . . ‘ + 309
its o ject, . . . * . e 309
its reasons, . - = & 309
its petitions, 5 A = 310
its characteristics, . . . 4 310
lts warrants, F ’ 5 310
its resolutions, . = : e gio
its basis, . - ° ° 310
Prayer, encoura; ements fer - ATER


pray because God is the Lord, . Reh
the Lord is our God, . - °
The Lord is gracious, . ‘ . 231
the Lord is righteous, P ‘: » 232
our God is merciful, . .
Prayer for grace and guides a good
man’s, ..
the Psalmist prays “for God's dis-
tinguishing favour as a God of
grace, . : : : , . 410
God’s daily guidance as a God of
Providence,
the constant acceptance of his devo-


410


tions as a prayer-hearing God, . 4it
Prayer from the depth of misery (See ==
MISERY), . t
Prayer in trouble, and confidence in
prayer, trouble in life (Bee
TROUBLE), » 392
Prayer, its object and its value, . 229
characteriatics OL, - 229
the object of, 2 : 229
the ‘a uetofy oe 5 ; i . 229
Prayer, morning, . : 310
the Bible speaks much F 3 310


morning is the most tavourable time

for, S . ike}
morning is the time God demands for,
ns is the most appropriate time


mh

Piva er r of a distressed servant of God. :
the, : . 408
the blessings which are sought, . go8
the loving-kindness of 40g
deliverance from distressea, . 408
inward and spiritual blessings, . . 408


the grounds open which they are
sought, . > e « 489





INDEX. xxi
PAGB PAGE
the sore needs of the Pralmisi, . . 409 & consciousness of sin sinks the soul


his personal relations to God, :

the aie eas with which they are
t, 4to

Prayer of the godly for deliverance from
enemies, a (See DELIVERANCE), . 416

Prayer of the godly man from the depths


of distress, . : - 399
& “rea of deep distress, . . “ + 399
ad es rsecution of his enemies, . + 399
ure of human help, + 399

he depression of his circumstances
and condition, A . 400
@ prayer of strong confidence, . » 400
God’s accessibleness to him, . + 400
God’s interest in him, i + 400
et s knowledge of him, . . + 400
from in asa of faith & + 400

basis of the prayer
+ 400
tage of the upright, a - F - 389
for Divine examination, : » 389
for entire freedom from evil, . 389


for Divine guidance in the way of


righteousness, » 389
Prayer preferred, the wicked way "with.


in us, and the, ‘ ° » 39%
Prayer, special, . 7 - : » 230
the time for, . ° * ° 2 230
the subjects of, . A - 5 eeaak
the manner of, . . . 231
Prayer, the motive for persevering (See
MOTIVE), : + 230
Preaching and practice, 5 ° « 375
the Psalmist’s prayer, . . + 275
the Psalmist’s purpose, . - e275
the Psalmist’s consolation, A 275
Preciousness and number of God's
thoughts, the (See THOUGHTS), . 386


Privilege rand security of the good, the, 332
it is the iene of the good to trust


in the 332
it is the security of ‘the good ‘to be

guarded by His presence, . an 34a
their security is perpetual, ~ 5343


Privileges of the godly, the glorious, . 57
some features in the pia of the


godly, . ey
love to God, ; ‘ 5 . a ST.
knowledge of God, . - : Aeris!
prayer to God, . : : 2 . 58
some of the privileges of the godly, . 58
deliverance from danger, . : +: O88
exaltation and consequent miei :
answers to prayer, . . 58
the presence of Ged in trouble, . . . 59
the conference of distinguished
honours, 59
eatisfaction with the duration of life, 59
full salvation, . : 5 » 59
Profession, religious, 296


shoul d be of the most binding char


acter, ;
the result of serious th ht, . 207
made with a free but resolute will, . 297
faithfully and TeTeased kept, . 297

‘Profundis, de, ry . e . 343
VoL.


into depths of penitential sorrow, . 34a
from the depths of penitential sorrow
the soul cries earnestly for pardon, 343


the penitential soul seeks pardon in
order to serve God acceptably, . 342
Progress, Christian, . . 271


the way of, is Divinely revealed, . 271
is poszible only under certain definite


conditions, . . a7
is pee without Divine assist-
. e . 272
Pring, the faithful, . . 14l


the at remembrance of His pro-


the p pe Teta of His promines, 5
perpetuity o of He promises, . 142

ine recipients of His promises, . b
the ent of His promises, . .
Proper attitude of the righteous to-
cha’ the ungodly, the (See ae


DE), » 306
Prosperity and its qualifications, . + 196
tis prosperity? . » 196
what is calculated to produce it? 196
epi pecs can be urged against ©
- 197
Proenty vat ‘the elt the tema tem; 66
Prosperity, . 327
Riedie Peart: 3 » 323
ee and efiicient, : + 323
chil from the most open assaults, 323
guards from the t
peed F ‘ porte . 324
is a defence against every + 324
is realised amid the active duties of
life, 5 . f ° . 324
overshadows the rest of home, . + 324
is unremittin 324
Protection of God, the day of battle
and the (See BATTLE), . : - 394
Protection, the Divine, ; : . 302
where it is revealed, . joa
the comfort this revelation brings, . 307
Providence and pleasure of God a
reason for pralsing Him, the, + 444
the providence of : . 444
presiding over the elementa, + + 444
creating vegetation, . Fi ° + 444
providing for His creatures, . » 444
the pleasure of God, . + + G44
is not in those who trust in their own
resources, ' . 444
is in those who trast in Him, ; - 445
the praise of God, . 4 » 445
a response for Divine favours, + 445


aD piee of ceatiends kee for Divine
favours,
Providenee, mercy "in the revolutions of


(See MERCY}, .
Provitential inequalities readjusted
(See INEQUALITIES), . : . 266
Provisions, Divine : . 2358
me oe result of the Divine pre-


$i 3


2 . 238
Sintcersdats real need, A Z - 358
come in unexpected forma, . 258





PAGE |

flow with abounding fulness, . . 218

are constantly permanent, 7 218
Psalm of universal praise, a (See

PRAISE), . 104
acrseront pardon with (See Par.

DON 102
Purpose ot therevelation of God's power,

the (See REVELATION), . A - 190


QUALIFICATIONS, prosperity and its

(See PROSPERITY), : : :
py sowing and (See Sow-
man ‘.
to meet


Reco Aiton of God’s goodness
co fill ae ec is manifested


need,

shall t be universally recognised,
such recognition will characterise the
pedesiet and wleniied Church for


Recollection and an encouraging " anti-
Pare a devout resolution, grate-


See RESOLUTION), . i
Recollection, precious yet sorrowful, .
of lost privileges, . . :
their country, . a f ; F
their freedom, : o earls
their prune rivileg : .


of privileges which they had lost by
reason of their non-appreciation of
them, . a : ;
Redeemed, the way of the, .
Redemption and provision, mercy in
human (See Me
Redemption,. .
its sure foundations, . =
and its awful sanctions,
the hope of (See Horx),
Refreshing Himself, Christ,
the Divine refreshment, .
the consequence of that refresh-
ment, c
Ref of the distressed, J ehovah
the saad is often in circumstances of
distress,
in every time of distress Jehovah is
an available refuge,
the most signal manifestations of Di-
vine help are realised in the sanc-


fed Fart yf SM >


ee ws et @ @


tuary,
the sou! is delivered from distress only
as it turns to Jehovah,
gst iy praise of the Lord, the glo-


oe ee of the Lord,

ite stability, . .
ita majesty, C °
its lider ne

the praise of the Lord,
by hoiy angels, . .
by the unintelligent eeeticn,


te 16 8 * ‘e420 2
«eee ef © © © « @


by redeemed men, .

of God, the, '
the subjects of the Divine are
ment, ° e ° °


INDEX


336
242


+ 243


- 374
367


- 367


367
368
368


368
» 160


364
191
192
192


343
182


182


182
321


22


322


Qt








PAGE

certain characters which mark his fe

ministration, g2

the demand upon our grateful joy, nO?
Reign, the praise of the Divine, .


the characteristics of the Lord's, 7 . 429
glorious, . r “ b « 429
mighty, ° . . ry e . 429
ih lee - ; i s ; - 429
he conversation on His reign, . - 429
delight i in His reign, . : ‘ 429
prete of Hisreign, . + 429
eaire for the extension of His reign, 429
Rejoicing of the man in the
overnment of God, the (See
sOVERNMENT), : 66
Relation to different characters, the
praise of the Divine, . . 43!
His relation to the weak and the
burdened, ‘ : r - 431
the dependent, . ¥, ‘ . » 431
the prayerful, . . 2 > - 432
His saints, ° . ° . . 432
the wicked, A . 432
His righteousness and kindness tn all
His relations, - 433


His praise because of all His relations, 433


Relationships, Divine, 241
a relationship of obedience yet
friendship, . 241
of friendship yet obedience, . . 242
must receive a formal and public ac-
knowledgmen : 242
Relief which the Gospel affords, the suf-
ferings of God's servants, and the
(See SUFFERING), . 5 ° . 398
Religion, personal, . 252
consists in the acknowledgment of a
ersonal God, 252
ac pac er peas of a personal God
aecessible to man, . 252
apprehension of a personal God, ke)
enjoyment of a Divine revelation, . 253
ersonal sacrifices, . : - . 253
evout worship, . 253
Religion, the characteristics and bless-
edness of true, . 194
the characteristics of true religion, . 194
fear of the Lord, . . 194
delight in God’s commandments, . 194
Divine praise, . 194
the blessedness of true religion, . 194
Religion, the posthumous results of, . 195
what the text ich ; « 195
what the text declares, . . - 195
what the text implies, . 196


Religious fellowship (See FELLOW.
SHIP), eS
Religious ’gladness, :
Religious profession (See PROFESSION), e
Remedy, a danger and its (See Dax-
GER)" "an ee ae Dee OM
Remembrance of the Lord’s benefita,
man's Nee BENEFITS), 122
Removal jai obstacles, the (Bee Opsta-
3 . 3
Removed, why obstacles ere (See On-
STACLES), ‘ ° . 219








IN DEX. wxill

PAGE PAGE

Renewal of the faee ef the earth an His great law of service, . a 132

{illustration of the renewal ef the His regard for all Hia creatures, 132

soul, the. é ; ke ee 19, His supreme regard for man, . 132
the renewal of the face of the earth, Revival of the Church, a, and «ymptome

succeeds to the dreary and seem- which precede it, . . . » WS

ingly dead state of nature in Revolutions, terrest A . 165

winte: 137 revolutions in coun . 165

bs Pred by life and. treshiness, 137 revolutions in human ‘ 166

is very ual, : 137 the salutary impression of such, . 166

is irresistible, . 137 | Retribution, . 373
i» initiatory te a glorious season of an important feature of the Divine

maturity, ekg government of the world, . 373

opt hegre spiritual, 2s a et A retribution,. . ; + 373

requites His saints for their an illustration of the nature of, 373
oe : 4 - 239 the desire for retribution is prone to
requital is ample, : - 239 develop into vindictiveness towards


shoal be oe 5 ppenage by man’s re-
quital of God’s love,


Bezignation, its duties and usefulness,


resignation to the Divine will, . 287
prone es and includes prayer for
ort and support, . . 288
er for life is consistent with, . 288
regen ed life is desired for the two-
Pfold Aattaados that it may wield, . 288
Resolution, a devout, grateful recollec-
a and an So Sud anticipa-
NY f |
@ aot resolution, Ser + 374
te praise God in the moat excellent
manner, . eens 74
fer the most excellent reasons, : 37%
a grateful recollection, 4 - 375
ef speedy and gracious answers to
prayer, . » 375
an encouraging anticipation, + 375
Resolutions, good, 255
depend on the presence of Ged for
their fulfilment, ; 25
have respect to Divine law,
their ent depends on the dght
state of the heart and life, 256


and should be followed by gratitude, 256
Saat a godless inquiry and a


(See INQUIRY), . 220
Responsi Bmaibilieg towards the young, our,
a Sunday-school sermon, . 116
Rest, the soul’s return to its, : 233
this rest is its rightful heritage, 233
man’s lost rest may be regained, . 234
Restored, the harmony of creation (See
HARMONY), . 138
Results of religion, the posthumous
(See RELIGION), . 195
Revelation of God’s power, the purpose
of the, 190
God! ) people have acquired the heri-
tage of the heathen, 190
this cs clay is the result of
Divine . 190
aad is for Ah i enett of bumanity at
. 190
eee of the Lord, crvation a, 130
displays His absolute renee ee
over the waters, . ° » 130
over the earth, . - 138
displays His delight in beauty, 432


those who have injured us, . - 374
Reward of the wicked, the, . 53
gives the Bible better than (See


LE),
Bightoose the palm-tree an analogue of
the (See PALM), .
Higntoons, the stability and memory of
the


. . 199

Road, the heavenly, eee
man is naturally in the wron way, :
reflection will lead men into the ch ae


thercholte. of the right way must be
Hae the by a deliberate change of


it, . .

the right way is to be pursued with
alacrity,

this aisectiy leer ie be lessened by

the dangers and privations of the

road, Sipe cae eee eae

Royal army, the, ; ° 5 : - 177


SACRED cages) the oe ENcLO-
SURE), . . 3
Sacrifices, spiri
a ~~ lon of of the spiritaal priest.

of believers, .

pote priests must have spiritual
preparation, . .

must offer, and can only offer, ‘ spiri-
tual sacrifices,

spiritual offerings must be free-will
offerings, A

pinetny offerings are ‘most ‘acceptable


to God, .
Saints, the communion of (Bee ‘Com. ae


281
233


Si


2322


MUNION), - ’ - . . 281
Salvation, . + 274
the outcome of the Divine merci - 274


not a humana wae but a Divine
visitation,


- 274
the subj $e ot Divies . 274
a withers tothe Geclincees the


Divine word,. . . . 275
Salvation, God’a,. . ‘ + 314
its nature, . ° . ° 314
its conditions, : + 314
coieenertabed ox Jee . 315
its o tions, » 31
Salvation, man’s adversity and God’s ;
(Bee ADVERSITY). . . . 28


wxty rynEeT.
oe th Hecti ain
Sanctuary. Slessi: @ recolle : ‘ F o 38
the Tomple 's Wratnaiee® the rest of God, ‘se Sickness and Divine healing, bumas, . 162
the Tempe was incomplete without human sickness, ‘ of» 168 5
ark, . 349 in its cause and effect, ; , - 164
the thee Dlensings which are ‘asked Divine healing, : ¢ . 162
for, . : . + 350 effected in answer to prayer, h 162
School sermon, & Nunday, : . 116 effected with supreme ease, . . 162


Sarcasm the cause of pungent suffering, 329
a common weapin ef the enemies of
the cause of Ua pa suffering to His

people, .
this suffering is counterbalanced by
the consolations ef the Divine
mercy, .
Beamen and the Bovereign of the sea,
ace
’s sovereign over t e nea, .
man’s pce when the sea rebels
against


+ 163
163


163
man's resource when the nea rebels
Hes pei him, . : 6 : . 18%
‘3 answer to man’s cry, 164
man’s obligation for God's interposi-


tion, .
Seasons of praise, the su bjects and, .
Seasons, the uses ef the (See Usks), .
Security of the godly, the inviolable, .

as eflected by God, . ‘
its tenderness and effectivences, mot LG
as gloriously complete, . ° °


safe from all perils, . : “ 51
safe at all times, : 52
raised above the fear of danger, 52


as conditionated by trustin God, , 53
Security of the good, the privilege and


(See PRIVILEGE), . r 332
Self-retributive character of slander,
we the (See Lapaalad ps 5 LY
Aes and consisten
the necessity of separation from evil- ar
the duty of keeping God’s command. it
ments, 303
the importance of prompt resolution, 303
Serious word for young men, a (See
Worp), . : : . 256
Sermon, . Sunda -achool, 4 . . 1i6
Servant of God, the, . 5 ' . 272
God qualifies His servants, 5 + 272
those whom God qualifies for, He
consecrates to His service, . 272
those whom He consecrates He sup-
porta by special encouragements, . 273
those whom He qualifies, conse-
crates, and encourages are expected
to exhibit certain traits, - 273
Service, a noble people and a noble (See
NOBLE), . 204.


Bervice, life as the sphere of ‘Divine, : 227


the features of Divine service, , » 228
the sphere of Divine service, . 228.
exceptions to Divine service, , . 228
pane Di cane life a, . ° ° 2 416
Sheep, the lost, ° s . 2 315
the wandering, ° e e e . 3I
9 ® e ° gt





demanding grateful acknowledgment, 163
Sin and folly a petag unhappy, the (See
UNHAPPY), . - 105
Sin estimated the light of heaven, . 40
Siv, human frailty the result of human
(See YRAILTY), 37
Sin in ite progress, pollution, and


punishment, : - 5 . 156
sin in ita progress, . . ° « 156
disobedience, . . . - 156
evil associations, e : . 156
idolatry, c : . 156
offering human sacrifices, . . . 156
sin in ita pollution, . ‘ . » 157
sin in its punishment, ; - may
punishment was long delayed, . 157
an expression of Divine anger, - 157
corresponded with the sin, SA |


Sin in its root, expressions, and punish
ments, . - 158


in its root—forgetfulness of God, 151

in its expressions, - 151

- regards the Oivine provision, er
regards the Divinely-appointed

ot ers, . - . 15%

as regards the Divine Person, : 151

in its punishments. 152


punishment corres nding with sin,
punishment anes intercession,
Sin, the Lord’s goodness and man’s
(See GOODNESS), .
Sinners entreated to hear God's voice, 86
Sins of men, the covenant of God and
the (See COVENANT),


Slander, ; 108, <
Slander, the self-retributive character

reli: negne

the work of slander, F : - 317

the retribution of slander, 318


Solicitude on behalf of sons and


daughters, . - . 419
the objects of this solicitnds, : . 419
our sons, . 3 . » 419
our daughters, . + 423
the subjects of this silicitaiagds + 421
Song, encouragementa to holy, - - 64
Bong of the Builders, the aes
UILDERS), ‘ . 352
Songs in a strange land, ms72


Songs in exile, the difficulty of singing,
what the world is to the Christian, . 371
whence arises the difficulty of sing-
ee the Lord’s song in a world like


whet answer shall bo returned to the
papel: gpa shali we sing 1”

. + 378

Sees of 336


seins tes Bly parma a wa


a


PY PRX.





PAGE
Sons and daughters, solicitude on be-
half of (See SoLrciTuDE), . 419
Sorrowful recollections, precious yet


(See RECOLLECTIONS), . 367
Sorrows of the soul and the knowledge

of God, the, . - : . 401

a figure indicating great sorrow, + 4or

a fact affording great consolation, + 402


Boul, the home of the (See HoME), .. 35
Soul, the need, succour, and triumph


of the, . = 5 : . . 20
saa sible to its rest, the (See
EST), + 233
penis. the duty of caring for,
Sound, the blessedness of knowing the
pvt - 36


atthe Gospelia, - =... 16
what it demands, ‘ A e - 416


what it ensures, 16
Sovereign of the sea, distressed seamen

and the (See SEAMEN), . . 163

Sovereignty of Christ, the - 174


Christ reigns by Divine appointment, 175


by Divine right, - 175
by a devout acknowledgment, eet 7S
over a disputed empire, : 3 te
by the enforced service of His foes, >. 7B
will reign over an undisputed uni-
verse, : . 176
Bovereignty of God, examples of the
holy, and the becoming worship of
His people (See EXAMPLES), . IOI
Sowing and reaping, 336


the time of sowing is often attended
with anxiety and sorrow, . oe 330

the time of reaping is one of inexpres-
sible joy, 5 ° 330
Special oe (See PRAYER), 5 » 230
Spirit, the wicked (See WICKED), . 202
Spiritual joys (See Joys), . . 140
Spiritual requital (See REQUITAL), . 238
Spiritual sacrifices (See SACRIFICES), . 298
Spiritual warfare (See WARFARE), . 246

Stability and memory of the righteous,
the, . . 199
Stages from misery to exultation, nS


misery leading to a cry for mercy, . 158
a ee for mercy securing the Divine 4
15
ihe tprvies regard ‘securing ‘relief
from trouble, 158
relief from trode awakening prayer
for complete salvation, . ° 158
Strangers and pues ° ’ » 265
the stranger, ° ° » 265
the stranger's rayer, 4 ° < she
the stranger’s longing, . ° Bae:
Stier lta ° ° ° ° 269
tle Psalmist’s case, . ° ; e 269
the Psalmist’s prayer, , . 269
th: Psalmist’s plea, . : . 269


Stren: th of God an encouragement to
His people to trust in Him, the . I!

the strength ef God is manifested in
i control over nature, 41

ma in His subjugation of
His foea, e e ° ° . 3


PAGH
ever exereized in harmony with right-
eousness, mercy, and truth, . + xe
an encouragement to trust Him, . 13
Subjects and ¢ expressions of Prev, the
(See PRAISE), . 463
Subjects and seasons of praise, the . 64
Subjects, the character, privileges, and
duty of the King’s (See CHaA-
RACTER),
Succour and triumph of the soul, the


ne
Suffering, sarcasm the cause of pun.
gent (See SARCASM), .
Sufferings of God's servants, the and
the relief which the Gospel affords,
God's most favoured servants have
often been exposed to the utmost
extremity and danger, . :
in the most hopeless circumstances
the Gospel affords relief, A
in roporsion to the safety of God’ 2
chil n must be the misery of His
enemies, . ° » 399
Summons to holy work, the, 5 » 79
review a few characteristics of the
evil-doers, 79
consider the course which God has
taken with these evil-doers, and
what is involved in the appeal here
uttered, .
the response which is made to this
appeal,
Summons to ‘universal praise, a , (See
PRAISE), . - 455
Superior understanding (See Uxprr.
STANDING),
Support, universal dependence ah)
ivine (See DEPENDENCE), .
Supremacy of the Lord in the Cheek
and the state, i
His supremacy in the Church, « :
He dwells there, : : -
He is supreme there, 7 =
His piieteee st in the state, .
characterised by power, . » 20O
and righteousness, . 100
His supremacy is a reason for worship, 100
Supremely great, the (See GREAT), . 443
Surprises, historical, ; ; ral
a famine driving the ple from the
land promised to them, yet con-
tributla to their possession of it,. 143
a slave fraconied the saviour of a
eaatek and of the chosen people,
risoner made the ruler over the
Gigad -
a subject people growing stronger
thar a sovereign people, 144
Symptoms which precede fe a revival
of the Church, and, : ; » 115


TEMPLE and the kingdom, the, .
Teneo et teneor, .
how do we keep God’s testimonies ? 267
how do God’s testimonies keep us? . 267
Terrestrial revolutions (See REVOLU-
SIGNS) se) cs) rk ss eo BOY


» 599


SBees &


143


144


. 218





ware! INDEX,
PAGE PAGE
Testimonies a nd of hao » 261 Teemph ot (egy pee Bee
what the ist did . 261 cour, and, - 208
oiced in God’s testimonies, . . 261 | Triumph over tyranny, Christ's "(Bee
ud he did it? . 262 TYBANNY)))° 32 « . 180
spate of their suitability to his Triumph, the Lord’s, . . 248
Hert eee: the personal reel h of (ap.
eae the greater covered the lesa, 262 the triumphs of His Gospel
Testimonies, the benefit of God’a, . 267 human heart, .
they aredelight, . . . . ash the triumphs of His Church in the
they are counsellors, . ° . ‘ woria, . 248
Testimony; (2.0 ee we . Trouble in life, prayer ‘in trouble, and
ite subject, . . . e F cs confidence in prayer, 392
ita manner, Se re ° : . 261 trouble in life, . 392
itsreason,. . . 261 arising from enemies who were ma-
Theme for joyous song, deliverance « li t, . +1 ee. Ree . 392
me DELIVERANCE) 335 co ederate, * . ° . . 392
and how to see Se wondrous slanderous, . . - . - 392
see be WONDROUS), . ; . 264 violent, . e , . ’ . 392
Thoughts, the ibe ota bal and num- determined, , . . ’ - 392
ber of God’s, . “ . 386 aig ° 2 ° e . + 392
the preciousness of them, . : : 386 7 ° . « 392
because of their originality, . 386 prayer x trouble, : ° » 393
their moral excellence, . : » 386 or preservation from enemies, i 403
their practicableness and utili » 387 the overthrow of enemies, : » 393
their influence upon our thoug ta, 79387, confidence in prayer, + 393
their generosity, A : 5 . 387 based upon his relation to God, > 303
the number of them,. . : » 387 his ideas of God, : 393
the realisation of God’s presence, . 387 his experience of the protection of God, 393
Three petitions, the (See PETITIONS),. 47 his faith in the righteous rule of God, 393
Time and ours, the Lord’s, - 304 | True greatness (See GREATNESS), 309
a time common to both to ‘work, . 304 | Trust and praise, . 5 : 435
& work common for both to do, « 304 the trust prohibited, .  . 435
a time for God alone to work, . . 304 the trust encouraged, ‘ 436
a work for God alone to do, + 304 the praise celebrated, < asy
Time, the praise of (See PRaIsE) 424 | Trust, humanand Divine, . . 246
Travellers and their Divine Helper, man must trust, “ox 246
distressed, - e 159 whom should man trust? . ‘ - 246
the distressed travellers, ; Rode » 159 who warrants that trust? . 246
through a reste desert, 6 « 159 God offers Himself as the ebdject of
pride a homeless desert, ‘ - 159 human trust,. . . . - 246
ugh an inhos; itable de desert, . 159 | Trestin God, . : F . ° 222
-sufficient Helper, . ; 160 the nature of, : e ° ° . 222
Hie help was granted in answer to the groundsof,. . . « . 223
prayer, . . 160 those who, < A a a - 223
and was adequate to their need, . 160 the consequences of,.  .. . + 223
the manifest obligation, . 5 . 160 | Truth of God, the eternal, . a . 106
to praise the Divine Helper, 160 God is true, . tp hie + 106
Treatment ef different classes of in all generations, . é s + 107
racter, God’s, . 377 | Tyranny, Christ’s triumph over, . . 180
His treatment vat the humble, ‘ + 377 ma t nny is the foe of Christ, . 180
proud, : 5 . + 377 ject to the wrath of Christ, 181
His afflicted people, . Ge RErsy eae . 378 an ie destroyed by Christ, 181
His trustful people, . . 378 will be supplanted by Christ, . 181
Trial, the conduct of a good man in a Tyranny of the winken: transient, the, 333
time of (See ConpucrT), 4 » 39 the rule of the wicked is tyrannical, 333
Trials of ms gone the, 4 : AEM the tyranny of the wicked is transient, 333
unconge neighbours, . . . 318 the unchecked tyrann fe the wicked
unrighteous contradictions, . 318 would be a serious sreichren en
Trials, the comforts of Christians under, 81 to the righteous, . . 333
ty clots, of the Christian life, the com-
; . 167 | UNBELIEF, a warnin sere
soted by p — to God, 45 55 ve 7 WARNING), re * a 84
bens an 1 ah God, . i nderstanding, superior : ; ee
and strengthens fai 167 what in? * fe a tae ae
ae by ata of the over whom ? 3 “ : « 295
already marke 16 through what power fo, 2 » 295
eet God, - I by what instrumentality t = tags





INDEX, xxvii
PAGE PAGE
with what results 295 what itimplies,. . er) sek Ls
Unha Py; ¢ the sin a folly of being, : » 105 whatit means, . . . .« «236
Go happy, . » 105 where it cee lace, . 5 ws 236
piele are ppy, : *  s FO§ haepie he spuitualy Fi ithe toe purrs
forgiven men are happy, + 105 er, ; 5 ° S « 246
we can only be unhappy by refusing help, . Pete yuri Pacer. cies ¥,
pardon, . ; 4 - 106 victory, ; ‘ . 247
by refusing Christ, Bora ° 106 | Warning against unbelief, a, « «e 8%
by determining not te ome . 106 the ensample of human sin, . 84
Union, Christian, . A = 356 the ensample of Divine judgment, . 85
its nature, - Bo eis, ats nee 356 the improvement to be made of these
its importance, - 356 ensamples, cones 85
Unity, the excellence and ‘beanty of Way of ee: yiccuel: the, : . 160


aternal, ° .


its propriety, . e . + 354
its comprehensivences, se ° 354
e a usness, . ° ° e © 355

uence, . i - 355


Universal usr (See PRAISE), A
Universal wo Pr (See WORSHIP), .
and His (See Lorn),


Universe, the Lo 134
Upright, a prayer of the (See PRAYER), 389
Upright, the attributes of the, . . 198
the upright bend, . . 198
yet they maintain their integrity, 198
Uses of the seasons, the, . 132
the usesofday,. . « 133
it is the season of work for man, ee
of retirement for wild ep . laa
the uses of night, . 143
it is the season of rest for man, s2133
of activity for wild beasts, . 133
the mo uses of the seasons, . - 134
by them God teaches us, . ° . 134
he measurement of time,. . » 134
np ah reciousness of time, . . 134
tness of certain times for certain
eens ° . ° ° » 134


VANITY of idols an incentive to praise
the Lord God, the Neos IDOLS), . 360
Vanity of man apart from his immor-


tality, the, ies 5 ey
the shortness of his life, 27
A tia is tia imiventonot chs world, 28
the diseases of the body, . 28


the manual and orcauteat labours, 28
the unsatisfactoriness of wealth, . 28
the unsatisfactoriness of De SHIA 29
the unsatisfactoriness of religion also,


but this hypothesis is utterly false, . 30
Ee lg of the good, the foes and (See
ES), 57
View of the wicked, the poet's (See
WICKED), . : e F ae
Views of death, two, .
Voice, sinners entreated to hear God's, 8
Voices of creation (See CREATION), . I a


Voracity of the wicked, the egrerpisea 331
the wicked are ever ready to devour
the righteous, 33
the Lord is the a dalieecar of the right.
eous, . 331
thankegivin; ehould be offered to the
Lerd for His deliverance, Peers 61


WALEING beforeGed, . . «» + 93%


Way within us, the "wicked, and the
prayer aprae
Ways, s, though often inserutable,
are one . °
Ways, thetwo, . chee °
there are two pray ° : . .
these are epee man’s deliberate
choice,
the e fale way is most natural to


to walk firmly i in the true way Divine
assistance 1s indispensable,
continuance in the true way is con-
ditional on the use of Divinely-
appointed means, . 270
Weakness, stren aay in (See STRENGTH), 269
Wicked spirit, t » 202


391


3 BaF


the character of the wicked, 4 . 202
the inspection of the wicked, . . 203
the disappointment of the wicked, . 203


tle fate of the wicked, 203
Wicked, the desire of the (See DxsrRz), 203
Wicked, the insatiable voracity of the

(See VORACITY), . ss a 331
Wicked, the poet’s view of the, ve 38S

the character of the wicked described, 388

the end of the wicked Loan 388

the companionship the wicked

avoided, . Sat tee arg
Wicked, the reward of the, 7 °
eee the temporal prosperity of


Ww slow ‘harps on the (See HARPS), . 369
Winter and its moral suggestions, 449
winter indicates the severity of God, 449
suggests the retributiveness of the
ivine arrangements, .
some things which are peculiar to
this season have poet instruction
for us, é : . AH
is an emblem of old ace, F
of the present state of the bodies ae
the departed, . 450
and of the present moral state of the
world, . 450
Wondrous things, and how to see them, 264
man by himself cannot see wondrous
things, . . 264
there is a process by means of which
man may see wondrous things, . 264
when this process is complete won.
drous things are seen in God's law,
hen lamp and a light, God’s (See
aT


+ 449


295


PAGE


bho ¥% a tried word and a loved pia


IN D&E.


Word pala God’ 8, ‘ . 376
Word for young men, 4 eg . . 256
& serious question ask oa 257
a satisfactory answer given, , 457
sufficient reasons suggested, ° . 857
Word, God's, ve e » 305
desired, . ° * ° ° - jo
instructive, « ° ° ° ° He
wonderful, . Poe Bet - 306
nore Le . F + 306
love for God’s (See ian . 300
Word of God, the benefit and
tion of the . . 29
hibeilis ore the, ita sphere and ite
2
Word: the i heritage ‘of His people, God’s
(See HERITAGE), .
Word the ee of reverence and j joy,
312
Word, the stability of God's, the recti-
tude of God’s works, and . IQ
Word, the truth and endurance of God’ 8, ae
God’s word is based upon truth, . 312
had its beginning im truth, wgiz
is true all throug: 12
ee pe summons to ‘holy ‘(See Bum.
NS); 0 WY
Works and God’s words God's, 3 . 290
have immovable foundations, . . 290
continue, . . 291
aa ees of the Divine faithful-
. 291
ihe ‘honvens and the earth will some /
px Aermere ted eh not so the pro-
. 391
Woon an, and worshiy of the Lord, the, . 139
the worship of the Divine Bein . 139
the character of the Divine Rote » 139
the treatment of the Divine works, . 140
the people of the Divine choice, . 140
Works, forgetfulness of the Divine (See
FORGETFULNESS), . 152
Works of God, the, the subject of soul-
satisfying search, - - » 385





PAGE


God’s works are great, » 185
ae be the subject of study, . 186
are promotive of soul-satisfaction, . 186


Works, the rectitude of God's, and the


stability of God’s word, . 191
World’s moat joyous day, the (Bee
Day), . ‘ . 8)
Worship, an invitation to, rc 2 84
the method of worship, . ° . 82
joyfully, ‘ < : ‘ ‘ 82
psi A . . s . . 83
ully, ° ° > . . 83
vale y else 83
the motives of worship, : - 83
because Jehovah is supreme, . 83
He is the creator an ees
all thi 83
because OF Hie relations to His peo le, 84
Worship, church and sare 184
distinctions in worship, . 184
places of worship, . - 184
manner of worshi 185
Worship of His pep e, examples of the
holy sovereignty of and the
becoming (See ieee - 101
Worship of the Lord, be works and
(See WORKS), . ee) on ehs
Worship, the highest, . —. = eis
is offered to God, . A ee
is offered by saints, . . : Pe
is reverent in spirit, . 11


in it the presence of God is realised, It


Worship, the joy of Divine (See Joy), 325
Worship, the object, camer: and
expression of, - 8&9
Worship, universal, - | 206
God’s name ought te be praised
everywhere, . . 206
under all circumstancea, | x : + 206
at all times, . 206
Wretchedness and Divine compassion,
human (See COMPASSION), . . 365


YOUNG, our responsibility towards the, 116


Zi0u a type of the Church, . . 383


LIST OF AUTHORS QUOTED


ADDISON, Joseph, 324, 424.
Alexander, J. A., 31.
Alford, Henry, 84, 1209.
Allon, Henry, 462.
Amyraldus, 31.

Arvine, R., 85.
Augustine, 224.


Bacon, L., 70.

Bailey, P. J., 60, 328, 465.

Bally, G., 75.

Barbauld, A. L., 30.

Barnes, Albert, 98, 114, 118, 238, 253, 256,
270, 281, 284, 312, 316, 318, 360, 374,
399, 419, 423, 432, 449.

Bayley, Emilius, 380.

Beecher, H. W., 95, 197, 213, 380.

Bevan, LI.D., 369.

Bonar, Horatius, 44, 60, 105.

Bouchier, B., 74.

Boyle, Robert, 308.

Brooks, George, 353, 372, 379, 415, 455,


458.
Brown, J. Baldwin, 208.
Bruce, W. S., 424.
Buck, C., 385.
Burleigh, W. H., 380.
Burns, Jabez, 428, 437.
Bushnell, H., 134, 278.
Byron, Lord, 459.


CALVIN, John, 128, 380.

“Caravan and the Temple,” the, 321, 328,
330, 333, 337, 342.

Carlyle, Thomas, 133, 319.

Chalmers, Thomas, 441.

Chamocke, Stephen, 32, 33, 100, 118, 380,


381
“Christian Guardian,” the, 416.
Clarke, Adam, I11, 257, 306, 312, 315, 340.
Clayton, George, 152.
Coleridge, S. T., 173.
Coley, Samuel, 210.


DALE, R. W., 227.

Darby, 3.

Dawson, W., 59.

Delitzsch, F., 460.

“Dictionary of Illustrations,” 85.
Disraeli, B., 177.


FE R, 123.
Finlayson, 238.
Fletcher, Joseph, 123.





Goapsy, J. J., 47.
Gray, Thomas, III.
Griffin, R. A., 81.
Grindon, L. H., 38.
Gurnall, W., 100.
Guthrie, Thomas, 355.


Hatt, John, 116.

Hall, Robert, 27, 81, 92, 430.

Hamilton, James, 31, 46.

Harmer, T., 320.

Havard, W., 319.

Hayman, Henry, 457.

Heber, Reginald, 9o.

Hengstenberg, E. W., 48, 97, 151, 357, 409.

Henry, M., 59, 124, 156, 238, 270, 277, 306,
393.

Herbert, George, 350.

Hertveys4.C., "

Hibbard, F. G,,

“Homiletical Gharenez the, 152, 411, 424.

Hood, E. P., 439.

Horsley, S., 114.

Horton, T., 79.

Howe, John, 7


Jenkins, E. E., 236.
KeEBLz, John, 332.


L., 93.

Lecky, W. E. H., 176, 178.
Liddon, H. P., 229, 248.
Lilley, W. O., 411.
Longfellow, H. W., 70.
Lovelace, 404.

L S, 422.

Luther, M., 33, 34, 73, 355+


Mactaren, A., 102, 180, 200, 240, 265.
Mansel, H. L., 200.

Melville, H., 84.

Mill, J. S., 176.

Milton, John, 128, 131.

Moll, C. B., 204, 242, 284, 408.
Montgomery, J., 133, 345, 351.

Moore, T., 112, 345.





xxXX


INDEX TO AUTHORS QUOTED.


nL EEEEEEESEENSSNnSSEEEeEne?


Morris, A. J., 42, 235, 236.
M., W., 160.


N., 402.
Napoleon, 176, 182.
Newman, J. H., 385.


PARKER, Joseph, 73, 137, 202, 221,
442.

Pascal, B., 224.

Payson, E., 40, 86.

Peabody, 257.

Pearson, 225.

Perowne, J. J. S., 6, 71, 77, 82, 97, 99, 128,
138, 139, 142, 147, 148, 152, 158, 159,
165, 166, 170, 172, 194, 220, 344, 347,
354, 361, 367, 375, 379, 388, 392, 395,
306, 412, 413, 422, 451, 456, 461.

Plumptre, E, H., 210.

Pollok, R., 163.

“Preacher's Treasury,” the, 356.

“Pulpit Analyst,” the, 160,

Pulsford, J., 104, 121.

Punshon, W. M., 132, 349.


Quartes, F., 160.


RAFFLES, T., 414.

Raleigh, A., 265.

Renan, E., 176.

Reynolds, H. R., 73, 79.
Robertson, F. W., 32, 108,
Ruskin, J., 131, 133, 445.
Rutherford, 192.


SAURIN, J., 382.

Sayer, J., 419.

Scott, W., 9.

Shakespeare, W., I10, III, 117, 154, 170,
171, 172, 239, 317, 327, 330, 374, 415,
459.


310,


“Skeletons of Sermons,” 122.
“Sketches of Sermons,” 93, 403.


Sleigh, W., 16, 149.

“Speaker’s Commentary,” the, 253, 284,
310.

Spenser, E., 55

Spurgeon, C,H ., 106, 108, 123, 430.

Stanley, A. P., 109, 237, 373.


Stewart, A., 227,
Stier, R., 250.
Strauss, £76.
Stuart, M., 118.
“Study,” the, 115.


Tennyson, A., 39, 228, 3
Thodey, S., 345, 365, 3
410, 450, 463.
Thomson, J., 450.
Tillotson, J., 75.
Trapp, J., 341.
“Treasury of David,” the, 64.


355»
371, 376, 383, 398,


VAUGHAN, 183.
Vince, €.,) 104:


WALLACE, T., 391.
Waring, A. L., 344.
Watson, R., 75, QI.
Watts, I., 60, 138, 375, 437-
Wells, John, 64.
Wesley, C., 338.
Whitcomb, W. C., 356.
Wilberforce, S., 211.
Wileman, J., 115.
Wilkins, 443.

Wilson, G., 385.
Wythe, W. W., 376


Xavier, F., 58.


Youne, E., 369, 415, 418,
Young, J., 208, 209.


ERRATA.
Page 59a, line 51, supply “is” before “in.”


pp Ole tes en 920 “But” read “Both.”

an 61b, <. 23, », ‘“adduces” read “educes.”
1 2a;4-, 10) a ecnumber we) ecmenber.:
Aree Dy es era our . “one.”
09 Gee to) We invite: “incite.


» 376b, » 1


“transferred,,


Sekai oA Me


>
ie SS i IER delete SiS? before “drawn,”
» 3895, ,,. 12, for “entranced” read “entrance.”


By AOS ye 54, iss “Here” yo near’
2 422a, ,, 24, ,, “omnipotence” read tei ee
437b, , 4, ,, “enemy is” » “enemies are.’





BaEEMON T, CALIF.








BS491 .P65 / vol 12
The Preacher s complete homiletical com


ie
44
PES
““/* THEOLOGY LIBRARY
SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY
AT CLAREMONT
CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA
91711
444124 oa


ee eee


PO
tata tate
tohatuts tote
fate tatae.
aeaiaee te’


oe,
ree


st,


Sastee


tt
Ose
had sea

.

rs!
n

3


3
Rae


tot 24
tacetakee


4
Retinessacece
Rete te satel’


Metatetetetet
CHR ¢.
Fetetetates


* t 5, Setactate®,
noes ese tens ete Sain Se seSeseceretetasdse
IARRRR MEER MMR PRR moth pm hhh
atecatecetetetet
Setetaccy, oe
Kot et cere


ae.
seks


tote tet,


5 stuSatere
te, S58 S18 tetas, Retstssa st,

Meu he su ce tu sesesastseseceee se se
Src ese Seseseses


neater


Sys,


= e% 2 eM,
eeceteseeceneasstesesesecereceseteses
sense ce ctucdenseececencuecc ance cesesec
aSens pene sect ceed ee,


Sats SS,
eceancegece


3¢
et
eeetesetese:


atatata tate tetas


tie)
Sat eS eset asetatd sae tecesets

“1 Se oett Seat eitsegenase se sesesates
atu Satubetg Soke tote tatat ies

Situtst tat oaae seated et


wegest cases


4
thes,
ak saseoasece.
Seiete tie teeeiee


Soeeecieese


= ~] 5 Satatetes ¢ Setetetets<,
sieieiy ses segecdceiesetesesese sei seseseseteseseseseteceneceketenctetwtetataee eee’
Sef.

feta


pene’


<5S265%,5.%,
mat steest ess
atates ate!


teen
ate


eed nant
Rahea


ee
a atsties t7


eiecesetes


ene 8!


cane


HY


eseseceseatsecd
Bs


fe Sasa cn
Sy


Skixs 45
Rear HM PREC bem CH
" SEN ee es heel etet etek e tesa se teses,
Ryesezetaceasa ea ceteeecasasaceseeases
Seheacteceses


eteees,


2 SS DSRSES sass


we pesso tes Se=.
eee scesasete


aetanesakones,
z
SSkP =
SS DALSESIADSEE DLAs 2e NIK S 28S,


mesa oes’,
Sas25.
S2425.


«


eae


ecastee, pybepome me brats
Seakseseresestces 8, Sot,


28


eagese


<8,
ek esas tes et et ae,
Secateteieiesesas


ecesecesetadecece
Sedecesectiececestsace
Seeiseeeniatencdes


Sosa sg hasctatesase
Ret pabt cot be ibe Pe hy Pe


2st<
Te


Potente ht eke he
mh} =" mre


aS
Us2S25;


a


sate
cS


“=.
SSS


SSS =


S
~


os
= Es


ety PMG?
Pretoria eR CR EH beh ae Shee aba
TEASE SSSEERS Se iestiaseseceeseses


aRak, 3 anak cetene
SISISIADSIA SSSA STR Ra Resa hes eee she tenes
eeesecedeeeseses & %


SeeSeheke
3 EDS De babe PORE PEN Pepe De bebe Bebe ape ae
Sa Pens aeL Pee Pe ae eR ere eb ee SSeseraseses


=eS>


SOOT Y
oe
cana


Ce ay
Pe ts
Pyea


Pevee


)
iy
tn ai ate
teieteiet
iatatateta
Yeber ers
et atet tet ates
Seseteietaiet aie eteleleleteiete
Cat atatetat tut date ¢ A atetatatatatatata®
eeteleteictetete Met hea tata te Seta tase
totetetatateteta%. oe oe) tL F tot
4, 450444, %, 4, <, *otetetetete*. 464.4,
Bs SeaeiaietsteSeSeleintete Pe beDt Pabst BeBe be bebe)
atthe atasesas finesse SadeSatetateSelalcSese
senesecene PDS PPS PSS oa PLP ayia ary erat al
sete tet aty ¥ > atts tate
St ptatatadetetalatatatatetesatetece < Citta eget eat
Mat et tet at ete et ete tate tote totes ith teet het eietat alates
eer etateteeat dataset et etatetstetst tet etatet eset st etet tet states,
Sfatetitatatetatetetetate tat yteteta tute latetetsietaeititeesteertee
ASseeteseatytasatescketasatatatat cata tatyt sta tetetetasaestctet
Sedataseees ie test en itbel sat etatetetetetete tate tetet etetetee
Aas tata te Sat et et et et tS ot otal eet e eSeSletat ef<ici<
totse yea tee state tstatatetet stetaeetetetetets tetete tet ata ts ts
Seb Deep bebe peo a bebe bebe heb bebe Bet bes? bebe
eaetaetesaias<ie: weeSeSelaSalatcicSa tates ahetatetesecase
enadesehcasiesesese Pater aterm at ae Dew SE DME DT bebe ht Mt BeBe)
Aiehee $a tases<secasdtat ala tatainan stenatecetetstet ety tetas as otataes:
te teleSetesesalc case letekeintetate’ sletetstssesclategescsetese
PPE DEP Bt Dt BEBE BEE bebe Bebe BUD bbe BED be Ya be bebe bt BE ote
a +i) it ateta® tat et et ett tes ett et ate etatatete ta td te tesa te
fe ) eece ha sekeSetc delete lesetetafetet <fateselasel cfete
Met ahiata taba tata tata tatatata tata ta*atatasetatgtat
MSeleteletetetesesaleses
Pee, aie letaSs


a
See
Ae.
SS.
Penge


+)


e

a ¢
saat etatetatasetate?
ot peeseent ae sagkeest


“s
Pees
‘sate at


~*


ae estetetetetes
SeSetataSeletefeletetetes<
Seatetatetet tat state tet etaletetetetetetetet
etgtetatetatetstetscotetgts tye,
SBC PL DeN Seb be bi be bs bebe be bebe bebe ot bebe be)
ee totet etek esha oetate tate tate tetata tala tetatataty tate
ot t% 4, Ret het eh eF ok et at et ake t alg tat a tate cate tat
eGaiasessdtszetetetetatetetetetete tate sate tatetetetetet etitetstst
LAL EL PPLE MDE PPL DLO EOL =e bt bs bt bebe by beh by DEDEDE DE DEBS be bubba bt
3 Seiesencetetes 2S44 Fos be bt br
rubs Paty babe ee babe bt be bt Se BL Deby be bt bey Debt bebe by be bt Mi be Be be bee be be be be bu eS
Rea titatatetetetetetatetetetatetetetetetetetetntatit sts teksten tee sdeels se eaedee
EOS HID DE Bt eh ee bbe be be MERE De ee BEDE DE oS bt be BEDE Mot BED: bt be be bs
Cot bebe bade bmi be he babe bat bes SO bes be bebe bt bebe be babe be be be be bebe bt bebe be ot Bebe}
stetetut. *, ott. Rates ei aS et akg tat gta tata tg tag te gee Sq tao te tat tet,
eeatatatetatetatceetatatetetasetceetetdeastestaceseeeiiateetea tat ceatetasetasetete
Se ictetetatesatetee iene ee tate eace tates te terete tate te ¢


ate ha tat at eSeta sate tetata®
; Ratatgtatetatatetatate tess ta tata tata ta tatata tata te tata te tate tata te tet atetatctetetetc®
eeasece to tatet i eGetetete satel eds ahaha tc hatc tate lalate ta satanic sata®


‘ ese tet at etagtctet
yigtu tate LEE PSPLES PSBEP EDD DPS ELD EP E PEPE PED Sy SPAT SDSL SD SESE SRD RDEEDD DP ot
26, POPE P EPS behets bebe Deby Dy mots
RH BE PT DEPTS PrP Drs by Py be)
thet hoe. by ata teSet. Met etse
<Gt, Setatetee


PUPP arr ars!

< aha tetatatatetet het eset ete te

Phebe be bree htt be bs bebe bbe bObE bt be be}
Potpeai peor beae bebe bebe beat br be bese be be bebe be bebe bed

Seta tee senen este tat sae tat etek etetaletaCeteletet tet ieede
DP Pape DUPE Py PaPabe PEPe EPL PLDT DE Dn DE DLE DL DED DeDe Mbt bt at Dts
etek eh eh at gt etek ot ot het eh ot tak edd oe oe ie ele hee ae ke ee 46464. 4.
Pr ESCROW MDs be by babe be Boba bub bt be be bt be by by BEDE BEB BEDI be bt be be Be be br bee
ak ate tes, 4 aS4%. bebe bebe bebe bebe bebe bee be Ssatet<t fetetet Reg tqtg tate? tetat

bs SOS PIESP PL De Pe OEM De De De DL bE bebe he bt bebe be bE be DE DEBT Dt bt be}
se% Ri Syt eter e te rete ® Rett gtetgtstetatetatateteteta tate etc ta tats tatateteteteta®
tie pe Be) CLT Ec ee bL ee at be BEL Be ot ee Pee bebe PEED ee Be be Pe Dee Be be he BL Dt Pe De Y

Retececsasatceetececese Secu setetesetetes SeeeeleseteSesatecetet clea Sasa Sale sese

. 5 <5ecese ehateteteteteSetetetatasctetatetetetetetes

pep ee bens Me beM bob Seb Sra Ree be Ree BOS Bt be be br bee Bee bet Bt
eh et hte ees esas et eset tet eee toh et het et Cetetetet, het te tetata*, <,4 ¢,
SG erecececeescecacencaetceeecaseesereeentee cere carenc tates ate steele sand ierd en ssestenseee eas
Sad eeaeeasenceccercacacsete se cecercceccsececsecteccetsc sec eeeetetened seeete react ie ee seeeseea ads

tetates, 4,¢. Saket at etateteta®,

PoE bpbt ott be br bet bebe bedi bit Ber bebe be br bt) Pree beat bes
2Se etetetese Paha threat ech hr bbe bebe be br bebe St bebe babe bret bi br bt br bebe bt br ot)
shebeteteteteteseteseseteseseseteSetecen stake tate tetcsesecat state esata cesernta ante e Cite teed odd Sk ase ee
PP pP ee Dame pabe eh be Pr PRPC HL Dba DCM BC be bt be be bt be babi bt bt baby be bee bE DEDEDE De be DEBT DEBT DE bebe be br bt
PTL PL ILE PE DLE Dee ECD LDR BE Babe pa bebe by be be be bebe bt bt ba be be be bt bE bs bt bt be be bt

Coed prem veh haem Mabe bh he bt pe beh pe Dee pe bo be be <%« SaSatedateSe Se

es cet eS PSPs PPPS aorta bt Set Pa PLN Pt Pt De Pt PE « Sette teks teta®
Seses ae cSchasesegaseacecs Enipepbersi pepe seb orb bt bt at br bebe br be: as acekacete
yeh Pah Por eee hy Dr OPO PL RD BEDE bee DE RED Bebe be > bt Dabo bt bt EDL D ehefesesege'
SabeSdSdsu bese cececess sesean estcesecesd ease ete se seat ed sees ee seed See tesa se esesete
S, Sete Sete =. 5%. +) =, set ct ete teseteteteteX, ¢ t,t ett

GSM SM SH ecu ce sere SPaPa Pet he ae Se ep S PSE S PDS ESE yore See he aT eer here oes
SPEPLDS HP Da be DL Be PTR De DET be LMC DE DED DEDEDE DL DOD. aS bE

Sor pr pepe rt pt pope bebe bebe br mb pt DT be br ata Dh bebe Ht beat bt hts

mite ctctetc eoete cece s beriee Ae, S2eatzt. F2¢ Sat eS ete8 < Se. Settle Oe ot et
eee be oe pr repre HOOD be Dr DDE DS EMER DEDEDE DEDEDE DL DLL bi we bebe bebe prs

SHPLH CN Prat We by PRD DD EDL BE Dy Bebe bP be be be Be pe be bt ph he De DT by DO PDP RE DL DDL}

PR LA CR OH DE De DED NE DDE DE DEEDS Dee DEM SED DP PED PDE DEES bi bd}

SEN ep ei bear be hee RED hehe bear Den DPR bie bebe rot bob bo) <S4Se
PEPE PIR PE PLP DEDEDE PEN PED ESE me nt be pen Dibra bear br bt bi ht beat bi brs Be)
esahaSe A gh IM E4424 345 E36 CE $$ 252498245524 2% So ee PL Pe Pe ee De ee Pe be ee <

S<34Saze


aheks

Kee"

ensatateteses,
eer


5 tetete2, %, tet.
Sorat yar by bebe be eat bree be he bt


“nam
‘Satan s.
ty anne
nnn
aa.


Anan
‘~


si28ite

a iacs Segsikeds
aaseanecsnee
SElEgS24S¢5¢2 6242428 se seat ee ates
atcestotetetatse ates se staeses


aene!


Se ceaesen


nie ah
LAN AAA


<
< eh xSahe
SPL OCHE Dr ee ee me be bi be De Re ST DLL De Dy by) 43<iete
ed egecesesesecesesscese sess sceceece saree se sk sa ce tase cetera cese
a eS aN ot e42s 2425 282524 2528S eRe eee et 45% 04 et Set
25. tet et 2442. <<, PPL Pt Pt 424.0160
Chee bbe bt pe be pe be Ree be bebe be bt be pr be eicSeSe
see et aS et tet gt gt gts teh tetetatetc*. Re teS ete Pt > es
SOUPS Pepe pupae ba baba be bee be be oe Di De be! Bet peor bebe be bi br be bt
Pspee oS Pure babe eespe be bebe De be De Bh DEDEDE D SUD Rte bt Deepa be bebe
aS eSaseestccenececanceccesen esate senesecetssatd esate scene scsece ca sesatelececcegscta sete
sSobahekehete hese sesesesese ses eseseheceteceses eoes oeSedetaesasetas ces oe seeteeecasesetate
=| ES er eve Me Depart pe De Pep pepe pebebe pepe be pr bee De ain DED DO PER bebe bt be bebe bo]
5 $4353 3S Se < anes ese hehe fete
aie esa se Sasa Sasa case e seca se ee seTe seis eee eeea eae ee See e ees eee s ese Se eee Se eae Sete
Tafa Se bases sesas. S2253< a esaiu ssa Ss Sec eSesese i eSesese se se tese sete Sessa sases
LPO HPP PO ese SeSate sales gsesase suse se ses ese tase Se Se Sch g teks Ses e tes ete
ster esgtetetese Satctatesetgtst® 8 otyt tte Sgt Rot 8282842404454
CHESe phe p beh pr bah pro be bth he bebe ara Srp PDr at Dna arr bP a SDP eS bP hr
eesceceatetoseken ence CPP DL PLD ot ee bt be bt bedi Bt ot Debs we by be bebe be br bors
Peat pe Ney p pepe Pde dr hr pe hear peel prt pUby hI pT at DP ae pepe pUnreeDe pe DPSS DDS SP DPD ps
PPS Pe PLE PPe tbs Pee Pee PEP IED Dee be bebe PERE REDE DE DD BEL BEDI DEBE EE DODD bes
CPE Pep be he pe det DED PPE DPM PO DED DE De heb Pe DED DED BEDE RD be br bt BE br pear Ot by |
Ses Sesegecesceesasecacecece sees ecece ade SeSes shel ese Se Se Se Saou Sates ese seSes Sasaki:
*, Se eet ate teks Bese SeseSc tet etaictes. Pr br beep eae be pee br eT DT Er eT eee be DT tet
SS ees eS eS ate eit es ise eek a8 e828 ge 8 t Sees ees ete eee ete eS etek he tetat
ase SaSeSeSeFaSaieceseadeesusses sacs etedeeee SPE POP DO ae Pepe bebe ede PDE DED De PI
pre Dee D DUPED ORB De Bebe pE bebe bebe DED OST EES DE py BE DS bO DEEP DDD PRIDE DD TDD pa DI
sae Sasa SeSe Se Ses Sa Se S89 So 5 2 See 5 45982549 Foe ese 8e ig he Sg Seah ta sa he setae cee tata eae
LHP PP PIP PPM MM RM H PER bebe Drar ora Re a beh a at beh bt)
PPTL PEPE Dr PCP PUbSPL PID DCD PLL DE DEDEDE PRED! be bene bs Te) aSasate
= =e S, s, et ets Sates etetg ets tete Sete t So s2 thet eee
PPP Pepe Pea DL Pee be be Pewee Pe DOPE DOD pO DER DEED BOM BOD? Be Dr be Dea M he ne brhe bir hhs
EL PLN IMAM PL de Pepe Pe LIN DL DUST DE DIRE DL pO Dbl SrbP bP be Deb R eS Seer |
SaaS ahes cases ches etetececetetesotehesese Sea deSadeSe cose sess sees


eae


3 Sets SS lS TRIS TR SESS SSR SI SL 8 ees eee
RAH MRM MPM Hmm Ma DER PD Me bea Tbe hb bebe DPS I ReaD
SLE PAPI LEPC DER PLM DER DERE EL DST BE Dy PPP hPL EET br bt heb! be
<. = < s, ole < SoS, = = 225. = a
aSeSe8s 5 eases PPE PL Pere ee P eh POPP OEP LP EPE OT!
SPP ee eRe TEP EPP DE PEP Debt De DEERE be bahay
PLE PA PL PLPC PES DLO DE DPE PE DED DEDL DED De pe be po be pr he hh beat pr ht
PRL R REDE DED DEDEDE DEDE DEDEDE DE DED DD DL PD Ry RP DER e DE bia DD) SPB PSP SP:

Lepr peer PE PEPE DER DERE DERE REDDER DP DED DPD SPD EDT DEDEDE De bE hPa PRP On!
ALPEN SENET EM PREM MEPL D DED pe DENT PEPE DED Sr pe peer ar a aap Eat Se heath hie:
RISES BS GSoC Saha ag SoG aha R aN ae ga NoMa eM ORR Ea gaa e eet RSS eeeisic
ees! Sesetesesesesess etetats aaa Se.
SeSeSs5sS ssa Sage tesa setsseha tesa sets 2
stesetatatesasatasetetesetssesesetess
Speesegases cae ceseee sese case setasaseseseseseaeeaseseteees
S *. P55 Po Pe PLP Pet PoP er ae >
Reletny my Peaster ht bebe ne pr hee ae peDeet Debt DET Dr ar SSP eP DD SeS PRO De

She Se Ss ES seis he Se dde Se sek hsissecessasas ss oe eae eneteteness ea sesase
PEN Deh PrP DCPEM ber bebe hr deme bbe ee pe aeDE hear pe PRPS DNS PDP aD SP ReaD DN
SSS SEES ERIS RS SE SSE SR ES

SeSegeSe38 582 See
es


ise
gaaesesaseeasesese
PAT R HTD |


Pe ee e
SES 5S s8e5285 Sascha
Setesatet
Sakasi ese


eeasases


seahssetcns


Pipa pr or pt aor be pr bebe bey SeSa fede eeSasescsecas.
SAs8SR2 RBBB SS ENSR RES SSissecage
DEPRES PPS Park Ph Pes PS SPS PEPE Pe OL Dl ls
SSSSESESSS RIAA ah ae aset es hehe eee eee
SORES IS ES IS SS ag SES SSS aS Roe eee
PPS PO Pe PL PL ee ee
SPELL PCPS PEO Bt De Dee be Debt pO Dl Bebe bet
PE PEPRPL PPL DS PE DEPI DE DE DO DT Dear bear Bib bt brs
PEPE SPT eT RC ERC EE PN PREP Dee
ESOe LPS PEP PU PEED DL PED. REP EPE DE DD deb eben Dt ok
PSPSPS SPS Pe PS se Pa Pe Oe Pe Pt Pe PL Pet he Pee)


SSS tS
SrA eS Sashes,
Daresaserecg sates
Sea ea sa tose seco estat tatatese
eSSESSSESIS ES TSS ESS nt
PET NITE PEN pe REDP nea PDPDP DPD POD: aha geese Se Sa teSeS<
sSateSesetes SE area Po Pama Re ry Pe PPO Pe me Py Pome pees EDT DE DOS, DEOE ROD. DEE aE bar bel
SESE SEES SESS ss cessssaea eae eee as te enero te eget teenie neato tenses
Renee bathe pea at Rept Rete ahh hehe hh a he Paty PO Pe bo Pa De OR DE De Dt thes
SSR RSSSE SSSI SESS SSS SESSA SS Rae Saga ae ede tea aed See ETS.
eT S NPE RE RE MEN ear aE Tae Sepa pene pe yer ne pr neato:
easateS SN SeHSEN SN NSS BREESE
Reppnpponebaprnnpt bebebs ten Re btnebr et PEDSPIOS POSS PEREDS SPS MEDS DED
Pada Pada cerema beens be beee ree bbl bibs Deb era pre) PD RED SD ESP DPD DearS Pan
SSS83 SSSR pprtepretererehineratp Pen npanheDent Sy Rehan
STEREPL PE PLP LEE Dee PePr Re MR RRS RT Ren Raa reper he pepe er pr eben ear hs
EM PEPT DEPP me PE pe oe ae eT? eas eta seRe Saks a sate seta tetesasetate
ape se dasesgiesaseese SSNS aie ON SAAS Sas
RS as ese tetasetesa nes eeesesat eared Sao eee a ses ale eta ara tat ete ete eee
SSa85s SETS SS ROSS SSESPU PSPS PSP)

Ae easseges BSG SSSR She pedasesacesaeesesese
SAREE SASSER EEN
3S ese * <. + SONA 4 ehhh ee “

asesahs Eperrarereeerarareny Sep etefeses ASE SE
MESSER Sedap<i :


ABS)


<SSNis sSepciapetapc telat Se sches
SSS isis pedeiekee Riche etesekes Seekets
SPEIRS SSeS ee hep Sasha sete ees
ASSESS SaSsde: 2 e) <
DEPLRED PLP PLP PN Pe PEM ea eT hehe ara tart
SSS ERE RRS RASS AS ARERR SR eS
STEPS ESS SSS SSeS SSS Se Se Se Se Se SERRE SES
= DEPP meee MPS PLD RPL DE eee ae Rae ee)
as < SES EERE SERS
S3-SSSSISSS SSspssteis PLP DEDEDE PE de Pee ers
RSS RRS. SASAKI
: RS
*, oh Pe)
esas efetess:
SSS ates.
Pert preter aren
SSSR


S
SSIS SiS


=.
ae
SRSA.
sets,
zs}


Oe


Nyaa ay
4 LEER:


ne:
PETRUS


Sedesess


PF,
PLANES
ys
CAC eS
Kae
PPLE EL PLE
Fr


4
ras
%


Gioye
f fy 4s


(ee,
Peto
wee


Pe ag


MAO AAL AS


Pe eR EK
ae ae


ane
Cee


‘ean


YY yY)


ae
