Google


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project

to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online.

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject

to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover.

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you.

Usage  guidelines

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  tliis  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying.
We  also  ask  that  you:

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for
personal,  non-commercial  purposes.

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help.

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  in  forming  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it.

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe.

About  Google  Book  Search

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.   Google  Book  Search  helps  readers
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web

at|http: //books  .google  .com/I


ft


^


■-•  ••  *


^


THE


PULPIT    COMMENTARY,


EDITED   BY    THE


REV.  CANON  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  M.A.,

VICAB  AND  BUBAL  DEAN  OF  8T.   PANCRAS,  AND  EXAMINING  CHAPLAIN   TO  THE  LORD

B18II0P  OF  OLOUCEdTER   AND   BBI8T0L;


AND    BY   THE

REV.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A.


WITH

INT1K)DUCTI0NS


BY  THE


REV.   CANON  F.  W.  EAKRAR,  D.D.,  F.B.S.

RIGHT  REV.  H.  COTTEBILL,  D.D.,  F.R.S.B.

VERY   REV.  PRINCIPAL   J.  TULLOCH,  D.D.

REV.  CANON  G.  RAWLINSON,  M.A.

REV.  A.  PLUMMER,  M.A.


-•♦-


llonDon :
KEGAN  PAUL,  TRENCH  &  CO.,  1,  PATERNOSTER  SQUARE.

1883.


r

lui.    a


r  :  1


FKINTKU    HV    WII.I.IAM  c  UlUI.^    ANI»   J^NS,    IIMIirij,
l.l>.M><>N    ANO    |:i.t.<.l  1£S.


[1  he  rights  {</ trausiititott  auj of  ft-prc.nutim  are  trs^nrct.)


THE


PULPIT    COMMENTAPiY,


EDITKD   BY   THK


REV.  CANON  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  M.A.,

VICAB  4ND  BUBAL  PEAN  OF  ST.   PAKCBA8,  AND  EXAMINING  CHAPLAIN  TO  Till  LOBD

BISHOP  OF  GLOl'CEBTKB  AND  BBISTOL ;

AND  BY   THK

REV.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A.


J  E  E  E  M I A II .

By  rev.  T.  K.  CHEYNP:,  M.A.,

BECTOU  or  TENDUING,   AND  LATE  FELLOW  OF  BALLIOL  COLLKtiE,  OXFORD.

f^omtlcttcs
By  key.  W.  F.  ADENEY,  M.A.

I^omtltes  bu  Farious  ^utj^ors:

REV.  D.  YOUNG.  B.A.  REV.  S.  CONWAY,  B.A.

HEW  J.  WAITE,  B.A.  REV.  A.  F.  MUIR,  M.A.

VOL.    I.


21  0  u  D  0  n  :
KEGAN  PAUL,  TRENCH  &  CO ,  1,  rATERNOSTER  SQUARE.

1883.


THE


BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.


INTRODUCTION.

§  1.   The  Life,  Times,  and  Cuaractekistics  of  Jeremiah.

1.  The  name  of  Joremiah  at  once  suggests  the  ideas  of  trouble  and  lamenta-
tion ;  and  not  without  too  much  historical  ground.  Jeremiah  was,  in  fact,
not  only  *'  the  evening  star  of  the  declining  day  of  prophecy,"  but  the
herald  of  the  dissolution  of  the  Jewish  commonwealth.  The  outward  show
of  things,  however,  seemed  to  promise  a  calm  and  peaceful  ministry  to  the
youthful  prophet.  The  last  great  political  misfortune  mentioned  (in
2  Chron.  zxxiii.  11,  not  in  Kings)  before  his  time  is  the  carrying  captive
of  King  Manasseh  to  Babylon,  and  this  is  also  the  last  occasion  on  which
a  king  of  Assyria  is  recorded  to  have  interfered  in  the  a£fairs  of  Judah.
Manasseh,  however,  we  are  told,  was  restored  to  his  kingdom,  and,  apostate
and  persecutor  as  he  was,  found  mercy  from  the  Lord  God  of  his  fatheis*
Before  he  closed  his  eyes  for  ever  a  great  and  terrible  event  occurred —
the  sister  kingdom  of  the  ten  tribes  was  finally  destroyed,  and  one  great
burden  of  prophecy  found  its  fulfilment.  Judah  was  spared  a  little
longer.  Manasseh  acquiesced  in  his  dependent  position,  and  continued  to
pay  tribute  to  the  "  great  King "  of  Nineveh.  In  b.c.  642  Manasseh  died,
and,  after  a  brief  interval  of  two  years  (it  is  the  reign  of  Amon,  a  prince
with  an  ill-omened  Egyptian  name),  Josiah,  the  grandson  of  Manasseh,
ascended  the  throne.  This  king  was  a  man  of  a  more  spiritual  religion  than
any  of  his  predecessors  except  Hezokiah,  of  which  he  gave  a  solid  proof  by
patting  down  the  shrines  and  chapels  in  which  the  people  delighted  to
worship  the  true  Ood,  Jehovah,  and  other  supposed  gods  under  idolatrous
forms.  This  extremely  popular  form  of  religion  could  never  be  entirely
eradicated ;  competent  travellers  agree  that  traces  of  it  are  still  visible  in
the  religious  usages  of  the  professedly  Mohammedan  peasantry  of  Palestine.
**  Not  only  have  the  fellahs  preserved  (Robinson  had  already  a  presentiment
of  this),  by  the  erection  of  their  Mussulman  kuhheB^  and  through  their  fetish-
worship  of  oertain  great  isolated  trees,  the  situation  and  the  memory  of  those
-sanctuaries  which  Deuteronomy  gives  up  to  the  execration  of  the  Israelites
entering  the  promised  land,  and  which  it  points  out  to  them  crowning  the
lofty  summits,  surmounting  the  hills,  and  shelteiing  themselves  under  the

JEREMIAH.  b


ii  INTRODUCTION  TO


grocn  trees ;  Imt  they  pay  them  almost  the  Bamo  worship  as  the  ancient
devoteoB  of  the  Eloliim,  those  Canaanitish  kuffara  of  whom  they  are  the
dcHcondaiits.  Thewe  makoms — so  Deuteronomy  calls  them — which  Manasseh
went  on  constructing,  and  against  which  the  prophets  in  vain  exhaust
th(;ir  grandiose  invectives,  are  word  for  word,  thing  for  thing,  the  Arab
makmns  of  our  modern  (joyim,  covered  by  those  little  cupolas  which  dot  with
such  picturesque  white  8j)ot8  the  mountainous  horizons  of  the  arid  Judaea."
Such  is  the  language  of  an  accomplished  explorer,  M.  Clermont-Gannman,*
and  it  helps  us  to  understand  the  difficulties  with  which  Hezekiah  and
Jr^siah  had  to  contend.  ITie  former  king  had  the  support  of  Isaiah,  and  the
latter  had  at  his  right  hand  the  equally  devoted  prophet,  Jeremiah,  the
year  of  whose  cjiU  was  apparently  the  one  immediately  following  the  com-
mencement of  the  reformation  (see  ch.  i.  2 ;  2  Chron.  xxxiv.  3).  Jeremiah,
however,  had  a  more  difiicult  task  than  Isaiah.  The  latter  prophet  must
have  had  on  his  side  nearly  all  the  zealous  worshippers  of  Jehovah.  The
8tiit<3  was  more  than  once  in  great  danger,  and  it  was  the  burden  of
IhaiairH  prophecies  that,  by  simply  trusting  in  Jehovah  and  obeying  his
commandments,  the  state  would  infallibly  be  delivered.  But  in  Jeremiah's
time  there  seems  to  have  been  a  great  revival  of  purely  external  religion.
Men  went  to  the  temple  and  performed  all  the  ceremonial  laws  which
conc<jrned  them,  but  neglected  those  practical  duties  which  make  up
so  largo  a  poition  of  true  religion.  There  was  a  party  of  this  kind
in  Tsaiah's  time,  but  it  was  not  so  powerful,  because  the  misfortunes  of
the  country  seemed  to  show  clearly  that  Jehovah  was  displeased  with
the  state  of  the  national  religion.  In  Jeremiah's  time,  on  the  other
hand,  the  continued  peace  and  prosperity  which  at  first  prevailed  was
equally  regarded  as  a  proof  that  God  looked  favourably  upon  his  people,
in  accordance  with  those  repeated  promises  in  the  Book  of  Deuteronomy,
that,  if  the  people  o>)eyed  the  Law  of  Jehovah,  Jehovah  would  bless  their
baskfit  and  their  store,  and  would  keep  them  in  peace  and  safety.  And
hero  it  must  be  remarked  (apart  from  the  higher  criticism,  so  much  is  as
clear  as  the  day)  that  the  Book  of  Deuteronomy  was  a  favourite  reading-book
of  religious  people  at  this  time.  Jeremiah  himself  (surely  a  representative
of  the  most  religious  class)  is  full  of  allusions  to  it ;  its  characteristic  phrases
recur  continually  in  his  pages.  The  discovery  of  the  book  in  the  temple  ■
(2  Kings  xxii.)  was,  wo  may  venture  to  surmise,  providentially  permitted
with  a  view  to  the  religious  needs  of  those  times.  No  one  can  deny  that
Deuteronomy  was  peculiarly  adapted  to  the  age  of  Josiah  and  Jeremiah,
partly  because  of  the  stress  which  it  lays  on  the  importance  of  religious
centralization  as  opposed  to  the  liberty  of  worshipping  at  local  shrines,  and
partly  because  of  its  emphasis  on  the  simple  moral  duties  which  the  men
of  that  ago  were  in  serious  danger  of  forgetting.     No  wonder,  then,  that


»  •  Ln  Palostiue  Inconnno  '  (rariB,  1870),  pp.  49,  50.

•  Th(»  quo»*tioTi,  on  which  Old  Testimcnt  critics  aro  so  much  divided,  as  to  the  Mosaic  or
lH>8t-MoBaio  oi  ij^in  of  the  Book  of  Deuteronomy  receives  a  apocial  treatment  elsewhere.


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  iii

Jeremiah  himself  should  take  np  the  study  of  the  hook  with  special  earnest-
ness, and  that  its  phraseology  should  impress  itself  on  his  own  style  of
writing.     There  is  yet  another  circumstance  which  may  help  us  to  under-
stand our  prophet's  strong  interest  in  the  Book  of  Deuteronomy.     It  is  that
his  father  was  not  improhahly  the  high  priest  who  found  the  Book  of  the  Law
in  the  temple.     We  know,  at  any  rate,  that  Jeremiah  was  a  memher  of  a
priestly  family,  and  that  his  father  was  named  Hilkiah  (ch.  i.  1) ;  and  that
he  had  high  connections  is  probable  from  the  respect  shown  to  him  by  suc-
cessive rulers  of  Judah — by  Jehoiakim  and  Zedekiah,  no  less  than  by  Ahikam
and  Gedaliah,  the  viceroys  of  the  King  of  Babylon.     We  may  safely  assume,
then,  that  both  Jeremiah  and  a  large  section  of  the  Jewish  people  were
deeply  interested  in  the  Book  of  Deuteronomy,  and,  though  there  was  no
Bible  at  that  time  in  our  sense  of  the  word,  that  this  impressive  book  to
some  extent  supplied  its  place.     There  was,  however,  as  has  been  indicated
above,  a  danger  connected  with  recwling  the  Book  of  Deuteronomy,  the
exhortations  of  which  so  repeatedly  connect  the  national  prosperity  with
obedience  to  the  commandments  of  God.     Now,  these  commandments  are
obviously  of  two  kinds — moral  and  ceremonial ;  not  that  any  hard  and  fast
line  can  be  drawn  between  them,  but,  roughly  speaking,  the  contents  of  some
of  the  laws  are  more  distinctly  moral,  and  those  of  others  more  distinctly
ceremonial.      Some  of  the  Jews  had  little  or  no  conception  of  the  moral  or
spiritual  side  of  religion,  and  thought  it  enough  to   perform   with  the
strictest  punctuality  the   ceremonial   part  of  God's   Law.     Having  done
this,  they  cried,  "  Peace,  peace ;  "  and  applied  the  delightful  promises  of
Deuteronomy  to  themselves.     And  it  seemed  as  if  Providence  justified  them,
for,  as  was  noticed  just  now,  the  kingdom  of  Judah  was  freer  from  external
danger  than  it  had  been  for  a  long  time.     Another  consideration  may  be
added.     The  prophet  Nahnra,  as  is  well  known,  predicted  the  complete
destruction  of  the  tyrannical  power  of  Assyria.      In  B.C.  626,  t.e.  in  the
fourteenth  year  of  Josiah,  a  great  step  was  taken  towards  the  fulfilment  of
that  prediction ;  a  powerful  rival  kingdom  to  Assyria  (though  in  nominal
subordination  to  it)  was  established  at  Babj'lon,  and  the  Medes,  now  a
powerful  and  united  kingdom,  advanced  upon  Assyria  from  the  east.     This
was  just  at  the  time  when   Josiah  was   beginning  his  reformation,  and
Jeremiah  beginning  to  prophesy.     Could  there  be  a  more  manifest  token
(so  many  professedly  religious  people  might  urge)  of  the  favour  of  God
to  his  long  humiliated  people  ?      Jeremiah,  however,  thought  otherwise.
Cassandra-like,  he  began  his  dirge  when  all  were  lulled  in  a  deep  sense  of
security.     The  spiritual  state  of  his  country  seemed  to  him  utterly  rotten.
He  agreed,  it  is  true,  with  those  would-be  religious  persons  that  the  local
shrines  and  chapels  ought  to  be  abolished,  and  he  could  not  object  to  their
strict  observance  of  the  appointed  rites  and  ceremonies ;  but  he  did  from  the
bottom  of  his  heart  abhor  and  detest  the  supposition  that  a  mere  ceremonial
worship  could  be  pleasing  to  God  (see  those  remarkable,  though  at  the  same
time  obscure,  passages,  ch.  vii.  8 — 15,  21 — 23;  xi.  15).


iv  INTRODUCTION  TO


2.  Jeremiah  did  not  cease  preaching,  but  with  very  little  result.  We
need  not  wonder  at  this.  The  visible  success  of  a  faithful  preacher  is  no
test  of  his  acceptableness  before  God,  There  are  times  when  the  Holy
Spirit  liim«elf  seems  to  work  in  vain,  and  the  world  seems  given  up  to  the
powers  of  evil.  True,  even  then  there  is  a  "  silver  lining  "  to  the  cloud,  if
we  have  only  faith  to  see  it.  There  is  always  a  "  remnant  according  to  the
election  of  grace  ;  "  and  there  is  often  a  late  harvest  which  the  sower  does
not  live  to  see.  It  was  so  with  the  labours  of  Jeremiah,  who,  like  the  hero
Samson,  slew  more  in  his  death  than  in  his  life ;  but  on  this  interesting
point  we  must  not  at  present  linger.  Jeremiah  wont  on  preaching,  but
with  small  apparent  success ;  when  all  at  once  a  little  cloud  arose,  no  bigger
than  a  man's  hand,  and  soon  the  fair  prospects  of  Judah  were  cruelly
blighted.  Jusiah,  the  favourite,  as  it  seemed,  of  God  and  man,  was  defeated
and  slain  on  the  field  of  Megiddo,  in  B.C.  609.  The  immediate  result  was  a
tightening  of  the  political  yoke  under  which  the  kingdom  of  Judah  laboured.
The  old  Assyrian  empire  had  long  been  declining ;  and  just  at  the  beginning
of  Jeremiah's  ministry  there  occurred,  as  we  have  seen,  one  of  those  great
events  which  change  the  face  of  the  world — the  rise  of  the  great  Babylonian
power.  It  need  hardly  be  said  that  Babylon  and  the  Chaldeans  occupy  a
large  place  in  the  prophecies  of  Jeremiah ;  Babylon  was  to  him  what  Nineveh
had  been  to  Isaiah.

But,  before  entering  upon  this  subject  of  the  relations  of  Jeremiah  to  the
Babylonians,  we  have  first  to  consider  a  question  of  some  importance  for  the
study  of  his  writings,  viz.  whether  his  references  to  foreign  invaders  are
covered  entirely  by  the  Babylonian  aggression.  Is  it  not  possible  that  an
earlier  danger  may  have  left  its  impress  on  his  pages  (and  also  on  those  of
Zephaniah)  ?  Herodotus  tells  us  that  the  Scythians  were  masters  of  Asia
for  twenty-eight  years  (?),  that  they  advanced  to  the  borders  of  Egypt,  and
that,  on  their  return,  some  of  them  plundered  the  temple  of  Ascalon  (i.  106).
The  date  of  the  Scythian  invasion  of  Palestine  can,  it  is  true,  only  be
fixed  approximately.  The  Canons  of  Eusebius  place  it  in  Olympiad  36.2,
equivalent  to  B.C.  635  (St.  Jerome's  Latin  version),  or  Olympiad  37.1,
equivalent  to  B.C.  632  (Armenian  version).  At  any  rate,  it  ranges  between
about  B.C.  634  and  618,  i.e.  between  the  accession  of  Cyaxares  and  the  death
of  P^amnutichus  (see  Herod.,  i.  103 — 105),or  more  precisely, perhaps, between
B.C.  634  and  625  (accepting  Abydenus's  account  of  the  fall  of  Nineveh).
True,  one  could  wish  for  better  evidence  than  that  of  Herodotus  (loc,  cit.)
and  Justin  (ii.  3),  But  the  statements  of  these  writers  have  not  yet  been
disproved,  and  they  suit  the  chronological  conditions  of  the  prophecies
before  us.  A  reference  to  the  Babylonian  invasion  seems  to  be  excluded  in
the  case  of  Zephaniah,  by  the  facts  that  in  B.C.  635 — 625  Babylonia  was  still
under  the  supremacy  of  Assyria,  and  that  from  neither  country  could  any
danger  to  Palestine  then  be  apprehended.  The  case  of  Jeremiah  is,  no
doubt,  moro  complicated.  It  cannot  be  maintained  that  any  discourses,  in
the  form  in  which  we  now  have  them,  relate  to  the  Scythians;  but  it  is


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEKEMIAH.


possible  that  passages  originally  spoken  of  the  Scythians  have  been  inter-
mixed with  later  prophecies  respecting  the  Chaldeans.  The  descriptions
in  ch.  iv.,  v.,  viii.,  of  the  wild,  northern  nation,  sweeping  along  and
spreading  devastation  as  it  goes,  seems  more  strikingly  approjmate  to  the
Scythians  (see  Trofossor  Eawlinson's  description,  *  Ancient  Mouarchies,'  ii.
122)  than  to  the  Babylonians.  The  difficulty  felt  by  many  in  admitting
this  view  is  doubtless  caused  by  the  silence  of  Herodotus  as  to  any  mischief
wrought  by  these  nomad  hordes  in  Judah  ;  of  course,  by  keeping  the  coast-
road,  the  latter  might  have  left  Judah  unharmed.  But  (1)  we  cannot  be
sure  that  they  did  keep  entirely  to  the  coast-road.  If  Scythopolis  is  equi-
valent to  Beth-shan,  and  if  '•  Scy tho-"  is  correctly  explained  as  "  Scythian,"
they  did  not ;  and  (2)  the  pictures  of  devastation  may  have  been  principally
called  forth  by  the  later  invasion.  According  to  ch.  xxxvi.  1 — 4,  Jeremiah
dictated  all  his  former  prophecies  to  Baruch,  either  from  memory  or  from
rough  notes,  as  late  as  B.C.  606.  Is  it  not  possible  that  he  may  have
heightened  the  colouring  of  warnings  suggested  by  the  Scythian  invasion
to  adapt  them  to  the  later  and  more  awful  crisis  ?  Nay,  more,  is  not  this
expressly  suggested  by  the  statement  (ch.  xxxvi.  32)  that  **  there  were
added  besides  unto  them  many  like  words  '*  ?  When  you  once  grant  that
prophecies  were  written  down  subsequently  to  their  delivery,  and  after-
wards combined  with  others  in  the  form  of  a  summary  (a  theory  which
does  not  admit  of  a  doubt  either  in  Isaiah  or  in  Jeremiah),  you  therewith
admit  that  features  of  dififerent  periods  have  in  some  cases  most  probably
been  combined  by  an  unconscious  anachronism.^

We  may  now  return  to  that  more  pressing  danger  which  has  so  deeply
coloured  the  discourses  of  the  prophet.  One  striking  feature  about  the
rise  of  the  Babylonian  power  is  its  rapidity ;  this  is  vigorously  expressed
by  a  prophet  contemporary  with  Jeremiah —

**  Behold  ye  among  the  nations,  and  look,
Astonish  yourselves,  and  be  astonished  ;
For,  he  doeth  a  deed  in  your  days,
Which  ye  will  not  believe,  when  related.
For,  behold,  I  raise  up  the  Chaldeans,
The  passionate  and  impetuous  nation.
Who  g(Xith  through  the  breadth  of  the  earth.
To  possess  himself  of  dwelling-places  which  are  not  his."

(Ilab.  i.  6,  6.)

In  B.C.  609  Babylon  had  still  two  seemingly  vigoroiis  rivals — Assyria
and  Egypt ;  in  b.g.  604  it  had  the  undisputed  mastery  of  the  East.  Between
these  two  dates  lie — to  mention  the  events  in  Palestine  first — the  conquest
of  Syria  by  Egypt,  and  the  reattachment  of  Judah,  after  the  lapse  of  five
centuries,  to  the  empire  of  the  Pharaohs.     Another  still  more  surprising

*  On  the  whole  Scythian  question,  see  further  Ewald,  *  History  of  Israel,*  iv.  255,  256 ;
Duncker. '  Hitftory  of  Antiquity,'  iii.  271 — 274 ;  Payne  Smith  (whose  expressions  seem  to
the  present  writer  too  hasty  and  dogmatic), '  Speaker's  Commentary,*  v.  314.


Ti  INTliObUCTlUN   TO


event  remains — the  fall  of  Nineveh,  which,  so  very  short  a  time  previously,
had  made  such  a  show  of  warlike  power  under  the  brilliant  Assurbanipal
(B.C.  648 — 626).  In  vol.  xi.  of  the  *  llecords  of  the  Past,*  Mr.  Sayce  has  trans-
lated bome  striking  though  fragmentary  texts  relative  to  the  collapse  of  this
mighty  colossus.  "  When  Cyaxares  the  Mede,  with  the  Cimmerians,  the
people  of  Minni,  or  Van,  and  the  tribe  of  Saparda,  or  Sepharad  (cf.  Obad.  20),
on  the  Black  Sea,  was  threatening  Nineveh,  Esarhaddon  II.,  the  Saracos
of  the  Greek  writers,  had  i^roclaimed  a  solemn  assembly  to  the  gods,  in  the
hope  of  warding  off  the  danger.  But  the  bad  writing  of  the  tablets  shows
that  they  are  merely  the  first  rough  text  of  the  royal  proclamation,  and  we
may  perhaps  infer  that  the  capture  of  Nineveh  and  the  overthrow  of  the
empire  prevented  a  fair  copy  from  being  taken  "  (p.  79).

Thus  was  the  prediction  of  Nahum,  uttered  in  the  height  of  Assyrian
power,  fulfilled ;  the  sword  devoured  her  young  lions,  her  prey  was  cut  off
from  the  earth,  and  the  voice  of  her  insolent  messenger  (like  the  Rabshakeh
in  Isa.  xxxvi.)  was  no  more  heard  (Nah.  ii.  13).  And  now  began  a  series  of
calamities  only  to  be  paralleled  by  the  still  more  awful  catastrophe  in  the
Koman  War.  The  Chaldeans  became  the  waking  thought  and  the  nightly
dream  of  king,  prophets,  and  people.  A  reference  was  made  just  now  to
Habakkuk,  who  gives  vent  to  the  bitterness  of  his  reflections  in  complaint
to  Jehovah.  Jeremiah,  however,  fond  as  he  is  supposed  to  be  of  lamen-
tation, does  not  give  way  to  the  language  of  complaint ;  his  feelings  were,
perhaps,  too  deep  for  words.  He  records,  however,  the  unfortunate  moral
effect  produced  by  the  danger  of  the  state  on  his  fellow-countrymen.  It
took  the  form  of  a  religious  reaction.  The  promises  of  Jehovah  in  the  Book
of  Deuteronomy  appeared  to  have  been  falsified,  and  Israel's  God  to  be
incapable  of  protecting  his  worshii^pers.  Many  Jews  fell  away  into
idolatry.  Even  those  who  did  not  become  renegades  kept  aloof  from
j)rophets  like  Jeremiah,  who  boldly  declared  that  God  had  hidden  his  face
for  the  sins  of  the  people.  Those  who  have  read  the  life  of  Savonarola
will  be  struck  by  the  parallel  between  the  preaching  of  the  great  Italian
and  that  of  Jeremiah.  W^ithout  venturing  to  claim  for  Savonarola  an
ecjuality  with  Jeremiah,  he  can  hardly  be  denied  a  kind  of  reflection  of  Old
Testament  prophecy.  God's  Spirit  is  not  tied  to  countries  or  to  centuries ;
and  there  is  nothing  wonderful  if  mountain-moving  faith  were  blessed  in
Florence  as  it  was  in  Jerusalem.

The  prospects  held  out  by  Jeremiah  were  gloomy  indeed.  The  Captivity
was  to  be  no  brief  interlude  in  Israel's  history,  but  a  full  generation ;  in
round  numbers,  seventy  years.  Such  a  message  was,  from  its  very  nature,
doomed  to  an  unfavourable  reception.  The  renegades  (probably  not  a  few)
were,  of  course,  disbelievers  in  "  the  word  of  Jehovah,"  and  many  even  of  the
faithful  still  hoped  against  hope  that  the  promises  of  Deuteronomy,  accord-
ing to  their  faulty  interpretation  of  them,  would  somehow  be  fulfilled.

It  cost  Jeremiah  much  to  be  a  prophet  of  ill ;  to  be  always  threatening
"  sword,  famine,  pestilence,"  and  the  destruction  of  that  temple  which  was


THE  BOOK  OF   THE   PROPHET   JEREMIAH.  vii


"the  throne  of  Jehovah's  glory"  (ch.  xvii.  12).  But,  as  our  own  Milton
says,  "  when  God  commands  to  take  the  trumpet  and  blow  a  dolorous  or  a
jarring  blast,  it  lies  not  in  man's  will  what  he  shall  say."  ^  There  are  several
passages  which  show  how  nearly  intolerable  Jeremiah's  position  became  to
him,  and  how  tenibly  bitter  his  feelings  (sometimes  at  least)  towards  his
own  enemies  and  those  of  his  country.  Take,  for  instance,  that  thrilling
passage  in  ch.  xx.  7 — 13,  beginning  (if  one  may  correct  the  version^


'*  Thou  didst  eDtico  me,  0  Jehovah  !  and  I  let  myself  be  cniiccd ;
Thou  didst  take  hold  on  me,  and  didst  prevail ;
I  have  become  a  derision  all  the  day  long,
They  all  mock  mc."

The  contrast  between  what  he  hoped  for  as  a  prophet  of  Jehovah,  and
what  he  actually  experienced,  takes  form  in  his  mind  as  the  result  of  an
enticement  on  the  part  of  Jehovah.  The  passage  draws  to  its  end  with
the  solemnly  jubilant  words —

"  But  Jehovah  is  with  me  as  a  fierce  warrior ;
Therefore  shall  mine  enemies  stumble  and  not  prevail,
They  shall  be  greatly  ashamed,  because  they  have  not  prospered.
With  an  everlasting  reproach  that  shall  never  be  forgotten.
And  thou,  0  Jehovah  of  hosts,  that  tricst  the  righteous.
That  seest  the  reins  and  the  heart.
Let  me  see  thy  revenge  upon  them,
For  unto  thee  have  I  committed  my  cause.
Sing  ye  unto  Jehovah  ;  praise  ye  Jehovah :
For  he  hath  delivered  the  soul  of  the  poor  from  the  hand  of  evil-doers.'*

But  immediately  after  this  chant  of  faith,  the  prophet  relapses  into  melan-
choly with  those  terrible  words,  which  recur  almost  word  for  word  in  the
first  discourse  of  the  afflicted  Job —

*•  Cursed  be  the  day  wherein  I  was  bom :
Let  not  the  day  wherein  my  mother  bare  me  be  blessed,"  etc'

And  even  this  is  not  the  most  bitter  thing  which  Jeremiah  has  said.  On
one  occasion,  when  his  enemies  had  plotted  against  him,  he  utters  the
following  solemn  imprecation : — **  Give  heed  to  me,  0  Jehovah,  and  hearken
to  the  voice  of  them  that  contend  with  me.  Should  evil  be  recompensed
for  good?  for  they  have  digged  a  pit  for  my  soul.  Remember  how  I  stood
before  thee  to  speak  good  for  them — to  turn  away  thy  wrath  from  them.
Therefore  deliver  up  their  children  to  the  famine,  and  spill  them  into  the
hands  of  the  sword ;  and  let  their  wives  become  childless,  and  widows ;  and
let  their  men  be  slain  by  the  plague,  their  young  men  smitten  of  the  sword
in  battle.  Let  a  cry  be  heard  from  their  houses,  when  thou  bringest  sud-
denly troops  upon  them :  for  they  have  digged  a  pit  to  take  me,  and  hid

'  *  Reason  of  Choroh  Government,'  bk.  ii.

'  Ck>mpare  similar  passages  in  ch.  xiv.,  zv.,  xvii.  15 — 18.


viii  INTIIODUCTION   TO


snares  for  my  feet.  But  thoii,  0  Jehovah,  knowest  all  their  counsel  against
mo  to  slay  me :  forgive  not  their  iniquity,  neither  blot  out  their  sin  from
thy  bight,  but  let  them  be  (counted  as)  fallen  ones  before  thee ;  deal  witli
them  (accordingly)  in  the  time  of  thine  anger"  (ch.  xviii.  19 — 23).  And
now,  how  are  wo  to  account  for  this?  Shall  we  ascribe  it  to  a  sudden
ebullition  of  natural  anger?  Some  will  reply  that  this  is  inconceivable  in
one  consecrated  from  his  youth  to  the  service  of  God.  Let  us  remember,
however,  that  even  the  perfect  Exemplar  of  consecrated  manhood  gave
utterance  to  feelings  somewhat  akin  to  those  of  Jeremiah.*  When  our
Lord  found  (from  the  point  of  view  of  his  humiliation,  we  may  say
••  found  ")  that  all  his  preacliing  and  all  his  wonderful  works  were  thrown
away  on  the  scribes  and  Pharisees,  he  did  not  hesitate  to  pour  out  the
full  vials  of  his  wrath  on  those  "  hypocrites."  Doubtless  "  he  felt  pity  as
well  as  anger,  but  he  thought  the  anger  had  a  better  right  to  be  expressed.
The  impostors  must  be  first  unmasked ;  they  might  be  forgiven  after-
wards, if  they  should  abandon  their  conventionalties.  The  lover  of  men  is
angry  to  see  harm  done  to  men."*  Jeremiah,  too,  like  our  Lord,  felt  pity  as
well  as  anger— pity  for  the  nation  misguided  by  its  natural  "shepherds,"
and  was  willing  to  extend  forgiveness,  in  the  name  of  his  Lord,  to  those
who  were  willing  to  return;  the  addresses  in  ch.  vii.,  xxii.  2 — 9  are
manifestly  intended  for  those  very  "shepherds  of  the  people"  whom  he
afterwards  so  solemnly  curses.  Natural  feeling,  no  doubt,  there  was  in  his
communications,  but  a  natural  feeling  purified  and  exalted  by  the  inspiring
Spirit.  lie  feels  himself  charged  with  the  thunders  of  an  angry  God  ;  he
is  conscious  that  he  is  the  representative  of  that  Messiah-people  of  whom
a  btill  greater  prophet  speaks  in  the  name  of  Jehovah —

"  Thou  art  my  servant,  0  Israel,  in  whom  I  will  get  myself  glory."

(Isa.  xliz.  3.)

This  latter  point  is  well  worthy  of  consideration,  as  it  suggests  the  most
probable  explanation  of  the  imprecatory  passages  in  the  Psalms  as  well  as  in
the  Book  of  Jeremiah.  Both  psalmists  and  prophet  felt  themselves  repre-
sentatives of  that  "Son  of  God"  (Hos.  xi.  1),  that  Messiah-people,  which
existed  to  some  slight  extent  in  reality,  but  in  its  full  dimensions  in  the
Divine  counsels.  Jeromiali,  in  particular,  was  a  type  of  the  true  Israelite,
an  Alnliol  (a  "servant  of  God")  among  the  faithless,  an  adumbration  of
the  perfect  Israel  and  the  perfect  Israelite  reserved  by  God  for  future  ages.
Fooling  himself,  however  indistinctly,  to  be  such  a  type  and  such  a  repre-
sentative, and  being  at  the  same  time  "  one  of  like  affections  (ofioioiraOijq)
with  ourselves,"  he  could  not  but  use  language  which,  however  justifud,
bears  a  superficial  resemblance  to  vindictive  enmity.

»  It  is  best  to  Kponk  puanU^Uy.  Tiioro  wjis,  doubtless,  some  human  dross  left  in  Jere-
miah :  and  only  the  porfwt  *•  Senant  of  Jt  hovah  **  could  nppropriato  the  description  in
Isa.  xlii.  2«  8.

■  '  Ecco  Homo/  p,  270  (ch.  xxi).


THE  BOOK  OF   THE   PllOPHET   JEREMIAH.  ix

3.  Jeremiah's  warnings  becamo  more  and  more  definite.  He  foresaw,  at
any  rate  in  its  main  outlines,  the  course  which  events  would  shortly  after-
wards take,  and  refers  expressly  to  the  dishonoured  burial  of  Jehoiakim,
and  the  captivity  of  the  youthful  Jehoiachin.^  In  the  presence  of  such
misfortunes  he  becomes  tender-hearted,  and  gives  vent  to  his  sympathetic
emotion  precisely  as  our  Lord  does  in  similar  circumstances.  How  touch-
ing are  the  words  ! —

"  Weep  not  over  one  that  is  dead,  neither  lament  for  him ;
Weep  (rather)  for  one  that  is  gone  away ;
For  he  will  return  no  more.
Nor  see  his  native  country."

(Ch.  xxii.  10.)

And  in  another  passage  (oh.  xxiv.)  he  speaks  both  kindly  and  hopefully
of  those  who  have  been  carried  away  into  exile,  while  those  who  are  left
at  home  are  described,  most  expressively,  as  **  bad  figs,  very  bad,  that
cannot  be  eaten."  •*  All  that  we  hear  of  the  later  history  helps  us,"  Mr.
Maurice  remarks,  "  to  understand  the  force  and  truth  of  this  sign.  The
reign  of  Zedekiah  presents  us  with  the  most  vivid  picture  of  a  king  and
people  sinking  deeper  and  deeper  into  an  abyss,  ever  and  anon  making  wild
and  frantic  efforts  to  rise  out  of  it,  imputing  their  evil  to  every  one  but
themselves, — their  struggles  for  a  nominal  freedom  always  proving  them  to
be  both  slaves  and  tyrants  at  heart."  *

The  evil,  however,  was  perhaps  by  nothing  so  much  intensified  as  by  the
hearing  which  the  people,  and  especially  the  rulers,  accorded  to  the  flat-
tering prophets  who  announced  a  too  speedy  termination  to  the  clearly
impending  captivity.  One  of  these,  named  Hananiah,  declared  that  in  two
years  the  yoke  of  the  King  of  Babylon  should  be  broken,  and  the  Jewish
exiles  be  restored,  together  with  the  vessels  of  the  sanctuary  (ch.  xxviii.).
"Not  in  two  but  in  seventy  years,"  was  virtually  Jeremiah's  reply.  If  the
Jews  who  remained  did  not  submit  quietly,  they  would  be  utterly  destroyed.
If,  on  the  other  hand,  they  were  obedient,  and  **  brought  their  necks  under
the  yoke  of  the  King  of  Babylon,"  they  would  bo  left  undisturbed  in  their
own  land.

This  seems  to  be  the  place  to  answer  a  question  which  has  more  than
once  been  asked— Was  Jeremiah  a  true  patriot  in  so  continually  expressing
his  conviction  of  the  futility  of  resistance  to  Babylon  ?  It  must  be  remem-
bered, first  of  all,  that  the  religious  idea  with  which  Jeremiah  was  inspired
is  higher  and  broader  than  the  idea  of  patriotism.  Israel  had  a  divinely
appropriated  work ;  if  it  fell  below  its  mission,  what  further  right  had  it
of  existence?  Perhaps  it  may  be  allowable  to  admit  that  such  conduct  as
Jeremiah's  would  not  in  our  day  be  regarded  as  patriotic.     If  the  Govem-

^  There  is  nothing  inconceivable  in  this,  even  if  we  should  grnnt  that  the  prophecy,
ch.  xxi.  1 — xxiii.  40,  was  modified  in  expression — in  a  word,  edited— in  the  reign  of
Zedekiah,  the  uncle  and  successor  of  Jehoiachin.

■  Maurice,  *  Prophets  and  Kings,'  p.  420.


INTUoDUCTiON    TO


mcnt  had  fully  committod  itself  to  a  definite  and  irrevocable  policy,  it  is
probable  tliat  all  parties  would  agree  to  enforce  at  any  rate  silent  acqui-
escence. One  eminent  man  may,  however,  be  appealed  to  in  favour  of
Jeremiah's  patriotism.  Niebuhr,  quoted  by  Sir  Edward  Strachey,  writes
thus  at  the  period  of  Germany's  deepest  humiliation  under  Napoleon :  **  I
told  you,  as  I  told  every  one,  how  indignant  I  felt  at  the  senseless  prating
of  those  who  talked  of  desi)erate  resolves  as  of  a  tragedy.  ...  To  bear  our
fate  with  dignity  and  wisdom,  that  the  yoke  might  be  lightened,  was  my
doctrine,  and  I  supported  it  with  the  advice  of  the  prophet  Jeremiah,  who
spoke  and  acted  very  wisely,  living  as  ho  did  under  King  Zedekiah,  in  the
times  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  though  he  would  have  g.ven  different  counsel  had
ho  lived  under  Judas  Maccabajus,  in  the  times  of  Antiochus  Epiphanes."^

This  time,  too,  Jeremiah's  warning  voice  was  in  vain.   Zedekiah  was  mad
enough  to  court  an  alliance  with  Pharaoh-llophra  (the  Egyptians  called
him  Uah-ab-ra,  the  Greeks  Apries),  who,  by  a  naval  victory,  had  **  revived
the  prestige  of  the  Egyptian  arms  which  had  received  so  severe  a  shock
under  Necho  II."  *    The  Babylonians  would  not  pardon  this  insubordination,
and  a  second  siege  of  Jerusalem  was  the  consequence.     Undaunted  by  the
hostility  of  the  popular  magnates  (**  princes  "),  Jeremiah  urgently  counsels
immediate  surrender.     (At  this  point,  it  is  expedient  to  be  brief;  Jeremiah
himself  is  his  best  biographer.     There  is,  perhaiJS,  nothing  in  all  litera-
ture which  rivals   the  narrative  chapters  in    his  book   for  dispassionate
truthfulness.)     He  is  rewarded  by  close  imprisonment,  but  his  policy  is
justified  by  the  event.      Famine   raged  among  the  besieged  inhabitants
(ch  lii.  0 ;  Lam.  i.  ID,  20,  etc.),  till  at  length  a  breach  was  eflfected  in  the
walls  ;  a  vain  attempt  at  flight  was  made  by  the  king,  who  was  captured,
and   with   most  of    his  people  carried  to  Babylon,  B.C.  588.      Thus  fell
Jerusalem,  nineteen  years  after  the  battle  of  Carchemish,  and,  with  Jeru-
salem, the  last  bold  opponent  of  Babylonian  power  in  Syria.     A  few  poor
inhabitants,  indeed,  were  left,  but  only  to  prevent  the  land  from  becoming
utterly  desolate  (2  Kings  xxv.  12).     Their  only  consolation  was  that  they
were  allowed  a  native  governor,  Gedaliah,  who  was  also  a  hereditary  friend
of  Jeremiah.     But  it  was  a  short-lived  consolation  !     Gedaliah  fell  by  an
assassin's  hand,  and  the  principal  Jews,  fearing  the  vengeance  of  their  new
lords,  took  refuge  in  Egypt,  dragging  the  prophet  with  them  (ch.  xlii.  7 — 22  ;
xliii.  7 ;  xliv.  1).     But  Jeremiah  had  not  come  to  the  end  of  his  message  of
woo.     Did  the  Jews,  he  asked,  expect  to  be  secure  from  the  Babylonians  in
Egpyt?     Soon  would  their  foes  be  after  them;  Egypt  would  be  chastised,
and  the  Jews  would  suffer  for  their  treason.      And  now  the  unhappy  con-
sequences of  the  misreading  of  the  Deuteronomio  Scripture  became  fully
visible.     It  was  from  their  infidelity,  not  to  Jehovah,  but  to  the  queen
of  heaven,  that  their  calamities  proceeded,  said  the  Jewish  exiles  in  Egypt

*  Strachey,  *  JowiBh  IlUtory  uud  Politics  in  the  Times  of  Sargon  and  Sennacherib,'
p.  222,  note.
«  Dr.  lUrch, » Egypt;  p.  180.


THE  BOOK  OF   THE   PROPHET   JEREMIAH,  xi

(ch.  xliv.  17 — 19).  What  answer  could  Jeremiah  make?  His  mission  to
that  generation  was  closed.  He  could  only  console  himself  with  that  heroic
faith  which  was  one  of  his  most  striking  qualities.  During  the  siege  of
Jerusalem  he  had,  with  a  Roman  belief  in  his  country's  destinies,  purchased
a  piece  of  ground  at  no  great  distance  from  the  capital  (ch.  xxxii.  6 — 15)  ;
and  it  was  after  the  fate  of  the  city  was  sealed  that  he  rose  to  the  highest
pitch  of  religious  enthusiasm,  when  he  uttered  that  memorable  promise  of
a  new  and  spiritual  covenant  in  which  the  external  helps  of  prophecy  and
a  written  Law  should  be  dispensed  with  (ch.  xxxi.  31 — 34).  And  in  this
heaven-bom  assurance  of  the  immortality  and  spiritual  regeneration  of  his
people  he  persisted  to  the  end.

4.  It  was  impossible  to  avoid  giving  a  brief  abstract  of  Jeremiah's  pro-
phetic career,  because  his  book  is  to  such  a  large  extent  autobiographical.
He  cannot  limit  himself  to  reproducing  **  the  word  of  the  Lord  ;  "  his
individual  nature  is  too  strong  for  him,  and  asserts  its  right  of  expression.
His  life  was  a  constant  alternation  between  the  action  of  the  **  burning  fire  "
of  revelation  (ch.  xx.  9),  and  the  reaction  of  human  sensibilities.  Truly  has
it  been  observed  that  **  Jeremiah  has  a  kind  of  feminine  tenderness  and
susceptibility ;  strength  was  to  be  educed  out  of  a  spirit  which  was  inclined
to  be  timid  and  shrinking ;  "  and  again  that  **  he  was  a  loving,  priestly  spirit,
who  felt  the  unbelief  and  sin  of  his  nation  as  a  heavy,  overwhelming
burden."     "Who  does  not  remember  those  touching  words  ? —

"  Is  there  no  balm  in  Gilead  ?  is  there  no  physician  there  ?
Why  then  hath  not  healing  appeared  for  the  daughter  of  my  people  ?
Oh  that  my  head  were  water,  and  mine  eye  a  fountain  of  tears.
That  1  might  weep  day  and  night  for  the  slain  of  the  daughter  of  my  people !"

(Ch.  viii.  22  ;  ix.  1.)

And  again —

**  Let  mine  eyes  run  down  with  tears  day  and  night,*
And  let  them  not  cease  :

For  the  virgin  daughter  of  my  people  is  broken  with  a  great  breach.
With  a  very  grievous  blow."

(Ch.  xiv.  17.)

In  this  respect  Jeremiah  marks  an  epoch  in  the  history  of  prophec}'.
Isaiah  and  the  prophets  of  his  generation  are  fully  absorbed  in  their
message,  and  allow  no  space  to  the  exhibition  of  personal  feeling.  In
Jeremiah,  on  the  other  hand,  the  element  of  human  feeling  is  constantly
overpowering  the  prophetic.  But  let  not  Jeremiah  be  disparaged,  and  let
not  those  triumph  over  him  who  are  gifted  with  greater  power  of  self-
repression.  Self-repression  does  not  always  imply  the  absence  of  selfishness,
whereas  Jeremiah's  demonstrativeness  is  not  called  forth  by  purely  personal
troubles,  but  by  those  of  God's  people.     The  words  of  Jesus,  "  Ye  would

*  This  has  been  well  brought  out  in  Keble*s  verses  on  Jeremiah  (*  Lyra  Apostolica ').


xii  INTRODUCTION   TO


not,"  and  '*  But  now  they  aro  hid  from  thine  oyes,"  might,  as  Delitzsch
remarks,  be  placed  as  mottoes  to  the  Book  of  Jeremiah.

Jeremiah*8  rich  individual  consciousness  extends  its  influence  over  his
conception  of  religion,  which,  without  being  less  practical,  has  become  more
inward  and  spiritual  than  Isaiah's.  The  main  object  of  his  preaching  is  to
communicate  this  deeper  conception  (expressed,  above  all,  in  his  doctrine
of  the  covenant,  see  on  ch.  xxxi.  31 — 3t)  to  his  countrymen.  And  if  they
•will  not  receive  it  in  the  peace  and  comfort  of  their  Judsean  home,  then
— welcome  ruin,  welcome  captivity!  By  uttering  this  solemn  truth  (ch.
xxxi.) — that  a  period  of  enforced  seclusion  was  necessary  before  Israel  could
rise  to  the  height  of  his  grand  mission — Jeremiah  preserved  the  spiritual
independence  of  his  people,  and  prepared  the  way  for  a  still  higher  and
more  spiritual  and  evangelical  religion.  The  next  generation  instinctively
recognized  this.  Not  a  few  of  those  psalms  which  belong  most  probably
to  the  Captivity  (especially  Ps.  xxii.,  xxxi.,  xl.,  Iv.,  Ixix.,  Ixxi.)  are  so  per-
vaded with  the  spirit  of  Jeremiah  that  several  writers  have  ascribed  them
to  the  pen  of  this  prophet.  The  question  is  a  complicated  one,  and  the
solution  can  hardly  be  so  simple  as  these  writers  appear  to  suppose.  We
have  to  deal  with  the  fact  that  there  is  a  large  body  of  Biblical  litera-
ture impregnated  with  the  spirit,  and  consequently  filled  with  many  of  the
expressions,  of  Jeremiah.  The  Books  of  Kings,  the  Book  of  Job,  the  second
part  of  Isaiah,  the  Lamentations,^  are,  with  the  psalms  mentioned  above,
the  chief  items  of  this  literature ;  and  while,  on  the  one  hand,  no  one  would
dream  of  assigning  all  these  to  Jeremiah,  there  seems,  on  the  other,  to  be
no  sufficient  reason  for  giving  one  of  them  to  the  great  prophet  rather  than
the  other.  With  regard  to  the  circumstantial  parallels  in  the  above-named
psalms  to  passages  in  the  life  of  Jeremiah,  it  may  be  observed  (1)  that  other
pious  Israelites  had  a  similar  lot  of  persecution  to  Jeremiah  (cf.  Micah  vii.
2;  Isa.  Ivii.  1) ;  (2)  that  figurative  expressions  like  "sinking  in  the  mire
and  in  the  deep  water'*  (Ps.  Ixix.  2,  14)  require  no  groundwork  of  literal
biographical  fact  (not  to  remind  realibtic  critics  that  there  was  no  water  in
Jeremiah's  prison,  ch.  xxxviii.  6)  ;  and  (3)  that  none  of  the  psalms  ascribed
to  Jeremiah  allude  to  his  prophetic  office,  or  to  the  conflict  with  the  **  false
prophets,"  which  must  have  occupied  so  much  of  his  thoughts.

Still,  the  fact  that  some  diligent  students  of  the  Scriptures  have  ascribed
this  group  of  psalms  to  Jeremiah  is  an  index  of  the  close  affinities  existing  on
either  side.  So,  too,  the  Book  of  Job  may  be  more  than  plausibly  referied  to
as  influenced  by  Jeremiah.  The  tendency  of  careful  criticism  is  to  hold  that
the  author  of  Job  selects  a  passionate  utterance  of  Jeremiah's  for  the  theme
of  his  afflicted  hero's  first  discourse  (Job  iii.  3 ;  comp.  ch.  xx.  14) ;  and  it  is
difficult  to  evade  the  impression  that  a  feature  in  the  deepest  prophecy  of
the  second  part  of  Isaiah  is  suggested  by  Jeremiah's  pathetic  comparison  of
himself  to  a  lamb  led  to  the  slaughter  (Isa.  Iii.  7  ;  comp.  ch.  xi.  19).     Later

»  On  the  quoation  whether  Jeremiah  really  wroto  the  Lamentations,  Old  Tegtament
scholars  are  divided.


THE  BOOK  OP  THE   PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  xiil

on,  an  intensified  interest  in  the  details  of  the  future  contributed  to  heighten
the  estimation  of  Jeremiah's  works  (Dan.  ix.  2 ;  comp.  2  Chron.  xxvi.  21) ;
and  several  traces  of  the  extraordinary  respect  in  which  this  prophet  was
held  appear  in  the  Apocrypha  (2  Mace.  ii.  1 — 7  ;  xv.  14 ;  Epist.  Jer.)  and
in  the  Gospel  narrative  (Matt.  xvi.  14;  John  i.  21).

Another  point  in  which  Jeremiah  marks  an  epoch  in  prophecy  is  his
peculiar  fondness  for  symbolic  acts  (e,g,  ch.  xiii.  X;  xvi.  1 ;  xviii.  1 ;  xix.  1 ;
xxiv.  1  ;  XXV.  15 ;  xxxv.  1).  This  is  a  jwibject  fraught  with  difficulty,  and
the  question  may  reasonably  be  asked  whether  his  accounts  of  such  trans-
actions are  to  be  taken  literally,  or  whether  they  are  simply  visions  trans-
lated into  ordinary  narrative,  or  even  altogether  imaginary — recognized
rhetorical  fictions.  We  must  remember  that  the  flourishing  age  of  prophecy
is  over,  the  age  when  the  public  work  of  a  prophet  was  still  the  chief  part
of  his  ministry,  and  the  age  of  decline  is  come,  in  which  the  quiet  work  of
laying  up  a  store  of  testimony  for  the  next  generation  has  actjuired  greater
importance.  The  chapter  with  Jeremiah's  going  to  the  Euphrates  and  hiding
a  girdle  "  in  a  hole  of  the  rock  "  till  it  became  good  for  nothing,  and  then
taking  another  journey  thither  to  fetch  it  again,  is  no  doubt  rendered  more
intelligible  by  reading  **  Ephrath  "  instead  of  P'rdth,  i.e.  "  the  Euphrates  "
(ch.  xiii.  4 — 7) ;  but  the  difficulty  is,  perhaps,  not  entirely  removed.  May
not  this  narrative  (and  that  in  ch.  xxxv.)  be  regarded  as  fictitious  with
fully  as  much,  ground  as  the  equally  positive  statement  in  ch.  xxv.  17,
**  Then  took  I  the  cup  at  Jehovah's  hand,  and  made  all  the  nations  to
drink"?

There  is  yet  another  important  feature  for  the  student  to  notice  in
Jeremiah — the  diminishing  emphasis  on  the  advent  of  the  Messiah,  i.e.  of
the  great  ideal  victorious  King,  through  whom  the  whole  world  was  to  be
brought  into  subjection  to  Jehovah.  Though  still  found — at  the  end  of  a
passage  on  the  bad  kings  Jehoiakim  and  Jehoiachin  (ch.  xxiii.  5),  and  in
the  promises  given  shortly  before  the  fall  of  Jerusalem  (ch.  xxx.  9,  21 ;
zxxiii.  15) — the  personal  Messiah  is  no  longer  the  centre  of  prophecy  as  in
Isaiah  and  Micah.  In  Zephaniah  he  is  not  mentioned  at  all.  It  seems  as
if,  in  the  decline  of  the  state,  royalty  had  ceased  to  be  an  adequate  symbol
for  the  great  Personage  to  whom  all  prophecy  points.  Every  one  remembers
that,  in  the  last  twenty-seven  chapters  of  Isaiah,  the  great  Deliverer  is  spoken
of,  not  as  a  King,  but  as  a  persuasive  Teacher,  reviled  by  his  own  country-
men, and  exposed  to  suffering  and  death,  but  in  and  through  his  sufferings
atoning  for  and  justifying  all  those  who  believed  in  him.  Jeremiah  does
not  allude  to  this  great  Servant  of  Jehovah  in  words,  but  his  revelation
of  a  new  and  spiritual  covenant  requires  the  prophecy  of  the  Servant  for  its
explanation.  How  is  the  Law  of  the  Lord  to  be  written  in  the  liearts  of  a
rebellious  and  depraved  humanity?  How,  except  by  the  atoning  death
of  the  humble,  but  after  his  death  rovally  exalted,  Saviour?  Jeremiah
prepared  the  way  for  the  coming  of  Christ,  partly  by  his  putting  out  of
sight  the  too  dazzling  regal  conception  which  prevented  men  from  realizing


xiv  INTRODUCTION  TO


tho  deeper  evangelical  truths  summed  up  in  the  prophecy  of  the  "  Servant
of  tho  Lord."  It  ought  to  Ikj  added  (and  this  is  another  respect  in  which
Jeremiah  is  a  remarkable  waymark  in  the  Old  I'estament  dispensation)
that  he  prepared  the  way  of  Christ  by  his  own  typical  life.  He  stood  alone,
with  few  friends  and  no  family  joys  to  console  him  (ch.  xvi.  2).  His
country  was  hastening  to  its  ruin,  at  a  crisis  which  strikingly  reminds  us
of  the  times  of  the  Saviour.  He  lifted  up  a  warning  voice,  but  the  natural
guides  of  the  people  drowned  it  by  their  blind  opposition.  In  his  utter
self-abnegation,  too,  he  reminds  us  of  the  Lord,  in  whose  human  nature
a  strong  feminine  element  cannot  be  mistaken.  Doubtless  he  had  a  less
balanced  mind ;  how  should  this  not  be  the  case,  for  we  are  speaking  of
him  in  relation  to  the  uni(jue,  incomparable  One  ?  But  there  are  moments
in  the  life  of  Jesus  when  the  lyrical  note  is  as  clearly  marked  as  in  tho
utterances  of  Jeremiah.  The  prophet  weeping  over  Zion  (ch.  ix.  1 ;  xiii.  17 ;
xiv.  17)  is  an  adumbration  of  the  sacred  tears  in  Luke  xix.  41 ;  and  the
suggestions  of  the  life  of  Jeremiah  in  the  great  prophetic  life  of  Christ
(Isa.  liii.)  are  so  distinct  as  to  have  induced  Saadyab  the  Jew  (tenth  century
A.D.)  and  Bansen  the  Christian  to  suppose  that  the  original  reference  was
simply  and  solely  to  the  prophet.^  It  is  strange  that  the  most  esteemed
Christian  writers  should  have  dwelt  so  little  on  this  typical  character  of
Jeremiah ;  but  it  is  one  proof  of  tho  richness  of  the  Old  Testament  that
HO  striking  a  type  should  have  been  reserved  for  later  and  less  conventional
students.

5.  The  literary  merits  of  Jeremiah  have  been  frequently  contested.  He
is  accused  of  Aramaizing  diction,  of  diflfiiseness,  monotony,  imitativeness,'
proneness  to  repetition,'  and  to  the  use  of  stereotyped  formulro ;  *  nor  can
those  charges  be  denied.  Jeremiah  was  not  an  artist  in  words,  as  to  some
extent  was  Isaiah.  His  poetic  flights  were  restrained  by  his  presentiments ;
his  utterance  was  choked  by  tears.  How  could  he  exercise  his  imagination
on  depicting  woes  which  he  already  so  fully  realized  ?  or  vary  a  theme  of
such  unchanging  importance  ?  Even  from  a  literary  point  of  view,  however,
his  unpretending  simplicity  is  not  to  be  despised ;  as  Ewald  has  already
remarked,  it  forms  a  pleasing  contrast  (be  it  said  with  all  reverence  to  the
Spirit  common  to  all  the  prophets)  to  the  artificial  style  of  Habakkuk.     But

'  Grotiug,  with  a  true  instinct,  remarks,  "  Ha)  notie  in  Jeremiam  quidem  congruunt
prills,  Bcd  ])otiua  sublimiusque,  saapo  et  magis  Karit,  Kf^ty^  in  Ciiristum."

•  Poo  tho  Commentary,  pamm.

»  Kuonon  (*  Ilistorisch-kritisch  Onderzock,*  vol.  ii.  248)  gives  a  long  list  of  almost  identical
passages,  from  which  I  take  the  commencement :  oh.  i.  18,  19  (xv.  20) ;  ii.  15  (iv.  7) ;  ii.  28
(xi.  13);  iv.  5  (viii.  U);  iv.6(vi.  1);  v.  9  (29;  ix.  8);  vi.  13—15  fviii.  10—12);  vi.  22—24
(1.  41—43)  ;  vii.  16  (xi.  14;  xiv.  11);  vii.  31—33  (xix.  5-7;  xxxii.  35);  vii.  33  (xix.  7;
xvi.  4  ;  xxxiv.  20).

*  Such  are — "sword,  famine,  and  pestilence,"  or  ** sword  and  famine"  (ch.  xiv.  12—16;
XV.  2 ;  xvi.  4  ;  xxi.  7,  9 ;  xxiv.  16;  xxvii.  8,  13;  and  twelve  other  passages) ;  "the  voice  ol
mirth  and  the  voice  of  gladness  "  (ch.  vii.  34 ;  xvi.  9 ;  xxv.  10) ;  **  terror  on  every  side  "  (ch.
vi.  25;  XX.  3, 10;  xlvi.  5;  xlix.  29);  **  feed  with  wormwood,  and  give  water  of  gall  to  drink"
(th.  viii.  14;  ix.  15;  xxiii.  15).


THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.


XT


above  and  apart  from  his  literaiy  merits  or  demerits,  Jeremiah  deserves  the
highest  honour  for  his  almost  unparalleled  conscientiousness.  Under  the
most  trying  circumstances,  he  never  swerved  from  his  fidelity  to  the  truth,
nor  gave  way  to  the  "  grief  that  saps  the  mind."  In  a  quieter  ago  he  might
(for  his  talent  is  chiefly  lyrical)  have  developed  into  a  great  lyric  poet.
Even  as  it  is,  he  may  fairly  claim  to  have  written  some  of  the  most  sym-
pathetic pages  of  the  Old  Testament ;  and  yet — his  greatest  poem  is  his  life.

§  2.  Growth  of  the  Book  of  Jeremiah.

The  question  naturally  suggests  itself — Do  we  possess  the  prophecies  of
Jeremiah  in  the  form  in  which  they  were  delivered  by  him  from  the
thirteenth  year  of  the  reign  of  Josiah  onwards  ?  In  reply,  let  us  first  of
all  look  to  the  analogy  of  the  occasional  prophecies  of  Isaiah.  These,  it
can  be  reasonably  well  proved,  have  not  come  down  to  us  in  the  form  in
which  they  were  delivered,  but  have  grown  together  out  of  several  smaller
books  or  prophetic  collections.  Analogy  is  in  favour  of  a  somewhat  similar
origin  of  the  Book  of  Jeremiah,  which  was,  at  any  rate  once,  much  smaller.
The  collection  which  formed  the  nucleus  of  the  present  book  may  be  con-
jectured to  have  been  as  follows : — Ch.  i.  1,  2 ;  i.  4 — ix.  22  ;  x.  17 — xii.  6 ;
XXV. ;  xlvi.  1 — xlix.  33  ;  xxvi. ;  xxxvi. ;  xlv.  These  were,  perhaps,  the
contents  of  the  roll  referred  to  in  ch.  xxxvi. — if  at  least,  with  the  great
majority  of  commentators,  we  give  a  strict  interpretation  to  ver.  2  of  that
chapter,  in  which  the  command  is  given  to  write  in  the  roll  "  all  the  words
that  I  have  spoken  unto  thee  .  .  .  from  the  days  of  Josiah,  even  unto
this  day."  On  this  view  of  the  case,  it  was  not  till  twenty-three  years  after
Jeremiah's  entrance  upon  his  ministry  tliat  he  caused  his  prophecies  to  be
committed  to  writing  by  Baruch.  This  obviously  excludes  the  possibility
of  an  exact  reproduction  of  the  early  discourses,  even  if  the  main  outlines
were,  by  God's  blessing  upon  a  tenacious  memory,  faithfully  reported.
But  even  if  we  adopt  the  alternative  view  mentioned  in  the  introduction
to  ch.  xxxvi.,  the  analogy  of  other  prophetic  collections  (especially  of  those
embodied  in  the  first  part  of  Isaiah)  forbids  us  to  assume  that  we  have
Jeremiah's  original  utterances,  unmodified  by  later  thoughts  and  experiences.

That  the  Book  of  Jeremiah  has  been  gradually  enlarged  can,  indeed,  be
shown  (1)  by  a  simple  inspection  of  the  heading  of  the  book,  which,  as  we
shall  see,  originally  ran  thus  :  '*  The  word  of  Jehovah  which  came  to  Jere-
miah in  the  days  of  Josiah,  etc.,  in  the  thirteenth  year  of  his  reign."  It  is
clear  that  this  was  not  intended  to  refer  to  more  than  ch.  i.,  or,  more  precisely,
to  ch.  i.  4 — ii.  37,  which  appears  to  represent  the  earliest  discourse  of  our
prophet.  Two  further  chronological  specifications,  one  relative  to  Jehoiakira,
the  other  to  Zedekiah,  appear  to  have  been  successively  added,  and  even  the
later  of  these  will  not  cover  ch.  xl. — xliv.  (2)  The  same  result  follows  from
the  remark  at  the  close  of  ch.  li.,  "  Thus  far  are  the  words  of  Jeremiah."
This  evidently  proceeds  from  an  editor,  in  whoso  time  the  book  terminated
at  li.  64.     Ch.  Hi.  is,  in  fact,  not  an  independent  nairativo,  but  the  conclu-


xvl


INTRODUCTION  TO


Biori  of  a  history  of  the  kings  of  Judah — tho  same  historical  work  which  was
followed  by  the  editor  of  our  "  Books  of  the  Kings,"  except  that  vers.  28 — 30
(a  notice  of  the  n\imlH3r  of  the  Jewish  captives)  appears  from  tho  chronology
to  be  from  another  source  ;  it  is  wanting,  moreover,  in  the  Septuagint  Version.
Granting  (1)  that  the  Book  of  Jeremiah  was  edited  and  brought  into  its
present  form  subsequently  to  the  time  of  the  prophet  himself,  and  (2)  that
an  important  addition  in  the  narrative  style  has  been  made  to  it  by  one  of
its  editors,  it  is  not  a  jmori  inconceivable  that  it  should  ako  contain  passages
in  the  prophetic  stylo  not  by  Jeremiah  himself.  The  passages  respecting
which  tho  greatest  doubt  exists  are  ch.  x.  1 — 16  and  ch.  L,  li.  (the  longest
and  one  of  the  least  original  of  all  the  prophecies).  It  is  unnecessary
to  enter  upon  the  question  of  their  origin  here ;  it  is  enough  to  lefer  the
reader  to  the  special  introductions  in  the  course  of  this  work.  The  case,
however,  is  sufliciently  strong  for  the  negative  critics  to  make  it  desirable
to  caution  tho  reader  not  to  suppose  that  a  negative  position  is  necessarily
inconsistent  with  the  doctrine  of  inspiration.  In  words  which  the  author
asks  permission  to  quote  from  a  recent  work  of  his  own,  **  The  editors  of
the  Scriptures  were  inspired  ;  there  is  no  maintaining  the  authority  of  the
Bible  without  this  postulate.  True,  we  must  allow  a  distinction  in  degrees
«f  inspiration,  as  the  Jewish  doctors  themselves  saw,  thuugh  it  was  eorao
time  before  they  clearly  formulated  their  view.  I  am  glad  to  notice  that
one  so  free  from  the  susjuciun  of  rationalism  or  Eomanism  as  Rudolf  Stier
adopts  the  Jewish  distinction,  remarking  that  even  the  lowest  grade  of
inspiration  (bWuakh  haH-mJesh)  remains  one  of  faith's  mysteries"  (*  The
Prophecies  of  Isaiah,*  ii.  205).

§  3.  Relation  of  the  Received  Hebrew  Text  to  that  represented  by

THE  SeI»TU AGIST.

The  differences  between  the  two  recensions  relate  (1)  to  the  arrangement
of  the  prophecies,  (2)  to  the  reading  of  the  text.

1.  Variation  in  arrangement  is  only  found  in  one  instance,  but  that  a
very  remarkable  one.  In  the  Hebrew,  the  prophecies  concerning  foreign
nations  occupy  ch.  xlvi. — li. ;  in  the  Septuagint  they  are  inserted  imme-
diately after  ch.  xxv.  13.     The  following  table  will  show  the  differences : —

Text  of  Septuagint,
..         ...         ...         ...     cli.  xxv.  14 — 18.

..  ...  .•*  ...        CM.     XJL w  I.     X         XX.


ITehrew  text,
Ch.  xlix.  34—39
Cb.  xlvi.  2—12
Ch.  xlvi.  13— 2S
Ch.  xlvi.  40—51
Ch.  xlvii.  1 — 7
Ch.  xlix.  7—22
Ch.  xlix.  1—6
Ch.  xlix.  2S— 33
Ch.  xlix.  23—27
Ch.  xlviii.
Ch.  xxv.  15—38


ch.  xxvi.  12—26.
ch.  xxvi.  27,  28.
ch.  xxix.  1 — 7.
ch.  xxix.  7 — 22.
ch.  XXX.  1 — 5.
ch.  XXX.  6 — 11.
ch.  XXX.  12 — 10.
ch.  xxxi.
ch.  xxxii.


THE   BOOK  OF  THE   TROPHET   JEREMIAH.  xvii


Thus  not  only  is  this  group  of  prophecies  clifforently  placed  as  a  whole,
but  the  members  of  the  group  are  differently  arranged.  In  particular,
Elam,  which  comes  last  but  one  (or  even  last,  if  the  prophecy  on  Babylon
be  excluded  from  the  group)  in  the  Hebrew,  opens  the  series  of  prophecies
in  the  Septuagint.

Which  of  these  arrangements  has  the  stronger  claims  on  our  accept-
ance? No  one,  after  reading  ch.  xxv.,  would  expect  to  find  the  prophecies
on  foreign  nations  separated  from  it  by  so  long  an  interval  as  in  the  received
Hebrew  text ;  and  thus  (the  latter  being  notoriously  of  comparatively  recent
origin,  and  far  from  infallible)  it  would  seem  at  first  sight  reasonable  to
follow  the  Septuagint.  But  there  must  be  some  error  in  the  arrangement
adopted  by  the  latter.  It  is  incredible  that  the  passage,  ch.  xxv.  15 — 26
(in  our  Bibles),  is  rightly  placed,  as  in  the  Septuagint,  at  the  very  end  of
the  foreign  prophecies  (as  part  of  ch.  xxxii.)  ;  it  seems,  indeed,  absolutely
required  as  the  introduction  of  the  group.  The  error  of  the  Septuagint
appears  to  have  arisen  out  of  a  previous  error  on  the  part  of  a  transcriber.
When  this  version  was  made,  a  gloss  (viz.  ch.  xxv.  13)  de8tructive  of  the
connection  had  already  made  its  way  into  the  text,  and  the  Greek  translator
seems  to  have  been  led  by  it  to  the  striking  dislocation  which  we  now  find
in  his  version.  On  this  subject  the  reader  may  bo  referred  to  an  important
efisay  by  Professor  Budde,  of  Bonn,  in  the  *JahrbUchcr  fiir  deutsche
Theologie,'  1879  (see  p.  533).  That  the  whole  of  the  verse  (ch.  xxv.  13)  is
a  glo^s  had  already  been  recognized  by  the  old  Dutch  commentator  Venema
(1765),  who  will  hardly  be  accused  of  rationalistic  tendencies.

2.  Variations  of  reading  were  of  common  occurrence  in  the  Hebrew  text
employed  by  the  Septuagint.  It  may  bo  admitted  (for  it  is  self-evident)
that  the  Greek  translator  was  but  ill  prepared  for  his  work.  He  not  only
often  attaches  wrong  vowels  to  the  consonants,  but  is  sometimes  so  completely
at  a  loss  for  the  meaning  that  he  introduces  Hebrew  words  untranslated  into
the  Greek  text.  It  would  also  appear  that  the  Hebrew  manuscript  which
he  employed  was  badly  written,  and  disfigured  by  frequent  confusions  of
flimilar  letters.  It  may  further  be  granted  that  the  Greek  translator  is
sometimes  guilty  of  deliberately  tampering  with  the  text  of  his  manuscript
(striking  instances  of  this  may  be  found  in  ch.  xxv.  25  and  xliii.  13,  and
less  conspicuous  ones  in  ch.  ii.  18,  25,  30 ;  iv.  6  ;  viii.  6  ;  xviii.  2,  22  ;  xxii.
14,  30;  XXX.  5);  that  he  sometimes  abridges  where  Jeremiah  (as  often)
repeats  himself;  and  that  either  he  or  his  transcribers  have  made  various
unauthorized  additions  to  the  original  text  (as,  for  instance,  ch.  i.  17 ;  ii.  28 ;
iii.  19;  v.  2;  xi.  16;  xiii.  20;  xxii.  18;  xxvii.  3;  xxx.  6).  But  a  candid
examination  reveals  the  fact  that  both  the  consonants  and  the  vociilizatiun
of  them  employed  in  the  Septuagint  are  sometimes  better  than  those  of  the
received  Hebrew  text.  Instances  of  this  will  be  found  in  ch.  iv.  28 ;  xi.  15  ;
xvi.  7  ;  xxiii.  33 ;  xli.  9  ;  xlvi.  17.  True,  there  are  interpolations  in  tho  text
of  the  Septuagint ;  but  snch  are  by  no  means  wanting  in  tho  received  Hebrew
text.    The  Septuagint  is  sometimes  nearer  to  tho  original  simplicity  than  the

JEREMIAH.  C


xviii  INTRODUCTION   TO


Ilehrew  (soe,  for  instance,  cli.  x. ;  xxvii.  7,  8  6,  16, 17,  19 — 22 ;  xxviii.  1,  14,
10;  xxix.  1,  2,  16—20,  32).^  And  if  the  Greek  translator  takes  offence  at
some  of  the  repetitions  of  his  original,  so  in  all  probability  have  the
transcribers  who  have,  without  an}'  evil  intention,  moJified  the  received
Hebrew  text.  On  the  whole,  it  is  a  favourable  circumstance  that  we  have*
virtually,  two  recensions  of  the  text  of  Jeremiah.  If  no  prophet  was  more
uni)opular  during  his  life,  none  was  more  popular  after  his  death.  A  book
which  is  known  "  by  heart  "  is  much  less  likely  to  be  transcribed  correctly,
and  much  more  exposed  to  glosses  and  interpolations,  than  one  in  whom
no  such  special  interest  is  felt.

§  4.    EXEXJETICAL  AND    CRITICAL  LITERATURE.

The  Latin  Commentary  of  St.  Jeromo  only  extends  to  the  thirty-second  chapter  of
Jeremiah.  Abcn  Ezra,  the  most  talented  of  the  rabbis,  did  not  write  on  our  prophet;
but  tlie  works  of  Kashi  and  David  Kimchi  are  easily  accessible.     Modern  philological

exegeHis  bej^ing  with  the  Keformation.   The  following  commentaries  may  be  mentioned :

Calvin,  *  rrailcctiones  in  Jeremiain,*  Geneva,  1503  ;  Venema, '  Commentariusad  Librum
Prophctiarum  Jeremia*,' Leuwanlcn,  1705;  Blayney,  'Jeremiah  and  Lamentations,  a  New
Translation  with  Notes,'  etc.,  Oxford,  1781;  Dahler,  'Jereniie  traduit  sur  le  Texto
Original,  accompaj^iie  de  Notes,' Strasbourg,  1825;  Ewald,  *  The  Prophets  of  the  Old
TeHtanient,*  Enj;li.sh  translation,  vol.  iii.,  London,  1878;  llitzig,  *  Vvr  Prophet  Jereniia,*
2nd  edit.,  L<'ij)zij^,  1800;  Graf,  *  I)er  Propliet  Jereniia  erkliirt,'  Leipzig,  1862;  Naegels-
bach,  'Jeremiah,'  in  Lange's  Coninient.iry,  part  xv. ;  Payne  Smith,  'Jeremiah,'  in  the


§   5.   ClIRONOLOOY.

Any  chronological  arrangement  of  the  reigns  of  the  Jewish  kings  must
bo  largely  conjectural  and  open  to  criticism,  and  it  is  not  perfectly  clear
that  the  writers  of  tbo  narrative  books  in  the  Old  Testament,  or  those  who
edited  their  works,  intended  to  give  a  critically  accurate  chronology  ade-
quate for  historical  pur^ioses.  The  most  tedious  problems  relate  to  the
times  previous  to  Jeremiah.  One  difficulty,  however,  may  be  pointed  out
in  the  chronology  of  tlie  concluding  reigns  (see  Robertson  Smith,  *  Tho
Prophels  of  Israel,*  p.  415).  According  to  2  Kings  xxiii.  36,  Jehoiakim
reigned  eleven  years.  This  agrees  with  ch.  xxv.  1,  which  makes  the  fourth
year  of  Jihoiakim  synchronize  with  the  first  of  Nebuchadnezzar  (comp.
oh.  xxxii.  1).  But.  according  to  ch.  xlvi.  2,  the  battle  of  Carchemish  took
place  in  the  fourth  year  of  Jehoiakim,  which  was  the  last  year  of  Nalx)-
polassar,  tho  father  of  Nebuchadnezzar.  This  would  make  the  first  year
of  Nebuchadnezzar  synchronize  with  the  fifth  year  of  Jehoiakim,  and  we

*  Nearly  all  <ho  reforonooB  in  this  paragraph  are  from  vol.  ii.  of  Kuenen's  *  Ilibtorisc-h-
kritiHch  Ondrrzoek:*  Loyden,  1801-05, — a  book  unsurpassed  among  introductions  to  the
Old  IVstaineut  for  coniplctencss,  accuracy,  and  sobriety  of  judgment,  and  written  on  nn
cntin»ly  different  plan  from  tho  authors  equally  able  but  (in  the  judgment  of  orthodox
throlM>;iau8)  biasttod  work  on  *  Tho  Religion  of  Israel.*


THE   BOOK   OF   THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  xix

should  have  to  conclude  that  the  latter  king  reigned  not  eleven  but  twelve
years.

The  following  table,  which  is  at  any  rate  based  on  a  critical  use  of  the
sometimes  discordant  data,  is  taken  from  Professor  H.  Brandes*  •  The  Royal
Successions  of  Judah  and  Israel  according  to  the  Biblical  Narratives  and
the  Cuneiform  Inscriptions  * : —

B.C.  641  (spring)  First  year  of  Josiah.

B.c.  611  f  spring;  Thirty-first  year  of  Josiah*

B.c.  610  (autumn)  Jehoahaz.

B.c.  609  (spring)  First  year  of  Jchoiakira.

B.C.  599  (spring  Eleventh  year  of  Jehoiakim.

B.c.  508-7  (winter)  Jehoiachin.    Beginning  of  the  Captivity.

B.C.  5f«7  (summer)  Zedekiah  appointed  king.

B.C.  596  (spring)  First  year  of  Zedekiah.

B.C.  586  (8[»ring)  Eleventh  year  of  Zedekiah.   Fall  of  the  kingdom  of  Judah.


THE


BOOK  OP  THE  PEOPHET  JEREMIAH.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTEB  L


If


As  ACOOTOT  OF  THE  CaLL  AND  CONSECRA-
TION OP  Jebemiah  to  the  Pbopiietio
Office,  followed  by  Two  Expbes3ive
Symbols  op  tub  Mattebs  whioh  he  has
to  announce.

Vers.  1—3. — There  are  some  indications
that  the  original  form  of  the  heading  has
been  somewhat  modified.  Notice  (1)  that
the  words  with  which  ver.  2  opens  are  i<lon-
ticul  with  one  of  Jeremiah's  characteristic
formulae  for  introducing  a  prophecy  (comp.
ch.  xiv.  1 ;  xWi.  1 ;  xlvii.  1 ;  xlix.  31);  and
notice  (2)  the  awkward  connection  of  vers.
1  and  2,  and  2  and  3  respectively.  (The  Scp-
tuagint  has  endeavoured  to  efface  this  awk-
wardness in  part,  and  is  so  far  unfaithful  to
the  original  record,  but  probably  preserves
an  earlier  form  of  the  opening  words,  rh
^TjfM  rod  0€ov).  It  is  a  reasonable  conjec-
ture that  the  passage  originally  ran  thus :
**  The  word  of  the  Lobd  which  came  to  Jere-
miah in  the  days  of  Josiah,"  etc. ;  vers.  1
and  3  being  added  later,  which  involved
a  change  in  the  construction.

Ver.  1. — ^The  words  of  Jerexniali.  This
introductory  formula  only  occurs  here  and
in  Amos  i.  1.  The  editor  of  Jeremiah  and  of
Amos  deserts  the  usual  phrase  (**  burden  **  or
•*  utterance,"  "vision,"  "the  word  of  the  Lobd
which  came,"  etc.)  in  order  to  give  fuller
information  concerning  tho  origin  of  the
prophetic  writers  (but  see  on  ver.  2).  On  tho
name  Jeremiah,  and  on  the  position  occu-
pied by  Hilkiah,  see  Introduction.  That  were

.    JKBEMIAB*


in  Anathoth.  So  Vulgate ;  Septaagini,  how-
ever (followed  by  Payne  Smith),  makes  tho
relative  refer  to  Jeremiah  {hs  KartfKfC).  But
in  this  case  would  not  the  phrase  luive  been
"Jeremiah  the  priest,"  etc.  (comp.  Ezek.
i.  1)?  Anathoth  was  one  of  tho  priestly
cities  (Josh.  xxi.  18) ;  it  lay  on  or  near  tho
great  northern  road  (Isa.  x.  3Q),  and  has
been  identified  by  Dr.  Robinson  (so  also  by
Lieutenant  Conder)  with  'An&ta,  situated
on  a  ridge,  an  hour  and  a  quarter  north-
north-east  from  Jerusalem.

Ver.  3.— XTnto  the  end  of  the  eleventh
year,  etc.  The  limit  is  accurate  with  regard
to  ch.  i. — xxxix.  The  later  prophecies  have
a  superscription  of  their  own  (see  ch.  xl.  1).
In  the  fifth  month  (comp.  ch.  Hi.  12,  27).

Vers.  4 — 19. —  The  ccdl  of  Jeremiah.

Ver.  4. — Unto  me.  Fop  tho  change  of
person,  comp.  Ezek.  i  4.

Ver.  5. — Knew  thee ;  i.e.  took  notice  of
thee ;  virtually  equivalent  to  selected  thco
(comp.  Gen.  xxxix.  6;  Amos  iii.  2;  Isa.
Iviii.  3;  Ps.  cxliv.  3).  Observe,  the  pre-
destination of  individuals  is  a  familiar  idea
in  tho  Old  Testament  (comp.  Isa.  xlv.  4;
xlix.  1 ;  Ps.  cxxxix.  16).  It  was  also
familiar  to  the  Assyrians :  King  Assurba-
nipal  declares  at  the  opening  of  his  ^  Annals '
that  the  gods  "  in  the  body  of  his  mother
have  made  (him)  to  rule  Assyria."  Familiar,
too,  to  the  great  family  of  religious  reformers.
For,  as  Dean  Milman  has  truly  observed,
"  No  Pelagian  ever  has  or  ever  will  work  a
religious  revolution.  He  who  is  destined
for  such  a  work  must  have  a  full  conviction
that  God  is  acting  directly,  immediately,
consciously,  and  therefore  with  irresistible
power,  upon  him  and  through  him.  .  .  .  He
who  is  not  predestined,  who  does  not  de-
clare, who  does  not  believe  himself  predes-

B


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.       [cii.  i.  1—19.


lined  as  the  author  of  a  great  religious
movement,  ho  in  whom  God  is  not  mani-
festly, sensibly,  avowedly  working  out  his
pre-ostablishea  designs,  will  never  be  saint  or
reformer"  (* Latin  Christianity,*  1.  Ill,  112).
Sanotifled  thee ;  t.e.  set  thee  apart  for  holy
uses.  Ordained;  rather,  appointed,  XTnto
the  nations.  Jeremiah's  prophecies,  in  fuct,
have  reference  not  only  to  Israel,  but  to  the
peoples  in  relation  to  Israel  (ver.  10 ;  ch.  xxv.
15,  16 ;  xlvi. — xlix. ;  1.  and  li.  ?).

Ver.  6.— Ah,  Lord  God !  rather,  AlaSj  0
Lord  Jehovah!  It  is  a  cry  of  alarm  and
pain,  and  recurs  in  ch.  iv.  10;  xiv.  13;
xxxii.  17.  I  am  a  child.  I  am  too  young  to
support  such  an  office.  The  word  rendered
"child"  is  used  elsewhere  of  youths  nearly
grown  up  (comp.  Gen.  xxxiv.  19 ;  xli.  12 ;
1  Kings  iii.  7).

Ver.  7. — Thou  shalt  go,  etc.  Thoughts  of
self  are  altogether  out  of  place  in  one  who
has  received  a  Divine  commission.  Jere-
miah's  duty  is  simple  obedience.  In  pur-
suing this  path  he  cannot  but  bo  safe
(ver.  8).

Ver.  9. — Toaohed   my   mouth;   literally,
caused  (his  hand)  to  touch  my  mouth.    Jere-
miah   had  said  that  he  was  unskilled  in
oratory;   the  Divine  answer  is   that  the
words  which  he  has  to  speak  are  not  his
own,  but  those  of  Jehovah.    Two  things  are
obvious  :  1.  The  touching  of  the  lips  is  not
purely  metaphorical,  as  in  Ps.  li  15  (comp.
Fs.  xl.  6);  it  represents  a  real  experience.
2.  This  experience,  however,  can  only  have
been  a  visionary  one,  analogous  to    that
vouchsafed  to  Isaiah  at  the  opening  of  his
prophetic  ministry.    In  the  grand  account
given  by  Isaiah  of  his    inaugural  vision
(which  nas  evidently  influenced  the  form  of
the  vision  of  Jeremiah),  we  read  of  the  same
significant  act  on  the  part  of  one  of  the
seraphim.    It  is  the  same  act,  certainly,
but  it  symbolizes,  not  as  here  the  communi-
cation of  a  prophetic  message  (comp.  Matt.
X.  19),  but  the  purification  of  the  lips.
Does  it  not  seem  as  if  Isaiah  had  attained
a  deeper  insight  into  the  spiritual  regenera-
tion needed  by  the  prophet  than  had  been
granted  to  Jeremiah?     Another  point  in
which  Jeremiah's  account  seems  inferior  to
that  of  Isaiah  is  plastic  power.    Notice  how
Jeremiah  dwells  upon  the  meaning  of  the
words;  this  is  a  reflective  element  which
diminishes  the  poetic  power  of  the  narrative.
A  word  may  oe  added    to   explain  that
**  visionary  "  is  not  here  used  in  opposition
to  "based  on  fjaot."    That  the  two  epithets
ore  susceptible  of  combination  is  well  shown
in  the  vision  described  by  P^re  Gratry,  in
hifl  'Souvenirs  de  ma  Jeunesse'  (pp.  102—
105),  the  reality  of  which  is  not  in  the  least
impaired  in  the  writer's  mind  by  its  tho-
roughly inward  character:  "Dans  toutes  ces


scenes  int^rieures,  jo  n'imagiuais  rien  .  .  .
c'etaiont  do  saisissantes  ot  trt^s-energiquea
realities  auxquelles  jo  ne  m'attendais  nulle-
ment."

Ver.  10.— I  have  set  thee;  literally,  1 7iat?fl
made  thee  an  overseer,  or  vicegerent  (comp.
Gen.  xli.  34;  Judg.  ix.  28,  where  the  Autho-
rized Version  renders  the  cognate  noun
*'  officer ").  To  root  out  .  .  .  to  plant,  viz.  by
pronouncing  that  Divine  judgment  which
fulfils  itBclf  (comp.  ch.  v.  14 ;  Numb,  xxiii.
25;  Isa.  ix.  8,  9;  Iv.  11).  As  there  is  so
much  more  threatening  than  promise  in
Jeremiah's  writings,  the  destructive  side  of
his  activity  is  expressed  by  four  verbs,  the
constructive  only  by  two.

Vers.  11 — IG. — Two  trials  or  probations
of  Jeremiah's  inner  sight  (2  Kings  vi.  17).
Two  visions  are  granted  him,  which  ho  is
required  to  describe.  The  first  expresses
tho  certainty  of  his  prophetic  revelation;
tho  second  indicates  its  contents.

Ver.  11. — A  rod  of  an  almond  tree.  Tlie
name  here  adopted  for  the  almond  tree  is
peculiarly  suitable  in  this  connection.  It
means  "  wakeful ; "  the  almond,  blossoming
in  January,  is  the  first  to  "  wake  "  from  tho
sleep  of  winter.

Ver.  12. — I  will  hasten  my  word ;  liter-
ally, I  am  wakeful  over  my  word ;  alluding
to  tho  meaning  of  the  Hebrew  word  for
almond.

Ver.  13. — A  seething  pot.  There  is  a
variety  of  Hebrew  words  for  "pot."  The
word  here  used  suggests  a  vessel  of  large
size,  since  pottage  for  a  whole  company  of
prophets  could  oe  cooked  in  such  a  pot
or  caldron  (2  Kings  iv.  38).  From  Ezek.
xxiv.  11  we  may  infer  that  it  was  of  metal.
A  "seething  pot"  in  ancient]  Arabic  poetry
is  a  figure  for  war.  The  same  symbol  oc-
curs in  Ezek.  xxiv.  3 — 12,  but  with  a
different  application.  The  £EUse  thereof  is
toward  the  north ;  rather,  toward  the  south ;
literally,  from  the  face  of  the  north.  The
"  face  "  of  the  pot  is  the  side  turned  to  the
prophet.  We  may  suppose  tho  contents  to
be  on  the  point  of  boiling  over.

Ver.  14.— Out  of  the  north.  Previously
to  the  battle  of  Carchemish,  tho  Baby-
lonians are  only  mentioned  vaguely  as  a
northern  people  (see  ch.  iv.  6;  vi.  1,  22;
X.  22).  Strictly  speaking,  they  were  an
eastern  people  from  the  point  of  view  of
Palestine ;  out  the  caravan-road  which  the
Chaldaean  armies  had  to  take  entered  Pales-
tine at  Dan  (comp.  ch.  iv.  15 ;  viii.  16),  and
then  proceeded  southward.  (On  the  question
whether  a  Scythian  invasion  is  referred  to,
at  least  conjointly  with  tho  Babylonian,  see
Introduction.)  An  evil;  rather,  tlie  evil;
viz.  tho  calamity  which  in  deepening  gloom


cu.  1. 1—19.]      THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.


forms  the  burden  of  the  prophet's  dis-
courses. Shall  break  forth ;  literally,  shall
open ;  Le.  let  loose  by  opening  (comp.  the
use  of  the  same  verb  in  Isa.  xiy.  17,  liter-
ally, "looseth  not  his  prisoners  homewards ; "
and  Amos  viii.  5,  literally,  *'that  we  may
open,"  t.e.  **  bring  forth  wheat ").  There  is,
however,  some  difficulty  in  explaining  the
choice  of  this  expression.  We  might  indeed
suppose  that  the  caldron  had  a  lid,  and  that
the  removal  or  falling  off  of  this  lid  is  the
"opening"  referred  to  by  the  phrase.

Ver.  15. — I  will  call;  literally,  I  am
eaUing ;  i.e.  I  am  about  to  call  The  king-
doms of  the  north ;  alluding  possibly  to  the
yaried  origin  of  the  population  of  Assyria
and  Babylonia.  But  more  probably  it  is
simply  a  suggestive  phrase  for  the  wide
extent  of  the  hostile  empire  referred  to
(comp.  ch.  XXV.  9).  They  shall  set  every  one
his  throne,  etc.  The  kings  or  the  generals,
representing  **all  the  families,"  etc.,  shall
set  up  the  high  scat  of  power  and  judicial
authority  at  the  broad  space  within  the  gate
of  the  city,  which  constituted  the  Oriental
forum  (comp.  Gen.  xxiiL  10 ;  Josh.  xx.  4 ;
Job  xxix.  7 ;  zxxi.  21).  Thither  the  be-
sieged would  have  to  come  to  surrender
themselves  (2  Kings  xxiv.  12)  and  to  hear
their  fate.  A  similar  prediction  is  made  with
regard  to  Nebuchadnezzar  (ch.  xliii.  9, 10).
It  is  true  the  seat  of  authority  is  there  said
to  be  placed  at  the  entrance  of  the  palace,
but  this  was  in  fact  another  place  where  jus-
tice was  wont  to  be  administered  (ch.  xxii.  2,
3).  Jerome's  view,  adopted  by  Rosenmullor
and  Nagelsbach,  that  **■  to  set  one's  seat  '^
means  ^*  to  besiege  **  is  against  usage,  and
does  not  accord  with  the  opening  wonls  of
ver.  16.  Thero  is,  however,  an  element  of
truth  in  it.  The  judgment  executed  minis-
terially by  the  northern  kings  or  generals
began  with  the  siege  of  Jerusalem  and  the
other  cities,  and  hence  the  words  with  which
the  prophet  continues.  And  against  all  the
walls,  etc.  Wo  should  have  expected  some-
thing like  "and  shall  set  themselves  in
array  against,"  etc.  (comp.  Isa.  xxii.  7  h) ;
see,  however,  last  note.

Ver.  16.— I  will  utter  my  judgments ;  or,  I
will  hold  a  court  of  justice  upon  them;  liter-
ally, I  vjiU  speah  judgments  with  them.  The
expression  is  peculiar  to  Jeremiah  (comp.  ch.
iv.  12 ;  xiL  1 ;  xxxix.  6 ;  lii.  9),  and  includes
both  the  examination  of  the  accused,  and
the  judicial  sentence  (see  ch.  xxxix.  5 ;  lii.  9\
All  their  wickedness,  etc.  Their^ "  wickea-
ness,"    t.0.   their    infidelity    to   Jehovah,


showed  itself  in  burning  incense  to  **  other
gods,"  and  bowing  down  to  their  images.
"  Burned  incense "  is,  however,  too  narrow
a  sense.  The  root-meaning  of  the  verb  is
to  bo  fragrant,  and  the  causative  conju-
gations will  strictly  mean  only  '*  to  make  a
sweet  odour,"  whether  by  the  offering  of
incense  or  by  burnt  offerings  (comp.  ch.  xi.  12 ;
2  Kings  xxiii.  8,  where  a  causative  conju-
gation is  used  in  the  same  wide  sense  here
postulated ;  also  Ps.  Ixvi.  15  and  Isa.  i.  13,
where  the  word  usually  rendered  **  incense  "
seems  rather  to  mean  **a  sweet  smoke  ").  The
prophet  says,  "  of  other  gods  "  (not  **  of  false
goas  "),  out  of  consideration  for  the  ignor-
ance of  his  hearers,  to  whom  Ikial  and
Moloch  really  were  as  gods;  in  fact,  that
expressive  word  C^^^V  which  Isaiah  uses
ten  times  to  express  tho  unreality  of  the
other  so-called  gods,  occurs  only  once,  and
then  not  in  quite  the  same  sense  (see  ch.
xiv.  14)  in  Jeremiah.  But  the  prophet's
own  strict  monotheism  is  proved  by  such
passages  as  ch.  ii.  27  o ;  viib  19  h ;  xvi.  20.

Ver.  17. — Gird  up  thy  loins,  as  an  Orien-
tal docs  before  making  any  kind  of  physi-
cal exertion,  whether  walking  (Exod.  xli.  11 ;
2  Kings  iv.  29),  running  (1  Kings  xviii.  46),
or  fighting  (Job  xii.  21).  Be  not  dismayed.
A  want  of  confidence  on  Jeremiah's  part
will  issue  in  his  utter  discomfiture  by  his
encmicd.  "  Dismay  "  in  Hebrew  has  a  two-
fold reference,  subjective  ("dismay")  and
objective  ("ruin,"  " discomfiture '0*  Both
references  can  be  illustrated  from  this  verse.
(Comp.  the  command  and— ver.  18 — ^promise
to  Jeremiah  with  the  command  and  promise
to  Ezekiel— lii.  8,  9.)

Ver.  18. — Brasen  walls.  The  plural  ia
used  instead  of  a  collective  term  for  the
whole  circle  of  fortifications.  In  the  parallel
passage  (ch.  xv.  20)  the  singular  occurs ;  the
same  alternation  of  plural  and  singular  as
in  2  Kings  xxv.  10;  1  Kings  iu.  1.  The
combination  of  figures  strikingly  expresses
the  invincibility  of  one  whose  strength  is  in
his  God.  The  kingi  of  Jndah.  Why  the
plural?  Most  reply,  because  Jeremiah
would  have  to  do  with  successive  sovereigns.
But  this  meaning  would  have  been  just  as
well  conveyed  by  the  singular:  **the  king
of  Jndah,"  without  any  name  being  added —
would  mean  the  king  who  from  time  to  time
happened  to  be  reigning.  "Kings  of
Jndah  "  in  Jeremiah  seems  to  have  a  special
meaning,  and  to  include  all  the  members  of
the  royal  family,  who  formed  a  numerous
and  powerful  class  (see  on  oh.  xvii.  20).


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.       [cu.  1. 1—19.


HOMILETICS.

Vera.  1 — 3. — On  the  external  surroundinga  of  the  life  qf  Jeremiah,  These  words,
which  constitute  the  preface  to  the  Book  of  Jeremiah,  are  evidently  intended  to  furnish
a  historical  setting  for  the  writings  of  the  prophet  But  they  also  throw  light  on  his
character  and  work.  For,  though  the  true  life  of  every  man  is  his  inner  spiritual  life,
we  cannot  estimate  the  worth  of  this  until  we  have  taken  account  of  the  circumstances
in  which  it  is  placed,  the  aids  and  the  hindrances  it  receives  from  without.  Let  us  con-
sider, therefore^  the  spiritual  significance  of  the  main  historical  surroundings  of  the  work
of  Jeremiah.

I.  The  official  belatiokship  of  Jeremiah.  1.  Jeremiah  Tiad  the  advantage  of
heina  the  son  of  a  priest.  He  had  probably  received  a  religious  education  from  his  child-
hood. The  religion  of  his  fathers  must  have  been  familiar  to  him.  Its  solemn  rites  and
suggestive  sjrmbols  were  often  before  his  eyes.  Possibly,  like  St.  Paul,  who  was  trained
in  Jewish  theology  before  he  became  a  Christian  (Gal.  i.  14),  he  may  have  found  the
Law  a  schoolmaster  to  bring  him  to  a  higher  religion.  The  children  of  Christian
ministers  have  peculiar  privileges  in  the  early  knowledge  of  Scripture,  Church  life,  etc.,
which  they  have  opportunities  of  acquiring.  2.  Yet  this  official  relationship  of  Jeremiah's
had  its  disadvantages.  It  was  quite  exceptional.  Not  more  than  three  of  the  prophets
were  of  sacerdotal  origin.  For  the  most  part  the  priestly  class  regarded  the  propnetic
with  jealousy,  if  not  with  envy.  (1)  OiBcialism  is  conservative,  and  opposed  to  the  free
and  revolutionary  spirit  of  prophecy.  (2)  It  is  also  formal,  and  tends  to  repress  the
inward  and  spiritual  experiences  of  which  prophecy  is  the  highest  outcome.  It  speaks
well  for  Jeremiah  that  the  spirit  of  prophecy  was  not  crushed  out  of  him  by  the  dry
traditionalism  and  the  rigid  ritualism  of  his  priestly  connections.  3.  It  is  noteworthy
that  the  official  relationship  of  Jeremiah  toas  entirely  overshadowed  by  his  prophetic
mission.  He  is  known  to  history  not  as  the  priest,  but  as  the  prophet.  Official  religious
services  are  quite  secondary  to  spiritual  work.

U.  The  ohabacter  of  the  aqe  of  Jeremiah.  1.  Jeremiah  entered  on  his  mission  in
the  midst  of  the  reformation  of  Josiah.  Yet  the  prophet's  work  was  entirely  discon-
nected from  that  of  the  king.  Political  religious  activity  is  very  different  from  personal
spiritual  work.  Ecclesiastical  reforms  will  not  effect  spiritual  regeneration.  The  king's
overthrow  of  the  idols  does  not  dispense  with  the  need  of  the  prophet's  call  to  repentance.
2.  Jeremiah  continued  his  mission  after  the  failure  of  Josiah^ s  reformation  and  during
an  age  of  national  decay.  The  character  of  the  age  changed,  but  the  prophet  remained
unchuiged.  Weak  men  may  be  content  to  echo  the  popular  cries  of  the  day.  It  is  too
often  the  mission  of  the  servant  of  God  to  contradict  these  familiar  voices.  The  true
prophet  is  not  the  creature  of  his  age,  the  mouthpiece  of  the  Zeitgeist ;  ho  is  called  to
resist  this  influence.  3.  JeTemi&h.  closed  his  mission  amidst  scenes  of  national  ruin.  It
was  given  him  to  see  the  fulfilment  of  his  warnings  of  doom,  but  not  that  of  his  promises
of  restoration.  Hence  he  is  the  prophet  of  tears.  Jesus  also  wept  over  Jerusalem,  but
he  brought  redemption.  We  should  be  thankful  that  we  live  in  these  latter  times  when
wo  can  see  the  realization  of  the  promises  of  *'  the  Book  of  consolation."

IIL  The  duration  of  the  mission  of  Jeremiah.  It  lasted  for  at  least  forty  years ;
how  many  more  after  the  overthrow  of  Jerusalem  we  do  not  know.  1.  This  fact
speaks  much  for  the  prophetic  poufer  of  Jeremiah.  Many  men  can  only  rouse  themselves
to  one  supreme  effort.  True  greatness  is  as  much  seen  in  the  continuance  of  powers  as
in  supremo  exhibitions  of  them.  2.  This  fact  is  a  grand  proof  of  the  faithfulness
of  the  prophet.  Almost  the  whole  of  his  work  was  done  '*  in  opposition."  We  admire
the  young  martyr  who  summons  up  a  momentary  heroic  courage  to  seal  his  testimony
ynth  his  blood ;  but  greater  honour  is  due  to  the  aged  confessor  who  has  persevered
through  a  lifelong  mairtyrdom,  and,  though  spared  to  old  age,  is  also  "  faithful  unto
death."  3.  This  tact  sheds  light  on  Ood's  ways  with  man.  Jeremiah  commenced  his
stem  prophetic  denunciations  forty  years  before  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem.  This
suggests  to  U8  (1)  that  God  mercifully  delays  the  execution  of  his  threats  to  give  man
time  for  repentance ;  and  (2)  that  the  forbearance  of  God,  which  postpones  the  evil  day,
does  not  frustrate  the  justice  which  must  ultimately  bring  it  upon  the  impenitent.


cn.i.  1— 19.]       THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  o

Ver.  6. — Predestination,  L  Consider  the  charaotebistics  of  a  Divinb  pre-
destination. 1.  This  implies  (1)  foreknowledge — Ood  has  bis  idea  about  a  man  and
his  mission  before  he  forms  the  initial  germ  of  his  life ;  (2)  a  sanctifying^  or  setting  apart^
by  which  the  man  is  considered  by  G^  in  relation  to  his  destined  mission,  and  treated
accordingly ;  and  (3)  a  preordination,  a  Divine  action  in  accordance  with  the  Divine
idea  and  purpose  which  tends  to  carry  these  into  effect.  Every  life  is  prophesied  in  the
mind  of  uod  by  God's  thought  of  it,  and  comes  into  the  world  girded  witn  Divine  pur-
poses, wrapped  up  and  drawn  onwards  by  the  unseen  threads  of  the  designs  of  God.

2.  This  preaestination  does  not  involve  fatalism ;  it  is  consistent  with  human  freedom
of  action  and  personal  responsibility.  On  the  one  hand  we  must  conclude,  from  its
existence,  that  there  are  certain  possibilities  with  which  God  endows  a  man,  and  certiun
limits  with  which  God  has  hedged  him  about.  But  on  the  other  hand,  we  must
recognize  that  it  depends  on  the  man's  own  will  and  effort  whether  he  use  those  possi-
bilities, and  attain  to  the  end  enclosed  within  those  limits.  He  has  a  Divine  vocation,
but  he  may  neglect  it ;  he  may  fail  in  realizing  God's  idea  of  his  life.  There  rests  on
him  the  responsibility  of  accomplishing  his  destiny.

IL  Consider  the  grounds  for  belief  in  a  Divine  predestination.  1.  It  is  re-
vealed in  Scripture  (e.g.  Acts  ii.  23 ;  Rom.  viii.  29 ;  1  Pet.  i.  2).  2.  It  is  involved  in
the  idea  of  the  providence  of  a  supreme  God.  God  foresees  all  the  future ;  in  eveiy  act  of
his  all  other  events  and  their  relation  to  this  must  be  present  to  the  mind  of  God.  With
such  knowledge  a  universal  control  of  events,  such  as  is  implied  by  a  providence  not
interfering  from  without  now  and  again  at  critical  moments,  but  immanent  in  the
whole  course  of  the  world,  must  imply  a  Divine  preordination.  3.  It  is  proved  to  us  by
experience,  (1)  We  are  bom  with  certain  peculiarities,  faculties,  powers,  tendencies.  The
prophet,  like  the  poet,  nascitur,  non  fit,  (2)  The  external  circumstances  of  life  are
largely  beyond  our  control.  The  child  cannot  determine  the  sphere  of  life  into  which
it  is  to  enter  at  birth.  All  the  opportunities  and  duties  which  result  from  these  circum-
stances are  made  for  us,  not  by  us.  They  bring  a  mission  and  open  up  a  career,  by
chance  if  there  be  no  providence,  but  by  preordination  if  there  be  a  providence.

III.  Consider  the  purpose  of  a  Divine  predestination.  1.  It  must  often  bo
mysterious.  Until  we  review  life  as  a  whole  wo  shall  not  be  able  to  interpret  the
meaning  of  its  several  parts.  We  cannot  judge  of  the  architect's  design  by  examining  the
separate  stones  which  lie  scattered  in  the  builder's  yard.  But :  2.  It  is  not  arbitrary,
Tne  very  idea  of  destiny  as  determined  by  a  Being  of  infinite  thought  implies  purpose
based  on  reason.  God  would  not  determine  events  simply  to  manifest  his  unfettered
rights  of  sovereignty.  Such  aimless  caprice  could  only  emanate  from  a  senseless  despot.

3.  It  is  turned  to  a  good  purpose.  This  must  be  so,  for  if  God  is  good  his  designs  must
be  good.  The  predestination  is  (Y)  for  the  good  of  the  agent,  who  is  blessed  Dy  being
selected  for  Divine  service ;  and  {2)  for  the  good  of  the  world.  The  elect  are  chosen
instruments  for  benefiting  the  whole  world.  Thus  Jeremiah  was  destined  to  be  **  a
prophet  unto  the  nations.'  The  Jew  was  an  elect  people  that  he  might  be  the  channel
of  blessing  to  all  mankind  (Gen.  xii.  3 ;  Rom.  iii.  2).  The  Christian  is  a  chosen  vessel
that  he  may  carry  grace  to  others,  and  serve  as  the  salt  of  the  earth,  as  the  light  of  the
world.

IV.  Consider  the  practical  effect  op  the  doctrine  of  predestination.  It  con-
tains no  excuse  for  indolence  and  no  reason  for  despair,  for  God  fits  all  of  us  for  some
service,  the  accomplishment  of  which  depends  on  our  own  faithfulness.  1.  It  should
lead  us  to  inquire  what  is  Ood's  will,  rather  than  to  carve  out  a  career  for  ourselves.
2.  It  should  make  us  humble,  submissive,  obedient,  and  diligent  in  service,  since  there  is
a  Divine  idea  of  our  life  which  God  expects  us  to  realize.  3.  It  should  inspire  courage
in  the  midst  of  difficulties.  Jeremiah  was  brave  in  the  thought  that  he  was  fulfilling
a  Divine  destiny.  Such  a  thought  inspires  energy  in  face  of  enmity,  contempt,  isolation,
and  apparent  failure.

Vers.  6—9. — Diffidence  overcome,  I.  Diffidence  is  a  difficulty  to  be  overcome.
1.  Jeremiah  shrank  from  his  mission,  not  through  the  cowardice  that  fears  danger,  nor
through  the  indolence  that  dislikes  effort,  nor  through  the  selfishness  that  declines  respon-
sibility, but  through  the  diffidence  of  youth,  sensitiveness,  and  humility.  (1)  Youth  is
naturally  diffident.  The  world  is  all  unknown  ;  powers  are  not  yet  proved  by  experience.


G  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.       [ch.  i.  1—19.

(2)  Sensitiveness  inclines  to  diffidence.  There  is  a  confidence  which  depends  simply  on
denscness  and  callousness.  Acute  feeling  is  a  great  hindrance  to  bold  action.  Jeremiah
felt  the  miseries  of  his  nation  deeply,  and  it  was  peculiarly  difficult  for  such  a  man  to
assume  the  position  of  a  stem  censor.  (3)  Humility  leads  to  diffidence.  If  we  think
little  of  ourselves  we  are  not  likely  to  be  forward  in  accepting  posts  of  responsibility.
2.  Now,  this  diffidence  is  an  evil  thing.  It  may  not  be  sinful  in  its  origin,  but  perfectly
innocent,  and  even  a  mark  of  amiable  characteristics.  But  it  is  injurious  in  its  effects,
and  becomes  positively  guilty  if  indulged  in  when  God  has  provided  us  means  for  over-
coming it.  The  most  gifted  are  often  Uie  most  diffident.  Hence  if  they  yielded  to  their
reluctance  to  fulfil  their  vocation,  the  greatest  and  best  work  of  the  world  would  be  left
undone.  There  is  also  a  danger  lest  diffidence  should  become  an  excuse  for  indolence,
selfishness,  and  cowardice.  If  unrestrained  it  will  lead  to  these  vices.  People  are  often
greatly  to  blame  for  shrinking  from  posts  of  responsibility,  although  they  may  even
imagine  they  are  earning  the  honours  of  modesty  and  humility.

II.  God  provides  means  for  ovERCOMiNa  diffidence.  God  never  calls  a  man  to
any  work  without  securing  to  him  the  means  for  performing  it.  Thus  having  called
Jeremiah  to  his  service,  God  sends  help  for  overcoming  the  young  man's  diffidence.  1.
2%e  consciousness  of  a  Divine  mission,  "  Thou  shalt  go  to  all  that  I  shall  send  thee."  It
is  well  to  feel  that  we  are  not  doing  our  own  work  but  God*s.  If  we  fail,  what  does  that
matter  to  us  so  long  as  we  are  doing  his  will  ?  The  thought  of  duty  is  itself  an  in-
spiration. We  are  not  simply  to  attempt  what  we  imagine  to  be  a  good  thing ;  we  are
called  for  a  purpose,  sent  on  a  mission,  and  the  thought  that  we  are  about  our  Father's
business  should  allay  the  hesitation  of  natural  diffidence.  The  ambassador  is  armed  with
the  authority  of  his  master  and  backed  by  his  master's  power.  The  prophet  is  sent  by
Grod  with  God's  authority.  All  who  are  working  God's  will  are  similarly  supported  by
God's  authority.  2.  The  realization  of  the  presence  of  Ood.  **I  am  with  thee."  We  may
be  diffident  wMle  we  look  to  self;  but  when  we  look  away  to  God  we  see  the  Source  of
strength  and  victory.  Indeed,  our  very  diffidence  may  be  a  means  of  securing  our  true
strength  by  making  us  seek  the  help  of  God.  Self-distrust  may  lead  to  trust  in  God.
Thus  when  weak  in  ourselves  we  may  become  strong  in  him  (2  Cor.  xii.  10).  If  we  go  in
God's  strength  wo  have  no  more  occasion  to  fear,  since  success  no  longer  depends  on  our
ability  but  on  his  assistance.  3.  The  direct  inspiration  of  the  Spirit  of  Ood.  "  Behold
I  have  put  my  words  in  thy  mouth."  Grod  is  not  only  present  by  our  side  to  assist
and  deliver  us,  but  he  is  within  the  soul,  infusing  light  and  power.  The  prophet  fears
he  cannot  speak  the  needed  words.  The  words  he  is  to  speak  are  not  his  own  but  God's.
He  is  the  messenger,  God  is  the  real  speaker.  If  then  he  can  but  discern  the  voice  of
God  within  him,  and  interpret  this  to  the  people,  all  diffidence  arising  from  his  own
imcompetence  should  vanish.  Every  work  which  is  done  for  God  can  only  proceed
from  Crod,  and  when  it  does  thus  come  from  God  we  need  not  fear  its  failure.  God  can
accomplish  his  own  will  in  us  as  well  as  by  his  immediate  actions  in  the  world.

Ver,  10.— 2%«  power  of  prophecy,  I.  There  is  a  power  in  propiiect.  Prophecy
is  not  simply  a  light,  a  revelation  of  truth ;  it  is  also  a  voice  of  authority,  a  means  of
active  influence,  a  power.  The  Divine  word  in  the  prophet  is  like  the  Divine  word  in
nature— an  energizing  word.  God  speaks,  and  it  is  done.  The  New  Testament  references
to  prophecy  are  made  in  obedience  to  this  thought.  The  fulfilment  of  prophecy  is
there  auoted  not  so  much,  as  in  modern  evidential  literature,  as  a  proof  of  supernatural
foresight,  but  rather  as  the  effect  of  a  Divine  power  which  has  realized  the  purpose  of
the  ancient  Word  of  God.  This  or  that  is  said  to  be  done  "  that  it  might  be  fulfilled
which  was  spoken  by  the  nrophet."  God's  Word  is  always  a  power  (Heb.  iv.  12).  The
Bible  is  not  simply  a  revelation ;  it  is  a  means  of  influence.  The  preacher  should  see
that  he  is  clothed  with  power.    His  mission  is  to  influence  as  well  as  to  teach.

n.  The  sources  of  the  power  of  prophecy  are  spiritual.  The  authority  con-
ferred on  Jeremiah  is  not  that  of  the  secular  arm.  He  is  to  exert  his  influence  by  no
material  force.  His  power  is  different  in  kind  from  that  of  a  political  government.
The  claim  of  the  papal  authority  founded  on  this  verse  is  unwarranted,  since  this  does
not  confer  the  power  of  the  sword  but  direct  spiritual  influence.  Neither  is  the  power
of  prophecy  in  the  least  allied  to  magic  or  sorcery.  It  is  not  a  miraculous  material  force.
1.  It  is  the  power  of  truth.    Truth  is  strong;  knowledge  is  power.    The  prophet  sees


en.  1. 1—19.]   THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  7

the  deep  principles  of  God's  government,  and  in  the  discernment  of  them  lies  the  force
of  his  utterances.  2.  It  is  the  power  of  right.  The  prophet  takes  his  stand  on  the  side
of  justice,  purity,  goodness.  In  the  end  the  might  must  go  with  the  right.  3.  It  is
the  power  of  Ood.  The  prophet  is  nothing  in  himself;  he  is  God's  servant;  the
authority  he  wields  is  God's.  So  the  power  of  the  preacher  is  not  to  be  sought  in  reason,
in  eloquence,  nor  in  official  authority,  but  in  the  truth  of  his  message,  in  the  righteous-
ness of  his  cause,  and  in  his  fidelity  to  the  will  of  God.

III.  The  bange  of  the  power  of  prophecy  is  worldwide.  Jeremiah  was  a  Jew.
Yet  he  was  "  set  over  the  nations  and  over  the  kingdoms."  1.  God  is  the  King  of
kings  and  his  authority  concerns  kingdoms  as  well  as  individuals.  Political  questions
are  amenable  to  the  influence  of  Divine  truth  and  righteousness.  2.  God's  truth  docs
not  only  concern  the  Church.  It  is  for  the  world — if  the  world  will  obey,  for  its  blessed-
ness; if  it  will  not  heed,  for  a  judgment  upon  it.

IV.  The  effects  of  the  power  of  prophecy  are  bevolutionaby.  It  is  no  wild
and  transient  influence,  but  a  great  stirring  energy.  Translated  into  modem  language,
this  means  that  truth,  right,  and  the  wiU  of  Qiod  are  powerful  factors  in  history,  dis-
arranging human  schemes  and  bringing  higher  designs  into  efifect.  1.  This  power  is
destructive.  Jeremiah  is  to  "  root  out,"  etc.  Evil  is  not  a  mere  negation— simple  dark-
ness. It  must  be  fought  and  cast  out.  Christ  sent  "  a  sword  "  (Matt.  x.  34).  The
era  of  the  Reformation  was  a  destructive  age.  It  is  the  duty  of  the  preacher  to  protest
agjiinst  evil,  to  denounce  it,  to  seek  its  overthrow,  and  not  to  shrink  for  fear  of  conse-
quent disturbances.  Warfare  is  better  than  guilty  peace.  2.  This  power  is  ultimately
constructive.  Jeremiah  is  "  to  build  and  to  plant."  The  destructive  agencies  of  God
are  simply  intended  to  clear  off  obstructions,  and  make  the  way  for  a  new  and  better
order.  The  disintegrating  power  of  criticism  should  be  regarded  as  only  preparatory
to  tlie  creative  influence  of  living  truth.  ITie  gospel  is  chiefly  a  constructive  power,
making  men  new  creatures,  building  up  the  kingdom  of  God  in  our  midst,  bringing
about  a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth.

Vers.  11, 12. — The  almond  rod.  The  early  budding  almond  rod  is  symbolical  of  the
Avakcful  attitude  of  God  at  a  crisis  in  human  events.  God's  manner  of  acting  at  this
])criod  of  Jewish  history  may  be  regarded  as  typical  of  what  we  may  expect  again  under
similar  circumstances.

I.  There  are  occasions  when  God's  watchfulness  and  energy  abe  especially
manifest.  God  never  sleeps  (Ps.  cxxi.  4).  While  we  sleep  he  keeps  watch.  Though
we  do  not  mark  his  presence  nor  even  think  of  it,  he  is  still  looking  upon  us  and  never
ceasing  from  his  activity.  Yet  he  is  said  to  awake  as  though  from  sleep  (Ps.  xliv.  23),
because  to  us  he  appears  to  be  more  wakeful  at  one  season  than  at  another.  1.  There
arc  times  when  God  watches  unseen,  and  times  when  he  makes  his  watchfulness  manifest
to  us  by  his  acts ;  then  he  is  said  to  awake.  2.  God  generally  acts  in  quiet  ways  un-
noticed and  not  directly  interfering  with  us ;  but  now  and  again  his  ceaseless  activity  is
more  pronounced,  and  is  specially  felt  by  opposing  our  course ;  then  God  seems  to  have
aroused  himself.  Such  times  are  awful  crises  of  existence.  We  should  be  prepared  to
expect  them,  and  not  presume  on  the  present  obscurity,  of  the  Divine  actions.  Some
day  it  will  be  as  though  God  awoko  with  the  voice  of  a  trumpet  and  the  might  of  a  host
suddenly  revealed.

II.  G<)D  NEVER  DELAYS  HIS  ACTION  BEYOND  ITS  DUE  TIME.  When  It  Is  time  for  God
to  "  awake,"  he  does  "  awake."  It  seems  as  though  he  tarried ;  but  he  has  a  reason  for
waiting.  1.  He  docs  not  come  to  deliverance  at  the  moment  we  expect  him  (1)  because
it  is  w^ell  we  should  be  tried  by  distresses,  or  (2)  because  high  purposes  beyond  our
own  lives  are  to  be  attained  through  the  things  which  are  occasioning  us  trouble,  or  (3)
because  we  have  not  sought  his  aid  with  true  faith  and  submission,  or  (4)  for  causes
beyond  our  comprehension.  2,  Ho  does  not  come  to  judgment  (1)  because  he  waits  for
sin  to  ripen,  or  (2)  because  he  is  long-suflering  and  gives  time  for  repentance,  or  (3)
because  larger  issues  than  those  which  touch  us  are  involved  in  the  act  of  judgment.
Still,  in  both  cases  he  comes  at  the  right  time.  Ho  is  not  a  slothful  God.  He  is  wake-
ful, and  his  actions  may  be  typified  by  the  almond  branch.

III.  God's  judgments  sometimes  fall  suddenly  and  swiftly.  We  may  have  but
short  warning  of  their  approach.    The  execution  of  them  may  be  rapid.    The  storm


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  rKOPHET  JEREMIAH.       [cii.  i.  1—10.


wliich  has  long  been  brewing  may  burst  quickly.  The  harvest  which  has  ripened  slowly
may  be  gathered  in  with  haste.  The  impending  judgment  may  not  be  discerned  till  it
is  too  late  for  escape.  When  the  rain  began  to  fall  it  was  too  late  for  man  to  seek
refuge  in  the  ark.  When  the  Jews  saw  the  hosts  of  Nebuchadnezzar  approaching  there
were  no  means  for  saving  their  country  from  ruin.  It  is  foolish  and  wrong  to  neglect
the  salvation  of  God  until  we  discern  his  judgment  looming  over  us.  "  To-day  if  ye
will  hear  his  voice,  harden  not  your  hearts."

Vers.  13, 14. — The  seething  pot  I.  The  vision  op  the  seethihg  pot  foreshadows
APPROACHTNQ  DOOM.  God  is  about  to  "  hold  his  session  "  upon  Jerusalem  and  the  cities  ot
Judah.  1.  They  who  are  most  favoured  by  God  must  expect  the  severest  judgment  if  they
prove  unfaithful  to  him.  The  Jews  were  a  favoured  people.  Their  privileges  were  great ;
if  they  abused  these  their  guilt  and  consequent  punishment  must  be  proportionately
great.  Therefore,  instead  of  considering  the  past  mercies  of  God  as  a  ground  for  ex-
pecting to  escape  the  penalties  of  our  offences,  we  should  see  in  them  the  measure  of  his
future  severities  upon  us  if  we  sin  in  face  of  the  special  inducements  to  devotion  afforded
by  those  mercies.  2.  The  revelation  of  impending  judgment  is  a  great  motive  for  faithful
preaching.  This  vision  of  the  seething  pot  is  given  to  Jeremiah  to  rouse  him  to  under-
take his  prophetic  duties.  A  large  part  of  his  work  consisted  in  gloomy  predictions  of
coming  doom.  This  was  peculiar  to  the  age.  There  are  ages  when  similar  preaching
is  especially  appropriate.  But  as  sin  always  makes  for  death  the  preacher  is  always
called  to  raise  a  voice  of  warning.

II.  The  vision  of  the  seething  pot  illustrates  the  character  of  the  approach-
ing DOOM.  1.  It  is  gradually  prepared.  The  vessel  is  slowly  heated  to  the  boiling
point.  The  guilt  of  sin  accumulates  and  the  evil  consequences  gather  in  force  until
they  burst  upon  the  victim  with  the  energy  of  long  pent-up  wrath.  2.  It  breaks  forth
suddenly.  Suddenly  the  vessel  boils  over.  Judgment  may  be  delayed  and  gradual  in
the  preparation,  and  yet  suddenly  surprise  us  when  at  length  it  falls  upon  us.  3.  It  is
violent  and  overwhelming^  as  the  seething  pot  suggests  fury,  tumult,  and,  in  its  boiling
over,  a  rushing  forth  of  its  scalding  contents.

III.  The  vision  of  the  seethino  pot  suggests  the  source  of  the  approaching  doom.
The  pot  was  turned  towards  the  south  and  heated  by  fires  in  the  north.  1.  Punishment
may  come  from  the  most  unlikely  quarter.  The  Jews  had  turned  to  Babylon  for  friendship,
and  from  Babylon  came  their  ruin.  Our  most  trusted  friends  may  become  the  instruments
of  our  keenest  suffering.  2.  Lawless  violence  may  he  overruled  hy  providence  to  work
the  ends  of  God's  righteous  laws.  The  doom  is  not  to  come  from  within  the  range  of  the
theocracy  and  through  the  influence  of  those  who  consciously  executed  the  Divine  decree,
but  from  far-off  regions,  wholly  beyond  the  light  of  Israel's  religion.  Thus  God  makes
the  wrath  of  man  to  praise  him.  So  storms  and  earthquakes,  revolutions  and  invasions,
tumults  in  nature  and  tumults  in  the  human  world,  work  ultimate  good  results  in  clearing
and  purifying  the  air,  sweeping  away  pestilent  corruption,  and  preparing  for  a  new  and
wholesome  order.  3.  The  more  luxurious  Southern  races  have  frequently  been  visited
by  terrible  invasions  of  hardier  races  from  the  North.  The  Scythians  in  the  East,  the
Goths  in  the  West,  were  scourges  of  God,  and  wholesome  scourges,  helping  to  reform  the
corrupt  and  indolent  peoples  who  lived  in  dread  of  their  invasions.  We  should  see  wise
and  good  purposes  of  providence  in  these  terrible  events  of  general  history,  as  we  see
them  in  the  special  history  of  Israel.

Vers.  17-^19. ^^Encouragements  to  fidelity.  It  was  no  easy  matter  for  Jeremiah,
young,  modest,  and  sensitive,  to  come  boldly  forward  and  threaten  the  judgment  of
God  against  his  country.  But  if  God  calls  a  man  to  any  task,  he  will  help  him  through
with  it,  and  Jeremiah  receives  encouragements  proportionate  to  his  duty.

I.  The  duty.  Consider  what  the  duty  of  faithful  service  laid  upon  the  prophet
included.  1.  Energy.  He  is  to  gird  up  his  loins,  and  arise.  God  is  not  satisfied  with
passive  submission  to  his  will.  God  cannot  be  faithfully  served  by  the  indolent.  All
our  powers  are  required  for  his  service,  and  they  must  be  employed  without  distraction.
2.  Obedience.  Jeremiah  is  to  speak  just  what  God  commands  him.  Fidelity  is  not
simply  devotion  to  God,  it  is  devotion  according  to  his  will— the  devotion  of  servants,
not  that  of  patrons.    3.  Thoroughness,    The  prophet  is  to  speak  "  all  **  that  GK)d  com-


en.  L  1—19.]   THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEHEMIAH.  9

mands  bim.  It  is  treason  for  the  ambassador  to  suppress  those  elements  of  hb  commis-
sion which  are  displeasing  to  himself.  The  servant  of  God  must  not  select  from  the
revelation  of  Divine  truth  the  words  which  suit  his  purpose  and  neglect  the  rest.  He
is  not  to  shun  to  declare  "  the  whole  counsel  of  Gcxi " — threats  as  well  as  promises,
difficult  sayings  and  mysteries  as  well  as  plainly  acceptable  doctrines.  4.  FearlessnesB,
"  Be  not  dismayed.**  Fear  is  not  only  painful ;  it  is  injurious  by  paralyzing  efifort.
Cowardice  is  sin.

II.  Thb  ENOOURAGEHEirrs.  It  is  our  duty  to  be  faithful,  though  fidelity  should  bring
our  ruin;  but  such  a  result  will  not  follow  it.  Consider  the  various  inducemento
Jeremiah  receives  to  a  faithful  discharge  of  his  difficult  task.  1.  A  revelation  of
momentous  truths,  God  says,  "Thou  there/ore  gird  up  thy  loins,"  etc.  The  word
"  therefore  "  carries  us  back  to  the  visions  of  the  almond  rod  and  the  seething  pot.  The
truths  revealed  in  these  visions  themselves  furnish  a  motive  for  the  prophet  to
declare  them.  The  seer  should  become  a  prophet.  Truth  is  not  the  private  property
of  the  few ;  it  is  the  rightful  heritage  of  all.  It  is  the  duty  of  him  who  knows  to
enlighten  the  ignorant.  More  especially  is  this  the  case  in  regard  to  spiritual  truths,
practical  truths,  and  truths  whicn  concern  the  highest  welfare  of  mankind.  2.  A
warning  of  Divine  displeasure,  "  Be  not  dismayed  at  them,  lest  I  make  thee  indeed
dismay^."  The  fear  of  Grod  is  a  safeguard  against  the  fear  of  man.  Cowardice  pro-
vokes danger.  The  Christian  has  no  armour  provided  for  his  back.  8.  An  assurance
of  Divine  'protection.  This  is  given  in  a  succession  of  strong  images,  that  it  may  bo
felt  in  all  its  certainty  and  importance.  For  we  need  not  only  to  know  that  God  will
protect  us,  but  to  realize  this  if  we  are  to  be  brave  and  strong.  Thus  Jeremiah  is  made
to  feel  that,  in  spite  of  his  youth  and  sensitiveness,  he  will  be  strong  as  a  fortress  and
firm  as  brazen  walls.  None  are  so  independent  before  men  as  they  who  are  wholly
dependent  on  God.  4.  A  promise  of  victory  over  opposition.  The  young  prophet  is
taught  to  expect  opposition.  (1)  It  is  foolish  to  ignore  the  approach  of  trouble.  A
surprise  sometimes  leads  to  a  defeat  from  very  inferior  foes.  Danger  foreseen  is  danger
half  overcome.  The  Bible  never  makes  light  of  the  difficulties  and  hardships  of  Hfe
(Luke  X.  3).  (2)  No  ground  of  confidence  is  more  inspiring  than  the  knowledge  that
the  danger  clearly,  fully  apprehended  will  yet  be  certainly  overcome.  This  was  the
assurance  given  to  Jeremiah.  The  same  assurance  is  offer^  to  every  faithful  servant
of  God  (Isa.  xUii.  1).


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

On  JeremiaKs  ministry  in  general,  "  It  is  sufficient,"  sjdd  our  Saviour,  "  that  the
disciple  be  as  his  Lord."  Now,  of  all  his  servants  few  answered  more  closely  to  this
description  than  did  the  prophet  Jeremiah.  In  a  very  deep  and  real  sense  his  life  was
a  ijpQ  of  our  Lord's.  It  is  in  the  spiritual  world  as  in  the  natural,  a  close  resemblance
exists  between  the  separate  parts  and  the  entire  organism  to  which  they  belong.  The
root,  stem,  bud,  flower,  fruit,  and  seed  are  each  constructed  on  the  same  type  as  the
tree  itself.  However  widely  diversified  they  may  seem  in  form  or  fimction,  their
essential  nature  is  the  same.  Hence  every  leaf  is  a  miniature  of  the  tree  on  which  it
grows ;  trunk,  branches,  foliage,  are  each  patterned  in  it.  And  likewise  every  branch  is
but  a  reproduction  on  a  smaller  scale  of  the  whole  tree.^  But  this  is  only  what  we  find
constantly  exemplified  in  the  spiritual  world.  What  miniature  lives  of  Christ  are
those  of  men  like  Joseph,  Moses,  David,  and  many  more  I  And  amongst  such  as  are
illustrious  in  this  respect  stands  Jeremiah.  Like  him,  the  consciousness  of  the  Divine
call  was  with  him  from  childhood  (cf.  Luke  ii.  49  and  ch.  i.  6).  He  too  was  perse-
cuted with  murderous  hate  by  his  own  townsmen.  As  Christ  was  driven  from
Nazareth,  so  was  Jeremiah  from  His  native  Anathoth  (ch.  xii.  6).  His  vehement
denunciations  of  the  corrupt  priests  and  prophets  of  his  day  remind  us  of  the  reiterated
woes  pronounced  by  our  Lord  on  the  "  scribes  and  pharisees,  hypocrites,"  of  his  day.
Like  our  Lord,  Jeremiah  also  was  the  prophet  who  stood  nearest  to  and  told  most
plainly  of  the  dread  catastrophe  which  overwhelmed  Jerusalem  and  her  people.

^  Macmillan.


10  THE  BOOK  OP  TIIK  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,      [en.  1. 1—19.

Jeremiah  was  the  prophet  of  Jerusalem's  destruction  by  the  Babylonian  Nebuchad-
nezzar; our  Lord  of  tho  like  destruction  by  the  Roman  Titus.     Both  beheld  the
glories  of  the  temple,  and  both  told  of  tho  swiftly  coming  days  when  there  should  "  not
be  left  one  stone  upon  another,  which  should  not  be  thrown  down."    Tho  footsteps  of
him  who,  beyond  all  others,  was  "  despised  and  rejected  of  men,*'  Jeremiah,  in  so  far
as  it  was  possible  to  him,  anticipated.    The  bitter  tears  shed  by  our  Saviour  over
impenitent  Jerusalem  are  shadowed  forth  in  the  prophet's  prolonged  and  profound
lament  over  his  own  idolatrous  and  disobedient  countrymen.    His  well-known  words,
••Is  it  nothing  to  you  all  ye  that  pass  by?"  uttered  concerninj;  the  sorrows  of  Jcru-
Balem  and  her  people,  have  come  to  bo  so  universally  appropriated  to  our  Lord,  that  the
prophet's  own  deep  distress  which  they  tell  of,  and  the  occasion  of  that  distress,  aro
alike  almost  if  not  entirely  forgotten.    "  His  sufferings  come  nearest  of  those  of  tho
whole  army  of  martyrs  to  those  of  the  Teacher  against  whom  princes,  and  priests,  and
ciders,  and  people  were  gathered  together."    To  him,  as  to  the  great  apostle,  was  it
given  to  know  "  the  fellowship  of  Christ's  sufferings,  and  to  be  made  conformable
unto  his  death."    And  we  may  venture  to  prolong  the  parallel,  and  to  apply  to  Jere-
miah the  august  words  which,  in  their  supreme  meaning,  can  belong  to  but  One  alone.
**  Wherefore  God  also  hath  highly  exalted  him,  and  given  him  a  name  which  is  above
every  name."    In  that  high  recompense  Jeremiah,  so  far  as  any  servant  of  God  may,
shares.    For  the  honour  in  which  his  name  came  to  be  held  was  very  great.    As  time
rolled  on  he  was  regarded  as  the  chief  representative  of  the  whole  prophetic  order.    By
some  he  was  placed  at  the  head  of  all  tho  prophets.    At  the  time  of  the  Christian
era  his  return  was  daily  expected.    Ho  was  emphatically  thought  to  bo  "  the  Prophet
— '  the  Prophet  like  unto  Moses,'  who  should  close  the  whole  dispensation."    No
wonder,  then,  that  one  devout  student  after  another  has  been  struck  by  the  closeness  of
the  resemblance  here  briefly  pointed  out,  and  has  delighted  to  trace  in  the  prophet's
history  foreshadowings  of  the  •^Man  of  Sorrows,"  who,  more  than  any  other,  was
acquainted  with  grief.-^O.

Vers.  1 — 3. — Introductory  statements  concerning  Jeremiah's  parentage  and  period  of
his  ministry.  I.  His  pabentage.  He  was  the  son  of  Hilkiah,  not  that  Hilkiah  who
was  high  priest  during  the  reign  of  Josiah,  but  of  some  similarly  named  priest.  Even  amid
tho  terrible  corruptions  of  that  period,  there  appear  to  have  been  a  few  faithful  souls  who
held  fast  to  the  fear  of  the  Lorn.  We  have  their  names,  Huldah,  Shallum,  Baruch,  etc.
From  amidst  these  Jeremiah  sjirang.  The  Lord  can  call  and  convert  and  consecrate
to  his  work  whom  he  will ;  but  his  more  common  way  is  to  come  to  the  habitations
of  his  people,  when  he  would  find  some  whom  he  destines  for  special  and  honoured
service.  The  homes  of  the  godly  are  the  hope  of  the  Church.  Amidst  the  children  of
the  believing  are  to  be  found  thoso  whom  God  will  generally  employ  to  carry  on  his
work.  This  is  ono  way  in  which  tho  promise  is  fulfilled,  "  Them  that  honour  mo  I
will  honour."

II.  His  profession.  Ho  belonged  to  the  priesthood.  Terrible  are  the  charges
which  are  brought  against  tho  priests  and  prophets  of  that  day.  They  had  reached
the  limit  of  utmost  degradation.  They  aro  said  to  **  deal  falsely,"  to  be  "  profane ; "  and
their  conduct  is  described  as  ••a  wonderful  and  horrible  thing."  Yet  Jeremiah  be-
longed to  this  deeply  fallen  class.  How  difficult  must  have  been  his  position !  how
constant  his  resistance  to  tho  contagion  of  their  example  and  influence !  When  from
amongst  those  who  are  of  the  same  order,  who  have  common  interests,  common  duties,
and  who  are  thrown  together  in  so  many  and  close  relationships,  ono  stands  aloof  and
turns  upon  his  companions  in  severe  and  solemn  rebuke  as  Jeremiah  did,  such  a
ono  needs  to  be  strong  as  **  a  defcnced  city,  and  an  iron  pillar,  and  brazen  walls  "
(ver.  18)  Jeremiah  stands  before  us  as  a  noble  proof  that  the  tide  of  evil,  however
strongly  it  may  run,  may  yet  be  resisted ;  none  are  of  necessity  borne  down  by  it
but,  by  the  same  grace  which  was  given  to  Jeremiah,  they  may  stem  the  fierce  current
and  de^  its  power.  Ten  thousand  of  the  saints  of  God  have  done  this ;  why  should
not  we  ?

III.  The  reason  op  all  men  couNTixa  iiim  as  a  prophet.  *'  The  word  of  the  Lord
came  unto  him."  He  did  not  say,  "  1  am  a  prophet ; "  but  all  men  felt  ho  was.  For
his  words  had  power ;  they  were  mighty  to  the  pulling  down  of  the  strong  holds  of


CH.  1. 1—19.]       THE  BOOK  OF  TUE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  11

sin.  It  was  not  simply  that  he  announced  that  there  should  be  a  "  rooting  out  and
pulling  down  "  (cf.  ver.  10),  but  the  words  which  he  spoke  so  wrought  in  men's  minds
that  Uiese  resnlts  follow^.  Hence  men,  conscious  of  the  power  of  his  words,  con-
fessed that  it  was  "  the  word  of  the  Lord "  which  had  come  to  him.  This  is  the  old
prophetic  word  which,  whenever  spoken,  constrains  men  to  confess  the  presence  of
God  (cf.  1  Cor.  xiv.  25).  And  St.  reter  (2  Epist.  i.  19)  says  concerning  it,  **  Wo  have,
surer  still,  the  prophetic  word."  "  More  sure,"  he  meant,  than  even  the  wondrous  voice
and  vision  of  "  the  holy  mount,"  for  that  was  but  a  transient  testimony  given  once
and  to  the  three  favoured  apostles  of  the  Lord  alone ;  but  the  prophetic  word,  that
which  woke  up  the  response  in  men's  hearts,  and  by  which  the  secrets  of  each  soul
were  disclosed — ^that  was  a  more  constant,  more  universal,  more  powerful,  and  therefore
a  more  sure  testimony  than  aught  beside.  And  the  occasions  when  this  '*  word  of  the
Lord "  comes  to  any  of  his  servants  are  well  known.  See  how  particular  and  definite
the  dates  are  here.  "  In  the  thirteenth  year  of  the  reign  of  King  Josiah.  It  came
also  in  the  days  of  Jehoiakim,"  etc.  The  coming  of  the  word  of  the  Lord  to  any  soul
is  a  marked  and  memorable  period.  He  through  whom  that  word  is  spoken  is  conscious
of  an  imusual  power,  he  realizes  the  Divine  presence  in  an  altogether  unusual  manner.
He  is  more  jwissive  than  active.  It  is  said  of  the  holy  men  of  old,  that  they  "  spake  as
they  were  moved  [borne  along]  of  the  Holy  Ghost,"  and  this,  St.  Peter  declares  (2  Epist.
i.  21),  is  ever  a  characteristic  of  the  prophetic  word.  And  those  who  hear  the  word  know
that  the  Lord  is  speaking  through  his  servant.  Listlessness  and  unconcern  give  way
to  serious  concern.  Some  can  tell  the  very  day  and  hour  when  they  first  heard  the
**  word  of  the  Lord."  They  had  listened  to  sermons  and  read  the  Scriptures  again  and
again,  but  one  day  they  felt  that  the  Lord  himself  was  speaking  to  them,  and  they
could  not  but  give  heed.  Like  as  the  people  of  Judah  and  Jerusalem  knew  when  the
voice  of  God,  though  they  despised  it  to  their  ruin,  was  speaking  to  them,  so  do  men
now.  And  if  we  have  heard  it  for  our  salvation,  the  time,  the  place,  the  speaker,  will
often  be  vividly  remembered  in  connection  with  it,  like  as  those  who  heard  Jeremiah
knew  the  very  year  when  the  "  word  of  the  Lord  came  "  to  him.  It  is  ill  for  both
hearers  and  speakers  alike  if  they  be  unable  to  point  to  periods  when  they  were  conscious
that  *'  the  word  of  the  Lord  "  came  to  them.  For  a  preacher  never  to  i-ealize  the  sacred
glow  and  the  uplifting  of  soul  which  accompany  the  utterance  of  the  prophetic  word ;
or  for  a  hearer  to  have  so  dulled  his  conscience,  so  destroyed  his  spiritual  ear,  that
though  the  word  of  the  Lord  be  spoken  his  heart  never  responds,  his  soul  never
realizes  the  presence  of  God ; — from  the  sin  and  sorrow  of  either  may  God  mercifully
save  us.

lY.  The  date  and  dubation  op  Jebemiah's  mtnistry.  We  are  told  when  it  began,
and  how  long  it  lasted.  It  began  when  the  evil  days  for  Judah  and  Jerusalem  were
drawing  very  near.  It  was  in  vain  that  the  devout  King  Josiah  endeavoured  to  turn
back  the  hearts  of  the  people  to  the  Lord  Grod  of  their  fathers.  '  But  though  the  long-
sufiering  of  God  had  been  so  tried  and  was  now  almost  ceasing,  yet,  ere  they  were  given
up  to  the  punishment  which  was  their  due,  Grod  raises  up  his  servant  Jeremiah  and
the  band  of  faithful  men  who  stood  by  him  (cf.  2  Chron.  xxxvi.  15 — 21).  For  forty
years — for  that  is  the  period  covered  by  the  reigns  of  the  several  kings  spoken  of—
Jeremiah  exhorted,  warned,  entreated,  threatened,  prayed,  wept;  but  all  in  vain.
Therefore  God's  wrath  at  length  rose  against  them,  and  there  was  no  remedy.  "  Behold
the  goodness  and  the  severity  of  God ! "  How  reluctantly  will  he  abandon  any  to  the
results  of  their  own  ways !  how  slow  is  he  to  let  come  upon  them  that  which  they
have  long  deserved !  Yea,  he  is  the  long-suffering  God.  But  whilst  we  fail  not  to
remember  and  to  rejoice  in  this,  let  us  not  fail  either  to  remember  and  to  dread  the
other  equally  sure  fact,  that  "  God  is  a  consuming  fire  "  to  those  who  set  at  nought  all
his  counsel,  and  will  have  none  of  his  reproof  (Prov.  i.  24 — 33).  Those  to  whom
Jeremiah  prophesied  found  it  so,  and  so  will  all  who  sin  in  like  manner  now. — C.J

Vers.  4—19. — The  dread  commission,  I.  What  was  it  ?  (Cf.  ver.  10.)  It  was  to
denounce  the  judgments  of  God  against  his  people.  At  the  end  of  the  commission
there  is  mention  made  of  "  building  and  planting ; "  but  the  chief  charge  is  of  an  alto-
eether  opposite  character.  Jeremiah  was  set  over  the  nations  "  to  root  out,  and  to  pull
3own,  to  destroy,  and  to  throw  down."    It  was  a  terrible  undertaking.    Ho  was  to


12  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.       [cu.  i.  1—19.


spare  no  class,  no  rank,  no  order.  Kings,  princes,  priests,  and  people  were  all  to  bo
alike  solemnly  warned  of  the  sure  judgments  that  were  coming  upon  them.  And  the
like  work  has  to  be  done  now.  How  prone  wo  aU  are  to  speak  with  bated  breath  of
the  retribution  of  God  !  how  ready,  to  ourselves  and  to  others,  to  explain  away  or  to
soften  down  the  awful  words  of  God  against  sin  and  the  doers  thereof !  Preachers  and
teachers  of  God*s  truth,  beware  lest  the  blood  of  those  who  perished  because  you
warned  them  not  be  required  at  your  hands  (Ezek.  xxxiii.  6) !

II.  But  it  is  a  dread  commission.  The  shrinking  of  Jeremiah  from  it  is  manifest
all  through  this  chapter.  Before  the  heavy  burden  which  he  was  to  bear  was  fully
disclosed  to  him,  he  exclaims  (ver.  6),  "  Ah,  Lord  God !  behold  I  cannot  speak ;  for  I  am  a
child."  And  the  assurances,  aids,  and  encouragements  which  are  given  him  all  show
how  much  needed  to  be  done  ere  his  reluctance  and  trembling  fear  could  be  overcome.
The  whole  chapter  tells  of  God's  gracious  preparation  of  his  servant  for  the  arduous  work
he  had  to  do.  And  whosoever  now  undertakes  like  work,  if  he  have  no  realization  of
its  solemnity  and  burden,  it  is  plain  that  God  has  not  called  him  to  speak  in  his  Name.
To  hear  a  man  tell  of  the  awful  doom  of  the  impenitent  in  a  manner  that,  if  it  be  not
flippant,  yet  seems  to  relish  his  task,  and  to  hail  it  as  an  opportunity  for  rhetorical
display,  is  horrible  in  the  extreme,  and  will  do  more  to  harden  men  in  sin  than  almost
anything  beside.  The  subject  is  so  sad,  so  serious,  so  terrible,  that  ho  who  believes  in
it  at  aU  will  be  sure  to  sympathize  with  the  prophet's  sensitive  shrinking  from  the  work
to  which  he  was  ordained.  If  when  sentencing  criminals  who  have  broken  the  laws  of
man  to  their  due  punishment,  humane  judges  often  break  down  in  tears,  though  their
punishment  touch  not  the  soul, — how  can  any  contemplate  the  death  that  is  eternal
unmoved  or  without  the  most  solemn  compassion  and  tenderest  pity  ?  And  to  increase
the  fear  and  shrinking  with  which  Jeremiah  regarded  the  work  before  him,  there  was
the  seeming  presumption  of  one  so  young — little  more  than  "  a  child "  in  years,  ex-
l)crience,  or  knowledge — ^undertaking  such  a  work.  TJte  Jiopelessness  of  it  also.  As  well
might  a  sparrow  think  to  fly  full  in  the  face  of  a  hurricane,  as  for  the  young  prophet
to  think  to  stay  the  torrent  of  sin  which  was  now  flooding  and  raging  over  the
whole  life  of  his  people.  Sin  and  transgression  of  the  grossest  kind  had  become  their
habit,  their  settled  custom,  their  ordinary  way.  All  that  he  had  to  tell  them  they  had
heard  again  and  again,  and  had  despised  and  forgotten  it.  What  hope  of  success  was
there,  then,  for  him?  And  the  fierceness  of  the  opposition  he  would  arouse  would  also
deter  him  from  the  work.  It  was  not  alone  that  the  faces  (ver.  17)  of  kings,  princes,
priests,  and  people  would  darken  upon  him,  but  they  would  (ver.  19)  "fight  against"
him,  as  we  know  they  did.  Well,  therefore,  might  he  say,  "  Ah,  Lord  I  I  cannot."
And  to-day,  how  many  are  the  plausible  reasons  which  our  reluctant  hearts  urge
against  that  fidelity  in  such  work  as  Jeremiah's  which  Grod  requires  at  our  hands  I  But
God  will  not  allow  them.    See —

HI.  How  HE  CONSTRAINED  Jeremiah  TO  UNDERTAKE  THIS  WORK.  1.  Ver.  5 :  he  gave
him  certainty  as  to  his  being  called  to  the  prophetic  work.  To  know  that  we  are  indeed
called  of  God  to  any  work  is  an  unfailing  source  of  strength  therein.  2.  Ver.  7 :  he
made  him  feel  that  necessity  was  laid  upon  him ;  "  thou  shalt  go ;  '*  "  thou  shcUt  speak."
(Of.  Paul's  "  Yea,  woe  is  me,"  etc.)  So  Jeremiah  himself  afterwards  says  (ch.  xx.  9)  God's
word  was  like  "  a  burning  fire  shut  up  in  my  bones,  and  I  was  weary  with  forbearing,
and  I  could  not  stay,"  What  a  help  to  the  preacher  of  God's  truth  is  such  a  conviction
as  this !  3.  Ver.  8 :  he  promised  his  presence  and  delivering  grace.  Consciousness  of
security  and  safety  in  God  will  give  a  dauntless  courage  in  the  face  of  any  and  of  all
opposition.  4.  He  gave  him  special  qualifications  for  his  work.  Words  and  power  of
speech  (ver.  9).  Immovable  and  unflinching  strength  of  will,  a  determination  and
resolve  that  would  not  waver  (ver.  18).  5.  He  showed  him  that  the  rooting  up  and
the  destruction  were  not  ends  in  themselves,  but  to  lead  on  to  planting  and  to  building
afresh  (ver.  10).  To  know  that  we  are  working  on  to  a  good  and  blessed  end  is  no
small  encouragement  to  us  in  working  through  all  manner  of  difficulty  to  reach  that
end.  6.  He  made  him  vividly  realize  the  nature  and  nearness  of  the  judgments  he
foretold.  This  was  the  purpose  of  the  visions  of  the  rod  of  the  almond  tree  and  the
seething  pot  (vers.  11—15;  for  explanation,  see  exegesis).  The  first  vision  told  of
God's  judgment  close  at  hand.  The  second,  of  the  quarter  whence  these  judgments
comCi  and  of  the  fierce,  furious  character  of  the  foes  who  should  come  upon  them.


CH.  1. 1—19.]       THE  BOOK  OP  TOE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  13

_^  ■!■  M-^M-M— TT —  —  1|-  I  ■■  !■  I     ^mm  Mill  -■

Jeremiah  was  enabled  to  "  see  well "  the  visions,  that  is,  to  realize  very  forcibly  what
they  meant.  Oh,  if  we  could  but  more  vividly  realize  what  the  anger  of  God  is  against
sin ;  if  we  could  have  a  vision  of  the  wrath  of  GKxl ;  with  how  much  more  power  and
urgency  should  we  plead  with  men  to  flee  from  the  wrath  to  come  I  7.  Yer.  16 :  he
reminds  Jeremiah  of  the  sins  that  called  for  these  judgments.  A  deep  sense  of  sin  is
indispensable  to  those  who  would  earnestly  warn  of  the  doom  of  sin.  8.  And  (ver.  19)
Grod  again  gives  his  servant  the  blessed  assurance,  ''They  shall  not  prevail  against
thee ;  for  I  am  with  thee  to  deliver  thee."  Thus  did  God  equip  the  prophet  and  prepare
him  for  his  work.  His  God  supplied  all  his  need.  It  was  a  stem  warfare  on  wnich  he
was  to  go,  but  he  went  not  at  nis  own  charges.  If  we  be  summoned  to  difficult  duty,
we  shall  be  supplied  with  all-sufficient  strength.  Only  let  us  be  careful  to  avail  our-
selves of  the  help  assured,  lest  (ver.  17)  we  be  dismayed  and  God  confound  us  before  our
enemies.  Dread,  therefore,  no  commission  that  God  entrusts  thee  with,  for  along  with
it  will  ever  be  found  the  grace,  all  the  grace,  needed  for  its  successful  discharge.--C.

Ver.  10.— 2%e  ministry  for  a  corrupt  age,  I.  Must  be  raised  up  by  God.  Such  an
age  will  have  its  ministers,  but  they  will  be  prophets  who  will  prophesy  only  smooth
things.  But  a  true  ministry  for  such  an  age  will  not  be  produced  by  it^  but  be  given
to  it  from  God.    "  See,  I  have  set  thee,"  etc.

11.  Will  be  indued  with  Divine  poweb.  "  I  have  set  thee  over  the  nations  .  .  .
to  root  out,"  etc.  None  who  contemplate  the  marvellous  effects  of  such  a  ministry
and  compare  them  with  the  natural  powers  of  him  who  exercises  it,  but  must  see  that
the*  ascendancy  he  has  gained  and  the  spiritual  power  he  wields  are  of  Ck>d  and  not  of
man.

ni.  Will  make  no  cx)ifPB0MiSE  with  sin.  See  the  number  and  force  of  the  words
used  to  indicate  the  ruthless  antagonism  which  the  prophet  would  manifest  toward  the
wickedness  of  his  day.  Nothing  less  than  its  complete  overthrow  would  fulfil  the
ministry  entrusted  to  him.

IV.  Will  demand  on  the  part  op  the  prophet,  and  will  gain  from  the  grace
OF  God,  a  fearless  and  an  unconquerable  courage.     (Vers.  17, 18.)

V.  Its  end  and  result  blessed.  "  To  build  and  to  plant "  (ver.  10).  The  en-
cumbered ground  had  first  to  be  cleared  and  cleansed,  but  that  done,  the  fabric  of  a
true  life  should  be  upreared,  and  principles  pure,  holy,  and  blessed  should  have  root  in
the  hearts  of  all.— C.

Vers.  11 — 16. — Jeremiah^s  visions,    I.  What  were  they?    (Of.  vers.  12 — ^14.)

II.  Wherefore  were  they  ?  In  all  probability,  for  the  sake  of  vividly  impressing
the  mind  of  the  prophet  with  the  message  he  was  to  deliver,  and  so  ensuring  that  that
message  should  be  delivered  with  greater  power.  Hence  the  question,  "  What  seest
thou?"  (ver.  11)  was  designed  to  arouse  and  arrest  his  attention,  and  for  the  same
reason,  when  that  attention  had  been  awakened,  the  Divine  commendation,  "  Thou
hast  well  seen,"  is  given.  Of.  for  similar  questions  and  similar  visions,  ver.  13 ;  ch.  xxiv.  3 ;
Amos  vii.  8 ;  viii  2 ;  Zech.  iv.  2 ;  v.  2,  and  in  each  case  the  motive  seems  to  have
been  the  same.

III.  Their  suggestions  for  ourselves.  1.  Concerning  Ood's  punishment  of  sin,
(1)  Its  not  being  apparent  to  us  is  no  reason  for  denying  it.  Certainly  the  vision  of
the  stem,  or  branch,  of  the  almond  tree  would  not  to  an  ordinary  observer  have  sug-
gested it.  Nor  either  the  second  vision,  that  of  the  "  seething  pot,"  although  that  did
undoubtedly  present  somewhat  more  of  a  troubled  aspect.  Yet  both  alike  needed  that
their  meaning  and  interpretation  should  be  given.  Their  significance  did  not  Ho  on  the
surface.  Only  a  divinely  illumined  eye  could  see  that  the  early-budding  almond  tree
which,  because  of  its  outstripping  other  trees,  being  in  advance  of  them  all  in  yielding  its
fruit,  was  called  the  "  wakeful "  or  "  watchful "  tree,  meant  that  the  Lord  was  "  watchful
over  his  word  to  perform  it."  Nor  was  the  interpretation  of  the  second  vision  much
more  evident  than  that  of  the  first.  And  so  continually,  in  connection  with  ungodly
men,  there  are  events  occurring  and  signs  of  varied  kind  are  given,  which  to  those  who
are  taught  of  God  tell  plainly  how  God  is  "  watchful  over  his  word  to  perform  it ; "  but
to  others  thay  tell  nothing  of  the  kind.  They  are  like  the  prophet's  almond  tree  and
seething  pot,  wMch  had  no  meaning  until  that  meaning  was  pointed  out.    The  people


14  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PKOrHET  JEREMIAH.      [cii.  i.  1-19.


of  Judah  and  Jerusalem  saw  nothing  in  these  circumstances,  any  more  than  in  the
prophet's  visions,  to  alarm  them  very  much.  And  so,  still,  ungodly  men  are  at  ease  in
the  presence  of  facts  and  indications  which  fill  those  who  believe  Qod*s  Word  with
unspeakable  alarm.  How  foolish,  then,  is  it  to  take  the  imconcern,  the  powerlessnesa
to  understand  God's  signs,  which  characterize  ungodly  men,  as  any  evidence  of  the
unreality  of  that  which  God  has  declared !  "  As  it  was  in  the  days  of  Noah,  so  shall  it
be,"  etc.  Lot  was  as  "  one  that  mocked  unto  his  sons-in-law."  The  Jews  crucified
our  Lord  because  he  saw  so  clearly  and  declared  so  plainly  the  character  of  their
trusted  leaders  and  the  destruction  that  was  coming — one  even  more  terrible  than  that
which  Jeremiah  foretold.  But  the  Jews  neither  saw  nor  believed  anything  of  the  kind.
(2)  Its  being  by  means  of  natural  laws  does  not  make  it  the  less  God's  punishment  of
sin.  The  rapid  growth  and  yield  of  the  almond  tree  was  a  perfectly  natural  thing  :
there  was  no  interference  with  the  orderly  course  which  such  forms  of  plant  life
assume.  And  the  war  between  the  empires  of  Egypt  and  Babylon,  in  the  vortex  and
whirlpool  of  which  Jerusalem  was  dragged  in  and  dragged  down ;  all  this  which  the
prophet's  second  vision  told  of,  was  it  not  the  inevitable  though  sad  misfortune  of  any
such  diminutive  power  as  was  that  of  Judah  and  Jerusalem  when  placed  in  like
circumstances?  tier  lot  was  cast  just  in  the  place  where  the  two  raging  seas  of  Egypt
and  Babylon  met.  What  wonder  if  her  poor  little  barque  went  to  pieces  beneath  tho
violence  of  those  waves?  It  was  sad  enough,  but  yet  perfectly  natural ;  indeed,  one
may  say,  inevitable.  And  so  it  would  be  quite  possible  to  explain  all  God's  punish-
ment away,  and  to  regard  it  like  the  early  blossoming  of  the  almond  tree,  and  like
tho  seething  troubles  which  must  come  upon  little  kingdoms  placed  as  Judah  was,
when  great  empires  on  either  side  of  her  go  to  war,  as  only  what  was  to  be  expected,
what  was  in  keeping  with  the  natural  order  of  things.  Let  any  one  read  Gibbon,
and  from  his  account  of  the  decline  and  fall  of  the  Roman  empire,  you  would
gather  no  idea  of  a  Divine  righteousness  arising  to  inflict  merited  punishment  on  an
awfully  corrupt  and  degraded  people.  Believers  in  God  can  and  do  see  this,  but  tho
great  historian  has  not  felt  himself  bound  to  point  out  any  such  cause  of  tho  long
series  of  disasters  which  he  so  eloquently  relates.  The  inspired  prophet  and  seer  of
Patmos  has,  however,  done  this;  and  in  the  Book  of  tho  Revelation,  the  woes  coming
upon  that  blood-stained  empire  are  told  of  in  symbolic  but  terrible  form,  and  in  con-
nection with  that  God-defying  wickedness  which  was  the  source  and  cause  of  them  all.
And  so  to-day,  under  cover  of  the  fact  that  God  works  according  to  tho  natural  order
of  things,  men  evade  the  teaching  of  the  events  that  befall  them.  Because  God
punishes  sin  by  the  action  of  his  natural  laws,  men  deny  that  he  punishes  sin  at  alh
Hia  hand  is  not  recognized  in  it,  and  therefore  no  repentance  is  awakened.  They  deem
themselves  unfortunate,  and  that  is  all  If  wo  would  be  more  faithful  with  ourselves,
we  should  "hear  the  rod  and  who  hath  appointed  it,"  No  calamities  or  disasters  como
without  meaning  and  intent ;  they  are  sent  for  moral  and  spiritual  purposes,  however
much  they  may  appear  to  be  but  natural  and  necessary  events.  Each  of  fiiem  will  own,
if  interrogated, "  I  have  a  message  from  God  unto  thee."  (3)  It  will  increase  in  severity
if  there  be  need.  The  first  vision  is  simply  that  of  the  almond  tree ;  an  emblem  of
gentleness  rather  than  of  severity.  But  the  second  vision,  that  of  the  boiling  caldron,
suggested  a  far  other  and  more  terrible  visitation  (cf.  the  plagues  in  Egypt,  which
increased  in  terribleness  as  they  went  on).  And  it  is  ever  so  even  unto  the  "  con-
suming fire"  (Heb.  xii.  29).  (4)  It  often  comes  from  unexpected  quarters.  The
"  seething  pot "  that  the  prophet  saw  had  its  face  northward.  Now,  the  reader  of  the
history  of  tho  times  of  which  our  prophet  tells — the  times  of  King  Josiah — ^will  know
that  it  was  from  the  south,  from  Egypt,  they  expected  that  troubles  would  arise.  And
in  the  next  chapter  (ver.  16^  mention  is  made  of  trouble  that  did  arise  from  that
quarter,  though  what  particular  event  is  referred  to  it  is  not  easy  to  say.  But  tho
great  trouble  was  to  come  from  the  north,  from  the  last  quarter  from  which  they
anticipated  it.  King  Josiah  lost  his  life  in  doing  good  service  to  that  northern  power,
the  great  Assyrian  kingdom,  by  fighting  against  Egypt.  It  was  not,  therefore,  to  bo
expected  that  thence  calamity  would  come.  But  nevertheless  i^was  thence  that  their
great  overthrow  and  destruction  came.  And  little  do  the  transgiessors  against  God
ever  know  or  even  dream  whence  his  judgments  against  them  will  arise.  It  is  not  only
^  in  such  an  hour/'  but  from  such  a  quarter  ''  as  they  think  not,  that  the  Divine  dis-


CH.  L  1—19.]       THE  BOOK  OF  THE  mOPHET  JEREMIAH.  15

pleasure  breaks  upon  them.  A  transgressor  against  God  is  safe  nowhere :  nothing  may
be  visible  to  his  eye,  everything  may  be  going  on  in  orderly  course,  and  ho  may
have  full  confidence  that  all  is  well.  But  notwithstanding  this,  events  soon  to  happen
may  prove  that  he  has  wrongly  read  the  whole  of  (Jod's  providence,  and  that  his  security
is  least  where  he  thought  it  was  greatest  and  most  certain.  Happy,  and  happy  alone,
is  he  who  hath  made  the  Lord  God  his  trust,  and  whose  hope  the  Lord  is.  2.  Con-
cerning the  Divine  love,  "Wo  have  seen  wherefore  these  visions  were  given.  They
reveal  to  us  that  Divine  love  which  would  warn  men  from  ways  which  bring  upon  them
such  sore  judgments.  The  desire  of  God  to  save  guilty  men,  to  leave  nothing  undone
by  which  they  may  be  turned  and  kept  back  from  evil,  is  manifest  in  all  this.  He
would  not  have  his  message  miss  its  mark  by  reason  of  any  lack  of  deep  impression
and  vivid  realization  of  the  truth  on  the  part  of  the  messenger.— 0.

Vers.  4— 9.— tTcAovoA  calls  Jeremiah  and  gives  him  ample  encouragements,  I.  The
PCTBPOSB  FOB  WHICH  Jeremiah  WAS  BROUGHT  INTO  EXISTENCE.  This  is  Stated  in  a  very
solemn  and  impressive  way  in  vcr.  6.  Jehovah  presents  himself  to  Jeremiah  as  ho
who  formed  him  in  the  belly,  and  even  before  then  recognized  him  as  one  who  was  to
do  a  special  work.  So  with  regard  to  Moses,  Isaac,  Samuel.  The  circumstances  of
their  birth  direct  our  thoughts  to  the  special  ends  to  be  worked  out  by  their  earthly
life.  To  each  of  them  the  same  words  might  have  been  spoken  as  to  Jeremiah.  More-
over, if  true  of  them,  this  word  is  true  of  all.  Jehovah  is  the  Fashioner  of  all  mankind,
and  since  he  does  nothing  without  some  purpose,  it  follows  that  for  every  one  of  us,
equally  with  Jeremiah,  there  is  a  recognition,  a  consecrating,  an  ordaining.  In  a  few
instances  there  may  be  a  special  publication  of  the  purpose,  but  the  purpose  itself  is
real  in  every  instance.  Therefore  our  business  clearly  is  to  find  out  what  God  would
have  us  be,  our  eyes  open  to  his  presence,  our  ears  to  his  voice.  Then  if  we  have  dis-
covered what  God  would  have  us  be,  if  there  is  a  deepening  impression  on  our  minds
that  we  are  in  the  right  way,  this  very  thought,  that  God  saw  the  proper  work  of  our
life  or  ever  we  entered  upon  it,  will  assure  us  that  the  work  cannot  fail.  We  shall  feel
that  requisite  strength  in  the  doing  of  it,  and  full  success  at  the  end  of  it,  are  made
certain.  The  failings  of  life  come — and  it  is  easy  to  see  that  they  must  come — from
putting  our  own  purposes  athwart  the  settled  purpose  of  God.  We  may  rebel  against  the
work  which  he  calls  upon  xis  to  undertake,  but  it  is  very  certain  that  any  work  put  in
its  place  must  end  in  disappointment  and  disaster.  To  Jonah  as  to  Jeremiah,  Gk)d
might  have  said  somewhat  the  same  as  is  here  recorded.  It  is  an  awful  thought  for
sinners,  in  the  collapse  of  their  own  plans,  that  they  might  have  been  successful  and
rejoicing,  if  only  they  had  been  from  the  heart  obedient  to  the  plans  of  God.

II.  The  AKSWERiNa  plea  op  Jeremiah.  An  opposing  plea  it  can  hardly  be  called,
but  it  is  the  not  astonishing  statement  of  a  difficiity  that  from  the  human  point  of  view
looks  very  great.  When  God  makes  his  first  approaches  to  men,  asking  them  to  do
something  special,  what  is  more  natural  than  that  they  should  see  huge  difiiculties  in
the  way  of  obedience  ?  How  fertile  was  the  self-distrusting  Moses  in  suggesting  difii-
culties when  God  came  to  him  in  Horeb  (Exod.  iii.  4)?  Take  special  notice  that  the
difiiculties  of  such  men  as  Moses  and  Jeremiah  are  not  meant  to  be  mere  excuses,  but
are  felt  to  be  real  reasons.  Such  is  emphatically  the  position  here.  Jeremiah  was  but
a  lad ;  it  is  possible  that  he  had  not  yet  attained  to  what  we  should  call  a  young  man
(Gen.  xli.  12 ;  1  Kings  iii.  7).  At  such  an  age  one  is  valued  for  listening  and  learning
rather  than  for  talking.  That  the  prophet  made  such  an  initial  reply  to  Jehovah  was
a  good  sign  rather  than  a  bad  one.  Deep  humility  and  a  keen  consciousness  of  natural
weakness  are  welcome  features  in  the  man  whom  God  would  make  his  servant.  It  is
tolerably  certain  that  among  the  elders  of  Anathoth  Jeremiah  would  have  the  reputa-
tion of  being  a  quiet,  unpretending  lad.  If  a  young  man  of  another  reputation  had
stood  forward  as  a  prophet,  there  would  have  been  fair  ground  to  charge  him  with
presumption.  But  when  one  stands  forward  who  ever  looks  doubtfully  on  his  own
abilities,  is  no  self-asserter,  and  forms  by  preference  a  member  in  the  background  of
every  scene,  such  a  standing  forward  at  once  suggests  that  there  is  some  superhuman
motive  behind  it.  Jeremiah's  plea  is  therefore  a  recommendation.  Unconsciously  he
gives  a  valid  certificate  of  fitness  for  his  work.  At  the  same  time,  this  plea  sugc^csts  all
the  difference  which  there  is  between  the  youthful  Jeremiah  and  the  youthful  Jesus.


\


16  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,      [en.  1. 1—19.


Jesus  in  the  temple  seems  in  his  natural  element,  not  too  young  oven  at  twelve  years
of  age  to  show  an  ardent  interest  in  all  that  concerned  Divine  worship  and  service.

III.  The  ample  encoubaqement  which  Jehovah  gives  to  Jebemiah.  In  a  few
words,  God  puts  before  his  servant  all  that  is  needed  and  all  that  can  be  supplied.  1.
There  will  he  clear  commands  from  Ood,  and  from  the  prophet  there  must  he  correspond'
ing  ohedience.  Not  with  Jeremiah  rests  the  deciding  of  whether  he  shall  go  here  or
there,  or  to  what  place  first  and  to  what  last.  He  is  always  a  sent  man,  and  when  he
comes  into  the  presence  of  his  appointed  audience,  his  message  is  a  provided  message.
Thus  it  is  ensured  that  he  never  finds  himself  in  the  wrong  place  or  speaking  at  the
wrong  time.  Well  does  Gtod  know  how  little  we  are  able,  of  ourselves,  to  decide  when
to  speak  and  when  to  be  silent,  what  to  say  and  what  to  leave  unsaid.  2.  One  conse-
quence of  God*8  message  faithfully  delivered  will  be  hostility  and  menace  from  the
nearers,  and  therefore  there  is  an  exhortation  to  courage,  and  an  indication  of  the
ground  which  makes  that  courage  possible.  When  Jeremiah  gets  into  a  certain  presence
and  speaks  a  certain  word  he  will  bo  threatened.  The  threatening  must  be  expected ;
it  shows  that  the  arrow  of  God's  truth  has  found  its  home.  All  the  powers  of  the
human  face  will  be  called  into  malignant  exercise  against  the  prophet.  The  eye,  the
tongue,  the  muscles  of  the  face  will  all  be  joined  in  strong  combination  to  express  the
contempt  and  hatred  filling  the  brain  that  lies  behind.  In  no  way  can  Jeremiah  escape
this  experience ;  he  must  face  the  enemies,  but  in  doing  so  he  has  the  assurance  that
his  Commander  is  near  to  deliver.  3.  Qod  mukes  now  an  actual  communication  to  the
prophet.  The  path  is  not  yet  taken,  the  audience  is  not  yet  in  view,  but  by  way  of  earnest
inspiration  the  words  of  the  Master  are  put  into  the  servant's  mouth.  This  of  course
was  an  indescribable  experience.  What  it  is  to  have  the  words  of  God  in  one's  mouth  can
only  be  known  by  an  actual  enjoyment  of  the  privilege.  The  only  way  in  which  we
can  discern  how  real  and  fruitful  this  experience  was,  is  by  observing  its  effect.  There
is  no  more  hesitating,  no  turning  from  one  answered  plea  to  find  another  more  cogent.
Henceforth  the  prophet  goes  on  steadily  and  faithfully  in  his  mission,  and  his  perfect
service  is  best  proved  by  this,  that  in  due  time  he  meets  with  the  indicated  opposition,
and  receives  from  God  his  promised  protection,— -Y.

Ver.  10. — The  vcLst  compass  of  the  propheVs  work,  I.  The  wide  extent  the
prophecies  cover.  Primarily  they  haci  to  do  with  Jerusalem  and  Judah  and  all  the
families  of  the  house  of  Israel.  But  this  was  only  the  beginning.  They  went  on  to
affect  in  the  most  intimate  way  all  the  nations  and  the  kingdoms.  The  principles  of
righteousness  and  truth  and  Divine  authority  concern  all.  They  can  no  more  bo  kept
within  certain  geographical  bounds  than  can  the  clouds  and  rains  of  heaven.  On  this
day,  when  the  Great  I  AJM  came  to  the  youthful  Jeremiah,  he  set  him  over  the  nations
and  over  the  kingdoms,  and  here  is  the  reason  why  these  prophecies,  with  their  grand
ethical  deliverances,  have  still  such  a  firm  hold  upon  Christendom,  upon  the  Gentile  just
as  much  as  the  Jew.  Wherever  there  still  remains  the  worshipper  of  stocks  and  stones,
wherever  the  oppressor  is  found,  and  the  man  who  confides  in  the  arm  of  flesh,  and  the
man  who  is  utterly  indifferent  to  the  glory  of  God, — then  in  that  same  place  there  is
occasion  to  insist  most  strenuously  upon  the  continued  application  of  Jeremiah's  words.
The  prophets  were  more  than  indignant  patriots;  they  were  and  are  still  witnesses  to
an  ideal  of  humanity,  nowhere  regarded  as  it  ought  to  be,  and  only  too  often  neglected,
if  not  contemptuously  denied.  He  who  came  forth  to  condemn  his  own  people  for
lapsing  into  idolatry  did  thereby  equally  condemn  other  nations  for  not  departing  from
it.  The  gospel  for  every  creature  is  preceded  by  a  body  of  prophecy,  which  is  shown
also  to  concern  every  creature,  not  by  laborious  inference,  but  by  such  explicit  words  as
we  find  in  this  verse.

II.  The  depth  of  the  work  to  which  these  prophecies  point.  The  work  is  not
only  wide ;  it  is  deep  as  it  is  wide.  The  ultimate  aim  is  set  forth  in  two  figures :
1.  Building.  2.  Planting.  On  these  two  figures  Paul  dwells  very  suggestively  in
writing  to  the  Corinthians.  The  constructive  work  of  God  in  the  human  soul  needs
more  than  one  figure  sufiBciently  to  illustrate  it.  But  all  true  building  must  be  on  a
sufiicient  foundation ;  all  Divine  planting,  if  it  is  to  come  to  anything,  must  be  in  a
suitable  soil.  Hence  there  goes  beforehand  an  unsparing  work,  to  destroy  things  already
In  existence.    Buildings  already  erected  must  be  pulled  down ;  plants  already  growing


CH.  1.1—19.]      THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  17

must  be  uprooted  and  put  beyond  the  chance  of  further  growth.  We  have  done  things
which  ougnt  to  have  been  left  undone ;  and  the  word  to  Jeremiah  is  that  they  must  be
undone,  in  order  that  the  things  which  ought  to  be  done  may  be  fully  done.  The
terms  indicating  destruction  are  multiplied  to  emphasize  the  need,  and  prevent  escape
into  ruinous  compromise.  There  must  be  no  tacking  on  of  a  new  building  to  certain
humanly  cherished  parts  of  the  old.  Ck)nstructions  after  the  will  of  God  must  not  be
liable  to  a  description  such  as  that  of  the  image  which  Nebuchadnezzar  saw  in  his
dream ;  all  must  be  strong,  pure,  and  beautiful  from  basement  to  summit.  In  the
garden  of  the  Lord  there  can  be  no  mixing  of  heavenly  and  earthly  plants.  A  clean
sweep— such  is  necessitated  for  the  glory  of  (}od  and  the  blessedness  of  man.  Thus  at
the  very  first  is  given  a  hint  of  the  hostility  which  Jeremiah  would  provoke.  Pulling
down  means  the  expulsion  of  self  from  its  fortress,  and  its  bereavement  of  all  that  it
valued.  Every  brick  detached,  every  plant  uprooted,  intensified  the  enmity  one  degree
more.  "  Destroy,"  *'  overthrow,"  are  the  only  words  that  can  be  spoken  as  long  as  any-
thing remains  in  which  human  pride  and  selfishness  take  delight.  But  at  the  same
time,  the  prophet  goes  forth  to  build  and  to  plant.  He  takes  nothing  away  but  what
he  leaves  something  infinitely  better  behind.  When  God  sends  a  messenger  to  us,  his
great  first  word  is  "  thorough ; "  and  even  though  he  has  to  make  his  way  through
human  pains,  tears,  murmurings,  and  semi-rebellions,  he  keeps  to  the  word.  Remember,
then,  that  he  who  pulls  down  also  builds ;  he  who  uproots  also  plants ;  and  he  builds
and  plants  for  eternity.— Y.

Vers.  11 — 14. — The  cUmcnd  tree  and  the  Mething  -pot.  He  who  put  his  word  into  the
prophet's  mouth  also  put  a  new  power  of  vision  into  his  eyes,  and  gave  him  to  see  signs
such  as  tended  to  fix  permanently  in  his  mind  deep  convictions  with  regard  to  the
power  and  purposes  of  God.  Thus  the  prophet  was  assured  of  his  ability  to  see  more
than  others  could  see.  Both  through  eye  and  car  he  was  fortified  in  the  consciousness
that  his  prophetic  office  was  no  empty  boast.

I.  The  bod  op  the  almond  tree.  Probably  much  such  a  rod  as  those  which  were
laid'up  in  the  tabernacle  overnight  in  order  to  certify  beyond  all  question  the  divinely
appointed  office  of  Aaron  (Numb.  xvii.).  This  narrative,  we  may  be  pretty  sure,  would
be  transmitted  with  special  care  from  generation  to  generation  of  the  priesthood,  and
to  it  the  mind  of  Jeremiah  may  at  once  have  turned.  That  rod  which  once  helped  the
priest  is  now  found  helping  the  prophet.  It  was  the  sign  of  how  much  living  and
fructifying  energy  might  break  forth  where  there  was  only  the  appearance  of  death.
The  auditors  of  Jeremiah's  prophecies  might  say  they  saw  no  sign  of  impending
calamities.  In  all  self-confidence  they  might  say,  *'  Peace  and  prosperity  will  last  out
our  time."  And  so  Jeremiah  goes  forth  with  the  remembrance  of  tne  almond  rod,  well
assured  that  by  GK>d's  power  the  most  unexpected  things  may  happen  with  the  utmost
suddenness.  The  words  of  prophecy  may  long  lie  dormant,  and  some  may  treat  them
as  dead  and  obsolete ;  but  none  can  tell  at  what  moment  the  long  quiescent  may  start
into  the  most  vigorous  activity.  Was  it  not  all  at  once,  after  a  long  period  of  quietude,
that  Jesus  came  forth  with  a  sudden  outburst  of  miraculous  energy  and  teaching
wisdom  ?  It  is  precisely  those  who  have  been  long  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins  who
sometimes  startle  the  world  by  a  sudden  exuberance  of  the  Divine  life  within
them.

II.  The  beethino  pot.  Here  again  is  the  exhibition  of  energy,  and  a  sudden  and
irresistible  change  from  quiet  into  furious  and  threatening  movement.  A  pot  boiling
over  with  the  vehemence  of  the  fire  under  it,  is  an  excellent  emblem  of  how  God  can
stir  up  his  destroying  wrath  against  the  rebellious.  What  can  be  quieter  than  the
water  as  it  lies  in  the  pot?  what  quieter  than  the  fuel  before  it  is  kindled?  and  yet
the  light  touch  of  a  very  small  flame  sends  fuel  and  water  into  activity,  and  that
activity  soon  rises  into  fury.  The  water  that  only  a  few  minutes  ago  was  still  and
cold  is  now  turbulent  and  scalding.  Just  in  the  same  way,  God  can  take  these  "  families
of  the  kingdoms  of  the  north/*  and  make  them  the  instruments  of  his  wrath  and  chastise-
ment, little  conscious  as  they  are  of  all  the  use  to  which  they  are  being  put.  Every-
where in  close  proximity  to  us  there  are  latent  forces  of  destruction,  and  these  with
startling  rapidity  may  become  patent.  Consider  how  soon  the  beautiful  and  cheering
heavens  may  be  filled  with  the  elements  of  deadly  storm. — Y.

JEREMIAH.  0


13  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.      [en.  1. 1—19.

Vcr.  n.^-'The  consequence  of  unreasonable  fear,  God  has  already  exhorted  Jeremiah
to  courage,  and  given  him  the  strongest  assurances  of  his  own  unfailing  presence.  But
now  he  adds  warning.  Fear  of  the  enemies  of  God  will  bring  not  only  suffering  but
shame.  The  man  who  goes  out  to  fight  for  his  country,  and  turns  in  cowardice  on  the
day  of  battle,  only  escapes  the  enemy  to  die  a  disgraceful  death  at  the  hands  of  his  own
people.  To  meet  the  threatenings  of  men,  we  must  have  in  our  hearts  not  only  the
strength  of  God  but  the  fear  of  God.  Those  who  turn  from  the  weapons  of  God's
enemies,  whom  in  God's  strength  they  should  meet  and  conquer,  find  Gt)d  himself  in
arms  against  them.  He  himself  visibly  and  signally  confounds  the  unfaithful,  and  thus
even  in  the  unfaithfulness  of  the  messenger  he  who  sends  him  is  all  the  more  honoured.
As  yet,  of  course,  Jeremiah  had  not  been  tried,  and  all  through  his  prophecies  there  is
no  sign  that  personal  fear  ever  entered  his  mind.  Ho  had  a  very  sensitive  nature ;  ho
was  often,  almost  continually  one  may  say,  the  subject  of  depressing  emotion,  but  the'
fear  of  no  man,  however  dignified  and  powerful  that  man  might  be,  deterred  him  from
a  plain  exposure  of  his  misdoings.  And  yet,  although  the  prophet  did  not  fall  into  un-
faithfulness, it  was  well  to  warn  him  beforehand.  Warning  never  comes  unsuitably  to
any  servant  of  God.  He  who^  stands  should  never  take  it  amiss  if  he  be  exhorted  to
take  heed  lest  he  fall.  And  all  the  securing  words  with  which  Grod  follows  up  the
warning  here  do  not  make  that  warning  one  whit  less  needful.  The  prophet  was  to
become  like  a  fortress,  as  far  as  God  could  surround  him  with  protection ;  but  all  the
protection  would  avail  him  nothing,  if  he  became  careless  as  to  nis  own  believing  con-
nection with  God.  When  faith  fails,  the  whole  spiritual  man  becomes  vulnerable,  and  to
become  vulnerable  soon  leads  to  being  actually  wounded, — Y.

Vers.  1 — 3.^-4  protracted  ministry.  The  ministry  of  Jeremiah  attracts  attention
because  of  its  length,  the  varied  scenes  amidst  which  it  was  carried  on,  and  the  external
aspect  of  failure  worn  by  it  from  first  to  last.  May  there  not  bo  in  these  and  other
respects  a  moral  attaching  to  it  for  those  who  in  distant  ages  can  regard  it  as  a  whole,
and  in  connection  with  the  subsequent  Divine  evolution  of  events  of  which  it  spoke?
Contrast  it  with  that  of  John  the  Baptist.

I.  Its  background  of  oibcumstance.  Five  reigns :  for  the  most  part  brief ;  two
of  them  ridiculously  or  tra^cally  so.  Beginning  in  a  fitful  flush  of  religious  enthusiasm,
and  ending  in  a  long  and  shameful  captivity.  Foreign  politics  were  unusually  interest-
ing. The  Medo-Babylonian  overthrow  of  Syria  was  about  to  take  place  when  he  began ;
in  the  twenty-third  year  of  his  ministry  Nebuchadnezzar  laid  the  foundation  of  Baby-
lonian empire  in  the  victory  of  Carchemish,  in  which  Israel  was  subdued,  and  universal
rule  passea  into  his  hands ;  the  invasion  of  Judsea  followed  in  four  years,  and  in  the
eleventh  year  of  Zedekiah  Jerusalem  was  taken.  Personally  his  had  been  a  chequered
career.  For  twenty-two  years  comparatively  obscure ;  for  the  most  part  probably  at
Anathoth.  But  towards  the  end  of  this  period  he  came  to  Jerusalem.  We  find  him  in
the  temple  (ch.  vii.  2) ;  in  the  gates  of  the  city  (ch,  xvii.  19) ;  in  prison  (ch.  xxxii.  2) ;
in  the  king's  house  (ch.  xxii.  1 ;  xxxvii.  17) ;  and  then  at  times  in  Egypt.  There  are
two  traditions  as  to  his  death— one  that  he  was  stoned  by  the  Jews  in  their  settlement
at  Tahapanes,  in  Egypt ;  the  other  that  Nebuchadnezzar,-  having  in  the  twenty-seventh
year  of  his  reign  conquered  Egypt,  took  him  and  Baruch  with  him  to  Babylon.  In  any
case,  he  probably  lived  to  an  extreme  age.

n.  Its  jiEBSAGB.  To  warn  against  idolatry,  by  exposing  its  real  nature  and  declaring
its  consequences.  But  through  all  and  beyond  all,  to  declare  the  indestructibleness  of
the  kingdom  of  Gk)d,  the  certain  advent  of  "  The  Lord  our  Righteousness,"  and  the
idtimate  glory  and  happiness  of  a  redeemed  and  purified  people.  Of  scarce  any  other
prophet  can  it  be  said  that  his  predictions  were  so  absolutely,  and  to  present  percep-
tion hopelessly  future.  Yet  is  his  tone  on  this  account  none  the  less  believing  and
confident.

III.  Its  Divinb  biqnifioance.  The  "  burden  "  of  Jeremiah  is  identical  from  reign  to
reign,  although  the  illustrative  and  occasioning  circumstances  vary.  May  we  not  say
that:  1.  The  personality  of  the  prophet  had  a  place  in  the  Divine  intention  f  Certain
we  are  that  its  influence  was  second  only  to  that  of  his  words,  if  even  to  that.  His
astonishment,  sorrow,  hope,  etc.,  are  all  instructive  and  remarkable.  2.  The  word  of
Ood  has  to  deal  with  the  continuity  and  development  of  error,  and  will  outlast  it.    The


CH.1. 1— 19.]   THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  19

best  antidote  to  error  is  the  healthful  development  of  truth.  There  is  no  phase  of
depravity,  transCTession,  or  unbelief  for  which  the  Word  of  God  has  not,  in  its  historio
evolution,  some  aoctrine,  reproof,  correction,  or  instruction  in  righteousness.  Revealed
through  human  lips  and  lives  by  the  operation  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  it  is  a  living,  manifold
growth,  intimately  associated  with  the  vicissitudes  of  that  human  life  it  has  to  correct
and  redeem.  There  can  never  be  a  time  when  the  gospel  will  have  no  word  for  the
inquiring,  wondering,  suffering,  sinning,  unbelieving  spirit  of  man.  3.  The  ministry
of  the  prophet  was  a  visible  sign  of  the  Divine  long-suffering,  "  But  to  Israel  he  saith.
All  day  long  I  have  stretched  forth  my  hands  unto  a  disobedient  and  gainsaying
people  "  (Rom.  x.  21 ;  Isa.  IxT.  2).  **  0  faithless  and  perverse  generation,  how  long  shall
1  be  with  you  ?  how  long  shall  I  suffer  you?"  (Matt.  xvii.  17). — ^M.

Vers.  4 — 10. — The  call  of  the  prophet.  As  these  are  elements  both  ordinary  and
extraordinary  in  the  prophetic  oflBce,  so  preparation,  etc.,  for  it  must  be  of  both  kinds.
Much  that  may  be  said  of  it  will  be  applicable  to  all  other  service  in  God's  Church ;  and
there  will  be  some  conditions  and  circumstances  that  must  necessarily  be  peculiar  and
abnormal.  The  behaviour,  too,  of  one  called  to  such  a  high  ofSce  must  ever  be  interest-
ing to  observers.

I.  The  spirit  in  which  such  an  office  shoxtld  be  assumed.  Like  Moses  and  others
of  whom  we  read,  Jeremiah  was  of  a  backward  and  retiring  disposition.  It  required
insistance  and  remonstrance  on  the  part  of  Jehovah  to  persuade  him  to  undertake  the
task.  His  low  thoughts  of  himself  as  contrasted  with  the  mighty  office  to  which  he
was  called,  held  him  back.  There  are  some  things  that  come  mast  gracefully  when
they  are  spontaneous.  The  general  duty,  love,  and  service,  owing  by  the  creature  to
the  Creator,  etc.,  are  of  this  kind.  But  for  special  work  and  appointment,  requiring
great  qualifications  and  especial  help  of  God,  modesty  and  hesitation  are  a  recommendation
rather  than  otherwise.  Our  question,  pointed  first  of  all  homewards,  should  be,  **  Who
is  sufficient  for  these  things  ?  "  A  feeling  Uke  this  is  helpful  and  preparative,  as  leading;
to  the  perception  of  the  true  strength  ana  fitness  that  come  from  Go^  and  to  a  constant
dependence  upon  him.  Many  long  idly  for  "  some  great  thing  to  do,"  others  hesitate
because  the  thing  is  too  great.

II.  The  manner  in  which  God  prepares  men  for  extraordinart  service  in  his
Church.  Where  direction  and  impulse  are  needed  revelation  is  made.  The  spirit  of
the  prophet  is  not  left  in  doubt.  A  hesitating,  vacillating  prophet  were  a  worthless
messenger  to  the  faithless.  Revelation  is  therefore  made  to  him  of :  1.  His  anticipative
choice  in  the  counsels  of  Qod,  This  predestinating  grace  of  God  is  a  frequent  assertion
of  the  Old  Testament.  It  is  a  mystery  we  cannot  fathom ;  but  is  consistent  with  the
free  choice  of  the  subject  addressed.  It  has  its  effect  in  the  voluntary  acceptance  of  the
appointment  through  persuasion  and  appeal.  A  discovery  of  this  nature  can  only  be
for  the  few,  who  are  called  to  especial  responsibilities,  etc.,  and  has  no  reference  to  the
general  demands  of  duty,  affection,  zeal,  which  address  themselves  to  all.  2.  Future
Divine  evidence,  protection,  and  inspiration,  God  will  be  with  him,  and  will  fit  him
for  all  he  has  to  do.  So  Christ  to  his  disciples,  "  Lo,  I  am  with  you  alway,  even  unto
the  end  of  the  world  "  (Matt,  xxviii.  20).  This  is  to  meet  the  exigencies  of  Divine
service,  and  is  not  intended  for  personal  aims  and  ends.  Many  a  lowly  worker  in  the
Master's  service  is  thereby  endued  with  irresistible  power.  It  is  a  conviction  for  which
we  are  encouraged  to  seek  grounds  and  assurances.  3.  Authority  amongst  the  nations  to
destroy  and  to  restore.  This  is  a  moral  investment.  Just  as  God  enforces  truth  and
righteousness  with  accompanyiDg  mysterious  sanctions,  so  he  clothes  his  messenger
with  an  authority  the  consciences  of  men  will  recognize  even  when  their  perversity
of  will  inclines  them  to  disobey.

How  much  of  this  spirit  of  certitude  and  conviction  is  needed  for  the  ordinary  life  of
the  Christian  ?  Have  we  the  measure  of  it  we  require  ?  or  are  we  inefficient  and  useless
because  of  our  lack  of  it  ?  There  can  be  no  question  that  such  a  spirit  is  inculcated  by
Christianity,  and  that  reasonable  grounds  are  afiorded  us  all  upon  which  to  be  thoroughly
persuaded  in  our  own  mind.  Let  us  act  upon  our  deepest  convictions  and  most  unalter-
able certainties.  This  is  the  only  way  to  attain  to  a  sound  apprehension  of  Divine  things,
and  an  efficient  condition  of  service. — M.


20         THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,   [ch.  l  1—19.

Ver.  11.—"  What  seest  thouf'  (cf.  Amos  vii.  8;  viii.  2;  Zech.  iv.  2;  v.  2).  The
seer  is  encouraged  and  impelled  to  the  exercise  of  his  gifts.  His  first  duty  is  plain,  viz.
to  test  his  own  powers  of  vision ;  and  next,  to  ponder  the  significance  of  what  he  sees.
So  the  spiritually  endowed  are  summoned  to  the  performance  of  the  special  work  to
which  they  have  been  called ;  and  the  newly  discovered  gift  lifts  them  into  a  new  sphere
of  responsibility  and  action.

I.  GoD-OrVBN  GIFTS  ABB  A  BTEWABDSHI?  TO  BB\EXEBCISED  WITH  THE  UTMOST  CABE-
rULNBSS  AND  KNDEAVOUB.

II.  We  cannot  TELL  HOW  HIGHLY  WH  ABE  ENDOWED  UNTIL  WE  TBY  OUBSELVES  TO
THE  UTMOST  ;   AND  THE  BEST  GIFTS  MAY  BE  IMPBOVED  BY  CULTIVATION,

III.  The  welfabe  of  multitudes  may  depend  upon  the  faithfulness  of  one.  Of
many  it  might  be  asked,  "  Do  they  see  at  all  ?  "  Vision  is  a  Divine  gift  to  those  who  are
to  be  leaders  of  men ;  and  in  lesser  measure  is  given  to  all  for  their  salvation  if  they  will
but  open  their  eyes. — M.

Vers.  12 — 16. — Hastening  ills,  (For  the  first  fig,  cf.  Matt.  xxiv.  32.)  The  vision  of
the  prophet  is  twofold,  viz.  a  wakeful  almond  rod,  and  a  boiling  pot.  They  are  symbols
of  quick  accomplishment  and  violent  invasion.  As  the  almond  rod  is  wakeful  or  ready
to  sprout  when  planted,  and  "  first  to  wake  from  the  sleep  of  winter,"  so  the  evils  pre-
pared by  God  will  be  quickly  brought  to  pass.  The  boiling  pot  would  seem  to  be  the
Chaldeans,  who  invaded  Israel  from  the  north.  As  swiftly  and  violently  as  the  pot
boils  over,  so  will  Grod  make  the  wrath  of  men  to  praise  him.  The  ills  are  swiftly
approaching,  but  they  are  self-prodnced  by  Israel.  When  we  compare  this  statement
with  the  forgiving  character  of  God,  we  must  feel  how  great  the  sin  and  the  provocation
that  could  so  move  him.  Tet  on  the  very  edge  of  his  destroying  vengeance  he  remem-
bers mercy,  and  will  have  his  people  repent.    Notice —

I.   SiNNEBS  must  not  CONCLUDE  THAT  THEY  ABB  SAFE  BECAUSE  OP  FBBSENT  IMMUNITY.

Jeremiah  was  as  the  eye  of  Israel  just  opened  to  the  impending  dangers.  Many  would
even  now  reject  his  message ;  but  the  warning  is  given :  1.  Through  an  intensely
sensitive  mind,  that  it  may  produce  a  vivid  impression  upon  the  imagination  and  heart
of  those  who  hear  the  prophet.  2.  Seasonably,  that  although  but  a  short  time  remains,
there  may  be  opportunity  of  repentance  and  reform.

II.  God  begins  the  chastisement  of  his  people  gently,  but  if  they  bepent  not

HE  WILL  INCBBASB  AND  HASTEN  HIS  JUDGMENTS  UNTIL  THE  EVIL  IS  WHOLLY  AT  AN  END.

The  first  emblem  is  one  of  rapid  yet  natural  development ;  it  is  otherwise  indefinite.
The  second  is  more  suggestive  of  punishment  and  destruction.  The  first  speaks  only  of
such  punishment  as  may  be  needed  from  time  to  time,  and  of  the  unceasing  vigilance
of  the  offended  God;  the  second  is  sudden,  overwhelming,  and  beyond  all  reckoning  or
measurement.

III.  Idolatby  is  THE  BIN  OF  WHICH  GoD  18  MOST  INTOLEBANT.  It  Is  the  transfer  of
affection  and  trust  to  an  unworthy  object,  and  an  insult  to  Gkxl  and  degrading  to  them-
selves. They  who  indulge  in  it  are  warned  that  their  punishment  will  be  constant  and
rapidly  successive ;  and  that  they  are  on  the  brink  of  signal,  terrible  manifestation  of
Divine  wrath.— M.

Vers.  4 — 10. — Theprophet^s  call.  We  see  in  the  case  of  Jeremiah  a  striking  instance
of  a  man  constrained  oy  force  of  circumstance  and  by  a  Divine  call  to  occupy  a  posi-
tion and  to  do  a  kind  of  work  for  which  he  was  not  naturally  cither  qualified  or
disposed.  Of  a  highly  sensitive  and  timid  nature,  a  tender  heart,  a  desponding  spirit,
he  was  inclined  to  mourn  in  secret  over  the  abounding  evils  of  the  time  rather  than
publicly  to  rebuke  them.  But  as  soon  as  the  Divine  summons  comes  to  him,  ho
"  confers  not  with  fiesh  and  blood,"  he  forgets  his  fears  and  infirmities,  and  for  forty
long  years  patiently  withstands  the  tide  of  iniquity  and  adversity — a  noble  example  of
blended  tenderness  and  strength.    In  this  account  of  the  prophet's  call,  note*-

I.  (Jod's  sovebeignty  in  THE  BAI8ING  UP  OF  MEN  TO  DO  HIS  woBK.  Jcrcmiah  was
"known"  and  "  sanctified  "—dedicated  by  Grod  to  his  sacred  office — ^before  his  birth.
His  "  ordination,"  appointment,  now  is  but  the  fulfilling  of  an  antecedent  Divine  pur-
pose and  choice.  Most  of  the  illustrious  men  of  old  bear  some  conspicuous  mark  of
such  Divine  election  npon  them,  e,g,  Moses,  Gideon,  Samson,  Gyrus.    St.  Paul  dc-


CH.  L  1—19.]   THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  21

▼oatly  recognized  it  in  himself,  in  spite  of  all  his  blind  hostility  to  the  name  of
Christ  in  former  years  (Oal.  i.  15).  We  fail  too  often  to  take  sufficient  note  of  this
mystery  of  Ood's  foreknowledge  and  predetermination  imderlying  the  progress  of  the
kingdom  of  truth  and  righteousness  in  the  world.  And  yet  we  understand  its  history,
we  get  at  the  heart  and  core  of  its  meaning,  only  so  far  as  we  look  through  all  surface
appearances  and,  holding  fast  to  the  equally  sure  principles  of  human  freedom  and
responsibility,  discern  the  will  that  works  out  steaoily,  through  chosen  instruments,
its  own  eternal  purpose.

II.  The  bhbinkikq  of  a  lowlt  8pibit  fboh  a  position  of  extbaobdinabt
DiFFicuLTT  AKD  DANGER.  "Ah,  Lord  Qod !  bchold,  I  cannot  speak,  for  I  am  a  child."
This  was  the  honest  expression  of  conscious  personal  unfitness.  1.  The  feeling  was  very
honourable  to  him.  Who  that  knows  himself  would  not  tremble  on  being  summoned
to  such  a  work  ?  To  take  up  a  solemn  responsibility  with  a  light  heart  and  easy  self-
confidence  is  the  mark  of  a  vain  spirit  that  courts  rebuke.  He  who  has  any  true  sense
of  the  greatness  of  his  mission  from  GK)d  will  often

^  Lie  contemplating  his  own  unworthiness."

2.  It  was  a  sign' of  his  real  fitness  for  the  work.  Humility  is  the  basis  of  all  that  is  great
and  good  in  human  character  and  deed.  "  God  resisteth  the  proud,  but  giveth  grace
unto  the  humble."  The  cry, "  Who  is  sufficient  for  these  things  ?  **  is  a  symptom  of  in-
herent nobleness  and  slumbering  power.  Jeremiidi's  feeling  that  he  was  "  but  a  child,"
prepared  him  the  better  to  become  the  representative  of  the  Diyine  majesty  and  the
rehicle  of  Divine  strength.

III.  The  spiritual  constraint  of  which  all  true  servants  of  God  are  con-
scious. The  prophetic  inspiration  came  upon  him  and  compelled  him  to  doliyer  his
message.  '*  The  word  of  the  Lord  was  in  his  heart  as  a  burning  fire  shut  up  in  his
bones, . . .  and  he  could  not  stay  "  (ch.  xz.  9).  A  Divine  commission  thus  asserting  itself
in  the  inward  consciousness  of  him  who  received  it,  might  well  be  called  the  "  burden
of  the  Lord."  Great  reformers,  preachers,  missionaries,  martyrs,  have  ever  been  moved
by  some  such  Divine  afflatus.  Bo  felt  Peter  and  John  before  the  Jewish  Council :  "  Wo
cannot  but  speak  the  things  which  we  have  seen  and  heard  "  (Acts  iv.  20).  So  felt  St.
Paul :  "  Necessity  is  laid  upon  me ;  yea,  woe  is  unto  me,  if  I  preach  not  the  gospel "  (1  Cor.
ix.  16).  **  Say  not,  I  am  a  child :  for  thou  shalt  go  to  all  that  I  shall  send  thee,  and
whatsoever  I  command  thee  thou  shalt  speak."  He  must  **  speak  "  who  is  thus  com-
manded ;  he  must  "  go  "  who  is  thus  sent.

IV.  The  courage  and  strenoth  with  which  God  endows  all  who  thus  obey
HIS  BIDDING.  The  ministry  of  Jeremiah  is  a  signal  example  of  the  way  in  which  the
grace  of  God  may  clothe  [the  most  timid  spirit  with  dauntless  energy  and  victorious
power.  He  will  never  be  "  afraid  of  the  faces  of  men,"  who  knows  that  the  Lord  is
with  him.  The  fear  of  God  casts  out  all  other  fear.  Many  a  *'  little  child  "  has  thus
become  pretematurally  brave ;  "  out  of  weakness  made  strong."  The  history  of  the
kingdom  of  Grod  among  men  abounds  with  illustrations  of  the  way  in  which  he
"  chooses  the  weak  things  of  the  world  to  confound  the  mighty."  And  every  patient,
heroic  Christian  life  bears  witness  to  the  sufficiency  of  his  grace.  You  can  glory  even
in  infirmities,  reproaches,  necessities,  and  distresses,  if  the  "  power  of  Christ "  does  but
rest  upon  you  (2  Cor.  xii.  9, 10).

V.  The  mastery  of  truth  over  all  the  hostile  powers  of  the  world.
Jeremiah  was  "  set  over  the  nations  and  over  the  kingdoms,"  not  as  a  prince,  but  as  a
prophet;  not  as  wielding  any  form  of  mere  brute  force,  but  as  the  instrument  of  that
silent  energy  of  truth  that  casts  down  the  strongholds  of  Satan  in  every  land.  His
word  was  '*  like  a  fire  and  like  a  hammer  that  breaketh  the  rock  in  pieces  "  (ch.  xxiii.
29)..  Divine  truth  is  the  mightiest  of  all  forces  alike  to  "  root  out  and  to  pull  down, . , .
to  build  and  to  plant."  The  sovereignty  of  the  world  is  his  of  whom  it  is  written,  "  He
shall  smite  the  earth  with  the  rod  of  his  mouth,  and  with  the  breath  of  his  lips  shall  he
slay  the  wicked"  (Isa.  xi.  4).  The  "many  crowns"  are  on  the  head  of  him  whose
"  Name  is  called  The  Word  of  God."— W.


•^


22


THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,     [cii.  ii.  1— 37.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  n.


The  second  chapter  forms  the  introduction
of  a  group  of  discoursea  (ch.  ii. — vi.),  which
should  bo  read  together.    It  is  called  by
Ewald  (and  the  position  of  the  prophecy
favours  this  view)  the  first  oraclo  which
Jeremiah  delivered  in  public  (**  oracle "  is,
in  fact,  the  nearest  English  equivalent  to
those  two  remarkable  Hebrew  sjmonyras,
massa  and  ti^m — especially  for  the  latter).
This  would  bring  it  into  the  thirteenth
year  of  the  reign  of  Josiah  (sco  ch.  i.  3),
though    of    course    we    cannot    be    sure
that  references  to  a  later  period  may  not
have    been    inserted    afterwards.      It    is,
obviously,  only  a  summary  of  the  prophet's
spoken  words  which  we  have  in  this  most
impressive  discourse.   In  order  to  appreciate
it,  we  must  bear   in   mind  the   external
.  political  relations  and  the  internal  religious
condition  of  the  kingdom  of  Judah.    These
have   been   already  touched  upon  in  the
general  introduction.    Suffice  it  to  remind
the  reader  that  Josiah's  reformation — in  the
strict  sense  of  the  word — did  not  begin  till
the  eighteenth  year  of  that  king's  reign;
and  that  the  state  of  things  was  at  this
time  complicated  by  a  dangerous  alliance
with  that  power  against  whose  religion  the
teaching  of  the  prophets  of  Jehovah  was  a
continual  protest  (on  the  Egyptian  alliance,
oomp.  Ewald,  'History  of  Israel,'  iv.  218).
The  first    section  of  the    prophecy  is   a
general  introduction,  already  full  of  serious
charges  against  the  people  (vers.  1—9) ;  in
the  second,  the  special  occasion  of  the  dis-
course is  declared  in  the  form  of  a  question,
and  the  sin  referred  to  is  rebuked  (vers.
10 — 19);   in  the  third,  Judnh's  inveterate
idolatry  is  denounced,  and  the  disappoint-
ment and  ruin  to  which  it  led  candidly
pointed  out  (vers.  20—28) ;  and  in  the  fourth,
*'  half  in  earnest  and  half  in  ironical  satire  "
(EwaldX  the  prophet  points  the  moral  of
this  foolish  Egyptian  fever  which  has  seized
upon  rulers  and  people  (vers.  29—37).

It  is  always  interesting  to  notice  how
later  inspired  writers  hasten  to  do  honour
to  their  predecessors.  Originality  is  not
an  object  with  the  prophets,  but  rather  the


developing  and  adapting  the  truths  long
ago  *' delivered."  The  whole  group  of
prophecies  to  which  oh.  ii.  belongs  contains
numerous  points  of  contact,  in  ideas  or
phraseologry,  with  the  song  of  Moses  (Deut.
xxxii.).  The  following  have  been  indi-
cated:— Cf.  ver.  5  with  Deut.  xxxii.  4;
vers.  11, 12  with  Deut.  xxxii.  1,  21 ;  ver.  20
with  Deut.  xxxii.  15;  vers.  26—28  with
Deut.  xxxii.  6,  18,  37,  38;  ver.  31  with
Deut.  xxxii.  5 ;  ch.  iii.  19  with  Deut.  xxxii.
6 ;  ch.  iv.  22  and  v.  21  with  Dent,  xxxii.  6 ;
ch.  V.  7  with  Deut.  xxxii.  15 ;  ch.  v.  14  with
Deut.  xxxiL  22 ;  ch.  v.  28  with  Deut.  xxxii.
15;  ch.  vi.  11  with  Deut.  xxxiL  25;  ch.  vi.
15  with  Deut.  xxxii.  35 ;  ch.  vi.  19,  30  with
Deut.  xxxii.  18,  19.

Ver.  1. — Moreover;  literally,  and.  The
introductory  formula  agrees  with  ch.  i.  4.
We  have  as  it  were  two  parallel  prophecies
(ch.  i.  4,  etc.,  and  ch.  ii.  1,  etc.);  both
branching  out  of  the  original  chronological
statement  in  ch.  i.  2  (see  Introduction).

Ver.  2.— In  the  ears  of  Jerusalem.  Pre-
sumably Jeremiah  had  received  his  call  at
Anathoth  (comp.  ch.  i.  1).  I  remember  thee,
etc. ;  ri\ther,  1  remember  for  thy  good  the
kindness  of  thy  youth.  It  is  an  open  ques-
tion whether  tho  "  kindness  "  spoken  of  is
that  of  God  towards  tho  people,  or  of  tho
people  towards  God.  The  usage  of  tlie
Hebrew  (kh^sed)  admits  of  either  accepta-
tion ;  comp.  for  the  first,  Ps.  v.  7,  xxxvi.  5,
and  many  other  passages;  for  the  second,
Hos.  vi.  4,  6  (in  ver.  6  rendering  for
"mercy,"  "goodness")  and  Isa.  Ivii.  1
(rendering  "  men  of  piety  ").  But  the  con-
text, which  dwells  so  strongly  on  tho
oblivion  into  which  the  Divine  benefits  had
been  allowed  to  pass,  is  decidedly  in  favour
of  the  first  view.  How  beautiful  is  this
condescending  language  I  Jehovah's  past
feelings  come  back  to  him;  at  least,  so  it
appears  to  the  believer,  when  God  lets  tho
light  of  his  countenance  shine  forth  again
(comp.  ch.  xxxi.  20 ;  Hos.  ix.  10).  He  even
condescends  to  overlook  tho  weakness  and
inconsistency  of  tiie  Israel  of  antiquity.
He  idealizes  it  (i.e.  Jeremiah  is  permitted
to  do  so).  This  is  in  harmony  with  other
prophetic  passages  (see  Isa.  i.  2G  (**  as  at  the
first");  Hos.  xi.  1,  3,  4;  Ezek.  xvi.  6—14).
The  figure  of  the  bride  recurs  constantly  (see
Hos.  iL  19,  20 ;  Isa.  liv.  4,  5 ;  Ezek.  xvi.  8).
Thine  espousals;  rather,  thy  bridal  state.
When  thou  wentest  alter  me  (comp.  Deut.
viii.  2,  "all  the  way  which  Jehovah  thy


JH.II.1— 37.]  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.


23


Qod  led   thee  these   forty  years   in  the
wilderness  ").

Yer.  3. — Israel  was  holiness,  etc.  Israel
was  a  consecrated  people  (comp.  Exod.  xix.
5,  6 :  Dent  Yii.  6 ;  xiv.  2 ;  xxvi.  19).  Isaiah,
fond  as  he  is  of  the  phrase  **  Israel's  Holy
One,"  does  not  expressly  enforce  the  correla-
tiTC  trnth,  as  Jeremiah  does  here.  The  first-
fmits  of  his  increase ;  rather,  his  firstfruits
(if  increase.  Israel  is  compared  to  the  first-
frnits  (reshUh)  of  the  land,  which  were  do-
Toted  to  the  house  of  the  Lord  (Exod.  xxiii.
19;  Numb,  xviii.  12, 13).  So  in  Amos  vi.
1,  tiie  title  given  him  is  **  the  chief  [margin,
*  firstfruits  'j  of  the  nations  "  (in  ch.  xxxi.  7,
a  synonymous  and  cognato  word,  rosky  takes
the  place  of  reshlth  for  "  chief").  All  that
devour  him  shall  offend ;  rather,  all  that  ate
him  incurred  guilt,  or  became  guilty  of  a
trespass.  Foreigners  wore  forbidden  to  eat
of  consecrated  things;  by  breaking  this
law  they  became  guilty  of  a  "trespass,"
having  invaded  the  rights  of  Jehovah  (Lev.
xxiL  10,  15,  16).  The  word  for  "  trespass  "
is  tho  same  as  that  rendered  "  guilt."

Ver.  5. — "What  iniquity,  etc. ;  rather,  7chat
unrighteousness^  etc.  (comp.  Dent,  xxxii.  4,
**a  God  of  faithfulness,  and  without  un-
righteousness," alluding  to  the  "covenant"
between  Jehovah  and  Israel).  God's  con-
descending graco  (his  ^andvah,  Ps.  xviii.  3C).
As  if  he  were  under  an  obligation  to  Israel
(comp.  Micah  vi.  3,  etc. ;  Isa.  v.  3).  Vanity ;
i.e.  the  idols ;  literally,  a  breath  (so  ch.  x.
15 ;  xiv.  22 ;  xvi.  19).  Are  beoome  vain.  Tho
whole  being  of  man  is  affected  by  tho  want
of  solid  basis  to  his  religion  (comp.  ch.  xxiii.
16 ;  Ps.  cxv.  8) ;  and  the  evident  allusion  to
our  passage  in  Bom.  i.  21  (St.  Paul  has
ifx€naid>0'n(Tay,  as  Septuagint  here).  The
clause  is  verbally  repeated  in  2  Kings  xvii.
15,  with  reference  to  the  ten  tribes.

Yer.  6.— Neither  said  they,  etc ;  as  their
children's  children  were  forced  by  stress  of
trouble  to  say  (Isa.  Ixiii.  11 ;  see  note).  A
land  of  deserts  and  of  pits.  The  first  phrase
applied  to  tho  region  through  which  the
Israelites  passed  (**a  wilderness/')  was
▼ague,  and  might  mean  merelv  pasture-
land.  The  remainder  of  the  description,
however,  shows  that  "wilderness"  is  hero
meant,  as  often  (e.g.  Isa.  xxxv.  1 ;  1.  2),  in
the  sense  of  **  desert."  Though  recent
travellers  have  shown  that  the  Sinaitic
peninsula  is  not  by  any  means  universally
a  "  desert,"  and  that  in  ancient  times  it  was
still  less  so,  it  is  not  unnatural  that  an
ag^cultural  people  should  regard  it  as  a
most  inhospitable  region,  and  should  even
idealize  its  terrors  (comp.  Deut.  viii.  15).
"  Pits,"  i.e.  rents  and  fissures  in  the  soil,  in
which  the  unwary  traveller  might  lose  his
Ufe  (ch.  xviii.  20,  22).

Ver.  7.— A  plentiful  eonntry.  "  A  Carmcl


land,"  as  it  were  (so  Pavne  Smith).
<*  Oarmel "  is  strictly  an  appellative  nonn«
meaning  "garden-land,"  i.e,  land  planted
with  vines  and  other  choice  plants.  So  ch.
iv.  2G;  Isa.  xxix.  17;  xxxvii.  24.

Ver.  8. — The  priests,  etc.  The  blame
principally  falls  on  tho  three  leading  classes
(as  in  ver.  26;  Micah  iii.  11).    First  on  the

Eriests  who  "handle  tho  Law,"  i.e.  who
ave  a  traditional  knowledge  of  the  details
of  tho  Law,  and  teach  the  people  accordingly
(Deut.  xvii.  9—11 ;  xxxiii.  10 ;  ch.  xviii.  18 ;
see  also  on  ch.  viiL  8);  next  on  the  ''pastors,"
or  "shepherds  "  (in  the  Homeric  sense),  the
civil  and  not  the  spiritual  authorities;  so
generally  in  the  Old  Testament  (see  oh.  iii.
15 ;  X.  21 ;  xxii.  22 ;  xxv.  84 ;  Zech.  x.  8 ;  xi.
5,  8,  16;  Isa.  xliv.  28);  and  lastly  on  the
prophets,  who  sought  their  inspiration,  not
from  Jehovah  (comp.  note  on  ver.  30),  but
from  Baal.  To  prophesy  hy  (by  means  of)
Baal,  or  rather,  the  Baal,  implies  that  pro-
phecy is  due  to  an  impulse  from  tho  super-
natural world ;  that  it  is  not  an  objectifying
of  the  imaginations  of  the  prophet  himself.
Even  the  Baal  prophets  yielded  to  an  im-
pulse from  without,  but  how  that  impulse
was  produced  the  prophet  does  not  tell  us.
We  are  told  in  1  Kings  xxiL  19—23,  that
even  prophets  of  Jehovah  could  be  led
astray  by  a  "lying  spirit;"  much  more
presumably  could  prophets  of  the  Baal.
The  Baal  is  hero  used  as  a  representative
of  the  idol-gods,  in  antithesis  to  Jehovah;
sometimes  "Baalim,"  or  the  Baals,  is
used  instead  (e.g.  ver.  23 ;  ch.  ix.  13),  each
town  or  city  having  its  own  Baal  ("  lord  ").
Things  that  do  not  profit  A  synonym  for
idols  (comp.  ch.  xvi.  19;  Isa.  xliv.  9;  1
Sam.  xii.  21).  An  cnliglitcncd  regard  for
self-interest  is  encouraged  by  the  religion
of  the  Bible,  at  any  rate  educationally.
Contrast  Gomtism.

Ver.  9. — I  will  yet  plead,  etc.  Repeated
acts  of  rebellion  call  forth  repeated  objurga-
tions and  punishments.  With  your  ehildren'i
children.  For  God  "visits  the  iniquity  of
the  fathers  upon  the  children  "  TExod.  xx.  5).

Ver.  10. — Justification  of  Jehovah's  judi-
cial action  towards  Judah.  Consider  the
heinousness  of  tho  offienco.  Pass  over —
rather,  ^ss  over  ^o— the  isles  of  Chittbn ;
i.e.  the  islands  and  maritime  countries  of  the
West,  represented  by  Cyprus  (see  on  Gen.  x.
4).  For  the  wide  use  of  Clhittim,  comp.
Numb.  xxiv.  24 ;  Dan.  xi.  30).  Kedar,  in  tho
narrower  sense,  is  a  large  tribo  of  Arabian
origin,  whoso  haunts  were  between  Arabia
Petraa  and  Babylonia.  Hero,  however,  it
is  used  in  a  wider  sense  for  the  Arab  tribes
in  general  (so  ch.  xlix.  28 ;  Isa.  xxi.  10, 17^.

Ver.  11.— Hath  a  nation  ohanged  their
gods  t  Has  any  heathen  nation  ever  changed
its  idol-god  for  anotJier  9   The  prophet  clearly


24


THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,      [ch.  il  1— 37.


implies  a  negative  aiiBwer ;  and  yet  it  most
be  admitted  that  the  adoption  of  a  new  reli-
gion, under  the  pressure  of  conquest  or  a
higher  foreign  civilization  is  not  an  unknown
phenomenon  in  the  ancient  world.  Glory;
i.e.  source  of  all  outward  prosperity  (comp.
Ps.  iii.  3, "  my  Glory,  and  the  Lifter  up  of  my
head  '*).  Religion  was,  in  fact,  the  root  of
national  life  in  antiquity ;  contrast  our  own
division  between  the  sacred  and  the  secular  !
Jehovah  elsewhere  receives  the  title  *'the
Pride  of  Israel " — Authorized  Version,  rather
weakly,  "  the  Excellency  of  Israel  "—-(Amos
viii.  7 ;  Hos.  v.  5.  Comp.  the  parallel  pas-
sages, Ps.  cvi.  20 ;  Rom.  i.  23).

Yer.  12.— Be  astonished.  *'Be  appalled"
would  more  nearly  express  the  force  of  the
Hebrew  (so  ch.  xviii.  16 ;  xix.  8).  Be  ye  very
desolate;  literally,  become  dry;  i.e.  not  so
much  **  shrivel  and  roll  up  "  (on  the  analogy
of  Isa.  xxxiv.  4),  as  '*  bccomo  stiff  witli
horror."

Ver.  13. — Two  evils.  Israel  has  not  merely
offended,  like  the  heathen,  by  idolatry,  but
by  deserting  the  only  God  who  can  satisfy
the  needs  of  human  nature.  The  fountain
of  living  waters.  So  ch.  xvii.  13  (comp.  Ps.
zxxvi.  9).  Fountain  ;  literally,  tank  or  reser-
voir. Such  reservoirs  were  **dug  in  the
ground  (see  on  ch.  vi.  7),  and  chiefly  intended
for  storing  living  waters,  i.e.  those  of  springs
and  rivulets"  (Payne  Smith).  Cisterns,
broken  oistems.  A  cistern,  by  its  very  na-
ture, will  only  hold  a  limited  amount,  and
the  water  "  collected  from  clay  roofs  or  from
marly  soil,  has  tho  colour  of  weak  soap-
suds, the  taste  of  the  earth  or  the  stable."
Who  would  prefer  such  an  impure  supply  to
the  sweet,  wholesome  water  of  a  fountain  ?
But  these  cisterns  cannot  even  be  depended
upon  for  this  poor,  turbid  drink.  They  are
"oroken,"  like  so  many  even  of  the  best
rock-hewn  cisterns  (Thomson,  *Tho  Land
and  the  Book,*  p.  287).  How  fine  a  descrip-
tion of  the  combined  attractiveness  and  dis-
appointlngness  of  heathen  religions,  qualities
the  more  striking  in  proportion  to  tne  scale
on  which  tho  religious  problem  is  realized
(e.q.  in  Hinduism)  I

Vers.  14 — 19. — IsraeTs  punishment  and  its
cause.

Ver.  14.— Is  Israel  a  servant  t  The  speaker
is  evidently  tho  prophet,  who  exclaims  in
surprise  at  the  view  which  his  prophetic  in-
sight opens  to  him:  ** quasi  de  re  nov&  et
absurd&  sciscitatur  "  (Calvin).  For  Israel  is
a  member  of  Jehovah's  family ;  be  is  not  a
servant  (except  in  the  same  high  sense  as  in
Isa.  xl. — liii.,  where  *'  servant "  is  virtually
equivalent  to  **  representative  "),  but  rather
in  the  highest  degree  a  free  man,  for  he  is
Jehovah's  "firstborn  son"  (Exod.  iv.  22).
How  is  it,  then,  that  he  is  dragged  away  into
captivity  like  a  slave  who  has  never  Imown


freedom  ?  The  view  of  some,  that  "^servant "
means^"  servant  of  Jehovah  "  (comp.  ch.  xxx.
10),  and  that  the  question  therefore  is  to  be
answered  in  the  amrmativc,  is  less  natural.
"Servant,"  by  itself,  never  has  this  turn-
in;:^;  and  there  is  a  prcciselv  similar  term
in  the  discourse  at  ver.  31,  where  the  nega-
tive answer  of  the  question  does  not  admit
of  a  doubt.

Ver.  15. — ^The  young  lions,  etc.  A  fresh
figure,  and  a  most  natural  one  in  JudsDa
(comp.  1  Sam.  xvii.  34) ;  already  applied  to
the  Assyrians  by  Isaiah  (v.  29,  30).  Burned ;
rather,  made  ruinous  (oomp.  ^*  ruinous
heaps,"  2  Kings  xix.  25).

Ver.  IC. — Also  the  ohildren  of  Noph,  etc.
This  is  the  climax  of  the  calamity.    Noph,
called  Moph  in  the  Hebrew  text  of  Hos.  ix.
C,  is    generally  identified   with    Memphis
(after  tho  Septua^nt),  which  was  called  in
tho    inscriptions    Mennufr,  or    "the  good
abode,"  but  may  possibly  be  Napata,  the
Nap  of  the  inscriptions,  the  residency  of
the  Ethiopian  dynasty  (Do  Roug(5).     Taha-
panes.    Tho  Hebrew  form  is  Takhpanes  or
Tahkpanhhes.      This  was  a  fortified  fron-
tier   town    on    the    Pelusiot    arm    of   the
Nile,  called  in  Greek  Daphnsa  (Herod.,  ii.
20),  or  Taphno)  (Septuagint  here).     Have
broken,  etc. ;    rather,   shall  hreaJCf  or    (for
the  pointing  in  the  Hebrew  Bible  requires
this  change)  shall  feed  off  (or  depasture).
From  this   verse   onwards,  Judah  is  per-
sonified as  a  woman,  ns  appears  from  the
suffixes  in  the  Hebrew.     Baldness  was  a
great  mark  of  disgrace  (2  Kings  iL  23 ;  ch.
xlviii.  45).    There  is  a  striking  parallel  to
this  passage  in  Isa.  vii.  18—20,  where,  in
punishment  of  the  negotiations  of  Ahaz  with
Assyria,  the  prophet  threatens  an  invasion
of  Judah  both  by  Assyria  and  by  Egypt,  and
employs  the  very  same  figure  (see  ver.  20).
So  here,  the  devastation  threatened  by  Jere-
miah is  the  punishment  of  the  unhallowed
coquetting  with  the  Egyptian  power  of  which
the  Jewish  rulers  had  been  recently  guilty.
The  fact  which  corresponds  to  this  predic-
tion is  the  defeat  of  Josiah  at  Megiddo,  and
the    consequent  subjugation    of  Judah  (2
Kings   xxiii.    29).      Tho   abruptness  with
which  ver.  16  follows  upon  ver.  15  suggests
that  some  words  have  fallen  out  of  the  text.
Ver.  17. — Hast  not  thou  procured  thist
rather,  Is  it  not  this  that  doth  procure  it  unto
thee  (namely)  that  thou  hast  forsaken,  etc.  ?
or,  Is  it  not  thy  forsaking  Jehovah  that  pro'
cureth  thee  this  9    When  he  led  thee  by  the
way.     The  prophet  thinks,  perhaps,  of  tho
rebellion  of  the  forefathers  of  Israel,  who
too  soon  ceased  to   "go   after"   Jehovah
(comp.  ver.  2),  and   whose  fickleness  was
imitated  but  too  well  by  their  descendants.
This  view  is  favoured  by  the  phraseology  of
Dent.  i.  33;  viii.  2, 15.     But  we  may,  if  we


CH.  II.  1—37.]  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.


25


prefer  it,  explain  ''by  (or,  rather,  in)  the
way,"  on  the  analogy  of  the  promise  in  ch.
zxxL  9,  *'  I  will  lead  them  ...  in  a  straight
way/'  i.e.  I  will  gprant  them  an  nnintermpted
course  of  prosperity.  Tlie  omission  of  the
adjectiTO  in  the  present  passage  may  be
paralleled  by  Ps.  xxy.  8,  ^  Therefore  will  he
instruct  sinners  in  the  (right)  way."

Ver.  18.— What  hast  thou  to  do  in  the  way
of  Egypt!  rather,  vnih  the  way  to  Egypt.
Isaiah  (xxx.  2—5 ;  xxxL  1)  and  Hosea  (vii
11,  16)  had  already  inveighed  against  an
Egyptian  alliance.  The  name  given  by
Manasseh  to  his  son  and  successor  (Amon)
suggests  that  at  one  period  in  his  reign  an
Egyptian  policy  was  in  the  ascendant,  which
coincides  with  the  tradition  preserved  in  2
Chron.  xxxiii  11,  of  an  Assyrian  captivity
of  Manasseh.  Jehoiakim  at  a  later  period
was  a  vassal  of  Egypt  (2  Kings  xxiii.  31,
35).  To  drink  the  waters;  taking  up  the
idea  of  the  second  clause  of  ver.  13.  Bihor,  or
Shihor,  occurs  again  in  Isa.  xxiiL  3,  as  a
name  of  the  Nile.  It  properly  means,  not
so  much  "  the  black "  as  *'  the  dark  grey  "
(connected  with  ihdkhar,  the  morning  grey),
from  the  colour  of  the  water.  Bosenmiiller's
contrast  between  the  muddy  waters  of  foreign
streams  and  the  ^  fountain  of  living  waters  "
is  uncalled  for ;  besides,  the  Nile  water  has
always  been  held  in  high  esteem.  The
Septuagint  has  Tf\^Vy  i.e.  Gihon,also  a  name
of  the  Nile  according  to  Ecclus.  xxiv.  27.
The  way  of— rather,  to— Asiyria.  It  is  true
that  Assjrria  was,  to  say  the  least,  powerless
to  interfere  for  good  or  for  evil,  when  these
words  were  written.  But  in  ver.  5  the  pro-
phet has  already  warned  us  that  his  com-
plaints are  partly  retrospective.  It  would
seem  that  the  Assyrian  party  from  time  to
time  gained  the  upper  hand  over  the  Egyp-
tian in  the  councils  of  the  State.  Or  per-
haps the  prophet  may  refer  to  the  Quixotic
fidelity  to  Assyria  of  Josiah  (see  below  on
ver.  36).  The  river;  i.e.  the  Euphrates,
"  the  great  river  "  (Gen.  xv.  18).  Babylonia
it  should  be  remembered,  was  in  nominal
subjection  to  Assyria;  the  Euphrates  was
the  boundary  between  Syria  and  Palestine
on  the  one  hand,  and  Assyria — hero  the
Assyrio-Baby Ionian  region^-on  the  other.

Yer.  19. — Shall  eorreot  .  .  .  shall  reprove ;
rather,  chastiee . . .  punUh.  It  is  a  constantly
renewed  punishment  which  follows  the  ever-
repeated  offence.

Ver.  20. — Here  a  new  section  begins.  I
have  broken  .  .  .  burst  This  is,  grammati-
cally, a  possible  rendering,  but  inconsistent
with  the  second  person  in  thou  saidst,  unless
indeed  (with  Ewald)  we  suppose  that  some-
thing has  fallen  out  of  the  text  between  the
first  and  the  second  clauses  of  the  verse.  The
best  critics,  except  Ewald  and  Dr.  Payne
Smith,  are  agreed  that  we  should  follow  the


Septuagint  and  Vulgate  in  rendering  ^  thou
hast  broken  .  .  .  (and)  burst."  This  does
not,  strictly  speaking,  imply  a  new  reading
of  the  text,  for  ti  was  the  old  form  of  the
suffix  of  the  2nd  pers.  fem.  sing. ;  there  is  a
precisely  similar  case  in  Micah  iv.  13.  It  is
a  true  description  of  the  history  of  Israel  be-
fore the  exile.  It  would  almost  seem  as  if
there  was  a  fusion  of  two  races  among  the
Israelites,  and  that  the  smaller  but  nobler
stock  supplied  all  the  g^reat  men  in  the  sphere
of  religion ;  just  as  in  Florence,  most  of  the
men  who  have  illustrated  her  annals  bear
names  of  Teutonic  origin.  So  we  might
argue,  if  we  wished  to  explain  the  Biblical
history  from  purely  natural  causes.  But  God
(to  apply  the  Caliph  Omar's  words)  ^  knoweth
his  own."  Bands  (see  on  ch.  v.  5).  I  will  not
transgress.  This  is  the  tran^tion  of  the
marginal  reading  in  the  Hebrew  Bible,
which,  though  implied  also  in  the  Tar^um,
is  probably  a  conjecture  of  the  Jewish  critics.
The  text  reading  (also  that  of  the  Septuagint
and  the  Syriac)  is,  ^I  will  not  serve,"
(equivalent  to  **!  will  not  be  a  slave  any
longer").  Obviously  this  does  not  harmonize
with  the  rendering  ^  I  have  broken,"  etc.,  in
the  first  clause  (unless,  with  Dr.  Payne  Smith,
we  explain  **  I  will  not  serve "  as  virtualW
equivalent  to  '*I  will  still  serve  my  idol-
gods");  hence  the  Jewish  critics,  by  just
adding!  a  Kipcua  (Matt.  v.  18%  changed
"serve"  into  "transgress."  They  did  not
venture  to  alter  the  next  clause,  which,  quite
as  much  as  the  first,  presupposes  the  reading
<* serve"  (see  next  note).  When — rather,
for — ^npon  every  high  hUl,  etc.  Bare,  treeless
heights  were  favourite  spots  for  sacrifices,
especially  for  Bool ;  |^ves,  and  leafy  trees  in
general,  for  the  lascivious  rites  of  Asherah
and  Ashtoreth.  The  apparently  extreme
statement  of  the  prophet  is  not  to  be  mini-
mized. Travellers  still  tell  us  of  vestiges  of
ancient  and  doubtless  pre-Christian  idola-
trous worship  still  visible  on  almost  every
attractive  spot  in  the  open  country  in  Pales-
tine. Under  every  green  tree.  We  have  no
single  word  to  convey  the  "  fluid  "  meaning
of  this  expressive  word.  It  combines,  in  fao^
the  senses  of  pliant,  sappy,  leafy  (comp.  note
on  ch.  xi.  16).  Thon  wuiderest;  rather,  thou
wast  stretching  thyself  out,

Yer.  21. — A  noble  vine.  Jeremiah  means
the  choicest  kind  of  Oriental  vine,  called
sorek  (from  the  dark-red  colour  of  its  grapes),
and  mentioned  again  in  Isa.  v.  2.  The  figure
of  the  vine  is  one  endeared  to  us  by  its  asso-
ciation especially  with  our  Lord ;  it  was  en-
deared to  the  Jews  by  the  annual  festivities
of  the  vintage.  The  sacred  writers  are  never
afraid  of  its  palling  on  the  ear  by  repetition
(comp.  ch.  V.  10 ;  vL  9 ;  xii.  10 ;  lia.  v.  1 — 7 ;
xxviL  2,  3 ;  Ezek.  xvu.  6 ;  Ps.  Ixxx.  8—16).
A  right  seed ;  i.e.  a  vine-shoot  of  the  genuine


26


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,     [en.  n.  1-^7.


■ort.  "  Seed  "  for  **  Bhoot,"  as  in  Isa.  xvii.  1 1
(comp.  Tcr.  10).  The  degenerate  plant;
rather,  degenerate  shoote  (if  at  least  the  text
ie  right).

Ver.  22.— Kitre  does  not  mean  the  sub-
ttance  which  now  bears  that  name,  but
*' natron,"  a  mineral  alkali,  deposited  on  tho
shores  and  on  tho  bed  of  certain  lakes  in
Egypt,  especially  those  in  the  W&dy  Nat-
r(hi  (the  ancient  Nitria,  whence  came  so  large
a  store  of  precious  Syriac  manuscripts).  In
ancient  times,  this  natron  was  collected  to
make  lye  from  for  washing  purposes  (comp.
Prov.  XXV.  20).  Sope ;  rather,  potash  ;  the  cor-
responding vegetable  alkali  (comp.  Isa.  i.  25).
Thme  iniquity  is  marked.  So  Kimchi  and
Gesenius  (through  a  doubtful  etymology) ;
but  tho  Aramaic  use  of  the  word  favours  the
rendering  stained,  i.e.  filtliy.  Tho  word  is
in  the  participle,  to  indicate  the  permanence
of  the  state  (comp.  **  Will  all  great  Neptune's
ocean  wash  this  blood,"  etc.  ?  *  Macbeth  *).

Yer.  23. — How  eanst  thou  say,  etc.  ?  This
is  not  a  mere  rhetorical  fiction  equivalent
to  "or  if  thou  shouldst  perhaps  say,"  but
probably  represents  an  objection  really  made
Dv  the  inhabitants  of  tho  kingdom  of  Judah.
Their  fault  was  not  in  neglecting  the  public
worship  of  Jehovah  in  his  appointed  temple,
but  in  superadding  to  this,  idolatrous  rites
inconsistent  with  tho  spiritual  religion
taught  by  Jeremiah.  Tho  people  did  not,
it  seems,  regard  this  as  tantamount  to  "fol-
lowing Baalim,"  just  as  some  converts  to
Christianity  in  our  own  foreign  missions
might  exclaim  against  being  accused  of
apostacy,  because  they  secretly  carry  on
certain  heathen  practices.  The  prophet,
however,  applies  a  more  rigorous  test  to
their  conduct  Baalim ;  the  plural  of  Baal,
nsed  for  **  other  gods"  (ch.  i.  16 ;  comp.  on
ver.  8).  Thy  way  in  the  valley.  The  valley
in  this  context  can  only  be  that  of  Hinnom
(see  on  ch.  vii.  31),  which  from  the  time
of  Ahaz  had  been  defiled  with  tho  rites
of  "Moloch,  horrid  king"  (see  'Paradise
Lost,'  i.  392— 39G).  Thou  art  a  swift  drome-
dary. Ewald  would  attach  this  half  of  tho
verse  to  ver.  24 ;  and  there  is  something  to
bo  said  for  this  plan.  Swift  dromedary  is,
properly  speaking,  in  the  vocative.  The
ardour  of  tho  people  for  idolatry  is  expressed
by  the  comparison  of  it  to  the  uncontrollable
instinct  of  brute  beasts.  Tho  word  rendered
•*  dromedary  "  is  in  the  feminine  gender ;  it
means  strictly  the  young  she-camel  which
has  not  yet  had  a  foal.  TraYorsing  her
ways ;  rather,  interlacing  her  ways ;  i.e.  run-
ning backwards  and  forwards  at  the  impulse
of  passion.

Ver.  24.— A  wild  ass,  etc.  The  type  of
wildness  and  independence  (comp.  Gen.  xvi.
12 ;  Job  xxxix.  5—8).  That  snuffeth  up  the
wind;  to  cool  the  heat  of  her  passion.    In


her  occasion  ...  in  hor  month ;  i.e.  at  the
pairing-time.

Ver.  25.— Withhold  thy  foot,  etc.  Hitzig,
with  unnecessary  ingenuity,  explains  this
with  reference  to  the  fatiguing  practices  of
the  heathen  oultus,  comparing  1  Kings  xviii.
26,  where  "vain  repetitions"  of  "Baal,  Baal,"
and  (as  he  thinks)  barefoot  religious  dances,
are  mentioned  as  parts  of  the  worship  of
Baal.  Umbreifs  view,  however,  is  far  more
natural.  "God  the  true  husband  exhorts
Israel  not  to  run  barefoot,  and  with  parched
throat,  like  a  shameless  adulteress,  after
strangers"  (Payne  Smith).  There  is  no
hope;  i.e.  the  exhortation  is  in  vain  (so  ch.
xviii.  12).

Ver.  26.— Is  .  .  .  ashamed.  It  is  the  per-
fect of  prophetic  certitude.

Ver.  27. — And  to  a  stone,  etc.  Stone  {^ehhen)
is  feminine  in  Hebrew,  and  therefore  ad-
dressed as  the  mother.

Ver.  28. — According  to  the  nnmber  of  thy
cities,  etc.  A  remarkable  statement,  and
ono  that  well  illustrates  tho  superficial
character  of  Hezekiah's  reformation.  True,
Manosseh's  reactionary  reign  had  intervened,
but  his  counter-movement  would  not  have
been  so  successful  had  it  not  been  attended
by  tho  good  wishes  of  tho  people;  and
besides,  tho  last  years  of  Manasseh,  accord-
ing to  tho  tradition  in  2  Chron.  xxxiii.
12 — 16  were  devoted  to  undoing  tho  mis-
chief of  his  former  life.  The  force  of  tho
prophet's  words  is  strikingly  brought  out  by
M.  Ronan  (he  led  an  expedition  to  Phco-
nicia),  who  has  shown  that  every  district
and  every  town  had  a  cultus  of  its  own,
which  often  only  differed  from  the  neigh-
bouring cultus  by  words  and  titles  (nomina,
numinn);  comp.  Baal-Hamon,  Baol-Hazor,
etc.  Dr.  Payne  Smith  well  expresses  tho
argument  of  Jeremiah :  "  When  every  city
has  its  special  deity,  surely  among  so  many
there  might  be  found  one  able  to  help  his
worshippers."

Ver.  29. — ^Wherefore  will  ye  plead  with
me  1  How  can  ye  be  so  brazen-faced  as  to
attempt  to  justify  yourselves  ?

Ver.  80.— Have  I  smitten  yonr  children.
The  cities  and  towns  of  Judah  aro  repre-
sented as  so  many  mothers,  and  tho  popu-
lations as  their  children.  It  would,  no
doubt,  be  more  natural  to  take  "  children  "
literally ;  but  then  wo  must  read  tho  verb
in  tho  next  clause,  "  Ye  have  received,"  as
the  Septuagint  actually  renders.  In  tho
former  case  tho  "  smiting  "  will  refer  to  all
God's  "sore  judgments" — ^sword,  drought,
famine,  pestilcnco ;  in  tho  latter,  to  the  loss
of  life  in  battle.  Tour  own  sword  hath
devoured  yonr  prophets  (comp.  2  Chron.
xxiv.  21 ;  2  Kings  xxi.  16).  Manasseh's  per-
secution (which  extended,  according  to
Josephus,  especially  to  the  prophets)  may  ac-


en.  n.  1—37.]  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.


27


count  for  the  preponderance  of  "  false  pro-
phets'' referred  to  in  ver.  8  (of.  Matt,  xxiii.  29).

Yer.  31.-^  goneratioii,  see  ye.  It  is
doubtful  whether  generation  hero  means
•* contemporaries"  (e^uiYalent  to  "men  of
this  generation  "),  or,  like  y^vti  sometimes  in
the  New  Testament,  a  class  of  men  united
by  moral  affinity  (comp.  Ps.  xiv.  5 ;  Ixxviii
8).  In  the  latter  case  we  should  rather
attach  the  pronoun  in  "  see  ye  "  to  "  O  gene-
ration," and  render  "O  (evil)  generation
that  ye  are  I "  So  Hitzig,  Keil,  and  Payne
Smith ;  Ewald  and  Delitzsch  adopt  the  first
rendering.  Have  I  been  a  wUdemess,  etc.  ?
**  Have  I  not  been  the  source  of  light  and
happiness  to  my  people,  and  of  all  temporal
blessings  ?  "  (comp.  ch.  ii.  6).  So  the  Divine
speaker  in  Isa.  xlv.  19,  **  I  said  not  unto  the
seed  of  Jacob,  Seek  yo  me  in  vnin,"  or  more
literally,  "  in  chaos"  (same  word  as  in  Gen.
i  2);  "chaos"  and  "the  wilderness"  are
both  images  of  that  which  is  utterly  unre-
munerative.  A  land  of  darlmess.  This  is,
of  course,  not  literally  accurate  as  a  descrip-
tion of  the  Arabian  desert.  "Darkness"  is
here  used  as  a  synonym  for  "misery."
Cloud  and  rain  occupy  precisely  opposite
places  in  the  estimation  of  nomadic  and
agricultural  peoples  respectively.  "The
Bedouins,"  says  an  Arabic  scholast,  "always
follow  the  rain  and  the  places  where  rain-
drops fall ; "  whereas  a  townsman  of  Mecca
calls  himself  **  child  of  the  sun."  So  Indra
and  Varuna,  originally  belonging  to  the
cloudy  and  rainy  sky,  are  in  the  Vedic
hymns  endowed  with  solar  traits.  It  should
be  added  here  that  it  is  an  old  problem,  and
too  difficult  a  one  for  us  to  investigate,
whether  we  should  render  "  the  darkness  of
Jah  "  (Jehovah)  or  (as  Authorized  Version)
simply  "  darkness."  The  former  rendering
will  mean  very  groat  darkness,  such  as
Jehovah  sends  in  judgment  (e.g,  to  the
Egyptians,  Exod.  x.  21—23).  On  this
question,  see  Dr.  Ginsburg  on  Cant.  viii.  6
(where  a  similar  doubt  exists),  Geiger's
*  Urschrift  und  Uebersetzungen  der  Bibel,*
p.  276 ;  Ewald,  *  Lehrbuch  der  Hebraischen
Bprache,'  §  270  c.  We  are  lords;  rather,
voe  have  broken  loose.  It  is,  however,  a  diffi-
cult word,  which  only  occurs  elsewhere  in
Gen.  xxvi.  40 ;  Hos.  xii.  1 ;  Ps.  Iv.  3.

Yer.  32.— Or  a  bride  her  attire.  The
prophet  perhaps  means  the  magnificently
adorned  girdle  which  the  bride  wore  on  her
wedding  day  (comp.  Isa.  xlix.  18).  But  the
word  only  occurs  again  in  Isa.  iii.  20,  and  its
precise  signification  is  uncertain.

Yer.  33. — ^Why  trimmest  thou  thy  way  1
rather,  How  well  thou  contrivest  thy  tmy,
etc.  ?  Therefore  hast  thou  also  taught,  etc.
The  meaning  which  floated  before  our  trans-
lators seems  to  be  this :  "so  utterly  immoral
is  thy  course  of  life,  that  even  the  worst  of


women  [*  wicked  ones '  is  in  the  femininel
have  been  able  to  learn  something  from  thee''
Cso  the  great  Dutch  scholar,De  Dieu,in  1548).
But  a  more  natural  rendering  is,  "  There-
fore [i.e.  to  gain  thine  ends]  thou  hast
accustomed  thy  ways  to  those  evil  thinps."
Nemo  repente  fuii  iurpimmun.  It  required
a  deliberate  "  accustoming,"  or  **  training  "
(such  is  the  literal  meaning  of  Ummad),  to
produce  such  a  habit  (t^is)  as  is  here  re-
Duked.

Yer.  34.— Also  in  thj  skirts,  etc.;  or,
there  ii  even  found  in  thy  skirts  (or,  perhaps,
in  thy  sleeves — the  wide  sleeves  of  an  Eastern
mantle).  The  fact  which  follows  is  adduced
as  the  crowning  evidence  of  wickedness.
Blood  of  the  bojSb  is  explained  by  the  state-
ment in  Lev.  xvii.  11,  "The  soul  of  the
flesh  [i.e.  of  the  body]  is  in  the  blood ; "  hence
the  importance  of  the  blood  in  the  Mosaic
sacriflces.  The  historical  reference  of  this
passage  of  Jeremiah  may  well  be  to  the  per-
secution of  Manasseh,  who  is  said  to  havo
"  shed  innocent  blood  very  much  "  (2  Kings
xxi.  10).  It  is  Judah,  no  doubt,  who  is
addressed,  but  tho  prophets  mostly  assume
the  "  solidarity "  of  king  and  people
(analogous  to  that  of  a  forefather  and  nis
posterity);  Manasseh,  moreover,  probably
nad  the  support  of  a  large  section  of  the
population,  at  any  rate  in  so  far  as  he
favoured  the  inveterate  cultus  of  the  high
places  or  local  sanctuaries.  I  have  not
found  it  by  secret  search;  rather,  thou  hast
not  found  them  hredking  through  (houses).
The  phraseology  agrees  with  that  of  Exod.
xxii.  2,  the  law  against  "breaking  through ;"
it  suggests  that  the  houses  of  all  but  the
highest  class  in  ancient  as  well  as  often  in
modem  Palestine,  were  made  of  mere  sun-
dried  brick,  which  could  be  easily  ''dug
into"  (comp.  Ezek.  xiL  5 ;  Matt  vi.  19,  20,
in  the  GreekV  [Lieut  Conder  states,  it  is
true,  that  in  hilly  districts  of  Palestine  the
houses  of  the  villages  are  built  of  stone,  but
he  adds  that  the  stone  is  simply  taken  from
tho  ruins  of  tho  ancient  towns.]  Burglars
caught  in  the  act  might  be  kUled  (£&od.
xxii.  2),  but  the  innocent  victims  of  persecu-
tion could  not  be  brought  under  this  category,
and  hence  those  who  slow  them  were  zeally
guilty  of  murdor.  But  upon  all  these;
rather,  hut  because  of  all  these  things ;  Le.
not  for  any  crime,  but  becauso  oi  thine
apostasy  and  zeal  for  the  false  gods  ("  these
things,"  as  in  ch.  ilL  7) ;  so  Uitzig,  Eeil»
Payno  Smith ;  less  naturally  Do  Dicu,  "  be-
cause of  those  false  gods."

Ver.  35. — Because.  This  "because"  is
misleading ;  there  is  no  argument,  but  tho
statement  of  a  supposed  fact.  The  particle
so  rendered  merely  serves  to  introduce  the
speech  of  the  Jews  (like  5ti).  Shall  turn ;
rather,  hath  turned.     Judah  had  so  long


28


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,     [en.  il  1-37.


been  undifltorbcd  by  any  foreign  power,  that
tho  people  fancied  the  promiseB  of  Deute-
ronomy  were  being  fulfilled,  and  that  they,
on  their  part,  had  pleased  God  by  their
formal  obedience  (comp.  2  Kings  xxii.  17).  I
will  plead  with  thee.  Here,  as  in  some  other
passages  (e.g.  Isa.  Ixvi.  16 ;  Ezek.  xzxviii.  22),
the  word  includes  the  sense  of  punishing.

Yer.  36.— Why  gaddest  thou  about  bo
mnoh— many  render.  Why  runnest  thou  so
qtUcklp;  but  the  verb  simply  means  to
"go,"  and  it  is  enough  to  refer  to  foreign
emlMissies,  such  as  are  alluded  to  in  this
very  chapter  (vcr.  18)— to  change  thy  way  1
The  "way"  or  policy  of  Judoh  was
"  changed,^  according  as  the  party  in  power
favoured  an  Egyptian  or  an  Assyrian
alliance.  Thou  idso  ihalt  be  ashamed  of;
rather,  thou  shall  also  he  hrotight  to  shame
throtigk.  As  thou  art  ashamed  of  Assyria
(correct  rendering  as  before).  This  is
certainly  difficult,  for  in  the  reign  of  Josiah
it  would  appear  that  the  political  oonnection


with  Assyria  still  continued.  Is  it  possible
that  Jeremiah,  in  these  words,  has  in  view
rather  the  circumstances  of  Jehoiakim  than
those  of  Josiah?  Does  he  not  appear  to
look  bock  upon  Judah*s  final  "  putting  to
shame  through  Assyria  "  as  a  thing  of  the
past  ?  And  to  what  event  can  this  expres-
sion refer  but  to  the  overthrow  of  Josiah  at

Meffiddo(soGraO?

Ver.  37. — ^From  him;  t.e.  from  Egypt,  per-
sonified as  a  man  (so  whenever  a  people  is
referred  to;  a  land  is  represented  as  a
woman).  Egypt  was,  in  fact,  the  only  great
power  capable  of  assisting  Judah  at  this
time  (see  Introduction);  yet  even  Egypt,
the  prophet  says,  shall  disappoint  her
Jewish  allies,  for  Jehovah  has  r^eoted  thy
confidences  (t.e.  the  objects  of  thy  confi-
dence). As  a  matter  of  fact,  "  the  King  of
Egypt  came  not  again  any  more  out  of  his
land"  after  Necho's  crushing  defeat  at
Carchemish  (2  Kings  xxiv.  7;  oomp.  ch.
xxxvii.  5).


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1 — 3.— i?eco??ec/to««  of  the  happy  past.  It  is  pleasing  to  see  how  the  prophet
of  judgment  opens  his  first  oracle  with  touching  reminiscences  of  the  early  happy
relations  between  God  and  his  people.  Thus  the  young  man  connects  his  new  utter-
ances with  ancient  experience  and  the  old  well-tried  principles  of  spiritual  religion.
Thus,  too,  he  leads  the  way  from  thoughts  of  God's  g(X)dness  and  memories  of  early
devotion  to  a  right  condition  of  reflectiveness  and  tenderness  of  heart,  in  which  the
revelation  of  dark  truths'  of  the  future  will  be  less  likely  to  harden  his  hearers  in
rebellion  than  if  they  had  been  spoken  abruptly  and  harshly.

I.  Many  of  us,  like  the  Jews,  may  be  reminded  of  a  happy  past.  In  years
of  deepening  disappointment  the  sunny  days  of  youth  rise  up  to  memory  and  rebuke
the  cynical  mood  which  sorrow  is  too  ready  to  engender.  In  years  of  lessening
spirituality  the  holy  seasons  of  early  devotion  may  be  recalled  to  mind  to  startle  us
out  of  our  self-complacency.  It  is  well  to  reflect  upon  such  a  past  history  as  that  of
the  Jews.  1.  This  was  marked  by  peculiar  blessings  on  GocTs  side.  (1)  It  was  a  time
when  God's  love  and  kindness  were  felt  with  all  the  fresh  receptiveness  of  youth ;  and
(2)  it  was  memorable  for  remarkable  Divine  protection  and  blessing.  2.  This  was
characterized  by  great  fidelity  on  the  side  of  Israel,  In  spite  of  frequent  murmurings
and  rebellions,  the  age  of  the  Exodus  had  been  the  heroic  age  of  Israel's  national  and
religious  history.  (1)  The  people  then  followed  God  with  affectionate  devotion  ;  they
"  went  after  him."  (2)  They  consecrated  themselves  in  purity  and  in  service ;  "  Israel
was  consecrated  unto  the  Lord."  (3)  They  were  the  earliest  true  servants  of  God —
God's  "  firstfruits."  Yet  the  first  may  become  last  (Matt.  xx.  16).  (4)  This  devotion
was  witnessed  under  trying  circumstances.  It  was  "  in  the  wilderness,  in  a  land  that
was  not  sown."  God's  love  is  sometimes  most  manifest  when  outward  circumstances
are  most  distressing,  and  men  are  often  more  faithful  to  God  in  the  wilderness  than  in
the  land  flowing  with  milk  and  honey.  What  a  strange  irony  of  history  is  this,  that
though,  while  passing  through  the  wilderness,  the  people  looked  forward  to  their  happi-
ness in  the  possession  of  the  promised  land,  after  they  have  had  long  possession  of  it
they  are  led  to  look  back  on  those  early  homeless  wanderings  as  containing  the  most
blessed  age  of  their  existence  I  But  true  happiness  is  ever  found,  not  in  external  comfort,
but  in  spiritual  blessedness.  Can  we  recollect  early  days  when  the  battle  of  life  was
hard,  and  we  longed  for  the  ease  which  came  with  success,  and  now  see  that  there,  in
that  hard  battle,  our  best  days  were  lived,  our  true  blessedness  was  realized  ?  Such  a
memory  must  be  full  of  pathetic  suggestions.


CH.  n.  1—37.]  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.         29


II.  The  BEOOLLEcnoN  of  ▲  happy  past  is  profitable.  1.  Ood  remenibert  the  poii.
Not  like  tho  sour  censor  who  remembers  only  our  past  faults,  but  rather  like  the  kind
parent  who  delights  to  call  to  mind  the  goodness  of  his  children's  early  days,  God
makes  no  mention  of  the  sins  of  the  wilderness  life,  but  dwells  graciously  on  its  happy
features.  God  remembers  our  past  for  our  good :  (1)  as  a  link  of  affection  after  suose-
quent  sin  has  driven  us  from  him ;  (2)  as  an  ideal  to  which  he  would  bring  us  back ;
and  (3) — still  for  our  good— as  a  standard  by  which  to  measure  our  present  condition,
and  a  just  ground  for  wholesome  chastisement.  2.  We  are  to  recollect  our  happy  past,
Israel  is  reminded  of  his  early  days.  If  we  have  "  lost  our  first  love,"  it  is  well  that
we  should  know  this  :  (1)  that  we  may  see  how  far  we  have  fallen,  and  repent  (Rev.  ii.
4,  5) ;  (2^  that  the  recollection  of  the  blessedness  of  early  devotion  may  revive  the
longing  for  its  return ;  (3)  that  the  consciousness  that  this  was  once  attained  m^
encourage  us  to  believe  that  it  is  a  possibility,  and  therefore  may  be  attained  asain.  In
conclusion^  note :  1.  It  is  foolish  simply  to  regret  the  happy  past.  The  use  of  memory
is  not  to  give  to  us  profitless  melancholy,  but  to  lead  us  actively  to  do  better  for  the
future.  2.  It  is  a  mistake  for  us  to  seek  simply  to  regain  the  lost  past,  because  (IS  this
is  gone  irrevocably,  (2)  the  new  age  rea  uires  new  forms  of  life,  and  (3)  we  shomd  seek
better  things  in  the  future.  The  second  Adam  is  better  than  the  first  Adam  before  the
fall.  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  more  glorious  than  the  garden  of  Eden.  The  ripe
Christian  is  higher  in  the  spiritual  life,  though  he  may  have  fallen  in  the  past,  than
the  innocent  child  who  has  never  known  evU  but  has  not  experienced  the  discipline
of  life.

Vers.  6—7. — The  ingratitude  of  sin.  Of  the  many  aspects  imder  which  sin  may  bo
viewed  none  is  more  sad  than  that  of  ingratitude  to  God.  Every  act  of  sin  is  a  distinct
act  of  ingratitude ;  for  every  such  act  is  an  offence  against  him  who  has  shown  to  us
nothing  but  love,  and  from  whom  we  are  taking  innumerable  favours  in  the  very  moment
of  our  transgression.

I.  The  INaBATITUDE  OF  SIN  IS  SEEN  IN  THE  FORGETFULNESS  OF  God's  8AVIN0  MEBCT.

So  the  Israelites  forget  the  glorious  deliverance  from  l^gypt^  and  preservation  amidst
the  horrors  of  the  wilderness  (ver.  6).  God  is  resorted  to  in  distress  only  to  be  ignored,
forsaken,  insulted,  directly  rebelled  against,  when  he  has  effected  a  deliverance.

IL  The  ikobatitude  of  sin  is  seen  in  the  ignobino  of  the  pbesent  goodness  of
God.  (Ver.  7.)  The  Israelites  were  eating  the  fruit  of  the  good  land  which  God  had
given  to  them  while  they  were  rebelling  against  him.  This  is  even  worse  than  in-
gratitude for  past  blessings.  Such  ingratitude  might  attempt  to  plead  the  excuse  of
failure  of  memory ;  ^but  ingratitude  for  present  mercies  can  only  arise  from  gross
spiritual  blindness  or  wilful  disregard  of  all  claims  of  justice  and  affection.

III.  The  ingbatitude  of  sin  is  seen  in  the  false  chabacteb  which  is  ascbibed
to  God.  God  asks,  "  What  unrighteousness  have  your  fathers  found  in  me  ?  "  The
conduct  of  the  Jews  was  a  direct  indictment  of  the  character  of  God.  They  deliberately
insulted  him,  and  rejected  him  for  heathen  deities.  Such  conduct  could  only  be
justified  by  the  discovery  that  he  was  not  what  he  claimed  to  be.  After  God  has
revealed  himself  to  men  in  myriadfold  evidences  of  goodness,  there  are  some  who  hold,
if  they  do  not  confess  to,  such  evil  conceptions  of  his  character  as  amount  to  the
basest  calumnies  of  heartless  ingratitude.

IV.  The  ingbatitude  of  sin  is  seen  in  the  chabacteb  of  the  gods  who  abb
pbefebbed  to  Jehovah.  These  are  "  false  "  gods.  Jews  who  knew  that  converted
religious  worship  into  an  unreality,  and  thus  became  themselves  hollow  and  unr^.
For  this  miserable  result  did  they  forsake  the  GKxl  of  heaven  and  earth,  their  Saviour
and  constant  Bene£eu;tor  I  If  they  had  found  a  rival  with  some  pretensions  to  worth
the  insult  would  have  been  less.  Herein  is  the  grossness  of  the  insult  to  God  seen  in
all  sin.  What  do  men  prefer  to  him  ?  Transient  pleasures,  earthly  dross.  Tho  pearl
of  great  price  is  flung  away,  not  for  a  smaller  pearl,  but  for  dust  and  ashes.

Y.  The  ingbatttxtde  of  bin  is  seen  in  the  abuse  and  cobbuption  of  God's  gifts.
GK)d  gave  the  Israelites  "  garden-land,"  and  they  defiled  it ;  they  made  God's  heritage
an  alx)mination.  When  we  sin  we  do  so  by  employing  the  very  powers  which  God
has  bestowed  upon  us.  We  insult  him  by  turning  his  own  gifts  into  weapons  of
rebellion.    We  blaspheme  him  with  the  tongue  which  he  has  made.


30  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,  [ch.  ii.  1— 37.

Ver.  8. —  Wickedjiess  in  leading  men,  Tho  great  indictment  of  Israel  reaches  its
climax  in  the  accusation  of  the  leaders  of  the  people.  Even  the)-  who  should  have  been
the  guardians  of  truth  and  tho  vindicators  of  right  have  turned  aside  to  evil  ways.
After  this  the  defection  of  tho  whole  nation  appears  utter  and  hopeless.  Wo  have  hero
an  instance  of  tho  terrible  condition  into  which  a  country  has  fallen  when  its  leaders,
its  teachers^  its  responsible  civil  and  religious  authorities^  are  unfaithful  to  their  mission
and  set  examples  of  wickedness.

I.   CJONSIDKB  THE  8IQN8  0F  WICKEDNESS  IN  LEADING  MEN.     1.   Those  are  ofton  UDreCOg-

nized  until  the  evil  has  wrought  disastrous  effects.  For  there  arc  circumstances  which
make  them  diflScult  to  detect,  viz :  (1)  JUxternal  propriety.  Tho  priests  still  minister
at  tho  altar,  tho  Law  is  still  slavishly  observed  in  ceremonial  details,  rulers  still  exerciso
authority,  prophets  still  write  and  preach  in  orthodox  language,  and  on  tho  outside  all
things  go  on  respectably,  while  [there  is  rottenness  hidden  within.  This  was  specially
the  case  after  the  reformation  of  Josiah,  when  an  outward  respect  for  religious  obser-
vances was  established  without  any  purification  of  heart  or  revival  of  spiritual  life.
(2)  Iteapectfor  authority.  Many  people  are  too  subservient  to  question  the  character
of  their  leaders.  They  would  rather  unite  with  their  rulers  in  crucifying  Christ  than
recognize  his  claims  against  the  authority  of  these  men.  They  do  not  judge  of  tho
character  of  their  leaders  by  any  standard  of  morals,  but  found  their  standard  of  morals
on  that  character.  2.  The  signs  of  wickedness  in  leading  men  may  be  detected  in  its
bearing  on  the  special  functions  of  their  respective  offices.  The  priests  are  the  temple
servants  of  Jehovah,  yet  they  never  seek  their  Master.  They  who  are  familiar  with
the  precepts  of  the  Law  know  nothing  of  the  person  and  will  of  tho  Lawmaker.  Tho
civil  rulers  who  are  ruling  under  a  theocracy  directly  transgress  the  Law  of  God.  Tho
prophets  lend  themselves  to  a  corrupt  source  of  inspiration.  So  now  again  we  may  see
men  abusing  tho  powers  of  office,  and  sinning  in  the  very  exercise  of  tho  responsi-
bilities which  aro  entrusted  to  them  for  the  sake  of  the  maintenance  of  right  and  truth.
Therefore  we  must  be  on  our  guard,  and  not  simply  follow  those  who  claim  to  lead
because  of  their  rank  or  office.  Men  of  leading  are  not  always  men  of  light.  Wo
must  **  try  tho  spirits"  (1  John  iv.  1),  and  judge  of  the  character  of  those  who  claim
to  lead  us  by  their  actions,  "  Ye  shall  know  them  by  their  fruits  "  (Matt.  vii.  16).

II.  Consider  the  peculiab  guilt  op  wickedness  in  leading  men.  1.  It  is  contrary
to  knowledge.  The  priests  handle  the  Law.  Men  of  influence  are  usually  in  a  position
to  learn  what  is  wise  and  good.  Teachers  of  religion  may  be  presumed  to  know  more
than  tho  average  of  men.  How  great,  then,  is  their  guilt  when  their  conduct  is  corrupt
(Rom.  ii.  21 — 23) !  2.  It  is  contrary  to  profession.  These  leaders  set  themselves  up  as
examples  to  others,  and  then  even  they  go  wrong.  They  who  assume  a  high  position
should  justify  that  position  by  manifesting  a  high  character.  More  is  expected  of  the
professed  Christian  than  of  the  confessed  man  of  the  world.  3.  It  is  an  abuse  of  great
responsibility.  If  men  wilfully  employ  positions  of  trust  as  means  of  violating  the  very
objects  of  those  trusts,  their  guilt  is  proportionate  to  the  privileges  they  have  received
and  tho  honours  they  have  accepted.  He  who  uses  a  Christian  pulpit  to  propagate
doctrines  subversive  of  Christianity  is  guilty  of  base  treason.

III.  Consider  the  injurious  effects  of  wickedness  in  leadiijo  men.  These  will
be  great  in  proportion  to  the  influence  of  the  men,  and  will  partake  of  the  special
characteristics  of  that  influence,  viz. :  1.  Breadth,  Leading  men  have  a  wide  influence,
and  the  seeds  of  evil  which  they  sow  will  be  widespread.  2.  Depth,  Leading  men
have  power  at  their  disposal.  Their  example  is  weighty.  3.  Subtlety,  Dignity,
prestige,  authority,  disguise  the  evil  which  would  be  recognized  if  it  were  stripped  of  the
pomp  of  office.  Therefore :  (1)  see  that  good  men  are  chosen  for  posts  of  influence,  and
let  the  selection  and  education  of  civil  and  religious  leaders  be  a  matter  of  more  prayer
and  thought  on  the  part  of  the  Church ;  and  (2)  be  not  too  ready  to  follow  with  blind
ob«iionce  those  who  may  be  in  high  positions.  Be  independent  and  watchful.  Follow
the  one  infallible  Leader,  "  the  Good  Shepherd,"  Christ.

Ver.  13.— 2?ro/ccu  cistenis,  I.  All  men  need  spiritual  refreshment.  The  soul
has  its  thirst  (Ps.  Ixiii.  1).  1.  This  is  natural.  We  are  bom  with  instincts  which
reach  out  to  tho  unseen,  and  the  worldly  habits  which  deaden  these  instincts  cannot
utterly  eradicate  them.    If  they  could,  we  should  cease  to  bo  men  and  become  merely


cH.n.1— 37.]  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  31


rational  brutes^  for  '*  man  is  a  religious  animaL"  2.  This  is  intensified  by  the  eac-
perience  of  life.  Thirst  is  increased  by  a  heated  atmosphere,  hard  work,  disease,  and
special  agents,  e,g.  salt  water ;  so  spiritual  thirst  is  deepened  by  the  heat  and  burden  of
life,  by  its  toil  and  battle,  by  the  fever  of  passion  and  the  weariness  of  sorrow,  by  the
poison  of  sin  and  the  disappointment  of  delusive  promises  of  satisfaction.  How
pathetic  is  this  picture  I  If  the  living  water  is  forsaken,  cisterna-*even  poor,  broken
cisterns,  with  scant  supply  of  foul  water,  are  resorted  to,  for  in  some  way  the  burning
thirst  of  the  soul  must  be  quenched.

JI.  Thet  who  fobsake  God  injube  theib  own  souls.  Hitherto  the  prophet  has
spoken  of  the  guilt  of  unfaithfulness.  He  now  speaks  of  the  loss  this  entails.  It  is
right  that  we  should  first  think  of  the  simple  sinfulness  of  our  sin,  for  this  is  its  most
important  feature.  But  it  is  profitable  to  consider  also  the  folly  of  it,  and  the  misery
that  it  must  bring  upon  us.  This  is  not  to  be  all  relegated  to  the  world  of  future
punishments.  It  is  to  be  felt  now,  and  would  be  felt  keenly  if  men  were  not  blind  to
their  own  condition.  As  godliness  has  the  promise  of  the  life  which  now  is  as  well  as
of  that  which  is  to  come,  so  ungodliness  brings  present  loss.  This  must  not  be  looked
for  in  the  direction  of  material  profit  and  loss,  of  bodily  pain  and  pleasure,  towards  which
the  Jew  was  too  much  inclined  to  turn  his  attention.  It  is  inward  and  spiritual,  yet  it
is  not  the  less  real.  For  the  spirit  is  the  self.  When  the  noise  of  the  world  is  stilled,
in  silent  watches  of  the  night,  in  lonely  hours  of  reflection,  does' not  the  poor  homelesa
soul  feel  some  sense  of  unrest,  some  vague  thirst  which  nojpleasure  or  possession  has
yet  satisfied  ?

III.  The'  injuby  abisiko  from  FonsAKrara  God  is  found  fibst  in  the  very  loss
OF  God.  God  is  more  to  us  than  all  his  gifts.  The  greatest  loss  of  the  prodigal
son  is  not  the  food  which  he  craves  for  in  the  land  of  famine,  but  the  father  whom  ho
lias  forsaken.  God  is  the  chief  source  of  the  soul's  refreshment.  Men  talk  of  the
duty  of  religion.  They  should  consider  its  blessings,  and  learn  to  seek  God  as  they
seek  their  bread  and  water — the  first  necessaries  of  life.  God  is  a  Fountain  of  living
water.  1.  His  refreshing  grace  is  ever  flowing,  and  in  great  abundance,  not  limited  in
quantity  as  that  of  the  largest  cistern  may  be  so  that  there  is  enough  for  all,  and  it
may  be  had  at  all  times.  2.  It  is  freshf  like  the  mountain  stream  bubbling  forth  cool
from  the  rock,  not  like  the  stale  waters  of  the  cistern.  "  He  giveth  more  grace "
(Jas.  iv.  6),  and  "  grace  for  grace  "  (John  i.  16).  The  Christian  does  not  have  to  go
back  to  the  grace  of  God  in  past  ages.  There  is  a  fresh  stream  now  flowing,  and  prayer
opens  to  us  fresh  supplies  of  the  love  and  help  of  God.  3.  It  is  wholesome  and  tn-
vigorating,  unlike  the  earthy  waters  of  the  cistern.  How  foolish,  then,  to  turn  aside
from  such  a  supply  for  anything !    We  need  no  better.

IV.  The  injuby  abising  from  forsaking  God  is  intensified  by  the  unbatis-
factoby  natube  of  the  substitutes  men  tubn  to.  1.  These  are  self -made,  God
makes  the  fresh  spring,  man  makes  the  cistern.  Can  our  work  equal  God's?  2.  They
are  limited  in  supply — reservoirs,  not  flowing  streams.  3.  They  are  often  impure  ;  the
cistern  soon  gets  impregnated  with  unwholesome  matter.  4.  They  are  imperfect  of  their
kind.  The  cisterns  are  broken ;  what  little  unwholesome  water  they  have  leaks
away.  All  these  characteristics  apply  to  the  waters  men  turn  to  in  preference  to  God
— e.g.  human  religion,  philosophy,  public  occupation,  social  distraction,  pleasure;
these  all  fail  to  slal^e  the  soul's  thirst.  '*  Cor  nostrum  inquietum  est  doneo  requiescat
in  te."

Ver.  19. — Sin  self-corrected,  I.  Sin  bbings  its  own  chastisement.  1.  Sin  reveals
its  evil  character  as  it  comes  into  existence,  and  is  no  sooner  completed  than  it  is
regarded  by  its  parent  with  disgust.  The  wicked  action  which  looks  attractive  in
desire  is  repulsive  to  reflect  upon,  llie  very  sight  and  thought  and  memory  of  sin
are  bitter.  The  burden  of  guilt,  the  shame  of  an  evil  memory,  the  sin  itself  is  thus  its
own  chastisement.  2.  Sin  naturally  produces  its  punishment.  The  penalty  of  sin  is  not
arbitrarily  adjudicated  nor  is  it  inflicted  db  extrd.  It  is  the  natural  fruit  of  sin.  It  is
reaping  what  we  have  sown  (Gal.  vi.  7,  8).  This  fruit  the  guilty  man  must  eat  as  his
bread  of  sorrows  (Prov.  i.  31).  Thus  intemperance  naturally  breeds  disease,  mental
degradation,  poverty,  and  dishonour.  Greedy  selfishness  brings  upon  a  man  dislike
and  provokes  retaliation.    Unfaithfulness  to  God  deprives  us  of  the  communion  of  his


82  THE  BOOK  OP  TUE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,     [ch.  n.  1— 37.

Spirit  and  tho  protoction  of  his  providenco.  We  have  to  wait  for  no  formal  sentence,
no  executioner.  The  law  within  us  carries  its  own  sentence,  and  is  its  own  executionerj
and  oven  as  wo  do  wrong  we  begin  to  bring  upon  ourselves  the  penalty  of  our  conduct.

II.  The  chastisement  of  sin  is  to  reprove  and  correct.  The  headache  of  the
morning  is  a  warning  to  the  drunkard  not  to  repeat  the  debauch  of  tho  night.  1.
Chastisement  corrects  by  bringing  us  to  our  right  mind.  It  sobers  a  man,  and  thus
helps  him  to  look  at  his  life  in  a  true  light.  2.  Chastisement  corrects  by  revealing  the
true  character  of  sin.  Its  charms  are  all  torn  off,  and  the  hideous  monster  is  revealed
in  its  naturally  hateful  shape.  Then  we  see  that  all  sin  involves  our  forsaking  God,
and  is  due  to  the  loss  of  respect  for  his  will^the  loss  of  the  "  fear  of  God  "  according
to  the  Old  Testament  view,  the  loss  of  love  to  Qtod  according  to  the  Christian  view.

III.  It  is  not  well  to  wait  for  the  corrective  influence  of  chastisement
BEFORE  REPENTiNa  OF  SIN.  I.  The  chastisement  may  be  a  terrible  experience  from
which  we  would  fain  shrink  if  we  knew  the  nature  of  it.  2.  Sin  is  evil  in  itself,  and
the  sooner  we  stay  our  hand  from  it  the  better  for  ourselves,  for  the  world,  and  for  the
honour  of  Qod,  It  is  better  not  to  fall  than  to  fall  and  be  restored.  3.  Crod  has  pro-
vided a  higher  means  than  chastisement  for  delivering  us  from  sin.  This  is  an  exercise
of  his  goodness  to  lead  us  to  repentance  (Rom.  ii.  4).  The  gospel  shows  us  how  Christ
can  save  us  from  our  sins  by  drawing  us  to  himself  and  constraining  us  by  his  love
to  walk  in  his  footsteps  of  holiness.

Ver.  22. — The  stains  of  sin,  L  Sin  stains  the  character  and  life  of  men.
1.  Sin  leaves  stains  behind  it  No  man  can  have  clean  hands  after  touching  it.  These
stuns  are  of  two  classes :  (I)  internal — the  soiled  imagination,  the  corrupted  will,  tho
TiUaied  habit  which  a  single  act  of  sin  tends  to  produce ;  and  (2)  external,  in  the  form
of  guilt  before  God,  and  lowered  reputation  in  the  sight  of  men.  2.  The  stains  of  sin
are  not  natural,  lliey  are  no  part  of  the  true  colour  of  a  man's  character.  They  are
all  contracted  by  experience.  3.  These  stains  are  all  evil  things.  They  are  not  like
marks  of  immature  development  or  of  the  necessary  imperfection  of  humanity.  They
are  products  of  corruption.

II.   No  MAN  can  wash  THE  GUILT  OF  SIN  FROM  HIS  CHARACTER.    (Ch.  xiii,   23.)     The

Jews  were  attempting  this  by  denying  the  offences  charged  against  them  or  excusing
thorn.  They  would  not  admit  their  apostacy ;  but  in  yain.  I.  Sin  cannot  be  undone.
We  cannot  recall  the  past.  History  is  unchangeable.  What  we  have  done  we  have
done.  2.  Sin  cannot  oe  hiddt%.  We  can  never  hide  it  from  God,  who  searches  tho
heart  (1  John  iiL  20).  We  cannot  long  or  perfectly  hide  it  from  man.  It  will  colour
our  livies  and  reveal  itself  in  action,  in  conversation,  in  countenance,  3.  Sin  cannot  bo
cwMSNi.  We  may  pcunt  to  our  training,  our  temptations,  our  natural  weakness,  our
ignoranoe ;  and  no  doubt  these  facts  are  important  as  determining  the  degree  of  our
guilt  (Luke  xxiiL  34).  But  the  sin  itself,  groater  or  less  as  it  may  be,  cannot  be
•xplained  away.  Our  ^ns  are  our  own  or  they  would  not  be  sins.  4.  Sin  cannot
be  egpktttd  by  as.  Sacrifice  is  of  no  real  avaiL  That  was  only  acceptable  as  a  symbol
and  type  of  God's  method  of  cleansing  ^n.  Penance  could  only  act  as  discipline  for
the  future ;  for  the  past  it  is  no  better  than  a  fruitless  sacrifice.  Future  goodness
cannot  atone  for  the  past;  for  that  is  required  on  its  own  account,  and  if  it  were
perfect  it  would  be  no  more  than  it  ought  to  be— we  should  still  be  *^  unprofitable


IIL  No  XAX  CAX  WASH  THE  STAUf  OF  IXDWELUXO  SIS  FROM  HIS  LITE.     Men  have

tried  all  methods ;  but  in  vain.  1.  Simple  d^terminaiion  to  conquer  it.  But  he  who
commits  sin  is  the  slave  of  sin  (John  viiL  34),  and  a  slave  who  cannot  emancipate
him»elt  The  worst  effect  of  sin  is  seen  in  the  corruption  of  the  will.  Hence  we
bare  not  the  pomier  to  reform  until  our  will  is  renewed,  i.e.  until,  in  New  Testament
lang:ua^  we  are  •  bom  again,*  2.  CTtan^  {/  external  drcumsfances.  This  is  a  helpful
acoosKirrof  more  effiectual  mea&s»  but  it  is  not  sufficient  in  itself,  because  ^  is  internal,
and  DO  ckanpf  of  sceiM  will  effect  a  change  of  heart,  A  man  may  cross  the  Atlantic,
Kat  be  will  he  the  same  being  in  America  that  he  was  in  England.  He  may  be  lifted
from  the  dunghill  to  a  throne,  but  if  he  had  a  vicious  nature  in  his  low  com^tion  he
will  canr  tbat  with  lum  to  his  new  sphere.  Base  metal  docs  not  become  gold  by  re-
cnvii^  tiie  gtunea^'s  stan^  Sanitarr  arrangements^  education,  reforming  infiuences>  etc.


CH.II.1— 37.]     THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  33

are  all  helpful,  but  none  are  fundamental  enough  to  effect  the  complete  change.    The
stains  are  too  ingrained  for  any  such  washing  to  remove  them.
IV.  In  the  gospel  of  Christ  we  mat  see  the  means  fob  cleansing  both  the

GUILT  of  CHABAOTEB  AND  THE  STAIN  OF  INDWELLING  BIN.      1.    OuUt  18   shoWU    tO  bo

removed  by  the  free  forgiveness  of  Ood  in  Christ,  for  no  merits  of  our  own,  but  for  the
sake  of  his  work  and  sacrifice ;  by  no  effort  of  ours,  but  on  condition  of  repentance  and
the  faith  which  trusts  him  as  our  Saviour,  and  submits  to  him  as  our  Lord  (Acts
X.  43).  2.  The  stain  of  indwelling  sin  is  shown  to  be  removed  by  the  renewal  of  our
nature,  so  that  we  are  bom  "  from  above  *'  and  "  of  the  Spirit "  (John  iii.  3 — 8),  and
become  new  creatures  in  Christ  by  means  of  the  same  faith  of  trust  and  submission
(2  Cor.  y.  17).

Vers.  35 — 37.— J^a?w  confidence,  I.  The  gbounds  of  false  confidence.  1.
Assumed  innocence,  Israel  says,  "  1  am  innocent ; "  "I  have  not  sinned."  This
assumption  may  result  from  (1)  self-deception,  or  (2)  hypocrisy.  2.  A  daim  to  be
favoured  by  God,  Israel  says  ag^,  "  His  anger  has  turned  from  me."  Present  peace
is  taken  as  a  warrant  for  expecting  continued  security,  so  that  the  very  forbearance  of
God  is  converted  into  an  excuse  for  presumption  and  iudifference.  Perhaps,  too,  pride
comes  in  and  cuds  the  assumption  that  the  guilty  people  are  special  favourites  of
Heaven  and  will  be  protected,  whatever  wrong  they  do.  This  was  the  mistake  of  the
contemporariesof  our  Lord  when  they  relied  on  the  mere  fact  that  they  were  Abraham's
children  (John  viiL  39).  3.  Trust  in  human  aid,  Judah  turned  first  to  Assyria,  and
then  to  Egypt.  So  men  look  to  worldly  associations  for  security  in  trouble.  4.  Be-
lianee  on  diplomatic  skiU.  Israel  turned  from  Assyria  to  Egypt  when  the  former  power
failed  and  the  latter  was  in  the  ascendancy.  Men  think  to  protect  themselves  by  their
own  ingenuity.

II.  The  failube  of  false  confidence.  The  reasons  of  this  may  be  noted :  1.  The
reality  of  sin.  This  is  not  the  less  real  because  it  is  denied.  God  still  sees  it.  It
still  bears  its  necessary  fruits.  2.  ITie  rejection  of  Ood,  Israel  turned  from  God  to  man.
How  then  could  he  expect  God's  continued  protection  ?  3.  Lack  of  principle,  Israel
turned  about  from  Egypt  to  Assyria.  There  was  no  settled  policy.  When  expediency
is  the  sole  guide  of  conduct  we  are  sure  to  be  landed  in  ultimate  failure.  4.  The  character
and/ate  of  the  human  objects  of  confidence.  These  were  rejected  by  God.  They  who
trust  them  must  share  their  doom.  It  is  always  vain  to  "  put  confidence  in  princes  "
(Ps.  cxviiL  9).  But  when  these  are  bad  men,  godless  men,  rejected  by  God,  the
consequences  of  trust  in  them  will  be  fatal.  We  are  always  involved  in  the  fate  of
what  we  trust  ourselves  to.  If  we  trust  to  the  world,  to  human  aid,  to  errors  and
fJEdsehoodo^  to  evil  things,  the  certain  overthrow  of  these  most  involve  us  in  its  ruin.

HOMILIES  BY  VABIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1—14.—^  stoeei  rememhrance  embittered ;  or  Divine  delight  turned  by  his
people's  ingratitude  into  Divine  distress.

I.  God  gbeatly  deliqhts  in  his  people's  love.  See  the  similitude  he  employs :
"  the  love  of  thine  espousals."  It  is  diflicult  for  us  to  recall  any  period  in  the  history
of  Israel  when  such  high  pnuse  as  this  was  merited  by  them.  For  it  is  of  their  love
to  (jod  rather  than  of  his  to  them — though  there  was  never  any  doubt  about  that —
that  the  prophet  is  here  speaking.  But  when  was  Israel's  love  at  all  of  such  devoted
and  intense  order  as  to  deserve  to  be  thus  spoken  of?  It  is  difficult  to  say.  And  he
that  knows  his  own  heart  will  be  slow  to  credit  himself  with  any  such  ardent  affection
as  is  spoken  of  here.  The  explanation  of  such  language  is  found  in  that  joyous  appre-
ciation by  God  of  all  movements  of  our  hearts  towards  him  which  leads  him  to  speak
of  our  poor  oflFerings  as  if  they  were  altogether  worthy  and  good.  Cf.  "  Lord,  when  saw
we  thee  an  hunted,  or  athjrst,"  etc.  ?  (Matt.  xxv.  44) ;  also  our  Lord's  estimate  of
the  widow's  two  mites ;  the  cup  of  cold  water  given  in  his  Name,  etc.  Still,  whilst
the  believer  is  compelled  to  confess  that  his  Lord's  loving  estimate  of  his  poor  service
and  affection  is  an  exaggerated  one,  it  is  one  which  is  nevertheless  founded  upon  a  very
blessed  fact    There  is  such  a  thing  as  the  child  of  God's  "first  love,**  when  our  delight

JEBEMIAH.  O


3i  THE  BOOK  OF  TIIK  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,     [ch.  ii.  1^37.

In  God  wns  intense,  real,  abiding ;  when  prayer  and  service  were  prompt  and  frequent
and  delightful.  Then  we  were  content  to  leave  the  world,  and  to  go  out  into  the
dreary  wilderness  if  but  our  God  led  the  way.  Then  there  was  not,  as  now  there  too
often  is,  a  wide  separation  between  our  religious  and  our  common  life ;  but,  as  vcr.  3
tells,  we  ourselves  and  all  we  had  were  counted  as  holy  unto  the  Lord.  We  sought
that  in  whatsoever  we  did  we  might  do  all  unto  the  glory  of  God.  Now,  such  service
is  a  delight  to  the  heart  of  God.  We  are  shown,  therefore,  that  we  can  add  to  or
diminish  the  joy  of  God.  Such  power  have  we.  And  the  Divine  appreciation  of  such
service  is  shown  by  his  anger  towards  those  that  in  anywise  hurt  his  servants.  "  All
that  devour  him,**  etc.  (ver.  3).  The  Book  of  the  Revelation  is  one  long  and  awful
declaration  of  how  the  Lord  God  will  avenge  his  saints.

IL  But  this  Divine  delight  has  become  Divine  distress.  The  remembrance  has
become  bitter.  The  cause  of  this  change  is  by  reason  of  his  people  having  forsaken
him.  As  is  the  joy  of  God  at  men's  hearts  yielding  to  him,  so  is  his  grief  at  their
unfaithfulness.  The  heart  of  Gx)d  is  no  figure  of  speech,  but  a  reality.  It  rejoices  in
our  love,  it  mourns  over  our  sin.  And  this  all  the  more  because  of  the  aggravation
attending  such  forsaking  him.  For :  1.  It  is  in  violation  of  solemn  vows  and  pledges
of  fidelity  which  we  have  given  him.  The  yielding  of  the  soul  up  to  God  is  likened
unto  the  espousal  of  the  soul  to  God.  At  the  time  we  made  our  surrender  we  joy-
fully confessed,  "Thy  vows  are  upon  me,  0  God:  0  my  soul,  thou  hast  said  uuto
the  Lord,  Thou  art  my  Lord."  Now,  to  go  back  from  God  is  to  violate  all  these  sacred
vows.  2.  And  whatever  departures  from  God  have  taken  place,  they  have  been  without
any  provocation  whatsoever,  Ver.  5,  "  What  iniquity  have  your  fathers  found  in  me  ?"
etc.  Has  lie  been  hard  with  us,  or  impatient,  or  unready  to  answer  prayer,  or  faithless
to  his  promise?  Can  any  who  have  forsaken  God  charge  him  so?  3.  And  such
forsaking  of  God  has  been  aji  act  of  base  and  shameful  ingratitude  (cf.  ver.  6).  God  had
l)i-ou;.'ht  Israel  up  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  etc.  And  he  had  brought  them  into  a
plentiful  country,  but  they  had  polluted  it,  etc.  (ver.  7).  All  men  are  under  a  vast  debt
of  gratitude  to  God,  even  the  heathen— so  St.  Paul  teaches  us — ^who  never  heard  his
Name.  But  how  much  more  vast  is  the  debt  of  those  who  have  "tasted  that  the
Lord  is  gracious,"  and  known  his  redeeming  love,  and  who  yet  "  turn  back  and  walk  no
more  with  him  **  1  4.  Such  departures  from  God  are  characterized  by  most  unheard-of
and  monstrous  foolishness,  Tne  prophet  in  contemplating  it  (ver.  12)  calls  on  the
lioavens  to  be  astonished,  etc.  For  such  conduct  was  unheard  of  (cf.  vers.  10,  11).
Idolatrous  nations  remained  true  to  their  gods,  though  they  were  no  gods ;  but  Israel,
etc.  Too  often  is  it  that  the  professed  people  of  Gtod  are  put  to  shame  by  those
who  make  no  such  profession  at  all.  And  it  was  as  monstrous  as  it  was  unheard
of  (cf.  ver.  13).  It  was  as  if  any  should  abandon  the  waters  of  some  bright,  pure
running  fountain  for  the  muddy  mixture  of  a  tank  or  cistern,  which  at  the  best
is  almost  repulsive  to  one  accustomed  to  the  fountains  of  living  water.  And  the
folly  of  such  exchange  is  even  exceeded,  for  not  only  was  it  this  foul  cistern  for
which  the  living  fountains  had  been  forsaken,  but  even  these  very  cisterns  were  flawed
and  fractured  so  that  they  could  "hold  no  water."  The  force  of  folly  could  no
further  go.  And  men  do  the  like  of  this  still.  As,  e.g.,  when  they  forsake  the  faith  of
the  Father  in  heaven  for  the  creed  of  the  materialist,  the  agnostic,  the  atheist ;  when
they  choose  rather  the  peace  of  mind  which  contemplation  of  their  own  correctness  of
conduct  can  afford  instead  of  the  joyful  assurance  of  sin  forgiven  and  acceptance  with
(Jod,  gained  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord ;  when,  in  the  controversy  that  is  ever
going  on  between  God  and  the  world,  they  decide  for  the  world ;  when,  reliance  is
placed  on  a  religion  of  sacraments,  professions  and  forms  of  worship,  instead  of  that
sincere  surrender  of  the  heart  to  Gbd,  that  spiritual  religion  which  alone  is  of  worth  in
his  sight;  when  the  lot  of  the  people  of  God  is  rejected  in  order  that  the  pleasures  of  sin
m^rbe  enjoyed  for  a  season,  and  m  many  other  such  ways.  5.  And  the  sin  is  of  such
asperate  character.  For  see  (ver.  8)  how  it  has  mounted  up  and  overwhelmed  those
who  from  their  profession  and  calling  we  should  have  thought  would  have  been  above
it  The  mimstere  of  relirion,  the  priests,  pastors,  teachers,  have  all  been  swept  away
Wthe  torrrat  of  sin.  When  those  whose  lives  are  given  to  prayer,  to  the  study  of
God  s  holy  Word,  uid  to  that  sacred  ministry  which  should  be  a  bulwark  and  defence,
not  only  lor  those  for  whom,  but  also  for  those  by  whom,  it  is  exercised ;  when  these


ciLii.1— 37.]      TUB  BOOK  OF  TlIE  PROrHET  JEREMIAH.  C5


are  seen  to  be  inyolved  in  the  common  corruption,  then  the  case  of  such  a  Church,  com*
monity,  or  nation  is  hopeless  indeed.  See,  too,  the  insensibility  that  such  sin  causes.
In  yer.  2  Jeremiah  is  bidden  "  Oo  and  cry  in  the  ears  of  Jerusalem."  As  you  would
bend  down  your  (ace  to  the  ear  of  one  in  whom  the  sense  of  hearing  was  all  but  dead,
and  would  place  your  lips  close  to  his  ear,  and  by  loud,  clear  utterance  strive  to  make
Imn  hear,  so  had  it  become  necessary  by  reason  of  the  insensibility  which  their  sin  had
caused,  to  deal  with  those  to  whom  the  prophet  wrote.  It  is  one  of  the  awful  judg«
ments  that  overtake  the  hardened  and  impenitent,  that  whereas  once  they  would  not
hear  the  voice  of  Ood,  they  at  length  find  they  cannot  Oh,  then,  let  the  prayer  of  ua
all  be  "  From  hardness  of  heart,  and  contempt  of  thy  Word  and  commandment,  good
Lord,  deliver  us."— C.

Vers.  14 — 19. — The  Divine  ideal^  how  last  and  regained.  The  prophet  has  in  his
mind  what  was  God's  original  thought  for  Israel,  the  Divine  ideal  concerning  him ;  and
along  with  that  the  mournful  and  utter  contrast  of  his  actual  condition.  An  indignant
*'  No  **  is  the  answer  which  rises  to  the  prophet's  lips  as  the  questions, "  Is  Israel  a  slave  ?
Is  he  a  homebom  slave  ?"  are  asked.  He  thinks  of  Gh)d's  words  (Exod.  iv.  22).  But
then  there  stares  him  in  the  fiEtce  the  most  distressing  but  yet  most  unanswerable  fact
that  Israel  has  become  altogether  such  an  one.  ^  He  is  spoiled ;  the  young  lions  roar
over  him,"  etc.  (ver.  15).    Applying  the  story  of  Israel  to  ourselves,  we  learn—

I.  The  diohitt  asd  qlobt  which  God  designed  for  his  bedeemed.  They  were  to
bo  as  ^is  ions  (cf.  John  L  12,  and  parallels).  Think  of  the  ideas  which  we  associate
with  the  relationship  of  sons.  Take  the  story  of  Abraham  and  Isaac  as  setting  forth  in
human  form  what  these  relationships  are.  What  affection,  what  confidence,  what
sympathy,  what  affluence,  what  honour,  were  Isaac's  because  he  was  Abraham^s  son !
All  that  appertained  to  him  no  doubt  manifested  his  happy  consciousn^  of  the  place
he  held  in  his  father*s  love.  His  looks,  his  tones,  his  dress,  his  demeanour,  the  respect
paid  to  him,  the  freedom  of  his  intercourse  with  Abraham,  the  influence  ho  had
with  him,— -all  made  manifest  his  honoured  and  his  happy  position.  Now,  all  that  which
was  Isaac's  because  he  was  Abraham's  son,  Qod  purposes  should  be  ours  because  we
are  his.  Were  the  Divine  ideal  fulfilled,  all  that  appertains  to  ns  would  reveal
the  terms  on  which  we  stand  towards  GK)d.  Our  look,  our  voice,  our  demeanour,  our
freedom  from  care,  the  general  brightness  of  our  life, — ^all  would  show  our  happy  con-
sciousness that  we  were  the  *'  sons  "  of  our  Father  in  heaven.  The  delight  tnat  Isaac
had  in  Abraham,  the  delight  that  children  have  in  their  parents  (Prov.  xvii.  6),
above  all^  as  the  supreme  example  of  true  sonship,  the  delight  that  Jesus  had  in  God,
we  should  increasingly  realize.    Such  is  God's  ideal  for  his  redeemed.

n.  The  sad  oontbast  which  actual  facts  too  often  present  to  this  ideal.
This  contrast  Jeremiah  presents  in  a  series  of  vivid  similitudes.  1.  Israel  is  **  spoiled,^*
That  is,  he  who  had  been  a  beloved  son,  happy,  honoured,  and  free  in  his  father's
affluent  home,  is  made  a  prey  of,  bound,  beaten,  abused,  carried  oft  as  a  slave.  2.  Next
he  is  likened  to  some  unhappy  traveUer  who,  passing  by  a  lion's  lair,  has  fallen  a
victim.  The  beast's  talons  are  fastened  in  his  quivering  flesh  as  he  lies  prostrate  on  tho
ground,  and  its  fierce,  exultant  yells  over  him  make  the  forest  ring  again.  3.  Tho
next  is  that  of  a  wasted  land,  the  desolated  homesteads,  the  stripped  fields,  the  torn-
down  vineyards,  the  flocks  and  herds  all  driven  away.  4.  The  next,  that  of  once
goodly  cities,  l^eir  buildings  now  a  heap  of  smouldering  ruins.  5.  And  last,  that  of
mocked  and  insulted  captives  in  Egypt.    Their  captors  have  inflicted  on  them  tho


before  the  minds  of  Israel,  the  prophet  suggests  in  these  several  sentences,  in  order  to
flhow  the  contrast  between  what  God  proposal  for  Israel  at  the  first,  and  that  to  which
he  had  now  fidlen.  But  that  which  was  true  of  Israel  is  true  now,  once  and  again,  of
those  who  should  have  continued  as  God's  sons.  Does  not  that  verse  "  Where  is  the
happiness  I  knew?"  etc.,  and  the  whole  tone  of  that  well-known  hymn,  describe  a
spiritual  condition  all  too  common  ?  Our  very  familiarity  with  it  shows  how  often
there  has  been  the  sad  experience  of  which  it  tells.  One  reason  why  wo  love  the
Psalms  so  much  is  that  they  clothe  our  own  thoughts  in  tho  very  words  wo  need ;


30  THE  BOOK  OF  TUB  TROrHET  JEREMIAH,      [ch.  n.  1— 37.

tliry  nay  what  our  hearts  have  often' said,  and  not  least  do  they  thus  sfwak  for  us
when,  as  they  so  often  do,  they  confess  the  smart,  the  shame,  the  pain,  and  the
manifold  distress  which  our  sin  has  bronj^ht  upon  us.

IIL  The  cause  of  this  contrast.  (Ver.  17.)  Did  not  thy  forsaking  of  Jehovah  thy
Oo<i  procure  thoe  this  ?  Let  conscience  confess  if  this  bo  not  the  true  explanation  of
vor.  19.  Let  us  beware  of  explaining  away  the  true  cause,  and  sheltering  our  sin
1)eneath  some  convenient  excuse.

IV,  The  UEMEDr  fou  this  condition  of  things.  1.  There  must  be  the  clear  per-
ception of  its  true  cause.  Ver.  19,  "  Know  therefore  and  see  that,"  etc.  To  further  this
most  salutary  knowledge  was  the  reason  of  so  many  distresses  coming  upon  Israel,  and
for  the  same  reason  Ood  will  not  suffer  sin  to  be  onlv  pleasant,  nor  the  cup  of  iniquity
to  bo  free  from  bitterness.  To  the  riot  and  gaiety  of  tne  prodigal  in  the  "  far  country,"
(iod  added  on  the  poverty,  the  swine-feeding,  the  rags  and  wretchedness,  the  husks  for
food,  and  the  desertion  by  all  his  so-called  friends, — all  that  misery  that  he  might  "  come
to  Iiimself,"  which  whilst  his  riches  and  riot  lasted  he  never  would.  And  this  is  God*s
way  still.  lie  would  have  us  know  and  see  that  it  is  an  evil  thing  and  bitter  to  forsake
the  Lord.  2.  And  when  this  has  been  thus  known  and  seen,  would  we  regain  what
we  have  lost,  wo  must  have  done  "  vrith  the  way  of  Egypt  and  the  waters  of  Sihor,"
that  is,  we  must  resolutely  abandon  those  forbidden  ways  in  which  we  have  hitherto
been  walking.  Ver.  18  is  an  earnest  expostulation  with  such  as  have  wandered  from
God.  It  seems  to  say  to  such,  •*  What  hast  thou  to  do  to  be  going  after  the  world's
sinful  ways,  or  to  be  looking  for  help  from  her  Sihor-like,  her  foul  dark,  waters  ?  Oh,  have
not  her  ways  harmed  thee  sufTiciently  already  ?  will  not  the  burnt  cliild  dread  the  fire  ?
Wilt  thou  again  belie  thy  name,  and  live  rather  as  the  devil's  slave  than  as  God's  child  ?
Was  the  one  sorrow  and  shame  which  thy  sin  heaped  upon  thy  Saviour  not  sufficient,
that  thou  must  crucify  the  Son  of  God  afresh,  and  put  him  anew  to  open  shame  ?  Shall
the  dove  vie  with  the  vulture  in  greed  for  foul  food,  or  the  lamb  find  satisfaction
in  the  trough  of  the  swine  ?  As  soon  shouldest  thou,  child  of  God,  love  sin  and
its  evil  ways.**  Let  us  remember  for  our  great  comfort,  when  well-nigh  despairing  of
deliverance  from  the  dread  power  of  sin,  that  Christ  has  as  certainly  promised  to  deliver
us  from  this,  the  power  of  sin,  as  he  has  from  its  guilt.  The  earnest  look  of  trust  to
him,  pleading  his  promise  herein,— this  repeated  day  by  day,  and  especially  when
wo  know  that  *'  sin  is  nigh,*  wiH  break  its  mastery,  and  win  for  us  the  freedom  we
need.— 0.

Vers.  20— 87.— jy^ovo^'f  indictment  against  Israel.    Note —

I.  Its  mant  oountb.  1.  Their  sin  of  outrageous  character.  It  is  spoken  of  as  in  ver.  20,
because  it  so  commonly  involved  the  grossest  fleshly  sins,  and  because  it  involved
shameful  denial  of  God.  Cf.  ver.  27,  "Saying  to  a  stock.  Thou  art  my  father,*'  etc.
And  it  was  chargeable  with  numerous  and  shameful  murders  (ver.  30).  Killing  the
prophets  of  God ;  ver.  34,  "  In  thy  skirts  is  found  the  blood  of  the  souls  of  the  poor
mnocents,"  etc.  2.  0/  long  standing,  Ver.  20,  "  Of  old  time  thou  hast  broken  thy
yoke  "  fseo  exegeas  for  true  translation),  "  and  saidst,  I  will  not  servo,"  3.  In  no  wise
chargeMe  to  Ood,  Ver.  21,  "  Yet  I  had  planted  thee  a  noble  vine,"  etc.  4.  Was
ingrained  into  Hteir  very  nature  (ver.  22).  All  manner  of  endeavour  had  been
made  to  cleanse  away  the  defilement,  but  its  stain  remained  in  them  still.  5.  Was
fiercely  and  determinately  pursued  after  (vers.  23,  24,  33;  see  exegesis).  They
•*  worked  all  imcleanness  with  greediness."  6.  And  this  in  spite  of  all  that  might  have
taught  them  bettor.  (1)  Warnings  (ver.  25,  where  they  are  entreated  to  have  done
with  such  wickedness).  (2)  Miserable  results  of  their  idolatry  in  the  past  (vers.  26—
^  (3)  Divine  chastisements  (ver.  30).  (4)  God's  great  mercy  in  the  past  (ver.  31).
God  had  not  been  to  them  as  a  wilderness.  (5)  The  honour  and  glory  God  was  ready
to  ]^aoe  upon  them  (ver.  32),  like  as  a  husband  would  adorn  his  bride  with  jewels.  7.
And  tiieir  tin  is  aggravated  by  (1)  their  shameless  asserUon  of  innocence  (vers.  23,  35);
m  their  pejrnstenoe  in  dn  (ver.  36),  "  gadding  about  to  change  their  way,"  going
■Wft  oneidolatry  to  another,  one  heathen  alliance  to  another.

n.  Thk  1C8KRABLB  dkfkucb  offebed.  It  consisted  simply  in  denial  (vers.  23,  35).
It  imginented  their  gidlt  and  condemnation  (ver.  37),

Ht  TbB  IVBTHUCnOH  FROM  ALL  THIS  FOR  OUR  OWN  DAY  AND  FOB  OIJR  OWN  LIVE8.


CH.II.1— 37.]   THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.         8'


1.  It  shows  us  tho  terrible  nature  of  sin.  (1)  The  lengths  it  will  ga  (2)  The  gracious
barriers  it  will  break  through.  (3)  The  condemnation  it  will  surely  meet  2.  It  bids
us  not  trust  to  any  early  advantages.  Israel  was  planted  "  a  noble  vine,  wholly  a  right
seed."  3.  The  folly  and  guilt  of  denying  our  sin  (cf.  I  John  L  8,  "  If  we  say  that  we  haye
no  sin,"  etc.).  4.  The  needs  be  there  is  for  us  all  of  the  pardoning  and  presenring  grace
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ — G.

Yer.  22.^'The  tinnet^s  attempt  to  vxuh  away  his  $in,  I  Wherefore  he  makes  the
ATTEiCFT.  Sometimes  it  is  that  (I)  conscience  is  aroused ;  or  (2)  the  Word  of  God  is
too  plainly  against  him;  or  (3)  Divine  providence  threatens  ominously;  or  (4)  like
Felix,  he  trembles  as  some  Paul  preaches.

II.  The  hanker  in  which  he  proceeds.  1.  He  partially  abandons  known  An,  as
Pharaoh,  Nineveh,  Israel  at  time  of  Josiah's  reformation,  Herod.  2.  Multiplies
religious  services.  3.  Is  ready  with  good  resolves.  4.  There  is  some  stir  of  reh^ous
feeling.  Tears  are  shed,  the  emotional  nature  is  excited,  and  there  is  some  temporary
tenderness  of  conscience.  Added  to  all  this  there  mav  be  :  5.  Self-inflicted  punish-
ments, bodily  mortifications.  Such  is  the  washing  with  nitre  and  the  taking  of  much
soap  which  the  prophet  describes.

III.  Its  ttbelessness.  The  stain  of  the  iniquity  is  there  still  (ver.  22).  How
powerfully  is  this  confessed  in  the  great  tragedy  of '  Macbeth '  I  After  his  dread  crime,  tho
conscience-stricken  wretch  thus  speaks^-

^How  is't  with  me,  when  every  noise  appals  me?
What  hands  are  here  ?    Ha  1  they  pluck  out  mine  eyes !
Will  all  great  Neptune's  ocean  wash  this  blood
Clean  from  my  hand  ?    No ;  this  my  hand  will  rather
The  multitudinous  seas  incarnadine,
Making  the  green — one  red."

IV.  The  true  cleansing  which  it  suggests  and  nnnTBS  us  to.  Isa.  L  18, ''  Come
now,  and  let  us  reason  together,"  eta — C.

Yer.  25. — A  dread  mare  of  the  devU.  I.  In  what  it  consists.  The  persuading  tho
sinner  that  "  there  is  no  hope."

II.  Its  terrible  character.  It  leads  the  sinner  to  excuse  himself  in  his  sin  by  the
false  belief  that  ho  is  delivered  to  do  all  his  abominations.  It  encourages  him  to  go  on
in  his  sin  (cf.  ver.  25),  instead  of  resolutely  breaking  away  from  it.

III.  How  men  fall  into  it.  By  letting  sin  b^me  the  habit  of  their  lives ;  tho
constant  repetition  of  separate  sinful  acts  forges  the  chain  of  habit,  which  it  is  hard
indeed  for  any  to  break  through.

lY.  How  MEN  MAT  GET  OUT  OF  IT.  1.  By  prayerful  pondering  of  the  many  proofs
which  show  that  this  suggestion  of  Satan,  that  "  there  is  no  hope,"  is  one  of  his  own
lies.  These  proofs  are  to  be  found  in  the  plain  statements,  and  in  the  many  examples
of  the  Word  of  God,  which  tell  of  God's  grace  to  the  very  chief  of  sinners.  They  are  to
be  found  also  in  the  recorded  biographies  and  observed  lives  of  many  of  the  people  of  God.
And  ^so  in  our  own  experience  of  Qod  in  the  past.  2.  By  then  and  there  committing
our  souls  into  the  handis  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  for  pardon,  for  restoration,  and  for
safe  keeping  for  the  future.  8.  By  renewing  this  self-surrender  day  by  day,  and  espe-
cially when  we  are  conscious  that  danger  is  near.  So  shall  we  be  able  to  say,  "  My  soul
is  escaped  as  a  bird  out  of  the  snare  of  the  fowler." — C.

Yers.  36, 37. — Hie  restlessness  of  sin.  "  Why  goddest  thou  about  so  much  to  change
thy  way? "etc.

I.  This  is  a  common  course  of  conduct  in  sinful  men.

II.  The  reasons  for  adopting  it  are  of  various  kinds.  1.  Hope  of  larger  gain.
2.  Prospects  of  increased  pleasure.  3.  Disappointment  with  tho  way  that  has  hitherto
been  tried.    4.  Conscience  will  not  be  quiet  in  continuing  the  present  way,  etc.

III.  But  rr  is  all  of  no  avail.  The  same  wretched  result  is  reached  whichever  way
is  taken  (vers.  86, 37).


38  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,     [cir.  ii  l~37.

lY.  God  in  all  this  is  sayixo,  "  Let  thb  wicked  forsake  his  way,  and  the

UNRIGHTEOUS,"  ETC.  (Isft.  Iv.). — G.

Ver.  2. — OaTs  estimation  of  his  people's  love,  A  remarkable  passage  :  to  be  taken  in
its  evident  meaniDg,  and  not  to  be  explained  away.  What  a  loving  use  to  make  of  the
Iiast  faithfulness  and  attachment  of  his  people !  He  would  remind  them  of  them,  that
they  may  repent  and  return.

I.  It  18  FULL  OF  INTEREST  TO  HIM.  To  those  who  feel  intense  love  for  others,  it  is
exceedingly  grateful  to  find  their  love  reciprocated.  High,  pure,  disinterested  love,  like
that  of  God  for  men,  never  receives  equal  return ;  but  what  it  does  elicit  it  prizes  be-
yond all  its  intrinsic  value.  The  parent  thinks  more  of  the  child's  love  for  him  than
the  child  of  the  parent's.  1.  It  spoke  of  trust,  Th«re  is  no  fear  or  selfishness  in  love
Divine  love  awakens.  The  wilderness  could  not  daunt  the  simple  hearts  of  faithful
IsraeL  They  were  willing  to  take  God  at  his  word,  and  to  look  for  the  land  of  promise.  So
with  respect  to  Christ.  2.  It  spoke  of  gratitude.  He  had  saved  them  from  Egypt's
bondage,  and  made  them  his  own  freemen.  No  service  was  too  arduous ;  no  trial  too
severe.  Jesus  has  saved  us  from  sin  and  its  consequences ;  we  owe  to  him  a  deeper
gratitude.  3.  It  spoke  of  an  affection  that  was  its  own  reward.  There  was  delight  in
the  presence  and  communion  of  God.  Worship  was  rapture.  The  chief  interest  of  life
was  spiritual  and  Divine,  llie  life  of  Israel  was  separated  and  sanctified  to  God.  Love
that  could  manifest  itself  thus  was  a  sign  and  guarantee  that  the  love  of  God  had  not
been  in  vain.

II.  Its  FAILINGS  ARE  CONDONED  BY  ITS  0ENUINEKES9.  No  mention  is  made  of
their  murmurings,  their  disobedience,  and  unbelief.  Where  the  true  spirit  of  Divine
love  is  exhibited  God  can  forgive  defects,  etc.  To  him  it  is  enough  for  the  present  that
we  do  our  best,  and  are  true  and  earnest.  So  at  the  first  signs  of  repentance  he  is  will-
ing to  forget  all  our  offences.  What  is  good  and  real  in  men,  is  of  infinitely  more  value
to  him  than  we  can  imagine,  and  for  the  sake  of  that  he  is  willing  to  cover  the  guilty
]>a8t.  This  is  all  the  more  precious  a  trait  in  the  Divine  character  that  it  does  not  spring
from  ignorance  of  us.  He  knows  us  altogether,  our  secret  thoughts,  our  down-sitting
and  our  uprising.  The  readiness  of  God  so  to  forgive  and  to  overvalue  past  love  and
trust  on  the  part  of  his  people,  ought  to  fill  us  with  compunction  and  shame.  We  ought
to  ask,  "  Was  this  our  love  ?  "    "  Lord,  when  saw  wo  thee  an  hungred,"  etc.  ?

ni.  Though  transient,  it  elicits  an  eternal  attachment  and  leaves  an  un-
dying MEMORY.  "  I  remember."  It  ought  to  be  a  strong  motive  to  the  Christian  to
think  that  his4ittle  works  of  faith  and  labours  of  love  are  so  highly  prized,  and  so  long
remembered.  "  For  thy  works'  sake."  Who  would  not  rather  charge  the  memory  of
God  with  such  gracious  memories,  that  "  heap  up  wrath  against  the  day  of  wrath  "  ?— M.

Vers.  2,  Z,-^First  love  to  Ood,  We  have  here  a  picture  of  the  idyllic  days  of  the
soul's  first  love  for  God.  The  emphasis  is  on  the  sentiment — its  depth,  reality,  and
attractiveness.  It  is  spoken  of  as  something  in  which  God  delights ;  as  in  the  odour
of  a  rose,  the  beauty  of  a  landscape,  or  the  pleasant  melody  of  a  song.

I.  It  18  ATTRACTIVE.  For  its  spontaneity ;  its  spirit  of  self-sacrifice ;  and  its  abso-
luteness.

II.  It  is  IMMEDIATE  IN    ITS    INFLUENCE    UPON    CHARACTER    AND   LIFE.       GenerOUS

sacrifice.    Dominance  of  spiritual  aims  and  interests.    Personal  holiness.

IIL  It  IS  FULL  OF  PROMISE.  Not  only  what  it  is,  but  what  it  may  become.  In
one  sense  the  bud  is  more  valuable  than  the  leaf,  or  flower,  or  fruit.  It  has  the  interest
of  growth  and  the  future  about  it.  Israel's  best  gift8,  then,  were  to  God  but  "  first-
fruits.  God  only  knows  what  capacity  of  spiritual  progress  and  enlargement  is  ours ;
and  he  alone  can  tell  the  influence  and  importance  of  his  people's  faithfulness.— M.

Ver.  S.—Gftt^  instmmenta  of  Divine  fudgment.  A  great  problem  in  morals.
Fharaoh  8  heart  is  hardened,"  and  yet  his  guilt  remains.  Nations  are  rdsed  up  to
punish  Israel  for  unfaithfulness,  yet  they  "  offend  "  in  doing  this  very  thing.

L    YfEtKEJS  THE  GUILT  OF  INSTRUMENTS  OF  DiVINE  VENGEANCE  MAY  CONSIST.    At

least  two  explanations  of  this  are  to  be  found :  1.  In  the  distirxtion  between  the  formal
ana  the  matmal  character  of  actions.     The  essential  evil  or  good  of  an  action  is  in  the


ch.il  1—37.]      THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  89


ioiention,  the  subicctiTe  conditions  that  originate  and  give  character  to  it.  It  is  sub-
jective, not  actualized ;  or  its  actualization  in  one  of  several  forms  or  directions  is  in*
different.  Towards  any  of  these  the  Divine  power  may  direct  the  impulse  and  tendency  ;
or  they  may  be  shut  up  to  them  through  the  unconscious  influence  of  providence,
working  in  wider  cycles.  2.  In  the  overdoing  or  (aggravation  of  the  appointed
Uuh,

II.  What  it  is  that  aggbatates  the  oun/r  of  the  wicked  ikstruiteitt  of  Divine
WRATH.  It  is  the  cliaracter  of  GKkI's  people,  and  the  relation  they  bear  to  him.  They
have  been  ^  holiness  unto  the  Lord."  In  so  far  as  this  character  is  interfered  with  or
injured  by  the  instruments  of  yengeance,  the  latter  shall  be  the  more  guilty.  In  so  fiEur,  too,
as  hatred  for  this  character,  either  as  past  or  present,  in  Gt>d's  people  has  actuated  the
rengeance  inflicted,  the  avengers  "  shall  offend."  (Of.  for  a  similar  sentiment.  Matt,
zviii.  6.)  The  Divine  Being  declares  his  personal  attachment  to  those  he  has  chosen,
and  his  identification  with  them.  To  injure  them  is  to  injure  him.  They  also  repre-
sent, even  in  their  apostasy,  the  stock  from  which  salvation  is  to  come,  and  the  world's
spiritual  future.— M.

Vers.  4— 9. — The  indictment  of  Israel.  The  chosen  nation  is  arraigned  in  all  its
generations  and  in  all  its  orders.  It  is  a  universal  and  continuous  crime ;  and  it  ran
parallel  with  a  succession  of  unheard-of  mercies,  deliverances,  and  favours.  In  these
respects  it  corresponds  to  the  sin  of  Gtod's  people  in  every  age — forgctfulness  of  past
mercy,  abuse  of  present  blessings,  the  corruption  and  perverseness  of  those  who  were
entrusted  with  Divine  mysteries  and  sacred  offices.

I.  Jehovah  appeals  to  his  chabacteb  and  dealings  in  the  past  in  disproof  of
there  being  ant  excuse  in  them  for  the  bin  of  his  people.  Inquiry  is  challenged.
History  is  rehearsed.  So  it  always  has  been.  The  reason  for  the  sins,  etc.,  of  God's
people  is  in  themselves  and  not  in  God.  God  is  just,  and  aU  the  allegations  and  mur-
murs of  unbelieving  and  disobedient  Israel  are  lies.  So  the  excuses  Ohristians  often  give
for  their  faults  and  offences  are  already  answered  in  advance.  We  have  received  from
him  nothing  but  good.  His  help  and  protection  were  at  onr  disposal ;  but  we  forsook
him,  and  sinned  against  both  him  and  ourselves.

II.  The  enormity  of  the  offence  is  then  bet  forth.  The  recital  is  marked
by  simplicity,  symmetry,  force,  and  point.  It  contains  the  undeniable  commonplaces
of  history  and  experience,  but  the  artist's  power  is  shown  in  the  grouping  ana  per-
spective. 1.  It  is  ancient  and  hereditary.  The  fathers,  the  children,  and  the  children's
children.  Just  as  they  could  not  go  back  to  a  time  when  God  had  not  cared  for  them
and  blessed  them,  so  they  could  not  discover  a  time  when  they  or  their  forefathers  had
not  shown  unbelief  and  ingratitude.  It  is  pertinent  to  ask  in  such  a  case,  '*  Must  there  not
be  some  hereditary  and  original  taint  in*the  sinners  themselves  ?"  What  will  men  do
with  the  actual  existence  of  depravity  ?  How  will  they  explain  its  miserable  entail  ?
Human  history  in  every  age  is  marked  by  persistent  wickedness ;  Christianity  suggests
an  explanation  of  this.  It  is  for  objectors  to  substitute  a  better.  2.  It  consists  in  in^
gratitude,  unbelief,  and  the  service  of  false  gods.  The  Exodus  with  all  its  marvels  and
mercies,  the  blessings  that  surrounded  them  in  tko  present,  go  for  nought.  They  are
forgotten  or  ignored.  And  idols,  which  are  but  vanity,  are  sought  after  to  such  an  ex-
tent that  their  worshippers  "  are  like  unto  them."  This  is  the  history  of  religious
defection  in  every  age.  Forgctfulness  of  God,  ingratitude,  and  the  overwhelming  in-
fluence of  worldly  interests  and  concerns,  and  the  lusts  of  our  own  sinful  nature,  work
the  same  ruin  in  us.  How  many  idols  does  the  modem  world,  the  modern  Church  not
set  up  ?  3.  It  is  marked  by  the  abuse  of  blessings  and  the  breach  of  sacred  trusts.
When  men  are  rendered  worthless  by  their  sinful  practices,  they  cannot  appreciate  the
good  things  of  God.  Divine  bounty  is  wasted,  and  blessings  are  abused,  oacred  things
are  desecrated.  Those  who  ought  to  be  leaders  and  examples  are  worse  than  others.
The  priest  who,  if  any  one,  ought  to  know  the  '*  secret  place,"  "  the  holy  of  holies,"  of
the  Most  High,  is  asking  where  he  is.  ^The  lawyers  are  the  greatest  law-breakers.  The
pastors,  who  ought  to  guide  and  feed,  are  become  "  blind  mouths.**  And  the  prophets
are  false.  Corruptio  optimi  pessima.  How  hard  is  the  heart  that  has  once  known
Qod  I  "  If  the  light  that  is  in  you  be  darkness,  how  great  is  that  darkness  1 "  The
backslider,  the  child  of  holy  parents,  etc.,  who  shall  estimate  their  wickc^lness  ?


40  TUE  BOOK  OP  TUE  PROPUET  JEREMIAH,     [cu.  il  1— 37.

III.  Fob  all  these  things  men  will  be  brought  into  judgment.  The  assur-
ance is  very  terrible :  "  I  will  yet  plead  with  "  (i.e.  reckon  with  or  plead  against)  "  you,
,  .  .  and  with  your  children's  children  will  I  plead."  This  is  the  same  Jehovah  who
"  keepeth  mercy  for  thousands,"  but  "  visiteth  the  iniquity  of  the  fathers  upon
the  children."  There  is  a  solidarity  in  Israel,  Christendom,  and  the  race,  which  will  be
brought  to  light  in  that  day.  "  It  is  a  fearful  thing  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living
God,"  and  to  bear  our  offences  in  the  company  of  transgressors  and  the  universal  con-
nection of  the  world's  sin.  "  But  as  in  Adam  all  have  died,  so  in  Christ  shall  all  be
made  alive."  Jesus  is  set  forth  as  the  Head  and  Representative  of  the  humanity  he
redeems.    Let  us  seek  oneness  with  him  through  faith. — M.

Vers.  10 — IS.-^The  marvel  of  unbelief.  A  magnificent  apostrophe.  Yet  this  is  no
mere  rhetoric.  There  is  a  terrible  reality  in  the  phenomenon  to  which  attention  is
directed.  Chittim,  the  general  name  of  the  islands  and  coast  of  the  eastern  Mediter-
ranean, stands  for  the  extreme  west ;  and  Kedar,  the  general  name  of  the  Arabs  of  the
desert  for  the  extreme  east  of  the  "  world,"  with  which  the  prophet  and  his  hearers  were
familiar.    Our  "  from  China  to  Peru  "  would  represent  its  meaning  to  us.

I.  The  considerations  that  make  it  marvellous.  The  people  themselves  were
but  dimly  conscious  of  the  strangeness  of  their  apostasy.  The  prophet  seeks  to  rouse
their  better  nature  by  the  most  striking  comparisons  and  illustrations.  1.  He  corn-
fares  it  with  the  general  fixedness  of  heathen  systems,  A  tendency  to  subdivide  and
stereotype  life  in  the  family,  society,  and  the  state  is  shown  by  idolatry.  Idolatries
reflect  and  pamper  human  desires  and  ideas,  and  enter  into  the  whole  constitution
of  the  people.  They  undermine  the  moral  life  and  spiritual  strength,  and  flourish  upon
the  decay  they  have  made.  Their  victims  are  helpless  because  they  are  moribund  or  dead.
The  words  of  Isaiah  are  justified  in  such  a  case ;  "  from  the  sole  of  the  foot  even  unto  the
head  there  is  no  soimdness  in  it,"  etc.  This  is  the  reason  of  the  perpetuation  of  error
and  superstition ;  but  the  fact  is  there  all  the  same,  and  it  is  in  striking  contrast  to
the  vacillation  and  apostasy  of  God's  people.  That  which  only  appears  to  be  good  is
clung  to  with  reverence  and  tenacity  from  age  to  age.  That  which  is  acknowledged  to
be  b^t,  and  in  part  realized  to  bo  so,  is  cast  aside  repeatedly.  2.  Look  too  at  the  character
of  him  who  is  forsaken.  He  has  already  told  them  a  little  of  GkKi's  doings  (vers.  5 — 7).
Now  it  is  sufficient  to  describe  him  as  the  "  Glory  "  of  Israel.  The  heavens,  which
look  at  everything  all  the  world  over,  are  to  wonder  and  to  be  horror-struck  at  this
unhsard-of  ingratitude  and  folly.  3.  Disadvantage  and  dissatisfaction  must  evidently
restUt,  The  action  of  the  apostate  is  twofold — negative  and  positive.  Describe  the
figure.    How  great  the  labour  of  worldliness ;  and  its  disappointment  I

II.  How  SUCH  conduct  can  be  accounted  for.  If  it  were  the  result  of  genuine
and  honest  experience,  it  might  be  fatal  to  the  claims  of  Jehovah.  But  it  is  explained
by :  1.  The  influence  of  the  near  and  sensible.  The  physical  side  of  our  nature  is  more
developed  than  the  spiritual.  Our  need  appeals  to  us  first  and  most  strongly  on  that
side.  Abraham,  who  pleaded  for  Sodom,  lied  for  Sarah.  Jacob,  the  dreamer  of  Bethel,
IS  the  craven  at  Penuol.  How  unaccountable  the  yielding  of  the  man  of  God  to  the
false  prophet  (1  Kings  xiii.)  I  After  David's  signal  escapes  and  deliverances,  he  yet  said
in  his  heart,  **  I  shall  now  perish  one  day  by  the  hand  of  Saul.  There  is  nothing  better
for  me  than  that  I  should  speedily  escape  into  the  land  of  the  Philistines."  Elijah,
after  all  his  miracles  and  testimonies,  sighs  out,  "  Let  me  die."  Peter,  upon  whoso
witness  Christ  was  to  found  his  Church,  is  addressed  as  he  is  ready  to  sink  at  tho
vessel's  side,  "0  thou  of  little  faith,  wherefore  didst  thou  doubt?"  Paul,  who  had
withstood  them  "  that  seemed  to  be  pillars,"  quails  beneath  the  "  thorn  in  the  flesh."
2.  Tlie  demands  made  by  true  religion.  Self  has  to  be  denied.  The  whole  carnal
life  is  condemned.  2>*%cnctf  is  insisted  upon.  We  have  to  "pray  without  ceasing,"
to  labour  and  not  faint.  We  have  to  "  press  toward  the  mark  for  the  prize."  Patience
is  demanded,  and  the  Christian  profession  commits  us  to  indefinite  sacrifice. — M.

yer.  18.— 2%c  unreasonableness  of  appealing  to  worldly  assistance  in  spiritual  enter-
prises.  This  was  the  tendency  of  Israel  when  her  faith  grew  weak.  It  is  shown  even
now  bv  those  who  trust  to  the  arm  of  flesh,  and  who  seek  worldlv  alliances  for  the
Church,    Wo  ought  to  bo  deterred  from  this  when  we  consider—


can.  1—37.]      THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  41

I.  The  opposition  of  the  chaeacteb  and  aims  of  the  wobld  to  those  or

BPIBTTUAL  RELIGION.

II.  The  unbeliablenebb  of  the  worldly.

III.  The  DISHONOUR  and  spiritual  PERIL  OF  such  alliances. — ^M.

Ver.  19. — QocCb  method  ofpunUhitig  apostasy,    I.  Its  own  sin  is  to  find  it  out.
IL  That  the  true  character  of  its  actions  and  the  bitter  fruits  of  its  sin

HAT  APPEAR.^M.

Vers.  26—28.-7^  shameless  shame  of  idolatry.  I.  Its  degrading  influence.  It
violates  all  morality.  Is  repeatedly  affronted  by  the  discoveries  which  are  made  of  its
wickedness  and  folly.  It  affects  the  whole  nation  from  the  highest  and  the  best.  The
reason  is  debased  and  set  at  nought.

II.  Calaxitt  is  the  test  of  its  pretensions.  Whilst  things  ^o  well  with  the
idolater  he  forgets  Ood  or  consciously  dishonours  him.  But  when  ne  is  overtaken  with
the  consequences  of  his  evil  deeds  he  is  not  ashamed  to  call  upon  Qod,  The  unreason-
ableness and  inconsistency  of  this  conduct  are  no  barrier  to  it.  Beneath  the  unbelief
and  worldliness  of  men  there  is  a  tacit  belief  in  the  goodness  and  power  of  Gk>d«  In
prosperity  they  are  idolaters,  in  adversity  they  find  their  way  back  to  the  Qod  they
had  despised.  This  is  the  universal  and  permanent  inconsistency  of  the  world  life. — M.

Ver.  28. — **  Lords  many  and  gods  many/*  The  multiplicity  of  idols  contrasts  with  the
unity  of  the  true  God.  It  involves  inconsistency,  spiritual  confusion,  etc.  But  hero
the  argument  is^-

I.  That  idolatry  is  a  local,  exclusive,  and  separative  principle.

IL  It  is  thus  the  creature  and  the  occasion  of  ignorance,  prejudice,  and
discord.

III.  It  is  therefore  BOuin>  to  disappear  before  the  light  and  progress  of
humanity. — M.

Ver.  30. — Rejecting  the  chastisements  qf  Qod,  The  spiritual  benefits  of  pain,  calamity,
etc.,  are  contingent  for  the  most  part  upon  their  being  received  in  a  right  way — as  from
God,  and  not  by  accident.  They  are  intended  to  discover  our  sins  to  us,  and  to  lead
us  to  the  love  and  righteousness  of  GK)d.  Where  this  result  is  not  effected,  "  chastise-
ment is  not  accepted."

L  The  possibility  of  befusing  chastisement.

II.  MiSEBY  AND  PAIN  ABE  NOT  OF  THEMSELVES  MINISTERS  OF  GBACE.

III.  Rightly  becetved,  oxtb  gbeatest  gbiefs  may  become  oxtr  greatest  mercies.
— M.

Ver.  35. — The  plea  <^  innocence  a  eulminaiing  sin.  We  do  not  know  to  which  par-
ticular charge  this  reply  is  given.  Perhaps  the  key  is  contained  in  2  Kings  xxiii.  26.
An  external  reformation  was  considered  enough  in  the  reign  of  Josiah,  and  it  was
assumed  that  the  anger  of  God  was  thereby  turned  away.  The  prophet  assures  them
that  this  was  a  mistake,  and  more  than  this,  a  sin  in  itself.

I.  Deadly  sin  may  exist  in  the  mind  which  is  not  specially  conscious  of  it.

II.  Such  unconsciousness  ezhibitb  pebverted  mobal  natube  and  callousness

OF  HEABT.

III.  It  provokes  the  more  seyebe  judgment  fbom  God. — ^M.

Vers.  1 — 8.— 7«ra«?'«  desertion  of  Jehovah  viewed  in  the  light  of  the  past.  Desertion
rather  than  apostasy  is  the  word  by  which  to  describe  the  offence  charged  against
Israel  in  this  cnapter.  Apostasy  from  principle  is  too  abstract  and  unemotional  a  way
of  putting  the  thing.  The  spectacle  presented  to  us  is  that  of  one  person  deserting
another  in  the  basest  and  most  ungrateful  way.  It  is  a  desertion  without  excuse,
aggravated  by  every  circumstance  which  can  aggravate  it.  And  now  Jehovah  sends
his  servant  to  bring  the  reality  of  this  desertion  distinctly  Ixifore  the  nation.  And
suitably  enough  he  sends  him  to  "  cry  in  the  ears  of  Jerusalem.**  Whatever  is  sounded
forth  in  the  capital  by  a  man  who  has  had  the  words  of  God  put  in  his  mouth  may  be
expected  to  go  to  the  ends  of  the  land.


42  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,      [ch.  n.  1— 37.

I.  Thb  whole  nation  is  bpokkn  to.  Grod  has  the  power  to  look  at  human  life  in
the  light  of  a  unity  which  the  individual  man  is  scarcely  able  to  conceive.  Here  he
looks  not  only  at  the  living  generation  of  those  who  had  sprung  from  Jacob,  but  all
l»ckward  through  the  past ;  each  generation  is,  as  it  were,  a  year  in  the  life  of  one
who  still  lives,  and  is  able  to  look  back  on  things  that  happened  centuries  ago  as  events
of  his  own  youth.  Thus  not  only  is  it  true  that  one  generation  goes  and  another
comes,  while  Ood  abides  for  ever,  but  it  is  also  true  that  while  one  generation  goes  and
another  comes,  Israel  abides  for  ever.  Israel  is  spoken  to  as  a  full-grown  man  might
be  spoken  to,  exhorted  in  the  midst  of  backsliding  and  imworthy  habits  to  look  back
on  the  far  different  promise  of  his  youth.

II.  The  nation  is  spoken  to  as  bustainino  a  most  endearino  relation  to
God.  Even  as  a  husband  loves  and  cherishes  his  wife,  so  God  has  loved  and  cherished
Israel.  Ho  looks  back  into  the  past,  and  he  sees  a  great  fall.  The  youth  of  Israel,
according  to  his  present  view  of  it,  was  a  time  of  love  and  devotion.  No  doubt  there
were  murmurings  and  rebellions ;  and  indeed,  when  we  think  of  some  of  the  things
that  Israel  did  during  the  leadership  of  Moses,  the  words  of  God  seem  exaggerated  in
speaking  of  the  kindness  of  Israel's  youth  and  the  love  of  its  espousals.  But  then  we
must  bear  in  mind  that  we  know  only  in  a  very  imperfect  way  what  is  recorded,
whereas  God  saw  all,  and  to  him  the  enthusiasm  of  the  people  on  certain  memorable
occasions  was  very  significant.  He  remembered  all  those  events  in  which  Israel  rose  to
the  height  of  its  better  self,  and  indicated  the  possibilities  that  might  be  expected
from  it.  Such  events  now  stand  forth  like  sunny  heights  in  memory.  They  are
reasons  why  God  should  not  allow  his  people  quietly  to  depart,  further  and  further,
into  the  alienations  of  idolatry.  This  is  what  makes  the  present  attempt  at  restoration
so  full  of  interest,  that  it  is  an  attempt  to  bring  back  the  erring  spouse  to  her  first  love.

III.  The  nation  is  viewed  in  the  light  of  a  past  in  which  Jehovah  had  made
great  promises  and  entertained  great  expectations  with  regard  to  Israel's
FUTURE.  They  were  reckoned  a  holy  nation.  They  were  as  firstfruits  of  the  whole
earth,  to  which  he  attached  an  especial  value.  Levi  he  brought  in  sacred  nearness  to
himself  in  lieu  of  the  firstborn  of  Israel.  It  is  one  of  Christ's  distinctions  that  he
has  become  the  firstfruits  of  them  that  slept ;  and  so  here  there  was  a  nation  which
was  the  first  to  step  out  from  long-accustomed  idolatry.  The  glory  of  Abraham's  faith
in  the  unseen  was  still,  as  it  were,  resting  on  Israel  in  the  wilderness.  Jehovah  told
the  people  where  to  go ;  he  gave  them  bread,  water,  and  defence  against  enemies,  in  a
land  of  peculiar  desolation  and  danger.  Promises  for  the  future  were  given  in  the
most  effective  way  by  distinguished  services  rendered  in  the  present.  When  at  last
the  Israelites  settled  down  in  Canaan,  it  might  have  been  said  to  them,  "  May  you  not
be  sure  that  he  who  has  freely,  amply,  and  just  at  the  right  time,  supplied  your  every
need,  will  also,  in  all  the  generations  to  come,  whatever  their  peculiar  experiences,
do  the  same  thing  ?  "  Gkxi  had  taken  his  people  into  the  deepest  darkness,  and  put  out
every  earth-enkindled  light,  just  that  he  might  manifest  in  greater  glory  and  attrac-
tiveness that  light  which  is  the  portion  of  all  unwavering  believers  in  himself.  Thus
the  past  of  Israel  glorified  the  God  of  Israel ;  and  at  the  same  time,  it  not  only  dis-
graced Israel  itself,  but  had  in  it  such  elements  of  God's  favour  and  assiduity  as  made
the  national  desertion  of  him  a  great  mystery.

IV.  Observe  how  completely  it  is  brought  out  that  the  desertion  is  a
NATIONAL  ACT.  The  prtests  appointed  mediators  in  offering  and  atonement  between
Jehovah  and  his  people;  the  expounders  of  the  Law,  whose  business  it  was  to  keep  ever
manifest  the  difference  between  right  and  wrong ;  the  shepherds,  such,  for  instance,  as
every  father  at  the  head  of  his  household,  providing  and  guiding ;  the  prophets,  who
shoiUd  have  been  the  messengers  of  Jehovah ; — all  these,  far  away  from  their  right  place,
are  found  in  the  very  forefront  of  iniquity.  Jehovah  is  not  only  ignored ;  he  is  almost
treated  as  if  he  were  unknown.  The  people  carelessly  let  their  superiors  think  for
tliem.  When  the  priest  in  the  parable  went  by  on  the  other  side,  the  inferior  Levite
woald  have  thought  it  presumption  to  have  acted  differently.^Y.

VefB.  10, 11. — Ewthendom  gives  an  uiiconscious  relume  to  apostate  Israel,  Prom  a
hBmiliatJng  contrast  of  the  present  conduct  of  Israel  with  what  might  have  been
nooonably  expected  from  the  peculiar  experiences  of  the  past,  God  now  turns  to


CH.  n.  1—37.]  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.         4»


make  a  contrast  more  hnmiliating  still  with  heathen  nations.  The  request  to  look  hack
is  succeeded  by  a  request  to  look  round.  Search  through  every  nation,  inquire  in  every
idol  temple,  watch  the  religious  life  of  idolaters,  and  everywhere  you  will  see  a  fidelity
which  puts  the  apostate  children  of  Israel  to  shame.  The  heathen  gods  themselves
Jehovah  has  indeed  put  to  shame,  notably  the  gods  of  Egypt  and  Philistia ;  but  in  spite
of  aJl,  the  heathen  are  still  clinging  to  the  falsehoods  in  wnich  they  have  been  taught
to  believe.  Their  fieuiatical  devotion  is,  indeed,  a  pitiable  thing,  but  even  in  the  midst
of  all  that  is  pitiable,  God  can  find  something  to  be  used  for  good.  This  very  fidelity
to  what  is  so  false  and  degrading  may  be  nam  to  point  a  keen  reproach  to  those  who
owe  but  do  not  pay  allegiance  to  Jehovah.

There  is  thus  suggested  as  a  topic  the  uvoonscious  rebukes  which  the  wobld  gives
TO  THE  Chuboh.  The  heathendom  on  which  Jehovah  bade  his  people  look  has  long
passed  away.  In  spite  of  the  fidelity  here  indicated,  the  temples  have  fallen  into  ruin
and  the  idols  are  utterly  vanished.  I^ay,  more ;  increasing  signs  come  in  from  year  to
year,  that  all  heathendom  is  gradually  cUssolving,  so  that,  in  one  sense,  Jehovah's  words
may  be  said  no  longer  to  apply.  But  we  know  that,  in  the  spirit  of  the  words,  they
continue  to  apply  only  too  forcibly.  It  is  but  the  /arm  of  the  idol  that  passes  away ;
the  reality  is  the  same.  Thus  he  who  calls  himself  and  wishes  to  be  thougnt  a  believer
in  Christ,  docs  well  to  look  out  and  see  what  he  can  gather  by  way  of  spiritual  instruo-
tion  and  rebuke  from  the  world.  The  world  has  much  to  teach  us  if  we  would  only
learn.  Jesus  himself  gave  the  New  Testament  parallel  when  ho  spoke  of  the  children
of  the  world  being  wiser  in  their  generation  than  the  children  of  light.  And  though
we  should  be  very  foolish  to  pay  any  attention  to  the  world,  when  it  puts  on  the  air  of
a  wiseacre  and  talks  with  the  utmost  self-conceit  of  things  it  does  not  understand,
there  is  all  the  more  reason  why  we  should  learn  all  we  can  by  our  own  divinely  directed
observation.  How  the  world  rebukes  us,  for  instance,  every  time  we  see  men  of  $cience
searching  afUr  truth  I  Think  of  the  patient  attention  given  day  after  day  with  the
telescope,  the  microscope,  and  all  the  apparatus  of  the  ezperimentalist  in  physics.  Think
of  the  perils  and  privations  of  the  traveller  in  tropic  and  in  arctic  zones.  Think  of
the  unwearied  hunting  of  facts,  for  possibly  a  whole  lifetime,  in  order  to  turn  some
hypothesis  into  an  established  truth.  And  we  also  have  truth  to  attain.  Jesus  and
his  apostles  often  spoke  of  truth  which  wo  have  to  make  our  own ;  understanding  it^
believing  it,  and  making  it  part  of  our  experience.  But  that  tnith  assurei^y  is  not  to
be  won  without  effort  The  question  may  well  be  asked  if  such  difierences  would
continue  to  exist  among  Christians  as  do  exist,  provided  they  only  set  themselves  in
reality  and  humility  to  discover  all  that  may  be  Known  on  the  subject-matter  of  their
convictions.  A  man  of  science,  for  instance,  would  not  grudge  the  labour  needed  to
learn  another  language,  if  he  felt  that  an  increase  of  knowledge  would  prove  the  result
to  be  worth  the  labour.  But  how  many  Christians  can  be  found  who  have  any  notion
that  it  might  be  worth  their  while  to  learn  the  Qreek  Testament  for  themselves  instead
of  depending  upon  even  the  best  of  translations  ?  A^ain,  the  world  rebukes  us  as  we
consider  the  enthusiasm  of  terrestrial  citizenship.  There  is  much  for  the  Christian  to
learn  as  he  contemplates  the  spirit  breaking  forth  in  many  men  at  the  thought  of  the
land  that  gave  them  birth.  How  the  feelings  of  such  men  glow  to  fever  heat  with  the
exhibition  of  a  national  flag,  the  singing  of  a  national  anthem,  or  the  mention  of  great
military  and  naval  triumphs,  with  the  names  of  the  captains  who  achieved  them  1
Then  think  of  what  is  better  still,  the  xmwearied  labours  of  social  reformers,  simply
from  love  to  their  country,  to  lessen  crime,  vice,  disease,  and  ignorance.  In  view  of  all
this  deep  attachment  to  the  land  where  the  natural  man  has  sprung  into  existence  and
is  sustained,  may  not  Christ  well  ask  his  people,  if  the  heavenly  iroxircfa  into  which
they  have  been  inttoduced  by  the  second  birth,  is  as  dear  to  them  ?  Then,  what  a
rebuke  comes  to  us  as  we  look  at  the  efforts  of  commercial  enterprise.  What  toil  there
is  here  1  what  daring  investments  of  capital  I  what  quick  combinations  of  the  many  to
ftttain  what  cannot  be  done  by  the  one !  what  formation  of  business  habits  so  as  to
make  easy  and  regular  what  would  otherwise  be  difBcult,  perhaps  impossible  1  And
yet  it  is  all  done  to  get  that  wealth  on  which  the  Scriptures  have  so  many  warning
words  to  speak.  As  these  gods  of  the  nations  were  no  gods,  so  the  wealth  men  think  so
much  of  is  really  no  wealth  at  all.  We  are  not  to  look  towards  the  goal  of  their
deures,  nor  follow  in  their  steps.    But  as  earnestly  as  they  look  towards  the  goal  of  an


44         THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,  [en.  ii.  1—37.

earthly  fortune,  we  should  look  towards  that  of  a  heavenly  one.  As  we  stand  among
men  clinging  to  riches  which  they  cannot  keep,  and  clinging  none  the  less  firmly
because  the  riches  are  hollow,  let  us  bear  in  mind  how  easy  it  is  for  us  who  are  but
sinful  mortals  also  to  be  deluded  away  into  neglect  of  the  true  riches. — ^Y.

Ver.  13. — Forsaking  the  fountain  of  living  waters,  I.  There  is  suggested  here
AN  inconceivable  ACT  OF  FOLLY.  It  is  a  thing  which  could  be  believed  of  no  one  in
his  sound  senses  that  he  would  leave  a  fountain  of  living  water,  knowing  it  to  be
such,  and  enjoying  the  use  of  it ;  and  bo  contented  with  a  cistern  such  as  is  here
described.  A  fountain  is  that  from  which  he  benefits  without  any  trouble ;  it  is  a  pure
gift  of  grace,  and  all  he  has  to  do  is  to  take  up  his  habitation  by  it.  Why,  then,  should
he  leave  a  fountain  for  a  cistern,  even  if  the  cistern  were  ready-made?  Still  less
credible  is  it  that  he  should  take  the  trouble  to  make  a  cistern.  And  the  incredibility
reaches  its  height  when  we  are  asked  to  suppose  him  doing  all  this  with  the  end  of
possessing  a  broken  cistern  that  can  hold  no  water.  Such  broken  cisterns  the  people  of
Israel  seem  to  have  known  only  too  well.  Dr.  Thomson  says  there  are  thousands  such
in  Upper  Galilee,  which,  though  dug  in  hard  rock  and  apparently  sound,  are  all  dry  in
winter ;  at  best  they  are  an  uncertain  source  of  supply,  and  the  water,  when  collected,
IS  bad  in  colour  and  taste,  and  full  of  worms.  The  whole  action,  then,  of  the  character
here  indicated  is  scarcely  conceivable,  imless  as  the  expression  of  fear  in  a  diseased
mind.  In  somewhat  of  this  way  wo  have  heard  of  men  acting,  who,  after  having
made  great  fortunes,  have  become  victims  to  the  horrid  delusion  that  they  are  paupers,
and  must  make  some  sort  of  provision  against  utter  destitution.  So  we  might  imagine
the  victim  of  delusion,  with  fountains  all  round  him,  still  insisting  upon  having  some
sort  of  cistern  provided.  Note,  moreover,  that  the  aspect  of  folly  becomes  more
decided  when  we  consider  that  it  is  water  which  is  treated  in  this  way.  The  water
which  is  offered  so  freely  and  continuously  in  the  fountain  is  a  thing  which  man  needs^
and  yet  it  is  for  the  supply  of  that  which  is  a  great  and  may  be  a  painful  need  that  ho
is  represented  as  depending  on  broken  cisterns  which  with  great  toil  he  has  constructed
for  himself.

II.  There  is  mentioned  an  indisputable  act  of  desertion.  Israelites,  stung  to
wrath  by  a  charge  of  folly,  might  reply  that  they  had  not  left  a  living  fountain  for
broken  cisterns.  This,  however, was  but  denying  the  application  of  a  figure;  the
historical  fact  which  the  prophet  had  connected  with  the  figure  they  could  not  possibly
deny.  Assuredly  they  had  forsaken  God.  Not  simply  that  at  this  time  they  were
without  him,  but,  having  once  been  with  him,  they  had  now  left  him.  Had  he  not
taken  them  up  when  they  were  in  the  weakness,  dependence,  and  waywardness  of
national  infancy?  Had  they  not  received  all  their  supplies  from  him,  and  gathered
strength  and  prestige  under  the  shelter  of  his  providence?  They  owed  the  land  in
which  they  lived,  and  the  wealth  they  had  heaped  up,  to  the  fulfilment  of  his  promises,
and  yet  they  were  now  worshipping  idols.  Their  worship  was  not  a  momentary  out-
break like  the  worship  of  the  golden  calf,  soon  after  leaving  Egypt,  and  when  they  had
80  long  been  living  in  the  midst  of  idolaters.  It  was  a  steady  settling  down  into  the
worst  excesses  of  an  obscene  and  cruel  worship,  after  long  centuries  during  which  the
Mosaic  institutions  had  been  in  a  place  of  acknowledged  authority.  What  extenua-
tions there  may  have  been  for  this  apostasy  are  not  to  be  considered  here.  The  thing
insisted  upon  is  the  simple  undeniable  fact  of  the  apostasy  itself.

III.  This  desertion  of  Jehovah  is  divinely  asserted  to  be  an  act  of  the
GROSSEST  folly.  We  have  noticed  the  figure  under  which  this  act  is  set  forth  ;  and
if  Israel  meant  to  get  clear  of  a  humiliating  charge,  it  was  only  by  denying  that  God
was  indeed  a  fountain  of  living  water.  The  figure,  therefore,  resolves  itself  into  a  sort  of
logicaJ  dilemma ;  and  the  fact  is  clearly  shown  that  in  spiritual  affairs  men  are  capable
of  a  folly  which,  in  natural  affairs,  they  are  as  far  from  as  possible.  Man  holds  within
him  a  strange  duality  of  contradictions.  In  some  directions  he  may  show  the  greatest
powers  of  comprehension,  insight,  foresight ;  may  advance  with  all  the  resources  of
nature  well  in  nand.  But  in  other  directions  he  may  stumble  like  a  blind  man,  while
around  him  on  every  hand  are  piled  up  the  gracious  gifts  of  a  loving  and  forgiving  God.
There  is  no  special  disgrace  to  any  individual  in  admitting  what  a  fool  he  may  be  in
ipiritual  things.    In  this  respect,  at  all  events,  ho  is  not  a  fool  above  other  fools.    Hq


ch.il  1—37.]     THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  45

may  see  many  of  the  wise,  noble,  and  mighty  of  earth  who  have  lived  and  died  in
apparent  neglect  as  to  the  concerns  of  eternity  and  the  relation  of  Christ  to  Uiem.
Men  toil  to  make  securities  and  satisfactions  for  themselves,  but  if  they  only  clearly
saw  that  they  are  doing  no  better  than  making  broken  cisterns,  their  toils  would  be
relinquished  the  next  moment  It  is  but  too  sadly  plain  how  many  neglect  the  revela-
tions, offers,  and  promises  of  God ;  but  who  can  doubt  that  if  they  could  only  really
see  him  to  be  the  true  Fountain  of  living  waters,  the  neglect  would  come  to  an  end  at
once?— Y.

Yer.  26. — A  shame  to  he  ashamed  of.  There  is,  as  Paul  tells  us  (2  Con  tU.),  a  godly
sorrow  and  a  sorrow  of  the  world ;  a  codly  sorrow  working  out  a  repentance  never  to
be  regretted,  and  a  sorrow  of  the  world  which  works  out  death.  So  there  is  a  shame
and  humiliation  which  is  profitable  in  the  right  way  and  to  the  highest  degree,  when  a
man  comes  into  all  the  horrors  of  self-discovery,  and  is  ready  to  declare  himself,  feeling
it  no  exaggeration,  as  the  chief  of  sinners.  Such  a  shame  is  indeed  the  highest  of
blessings,  since  it  gives  something  like  a  complete  understanding  of  what  human  nature
owes  to  the  cleansing  blood  of  Christ,  and  to  the  renewing  power  of  the  Spirit.  But
there  is  also  shame  and  humiliation  such  as  the  gaoler  at  rhilippi  felt  when  he  sus-
pected his  prisoners  were  gone,  and  degradation  was  impending  over  him  at  the  hand
of  his  masters.  It  is  to  such  a  shame  that  our  attention  is  directed  here.  The  shame
of  a  thief,  not  for  the  wrong  he  has  done,  but  because  he  is  detected  in  the  doing  of  it.
Israel,  we  see,  is  being  dealt  with  in  very  plain  language.  Already  the  nation  which
Gtxl  had  so  favoured,  and  from  which  he  had  expected  bo  much,  has  been  spoken  of  as
lower  than  an  idolater.  And  now  it  is  likened  to  the  thief  in  the  moment  when  his
knavery  is  discovered.    Consider,  then,  as  here  suggested —

I.  Why  the  sinneb  should  be  ashamed.  The  thief,  of  course,  ought  to  be  ashamed,
and  ashamed  whether  he  is  caught  or  not.  He  ought  to  come  into  such  a  state  of
mind  as  to  acknowledge  his  offence  and  make  restitution,  even  when  otherwise  his
offence  might  remain  undiscovered.  He  should  be  ashamed  because  he  has  done
v:Tong ;  because  he  has  broken  a  commandment  of  Ood ;  because  he  lives  on  what  has
been  won  by  the  industry  and  toil  of  his  neighbours ;  because,  in  addition,  he  is  rob-
bing his  neighbours  of  what  benefit  should  have  come  to  them  from  his  own  industry
and  toil  Some  have  enough  to  make  them  bow  their  heads  in  despair  of  ever  being
able  to  make  restitution ;  and  it  is  just  when  we  thus  begin  to  estimate  the  sense  of
shame  that  should  fill  the  thoughts  of  the  thief  that  we  also  come  to  have  a  clear  idea
of  what  a  universal  feeling  amongst  mankind  shame  should  be.  **  The  thief  should  be
thoroughly  ashamed  of  himself,"  you  say,  "  in  all  possible  ways."  True,  he  ought.
But  now  take  to  mind  the  home-pressing  words  of  the  apostle,  "  Wherein  thou  judgest
another,  thou  condemnest  thyself;  for  thou  that  judgest  doest  the  same  things"
(Rom.  ii.  1).  Nav,  there  may  be  more  to  be  said  for  the  thief  than  for  thee.  Only  too
often  he  has  a  bad  start,  and  no  real  chance  of  getting  out  of  bad  associations.  He  may
get  so  hemmed  in  with  temptations  as  to  find  it  very  difficult  to  resist.  And  in  any
case,  the  thief  has  no  more  cause  to  be  ashamed  of  his  theft  than  any  other  sinner  for
his  own  particular  mode  of  self-indulgence.  Gkxi  does  not  draw  the  distinctions  which
we  are  compelled  to  do,  between  wrongs  that  are  crimes  and  wrongs  that  are  not
crimes.  His  distinctions  are  made  on  altogether  different  principles — principles  which
abide.  If  the  thief  has  wronged  his  neighbour  in  one  way,  be  sure  of  this,  that  you
have  wronged  him  in  another.  If  the  thief  has  sinned  against  God  in  one  way,  you  have
sinned  against  him  in  another.  You  may  go  through  the  world  without  the  slightest
fear  of  anything  leaping  to  the  light  such  as  will  bring  the  detective's  tap  upon  your
shoulder,  and  nevertheless  you  have  yet  to  bo  bowed  in  unspeakable  bitterness  of
shame  because  yon  have  been  defrauding  Qod  and  missing  the  great  end  of  life.  What
is  wanted  is  that  all  of  us  should  come  to  ourselves — being  guided  by  that  unerring
Spirit  which  guides  into  all  truth,  and  self  being  revealed  by  the  light  of  the  cross  and
ol*  eternity.

IL  Why  the  sinneb  actually  is  ashau eb.  Discovery  is  what  he  dreads ;  dis*
oovery  puts  him  in  utter  confusion.  Discovery  is  disgrace  and  ruin,  so  far  as  his  future
relation  to  men  is  concerned.  Henceforth  he  passes  into  a  suspected  and  avoided
class ;  he  has  iost  the  mark  of  respectability  and  confidence.    The  sad  thing  is  that,  in


46  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,      [cu.  il  1—37.

the  eyes  of  a  large  part  of  mankind,  discovery  seems  to  make  all  the  difference.  One
may  do  a  great  deal  of  wrong  with  social  impunky,  if  only  there  is  cleverness  enough
to  keep  on  the  hither  boundary  of  what  is  reckoned  criminal.  Those  who  are  most
serenely  indifferent  to  the  Law  of  God  will  fall  into  all  sorts  of  sins,  real  and  far-reaching
evils,  rather  than  transgress  a  certain  social  code.  It  is  not  so  long  ago  since  the  duel
ceased  to  be  a  part  of  the  social  code  of  England ;  and  what  a  curious  standard  of
honour  was  involved  in  such  a  practice  I  There  are  countries  still  where  a  man  is  dis«
graced  if  he  refuses  to  fight ;  if  he  fights  and  kills  his  man  it  is  reckoned  no  shame  at  all.
The  most  immoral  and  debauched  of  men  are  yet  curiously  sensitive  to  what  they  choose
to  consider  points  of  honour.  People  will  plunge  over  head  and  ears  into  debt,  and
run  into  the  wildest  extravagance,  that  they  may  flourish  a  little  longer  in  the  social
splendour  which  they  know  they  have  not  the  honest  means  to  maintain.  They  feel  it
is  a  greater  disgrace  to  sink  in  the  world  than  to  be  unable  to  pay  their  debts.  How
needful  it  is  for  the  Christian  to  take  up  all  positions  which  he  feels  to  be  right — riglit
according  to  the  Divine  will,  no  matter  now  much  he  may  be  exposed  to  the  reproach  of
folly.  Quixotism,  and  fanaticism  1  Let  us  pray  that  we  may  ever  have  a  godly  shame
when  the  light  of  heaven  is  thrown  on  us,  and  we  are  contrasted  with  God  in  his  holi*
nesa  and  Jesus  in  his  perfect  manhood.  Let  us  equally  pray  that  we  may  never  be
ashamed  of  Jesus.  It  is  a  harder  thing  than  many  seem  to  think,  even  though  they
are  constantly  acknowledging  in  hymn  and  prayer  what  they  owe  to  Jesus  in  uie  way
of  gratitude  and  service.— Y.

Ver.  37. — Why  the  confidencei  of  men  do  not  prosper.  The  people  of  Israel  are  set
forth,  even  within  the  limits  of  this  one  chapter,  as  having  multiplied  and  extended
their  confidences;  and  yet  it  could  not  be  said  that  they  were  prospering.  Men  with
the  religious  element  in  their  nature  strongly  clamouring  for  satisfaction,  had  turned
to  the  gods  of  neighbouring  nations,  and  multiplied  these  objects  of  worship  until  it
could  1^  said,  ''According  to  the  number  of  thy  cities  are  thy  gods,  0  Judah."  God
compares  them  to  thirsty  people  who,  with  a  copious  fountain  in  their  midst,  work  and
toil  to  make  cisterns,  only  to  find  that  the  end  of  their  labour  is  in  broken  cisterns  which
can  hold  no  water.  And  then,  when  their  broken  cisterns  had  proved  quite  unavailing,
they  fly  to  drink  of  Nile  and  of  Euphrates.  Evidently  their  confidence  had  not  prospered,
and  a  continuance  and  increase  of  adversity  was  threatened,  the  cause  of  it  all  being
that  their  confidences  were  such  as  God,  in  his  righteousness  and  majesty,  must
inevitably  reject.    Consider —

I.  Why  this  question  as  to  thb  sufficienot  op  human  confidences  is  so
DCFOBTANT.  The  answer  is  that  men  cannot  do  without  confidences.  The  events  of
a  single  day  of  life  might  be  registered  in  such  an  aspect  as  to  show  what  a  confiding
creature  man  is.  Faith  has  become  so  much  a  habit  with  him  as  to  be  almost  a
second  nature.  Hence,  even  in  the  great  concerns  of  life,  we  find  many  reposing  trust
wi^  very  little  inquiry.  Looking  at  others,  we  find  their  lives  proving  the  need  of
confidence  by  the  very  frequency  of  doubt  and  irresolution  in  them.  They  are  ever
asking  the  question,  yet  never  quite  able  to  answer  it,  "  What  is  the  best  thing  for  me
to  do  ?  "  And  then,  as  so  often  happens,  the  end  of  hesitation  and  perplexity  is,  that
they  seem  to  have  no  choice  at  all,  and  go  submissively  towards  the  confidence  that
happens  to  be  most  inviting  at  the  moment.  Seeing,  therefore,  that  we  are  compelled
to  nave  confidences,  it  is  of  the  first  importance  to  discover  in  what  sort  of  confidences
prosperity  will  alone  be  found.

II.  Many  actual  confidences  of  men  fbove  failubes  in  the  end.  They  approach
men  invitingly,  they  seem  to  stand  well  in  the  judgment  of  past  generations,  they  may
be  the  objects  of  very  general  approval,  and  yet,  when  they  are  searched  into,  when
the  truth  concerning  them  is  got  from  the  bottom  of  the  proverbial  well,  that  truth  is
seen  to  be  well  expressed  in  the  words  which  say  men  have  not  prospered  in  them.
There  is,  for  instance,  a  very  plausible  appearance  of  prosperity  in  worldly  wealth.
Many  fail  to  acquire  it^  and  when  they  acquire  it,  fail  to  keep  it ;  but  this  is  held  to
oome  in  the  majority  of  cases  from  some  fault  in  the  man,  and  not  in  the  stability  of
bis  possessions.  To  say  that  a  possession  is  as  safe  as  the  Bank  of  England  is  to
utter  the  strongest  conviction  as  to  its  stability  and  security ;  and  yet  such  confidences
fBil  because  they  are  not  enough  for  the  whoU  man.    It  is  just  one  of  the  perils  of


CH.  n.  1—37.]      THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  47

wealth  that  man  should  let  his  whole  heart  rest  upon  it ;  should  come  to  let  the  com-
forts, occupations,  and  hopes  of  life  depend  upon  external  possessions.  There  is  failure
also  when  men  put  conndence  in  self,  confidence  in  present  views  of  life,  present
feelings,  present  vigour  of  body  and  mind,  in  natural  qualities,  such  as  shrewdness,  self-
control,  presence  of  mind,  and  in  habits  of  attention,  industiy,  and  promptitude,  that
have  been  cultivated.  What  manifest  failure  also  often  comes  from  too  much  confi-
dence in  the  judgment  of  man  1  The  counsels  of  the  wisest,  most  experienced,  most
successful  of  men,  must  be  listened  to  with  discretion.

III.  ThB    BBASOH    why    such     confidences    do    not    BBnrO   PBOSPEBITT     IS    MADE

PLAIN.  They  are  not  confidences  after  God's  own  heart.  They  are  an  ungodly  waste
of  affections  and  energies  given  for  higher  purposes  and  more  durable  occupations.  The
practical  lesson  is  that  we  should  reject  all  confidences  if  we  are  not  made  quite  certain
that  God  approves  them.  Blessed  is  that  man  who  has  found  his  way,  it  may  be
through  many  losses  and  agonizing  pains,  to  the  truth  that  tlie  unseen  is  more  trust-
worthy than  the  seen,  the  eternal  than  the  temporal.  One  who  has  thus  risen  into  the
sphere  of  Divine  realities  may  have  hii  confidences  rejected  and  despised  of  men.  What
do  these  rejections  matter  ?  He  who  has  firm  hold  of  God  himself  need  not  to  care
for  contemptuous  words.  The  hard  words  of  worldly  men  cannot  destroy  spiritual
prosperity.— Y.

Ver.  13.— 2%«  people^s  sin.  This  is  the  sum  and  substance  of  the  charge  the  prophet
was  called  to  bring  against  Israel.  Idolatrjr  was  their  destroying  sin,  the  root  of  all
their  discords  and  miseries.  It  involved  the  renunciation  of  their  allegiance  to  the  God
of  their  fathers,  and  in  this  their  conduct  was  without  a  paralleL  No  instance  of  such
apostasy  could  be  found  elsewhere.  Those  whom  God  had  chosen  to  be  witnesses  for
him  before  all  the  world  were  put  to  shame  in  this  respect  by  the  very  heathen  whom
it  was  their  mission  to  enlighten  and  bless.  But  we  may  regard  this  as  the  condemna-
tion of  the  whole  human  race.  ''  lliey  have  forsaken,"  etc.  Note  the  view  we  get
here—

I.  Of  the  BEFsa  of  God  and  the  belation  he  sustains  towards  us.  "The
Fountain  of  living  waters  "  (see  also  ch.  xvii.  13  ;  Ps.  xxxvi.  9).  1.  ffe  is  emphaiica2ly
the  Living  One,  The  grand  distinction  of  the  Bible  is  that  it  reveals  ^  die  living
God."  The  Name  Jehovah,  the  mysterious  and  incommunicable  Name,  was  expressive
of  this.  "  And  God  said  to  Moses,  I  AM  THAT  I  AM,"  etc.  (Exod.  iii.  14).  Abso-
lute existence — essential,  independent,  necessary  being — is  the  idea  it  conveys.  The
knowledge  of  such  a  spiritual  Being,  of  a  personality  kindred  with  our  own  but  abso-
lutely exempt  from  its  limitations,  is  our  supreme  need.  David  did  but  utter  forth  the
insatiable  longing  of  our  nature  fi>r  its  true  home,  its  only  possible  resting-place,  when
he  cried,  "  My  soul  thirsteth  for  God,  yea,  for  the  living  God."  We  want,  not  mere
vague  impressions  of  infinitude  and  eternity,  but  an  Infinite  and  Eternal  One  in  whom
we  may  trust.  Not  mere  abstract  ideas  of  truth,  and  beauty,  and  righteousness,  and
love,  but  One  of  whom  these  are  the  unchanging  attributes,  and  to  whom,  in  the  frailty
of  our  nature,  we  can  fly  for  refuge.  "  Our  heart  and  our  fl^sh  cry  out  for  the  living
God."  2.  He  is  the  Oiver  and  Sustainer  of  all  other  forms  of  spirit-life.  The  "  Foun-
tain "  of  life ;  all  other  existences  are  dependent  upon  him.  "  The  Father  of  spirits ; "
"we  also  are  his  offspring;"  *'in  him  we  live  and  move  and  have  our  being."
Whether  our  spirit-life  once  given  can  ever  become  extinct  again  may  be  a  matter  of
doubt  and  controversy,  but  certainly  it  cannot  be  regarded  as  absolute  and  necessary
existence.  Though  God  may  have  endowed  our  nature  with  his  own  immortality,  we
do  not  possess  immortality  in  the  sense  in  which  he  does.  *'  He  only  hath  immortality."
Ours  is  not  self-existent  being ;  it  is  dependent  on  him  from  whom  it  came — an  out-
flow of  the  ''  Fountain  "  of  life.  3.  He  is  the  Source  of  all  that  nourishes,  enriches,  and
gladdens  this  dependent  creature-life^^'* tho  Fountain  of  living  waters."  "Living
waters  "  are  the  Divine  satisfactions  of  the  human  soul.  The  Scriptures  abound  with
similar  figurative  representations  (Gen.  ii.  10 ;  Zech.  xiv.  8 ;  John  iv.  14 ;  Hev.  xxiL
1, 17).  Every  age  has  had  its  witness  to  the  truth  that  man's  real  satisfactions  are  only
to  be  found  in  God.  In  Christ  that  witness  is  perfected,  that  truth  verified.  "  This  is
the  record,"  etc  (1  John  v.  11, 12).  Here  are  the  conditions  of  infinite  blessedness  for
every  one  of  us.    To  be  separated  from  God  in  Christ,  to  turn  away  from  him,  is  to


48


THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,     [en.  m.  1—25.


perish,  to  doom  yourself  to  the  pangs  of  an  insatiable  hunger  and  a  quenchless  thirst.
•*  This  is  life  eternal,  that  they  might  know  thee,"  etc.  (John  xvii.  3).  This  is  death
eternal — not  to  know  him,  to  refuse  the  knowledge  of  him,  to  dream  that  you  can  live
without  him.

II.  The  folly  akd  exceedikq  BiNFULyESS  of  bin.  The  "  two  evils  "  here  spoken
of  are  but  two  forms,  two  sides,  of  one  and  the  same  thing.  There  is  the  self-willed
departure  from  God,  and  there  is  the  endeavour  in  that  to  lead  a  self-determined  and
self-sufficient  life.  1.  They  have  forsaken  me.  All  sin  is  a  forsaking  of  God.  Adam
turned  his  back  on  Qod  when  he  listened  to  the  voice  of  the  tempter.  The  prophet
rebukes  here  the  shameful  idolatries  of  the  people.  Think  what  idolatry  means.  It
has,  no  doubt,  its  fairer  side,  in  which  it  is  seen  to  be  the  ignorant  but  still  honest
expression  of  the  religious  sentiment  in  men — the  blind  '*  feeling  after  God  if  haply
they  may  find  him."  But  think  how  it  arose,  and  what  its  issues  have  been.  St.  Paul
tells  us  how  it  was  bom  of  the  corruption  of  man's  nature,  and  has  ever  since  been  the
Satanic  means  of  deepening  that  corruption  (see  Rom.  i.  20,  et  seq,).  So  is  it  with  every
sinful  life.  It  begins  with  a  more  or  less  intentional  and  deliberate  renunciation  of
God.  The  exact  point  of  departure  may  not  be  very  definitely  marked ;  but  as  the  life
imfolds  itself,  the  fact  that  this  is  its  true  meaning  becomes  more  manifest.  How  mar-
vellous a  picture  of  this  dread  reality  of  moral  life  does  our  Lord's  parable  of  the  prodigal
supply  I  Such  is  the  history  of  prodigal  souls.  Happy  are  they  who  **  come  to  them-
selves "  before  it  is  too  late  to  return  to  the  forsaken  home  of  the  Father.  2.  The  dream
of  a  tdf-dttermined  and  self-contained  life,  "  They  have  hewed  them  out  cisterns"  of
their  own,  which  shall  render  them,  as  they  think,  independent  of  the  "Fountain
of  living  waters."  Here  is  the  idea  of  a  proud  endeavour  to  find  in  one's  self  and  one's
own  self-willed  way  all  necessary  good.  But  it  is  altogether  vain.  The  cisterns  are
miserably  shallow,  and  they  are  "  broken."  It  is  true  of  every  man,  indeed,  that  his
satisfactions  must  spring  from  what  he  finds  within  rather  than  from  his  earthly  sur-
roundings; but  then  he  is  "  satisfied  from  himself"  only  because  he  has  learnt  to  link
himself  with  the  Divine  Source  of  all  blessedness — the  living  God.

"  Here  would  wo  end  our  quest ;
Alone  are  found  in  thee
The  life  of  perfect  love,  the  rest
Of  immortaUty."

W.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  ra.


That  this  chapter  (to  which  the  first  four
verses  of  ch.  iv.  ought  to  have  been  at-
tached) belongs  to  the  time  of  Josiah  seems
to  be  proved  by  ver.  6,  and  the  years  im-
mediately following  the  reformation  are
not  obscurely  referred  to  in  vers.  4,  10.
Naegelsbaoh  gives  a  striking  distribution
of  its  contents.'  The  general  subject  is  a
call  to  "  return."  First,  the  prophet  shows
that,  in  spite  of  Deut.  xxiv.  1,  etc.,  a  return
is  possible  (vers.  1—5).  Then  he  describes
successively  an  invitation  already  uttered
in  the  past,  and  ito  sad  results  (vers.  6—10),
and  the  call  which  will,  with  a  happier
issue,  be  sounded  in  the  future  (vers.  11 —
25) ;  this  is  followed  by  an  earnest  exhorta-
tion, addressed  first  to  Israel  and  then  to
Judah  (ch.  iv.  1—4).


Ver.  1. — They  say,  etc ;  as  the  margin  of
Authorized  Version  correctly  states,  the
Hebrew  simply  has  **  saying."  Various  in-
genious attempts  have  been  made  to  explain
this.  Hitzig,  for  instance,  followed  by  Dr.
Payne  Smith,  thinks  that  •*  saying  "  may  be
an  unusual  equivalent  for  "  that  is  to  say,"
*'  for  example,"  or  the  like ;  while  the  Vul-
gate and  Rashi,  followed  by  De  Wette  and
Rosenmiiller,  assume  an  ellipsis,  and  render,
*'  It  is  commonly  said,"  or  '*  I  might  say."
But  far  the  most  natural  way  is  to  sup-
pose that  "saying"  is  a  fragment  of  tho
superscription  of  the  prophecy,  the  re-
mainder of  which  has  been  accidentally
placed  in  ver.  6,  and  that  wo  should  read,
"  And  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  unto  me
*  in  the  days  of  Josiah  the  king,  saying."  So
J.  D.  Michaelis,  Ewald,  Graf,  Naegelsbach.
If  a  man  pat  away  his  wife.  The  argument
is  found^  on  the  law  of  Deut.  xxiv.  1—4,
which  forbade  an  Israelite  who  had  divorced
bis  wife  to  take  her  again,  if  in  the  interval


CH.  m.  1—25.]     THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMUH.


49


she  had  been  married  to  another.  The  Jews
had  broken  a  still  more  sacrod  tie,  not  onco
only,  bat  repeatedly;  they  worshipped  ^*gods
many  and  lords  many ; "  so  that  they  had
no  longer  any  claim  on  Jehovah  in  virtao
of  his  **ooTenant''  with  his  people.  Shall
he  return,  etc.  ?  rather.  Ought  he  to  return  f
The  force  of  the  term  is  potential  (comp.
Authorized  Version  of  Gen.  xxxiv.  7,  "which
thiog  ought  not  to  be  done").  Shall  not
in  the  next  clause  is  rather  would  not.
Yet  retnm  again  to  me.  So  Pcshito,  Tar-
gum,  Vulgate,  and  the  view  may  seem  to  be
conHrmed  by  the  invitations  in  vers.  12,  H,
22.  But  as  it  is  obviously  inconsistent  with
the  argument  of  the  verse,  and  as  the  verb
may  equally  well  be  the  infinitive  or  the  im-
perative, most  recent  commentators  render,
"And  thinkest  thou  to  return  to  me?"  (liter-
ally, and  returning  to  met  implying  that
the  very  idea  is  inconceivable).  Probably
Jeremiah  was  aware  that  many  of  the  Jews
were  dissatisfied  with  tho  religious  condi-
tion of  the  nation  (comp.  ver.  4).

Ver.  2. — lift  up  thine  eyes,  etc.  No
superficial  reformation  can  be  called  "re-
turning to  Jehovah."  The  prophet,  therefore,
holds  up  the  mirror  to  the  sinful  practices
which  a  sincere  repentance  must  extinguish.
The  high  places;  rather,  the  hare  hills  {comp.
on  ch.  ii.  20).  In  the  ways  hast  thon  sat
for  them.  By  the  roadside  (comp.  Gen.
xxxviii.  14 ;  Prov.  vii.  12).  As  the  Arabian
in  the  wilderness.  So  early  was  the  reputa-
tion of  the  Bedouin  already  won  (comp.
Judg.  vi.).  Jerome  ad  loc.  remarks,  "  Qua)
gens  latrociniis  dedita  usque  IfDdie  iucursat
terminos  Palasstinaj."

Ver.  4. — Wilt  thou  not,  etc.  ?  rather.  Truly
from  this  time  Umu  callett  unto  me  (literally,
Dogt  thou  not,  etc.  ?  a  common  way  of  giving
an  cnergetio  assurance).  The  prophet  ad-
mits the  apparent  revival  of  faith  in  Jehovah
which  attended  the  compulsory  reformation
under  Josiah,  but  denies  that  it  was  more
than  apparent  (comp,  ver.  10).  The  guide  of
my  youth ;  rather,  the  companion  (the  familiar
associate) ;  so  in  Prov.  ii.  17.  Comp.  ch.  it  2,
and  especially  Isa.  liv.  6,  "and  a  wife  of
youth'*  (i.e.  married  in  youth),  "that  she
should  be  rejected  [how  incredible  a
thing !  ]  "

Ver.  5.— Will  he  reserve!  rather,  Will  he
retain,  etc.?  It  is  a  continuation  of  the
supposed  address  of  Judah.  To  the  endl
rather,  everlastingly  f  Behold,  th<m  hast
spoken,  etc. ;  rather,  Behold,  tJwu  hast
spoken  it,  but  hast  dime  these  evil  things,
and  hast  prevailed  (i.e.  succeeded).  The
substance  of  the  two  verses  (4  and  5)  is
well  given  by  Ewald:  "Unhappily  her
power  truly  to  return  has  been  exnausted,
as  not  long  ago  after  fresh  signs  of  the
Pivine  displeasure  she  prayed  in  beautiful

JEBEHIAH.


language  to  [Jehovah]  for  new  favour  and
abatement  of  the  old  sufierings,  [but]  she
inmiediately  fell  again  into  her  sin,  and
carried  it  out  with  cool  determination."

Ver.  6. — ^The  Lord  said  also  unto  me,  etc.
It  has  been  suggested  (see  on  ver.  1)  that
this  introductory  clause  belongs  rather  to
ver.  1.  Some  sort  of  introduction,  however,
seems  called  for ;  Ewald  supposes  a  shorter
form,  such  as  "  And  the  Lord  said  further
unto  me."  The  view  is  not  improbable,  for
although  there  is  evidently  a  break  between
ver.  5  and  ver.  6,  there  are  points  of  contact
enough  between  vers.  1 — 5  and  the  follow-
ing discourse  to  prove  that  they  represent
the  same  propbetio  period  (comp.  ver.  10
with  ver.  3,  vers.  8,  9  with  ver.  1,  ver.  12
with  ver.  5,  ver.  19  with  ver.  4).  HftiiWHiilwg
Israel;  literally,  apostaey  Israel.  Usually
a  change  or  modification  of  a  name  is  a  sig^
of  honour ;  here,  however,  it  marks  the  dis-
grace of  the  bearer.  Israel  is  apostaey  per-
sonified (corap.  vers.  14,  22).  She  is  gone
up ;  rather,  her  wont  haOi  been  to  go  up.

Ver.  7. — And  I  said  after  she  had  done,
etc. ;  rather,  and  I  said.  After  she  hath  dons
all  these  things,  she  tcill  return  unto  me.  And
her  treacherous  sister.  Observe  the  distinc-
tion between  the  two  sifters.  Israel  had
openly  broken  tho  political  and  religious
connection  with  Jehovah  (Hos.  viii.  4);
Judah  nominally  retained  both,  but  her
heart  was  towards  the  false  gods  (comp.
tho  allegory  in  £zek.  xxiii.,  which  is  evi-
dently founded  upon  our  passage).

Ver.  8. — And  I  saw,  when  for  all  the
causes,  etc. ;  rather,  and  I  saw  that  even
because  apostate  Israel  had^  etc  But  this  is
exceedingly  strange  in  this  connection.  The
preceding  words  seem  to  compel  us  either
(with  the  Vulgate)  to  omit  "and  I  saw"
altogether,  or  (with  Ewald)  to  read  the  first
letter  of  the  verb  differently,  and  render
"  and  she  saw,"  taking  up  the  statement  of
ver.  7  ("  saw ;  yea,  sho  saw,"  etc.).  Tho
latter  view  is  favoured  by  a  phrase  in  ver.  10
(see  note  below).  The  same  corruption  of
the  text  (which  is  palsBographically  an
easy  one)  occurs  probably  in  Ezek.  xxiii.
13.  Tho  error  must,  however,  be  a"  very
ancient  one,  for  tho  Scptuagint  already  has

Ver.  9.— Through  the  lightness  of  her
whoredom;  i.e.  through  the  slight  impor-
tance which  she  attached  to  her  whoredom.
So  apparently  the  ancient  versions.  The
only  sense,  however,  which  the  word  hoi
ever  has  in  Hebrew  is  not  "  lightness,"  but
"sound,"  "voice,"  and  perhaps  "rumour"
(Gen.  xlv.  16).  Hence  it  is  more  strictly
accurate  to  render  **  through  the  cry,"  etc.
(comp.  Gen.  iv.  10;  xix.  13).  or  "through
tho  fame,"  etc  (as  Authorized  Version,
margin).    But  neither  of  these  seems  quite

B


THE  LOOK  OF  TIIK  I'ROrnET  .IKREMrAII.    [ui


■


(.ultablo  to  tlio  coiilcKt,  iuhI  if,  os  KUiR
Jamca'e  traiiBluturd  euiiii  til  linvo  fult  ii
niici'E^uiiy  to  cl(i,  vo  ilcBtrt  thu  fnithfnl  tiunii-
lutinn,  aaA  cntur  »u  tlio  ]iiitli  of  ooiijoctiiri',
why  iiot  i.i«i'tiil  tul  into  k'liiu  {tlicro  in  iio
tar,  anil  hucIi  lTa;;mi!nb  of  true  Ttudin^H  iiro
not  nlliijL'thcr  unmnimon  in  ILo  lltlirow
text),  wliii-'li  nt  onru  jii/liU  u  j.-micl  mmniiic
— "  tlirousli  till! iliii^Tii™ of  lier  whoroiloin "?
ICwalil  tliinkft  tliiil  liOl  luftjr  Ui  tukuu  iu  tho
Ecmse  of  li'luii  ;  liut  tliis  is  rDiillv  iiinro  aibi-
tniTy  tliiiu  I'liii-inHn;;  Iho  tcxi.  Tith  itones,
cto.  («■■>■  rli.  ii.  21).

Vw.  10.— For  ftU  tlii*;  i.e.  thoagh  JuJali
bad  tixn  tlia  )lIllli^lItnoIlt  of  npnstuto  larai-l
(cli.  iii. 7, 8).  Pii  r.nKlii, NocgcUlmcli, lyviio
t^tuillt.  M<et  coDimctitulura  gu|>tuuv  Ihu
jihreao  to  icfn  to  Juduli's  oLutinutit  widcul-
iiOBt  (vcr.  U),  1)ut  Oiin  gives  u  vi-ak  senBe.
"  Jndah  dotllnl  llio  lonij,  etc.,  uiiil  yet  ni<t-
witliBlnnding  her  ro|ienlniieo  wiu  iusincero"
— thi«  Ih  by  uo  iiicuns  a  nnlurul  BeqncDoe  of
ideas.    The  riglit  cxpocitiou  iDcii.iiM.-a  thu

Erohability  uf  ttie  eorreotion  propiuud  at  tlic
I'^imiing  of  TCI.  8.

Vcr.  II.— It  ia  vprr  notuiiorthy  that  Jert-
liiiuh  should  Iiuvo  still  bo  nnim  ii  fut'liiig  for
tho  exilca  of  tiio  notthcni  kingJoiu  (mora
tlian  a  liundreil  ytunt  after  thu  j;rir!U  mtiii"-
trophe).  Hath  jnaUfled  heneU.  "ToJHstlfy"
eun  inenu  "  to  ehow  iinc'a  nilf  right(-cui>,"  as
\ctll  uB  "  to  rniiko  one's  ecU'  rigliteoiu,"  juHt
iia  ''  to  unnclify  "  fan  nif  an  "  to  ebow  one'a
M:lf  holy  "(Iku.  viii,  13). a»  wdl  an "  to iiuiko
I  nvV  acir  lioly."  In  omtc  of  Israel's  .ipoatai^r,
the  buH  shon  n  hcrai'lf  letH  irortbyuf  jmnisti-
mint  thnu  .Tmluh,  who  bus  had  bc-toro  Uct
Iho  v'ainiug  leisdun  of  Israel's  i'i:iniiile,  and
vho  baa  been  guilty  of  tho  most  bnteful  of
b11  riua,  liypnerisy  (romp.  ver.  7).

Ver.  12.— Iirnel,  llurefore,  shall  bo  ro-
called  from  exile.  Uer  sins  ara  Icbs  tbnn
tliOM  of  Judnh,  and  bon  long  aod  liitlcrly
has  abo  safTered  for  them  I  Toward  the  nortli.
For  laracl  bad  been  carried  cajilivo  into  Ibo
regions  to  tbo  north  of  the  Asayrian  empiro
(2  Kinga  svii.  G ;  xviii.  11).  Coinp.  tbo  pro-
misD  in  cb.  nxl.  8.  I  wUl  not  c«nn  mine
anger  to  fall  upon  yon;  rather,  mjr /qm  Io
full  lotnanli  you  (i.e.  upon  your  return).

Ver.  13.— TAa  condilion  of  reiloralioa  to
fatour.  Israel  is  to  aoknowledge,  or  por-
ceirc,  notice,  recognize,  her  guilt.  And  luitt
■BattaTBd  thy  way* ;  aUudtug  to  that  "  ted-
ding about"  in  quest  of  foniign  nllLiDccs,
roproTed  iu  tho  preceding  chaptor  (il  3(;).
Comp.  "intcilaclng  her  waya,"  eh.  ii.  23.

Vor.  11.— Tun,  0  i«flVT»^lng  ahildien.
Then)  Ii  a  play  npon  words,  or  rather  upon
•ODMi,  In  tha  oilglnal,  "Tun,  yo  turned
kWftj  onee"  (pomp.  ver.  12).  To  whom  is
thll  addreMBd  ?  To  the  laraclitca  in  the
I,  fbr  thero  la  nothing  to  iu-
'"—      Long  u  they  bsTO


l>t-en  rcnitiied  from  the  palcriml  hi;arth,
lliL-y  are  still  "amf."  For  I  am  married
unto  jou.  The  same  Ili^brew  phrase  ooi-ura
in  ell.  xsxi.  .Il>.  Its  sisiiiflciitioii  hns  been
a  Bubjwt  of  ilisput<\  Fftiiu  Iho  aiipjiosed
ueecBoiliea  of  extv,^!sU  in  eh.  \xxi.  '.VI,  aoino
(ir^.l'ococku  and  iiesenina)  linve  tranfluted,
"for  I  liuvo  rijecled  yon,"  but  the  eim-
nection  requires  nut  "riir"  but  ■' thouKh,"
nhich,  however,  iii  an  illadulia^ilde  ren<IiT<
lag;  iK'^idea,  thu  Hebrew  verii  in  qiieaiiun
iiowheru  lius  the  aciise  of  "n-jeet''  elai^
where  (yet  tliu  8<'ptuagint  alreaily  has  it,
virtually  at  leant,  inch,  xixi.  32.  <^.c.).  Thu
literal  meaning  U  fur  I  Uatv  hea  n  Ifrl
onr  HUH,  Le.  u  biikbund.  Israel  ia  de-
>lH>TidL-nt,  and  fears  to  retnni.  Jehovah
rt'iicata  liia  iuvilatiou.  asjinring  Israel  that
111'  doea  not  regard  the  miirria^'o  IkihiI  as


ii. :  Isa.  1. 1 ;  liv.  G,  etc).  One  itf  a  city,  and
two  of  a  family.  Tbo  prcmiaei'  "t  Cioil  are
prininrilv  to  cnmmunitiea,  but  this  itoea  not
preveut  him  from  dc-voling  Ihr  uioal  piicekil
cure  tu  indivtdii:ils.  "Unu  of  a  eily,  and
two  of  a  family,"  even  thoagh  thero  ehould
be  hat  one  ftulbful  Ix>t  In  a  city,  and  twu
i-ncb  in  a  family  (larger  than  a  city,  a .
ainglo  tribe  containing  only  a  few  mi'hpii-
U(ifA,or  cIan!i),TctI  will  admit  tliwe  few  I.)
iho  iiromiscil  ble.'sings."  Calvin'a  reniurk
ia  wntlh  notielng:  "Hio  Incus  dignus  est
ubiicrvatu,  qniu  nalAUilit  Deus  uon  ci^ao,  cm
iilii  alios  expcctent;  deindo  etiom  al  ciirpiia
ijiEuin  popiili  piitrci=eat  iu  aula  pecciitis,
tanien  ai  panri  ad  ipsiim  redeant,  bu  iilis
eliam  fore  plambili'm. '    Tbo  historical  facts


etc.,  kuppoau  it  to  Uavo  been  fulfilled  e
□luaively  in  tho  return  from  llaUylon ;  h^.
Jerome  and  others  Ibhik  rather  of  the  Mas-
sinnie  period.  Ilcngiiteulierg  finds  a  con-
tinuous fulfilment,  bcginiiiuK  at  tho  time  of
Cyrus,  when  many  lielougiug  tu  th'j  ttn
tribes  joined  tbcniselvea  to  tbo  letumiDg
•ludahitee.  lIo  liiidtf  a  furlher  ctintiiiiiaii<in
in  tiio  times  of  thu  Jloccjibcea,  and  in  fuct  a
continmily  growing  fullilnicnt  in  proji-ira-
tinn  for  tliat  cuiupletc  one  brougbt  iu  by
Chiigt,  when  the  jironiieed  bterKiiig.-i  wero
IKiurvd  out  uiKin  flio  whole  iaiiticiifv\of
(Luke  iL  Sli).  "  Zi^in  and  tbo  bol^  land
weio  nt  that  tima  the  seat  of  the  kingdom
of  God,  so  tliat  the  return  to  the  latter  woe
iui<i.']>;im.ble  from  thu  return  to  the  former."
Dr.  (inthe,  Iiowutvt,  the  latest  orilicul  coin-
nientator  on  Jcremi:ih,  thinks  tbut  tbi>  pas-
sage can  be  explained  otherwise,  viz.  '■  from
each  oitr  one  1^  one,  and  from  each  faiuity
twu  by  'two."  Tliid  gives  a  muie  obvious
cx|>Iaoaliuu;  but  the  ordinary  rendering  is
moio  natural,  oud  Ihu  cxpLuiation  based


CH.  m.  1—25.]  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.


51


upon  it  is  in  the  highest  degree  worthy  of
the  Divine  subject  The  doubt,  of  oourso,  is
whether  in  the  Old  Testament  a  special
proTidence  is  extended  dsewhere  so  dis-
tinctly to  the  indiyidnal.  But  Jeremiah  is
pre-eminently  an  individualizing  prophet ;
he  feels  the  depth  and  reality  of  individual
as  opposed  to  corporate  life  as  no  one  else
among  the  prophets.  (At  any  rate,  one
point  is  clear,  that  the  prophet  foresees  that
the  number  of  the  exiles  who  return  will
be  but  small  compared  with  the  increase  to
be  divinely  vouchsafed  to  them;  eco  ver.
16.)

Ver.  15. — ^Pastors.  In  ch.  xxiii.  4,  the  same
word  is  rendered  in  the  Authorized  Ver-
sion *'  shepherds,"  which  would  be  less  open
to  misunderstanding  here  than  ^'pastors,"
civil  and  not  spiritual  authorities  being  in-
tended (see  on  ch.  ii.  8).  The  prophecy
is,  of  course,  not  inconsistent  with  passages
like  ch.  3Lxiii.  5,  but  as  the  national  con-
tinuance of  Israel  was  guaranteed,  it  was
natural  to  refer  to  the  subordinate  civil
authorities.  Aooording  to  mine  heart;
better,  according  to  my  mind;  for  here,  as
also  in  1  Sam.  xiiL  14,  it  is  something  very
far  from  perfection  which  is  ascribed  to  the
chosen  rulers.  "  Heart "  is  sometimes  equi-
valont  to  **  understanding."

Ver.  16, — ^When  ye  be  multiplied;  a
common  feature  in  pictures  of  the  latter
days  (ch.  xxiii.  3 ;  Ezek.  xxxvi.  11 ;  Hos.
ii.  1).  They  shall  say  no  more,  The  ark  of
the  oovenant  of  the  Lord.  A  definition  of
the  Messianic  period  on  its  negative  side —
the  ark  shall  be  no  longer  the  centre  of
religious  worship.  We  must  remember  that
the  ark  is  represented  in  the  Law  as  the
throne  of  Jehovah,  who  was  *' enthroned
upon  the  cherubim"  on  the  lid  of  the  ark.
It  is  in  virtue  of  this  sacramental  presence
that  the  temple  is  called  the  ^'dwelling-
places  "  of  Jehovah  (e.g.  Ps.xlvi.4 ;  Ixxxiv.  1,
where  Authorized  Version  has  wrongly
"tabernacles").  Now,  in  the  Messianic
period  the  consciousness  of  Jehovah's  pre-
sence was  to  be  so  widelv  spread,  at  any
rate  in  the  centre  of  Goa's  kingdom,  the
holy  city,  that  the  ark  would  no  longer  be
thought  of;  it  would  be,  if  not  destroyed
(we  know,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  that  the  ark
was  destroyed  in  some  unrecorded  way),  yet
at  least  become  utterly  unimportant.  Jeru-
salem would  then  naturally  succeed  to  the
title  "Jehovah's  throne"  (applied  to  tho
temple  in  ch.  xiv.  12).  Neither  shall  it  come
to  mind.  The  same  phraso  is  used  of  the  old
heaven  and  earth  as  compared  with  the  new
(Isa.  Ixv.  17).  In  the  concluding  clauses,
"visit"  should  rather  be  " miss,"  and  " that
be  done "  should  be  **  it  [j^iz.  the  ark]  be
made."  On  the  whole  subject  of  the  pro-
phetic descriptions  of  the  worship  of  the


Messianic  period — descriptions  which  often
wear  at  any  rate  a  superficial  appearance  of
inconsistency,  see  the  luminous  remarks  of
Professor  Biehm,  *  Messianic  Prophecy,*  pp.
161 — 163.  At  the  same  time,  we  must  be
extremely  cautious  how  far  we  admit  that
Old  Testament  prophecies  of  the  latter  davs
have  received  a  complete  fulfilment  in  the
Ohristian  Church,  considering  how  far  the
latter  is  from  the  realizable  ideal,  and  also
the  importance  attached  in  the  New  Testa-
ment as  well  as  in  the  Old  to  the  continuance
of  Israel  as  a  nation.

Ver.  17. — JerusaJem^B  spiritual  glory.
With  Jeremiah's  description,  comp.  that
of  Ezekiel, "  The  name  of  the  city  from  that
day  shall  be,  The  Lord  is  there"  (xlviii.  35).
This  gives  us  the  positive  aspect  of  tho
Messianic  period  (comp.  on  ver.  16).  Jeru-
salem shall  be  tho  spiritual  centre  of  the
universe,  because  it  is  pervaded  by  the
presence  of  the  Most  High  (comp.  Isa.  iv.  5).
May  we  explain  with  Dr.  Payne  Smith,
"Jerusalem,  i.e.  tho  Christian  Church"?
Only  if  the  provisional  character  of  the
existing  Church  be  kept  well  in  view.  All
the  nations ;  t.e.  all  except  the  chosen  people.
The  word  for  "nations"  (jgoylm)  is  that
often  rendered  "heathen."  To  the  name;
or,  becatue  of  the  name,  i.e.  because  Jehovah
has  revealed  his  name  at  Jerusalem.    The

Shraso  occurs  again  with  a  coiomentary  in
osh.  ix.  0,  "  Thy  servants  are  come  because
of  tho  name  of  Jehovah  thy  God,  for  we
have  heard  tho  fame  of  him,  and  all  that  ho
did  in  Egypt."  But  wo  must  not  suppose
that  "  name  "  is  equivalent  to  "  revelation ; "
rather,  there  is  hero  an  ellipsis — "  because
of  the  name  "  is  equivalent  to  "  because  of  the
revelation  of  the  name,"  or  better  still,  "...
of  the  Name."  Th|  "  Name  of  Jehovah  "  is
in  fact  a  distinct  hypostasis  in  the  Divino
Being ;  no  mere  personification  of  the  Divine
attributes  (as  the  commentators  aro  fond  of
saying),  but  (in  the  theological  sense)  a
Person.  The  term, "  Name  of  such  and  such
a  God,"  is  common  to  Hebrew  with  Phoenician
religion.  In  the  famous  inscription  of
Eshmunazar,  King  of  Zidon,  Ashtoreth  is
called  "  Name  of  Baal ; "  and  to  whichever
proper  name  the  religious  term  Name  may
be  attached,  it  means  a  personal  existenco
in  tho  Divino  nature,  specially  related  to
tho  world  of  humanity;  or,  to  use  tho
language  of  Hengstenberg,  tho  bridge  be-
tween the  latter  and  the  transcendent
heights  of  God  as  ho  is  in  himself.  In
short,  the  Name  of  Jehovah  is  virtually
identical  with  the  Logos  of  St.  John,  or  tho
second  Person  in  tho  blessed  Trinity.
Hence  the  personal  language  now  and  again
used  of  this  Name  in  the  Old  Testament,
e.g.  Isa.  xxx.  27,  "  The  Namo  of  Jehovali
Cometh  from  far  *  .  .  ftis  lipa  are  full  of


52


THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [en.  ni.  1-25.


imlir^nation ; "  Isa.  xxvi.  8, "  The  desire  of  our
fioul  wufl  to  thy  Name; "  Isa.  lix.  19,  **So  shall
they  fear  the  Namo  of  Jehovah  from  the
west,  and  his  glory  from  the  rising  of  the
Bun."  Comp.  also  Prov.  xviii.  10 ;  men  do
not  run  for  safety  to  au  abstract  idea.  Nor
will  all  nations  in  the  latter  days  resort
either  to  a  localized  or  to  a  spiritually  dif-
fused Jerusalem  in  the  future,  to  gratify  a
refined  intellectual  curiosity.  Neither  shall
they  walk,  etc.;  i.e.  the  Israelites  of  the
latter  days ;  not  the  "  nations"  before  men-
tioned (as  Hengstenberg).  The  phrase
occurs  eight  times  in  Jeremiah,  and  is
always  used  of  the  Israelites.  The  word
rendered  "imagination"  is  peculiar  {sh&rl-
ruth).  As  Hengstenberg  has  pointed  out,  it
occurs  independently  only  in  a  single  pas-
sage (Dcut.  xxix.  18) ;  for  in  Ps.  Ixxxi.  13,
it  is  plainly  derived,  not  from  the  living
language,  from  which  it  had  disappeared,
but  from  the  written.  (The  close  phraseo-
logical affinity  between  the  Books  of
Deuteronomy  and  Jeremiah  has  been  already
indicated.)  The  rendering  of  the  Autho-
rized Version,  which,  is  supported  by  the
Septuagint,  Peshito,  Targum,  is  certainly
wrong;  the  Vulgate  has  pravitatum;  the
etymological  meaning  is  *^  stubbornness."
The  error  of  the  versions  may  perhaps  have
arisen  out  of  a  faulty  inference  from  Ps.
IxxxL  13,  where  it  stands  in  parallelism  to
"  their  counsels."

Ver.  18. — The  reunion  of  the  separated
portions  of  the  nation  (comp.  Ezek.  xxxvii.
16, 17;  Hos.  i.  11 ;  Isa.  xi.  12, 13).  Observe,
Israel  is  converted  first,  then  Judah.  This
detail  in  the  prophecy  is  not  to  be  pressed.
Not  that  the  force  of  any  prophecy  is  to  be
evaded,  but  that  in  this  case  the  form  of  the
statement  is  so  clearly  conditioned  by  the
abounding  sympathy  of  the  prophet  for
the  ten  tribes.  These  had  been  so  long
languishing  in  captivity  that  they  needed
a  special  promise.  The  form  of  the  promise
is  imaginative ;  this  seems  clearly  to  follow
from  &e  fact  that  in  no  other  passage  (ex-
cept, indeed,  ch.  xxxi  9)  is  there  a  reference
to  the  spiritual  primacy  of  Ephraim  in  the
restored  nation.  Out  of  the  land  of  the
north ;  i.e,  Assyria  and  (ch.  i.  14)  Babylonia.
The  Septuagint  inserts,  **  and  from  all  the
countriee,"  agreeably  to  ch.  xvl.  15 ;  xxiii.
8;  xxxii.  87.  Of  course,  it  would  not  be
an  accurate  statement  that  the  exiles  from
Judah  were  confined  to  **  the  land  of  the
north."  Thifl  is  a  fair  specimen  of  the
supplementing  tendency  of  the  Septuagint,
though  it  is  possible,  and  even  probable,
that  the  Hebrew  text  has  sufiered  in  a  less
degree  from  the  same  tendency  on  the  part
of  later  copyists.

Ver.  19.— The  concluding  words  of  the
last  verse  have  turned  the  current  of  the


prophet's  thoughts.  **Unto  your  fathers."
ics;  how  bright  the  prospect  when  that
ideal  of  Israel  was  framed  in  the  Divine
counsels !  Condescending  accommodation
to  liumaa  modes  of  tliought.  But  I  said
fails  to  represent  the  relation  of  this  verso
to  the  prccediug.  Render,  I  indeed  had
iaid,  and  continue,  Iloto  toill  7,  etc.  Put
thee  among  the  children.  This  is  a  very
common  rendering,  but  of  doubtful  correct-
ness. It  assumes  tliat,  from  the  point  of
view  adopted  (under  Divine  guidance)  in
the  prophecies  of  Jeremiah,  the  various
heathen  nations  wcro  in  the  relation  of
sons  to  Jehovah.  This  is  most  improbable ;
indeed,  even  Exod.  iv.  22  does  not  really
favour  the  doctrine  of  the  universal  father-
hood of  God  in  the  fullest  sense  of  the  word.
Moreover,  the  pronoun  rendered  "  thee  "  is
in  the  feminine,  indicating  that  the
prophet  has  still  in  his  mind  tho  picture
of  Israel  as  Jehovah's  bride.  It  would
surely  be  an  absurd  statement  that  Jehovali
would  put  his  bride  among  the  children!
Render,  therefore.  How  tcill  1  found  thee
icith  mm!  comparing,  for  the  use  of  tho
Hebrew  verb,  1  Bam.  ii.  8,  and  for  that  of
tho  preposition,  Isa.  liv.  11.  It  is,  in  fact,
tho  familiar  figure  by  which  a  family  or  a
nation  is  likened  to  a  building  (**  house  of
Abraham,"  "of  Israel").  Jehovah's  purpose
had  been  to  make  Abraham's  seed  as  the
dust  of  tho  earth  (Gen.  xiii.  IG).  Instead
of  that,  tho  restored  exiles  would  bo  few,
and  weak  in  proportion,  so  that  tho  Jewish
Church  of  the  early  restoration  period  is
represented  as  complaining,  "  We  made  not
the  land  salvation,  neither  were  inhabitants
of  the  world  produced  "  (Isa.  xxvi.  18).  A
special  Divine  promise  was  needed  to  sur-
mount this  grave  difiiculty.  A  goodly  .  .  .
nations;  rather,  a  heritage  the  most
glorious  among  the  nations.  So  in  Ezckiel
(XX.  6,  15)  Palestine  is  described  as  "  the
glory  of  all  lands."  The  want  of  irrigation,
and  the  denudation  of  the  land,  have  no
doubt  much  diminished  the  natural  beauty
and  fertility  of  Palestine;  but  wherever
moderate  care  is  bestowed  on  the  soil,  how
well  it  rewards  it !  Thou  shalt  call  me  .  .  .
Shalt  not  turn;  rather,  tJiou  icilt  call  me
.  .  .  wilt  not  turn.  It  is  tho  continuation
of  Jehovah's  ideal  for  Israel.  In  response
to  his  loving  gifts,  Israel  would  surely
recognize  him  as  her  Father,  and  devote  to
him  all  her  energies  in  willing  obe<lience.
Father  is  here  used,  not  in  the  spiritual  and
individualizing  sense  of  tho  New  Testa-
ment, but  in  such  a  sense  as  a  member  of  a
primitive  Israelitish  family,  in  wliich  the
patria  potestas  was  fully  carried  out,  could
realize.  Tho  first  instance  of  the  indi-
vidualizing use  of  the  term  is  in  Ecclus.
xxiiL  1—4.    (For  the  Old  Testament  use,


cu.  m.  1—25.]  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.


53


oomp.  Isa.  i.  2;  Ixili.  16;  Exod.  It.  22;
Ho6.  xi.  1.)

Yer.  20. — Sorely.  The  word  acquires  an
advergative  seiiBe  from  the  context,  as  in
Isa.  liiL  4,  and  is  Tirtoally  equivalent  to
'*  but  surely."  From  her  husband ;  literally,
from  her  friend  or  companion.  The  choice
of  the  word  seems  to  indicate  the  inner
hoUowness  of  the  married  life.  Tho
woman  only  sees  in  her  husband  the
companion,  behind  whose  back  she  can
follow  her  own  inclinations.

Yer.  21. — Another  of  those  rapid  transi-
tions so  common  in  emotional  writing  like
Jeremiah's.  The  prophet  cannot  b^  to
dwell  upon  the  backsliding  of  his  people.
He  knows  the  elements  of  good  which  still
survive,  and  by  faith  sees  them  developed,
through  the  teaching  of  God's  good  provi-
dence, into  a  fruitful  repentance.  How
graphic  is  the  description!  On  the  very
high  places  (or  rather,  hare^  treelea  heights
or  downs,  as  ver.  2)  where  a  licentious
idolatry  used  to  be  practised,  a  sound  is
heard  (render  so,  not  tocis  heard)— the
sound  of  the  loud  and  audible  weeping  of
an  impulsive  Eastern  people  (comp.  ch.  vii.
29).  For  they  have;  this  evidently  gives
the  reason  of  tho  bitter  lamentation ;  render,
because  they  have.

Yer.  22. — Betum,  ye  badniliding  children,
etc. ;  more  literally,  Turn.,  ye  iurned-away
tons ;  I  UTtll  heal  your  turnings  (as  Hos.  xiv.
4).  It  seems  strange  at  first  sight  that  this
verse  does  not  stand  before  ver.  21.  But  the
truth  is  that  ver.  21  describes  not  so  much
the  **  conversion "  of  the  Jews  as  their
willingness  to  *^ convert"  (an  archaism  of
King  James's  Bible,  which  we  may  well
regret),  or  ♦*tum"  to  God.  Christ  must
touch,  or  at  least  make  his  presence  felt,  in
order  that  the  sick  man  may  be  healed ;  a
special  call  of  God  must  be  heard,  in  order
that  the  sinner  may  truly  re^nt  Bdiold,
we  come  unto  thee.  Efficacious,  and  not
"  irresistible  "  grace,  is  the  doctrme  of  the
Old  Testament

Ver.  23. — Truly  in  Tain,  etc.  An  obscure
and  (if  corruption  exists  anywhere)  corrupt
passage,  which,  however,  it  is  hopeless  to
attempt  to  emend,  as  the  corruption  con-
sists partly  in  wrong  letters,  partly  in
omitted  letters  or  words  (or  both);  and,
moreover,  the  text  employed  by  the  Septua-
gint  appears  to  hnve  presented  the  same
difficult.     The  latter  point  is  especially


noteworthy.  It  is  far  from  proving  that
the  traditional  text  is  correct ;  what  it  does
suggest  is  that  the  writings  of  the  prophets
were  at  first  written  down  in  a  very  insecure
manner.  The  rendering  of  the  Authorized
Yersion  is  substantially  that  of  Hitzig,  who
explains  *'the  multitude  of  [the]  moun-
tains," as  meaning  "  the  multitude  of  gods
worshipped  on  the  mountains" — too  forced
an  expression  for  so  simple  a  context.  It
seems  most  natural  to  suppose  (with  Ewald,
Graf,  and  Eeil),  a  contrast  between  the  wild,
noisy  cultus  of  idolatrous  religions,  and  the
quiet  spiritual  worship  inculcated  by  the
prophets.  Compare  by  way  of  illustration,
the  loud  .and  ostentatious  demonstrations
of  Baal's  ritual  in  1  Kings  xviii.,  with
the  sober,  serious  attitude  of  Elijah  in  tho
same  chapter.  The  word  rendered  in  the
Authorized  Yersion  **  multitude  "  has  a  still
more  obvious  and  original  meaning,  viz.
**  tumult ; "  and  probably  the  Targum  is  not
far  from  the  true  sense  in  rendering,  **  In
vain  have  we  worshipped  upon  the  hills,
and  not  for  profit  have  we  raised  a  tumult
on  the  mountains."

Yer.  24.— For  shame;  rather,  and  the
Shame  (i.e.  the  Baal).  The  words  Bosheih
(**  Shame  ")  and  Baal  are  frequently  inter-
changed ;  so  again  in  ch.  xi.  13  (comp.  Hos.
ix.  10).  So,  too,  Jerubbesheth  stands  for
Jerubbaal  (2  Sam.  xi.  21 ;  oomp.  Judg.  vi.
32) ;  Ishbosheth  for  Eshbaal  (2  Sam.  ii.  8 ;
comp.  1  Chron.  viii.  33).  Hath  devoured
the  labonr  of  onr  fathers,  etc. ;  a  condensed
way  of  saying  that  Baal- worship  has  brought
the  judgments  of  God  upon  us,  our  flocks
and  heiSs,  and  all  the  other  ^  labour  "  (or
rather  **  wealth,"  i.e.  fruit  of  labour)  of  our
fathers,  being  destroyed  as  the  punishment
of  our  sins  (comp.  Deut.  xxviiL  30 — 32).
Another  view  is  that  the  *'  devouring  "  had
to  do  with  the  sacrifices,  but  it  is  improbable
that  the  sacrificial  worship  of  Baal  had
developed  to  such  a  portentous  extent,  and
the  former  explanation  is  in  itself  more
suitable  to  the  context.

Yer.  25. — ^We  lie  down ;  rather,  Let  us  lie
doum;  said  in  despair,  just  as  Hezekiah
says,  "Let  us  enter  the  gates  of  Sheol"
(Isa.  XXX viii.  10).  A  prostrate  position  is
the  natural  expression  of  deep  sorrow  (2
Sam.  xii.  16;  xiii.  31;  1  Kings  xxi.  4).
Our  oonfosion  ooyereth  us;  rather.  Let  our
confuiion  (or  reproach)  cover  us  (like  a
veil)  (comp.  ch.  li.  51 ;  rs.  Ixix.  7).


HOMILETICS.


Ver.  4. — Filial  reminiscences  of  God.    "Wo  arc  here  brought  from  the  view  of  God  ad
a  Husband  to  that  of  him  as  a  Father,  for  only  when  wo  consider  his  various  relations


54  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [en.  in.  1—25.

with  lis  can  wc  mcasuro  tho  depth  of  our  am  or  tho  motives  wo  have  for  returning
to  him.

I.  God's  people  can  call  to  mikd  old  memories  of  his  fatherly  goodness.
1.  In  our  own  experience  of  his  grace  he  has  revealed  himself  as  a  Father,  He  is  tho
Source  and  Origin  of  life.  In  him  we  continue  to  exist  TActs  xvii.  28).  He  is  constantly
protecting  us  and  cnrichinc  us  with  his  gifts.  2.  Goa  may  bo  discerned  as  tho  Com-
pinion  ^  his  people's  early  days,  (1)  Ho  was  with  his  people — a  Companion — ^not
merely  blessing  them  from  a  distance.  (2)  He  was  with  his  people  as  a  Friend,  holding
kindly  intercourse,  condescending  to  intimate  communion,  accompanying  them  as  a  Stay
and  Solace  through  their  pilgrimage.  (3)  He  was  with  his  people  in  their  you^^.  None
are  too  young  to  bo  honoured  with  the  friendship  of  God.  Happy  are  they  who  have
been  in  communion  with  Gtxl  from  their  youth  up,  instead  of  only  coming  to  him  at  the
eleventh  hour !  They  enjoy  the  most  of  liim,  have  longest  time  for  his  service,  have
most  advantages  for  growing  and  ripening  in  religious  experience.  As  we  look  back  on
our  early  days,  we  may  often  discern  how  God  has  been  with  us  in  dark  scenes  where
liis  presence  was  unrecognized  at  the  time,  and  has  been  sustaining  and  cheering  us
when  we  have  not  recognized  tho  hand  from  which  the  comfort  was  coming,

II.  Old  memories  of  God's  fatherly  goodness  may  be  abused.  It  would  seem
that  the  Jews  often  fell  into  this  mistake.  1.  We  may  assume  that  the  past  blessing  of
God  is  all  that  ue  need.  Because  we  once  enjoyed  his  presence  wo  may  be  too  ready
to  rest  satisfied  as  though  all  must  be  well  with  us  henceforth  for  ever.  But  we  cannot
live  in  the  past.  It  is  vain  to  waste  our  time  in  idle  self-congratulations  on  our  early
devotion  if  later  years  have  found  us  wandering  far  from  God.  We  must  not  say  that
all  is  done  that  our  souls  need  if  wc  can  point  to  an  early  time  when  we  were  introduced
to  filial  relations  with  God.  It  is  nothing  to  us  that  God  was  the  Friend  of  our  youth
if  he  has  been  rejected  in  our  later  days.  Indeed,  this  early  memory  will  bo  our
accuser  for  subsequent  unfaithfulness.  2.  We  may  assume  that  if  Qod  tvas  once  our
Father  and  Friend  he  will  always  stand  in  those  relations  to  us.  But  if  we  lose  our
first  love  wo  lose  the  blessings  which  are  connected  with  it.  The  past  is  no  security  for
the  present.  The  momentous  questions  is,  Do  we  now  stand  in  a  true  filial  relation
with  God?  Is  he  still 'our  Friend?  If  he  was  valued  as  a  Companion  in  tho  fresh-
ness of  youth,  is  he  not  wanted  in  the  toils  and  battles  of  manhood  ?  will  he  not  bo
needed  in  the  weariness  of  age  ?  in  the  darkness  and  mystery  of  tho  lonely  passage  of
death?

HI.  Old  memories  op  God's  fatherly  goodness  may  be  considered  with  profit.
1.  They  may  reveal  our  subsequent  unfaithfulness.  We  compare  ourselves  with  our-
selves and  see  how  we  have  fallen.  2.  They  may  lead  us  to  see  the  blessedness  of  an
earlier  estate,  to  bo  awakened  to  the  loss  we  have  suffered,  and  to  bo  roused  to  the
desire  for  a  return  to  it.  3.  They  may  help  us  to  trust  Qod,  He  was  our  Father  and
our  Friend  in  early  days.  He  is  changeless.  If,  then,  we  repent  and  return  to  him,  will
ho  not  permit  us  still  to  cry,  "  My  Father ; "  and  again  to  enter  into  the  blessed  in-
fluences of  friendly  fellowship  with  him  ?  So  the  prodigal  remembers  his  early  days,  and
is  induced  by  old  memories  to  say,  "  I  will  arise  and  go  to  my  father  "  (Luke  xv,  18).

Vcr.  10. — Insincere  repentance,  I.  IiErENTANCE  is  insincere  when  it  does  not
possess  the  whole  heart.  Judah  is  accused  of  being  "false,"  and  of  turning  to
Jehovah  "feignedly,"  because  she  did  not  turn  "with  her  whole  heart."  1.  True
repentance  must  bo  found  in  the  heart.  Mere  confession  with  the  lip  without  a  change
of  feeling  is  a  mockery  (Isa.  xxix.  13).  Simple  amendment  of  external  conduct  is  no
repentance  unless  it  is  prompted  by  a  sincere  desire  to  do  better,  by  a  return  to  the  love
of  goodness.  2,  True  repentance  must  possess  tho  whole  heart.  It  is  not  consistent
•with  a  lingering  affection  for  sin.  The  penitent  must  not  look  back  regretfully,  like
Lot's  wife,  on  the  pleasant  things  he  is  renouncing.  Repentance  must  be  for  sin,  not  for
certain  sins  selected  from  the  rest  for  condemnation ;  it  means  the  desire  to  abandon
all  wickedness.  People  sometimes  repent  insincerely  by  confessing  and  abandoning
trifling  faults,  while  they  cling  to  greater  evils.  A  right  repentance  searches  tho  dark
depths  of  the  soul  and  brings  forth  old  buried  sins,  forgotten  but  not  yet  forgiven,  dar-
ling bosom  sins  which  have  grown  into  the  very  life  and  can  only  be  torn  out  from  a
bleeding  heart,  common  sins  which  aro  classed  among  a  man's  habits  and  which  he


cu.  in.  1—25.]  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.         55

excuses  to  himself  as  being  "  his  ways."  Such  repentance  is  no  superflcial  emotion,  no
sentiment  of  the  hour  stirred  in  the  church  only  to  be  forgotten  as  soon  as  a  man
re-enters  his  worldly  associations.  It  must  be  thorough,  profound,  overwhelming.  Yet
it  is  not  to  be  measured  by  the  number  of  tears  shed,  but  by  its  practical  fruits,  the
solid  proofs  of  a  desire  for  a  better  life  (Luke  iii.  8 — 14).

II.  Insincere  bepentancb  cannot  be  accepted  by  God.  1.  Such  repentance  is
inexcusable,  Judah  had  failed  to  profit  by  the  solemn  lessons  of  her  sister's  sin  and
ruin.  In  face  of  such  terrible  warnings,  how  foolish  to  cling  still  to  the  old  life  even
while  pretending  to  turn  from  it!  2.  Such  repentance  is  only  self -deceiving.  The
hypocrite  would  deceive  God,  but  failing  to  do  this  he  deceives  himself.  Ho  is  the  dupe
of  his  own  design.  For  he  imagines  that  his  fraud  will  serve  him  some  good  purpose,
whereas  it  is  detected  by  Gxxi  and  frustrated  from  the  first.  3.  Such  repentance  is
useless.  Judah  gains  no  deliverance  by  her  feigned  repentance.  Gkni  is  Spirit,  and  can
only  be  approached  in  spirit  (John  iv.  24).  Any  other  pretended  return  to  him  is  no
return.  We  do  not  come  to  God  by  simply  entering  a  church,  nor  please  him  by  the
mechanical  observance  of  an  external  service  (Isa.  i.  11 — 15).  The  insincere  repentance
is  a  double  mistake,  its  trouble  is  all  wasted,  its  tears  all  shed  to  no  purpose,  and  the
falsehood  of  it  is  a  new  offence  increasing  guilt  before  God.  To  turn  to  God  only  with
the  lip  is  thus  not  merely  not  to  turn  to  him  at  all,  it  is  to  wander  still  further  from
him.  liCt  us  beware^  therefore,  of  using  the  familiar  language  of  confession  if  we  are
not  really  desiring  to  renounce  sin  and  be  reconciled  to  Qt)d.  Let  repentance,  of  all
things,  be  true  and  whole-hearted.

Vers.  12,  13. — Ood  inviting  the  return  of  his  sinful  children.  This  invitation  is
offered  to  "  backsliding  Israel "  in  preference  to  "  false  Judah  "  (ver.  11).  There
seemed  to  be  more  hope  of  the  former.  Openly  wicked  men  are  more  easily  led  to
repentance  than  hypocritical  pretenders  to  goodness.  Christ  came  not  to  call  the
righteous,  but  sinners  (Matt.  ix.  12, 13),  and  his  invitations  were  more  readily  accepted
by  publicans  and  reprobates  than  by  Pharisees.

I.  The  invitation  is  from  God.  Before  men  return  to  God  he  seeks  them.  The
Father  calls  to  his  children  while  they  "are  yet  in  rebellion  against  him.  In  the  quarrel
between  man  and  God  all  the  wrong  is  on  man's  side,  yet  G^  is  the  first  to  bring  about
a  reconciliation.  1.  We  have  not  to  reconcile  Ood  to  us,  but  to  be  reconciled  to  him
(2  Cor.  V.  20).  Any  difficulty  on  God's  side  has  been  removed  by  his  own  act  in  the
sacrifice  of  his  Son.  Now  it  only  remains  for  us  to  return.  2.  We  have  not  to  wait
for  Ood^s  willingness  to  receive  ws,  nor  to  persuade  him.  Already  ho  has  invited  us,
and  he  now  waits  to  be  gracious.

II.  The  motive  for  the  invitation  is  the  goodness  of  God.  Wo  must  not
imagine  that  there  is  in  us  any  inherent  attractiveness,  any  merit  which  in  the  eye  of
God  outweighs  our  sin,  any  valuable  qualities  which  make  us  necessary  to  him.  The
reason  for  God's  anxiety  to  have  his  children  return  is  simply  his  love  for  them,  and
this  love  is  not  derived  from  their  worthiness,  but  from  his  nature.  1.  It  is  because
Qod  is  " mercifvlj^  i.e.  this  is  his  peculiar  characteristic  ;  and  mercy  is  exercised  not
according  to  desert,  but  according;  to  need.  Therefore  the  less  man's  desert  is  the
greater  will  bo  the  outgoing  of  God's  mercy,  because  the  deeper  will  be  man's  wretched-
ness. 2.  It  is  because  Oo$s  anger  is  temporary,  while  his  mercy  "  endureth  for  ever."
God  says,  "  I  will  not  keep  mine  anger  for  ever ; "  but  he  does  keep  his  love  for  ever.
We  say  **  God  is  love,"  but  we  do  not  say  "  God  is  anger."  He  exercises  anger  when
this  is  required,  but  to  servo  an  end — to  establish  justice,  to  punish  sin,  etc.,  whereas  he
exercises  love  for  its  own  sake.  This  latter  is  more  fundamental,  in  the  very  heart  of
God,  and  outlives  the  wrath.  Hence  behind  the  passing  anger  that  denounces  and
punishes,  there  is  the  eternal  love  that  invites  to  reconciliation.

IlL  The  one  condition  for  acceptino  the  invitation  is  the  acknowledgment
of  guilt.  "Acknowledge  thine  iniquity."  1.  This  acknowledgment  is  necessary.
We  can  only  return  to  God  by  forsaking  our  sin,  for  it  is  just  our  sin  which  keeps  us
from  him,  and  as  long  as  this  is  retained  must  still  keep  us  from  him.  Indeed,  separa-
tion from  God  and  sin  are  but  two  aspects  of  the  same  spiritual  condition.  Wo  can
only  be  forgiven  when  we  admit  our  guilt,  and  only  be  welcomed  by  God  when  wo
bumble  ourselves  before  him.    2.  This  acknowledgment  must  be  complete.    It  must


56  TUE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [en.  iii.  1— 25.

include  a  recognition  of  (1)  positive  disobedience — **  thou  hast  transgressed,"  etc  ;  (2)
the  multitudinous  variety  of  sins — "  and  hast  scattered  thy  ways ;  *'  (3)  the  disregard  of
God's  voice  even  when  he  has  sicken  in  love  and  urged  us  to  return.  3.  This  acknow-
ledgment is  sufficient,  "  Only  acknowledge  thine  iniquity.  No  sacrifice,  penance,  or
partial  reformation  is  first  required  on  our  part.  The  new  and  better  life  must  begin
with  our  return  to  Gkxi.

Ver.  14  (second  clause,  "  and  I  will  take  you,"  etc.).— i?e7*^iOMS  individualism,  I.
By  nature  MEN'  LIVE  SEPAUATE,  iXDiviDUAL  LIVES.  Man  is  social,  yet  ho  is  personal.
1.  Each  soul  has  its  own  personality,  separate  from  that  of  every  other  soul  by  im-
measurable oceans.  Sympathy  unites  souls,  but  docs  not  destroy  this  individuality  of
being.  Each  soul  has  its  own  secret  life,  and  the  deeper  the  spiritual  experience  is  the
more  lonely,  hidden,  and  incommunicable  will  it  be.  There  are  dark  recesses  of  con-
sciousness in  the  shallowest  heart  which  no  stranger  can  fathom  (Prov.  xiv.  10).  2.
Each  soul  has  its  own  separate  course  to  live,  its  peculiar  privileges  and  privations,
blessings  and  trials,  its  duties  which  no  other  soul  can  fulfil,  its  reserved  heritage,  its
vast  destiny.  Starting  from  near  points,  our  lives  may  branch  out  in  all  directions  till
they  are  utterly  isolated  in  the  lonely  solitudes  of  the  infinite  possibilities  of  being.  3.
Each  soul  has  its  own  necessary  variety  of  nature.  No  two  are  alike.  The  unity  of
mankind  is  a  oneness,  not  of  unison,  but  of  harmonv.

II.  God  deals  with  men  separately  and  individually.  1.  His  love  is  towards
men  as  individuals.  The  size  of  the  human  family  is  no  impediment  to  this  with  an
Infinite  Being  who  possesses  infinite  capacities  of  thought  and  affection.  Even  among
men  the  parent  of  a  large  family  has  as  individual  a  love  for  each  of  his  children  as  the
parent  of  a  small  family.  2.  God  approaches  man  individually.  The  outward  voice
of  invitation  is  general :  "  whosoever  will "  is  invited.  But  the  inward  voice,  in  con-
science and  spiritual  communion,  is  private.  Yet  this  fact  is  not  a  restriction  on  our
enjoyment  of  God*s  favours,  for  he  sjicaks  thus  inwardly  to  all  who  will  listen  to  him.

III.  Men  must  return  to  God  separately  and  individually.  Each  must  repent,
trust,  pray  for  himself.  A  nation  can  only  return  as  the  units  return,  **  one  of  a  city,
and  two  of  a  family."  We  must  enter  the  "  wicket-gate  "  in  single  file.  No  association
with  Christendom,  a  Christian  nation,  a  Church,  a  Christian  family,  will  secure  our
personal  redemption.  Even  families  are  divided  here.  Each  must  say  for  himself  in
the  singular,  "  /will  arise ; "  "  My  Father ;  "  "  My  God."  Still :  (1)  We  may  help  one
another,  and  owing  to  the  influence  of  sympathy  there  may  bo  "  two  of  a  family,"  while
perhaps  there  is  only  "  one  of  a  city ; "  (2>  after  wo  return  to  God  wo  may  naturally
unite  in  his  service  as  his  family,  his  Church,  the  one  body  of  which  Christ  is  the  Head ;
and  (3)  though  a  few  may  return  at  first,  it  is  to  bo  the  work  of  these  few  to  increase
their  number  till  the  whole  apostate  family  is  reconciled  to  God.

Vers.  16 — 18. — The  lilessings  of  redemption.  The  blessings  which  are  here  described
as  following  the  restoration  of  Israel  are  partly  national  and  material  in  form,  but  they
contain,  in  the  heart  of  them,  those  deep  spiritual  elements  of  the  Messianic  ideas  which
constitute  the  blessings  of  redemption.     Note  the  chief  characteristics  of  these —

I.  The  negative  characteristics  of  the  blessings  of  redemption.  1.  Freedom
from  the  old  life  of  sin,  "  Neither  shall  they  walk  any  more  after  the  stubbornness  of
their  evil  hearts."  This  implies  (1)  that  the  conquest  of  sin  is  itself  a  good  to  God's
people,  and  not  merely  a  painful  and  self-denying  means  for  securing  some  other  good ;
and  (2)  that  this  conquest  is  to  be  complete  and  final.  Bad  as  were  the  subsequent
failings  of  the  Jews  after  the  Captivity,  they  were  cured  for  ever  of  their  old  sins  of
idolatry  and  of  participation  in  the  immoral  and  cruel  rites  of  their  neighbours'  religions.
Many  as  are  the  defects  and  falls  of  the  Christian,  these  do  not  equal  the  evil  of  his  old
life.  2.  A  change  from  the  old  habits  of  religion.  The  Jews  will  no  longer  have  the
ark,  the  seat  of  a  localized  Divine  presence,  and  they  will  not  want  this.  We  can
never  exactly  recover  the  past.  Paradise  cannot  be  regained.  The  new  Jerusalem  will
not  be  like  the  old  garden  of  Eden.  The  restored  Christian  cannot  return  to  the  primi-
tive innocence  of  childhood.  But  he  need  not  altogether  regret  this  impossibility.
With  the  innocence  of  childhood  there  were  associated  its  ignorance,  its  weakness,  its
restraints.    With  redemption  there  comes  a  new  and  larger  life.    The  ark  is  lost ;  but


CH.  III.  1—25.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  67

this  need  not  be  regretted  since  with  it  the  limitations  and  material  conditions  of  the
Divine  visitations  are  gone  also.

II.  The  positive  characteristics  op  the  blessings  op  bedemption.  1.  The  enjoys
ment  of  God's  full  presence.  God's  throne  is  to  be  no  longer  the  mercy-seat  at  the  ark :
(1)  confined  to  one  small  sanctuary ;  (2)  separating  the  religious  from  the  secular ;  (3)
hidden  from  the  common  gaze  of  men.  All  Jerusalem  will  be  God's  throne.  God  will
dwell  in  the  midst  of  his  people,  revealed  to  all,  consecrating  the  aflfairs  of  daily  life
(Zech.  xiv.  20).  2.  The  glorifying  of  Ood  in  the  earth  through  the  instrumentality  of
his  people.  "  All  the  nations  shall  be  gathered,"  etc.  God's  people  are  honoured  by
being  the  means  of  attracting  others  to  him.  Thus  they  are  "a  city  set  on  a  hill"
(Matt.  V.  14).  The  blessings  of  the  gospel  in  Christ  are  offered  to  the  world.  The
glory  of  the  Saviour  and  the  joy  of  his  people  will  be  completed  by  the  acceptance  of
them  by  all  nations.  3.  Brotherly  love,  'llie  old  enmity  of  Israel  and  Judah  will
cease  (Isa.  xi.  12,  13).  Christ  is  the  Prince  of  peace.  His  advent  prepared  the  way
for  peace  on  earth.  As  his  kingdom  spreads,  peace  must  also  extend  over  the  troubled
world.  Even  now  the  individual  Christian  must  find  his  joy  in  exercising  the  peaceful
spirit  and  practising  brotherly  love  (Heb.  xiii.  1).

III.  The  conditions  fob  beceivino  the  blessings  op  bedemption.  1.  Return  to
Ood  in  repentance.  This  is  implied  in  the  previous  verses.  Repentance  precedes  restora-'
tion.  2.  Multiplication  of  numbers.  These  blessings  were  to  come  after  the  people
were  "  multiplied  and  increased."  We  cannot  expect  the  full  Christian  blessings  till
the  Church  has  grown  largely  in  numbers.  God  has  special  blessings  for  his  Church,
The  Holy  Spirit  came  at  Pentecost,  when  the  whole  Church  was  gathered  together
(Acts  ii.  1).  These  privileges  of  Christianity  are  of  such  a  nature  that  they  are  not
lessened  by  distribution,  but  the  more  they  are  scattered  abroad,  the  more  valuable  do
they  become  to  every  individual  who  enjoys  them.  3.  A  fitting  time.  These  blessings
were  not  enjoyed  at  once.  For  some  we  still  wait.  **  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  a
grain  of  mustard  seed."  Its  growth  is  gradual ;  so  is  also  the  enjoyment  of  its  blessings.

Ver.  22. — Invitation  and  response.  I.  The  invitation.  1.  The  object  of  the  in-
vitation. God  calls  on  his  peojjle  to  return  to  him.  Not  simple  reformation  of  morals,
but  the  restoration  of  personal  relations  with  Gtxl  as  the  Father  of  his  people  is  desired.
2.  The  condition  of  the  invited.  They  are  apostate  children ;  i.e.  (1)  they  are  far  from
God,  though  (2)  they  were  once  near  to  him,  and  (3)  they  are  still  his  children.  As
sinners,  men  have  all  lost  a  first  estate  of  innocence,  but  have  not  lost,  and  can  never  lose,
their  filial  relationship  to  God.  Hence  (1)  the  greatness  of  their  guilt  and  (2)  the  hope
of  their  restoration.  3.  The  accompanyin sjoromisc.  God  invites  and  does  not  drive ;
he  here  exchanges  threats  for  promises.  God  will  heal,  not  simply  receive  his  children.
God  alone  can  heal  their  apostacies.  Man  repents  of  sin,  but  God  cures  it.  It  is  our
part  to  turn  from  the  evil,  God's  to  destroy  that  evil.  Sin  is  washed  out,  not  by  the
tears  of  penitence,  but  by  the  blood  of  Christ.  The  healing  is  of  the  apostacies  them-
selves, not  simply  of  their  painful  effects.  Christ  saves  from  sin.  This  is  what  God
most  requires  in  us,  and  what  wo  most  need  for  our  own  blessedness  yohn  i.  29).

II.  The  BE8P0N8E.  1.  An  expression  of  willing  obedience.  "Behold,  wc  como
unto  thee."  This  response  must  be  voluntary.  God  waits  for  man's  return,  docs  not
force  it ;  since  what  he  desires  is  not  the  abject  submission  of  vanquished  enemies,  but
the  loving  reconciliation  of  children.  This  response  must  also  be  active.  "  We  come."
The  penitent  does  not  simply  "  accept"  the  grace  of  God  in  a  passive  faith.  He  must
"  arise  and  go  "  (Luke  xv.  18).  This  implies  exertion  of  will,  active  obedience.  2.
An  indication  of  the  grounds  of  that  obedience.  "  For  thou  art  the  Lord  our  God."
God  invites  by  a  promise  of  blessing  to  his  people  ;  they  respond  by  turning  from  the
thought  of  their  own  profit  to  that  of  the  character  and  claim  of  God.  The  great
motive  to  return  is  found  in  what  God  is  rather  than  in  what  he  does,  because  the
return  is  to  him  and  not  merely  to  his  blessings.  Men  will  return  to  God  when  thuy
see  what  there  is  in  him  to  attract  them  to  his  feet.  Hence  the  importance  of  knowing
God  (Job  xxii.  21).  Christ  invites  us  by  revealing  the  Father  (John  xiv.  6,  7).  \^1)
We  should  think  of  the  revealed  character  of  Gt)d  as  a  ground  for  returning  to  him.
Israel  returns  by  remembering  the  ancient  Name  "Jehovah,"  with  its  glorious  signi-
ficance and  its  sacred  memories.    (2)  Wo  should  think  of  God's  peculiar  relation^  with


58  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [cii.  iii.  1— 25.


U8.  Israel  thinks  of  "Jehovah  o?^r  God."  lliis  relationship  points  to  God's  claim
upon  US,  rising  out  of  his  recognized  authority  as  "  ours,"  and  the  special  covenant
bonds  of  those  who  have  once  yielded  themselves  to  him,  and  also  to  the  peculiar  grace
God  bestows  on  his  people,  which  both  increases  the  obligation  and  facilitates  tho  eflfort
to  return.

Ver.  23. — From  false  to  true  salvation,  I.  The  need  of  salvation.  This  seems
to  bo  confessed  before  as  much  as  after  repentance.  In  both  conditions  Israel  must
turn  somewhere  for  deliverance.  1.  The  need  is  universal,  Israel  was  in  national
danger ;  but  socially  and  privately  men  felt  a  vague  sense  of  unrest  and  helplessness,
and  their  heathen  rites  were  a  proof  of  this.  The  mystery  of  existence,  the  wearinesji
of  toil,  the  sorrow  and  disappointments  of  common  experience,  the  terror  of  death,  make
men  feel  their  helplessness.  All  religions  witness  to  this  fact.  2.  The  need  is  felt  to  bo
such  that  only  rtUgion  can  meet  it.  Men  instinctively  cry  to  their  gods  in  the  storm
(Jonah  i.  5).  This  clement  of  religion  is  retained  when  every  other  vestige  of  it  has
vanished.  This  clement  is  common  to  the  most  diverse  forms  of  religion,  tho  most
degraded  equally  with  tho  most  elevated.  Is  not  such  a  fundamental  fact  of  human
nature  a  ground  for  hope  ?  Can  wo  believe  that  such  a  deep,  instinctive  cry  will  meet
with  no  res^wnse  ?

II.  The  false  hope  of  balvation.  Israel  had  turned  to  the  pagan  worship  on  the
hills  for  deliverance  ;  but  in  vain.  1.  Suixirficially  regarded,  there  was  much  to  recom-
mend this,  (1)  It  was  conspicuous  and  imposing — on  the  hill-tops.  (2)  It  was  noisy ;
there  was  tumult  on  the  mountains.  The  more  noise  and  bustle  there  is  in  a  thing  tho
more  important  does  it  seem  to  those  who  forget  that  tho  real  power  is  with  "  the  still
small  voice"  and  the  "gentleness  "  that  makes  great.  (.*>)  It  was  ]x>pular ;  in  religious
matters,  as  in  all  else,  unthinking  people  go  with  the  multitude.  (4)  It  was  multiform ;
not  one  temple  service,  but  sacrifices  on  every  hill.  Unspiritual  people  put  faith  in  the
number  of  prayers,  the  amount  of  gifts,  etc.,  rather  than  in  tho  motive  and  spirit  which
prompt  them.  (5)  It  was  easy  to  follow ;  it  required  no  purity  of  life,  no  spiritual
effort  of  faith.  Men  like  a  cheap  religion.  2.  Experience  jiroved  the  hope  to  he  false.
The  salvation  was  hoped  for  in  vain.  Heathen  gods  neither  protected  from  external
foes  nor  cured  tho  internal  wretchedness  of  Israel.  This  must  have  been  the  case,
because  (1)  they  were  not  gods  at  all,  the  ground  of  the  hope  did  not  exist ;  (2)  tho
corruption  which  was  permitted  and  encouraged  in  tho  rites  with  which  these  gods
were  served  was  the  very  source  of  the  nation's  ruin.  The  hope  of  salvation  was  the
cause  of  destruction.  So  is  it  whenever  men  turn  from  God  to  lower  grounds  of  con-
fidence. The  very  apostacy  thus  committed  is  tho  source  of  tho  ruin  which  it  is
expected  to  avert.  It  is  a  great  thing  to  have  made  the  discovery  of  this  fact.  To  see
the  mistake  of  the  false  hope  is  the  first  step  towards  deliverance.

III.  TuE  true  hope  op  salvation.  "  Truly  in  Jehovah  our  God  is  the  salvation
of  Israel."  1.  God  only  can  deliver,  since  he  only  can  control  nations  and  subdue  tho
hearts  of  individual  men.  2.  God  does  deliver  by  his  providence  in  outward  events
and  his  spiritual  help  in  tho  internal  battle  with  sin.  3.  God  is  known  as  the
Deliverer  by  his  actions  in  the  past.  Israel  turns  to  "  Jehovah  our  God,"  the  God
who  had  often  shown  himself  as  a  Saviour.  He  who  rightly  reads  the  story  of  his
own  past  life  will  see  in  it  reasons  for  trusting  God  for  the  future.  4.  God  is  sought
as  the  Deliverer  when  all  other  refuges  fail.  After  making  tho  painful  discovery
mentioned  in  the  earlier  part  of  the  verse,  Israel  comes  to  recognize  tho  true  salvation,
but  not  till  then.  Trouble  is  good  if  it  reveals  tho  rottenness  of  our  mistaken  hope  in
time  to  set  us  free  to  sock  the  true  hope.  Yet  how  sad  that  men  should  need  to  have
the  veil  thus  forcibly  torn  from  their  eyes  I

Vers.  24-,  2o,'-Shame,  I.  Shame  is  the  natubal  accompaniment  of  guilt.  1.
Distinguish  shame  from  modesty.  Modesty  is  tho  fear  of  shame.  Modesty  shrinks
from  doing  the  thing  which  when  done  will  result,  or  ought  to  result,  in  shame.  Thus
modesty  pertains  to  innocence,  shame  to  guilt.  2.  Distinguish  natural  shame  from
auilty  Bhame,  ^  Natural  shame  results  from  the  exposure  of  what  should  be  kept  private
out  is  pure  in  itself — this  applies  to  spiritual  as  well  as  bodily  delicacy ;  guilty  shamo
Is  associated  with  that  whicn,  whether  revealed  or  not,  is  morally  bad.    3.  Distinguish


\


CH.  in.  1—25.]  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.         69

/o/m  from  true  shame,  Tlic  blush  of  innocence  when  falsely  accused,  the  shrinking
from  the  disapproval  by  others  of  conduct  which  we  feel  conscientiously  bound  to
pursue,  and  similar  feelings,  are  instances  of  the  former.  They  simply  result  from
weakness.  Such  shame  is  a  needless  pain,  but  it  is  only  culpable  when  it  leads  to
weak  subserviency  to  what  wo  know  is  not  right — tho  fear  of  man  which  bringeth  a
snare.  True  shame  is  not  simply  the  distressing  consciousness  of  the  disapproval  of
others,  but  the  consciousness  that  this  is  well  deserved.

II.  Repentance  leads  ub  to  begabd  bin  with  shame.  Israel  then  names  Baal,
the  god  of  her  former  worship,  "Shame."  To  tho  penitent  "all  things  are  new."
The  sins  in  which  he  gloried  are  now  objects  of  tho  deepest  shame.  1.  Men  must  see
sin  in  a  true  light  to  regard  it  with  shame.  Tho  Israelites  are  here  represented  as
confessing  sin ;  they  feel  it  is  their  own  act :  '*  We  have  sinned ; "  they  feel  that  their
fathers'  sin  docs  not  extenuate  the  guilt  of  tho  new  sin  of  the  children,  but,  on  the
contrary,  adds  to  the  cumulative  guilt  of  the  nation.  2.  When  sin  is  thus  regarded,  the
shame  is  overpowering  and  overwhelming :  overpowering,  for  Israel  says,  "  Let  us  lie
down  in  our  shame,"  there  is  no  resisting  tho  influence  of  it,  it  crushes  to  the  dust  in
humiliation ;  and  it  is  overwhelming,  "  let  our  confusion  cover  us ;  *'  such  shame  is  no
superficial  and  transient  emotion.     It  is  all-absorbing.

III.  The  shame  fob  bin  is  a  wholesome  corrective.  Nothing  is  more  painful.
Self-love,  self-conceit,  and  self-respect  arc  all  cruelly  wounded.  Yet  the  bitter  medicine
is  a  true  antidote  to  the  sweet  poison  of  sin.  1.  It  opens  our  eyes  to  the  fatal  conse-
quences of  wickedness.  In  regarding  Baal  as  "  shame,"  the  people  seem  to  discover  for
the  first  time  that  he  had  "  devoured  the  labour  of  their  lathers  from  their  youth."
The  passion  of  sin  throws  a  false  glamour  about  it  and  its  eflfects  which  shame  dissolves.
2.  It  serves  as  a  strong  deterrent  from  future  sin.  It  makes  our  old  ways  look  horrible,
disgusting,  contemptible.  We  wonder  how  we  could  have  loved  them,  and  so  long  as
the  shame  lasts  nothing  could  induce  us  to  return  to  them.  Unfortunately,  shame  soon
dies  away,  and  if  disregarded  leaves  men  harder  than  before.  Therefore  it  should  not
be  trusted  in  by  itself,  but  used  as  a  means  to  lead  us  to  the  enduring  security  against
sin  in  Christ  (Rom.  viii.  1—5).


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Ver.  4.— -4  caU  to  the  young.  We  need  not  hesitate  so  far  to  turn  these  words  aside
from  their  original  meaning  as  to  regard  them  as  a  Divine  appeal  to  the  young ;  especi-
ally if  wo  understand  that  the  prophet  is  here  calling  on  Judah  to  return  to  the  fresh-
ness of  her  "  youth  ; "  that  "  at  this  time,"  this  hopeful  reign  of  the  good  King  Josiah,
she  should  renew  her  covenant  with  Jehovah  and  the  "  love  of  her  espousals  "  (ch.  ii.  2).
In  the  days  of  youth  the  heart  is  most  freely  open  to  Divine  influences,  and  it  may  bo
expected  to  respond  readily  to  such  an  appeal  as  this.     Note—

I.  The  deepest  truth  of  religion  is  the  fatherhood  of  God.  That  he  is  tho
Father  of  our  spirits  is  tho  basis  of  his  claims  upon  us.  The  quality  of  our  religious
thought,  tho  drift  of  our  religious  opinions,  the  tone  of  our  religious  life,  depend  very
greatly  on  our  faith  in  this  truth.  Fatherhood  is  our  highest  conception  of  God,  and
includes  within  it  all  aspects  of  his  being,  and  all  the  relations  he  sustains  towards  us.
This  crowns  them  all,  embraces  all.  We  cannot  rise  above  and  b6yond  it.  Our  ideas
are  essentially  defective  if  we  fall  short  of  it.  Not  that  the  actual  human  fatherhood
worthily  represents  it ;  that,  at  its  best,  is  but  a  marred  and  broken  copy — a  feeble,
distant  reflection— of  the  Divine.  And  yet  the  essential  elements  remain  in  spite  of
accidental  faults.  Power,  wisdom,  love,  judicial  authority,  kingly  rule,  protective
tenderness, — these  are  the  attributes  of  its  ideal.  And  from  tho  human,  with  all  its
imperfections  and  perversions,  wo  rise  to  tho  Divine.

II.  The  apprehension  of  this  sacred  relationship  is  specially  befitting  the
season  of  youth.  What  more  natural  than  that  young  iKJople  should  think  of  God
as  their  Father ;  that  this  idea  of  him  should  give  shape  and  colouring  to  all  their  other
religious  ideas,  and  blend  with  all  their  views  of  life,  and  all  their  impressions  of  per-
sonal duty  ?  Those  who  have  grown  old — old  in  tho  habit  of  frivolous  thought,  in  the
carnalizing  ways  of  the  world,  in  the  debasing  service  of  sin,  are  often  dead  to  the  im-


60  THE  BOOK  OF  THE   rROPHET  JEREAIIAII.    [ch.  iir.  1— 25.


pression  of  it.  Their  hearts  are  too  much  estranged  to  feel  its  charm.  But  shall  not
they  who  still  have  the  dew  of  their  youth  upon  them,  the  bloom  of  its  quick  sensi-
bility and  pure  affection,  love  to  hear  a  Father^s  voice  ?

III.  Nevertheless,  tue  full  discovery  op  this  relation  marks  a  crisis  m  the
HISTORY  OF  ANY  SOUL.  It  is  generally  connected  with  the  painful  discovery  of  sin
and  need.  "  I  write  unto  you,  little  children,  because  your  sins  are  forgiven  you  for
his  Name's  sake, .  . .  because  ye  have  known  the  Father  "  (1  John  ii.  12, 13).  How  sug-
gestive is  this  of  the  hidden  causes,  the  secret  springs,  the  earliest  realizations  of  Divine
fife  in  the  soul !  One  of  its  first  evidences  is  the  recognition  of  the  Father.  The  cry,
"  Abba,  Father !  "  is  the  first  that  it  breathes  forth.  But  this  comes  with  and  through
the  recognition  of  Christ,  the  Son,  the  Saviour.  "  No  man  knoweth  the  Father  save  the
Son,  and  he  to  whomsoever  the  Son  shall  reveal  him  "  (Matt.  xi.  27\  And  it  is  a
revelation  that  brings  the  assurance  of  "  forgiveness  for  his  Name's  sake.  The  sense  of
dreary  distance  from  God — guilt,  shame,  hunger,  degradation, — this  is  the  prelude  to  the
sweet  satisfactions  of  the  life  of  sonship.  It  is  the  prodigal  "coming  to  himself."
When  we  are  thus  painfully  feeling  our  way  back  to  him,  God  comes  forth  in  Christ  to
meet  us,  embracing  us  in  the  arms  of  his  great  love,  breathiuj;,  weeping  out  upon  us
the  infinite  tenderness  of  his  fatherly  heart.  Then  we  feel  that  we  can  dare  to  take
that  sacred  name  "  Father"  on  our  lips.  It  has  a  deep  and  blessed  meaning  in  it  never
known  before.  And  fear  and  shame  and  sorrow  give  place  to  the  joy  of  eternal
reconciliation.

IV.  The  natural  result  of  this  discovery  will  be  full  personal  surrender
TO  the  Father's  guidance  and  control.  "Guide,"  literally,  Husband;  and  the
word  "husband  "  is  suggestive  of  all  thoughtful  and  kindly  guardianship,  the  wisdom
that  directs,  and  the  strength  that  sustains.  Youth  needs  such  guardianship :  1.  Because
of  its  special  moral  dangers^  worldly  fascinations,  Satanic  temptations,  acting  on  quick
natural  susceptibility.  2.  Because  of  its  inexperience.  Experience  is  the  growth  of
years.  It  is  not  of  itself  always  the  parent  of  the  highest  practical  wisdom,  but  the
want  of  it  calls  for  the  help  of  a  superior  power.  3.  Because  of  its  weakness  of  moral
principle.  There  may  be  excellent  natural  dispositions,  germs  of  Christian  virtue  in
the  soul,  but  they  are  not  yet  developed.  They  are  but  latent  possibilities  of  good.
When  put  to  the  test,  they  may  be  found  wanting.  God's  grace  alone  can  ripen  them
into  mature  and  steadfast  principles.  4.  Because  beneath  its  fairest  promise  there  may
he  hidden  seeds  of  evil,  which  only  need  the  outward  incentive  to  bring  forth  deadly
fruit.  5.  Because  the  after-destiny  depends  so  much  on  how  the  steps  of  youth  are  guided.
Let  the  young  give  heed  to  the  Father's  voice,  and  yield  themselves  to  his  loving  con-
trol, if  they  would  tread  the  path  of  honour  and  safety  and  blessedness. — W.

Ver.  22. — "  Backsliding  Israel."  "  Backsliding  "  was  the  characteristic  vice  of  the
Jewish  people  throughout  the  whole  course  of  their  history.  Their  career  was  one  of
perpetual  sinning  and  repenting,  until  the  great  apostacy,  the  final  "falling  away."
And  in  this  we  see  what  is  too  often  a  truthful  reflection  of  the  individual  life  of  men.
The  Jews  were  emphatically  a  representative  people.  Not  merely  does  their  recorded
history  represent  the  method  of  God's  ways,  but  it  illustrates  the  folly  and  treachery,
the  moral  weakness  and  waywardness  of  our  human  nature.  Dwell  on  the  individual
application  of  this  passage.    Consider —

I.  The  evil  indicated.  "  Backsliding  "  is  suggestive  of  a  turning  away  from  God,
a  departure  from  the  path  of  truth  and  righteousness,  a  fall  from  some  higher  state  of
spiritual  consciousness  or  moral  life.  This  evil  may  assume  different  forms.  It  may
consist;  1.  In  the  loss  of  the  simplicity  and  integrity  of  religious  faith.  In  an  age  of
mental  restlessness  like  the  present,  men  too  easily  lose  their  hold  of  truth,  which  is
the  very  hope  and  life  of  their  souls.  We  may  look  with  perfect  composure  upon  the
conflict  between  truth  and  error  as  regards  its  general  and  ultimate  issues,  but  dare  not
forget  how  disastrous  its  bearings  upon  the  individual  life  may  be.  There  are  revolu-
tions in  the  history  of  religious  thought,  as  in  the  history  of  nations,  which  it  is  as  vain
to  think  of  arresting  as  it  would  be  to  attempt  to  turn  back  the  ocean  tide;  but  it  is  a
mournful  thing  when,  under  such  conditions,  the  mind  that  once  had  a  firm  grasp  of  the
vital  elements  of  Christian  truth  has  slipped  from  its  moorings  and  drifted  out  into  the
wild  sea  of  doubt  and  uncertainty.   To  a  really  earnest  spirit  the  recovery  of  a  lost  faith


en.  in.  1—25.]  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  TROPHET  JEREMIAH.         CI


is  generally  a  painful  process.  How  many  have  travelled  back,  as  with  wounded,  bleeding
feet,  to  positions  of  clearer  vision  and  firmer  standing  which  they  once  occupied,  but  in
an  evil  hour  had  forsaken  1  As  sometimes  after  a  bright  morning,  which  has  been  fol-
lowed by  a  day  of  cloud  and  storm,  there  is  again  at  sunset  a  glorious  outbursting
gleam  of  the  radiance  that  had  been  obscured ;  so  is  it  with  their  souls.  They  return  to
rest  calmly  in  the  truth  that  they  had  for  a  while  lost  sight  of,  and  "  at  eventide,"  as
in  the  morning,  "  it  is  light."  2.  In  the  decline  of  religious  feeling^  the  decay  of  those
affections  in  which  religious  life  consists.  This  is  that  secret  spiritual  "  backsliding  "
that  directly  affects  the  soul's  personal  relation  to  God,  and  the  consciousness  of  which
sometimes  extorts  the  bitter  cry,  "  Oh  that  1  were  as  in  months  past  1 "  etc.  (Job  xxix.
2 — 4).  It  may  arise  from  no  change  in  religious  belief.  While  a  departure  from  tho
simplicity  of  the  faith  is  generally  connected  with  a  lowering  of  the  tone  of  religious
feeling,  the  converse  of  this  is  not  always  true.  But  tho  faith  has  lost  its  life-giving
force.  The  light  it  sheds  has  no  warm,  kindling  glow.  It  is  tho  light  of  tho  moon
rather  than  the  sun— clear  and  cold,  having  no  power  to  quicken  the  frame  of  nature,
to  develop  its  beauty  and  fruitfulness,  to  awaken  its  music,  and  fill  it  with  exulting
joy.  Tho  carnalizing  influences  of  the  world,  the  wear  and  tear  of  daily  life,  inevitably
lead  to  this  internal  spiritual  decay,  unless  there  is  a  perpetual  renewal  of  the  life
"  whose  springs  are  hidden  and  Divine."  3.  In  practical  departure  from  the  standard
of  rdigious  duty.  The  backsliding  of  the  heart  cannot  long  be  concealed.  It  betrays
itself  in  many  ways — in  a  forsaking  of  the  paths  of  Christian  service,  in  some  manifest
lack  of  moral  integrity,  in  a  relapse  into  some  form  of  vicious  habit,  perhaps  in  a  com-
plete loosening  of  the  bonds  of  religious  restraint,  and  utter  abandonment  to  the  pursuits
of  an  ungodly  life.  It  is  of  such  a  case  that  our  Lord  says,  "  If  the  salt  have  lost  his
savour,"  etc.  (Matt.  v.  13)  ;  and  again,  "No  man,  having  put  his  hand  to  the  plough,"
etc.  (Luke  ix.  62) ;  and  bt.  Peter  afterwards  affirms,  "  It  had  been  better  for  them  not
to  have  known  the  way  of  righteousness,"  etc.  (2  Pet.  ii.  21).

II.  God's  method  of  healdjo.  "I  will  heal  your  backslidings."  This  is  tho
gracious  persuasion  by  which  he  seeks  to  reclaim  his  children  from  their  guilty  wan-
derings. How  may  we  expect  him  to  fulfil  the  promise  ?  1.  By  awakening  in  us  a
vivid  sense  and  penitent  acknowledgment  of  the  wrong.  We  can  scarcely  be  delivered
from  it  till  we  have  seen  all  the  sin  and  shame  of  it — its  real  meaning,  the  source  from
whence  it  springs,  the  end  to  which  it  leads.  Until  all  this  is  deeply  felt  and  freely
confessed  before  God,  the  first  step  in  tho  process  of  recovery  has  not  been  taken  (seu
Ps.  li.  3,  4 ;  xxxii.  5 ;  2  Cor.  vii.  10, 11).  2.  By  moving  us  to  trust  simply  in  his  for-
giving and  renewing  mercy.  Our  only  refuge  is  in  the  Divine  mercy,  and  there  is  no
other  way  of  mercy  than  that  which  the  gospel  reveals.  The  guilt  of  our  backslidings
can  alone  be  cancelled  by  tho  blood  of  Christ,  and  the  secret  cause  of  them  removed  by
the  grace  of  his  Spirit  (1  John  ii.  1,  2  ;  iii.  5—9).  "  There  is  no  prescription  for  the
sickness  of  the  heart  but  that  which  is  written  in  the  Redeemer's  blood, '  for  in  this
alone  have  we  both  the  pledge  and  the  channel  of  the  saving  love  of  God.  3.  By  creat-
ing in  us  the  energy  of  a  nobler  life,  "  Return,"  etc.  It  is  a  question,  after  all,  of
moral  resolution  and  self-determining  spiritual  power.

'*  Full  seldom  does  a  man  repent,  or  uso
Both  grace  and  will  to  pick  the  vicious  quitch
Of  blood  and  custom  wholly  out  of  him,
And  make  all  clean,  and  plant  himself  afresh."

But  God  gives  this  gracious  energy  to  those  who  seek  it,  and  such  '*  repentance  unto
life  "  is  the  true  "  healing."— W.

Ver.  1. — The  offer  of  a  great  forgiveness,  I.  CJonsider  the  illustration  by  which
IS  SHOWN  THE  EXTENT  OF  Jehovah's  MERCY  TO  THE  LOST.  By  an  illustration  drawn
from  the  power  allowed  to  the  Israelite  husband,  Jehovah  shows  how  great  is  his  spirit
of  mercy  and  his  desire  that  tho  deserting  wife,  so  terribly  described  in  tho  preceding
chapter,  should  return.  The  reference  is  evidently  to  Deut.  xxiv.  1—4.  There  the
husband  is  invested  with  an  authority  which  almost  seems  arbitrary,  although  from
Kumb.  V.  it  also  appears  that  an  accused  wife  had  a  right  of  appeal  to  ordeal,  which
ordeal  would  infallibly  certify  either  innocenco  or  guilt.    The  essential  point  here,


62  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [en.  in.  1—25.

however,  lies  in  this,  that  there  was  an  ordained  inability  for  the  wife  to  return  to  her
first  husband.  The  marriage  tie,  in  spite  of  all  the  apparent  facility  of  divorce,  was
not  a  thing  to  play  fast  and  loose  with.  The  way  of  departure  might  seem  compara-
tively easy,  but  the  way  of  return  was  altogether  hedged  up.  We  behold  a  curious
mixture  of  indulgence  and  severity — indulgence  for  a  time  because  of  the  hardness  of
the  people's  hearts ;  severity,  in  order  that  society  might  be  kept  together  at  all.  For  a
husband  to  take  back  such  a  wife  was  ordained  a  ceremonial  pollution,  which  needed
to  be  cleansed  away.  But  if  such  a  return  was  impossible,  still  more  evidently
impossible  was  the  return  of  one  who  had  lived  as  a  harlot.  Yet  thus  did  Israel,  once
the  loving,  devoted  spouse  (ch.  ii.  1),  now  appear  to  Jehovah.  Her  life  of  desertion
from  Jehovah  is  described  as  one  continuous,  shameless  exhibition  of  the  harlot's  lust.
And  it  is  just  in  the  light  of  all  this  terrible  impurity  that  the  word  comes  to  her,
"  Return  again  to  me,  saith  the  Lord."

II.  Consider  how  it  comes  that  God  can  address  such  an  invitation.  It  is
the  old  story  of  God's  power  to  do  things  which  man,  however  loving  and  merciful  he
may  be  in  disi)osition,  finds  to  be  quite  beyond  his  reach.  Man,  with  the  best  inten-
tions, with  the  most  sympathetic  heart,  is  limited  in  his  resources  to  the  outcast  by
the  necessities  of  human  society.  To  put  one  who  has  been  an  habitual  thief  in  a
position  of  serious  trust,  is  a  thing  so  hard  as  to  be  practically  impossible.  The  victims
of  vicious  inclinations  may  be  deeply  pitied,  and  yet  the  moment  one  tries  to  give
them  any  large  measure  of  help,  the  claims  of  others  somehow  come  in  to  forbid.  But
God,  as  ho  rises  far  above  man  in  his  love  and  mercy  and  insight  into  the  sinning
human  heart,  so  he  rises — if  one  may  thus  put  it — higher  still  in  his  power  to  give  an
amply  suflBcient  help.  God  can  bring  back  into  the  privileges  and  possibilities  belong-
ing to  his  Church,  he  can  bring  under  all  the  ixjnetrating  potencies  of  his  grace,  the
very  worst  apostate.  What  creature  can  bo  thought  of  more  defiled  than  the  harlot  ?
Human  reclaiming  agencies  can  do  nothing  to  serve  her  or  save  her,  except  as  they  put
in  their  forefront  the  loving-kindness  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus.  It  is  well  for  us  when
we  have  to  consider  the  impure,  the  degraded,  the  despairing  slaves  of  vice,  to  consider
also  these  encouraging  words  of  God,  "  Return  to  me."  Think  much  of  him  who  spoke
them,  and  then  of  the  sort  of  people  to  whom  they  were  spoken.  Those  who  are  most
of  all  suffering  in  social  outlawry  may  read  all  the  horrible  descriptions  of  abandon-
ment to  impurity  found  not  only  in  this  prophet  but  in  others,  and  then  say  with  the
most  joyful  hope,  "  If  Israel,  being  such,  was  pressed  to  return,  I  also  may  return."
Hosea  gives  the  appropriate  words  for  such,  "  I  will  go  and  return  to  my  first  husband  ;
for  then  was  it  better  with  me  than  now  "  (Hos.  ii.  7).  And  to  keep  up  the  figure,
what  will  the  end  of  such  a  Divine  invitation  and  such  a  human  resolution  be  ?  It  is
found  in  Rev.  xxi.,  where  we  read  the  following  request,  "  Come  hither,  I  will  show
thee  the  bride,  the  Lamb's  wife."  The  first  Israel  sank  into  an  indescribable  shame ;
the  second  Israel  will  rise  into  an  indescribable  glory. — Y.

Ver.  4. — Israel's  cry  to  the  Father  and  the  Friend,  I.  Observe  the  sudden  change
OP  relation  which  is  thus  brought  before  us.  Hitherto  we  have  had  before  us
Jehovah's  description  of  Israel  under  the  guise  of  a  wife  departing  from  her  husband
into  the  most  degrading  and  shameless  conduct.  And  now  our  thoughts  are  suddenly
turned,  with  nothing  to  prepare  for  the  transition,  to  a  new  relation — that  of  father  and
child.  Note  that  it  is  not  God  who  directly  presents  himself  in  this  relation.  "  Father  "
is  a  term  put  into  the  mouths  of  the  people  in  the  preceding  chapter  and  also  in  this.
In  ch.  ii.  27  they  are  represented  as  saying  to  a  stock, "  Thou  art  my  father ; "  and  now
they  say  to  Jehovah,  "  Thou  art  my  Father,  the  Friend,  the  Companion  of  my  youth."
It  may  be  that  there  was  no  depth  of  real  sincerity  in  the  cry,  even  though  it  is  de-
scribed as  a  cry,  and  not  a  mere  perfunctory  recognition — at  all  events,  it  sets  forth  a
fact.  Jehovah  was  a  Father  to  the  nation  of  Israel  in  this  sense,  that  it  was  by  his
peculiar  and  necessary  power  that  Israel  was  separated  in  all  sorts  of  profoundly  sig-
nificant ways  from  the  great  mass  of  mankind.  When  Abram  started  forth,  not  know-
ing whither  he  went,  this  was  to  him  a  sort  of  being  born  again ;  an  entirely  new  life
lay  before  him,  with  expectations  that  he  never  could  have  cherished  but  that  God
planted  them  deep  in  his  heart.  And  thus  the  name  is  a  right  and  needful  name  to
use.    Israel  is  doing  what  it  ought  to  do  when  it  says,  "  Abba,  Father  1 "    The  idea


cH.ra.  1— 25.]  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROrHET  JEREMIAH.         63

evidently  is  that  Israel  has  learned  to  speak  to  Grod*  much  in  the  same  way  that  an
English  child  learns  to  say  "  papa  "  or  "  father  "  (Isa.  viii.  4).

U.  Obsebve  the  conduct  by  which  what  is  good  in  this  becoonized  belation
OF  FATHER  IS  MANIFESTED.  It  was  truo  that  Jchovah  had  been  Father  to  Israel ;  it
was  moreover  true  that  he  had  been  Guide,  Friend,  and  Companion  to  Israers  youth.  It
is  not  always  the  case  that  fatherhood  means  a  loving  and  cherishing  companionship.
But  here  it  is  emphatically  the  case.  Jehovah  was  a  very  close  Companion  to  Israel  in
its  youth ;  not  really  nearer,  of  course,  than  he  had  been  since,  but  near  in  such  a  way
that  the  people  were  compelled  to  note  his  proximity  to  them,  and  constant  watchful-
ness over  them.  This,  therefore,  as  Israel  looked  back  ujwn  its  youth,  was  the  right
way  for  it  to  speak  of  Jehovah.  Being  Father,  he  had  also  been  a  truo  Companion  and
Support.  "  Guide  of  my  youth  "  does  very  well  for  a  rendering,  if  we  bear  in  mind  all
that  the  guiding  implies.  There  is  a  guiding  which  is  a  mere^  trade,  a  mere  selling  of
the  guide's  knowledge.  He  takes  up  any  stranger,  shows  him  the  way,  gets  his  pay,
and  then  the  relation  is  at  an  end.  But  the  practical  guiding  here  comes  from  a  deep
love  and  solicitude.  Further,  it  must  bo  remembered  that  Jehovah's  friendship  and
companionship  were  the  friendship  and  companionship  of  one  competent  to  guide.
Friendship  by  itself  is,  of  course,  not  sufficient  to  constitute  guiding  capacity.  We  see,
then,  that  the  expression  of  this  verse  is  a  very  suggestive  one  by  which  to  address
God.  All  fathers  may  learn  from  it  the  spirit  of  a  right  relation  towards  their  children.
It  is  the  name  which  they  should  desire  their  children  to  associate  with  their  child-
hood. It  should  be  a  remembrance  having  a  binding  power  when  the  child  has  become
a  man,  and  the  father  an  old  man.  It  should  be  possible  to  look  back  on  a  childhood
where  the  father  was  a  true  companion,  one  whose  companionship  was  full  of  true
befriending  and  guiding.  There  is  also  indicated  the  spirit  in  which  youth  should  look
beyond  earthly  dependencies  to  Ood  himself,  lie  who  was  so  much  to  a  youthful  nation
of  old  will  be  of  inestimable  service  to  the  ignorance,  weakness,  and  abounding  need
of  all  youth.  Especially  should  this  consideration  have  force  when  one  thinks  of  the
significance  in  the  doctrine  of  being  bom  again.  He  who  is  bom  again  has  then  a
second  youth,  even  though  he  be  in  the  full  strength  of  natural  manhood.  And  what
is  wanted  is  that  the  man  in  his  strength  and  his  wide  outlook  on  the  possibilities  of
life  should  choose  a  tmly  humble  position  before  God.  The  expression  is  also  one  that
may  point  hack  to  a  submissive,  hopeful  youth,  wherein  many  Divine  impressions  were
made,  and  from  which  there  has  been  a  great  backsliding.  Then  how  beautifully
would  such  an  expression  come  from  the  lips  of  the  returning  prodigal,  "  My  Father,
thou  wast  the  Guide  of  my  youth,  and  now  after  a  bitter  experience  of  trying  to  make
my  own  way,  which  has  ended  in  a  mere  drifting  before  the  strong  currents  of  passion
and  self-indulgence,  I  come  back  to  thee  " !  It  is  sad  to  have  the  friendship  of  father
and  child  broken,  sad  at  any  time,  but  saddest  of  all  when  it  is  not  through  some
meddling  whisperer  or  repeater  of  a  matter  (Prov.  xvi.  28 ;  xvii.  9),  but  through  the
voluntary  and  obstinate  departure  of  one  of  the  friends. — Y,

Ver.  5. — Actions  speak  louder  than  words.  Israel,  wo  see,  is  represented  as  speaking
with  a  very  pathetic  remembrance  of  God's  great  favours  in  the  remote  past.  At
present,  indeed,  there  is  a  withholding  of  the  rain  that  means  fruitfulness  and  prosperity,
but  that  Father  who  has  been  the  Guide  of  Israel's  yonth,'^surely  he  will  soon  bring  the
rain,  with  all  that  follows  it,  in  spite  of  any  appearances  to  the  contrary,  such  as  his
anger  with  Israel  suggests.  Such  is  the  way  that  Israel  speaks  ;  but  how  does  it  act  f
Is  there  to  be  alteration  in  God  without  alteration  in  man  ?  It  is  of  no  use  for  the
sinning  nation  simply  to  wait  as  if  God's  righteous  chastisements  would  be  exhausted
by  lapse  of  time.  There  might  have  to  bo  waiting,  but  assuredly  there  loould  have  to
be  repenting,  and  the  bringing  forth  of  fraits  meet  for  repentance.  But  instead  of  this
God  is  confronted  with  persistent  transgression.  Ho  who  had  been  Friend,  Companion,
and  Guide  in  youth  could  not  have  been  so  without  a  docile  acceptance  of  the  companion-
ship. The  guidance  in  youth  meant  that  Jehovah  had  a  right  to  expect  a  manhood  of
holy  service.  But  so  far  from  the  people  giving  this,  the  expectation  in  their  heart
is  that  God  will  still  provide  for  them  and  let  them  do  as  they  like.  They  do  not
seem  to  imderstand  that  it  is  they  who  by  their  transgressions  provide  for  the  susten-
ance and  continuance  of  the  anger  of  Jehovah.     That  anger  is  not  like  a  storm  which


64  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [en.  in.  1—25.

rises  one  knows  not  how,  and  presently  subsides  without  man  being  able  to  do  any-
thing for  its  removal.  God's  anger  was  as  a  fire,  and  the  wickedness  of  the  people  was
like  dry  and  highly  combustible  fuel  before  the  flame.  The  one  thing  needful  was  to
stop  the  fuel,  and  the  fire  would  then  very  speedily  burn  out.  To  say  with  the  lips,
•*  My  Father,  thou  wast  the  Guide  of  my  youth,"  will  only  bo  of  use  when  there  is
something  like  correspondence  between  what  is  spoken  and  what  is  done. — Y.

Ver.  15. — Ood  will  provide  pastors  according  to  his  oivn  heart.    I.  The  need  so

EMPHATICALLY  IMPLIED  THAT  SUCH  PASTORS  SHOULD  BE  GIVEN.     The  shcphcrd's  occupa-
tion, it  need  hardly  be  said,  is  one  that  comes  up  again  and  again  in  the  Scriptures,  both
in  the  literal  sense  of  the  word  and  the  figurative  one.    And  even  in  the  literal  occupa-
tion there  was,  doubtless,  often  need  of  men  who  could  be  described  as  shepherds  after
God's  own  heart.    Every  shepherd  who  was  faithful,  observant,  courageous,  and  alto-
gether superior  to  the  hireling  spirit,  was  to  that  extent  a  shepherd   after  God's  own
heart.     Such  a  one  might  possibly  not  bo  after  God's  own  heart  in  other  respects.
Many  are  very  watchful  over  the  brutes  committed  to  their  charge,  and  utterly  thought-
less about  the    shepherding  of  their  own  souls  and  of  the  various   human  beings
dependent  on  them  and  influenced  by  them.    Then  passing  to  the  figurative  flocks  and
•  shepherds,  there  are  very  pathetic  representations  in  the  Scriptures  of  the  mischief  conse-
quent on  the  unfaithfulness  of  those  rulers  and  providers  who  had  been  set  over  God's
people.    Take  such  a  man  as  King  Ahab.     He  was  not  a  man  after  God's  own  heart,
and  what  is  the  result  ?    Gt)ing  out  against  the  King  of  Syria,  Ahab,  not  very  hopeful
of  a  favouring  word,  consults  Micaiah,  the  faithful  prophet  of  God  :  "  I  saw  all  Israel
scattered  upon  the  hills,  as  sheep  that  have  not  a  shepherd ; "  which  was  not  only  a
warning  of  utter  defeat,  but  a  bitter  charge  against  Ahab  that  he  had  been  utterly
faithless  to  his  trust  (1  Kings  xxii.  17).    There  is  so  much  of  the  sheep-nature  in  the
human  breast.    How  many  have  been  troubled  because  there  is  no  shepherd  (Zech.  x.
2) !    Every  time  the  confession  is  uttered,  "  All  we  like  sheep  have  gone  astray,"  there
is  a  hint  of  pastoral  unfaithfulness  somewhere  or  other.     The  sheep-nature   in   the
human  breast  has  never  been  better  set  forth  than  in  the  anxiety  of  the  departing
Moses  with  respect  to  a  competent  successor  (Numb,  xxvii.  17).    Food  needs  to  be  pro-
vided.   There  must  be  a  guarding  against  self-willed  w^andering  away  from  the  supplies
and  comforts  belonging  to  a  constant  member  of  the  flock.     There  are  the  perils  froia
wild  beasts  (1  Sam.  xvii.  34).    There  is  the  work  needed  to  bring  back  that  which  is
lost.    Look  at  Zech.  xi.  16,  where  there  is  a  hint  of  what  the  shepherd  has  to  do —
visiting  those  that  are  cut  off,  seeking  the  young  ones,  healing  the  broken,  bearing  that
which  standeth  still  (see  also  ch.  1.  G;  Ezek.  xxxiv. ;  John  x.).

II.  The  fact  that  such  pastors  will  assuukdly  de  provided.  Great  is  the  re-
quirement, and  there  has  often  been  a  grievous  disappointment  in  getting  it  met,  but
assuredly  it  can  be  met.  The  rulers  in  Israel  had  not  all  been  as  Ahab.  That  same
Moses,  who  was  so  anxious  concerning  his  successor,  had  been  himself  taken  from
faithful  oversight  of  another  man's  sheep  in  order  to  deliver  Israel  from  Pharaoh's
clutch,  and  lead  him  towards  the  green  pastures  and  still  waters  of  the  promised  land
(Exod.  iii.).  David,  who  had  followed  the  ewes  great  >vith  young,  no  doubt  gently
leading  them  when  needful,  gathering  the  lambs  in  his  arm  and  carrying  them  in
his  bosom,  who  also  had  smitten,  the  lion  and  the  bear,  was  now  taken  to  feed  Jacob
the  people  of  God,  and  Israel  his  inheritance  (Ps.  Ixxviii.  71 ;  Isa.  xl.  11).  Not  only
had  he  been  faithful  as  a  shepherd,  but  he  had  also  grown  ever  more  conscious  of  the
sheep-nature  in  himself,  and  the  sheeplike  requirements  of  his  own  life,  and  so,
looking  away  from  his  flock  upwards,  he  beautifully  says,  "  Jehovah  is  my  Shepherd."
He  had  lions  following  his  own  soul  (Ps.  vii.  2  ;  x.  9 ;  xvii.  12;  xxii.  13).  Those  are
fitted  to  be  shepherds  after  God's  own  heart  who,  feeling  their  own  needs,  make
Jehovah  their  Shepherd.  It  is  important  to  remember  how  David  ia  declared  as  the
man  after  God's  own  heart  (1  Sam.  xiii.  14 ;  Acts  vii.  46 ;  xiii.  22).  So  God  is  here
speaking  through  Jeremiah,  with  that  confidence  which  comes  from  actual  experience  of
tne  true  and  the  brave  among  his  own  chosen.  Then  there  is  the  great  work  of  Jesus
to  be  considered.  It  is  very  significant  that  in  ch.  xxiii.,  after  a  reference  to  the  un-
Xaithful  shepherds,  there  is  a  promise  of  faithful  ones,  their  work  being  set  forth  more
explicitly  even  than  here ;  and  then  God  goes  on  to  speak  of  the  righteous  Branch


<m.  m.  1-^25.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  65

wbicli  shall  be  raised  to  David,  the  King  who  Rhall  reign  and  prosper  and  cxecuto
jud<;ment  and  justice  in  the  earth:  he  is  the  Governor  who  shall  feed  tlie  Lord's
people  Israel  (Matt.  ii.  6);  he  is  the  Great  Shepherd  of  the  sheep  brought  again  from
the  dead  (Heb.  xiii.  20) ;  he  who  is  also  the  Lamb  in  the  midst  of  the  throne,  shall
meet  those  who  are  gathered  out  of  the  great  tribulation,  and  feed  them,  and  lead  them
"unto  living  fountains  of  waters"  (Rev.  vii.  17);  and  thus  Ixjing  himself  the  Great
Shepherd,  he  is  competent  to  convey  to  all  under-shepherds  the  resources  whereby  in
all  wisdom  they  may  feed  the  hungry  with  knowledge  and  understanding.  If  Jesus
makes  us  truly  righteous,  then  with  the  lips  of  the  righteous  we  shall  be  able  to  feed
many.  The  duties  of  a  pastor  after  God's  own  heart  will  appear  in  all  their  magnitude
to  one  who  is  considering  the  pastoral  work  of  Jesus  himself.  Such  a  one  will  take
heed  to  himself,  and  to  all  the  flock  over  which  the  Holy  Ghost  hath  made  him  over-
seer, feeding  the  Church  of  God  which  he  hath  purchased  with  his  own  blood.  Ho
will  have  his  eye  on  the  grievous  wolves  that  enter  in,  not  sparing  the  flock.  He  will
carry  out  the  spirit  of  the  commandment  which  God  gave  to  Moses  at  Sinai :  "  Neither
let  the  flocks  nor  herds  feed  before  the  mount "  (Exod.  xxxiv.  3) ;  by  doing  his  best  to
keep  all  within  his  charge  from  thoughtless  trifling  with  holy  things.  It  is  a  great
matter  to  be  put  in  a  position  of  spiritual  pastoral  responsibility ;  and  all  in  such  positions
may  joyfully  remember  that  God  will  give  them  all  needed  strength.  It  is  a  sad
thought  for  the  careless  pastor  that  it  should  so  often  be  needful  for  the  strangers  to  stand
and  feed  the  flocks  he  should  feed — men  that  to  a  certain  extent  may  be  reckoned
unauthorized*  And  yet  what  can  be  done ?  Flocks  must  not  die  of  hunger;  and  as  the
real  physician  is  he  who  cures  the  disease,  whatever  his  professional  standing  may  be,
so  the  real  shepherd  is  he  who  feeds  the  flock,  and  the  brand  of  interloper  is  aflixed  to
him  in  vain.  And  so  GK>d  would  invite  all  his  people  to  do  what  they  can  to  be  true
shepherds.  In  one  sense  the  shepherds  are  as  many  as  the  sheep.  It  is  better  to  be
ministering  to  the  deep,  undying  wants  of  men,  than  just  to  their  passing  pleasures.
He  who  strives  to  make  himself  acceptable  to  men  by  an  incessant  watching  of  their
whims  and  prejudices  is  very  much  like  the  prodigal  who  found  nothing  better  to  do
than  feed  the  swine.    It  is  Grod's  will  that  we  should  feed  sheep, — Y»

Ver.  16. — The  superseding  of  the  ark.  Along  with  the  denunciations  and  painful
descriptions  which  Jehovah  has  put  into  the  mouth  of  the  prophet,  there  now  begins
to  be  mingled  a  gracious,  evangelical  element.  God's  severest  condemnations  are
meant  to  pave  the  way  for  return,  repentance,  reconciliation,  and  a  reception  of  still
more  abundant  gifts  than  before.  Far  and  wide  Israel  has  been  scattered,  but
scattered  only  to  be  brought  together  again.  Though  there  be  but  one  in  a  city  and
two  in  a  nation,  God  will  find  out  the  isolated  ones  and  draw  them  back  to  him.  Then,
with  pastors  after  God's  own  heart,  what  can  there  be  but  increase  and  multiplication
of  the  flock  of  God?  And  then  comes  what  is  evidently  meant  to  be  considered  as  a
srcat  blessing,  though  at  first  it  seems  to  point  to  another  sad  apostasy,  and  to
lorgetfulness  of  one  of  the  holiest  and  most  precious  treasures  of  the  past.  The  ark  of
the  covenant,  with  the  tables  of  the  Law  deposited  within,  was  the  very  centre  of
religious  associations  to  the  nation.  But  now  it  is  to  be  no  more  spoken  of.  God,
indeed,  trusts  that  the  memory  of  it  was  to  pass  away.  Reading  such  a  verse  as  this,
how  one  is  made  to  feel  the  importance  of  time  as  an  element  necessary  to  the  proper
nnderstanding  of  things  I  Such  words  as  these  spoken  by  Israel  at  an  earlier  date
would  have  been  a  very  bad  sign,  but  spoken  at  the  time  when  all  was  ripe  for  them,
they  become  just  as  much  a  sign  for  good.  The  ark  of  the  covenant — the  literal  ark
with  the  literal  tables  of  stone— could  not  be  a  permanent  institution.  For  centuries
it  had  been  holy — holy  not  in  word  only,  but  also  in  deed.  Consider  how  God  honoured
it,  when  for  a  time  it  was  lodged  in  Philistia ;  consider  the  calamities  that  came  upon
the  men  of  Bethshcmesh  and  upon  Uzzah,  for  their  thoughtless  handling  of  the  ark.
Much  thus  happened  to  make  the  Israelite  very  careful  how  ho  dealt  with  it.  David
and  Solomon  in  particular  were  very  solicitous  to  honour  the  ark  to  the  utmost  of
their  power.  This  is  seen  not  only  in  the  bringing  of  the  ark  up  into  the  city  of
David,  and  the  putting  of  it  into  the  temple  by  Solomon,  but  perhaps  even  more  in  the
conduct  of  Solomon  to  Abiathar,  when  Abiathar  was  implicated  in  the  ofience  of
Adonijah.    Solomon  spared  the  man  he  would  otherwise  have  slain,  because  he  had

jSBEMiAH.  r    .


66  THE  BOOK  OP  THP]  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  m  1— 25.

lx)rae  the  ark  of  the  Lord  God  before  David  (1  Kings  ii.  26).  But  there  can  be  no  doubt
that  aa  generation  succeeded  generation,  the  general  feeling  would  become  so  mixed
with  superstition  as  to  do  more  harm  than  good.  The  people  had  said,  **  The  ark  of  the
covenant  of  the  Lord,"  but  their  saying  had  not  amotmted  to  much.  The  ark  had
been  remembered,  but  the  writing  on  the  stones  within  had  been  forgotten.  The
longer  it  stood  as  the  central  object  of  a  unique  ritual,  the  more  it  became  a  symbol
of  separation  from  other  nations.  That  which  had  been  given  so  that  one  set  of
thoughts  should  be  associated  with  it,  thoughts  to  help  in  making  pure,  reverent,  and
watchful,  had  ended  in  having  quite  another  set  of  thoughts  associated  with  it.  And
so  both  the  object  itself  seems  to  have  vanished,  and  at  the  same  time  its  dominion  to
have  ceased.  It  is  surely  a  very  remarkable  thing  that  all  through  the  Books  of  Ezra  and
Nehemiah  there  is  no  reference  to  the  ark.  The  vessels  of  God*s  house  are  mentioned,
an  altar  was  set  up  and  offerings  made,  and  in  due  time  a  temple  built ;  but  there  is  no
word  of  the  ark.  Its  work  was  done,  and  we  are  not  so  much  as  told  what  became  of
it.  We  know  that  the  brazen  serpent  was  declared  Nehushtan^  but  the  withdrawal  of
the  ark  God  manages  in  complete  silence.     So  true  it  is  that —

"  Go<l  fulfils  himself  in  many  ways,
Lest  one  good  custom  should  corrupt  the  world.**

Y.

Ver.  17.— T^c  gathering  of  (he  nations  to  Jehovah's  throne.  L  Thr  kew  character
IN  WHICH  Jerusalem  appears.  It  is  no  longer  to  be  considered  simply  as  the  centre  of
Israelite  affection  and  devotion,  the  city  where  was  the  palace  of  a  human  king,  and  the
temple  of  Jehovah  as  the  peculiar  deity  of  Israel.  It  is  no  longer  to  be  the  place  of  a
peculiar  worship.  Its  character  henceforth  is  to  be  far  more  glorious,  one  in  which
Israel  shall  lose  nothing,  yea,  rather  gain,  in  remembering  what  it  has  been  able  to  con-
tribute in  attaining  such  an  end.  Jerusalem^  that  had  been  associated  with  all  sorts  of
idolatrous  abominations,  is  first  of  all  to  be  desolated  and  humbled,  whatever  human
pride  and  glory  there  was  in  it  extinguished ;  and  then  the  true  glory  will  come.  The
city  shall  be  Jehovah's  throne,  the  throne  of  him  who  is  God  above  all  gods  and  King
above  all  kings.  And  when  men  would  recognize  the  authority  of  a  kinj;,  his  throne
is  the  place  they  must  come  to.  Hence  to  Jehovah,  seated  on  his  throne,  all  the
nations  are  to  be  gathered ;  forsaking  national  idols  and  national  ideals,  all  that  is  local
and  narrow  and  self-originated  will  vanish.  The  ark  of  the  covenant  passes  away,  and
the  tables  of  stone  become  unnecessary,  for  from  his  throne  Jehovah  will  take  means
whereby  he  may  write  on  the  fleshy  tables  of  every  human  heart  the  two  great  prin-
ciples, "  Love  God  and  love  thy  fellow-man."

II.  How  THE  GATHERING  18  TO  BE  BROUGHT  ABOUT.  How  clcar  it  is  that,  the  ark  of
the  covenant  passing  away,  mere  local,  terrestrial  Jerusalem  must  also  cease  to  have
any  peculiar  value !  The  taking  away  of  the  ark  of  the  covenant  is  really  the  taking
away  of  all  in  the  way  of  dependence  that  is  merely  visible  and  material.  It  is  plain
that  the  gathering  together  to  Jerusalem  cannot  mean  an  actual  travelling  there  from
all  parts  of  the  earth's  surface.  Not  that  the  mere  local  Jerusalem  can  become  as  a
common  spot  of  earth.  After  these  northern  dcsolators,  of  whom  Jeremiah  so  uften
spoke,  had  done  with  it,  it  was  rebuilt,  and  in  due  time  became  the  scene  of  great
spiritual  redeeming  acts  profoundly  aflecting  every  child  of  man.  The  thought  of  the  •
local  scenes  where  Christ  died,  rose  again,  and  ascended  into  glory,  may  well  help  every
sinner  in  his  believing  approaches  to  his  Saviour.  Those  who  gather  at  Jerusalem
gather  there  by  virtue  of  the  power  which  there  is  in  every  believing  heart.  Innumer-
able pilgrims,  on  piety  intent,  have  gone  on  pilgrimage  to  Jerusalem,  doing  laborious
penances  by  the  way,  only  to  discover  in  the  end  that  they  have  been  walking  after  the
imaginations  of  their  evil  hearts.  There  may  be  great  value  in  a  journey  to  the  Holy
Land,  if  only  those  who  go  there  have  first  of  all  had  their  minds  opened  to  apprehend
the  work  which  he  who  died  at  Jerusalem  did  for  them ;  otherwise  their  travels,  what-
ever the  human  joy  and  interest  of  them,  may  only  add  to  their  subsequent  condem-
nation. To  go  to  Jerusalem  spiritually  is  the  great  thing.  The  Jerusalem  of  our
journey  is  situated  in  the  pages  of  the  Kew  Testament  rather  than  in  Palestine.  It  is
as  we  read  the  Gospels  that  we  feel  how  Jerusalem  is  indeed  the  throne  of  Jehovah  in
this  sense,  that  there,  through  his  Son  Jesus,  he  manifested  righteousness,  power,  and


CH.m.  1—250     THE  BOOK  OP  TEE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  67


love,  all  the  glorions  attributes  of  his  eternal  reign.  The  transactions  at  Jerusalem  are
incomparable.  No  transactions  in  any  one  nation,  however  much  they  may  affect  the
career  of  that  nation,  can  rival  the  transactions  at  Jerusalem.  The  Englishman  as
an  Englishman  may  feel  his  deep  concern  in  Magna  Charta  and  the  IM\\  of  Rights.
The  American  as  an  American  thinks  of  Philadelphia  and  the  Declaration  of  Inde-
pendence. The  negro  as  a  negro  remembers  Lincoln  and  the  proclamation  which  gave
freedom  to  the  slaves.  But  underneath  the  natural,  the  peculiar,  the  merely  terrestrial,
there  is  another  man,  the  man  who  has  to  think  of  sin  within  him,  and  death  and
eternity  before  him.  Such  a  man,  if  ho  thinks  rightly,  will  feel  that  it  is  towards
Jerusalem  that  his  most  earnest  considerations  should  gather.  All  who  truly  ponder  the
great  questions  of  life  must  gather  there,  and  thence  in  faith  their  thoughts  will  ascend
to  the  true,  the  heavenly,  the  everlasting  Jerusalem.— Y»

Ver.  21.— -4  tincere  repentance  in  an  appropriate  place.  How  came  this  voice  to  be
heard  on  the  high  places — this  weeping  and  this  supplication  ?  The  answer  seems  to  lie
in  ver.  20,  where  tnere  is  interposed  a  suggestion  that  Israel,  because  of  its  past  defec-
tions, would  fail  to  prove  capable  and  worthy  of  that  glorious  future  which  has  been
just  depicted.  How  then  can  Israel  reply  except  by  an  abundant  outflow  of  the  signs
of  penitence?  There  is  weeping;  there  is  deprecation  of  any  such  withdrawal  of
Jehovah's  contemplated  goodness;  there  is  a  most  emphatic  declaration  that  they  had
indeed  been  utterly  perverse  and  had  forgotten  Jehovah,  llie  submission  to  him,  the
acknowledgment  of  him,  shall  now  be  complete.  The  words  put  into  the  lips  of  the
repentant  people  (vers.  22 — 26)  are  not  extorted  and  grudging  words,  with  a  counter-
resolution  underneath  to  back  out  if  any  chance  should  offer.  The  eyes  of  the  apostates
have  been  opened ;  Israel  has  come  to  itf«lf.  What  has  been  sought  in  vain  on  hills
and  mountains  in  the  cruel  service  of  heathen  deities  is  to  be  got  in  full  and  abiding
power  from  Gk>d.    Observe  now  how—

These  high  places  were  most  appropriate  for  these  tearful  acknowledo-
1IENT8  AND  THESE  ENTREATING  APPROACHES  TO  CtoD,  1.  The  thing  done  had  been  a
great  public  wrong.  Where  men  have  sinned  is  the  place  for  them  to  confess  their  sin.
Kow,  this  was  not  a  sin  in  some  secret  place;  it  was  not  a  sin  confined  to  the  thoughts
of  the  heart,  and  known  only  to  God ;  it  was  not  some  private,  domestic  wrong-doing.
The  whole  nation  shared  in  the  sin  of  the  high  places.  Even  if  some  were  not  actually
idolatrous,  yet  by  their  silence  and  inaction  they  condoned  the  idolatry.  All  sur-
rounding nations  must  be  cognizant  of  it.  Sins  in  public  cannot  be  got  rid  of  without
an  equally  public  repentance  and  suffering.  Who  can  tell  what  audacious  and  mocking
words  may  have  been  spoken  concerning  Jehovah  by  the  heathen  around  ? — "  Why,  this
Jehovah,  whose  temple  and  service  are  in  Jerusalem,  and  who  has  no  image,  has  really
no  power  over  the  people  I  He  has  a  name  to  live,  but  surely  he  is  dead! "  Elijah
mocked  the  priests  of  Baal,  and  he  had  cause,  for,  unhappy  men  that  they  were,  they
had  believed  in  a  lie.  But  priests  of  Baal  mi<;ht  also  many  times  have  mocked  the
people  of  Israel,  for  in  one  sense  they  had  the  truth,  but  they  did  not  believe  in  it.  Of
course,  in  the  end,  such  people  were  bound  to  make  a  very  public  acknowledgment  of
their  folly  and  unbelief.  2.  By  this  weeping^  etc,,  on  the  high  places,  there  was  a  par-
ticularly impressive  condemnation  of  idolatry.  He  who  forsakes  a  course  of  action
necessarily  condemns  that  action,  and  reproaches  all  who  still  continue  in  it,  reproaches
them  none  the  less  because  reproach  may  not  be  at  all  intended.  Such  a  return  to
Jehovah  as  is  indicated  in  the  concluding  verses  of  this  chaptor  is  also,  by  the  very  act,
a  downright  blow  against  idolatry.  Let  men  who  will  persist  in  wrong  courses  know
that  they  must  be  prepared  for  painful  experiences  when  their  companions,  every  now
and  then,  desert  them.  There  will  always  be  some  one  discovering  that  the  course  is
wrong,  and  going  over  to  the  other  side.  Take  a  very  imi)ortant  instance  of  such
exposure  as  we  find  it  in  the  New  Testament.  Pharisaism  and  Jewish  pride  are  there
condemned  from  two  great  sources  of  judgment.  One  of  these  we  find  in  Jesus,  who
spoke,  we  know  how  severely,  against  the  Pharisees  and  their  doings.  From  his  words
we  feel  how  bad  their  spirit  must  have  been  and  their  inner  life.  But  perhaps  it  is
not  too  much  to  say  that  Saul's  condemnation  of  them  is  still  more  striking ;  shown
not  in  words  so  much,  but  oh,  how  clearly  in  deed  I  when  he  came  out  from  them,
showing  ho  was  no  more  of  them.    3.  There  is  thus  a  great  warning  to  all  who  are


68         THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,  [ch.  hi.  1— 25*


acting  doubtfully  in  the  blaze  of  public  life.  If  such  have  occasion  to  turn,  they  must
turn  in  public.  Any  one  who  stands  well  out  before  his  fellows  had  need  take  care
what  he  says  and  does,  for  he  knows  not  what  may  be  the  force  of  circumstances,  what
revolutions  there  may  be  in  his  convictions.  How  much  nations  have  had  to  suffer-
perhaps  will  have  to  suffer  to  the  end  of  time — just  because  they  are  not  careful  of  tho
Deginnings  of  evil  in  their  midst  1  Look  at  what  it  cost  America  to  get  rid  of  negro
slavery  when  once  it  had  grown  into  a  far-spreading  and  lucrative  custom. — Y.

Vers.  1 — 5. — Stn,  LaWy  Grace,  We  have  here  represented  to  us—
I.  Sin  in  its  most  awful  form.  It  was  the  sin  of  idolatry.  This  was  especially
nievous  in  the  sight  of  God,  since  Israel  was  designed  to  give  light  to  all  other  nations.
They  were  raised  up  for  the  very  purpose  that  through  them  the  knowledge  of  God  might
flow  forth  to  the  whole  world.  The  destinies  of  humanity  depended  on  them.  Ilcnco
if  the  light  that  was  in  them  were  darkness,  "  how  great,"  etc.  I  Their  corruption  was  tho
poisoning  of  the  fountain,  which  would  render  deadly  all  its  streams.  Hence  it  is  that
this  sin  is  so  commonly  represented  in  the  prophetic  writings  under  the  images  of
harlotry  and  adultery— crimes  which,  when  found  in  any  belonging  to  him,  the  Israelite
would  most  fiercely  resent.  By  the  nature  and  measure  of  their  own  hatred  for  such
outrages  on  the  purity  of  their  home  life,  would  God  have  them  understand  somewhat  of
tho  nature  and  measure  of  his  hatred  of  that  idolatry  into  which  as  a  nation  they  had
fallen,  and  against  which  God*s  prophets  were  for  ever  uttering  their  earnest  protest.
And  to  aggravate  their  wickedness,  they  had  been  guilty  thereof  again  and  again  (ver.  1),
They  hs^d  become  lost  to  all  sense  of  shame  in  regard  to  it  (vers.  2,  3).  They  had  not
waited  to  be  tempted  and  persuaded,  but  had  gone  after  their  sin,  greedily,  seeking  it
rather  than  it  them  (ver.  2).  They  had  persisted  until  the  land  was  polluted  by  their
Bin  (ver.  3).  They  had  become  so  hardened  that  God's  corrections  failed  to  produce
any  result  save  to  make  them  more  brazen-faced  in  their  wickedness  than  before
(ver.  3).  And  they  had  gone  on  to  this  degree  of  criminality  that  they  dared  to  mock
Uod  with  mere  lip  service  (vers.  4,  6).  *'  Ay,  and  from  this  time  forward  thou  criest
to  me,  My  Father,  the  Friend  of  my  youth  art  thou.  Will  he  always  bear  a  grudge
and  keep  it  up  for  ever  ?  Behold  thou  speakest  thus  and  doest  wickedness  and  carriest
it  out "  (Keirs  translation).  Corruptio  optimi  pessima  est.  The  sin  of  such  as  Israel—
and  toe  are  such,  raised  up,  qualified,  designed  to  be  the  means  of  vast  blessing  to
others,,  as  is  God's  purpose  with  his  Church, — is  more  aggravated  and  assumes  forms
more  terrible  than  is  possible  to  others.

II.  Law  in  its  most  biqhteous  uttebancb.  (Ver.  1 ;  of.  Dent.  xxiv.  4.)  "  They
8ay;"  it  was  a  well-known  fact  that  the  Law  would  not  hear  of  the  forgiveness  and  restora-
tion of  those  who  had  sinned  in  the  manner  Israel  had.  Such  leniency  would  open  the
door  wide  to  the  most  glaring  iniquity.  "  Plato,  Plato,"  said  Socrates,  *'  I  do  not  see
how  God  can  forgive  sin."  Sin  once  committed  becomes  a  fact.  Facts  have  their
necessary,  immutable  and  eternal  consequences,  which  only  by  a  miracle  can  be  set
aside  or  escaped.  (See  sermon  by  Rev.  T.  Binney,  on  '  The  Law  our  Schoolmaster,'
etc. ;  also  J.  CJook,  of  Boston,  Monday  Lectures :  •  The  Atonement.')  There  is  no  gospel
for  the  sinner  anywhere  outside  the  gospel.  The  Law,  as  here,  binds  the  wrong-doer
to  the  inevitable  issues  of  his  own  wrong-doing.  Forgiveness  and  restoration  are  simply
impossible.    But  note —

III.  Grace  in  its  most  marvellous  manifestation.  Ver.  1,  **  Yet  return  again
to  me,  saith  the  Lord."  There  is  doubt  as  to  the  meaning  of  this;  some  read  it  (see
exegesis)  as  a  question  to  which  a  negative  answer  is  required.  But  the  whole  tone  and
intent  of  the  chapter  (ver.  12)  uphold  the  gracious  meaning  which  belongs  to  the  words
as  they  stand  and  which  we  therefore  accept.  But  if  righteous  Law  forbids  the  sinner's
return,  how  can  grace  invite  such  return  ?  The  elder  son  in  the  parable  was  much
scandalized  at  the  father's  welcome  of  his  prodigal  younger  brother.  It  did  seem  to  be
an  improper  thing  to  do.  The  practical  reply  to  all  such  objections — and  they  have
never  ceased  to  be  urged  in  all  ages  of  the  Church— is  to  point  to  actual  facts.  What  has
been  the  result  of  the  belief  of  God's  wondrous  grace  ?  Has  a  scriptural  faith  been
proved  to  foster  a  sinful  life  ?  Are  they  who  humbly  rest  on  God's  grace  in  Christ  the
licentious,  the  ungodly,  the  profane  ?  The  Evangelical  Church  can  fearlessly  press
questions  like  these.    And  if  it  be  asked  what  is  the  philosophy  of  this?  how  is  it


CH.ra.1— 25.]    TEE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  69

that  what  seems  likely  to  produce  such  ill,  in  fact  does  not?  the  answer  is,  that  when
the  sinner  comes  in  contrition  and  faith  to  the  cross  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  new
life,  the  gift  of  regeneration,  which  is  ever  in  connection  with  the  cross,  is  given  to  him.
He  is  started  on  a  new  career,  on  which  he  is  certain  to  make  progress,  slow  it  may  he,
but  sure  nevertheless.  And  as  day  by  day  he  repairs  again  to  that  same  Saviour,  the
powers  of  the  new  life  are  replenished  and  renewed,  and  so,  instead  of  the  full  free  for-
giveness which,  when  he  returned  to  God,  was  bestowed  upon  him,  causing  him  to  take
encouragement  to  live  on  in  sin,  it  has  wrought  in  him  a  holy  hatred  of  it,  and  led  him
to  turn  from  it  more  and  more.  No,  the  wondrous  grace  of  God,  which  is  told  of  in
this  word,  "  Tet  return  again  to  me,"  does  not  make  void  the  Law,  but  it  establishes
the  Law  (cf.  Rom.  viii.  1). — C.

Vers.  6 — 10. — An  old  and  sad  hut  very  true  story,  I.  God  looking  for  fruit  but
KONE  FORTHCOMING.  1.  The  fruit  God  looked  for  was  Judah*s  repentance  (cf.  the
history  of  the  times  to  which  Jeremiah  refers).  Idolatry  was  rampant  in  the  northern
kiegdom.  The  southern  also  had  been  very  far  from  free  from  it.  But  at  this  time
God  looked  for  a  true  repeotance  on  Judah*s  part.  2.  And  such  fruit  was  reasonably
expected.  There  was  the  personal  example  and  influence  of  King  Josiah  and  the  band
of  faithful  men  who  were  endeavouring  to  promote  a  true  religious  reformation.  They
had  seen  the  degradation  which  followed  IsraeFs  sin  Tver.  9^  ;  how  Israel  had  fallen  so  low
as  to  worship  stocks  and  stones,  the  "  most  scoundrel  iaols,*'  as  Matthew  Henry  calls
them.  They  had  heard  the  gracious  appeal  of  God  to  Israel  (ver.  7).  They  had  seen
the  judgments  of  God  which  had  followed  when  his  grace  was  rejected.  How  severe
and  terrible  these  had  been !  God  *'  had  put  Israel  away  "  (ver.  8).  For  nearly  a
century  Israel  had  been  in  dread  captivity  by  reason  of  their  sins.  And  the  sin  which
had  brought  down  their  judgments  was  the  sin  which  Judah  herself  was  guilty  of.
And  the  judgment  had  not  happened  to  an  alien  nation  or  in  a  remote  land.  No,  but
to  Judah's  own  sister,  to  members  of  the  same  family,  of  one  blood  and  lineage ;  and
close  to  her  own  door,  hence  under  her  own  eye.  What  more  arousing  and  alarming
call  to  the  unconverted  could  there  have  been  than  all  this  ?  And  to  lend  further  force
to  this  call,  there  was  in  Judah  the  presence  of  the  temple,  the  possession  of  all  manner
of  religious  privilege.  How  reasonable,  then,  was  the  expectation  that  Judah  should
turn  away  from  her  idolatry  and  unfeignedly  repent !  But  the  like  of  all  such  reasons
for  the  expectation  of  a  true  turning  to  God  exists  in  the  case  of  many  to-day.  Every
influence  and  ar^ment  for  such  turning  to  God  as  bore  upon  Judah  then,  bears  upon
many  still.  3.  But  that  which  God  desired  was  not  forthcoming.  It  is  the  burden  of
the  prophet's  complaint  that  what  Israel  had  done,  and  worse,  was  chargeable  against
Judah.  And  as  now,  all  too  often,  those  from  whom  real  religion  may  reasonably  be
expected  are  found  not  only  as  evil,  but  outstripping  others  in  ungodly  ways.  This  is
part  of  the  story  told  us  by  these  verses.

n.  Another  is  that  of  men  seeking  to  palm  off  on  God  fictitious  fruit  instead
OF  GENUINE.  (Ver.  10.)  Cf.  the  history  of  the  reformation  in  Josiah's  day — how  justly
it  is  described  in  this  verse  I  It  was  sudden,  partial,  external,  shortliv^.  And  such
feigned  reformations  are  common  enough  still.  Cf.  Luke  xi.  21 — 26 ;  and  sermon  No.
613  by  Spurgeon  :  '*  And  as  the  devil  looks  round  and  finds  the  place  swept,  he  finds
it  garnished  too.  The  man  has  bought  some  pictures :  he  has  not  real  faith,  but  he
has  a  fine  picture  of  it  over  the  firi'place.  He  has  no  love  to  the  cross  of  Christ,  but  he
has  a  very  handsome  crucifix  hanging  on  the  walL  He  has  no  graces  of  the  Spirit,  but
he  has  a  fine  vase  of  flowers  on  the  table  of  other  peoples'  experiences  and  other  peoples'
graces,  and  they  smell  tolerably  sweet.  There  is  a  fireplace  without  fire,  but  there  is
one  of  the  handsomest  ornaments  for  the  fireplace  that  was  ever  bought  for  money.  It
is  swept  and  garnished.  Oh,  the  garnished  people  I  have  met  with  1  garnished  some-
times with  almsgiving,  at  other  times  with  long-winded  prayers ;  garnished  with  the
profession  of  zeal  and  the  pretence  of  reverence.  You  will  find  a  zealous  Protestant —
oh,  so  zealous  I — who  would  go  into  fits  at  the  sign  of  a  cross,  and  yet  will  be  guilty  of
nameless  vice.  You  find  persons  shocked  because  another  boiled  a  tea-kettle  on  a
Sunday,  or  insured  his  life,  or  assisted  at  a  bazaar,  who  will  cheat  and  draw  the  eye-
teeth  out  of  an  orphan  child  if  they  could  get  sixpence  by  it.  They  are  swept  and
garnished.    Walk  iii|  ladies  and  gentlemen  1    Did  you  ever  see  a  house  so  delightfully


70  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [en.  ra.  1—25.

furnished  as  this?  How  elegant!  how  tasteful  I  Just  so:  but  men  may  be  damned
tastefully,  and  go  to  hell  respectably,  just  as  well  as  they  can  in  a  vulgar  and  debauched
fashion."  Wherefore  do  men  thus  actf  Because  conscience  has  been  aroused  by
God's  dealings  with  them,  and  it  will  not  let  them  rest  without  doing  something.
The  question  now  comes,  how  little  can  they  do  which  will  be  sufficient  to  still  the
inconvenient  and  uncomfortable  clamour  of  conscience?  and  such  turning  to  God
"  feignedly,"  such  reformations  as  that  of  Judah  under  King  Josiah,  such  sweeping
and  garnishing  of  the  house  empty  of  any  true  love  to  God,  is  the  device  they  resolve
upon.    Then  next,  in  this  sad  story,  we  see —

III.  Greater  condemnation  than  ever  coming  upon  men  in  consequence.  1.  They
are  branded  with  a  worse  name  than  others  (cf.  "treacherous  Judah,"  vers.  7,  10).
Under  pretence  of  being  faithful  to  God,  guardians  of  the  temple,  the  priesthood,  the
Law,  making  loud  profession,  they  were  idolatrous  even  as  Israel.  Hence  the  name
of  infamy,  "  treacherous."  And  Christ's  most  terrible  words  were  for  the  "  hypocrites  "
of  his  day.  2.  A  place  less  tolerable  in  the  day  of  judgment  will  be  assigned  them,
than  that  of  those  who  sinned  in  like  manner  but  without  any  such  religious  pro-
fession (ver.  11),    Oh,  then,  what  need  for  the  prayer —

•*  Search  me,  O  God,  and  try  my  heart.
For  thou  that  heart  canst  see ;
And  turn  each  cursed  idol  out
That  dares  to  rival  thee."  ^

a

Ver.  11. — TTie  eomparaiive.  advantages  of  Judah  and  Israel ;  professors  and  non"
professors.    I.  Let  Judah  and  Israel  be  taken  as  bepresentino  respectively

PROFESSORS  OF  RELIGION  AND  THOSE  WHO  MAKE  NO  SUCH  PROFESSION.      Judah   did   make

such  profession,  but  Israel  stooil  aloof,  neither  worshipping  at  the  temple  nor  joining  in
the  appointed  feasts.

II.  Observe  that  Israel  is  said  to  have  "justified  herself  more,"  etc.  (Ver.  11.)
1.  This  was  true,  for  a  sterner  sentence  went  out  against  Judah  than  against  Israel.
(1)  A  more  infamous  name  is  given  to  her  than  to  Israel;  she  is  called  "Trea-
cherous." (2)  And  her  punishment  was  more  severe.  Israel  had  long  been  prepared  to
mingle  more  or  less  readily  with  other  nations.  An  assimilating  process  had  been
going  on  for  many  generations,  religiously,  socially,  and  politically.  Hence  they  were
lookeid  upon  much  as  the  Pharisees  of  our  Lord's  day  looked  upon  the  publicans  and
sinners  whom  he  so  graciously  welcomed.  And  we  find  that,  as  a  fact,  they  soon  became
merged  into  the  nations  whither  they  had  been  carried  away  captive.  They  had
no  such  memories,  no  such  anti])athies  as  the  people  of  Judah,  and  hence  their  exile
must  have  been  more  tolerable.  The  piteous  psalms  which  bewail  the  hard  lot  of  the
captive  came  not  from  them,  but  from  the  exiles  of  Judah.  It  was  they  who  "  by  the
rivers  of  Babylon  sat  down  and  wept  as  they  remembered  Zion."  The  iron  entered  into
their  soul  as  it  could  hardly  have  done  in  the  case  of  Israel.  And  the  like  facts — (1)
and  (2) — are  seen  in  the  case  of  unworthy  professors  of  religion.  See  our  Lord's  holy  hate,
hear  his  scathing  words  of  scorn  and  doom,  in  regard  to  the  hypocrites  of  his  day.  And
the  world,  too,  looks  on  them  with  a  contempt  it  keeps  for  none  other.  And  they
suffer  as  none  other  can.  If  the  grace  of  God  be  still  in  them,  who  can  describe  the
remorse,  the  self-abasement,  the  shame,  with  which  they  view  the  punishment  that
has  come  upon  them  ?  2.  And  the  rectsons  wherefore  it  was  less  tolerable  for  Judah
than  for  Israel  were :  (1)  Judah's  privileges  were  so  much  greater.  (2)  Her  warnings
had  been  more  numerous,  more  plain,  more  arousing,  more  prolonged  (cf.  the  history
and  previous  verses).  (3)  Her  inducements  to  loyal  obedience  were  stronger.  Hence
her  sin  brought  the  greater  doom,  "  And  the  Lord  said,"  etc.  (ver.  11).  And  these  are
the  reasons — greater  privileges,  louder  warnings,  more  powerful  inducements  to  obedi-
ence— which,  when  they  are  all  disregarded  and  set  at  nought,  compel,  yea,  create  a
scourge  for  the  fallen  Church,  such  as  they  who  have  never  made  any  such  profession
can  never  feel.    Therefore —

III.  Inquire  what  is  the  just  conclusion  that  should  be  drawn  from  the
fact  now  observed.  1.  Is  it  this :  that  it  is  better  to  bo  Israel  than  Judah ;  to  stand
aloof  from  all  profession  of  religion  than  to  make  such  profession  ?    (1)  Ko  \  for  it  waa


cam.  1—25.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  71

better  to  bo  Judah  than  Israel.  There  were  possilulities,  and  these  generally  realized,  of
greater  blessedness  in  Judah  than  could  be  attained  in  Israel.  Compare  the  histories  of
the  kingdoms  of  Judah  and  Israel,  and  see  if  the  brightest  and  most  numerous  examples
of  sanctity,  as  well  as  the  greatest  displays  of  Grod's  favour,  to  say  naught  of  the  joy  of
his  appointed  worship,  were  not  in  Judah  rather  than  in  Israel.  And  so  in  like  manner
we  affirm  that  it  is  better  to  bo  the  avowed  disciple  of  Christ,  notwithstanding  the  possi-
bility of  a  more  terrible  fall,  than  to  be  numbered  with  the  crowd  of  those  who  neither
possess  nor  profess  any  regard  for  God.  For  larger  blessing,  in  the  form  of  increased
moral  resemblance  to  God,  of  joy  in  God,  and  of  greater  security  from  the  power  of  sin,
—these  certainly  belong  to  those  who  are  as  Judah  rather  than  to  those  who  are  as
Israel.  All  God's  favour  is  open  to  them  as  it  is  not  to  those  in  whom  God's  fear  does
not  dwell.  (2)  And  again.  No ;  for  we  do  not  reason  in  such  manner  in  regard  to  other
things.  True,  "  He  that  is  down  need  fear  no  fall ; "  but  we  do  not,  on  the  strength  of
that  dismal  proverb,  begin  immediately  to  prefer  the  lot  of  the  fallen  one  to  that  of  him
who,  by  Goa's  providence,  is  set  on  hijih  and  stands  upright.  The  rich  man  does  not
hasten  to  make  himself  poor  that  he  may  be  free  from  the  fear  of  becoming  so.  Nor
does  the  man  who  is  blessed  with  vigorous  health  desire  the  condition  of  the
invalid  because  in  that  condition  there  can  be  no  fear  of  loss  of  health.  Then  why
should  the  far  less  blessed  lot  of  Israel,  and  of  those  outside  the  professed  Church  of
God  whom  Israel  represents,  be  preferred  to  the  better  and  brighter  lot  of  Judah  and
of  God's  Church,  though  a  fall  terrible  and  sad  is  possible  here  which  could  not  be
there?  (3)  And  it  would  be  right  still  to  prefer  the  lot  of  Judah,  even  if  Israel  had
been  simply  let  alone  by  God.  If  God  had  sent  no  punishment  to  Israel,  it  would  have
been  better  to  bo  Judah,  with  the  possession  of  God's  favour,  although  the  possession
involved  the  possibility  of  its  loss,  than  to  have  been  without  that  favour  at  alL  But
when  we  see  that  the  judgment  of  God  came  upon  Israel  as  well  as  upon  Judah,  then
much  more,  notwithstanding  the  sad  fact  declared  in  this  ver.  11,  was  it  better  to  have
been  Judah  than  Israel.  And  so,  were  there  no  judgment  on  the  world,  and  God's  anger
came  only  on  a  fallen  Church,  better  even  then  to  be  of  the  Church  than  of  the  world.
But  when  we  know  that  there  is  a  judgment  of  the  world  as  well  as  of  the  Church,  that
sin  has  no  immunity  anywhere,  then,  though  sin  in  the  Church  be  worse  than  sin  in
the  world,  still  let  me  be  there  where  the  favour,  the  joy,  and  the  grace  of  God  are,  and
not  where  they  can  never  come.  2.  But  the  true  lesson  of  what  we  have  been  con-
sidering is,  "Let  him  that  thinketh  he  standeth  take  heed  lest  he  fall."  Judah,
and  the  Church  of  God  whom  Judah  represents,  need  to  remember  that,  notwith-
standing their  high  position  of  privilege,  corruption  and  sin  may  lay  hold  upon  them,
and  should  that  happen,  their  sin  and  their  doom  will  be  the  most  terrible  of  all  (cf.
Epistle  to  Church  at  Laodicea).  Therefore  hearken  to  our  Lord^s  words,  "  Watch  and
pray."— 0.

Vers.  12 — 19.— Concession  of  sin  the  indispensable  prerequisite  for  its  pardon.  That
this  is  so  is  shown  by  the  evident  fact  that  if  it  could  have  been  dispensed  with  it
would  have  been.  For  the  desire  of  God  to  pardon  his  guilty  people  is,  as  this  section
shows,  intense.  He  will  not  cease  to  seek  after  them  even  wnen  the  punishment  of
their  sin  has  actually  come  upon  them.  Hence  (ver.  12)  he  addresses  them  in  the
lands  of  their  exile,  Mesopotamia,  Assyria,  and  Media  (2  Kings  xvii.  6),  and  three
times  (vers.  12, 14,  22)  implores  them  to  "  return."  He  **  fills  his  mouth  with  argu-
ments, and  endeavours  by  every  kind  of  assurance  and  promise  to  induce  them  to
return.  Ver.  12 :  they  shall  be  completely  forgiven.  Ver.  14 :  they  ought  to  return,
for  they  are  his  by  right,  as  the  wife  is  the  rightful  possession  of  the  husband.  Ver.  14 :
they  are  the  object  of  his  constant  regard,  so  that  they  cannot  be  concealed  from  his
eye  or  hindered  from  his  help.  No,  though  in  a  whole  city,  or  tribe,  or  nation,  there
should  be  but  "  two  "  or  even  "  one,"  still  his  hand  would  reach  them  there,  and  bring
them  out  and  restore  them  to  Zion.  Ver.  15 :  and  those  who  in  days  gone  by  had  so
grievously  led  them  astray,  should  do  so  no  more,  for  now,  "  pastors,"  i.e.  rulers  and
guides,  whether  in  the  State  or  in  religion,  should  be  such  as  were  "  according  to  God's
own  heart,"  and  these  should  feed  them  with  knowledge.  Ver.  16 :  and  under  this
happy  rule  they  should  greatly  multiply  in  the  land.  And,  better  still,  they  should  so
realize  and  rejoice  in  the  spiritual  presence  of  Grod  that  they  should  no  longer  need  the


72  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ca  m.  1—25.

aid  of  the  ancient  symbols  of  that  presence,  such  as  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of  the
old  dispensation.  Ver.  17 :  and  Jerusalem  should  be  so  filled  with  the  Lord's  presence
that  they  should  call  the  city  **  the  throne  of  the  Lrrd."  And  the  "nations'*  should
be  converted,  and  their  wickedness  be  forsaken.  Ver.  18 :  and  Judah  and  Israel  should
be  one,  and  in  unity  and  affection  possess  the  land.  Such  were  the  glorious  hopes
with  which  God  sought  to  win  back  his  people's  hearts  to  himself,  and  they  conclu-
sively show  how  intensely  the  heart  of  God  was  set  upon  his  people's  return.  But
eagerly  desirous  as  God  was  for  this  restoration  of  his  lost  children  to  his  heart  and
home  again,  he  is  evidently  held  back  from  indulging  such  affectionate  promptings
by  considerations  that  could  not  be  overlooked.  What  they  were,  the  demand  that  he
makes  for  confession  of  sin  plainly  shows.    They  are^

I.  The  Law  of  righteousness.  Sin  is  the  violation  of  that  Law,  and  until  due  atone-
ment and  acknowledgment  have  been  made,  sin  ought  not  to  be  forgiven.  1  may,  in
accordance  with  cur  Saviour's  commands,  refrain  from  inflicting  punishment  on  one  who
has  wronged  mc,  even  though  he  have  not  repented  of  his  wrong ;  and  that  refraining  from
inflicting  punishment,  or  from  demanding  what  is  my  right,  is  forgiveness  in  the  sense
our  Lord  meant ;  but  he  did  not  mean,  for  it  would  be  a  command  impossible  to  obey-
that  I  should  receive  such  a  one  into  the  same  confidence  and  love  which  I  bear  towards
a  dear  friend  who  has  never  deserved  anything  else.  Therefore  my  forgiveness  of  such
an  unrepentant  offender,  though  granted  in  accordance  with  our  Lord's  command,  and
well-pleasing  in  his  sight,  and  the  best  I  am  capable  of,  is  nevertheless  not  complete,
not  perfect ;  for  perfect  forgiveness,  that  which  God  would  bestow  upon  sinful  men,
means  far  more  than  the  remission  of  penalty  :  it  means  restoration  to  the  love,  the
fellowship,  and  the  confidence  of  God.  But  this  cannot  be  apart  from  due  atonement
made  on  the  part  of  the  wrong-doer.  The  Law  of  righteousness,  the  Law  written  upon
our  hearts  as  well  as  inherent  in  the  nature  of  things,  forbids  such  forgiveness  apart
from  the  essential  condition  of  such  forgiveness.

IL  And  the  well-being  of  his  household  is  that  other  consideration  which  restrains
the  prompting  of  affection  to  forgive  sin  unconditionally  and  from  mere  pity.  Man  is
not  the  whole  of  God's  household.  He  may  be  only  the  one  sheep  who  has  gone
astray.  The  rest,  the  ninety  and  nine  blessed  ones  who  need  no  repentance.  But  to
pardon  sin  without  atonement  would  be  to  confound  all  moral  distinctions,  to  dis-
courage the  good,  and  to  teach  the  wrong-doer  to  regard  his  wrong  as  a  very  slight
matter ;  it  would  be  to  carry  the  discords  of  earth  into  the  jM-esence  of  God,  and  to
reproduce  there  the  sins  and  sorrows  of  this  world.  Therefore  let  the  love  of  Gtxi
towards  sinful  man  be  inconceivably  great,  and  it  is  so,  still  it  is  held  back  in  its
exercise  by  these  considerations  now  named.  But  where  sin  is  confessed  as  God
demands  it  should  be,  then,  as  is  promised  here  and  in  many  other  Scriptures  beside,
God's  pardoning  love  can  go  forth  and  the  sinner  be  restored  to  the  favour,  which  he
had  lost.  And  the  reason  of  this  is  not  because  the  sinner's  poor  and  inadequate  con-
fession of  his  sin  is  a  sufficient  atonement  for  the  wrong  he  has  done,  but  because,  when
he  sincerely  makes  that  confession,  he  is  invested  with  the  acceptahleness  of  Christ,
For  Christ  has  made  that  atonement  perfectly  which  man  can  only  offer  in  the  most
imperfect  way ;  "  man's  repentance  needing  too  often  to  be  repented  of,  and  his  very
tears  to  be  washed  in  the  blood  of  Christ"  But  Christ  looked  upon  sin  as  God  looks
upon  it,  hated  it  as  God  hates  it,  consented  to  God's  judgment  concerning  it  by
bearing  the  penalty  of  it ;  "  he  bore  our  sins  in  his  own  body  on  the  tree,"  and  so  made
that  true,  that  perfect  confession  and  atonement  which  we  can  never  make.  And  ho
did  this  in  our  nature,  and  as  our  Representative.  So  now,  when  we  come  in  his  Name,
sincerely  repenting  of  sin,  though  that  repentance  be  inadequate  in  itself,  yet  because
it  is  "  the  mind  of  Christ,"  and  looks  upon  sin  sorrowing  over  it  as  he  did,  our  imperfect
atonement  is  accepted  in  his  perfect  one,  we  have  the  fellowship  of  his  sufferings,  his
atonement  is  in  our  measure  reproduced  in  us,  and  we  are  made  conformable  to  his
death.  Pardon  thus  bestowed  neither  violates  the  Law  of  righteousness  nor  is  incon-
sistent with  the  well-being  of  the  whole  family  of  God.  Hence  it  is  that,  as  in  ver.  13,
the  demand  is  made  for  confession  of  sin,  and  then  of  their  iniquity  in  all  its  aggravated
forms.  Without  such  confession  pardon  cannot  be  bestowed.  Not  till  the  prodigal
**  came  to  himself,"  went  to  his  father  and  said,  "  I  have  sinned,"  was  he  forgiven,  not-
withstanding  all  the  yearning  of  the  father's  heart  after  his  lost  child.    Now,  to  bring


CH.m.  1— 25.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  73

men  to  this  looking  upon  their  sin  as  God  looks  upon  it,  as  the  Lord  Jesus  looks  upon
it,  is  the  object  of  6od*s  disciplines,  of  the  pain  and  smart  which  so  often  accompany
sin,  and  of  so  much  of  the  teaching  of  the  Bible  and  of  God's  providential  government.
And  those  who  have  trusted  in  Christ  are  continually  to  be  "  looking  unto  Jesus,"  for
in  that  trustful  look  is  the  sure  guarantee  of  the  preservation  of  the  **  mind  of  Christ "
in  them  in  regard  to  sin,  and  so  of  their  for  ever  abiding  in  the  favour  and  love  of  God.
lliis  mind  of  holy  hatred  and  sorrow  on  account  of  sin  it  is  the  especial  work  of  God's
Holy  Spirit  to  produce  in  men ;  that  Spirit  who  is  given  to  them  that  ask  his  aid,
more  readily  than  even  parents  give  to  their  children  what  those  children  they  so  much
love  need  and  ask  for.--C.

Ver.  14. — Married  to  Chd,  "  Turn,  0  backsliding  children,  saith  the  Lord ;  for  I
am  married  unto  you."

L  This  seems  an  incbedible  statement.  Had  it  been  spoken  of  angels,  or  of
unfallen  man,  or  of  eminent  saints,  it  would  have  been  more  easy  of  belief.  But  it  is
of  men  desperately  wicked,  and  to  such,  that  God  says,  '*  I  am  married  unto  you."
What  infinite  condescension  and  love !

II.  But  nevertheless  it  is  true.  For :  1.  We  have  the  marriage  lines,  the  record
of  the  transaction,  the  very  words  of  the  covenant  deed  (cf.  Ps.  Ixxxix.  3,  28 ;  Heb.
viii. ;  ch.  xxxii.  38 — 10).  In  all  these  Gt:d  declares  that  he  has  taken  us  to  be
his  for  ever :  "  They  shall  be  my  people,  and  I  will  be  their  God."  2.  Our  children
are  his. .  He  bids  them  all  call  him  by  the  blessed  name  of  Father.  3.  He  repeatedly
declares  that  we  were  the  objects  of  his  choice.  Cf.  Eph.  i.,  "  He  took  not  on  him
the  nature  of  angels,  but  he  took  on  him  the  seed  of  Abraham."  And  this  because
we  "  were  partakers  of  flesh  and  blood,  he  himself  also  took  part  in  the  same ; "  "  God
so  loved  the  world ; "  "  He  came  to  seek  and  to  save  that  which  was  lost "  (cf.  also
Eph.  V.  25— «27).  4.  He  has  given  us  the  sign  and  token  of  our  being  his  in  the
sacrament  of  our  baptism.  That  which  the  wedding  ring  is  to  the  wife,  baptism  is  to
us :  it  declares  the  blessed  fact  that  we  are  God's,  and  separates  us  for  his  Name,  the
Name  of  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost.  5.  He  has  endowed  us  with  his
goods :  "All  things  are  yours, .  .  .  the  world,  or  life,  or  death,  or  things  present,  or  things
to  come ;  all  are  yours  *'  (1  Cor.  iiu  22).  6.  He  is  always  with  us :  "  In  him  we  live  and
move,"  etc.  He  is  not  far  from  any  one  of  us :  "I  \nll  never  leave  thee  nor  forsake
thee."  7.  He  is  jealous  of  our  love :  "  I  the  Lord  thy  God  am  a  jealous  God."  What  is
the  Bible  but  one  long  record  of  the  disquiet  of  the  heart  of  God  when  the  love  of  those
to  whom  he  is  "  married  "  is  turned  from  him  ?  Hence  the  eternal  law,  "  Thou  shalt
have  no  other  gods  before  me;"  "  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart."
A  man  has  a  right  to  claim  that  she  whom  he  has  married  should  love  him.  He  has
no  such  claim  on  any  other.  And  so  because  the  Lord  God  condescends  to  hold  this
relationship  towards  us,  he  too  claims  our  love :  "  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God."
8.  We  are  on  the  way  to  dwell  with  him  in  his  eternal  home.  We  are  not  there  yet,
but  we  are  on  the  way.  "  We  are  coming  up  from  the  wilderness,"  and  if  we  faithfully
recognize  our  relationship  to  God,  we  shall  be  "leaning  upon  our  beloved"  TCant.
viii.  5).  9.  He  has  done  for  us,  and  does  for  us  still,  what  only  such  a  near  ana  dear
relationship  can  account  for.  Even  the  compassionate  friend  will  not  feel  himself
bound,  though  he  will  minister  relief,  to  go  and  share  the  very  same  lot  as  that  of  those
whom  he  compassionates.  And  the  father  of  the  prodigal  did  not  make  himself  poor
as  that  prodigal  was.  He  lifted  him  up,  but  he  did  not  himself  stoop  down.  No ;  that
which  the  Lord  God  has  done  is  more  than  the  love  of  friend,  brother,  father;  it  is  the
love  of  the  husband  alone.  For  the  husband,  if  he  be  worthy  of  the  name,  will  shaie
the  lot  of  the  wife.  And  if  she  must  suffer  hardship,  he  will  share  it  with  her.  If  she
dwell  in  mean  abode,  he  will  not  be  happy  to  dwell  elsewhere.  But  does  not  all  this
describe  what  the  Lord  God  hath  done?  "He,  though  he  was  rich,  yet  for  our
sakes  became  poor."  The  word  "  married "  is  not  a  mere  metaphor,  it  is  the  alone
explanation  of  the  Incarnation  and  of  the  Atonement.  The  general  benevolence  of
God,  not  even  the  fatherhood  of  God,  will  adequately  tell  wherefore  he  so  humbled
himself  and  lived  here  "  as  a  poor  meek  man  upon  earth,"  and  then  died  for  us ;  but
the  husbandhood  of  God,  the  fact  that  he  declares  when  he  says,  "  I  am  married  unto
you,"  will  account  for  it  and  explain  all.    We  have  to  live  here  in  this  wildemosa


74  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [en.  m.  1—25.

world,  to  be  tried,  tempted,  troubled,  and  at  length  to  die,  and  we  have  also  to  resist
even  unto  blood,  striving  a;j;ainst  sin ;  and  therefore  he  himself  also  took  part  in  the
same.  Then  if  this  stitement  of  the  text  be  true-
Ill.  Vast  consequences  follow.  1.  Forgetfulness  or  disregard  of  this  relationship
In  which  we  stand  to  God  must  be  utter  misery.  Perhaps  hell  is  never  so  nearly
brought  up  and  made  known  in  all  its  hideous  wretchedness  here  on  earth  as  by  means
of  a  marriapjc  in  which  one  side  has  lost  all  love  for  the  other.  Oh,  the  drag  of  the  mar-
riage bond  then  I  What  an  iron  chain;  what  a  fetter  it  is !  How  it  frets!  How  it  galls  I
How  simply  horrible  it  has  become  1  Penal  servitude  for  life  is  but  a  mild  description
of  it.  From  ever  knowing  it  by  experience,  may  God  deliver  us  all  I  But  such  things,
alas,  are,  and  between  men  and  women  who  have  vowed  to  love  and  cherish  each  other
•*  until  death  do  them  part."  But  we  do  not  recognize  so  readily  that  well-nigh  all  the
sorrow  of  this  life  of  ours  is  because  we  have  forgotten  or  disregarded  our  relationship
to  God.  That  marriage  also  is  a  bond  which  can  never  be  severed.  And  if  we  have
no  love  to  God,  no  delight  in  him,  no  trust  or  conBdence,  oh,  how  that  bond  will  gall,
will  irritate,  will  fret,  and  so  become  the  very  "  strength  of  sin  " !  The  unrest,  the  dis-
tress, the  wild  attempts  to  win  happiness  in  lawless  ways,  the  sting  of  conscience,  the
inward  remorse,  are  all  accounted  for  by  the  consciousness  that  men  have  of  their  obliga-
tion to  God  whilst  that  obligation  is  being  grievously  disregarded.  On  the  other  hand :  2.
Due  response  rendered  to  the  love  of  God  towards  us  must  be  our  deep,  our  indestructible,
our  ever-advancing  joy.  See  the  proofs  of  this  in  the  return  of  the  prodigal :  **  They
began  to  be  merry."  Listen  to  David:  "0  God,  thou  art  my  God,"  etc.  "I  will  go  unto
the  altar  of  God,  unto  God  my  exceeding  joy."  Behold  the  martyrs.  Rather  tnan  be
severed  from  God  by  denial  of  him,  let  what  shame,  agony,  loss,  death,  that  might  come
upon  them.  Ask  those  who  know  what  the  love  of  God  is,  if  it  be  not  as  we  say.  1'hat
pure  joy  which  a  true  wife  has  in  the  husband  she  loves  and  reveres,  that  is  the  type
of  the  joy  in  God  which  we  may  have  and  should  have,  and  to  which  even  the  worst
of  us,  the  miserable  backsliders,  are  by  God  himself  entreated  to  return.  How  happy
in  his  protection!  How  certain  that  he  will  be  prompt  to  help  in  all  peril  and  emergency !
How  free  the  outpouring  of  the  heart  in  loving  confidence!  How  sure  of  his  love  always!
— no  doubt  ever  clouding  that  certainty.  And  how  sure,  too,  of  his  sympathy,  his  wise
counsel,  his  constant  support !  And  to  all  this  God  invites  us,  yea,  he  by  this  word
of  his  bids  us  claim  it  as  our  right — a  right  he  will  at  once  recognize.  It  is  wonderful ;
the  condescension  and  the  love  of  it  are  so  marvellous  that  we  are  slow  to  comprehend,
slower  still  to  believe  it,  and  slowest  of  all  to  realize  and  rejoice  in  it.  But  yet  it  is
most  assuredly  true.  Therefore,  Lord,  increase  our  faith ;  we  believe,  but  help  thou  our
unbelief. — 0.

Ver.  19. — The  great  difficulty  overcome,  "  How  shall  I,**  etc.  ?  A  different  rendering
has  been  proposed  for  this  verse,  but  inasmuch  as  the  general  meaning  and  spirit  of
the  prophecy  are  maintained  in  our  common  translation,  we  prefer  to  abide  thereby.
So  read,  the  verse  brings  before  us—

I.  God's  gracious  purpose  op  love  towards  sinful  men.  He  would  put  them
"  among  the  children,"  etc.  Think  what  this  involves.  Picture  to  ourselves  the  lot  of
the  children  in  the  home  of  an  affluent,  affectionate,  wise,  and  godly  father.  What
condition  fairer,  more  enviable,  can  bo  conceived  ?  What  freedom  from  all  care !  What
imrestrained,  confiding,  loving  intercourse  between  the  children  and  their  father  1  What
healthful  development  and  direction  of  character  and  disposition !  How  sheltered ;  how
secure;  how  happy  in  the  abiding  consciousness  of  their  father's  love!  How  full  of  all
good  their  position  cannot  but  be !  But  the  brightest,  fairest  lot  that  ever  fell  to  any
children  in  an  earthly  home  fails  fully  to  set  forth  what  it  must  be  to  be  set  amongst
Qod's  children,  and  to  be  numbered  amongst  his  sons  and  daughters.  Blessed  indeed
are  such ;  how  blessed  none  but  they  who  are  thus  "  set  among  the  children  "  can  fully
know.  But  such  was  the  gracious  purpose  of  God  towards  man,  nothing  less  than
this.  He  created  us  for  this  very  purpose,  with  this  very  intent.  And  it  is  the  reason
and  motive  of  the  creation  of  every  newly  bom  child.  For  this  every  human  soul  is
endowed  with  faculties  which  can  find  their  complete  exercise  and  enjoyment  only
amongst  God's  children :  '*  God  hath  made  us  for  himself,  and  our  hearts  have  no  rest
until  they  find  rest  in  him."    But  the  verse,  by  it«  very  form,  indicates—


en.  in.  1—25.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  75


IL  The  terrible  thwarting  and  hindering  of  that  gracious  purpose  which
HAS  TAKEN  PLACE.    "  How  shall  I  Dut  thcc,"  etc.  ?  plainly  denoting  that  there  is  some

..     t    .      y     .     ^1 x_  xL-  * _*  T 1  Ai-  * J «.: r  au:«  ».^^i.^^«


carrying  out  nis  purposes  ot  grace
we  have  done  as  in  what  we  are.  The  heart  of  man  is  not  right  in  the  sight  of  QkA,
and  whilst  that  is  so,  Grod  cannot  set  us  amongst  his  children.  Transgressions  and
offences  are  but  the  symptoms  of  the  deadlier  evil  that  lurks  within,  not  the  evil  itself.
That  consists  in  the  state  of  heart  Godwards  which,  alas!  characterizes  us  all,  until  the
new  heart  and  the  right  spirit  be  given.  What  should  we  say  if  towards  ourselves  as
parents  our  children  were  to  order  themselves  as  we  do  towards  God  ? — rarely  thinking
of  us,  placing  no  confidence  in  us ;  though  we  would  delight  to  have  them  speak  to  us,
yet  maintaining  a  sullen  silence  always;  in  their  hearts  disliking  us  and  resenting  the
expression  of  our  will ;  disobeying  us  on  the  slightest  pretext,  and  choosing  for  their
friends  those  they  well  know  to  be  our  foes.  If  any  parent  was  so  unhappy  as  to  have
such  a  son  or  daughter,  how  could  he  set  such  a  one  amongst  his  other  children  who
love  him  as  children  should?  And  that  this  is  the  case  between  the  unrenewed  man
and  God,  let  conscience  and  men's  works,  words,  and  ways  witness.  This  being  so,  how
can  we  **  marvel "  that  our  Lord  hath  said, ''  Ye  must  be  bom  agsdn  "  ?  But  we  are
shown  also^

III.  TuiB  difficulty,  vast  as  it  is,  triumphantly  overcome.  In  the  latter  part
of  the  verse  and  in  the  confessions  of  the  twenty-second  and  following  verses  it  is  clear
that  a  great  change  has  taken  place.  The  rebel  heart  has  gone,  the  child's  heart  has
come  in  its  place.  The  erewhilo  sinful  godless  soul  is  heard  calling  upon  God  as  "  My
Father,"  and  in  daily  conduct  is  found  not  turning  away  from  him.  What  a  change  I
No  wonder  that  the  Scripture  emblems  of  it  are  all  drawn  from  contrasts  the  most
vivid  and  intense  that  experience  furnishes  or  the  mind  can  conceive :  life  and  death,
darkness  and  light,  crimson  red  and  snow  whiteness,  leprous  and  pure;  as  one
possessed  of  the  devil,  and  as  one  calm,  sober,  and  in  his  right  mind ; — such  are  some  of
them.  But  the  beholding  of  so  great  a  change  leads  of  necessity  to  the  inquiry  how
it  was  brought  about.    Hence  note—

IV.  The  means  whereby  this  was  accomplished.  These  were  as  they  ever  are,
the  manifestation  of  the  love  of  God.  In  Christ  God  came  to  seek  and  to  save  his
self-lost  children.  But  they,  instead  of  welcoming  the  Christ  of  God,  crucified  and  slew
him.  That  rebel  alienated  heart  which  is  common  to  us  all  wrought  this  awful  crime.
But  it  is  when  by  the  Holy  Spirit  men  are  led  to  see  what  they  have  done  to  him
who  so  loved  them  as  to  come  from  heaven  to  save  them,  there  is  produced  that  con-
viction of  sin,  that  deep  and  genuine  repentance,  that  sense  of  his  infinite  love,  and
that  consequent  entire  trust  in  him, — all  which  are  the  very  elements  of  that  heart  of  a
dear  child  which  calls  God  "  My  Father,"  and  which  will  not  turn  away  from  him.  I
have  read  of  one  who  was  for  ever  reclaimed  from  the  deadly  sin  of  drunkenness  by  the
deep  anguish  of  heart  which  he  experienced  when  he  found  that  one  day,  when
brutalized  by  drink,  he  had  smitten  to  the  ground  his  own  dear  child,  and  wounded  her
with  a  wound  the  scar  of  which  she  would  never  lose ;  and  that  he  had  done  this
whilst  she  was  lovingly  seeking  to  lead  him  away  from  the  place  and  the  people  who
were  tempting  him  to  his  ruin.  When  he  came  to  himself  and  knew  what  he  had
done,  his  horror  and  remorse  had  no  bounds.  ''  The  drink  I  ay,  it  was  all  the  drink  1 "
he  exclaimed  when,  years  after,  telling  the  story.  "  Could  I  ever  touch  it  again  ?  I
kept  my  finger  lightly  on  the  little  maid's  forehead,  and  lifted  my  face  to  heaven,  and
vowed  that  I  would  never  touch  the  murderous  thing  again  as  long  as  I  lived,  and
with  a  broken  heart  I  prayed  the  Lord  to  help  me."  That  well-known  story  serves  to
illustrate  how,  in  this  great  matter  of  man's  restoration  to  God,  he  who  once  was  a  god-
less rebel  becomes  fill^  with  another  heart,  and  God  can,  as  he  desires  to,  place  him
amongst  the  children.  For  when  I  clearly  see  the  wounds  which  I  in  my  mad  sia
have  inflicted  on  him  who  sought  to  save  me,  and  who  tenderly  loves  me  still  not-
withstanding all  I  have  done,  the  sight  of  his  cross  and  of  those  wounds  will  fill  my
soul  with  such  a  hatred  of  sin  and  love  of  God  that  I  am  no  longer  what  I  was ;  I  nm
bom  again,  I  have  passed  from  death  unto  life.  Yes,  it  is  the  sight  of  the  love  of  God
in  Chnst  which  turns  the  sinner  into  the  child  of  God,  and  wins  for  him  a  place


76         THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,  [ch.  in.  1—25.

amongst  the  children  of  God.  With  what  fervour,  then,  may  we  pray  the  blessed  Spirit
to  fulfil  his  work  in  and  for  us  and  for  all  men  I — C.

Ver.  20 — ch.  iv.  2. — Ood^s  way  of  restoration ;  or,  the  experiences  of  a  young  convert.
In  ver.  19  we  have  given  us  the  expression  of  the  Divine  perplexity  in  regard  to  lost
Israel :  "  How  shall  I  place  thee  among  the  children,"  etc.  ?  But  ere  the  verse  closes
we  behold  the  problem  solved,  the  seeming  impossibility  accomplished,  for  the  lost  is
found,  and  he  that  was  dead  is  alive  again.  The  rebel  Israel  has  become  the  loving
obedient  child.  And  now  in  these  verses  (20 — ch.  iv.  2)  we  seem  to  have  a  telling
of  the  experience  of  the  restored  one,  a  setting  forth  of  how  GKxi  had  dealt  with  him.
It  is  given  in  the  form  of  a  dialogue  between  God  and  Israel,  and  is  an  accurate  descrip*
tion  of  the  Divine  process  of  restoration.

I.  There  is  the  bringing  home  of  sin  to  the  conscience.  (Ver.  20.)  God  charges
upon  lost  Israel  great  and  grievous  sin.  Ho  likens  the  wrong  he  has  suffered  at  the
hands  of  Israel  to  the  most  grievous  wrong  it  is  possible  for  a  man  to  suffer,  and  which
of  all  others  a  man  resents  the  most.  The  accusation  is  terrible.  Thus  sharply  and
sternly  does  God  deal  with  the  soul  he  would  save.  He  does  not  gloss  over,  or  palliate,
or  in  any  way  make  little  of  our  sin,  as  we  are  apt  to  do ;  but  he  shows  it  to  us  so
clearly  that  the  sight  of  it  is  almost  more  than  the  heart  can  bear.

II.  This  conviction  of  bin  is  followed  by  a  deep  repentance.  (Yer.  21.)  Israel
is  represented  as  seeing  her  sin,  and  then  from  the  very  high  places  which  had  witnessed
her  guilt  is  heard  her  weeping  and  supplication.  The  soul  that  has  never  known  the
smart  and  pain  of  the  conviction  of  sin  will  never  earnestly  turn  to  the  Great  Physician
for  the  healing  that  is  needed.

III.  The  proclamation  op  mercy  follows.  Ver.  22,  "Return,  ye  apostate
children,  I  will  heal  your  apostasies."  Just  as  to  the  enraptured  ears  of  the  penitent
who  was  weeping  over  the  Saviour's  feet  there  came  the  blessed  sound  of  his  pardoning
word,  assuring  her  her  sins  were  forgiven  and  that  she  might  go  in  peace,  so  here  God
is  represented  as  declaring  his  mercy  to  the  weeping,  supplicating  IsraeL  And  the
heart  the  Lord  hath  dealt  with  knows  that  thus  it  is.  A  voice  not  audible,  but  real,  is
heard  in  the  soul,  assuring  the  contrite  one  of  the  forgiveness  he  needs  and  craves.

IV.  In  such  a  heart  prompt  belief,  instant  acceptance  of  the  offered  mercy,
FOLLOWS.  Ver.  22,  "  Behold,  we  come  unto  thee ;  for,"  etc.  As  well  might  the  steel
filings  refuse  to  be  moved  by  the  magnet  that  lies  by  them  as  the  sin-convinced  and
contrite  heart  fail  to  lay  hold  on  the  promise  set  before  it  in  the  gospeL  No  sooner
has  God  said,  "  Return,  I  will  heal,"  than  the  answer  is  heard,  "  Behold,  we  come."

V.  Then  follows  the  confession  and  repentance  of  faith.  (Vers.  23 — 25.)
There  had  been  confession  and  repentance  before  the  soul  had  heard  and  accepted  the
offer  of  pardon ;  but  that  which  follows  is  more  full,  more  deep  than  that  which  went
before.  We  repent  more  deeply  of  sin  after  we  have  known  God  has  pardoned  us  than
before  we  had  that  blessed  knowledge.  See  here:  1.  Their  confession  of  the  utter
vanity  of  all  their  idols  (ver.  23).  2.  Their  confident  assurance  that  God  alone  can  be
their  salvation  (ver.  23).  3.  Their  confession  of  the  disgrace  and  infatuated  folly  which  had
characterized  them  as  a  people  for  so  long  a  time  (ver.  24).  They  call  their  idolatry
"shame,"  and  own  how  it  has  destroyed  both  their  substance  and  themselves.  4.  They
acknowledge  the  complete  righteousness  of  God's  judgment  against  their  sin,  and
their  own  just  exposure  to  his  wrath  (ver.  25).  "  Let  us  lie  in  our  shame  and  our  dis-
grace cover  us,  that  we  have  sinned,"  etc.  (I^ange's  translation).  And  thus  it  ever  is :
the  more  we  realize  God's  pardoning  love,  the  more  intense  will  be  our  perception  of
the  baseness  and  utter  evil  of  the  sin  that  has  been  forgiven.

VI.  This  confession  is  followed  by  further  assurances  of  grace.  (Ch.  iv.
1,  2.)  Return  to  God  shall  be  followed  by  return  to  their  own  land.  "  If  thou  re-
tumest  to  me,  thou  shalt  return  (unto  thy  land),  and  if  thou  puttest  away,  etc.,  thou
shalt  not  remove,"  i.«.  into  exile  again.  "  And  if  thou  shalt  swear  by  Jehovah  with
sincere,  righteous,  and  true  heart,"  i.e.  "if  thou  wilt  truly  give  thyself  up  to  God,  then
the  heathen  nations  outside,  seeing  how  thy  God  shall  bless  thee  and  shall  heap  his
favours  upon  thee,  shall  come  and  bless  themselves  in  him,  and  shall  glory  in  him,"  i.e.
they  shall  have  done  with  their  idolatries  and  be  converted  unto  God.  With  such
gracious  promises  would  God  encourage  Israel  in  the  new  and  better  way  in  which


CH.  III.  1—25.]  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.         77

they  are  represented  as  walking ;  with  such  gentleness  would  he  make  them^  as  he  in
like  manner  makes  all  who  truly  turn  to  him,  great. — G.

Ver.  16. — Supercession  of  external  religious  ordinances  ar^d  institutions.  This  is
because  of  the  necessarily  temporary  nature  of  these,  and  the  spirituality  to  which  they
are  intended  to  minister,  and  which  subsequently  they  may  hinder.

I.  The  true  worship  of  God  is  spiritual.  It  is  not  to  bow  before  an  altar  or  an
ark  that  Grod  calls  us  to  his  temple,  but  to  see  himself  face  to  face,  to  discover  our  need
of  him,  and  to  delight  in  his  presence.  Nor  is  this  communion  to  be  occasional  or  in-
termittent. The  whole  life  is  to  be  affected  by  spiritual  influences.  A  true  life  may
thereby  become  worship,  and  "  daily  toil  temple  service."  This  arises  from  the  nature
of  God.  "  (rod  is  a  Spirit :  and  they  that  worship  him  must  worship  him  in  spirit  and
in  truth."

II.  The  most  sacred  symbols  are  only  useful  as  they  help  to  this,  and  when
rr  IS  ATTAINED  ARE  NO  LONGER  REQUIRED.  This  may  be  said  not  only  of  external  church
furniture,  rites  of  worship,  etc.,  but  even  of  words  and  doctrines  themselves,  which  are
but  imperfect  representations  of  the  Divine  glory.  When  the  building  is  finished  the
scaffolding  is  removed.  The  final  end  of  education  is  not  to  load  the  mind  with  dead
knowledge,  but  to  culture  and  strengthen  it.  Ceremonial  and  doctrinal  teaching  are
intended  to  lead  men  into  personal  experience  of  God  and  communion  with  him.
When  that  is  attained  they  fall  into  the  background.

III.  That  ritual  worship  shall  give  place  to  spiritual  is  distinctly  promised.
1.  An  incentive  to  the  spiritual  use  of  rites,  2.  An  assurance  of  Divine  favour  and
love.    3.  A  promise  of  Christ  and  communion  through  him. — M.

Ver.  19. — *'  Put  among  the  children.^  A  promise  deeply  and  tenderly  evangelical.
Israel  and  Judah  had  forfeited  this  position  because  they  had  broken  the  covenant.
But  the  forgiving  love  of  God  is  shown  in  his  declaring  that  they  should  be  reinstated.
The  force  of  the  phrase  is  well  explained  as  that  of  "  bestowing  a  rich  paternal  bene-
diction," or  of  restoring  to  the  rights  and  privileges  of  inheritance.

I.  The  sinner  has  forfeited  his  position  in  the  family  of  God.  All  through
Scripture  this  relation  is  shown  as  depending  upon  mutual  agreement  and  obligation.
The  covenant  is  the  title-deed  to  the  inheritance  of  God's  children.  The  breaking  of
this  on  the  part  of  the  sinner  destroys  his  claim  and  position.  In  the  parable  of  the
prodigal  son  we  have  the  consciousness  of  this  on  the  part  of  the  transgressor  beauti-
fully described — "  I  am  no  more  worthy  to  be  called  thy  son."  Moral  harmony  between
the  soul  of  man  and  God  is  of  the  essence  of  the  filial  relation.  A  lost  position ;  a
possibility  that  we  have  destroyed  by  our  own  act.  Henceforth  the  sinner  is  a  spiritual
orphan,  or  a  "  child  of  Satj^n."  There  is  no  claim  upon  God  save  on  condition  of
renewed  obedience.  He  is  subject  to  the  wrath  of  God's  wounded  love  and  outraged
honour.

II.  Readoption  is  the  guarantee  of  all  highest  blessings.  It  is  only  children
of  God  who  are  heirs  of  God  ;  if,  then,  we  would  enjoy  the  privileges  and  blessings  of
his  house,  we  must  be  reinstated  in  that  which  we  have  lost.  But  this  is  only  possible
on  repentance  and  belief.  We  are  assured  here  and  elsewhere  that  the  sinner  can
regain  this  title  and  relation  without  lessening  of  the  dignity,  privilege,  and  affection.
When  once  this  has  taken  place  there  is  no  bar  to  the  bestowal  of  God's  richest  bene-
diction. As  his  children,  as  those  who  are  actuated  by  his  love  and  governed  by  his
Spirit,  there  is  ample  security  that  his  blessings  shall  not  be  abused.  A  holy  confidence
and  communion  are  established,  and  the  true  end  of  being  is  once  more  secured.

III.  This  is  an  act  of  God's  free  grace.  The  initiative  is  not  the  sinner's.
Overtures  of  mercy  come  from  him  he  has  offended.  There  is  nothing  to  compel  God
to  do  this.  He  is  perfectly  free,  and  any  obligation  into  which  he  enters  is  sealcl  only
by  his  voluntary  promises.  There  is  abundant  evidence,  too,  of  a  Divine  satisfaction
and  joy  in  the  exercise  of  pardoning  love.  It  is  spoken  of  as  a  long  hopeil  for  and
gladsome  consummation.  The  "Abba,  Father!"  of  the  restored  one  is  music  in  the
heart  of  God.  This  is  the  only  true  joy — the  joy  of  reconciliation.  Who  can  doubt
his  welcome  with  such  assurances  as  tjiis  ?  God  wills  not  that  any  should  perish,  but
that  all  should  come  to  him  and  live. — M.


78


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,  [en.  iv.  1—31.


Vers.  21 — 25. —  Typical  penitence.  It  is  difficult  if  not  impossible  to  fix  any  historic
date  for  the  fulfilment  of  this  prophecy.  Not  a  few  competent  scholars  maintain
that  it  is  yet  unfulfilled.  But  in  any  case  it  is  a  picture  of  the  future,  and  may  be
accepted  as  a  description  of  the  penitence  that  is  well-j)leas>ing  in  the  sight  of  God.  All
'through  it  is  spiritual,  and  the  national  circumstances  involved  are  put  thoroughly  into
tlie  background.

I.  The  upspbingino  of  oodly  sorrow  for  sin.  (Ver.  21.)  It  is  not  the  expression
of  annoyance  and  pain  at  the  consequences  of  sin.  A  deeper  sentiment  inspires  the
host  of  weeping  supplicants.  Sin  itself  is  the  grief.  The  cry  is  from  men  who  feel  they
have  lost  their  way,  that  there  is  no  satisfaction  in  the  foul  and  inconsequent  rites  of
idolatry.  The  religion  and  the  life  that  flows  from  it  are  felt  to  be  profoundly  and
utterly  false.  Memories  of  past  spiritual  privileges  and  endearing  ties  overpower
their  hearts.  They  do  not  wait,  but  pour  forth  their  sorrow  on  the  very  scene  of  trans-
gression. Their  sin  is  before  them.  God  is  the  Being  they  have  offended,  and  to  him
therefore  do  they  cry,  in  heartfelt  and  unrest rainable  sorrow.

II.  The  Divine  response.  (Ver.  22.)  The  fatherly  heart  of  Gtod  cannot  resist  the
**  voice  heard  upon  the  high  places."  He  waits  not,  but  forthwith  addressing  them
already  as  "children,**  encourages  their  approach.  Their  offence  is  declared,  but  equally
is  the  promise  given,  "  I  will  heal  your  backslidings  [apostasies].*'  This  expresses  the
objective  and  subjective  influence  of  Divine  forgiveness.  It  not  only  removes  the  sin
80  that  forthwith  and  henceforth  it  is  as  if  it  had  never  been,  but  it  destroys  the  causes
and  tendencies  of  the  evil.  The  source  is  cleansed,  the  disposition  changed,  and  the
way  cleared  for  thorough  reconciliation  with  God.

III.  The  acceptance  of  the  Divine  invitation.  (Ver.  22.)  God  is  taken  at  his
word.  No  delay  takes  place.  As  the  way  of  return  has  been  shown,  so  they  hasten  to
avail  themselves  of  it.  His  authority  and  relation  to  them  are  acknowledged.  They
obey  him.

IV.  The  accepted  sinner's  confession.  (Vers.  23,  24.)  The  "  vanity,"  waste,  and
ruin  attendant  upon  idolatry  are  declared.  God  is  recognized  as  the  only  Saviour.
Testimony  like  this  has  often  proved  more  powerful  in  converting  sinners  than  many
sermons.     It  is  due  to  God,  and  may  be  profitable  to  others.

V.  Tub  accompanying  emotions.  (Ver.  25.)  Shame  predominates.  But  it  is  not
accompanied  by  despair.  There  is  a  false  shame  which  prevents  the  sinner  coming  to
God ;  there  is  a  true  shame  which  coexists  with  accej^tance  of  proffered  mercy,  and
earnest  effort  to  retrieve  the  past.  We  ought  not  too  readily  to  forget  "  the  wormwood
and  the  gall."— M.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  IV.


Vers.  1,  2. — The  form  and  structure  of
the  translation  require  a  ciiango.  Kendcr,
If  thou  wilt  return,  O  Israel,  saiih  Jehovah,
wilt  return  unto  me;  and  if  thou  wilt  put
away,  etc.,  and  not  wamler ;  and  wilt  fwear,
As  Jehovah  liveth,  leith  good faith^with  justice,
and  with  righteousness ;  then  sh»ll  the  nations
bless  themselves  by  him,  and  in  him  shall
they  glory.  The  clause,  **  and  not  wander,**
seems  too  short;  the  Septuagint  had  a
choicer  reading,  *'  and  put  away,  etc.,  from
hid  [thy]  mouth,  and  not  wander  from  before
me.**  It  is  the  close  of  the  prophecy  which
we  have  here.  The  prophet  subjoins  a
promiso  which  he  has  heard  from  Jehovah.
True,  it  does  not  appeal  to  Israel's  self-love
(as  Isa.  xlviii.  18,  19;  Ps.  Ixxxi.  13 -IG),
but  to  a  nobler  feeling  of  responsibility  for
the  world's  welfare.  Israel  lias  been  en-
trusted with  a  mission,  and  on  the  duo


performance  of  this  mission  hangs  the  weal
or  woe  of  humanity.  Hence  Jehovah's
longing  for  Israel's  repentance.  If  Israel
will  but  "return,"  and  obey  God's  com-
mandments, all  nations  will  be  attracted  to
the  true  religion.  The  form  of  expression
used  for  the  latter  statement  is  borrowed
prol»ably  from  Gen.  xxii.  18;  xxvi.  4  (it
is  less  closely  parallel  with  Gen.  xii.  3;
xviii.  18).  To  **  bless  by"  any  one  is  to
use  his  name  in  the  benediction  formula.
Seeing  Israel  so  blessed  through  his  allegi-
ance to  Jehovah,  all  nations  shall  wish
themselves  a  similar  blessing  (the  rever;ie
of  the  proci  8S  in  ch.  xxix.  22 ;  com  p.  Isa.
Ixv.  16).  To  "swear,  As  Jehovah  livelV
means  to  &ill  Jehovah  to  witness  to  the
truth  of  a  statement.  This  is  to  be  done
"with  goo<l  faith,"  etc.,  i.e.  the  object  of
the  oath  must  be  consistent  with  honesty
and  probity.  AbominationB ;  t.e.  idols,  as
often  (sec  2  Kings  xxiii.  24).


CH.  IV.  1—31.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.


79


Ver.  3. — ^There  is  no  occasion  to  separate
Ters.  3,  4,  from  the  preceding  prophecy.  We
have  other  instances  of  as  eudden  a  tran-
sition from  the  Israelites  (in  the  narrower
sense)  to  the  men  of  Judah  (see  Isa.  viii.
6— H ;  X.  1—4 ;  xxviiL  1—6 ;  in  the  writer*s
commentary).  For  thus,  etc  **For"  is  here
not  causal,  but  explanatory:  "I  say  this
»  not  only  to  the  men  of  Israel,  but  to  you,
O  men  of  Judah,  who  need  the  admonition
to  repentance,  how  deeply  1 "  (see  ch.  v.  2).
Break  up  your  fkllow  ground;  the  same
figure  as  in  Hos.  x.  12.  To  understand  it,
we  must  read  the  clause  in  connection  with
the  following  one.  Sow  not  among  thorns.
The  prophet  means,  though  ho  does  not  say
so,  the  roots  which  will  spring  up  into
thorns.  •*Do  not  plant  your  goo<l  reso-
lutions in  a  heart  filled  up  with  the  roots
of  thorns,'  but  first  rake  up  the  soil,  and
clear  it  of  noxious  germs,  and  then  sow  the
seed  which  will  grow  up  in  a  holy  life"
(oomp.  Matt.  xiii.  7).

Ver.  4. — Gironmcise  yonnelyM  to  the  Lord.
A  significant  passage.  All  the  Jews  were
circumcised,  but  not  all  were  "  circumcised
to  the  Lord."  There  were  but  too  many
who  were  "circumcised  in  uncircumcision "
(ch.  ix.  25),  and  the  prophet  sternly  reduces
such  circumcision  to  the  level  of  the
heathenish  rite  of  cutting  off  the  hair  (ch.  ix.
26;  comp.  Herod,  iii.  8).  Jeremiah  seems
to  have  been  specially  anxious  to  counteract
a  merely  formal,  ritualistic  notion  of  cir-
cumcision, sharing  in  this,  as  in  other  points,
the  influence  of  the  Book  of  Deuteronomy,
80  lately  found  in  the  temple  (comp.  Dent
z.  16).  To  him  the  venerable  rite  of  cir-
cumcision (older,  certainly,  than  Abraham)
is  a  symbol  of  the  devotion  of  the  heart  to
its  rightful  Ix)rd  (^comp.  St.  Paul  in  liom.
ii  28,  29;  Col.  ii.  11 ;  Phil.  iii.  3).

Vers.  5—31. — A  revelation  of  grievous
purport  has  suddenly  reached  the  prophet.
See  how  the  foe  draws  nearer  and  nearer,
and  how  alarm  drives  the  scattered  popu-
lation to  seek  for  refuge  in  the  fortified
cities.  Can  such  be  the  issue  of  the
promises  of  peace  with  which  Jehovah  has
encouraged  his  people  ?  Such  are  the  con-
tents of  the  first  paragraph  (vers.  5 — 10).
Next,  in  short,  detached  figures  the  prophet
Bets  forth  the  sin  of  the  people  and  its
punishment.  Like  a  scorching  simoom  is
the  foimer;  like  swift  clouds,  and  like  a
whirlwind,  is  the  onward  march  of  the
instruments  of  the  latter.  Swift,  indeed,
must  repentance  be,  if  it  is  to  outrun  pun-
ishment. For  the  northern  peoples  are
already  here  (vers.  11—18).  The  impres-
•ioQ  is  80  strong  on  the  mind  of  the  prophet


that  he  vents  himself  in  language  such  as  the
last  man  might  employ  on  the  morrow  of  the
final  judgment  day  (vers.  19 — 26).  And
now,  "  lest  what  precedes  might  seem  only
poetry"  (Payne  Smith),  the  Divine  decree
is  solemnly  announced.  The  judgment  is
irrevocable ;  but  there  is  a  gleam  of  hope :
*•  I  will  not  make  a  full  end."  On  the  ques-
tion whether  the  Scythians  or  the  Baby-
lonians are  mainly  alluded  to,  see  Intro-
duction.)

Ver.  5. — C17,  gather  tO£^er;  rather,
ery  aloud.

Ver.  6. — Set  np  the  standard.  The  **  stan-
dard" was  a  tall  pole  with  a  flag,  pointing
in  the  direction  of  Zion,  for  the  guidance
of  fugitives.  Retire,  stay  not ;  rather,  save
your  goods  by  flight;  linger  not.  The  former
verb  occurs  again  in  the  same  sense  in
Exod.  ix.  19;  Isa.  x.  31.  From  the  north.
The  expression  suits  either  the  Scythians  or
the  Chaldeans  (see  on  ch.  i.  14).

Ver.  7. — The  lion;  the  symbol  of  irre-
sistible might  and  royalty  (Gen.  xlix.  7;
Bev.  V.  5).  Of  the  Gentiles ;  rather,  of  Vie
nations.  There  is  no  reference  to  the  dis-
tinction between  Jews  and  Gentiles;  the
Jews  themselves  are  not  allowed  to  escape.
An  ordinary  lion  attacks  individual  men;
this  lion  destroys  nations.  Is  on  his  way ;
literally,  has  broken  up  his  encampment— a
phrase  perhaps  suggested  by  the  nomad
Scythians.

Ver.  8.— Is  not  tnmed  back  from  u.  As
we  in  our  folly  believed  (ch.ii.  35).

Yer.  9. — The  heart .  .  .  shall  perish ;  i.e.
they  shall  lose  their  reason.  The  same  verb
in  Ethiopic  means  "to  be  mad."  The
**  heart "  in  Old  Testament  language  is  the
centre  of  the  intellectual  as  well  as  of  tlie
moral  life  (comp.  Hos.  iv.  11 ;  Job  xii.  24;
Prov.  XV.  28).  So  St.  Ephrom  the  Syrian
says  (*  Works,'  in  Syriac,  ii.  316,  quoted  by
Delitzsch),  *'  The  reason  expatiates  in  the
heart  as  in  a  palace."

Ver.  10.— Ah,  Lord  God !  rather,  Alas  I  0
Lord  Jehovah  (see  on  ch.  i.  6).  Thou  hast
greatly  deceiyed  this  people,  etc.  Much
difficulty  has  been  felt  in  interpreting  this
verse,  partly  because  it  seems  directly  to
charge  Jehovah  with  **  deceit,"  and  partly
because  the  prophecy,  Te  shall  have
peace,  on  which  this  charge  is  founded,
accords  exactly  with  the  strain  of  the  **  false
prophets"  (see  ch.  vi.  14;  xiv.  13;  xxiii.  17).
Hence  some  (e.g.  Ewald)  have  altered  the
points  of  the  verb  at  the  beginning  of  tho
verse,  so  as!  to  enable  them  to  render,
"  And  one  shall  say,"  the  subject  understood
being  either  a  *'  folso  prophet "  or  one  of  the
people.  This  view  is  not  in  itself  impos-
sible (Keil's  objection  will  not  bear  cxar


80


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [cir.  nr.  1— 31.


mination),  hut  is  not  ab8oluti»ly  necosBary,
for  tlie  present  is  not  the  only  passage  in
which  Jeremiah,  under  the  influence  of
strong  emotion,  charges  Jehovah  with
•*  deceit "  (see  ch.  xx.  7,  a  synonymous  word
is  used ;  and  comp.  1  Kings  xxii.  23),  and
the  words,  **  Ye  shall  have  peace,"  may  be
meant  to  summarize  the  cheering  promises
iu  ch.  iii.  14 — 18.  Jeremiah  may  (it  ia  not
incorrect  to  conjecture)  have  supposed  the
fulfilment  of  his  prophecy  to  be  nearer  tlian
it  really  was  (comp.  1  Pet.  L  1 1) ;  hence  his
disappointment,  and  hence  his  strong  lan-
guage. So  St.  Jerome,  *^  Quia  supra  dixe-
rat.  In  illo  tempore  vocabunt  Jerusalem
solium  Dei,  etc.,  et  nunc  dicit,  Peribit  cor
regis,  turbatur  propheta  et  in  se  Deum  putat
esse  mentitum;  neo  intelligit,  illud  multa
post  tempera  repromissum,  hoc  autem  vicino
futurum  tempore."  To  suppose,  with  Keil,
that  Jeremiah  refers  the  prophecies  of  the
**  false  prophets"  to  God  as  tlieir  ultimate
Author,  seems  inconsistent  with  Jeremiah's
own  statements  in  ch.  xiv.  14  (comp.  ch.  v.
13).  Moreover,  we  have  parallels  elsewhere  in
the  prophets,  as  well  as  in  the  Book  of  Job,
for  the  use  of  language  with  regard  to  Provi-
dence which  a  calmer  judgment  would  con-
demn. A  notable  instance  is  Isa.  Ixiii.  17,
where  the  Jewish  Church,  through  its
mouthpiece  the  prophet,  throws  the  respon-
sibility of  its  errors  upon  Jehovah.  De-
pressed by  melancholy,  they  give  way  for
the  moment  to  those  human  **  thoughts "
which  are  not  as  "My  thoughts."  They
felt  the  "  burden  of  the  mystery."  Unto  the
■oul;  i.e.  unto  the  life.

Yer.  11.— Shall  it  be  laid  to  this  people;
i.e.  words  like  these  may  be  used  with
reference  to  this  people.  A  dry  wind,  etc.  ;
literally,  a  dear  wind  (but  the  notions  of
dryness  and  heat  are  closely  connected  with
that  of  heat;  comp.  Isa.  xviii.  4).  The
prophet  doubtless  means  the  ea&t  wind,
which  is  very  violent  in  Palestine,  and,  of
course,  quite  unsuitable  for  the  winnowing
process.  High  places  should  rather  be  bare
nilU,  Toward;  or  (is)  the  way  of.  So  Hitzig,
supposing  the  conduct  of  the  Jews  to  be
likened  to  a  wind  which  brings  no  blessing,
but  only  drought  and  desolation.

Yer.  12. — Even  a  full  wind  from  those
places.  The  passage  is  obscure,  but  this  is  a
very  possible  rendering.  **  Full,"  equivalent
to  "  violent ; "  *'  those  (places),"  equivalent
to  the  bare  hills  spoken  of  in  ver.  11.  Keil
and  Payne  Smith,  however,  render,  "  a  ful-
ler wind  than  those,"  i.e.  a  more  violent
wind  than  those  which  serve  for  winnowing
the  com ;  while  Hitzig  (see  on  ver.  11)  sup-

Soses  "from  those"  to  mean  the  persons
escribed  in  ver.  1 1  as  **  tlie  daughter  of  my
people."  Unto  me ;  or  perhaps  for  me,  at  my
l>eck  and  call    Now  also  will  I,  etc    We


must  supply  the  other  term  of  the  anti-
thesis fn)m  the  context :  "  As  they  have
sinned  against  me,  so  will  I  also  now  hold
a  court  of  justice  upon  them"  (see  on
oh.  i.  16).

Yer.  13.— He  shall  eome  up  as  elondi,  etc.
It  is  nee<lle8s  to  name  the  subject ;  who  can
it  be  but  the  host  of  Jehovah's  warlike  in-
struments? (For  the  first  figure,  comp.
Ezek.  xxxviii.  IG;  for  the  second,  Isa.  v.  28;
Ixvi.  15 ;  and  for  the  thirl,  Hab.  i.  8;  Deut.
xxviii.  49.)  Woe  unto  ns!  etc.  The  cry
of  lamentation  of  the  Jews  (comp.  ver.  20 ;
ch.  ix.  18).

Yer.  14.— Thy  vain  thoughts.  The  phrase
specially  belongs  to  sins  against  one's
neighbour— such  sins  as  are  described  in
ch.  vii.  5—9  (Keil).  «  Vain  "  should  rather
be  "  wicked  "  (immoral  i ;  the  root-meaning
of  the  noun  is  '*  a  breath  "  (the  symbol  of
material  or  moral  emptiness).

Yer.  15. — For  a  voice  deolareth,  etc.
There  is  no  time  to  lose,  for  already  news
of  the  foe  has  arrived.  He  is  now  at  Dan,
the  northern  frontier-town,  and  is  heard
of  almost  as  soon  in  the  hill-country  of
Ephraim.

Ver.  16. — ^Kake  ye  mention,  etc.  This
verse  contains  a  call  to  the  neighbouring
nations  to  take  notice  of  an  event  which
nearly  concerns  them  all.  True,  it  is  only
the  investment  of  Jerusalem  which  can  as
yet  be  reported,  but  there  can  hardly  be  a
doubt  of  the  isbue,  and  the  capture  of  the
principal  fortress  will  at  once  be  followed  by
that  of  the  other  fortified  **  cities  of  Judah."
Against  in  the  second  clause  bhould  rather
be  concerning.  (For  the  use  of  "behold"
before  an  imperative,  comp.  Ps.  cxxxiv.  1.)
Watchers;  i.e.  besiegers  (comp.  ver.  17),  who
like  the  ])anthcr  lie  in  wait  for  every  one
who  conies  out  of  the  city,  to  kill  him  (ch,
V.  6 ;  comp.  ch.  vi.  25).

Yer.  17.— As  keepers  of  a  field.  The
pro))het  compares  the  tents,  or  perhaps  the
lxx)ths  (1  Kings  xx.  12,  IG),  of  the  besieging
army  to  the  booths  of  the  guardians  of  the
crops  (Isa.  i.  8 ;  Job  xxvii.  18).

Yer.  18.— This  is  thy  wickednesi;  i.e.  the
effect  of  thy  wickedness.  (For  the  following
words,  comp.  ch.  ii.  19 ;  iv.  10.)  Beoanse ;
rather,  truly.

Ver.  19. — My  bowels.  It  is  doubted
whether  the  speaker  in  vers.  19 — 21  is  the
prophet  or  the  whole  nation.  Yer.  19  re-
minds us  of  Isa.  XV.  5 ;  xvi.  11  and  xxi.  3, 4,
and  would  be  quite  in  harmony  with  the
elegiac  tone  of  our  prophet  elsewhere ;  the
Targum  too  already  regards  the  passage  as
an  exclamation  of  the  prophet.  On  the
other  hand,  the  phrase  "  my  tents  "  (ver.  20)
certainly  implies  that  the  people,  or  the

Sious  section  of  the  people,  is  the  speaker,
loth  views  may  perliaps  be  united.    Tho


ce.  !▼.  1—81.]  TEE   BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.


bl


prophet  may  be  the  speaker  in  ver.  19,  but
simply  (as  is  the  cafee  with  so  many  of  the
psalmists)  as  the  repretfentative  of  his  fel-
low-belieTers,  whom  in  ver.  20  he  briugs  on
the  stage  more  directly.  Ver.  19  is  best
rendered  as  a  series  of  exclamations —
**My  bowels  I  my  bowels  1  I  must  writhe  in
painl

The  walls  of  my  heart  I  My  heart  moaneth
unto  me  I

I  cannot  hold  my  peace  I

For  thou  hast  heard,  O  my  soul,  the  sound
of  the  trumpet.

The  alarm  of  war  1 "
Observe,  the  **  soul "  hears ;  the  *^  heart  *'  is
pained.  So  generally  the  one  is  more  active,
the  other  more  passive.  The  Hebrew  mar-
gin g^ves,  for  **I  must  writhe,"  **I  must
wait'*  (comp.  Micah  vii  7) ;  but  this  render-
ing does  not  suit  the  context.  The  walls  of
my  heart.  A  poetical  way  of  saying,  *^  My
heart  beats."

Ver.  20.— My  tenti.  Jeremiah  uses  a
•imilar  phrase  in  ch.  xxx.  18  (comp.  also
2  Sam.  XX.  1 ;  1  Kings  viii  60;  xii.  16;  Ps.
cxxxii.  8;  also  Isa.  xxix.  1,  **city  whore
David  encamped,  i.e.  dwelt").  The  ex-
pression is  evidently  a  "survival"  of  the
nomadic,  tent-dwolliiig  age.  (C!omp.  the
parallel  phrase,  **my  curtains,"  i.e,  my
tent-curtains ;  comp.  ch.  x.  20 ;  Isa.  liv.  2 ;
Cant.  i.  5.)

Ver.  21.— 8han  I  lee  the  ftandard.  (See
on  ver.  6.)

Ver.  22. — ^For  my  people  is  foolish.  The
Lord  gives  no  direct  answer  to  the  com-
plaining question  in  ver.  21.  He  simply
states  the  moral  ground  for  Judah's  calamity,
and  implies  that  this  will  last  so  long  as
the  people  continue  to  be  **  foolish,"  i.e.
virtual  deniers  of  the  true  God.

Ver.  23. — I  beheld.  The  prophet  is  again
the  speaker,  but  in  a  calmer  mood.  God's
judgment  has  been  pronounced,  and  it  is
not  for  him  to  rebel.  He  has  now  simply
to  record  the  vision  of  woe  which  has  been

E anted  him.  He  foresees  the  utter  deso-
tion  into  which  not  only  the  land  of
Judah,  but  the  earth  in  general,  will  be
brought,  and  which  reminds  him  of  nothing
so  much  as  the  ^  waste  and  wild  "  condition
of  the  earth  previous  to  the  first  creative
word.  But  why  is  **  the  earth  "  mentioned
in  this  connection?  Because  the  judgment
upon  Judah  is  but  one  act  in  the  great
general  judgment  which,  when  completed,
will  issue  in  a  fresh  order  of  things  (comp.
Isa.  iii.  14, 15,  where  side  by  side  are  men-
tioned Jehovah's  judgment  of  "the  peoples"
and  of  **  his  people,"  and  Isa.  xxiv.,  where
the  judgment  upon  the  enemies  of  Israel
is  interwoven  with  the  judgment  upon  **  the
earth  ").  Without  form,  and  yoid ;  rather,
^loaiU   and    vfUd  (to    represent   in    some

JEBEMIAH.


degree  the  characteristic  assonance  of  the
ori<]^inal — toku  va-bohu) ;  more  literally,  im-
movable and  lifeless.  It  is  the  phrase  used
in  Gen.  L  2  fur  primeval  chaos.  TohQ  and
bohu  occur  in  parallel  lines  in  Isa.  xxxiv.  11,
to  express  utter  desolation ;  tohu  alone  five
times  in  the  Book  of  Isaiah,  and  once  in
Job.  They  had  no  light  The  heavens  were
in  the  same  condition  as  on  the  third  day,
subsi'quently  to  the  creation  of  the  heavens,
but  prior  to  that  of  the  luminaries.

Ver.  24.— Moved  lightly ;  rather,  moved  to
and  fro.

Ver.  26.— The  fmitfol  plaee;  rather,  the
garden-land  (tee  on  ch.  ii.  7).  Not  "the
Carmol "  (Keil,  Payne  Smith)  for  the  con-
text refers  to  the  whole  of  the  country,  not
to  any  single  tract.  The  article  before  the
two  appellatives  is  the  generic.  At  the
presence  of ;  rather,  hy  reason  of.

Ver.  27. — The  vision  breaks  off,  and  the
prophet  emphasizes  its  truthfulness  by  the
announcement  of  the  Divine  decree.  **  Deso-
lation, and  yet  not  a  full  end,"  is  its  burden.
This  is  the  same  doctrine  of  the  "  remnant "
which  formed  so  important  a  part  of  the
prophetic  message  of  Isaiah  and  liis  con-
temporaries. However  severe  the  punish-
ment of  Judah  may  be,  there  will  be  a
**  remnant "  which  shall  escui)e,  and  become
the  seed  of  a  holier  nation  (Amos  ix.  8 ;
Isa.  iv.  2;  vi.  13;  x.  20;  xi  11;  Hos.  vi.  1,2).

Ver.  28. — For  this;  t.e.  because  of  the
impending  judgment.  Be  black.  **  To  be
black  "  is  equivalent  to  "  to  put  on  mourn-
ing "  (comp.  ch.  viii.  21 ;  xiv.  2).

Ver.  29.— The  whole  city.  The  reading
of  which  this  is  a  veruion  can  hardly  be  the
right  one ;  for  **  the  whole  city "  can  only
be  Jerusalem,  and  in  ver.  6  the  people  out-
side are  bidden  to  take  refuge  in  the  capitaL
Hence  Ewald,  Hitzig,  and  Payne  Smith  (after
Septuagint,  Targum)  would  slightly  amend
the  word  rendered  *'  city,"  so  as  to  translate
"the  whole  land"  (of  Judah).  Shall  flee;
literal ly,>le€^.  So  afterwards  render,  "  have
gone,"  "  is  forsaken,"  **  dwelleth."  It  is  a
vivid  dramatic  representation  of  the  effects
of  the  invasion.  Bowmen.  It  is  singular
that  Herodotus  should  say  nothing  about
the  use  of  the  bow  by  the  Chaldeans.  But
the  monuments  give  ample  evidence  that
they  were  a  people  of  archers.  So  of  course
were  the  Scythians,  as  Herodotus  testifies.
The  rooks ;  i.e.  the  limestone  caverns  which
abound  in  Palestine,  and  which  were  fre-
quently used  as  strongholds  and  hiding-
places  (see  Judg.  vi.  2;  xv.  8;  1  Sam.
xiii.  6;  xiv.  11;  xxiv.  3  (especially);  1  Kings
xviii.  13).

Ver.  30.— And  when  thou  art  spoiled,  etc
It  is  Jerusalem  who  is  addresited — Jeru-
salem, personified  as  a  woman,  who  decks
herself  out  finely  to  please  her  admirers.

Q


82


THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,  [oh.  iv.  1— 31,


All  these  arts  are  in  Tain,  for  a  yiolent
repulBion  has  oonverted  her  lovers  into  her
deadly  enemies.  And  when  Jerusalem  is
**  spoiled,*'  or  taken  by  storm,  what  device
will  there  be  left  to  attempt?  The  "lovers"
are  the  foreign  powers  to  whom  the  Jews
paid  court  (eh.  ii.  18,  36, 37).  Though  then
nntest  thy  face,  etc ;  alluding  to  the  custom
of  Eastern  women,  who  try  to  make  their
eyes  seem  larger  by  putting  powdered  anti-
mony (the  Arabic  kohl)  upon  their  eyelids.
Bo,  for  instance,  did  Jezebel  (see  2  Kings
zL  30) ;  and  one  of  Job's  daughters  received
the  name  Keren-happuch,  ^box  of  anti-
mony," t.0.  one  who  sets  off  the  company  in
which  she  is,  as  antimony  does  the  eye.  An
old  author,  Dr.  Shaw,  writes  thus  :  '*  None
of  these  ladies  take  themselves  to  be  com-
pletely dressed  till  they  have  tinged  the


hair  and  edges  of  their  eyelids  with  the
powder  of  lead  ore.  And  as  this  operation
is  performed  by  dipping  first  into  this  powder
a  small  wooden  bodkin  of  the  thickness  of
a  quill,  and  then  drawing  it  afterwards
through  the  eyelids  over  the  ball  of  the
eye,  we  have  a  lively  ima^e  of  what  the
prophet  (Jcr.  iv.  30)  may  be  supposed  to
mean  "  (Shaw,  *  Travels  in  Barbary  and  the
Levant,'  2nd  edit,  p.  229).

Yer.  31. — For  I  have  heard  a  yoioe,  etc.
This  explains  the  preceding  statement,
«»  They  will  seek  thy  life,"  It  is  this  mur-
derous plot  which  calls  forth  the  "  cry  as  of
a  wonjttn  in  pangs."  Bewaileth  herself;
rather,  sigheth  deeply.  Her  hands ;  literally,
her  palms.  Is  wearied  beeanse  of  mnrderen;
rather,  fainteth  into  the  hands  o/ (literally,
if  weary  unto)  the  murderen.


HOMILETICS.

Ver.  3. — Fallow  ground.  Fallow  ground  is  land  that  has  fallen  out  of  cultivation,
or  that  has  never  been  cultivated,  and  this  has  its  counterpart  in  the  broad  fields  of
humanity^  in  the  nations  or  individual  men  who  are  not  under  the  influence  of  spiritual
cultivation.

L  Fallow  OBOUin)  is  oomfabatiyelt  fruitless.  It  may  not  be  utterly  fruitless.
Even  the  bramble  bears  its  wholesome  fruit,  and  good  thoughts  and  good  deeds  spring
up  in  the  midst  of  heathen  nations  and  irreligious  people.  God's  Spirit  has  not  wholly
deserted  any.  But  such  fruit  is  poor  compared  with  the  fruit  of  cultivation,  and  the
crop  of  it  is  thin.  The  good  which  still  pertains  to  a  neglected  soul  is  imperfect,  and
small  in  the  extreme  compared  with  the  good  which  would  spring  up  in  that  soul
under  proper  spiritual  influences.  The  highest  thought,  the  purest  morality,  the
noblest  effort,  the  largest  charity,  are  only  to  be  found  where  the  spiritual  life  is  culti-
Tated  by  worship,  instruction,  and  discipline.

II.  Fallow  ground  bears  weeds.  If  there  are  no  flowers  in  a  neglected  garden,
the  soil  will  not  be  unoccupied.  Dropped  by  birds  in  their  flight,  borne  on  the  wings
of  the  wind,  in  some  way,  myriads  of  seeds  will  find  entrance  into  that  garden  and  spring
up  in  luxuriant  growth.  The  neglected  garden  is  not  a  barren  desert ;  it  is  a  wilderness.
The  neglected  soul  will  not  be  merely  deficient  of  good ;  it  will  bear  a  crop  of  evil.
The  heart  cannot  endure  a  void.  If  it  is  not  filled  with  pure  thoughts,  it  will  indulge  in
imholy  imaginations ;  if  it  has  no  object  of  worthy  love,  its  affections  will  descend  and
twine  about  some  debased  object ;  if  it  is  not  active  in  doing  good,  it  will  be  diligent
in  doing  luum.  In  proportion  to  the  gifts  and  powers  of  the  soul  will  be  the  evil  that
will  come  out  of  it  when  neglected ;  Uie  more  fertile  the  soil,  the  more  abundant  the
cropof  weeds.

in.  Fallow  ground  is  susceptible  of  cultivation.  It  is  not  rock,  but  good  soil.
The  most  brutalized  man  is  not  yet  a  brute.  (}onscicnce  slumbers,  is  not  killed.  The
Divine  image  in  the  soul  is  worn  in  the  traffic  of  worldliness  and  fouled  in  the  mire  of
sin,  but  it  is  not  effaced.  The  disobedient  son  is  still  a  son.  Hence  there  is  hope  for
the  most  neglected  heathen,  the  worst  sinner,  the  oldest  enemy  of  Christ.

IV.  Fallow  ground  must  be  broken  up.  Throw  bushels  of  wheat  among  the
thorns,  and  the  thorns  will  only  **  choke  "  it  (Matt.  xiii.  7).  Till  the  old  evil  is  torn
from  the  heart,  the  new  truth  cannot  grow  and  bear  fruit  there.  Men  must  repent  of
sin  before  they  can  receive  the  seed  of  eternal  life  to  profit.  John  the  Baptist  must
precede  Ohrist.  So  long  as  we  are  cherishing  any  sin  we  are  preventing  the  growth  of
fruitful  graces,  llie  mere  hearing  of  the  truth  is  not  enough.  If  the  heart  is  hard,  it
will  not  receive  it  (Isa.  vi.  10).  If  the  heart  is  preoccupied,  the  truth  will  be  soon
forgotteUi  or  at  best  will  be  crushed  out  of  all  living  energy.    Hence  the  heart  must


CIS.  IV.  1—31.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  83


not  only  be  cleared  of  weeds,  it  must  be  sofbened.  The  plough  must  break  up  the
(allow  ground.

V.  It  18  ouB  DUTY  TO  BREAK  UP  THE  FALLOW  GBOUND.  Mcu  must  be  prepared  for
receiving  the  gospel  of  Christ.  We  are  too  eager  to  sow  the  seed.  Hence  the  slight
returns  we  have  for  so  much  effort  and  expenditure.  People  are  called  to  "accept
Christ "  who  do  not  know  Christ,  and  would  have  no  room  in  their  hearts  to  receive
him  if  they  did  know  him.  Much  so-called  *'  gospel  preaching "  thus  meets  with
ridicule,  or  indifference,  or  bewildered  surprise.  If  we  were  less  hasty  in  seeking
brilliant  results  we  should  see  more  true,  fruitful  returns  for  our  work.  Christ  was  not
always  and  only  crying,  '*  Come  unto  me !  **  "  Follow  me  1 "  Less  pleasing,  and  in
some  eyes  less  important,  words  were  often  seen  by  him  to  be  necessary.  Men  need
instructing  as  well  as  inviting,  rebuking  as  well  as  exhorting.

VI.  The  DUTY  of  breaking  up  the  fallow  ground  is  GREAT  AND  PEE8SINO.      HoW

much  fallow  ground  there  is  (1)  in  the  world ! — think  of  India,  China,  Africa,  the
godless  of  Europe;  (2)  in  the  Church! — how  many  enjoy  its  privileges!  how  few
maintain  its  work !  and  (3)  in  our  own  hearts  1 — what  faculties  are  wasted  1  what  oppor-
tunities for  good  neglected  1

Ver.  10. — Divine  tUusionB,  I.  QooD  men  may  misjudge  (Jod's  actions.  The
words  of  the  text  are  not  spoken  with  Divine  authority ;  on  the  contrary,  they  are

given  in  historical  narrative  as  a  record  of  the  personal  utterance  of  the  prophet.  He
oes  not  preface  them  with  the  august  claim  of  authority,  *'  Thus  saith  the  Lord  ; "  he
distinctly  says,  **  Then  said  I."  Without  needing  to  look  for  any  other  rendering  of  the
text,  we  may  consider  it  as  throwing  light  on  the  condition  of  the  prophet's  mind,
rather  than  as  a  difficult  scriptural  declaration  of  God's  character  and  mode  of  acting.
Thus  we  may  see  in  it  an  expression  of  hasty  judgment,  misunderstanding,  irritable
impatience,  complaint.  If  so,  it  warns  us  to  beware  of  the  prejudiced  or  impassioned
utterances  of  the  best  and  wisest  men  (Ps.  cxvL  11),  and  to  be  more  cautious  in  forin-
ing  judgments  on  difficult  aspects  of  providence  and  religion,  since  even  prophets  err.

II.  It  is  difficult  to  judge  rightly  of  God's  actions  while  we  are  in  the  midst
OF  THEM.  We  are  too  near  to  have  the  right  perspective.  The  character  of  an  action
cannot  be  judged  till  its  ultimate  design  is  revealed.  Many  things  look  wrong  because
they  are  parts  of  a  whole  the  remainder  of  which  is  unseen.  Pride,  passion,  self-
interest,  and  prejudice  pervert  our  judgment.  We  must  wait  for  time  to  clear  up  many
dark  passages  in  earthly  providence  (John  xiii.  7).  The  inconsistency  which  seemed
palpftble  to  Jeremiah  is  less  felt  by  us.

IIL  GK)d's  actions  are  sometimes  illusory  to  ub.  There  was  a  measure  of  truth
in  the  rash  cry  of  the  prophet.  God  never  deceives.  Yet  his  utterance  may  be  mis-
understood by  us.  God  is  said  to  harden  the  heart  when  his  action  results  in  this
evil  condition  through  the  misconduct  of  men,  and  not  at  all  through  his  wish  to  bring
that  evil  about.  So  God  might  almost  be  said  to  deceive  (though  the  expression  is
misleading)  when  his  Word  is  such  that  we  fall  into  a  misconception  in  hearing  it.

IV.  The  illusory  character  of  some  of  God's  actions  is  determined  by  com-
mon limitations  and  imperfections.  Some  truths  are  revealed,  while  qualifying
truths  are  necessarily  hidden  because  we  could  not  understand  them.  No  mention  is
made  of  the  time  of  the  fulfilment  of  a  promise ;  hence  we  think  it  will  be  immediate,
and  are  disappointed  when  we  see  delay  and  find  unexpected  troubles  coming  first.
One  part  of  God's  Word  may  seem  to  contradict  another  when  they  refer  to  different
conditions,  but  conditions  not  yet  revealed  to  us.

V.  Truth  and  human  welfare  are  better  served  by  these  illusions  than  by
BEVEL ATiONS  WHICH  ADMIT  OF  NO  MISCONSTRUCTION.  If  the  child  were  never  allowed
to  stumble,  he  would  never  learn  to  walk.  We  are  educated  by  temporary  illusions
for  higher  truths  than  could  be  attained  by  plainer  paths.  Thus  we  know  more  of
God  and  of  heaven  through  the  anthropomorphic  and  materialistic  language  of  much
of  Scripture,  which  has  resulted  in  gross  misconceptions  at  times,  than  we  should  have
learnt  from  language  made  bare  enough  to  be  unmistakable.

Ver.  14. — The  deansing  of  the  heart  a  necessary  condition  of  salvation,  I.  Sal-
vation IB  PROMISED  ON  THE  SIMPLEST  POSSIBLE  CONDITIONS.    The  Very  mention  of  con-


84  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,     [ch.  nr.  1— 31.

ditioDS  suggests  difficulties,  delays,  barriers.  But  the  only  conditions  required  are  in
our  own  power,  are  simply  such  as  are  necessary  to  make  the  reception  of  the  salvation
of  Gkxi  possible  to  us,  and  do  not  refer  to  the  source  of  it.  We  are  not  to  save
ourselves,  not  to  purchase  nor  to  merit  salvation,  but  only  to  be  in  a  right  condition
to  receive  it.

II.  Salvation  is  only  possible  where  there  is  a  cleansing  from  wickedness.
The  soul  that  clin;j;s  to  sin  cannot  also  grasp  the  Saviour.  If  it  would  be  right  to
deliver  men  from  the  painful  consequences  of  wickedness  while  they  remained  under
the  power  of  it,  it  must  have  been  wrong  ever  to  have  permitted  those  consequences.
If  it  is  not  unjust  to  forgive  the  impenitent,  it  is  unjust  to  punish  them,  which  is
absurd.

III.  The  cleansing  from  wickedness  must  be  in  the  heart.  There  all  sin  has
its  origin.  Clean  hands  are  vain  without  a  pure  heart.  Reformation  must  not  fdm  ply-
be  moral,  it  must  be  spiritual — not  a  change  of  habits,  but  a  purification  of  thought,
affection,  and  desire.

IV.   The  duty  of  cleansing  our  hearts  from  wickedness  rests  upon  OURSELVEa

The  text  is  not  a  promise,  but  an  exhortation.  True,  no  one  can  purify  himself  by  hii
own  efforts  alone  (ch.  ii.  22).  God  has  provided  the  fountain  for  uncleanness,  and  only
they  who  wash  in  this  are  clean.  But  men  must  plunge  into  the  purifying  flood,  must
make  the  effort  of  repentance,  must  seek  the  cleansing  which  is  promised  through
Christ,  must  submit  to  the  baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  must  actively  apply  them-
Belies  to  the  execution  of  good  deeds  in  the  power  given  by  God.  Compare  the  words
of  Isaiah  (i.  16).

V.  There  is  no  reason  to  delay  the  cleansing  of  our  hearts.  "How  long
ghall  thoughts  of  wickedness  lodge  within  thee?"  The  longer  repentance  is  post-
poned, the  more  difficult  does  it  become ;  the  more  numerous  are  the  stains  of  sin,  the
nearer  is  the  approach  of  doom.  Since  it  is  for  men  to  seek  the  cleansing  of  their
souls,  any  delay  must  be  attributed  to  their  negligence,  not  to  God's  unwillingness  to
help  them.

Ver.  22. — ThefoUy  of  misdirected  wisdom,  I.  Wickedness  is  folly.  The  "  fool,"
according  to  Scripture,  is  both  morally  corrupt  and  intellectually  imbecile  (eg.  Ps.
cvii.  17).  There  is  a  truth  underlying  the  saying  of  Socrates,  that  "  Virtue  is  know-
ledge, and  vice  is  ignorance."  It  is  apparent,  indeed,  that  men  may  have  an  intellectual
conception  of  the  right  while  they  do  wrong,  as  also  that  good  men  may  fall  into
error.  But,  on  the  other  hand  :  1.  We  cannot  progress  in  goodness  till  we  discern  the
way ;  we  must  know  God  to  love  him,  recognize  the  good  to  choose  it.  2.  Immorality
deadens  tJie faculty  of  spiritual  intuition;  purity  purges  the  vision  of  the  soul.  3.
Wisdom  is  not  mere  intelligence,  but  applied  intelligence^  practical  intelligence.  It
IB  not  perfected  till  it  is  practised.  He  who  knows  the  good  is  not  wise  until  he  does
it ;  and  he  who  does  right  from  instinct,  habit,  or  mere  inclination  is  not  really  per^
forming  a  moral  action.  An  action  is  moral  when  it  is  performed  with  an  intelligent
regard  to  principle,  i.e,  when  it  is  under  the  direction  of  spiritual  wisdom.

II.  The  folly  of  wickedness  may  be  associated  with  misdirected  wisdom.
The  *'  fool "  in  spiritual  things  may  be  a  worldly  wise  man  and  clever  in  the  execution
of  wickedness.  Ironical  as  is  the  language  of  the  text,  it  may  often  find  a  literal
application.  Shrewd  business  men  may  be  spiritually  blind.  Men  who  are  wakeful
and  eager  in  material  concerns  become  dull  and  listless  when  they  touch  higher
interests.  This  may  be  explained  by  two  considerations.  1.  We  develop  most  wisdom
in  regard  to  those  things  which  interest  us  most.  Interest  rouses  attention,  quickens
perception,  excites  inquiry,  stimulates  intellectual  activity;  while  lack  of  interest
leaves  the  mind  in  a  slumberous  condition,  working  at  half-power.  If  we  feel  no
interest  in  goodness,  we  shall  be  dull  and  foolish  in  regard  to  it.  2.  Spiritual  wisdom
depends  upon  a  spiritual  tone  of  mind.  The  greatest  intelligence  is  not  callable  of
detecting  subtle  harmonies  and  discords  if  it  is  not  accompanieil  by  "  an  ear  for  music."
The  cold  intellect,  which  is  but  a  huge  calculating-machine,  has  not  the  fitting  powers
of  perception  for  discerning  spiritual  truth.  This  requires  a  spiritual  sympathy
(1  Uor.  ii.  14).  Therefore  (1)  let  the  man  of  conscious  intellectual  power  beware  of
the  danger  of  assuming  to  judge  spiritual  questions  before  he  has  acquired  tjie  requisite


0

CH.IV.  1— 31.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  85

spiritual  quali6cation ;  and  (2)  let  us  all  beware  of  attaching  too  much  weight  to  the
religious  motives  of  people  who  may  be  able  business  men,  clever  literary  critics,
and  even  profound  students  of  science,  and  yet  in  moral  regions  "  blind  leaders  of  the
blind."

IIL  MiBDiBECTED  WISDOM  IS  THE  HEIGHT  OF  FOLLY.  The  Very  ability,  misapplied,
witnesses  for  the  foolishness  which  permitted  so  gross  a  mistake.  These  people  who  are
**  wise  to  do  evil  **  are  on  the  whole  "  foolish,"  "  sottish,"  and  "  have  no  understanding."
The  man  who  is  prudent  enough  to  exercise  forethought  for  this  life  only  enhances  nig
folly  in  having  none  for  the  future  life  TLuke  xiL  16 — 21).  He  who  knows  much  of
worldly  things  is  convicted  of  grossest  darkness  in  not  knowing  Ood.  The  bom  fool
is  excused  by  his  misfortune  of  nature.  But  how  foolish  for  the  man  who  shows  him-
self capable  of  wisdom  to  neglect  the  highest  wisdom  1  Note,  in  conclusion,  (1)  the
common  mistake  of  honouring  men  for  their  intellectual  ability  rather  than  for  their
moral  character ;  (2)  the  error  of  those  who  pride  themselves  in  "  knowing  the  world,"
while  they  are  ignorant  of  God  (Elom.  xvi.  19) ;  and  (3)  the  need  to  turn  from
intellectual  pride  to  childlike  trust  for  the  source  of  true  wisdom  (Matt.  xL  25).

Vers.  23 — 26. — Chaos  the  result  of  sin,  I.  Sin  has  a  betbooressive  movement.
In  his  vision  of  the  earth  desolated  by  a  Divine  judgment  on  sin,  Jeremiah  sees  a
relapse  to  the  primeval  condition  before  the  dawn  of  creation,  and  in  his  graphic  descrip-
tion uses  the  very  words  of  the  narrative  in  Genesis.  He  describes  the  earth  as  '*  waste
and  wild."  Every  step  in  sin  is  a  step  downward,  backward.  It  is  backsliding.  How
rapid  this  is  1  One  generation  sees  the  fall  back  to  the  condition  from  which  it  had
taken  ages  to  build  up  the  order  of  the  world.  One  day's  sin  may  undo  the  work  of
years  in  a  soul's  progress.    One  age  of  misrule  may  throw  a  nation  back  for  centuries.

IL  Sin  has  a  disinteobating  influence.  It  breaks  up  the  fair  order  of  the  world
and  tends  to  reduce  it  to  chaos.  Religion  and  morality  are  the  chief  securities  for  order,
the  strongest  bands  of  social  unity.  Vice  is  a  social  solvent,  destroying  ties  of  trust
and  affection,  undennining  the  foundations  of  industrial  co-operation.  It  is  corruption,
and  corruption  means  decomposition.  This  may  be  applied  (1)  politically,  (2)  socially,
(3)  personally.

III.  Sin  has  a  desolating  effect.  The  earth  is  seen  as  not  only  wild ;  it  is  "  waste,"
f.e.  fruitless,  solitary,  desolate.  The  fruitful  place  becomes  a  wilderness,  and  the  whole
land  desolate.  The  result  of  the  retrogressive  and  disintegrating  influences  of  sin  is
not  to  reduce  the  world  to  a  state  of  elementary  simplicity.  It  introduces  confusion,
turmoil,  disaster,  death.  The  loss  of  goodness  involves  the  admission  of  evil  passions,
and  the  advent  of  these  is  followed  by  the  irruption  of  misery  with  no  prospect  of
peace  but  in  death  and  destruction  (Jas.  i.  15).

Ver.  30. — The  abject  helplessness  which  resorts  to  false  pretensions  and  its  failure,
I.  Abject  helplessness.  This  follows  the  discovery  or  punishment  of  sin.  It  is  when
Israel  *' is  spoiled."  Israel  is  boastful  and  self-confident  before  the  disaster  comes;  the
prophet  advises  him  to  consider  what  he  will  do  after  it  has  fallen  on  him.  What
can  be  done  in  such  a  case  ?  The  sin  cannot  be  undone ;  once  revealed  it  cannot  be
hidden  again ;  punishment  from  God  cannot  be  successfully  resisted  by  man.  It  is
vain,  then,  to  call  on  the  mountains  to  fall  and  cover  us  (Luke  xxiii.  30).  How  dread-
ful to  be  thus  confounded!  left  without  excuse,  without  refuge,  without  remedy  I
How  much  better  to  anticipate  this  conclusion  and  prevent  it  I

II.  False  pbetensions.  There  are  the  refuges  now  resorted  to  and  trusted  in  for  the
future,  but  in  vain.  1.  Outward  glory  is  a  mockery  when  once  internal  wretchedness
is  discovered.  What  use  are  purple  and  fine  linen  to  the  leper  ?  2.  When  character
is  revealed,  profession  counts  for  nothing.  3.  When  true  worth  is  destroyed,  the  most
frantic  attempts  to  recover  it  at  the  last  moment  will  prove  fruitless.  The  character
once  lost  is  hard  to  retrieve.  Consider,  then,  the  common  mistake  of  living  for
appearances,  making  the  outside  of  life  respectable  while  the  heart  is  corrupt,  and,  in
the  event  of  discovery,  not  repenting  and  amending,  but  simply  excusing  one's  self,
"  making  the  best  of  the  matter,"  trying  still  to  put  on  a  fair  show.  This  is  common
at  all  times.  So  many  people  are  more  anxious  to  seem  good  than  to  be  good.  All
the  petty  contrivances  and  miserable  deceptions  of  such  lives  will  be  one  day  disclosed.


86  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,  [en.  iv.  1—31.


»


III.  Ultimate  failurk.  '*  Thy  lovers  will  despise  thee,  they  will  seek  thy  life.
1.  Once  discovered,  the  attempt  to  win  favour  by  false  appearances  will  not  only  defeat
its  own  object ;  it  will  aggravate  the  evil  it  is  intended  to  avoid.  It  aims  at  securing
honour ;  but  when  detected  it  is  the  butt  of  ridicule,  the  deserved  occasion  of  con-
tempt. 2.  The  friends  of  sinful  days  become  foes  in  the  time  of  trouble.  The  lovers  of
the  daughter  of  Zion  are  the  first  to  despise  her  and  seek  her  life.  The  ties  of  friend-
ship in  wickedness  are  brittle.  This  is  based  on  selfishness.  No  high  constancy  can  bo
expected  from  people  of  bad  character.  ITie  only  friend  who  will  be  a  refuge  in  the
shame  and  ruin  which  follow  sin,  is  not.  the  partner  in  guilt,  but  the  very  God  against
whom  the  sin  is  committed.


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1 — 4. — The  duty  of  reality  in  reliyious  profession.  The  reformations  of  Jehu
and  Josiah  were  sujjerficial  and  hhort-lived.  Something  more  thorough  was  required.
A  real,  immediate  return  to  Jehovah  was  demanded.

I.  The  signs  of  unreality.  1.  detention  of  the  memorials  and  symbols  of  the
guilty  past.  They  may  not  be  used,  but  they  are  there.  There  has  not  been  strength
of  will  to  remove  them,  or  the  fear  of  man  has  produced  vacillation.  Externally  the
heathen  temple  stands  side  by  side  with  the  house  of  God,  and  may  claim  equal  respect
with  it.  2.  An  uncertain  and  wavering  attitude.  Blowing  hot  and  blowing  cold.
Compromising  with  existent  evils.  Postponing  needed  reforms.  3.  Unrighteousness  of
life.  This  is  one  of  the  gravest  evils.  A  creed  which  does  not  affect  conduct  must  be
either  untrue  or  not  heartily  believed.  An  enigma  of  the  anti-slavery  times  was  the
fact  that  amongst  the  pro-slavery  advocates  were  many  of  the  most  orthodox  clergy,
whereas  the  leaders  of  the  agitation  for  freedom  were  secularists,  Unitarians,  and  men
of  vague  or  heterodox  religious  opinions.

II.  Evils  attendant  upon  unreality.  1.  Confusion  is  created  hetween  the  true
and  the  false  religions,  2.  A  constant  temptation  exists  in  the  relics  and  pra^ctices  of
evil  that  are  retained,  3.  Moral  influence  upon  unbelievers  is  lost,  and  unrighteousness
encouraged,  4.  Spiritual  growth  is  seriously  impeded.  It  is  a  "  sowing  among
thorns,*'  or  upon  the  exhausted  and  unfruitful  soil  of  superficial  emotion  and  fancy.
As  wild  land  can  be  cleansed  from  weeds  only  by  deep  and  repeated  ploughing,  so  the
spiritual  nature  must  be  thoroughly  moved  by  penitence  and  steadfast  resolution.

III.  God's  feeling  towards  unreal  worshippers.  He  cannot  accept  their  peni-
tence. Their  services  are  an  abomination  to  him.  His  anger  is  represented  as  a
smouldering  fire  ready  to  break  forth  in  destruction. — M.

Ver.  10. — Human  uncertainty  coexisting  with  Divine  illumination.  The  prophecy
now  uttered  does  not  harmonize  with  that  of  ch.  iii.  12 — 25.  The  times  of  fulfilment
are  unknown  to  the  prophet.  This  element  of  uncertainty  in  all  prophecies,  even  those
of  Christ  (**  for  of  the  times  and  the  seasons  knoweth  no  man,**  etc.)  is  noteworthy.
This  outburst  of  annoyance  and  misconception  illustrates —

I.  The  temptation  latent  in  superior  Divine  knowledge.  The  moral  balance
and  perspective  are  threatened  with  disturbance.  Hence  the  impulse  to  expostulate
with  God — to  speak  as  if  from  a  superior  standpoint  of  morality.  Seeming  con-
tradictions are  encountered  which  would  have  no  existence  to  a  simpler  or  less
illuminated  spirit.  It  is  as  if  the  moral  nature  of  man  were  only  practically  sufiBcient
for  what  is  revealed  to  him  by  the  ordinary  faculties  and  means  of  knowledge.

II.  The  sorrow  accompanying  exceptional  gifts.  The  prophet,  no  more  than  the
poet  or  man  of  genius,  is  to  be  envied.  How  hard  to  bo  the  custodian  of  a  truth  men
will  not  receive  I  to  be  conscious  of  evils  impending  which  one  cannot  avert  1  The  except
tional  sensitivetiess  of  the  prophetic  temperament,  and  the  keener  vision  of  the  seer,  are
the  occasions  of  an  incommunicable  sadness,  and  even,  at  times,  of  over  whelming  concern.
Especially  is  this  the  case  where  patriotic  feeling  identifies  the  prophet  on  the  one  side
with  his  people,  and  devout  spirituality  leads  him  nevertheless  to  acknowledge  the
righteousness  of  God«    There  was  no  more  human  or  loving  heart  in  Israel  than


CH.rr.1— 31.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  87


JeremUh's,  and  if  they  would  not  heed  his  connsels,  he  was  helpless.    To  he  *'  hefore
the  age  "  in  snch  a  sense  is  not  so  enviahle  as  we  might  imagine.

III.  The  besebve  that  mabks  the  communication  of  truth.  Partly  necessitated
by  limitation  of  human  nature ;  partly  due  to  the  subordination  of  the  prophet,
teacher,  etc.,  to  the  special  task  before  him.  We  should  lose  more  than  we  should  gain
if^  constituted  as  we  are,  we  were  to  receive  unlimited  revelations  of  the  future.  The
practical  and  immediate  import  of  Divine  revelation  is  therefore  our  first  concern.  To-
day is  a  little  space  cleared  for  duty.  Opportunities  of  well-doing  occur  in  constant
succession.  **  What  is  that  to  thee  ?  "  might  well  be  asked  of  many  a  one  that  concerns
himself  with  things  beyond  his  ken :  '*  follow  thou  me." — M.

Ver.  22. — Thewimlom  of  this  world.  That  there  is  such  a  thing  we  may  well
believe,  for  Christ  himself  noticed  and  commended  it :  "  The  children  of  this  world  are
wiser  in  their  generation  than  the  children  of  light."  Within  a  certain  range  it  is  often
•een  to  the  disadvantage  of  the  "  wisdom  that  is  from  above."

L  It  is  great  in  questions  op  means,  methods,  and  policy.  Attention  is  directed
to  these  continually.  A  certain  pride  is  exhibited  in  skill  and  power  of  manipulation.
There  is  something  very  attractive  to  a  certain  order  of  mind  in  the  opportunities  the
world  affords  for  manoeuvre,  dexterity,  intrigue.  The  world  prizes  and  encourages
cleverness  in  practical,  external  matters.  It  can  even  appreciate  the  business  qualities
and  the  reliable  character  of  Christians,  when  their  inspiring  principle  is  utterly  ignored
or  intensely  disliked.  How  much  has  the  Church  of  to-day  to  learn  of  the  world  in
merely  practical  concerns,  knowledge  of  human  nature,  and  adaptation  of  herself  to  her
surroundings  1

II.  It  is  marred  bt:  1.  Dislike  to  what  is  worthy  and  good.  Disillusion  from
worldly  dreams  may  coexist  with  this.  But  men  without  lofty  ideals  cannot  be  happy
or  satisfied.  2.  Heedlessness  cu  to  the  impending  judgments  of  Ood  and  the  eternal
future,    3.  Consciousness  of  worthlessness  and  uskessness  of  its  own  efforts, — ^M.

Ver.  3. — Fallow  ground.  Such  an  analogy  as  this  reminds  us  that  the  materials  of
the  highest  wisdom  are  always  lying  close  within  our  reach,  sometimes  in  very  unlikely

E laces.  The  world  without  is  a  mirror  in  which  we  see  our  own  moral  life  and  the
kws  that  govern  it  reflected.  Air,  earth,  and  sea  are  full  of  teachers  whom  Ood  has
sent  to  rebuke  in  us  all  that  is  false  and  evil,  and  lead  us  into  all  that  is  true  and  good.
The  prophet,  in  the  text,  does  but  give  an  articulate  voice  to  the  silent  eloquence  of
one  of  these.    Apply  personally  some  of  the  lessons  taught.

I.  The  life  of  every  man  is  a  process  of  spiritual  husbandry.  There  is  a  true
analogy  between  the  soul  of  a  man  and  the  field  in  which  a  farmer  sows  his  seed.  In
each  case  there  are  latent  productive  elements,  that  may  be  turned  either  to  good  or  evil
according  to  the  conditions  of  their  development— capacities  of  indefinite  improvement
or  of  indefinite  deterioration,  of  boundless  fruitfulness  or  of  boundless  waste.  The  pro-
lific virtue  of  the  soil  will  nourish  alike  the  germs  of  precious  com  or  of  noisome  weeds ;
and,  whichever  it  be,  the  heavens  above,  by  all  the  influences  thev  shed  down  upon  it^
will  promote  the  process.  Thus  will  the  faculties  of  our  spiritual  nature  foster  either
the  seeds  of  Divine  excellence  or  of  satanic  corruption,  and  then  all  the  laws  to  which
our  nature  is  subject,  and  all  the  associations  of  our  life,  will  help  to  elaborate  the  issue,
until  we  reap  either  a  glad  harvest  of  fruits  that  will  endure  for  ever,  or  one  of  shame
and  sorrow — thorns  and  weeds  and  briars  fit  only  for  the  flames.  '*  He  that  soweth  to
his  flesh,"  etc.  (Ghil.  vi.  8).  Hence  the  solemn  necessity  for  some  Divine  power  so  to
control  and  govern  the  secret  dispositions  and  tendencies  of  our  nature  as  that  in  our
case  the  law  shall  be  fulfilled  in  the  nobler  and  better  way.  '*  Make  the  tree  good,"  etc.
(Matt.  xii.  33).

II.  In  this  husbandry  of  the  soul,  neglect  leads  to  loss  and  waste  and  ruin.
"  Fallow  ground "  is  land  untilled,  uncultivated,  which  no  plough  turns  up  and  into
which  no  seed  is  cast.  It  may  be  purposely  left  to  rest,  that  it  may  not  exhaust  itself,
and  that  its  internal  resources  may  be  all  the  richer  afterwards.  But  the  point  of  the
analogy  is  this — that  it  naturally  becomes  encumbered  with  "  thorns,"  In  the  spiritual
husbandry,  while  fruitfulness  is  the  result  only  of  diligent  labour,  ruin  follows  from
simple  neglect.    The  land  of  the  slothful  husbandman  will  soon  present  the  picture  of


88         THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,  [ch.  iv.  1—31.

weedy,  thorny  desolation.  To  be  riiinetl,  to  sink  into  a  state  of  utter  poverty  and
barrenness  and  destitution  of  all  satisfying  good,  the  souls  of  men  only  need  to  be  left
alone.  "  While  men  sleep  the  enemy  sows  tares."  "  What  shall  it  profit  a  man,"
etc.  ?  fMark  viii.  36).  Our  Lord  speaks  of  the  soul  as  being  "  lost "  simply  through
i>eing  forgotten  in  the  eager  pursuit  of  a  kind  of  good  which  can  never  of  itself  enrich
and  satisfy  it.  This  implies  that  its  native  propensities  are  for  the  most  part  of  a  down-
ward tendency.  It  bears  within  it  the  seeds  of  moral  decay.  The  *'  fallow  ground ''
spontaneously  produces  "  thorns."

IIL  It  IS  VAIN  TO  sow  seeds  of  truth  and  000DN1C8S  IN  HEABT8  PRBOCCUPIED  WITH

OTHER  AND  INCONGRUOUS  THINGS.  How  many  there  are  whose  religious  career  may
well  be  described  as  a  " sowing  among  thorns" I  They  have  religious  susceptibilities ;
they  are  familiar  with  religious  Influences ;  but  their  secret  hearts  are  the  home  of
mean  ambitions,  tainted  with  the  *'  lust  of  the  eye  and  the  pride  of  life,**  or  they  are
entangled  with  a  network  of  worldly  associations  or  bound  by  the  chains  of  some  bad
habit,  from  which  they  have  not  the  courage  or  the  strength  to  set  themselves  free.
And  so  their  spiritual  condition  is  a  strange  medley  of  good  and  evil.  Every  better
affection  and  impulse  within  them  has  some  form  of  moral  weakness  by  its  side  that
nullifies  it.  Strong  as  their  heavenward  aspirations  may  sometimes  be,  there  is  nothing
like  whole-heartedness  in  their  pursuit  of  the  nobler  good.  No  wonder  they  are  "  barren
and  unfruitful  in  the  knowledge  of  Christ."  The  ground  must  be  cleared  before  a
better  result  can  be  expected.  How  many  a  sower,  going  forth  in  the  name  of  the  Great
Husbandman,  is  oppressed  in  spirit  with  the  thought  that  much  of  the  seed  that  he
scatters  falls  "  among  thorns  "  1  He  has  to  contend  with  a  thousand  obstructive  forces
in  men's  hearts,  and  knows  well  that,  unless  some  mightier  force  goes  with  his  mes-
sage to  overbear  all  these,  they  will  *'  choke  the  Word."  Let  the  young  especially  watch
and  pray  against  the  encroachment  upon  them  of  influences  fatal  to  their  higher  life.
It  is  a  comparatively  easy  thing  to  overmaster  the  sins  and  follies  of  youth.  Far
otherwise  when  they  have  become  the  confirmed  and*  cherished  habits  of  the  man.
"  Break  up  your  fallow  ground  1 "  It  is  hard  to  do  this.  It  involves  much  self-
crucifixion.  We  all  like  to  live  at  ease — to  yield  to  the  strongest  influences  of  the
passing  hour,  as  the  sluggard  does,  who  allows  himself  to  be  overcome  by  the  spell  of
sleep,  and  to  dream  away  the  hours  and  moments  that  ought  to  be  spent  in  the
wakeful  activities  of  life.     But  this  is  not  the  way  to  reach  the  heights  of  heavenly

flory  and  blessedness.  It  is  the  certain  road  to  poverty  and  ruin,  to  despair  and  death.
Tot  on  grounds  of  self-interest  alone  is  the  appeal  of  the  text  to  be  urged.  Consider
what  a  loss  to  the  world  is  involved  in  every  barren,  undeveloped  human  soul  and  life.
It  is  a  great  calamity  to  a  country  to  have  large  tracts  of  its  territory  lying  waste  and
desolate,  while  many  of  its  people,  perhaps,  are  perishing  for  lack  of  bread,  or  compelled
to  flee  to  other  lands  to  find  a  field  and  reward  for  their  labour.  How  sad  that,  in  a
world  of  such  overwhelming  spiritual  need  and  destitution  as  this,  the  powers  of  any
human  soul,  that  might  exercise  a  redeeming  influence  upon  it,  should  be  left  idle  or
allowed  to  run  to  waste  1 — W.

Ver.  14. —  Vain  thoughts,  I.  The  lite  of  every  man  is  governed  by  his  thoughts.
"As  a  man  thinketh  in  his  heart,  so  is  he"  (Prov.  xxiii.  7).  True  as  it  is  that  the
essential  moral  quality  of  the  man  will  always  determine  the  order  of  his  thinking,  the
converse  also  is  equally  true.  Thought  is  the  formative  principle  of  all  i>ersonal  life-
kindles  feeling,  touches  the  springs  of  purpose,  guides  the  course  of  moral  action.  What
are  character  and  conduct  but  the  definite  expression  of  secret  thought  ?

**  Thftt  subtle  husbandman.
That  sows  its  little  seed  of  good  or  ill
In  the  moist,  unsunned  surface  of  the  heart.
And  what  it  there  in  secrecy  doth  plant.
Stands  with  its  ripe  fruit  at  the  judgment  day.**

n.  Every  man  is  responsible  for  the  tenor  op  his  thoughts.  If  not,  there
could  be  no  room  in  this  matter  for  remonstrance  or  appeal.  The  law  of  the  associa-
tion of  ideas  may  be  such  that  it  is  as  impossible  to  prevent  some  particular  thought
from  recurring  to  the  mind  as  to  stay  the  tide  of  the  ocean ;  but  it  is  certainly  possible


CE.  IV.  1—81.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  89


for  OS  to  regulate  our  hctbitual  mental  conditions.  It  is  given  to  us  by  watchful,
prayerful  self-discipline,  especially  by  occupying  the  mind  with  higher  and  nobler
things,  to  secure  that  the  main  drift  of  our  thinking  shall  be  in  the  right  direction.
We  can  choose  our  own  fields  of  daily  contemplation.  Those  thoughts  wUl  **  lodge  "*  in
OS  which  we  most  encourage  and  cherish,  and  for  this  we  are  accountable.

III.  ThB  CHEBISHINO  of  vain  thoughts  is  KECE88ABILT  DEORADlKa  DT  ITS  EFFECT.

"  Vun  thoughts  "*  are  iniquitous  thoughts,  sinful  thoughts.  "  The  thought  of  foolish-
ness is  sin."  (Prov.  xxIt.  9).  It  is  impossible  to  measure  the  corrupting  power  of  such
thoughts.  No  evil  imagination  or  purpose  can  enter  the  mind,  and  &  allowed  for  a
moment  to  dwell  there,  without  leaving  some  moral  stain  behind  it  Accustom  yourself
to  any  extent  to  the  play  of  such  influences,  your  whole  being  becomes  contaminated
l^  them,  and— •

^  The  baseness  of  their  nature
Shall  have  power  to  drag  you  down.**

Oar  minds  cannot  be  in  frequent  contact  with  mean  or  erovelling  objects  of  contem-
plation without  finding  that  they  poison  all  the  streams  of  moral  life  within  us.  "  To
oe  carnally  minded  is  death  "  (Hom.  viii.  6).

IV.  The  only  cube  fob  this  evil  tendency  ib  the  Divine  benewal  of  oub
BFiBiTUAL  NATUBB.  "  Out  of  the  heart  proceed  evil  thoughts  *'  (Matt.  xv.  19).  Let
that  be  sanctified,  and  their  power  over  us  shall  cease.  Superficial  expedients,  mere
external  restraints  and  corrections,  are  of  little  use.  We  need  something  that  shall  go
to  the  root  of  the  disease.  The  fountain  of  life  within  must  be  cleansed  if  the  streams
that  flow  from  it  are  to  be  pure.  The  temple  at  Jerusalem  was  externally  beautiful,
its  roof  so  bright  with  burnished  gold  that  nothing  less  pure  than  the  glorious  sun-
beams could  rest  upon  it ;  but  that  did  not  prevent  it  from  being  internally  the  haunt  of
many  a  form  of  hollow  hypocrisy,  and  the  scene  of  a  base,  worldly  traffic — "  a  den  of
thieves."  Let  the  Spirit  of  God  make  our  souls  his  temple,  and  that  holy  Presence
shall  effectually  scatter  all  vain  and  corrupt  imaginations.  They  cannot  '*  lodge  *'  where
the  heavenly  glory  dwells.  Every  thought  of  our  hearts  shall  then  be  ^  brought  into
captivity  to  Christ." — W.

Vers.  3,  4. — The  peril  of  profession  without  possession  of  real  religion.  This  will  be
shown  if  we  consider —

I.  The  SCENE  hebe  pbesented  to  ub.  1.  The  fallow  ground;  that  is,  ground
unoccupied,  free.  Not  hardened,  as  the  wayside  (cf.  Matt,  xiii.) ;  not  shallow-soiled,  as
the  stony  ground ;  not  poor  and  barren,  but  capable  of  yielding  rich  return.  2.  Sowers
about  to  cast  in  seed — good  seed.  3.  A  stem  prohibition  of  their  work.  They  are
commanded  to  "  sow  not."  A  reason  is  given — the  fallow  ground  that  looks  so  fair  is
full  of  thorns.  They  are  bidden  '*  break  up,"  %,e,  purge,  cleanse,  this  ground.  And  all
this  on  penalty  of  God's  sore  displeasure  (ver.  4,  etc.).

n.  Its  significance.  1.  Fur  those  to  whom  Jeremiah  wrote,  (1)  They  were  as  the
fallow  ground,  at  this  time  free  from  open  vifiible  idolatry  which  had  been  their  dis-
grace and  ruin.  All  that  King  Josiah  had  put  a  stop  to.  So  now  they  were  free  to
b^n  afresh,  to  take  a  new  departure,  to  turn  over  a  new  leaf,  as  fallow  ground  is  ready
for  a  new  sowing  (cf.  the  history  of  the  times).  (2)  And  they  were  about  to  sow  the
seed ;  i.e,  they  were  about  to  adopt  the  outward  forms  of  the  divinely  appointed  Jewish
worship.  Externally  they  would  conform  to  the  ancient  faith,  and  in  large  measure
they  did  so.  (3)  But  now  there  comes  the  strange,  stem  prohibition  of  the  text,  and
in  so  much  that  follows.  They  are  bidden  to  refrain  from  this  external  reli^on,  these
outward  rites.  And  the  reason  is  given — their  hearts  were  yet  unchanged,  full  of  the
seeds  of  all  their  former  wickedness,  and  until  these  "  thorns  "  were  purged  out  no
good,  but  only  evil,  could  come  of  any  mere  external  conformity.  It  had  no  value  in  the
eyes  of  God,  it  only  aroused  his  sore  wrath.  But  let  them  "  break  up  the  fallow  ground  "
(cf.  vers.  4, 14).  Let  there  be  a  tme  inward  repentance  before  they  approach  GK)d  with
the  visible  signs  and  forms  of  his  worship.  Let  them  not  think  that  by  any  such  mere
formal  service  they  could  tum  aside  the  anger  of  God.  Such  the  significance  of  this  scene
in  regard  to  Judah  and  Jerusalem  in  the  days  of  Jeremiah.  But  note  :  2.  Its  significance
for  ourselves,  (1)  There  are  many  whose  character  corresponds  to  the  "  fasdlow  ground.**


80  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  iv.  1— HI.

Free  from  gross  external  fault,  morally  fair,  decent,  and  reputable.    Not  thoughtless
and  trifling,  as  the  wayside  hearers  (cf.  Matt.  xiii.).     Not  obstinately  self-willed,  as  the
stony-ground  hearers,  who  are  represented  by  the  emblem  of  a  superficial  soil  having
stretched  beneath  it  a  hard,  pavement-like  rock,  through  which  the  rootlets  of  the  sown
seed  cannot  thrust  themselves  to  reach  the  nourishment  of  the  soil  beneath.    Nor  are
they  incapable  of  yielding  good  service  to  GK)d ;  on  the  contrary,  they  have,  like  the
fallow  ground,  all  capacities  for  yielding  a  rich  return.    (2^  And  such  persons  oftm
BOW  the  seed  of  religious  profession  and  observance,  ana  assume  the  varied  ex-
ternal signs  of  true  religion.    It  is  not  necessary  to  inquire  their  motives,  but  thej
do  this.    And  when  we  see  them  we  are  all  well  pleased.    We  hope  very  much  from
them,  as  no  doubt  Josiah  hoped  much  from  the  external  religiousness  of  the  people  with
whom  he  had  to  do.    But  God  sees  not  as  man  seeth.    His  eye  penetrates  beneath  the
surface.    And  the  fallow  ground  may  be  full  of  thorns ;  that  is,  the  heart  of  him  who
makes  all  this  external  profession— comes  to  the  Lord's  table,  teaches  in  a  Sunday
school,  leads  in  prayer,  perhaps  enters  the  ministry  of  the  Church, — his  heart  may  aU
the  while  be  unrenewed,  impure,  filled  with  the  seeds  of  thorns,  which  wait  only  their
opportunity  to  bear  their  baneful  harvest    (3)  Hence  (Jod  forbids  such  sowing  amongst
thorns.     How  stem  his  denunciations,  how  awful  his  threatenings,  to  those  who  are
guilty  of  this  sin !  Do  any  inquire,  Wlierefore  this  severity  ?  The  reply  is :  (a)  Hypocrisy
is  hateful  to  him.     See  our  Saviour's  denunciations  of  hypocrisy  (cf.  Matt,  xxiii^.    ae
who  was  gentle  and  full  of  grace  to  all  others,  had  no  words  too  scathing  for  this  sin.
No  doubt  his  stem  words  were  designed  also  to  open  the  eyes  of  the  people  who  were
deceived  by  the  false  professions  of  those  to  whom  our  Lord  spoke  so  severely.    And  we
can  hardly  doubt,  either,  that  there  was  a  gracious  purpose  in  regard  to  the  men  them-
selves, to  awaken  and  alarm  them,  if  by  any  means  it  might  be  possible.     But  still,  ho
who  to  us  is  the  Manifestation  of  God,  makes  evident  how  hateful  in  his  sight  is  all  reli-
gious profession  that  rests  on  no  reality  within,    (h)  A  further  reason  for  the  severity
which  is  so  marked  here  is  the  extreme  peril  of  such  sowing  amongst  thorns  to  the  sowers
thepnselves.     Few  things  are  more  deceiving  to  a  man  s  ftoul  than  to  be  professing
rehgion,  and  to  be  accounted  by  others  as  truly  religious,  when  he  is  not  so.  It  is  bad  to
be  an  unregcncrate  man ;  it  is  worse  to  be  such  and  not  to  know  it ;  but  the  worst  con*
dition  of  all  is  to  be  such,  and  to  be  believing  all  the  while  that  you  are  the  reverse,  and
that  for  you  salvation  is  sure.    But  this  dread  self-deception  is  fearfully  fostered  by
this  sin,  which  God  here  so  severely  condemns,    (c)  And  yet  another  reason  for  this
Divine  condemnation  is  that  by  this  sin  the  Name  of  God  is  blasphemed.     The
world  is  keen-eyed,  and  soon  detects  the  mere  outside  religion  of  those  whom  this  word
contemplates.    And  because  of  the  base  coin  the  genuine  is  suspected,  and  the  way  of
godliness  despised.    Therefore  note-
Ill.  The  solemn  suggestions  of  this  subject  to  oubselves.    1.  To  those  who
have  been  guilty  of  this  sin.    You  have  been,  you  are  now,  it  may  be,  making  loud
religions  profession,  and  yet  your  heart  is  not  right  in  the  sight  of  God.    We  do  not
say,  "  ITirow  up  your  profession,  abandon  all  religious  ways ; "  but  we  do  say,  "  Have
done  with  insincerity."    Resolve  that  the  fallow  ground  shall  be  broken  up,  the  heart
truly  yielded  to  God.   Implore  him  to  give  you  the  reality,  that  your  profession  may  be
a  lie  no  more.    2.  Let  all  remember  that  this  purging  of  our  hearts,  this  cleansing  of
our  souls,  needs  to  be  continually  done.    The  thom  seeds  float  continually  over  the  fallow
ground,  and,  if  it  be  not  continually  cleansed,  they  will  take  root,  and  the  good  seed  will
be  choked.    3.  The  Divine  condemnation  of  sowing  amongst  thorns  is  not  designed  to
deter  our  sowing  where  the  grace  of  Gk)d  has  cleansed  us  from  such  thorns.    Many  read
these  terrible  threatenings,  and  fear  to  take  upon  them  a  religious  profession,  lest  they
should  be  found  unworthy  and  untrae.    But  if  God  has  given  you  to  repent  of  sin,  to
long  after  holiness,  to  look  daily  to  your  Lord  for  grace  and  help,  then  he  has  washed
your  heart  from  wickedness  (ver.  14),  and  you  may,  you  ought,  openly  to  avow  his
name,  observe  his  appointed  ordinances,  and  engage  in  any  way  his  providence  may
inyite  you  in  his  direct  and  recognized  service.    4.  And  let  not  those  who  neither
possess  nor  profess  religion  deem  themselves  better  off  because  those  who  profess  with-
out possessing  are  so  severely  dealt  with.    Let  thera  remember  that  if  the  righteous —
and  to  the  outward  eye  these  are  righteous — scarcely  be  saved,  where  shall  the  un-
godly and  the  sinner  appear  ? — 0.


PH.IV.  1— 31.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  01

Vers.  5 — 31. — The  prodamaiion  qfv^oe.  Such  is  the  character  of  this  entire  BectioD,
and  we  obaerve  upon  this  proclamation^

I.  That,  likb  all  such,  it  is  prompted  by  Divine  love.  The  most  fearful  judgments
contidned  in  the  whole  Bible  are  those  denounced  by  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  The  most
awful  words  ever  spoken  are  those  which  proceeded  out  of  the  mouth  of  him  at  whose
graciousness  all  men  wondered.  It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  they  were  the  utterances,
as  is  this  one  here,  of  Divine  love.  They  are  beacon-lights  set  up  as  a  warning,  thai
men  may  not  suffer  their  vessels  to  run  on  those  rocks  against  which  they  warn,  and  of
whose  peril  they  are  the  evidence  and  sign.  There  was  time  for  those  to  whom
Jeremi^  spoke  to  turn  unto  the  Lord  and  find  salvation,  though  indeed  it  was  the
eleventh  hour.  And  that  they  might  be  driven  to  this,  morally  compelled  to  come  in
to  the  mercy  of  GK)d,  is  the  object  of  these  terrible  threatenings,  these  blasts  of  the
alarm-trumpet  of  Ood's  love.    And  in  keeping  with  this  intent,  this  proclamation—

n.  SeTB  FOBTH  in  a  vivid,  8TBIKINO  FORM  THE  JUDGMENTS  THAT  IT  DENOUNCES.      1.

Under  the  emblem  of  a  lion  bursting  forth  from  its  thicket  upon  its  defenceless  prey
(vers.  7,  8).  2.  Under  that  of  a  terrible  tempest  (vers.  11 — 13).  3.  Under  that  of  a
cordon  of  ^  watchers/'  who  guard  every  comer  and  the  entire  circumference  of  a  field  in
which  the  game  thev  are  hunting  for  has  taken  refuse.  So  should  Judah  and  Jerusalem
be  beleaguered  and  nemmed  in  until  captured  and  destroyed  (vers.  16, 17).  They  who
would  1^  men  away  from  sin  to  Qod  must  not  shun  to  set  forth  in  the  most  impres-
sive way  possible  to  them  the  dread  evil  of  that  which  they  would  have  them  forsake.
Hence  the  lurid  pictures  of  the  unouenchable  flame  and  the  undying  worm  which  our
Saviour  presents  to  us,  and  hence  these  vivid  representations  of  the  prophet  Jeremiah.

IIL  Is  INTEBMINOLED,  AS  IT  HAS  BEEN  PRECEDED,  WITH  EXHORTATIONS  TO  THAT
REPENTANCE  BY  WHICH  THE  THREATENED  JUDGMENTS  WOULD  BE  TURNED  ASIDE.      (VeTS.

8, 14.)  So  in  declaring  the  judgments  of  GK)d  against  sin,  we  should  never  let  it  be  for-
gotten how  Gtod  hath  said,  "As  I  live,  saith  the  Lord  Ood,  I  have  no  pleasure  in  the  death
of  the  wicked^  but  rather/'  etc.  This  section  is  a  model  of  the  method  in  which  the
more  awful  portions  of  oiu:  message  to  men  should  be  declared.    Hence  note  how  it—

IV.  Is  A  BURDEN  OP  THE  LORD  ON  THOSE  WHO  ARE  CHARGED  WITH  IT.   (Vers.  19 — 31.)

Jeremiah  could  not  refrain  from  delivering  his  message,  and  could  not  but  know  that  to
many  it  would  be  delivered  in  vain ;  but  it  was  with  grief  and  pain  of  heart  he  foretold
what  he  knew  must  come.  See  our  Saviour's  tears  ovef  Jerusalem.  Listen  to  St.  Paul,
"  Of  whom  1  tell  you  even  weeping."  Would  that  we  all  knew  how  to  combine  this
faithfulness  and  this  yearning  tenderness  in  the  delivery  of  this  message  I  Then  would
men  be  aroused,  as  too  often  they  are  not  now,  to  "  flee  from  the  wrath  to  come."

V.  Is  CERTAIN  TO  BE  FULPILLED  IF  THE  SIN  WHICH  IS  THE  CAUSE  OF  IT  BE  NOT  FOB-

8AKEN.  Few  things  are  more  solemnizing  to  the  careless  soul  than  to  have  plainlv
brought  before  him  the  sure  fact  that  God  has  never  gone  from  his  word,  awful  though
that  word  might  have  been.  He  did  not  here.  All  that  Jeremiah  foretold  came  to  pass.
The  anguish  of  his  heart  was  not  caused,  any  more  than  were  the  Redeemer's  tears,  by
a  merely  fancied  calamity.  We  are  not  able  to  tell  what  will  be  all  the  characteristics
and  elements  of  the  Divine  retribution  on  sin,  but  of  its  reality  none  who  read  the  book
of  €k)d*s  written  records,  or  the  book  of  his  providence  as  seen  in  historic  facts,  can  for
one  moment  doubt.  Oh  for  a  far  deeper  conviction  of  these  soul-subduing  truths  on
the  part  of  all  who  preach  and  all  who  hear  God*s  holy  Word  I — C.

Ver.  10. — ^*  Ah,  Lord  God!  surely  thou,"  etc.  Inflicted  infatuation^  or  the  deceived  of
Ood,  I.  There  are  such.  How  else  can  they  be  described  who,  in  spite  of  the  plainest
declarations  of  God  against  their  wickedness,  persist  therein,  persuading  themselves  that
they  have  no  cause  to  fear?  Such  was  the  way  of  these  to  whom  Jeremiah  spoke.
They  and  their  false  prophets  were  continually  saying,  "  We  shall  have  peace  "  (cf.  ch.
V.  12,  31).  And  there  have  been  other  instances  (cf.  Pharaoh,  hardening  his  heart
against  God).  And  there  are  many  now.  The  Bible  speaks,  providence  speaks,  con-
science speaks,  Christ's  ministers  speak,  the  Holy  Spirit  speaks  pleading  with  them ;
but  they  heed  not,  they  turn  a  deaf  ear  to  every  voice.  What  can  this  be  called  but
infatuation?  And  it  can  only  be  explained  as  Jeremiah  here  explains  it,  as  a  Divine
judgment  "  Ah,  Lord  Gkxl !  surely  thou  hast  deceived  them."  The  evidence  that  their
course  was  one  that  must  bring  punishment  was  so  glaring,  so  strong,  so  irresistible^


92  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  iv.  1— 31.

that  none  but  the  infatuated  could  possibly  disregard  it.  Now,  it  is  the  testimony  of
the  Word  of  God  that  such  blindness  is  judicial,  is  from  God.  God  hardened  Pharaoh's
heart.  Our  Lord  refers  more  often  than  to  any  other  Old  Testament  Scripture,  to  that
word  of  Isaiah's  which  tells  of  the  Divine  will,  that  "  seeing,  they  [his  enemies]  may
■ee  and  not  perceive,  and  hearing,  they  may  hear  and  not  understand."  Men  who  will
not  hear  come  at  length  to  find  they  cannot.  So  with  Judah  and  Jerusalem ;  they  were
at  this  time  "  given  up  to  a  strong  delusion,  that  they  should  believe  the  lie  " — that
peace  could  be  their  lot  in  spite  of  what  they  were.  We  speak  of  gospel-hardened
men,  and,  alas  1  we  too  often  see  such«  And  this  is  in  keeping  with  Gkxl's  law  of  habit
—Hi  law  most  beneficent  to  those  who  obey  him,  but  terrible  in  its  effects  on  the  dis-
obedient. For  separate  actions  crystallize  into  habits,  whereby  such  actions,  no  matter
what  their  character,  become  easy  to  us,  and  at  last  can  be  performed  without  any  effort
of  our  will.  So  that  separate  acts  of  obedience  to  God  will  at  length  become  a  blessed
and  holy  habit  of  obedience,  and  separate  acts  of  sin  repeated  again  and  again  will
become  a  direful  habit  of  sin,  from  which  we  cannot  break  away.  And  because  all  this
is  in  accordance  with  a  Divine  law,  therefore  God  is  said  to  harden  men's  hearts,  to
hinder  their  understanding  of  his  Word,  to  give  them  over  to  strong  delusions  and,  as
here,  to  "  deceive  the  people."

II.  The  cause  is  clear.  Ver,  18,  "  Thy  way  and  thy  doings  have  procured  these
things  unto  thee."  It  is  firom  no  decree  of  reprobation,  from  no  predestination  to  sin,
but  from  the  inevitable  action  of  the  law  of  God  which  ordains  that  "  ways "  and
"  doings"  such  as  Judah's  were  shall  at  length  so  utterly  deceive  those  who  are  guilty
of  them  that  the  most  glaring  falsehood  is  not  too  glaring  for  them  to  believe.

III.  Its  doom  is  just.  Is  it  unjust  that  a  man  shall  be  filled  with  the  fruit  of  his
own  ways  ?  that  what  a  man  soweth  that  he  shall  also  reap  ?  Holiness  must  become
impossible  if  its  opposite  be  not  possible  too.  The  same  law  necessitates  both.  It  is
no  arbitrary  infliction,  but  the  natural  outcome  of  what  a  man  has  been  and  of  what
he  has  persistently  done.  It  is  as  natural  as  that  the  harvest  should  follow  the  sowing
of  its  own  seed.  The  most  dreadful  element  in  the  sinner's  doom — the  worm  that  dieth
not — will  be  the  ever-present  reflection  that  he  has  brought  it  all  upon  himself.  He
himself  made  the  bed  on  which  he  has  to  lie.  And  if  still  the  doom  of  these  wicked
men  be  objected  to,  as  it  is,  we  reply,  remembering  how  it  is  ever  the  necessity  of  any
moral  condition  to  be  seeking  to  assimilate  its  surroundings  to  itself,  so  that  goodness
seeks  to  make  others  good,  and  evil  seeks  to  make  others  evil — remembering  this  we
say,  with  the  late  Dr.  Arnold,  "  It  is  better  that  the  wicked  should  be  destroyed  a
hundred  times  over  than  that  they  should  tempt  those  who  are  yet  innocent  to  join
their  company."  And  this  is  what  they  would  be  sure,  from  the  very  necessity  which
arises  from  what  they  are,  to  be  ever  seeking  to  accomplish.  Therefore  we  say  their
doom  is  just,

IV.  The  awakening  awful.  (Ver.  9.)  See  the  picture  of  dismay  and  despair
which  the  prophet  draws  (cf.  Rev.  vi.  17).  Self-deception,  however  hardened  into  habit
by  long  years'  use,  cannot  endure  for  ever.    There  will  be  an  awakening.

V.  The  lesson  plain.  Break  away  at  once  from  sin  lest  it  coil  round  thee  like  a
serpent,  lest  repeated  transgression  become  links,  and  the  links  a  chain  which  will  bind
thee  so  fast  that  thou  canst  not  escape,  llierefore  break  away  now,  turn  to  the  Lord
Jesus,  invoke  his  aid,  day  by  day  look  to  him,  and  thou  art  saved. — G.

Ver.  14.—*'  0  Jerusalem,  wash  thine  heart  from  wickedness,  that  thou  mayest  be
saved."     The  loving  charge  of  the  Great  Searcher  of  hearts.    The  text  shows  us —

I.  God  intensely  desibinq  man's  salvation.  This  is  evident  from  the  pleading  tone
of  the  text.  It  is  like  the  pathetic  cry  of  the  Saviour  over  the  same  Jerusalem,  when  her
people  rejected  him.  And  this  Divine  distress  over  the  sinner's  rejection  of  salvation,
or  in  any  wise  missing  of  it,  is  attested  not  by  any  one  Scripture  alone,  but  by  many,
and  by  a  multitude  of  other  witnesses  beside.  How  many  Divine  utterances  there  are
which  breathe  the  like  loving  concern  to  that  well-known  one  which  says,  "  As  I  live,
saith  the  Lord  God,  I  have  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  the  wicked ;  but  that  the  wicked
turn  from  his  way  and  live  '*  (Ezek.  xxxiii.  11)  1  And  the  Divine  words  of  love  are
confirmed  by  the  supreme  deed  of  love.  "  God  so  loved  the  world."  Surely  the  remem-
brance of  this  Divine  yearning  for  our  eternal  salvation  should  touch  and  subdue  our


OB.  IV.  1-^1.]  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  98

hearts.  If  we  knew  of  one  who,  when  we  were  prostrate  with  disease,  out  of  love  came
to  us,  despising  all  risk  of  contagion,  and  watched  over  us  night  and  day,  on  the  alert
at  every  turn  and  stage  of  the  dresid  foe  that  was  threatening  our  life,  who  in  every  way
showed  himself  heedless  of  his  own  comfort  or  safety,  so  only  as  he  might  win  us  hack
to  health ;  how  in  after  years  should  we  regard  such  a  one  ?  Would  not  even  the
most  selfish  cherish  a  warm  regard,  a  grateful  recollection  ?  And  most  men  would  take
care  to  let  it  be  known  what  was  their  estimate  of  such  self-sacrificing  love.  '*  But,**
saith  God,  "  Israel  doth  not  know ;  my  people  doth  not  consider."

II.  (jod  declarino  that  man  must  do  bis  part  if  that  salvation  IB  to  bb
WON.  If  the  whole  matter  rested  with  Ood,  such  language  as  our  text,  in  which  man  is
charged,  importuned  to  bestir  himself,  would  have  no  meaning,  would  be  what  we  will
not  even  suggest.  And  our  text  but  embodies  the  same  truth  as  to  the  need  of  man's
co-operation  with  God  which  lies  upon  the  surface  of  every  *'  Come  unto  me  "  uttered
by  our  Lord  or  by  his  apostles  and  ministers  in  his  Name.  Our  salvation  is  not  a  case
in  which  God  but  speaks  and  all  is  done,  and  commands  and  all  stands  fast.  The
work  of  grace  is  not  accomplished  as  one  tree  is  made  an  oak,  the  other  an  elm.  We
look  with  delight  and  wonder  at  the  manifold  triumphs  of  mind  over  matter  which  the
varied  discoveries  of  science  have  in  this  century  achieved.  But  the  salvation  of  a  soul
has  the  higher  glory  of  the  triumph  of  mind  oyer  mind — that  in  strict  harmony  with  the
laws  and  liberties  of  mind,  and  in  spite  of  inherent  and  inveterate  opposition,  the  love
of  God  shall  conquer  and  subdue,  and  the  '*  unruly  wills  of  sinful  men  **  shall  cheerfully
own  and  yield  to  the  Divine  sway.  But  in  such  a  salvation  man  must  do  his  part;  he
is  not  left  out  in  the  scheme,  and  here,  as  in  so  many  other  Scriptures,  he  is  called  upon
to  be  a  worker  together  with  God  that  he  "  may  be  saved."  How  this  truth  shatters
the  delusion  and  the  fatal  self-deception  of  those  who  comfort  themselves  in  their  dis-
regard of  God  by  a  wresting  of  the  doctrine  of  the  Holy  Spirit's  work,  as  if  it  were  one
which  absolved  them  from  all  endeavour,  instead  of  prompting  them  thereto  and  aiding
them  therein.  And  some  Christian  workers  need  also  to  be  reminded  of  this  same
truth ;  for  they  are  tempted  at  times  to  excuse  and  account  for  their  want  of  success  on
the  ground  of  the  sovereignty  of  the  Divine  working — the  Spirit,  like  the  wind,  blow-
ing where  it  listeth — rather  than  on  the  ground  of  their  own  laggard  following  of  the
Divine  leading  and  their  failure  to  co-operate  mth  God.  Man  must  do  his  part — this
is  the  law  writ  large  over  all  God's  Word  and  works  and  ways.

III.  GK)D  SHOWING  TO  MAN  WHAT  HIS  PART  IS.  "  Wash  thine  heart,"  etc.  Then :
1.  Wickedness  is  a  defiling  thing.  It  is  to  the  soul  what  the  mud  and  mire  of  the
street,  what  all  material  foulness,  are  to  the  body.  Sometimes  this  is  made  manifest
even  now.  On  a  man's  face  may  be  read  the  moral  defilement  of  bis  soul.  But  generally
men  are  too  cautious  for  that,  and  in  this  world  men  take  care  not  to  let  the  inward
defilement  appear.  We  are  formed  to  love  what  is  fair-looking  and  pure  and  whole-
some, and  we  turn  away  from  its  opposite.  And  wicked  men  know  this,  and  are  careful
to  maintain  appearances.  But  if  hereafter,  as  now,  God  ''gives  to  every  seed  its
own  body,"  he  shall  then,  as  is  plainly  taught,  give  to  every  soul  its  own  body
<— a  body  that  will  take  its  nature,  shape,  and  form  from  the  moral  characteristics
of  the  soul.  Oh,  what  transformations  there  may  be  then  I  The  character  of  the  soul
determining  what  the  body  shall  be.  Some  then,  who  here  have  had  no  form  nor  comeli-
ness, shall  be  seen  then  as  the  angels  of  God ;  and  others  who  here  have  lacked  no
natural  beauty,  shall  be  shunned  as  were  those  who  in  our  Lord's  days  on  earth  were
possessed  with  an  unclean  spirit.  Oh  for  the  purged  vision,  that  we  might  see  our
souls  as  God  always  sees  them !  Then  surely  we,  seeing  how  wickedness  ever  pollutes
and  defiles,  should  turn  from  it  with  loathing,  as  now  we  too  seldom  do.  2.  And  the
defilement  is  such  as  cleaves  to  the  soul.  "  Wash  thine  heart,"  etc.  The  abode  from
which  the  evil  spirit  went  forth  for  a  while,  but  then  in  his  lordly  manner  declared  he
would  return  to  it,  as  ho  did — that  abode  was  only  "  swept,"  not  washed ;  that  defile-
ment which  lay  loose  and  light  about  the  house  could  be  thus  got  rid  of,  but  that  which
cleaved  to  it  continued  there  still.  He  who  would  be  saved  must  deal  thoroughly  with
his  souL  No  light,  easy,  partial  amendment  will  do.  This  God  teaches  us  by  this
earnest  word,  "  Wash  thine  heart,"  etc.  3.  And  this  cleansing  must  be  of  the  heart.
The  whole  chapter  is  a  protest  against  the  mere  external  purifying  which  the  sinful
people  were  seeking  to  palm  off  upon  God  instead  of  the  tme  inward  cleansing  whick


94  •  TEE  BOOK  OF  THE  rROPIIET  JEREMIAH,    [oh.  iv.  1—31.

ho  dciuauded,  and  with  which  alone  ho  would  or  ever  will  bo  content.  4.  And  this  we
must  do.  Had  we  boon  told  that  the  blood  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  can  alone  do  this,
or  had  we  been  bid<len  pray  like  David,  "  Purge  mo  with  hyssoi),  and  I  shall  be  clean :
wash  me,  and  I  shall  be  whiter  than  snow."  "  Wash  me  throughly  from  mine  iniquity,
and  cleanse  me  from  my  sin ; " — such  declarations  and  counsels  we  could  readily  havo
understood,  but  for  us  to  be  told  to  do  ourselves  what  so  many  Scriptures  repeatedly
declare  God  alone  can  do—how  is  this?  Well,  let  the  story  of  the  blind  man  whom
our  Lord  bade  go  and  wash  in  the  \yyo\  of  Siloam,  and  who  because  he  obeyed  won  back
his  sight, — let  his  story  answer  the  question.  It  was  the  grace  of  the  I^rd  Jesus  restored
him,  but  yet  this  much  that  he  could  do  he  had  to  do.  But  never,  never  on  the
ground  of  that  washing  in  Siloam  would  the  restored  man  claim  for  himself  the  credit
of  his  own  restoration,  and  so,  although  we  be  bidden  wash  our  hearts  from  wicked-
ness, yet  who  does  not  know  that  there  lies  behind  these  words  the  promise  of  the
cleansing  fountain,  in  which  alone  we  can  wash  and  be  clean  ?  And  every  one  who
seeks  to  obey  this  word  will  soon  find  his  own  utter  powerlessness  to  rid  himself  of  tho
clinging,  cleaving  wickedness  of  his  heart,  and  the  necessity  he  is  under  to  answer  back
to  this  word  of  the  Lord's,  "Lead  me,  then,  Lord,  to  that  cleansing  stream,  where  only
it  is  of  any  avail  that  I  seek  to  wash  my  heart  from  wickedness.**

IV.  God  knooukaoiko  man  to  do  his  part  by  the  promise  of  salvation.  **  Wash
ihine  heart,  .  .  .  tJicU  thou  may  est  he  eaued,^  The  promise  is  contained  in  the
command.  We  can  appeal  to  experience  to  verify  this  implied  promise.  In  tho  hour
when  sin  would  assert  its  mastery,  let  the  soul  turn  in  instant  trust  and  i^raver  to  tho
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  he  shall  find  that  he  is  saved.  Sin  will  slink  away,  like  Satnn
did  at  the  word  of  the  Lord,  and  in  such  ex|>cricnce  of  Christ's  saving  power  we  have
the  pledge  and  earnest  of  the  full  salvation  which  shall  bo  ours  when  ho  who  has  biguu
the  work  in  us  has  perfected  it  according  to  his  word. — C.

Ver.  14. —  Vain  ihoughit,    "  How  long  shall,"  etc.  ?

I.  They  are  the  prolific  source  and  cause  of  all  wickedness.  "  As  a  man  thinketh
in  his  heart,  so  is  he."  St.  Paul,  desiring  all  things  lovely  and  of  good  report,  all  that  has
praise  and  virtue,  to  abound  in  the  disciples  of  Christ,  bids  them  "  think  on  these
things  '*  (Phil.  iv.).  Therefore  vain  thoughts  must  lead  to  and  produce  wickcdnt-ss.
**  They  are  the  spawn  of  the  evil  heart,  from  which  all  other  wickedness  is  produced."
They  are  not  to  be  here  understood  as  merely  trifling,  foolish,  empty  thoughts,  but
thoughts  that  are  evil,  impious,  sinful,  wicked.  They  are  the  thoughts  which  bring
forth  sin,  which  in  its  turn  brings  forth  death.  **  Keep  thy  heart  with  all  diligence,  for
out  of  it,**  etc.

II.  They  render  salvation  impossible.  The  cleansing  of  the  heart  from  them,
iheir  dislodgement  therefrom,  is  set  forth  as  indispensable  to  Jerusalem  being  saved-^
a  condition  that  must  be  fulfilled.  '*  Blessed  are  tho  pure  in  heart :  for  they  shall  see
God.."  The  converse  of  this  is  true  also  and  equally, "  Without  holiness,**  that  is,  without
this  puroness  of  heart,  **  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord.**  Uow  manifestly  true  this  is  1
What  would  a  man  whose  heart  is  full  of  these  thoughts  do  in  tho  "  Father's  houso"?
It  would  be  hell  to  him.    Ue  would  be  anywhere  rather  than  there.

III.  They  are  voluntarily  entertained.  They  have  come  to  the  door  and  have
Bonght  and  obtained  entrance.  They  havo  been  bidden  *'  come  in,**  and  the  heart  has
consented  to  ^  lodge  "  them.  The  protest  that  the  prophet  utters  against  them,  were
they  not  volxmtarily  admitted  and  retained,  would  be  unmeaning.  There  would  be
occasion  for  profound  pity,  bat  none  for  blame.  But  conscience  owns  the  truth  that
theprophet's  word  implies.

Iv.  They  can  be  got  bid  of.  Men  are  called  upon  to  ''  wash  their  hearts  **  from
tlifim  and  to  expel  them.  It  is,  therefore,  plainly  within  men's  power  to  do  this.  The
words  of  these  exhortations  suggest  the  method.  1.  Turn  to  Christ,  in  trust  and
nrnyer,  especially  to  him  as  your  crucified  Lord.  Behold  the  fountain  of  his  blood.
Baeh  turning  to  CShrist  for  pardon  and  for  purity  will  "  wash  thine  heart  from  wicked-

v-  BflM."    2.  By  a  vigorous  act  of  the  will,  like  as  when  our  blessed  Lord  fomid  the  evil

MM  lodging  wrong  thoughts  in  his  mind,  he  gave  him  no  place,  but  sternly  bade  him
and  his  b^one.    And  this  was  ever  his  way.    It  must  be  ours.    3.  But  leave  not  the

^.  knrt  empty.    Bring  in  at  once  other  thonghts,  holy,  Christ-like,  that  demand  prompt,


E


CH.  IV.  1—31.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  95


vigorous,  and  continuous  work  for  Christ ;  so  shall  vain  thoughts  quit  their  hold  and
home  in  thy  heart,  and  lodge  there  no  more.

Y.  Thet  ABE  GRIEVOUS  IN  THE  BIGHT  OF  GrOD.  Note  the  pathos  and  pleading  of  the
appcsd.  "  0  Jerusalem,  .  .  .  How  long  ?  "  Men  take  cognizance  only  of  words  and
deeds,  and  are  content  if  these  be  in  keeping  with  the  laws  society  has  laid  down.  But
Qod  notes  the  thoughts  of  the  heart,  and  grieves  when  they  are  "  vain."  What  fervour
this  fact  should  lend  to  our  prayers  for  purity  of  heart,  that  its  thoughts  may  be  cleansed
by  the  inspiration  of  Ood's  Holy  Spirit  I

VI.  They  abe  buinodb  in  theib  effects.  (Cf.  vers.  15 — 17.)  They  lead  to  sin  and
that  to  death.  Are  we  conscious  that  such  thoughts  have  lodged  or  are  lodging  within
us?  Listen  to  the  Divine  appeal,  and  implore  his  grace  that  you  may  respond  thereto  as
he  would  desire. — C.

Ver.  27. — ^**  Yet  will  I  not  make  a  frdl  end."  Qod*%  reserve  of  mercy.  This  Divine
resolve  regarding  the  reserved  remnant  of  the  people  of  Judah  and  Jerusalem,  who  should
be  excepted  from  the  desolation  that  was  coming,  is  declared  several  times.  Here  in
the  text,  then  again  in  ch.  v.  10 ;  xxx.  11,  and  once  again  in  ch.  xlvi.  28.  And  these
are  but  the  echo  of  what  Qt>d  said  to  Israel  long  ages  before  in  the  desert  of
Sinai,  as  we  read  in  Lev.  xxvi.  44.  And  in  other  parts  of  Jeremiah's  prophecies,  and
in  iJie  writings  of  all  the  prophets,  this  Divine  resolve  to  mercifully  reserve  from
destruction  a  portion  of  Israel  is  more  or  less  plainly  declared.  Thus,  then,  God  does  not
conceal  that  the  end  he  makes  will  not  be  a  full  end.  And  there  were  many  reasons
why  this  fact  should  be  declared.  1.  It  would  show  that  GK>d  was  mindful  of  his
covenant  with  their  fathers ;  that  their  *'  unfaithfulness  could  not  make  the  faithfulness
of  Gkxl  of  none  effect."  The  scoff  of  the  unbeliever,  the  dismay  of  the  true-hearted,
would  be  alike  prevented,  for,  by  God's  not  making  a  full  end,  the  way  was  yet  plain
for  the  accomplishment  of  all  that  he  had  spoken.  2.  Moreover,  such  declaration
would  sustain  the  faith  of  the  faithful.  They  would  see  how  they  were  not  forgotten,
that  G^*s  watchful  care  was  over  them,  and  that  amid  the  coming  desolations  he
would  find  means  to  deliver  those  who  put  their  trust  in  him.  3.  And  the  keeping
open  of  this  door  of  hope  was  calculated  to  persuade  some  to  enter  through  that  door
and  so  be  saved.  This  is  why,  even  when  a  man  has  sinned  away  well-nigh  all  his
life,  when  he  has  made  an  end  of  nearly  every  opportunity  of  return  to  God,  we  go
and  stand  by  his  bedside,  dying  sinner  as  he  is,  and  tell  him  that  "  a  full  end  "  is  not
yet  made ;  even  now  Christ  waits  to  be  gracious,  and  will  in  no  wise  cast  out.  We
tell  of  this  hope  in  the  trust  that  now,  even  at  the  last,  the  guilty  one  may  turn  to
Christ  and  live.  But  we  know  that  an  **  end  "  was  indeed  made  to  the  national  life  of
IsraeL  The  terrific  judgments  which  came  upon  them,  and  which  the  prophet  in  this
chapter  so  vividly  describes  and  so  bitterly  bewails,  did  make  an  end  to  all  their
national  glory.  Their  land  became  desolate,  their  cities  were  destroyed,  the  holy  and
beautiful  house  of  God  was  burnt  with  fire,  their  kings  were  slain,  the  throne  over-
turned, the  whole  people  carried  into  captivity ;  their  cup  of  national  sorrow  was  full
to  overflowing.  But  God  did  not  suffer  the  agents  of  his  righteous  judgment  to  make
a/uA  end.  Accordingly,  in  the  days  of  Cyrus  and  his  successors  there  came  a  restora-
tion, although  partial,  poor,  and  incomplete,  and  under  Ezra  and  Nehemiah  Jerusalem
and  the  house  of  the  Lord  were  raised  from  their  ruins  and  rebuilt  A  remnant
of  the  people  was  saved,  the  full  end  was  not  allowed  to  come,  has  never  been
allowed  to  come,  though  Israel's  national  glory,  yea,  their  very  existence  as  a  nation,  has
long  since  passed  away.  But  whilst  the  oft-repeated  words  of  the  text  refer  mainly  to
Judah  and  Jerusalem,  they  really  declare  a  principle  of  the  Divine  procedure,  a  continual
law  of  his  government  and  rule.  God's  way  is,  when  making  an  end,  not  to  make  a  full
end.    He  has  ever  a  reserve  of  mercy.    Now,  concerning  this  principle,  we  observe—

I.  It  is  in  perpetual  opebation.  1.  It  finds  illustration,  yea,  may  be  said  to  be
ever  ruthlessly  at  work,  in  the  kingdom  of  nature.  Look  at  the  story  of  creation.
Whatever  may  have  been  the  material  condition  of  our  globe  prior  to  the  period  told
of  in  the  sacred  record,  we  cannot  conceive  of  it  as  having  been  eternally  '*  without
form  and  void."  The  researches  of  science  seem  to  give  a  very  difierent  account  from
that  But  whatever  may  have  been  its  condition,  and  we  can  hardly  doubt  that  it
had  an  order  and  beauty  of  its  own,  an  end  was  made  to  all  that  ere  the  last  creatioa


96  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  iv.  1--31.


era  dawned.  But  yet  not  a  full  end.  The  material  for  the  new  creation  was  there,
and  it  took  new  form  and  order  according  to  the  creative  word.  All  had  become  deso-
late, but  out  of  that  God  brought  forth  a  new  condition  of  things,  which  he  himself
declared  to  be  "  very  good."  And  what  is  this  doctrine  of  evolution^  concerning  which
in  these  days  we  hear  so  much — what  is  it  but  a  further  illustration  in  the  kingdom  of
nature  of  the  law  of  the  text?  **  The  survival  of  the  fittest" — what  does  that  imply
but  that  there  has  been  an  end  made  of  all  the  unfit  and  the  less  fit.  But  the  whole
order  has  not  perished ;  there  has  been  an  end,  but  not  a  full  end,  and  the  fittest  have
been  reserved.  2.  And  how  frequent  in  the  pages  of  history  are  the  illustrations  and
examples  of  this  principle  of  the  Divine  procedure  t  The  destruction  of  the  world  by
the  Flood, — that  was  an  end,  but  not  a  full  end,  for  Noah  and  his  house  were  saved.
Earlier  still,  when  God  drove  out  firom  Eden  the  parents  of  our  race, — what  an  end
was  then  made  of  all  that  was  bright  and  blessed  in  their  lives  1  but  stiU  not  a  full
end.  For,  as  St.  Paul  tells  us,  *'  the  creature  was  made  subject  to  vanity,  in  JiopeJ*
Hope,  the  hope,  of  redemption  and  restoration  through  the  promised  Seed  of  the  woman,
was  God's  illustration  of  this  law  then.  The  destruction  of  the  generation  of  Israel
that  came  up  out  of  Egypt  with  Moses,  and  whose  carcases  fell  in  the  wilderness ;
but  their  children  were  God's  reserve  of  mercy  in  their  case.  And  outside  the  pages  of
the  Bible,  thoughtful  students  of  history,  who  love  to  trace  the  hand  of  God  therein,
are  able  to  point  to  many  an  illustration  of  this  law.  Take  the  story  of  one  man— -
Alfred  the  Great:  he  and  the  little  Saxon  band  that  clave  to  him  were  God's  reserve  of
mercy  for  our  land  in  those  dark  days,  and  saved  us  from  coming  to  a  full  end,
though  we  had  come  so  near  to  it.  And  there  are  many,  many  more  to  which  we  cannot
now  allude.  And  io  the  history  of  the  Church  also  how  often  has  this  been  seen !  Take
the  call  of  Abraham,  for  example.  The  religion  of  the  ancient  patriarchs  had  all  but
died  out,  an  end  had  nearly  come.  But  by  the  Divine  call  of  Abraham  it  was  prevented
from  being  a  full  end ;  a  new  era  was  introduced  when  he  became  "  the  father  of  tho
faithful  and  the  friend  of  Otxi."  And  to  pass  over  all  intermediate  illustrations  of  this
same  law,  though  they  be  many,  and  some  of  them  most  notable,  we  may  refer  to  tho
revival  of  evangelical  religion  in  the  last  century.  An  end  had  come  to  well-ni<;h  all
earnest  religion ;  the  land  was  desolate  with  more  than  a  material  desolation.  There
was  "  a  famine,  not  of  bread,  but  of  the  hearing  of  the  Word  of  the  Lord."  But  God
suffered  it  not  to  be  a  full  end.  Wesley  and  his  trusty  band,  Whitefield  and  those  who
laboured  with  him,  became,  under  God,  the  means  of  a  new  departure,  the  introducers
of  a  better  order  of  thines  which  has  continued  to  this  day.  And  it  has  been  the
same  in  families.  Take  toe  prophetic  family  in  the  days  of  Samuel.  But  for  him  it
would  have  come  to  a  full  end.  Take  the  most  illustrious  instance  of  all, — the  house
and  lineage  of  David.  To  what  nearness  to  extinction  it  had  come  when  the  Saviour,
the  predicted  Stem  who  should  grow  out  of  the  root  of  Jesse,  was  bom  at  Bethlehem,
and  that  course  of  events  began  which  have  made  the  name  of  David,  great  before,  yet
infinitely  and  eternally  great  now  by  means  of  him  of  whom  it  was  foretold  by  the
angel  to  his  mother,  that  he  should  "  sit  upon  the  throne  of  his  father  David,"  and  of
whose  kingdom  David  himself  sang  that  it  "  should  have  no  end."  3.  And  what  are
many  of  God's  providential  dealings  with  men,  his  afflictive  dispensations  especially,
but  further  illustrations  of  this  same  law  ?  '*  Te  have  heard  of  the  patience  of  Job."
The  lives  of  Joseph,  of  David,  of  Elijah,  of  Daniel,  of  Paul,  and,  above  all,  of  our
Lord, — what  are  they  but  instances  in  which  '*  it  pleased  the  Lord  to  bruise  them,  and
to  put  them  to  grief"?  He  saw  fit  to  make  an  end  to  much  of  that  which  naturally
they  loved,  and  for  a  weary  while  to  cloud  over  and  conceal  well-nigh  all  the  brightness
of  their  lives.  But  in  no  case  was  there  a  full  end  made,  nor  ever  will  there  be.  To
many  of  us  the  Lord  God  comes  and  makes  an  end  of  what  we  would  so  much  like  to
guard  and  keep — health,  wealth,  friends,  prosperity,  our  inward  joys,  our  outward
gladness ;  God  sends  his  angel  of  discipline  and  bids  him  make  an  end — though  not  a
full  end — of  these  things.  Yes,  it  is  oftentimes  God*s  way.  4.  And  what  are  his
spiritual  disciplines  hnt  the  carrying  out  of  the  same  principle?  Do  we  not  read,
**  Then  Manasseh  knew  that  the  Lord  he  was  God  "  ?  of  the  prodigal,  that  "  he  came
to  himself,"  and  said,  "  I  will  arise  and  go  to  my  father,  and  say  unto  him.  Father,  I
have  sinned?"  of  Peter,  th'^t  "he  went  out  and  wept  bitterly  "?  Yes,  often  does  he
bring  down  our  hearts  so  that  we  cry  out,  "  Why  art  thou  cast  down,  0  my  soul  ?  "


CH.  IV.  1—31.]  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.         97


But  he  never  makes  a  full  end.  False  hope  and  trust  have  to  go,  but  trust  that  is
true,  hope  that  is  of  God,  come  under  the  law  of  his  reserve  of  mercy — they  are  the
spared  remnant,  and  whilst  an  end  is  made  of  all  the  rest,  these  survive.  5.  And  what
will  detUh  itself  he  but  our  last  experience  of  this  law  ?  Heart  and  flesh  shall  fail,  the
outward  man  shall  perish,  there  shall  be  an  end  made  of  all  that  belongs  to  this
world  so  far  as  we  are  concerned,  and  the  place  that  has  known  us  here  shall  know  us
no  more  for  ever.  But  whilst  it  will  be  an  end,  so  much  so  that  our  bodies  shall
return,  "  earth  to  earth,  dust  to  dust,  ashes  to  ashes,"  still  it  will  not  be  "  a  full  end."
We-^the  true  self — shall  still  remain  ;  though  the  body  go  back  to  its  earth,  '*  the  spirit
shall  return  unto  GK)d  who  gave  it"  Yes,  the  law  of  the  text  is  seen  everywhere.  It
is  a  principle  of  the  Divine  procedure  that  is  in  perpetual  operation ;  it  was  brought  to
bear  upon  Judah  and  Jerusalem  in  the  days  of  Jeremiah,  and  it  bears  upon  nations.
Churches,  families,  individuals,  men,  whenever  God  sees  that  the  time  has  come  for  its
application.    But—

II.   It  IS  A   PBINCIPLB   THAT    PB0MPT8    INQUIBT     AS    TO    ITS    REASON    AND    INTENT.

This  making  an  end,  even  though  it  bo  not  a  full  end,  has  much  about  it  that  may
well,  if  not  perplex,  yet  give  rise  to  earnest,  thoughtful  inquiry  on  the  part  of  him
who  observes  it.  Without  question,  it  is  often  a  severe  law,  a  principle  prolific  in  pain.
It  was  so  in  the  case  of  those  to  whom  Jeremiah  wrote.  **  The  righteous  scarcely  were
saved,"  but  "  the  ungodly  and  the  sinners,"  who  formed  the  vast  majority,  were  not
saved  at  all.  Yes,  though  God  made  not  a  full  end,  the  end  he  did  make  was  terrible
indeed.  Now,  we  know  it  is  not  possible  for  us  so  to  understand  all  the  ways  of  God  that
we  may  fully  rise  to—

**  The  height  of  this  high  argument,
And  justify  the  ways  of  God  to  men."

But  this  much  we  may  say:  the  surgeon's  knife  that  cuts  away  the  poisoned
flesh  in  order  to  save  life  is  a  severe  operation,  yet  one  that  even  he  who  writhes
beneath  it  will  consent  to  and  be  thankful  for.  The  burning  houses  that  cannot  be
saved  are  allowed  to  bum  on,  and  men's  efforts  are  all  turned  towards  the  saving  of
those  that  are  yet  untouched.  If  Israel  was  to  be  preserved  faithful  as  the  keeper  of
the  oracles  of  God — and,  humanly  speaking,  the  welfare  of  the  whole  world  depended
upon  her  fidelity  in  this  matter— then  the  cankered  'portion  of  her  people  must  be  cut
off,  that  the  rest,  yet  in  health,  might  continue  so.  "  Our  God  is  a  consuming  fire."
His  judgments  will,  must,  bum  on  until  all  that  is  rotten  and  unsound  has  perished
from  the  way.  The  dread  doom  of  the  world  to  come  is  described  by  a  word  that  tells
of  the  action  of  the  surgeon's  knife,  or  of  the  vine-dresser's  pruning  implements,  which
are  used  to  cut  away  that  which  is  evil  or  worthless,  that  that  which  is  healthful  may
be  preserved,  strengthened,  and  developed  according  to  the  will  of  God.  Yes,  it  is
dr^dful  when  God  comes  forth  to  make  an  end  of  wickedness  and  the  wicked ;  but  it
would  be  more  dreadful  still —  the  whole  history  of  mankind  attests  it — if  he  did  not.
But  it  is  a  work  from  which  he  shrinks.  '*  As  I  live,  saith  the  Lord  " — and  can  we
dare,  or  would  we  wish, to  disbelieve  him?-— "I  have  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  the
wicked ;  but  rather  that  he  should  tum  from  his  wickedness  and  live."  "  Why  will  ye
die,  0  ye  house  of  Israel  ?  "  And  we  may  say  more  than  this.  In  the  repetition  of  our
text,  which  we  have  in  the  tenth  verse  of  the  next  chapter,  we  see  another  purpose
designed  by  these  terrible  dealings  of  God  with  his  people.  They  were  gettino;  behind
"  battlements,"  trusting  in  defences  and  safeguards  which  were  of  no  avail ;  withdraw-
ing their  confidence  from  God,  who  had  never  failed  them,  to  place  it  in  those  professed
protectors  who  would  always  fail  them,  even  as  they  had  ever  done.  Hence  one  pur-
pose of  the  stem  process  through  which  Judah  and  Jerusalem  had  to  pass  was  the
taking  away  of  those  "  battlements  "  which  were  "  not  the  Lord's."  Their  looking  to  the
rulers  of  other  nations,  the  gods  of  other  nations,  or  to  such  poor  material  resources  as  they
could  themselves  supply,  was  fatal  to  that  reliance  on  the  Lord  God  which  had  been  their
distinguishing  feature  in  their  happiest  and  most  glorious  days.  But  it  was  essential  to
the  fulfilment  of  God's  purposes  in  regard  to  them  that  this  reliance  upon  God  should
by  any  means  be  restored.  Therefore  it  was  necessary  that  God  should  make  an  end  of
and  destroy  these  "  battlements,"  taking  them  utterly  away.  And  in  pursuance  of  this
same  main  design,  God  would  set  the  faithful  amongst  them  free  to  live  a  new,  a  happier,

JEBEMIAIL  H


98         THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,  [en.  iv.  1—31.

holier,  and  every  way  better  life.  For  they  were  hampered,  entangled,  ensnared,  thwarted,
and  hindered  at  every  turn  by  the  hideous  mass  of  moral  wreckage  by  which  they  wero
surrounded.    They  could  hardly  move  for  it.    There  must,  therefore,  be  a  clearance
made  if  God*s  people  were  to  enter  upon,  as  he  was  determined  that  they  should,  that  new,
that  better  life,  to  which  he  recommended  them,  and  after  which  they  yearned.     "  Now,
all  these  things  happened  unto  them  for  an  ensample,"  and  we  may  see  in  them,  if
we  will,  the  motive  and  intent  of  the  like  dealings  of  God  with  men  in  our  day.    Thou
troubled  child  of  God,  afflicted  very  much,  of  whose  earthly  comforts,  enjoyments,  and
possessions  God  has  been  pleased  to  make  so  large  an  end,  thou  seest  the  reason  why.
And  thou  whose  soul  he  has  brought  very  low,  taking  from  thee  all  thy  trust  and  con-
fidence, so  that  now  he  has  made  **  thy  very  spirit  poor,"  canst  thou  not  understand
wherefore  ho  hath  so  dealt  with  thee  ?   And  our  death,  whicli  makes  an  end  of  all  that
in  this  world  we  have  called  our  own,  it  too  finds  its  explanation  in  what  was  the
evident  purpose  of  God's  dealing  with  his  ancient  people.    It  was  and  it  is,  either  for
the  putting  away — if  even  by  a  terrible  process— of  the  evil  and  wrong  that  are  yet  in
men ;  or  for  the  destruction  of  every  false  confidence,  or  for  the  setting  the  soul  free —
as  his  disciplines  do,  and  as  at  last  his  messenger.  Death,  will  do — to  serve  him  in  new-
ness of  life  to  his  honour  and  glory,  and  to  our  own  eternal  joy.     But  in  what  has  now
been  advanced  we  have  only  spoken  of  the  reason  wherefore  God  makes  an  end  of  so
much,  why  he  comes  in  these  often  terrible  ways.     Wo  have  yet  to  ask,  "  Why  are  lue
spared?     Why  is  there  this  reserve  of  mercy  f    Why  is  not  a  full  end  made ?  "    And
looking  at  tho  history  of  God*s  ancient  people,  answers  to  these  questions  also  may
readily  be  found.    To  have  made  a  full  end  would  have  given  occasion  to  the  enemies
of  God  to  blaspheme.     We  remember  how  Moses  pleaded  tliis  argument  when  sore
wrath  had  gone  out  against  Israel,  and  it  seemed  as  if  a  full  end  was  to  be  made.    And
the  promise  of  God  to  Abraham  would  have  been  set  aside,  the  covenant  which  ho
made  with  their  fathers  in  the  days  of  old.    And  tho  language  which  we  find  in  tho
Scriptures,  the  language  of  intense  tenderness  and  love  towards  his  j>eople,  proves  that
to  have  made  a  full  end  would  have  broken  the  heart  of  God.    "  How  shall  I  give  thee
up  ?"    "I  have  written  thee  on  the  palms  of  my  hands."    "  Can  a  mother  forget  her
sucking  child,  that  she  should  not  have  compassion  on  the  son  of  her  womb  ?  Yea,  she
may  forget ;  yet  will  not  I  forget  thee."    In  view  of  such  love,  how  could  there  be  a
full  end  ?    And  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  rendered  such  condemnation  needless.     For
they  who  are  spared  when  God  judges  the  world,  are  spared  not  for  any  inherent
intrinsic  excellency  in  themselves,  but  they  are  they  who  have  believed  on  the  Name  of
God's  dear  Son.    Hence  they  have  the  righteousness  of  faith,  the  germ,  the  guarantee,
the  generator  of  all  righteousness ;  and  they  have  the  indwelling  of  the  Holy  Ghost  by
whom  they  shall  be  strengthened  to  live  in  newness  of  life.    All  the  possibilities  to  secure
which  God  makes  an  end  of  so  much  in  those  who  have  not  come  to  faith,  they  already
have,  and  hence  God  is  able,  even  as  he  is  willing,  to  except  them  from  the  destruction
that  comes  on  all  beside.    And  to  mention  but  one  other  reason  for  this  reserve  of
mercy — for  God  not  making  a  full  end ;  he  sees  in  these  spared  ones  those  by  whom
his  "  way  shall  be  made  known  upon  earth,  and  his  saving  health  among  all  nations."
They  are  to  be  the  instruments  of  his  grace,  his  channel  of  untold  blessing  to  all  man-
kind.   Therefore  doth  God  care  for  and  guard  them,  and  amid  all  destruction  no  evil  is
suffered  to  befall  them,  nor  any  plague  to  come  nigh  their  dwelling.

III.  And  now,  lastly,  we  note  that  this  principle  of  the  Divine  procedure  which  we
have  been  considering  is  one  which  we  must  all  of  us  be  prepared  to  have  applied
TO  ourselves.  Yes,  God  will  look  down  upon  us  all,  as  Churches,  families,  individuals,
and  will  mark  what  in  us  and  who  of  us  will  be  found  worthy  to  stand  in  the  great
day  when  he  separates  the  chaff  from  the  wheat.  Ah  1  this  is  the  great  question  which
concerns  us.  "  Where,  then,  shall  I  myself  be  ?  Shall  it  be  amongst  those  whom  God
must  put  away,  or  amongst  those  whom  he  shall  delightedly  spare  ?  "  What  question
can  compare  with  this?  But  the  material  for  its  answer  may  be  found  by  asking—
Where  are  we  now  ?  The  destroying  powers  of  the  world,  the  flesh,  and  tho  devil
are  abroad ;  they  are  slaying  their  thousands  and  their  tens  of  thousands.  But  are  they
destroying  us  ?  Or  are  we — as  God  grant  it  may  be — amongst  his  "  reserve  of  mercy  "  ?
Are  we  living  unto  God  ?  Can  we  look  up  to  our  Lord  and  Saviour  and  appeal  to  him
who  knowcth  all  thinj};s,  to  attest  the  love  and  trust  towards  him  that  abide  in  our


CH.IV.  1— 31.]  'THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROrHET  JEREMIAH.  99


heart  ?  Oh,  if  it  be  so,  and  the  life  of  prayer,  of  obedience,  of  self-surrender,  be  ours
now,  then  we  can,  with  humble  but  strong  confidence,  predict  that  when  the  last
destroyer  comes,  eyen  Death,  whilst  he  will  be  permitted  to  make  an  end  of  much  that
here  we  rejoice  in,  yet  he  shall  by  no  means  make  *'  a  full  end  '*  of  us.  No,  his  coming,
which  is  so  terrible  to  the  imbeliover,  shall  for  us  be  but  a  setting  us  free,  a  delivering
us  from  the  bondage  of  corruption"  into  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  children  of  God,**
so  that  our  soul  shall  escape  as  a  bird  from  out  the  snare  of  the  fowler,  and  we  hence«
forth  shall  "  live  unto  God."

**  Then  shall  the  day,  dear  Lord,  appear
That  we  shall  mount  and  dwell  above.
And  stand  and  bow  amongst  them  there,
And  see  thy  face  and  sing  thy  lore."

An  end,  a  full  end,  will  have  been  made  of  all  that  is  corruptible,  all  that  distresses,  all
that  defiles,  all  that  death  can  in  any  way  touch ;  but  it  shall  not  be  a  full  end  of  u«,
rather  shall  it  be  the  beginning  of  a  life  so  holy,  so  blessed,  that  all  the  past  shall  seem
to  have  been  no  life  at  all.  Look,  then,  at  the  two  companies  which  have  been
brought  before  us.  There  are  those  whom  God's  judgments  are  making  an  end  of,
and  there  are  those  whom  those  judgments  cannot  touch — God's  reserve  of  mercy.
Look  at  these  latter  again ;  they  are  clothed  in  white  robes,  and  they  have  palms  in  their
hands.  For  they  have  come  "  out  of  great  tribulation,  and  have  washed  their  robes,
and  made  them  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb.  Therefore  are  they  before  the  throne
of  God,  and  serve  him  day  and  night  in  his  temple.  .  .  .  They  hunger  no  more,  neither
thirst  any  more ;  neither  doth  the  sun  light  on  them,  nor  any  heat.  For  the  Lamb
which  is  in  the  midst  of  the  throne  shall  feed  them,  and  shall  lead  them  unto  living
fountains  of  waters :  and, God  shall  wipe  away  all  tears  from  their  eyes."  Therefore,  0
Lord,  make  us  to  he  numbered  with  thy  saints  now  and  in  glory  everlasting. — C.

Vers.  20,  30. — "  Suddenly  are  my  tents  spoiled."  "  When  thou  art  spoiled,  what
wilt  thou  do  ? "  A  surely  coming  confession  compelling  a  present  serious  question.
Note  the  historic  reference  of  the  words  to  the  people  to  whom  the  prophet  spoke.
Applying  them  in  more  general  sense,  let  us  observe —

I.  The  confession.  "  Suddenly,"  etc.  This  confession.  1.  Not  that  of  the  child
of  Qody  for  his  tents  cannot  be  spoiled.  (1)  The  peace  of  mind  which  he  enjoys.  That
rests  on  the  sure  basis  of  what  Christ  has  done  for  him.  The  varied  disturbing  powers
of  this  world  cannot  touch  that.  Nothing  can  separate  him  from  the  love  of  God
(Bom.  viii.  at  end).  (2)  The  righteousness  which  God  has  given  him.  That  springs
from  a  source,  and  is  sustained  by  a  power,  that  is  supernatural  and  therefore  beyond
the  power  of  this  world  to  give  or  take  away.  (3J  His  most  cherished  possessions.
True,  the  child  of  Grod  is  subject,  like  other  men,  ana  at  times  it  seems  more  than  other
men,  to  sudden  reverses  of  fortune,  to  loss,  bereavement,  and  the  other  manifold  sorrows
of  this  life.  But  though  he  cannot  but  lose  his  earthly  treasures,  and  deeply  feel  their
loss,  yet  all  the  while  his  true  treasure  remains  intact,  for  it  is  not  here,  but  yonder.
And  even  when  with  one  hand  God  takes  away  his  earthly  treasures,  with  the  other
he  so  graciously  ministers  support  and  consolation  that,  in  the  might  of  a  Divine
faith  and  love,  he  is  able  to  say,  "  The  Lord  gave,  and  the  Lord  hath  taken  away ;
blessed  be  the  Name  of  the  Lord."  (4)  His  life.  That  is  not  capable  of  being  spoiled.
If  he  is  called  upon  suddenly  to  lay  it  down,  or  to  give  it  up  amid  much  pain  and  dis-
tress, he  is  able  to  say,  as  dear  old  Richard  Baxter  did  when  he  lay  allying,  and  when
asked  by  a  friend  how  he  was,  "  Almost  well."  Yes,  the  nearer  death,  the  nearer  life  to
the  child  of  God.  It  is  a  blessed  exchange  for  him,  come  how,  come  when,  come  where
it  will.  Therefore  this  confession  cannot  be  his.  But,  as  it  was  in  the  days  of  Jere-
miah, it  is :  2.  ITie  confession  of  the  worldling  and  all  those  who  are  living  without  Ood,
For  their  tents  are  suddenly  spoiled.  (1)  The  peace  of  mind  in  which  they  often  seem
so  established.  To  our  eyes  they  appear  not  to  be  troubled,  neither  to  be  ])lagued  as
other  men  are  (cf.  Ps.  xxxvii.).  How  easy  and  unconcerned  they  are !  but  the  text  comes
true  to  them.  Remorse  may  suddenly  spoil  their  tents.  Like  "  Esau,  who  found  no
place  of  repentance,  though,"  etc.  The  events  of  Ood^s  providence  may  be  the  spoiler ;
carrying  off  their  riches,  striking  down  their  wealth,  turning  away  their  friends.  Every-


100  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [en.  iv.  1—31.


thing  may  eeem  to  be  slipping  away  from  them.  And  then,  oh  liow  true  our  text  is  of
them  then  I  And  the  approach  of  death,  with  the  "  fearful  looking  for  of  judgment."
And  should  none  of  these  have  succeeded  in  this  life  to  shatter  their  false  trust,  how
will  the  dread  solemnities  of  Ood*s  judgment  day  certainly  do  this!  See  the  conster-
nation of  those  on  the  left-hand  side  of  the  Judge,  who  asked,  "  When  saw  we  thee,"
etc.?  (2)  The  moral  rectitude,  the  credit  for  righteous  character,  on  which  they  have
stayed  their  souls.  This  too  may  be,  will  be,  suddenly  spoiled.  Sometimes  sudden
temptation  will  do  this.  Unguarded  by  any  Divine  power,  the  man's  weak  resolves
eive  way  under  unusual  pressure,  and  character  is  blasted  and  the  good  name  gone,  as
m  a  moment.  Transient  visions  of  the  Divine  holiness,  the  claims  and  requirements
of  God*s  Law  flashing  upon  him  as  did  the  lightnings  from  Mount  Sinai, — such  mani-
festations will  reveal  the  man  to  himself,  and  "  spoil "  his  self-complacency  for  ever.
The  light  of  eternity  must  do  this.  Tried  by  the  standard  God  has  given,  self-
righteousness  must  give  way.  (3)  His  external  prosperity  on  which  his  heart  was
fixed.  To  have  nothing  but  what  this  world  can  give,  and  to  have  that  suddenly  taken
away,  as  it  often  is,  as  at  death  it  all  must  be, — whose  should  this  confession  be  if  not
his  of  whom  we  are  speaking?  (4)  His  life  itself,  to  which  he  clung  so  tenaciously,
oh,  what  a  wrench  that  will  be  when  the  man  to  whom  this  life  was  all  is  by  the
hand  of  death  ruthlessly  torn  away  from  it !  And  oftentimes  this  is  sudden,  unlocked
for,  at  such  an  hour  as  he  thinks  not,  as  he  has  made  up  his  mind  that  it  will  not  come.
Like  him  to  whom  God  said,  "  Thou  fool ! "  These,  then,  are  they  from  whom  this  con-
fession— bitter  lamentation  and  wail  of  woe  rather  should  it  be  called — is  heard.  What
agony  of  heart  can  be  conceived  more  awful  than  that  of  the  worldling  and  the  god-
less, when  "  suddenly  their  tents  are  spoiled  "  ?  God  grant  it  may  not  be  ours.  Note —
n.  The  question,  "  What  wilt  thou  do,"  etc.  ?  Who  can  tell  what  the  delirium  of
dismay  and  despair  will  drive  a  man  to  under  such  circumstances?  See  Judas  the
traitor.  Suddenly  his  tent — the  hope  of  his  gains — was  "  spoiled,"  and  we  know  what,
in  the  remorse  and  despair  which  fastened  upon  him,  he  did.  But  some  will  harden
themselves  still  more.  Others  will  plunge  into  business,  pleasure,  sin,  and  there  seek
to  drown  the  tortures  of  the  mind.  It  is  impossible  to  forecast  what  one  and  another
will  do,  and  least  of  all  can  they  tell  themselves.  But  it  is  Ood  who  asks  this  ques-
tion, and  that  with  the  gracious  intent  that  we  should  turn  to  him  for  the  answer.  Let
us  do  so.  Perhaps  yoiur  tents  are  spoiled  already.  Before,  therefore,  you  say  what
you  will  do,  ask  of  Gt)d  what  thou  shouldest  do.  1.  Is  it  thy  inward  peace,  the  calm
and  unconcern  of  thy  life,  that  is  spoiled  ?  Then  "  acquaint  thyself  with  God,  and  be  at
peace."  2.  Is  it  thine  estimate  of  thine  own  righteousness  ?  Do  not  seek  to  mend  or
patch  it  up  in  any  way  (cf.  Phil.  iii.).  Seek  from  Christ  the  righteousness  that  is  of  faith.
3.  Is  it  thine  earthly  prosperity  that  is  shattered?  '*  Set  your  affections  on  things  above,
and  not  on  things  on  the  earth."  Have  your  treasure  for  the  future  in  heaven.  There,
**  where  neither  moth  nor  rust,"  etc.  4.  Is  it  thy  very  life  that  is  being  taken  from  thee  ?
Oh|  wait  not  until  this  tent  is  actually  spoiled.

**  To  Jesus  do  thou  fly,
Swift  us  the  morning  light,
Lest  life's  young  golden  beams  should  die,
In  sudden  endless  night."

HI.  The  obdeb  in  which  this  confession  and  question  are  placed.  The
question  is  asked  he/ore  the  spoiling  takes  place.  Like  as  it  is  asked,  "  How  shall  we
escape  if  we  ^neglect  so  great  salvation  ?  "  The  intent  is  that  we  should,  by  turning
to  God  and  coming  within  his  sure  defence,  escape  that  spoiling  of  our  tents  which
must  come  on  all  not  within  that  defence.  And  so  in  the  other  question,  which  is  like
unto  it,  the  intent  manifestly  is  that  we  should  not  neglect  so  great  salvation.  Then
let  this  good  will  of  the  Lord  be  done.  Come  over  amongst  those  whose  tents  cannot  be
spoiled,  and  away  from  those  upon  whom  the  spoilers  shall  fiEdl  certainly,  suddenly,  and
soon.— -C.

Vers.  19—30.—"  ThefeHomhip  of  Chrisfs  sufferings/*    The  extreme  anguish  of  ihe

Srophet  which  is  revealed  in  these  verses  justifies  the  afiirmation  that,  l^e  St.  Paul,
eremiah  also  knew  *Uhe  fellowship  of  Christ's  sufferings."    Consider—


CH.IV.  1— 31.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  101


I.  Theib  nature.  1.  The  sight  of  the  constant  dishonour  done  to  God.  This  wm
part  of  our  Lord's  suffering.  Living  amongst  men  at  all  involved  it.  It  has  heen  sud
truly  that,  if  the  h^n  of  God  became  incarnate,  he  must  be  a  "  man  of  sorrows."  But  if
it  be  a  pain  and  outrage  to  an  affectionate  son  to  hear  his  father,  whom  he  knows  to  be
worthy  of  all  honour,  yet  nevertheless  insulted,  and  to  see  him  daily  dishonoured,
what  must  have  been  the  sufferings  of  our  Lord  at  what  he  daily  had  to  see  and  hear !
And  to  Jeremiah  this  was  one  chief  part  of  his  sorrow.  To  him  the  Name  of  God  was
dear ;  his  honour  and  glory  precious ;  but  let  these  chapters  tell  what  scenes  continu-
ally came  before  him.  '*  Rivers  of  water  run  down  mine  eyes  because  men  keep  not
thy  Law."  Dishonour  done  to  God  has  ever  been  distress  and  pain  to  his  servants.  2.
The  endurance  of  the  scorn  and  hate  of  men.  To  some  men  this  is  nothing.  They
answer  scorn  by  scorn  and  hate  by  hate.  They  choose  war  rather  than  peace.  But
in  proportion  as  a  man  is  of  a  loving  disposition,  and  has  lavished  his  love  upon
any,  he  will  desire,  yea,  yearn  for,  a  response.  Do  not  parents  desire  it  in  their  chil-
dren ?  Would  they  not  be  distressed  indeed  if  they  did  not  receive  it  ?  And  so  with
our  Lord.  He  had  no  armour  of  indifference,  or  contempt,  or  hate  against  men.  But
he  opened  his  heart  to  them.  There  was  no  stint  in  the  lova  he  lavished  upon  them.
Hence  he  could  not  but  long  to  receive  a  response  to  that  love.  The  cross  itself  was
wreathed  with  attractiveness  for  him,  because  it,  though  nothing  else  would,  would  draw
all  men  unto  him.  And  in  the  fellowship  of  this  suffering  Jeremiah  shared.  He,  though
deeply  loving  his  people  and  faithfully  serving  them,  yet  was  denied  the  response  of
trust  and  love  which  he  would  fain  have  gfdned.  He,  too,  "  was  despised  and  rejected
of  men."  3.  The  realizing,  by  the  power  of  affectionate  sympathy,  the  awful  conse-
quences of  his  countrymen's  sin.  It  is  the  effect  of  such  sympathy  to  cause  the
sufferings  of  those  we  love  to  come  before  us  in  such  terrible  vividness  that  they  fill
the  soul  with  an  anguish  that  is  almost  intolerable.  Hence  our  Lord's  deep  distress
(of. ''  0  Jerusalem,  Jerusalem  ! "  etc.  and  his  lament  over  the  doomed  city  and  people).
But  in  this  suffering  of  our  Lord  Jeremiah  had  indeed  fellowship  (cf.  vers.  23 — 30.)
He  saw  the  destruction  that  was  coming  on  Judah  and  Jerusalem  in  its  entireness.
"  The  whole  land  is  spoiled ; "  "  The  whole  land  shall  be  desolate."  In  its  suddennesB,
*'  Suddenly  are," etc.  (ver.  20).  In  its  duration,  Ver.  21,  "How  long  shall  I  see  the
standard  ?  "  etc.  It  could  not  be  a  passing  storm,  but  an  abiding  wrath.  And  more  still,
he  sees  how  deserved  it  all  was  (vers.  18,  22).  And  then  how  awful  t  It  was  as  if
original  chaos  had  come  again  (ver.  23 ;  cf.  Gren.  i.).  It  was  as  the  dread  and  never-to-
be-forgotten  manifestation  of  God  at  Sinai,  when  the  mountains  trembled  and  all  who
beheld  were  stricken  with  fear  (ver.  24).  For  the  devastation  caused  by  the  "  spoilers  "
had  been  so  thorough,  they  had  done  their  work  in  such  fearful  fashion,  that  districts
heretofore  teeming  with  population  were  now  solitary  and  lone  as  the  desert ;  and  so
stripped  were  they  of  all  that  could  minister  to  Hfe,  that  the  very  birds  had  fled  away
(vers.  25,  26).  The  awful  spectacle  was  clearly  visible  to  the  prophet's  eye,  and,  as  ho
looked  upon  it  all  and  knew  how  certain  was  its  advent,  he  cries  out  as  in  the  agony  of
dread  bodily  pain  (ver.  19).  4.  The  witnessing  day  by  day  the  decay  of  all  goodness  and
the  firmer  hold  of  sin.  Our  blessed  Lord's  tears  over  Jerusalem,  his  oft  '*  sighing,"  his
agony,  his  long  lament  over  the  guilty  people,  were  not  caused  only,  nor  chiefly,  by
the  mere  fact  of  their  sufferings,  but  it  was  because  of  the  increasing  alienation  from
God,  the  ever-hardening  heart,  the  mighty  power  of  sin  upon  them,  that  his  bitterest
tears  were  shed  and  his  deepest  agony  endured.  And  so  with  Jeremiah.  Pain  and
distress  were  evils  undoubtedly,  but  they  were  as  nought  compared  with  the  moral
degradation,  the  spiritual  wickedness,  which  he  saw  around  him  and  increasing  every
day.  5.  The  being  compelled  to  utter  the  "  amen  "  of  his  soul  to  the  judgment  of  God
as  "  true  and  righteous  altogether."  With  what  agony  would  a  father  witness  the
accumulation  of  proof  upon  proof  that  his  son  whom  he  loved  had  been  guilty  of
crime  that  deserved  and  must  receive  condign  punishment  I  To  be  obliged  to  own  to
himself  that  his  beloved  son  is  righteously  condemned — what  sorrow  that !  And  this
confession  our  Lord  made.  His  death  meant  this — bis  assent  to  the  judgment  of  God
against  sin  that  that  judgment  was  just.  Death  was  the  penalty,  and  he  submitted  to
it.  And  never  has  death  been,  nor  can  it  be  to  any  child  of  God,  what  it  was  to  our
Lord.  The  realization  of  sin,  the  consciousness  that  on  him  was  the  iniquity  of  us  all,
and  how  awful  but  how  just  was  the  wrath  of  God  ogainst  it, — this  explains  that


J


103  TUE   IJO(.>K  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [en.  it.  1—31.

fJii't'tiiius  liilltT  cry  from  out  the  diirkuess,  "  ily  Gml,  my  Goii,  wliy  li.ist  thou  fursakcn
niu?"  AjiJ,  in  lus  mcaaurc  and  dcj^rcr,  Jcrcniiali  hnd  (he  fullo»'ii)ii|)  of  Ihia  BiiiTuring
altK'.  It  it  the  eorrow  of  sorrows  to  bim  tliat  tlicro  was  no  alteroatiTe;  Ood  mutt
vunish  Bin  liko  that  of  his  countrymen.  How  glad  would  he  have  been  could  bo
noTe  sten  nny — however  little — light  in  tho  darkness !  J5ut  it  was  (ill  dark ;  there  was
nut  B  Bolitiiry  redeoniing  ray.  The  condemnation  was  awful,  but  Goil  wna  just  who
judged  BO.

II.  TiiE  usivEBSALiTTOF  Tuis  FELLOwunii'.  Liku  as  in  every  loaf  of  tho  treo  the
wholu  fabric  of  tho  tree  is  lourlraycd,  root  and  trunk,  branch  and  foliage,  so  in  the
cxix'rience  of  ovory  member  of  Christ's  mystical  body,  however  humble  that  member
may  be,  there  ia  hhown  tho  resemblance  of  Christ  hitnsclf.  Sec  Abraham  lotcrccding
for  Sodom,  SIoscs  fur  Israel,  Samuel  mourning  for  Saul ;  Elijah's  ministry  and  that  of
all  the  prophets,  Paul's  and  that  of  all  thu  apostles,  and  wlicro  there  are  any  who  havo
"  tho  mind  that  was  in  Chrisf  Jcitus,"  who  tiro  tilled  with  Ioto  In  God  and  love  to  man,
to  wlioni  sin  is  hateful  aud  holinefia  dear.  It  will  be  a  measure  and  a  test  of  our  own
possession  of  tho  mind  of  Christ  if  those  sad  facta,  which  were  the  source  to  him  and  to
all  his  tnio-hcartcd  servants  of  such  great  sorrow,  are  likewise  sources  of  sorrow  to  us
and  make  us  know  the  fellowship  of  his  sulTcriDg!!.

HI.  Its  KXCEEUiKa  slessedi<kes.  It  may  seem  an  anomaly  and  (»mtradictton  to
epeak  of  "  blessedness  "  as  appertaining  to  "  suffering,"  but  it  is  nevertheless  true  that
c;(Cccdin«  hleKsolness  does  U'long  (o  the  fellowship  of  ChriEt's  sufTt-ringa.  For:  1.  It
wins  for  us  tliu  ministries  that  [sustained  our  I«rd.  These  were  such  as  tho  full  enjoy-
ment of  the  luvc  of  God,  uninti'rrupted  cominnniun  and  intercourse  witli  him,  the
open  vision  of  the  "joy  set  before  him"  In  tho  winning  back  of  tiio  world  to  God, —
Bueh  were  the  siipixirts  of  Christ's  ministry,  and  tbo  lite  has  been  given  to  all  who
have  entered  into  his  sulk-riugs.  See  the  liright  onlook  of  Jeremiah  (cf.  ch.  iii.  13 — 18
■nd  11)  and  uf  all  the  prophetts ;  of  St.  Paul  and  all  the  apostles.  And  sco,  too,  their
Joy  in  Goii,  the  rust  of  tlieir  hearts  in  hia  love.  Such  have  been  and  such  will  bo  the
supports  of  such  souls.  2.  It  fortiGcs  us  impregnably  against  all  the  power  of  tho
wieked  one.  Satan  will  not  waste  his  limo  and  energy  on  those  who  ore  within  the
sure  defence  of  this  holy  fellowship.  His  darts  cannot  reach  where  they  stand,  or,  if
they  reach  and  strike,  they  cannot  jwnetrato  the  "armour  of  God"  in  which  they  aro
clad.  Sitthasnocbarni,  but  rcjicU;  holiness  attracts  with  a  magnetic  might  "They
are  bom  of  God,  and  the  wicked  one  toucheth  them  not."  d.  It  gives  tremendous
power  over  the  hearts  of  moo.  What  is  the  great  need  of  our  day  but  this,  a  ministry
that  has  entered  into  this  fellowship?  one  penetrated  with  tho  love  of  God  and  the
love  of  men,  to  whom  the  favour  of  God  is  life,  and  the  iudgmcnta  of  God  the  un-
unspealiable  woo  of  the  soul?  How  would  such  men  speak  and  pray  and  plead?  It
was  the  secret  of  St.  Paul's  power,  and  of  the  great  ministers  for  Christ  in  all  ages.
It  won  all  the  triumphs  of  the  early  Church,  it  was  manifest  in  Bernard,  Francis,
Wesley,  Whitefield,  and  many  more.  Jlen  cannot  resist  the  power  with  which  such
speak.  It  constitutes  those  who  have  cntercil  into  it  God's  true  priests.  They  have
power  when  they  plead  with  God  for  men,  and  when  they  plead  with  men  for  God.
Such  is  another  eloinoiit  of  the  escecdiug  blessedness  of  this  fellowship  of  Christ's
Buflcrings.

IV.  Its  aloke  entiiasck.  This  entranee  ia  by  fellowship  with  Christ  in  our  daily
life.  Let  us  look  much  upon  him  as  he  is  shown  to  us  in  hia  gospel  an.l  in  tho
Bcriptures  generally,  and  as  wo  see  his  likeness  reproduced  in  the  lives  of  the  truest
of  his  peopie.  Lot  there  be  much  looking  to  him  in  the  exercise  of  daily  trust,
committing  and  commending  our  whole  interests  to  bis  care.  Let  there  bo  much
CffflTOTH  mth  him  In  derout  meditation,  worship,  and  prayer.  Let  there  bo  much
■errios  done  for  hitn  In  bU  such  ways  as  ho  points  out  for  ua,  and  the  result  will  be
tint  m  ihall  coma  m  to  les,  hew,  touch  him,  so  to  realize  his  living  presence,  and
then  KO  to  love  Lim,  that  all  thit  tSecta  him  will  affect  us.  Wo  shall  have  fellovrship
111  it  all,  aud,  therefore,  in  this  hUowahip  of  hia  sufferings  in  which  all  his  cbosea  have
■horcdv— G,

Viir«.  3<^  Sl-f—SrolKii  rerAt,  ooneeniing  whidi  noto—

L  WniT  I'nxx  Aae.     They  tn  tlu  fiinids  that  are  kept  simply  by  either:  1


en.  IV.  1—31.]    THE  BOOK   OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  103

Wealth.  "  Though  thou  clothest  thyself  with  crimson  "  (ver.  30).  The  garb  of  tho
rich,  tellinp'how  Jerusalem  had  won  some  of  her  professed  friends.  2.  Splendour,
"  Deckcst  thee  with  ornaments  of  gold."  Jerusalem  could  make  a  grand  show,  put  on
much  pomp  by  which  the  eyes  of  men  were  dazzled  and  deceived.  And  outward  show
will  deceive  many  men.  But  those  thus  attracted  know  how,  when  the  splendour  pales
and  the  outward  show  can  no  more  be  kept  up,  to  fall  away  and  show  what  "  broken
reeds  "  they  are.  3.  External  beauty.  The  "  painting  "  spoken  of  was  an  Oriental  device
to  increase  the  beauty  of  the  countenance.  But  weak  indeed  is  the  hold  which  mere
outward  beauty  can  have  on  any  who  have  been  attracted  by  it.  It  fades,  and  they
along  with  it.

II.  Theib  appabent  trustworthiness.  Had  there  never  been  anything  at  all  like
helpfulness  in  them,  no  reliance  could  have  been  placed  upon  them.  But  the  lures
which  drew  them  had  power  enough  to  make  them  profess  much  and  then  to  practise
somewhat.    Hence  they  seemed  to  be  real  friends.

III.  Their  true  character.  When  they  can  no  longer  gain  aught  by  her  who
believed  in  them,  they  turn  round  upon  her  and  "  seek  her  life*'  (ver.  30).  It  was  so
with  Jerusalem,  it  will  be  so  with  such  as  are  like  her.  And  yet  men  go  on  seeking
after  these  outward  things  which  can  win  for  them  only  friends  of  this  wretched  sort,
whilst  those  inward  qualities  which  have  no  charm  for  such,  but  have  all  charm  for  the
worthy  and  the  good,  are  little  valued  and  therefore  little  cultivated.

IV.  The  dread  increase  of  sorrow  they  are  the  cause  of.  A  more  appal-
ling picture  of  utter  agony  and  distress  of  soul  cannot  be  imagined  than  that  pven  in
ver.  31.  It  is  said  that  when  Cajsar  saw  Brutus  amid  his  assassins,  he  covered  Ijis  face
with  his  mantle  and  let  his  murderers  do  their  worst.  No  stab  could  be  so  deadly  as
the  discoverv  that  his  trusted  friend  had  become  his  murderer.  "  Et  tu,  Brute  1 "  And  '
part  of  the  deep  sorrow  of  our  Lord  was  that  Judas,  "  his  own  familiar  friend,**  should
betray  him.  If,  then,  to  the  stainless  soul  tho  discovery  of  such  treachery  can  cause
such  sorrow,  how  must  the  sorrow  of  those  who,  in  addition  to  this,  have  the  memory  of
their  own  sin,  be  deeper  and  more  dreadful  still  ?

V.  The  way  of  wisdom,  which  knowledge  of  them  points  to.  Surely  it  is
this — to  turn  from  all  such  " broken  reeds"  to  "the  rod  and  the  staff"  which  Christ
furnishes  for  all  his  pilgrims.

"  One  there  is  above  all  others,
Well  deserves  tho  name  of  Friend,"  etc.

0.

Ver.  31. — "  There  shall  he  weeping.*^  Tho  text  is  a  solemn  and  awful  declaration  of  tho
retribution  of  God  upon  impenitent  men.

I.  No  truth  more  doubted  or  denied  than  this.  Lot  was  "  to  his  sons  in  law
as  one  that  mocked."  And  so  it  is  still ;  this  truth  scarce  gains  any  hearing  and  yet
less  belief.  Beasons  of  this  are:  the  prevalent  scepticism  as  to  all  religious  belief;
the  special  dislike  to  such  a  subject  as  this ;  false  views  as  to  the  love  of  God ;  tho
busy  energy  of  tho  evil  one,  who  will  not  suffer  men  to  consider  and  ponder  this
truth.

n.  But  it  is  nevertheless  the  truth  of  God.  Scripture  is  full,  plain,  and
earnest  in  the  matter.  Tho  premonitions  of  conscience  endorse  tho  Word  of  God.  The
course  of  observed  events  lends  its  strong  testimony.  The  common  consent  of
the  wisest  and  best  of  men  confirms  it.  The  analogy  of  all  human  government
supports  it

III.  And  demands  therefore  to  be  made  known.  Compassion  would  prompt  to
its  proclamation.  Tho  severe  displeasure  of  God  against  the  watchman  who  neglects
to  warn  the  people  urges  this.  The  example  of  our  Lord,  who  ever  insisted  on  it.  Its
manifest  fitness  to  arouse  and  arrest  tho  sinner.  Beware,  therefore,  of  yielding  to  the
temptation  to  be  silent  on  this  theme.

Iv.  But  to  be  preached  only  by  such  as  believe  and  feel  its  truth.
Unbelieving  or  unfeeling  setting  forth  of  these  awful  verities  will  but  steel  tho  heart
of  the  ungodly  against  them.  But  in  tho  spirit  of  Jeremiah,  and  yet  more  in  the
spirit  of  our  Lord,  let  men  be  warned  that  for  the  impenitent  there  rcmaineth  the  dread
retribution  of  God,


lOi  THE   BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.    [cH.iv.  1— 31.

Ver.  1. — The  kind  of  return  which  Jehovah  requires.  In  ch.  iii.  there  has  been  much
spoken  concerning  return.  There  is  the  impossibility  pointed  out  of  a  divorced  wife
returning  to  her  husband ;  yet  Jehovah's  own  people,  whose  conduct  has  been  even
worse,  ho  presses  to  return.  The  fact  is  mentionea  that  Israel  had  been  told  to  turn,
yet  had  not  turned.  There  is  also  the  fact  that  Judah  had  made  a  feigned  turning.  A
true  return  is  seen  to  be  the  prime  condition  of  all  the  glorious  future  which  Qoa  had
shadowed  forth,  first  for  Israel,  and  then  for  all  nations.  And  then  the  chapter  con-
cludes with  a  touching  outburst  of  penitential  emotion.  From  all  which  it  will  bo
clearly  seen  how  timely  and  needful  is  the  exhortation  which  introduces  ch.  iv.  Return
of  a  certain  kind  is,  after  all,  not  so  difficult,  if  only  there  be  certain  conspiring  circum-
stances. The  most  undemonstrative  and  unlikely  man  may  have  his  feelings  roused
up,  and  then  comes  decided  utterance.  Right  words  are  spoken,  right  purposes
declared.  But  what  of  the  carrying  of  them  out  ?  What  about  the  difficulties  in  tho
future — the  fightings  without  and  the  fears  within?  The  return  which  God  desires  is
a  permanent  return,  just  as  when,  after  a  long  frost,  there  comes  a  complete  thaw,  and,
with  genial  warmth  following,  renewed  life,  growth,  and  fruitfulness.

I.  Observe  how  God  becoonizes  the  instability  op  the  apostate  people.  It  is
not  simply  that  he  apprehends  instability  in  their  resolutions  towards  himself.  Their
very  apostasy  is  itself  an  unstable  thing.  With  all  the  hold  which  idolatry  seems  to
have  upon  them,  they  are  not  thoroughly  fixed  in  it.  Evidently  there  are  ways
of  appealing  to  them  which  draw  forth  a  resolve  to  make  some  sort  of  turning.  Never
should  we  forget  that  sinners,  even  the  most  persistent  of  them,  are  unstable  in  their
ways.  Instability  there  of  course  is  from  the  common  fluctuations  of  life ;  but,  more
than  that,  the  very  purposes  of  the  sinner  are  more  unstable  than  he  thinks.  A  thick-
skinned  conscience  is  olten  more  in  appearance  than  in  reality ;  the  penetrable  point
has  not  been  discovered — that  is  all.  Even  when  to  all  outward  appearance  a  man
seems  quite  contented  with  the  life  which  others  condemn,  he  may  have  very  trying
ZiaXoyifffiol  within  him.  Hence  the  strange  anomaly  sometimes  presented  of  wicked
men  doing  deeds  of  helpfulness  to  others.  Gamblers,  out  of  their  unrighteous  gains,
are  known  to  indulge  in  most  eccentric  acts  of  beneficence.  After  all,  the  powers  of  evil
have  a  most  uncertain  tenure  over  those  who  may  seem  most  their  slaves.

IL  The  only  turning  from -evil  which  can  be  complete  and  profitable  is  the
TUBNiNQ  TOWARDS  GoD.  Not  only  from  sin,  but  towards  God.  That  is  the  only  way
of  keeping  clear  both  of  Scylla  and  Charybciis.  To  turn  from  a  life  that  is  self-con-
demnea,  by  trying  to  make  another  path  of  one's  own,  may  seem  to  be  successful  for  a
while,  but  in  truth  it  is  only  travelling  in  a  circle.  The  man  whose  springs  of  know-
ledge and  strength  are  in  himself,  or  in  the  counsels  of  men,  will  come  back  to  where
ho  started.  Think,  for  instance,  of  those  drunkards  who  have  taken  pledges  of  total
abstinence,  and  set  their  feet  towards  a  manlier  and  purer  life,  only  to  find  very  soon
that  appetite  and  habit  are  not  so  easily  mastered.  At  last,  after  many  failures,  a  per-
manent keeping  comes.  There  is  a  struggle,  crowned  with  victory,  because  the  soul,
having  lost  all  its  self-confidence,  has  really  turned  to  God,  The  departure  into  sin  is
from  Qodf  and  to  him  must  be  the  only  satisfactory  return.

III.  The  forsaking  of  sin  must  be  a  complete  forsaking.  Into  this  demand  for
completeness  there  must  be  put  the  utmost  significance  of  the  word.  God's  people
might  visit  all  the  high  places  in  turn,  and  laboriously  erase  every  outward  vestige  of
idolatry.  On  everything  like  an  approach  to  idolatry  tho  most  rigorous  penalties
might  be  imposed.  There  might  bo  a  domiciliary  visitation,  and  a  ransacking  of  every
house  from  garret  to  basement,  lest  there  should  be  anything  hidden  away,  such  as
Laban's  seraphim  which  Rachel  stole.*  But  what  of  all  such  exertions  ?  They  could
only  end  in  the  taking  of  abominations  out  of  the  sight  of  man.  The  essential  thing
was  to  take  them  out  of  the  sight  of  God,  The  high  places  and  groves  in  every  heart
must  be  purged  of  their  idolatries.  Here  the  edicts  of  a  king  and  the  vigilance  of
reforming  enthusiasts  were  of  no  avail.  By  tho  very  necessity  of  the  case,  the  putting
away  must  be  an  individual  act.  Forth  from  the  heart  proceed  the  outward  visible
abominations,  and  the  only  way  of  stopping  the  procession  was  by  a  thorough  cleansing
of  the  source  whence  it  came.  JSuch  prayers  are  wanted  as  for  the  creating  of  a  clean
heart,  and  the  setting  of  one's  secret  sins  in  the  light  of  God's  countenance.  The
heart,  deceitful  and  desperately  wicked,  only  God  can  know,  and  only  God  can


CE.  IV.  1—31.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PHOPHET  JEREMIAH.  105


cleanse.  He  himself  must  be  besought  to  direct  affectioiis,  purposes,  imasinationSy
towards  things  pure,  holy,  and  Divine.  Remember,  then,  that  a  thing  may  pe  out  of
man's  sight  and  yet  right  over  against  the  eyes  of  Qod.  Even  that  which  may  not
at  present  disturb  your  conscience  may  yet  be  very  offensive  to  him.  Thus  it  will  be
seen  that  a  real  turning  to  (rod  is  very  difficult  and  needs  much  submission  and
humility.  One  has  to  walk  very  circumspectly.  Wavering  is  one  of  the  greatest
perils,  and  may  very  soon  be  fatal.  He  who  wavers,  vacillates,  and  turns  to  look
round  to  the  things  that  are  lefl,  loses  the  direction ;  and  that  direction,  once  lost,  who
knows  how  much  else  may  be  lost  before  it  can  be  recovered? — T.

Yer.  2.-*JeAovaA's  requirement  with  reaped  to  the  oath.  Jehovah  has  just  told  his
people  that,  with  imwavering  resolve,  they  must  put  their  abominations  out  of  his
sight.  This  exhortation,  general  as  it  is,  is  very  emphatic ;  but  it  chiefly  serves  to
lead  on  to  something  more  explicit.  Jehovah  singles  out  one  peculiar  abomination,  and
fixes  the  attention  of  his  people  on  that.  The  truth  is,  if  they  sweep  this  abomination
away,  all  is  done  that  needs  to  be  done.  These  abominations,  so  odious  to  the  pure
eyes  of  Jehovah,  were  bound  together  in  a  kind  of  organic  unity.  The  infliction  of  a
fatal  blow  on  any  one  of  them  inevitably  brought  death  and  withering  on  the  others.
Just  as  he  who  stops  the  action  of  one  of  the  vital  organs  of  the  body  stops  the  action  of
them  all.    Look,  then —

L  At  what  Jehovah  bequibes  with  heoaud  to  the  oath.  There  were  many
solemn  appeals  that  had  in  them  the  nature  of  an  oath.  God  at  once  directs  attention
to  the  most  solemn  of  all,  the  appeal  to  himself  by  his  own  peculiar  Name  and  his  own
enduring  existence.  The  passages  are  too  numerous  to  mention  in  which  there  Is
record  of  people  saying,  **  As  jSiovah  liveth."  Now  and  then,  no  doubt,  the  words
were  spoken  with  solemnity  and  sincerity,  and  also  with  a  steady  remembrance  after-
wards of  the  holy  Name  which  had  thus  come  to  the  lips.  But  in  the  great  bulk  of
instances  it  was  only  an  idle  word.  A  man  gets  excited,  and  then  the  most  solemn
words  rush  from  his  mouth,  with  no  thought  of  the  meaning  they  express.  Or,  worse
still,  there  may  be  the  deliberate  attempt  to  consecrate  a  falsity,  and  get  it  received  for
undoubted  truth,  so  that  others  may  act  from  it  and  rest  upon  it  with  the  utmost  con-
fidence. Now,  to  the  removal  of  all  this  false  swearing,  (rod  would  have  his  people
earnestly  to  apply  themselves.  Note  that  God  does  not  say  here  what  Jesus  afterwards
said,  "  Swear  not  at  all.**  The  time  was  not  ripe  for  such  an  exhortation.  The  words
of  Jesus  aim  directly  at  that  ideal  state  when  every  man  shall  speak  truth  as  natmally
as  he  breathes  pure  air ;  when  it  shall  be  as  impossible  for  him  to  speak  or  even  think
the  false  as  to  uve  amid  carbonic  acid  gas.  One  may  say  that  even  here,  in  this  word
through  Jeremiah,  there  is  nothing  to  bind  the  hearer  to  an  oath.  The  injunction
has  a  permissive  element.  A  man  needs  not  to  say,  **  Jehovah  livcth ; "  but  if  he
does  say  so,  let  him  bear  in  mind  all  that  the  expression  involves.  It  is  the  most
solemn  way  of  securing  that  all  speaking  and  actine  shall  be  true  and  sincere ;  that  all
judgments  shall  be  according  to  proven  facts  and  Jehovah's  declared  principles  of
justice ;  and  that  all  life,  in  short,  should  be  pervaded  and  filled  with  energy  by  a  spirit
of  righteousness.  To  begin  with,  what  an  abomination  it  was  to  say,  '*  As  Jehovah
livetb,"  when  the  practice  showed  that  whatever  true  recognition  of  Deity  obtained
among  these  people  was  on  the  high  places  and  towards  the  heathen  idols !  Then  from
this  it  was  only  too  easy  to  bring  forward  Jehovah's  Name  in  connection  with  all  sorts
of  falsehood,  cruelty,  and  oppression.  The  change  is  to  come  by  bringing  tmth  into
the  oath.  There  must  ever  live  in  the  mind  of  the  oath-taker  a  distinct  apprehension
and  conviction  as  to  Jehovah's  real,  enduring  existence.  It  must  be  remembered  how
he  said  to  Moses,  "  I  am  that  I  am."  And,  following  the  history  of  Israel  onward,
there  must  be  an  ever  clearer  perception  of  his  character,  of  his  power,  of  his  constant
observation  of  individual  life,  and  his  fiery,  consuming  anger  against  all  iniquity.  Then,
if  all  this  truth,  justice,  and  righteousness  appear  where  before  there  was  such  a  loath-
some sink  of  deception  and  corruption,  what  will  be  the  result  ?

II.  The  katioks  will  ekter  into  an  inexfbessibly  satisfactory  relation
TOWARDS  Jehovah.  His  aspect,  in  their  eyes,  altogether  alters.  A  step  is  taken — a
great  step,  and  one  that  makes  all  others  easy — towards  that  gathering  of  the  nations
to  Jehovah's  throne  which  is  mentioned  in  ch.  ill  17.    There  is  now  something  to  awe


106  THE   BOOK   OF   TUE  PROPHET  JERKMI AIL    [en.  nr.  1—31.


and  to  attract  the  hitherto  worshippers  of  idols.  They  say  that  a  man  is  known  hy
bis  friends.  If  the  man  be  one  not  yet  seen,  living  at  a  distance,  he  can  only  be
judged  of  by  those  professing  to  be  his  friends,  with  whom  we  come  into  actual  inter-
course. If  those  whom  we  see  be  upright,  generous,  magnanimous,  loving,  we  shall
have  no  difficulty  in  crediting  that  the  unseea  one  is  the  same.  Israel  having  been
what  it  had  been,  it  was  little  wonder  if  the  heathen  came  to  have  a  very  poor  opinion
oif  Jehovah.  But  Israel  is  now  called  to  a  very  diflferent  life,  and,  in  particular,  to
make  such  a  use  of  the  oath  as  that  the  nations  shall  not  merely  have  their  opinion  of
Jehovah  altered,  but  shall  find  in  him  a  source  of  blessing  to  themselves  and  one
in  whom,  without  risk  of  shame  and  confusion,  they  can  continually  glory.  Jehovah,
Qod  of  Israel,  whom  Israel  at  last  has  truly  honoured,  obtains  then  more  than  a  bare
acknowledgment.  He  is  exulted  in  as  Lord  and  Benefactor  to  all  the  nations  of  the
earth.  "  And  I  heard  as  it  were  the  voice  of  a  great  multitude,  and  as  the  voice  of
many  waters,  and  as  the  voice  of  mighty  thunderings,  saying,  Alleluia :  for  the  Lord
God  omnipotent  reigneth"  (Rev.  xix.  6).  This  is  the  consummation  of  creation's
choral  song,  and  it  comes  from  practising  truth,  justice,  and  righteousness  in  such  a
way  as  will  fully  please  Jehovah. — Y.

Ver.  3. — Thoroughness  in  spiritual  culture.  There  is  put  before  us  here  an  agri-
cultural figure,  which  our  observation  of  fallow  ground  in  England,  at  present,  fails
to  give  us  the  power  of  understanding.  When  we  look  at  an  English  ploughman
turning  a  piece  of  meadow-land  into  arable,  there  does  not  seem  anything  very  difiicult
about  his  work.  Why,  then,  should  breaking  up  the  fallow  ground  be  so  hard?  Why
should  this  be  reckoned  an  appropriate  figure  for  something  evidently  difficult,  some-
thing, it  would  seem,  habitually  shirked  and  the  necessity  of  attending  to  which  the
men  of  Judah  and  Jerusalem  did  not  sufficiently  recognize?  The  answer  is  to  be  found
in  a  state  of  things  which,  after  all  our  efforts,  will  probably  present  itself  imperfectly
to  the  mind.  By  many  of  the  Hebrew  husbandmen  the  cultivation  of  their  land  seems
to  have  been  managed  in  a  very  imperfect,  careless,  happy-go-lucky  sort  of  way.  In
the  moveless  East,  what  things  are  to-day  tell  us  pretty  well  what  they  were  two
thousand  years  ago.  Dr.  Thomson,  speaking  of  the  plain  of  Gennesarct — a  district
which  Josephus  describes  as  extremely  fruitful — says,  "Gennesarct  is  now  pre-eminently
fruitful  in  thorns.  They  grow  up  among  the  grain,  or  the  grain  among  them."  And
again  on  the  same  page,  "  These  farmers  all  need  the  exhortation  of  Jeremiah,  *  Break
up  your  fallow  ground,  and  sow  not  among  thorns.'  They  are  too  apt  to  neglect  this ;
and  the  thorns,  springing  up,  choke  the  seed,  so  that  it  cannot  come  to  maturity"
(*Land  and  the  Book,*  p.  348).  The  truth,  then,  was  that  the  land  was  but  half
reclaimed  from  the  wilderness.  To  have  properly  reclaimed  it,  and  then  kept  it  in
a  satisfactory  state,  would  have  required  a  great  deal  of  trouble.  And  since  from  such
fertile  land  the  husbandman,  with  but  little  effort,  could  get  enough  to  serve  the
passing  day,  he  did  not  concern  himself  to  maJce  the  land  do  its  best.

Hence  we  see  that  this  admonition,  whatever  its  first  aspect  of  obscurity,  is  really
ft  most  important  one  for  all  of  us.  The  exhortation  is  to  nothing  less  than  thorough-
ness in  spiritual  culture.  Thoroughness  in  the  cultivation  of  the  heart,  as  a  soil
wherein  the  seeds  of  Divine  truth  are  sown,  pays  in  the  highest  sense  of  the  word.
Look  at  what  science,  skill,  and  the  bold  investment  of  capital  for  the  enrichment  of
the  soil  and  for  machinery  to  save  labour,  have  done  for  modern  farming.  The  full
productiveness  of  God's  earth  seems  to  bo  apprehended  by  comparatively  few.  And
if  this  is  80  in  things  natural,  there  is  no  wonder  at  all  that  we  should  bo  so  little
conscious  of  the  thoroughness  required  in  cultivating  our  spiritual  nature.  There  arc
many  human  hearts  where  subsoil  ploughing  is  as  yet  unknown.  There  is  a  soil  that
grows  an  abundant  crop  from  plants  of  human  origin,  but  the  seed  that  God  sows
either  falls  dead  or  dies  after  a  brief  struggle  to  find  hold  and  sustenance  in  the  heart.
The  word  through  Jeremiah  here  is  but  the  germ  from  which  our  Lord  expounded  his
parable  of  the  four  kinds  of  soil.  There  is  laid  on  each  one  of  us  a  heavy  burden — the
stewardship  of  a  human  heart.  And  yet  it  is  a  precious  and  honourable  burden.  Far
beyond  the  ripest,  sweetest,  and  most  copious  fruits  of  the  soil  beneath  our  feet,  is  the
firuit  that  may  come  from  within  us.  But  the  culture  must  be  thorough.  Tme,  that
means  toil,  patience,  watchfulness,  discrimination ;  but  what  great  work  was  ever  done
without  them? — Y.


CH.  IV.  1—31.]  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.         107

Ver.  9. — Despair  among  the  leaders  in  Israel.  Let  us  consider  how  Jehovah  leads
the  prophet  up  to  the  emphatic,  and  what  we  may  call  consummating,  announcement
of  tnls  verse.  One  severe  sentence  comes  on  another,  until  at  last  the  prophet  himflelf,
crushed  and  overwhelmed,  gives  utterance  to  the  sense  he  feels  of  contradiction  to  for-
mer gracious  words.  This  cheerless  outlook  to  Israel,  he  says,  is  as  a  sword  piercing  to
the  soul.  Looking  hack,  then,  through  the  previous  eight  verses,  we  find  a  spirit  of
thoroughness  running  through  the  whole.  Jehovah  has  asked  for  thoroughness,  and  seems
to  intimate  that  the  demand  will  be  practically  neglected.  Thoroughness  in  turning  to
him ;  thoroughness  in  the  putting  away  of  all  abominations ;  thoroughness  in  observing
the  sanctity  and  obligation  of  the  oath ;  thoroughness  in  the  culture  of  spiritual  life ;
thoroughness  in  circumcision  of  heart ;  thoroughness  everywhere,  is  the  order  of  the
day.  Then  on  the  other  hand — because,  in  spite  of  all  remonstrances,  there  is  a  clinging
to  the  superficial  modes  in  which  all  merely  human  reformations  are  managed — we  are
confronted  with  the  thoroughness  of  Good's  work.  1/  men  will  not  he  thorough,  at  ail
events  Qod  will  he  so.  His  fury  will  come  forth  like  the  unquenchable  flame;  his
agents,  in  the  shape  of  invincible  armies,  will  bear  down  resistlessly  on  his  unfaithful
people ;  and,  as  a  sort  of  climax,  the  very  heads  and  guides  will  acknowledge  themselves
utterly  overcome.    Such  is  the  scene  presented  in  ver.  9.    Consider —

I.   How  THE  CONSTERNATION  AND  HUMILIATION  OF  THESE  MEN  NOW  IB  IN  CONTBAST

TO  THEiB  PREVIOUS  CONDUCT.  We  do  uot  stay  here  to  make  discriminations  among
the  four  classes  of  prominent  men  here  indicated.  The  general  truth  underlying  the
conduct  of  all  of  them  is  that  the  leading  persons  in  the  State  would  assuredly  lose
their  self-confidence.  Brazen  and  complacent  as  that  self-confidence  is,  Jehovah  is
undermining  it  in  secret,  and  it  will  come  down  with  a  crash.  These  men  were
associated  in  deception;  each  one  deceived,  first  of  all,  himself;  and  then  by  a  con-
tinuous mutual  action  and  reaction,  the  power  both  of  deceiving  and  of  being  deceived
became  very  great  indeed.  The  king,  upon  giving  the  slightest  encouragement,  would
become  a  centre  for  all  sorts  of  flatteries  and  arrogant  assurances ;  and  indeed,  as  long
as  it  was  a  matter  of  keeping  their  own  people  in  subjection,  these  leaders  might  have
comparatively  little  difficulty.  They  knew  what  they  were  dealing  with,  and  could
keep  it  in  bounds  by  virtue  of  long  practice  and  cleverly  transmitted  tricks  of  manage-
ment. There  was  a  certain  ground  of  experience  which  they  went  upon  in  all  their
contemptuous  refusals  to  listen  to  Gkxl's  prophet.  But  now  there  comes  up,  all  at  once,
a  danger  outside  their  experience,  and  not  only  defying  their  resources,  but  coming
down  on  those  resources  like  a  deluge,  and  utterly  sweeping  them  away.  When  the
downtrodden  and  aggrieved  in  their  own  borders  begin  to  mutter  sedition  and  meditate
conspiracy,  they  may,  perhaps,  stop  this  peril  in  its  beginning ;  but  when  the  majestic
destroyer  of  the  Gentiles  is  on  his  way,  how  shall  he  be  met  ?  The  lion  out  of  the
thicket  is  manageable  enough  if  the  man  against  whom  he  advances  happens  to  have  a
loaded  rifle  in  his  hand,  and  the  power  of  using  it  with  unerring  aim ;  but  what  if  he
has  nothing  more  than  a  cudgel?  Kings  and  princes,  priests  and  prophets,  might
successfully  join  in  counsel  to  mislead  and  keep  down  their  own  people ;  but  a  strong
and  proud  army,  that  has  come  forth  like  a  mighty  wild  beast  intent  on  prey,  is  not  to
be  turned  back  by  mere  counsels.  In  the  last  resort  strength  must  be  opposed  to
strength.  The  solo  virtue  of  skill  lies  in  this,  that  it  can  make  the  most  of  strength.
But  where  the  strength  is  lacking,  skill  can  do  nothing.  No  amount  of  skill  can  iriike
a  walking-stick  do  tne  work  of  a  rifle,  and  the  great  peril  of  most  human  lives  lies  just
in  this,  that  they  go  on  in  the  contented  use  of  ordinary  resoiu*ces  for  ordinary  needs.
Practically  speaking,  extraordinary  needs  are  not  thought  of  till  they  come.  There  are
voices  to  us,  even  as  to  these  kings,  princes,  priests,  and  prophets  of  old ;  but  we  do
not  heed  them,  and  meanwhile  the  lion  out  of  the  thicket,  all  unsuspected,  is  coming
nearer  and  nearer  to  us.

IL  Note  the  forcible  expression  with  regard  to  the  kings  and  princes
Their  hearts  are  to  perish.  Not  but  what  priests  and  prophets  may  have  the  same
experience.  Hebrew  parallelism  is  to  bo  borne  in  mind.  The  description  of  king  and
princes  applies  also  to  priest  and  prophet,  and  vice  versd.  They  were  overwhelmed  in
a  common  catastrophe.  It  is  the  heart-perishing  icself  we  would  call  attention  to,  who-
ever the  subject  of  it  might  be.  One  is  reminded  of  the  similar  expression,  tolerably
frequent  in  the  Old  Testament,  of  the  heart  melting.    With  regard  to  the  king,  there


108         THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,  [ch.  iv.  1—31.

would  be  an  utter  collapse  of  all  kingly  dignity  and  pretension.  It  is  not  the  mere  con-
quest of  territory  and  the  desolation  of  it  that  can  turn  the  supreme  master  into  a
complete  slave.  Complete  subjection  is  only  achieved  when  body  and  mind  are  alike
in  bondage.  Many  a  captive  has  shown  himself  nobler  than  his  captor;  his  heart
being  swelled  out  with  even  an  increase  of  vitality,  coimige,  and  resource  in  the  very
hour  when  the  ungodly  seem  to  have  triumphed.  Discrowned  kings  have  sometimes
been  more  regal  than  on  the  coronation-day  itself.  The  thing  to  be  marked  here  is  that
these  leaders  being  cast  down  outwardly  were  equally  cast  down  inwardly.  The
whole  nature  crashes  down  in  ruins.  The  dispossessed  leader  becomes  as  dejected
in  soul  as  he  is  in  station.  What  a  warning /or  %is,  then,  is  this  melancholy  prediction!
It  is  very  certain  that  to  us  the  outward  casting  down,  at  all  events,  must  come.
Natural  resources,  limited  and  temporary  at  the  best,  are  always  showing  weak  points,
always  needing  patching  up,  and  the  most  that  can  be  done  is  to  postpone  the  evil
day.  And  then  what  is  the  end  to  be?  Are  our  hearts  also  to  perish?  Is  there
to  come  on  us  utter  despair  and  brokcnness  of  spirit?  It  need  not  be  so.  Look  on
the  courage  of  genuine  Christians  in  captivity,  m  martyrdom,  in  poverty,  amid  the
attacks  of  slander,  in  the  midst  of  spiritual  non-success.  If  the  heart  perish,  it  will
be  for  want  of  believing  resort  to  tne  succours  which  come  down  from  the  heavenly
places.  God  can  so  unite,  inspire,  instruct,  and  gladden  the  heart  of  every  believer,  as
effectually  to  deliver  it  from  perishing.  And  remember,  we  are  every  one  called  to  be,
if  not  kings,  at  dl  events  viceroys  in  our  own  life.  There  must  be  no  yielding  to  pre-
sumptuous and  audacious  dictation  of  men.  He  who  leans  upon  the  mere  assertions  of
others,  because  he  is  himself  indisposed  to  make  the  necessary  effort  for  finding  out
truth,  must  be  prepared  at  last  to  get  into  that  state  which  is  described  as  one  in
which  the  heart  perishes. — ^Y.

Vers.  11 — 13. — The  uses  of  the  wind.  Not  all  the  uses  of  the  wind  are  set  forth  here,
but  enough  is  mentioned  to  remind  us  how  God  can  turn  a  beneficial  agent  into  a
destructive  one  very  rapidly  and  decisively.  The  force  of  the  unquenchable  fire  has
already  been  spoken  of  (ver.  4) ;  and  it  is  a  sufiQciently  dreadful  thought  that  fire,  so
genial,  so  useful,  with  such  a  place  in  the  house,  and — so  far  as  Israel  was  concerned-—
such  a  place  in  the  service  of  God,  should  thus  have  become,  in  the  thoughts  to  be
associated  with  it,  dreadful  as  sword,  famine,  or  pestilence.  The  man  who  has  had  his
house  burned  down,  to  the  utter  loss  of  all  his  goods,  will  henceforth  be  apt  to  make
grim  comments  in  his  own  heart  when  he  hears  men  extolling  the  benefactor  fire.  And
now  God  comes  to  another  great  force  in  the  material  world,  and  shows  how  it  can  be
the  symbol  of  the  workings  out  of  his  holy  wrath.  1.  Observe  how  he  calls  atten^
iion  to  ihe  bent^ficial  working  of  the  wind.  Frequently  the  force  of  the  wind  is  of  such
a  moderated,  yet  effectual  kind,  that  it  is  used  to  fan  and  to  cleanse.  These  invading
hosts,  it  was  to  be  remembered,  were  not  essentially  destructive.  They  were  made  up
of  human  individuals,  each  of  whom  had  measureless  capabilities  of  benefiting  his
fellow-men.  Possibly  from  these  very  northern  lands  there  had  come  buyers  and
sellers,  bringing  commercial  prosperity  to  Israel  Is  it  not  plain  that  we  should  always
consider,  when  one  approaches  us  in  a  hostile  and  threatening  way,  that  it  may  be
nossible  by  a  certain  course  of  conduct  to  have  him  come  in  a  very  different  way  ?
Many  enemies  have  been  friends,  and  after  their  enmity  has  come  to  a  head  and  done
much  damage,  it  is  possible  for  them  to  become  friends  again.  This  destroying  wind,
fierce  and  dreadful  as  it  was  for  a  time,  would  yet  subside,  and  fanning  and  cleansing
work  be  done  again.  2.  It  is  worth  noticing  that  the  Spirit  of  Ood  which  has  such
large  power  to  bless  Tuts  also  pouter  to  destroy.  The  Spirit  of  God  is,  on  the  highest
authority,  compared  to  the  wind.  Indeed,  that  is  what  the  name  signifies — the  breath
oif  wind  from  God.  Working  through  Peter  in  the  glorious  apostolic  days,  we  see  that
Spirit  healing  the  lame  man ;  we  hear  him  speaking  mighty,  convincing,  renewing
wards  to  thousands  hitherto  indifferent ;  bringing  men  into  correct  and  firm  apprehen-
iloDS  of  trutli  that  had  been  misunderstood  or  not  understood  at  all ;  and  filling  their
minds  with  such  a  light  of  promise  as  gave  reality  and  indescribable  charm  to  the
Aitare.  But  that  same  Spirit  struck  down  Ananias  and  Sapphira  with  an  appalling
and  fatal  blow,  and  made  Elymas  the  sorcerer  suddenly  blind.  Only  a  turn  is  needed,
•ad  the  open  hand  which  God  extends,  the  hollow  of  it  filled  with  the  gifts  of  his


CH.  IV.  1—31.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  100


grace,  can  be  closed  so  as  to  smite  in  wrath.  God  does  not  need  to  go  far  afield  for  the
instruments  of  his  chastisement.  The  energy  of  his  Holy  Spirit  can  destroy  as  well
as  make  alive ;  and  Jesus,  who  is  Saviour,  is  also  appointed  to  judge  and  condemn.— T.

Ver.  14. — The  unwashed  heart  and  the  vain  purposes  cherished  in  it  There  are  here
an  exhortation  and  a  question  which,  taken  together,  pierce  very  deep,  and  suggest
once  more  the  true  cause  of  all  the  terrible  calamities  which  are  ifi  befall  Israel ;  for
though  Jerusalem  is  addressed,  the  repentance  and  remedy  for  all  the  evils  in  question
must  come  from  the  action  of  a  united  people.  Jeremiah's  words  in  ver.  10  are  in  a
measure  representative  words;  they  indicate  the  way  in  which  the  nation  would
conclude  that  Jehovah  had  promised  one  thing;  whereas  quite  another  thing  had
happened,  and  that  evidently  by  his  disposition.  And  so  Jehovah  meets  Jeremiah  with
this  word,  so  that  ho  shall  not  persist  in  a  mistaken  attempt  to  harmonize  Jehovah's
predictions.  Further,  he  is  to  declare  the  same  thing  to  Jerusalem,  that  being  the  great
centre  where  kings  and  princes,  priests  and  prophets  are  gathered  together.  Instead
of  looking  outward  and  ignorantly  complaining  of  God,  let  them  look  inward,  with
practical  intent,  and  see  what  they  can  do  by  way  of  heart-reformation.  These
stupendous  perils  can  all  be  removed,  but  Jehovah  by  himself  cannot  remove  them.
In  one  sense,  of  course,  he  could  do  so.  The  wind  might  be  made  to  subside,  the  lion
be  driven  back  to  lus  thicket,  the  destroyer  of  the  Gentiles  annihilated.  But  there
would  be  no  permanent  putting  right  in  this  if  Israel  remained  the  same.  Israel
indeed  might  tnink  that,  if  only  the  enemies  vanished,  then  the  sword  would  indeed  be
withdrawn  from  the  souL  The  hearts  of  the  king  and  princes  did  not  perish  simply
because  of  the  hosts  that  were  gathered  against  them.  This  was  a  reason  so  far ;  out
in  another  sense  no  reason  at  all,  seeing  it  did  not  go  to  the  root  of  the  matter.  But
now  Jehovah  does  go  to  the  root  of  the  matter ;  his  Word  is  indeed  a  sword  reaching
deeper  than  the  superficial  thoughts  of  the  people.

I.  The  exhortation.  1.  The  heart  is  to  be  cleansed.  The  heart.  Persistently
does  Grod  drag  these  people  to  look  within.  Either  they  were  not  willing  to  do  so,  or
not  able  to  do  so,  or,  what  is  perhaps  a  more  correct  way  of  putting  it,  they  lacked
both  willingness  and  ability.  They  would  look  anywhere  but  to  the  true  cause  of  all
their  ills  and  to  the  true  sphere  where  redemption  and  security  were  to  be  worked  out.
If  they  would  only  attend  to  their  hearts  and  see  in  their  hearts  what  God  saw  in  them,
all  the  seeds  of  peril,  corruption,  and  everlasting  shame,  then  they  would  get  on  to
the  right  way,  and  being  delivered  from  fundamental  errors  in  their  thoughts,  they
would  come  to  the  apprehension  and  practice  of  fundamental  truths.  They  had  already
been  told  of  the  mockery  of  a  mere  outward  circumcision,  and  enjoined  to  circumcise
their  hearts.  Now  the  figure  is  varied,  and  they  are  told  to  cleanse  their  hearts.
It  is  because  the  heart  of  the  king  and  the  prince  is  so  polluted  that  it  perishes.  If  it
were  a  clean  heart  it  would  be  a  strong  heart,  invincible  against  panic  and  despair.
2.  The  filth  that  is  to  be  taken  out  of  the  heart  is  wickedness.  It  takes  a  long  time  to
work  the  conviction  into  the  minds  of  many  people  that  wickedness  is  as  filth.  These
very  people  loathe  the  waifs  and  strays  who  think  nothing  of  being  constantly
begrimed  with  dirt.  To  such  the  impurity  of  the  great  unwashed  is  a  loathsome  thing ;
it  nauseates  them  to  come  within  sight  or  scent  of  it.  But  let  such  recollect  that  even
if,  as  far  as  their  bodies  are  concerned,  they  have  daily  changes  of  fine  linen,  whito
and  clean,  that  is  a  mere  trifle  if  the  consciousness  within  be  habitually  defiled  by
inhimian  and  degrading  thoughts.  There  is,  of  course,  a  very  practical  truth  in  the
common  saying  that  ''Cleanliness  is  next  to  godliness ; "  but  cleanliness  of  the  conscience,
removal  of  every  slimy  stain  of  self,  is  but  one  of  the  aspects  of  perfect  godliness.  If
only  we  are  labouring  to  cleanse  our  hearts  from  wickedness,  all  other  cleanliness  will
assuredly  follow.  In  proportion  as  wickedness  is  cleansed  out,  there  will  follow  all
outward  decencies,  courtesy  of  manner  and  refinement  of  tastes.  The  right  inwardly
grows  to  the  comely  outwardly ;  but  if  that  inward  right  be  lacked,  then  all  apparent
comeliness  is  but  the  whited  sepulchre.  3.  The  mode  of  cleansing.  The  word  chosen
to  indicate  this  is  a  very  significant  one.  The  mere  general  term  for  cleansing  is  not
sufficient ;  nor  even  the  more  restricted  but  still  general  term  for  cleansing  with  water.
The  washing  to  be  done  is  that  sort  which  in  the  literal  instance  b  to  be  done  by  a
YigDious  trampling  of  the  feet.    The  Hebrew  word  is  the  same  one  in  which  the


110  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [cii.  iv.  1-^1.

profoundly  penitent  David  prays  that  God  would  wash  him  from  his  iniquity,  and
again  to  wash  him  so  that  he  should  bo  whiter  than  snow  (Ps.  11.).  And  so  hero  we
haye  another  instance  of  the  unremitting  thoroughness  which  marks  this  chapter.  It
is  the  heart  that  is  to  be  cleansed,  and  that  by  the  most  vigorous  kind  of  washing.  The
accumulated  filth  of  years  has  entered  into  the  very  texture  of  the  fabric.  The  truth  is
tibat  the  only  way  of  carrying  out  the  exhortation  is  to  submit  the  heart  to  him  in  exactly
the  same  spirit  as  David  did.  Grod  is  the  Cleanser,  and  only  when  our  nature  has
passed  through  all  his  purifying  agencies  shall  we  really  know  what  perfect  human
nature  is.  We  do  indeed  see  that  perfection  in  Jesus,  but  with  such  distorted  vision
Uiat  the  seeing  cannot  be  called  seeing  as  we  ought  to  see.

II.  The  question.  The  thoughts  with  respect  to  which  the  question  is  asked  are
really  purposes.  This  will  come  out  more  clearly  on  considering  some  of  the  expres-
sions in  which  the  same  Hebrew  word  is  used ;  e.g,  when  the  woman  of  Tekoah  spoke
to  David  of  Grod  devising  means  to  bring  back  his  banished  (2  Sam.  xiv.  14) ;  so
Eliphaz  tells  Job  that  God  disappoints  the  devices  of  the  crafty  (Job  v.  12).  Several
of  tne  Proverbs  contain  the  word.  The  thoughts,  i.e.  counsclsy  of  the  righteous  are  just
(Prov.  xii.  6).  Where  there  is  no  deliberation,  purposes  are  disappointed  (Prov.  xv.  22).
There  are  many  devices  in  a  man's  heart,  but  the  counsel  of  God  shall  stand  (Prov.
xix,  21).  Purposes  are  established  by  counsel,  i.e,  there  must  be  wisdom  in  forming
them,  and  prudence  in  carrying  them  out.  A  comparison  of  these  selected  passages
will  amply  suflBce  to  show  what  God  means  by  vain  thoughts,  and  what  sort  of

Sractical  thoughts  he  would  wish  us  to  put  in  their  place.  Man  is  meant  to  live  with
efinite  ends  in  view,  on  which  he  may  expend  his  strength  and  faculties.  But  when
these  ends  are  his  own — self-originated  and  self-gratifying — then  they  are  emphatically
vain.  They  can  only  continue  by  deceiving  the  mind  that  proposes  them  and  holds  to
them.  The  question  therefore  is  as  to  when  our  eyes  shall  bo  opened  to  perceive  the
right  purposes  of  life,  the  solid  and  attainable  ones,  the  purposes  that  are  not  vain,
because  they  are  God's  purposes  and  because  he  provides  all  resources  needed  for  carry-
ing them  out.  Jerusalem  wished  these  terrible  troubles  from  outside  to  be  at  an  end,
just  that  it  might  resume  its  o^vn  projects.  On  the  other  hand,  God  wished  it  from
the  very  heart  to  adopt  his  projects  in  order  that  then  he  might  take  all  obstacles
and  enemies  completely  out  of  the  way, — Y.

Ver.  22.— 2%ose  who  are  wise  to  do  evil.  This  description  of  "my  people"  has  a
curious  resemblance  to  the  exhortation  of  our  Lord  when  he  told  his  friends  to  be  wise
as  serpents  and  harmless  as  doves.  These  people,  according  to  Jeremiah's  observation,
had  all  the  wisdom  of  the  serpent,  but  it  was  for  serpentine  purposes.  And  the  worst
of  it  was  that  they  hurt  themselves  the  most.    Kote—

I.  The  befebence  to  man's  obeat  powers.  Even  in  his  headlong,  infatuated
deacent  to  ruin,  the  great  powers  are  manifest.  It  is  the  very  perversion  and  ruin  of  what
la  80  noble  in  its  original  constitution  that  helps  to  give*  one  an  insight,  deep  even
though  melancholy,  into  all  that  makes  up  the  nobility.  A  temple  in  ruins  fills  one
with  thoughts  which  could  never  be  excited  by  looking  at  a  dilapidated  shed.  Jeremiah
looks  upon  Jerusalem  and  the  men  who  are  leaders  there  (ver.  9),  and  their  great  human
faculties  cannot  be  concealed  from  him.  When  man  sinks  into  sin,  this  does  not
destroy  the  great  human  powers ;  it  simply  distorts  their  operation.  We  look  at  men
as  they  are,  and  whatever  the  sad  reflections  coming  into  our  minds,  we  still  see  the
supremacy  in  terrestrial  creation,  the  power  to  adapt  means  to  ends,  and  all  that
strength  and  suppleness  of  intellect  which  arc  so  much  more  than  the  greatest  strength
of  a  brute.

II.  These  obeat  powers  must  be  used.  The  human  intellect  cannot  be  left  to
lie  like  a  dead  sword  in  the  scabbard.  In  one  sense  the  intellect  is  but  an  instrument.
having  in  itself  no  character  either  for  good  or  evil,  any  more  than  a  piece  of  machinery.
Everything  depends  on  the  disposition  and  intents  of  the  man  using  it.  But  then  the
inteUect,  instrumental  as  it  is,  is  not  a  mere  instrument,  but  has  a  living  connection
with  the  rest  of  human  nature.  It  must  act,  with  more  or  less  energy,  according  to  the
individuality  of  its  possessor.  These  faculties  must  be  used,  if  not  for  good,  then  for
eviL  History  abounds  in  instances  of  wicked  and  selfish  men  who  have  achieved  their
mischievous  ends  by  that  very  intellectual  force  which  was  given  for  something  very


CH.  IV.  1—31.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  Ill


different.  Hence  the  importance  of  early  training  and  direction,  so  fieir  as  one  will  can
alter  the  course  of  another.  Every  individual  whose  faculties  are  diverted  from  good
purposes  is  so  much  gain  to  the  powers  of  evil.  There  is  no  neutral  ground  to  whidi  to
retire.  To  go  out  of  the  one  path  is  to  go  into  the  other.  This  was  the  sad  thought
that,  even  while  Jerusalem  was  going  down,  lower,  lower,  towards  the  hour  of  its  capture
and  desolation,  there  were  yet  in  it  many  men  who  had  the  power,  if  only  their  hearts
had  been  right,  to  do  much  towards  saving  and  blessing  their  country.  But  all  their
thoughts,  their  utmost  acuteness  of  mind,  were  given  to  build  and  enrich  self.— Y.

Vers.  23 — 27.— -4.  threatened  return  from  cosmos  to  chaos.  It  is  impossible  to  read
this  passage  without  having  the  first  chapter  of  Genesis  brought  to  mind.  Moreover,  it
was  intended  that  it  should  be  brought  to  mind.  In  Gren.  i.  we  have  the  brief,  sub-
lime description,  impossible  to  forget,  of  the  advance  from  chaos  to  cosmos.  Here  in
Jeremiah  we  have  a  very  sad  and  suggestive  indication  of  possible  return  from  cosmoi
to  cliaos.  These  two  words,  it  will  bo  admitted,  are  often  used  very  loosely.  Particu-
larly is  this  true  of  the  latter.  We  talk  of  things  having  got  into  a  chaotic  condition,
when  if  such  rwdly  were  so,  it  would  be  a  very  terrible  condition  indeed.  For  what  is
chtws  t  It  is  the  state  indicated  at  the  very  beginning  of  the  Scriptures,  the  state  out
of  which  Grod  fiEtshioned  what  we  call  the  cosmos  or  the  world.  Bear  in  mind  that  the
creation  described  in  Genesis  is  not  the  making  of  something  out  of  nothing,  but  the
fashioning  of  formless,  empty  matter  into  an  orderly  collection  of  appropriate  parts  and
beyond  that  an  innumerable  array  of  living,  active  organisms.  "  The  earth  was  without
form  and  void."  Strictly  speaking,  the  earth  spoken  of  in  Genesis  was  as  yet  an  ideal
thing.  "  And  darkness  was  on  the  face  of  the  abyss."  As  the  writer  of  the  narrative
conceived  it,  there  stretched  out  from  the  formless,  empty  earth  an  impenetrable,  rayless
depth  of  space.  This  is  chaos,  where  there  is  no  ray  of  light,  not  even  the  slightest
beginning  of  order,  not  even  the  smallest  seed  of  life.  But  with  the  moving  of  God's
breath  upon  the  face  of  the  water  cosmos  begins.  Light  comes ;  and  then  day  and
night  are  defined,  and  heaven  and  earth,  and  so  on  through  the  familiar  procession  of
G^*s  wonderful  works,  till  cosmos  gets  its  terrestrial  crown  in  the  fashioning  of  man.
It  is  worth  while  for  all  who  would  rejoice  in  the  works  and  ways  of  God  to  get  a  clear
notion  of  the  difference  between  chaos  and  cosmos.

Then  bearing  this  difference  in  mind,  what  a  terrible  prospect  Jeremiah  hints
AT  IN  THIS  PASSAGE  1  Just  by  the  profit  and  glory  of  the  ascent  from  chaos  to  cosmos
in  Genesis  do  we  measure  the  loss  and  shame  of  the  descent  from  cosmos  to  chaos  in
Jeremiah.  It  is  earth  we  see,  with  the  men  and  women,  the  domestic  and  social  bonds,
city  and  country,  all  occupations  of  mankind,  all  that  is  highest  in  human  attainments;
and  this  aggregation,  which  comes  from  man's  toiling  development  of  the  cosmical
elements  presented  to  him,  is  seen  sliding  back  to  chaos  again.  There  can  be  no
mistake  about  it.  Mark,  it  is  not  what  the  prophet  hears,  but  what  he  sees.  "I
beheld "  is  repeated.  And  looking  out  he  sees  not  the  accustomed  scene  of  life  and
activity,  but  the  earth  without  form  and  void.  He  looks  for  the  heavens  where  dwell
the  sun  by  day  and  moon  and  stars  by  night,  but  there  is  no  light  of  any  sort.  The
mountains  and  hills,  which  always  were  so  significant  of  strength  and  grandeur  to  the
Hebrew  imagination,  show  signs  of  being  moved  away.  No  man  could  be  seen.  There
are  several  words  in  Hebrew  all  rendered  by  the  English  word  "  man,"  but  Jeremiah's
word  here  is  the  same  with  that  in  Gen.  i.  26.  Then,  moreover,  all  the  birds  of  the
heaven  fly  away.  Other  inhabited  and  cultivated  places  have  become  as  the  wilderness,
but  not  as  an  uninhabited  wilderness.  Note  Isa.  xiv.  23 :  Babylon  is  there  described
as  being  made  a  possession  for  the  bittern.  Thus  it  is  indeed  desolated,  but  evidently
the  birds  do  not  fly  away  from  it.  Here,  however,  even  the  birds,  which  so  easily  flit
from  place  to  place,  disappear  as  if  they  had  no  hope  of  making  in  this  place  their
nests  and  finding  in  it  their  sustenance.  Thus  every  detail  points  to  the  chance,  the
possibility,  of  Chaos  resuming  his  ancient  reign.     But  now  observe—

There  is  an  arrest  before  such  a  deplorable  consummation.  "  I  will  not  make
a  full  end."  Man  the  individual  and  men  the  social  community  may  slide  a  long  way
towards  destruction,  may  bo  as  it  were  on  the  brink,  without  a  remedy ;  and  yet  God
can  so  act  as  to  arrest,  restore,  and  consolidate  anew,  with  such  internal  purity  and
coherency  as  will  defy  further  lapse.    Note  the  full  significance  of  the  use  of  the  word


112  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,     [cii.  iv.  1—31.


fc^/iof  in  the  Qrcck  Testament.  It  was  into  the  K6<rfu)s'  that  the  true  Light  came.
John's  great  directing  word  to  his  disciples  as  he  saw  Jesus  coming  to  nim  was,
"  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God,  which  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  K6<rfjLos**  Where  all  should
be  perfect  order,  vigorous  life,  and  exuberant  fruitfulness,  there  is  discord,  contradiction ;
everything  jars,  and  there  is  a  never-intermitting  groan  of  pain.  All  this  Jesus  can
take  away,  and  must  take  away.  It  is  throu^^h  him  that  whatever  promises  and  hopes
lie  in  ver.  27  are  to  be  carried  into  e£fect.  This  whole  passage,  therefore,  suggests  an
aspect  in  which  the  need  of  Christ's  work  and  the  reality  of  it  may  be  very  profitably
considered. — Y.

Ver.  30. — Departed  cTiarms  that  cannot  be  restored.  The  figure  here  is  of  a  woman,
once  beautiful  and  attractive.  There  is  thus  a  return  to  the  theme  of  ch.  ii.,  where
the  idolatrous  land  is  set  forth  as  a  wife  departing  from  her  husband.  In  the  .days  of
her  beauty  she  has  fascinated  many  lovers ;  but  now  the  beauty  is  gone,  and  she  makes
desperate  attempts  to  compensate  for  vanished  charms  by  external  Comments ;  only  to
find  her  efforts  cause  for  deeper  humiliation.    Consider—*

I.  The  charm  of  natural  attractions.  There  is  a  time  when  youth  and  beauty
are  comparatively  independent  of  external  sdds.  So  there  was  a  time  in  Israel  when  no
special  devices  were  needed  to  keep  the  admiration  and  envy  of  the  world.  David  and
Solomon  made  the  kingdom  great,  not  by  a  dexterous  concealment  of  poverty  and  hollow-
ness  under  external  magnificence,  but  by  a  simple  and  scarcely  avoidable  exhibition  of
the  greatness  of  real  resources.  The  kingdom  was  one  of  strong  men,  valiant  warriors,
and  overflowing  material  wealth.  So  it  is  with  individuals  still.  They  attract  and
influence,  not  oy  vain  pretensions,  but  by  what  they  really  are.  The  attractive
element  in  them  may  be  overvalued,  but  at  all  events  it  is  not  a  mere  appearance.
Nothing  is  gained  by  refusing  to  admit  the  success  and  charm  of  natural  resources.
Confidence  in  them  is  justified  by  the  way  in  which  the  world  receives  and  encourages
thase  who  possess  them.

II.  The  folly  of  FOROETTiNa  that  natural  attractions  must  fade  and  dis-
appear. Probably  they  are  but  comparatively  few — those  vain  men  and  women  who
use  dyes,  cosmetics,  and  paints,  under  the  notion  that  thereby  they  conceal  the  ravages
of  time.  Nevertheless,  ludicrous  as  such  devices  are,  there  are  only  too  many  who  do
the  same  thing,  so  far  as  the  euential  principle  is  concerned.  They  cannot  be  got  to
admit  the  failure  of  power  and  faculty.  Habit  is  too  strong  to  enable  them  rightly  to
apprehend  their  diminished  resources.  Hosea  said  of  Ephraim,  "  Gray  hairs  are  here
and  there  upon  him,  yet  he  knoweth  not "  (vii.  9).  There  may  even  be  a  nobler  side
to  such  a  spirit,  viz.  the  ^resolution  not  to  give  way  before  difiQculties.  But  we  must
take  care  that  an  admirable  element  in  conduct  does  not  blind  us  to  what  may  be  dis-
advantageous or  even  perilous  in  it ;  e.g,  one  hears  sometimes  of  judges  afflicted  with
deafness — a  most  dangerous  infirmity  in  the  administration  of  justice,  and  at  least  a
most  discommoding  one  to  all  who  have  to  address  the  judge.  What  is  needed  is  that,
even  in  the  days  of  youth  and  strength,  of  unimpaired  faculties  of  sense  and  intellect,
one  should  remember  that  far  other  days  are  coming.  Consider  in  connection  with  this
the  last  eighteen  verses  of  Ecclesiastes.  The  spectacles  and  the  speaking-trumpet  are
all  very  well  in  their  way,  so  far  as  they  make  an  easier,  smoother  slope  to  the  grave ;
but  what  foUy  it  is  to  be  assiduous  about  these  things,  and  utterly  careless  about  that
new.  Divine,  and  eternal  life  which  shows  itself  in  all  the  grandeur  of  its  peculiar  principle
and  strength,  precisely  amid  the  decays  of  the  natural  man !  What  sadder  sight  can
there  be  than  an  old  man,  clinging  to  the  worn,  torn,  weather-beaten,  age-marked  sides
of  his  earthly  tabernacle,  and  doing  his  best  to  resist  every  incursion  from  the  fore-
ninners  of  death ;  simply  because  he  knows  of  no  better  mansion,  because  he  is  utterly
ignorant  of  the  "  house  of  God  not  made  with  hands,  eternal  in  the  heavens  "* ! — Y.


CH.V.1— 31.]     THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.


113


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  V.


Is  the  punishment  thought  too  seyere?
Then  let  the  moral  condition  of  Jenisalcm
be  inquired  into.  Must  not  such  trans-
gressions precipitate  its  people  into  ruin?
There  are  four  well-marked  sections  or
strophes.

Vers.  1—9.— -Gladly  would  Jehovah
pardon,  if  his  people  showed  but  a  gleam
of  sound  morality.  But  they  are  all  deaf
to  the  warning  voice — the  Law  of  God  is
flagrantly  violated.  In  particular  the
marriage  tie,  as  well  the  typical  one  be-
tween man  and  woman  as  the  anti-typical
between  the  people  and  its  God,  is  openly
disregarded  (comp.  Hos.  iv.  1 ;  Micah  vii.  2 ;
Isa.  Uiv.  6,7;Ps.  xiv.  3).

Yer.  1. — If  ye  can  find  a  maxL  **  A  man  "
is  explained  by  the  following  clauses.  It
is  a  man  whose  practice  and  whose  aims
are  right,  of  whom  Jeremiah,  like  Diogenes
with  his  lantern,  is  in  search.  (It  is  evident
that  the  prophet  speaks  rhetorically,  for
himself  and  his  disciples,  however  few,
were  doubtless  ^*mcn"  in  the  prophetic
sense  of  the  word.)  Judgment  ...  the
truth;  rather,  jtittice  .  .  .  good  faith,  the
primary  virtues  of  civil  society.

Yer.  2.— And  though  they  say,  The  Lord
liyeth.  Though  they  asseverate  by  the
most  solemn  of  all  oaths  (contrast  ch.  iv.
1, 2).  Surely.  So  the  Syriac.  This  ren-
dering, however,  involves  an  emendation
of  one  letter  in  the  text.  The  ordinary
reading  is  literally  therefore,  but  may  ety-
mologically  be  taken  to  mean  "  for  all  this,"
**  nevertheless."

Yer.  3.— Are  not  thine  eyes  upon  the
truth  t  rather,  surely  thine  eyes  are  upon
(equivalent  to  thou  loohestfor  and  demandest)
good  faith,  alluding  to  ver.  1.

Yer.  4.— Therefore  I  said;  rather,  and  as
for  me,  I  said.  They  are  foolish ;  rather,
they  ad  foolishly  (as  Numb.  xii.  11).  For ;
rather,  because.  Their  want  of  religious
instruction  is  the  cause  of  their  faulty
conduct.  In  fact,  it  was  only  after  the
return  firom  Babylon  that  any  popular
schools  were  founded  in  Judaea,  and  not  till
shortly  before  the  destruction  of  the  temple
that  the  elementary  instruction  attained
the  regularity  of  a  system  (Edershcim,
'Sketches  of  Jewish  Social  Life  in  the
Time  of  Christ,*  pp.  134,  135).  The  judg-
ment of  their  God.  A  similar  phrase  occurs
in  ch.  viiL  7.  "Judgment  (mishpat)  here
(as  in  some  other  passages)  has  acquired  a
technical  sense.  This  may  be  illustrated
by  the  corresponding  word  in  Arabic  (jiin),

JEREMIAH.


wliich  means  (1)  obedience,  (2)  a  religion,
(3)  a  statute  or  ordinance,  (4)  a  system
of  usages,  rites,  and  ceremonies"  (Lane's

*  Lexicon,*  s.v.).  "  Judgment  '*  is,  therefore,
here  equivalent  to  **  religious  law,"  and
"  law  **  is  a  preferable  rendering.

Yer.  5. — ^The  bonds  are  the  thongs  by
which  the  yoke  was  secured  to  the  neck
(comp.  Isa.  Iviii.  6).  In  ch.  iL  20  the  word
is  rendered  "  bands."

Yer.  6. — This  verse  reminds  us  of  a
famous  passage  in  the  first  canto  of  Dante's

•  Commedia,'  in  which  Dante  the  pilgrim  is
successively  opposed  by  three  wila  b^ts—
a  panther,  a  lioo,  and  a  she-wolf.  That  the
poet  had  Jeremiah  in  his  mind  cannot  be
doubted.  The  deep  knowledge  of  the
Scriptures  possessed  by  mediaeval  theo-
logians (and  such  was  Dante)  may  put
many  Protestants  to  shame.  Curiously
enough,  whereas  the  early  commentators
on  Dante  interpret  these  wild  beasts  of
vices,  the  modems  find  historical  references
to  nations.  On  the  other  hand,  while
modem  expositors  explain  Jeremiah's  wild
beasts  as  symbols  of  calamities,  Rashi  and
St.  Jerome  understand  them  of  the  Chaldeans,
Persians,  and  Greeks.  A  lion  out  of  the
forest.  The  first  of  a  series  of  figures  for
the  cruel  invaders  of  Judah  (comp.  ch.
iv.  7).  The  frequent  references  (see  also
ch.  xiL  8;  xxv.  38;  xlix.  19;  L  4)  show
how  common  the  lion  was  in  the  hills  and
valleys  of  the  land  of  Israel.  A  wolf  of
the  evenings ;  %.e.  a  wolf  which  goes  out  to
seek  for  prey  in  the  evening.  So  the  Peshito,
Targ|um,  Yulgato  (comp.  "wolves  of  the
evening,'*  Hab.  i.  8;  Zeph.  iii.  3).  But
there  is  no  evidence  that  *erebh,  evening,
has  for  its  plural  *ardbh6th,  which  is,  in  fact,
the  regular  plural  of  ^aroboA,  desert.  Render,
therefore,  a  wolf  of  the  deserts,  i.e.  one  which
has  its  den  in  the  deserts,  and  falls  upon  the
cultivated  parts  when  it  is  hungry.  Luther,
**  the  wolf  out  of  the  desert.'*  A  leopard ;
rather,  a  panther.  The  Chaldeans  are  com-
pared to  this  animal,  on  account  of  its
swiftness,  in  Hab.  i.  8.

Yer.  7.— How  ...  for  thist  rather.  Why
should  I  pardon  thee  ?  Thy  children ;  i.e,
(since  '*  the  daughter  of  Zion  '*  is  equivalent
to  Zion  regarded  as  an  ideal  entity)  the
members  of  the  Jewish  people  (comp.  Lev.
xix.  18,  **the  children  of  thy  people*').
When  I  had  fed  them  to  the  fall.  SoEwald,
following  the  versions  and  many  manuscripts
(there  is  no  marginal  reading  in  the  Hebrew
Bible).  This  gives  a  good  sense,  and  may
be  supported  by  ver.  28;  Deut.  xxxii.  15:
Hos.xiu.6.  But  the  reading  of  the  received

I


114


THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,     [cu.  v.  1—31.


Hebrew  text,  though  somewhat  more  diffi-
cult, IB  yet  perfectly  capable  of  explanation ;
and.  Blight  as  the  difierence  is  in  the  reading
adopted  by  Ewald  (it  involves  a  mere  shade
of  pronunciation),  it  is  not  to  be  preferred
to  the  received  reading.  Read,  therefore,
though  I  made  them  to  swear  (allegtance)^
yet  they  committed  adultery.  The  oath  may
be  that  of  Sinai  (Exod.  xxiv.),  or  such  an
oath  as  had  been  recently  taken  by  Josiah
and  the  people  (I  Kings  xxiii.  3;  2  Chron.
xxxiy.  31,  82).  The  "adultery**  may  be
taken  both  in  a  literal  and  in  a  figurative
sense,  and  so  also  the  **  harlots'  houses  "  in
the  next  clause.  It  is  also  well  worthy  of
consideration  whether  the  prophet  may  not
be  referring  to  certain  matrimonial  customs
handed  down  from  remote  antiquity  and
arising  from  the  ancient  system  of  kinship
through  women  (comp.  Ezek.  xxii.  11).

Ver.  8. — As  fed  hones  in  the  morning.
The  rendering  fed  horses  has  considerable
authority.  "Lustful  horses*'  is  also  pos-
sible; this  represents  the  reading  of  the
Hebrew  margin.  The  following  word  in
the  Hebrew  is  extremely  difficult.  "  In  the
morning  **  cannot  bo  right,  as  it  is  against
grammar;  but  it  is  not  easy  to  furnish  a
substitute.  Most  modems  render  "roving
about ;  **  Fiirst  prefers  "  stallions.**

Vers.  10 — 18. — Provoked  by  the  open  un-
belief of  the  men  of  Judah,  Jehovah  re-
peats his  warning  of  a  sore  judgment.

Ver.  10.— Her  walls.  There  is  a  doubt
about  "  walls,*'  which  should,  as  some  think,
rather  be  vine-rows  (a  change  of  points  is
involved  ;  also  of  shin  into  nn— the  slight-
est of  all  changes),  or  shoots,  or  branches
(comparing  the  Syriac).  The  figure  would
thus  gain  somewhat  in  symmetry.  How-
ever, all  the  ancient  interpreters  (whose
authority,  overrated  by  some,  still  counts  for
something)  explain  the  word  as  in  the  Au-
thorized Version,  and,  as  Graf  remarks,  in
order  to  destroy  the  vines,  it  would  be
necessary  to  climb  up  upon  the  walls  of  the
vineyard.  (For  the  figure  of  the  vine  or
the  vineyard,  comp.  on  ch.  ii.  21.)  Take
away  .  .  .  not  the  Lord's.  The  Septuagint
and  Peshito  read  dificrently,  translating
"leave  her  foundations,  for  they  are  the
Lord's**  (supposing  the  figure  be  taken  from
a  building).  As  the  text  stands,  it  is  better
to  change  battlements  into  tendrils.  Judah's
degenerate  members  are  to  be  removed,  but
the  vine-stock,  i.e.,  the  believing  kernel  of
the  nation,  is  to  be  left.  It  is  the  kcy-noto
of  the  "renmant**  which  Jeremiah  again
strikes  (see  ch.  iv.  27).

Ver.  12. — It  is  not  he.  Understand  "  who
speaks  by  the  prophets"  (Payne  Smith).
It  is  hardly  conceivable  that  any  of  the
Jews  absolutely  denied  the  existence  of
Jehovah.    They  were  practical,  not  specu-


lative unbelievers,  like  men  of  the  world
in  general.

Ver.  13. — And  the  prophets,  etc.  A  con-
tinuation of  the  speech  of  the  unbelieving
Jews.  The  word  is  not  in  them.  The
Authorized  Version  gives  a  good  meaning,
but  it  involves  an  interference  with  the
points.  The  pointed  text  must  be  rendered,
he  who  speaketh  (through  the  prophets,  viz.
Jehovah)  is  not  in  them.  Thus  the  Jews
hurl  against  prophets  like  Jeremiah  the
very  charge  which  Jeremiah  himself  brings
against  tho  "  false  prophets  **  in  ch.  xxiii.
25 — 32.  Thus  shall  it  be  done;  rather,  so
he  it  done ;  i.e.  may  the  sword  and  famine,
with  which  they  threaten  us,  fall  upon  them.

Ver.  14. — My  words  in  thy  month  fire.
(See  on  ch.  i.  9,  10.)

Ver.  15.— 0  house  of  IsraeL  After  the
captivity  of  the  ten  tribes,  Judah  becamo
the  sole  representative  of  the  people  of
Israel  (comp.  ch.  ii.  26).  A  mighty  nation.
The  Authorized  Version  certainly  gives  a  part
of  the  meaning.  The  Hebrew  word  rendered
"  mighty  **  (*e/Aan),  rather,  "  perennial,**  is
the  epithet  of  rocks  and  mountains  (Numb,
xxiv.  21 ;  Micah  vL  2) ;  of  a  pasture  (ch.
xlix.  19) ;  of  rivers  (Deut.  xxL  4 ;  Ps.  Ixxiv.
15).  As  applied  in  tho  present  instance,  it
seems  to  describe  tho  inexhaustible  resources
of  a  young  nation.  Render  here,  ever  re-
plenished ;  i.e.  over  drawing  anew  from  its
central  fountain  of  strength.  Does  not  this
aptly  convey  tho  impression  which  a  long-
civilized  nation  (and  tho  Jews,  who  have
been  called  "  rude,**  were  only  so  by  com-
parison with  the  Egyptians  and  Assyrians)
must  derive  from  the  tumultuous  incursions
of  nomad  hosts?  Tho  description  will
therefore  fit  tho  Scythians ;  but  it  is  not
inappropriate  to  tho  Chaldeans,  if  we  take
into  account  the  composite  nature  of  their
armies.  An  ancient  nation ;  i.e.  one  which
still  occupies  its  primeval  seat  in  the  north
(ch.  vi.  22),  undisturbed  by  invaders.  Whose
language  thou  knowest  not  So  Isaiah  of
the  Assyrians,  "  (a  people)  of  a  stanmiering
tongue,  that  thou  canst  not  understand.*'
The  Jews  were  no  philologists,  and  were  as
unlikely  to  notice  the  fundamental  aflBnity
of  Hebrew  and  Assyrian  as  an  ancient
Greek  to  observe  the  connection  between
his  own  language  and  the  Persian.  When
tho  combatants  wero  to  each  other  fidpfiapot,
mercy  could  hardly  be  expected.  The  se-
quence of  vers.  49  o  and  50  in  Deut.  xxviii.
speaks  volumes.

Ver.  16. — Their  quiver.  (See  on  ch.  iv.
29.)  As  an  open  sepulchre  ;  i.e.  furnished
with  deadly  arrows,  "  fiery  darts.**  So  tho
psalmist,  of  the  "  throat  *'  of  deceitful  perse-
cutors (Ps.  v.  9).

Ver.  17. — Which  thy  sons  and  thy  daugh-
ters, etc. ;  rather,  t?tey  shall  eat  thy  sons  and


CH.V.1— 31.]  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.


115


ihy  daughiert.  In  the  other  dauses  of  the
verse  the  verb  is  io  the  singular,  the  subject
being  the  hostile  nation.  They  shall  im-
poYcndi,  etc.;  rather,  U  shall  hatter  .  .  .
toith  weapons  of  tjoar  (so  rightly  Pajne
Smith);  kh&a>h,  commonly  rendered
•*  swoid,"  is  applied  to  any  cutting  instru-
ment, such  as  a  razor  (Ezck.  v.  1),  a  mason's
tool  (Exod.  XX.  25),  and,  as  here  and  Ezek.
xxvi  9,  weapons  of  war  in  general.

Vers.  19 — 29.  — Judah's  own  obstinacy  and
flagrant  disobedience  are  the  causes  of  this
sore  judgment.

Yer.  19. — Like  as  ye  have  forsaken  me,  etc.
The  law  of  correspondence  between  sin  and
punishment  pervades  Old  Testament  pro-
phecy (comp.  isa.  v.).  As  the  Jews  served
foreign  gods  in  Jehovah's  land,  they  shall
become  the  slaves  of  foreigners  in  a  land
which  is  not  theirs.

Yer.  21.— Withont  understanding;  lite-
rally, tcithout  heart.  This  seems  at  first
sight  inconsistent  with  vcr.  23,  where  the
people  is  described  as  having  indeed  a
**  heart,"  but  one  hostile  to  Jehovah.  The
explanation  is  that  a  course  of  deliberate
sin  perverts  a  man's  moral  perceptions.
The  prophet  first  of  all  states  the  result,  and
then  the  cause.  So  in  Ezek.  xii.  2,  "  Which
have  eyes  and  see  not,"  etc. ;  "  for  they  are
a  rebellious  house."

Yer.  22.— Fear  ye  not  me  ?  The  Hebrew
places  "  me  "  emphatically  at  the  beginning
of  the  sentence.  By  a  perpetual  decree.  This
is  one  of  the  evidences,  few  but  sufficient,
of  the  recognition  of  natural  laws  by  tho
Biblical  writers ;  of  laws,  however,  which  are
but  the  description  of  the  Divine  mode  of
working, "  covenants  "  (ch.  xxxiii.  20 ;  comp.
Gen.  ix.  18)  made  for  man's  good,  but  capable
of  being  annulled  (Isa.  liv.  10).  Comp.  Prov.
viii.  29 ;  Job  xxxviii.  8 — 12.

Yer.  23.^A  revolting  and  a  rebellious
heart.  The  heart  is  the  centre  of  the  moral
life  virtually  equivalent  to  **  the  will ; "  it  is
"revolting"  when  it  "turns  back"  (so
literally  here)  from  God's  Law  and  service,
and  "  rebellious  "  when  it  actively  defies  and
opposes  him.

Yer.  24.— That  giveth  rain,  etc.  The
second  appeal  is  to  the  regularity  of  the
rains.  Dr.  Robinson  remarks  that  there  are
not  at  the  present  day  in  Palestine  "any
particular  periods  of  rain,  or  succession
of  showers,  which  might  bo  regarded  as
distinct  rainy  seasons,"  and  that,  unless
there  has  been  some  change  in  the  climate
of  Palestine,  the  former  and  the  latter  rains
seem  to  correspond  to  **  the  first  showers  of
autumn,  whicn  revived  the  parched  and
thirsty  earth  and  prepared  it  for  the  seed,
and  the  later  showers  of  spring,  which  con-
tinued to  refresh  and  forward  both  tho
ripening  crops  and  the  vernal  products  of


the  fields"  (» Biblical  Researches,'  iil  98).
He  reserveth  nnto  us,  etc.;  literally,  he
keepeth  for  us  the  weeks — the  statutes  of
harvest;  i.e.  the  weeks  which  are  the  ap-
pointed conditions  of  harvest.  The  prophet
moans  the  seven  weeks  which  elapsed  from
tho  second  day  of  the  Passover  to  the  "Feast
of  Harvest,"  or  "  Feast  of  Weeks  "  (Pente-
cost) (Exod.  xxiii.  16;  xxxiv.  22;  Deut.
xvi.  9,  10).

Yer.  25. — Have  turned  away  these  things.
"  These  things  "  are  the  benefits  mentioned
in  the  preceding  verse  (comp.  ch.  iii.  8;
xii.  4).  Thus  the  judgment  is  not  entirely
future;  a  foretaste  of  it  has  already  been
given  (comp.  1  Kings  xvii. ;  Amos  iv.).

Yer.  26.— They  lay  wait,  etc.;  rather,
ihey  spy  (literally,  one  spieth),  as  fowlers  lie
in  wait.  A  trap ;  literally,  a  destroyer ;  i.e.
an  instrument  of  destruction  (comp.  Isa.
liv.  16,  where  "  tho  waster  "  (or  destroyer)
probably  means  the  weapon  referred  to
previously).

Yer.  27.— A  cage.  The  Hebrew  word
k^lub  is  used  in  Amos  viii.  1  for  a  basket
such  as  was  used  for  fruit ;  it  seems  to  be
the  parent  of  the  Greek  word  K\tafi6s,  used
in  the  'Anthology  *  for  a  bird-cage.  The  root
means  to  plait  or  braid ;  hence  some  sort
of  basket-work  seems  to  be  meant.  Con-
necting this  with  the  preceding  verse,  Hitzig
seems  right  in  inferring  that  the  "  cage "
was  at  the  same  time  a  trap  (comp.  Ecclus.
xi.  30,  "  Like  as  a  partridge  taken  in  a  cage
[iv  KoprdWqff  a  peculiar  kind  of  basket],  so  is
tho  heart  of  the  proud  ").  Canon  Tristram
suggests  that  there  is  an  allusion  to  decoy-
bird^,  which  are  still  much  employed  in
Syria,  and  are  carefully  trained  for  their
office  (*  Natural  History  of  the  Bible,'
p.  163).  But  this  seems  to  go  beyond  tho
text.  Deceit;  t.e.  the  goods  obtained  by
deceit.

Yer.  28. — ^They  overpass  the  deeds  of  the
wicked;  rather,  they  overpass  the  common
measure  of  wickedness  (literally,  the  cases  of
wickedness);  or,  as  others,  Oiey  exceed  in
deeds  of  wickedness.  Yet  they  prosper;
rather,  so  that  they  (the  fatherless)  might
prosper ;  or,  that  they  (the  rich)  might  make
it  to  prosper.

Yer.  29. — A  repetition  of  ver.  9  in  tho
manner  of  a  refrain.

Yers.  30,  31. — Tho  result  of  the  prophet's
examination  of  the  moral  condition  of  tho
people.

Yer.  30.— A  wonderful  and  horrible  thing,
etc. ;  rather,  a»  appalling  and  Iwrrrible
thing  Imth  happened  in  the  land.  The  word
renrlered  "appalling"  (or  stupefying)  has
a  peculiar  force.  It  only  occurs  again  in
ch.  xxiii.  14,  though  a  cognate  adjective  is
found  in  ch.  xviii.  13  (comp.  on  ch.  ii.  11).

Yer.  31.— Tho  prophets  ...  the  prietts.


116


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,     [ch.  v.  1—31.


(See


on  ch.  ii  26.)    Bear  rnle  by  their

;  rather,  rule  at  their  heck  (literally,

at  their  hands,  comp.  ch.xxxili.  13;  1  Chron.
XXV.  2,  8;  2  Chron.  xxiii.  18).  An  example
of  this  inteferenoe  of  the  false  prophets  with
the  priestly  oflBce  is  given  by  Jeremiah
himself  (ch.  xxix.  2i-26).    My  peoplo  love


to  have  it  bo.  Sometimes  the  prophets
speak  as  if  the  governing  classes  alone  were
responsible  for  the  sins  and  consequent
calamities  of  their  country.  But  Jeremiah
here  expressly  declares  that  the  governed
were  as  much  to  blame  qb  their  governors.


HOMILETICa

Ver.  h-^Forgivenesafor  many  through  the  righteousness  of  one.  I.  €k)D  IB  greatly
DEsiKOUS  TO  PABDON  HIS  CHILDREN.  The  Command  is  given  to  *'  run  to  and  fro  "  and
search  for  the  one  righteous  man.  Gbd  thus  expresses  his  anxiety  to  forgive.  '*  Ho
ivaiteth  to  be  gracious.'*  The  first  movement  towards  exercising  pardon  comes  from
God  even  before  men  desire  it.  He  will  lay  hold  of  the  smallest  ground  for  forgiveness.
If  the  one  righteous  man  can  but  be  found,  Grod  will  forgive  the  city.

II.  Some  riohteousness  is  kecessart  as  a  ground  for  forgiveness.  If  the
righteous  man  cannot  be  found,  the  condition  of  the  city  is  hopeless.  There  is  a  pro-
pitiatory power  in  righteousness.  Good  men  are  priests,  and  their  lives  sacrifices  of
value  for  the  advantage  of  others.  The  righteousness  of  Christ  is  an  essential  element
in  the  atonement  (Heb.  x.  9, 10).  It  was  not  possible  for  the  sin  of  man  to  be  forgiven
except  on  condition  of  this.    Pardon  is  offered  to  men  only  through  this  (Acts  xiii.  38).

III.  The  righteousness  which  avails  with  God  must  be  solid  and  practical.  A
vain,  religious  boast  counts  for  nothing  (ver.  2).  1.  The  goodness  to  be  sought  for  is
not  devoutness  of  demeanour,  but  the  exercise  of  justice  and  the  effort  to  keep  good
faith.  2.  This  is  to  be  looked  for,  not  in  the  temple,  but  in  the  streets  and  lanes  and
places  of  public  concourse,  t.e.  in  daily  life.  The  best  evidences  of  character  are  to  be
seen  in  home  life  and  conduct  in  business.  When  the  domestic  and  commercial
morality  of  a  city  is  corrupt,  the  condition  of  that  city  is  ruinous,  whatever  may  be  the
assiduity  and  decorum  with  which  religious  observances  are  maintained.

IV.  The  righteousness  op  one  may  be  efficacious  for  the  security  of  many.
Sodom  and  Gomorrah  would  have  been  spared  for  the  sake  of  ten  righteous  men  (Gen.
xviii.  32).  Lot  was  the  providential  means  of  saving  Zoar  (Gen.  xix.  21).  The  one
man  Christ  secures  salvation  for  the  whole  world  (Heb.  vii.  24,  25).  There  is  much
that  is  mysterious  in  the  principle  of  Divine  grace  which  is  here  revealed — much  that
we  cannot  explain.  Still,  there  are  truths  entering  into  it  which  may  be  discerned,  e.g,
injustice  cannot  be  done  by  God  in  the  smallest  respect ;  the  righteous  are  "  the  salt
of  the  earth,"  they  preserve  by  preventing  complete  corruption ;  there  is  hope  for  the
city  in  which  but  one  righteous  man  lives,  since  he  may  be  the  means  of  leading  others
back  to  righteousness— this  principle  is  one  on  which  God  acts  in  forgiving,  not  in
distributing  bare  rights ;  all  that  he  requires  is  a  safe  and  justifiable  ground  on  which
to  exercise  pardon,  not  a  fund  of  merit  snch  as  could  constitute  a  claim  on  his  grace.

Ver.  3. — Fruitless  chastisement,  I.  The  purpose  of  chastisement  is  correction.
1.  It  is  to  lead  men  by  outward  suffering  to  inuxird  grief  ("  they  have  not  grieved  ").
No  more  hopeless  condition  can  be  found  than  pleasure  or  indifference  in  sin.  The
tears  of  penitence  are  the  first  preparations  for  reformation.  2.  It  is  to  lead  men,
through  outward  suffering  and  inward  grief,  to  a  genuine  conversion  of  character  TGod
looks  for  a  restoration  of  "  good  faith  "),  and  to  bring  them  hack  to  Ood  ("  they  have
refused  to  return  ").  It  is  no  end  in  itself,  no  good  except  as  leading  to  a  further  good.
It  18  not  given  in  vindictive  rage  nor  to  satisfy  the  claims  of  abstract  justice.  Though
it  springs  directly  from  the  wrath  of  God,  that  wrath  is  based  on  his  eternal  love.
Because  God  loves  his  children  he  must  be  angry  when  they  sin.  Because  he  desires
thdr  good  he  must  not  spare  his  rod  (Prov.  iii.  11, 12).  The  purpose  of  chastisement
18  not  80  mysterious  as  is  commonly  supposed.  People  often  exclaim  vaguely, "  These
troubles  must  be  sent  for  some  good  purpose."  The  purpose  is  not  all  hidden.  It  is
mainly  that  we  may  be  brought  nearer  to  God.

IL  Thi  oobbbctioh  aimed  at  in  chastisement  is  hot  always  attainsd.     a


cii.  V.  1—31.]   THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.         11'


terrible  delnsion  possesses  multitudes  of  sufieriDg  people.  They  have  faith  enough  to
believe  that  trouble  is  sent  for  their  good,  but  not  spirituality  enough  to  see  how
to  use  it  for  that  end.  Such  people  assume  that  it  must  benefit  them,  however  they
behave  under  it.  Some  suppose  that  if  they  suffer  in  this  world  they  will  certainly
receive  compensation  in  tne  next.  Such-  ideas  imply  that  chastisement  cannot
be  deserved,  or  that  the  mere  endurance  of  it  is  meritorious,  or  that,  if  not  exactly
punishment  for  sin,  it  must  be  a  necessity  to  be  borne  now  or  hereafter  for  its  own
sake  or  to  satisfy  some  strange  will  of  God.  But  chastisement  is  a  "  means  of  grace,"
and,  like  other  "  means  of  grace,"  may  be  frustrated.  We  may  receive  this  grace  in
vain  (2  Cor.  vL  1).  Consider  the  causes  of  the  fruitlessness  of  chastisement.  1.
Sioieal  hardness.  We  may  be  stricken,  but  not  grieve.  2.  Thoughtlessness,  We
may  feel  inward  grief,  but  not  reflect  on  our  condition  and  need.  3.  Pride,  which
suffers  pangs  of  grief  but  no  contrition  for  sin.  4.  Impenitence,  We  may  "  refuse  to
receive  correction,**  harden  our  wills  against  submission,  and  rebel  in  impatience  and
complaining  against  God,  instead  of  returning  to  him.

III.  Fbditless  chastisement  is  wholly  an  evil  thing.  Like  every  other  grace,
if  abused  it  works  injury.  Sent  to  bless,  it  is  converted  into  a  curse.  1.  It  is  wasted
suffering.  As  such  it  must  be  reckoned  as  an  evil.  Pain  in  itself  is  not  a  good  thing.
If  it  works  no  good,  natural  instinct  is  right  in  regarding  it  as  bad.  2.  It  leads  to  an
aggravation  of  wickedness.  The  very  abuse  of  it  is  a  sin.  The  wrong  temper  in  which
it  is  received  is  so  much  more  wickedness  added  to  the  long  catalogue  of  unrepented
sin.  One  more  call  from  the  Father  is  spurned  by  his  children.  3.  It  leaves  the  heart
harder  than  it  finds  it.  Sorrow,  if  it  does  not  soften  the  sufferer,  will  harden  him,  as
friction,  which  abrades  the  tender  skin,  renders  the  tough  skin  more  thick  and  homy.

Vers.  12, 13. — Culpable  unbelief.  The  Jews  are  accused  of  unbelief  as  a  sin.  It  is
therefore  sometimes  to  be  regarded  in  this  light  (e.g.  Heb.  iv.).  Let  us  consider  the
characteristics  of  a  culpable  unbelief  and  its  origin.

I.  Unbelief  is  morally  culpable  when  it  arises  from  an  evil  heart.  1.  This
unbelief  must  be  distinguished  (1)  from  that  of  ignorance ;  (2)  from  that  of  prejudice,
bad  education,  etc. ;  (3)  from  that  of  honest  doubt.  2.  It  is  recognized  (1)  as  residing  in
the  will  rather  than  in  the  intellect — a  result  of  wishing  a  thing  not  to  be  true ;  and  (2)
as  coloured  by  custom,  worldly  proclivities,  base  passions,  ill  feeling  against  all  that  the
highest  truth  is  concerned  with.  It  is  practically  equivalent  to  the  wilful  rejection  of
truth.  He  who  is  blamed  for  this  is  not  blamed  for  his  opinions,  but  for  the  moral
determining  causes  of  them.  We  are  not  responsible  for  our  beliefs,  in  bo  far  as  they  are
purely  intellectual,  but  we  are  responsible  for  them  in  so  far  as  they  are  formed  imder
moral  influences.

II.  The  evil  tendencies  towards  a  culpable  unbelief  are  abundant  and
POWERFUL.  These  arc  not  to  be  found  in  a  simple  proneness  to  err,  a  natural  weakness
of  faith,  nor  in  the  dangers  accompanying  daring  si>eculation.  They  are  to  be  traced
in  conduct  and  practical  affairs.  1.  Untruthful  habits,  Israel  had  dealt  treacherously
with  God  (ver.  11).  We  must  be  true  to  discern  truth.  If  the  eye  is  evil,  the  whole
body  is  full  of  darkness.  There  is  a  close  connection  between  those  two  evil  things
which  go  under  the  name  of  infidelity — treachery  and  unbelief,  lack  of  faithfulness  and
lack  of  faith,  2.  Resistance  to  the  will  of  God,  The  language  of  the  people  betrays  an
animus,  a  spirit  of  enmity  to  God.  "  They  have  belied  the  Lord."  Nothing  blinds
like  hatred.  3.  Love  of  ease.  The  words  of  Jeremiah  were  not  pleasant ;  he  threatened
terrible  things.  Therefore  his  hearers  refused  to  accept  his  message.  Their  conduct
was  most  illogical,  since  truth  is  not  affected  by  our  liking  for  it — are  there  not  many
unpleasant  truths  ?— and  most  injurious  to  themselves,  since  it  was  for  their  own  interest
to  give  heed  to  the  warning  of  approaching  calamity,  that  foresight  might  mitigate  the
force,  if  it  could  not  now  prevent  the  falling,  of  the  blow.  Yet  this  conduct  was  most
natural.  It  is  constantly  to  be  observed  that  people  listen  to  the  teachers  whom  they
like  rather  than  to  those  whom  they  believe  to  be  si)eaking  the  most  important  truths,
and  accept  the  opinions  which  suit  their  inclinations  rather  than  those  possibly  less
agreeable  ideas  which  stand  on  the  surest  foundation  of  fact.  4.  Spiritual  decidness.
The  Jews  deny  the  inspiration  of  the  proi)hcts.  To  them  weighty  words  such  as  those
of  Jeremiah  are  mere  "  wind."    So  there  were  those  who  derided  him  who  spake  with


118  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,     [ch.  v.  1— 31.

the  weightiest  authority  and  "as  never  man  spake."     Sin  deadens  the  soul  to  the
perception  of  God's  voice  in  nature,  in  the  Bible,  in  Christ,  in  conscience.

Ver.  19. — Suitable  retribution.  In  anticipation  of  their  astonishment  at  the  character
of  the  retribution  that  is  to  fall  upon  them  the  Jews  are  to  be  shown  that  this  is  fitting
and  rightly  corresponds  to  their  conduct.

L  They  who  forsake  God  in  prosperity  will  feel  the  loss  op  God  in  adver-
sity. According  to  the  religious  conduct  in  sunny  days  will  be  the  condition  of  rest
or  ruin  in  dark  days.    .

XL  The  false  gods  op  prosperity  prove  worthless  in  adversity,  Israel  served
heathen  gods  in  their  own  land.  In  their  captivity  they  are  to  be  slaves  to  strange
men.  The  gods  are  then  nowhere.  Men  make  gods  of  wealth,  pleasure,  fame,  etc.,
and  find  that,  though  these  may  be  worshipped,  they  can  do  nothing  to  deliver  their
devotees.

III.  They  who  throw  off  the  service  op  God  must  submit  to  harder  service.
They  think  to  be  free,  but  they  really  are  the  slaves  of  sin  (John  viii.  34).  They
reject  the  easy  yoke  and  light  burden  of  Christ  only  to  find  themselves  bound  in  the.
galling  fetters  of  Satan.

IV.  The  abuse  of  blessings  is  naturally  punished  by  the  loss  of  them.  In
their  own  land  the  Jews  had  proved  unfaithful  to  the  God  who  had  given  it  them.  They
are  rightly  punished  by  exile  to  a  strange  land,  where  they  must  miss  his  gracious
government.

Vers.  22 — 24.— Jlfan  rebuked  hj  nature,  Man  considers  himself  to  be  "  the  lord  of
creation."  He  alone  of  all  creatures  is  made  in  the  image  of  God.  Yet  there  are  things
in  nature  which  should  put  him  to  shame.     Jeremiah  indicates  two  of  these.

I.  The  Divine  order  of  nature  rebukes  tub  wilful  disobedience  of  man.  1.
Nature  is  ever  obedient  to  the  law  of  Qod,  (I)  The  greatest  powers  of  nature  submit
to  Divine  ordinances.  The  sea,  vast  and  mighty,  is  bound  by  his  decree  (Job  xxxviii.
8—11).  (2)  The  wildest  convulsions  of  nature  do  not  transgress  these  ordinances.
The  waves  may  toss  and  roar,  but  they  cannot  pass  the  bounds  that  God  has  set  them.
Hurricanes,  thunder-storms,  earthquakes,  are  as  subservient  to  law  as  the  silent  sun-
shine and  the  peaceful  growth  of  spring.  (3)  The  simplest  means  in  accordance  with
Divine  laws  are  sufficient  to  restrain  the  fiercest  forces  of  nature.  God  has  placed  the
mnd  as  a  bound  of  the  sea,  and  the  storms  are  driven  back  from  the  sandy  beach  as
surely  as  from  the  coast  of  iron  crags.  (4)  The  obedience  of  nature  to  these  Divine
ordinances  is  everlasting  and  without  exception.  The  sea  is  bound  by  perpetual
decrees.  2,  Man  alone  is  disobedient  to  the  Law  of  Qod,  He  is  the  great  exception  to
the  order  of  the  universe.  The  wild  sea  never  transgresses  God's  decrees ;  man  is  the
sole  transgressor.  The  possibility  of  this  strange,  solitary  rebellion  among  all  the
orders  of  God's  kingdoms  of  nature  is  explained  by  the  constitution  of  man  and  the
character  of  the  obedience  which  is  required  by  this.  Nature  is  under  necessity ;  man
is  free.  Nature's  obedience  is  unconscious,  material ;  man's  is  deliberate,  moral.  He  is
to  fear,  to  tremble,  t.c  to  obey  under  the  influence  of  thoughts  and  feelings  of  reverence.
Lacking  these,  he  can  be  bound  to  the  throne  of  God  by  no  chains  of  compulsion.  But
how  terrible  to  use  the  high  endowment  of  liberty  only  to  set  at  defiance  the  august
decrees  before  which  all  other  creatures  bow  unceasingly !

II.  The  Divine  beneficence  op  nature  rebukes  the  ungrateful  rebellion  of
MAN.  1.  The  order  of  nature  is  beneficent,  God  gives  the  rain  "in  its  season."  He
keeps  for  men  "  the  appointed  weeks  of  the  harvest.'  The  regularity  and  harmony  of
the  physical  world  are  beneficial  to  men.  The  sun  never  fails  to  rise.  If  it  once
failed,  what  disasters  would  follow  I  If  the  motion  of  the  earth  were  irregular  no  life
could  continue  to  exist.  The  order  of  the  seasons  is  a  distinct  blessing  (Gen.  viii.  22).
Instead  of  shrinking  from  *'  the  reign  of  law  "  as  from  a  cruel  tyranny,  we  should
welcome  it  when  we  remember  that  the  laws  of  nature  are  but  the  material  expression
of  the  will  of  God,  and  that  will  the  outcoma  of  his  goodness.  2.  This  beneficence  of
nature  shows  all  sin  to  be  a  mark  of  ingratitude,  God  smiles  on  us  in  nature  (Matt,
7.  45).  How  then  can  we,  while  blessed  by  the  very  sunshine  of  that  smile,  rise  up  in
revolt  against  him  ?    If  the  grandeur  and  splendid  harmony  of  nature  do  not  awe  us^


CH.  V.  1—31.]       THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  119


shall  not  its  gentleness  and  kindliness  attract  ns  to  loyal  obedience  to  him  who  is  at  once
the  Fountain  of  law  and  the  Father  of  mercies  ?

Vers.  30,  31, — The  most  appalling  condition  to  which  a  nation  can  sink.  After
enumerating  the  sins  of  his  people  in  ever-darkening  series,  the  prophet  at  length
reaches  a  form  of  evil  worse  than  all  others,  at  the  sight  of  which  he  starts  back  with
an  exclamation  of  horror ;  this  is  corruption  at  the  very  fountain  of  instruction  and
worship,  and  the  willing  acquiescence  in  it  by  the  nation.

I.  Consider  the  fearful  nature  op  this  evil.  1  False  prophecy.  The  prophet
should  be  the  highest  oracle  of  truth.  If  he  utters  lies,  knowledge  is  corrupted  at  its
source.  The  guilt  of  such  conduct  is  exceptionally  great,  because  (1)  it  is  a  sin  against
light ;  (2)  it  is  a  prostitution  of  the  highest  powers  to  the  basest  ends ;  and  (3)  it  is  a
cause  of  widespread  ruin  to  those  who  follow  these  "  blind  leaders  of  the  bUnd."
2.  Subservient  priesthood.  The  priests  were  at  the  beck  of  the  false  prophets.  These
men  had  not  the  excuse  of  the  prophets.  The  prophets  represented  a  progressive
religion — a  religion  of  inward  lights,  a  religion  in  which  new  departures  were  expected,
and  therefore  one  in  which  the  excuse  of  honest  though  mistaken  enthusiasm  might  be
urged  in  defence  of  a  lapse  into  error.  But  the  priests  were  the  custodians  of  a  rigid
ritual  defined  by  a  written  Law.  They  were  put  in  trust,  and  their  apostasy  was  a
deliberate  act  of  unfaithfulness.  The  Christian  teacher,  though  free  from  the  letter  of
the  Law,  and  gifted  with  the  spiritual  freedom  of  prophecy,  is  put  in  trust  with  the
gospel  (1  Tim.  i.  11).  If  ho,  while  retaining  the  influence  and  emoluments  of  his  office,
consciously  forsakes  the  guidance  of  the  New  Testament  for  the  fascinations  of  ground-
less speculation,  he  too  is  guilty  of  unfaithfulness ;  and  if  he  knows  the  speculation  to
be  false,  but  accepts  it  out  of  deference  to  its  popularity,  he  is  guilty  of  base  treason
like  that  of  the  commander  of  a  fortress  who  surrenders  to  the  enemy  from  sheer
cowardice.  3.  Popular  acquiescence  in  these  evils.  "  My  people  love  to  have  it  so."
This  is  pleasing,  since  (1)  the  false  prophets  flatter  and  prophesy  smooth  things,  while
the  true  prophets  like  Jeremiah  must  often  rebuke  and  denounce  judgments ;  and  (2)
the  priests  are  satisfied  with  an  unspiritual  religion,  ritual  without  morality,  perhaps
even  immorality  in  religion.  But  this  fact  completes  the  terrible  depravity  of  the
nation.  The  people  cannot  plead  ignorance  nor  compulsory  obedience.  The  willing
followers  of  corrupt  religious  leaders  must  share  their  guilt ;  nay,  they  are  responsible
for  the  aggravation  of  it  by  fostering  with  applause  that  which  would  die  out  if
neglected.

II.  Consider  the  final  result  of  this  evil.  "  And  what  will  ye  do  in  the  end
thereof?"  It  was  characteristic  of  the  false  prophets  that  they  aimed  only  at  imme-
diate popularity,  and  thought  only  of  the  present,  while  the  true  prophets  were  con-
cerned with  the  future.  But  the  future  will  some  day  be  the  present.  Is  it  not  best
to  inquire  what  this  is  becoming  while  yet  there  is  time  to  modify  it  ?  1.  Consider  the
moral  results  of  this  depravity,  the  corruption  of  conscience,  the  falsifying  of  the  nature
of  those  who  live  in  falsehood,  the  destruction  of  all  spiritual  life  in  those  who  lower
spiritual  functions  before  the  claims  of  worldly  convenience.  2.  Consider  the  penal
results  of  this  depravity.   Can  this  of  all  evils  go  unpunished  ?   (See  ver.  29.)

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS,

Ver.  1.— il  vncked  city  spared  for  the  sake  of  one  saint.  The  challenge  is  very  bold
and  striking.  It  proves  how  thoroughly  the  prophet,  as  taught  by  the  Spirit,  had  read
the  national  corruption.  At  the  same  time  it  furnishes  a  gauge  of  the  long-suffering
mercy  of  God,  and  the  influence  for  good  of  one  true  man.  Jerusalem,  the  chief  city,
is  chosen  as  representing  what  is  best  and  most  influential  in  the  nation ;  and  its  streets
and  lanes  as  the  haunts  of  the  multitude,  the  merchants,  the  artisans,  and  common
people,  who  would  represent  the  general  public  morality.  It  is  as  if  he  had  said,  *'  In
practical  life,  amid  the  miscellaneous  throng,  seek  for  the  just  and  honourable  man,"
What  light  this  throws  upon—

I,  The  extent  op  corruption  possible  in  human  nature  !  The  Jewish  metropolis
had  been  highly  favoured.    The  priesthood  had  its  head-quarters  there.    The  chief


120  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,      [ch.  v.  1— 31.


messages  of  the  prophets  had  been  delivered  in  its  precincts.  It  was  the  centre  of
influence,  national  spirit,  and  intelligence.  Yet  the  effect  of  all  this  was  morally  and
spiritually  nil.  Worse  even  than  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  in  actual  spiritual  condition,
as  certainly  it  would  be  far  less  tolerable  for  it  than  for  them  in  the  day  of  judgment.
Ideally  it  was  the  city  of  the  saints  and  of  heavenly  peace  and  order ;  actually  its
temple  was  a  den  of  thieves,  and  its  streets  the  scenes  of  universal  dishonesty,  godless-
ness,  and  corruption.  As  has  been  said  of  a  certain  metropolis  of  Christendom,  it
would  appear  to  have  been  the  case  that  "the  more  churches  the  less  religion."
Allowing  it  to  be  a  rhetorical  exaggeration,  it  was  nevertheless  a  terrible  statement  to
be  able  to  make.  But  the  great  cities  of  the  modem  world  have  filled  with  a  like
despair  the  minds  of  the  wisest  thinkers.  The  measure  of  man's  possible  degeneration
and  depravity  who  can  fix  ?

n.  I'he  importance  of  individual  tNTLUENCE  IN  SPIRITUAL  THINGS  1  The  spectacle
of  Abraham  praying  for  the  cities  of  the  plain  is  most  impressive.  But  may  it  not  be
paralleled  by  the  unconscious  influence  of  good  men  ?  Even  accepting  the  statement
as  a  challenge,  was  it  not  a  great  thing  to  say  that  one  man  by  his  holiness  could  have
saved  the  city  ?  Suppose  there  had  been  such  a  man.  One  can  imagine  what  would
have  been  his  sorrow  at  the  universal  evil,  and  his  feeling  of  helplessness  and  useless-
ness  amid  the  prevalent  irreligion.  Yet  would  his  presence  there  be  no  light  matter,  no
vain  thing.  Though  he  knew  it  not,  he  would  have  been  the  saviour  of  the  people-
immediately  from  the  judgment  of  God,  possibly  in  the  future  from  the  sin  that  was
destroying  it.  The  value,  therefore,  of  individual  influence  in  spiritual  matters  is  incal-
culable ;  and  no  Christian  can  say  that  he  is  of  no  use.  Qoatuard  the  prayer  of  the
faithful  may  soar  in  constant  intercession  and  mediation ;  manivard  his  character  and
works  are  a  constant  testimony  to  the  unbeliever.

III,  The  infiniteness  of  God's  lono-sufferinq  love.  The  presence  of  one  good
man  in  the  wicked  city  would  have  been  an  appeal  to  Ood*8  justice  that  could  not  bo
despised.  He  could  not  "destroy  the  righteous  with  the  wicked."  But  far  more  would
it  have  been  an  appeal  to  his  love.  The  hope  of  the  future  would  have  been  wrapped
up  in  that  solitary  saint.  In  him  grace  would  find  a  secret  sanctuary,  and  the  forces  of
salvation  a  vantage-point  from  which  to  sally  forth  to  the  rescue  of  perishinoj  souls
and  the  work  of  national,  yea,  of  world-wide,  regeneration.  The  judgments  of  God  are
not  inflicted  arbitrarily  or  in  haste.  He  has  "  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  the  wicked."
Any  reasonable  excuse  for  merciful  intervention  or  delay  is  welcome.  Countless  acts
of  mercy  and  forgiveness,  countless  opportunities  for  repentance,  have  occurred  ere  the
uplifted  axe  has  dealt  its  terrible  stroke.  Learn,  then,  from  this  that :  1.  The  life  as
the  prayer  of  a  righteous  man  availeth  much  with  Ood,  2.  That  Ood  will  save  us
if  we  will  only  let  him ;  and  3.  Ee  will  begin  his  work  of  salvation  from  the  leasts  and
carry  it  on  even  to  the  greatest,

IV.  The  reasonableness  and  righteousness  op  vicarious  suffering  through
Christ. — M.

Ver.  3. —  Wha^  Ood  requires  of  man,  "0  Lord,  are  not  thine  eyes  upon  the
truth  ?  "  This  is  better  rendered,  "  0  Lord,  look  not  thine  eyes  for  fidelity  ?  "  Faith
is  the  grand  requirement.  It  is  the  condition  of  communion  between  man  and  God,
and  man  and  man.  Scripture  lays  stress  on  this.  Faith  cannot  be  a  mere  logical
abstraction  or  a  condition  Deyond  the  reach  of  man.  It  must  be  practical — within  the
power  of  the  will,  and  such  as  may  be  reasonably  looked  for  in  all.  "  Fidelity,"  the  Old
Testament  equivalent  for  the  New  Testament  "faith,"  has  its  expression  in  reality,
honesty,  thoroughness.  These  are  the  marks  of  the  man  God  delights  to  honour,  and
they  are  the  obligation  of  all  (cf.  Micah  vi.  8).

I.  The  simplicity,  reasonableness,  and  necessity  op  it.  God  could  not  ask  for
less  than  man  demands  of  his  fellow,  and  society  requires  for  its  stability  and  advance-
ment. It  is  obviously  independent  of  the  accidents  of  culture,  fortune,  or  position ;
and  for  any  solid  imderstanding  between  God  and  man,  absolutely  indispensable.  We
are  God's  stewards,  servants,  representatives,  etc.  Having  this,  we  have  all ;  wanting
this,  all  our  other  acquirements  are  vain.

II.  The  scarcity  of  it.  A  little  while  ago  we  read  that  not  a  just  man  could  be
found  in  all  Jerusalem.    Here  it  is  said  that  even  in  the  most  sacred  oath  there  is  false


:;h.  v.  1-^31.]      THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  121

swearing.   The  want  of  this  quality,  rather  than  its  presence,  strikes  the  inquirer.  This
it  is  that  gives  rise  to  wars,  jealousies,  selfishness,  sin  in  all  its  forms.

III.  The  beason  fob  its  absence  ik  most  men.  Because  men  are  sinners,  alienated
from  the  life  of  Grod  and  unconscious  of  his  claims.  The  carnal  nature  is  unable  of
itself  even  to  be  real,  to  be  truly  honest,  or  to  discharge  faithfully  and  completely  the
most  ordinary  duties.  A  supernatural  aid  is  required.  A  Saviour  must  die.  Through
him  the  soul  must  be  united  with  God  in  a  true  love  and  holy  understanding.  The
better  nature  thus  awakened,  the  trust  and  confidence  and  love  thus  created  must  be
reinforced  by  the  Spirit.  How  terrible  the  thoughts,  "  Thou  Grod  seest  me  "  I  "  Be  not
deceived :  God  is  not  mocked  " !  **  His  eyes  are  as  a  flame  of  fire" !  "  The  Word  of  God
is  sharper  than  any  two-edged  sword,"  etc. !  Who  shall  deceive  that  all-seeing  One?
The  eyes  of  Jehovah,  reading  the  secrets  of  the  soul,  look  for  fidelity ,  for  faith, — M.

Ver.  18. — Sparing  mercy.  The  judgments  described  as  about  to  be  inflicted  are
very  fearful,  but  they  were  amply  deserved.  The  wickedness  of  the  people  was  such
as  to  justify  their  complete  destruction.  Yet  they  were  spared  ere  they  were  totally
extinct !    Why  this  unlooked-for  restraint?

I.  It  has  chabactebized  all  God's  judgments  op  mankind  on  eabth.  The  Fall,
the  Flood,  the  Exodus,  etc.,  the  sparing  of  the  remnant  of  Benjamin,  etc.

II.  Thebe  is  but  one  explanation  fob  it.  It  is  the  possibility  of  some  turning  to
him  truly  in  the  first  instance ;  and,  secondly,  through  them,  of  the  race  being  saved
in  the  future.  Grod  has  never  utterly  cut  off  even  the  most  sinful.  Love^  and  not
mere  vengeance,  behaves  in  this  way.  1.  Uas  Tie  not  spared  us  f  2.  He  has  never
abandoned  his  purpose  of  saving  "  the  whole  world,** — ^M.

Ver.  22. — Qod^s  power  in  restraining  the  forces  of  nature.  An  old,  yet  ever  new,
illustration  of  his  power.  The  tiny  grains  of  sand,  the  "  Portland  Beach  "  of  shingle
or  pebbles,  is  enough  to  hold  back  the  mighty  ocean.  It  is  but  one  of  many  impressive
illustrations  of  his  restraining  power  and  goodness.

I.  It  is  calculated  to  inspibb  bevebence  and  love.

II.  OUB  HELPLESS  DEPENDENCE  UPON  HIM  18  THUS  SHOWN.

III.  The  poweb  of  God  in  the  sphebe  of  mobal  influence  and  sayxno  gbace  as
thereby  suggested.

**  *  Thus  far  and  no  furthw,'  when  addressed
To  the  wild  waves,  or  wilder  human  breast,
Implies  authority  that  never  can
And  never  ought  to  be  the  lot  of  man.*'

It  is  God's  prerogative.    Let  us  not  defy  him  or  arrogate  to  ourselves  that  which  la
his.    Let  us  rather  yield  ourselves  to  his  gracious  dealings  and  fatherly  purpose. — ^M.

Ver.  1.— (7a»  a  righteous  man  he  found  in  Jerusalem  f  God's  warnings  still  go  on
concerning  the  same  thing — the  deeply  seated,  the  deeply  destructive  wickedness  of  the
people.  But  though  the  same  subject  has  to  be  spoken  of,  there  is  no  monotony  in  the
treatment  of  it.  It  can  be  looked  at  from  fresh  points  of  view,  and  put  into  fresh
lights.  A  careful  reading  of  ch.  iv.  will  show  how  many  different  things  can  be  said
concerning  wickedness ;  and  now,  with  ch.  v.  1,  the  reproaches  and  appeals  still  con-
tinue.   Note —

I.  The  individualizino  aspect  of  the  appeal.  The  nation  and  Jerusalem  and  the
leaders  in  it  have  all  been  referred  to ;  but  as  long  as  there  are  generalities  and  nothing
more  individuals  will  think  they  can  get  away  from  blame  under  cover  of  them.  Here,
then,  is  a  bold  challenge  which  fastens  up  in  a  corner  every  dweller  in  Jerusalem.  The
challenge,  of  course,  is  not  to  be  taken  literally.  The  true  state  of  things  may  be
known,  and  known  very  distinctly,  without  any  running  to  and  fro  at  all.  Let  every
one  take  a  glance  at  those  whom  he  knows,  and  then  come  home  to  a  candid  inquiry
concerning  the  life  within  his  own  breast.  It  is  an  easy  thing  to  blame  others,  to
throw  the  fault  of  disaster  upon  those  who  occupy  prominent  positions.  Followers  are
to  blame  as  well  as  leaders.  The  iniquity  of  Jerusalem,  deep,  turbid,  incessant  as  the
stream  of  it  is,  is  made  of  many  contributions  which,  individually  considered,  may
seem  very  slight,    A  few  men  in  every  age  are  called  to  toil  for  the  removal  of  eviLa


122         THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,   [ch.  v.  1—31.

of  which,  personally,  they  are  not  guilty ;  but  every  one  has  the  opportunity  of  im-
proving the  world,  by  doing  his  best  to  keep  his  own  heart  right.  Others  are  to
blame,  and  there  are  times  when  they  must  be  faced,  blamed,  and  resisted ;  but  there
Ib  given  a  daily  need,  duty,  and  opportunity  to  do  in  our  own  hearts  what  no  one  else
mn  do  for  us.

n.   How  COMPREHENSIVE  AND  CONFIDENT  THE  CHALLENGE  IS.       It  amOUnts  tO  thi3,

that  there  cannot  be  found  in  all  Jerusalem  one  man  who  is  just  in  all  his  dealings,
and  a  seeker  after  truth.  Not  one.  Must  we,  then,  take  this  literally?  The  answer  is,
No,  and  Yes.  It  would  have  been  strange  if  Jerusalem  had  become  so  utterly  bad  a
place  that  every  soul  within  it  was  perverted  from  the  ways  of  ri^^ht  and  truth.  There
must  have  been  some  men  desiring  and  striving  to  live  a  right  life.  We  bear  in
mind  what  God  said  to  Elijah  when  Elijah  said,  in  the  despair  and  bitterness  of  his
heart,  that  only  he  was  loft  to  serve  God.  Not  so  by  any  means;  the  searching  God,
who  counts  hearts  where  fallible  men  can  only  count  heads,  told  his  prophet  there
were  still  seven  thousand  with  knees  unbowed  to  Baal.  And  did  not  Jeremiah  dis-
cover from  his  own  experience  that  there  were  some  on  Jehovah's  side  (ch.  xxvi.  24 ;
xxxix.  15 — 18)?  But  they  were  not  enough  to  exert  a  leavening  and  recovering
influence.  And  yet  the  very  men  whom  we  may  call  good  and  just  and  true,  seeing
something  of  the  rijijht,  and  trying  to  do  it  as  far  as  they  saw,  would  have  drawn  back
in  confusion  and  selfnlistrust  if  they  had  been  asked,  in  a  direct  way  and  so  that  the
question  could  not  be  evaded,  "  Do  you  answer  this  description  ?  "  *'  Are  you  doers  of
justice  and  seekers  after  truth?"  In  trying  to  answer  such  a  question,  would  not  the
moments  of  unfaithfulness  and  hesitation  come  to  mind — the  occasions  when  they
were  tempted  to  escape  from  loss  and  pain  by  some  convenient  compromise?  It  will
never  do  for  us  to  congratulate  ourselves  on  being  a  great  deal  better  than  others  so
long  as  we  come  short  of  what  God  wants  us  to  be.

III.  The  thing  to  be  specially  considered  is,  how  this  accusation  applies  to  the
GREAT  MASS  OF  THE  PEOPLE.  Many  would  havc  said,  cynically  enough,  *'  Justice  and
truth  are  no  concern  of  ours."  These  are  words  that  sound  very  well  in  general
statements  ;  but  directly  the  attempt  is  made  to  bring  them  close  to  the  individual,  it
is  alleged  that  they  do  not  apply,  or  else  there  is  the  name  and  not  the  thing.  Thinj:^.s
are  called  just  which  are  not  just,  and  true  which  are  utterly  false.  Let  men  of  noble
minds  talk  of  justice  and  truth,  and  only  too  many  are  found  to  nllego  that  sucli
speaking  is  but  cant  and  hyprocrisy.  When  Jesus  said  to  Pilate  that  he  came  into
the  world  to  bear  witness  to  the  truth,  Pilate  answered  him  with  the  question,
"  What  has  truth  got  to  do  with  the  matter  ? "  Men  want  to  get  on,  to  get  rich,  to
get  kno\vn,  to  live  easily,  to  satisfy  the  lust  of  the  flesh  and  the  lust  of  the  eye  and
the  pride  of  life;  aud  the  claims  of  justice  and  truth  would  make  sad  havoc  with  such
purposes.  Those  who  have  learned  from  Christ  that  justice  and  tnith  are  great
necessities  of  life,  necessities  in  a  far  higher  sense  than  food  and  clothing,  have  often
to  notice,  with  great  pain  and  concern,  the  number  of  those  who  do  not  seem  to  havo
any  conception  of  what  it  is  really  to  do  justice  and  seek  after  truth.  They  do  not
comprehend  the  objects  which  God  and  Christ  set  before  them  any  more  than  a  blind
man  comprehends  colours.  Why,  then,  blame  them?  it  may  be  asked.  The  blame  is
that  they  will  not  come  to  Christ  that  they  may  have  sight.  To  Christians  the  power
and  disposition  are  given  to  do  justice.  The  spirit  is  put  in  them  to  seek  for  truth  as
those  who  seek  for  hid  treasures,  and  those  who  seek  with  such  a  zeal  and  impulse
can  never  seek  in  vain.— Y.

Vers.  3 — 6. — Chastisement  thwarted  hy  universal  stubbornness,  I.  The  fact  that
God's  chastisements  are  thwarted.  The  chastisements  are  evidently  indicated
as  severe,  and  the  reason  of  the  severity  is  hinted  in  the  fpreliminary  ques-
tion. God  is  looking  for  truth,  looking  for  it  in  the  midst  of  oaths  broken  and
despised.  Ho  looks  for  faithfulness  in  all  the  ways  in  which  it  can  bo  shown.  There
must  be  correspondence  between  promises  aud  performances ;  there  must  be  stability
of  character ;  the  character  must  be  such  that  men  will  be  the  same  out  of  sight  as  in
sight,  working  as  ever  in  the  Great  Taskmaster's  eye.  Moreover,  God  cannot  be  put  off
by  the  most  plausible  appearance  of  fidelity ;  he  knows  always  whether  the  heart  is
steadfast  in  its  affection  and  zeal.    And  thus  seeing  all  this  insincerity  among  his


CH.  V.  1—31.]      THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  123


l^coplc,  tliis  carelessness  about  truth,  he  chastises  them  to  make  them  feel  their  wronff,
attend  to  his  will,  and  alter  their  deceiving  ways  so  as  to  correspond  with  it.  They  aro
told  beforehand  what  is  coming,  and  the  very  instrument  of  cliastisement  is  displayed
before  them.  They  had  no  ground  for  saying,  "  Suffering  camo  upon  us,  and  we  knew
not  why  it  came."  We  know  that  Jeremiah's  words  must  have  been  very  pungent
and  irritating,  and  the  irritating  element  was  just  this,  that  he  persistently  spoke  of
conquest,  desolation,  and  exile  as  lying  in  the  immediate  future  for  his  fellow-country-
men. And  here  Jeremiah,  with  the  prophet's  melancholy  privilege,  sets  forth  the  futiie
as  present.  The  stroke  has  fallen ;  the  suffering,  the  loss,  the  humiliation,  are  keen ;
but  there  is  no  imderstanding  in  the  mind,  and  no  sign  of  repentance  and  return.
Their  faces  are  harder  than  the  rock.  If  some  sculptor  could  put  into  a  marble  face
all  that  outwardly  marks  the  stubborn  mind,  that  would  be  the  expression  of  Israel
now  towards  Jehovah.  No  subdued  look  in  the  eye ;  no  irrepressible  quivering  of  the
lips  preliminary  to  saying,  "  Father,  I  have  sinned  .  •  .  and  am  no  more  worthy  to  be
called  thy  son  "  (ch.  iii.  4).

II.  The  beason  wnicn  the  propiiet  advances  for  this  stubbornness.  Remember
what  we  have  said  already — and  let  it  bo  said  again,  for  it  is  essential  to  a  right  under-
standing of  the  passage — that  the  purpose  of  the  chastisement  was  distinctly  set  forth
beforehand.  The  people  had  not  to  grope  in  the  dark  as  to  the  reason  of  their  suffering.
There  was  no  room  for  disputing,  if  only  Jeremiah  were  accepted  as  indeed  a  prophet
of  Jehovah.  And  to  Jeremiah  himself  the  intention  of  the  chastisement  was,  of
course,  plain  by  the  very  clearest  light.  And,  since  it  is  natural  for  us  to  suspect  that
what  is  plain  to  us  should  be  plain  to  others,  Jeremiah  could  see  only  one  reason  for
this  distressing  want  of  recipiency.  Those  who  aro  so  stubborn  he  thinks  can  be  but
a  part  of  Israel,  the  poor  and  foolish,  the  degraded,  brutalized  residuum  of  the  nation.
Thus  Jeremiah  illustrates,  by  this  interposed  conjecture  of  his,  a  very  common  and
perilous  tendency  among  thinking  men.  We  may  not  be  im willing — indeed,  we  may
only  be  too  eager — to  admit  the  degradation  of  a  large  part  of  mankind,  and  their  stolid
indifference  to  all  that  is  noble,  refined,  and  truly  humane.  But  then,  on  the  other
hand,  there  is  an  excessive  exaltation  of  the  natural  man.  Genius,  intellect,  success
in  research  and  discovery,  such  as  that  of  a  Newton  and  a  Faraday — these  are  glorified
beyond  their  due.  It  is  forgotten  that  while  men  have  natural  powers  whereby  they
can  climb  very  high,  they  must  come  to  God  in  humility  and  ask  for  wings  of  faith  if
they  are  to  discover  the  highest  kind  of  truth,  the  truth  to  which  man  must  soar
rather  than  dimh,  Jeremiah  reckons  that  what  he  certainly  cannot  find  in  some  he
will  assuredly  find  in  others.  He  will  turn  away  from  the  ignorant  rabble,  and  go  to
the  men  of  substance,  the  men  with  responsibility,  such,  doubtless,  as  the  king  and
the  princes,  the  priests  and  the  prophets.  But  he  goes  only  to  fail,  only  to  discover
that  the  wise  men  of  this  world  are  as  little  disposed  to  attend  to  the  preaching  of  the
prophet  as  Paul  afterwards  discovered  them  to  be  to  the  preaching  of  the  apostle.

III.  And  BO  we  come  to  the  real  reason  op  the  stubbornness.  It  is  something
which  lies  in  universal  sinful  human  nature,  apart  from  any  special  defects  or  specisll
excellences.  The  stubbornness  may  sometimes  suddenly  vanish  where  we  should
expect  it  to  continue,  and  where  we  should  expect  it  to  vanish  it  may  not  only
continue  but  become  to  all  appearance  invincible.  The  heart  of  unbelief  is  found  in
every  rank.  The  experience  of  Jesus  would  seem  to  have  been  that  the  poor  and  the
foolish,  as  Jeremiah  would  have  classified  them,  were  more  ready  to  turn  to  him  than
the  great.  An  excellent  commentary  on  the  passage  we  have  been  considering  is  to  be
found  in  the  first  and  second  chapters  of  Paul's  First  Epistle  to  the  CJorinthians.— Y,

Ver.  10.— TAe  vineyard  spoiled  became  of  the  degenerate  branches,  I.  Look  at
the  riauRE  which  underlies  this  exhortation.  We  find  in  other  parts  ol
Scripture  passages  curiously  rich  in  illustration  of  the  emphatic  exhortation  here.
Turn  to  Isa.  v.  1 — 7:  here  is  presented  to  us  the  picture  of  a  vineyard  pro-
tected by  a  fence  against  marauders  and  wild  beasts,  planted  with  the  choicest  vine,
and  tilled  in  the  most  complete  and  careful  manner.  But  when  the  vineyard,  in  spite
of  all  care,  only  yields  wild  grapes,  then  the  hedge  and  the  wall  are  taken  away  and
the  cultivated  land  lapses  into  wilderness.  Ps.  Ixxx.  contains  a  very  similar  pas-
sage, save  that  it  is  the  language  of  appeal  from  a  suffering  people  instead  of  a  warning


124         THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,  [cu.  v.  1^31.

from  a  disappointed  God.  God  is  described  as  having  cast  out  the  heathen  to  make
room  for  the  vine  which  he  had  brought  from  Egypt.  And  in  the  land  where  he
planted  it  it  grew  downwards  and  upwards  and  outwards,  spreading  far  and  wide.
"  Why  then,"  say  the  people,  "  hast  thou  broken  down  her  hedges,  so  that  all  which
pass  by  the  way  do  pluck  her?  The  boar  out  of  the  wood  doth  waste  it,  and  the  wild
beast  of  the  field  dotn  devour  it."  Once  again,  there  is  a  very  striking  passage  in  Prov.
xiiv.  30,  31.  The  wise  man  passes  the  vineyard  of  the  man  void  of  understanding,
and  finds  it  full  of  thorns  and  nettles,  and  tJie  stone  wall  thereof  broken  down.  Hence
the  vineyard,  with  its  need  of  a  strong  wall  kept  in  good  repair,  comes  before  us
almost  as  distinctly  as  if  it  were  a  familiar  sight.

11.  Consider  now  the  exhortation  itself.  The  wall  round  this  vineyard  of
Ck)d,  even  this  vineyard  which  he  so  plainly  set  apart  and  has  cared  for  so  much,  is  to
be  broken  down.  We  have  not  far  to  seek  for  the  reason.  The  branches  of  the  vine
are  not  Jehovah's.  "  I  had  planted  thee  a  noble  vine,  wholly  a  right  seed :  how  then
art  thou  turned  into  the  degenerate  plant  of  a  strange  vine  unto  me  ?  "  (ch.  ii.  21).  The
wall  is  not  yet  in  such  case  as  that  round  the  vineyard  of  the  man  void  of  understand-
ing. It  has  not  dropped  to  pieces  through  sloth.  Its  fate,  it  may  be  said,  is  even
worse,  for  it  has  to  come  down  by  an  act  of  judgment.  Protection  is  a  mockery  and
reproach  when  the  thing  protected  fails  to  reward  the  care  that  has  been  lavished  upon
it.  God  breaks  down  the  fence  that  he  may  make  a  clear  way  for  the  removing  of  the
branches.  The  branches,  one  may  say,  are  fixed  in  a  true  vine  and  draw  nourishment
from  good  soil ;  yet  wild,  sour,  deluding,  discreditable  grapes  are  all  the  result.  The
branches,  therefore,  are  to  go,  but  only  the  branches.  A  full  end  is  not  to  be  made.
The  trunk,  the  roots,  still  stay.  For  indeed  a  word  has,  by-and-by,  to  be  spoken  by
Jesus,  concerning  the  vine  and  the  branches,  and  the  branches  which  are  to  ahide  in
the  vine  that  they  may  bring  forth  fruit.  God  will  destroy  all  profitless  connection
with  himself.  If  men  avail  themselves  of  the  strength  and  opportunity  which  he  gives
to  bring  forth  fruit,  not  such  as  will  glorify  him,  but  such  as  suits  the  i)erverted  taste  of
men,  then  all  the  branches  on  which  such  fruit  comes  must  be  unsparingly  cut  away.
And  what  a  thought  that  fruit  which  men  so  much  value  is  after  all  in  God's  sight,
which  gives  the  true  estimation,  a  sour  and  worthless  thing ! — Y.

Ver.  14. — Those  who  call  the  word  of  Jehovah  a  lie.  It  has  been  a  common  folly,  in
connection  with  all  the  revelations  which  God  has  made  at  sundry  times  and  in  divers
manners,  to  despise  the  authority  of  the  messengers.  Noah,  Moses,  David,  and  many
others  up  to  Jesus  himself,  could  tell,  along  with  Jeremiah,  the  same  essential  expe-
rience of  contempt,  rejection,  and  persecution.  It  is  not  for  God  to  use  those  outward
pomps  and  recommendations  on  wnich  men  count  so  much.  A  message  unwelcome  in
itself  is  easily  made  of  no  repute  when  the  messenger  is  devoid  of  outward  state.  Out-
ward show,  as  every  age  can  tell,  counts  for  a  great  deal.  Perhaps  the  visit  of  the
Queen  of  Sheba  would  nave  been  made  far  less  of  if  she  had  not  been  a  queen,  or  had
come  without  the  barbaric  treasures  which  she  spread  forth  in  such  great  abundance.
Simple  lovers  of  truth,  when  their  station  hapi>ens  to  be  obscure,  are  not  much
remarked.  Here  then  was  Jeremiah,  asserting  that  he  had  come  with  a  message  from
the  Lord  of  the  utmost  moment,  and  he  is  rejected  with  the  brusque  intimation  that  his
message  is  a  lie  and  he  himself  an  impostor.  And  this  rejection  is  all  the  more  notice-
able because  the  words  of  the  prophet  must  surely  have  had  a  strange  impressiveness.
None  of  the  prophets  could  have  spoken  in  the  routine  fashion  of  a  herald  announcing
the  proclamation  which  many  times,  perhaps,  he  has  announced  before.  They  must
all,  at  least  in  the  judgment  of  a  few,  have  s^wken  with  authority  and  not  as  the
scribes.  And  Jeremiah  at  all  events  must  have  stood  before  the  people,  having  every
channel  of  outward  expression  filled  from  the  sad  experiences  and  emotions  of  his  own
inward  life.  The  sorrows  of  which  he  spoke  were  as  sorrows  that  he  saw  rising  before
his  mind's  eye  in  all  the  horrors  of  their  reality.  The  words,  as  he  says  in  ch.  xx.  9,
were  often  words  that  he  tried  to  keep  back,  but  that  which  was  as  a  burning  fire  shut
up  in  his  bones  must  break  out  at  last.  And  therefore,  when  the  words  did  come,  they
were  charged  with  a  force  of  personal  conviction  and  brotherly  entreaty  which  in
itself  ought  to  have  been  enough  to  arrest  attention.  Moreover,  sword  and  famine,
future  calamities  with  all  their  aggravations,  were  not  the  only  things  of  which  the


ciLv.l— 31.]      THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  126


prophet  spoke.  He  had  to  deal  with  an  actual  present  as  well  as  a  foreshadowed
future.  The  present  in  which  he  and  his  audience  lived  teemed  with  Idolatry,  perjury,
fraud,  and  oppression.  These  things  were  not  lies.  It  was  no  lie  to  point  to  the
Tnanifest  seed  that  Israel  was  sowing,  and  surely  there  was  nothing  more  really  reason-
able than  that  there  should  be  a  reaping  according  to  the  sowing.  At  this  height  of
rejection,  then,  God  steps  in  to  vindicate  and  honour  hie  faithful  servant.  It  is  a
melancholy  kind  of  distinction,  but  a  distinction  nevertheless!  His  words  were  not
only  true  words,  but  most  terribly  near  to  their  fulfilment.  It  was  not  that  Jeremiah
himself  was  an  agent  in  destroying,  but  his  words  became  so  immediately  true,  there
was  such  a  rapid  production  and  concentration  of  the  agents  of  destruction,  as  to  make
it  quite  proper  to  say  that  these  words  of  the  prophet  were  as  consuming  fire.  But  a
few  years,  and  many  of  these  despisers  found  that  the  alleged  lies  were  only  too  pain-
fully true.  It  is  not  over  lapsing  centuries  that  we  have  to  look  for  the  fulfilment  of
Jeremiah's  gloomy  prediction.  Isaiah  long  before  had  sounded  the  note  of  warning,
and  now  the  peril  is  close  at  hand.  It  was  inevitable  that  Jeremiah  should  speak  wiui
an  urgency  and  excitement  absent  from  the  messages  of  his  great  predecessor.  As  the
time  of  chastisement  drew  nearer,  the  warnings  had  to  be  louder,  more  disturbing,
possibly  more  continuous.  The  mariner  setting  out  on  his  voyage  may  be  warned  of
some  special  danger  lying  in  his  track ;  but  the  adviser,  while  he  may  speak  very
earnestly,  will  not  speak  as  does  the  man  who,  when  the  helmsman  is  close  upon  the
danger,  shouts  to  him,  with  utmost  excitement  and  agitation,  at  once  to  change  his
course.  God  gave  to  Jeremiah  this  melancholy  satisfaction,  that  while  he  had  been,
to  his  heart's  deepest  sorrow,  a  messenger  of  woe,  he  had  yet  been  approved,  on  the
surest  evidence,  as  a  messenger  of  truth. — Y.

Ver.  22. — A  lesson  from  the  raging  sea,  I.  We  obsebve  God  fixinq  limits  withik
wuicH  HIS  CREATUBES  EXEBCiSE  THEiB  FOWEB.  Jehovah  spcaks  here  of  the  sea  in
particular,  but  just  because  it  happens  to  be  an  excellent  representative,  for  the  pur-
pose in  view,  of  the  rest  of  his  creation.  We  may  notice  God's  boundaries  in  many
places  and  at  different  seasons,  and  smrely  it  must  often  strike  thoughtful  minds,  as
they  walk  by  the  mighty  deep,  that  there  is,  in  the  arrangement  of  sea  and  land,  an
exquisite  illustration  of  the  unfailing  wisdom  of  God.  Here  is  this  vast  mass  of  water,
covering  the  surface  of  the  globe,  ever  in  motion  and  yet  ever  keeping  its  place.  The
true  state  of  the  case  is  even  more  wonderful  than  that  which  was  presented  to
Jeremiah.  To  him  the  earth  was  a  fiat  expanse,  and  the  beach  would  have  the  aspect
of  an  embankment  which  really  kept  the  water  back.  We,  aided  by  the  discoveries  of
science,  know  that  the  real  limiting  forces  of  the  sea  work  in  a  much  more  mysterious
manner.  But,  of  course,  the  fundamental  truth  is  the  same.  There  must  be  a  great
and  loving  intelligence  at  work,  keeping  the  waters  within  their  appointed  bounds.

11.  Observe  the  cohpabison  which  is  made  between  disobedient  man  akd  thb
SEA  in  a  state  of  btobm.  The  sea  easily  gets  a  kind  of  personality,  and  the  sea  in  a
storm  is  very  like  a  proud  man  chafing  against  the  barriers  which  confine  him,  and
trying  to  break  them  down.  More  than  that,  when  Gh)d  looks  down  into  human
society,  underneath  the  (to  us)  often  calm  surface,  he  must  see  little  else  than  stormy
agitation,  one  human  billow  dashing  against  another,  each  individual  in  his  self-
assertion  contributing  to  make  a  general  disturbance,  and  a  disturbance  which  appa-
rently will  not  soon  have  an  end.  And  yet  the  sea,  with  all  its  fury  and  roar  and
threatening,  with  all  the  destruction  it  may  work  out  in  its  own  sphere,  is  powerless
to  overwhelm  the  solid  land.  In  the  strength  of  their  confidence,  men  would  build
large  cities  close  to  the  ocean-brink  and  inhabit  them  without  fear.  They  will  go  down
and  look  at  the  tempest  in  its  utmost  fury,  sure  that  they  are  safe.  A  few  yards  make
all  the  difference  between  the  agony  of  deadly  peril  and  perfect  ease  of  mind.  The
more  furious  the  storm  is,  the  grander  it  makes  the  sight  without  in  any  wise  diminish-
ing the  feeling  of  safety.

lU.  Hence  thebe  is  indicated  the  folly  of  all  human  opposition  to  God.  The
storm  rises ;  it  may  destroy  many  ships  and  lives ;  but  in  due  time  the  calm  retuma
and  the  great  features  of  the  scene  appear  the  same.  The  land  is  still  there.  And  ac
men  may  chafe  against  the  commandments  and  purposes  of  God,  and  may  go  <m
without  intenridfl  of  calnii  even  exceeding  the  sea  in  the  continuity  of  their  Tioience.


126  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,     [ch.  v.*l-^l.

But*Avhat  does  all  the  strife  avail?  The  boundaries  are  fixed.  If  in  that  which  is
natural  God  has  taken  so  much  care  in  the  line  between  sea  and  land,  is  it  not  certain
that  he  will  take  equal  care  in  that  which  is  spiritual  ?  God's  work  continues  on  the
solid  land,  away  from  all  disturbance  of  his  foes.  Nay,  more,  looking  at  the  figure
here  from  the  Christian  point  of  view,  we  see  that  even  within  what  seems  its  own
sphere,  the  raging  of  the  sea  can  soon  be  stopped.  Let  us  think  of  Jesus  quelling  the
waves,  and  we  shall  feel  that  the  greatest  storms  of  opposition  and  persecution  are
entirely  in  the  hands  of  God.  How  long  these  storms  may  rage  and  what  they  may
do  entirely  depend  on  the  purpose  which  he  wishes  them  to  subserve. — Y.

Vers.  26—29. — The  worst  kind  of  wickedness  found  among  the  people  of  Jehovah,
God's  people  are  well  acquainted  with  the  voice  of  those  scorners  who  speak  as  if
hypocrisy  was  the  invariable  accompaniment  of  a  religious  profession.  They  do  discover,
it  must  bo  admitted,  far  more  frequently  than  they  ought  to  discover,  that  religious
profession  is  a  mere  pretence ;  and  thereupon  they  never  forget  the  few  well-established
instances  which  are  a  ground,  in  season  and  out  of  season,  for  a  sweeping  charge  of
hypocrisy.  But  such  people,  unfortunately  for  themselves,  are  not  readers  of  the
Scriptures ;  else  they  would  discover  that  God  does  not  wait  for  outside  malevolent
critics  to  make  the  most  of  the  hypocrisies  to  be  found  amongst  his  people.  God  not
only  sees  and  laments  this  peculiarly  odious  form  of  wickedness,  but  is  exceedingly
plain  in  his  description  and  terribly  severe  in  his  denunciation.  In  this  matter  out-
siders cannot  tell  God's  people  anything  they  do  not  know  already.    Note—

I.  That  which  ought  to  be  found  amongst  God's  rEOPLE.  This  is  just  the  thing
which  makes  the  whole  discovery  so  inexpressibly  sad — that  this  wickedness  is  found
where  there  should  have  been  found  a  character  diametrically  op|X)site.  It  is  the  scene
of  the  wickedness  that  indescribably  aggravates  the  wickedness  itself.  That  a  good
man,  a  really  good  man,  should  be  found  in  a  den  of  thieves  is  impossible.  Vain
would  it  be  for  him  to  continue  there  and  yet  plead  his  uprij^litness,  A  den  of  thieves
does  actually  give  character  to  every  one  who  willingly  inhabits  it,  and  so,  passing  from
the  bad  to  the  good,  a  certain  high  reputation  must  attach  to  every  one  who  openly
ranks  himself  among  the  i^eople  of  God.  It  was  not  because  these  Israelites  dwelt  in
a  certain  territory  or  were  descendants  from  certain  ancestors  that  they  were  reckoned
the  people  of  God.  There  was  a  covenant,  the  terms  of  which  were  to  be  taught  to
every  generation  and  diligently  observed  by  it.  And  this  covenant  emphatically
required  that  these  people  should  live  among  themselves  an  upright,  brotherly,  loving
life.  Without  this,  worship  was  vain ;  indeed,  without  this,  worehip,  in  the  true  sense,
was  impossible.  In  the  home,  union  was  to  be  preserved  by  subordination  and  purity  ;
and  in  society,  by  the  safety  of  life  and  property  to  the  individual.  God's  people  are
"  the  people  of  his  pasture  and  the  sheep  of  his  hand,"  and  it  is  manifest  that,  in  the
right  order  of  things,  a  sheep's  clothing  should  cover  a  sheep  and  not  a  wolf.

II.  That  which  actually  is  found.  Wicked  men  are  found  where  none  but  the
devout,  the  upright,  and  the  gentle  ought  to  be.  Further,  this  wickedness  is  so  marked
off  by  bold  and  indignant  expressions  that  every  one  guilty  of  it  may  know  Jehovah's
eye  to  be  upon  him.  For  such  a  man  there  lies  no  way  of  escape  among  vague
generalities.  He  cannot  get  off  by  alleging,  with  apparent  seriousness,  that,  while  there
are  undoubtedly  deceivers  among  the  people  of  God,  he  at  all  events  is  not  to  bo
numbered  amongst  them.  If  a  man  is  behaving  himself  after  the  fashion  here
described,  he  certainly  must  know  it.  With  regard  to  certain  actions,  the  nature  of  them
may  come  out  so  openly  that  it  is  easy  to  effect  the  consequent  exclusion  and  sepa-
ration of  the  offender  from  the  people  of  God.  But  there  yet  remain  many  wickednesses,
the  worst  of  wickednesses,  which  a  man  may  go  on  committing  and  yet  keep  his
name  written  in  the  human  record  of  those  who  profess  service  to  God.  He  may  even
make  his  very  position  a  vantage-ground  for  the  laying  of  his  snares  and  the  perfecting
of  his  wiles.  He  may  be  able  so  to  conceal  his  hand  and  his  purpose  as  to  deceive  even
his  victims,  who,  instead  of  arguing  that  because  there  is  great  wickedness  the  doer  of
it  must  be  a  bad  man,  begin  at  the  other  end  and  say  that  a  maker  of  long  prayers
cannot  possibly  be  bad ;  he  may  be  driven  to  the  infliction  of  a,  painful  blow,  but,
that  must  be  reckoned  his  calamity  rather  than  his  fault.  Now,  the  descriptions  in
this  passage  make  it  evident  that  God  sees  into  all  the  doings  of  such  men.    And  at


>


CH.  V.  1— 31.]     THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  127


this  particular  time  these  men  had  become  very  successful,  and  we  must  infer  very
influential.  Wherever  money  is  heaped  up  it  makes  influence.  And  even  though
such  oppressors  were  not  numerous,  their  very  position  gave  them  power.  But  over
against  them,  with  all  their  power,  all  their  wealth,  all  their  pretensions,  there  is  that
God  who  marks  every  tear  and  groan  and  writhing  of  the  oppressed.  This  passage  is
but  one  out  of  many  in  which  Qod  shows  his  hatred  to  all  injustice.  Some  of  the
so-called  friends  of  humanity,  who  are  never  tired  of  asserting  their  friendship  and
X^ressing  their  claims,  make  one  of  their  great  claims  to  be  in  this,  that  they  oppose  all
acknowledgment  of  God.  Depend  upon  it,  God  is  the  true  Friend  of  humanity ;  he
first,  and  afterwards  are  those  whom  he  inspires  with  his  own  indignation  against
wrong,  and  endows  with  the  strength,  patience,  resolution,  and  all  Divine  resources
needed  to  destroy  it.  What  wonder  is  it  that  God  should  speak  of  vengeance  against
such  a  nation  as  permits  and  extenuates  the  monstrous  evils  denounced  in  this
passage  ? — Y.

Vers.  30,  31. — Mutual  helpers  in  wrong-doing,  I.  The  temptations  herb  bet
FORTH.  Three  classes  are  mentioned — the  prophet,  the  priest,  and  the  people  in
general.  Each  class  plays  only  too  well  its  iniquitous  and  deplorable  part,  just
because  of  the  strong  assistance  which  it  gains  from  the  attitude  of  the  others.
Each  class  acts  as  tempter  in  its  turn,  and  that  none  the  less  effectually  because  it
may  do  it  unconsciously.  Each  one  also  tempts  because  he  is  tempted,  and  one
hardly  knows  where  the  malign  influence  begins  save  by  remembering  the  words  of
James,  "  Every  man  is  tempted  when  he  is  drawn  away  of  his  own  lust  and  enticed."
The  prophet,  however,  is  here  put  first,  and  this  can  hardly  be  without  reason.  On
him  there  did  indeed  lie  a  peculiar  burden  of  responsibility.  The  prophets  here
mentioned,  we  may  take  it,  were  not  false  prophets,  although  they  spoke  falsely.
The  false  prophet  was  he  who  pretended  to  be  a  prophet,  although  God  never  sent
him ;  and  of  such  there  were  doubtless  some  in  the  land  at  this  very  time.  But  the
horrible  thing  here  was  that  men  whom  God  had  set  apart  to  speak  the  truth  used
the  prophetic  office  to  tell  convenient  lies,  such  as  seemed  to  afford  security  and  profit.
Jonah,  in  his  cowardice  fleeing  from  duty,  is  an  illustration  of  what  many  other  prophets
must  have  done,  only  they  went  further  and  never  came  back  to  truth  and  peace.  We
know  how  men  in  all  ages  have  sold  the  heritage  of  faculty  which  God  has  given  them
to  the  service  of  lying  and  darkness.  Instead  of  fighting  where  their  hearts  ought  to
have  been,  among  the  soldiers  for  truth  and  liberty,  they  have  become  mercenaries
under  despots.  These  prophets  on  whom  Jehovah  had  put  his  hand  had  allowed
themselves  to  be  filled  with  fear  and  greed  and  schemes  for  worldly  success,  instead  of
with  the  Spirit  of  Jehovah.  They  went  not  with  what  was  true,  but  with  what  was
acceptable.  How  much  higher  the  faithful  prophets  should  stand  in  our  esteem  when
we  consider  the  temptations  they  resisted,  the  pains  they  suflered,  the  pious  heroism
which  marked  their  sometimes  long  career  I  Imagine  what  the  consequences  would
have  been  if  the  apostles  had  altered  and  trimmed  the  gospel.  Then  there  were  the
l)riest8,  "  The  priests  bear  rule  by  their  means."  The  allusion  may  bo  to  the  hands
of  the  prophets,  but  perhaps  a  better  meaning  is  to  take  it  that  the  prophet  sinned  in
his  way,  and  the  priest  again  in  his  way.  The  prophet's  great  instrument  of  service
was  his  mouthy  and  with  this  he  prophesied  falsely.  The  priest's  great  instrument  of
service  was  his  hand,  and  this  he  used  to  get  superstitious  deference  to  his  privileges,
instead  of  for  the  purpose  of  presenting,  with  his  whole  heart,  offering  and  atonement
for  the  people.  In  addition  to  this,  there  may  have  been,  and  very  likely  was,  a
corrupt  understanding  between  priest  and  prophet.  Then  both  priest  and  prophet  had
in  their  eyes  the  great  mass  of  the  people.  God  himself  looked  down  on  this  unfaith-
fulness of  the  great  officials  with  a  warmth  of  indignation  that  would  soon  burst  into
flame,  but  the  people  regarded  it  all  with  a  very  diflerent  feeling.  They  "  loved  to  have
it  so."  When  a  true  prophet  came,  speaking  truth,  his  message  was  so  hateful  and
humiliating  that  they  denied  his  office.  "  Surely  the  man  who  speaks  such  things  cannot
be  a  prophet ;  a  madman  he  may  be,  or  a  fanatic,  or  a  disloyal  man  whose  Israelite
form  nides  a  foreign  heart ;  anything  you  like,  but  not  a  prophet,^*  But  when  the
prophet  comes  speaking  lies,  looking  into  the  faces  of  his  audience  for  all  that  he  has
to  put  into  their  ears,  then  his  oflice  will  be  approved.    And  so  with  the  priest    Ji  he


128  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PKOPHET  JEREMIAH,     [ch.  v.  1— 31.

makes  it  clear  that  burnt  offerings  and  all  sacrifices  are  nothing  without  repentance
and  reform,  he  will  be  thought  very  little  of.  He  must  let  the  people  sin  and  sin  as
much  as  they  like.  They  will  cram  the  temple  area  with  multitudes  of  flocks  and
herds  to  take  the  effect  of  sin  away,  if  only  they  may  go  on  sinning.  What  God  had
given  to  teach  the  dreadful  malignity  of  sin,  these  priests  had  turned  into  an  agency
for  making  it  seem  a  mere  trifle.

IL  There  was  also  an  oppobtuntty  of  rebuke  and  remonstbance.  The  people
were  not  obliged  to  accept  these  priests  and  prophets  on  their  own  ipse  dixit.  It  was
not  because  a  man  came  forth  with  his  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord "  that  he  was  to  be
followed.  Anybody  can  say,  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord."  The  devil  attempted  i)ersuasions
of  this  sort  when  he  came  to  Jesus  in  the  wilderness.  There  must  be  a  strict  search-
ing into  what  is  said.  One  purpose  for  which  God  used  prophets  and  priests  was  as
a  test  of  those  whom  they  had  to  do  with.  God  wishes  to  know  the  extent  of  our
regard  for  the  truth,  and  he  has  not  left  us  helpless  in  discovering  that  truth  with  the
almost  certainty.  There  is  always  something  to  appeal  to.  Every  true  prophet  with
his  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord "  had  behind  him  a  Law  and  testimony,  already  written
and  indisputably  valid,  to  which  ho  could  point.  Each  prophet  as  he  came  along
was  more  firmly  tied  to  the  truth,  because  ho  had  behind  him  so  many  who  had
already  spoken,  and  whom  he  must  not  contradict.  So  the  apostles  could  be  checked
in  speaking  lies  or  inventions,  because  an  appeal  was  possible  to  what  Jesus  had  said
in  the  flesh.  There  were  twelve  men  with  one  message,  and  only  as  long  as  the
message  was  one  were  people  bound  to  receive  it.  And  happily,  if  a  difierence  had
arisen,  there  was  always  the  means  of  testing  which  speaker  was  right.  "  No  man
speaking  by  the  Spirit  of  God  calleth  Jesus  accursed."  As  things  stand  to-day,  it  is
perfectly  clear  that  we  can  test  every  one  professing  to  be  a  messenger  of  Divine  truth ;
we  can  test  him  efiectually.  We  are  not  left  unprovided  amid  modem  im^wsture,
knavery,  and  delusion. — Y,

Ver.  1. — True  manhood.  Without  any  introduction,  let  us  plunge  at  once  into  our
subject,  which  is  True  manhood.  It  opens  broadly  before  us  in  the  suggestions  which
both  this  verse  and  the  chapter  from  which  it  is  taken  contain.  And  first  of  all  we
will  note —

I.  The  Divine  definition  and  description  op  it.  It  consists  in  executing
judgment  and  seeking  the  truth.  The  Lord  asks  importunately  that  *'  a  man  "  may
be  found,  and  then  he  defines  and  describes  what  ne  means  by  "  a  man,"  in  the
words,  *'one  that  executeth  judgment,  that  seeketh  the  truth."  Such  is  his
description  of  true  manhood.  So,  then,  the  true  man  is  he  to  whom  truth — that
which  is  right,  that  which  is  in  accordance  with  the  will  of  God — is  the  all-important
thing.  The  habit  of  his  mind,  the  purpose  of  his  life,  is  to  discover  this  truth —
to  know  what  is  right.  And  when  what  professes  to  be  truth  comes  before  him,
he  weighs  it  in  the  balance  of  conscience,  tests  how  it  tallies  with  the  mind  and  will
of  God ;  and  according  to  its  agreement  thereto  he  approves  or  disapproves,  he  gives
his  judgment.  And  then,  when  his  judgment  is  formed,  his  mind  made  up,  as  we  say,
he  does  not  linger  in  the  outer  courts  of  mere  approbation,  but  he  presses  on  into  the
very  sanctuary,  the  holy  of  holies,  of  corresponding  action — he  **  executeth  judgment."
Having  sought,  seen,  approved  the  right,  he  does  it;  not  once  now  and  then,  but
habitually.  Such  is  the  man  after  God's  own  heart,  such  the  Divine  description  of
what  manhood  really  is.  And  now  observe :  1.  How  complete  a  definition  this  is !
lor  what  form  of  goodness  or  excellence  is  there  that  this  does  not  include?
vvhatever  is  right  for  a  man  to  do  or  be  comes  under  this  description.  Our  well-
known  word,  "virtue,"  will  help  us  here;  for  what  is  virtue  but  simply  that  which
becomes,  which  properly  belongs  to  the  idea  of,  the  vir,  the  grand  old  Roman  name
tor  man  re^rded  in  his  higher  nature,  as  contrasted  with  the  lower  idea  of  man  in
regard  to  those  qualities  which  he  possesses  in  common  with  the  brutes  around  him  ?
Man  spofcen  01  as  merely  the  human  creature  was  designated  by  another  word  ;  but
man  as  ii^^VJpnt  and  moral,  man  in  his  nobler  being,  they  designated  by  that  word
«iIiiwTa^ccTw"^  ^.?^  "  virtue  "  comes.  Therefore  "  this  word '  virtue '  corresponds  as
kTm!i^»^o?^Vf »  -^^^^  ^^  ^ord  *  manliness.'  They  are  equivalent  terms.  Then,  if  wo
MOW  wnat  Yinuo  is,  we  know  what  true  manhood  is.    It  includes  aU  moral  excellence


OH.  V.  1—31.]      THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  129


whatsoever.  It  is  the  fruit,  the  certain  fruit,  of  a  man's  seeking  tho  truth,  and  then,
when  he  has  found  it  and  conscience  tells  him  that  he  has  found  it,  of  his  straightway
practicaUy  putting  it  into  action,  embodying  it  in  word  and  deed.  It  is  the  product  of
the  three  highest  faculties  God  has  given  to  man^ntellect,  conscience,  will.  It  there*
fore  must  embrace  all  that  belongs  and  is  becoming  to  the  v/r,  tho  man,  and  must
exclude  all  that  is  contrary  thereto."  2,  And  how  catholic  a  description  it  is  I  In  it
"  there  is  neither  Greek  nor  Jew,  circumcision  nor  uncircumcision,  barbarian,  Scythian,
male  nor  female,  bond  nor  free ; "  there  is  neither — that  is,  neither  exclusively — Buddhist,
Mahommedan,  Christian,  Jew ;  neither  Romanist,  Eastern,  Anglican,  Lutheran,  Pres-
byterian, Congregationalist,  nor  any  other  sect  nor  creed  whatsoever.  For  "  God  is  no
respecter  of  persons,"  but,  as  St.  Peter  said  to  Cornelius,  *'  In  every  nation  he  that
fcareth  God  and  worketh  righteousness  is  accepted  of  him."  Thus  catholic,  thus  all-
embracing,  is  this  Divine  description  of  a  true  man.  Qod'a  chosen  ones  consist  of  all
the  good.  3.  But  how  condemnatory  of  the  world's  standards !  Before  what  tinsel
imitations  of  the  true  manhood  does  the  world  bow  down !  How  many  glorify
physical  strength — tho  Samsonian  typo  of  man!  And  indeed  the  possession  of  a
physical  frame  capable  of  much  toil,  much  endurance,  that  shrinks  not  from  hardships,
and  laughs  at  bold  and  daring  enterprises  before  which  other  men  quail ;  a  body  well
organized,  its  varied  functions  all  working  powerfully  and  smoothly  like  the  several
parts  of  a  perfectly  adjusted  machine; — that  is  a  great  gift  of  God.  But  to  make  a
man's  physical  qualities  the  measure  of  his  manhood,  that  cannot  be  worthily  thought
of  for  one  moment.  And  so,  too,  if  we  take  inteUectual  distinction — that,  though  far
nobler  than  the  physical,  will  fall  before  the  high  claim  of  the  Divine  ideal.  And  as
for  secular  distinction — that  greatness  which  consists  in  what  a  man  has,  wealth,  rank,
I)ower,  rather  than  what  he  is, — that  claim  will  not  stand  for  one  moment.  The  world
may,  does,  fall  down  before  these  thiugs,  and  before  the  last  it  absolutely  grovels ;  but
in  the  high  courts  of  God's  judgment  Uiey  go  for  nothing  at  all.  And  at  that  bar  not
a  little  that  has  the  world's  free  licence  as  consistent  with  manhood  is  frowned  upon
and  utterly  condemned.  No ;  right,  truth,  virtue,  all  that  is  in  harmony  with  God's
will, — this  is  what  the  man  after  God's  mind  seeks,  finds,  and  habitually  does.  4.  And
how  commendatory  to  the  conscience  is  this  Divine  definition  of  manhood !  Put  it
l>cfore  any  thoughtful  man,  and  at  once  he  confesses  it  worthy  of  GKxl  to  set  forth  and
blessed  for  man  to  seek  after.  Hero  tho  excellent  of  tho  earth  in  all  ages  and  in  all
lands  have  found  a  common  meeting-place,  and,  when  unbiassed  conscience  has  spoken,
have  come  to  a  cordial  embrace.  5.  But  how  Christ'Compelling  is  this  Divine
description  of  true  manhood !  For  he  who  sets  himself  to  embody  it,  and  really  enters
on  the  glorious  endeavour,  will  speedily  find  that  he  wants  a  model,  a  motive,  and  a
might  which  assuredly  he  cannot  find  in  the  world  around  him.  A  model ;  for  mere
abstract  descriptions  help  but  little.  What  can  the  most  brilliant  word-painting  do  to
enable  you  to  realize  what  a  lovely  landscape  is  like  ?  It  can  do  something,  but  not
very  much.    But  let  the  gifted  artist  draw  the  scene,  let  him  in  beautiful  picture

Eortray  it,  and  how  much  more  vividly  we  realize  it  then  I  The  mechanician  must
ave  his  model  to  work  from  if  he  is  to  do  successful  work.  And  so,  would  wo  realize
the  description  God  has  given  us  of  a  true  man,  we  also  must  have  our  model.  But
there  is  only  One  who  is  flawless  and  altogether  perfect — the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.
Patriarchs,  prophets,  psalmists,  apostles,  saints,  even  the  most  worthy,  are  none  of  them
perfect ;  for  we  have  to  modify  here,  correct  there,  and  absolutely  reject  elsewherd.
It  is,  therefore,  to  the  life  of  our  blessed  Lord  and  Master  that  this  Divine  description  of
manhood  forces  me  would  I  find  the  one  example  I  may  safely,  always,  and  everywhere
copy.  But  I  want  a  motive  also ;  for  when  I  begin  my  great  endeavour  I  find  it  no
holiday  task.  It  brings  no  worldly  gain,  it  wins  no  human  applause.  My  natural
bent  and  bias  are  utterly  against  it.  Ease  and  comfort  are  ever  crying,  "  Spare  thy-
self." Companions  on  the  road  are  few,  and  not  all  of  them  to  my  liking,  and  the  way
is  narrow  and  rough  and  steep.  What,  then,  can  alone  spur  me  on  and  constrain
me  by  a  compulsion  I  cannot  resist  ?  What  but  a  sense  of  Christ's  great  love,  and
the  supreme  solicitude  to  "  be  accepted  of  him,"  which  flows  therefrom  ?  There  is  abso-
lutely no  other  motive  which  will  serve  for  the  whole  way.  Some  will  take  me  a  part
of  the  way,  and  others  a  further  part,  but  all  will  fail  long  ere  the  true  end  is  reached.
Therefore  am  I  again  driven  to  Onrist,  that,  as  he  is  my  Model,  so  he  may  be  my  Motive

K


130  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PHOPHET  JEREMIAH,     [ch.  v.  1—31.


too*  Bat  be  must  al^  be  mj  Might.  The  power  to  endure,  the  strength  to  toil,  the
dftily  g^raoe  for  daily  lieed,— whence  can  it  come  bat  from  him  who  has  said, "  Because
1  lire,  ye  shall  live  alxo ?  "  True  manhood,  real  virtae,  is  therefore  an  impoasible  thing
apart  from  Christ.  More  or  less  st anted  and  distorted  forms  of  it  there  may  be,  but
ine  Dirine  ideal,  never.  May  he  help  as  to  remember  this.  Urns,  then,  complete,
catholic,  condemnatory  of  the  world  i  standards,  commendatory  to  the  conscience,
compel  ling  resort  to  Christ,  Is  this  Divine  manhood  of  which  our  text  tells.    Bat


II.  The  Divtxe  DisApponmcEST  Ajn>  dismay  at  kot  tisdisq  rr  whebs  it  mat
10  JU0TLT  HAVE  BEES  EXPECTED.  Observe  the  words  of  oar  text,  how  they  challenge
the  most  thorough  search  everywhere,  implying  that  the  Lord  himself  had  made  such
•earch — ^he  whose  eyes  (ver.  3)  "  are  upon  the  truth,"  who  is  keen-visioned  to  discover  his
own  in  the  densest  crowd  or  in  the  most  obscure  abode.  But  now  he  challenges  any
to  make  a  like  search.  Let  them  run  to  and  fro  in  the  by-streets,  in  the  broad  ways,
in  market-places,  in  all  {xirts  where  men  congregate ;  let  them  in  every  such  place  see,
know,  seek,  if  they  can  6iid  even  one  true  man.  And  the  challenge  is  made  not  in
•com  nor  in  anger,  but  in  disappointment  and  dismay.  For  where,  if  not  amongst
God's  own  prof(^sed  people,  and  in  the  centre  of  their  worship,  Jerusalem ;  where,  if  not
there,  coula  such  as  God  sought  be  found  ?  But  not  even  there  were  they ;  there  were
**  none  righteous ;  no,  not  one.'*  But  what  was  found  this  whole  chapter  plainly  declares.
There  was  horrible  wickedness — wickedness  which  only  such  appalling  images  as  the
feventh  and  eighth  verses  of  this  chapter  could  fitly  describe.  And  this  not  amongst  the
ignorant  poor  only,  but  amongst  the  great,  the  well  instructed  albo  (vers.  4,  5).  And
where  there  was  a  form  of  religion  the  power  was  wanting,  as  the  second  verse  tells.
They  might  use  devout  words,  but  the  Lord,  whose  eyes  were  on  the  truth  (ver.  3),
know  how  hollow  that  profession  was.  So  that  there  was  not  one  man  such  as  God
desired.  And,  though  willing  to  spare,  God  was  forced  to  punish  (ver.  9).  This  and
much  more  of  a  like  sort  prevails  all  through  the  chapter.  But  the  contemplation  of
it  fills  the  Divine  mind  with  disappointment  and  dismay.  It  is  deep  distress  to  him
that  ho  cannot  find  what  he  so  much  desires  to  find.  Are  we  quite  sure  that  the  like
question  might  not  be  asked  in  our  day  ?  Is  the  Divine  ideal  of  manhood  so  constantly
realized  ?  Is  there  not  very  much  to  make  a  devout  heart  fear  lest  a  like  search  might
load  to  a  too  much  like  result  ?  Let  us  remember  what  it  is  God  looks  for  in  as.  Not
that  which  tho  world  thinks  so  much  of,  but  this  manhood ;  and  he  mourns  when  he
finds  it  not.  And  let  it  be  our  prayer  that  more  and  more  we  may  be  men  according  to
his  mind.     Note  next—

IIL  The  Divine  demonbtbation  of  the  delight  and  joy  he  has  in  it.  He
fiays  if  there  be  but  one  such  man,  he  will  spare  Jerusalem  for  his  sake.  Such  is  the
meaning  of  tho  last  clause  of  this  verse.  What  higher  proof  (save  one  which  we  will
note  anon)  could  he  give  of  his  estimate  of  this  manhood  ?  He  gave  large  proof  when
ho  told  Abraham  that  if  there  were  ten  righteous  in  Sodom  he  would  spare  the  city
for  their  sakcs.  And  he  is  continually  doing  the  like  of  what  he  here  said  ho  would  do.
He  is  continually  blessing  the  bad  for  the  sake  of  the  good.  "  Ye  are  the  salt  of  tho
earth."  said  our  Lord  to  his  disciples,  implying  thereby  that,  but  for  his  people,  the
worla  would  go  to  corruption.  "  For  tho  elect's  sake  those  days  shall  bo  shortened  ''—
tho  days,  ho  meant,  of  iferusalem's  destruction,  which  were  then,  as  in  Jeremiah's  time,
swiftly  drawing  on.  And  how  often  we  read  of  bad  and  wicked  descendants  and  suc-
cessors on  tho  throne  of  David,  who  for  his  sake  were  dealt  with  far  other  than  they
desorvod  I  And  to-day,  how  many  godless  children  of  pious  parents  are  for  like  reason
doalt  with  in  like  manuor  1  Tho  Church  might  well,  did  she  choose,  challenge  the  world
to  say  whoro  It  would  bo  without  the  Church.  The  impious  sneer  at,  persecute,  and
dospiso  tho  godly ;  but  were  it  not  for  those  they  so  shamefully  use,  theirs  would  bo  a
short  shrift  and  a  quick  going  down  into  hell.  And  let  all  who  are  living  godly  in
Christ  JoHUB  bo  choorod  by  knowing  that,  though  persecuted  by  the  world,  they  are  yet
most  precious  in  tho  JjonVH  sight.    Now  finally  note—

IV.  'J^IIH  SUPREME  demonstration  GoD  HAS  GIVEN  OF  HIS  DELIGHT  AND  JOY  IN  IT.

Wo  turn  to  tho  gosixjl  for  this,  and  it  enables  us  to  reply  to  the  Divine  challenge  to
"  find  a  man  ; "  fur  wo  have  found  him  **  of  whom  Moses  and  the  prophets  did  write  "—the
nmu  Christ  Josus.    He  has  answered  to  the  Divine  desciiption,  and  for  his  sake  not  a  city


CH.V.  1— 31.]     THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  181

alone,  but  a  world,  is  to  be  pardoned*  **  For  he  is  the  Propitiation  for  our  sins,  and  not
for  ours  only,  but/'  etc.  And  our  pardon  will  be  not  as  Sodom's  or  Jerusalem's  would
have  been — leaving  the  people  still  the  slaves  of  sin ;  but  the  beginning  of  a  new  life,
in  which  we  shall  grow  more  and  more  into  the  fulness  of  the  stature  of  the  perfisct
man,  the  Divine  id^  embodied  in  Christ  Jesus.  But  such  is  the  Bivine  delight  m  this
Man  that,  for  his  sake,  he  pardons  whosoever  believeth  on  him.  God  hath  laid  help  for
us  *'  on  One  who  is  mighty  "  to  save.  Let  us,  then,  go  and  put  in  our  claim,  confessing
our  deep  need  of  pardon^  but  pleading  Ghxi's  own  promise,  that  for  the  sake  of  this
Man — his  own  "beloved  Son  in  whom  he  is  well  pleased" — he  should  pardon  ui.
And  the  answer  will  come  back,  "  CK)  in  peace ;  be  of  good  cheer :  thy  sins  be  forgiven
thee."— C.

Ver.  3. — An  unfailing  appeal,  ^'O  Lord,  are  not  thine  eyes  upon  the  truth?**
Text  uttered  in  protest  against  the  pretence  and  hypocrisy  everjrwhere  prevailing  in  the
prophet's  day.  But  the  appeal  is  vindicated  whatever  we  understand  by  *'  the  truth."
Consider  it  in  regard—

I.   To  THE  TRCTH   AS  SPOKEN  BY   GOD,  IN   HIS  WORKS  AND  IN  HIS  WORD.      See  this

in  the  constancy  and  invariability  of  the  order  of  nature.  The  reign  of  law  is  because
"  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  are  ever,"  etc.  See  it  in  the  fulfilment  of  ancient  prophecies,
especially  those  which  concern  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  and  we  are  to  believe  it  in
re^rd  to  those  many  promises  of  God,  the  fulfilment  of  which  yet  waits.

II.  To  THE  TRUTH  WRITTEN— to  try  and  test  thereby  all  our  teachings  and  beliefs.
See  our  Lord,  in  the  temptation,  how  Aw  eyes  were  ever  on  the  truth.  Hence  his  *'  It
is  written  "  foiled  the  tempter  again  and  again.  "  To  the  Law  and  to  the  testimony,"
etc.  The  Bereans — and  their  example  is  held  up  as  noble — searched  the  Scriptures
daily,  to  see  if  the  teachings  they  heard  *'wcre  so;"  so,  that  is,  as  the  apostles
affirmed.

III.  To  THE  TRUTH  IMPLANTED— to  cncourage  and  avenge  it.  His  grace  implants
truth  in  the  character,  and  leads  to  its  being  acted  out  in  the  life.  Kow,  the  eyes  of
the  Lord  are  ever  upon  such  men.  As  he  liaies  the  hypocrites,  so  he  loves  the  sincere,
the  "  Israelites  indeed,  in  whom  there  is  no  guile."  His  eyes  rest  on  them  ever  with
delight.  His  Spirit  cheers  and  encourages  them  amid  all  outward  distress  and  per-
secution.   His  hand  will  verilyjavenge  them  as  *'  his  own  elect,"  in  his  own  good  time.

IV.  To  THE  Truth  incarnate — to  behold  and  bless  all  those  who  are  in  him.  **  I
am  the  Truth,"  said  the  Lord  Jesus.  How  we  love  to  attract  the  attention  and  to
enjoy  the  smile  of  recognition  and  approval  on  the  part  of  those  who  are  greater  thiui
ourselves  in  this  world  1  Would  wo  come  under  the  notice  and  smile  of  the  Lord  Ghxl,
we  must  come  to  him  upon  whom  his  eyes  are  ever  resting  with  delight,  even  to  his
well-beloved  Son,  the  Truth  incarnate.  Until  we  are  "  in  him "  we  are  in  the  oold
shade,  and  without  hope  or  help.  In  him  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  are  on  us  as  they  are  on
him,  and  *'  he  makes  his  face  to  shine  upon  us." — C.

Ver.  3. — The  sorrow  of  sorrows,  "  Thou  hast  stricken  them,  but  they  have  not
grieved,"  etc.

I.  To  BE  STRICKEN  OF   Gk)D  AND  AFFLICTED  IB  IN  ITSELF  VERY  PAINFUL  TO  CX)H-

TEiffPLATE.  When  such  sorrow  comes  it  is :  1.  To  teach  the  servant  of  God  how  to
sympathize  with  and  succour  other  troubled  ones.  2.  To  loosen  them  from  the  clinging
Imnds  of  this  world.  3.  Because  such  sorrow  is  the  inevitable  pain  and  distress
attendant  upon  that  glorious  contest  for  "  the  prize  of  our  high  calling,"  for  which
contest  our  Father,  out  of  love  to  us  and  because  of  his  joy  in  us,  and  knowing  that  we
shall  win  it,  has  entered  us.  Still,  notwithstanding  these  facts  and  others  like  them,
the  afflictions  of  the  righteous  are  painful  indeed.

II.  Bur   SORROW  IS  YET  MORE   SORROWFUL  WHEN  IT  IS  BELF-OAUSED.      Such  WaS  the

sorrow  of  many  of  those  whose  tears  and  lamentations  we  read  of  in  Scripture— David,
Peter,  Esau.  **  It  was  my  own  fault : "  this  is  the  reflection  which  calls  into  dread  life
and  activity  "  the  worm  that  dieth  not."  But  still,  when,  as  with  the  contrite  heartp,
Manasseh,  David,  Peter,  etc.,  of  whom  Scripture  tells,  their  sorrow  is  of  a  godly  sort,
then,  sad  as  it  is,  its  result  makes  it  blessed.
III.  But  there  is  a  borrow  of  borrows,  and  rr  is  told  of  herb.    It  is  when,  r.B


182  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,     [ch.  v.  1—31.


this  verse  tells,  God  sends  his  corrections  and  sore  afflictions  upon  men,  and  yet  they
are  none  the  better  for  them,  but  even  worse.  Pliaraoh  is  the  great  illustration  of  this
deepest  sorrow.  It  is  not  all  who  can  say,  "  Before  I  was  afflicted  I  went  astray :  but
now  have  I  kept  thy  Word."  But  of  too  many  that  word  is  true  which  says,
"Though  thou  shottldest  bray  a  fool  in  a  mortar  .  .  .  yet  will  not  his  foolishness
depart  from  him "  (cf.  Rev.  xvi.  10 ;  Acts  xxvi.  14).  1.  But  what  is  the  cause  of
ihe»e  failures  on  the  part  of  QoiTs  chastisements  f  They  are  such  as  those :  (1)  Sentence
aeainst  an  evil  work  is  not  executed  speedily,  (2)  The  fearful  force  of  the  desire
alter  the  evil  object  overwhelms  and  bears  down  all  thought  of  the  punishment  that
must  follow.  ^3)  The  assigning  of  the  affliction  that  comes  to  other  causes  than  the
true  one.  To  this  day  the  Jews  do  not  see  that  their  rejection  of  the  Lord  Jesus  was
the  reason  of  Gk)d's  rejection  of  them,  nor  that  it  is  his  blood  which  is  upon  them  and
their  children.  2.  But  without  question  such  sorrows  are  the  most  lamentable  of  all ;
for:  (1)  they  reveal  the  virulence,  the  deep-seated  character,  and  the  dread  hold
which  sin  has  gained;  (2)  they  necessitate  and  foretell  yet  more  severe  judgments
from  God ;  (3)  they  cast  most  sad  doubt  on  the  question  whether  such  persons  will
ever  be  saved  at  all.

Conclusion.  Is  sorrow  resting  upon  us?  Then:  1.  Rest  not  until  you  have
found  out  its  cause.  "  Show  me  wherefore  thou  contendest  with  me "  should  be  our
appeal.  ^,  Let  the  possibility  that  your  sorrows  may  leave  you  unblessed,  that
dod's  purpose  and  intent  may  be  lost  upon  you,  send  you  to  the  throne  of  grace  with
importunate  prayer  that  so  it  may  not  be  with  you. — C.

Vers.  3 — 5. — The  rich  and  the  poor  meet  together.  They  do  so— •
L  In  most  moubntul  ways.  1.  In  their  common  exposure  to  sorrow  and  death,
2.  In  their  yet  more  moumfvl  subjection  to  the  bondage  of  moral  evil,  both  alike
leagued  together  in  rebellion  against  Gkxi  (cf.  text).  From  which  learn:  (1)  No
circumstances  alone  will  shut  out  sin.  (2)  If  one  condition  of  life  has  its  moral  dis-
advantages, so  has  another.  (3)  That  this  does  not  affirm  that  all  are  on  one  level  in
this  respect.  They  are  not  so ;  they  who  have  knowledge  and  have  been  taught  God's
truth  may  and  will  justly  be  expected  to  compare  favourably  in  conduct  and  character
with  those  not  so  privileged.  (4)  That  the  terribleness  of  the  might  of  sin  is  seen  in
the  fact  that  it  leaps  over  the  fences  and  safeguards  of  happy  circumstances  and
abundant  knowledge,  as  easily  as  it  finds  entrance  where  there  are  no  such  fences  at
all.  But  the  moumfulness  of  this  meeting  of  the  rich  and  poor  leads  us  to  look  out
for  and  rejoice  in  other  and  more  happy  ones.  And  there  are  such.  Note,  therefore—*
IL  Thb  blessed  MEETIN08  OP  THE  RICH  AND  THE  POOR.  1.  In  their  commoH
possession  of  a  moral  and  spiritual  nature.  Those  great  capacities  whereby  "  a  man
is  80  much  better  than  a  sheep  "  are  the  property  of  rich  and  poor  alike— to  love  and
be  loved ;  to  search  out  knowledge,  to  worship,  trust,  and  delight  in  God.  Man  is
God's  jewel,  whether  it  be  set  in  all  fit  and  beautiful  surroundings  or  whether  by  some
malign  cause  it  have  fallen  into  the  mud.  By  its  nature,  not  its  surroundings,  are  wo
to  judge  of  it.  2.  In  Christ,  '*  He  was  rich, ...  he  for  our  sakes  became  poor  " — thus
for  ever  uniting  the  two  together.  He  was,  whilst  on  earth,  at  the  same  time  both
rich  and  poor,  having  at  his  command  more  than  the  vastest  resources  of  the  rich,  and
yet  day  by  day  sharing  the  lot  of  the  poor.  He  was  the  Son  of  man,  the  Head  and
Representative  of  all  men— of  humanity  at  large.  3.  At  the  cross.  The  common
malady  craves  and  finds  the  common  medicine.  The  sorrows  of  the  contrite  heart  are
those  of  no  class  at  all,  but  are  the  experience  of  rich  and  poor  alike ;  and  the  cross
alone  can  soothe  them,  and  thither  therefore  they  alike  come.  These  all  are  clothed
in  the  robe  made  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb.  4.  In  the  everlasting  kingdom  of
cur  God,  There  the  barriers  of  caste  and  class,  which  here  seem  so  fixed  that  they  can
never  be  moved,  will  be  broken  down,  and  character  alone  will  determine  whether  we
shall  stand  high  up  or  low  down  on  the  steps  of  the  eternal  throne.  The  love  of  God
in  Christ  will  be  the  great  uniting  bond,  ana,  as  that  rules  and  governs  us,  so  will  our
companionship  and  our  condition  be  ordered.  There  the  rich  shall  be  rid  of  the  many
hindrances  of  their  lot  which  make  it  so  "  hard  for  a  rich  man  to  enter  into  the  kingdom
of  Gkni;"  and  there  the  poor  shall  have  said  farewell  for  ever  to  all  the  privation  and
painful  toil  of  earth.    The  tears  of  all  shall  flow  no  more.     Then  let  us  learn :  (1)  To


CH.  V.  1—31.3     THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  133

cherish  sympathy  with  all  our  brethren.  The  poor  with  the  rich,  and  they  with
the  poor.  It  is  equally  difficult  but  equally  obligatory  on  each.  (2)  To  be  eager  in
telling  to  the  poor  of  this  gospel  of  the  meeting  of  the  rich  and  the  poor.  (3)  To  come
to  Christ  and  to  his  cross,  and  to  abide  there,  that  the  Spirit  of  him  who  was  the
Friend  and  Saviour  of  all  may  dwell  in  us  more  and  more. — </.

Yer.  4. — The  moral  disadvantages  of  the  poor.  Jeremiah  recognizes  and  refers  to
these  disadvantages  as  a  well-known  fact,  and  he  tells  how  he  expected  to  find  in  them
an  explanation  of  the  deplorable  wickedness  with  which  Jerusalem  was  filled.  ''  Theie-
fore  I  said.  Surely  these  are  poor,"  etc.    We  note —

I.  That  these  abe  the  real  evils  of  the  lot  of  the  foob.  At  once  all  manner
of  other  distresses  which  attend  povertv  arise  to  our  minds,  and  therefore  we  would
observe :  1.  That  we  do  not  deny  that  their  physical  and  social  disadvantages  are  also
evils.  To  be  ill  fed,  iU  housed,  ill  clothed,  as  so  many  of  the  poor  are, — who  can  mi^e
light  of  a  lot  like  theirs  ?  Therefore :  2.  Still  less  do  we  deny  our  duty  to  rdieve  their
physical  evils  to  the  utmost  of  our  power.  3.  But  we  do  deny  that  these  are  their  diUf
evUs.  For :  (1)  Many  of  these  are  more  than  counterbalanced  by  what  is  so  commonly
found  amongst  the  rich.  Dr.  Channing  says,  "When  I  compare  together  different
classes  as  existing  at  this  moment  in  the  civilized  world,  I  cannot  think  the  difference
between  the  rich  and  the  poor  in  regard  to  mere  physical  suffering  so  great  as  is  some-
times imagined.  That  some  of  the  indigent  among  us  die  of  scanty  food  is  undoubtedly
true,  but  vastly  more  in  this  community  die  from  eating  too  much  than  from  eating
too  little,  vastly  more  from  excess  than  starvation.  So  as  to  clothing :  many  shiver
from  want  of  defences  against  the  cold ;  but  there  is  vastly  more  suffering  among  the
rich  from  absurd  and  criminal  modes  of  dress,  which  fashion  has  sanctioned,  than
among  the  poor  from  deficiency  of  raiment.  Our  daughters  are  oftener  brought  to
their  grave  by  their  rich  attire  than  our  beggars  by  their  nakedness.  So  the  poor  are
often  overworked ;  but  they  suffer  less  than  many  among  the  rich,  who  have  no  work
to  do,  no  interesting  object  to  fill  up  life,  to  satisfy  the  infinite  cravings  of  man  for
action.  According  to  our  present  modes  of  education,  how  many  of  our  daughters  are
victims  of  ennui — a  misery  unknown  to  the  poor,  and  more  intolerable  than  the
weariness  of  excessive  toil !  The  idle  young  man,  spending  the  day  in  exhibiting  his
person  in  the  street,  ought  not  to  excite  the  envy  of  the  overtasked  poor ;  and  this
cumberer  of  the  ground  is  found  exclusively  amoi^  the  rich."  (2)  And  their  in-
tellectual disadvantages  are  nearly  as  great  an  evil  as  those  that  belong  to  their
outward  lot.  "  Knowledge  is  power,"  but  to  be  without  knowledge  is  to  lack  the
power  to  lighten,  to  elevate,  to  refine,  to  cheer,  and  in  ways  manifold  to  ameliorate  onr
lot  in  life.  Therefore  to  lack  knowledge  and  education  deserves  to  be  looked  upon
with  even  more  compassion  than  the  lack  of  physical  comforts.  But  still,  the  chief
evil  of  poverty  is  its  moral  disadvantage.    Now —

II.  These  moral  disadvantages  of  the  poob  abe  such  as  abise  fbom  :  1.  The
difficulty  of  maintaining  self-respect.  All  the  world  seems  agreed  to  regard  the  poor
as  the  '*  lower  orders,"  and  to  confine  the  term  *'  respectable  "  to  those  who  have  enough
and  to  spare.  And  when  poverty  necessitates  the  receiving,  and  yet  more  the  asking,
of  charity,  how  hard  it  is  then  to  maintain  that  erect  moral  bearing,  that  spirit  of
independence,  which  is  so  essential  to  the  formation  of  all  true,  worthy  moral  character!
2.  The  almost  impossibility  of  mental  ctdture.  How  can  the  man  who  has  to  continue
at  prolonged  and  laborious  bodily  toil  from  morn  to  night,  day  after  day  all  his  life
long,  and  only  then  can  earn  scarce  sufficient  to  provide  for  his  actual  bodily  necessities,
be  expected  to  be  other  than  rough,  rude,  illiterate,  and  contented  to  be  so  ?  What
mockery  it  seems  to  talk  of  mental  cultivation  to  a  man  like  that  I  But  shut  off
from  such  cultivation,  how  utterly  is  the  door  closed  upon  him  which  leads  to  so  much
that  would  cheer  and  brighten  his  whole  life,  and  would  lift  him  up  in  the  scale  of
moral  being  I  3.  The  risk  to  all  moral  delicacy  and  refinement  which  their  crowded
and  wretched  habitations  involve.  If  men  are  obliged  to  herd  like  cattle,  only  less
comfortably  than  they,  how  can  *'  a  man  be  better  than  a  sheep  "  in  such  case  ?  4.  ITke
temptation  to  envy  and  sullen  discontent  at  their  beholding  what  seems  to  them  the  so
much  brighter  lot  of  the  well-to-do.  The  patience  of  the  poor  beneath  the  awful
injustices  and  hardships  which  arise  from  the  unequal  distribution  of  wealth  is  a


VA  THE  BrX)K  OF  THE  PHOPHET  .JEBEVIAH.     rr3.T.l_n.


nurreL  E-^^-'Z-iiij,  t'-^v,  when  tL^y  Lare  dif.j  to  e'i::re  tie  —y^Er::!:::!*  and
tfCfjndni  treatrr,*:Lt  wLich  the  y*>?*«^?r.^n  if  wealth  aIn:i^:  i^Tira'c'v  b-ereis  tc
tboie  who  Lare  it  Dot.  5.  Ta^  ^#<rri  s'r^fprle  vhich  fiith  in  Goi  aikd  hU  gorAr.tis
vtmmi  hU  hav^amidth^  hard*hip§  ff  fottriy.  It  ii  triie  that  m^^n  wo-ili  l<  far  barr  >:r
M  they  were  better  ni€;n,  bat  it  is  also  troe  that  rart  nTnnbers  of  men  woTild  h«  oeUcr
if  tbey  were  on-y  happier.  When  our  chiltiren  are  happy  they  are  good;  it  is  un-
lisppiiieM  makestbem  cross  axxl  wrong.  There  is  do  more  heartbreaking  fact  to  a
tbougbtfal  and  ootDpassionate  mind  tb^  this,  that  the  blessing  of  fiith  in  G:»i  and
the  lore  of  God,  which  the  poor  most  of  all  need,  is  for  them  the  hardest  of  all  io  win
sod  kec'p.  6.  27««  dr^tnd  Umptafion  to  Btnsual  indulgence  trAi'cA  the  haHsJtir,^  of  i\eir
lai  ezpone  them  to.  Can  we  wonder  that  these  men  rush  to  the  dn-sbop,  the  tavern,
•nd  tnere  in  strong  drink  forget  for  a  while  the  miseries  of  their  common  life  ?  It  is
ft  piteous  fact  that  it  is  the  most  wretched  of  the  pocT  who  drink  most  desperately.
(Let  the  reader  turn  to  Dr.  Channing's  sermon  on  •  Ministry  for  the  Poor/  to  see  many
of  these  p^-ints  worked  out.)  Such  are  the  real  erils  of  the  lot  of  the  r-cor,  besi  !c
which  their  outward  hardships  arc  small  in  comparison.

IIL  Fbom  all  this  we  leark  why  we  should  o 'Mpas5I03^ate  theip.  lot,  and
WHAT  IN  IT  WE  SHOULD  CHIEFLY  EXDEAVOUR  TO  RELiETE.  When  their  moral  dis-
ftdrantages  move  our  comfAssion,  as  they  sh<^'uld  and  as  ibcy  did  our  L^.rd's,  we  shall
•trire  most  of  all  to  counteract  and  remoTe  them.  How  shall  we  do  this?  We  reply,
J/ter  the  -manner  of  ctur  Lord.  Chiefly  by  ministering  to  th'.ir  souLs.  He  went  ahjut
everywhere  preadiing  and  teaching.  The  very  greatest  kindness  that  can  be  done  to  a
poor  man  is  to  bring  him  to  Christ,  to  get  him  by  God's  grace  thoroughly  converted.
That  will  lift  him  up  and  bless  him  every  way.  It  will  not  despise  secondary  means.
Our  Lord  fed  the  f>oor,  healed  them,  ministered  to  their  temporal  relief  frequently.  But
he  did  not  do  this  indiscriminately.  They  were  by  no  means  his  chief  works.  That
chief  work  was  a  ministry  to  their  souls.  And  so  those  who  copy  his  example  will  not
despise  secondary  means— charity,  wise  sanitary  laws,  education.  But  all  these  will
he  j/ut  in  the  second  place,  not  in  point  of  time  and  attention,  but  in  esteem  and  worth.
They  will  be  counted  only  as  aids  to  what  is  far  better  than  themselves.  It  may  be  thit
the  Church  has  not  availed  herself  of  these  aids  as  she  should,  but  has  left  them  to  the
care  of  the  State  more  than  she  should.  Still,  it  is  ever  those  who  are  most  intent  on
the  moral  well-being  of  the  poor  who  are  found  to  the  front  in  all  schemes  for  their
physical  and  social  well-being.  So  that  the  excellence  of  onr  Lord's  method  is  that,
whilst  it  aims  at  the  highest  good,  it  more  than  any  other  seeks  to  promote  and  indeed
•ecures  as  a  help  to  that  highest,  the  lower  and  temporal  good  of  those  to  whom  it
ministers.  And  it  has  a  rich  reward,  "  Blessed  are  ye  poor,"  said  our  Lord,  "  rich
In  faith  and  heirs,"  etc.  Not  a  few  of  the  greatest  saints,  the  martyrs,  the  heroes  of
the  faith,  have  been  drawn  from  the  ranks  of  the  poor.  The  grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ  has  come  to  them,  and  straightway  they  have  been  as  it  were  transformed.
They  have  risen  up  above  the  low  levels  of  their  old  life — so  mean,  sordid,  foul,  godless
oftentimes— and  have  come  to  bo  like  the  Lord  himself.  And  to-day,  how  perpetually
may  wo  see  amid  the  godly  poor  all  the  disadvantages  of  their  lot  which  we  have
enumerated  above,  completely  overcome  1  They  reverence  conscience ;  they  envy  not
the  rich;  they  cultivate  and  rejoice  in  the  purest  and  tendercst  home  affections;  though
ignorant  of  most  of  human  learning,  they  have  the  fear  of  Gt)d  and  the  knowledge  of
his  Word,  and  so  are  wise  with  a  wisdom  before  which  mere  human  wisdom  dwindles
into  insignificance.  They  keep  themselves  from  all  vice,  they  love  and  trust  God
with  a  simplicity  of  utter  trust  and  calm  confidence,  beautiful  and  blessed  even  to
contemplate — how  much  more  to  possess  1  "  Blessed  are  yc  poor  I  '*  Thus,  then,  after
the  manner  of  our  Lord,  would  we  strive  to  meet  and  overcome  the  moral  disadvantages
of  the  poor.— 0.

Vcr.  7. — TTow  men  cune  their  hlemings,    ",When  I  had  fed  them  to  the  full,**  etc.

L  God  dokh  this  at  times.  Cf.  Gen.  iii.  17,  "Cursed  is  the  ground  for  thy  sake,"
etc. ;  Hag.  i.  11,  etc.  And  whenever  he  makes  our  good  and  pleasant  things  the  means
of  our  puuiHhmcnt.  Ilczekiah's  riches  and  prosperity  were  the  lure  which  drew  upon
him  the  opnroHBlng  Assyrians.  And  so  the  body  which,  when  possessed  of  all  its
faoultioA  anu  in  health,  ministers  so  much  good  to  man,  God,  in  judgment  upon  the


CH.  V.  1— 31.]     THE  BOOK   OF   THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  135


man's  sin,  may  for  the  sake  of  the  sinful  soul  cause  that  disease,  pain,  impotence,  may
curse  it.  Ana  the  mind  also— that  may  become  a  den  of  malignant,  impure,  profane
thoughts.

II.  But  men  do  this  par  mobe  frequently.  The  noblest  physical  gifts  may  be
shattered,  wrecked,  by  sins  against  the  body.  The  mind — capable  of  such  high  service
and  a  channel  of  such  vast  blessing — ^men  may,  do,  pollute,  corrupt,  and  pervert  and
60  curse  their  blessings.  The  moral  nature — this  a  great  gift  of  God,  the  power  to
judge,  choose,  resolve ;  but  see  how  soon  man  cursed  that  and  turned  his  blessing  into
a  curse.  The  gifts  of  providence  are  also  abused  in  the  same  way  (cf.  text).  The
home.  Oh,  what  joy  comes  to  men  through  the  blessings  that  were  designed  to  be  for
ever  associated  with  that  word  I  But  how  often  men,  by  self-indulgence,  neglect,  evil
example,  utter  failure  in  parental  duty,  turn  the  blessing  of  home  into  a  curse  I  And
even  the  gospel  of  Christ  itself— God's  unspeakable  gift — ^men  may  make  the  knowledge
of  it  to  be  "  a  savour  of  death  imto  death  "  for  themselves.  "  This  Child  is  set  for  the
fcdl  of  many  in  Israel,"  said  Simeon  of  our  Lord.

III.  But  it  is  a  crime  which  God  cannot  away  with.  "  How  shall  I  pardon  thee
for  this  ?  "  etc.  "  Shall  I  not  visit,"  etc.  ?  (ver.  9).  Cf.  parable  of  fruitless  fig  tree—
"  Cut  it  down,"  etc. ;  the  talents — "  Take  from  him  the  talent,"  etc.  And  the  human
conscience  everywhere  assents  to  this  judgment  of  God.  We  judge  in  like  manner
ourselves.  We  feel  that  such  are  without  excuse.  Let  us,  then,  consider  our  blessings,
and  ask  ourselves,  "What  are  we  doing  with  them?  how  are  we  using  them?"  Ijet
it  be  our  daily  prayer  and  endeavour  that  we  fall  not  into  this  great  sin.

IV.  God's  way  is  to  turn  our  curses  into  blessings.  (Cf.  Neh.  xiii.  2.)  1.
He  has  done  so  even  with  sin.  What  curse  could  be  greater  ?  Yet,  by  the  redemption
there  is  in  Christ,  even  that  is  so  made  subject  that  now

"  We  may  rise  on  stepping-stones
Of  our  dead  selves  to  higher  things."

2.  And  he  has  done  so  with  sorrow.  Grief  had  been  forages  going  about  the  world,  a
sad-robed,  sombre,  and  ever-tearful  guest  in  whatever  house  she  took  up  her  temporary
abode :  and  there  was  no  house  she  did  not  visit.  But  since  the  Lord  Jesus  became
the  "  Man  of  sorrows,  and  acquainted  with  grief,"  she,  in  virtue  of  that  acquaintance,
has  changed  her  very  nature,  and  the  curse  is  turned  into  a  blessing.  She  ministers
help  to  the  soul,  in  releasing  it  from  the  bonds  of  this  evil  world  and  in  uplifting  it
towards  its  true  Father  and  home  in  heaven.  3.  And  so  with  death.  Its  sting  is
taken  away.  To  them  who  are  in  Christ  he  is  rather  a  friend  than  a  foe,  for  he  it
is  who  opens  the  door  of  our  prison-house  and  lets  the  soul  go  free  and  rise  to  that
place —

**  Where  loyal  hearts  and  true
Stand  ever  in  the  light,
All  rapture  through  and  through,
In  God's  most  holy  sight."

a

Ver.  10. — Battlements  not  the  Lord^s,  Jeremiah  Is  telling  of  the  defences  of  Judah
and  Jerusalem.  In  the  approaching  invasion  they  should  fall  and  prove  utterly
worthless ;  for,  by  reswon  of  the  people's  sin,  that  blessing  of  the  Lord  wmch  had  made
their  battlements  impregnable  hitherto  was  withdrawn,  and  so,  the  people  being  no
longer  the  Lord's,  their  defences  were  not  either,  and  so  were  no  defences  at  all.  But
often  those  who  are  not  under  the  Divine  displeasure — nations.  Churches,  individuals —
are  found  relying  on  defences  that  are  not  Divine,  thinking  to  find  shelter  and  safety
within  battlements  that  are  not  the  Lord's ;  and  when  such  is  the  case  the  Lord  would
ever  have  such  battlements  taken  away.  The  course  of  his  providence  not  seldom
makes  plain  his  displeasure  in  these  things ;  for  they  get  torn  down  and  destroyed
hopelessly  if  they  who  trust  in  them  are  not  wise  in  time,  and  themselves  take  them
away.  There  are  many  references  in  Scripture  to  such  battlements.  They  are  spoken
of  either  as  **  walls  daubed  with  \mtempered  mortar,"  or  as  "  broken  cisterns  which
hold  no  water,"  or,  more  plainly,  as  "  refuges  of  lies,"  or  as  "a  house  built  upon  the


136  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,      [en.  v.  1—31.


sand,"  or  as  the  building  upon  the  foundation  of  '*  wood,  hay,  stubble."  Such  are  some
of  the  parallels  to  the  truth  taught  in  the  text.  But  take  some  illustrations  of  this
erecting  of  and  trusting  in  battlements  not  the  Lord's.

I.  It  has  been  seen  in  the  defence  of  the  Chubch  of  Chbist.  Nothing  in  the
world  is  so  precious,  so  essential  to  the  world,  as  the  Church  of  Christ,  and  he  has
promised  to  preserve  it  unto  the  end.  But  men  have  often  tried  to  plant,  maintain,
and  spread  it  in  anything  but  Divine  ways ;  e.g,  when :  1.  They  have  relied  on  the
secular  arm.  They  have  done  so,  and  with  what  consequences  let  the  present  state  of
Christendom  tell.  When  will  men  trust  the  glorious  inherent  power  of  the  faith  of
Christ,  and  throw  to  the  winds  those  carnal  weapons  which  she  wields  only  to  her  own
wounding  ?  When  will  she  hear  the  voice  of  God  saying,  concerning  such  battlements,
'*  Take  them  away ;  they  are  not  the  Lord's  "  ?  2.  Organizaiion  is  another  of  these  very
questionable  defences.  That  it  has  its  use,  and  is  capable  of  much  and  valued  service,
he  would  be  a  fool  who  should  deny.  But  the  peril  is  lest  the  artificial  and  merely
human  supports  which  organization  supplies  should  be  allowed  to  serve  instead  of  that
Divine  life  which  alone  is  the  true  defence  of  any  Church.  Church  arrangements
which  necessitate  that  when  that  life  is  wanting  everything  shall  collapse  about  such
a  Church,  that  it  shall  cease  to  be  and  not  present  the  mere  simulacrum  of  what  it  is
not, — it  is  a  question  if  this  be  not  a  better  order  than  one  which,  by  means  of  its
elaborate  organization,  keeps  up  the  show  of  Church  life  when  the  reality  is  not  there.
3.  And  the  same  may  bo  said  of  all  those  adventitious  aids  to  the  Church  of  Christ  upon
which  men  are  apt  so  much  to  rdy.  Wealth,  social  position,  learning,  eloquence,
numbers,  gifts,  and  other  such  advantages, — let  a  Church  place  her  trust  in  any  of  these,
and  the  command  of  the  text  will  go  forth  at  once.  But  the  true  defence  of  a  Church
is  the  life  that  is  in  her,  the  manifest  godliness  of  her  members ;  that  is  a  battlement
which  is  the  Lord's,  and  which  none  can  take  away.

II.  It  has  been  seen  in  the  defence  of  the  faith  of  the  Church.  The  faith
of  the  Church  is,  without  doubt,  most  precious ;  and  it  is  our  duty  to  contend  earnestly
for  it.  But  men  have  sought  to  guard  and  defend  it  in  wrong  ways.  1.  Persecution
has  been  tried.  2.  Demanding  subscription  to  fixed  creeds.  There  may  be  and  are
good  reasons  for  demanding  such  subscription,  but  it  cannot  be  said  that  such  sub-
scription has  kept  the  faith  one  and  entire  in  all  the  members  of  the  Church.  Probably
there  is  more  unity  of  belief  in  those  Churches  which  demand  no  such  subscription
than  in  those  who  do.  3.  Relying  mostly  on  the  intellectual  defences  of  the  faith.
There  are  such,  many,  varied,  cogent,  clear,  invaluable,  but  they  may  be  all  read  and
mastered,^and  the  citadel  of  the  heart  be  not  won.  But  the  true  battlement  of  the
faith  is  in  the  fact  that  it  commends  itself  to  every  man's  conscience  in  the  sight  of
Gk)d.  Let  conscience  be  awakened  and  then  the  faith  presented,  and  the  fitness  of  the
faith  to  the  needs  and  teachings  of  conscience  are  visible  at  once.

in.  It  is  continually  seen  in  men's  conduct  in  begabd  to  their  own  pebsonal
SALVATION.  What  else  is :  1.  Trust  in  sacraments  f  They  are,  without  doubt,  means
of  grace  to  the  believer  in  Christ — the  experience  of  myriads  of  saints  attests  that ;  but
he  who  looks  to  them  as  a  viaticum  that  will  open  a  way  to  heaven  for  the  vilest,
surely  that  is  a  refuge  of  lies.  2.  Reliance  on  human  priests^  This  reliance  is  by
no  means  confined  to  the  Church  of  Rome.  Deep  seated  in  men's  mind  is  the  idea
that  ministers  of  religion  can  really  help  the  soul  in  its  great  needs.  Much  of  sending
for  ministers  in  cases  where  death  is  anticipated  is  based  on  this  false  belief.  3.  Trust
in  such  poor  righteousness  as  we  can  offer  to  God ;  what  can  it  do  ?  4.  Resting  on  an
imagined  leniency  in  God,  which  will  prevent  his  carrying  out  the  threatenings  of  his
holy  Law  as  he  has  said  he  would?  How  many  soothe  and  still  ail  disquiet  of  con-
science by  such  false  confidence  as  this ! — a  confidence  which  the  facts  of  life,  apart
from  the  Word  of  God,  utterly  shatter  and  show  to  be  false.  But  the  true  defence  of
the  soul  is  Christ;  that  battlement  is  the  Lord's,  yea,  is  the  Lord  himself,  and  he  will
keep  that  which  is  committed  to  him  even  imto  the  great  day.-   ^*


Ver.  24. — The  silken  fetter.  In  ver.  22  the  prophet  has  spoken  of  the  soft,  unstable
sand  holding  in  and  beating  back  the  mighty  surgings  of  the  sea  ;  but  here  he  tells  of
what  would  seem  a  still  more  unlikely  thing,  that  the  goodness  of  GKxi  should  lead
men  to  fear  him.    He  selects  that  prominent  proof  of  God's  goodness,  the  giving  of


CH.  V.  1— 31.]  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.         i;]7


the  rains  and  the  harvest,  as  a  type  of  all^  and  he  takes  for  granted  that  men  ought  to
have  found  in  this  goodness  of  God  an  argument  for  his  fear.    Now  we  remark —

L  That  this  is  an  ukusual  argument.  We  could  understand  other  attributes
of  Gk>d  beine  appealed  to  as  grounds  for  fearing  him — ^his  majesty,  his  power,  his  justice,
his  wrath— but  his  goodness  seems  to  call  for  almost  eveitY  other  feeling  than  that  of
fear.  Joy,  gratitude,  benevolence,  praise,  but  not  fear.  We  delight  ourselves  in  his
goodness,  we  bask  in  it  as  in  the  blessed  warmth  of  the  sun,  but  we  never /«ar  it,  or
see  in  it  a  reason  for  such  regard  of  God.  And  it  is  certain  that  this  expectation  of
the  prophet,  that  6K)d's  goodness  should  lead  us  to  his  fear,  was  not  based  on  any
supposition  or  belief  that  there  was  aught  of  fearfulness  about  the  goodness  of  QoJL
Of  the  devil's  goodness  when  he  turns  himself  into  an  angel  of  light,  when  he  quotes
Scripture,  as  he  did  at  our  Lord's  temptation,  and  when  he  pours  honey  into  our  cup, —
of  his  goodness  we  may  be  afraid.  It  is  but  a  mask.  And  of  some  rrten's  goodness  we
may  be  afraid — ^men  who  are  "  false  as  the  smooth,  deceitful  sea,"  "  adders'  poison  under
their  lips ; "  they  betray  with  a  kiss.  And  men  were  wont  to  fear  the  goodness  of  the
gods  they  worshipped.  They  imagined  they  would  be  jealous  if  they  saw  a  man
prospering  overmuch.  Hence  to  appease  them  men  would  inflict  loss  and  injury  on
themselves.  See  the  story  of  Polycrates.  Nor  either  because  there  is  aught  of  fatality
attached  to  the  goodness  of  God.  It  is  not  as  the  beautiful  flush  on  the  countenance,
which,  lovely  as  it  may  appear,  is  a  mark  of  doom  clearly  discernible  to  the  experienced
eye.  For  no  such  reasons  as  these  are  we  to  fear  Qod  and  his  goodness.    Nevertheless^*

II.  God's  goodness  is  a  propeb  beason  fob  a  holy  feab.  1.  For  it  reveals  a
Being  so  far  removed  above  all  our  conceptions  of  human  goodness.  One  who  stands  on
so  infinitely  higher  a  level  of  moral  excellency,  that  a  sacred  awe  fills  our  soul  as  we
contemplate  what  God  is  and  what  his  love  is,  especially  his  love  to  us  in  Christ.
"  There  is  forgiveness  with  thee,  that  thou  mayest  be  feared."

"  Oh,  how  I  fear  thee,  living  God,
With  deepest,  tenderest  fears,
And  worship  thee  with  humble  hope
And  penitential  tears  1 "

2.  And  because  God's  goodness  reveals  the  intensity  and  depth  of  his  love,  and  there-
fore reveals  a  corresponding  wrath  against  all  who  outrage  that  love.  The  gentlest
mother  yearning  with  afiection  for  her  children, — let  those  little  ones  be  wrong^  what
a  fury  will  she  become  towards  the  wrong-doer,  and  all  because  her  love  is  so  great  I
And  so, "  according  to  God's  love,  so  is  his  wrath."  There  is  no  wrath  like  that  "  of  the
Lamb."  3.  And  because  GK)d's  goodness  in  its  temporal  manifestations  is  but  granted
for  a  while.  He  reserves  his  right  to  recall  it  when  he  will.  Hence  if  riches,  or  any
other  form  of  earthly  good  and  present  earthly  joy, — if  these  increase,  set  not  your  heart
upon  them.  It  is  terrible  to  have  all  our  peace  of  heart  and  mind,  all  the  joy  of  our
life,  identified  with  and  dependent  upon  what  one  day  God  may  recall.  Every  channel
of  Gi3d's  goodness  thus^becomes  a  possible  channel  of  deep  suffering  and  distress.  If,
then,  your  delight  in  the  gift  have  not  led  you  to  the  love  and  trust  of  the  Giver,  what
comfort  will  you  have  when  the  sift  is  withdrawn  ?  What  an  argument  this  for  the
comment  of  our  text  1  4.  Remember,  again,  the  depraved  nature  which  we  carry  about
with  us,  which  ever  seeks  to  pervert  to  evil  what  Grod  gives  us  for  our  good.  '*  Jeshurun
waxed  fat,  and  kicked."  Prosperity  is  a  sore  temptation,  before  wmch  many  a  man
falls.  God's  gifts  are  the  material  out  of  which  many  build  a  screen,  a  wall  which
shuts  them  on  from  God.  5.  And  because  Gtxl's  goodness  heightens  our  responsibility.
How  stem  the  word,  "Cut  it  down ;  why  cumbereth?  "  etc.  I  Goodness  and  love  and  care
had  been  thrown  away  upon  it.  If  God,  then,  have  pleaded  with  us  by  his  love,  as  we
know  he  has,  what  if  our  hearts  be  still  estranged  from  him  ?  "  He  that  from  God's
mercy  gathers  no  argument  for  his  fear,  may  conclude  thus  much — that  there  is  indeed
forgiveness  with  Gk>d,  but  no  forgiveness  for  him  "  (South).    Then  let  us  ask^

''  Lord,  let  thy  fear  within  us  dwell.

Thy  love  our  footsteps  guide;
Tliat  love  shall  all  vain  love  expel,
That  fear  all  fear  beside."

0.


138  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPDET  JEREMIAH,     [ch.  v.  1—31.


Yqy,  24. — Gud's  gifts  of  the  rains  and  the  harvest,  "  The  Lord  our  God,  that  giveth
rain,  both  the  former  and  the  latter,  in  his  season ;  ho  reserveth  unto  us,"  etc.  To
a  country  so  liable  to  drought  as  Palestine,  the  regular,  periodic  rainfall  was  of  tlio
utmost  importance.  If  they  had  not  the  former  rain — that  which  came  first  after  seed-
time—the seed  would  not  germinate  in  the  soil ;  and  if,  when  near  the  harvest,  the  rain
did  not  come  again,  there  would  be  no  full  corn  in  the  ear :  it  would  not  swell  out  and
mature  in  any  way  to  the  husbandman's  content.  "  Hence  the  people  of  those  lands
speak  of  the  weather  and  the  crops  with  a  more  immediate  reference  to  God  than  is
usual  with  us.  It  is  said  that  the  common  expressions  of  the  peasantry  arc  such  as
much  impress  travellers  with  their  apparently  devout  recognition  of  the  Almighty's
agency."  A  lady  and  her  party  were  one  day  traversing,  under  the  conduct  of  their
Arab  guide,  the  fertile  plains  west  of  the  Carmel  range.  **  Rain  began  to  fall  in  torrents.
Mohammed,  our  groom,"  so  the  lady  tells,  "  threw  a  large  Arab  cloak  over  me,  saying,
*May  Allah  preserve  you,  0  lady,  while  he  is  blessing  the  fields!'"  "Blessing  the
fields," — what  a  beautiful  synonym  for  the  rain !  But  it  indicates  the  constant
dependence  of  those  lands  on  these  rains,  and  the  ]X5ople's  sense  of  the  high  value  of  this
gift  of  God.  The  husbandman  relies  entirely  upon  the  early  and  the  latter  rain,  and
if  these  do  not  fall  copiously  in  their  season  famine  will  ensue.  Therefore,  when
wishing  to  point  out  some  signal  mark  of  the  Lord's  favour  to  his  people,  the  prophet
selects  this,  that  he  "  giveth  rain,  both  the  former  and  the  latter,  in  his  season,"  etc.
The  prophet  knew  that  every  heart  would  assent  and  own  the  goodness  of  the  Lonl
herein.  Probably  he  was  more  sure  of  it  there  and  then  than  he  would  be  here  and
now.  We  have  got  so  mystified  with  the  modern  doctrines  of  "  the  order  of  nature  "
and  "  the  uniformity  of  natural  law,"  that  we  have  come  to  regard  the  universe  almost
as  a  great  machine,  the  regular  working  of  which  excites  no  surprise,  and  demands  and
obtains  still  less  gratitude.  But  all  this  is  very  sad.  Happy  they  who,  in  the  comin:;
round  of  the  seasons,  the  fall  of  the  rain  and  the  blessed  harvest,  are  both  able  and
glad  to  confess,  "It  is  the  Lord,  who  giveth  food  to  all  flesh  :  for  his  mercy  enduretli
for  ever."  But  let  this  verse  not  so  much  suggest  the  literal  facts  here  commemorated
by  the  prophet,  as  those  other  and  higher  spiritual  facts  which  they  resemble  and
suggest.  The  three  blessed  gifts  of  God  in  the  natural  world  here  spoken  of,  tell  of
gifts  like  to  them  in  the  spiritual  world.     And  first  they  remind  us  of—

L  Those  persons  who  are  so  happy  ab  to  realize  all  the  three  :  the  two
rains — both  the  former  and  the  latter — and  the  harvest.  Now,  there  are  many  such,
God  be  praised  for  them !  In  their  own  religious  life  they  know  what  God's  blessing
of  the  former  rain  is.  There  was  such  vivid  realization  of  the  love  of  Christ,  such
hatred  of  sin,  such  sweet  sensitiveness  of  conscience,  such  free  intercourse  with  God  in
prayer,  such  bright  onlooks  into  the  glory  to  be  revealed,  such  ready  delight  in  worship
and  in  work,  such  prompt  siding  with  the  will  of  God — in  a  word,  such  enjoyment  of
him,  that  it  is  still,  and  will  ever  be,  a  deligh  fal  retrospect.

•*  What  peace  ail  hours  we  then  enjoyed  I
How  sweet  their  memory  still  I "

"  That  was  the  early  rain.  The  seed  had  just  been  sown,  and  the  Master,  to  make  it
take  deeper  root,  and  to  make  it  spring  up  faster  into  the  green  blade,  gave  them  the
sacred  shower  of  his  loving  presence."  And  then  there  came  afterwards  the  latter  rain.
For  such  is  needed  even  in  the  holiest  Christian's  life.  The  early  excitement,  the  power
of  novelty,  which  is  a  power  in  the  religious  life  as  in  all  other,  wore  off,  as  it  is  its
nature  to  do.  Many  weary  leagues  of  life's  pilgrimage  had  to  be  traversed,  many
disappointments  to  be  met  with,  many  trials  to  be  endured,  many  temptations — subtle,
strange,  strong — had  to  be  met  and  overcome,  and  they  left  the  soul  weary  and
exhausted.  And,  but  for  the  blessed  latter  rain,  the  strength  and  vigour  of  the  Divine
life  in  the  soul  would  have  died  down.  But  then  there  came,  brought  about  in  one
way  and  another,  the  second  baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  And,  by  means  of  that,
separate  acts  of  obedience  crystallized  into  blessed  habits,  which  made  their  discharge
prompt,  easy,  and  eflective.  The  power  of  prayer  became  more  marked,  the  knowledge
and  experience  of  the  truth  of  God's  Word  deepened.  The  unseen  and  eternal  came
out  of  the  mist  and  vagueness  of  former  years  into  dear,  well-defined  reality,  so  that
the  seeing  him  who  is  invisible  came  to  bo  a  daily  vision ;  and  the  walk  with  God


en.  V.  1—31.]     THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREmAH.  139


grew  to  be  constant,  delightful,  and  more  intimate  each  day.  And  so  the  harvest  of
peace  with  God,  of  holy  calm,  of  settled  obedience,  and  of  loyal,  happy  service,  was
daily  reaped.  And  in  the  case  of  those  who  have  passed  into  the  skies,  the  harvest  of
glory  has  been  reaped  also,  or  rather  is  being  reaped,  the  joy  of  which  is  ever-during
with  the  eternal  life  of  the  soul.  So  again  and  again  has  it  been  in  the  experience  of
the  Christian  life.  And  likewise  has  it  been  also  in  the  work  and  service  rendered  to
Christ.  That,  too,  in  many  an  instance,  has  had  its  former  rain  of  blessing.  It  was
begun  in  Christ  and  for  Christ.  Tokens  of  the  Lord's  presence  were  not  wanting  even
at  the  very  outset.  Sinners  were  converted,  believers  were  edified,  souls  were  saved,
as  the  result  of  the  early  toil  in  the  Master's  vineyard.  The  sermons  may  have  been
juvenile,  unskilled  in  mere  sermonic  art,  but  they  had  the  Divine  power  with  them.
The  teaching  given  to  the  scholars  in  the  class  may  have  been  sadly  unscientific,  and
wanting  in  symmetry  and  system ;  but  Jesus  was  commended  to  the  children,  and  his
love  so  spoken  of  that  they  glistened,  were  touched,  were  persuaded,  were  saved.  And
then  years  after  the  latter  rain  came.  For  a  long  while  the  work  went  on  in  a  quiet,
almost  monotonous  way.  There  appeared  no  stir,  no  great  impression  made.  But  he
who  gave  the  early  rain  now  sent  the  latter  also.  And  a  new  outpouring  of  the
Spirit's  influence  was  given.  And  again  and  increasingly  the  Word  was  spoken  with
power ;  the  influence  of  Christ's  servant  told  with  all  the  added  strength  that  life-long
consecration  to  that  work  gave  to  it,  and  many  a  soul  confessed  the  might  of  that
ministry  which  Christ  enabled  him  to  discharge.  And  a  blessed  harvest  was  reaped,
day  after  day,  week  by  week ;  the  sickle  of  the  Word  seemed  never  so  keen,  the  hand
that  wielded  it  never  so  vigorous,  the  sheaves  never  so  large,  until  the  reaper  was
called  away  to  join  in  the  glad  festivities  of  the  eternal  harvest-home.  Yes,  so  it  has
been  again  and  again.  And,  would  we  have  it  so  with  ourselves, — and  would  we  not  ?—
let  it  not  be  forgotten  that  the  realization  of  these  blessings — the  early  and  the  latter
rain,  and  the  harvest — in  our  work  depends  upon  our  personal  realization  of  them  in  our
own  souls.  The  soul  not  alive  in  and  for  God  can  never  accomplish  much  in  his  work
and  service.  We  must  *'  take  heed  to  ourselves  "  would  we  successfully  take  heed  to
our  work,  and  be  the  means  of  salvation  to  others.  Yes,  let  us  remember  this.  But
be  encouraji^ed  by  remembering  also  that  it  is  God's  way  and  wont  to  send  this  three/old
blessing.  This  verse  speaks  of  his  giving  these  great  gifts  as  his  customary  habit.  It
is  not  an  exceptional  or  strange  thing  with  him,  but  that  which  we  may,  and  even
should,  look  for.  May  he  help  us  so  to  do,  and  then  give  us  our  heart's  desire !  But
next  consider—

II.  Those  less  happy  ones  who  realize  only  two  out  op  these  three  gifts
OF  God.  They  have  had  the  early  and  the  latter  rains,  but  the  harvest  they  have  not
yet  rejoiced  in.  There  are  such  experiences,  both  in  the  Christian  life  and  in  Christian
work.  The  men  were  truly  converted  to  God  at  the  first,  and  they  have  in  after  years
felt  the  power  of  his  Spirit  again  and  again ;  but  that  harvest  of  settled  peace  and  joy,
that  power  habitually  to  walk  with  God  in  the  comfort  of  his  love,  and  in  prompt,  joy-
ful obedience  to  his  will,  has  not  come  to  them.  And  they  grieve  over  it  much.  And
yet  more  is  this  delay  of  the  harvest  often  known  in  the  sphere  of  Cl^ristian  work.
The  whole  Christian  Church  mourns  to-day  over  this  delay  of  harvest.  The  early  rain
of  the  Pentecostal  day  fell  refreshingly  upon  them ;  and  since  then  there  have  been
spring-tides  of  Divine  influence,  copious  outpourings  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  latter  rains
in  deed  and  in  truth.  But  the  harvest — where  is  that  ?  Where  is  the  world,  or  even
one  entire  nation,  won  for  God?  The  boundaries  of  the  kingdom  of  Satan  do  not
seem  much  diminished,  nor  those  of  the  kingdom  of  God  much  enlarged.  And  so,  too,
individual  Churches  have,  in  like  manner,  been  blessed  with  early  and  latter  rains,  but
the  harvest  of  their  work  has  not  come.  They  can  tell  you  of  times  in  their  history
when  there  seemed  a  general  movement  Godwards  ;  when  the  people  met  for  prayer  in
unwonted  numbers  and  with  unwonted  fervour.  Their  early  history  may  have  been
one  of  difliculty  and  struggle,  but  these  were  overborne  by  a  glorious  awakening,  a  gird-
ing of  them  with  power,  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  manifestly  setting  up  his  standard
in  their  midst.  "  And  the  Lord  added  to  them  daily  such  as  should  be  saved."  And
in  more  recent  years  they  have  had  like  and  even  larger  experiences  of  his  glorious
presence.  But  yet  the  harvest  is  not  reaped.  Not  onljr  is  the  neighbourhood  around
hem  still  for  the  most  part  as  it  was,  untouched,  ummpressed  by  the  power  of  the


HO  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,      [cii.  v.  1— 31.

gospel,  but  many  who  gather  with  them  Sunday  by  Sunday,  and  in  their  week-day
assemblies,  are  yet  unconverted  and  unsaved.  Where  is  the  harvest  ?  Why  does  it
not  come  ?  "  How  long,  0  Lord,  how  long  ?  "  these  servants  of  Grod  .continually  cry
to  him.  And  so,  too,  with  the  individual  worker  for  Christ.  He,  too,  can  look  back
on  a  time  when  he  began  his  holy  labour,  whether  in  more  prominent  or  more  obscure
place  it  matters  not ;  but  there  was  given  to  him  the  early,  and  since  then  there  has
oeen  the  latter,  rain.  But  he  looks  round  his  class,  his  family,  his  school,  his  congre-
gation, and  oh,  what  a  scant  portion  of  the  field  is  as  yet  even  begun  to  be  garneretl
for  Christ !  How  powerless  his  words  seem  to  fall  on  many  of  them !  How
unanswered  his  prayers  on  their  behalf  still  seem  to  be!  Now^  what  are  we  to  say
to  all  this  f  Well,  these  three  things  wo  may  surely  say :  First,  that  God  reserves
the  weeks  of  harvest.  He  has  appointed  them,  but  the  day  of  their  coming  he  has
reserve^  in  his  own  power.  The  husbandman  must  have  long  patience ;  the  growth
and  development  of  the  holy  seed  is  an  orderly,  and  is  generally  a  slow,  process.  All
God's  greatest  works  are  slow.  Science  is  ever  teaching  us  this.  What  ages  upon
ages  do  the  geologist  and  the  astronomer  demand  for  the  processes  of  which  they
tell!  How  our  little  chronologies  dwindle  into  insignificance  besides  those  vast
periods  which  they  have  conclusively  shown  to  have  been  occupied  by  the  Creator
in  perfecting  those  phenomena  of  which  their  several  sciences  take  account  I  And,  in
the  far  greater  and  more  difficult  work  of  the  moral  and  spiritual  regeneration  of
human  souls,  shall  we  be  impatient  if  God  do  not  begin,  continue,  and  end  it  all  in  the
short  space  of  our  little  lives?  Surely  this  is  to  be  imreasonable,  is  improper,  is
wrong.  But  remember,  too,  that  the  harvest  itself  is  a  long  process.  They  are
"  u^eks  of  harvest."  The  ingathering  has  begun  when  only  one  ^eaf  in  a  field  has
been  reaped.  The  Lord  Jesus  said,  "  The  fields  are  white  already  unto  harvest,"
when  ho  held  in  his  hand  only  one  solitary  ripe  ear  of  com,  the  conversion  of  the
woman  of  Samaria.  Hence  we  may  possibly  be  mourning  that  the  harvest  has  not
come,  when  in  fact  it  has  actually  begun.  Why,  my  brother,  it  began  in  you  from  the
first  hour  that  you  were  converted  to  God.  He  was  cutting  the  bonds  that  bound  you
to  this  world  when  he  first  called  you  to  himself;  and  all  the  varied  means  by  which
he  is  separating  you  from  the  world  is  but  the  reaping  continually  going  on ;  and
when  the  sickle  of  death  comes  and  cuts  down  this  bodily  life  of  yours,  it  will  bo
but  the  last  stroke  of  the  reaper  that  tells  that  the  harvest  for  you  is  finished  at  last.
And  so  with  your  work.  The  harvest  is  begun.  That  child's  heart  you  won  for  Christ
here,  that  soul  that  was  brought  to  Jesus  through  the  Word  preached  by  you  there,
those  others  gathered  to  the  Redeemer's  feet  elsewhere, — what  were  these  blessed  facts
but  the  beginning  of  the  harvest,  a  beginning  that  is  to  go  on  ?  You  are  not  strong
enough  to  reap  all  the  Lord's  field ;  be  content  that  he  lets  you  reap  a  part.  Other
workmen  are  to  enter  in  where  you  may  not,  and  to  their  arm  shall  fall  the  sheaves
that  you  may  not  gather.  So  say  not  any  more,  "  The  harvest  is  delayed."  Why,  you
are  actually  engaged  in  it  now.  You  are  not  a  mere  sower,  but  you  are  a  reaper  too.
And  remember  the  full  harvest  shall  be  reaped.  He  is  the  Lord  of  it,  and  will  not  let
it  waste ;  by  one  means  or  another  it  shall  all  be  gathered  in.  This  is  what  we  have
to  say  to  you  who  mourn  at  the  harvest's  delay.

III.  But  there  are  others  less  happy  still.  Those  who  can  claim  to  have
BEALiZED  ONLY  ONE  OP  THESE  THREE  GIFTS  OF  GoD.  Tho  harvcst  is  not  thcirs,  uor
both  the  former  and  the  latter  rains,  but  only  one  of  them.  Now,  this  one  may  be  only
the  former  rain.  In  their  religious  life  they  were  blessed  with  this ;  the  wonted  happy
results  followed ;  but  since  then  there  has  been  a  standstill,  and  those  observing  them
are,  as  St.  Paul  was  in  reference  to  the  Galatians, "  in  doubt "  about  them,  and  sorrow-
fully ask  the  question,  '*  Ye  did  run  well ;  who  did  hinder  you  ?  "  Their  goodness  has
been  "  like  the  morning  cloud  and  the  early  dew  " — it  has  gone  away.  And  so  also  in
much  of  religious  work.  At  the  beginning  there  was  a  zeal  and  fervour  and  force
which  promised  great  things,  but  it  all  soon  died  down.  They  had  no  staying  power,
and  because  all  was  not  accomplished  in  one  vigorous  rush  and  charge,  and  because  the
diflBculties  that  had  to  bo  overcome  presented  a  more  stubborn  and  obstinate  front  than
was  anticipated,  those  who  went  forth  to  do  battle  with  them  became  discouraged  and
soon  turned  back.  In  these  cases,  both  in  the  life  and  the  work,  though  there  was  tLe
former  rain,  the  latter  has  not  as  yet  fallen.    Now  where,  as  is  often  the  case,  this  has


CH.  V.  1—31.]      THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  141


been  owing  to  neglect  of  those  Divine  aids  which  God  has  placed  within  our  power— •

the  blessed  aids  of  prayer,  watchfulness,  and  the  diligent  use  of  grace  already  given

then  not  pity  but  censure  must  be  awarded  to  those  of  whom  we  spesik.  "  They  have
not  because  they  asked  not ; "  or  if  they  asked  they  *'  asked  amiss."  Ah,  what  a  sad
amount  of  such  asking  amiss  there  ever  is ! — ^asking  as  a  substitute  for  working,  instead
of  as  an  aid  and  encouragement  thereto ;  asking,  but  with  motives  marred  by  selfish-
ness, strife,  and  many  forms  of  that  "  regarding  iniquity  in  the  heart,"  which  ever  bars
the  coming  of  the  needed  answer.  And  so  there  have  been  decline  and  decay,  and  a
fresh  fall  of  the  heavenly  rain  is  indeed  wanted.  Oh,  do  these  words  apply  to  any  of
us,  either  in  regard  to  our  stunted  life  or  our  ineffectual  work  ?  It  may  be  so.  But,
thank  God,  such  sad  facts  are  not  always  the  cause.  God  may  be  pleased,  notwith-
standing that  his  servants  wait  upon  him  for  the  outpouring  of  his  Spirit  they  so  much
desire,  to  delay  his  answer.  The  rains  of  God  have  their  season,  and  he  best  knows
what  and  when  that  season  is.  His  purpose  is  to  stir  you  up  to  yet  more  earnest
prayer,  to  greater  energy  of  spiritual  endeavour.  All  the  night  through  did  Jacob
wrestle  with  the  angel,  ere  he  won  the  glorious  name  of  Israel.  Not  till  after  so  long
and  so  arduous  a  struggle  that  his  physical  strength  gave  way,  the  sinew  of  his  thigh
shrank,  and  he  seemed  reduced  to  utter  powerlessness ; — not  till  then  was  the  victory
won.  If,  therefore,  any  of  us,  in  our  own  religious  life  or  work,  are  still  waiting  in
praver  and  watching  thereunto,  but  yet  the  desired  answer  has  not  come,  regard  it  not
as  denial,  but  only  as  a  delay  sent  to  test  and  try  your  faith — that  faith  more  precious
in  the  sight  of  God  than  gold  and  silver,  and  which  when  tested  shall  come  forth
triumphant,  to  the  praise  and  glory  of  his  grace.  But  there  are  those  who  have  the  latter
rain  only.  Is  it  not  so  with  all  those  instances  of  late  repentance,  of  eleventh-hour
turning  to  God  ?  Such  coming  to  God  at  the  last  does  now  and  then  occur,  and  the
promise  of  our  Lord,  "  Whosoever  cometh  imto  me  I  will,"  etc.,  is  made  good.  Such
have  the  latter  rain,  but  they  can  hardly  be  said  ever  to  have  known  the  former.  And
so,  too,  with  those  who  all  their  lifetime  have  been  subject  to  bondage,  have  walked  in
darkness  and  have  seen  no  light, — to  these  tried  children  of  God  light  often  comes  at
eventide ;  they  have  the  latter  rain,  but  not  the  former.  And  it  is  so  also  in  many  depart-
ments of  Christian  work.  Take  the  long  and  painful  history  of  many  of  our  missions.
For  how  many  years,  amid  how  many  discouragements,  from  deaths,  desertions,  disease,
and  the  like,  have  the  pioneers  of  those  missions  toiled  on  as  the  missionaries  in  Central
Africa,  so  repeatedly  deprived  by  death  of  one  and  another  of  their  little  band,  are
yet  doing !  The  early  rain  has  never  come,  but  the  latter  we  are  sure  they  and  all
such  shall  have.  Oh,  how  they  deserve  and  demand  our  sympathy  and  our  earnest
prayers !  Shame  will  it  be  on  the  Church  at  home  if  these  bo  withheld.  But  we
believe  they  are  not  and  will  not  be.  These  are,  however,  a  third  class  less  blessed
than  those  who  have  both  the  former  and  latter  rain,  and  still  less  than  those  who  have
added  on  the  crown  and  consummation  of  all  their  toil — the  joyous  harvest.  But  far,
far  more  blessed  are  they  than  that  other  and  last  class  of  whom  also  we  are  reminded—*
rV.  Those  who  have  neither  op  TEffiSE  blessings — neitheb  fobmeb  nob  latteb
BAIN,  nob  HABVE8T,  The  profession  of  the  Christian  life  may  be  made,  and  one  or
other  form  of  Christian  work  may  be  undertaken,  but  all  manner  of  motives,  all  maimer
of  reasons,  save  the  alone  right  and  true  one,  may  account  for  such  facts.  The  religion
and  the  work  may  alike  iS)  hollow,  formal,  insincere ;  a  life  and  a  work  on  which
neither  the  former  nor  the  latter  rains  of  God's  Spirit  will  ever  come,  and  the  only
harvest  which  shall  be  reaped  will  be  one  of  "  shame  and  everlasting  contempt."  There
is  no  Divine  life  in  the  man's  soul,  and  therefore  none  in  his  work  either.  No  more
pitiful  spectacle  can  any  contemplate  than  this,  and  from  being  examples  of  it  may  God
in  his  mercy  deliver  us  all.  But  there  is  no  need  of  this.  The  Lord  our  God  is  wont
to  give  "  rain,  both  the  former  and  the  latter,  in  his  season,"  and  to  reserve  unto  us  the
appointed  weeks  of  harvest.  This  is  his  declared  will.  Why,  then,  should  we  be  with-
out his  blessing  ?  Oh,  let  every  one  resolve  that  if  importunity  of  prayer  can  for
Christ's  sake  win  it,  we  will  know  the  joy  of  both  the  former  and  the  latter  rain,  and
will  anticipate  and  look  out  for  the  appointed  weeks  of  harvest  I  You  who  have  had  both
the  former  and  the  latter  rain,  be  ready  for  the  reaper's  work.  You  who  have  had  but
the  former  rain,  plead  mightily  for  the  latter  too;  and  you  who  have  had  neither,
whether  in  your  own  Ufo  or  in  your  work,  remember  the  fault  is  your  own,  but  resolve


142  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,      [ch.  v.  1-31.

in  the  atrength  of  God's  grace  that  it  shall  be  so  no  more.  Turn  to  him  your  Lord  and
Saviour,  who  came  that  you  might  have  life,  and  might  have  it  more  abundantly,  and
beseech  him  to  give  you  what  you  must  have  or  die.  And  so  for  you  and  for  us  all  wo
would  pray—*

**  Diffuse,  O  God,  those  copious  showers,
That  earth  its  fruit  may  yield,
And  cliango  this  barren  wilderness
To  Carmers  flowery  field.'*

0.

Vers.  27,  28.^-The  deviVs  lure,  "  Their  houses  are  full  of  deceit,  therefore  they  are
become  great,"  etc.

I.  Several  op  these  lures  are  named  here.  1.  Wealth ;  "  They  are  waxen
rich."  2.  Luxury :  "  They  are  waxen  fat,  they  shine."  3.  Impunity  ;  "  They  overpass,
.  .  .  they  judge  not,  .  .  .  yet  they  prosper."    4.  Success :  "  They  prosper."

II.  And  the  like  lures  are  held  out  still.  Satan  is  ever  seeking,  and  with
sad  success,  to  seduce  men  by  such  and  similar  snares.

III.  It  is  what  we  might  expect.  For  that  Satan  should  in  this  manner  tempt
men  is  in  keeping  with  his  constant  method  of  parodying  and  travestying  all  the  good
works  of  God.  What  virtue,  what  Christian  grace,  is  there  that  he  does  not  carica-
ture—modesty by  servility,  prudence  by  meanness,  generosity  by  careless  waste,  etc.  ?
And  so  here,  "  The  blessing  of  the  Lord,  it  maketh  rich,"  and  hence  Satan  sets  to  work
to  devise  a  blessing  of  his  which  also  shall  make  rich — and  this  is  his  great  lure.

IV.  And  this  lure  is  made  the  more  attractive  by   the   fact  that  God

OFTEN  BUFFERS   HIS   SERVANTS  TO  FALL   INTO   GREAT   DISTRESS.      "  Many  arc  tllC  afllic-

tions  of  the  righteous ; "  "  In  the  world  ye  shall  have  tribulation."  For  God  desires
that  we  shall  love  him  for  himself,  yea,  when  our  earthly  interests  even  plead  against
him.     Such  trial  of  our  faith  is  exceeding  precious  in  his  sight.

V.  Our  duty  and  defence,  therefore,  is:  1.  To  look  right  on  beyond  the
present  reward,  even  to  "  the  end."  2.  To  expose  to  others  the  treachery  of  these
apparent  rewards.  3.  To  pray  for  and  cherish  the  spirit  of  Nehemiah,  who  said,  "  So
did  not  I,  because  of  the  fear  of  God."  4.  To  yield  our  heart  and  soul  up  to  the  better
attraction  of  Christ  and  his  cross,  until  we  come  to  eay  of  him,  **  Thou  art  *  mine
exceeding  joy.' " — C.

Ver.  31.— -4  wonderful  and  horrible  thing  indeed.  Consider—
I.  In  what  it  consisted.  1.  "  The  prophets  prophesy  falsely.*'  The  prophets  were
not  mere  predictors  of  future  events,  but  the  utterers  of  God's  will — those  who  spoke
forth,  as  the  very  word  "  prophet "  denotes,  the  hitherto  undeclared  mind  of  God.  For
this  purpose  they  were  specially  selected,  trained,  privileged,  commissioned.  Hence
every  inaucement  that  could  possibly  bear  on  them  to  lead  them  to  be  faithful  to  their
high  charge  and  trust  was  theirs :  love  of  their  country ;  approval  of  their  own  con-
science; the  fear  of  God;  the  sure,  if  not  present,  reward  of  their  fidelity  which
they  would  receive  from  God.  But  yet  they  prophesied  falsely.  We  could  have
understood:  (1)  Their  hesitation  in  the  discharge  of  their  duty.  See  how  Jeremiah
himself  shrank  from  it,  so  stem  and  arduous  was  it.  It  was  no  light  matter  to  be  a
prophet  in  those  days.  (2)  Their  silence  even.  Fear  may  have  rendered  them  dumb,  or
hopelefcsness  of  doing  any  good  may  have  silenced  them.  But  that  they  should  prophesy
falsely — they  from  whom  fidelity  at  all  costs  might  have  been  looked  for — that  was  "  a
wonderful  and  horrible,"  etc.  The  fountains  of  truth  were  poisoned,  the  helm  of  the
ship  was  in  the  hands  of  those  who  would  steer  her  on  to  the  rocks.  The  light  that
was  in  Israel  was  darkened,  therefore  how  great  was  their  darkness  I  What  force  such
a  fact  as  this  lends  to  the  urgency  with  which  :  (a)  Ood*s  pro2)hets^'h\a  ministers  to-day
are  such — should  take  heed  to  themselves  and  to  their  doctrine  ;  and  (b)  God's  people
should  remember  in  fervent  prayer  those  on  whom  so  high  and  solemn  a  charge  is  laid.
2.  "  The  priests  bear  rule  by  their  means.''  The  priests  were  the  more  familiar  ministers
of  religion.  They  were  a  permanent  order,  not  raised  up  for  special  occasions,  and  they
came  into  contact  with  men  continually.  They  were  supposed  "  to  keep  knowledge."
They  had  all  the  traditions  of  their  order,  all  the  memories  of  their  history  and  of  God's


^^


en.  V.  1—31.]      THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  143


favour  to  them.  They  were  independent  of  the  prophets,  but  were  much  bound  to  the
people  for  their  sympathy  and  support.  But  whilst  independent  of  the  prophets,  they
were  greatly  assisted  by  them  in  furthering  the  service  of  God.  And  they  also  had
means  of  knowing  the  truth.  They  were  able  to  try  the  spirits,  whether  they  were  of
God.  Hence  they  might  have  known  the  falsity  of  the  false  prophets.  And  they
ought  to  have  exposed  it.  But  instead  they  combined  with  them,  accepted  the  aid  of
their  falsehood,  and  bore  rule  by  their  means.  For,  corrupt  as  the  people  were,  they
would  speedily  have  discovered  the  wickedness  of  the  priests  had  not  the  prophets
sided  with  them.  Now  the  poison  spreads.  The  priests,  coming  into  contact  with  all
the  people,  propagate  the  falsehood  of  the  prophets,  shelter  themselves  behind  their
authority,  and  deceive  those  who  trusted  in  them.  Yes,  it  is  "  a  wonderful  and  horrible,"
etc.  It  is  in  the  power  of  some  to  originate  falsehood :  this  the  prophets  did.  It  is
in  the  power  of  others  to  spread  that  falsehood  abroad :  this  the  priests  did.  Leagued
together,  the  people  who  trusted  them  were  in  evil  case  indeed.  But  there  was  a  further
element  of  sorrow  to  be  yet  added.  3.  The  people  loved  to  have  it  so,  (1)  This  showed
that :  (a)  conscience  was  dead  or  drugged ;  (b)  all  perception  of  Hheir  true  wisdom  was
gone ;  (c)  there  was  no  remedy  but  the  fire  of  the  judgment  of  God.  ^^2)  It  is  explained
by  probable  facts  that :  (a)  the  poison  was  disguised ;  (6)  large  licence  was  allowed.
(3)  It  reveals  the  awfully  conta^^ious  nature  of  moral  evil  The  dread  possibilities  of
national  corruption,  against  which  we  are  bound  to  watch  and  pray.

II.  The  question  it  gives  rise  to  :  "  What  will  ye  do  in  the  end  thereof?"  That
is,  to  what  lengths  will  they  go  when  their  wickedness  has  full  hold  upon  them  ?  to
what  depths  of  degradation  will  they  fall?  to  what  resources  will  they  turn  when  God*s
judgments  come?  The  sadness  of  the  question  lies  in  the  imj^ssibility  of  satisfactorily
answering  it.  It  leads  us  to  the  brink  of  an  abyss,  at  which  we  can  only  shudder  and
pray  that  none  of  us  may  fall  therein.

Conclusion.  1.  Thank  God  that  such  prophets  and  priests  are  the  exception  to  the
rule.  2.  That  when  such  exceptions  are  met  with,  God  has  provided  a  remedy  against
them— in  his  infallible  Word ;  in  his  Spu*it,  leading  us  into  all  truth.  3.  Try  aU  that
human  ministers  say  by  these  tests.  4.  Seeing  how  much  depends  upon  them,  and
what  power  for  good  or  ill  they  cannot  but  have,  pray  with  all  importunity  that  God
send  only  faithful  men  into  his  ministry,  and  preserve  in  their  fidelity  those  who  are
there  already. — C.

Vers.  20 — ^24. — Natures  witness  against  blind  eyes  and  rebellious  Jiearia,  Three  forms
of  evil  are  rebuked  here.

I.  The  dulness  of  spiritual  sensibility  that  fails  to  discern  the  Divine
MEANING  OF  NATURE.  Israel  and  Judah  are  addressed  as  a  "  foolish  people,  without
understanding,*'  etc.  Their  crimes  and  sorrows  sprang  in  great  part  out  of  their  blind-
ness and  thoughtlessness  Tlsa.  i.  3 ;  v.  12,  13).  They  would  not  use  even  the  powers
of  spiritual  discernment  they  possessed.  They  perceived  not  the  Divine  presence  in
natural  things— the  sounding  shore,  the  revolving  seasons — so  as  to  bow  with  adoring
reverence  before  it.  Few  things  are  stranger  or  sadder  than  the  insensibility  of  the
spirits  of  men  to  the  Divine  in  nature.  "  They  have  eyes,  but  do  not  see  "  the  "  invisible
things "  of  the  Great  Creator  "  through  the  things  that  are  made,  even  his  eternal
power  and  Godhead."  They  must  be  startled  into  the  recognition  of  the  present  God.
When  some  event  out  of  the  ordinary  course  occurs,  they  stand  in  awe  before  it,  but  in
the  familiar  round  of  nature  they  find  nothing  Divine.  We  are  all  more  or  less  open  to
this  charge.  The  earthquake,  the  lightning  flash,  the  hurricane,  set  us  thinking  of  the
majesty  of  him  who  wields  such  mighty  forces  at  his  will ;  but  we  forget  the  still
more  marvellous  exercise  of  power  that  maintains  the  silent  harmony  of  the  spheres,
holds  the  due  balance  of  earth  and  sea,  chases  away  the  darkness  of  the  night  by
the  gently  spreading  dawn  of  every  new  morning,  brings  the  grass  blades  and  the
flowers  up  out  of  the  cold  sod,  ripens  the  fruit  upon  the  trees,  and  changes  the  green
carpet  of  the  springing  com  into  the  golden  glory  of  the  harvest.  Of  course  it  cannot
be  expected  that  any  incident  in  the  familiar  daily  round  of  nature  should  produce
precisely  the  same  effect  on  us  as  some  new  and  startling  phenomenon.  The  glory  of
the  setting  sun,  that  we  have  gazed  upon  a  thousand  times  before,  must  needs  be  less  to
us  in  this  respect  than  that  of  some  flaming  meteor  that  bursts  suddenly  upon  the


m


THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  vl  1— 30.


darkness  and  is  gone.  But  it  is  deeply  significant  of  the  dulness  of  our  spiritual
sensibility  that  we  can  gaze  so  often  on  the  world  of  wonders  around  us  without  being
solemnly  impressed  with  the  presence  of  the  living  God.

II.  The  self-will  that  spurns  the  Divine  cx)ntrol,  A  contrast  is  here  drawn
between  the  subjection  of  the  great  sea  to  the  laws  God's  will  has  imposed  on  it,  and
the  bounds  his  hand  has  drawn  around  it,  and  the  insubordination  of  the  rebellious
spirit  of  man.  It  is  a  grand  expression  of  Divine  power  in  the  material  realm  that  the
sea-shore  presents.  We  are  impressed  with  the  majestic  force  of  the  rolling  tide,  but,
after  all,  there  is  something  still  more  wonderful  in  the  solid  strength  of  the  belt  of  sand
that  resists  and  restrains  it.  (Even  as  the  moral  strength  of  a  man  is  seen  not  so  much
in  the  ungovemed  fury  of  his  passions,  as  in  the  calm  resolution  that  controls  them.)
The  sea  is  subject  to  restraint ;  not  so  the  wayward  spirit  of  man.  The  sea,  in  its
wildest  raging,  obeys  the  laws  that  are  imposed  on  it,  and  "  its  own  appointed  limits
keeps;"  but  the  rebellious  heart  of  man  defies  all  authority  other  than  its  own
impulses.  How  deep  the  mystery  of  this  difference  between  material  and  spiritual
forces  I  How  awful  the  prerogative  of  a  being  on  whom  God  has  conferred  a  moral
freedom  like  his  own !  He  will  never  violate  that  freedom  in  any  of  his  dealings  with
us;  that  were  to  destroy  the  very  nature  he  has  given.  But  in  proportion  to  the
dignity  of  the  self-determining  power,  so  dreadful  must  be  the  penalty  of  abusing  it.

III.  The  inqratitude  that  yields  no  return  of  love  for  the  Divine
beneficence.  It  was  an  aggravation  of  the  guilt  of  Israel  that  they  were  as  unmoved
by  the  perpetual  manifestation  of  the  goodness  of  God  as  they  were  by  the  revelations
of  his  power.  Even  that  did  not  lead  them  to  repentance  or  teach  them  to  fear  him.
Few  evidences  of  the  thoughtful  goodness  of  God  have  been  more  conspicuous  through  all
the  ages  than  the  beneficent  round  of  the  seasons.  In  spite  of  all  the  wickedness  of  man's
ways,  "  he  left  not  himself  without  witness,  in  that  he  did  good,"  etc.  (Acts  xiv.  17).
The  appeal  this  great  fact  makes  to  the  consciences  and  hearts  of  men  is  specially
forcible  as  bearing  on  those  whose  calling  is  to  be  fellow-workers  with  God  in  develop-
ing the  harvests  of  the  earth.  "Labour  is  a  sublime  necessity,"  not  as  a  mere
"  necessity,"  but  because  of  its  moral  meaning  and  moral  uses.  And  of  all  physical
labour,  the  husbandry  of  the  earth  is  most  rich  in  moral  associations,  as  educating  men
to  lowly  dependence  on  Gt)d,  and  grateful  devotion  to  him  in  response  to  his  fatherly
providence  and  long-suffering  grace.

Learn — As  all  Divine  manifestations  speak  to  us  alike  of  infinite  power  and  infinite
beneficence,  so  the  result  in  us  should  be  the  blended  affections  of  fear  and  love. — W.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  VI.


A  prophecy,  in  five  stanzas  or  strophes,
vividly  describing  the  judgment  and  its
caoses,  and  enforcing  the  necessity  of  re-
pentance.

Vers.  1 — 8. — Arrival  of  a  hostile  army
from  the  north,  and  snmmons  to  flee  from
the  doomed  city.

Yer.  1. — 0  ye  children  of  Bexuamin.  The
political  rank  of  Jerusalem,  as  the  capital  of
the  kingdom  of  Judah,  makes  it  difficult  to
realize  that  Jerusalem  was  not  locally  a  city
of  Jadah  at  all.  It  belonged,  strictly  speak-
ing, to  the  tribe  of  Benjamm,a  tribe  whose  in-
significance, in  comparison  with  Judah,  seems
to  have  led  to  the  adoption  of  a  form  of  ex-
pression not  literally  accurate  (see  P8.]xxvlil.
68).  The  true  state  of  the  case  is  evident
from  an  examination  of  the  two  parallel  pas-
sages. Josh,  XV.  7,  8,  and  xviiL  16, 17.    As


Mr.  Fergusson  points  out,  "The  bonndary
between  Judah  and  Benjamin  . . .  ran  at  the
foot  of  the  hill  on  which  tbe  city  stands,  so
that  the  city  itself  was  actually  in  Benjamin,
while,  by  crossing  the  narrow   ravine  of
Hinnom,    you  set  foot  on  the  territory  of
Judah  "  (Smith's  *  Dictionary  of  the  Bible,'
i.  983).    It  is  merely  a  specimen  of  the  un-
natural method  of  early  harmonists  when
Jewish  writers  tell  us  that  the  altars  and
the  sanctuary  were  in  Benjamin,  and  the
courts  of  the  temple  in  Judah.    The  worcls
of  "  the  blessing  of  Moses  "  are  clear  (Deut.
xxxiii.l2);  "The  beloved  of  the  Lord  I  he
shall  dwell  in  safety  by  him,  sheltering  him
continually,  and  between  his  shouldei-s  he
dwelleth ; "  i.e.  Benjamin  is  specially  pro-
tected, the  sanctuary  being   on  Benjamite
soil.    And  yet  these  highly  favoured  "chil-
dren of  Benjamin"  are  divinely  warned  to
flee  from  their  sacred  homes  (see  ch.  vii.  4—
7).    Gather  yourselves  to  flee ;  more  strictly.


CH.  vLl— 30.]  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.


148


tave  jfour  goods  hy  flight  In  ch.  iv.  6  the
same  advice  was  given  to  the  inhabitants  of
the  ooantry  districts.  There,  Jerusalem  was
represented  as  the  only  safe  refuge;  here,
the  capital  being  no  longer  tenable,  the  wild
pasture-land  to  the  south  (the  foe  being  ex-
pected from  the  north)  becomes  the  goal  of
the  fugitives  of  Jerusalem.  InTekoa.  Tekoa
was  a  town  in  the  wild  hill-country  to  the
Boath  of  Judah,  the  birthplace  of  the  prophet
AmoB.  It  is  partly  mentioned  because  its
name  seems  to  connect  it  with  the  yerb
rendered  blow  the  tnunpet.  Such  parono-
masisB  are  favourite  oratorical  instruments
of  the  prophets,  and  especially  in  connections
like  the  present  (comp.  Isa.  z.  30 ;  Micah  i.
10 — 15).  A  sign  of  fire  in  Beth-haooerem ;
rather,  a  signal  on  Beth-hakk^em.  The  ren-
dering of  Authorized  Version  was  suggested
by  Judg.  xz.  38,  40 ;  but  there  is  nothing
in  the  present  context  (as  there  is  in  that
passage)  to  favour  the  view  that  a  fiery
Deacon  is  intended.  Beth-hakk^rem  lay,
according  to  St.  Jerome,  on  an  eminence
between  Jerusalem  and  Tekoa ;  t.e.  probably
the  hill  known  as  the  Frank  Muuntain,  the
Arabic  name  of  which  (Djebel  d-FuraidiSy
Little  Paradise  Mountain)  is  a  not  unsuit-
able equivalent  for  the  Hebrew  (Vineyard-
house).  The  **  district  of  Beth-hakkerem  "
is  mentioned  in  Neh.  iii.  14.  The  choice  of
the  loodity  fur  the  signal  was  a  perfect  one.
"There  is  no  other  tell,"  remarks  Dr.
Thomson,  **  of  equal  height  and  size  in  Pales-
tine." Appeareth ;  rather,  bendeth  forward^
as  if  it  were  ready  to  fall.

Ver.  2. — I  have  likened  ...  a  comely  and
delicate  woman.  This  passage  is  one  of  the
mobt  difficult  in  the  book,  and  if  there  is  cor-
ruption of  the  text  anywhere,  it  is  here.  The
most  generally  adopted  rendering  is,  "  The
comely  and  delicate  one  will  I  destroy,  eyen
the  daughter  of  Zion,"  giving  the  verb  the
same  sense  as  in  Hos.  iy.  5  (literally  it  is,
I  have  brought  to  silence^  or  perfect  of  pro-
phetic certitude).  The  context,  however,
teems  to  fayour  the  rendering  "  pasturage  "
(including  the  idea  of  a  nomad  settlement),
instead  of  ^  comely ;  "  but  how  to  make  this
fit  in  with  the  remainder  of  the  existing  text
is  far  from  clear.  The  true  and  original
reading  probably  only  suryives  in  fragments.

Ver.  3. — The  ihepherdB  with  their  flocks,
etc.;  rather.  To  her  came  sitepherds  unth  their
flocks ;  they  have  pitched  their  tents  round
about  her;  they  have  pastured  each  at  his  side.
The  best  commentary  on  the  last  clause  is
furnished  by  Numb.  xxii.  4, "  Now  shall  this
company  lick  up  all  that  are  round  about  us,
as  the  ox  licketh  up  the  grass  of  the  field."

Ver.  4. — Prepare  ye  war;  literally,  sanc-
tify (or,  consecrate)  war.  The  foes  are  dra-
matically described  as  urging  each  other  on
at  the  different  stages  of  the  campaign.  The

JEREMIAH.


war  is  to  be  opened  with  sacrifices  (comp.
Isa.  xiii.  3  with  1  Sam.  xiii.  9) ;  next  theio
is  a  forced  march,  so  as  to  take  the  city  by
storm,  when  the  yigilance  of  its  defenders
is  relaxed  in  the  fierce  noontide  heat
(comp.  ch.  xy.  8) ;  evening  surprises  the  foe
still  on  the  way,  but  they  press  steadily  on,  to
do  their  work  of  destruction  by  niglit.  The
rapidity  of  the  marches  of  the  Chaldeans  im-
pressed another  prophet  of  the  reign  of  Josiah
— Habakkuk  (see  Hab.  i.  6,  8).  Woe  unto
TLB !  for  the  day  goeth  away ;  rather,  Alas  for
us  I  for  the  day  hath  turned.

Ver.  5. — Let  ns  go ;  rather,  let  us  go  up,
•*  To  go  up "  is  the  technical  term  for  the
movements  of  armies,  whether  adyancing
(as  here  and  Isa.  yiL  1)  or  retreating  (as  oh.
xxi.  2;  xxxiv.  21;  zxxvii.  5,  11).

Ver.  6.— Hew  ye  down  trees ;  rather,  her
trees.  Hewing  down  trees  was  an  ordinary
feature  of  Assyrian  and  Babylonian  expe-
ditions. Thus,  Assuma^irpal  *^  caused  the
forests  of  all  (his  enemies)  to  full "  (*  Records
of  the  Past,*  iii.  40,  77),  and  Shalmaneser
calls  himself  *'  the  trampler  on  the  heads  of
mountains  and  all  forests  "(Ibid., p.  83;  comp.
p.  90).  The  timber  was  partly  required  for
their  palaces  and  fleets,  but  also,  as  the  con-
text here  sugg:e8ts,  for  warlike  operations.
"Trees,"  as  Professor  Bawlinson  remarks,
"  were  sometimes  cut  down  and  built  into  the
mound  "  (see  next  note) ;  they  would  also  be
used  for  the  **  bulwarks  "  or  siege  instru-
ments spoken  of  in  Deut.  xx.  20.  Cast  a
mount ;  literally,  pour  a  mount  (or  "  bank,"
as  it  is  elsewhere  rendered),  with  reference
to  the  emptying  of  the  baskets  of  eurth  re-
quired for  building  up  the  "mount"  (mound).
Mabakkuk  (i.  10)  says  of  the  Chaldeans,  "He
laugheth  at  every  stronghold,  and  heapeth  up
earthy  and  taketh  it "  (comp.  also  2  Sam.  xx.
15 ;  Isa.  xxxvii.  33).  The  intention  of  the
mound  was  not  so  much  to  bring  the  be-
siegers on  a  level  with  the  top  of  the  walls  as
to  enable  them  to  work  the  battering-rams
to  better  advantage  (Rawlinson,  '  Ancient
Monarchies,'  i.  472).  She  is  wholly  oppres-
sion, etc. ;  rather,  she  is  the  city  that  is
punished ;  wholly  oppression  is  in  the  midst
of  Tier.

Ver.  7. — Asafonntain  eaitethont;  rather,
(U  a  cistern  keepeth  fresh  (literally,  cooO.  The
wickedness  of  Jerusalem  is  so  thoroughly
ingrained  that  it  seems  to  pass  into  act  by
a  law  of  nature,  just  as  a  cistern  caimot  help
always  yielding  a  supply  of  cool,  fresh  water.
Violence  and  spoil;  rather,  injustice  and
violence  (so  ch.  xx.  8 ;  Amos  iii.  10;  Hab.  L
3).  Before  me,  etc. ;  rather,  before  my  fajoe
continually  is  sickness  and  wounding.  The
ear  is  constantly  dinned  with  the  sounds  of
oppression,  and  the  eye  pained  with  the  sight
of  the  bodily  sufferings  of  the  victims.  The
word  for  **  sickness  "  is  applioable  to  any  kind


lie


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,  [ch.vi.1— 30.


of  inflnnity  (see  Isa.  liii.  8, 4),  bnt  the  con-
text clearly  limits  it  here  to  bodily  trouble.

Ver.  8. — Be  thou  ixutrncted ;  rather,  Let
ikyadf  he  corrected  (Authorized  Version
misses  the  sense,  a  very  important  one,  of
the  conjugation,  which  is  Ni/al  toUrativum
(comp.  Ps.  ii.  10;  Isa.  Hit  12).  The  phrase
is  equivalent  to  "  receive  correction  "  (ch.  ii.
80 ;  V.  8),  and  means  to  accept  the  warning
oonveyed  in  the  Divine  chastisement.  Lett
my  loul,  etc. ;  rather,  lest  my  tout  be  rent  front
ihee  (Authorized  Version  renders  the  same
verb  in  Ezek.  xxiii.  17,  **  be  alienated  ").

Yers.  9— 15.~It  is  an  all  but  complete
judgment  which  Jehovah  foreshows.  Un-
willing as  the  people  are  to  hear  it,  the
disclosure  must  be  made.

Ver.  9. — They  shall  thronghly  glean,  etc.
''Israel'*  has  already  been  reduced  to  a
•*  remnant ; "  the  ten  tribes  have  loet  their
independence,  and  Judah  alone  remains
(oh.  y.  15).  Even  Judah  shall  undergo  a
■evere  sifting  process,  which  is  likened  to
a  gleaning  (comp.  Isa.  xxiv.  18;  Obad.  5;
oh.  xlix.  9).  The  prospect  is  dark,  but
believers  in  God's  promises  would  remember
that  a  few  grapes  were  always  left  after  the
gathering  (comp.  Isa.  xvii.  6).  Tom  back
thbie  hand.  If  the  text  is  correct,  the
apeaker  here  addresses  the  leader  of  the
gleaners.  Keil  thinks  this  change  of  con-
stmotion  is  to  emphasize  the  certainty  of
the  predicted  destruction.  But  it  is  much
more  natural  (and  in  perfect  harmony  with
many  other  similar  phenomena  of  the  re-
ceived text)  to  suppose,  with  Hitzig,  that  the
letter  represented  in  the  Authorized  Version
by  ^  thine  "  has  arisen  by  a  mistaken  repe-
tition of  the  first  letter  of  the  following  word,
and  (the  verbal  form  being  the  same  for  the
infinitive  and  the  imperative)  to  render
turning  again  the  hand.  In  this  case  the
olause  will  be  dependent  on  the  preceding
statement  as  to  the  **  gleaning  "  of  Judah.
Into  the  Iwiketi ;  rather,  unto  the  ehoote.  The
gleaners  will  do  their  work  with  a  stem
thoroughness,  laying  the  hand  of  destruction
again  and  again  upon  the  vine-shoots.

Ver.  10. — Their  ear  is  nndroomoised ;
oovered  as  it  were  with  a  foreskin,  which
prevents  the  prophetic  message  from  find-
ing admittance.  Elsewhere  it  is  the  heart
(Lev.  xxvi.  41 ;  Ezek.  xliv.  7),  or  the  lips
(Exod.  vi.  12)  which  are  said  to  be  **  circum-
cised ;  **  a  passage  in  Stephen's  speech  ap-
plies the  epithet  both  to  the  heart  and  to
the  ears  (Acts  vii.  51).

Ver.  11. — ^Therefore  I  am  ftill;  rather.  But
I  am  full.  I  will  pour  it  ont.  The  text  has
**pour  it  out.**  The  sudden  transition  to
the  imperative  is  certainly  harsh,  and  ex-
ooses  the  conjectural  emendation  which  under-
lies the  rendering  of  the  Authorized  Version.
If  we  xetain  the  imperative,  we  must  explain


it  with  reference  to  Jeremiah's  inner  expe-
rience. Tliere  are,  we  must  remember,  two
selves  in  the  prophet  (comp.  Isa.  xxi.  6),
and  the  higher  prophetic  self  here  addresses
the  lower  or  human  self,  and  calls  upon  it
no  longer  to  withhold  the  divinely  com-
municated burden.  All  classes,  as  the
sequel  announces,  are  to  share  in  the  dread
calamity.  Upon  the  children  abroad ;  liter-
ally, upon  the  child  in  the  street  (comp.
Zech.  viii.  5).  The  assembly  of  young  men.
It  is  a  social  assembly  which  is  meant  (comp.
ch.  XV.  17,  "  the  assembly  of  the  laughers  **).

Ver.  12. — Shall  be  turned ;  t.e.  transferred.
Their  fields  and  wives.  Wives  are  regaled
as  a  property,  as  in  Exod.  xx.  17  (comp.
Deut.  V.  21).

Ver.  13. — Oiyen  to  coTetonmess ;  literally,
gaineth  gain;  but  the  word  here  rendered
**  gain  **  implies  that  it  is  unrighteous  gain
(the  root  means  "to  tear**).  Unjust  gain
and  murder  are  repeatedly  singled  out  in
tlie  Old  Testament  as  representative  sina
(comp.  Ezek.  xxxiii.  31 ;  Ps.  cxix.  36 ;  Isa.
i.  15  ;  ch.  ii.  34 ;  and  see  my  note  on  Isa.
Ivii.  17).  There  is  a  special  reason  for  the
selection  of  **  covetousness  '*  here.  Land  was
the  object  of  a  high-bom  Jew*s  ambition,
and  expulsion  from  his  land  was  his  appro-
priate punishment  (comp.  Isa.  v.  8,  9).

Ver.  11.— They  have  healed,  etc.  The  full
force  of  the  verb  is,  "  they  have  busied
themselves  about  healing**  (so  ch.  viii.  11 ;
Ii.  9).  0/  the  daughter.  Our  translators
evidently  had  before  them  a  text  which
omitted  these  words,  in  accordance  with  many
Hebrew  manuscripts  and  the  Septuagint;
Van  der  Hooght*s  text,  however,  contains
them,  as  also  does  the  parallel  passage  (ch.
viii.  11).  BlighUy;  or,  lightly;  Septuagint,
iEou0tvovvrfs.  Saying,  Peace,  peaoe.  Always
the  burden  of  the  mere  professional  prophets,
who,  as  one  of  a  higher  order — the  twld,  un-
compromising Micftn  —fittingly  characterizes
them,** bite  with  their  teeth,  and  cry,  Peace;**
t.e.  draw  flattering  pictures  of  the  state  and
prospects  of  their  country,  in  order  to  **  line
their  ovm  pockets  **  (Micah  iii.  5).

Ver.  15. — Were  they  ashamed  1  The  Autho-
rized Version  certainly  meets  the  require-
ments of  the  context;  there  seems  to  be
an  implied  interrogation.  Most,  however,
render,  "  They  are  brought  to  shame ;  **  in
which  case  it  seems  best  to  take  the  verb  as
a  perfect  of  prophetic  certitude,  equivalent
to  **  they  shall  surely  be  brought  to  shame.*'
When ;  rather,  because.  Kay,  they  were  not
at  all  ashamed;  rather,  nevertheless  they  feel
no  shame  (i.e.  at  present).  They  shall  be
oast  down ;  rather,  they  shall  stumble.

Vers.  16 — 21. — Without  hearty  repentance,
there  is  no  hope  of  escape.  But  hitherto
Judah  has  rejected  all  admonitions.  What
availeth  mere  ceremonial  punctuality  ?


CH.  VI.  1—30.]  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.


Ul


Ver.  16. — Stand  ye  in  the  wayi ;  literally,
gtation  yourselves  on  (or,  by)  roads,  i.e.  at  the
meeting-polDt  of  different  roads.  There  (as
the  following  words  state)  the  Jews  are  to
make  in(|airy  as  to  the  old  paths.  An-
tiquity gives  a  presumption  of  rightness;
the  ancients  were  nearer  to  the  days  when
God  spoke  with  man ;  they  had  the  guidance
of  God's  two  mighty  "shepherds"  (Isa.
IxiiL  11);  they  knew,  far  better  than  we,
who  **  are  but  of  yesterday,  and  know  no*
thing  ^  (Job  viii  9),  the  way  of  happiness.
For  though  there  are  many  pretended
•*  ways,"  there  is  but  "  one  way  "  (ch.  xxxii.
89)  which  has  Jehovah's  blessing  (Ps.  xxv.
8,9).

Ver.  17.— Also  I  let;  rather,  arid  I  kept
raising  up  (the  frequentative  perfect).
Watehjnen;  i.e,  prophets  (Ezek.  iii.  17,  and
part  of  Isa.  Iii.  8 ;  Ivi  10).  Hearken,  etc.
l^robably  the  words  of  Jehovah.  Standing
on  their  high  watch-tower  (Hab.  ii.  1),  the
prophets  scrutinize  the  horizon  for  the  first
appearance  of  danger,  and  give  warning  of
it  by  (metaphorically)  blowing  a  trumpet
(so  Amos  iii.  6).

Yer.  18.— Therefore  hear,  eto.  Remon-
strance being  useless,  the  sentence  upon
Israel  can  no  longer  be  delayed,  and  Jehovah
summons  the  nations  of  the  earth  as  wit-
nesses (comp.  Micah  L  2;  Isa.  xviii.  3;
Ps.  xlix.  1).  0  eongregation,  what  is  among
them.  The  passage  is  obscure.  **  Congrega-
tion "  can  only  refer  to  the  foreign  nations
mentioned  in  the  firat  clause;  for  Israel  could
not  be  called  upon  to  hear  the  judgment
**npon  this  people"  (ver.  19).  There  is,
however,  no  other  passage  in  which  the  word
has  this  reference.  The  w(5rds  rendered
**  what  is  among  them,"  or  ^  what  (shall
happen)  in  them,"  seem  unnaturally  laconic,
and  not  as  weighty  as  one  would  expect  after
the  solemn  introduction.  If  correct,  they
must  of  course  refer  to  the  Israelites.  But
Grafs  conjecture  that  the  text  is  corrupt
lies  near  at  hand.  The  least  alteration  which
will  remove  the  difficulties  of  the  passage  is
that  presupposed  by  the  rendering  of  Aquila
(not  Symmachus,  as  St.  Jerome  says;  see
Field's  *  Hexapla ')  and  J.  D.  Michaelis,
**the  testioiony  which  is  against  them."

Ver.  19.— The  trait  of  their  thought!.
That  punishment  is  the  ripe  fruit  of  sin,  is
the  doctrine  of  the  Old  (Isa.  iii.  10;  Ps.
IviiL  11,  margin)  as  well  as  of  the  New  Tes-
tament (J  as.  i.  15).

Ver.  20. — ^To  what  purpose  .  .  .  inoenie
from  8heba  1  This  is  the  answer  to  an  im-
plied objection  on  the  part  of  the  Jews,  that
they  have  faithfully  fulfilled  their  cere-
monial obligations.  ^  To  obey  is  better  than
•acrifice  "  (1  Sam.  xv.  22);  "  And  what  doth
the  Lord  require  of  thee,  but  to  do  justly,
and  to  love  mercy,  and  to  walk  humbly  with


thy  God?"  (l^Iicah  vi.  8;  comp.  Isa.  i.  11;
Amos  V.  21—24 ;  Hos.  vi.  6 ;  Micah  vi.  6—8),
All  these  passages  must  be  read  in  the  light
of  the  prophets'  circumstances.  A  purely
formal,  petrified  religion  compelled  them  to
attack  the  existing  priesthood,  and  a  holy
indignation  cannot  stop  to  measure  its  lan-
guage. License  from  Sheba;  frankincense
from  soutli-west  Arabia.  This  was  required
for  the  holy  incense  (Exod.  xxx.  34),  and  as
an  addition  to  the  minkhah,  or  **  meal  offer-
ing." Sweet  eane.  The  "sweet  calamus'*
of  Exod.  xxx.  23,  which  was  imported  from
India.  It  was  an  ingredient  in  the  holy
anointing  oil  (Exod.,  loe,  cit.).  Not  to  be
confounded  with  the  sugar-cane.

Ver.  21.— I  will  lay  stnmhling-bloeki,  eto.
Of  the  regenerate  Israel  of  the  future  it  is
prophesied  (Isa.  liv.  15)  that  his  enemies
shall  **  fall  upon  him  [or,  *  by  reason  of  him  *]."
Of  the  unregenerate  Israel  of  the  present,
that  he  shall  "  fall "  {i.e.  come  to  ruin)  upon
the  "  stumbling-blocks"  presented,  not  with-
out God's  appointment,  by  the  terrible
northern  invader.

Vera.  22— 30.— The  enemy  described ;  the
terror  consequent  on  his  arrival ;  a  rumoured
declaration  of  the  moral  cause  of  the  judg-
ment

Ver.  22.— From  the  north  oonntry  (so
oh.  i.  14  (see  note) ;  iv.  6).  Shall  be  raised ;
rather,  shaU  be  aroused.  The  sides  of  the  earth;
rather,  '*  the  recesses  (t.e.  furthest  parts)  of
the  earth  "  (so  ch.  xxxv.  32 ;  Isa.  xiv.  13).

Ver.  23.— Spear ;  rather, jave/tn  (or,  lanoey
They  are  erael.  The  cruelty  of  the  Assyrians
and  Babylonians  seems  to  have  spread
general  dismay.  Nahum  calls  Kineveh
**the  city  of  bloodshed"  (iu.  1);  Habakkuk
styles  the  Chaldeans  **  bitter  and  vehement,
terriSle  and  dreadful "  (i.  6,  7).  The  cus-
toms brought  out  into  view  in  the  monu-
ments justify  this  most  amply,  though
Professor  Rawlinson  thinks  we  cannot  call
the  Assyrians  (with  whom  the  Babvloniana
may  of  course  be  coupled)  naturally  hard-
hearted.  **The  Assyrian  listens  to  the
enemy  who  asks  for  quarter;  he  prefers
making  prisoners  to  slaying;  he  is  very
terrible  in  the  battle  and  the  assault,  but
afterwards  he  forgives  and  spares"  (*  Ancient
Monarchies,'  i.  243).  Their  Toioe  roareth.
The  horrid  roar  of  the  advancing  hosts
seems  to  have  greatly  struck  the  Jews
(comp.  Isa.  V.  30 ;  xvii.  12,  13).

Ver.  24. — We  have  heard  the  fiune  thereol
The  prophet  identifies  himself  (compi,  for
the  same  phenomenon,  ch.  iv.  19 — 21;  z.
19,  20)  with  his  people,  and  expresses  the
genersJ  feeling  of  anxiety  and  pain.  The
phraseology  of  the  closing  lines  reminds  Of
of  Isa.  xiii.  7,  8.

Ver.  25.— €k>  not  forth  into  the  field.  The
<*  daughter  of  Zion  "  (<.«.  the  personifio    po-


148


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  vi.  l-3a


pnlation  of  Jerusalem)  is  cautioned  against
yenturing  outside  the  walls.  The  sword  of
fhe  enemy ;  rather,  the  enemy  hath  a  tword.
7ear  is  on  every  side ;  Hebrew,  magdr  mum-
Inb;  one  of  Jeremiah's  favourite  expressions
(see  ch.  xx.  3,  10;  xlvi.  5;  xlix.  29;  and
oomp.  Pa.  xxxi.  13  [14].).  Naturally  of  a
timid,  retiring  character,  the  prophet  cannot
help  feeling  the  anxious  and  alarming
rituation  into  which  at  the  Divine  command
he  has  ventured.

Yer.  26.— Wallow  thyself  in  ashes;  rather,
tprinkle  thyself  tcith  asheSf  a  sign  of  mourn-
ing (2  8am.  xiii.  19;  so  Micah  i.  10).
Xonming,  as  for  an  only  son.  The  Septua^iu  t
renders  trtydos  kyamirov  (comp.  Gen.  xxii.  2,
where  in  like  manner  the  Septuagint  renders,
not  "thine  only  son,**  but  "thy  beloved
son**).  Possibly  this  was  to  avoid  a  sup-
position which  might  have  occurred  to
some  readers  (it  has,  in  fact,  occurred  to
several  modem  critics)  that  the  "only  son '*
was  Adonis,  who  was  certainly  "  mourned
for"  by  some  of  the  Israelites  under  the
name  of  Tbammuz  (Ezek.  viii.  14),  and
whose  Phoenician  name  is  given  by  Philo
Ot  BybluB  as  *Uoi9  (i.e.  probably  YakJiidht
only  begotten,  the  word  used  by  Jeremiah ;
oomp.  Bi7f>o<^,  equivalent  to  Berith).  M.
Benan  found  a  vestige  of  the  ancient  festival
of  Adonis  at  Djebeil  (the  Phoenician  Gebal)
even  at  the  present  day.  There  would  be
nothing  singular  in  the  adoption  of  a  com-
mon popular  phrase  by  the  prophet,  in  spite
of  its  reference  to  a  heathen  custom  (comp.
Job  iii.  8),  and  the  view  in  question  gives
additional  force  to  the  passage.  But  the
ordinary  explanation  is  perfectly  tenable
and  more  obvious.  The  phrase,  "  mourning
[or,  *  lamentation  *]  for  an  only  begotten  one,**
occurs  again  in  Amos  viii.  10;  Zech.  xli.  10.
In  the  laat-montioned  passage  it  is  parallel
with  "  bitter  weeping  for  a  firstborn.**

Ver.  27.— I  have  set  thee,  etc. ;  literally,
a$  an  awayer  have  I  8et  thee  among  my
veopUj  a  fortress.  Various  attempts  have
Seen  made  to  avoid  giving  the  last  word  its
natural  rendering, "  a  fortress.*'  Ewald,  for
instance,  would  alter  the  points,  and  render
"  a  separator  [of  metals],**  thus  making  the
word  synonymous  with  that  translated  "  an
assayer ; "  but  this  is  against  Hebrew  usage.
Hitzig,  assuming  a  doubtful  interpreta-
tion of  Job  xxii.  24,  renders  "...  among
my  people  without  gold,**  ue.  "without
there  being  any  gold  there  for  thee  to  as-
say **  (a  very  awkward  form  of  expression).
These  are  the  two  most  plausible  views,  and
yet  neither  of  them  is  satisfactory.  Nothing
remains   but   the  very  simple  conjecture.


supported  by  not  a  few  similar  phenomena,
that  mihh^r^  a  fortress,  has  been  inserted
by  mistake  from  the  margin,  where  an  early
glossator  had  written  the  word,  to  remind
of  the  parallel  passage  (ch.  i.  18,  "I  have
made  thee  this  day  a  fortress-city,**  *ir
mibh^ar).  In  this  and  the  follomng  verses
metallurgic  phraseology  is  employed  with  a
moral  application  (comp.  Isa.  i.  22,  25).

Ver.  28. — Orievoas  revolters;  literally,
rebels  of  rebels.  Walking;  rather,  g(titig
about,  as  a  pedlar  with  his  wares  (so  Frov.
xi.  13;  XX.  19;  Lev.  xix.  16).  Jeremiah
had  good  reason  to  specify  this  characteristic
of  his  enemies  (see  ch.  xviii.  18).  Brass  and
Iron ;  rather,  copper  and  iron,  in  short,  base
metal.

Ver.  29. — ^The  bellows  are  bnmed.  The
objection  to  this  rendering  is  that  the  burn-
ing of  the  bellows  would  involve  the  inter-
ruption of  the  process  of  assaying.  We
might,  indeed,  translate  "  are  scorched  **  (on
the  authority  of  Ezek.  xv.  4),  and  attach
the  word  rendered  "  of  the  fire  **  to  the  first
clause ;  the  half-verse  would  then  run :
"The  bellows  are  scorched  through  the  fire;
the  lead  is  consumed,**  i.e.  the  bellows  are
even  scorched  through  the  heat  of  tho
furnace,  and  the  lead  has  become  entirely
oxydized.  But  this  requires  us  to  alter  the
verb  from  the  masculine  to  the  feminino
form  of  third  sing.  perf.  (reading  tammah).
It  is  better,  therefore,  to  give  the  verb  (which
will  be  Kal,  if  the  nun  be  radical)  the  sense
of  "snorting,"  which  it  has  in  Aramaic  and
in  Arabic,  and  which  the  corresponding  noun
has  in  Hebrew  (ch.  viii.  16;  Job  xxxix.  20 ;
xli.  12).  The  masculine  form  of  the  verb
rendered  "  is  consumed  *'  is  still  a  difficulty ;
but  we  have  a  better  right  to  suppose  that
the  first  letter  of  tittom  was  dropped,  owing
to  its  identity  with  the  second  letter,  than
to  append  (as  the  first  view  would  require
us)  an  entirely  different  letter  at  the  end.
This  being  done,  the  whole  passage  becomes
clear:  "The  bellows  puff,  (that)  the  lead
may  be  consumed  of  the  fire.**  In  any  case,
the  general  meaning  is  obvious.  The
assayer  has  spared  no  trouble,  all  the  rules
of  his  art  have  been  obeyed,  but  no  silver
appears  as  the  result  of  the  process.  Lead
is  mentioned,  because,  before  quicksilver
was  known,  it  was  employed  as  a  flux  in
the  operation  of  smelting.  Plucked  away;
rather,  separated,  like  the  dross  from  the
silver.

Ver.  30. — Reprobate  silver  .  .  .  rejected
them;  rather,  refuse  silver  (as  the  margin)
.  .  .  refused  them.  The  verbal  root  is  the
same.


OH.vi.1-^.]     THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  U9


HOMILETICS.

Ver.  7. — Wells  of  wickedness,  L  If  wickedness  is  abundant  ah©  fersibtent,  it
icuBT  GOME  FROM  A  DEEP  80UECE.  The  wickodness  of  Israel  is  coDstantly  renewed—
ever  fresh  and  abundant,  like  water  in  a  well.  Such  water  must  flow  out  of  deep
fountains.  The  continuity  of  a  course  of  sin  proves  that  its  origin  is  deep-seated.  The
sin  of  hasty  temper  is  less  than  that  of  deliberate  calculation,  the  fall  before  sudden
temptation  more  excusable  than  the  wilful  choice  of  evil,  the  occasional  slip  less
culpable  than  the  continuous  habit  of  wickedness.  This  habitual  sin  must  be  rooted
in  a  man's  nature.  Springing  out  under  all  circumstances,  it  is  seen  to  be,  not  an
outside  defect,  but  a  fruit  of  his  own  inner  life.  Constantly  flowing  in  spite  of  all
restraints  of  law,  social  influence,  and  conscience,  it  shows  how  thoroughly  corrupt  the
heart  must  be  (Matt.  xv.  18).

IL  If  wickedness  is  deep-seated  in  the  heabt,  it  must  flow  out  ih  frequent
ACTS.  The  spring  cannot  restrain  its  waters ;  the  heart  cannot  repress  its  imaginations.
These  must  come  forth  and  express  themselves  in  deeds.  Men  may  aim  at  living  two
lives — an  inner  life  of  sin  and  an  outer  life  of  propriety ;  but  the  attempt  must  ulti-
mately faiL  The  greater  the  evil  of  the  heart,  the  more  completely  must  this  colour
the  life.

III.  Deep-seated  and  ever- flowing  wickedness  provokes  the  severest  judo-
MENT  from  God.  Jeremiah  points  to  this  as  the  terrible  justification  for  the  approach-
ing desolation  of  the  land.  1.  In  itself  it  is  most  heinous,  and  carries  the  greatest  guilt,
2.  It  is  so  radically  evil  that  it  impr^uates  the  whole  nature  of  the  people  in  whom  it
dwells,  so  that  they  cannot  be  regarded  as  doers  of  wickedness  only,  but  as  wicked ;
not  as  those  who  have  committed  acts  of  dishonesty,  untruth,  violence,  etc.,  but  as
thieves,  liars,  murderers,  etc.  3.  Ever-flowing,  it  promises  no  better  things  for  the
future.  If  left  to  itself,  it  will  but  repeat  the  sickening  tale  of  the  past  with  aggravated
depravity.  4.  It  is  the  source  of  evil  to  others.  The  sin  flows  out.  It  most  be
checked  for  the  protection  of  all  who  come  under  its  influence.

Vers.  10,  11. — The  indifference  of  men  and  the  burden  <f  truth.  We  have  here
revealed  to  us  a  conflict  in  the  mind  of  the  prophet.  At  first  it  seems  vain  for  him  to
speak,  for  none  heed  his  warnings  (ver.  10) ;  but  then  he  feels  the  awful  burden  of  his
message  compelling  utterance.  While  he  looks  at  his  audience  he  loses  heart  and  sees
little  good  in  attempting  to  influence  them ;  but  when  he  looks  within  at  his  trust  he
finds  that  this  has  claims  and  powers  before  which  he  must  bow  obediently.  Thus  the
teacher  of  high  truth  is  often  discoiu^ed  when  he  considers  the  unfitness  of  men  to
receive  it,  until  he  realizes  more  fully  the  majesty  of  the  truth  itself  which  possesses
him  and  is  not  simply  a  treasure  to  be  regardeii  as  his  property,  but  a  Lord  demanding
his  faithful  service.

L  The  indifference  of  men.  Here  was  the  source  of  Jeremiah's  discouragement,
and  we  can  sympathize  with  him.  What  is  the  use  of  uttering  truths  that  men  are
not  fit  to  receive— only  to  waste  our  powers,  create  misunderstandings,  and  provoke
opposition  ?  1.  The  reception  of  truth  depends  on  the  condition  of  the  receiving  mind.
Language  requires  ears  as  well  as  tongues.  Outward  ears  are  useless  without  the
inward  ears  of  an  understanding  mind.  An  ass  has  no  lack  of  ears,  but  what  are  a
prophet's  words  to  him  ?  There  are  people  to  whom  the  solemn  utterance  of  the  most
awful  truths  is  but  so  much  noise.  Therefore  (1)  it  behoves  men  to  beware  of  mocking
at  the  supposed  folly  of  any  teaching  till  they  have  ascertained  whether  the  fault  lies
with  the  teacher  or  with  the  taught.  And  (2)  it  is  not  enough  to  utter  truth ;  we
should  seek  for  men  the  right  preparation  for  receiving  it — the  ploughing  of  the  hard
soil  in  readiness  for  the  sowing  of  the  seed.  2.  When  the  mind  is  in  a  wrong  can^
ditionfor  the  reception  of  truth  this  may  meet  with  ridicule  and  dislike.  Truth  may
meet  with  ridicule.  The  word  of  Jehovah  was  "  a  mockery  to  the  Jews."  Ridicule
may  be  both  a  result  of  misunderstanding  the  truth  and  a  cause  of  fiu'ther  mistakes.
Truth  may  also  meet  with  dislike.  The  Jews  had  " no  delight"  in  the  Divine  Word.
This  was  a  proof  of  their  not  understanding  it ;  for  to  know  it  Sa  to  love  it  (Fs.  cxiz.


150         THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,  [ch.  vi.  1^^.

16).    It  was  also  a  cause  of  their  not  rightly  receiving  it ;  for  dislike  to  truth  blinds
the  eye  to  the  nature  of  it.

II.  The  burden  of  truth.  In  spite  of  all  these  grounds  for  discouragement,
Jeremiah  feels  that  he  must  utter  his  message  when  once  he  considers  its  origin  and
character.  1.  Truth  is  a  trust  from  God.  It  is  "  the  fury  of  the  Lord  "  that  possesses
the  prophet,  not  the  mere  passion  of  his  own  thouj^hts.  He  who  holds  a  Divine  truth
is  a  steward  of  an  oracle  of  God.  Woe  to  him  if  he  consult  his  own  conveuieuce  and
rely  only  on  his  own  jud;]jment  when,  as  a  steward,  he  is  called  to  be  faithful  to  his
Master's  will.  His  duty  is  to  speak ;  the  consequences  may  be  left  to  God.  2.  Truth
if  an  inspircUion  from  God.  Jeremiah  is  "  full  of  the  fury  of  Jehovah."  The  Spirit
of  Gkxl  has  possessed  him ;  he  is  brought  into  sympathy  with  the  thought  and  feeling  of
God :  he  must  needs  utter  this.  If  men  feel  the  inspiration  of  truth  they  will  be  carried
away  by  it  and  poor  considerations  of  worldly  expediency  will  be  swept  on  one  side  by
the  flood  of  a  Divine  passion.  3.  Truth  is  a  burden  on  the  soul  which  cries  for  utter*
once,  Jeremiah  exclaims,  "  I  am  weary  with  holding  in ! "  "  Woe  is  me ! "  cries  St.
Paul,  as  he  thinks  of  the  suggestion  to  restrain  his  preaching  the  gospel.     Under  great

Cions  men  do  not  speak  measured  words,  chosen  in  strict  consideration  for  their
ers;  they  speak  to  give  vent  to  their  own  souls.  The  grandest  utterances  of
humanity,  in  prophecy  and  in  poetry,  are  free  from  all  calculations  as  to  the  reception
of  them  by  an  audience.  They  are  unrestraiuable  expressions  of  the  soul ;  like  the
songs  of  birds  flowing  from  the  very  fulness  of  the  heart.  4.  Truth  is  for  the  good  of
mankind,  Jeremiah  must  speak,  for  what  he  utters  concerns  others  than  himself.  No
one  has  a  right  to  the  monopoly  of  any  great  truth.  It  is  common  property,  and  he
who  hides  it  steals  it    If  his  excuse  is  that  men  cannot  understand  it,  let  him  remember

il)  that  he  is  not  an  infallible  judge  of  the  capacities  of  other  men ;  and  (2)  that  his
uty  is  to  bear  his  testimony,  whether  men  will  hear  or  no,  and  to  leave  all  further
responsibility  with  them.

Ver.  14. — False  peace,    I.  The  cravtno  fob  peace  is  natural.     These  false

Srophets  gained  their  influence  by  professing  to  satisfy  a  natural  instinct.  The  Jews
readed  war  with  their  great  neighbours.  1.  All  wicked  men  are  at  heart  in  a  state
of  unrest.  The  soul  that  sins  is  at  war  with  God,  with  the  law  and  order  of  the
universe,  with  its  own  nature.  2.  This  condition  is  distressing.  The  outward  warfare
begets  inward  unrest.  Then,  above  all  things,  peace  is  the  great  want  of  the  soul.
Wealth,  success,  happiness,  can  be  spared  if  but  this  jewel  is  still  preserved.  All
great  philosophies  and  all  earnest  religions  set  themselves  to  the  task  of  discovering
or  creating  it.

II.  The  pbetenbionb  of  false  peace  are  plausible.  The  prophets  dissuaded  theur
hearers  from  attending  to  the  warning  words  of  Jeremiah,  and  endeavoured  to  make
them  believe  that  they  were  in  no  danger.  There  is  much  that  is  very  popular  in
arguments  such  as  theirs.  1.  They  agree  with  the  wishes  of  the  hearers.  Men  are
always  inclined  to  believe  what  they  wish.  2.  They  flatter  the  pride  of  the  populace.
The  people  are  told  that  they  are  too  great  and  too  favoured  of  Heaven  to  suffer  any
serious  calamity,  and  they  are  only  too  ready  to  believe  it.  3.  They  claim  the  merits  of
charity.  They  promise  pleasant  things.  This  looks  more  charitable  than  the  threat-
ening language  of  stem  censors.  Hence  the  prophets  win  favour  for  their  apparent
geniality  and  liberal  sentiments.  4.  They  require  no  sacrifices  from  those  who  accept
them.  The  doctrine  is  popular  because  the  practice  flowing  from  it  is  easy.  The
flattering  prophets  called  to  no  reformation  of  character.  5.  They  have  appearances  in
their  favour.  At  present  all  looks  fair.  Is  not  this  a  presumption  that  the  future
will  be  happy  ?  The  sun  is  rising  in  gold  and  crimson ;  why,  then,  prophesy  the
approach  of  a  storm  ?

III.  The  pretensions  of  false  peace  are  ruinous.  1.  These  pretensions  do
nothing  to  secure  the  peace.  They  simply  lead  men  to  believe  that  they  are  to  enjoy
it.  Such  a  belief  cannot  alter  facts.  If  there  is  no  peace  we  do  not  make  peace  by
crying,  "Peace,  peace!"  This  is  the  language  of  folly  and  indolence.  2.  These
delusions  only  aggravate  the  danger,  lliey  prevent  men  from  preparing  for  the
calamity  by  blinding  them  to  the  near  advent  of  it.

lY.  ThEBE  is  a  WAT  BY  WHIOH  THE  NATUBAL  CBAYINO  FOB  PEAOB  MAT  BE  SATISFIED,


CH.  VI.  1—30.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHlfT  JEREMIAH.  161

The  deceiving  prophets  do  not  make  peace ;  they  only  talk  of  it.  But  in  the  teaching
of  true  prophets  and  apostles  the  way  to  secure  solid  peace  is  revealed.  1.  This  is  shown
to  be  not  immediate,  Jeremiah  was  right  in  saying  that  the  people  must  suffer  before
they  enjoyed  peace.  Christ,  the  Prince  of  peace,  came  to  "  sena  a  sword  "  (Matt.  x.  34).
The  gospel  does  not  preach  **  peace  at  any  price,"  but  peace  after  victory  in  warfiEure,
rest  after  patient  endurance  of  tribulation.  2.  This  is  shown  to  be  through  repentanoB
and  renewal  of  life.  The  deceiving  prophets  promise  peace  to  the  people  as  they  are.
While  we  are  in  sin  we  cannot  have  true  peace  (Isa.  xlviii.  22).  Peace  follows  the
advent  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ  (John  xiv.  26,  27).

Ver.  16. — The  old  path$,  I.  Consider  the  becommendation  to  follow  the  old
PATHS.  1.  The  course  of  life  should  be  determined  after  thoughtfvl  deliberation.
Jeremiah  is  to  **  stand  in  the  ways  and  see."  It  is  foolish  to  go  with  the  multitude
without  individual  convictions  of  what  is  right,  or  to  follow  our  own  private  impulses
blindlv  and  aimlessly.  2.  The  choice  should  fall  on  a  good  way.  Other  ways  may  bo
smooth,  pleasant,  flowery  at  the  starting,  only  to  lose  themselves  in  the  pathless
wilderness,  while  this  may  look  more  rugged  and  steep  at  first ;  but  it  shoula  not  be
the  present  attractiveness,  but  the  direction,  the  whole  course  and  the  end  of  a  way,
whicn  should  determine  our  choice  of  it.  3.  There  are  old  paths  of  right.  Religion
has  not  to  be  made  anew.  It  is  not  left  for  the  latest  saint  to  discover  the  way  of
holiness.  4.  Having  found  the  right  way,  we  should  forthwith  "  wcHk  therein,^  Know-
ledge is  useless  without  practice ;  nay,  guilt  is  aggravated  if,  knowing  the  right,  we
follow  the  wrong.  5.  In  the  right  way  is  rest  for  the  soul.  Even  while  on  the
earthly  pilgrimage  many  quiet  resting-places  may  be  found  (Ps.  xxiii.  2),  through
all  the  course  an  inward  peace  may  be  enjoyed  (Prov.  iii.  17),  and  at  the  end  will  be
found  the  perfect  rest  of  the  home  of  God  (Heb.  iv.  9).

II.  Consider  the  obounds  on  which  this  recommendation  is  based.  1.  Old  ways
have  been  tested  by  experience.  We  choose  for  a  guide  one  who  has  already  traversed
the  country.  In  an  unknown  land  we  naturally  turn  to  beaten  tracks  in  preference  to
following  stray  footprints  across  the  wild,  or  striking  out  for  ourselves  a  pathless  way.
If  others  have  done  rough  pioneer  work,  why  should  not  we  avail  ourselves  of  it  ?  If
they  have  reached  the  goal,  they  have  proved  that  it  is  attainable  by  their  way.
This  is  fact;  that  a  new  way  will  be  easier  or  shorter  is  conjecture.  There  is,
therefore,  a  presumption  in  favour  of  the  old.  2.  Old  ways  in  religion  are  nearer  to
the  original  fountains  of  inspiration,  Israel  was  referred  back  to  the  old  ways
marked  out  by  Moses,  the  great  founder  of  the  Jewish  faith.  Christians  are  referred
back  to  primitive  Christianity,  to  the  teaching  of  the  apostles,  to  the  life  and  example
of  Christ.  Christianity  is  not  a  speculation,  a  creation  of  the  spirit  of  the  age.  It
is  a  tradition,  a  following  of  those  Divine  counsels  which  are  indicated  in  the  New
Testament.

III.  Consider  the  limitations  to  the  application  of  this  eegommendatiov.
1.  The  old  ways  are  to  be  followed  only  in  so  far  as  they  are  good.  Still  we  must
judge  by  our  own  conscience.  Antiquity  must  not  be  taken  as  a  despotic  master.
There  are  bad  old  ways.  The  first-bom  man  struck  out  an  evil  way ;  it  was  left  to
Abel,  the  second-born,  to  show  the  better  course.  2.  In  considering  the  character  of  an
old  way,  we  must  take  note  of  the  character  and  light  of  those  who  founded  it.  Thore
have  been  dark  ages  in  the  past.  Corruption  soon  crept  in.  Things  are  not  good  just
in  proportion  to  their  age.  Christians  must  look,  not  to  the  Puritans,  the  Reformers,
the  mediaeval  Church,  the  Fathers,  but,  passing  numerous  errors  and  corruptions,  reach
back  to  Christ  himself  for  the  true  old  way.  He  is  t?ie  Way  (John  xiv.  6).  3.  We
must  ever  progress  beyond  the  attainments  of  the  past.  We  are  to  follow  those  old
ways  that  are  good ;  we  are  to  build  on  the  one  foundation.  But  we  are  not  to  be  con-
tent  with  having  the  foundation.  The  fabric  must  rise  higher  and  higher  (1  Cor.  ilL
11 — 15).  Christianity  is  a  religion  of  progress.  It  is  not  to  be  subject  to  revolutions.
Progress  must  follow  the  lines  laid  down  by  Christ  and  his  apostles.  Christianity  is
not  strengthened  nor  adorned,  but  only  burdened  and  hidden,  by  a  mere  accretion  of
human  ideas  and  institutions ;  yet  it  is  a  seed  which  grows,  developing  larger,  fuller
life  out  of  its  own  essential  principles  (Matt.  xiii.  31).  Jeremiah  himself  took  a  great
stride  forward  beyond  the  limits  attained  by  antiquity,  though  in  the  direction  of  the


162  THE  BOOK  OP  THE   PROPHET  JEREMIAH,     [ch.  vi.  1— 30.


old  path,  t.«.  in  the  spirit  of  the  religion  of  his  fathers  (ch.  xxxi.  31 — 34).  "These
times  are  the  ancient  times,  when  the  world  is  ancient,  and  not  those  which  we  count
ancient,  ordine  retrogrado,  by  a  computation  backwards  from  ourselves"  (Francis  Bacon).

Ver.  17. —  Watchmen.  I.  The  mission  of  the  watchmen.  1.  They  Sive  appointed  by
Qod,  God  raises  up  prophets,  preachers,  teachers  of  righteousness.  Unless  they  have
a  Divine  call  they  are  usurping  a  position  to  which  they  have  no  right  (Gal.  i.  1,  15).
Hence  see  (1)  the  authority  of  the  watchmen  ;  (2)  the  merciful  kindness  of  God  in  pro-
Tiding  warning  and  instruction.  2.  They  are  to  observe  what  goes  on  around  them.
The  prophets  are  seers  of  spiritual  truths,  observers  of  events  of  history  in  the  light  of
those  truths,  and  thus,  as  watchmen,  able  to  discern  approaching  dangers.  The
Christian  teachers  must  not  be  wrapt  up  in  abstract  truth.  They  must  see  the  appli-
cation of  this,  note  the  condition  and  needs  of  men,  discern  tlie  "  signs  of  the  times.*'
The  prophets  were  political  leaders.  They  discoursed  on  subjects  which  in  our  day
vould  be  discussed  in  the  newspaper.  3.  They  are  to  blow  the  trumpet.  The  seer  is
to  be  a  prophet.  He  who  knows  truth  must  make  it  known  to  others.  The  watchman
must  not  simply  "  let  his  light  shine ; "  he  must  blow  a  trumpet,  demand  attention,
compel  men  to  hear.  The  enemy  is  at  the  gate.  This  is  no  time  for  mild  disquisitions
on  military  tactics;  it  is  a  moment  when  men  must  be  awaked  from  their  sleep  and
summoned  to  arms.  The  Christian  preacher  speaks  to  men  who  are  asleep  and  in  great
danger.  His  duty  is  not  simply  to  let  the  truth  be  known.  He  must  arouse,  urge,
**  compel  "  men  to  hear  his  message.

II.  The  reception  of  the  mission  of  the  watchmen.  The  watchman  has  done  his
duty  in  sounding  the  trumpet.  If  none  will  hear,  he  is  free.  1.  Men  must  hearken  to
the  Divine  message  before  they  can  profit  by  it.  To  be  warned  is  not  to  be  saved.  If
men  refuse  to  accept  the  truths  of  Christianity  these  can  do  them  no  good,  and  they
are  left  free  to  follow  or  to  neglect  them.  2.  Men  must  obey  the  Divine  message  before
they  can  profit  by  it.  It  is  nothing  to  tremble  at  the  warning  of  judgment  unless  we
are  moved  to  actions  of  precaution.  Felix  trembled,  and  was  none  the  better  for  this
proof  of  the  powerful  efifect  of  the  preaching  of  St.  Paul  (Acts  xxiv.  25).  3.  If  the
Divine  message  is  heard  and  disregarded,  the  folly,  guilt,  and  ruin  will  only  be  aggra-
vated. The  plea  of  ignorance  is  gone.  IndiHereace  is  converted  into  obstinate  rebellion
(ver.  19).

Ver.  20. — Worthless  sacrifices.  L  Sacrifioes  are  worthless  when  they  are
HOT  OFFERED  IN  THE  RIGHT  SPIRIT.  The  mere  gifts  are  of  no  use  to  God  (Ps.  1,
8—13).  They  are  only  valuable  as  expressing  the  thoughts  and  feelings  of  the  giver.
Beligious  services  are  simply  good  as  the  outward  expression  of  worship.  1.  Sacrifices
are  worthless  when  they  are  not  prompted  by  spiritual  devotion  ;  religious  services  are
miacceptable  when  they  are  only  external  performances.  The  true  sacrifice  must  be  of
the  wUU  *.«.  self-dedication.  2.  Sacrifices  are  worthless  when  they  are  accompanied  by
immorality  of  conduct.  Worship  at  church  is  a  mockery  if  daily  conduct  in  the
world  is  corrupt  (Isa.  i.  15).

II.  Worthless  sacrifices  mat  have  all  the  external  characteristics  of
AOCEFTABLE  SACRIFICES.  1.  They  may  be  ofifered  to  Qod,  There  may  be  a  real  inten<-
tion  to  approach  God,  yet  this  is  vain  if  the  heart  is  wrong.  2.  They  may  be  accord-
ing to  prescribed  order.  The  formally  obedient  Jews  were  rigidly  subservient  to  the
ordinance  of  the  authorized  ritual,  3.  They  may  be  costly — incense  from  Sheba,  sweet
cane  from  India.    But  men  cannot  buy  acceptance  with  God  by  signing  heavy  cheques.

III.  The  offering  of  worthless  sacrifices  is  a  serious  fault.  1.  It  is  an
inBult  to  Qod,  Better  offer  nothing  than  the  worthless  gift  when  all  he  really  asks  for,
the  heart,  is  withheld.  2.  It  is  a  source  of  self-delusion.  The  ofi'ering  being  given,
the  conscience  feels  relieved,  false  pride  is  stimulated,  and  the  real  spiritual  condition  is
hidden.  People  have  a  vague  feeling  that  they  have  done  a  good  thing  in  attending
church,  in  sitting  out  a  service,  in  mechanically  following  the  iforms  of  worship.  Yet,
A8  this  is  really  utterly  worthless,  the  impression  of  self-complacency  it  produces  is
highly  injurious.

Vers.  27 — 30. — Ttsting  fir€9.    Under  the  image  of  an  assayer  and  his  fire,  Jeremiah


CH.  VL  1—30.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PJIOPHET  JEREMIAH.  168

\b  led  to  regard  his  miBsion,  and  the  trouhles  of  Israel,  with  which  this  is  so  much
concerned,  as  means  for  testing  the  character  of  the  Jews.

L  The  btandasd  of  mbasureiuent  is  Divike  truth.  The  prophet  is  to  be  an
assayer.  Men  are  to  be  judged  by  the  truths  of  righteousness  which  he  is  inspired  to
see  and  to  declare.  God  has  revealed  standards  of  judgment.  We  are  not  free  to
shape  our  lives  according  to  fancy,  taste,  or  unaided  private  judgment.  The  truths  of
Scripture  constitute  the  standard  by  which  we  shall  be  measured.  This  will  be  applied
according  as  it  is  known.  Jeremiah  was  the  watchman  before  he  was  the  assayer.  He
blew  the  trumpet,  preached  the  truth  he  saw.  They  who  have  not  received  the  fuller
revelation  will  be  judged  by  what  light  they  possess  (Rom.  L  18 — 20 ;  iL  12).

II.  The  test  is  applied  nr  the  fibes  of  affliction.  Trouble  is  not  only  sent
for  discipline  and  chastisement ;  it  is  a  test,  a  revealer  of  character.  It  reveals  a  man
to  himself  and  to  others.  If  he  has  any  true  spiritual  life,  any  precious  metal,  it  must
come  out  when,  one  after  another,  the  worthless  ideas  and  feelings  fail  before  the  search-
ing flames  of  the  baptism  of  fire.  Trouble  shows:  1.  Whether  religion  is  real  and
heartfelt,  or  formal  and  superficial.  2.  How  far  faith  is  a  practical  trust,  and  how  far
it  is  a  barren  conviction.  3.  Whether  love  and  devotion  to  GKxl  are  deep  enough  to
stand  against  the  temptation  to  rebel  or  despair.

IIL  ThET  ABE  UTTEBLY  W0BTHLES8  WHO  DISPLAY  NO  GOOD  QUALITIES  AFTEB  THB

8EABCHINO  TBiAL  OF  AFFLICTION.  This  follows  from  tiie  preceding  statements.  It
was  terribly  applicable  to  IsraeL  We  should  ask  how  far  it  applies  to  ourselves,  and
beware  of  two  delusions,  viz. :  1.  The  delusion  that  merit  may  be  still  hidden  after
God  has  applied  his  most  thorough  test.  A  religion  which  is  completely  secret,  never
discoverable,  must  be  a  poor  and  worthless  thing.  The  heart  cannot  be  right  if  it
never  gives  proof  of  good  qualities  when  tested  in  all  ways.  2.  The  delusion  that
trial  can  destroy  spiritual  worth.  The  silver  is  not  burnt  if  it  is  not  forthcomiug.
True  religion  will  survive  the  hardest  test  that  may  be  applied  to  it.  It  is  only  the
superficial,  unreal  sentiment  of  religion  that  is  scorched  up  by  persecution  and  afi^ction;
the  growth  on  the  barren  rock,  not  that  in  the  good  soil  (Matt  xiiL  6, 20,  21).

IV.  God  WILL  beject  none  without  full  tbial.  •  Character  is  to  be  assayed.
Ghxl  judges  before  he  condemns.  The  reprobate  silver  has  been  well  tried.  No  soul  is
reprobated  by  God  till  every  means  has  been  used  to  search  for  some  good  in  it.  See,
then,  the  merciful  intention  of  trial.  The  fires  are  fierce  because  the  intention  is  to
discover  some  small  good  thing  hidden  from  every  milder  test,  if  only  this  exists.  God
is  not  anxious  to  find  the  evil,  but  to  find  the  good,  in  men,  as  the  assayer  is  searching
for  silver.  He  will  gladly  welcome  the  faintest  indication  of  the  least  good.  No
genuine  silver  can  miss  the  Assayer  after  his  most  searching  tests.  GKxl  will  abandon
no  soul  till  he  has  sought  for  all  that  can  be  brought  in  its  favour.  He  is  loth  to  giv9
bis  children  up  (Hos.  xL  8).

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  4—8. — The  apostate  city  that  cannot  le  let  alone,  Gk>dlessness  Is  condemned  hj
its  impracticabloness  as  a  imiversal  and  thorough-going  principle  of  human  life.  It
is  also  an  evil  that  defies  ordinary  restraints,  and  constantly  becomes  worse.  **  This
is  the  strongest  and  most  dangerous  mining-powder  of  cities  and  fortresses  when  sin,
shame,  vice,  and  wantonness  get  the  upper  hand  "  (Cramer).  The  city  that  has  for*
saken  God  is —

I.  A  souBCE  OF  MISCHIEF  AND  UNCLEANNE88.  It  is  likened  to  a  fountain  casting
forth  wickedness.  It  is  an  originative  agent  of  evil.  Its  private,  social,  and  publio
life  multiplies  occasions  and  causes  of  sin.  There  is  no  power  within  itself  sufficient
to  restrain  or  purify.  Its  very  laws  and  regulations  tend  to  foster  vice.  As  of  the
natural  heart  our  Saviour  said  that  out  of  it  ''proceed  evil  thoughts,  murders,
adulteries,  etc.,"  so,  where  there  are  multitudes  of  such,  there  will  be  an  exaggeration
of  the  individual  tendency  and  influence.  As  the  leader  of  fashion,  and  dominant
authority  in  new  customs  and  ideas,  there  is  an  idcU  transferred  ixom.  it  to  what  is  evlL
Its  existence  becomes,  therefore —

U.  An  oocasion  of  injubt  and  danqeb  to  all  who  haye  to  do  with  it.    It


154  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  vl  1—30.


is  as  a  fire  that  has  broken  ont  amidst  combustible  material.  By-and-by  ''the
wicked  city  "  is  felt  to  be  an  intolerable  evil.  It  is  a  menace  to  the  peace  and  good
govemment  of  its  neighbours.  They  cannot  afford  to  ignore  it.  No  time  must  be
lost  in  bringing  it  to  reason.  Its  excitements  and  dissipations  wax  madder  and  more
widespread.  No  time  can  be  lost.  Hence  the  avengers  come  from  all  quarters  in
haste  and  eagerly.  *'  Sanctify  war  against  her !  Arise,  let  us  go  up  at  noon  I  " — the
heat  being  no  barrier  to  their  setting  out ;  "  Arise,  and  let  us  go  up  in  the  night  I  "—
the  darkness  and  weariness  being  forgotten  in  their  hatred  and  vengeance.  For  the
same  reason  no  terms  can  be  made  with  it.  The  Mosaic  regulations  in  warfare  are  set
aside  (Deut.  xx.  19,  20).  There  is  no  chivalrous  respect  inspired  by  it,  and  as  it  shows
no  mercy,  none  is  accorded  to  it.

III.  It  is  a  continual  offence  to  God.  GKxi's  love  for  it  had  been  great,  and  he
had  purposed  to  make  it  a  centre  of  redeeming  love.  This  aim  had  been  thwarted.  So
it  has  been  with  the  city  life  of  man  everywhere.    As  a  natural  development,  and  a

Srovidential  result  in  human  history,  the  city  is  intended  to  enlarge  the  powers  of
oing  good  and  to  bless  the  world.  But  how  seldom  has  this  been  the  case  I  The
centralization  of  life  has  but  intensified  its  corruption.  Is  there  any  place  where  the
salvation  of  society  seems  more  hopeless  than  in  our  great  cities  ?  And  God's  patience
threatens  to  give  out.  He  cannot  bear  the  noisomeness  of  its  evil.  He  is  about  to  turn
from  it  in  utter  loathing  and  final  abandonment.  But  not  yet.  Warning  is  given ;  a
prophet  is  sent.  Nay,  the  Son  himself,  if  haply  they  will  hear  him,  in  whom  alone  a
sufficient  antidote  is  found.  In  him  is  salvation,  for  of  the  holy  city,  the  New  Jeru-
salem, the  scene  of  regenerated  society,  he  is  Centre  and  Lord.  He  is  the  '*  Fountain
opened  for  sin  and  for  all  uncleanness." — M.

Ver.  13, — T?ie  ministry  of  deceit  The  extent  to  which  corruption  prevailed  is
suggested  when  even  the  prophets  and  priests  share  the  general  apostasy :  "  Every  one
dealeth  falsely."  ^

I.  The  duty  it  had  to  fulfil.  The  priest  dealt  with  ritual,  the  prophet  with
moral  and  doctrinal  questions  in  religion.  They  had  to  act  as  the  spiritual  guides  and
overseers  of  the  people  of  God.  Here  they  are  represented  as  behaving  like  quack
doctors  in  cases  oi  grave  injury  or  disease.  They  were  appointed  for  the  spiritual  health
and  well-being  of  men.  Circumstances  in  the  condition  of  their  flocks  would
determine  the  manner  in  which  they  should  exercise  their  functions,  and  the  special
direction  in  which  their  attention  should  be  directed.  Israel  had  fallen  into  serious
wickedness.  It  was  no  isolated  acts  of  transgression  of  which  she  was  guilty ;  her
whole  spiritual  state  was  one  of  alienation  from  God.  In  such  a  case  the  utmost
faithfulness  and  severity  were  required ;  as  the  surgeon  has  to  probe  the  wound,  and  use
sharp  instruments  for  excising  the  part  that  is  diseased ;  or  the  physician  has  to  make
a  thorough  diagnosis  of  a  patient,  and  in  desperate  sickness  to  use  desperate  remedies.
Here  an  opposite  course  had  been  pursued.  The  gravity  of  the  "  hurt "  was  overlooked
or  ignored,  and  merely  outward  signs  of  amendment  were  regarded  as  complete  recon-
ciliation with  GxkL  1.  That  which  separates  men  from  Ood  is  no  slight  matter.  It  is
a  deadly  thing.  If  it  continues,  it  must  inevitably  destroy.  The  observances  of
religion  will  be  nullified  until  it  is  put  right.  Men  must  be  told  of  their  sin,  not  merely
in  a  round  and  general  manner,  but  judiciously,  and  according  to  the  specialities  of
individual  or  class  peculiarities.  The  unbelief  of  the  natural  man  is  the  parent  of  his
misdeeds  and  sin,  and  keeps  him  from  any  real  communion  with  God.  2.  The  min-
ister  of  religion  is  hound  to  be  discerning  and  faithful,  3.  It  is  only  through  a  real
and  spirittuil  repentance  that  reconciliation  can  he  effected.  At  such  a  juncture  spiritual
religion  ought  to  have  been  insisted  on,  and  the  enormity  of  the  offence  exposed.
Preliminary  acts  of  contrition ;  experiences  and  discoveries  of  the  heart  such  as  con-
yiction  of  sin,  etc. ;  the  necessity  of  love,  obedience,  and  faith  ought  not  to  be  slurred  over.

n.  Failure  in  this  duty  and  its  causes.  The  root-cause  is  undoubtedly  the
share  which  the  religious  teachers  had  in  the  general  depravity.  There  was  also  a
consequent  lack  of  spiritual  discernment.  The  greatness  of  the  fall  from  the  former
position  occupied  by  Israel  was  not  appreciated,  and  the  nature  of  true  religion  was
not  understood.  A  ministry  under  court  patronage  and  a  merely  popular  ministry  are
alike  subject  to  the  temptations  to  please  rather  than  to  deal  honestly  with  the  evils  of


k


CH.VL1— 30.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  16<

individuals,  society,  and  the  state,  and  to  rectify  them.  "  They  who  live  to  please  must
please  to  live."  There  is  such  a  thing  always  as  a  making  of  religion  too  easy  either
in  its  moral  conditions  or  its  doctrinal  realizations.  It  is  fearfully  wrong  to  say  a  man
is  a  Christian  when  he  is  not  a  Christian ;  or  so  to  deal  with  him  in  pastoral  relations
that  he  fancies  himself  in  possession  of  salvation  and  spiritually  secure  when  he  is  in
heart  and  life  far  from  OchL  Flattery  has  a  thousaud  forms,  and  there  is  no  false*
hood  to  which  it  contrihutes  that  is  more  insidious  or  wide-reaching  than  this.

in.  The  results.  These  are  terrible  in  the  extreme.  From  the  authority  of
ofiSce  they  are  credited  in  their  declarations,  and  national  and  individual  offences  are
condoned  and  perpetuated.  Possible  for  a  man  to  be  deceived  on  this  most  vital
question ;  to  think  himself  a  child  of  GKxi  when  he  is  in  reality  a  child  of  Satan.
Death-bed  repentances.  1.  The  divorce  of  morality  from  religion,  2.  The  intenn*
fied  wrath  of  God  at  hypocrisy  and  sham  religion.  3.  Eternal  death  and  irretrievdbU
loes, — M.

Ver.  16.  —  The  old  patht.  Men  are  surrounded  from  their  earliest  years  with
various  religious  systems,  the  claims  of  which  conflict.  To  a  conscientious  mind,
intellectual  disquietude  is  the  first  result  of  this ;  in  those  less  in  earnest  it  produces
and  justifies  indifiference.  All  religions  tend,  under  these  circumstances,  to  assume  the
aspect  of  speculative  questions,  and  the  moral  life  is  increasingly  detached  from
religious  sanctions.  Morality  must  thereby  be  impaired,  if  it  do  not  ultimately  dis«
appear.  The  prophet,  therefore,  recalls  the  people  to  the  consideration  of  religion  as  a
practical  question.  It  is  with  him  a  question  not  of  pure  theory,  but  of  conduct  and
experience.  He  urges  the  settlement  of  the  conflict  upon  these  grounds,  and  furnishes
certain  criteria  by  which  to  determine  it.

I.  AiniQUTTT  IS  A  TEST  OF  TRUE  RELIGION.  Man  Is  a  religious  being  by  nature,
and  Gk)d  has  never  left  himself  without  a  witness  in  the  world.  There  has  been  no
generation  in  which  some  have  not  sought  and  found  him.  From  the  very  first,
therefore,  there  must  have  been  religious  conditions  observed,  which  from  their  nature
must  be,  as  they  were  intended  to  be,  permanent.  The  argument  for  the  existence  of
God,  for  instance,  is  greatly  strengthened  by  the  evidence  of  the  recognition  of  him  by
primitive  and  ancient  peoples.  Even  in  their  errors  and  mistakes,  when  their  views
and  observances  are  collated  and  compared,  witness  is  given  to  fundamental  truths.
But  the  argument  is  stronger  still  when  the  people  appealed  to  are  those  who,  like
Israel,  have  an  historical  faith.  Ages  of  faith  were  behind  them,  illustrated  by  mighty
heroes  and  saintly  men  of  God.  For  ages  a  certain  communion  had  been  observed
between  the  nation  and  its  theocratic  Head.  What  was  the  secular  character  of  those
ages  ?  Were  they  marked  by  political  strength,  social  order  and  purity,  and  commercial
prosperity  ?  Were  the  leaders  of  the  people  men  whose  ideal  of  life  and  actual  beha-
viour commended  themselves  to  the  general  conscience  of  the  world  ?  Was  it  to  be
supposed  that  any  essential  truth  for  the  spiritual  guidance  of  men  had  to  be  discovered
thus  late  in  the  day  ?  Were  men  to  be  always  on  tiptoe  to  learn  what  the  last  finding
of  research  might  be  ?  There  were  paths  that  had  been  tried  by  holy  men.  When
the  nation  was  at  its  best,  it  acknowledged  God  in  these  ways.  The  vast  majority  of
those  who  were  holiest  and  best  had  tried  them  and  found  them  satisfactory.

II.  But  DISCRIMINATION  IB  REQUIRED.  The  children  of  Israel  were  to  "  stand  in  the
ways,"  i.e.  to  examine  the  di£ferent  systems  of  religion  and  morals  that  laid  claim  to
their  attention.  Critical  and  historical  judgment  had  to  be  exercised.  It  is  not
simply  the  oldest  religion  that  is  to  be  retained  and  followed,  but  that  in  the  religious
history  of  the  past  which  has  most  evidently  conduced  to  noble  action,  spiritual  health,
and  well-being.  The  heathenisms  of  the  world  are  self-condenmed ;  immorality  has
ever  tended  to  destruction.  The  Englishman,  therefore,  is  not  to  look  to  the  Druids
for  infallible  teaching ;  nor  Christians  to  the  saints  of  the  Old  Testament  times.  The
dictum  of  Ignatius  is  sound :  Nobis  vera  antiquitas  est  Jesus  Christus,  But  the
teaching  and  personality  of  Jesus  were  commended  by  their  essential  agreement  with
Mosaicism  in  its  most  ancient  form ;  as  that  in  turn  was  but  a  confirmation  and  elabo-
ration of  patriarchal  convictions,  experiences,  and  revelations.  The  truth  that  has  been
held  in  all  ages  is  retained  in  each  new  development  of  revelation  and  history,  but  it  is
spiritualized  and  grounded  upon  deeper  and  wider  sanctions.


Ue  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  vl  1— 3a

in.  The  katl'bal  humax  desire  fob  mehe  koveltt  has  to  be  ovebcoice.
True  religion  i«  not  to  be  despised  because  it  is  old.  The  truth,  whea  carefully  studied
ftod  spiritually  realized,  is  ever  new  and  fresh.  And  the  "  new  truths  **  to  which
•dvanciu^  time  introduces  us  arc  justified  only  as  we  can  organically  and  spiritually
evolve  them  from  their  archaic  predecessors.  Obligations  which  are  merely  relative
will  change  or  dinappear  with  the  relations  upon  which  they  are  founded,  but  the
cardinal  truths  of  heart  and  life  must  ever  retain  their  authority,  and  new  experience
will  but  tend  to  dee|x:n  and  strengthen  their  hold  upon  the.religious  nature.  If,  on  the
other  band,  the  teachings  of  exjx;rience  and  the  warnings  of  prophets  are  despised,
new  heinousness  will  be  added  to  the  wickedness  of  the  wicked.  It  will  be  wilful
disobedience,  and  as  such  will  be  more  severely  punished.

IV.  Obedience  to  these  doctrines  of  experience  will  confirm  and  satisfy
THE  SOUL.  If,  in  spite  of  these  corroborations,  the  doctrines  were  productive  of  misery
and  spiritual  unrest,  then  they  would  go  for  nothing.  But  this  is  the  final  and  abso-
lute criterion — Do  they  tend  to  the  welfare  and  increase  of  spiritual  life,  and  to  the
latisfaction  of  the  deepest  longings  of  the  soul  ? — M.

Vers.  18 — 20. — The  reasonableness  of  the  Divine  Judgments,  The  language  employed
f uegcsts  publicity.  The  world  is  called  into  solemn  council — a  **  congregation  "  for
Judgment.  1.  Not  that  upon  questions  of  this  nature  the  carnal  mind  is  any  authority
<^  and  by  itself,  "  Who  art  thou  that  judgest  ? "  might  well  be  asked  of  any  who
Assumed  such  an  office.  It  is  only  as  confirming  and  justifying  the  action  taken  by
Gkxi.  Thus  understood,  the  testimony  of  the  world  is  most  valuable,  being  difierent
^m  what  might  be  expected.  It  is  a  great  mystery,  this  judgment  of  God's  apostate
people  by  the  heathen  nations.  2.  And  yet  we  must  not  understand  it  as  a  mere  figure
of  speech.  There  is  a  real  endorsement  of  the  righteous  judgments  of  God  in  the
mind  of  the  world— one  of  those  revealing  circumstances  which  show  *'  the  Law  of  God
written  upon  their  heart."  When  the  question  is  a  broad,  simple,  and  evident  one,
even  the  most  perverted  soul  will  affirm  the  sentence  of  Heaven.  Unbelief  is  only
superficial.  Beneath  the  crust  of  hardened  consciences  there  still  remains  a  primitive
lense  of  justice ;  and  to  this  will  the  final  sentence  of  condemnation  appeal,  when  we
shall  give  account  of  the  deeds  done  in  the  body.  The  sinner  will  not  only  hear  the
decision  from  the  great  white  throne,  but  he  will  stand  self-condemned  ;  and  the  uni-
versal assembly  will  confirm  the  verdict.  3.  Sow  fearful,  too,  must  have  been  the  guilt
of  Ood's  people  that  on  this  occasion  such  umpires  could  have  been  so  confidently
appealed  to  I  The  features  of  their  criminality  that  are  emphasized  are  these :  obstinacy
and  hypocrisy.  The  latter  is  but  the  abettor  of  the  former.  The  unreality  of  Israel's
repentance  was  especially  abhorrent  to  Jehovah.  It  vitiates  all  the  costly  articles  and
ennancemonts  of  their  worship,  and  is  but  the  cloak  of  a  real  continuance  in  sin.  If,
then,  they  do  in  heart  refuse  to  obey  God,  what  more  reasonable  than  that  he  should
suffer  the  laws  of  his  universe  to  deal  with  them,  and  punish  them  with  "  the  fruit  of
their  thoughts"?  The  angels  of  vengeance  that  wait  upon  sin,  licentiousness,  luxury,
and  waste,  will  be  suffered  to  do  their  work ;  and  they  shall  learn  by  experience  that
**  the  way  of  transgressors  is  hard."  But  the  instant  that  the  spirit  of  reality  and
Binoerity  revisits  their  hearts,  his  ear  will  be  opeu  to  their  cry,  and  his  mercy  will
r6dcom.~M«

Vers.  27 — 30.— 7%«prqpA«<  a  spiritual  assayer.  Of  interest  as  a  description  of
process  of  refining  precious  metals  among  ancient  peoples.  The  grinding  and  wash-
ing of  the  ore  to  discover  and  separate  the  precious  metals,  the  fusing  of  the  silver
with  load  in  order  to  its  further  purification,  and  the  repetition  of  this  under  severer
hsftti  are  processes  which  are  used  to  illustrate  the  influence  of  the  words  of  revelation
upon  the  human  heart.    Those  words —

L  Reveal  character.  "  Some  believed,  and  some  believed  not,"  is  the  consequence
always  following  upon  the  faithful  preaching  of  the  truth.  '*  It  is  a  hard  saying ;  who
can  near  it?"  How  instantaneous  were  the  results  in  this  way  attendant  on  the
proclamations  of  Biblical  prophets  and  preachers !  They  addressed  the  conscience,  the
i^eotioQ,  and  the  will,  ana  pressed  for  a  verdict  and  practical  following  up  of  opinion
iid  aotion*    Muoh  more  is  this  the  case  with  the  gospel,  because  of  its  deeper  and  more


^


CH.  vt  1—30.]     THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  157

spiritual  force.    It  is  by  hearing  the  Word,  and  looking  into  the  mirror  it  affords,
that  a  man  is  discovered  to  himself.

II.  Determine  destiny.  Sometimes  in  a  good,  sometimes  in  a  bad  sense.  In  the
case  before  us  it  is  wholly  the  latter.  As  there  was  no  reality  or  earnestness  in  Israel,
80  there  was  no  point  at  which  a  commencement  could  bo  made  towards  reformation.
They  are  all  concluded  guilty  and  worthless.  It  was  a  severe  judgment,  but  was  meant
in  mercy  to  the  people  themselves.  They  were  thereby  warned  of  the  need  of  radical
change,  and  the  sunematural,  saving  grace  of  God.  It  is  by  the  determinations
and  effects  produced  by  the  hearing  of  the  Word  that  the  future  is  influenced.
There  is  a  distinct  moral  responsibility  incurred  each  time  the  truth  is  proclaimed  in
our  hearing.  Nothing  else  so  searches  into  and  potently , affects  the  moral  nature,
because  the  conscience  is  most  vividly  aroused  and  reality  in  all  its  naked  force  bursts
upon  the  soul.  The  furthest  developments  of  personal  character,  interest,  and  occupa*
tion  may  be  thus  conditioned :  "  See,  then,  how  ye  hear ! "

III.  Arb  carefully  adapted,  by  increasinqly  severe  processes,  to  effect
THEIR  END.  They  result  in  rejection,  and  this  is  rendered  inevitable  by  the  utter
worthlessness  of  character  and  work  exhibited.  If  there  is  any  good  in  a  man,  the
truth  will  discover  it,  and  sympathetically  develop  and  reinforce  it ;  if  not,  it  will  only
the  more  utterly  and  unquestionably  condemn  him.  The  ear  does  not  try  words  more
delicately  or  decisively  than  words  of  God  try  the  heart.  According  to  their  spiritual
state  will  men  be  condemned,  approved ;  received  or  rejected  by  the  hearing  of  the
gospel.  Some  men  have  been  tried  and  condemned  by  it  already ;  to  others  it  opens
more  and  more  widely  the  door  of  hope. — M.

Vers.  1 — 8.— -4  dreadful  onlooJc.  Such  was  the  vision  of  Jeremiah  which  he  saw
concerning  the  coming  wrath  upon  Judah  and  Jerusalem.  It  was  the  sad  sight  which
the  sinners  in  Jerusalem  never,  but  the  seer  ever,  saw  clearly,  vividly,  heart-brokenly.
The  vision  of  Jeremiah  for  Jerusalem  was  the  forerunner  of  our  Lord's  in  substance,
spirit,  and  result.  Now,  with  regard  to  this  awful  onlook  of  the  prophet  which  lb  here
related,  note—

I.  How  SOLITARY  IT  WAS.  The  people  of  Judah  and  Jerusalem  were  in  no  fear,
and  for  forty  years  and  more  this  vision  was  not  realized.  Other  eyes  saw  nothing  to
be  troubled  about,  and  men  generally  were  at  ease  in  Zion.  It  was  only  the  purged
vision  of  the  prophet  that  pierced  the  future  and  portrayed  the  dread  realities  of  that
fast-coming  day.  He  saw  clearly  what  others  sa^  not  at  alL  And  so  it  is  always.
But  why  is  this  ?  Why  do  sinners  not  see  ?  Take  an  answer  from  those  senseless
exhibitions  in  which  the  performers  place  themselves  in  positions  of  frightful  peril,  so
that  a  moment's  unsteadiness  of  nerve,  the  slightest  slipping  of  hand  or  foot,  would
lead  to  their  immediate  inevitable  and  dreadful  death ;  running  all  this  risk  to  amuse
the  gaping,  shameless  crowds,  who  stare,  stamp,  and  shout  their  applause  at  what
never  ought  to  be  done.  But  let  these  performers  provide  us  a  reply  to  the  question  we
have  asked.  They  will  tell  you  that  at  first  they  approached  those  dangerous  places
with  great  fear ;  how  it  was  long  ere  they  could  walk  with  ease  along  that  slender  cord,
or  stand  fearless  on  that  dizzy  height.  But  they  got  at  length  so  used  to  these  things
that  now  they  go  through  their  perilous  performances  without  the  slightest  fear.  And
so  is  it  with  grievous  sinners  against  God.  They  have  got  so  used  to  the  threatening
of  his  anger  that  they  think  nothing  of  it  after  a  while,  and  go  on  unconcernedly
until  almost  the  moment  of  his  vengeance  bursts  upon  them.  '*  Because  sentence
against  an  evil  work  is  not  executed  speedily,  therefore,'*  etc.  Their  heart  wishes
that  there  may  be  nought  to  fear.  The  long-suffering  and  forbearance  of  God  are
perverted,  by  the  deceitfulness  of  sin,  to  foster  that  belief,  and  so  they  at  length
persuade  themselves  that  what  God's  servants  see  so  clearly  and  warn  them  of  so
faithfully  has  no  real  existence,  and  "  as  it  was  in  the  days  of  Noah,  so  is  it  also  in  the
days  when  the  Son  of  man  cometh."  Oh,  what  need  for  the  praver,  *'  From  all  the
deceits  of  the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil,  good  Lord,  deliver  us  "  I

II.  How  VIVIDLY  SEEN.  Jeremiah  sees  the  hurried  flocking  of  the  Benjamites
(see  Exposition),  the  terrified  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,  to  some  common  centre  in  the
city,  and  then  their  hasting  away  out  of  the  southern  gates  towards  Tekoa,  one  of  the
Bouthemmost  cities  of  the  land,  and  furthest  off  from  the  dread  invaders,  who  were


168  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [oh.  vl  1—80.


speeding  from  the  north.  The  alarm-trumpet  sounding  its  shrill  notes  amid  the  quiet
streets  of  Tekoa ;  he  sees  the  ngnal-fires  Blazing  from  the  height  of  Beth-haccerem,
and  answered  by  other  like  fires,  all  telling  of  distress ;  and  then,  from  hill-summits
yet  further  away,  he  sees  the  never-ending  train  of  fierce  and  victory-flushed  soldiers
marching  ^ruthlessly  on  in  all  the  pride  and  pomp  of  war,  streaming  along  the  great
northern  roads,  the  open  highway  whereby  they  entered  the  holy  land*  He  sees  the
various  encampments,  the  spoliation  of  the  whole  district  round,  the  eager  haste  of  the
foe  to  attack  tne  great  fortress  of  Jerusalem,  the  goal  of  all  their  hopes  and  the  prize
of  their  arduous  campaign ;  he  sees  the  varied  preparations  for  war,  the  building  of  the
engines  of  attack,  the  burning  of  her  palaces ;  in  short,  the  whole  dread  details  of  a
city  doomed  to  destruction  at  the  hands  of  a  besieging  army.  Thus  vivid  was  the
vision.  And  such  clearness  of  onlook  is  given  to  Cfod's  seers  that  they  may  thereby
more  deeply  impress  and  more  surely  move  the  minds  of  those  they  are  sent  to.  It  is
well  to  muse  over  things  unseen  and  eternal  until  they  become  real  to  us,  until  our  faith
beoomes  the  evidence  of  the  things  not  seen,  and  ^ves  substance,  shape,  and  body  to
the  things  hoped  for.  Then  as  those  who  have  tasted  and  handled  and  felt  the
powers  of  the  world  to  come,  we  shall  speak  with  unwonted  power,  and  men  through
us  will  also  see  what  they  have  never  seen  before.    But —

IIL  How  WELL  FOUNDED  THIS  VISION  WAS.  For  the  prophet  came  to  the  convic-
tion of  the  coming  wrath  upon  his  country,  not  on  any  light  grounds,  but  on  such  as
in  all  ages  may  lead  to  a  like  conviction.  1.  There  was  the  extreme  importance  of
Jeruealemy  as  an  almost  impregnable  mountain  fortress.  In  the  frequent  wars  between
Egypt  and  Assyria  this  fortress  was  the  object  of  much  solicitude  to  either  side.  And
besides  her  strength  there  was  her  wealth  and  her  fame,  so  that  Jerusalem  became  a
coveted  possession  to  one  great  monarchv  after  another.  Jeremiah  (ver.  2)  compares
her  to  a  beautiful  and  luxuriant  pasturage  (cf.  Exposition).  And  as  shepherds  would  covet
such  pasturage  for  their  flocks,  so  the  enemies  of  Jerusalem  would  covet  her.  So
attractive,  so  desirable  was  she  in  their  esteem.  This  fact,  then,  of  the  worth  of  Jerusalem
to  Assyria  was  one  reason  wherefore  Jeremiah  knew  that  that  lawless  and  rapacious
nation  would  certainly  attack  her.  2.  The  ^'delight  in  war'*  which  characterized  Assyria,
Vers.  4,  6  represent  the  language  of  their  soldiers,  their  eagerness  to  be  led  to  the  attack,
their  impatience  at  every  hindrance,  their  disregard  both  of  the  heat  of  noon  or  darkness
of  night.  They  wore  a  people  ever  on  the  look  out  for  plunder  and  aggrandizement,
and  seized  on  the  very  first  pretext  that  offered  for  invasion  and  capture.    3.  The

ahefs  dear  perception  that  God  was  on  the  side  of  IsraeTs  foes,  Ver.  6,  "  Thus
the  Lord  of  hosts  said."  It  was,  therefore,  his  will.  It  had  been  borne  in  upon
his  mind  that  God*s  wrath  was  ready  to  be  poured  out.  He  had  been  told  so  by  the
Spirit  of  Qod. ;  he  "  spiritually  discerned  "  the  dark  facts  of  the  future,  so  that  they
stood  out  vivid  and  clear  before  the  eye  of  his  soul.  4.  And  his  conviction  that  such  was
ChnTs  wiU  could  not  hut  he  deepened  hy  the  constant  presence  hefore  him  of  the  atrocious
wickedness  of  the  doomed  city,  Ver.  7, "  As  a  fountain,"  perpetually,  copiously  freely,
irresistibly,  **  casts  out  her  waters,  so  did  Jerusalem  cast  out,"  etc.  The  moral  cor-
ruption of  the  people  made  him  certain  that  the  holy  God  of  Israel  would  not  suffer  it
to  go  on  unpimished.  And  it  is  ever  so.  Let  a  nation,  a  femiily,  a  Church,  an  individual^
give  themselves  up  to  wickedness  and  gross  violation  of  the  commandis  of  God,  it  is
certain  that  sentence  of  death  is  on  them.  Execution  may  be  deferred,  but  imless  there
be  repentance  it  will  certainly  be  carried  out.  There  were  special  features  about  the
vision  that  was  given  to  Jeremiah,  but  every  believer  in  God  sees  in  substance  the  very
same.  The  deep-felt  conviction  of  the  godly  is  the  expression  of  the  will  of  Gkxi.  What
such  a  one  binds  on  earth  is  boimd  in  heaven,  and  whose  sins  such  retain  they  are
retained.  It  is  a  terrible  fact,  then,  when  any  come  under  the  grave  moral  condemna-
tion of  the  people  of  God,  for  their  condemnation  is  but  the  echo  of  those  thunders  they
have  heard  reverberating  around  the  throne  of  Gtxi.

rV.  How  HEBCI7ULLT  BENT.  Their  purpose  was  obvious.  Many  years  God  would
yet  wait.  Thus  he  gave  this  call  to  repentance,  and  waited  long  to  see  if  it  would  be
needed.  The  most  loving  words  of  Jesus  are  those  which  make  our  hearts  tremble  and
our  spirits  quake  with  fear ;  those  which  tell  of  the  everlasting  fire  and  the  never-dying
worm.  For  these  awful  declarations  are  the  expedients  of  love  to  drive,  to  terrify,  to
Ibroe  away  from  the  edge  of  the  precipice  of  ruin  those  whom  no  other  means  will  with*


OH.  VL  1-^0.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  159

draw  therefrom*  And  that  this  is  the  intent  of  these  awful  representations  of  Gknl's
wrath  is  seen  in  ver.  8,  where  GKxl  pathetically  pleads  with  Jerusalem  to  be  **  in-
itmcted  *'  by  his  words,  "  lest  his  soul  depart  from  her.  Remember,  then :  1.  It  is
only  the  eye,  purged  by  the  Spirit  of  truth,  that  can  see  the  truth  as  to  ourselves  or
others.  Until  thus  cleansed,  we  may  be  going  down  to  our  graves  with  a  lie  in  our  right
hand.  2.  Praise  and  bless  Ood  for  his  loving  warnings  to  the  wicked.  Pray  that
they  may  be  heeded,  and  be  careful  not  to  disguise  or  diminish  them  by  prophesyings
of  peace  when  there  is  no  peace.  3.  Hasten  to  be  yourself  and  to  bring  others  to  be  safe
within  the  shelter  of  the  love  of  God,  where  no  evil  can  befall  and  no  plague  ever  come
nigh, — 0.

Ver.  l,'^ Signal-fires,  "  Set  up  a  sign  of  fire  in  Beth-haccerem."  Introduction-
Illustrate  from  Homer's  description  of  such  signal-fires,  or  from  Macaulay*s  poem,
*  Defeat  of  the  Spanish  Armada.'  Take  them  as  illustrative  of  the  warnings  of  GKxl
against  sin.

I.  Review  some  of  these  sigkal-fibes.  1.  The  Bible.  2.  The  ministers  of  Gk)d's
truth.    3.  Conscience.    4.  Present  judgments  upon  men's  sin.

IL  Note  wherefobe  they  should  be  set  up.  1.  Men  are  living  in  grievous  sin.
2.  God's  judgments  are  near  at  hand.  3.  Men  are  in  a  state  of  false  security.  4.  They
will  rally  the  good  to  increased  exertion.  5.  They  will  arouse  and  arrest  the  wicked.
6.  That  like  fires  may  be  enkindled  by  the  faithful,  who  have  seen  them  and  taken
the  warning,  and  will  therefore  send  it  on.  7.  GKxi's  sore  judgment  will  come  upon
those  who  do  not  set  them  up.

III.  How  THIS  MAT  BE  DONE.  1.  By  faithful  preaching.  2.  By  living  in  the  fear
of  God.  3.  By  separation  from  the  ungodly.  4.  By  seeking  to  save  all  over  whom  you
have  influence  from  the  wrath  to  come.

IV.  When  done,  let  these  wabnings  be  as  sional-fibes.  1.  Such  as  all  must
observe.  2.  Such  as  all  will  understand.  3.  Set  up  from  sense  of  the  reality  both  of
the  threatened  danger  and  the  people's  need.  4.  Kept  burning  steadily  in  spite  of  all
that  would  quench  them.

V.  The  sional-fibes  that  God  sets  up  have  these  chabactebistics.  1,  The
Bible.    2.  Conscience.    3.  Present  judgments.

VL  Let  oubs  have  the  same.— -0.

Vers.  2,  3. — The  Lord*s  pasture.  Patterns  of  things  spiritual  and  eternal  are
scattered  broadcast  over  God's  universe.  Nothing  is  more  pleasant  than  to  trace  these
resemblances  out.  Our  Lord  was  ever  "  likening  "  things  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven  to
things  he  saw  around  him  in  the  world.  His  own  word,  "  parables,"  tells  of  things
**  placed  by  the  side  "  of  others  for  comparison  of  their  likenesses  or  contrasts.  The
prophet  in  these  verses  "  likens  "  Jerusalem — the  daughter  of  Zion — to  a  beautiful  and
luxuriant  pasturage  (cf.  Exposition).  He  was  speaking  of  the  material  city.  But  thai
daughter  of  Zion  leads  our  thoughts  to  the  heavenly  Jerusalem,  the  city  of  God,  the
Church,  *'  which  he  has  purchased  with  his  own  blood."  Now,  that  may  be  fitly  likened
to  such  a  pasture ;  it  is  the  Lord's  pasture.    For^

I.  Thebe  the  sheep  of  the  good  Shephebd  find  best  and  befbeshment  after

THE  often  WEABY  JOUBNEY  OVEB  THE  WAYS  OF  THE  WOBLD.      (Cf.   Ps.  XXiiL,  IxXXiv.)

See  the  many  testimonies  to  the  spiritually  refreshing  and  restful  influence  of  the
worship  of  the  Church.    *'  He  maketh  me  to  lie  down  in  green  pastures,"  etc.

IL  I'hebe  his  sheep  find  pastube.  "  I  will  abundantly  bless  her  provision :  I
irill  feed  her  poor  with  bread."  By  the  ministry  of  God's  truth,  by  the  application,
through  the  Hx>ly  Spirit's  grace,  of  the  things  of  Christ.  Christ's  people  are  fed  as  with
the  Bread  of  life.

ni.  The  comeliness  and  beauty  of  the  Chubch  of  Chbist  justify  this  oom-
PABisoN.  True,  the  Church  has  not  yet  put  on  her  "  beautiful  garments."  The  pro-
phetic visions  of  her  glory  and  majesty  still  wait  to  be  realized.  "  The  bride  "  has  not
yet "  made  herself  ready."  But  even  as  she  is,  in  her  garments  of  humiliation,  treading
her  painful  way  as  a  weary  pilgrim,  who  is  like  unto  her  ?  Where  are  moral  beauty  and
grace  to  be  found  such  as  she  possesses,  and  has  shown — yea,  is  showing  still — ^in  spite
9f  all  imperfections  ?  Even  now— oh,  how  much  more  by-and-by  1 — the  Church  of  Christy


1«0         THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PBOPHET  JEEEMIAH.  I;ch.ti.

the  Lord'e  pasture,  if  the  fairest,  loveliest  iceiie  thiF  poor  bil  and  bottow  Btrioken  owli
preteutb.     Jb^veu  uuw  sut-  it  CurintV  briut,  auu  aL  Bpiniual  beauty  and  comeliu
•umnied  up  in  tUat.

JV.  Fva  ATTLAt'J'Jvgyjsws.  CI  vcr.  8,  wuicb  telif  how  otiier  BliepbcrOF  fFcre
^blr  drawn  tt.  tbi^  paaturagt.  aud  Ijow  eageriT  tner  kd  tbeir  fiocK*  inere.  Af  cod-
oerfi<$d  tbeeartbiv  Jerusai^iu  tiiit  bad  ut»  ba])|>T  meaning,  bui  ai^  concenif  Cnnst V  Cnunii
Hb  meaning  it-  ba]»py  and  bletwed  ind^^ed.  It  if  go(»d  tbat  the  IowIf  nf  tbr  air  should
lodge  ill  tbe  braucbofe  of  tbe  great  tr^:,  wbicL  ba*  6}iniiur  irom  tbtf  tiuj  noed  pbiuted  bf
tbe  JLford.  And  it  le  good  tlmi  ^  uationK,  and  jieopie^,  and  tribe&,  and  tonxrufi^  **  should,
m  many  already  have  been,  and  as  all  otberE  wili  be,  drawn  by  tne  attractivenesB  of  th»
rich  and  luz.uriant  pasturage  which  the  Lord'e  pasture  ofTerE.  it  If  a  weary  world ;  self
and  sis  are  cruel  tat>k.uiasterf  ;  ther  have  no  green  paRtures  intc>  which  thpy  lead  thear
gboep.  Tiie  open^Ki  ear  of  those  whone  hearts  are  touched  with  Gtirist'e  Fympaihy  per-
wjtually  heart  tbe  cry  for  help,  tbe  longing  to  be  led  intc  the  paiaure  of  the  Lord.  It
U  a  reproacb  to  every  profeBsed  disciple  of  Christ  if  he  dc'  not,  by  what  he  is  and  "by
tiae  spirit  of  hie  life,  attract  others  to  the  LordV  pasture,  and  lead  mem  to  say,  **  ^e  wUk
go  with  you,  for  we  see  that  tbe  Lord  is  witb  you."

V.  It  1£  thjcke  whe&e  tee  Ixsld  ljiaiis  eif  bhzxf.  Hasy  think  they  can  he  Ghrist^s
without  uniting  themselres  to  hiB  people,  keejang  amid  tbe  woridV  ways  and  standins
aloof  from  the  Lord's  pasture.  But  this  ie  wrong.  Thtsre  is  a  sense  in  whicb  tbe  old
flaying,  **  Nulla  sal  us  extra  ecclesiam,''  is  true,  and  nothing  caf^s  graver  doubt  on  the
reaiity  of  our  discipleship  than  absence  of  sympathy  with  either  disci jiles,  and  no  liking
for  their  companionship.  Lore  for  "  the  brethren  **  is  given  as  one  note  of  having
^  passied  from  death  unto  life.*  It  is  the  Lord's  will  that  his  people  should  be  banded
together  in  tbeir  sereral  folds,  and  the  instinct  of  the  rex^wed  heart  almost  oertainlj
leaids  it  to  desire  this  pasturage.  Henoe,  as  a  fact,  there  are  scarce  any,  if  any,  of  the
disciples  of  Christ  who  are  not  found  in  one  or  otho-  of  the  folds  into  which  the  one
flock  of  tbe  Good  6he|^erd  is  divided.

CovcLCfioy.  Ask  two  questions :  L  0/  tho^e  tc}*o  art  not  Cftriff^  Do  yon  find
that  the  ways  of  the  world  arc  really  better  than  the  Lord's  pasture?  is  it  better
to  serve  sin  and  self  than  Christ  ?  We  are  sure  that  there  can  be  bnt  one  answer.
Why,  then,  do  you  not  hear  the  voice  of  tbe  Go^jd  Shei»herd  and  **  follow  "  him  ?  2.  (y
thote  who  are  hit.  Are  jou  careful  not  to  blotch  and  blur  that  likeness  ?  Many  do  this,
■o  that  the  likeness  carjiot  be  traced,  and  the  world  ttims  away  from  it,  not  drawn
by  what  it  sees.  Strive  to  let  men  see  in  you  somewhat — much^-of  that  spiritual
grace  aod  beauty  which  will  lead  men  greatly  to  desire  to  enter  the  L(»d*s  pasture  for
themseWes,-


Ver.  4. — Barrow  hecaum  of  eventide.  "  Woe  unto  us !  for  the  day  goeth  away,  for
the  shadows  of  the  evening  are  stretched  out."  It  is  not  thus  tbat  we  are  wont  to
welcome  the  going  away  of  the  day,  the  quiet  peaceful  hours  of  eventide.  How  heauii/ulf
even  in  its  outward  aspect,  is  oftentimes  the  evening  hour,  the  gradual  subsidence  of
tbe  varied  sounds  of  the  busy  day,  the  glorious  sunsets,  the  rich  radiance  of  the
evening  skv,  the  exquisite  tints  and  colourings  of  the  hills  as  the  mellow  light  of
evening  falls  upon  them,  the  ruby  glow  which  adorns,  glorifies,  and  almost  transfigures
the  sun-clad  peaks  of  mountainous  lands!  Yes,  eventide  is  an  hour  of  beauty,  in
which  Nature  puts  on  her  almost  loveliest  garb  now  tbat  the  "garish  day"  has  gone.
It  is  a  scene  on  which  the  eye  delightedly  rests.  And  it  is  the  hour  of  reunion  alsa
From  tlie  scattered  districts  where  one  and  another  have  pursued  their  daily  toil,  the
members  of  the  family,  the  household,  the  village,  come  home,  and  in  pleasant  converse
talk  over  the  events  of  the  day,  and  forecast  the  events  of  to-morrow.  The  hearts  of  the
children  turn  to  the  fathers,  and  the  heart  of  the  fathers  to  the  children,  in  the  happy
Intercourse  which  is  onlv  possible  on  the  blessed  Sunday  or  at  the  evening  hour.  And
It  is  the  hour  of  rat.  The  plough  stands  still  in  the  furrow,  for  the  ploughman  has  gone
home ;  the  toil-worn  horse  roams  in  his  pasture  or  feeds  peacefully  in  his  stable.
The  man  of  business  has  shut  up  his  ledger,  and  left  the  city  and  the  office,  and  rests

Juletlv  amid  his  family  at  home.    The  night  has  come,  in  which  no  man  can  work.
^nd  if  we  take  the  symbolic  meaning  of  the  day  and  regard  it  as  telling  of  the  day  of
Hf$f  even  then  the  ideas  of  calm,  rest,  and  serene  quiet  gather  around  it.    What  a


CH.vi.  1— 30.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  161


beautiful  old  age  is  that  described  in  the  seventy-first  psalm — beautiful  for  its  confidence
in  Grod,  for  its  humility  and  meekness,  for  the  vigour  of  its  desire  for  God's  glory,  and  for
its  bright  onlook  into  the  future  I  And  such  beauty  often  belongs  to  old  age,  so  that
"at  eventide  there  is  light."  We  probably  all  of  us  know  of  some  on  whom  the
shadows  of  evening  are  falling  fast,  because  the  day  of  their  life  "  goeth  away  ;  "  but
how  calm,  how  serene,  how  peaceful,  how  bright,  is  their  old  age !  They  do  not  say,  nor
do  others  say  concerning  them,  "  Woe  unto  us  I  for  the  day,"  etc.  But  in  the  text  we
have  a  precisely  opposite  feeling^  one  of  dismay  and  sore  grief  because  of  the  day's  depar-
ture. And  this  lamentation  is  one  uttered,  not  alone  by  those  of  whom  the  prophet
wrote,  but  by  many  others  also.    Therefore  let  us^

I.  Listen  to  those  who  make  this  lamentation.  And :  1.  There  were  those  of
whom  Jertmicik  turote.  The  Chaldeans,  who  were  about  to  invade  Juda^  and  Jemsalem.
The  text  occurs  in  a  vivid  description  of  the  troubles  they  would  bring  upon  his  people.
He  is  representing  their  eagerness,  their  furious  haste  to  assail  and  capture  the  doomed
city.  Hence  the  interruption  of  nightfall  is  fiercely  resented  by  them.  They  would
lengthen  out  the  day  if  but  they  could.  Like  as  Joshua  bade  the  sun  stand  still
fJosh.  X.),  that  he  might  complete  the  overthrow  of  his  enemies,  so  would  these
Chaldeans  like  that  the  sun  should  stand  still,  that  they  might  complete  the  overthrow
of  theirs.  And  because  that  cannot  be,  therefore  they  exclaim,  "  Woe  unto  us  1 "  etCc
What  a  lesson  these  Chaldean  soldiers  give  to  the  professed  soldiers  of  Christ  1  Would
that  we  had  the  like  zeal  in  our  endeavour  to  win  the  kingdom  of  heaven  1  But  it  ia
only  the  violent,  those  who  are  in  real  earnest  and  put  forth  all  their  "force,"  who  shall
take  it.  2.  But  if  we  take  the  day  as  referring  to  the  day  of  life,  we  shall  often  hear  in
Holy  Scripture  the  like  lamentation.  The  saints  of  the  Old  Testament,  how  they
shrank  from  death;  "Oh,  spare  me,  that  I  may  recover  strength,  before  I  go  hence,  and
be  no  more  ; "  "  The  dead  praise  not  thee,  neither  any  that  go  down  into  silence ; "  **  The
living,  the  living,  shall  praise  thee,  as  I  do  this  day."  The  overflowmg  gratitude  of  the
hundred  and  sixteenth  psalm  is  because  of  deliverance  from  the  dreaded  death.  How
Hezekiah  (Isa.  xxxviii.)  piteously  wept  and  prayed  that  he  might  not  diel  They
knew  not  that  to  depart  was  far  better ;  death  was  to  them  only  gloomy,  silent,  diirk,
and  where  fellowship  with  God  was  not.  Hence  this  "  Woe  unto  us  1  "  ete.,  expresses
the  common  feeling  of  Old  Testament  times  at  the  going  away  of  the  day  of  life.  3.
But  there  are  those  who  still  make  like  lamentation.  Let  us  listen  to  them.  (1)  Those
from  whom  the  day  of  opportunity  is  going  away.  We  none  of  us  like  to  miss  oppor-
tunities. Even  to  miss  a  train  vexes  us.  How  much  more  when  we  see  slipping  fast
from  us  the  power  of  gaining  and  doing  great  good  !  The  scholar  who  has  let  slip  the
opportunities  of  winning  the  knowledge  which  would  fit  him  for  his  life's  work,  but
now  must  go  forth  all  ill  oqiiipped,  and  so  must  with  shame  take  a  lower  place.  The
youth  or  man  who  has  failed  to  win  the  confidence  of  those  about  him,  and  now  has  to
leave  them  without  the  great  advantage  which  their  confidence  would  have  given  him.
The  professed  disciple  of  Christ  who  has  some  child,  some  companion,  some  one  over
whom  he  had  infiuence,  leaving  him  for  a  distance,  or,  more  grievous  still,  by  death,
and  he  has  never  used  his  opportunity  of  speaking  to  him  on  behalf  of  Christ.  This  is
a  woe  indeed,  a  reflection  bitter  to  have  resting  upon  one's  conscience.  The  brother  or
fiister,  the  husband  or  wife,  the  companion  or  friend,  who  have  let  go  opportunities  of
showing  kindness,  of  comforting  and  helping  those  who  looked  to  them  for  such
comfort  and  help,  and  now  it  is  too  late.  Ah  I  that  is  a  dreadful  thought,  to  think  of
what  you  might  have  done  for  them  and  ought  to  have  done  but  did  not,  and  now  can
never  do.  All  these  are  instances  in  which  those  from  whom  the  day  of  opportunity  is
going  away  will  often  lament,  "  Woe  unto  us  ! "  It  is  with  a  bitter  pang  that  we  see
**  the  shadows "  of  that  "  evening  stretched  out."  (2)  Those  from  whom  the  day  of
prosperity  is  going  away.  Listen  to  the  patriarch  Job  (xxix.  3):  "Oh  that  I  were
as  in  months  past,  as  in  the  days  when  God  preserved  mel"  And  all  through  the
chapter  he  continues  his  sad  lament  over  happy  days  gone  by.  And  so  now  to  see  the
like  befall  ourselves — health,  wealth,  friends,  dear  children,  or  those  even  dearer  still,  all
going  from  us,  what  wonder  that  such  say, "  Woe  is  us  1"  etc.?  But  sometimes  it  is  on
account  of  the  going  away  of  the  day  of  spiritual  ])rosperity.  The  mournful  retrospect
of  days  of  purity,  peace,  strength,  enjoyment  of  God,  delight  in  his  worship,  usefulness
in  his  service ;  but  these  now  all  gone  or  la&t  disap|)earinjE.    Ah  I  the  backslider^  the

JEREMIAH.  M


162         THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,  tcH.  vi.  1— 3a

man  who  suffers  himself  to  lose  his  religion,  has  many  bitter  moments  of  regret  and
remorse.  How  he  curses  the  sinful  folly  which  led  him  to  lend  an  ear  to  the  deceitful
suggestions  of  the  wicked  one,  and  which  have  brought  him  to  this  wretched  pass!
Yes,  it  is  a  terrible  thing  to  see  the  day  of  spiritual  prosperity  going  away  and  the
shadows  of  its  evening  stretched  out.  (3)  Those  from  whom  the  day  of  a  life  lived
without  Ood  is  going  away.  This  must  be  dreadful  indeed.  They  have  dnmk  up  all
that  the  cup  of  this  world  has  to  give  them;  there  is  not  a  drop  left,  and  there  is  no
provision  made  for  the  eternity  to  which  they  are  hastening.  With  what  intensity  of
bitterness  will  the  "Woe  unto  us!"  of  such  be  uttered !  For  though  such  perceive  that
eternity  is  near,  and  Grod's  awful  judgment  bar,  yet  how  difficult,  how  all  but  impos-
sible do  they  find  it  to  hurry  on  their  preparations  as  they  would  fain  do!  The  lips
unused  to  pray  cannot  pray.  The  habits  of  unbelief  and  worldliness  won't  be  broken.
Faith  will  not  come.  They  have  so  long  turned  away  from  Christ  that  now  they
cannot  turn  to  him.  Pride  holds  back  the  confession  which  their  repentance  would
make,  that  all  their  past  life  has  been  one  melancholy  mistake.  Such  are  some  of  the
great  difficulties  which  stand  in  the  way  of  him  who,  at  the  close  of  a  long  life  lived
without  God,  would  then  turn  to  God.  And  as  ho  sees  that  now  this  world  is  lost  to
him,  and  the  next  not  won  and  all  but  impossible  to  be  won,  how  inevitable  the
exceeding  bitter  cry,  *'  Woe  unto  us ! "  etc.  I    But  now—

IL  Let  us  endeavour  to  lighten  this  lamentation,  and  to  comfort  those  who
SAT,  "  Woe  unto  us  1 "  1.  Those  who  lament  the  going  away  of  the  day  of  oppor^
tunity.  Remember  that  all  opportunity  is  not  gone.  "  Why  should  a  living  man
complain?"  "A  live  dog  is  better  than  a  dead  lion."  (Illustrate  from  Foster's
essay  on  *  Decision  of  Character.'  Story  of  a  spendthrift  who  had  lost  a  vast  estate
suddenly  resolving  that  he  would  regain  it,  and  at  once  setting  about  to  earn  money,
though  ever  so  little,  and  at  length,  by  dint  of  prolon^^ed,  hard,  and  often  degrading  toil
and  of  rigid  economy,  accomplishing  his  resolve.  Such  victories  have  been  won  in
spite  of  temporal  loss.)  Remember  all  is  not  gone.  And  where  spiritual  opportunities
nave  been  let  go,  sad  as  such  loss  is,  others  yet  remain.  "  Sleep  on  now,  and  take  your
rest;"  that  was  our  Saviour's  way  of  telling  his  un watchful  disciples  that  they  had  lost
the  opportunity  of  ministering  to  him  as  he  had  asko<i  them.  But  in  the  next  breath
he  says,  "  Rise,  lot  us  be  going :  behold,  he  that  betrayeth,"  etc. ;  that  was  his  way  of
telling  them  that  there  were  opportunities  for  other  service  yet  awaiting  them.  Peter,
when  he  went  out  after  his  denial  of  his  Lord,  and  wept  bitterly,  thought  that  never-
more would  he  have  opportunity  of  doing  aught  for  that  dear,  dear  Lord  whom  he  had
80  shamefully  denied.  But  'twas  after  that  the  Lord  said  to  him,  "  Feed  my  laml>s,"
"  Feed  my  sheep."  Therefore  waste  not  time  in  mere  brooding  over  lost  opportunities.
Confess  your  fiiithlessness,  and  seek  forgiveness,  and  then  ask  the  Lord  to  show  you
what  yet  remains  that  you  may  do  for  him.  And  be  sure  that  he  will  graciously  deal
with  you  as  he  did  with  his  apostle  of  old.  2.  Those  who  lament  the  going  away  of
the  day  of  prosperity.  If  you  are  not  a  believer  in  Christ — one  born  again  of  the  Holy
Ghost  unto  him,  then  I  know  not  how  to  comfort  you  or  how  to  lighten  your  lamenta-
tion. I  can  only  counsel  you  to  kneel  and  pray  that  this  loss  of  temporal  good  may
lead  you  to  him  who  waits  to  give  you  eternal  good,  in  the  gain  of  which  ail  earthly
loss  will  be  forgotten.  God  grant  you  may  follow  this  counsel.  But  if  you  are  a  child
of  God,  then  remember  Christ  mill  he  with  you  in  your  trial.  Was  there  not  another
with  the  three  Hebrew  youths  in  the  furnace  of  fire,  so  that  its  fierce  flames  burned
them  not,  and  they  walked  up  and  down  as  if  beneath  the  cool  shade  of  the  trees  of
Paradise?  Manifold  and  great  good  to  you  and  through  you  is  undoubtedly  designed
by  letting  such  trial  come  to  you.  To  give  you  holy  skill  and  blessed  tenderness  in
ministering  to  other  troubled  souls ;  to  impart  to  you  deeper  knowledge  of  yourself ;
to  make  you  the  means  of  making  known  to  others  what  Divine  grace  can  do.  This
was  why  God  suffered  Job  to  be  so  tried,  and  why  the  Lord  put  the  faith  of  the  Syro-
phoenician  woman  to  so  severe  a  strain.  Did  not  our  Lord  himself  become  the  **  Man
of  sorrows  and  acquainted  with  grief"?  What  do  we  not  all  owe  to  that?  And  so
through  his  people  becoming  more  or  less  men  of  sorrows  and  acquainted  with  grief,
large  blessing  shall  flow  down  to  others.  Then  do  not  think  it  all  "  woe  "  if  the  day
of  your  earthly  prosperity  does  seem  to  be  "  going  away,"  and  the  shadows  of  its
evening  be  stretched  out.    3.  Those  who  lament  the  going  away  of  the  day  of  a  lifo


CH.vi.1-^.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  168


lived  without  God.  To  such  we  would  say  that  it  is  a  rare  mercy  that  they  are  dla-
tresscd  at  all.  For  many  die  as  they  have  lived,  indififerent  and  unconcerned  about
GKxi  and  things  eternal.  But  if  alarm  and  fear  have  been  awakeued,  that  is  a  token  of
mercy.  The  dying  robber  on  the  cross  beside  our  Lord,  at  that  last  hour  turned  to
him,  and  was  not  refused  the  mercy  he  craved.  Christ  "  saves  to  the  uttermost  all  that
come  unto  God  by  him."  Give  glory  to  him  by  even  now  turning  to  him,  as  he  bidi
you  do.  But  let  none  presume  on  the  possibilities  of  such  repentance  at  the  very  last.
**  The  Gt>spels  tell  of  one  such,  that  none  may  despair ;  but  of  only  one,  that  none  may
presume."    **  Remember  now  thy  Creator  in  the  days  of  thy  youth."

•*  To  Jesus  may  we  fly

Swift  as  the  morning  light.
Lest  life's  youne  golden  beams  should  die

In  sudden  endless  night."

If  we  be  found  in  A»m,  then  the  exceeding  bitter  cry  of  our  text  will  never  be  heard
from  ns.  The  day  of  opportunity  will  not  leave  us.  If  the  day  of  earthlv  prosperity
do  leave  us,  then  it  will  be  because  the  Lord  hath  provided  some  better  thing  for  ufl.
And  when  the  day  of  life  goeth  away  and  we  with  it,  it  will  be  but  "  to  depart  and  be
with  Christ,  which  is  far  better." — C.

Vers.  4, 5. — ffow  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  to  he  taken,  "  Prepare  ye  war,"  etc.  It
is  lawful  to  learn  from  the  children  of  this  generation,  who  are  wiser  in  their  affaire
than  the  children  of  light.  Therefore,  from  the  way  in  which  the  enemies  of  Judah
should  assail  her,  we  may  learn  how  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  to  be  won.    There  is— >

I.  The  becoonition  op  the  beality  op  the  STBUoaLB.    "  Prepare  ye  war,"  etc.

II.  Casting  aside  of  all  buogestions  of  ease.  **  Let  us  go  up  at  noon ; "  the
burning  heat  did  not  matter.

III.  Impatience  of  hindbances.    "  Woe  unto  us  I  for  the  day,"  etc.

IV.  Resolve  to  encoumteb  ant  and  eveby  pebil  batheb  than  be  put  back  fboic
tbeib  entebpbise.    **  Let  us  go  up  by  night."

V.   DeTKBMINATION    not    to    best    till     the     POWEB     of     the    fob    be    tJTTEBLT

DE8TB0YED.    "  Let  US  destroy  her  palaces,"  etc. — C.

Ver.  6. — The  real  director  of  human  affaire.  "  For  thus  hath  the  Lord  of  host«
said.  Hew  ye  down  trees,"  etc.  Nothing  could  seem  a  more  purely  human  affair  than
the  invasion  of  Judah  and  Jerusalem  by  the  armies  of  Babylon.  Its  motives,  methods,
means,  results,  were  all  just  such  as  were  perfectly  comprehensible  and  according  to
the  manners  of  that  age  and  the  peoples  concerned.  One  event  followed  another  in
natural  sequence,  and  was  fully  explained,  so  men  would  say,  by  what  went  before.
And  so  in  reference  to  a  still  more  notable  event — the  crucifixion  of  our  Lord  Jesua
Christ.  To  the  eye  of  an  ordinary  historian,  that  supreme  event  was  brought  about  in
altogether  a  common  and  ordinary  way.  But  as  concerning  that  event,  so  concerning
this  of  which  Jeremiah  tells,  it  is  distinctly  declared  that  Ood  was  overruling  and
directing  all  that  took  place.  Not  that  God  was  the  author  of  the  wickedness  which
seemed  triumphant  in  these  events — especially  in  the  "  wicked  hands  "  by  which  our
Lord  was  "  crucified  and  slain."  No,  but  just  as,  when  a  fire  has  broken  forth  and  is
threatening  to  devour  and  destroy  on  all  hands,  wise  and  skilful  firemen,  when  they
cannot  quench  it,  will  contrive  to  lead  it  in  a  given  direction,  will  order  the  path  it
shall  take  as  seems  to  them  best,  so  GKxi,  when  he  sees  the  raging  fire  of  wickedness
has  broken  forth,  guides  and  orders  the  path  it  shall  take,  the  work  it  shall  do.
Wickedness  is  never  attributable  to  God,  but  the  development  and  form  it  shall
assume  are  so.  Hence  in  the  text,  the  Lord  of  hosts  is  represented  as  the  real  Com-
mander of  the  armies  that  were  to  invade  Judah  and  Jerusalem  ;  it  was  his  ordero  they
were  in  fact  obeying,  though  nothing  was  further  from  their  thoughts  than  this.  And
so  we  are  taught  that  Ood  is  behind  all  human  affairs,  ordering  and  directing  them
according  to  his  will.

"  There's  a  divinity  that  shapes  our  ends^
Bough-hew  them  how  we  wilL"


164  THE   BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  vi.  1-^.


And  now  we  ask—

L  Why  should  not  this  be  so  ?  Many  reply  that  if  you  find  an  adequate  caiue
for  any  given  effect,  there  is  no  need  to  look  for  any  other.  But,  in  answer,  see,  I  let
this  book  fall ;  what  causes  it  to  fall  ?  The  law  of  gravity  will  adequately  explain  it.
But  was  that  the  real  cause  ?  Was  not  my  will  to  let  it /all  that  real  cause  ?  And  so  in
haman  affairs,  we  may  see  the  immediate  antecedent,  but  we  have  a  right  to  ask,  ^  What
lies  behind  that  ?  "  You  say, "  SufiBciently  plain  motives  led  to  such  and  such  conduct ; "
but  we  ask,  "  Who  brought  these  motives  into  action  ?  who  or  what  set  them  at  work  so
that  these  results  have  come  about?  "     Further —

II.  God  is  a  perfectly  holy  Being,  and  therefore  must  desire  to  have  all
MORAL  NATURES  MADE  LIKE  UNTO  HIMSELF.  "  Good  and  Upright  is  the  Lofd,  therefore
will  he  teach  sinners  in  the  way."  "The  righteous  Lord  loveth  righteousness  ; "  hence
We  are  bidden, ''  Give  thanks  at  the  remembrance  of  his  holiness.**  Hence  it  is  certain
that  he  will  employ  all  means  consistent  with  the  nature  he  has  given  us  to  bring  our
iNrills  into  harmony  with  his  own.  Therefore  when  we  see  a  whole  system  of  things,
an  entire  course  of  events,  tending  to  and  actually  producing  this  result — for  the
Captivity  did  cure  Israel  of  their  idolatry,  they  went  no  more  after  false  gods,  nor  have
they  done  so  ever  since — we  at  once  put  it  down  to  him  whose  nature  and  whose  wiU
we  know.

III.  And  OUR  individual  cwnstitution  supports  this  view.  There  are  Divine  laws
for  the  body,  the  mind,  the  affections.  Ajid  to  bring  us  into  harmouy  with  his  laws,
which  are  the  expression  of  his  will,  he  has  '*  begirt  us  round  *'  with  safeguards  and
guides  which,  if  we  heed,  happy  are  we,  but  if  we  neglect,  we  suffer.  It  is  certain
that  the  health  of  our  whole  nature  follows  obedience  to  these  laws ;  and,  on  the
other  hand,  the  misery  which  results  from  disobedience  declares  plainly  his  will,  and
shows  that  he  is  behind  all  those  facts  which  we  call  the  causes  of  these  results,  and  is
himself  the  Cause  of  them  all.  Now,  this  is  true  in  the  case  of  each  single  person.
Hay  it  not,  therefore,  be  true  in  the  case  of  the  world  at  large,  and  in  regard  to  what  we
call  "  causes  and  effects  "  ?    Then  note  further^

IV.  The  unity  of  purpose  which  is  seen  throughout  the  ordering  of  th^

UNIVKRSB,  80  FAR  AS   WE   CAN   TRACE,  SEEMS  TO  INDICATE   ONE   MIND  OOVERNINO   ALL.

Bead  history,  or  such  a  book  as  Creasy's  *  Decisive  Battles  of  the  World,'  and  note  how
each  great  struggle  has  helped  forward  the  advance  of  humanity,  has  bettered  the
condition  of  mankind,  so  that  it  is  terrible  to  think  what,  in  many  instances,  would
have  been  the  consequences  had  the  events  fallen  out  in  an  opposite  way.  The  hand
of  God  in  history  is  clearly  discernible  by  all  who  believe  heartily  in  the  living,  all-
holy,  all-loving  God.

V.  And,  of  course,  the  whole  authority  of  Scripture  supports  this  doctrine,
(Cf.  the  story  of  Joseph,  and  his  answer  to  his  brethren,  "  It  was  not  you  that  sent
tne  hither,  but  God.")

VL  Learn  in  conclusion  :  1.  To  cast  out  from  your  minds  every  idea  or  thought  of
chance,  fate,  or  any  mere  haphazard  coming  about  of  events.  2.  How  seriously  we  ought
to  look  at  the  events  of  our  own  lives,  and  inquire  God's  meaning  in  regard  to  his
dealings  with  us.  We  are  not  to  be  drawn  off  from  this  by  the  imagination  that  our
little  lives  are  far  too  insignificant  for  God  to  care  for  or  direct.  Does  not  God  paint
the  roadside  flower,  the  wing  of  the  moth?  Is  there  anything  minute  or  insignificant
In  his  esteem?  3.  Rejoice  and  be  exceeding  glad.  "Our  Father's  at  the  helm.**  '*  What
we  know  not  now  we  shall  know  hereafter."  Therefore  '*rest  in  the  Lord,  and  wait
patiently  for  him.** — C.

Ver.  7. — Sin  compared  to  a  "fountain"  I.  The  comparison  just.  For :  1.  Natural*
fiess.  A  fountain  or  spring  bursting  out  on  the  hillside  excites  no  surprise  as  if  it  were
an  unheard-of,  an  extraordinary  thing.  Nor  does  the  outflow  of  sin  from  the  human
heart.    2.  Continuance,    The  streams  of  each  may  sing^

**  But  men  may  come  and  men  may  go,
But  we  flow  on  for  over."

8.  Having  their  source  "from  within"    Out  of  the  depths  both  alike  come.     4.

in  cAarac/er.     What  they  were  once  they  are  always.    5.  Spon-*


CH.  VI.  1-^.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  166

taneousness.  No  force  is  needed  to  draw  forth  their  streams.  6.  Coptoumen,
7.  Effectiveness,  The  course  of  a  stream  is  ever  discernible  by  its  effects.  It  tells  on
all  that  it  touches,  it  leaves  nothing  as  it  was  before  it  came.  8.  Force.  The  fountain
will  have  way  given  to  it.     It  will  break  all  barriers  that  block  its  way.

II.  The  lesson  is  obvious.  Shall  we  divert  its  streams,  and  compel  them  to  run
only  in  quiet  safe  places  where  they  will  cause  us  no  worldly  harm  r  This  is  what
most  men  try  to  do,  and  very  often  succeed  in  doing.  But  this  is  not  God's  plan.  His
charge  is,  "  Make  the  fourf  tain  good  "  And  this  he  can  do ;  he  can  create  a  clean  heart
and  renew  a  right  spirit  within  us.  *^  Ho  that  believeth  in  me,"  said  our  Saviour,
**  from  within  him  shall  flow  rivers  of  living  water ; "  not,  as  now,  rivers  of  death*
0  Christ—

••Thou  of  life  the  Fountain  art,
Frt-ely  let  me  take  of  thee :
Spriug  thou  up  within  my  hearty
Rise  to  all  eternity."

a

Yer.  8. — The  worst  woe  of  the  wicked,  **  Be  thou  instructed,  0  Jerusalem,  lest  my
Boul  depart  from  thee."

I.  There  are  many  woes  which  accompany  sin.  *'  Many  sorrows  shall  be  to  the
wicked."    All  observation  attests  the  truth  of  this  word.

II.  But  there  is  one  which  may  fitly  be  spoken  of  as  the  worst  of  all.  It  is
this — God's  soul  departing  from  the  sinner.  This  indeed  is  terrible.  It  is  so  amongst
men.  We  hear  at  times  of  those  who  have  worn  out  the  love  even  of  those  who  loved
them  most  tenderly.  They  have  made  the  soul  of  those  who  loved  them  to  depart
from  them.  Sons  have  done  this  for  fathers  and  mothers,  friends  for  frietids^
husbands  for  wives  and  wives  for  husbands ;  and  to  have  thus  driven  away  a  deep  and
earnest  love  is  a  depth  of  ruin  than  which  none  in  this  world  can  be  more  terrible.
But  to  have  worn  out  the  love  of  God — to  have  made  his  soul  to  depart  from  us,  what
woe  can  compare  to  that?  His  providential  favour  may  depart  from  us,  and  that  is
sad.  Our  realization  of  his  love  in  our  hearts  may  de[)art  from  us,  and  that  is  sadder
still.    But  for  his  love  itself  to  depart,  that  is  the  worst  of  all.

III.  What,  then,  can  cause  so  great  a  calamity  to  come  upon  a  man  ?  It  is  his
re/using  instiuction  (cf.  Prov.  i.,  "Seeing  thou  hatest  knowledge,"  etc.).  This  Judah
and  Jerusalem  were  doing ;  this  all  too  many  are  doing  now.

IV.  But  this  God  deprecates  greatly,  and  implores  us  not  to  be  guilty  of.
Be  thou  instructed,  0  Jerusalem,"  (cf.  our  Saviour's  tears  over  Jerusalem).  AppeaL— C*


<«


Ver.  9. — **  Turn  back  thine  handP  The  text,  no  doubt,  tells  of  the  utter  snd
complete  desolation  which  would  result  from  the  Chaldean  invasion  of  Judah  and
Jerusalem.  In  vivid  dramatic  form  Jehovah  is  represented  as  bidding  the  invadins
armies  go  over  their  ruthless  work  again,  and  make  the  desolation  yet  more  awful.
Like  as  the  grape-gatherer,  after  he  had  to  all  appearances  stripped  the  vine  of  its
clusters,  would  "  turn  back  his  hand  "  amongst  the  tendrils,  and  search  once  more  over
the  whole  branch  to  see  that  no  solitary  cluster  had  escaped  him  ("  tendrils,"  rather
than  "  baskets,"  are  what  is  meant ;  see  Exposition) ;  so,  if  there  were  a  solitary  village
or  homestead  which  had  escaped  the  fury  of  the  foe,  they  are  bidden  go  back  on  their
work,  that  none  whatever  might  escape.  Such  the  meaning,  and  it  was  ruthlessly
fulfilled.  But  the  form  of  expression  may  be  applied,  not  merely  to  the  ministers  of
God's  vengeance,  as  in  the  text,  but  to  those  who  serve  him  in  ways  far  more  accept-
able and  ordinary.  We,  therefore,  take  the  charge,  ''  Turn  back  thine  hand  as  a
grape-satherer,"  and  address  it —

I.  To  THOSE  WHO  ARE  AT  WORK  FOR  GoD.  The  Self -Satisfied  y  who  look  at  their  work
with  too  much  content,  as  if  it  could  not  be  bettered, — these  need  this  charge.  And  the
discouraged^  who  are  for  throwing  up  their  work,  abandoning  it  in  sorrow  and  despair,
believing  thty  can  do  nothing  more, — to  them  God  would  say,  **  Turn  back  thine  hand.**
To  those  who  desire  to  do  their  work  thoroughly.  Go  over  it  again.  See  how  Paul  was
constantly  in  the  habit  of  ''  turning  back  his  hand,"  t.e.  going  over  the  Churches  that
he  had  established,  revisiting  them,  in  order  that  he  might  "  confirm "  them  in  the


166  THE   BOOK   OF  THE  rROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  vi.  1— 30.

fiiitb  (cf.  Acts,  passim),    "  Line  upon  line,  lino  upon  line,"  is  God's  counsel  to  us  in
this  matter.

II,  To  THE  STUDENTS  OP  HIS  WoRD.  To  nonc  moFc  tlian  to  these  is  this  charge
necessary,  if  they  are  to  keep  a  living  interest  in  Grod's  \Vord.  We  come  to  be  so
fiuniliar  with  the  main  themes,  and  the  forms  in  which  they  are  expressed,  that
reading  of  the  Bible  comes  to  be  a  work  in  which  no  thought  is  aroused,  or  attention
arrested,  and  [we  weary  of  it  terribly.  Now,  it  is  to  the  diligent  searcher,  who  will
*  turn  back  his  hand,*'  go  over  his  work  again,  and  not  be  content  with  the  truths
■which  lie  only  on  the  surface  and  which  every  eye  am  see, — to  him  shall  there  be
revealed  clusters  of  precious  truths  which  he  had  never  seen  before,  and  the  Word  of
God  shall  yield  to  him  what  it  yields  only  to  searchers  like  himself.

III.   To  TUOSE   ANXIOUS  FOR   THE  FRUITS  OF   God's   GRACE  IN  THEMSELVES.      To  trUO-

hearted  believers  it  is  often  a  cause  of  rei^ret  that  tlnir  fruits  seem  ho  few  and  so  poor.
How  often  the  confession  is  made  of  this  spiritual  fruitlessness !  But  we  need  not,  ought
not,  to  stay  in  complaints  and  confessions.  **  Turn  buck  thine  hand,"  and  search  if  there
may  not  be  more  fruit  found,  and  of  a  better  kind.  "In  me  is  thy  fruit  found,"  says  God,
and  it  may  be  we  have  been  looking  in  the  wrong  places  and  to  wrong  sources  lor  tliat
which  we  so  earnestly  desire  to  see.  We  may  **  go  on  unto  i^erfection,"  for  so  bids  us  the
Word  of  God.  Our  "  whole  body,  soul,  and  spirit  may  be  preserved  blameless,**  and
we  may  be  "  the  sons  of  God  without  rebuke  ;**  for  Christ  "  is  able  [has  power]  to  save
to  the  uttermost,"  and  therefore  we  may  be  **  filled  with  all  the  fulness  of  Guid.**  So,
Christian  brother,"  turn  back  thine  hand  as  a  grai)e-gatherer,"  and  think  not  thou  hast
gathered  all  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit  that  may  be  borne  by  thee.     Thou  hast  not.

In  conclusion,  note  how  the  subject  tells  of:  1.  The  worth  of  those  objects  which  we
search  after.  The  action  of  the  grape-gatherer,  in  carefully  going  over  the  branch
again,  testifies  to  his  sense  of  the  value  of  that  for  which  he  searches.  And  so  here  in
J.,  II.,  III.  2.  And  what  is  yet  left  to  be  gathered  will  be  more  readily  found  because
of  the  others  that  have  been  gathered.  The  solitary  remaining  clusters  are  seen  more
easily  now  that  the  others  which  hid  them  are  cleared  away.  And  he  who  desires  to
do  more  work  for  God,  to  know  more  of  the  truth  of  God,  to  bear  more  fruit  unto  God,
shall  find  that  his  former  work  has  been  for  his  help,  and  on  account  thereof  he  is
more  sure  of  success.  "  Herein  is  my  Father  glorified,  that  ye  bear  much  fruit ; "
therefore  "  turn  back  thine  hand." — 0.

Vers.  9 — 17. — The  preacher^s  hitter  cry.  Profound  distress  marks  the  prophet's
utterances  in  this  section.  The  lament  over  the  incorrigible  wickedness  of  men  and
his  own  baffled  work  is  loud  and  long  and  bitter  exceedingly  (cf.  Christ's  tears  over
Jerusalem  ;  Paul's  sorrow  over  his  countrymen).

I.  What  caused  this  bitter  cry?  His  perception  of  the  judgment  of  God  drawing
nigh  (vers.  9, 12, 15).  The  obstinacy  of  the  people  (vers.  10, 16, 17).  The  hopelessness
of  reformation  (ver.  13).  All  were  corrupt,  and  the  prophets  and  priests  were  even
leaders  in  sin  (ver.  14).  Even  the  Lord's  voice  had  been  despised  (ver.  16).  Now,  when
facts  like  these  occur,  the  judgment  of  God  threatening  but  those  exposed  to  them
obstinately  refusing  warning ;  and  when  those  who  should  have  warned  them  and  been
their  guides  in  the  ways  of  God  are  themselves  godless,  and  the  voice  of  God  has  been
heard  and  deliberately  despised,  then,  as  the  faithful  servant  of  God  sees  this  awful  guilt
and  its  sure,  inevitable,  and  swift-approaching  judgment, — then  it  is  that  a  sense  of
despair,  a  deep  grief  fills  the  soul,  as  well  it  may.

II.  What  is  a  preacher  to  do  under  bucu  circumstances  ?  The  first  thought  is
to  turn  away  from  the  doomed  people  and  to  speak  no  more  to  them  in  God's  Name.
But  it  is  better  to  take  example  from  the  prophet,  who  was  verily  as  one  of  those  servants
vrho,  when  those  called  to  the  prepared  feast  would  not  come,  but  "  made  light "  of  the
gracious  invitation,  each  saying,  "I  pray  thee  have  me  excused,"  went  out,  at  his
lord's  bidding,  into  the  highways  and  the  hedges  and  compelled  them  to  come  in.  So
did  Jeremiah  now  (ver.  11).  It  grieved  him  to  the  heart  that  God's  Word  should  be
despised,  and  he  became  "  full  of  the  fury  of  the  Lord  "  (cf.  ch.  xx.  9).  Hence  he  poured
out  his  full  heart  upon  young  and  old,  men,  women,  and  children,  wherever  he  found
opportunity  of  unburdening  his  soul  on  this  great  theme.  He  was  inspired  by  God  to
do  thisi  and  the  fact  teaches  us  that  preaching,  which  may  seem  to  be  of  no  use  for  the


CH.  VI.  1—30.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  167

accomplishment  of  one  result,  may  yet  be  of  much  use  in  regard  to  another.  Jeremiah's
testimony,  though  it  did  not  save  the  people  from  captivity,  was  of  great  service  to
them  there,  and  to  the  whole  Jewish  people  ever  after.  His  words,  which  seemed  as
idle  tales  when  he  spoke  them,  became  mighty  through  God  in  after  days.  The  neglect,
therefore,  of  oar  message  now  should  not  lead  us  to  cease  delivering  it,  but  should  rouse
us  to  more  zeal,  and  make  us  **  weary  with  holding  in**  (ver.  11).  We  may  be  sure
that  whenever  Qod  moves  us  to  speak  earnestly  his  Word,  he  intends  to  make  our
message  a  means  of  blessing  somevfheu  and  somewhere.

III.  What  the  pbeachbb's  orief  reveals.  It  tells  much :  1.  0/  Ood,  (1)  Of
his  love ;  for  it  is  ever  he  who  inspires  his  servants  with  deep  solicitude  for  men's
salvation  :  it  is  he  who  through  them  is  saying,  "  How  can  I  give  thee  up  ?  "  (2)  Of
hia  righteousness ;  for  the  vivid  realization  of  the  coming  judgment  which  his  servants
have  is  given  them  that  they  may  impress  upon  the  impenitent  and  the  ungodly  the
sure  issue  of  their  sins.  The  prophets  who  see  and  declare  Qod*8  love  are  they  who
declare  his  righteousness  also.  2.  0/  the  preacher  himself.  How  truly  he  is  sent  of
God  I  It  is  the  Spirit  of  God  speaks  through  him,  the  love  of  God  leading  him  to  deep
love  for  his  fellow-men.  K  our  hearts  are  greatly  filled  with  a  yearning  for  men's  souls,
if  "  rivers  of  water  run  down  our  eyes  because  men  keep  not  God^s  law,** — such  solici-
tude is  a  sure  sign  of  the  presence  of  God  with  us,  and  a  pledge  of  his  help  in  deliver-
ing our  message.  3.  0/  men.  How  desperately  set  they  are  against  God  I  how  absolute
their  need  of  the  renewing  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost!  See  what  the  prophet  says
(ver.  10):  "Their  ear  is  uncircumcised,  and  they  cannot  hearken.**  The  habit  of  sin  has
caused  their  ear  to  be  overgrown,  and  its  power  of  hearing  stopped,  "  so  that,"  etc.  How
should  the  preacher  ever  remember  this,  and  supplicate  the  mighty  aid  of  the  Divine
Spirit  if  his  message  is  to  do  any  good  I

IV.  Questions  it  suggests.  1.  For  preachers  and  teachers.  Do  we  know  anything
of  the  prophet's  grief?  Facts  all  too  plentiful  and  too  closely  resembling  those
which  filled  Jeremiah  with  the  fury  of  the  Lord  (ver.  11)  abound  in  our  day.  Do  they
excite  any  similar  feeling  in  ourselves?  What  need  we  have  to  pray  and  watch
against  becoming  used  to  sin !  and  for  sympathy  with  the  prophets  of  Gt>d  and  yet
more  with  Christ,  their  Lord  and  ours  I  2.  /'or  those  who  hear  the  Word  of  Oo*I,  Are
you  becoming  the  cause  of  such  grief  to  any  of  God's  servants?  Remember  theirs  is
but  the  foreshadowing  of  your  own,  which  will  be  far  greater  if  you  heed  not  their
word.  Rather  heed  that  Word,  and  so  become  not  their  bitter  grief  but  their  joy  now,
and  their  cause  of  rejoicing  in  the  day  of  the  Lord. — C.

Ver.  10. — The  uncircumcised  ear,  L  What  is  this?  Not  a  physical  defect,  although
the  figure  employed  seems  to  tell  of  some  fleshly  growth  which  has  formed  over  the
cavity  of  the  ear,  and  so  destroyed  the  power  of  hearing.  Nor  a  mental  defect.  They
were  acute  enough  ;  they  readily  understood  the  prophet's  meaning  when  he  spoke  tu
them.  Their  minds  were  at  that  very  time  busy  about  all  sorts  of  plots  and  schemes,
which  they  hoped  to  carry  out.  Nor  was  it  a  moral  defect.  1'hey  knew  the  right,
the  true,  the  good.  Conscience  was  still  at  work  and  goading  them  with  her  reproaches.
Hence  they  devise  means  (ver.  14)  to  lull  and  quiet  it.  And  they  ha<l  the  power  of
choice,  and  deliberately  chose  ways  of  their  own  rather  than  those  of  Gk)d.  True,  it  is
said  in  the  text,  *'  And  they  cannot  hearken.'*  But  that  tells  only  of  what  is  the  perjKJtunl
result  of  refusing  continuously  to  hear  God's  Word.  Let  a  man  tie  bis  arm  to  his  side
for  six  months,  and  see  what  power  of  using  it  be  has  left  after  that.  It  will  have
become  atrophied.  And  so  in  like  manner  do  the  functions  of  the  soul,  the  limbs  of
our  spiritual  nature.  The  "will  not'*  in  regard  to  their  use  darkens  down  into  the
dreadful  "  cannot "  of  the  judgment  of  God.  There  is  no  more  awful  fact  for  the  faith-
less servant  of  God,  nor  more  blessed  one  for  the  faithful,  than  this  law  of  habit.  The
utterance  of  it  concerning  the  wicked  is,  as  here,  "  They  cannot  hearken  ;  "  but  con-
cerning the  good,  **  My  heart  is  fixed,  0  God,  my  heart  is  fixed :  I  will  sing  and  give
praise."  But  it  is  a  sfnritual  defect.  It  is  the  result  of  "  the  alienated  unll/'  that  which
the  Bible  calls  "  the  unrenewed  heart,"  "  the  carnal  mind,'*  "  the  unregenerate  nature."
All  such  expressions  tell  of  the  will  of  man  turned  away  from  God,  and  having  no
higher  motive  than  to  phase  and  gratify  self.  That  is  the  radical  defect  of  us  all,  and
it  is  that  which  tho  prophet  hero  terms  "  the  uncircumcised  ear.**    It  by  no  moans


168  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  vi.  1— 30.

always  involves  the  outraf^eous  wickedness  which  is  told  of  in  their  prophecies ;  it  caa
exist  and  yet  never  "  commit  abomination,"  as  did  these  to  whom  Jeremiah  spoke.  It
is  found  in  company  with  much  outward  religiousness,  much  moral  propriety,  much
amiability  of  character ;  but  wherever  it  is,  Ghrist^s  word  concerning  ell  such  is,  **  Ye
must  be  bom  again."  It  is  in  its  nature  fierce,  savage,  unsubdued  still.  It  oftea
seems  to  be  tamed,  and  moves  about  soft-footed  and  gently  as  if  it  never  could  do
barm ;  but  let  some  lure  be  held  out  to  it,  some  provocation  be  given,  and  then  its
ferocity  and  all  its  hideous  evil  will  reveal  itself  at  once.  Accustomed  as  we  are  to  see
this  evil  nature  held  in  check  by  the  usages  of  society,  the  habits  of  civilized  life  and
a  refined  selfishness,  we  are  often  blind  to  its  true  character,  and  "  marvel "  much  at  our
Saviour's  reiterated  word,  "  Ye  must  be  born  again."

II.  Its  effects.  1.  Disregard  of  and  dislike  to  the  Word  of  God.  **  To  whom  shall  I
speak?"  said  the  prophet.  He  could  get  no  one  to  listen  to  him.  And  this  is  the  too  frequent
experience  of  our  own  day.  How  deserted  the  churches  are,  and  where  they  are  better
attended,  what  kind  of  listening  is  it  that  prevails  ?  Granted  the  intolerable  dulness
of  many  preachers,  but  the  evil  is  not  probed  when  this  is  said.  The  true  cause  is
**  the  uncircumcised  ear  "  that  Jeremiah  tells  of.  But  not  only  have  men  "  no  delight
in  **  the  Word  of  God,  they  count  it  **  a  reproach."  They  come  to  be  ashamed  of  its
being  thought  that  they  should  regard  it  with  interest  or  have  any  real  care  for  it.
The  tone  adopted  regarding  those  who  do  delight  in  God*s  Word  is  one  of  scorn  and
contempt.  2.  Men  go  on  unchecked  in  sin  (cf.  vers.  13, 15,  and  passim).  Surely  it
IB  a  question  not  merely  for  the  Church,  but  for  thoughtful  men  of  the  world,  whether  it
be  well  for  any  community  or  people  to  be  throwing  aside  all  the  restraints  of  Gtxi's
Word,  as  so  many  are  doing.  The  history  of  Israel  of  old  is  a  beacon-light,  warning
the  people  of  our  day  of  what  comes  from  despising  the  Word  of  the  Lord.  3.  GKxi's
judgments  come  upon  such  people  (ver.  12).  4.  Men  become  shameless  and  hardened
(ver.  15).  5.  The  heart  of  God*s  faithful  servants  is  sorely  troubled  (cf.  ver.  10).  Here
the  prophet  mourns  over  their  "  uncircumcised  ears."

III.  Abettors  and  ministers  to  this  evil.  1.  Unfaithful  priests  and  prophets
(ver.  13).    2.  The  haidening  effects  of  the  people's  own  sin.

IV.  The  remedy.  Yet  more  impassioned  and  earnest  ministry  of  the  Word.  There
must  be  no  giving  up  of  work  or  abandoning  it  in  despair.  But — as  ver.  11 — more
intense  devotedness  in  the  endeavour,  futile  as  it  may  a[)pear,  to  save  men  from  death.
2.  The  fiery  disciplines  of  God.  Ho  is  "a  consuming  fire;"  and  the  fire  of  his  love
will  burn  fiercely  on  until  the  evil  on  which  it  fastens  is  burnt  out  of  the  soul,  the
Church,  the  nation,  he  loves.  Oh,  the  awfulness  of  the  love  of  God  i  If  God  were  not
love,  there  might  be  a  possibility  of  a  soul  being  allowed  to  perish  in  its  sins  and  to  go
its  own  way  to  death  unchecked ;  but  as  the  fondest  mother  will  subject  her  child  to
terrible  suffering  for  the  saving  of  its  life,  so,  too,  will  God.

Conclusion.  What  a  summons  comes  to  us  from  these  truths:  (1)  to  seek  the
renewing  grace  of  the  Spirit  of  God ;  (2)  to  take  heed  huw  we  hear  1 — C.

Ver.  14. — The  vampires  of  the  soul.  There  is  a  hideous  creatiu-e  called  the  vampire
bat,  that  is  said  to  destroy  its  victims  by  sucking  their  life-blood.  Whilst  thus
destroying  them,  it  gently  fans  them  with  its  wings,  and  so  keeps  them  in  a  profound
slumber,  from  which  the  probabilities  are  that  they  will  never  wake.  And  what  other
are  they  who  lull  the  souls  of  sinful  men  to  the  sleep  of  death  by  "  saying.  Peace,  peace ;
when  there  is  no  peace  "  ?  Mo  greater  crime  can  be  imagined  than  this  of  which  our  text
tells.  The  physician  who  should  pamper  a  man  in  his  disease,  who  should  feed  his
cancer  or  inject  continual  poison  into  the  system,  whilst  at  the  same  time  he  promised
sound  health  and  a  long  life, — such  a  physician  would  not  be  one-half  so  criminal  as
the  professed  religious  teacher  who  should  knowingly  bid  those  entrusted  to  his  charge
to  be  at  ease  and  to  take  comfort,  when  he  ought  to  be  crying,  "  Woe  unto  them  that
are  at  ease  in  Zion  1 "  The  pilot  who  should  pretend  to  steer  a  ship  toward  its  proper
haven,  but  all  the  while  was  of  intent  driving  her  upon  unseen  rocks,  would  not  be  a  worse
traitor  than  the  man  into  whose  hands  the  helm  of  human  souls  is  entrusted,  and  whose
professed  duty  it  is  to  steer  them  towards  Christ,  but  who,  instead  of  so  doing,  was
guiding  them  to  utter  ruin,  by  flattering  them  that  all  was  well  when  all  was  ill.  In
the  great  day^  when  all  shall  render  up  their  account  to  God,  what  awfulae^is  of  doom


CH.  VI.  1—30.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  169

will  not  be  reserved  for  him  who  has  been  chargeable  with  blood-guiltiness  like  this  ?
We  observe—

L  That  it  is  an  all  too  fbkquent  sin.  1.  The  prophets  of  Judah  and  Jerusalem
were  guilty  of  it,  notwithstanding  that  (1)  they  knew  the  truth ;  (2)  they  professed
the  truth  ;  (3)  they  were  ordained  to  teach  the  truth.  Still,  out  of  all  manner  of  evil
motive  they  were  guilty  of  this  sin.  Oh,  let  all  who  teach,  whether  in  the  pulpit,  the
home  circle,  or  in  the  school,  remember  that  their  sacred  charge  and  duty  may  not
merely  be  imperfectly  fulfilled — that  it  ever  is ;  nor  even  neglected  merely,  sad  as  that
is ;  but  it  may  be  utterly  perverted,  and  that  which  was  designed  to  be  for  our  own  and
others*  great  good  may  become  the  means  of  our  and  their  more  terrible  condemnation.
From  this  may  God  save  teachers  and  taught  alike  I  2.  And  there  are  now  those  who
are  bidding  men  be  at  peace  when  there  is  no  peace.  (1)  They  who  bid  men  be  at
peace  on  the  ground  of  their  moral  integrity,  their  respectability  of  character,  and  of
the  righteousness  with  which  they  are  credited  amongst  their  fellow-men.  God  forbid
that  we  should  decry  or  depreciate  the  value  of  character,  reputation,  and  integrity
amongst  men.  No,  indeed ;  but  all  the  same  we  feel  that  it  is  a  plea  all  too  feeble,
and  one  that  cannot  avail  such  as  we  are  before  the  bar  of  the  all-holy  God.  (2)  They
who  teach  men  to  trust  in  sacraments  or  Church  ordinances  of  any  kind.  These,  too,
are  precious  in  their  proper  place,  but  regarded  as  a  valid  claim  to  eternal  life,  apart
firom  the  disposition  of  tue  heart  God  wards,  they  will  save  no  man,  and  he  who  trusts
them  or  teaches  others  to  trust  them,  is  guilty  of  saying,  '*  Peace,  peace,"  etc
(3)  They  who  rely  on  a  faith  which  is  fruitless  in  love  to  God  and  man.  This  is  the
characteristic  of  all  forms  of  Antinomianism,  and  though  that  be  "a  way  which
seemeth  right  unto  many  men,  the  end  thereof  is  death."  3.  But  let  us  remember  that
we  may  practically  be  preaching  this  fatal  peace.  Christian  men  and  women,  who  do
nothing  for  the  salvation  of  those  around  you ;  who  are  eager  about  amusements,
business,  worldly  position,  and  all  such  things,  but  who  are  unmoved  or  but  very
little  moved  at  the  ungodliness  in  the  midst  of  which  you  live;  what  is  the  conclusion
that  others  draw  from  this  unconcern?  Why,  that  you  don^t  believe  what  you
profess,  and  that  therefore  they  need  not  either.  And  so  you  encourage  them  to  say,
**  Peace,  peace,"  etc.  Whose  conscience  is  there  that  does  not  smite  him  here?  and
who  of  us  is  there  that  has  no  need  of  the  prayer,  "  Deliver  me  from  blood-guiltiness,
O  God,  thou  God  of  my  salvation  "  ?  And  all  who  are  unconcerned  about  their  own
eternal  welfare.  Fathers  and  mothers  who  have  not  sought  the  Lord,  you  will  die  in
your  sins  if  you  repent  not ;  but  you  will  die  not  to  yourselves  merely ;  you  will  drag
your  children  down  with  you,  for  you  are  teaching  them  to  be  unconcerned  and
indifferent,  when  neither  you  nor  they  possess  any  true  peace  at  all.  4.  But  after  all,
those  who  are  the  most  guilty  of  saying,  "  Peace,  peace,"  etc.,  are  sinful  men,  to  them*
teltfes.  The  devil  taught  men  the  way  very  early  in  the  history  of  our  race.  **  Ye
shall  not  surely  die  ;**  so  he  lyingly  declared  to  our  first  mother,  and  she,  all  too  willing
to  believe  that  there  would  be  peace  though  she  did  disobey  Goil,  ruined  herself,  her
husband,  and  all  her  children  by  that  one  deed.  And  ever  since  men  who  love  to
disobey  have  encouraged  themselves  in  their  sin  by  this  fatal  flattery  of  their  souls  of
which  our  text  tells.  They  did  so  in  the  days  of  Noah,  "  until  the  flood  came  and
took  them  all  away."  See  also  Belshazzar's  feast  at  the  height  of  merriment,  when
the  handwriting  appeared  on  the  wall,  and  that  night  Babylon  was  taken  and  her
king  slain.  So  has  it  been  with  the  Jewish  people — in  Jeremiah's  time,  and  so  in  our
Lord's.  The  Captivity  shattered  that  first  false  peace,  and  the  utter  destruction  of
Jerusalem  the  second.  And  we  are  told  it  will  be  so  at  the  last,  in  that  "  day  when
the  Son  of  man  cometh."  Observe,  then,  some  of  the  deceits  whereby  men  b^uile
themselves  into  saying,  "  Peace,  peace,**  etc.  They  are  such  as  these :  (1)  The  infinite
mercy  of  God.  (2)  *'  I  am  no  worse  than  those  who  make  a  religious  profession.  If
they  are  saved,  I  shall  be  too."  (3)  *'  Yes,  I  am  going  to  rei^nt  and  turn  to  God  ;  I
ceilainly  mean  to  one  day."  (4)  Religious  profession :  '*  I  am  baptized  and  take  the
sacrament."  (6)  Denying  the  truth  of  the  Bible :  *'  I  have  no  proof  that  there  is  a
G^,  a  heaven,  or  indeed  that  I  have  a  soul.  It  is  all  a  '  perhaps ;  * "  so  men  say.  And
there  are  many  other  such  deceits.     But  now— -

II.  Note  how  the  lie  that  is  in  all  such  bating  of  "  Peace,  peace,"  etc.,  may
BE  detected,    A  mau  may  hold  up  a  phial  of  liquid  that  is  colourless,  clear,  spar-


170  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  vi.  l-«30.


kling,  that  seems  in  all  respects  like  pure,  wholesome  water.  But  the  skilled  chemist
drops  into  it  the  fitting  test,  and  at  onco  the  poisonous  subatance  is  precipitated,
and  thus  is  made  evident  to  ail.  Now,  with  all  these  deceits  of  which  we  have
been  telling,  their  true  nature  may  be  made  manifest  if  we  apply  those  tests  which
only  the  true  peace  of  God  will  endure.  For,  if  the  peace  in  which  we  are  trusting
be  a  true  one  and  not  a  deception,  it  will :  1.  Always  tend  to  the  making  of  us  holier,
purer,  more  Christ-like.  God's  ixiace  always  does  this.  It  "  keeps  our  hearts  and
minds  in  Christ  Jesus,"  it  "  rules  in  our  hejirts.  2.  Stand  under  the  hardest  blows  of
misfortune  and  earthly  sorrow.  Listen  to  its  voice  :  "  Though  he  slay  me,  yet  will  I
trust  in  him ; "  "  The  Lord  gave,  and  the  Lord  hath  taken  away ;  blessed  be  the  Name
of  the  Lord."  Now,  will  peace  such  as  springs  from  such  sources  as  tliose  told  of  help
ft  man  in  straits  like  those  of  Job?  3.  Be  with  him  in  death.  4.  Have  Christ  at  the
heart  of  it  as  its  Alpha  and  its  Omega,  its  beginning  and  its  end.

in.  But  cub  suhest  safeguard  is  not  in  oub  being  able  to  detect  the  falsb
PEACE,  BUT  IN  POSSESSING  THE  TRUE.  That  is  ours  whcu  we  surrender  our  souls  to
Christ.  Then  we  shall  have  peace  indeed,  (i)  Peace  from  fear  of  God's  condemnation  ;
(2)  peace  from  dread  of  guilt ;  (3)  peace  from  the  tyranny  and  oppression  of  '*  the
evil  one ;  **  (4)  peace  from  the  crushing  power  of  earthly  sorrow ;  (5)  peace  from  the
terror  of  the  grave  and  the  judgment  day  ;  (6)  peace  in  the  conscious  possession  of  the
love  of  God.  Such  is  the  true  "  peace  of  God."  Oh,  how  foolish,  then,  to  barter  thcU
for  the  false  and  fatal  pretences  of  peace  which  are  for  ever  beguiling  the  hearts  of
sinful  men  !  May  he  who  is  **  our  Peace,"  even  Christ,  cause  us  to  give  heed  to  his
own  loving  call,  ^  Come  unto  me  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give
you  rest  "1—C.

Ver.  15. — Hie  sin  against  the  Holy  Ohost,  I.  This  sin  is  set  forth  hebe.  For
the  sin  is  no  one  definite  act,  but  a  condition  of  mind  which  renders  repentance  hope-
less and  persistence  in  sin  certain  (cf.  Revised  Version,  Mark  iii.  29,  where  the  true
reading  is  as  there  given,  **  is  guilty  of  an  eternal  sin  ").  But  is  not  this  the  condi-
tion described  in  the  text,  described  vividly,  accurately?  They  had  hardened  themselves
till  repentance,  yea,  even  shame,  on  account  of  "  abomination"  was  utterly  absent  from
them.  "*They  were  not  at  all  ashamed,'  no  tinge  of  it,  not  the  least  'blush'  was
visible.  Was  it  not  certain  that  such  people  who  would  go  on,  as  they  did,  in  sin,
were  in  danger  of  eternal  sin  ? "  Hence  they  had  never  forgiveness,  and  the  prophet
was  forbidden  (see  ch.  vii.  16)  even  to  pray  for  them  (cf.  1  Joim  v.  16).

II.  Other  instances  of  it  or  approximations  to  it.  1.  Those  who  with  unblush-
ing effrontery  ascribed  Christ's  holy  ministry  and  his  deeds  of  merciful  might  to  Satanic
power.  They  cried  out, "  Show  us  a  sign  from  heaven,*^  implying  that  thus  far  he  had
only  shown  them  signs  from  hell.  2.  Those  who  were  responsible  for  the  cry,  "  His  blood
be  on  us,  and  on  our  children ! "  And  there  are  instances  now.  The  condition  of
shamelessness  in  sin  and  of  helplessness  as  to  repentance  may  be,  and  we  fear  at
times  is,  reached.    Therefore  note —

III.  The  steps  by  which  men  beach  this  condition.  1.  By  disregard  of  the
rebukes  of  conscience,  stifling  them,  instead  of  going,  as  they  would  prompt,  to  the
mercy-seat,  and  there  confessing  the  sin.  2.  By  persistence  in  sin.  3.  By  the  com-
mission of  great  sins.  4.  By  loss  of  self- respect.  5.  By  forfeiture  of  character  and  the
esteem  of  men.

IV.  Its  doom.  "It  hath  never  forgiveness."  "They  shall  fall  among  them  that
fall;  they  shall  be  cast  down,  saith  the  Lord."  Wherefore  this?  1.  Because  sin  and
sorrow  are  linked  together  by  a  chain  that  cannot  be  broken.  Therefore  where  there  is
eternal  sin  there  must  bo  eternal  punishment.  The  latter  keeps  pace  with  the  former,
and  dogs  its  footsteps  for  ever.  It  cannDt  but  be  so.  2.  Because  such  men  are
murderers  of  other  men's  souls.  They  are  centres  of  rebellion  against  God,  of  deadly
spiritual  conta;;ion.  Blood-guiltiness  is  upon  them,  yea,  they  are  steeped  therein.
3.  Because  God  could  not  be  God  and  not  abhor  such  condition  of  soul  as  this  siu
betrays.

V.  Its  solemn  lessons.  1.  Cherish  a  holy  hatred  of  sin,  for  its  tendency  is  ever  to
reproduce  itself,  and  so  to  become  eternal.  2.  Beware  of  disrcizarding  the  monitor
within — conscience^  God's  voice  in  our  souls.    To  do  so  is.  to  drive  away  the  trusty


CH.VL1— 30.]    THE  BOOK   OP  THE   PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  171

aentinel  who  guards  the  approaches  of  the  soul  against  its  deadly  foes ;  to  pierce  and
undermine  those  blessed  walls  which  keep  back  the  inrush  of  the  ocean  upon  the
whole  land.    Let  us  not  do  aught  like  this.    But  pray—

**  Quick  as  the  apple  of  the  eye,
O  God,  my  conscience  make,
Swift  to  dibcerii  when  sin  is  nigh,
And  keep  it  still  awake."

3.  Is  Bin  upon  your  conscience  now?  At  once  confess  it,  and  so  find  from  your
Lord  forgiveness  for  it,  and  more — deliverance  from  it  and  from  all  possibility  of  that
dread  sin  which  the  text  describes  and  which  hath  never  forgiveness. — C.

Ver.  16. — The  good  old  patJis.  It  is  noticeable  in  the  order  of  nature  how  God  has
secured  the  true  adjustment  and  hence  the  highest  well-being  of  his  universe  by  means
of  the  action  of  cofUrasted  and  opposite  forces.  By  means  of  that  power  which  the
mighty  mass  of  the  sun  has  to  draw  everything  to  itself — if  this  were  left  alone  to
cperate,  the  whole  of  those  innumerable  orbs  that  now  circle  round  the  sun  as  their
centre  would  be  drawn  in  upon  it  and  perish.  But  this  is  prevented  by  the  action  of
an  oppofflte  force,  called  the  centrifugal,  as  the  first-mentioned  is  called  the  centripetaJ«
This  opposite  force  tends,  by  the  velocity  with  which  the  planets  revolve  around  the
sun,  to  drive  them  off  and  away  from  it :  thus,  by  the  effect  of  these  opposite  forces,
that  perfect  harmony  and  imerring  order  of  the  whole  stellar  universe,  which  has  been
the  admiration  of  all  observers  in  all  ages,  are  preserved.  Chemistry  also  can  furnish
illustrations  not  a  few  of  the  beneficent  action  of  opposite  forces,  where  either  left  alone
would  work  only  harm.  In  the  great  law  of  sex,  the  constitution  of  all  life,  plant  life
as  well  as  animal,  as  male  and  female,  this  in  all  its  aspects  is  another  marked  instance
of  the  same  Divine  method.  In  political  life^  the  two  great  tendencies,  monarch ial
and  democratic,  or  the  rule  of  the  one  versus  the  rule  of  the  many — the  mutual
BtruggUngs  of  these  two— keep  the  world  in  such  equilibrium  as  we  see.  In  re/t-
gion,  the  Catholic  principle  which  makes  self  nothing,  and  the  Protestant  principle
which  makes  self  all-important,  each  man  having  to  give  an  account  of  himself  to
God, — these  are  both  designed  to  contend  the  one  against  the  other,  and  whilst
Catholicism  is  to  check  the  selfish  individualism  into  which  Protestantism  is  apt  to
lapse.  Protestantism  is  in  its  turn  to  struggle  against  that  servility  of  mind  into  which
the  principle  of  self-abnegation,  the  essential  principle  of  Catholicism,  is  prone  to
degenerate.  It  is  in  the  resultant  of  these  two  forces  that  the  purest  form  of  religious
life  is  found.  And  in  regard  to  the  lift  of  obedience  to  Gody  the  life  which  he  would
have  us  live  here  on  earth,  that,  too,  is  governed  by  the  action  of  opposed  laws.  There
is  the  law  which  works  through  our  bodily  nature,  and  which  if  left  alone  would  make
us,  not  in  body  only  but  in  soul,  of  the  earth  earthy,  for  ever  "  grovelling  here  below."
But  there  is  the  opposed  law  which  works  through  our  spiritual  nature ;  but,  blessed
as  it  is,  it  needs  to  be  disciplined  and  made  perfectly  healthful  to  us  by  means  of  the
salutary  necessity  of  giving  heed  in  due  measure  to  the  lesser  law  just  s(X)ken  of.  The
first  preserves  us  from  being  mere  enthusiasts,  the  second  from  the  far  greater  peril  of
enslavement  to  the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil  acting  through  them.  And  in  those
two  tendencies,  one  of  which  is  plainly  referred  to  in  this  sixteenth  verse  and  the  other
implied,  the  love  of  the  old  is  contrasted  with  the  love  of  the  new.  Here,  again,  we  have
set  before  us  two  great  forces  in  humanity,  which  by  their  mutual  contentions  preserve  it
in  tolerable  health  and  comfort,  and  ensure  its  steady,  onward  progress.  Conservatism
and  liberalism  are  not  the  products  of  any  one  national  revolution,  like  our  own  in
1688,  but  they  are  two  God-implanted  tendencies  of  the  human  mind,  each  of  which
has  its  appropriate  and  most  useful  function,  and  neither  of  which  can  be  dispensed
with  without  harm  to  the  whole  body  politic  in  every  nation  under  the  sun.  To  lie
like  a  log  on  the  ocean  of  human  life,  useless  and  despised  amid  the  nationalities  of
the  world,  is  the  doom  of  those  who  will  blindly  close  their  eyes  to  the  fresh  light  and
truth  which  are  for  ever  breaking  forth  upon  the  world ;  to  run  upon  the  rocks  and
make  shipwreck  of  everything  is  the  doom  of  those  who  despise  the  teachings  of
cxi>erience,  and  care  only  to  be  for  ever  finding  out  some  new  way  and  to  follow  some
new  guide.    But  let  these  two  act  and  react  each  on  the  other— the  love  of  the  old


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEKEMIAH.    [cii.  vi.  1— 30.

■poD  the  loTe  of  the  new,  the  tendency  to  be  always  looking  back  upon  the  tendency
to  be  always  looking  forward,  and  tlien  the  result  is  that  men  will  come  generally  to
practically  act  upon  that  prudent,  though  to  many  minds  most  prosaic^  maxim  which

•*  Be  not  the  first  by  whom  the  new  is  tried,
Nor  yet  the  last  to  lay  the  old  aside."

Bat  in  regard  to  the  way  in  which  God  would  have  us  go,  our  text  teaches-^

L  That  thebe  ake  no  new  ways.  From  the  beginning  that  which  the  Lord  God
Bath  required  of  man  has  Ijeen,  even  as  it  yet  is,  that  we  should  "do  justice,  love
mercy,  and  walk  humbly  with  our  God."  The  gospel  of  the  Lord  Jesus  is  not  to
ta{;er8ede  or  make  void  this  eternal  law,  but  to  establish  it  as  it  never  had  been  or
could  have  been  before.  "  What  the  Law  could  not  do  in  that  it  was  weak  through  the
fleiih,  God  sending  his  own  Son  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh,"  did, "  that  the  righteous-
oess  of  the  Law  might  be  fulfilled  in  us."  For  this  end,  by  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus
Christ,  the  burden  of  guilt  is  taken  off  from  us,  and  a  new  heart  and  a  right  spirit  giveoL.
But  the  law  of  life  is  ever  the  same.     It  is  the  old  and  good  way.

n.  Nevebtheless,  men  are  continually  devising  new  ways.  It  was  80  in  Jere-
miah's time ;  it  is  so  in  our  own.  By  denials  of  truths  most  surely  bclieveil  amongst  U8
for  many  generations,  or  by  additions  thereto,  or  by  substitutions  of  other  forms  of
faith,  men  have  done  to-day  as  in  the  days  of  old.  Every  magazine  and  newspaper,
besides  innumerable  volumes  ever  issuing  from  the  press, — all  alike  are  popular  as  they
throw  over  old  ideas  and  propound  **  some  new  thing."  Science  and  secularism  and
superstition  between  them  would,  long  ere  this,  have  destroyed  the  good  old  way,  had
it  not  been  so  flrmly  constructed  that  all  these  powers  combined  are  not  adequate  for
such  a  task.

III.  In  these  new  ways  what  is  true  will  be  found  to  be  old,  and  what  is
KOT  old  will  be  FOUND  TO  BE  NOT  TRUE.  For  there  are  tests  by  which  new  teachings
may  be  tried,  and  ought  to  be  tried,  and  by  which  the  prophets  of  God  tried  the  new
teachings  of  their  day.  1.  The  test  of  conscience.  The  human  conscience  confesses
God.  ft  is  borne  in  upon  the  human  heart  that  God  is.  Nothing  can  permanently
stifle  or  destroy  that  confession,  which  Conscience,  left  to  herself,  would  ever  make.
The  very  word  "conscience"  implies  the  recognition  of  some  other  being  as  with  us,
in  us,  around  and  about  us.  It  confesses  God.  All  teachings,  therefore,  that  deny  God,
or  explain  him  away  as  a  blind  force  or  law,  or  identify  him  with  his  universe,  the
pantheist's  God, — these  teachings  by  this  sure  test  are  tried,  and  found  wanting.
2.  The  test  of  result.  Note  what  is  the  result  of  any  professed  truth  u[X)n  personal
happiness,  God,  who  has  given  us  so  many  things  richly  to  enjoy,  must  from  his  very
nature  purpose  the  blessedness  of  his  children.  But  if  a  system  be  ofi'ered  us,  the
inevitable  result  of  which  is  to  blot  out  hope,  to  shut  us  up  to  this  often  most  miserable
life,  as  all  they  would  do  who  would  take  from  us  the  Christian  hope — then  its  drear
and  dread  effect  upon  the  heart  of  man  proclaims  it  false.  See,  too,  how  any  teaching
tells  upon  character.  Here  is  a  surer  test  still.  Whatever  else  is  dark  and  obscure,
goodness  and  truth  must  ever  be  right.  But  if  any  new  doctrines  tend  to  deteriorate
character,  as  many  of  them  do,  to  make  sin  easier  and  virtue  more  difficult ;  if  they
throw  the  reins  upon  our  lower  nature ;  if  they  take  away  the  great  motives  to  noble*
ness  of  life; — then  again  tiiey  are  demonstrated  false.  And  note  their  effect  upoa
society  generally.  Can  the  denial  of  God's  existence,  of  the  religious  basis  of  morality,
as  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer  denies  it,  of  the  authority  of  Holy  Scripture,  of  the  sanctity  of
the  sabbath,  of  the  Divine  mission  of  the  Son  of  God,  of  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,
the  judgment  and  future  blessedness  or  woe  depending  upon  our  lives  here ; — can  the
denial  of  any  of  these  things,  which,  alas !  is  common  enough  now,  tend  to  the  good  of
society?  Must  not  the  general  well-being  of  mankind  be  greatly  threatened  if  such
doctrines  bo  generally  accepted  ?  But  doctrines  that  would  thus  destroy  good  are  ipso
facto  declared  to  have  no  part  nor  lot  in  the  kingdom  of  truth.  By  these  tests  of  con-
science and  result  let  the  new  ways  be  tried,  and  it  will  be  seen  that  what  in  them  is
true  is  old,  and  what  is  not  old  is  not  true.

IV.  Wherefore,  then,  do  men  devise  these  new  ways?  The  causes  are  some-
times :  1.  Intellectual.  Mental  restlessness  on  the  part  of  some  will  lead  men,  even  in
the  most  perilous  matters,  to  be  doubting  the  old  and  devising  what  is  new.    And  God


CH.  VL  1—30.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  178


often  suffers  them  to  wander  in  the  far  and  drear  country  of  mental  unrest,  and  to  feed
upon  its  husks,  and  so  come  to  themselves,  and  arise  and  go  back  to  their  Father's
heart  and  home,  from  whence  it  had  been  better  had  they  never  strayed.  2.  Some-
times, and  more  often,  moral.  Religion  is  that  which  binds.  It  is  a  ligature,  a
restraining  cord  upon  the  evil  propensities  of  our  nature.  If,  therefore,  doctrines  be
offered  which  will  relax  that  little-loved  bond,  they  will  be  eagerly  welcomed.  A  faith
that  will  give  not  true  liberty,  but  "licence,"  men  will  ever  love.  3.  And  always
Bpiritual,  Where  the  heart  is  surrendered  to  Christ  the  mind  will  not  be  ensnared  by
these  subtleties  of  the  evil  one.  If  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God  have  wrought  in  us  the  great
regenerating  change,  we  shall  have  liberty  and  deliverance  from  all  these.  Safety  from
the  wanderings  of  the  intellect,  as  well  as  from  the  worse  wanderings  of  our  sinful
nature,  are  alike  ensured  to  him  who  has  given  himself  up  unreservedly  to  God.

V.  But  those  who  would  walk  in  the  way  God  would  have  them  go  may
KNOW  THE  way  BY  ITS  BEING  **  OLD "  AND  GOOD.  All  old  ways  are  not  good,  but  thc^
way  of  God  is  both.  It  is  old,  therefore  familiar  to  many ;  has  been  often  described,  is
well  marked  out;  its  dififerent  stages  are  well  known.  **  The  wayfaring  man,  though  a
fool,  need  not  err  therein."  And  it  is  good.  It  leads  to  him  who  is  the  supreme  Good
— GkxL  It  has  been  the  chosen  way  of  all  the  good.  It  makes  those  good  who  walk
therein.  He  who  alone  on  this  earth  of  ours  was  perfectly  good — our  Lord  Jesus^
walked  in  it,  and  lives  to  enable  us  to  walk  therein  also.  It  is  the  will  of  God  that  wa
should  walk  therein.  "  Its  ways  are  &11  ways  of  pleasantuess,  and  all  its  paths  are
peace."  "  Ye  shall  find  rest  to  your  souls."  For  all  these  reasons  it  is  the  good  way  as
well  as  the  old ;  therefore  let  us  "  stand,"  "  see,"  and  "  ask  "  for  this  way,  and  this  way
alone. — C,

Ver.  16.—^^  the  meeting  of  the  ways.    "  Stand  ye  in  the  ways,"  etc.

I.  This  is  where  very  many  are.  The  young  especially.  Paths  stretch  out  on
either  hand,  some  of  them  inviting,  some  repelling.  But  for  the  young,  and  for  many
others  beside  who  have  not  yet  fully  chosen  their  path,  the  present  is  a  time  when  a
decided  choice  must  be  made.  If  the  matter  were  to  be  settled  according  to  the
inviting  or  other  aspect  of  the  beginning  of  the  ways,  the  one  we  should  choose  would
soon  be  fixed  upon.  But  we  have  to  take  into  consideration  the  progress  of  the  way,
and,  above  all,  the  end  of  the  way.     Here  the  text  gives —

IL  Good  counsels  for  all  who  have  come  to  this  meeting  or  the  ways.  We
are  bidden :  1.  Pause  a  v)hile,  "  Stand  ye  in  the  ways."  Oh,  if  we  could  but  secure
this  thoughtful  pause !  if  we  could  but  induce  those  we  are  now  contemplating  to
"ponder"  a  while  the  paths  before  them!  if  it  were  but  realized  that  the  way  we  take
is  a  matter  for  consideration,  and  that  only  a  fool  would  rush  heedlessly  on  1  2.  Inveati^
fcUe,  As  one  at  the  meeting  of  the  ways,  but  not  certain  which  was  the  right  one  for
nim,  would  look  along  eaclv  way  in  turn,  and  "  see  "  which  appeared  to  be  the  most
likely  to  bring  him  to  his  desired  destination.  Therefore  we  are  bidden,  not  only
"stand,"  but  "see."  3.  Inquire,  Other  travellers  come  along — men  who  are  familiar
with  the  district,  who  have  traversed  one  or  other  of  these  roads  themselves.  Then  let
us  avail  ourselves  of  their  knowledge  and  experience,  and  "ask"  as  to  these  ways.
4.  And  let  your  mind  he  made  up  as  to  the  character  of  the  way  you  desire  to  walk  in.
Let  there  be  no  mere  vague,  listless  looking  over  all  the  paths  without  much  concern
which  of  them  you  take ;  but  we  are  bidden,  "  Ask  for  the  old  paths  •  •  •  the  good
way.'*

"  The  way  the  holy  prophets  went,
The  way  that  leads  from  baniuhment,
The  King's  highway  of  holiness."

All  the  "old**  paths  are  not  also  "good  ways;"  far  from  it.  But  there  is  an  old,  and
therefore  well-known,  well-trodden,  and  hence  unmistakable  way,  which  also  is  the
good  way.  One  purpose  of  the  lives  of  God's  faithful  people  is  that,  by  the  observation
in  the  record  of  them,  men  may  be  led  to  ask  for  the  paths  in  which  these  walked,
feeling  sure  the  way  they  took  must  be  a  good,  the  good  way.  Happy  they  who  have
been  led  to  resolve  they  will  find  out  the  secret  of  such  men's  lives  and  make  it  their
own.    These  will  ask,  not  for  any  way,  but  for  the  old  paths,  the  good  way.


174  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREVTAFF.    [ol


II f.  Orkat  i::»rr>rRAr,inrz:rrs  to  folli^w  this  co»:  s.4rl.  L  It  a  impiied  ihat  if
•uch  gni«^Unry!  be  AAkM  it  will  be  zi^^n.  P^r,  :t  ai;u  rii»iancc  ▼^^  noc  zi'^^n,  aov
con  1*1  any  walk  in  th#»jie  paths?  Thai  ic  la  or<;ii  t.i  laem  co  io  jo  prnvi^  cims  the
fukUncii  a«k*id  baa  been  sriv'm.  Ami  *>  it  ever  ▼:ii  be.  2.  It  ia  prrnmaai  that,  if  w«
walk  in  the  old  and  ?ood  vay,  w^e  fhad  ami  '*re9t"'  zo  onr  mtiLl  Arber  alL  tiiis  is
rrerythinjz;.  If  a  man  haa  inwi  rest  and  peace,  iieavea  fi}r  him  haa  be^m  beiow.
What  matter!!  it  what  we  hare  if  this  rest  be  not  ?  Woat  matto-s  what  we  hare  not
If  thin  rent  be  otjni  ?  And  it  w  a  tme  rwit — not  a  m/en  letaarzj  of  the  aooi  or  sleep  of
ecmncience,  bat  that  **  rest  which  reniaiaech  fi}r  the  penpte  ot  ♦j»>i,"  the  muz  of  ^th,
the  rent  promi«ed  by  the  Lord  Jesna  when  he  aaiii,  **  Come  inrxy  me, . . .  and  I  wilu^etc

IV.  CfTRrftT  HIMSELF  18  THAT  Wat — ^THK  OLD,  THB  <;ooo  Wat.  Let  the  will  be
utterly  fmrrendereii  to  him  ;  let  oar  £iith  daily  Itx^k  to  him  ;  thea  **  he  shall  be  made  to
Qf  of  G()<\f  wi:4dom,  and  n'j^hteonanefis,  and  ginctinrarion,  and  redfinpdoa."  Tliis  is
what  he  meant  when  he  said,  **  IsLm  the  Way."

**  This  is  the  way  I  long  had  lonzht.
And  motxmed  beeaode  I  &:>an!i  ii  not;
Till  late  I  heard  my  SaTioar  my.
'  Come  hither,  aooi.  I  am  the  Way/  *

And  90  we  nhall  find  rest  to  oar  fooIs. — C.

Vers.  18 — 30. — OfxTg  appeal  for  vindication  ofXU  vengeanre.     Note^

I.  The  challenge.  (Ver.  18.)  God  snmmons  the  nations,  the  coo^re^tions,  the
earth,  to  serve  as  on  a  grand  jary,  and  to  vindicate  by  their  verdict  the  right«>nsn€a»
of  his  procedure.  Now,  from  thU  challenge  we  leam :  1.  Tke  unictrioiity  of  amscience.
There  is  a  moral  sense,  a  knowledge  of  right  and  wrong,  implanted  in  all  men  by  God.
It  is  "  the  li;<ht  that  lighteth  every  man  that  cometh  into  the  world."  2.  lliat  God
desires  to  have  this  universal  conscience  approving  what  he  has  done.  (1)  He  takes
for  granted  that  his  procedure  will  be  scanned  and  judged  by  men.  (2)  But  this  he
desires  and  approves.  (3)  He  asks  only  for  a  true  deliverance  upon  the  case  before
them.  3.  (hi!\  desires  us  to  regard  his  actions,  not  as  ricrht  because  they  are  his,  but
Ss  his  becan«e  they  are  right.  It  is  a  perilous  thing  to  defend  the  rectitude  of  Divine
actf<ms — as  they  have  been  defended,  e.g.  the  massacres  of  the  Canaanites— on  the  ground
that  hin  will  makes  them  right  77tat  is  not  the  method  whereby  we  are  to  "vindi-
eate  the  ways  of  God  to  man."  Abraham  did  not  so,  but  asked,  "  Shall  not  the  Judge
f4  All  the  farth  do  right?"  Not  make  right,  but  do  it.  But  what  condescension  on
the  \mri  of  (htt),  thns  to  submit  himsdf  to  our  judgment!  But  he  does  this  because
Iifj  mt  ymrnH  fm  (mr  love,  and  because  love  cannot  be  apart  from  moral  approval.

n,  Thk  sTATEiKEi^T  OF  THE  MATTER  ON  THE  PART  OF  GoD.  1.  God  declares  what  he
will  do  (vf^^  19 — 21),  2,  How  he  will  accomplish  his  purpose  (vers.  22,23).  3.  How
UfffWAe  Its  acc<;mi»Hshmcnt  will  be  (vers.  24 — 26).  And  then  he  gives :  4.  The  grounds
erf  his  pfrKfifliire  (vers.  19,  28,  29).

Iff.  The  cAUhtna  or  the  witness.  (Ver.  27;  of.  Exposition.)  Jeremiah  was  to
f»biiM«rvfl  and  dwJaro  the  guilt  of  those  whom  God  condemned.

fV.  The  verdiot  anticipated.  (Ver.  30.)  Men  shall  call  them  "reprobate
«1lvw/'

(Jofif(ft«tTSioif.  Let  us  tremble  at  that  righteousness  of  God  which  the  whole  earth
will  (^nuUmn  when  ho  condemns  the  sinner.  Lot  us  lay  hold  on  that  righteoujiuess
of  God  which  is  for  us  in  Christ. — C.

\pr,  19. — The  fruit  of  thought  I.  Tiiouoirr  has  fruit.  In  all  departments  of
life  lt«  I'nilt  is  soon — scientific,  political,  social,  moral,  religious.  Thoughts  are  bom
In  Hoiiio  ono  mind.  Sown  by  words  spoken  or  written,  and  by  the  influence  of  the  lives
(if  lliowi  in  whom  they  are  born  ;  they  germinate  by  contact  with  other  minds;  they
tifwftir  tthovfi  ground  in  tho  toudcncics  of  any  given  age;  they  bear  fruit  in  tho
sohlovniionts  of  tho  ago.

n.  TnoiroHT  dears  aoon  fruit  or  Eviii,  according  as  the  Law  or  God  is
ttERDRD  on  rejected.  " Wherowlthal  shall  a  young  man  cleanse  his  way?  By
Uktng  hood  thoroto  acoording  io  thy  Wortk"


CH.VL1— 30.]     THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  176

IIL  Thk  chief  partaker  of  the  fruit  of  thought  will  be  the  thixkeb,
(Ct  text.)    And  it  is  true  both  of  good  thoughts  and  ill.     As  a  man  thinketli  so  is  he.

Conclusion,  Let  it  be  our  prayer  that  we  may  come  into  full  sympathy  with  him
who  said,  "  How  precious  are  thy  thoughts  unto  me,  0  God  1 "  bo  shall  the  fruit  of
our  thoughts  be  precious  likewise. — C.

Ver.  20.'~Jbhorred sacrifices.    L  There  are  such.    (Cf.  text;  Ps.  1.;  etc.)

II.  They  may  have  many  of  the  characteristics  of  acceptable  sacrifices.
L  Costly :  "  Incense  from  Sheba."    2.  Regular.    3.  Correct.

III.  But  yet  they  are  abhorred  of  God.  **  To  what  purpose,"  etc.  ?  (Cf.
our  Lord's  denunciations  of  hypocrites.)  This  because:  1.  They  lack  sincerity.
2.  They  yield  no  fruit  in  holy  obedience.  3.  They  cause  the  Name  and  worship  of
God  to  bo  hated  of  men.  4.  They  render  more  hopeless  the  true  repentance  of  the
offerer.

IV.  Wherefore  are  they  offered  ?  1.  Conscience  will  not  allow  men  to  throw
off  all  regard  for  religion.  2.  Custom  demands  it.  3.  Worldly  interests  are  served  by
it.    4.  There  is  a  secret  reliance  upon  them  as  furthering  their  good  before  God.

V.  What  do  such  facts  teach  us  ?  Not  to  throw  aside  outward  forms  of  worship :
many  do  this  on  the  ground  of  insincerity  often  associated  with  them.  But  to  see  that
whilst  we  worship  outwardly  we  worship  also  in  spirit  and  in  truth.  To  measure  the
worth  of  our  worship  by  its  power  over  our  conduct.  To  join  on  all  our  poor,  marred
offerings,  which  is  all  that  at  the  best  they  are,  with  the  perfect  sacrifice  which  Christ
has  offered  for  us  alL — C

Ver.  29. — "  7%e  hdlow$  are  humedj''  The  text  is  a  homely  and  unusual  one,  but  its
graphic  force  may  help  all  the  more  to  impress  the  truth  taught  by  it.  **  The  prophet
likens  the  people  of  Israel  to  a  mass  of  metal.  This  mass  of  metal  claimed  to  lie
precious  ore,  such  as  gold  or  silver.  It  was  put  into  the  furnace,  the  object  being  to  fuse
it,  so  that  the  pure  metal  should  be  extracted  from  the  dross.  Lead  was  put  in  with
the  ore  to  act  as  a  flux  (that  being  relied  upon  by  the  ancient  smelters  as  Quicksilver
now  is  in  these  more  instructed  days).  A  fire  was  kindled,  and  then  the  bellows  were
used  to  create  an  intense  heat,  the  bellows  being  the  prophet  himself.  He  complains
that  he  spoke  with  much  pathos,  much  energy,  much  force  of  heart,  that  he  exhausted
himself,  without  being  able  to  melt  the  people^s  hearts ;  so  hard  was  the  ore  that  the
bellows  were  burned  before  the  metal  was  melted — the  prophet  was  exhausted  before
the  people  were  impressed ;  ho  had  worn  out  his  lungs,  his  powers  of  utterance ;  he
had  exhausted  his  mind,  his  powers  of  thought ;  he  had  broken  his  heart,  his  powers
of  emotion ;  but  he  could  not  divide  his  people  from  their  sins,  and  separate  the  precious
from  the  vile  "  (C.  H.  Spurgeon).    Now,  from  the  text  learn —

L  It  IS  THE  PURPOSE  OF  GOD  so  TO  MELT  AND  SUBDUE  THE  HEART  OF  MAN  THAT
HE  MAY  MOULD  IT  AFRESH,   AND    ACCORDING  TO   HIS  OWN    GRACIOUS   WILL.        NoW    tO

this  end  there  are  needed :  1.  A  Divine  fire  which  shall  bear  upon  the  heart  of  man.
But  the  Holy  Spirit  is  such  a  fire,  which,  if  it  be  quenched,  woe  is  unto  us !  2.  That
that  fire  shall  glow  unth/trvent  heat

II.  To  SECURE  THIS  HE  MAKES  USE  OF  MANY  AND  VARIED  APPLIANCES  WHICH  THK

PROPHET  HERE  LIKENS  TO  '*  BEiiLOWS."  I.  The  prophets  own  ministry  in  the  case  of
.Tudah  and  Jerusalem  at  that  time.  2.  The  faithful  ministry  of  his  truth  by  his
prophets  now,  3.  His  Law,  his  Word,  the  varied  means  of  grace,  4.  His  mercies^
especially  the  mercy  of  God  in  Christ,  6.  His  chastisements  and  judgments.  These
more  especially  referred  to  here.    Such  are  some  of  these  appliances.

J II.    Now,  IT  IS  POSSIBLE   FOB   ALL  THESE   TO   BECOME   UTTERLY  INEFFECTUAL.    ThiS

is  what  is  here  meant.  Gkxi's  messengers,  Law,  mercies,  chastisements, — all  in  vain.  And
such  things  happen  now.  There  are  those  whom  nought  can  move.  What  is  the  caused
Not  that  the  Divine  heat  did  not  bear  upon  the  heart  that  was  to  be  melted.  Not  that
those  appliances  were  left  unused  whereby  the  understanding,  the  conscience,  the
affections,  and  the  will  might  be  rendered  more  susceptible  of  the  Divine  influences.
But  the  obduracy  of  the  heart.  The  perversity  and  evil  of  that  baffled  all  the  earnest
endeavours  of  God's  grace  in  regard  to  that  heart.

lY.  Now,    WHEN    **TUE    BELLOWS    ABB    BURNED,"    WHEN    ALL     MEANS    HAVE    BEEN


171  TBE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JERElfTAH,    [ctn.!— ML

TtlXD   A57>   FAILED   TO   WIS   THE  HEABT    FO*   G''r>,  yo   COyV^rnos   CJlS   BX   moke  AWTTIi

Ml  DKM>^'RABLE.  L  It  U  sad  /<>r  Ocf*  iRi.uc^m.  Jerer-..ir..  Pnal,  Ccxist,  and
tbouaAiMk  ofhU  ministers  since  hire  rnvei  Aud  we:c  o^er  ::^irx;e  L^arUL  2.  Bm4
it  u  fur  nu/r*  yid  f^/r  thesti  ?iar>i^«art^J  C'»rt  ll^^w*?*'?*?*.  (I)  rber  are  wiLhi^l
escose.     (*^)  There  U  no  hope  of  their  rep^i^LLnce.     (o;  TLer  &re  in  (Ursger  of  ecemjl

fin.

CoscLUSioy.  L  Christ's  ministers  must  expect  that,  io/<ir  as  fA^y  oaa  *«e,  xhej  will,
St  times,  labour  in  Tain  in  re-,2arvi  to  the  salviiicn  c:'  s*  alsw  Tne  bel  vws  will  be
burned,  and  the  ore  remain  unn-elt€d  stiiL  2.  TLey  are  to  ht  sastAintc  by  the  thought
that  Go*!  will  deal  with  them,  not  according  to  the  r^:>&lL>  oi  iLcir  w^>rk,  but  aococding
to  its  fidelity.     3.  Let  the  impenitent  be  warned. — C

Ver.  16. — The  good  way.  The  prophet  here  employs  the  Ecemory  of  the  past  as  a
motive  to  repentance.  He  would  fain  persuade  the  l^  p-e  :•;•  nrivirn  to  the  better  ways
in  which  their  fathers  walked.  The  calamities  that  were  iaiiiL^  so  LeaTiiy  upon  them
were  tie  result  of  their  having  forsaken  those  gcod  old  waysw  Let  them  consider  how
they  have  fallen,  search  out  the  n-al  causes  of  the  trouble  and  sc«rrow  they  endure,
retrace  their  wandering  steps,  and  the  old  prosperity  shall  come  bdck  to  them  again.
Note  here —

I.  The  ditebse  ways  men  take,  diverse  as  rersrds  their  moral  qna-ity  and  issues.
**  Stand  ye  in  the  ways."  Think  of  the  various  kinds  of  moral  life  li^at  men  are  leading.
Amid  the  social  conditions  and  relations  of  this  world  we  are  as  travdiers  with  many
paths  branching  out  in  dififereDt  directions  before  them,  who  must  choose  their  own.  We
may  know  little  of  the  internal  experiences  of  our  as:jociates  in  the  |iignmage  of  life,  but
the  broad  types  of  character,  the  general  tendencies  of  moral  habit,  are  oj^n  enough  to
our  view.  The  "  ways  "are  many,  but  there  is  only  one  |ath  o!  eternal  rectitude  aud
blessedness.  There  is  the  way  of  reckless  transgression,  of  thoughtless  iudiflference,  of
base  avarice,  of  exclusive  devotion  to  earthly  ambitioos,  of  mere  virtuous  respectability,
of  religious  indecision,  etc  ;  and  there  is  the  way  of  faith  and  piety,  '*  the  |>aih  of  the
just  which  is  as  the  shining  light,  that  shineth  more  and  more  unto  the  perfect  day."
Men  cannot  help  to  some  extent  revealing  outwardly  the  tenor  of  the  life  within
them.  Every  one  of  us  bears  more  or  less  clearly  upc»n  him  the  stamp  of  a  certain
distinctive  character.  Whatever  the  beut  of  his  s[>irit  may  be,  it  will  always  l)ctray
itself,  in  look,  manner,  speech,  conduct,  by  the  books  he  reads,  the  friendships  he
forms,  the  places  he  frequents,  the  (sratificatious  in  which  he  delights,  thruugh  a
thousand  channels  of  self-revelation.  We  are  all  "  living  epistles  "  of  something — some
type  of  character,  some  order  of  moral  lile — "  known  and  read  of  men."

IL  The  thoughtful  observation  these  conditioks  demand.  "  Stand  in  the
ways,  and  see."  It  is  a  great  thing  to  know  how  to  "see."  There  are  those  who
**  seeing,  see  not."  One  of  the  first  lessons  in  the  moral  science  of  life,  as  in  physical
science,  is  observation — to  know  how  to  note  facts  and  trace  laws  and  draw  conclusions,
to  know  how  to  learn  and  to  turn  what  is  learnt  to  good  account,  'i'he  characters  and
lives  of  otherii  are  not  to  be  to  us  mere  matters  of  amusement  or  philosophic  specula-
tion, much  less  ill-natured  criticism;  but  sources  of  instruction,  teachers  of  practical
truth.  They  all  have  their  admonitory  and  exemplary  use.  The  higher  advantages
of  social  life  have  never  been  reaped,  the  very  rudiments  of  our  duty  as  social  beings
bare  not  been  mastered,  till  we  thoroughly  apprehend  this.  Let  the  young  specially
lay  the  lesson  to  heart.  Their  position  is  favourable — the  plain  of  life  before  them,
not  yet  entangled  in  a  network  of  circumstantial  difficulties,  nothing  to  undo  that
ought  never  to  have  been  done,  no  false  steps  to  retrace  that  were  rashly  taken.  But
bow  »o<m  may  they  be  drawn  into  forbidden  and  dangerous  paths  if  they  do  not
Consider  1  As  the  ship  glides  imperceptibly  from  the  open  sea  into  the  broad  mouth
of  the  river,  whose  distant  banks  are  hidden,  so  easily  are  they  led  captive  to  the  power
of  evil  if  they  allow  themselves  to  drift  with  the  tide  of  outward  influence  and  inward
impulse,  and  will  not  think.  At  the  same  time,  enlarged  exi^rience  of  life  may  be
expected  to  give  added  force  to  its  moral  lessons.  Beset  as  a  man  may  be  with  associa-
tions that  seem  to  determine  his  course  for  him  in  spite  of  himself,  it  is  always  possible
for  him  to  pause  and  consider  his  way.  The  darkness  and  confusion  of  the  storm  may
be  too  great  to  allow  the  sailor  to  take  his  observations  and  find  out  his  real  place  on


CH.  VI.  1—30.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREOTAH.  177

the  pathless  ocean ;  not  so  with  any  man  as  concerns  his  relation  to  the  heavenly  powers
and  the  eternal  realities.  He  has  always  light  enough  to  "discern  between  the
righteous  and  the  wicked,  between  him  that  serveth  God  and  him  that  serveth  him
not "  (Mai.  iii.  18).  The  true  way  of  life  is  clearly  revealed  to  those  who  are  willing
to  *'  see."    "  The  wayfaring  man,  though  a  fool,  shall  not  err  therein  "  (Isa.  xxxv.  8).

III.  The  practical  result  to  which  such  observation  must  lead.  "Ask  for
the  old  paths,  where  is  the  good  way,  and  walk  therein."  Asking  and  acting,
inquiry  after  the  right  way,  and  a  resolute  determination  to  follow  it ;  when  theso
conditions  are  supplied  there  can  be  little  doubt  as  to  the  issue.  A  life  of  practical
godliness,  based  on  faith  in  revealed  truth,  springing  from  the  inspiration  of  the  spirit
of  truth  and  purity  in  the  secret  soul, — this  is  the  way.  It  is  the  "  old  way."  New  aa
regards  the  light  Christianity  has  shed  upon  it,  new  as  regards  the  revelation  of  him  in
whose  redeeming  work  its  deep  foundations  have  been  laid,  it  is  "  old  "  as  regards  ita
essential  principles  of  faith  and  righteousness.  The  martyrs,  prophets,  and  holy  men
of  every  age  have  left  their  glowing  footprints  upon  it.  Elijah  ascended  from  it  in  hU
chariot  of  fire.  David  made  the  statutes  of  the  Lord  his  delight  as  he  pursued  his
pilgrimage  along  it.  Abraham  trod  the  same  path,  led  on  by  the  star  of  promise.
Upon  it  Enoch  walked  in  lowly  fellowship  with  GtxL  It  is  stained  with  the  blood  of
righteous  AbeL

**  Our  glorioofl  Leader  claims  our  praise
For  his  own  pattern  given  ;
While  the  long  cloud  of  witnesses
Bhow  the  same  path  to  heaven."

The  way  is  as  plain  as  Divine  teaching  and  human  experience  can  make  it ;  let  us  gird
up  the  loins  of  our  minds  to  "  walk  in  it."

IV.  The  reward  of  practioal  obbdiencb.  "Ye  shall  find  rest  unto  your  souls."
**  Rest,"  for  beings  such  as  we  are,  is  the  repose  of  the  mind  in  discovered  truth,  the
pacification  of  the  conscience  in  the  assurance  of  Divine  forgiveness,  the  satisfaction  of
the  heart  in  the  embrace  of  real  good,  the  balance  of  all  our  powers  in  a  holy  service.
In  the  life  of  faith  and  godliness,  the  life  Christ  gives  to  all  who  come  to  him,  can  such
rest  alone  be  found.  "Take  my  yoke  upon  you, and  learn  of  me, . . .  and  ye  shall  find
rest  unto  your  souls  "  (Matt.  xi.  29). — W.

Ver.  7. — Jertisalem  like  a  fountain  casting  forth  evU,  A  fountain,  as  mentioned  in
Scripture,  is  generally  suggestive  of  a  most  gracious  and  abundant  supply  of  the
highest  good ;  even  as  in  ch.  ii.  13  and  John  iv.  14.  How  very  noteworthy,  then,  to
find  that  the  fountain,  which  naturally  suggests  all  that  is  bright,  beautiful,  and
refreshing,  should  be  so  turned  away  from  its  common  place  in  poetic  use  as  to  become
the  most  impressive  illustration  of  Jerusalem's  polluted  heart !  Indeed,  an  imaginative
writer  would  probably  get  severely  criticized  if  he  used  the  figure  of  a  fountain  for
such  a  purpose ;  and  yet,  when  one  thinks  it  over,  this  very  unexpectedness  makes  the
figure  more  instructive.  The  poetry  of  a  prophet  must,  above  all  things,  have  arresting
power  in  it.  Think,  then,  of  the  fountain.  Think  of  it,  first  of  all,  in  its  usual  aspect,
pouring  forth  a  bright,  pleasant-sounding  stream,  as  inspiring  to  the  mind  as  it  is
refreshing  to  the  thirsty  mouth.  But  all  this  view  must  be  instantly  and  decidedly
put  away.  Instead  of  the  clear,  sparkling  water  there  must  come  into  the  mind  the
thought  of  a  feculent,  poisonous  flood,  and  of  the  force  that  lies  behind  it,  some  deep
inward  energy  hidden  in  the  secret  places  of  the  earth.  A  continuity  of  most  pestiferous
evil  comes  from  these  secret  places,  and  even  by  such  an  image  as  this  is  the  actual
wickedness  of  Jerusalem  set  forth.  The  hearts  of  its  people  are  gathering-places  for  a
destructive  stream,  always  flowing  forth  and  always  replenished.  They  never  get  tired
of  their  wickedness  and  never  repent  of  it.  Then  one  remembers  that  the  hearts  of
men  were  destined  for  a  very  different  purpose.  Just  as  the  devout  heart  perceives
that  God  meant  these  crevices  and  great  caverns  in  the  earth  to  gather  and  pour  forth
the  refreshing  streams  of  water,  so  he  meant  the  hearts  of  the  children  of  men  to  gather
and  pour  forth  all  manner  of  loving,  hopeful,  patiently  pursued  projects  for  the  good  of
others  and  for  the  glory  of  God.  The  woman  of  Samaria  evidently  came  to  Jesus  with
a  heart  that  was  indeed  a  fountain  casting  out  wickedness,  but  she  heard  the  delight^
fol  news  that  Jesus  could  give  her  water  which  should  be  in  her  "a  well  of  water

JKBEMTAH.  K


178  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  vi.  1—30.

■  '

springing  np  into  eternal  life."  There  is  another  Jerusalem  besides  this  earthly
snd  polluted  one.  Jeremiah  was  not  the  only  one  who  told  people  to  fly  out  of  it
because  of  impending  destruction.  Jesus,  in  his  prophetio  words,  spoke  with  eyen
greater  emphasis — a  thing  to  be  expected.  The  earthly  Jerusalem,  great  and  glorious
as  it  once  was,  is  now  called  spiritually  Sodom  and  Egypt,  for  it  is  the  place  where  our
Lord  was  crucified  (Rev.  xi.  8).  The  Jerusalem  to  be  thought  of  henceforth  is  the
holy  Jerusalem,  descending  out  of  heaven  from  God.  It  has  many  glories,  many  beauties,
many  surpassing  gifts  of  grace  for  needy  men,  and  not  the  least  is  this,  that  there  is  "  a
pure  river  of  water  of  life,  clear  as  crystal,  proceeding  out  of  the  throne  of  Gkxi  and  of
the  Lamb."  And  may  we  not  say  that  this  river  is  constituted  by  the  numberless  foun-
tains that  flow  out  of  every  renewed  heart  ?  The  glory  of  the  river  is  Ood's,  but  the
servioe  and  dedication  which  bring  that  river  into  existence  are  the  privilege  of  Gbd's
people.  We  are  to  let  our  thoughts  dwell  on  the  deplorable  fountain  Jeremiah  speaks
of  here,  only  that  we  may  see  more  clearly  and  gratefully ,the  spring  of  true  and  abiding
goodness  which  he  can  put  in  its  place. — Y.

Yer.  13. — CovetousnesB  a  universal  sin.  It  is  not  so  much  of  covetousness  in  itself
that  the  prophet  is  here  speaking,  as  of  the  universality  of  it.  From  the  least  even
to  the  greatest  the  spirit  of  the  spoiler  is  in  the  hearts  of  the  people.  The  words,  of
course,  are  not  to  be  taken  literally  as  to  individuals ;  but  there  is  this  universality
about  them,  that  they  apply  to  every  class.  That  a  man  is  rich,  and  increased  with
goods,  and  that  he  has,  indeed,  a  great  deal  more  than  he  can  ever  enjoy  in  his  own
person,  is  far  from  being  a  general  ground  for  supposing  that  he  will  be  contented
with  his  possessions.  The  more  he  has  and  the  higher  ne  stands,  the  more  he  may
want  to  have  and  the  higher  he  may  want  to  get.  And  so  all  the  way  up  the  ladder
from  the  lowest  round,  men  are  continually  struggling  with  one  another.  It  is  a  ladder,
the  lowest  round  of  which  will  hold  a  great  multitude,  but  it  ever  narrows  as  it  ascends ;
and  the  covetous  who  happen  to  be  also  strong  and  consequently  victorious  over  their
feebler  competitors,  go  clambering  on  as  long  as  one's  eye  rests  upon  them.  No  one  ever
seems  to  reach  the  top  of  the  ladder ;  and  it  may  be  said  moreover  that,  though  there
seem  many  who  are  free  from  the  spoiling  spirit,  it  simply  arises  from  this,  that  there
has  been  nothing  to  bring  the  dormant  germ  into  life  and  activity.  No  one  can  tell
what  possibilities  of  evil  lie  within  him.  And  may  not  the  essential  element  in
eovetousness  be  a  strong  motive  force  even  when  it  is  hidden  away  under  the  appear-
ance of  something  else  ?  One  thing  is  very  certain,  that  covetousness  prevailed  from
the  least  even  to  the  greatest  in  Jerusalem ;  it  will  also  do  so  in  every  other  human
society.  It  is  in  human  nature  to  have  strong  desires  of  the  heart,  strong  and  impera-
tive even  as  hunger  and  thirst ;  and  these  desires  will  go  out  after  things  that  can  be
seen  and  felt,  enjoyed  with  the  senses.  To  whom  these  things  may  of  right  belong  is,
slas  I  a  secondary  consideration  with  many  men.  They  simply  do  not  reflect  upon  it  at
all.  Life  resolves  itself  into  a  struggle  between  him  who  wants  and  him  who  has,  and,
if  the  truth  must  be  spoken,  the  victor  in  such  a  struggle  is  practically  a  robber.
There  may  be  no  physical  violence,  no  shedding  of  blood ;  but  if  there  is  the  enriching
of  one's  self  at  the  expense  of  another,  then  the  essential  wrong  is  present.  Let  us  allow
the  covetous  man  whatever  credit  there  may  be  in  this,  tbEit  he  does  not  form  his
covetous  designs  for  any  pleasure  that  he  has  in  rapacity,  but  rather  that  he  is
rapacious  in  order  to  carry  out  his  covetous  designs.  He  wants  to  be  rich  and  strong,
and  the  only  way  he  can  do  it  is  by  crushing  others  into  poverty.  Hence  this  is
reckoned  an  unavoidable  accompaniment.  It  never  strikes  men  of  this  sort  that  there
is  a  more  excellent  way  to  satisfy  and  exhilarate  the  heart.  God*s  eye  is  upon  this
universal  desire  for  large  possessions^  and  he  can  make  a  Divine  and  truly  wise  use
of  the  desire.  He  turns  our  thoughts  to  the  heavenly,  the  unseen,  the  eternal.  Man
does  well  in  having  the  largest  views  as  to  possessions ;  he  does  well  in  looking  to  an
immense  increase  of  goods.  It  is  a  grand  thing  when  he  can  pull  down  his  barns  and
build  greater,  if  it  is  only  spiritual  wealth  that  he  is  heaping  up.  In  this  gathering
of  ffoods  there  is  no  spoiling  of  the  brethren,  leaving  them  hungry,  naked,  and
unsheltered.  The  spiritual  wealth  of  the  godly  man  makes  poverty  to  none.  Nay,
rather — ^beautiful  contrast — the  richer  he  be^mes^  the  richer  he  makes  all  with  whom
he  comes  in  living  contact— Y.


0H.VI.1— 30J    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  179

Ver.  14. — Healing  the  hurt  slightly.  There  is  here  an  illustration  of  the  fcdse
dealing  referred  to  in  the  previous  verse — an  illustration  from  the  prophets  in  parti-
cular, and,  as  might  be  expected,  the  specimen  given  shows  how  seriously  this  false
dealing  affected  the  prospects  of  the  nation.  There  is,  it  will  be  observed,  a  plain
statement  of  the  matter  wherein  the  prophets  were  deceivers ;  and  there  is  also  a
figure  setting  forth  the  practical  result  of  the  deception.

I.  Consider  the  plain  statement  op  that  whebein  the  prophets  are  found
LIARS.  They  say,  "  Peace,  peace ;  when  there  is  no  peace."  The  plain  statement  oomea
later  than  the  figure,  but  it  is  needful  to  consider  it  first.  War,  invasion,  humiliating
conquest, — these  had  been  threatened  by  the  true  prophet,  but  the  false  prophets  come
in  and  declare  that  there  shall  be  peace.  The  word  **  peace  "  was  probably  one  of  the
ordinary  mutual  salutations  of  the  people ;  and  these  prophets,  going  out  into  the  publio
places  when  war  had  been  threatened,  may  have  thrown  into  the  salutation  a  special
emphasis,  as  much  as  to  say,  "  This  Jeremiah  speaks  a  lie  when  he  prophesies  war."
And  this  word  of  the  prophets  showed  that  they  did  not  comprehend  where  the
hostility  really  lay.  The  hostile  relations  between  the  invading  human  hosts  and
Israel  amounted  to  the  merest  trifle  compared  with  the  hostility  between  Jehovah  and
those  who  had  been  named  as  his  people.  The  essence  of  the  struggle  lay,  not  in  its
bein^  a  struggle  between  invader  and  invaded,  but  between  rightful  Master  and
rebellious  servants.  The  invader  indeed  may  not  have  been  conscious  of  any  particular
enmity  against  Israel.  The  chief  passion  in  his  heart  may  have  been  nothing  more
than  savage  lust  for  the  exercise  of  force  and  the  acquirement  of  spoil.  But  between
God  and  his  people  there  was  a  deep  breach  in  all  right  relations.  God  wars  against
them,  and  therefore  they  were  not  to  suppose  that  peace  was  secured,  even  if  they
kept  on  amicable  terms  with  foreign  nations.  But,  in  truth,  no  amount  of  finessing,
parading,  and  boasting  could  keep  them  permanently  right  with  foreiorn  nations.  To
suppose  this  was  to  suppose  that  they  could  pluck  the  weapons  of  God's  chastening
anger  from  his  firm  grasp.  When  God  takes  the  wicked  to  become  his  sword,  his
sword  they  are,  to  be  wielded  with  no  uncertain  efficacy.  Men  make  the  blunder  of
thinking  there  is  peace,  when  they  have  only  conciliated  what  enemies  they  can  see
and  hear  into  invisibility  and  silence.

U.  Consider  the  figure  which  adds  to  the  force  of  the  plain  statement.
It  is  a  figure  which  does  much  to  bring  to  the  individual  Israelite  the  serious  conse-
quences of  this  false  dealing  on  the  part  of  the  prophets.  War,  while  always  a
national  disaster  and  anxiety,  may  leave  individuals  unscathed ;  nay,  there  are  always
a  few  who  manage  to  build  up  some  sort  of  prosperity  and  renown  by  successful  war.
But  here  is  a  figure  which  speaks  of  healing  and  of  hurt,  and  of  those  who  have  to
heal  the  hurt  The  prophet  is  set  forth  as  the  surgeon,  whose  business  it  is  to  enter
the  home  and  put  right  again  the  malady  that  may  be  afflicting  some  member  of  it.
This  figure,  too,  it  will  be  observed,  tells  us  something  of  the  feeling  of  the  people,
and  thereby  goes  beyond  the  plain  statement  as  to  the  false  dealing  of  the  prophets.
1.  There  is  a  consciousness  that  all  is  not  right.  There  is  a  hurt.  There  is  something
to  be  healed.  There  is  a  sense  of  uneasiness,  a  sense  which  somehow  must  be  taken
away.  The  words  of  Jeremiah  inflict  superficial  wounds  and  bruises  at  the  least.
There  is  a  pain  in  the  inward  consciousness  which  is  like  the  slashing  of  a  whip  upon
the  tender  skin.  Such  messages  as  those  which  God  put  into  the  prophet's  mouth
were  sure  to  hurt  the  pride  of  a  nation,  and  rouse  its  patriotism  into  egotistic  fury.
Then  we  may  be  sure  that  some  of  the  people  would  feel  that  the  prophet  might  bo
speaking  the  truth.  Some  things  he  said  were  undeniable.  The  idol-worship  was
plain ;  so  were  the  trickery  and  oppression  which  abounded  in  the  common  life  of  the
people.  And  all  this  sense  of  uneasiness,  which  is  really  the  sign  that  conscience  is
not  utterly  dead,  only  needs  to  be  treated  rightly  in  order  to  be  roused  into  a  vigorous
life.  2.  The  nature  of  the  hurt  is  misunderstood.  This  is  the  least  that  can  be  said.
It  may  have  been  understood  by  some  of  the  propheta,  and  yet,  for  their  own  base
purposes,  misrepresented.  Jeremiah  describes  the  hurt  by  its  true  name.  The  word  in
the  Hebrew  is  a  very  strong  word,  meaning  something  very  serious,  something  which
demands  great  skill  and  effort,  if  it  is  to  be  put  right.  Who  can  exaggerate  the  serious?
ness  of  the  crisis,  when  some  malady  going  to  the  very  heart  of  a  man  seems  to  awaken
no  corresponding  alarm,  either  in  his  own  mind  or  in  the  mind  of  his  physician  ?    And


ISa  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  vi.  1-^30;

what  a  serious  charge  to  bring  against  a  physician  if  he  seeks  to  lull  alarm  by  making
out  the  trouble  to  be  a  mere  trifle!  Yet  this  is  just  what  many  do.  When  the  sense
of  unrest  gets  into  the  life,  it  is  counted  but  as  a  physical  illness.  Change  of  air  and
scene  are  prescribed  for  symptoms  which  can  only  be  permanently  removed  by  change
of  heart.  The  more  worldly  and  unspiritual  a  man  is,  the  more  dogmatism,  reckless-
ness, and  overbearing  arrogance  he  will  show  in  lecturing  those  who  have  become
disturbed  in  their  consciences.  3.  There  is  thus  declared  to  be  healing,  when  there  ia
not  the  slightest  possibility  of  it.  Assurances  are  given  which  have  no  real  foundation
in  anything  the  assurer  knows  or  has  done.  He  has  been  giving  great  attention  to
the  visible  cuts  and  bruises,  and  the  deep,  internal,  organic  injury  is  more  firmly  fixed
than  ever.  Men  will  thus  play  the  physician,  try  to  get  credit  for  their  skill,  and  do
untold  harm,  when  they  ought  rather,  in  all  humility  and  modesty,  to  confess  their
ignorance. — Y.

Yer.  16. — The  ancient  paths  to  he  sought  and  walked  in.  I.  Thk  addbess  is  to  thosb
WHO  ABE  ALBEADT  WALKING  IN  A  CEBTAiN  WAY.  There  Is  activity  of  the  whole  life,
a  conscious  and  chosen  activity.  We  are  sometimes  spoken  of  as  being  asleep  and
needing  to  be  awakened  out  of  sleep,  and  even  as  being  dead  and  needing  to  be
renew^  to  life ;  but  here  there  is  rather  an  approach  to  the  other  extreme  in  the  aspect
of  sinful  man  that  is  presented.  One  kind  of  movement  in  human  life  lies  beyond
choice.  Man  must  move  on,  from  birth,  through  time,  into  eternity.  This  is  a  move-
ment which,  as  he  does  not  produce  it,  so  neither  can  he  in  the  least  retard  it.  But
now  we  are  called  to  notice  another  kind  of  movement,  that  which  man  chooses—
emphatically  chooses — and  into  which  he  throws  oftentimes  his  whole  ener^.  Thus
there  is  no  man  but  what  is  in  a  path  which  he  has  chosen.  However  much  he  may
seem  to  be  the  sport  of  circumstances,  yet  it  will  be  found,  in  the  complete  inspection
of  his  heart,  that  he  loves  to  have  circumstances  moving  him  rather  than  that  he
should  do  what  he  can  towards  controlling  circumstances.  Moreover,  the  address  is  to
those  who  are  walking  in  a  wrong  way.  Evidently  they  are  persisting  in  it.  And  it
is  not  only  wrong,  but  seriously,  even  fatally,  wrong.  Yet,  though  the  address  is  to
those  in  the  wrong  way,  there  is  every  reason  why  those  who  happily  are  in  the  right
way  should  also  consider  the  appeal.  If  it  is  very  difficult  to  turn  from  the  wrong
way  into  the  right,  it  is  very  easy  to  make  some  divergence,  at  first  imperceptible,
from  the  right  way,  and  so  become  most  dangerously  entangled  in  the  wrong  one.

II.  ThEBE  is   an  appeal  to  those  ADDBESSED,  to  give  THE  MATTEB  IN  QUESTION

MOST  EABNEST  OONSIDEBATION.  There  Is  surely  a  great  deal  in  these  two  words,  see  and
ask.  The  difference  between  right  and  wrong  is  also  the  difiference  between  the  soul's
highest  bliss  and  deepest  misery ;  but  it  is  a  difference  only  to  be  comprehended  when
the  soul  is  thoroughly  in  earnest  to  get  to  the  bottom  of  all  that  is  involved  in  the
difference.  Hence  we  are  told  to  look ;  and  we  must  be  sure  that  we  see  as  we  ought
to  sec.    It  is  quite  possible  to  have  eyes  and  to  look  towards  a  thing,  and  yet  to  be

Eractically  blind,  not  disceming  the  real  nature  of  it.  A  man's  ways  may  be  right  in
is  own  eyes ;  he  may  think  the  warnings  of  others,  or  the  differing  course  that  they
take,  to  be  mere  scrupulosity,  ending  in  nothing.  Wherefore  a  man  is  to  distrust  his
eyes,  and  add  to  what  they  may  tell  him  the  information  to  be  gotten  by  the  hearing
of  the  ear.  It  is  interesting  to  notice  how  sometimes  the  eye  confirms  the  ear,  and
sometimes  the  car  the  eye.  Here  the  man  is  to  make  the  tongue  follow  the  eye,  asking
to  follow  upon  seeing ;  so  that  he  may  get  information  on  a  matter  of  the  utmost
moment  from  authorities  on  whom  he  may  depend  with  the  utmost  confidence.  We
must  not  dare  to  blame  any  one  but  ourselves  if  we  make  some  gross  error  in  the
conduct  of  our  life.  God  knows  how  easily  the  children  of  men  wander ;  and  so  he
expects  them  to  do  all  they  can  by  way  of  making  sure  that  they  are  in  the  right
road.  Consider  how  alert  some  people  are,  in  travelling  by  rail,  lest  perchance  an
omitted  inquiry  may  send  them  in  a  wrong  direction.  A  prudent  man  will  never
miss  his  way  for  want  of  asking.  Yet  these  very  people,  who  are  reckoned  prudent  in
such  a  small  matter  as  finding  their  way  from  one  place  to  another  on  the  surface  of
the  earth,  are  indifferent  to  an  event  which  it  is  awful  to  contemplate,  when  they  arc
told  to  see  and  ask  if  they  be  in  the  right  way  for  eternity.

III.  ObSEEYE  the  DEFINITENE88  WHICH  IS  GIVEN  TO  THE  LOOKING  AND  THE  ASKING*


CH.vr.1— 30.]     THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  181

Man  is  not  sent  out  on  a  vague  quest,  with  nothing  to  guide  and  to  limit  him.  If  he
will  look  where  God  points,  and  ask  the  questions  which  Gkxl  puts  into  his  mouth,
his  quest  will  soon  he  at  an  end.  The  right  path  is  indicated  hy  infallible  signs.  It
is  the  ancient  one ;  the  way  which  began  to  be  trodden,  not  one  or  two  generations
back,  but  as  far  back  as  the  record  of  human  relations  extends.  The  right  way  is
older  than  the  wrong.  The  way  appointed  for  the  first  progenitors  of  mankind,  when
they  stepped  out  where  none  had  b^n  before  them,  is  the  way  for  us.  As  to  essentials^
Christ  points  out  no  different  way  from  that  which  Adam  was  set  to  traveL  Adam's
path  was  to  be  the  path  of  strict  attention,  so  that  he  might  understand  God's  will ;  of
strict  obedience  in  doing  the  will  when  understood ;  and  of  perfect  trust  in  God,  feeling
that  his  commandments  for  his  dependent  and  finite  creatures  were  the  best,  even
though  reasons  for  them  might  not  be  given.  The  most  ancient  of  all  paths  pre*
scribed  for  men  is  that  of  a  willing  handing  over  of  one's  life  to  the  will  of  that  wise,
loving,  and  holy  One  who  is  supreme.  All  that  Christ  has  told  us,  all  he  has  done  for
us,  is  for  the  purpose  of  leading  us  into  an  effectual  compliance  with  the  requirement.
Does  not  the  ex[)erience  of  Enoch  show  that  the  right  path  is  an  ancient  one  ?  What
more  can  be  said  of  the  most  devoted  Christian,  rich  in  all  the  resources  of  grace,  than
that  he  has  walked  with  God  ?  What  else  can  there  be  but  true  good  and  rest  undisturbed
when  one  is  under  the  immediate  influence  of  that  God  whose  own  peace  knows  not
the  slightest  invasion  amid  all  the  commotion  of  the  universe  ?  Real  rest,  a  rest  to
the  heart,  was  wanted  by  these  people  of  Israel,  and  all  that  was  so  much  wanted
would  surely  come  if  only  the  ancient  paths  were  found  and  once  more  frequented. — ¥•

Yer.  20. — Sweet  and  fragrant  things  made  abominable  to  God,    I.  Observe  the

TROUBLE  WHICH  MEN  WHO  ARE  REALLY  UNGODLY  MAY  TAKE  IN  CONNECTION  WITH

RELIGION.  Beal  religion  means,  of  course,  a  great  deal  of  trouble  and  self-denial,
watchfulness  and  prayer.  But  when  there  is  only  tlte  appearance  of  religion,  there  may
also  be  much  trouble,  considerable  time  may  be  appropriated,  and  there  may  be  con*
siderable  expenditure  of  money.  So  it  was  here.  Materials  for  holy  service  were
brought  from  a  far  country,  and,  being  probably  expensive  in  themselves,  they  would
become  more  expensive  still  by  the  distance  they  had  to  be  brought.  The  expense
would  also  look  greater  because  it  was  on  articles  which  were  not  manifestly  a  necessity
of  life.  Men  must  spend  money  for  food  and  raiment  and  a  roof  to  shelter  them,  and
out  of  the  money  so  spent  they  plainly  get  something ;  but  here,  in  return  for  all  the
trouble  and  cost  of  getting  the  incense,  etc.,  to  Jerusalem,  there  is  a  very  plain  intima*
tion  that  the  offering  of  it  does  not  effect  the  slightest  good,  does  not  in  the  least
improve  the  position  of  those  who  offer.  And  this  very  rejection  by  Jehovah  makes  us
see  more  clearly  the  trouble  these  people  took.  For  we  may  be  sure  that  the  word
through  Jeremiah  would  not  stop  them  in  their  offerings,  useless  as  they  were.  The
less  there  is  of  intelligent  and  pure  devotion  in  religion,  the  more  there  is  of  super*
stitious,  terrified  clinging  to  habitual  outward  forms ;  and  the  same  kind  of  action  con-
tinues still,  in  many  ways  and  in  all  communions.  People  without  any  real  love  to
God  in  their  hearts,  or  real  submission  to  him,  go  through  a  great  deal  in  the  way  of
forms  and  ceremonies,  and  delude  themselves  with  the  notion  that  somehow  they  will
be  the  better  for  it  all.

II.  Observe  the  certainty  that  this  trouble  is  all  in  vain.  Those  who  bring
the  offerings  are  not  left  in  even  the  slightest  doubt.  They  have  not  the  excuse  of
being  able  to  say  that  in  some  way  or  other,  which  they  do  not  understand,  there
will  come  a  benefit  out  of  their  offerings.  There  is  a  refusal  in  the  most  decided
and  solemn  way.  Although  these  gifts  may  find  their  way  into  the  house  of  God,  and
the  altar  itself  be  used  in  connection  with  them,  they  are  not  therefore  accepted.
They  are  just  as  much  refused  as  a  gift  would  be  if  the  bringer  of  it  had  the  door  of
the  house  where  he  brought  it  slammed  in  his  face.

III.  The  reason  of  the  refusal.  Though  not  here  expressed,  the  reason,  from
what  is  said  elsewhere,  is  perfectly  plain.  These  gifts,  sweet  and  fragrant  as  they  are
in  themselves,  become  an  insult  b^use  of  the  men  who  bring  ^them.  Growing  in
their  natural  place,  they  play  their  part  in  adding  to  the  beauty  and  perfume  of  (K)d's
world ;  but  now  the  fragrant  has  become  as  it  were  stinking,  because  of  the  defiled  hands
through  which  it  has  passed.    What  men  bring  to  God  they  must  bring  with  cleaa


182  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  vi.  1— 3a

hands  and  a  pure  heart.  The  great  use  of  these  gifts  with  their  pleasant  qualities  was
,to  signify  what  was  sweet  and  fragrant  and  devoted  in  the  hearts  of  the  people.  But
when  God  knew  that  the  gifts  were  be.stowed  through  suixjistition  or  formality,  or
through  the  fear  lest  neglect  might  bring  disaster  on  some  cherished  scheme,  how  could
he  accept  these  gifts?  Consider  further  how,  in  many  instances  at  least,  the  money
was  got  that  procured  these  gifts.  They  were  the  fruits  of  robbery,  fraud,  and  oppres-
idon.  When  we  read  bow  some  of  the  spoils  of  conquest  in  ancient  times  not
unfrequently  went  to  enrich  an  idol  temple,  how  thankful  we  should  be  that  in  Grod'a
Word  there  is  such  plain  dealing  with  those  who  think  that  some  great  gift  to  religious
uses  can  condone  their  wickedness.  Then,  of  course,  in  such  cases  the  greater  the
expense  of  a  man's  religion  the  greater  also  was  the  amount  that  had  to  be  gotten  in
wrongful  ways.  The  Pharisee  ext-ortioner  had  to  give  several  extra  turns  to  the  screw
in  oi^er  that  he  might  get  just  that  special  sum  which  was  needed  to  keep  up  his
reputation  as  a  religious  man. — Y.

Ver.  30. — **  Beprdbate  silver/*  Two  important  things  are  to  be  remembered  with
regard  to  the  meaning  of  the  words  in  this  verse.  1.  That  Jeremiah  uses  the  same
Hebrew  verb  where  we  have  the  two  diflferent  words,  **  reprobate  "  and  "  rejected."
What  Jeremiah  really  says  is  that  the  silver  bears  the  name  "  rejected  silver,"  because
Jebovah  has  rejected  it.  2.  The  verb  employed  is  commonly  used  to  signify  the  action
which  is  opposed  to  choosing ;  e.g.  in  Isa.  vii.  15  the  time  is  spoken  of  when  a  child
l)ecomes  able  to  reject  the  evil  and  to  choose  the  good,  and  in  Isa.  xli.  8, 9  there  is  a  still
more  striking  instance,  because  of  its  bearing  on  the  words  now  under  consideration.
These  are  the  words :  "  Thou,  hrael,  art  my  servant,  Jacobs  whom  I  have  chosen,  the
seed  of  Ahraham  my  friend.  Thou  whom  I  have  taken  from  the  ends  of  the  earth,
and  called  thee  from  the  chief  men  thereof,  and  said  unto  thee.  Thou  art  my  sertxmt ;
I  have  chosen  thee,  and  not  rejected  thee."  Thus  it  will  be  seen  that  we  are  not
simply  to  think  of  rejection  over  against  approval.  Silver  ore,  being  put  through  the
most  searching  test  possible,  may  respond  to  the  test  by  coming  out  approved  silver.
But  he  who  is  thus  ao^  to  approve  is  not  necessarily  in  the  position  which  requires  him
to  choose.  He  may  only  have  the  duty  of  an  assay  agent,  which  stops  with  reporting
the  result  of  his  test ;  he  who  has  employed  is  the  man  to  make  the  choice.  Now,
Gkxl  tries  in  order  that  he  may  decide  for  himself  whether  to  choose  or  reject ;  e,g,  he
rejected  Saul  from  reigning  over  Israel,  which  of  course  means  that,  from  the  hour  of
rejection,  SauUs  throne  was  considered  vacant.  We  can  now  proceed  to  point  out  the
truths  implied  in  this  verse.  1.  There  can  be  no  adequate  discernment  of  the  merit  or
demerit  of  any  man  unless  by  God  himself.  Only  when  God  rejects  can  the  stamp
"  reiected  "  be  put  on  any  one.  Men  may  set  up  their  canons  of  approval ;  they  may
apply  their  tests,  philosophical,  or  political,  or  literary,  or  even  theological.  They  may
reject  and  excommunicate,  pursuing  with  fiercest  hatred  all  who  are  not  approved
according  to  their  tests.  Thus  there  will  be  a  partial  and  temporary  rejection,  but  since
it  oomes  from  no  adequate  inquiry,  the  rejection  itself  will  be  rejected  by  a  higher
authority.  Of  this  we  have  a  conspicuous,  we  may  even  say  the  supreme,  instance  in
Pa.  cxviii.  22,  "The  stone  which  the  builders  rejected  [the  same  Hebrew  word  as
Jeremiah  uses,  be  it  observed]  is  become  the  head  of  the  corner."  It  may  be,  indeed,
that  he  whom  some  men  reject  may  in  the  end  be  rejected  by  God  also,  but  it  will  be
for  very  different  reasons.  2.  The  reasons  for  rejection  we  must  try  to  discover.  The
Lord  rejects  those  who  claim  to  be  accepted.  He  will  reject  the  claim  when  it  is  that
of  mere  national  descent,  as  when  Jesus  said  to  the  proud  Jews  who  opposed  him,  that
out  of  the  stones  he  could  make  children  to  Abraham.  God  rejects  all  mere  formal
acknowledgment  of  him ;  it  is  not  enough  to  say,  "  Lord,  Lord."  He  rejects  all  that
b  the  mere  exercise  and  effort  of  intellectual  faculties.  In  short,  he  rejects  all  that
does  not  begin  with  a  complete  acceptance  of  Christ,  and  hence  go  on  in  the  spirit
of  entire  submission  to  him.  Illustrations  of  what  prompts  to  rejection  are  furnished
both  before  and  after  this  verse,  e.g,  in  ver.  20,  where  the  incense,  etc.,  is  rejected,  i.e.
of  course,  the  men  who  offer  the  incense,  and  in  ch.  vii.  14,  where  the  admired  temple
Ib  threatened  with  overthrow.  A  mere  building  is  shown  to  be  nothing  in  God's  sight
unless  it  is  frequented  by  such  as  are  themselves  acceptable  to  him.  Observe  also,  in
aaoertaining  the  reason  for  rejection^  how  the  word  ''silver  "  is  kept.    The  thing  tested


OH.  vn.  1—34.]  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.


183


is  rejected,  not  because  it  is  counterfeit,  but  because  it  is  persistently  impure.  It  will
not  yield  up  those  baser  elements  which  are  so  intimately  blended  with  it,  and
effectually  destroy  the  value  and  hide  the  lustre  of  the  pure  silver.  And  yet  remember
how  high  rejected  man  rises  above  rejected  silver.  Man  in  his  freedom  may  relent
from  his  stubbornness  and  submit  to  those  renewing  and  purifying  processes  which
will  result  in  the  silver  being  approved  and  chosen.  3.  There  is  no  chance  ^
establishing  and  commending  what  the  Lord  r^'ects,  Saul  did  his  best  to  struggle
against  the  Divine  decision,  but  there  is  no  more  pitiable  sight  in  all  the  records  of
kingship  than  that  which  he  presents  in  the  struggle.  We  also  must  reject  thoee
whom  God  rejects ;  and  there  can  be  no  mistake  about  it  that  we  must  reject  thoee
who  reject  God^such  as  are  spoken  of  in  2  Kings  xvii.  16,  those  who  rejected  the
statutes  of  God  and  the  covenant  that  he  had  made  with  their  fathers^  and  the  testi*
monies  which  he  testified  against  them. — T.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  vn.


Ch.  vii.—x.— Severe  rebukes  of  idolatry
alternating  with  announcements  of  the  im-
pending judgment  The  oiroumstanoes  con-
nected with  this  discourse,  or  part  thereof,
appear  to  be  detailed  in  oh.  xxvi.  Among
the  parallelisms  between  the  two  sections,
notice  especially  the  reference  to  the  fate  of
the  temple  of  Shiloh  (oomp.  ver.  14  with  ch.
xxvi.  6>  The  date  of  the  original  utterance
of  the  prophecy  is  thus  fixed  for  one  of  the
early  years  of  Uie  reign  of  Jehoiakim.  Ch.
X.  1 — 16,  however,  requires  separate  con-
sideration.

Vers.  1 — 7, — The  Divine  requirements
and  the  corresponding  promise.

Ver.  2.>-8tand  in  the  gate;  i,e,  not  an
outer  gate  (for  the  outer  court  would  be  filled
with  the  people  whom  Jeremiah  was  to  ad-
dress), but  one  of  the  three  gates  which  led
from  the  inner  court  to  the  outer.  Probably
it  was  the  gate  where  Baruch  recited  the
prophecies  of  Jeremiah  at  a  later  period,
and  which  is  designated  **  the  new  gate  of
the  Lord's  house,"  and  said  to  have  been
situated  in  the  ^ upper"  i.e.  inner  court
(ch.  xxxvi.  10;  oomp.  oh.  xxvi.  10).  Yfe
may  conjecture  that  either  one  of  the  three
neat  festivals  or  some  extraordinary  fast
had  brought  a  large  number  of  people  to-
gether at  the  temple.

Ver.  4. — ^The  temple  of  the  Lord.  Notice
the  iteration  of  the  phrase,  as  if  its  very
sound  were  a  charm  against  eviL  It  re-
minds us  of  the  performances  of  the  howling
dervishes  at  Cairo,  who  **  sometimes  remain
for  hours,  incessantly  shouting  the  Muslim
confession  of  faith  (M  tlahoy  etc.)"  (Dr.
Ebers,  in  Badeker's  'Egypt,'  p.  150).  The
phrase  is  repeated  three  times  to  express
the  earnestness  of  the  speakers  (comp.  ch.
xxii  29,  **  0  eiu  th,  earth,  earth  ").    These


false  prophets  evidently  retained  a  lam
amount  of  the  old  materialistic  faith  of  the
Semitic  nations  (to  whom  the  Israelites
belonged  by  race),  which  localized  the
presence  and  the  power  of  the  divinity.
The  temple  was,  in  fact,  their  palladium,
and  as  long  as  it  stood,  the  national  inde-
pendence appeared  to  them  to  be  secured.
They  foithfully  handed  on  the  teaching  of
those  prophets  of  the  last  generation,  who,
as  Micah  tells  us  (iii.  11),  were  wont  to
**  lean  upon  the  Lord,  and  say.  Is  not  the
Lord  among  us  ?  none  evil  can  come  upon
us."  How  Isaiah  met  this  error  we  may
collect  from  Isa.  xxviii  16  (see  my  Com-
mentary). Are  these;  i^.  these  buildings
(comp.  2  Chron.  viii.  11,  where  for  **the
places"  the  Hebrew  has  **  these").

Ver.  5.— If  ye  throughly  amend,  eto. ;  a
development  of  the  idea  of  ver.  8.  The  true
palladium  of  Judah  would  be  the  faithftil
performance  of  Jehovah's  moral  laws,  es-
pecially those  referring  to  the  conduct  of  the
rulers.  Observe  the  stress  which  all  the
prophets  lay  on  the  virtues  of  civil  life.

Ver.  6.— The  stranger,  the  fstherlen,  tad
the  widow;  specially  commended  to  the
care  of  the  Israelites  (Exod.  xxiL  21,  22— a
passage  belonging  to  one  of  the  most  evi-
dently primitive  portions  of  the  Pentateuch ;
Deut  xxiv.  17,  19,  21;  xxvii.  19;  oomp.
l8a.L17,23;  X.  2;  Ezek.  xxiLT).  In  tUf
plaee ;  ie,  specially  in  Jerusalem,  but  not
altogether  excluding  the  rest  of  the  kingdom
(see  vers.  3,*  7).

Ver.  7.— For  erer  and  erer.  It  is  doubt-
ful, both  here  and  in  oh.  xxv.  5,  whether
these  words  should  be  joined  to  ** gave"  or
'*  cause  you  to  dwell."  Still,  the  latter  con-
nection is  both  in  itself  the  more  probable
one,  and  that  suggested  first  of  all  by  the
accentuation  (this,  however,  is  not  here
deci8ive>  It  was  not  the  extent  of  the
original  promise,  but  that  of  the  enjoyment
of  the  gift,  which  was  in  quesUon.  A
more    exact   rendering  of    the   prophefs


184


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,  [ch.  vn.  1—34.


formula  ia  that  of  the  Septimgint,  4^  cuvyos
Ktd  tut  euuyos  I  i.e.  from  the  mo8t  remote
aotiquity  to  the  most  dbtant  future.

Veri.  8 — 15. — The  formalism  of  Jewish
religion  exposed.    The  lesson  of  Shiloh.

\^r.  8. — Lying  wordi;  such  as  those
quoted  in  ver.  4.

Ver.  9.— Will  ye  itaal,  etc.?  rather,
Whal  I  ttealingy  murdering,  etc.  ?  The  con-
•truotion  is  formed  by  a  series  of  infinitives,
preceded  by  an  interrogative  expressing
extreme  surprise,  equivalent  to  **  Is  this
your  way  oi  life— a  course  of  theft,  and
■o  forth?"

Ver.  10. — ^And  oome,  etc.;  rather,  and
ihen  ye  come,  etc.  We  are  delivered  to  do,
etc. ;  rather,  we  have  escaped,  in  order  to  do,
etc.  To  make  the  concluding  words  of  the
verse  a  part  of  the  speech  seems  hardly  fair  to
tlie  Jews,  who  would  certainly  not  proclaim
that  they  had  made  their  escape  from  the
threatened  judgpnent  with  the  object  of
prosecuting  abominable  acts.  Such  a  view,
moreover,  greatly  weakens  the  force  of  the
emphatic  **  We  have  escaped."  "In  order
to  do,"  etc.,  are  the  words  of  the  prophet,
who  thus  lays  bare  the  secret  intentions  of
these  formal  worshippers.

Ver.  11.— Even  I  have  seen  it ;  understand,
**and  I  will  therefore  destroy  the  house
which  gives  shelter  to  evil-doers."

Ver.  12. — But  go  ye  now  onto  my  place
which  was  in  Shiloh.  Jeremiah  attacks  this
false  confidence  in  the  temple  of  Jerusalem,
by  pointing  to  the  destruction  of  an  earlier
sanctuary,  of  which  very  little  is  known,
indeed  only  so  much  as  to  give  an  e<lge  to
our  desire  for  more.  It  is  certain,  from
Josh,  xviii.  1  and  1  Sam.  iv.  S,  that  the  taber-
nacle and  the  ark  found  a  resting-place  at
Bhiloh  (an  Ephraimitish  town  to  the  north
of  Bethel),  nearly  the  whole  of  the  period  of
the  judges,  or  more  exactly  between  the
latter  days  of  Joshua  (Josh,  xviii.  1)  and
the  death  of  Eli  (1  Sam.  iv.  S).  Manifestly,
then,  there  must  have  been  some  sort  of
"house,"  i.e.  temple,  at  Shiloh;  a  mere
tent  would  not  have  been  sufiicient  for  so
lung  a  period.  This  presumption  is  con-
firmed by  the  language  of  Jeremiah,  and  by
the  expressions  of  the  narrative  books.  The
fate  which  the  prophet  is  bidden  to  announce
for  the  existing  temple  is  analogous  to  that
which  fell  upon  *'  Jehovah's  place  in  Shiloh."
The  latter  was,  therefore,  not  merely  a  depor-
tation of  the  ark,  such  as  is  referred  to  in
1  Sam.  V.  And  when  the  narrator  of  the
times  of  Samuel  speaks  of  Eli  as  "sitting
by  the  door-post  of  the  temple  of  Jehovah  "
(1  8am.  L  9),  is  it  more  natural  to  supuose
that  the  word  "  temple  "  is  here  applied  to
the  tabernacle,  or  tnat  there  was  really  a
house,  however  rude,  as  sacred  in  the  eyes
of  the  faithful  as  was  afterwards  the  splendid


temple  at  Jerusalem?  The  latter  view  is
strongly  confirmed  by  Judg.  xviii.  31,  "  All
the  time  that  the  house  of  God  in  ShiloU
existed  "  '^Authorized  Version  is  misleading),
and  Judg.  xix.  18,  where  the  Levite  travel-
ling to  Mount  Ephraim  says,  **  I  am  going
to  the  house  of  Jehovah."  It  is  no  doubt
strange  at  first  sight  that  so  little  informa-
tion is  given  us  as  to  this  central  sanctuary
of  the  true  relij;ion  ;  but  are  there  not  other
omissions  (especially  in  the  history  of  the
judges),  which  are  equally  strange  as  long
as  we  look  upon  the  Old  Testament  as
primarily  an  historical  document?  We  do
know  something,  however,  and  more  than  ia
generally  suspected;  for  when  the  right
translation  ia  restored  in  Judg.  xviii.  31,  it
follows,  from  a  comparison  of  this  and  tlio
preceding  verse,  that  the  temple  of  Sliiloh
was  destroyed  simultaneously  with  the
captivity  of  the  nortliern  tribes.  The  im-
pression produced  by  this  empliatic  an-
nouncement of  Jeremiah  is  revealed  to  us
by  a  later  passage  in  his  book  (see  ch.
XX  vi.).

Ver.  13. — Bising  up  early  and  speaking;
i.e.  speaking  zealously  and  continually  (so
ver.  25;  ch.  xxv.  4;  xxvi.  5;  xxix.  19).  It
is  an  expression  peculiar  to  Jeremiah.

Ver.  14.— To  Shiloh.  Shiloh  and  the
tenai)le  of  Shiloh  are  interchanged,  precisely
as  Jerusalem  and  the  temple  of  Jerusalem
(ch.  xxvi.  9;  Mieah  iii.  12).

Ver.  15. — I  will  cast  you  out  of  my  sight ;
viz.  into  a  foreign  land  (see  Deut.  xxix.  2o).
The  land  of  Israel  was  in  a  special  sense
"  Jehovah's  land "  (Hos.  ix.  3 ;  Lev.  xxv,
23).  Ephraim ;  here  used  for  the  northcra
tribes  collectively,  as  Isa.  vii  2;  Hos,  iv.
17 ;  V.  9 ;  xii.  1.

Vers.  l(>-20.— The  hypocrisy  of  the
worship  of  Jehovah  proved;  its  punish-
ment.

Ver.  16. — Pray  not  thou  for  this  people.
Abraham  prayed  for  Sodom  (Gen.  xviii.  23 —
82);  Moses  and  Simmel  for  Israel  (Exod.
xxxii.  11 — 14;  xvii.  II ;  Numb.  xiv.  13 — 20;
Ps.  cvi.  23;  1  Sam.  vii.  9,  10;  xii.  17,  18,
23) ;  and  Jeremiah  would  fain  perform  the
same  pious  duty  to  his  people.  We  have  a
specimen  of  his  intercession  in  ch.  xiv.  19  —
22  (comp.  ch.  xviii.  20),  followed  imme-
diately by  a  rejection  of  his  prayer,  parallel
in  thought  to  the  present  passage.  Verbal
parallels  are  ch.  xi.  14;  xiv.  11,  Cry;  t.e.
cry  for  help  (see  on  ch.  xiv.  12);  parallel
with  "prayer,"  as  ch.  xi.  14;  Ps.  xvii.  1;
Ixi.  1.

Ver.  17.  —In  the  streets.  A  climax.  There
is  no  sense  of  shame  left.

Ver.  18. — The  children  .  .  .  the  fathers
.  .  .  the  women.  All  ages  were  represented
in  this  idolatrous  act,  thus  justifying  the
sweeping   character   of  the  judgment  aa


CH.  vn.  1—34.]  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMTAH.


18S


deecribed  in  ch.  yi  11.  Cakei  (oomp.  ch.
zUy.  19).  The  word  is  peculiar  (kavvdnim),
and  perhaps  entered  Palestine  together
with  the  foreign  rite  to  which  the  cakes
belonged.  Various  conjectures  have  been
offered  as  to  their  nature,  but  without  any
demonstrable  ground.  Sacrificial  cakes  were
not  uncommon.  Hosea  refers  to  the  luscious
raisin-cakes  used  hj  idolaters  (Hos.  iiL  1).
To  the  queen  of  heaven.  This  title  of  a
divinity  only  occurs  in  Jeremiah  (here  and
in  ch.  xliv.  17—19,  25).  It  reminds  us,
first,  of  titles  (such  as  "  <iueen  of  the  gods  ")
of  the  Babylonio- Assyrian  goddesses,  Bilat
(Beltis)  and  Istar,  who,  though  divided  in
later  times,  were  **  originally  but  two  forms
of  the  same  goddess  "  (8ayce,  Transactioni
of  Sodetfj  of  Biblical  Arehxohgy,  iii.  169).
It  is,  however,  perhaps  an  objection  to  the
view  that  Bilat  or  Istar  is  intended,  that
neither  here  nor  in  ch.  xliv.  is  there  any
allusion  to  that  characteristic  lascivious
custom  which  was  connected  in  Babylonia
with  the  worship  of  Istar  (Herod.,  i  199).
The  phrase  has,  however,  another  associa-
tion. It  reminds  us,  in  the  second  place,  of
the  Egyptian  goddess  Neith,  *'the  mother
of  the  goda,"  The  first  mention  of  "  the
queen  of  heaven  "  in  Jeremiah  occurs  in  the
reign  of  Jehoiakim,  who  was  placed  on  the
throne  by  Pharaoh-Necho,  one  of  the  Sai'te
dynasty  (Sa'is  was  the  seat  of  the  worship  of
Neith).  If  the  "  queen  of  heaven  **  were  a
Babylonio- Assyrian  goddess,  we  should  have
looked  for  the  introduction  of  her  cultus  at
an  earlier  period  (e.g.  under  Ahaz).  But  it
was  in  accordance  with  the  principles  of
polytheism  (and  the  mass  of  tne  Jews  hiid
an  irresiBtible  tendency  to  polytheism)  to
adopt  the  patron-deitv  of  the  suzerain.
Bubseouentfy  Judah  became  the  subject
of  Neouchadnezzar ;  thus  it  was  equally
natural  to  give  up  the  worship  of  an
Egyptian  deity.  Jewish  colonists  in  Migdol
would  as  naturally  revert  to  the  cultus  of
the  Egyptian  ♦* mother  of  the  gods"  (see
Gr'atz,  *  Monatsschrift,'  Breslau,  1874,  pp.
849—351).  The  form  of  the  word  rendered
"queen"  beiog  very  uncommon,  another
reading,  pronounced  in  the  same  way,
obtained  currency.  This  should  be  ren-
dered, not  **  frame,"  or  "  workmanship  "  (as
Authorized  Version,  margin),  but  "  service."
The  context,  however,  evidently  requires  a
person.

Ver.  19. — ^Do  they  provoke  me,  etc?
literally,  Jf  it  me  that  (hiy  provoke  (or,  V€x)f
la  it  not  themselves  f

\'er.  20. — Upon  man,  and  npon  beast  That
all  creation  shares  in  the  curse  of  man  is
repeatedly  affirmed  in  the  Old  Testament
as  well  as  the  New.  luferentially,  this
doctrine  appears  from  the  narrative  of  the
Fall*  and  ^till  more  clearly  from  Isaiah's


description  of  Paradise  regained  (xi.%
Hosea  speaks  of  sufferings  of  the  animals
arising  out  of  the  guilt  of  Israel  (iv.  3),  and
a  consciousness  of  the  **  solidarity  **  of  all
living  creatures  is  ascribed  to  a  Ninevite
king  in  the  Book  of  Jonah  (iii.  7,  8).  In
general,  the  origin  of  this  community  of
suffering  is  left  mysterious,  but  in  Gen.
vi.  12  it  is  expressly  stated  as  the  cause  of
the  Deluge,  that  "  all  flesh  [t.6.  both  man
and  beast]  had  corrupted  its  way  upon  the
earth;"  i.e,  apparently,  that  contact  with
man  had  led  to  a  corruption  of  the  original
innocence  of  the  lower  animals.  It  is  a
common  experience  that  intercourse  between
Christianized  (not  to  say  civilized)  man  and
the  domestic  animals  produces  a  sometimes
pathetic  change  in  the  psychic  phenomena
of  the  latter.  Is  the  reverse  process  utterly
inconceivable  ?

Vers.  21 — 28. — Jeremiah  dispels  the
illusion  that  Gk>d'8  claims  are  satisfied  by  a
merely  formal  service.

Ver.  21. — Put  jonr  burnt  offerings,  eto.
Throw  all  your  sacrifices  into  a  mass,  and
eat  them  at  your  pleasure.  Ye  have  my
perfect  permission,  for  they  are  of  no
religious  value.  According  to  the  Law,  the
burnt  offerings  were  to  be  entirely  consumed
by  fire,  whQe  the  other  sacrifices  were
mostly  eaten  by  the  offerers  and  by  their
friends.  There  is  a  touch  of  contempt  in
the  phrase,  eat  flesh;  they  are  merely
pieces  of  flesh,  and  ye  may  eat  them.

Ver.  22. — I  spake  not  nnto  yonr  fiatlier%
etc.  An  important  and  much-disputed
passage,  from  which  Graf,  Colenso,  and
Kuenen  derive  one  of  their  chief  subsidiary
arguments  for  the  post-Exile  date  of  the
Levitical  legislation.  The  prophet  here
appears  to  deny  in  toto  that  Jehovah  at
Mount  Sinai  had  given  any  injunctions  on
the  subject  of  sacrifice.  But  the  prophet
must  at  any  rate  be  consistent  with  himself;
he  cannot  utter  anything  by  Divine  com*
mand  which  is  fundamentally  at  variance
with  other  equally  authoritative  declarations.
Do  the  statements  of  Jeremiah  elsewhere

{'ustify  us  in  accepting  the  words  in  their
iteral,  superflcial  meaning?  There  are
three  other  passages  which  have  a  olaim  to
be  considered.  In  oh.  xvii.  26  the  prophet
draws  a  picture  of  the  happy  condition  in
which  the  Jews  might  be,  were  they  onlT
obedient.  One  of  the  features  of  thui
picture  is  that  the  Jews  would  still  bring
all  the  various  kinds  of  sacrifices  to  the
house  of  Jehovah.  In  ch.  xxxi.  14  a  similar
description  is  closed  with  the  promise  to
**  satiate  the  soul  of  the  priests  with  fiit*
ness,'*  implying  that  there  would  be  a  great
abundance  of  thank  offerings  in  regenerate
Ljracl.  In  ch.  xxxiiL  11,  among  other
blessings  of  the  fature,  the  prophet  mentiont


186


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  vn.  1— 34.


the  praisefiil  exclamatioDS  of  those  who
would  briog  the  sacrifice  of  thanksgiving.
These  passages  do  not  contain  any  stute-
ment  respecting  the  origin  of  the  sacrificial
system;  but  they  do  expressly  assert  that
Jehovah  contemplates  that  system  with
pleasure,  and  apparently  that  he  designs  it
to  be  permanent  among  his  people  I^srael.
Let  us  now  turn  to  ch.  xxxiii.  17 — 24.
Here  the  prophet,  in  the  Name  of  Jehovah,
declares  that  there  is  a  Divine  covenant
^  with  the  Levites,  the  priests,**  who  shall
never  **want  a  man  beu>re  me  .  .  .  to  do
sacrifice  continually.**  A  covenant  with
the  priests  implies  a  covenant  with  the
people,  the  priests  being  the  representatives
of  the  people.  This  passage,  therefore,  is
more  distinct  than  those  previously  quoted ;
it  does  appear  to  maintain  that  the  range
of  the  Sinaitic  covenant  included  the  duties
of  the  priesthood,  i.e.  sacrifices.  On  the
other  hand,  it  should  be  observed  that  the
genuineness  of  this  latter  passage  is  not
beyond  dispute,  the  whole  section  in  which
it  occurs  (ch.  xxxiii.  14 — 26)  being  omitted
in  the  Septuagint.  We  have  now  to
inquire.  Is  there  a  real  discrepancy  between
the  words  of  Jeremiah  (strictly  speaking,
of  Jehovah)  in  the  verse  now  before  us,
interpreted  literally,  and  the  passages  ad-
duced above  ?  Are  they  more  inconsistent
than  such  an  utterance  as  ch.  yi.  20  (first
half  of  verse),  which  appears  to  deny  the
utility  of  sacrifices  altogether  ?  If  the  latter
may  be  explained  as  a  forcible  oratorical
exaggeration,  why  not  also  the  present
passage  ?  Jeremiah  sees  the  people  attach-
ing a  pernicious  importance  to  the  optu
operatum  of  sacrifice.  On  one  occasion  he
tells  them  that  Jehovah  cares  not  for
sacrifices ;  he  means,  as  the  context  shows,
the  sacrifices  of  men  without  spiritual
sensibilities.  On  another,  that  Jehovah
Dever  commanded  their  fathers  to  sacrifice ;
he  means  (may  we  not  presume  ?)  the  mere
outward  forms  of  the  ritual,  divorced
from  the  sentiment  and  practice  of  piety,
which,  as  Hosea  tells  us  (vi.  6),  Jehovah
**  delights  in  and  not  [equivalent  to
'more  than*]  sacrifice.**  There  is,  therefore,
no  fundamental  inconsistency  between  the
passage  before  us  and  the  three  passages
nrst  quoted,  and  if  so  there  can  be  no  real
discrepancy  with  the  last-mentioned  passage,
for  the  priests  (as  was  remarked)  perform
their  functions  on  behalf  of  the  people,  and
the  permanence  of  Jehovah*s  covenant  with
the  priests  depended  on  the  spiritual  life
of  the  people  they  representea  (read  ch.
xxxiii.  as  a  whole).  This  view  seems  less
arbitrary  than  that  of  Ewald,  who  thinks
that  the  sacrifices  spoken  of  in  our  passage
are  merely  the  free-will  ofi*erin^s  of  the  rich ;
ami  than  that  of  Dahler,  who  interprets.


"  Mv  chief  care  was  not  to  prescribe  rules
for  holocausts  and  sacrifices,  but  this  is  what
I  commanded  thee  above  all,**  viz.  moral
obedience.  According  to  it,  the  prophet*s
denial  is  not  absolute,  but  relative — relative,
that  is,  to  the  notion  of  sacrifices  entertained
by  the  Jews  whom  he  addresses.  Of  course,
Grafs  view,  that  the  denhd  is  absolute,  will
equally  well  suit  the  context  The  people
were  surprised  at  Jeremiah*8  objurgations,
because  they  thought  they  had  fulfiUed  the
claims  of  the  covenant.  Jeremiah*s  purpose
is  equally  well  fulfilled  whether  his  denial
is  qualified  or  unqualified,  absolute  or
relative.  Our  object  has  been  to  separate
the  exegesis  of  our  passage  frcnn  a  still
doubtful  controversy,  and  to  offer  a  tenable
view  of  it,  based  upon  grounds  purely
internal  to  Jeremiah.  It  may  be  suggesteo,
however,  to  the  student  of  Leviticus,  that
even  if  the  Levitical  legislation  in  its
present  form  were  proved  to  be  of  a  post-
Kxilo  date,  it  would  stUl  be  doubtful
whether  any  believing  temple-worshipper
oould  help  assuming  that  Jehovah  had,  from
the  first  existence  of  the  nation,  given  his
direct  sanction  to  the  offering  of  sacrifices.
If  so,  it  is  comparatively  unimportant
(except  with  regard  to  the  progressive
revelation  of  the  strictness  of  the  law  of
truth)  whether  the  Levitical  code  was  given
to  Moses  at  Mount  Sinai  in  its  present  form
or  not.

Yer.  23.— Bat  this  thixig  .  .  .  Obey  mj
▼oioe,  etc.  Comp.  Deut.  vi.  3,  **  Hear  [the
verb  rendered  here  'obey*]  therefore,  O
Israel,  and  observe  to  do  it ;  that  it  may  be
well  with  thee,**  etc.  The  words,  I  will
be  jonr  God;  rather,  to  you  a  Ood,  etc.,
occur  in  Lev.  xxvi.  12  (comp.  Exod.  vi.  7 ;
Deut.  xxix.  13).  Walk  ye  in  all  the  ways,
etc.,  is  not  a  citation,  but  reminds  us  of
passages  like  Deut  ix.  12, 16 ;  xL  28 ;  xxxi.
29.  That  it  may  be  well  nnto  yon  is  a
characteristic  phrase  of  Jeremiah  (ch.  xliL
6 ;  xxxviii.  20 ;  xl.  9) ;  but  is  also  frequent
in  Deuteronomy  (comp.,  besides  the  passage
quoted  above,  Deut  iv.  40;  y.  16;  vi  18;
xii.  25).

Yer.  24. — Imagination;  rather,  ttubibom"
nesa  (see  on  ch.  iii.  17).  Went  backward,
and  not  forward ;  rather,  turned  their  backt
and  not  their  face  (literally,  became  hack'
wardsy  and  not  forwardi),

Yer.  27. — Therefore  thou  shalt  speak,  etc.
rather,  and  though  thou  gpeak  ,  ,  ,  yet  will
they  notf  etc.;  and  though  thou  call  unto
them,  yet  will  they  not  answer  thee,

Yer.  28.— But  thou  shalt  say;  rather,
thou  shalt  therefore  say.  A  nation;  rather,
the  nation.  **  What  one  nation  in  the  earth
is  like  thy  people,  even  like  Israel,  whom
Gk)d  went  to  redeem  for  a  people  to  him-
self?** (2  Sam.  vii.  23).    And  >et  "this  is


.OH.  vn.  1—34.]  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.


187


the  nation  that  have  not  hearkened/'  etc.
Tinth ;  rather,  good  faith  (na  ch.  v.  1).  Is
eat  off  from  their  month;  t.e.  their  oaths  to
Jehovah  are  fulse  oaths  (ch.  v.  2).

Vers.  29— 34.— Tophet,  the  greatest  of
all  aboihinations ;  the  beginning  of  the
Divine  retribution.

Yer.  29. —Cut  off  thine  hair.  The
"daughter  of  Zion,"  i.e.  the  community  of
Jerusalem,  is  addressed ;  this  appears  from
the  verb  being  in  the  feminine.  It  is  a
choice  expression  which  the  prophet  em-
ploys— literally,  shear  off  thy  croum  (i.e,
thy  chief  ornament).  The  act  was  to  be  a
sign  of  mourning  (see  Job  L  20;  Micah  i.
16).  Some  think  there  is  also  a  reference
to  the  vow  of  the  Xazarite  (the  word  for
"crown"  being  here  n^zer,  which  is  also
the  word  rendered  in  Authorized  Version,
**  separation,"  i.e,  **  consecration,"  in  the
law  of  the  Nazarite  (Numb.  vi.).  But
neither  in  this  context  nor  anywhere  else
have  wo  any  support  for  the  application  of
the  term  **  Nazarite"  to  the  people  of  Israel.
On  high  places ;  rather,  on  (the)  bare  hilla
(see  on  ch.  iiL  21).  The  generation  of  lui
wrath;  t.e.  on  which  his  wrath  is  to  be
poured  out  (comp.  Isa.  x.  6).

Ver.  30. — They  have  set  their  abominations,
etc. ;  alluding,  doubtless,  to  the  altars  which
Manasseh  built  **  for  all  the  host  of  heaven
in  the  two  courts  of  the  house  of  Jehovah,"
and  especially  to  the  image  of  the  Ca-
noanitish  goddess  Ash^rah,  which  he  set
up  in  the  temple  itself  (2  Kings  xxL  5,  7).

Ver.  31. — The  high  places  of  Tophet;
rather,  the  high  place$  of  (hit  Topheth—ipn


the  "  high  places  "  (Hebrew  bamo/A)— here
probably  artificial  mounds  to  erect  the  altars
upon,  and  on  "the  Topheth,"  see  Com-
mentary on  1  Kings).  In  the  valley  of  the
son  of  Hinnom.  Hitzig  and  others  would
take  Hinnom  as  a  noun  meaning  **  groan-
ing" (Rashi,  the  great  Jewish  commentator,
had  already  proposed  this  view),  which  is
at  first  sight  very  plausible.  But  this  name
of  the  valley  is  already  found  in  the  descrip-
tion of  the  boundaries  of  Judah  and  Benja-
min in  Josh.  XV.  8 ;  xviiL  16.  To  bnm  their
sons,  etc.  (On  the  worship  of  Moloch
(Saturn),  see  on  Lev.  xviii.  21,  and  comp.
Ezek.  xvi.  20, 21,  from  which  it  appears  that
the  children  were  first  slain  before  being
'*  caused  to  pass  through  the  fire.")

Ver.  32.— The  valley  of  slaughter;  with
reference  to  the  great  slaughter  reserved
for  the  unbelieving  Jews.  The  scone  of
their  sin  shall  be  that  of  their  puniehment.
Till  there  be  no  plaoe;  rather, /or  toant  of
room  (elsewhere).

Ver.  33. — ^And  the  earoasee,  etc.;  almost
verbally  identical  with  Deut.  xxviii.  26.

Ver.  34. — The  land  shall  be  desolate;
rather,  thaJl  become  a  waste.  The  curse
denounced  upon  the  disobedient  people  in
Lev.  xxvi.  31,  33  (for  another  parallel
between  this  chapter  and  Lev.  xxvi.,  see
ver.  23).  In  both  passages  the  word  for
"waste"  is  khorbah^  which,  as  Dr.  Payne
Smith  remarks,  is  ^  used  only  of  places
which,  having  once  been  inhabited,  have
then  fallen  into  ruin."  Hebrew  is  rich  in
synonyms  for  the  idea  of  **  desolation.*


)>


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1 — 7, — Preaching  repentance.  I.  The  occabion.  It  was  in  the  gate  of  the
temple,  where  the  crowd  of  worshippers  would  pass,  and  at  the  time  of  their  going  up  to
worship.  1.  In  &  public  place,  (1)  that  men  might  not  have  to  seek  the  preacher,  but
rather  be  sought  by  bim;  and  (2)  that  all  might  hear,  for  truth,  warnings  of  judgment,
and  gospels  of  deliverance  are  for  all.  2.  At  the  entrance  to  the  place  of  worship,  because
(1)  worship  should  be  associated  with  instruction;  (2)  many  people  who  observe
religious  ordinances  need  to  be  convinced  of  their  sin  and  urged  to  repentance  as  much
as  the  *'  publicans  and  sinners;"  and  (3)  we  must  repent  of  sin  before  we  c^n  be
accepted  by  Ood ;  so  Jeremiah  was  to  preach  to  the  people  as  they  went  in  to  the
temple,  not  as  they  came  out.

II.  The  ACXiJUBATioN.  The  Jews  are  not  accused  of  Church  sins,  neglecting  religious
ordinances,  etc.  Their  sins  were  against  common  morality.  1.  Though  men  may  be
very  observant  of  religious  ordinances  they  may  yet  be  guilty  of  the  grossest  wicked*
ness  (ver.  6).  2.  Ood  is  most  concerned  with  our  conduct  in  daily  life.  Here  is  the
true  life,  the  life  which  occupies  the  larger  part  of  our  time,  engages  most  of  our
enerc[ie8,  gives  freest  scope  for  good  or  evil.

III.  The  exhortation.  Practical  amendment  is  sought.  1.  There  must  be  an
amending.  Repentance  is  not  merely  sorrow  for  the  past;  it  is  a  change  of  desire  and
effort  for  the  future.  2.  This  must  be  practical.  The  Jews  are  to  amend  their  "  ways.**
True  repentance  is  more  a  matter  of  conduct  than  of  emotion.  It  must  bring  forth
fruits  (Matt.  iil.  8).    3.  This  must  be  definite.    Particular  sins  are  specified  as  to  be


188  THE   BOOK   OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [en.  vn.  1—34.


abandoned  (ver.  6).  Men  must  repent  of  their  own  sins,  their  characteristic  sins,  their
habitual  sins.  We  are  too  ready  to  renounce  the  sins  which  do  not  belong  to  us,  and  to
pass  over  our  most  familiar  sins  unnoticed.  4.  This  must  be  thorough.  The  Jews  are
to  "  throughly  amend  "  their  ways.  A  half-hearted  repentance  is  a  mockery.  As
well  not  flee  from  the  City  of  Destruction  at  all  as  linger  regretfully  about  its  vicinity
like  Lot's  wife,  only  to  suJffer  a  similar  fate  to  hers.

IV.  The  admonition.  The  Jews  are  warned  of  the  danger  of  a  false  ground  of
confidence  (ver.  4),  and  threatened  with  approaching  judgment.  1.  If  we  believe  that
men  are  in  danger,  that  is  a/o/sc  charity  which  hides  the  danger  out  of  consideration
for  feelings  of  mere  temporary  comfort.  2.  There  is  an  advantage  in  using  the  minatory
language  of  Scripture,  though  (1)  with  deep  solemnity,  (2)  with  sadness  and  kindliness
of  purpose,  (3)  without  the  amplification  of  imaginative  sensationalism,  (4)  accom-
panied by  clear  indications  of  the  way  of  escape  and  encouragements  for  hope  ia
following  it.

V.  The  promise.  (Ver.  7.)  Repentance  is  to  be  followed  by  forgiveness  and  the
restoration  of  favour.  GKxi  charges  us  with  our  sins,  and  threatens  judgments,  all  in
love  that  he  may  thus  lead  us  to  safety  and  blessedness.  The  most  wicked  men  may
find  forgiveness  and  ultimate  salvation  if  they  will  but  repent  and  turn  to  God  (ver.  6).

Ver.  4. — The  confidence  of  superstition.  L  Confident  language  is  no  guarantee
FOR  A  SECURE  FOUNDATION  OF  TRUST.  The  Jcws  are  vehement  in  exclamation ;  but
their  words  are  boastful  without  ground.  Frequent  repetition  is  no  evidence  of  the
truth  of  a  saying.  Yet,  though  against  all  reason,  and  by  mere  force  of  urgency,  how
many  convictions  have  been  thus  forced  on  the  belief  of  mankind  I  Trite  sayinj^s  are
commonly  accepted  for  true  sayings.  We  do  not  think  to  test  the  genuineness  of  the  old
\irorn  coin  so  much  as  that  of  the  new  coin.  We  naturally  believe  that  with  which  we
are  familiar.  Indeed,  we  may  persuade  ourselves  to  believe  almost  anything  by  simply
dwelling  upon  the  idea  of  it  till  this  becomes  inseparable  from  our  consciousness.  And
all  this  without  the  slightest  reason!

II.  The    SUPERSTITION    OF   RELIGION   MAY   BE    FOUND    IN    MEN   WHO   HAVE   LOST  THfi

BPIBITUALITY  OF  IT.  The  Jcws  neglected  the  spiritual  worship,  which  was  all  that  was
really  valuable  in  the  temple  service,  but  they  clung  to  the  idea  that  there  must  be  a
Banctity  about  the  very  walls  of  the  temple  which  would  make  it  a  place  of  safety  fur
those  who  took  shelter  within  them.  Superstition  is  the  disease  of  religion.  When
spiritual  holiness  is  gone,  a  sanctity  is  ascribed  to  material  things.  They  who  have  no
faith  in  God  may  have  strange  faith  in  charms  and  spells,  like  the  Jews  who,  perhaps,
thought  to  work  a  charm  by  the  threefold  iteration  of  their  cry,  "  The  temple  of  Uie
Lord,"  etc.

III.  No  REAL  SECURITY  CAN  BE   FOUND  IN  EXTERNAL  THINGS.      The  temple  building

VI9A  no  palladium  to  the  bad  men  who  sought  refuge  in  it.  It  is  vain  to  be  near  the
Church  if  we  are  far  from  God.  Religious  ordinances,  membership  in  a  Church,  official
association  with  religion  as  priest,  prophet,  or  minister,  and  the  like  outside  affairs,
contain  no  promise  whatever  of  protection,  and  the  man  who  shelters  himself  beneath
the  whole  of  them  and  docs  not  seek  spiritual  shelter  is  as  much  exposed  to  the
tempest  of  judgment  as  if  he  stood  out  in  the  open  plain  of  bare  infidelity.

IV.  The  TRUE  temple  of  the  Lord  is  the  heart  of  a  good  man.  God  does  not
dwell  in  temples  made  with  hands.  Earthly  temples  of  stone  may  represent  his
dwelling,  but  they  cannot  bring  him  nearer  to  men  nor  confine  his  presence  within
limits.  But  the  soul  of  a  good  man  is  a  real  temple  wherein  God*s  Spirit  truly  abides
and  effectively  operates  (1  Cor.  vi.  19).  Such  a  temple  is  safe  from  all  harm.  Thus
we  must  seek  safety,  not  by  entering  a  temple,  but  by  becoming  a  temple — not  by
securing  the  external  protection  of  holy  things  while  the  heart  and  life  are  unholy,  but
by  receiving  God  within  the  heart  and  sanctifying  the  life  to  him.

Ver.  13. — The  voice  unheeded,  I.  God  is  ever  speaking  to  his  children.  There
is  a  Divine  voice  speaking,  not  to  favoured  prophets  in  rare  moments  of  spiritual  eleva-
tion, but  to  all  men,  that  all  who  will  may  hear.  This  voice  comes  to  us  in  many
forms.  1.  The  voice  of  nature — the  proclamation  of  the  power  and  wisdom  of  God  in
the  awful,  silent  speech  of  the  stars  (Ps.  xix.  3),  and  the  gentler  language  which  tolls


CH.  viL  1--34.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  18^

of  his  tenderness  and  beneficence  in  the  cheery  songs  of  spring  and  the  glad  shout  of  the
harvest.  2.  The  voice  of  history,  God  is  in  history,  and  speaks  to  us  through  the
events  of  the  past,  warning  by  judgments  (ver.  12),  inviting  by  acts  of  deliverance  and
gifts  of  mercy  (see  Ps.  cv.).  3.  The  voice  of  providence  in  daily  life.  Has  not  God
been  speaking  to  us  through  our  own  experience — using  various  prophetic  agencies—
the  advent  of  a  new  joy,  the  cloud  of  a  great  sorrow,  a  visitation  of  the  angel  of  death
to  the  home?  has  he  not  repeatedly  roused,  invited,  pleaded,  and  consoled  us  with
voices  from  out  eternity  ?  4.  The  voice  of  prophecy,  God  had  often  so  spoken  to  the
Jews  before  the  days  of  Jeremiah,  and  reference  is  plainly  made  to  this  fact  in  the
text.  That  voice  still  lives,  because  truth  is  eternal.  Thus  God  speaks  to  us  through
the  inspired  thoughts  of  the  Bible.  6.  The  voice  of  Christ,  He  is  the  "  Word "  of
Grod  made  articulate  in  the  dialect  of  men  (John  i.  1 — 14).  He  who  sees  Christ  hears
the  voice  of  God.  6.  The  voice  of  conscience.  This  is  God  speaking  within  the  soul.
Every  time  we  feel  compunction  at  doing  wrong,  or  an  inward  urging  to  do  the  right,
God  is  pleading  in  our  heart  by  direct  communion,  spirit  with  spirit.

II.  The  voice  of  God  is  urgent.  God  speaks  with  urgency — "  rising  up  early  and
speaking."  1.  The  urgency  of  God's  voice  is  a  proof  of  his  great  love  to  his  children.
He  speaks  with  frequency,  repeating  the  same  unheeded  lesson,  and  even  when  none
attend  to  his  voice.  God  speaks  to  his  children  before  they  pray  to  him.  The  first
impulse  to  spiritual  communion  comes  from  God,  not  from  us  (Ps.  xxvii.  8).  Christ
stands  at  the  door  and  knocks  (Rev.  iii.  20).  We  may  see  in  this  an  evidence  of  the
long-sufiering  mercy  of  God — a  mercy  which  *'  endureth  for  ever,**  and  we  may  see  an
encouragement  to  listen  and  turn  to  him.  Still  he  "  waiteth  to  be  gracious.'*  2.  The
urgency  of  God's  voice  is  a  proof  of  the  great  importance  of  what  he  says.  God  is  urgent.
What  tremendous  destinies  must  turn  on  a  question  which  even  he  must  rouse  and
bestir  himself  about !  We  might  expect  that  any  voice  from  the  awful  majesty  of  God
would  be  full  of  deep  and  vast  meaning.  What  must  be  the  significance  of  his  words
when  even  he  speaks  with  earnest  insistance,  with  pressing  urgency  ?  How  can  such
an  utterance  be  passed  unheeded  ?

III.  (jod's  voice  is  often  not  heeded.  He  speaks  with  the  authority  of  the
majesty  of  heaven,  with  the  yearning  love  of  a  Father,  with  the  urgency  which
betokens  matters  of  profound  interest,  and  with  a  direct  reference  to  the  most  fearful
woe  and  the  most  glorious  blessedness  of  his  children.  Yet  men  turn  aside  with  indif-
ference. What  are  the  causes  of  this  appalling  wonder?  1.  Spiritual  deafness.  There
are  men  who  have  no  ears  for  the  voice  of  God.  Yet  God  can  open  our  ears  if  we  are
willing  to  hear.  2.  Hatred  to  the  highest  truth.  Men  stop  their  ears  against  the  sound
of  houest  words  which  are  hateful  to  sinful  hearts.  3.  Consciousness  of  guilt.  Fearing
words  of  doom,  men  refuse  to  hear  any  words  from  God ;  but  (1)  the  doom  will  not  b^
the  less  because  the  warning  is  unheeded,  and  (2)  God  warns  to  save.  4.  Unbelief,
I>oubt  as  to  whether  a  voice  is  Divine  is  often  natural,  and  if  the  doubt  grows  into
widespread  scepticism  the  cause  may  be  intellectual  rather  than  moral.  But  when
once  a  voice  is  recognized  as  Divine,  imbelief  is  distrust  in  God ;  it  is  '*  making  him  a
liar."

IV.  The  BEFU8AL  TO  give  heed  to  Qod's  voice  is  a  fatal  evil.  1.  It  aggravates
guilt  by  adding  to  it  (1)  fresh  rebellion  against  our  great  King,  (2)  ingratitude  to  the
pleading  love  of  our  merciful  Father,  (3)  wilful  sin  against  light.  2.  It  leaves  the
purpose  of  God's  voice  uneffected.  He  urges  and  pleads  with  his  children,  but  he  does
not  force  them  to  return  to  him.  If  they  will  not  heed  his  voice  that  voice  is  lost
upon  them,  and  the  ruin  from  which  it  would  call  them  unaverted.

Ver.  16. — Forbidden  prayers.    Certain  prayers  must  be  regarded  as  unlawful.

L  Pbayers  of  positive  demand.  Many  men  pray  as  though  they  were  dictating  to
God.  Prayer  is  petition,  not  command.  The  suppliant  should  assume  the  attitude  of
a  mendicant.

II.  Praters  which  aim  at  turning  the  will  of  God.  We  may  believe  that  G^
will  do  in  answer  to  prayer  what  he  would  not  do  apart  from  prayer,  because  the  very
prayer  may  be  the  one  essential  condition  which  makes  that  fitting  which  would  not
be  fitting  without  it.  But  this  must  be  in  accordance  with  God's  will,  which  is
always  perfect,  while  ours  is  often  evil.


190  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  vn.  1—34.


III.  Prayerh  for  what  IB  WBONQ  IN  ITSELF.  Gt)d  cannot  grant  such  prayers.  We
may  pray  for  all  men,  but  we  may  not  pray  for  every  imaginable  favour  to  be  given
to  all  men.  Thus  it  is  wrong  to  pray  that  the  impenitent  wicked  should  not  be
punished.  The  purpose  of  the  text  seems  to  be  just  to  forbid  this  prayer.  Jeremiah
M  not  to  pray  that  the  calamities  he  sees  approaching  may  not  fall  on  the  guilty
people.  It  would  be  bad  for  them  and  an  outrage  on  justice  that,  while  they  refused
to  hear  the  Divine  voice  warning  them  of  their  danger  and  inviting  them  to  the  way
of  safety,  God  should  hear  the  voice  of  any  intercessor  pleading  that  the  threat  should
not  be  accomplished,  and  that  the  wicked  people  should  be  saved  from  just  punishment.

Vers.  21 — 28. — Declension,  Jeremiah  endeavours  to  rouse  a  sense  of  guilt  in  his
liearers  by  pointing  to  the  sad  downward  course  of  their  history  when  this  is  regarded
in  the  light  of  Divine  requirements  and  inducements  to  follow  them.

I.  The  Divine  requirements.  These  were  not  for  the  offering  of  mere  formal
sacrifices,  but  for  obedience  to  God  in  heart  and  conduct  (1  Sam.  xv.  22).  Men  need
to  be  repeatedly  reminded  of  this  fact,  because  there  is  a  common  tendency  to  separate
religion  from  morality,  to  believe  that  God  is  pleased  with  the  performance  of  Church
services  by  those  whose  lives  are  spent  in  sin  and  selfishness,  and  that  the  devotions
of  the  sanctuary  atone  for  the  wickedness  of  daily  life.    Jeremiah  and  the  prophets

Senerally  teach  (1)  that  religious  services  are  worthless  except  as  expressions  of  inward
evotion,  and  (2)  that  no  reUgious  service  is  acceptable  while  obedience  in  common  life
is  neglected.

II.  The  inducements  to  fulfil  these  requirements.  1.  A  clear  statement  of
them.  Jeremiah  was  not  the  first  to  reveal  them.  They  were  well  known  and  easily
understood.  2.  Rewards  promised  for  obedience.  It  would  be  "  well  with  "  the  people
if  they  walked  in  all  the  ways  that  God  commanded  them.  Disobedience  led  to  the
Captivity.  Obedience  is  the  only  condition  on  which  we  can  enjoy  liberty.  8.
Bepeated  warnings.  (Ver.  25.)  By  all  forms  in  which  the  Divine  voice  reaches  us
God  is  continually  reminding  us  of  his  will  and  urging  us  to  obedience.

III.  The  causes  of  declension.  1.  Inattention,  "  They  hearkened  not."  People
are  too  preoccupied  by  worldly  concerns  to  give  the  requisite  thought  to  higher
interests.  2.  Stlf-will,  "  They  walked  in  the  counsels  and  stubbornness  of  their  evil
heart."  Men  disobey  through  the  conceit  of  superior  knowledge  and  through  the
obstinacy  of  selfish  aims.

IV.  The  character  of  declension.  1.  Departure  from  Ood,  Israel  turned  "  the
back  and  not  the  face ''  to  God.  In  disobeying  the  will  of  God  we  necessarily  cease  to
walk  with  God,  lose  the  light  of  his  presence,  become  godless.  2.  A  constant  deterio^
ration  of  morals.  The  contemporaries  of  Jeremiah  "  did  worse  than  their  fathers."
Progress  is  the  natural  order.  But,  left  to  itself,  the  leaven  of  wickedness  will  spread  as
surely  as  the  seed  of  goodness  would  grow  if  that  were  allowed  free  development.

V.  The  consequences  of  declension.  1.  Hardening  against  the  reception  of  truth,
(Ver.  27.)  The  people  have  reduced  themselves  to  such  a  condition  that  they  cannot
receive  the  prophet's  message.  2.  Inability  to  profit  by  correction,  **  This  is  a  nation
that  •  .  .  receiveth  not  correction"  (ver.  28).  3.  Destruction  of  the  value  of  religious
$ervices.  The  burnt  ofiering  should  express  the  dedication  of  the  worshipper.  But  as
it  does  nothing  of  the  kind,  it  is  worthless,  and  may  as  well  serve  as  flesh  for  a  common
meal  fver.  21).  Religion,  which  should  be  the  inspiration  of  morality,  is  dead  and
powerless  in  the  hands  of  people  of  corrupt  lives.  The  noblest  exercise  of  humanity  is
thus  reduced  to  a  nullity.

Ver.  32— ch.  viii.  3. — Horrors  of  retribution.  I.  There  is  reason  to  believe  that
horrors  of  sin  will  be  followed  by  horrors  of  retribution.  1.  Justice  requires  a
proportionate  relation  of  punishment  to  sin.  The  Jews  had  sinned  greatly.  It  was
right  that  they  should  be  punished  with  severity.     Mild  views  of  the  requirements  of

Sunishment  may  be  the  result  of  a  dulness  of  conscience  which  does  not  recognize  the
epth  of  guilt.  When  men  are  most  deeply  convinced  of  sin,  they  are  also  most
apprehensive  of  the  merited  wrath  of  God.  2.  Punishment,  to  be  effective,  must  be
proportionate  to  guilt.  In  its  three  functions  as  deterrent  when  threatened,  chastise-
ment for  correction  when  received,  and  warning  to  others  when  witnessed,  it  can  only


CH.  vn.  1—34.]  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.        191:


be  effectual  if  a  dae  proportion  be  observed.  3.  The  nature  of  Ood  leads  us  to  suppose
that  he  may  exact  horrible  retribution  for  horrible  sin.  He  is  almighty,  and  if  his
anger,  which  is  slow  to  rise,  is  at  length  roused,  this  must  be  terrible  indeed.  God  is
long-suffering,  merciful,  ready  to  forgive;  but  he  is  not  weak  and  indifTcrent  to  the
great  evils  of  sin.  It  is  not  reasonable  to  suppose  that  the  Divine  anger  will  be  the
less  in  its  outpouring  because  it  is  long  withheld.

II.  There  are  indications  or  the  horrors  of  retribution  in  the  scriptural
REVELATIONS  CONCERNING  IT.  Jeremiah  is  speaking  chiefly  of  physical  horrors  which
are  to  accompany  the  overthrow  of  Jerusalem.  But  he  suggests  that  these  contain
certain  necessary  elements  of  retribution.  1.  Death,  Tophet  shall  be  a  valley  of
slaughter.  The  great  and  ultimate  punishment  is  always  regarded,  not  as  pain,  but  as
death  (Rom.  vi.  23).  2.  Shame,  The  corpses  are  to  be  unburied  and  exposed  to  the
ravages  of  unclean  animals — for  the  Jew  a  fearful  degradation.  Sin  exposed,  con-
founded, defeated,  will  reflect  burning  shame  on  the  sinner.  3.  Anguish.  ''The
voice  of  mirth,"  etc.,  will  cease;  men  will  prefer  death  to  life  (ch.  viii.  3).  4.  A
peculiar  relation  of  penalty  to  offence,  Tophet,  the  scene  of  horrible  wickedness,  shall
be  the  spot  for  retributive  slaughter.  Where  wretched  men  immolated  their  children
their  own  dead  bodies  shall  be  cast.  The  sun  and  moon  and  stars  which  they  wor«
shipped  shall  look  down  on  their  bones  bleaching  out  in  the  open.

III.  There  are  times  when  it  is  necessary  to  make  men  think  of  the  horrors
OF  retribution.  The  language  of  Jeremiah  is  explicit  and  graphic.  1.  Details  of
future  retribution  should  not  take  the  chief  place  in  instruction.  They  lose  their  effect
by  too  frequent  repetition.  By  themselves  they  are  not  able  to  produce  a  better  life,
but  may  result  in  hardness,  unbelief,  and  disgust  The  love  of  God  in  Christ  is  the
great  power  to  lead  to  holiness.  2.  Nevertheless  we  must  not  shun  to  declare  "  the
whole  counsel  of  Gbd."  Thoughts  of  retribution  may  be  powerful  means  for  rousing
convictions  of  sin,  if  they  are  accompanied  by  appeals  to  conscience  which  make  men
feel  the  due  proportion  of  guilt  to  punishment.


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1 — Z,'^Keep%ng  the  temple  gate.  It  was  probably  not  the  outer  gate,  but  one  of
the  gates  which  led  from  the  outer  to  the  inner  or  upper  court  (cf.  ch.  xix.  14 ;  xxvi.
10 ;  xxxvi.  10).  "  From  this  point  the  prophet  could  view  the  whole  assembly  of  the
people  in  the  outer  court,  as  well  as  the  gates  leading  from  without  into  it  **  (Lange).
Christ  seems  to  have  stood  thus  at  times.

I.  The  preacher  of  truth  does  well  to  choose  the  most  impressive  positions,

000ASI0N8,  AND  CIRCUMSTANCES  FOR  THE  DELIVERY  OF  HIS  MESSAGE.      The  great  aim  of

the  preacher  is  to  get  a  hearing  for  what  he  has  to  say.  Tact  (to  a  certain  degree),
artistic  juxtaposition  and  arrangement,  sympathy  with  the  spirit  of  the  times,  etc.,  are
indispensable  qualities  to  him  who  would  give  the  Word  of  God  bold  and  effective
expression.  Public  occasions  may,  therefore,  frequently  be  utilized  for  special  services,
etc.  Passing  movement  and  contemporary  events  may  give  fresh  interest  to  perma-
nent truth.  A  curious  ingenuity  is  sometimes  exhibited  in  making  the  preacher
inconspicuous  and  reducing  his  office  to  a  matter  of  routine.  He  ought  always  to  feel
that  his  message  is  an  extraordinary  one,  requiring  all  the  earnestness  and  effort  of
which  he  is  capable  to  convey  it  with  due  effect.  And  even  then  it  must  have  suffered
at  his  hands,  and  in  much  he  will  be  an  unprofitable  servant.

II.  Religious  observance  may  be  very  fashionable,  and  all  but  untverbal,
WHERE  THERE  IS  LITTLE  REAL  RELIGION.  One  has  to  distinguish  between  the  outward
and  the  inward,  the  religion  of  rite  and  ceremony  and  that  of  the  heart.  Here
apparently  the  representatives  of  *'  all  Judah  "  were  assembled,  and  yet  it  was  no  sign
of  national  piety,  but  rather  the  contrary.  Instead  of  the  carnal  nature  being  checked
and  corrected,  it  was  directly  fostered  by  such  worship.  Public  worship  is  a  phrase
which  often  includes  elements  that  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  worship  of  Gk)d.  That
the  services  of  Ood's  house  should  be  chaste  and  attractive  will  be  generally  admitted.
But  architectural  adornments,  musical  accessories  of  an  ornate  or  merely  artistic  nature,
displays  of  rhetoric,  and  similar  adcUtions  to  the  essential  characte/of  the  worship,  may


192  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  vii.  1— 54.

prove  popular  and  entertaining,  and  yet  be  spiritually  pernicious.  In  the  case  of  Judah
the  whole  worship  was  on  a  low  intellectual  and  spiritual  key.  The  gods  of  heathenism
and  Jehovah  were  worshipped  alike,  and  the  licentious  rites  of  idolatry  mingled  with
the  sacrifices  of  the  Law.  This  had  resulted  in  the  temple  being  polluted  and
becoming  a  "  den  of  thieves."  Our  aims  in  worship,  the  purity  and  concentration  of
our  hearts,  the  moral  relation  between  our  every-day  life  and  our  temple  service,  have
all  very  intimately  to  do  with  the  question  of  the  value  of  public  religious  observances.

III.  RiGUTEousNESs  OUGHT  TO  BE  PRELIMINARY  TO  WORSHIP.  "  Amend  your  ways
and  your  doings"  is  the  demand  the  prophet  makes  in  proof  of  the  genuineness  of
their  worship.  Religion  is  a  matter  of  life,  and  not  of  showy  observances  and  empty
protestations.  The  best  proof  that  we  intend  serving  God  is  that  we  have  already
Degun  to  do  so  in  business  and  morals.  This  duty,  although  difficult,  is  the  best  prepara*
lion  for  exalted  spiritual  experiences  and  sincere  adoration.  Men  are  not  fit  to  appear
before  God  when  their  misdeeds  are  still  being  repeated  and  their  moral  habits  are  not
under  the  influence  of  his  Spirit.

IV.  Unreal  worship  of  God  is  certain  to  be  detected  and  exposed.  We  can
imagine  the  shame  of  the  nobility  and  people  whom  the  prophet  from  his  unlooked-for
vantage-point  so  sharply  rebukea. — M.

Vers.  4 — 7. — Who  shall  dwell  in  the  house  of  the  Lordf  I.  An  unwarrantable
ASSUMPTION.  They  arrogate  to  themselves,  not  only  the  exclusive  possession  of  a
meeting-place  between  God  and  man,  but  they  speak  of  themselves  as  in  a  special  and
peculiar  sense  the  temple  of  God.  1.  There  is  an  argument  latent  here.  The  temple
is  looked  upon  as  a  permanent  and  immovable  building — a  place  of  intercourse  between
Jehovah  and  his  people.  It  is  the  only  place  of  the  kind,  and  it  will  stand  for  aye.  But
the  Jews  are  so  related  to  the  temple,  so  bound  up  with  its  existence  and  maintenance,
that  they  esteem  themselves  identified  with  it,  and  therefore  partaking  of  its  attributes.
By  an  easy  transition,  to  which  language  affords  many  parallels,  they  come  to  say,
"  The  temple  of  the  Lord  is  this  [i.e,  are  we]."  2.  And  yet  this  very  pretension,
when  spiritually  interpreted,  expresses  a  gracious  and  mysterious  truth.  That  is  the
intention  and  aim  of  man's  creation.  Every  man,  as  man,  is  made  to  be  a  temple  of
the  Holy  Ghost.  This  is  his  purpose  and  obligation ;  but,  instead  of  this,  how  opposite
is  the  actual  condition  of  most  men  I  Not,  therefore,  as  a  matter  of  course,  inde-
pendently of  moral  resolve  and  Divine  inspiration,  but  as  something  to  be  striven  after
and  earnestly  realized  in  holiness  of  life,  is  man  the  "  temple  of  the  Lord."  3.  And  as
is  often  the  case,  the  illegitimate  narrowing  and  monopoly  of  this  Divine  indwelling  is
the  very  sign  of  its  absence.  They  who  rest  upon  other  than  moral  grounds  for  the
claim  to  the  presence  of  God  within  them  are  usurpers.  It  is  the  universal  privilege
of  those  who  serve  God  acceptably  in  spirit  and  in  life.  That  which  has  a  moral  con-^
dition  cannot  be  confined  to  local  or  sectarian  limits.

II.  A  COMMANDMENT  WITH  PROMISE.  A  rehearsal  of  common  duties  enjoined  by
the  Law  of  Moses.  It  is  terse,  prosaic,  detailed,  and  altogether  opposed  to  the  absurd
pretension  it  is  meant  to  correct.  Just  those  duties,  too,  are  mentioned  which  the
prophet  was  well  aware  had  been  neglected  by  Judah.  There  is  nothing  brilliant  or
magnificent  about  the  catalogue  of  deeds.  They  are  just  such  actions  as  are  obligatory
upon  all  men.  It  was  not  even  necessary  for  a  man  to  be  a  Jew  to  do  them  ;  for  when
the  Gentiles  do  these  things  it  shows  that  there  must  be  a  law  written  upon  their
hearts  by  nature  or  grace.  And  yet  the  greatest  in  Jerusalem  could  not,  any  more
than  the  heathen,  do  the  least  of  them  perfectly.  How  gracious  that  to  them,  therefore,
is  attached  this  promise  of  temple  consecration  I  So  the  grand  human  duties  and
merciful  dispositions,  without  which  life  would  be  so  hard,  are  recommended  and
enforced  by  that  comprehensive  promise,  to  be  immediately  realized  in  personal
blessing  and  consecration^  to  be  completely  fulfilled  when  "  the  tabernacle  of  God  shall
be  with  men." — M.

Vers.  13,  25. — ^*  Rising  up  early, ^^  A  striking  expression  concerning  Jehovah.  In
vor.  25  it  is  strengthened :  *'  Daily  rising  up  early."    It  speaks  to  us —

I.  Op  THE  ANXIETY  OP  Jehovah  FOR  HIS  PEOPLE.  He  who  has  important  business
on  hand,  or  dear  ones  in  trying  circumstances,  or  great  results  dependent  upon  imme*


en.  vn.  1—34.]    THE  IK)OK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  193


diate  and  strenuous  exertion,  will  show  diligence  in  some  such  way.  He  will  be
unable  to  rest.  So  it  is  with  Gk>d  and  his  Church.  Not  that  he  can  be  said  to  fear
or  be  uncertain  as  to  the  issues.  But  the  interest  he  has  in  the  fortunes  and  spiritual
state  of  his  people  is  of  this  description.  It  is  no  impassive  God  who  is  present^  to
us  in  Scripture.  A  profound  concern  for  the  interests  of  our  race  ever  fills  the  mind
of  God.  His  deepest  affections  are  engaged.  He  mourns  the  sin  and  rejoices  in  the
salvation  of  men.

II.  Of  his  diligence  in  pbovidinq  fob  the  wants  of  his  people.  It  is  no  aimless,
helpless  anxiety  that  fills  his  breast.  The  most  practical  measures  of  help  and  direc-
tion are  devised  and  carried  into  execution.  Prophets,  the  plenipotentiaries  of  Divine
grace,  are  sent  in  immediate  response  to  the  needs  and  demands  of  men.  No  age  of
the  world  or  the  Church  but  has  its  thick  succession.  Heaven  is  in  continual  activity
on  behalf  of  sinners.  The  choicest  spiritual  gifts  are  ceaselessly  rained  upon  the  earth.
The  most  devoted  servants  of  God  are  raised  up  and  sent,  l^uth  in  quick  evolution
anticipates  the  spiritual  necessities  of  those  who  would  seek  God.  There  is  no  flaggings
no  cessation,  from  Adam's  fall  to  the  uplifting  of  the  second  Adam.  And  onwarofrom
that  Divine  spectacle,  in  which  was  displayed  the  "  fulness  of  the  Gt)dhead  bodily,"
events  hurry  to  the  culminating  glories  of  Pentecost  and  the  marriage  supper  of  the
Lamb.

III.  If  this  be  the  case,  how  ouoht  we  to  study  and  lay  hold  of  the  hessaoe
OF  salvation  ?  Is  there  not  a  contrast  between  the  affectionate  concern  and  sacrifice
of  God  and  the  languid  indifference  or  stubborn  refusals  of  men  ?  How  shall  we  escape
if  we  neglect  this  infinite  mercy?  How  shall  we  excuse  the  manner  in  which  we  listen
to  the  Word  of  God  ?— M.

Vers.  17 — 20. — Idolatry  a  detailed  insult  to  Jehovah.  This  is  frequently  stated  in
the  Bible.  It  must  be  the  case  from  the  very  nature  of  the  worship  of  false  gods.  It
is  a  denial  and  robbery  of  the  true  God.  But  the  description  here  given  helps  us  to
realize  more  completely  the  intense  sinfulness  of  the  worship  of  idou^  because  of  the
circumstances  attending  it.

I.  AaoBAVATiNa  cibcuustances.  1.  It  tvas  done  puhlidy  in  the  streets  of  Jerusalem
and  the  cities  of  Judah.  God  was  displaced  from  the  land  he  had  given.  The  place
that  was  consecrated  by  the  faith  and  worship  of  the  saints  and  the  ceaseless  mercies
of  Jehovah  is  desecrated  by  the  orgies  and  profanities  of  heathenism.  The  worship  of
the  "  queen  of  heaven  "  (the  female  representative— Astarte— of  the  nature  principle,
of  which  Baal  is  the  male  principle)  could  not  but  be  public.  As  the  Baal  worshippers
poured  forth  their  libations  to  the  sun-god  in  broaa  day,  so  the  worshippers  of  the
moon  made  no  secret  of  their  devotions.  It  was  done  literally  and  per&rce  "  in  the
face  of  heaven.''  And  celebrations  of  the  most  obscene  description  mingled  with  their
sacrifices.  Yet  was  there  no  shame.  2.  It  absorbed  the  attention  and  energies  of  the
people.  Here  is  a  picture  of  a  whole  family,  from  the  eldest  to  the  least,  occupied  in
tasks  connected  with  the  worship  of  Astarte.  How  different  from  the  perfunctory  or
imperfect  service  rendered  to  Jehovah  I  No  time  was  left  for  the  true  worship.  And
is  it  not  just  so  to-day  under  new  forms  and  conditions  ?  The  idolatry  of  pleasure,
gain,  ambition,  personal  and  social  ideals,— does  it  not  absorb  the  minds  and  bodies  of
its  devotees  ?  How  little  time  is  left  for  Christian  duty  and  sacrifice  I  How  weary
and  useless  are  those  faculties  which  are  professedly  placed  at  the  service  of  Gbd  1
Our  life-work  is  too  often  in  the  market-place,  in  the  forum  of  personal  display  and
self-seeking,  etc.,  instead  of  the  service  of  Jesus  and  the  house  of  God.  3.  It
involved  the  uxute  of  the  natural  products  of  the  land,

II.  The  delibebate  intention.  There  was  not  wanting  this  expressed  defiance.
The  idea  is  that  they  would  annoy  and  exasperate  Jehovah  with  impunity  to  them<*
selves,  as  mean  natures  delight  in  awakening  the  jealousy,  etc.,  of  others.  In  this  way
they  showed  how  completely  they  misunderstood  the  relations  of  Jehovah  with  his
world  and  his  people,  his  command  over  the  forces  of  nature,  and  his  power  of  retalia-
tion through  tne  ordinary  laws  of  nature.

III.  Its  becompense.  1.  According  to  natural  laws.  Affecting,  therefore,  the
objects  they  required  for  their  sacrifices  to  Astarte,  and  cutting  off  the  supplies  requisite
for  man  and  beast.    2.  To  their  own  confusion.    God  will  be  unaffected ;  they  them-

JEBEmAH.  o


194        THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  [ch.til1— M.


•elTes  will  he  pat  to  ahame.  The  idolater  and  atheist  are  their  own  wont  enemies.
3.  Not  to  be  neaped  or  ended,  Thej  are  playing  with  fire.  It  will  soon  find  its  prt^jcr
objects  in  themselTes  and  their  nroCaned  offerings.  Nor  will  thej  be  able  to  quench
that  which  they  haye  kindled,  bo  helpless  will  transgressors  erer  be.  In  the  least  of
the  calamities  that  they  provoke  upon  them^Wes  there  is  a  beginning  of  penal  fires
and  eternal  mlaeries. — M«

Vers.  31 — 33. — The  desecration  of  Tophel.  This  ralley  was  the  scene  of  Solomon's
Moloch-worship,  of  the  child-sacrifices  of  Ahaz  and  Manasseh,  and  of  the  varying
idolatrons  rites  of  succeeding  times.  If  the  temple  still  maintained  externally  its
consecration  to  Jehovah  and  its  position  as  the  centre  of  the  theocracy,  the  valley  of
Ben-Hinnom  was  the  acknowledged  centre  and  high  place  of  Moloch.  Its  vicinity  to
Jerusalem  brought  it  into  prominent  opposition  to  the  temple.  Some  signal  exhibition
of  the  Divine  wrath  is,  therefore,  called  for.  This  is  furnished  by  the  iconoclastic  zeal
of  Josiah,  the  great  slaughter  of  Israel  in  war,  and  the  gradual  use  of  it  as  a  receptacle
for  filth,  sewage,  unburied  dead,  etc.  The  prophecy,  repeated  in  ch.  xix.  11,  is
speedily  translated  into  history.    We  have  here  an  instance  of  the  Divine  laws —

L  That  that  which  is  morally  corbcpt  shall  entail  destruction.  Where
there  is  filth  in  God's  universe  there  will  be  fire.  Corruption  is  the  beginning  of
death,  in  this  world  and  that  which  is  to  come.

II.  The  inward,  moral  character  of  thixos  akd  persons  shall  have  external
PHYSICAL  EXPRESSION.  It  will  not  always  be  concealed.  That  which  is  whispered  in
the  ear  shall  be  spoken  from  the  house-top.  The  trap  will  be  labelled  and  the  pitfall
j)lainly  shown.  The  externalizing  processes  of  history  and  development  in  nations,
individuals,  etc.,  tend  to  declare  by  outward  and  unmistakable  signs  the  real  character.
Of  this  Tophet  is  an  illustration.  The  judgment  its  revolting  practices  bring  upon  its
votaries  is  the  occasion  of  its  permanent  defilement.  It  gradually  is  transformed  into
a  scene  of  physical  abomination,  and,  to  the  spiritual  imagination,  the  type  and  symbol
of  eternal  perdition.  Gehenna  fire&^how  dififercnt  their  first  and  last  senses,  and  yet
how  related!  The  same  law  will  operate  in  holy  and  spiritual  men.  The  inward
nature  will  cast  the  slough  of  corruption,  and  shall  be  clothed  upon  with  a  "  body,"
which  shall  express,  further,  and  fulfil  it.  When  that  which  is  really  and  spiritually
filthy  is  sentenced  to  be  "filthy  still,"  the  saints  shall  find  embodiment  and  circum-
stances corresponding  to  their  inward  condition,  and  constituting  the  elements  of  their
reward. — M.


i


Vers.  1 — 34. — JTie  relations  of  righteousness  and  religion.  This  chapter,  as  indeed
so  much  other  of  Jeremiah's  prophecies,  teaches  not  a  little  concerning  this  great  theme.
In  this  chapter  we  note  how  it  shows—

I.  That  righteousness  is  the  principal  thino.  1.  It  is  God's  solemn  demand
ver.  2).  (1)  Jeremiah  is  charged  to  proclaim  it  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord  and  as  his  word.
2)  He  is  to  go  where  there  will  be  a  vast  congregation  of  the  people :  "  In  the  gate  of

the  Lord's  house."  (3)  Probably  at  a  time  of  national  gathering,  at  one  of  the  feasts,
so  as  to  secure  a  yet  larger  audience.  (4)  At  a  moment  when  the  word  of  the  Lord
might  be  expected  to  win  most  attention  from  them — as  they  were  "  entering  in  at  the
gates  to  worship  the  Lord."  2.  It  is  God's  perpetual  demand.  See  the  whole  chapter,
the  whole  prophecy.  "  Amend  your  ways  and  your  doings  "  (ver.  3)  is  ite  constant
appeal.  3.  At  first  it  was  his  only  command,  and  it  is  ever  his  first  command  (ver.  22).
Our  first  parents  were  commanded  to  obey  before  sacrifice  or  any  rites  of  religion  were
appointed.  And  so  with  Israel  (ver.  22).  The  moral  Law  was  given  before  the  cere-
monial. And  it  was  given  in  a  far  more  imperative  form.  The  moral  Law  begins
"  Thou  Shalt ; "  the  Levitical  (Lev.  i.  2—u.  1),  "  If  any  man  will."  Hence  from  all
the  foregoing  it  is  evident  that  righteousness  stands  before  all  else  in  the  Divine  esteem.

II.  Religion  was  given  for  the  sake  of  and  as  an  aid  to  righteousness.
Righteousness  is  not  for  the  sake  of  religion,  but  vice  versa.  No  doubt  they  render  mutual
lieip,  but  the  proper  relation  of  the  two  is  as  aforesaid.  And  religion  can  be  a  help  to
righteousness  ana  ought  ever  to  be,  even  as  it  has  often  been  and  is.  1.  JBy  supplying
fresh  motives.  Apart  from  religion,  righteous  conduct  becomes  simply  morality,  and
\Kiacs  itself  upon  laws  of  expediency,  or  at  best  draws  its  force  from  motives  that  rise  no


CH.VU.1— 34.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  TROPHET  JEREMIAH.  195


higher  than  earth  and  man  and  the  present  life.  But  religion  gives  the  love  of  Ood  in
Christ  as  its  all-constraining  force.  Under  the  influence  of  this,  what  have  not  men
done  and  home ;  and  what  will  they  not  do  and  bear  ?  2.  Bv  lending  intensity  to  those
already  in  action.  How  puny  the  power  of  hope,  when  it  has  none  other  recompense
than  that  which  this  life  and  this  world  can  furnish,  contrasted  with  its  invincible  force
when  the  recompenses  of  eternity,  made  known  to  us  by  religion,  are  set  before  it  and
held  out  to  it !  And  so  with  the  motive  of  fear.  What  an  immense  addition  is  made
to  the  deterrent  force  of  fear  when  the  idea  of  God  and  his  awful  displeasure  are  present
before  the  mind  I

"  His  love  will  all  vain  love  expel,
His  fear  all  fear  beside."

3.  By  furnishing  a  perfect  example.  In  our  blessed  Lord's  life,  short  as  it  was  in
duration,  and  far  removed  from  us  as  it  is  in  time,  place,  and  circumstance,  neverthe-
less in  it  there  is  to  be  found  a  standard  and  model  of  righteous  conduct  for  all  ages
and  all  lands,  such  as  can  be  found  nowhere  else.  His  Hfe  has  been  the  compass  by
which  many  a  saint  has  steered  across  the  difiBcult  ocean  of  life,  and  by  its  aid  arrived
safely  at  the  desired  haven.  4.  By  winning  for  us,  in  response  to  our  fervent  prayers^
the  ever-present  and  potent  help  of  the  Divine  and  transforming  Spirit.  By  his  aid  the
very  "  body  of  sin "  within  us  is  crucified,  and  we  become  new  creatures  in  Christ.
5.  By  its  ordinances  of  worship  :  its  continual  teaching,  its  Church  fellowship,  and  its
varied  sacred  observances,  keeping  alive  within  us  those  beliefs  and  sentiments  which
are  ever  the  most  powerful  prompters  to  all  righteousness  of  life.  Thus  the  Israelite
of  old  found  the  Law  of  God  (cf.  Ps.  cxix.)  his  perpetual  aid,  and  the  worship  of  God'a
house  a  constant  solace  and  strength.  And  it  is  so  still.  By  the  truths  and  the  ordi-
nances of  religion,  the  weak,  wavering  will  is  steadied,  the  feet  are  kept  from  falling,
and  the  soul  is  preserved  from  death.  Such  ought  ever  to  be  the  case,  ever  is  so,  where
religion  is  the  worship  of  God  in  spirit  and  in  truth ;  and  this  was  the  Divine  design  and
intent  in  giving  it  to  us.

m.  But  they  are  at  times  found  asunder.  Religion  may  flourish,  but  righteous-
ness be  only  conspicuous  by  its  absence.  It  was  so  in  the  time  of  the  prophet.  We  see  a
whole  apparatus  of  religion — temple,  altar,  priests,  sacrifices,  services  ;  nothing  omitted
in  external  observances.  And  there  was  a  national  profession  of  it ;  large  sums  of  money
were  lavished  on  it,  and  there  was  a  universal  outward  regard  for  it.  But,  on  the  other
hand,  all  this  went  on  whilst  the  most  gross  unrighteousness  characterized  the  very
people  who  outwardly  were  so  religious  (cf.  vers.  6, 6, 9, 18).  This  was  an  appalling  fact.
Not,  alas !  is  it  one  that  now  has  no  existence ;  the  same  sad  separation  of  religion  from
righteousness  may  be  too  often  seen  in  our  days  as  of  old.  The  murderous  l^nditti  of
Southern  Europe  are  diligent  at  Mass,  and  pay  all  honour  to  the  Virgin  and  saints.  The
midnight  assassins  of  Ireland  are  all  good  Catholics.  And  many  a  chapel  and  church
in  our  own  land  has  amongst  its  seemingly  most  religious  worshippers^  men  who  are
cruel,  hard,  fraudulent,  impure—"  saints  at  the  prayer-meeting  and  sacrament,  but  very
devils  at  home."

IV.  They  may  be  even  opposed  to  one  another.  Not  merely  separate,  but
antagonistic.  Yes,  religion,  which  was  designed  to  minister  to  righteousness,  may  not
only  be  severed  from  it,  but  be  actually  found  undermining  it,  sapping  its  very  life  and
strength.  Thus :  1.  By  begetting  false  confidence,  (Cf.  ver.  4.)  The  Jews  thought  that
all  this  religion  must  guarantee  them  immunity  from  the  Divine  displeasure,  must  ensure
them  his  safeguard  and  protection.  He,  so  they  thought,  could  never  suffer  harm  to  come
to  his  own  temple — "  the  temple  of  the  Lord.'*  And  still  it  is  hard  to  persuade  our  hearts
that  all  our  religion  goes  for  nothing,  and  worse  than  nothing,  when  it  brings  forth  no
fruit  of  righteousness.  So  many  prayers,  such  liberal  gifts,  such  good  desires,  such
correctness  of  creed  and  of  outward  demeanour,  such  devotional  fervour, — surely  these
things  must  propitiate  Heaven,  must  ward  off"  the  Divine  displeasure  I  (Cf.  G.  Eliot's
character,  Bulstrode,  the  fraudulent  but  very  religious  banker,  in  *  Middlemarch.*)  2.  By
teaching  men  truths  which  they  can  readily  vrrest  to  evil,  (Cf.  ver.  10.)  The  meaning
(see  Exposition)  is  not  "  We  cannot  help  ourselves ;  GKxi  has  given  us  over  to  sin ; "  but
"  We  are  delivered  by  our  religious  observances — sacrifices  and  the  like;  the  score  is  cleared
off ;  we  are  secured  against  harm ;  we  mav  go  and  live  as  we  list."  Thus  they  "  turned
the  grace  of  God  into  lasciviousness,"  ana  "  continued  in  sin  that,"  etc.    And  is  not  this


196  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [en.  vii.  1-34.


done  still  ?  It  is  to  be  feared  that  not  a  few  suck  a  poisonous  pleasure  from  the  blessed
doctrine  of  the  forgiving  love  of  God.  Thus  the  gospel  itself  may  become  a  "  savour  of
death  unto  death  "  to  those  who  thus  "  make  Christ  the  Minister  of  sin."  And  because
religion  has  been  seen  so  often  severed  from  righteousness,  and  sometimes  even  minister-
ing to  unrighteousness,  many  have  been  and  are  eager  to  sweep  it  away  altogether  as  a
hindrance  rather  than  a  help  to  moral  well-being.  A  highly  educated  German  gentle-
man, whom  the  writer  met  abroad,  expressed  it  as  his  strong  and  deliberate  conviction
that  the  religiousness  and  the  decay  of  a  people  stand  related  as  cause  and  eflcct.  He
argued  that  England  must  sink  because  her  leading  statesman  was  an  eminently  reU-
gious  man.  Ana  were  religion  necessarily  or  generally  severed  from  righteousness,  still
more  if  it  were  necessarily  or  generally  opposed  to  righteousness,  then  it  would  deserve
the  denunciation  of  all  right-minded  men,  and  the  sooner  it  were  swept  utterly  out  of  the
way  the  better.  But  all  we  can  say  is  that  if  righteousness  be  not  found  in  company
•with  religion,  it  is  to  be  found  nowhere  else  ;  and  if  the  Church  of  God,  the  great  com-
pany of  those  who  profess  to  be  actuated  by  religious  motives  and  aims,  do  not  furnish
and  nurture  God-like  and  righteous  souls,  then  there  is  no  other  company  on  the  face  of
the  earth  that  does  so.    Bad  as  the  Church  may  be,  the  world  is  far  worse.

V.  What,  then,  is  our  duty  ?  Not  to  inveigh  against  religion,  still  less  to  seek  its
destruction,  but  to  do  all  we  can  to  restore  the  original  and  God-designed  relationship
between  it  and  righteousness.  "  What  God  hath  joined  together,  let,"  etc.  And  it  is
on  this  restoration  of  right  relationship  between  the  two  that  God  so  strenuously  and
sternly  insists  here  and  throughout  his  Word.  If  (ver.  3)  they  will  amend  their  ways,
then  his  blessing ;  but  if  not,  he  will  have  no  mercy.  He  cites  the  instance  of  Shiloh
as  a  solemn  warning  to  them  (ver.  14).  He  forbids  Jeremiah  even  to  pray  for  them
whilst  they  continue  as  they  are  (ver.  16).  He  pours  his  contempt  upon  all  their
religion,  their  burnt  offerings,  and  sacrifices  (ver.  21),  whilst  severed  from  righteousness.
He  tells  them  that  all  along  in  their  history,  from  the  first  until  now,  he  had  asked
for,  though  he  had  never  received  it  from  them,  not  religion  merely,  but  righteousness —
obedience  to  his  Word  (vers.  21 — 28).  Instead  of  that  they  had  committed  all  abomi-
nation, and  therefore  they  should  miserably  perish  (vers.  29 — 34).  How  dreadful,  then,
must  be  the  separation,  and  yet  more  the  antagonism,  between  these  whom  God  united  I
As  he  gave  Eve  to  be  a  help-meet  to  Adam,  so  did  he  give  religion  to  be  the  help-meet
of  righteousness.  Let  us  tremble  with  a  holy  fear  if  we  find  ourselves  able  to  go  on
contentedly  in  religious  observances,  whilst  conscience  becomes  less  and  less  sensitive,
and  our  love  and  loyalty  to  righteousness  grow  feebler  day  by  day.  Our  subject  shows
us  that  such  a  disastrous  condition  is  possible.  But  that  we  may  escape  it,  let  us
resolve  that,  inasmuch  as  God  has  given  us  religion  for  our  help— a  help  whicn  our  blessed
Lord  himself  ever  made  use  of —

**  Cold  mountains  and  the  midnight  air
Witnessed  the  fervour  of  his  prayer ; "

—we  will  know  the  possibilities  of  help  towards  holiness  which  undoubtedly  it  contains.
Let  us  set  ourselves  to  seek  the  "  baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost "  and  "  the  enduements  of
power  "  which  come  therefrom.  If  we  do  thus  set  ourselves  to  seek  these,  they  shall
be  ours,  for  they  are  most  certainly  promised  ;  so  shall  religion  and  righteousness  abide
in  that  most  intimate  and  hallowed  union  which  God  from  the  first  designed  for  them,
and  our  righteousness,  ministered  to  by  its  God-given  help-meet  religion,  shall  far  exceed
that  of  the  scribes  and  Pharisees,  yea,  shall  advance  ever  nearer  to  that  most  glorious
attainment,  in  which  we  shall  be  as  our  Saviour  bid  us  be — *'  perfect,  as  our  Father  in
heaven  is  perfect." — C.

Ver.  3. — The  indispensable  condition  of  all  grace,  "  Amend  your  ways,"  etc.  See
how  this  demand  for  amendment  is  reiterated  in  this  chapter  and  throughout  this
prophecy.    And  we  observe —

I.  It  is  ever  so.  1.  See  the  Word  of  Qod,  The  prodigal  had  to  come  away  from
the  far  country  first.    John  the  Baptist,  our  Lord,  and  his  apostles  all  preached  repent-


CH.  viL  1—34.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMUll.  197

this  same  demand  of  those  who  rebel  against  their  laws.  4.  God's  providence  upholds
this  demand.  The  constitution  of  things  is  for  the  obedient  and  against  the  trans-
gressor  (cf.  Butler's  •  Analogy ').

II.  And  the  beasoks  abe  because  sin  :  1.  Outtx^ges  God.  What  order  or  happi-
ness can  there  be  in  that  household  where  the  authority  of  the  head  is  openly  set  afe
naught  ?  2.  h  dogged  hy  wrrow  and  death.  The  avenging  deities  were  said  to  be
shod  with  wool,  so  that  their  footsteps,  ever  following  the  transgressor,  were  not  heard.
It  was  the  vision  of  sin  and  its  awful  issues  that  caused  Jesus  to  sigh,  to  be  troubled  in
spirit,  and  to  weep ;  it  was  his  agony.  Now,  God  would  save  us,  but  cannot  until  wo
have  done  with  wickedness.  3.  Binds  the  soul  to  enmity  against  God,  Deeds  of
wrong  are  the  devil's  sacraments,  whereby  he  seds  on  the  soul  his  own  impress  and
pledges  the  soul  to  serve  him.  Every  solitary  act  of  sin  deepens  that  impress  and
makes  that  pledge  more  irrevocable.  Therefore,  if  the  soul  is  to  be  saved,  that  bond
must  be  broken.  4.  Amendment  in  conduct  is  Vie  first  step  towards  the  restoration  of
th/e  souL  A  man  may  break  off  ill-doing,  and  yet  his  heart  be  very  far  from  right  with
God.  Still,  because  every  victory  over  sin  strengthens  the  conscience  and  weakens
the  power  of  sin,  its  hold  is  thus  loosened  upon  the  soul,  and  the  work  of  restoration
is  so  far  advanced.

III.  But  compliance  with  this  most  biqhteous  demand  is  :  1.  Often  very  difficult.
Ask  the  drunkard,  the  impure,  the  worldling,  the  gambler,  if  they  find  it  easy  to
break  away  from  their  besetting  sins.  How  like  a  set  of  fiends  they  clamour  for  their
wonted  indulgence !  "  Hoc  opus  hie  labor  est."  2.  But  never  impossible.  No ;  for
along  with  every  Divine  command  goes  forth  the  strength  needed  for  obedience.  How
absurd,  on  mere  human  principles,  for  our  Lord  to  bid  the  man  with  the  withered  hand
to  stretch  it  forth  ;  the  palsied  to  rise,  take  up  his  bed,  and  walk ;  and  Lazarus  to  come
forth  from  his  tomb !  But  all  these  facts  are  record^  to  encourage  those  who  would
turn  to  the  Lord,  but  yet  *'  are  sore  let  and  hindered."    We  often  ask—

'*  Oh,  how  shall  feeble  flesh  and  blood
Burst  through  the  bonds  of  sin  ?
The  holy  kingdom  of  our  GKkI,
.    What  soul  shall  enter  in?"

And  there  could  be  but  one  sad  answer  were  it  not  that  he  who  gives  the  command
gives  also  the  needed  help.    Yes —

**  There  is  a  way  for  man  to  ri^
To  that  sublime  abode ;
An  offering  and  a  sacrifice,
A  Holy  Spirit's  energies,
An  Advocate  with  God."

3.  And  ever  blessed.  (Cf.  vers.  3,  7.)  All  those  precious  sentences  with  which  the  ser-
mon on  the  mount  opens,  and  which  we  call  the  beatitudes,  were  addressed  to  those  who
had  resolved,  by  God's  grace,  to  amend  their  ways.  Christ  has  no  other  word  for
them  than  that  they  are  blessed,  and  what  his  Word  afi&nns  all  they  who  have  followed
his  leading  do  with  grateful  heart  confirm.  Yes,  "  blessed  are  they  that  do  his  com-
mandments, that  they  may  have  right  to  the  tree  of  life,  and  may  enter  in  through
the  gates  into  the  city."  4.  But  if  refused^  is  awfully  avenged.  Too  often  it  is
refused.  It  was  so  here.  All  manner  of  excuse  attempted,  and  though  these  '*  lying
words"  (ver.  4)  were  and  are  exposed  again,  the  refusal  is  persisted  in,  and  then  "  the
wrath  of  God  arises,  and  there  is  no  remedy."  "  From  all  such  hardness  of  heart  and
contempt  of  thy  holy  Word  and  commandment,  good  Lord,  deliver  us."— C.

Ver.  4.— How  men  deceive  themselves.  "  The  temple  of  the  Lord,  the  temple  of  the
Lord,"  etc.  The  people  of  Jerusalem  were  flattering  themselves  that  no  harm  would
come  to  them  because  of  the  presence  in  their  midst  of  the  temple  of  the  Lord.  And
men  flatter  themselves  in  like  manner  still.    Now  let  us—

I.  Coksideb  thbib  aboument.  Gh)d  had  said,  "  In  this  house  will  I  dwell."  They
knew  that,  and  hence  it  seemed  impossible  that  it  should  be  devastated  by  the  heathen.
It  waa  the  place  of  which  he  had  said, "  There  *  mine  honour  dwelleth.' "    The  cloud  of


198  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  vn.  1—34.

glory  bad  filled  it,  the  Shechinali  brightness  rested  on  the  mercy-seat.  Was  it  to  be
imagined  that  he  who  of  old  had  smitten  with  death  those  who  presumed  even  to  look
into  or  to  touch  the  ark  of  God,  who  had  smitten  monarchs  with  leprosy  for  lack  of
due  respect  to  it,  would  now  suffer  the  bands  of  the  idolaters  to  lay  waste  his  sanc-
tuary, in  which  it  was  enshrined?  Moreover,  once  and  again  salvation  for  Israel  had
gone  forth  from  the  temple  of  Grod,  deliverance  and  victory  had  there  been  won.  The
prophetic  prayer  of  Solomon  who  had  built  it  told  of  mercy  and  help  that  should
surely  come  to  Israel  through  that  temple.  Thus  ancient  teachings,  glorious  events,
the  manifested  presence  of  God,  many  promises  in  connection  with  the  temple  of  the
Lord,  all  combined  to  lead  men  to  look  upon  it  with  an  undue  trust,  and  to  believe
that,  so  long  as  it  reared  its  sacred  front  in  their  midst,  it  would  prove  as  a  palladium,
a  shield  and  defence  for  them  all.  Therefore  they  met  all  Jeremiah's  warnings,  and  all
misgivings  of  their  own  consciences,  by  the  oft-repeated  cry,  "  The  temple  of  the  Lord,
the  temple  of  the  Lord,  the  temple  of  the  Lord,  are  these ! "  And  that  which  answers
in  our  day  to  the  Jewish  trust  in  these  "  lying  words,"  as  Jeremiah  terms  them,  is  the
confidence  that  is  placed  in  the  Church,  her  sacraments  and  ministers ;  or  in  past  reli-
gious experiences,  or  in  present  moods  of  feeling ;  and  yet  more  in  the  endorsement  of  our
religious  profession  by  our  acceptance  into  the  Church's  fellowship  and  our  admission
to  her  ordinances.  Such  answer  now  to  the  **  lying  words  "  Jeremiah  denounced  then.
But  note—

n.  What  of  worth  there  is  in  this  arqument.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the
tares  owe  a  great  deal,  owe  everything  in  fact,  to  the  wheat  amongst  which  they  have
been  sown.  But  for  the  wheat,  they  would  have  been  plucked  up  long  ago.  And  GKxl's
dealings  with  men  had  so  often  confirmed  what  our  Lord's  parable  teaches,  that  the
tares  had  come  to  congratulate  themselves  that  they  had  no  cause  for  fear.  For  ten
righteous  men  Sodom  would  have  been  spared.  For  Moses'  sake  all  Israel  had  been
borne  with,  when  but  for  his  intercession  God's  righteous  anger  would  have  swept  them
away.  The  descendants  of  David  had  cause  many  times  to  bless  themselves  that,
though  so  unlike  their  great  ancestor  in  obedience  to  God,  they  were  yet  of  his  house
and  lineage.  "  For  the  elect's  sake,"  said  our  Lord,  "  those  days  " — days  of  Jenisalem's
final  doom — "  shall  be  shortened."  And  so  hero  in  the  text,  the  people  of  Jerusalem
could  not  but  know  that  they  were  wicked  in  the  extreme ;  but  because  they,  though
tares,  were  blessed  with  the'  presence  of  what  they  thought  God  counted  as  wheat — the
temple  and  all  its  hallowed  associations — ^they  laughed  at  the  idea  of  any  great  calamity
coming  upon  them.  And  in  the  present-day  parallels  to  that  old  trust  in  ''lying
words,"  what  of  worth  there  was  in  those  words  then,  there  is  in  the  like  of  them  now.
The  Church,  with  all  its  hallowed  associations,  is  God's  wheat,  or  rather,  does  assuredly
contain  all  there  is  of  it.  For  what  manner  of  definition  of  the  Church  of  God  will
any  one  presume  to  lay  down  other  than  this,  that  it  consists  of  all  the  good  ?  Broader  it
is  not ;  but  so  broad  it  is.  The  presence,  therefore,  of  the  godly  in  any  community  is  a
guarantee  of  good  to  that  communitv.  "  Ye  are  the  salt  of  the  earth,"  said  our  Lord.
But  for  his  Church  the  world  would  rot.  Let  any  who  sneer  and  persecute  Christ's
servants,  whether  in  school,  work-room,  ofiQce,  shop,  or  where  else — ^and  such  persecu-
tion is  common  enough — ^let  them  remember  that,  but  for  such  aa  those  on  whom  they
are  pleaswi  to  pour  their  contempt,  their  own  career  would  be  cut  very  short  indeed.
If,  then,  the  temple  of  the  Lord,  to  which  the  Jews  were  trusting,  was  as  the  wheat,
then  the  wicked  people  who  were  looking  to  it  for  safety  were  in  the  right,  and  their
words  were  not  lying  words.

m.  Its  worthlessness  notwithstanding.  In  all  those  instances  in  which  the
tares  had  been  spared  for  the  sake  cf  the  wheat,  there  had  been  two  conditions  ful-
filled. It  had  been  really  wheat  which  sheltered  the  tares,  and  there  had  been  suffi-
ciency of  it.  There  was  not  enough  of  it  when  the  Deluge  came,  nor  when  Sodom  was
destroyed ;  and  so,  in  like  manner,  should  ever  the  wheat  fall  short,  it  will  go  ill  with
the  tares  then.  But  did  the  temple  and  its  ritual  and  its  associations  fulfil  either  of
these  conditions  ?  No  doubt  the  mere  structure,  her  very  stones,  had  worth  in  God's
sight.  Just  as,  for  the  sake  of  the  dearly  beloved  soul  that  once  has  dwelt  within  that
now  lifeless  corpse,  we  hang  over  it  with  tenderest  fondness,  and  would  not  put  it
away  from  us  were  we  not  compelled;  so,  because  of  the  true  worship  that  had
gone  up  from  that  temple,  and  because  of  the  many  saintly  men  who  there  had


CH.  vn.  1— £4J     THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  109


drawn  near  to  God,  that  material  shrine  had  a  certain  value  and  would  not  lightly  bo
allowed  to  perish.  But  if  there  were  preciousness  in  the  temple,  there  was  not  suflS-
ciency  of  it  to  outweigh  or  to  cover  over  the  iniquities  which  surged  around  it,  yea,
invaded  its  very  courts,  and  of  which  it  was  made  the  unwilling  occasion.  Instead
of  being  a  palladium,  or  any  sort  of  guarantee  of  safety  to  that  godless  nation,  its
towers  and  courts,  its  altars  and  ever-ascending  sacrifices,  were  ever  calling  down  ven-
geance upon  those  who  so  shamefully  used  them.  And,  indeed,  it  could  hardly  be
said  to  bo  as  God's  wheat  at  all.  The  temple  had  often  been  the  vehicle  of  that  "  wor-
ship in  spirit  and  in  truth  "  which  alone  God  desires,  and  for  the  sake  of  such  worship
it  had  a  relative  preciousness.  But  let  that  worship  cease — as  it  had  long  ceased — then
the  temple  became  as  a  mere  corpse,  beautiful,  tenderly  loved  indeed,  but  still  cor-
ruptible, corrupting  and  spreading  corruption,  and  therefore  demanding  to  be  put  out  of
the  way.  Now  apply  all  this  to  the  false  truths  of  our  own  day.  Will  the  Church,
her  sacraments,  her  ordinances,  your  membership  with  her,  your  frequent  moods  of
religious  feeling,  your  current  .creed,  your  loud  profession  of  attachment  to  her,  your
manifold  religious  privileges, — ^will  any  or  all  of  these  things,  precious  though  they  every
one  of  them  be,  compensate  for  that  surrender  of  your  true  self  to  Otod  which  is  bis
perpetual  desire  and  demand?  Will  they  not  rather,  as  did  the  presence  of  the  temple
and  their  innumerable  privileges  for  the  Jews,  heighten  your  guilt,  and  make  more  glaring
your  sin,  because  they  show  that  you  have  been  amongst  those  "  to  whom  much  has
been  given,"  and  of  whom,  therefore,  "  much  will  be  required  "  ?  No  worship,  however
magnificent,  costly,  constant ;  however  hallowed  by  association,  or  authorized  by  vener-
able usage,  or  sanctioned  by  the  holiest  of  the  Church  of  God,  or  even  owned  by  God
as  the  means  of  uplifting  many  hearts  heavenward  and  GKxlward ;  if  such  worship  be
wanting,  as,  alas!  it  may  be,  in  the  all-essential  element,  the  '* worship  in  spirit
and  in  truth ; "  if  there  be  no  outgoings  of  the  7^eart  in  it  all,'as  too  often  there  is  not,—
then  it  will  prove  no  shield  from  but  a  provocative  to  that  holy  wrath  of  God  which
sooner  or  later  awaits  every  godless  soul.

IV.  The  very  serious  suogkstions  it  offers.  1.  The  utter  hate/tdness  of  sin,
(I)  It  turned  the  very  temple  of  the  Lord  and  its  sacrifices,  which  had  been  designed
to  be  "a  savour  of  life  unto  life"  to  those  who  by  means  of  them  drew  nigh  to  God,
into  "  a  savour  of  death  unto  death.''  And  so  still,  even  Christ  the  Rock,  the  sure
Foundation,  becomes  by  this  wresting  power  of  sin  a  crushing  stone  which,  falling  on
the  head  of  the  sinner,  grinds  him  to  powder.  (2)  It  drags  down  the  innocent  with
the  guilty.  That  temple  of  the  Lord,  the  holy  and  beautiful  house,  what  had  that
done?  Had  it  not  deserved  all  honour  and  love  from  those  amid  whom  it  stood?
And  now  the  sin  of  the  people  was  to  overwhelm  her  in  utter  and  irretrievable  ruin.
The  man  whose  wickedness  pulls  down  innocent  and  loving  wife  and  children,  and
drags  them  in  the  mire  which  he  has  chosen  to  wallow  in,  as  we  see  their  misery,  how
odious  his  sin  appears !  And  this  is  ever  one  of  sin's  works.  It  drags  in  and  down  the
innocent,  the  pure,  the  beloved.  Behold  those  blackened  ruins,  those  polluted  altars,
those  blood-stained  courts,  and  see  a  parable  of  sin.  2.  The  testimony  that  these  refuges
of  lies,  such  as  that  in  which  the  Jews  trusted,  do  surely  give  of  our  need  of  a  real
refuge^  a  true  defence.  Men  who  deny  the  Saviour  most  are  yet  ever  confessing  that
they  and  all  men  do  need  a  Saviour.  They  who  would  not  trust  in  God  trusted  in
the  mere  material  temple.  3.  To  what  are  tve  trusting?  In  "lying  words"— which
God  forbid  I— or — which  may  God  grant  I— in  those  words  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  which  are
able  to  make  us  wise  unto  salvation  ?^C.

Vers.  6 — ^16. — Strange  church-goers.  I.  Look  at  them  as  Jeremiah  saw  them.
Thieves  (vers.  6,  9),  most  cruel  oppressors,  miuderers,  adulterers,  etc.  Yet  they  were
all  going  into  the  temple  to  worship  the  Lord.    Strange  church-goers  indeed.

II.  Ask  if  there  be  any  such  now  ?  What  if  some  angel  of  God,  unseen  by  us,
were  to  mark  on  the  foreheads  of  all  who  enter  our  churches  now  their  true  characters
in  the  sight  of  God :  would  there  be  no  fraudulent,  no  oppressors  of  the  poor,  nono
whose  hearts,  though  not  their  hands,  are  chargeable  with  having  shed  innocent  blood?
Let  us  each  one  ask,  "  What  name  would  be  put  upon  me  f  "

IIL  Inquire  what  possible  motives  can  actuate  them.  1.  With  some,  no  doubt,
it  is  a  cloke  to  cover  up  their  real  character.    2.  Or  a  tribute  paid  to  the  demands  of


200  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMJAH.    [ni.  vii.  1--3I.


fashion,  ciwtora,  society.  What  would  be  thought  of  thciu  if  they  did  not  go  to
church  V  3.  Or  a  method  of  quieting  conscience.  They  come  away  and  think  they
have  wiped  off  the  score  that  was  against  them.  They  say  (vcr.  10), "  We  are  delivered
[see  Exposition]  to  do,"  etc.  4.  Or  to  set  an  example  to  those  they  are  nleased  to  call
*•  the  lower  orders ; "  like  the  philosophers  of  old,  who,  whilst  they  hela  all  religions
to  be  equally  false,  yet  regardea  them  all  as  indispensably  useful.  5.  Or  as  a  means
—for  so  many  regarded  such  things— of  propitiating  the  Divine  favour  and  securing  a
title  to  heaven  by-and-by.  But  there  is  no  end  to  the  motives  which  lead  such  men
to  do  that  which,  to  more  honest-hearted  people,  appears  a  mockery,  an  absurdity,  and
yet  worse.

IV.  LibTEN  TO  THE  Lobd'b  WORD  TO  SUCH.  He  tells  them :  1.  They  were  getting  no
good  whatsoever  from  such  worship  (ver.  3).  2.  They  were  completely  deceiving
themselves  (ver.  4).  3.  They  were  neglecting  that  amendment  of  their  ways  which
would  save  them  (ver.  5).  4.  They  were  grossly  insulting  God  (vers.  10, 11).  5.  They
were  blind  to  notorious  facts :  e,g,  Shiloh  (ver.  12) ;  Ephraim  (ver.  15).  6.  Thorough
reformation  was  alone  the  way  of  life  for  them  (vers.  3,  7).  "  Be  not  deceived ;  God  is
not  mocked:  for  whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap.  For  he  that  soweth
to  his  flesh  shall  of  the  flesh  reap  corruption ;  but  he  that  soweth  to  the  Spirit  shall  of
the  Spirit  reap  life  everlasting."--C.

Vers.  9 — 11. — Sacrilege,    I.  What  do  we  generally  understand  bt  this  word?

1.  Some  use  it  of  disregard  of  ritual.  2.  Others  of  secular  employment  of  sacred  places
or  things.  3.  Others  of  those  persons  whom  they  regard  as  unauthorized  presummg  to
minister  in  holy  things.  4.  Others  of  robbing  churches,  etc.  But  without  discussing
these,  let  us  note —

II.  What  God  counts  as  sacrilege.  It  is  declared  here  (ver.  11).  It  is  when  men
turn  the  Church  of  God  into  a  den  of  robbers.  Our  Lord  charged  this  upon  the
religionists  of  his  day.  Jeremiah  charges  it,  in  God's  Name,  upon  those  to  whom  he
was  sent.  Costly,  splendid,  correct,  continual  worship  was  duly  carried  on.  Irre-
verence— and  how  much  less  sacrilege ! — would  seem  to  be  a  charge  utterly  unfit  for
those  who  worshipped  in  such  manner.  And  yet,  though  the  word  be  not  here  used,
the  thing  itself  is  eniphatically  told  of  as  the  very  crime  which  these  people  were
flagrantly  guilty  of.  Turning  God's  house,  which  was  called  by  his  Name,  into  a  den  of
robbers,— if  that  bo  not  sacrilege,  what  else  is?  They  robbed  one  another  (vers.  5,  6).
They  robbed  God.  And  the  temple  was  their  haunt,  as  their  den  is  the  robbers'  haunt;
and  there  they  found  rest,  and  prepared  themselves  for  further  crime  (ver.  10),  as  does
the  robber  in  his  den.  It  is  an  awful  indictment.  But  under  one  or  other  of  the
counts  of  such  indictment  they  are  assuredly  chargeable  who  frequent  the  house  of
GK)d,  not  for  the  high  and  holy  purposes  for  which  the  worship  of  God  was  designed,
but  that,  as  in  ver.  10,  they  may  get  peace  of  mind  in  regard  to  their  past  sins  and  so
be  free  to  go  and  sin  again.  **  With  such  usage  the  temple  is  not  a  place  of  salvation,
but  s^  refuge  for  robbers,  where  they  purify  themselves  from  the  blood  of  their  evil
deeds,  so  as  to  be  the  readier  for  new  ones."  Therefore  all  they  who  *'  make  Christ
a  Minister  of  sin,**  who,  instead  of  deliverance  from  sin,  get  comfort  in  it  by  their
religious  observances,  who  shelter  themselves  from  all  fear  of  God's  anger  and  'silence
the  warnings  of  conscience  by  "  coming  and  standing  before  God  in  his  house  which
is  called  by  his  Name,",  though  their  object  be  only  "  to  be  delivered  to  do  all  these
abommations,"  and  not  at  all  to  be  saved  from  them,— these  are  the  sacrilegious,  and
their  profanation  of  holy  things  is  the  worst  of  all.

III.  Think  of  the  results  of  such  sacrilege.     1.  How  God  is  dishonoured!

2.  How  his  service  IS  made  hateful  in  the  eyes  of  men !  What  a  stumbling-block  it  is
to  those  who  would  turn  to  God !  3.  How  it  hardens  the  man's  own  soiU  I  4.  How
it  necessitates  the  judgment  of  God  I

^'  What  SHOULD  such  a  subject  teach  us?  Surely,  when  in  the  house  of  God,
to  pray  that  if  any  have  come  there  in  sacrilegious  manner,  God's  Spirit,  the  Lord  of
the  temple,  may  meet  with  them  and  turn  them  from  then-  evil  way.  Should  we  not
also  search  and  see  if  there  be  any  such  evil  way  in  ourselves  ?  And  let  our  prayer  be
unto  him  who  when  on  earth  drove  forth  with  scourges  the  "  robbers  "  whom  he  found
in  the  temple,  that  he  would  be  pleased,  by  the  scourge  of  his  Spirit  and  his  Word,  to


cii.  vii.  1— 34.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROrHET  JEREMIAH.  201


drive  forth  from  all  ia  his  house  now  all  in  them  that  would  roh  him  of  his  glory  and
their  souls  of  eternal  life.— C.

Vers.  12 — 16. —  Wattling  voices,  I.  Such  voices  are  perpetually  heard.  The
prophet  speaks  of  three  such  hero.  1.  Shilob  (ver.  12).  2.  The  Lord  himself  (ver.  13).
3.  Epbraim  (ver.  15).

II.  And  THEY  TELL  EVER  THE  SAME  TRUTHS.  1.  Tho  Divine  anger  against  sin
(ver.  12).  2.  The  utter  uselessness  of  their  '*  trust  in  lying  words "  to  escape  that
anger  (ver.  14).    3.  The  absolute  need  of  repentance.

III.  And  MEET,  ALL  TOO  OFTEN,  WITH  THE  SAME  RECEPTION.  They  wcre  rejected.
*'  Ye  heard  not ;  and  I  called  you,"  etc.  (ver.  13).

IV.  But  are  vindicated  in  like  awful  manner.  1.  By  their  sin  becoming
ineradicable,  so  that  they  are  given  over  to  a  reprobate  mind,  and  are  "guilty  of  an
eternal  sin"  (cf.  Mark  iii.  29).  Hence  (ver.  16)  the  prophet  is  forbidden  to  pray
for  them  (cf.  1  John  v.  16).    2.  By  the  judgment  of  God  falling  upon  them  (ver.  15).

Conclusion.  1.  Watch  and  pray  against  unbelief  in  these  warnings.  2.  Take
heed  to  them  yourselves.    3.  Hold  them  up  to  others.    4.  Bless  God  for  them. — C.

Vers.  12 — 14. — Shiloht  or  the  Ood-forsaken  shrine.  It  is  to  many  minds  impossible
to  avoid  a  feeling  of  deep  sadness  when  we  look  upon  the  ruins,  noble  even  in  their
desolation,  of  some  fonuer  beautiful  and  august  sanctuary  of  God.  There  are  many
such  scattered  over  this  and  other  lands :  Tintem,  Fumess,  Melrose,  etc.  Our
imagination  pictures  them  when  in  the  zenith  of  their  glory,  with  their  many  stately
towers  and  tapering  spires,  their  long-drawn  aisles  and  lofty  roofs,  the  glorious  vista
of  high-itrchea  nave  and  choir  and  glittering  sanctuaries  stretching  away  further  still
in  the  dim  distance^  the  gleaming  altars,  the  magnificent  service,  the  vast  throng  of
kneeling  worshippers,  the  soul-enchanting  music,  and  the  murmur  of  myriad  prayers.
The  memories  of  saintly  men  and  women  who  have  worshipped  and  are  burieid  there
crowd  upon  the  mind,  and  we  wistfully^wonder  where  and  wny  that  consecrated  genius
has  flown  which  had  power  to  rear  for  God  shrines  so  glorious  as  those  whose  ruins
we  are  beholding  must  once  have  been.  It  is  sad  to  think  of  such  glory  and  beauty
as  these  forsaken  shrines  once  had  gone  for  ever.  The  Jews  who  came  back  from  tho
Captivity  wept  when  they  thought  of  the  glory  of  the  ancient  temple,  which  they
never  more  might  see.  But  if  the  departure  of  material  glory  may  cause  sadness  to
the  mind,  how  much  more  the  departure  of  that  which  is  spiritual  1  If  we  mourn  that
we  shall  no  more  have  the  presence  of  some  fair  temple  of  the  Lord,  how  much  more
when  we  lose  the  Lord  of  the  temple  I  And  it  is  such  sadder  loss  that  Shiloh,  the
God-forsaken  shrine,  has  to  tell  of.    And  we  observe  upon  it  that—

L  There  are  few  more  mournful  histories  than  that  of  Shiloh.  Shiloh  was
one  of  the  earliest  and  most  sacred  of  the  Hebrew  sanctuaries.  There  for  full  three
hundred  years  the  ark  of  God  remained  and  the  priests  of  the  Lord  ministered.  As
soon  as  the  promised  land  was  mainly  subdued,  Joshua  brought  the  ark  of  God  from
Gilgal,  near  the  Jordan,  to  Shiloh.  The  place  was  probably  chosen  for  its  seclusion
and  hence  its  safety,  it  being  off  the  great  highways  of  the  land.  Bethel,  which  other-
wise might  have  been  chosen  as  especially  sacred,  was  yet  in  the  hands  of  the
Canaanites.  Hence  Shiloh,  in  the  territory  of  the  powerful  tribe  of  Ephraim,  and  of
their  great  ancestor  Joseph,  a  tribe  which  more  and  more  had  been  coming  to  the  front
amongst  their  brethren,  was  chosen  for  the  sanctuary  of  the  ark  of  God.  There,  as
afterwards  at  Jerusalem,  "  the  tribes  went  up,  the  tribes  of  the  Lord,  unto  the  testi-
mony of  Israel,  to  give  thanks  unto  the  Name  of  the  Lord."  What  glad  festivals ;  what
gracious  deliverances ;  what  Divine  responses  to  their  inquiring  of  the  Lord ;  what
holy  memories  of  thronging  worshippers,  of  accepted  sacrifices,  of  saintly  priests  and
prophets  who  had  dwelt  there,  were  all  associated  with  that  shrine  at  Shiloh  I  There
Eli  ministered,  and  Hannah  came  to  present  her  ofierings,  to  pour  out  her  prayers  and
to  pay  her  vows.  There  she  brought  Samuel,  and  there  the  Lord  called  him  to  his  high
service  as  he  ministered  before  him.  All  their  truest  and  noblest  life  drew  its  inspi-
ration from  the  God  who  had  placed  his  Name  there,  and  whom  there  they  went  to
worship.  But  at  length,  under  the  rule  of  Eli,  that  well-meaning  but  weak-willed  high
priest,  priesthood  and  people  alike  sank  down  into  a  state  of  moral  and  religious  degra*


202  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [cil  vil  1—34.

dation  from  which  Eli  was  powerless  to  deliver  them.  His  own  sons  led  tho  way  in
abominable  wickedness,  ana  became  sons  of  Belial  even  beyond  others.  So  low  had
they  fallen,  that  they  had  come  to  regard  the  ark  of  God  as  a  kind  of  fetish,  and  hence
they  carried  it  down  to  battle  against  the  Philistines,  thinking  thereby  to  certainly
win  the  day.  But  tho  ark  of  God  was  taken,  its  besotted  priests  slain,  and  Eli,
hearing  the  dreadful  tidings  suddenly,  died,  a  worn-out  and  broken-hearted  old  man.
From  that  hour,  as  the  seventy-eighth  psalm  tells,  God  "  forsook  Shiloh,  the  tent
which  he  placed  among  men  ;  •  .  .  he  refused  the  tabernacle  of  Joseph,  and  chose  not
the  tribe  of  Ephraim."  And  it  was  all  because,  as  the  same  psalm  tells,  Israel  "  tempted
and  provoked  tho  most  high  God,  and  kept  not  his  testimonies :  but  turned  back,  and
dealt  deceitfully  like  their  fathers :  they  were  turned  aside  like  a  deceitful  bow.  For
they  provoked  him  to  anger  with  their  high  places,  and  moved  him  to  jealousy  with
their  graven  images."  Wherefore  "  he  was  wroth,  and  greatly  abhorred  Israel."  And
now,  ages  after,  Jeremiah  bids  the  people  of  his  day  go  to  Shiloh,  and  see  what  God  did
to  it  for  the  wickedness  of  the  people.  They  might  trace  out,  perhaps,  the  foundations
of  her  ancient  walls,  and  discover  the  vestiges  of  the  former  sanctuary ;  but  now  no
altar  bore  the  sacred  fire,  the  smoke  of  no  sacrifice  ascended,  no  priest  ministered,  no
God  gave  answer,  no  song  of  the  Lord  went  up ;  the  whole  place  was  probably  ravaged
and  overthroMm  by  the  enemies  of  Israel,  who  had  carried  ofi"  their  great  treasure,
the  ark  of  God.  Well]  might  the  wife  of  Phinehas,  in  the  hour  of  her  agony,  call
her  new-bom,  but  now  fatherless,  and  soon  to  be  altogether  her  orphan,  child,
I-chabod,  for  indeed  the  glory  had  departed,  the  ark  of  God  was  taken,  and  the  Lord  had
forsaken  Shiloh.  Oh,  the  sorrow,  the  shame,  the  unavailing  remorse  which  would  over-
whelm the  faithless  priesthood  and  the  godless  people,  when  they  beheld  that  Gh>d-
abandoned  shrine,  and  remembered  wherefore  this  calamity  had  come  upon  them !  Yes,
this  story  is  a  sad  one ;  but  it  is  most  salutary  also,  and  therefore  we  may  well  heed  the
word  of  tho  Lord  which  says  to  us,  "  Go  ye  now  unto  my  place  which  was  in  Shiloh,
where  I  set  my  Name  at  the  first,  and  see  what  I  did  to  it  for  the  wickedness  of  my
people  Israel."    But  we  observe —

II.  TnAT  SuiLou  HAS  MAKT  PARALLELS.  Shiloh  Is  not  the  only  (jod-forsaken  shrine
of  which  tho  Bible  tells  or  of  which  wo  have  had  knowledge.  No;  there  are  all  too
many  like  it.  There  was  the  temple  of  the  Lord  in  Jeremiah's  time.  All  its
splendour,  its  solemn  ritual,  its  lavish  sacrifices,  its  ever-burning  altar  fire,  could  not
save  it.  The  stem  sentence  went  forth  against  it,  and  it  was  burnt  with  fire  and
laid  in  ashes  on  the  ground.  There  was  the  temple  which  was  afterwards  built  on  the
return  from  Captivity,  and  which  was  so  beautiful  and  adorned  in  the  time  of  our  Lord ;
concerning  that,  too,  Jesus  said,  '*  Behold,  your  house  is  left  unto  you  desolate  I "  And
it  was  the  same  with  many  Churches,  those  **  spiritual  houses  "  which,  after  our  Lord's
time  and  in  his  Name,  were  reared  "  for  a  habitation  of  God  through  tho  Spirit."  The
Christian  Church  at  Jerusalem.  The  honour  of  being  the  mother  Church  of  Christendom
was  taken  from  her  and  transferred  to  Antioch,  and  ultimately  it  was  overwhelmed
altogether  in  the  destruction  that  came  on  the  city  in  which  it  was  gathered.  And
there  were  the  Churches  of  Asia ;  their  "  candlestick  was  removed  out  of  its  place,"  as
the  Lord  warned  them  would  be  the  case,  and  now  secular  historians  bear  their  testi-
mony to  the  truth  of  that  warning  word.  Gibbon  tells  how  **  in  the  loss  of  Ephesus
the  Christians  deplored  the  fall  of  the  first  angel,  the  extinction  of  the  first  candlestick
of  the  Revelation ;  the  desolation  is  complete ;  and  the  Temple  of  Diana  or  the  Church
of  Mary  will  equally  elude  the  search  of  the  curious  traveller.  The  circus  and  tho
three  stately  theatres  of  Laodicea  are  now  peopled  with  wolves  and  foxes,  Sardis  is
reduced  to  a  miserable  village ;  the  god  of  Mahomet,  without  a  rival  or  a  son,  is  invoked
in  the  mosques  of  Thyatira  and  Pcrgamos;  and  the  populousness  of  Smyrna  is
supported  by  the  foreign  trade  of  Franks  and  Armenians.  Philadelphia  alone  has  been
saved  by  prophecy  or  courage.  At  a  distance  from  the  sea,  encompassed  on  all  sides  by
the  Turks,  her  valiant  citizens  defended  their  religion  and  freedom  above  four  score
years;  and  at  length  capitulated  with  the  proudest  of  the  Ottomans.  Among  the  Greek
colonies  and  Churches  of  Asia,  Philadelphia  is  still  erect ;  a  column  in  a  scene  of  ruins."
They  have  thus  all  disappeared,  as  Christian  Churches  almost  utterly ;  they  are  as  Shiloh
and  Jerusalem— their  houses  in  which  thejr  worshipped  God  left  imto  them  desolate.
And  there  have  been  many  other  Churches  since,  ana  some  nearer  our  own  time  and  in


CH.  VII.  1—34.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  203

our  own  land.  And  many  still,  perhaps,  need  sorely  tbe  admonitory  counsel  to  go  to
Shiloh,  and  see  what  the  Lord  has  done  there.  But  not  in  material  edifices  alone,  nor
even  in  those  gathered  communities  to  which  more  properly  the  name  of  Churches
belongs,  need  we  go  to  find  instances  of  God-forsaken  shrines.  For  inasmuch  as  we  all
are  "  temples  of  the  Holy  Ghost,"  so  St.  Paul  tells  us,  and  our  own  experience  confirms
his  word,  it  is  possible  to  find  only  too  many  illustrations  of  this  same  mournful  fact.
Take  tbe  ever-memorable  example  and  warning  of  the  fallen  apostle  Judas.  What  a  shrine
of  the  Holy  Ghost  he  once  was !  How  richly  gifted !  how  gloriously  endowed  I  He  came
with  the  rest,  saying,  "  Lord,  even  the  devils  are  subject  to  us  through  thy  Name."  He
with  tbe  rest  *'  ate  and  drank  in  Christ'spresence,  and  in  his  Name  did  many  wouderful
works."  He  enjoyed  the  fellowship  of  Christ,  and  by  him  was  sent  forth  in  his  Name.
But  behold  him  giving  place  to  the  devil,  yielding  his  soul  up  to  the  demon  of
covetousness  and  worldly  ambition,  and  then  acting  as  the  guide  to  them  who  arrested
the  Lord,  betraying  the  Son  of  man  with  a  kiss,  and  then,  when  too  late  he  awoke  to
see  the  madness  and  horror  of  what  he  had  done,  rushing  forth  to  seek  and  find  a
suicide's  grave  in  the  Aceldama,  "  the  field  of  blood,"  purchased  by  the  price  of  his
traitorous  gain.  And  Ananias  and  Sapphira  and  Demas  and  yet  others,  what  are  they
all  but  deplorable  instances  and  names  of  these  God-forsaken  shrines  ?  And  have  we
not  known  such?  Men  who  prayed,  and  worshipped,  and  taught,  and  preached,  and  then,
having  denied  the  Lord  who  bought  them,  fell  away,  and  found  henceforth  nothing  but
"a  fearful  looking  for  of  judgment"  and  of  the  "fiery  indignation"  of  God  destined
to  be  poured  out  on  all  such  as  they.  Ah !  it  is  a  sight  which  might  well  make  angels
weep,  and  which  drew  forth  the  bitter  tears  of  the  Son  of  Grod  himself.

III.  And  in  every  case  the  cause  of  this  ronsAKiNa  of  theh  by  GK)d  was  one
AND  the  same.  It  was  always  "  wickedness."  Not  any  outward  circumstance,  not  any
of  those  secondary  causes  which  we  are  so  apt  to  regard  as  the  real  cause.  But  this
which  these  verses  so  plainly  declare.  It  was  §o  even  in  those  ruined  edifices  to  which
wc  referred  at  the  beginning  of  this  homily.  History  will  tell  you  how  gross  immo-
rality and  horrible  corruption  found  a  too-ready  home  in  those  fair  fabrics  which  had
been  reared  for  far  other  purposes  and  with  far  other  desio^n.  But  "wickedness"
having  made  them  its  haunt  and  home,  the  people,  roused  to  fierce  wrath,  rose  up  and
tore  them  down,  and  their  grey,  ivy-clad  stones  utter  forth  to  this  day  such  message  as
that  in  our  text.  And  in  all  those  other  instances  to  which  wo  have  pointed,  whether
temples  made  with  hands,  whether  Churches  or  individual  men,  it  has  ever  been  sin,  sin,
which  has  wrought  all  this  evil.  And  in  that  every-day  fact  of  bodily  death  we  have
the  standing  type  of  this  terrible  truth,  "  The  wages  of  sin  is  death."  That  body  once
so  bright,  so  full  of  energy,  so  lit  up  with  intelligence  and  love,  so  possessed  too,  it  may
have  been,  with  the  Spirit  of  God,  so  fair,  so  lovely  to  look  upon  when  life  dwelt  in  it,
now  in  death, — what  is  it  but  a  God-forsaken  shrine,  and  hence  doomed  to  return, "  earth
to  earth,  dust  to  dust,  and  ashes  to  ashes  "  ?  We  are  so  accustomed  to  death  that  this
its  solemn  lesson  we  are  ever  forgetting  or  putting  out  of  sight

IV.  But  all  these  Shilohs  have  a  message  from  G&d  unto  us,  according  to
WHAT  WE  ARE.  We  cvcry  one  of  us  are  either  examples  of  these  forsaken  ones,  or
becoming  so,  or,  blessed  be  God,  still  habitations  for  him  through  the  Spirit.  Now,  if  we
be  already  forsaken  of  God,  then  if  this  fact  be — as  surely  it  should  be,  and  as  we  trust
it  is — ^a  matter  of  sore  distress  to  ns,  then  there  is  a  gracious  word  to  us  if  we  be  willing
to  hear  it.  All  of  ns  were  once  "  temples  of  God."  We  can  look  back  to  the  time
when  none  of  the  unclean  spirits  that  now  haunt  and  harm  us  so  terribly  had  any  home
m  our  souls ;  when  thoughts  were  pure,  hands  undefiled,  and  our  lips  impollutod  with
evil.  Our  fathers  and  mothers  brought  us  to  be  baptized,  or  in  other  ways  recognized
the  blessed  truth  that  we  belonged  to  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Spirit,  And  in  our
childhood  days  we,  as  all  children  are,  were  members  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  But
what  are  we  now?  0  God,  it  is  dreadful  to  think  of  what  some  are  now!  The
desolate  ruins  of  once  glorious  Churches ;  the  lifeless  bodies  that  we  carry  to  the  grave
are  but  faint  types  of  what  some  of  these  God-forsaken  ones  have  become.  And  can  it
be  that  any  are  willing  to  continue  so,  and  thus  make  it  inevitable  that  God  should
sweep  you  away  into  the  hell  of  all  corruption  ?  Oh  no ;  you  cannot  be  willing  that  that
should  be.  Well,  then,  if  you  tremble  at  such  doom,  as  well  you  may,  listen :  Ood  wUl
re-enter  his  shrine,  and  make  you  once  again  his  temples.  Yes,  he  will  do  that.  He  will


204  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPUET  JEREMIAH,    [cu.  vn.  1— 34.

** restore  your  souls  and  lead  you  in/*  etc.  But  first,  as  when  Hezckiah  cleansed  the  temple,
you  must  cast  out  the  manifold  uncleanncss  that  is  there.  There  must  be  a  thorough
purging,  a  real  repentance.  God  will  not  come  back  to  a  sin-inhabited  and  evil-loving
soul.  You  must  '*  throughly  amend  your  ways."  This  is  indispensable.  See  how  inthis
chapter  and  throughout  nis  Word  God  insists  upon  this.  Ana  then,  as  the  high  priest
was  wont  to  do,  come  bearing  the  blood  of  atonement  into  the  presence  of  God ;  come,
that  is,  pleading  the  Name  of  Jesus  for  acceptance  and  pardon  and  restoration, — and  you
1^11  benold,  in  the  shrine  of  your  soul,  the  cloud  of  glory  once  again  shining  there  and
the  presence  of  God  again  manifested  there.  Thus  come  day  by  day,  and  you  shall  find
how  Christ  saves  "  to  the  uttermost  all  that,"  etc.  But  are  you  of  those  whom  Gt)d  is
now  forsaking  ?  Is  the  dread  process  of  crowding  out  God  by  the  bringing  into  the  shrine
of  your  heart  those  many  things  God  hates  and  with  which  he  will  not  abide,  going  on
in  you?  Ah  IJ^that  may  be  so.  As  others,  so  you  were  once  the  temple  of  the  Holy
Ghost,  and  perhaps  there  came  a  day  when  more  than  ever  you  welcome^l  him  as  your
Ruler,  because  ht  had  taken  of  the  things  of  Christ  and  had  shown  them  unto  you.  You
made  your  open  confession  and  avowal  of  your  desire  to  be  ruleil  and  governed  by  him ;
yon  pledged  yourself  by  his  help  to  be  Christ's  faithful  servant  always.  And  for  a  time
you  were  so:  you  were  careful,  conscientious ;  you  remembered  your  Lord's  word,  "Watch
and  pray ;"  you  readily  abandoned  all  that  stood  between  you  and  the  doing  of  his  will ;
you  walked  with  Grod.  But  a  change  has  come  over  you.  One  by  one  you  received  into
your  heart  likings,  and  desires,  and  beliefs,  and  dispositions  which  were  contrary  to  the
Spirit  of  Christ.  These  suggestions  you  listened  to,  their  counsels  you  obeyed.  And
80  the  love  of  the  world  fastened  on  you,  propensities  and  habits  which  war  against  the
BOiU  took  hold  of  you,  and  now  you,  whose  heart  was  once  a  shrine  of  God,  will,  if  the
sad  process  I  have  spoken  of  goes  on  much  longer,  be  forsaken  of  him  altogether.  Oh
that  the  consideration  of  the  doom  of  Shiloh  may  fill  us  with  a  holy  fear,  and  lead  us
to  such  prayer  as  that  which  the  well-known  verse  expresses  !—

**  Search  nie,  O  Lord,  and  try  my  heart,
For  thou  that  heart  canst  see,
And  turn  each  cursed  idol  out
That  dares  to  rival  thee."

But  some  of  you  are  to  be  congratulated  that  you  arc  still  temples  of  God,  still
shrines  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Well,  then,  cherish  his  presence  as  the  greatest  joy  of  your
life.  For  "  he  is  your  life."  You  would  not  invite  to  meet  and  abide  with  a  dear  and
honoured  earthly  friend  those  with  whom  you  well  knew  he  had  no  sympathy  nor  they
with  him,  who  were  distasteful  and  hostile  to  him.  You  would  not  treat  an  earthly
friend  so.  Be  careful,  then,  not  so  to  treat  the  Spirit  of  God,  who  now  dwells  within  you.
Be  full  of  solicitude  not  to  grieve  him,  yet  more  to  do  nought  that  would  drive  him  from
jrou.  "Walk  not  after  the  flesh,  but  after  the  Spirit."  So  shall  God  dwell  in  you  and  you
m  God,  and  that  more  and  more  to  your  ever- increasing  strength  and  purity  and  joy.
Thus  though,  as  wo  have  now  done,  you  may  go  in  devout  thought  to  Shiloh,  and
behold  what  God  has  done  there,  yet  you  shall  be  able  with  thankful  joy  to  know  that
never,  never  shall  you  be  as  that  God-forsaken  shrine.— C.

Vers.  13 — 16. — The  Divine  long-suffering  worn  out.  The  above  section  brings  before
us,  as  do  many  other  Scriptures,  this  very  certain  and  very  serious  truth  of  Gk)d's
patience  being  not  only  exhaustible,  but  exhausted.    We  observe —

I,  The  Divine  LONG-suFFERiNa  is  a  veby  precious  fact.  Nations,  Churches,  indi-
viduals— have  not  we  ourselves  ? — have  been  examples  of  it.  What  have  not  all  of  us
owed  to  the  fact  that  the  Lord  is  long-sufiering,  ana  "willeth  not  the  death  of  a  sinner,
but  rather  that  he  should  turn,"  etc.  ?    But—

II.  This  tbuth  has  very  often  been  much  abused.  1.  In  men's  thotights;  for  they
have  allowed  themselves  to  pervert  the  truth  of  the  "  eternal  hope,"  and  to  think  that  in
no  way  can  the  finite  will  of  man  exhaust  the  infinitude  of  mercy  which  there  is
in  God.  2.  And  in  their  words  also  they  have  so  set  forth  the  long-suffering  of  God
as  to  leave  on  men's  minds  the  impression  that  it  was  practically  infinite.  We  love
to  sing  such  verses  as  those  which  tell  how


CH.  vn,  1— 34.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PllOPHET  JEREMIAH.  205


'*  None  oan  measure  out  thy  patience
By  the  span  of  human  thought,
None  can  bound  the  tonder  mercies
Which  thy  holy  Son  hath  wrought.**

And  there  is  a  sense  in  which  these  words  are  most  blessedly  true,  but  it  is  undeniable
that  such  words  are  often  pressed  to  a  meaning  which  practically  encourages  the
sinner  to  go  on  in  sin.  3.  And  yet  more  is  this  truth  abused  in  deed.  Those  to  whom
the  prophet  was  writing  had  abused  the  long-suflfering  of  God  (cf.  the  closing  verses
of  the  Second  Book  of  Chronicles).    And  how  fearfully  frequent  is  this  abuse  in  the


it  is  necessary  to  insist  with  all  urgency —

III.  That  the  LOKa-surrERiNO  of  God  can  be  worn  out.  The  above  section  of
this  prophecy  plainly  declares  this  fact.  And  the  fate  of  Jerusalem  stands  not  alone
in  evidence  of  this  (cf.  the  story  of  the  Deluge,  and  how  long  then  the  long-suffering
of  God  waited).  Those  who  perished  in  the  wilderness — how  often  were  they  warned !
And,  indeed,  it  may  bo  said  that  God  never  brings  ruin  upon  nation,  Church,  or
individual  soul  without  warning,  repeated,  plain,  and  urgent.  But  the  fact  that  he
does  send  such  ruin  proves  that  men  may  tempt  God  too  far.

IV.  Akd  that  wmcH  will  exhaust  the  long-sufferixo  of  God  is  clearly
SHOWN  us.  It  is  not  the  fact  of  sin,  great  sin,  repeated  sin,  but  it  is  when,  as  in  the
case  before  us,  sin  has  been  persisted  in  in  spite  of  every  kind  and  degree  of  plainest
irarning.  "He  that  being  often  reproved  hardeneth  his  neck,"  etc.  (Prov.  xxix.  1).
Now,  such  was  the  conduct  of  those  told  of  here.  God  had  not  merely  let  them  know
of  the  peril  of  their  conduct,  but  his  loving  solicitude  for  them  had  shown  itself  in  the
most  marked  ways.  Note  expressions  in  ver.  13 :  God  not  only  spoke  to  them,  but
like  as  "  those  who  watch  for  the  morning  "  rise  up  early,  so  God  himself  awoke  early,
i.e.  he  chose  the  most  favourable  hours,  the  most  probable  means  for  gaining  attention
to  the  truths  which  he,  by  his  prophets,  spoke  to  them.  But  it  was  all  of  no  avail.
**  Ye  heard  not ;  ...  ye  answered  not "  (cf.  ch.  vi.  16, 17).  Now,  it  is  sin  persisted  in,
in  spite  of  all  such  Divine  solicitude  so  repeatedly  manifested,  that  God  will  not  pardon
(vers.  14, 15).  It  is  an  unpardonable  sin,  and  like  such  sin  its  forgiveness  is  not  even
to  be  prayed  for  (ver.  16,  and  cf.  1  John  iv.  16).

V.  Consider  the  reason  of  this  refusal  to  forgivb.  It  is  not  because  there  is
not  love  sufficient  in  God  to  pardon,  but  because  his  love  is  so  great,  because  he  is
love.  For  God's  love  is  not  as  that  of  too  many  earthly  parents — a  partial  and  unjust
thing,  loving  one  child  at  the  expense  of  the  others — ^but  his  love  is  for  the  children.
His  whole  family  are  the  subjects  of  his  incessant  and  tenderest  solicitude.  Now,  if  a
rebellious  child  come  away  from  its  rebellion,  and  have  done  with  it,  coming  and
confessing,  "Father,  I  have  sinned,"  with  what  joy  the  Father  welcomes  such  returning
one  back !  And  so  do  the  angels  of  God.  No  harm,  but  only  good,  results.  But  if
there  be  no  repentance,  and  the  spirit  of  rebellion  burns  on  in  the  heart  of  the  child,
how,  consistently  with  true  regard  for  the  welfare  of  the  other  and  obedient  children,
can  the  Father  deal  with  that  one  as  he  does  with  these  ?  It  would  turn  heaven  into
hell,  and  make  the  Father's  house,  now  the  home  of  blessedness  and  the  blessed,  a  scene
of  eternal  discord.  It  could  not  be.  Now,  it  is  because  such  despising  of  the  long-
suffering  of  Grod  destroys  the  hope  of  repentance,  renders  impossible  the  sighing  of  the
contrite  heart,  and  renders  certain  the  going  on  in  rebellion,  that  therefore  this  sin
wears  out  the  long-suffering  of  God  and  hath  never  forgiveness.  The  very  love  of  God
necessitates  that  he  who  is  separate  and  alien  in  heart  from  the  children  of  his  love
should  be  separate  and  alien  from  them  in  every  other  respect  as  well.  And  therefore,
because  it  would  be  praying  against  the  well-being  of  God's  children,  the  prophet  is
forbidden  to  pray  for  the  forgiveness  of  this  sin.  It  is  the  unpardonable  sin,  the  sin
unto  death,  the  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost.

Conclusion.  We  learn  what  alone  bars  the  mercy  of  Ood.  Not  this  or  that  sin,
however  great.  Still  less  the  circumstance  of  death.  But  this  "  despising  the  for-
bearance of  God."     What  need,  then,  for  us  all  to  pray,  "  Keep  b.ick  thy  servant  also


206  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [cii.  vii.  1—34.


from  presumptuous  sins ;  let  them  not  have  dominion  over  me  :  ...  I  shall  be  inno-
cent wom  the  great  transgression  "! — C.

Ver.  16. — Prohibited  prayers.  The  text  a  distinct  instance.  We  remark —
I.  SocH  PROHIBITION  OP  PRAYER  SEEMS  VERY  STRANGE.  Are  WO  not  bidden  "  pray
without  ceasing,"  "  in  all  things  by  prayer  and  supplication  .  .  .  make  our  requests
known  unto  God  "  ?  Are  wo  not  promised,  "  Ask,  and  ye  shall  receive  "  ?  Did  not  the
Lord  say,  "  Men  ought  always  to  pray,  and  not  to  faint "  ?  And,  in  a  case  more  nearly
resembling  the  one  before  us  in  the  text,  did  not  Samuel  say  to  the  rebellious  people  of
his  day, "  But  God  forbid  that  I  should  sin  against  the  Lord  in  ceasing  to  pray  for

you"?
IL  It  is  nevertheless  a  fact.  And  this  prohibition  is  repeated  (cb.  xi.  14;  xiv.  11;

of.  also  Exod.  xxxii.  10).

HI.  And  we  rave  what  is  similar  now.  There  is  no  express  command  not  to
pray  for  the  reversal  of  the  laws  of  nature.  But  yet  we  never  do  pray  for  such  things.
David's  servants  wondered  that  when  his  child  was  dead  he  should  altogetlier  cease
from  fasting  and  prayer;  but  he  answered,  "Wherefore  should  I  fast?  can  I  bring  him
back  again  ?  "  (2  Sam.  xii.  23).  And  even  before  death  has  actually  taken  place,  when
there  is  no  hope  of  life,  we  find  it  all  but  impossible  to  pray  for  such  life.  And  so  in
regard  to  what  we  know  would  be  derogatory  to  the  honour  of  God  and  his  righteous-
ness ;  we  should  never  think  of  praying  for  aught  like  that.  Or  for  what  cannot  be  in
the  nature  of  things.  Now,  in  ail  these  things  it  is  as  if  we  had  been  prohibited  to
pray  for  them,  seeing  that  we  never  do  so  pray.  As  children  give  over  praying  their
parents  to  do  this  or  that  when  they  see  by  the  expression  of  their  countenance  that  it
cannot  be,  and,  on  the  contrary,  when  they  see  the  faintest  look  of  "  yes,"  they  urge
their  request  with  a  renewed  importunity  of  clamour;  so  is  it  in  our  prayers  before
God.  We  must  see  the  look  of "  yes  "  on  the  face  of  God  in  more  or  less  degree,  or  our
prayers  die  down.  But  if  it  he  seen,  then  they  rise  up,  press  on  and  forward  with  a
vigour  unknown  before.  This  is  a  law  of  all  prayer.  And  in  regard  to  prayer  for  such
as  are  told  of  in  the  text,  it  may  be  that  Jeremiah  was  not  expressly  told  in  so  many
words  that  he  was  not  to  pray  for  them,  but  it  was  borne  in  upon  his  mind  that  he
could  not.  And  it  is  sadly  possible  that  such  conviction  may  be  borne  in  upon  the
minds  of  (Jod's  people  now  concerning  some  reprobate  ones.  There  comes  over  the
soul  the  deep  feeling  that  such  and  such  a  one  "  is  joined  to  his  idols,"  and  that  you
can  only  "  let  him  alone."  The  disciples  of  the  Lord  were  bidden,  when  their  message
was  spumed,  to  cast  off  the  dust  of  their  feet  as  a  testimony  against  them.  Paul  did
80  with  the  hardened  Jews.  And  such  solemn  conviction  as  to  the  utter  godlessness  of
any  on  the  part  of  a  company  of  God's  people  is  that  "  binding  on  earth  *  which  will
bo  ratified  by,  because  it  is  but  the  result  of,  the  "  binding  in  heaven."  They  of  whom
the  Church  feels  deeply  that  "  their  sins  are  retained,"  those  sins  are  retained.  And  so
through  this  solemn  conviction,  this  despair  of  the  soul's  turning  to  God,  prayer  for
such  soul  may  become  impossible.  God  has  practically  said  concerning  such  to  his
people,  "  Pray  not  thou  for  this  people,  neither,"  etc.

IV.  This  is  a  fact  of  most  momentous  import  to  those  whom  it  concerns.  .  To  be
given  up  by  God's  servants  may  be  the  token  that  you  are  given  up  by  God.  Their
feeling  about  you  may  be — we  do  not  say  necessarily  is,  but  may  be — but  the  reflec-
tion of  God's.  Happy  are  they  who  put  joy  and  gladness  into  the  hearts  of  God's
servants,  and  for  whom  they  with  earnestness  and  strong  faith  cai\  pray.  But  sad
is  the  outlook  of  those  for  whom  those  same  servants  of  God  feel  they  cannot  pray.
Oh,  pray  that  prayers  for  vou  may  never  be  counted  by  God  or  by  his  people  as
amongst  prohibited  prayers ! — C.

Ver.  IS.^Idolatrotts  worship  loth  a  warning  and  a  model.  The  text  vividly  por-
trays the  worship  rendered  to  the  heathen  goddess,  whose  sumptuous  and  licentious
worship  had  so  fascinated  those  to  whom  the  prophet  wrote.

I.  It  is  a  warning.  For  it  shows  the  deadly  contagion  of  sin.  Now,  when  the
head  of  the  household  goes  after  evil,  he  speedily  draws  in  and  down  wife  and  children,
until  the  whole  family  is  corrupted,  and  they  become  a  household  of  wickedness.  The
text  reveals  whole  families  engaged  in  the  worship  of  idolatry,  each  member  taking  an


i


CH.  vn.  1—34.]  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.        207


active  and  eager  part.  They  become  so  many  societies  for  the  propagation  of  ungodli-
ness. In  the  sanctity  or  the  sin  of  the  parent  the  children  are  sure  to  share.  In  the
first,  by  the  grace  of  (Jod ;  in  the  second,  by  the  fatal  force  of  a  father's  example.  A
father  can  lift  his  children  up  to  heaven  or  he  can  drag  them  down  to  hell,  and  some
do.    See  the  text.

II.  But  it  is  a  model  also.  In  what  wo  are  here  told,  the  heathen  shame  the
Church.  Idolatrous  worship  may  well  put  to  the  blush  much  of  the  worship  of  God.
For  in  the  worship  told  of  in  the  text,  false  and  horrible  as  it  was,  nevertheless  we  see
much  that  we  might  well  copy.  1.  It  ivas  a  worship  that  made  all  work.  What  a  busy
hive  of  workers  each  household  is  seen  to  be !  But  where  is  the  counterpart  of  this  in
the  Church  of  Christ?  A  whole  family  eager  and  active  for  Christ — ^the  father,  the
mother,  and  all  the  children — would  be  a  unique  feust.  How  lazy,  how  indolent,  is
the  greater  part  of  our  religion  I  2.  The  children  were  interested  in  it.  We  are  heart-
broken that  the  great  masses  of  our  countrymen  stand  aloof  from  the  worship  of  Grod.
Did  we  interest  them  in  it  when  they  were  children?  We  had  them  all  in  our  hands,
as  we  have  their  children  now.  Are  our  modes  of  worship,  our  representations  of  God's
truth,  our  methods  of  instruction,  such  as  shall  make  them  love  Gk)d's  worship  when
they  grow  up?  What  would  we  not  give  to  see  our  children  so  eager  in  Qod*s  worship
as  were  the  children  told  of  in  the  text  in  idol-worship  ?  3.  Both  sides  of  the  house
were  agreed  on  this  great  question.  Husband  and  wife  were  of  one  mind,  and  each  did
what  they  could  to  further  it.  It  was  the  general  rule.  Is  it  so  now  in  regard  to  God
and  his  service?  Does  the  husband  never  hinder  the  wife?  does  the  wife  always  help
the  husband  on  the  heavenward  road  ?  4.  There  was  fit  work  for  each,  and  each  did
it.  The  children  could  gather  sticks,  the  men  kindle  the  fires,  and  the  women,  etc.
When  will  there  arise  in  the  Church  some  who  will  point  out  some  fresh  and  wise
methods  of  enlisting  all  in  her  work  ?  We  have  now  two  or  three  regular  plans  in
operation ;  but  if  any  be  unfit  or  unwilling  for  them,  as  many  are,  there  is  nothing  else
for  them.  What  we  need  is  what  these  idolaters  in  their  sad  worship  seem  to  have
found— a  work  for  every  one,  and  every  one  at  his  work.  But  meanwhile  let  each  one
who  is  standing  in  the  vineyard  idle,  not  because  unwilling  to  work,  but  because  no
one  has  hired  him,  no  one  has  pointed  him  to  the  work  for  which  he  is  really  fit—and
there  are  many  such — let  him  take  his  case  to  the  Lord,  and  ask,  **  Lord,  what  wilt
thou  have  me  to  do  ?  "  and  he  may  rest  assured,  no  matter  whether  he  be  little  child  or
grown-up  man,  an  answer  will  come  to  him  soon.— C*

Ver.  19. — The  recoil  of  sin,  I.  The  besults  op  bin  on  others  abe  terrible.  1.
What  may  not  be  their  deadly  influence  upon  those  with  whom  the  sinner  comes  in  con-
tacts How  hereditary,  how  contagious,  how  virulent,  the  poison  of  sin!  As  no  man  liveth
unto  himself,  so  also  *'  no  man  dicth  unto  himself."  If  he  die  by  reason  of  his  sin,  he
ever  drags  down  others  into  the  same  doom.  2.  And  their  results  Qodward,  It  is  said
they  *'  provoke  him  to  anger ; "  "  God  is  angry  with  the  wicked  every  day ; "  *'  God  is
slow  to  anger,  and  of  great  mercy.'*  Bat  still  sin  is  *'  the  abominable  thing  that  he
hates."  He  will  not  tolerate  it  in  his  children,  and  hence,  however  severe  the  measures
necessary  to  separate  it  and  them,  those  measures  will  be  taken.  ''Our  God  is  a
consuming  fire."    But^

II.  The  recoil  of  sin  on  the  sinneb  hdibelf  is  terrible  also.  It  is  described  in
the  text.  1.  It  provokes  him  to  anger.  It  is  not  alone  the  Lord  whose  anger  is  aroused,
but  the  sinner's  anger  also  is  provoked.  As  he  looks  back  on  the  foUv,  the  utter
madness,  of  what  he  has  done,  how  completely  ho  has  been  deceived,  what  rage  of
remorse  fills  his  soul !  How  ho  flogs  himself  with  the  lashings  of  his  own  self-upbraid-
ing 1  What  epithets  of  anger  and  contempt  does  he  heap  upon  his  own  head  1  He  is
filled  with  the  fruit  of  his  own  ways.  And  anqthcr  of  these  bitter  fruits  is :  2.  Con*
fusion  of  face.  He  is  ashamed,  abashed,  confounded,  because  of  his  sin.  He  is  so
(1)  hefore  his  own  conscience.  He  cannot  bear  to  think  of  himself.  From  the  com-
panionship of  his  own  thoughts  he  flees  as  from  a  haunting  ghost.  Like  a  sheeted  spectre
conscience  seems  to  be  pointing  at  him  with  its  dread  finger,  its  stony  eyes  ever  glaring
upon  him,  so  that,  turn  which  way  he  will,  ho  cannot  escape  their  gaze.  He  is  ashamed
of  himseU^,  covered  with  confusion  of  face  before  his  own  conscience.  Oh,  miserable,
miserable  wretch  that  ho  is !   (2)  Before  Ood,    He  cannot  pray.    Ho  shuns  the  throne


206  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,     [cu.  vu.  1— 34.

of  grace*  His  iniquities  have  so  "  taken  hold  of  him  "  that  he  cannot  "  look  up."  All
joy,  all  confidence,  all  hope  in  God,  have  fled.  He  feels  himself  an  outcast  Irom  the
Divine  presence ;  he  would  feel  the  eye  of  God  upon  him  if  he  knelt  down  to  pray,  and
that  he  cannot  bear.  (3)  Before  man.  He  cannot  for  ever  conceal  his  sin  and  folly,
and  even  when  it  is  as  yet  undiscovered,  he  is  conscious  of  this  "confusion  of  face'*  in
the  presence  of  others.  And  when  at  length  the  sin  is  discovered,  oh,  what  agony  of
shame  and  remorse  then !  Death  is  chosen  rather  than  life,  and  men  rush  to  the
Buicide*8  grave  as  to  a  positive  relief.  "  Anywhere,  anywhere  out  of  the  world,"  which
has  become  aware  of  their  sin  1  Oh,  this  awful  recoil  of  sin !  "  I  believe  that  if  the
mental  sufferings  of  such  backsliders  could  be  written  and  faithfully  published,  they
would  astound  you,  and  be  a  more  horrible  story  to  read  than  all  the  torments  of  the
Inquisition.  What  racks  a  man  is  stretched  upon  who  has  been  unfaithful  to  his
covenant  with  God  !  What  fires  have  burned  within  the  souls  of  those  men  who  have
been  untrue  to  Christ  and  his  cause !  What  dungeons,  what  grim  and  dark  prisons
underground,  have  saints  of  God  lain  in  who  have  gone  aside  into  by-path  meadows
instead  of  keeping  to  the  King's  highway  1  He  who  sins  must  smart,  especially  if  he
bo  a  child  of  God,  for  the  Ijord  hath  said  of  his  people,  *  You  only  have  I  known  of  all
the  people  of  the  earth,  therefore  I  will  punish  you  for  your  iniquities.'  Whoever  may
go  unchastised,  a  child  of  God  never  shall "  (Spurgeon).

III.  The  alone  cuue  for  this  confusion  of  face  is  the  contrite  confession  of
THAT  WHICH  HAS  CAUSED  IT.  God's  word  is  passcd  that  such  confession  shall  avail ;
but  let  not  him  who  has  gone  back  from  God  think  that  the  return  will  be  as  easy  as
the  departure.  It  will  not.  David  was  never  the  same  after  his  sin  as  he  was  before.
Oh,  it  is  dreadful  to  think  of  this  recoil  of  sin,  and  how  it  staggers  and  wounds  and
weakens  the  soul  for  the  whole  life  long.  We  slide  back,  gliding  easily  as  over  smooth
ice.  Not  so  do  we  return.  Still,  let  the  return  be  ever  so  difficult,  the  Lord  bids  us
return,  and  he  will  heal  all  our  backslidings.  Oh,  let  us  all  go  straight  away  to  the
cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  for  fear  we  should  be  backsliders  ;  for  there  is  the  surest
standing-ground,  there  our  footsteps  never  slip!  And  if  we  have  thus  sinned,  and  sin's
recoil  is  now  terribly  felt  by  us,  then  still  go  to  the  same  cross  ;  for  our  only  hope  of
healing  is  there,  and  there  alone.

•*  Come,  let  us  to  the  Lord  our  God
With  contrite  hearts  return  ;
Oar  God  is  g^racious,  nor  will  leave
The  penitent  to  mourn."

C.

Ver.  20.— 2%6  innocent  victims  of  sin,  I.  There  are  many  such.  All  forms  of
life  are  mentioned  here — human,  animal,  plant  from  the  stateliest  trees  down  to  the
lowliest  herb — and  all  shall  suffer  because  of  the  sin  of  but  a  portion  of  them.  How
many,  even  of  men,  were  innocent!  and  the  young  children — what  had  they  done?
Yet  none  were  to  escape,  though  it  was  but  a  portion  of  the  men  of  the  day  who  had
done  such  wrong.

II.  Hence  some  say,  "The  way  of  the  Lord  is  not  equal."  But:  1.  The
summing  up  of  all  life  in  one  head,  constituting  it  a  corporate  unity,  giving  a
solidariie  to  all  life,  especially  to  all  human  life,  is  the  Divine  order.  2.  And  though
sin  and  sorrow  come  by  means  of  it,  yet  a  far  larger  balance  of  good  is  produced  by  it.
What  do  we  not  owe  to  our  all  being  members  one  of  another?  True,  evil  comes,  but
good  yet  more.  Were  we  all  isolated,  separated,  independent,  there  would  be  no
guarantee  for  our  good  even  then,  but  there  would  be  certainty  of  infinite  loss.  If  the
sins  of  the  fathers  are  visited  on  the  children  unto  the  third  and  fourth  generation,  the
mercy  of  the  Lord  is  unto  thousands  of  generations  "  of  them  that  love  him  and  keep  his
commandments"  (Exod.  xx.  6).  3.  And  though  because  of  it  "  in  Adam  all  died,  yet
because  of  it  also  "  in  Christ  shall  all  be  made  alive."  This  interlinking  of  one  with
all  and  all  with  one  is,  therefore,  a  matter  for  great  thankfulness,  and,  though  attended
with  present  evils,  not  at  all  of  complaint.

III.  And  the  thought  of  these  innocent  victims  of  sin  is  most  salutary.
1.  It  often  holds  hack  from  sin.  This  is  one  way  in  which  God  "out  of  the  mouth  of
babes  and  sucklings  has  ordained  strength."    How  often  fathers  and  mothers  will>  for


ciL  vn.  1—34.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,  209

the  sake  of  their  children,  that  they  might  not  be  harmed,  keep  back  from  sin,  to
which  but  for  such  motive  they  might  have  yielded  1  2.  It  deepens  repentance  for  sin.
(C(.  2  Sam.  xxiv.  17.)  3.  It  makes  sin  more  hateful  to  us.  What  must  that  be  which
destroys  not  us  only,  but  our  children,  innocent  of  all  sin?  And  it  may  be  that  the
thus  furnishing  of  additional  safeguards  against  sin,  and  of  additional  motives  to
obedience,  was  one  reason  in  the  Divine  mind  for  constituting  us  all  *'  members  one  of
another."

IV.  And  thb  thought  of  the  innocent  Victim  op  bin,  oub  Lord  Jesus,  is  thk
HOST  8ALUTABT  OF  ALL.  For  he  transforms  us  from  victims  into  victors — victors  over
the  condemning,  the  attractive,  the  defiling,  the  enslaving  power  of  sin.  And  it  is  as
we  "  look  unto "  him,  as  our  souls  habitudly  trust  him  to  do  all  this  for  us,  that  we
cease  to  be  victims  of  sin,  and  become  victors  over  it.  Let  us  give^  glory  to  him  by
accepting  his  offered  grace. — C.

Vers.  21 — ^28. — The  indispensable  condition  of  well-being.  This  is  laid  down  la
ver.  23^obedience  to  God.  It  is  the  teaching  of  the  entire  Bible,  of  our  Lord,  the
prophets,  his  apostles.  The  gospel  is  for  this — to  secure  it  more  perfectly ;  and  the
sacrifices  of  the  ancient  Law  were  for  the  same  reason.  But  men  have  ever  rebelled
against  this.  They  were  doing  so  in  Jeremiah's  time.  They  sought  to  make  their
sacrifices  and  burnt  offerings  a  substitute  for  the  obedience  God  commanded.  Hence^
as  Hezekiah  was  compelled  to  destroy  the  venerable  relic,  the  brazen  serpent,  which,
intended  as  an  aid  to  faith,  had  become  the  object  of  faith,  so  now  Jeremiah  was  com-
pelled to  speak  slightingly  of  the  appointed  sacriBces  and  worship  of  the  temple  for  the
very  same  reason.  Ver.  21 :  be  mocks  at  their  repeated  sacrifices,  ana  (ver.  22)
declares  that  at  first  God  never  desired  or  commanded  any  such  things — only  that  they
should  obey  his  voice.  He  implies  that  they  were  afterwards  given  but  as  safeguards
and  helps  to  their  obedience,  which,  without  them,  could  not  be  secured,  lliat
obedience  (ver.  23)  he  emphasizes  as  the  one  thing  needful — the  only  thing  for  which
God  cared,  but  which  they  had  persistently  and,  what  was  worse  (ver.  26),  increasingly
refused.  So  that  now  (ver.  27)  they  were  fixed  in  their  disobedience,  and  no  words,
however  divinely  authorized,  however  earnestly  urged,  would  have  effect,  and  there
was  nothing  left  but  to  declare  (ver.  28)  their  utterly  abandoned  character  and  con*
dition.  And  the  like  conduct  is  seen  stilL  Men  still  are  ever  attempting  to  evade  the
Divine  rule  of  life.  By  reliance  on  sacraments,  profession  of  religion,  adherence  to
orthodox  creeds,  resting  in  feelings  and  periods  of  religious  excitement  when  their
emotional  nature  has  been  deeply  stirred, — ^in  almost  anything  rather  than  in  that  God
faith  in  whom  is  shown  only  by  obedience  to  his  will.  Ana  the  habit  of  this  grows,
and  its  results,  as  of  old,  become  worse  and  worse,  and  all  exhortation  and  warning
fall  on  deaf  ears  and  hardened  hearts,  and  men  still  become  as  those  who  "  obey  not  the
voice,"  etc.  (ver.  28).  Let  us  remember  that  this  is  the  subtle  temptation  of  all  ages,
all  Churches,  and  all  people ;  and  let  us  pray  that  God  would  write  upon  our  hearts
the  sure  truth  that  the  one  only  evidence  of  our  having  so  **  named  the  name  of  Christ  ••
as  to  be  "in  him"  is  our  "departing  from  inic[uity." — C.

Ver.  29— ch.  viii.  3.— 2%c  harvest  of  sin.  I.  We  bead  in  other  Scbiptubes  op  "  tab
JOY  of  harvest."  Such  shall  be  the  joy  of  G^'s  redeemed  people  when  his  purposes
of  grace  are  fulfilled  in  and  for  them.    It  will  be  a  joy  unspeakably  glorious.

II.  But  here  we  have  portrayed  another  harvest — that  of  sin.  Here  there  is
no  joy,  but  bitter  lamentation  and  weeping  and  woe  (ver.  29).  We  are  shown :  1.  The
seed  from  which  this  harvest  springs  (ver.  30)— the  doing  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord ;
setting  their  abominations  in  his  house  (ver.  30).  2.  We  see  ite  growth-^ln  open  and
unblushing  idolatry ;  in  the  debasement  of  their  nature.  They  had  come  to  sacrifice
their  own  children  to  their  idol-god,  to  such  horrible  cruelty  had  they  sunk  down.
3.  We  see  its  harvest,  (1)  in  death,  widespread  and  terrible  (vers.  32, 33) ;  (2)  in  the  flight
of  all  joy  and  gladness  (ver.  34) ;  (3)  in  public  and  deep  degradation  (ch.  via.  1,  2) ;  W  m
utter  despair  (ch.  viii.  3).  ^.^

III.  And  though  differing  in  outward  circumstance,  yet  in  surotanctb  awu
reality  the  same  harvest  will  ever  spring  from  the  same  seed.    1.  -^**
doing  is  such  seed.    And  sheltering  this  under  the  cloak  of  religion,— this  is  ine  B»m

JEREMIAH.


210  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,     [ch.  vii.  1— 34.


eeed.    2.  And  its  growth  will  be  in  like  manner.     Progressive  daring  in  sin;  the
debasement  of  our  nature.    3.  And  its  harvest  will  be  seen,  (1)  in  widespread  spiritual
death,  and  often  in  terrible  death-beds ;  (2)  in  the  loss  of  all  joy  and  gladness ;  (3)  in
degradation  before  men ;  (4)  in  awful  despair.
CoKCLUsiON.    Bemember,  '*  GK)d  is  not  mocked :  whatsoever  a  man  soweth,"  etc — G.

Ver.  4.—"  Lying  toords"  These  were  "  lying  words,"  as  being  used  by  false  men  for
a  false  purpose.  Literally  true,  for  it  was  "  the  temple  of  the  Lord  "  that  stood  in  the
midst  of  the  land,  and  in  the  gate  of  which  this  message  was  delivered, — they  were
false  in  spirit,  for  the  deceitful  prophets  thought  thus  to  make  the  sanctity  of  the
material  structure  a  cover  for  the  iniquities  of  the  people — a  charm  to  wtucd  off  their
threatened  punishment.  The  cry  was  indicative  of  a  hollow  and  rotten  condition  of
things  throughout  the  entire  system  of  social  life.  "  The  prophets  prophesied  falsely,
and  the  priests  bore  rule  by  their  means,  and  the  people  loved  to  have  it  so  **  (ch,  v.
81).    We  may  take  these  words  in  three  different  lights,  as  reflecting —

I.  The  spiritual  pbide  that  leads  men  to  think  themselves  the  special
OBJECTS  OF  the  Divtnb  FAVOUR.  This  was  the  characteristic  vice  of  the  Jewish  people.
The  distinctions  God  conferred  on  them— that  they  were  separate  among  the  nations
as  "  Abraham's  seed  "  and  the  chosen  covenant  people,  that  they  had  the  temple  of  the
Lord  among  them — were  made  occasions  for  national  vain-glory,  instead  of  incentives
to  holy  character  and  noble  deed.  The  same  principle  is  illustrated  whenever  superior
enlightenment,  knowledge  of  truth,  spiritual  gifts,  personal  sanctity,  ecclesiastical
advantage,  etc.,  lead  in  any  way  to  self-exaltation.  Nothing  more  unseemly  than  this.
If  in  any  such  sense  "  the  temple  of  the  Lord  "  is  with  us,  it  may  be  expected  that  the
shadow  of  it  will  produce  in  us  a  solemn  sense  of  responsibility.  Special  privilege
brings  with  it  corresponding  obligations.  Whatever  tokens  of  his  favour  God  bestows
on  us,  their  due  efi^t  is  to  lead  ufl  to  walk  with  the  greater  self-forgetfulness  and
reverential  fear  before  him.

II.  The  hypocrisy  that  makes  the  "form  of  godliness"  a  substitute  for  its
♦^  POWER."  What  availed  it  that  the  temple  of  the  Lord  stood  among  them,  if  the  spirit
of  devotion  had  departed?  The  sacred  shrine  in  which  they  boasted  was  but  a
mockery  of  their  internal  falseness.  The  essence  of  Pharisaism  lies  in  this  resting  in
the  outward  and  apparent,  to  the  neglect  of  the  inward,  the  spuitual,  the  real.  None
80  far  from  God  as  they  who  imagine  that  a  mere  round  of  external  observances  will
please  him  apart  from  the  sincere  homage  of  the  souL  *'  This  people  draweth  nigh
unto  me  with  their  mouth,  and  honoureth  me  with  their  lips,"  etc.  (Matt.  xv.  8).

III.  The  self-deception  that  puts  on  the  garb  of  a  religious  profession  as  a
OLOKE  foe  bin  AND  A  SHIELD  FROM  ITS  PENALTY.    The  people  did  wickedly,  and  then

•went  and  stood  before  the  Lord  in  the  house  called  by  his  Name,  and  said,  "  We  are
delivered  "  (ver.  10)— a  striking  illustration  of  the  folly  of  those  who  dream  that,  so
long  as  they  pay  public  homage  to  the  sovereignty  of  God's  claims,  they  may  violate
his  laws  with  impunity.  It  is  a  delusive  dream  that  must  have,  sooner  or  later,  a
dread  awakening.  The  mere  material  temple,  glorious  as  it  may  be,  is  no  sanctuary
for  a  guilty  conscience  and  a  corrupt  life.  Simply  to  "  lay  hold  on  the  horns  of  the
altar  "  will  not  save  us  from  the  Divine  retributions,  the  Nemesis  that  tracks  the  foot-
steps of  the  transgressor.  Merely  to  cry,  "  Lord,  Lord  1 "  will  never  avert  from  men
the  sentence,  "  Depart  from  me,  ye  workers  of  iniquity  "  (Luke  xiiL  25 — 27). — W,

Vers.  1 — 14. — The  doom  of  the  temple.  L  The  message  to  those  concerned  cannot
BB  ESCAPED.  The  message  is  to  men  who  make  their  boast  and  confidence  in  the
temple.  To  be  within  temple  reach  seems  to  place  them  in  a  kind  of  fortress.  Such
must  evidently  be  met  on  their  own  ground.  And  thus  the  prophet  is  sent  to  the
temple  gate.  There,  assuredly,  all  who  took  any  deep  interest  in  the  temple  would
be  found.  Jeremiah  himself  belonged  to  the  priests,  and  there  is  no  saying  but  what,
prophet  as  he  was,  he  had  to  take  an  allotted  share  in  the  temple  service.  Possibly  the
message  may  have  been  repeated  on  several  occasions,  and  likeliest  of  all  on  those
occasions  when  the  temple  precincts  were  crowded  with  visitors.  And  when  the
temple  was  destroyed,  would  there  not  be  many  to  remember  that  the  threatening  of
destruction  was  uttered  in  the  very  gates  of  it  ?    Thus  we  see  that  there  is  no  want  of


OH,  vn.  1—34.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,  211


directness  and  closeness  in  dealing  with  the  unfaithful ;  and  no  want  of  courage  and
candour  on  the  part  of  the  man  who  was  chosen  to  warn.

II.  The  message  is  to  mistaken  wobshippebs.  To  look  round  with  pride  and
say  these  buildings  are  the  temple  of  CK)d,  was  as  the  utterance  of  some  first  principle.
These  worshippers,  precise  enough  in  outward  forms,  had  a  superstitious  feeling  that
whatever  vicissitudes  might  come  elsewhere,  Jehovah  would  keep  the  place  of  worship
secure.  The  mistake  lay  in  thinking  that  Grod  valued  the  temple  for  itself.  Tet  it
had  not  been  made  by  his  command,  in  the  same  sense  as  the  tabernacle  had  been ;  '
rather,  it  was  accepted  as  a  sign  of  David's  deep  religious  feeling  and  Solomon's  pioua
regard  for  his  father's  wishes.  There  is  nothing  to  show  that  out  of  his  o\ni  will  God
would  ever  have  commanded  the  erection  of  a  temple.  It  was  unseemly  in  the  eyet
of  David  that  he  should  be  dwelling  in  a  house  of  cedar,  when  the  ark  of  God  was
behind  curtains.  But  this  feeling  had  in  it  a  certain  barbaric  element,  a  fondness  for
outward  pomp  and  display.  It  was  the  best  that  was  in  the  king's  heart,  and  so  it
was  accepted.  He  did  what  he  could.  But  there  was  no  inherent  sacredness  in  the
temple,  that  it  should  be  kept  inviolate  amid  the  wreck  and  defilement  of  everything
else.  The  people  needed  to  be  taught  this  truth  in  very  plain  language.  The  feeling
towards  the  building  is  made  manifest  in  such  a  passage  as  Ezra  ill.  11 — 13.  In  fkct^
the  more  the  people  became  alienated  in  heart  from  the  God  of  the  temple,  the  more
enthusiastic,  fisuiatical  even,  they  seem  to  have  become  with  regard  to  the  mere
building.

III.  The  way  in  which  the  mistake  is  bought  to  be  removed.  There  is  no
heaping  of  scorn  on  the  feeling  of  the  people.  Their  feeling  is  rather  made  the  ooca«
sion  of  strengthening  the  hold  of  God's  truth  upon  them.  If  they  really  value  the
temple,  they  are  shown  the  way  by  which  thev  may  keep  it  and  dwell  within  it,
Jehovah  shows  very  distinctly  that  in  his  eyes  the  true  glory  of  Jerusalem  is  not  the
temple,  but  the  sort  of  people  who  dwell  in  the  city.  It  is  better  to  have  a  community
of  the  pious,  the  upright,  the  truly  brotherly,  dwelling  in  cottages,  than  to  have  whole
streets  of  splendid  palaces,  inhabited  by  luxurious,  self-indulgent  oppressors.  Men
hold  in  high  esteem  buildings,  pictures,  books,  statues,  great  fruits  of  human  intellect.
God  looks  at  good  actions ;  little  but  significant  kindnesses^the  giving  of  the  cup  of
cold  water,  the  visiting  of  the  sick,  and  the  feeding  of  the  hungry.  A  community  of
men,  selfish  to  the  core,  will  not  be  preserved  for  the  sake  of  a  splendid  building ;  but
that  building  may  be  preserved  if  a  community  of  good  men  will  be  really  pleased  by
its  preservation.  The  truth,  however,  is  that  a  community,  living  such  a  life  as  God
here  indicates  should  be  chosen,  would  care  very  little  about  the  pomps  of  a  building.
They  would  prefer  to  spend  their  substance  in  satisfying  pressing  needs  of  men.  Many
of  the  ecclesiastical  buildings  of  to-day  are  inexcusably  sumptuous.  They  are  put  up
to  gratify  the  lust  of  the  eye,  and  meanwhile  the  spiritual  glories  of  the  upper  room
at  Jerusalem  and  the  Pentecostal  miracle  are  quite  forgotten.  The  publican,  the
penitent  after  God's  own  heart;  went  up  to  the  temple; but  what  were  its  material
splendours  to  him,  as  he  stood,  smiting  his  breast,  and  saying,  *'  God  be  merciful  to  me
a  sinner"?

IV.  The  message  is  clinched  by  a  closely  FimNa  example  from  histoby.
One  instance  is  enough  to  prove  a  negative.  The  feeling  in  the  hearts  of  the  people  is
that  God  will  fence  the  temple  site  around,  for  the  sake  of  the  temple.  But  Sniloh
is  at  once  brought  forward  as  a  capital  instance  to  the  contrary.  Evidently  it  still
remained  in  a  ruined,  neglected  state,  for  any  one  to  go  and  see  it.  Israel  knew  what
Shiloh  had  been  at  the  first,  and  they  could  see  how  different  it  was  now.  In  reading
history,  we  are  bound  to  profit  by  all  of  Divine  warning  that  may  appear  in  what  we
read. — ^Y.

Yer.  IS.'^The  family  Joined  in  idolatry,  I.  Bemembbb  GK>d'8  ideal  of  an
Ibbaelite  family.  This  is  not  set  before  us  in  any  particular  passage,  but  we  can
gather  it  from  different  institutions  and  commandments.  Religion  not  only  concerned
the  individual  in  his  relation  to  the  priest,  the  altar,  and  the  holy  of  holies,  and  in  his
general  relations  to  his  fellow-men ;  but  there  was  a  very  special  mention  of  institutions
and  regulations  which  made  the  individual  remember  Ids  position  in  the  family.  Those
inatitatioDB  and  r^ulaUoqa  were  as  yital  bonds^  mining  tne  Oeuodlj  into  a  true  oiganio


212  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMUH.    [en.  vn.  1—34.


unity.  There  were  the  dedication  of  the  firstborn,  and  the  institution  concerning  the
meaning  of  the  Passover  feast  (Exod.  xiii.).  There  was  the  command  to  honour  father
and  mother.  So  connected  with  the  passage  now  under  consideration,  there  was  the
setting  apart  of  the  dough  (Numb.  xv.).  A  continual  instruction  and  training  in  Divine
things  was  to  be  provided  for,  A  mother  could  have  no  greater  honour  than  that  her
children  should  rise  up  and  call  her  blessed.  Thus  gathering  together  many  passages
that  might  be  cited,  we  see  that  God  meant  the  family  to  be  a  great  agent  for  the
advancement  of  his  people  in  all  that  was  good ;  and  the  same  family  ideal  comes  out
with  equal  prominence  and  beauty  in  the  New  Testament.  The  natural  family  may,
80  far  as  Christ  is  concerned,  count  for  much,  if  only  each  individual  in  the  fjEunily  will
live  up  to  his  opportunities.  Still,  Christ  insists  upon  the  natural  family  being  subor-
dinate to  the  spiritual  family.  It  is  one  of  the  illustrations  of  the  great  disint^rating
and  reconstituting  power  of  the  gospel  of  Christ,  that  it  breaks  up  the  family  which  is
held  by  nothing  stronger  than  natural  bonds.  The  ideal  family  of  the  children  of  God,
those  who  are  the  spiritual  and  abiding  Israel,  must  be  gained  at  any  cost.  The
notion  of  a  family  gives  one  of  the  aspects  in  which  Christians  may  be  perfectly
associated  together.

II.  Look  at  the  deqbaded  position  in  which  the  Israelite  family  actually
WAS.  The  parents  are  confirmed  idolaters,  and  are  dragging  down  their  children  to
their  own  level.  The  children  are  sent  out  to  gather  fuel  towards  an  idolatrous  offer-
ing, when  they  should  be  learning  of  the  nature,  the  will,  and  the  promises  of  Jehovah.
A  desecrated  temple  has  been  spoken  of,  turned  into  a  den  of  robbers ;  but  what  is  that
compared  with  a  desecrated  family  ?  How  insidiously,  how  gradually,  how  irresistibly,
these  children  are  drawn  into  idolatry  1  Gathering  wood  might  be  an  interesting,
amusing  occupation,  more  like  play  than  work.  What  idea  could  the  children  have  of
the  awful  insult  to  which  this  gathering  would  contribute  ?  They  would  grow  up,  as
by  a  second  nature,  to  kindle  fires  and  knead  dough  themselves.  And  it  was  so  easy
to  treat  the  child  in  its  way,  to  tell  it  to  go  out  and  gather  wood;  far  easier  than  to
bear  patiently  with  its  waywardness  and  inattention,  and  thus  lead  it  on  to  some
understanding  of  IsraePs  glorious  past.  For  such  treatment  meant  that  the  parent
should  bo  a  learner  also,  he  and  his  children  moving  onward  together  into  an  enjoy-
ment of  the  fulness  of  the  Divine  promises.  And  yet  God  had  done  much  for  these
parents  to  make  the  teaching  of  his  truth  as  easy  as  it  could  be  made.  He  had  given
things  to  be  set  before  the  children's  eyes  at  periodic  intervals.  But  here,  in  this  deep
and  pleasing  infection  of  idolatry,  is  an  influence  which  seems  to  work  successfully
against  all  that  God  can  do.  What  could  be  hoped  from  rising  up  early  and  sending
the  prophets,  when  there  was  all  this  counter-working  in  the  Israelite  home  ?

In.  CONSIDEB    THE    POSSIBILITY  OF  STILL  ACHIEVING    THE    IDEAL.      Much  may  be

done  towards  making  even  the  natural  family  a  holier  and  more  edifying  institution
than  in  most  cases  it  is.  The  humiliating  description  here  shows  how  much  depends
upon  the  parents.  How  much  there  is  still,  even  among  families  nominally  Christian,
which  is  just  as  horrible  in  this  way  as  this  family  idolatry  among  the  Israelites  of  old?
Children  are  sedulously  schooled  into  the  worship  of  Mammon.  Selfish  and  heedless
parents  are  eager  to  send  them  to  work,  when  as  yet  they  should  know  only  the  home,
the  school,  and  the  playground.  Too  often  is  the  maxim  reversed  that  the  parents
should  provide  for  the  children.  Christian  parents,  at  all  events,  should  hold  them-
selves bound  by  the  most  solemn  obligations  to  do  all  they  can  for  the  training  of
their  children  in  godliness.  There  is  an  ideal  of  parental  duty,  and  that  ideal  is  seen
in  action  when  we  look  towards  the  great  Father  in  heaven.  Assuredly  there  would  be
more  God-fearing  children  if  there  were  more  really  God-fearing  parents.  But  what  can-
not be  gained  by  looking  up  to  human  guidance  and  example,  can  be  gained  by  looking
to  GK)d.  He  gathers  his  children  out  of  many  human  households,  and  gives  them  his
own  Word  to  be  an  impulse  and  a  guide.  He  puts  into  their  hearts  a  love  of  the
spiritual  brotherhood,  which  is  a  deeper  feeling  than  any  that  nature  knows.  And  the
end  of  it  all  will  be  that  his  children  will  be  perfectly  joined  together  in  one  mind,  in
the  praise  and  service  of  him  who  alone  is  worthy  to  be  praised  and  served  by  alL— -Y.

Ver.  28. — The  inveterate  disobedience  of  Israel,    All  along,  from  ver.  21,  this  is  the
themej  viz.  the  disobedience  of  Israel   Now,  to  give  full  foree  to  a  charge  of  disobedience


CH.  vm.  1— 22.]  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.


213


there  must  be  the  means  of  fuTDishing  ample  proofs  that  directions  have  first  been
given — plsdn,  earnest,  and  authoritative.  And  this  is  just  what  we  find  here.  God
refers  his  people  back  over  the  long  years  in  which,  by  divers  agencies,  he  had  laid
before  them  his  righteous  and  beneficent  wilL  What  he  commend^  was  for  his  glory ;
for  his  glory  because  for  his  people's  good ;  for  his  people's  good  because  for  his  glory.
The  present  state  and  prospects  of  the  people  are  very  humiliating,  but  assuredlv  no
part  of  their  humiliation  can  be  laid  to  the  charge  of  their  God.  The  cloudy  ana  the
fiery  pillar  was  but  a  symbol  of  most  distinct  guidance  for  the  whole  heart.  The  people
were  not  sufiered  to  wander  for  lack  of  expostulation  and  warning.  When  a  lad  turns
out  badly,  criticizing  speech  is  often  directed  against  the  parents,  as  if  somehow  they
must  be  at  fault.  They  may  be  at  fault  indeed,  but  there  is  no  must  in  the  matter.
Hasty  criticism  at  such  a  time,  from  the  very  injustice  of  it,  adds  a  cruel  intensity
to  the  pain  and  disappointment  already  existing.  But  hasty  criticism  cannot  be
silenced  by  merely  deprecating  it,  and  parents  at  such  moments  would  do  well  to
remember  that  they  stand  in  relations  to  their  disobedient  children  not  unlike  those  in
which,  as  is  represented  here,  Jehovah  stood  towards  Israel  of  old.  The  most  loving
and  watchful  and  patient  of  parents  never  did  for  his  children  near  so  much  as  Jehovah
did  for  Israel.  There  was  the  instruction  of  their  wonderful  career,  in  which  God  had
moved  so  sublimely  among  them.  There  were  the  ten  commandments,  formulated  so
distinctly,  and  set  in  such  a  grand  historical  frame.  There  were  all  the  rites  and
ceremonies  filled  with  instructiog  power  to  those  who  would  seek  to  understand  them.
And  there  was  also,  accumulating  generation  after  generation,  the  great  mass  of
prophetic  truth.  Man  is  what  he  is,  not  for  want  of  light,  but  for  want  of  disposition
to  use  and  obey  the  light  when  it  appears.  ;There  is  an  indisposition  to  attend  to
truth  and  to  fidelity  in  all  duty,  until  at  last  the  very  feeling  of  what  faithfulness
and  righteousness  are  vanishes  from  the  breast  But  still  the  excuse  is  attempted,
and  persisted  in  with  shameless  impudence,  that  the  word  which  professes  to  come  from
God  must  have  in  it  something  defective,  something  that  effectually  prevents  it  from
being  received.  But  it  is  only  from  the  unrenewed  mind  that  talk  of  this  kind  comes.
Thoee  who  have  had  their  eyes  opened  to  the  truth  of  (jod  soon  begin  to  discern  that
in  that  truth  there  is  no  lack  of  guidance,  or  inspiration,  or  comfort,  or  anv  good  thing
which  can  uplift  and  satisfy  the  heart.  And  we  may  be  sure  tha.t  God,  who  has  given
this  immense  and  fruitful  body  of  truth,  has  brought  It  nearer  to  the  individual
conscience  than  the  individual  in  his  perversity  will  always  acknowledge.  Men  are
indulged  too  much  in  the  complaint  that  nobody  has  spoken  to  them  about  their  souls.
A  miserable  egotism  often  lies  at  the  bottom  of  such  complainmg.  If  they  know  by
any  means  whatever — and  it  matters  not  how  slight  the  hint  may  be— that  there  is
something  written  for  the  obedience  of  all  mankind  and  for  their  consequent  advantage,
then  these  complainers  are  bound  to  attend  to  it.  Men  are  not  so  foolish  in  the  quest
of  worldly  gains.  Then  they  will  go  upon  the  slightest  hint,  and  follow  it  up  discreetly
and  warily.  Why,  then,  should  they  be  so  fooush  in  the  matter  of  spiritual  gain?
Because  ^  truth  is  perished^  and  is  cut  off  from  their  mouth.'*— Y.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  vm.


Vers.  1 — 3. — Punishment  will  even  over-
take the  slHncrs  who  have  long  since  been
deceased.

Yer.  1.— They  diaU  bring  out  tlie  bones.
Not  only  shall  many  of  the  dead  bodies
remain  unburied,  but  the  sepulchres  of
thoee  who  have  till  now  "  lain  in  honour,
each  one  in  his  house"  (Isa.  xiv.  18X  shall
be  violated.  The  inhalntaiits  of  Jemsalom
meant  are  evidently  those  of  the  upper
class,  for  the  others  were  buried,  with  but
litUe  regaid  to  the  security  of  the  corpses,


in  the  valley  of  Eedron  (2  Kings  xxiiL  6).
According  to  some,  the  motive  of  this  inva-
sion of  the  chambers  of  the  dead  is  avarice
(oomp.  Herod.,  L  187,  Darius  at  the  tomb  of
Nitocris);  but  the  context,  without  excluding
this  view,  rather  suggests  malice  and  con-
tempt. Thus  **  the  wrath  of  man "  was  to
♦♦  praise"  Jehovah  (Ps.  Ixxvi.  10).

Yer.  2. — ^And  they  shall  spread  them,  etc
Not  as  an  act  of  solemn  mockery,  for  the
agents  are  idolaters  themselves,  but  God  so
overrules  the  passions  of  his  unconscious
instruments  that  no  more  effective  cere-
monial could  have  been  devised.    Whom


r


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PBOPHET  JEREMIAH,    [cit  vm.  1—22.


ttaj  luTB  loTbd,  etc  The  prophet  Is
dnlgnedl; difTiise  in  Mb  deaoHptioD.  With
■11  thbir  miupent  Eeal,  theaa  unhappy
Idolaters  cannot  even  find  totnba.

Tel.  S. — Whloh  rtmiin.  The  nordi  are
OBttaiulj  lo  be  omitted  in  the  secoiid  plnoe
where  they  occur.  In  the  Uobrew  llioy
•tanil  after  in  all  the  plM«*,  and  the  woril
for  "places"  la  feminine,  vrbereas  the  parti-
dple,  "  tbe  remaining,"  i»  raaKoliDe.  The
Septnagint  and  Feehito  have  nothing  cone-

3 ending.  There  is  a  clerical  error  in  the
abrew.

Ter,  *— ch.  ir.  1.— The  incorrigiMe
iriohednGea  of  the  people,  and  the  anfulneaa
ot  the  judgment.

Ter.  4. — MoreaTei  thon  ibalt  mj,  etc. ;
literally,  and  Hum  ihiM  tay.  Tbe  SLCtion  it
intioduoed  by  a  formala  which  connects  it
with  ch.  Tu.  2,  2S.  ShftU  they  Ml,  etc.?
ifttSer,  Do  men  fall  ,  .  ,  doth  a  man  turn
auajif  One  of  those  appeals  to  oommon
•ease  In  which  the  prophets  delight.  Who
e*er  sees  a  futlen  man  stay  quietly  on  the
ground  without  attempting  to  rise?  or  a
man  who  baa  wandored  out  of  the  path
peniat  in  going  in  the  wrong  direction?

Ver.  5.— Bliddsn  back  .  .  .  backsliding.
The  verb  in  tlio  same  verb  (in  another  cou-
JQga^on)  as  in  Tor.  4,  and  tho  noun  ia  a
derivative  from  it.  Tho  Authorized  Ver-
■ion,  therefore,  haa  slightly  weakened  tho
force  of  theargumont.  They  holdfast  deceit.
They  cling  to  a  false  view  of  their  relation
to  their  Ood  (comp.  oh.  It.  2  ;  v.  2).

Vcr.  6.— I  hearkened  and  heard.  Tho
Divine  Judge  ooudescends  to  spoak  after
the  manner  of  men.  lie  will  be  his  own
witness  ;  for  it  is  bis  own  people,  Jealmrun,
which  is  on  its  trial.  Sot  aright.  It  ia  a
oompODnd  eipression,  equiralHnt  to  "insin.
oerely,"  "nntruly"  (comp.  Isa.  xvi,  6).
Xapentsd  .  ,  .  tnined;  lather,  repei^elh  .  .  .
lumeih  (or,  refumelA).  To  his  aonne.  The
Hebrew  text,  sometimes  represented  as
having  a  different  reading  ("conraea,"  in
the  plural)  from  the  margin,  really  gives
the  same  reading  with  one  letter  mis-
plaoed.  Tbe  singular  stands  Id  tijo  pamllol
passage,  oh.  iziii.  19,  and  offers  no  [dilB-
onlty.  As  the  horse  mihstb;  literally,  over-
jloteeOi.  Both  the  Autbuiized  Version  and
the  Yalgate  {impetu  vadmu)  efface  the
■econd  metaphor.  The  nncon  troll  able
paasion  of  both  people  and  war-horse  is
oompared  to  the  aU-subdning  oonrse  of  a
winter  strmm  or  torrent

Ter.  7.— The  appiml  to  the  rognlarity  of
DDlmal  instincts  reminds  us  of  Isa.  i.  3.  Tea,
the  stork,  etc.  The  migratory  birds  obey
their  instinct  with  the  most  uufailing  regu-
larity. Those  referred  to  ore :  (1)  tho  atork,
wbcee  "regular  and  sudden  return  is  ons
of  tbe  most  interesting   natnnl  sighls  of


[  Falosline.

I  which  they  Qy  during  migration"  (Trii<
tram);  (2)  the  turtle,  or  turtlc-duve,  whose
rttumia  theaureiiign  of  spring  (Cant.  ii.  11);
(3  and  4)  the  crane  and  tbe  swallow,  or
rather,  "the  swift  and  tlie  cmne."  Tbeoe
birds  are  again  mentioned  together  Id  Iso.
ixiviii.  14  (the  jjsolm  of  Heiokinh),  where
special  refercnoe  is  made  to  tbe  penotmting
quality  of  tlioir  note.  "  Tbe  whooping  or
trumpeting  of  the  cnoe  rings  through  tbe
nit.-ht  air  in  spring,  and  the  vast  flocks
which  WB  noticed  paaaing  north  near  Beer-
sheba  were  a  wonderfnl  eight"  The  intro-
duction of  tlie  Bwiillow  iu  the  Authorized
Version  is  mialoading.  as  that  bird  is  not  a
regular  migrant  in  I'alestiae.  The  note  of
the  swift  is  a  shrill  Bcroam.  "No  bird  is
more  conspicuous  by  the  suddenness  of  its
return  than  the  swiR,"  is  the  remark  of
Canon  Tristram,  who  saw  large  flocks  pass-
ing  northwards  over  Jerusalem,  on  the  Vith
of  February  ('Nat.  Hist  of  BiblV  P-  20S).
It  is  an  intereetitig  fact  that  the  swift  hears
the  same  name  (_>m)  iu  the  vernacular  Arabic
as  in  the  Ilebcew  of  Jeremiah.  The  judg-
ment i  butter,  e^  laa  (see  on  ch.  v.  4).

Ver.  6. — Haw  do  ye  say,  We  are  wisel
Jeremiah  ia  evidently  addressing  the  prieata
and  tho  propheta,  whom  he  so  oonstintly
described  as  among  tbe  chief  causes  of
Judab'a  min  (oomp.  ver.  10;  ch.  ii.  8,  20;
iv.  9 ;  v.  31),  and  who,  in  Isaiah's  daj-,
regarded  it  as  on  nnwarrantabla  assumption
on  tbe  port  of  that  prophet  to  pretend  to
Idstmct  them  in  their  duty  (Iso.  uviii.  9).
The  lav  Df  the  Lord  is  with  us.  "  With
ub;"  i.e.  in  our  hands  and  mouths  (comp.
Pa.  L  Iti).  The  word  torah,  oommonly  ren-
dered" Law,"  is  ambiguous,  and  a  difference
of  opinion  as  to  the  meaning  of  this  verse
b  inevitable.  Some  think  these  solf-atyled
"  wise  "  men  reject  Jeremiah's  counsels  on
the  ground  thdt  they  already  bave  the
divinely  giveu  Law  in  a  written  fonn  (comp.
Bom.  ii.  17—20),  and  that  the  Divine  revela-
tion is  complete.  Otliora  that  lorah  here,
as  often  Glsewhere  in  the  prophets  (s.o,  Isa.
i,  10;  riii.  16;  ilii.  4).  simply  moans  ■' in-
struction,"  or  "  dlreotiou,"  and  describes  the
authoritative  counsel  given  orall;  by  the
priests  (Deut  xvii.  11)  and  propheta  to
tliose  who  consulted  them  on  points  of
ritual  and  practice  respectivol;.  'The  usage
of  Jeremiah  himself  favours  the  Utter  view
(see  oh.  ii.  8  ;  iviii.  18 ;  ami  oepocially  «vL
4,5,  where  "to  walk  in  my  Tora/^"  is  parallel
'  to  "  to  hearken  to  tho  words  of  my  servalita
I  the  prophets."  The  context  equally  points
I  in  this  direction.    Tho,  most  natural  intei-

5 relation,  then,  is  tliia :  The  opponents  of
eremioh  bade  him  keep  his  exhortations  {o
J  himself  seeing  that  they  tbemselvM  were


CH.  viiL  1— 22.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,


215


wise  and  the  diviDely  appointed  teachers
of  the  people.  To  this  Jeremiah  replies,  not
(as  the  Authorised  Version  renders)  Lo,
oextainly  in  vain  made  he  it,  etc. ;  but.  Tea,
behold  I  for  a  lie  haih  it  vfrought-—tke  lying
pen  'of  the  9cribe$  (so  Authorized  Version,
margin).  Bofgrim  Ascribes)  is  the  term
proper  to  all  those  who  practised  the  art  of
writing  (jtifer) ;  it  included,  therefore,  pre-
sumably at  least,  most,  if  not  all,  of  the
priests  and  prophets  of  whom  Jeremiah
speaks.  There  are  indications  enough  that
the  Hebrew  literature  was  not  entirely  con-
fined to  those  whom  we  look  np  to  as  the
inspired  writers,  and  it  is  perfectly  credible
that  the  formalist  priests  and  false  prophets
should  have  availed  themselves  of  the  pen
as  a  means  of  giving  greater  currency  to
their  teaching.  Jeremiah  warns  his  hearers
to  distrtist  a  literature  which  is  in  the  ser-
vice of  f&lse  religious  principles — a  warning
which  prophets  in  the  wider  sense  of  the
term  (» The  Liberty  of  Prophesyings  *)  still
have  but  too  much  occasion  to  repeat.  [It  is
right,  however,  to  mention  another  gram-
matically possible  rendering,  which  is
adopted  by  those  who  suppose  torah  in  the
preceding  clause  to  mean  the  Mosaic  Law :
**  Yea,  betiold,  the  lying  pen  of  the  scribes
hath  made  (it)  into  a  Ue ;  **  t.6.  the  profes-
sional interpreters  of  the  Scriptures  called
dcribes  have,  by  their  groundless  comments
and  inferences,  made  the  Scriptures  (espe-
cially the  noblest  part,  the  Law)  into  a
lie,  so  that  it  has  ceased  to  represent  the
Divine  will  ai)d  teaching.  The  objections
to  this  are:  (1)  the  necessity  of  supplying
an  object  to  the  verb^the  object  would
hardly  have  been  omitted  where  its  omission
renders  the  meaning  of  the  clause  so  doubt-
ful; (2)  that  this  view  attributes  to  the
word  96fgrim  a  meaning  which  only  became
prevalent  in  the  time  of  Ezra  (comp.  Ezra
vii.  6, 11).]

Ver.  9. — ^The  wise  men  are  ashamed.  It
is  the  perfect  of  prophetic  certitude,  equiva-
lent to  **the  wise  men  shall  certainly  be
ashamed."  And  why  ?  Evidently  because
they  have  not  foreseen  the  calamities  im-
pending over  their  nation.  They  have
preached,  **  Peace,  peace ;  when  there  was
no  peace"  (ver.  11);  and  hence  they  find
themselves  **  taken  "  in  the  grijp  of  a  relent-
less power  from  which  there  is  no  escape.
What  wiidom;  literally,  wisdom  of  whatf
ie.  in  respect  of  what  ?

Vers.  10—12. — These  verses  are  almost
the  same  as  cIl  vi.  12 — 15  ;  the  differences
are  in  ver.  10.  The^  are  omitted  in  the
Septuagint,  and  Hitzig  regards  them  as  an
interpoUtion,  at  any  rate  from  the  point
where  the  present  passage  coincides  veroally
with  its  parallel.  His  grounds  are :  (1)  that
ver.  13  follows  more  naturally  on  ver.  10  a


(•*...  them  that  shall  inherit  them  ")  than
on  ver.  12;  (2)  that  ver.  10  is  deficient  in
svmmetry ;  and  (3)  that  the  deviations  from
ch.  vi.  13—15  sometimes  loosen  the  con-
nection of  the  clauses,  sometimes  sink  into
the  colloquial  stjle.  The  arguments  seem
to  be  inconclusive.  Jeremiah  is  apt  to
repeat  himself  (Graf  refers  to  ver.  14  =  ch.
iv.  5 ;  ver.  15  =  ch.  xiv.  19 ;  ch.  v.  9  =  v.  29,
ix.  8 ;  ch.  vii  16  =  xi.  14 ;  ch.  1.  41—43  =  vi.
22—24 ;  ch.  I  44-46  =  xlix.  19-21) ;  and
the  element  which  is  common  to  this  para-
graph and  to  ch.  vi.  12 — 15  seems  equally
appropriate  in  both  connections.  It  should
be  added,  however,  that  the  cautious  and
reverent  Bleek  has  come  to  the  same  con-
clusion as  Hitzig.  To  them  that  shall
inherit  them ;  rather,  to  them  that  ahaU  tak^
poBseeeion  of  them,  Le.  by  violence.

Ver.  13-— ch.  ix.  1. — Further  description
of  the  judgment ;  grief  of  Jeremiah.

Ver.  13. — There  shall  be  no  grapes,  etc. ;
rather,  (here  ewe  no  grapes  .  .  .  and  the  leaf
is  faded.  It  is  the  actual  condition  of
things  which  the  prophet  describes.  Else-
where Judah  is  compared  to  a  vine  with
bad  grapes  (ch.  ii.  21) ;  here  the  vine  does
not  even  pretend  to  bear  fruit  Another
figure  is  that  of  a  barren  fig  tree  (comp.
Matt  xxi.  19).  And  the  things  that  I  have
given  them,  etc.;  rather,  and  I  gave  them
Viat  which  they  transgress  (viz.  laws).  The
construction,  however,  which  this  rendering
implies  is  not  perfectly  natural,  though
supported  by  most  of  the  ancient  versions
(except  the  Septuagint,  which  omits  the
words),  and  it  is  better  to  alter  a  single
vowel-point,  and  render,  "  And  I  will  give
them  to  those  who  shall  pass  over  them.'*
The  phrase  to  pass  away  is  constantly  used
of  an  invading  host;  e.g.  Isa.  viii.  7;  Dan.
xi.  10,  40.

Ver.  14.— WhT-do  we  sit  stilll  The
prophet  transr^of  tl  us  by  a  stroke  of  his  pen
into  the  midbt  of  the  fulfilment  of  his
prophecy.  The  people  of  the  country
districts  are  represented  as  urging  each
other  to  fiight  True,  it  is  the  resource  of
despair.  No  defenced  oities  can  defend
them  against  the  judgment  of  Jehovah.
Let  ns  be  silent;  rather,  let  us  perish;
literally,  let  us  be  put  to  silenee.  Hath  put
ns  to  silenoe;  rather,  hath  caused  us  to
perish;  i.e.  hath  decreed  our  destruction,
water  of  gall ;  a  phrase  characteristic  of  our
prophet  (see  ch.  ix.  14 ;  xxiii.  15).  It  is  a
little  difficult  to  find  a  rendering  which
shall  suit  all  the  passages  in  which  rosh
(gall)  is  mentioned.  In  Deut  xxxiL  83
(and  so  Job  xx.  16)  it  is  clearly  used  for
M  venom "  in  general ;  and  yet  in  ver.  32  of
the  same  chapter  it  obviously  means  a
plant  Another  general  application  of  the
term  seems  to  have  been  to  bitterness  in


no.


THE  BGOC  OF  THE  FHOFEET  TEREXIAK.    Tch:  ¥111.1-


th«    ideam    *f(    hitsemem     •ml


Tolls. — ^Khi^; n&tf!r.A<?n/vHf.  A!U7^€r
m  tnmqiuBaiy  ^Mme  i^ue  am  in
•f  )»    Znmbit ;  zacher,  fr'mir.
T«c  id. — ThB  invaiier  Lb  incrodnced  widi
^km  mmm  mft/uxvmm  imieihiinenei  an  in  eii.

qn  cJl  IT.  IX)^
.mtahsd  (m  eh.  xirz.  il)^
Tbft  phraae  ''-aCznn^r  ones  **  ggnm-aJTy
oxen,  bat  hoe  (  js  in  eh.  ziTii.  3 ;
tjnhflwa.
Ter.  17.^ — A  xukw  mu^  to  intexisi^  the
of  <ir(»iifiiln€fla.  Scii^«u£i»
(•nvm)  i^tfa^ufciL
noon  u  in  appficitimi  to  the
geneni  •  •erpenta.'*  -BMiiiaka''
r«7«2M>  ue  the  remienn^  of
j^mi»  md  the  Yolgate.  Some  ipecxes  of
kighly  Tenoowna  lerpent  ui  ek*Hj  intemied;
»0i»  thin  th»  we  eannct  a  j.  The  locc
fMifetthiy  means"  to  huB.**  Gaxwn  Tratzaa
flinfcs  of  **»  Tery  besntifiillj  BftriEed  jetlow
strpeady  «id  titt  larzert  of  the  Tipen  foond
iB  th«  Hoir  Lszw^**  calkd  the  DoAms
s.  He  %Mt  thai  it  fa  one  of  the
dtegootH  CSaL  HisL  of  Pakstine,'

Ter.  IS— rh.  ix.  1.— The  captzritj  of
Jvdah  and  the  d^ep  iottow  of  Jeremiah.

Ter,  IS.— When  I  wvaki  «■
«l&  Thft  text  is  here  extmnelj  difficnlt,
•nd  IT  there  is  cr>niipdon  anjwh^  it  is  in
tlbe  oipening  of  this  Tene.  EwiJd  and  Graf
■wypiee  an  ellipsis,  and  render,  **  (Oh  for)
mcj  eDtireninf  ^t^.  an  enliTenin^  for  me]
is  tfiMibie ! "  Hitzi;^  m#>re  satnrally  renders
in  the  Toeatire,  '*  Mj  enllTener  in  tronMe,"
whieh  be  MOffpnmM  to  be  in  apposition  to
mj  hsart  lie  Dien  1&I8>  warers  between
this  and  (be  riew  that  it  is  an  address  to
Ids  wife,  •*Qn«  marito  tolatio  est."  (See,
hflireTsr,  ch.  xtL  2.)

Yer,  19.— Bsesnss  of  thsm  that  dwdl  in,
ete.  The  liebr&w  simpl  j  has  **  from  them,"
eie*  The  prr/ptiet  is  transported  in  imagi-
mAUm  to  the  time  of  the  fulfilment  of  his
pmheeies.  He  bears  the  lamentation  of
Us  eoonUjmen,  wbo  are  languishing  in
cttpiiritT.  Is  not  ths  Lord  in  Zion,  etc.  ?  is
fbe  burden  of  their  tad  complaints ;  **  king"
fa  ft  femiliar  sjrnonym  for  ^'God"  (oomp.
hm,  Tia  21 ;  xxxiiL  22 ;  but  fio<  Pa.  Ixxxix.
I8f  which  fa  certaiDlir  miitranslated  in
Authorized  Version).  Bat  why  **  in  Zion  "  ?
^ZUm^  was  properly  the  name  of  the  east-
ward hill  at  Jerusalem,  where  lay  the
oldeit  part  of  the  citv  (called  "the  city  of
Darid  %  and  the  highest  portion  of  which
was  crowned  by  the  temple.  Why  haye
th&f  yroToksd  mo  to  aager,  etc?  fa  the  reply


if  JfihfTVTih.  pninmu^  *mt  that  ibar

iaas  'wrth  inz  m  -ixoirc  cetzdsizsifln  &r  ch^

indiieiicv  ;  nmo.  m.  t.  ll>\

T^r.  ^.— Iha  ksrwt  is  pat;  €te.  Fir
*  mnuDeeS*  read  pr%U-^pith^nnq  t  ^ite  Ymta^
begian  jx  5«ptEmberv  Thm  p«M}pLe  ^run
beenmes  the  fpeaksn  The  d^rm  of  she
5p**eeh  renimhi  aae  of  a  pprverbL  When
the  harvisat  ^ras  'T^fst  imi  chi*  frri fri^tiiiTTny
aided.  tiLd  fmacamfTTum  Iiii^JBed  &r  a  aniift
time  af  reci^esnmcaiSL  Jmioh  had  had  ia
"^  harvesc-Gme  '^  lod  ^en  vsk  '*'  ^nit-eadsio^
imr;*'  its  ojeetls  hiui  been  zE^iiBilly  in-
eresBingv  >Qd.  on  the  siiali?^  of  pieviuns
deliT^iaaces  (rcmp.  Lm,  i.y\iL  4:  Trrffi
10  w  it  m:;fiis  huT«  been  «xp««ted  that  Gi?d
wiulti  hav>i  inc>:rp«?8eti.  his  help  bein^  only
delaj^ti  ia  opler  w  be  die  more  fi^sally
snpemacnraL     Bos  we  cze  uc  Kf<id  ^or

Ver-  iL— Tor  &e  ksrt»  etc.:  literallT,
h€cmmm  9/  tJW  hr^wcimj^  «tc  i  am  6nMbn  ;
eomp  di.  TTifL  :>«  and  the  phrase  *  broken  in
heart  '*  (Ija.  IxL  U  ecc.>  The  prophet  f«^fa
cnsshed  by  the  lense  of  the  utter  ntin  of
people.  I  am  hiask;  rather,  /  ^  ra
(»  Pa.  xxxriiL  6 ;  xIlL  ^).  The
root  means  rather  *^  foulness  '^  cr  ***  squalor  "
than  "^  UtteknesH  *  (crmpi  Job  t1  16;  whrre
•^blackish,'*  an  epithet  of  streams,  ihonld
catho  be  "^  turbid'^

V«.  22. — Xo  hope  or  remedy  fa  left;
again  a  proverbial  expression.  Vo  balm  in
OiTearf  Gikad  appears  to  hare  been
celebrated  in  early  times  for  its  balsam,
which  was  exported  by  Ishmselites  to
Egrpt  (Gen.  xxxriL  25)  and  by  Jewish
merchant  to  Tyre  (Eiek.  xxriL  17>  It
was  one  of  the  most  costly  products  of
Palestine  c^en.  xliii.  11),  and  was  prized
for  its  medicinal  properties  in  c&^es  of
wounds  (comp.  ch.  xln.  11 ;  IL  8).  Josephus
mentions  this  balsam  sereral  times,  but
states  that  it  only  grew  at  Jericho  (*  Antiq^'
XT.  4, 2).  Tristram  searched  for  balsam  in  its
ancient  haunts  but  in  rain ;  he  thinks  Jere-
miah means  the  £a/Misiod^iidroit  ^iMid^ass
or  ofohaUamum^  which  in  Arabia  is  used  as
a  medicine  both  intomallT  and  externally.
Bat  if  Pliny  (*Hi^  Natl,*  xxir.  22)  may
be  followed  in  his  wide  use  of  the  term
**  balsam "  £0  as  to  include  the  exudations
of  the  **  lentiscus "  or  mastick  tree,  then
^'balm  of  Gilead"  is  still  to  be  found;  for
the  mastick  tree  "  grows  commonly  all  OTer
the  country,  excepting  in  the  plains  and  the
Jordan  Talley"  (*Xat  Hist  of  Bible,'  p.
336).  Is  there  no  physidan  there  T  We
hear  but  little  of  physicians  in  the  Old
Testament.  They  are  only  mentioned  again
in  Gen.  1.  2  (but  with  reference  to  Egypt,
where  medicine  was  much  cultivatedX  and
in  2  Chron.  xvi.  12;  Job  xiii  4.  From  the
two  latter  passages  we  may,  perhaps,  infer


CH.  vm  1— 22.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.


217


that  physicians  were  rarely  snccessfal ;  and
this  is  certainly  the  imprewion  produced  by
Eoclos.  xxxTiiL  15,  **  He  that  sinneth  before
his  Maker,  let  him  fall  into  the  hand  of  the
phyBician."  The  remedies  employed  in  the
Talmudic  period  quite  bear  out  this  strong
saying  (see   Lightfoot,  'H(»»  Hebraic®/


on  Mark  ▼.  26).  The  physicians  of  Gilead,
howeyer,  probably  confined  themselyes  to
their  one  famous  simple,  the  baUam.  If
not  the  health  .  .  .  reooveredt  GesemuB
renders,  less  probably,  **  hath  no  bandage
been  applied  to  the  daughter  of  my  people  ?  **


H0MILETIC9.

Vers.  4 — 6. — Persistent  depravity.  I.  Pebsistent  depbavitt  mubt  bb  dtstiit-
GUISHED  FBOM  A  CASUAL  LAPSE  INTO  SIN.  1.  This  is  marked  by  a  constant  habit  of
sin,  a  falling  without  rising  again.  The  best  man  is  often  guilty  of  mistakes,  but  he
soon  seeks  to  recover  himself  (Ps.  xxxvii.  24).  His  habit  is  upright,  the  direction  he
follows  on  the  whole,  though  now  and  then  he  may  lose  ground  for  a  short  time,  is
right.  But  the  man  who  is  persistently  depraved  makes  the  wrong  way  his  main
course,  and  if  he  ever  deviates  from  it  does  so  accidentally  or  only  under  some  tem-
porary impulse,  soon  returning  as  by  instinct  to  wallow  in  the  mire,  where  only  he
feels  at  home  (2  Pet.  ii.  22).  2.  This  is  characterized  by  absence  of  repentance  after
sinning.  No  man  is  heard  to  repent  Tver.  6).  After  a  good  man  has  fallen  into  sin  he
is  overwhelmed  with  shame,  plunged  into  dark  depths  of  grief,  tortured  with  bitter
pangs  of  contrition,  like  Peter  when  he  "  went  out  and  wept  bitterly."  But  the
persistently  depraved  man  feels  no  such  distresses.  The  sun  shines  as  brightly  after
he  has  contracted  a  new  crime  as  before.  His  serene  self-complacency  is  not  mfflcd
by  one  spasm  of  inward  revulsion.  3.  This  is  characterized  by  an  impetttous  impulse
to  sin.  A  good  man  may  fall  into  sin.  One  who  is  persistently  depraved  rushes  into
it  To  the  former  sin  comes  as  defeat  after  a  battle  in  which  his  better  nature  has
fought  and  failed ;  to  the  latter  it  comes  unresisted,  welcomed :  he  "  retumeth  to  his
course  "  with  eagerness,  "  as  the  horse  rusheth  into  the  battle."

IL  PeBSKTENT  DEPBAVTTY  is  fab  MOBB  CULPABLE  THAN  A  CASUAL  LAPSE  INTO

SIN.  All  sin  is  culpable.  Sin  cannot  be  entirely  accidental  in  any  case,  or  it  would
cease  to  be  sin.  But  persistent  sin  is  by  far  the  most  evil  form  of  sin.  1.  A  casual
fall  may  be  induced  by  powerful  external  temptation ;  persistent  depravity  must  rise
from  an  internal  appetite.  2.  A  casual  fall  may  come  as  a  sudden  surprise  when  a
man  is  off  his  guard ;  persistent  depravity  must  be  clearly  perceived  and  consciously
cherished.  3.  A  casual  fall  may  be  the  result  of  a  sudden  outburst  of  passion  which
results  in  something  approaching  temporary  insanity ;  persistent  depravity  must  be
calm  and  cold-blooded^  standing  the  test  of  reflection.  This  is  altogether  beyond  what
could  be  anticipated.  You  are  not  surprised  that  a  man  should  stumble  occasionally
in  the  darkness  of  this  world,  amidst  the  snares  and  pitfalls  of  temptation,  with  the
natural  weakness  of  humanity,  or  that  he  should  sometimes  miss  his  way  or  be  lured
aside  from  the  right  road  to  pleasanter  paths ;  but  that  he  should  not  care  to  rise  after
falling,  not  think  of  returning  when  be  sees  the  error  of  his  way,  but  should  keep  to
it  with  a  consistency  which  would  be  heroic  in  a  better  course, — such  depravity  is
unnatural  and  monstrous.

Ver.  l.-^A  lesson  from  the  hirds.  It  is  interesting  to  observe  that  the  Scripture
references  to  natural  history  are  not  directed  so  much  to  theological  arguments  as  to
moral  lessons.  While  questions  concerning  the  being  and  nature  of  God  absorb
almost  the  exclusive  attention  of  the  natural  theologian,  the  prophet,  who  assumes  the
belief  of  his  hearers  in  the  immanence  of  GK)d  in  Nature,  is  more  concerned  to  show  how
she  rebukes  man  for  his  own  shortcomings  and  incites  to  goodness  by  her  mute
example.  The  scriptural  treatment  is,  therefore,  more  nearly  followed  by  the  reeard
for  the  human  and  moral  aspects  of  nature  in  the  spirit  of  Wordsworth  and  Buskin,
which  is  characteristic  of  the  better  thought  of  our  own  age,  than  by  the  cold,  prosaic
examination  of  the  physical  world,  as  simply  affording  one  section  of  the  evidences  of
religion,  which  was  pursued  in  the  days  of  Paley.

I.  The  bibds  behind  us  that  we  abe  subbounded  bt  Divine  obdinances.
Migratory  birds  have  their  appointed  times.    Every  creature  has  its  special  vocation.


ttt  THE  BOOS  OF  THE  FSOPHET  JEEEMIAH.    'ol  tiq.  l^SL


inacfart.     To  caaa  h  OGfDO  m  %  r7irri.>  -^^  'i^*7,  c-  r=i:clK  =i  ibe  ccn.-yaffiiofc,

to  be  dcarij  p€r«rr«d  aad  frttt j  cb:tf«n.      E::.!,  tb^o^  ibe  ttoe  Euechcjd  lor

the  peiicrEiafice  of  tbe  I^rrae  crdizazjoet  vixa  ccc^isf  a.  zMXsrt  a  nci

en  xcaa,  ti^^e  or!L:aaaecs  extesd  to  tisa^ ;  to  Lh&  aljo  ibtj  oceae  vii^  Dtriae

TViOgh  caa  ii  pliffaallj  free  to  rebet,  cscnllj  be  it  bo  isvore  kit  ova

titan  iTK  tLe  bcris  wbo  ve  bcoad  bj  toe  )aw%  o(  t£«ir  r-jtrart*    Freedoca  from

OQ  is  floC  frttxkim  from  oUigfttion.

ThK  BBSS  BSXETD  C«  THAT  IT  B  AS  VILL  TO  CYET  THE  Dmn  OKDCTAIICBL

lb  Uwir  xzkignUioos  tbej  find  tbesr  wtLfait  aeonred.  Driren  bj  tbe  i2.vini  impulse  c€
DHfne  Uw  wmteo  oo  thdr  isftmcti,  tbej  ipeed  tikem  erer  rut  tracts  of  imkiKyva
]sadi,aad  At  length  Ihid  tbemselTe*  in  tbednDeaad  At  th«  seAsoci  wLkh  is  bert  loited
for  tbem.  Wbat  ao  image  of  implictt  faiib !  We  are  called  to  p>  fcrtb,  like  Abrabam,
w«  know  not  wbitber,  but  liJLe  bim  to  find  a  pcaeeashoo  in  tike  unknown  land
fHeb.  xL  8).  Tbe  f atare  ia  nnaeen,  tbe  wm j  ia  wud  acd  patn^o;  dark  ckoda  aa  of
inxtding  storms  gitber  oo  the  borizoo ;  bat  if  we  take  as  oar  oc^npasa  the  known  will
of  God,  we  too  s£dl  find  annn  j  climes  bejood  the  aeas  of  trooUe,  a  home  at  the  end
of  our  ptlgrmkage.

HL  ThK    BIKMy    ST   THUB   SXAXPLB,  tKBCXS  OTB   DlSOBZDIESn  TO  THS  DlTCn

ODfyAYCBB.  Free  to  roam  throogh  illimitabk  resioos  of  mit,  the  higih-fijing  stork,  tbo
tnrtifO-dore,  the  swift,  and  the  crmoe  all  keep  to  their  true  oonrse,  not  dropping  down,
tempted  bj  the  attractioos  of  leafy  rales  or  frnitf al  gardens,  not  tamed  aside  terrified
hf  the  hoirors  of  high  moontains,  lonel  j  deserts,  or  storm  j  seas,  till  they  reach  thdr
destination  in  pfon^oal  obedience  to  the  mjsterioas  law  of  their  nature.  Tliese
migratorj  birds  are  representatire  of  external  libertj  restrained  hj  inward  bw.  We
are  not  under  anj  ontwaid  oompnlsioQ  nor  an j  inward  law  of  instinct  like  that  of  the
birds.  But  we  are  capable  of  following  a  h!gfaer  law.  We  hare  light  which  is
denied  to  them,  and  high  motires  of  fear  and  lore  to  prompt  to  obedience.  If  we
disobej,  the  obedience  of  the  Inrds  is  an  erer-recmring  rebake.

Vera,  8, 9. — Unlmsiworfhp  Uieratnre,  L  LrrsRATURZ  mat  hatb  vakt  ATTRAcnoyg
AMD  tet  bb  uttbustwobtht.  1.  AtUkority.  Thej  were  official  prophets  and  teachers
whom  Jeremiah  oppoaed.  Errors  gain  power  when  thej  are  pronounced  ex  eathedrcL
The  belief  in  papal  iofallibilitj  is  bat  one  instance  of  a  ooounon  human  weakness.
2.  PreUntiofuneu,  The  self-styled  wise  men  of  Jeremiah's  age  were  confident  and
boastful.  The  world  is  too  rudj  to  take  a  man  at  his  own  estimate  of  himself.
Yehement  assertion  ia  often  accepted  instead  of  solid  proot  3.  Numerical  force,
Jamniah  stood  as  one  against  manj.  No  mistake  is  greater  than  the  assumption  of
totalled  common  sense,  that  truth  maj  be  presumed  to  reside  with  tbe  majority.  How
often  from  the  days  of  Noah  downwards  has  it  been  found  with  the  few !  4.  Popular
tl/yle.  These  **  wise  "  men  knew  how  to  suit  the  taste  of  the  multitude ;  they  could
pcopbesy  smooth  things.  There  is  a  fearful  fascination  in  literary  style.  The  great
danger  to  the  cultiTated  is  that  they  should  select  for  their  guides  those  writes  whose
Isngqftgff  is  nv)st  pleasing  in  place  of  those  whose  arguments  are  most  sound.  Lies
may  l^  commended  by  brilliant  efngrams,  and  unwholesome  passions  fostered  by
spteitdid  poetry.  Tbe  ease  and  fluency  of  Hume  and  the  wit  of  Yoltaire  were  effectiye
with  many  persons  who  would  not  have  been  moved  by  bare  arguments.

IL  If  litkbatubb  is  ubtbu*  it  bhould  bb  tbbated  as  worthless.  1.  Style  is
bot  the  Testore  of  thought,  and  thought  is  but  idle  fancy  if  it  doe»  not  correspond  to
fad.  The  first  ouestion  to  be  asked  about  a  writ^  is  not,)"  Are  his  ideas  novel,  original,
striking?  are  they  beautiful,  grand,  imnosing?  are  they  pleasing,  popular,  accept-
able ?  **  but  simply,  ^  Are  they  true  ?  **  If  this  question  in  answered  in  the  negative,  all
other  recommendations  may  be  considered  as  worse  thim  worthless.  The  sweeter  the
bait,  the  more  dangerous  the  trap.  2.  The  test  of  truth  in  religious  literature  is  con^
farmiiy  to  the  Word  of  Qod,  Ine  8<^pture  is  a  guide  and  authority  to  the  Christian.
God's  word  in  nature,  providence,  and  conscience  must  be  heard  and  int^preted  if  men
would  speak  truly  on  these  subjects.  The  profession  to  be  speaking  Divine  words
Coonded  either  on  a  pretended  revelation  or  a  boast  of  superior  inteUdgence,  is  vain
imleif  the  prifsts  woras  of  the  indiyidoal  hannoniae  with  the  general  truth  of  Grod's


OH.  vm.  1—22.]  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.        219

world-wide  revelations.  3.  Experience  will  test  the  truth  of  literature.  If  literature
coucems  itself  with  serious  subjects,  it  cannot  be  regarded  as  a  trifle  of  idle  hours.  It
will  be  brought  into  judgment.  Experience  will  try  it.  No  lie  can  be  eternal.  The
oelf-styled  '^wise"  men  will  "have  to  be  ashamed,'*  ''dismayed  and  taken,"  when
events  contradict  their  untrue  language.

Ver.  11.— (See  on  ch.  vL  14.)

Vers.  14, 15. — Despair.  I.  Despair  will  abisb  on  thb  feboeftion  that  thebb  is
Ko  WAT  OF  ESOAFB  FBOM  BX7IK.  The  miserable  Jews  are  pictured  as  first  sitting  still
helplessly,  and  then  rousing  themselves  to  enter  the  fenced  cities,  only  to  find  that
death  awaits  them  there  as  surely  as  in  the  open  plain.  People  are  too  ready  to
believe  that  "  something  will  turn  up,"  and  so  hold  on,  in  confidence  and  indifierence,
till  their  eyes  are  suddenly  opened,  and  they  see  room  for  nothing  but  despair.

II.  Despair  will  arise  on  the  begoonition  of  the  wrath  of  God.  The  Jews
are  to  see  that  their  Gk>d  has  put  them  to  silence.  Philistines,  Egyptians,  Assyrians,
Chaldeans,  might  all  be  resisted ;  but  who  shall  resist  God  ?  Men  can  only  fight
against  God  with  confidence  until  they  perceive  him  fighting  against  them.  Then
hope  is  madness.

III.  Despair  will  be  heightened  bt  the  sense  of  quilt.  The  Jews  are  to  see
that  their  calamity  is  the  punishment  of  sin.  It  is  deserved.  It  is  justly  given.  Men
hope  on  while  they  refuse  to  admit  their  sin ;  but  conviction  of  sin  is  fatal  to  hope.

I  v.  Despair  mat  follow  a  confident  hope.  The  Jews  had  looked  for  peace
and  for  a  time  of  health.  Tet  none  came.  Hope  may  be  very  bright  and  yet  very
delusive.  The  splendour  of  the  sunrise  contains  little  promise  that  the  day  will  close
without  storms.  Subjective  confidence  is  no  guarantee  of  objective  truth.  Things
are  not  the  more  true  because  we  believe  them  very  firmly.  We  may  feel  safe  and  be
in  danger.  A  peaceful  death  is  no  security  for  a  joyful  resurrection.  It  is  little  that
a  man  has  overcome  the  fear  of  death ;  the  important  question  is  whether  he  has
removed  the  ground  for  that  fear.  The  faith  that  saves  is  not  confidence  in  our  own
security,  but  subiuissive  and  obedient  trust  in  Christ.

V.  The  possibilitt  of  despair  is  revealed,  not  to  produce  it,  but  to  wabn
us  FROM  IT.  If  it  were  inevitable,  or,  being  experienced,  invincible,  it  would  be  cruel
to  prepare  any  for  it.  Why  not  let  the  poor  doomed  wretch  enjoy  his  brief  hour  of
sunshine  before  he  is  sent  /'  to  dwell  in  solemn  shades  of  endless  night "  ?  But  the
revelations  of  a  possibly  dark  future  are  given  in  mercy  to  warn  us  from  sowing
the  seeds  of  despair  and  to  point  to  the  way  of  escape.  No  soul  need  despair  since
there  is  One  who  '*  is  able  to  save  them  to  the  uttermost  that  come  unto  Gkxi  by  him  **
(Heb.  viL  26>

Yer.  20. — Hcavesi  contrasts.  The  seasons  have  their  lessons  for  all  of  us,  teaching
both  by  analogy  and  by  contrast ;  for  the  warnings  suggested  by  the  opposition  of  our
own  condition  to  that  of  the  natural  world  may  be  as  instructive  as  the  encourage-
ments arising  out  of  the  harmony  between  the  two.  To  Jeremiah  the  harvest  came  in
its  brightness  only  to  show  the  condition  of  the  Jews  in  the  deeper  shadow.  A  similar
experience  may  occur  to  those  of  us  who  have  no  harvest-song  in  the  soul  to  respond
to  the  harvest-gladness  of  the  world  without.

I.  The  most  hopeful  external  event  is  no  security  for  deliverance  frox
THE  greatest  TROUBLES  OF  LIFE.  Even  harvest  did  not  bring  deliverance.  People
are  too  ready  to  rest  their  confidence  on  various  indications  of  God  in  the  outside
world.  1.  Time.  The  harvest  is  a  new  waymark  in  the  course  of  time.  Many  trust
blindly  to  time  to  bring  them  some  help,  while  they  do  not  stir  a  finger  to  secure  it.
2«  Change,  The  harvest  indicates  a  new  season.  The  sanguine  are  too  ready  to
believe  that  any  change  must  be  for  the  better.  3.  Material  prosperity.  The  harvest
brings  bread  for  the  body.  Must  it  not,  therefore,  lay  the  foundation  of  perfect  and
lasting  good  ?  To  those  men  whose  "  god  is  their  belly  "  the  harvest  would  seem  to
promise  complete  satisfaction.  4.  Indications  of  the  merciful  kindness  of  Ood.  He
sends  the  harvest  Then,  it  is  reasoned,  he  wishes  to  bless,  and  therefore  will  permit
no  harm.    But  experience  proves  the  error  of  these  anticipations,  and  reflection  should


220  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  vra.  1— 22.

soon  detect  tbo  fallacy  which  underlies  them.  Outward  events  do  not  always
correspond  to  inward  experiences ;  the  latter  have  their  own  separate  conditions.  God
may  aeal  mercifully  with  us  now  and  in  earthly  things,  but  his  present  forbear-
ance is  no  proof  that  we  shall  never  suffer  from  his  righteous  wrath  in  the  season  of
judgment.

II.  The  most  hopeful  extebnal  event  deepens  the  sense  op  the  internal
DISTRESS  WITH  WHICH  IT  18  CONTRASTED.  The  harvest  past,  and  yet  undelivered  I  1.  A
new  stage  of  time  has  gone,  and  the  deliverance  is  still  delayed.  2.  Outside  events
change,  but  the  essential  condition  remains  unchanged.  3.  Material  good  is  enjoyed
while  real  good  is  still  unattained,  and  this  makes  the  minor  blessing  seem  but  a
mockery.  4.  Ood  is  merciful^  and  yet  we  are  not  delivered  1  Some  fearful  evil  must
be  at  the  foundation  of  such  a  strange  condition.  5.  A  time  of  rest  is  looked  for  but
comes  not.  After  harvest  should  come  rest  Distress  is  heightened  by  the  disappoint-
ment of  expected  deliverance.  6.  Approaching  troubles  increase  the  gloom  of  present
distress.  The  harvest  is  past.  Now  we  look  forward  to  chill  autumn,  to  stormy
winter.    Not  saved  in  harvest  1    What  are  we  to  expect  in  less  propitious  times?

Ver.  22. — "Balm  in  Oilead"  I.  The  world  needs  remedies  for  moral  and
SOCIAL  healing.  Jeremiah  regarded  the  Jews  as  wounded  by  the  cruel  calamities
which  were  to  overwhelm  them;  but  beneath  the  wounds  he  detected  an  unhealthy
national  condition  which  equally  needed  healing.  Men  suffer  thus  from  the  external
wounds  of  adversity  and  from  the  internal  disease  of  sin.  How  small  a  part  of  mankind
can  be  considered  in  a  thoroughly  healthy  condition  1  Men  are  not  only  imperfectly
developed ;  they  are  suffering  from  posilive  disorders.  The  world  needs  medicine  as
well  as  food^-the  physician  as  well  as  the  farmer.  Nations  need  healing  for  political
disorganization  within  and  wrongs  of  subjection  to  a  foreign  yoke  without.  Society
sadly  requires  to  be  purified,  even  regenerated.  Individual  men  suffer  from  the  smart
of  sorrow  and  the  disease  of  sin — both  signs  of  an  imperfect,  disorganized  condition,
needing  cure.  The  one  disease  which  is  at  the  root  of  all  the  chief  maladies  of  man-
kind is  moral  evlL  The  forgiveness  of  sins  must  come  as  a  healing  of  sickness
(Mark  ii.  9).

II.  Many  professed  remedies  are  forthcoming.  Gilead  has  her  balm.  Every
new  physician  has  his  patent  nostrum.  The  world  does  not  suffer  from  the  small
number  of  remedies  which  have  been  proposed  to  cure  all  the  ills  that  flesh  is  heir  to.
It  is  rather  in  danger  of  being  poisoned  by  a  superabundance  of  most  incongruous
drugs.  Every  religion  brings  its  own  remedy.  Philosophy,  in  its  highest  ambition,
aims  at  a  practical  cure  of  society.  Political  innovations,  social  reforms,  education,
sanitary  improvements, — all  seek  this  result.

III.  No  EARTHLY  REMEDIES  SUFFICE  FOR  THE  NEEDED  CURE.      The  balm  of  Gllcad  is

found  in  abundance,  but,  alas  I  it  will  not  heal  the  smart  of  Israel.  Physicians  advise,
but  their  advice  is  futile.  Nothing  could  effect  the  deliverance  of  the  Jews  in  the  days
of  Jeremiah,  though  lying  prophets  and  astute  noliticians  did  their  best.  No  earthly
remedy  can  heal  the  widespread  evil  of  the  world  (Isa.  i.  6).  1.  Earthly  remedies  are
external.  They  may  change  the  social  order ;  they  cannot  cure  the  false  ideas,  irregu-
lated  passions,  and  vitiated  conscience  of  which  the  habits  of  society  are  but  symptoms.
Spiritual  disease  must  be  treated  with  spiritual  medicine.  The  physician  for  the  body
can  do  little  in  ministering  to  "  the  mind  diseased.*'  You  cannot  make  men  moral  by
the  strictest  puritanical  legislation.  (1)  The  disease  of  sin  is  in  the  heart,  and  the
remedy  must  reach  the  heart.  (2)  So  the  deepest  distress  of  mankind  cannot  be  cured
by  the  amelioration  of  physical  comforts.  A  princely  legacy  is  no  consolation  to  a
mother  for  the  loss  of  her  child.  2.  Earthly  remedies  partake  of  the  character  of  the
disMse.  Human  religions  bear  on  their  faces  the  marks  of  that  very  moral  corruption
which  they  aim  at  destroying.  Sin  can  only  be  cured  by  something  outside  the  sinful
world;  sorrow,  by  something  above  the  scene  of  human  distresses.  We  must  go
further  than  Gilead  for  the  true  balm,  for  Gilead  will  share  with  Israel  the  trouble  for
which  we  seek  a  remedy.

IV.  God  has  provided  his  own  remedy  for  the  moral  and  social  healing  of
THE  WORLD.  Christ  is  "the  good  Physician."  The  miracles  of  healing  which  he
wrought  on  the  bodies  of  men  were  signs  of  the  work  he  came  to  effect  for  their  souls.


CH.  VIII.  1—22.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  221


1.  Christ's  remedy  comes  from  higher  than  human  sources.  The  healing  of  the  sinless
One  is  not  tainted  with  the  corruption  which  marks  all  simply  human  attempts  at
cure.  2.  Christ's  remedy  goes  to  the  root  of  the  evil  of  mankind.  His  great  work  is
not  to  effect  an  external  revolution  of  society,  but  to  cleanse  the  conscience  (Heb.
iz.  14)  and  heal  the  heart  3.  Individually,  healing  is  brought  to  ally  and  the  worst
cases  are  just  those  for  which  Christ  chiefly  came  (Matt.  iz.  12).  When  all  other
remedies  fail,  his  is  most  effectual,  because  it  is  (1)  most  needed,  and  (2)  most  glorified
by  the  result.  4.  Society  must  be  healed  by  the  application  of  Christian  principles
to  politics,  to  commerce,  to  literature,  to  recreation,  to  domestic  llie.

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  4—7. — Apostasy  an  anomalous  and  incalculdble  thing,  L  The  analogies  of
COMMON  SENSE  AND  INSTINCT  ABB  FALSIFIED.  (Vers.  4 — 6.)  If  a  man  fall,  he  will  rise
again  to  his  feet ;  if  he  has  made  a  mistake  or  gone  in  a  wrong  direction,  and  disoovera
it,  he  will  turn  again,  unless  he  be  absolutely  bereft  of  his  senses.  One  might  ezpeci
similar  behaviour  in  spiritual  matters.  But  in  the  wickedness  and  defection  of  Israel
it  was  not  so ;  their  apostasy  seemed  perpetual.  The  migratory  birds  are  taught  by
instinct  when  to  return.  The  season  of  their  coming  again  is  almost  as  calculable  as
that  of  their  going.  But  the  departure  of  the  sinner  is  incomprehensible,  and  his
return  cannot  with  certainty  be  ezpected.  Nay,  the  likelihood  is  he  will  continue  in  his
sin,  and  pursue  his  own  destruction  to  the  bitter  end.  In  this,  as  m  many  other  instances,
the  career  of  the  sinner  can  only  be  ezplained  on  the  score  of  infatuation.  His  moral
sense  is  perverted  or  destroyed.  In  place  of  that  quick  response  which  conscience
ought  to  make  to  the  voice  of  duty,  there  comes  over  his  spirit  an  insensibility  to  moral
considerations,  and  a  growing  ignorance  of  things  Divine  gradually  deepening  into
outer  darkness.

II.  It  is  unmoved  by  the  considebations  that  ought  to  affect  it.  (Ver.  6.)
The  growing  misery  and  nnhappiness  which  it  occasions  are  not  strong  enough  to  check
the  tendency  to  sin,  if  indeed  their  connection  with  it  is  clearly  perceived  or  acknow-
ledged. The  cravings  of  the  spiritual  nature  have  to  give  place  to  "  the  lust  of  the  flesh,
the  lust  of  the  eye,  and  the  pride  of  life."  By-and-by  they  are  stilled,  not  by  being
satisfied,  but  by  being  stifled ;  and  a  curious  heedlessness,  which  is  deaf  to  all  the  voices
of  prophetic  warning  and  entreaty,  increasingly  characterizes  it.  Under  such  circum-
stances it  is  difficult  to  discover  any  common  point  of  contact  or  argument  that  shall
be  valid  to  both  parties.  When  reason  is  left  behind,  it  is  not  to  higher,  but  to  lower,
susceptibilities  that  appeal  has  to  be  made.

IIL  The  goncebn,  the  claims,  and  the  gbacious  pbovision  of  Qod  abe  as
NOTHING.  (Ver.  6.)  The  saint  in  the  times  of  his  calamity  calls  upon  Grod  to  incline  his
ear.  In  the  fearful  condition  and  moral  insensibility  of  his  people  to  their  wickedness
and  danger  Gk>d  is  represented  as  of  himself  inclining  his  ear  and  listening  attentively
for  the  lightest  sigh  of  repentance.  He  calls,  but  no  notice  is  taken.  The  means  of  salva-
tion he  has  provided  are  neglected  or  abused.  The  form  of  godliness  is  cultivated  when
the  spirit  has  fled  and  the  ezercises  of  religion  are  the  chief  foes  to  its  reality.  What
can  be  the  conclusion  to  all  this  ?  They  are  spiritually  dead.  There  is  neither  power
nor  inclination  to  seek  for  better  things.  Nothing  but  supernatural  grace  and  long-
suffering  love  cm  avail  to  save  them.— M.

Vers.  8 — 12. — "  Peace,  peace  ;  when  there  is  no  peaceP  The  present  condition  of  the
country,  the  evils  that  lowered  upon  the  horizon, — these  alike  bore  their  message  even
to  the  natural  conscience.  If  Israel  was  in  the  right  way,  and  really  understood  the
will  of  the  Lord  to  do  it,  why  these  scandals,  miseries,  and  impending  evils?  Again,
the  better  to  reach  the  perception  of  those  who  were  thus  unable  to  draw  the  inference
for  themselves,  the  condemnation  was  to  be  in  kind — a  sort  of  elementary  lesson  in  the
'*  correspondences  '*  that  marked  the  Divine  government  of  the  world  was  to  be  read  to
them.  The  scribe  who  had  prophesied  "smooth  things  "  would  be  confronted  with  his
own  writings  and  compelled  to  eat  his  own  words.

L  Divine  illumination  alone  can  give  tbue  undebstandinq  of  Clod's  Wobd.


222  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  vhl  1— 22.


The  priests  and  scribes,  because  of  familiarity  with  holy  things,  claimed  to  be  wise.
They  were  satisfied  with  the  spiritual  state  of  Israel.  Had  they  been  wise,  they  would
have  anticipated  what  took  place.  The  Holy  Spirit  alone  bestows  Divine  insight  and
foresight.

II.  The  despisebs  op  Divine  tbuth,  akd  those  who  falsely  pretend  to  its
C3D8T0DY,  WILL  BE  PUT  TO  SHAME.  " Refuges  of  lies"  will  be  swept  away,  llie  judg-
ment, when  it  comes,  will  find  them  wholly  unprepared  and  helpless.  '*  Take  heed
that  the  light  that  is  in  thee  be  not  darkness.  ''  Blind  leaders  of  the  blind,"  the
iorrowing  comes  to  them  in  vain  for  comfort,  or  is  deceived  to  his  own  hurt;  at  last
the  victim  of  a  misplaced  confidence,  to  find  himself  "  of  all  men  most  miserable."
The  sinner  meets  with  no  true  correction  or  instruction ;  and  in  his  desperation  he
receives  from  them  no  help.  Their  judgment  is  that  they  will  share  the  fate  of  their
victims  and  dupes. — M.

Vers.  13 — 15. — False  hopes  ministering  despair.  The  lessons  of  life  are  not  readily
learned  by  most  men.  They  require  to  be  frequently  repeated  ere  they  produce  an
impression.  Qod,  therefore,  deals  severely  with  his  people,  whose  delusion  is  the  more
unpardonable  because  of  the  piety  of  their  fathers  and  the  light  of  revelation  which  had
been  given.  He  will,  therefore,  make  to  ''pass  away  from  them"  one  by  one  the
things  that  he  had  given :  the  fruits  of  the  earth  shall  be  cut  off;  the  comforts  of  life
shall  be  at  an  end ;  trouble  and  sorrow  shall  seize  upon  them.

I.  How  HABD  it  IS  (OB  MEN  TO  BEAUZE  THAT  THE  OUTWABD  BLESSINGS  OF  LIFE  DO

jjiOT  OF  THEMSELVES  SATISFY,  AND  CANNOT  BE  BELIED  UPON !  Each  of  US  Can  remember
how,  one  by  one,  the  things  of  life  had  to  be  taken  from  him  ere  be  learnt  their  real
littleness  and  insufficiency.  This  is  often  the  way  God  seeks  to  bless  us.  He  takes
away  the  object  whose  possession  is  misunderstood  and  whose  properties  are  abused,
that  he  may  remove  the  temptation  from  the  heart  and  leave  it  free  for  heavenly
affections.  "We  can  do  without  happiness,  and  instead  thereof  find  blessedness."
But  to  only  a  few  is  it  given  to  know  this.  The  multitude  are  as  foolish  scholars,
^  ever  learning,  and  never  able  to  come  to  a  knowledge  of  the  truth."

II.  Hope  which  has  been  so  misplaced  and  betbayed  too  fbequently  xntboduces
TO  DESPAIB.  As  the  lesson  has  not  been  learned,  there  is  no  perception  of  the  real
mistake.  The  old  blunders  are  repeated  until,  in  the  sweeping  away  of  all  that  we  had
held  dear,  we  feel  that  life  itself  is  not  worth  living,  because  we  can  see  no  real  good
within  our  reach.  "Who  will  show  us  any  good?"  We  are  convicted,  too,  of
unpardonable  folly.  The  dissatisfaction  with  the  things  of  life  is  gradually  equalled,  if
not  surpassed,  by  dissatisfaction  with  ourselves.  We  are  conscious  of  needs  that  are
not  met  and  yearnings  that  refuse  to  be  stilled.  And  beneath  all  these  is  the  miserable
consciousness  that,  in  pursuits  so  trifling  and  tastes  so  mean,  our  true  nature  is  being
degraded.  We  grieve  over  oar  shattered  idols  and  our  vanished  comforts,  and  yet  more,
are  angry  with  ourselves  that  we  should  so  grieve.  The  question  will  at  last  come,
"  If  these  things  be  our  chief  good,  what  security  is  left  of  ultimate  happiness  ?  If
the  real  end  of  life  has  not  been  sought,  we  are  not  only  unfortunate — we  must  be
culpable."  For  to  seek  the  truth,  etc.,  of  life  is  not  only  a  possible  enjoyment  we  have
missed,  but  a  duty  we  have  neglected.  And  yet  of  our  own  selves  we  feel  unable  to
retrace  our  steps.  Having  the  desires  we  have,  which  have  been  strengthened  by  years
of  indulgence,  we  cannot  all  at  once  or  of  our  own  motion  replace  them  with  better
ones.  A  feeling  of  helplessness,  convicted  folly  and  sin,  and  indefinite  degradation
gradually  dawns  upon  our  affrighted  conscience.  How  shall  we  escape  from  the  conse-
quences of  our  own  actions?  Whither  shall  we  flee  who,  in  seeking  our  good  always
in  material  things,  have  been  living  in  practical  atheism  ?  We  can  do  nothmg  else  but,
like  the  smitten  Israelites,  betake  ourselves  to  our  closets  and  sit  still.

III.  But  the  judgments  of  Heaven  upon  the  sinneb,  howeveb  tebbiblb  in  them-
selves, ABE  NOT  MEANT  TO  PBODUCE  THIS  DESPAIB.  The  false  trust  is  removed,  that
we  may  find  the  true  one.  The  worst  calamities  of  life,  and  its  grievous  disappoint-
ments, will  be  more  than  compensated  for  if  they  lead  us  to  the  Saviour.  The  prophet,
speaking  representatively  for  Israel,  says,  ^*  Let  us  submit  to  God's  judgment,  and
confess  our  sin  as  its  cause."  "  Silence  before  the  Lord  "  is  the  sure  way  to  his  restored
imoui  and  help. — ^M.


CH.  VIII,  1—22.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  223

Ver.  20. — Occasions  of  hoped-for  salvation  thai  have  not  availed.  Probably  a  pro-
verbial expression.  It  is  not  admissible  for  us  to  understand  the  words  of  help  expected
from  Egypt,  which  would  be  to  make  them  an  anachronism.  They  well  describe  the
result  of  hoping  against  hope,  and  in  this  sense  might  be  spoken  by  those  who  have
been  reduced  to  extremity  by  worldliness  of  spirit  and  imholiuess  of  life.  "  It  is  plain
that  a  great  part  of  Israel  imagined,  like  their  heathen  neighbours,  that  Jehovah  had
need  of  them  as  much  as  they  had  need  of  him  ;  that  their  worship  and  service  could
not  be  indifferent  to  him ;  thisit  he  must,  by  a  natural  necessity,  exert  his  power  against
their  enemies,  and  save  his  sanctuaries  from  profanation.  This,  indeed,  was  the
constant  contention  of  the  prophets  who  opposed  Micah  and  Jeremiah  (Micah  liL  11 ;
ch.  vii.  4,  sea, ;  xxvii.  1,  seq,);  and  from  their  point  of  view  the  captivity  of  Judah
was  the  final  and  hopeless  collapse  of  the  religion  of  Jehovah  "  ( W.  Robertson  Smith).

I.  How  XANT  OGOASIQNS  HAVE  THERE  BEEN  ON  WHICH  WB  HAD  EXPEOTED  AN
IMAGINABT  GOOD,  OB  LOOKED  FOB  A  DELIVERANCE  WHICH  NEVEB  GAME  1      The  man  who

has  sought  for  wealth  becomes  rich  only  to  find  that  his  possessions  fail  to  yield  him
the  satisfaction  he  expected.  False  expectations  have  been  entertained  by  the  victims
of  misfortune  that  God  would  deliver  them.  True,  they  have  no  claim  upon  him,  and
they  know  that,  if  they  were  to  be  requited  as  they  deserved,  they  would  be  left  alone.
The  victim  of  imhallowed  desires,  hurried  and  driven  as  by  an  inward  demon,  fancies
that,  in  his  own  nature  or  the  course  of  life,  he  will  come  to  a  turning-point.  He  will
"  sow  his  wild  oats  "  now ;  by-and-by  he  will  settle  down  and  marry  and  be  respect-
able and  virtuous.  The  events  of  life  to  which  he  looks  forward  take  place,  but  there
is  no  deliverance  wrought  by  them.  So  many  seek  the  Divine  favour  in  formal  religious
observances,  and  do  not  find  it.  When  many  around  us  are  being  awi^ened  from
their  indifiference  and  converted  to  God,  we  are  alarmed  at  our  own  spiritual  deadness.
The  time  of  grace  has  slipped  past  unimproved*  God  has  been  gathering  in  his
children,  and  we  are  left  out.

U.  To  WHAT  GONCLUSioN  OUGHT  THIS  TO  LEAD  US?  That  we  ought  to  be  anxious
and  in  earnest  there  can  be  no  question.  Our  chances  appear,  desperate.  Our  power
of  moral  recovery  is  greatly  lessened  as  compared  with  the  freshness  of  childhood's
days.  But  whilst  there  is  life  there  is  hope.  We  have  reason  to  congratulate  ourselves
that  we  have  not  been  cut  off  in  the  midst  of  our  sins.  The  door  is  still  open.  Let  us,
as  those  *'bom  out  of  due  time,"  awake  to  righteousness,  and  seek  with  tears  an
offended  but  loving  Father.  " Now  is  the  accepted  time;  •  •  •  now  is  the  day  of  sal-
vation."^M.

Ver.  22. — "  Physician,  heal  thyself P  Gilead,  an  outlying  district  of  Palestine,  was
celebrated  for  its  aromatic  balsam,  of  great  virtue  for  wounds,  sores,  etc.  The  natives  of
the  place  doubtless  became  expert  in  the  application  of  their  famous  herb.  By  virtue
of  its  possession,  Israel  might  be  said  to  be  the  healer  of  the  surrounding  nations.  Even
more  so  in  a  spiritual  sense  it  was  the  physician  of  men's  souls,  holding  for  others  and
for  all  time  the  saving  truth  of  God.  But  the  evils  which  came  upon  itself-— social,
political,  spiritual — had  now  increased  to  such  a  degree  that  it  might  well  be  asked,
were  the  sources  of  saving  health  exhausted,  or  were  the  possessors  of  spiritual  wisdom
wholly  extinct?

I.  What  foundation  was  there  fob  the  fbetension  of  Isbael  to  be  the  sayioub
OF  the  nations  ?  Its  own  internal  condition  was  deplorable.  Materially  and  spiri-
tually it  was  more  in  need  of  healing  than  those  it  regarded  as  barbarians  and  heathen.
So  of  the  Church  which  has  become  corrupt  a  similar  question  may  be  asked.  If  those
who  profess  the  faith  of  Christ  do  not  exhibit  ite  fruits  or  possess  ite  peace,  they  belie
their  profession  and  discredit  the  cause  of  their  Master.  When  professed  believers  are
as  troubled  with  earthly  cares  and  as  downcast  amid  earthly  trials  as  others,  men  of
the  world  will  doubt  the  efficacy  of  their  religion,  belief,  and  life.  This  is  the  burning
question  of  Christendom  through  all  time.  Has  it  any  means  of  curing  the  evils  of
humanity,  the  miseries  of  life,  the  wickedness  inherent  in  human  nature  ?

II.  Had  the  utmost  itse  been  made  of  the  besouboes  at  command?  Was  there
anv  one  who  knew  the  nature  of  the  evil,  and  how  to  cure  it  ?  Why  did  they  not  seek
Jehovidi?  Christians  are  frequently  at  a  loss,  not  so  much  for  lack  of  an  orthodox
creed  as  of  a  realizing  ^faith.    Thej  have  not  been  in  the  habit  of  going  to  Christ


224        THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,  [ch.  vin.  1—22.

with  their  cares  and  sorrows.  Earthly  things  have  been  allowed  to  divert  their  atten-
tion from  truth  and  righteousness  as  the  principles  of  life.  But  sometimes  great
mischief  is  done  by  wrong  expectations  of  what  Christ  will  do  for  his  people.  Men  sow
to  the  flesh  and  expect  to  reap  a  spiritual  harvest,  or  their  faith  in  Christ  is  but  another
avenue  to  an  earthly  end.  Under  such  circumstances  they  cannot  fail  to  be  disap-
pointed. We  must  look  to  religion  for  its  proper  functions ;  to  Christ  for  what  he  has
promised  to  give.  Have  we  any  grief  which  we  do  not,  cannot  take  to  Christ  ?  Are
we  consciously  resting  on  him  for  moral  guidance  and  support  and  spiritual  fellowship?
They  who  always  and  in  all  things  rest  their  souk  upon  a  living  Saviour  will  know
that  there  is  "  balm  in  Gilead,"  etc. — M.

Ver.  2. — Btfooled  indeed.  This  is  what  we  say  when  we  see  men  giving  heed  to  the
plausible  statements  of  gross  impostors,  and,  in  consequence,  lavishing  their  time,  energy,
and  wealth  in  the  hope  of  large  recompense;  but  who,  when  the  time  oomes  that  the
hoped-for  gain  should  be  theirs,  find  themselves  deceived,  defrauded,  helpless,  and
utterly  ruined  men.  These  are  they  who  are  the  prey  of  bubble  companies,  lying
advertisements,  and  the  other  ten  thousand  frauds  into  which  unwary  persons  are
b^uiled.  But  is  not  this  what  we  may  say  when  wo  read  of  those  told  of  in  our  text  ?
Was  there  ever  more  flagrant,  piteous,  and  awful  instance  of  men  being  made  fools  of
indeed?    For—

I.  Look  at  these  utterly  deceived  ones.  1.  They  were  worshippers  of  the  gods
of  the  heathen.  The  sun,  the  moon,  and  all  the  host  of  heaven  :  these  were  the  objects
of  their  worship.  Reference  is  continually  made  to  them  and  to  their  worship  (2  Kings
xxiii.  5 ;  xxi.  3,  etc.).  2.  And  they  were  most  earnest  worshippers.  Note  the  piling
up  of  expressions  to  indicate  this.  (1)  They  '*  have  loved  "  them.  Here  is  the  root  of  all
reed  worship.  The  object  must  be  loved,  and  these  people  were  drawn  to  and  attracted
by  these  false  gods.  (2J  They  "  served  "  them.  This  follows  as  a  sure  consequence.  It
is  not  said  they  believed  in  them ;  but  that  matters  not :  if  there  be  that  in  the  object  of
our  worship  which  makes  us  like  it^ove  is  almost  too  sacred  a  word  as  applied  to  false
gods — we  shall  serve  it  readily  enough.  (3)  And  then  they  "  walked  after "  them.
That  which  lured  them  at  the  first  drew  them  more  and  more,  and  so  it  became  the
habit  of  their  lives.  (4)  And  they  "  sought "  them.  When  they  found  the  worship  of
some  of  these  gods  was  pleasant,  they  sought  out  more  of  them ;  or  it  may  mean  that
they  got  at  last  to  have  a  real  faith  in  them,  and  hence  "  consulted  them  as  oracles,
appealed  to  them  as  judges,  implored  their  favour,  and  prayed  to  them  as  benefactors.*'
(5)  And  they  "  worshi^>ed"  them.  See  them  at  their  worship  on  Mount  Carmel,  on
the  day  when  Elijah  challenged  their  priests  to  put  to  the  test  his  God  and  theirs.
None  could  doubt  the  sincerity  of  their  worship  or  the  earnestness  with  which  they
cried  all  that  morning  long,  "  0  Baal,  hear  us  1 "  And  those  to  whom  Jeremiah  wrote
were  such  thorough  worshippers  of  these  gods.  They  withheld  no  proof  of  their  devoted-
ness.  3.  But  yet  they  were  utterly  deceived  and  disappointed.  See  in  text  and  in
immediate  context  how  these  gods  dealt  with  them.  Ardent  votaries  as  they  had  been,
those  whom  they  worshipped  let  all  the  hideous  woes  come  upon  them  which  are  told
of  here :  death,  desolation,  degradation,  and  despair.  That  was  what  their  gods  did
for  them.  They  had  spent  their  all  on  these  pretended  physicians,  and  were  nothing
bettered,  but  made  worse  indeed.

IL  Endeavoub  to  explain  both  their  infatuation  and  theib  disappointment.
1.  As  to  their  infatuation.  It  can  hardly  be  possible  for  any  reader  of  the  history  of
these  people  to  avoid  asking  the  question,  '*  Wherefore  was  it  that  they  were  so  given
to  idoktry  ?  "  Their  whole  national  history  showed  that  nothing  but  sorrow  and  shame
had  come  from  idolatry,  and  yet  here  they  were  for  ever,  not  merely  falling  into  it,  but
deliberately  and  persistently  going  after  it.  What  could  be  the  reason  ?  (1)  Partly,
no  doubt,  the  example  of  the  great  and  mighty  nations  around  them.  We  must
remember  what  an  infinitesimally  small  kingdom  that  of  Judah  was—about  the  size
of  an  ordinary  English  county,  and  how  insignificant  they  were ;  how  the  influence,
therefore,  of  the  great  empires  which  pressed  them  on  either  side  could  not  but  be  felt.
And  this  was  all  on  the  side  of  idolatry.  Idolatry  had  done  tJiem  no  harm ;  the  gods
they  worshipped  had,  so  it  would  seem,  lifted  them  up  to  greatness  and  power  surpassed
by  none.    AU  seemed  to  say  to  the  poor,  weak,  little  kingdom  of  Judah,  '*  You  had  far


CM.  vm.  1—22.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,  226

better  do  as  we  do  and  trust  our  gods  rather  than  your  own."    (2)  The  spirituality  of  tho
worship  Grod  required,  and  the  absence  of  all  such  demand  on  the  part  of  idolatry,  was
another  argument  for  idolatry  and  against  the  worship  of  God.    No  graven  image,  no
representation  of  God,  nothing  that  would  help  the  senses  to  conceive  of  God  as  like  to
themselves,  was  fi^ranted  to  the  Jews  ;  God  was  a  Spirit,  and  he  was  to  be  worshipped  in
spirit  and  in  truth.    No  statue,  no  image,  no  painting,  no  symbol  even,  was  to  repre-
sent him.    It  was  not  allowed  that  the  Jew  should  be  able  to  place  in  his  house  or
carry  about  with  him,  as  other  nations  did,  any  material  emblem  of  his  God  (cf.
Deut.  iv.  15 ;  Isa.  xl.  18).    But  spiritual  worship  of  this  kind  has  ever  been  found  far
more  difficult  to  maintain :  it  demands  a  condition  of  heart  and  mind  so  purified  that
to  the  gross  and  sensual  such  worship  is  impossible,  and  to  the  ordinary  mind  it  is  far
from  easy.    The  anthropomorphisms  of  the  Old  Testament,  and  the  Incarnation  itself,
are  condescensions  of  God  to  the  confessed  feebleness  and  incapacity  of  man  for  such
pure  worship.   But,  on  the  other  hand,  idolatry,  abounding  with  "  chambers  of  imagery,"
lending  itself  to  all  the  clamour  of  the  senses, — what  wonder  that  it  was  preferred  ?    (3)
Add  on  to  this  the  fact  that  strict  obedience  to  the  Iicvitical  Law  involved  such  isolation
from  all  other  people,  such  scrupulous  care,  such  heavy  sacrifices  of  time,  wealth,  ease,  and
the  good  will  of  men ;  in  short,  was  altogether,  as  St.  Peter  afterwards  said  (Acts  xv.  10),
"  a  yoke  which  neither  our  fathers  nor  we  were  able  to  bear ; "  whilst  idolatry  wooed  them
with  its  sensuous,  brilliant,  luxurious,  and  easy  rites  ;  and  again  wo  ask,  what  wonder
that  idolatry  was  preferred  ?    (4)  And  present  earthly  good  seemed  to  be  associated  with
it,  and  absent  from  the  worship  of  God  (cf.  ch.  xliv.  15 — 19,  "  For  then  had  we  plenty
of  victuals,  and  were  well,  and  saw  no  evil.    But  since  we  left  ofif,  ...  we  have  wanted
all  things ").    And  (5)  lastly,  the  licence  allowed  by  the  lax  moral  code  of  idolatry,
and  its  positive  sanction  of  gross  licentiousness ;  this,  contrasted  with  the  stern  frown
of  the  true  Jewish  faith  upon  all  such  sin,  was  more  than  sufficient  to  attract  in  crowds
a  people  so  debased  as  the  Jews  had  now  become.    Then,  as  still,  the  most  powerful  and
the  most  depraved  passions  of  human  nature  were  not  only  permitted  free  indulgence
by  idolatry,  but  actually  patronized,  protected,  and  prescribed.    All  ancient  history
attests  this,  and  the  result  on  the  heathen  world,'not  only  history  but  God's  providence
and  his  Word  alike  (Rom.  i.)  have  plainly  declared.    2.  As  to  their  disappointment.
Idolatry,  however  for  the  moment  it  may  seem  to  have  brought  good  along  with  it
(cf.  supra),  resulted  at  last  in  such  un^Miralleled  woe  as  the  prophets,  one  and  all,
continually  declared  must  come  from  it.    But  whilst   no  idolatrous  nation  has  ever
stood  permanently  in  its  greatness — ^let  the  decayed  and  perished  empires  of  antiquity
witness— there  can  be  little  question  that  sentence  against  the  evil  work  was  executed
more  speedily,  more  sternly,  and  more  notoriously  against  the  Jews  than  against  any
other  idolatrous  nation  whatsoever.    It  cost  them  more  than  any  other  people,  and  they
have  not  paid  ''  the  uttermost  farthing  "  even  yet.    The  rabbis  say  that  in  every  one
of  the  innumerable  cups  of  affliction  which  Israel  in  the  course  of  the  long  ages  has
had  to  drink,  there  has  been  mingled  some  of  the  dust  of  that  golden  idol-calf  which
Moses  ground  to  powder  beneath  Mount  Sinai.    We  are  told  how,  when  he  had  done
this,  he  cast  the  powder  into  the  stream  from  whence  the  camp  drew  its  water,  and  made
all  the  people  drink  of  it.    Now,  wherefore  was  sorer  judgment  meted  out  to  Israel
than  to  others  because  of  their  idolatry  ?    (1)  Because  they  were  the  beloved  of  the  Lord.
A  man  may  see  a  strange  child  doing  a  disgraceful  action  and  may  take  comparatively
little  notice ;  but  if  it  be  his  own  son,  whom  he  loves,  will  he  not  feel  and  resent  it  then
as  otherwise  he  never  would  ?    (2)  And  '*  chiefly  because  to  them  were  committed  the
oracles  of  God."    They  were  to  be  the  channel  along  which  the  truth  of  revelation  was
to  flow  to  mankind  at  large,  and  if  that  channel  were  not  kept  free  from  pollution,
neither  could  the  living  waters  which  flowed  along  it.    Hence  the  prompt  and  stem
measures  which  were  ever  taken  to  preserve  Israel  in  the  faith  of  God,  or  to  restore
them  if  they  had  wandered.    It  could  not  be,  therefore,  that  Israel  should  permanently
and  entirely  lapse  into  idolatry.    The  well-being  of  the  world  hinged  on  their  handing
down  pure  ana  uncorrupt  the  oracles  of  God  and  the  faith  of  their  forefathers,  and
because  "  God  so  lov^  the  world,"  the  cup  of  idolatry  was  ever  made  bitter  and  nauseous
to  his  people,  so  that  they  might  hate  to  drink  of  it.

III.  Try  to  turn  this  whole  subject  to  good  accoukt.    1.  The  votaries  of  i?i0
toorld  may  in  these  verses  behold  their  own  portraiture  and  read  their  sure  reward.

JEREMIAH.  Q


226  THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [en.  viii.  1— 22.


For  (1)  they  do  after  this  manner  give  themselves  to  the  world.  They  "  love,"  "  serve/*
**  walk  after,"  "  seek,"  and  **  worship  "  it.  (2)  And  their  infatuation  is  explained  by  like
reasons.  (3)  And  their  reward  will  be  to  be  utterly  deceived  and  disappointed.  Grod
will  say  to  each  one  of  them,  "  Thou  fool ! "  (Luke  xiL  20).  2.  The  worshippers  of  Qod
may  profitably  contemplate  a  model  which  too  many  of  them  too  sddom  follow,  of
tamest  devotedness  in  their  worship,  "The  children  of  this  world  are  wiser  in  their
generation  than  the  children  of  light."  Would  that  the  devotedness  of  the  world  to  its
god  were  equalled  by  the  devotedness  of  the  Church  to  theirs !  3.  Every  one  may
behold,  in  the  tremendous  and  deadly  attraction  of  the  world,  fresh,  urgent,  and  constant
need  of  being  "  kept  by  the  power  of  God  '*  in  the  love  of  God.  Well  may  each  day
begin  with  this  prayer-^

**  Lord,  I  my  vows  to  thee  renew  ;
Scatter  my  sins  like  morning  dew,
Guard  my  first  springs  of  tliought  and  will,
And  with  thyself  my  bpixit  filL"

C.

Vers.  4—11. — Backsliding  in  its  worst  forms.  All  departures  from  God  are  evil,  but
some  are  only  temporary,  and  are  quickly  followed  by  repentance,  return,  and  restoration.
There  are  others,  however,  of  a  far  more  serious  kind,  and  we  have  in  these  verses  a
great  deal  told  us  concerning  them.     Wo  are  told  of  some  of—

I.  I'liEiR  CHARACTERISTICS.  1.  So  Contrary  to  men*8  wonted  ways.  For  when  men
find  that  they  have  brought  evil  on  themselves,  they  will  at  once  seek  to  undo  such
evil  (ver.  4).  If  a  man  fall,  he  will  not  lie  still  in  the  mire  or  in  the  road,  but  will  get
up  again  as  speedily  as  may  bo.  If  ho  have  mistaken  his  path  and  got  on  a  wrong
track,  will  he  not,  as  soon  as  he  discovers  his  mistake,  quickly  retrace  his  steps  that  he
may  get  into  the  right  way  ?  That  is  how  men  act  in  the  common  affairs  of  life.  But,
though  Judah  and  Jerusalem  knew  well  that  they  had  fallen,  yet  they  showed  no
desire  to  rise,  and  though  they  could  not  but  know  they  were  altogether  out  of  the
right  way,  they  showed  no  willingness  to  return.  2.  Resists  the  strivings  of  Ood's  Spirit
and  all  his  drawings  of  them  to  himself.  Ver.  7  implies  such  God-implanted  instincts
in  men's  souls,  but  declares  that,  unlike  the  ever-obedient  birds,  man  resists  and  refuses
the  call  of  God.  3.  Becomes  shameless.  (Vers.  6, 12.)  This  feature  we  have  had  noticetl
before  (cf.  ch.  vi.  15) ;  it  arrested  the  prophet's  attention  as  being  evil  exceedingly.
4.  Determined  and  defiant.  (Ver.  6.)  5.  Is  at  last  perpetual.  (Ver.  5.)  They  have  gone
into  an  evil  way,  and  they  abide  in  that  way,  no  power  of  Divine  grace  being  able  to
draw  them  therefrom.     So  terrible  is  this  worst  form  of  backsliding,  it  is  perpetual.

II.  Their  consequences.  The  evil  fruit  such  sin  bears  is  shown  here.  1.  Deep
Borrow  to  the  heart  of  God.  How  pathetic  is  this  lament  I  How  it  echoes  the  anguish
of  those  words,  "  How  shall  I  give  thee  up ! "  "  How  often  would  I  have  gathered  thee !  "
etc. !  Such  is  the  tone  of  these  (vers.  4 — 8).  The  Divine  grief  is  audible  through  every
part.  2.  Shame  to  the  backsliders  themselves.  (Ver.  9.)  It  is  ever  so.  These  chapters
have  been  giving  illustration  upon  illustration  of  this  result.  And  our  own  observation
and  the  experience  of  all  who  have  turned  from  God  to  sin — all  alike  confirm  what  God's
Word  has  said.  3.  Utter  and  absolute  ruin,  (Ver,  10.)  The  dreadful  sorrows  of  the
vanquished  in  beholding  their  most  beloved  ones  torn  from  them  to  a  fate  worse  than
death,  and  their  lands  which  they  had  inherited  from  their  fathers  taken  possession  of
by  their  conquerors, — these  common  incidents  of  war  are  cited  as  illustrative  of  the
litter  ruin  which  would  come  upon  these  ungodly  ones.  And  evermore  will  men  find
it  an  exceeding  bitter  thing  to  depart  from  the  living  God.    We  are  also  shown  some  of —

III.  Their  causes.  1.  Deception.  Ver.  6,  "  They  hold  fast  deceit."  How  many  are
the  falsities  by  which  men  are  deceived,  and  to  which  they  hold  fast  as  if  they  were
sure  facts  on  which  their  souls  might  rest  (cf.  vers.  8, 11 ;  vii.  4, 8) !  2.  Dislike  of  Ood's
ways.  "  They  refuse  to  return."  They  had  no  desire  to  detect  the  falsity  of  their
trust ;  they  were  glad  to  have  any  excuse  for  refusal.  3.  Strong  preference  for  the
world's  ways.  Ver.  10,  "  Every  one  .  .  .  given  to  covetousness."  The  ways  of  God
Buflfered  not  such  worldliness,  but  the  ways  they  had  chosen  gave  free  permission.
Here  is  ever  the  secret  of  departure  from  God.  But  can  nothing  be  done  ?  **  la
there  no  balm  in  Gilead  ?  "  (ver.  22).    Note,  then—


CH.  vm.  1— 22.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  TROPHET  JEREMIAH.  227

IV.  Their  cure.  How  shall  this  evil  spirit  be  cast  out  and  the  right  spirit  be  restored  ?
In  ver.  6  the  process  is  shown  to  us.  There  is  :  1.  Bealization  of  the  results  of  our  sin.
The  backslider  is  represented  as  contemplating  with  dismay  the  awful  consequences  of
his  sin,  and  asking,  "  What  have  I  done  ?  "  It  is  "  the  conviction  of  sin  "  which  is  the
beginning  work  of  God's  Spirit  in  the  sinner's  heart.  See^tho  prodigal  contemplating
the  ruin  he  had  brought  upon  himself,  lliis  was  the  first  step  in  his  "coming  to
himself."  2.  Repentance  of  our  wickedness.  (Ver.  6.)  Not  general  repentance,  but  each
man  seeing  his  own  wickedness  and  repenting  of  that.  The  man  has  come  to  look  on  it
as  God  looks  on  it.  Formerly  he  loved  his  sin,  now  he  hates  it.  One  element  of  our
Saviour's  atonement  was  this,  that  he  in  our  nature  and  as  our  representative,  looked
upon  our  sin  as  God  looked  on  it,  and  so  ofiered  to  Grod  for  us  a  true  repentance.
We,  however  contrite  in  heart,  could  ofifcr  none  such,  for  as  it  has  been  truly  said,
"  Our  very  repentance  needs  to  be  repented  of,  and  our  tears  washed  in  the  blood  of
Christ."  But  this  element  of  all  true  atonement — that  he  who  makes  such  atonement
looks  on  the  wrong  done  as  he  who  has  been  wronged  looks  on  it— -was  present  ia
Christ's  atonement,  and  is  one  reason  wherefore  "  the  blood  of  Christ  cleansetn  from  all
sin."  3.  Confession,  This  is  the  **  speaking  aright "  which  is  told  of  in  ver.  6.  They
had  been  denying,  excusing,  maintaining  their  sin  heretofore,  anything  but  speaking
aright  about  it ;  but  now  there  is  heard  the  right  language  of  .confession :  "  I  have
sinned,"  4.  Practical  turning  from  the  evil  vxiy.  As  before  each  had  turned  determinedly
to  his  own  self-chosen  course  (ver.  6),  now  they  would  turn  from  it.  Such  is  the  way
of  the  backslider's  return  and  restoration,  a  way  up  which  there  is  no  smooth  easy  sliding
as  there  was  down,  but  in  which  every  step  has  to  be  firmly  made  and  resolutely  kept
to — a  way  difficult  indeed,  but,  blessed  be  Gk>d,  not  impossible.

V.  Their  counsel.  Let  each  wanderer  from  God  ask  himself  the  question,  "  What
have  I  done  ?  "  1.  Such  inquiry  can  do  no  harm ;  and :  2.  Is  likely  to  be  of  great
advantage.  3.  The  time  for  such  inquiry  is  lessening  day  by  day.  4.  "It  is  a  fearful
thing  "  for  an  unforgiven  man  "  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living  God."— C.

Ver.  6.— 7%c  way  home.  The  text  suggests  much  concerning  this  way  from  the  far
country  of  sin  to  the  home  of  our  Father  and  GKkL  The  Lord  is  here  lamenting  that
none  of  the  people  of  Jerusalem  were  walking  in  it.    Note—

I.  The  stages  of  the  way.  1.  Realization  of  the  ruin  wrought  hy  our  sin.  The
soul  is  represented  as  contemplating  this  ruin,  and  asking,  "  What  have  I  done  ?  '*
This  is  the  first  stage.  2.  Repentance,  Each  one  is  to  repent  of  "  his  wickedness."  We
are  not  to  lose  ourselves  in  a  general  confession  of  sin,  as  too  many  do,  but  to  think  of
our  own  sin  apart  from  that  of  other  people,  and  to  think  of  what  is  especially  our  sin.
Thus  personal  and  particular,  our  repentance  is  the  more  likely  to  be  genuine  and  godly.
3.  Confession,  "  These  that  have  sinned,  these  and  these  only  speak  aright  when  they
speak  of  repenting,  and  it  is  sad  when  they  who  have  so  much  work  for  repentance  do
not  say  a  word  of  repenting."  But  confession  is  this  "  speaking  aright "  which  God
desires  to  hear  from  us.  Now,  this  confession  is  so  acceptable  to  God  because  it
glorifies  his  holiness  and  his  love.  His  holiness ;  for  the  sinner  has  come  to  see  sin  as
God  sees  it,  and  hence  to  hate  and  abhor  it.  He  is  of  one  mind  with  God  about  it  as  he
never  was  before.  And  his  love ;  for  confession  casts  itself  in  faith  upon  a  love  that  is
deeper  than  its  sin.  Deep  as  is  Gk)d's  abhorrence  of  sin,  the  sinner  in  confession  appeals
to  and  lays  hold  on  a  love  that  is  deeper  still.  Hence,  when  the  sinner  makes  his
sincere  confession  before  God,  he  is  at  once  right  out  of  "  the  far  country,"  and  home
in  the  heart  of  God.  The  robe,  the  ring,  the  shoes,  are  put  upon  him ;  the  feast  is  pre-
pared, and  the  merry-making,  the  joy  in  the  presence  of  the  angels  of  God,  at  once  begins.

II.  The  attentive  observer  op  those  who  travel  by  this  way.  It  is  God  who
is  represented  as  bending  down  his  ear,  hearkening  to  what  is  said,  listening  for  any
words  of  confession,  and  ready  to  hear  them  if  spoken.  The  text  is  the  language  of
gracious  expectation  and  desire  on  the  part  of  Gk>d.  It  calls  to  mind  the  father^s
waiting  for  the  prodigal's  return.  How  often  had  he  looked  with  longing,  loving  gaze
down  the  road  along  which  his  returning  son  must  come,  if  ever  indeed  he  would  cornel
He  had  looked  so  often  that  a  speck  in  the  far  distance  would  at  once  be  discerned  by
him.  Hence,  '*  when  a  great  way  ofif,"  the  father  saw  him.  And  so  here  God  is  repre-
sented as  thus  waiting  for  his  guilty  people's  return.    And  how  much  there  is  to


228  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [cii.  vul  1— 22.

^— — — ^^— ^— ■■^™^^  '  ^■'^■^—  ~^^^~       -•^~^~       '  ■

confirm  our  faith  in  this  Divine  solicitude  for  the  sinner's  salvation !  Look  at  the  very
constitution  of  our  nature.  That,  as  Bishop  Butler  has  shown,  is  evidently  on  the  side
of  virtue,  that  is,  of  obedience  to  God,  and  against  the  disobedient.  "  Who  will  harm
you,  if  ye  be  doers  of  that  which  is  good  ?  " — thus  the  apostle  appeals  to  the  universally
recognized  fact,  that  the  constitution  of  man's  nature  is  such  as  to  favour  the  good.
And,  on  the  other  hand,  the  declaration  that  **  the  way  of  transgressors  is  hard,'*  is  based
on  another  like  fact  of  universal  experience.  Such  is  one  evidence  of  "  the  care  "  with
which,  as  George  Herbert  sings, "  Lord,  with  what  care  thou  hast  begirt  us  round!"  Then
the  revelation  of  his  ti-uth  is  yet  further  in  evidence.  That  truth,  as  ministered  to  us  by
the  written  Word  or  by  the  lips  of  prophets,  apostles,  pastors,  teachers — it  matters  not —
is  a  perpetual  proof  of  the  Divine  solicitude  for  our  eternal  good.  And  his  providence,
making  it  to  bo  well  with  the  righteous  and  ill  with  the  unrighteous.  Well  and  ill  with
each  respectively  in  mind,  body,  and  estate.  And  his  Spirit,  That  Spirit  speaking  to
us  in  conscience  and  in  the  powerful  pleadings  of  his  grace  in  our  hearts,  of  which  we  are
all  so  often  conscious.  And,  last  of  all,  God  has  shown  us  this  loving  care  of  his  for  us
in  his  Son,  He  has  shown  himself  in  a  manner  adapted  to  touch  and  move  all  hearts,
and  to  draw  all  men  unto  him.  Now,  all  this  mass  of  evidence  is  in  keeping  with  that
solicitude  which  this  verse  and  so  many  other  portions  of  God's  Word  reveal  as  felt  by
him  towards  sinful  men.  And  if  it  be  asked  "  What  moves  this  solicitude  ?  "  the  cha-
racter of  God  furnishes  the  answer.  The  holiness  of  God.  "Good  and  upright  is  tho
Lord, therefore  will  he  teach  sinners  in  the  way."  And  we  are  bidden  "Give  thanks nt
the  remembrance  of  his  holiness."  It  is  the  nature  of  holiness  to  be  distressed  at  all
that  contradicts  it  and  is  unlike  itself.  It  rests  not  until  it  has  assimilated  all  around
it  to  itself.  Here,  then,  is  one  reason  of  God's  perpetual  appeals  to  sinful  men.  His
iffisdom  also.  It  is  the  characteristic  of  God's  wisdom  to  adjust  means  to  ends.  How
wonderfully  and  beautifully  this  is  seen  in  all  departments  of  nature  I  But  for  tho
fulfilling  of  the  high  purposes  of  his  grace,  what  instrument  can  he  find  more  fit  than
the  regenerated,  redeemed  soul  ?  Even  now  and  here  we  see  this.  A  soul  aglow  with
love  and  faith  towards  God,  what  will  not  that  soul  do  for  God?  Hence  to  the  princi-
palities and  powers  in  heaven  shall  be  made  known  by  the  one  Church — the  company
of  the  redeemed  shall  evidence  it — the  manifold  wisdom  of  God.  His  love  also.  If  the
beholding  of  scenes  of  distress  touch  our  hearts  and  make  us  eager  to  render  help,  can
vre  imagine  that  he  who  made  us  is  less  willing  than  ourselves  to  show  pity  and  render
help?  Our  Lord's  argument  is,  "If  ye,  evil  though  ye  be,  know  how" — and  we  do
kno^  how — "  to  give  good  gifts  to  your  children,  now  much  more  will  your  heavenly
Father  give,"  etc.  ?  Humanity,  as  it  has  been  well  said,  is  the  heavenly  Father's  sick
child.  Will  not  the  Father's  love,  therefore,  be  all  the  more  called  forth  to  that  child  ?
And  his  compassion  also.  For  this  life  is  the  critical  period  of  that  child's  malady.  It
is  the  time  when  the  great  question  of  its  life  or  death  is  being  determined.  Terrible
forces  are  against  it,  and  the  struggle  is  now  at  its  most  momentous  hour.  This  fact
would  cause  the  Father's  love  to  go  forth,  as  it  has  gone  and  is  going  forth,  in  active
compassion,  in  open  manifestation  of  its  solicitude.  Such  are  some  of  the  considera-
tions which  lead  to  our  Father's  attentive  observance  of  all  those  who  travel  by  this
homeward  way.

III.  The  end  op  the  way.  They  who  come  there  will  find  restoration  to  tho
Father's  love,  the  implantation  of  a  new  nature,  the  complete  pardon  of  the  past,  power
to  live  as  God's  dear  child  for  the  future,  and  ultimately  the  everlasting  dwelling  in
the  very  presence  and  home  of  Qod,

rV.  Bbooks  by  the  way.  It  is  said, "  He  shall  drink  of  the  brook  by  the  way,
therefore  shall  he  lift  up  the  head."  We  may  apply  these  words  to  the  travellers  in
the  way  we  are  speaking  of;  for  they  need,  in  the  weary  and  often  most  difficult  journey,
the  refreshments  which  God  alone  can  supply.  Such  aids  are  given  in  the  promises  of
Gtxl,  the  fellowship  of  God,  the  communion  of  fellow-travellers  on  the  way,  and  in  the
service  and  worship  of  (Jod.

V.  The  solitakiness  of  the  way.  It  is  but  "  here  and  there  a  traveller "  that  is
found.  The  way  is  not  thronged.  This  verse  is  God's  lament  that  scarce  any  are  found
willing  to  go  along  this  road ;  for  it  is  not  the  way  of  worldly  advantage.  They  who
"  are  given  to  covetousness  "  (ver.  10)  will  never  choose  this  way.  They  have  i)er-
suaded  themselves  that  they  are  as  well  off  and  better  where  they  are.    They  are


-6H.  Tin,  1—22.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  229

deceived,  and,  what  is  worse,  are  willing  to  be  deceived :  "  They  hold  fast  deceit,  and
80  refuse  to  return."  We  should  have  thought  that  surely  it  would  be  otherwise.  1.
Etason  bids  them  return  (ver.  4).  If  a  man  have  fallen,  he  will  not  lie  content  on  the
earth,  but  will  arise.  If  in  an  ordinary  journey  he  have  missed  his  way,  he  will  at
once  retrace  his  steps.  Reason  rules  in  such  cases,  but  not  here.  2.  Conscience  bids
them  return.  They  could  not  but  know  that  their  sin  had  done  them  sore  harm  ;  but
none  of  them  asked,  "  What  have  I  done?"  however  loudly  conscience  might  summon
them  to  such  repentance.  3.  Qod^s  Word  bade  then  return  (ver.  8),  but  lo !  certainly
in  vain  he  made  it.  4.  Providence  bade  them.  The  events  that  had  taken  place  were
all  admonitions  of  GKxl ;  but  though  the  birds  of  the  air  marked  and  obeyed  the  pro-
vidence of  God,  sinful  man  **  knew  iwt  the  judgment  of  the  Lord  "  (ver.  7).  Hence
the  way  is  solitary.

Conclusion.  But  the  question  for  us  is,  ''Are  we  in  this  way?"  Let  us  bless  Ood  if
we  are,  and  press  on  therein.  Let  us  note  how  short  the  day  is  in  which  we  can  travel,
how  its  few  fleeting  hours  are  lessening,  lest  when  we  would  start  on  the  way  we  have
to  exclaim  (ch.  vL  4),  "  Woe  unto  us  1  for  the  day  goeth  away,  for  the  shadows  of  the
evening  are  stretched  out," — 0.

Ver.  18 — ch.  ix.  1. — The  prophet's  grievous  lament.  I.  Its  gbievousness.  (Vers,
18,  21,  ch.  ix.  1.)  Ver.  18,  "  When  I  would  comfort  myself,"  etc.  All  hope  dies
down,  is  crushed  beneath  the  overwhelming  evidence  of  the  hopelessness  of  his  people's
condition.  Ver.  21 :  he  is  as  if  wounded,  his  heart  is  clad  in  the  garb  of  deepest  woe^
the  black  raiment  of  the  mourner.  Ch.  ix.  1 :  he  has  exhausted  his  power  of  telling
forth  bis  deep  grief,  his  eyes  refuse  to  weep  more,  though  his  heart  be  sore  pierced,
and  the  troubles  of  his  people  are  unrelieved.  Therefore  he  desires  that  he  might
weep  continually.

Ii.  Its  grounds^  1.  They  were  still  trusting  in  lying  words  (ver.  19),  reckoning
that,  because  the  temple  of  Jehovah  and  the  throne  of  David  belonged  to  them,  there-
fore they  should  have  been  secure.  Though  in  distant  lands,  in  actual  captivity — for
there  the  prophet  contemplates  them — they  were  still  imagining  that  the  possession  of
the  temple  and  David's  throne  should  have  been  their  sure  safeguard.  It  is  terrible
to  see  G^'s  judgments  coming  upon  guilty  men,  but  when  these  judgments  themselves
seem  to  fail  in  teaching  the  needed  lesson,  that  is  a  greater  sorrow  still.  2.  T?ie  time  of
redemption  was  ever,  (Ver.  20.)  The  long  harvest  days,  the  bright  summer  weather —
symbols  of  all  days  of  opportunity — these  were  gone.  The  days  when  they  might
have  turned  to  G^  and  found  deliverance,  *'  the  wrath  of  God  had  arisen  against  them,
and  there  was  no  remedy."  But  what  a  retrospect  is  his  who  has  to  say  as  did  lost
Israel, "  The  harvest  is  past,"  etc.  I  For:  (1)  Such  seasons  remind  us  of  our  privileges
and  obligations,  (a)  It  is  a  time  of  fruitfulness,  of  great  privilege,  grace,  and  good-
ness. God  makes  man's  cup  to  overflow.  Youth  and  days  of  gospel  privilege.  Sun-
days, sacred  services,  etc.  (()  It  should  be  a  time  of  great  activity.  The  natural  harvest
and  summer-time  is  so.  For :  (c)  It  is  a  season  of  such  limited  duration.  (2)  But  men
often  let  these  times  pass  away  unimproved,  (a)  The  world  hinders  them.  (6)  Per-
version of  Scripture  truths,  (c)  Belief  that  they  are  well  enough  as  they  are.  (d)
Procrastination.  (3)  But  once  gone,  the  fruits  of  that  summer  and  that  harvest  can
never  be  saved.  Such  facts  as  these  open  the  floodgates  of  grief  in  hearts  like  that  of
Jeremiah.  3.  He  could  see  no  means  of  restoration  or  recovery  whatsoever  (ver.  22),
no  balm  and  no  physician  anywhere.

III.  Its  word  to  all  who  should  know  ob  ark  the  gafses  of  such  grief
Kow.  1.  Christ's  servants  should  be  in  sympathy  with  the  prophet's  lament  It  is
because  vje  are  so  indifferent  the  world  is  so.  *'  Si  vis  me  flere  flendum  est,"  it  is  ever
saying,  but  in  vain,  to  the  professing  Church.  Oh  for  the  compassion  of  Jeremiah  and
yet  more  of  Christ  1  If  we  sowed  in  tears  we  should  peap  in  joy.  If  so  we  went  forth
'*  bearing  precious  seed,  we  shall  doubtless  come  again  rejoicing,  bringing,"  etc.  2.  But
you  who  cause  such  grief,  think  you  not  that  if  such  be  the  result  of  anticipating  God's
judgments  upon  sin,  the  enduring  of  them  must  be  far  worse?  And  that  is  your  part
in  them.  Christ  himself  assured  the  weeping  women  who  followed  him  to  Calvary
that  the  woes  of  them  who  crucified  him  would  be  worse  than  his  own*  *'  If  they  do
these  things  in  a  green  troey  what  shall  be  done  in  the  dry  ?  "


230        THE  BOOK  OP  THE  TROPHET  JEREMIAH,  [ch.  vm.  1—22,


Conclusion.  Then,  instead  of  causing  soitow  to  the  faithful  servants  of  God  by
resisting  their  appeals,  yield  to  them,  and  so  gladden  these  servants,  and  the  angela
of  God,  and  the  heart  of  God,  and  the  Son  of  God.  So  you  yourself  shall  "  enter
into  the  joy  of  your  Lord." — C.

Ver.  22.— C^rt«*  and  the  Holy  Ohost  realities  after  all  "  Is  there  no  balm  in  Gilead?  **
etc.  One  of  the  commonest  taunts  of  ungodly  men — and  it  has  been  so  in  all  ages —
against  the  believer  in  God  and  in  his  redeeming  grace,  has  been  their  apparent  utter
absence  amongst  such  vast  multitudes  of  people  for  so  many  centuries,  and  this  though
the  conditions  were  such  as  needed,  and  that  in  most  distressing  manner,  both  their
presence  and  their  power.  And  one  of  the  subtlest  and  saddest  temptations  to  which
the  human  mind  is  subject  is  that  of  doubting  the  grace  of  God.  "  My  tears  have  been
my  meat  day  and  night,  while  they  continually  say  unto  me.  Where  is  now  thy
God?  "  The  taunt  of  the  psalmist's  enemies  had  roused  up  the  demon  of  doubt  con-
cerning God  and  his  love,  and  no  wonder,  then,  that  the  psalmist's  tears  flowed  fast
both  day  and  night.  Now,  the  text  is  one  of  those  sad  questionings  to  which  the  force
of  distressing  facts  will  now  and  again  give  rise.  It  contains  three  questions,  and
we  will  note  concerning  them  these  three  things — their  meaning,  their  occasions,  their
answers.

I.  Theib  meaning.  And  take :  1.  The  literal  meaning  of  the  balm  and  the  physician
about  which  the  prophet  so  mournfully  inquires.  Balm  was  a  resinous  gum  which
flowed  from  the  side  of  a  tree  or  shrub  found  on  the  sunny  slopes  of  Mount  Gilead,  and
counted  very  precious.  When  Jacob  would  counsel  his  sons  how  they  might  propitiate
Joseph,  who  held  their  brother  in  captivity,  he  told  them  to  take  him  a  present  of  "a
little  balm  "  (Gen.  xliii.  11).  It  was  an  article  of  merchandise  (Gen.  xxxvii.  25),  rejzardt  d
as  of  invaluable  efiBcacy  in  medicine  (cf.  ch.  xlvi.  11;  li.  8).  Its  name  was  derived  from
a  word  which  told  of  the  manner  in  which  it  was  procured  from  the  tree  that  bore  it.
The  side  of  the  tree  was  pierced,  and  the  precious  balm  then  flowed  forth.  The  physi-
cians of  the  day  constantly  made  use  of  it,  and  had  studied  the  best  means  of  applying
it.  But  it  is  evident  that  the  prophet  is  speaking  under  a  figure.  Note,  then  :  2.  The
meiapkorical  meaning.  He  speaks  of  the  lost  "  health  of  the  daughter  of  my  people,"
and  means  by  that  the  national  ruin  which  was  so  fast  coming  on  Judah  and  Jeru-
salem— ^ruin  of  all  kinds,  spiritual,  moral,  temporal.  By  the  "  balm  "  he  means  some
method  of  recovery  for  his  people,  and  by  the  "  physician  "  some  skilled,  sagacious,
powerful  deliverer,  who  should  be  able  to  employ  these  methods  and  so  save  the  land.
The  prophet  was  in  despair  about  this ;  he  saw  no  hope  nor  help  anywhere,  and  hence
the  piteous  cry,  the  mournful  question  of  our  text.  To  every  one  who  professed  to
have  found  the  balm  and  the  physician  the  ruined  land  so  needed,  he  addressed  the
unanswerable  question, "  Why  then  is  not  the  health,"  etc.?  3.  Their  evangelic  import.
It  has  all  along  been  seen  that  the  terms  used  here  were  capable  of  such  application.
The  "  balm  "  is  a  beautiful  symbol  of  Christ.  The  Mount  Gilead,  the  tree,  the  pierced
side,  the  stream  thence  issuing,  and  its  mighty  healing  power, — these  severally  send
our  thoughts  to  Mount  Calvary,  the  cross,  the  pierced  side  of  the  Saviour,  the  precious
blood,  and  the  unquestionable  spiritual  healing  might  there  is  therein.  And  Scripture
is  ever  speaking  of  sin  as  a  disease ;  of  man  as  one  whose  health  needs  recovery.  The
analogies  are  obvious.  And  the  "  physician,"  who  is  he  but  that  Divine  Spirit  whose
office  it  is  to  take  of  the  things  of  Christ  and  show  them  unto  men  ?  He  so  shows  to
us  the  meaning  and  intent  of  our  Saviour's  sacrificial  death,  that  "  by  his  stripes  we
are  healed."  Yes ;  whilst  we  all  are  the  stricken  with  mortal  disease,  Christ  is  the
Balm  that  surely  heals,  and  the  blessed  Spirit  is  he  who  reveals  Christ  to  the  soul.
•*  For  no  man  can  say  that  Jesus  is  Lord  "—that  is,  in  all  the  full  meaning  of  those
words,  and  with  sincere  intent — "  but  by  the  Holy  Ghost."

II.  Theib  occasions.  What  led  to  those  questions  being  asked  by  the  prophet?  and
what  tends  to  their  being  asked  still  ?  1.  By  the  prophet.  The  ruin  of  his  land  and
people.  The  awful  calamities  that  were  at  that  moment  overhanging  the  doomed  nation.
But :  2.  By  men  still.  It  is  the  contemplation  of  the  threefold  fact  of  sin,  sorrow,  and
death.  (1)  Of  sin.  Think  of  the  myriads  of  mankind  who  have  lived  and  died  on  this
earth  of  ours,  and  all  of  them  unblessed  by  the  light  of  the  gospel.  Think  of  the
rampant  wickedness^  the  hideous  vice,  the  festering  corruption,  the  indescribable  moral


CH.  vin.  1— 22.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  231

pollution  that  characterizes  vast  masses  of  iDankind,  indeed  the  mass  of  mankind.  And
think  of  the  corruption  of  Christianity:  what  a  veneer  of  religion!  what  a  counterfeit  of
godliness!  what  a  hollow  mockery  so  great  part  of  it  is!  And  coming  closer  home,  the
saddened  contemplator  of  the  ravages  of  sin  may  turn  his  gaze  inward  into  his  own
heart,  and  as  he  reflects  on  tha  slender  hold  which  Divine  and  holy  principles  have
uponhim^

'*  What  scanty  triumphs  grace  has  won.
The  broken  vow,  the  frequent  &U ; "

and  as  he  cries  out  at  times  almost  in  despair  at  seeing  the  strength  of  the  chains  by
which  his  soul  is  bound,  "  0  wretched  man  that  I  am ! "  etc., — the  words  of  our  text  fit
in  with  his  mournful  mood.  It  seemed  to  him  as  if  there  were  **  no  balm  in  Gilead,
no,"  etc.  (2)  0/  Borrow,  To  St.  Paul,  as  he  penned  the  eighth  chapter  of  Uie  Epistle
to  the  Romans,  the  whole  creation  seemed  to  "  groan  and  travail  together  in  pain."
What  is  the  progress  of  mankind  but  one  long  procession  of  mourners  I  Oh,  the  tears
and  sorrows  of  the  broken-hearted,  the  helpless,  the  desolate  and  afflicted  of  all  ages
and  of  all  lands  1  What  a  catalogue  do  they  fill  1  The  mind  reels  as  it  contemplates
the  dark  mass  of  human  woe.  Its  faith  in  the  Divine  Fatherhood  staggers  as  if  smitten
with  a  deadly  blow,  and  is  half  forced  to  the  conclusion,  which  to  a  sad  and  an  in-
creasing number  seems  self-evident,  that  there  is  no  balm  in  Gilead,  no  physician  there.
(3)  And  the  reign  <^  death  produces  similar  feelings.  As  men  see  how  the  king  of
terrors  stalks  triumphantly  through  the  land,  how  ruthless  is  his  tyranny,  how  crush-
ing his  power,  how  dark  the  grave  into  which  we  so  soon  descend,  and  how  helpless
we  all  are  against  his  might,  it  does  seem  at  times  as  if  there  were  no  deliverer  and  no
deliverance.    But  note —

III.  The  answers  to  these  qxtestioks.  1.  To  those  which  inquire,  *'  la  there  no
halm  .  •  •  physician  there  f  "  some  answer  ''  No."  Sin,  they  say,  is  a  mistake  which
education  will  rectify,  and  the  operations  of  the  great  law  of  evolution  will  gradually
eliminate.  In  fact,  there  is  no  such  thing  as  *'  sin "  in  the  sense  religious  people
think.  Therefore,  whilst  for  the  race  there  is  hope,  for  the  present  and  past  generations
there  is  none.  Sorrow,  also,  they  teach,  is  the  result  of  ignorance  of  natural  laws  or
of  disr^ard  of  tiiem.  The  progress  of  knowledge  will  gradually  lessen  it ;  that  is  idl
that  can  be  said.  And  as  to  death,  that,  of  course,  is  the  inevitable,  and  ends  •  all.  The
only  immortality  is  in  the  influence  which  a  man  exerts  in  those  who  come  after  him.  As
to  '*  the  Resurrection  and  the  life  " — credat  Judceus.  Such  is  the  dismal  gospel  of  this
nineteenth  century.  But  the  Christian  reply  to  these  questions  is  unhesitatingly,  "Tes;
there  is  a  Balm  and  a  Physician  for  the  sin-stricken  soul,  whether  of  the  individual  or
of  the  whole  human  race.  And  for  the  heart  riven  with  sorrow,  broken  with  grief.
And  for  all  those,  too,  over  whom  Death  has  reigned  with  such  cruel  power.  Because
we  believe  in  Christ  and  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  we  believe  in  the  'Balm'  and  in  the
'  Physician '  humanity  needs."  But  then  comes :  2.  2'he  last  and  seemingly  unanswer"
able  question.  "  Why  then  is  not,"  etc.?  What  are  we  to  reply  to  this?  (1)  For
one  large  part  of  those  whom  it  concerns,  the  sin,  sorrow,  and  death  ridden  multitudes,
we  deny  that  which  the  question  assumes.  For  the  Balm  and  the  Physician  have  done
or  are  doing  their  blessed  work  on  them.  We  appeal  to  the  throng  of  the  redeemed,
the  blessed  dead,  myriads  of  whom  are  now  with  God.

«  White-robed  saints  in  glonr,
Cleansed  fzom  every  stain."

With  the  eye  of  faith  we  behold  them,  and  we  believe  in  their  existence  as  we  believe
in  our  own,  and  the  yearning  of  our  hearts  is  to  be  with  them.  And  they  are  a  great
cloud  of  witnesses  to  the  Balm  and  to  the  Physician  both.  But — as  unMievers  will
demand  clamorously  that  we  should  do — we  come  down  to  this  world  and  this  life
that  now  is.  Well,  then,  we  appeal  to  the  fact  that  there  are  r^enerated,  renewed,
saintly  souls  living  here  on  earth  to-day,  walking  in  purity,  integrity,  and  in  the  light
and  love  of  GK)d.  They  are  God's  witnesses  to  what  the  unbeliever  denies.  Further-
more, there  are  a  vast  number  in  whom  this  process  of  healing  is  going  on,  Slowlv,  it
(nay  be,  and  with  sad  retrogressions  at  times,  but  really,  notwithstanding.    The  tide  is


282  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [en.  vra.  1—23.

a  long,  long  time  coming  in,  but  it  does  come  in.  Healing  is  always  a  gradual  work.
**Nemo  repente  fuit  *  sanctissimus/ "  any  more  than  "  turpi ssim us."  A  man  cannot
leap  into  heaven,  as,  thank  Grod,  he  cannot  leap  into  hell.  But  because  healing  is  only
gradual, do  we  deny  its  existence?  But  we  know  there  are  vast  multitudes  more  to  be
accounted  for  than  those  we  have  as  yet  told  of.  (2)  Therefore  for  this  part  we  aay
concerning  them,  wait.  St.  Paul  had  evidently  pondered  this  problem,  and  he  has
taught  ns  that  there  are  due  times  and  seasons  appointed  in  the  wisdom  of  God  for
the  manifestation  of  Christ  to  men  (cf.  1  Tim.  ii.  6 ;  Eph.  i.  8 — 10 ;  Phil.  ii.  9 ;
Col.  i.  20),  but  that  in  the  "  dispensation  of  the  fulness  of  times  "  it  is  God's  "  good
pleasure"  to  "gather  together  all  things  in  Christ,"  all  the  living  and  all  the  dead.
And  it  is  impossible  not  to  see  how  the  heart  of  the  holy  apostle  exults  in  the  beatific
vision,  the  "  breadth,  and  length,  and  depth,  and  height "  of  the  glorious  completed
living  temple  of  the  Lord  God.  Therefore,  in  view  of  revelations  like  these,  we  say
that  before  the  reality  of  the  work  of  Christ  and  the  Holy  Ghost  are  denied,  we  are
bound  to  wait.  And  if  it  be  objected  that  the  waiting  has  been  and  may  be  for  so
long,  we  reply  that  it  is  because  men  unll  not  come  unto  Christ  that  they  might  have
life.  The  remedy  of  redemption  is  not  forced  upon  any  soul.  A  man's  soul  is  not
saved  by  his  will  being  crushed,  by  his  ceasing  to  be  a  man  and  becoming  a  machine.
We  cannot  but  believe  and  know — the  individual  conversion  of  every  true  child  of
God  demonstrates  it — that  God  has  ways  and  means  to  bring  "the  unruly  wills  of
sinful  men "  into  accord  with  his  own,  and  this  in  perfect  harmony  with  the  moral
freedom  he  has  given  man.    How  long  and  how  dreadfully  far  the  human  will  may

go  in  resisting  God  we  cannot  tell,  but  we  may  not  believe  that  it  is  greater  than  God
imself  and  can  exhaust  all  the  Divine  resources.  The  hunger  and  misery  of  the
prodigal  brought  him  "  to  himself,"  the  consuming  fire  of  the  dread  captivity  which
Jeremiah  is  foretelling  burnt  out  for  ever  the  love  of  idolatry  amongst  Israel ;  and  there
are  other  like  fires  of  God's  holy  love  which  may  have  like  results.  Therefore,  we
say,  that  until — if  we  may  so  speak — God  has  thrown  up  the  case  of  sin  and  sorrow
stricken  humanity,  we  have  no  right  to  affirm  that  there  is  "  no  balm  in  Gilead,"  etc.
In  regard  to  sorrow,  that  has  a  ministry  of  spiritual  healing  of  its  own,  which  has
gone  on  ever  since  "  the  Man  of  sorrows  "  became  "  acquainted  with  grief."  As  his
ine8senger,'Grief  has  gone  about  from  house  to  house,  from  heart  to  heart,  a  veritable
sister  of  mercy,  though  clad  in  coarse  and  unlovely  garb.  Up  and  down  the  streets  of
this  weary  world,  and  in  and  out  every  one  of  its  homes,  she  perpetually  goes ;  but  no
one  ever  meets  her  in  the  new  Jerusalem,  in  the  city  of  our  God,  for  her  ministry  is
not  needed  there.  Then  as  to  death,  we  say  that  in  all  the  drear,  dark,  hopeless  power
of  it  "  Christ  has  abolished  death."  We  can,  and  by  every  graveside  we  do — challenge
death  as  to  its  sting,  and  the  grave  as  to  its  victory.  I'herefore  we  say,  and  with  glad
hearts,  that  the  health  of  the  daughter  of  the  people  is  recovered,  or  is  recovering,  for
that  there  is  both  Balm  in  Gilead  and  a  Physician  there.

Conclusion.  But  whilst  we  bid  the  unbeliever  wait  ere  he  pronounce  with  certainty
that  there  is  neither  Balm  no?  Physician,  we  would  earnestly  and  affectionately  beseech
him  not  to  wait  ere  he  has  recourse  to  them.  Disease  does  not  become  easier  to  cure
by  being  allowed  to  go  on  unchecked.  It  only  gives  the  physician  far  more  trouble,
and  the  patient  far  more  pain.  And  the  analogy  holds  good  in  regard  to  the  disease  of
sin.    Come,  then,  to  Christ  now.— C.

Ver.  22.— 2%e  halm  of  Oilead.  There  were  those  who  treated  the  crimes  and
miseries  of  the  nation  as  a  trifling  matter ;  they  sought  to  "  heal  the  hurt  slightly,  saying,
Peace,  peace;  when  there  was  no  peace"  (ver.  ill).  Not  so  the  prophet.  He  is
keenly  alive  to  the  dreadful  evils  of  the  time.  He  takes  the  sins  and  sorrows  of  the
people  on  himself,  makes  them  his  own.  Tender  human  sympathy,  as  well  as  Divine
compassion,  breathes  in  the  words,  "  For  the  hurt  of  the  daugnter  of  my  people  am  I
hurt."  And  it  is  not  sorrow  alone  but  "  astonishment "  of  which  he  is  conscious.
••  Why  is  not  her  health  recovered  ?  "  Can  it  be  that  there  is  no  remedy  ?  The  "  balm
of  Gilead  "  is  taken  as  the  symbol  of  a  healing  moral  power.  Is  it  so,  then,  that  the
very  nation  that  was  called  to  diffuse  a  redeeming  influence  over  all  the  world  is
unable  to  cure  herself — has  no  medicine  for  her  own  diseases,  or  none  to  apply  it  ?
Such  is  the  wonder  with  which  a  thoughtful,  earnest  spirit  will  often  contemplate  the


en.  vnLl— 22.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  233

moral  condition  of  the  world,  in  view  of  the  fact  that  God's  "saving  health"  in  the
gospel  has  so  long  been  made  known  to  it.    Consider—

I.  The  DrvixE  remedy  for  the  moral  maladies  of  the  human  race.  Thia
remedy  is  the  spontaneons  fruit  of  the  love  of  God.  On  the  ground  of  that  love  we  may
justly  expect  such  a  remedy.  It  is  not  likely  that  a  Qod  of  infinite  benevolence  would
leave  the  human  race  to  perish.  Though  redemption  is  "  of  grace,"  yet  there  is  every-
thing to  make  it  antecedently  probable.  Though  nature  contains  no  revelation  of  it,
yet  to  the  eye  on  which  the  light  of  the  gospel  has  once  fallen,  the  whole  constitution
of  the  universe  is  full  of  dim  prophecies  and  promises  of  some  such  triumphant  grace.
The  spirit  of  boundless  beneficence  that  pervades  and  governs  it — the  fact  that  for  every
want  there  is  a  supply,  for  every  appetite  that  which  gratifies  it,  for  every  danger  a
safeguard,  for  every  poison  its  antidote ;  above  all,  the  silent  witness  in  favour  of  mercy
that  is  graven  more  or  less  deep  on  every  human  heart ; — all  this  is  so  much  in  harmony
with  the  great  redemption  as  in  a  sense  to  anticipate  it.  But  it  is  facts,  not  proba-
bilities, with  which  we  have  to  deal.  The  gospel  is  God's  actual  answer  to  our  human
necessities,  the  sovereign  remedy  his  love  has  provided  for  the  sins  and  sorrows  of  the
world.  He  heals  them  by  taking  them  upon  himself  in  the  person  of  Jesus  Christ  his
Son.  **  He  was  woimded  for  our  transgressions,"  etc.  (Isa.  liii.  5) ;  "  Who  his  own  self
bare  our  sins,"  etc.  (1  Pet.  ii.  24);  "Where  sin  abounded,  grace  did  much  more
abound,"  etc.  (Rom.  v.  20,  21).  Note  respecting  this  Divine  remedy :  \,  It  goes  to  the
root  of  the  disease.  It  does  not  effect  a  mere  superficial  reformation,  as  human  methods
for  the  most  part  do ;  does  not  flatter  with  the  appearance  of  health  while  leaving  the
malady  to  strike  its  roots  down  deeper  and  deeper  into  the  soul.  It  reaches  at  once
the  secret  springs  of  all  mischief,  destrovs  the  germs  of  evil  in  human  nature,  changes
the  outwara  aspects  of  the  world's  life  by  giving  it  a  "  new  heart.*'  2.  It  is  universal
in  its  application.  All  national  diversities,  all  varieties  of  social  condition,  of  age,  of
culture,  of  intellectual  development  and  moral  life,  etc.,  are  alike  open  to  its  applica-
tion, and  it  is  the  same  for  all.  3.  It  is  complete  in  its  efficacy.  Every  element  of  human
nature,  every  department  and  phase  of  human  life,  bears  witness  to  its  healing  power.
A  perfect  manh(X)d  and  a  perfect  social  order  are  the  issue  it  works  out.  4.  It  stands
alone,  not  one  among  many,  but  absolutely  the  only  remedy.  It  enters  into  no  kind
of  competition  with  other  methods  of  healing.  It  has  the  solitary  and  supreme
authority  of  that  which  is  Divine.  "Neither  is  there  salvation  in  any  other :  for  there
is  none  other  name,"  etc.  (Acts  iv.  12).

II.  The  hindrances  to  its  universal  efficiency.  "  Why  then  is  not,"  etc.  ?
The  reason  lies,  not  in  any  want  of  fitness  in  the  remedy,  or  in  any  lack  of  power  or
willingness  in  him  who  provides  it,  but  in  certain  human  conditions  that  nullify  its
action  and  thwart  his  purpose.  1.  In  the  self-delusion  that  leads  men  to  think  tJiat
they  have  no  need  of  cure,  "  They  that  are  whole  need  not  a  physician,"  etc.  (Matt  ix.
12).  The  sense  of  moral  sickness  is  the  first  step  to  healing.  2.  In  the  vain  self-trust
by  virtue  of  which  men  dream  that  they  can  cure  themselves.  How  many  and  how
plausible  are  the  expedients  by  which  the  world  seeks  to  rid  itself  of  its  own  maladies  I
How  slow  is  human  nature  to  confess  its  helplessness  I  3.  In  the  obstinacy  of  spirit
that  refuses  the  Divine  method,  *'  Are  not  Abana  and  Pharpar,  rivers  of  Damascus,
better  than  all  the  waters  of  Israel  ?  "  etc.  (2  Kings  v.  12).  Anything  rather  than  God*8
way  of  healing  by  the  blood  of  atonement  and  the  regenerating  grace  of  the  Spirit  1
4.  In  the  lethargy  and  neglect  of  those  whom  Ood  has  called  to  minister  the  healing
power.  Who  shall  say  how  much  of  the  continued  sin  and  misery  of  the  world  lies  at
the  Church's  door  ?  If  all  who  have  themselves  known  the  virtue  of  this  sovereign
balm  were  but  more  thoroughly  in  earnest  in  their  efforts  to  commend  it  and  to
persuade  men  to  apply  it,  how  much  more  rapidly  would  the  health  of  human  society
everywhere  be  recovered  I — W,

Vers.  1,  2.— 37ic  bones  of  the  dead  idolaters  cast  out  before  their  cities,  I.  AsK
HOW  THIS  SPOLIATION  COMES  TO  PASS.  One  cannot  suppose  that  it  came  by  the  intention
of  Jehovah.  Rather  would  it  arise  as  a  necessary  part  of  wholesale  pillage.  Considerable
treasures  might  be  lying  in  the  tombs  of  these  grandees  of  Israel,  and  much  might  also
have  been  hidden  in  them  for  purposes  of  safety,  and  therefore,  seeing  that  this  hideoufl
devastation  had  to  happen,  it  was  fitting  to  call  attention  to  it  beforehand.    It  was


234  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch,  vm,  1—22.

another  indication  of  how  completely,  for  its  sins,  Jerusalem  had  been  handed  over  to
the  foreign  destroyer.  It  makes  all  the  difiference  to  mention  such  a  terrible  circum-
stance beforehand,  as  an  illustration  of  the  severity  of  God's  dealiogs.  Thus  it  is  seen
that  the  spoliation  cannot  be  laid  to  his  charge.  And  though  it  must  be  taken  as  a  sign
how  barbarous  the  ancient  civilization  was  at  bottom,  this  is  but  a  consideration  by  the
way.  The  real  cause  of  this  hideous  spectacle  was  in  the  idolatry  of  those  who  had
covenanted  to  love  and  serve  Jehovah,  to  walk  after  him  and  seek  him  and  worship
him.  These  dead  ones  had  forsaken  God  and  taught  their  posterity  to  forsake  him
also ;  and  now  there  was  none  among  the  living  able  to  protect  the  bones  of  the  dead
from  such  horrible  insult.

IL  Observe  that  the  mmiLiATioN  has  a  peculiar  connection  with  thb
IDOLATBY  OP  THE  PEOPLE.  Not  Only  are  the  tombs  emptied,  but  the  bones  are
scattered  before  the  host  of  heaven.  The  enemy  was  not  thinking  of  this  exhibition,
but  it  happened  so  very  opportunely.  Sun,  moon,  and  stars  looked  down  upon  the
scene  thus  strewn  with  the  bones  of  the  illustrious,  as  if  in  rebuke  for  the  use  which
Israel  had  tried  to  make  of  them.  They  had  worshipped  and  served  the  creature  in
opposition  to  the  Creator,  and  this  was  what  had  come  of  it.  These  bones  had
strengthened  the  living  body  to  worship  the  sun,  and  now  the  sun  shone  steadily
down  on  them,  as  if  in  public  rejection  of  what  was  not  only  a  mistaken  honour  to  the
creature  but  a  shameful  insult  to  the  Creator.  The  very  things  we  misuse  become
the  instruments  of  our  humiliation.

IIL  The  general  question  op  the  treatment  op  dead  bodies  is  suggested
FOR  consideration.  Various  are  the  customs  of  men  with  respect  to  the  treatment
of  the  dead,  but  many  of  them  have  one  common  element,  in  that  they  try  to  preserve
the  visible,  tangible  relics  of  life  as  long  as  possible.  There  is  something  very  touching
in  the  hopes  and  beliefs  which  are  represented  by  an  Egyptian  mummy,  as  if  the
survivors  felt  that  life  had  receded  into  some  deep,  inscrutable  chamber,  aszain  to  come
forth  in  due  time  and  reanimate  its  old  tenement.  We  think  of  how  Joseph  must
have  been  under  the  influence  of  a  feeling  of  this  kind,  when  he  gave  such  strict
commandment  concerning  his  bones.  Still,  it  is  part  of  the  salvation  wherewith  Christ
saves  his  people,  that  we  are  lifted  above  these  haunting  considerations  as  to  the  cor-
poreal frame.  It  is  according  to  the  Spirit  of  Christ  that  we  should  labour,  by  exercise
and  self-denial,  to  make  the  living  body  an  eflScient  agent  of  his  will ;  but  when  the
life  has  gone,  no  sentimental  treatment  of  ours  can  alter  the  fact  that  the  body  is  mere
matter,  fast  under  the  chemical  laws  which  will  soon  resolve  it  into  its  constituent
elements.  Have  not  the  bodies  of  God's  saints  been  shamefully  maltreated,  both  during
life  and  after  death  ?  Think  out  of  what  a  mangled  and  bleeding  form  the  spirit  of
Stephen  took  its  flight  to  everlasting  bliss.  If  there  bo  force  in  the  injunction  of  Jesus
not  to  fear  what  men  can  do  to  the  sentient  body,  how  much  more  may  it  be  urged  not
to  fear  what  they  can  do  to  the  senseless  corpse.  The  enemies  of  the  noble  and  fearless
witnesses  of  truth  have  shown  more  than  once  their  contemptible  spirit  by  the  way  in
which  they  have  treated  the  dead.  They  could  not  get  at  them  when  living,  and  they
thought  it  was  something  of  a  triumph  to  insult  their  remains  when  gone ;  e.g,  Wycliflfe
and  Cromwell.  The  scattering  of  these  bones  before  sun,  moon,  and  stars  would  have
been  a  thing  to  glory  in,  if  the  men  to  whom  they  belonged  had  been  soldiers  in  the
noble  army  of  martyrs.— Y#

Ver,  8.— -4  pitiable  condition :  death  pre/erahle  to  life.  I,  Eemember  man's
natural  dread  op  death.  The  very  force  of  the  prophet's  expression  here  lies  in
this,  that  it  contradicts  the  habitual  feelings  of  the  human  breast.  The  natural
preference  is  to  choose  life  rather  than  death ;  nay,  it  can  hardly  be  called  preference
at  all.  There  is  an  instinctive  prompting  to  ward  off  everything  that  may  be  fataL
Whatever  the  drawbacks  and  pains  of  life  may  be,  life  is  chosen  rather  than  death.
In  most  instances  the  suicide  is  held  not  responsible  for  the  state  of  his  mind  at  the
time.  We  must  all  die  indeed ;  yet  death  is  so  alien  to  every  predominating  feeling  of
the  mind  when  in  health  and  prosperous  circumstances,  that  even  when  death  comes
near  others,  it  is  viewed  as  if  it  had  little  or  nothing  to  do  with  us.  And  bo  when
Jeremiah's  word  came  to  these  people  in  Jerusalem,  they,  at  least  the  young  and  the
Strong  among  them,  would  receive  it  very  incredulously.    That  things  should  ever  become


€H.  vm.  1—22.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  238

80  bad  as  to  make  death  desirable  would  seem  to  them  to  show  that  the  threatoner  of
such  a  doom  was  overdoing  his  warnings.

II.  LiFB  MAY  BECOME  80  FULL  OF  PAIN  AND  MISEBT    THAT  THIS  NATURAL    BBEAD

MAT  BE  BEYEB8ED.  When  the  blow  was  struck  and  Jerusalem  fell  into  the  hands  of
the  hosts  from  Babylon,  thousands  would  be  thankful  that,  amid  so  much  destruction,
their  lives  were  spared.  To  lose  possessions  and  go  into  exile  would  seem  a  light  price
to  pay  for  the  preservation  of  life.  But  with  the  increased  experience  of  exile  itself
its  dreadfnlness  became  manifest.  How  could  it  be  otherwise?  The  captivity  and
exile  were  not  of  an  ordinary  nation,  but  of  one  whose  Grod  was  Jehovah.  These  people
had  been  in  the  enjoyment  of  peculiar  privileges  and  satisfactions,  which  they  had  come
to  accept  as  a  matter  of  course ;  and  when  they  lost  them,  they  would  then  discern,  if
never  l^ore,  something  of  their  true  value.  It  was  out  of  a  land  of  promise,  a  land
reserved  for  the  people  of  Ood,  that  they  had  been  cast,  and  no  lapse  of  time  could
content  them  to  be  as  other  nations.  It  is  just  because  man  has  within  him  such
capabilities  for  enjoying  life  that  he  can  be  driven  to  the  other  extreme  of  desiring
death.  Life  could  not  be  so  blessed  as  Christ  holds  out  the  hope  of  its  being,  unless
there  were  also  the  possibility  of  its  being  correspondingly  wretched.

IIL  It  is  thus  suggested  that  we  should  aim  at  reaching  a  state  of  mind  such  that

ETTHEB  LITE  OR   DEATH  SHOULD  BE  EQUALLY  ACCEPTABLE.      To  prefer  life  tO  death  18

a  natural  feeling,  but  certainly  not  the  feeling  which  a  believer  in  Ood  and  Jesus  should
have.  And  to  prefer  death  to  life  is  the  feeling  which  comes  after  a  time  of  struggling,
weariness,  pain,  and  disappointment ;  but  what  darkness  of  the  mind  does  this  not
prove  I  what  inability  to  profit  by  the  light  which  shines  in  Christ !  The  Christian
medium  lies  between  the  two  extremes.  Not  to  wish  to  live,  nor  to  wish  to  die,  but
to  be  in  Christ's  hands,  so  that  as  long  as  we  are  living  there  may  be  an  availing  of
every  opportunity  of  service,  and  when  we  die  a  fresh  proof  that  faith  in  the  Saviour
who  also  died,  but  rose  again,  is  no  deluding  vanity.  It  is  one  of  the  glorious  aspects
of  Christ's  salvation  that  he  can  save  men  from  crying  out  for  death  rather  than  life,
just  because  he  can  lift  them  into  an  experience  of  joy  and  peace  which  overbear  the
sense  of  temporal  pain  and  loss.— T.

Vers.  4—7. — The  unnatural  conduct  of  Jerusalem,  Still  more  humiliation  for  the
proud,  self-satisfied  city.  The  prophet  comes  with  a  heavenly  light,  revealing  the  very
foundations  of  her  glory,  and  showing  how  unsubstantial  they  are,  how  easily  exposed  as
contradicting  truth  ana  the  highest  propriety.  What  is  aimed  at  here  is  to  set  before
man,  by  the  force  of  contrast,  what  he  ought  to  be,  in  the  sum  of  all  his  faculties  made
one  by  a  will  which  acts  according  to  the  commandment  of  God.    And  so  we  see

I.  A  LESSON  FROM  THE  SUBORDINATE  PART  OF  man's  NATURE.  If  a  man  falls,  he  instantly
attempts  to  rise  again.  Even  if  there  is  some  serious  injury,  it  is  commonly  discovered
by  the  failure  of  the  man's  attempt  to  rise ;  and  so  from  the  subordinate  part  of  our
nature  there  is  a  rebuke  to  the  higher  and  governing  part.  A  very  striking  instance  of
such  a  rebuke  would  be  given  in  the  falling  of  a  drunken  man  to  the  ground.  He
staggers  to  his  feet  again  if  he  can.  If  he  remains  on  the  ground  it  is  a  sign,  to  use  the
common  expression,  that  "  he  is  very  far  gone  indeed ; "  and  in  such  an  instance  may  we
not  truly  say  that  the  body  is  rebuking  the  will  for  its  imbecility  and  its  base  slavery
to  appetite?  So  if  a  man  is  going  anywhere,  and  turns  unwittingly  from  the  straight
path ;  such  a  turning  may  be  made  very  easily,  and  the  wrong  path  be  kept  in  for
a  while,  but  presently  there  will  .be  some  sign  to  show  the  error,  and  with  more  or  less
delay  there  will  be  a  return  to  the  right  path.  Here,  then,  are  two  instances,  level  with
the  experience  of  everybody,  of  what  is  natural  for  man  to  do,  viz.  come  back  from  a
wrong  state  as  soon  as  ever  he  can ;  and  if  the  jxeition  be  only  looked  at  truly,  it  will
be  seen  that  it  is  as  unnatural  for  a  man^to  remain  in  spiritual  degradation  as  to  con-
tinue  lying  on  the  ground.

II.  A  LESSON  FROM  THAT  PART  OF  THE  CREATION  WHICH  IB  SUBJECTED  TO  MAN.      There

is  the  horse.  He  can  be  so  trained  as  to  become  a  potent  force  in  the  battle-field,  and
if  he  becomes  uncontrollable  and  rushes  hither  and  thither,  as  dangerous  to  friend  as  to
foe,  it  is  not  because  of  any  rebellious  purpose,  but  a  brief  madness  has  seized  on  hinu
Let  a  few  hours  pass,  and  he  may  be  submissive  and  serviceable  as  before.  '*  We  put  bits
in  the  horses'  mouths^  that  they  may  obey  us ;  and  we  turn  about  their  whole  body."


238       THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,  [en.  vra.  1— 22.

•*  The  ox  knoweth  his  owner,  and  the  asa  his  master's  crib  :  but  Israel  doth  not  know,
my  people  doth  not  consider."  The  very  birds  of  the  air,  seemingly  so  free  from  all
restraint,  come  and  go  according  to  certain  laws.  If  the  beasts  which  man  has  tamed
to  his  use,  and  on  which  he  daily  depends,  were  to  treat  him  as  he  treats  Ood,  what  an
awkward,  nay  more,  what  a  perilous  scene  this  world  would  become  I  The  whole  visible
universe,  ground  beneath,  air  around,  and  far  away  into  the  immensities  of  space,  are
crowded  with  admonitions  to  perversely  disobedient  man.  These  birds  mentioned  here,
by  certain  wondrous  intimations  to  which  they  are  ever  heedful — exceptions  only  going
to  prove  the  rule — help  to  carry  on  the  government  of  God.  They  are  faithful  to  their
nature,  and  their  faithfulness  is  again  but  a  sign  of  God*8  own  faithfulness  in  the  order-
liness of  the  seasons.  Then  go  beyond  the  ordinary  subjection  of  Ood's  creation  to  his
wilk  Look  at  what  we  call "  miracles."  Think  of  the  passage  of  the  Red  Sea,  the  speak-
ing of  Balaam's  ass,  the  obedience  of  the  fish  in  the  Sea  of  Galilee  to  the  will  of  Jesus,  the
storm  becoming  a  calm,  the  venomous  serpent  dropping  innocuous  from  the  hand  of  Paul.
What  rebukes  these  are  to  man,  who  persists  in  walking  in  his  own  way  1  Man  himscli
proceeds  with  all  confidence  in  the  training  of  brute  beasts.  He  takes  the  eolt  and  the
puppy,  and  makes  them  abundantly  usefuL  He  is  pretty  sure  how  they  will  turn  out.
lie  trouble  he  takes  with  them  is  rewarded  in  the  end.  But  with  regard  to  his  own
child,  though  he  has  watched  over  it  far  more  carefully  than  any  of  his  b^ts,  he  may  be
bitterly  disappointed.  His  training  may  be  mocked,  as  it  were,  and  put  to  shame— -and
so,  rising  from  the  human  parent  to  the  thought  of  God  in  [heaven,  we  see  Israel
similarly  perverse,  negligent  of  all  that  has  been  done  to  make  right  ways  for  it  and
keep  it  m  them. — Y.

Vers.  8 — 12. — The  exposure  of  pseudo-wisdom,  I.  The  claim  made.  Those  on  whom
Jeremiah  presses  his  appeals  for  a  change  of  purpose  reply,  if  not  by  plain  words,  at  all
events  by  equally  plain  actions,  that  they  are  so  wise  in  their  own  conceits  as  to  need
DO  guidance  from  an  outsider.  A  profound  belief  in  one's  own  insight  and  skill  may  of
course  be  justified  by  results  ;  such  a  belief  has  been  a  very  important  factor  in  many
great  achievements.  But  it  is  also  to  be  noticed  that  to  have  this  belief  without  any
corresponding  reality  is  an  evil  which  may  afflict  a  man  at  every  ago  of  his  life.  It
belongs  to  the  young  in  their  ignorance,  and  the  old,  with  all  their  experience,  may  not
be  free  from  it.  That  experience,  even  though  long,  may  have  been  a  narrow  one,  and
yet,  with  all  its  narrowness,  full  of  blunders.  But  the  recollection  of  all  that  should
make  such  old  men  humble  avails  nothing  to  diminish  the  dogmatism  of  their  advice
to  others.  A  certain  official  and  social  position  is  also  a  grand  vantage-ground  to  aii
a  reputation  for  wisdom.  Nothing  is  then  needed  but  an  abundance  of  self-assertion  to
gain  acknowledgment  from  the  weak  and  the  ignorant.  These  great  men  of  Jerusalem
would  point  scornfully  at  Jeremiah,  the  lonely  prophet.  Their  city  polish  would
perhaps  be  in  strong  contrast  to  the  rustic  airs  of  the  man  from  Anathoth,  and,  as  ii
to  make  their  claim  of  wisdom  more  definite,  they  fell  back  on  what  seemed  an
unanswerable  challenge.  '*  Is  not  the  Law  of  Jehovah,  with  us?"  The  meaning  of
this  seemed  to  be  that  they  could  boast  of  a  certain  outward  conformity  with  Mosaic
institutions.  They  certainly  did  attend  to  the  incense  and  the  sweet  cane,  the  burnt
offerings  and  the  sacrifices  (ch.  vi.  20).  Moreover,  what  they  asserted  for  themselves
impUed  a  correspondingly  humiliating  opinion  of  Jeremiah.  They  were  wise,  and  of
course  he  was  a  fooL  They  had  the  Law  of  Jehovah,  and  Jeremiah,  in  pretending  to
utter  Jehovah's  words,  was  of  course  nothing  better  than  an  impostor.

II.  The  Divine  way  op  exposing  this  claim.  These  self-constituted  wise  men  meet
the  prophet  with  a  declaration  as  to  what  they  think  themselves  to  be.  "  We  are  wise*
men,"  they  say,  nor  does  the  prophet  throw  back  the  shortest,  directest  answer  that
was  possible.  It  would  have  been  of  no  use  to  say, "  You  are  fools."  But  it  was  of  use
to  project  himself  into  the  future,  and  indicate  what  would  happen  to  these  boasters.
When  the  homes  of  these  pseudo-wise  are  broken  up,  and  their  wives  and  fields  become
the  spoil  of  the  conqueror,  then  it  will  be  clear  beyond  a  doubt  where  the  wisdom  is
and  where  the  folly.  Folly  will  be  condemned  of  her  children,  even  as  wisdom  is
justified  of  hers.  Where  now  are  the  writings  of  these  wise  men  ?  Jeremiah  said  at
the  time  that  they  were  full  of  lies,  and  we  may  be  sure  that,  like  all  reflections  of
popular  fashion  and  prejudice,  they  passed  very  quickly  out  of  vogue.    "  The  Law  of


en.  viiL  1—22.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  237

•

Jehovah  is  with  us,"  said  these  wise  men ;  but  it  was  a  valueless  connection,  whereas  the
prophet  had  that  Law  written  in  his  heart.  Being  in  full  sympathy  with  all  that  was
right,  and  loving,  and  generous,  and  pure,  he  was  a.fit  subject  for  the  solemn  impulses
that  came  to  him  from  on  high,  and  thus  he  went  forth  to  speak  on  themes  immeasur-
ably deeper  than  the  passing  phenomena  of  an  age.  And  so  it  is  that  his  words,
despised  and  rejected  at  the  time,  nevertheless  abide,  and  are  felt  to  be  very  precious  by
all  who  lack  wisdom.  As  we  notice  the  arrogance  of  spurious  wisdom  here  and  also  in
such  passages  as  John  vii.  48  and  1  Cor.  i.  22,  we  turn  away  to  welcome  that  heavenly
light  which  in  the  very  shining  of  it  proclaims  its  source  to  be  entirely  different  from
any  earth-enkindled  light.  Our  true  wisdom  in  presence  of  the  Law  and  the  prophets,
the  Christ  and  the  apostles,  is  to  feel  very  deeply  how  ignorant,  benighted,  and  astray  we
are  without  them.  And  there  is  true  wisdom  also  in  that  power  of  the  heart  which
enables  us  to  discern  between  the  false  prophet  and  the  true,  the  false  Christ  and  the
true.  Such  wisdom  may  be  found  in  the  heart  of  a  little  child  or  of  a  man  on  the
common  level  of  humanity,  when  it  is  utterly  lacking  among  many  who  lead  the  world
in  temporal  affairs.  Full  of  darkness  and  duplicity  must  the  minds  of  these  leaders  in
Jerusalem  have  been  when  they  lacked  the  power  of  seeing  that  Jeremiah,  unpromising
as  his  outward  appearance  might  be,  was  indeed  a  prophet  of  God. — Y.

Ver.  17. — The  serpents  which  cannot  he  charmed,  L  There  abe  serpents  which  cah
BE  CHARMED.  Serpent-charming  must  have  been  a  not  unfamiliar  sight  to  the  Israelites
(see '  The  Land  and  the  Book,'  pp.  154, 155).  This  means,  taking  the  figure  away,  that
there  were  many  great  and  pressing  evils  which  lay  within  human  resources  to  mitigate,
perhaps  to  remove.  Thus  when  sore  famine  fell  upon  Canaan,  Jacob  found  com,  though
he  had  to  send  as  far  as  Egypt.  The  resources  thus  employed  are,  no  doubt,  exceptional,
and  need  peculiar  skill  and  aptitude  to  discover  and  use  them ;  but  still — and  this  is  the
thing  of  importance  here  to  remember — they  are  within  the  reach  of  the  natural  man.
To  say  that  necessity  is  the  mother  of  invention  is  only  another  way  of  saying  that
there  are  serpents  which  can  be  charmed.  Man  stands  upon  the  known  and  the
achieved,  that  he  may  reach  forward  and  win  something  more  from  the  unknown.  Not
everybody  can  charm  a  serpent,  but  some  can.  So  there  are  a  few  physicians,  one  here
and  another  there,  who  have  wonderful  skill  in  the  cure  of  special  diseases.  Part  of  the
ills  of  human  life  can  be  swept  away  by  wise  and  timely  legislation.  Epidemics  may
be  restrained  and  made  comparatively  mild  by  cleanliness  and  attention  to  sanitary
rules.  Ills  which  in  one  age  have  been  thought  beyond  remedy,  in  the  next  age  are
perfectly  understood  as  to  their  causes  and  their  cure.

U.  There  are  serpents  which  cannot  be  charmed.  We  may  assume  that  it  was
so  literally ;  that  there  were  certain  serpents  which  proved  obdurate  against  every  wile.
And  the  danger  of  the  serpent's  bite  would  in  such  an  instance  become  most  dreadful,
just  from  this  very  insensibility  to  everything  in  the  shape  of  a  charm.  An  enemy  was
to  be  brought  on  Israel  whom  no  bribe,  no  promise,  no  art  of  persuasion  whatever,
could  turn  back.  If  he  was  to  be  turned  back,  it  must  be  by  main  force  or  by  Divine
interposition.  So  we  have  to  consider  that,  whatever  ills  we  mdj  succeed  in  neutralizing,
there  are  others  still  left  behind,  unabated  in  their  deadly  efficiency  by  any  resources
we  have  in  ourselves.  It  matters  little  that  we  can  charm  some  serpents,  if  we  cannot
charm  all.  If  there  be  left  only  one  superior  to  our  skill,  that  one  is  enough  to  ruin  all.
The  most  successful  charmer  among  us  will  discover  his  match  at  last.    He  may  charm

g>verty  away,  only  to  find,  in  a  little  while,  ennui  and  possession  without  enjoyment,
e  may  have  the  experience  indicated  in  Prov.  xxiii.  32 :  he^  may  charm  away,  as  he
thinks,  the  peril  of  the  wine-cup,  and  exult  in  assured  mastery,  only  to  discover  at  last
that  the  foe  with  whom  he  has  been  trifling  "  bites  like  a  serpent,  and  stings  like  an
adder."  So  a  man  may  achieve  most  of  his  purposes,  charming  away,  as  it  were,
obstacles  on  every  side,  only  to  find  in  the  end  that  he  cannot  charm  his  conscience,
that  it  will  not  be  silent  and  sleep  before  the  memory  of  much  wrong-doing.

IIL  There  are  serpents  which  can  be  more  than  charmed.  There  is  mnch
in  the  conjecture  that  the  reference  to  the  serpent  here  is  suggested  by  the  mention  of
Dan  in  the  previous  verse,  Jacob's  word  for  his  son  Dan  was,  "Dan  shall  be  a
serpent  by  the  way,  an  adder  in  the  path,  that  biteth  the  horse  heels,  so  that  his  rider
fihall  fjEill  backwards  "  (Gen.  xliz.  17).     But  we  shall  do  wisely  in  considering  the


238  THE  BOOK  OF  TQE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ca.  viii.  1— 22.


reference  as  having  a  deeper  connection  with  the  work  of  him  who  is  the  serpent  from
the  beginning  (Rev.  xx.  2).  All  the  painful  serpent-bites  of  life,  all  the  deadly  ills,
proceed  from  the  brood  which  in  some  way  or  other  originate  with  him.  And  thus
thinking  of  him,  the  great  dragon,  the  devil,  the  adversary,  we  must  needs  think  of  the
correspondingly  profound  work  of  Jesus  over  against  his  work.  Jesus  was  a  serpent^
charmer ;  and  his  efiBcacy  as  a  charmer  is  most  graciously  manifested  in  the  miracles
which  he  wrought  to  remove  physical  defect,  disease,  and  death.  These  miracles  had  in
them  something  of  the  nature  of  a  charm.  They  did  not  destroy  the  maleficent  power,
but  they  curbed  it,  made  it  for  the  time  dormant  and  inoperative.  But  after  having
done  all  these  miracles,  Jesus  is  seen  proceeding  to  a  work  which  is  more  than  that  of
the  charmer.  He  who  was  lifted  up  to  draw  all  men  to  him  makes  the  victim  of  tho
Berpent-bite  impervious,  for  all  future  existence,  to  any  further  danger.  The  bite  may
come,  in  the  sense  of  inflicting  pain,  but  the  peril  is  |«st.  The  serpent-poison  becomes
neutralized  by  the  vigour  and  purity  of  that  eternal  life  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  the
Lord.— Y.

Ver.  20.—"  The  life  is  more  than  the  meat,**  After  the  subsidence  of  the  Deluge,  there
was  a  promise  given  to  Noah  that,  "  while  the  earth  remaineth,  seed-time  and  harvest,
.  . .  summer  and  winter,  .  .  .  shall  not  cease."  Scanning  the  surface  of  the  Scripture  nar-
rative, it  appears  as  if  this  promise  had  not  been  kept,  seeing  there  is  a  record  of  several
notable  and  protracted  famines;  and  moreover,  we  have  only  too  good  reason  to
suppose  that  millions  in  the  successive  ages  of  the  world  have  perished  from  famine.
We  must  hold,  however,  to  God's  promise  having  been  kept  in  the  spirit  of  it ;  its  non-
fultilment,  so  far  as  human  experience  is  concerned,  must  arise  from  some  other  cause
than  the  unfaithfulness  of  God.  An  inquiry  into  these  painful  experiences  is  suggested
by  the  utterance  of  this  verse.  The  meaning  seems  to  be  that  harvest  and  summer,
the  annual  gathering  of  the  corn  and  the  wine  and  the  oil,  have  nevertheless,  in  some
way  or  other,  left  the  people  who  should  have  profited  by  them,  unprovided  for.  The
\iords  may  be  applied  in  two  ways.  1.  When  there  is  an  actual  gathenng  of  harvest.
There  may  be  an  abundance,  even  a  superabundance,  of  the  fruits  of  the  earth,  and  yet
those  who  sowed  and  planted,  watched  and  watered,  may  not  get  tho  slightest  benefit.
Now,  not  to  get  the  expected  benefit  from  these  things  means,  if  not  destruction  of
life,  at  least  a  considerable  impairment  of  it ;  for  natural  life  depends  upon  them.  And
ch.  V.  15 — 24  casts  no  small  light  on  this  state  of  things.  There  the  mighty  men  from
the  north  are  spoken  of,  and  Israel  is  addressed  as  follows  : — "  U'hey  shall  eat  up  thino
harvest,  and  thy  bread,  which  thy  sons  and  thy  daughters  should  eat :  .  .  .  they  shall
eat  up  thy  vines  and  thy  fig  trees."  Strangers  pluck  the  rich  fruit  of  the  husbandman's
toil,  and  he  himself  is  trampled  into  privation,  reduced  to  the  bare  subsistence  of  a  slave
taken  in  war.  Thus  we  see  how  God  may  lay  before  a  man  that  which  through  the
nn  and  folly  of  the  recipient  he  may  not  be  able  to  use.  Think  of  the  prosperous  man
in  the  parable,  who  had  such  abundant  crops  that  he  must  needs  build  bigger  barns,
and  yet  in  the  very  day  of  his  pride  was  taken  away.  What  is  wealth  unless  God,
in  the  prosecution  of  his  own  wise  purposes,  chooses  to  give  security  in  the  possession
of  that  wealth  ?  2.  When  the  harvest  itself  fails.  The  harvest  season  may  pass  and  the
summer  close,  only  to  leave  men  with  empty  gamers,  in  hunger  and  despair.  Whither
shall  they  turn,  when  drought,  blasting,  and  mildew,  palmerworm  and  locust,  cankerworm
and  caterpillar,  have  done  their  work  ?  Then  it  is  that "  those  who  are  slain  with  the  sword
are  better  than  those  who  are  slain  with  hunger,  for  these  pine  away,  stricken  through
for  want  of  the  fruits  of  the  field  "  (Lam.  iv.  9).  Thus,  whether  the  harvest  be  given
or  withheld,  the  practical  result  is  the  same.  The  people  are  not  saved.  Gt)d  may
bring  the  harvest  to  a  complete  and  beautiful  maturity,  may,  so  to  speak,  save  the
harvest — and  "save  the  harvest"  is  not  an  unfamiliar  expression  to  those  who  are
engaged  in  the  vicissitudes  of  agriculture— only  to  teach  thereby  a  more  impressive
lesson  to  tho  people  who  live  so  that  they  cannot  be  kept  safe.  What  force  there  is  in
the  expression  of  this  verse  if  we  take  it  to  mean,  "  The  corn  is  saved ;  the  vintage  is
saved ;  the  olives  are  saved  ;  all  tho  pleasant  fruits  of  the  land  are  saved ;  but  we  are
not  saved  " !  The  life  is  more  than  the  bodily  nourishment,  and  when  men  will  not  take
heed  to  the  higher  things  which  belong  to  the  life,  it  is  just  what  might  bo  expected
that  they  should  have  disappointments  in  the  lower  things  which  belong  to  the  nourish*


CH.  vm  1— 22.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  2C9


ment  The  true  material  wealth  of  every  land,  when  we  get  at  the  substance  of  it,  lies
in  what  its  soil  produces ;  and  when  men  boast,  as  they  are  apt  to  do,  that  their  own
land  has  gotten  them  their  wealth,  it  is  needful  that  Jehovah  should  show  them  how
completely  he  controls  the  roots  and  fruits  of  everything  that  he  has  made  to  grow  for
human  food.  No  wonder  evil  comes  to  those  who  do  not  say  in  their  hearts,  "  Let  ua
now  fear  Jehovah  our  (Jod,  that  giveth  rain,  both  the  former  and  the  latter,  in  his
season  :  he  reserveth  unto  us  the  appointed  weeks  of  the  harvest "  (ch.  v.  24).  Malachi
puts  into  striking  words  the  fundamental  reason  for  the  sore  complaint  we  have  been
considering,  and  the  way  in  which  it  may  be  brought  to  cease  (ch.  iii.  9—11). — Y.

Vers.  21,  22. — Why  the  hurt  of  Israel  is  not  healed,  I.  It  is  not  fob  want  of
EARNESTLY  CALLING  ATTENTION  TO  THE  HUBT.  Jeremiah  had  wearied  and  vexed  his
fellow-countrymen  by  his  persistent  warnings.  In  ver.  21  he  insists  on  how  the  hurt  of
Israel  had  become  his  hurt.  In  one  sense  he  was  not  hurt,  for  ho  had  kept  clear  of  all
idolatrous  and  unjust  ways ;  he  was  in  a  dififerent  service  and  different  kind  of  occupation.
But  though  separated  thus,  he  was  also  united  even  as  a  member  to  the  rest  of  the  body,
and  had  to  suffer  where  he  had  not  sinned.  His  fellow-countrymen,  perhaps,  said  to  him,
in  substance  if  not  in  so  many  words,  "  Leave  us  to  go  our  way,  and  go  you  yours ;  if
we  sin,  we  sin,  and  if  we  suffer,  we  suffer,  and  it  is  no  concern  to  any  but  ourselves."
The  sinner  in  his  suffering  and  his  heart-corruption  must  be  a  cause  of  great  trouble  to
those  who  are  trying  to  serve  God.  They  cannot  go  by  on  the  other  side  and  leave
him.  No  matter  how  self-occupied  one  may  have  been  before  he  came  under  the
control  of  the  Divine  will,  afterwards  he  must  occupy  himself  with  such  things  as
concern  the  spiritual  health  and  blessedness  of  all  mankind.  Jeremiah  sets  us  a  great
example  in  thus  speaking  of  himself  as  being  individually  wounded.  If  sinners  continue
careless,  impenitent,  incredulous  as  to  the  wrath  of  God  and  their  pitiable  state  of
alienation  from  him,  there  is  all  the  more  need  that  God's  people  should  feel  instead  of
them.  These  Israelites  could  not  say  they  were  left  without  warning  and  urgent
remonstrance,  for  the  man  upon  whom  the  business  of  warning  had  been  laid  cried  and
mourned  over  the  troubles  of  others,  because  in  a  very  deep  sense  they  were  his  own.
Vain,  therefore,  was  it  for  the  people,  in  after  years,  amid  the  gloom  of  exile  and
bereavement,  to  say  they  had  not  been  properly  warned.

II.  It  was  not  for  want  of  a  medicament.  In  wounds  of  the  body,  Israel
knew  where  to  go.  They  found  balm  in  Gilead,  and  Gilead  was  not  far  off,  even
supposing  they  had  always  to  oo  there  to  get  the  balm.  Balm  of  Gilead  might  be  made
to  grow  nearer  than  Gilead.  Thus  we  see  the  medicament  was  easily  procured — a  very
imiwrtant  consideration.  The  incense  for  the  altar  they  brought  all  the  way  from
Sheba,  but  the  balm  for  healing  grew  much  nearer.  Easiness  of  procurement,  howevei',
would  have  been  little  without  efficiency.  A  certain  remedy  brought  from  the  ends  of
the  earth  is  better  than  a  doubtful  one  near  to  home ;  only,  of  course,  there  must  be
foresight  to  lav  in  a  stock,  so  that  it  will  be  at  hand  when  wanted.  Evidently  this
balm  of  Gilead  which  grew  within  Israelite  territory  was  a  famous  and  trusted  balm.
Only  some  popular  and  widely  known  agent  of  healing  would  have  served  the  purpose
of  the  prophet  for  quoting  here.  And  is  it  not  plain  that  the  God  who  thus  provided
for  bodily  wounds  a  balm  so  easily  obtained  and  so  efficient  in  its  action,  might  also
be  trusted  to  provide  an  available  and  thorough  cure  for  the  worst  of  spiritual  ills  ?
Assuredly  the  prophet  means  that  an  affirmative  and  encouraging  answer  is  to  be
given  to  his  question.  There  is  balm  in  Gilead.  There  is  peace  for  the  guilty  con-
science, purity  for  the  turbid  and  defiled  imagination,  strength  for  the  weakened  wiU.
The  springs  of  all  our  pollution  and  pain  can  be  dried  up,  and  their  place  know  them
no  more  for  ever.

III.  It  was  not  for  want  of  a  phtbictan.  The  medicament  is  good,  but  it  may
require  to  be  applied  by  a  skilful  and  experienced  hand.  The  physician  can  do  nothing
without  his  medicaments,  and  the  medicaments  are  oftentimes  nothing  without  the
physician.  A  physician  is  needed  to  prepare  the  way  for  saving  truth,  to  apply  it  in
its  most  efficacious  order,  and  to  press  it  nome  in  close  and  vigorous  contact  with  that
which  has  to  be  healed.  The  balm  of  Gilead  is  not  given  that  it  may  be  trifled  with,
that  it  may  film  over  deep  evils  with  a  deceptive  appearance  of  removal.  In  applying
that  balm  there  may  have  to  be  pain,  intense  pain  for  a  time^  in  order  that  a  worse


240


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,  [en.  ix.  1—20.


pain  may  bo  for  ever  taken  away.  The  paia  coming  from  self-indulgence  must  bo
succeeded  by  the  pain  coming  from  self-denial.  Men  have  to  discover  that  the  pains  of
sin  are  the  smkings  of  God,  and  when  they  have  made  this  discovery  they  will  bo  in
a  fur  way  to  learn  that  only  ho  who  smites  can  also  heal.  Do  not  let  us  unjustly
complain  of  incurable  ills ;  let  us  rather  confess  that  we  are  much  in  the  condition  of
the  poor  woman  who,  after  spending  much  on  many  physicians,  found,  by  a  simple
feith  touching  the  true  Source  of  healing,  what  she  had  long  vainly  sought.

IV.  The  reason  plainly  lay  with  the  people  themselves.  They  would  listen
to  no  warning.  Balm  was  offered,  and  the  physician's  skill  to  apply  it,  but  they  would
not  come  to  be  healed.  They  preferred  the  pleasures  of  sin  along  with  its  risks  and
pjuns.  That  their  state  was  bad  they  knew,  but  they  believed  it  was  not  near  so  bad  as
the  prophet  made  it  out  to  be.  Only  physicians  can  tell  how  many  cases  of  bodily  disease
might  bo  cured  if  the  sick  were  willing  to  go  to  the  root  of  the  matter,  and  mend  their
habits  as  to  eating  and  drinking,  working  and  playing.  Ignorance,  indifference,
prejudice,  and  unblushing  lust  of  the  flesh  lie  at  the  bottom  of  much  bodily  disease,
explaining  both  how  it  originates  and  how  it  continues.  And  similar  causes  operate
with  regard  to  such  ills  as  afflict  the  consciousness  of  the  entire  man.  Sinners  must
have  a  will  to  go  to  Jesus  if  they  expect  healing  and  life,  and  then  life  more  abun-
dantly.— Y.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  IX.


Yor.  1. — The  Hebrew  more  correctly
attaches  this  verso  to  ch.  viii.  Oh  that  my
head  were  waters,  etc.  1  A  quaint  conceit,  it
may  bo  said.  But  "  if  we  have  been  going
on  pace  for  pace  with  the  passion  before,  this
sudden  conversion  of  a  strong-felt  mctanhor
into  something  to  bo  actually  realized  in
nature,  is  strictly  and  strikingly  natural.**  So
Bishop  Doane,  quoting, by  way  of  illustration,
Bhakospeare'tt  *  Richard  U.,*  *^  meditating
on  his  own  utter  annihilation  as  to  royalty :  **

^  Oh  that  T  were  a  mockery  king  of  snow,
To  melt  before  the  sun  of  Boliugbroke  1  *'

The  tone  of  complaint  continues  in  the
following  verse,  though  the  subject  is
different.

Vers.  2 — 22. — Complaint  of  the  treachery
and  folly  of  the  people;  lamentation  over
their  oonsoquences.

Ver.  2.— A  lodging  place  of  wayfiaring
men ;  a  **  khan  "  or  **  caravanserai,*'  to  use
the  terms  now  so  familiar  from  Eastern
travel,  where  **  wayfaring  men  *'  could  at
least  find  shelter,  and  the  means  of  preparing
their  provisions.  Ck)mp.,  besides  the  parallel
passage  in  Ps.  Iv.  6,  7,  our  own  Cowner*s
fine  reminiscence  of  Jeremiah :  "  Oh  fur  a
lodge  in  some  vast  wilderness  1  '*  oto.  Adnl-
teren, . . .  treaoherons  men  (see  ch.  ii  20 ;
fa.8.9;  iu.  20;  v.  11).

Yer.  8. — And  they  bend  their  tongnes,  etc. ;
rather,  and  they  hend  their  tongue  <u  their
how  o/faUehoodj  and  they  use  not  their  valour
in  (literally,  according  to)  good  faith.  There
is  a  sad,  stem  irony  in  those  words,  which
remind  us  of  Isaiah's  (v.  22)  **  valiant  men —
for  diinkiDg  winoi"  and  of  our  own  prophet's


repetition  of  himself  m  ch.  xxiii.  It).  «  Their
valour  is— untruth."  A  less  pointed  form
of  tho  same  figurative  statement  is  that  of
the  psalmist  in  Ps.  Ixiv.  8.  Upon  the  earth ;
rather,  in  the  land.  The  Authorized  Version
pays  very  little  regard  to  the  context  in  its
rendering  of  tho  ambiguous  word  crcf.

Ver.  4.— Take  ye  heed  every  one  of  his
neighbour.  Such  was  tho  result  of  clinging
to  an  unprogressive  religion — one  which
refused  to  be  spiritualized  by  the  prophets.
Certainly,  if  tho  established  religion  was  so
inefficacious,  it  was  self-oondemned.  Here
we  find  the  prophet  depicting  a  state  of
society  in  which  the  elomentanr  bonds  are
already  dissolved,  and  suspicion  becomes  the
natural  attitude  even  of  a  good  man.  We
find  a  very  similar  picture  in  the  last  chapter
of  Micah — a  chapter,  it  is  true,  which  stands
apart  from  the  rest  of  the  book,  as  it  implies
a  greater  development  of  wickedness  than
the  rest  of  Micah  and  the  contemporary
prophecies  of  Isaiah  would  lead  us  to  expect.
Are  these  prophetic  descriptions  just  and
accurate?  Wo  may  allow  something,  no
doubt,  for  tho  warmth  of  feeling  natural  to
every  human  preacher,  oven  under  the  influ-
ence of  inspiration ;  but  wo  must  not  allow
ourselves  to  explain  away  the  obvious  mean-
ing of  tho  prophets.  The  latter  and  their
disciples  were  "  tho  salt  **  of  their  country ;
and  in  proportion  as  their  influence  declined,
tho  natuml  effects  of  a  non-moral,  purely
rituaUstio  religion  showed  themselves  on  a
larger  scale.  Every  brother;  t.e.  every
fellow-tribesman  or  fellow-citizen.  Will
utterly  supplant.  There  is  nothing  in  the
context  to  suggest  an  allusion  to  Gen.  zxvii.
86  (Jacob).  The  verb  has  its  common  sense
of  deceiving.     The  tonse  should  be  the


-CH.  IX.  1—26.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.


241


present,  not  the  future,  both  here  and  in  the
next  verse.  Will  walk ;  rather,  goeth  ahout
(see  ch.  vi.  28).

Ver.  5.— They  have  taught  their  tongne,
etc. ;  again  an  intimation  of  the  nnnatural-
ness  (in  the  higher  sense)  of  vice  (oomp.
oil  ch.  ii.  33).

Yer.  6. — Thine  habitatioii,  etc  According
to  St.  Jerome,  this  is  addressed  to  tlie
prophet;  but  it  is  better  to  follow  the
Targum,  vhich  makes  the  clause  refer  to
the  Jewish  people.  The  connection  is  (as
Dr.  Payne  Smith  points  out),  **  Trust  no  one ;
for  thou  dwellest  surrounded  by  deceit  on
every  side."

Ver.  7. — I  will  melt  them.  It  is  the  same
word  as  that  used  in  Mai.  iii.  3  of  the
**  refiner  and  purifier  of  silver."  Purification,
not  destruction,  is  the  object  of  the  judg-
ment which  is  threatened!  Strange  that
mercy  should  find  place,  after  the  offence  of
the  criminal  has  been  found  so  grievous!
But,  lest  we  should  expect  too  favourable
an  issue,  the  prophet  adds,  in  the  name  of
Jehovah,  For  how  shall  I  do!  or  rather,
How  Bhovdd  I  act  f  How  otherwise  fhould  I
act  f  The  continuation  is  a  little  doubtful.
The  Hebrew  has,  **  by  reason  of  the  daughter
of  my  people ; "  but  this  can  hardly  be  right
We  naturally  expect  something  to  justify
the  preceding  statement.  The  reading  of
the  Septuagiut  answers  to  our  anticipations
by  rendering  ixh  xpoffwnov  ironiptas  Ouyarphs
Xaov  fiovf  and  this  is  confirmed  by  the
parallel  passage  ch.  vii.  12  (comp.  ch.  xL  17 ;
xxxii.  32).

Ver.  8.— (0)mp.  Ps.  Iv.  21.)  As  an  arrow
ahot  out ;  rather,  as  a  sharpened  arrow ;  but
this  is  based  on  the  marginal  reading,
and  is  itself  a  slightly  forced  rendering.
The  Hebrew  text  (i.e.  the  consonants),  and
also  the  Septuagint  and  Vulgate,  have  **  as
a  murderous  arrow."

Ver.  10.— This  and  the  next  six  verses
contain  a  description  of  the  sad  fate  of  the
Binful  land  and  people.  At  first  the  prophet
speaks  as  if  he  saw  it  all  spread  out  before
him.  Then,  in  the  cliaracter  of  a  surprised
Bpeotator,  he  inquires  how  this  came  to
pass,  and  receives  the  Divine  answer,  that
it  is  the  doom  of  self-willed  rebellion.  The
habitationB  should  rather  be  pastures.  The
country,  once  covered  with  grazing  flocks
and  herds,  is  now  so  utterly  wasto  that  oven
the  birds  cannot  find  subsistence.

Ver.  11. — I  will  make,  etc.  Notice  how
the  utterances  of  the  prophets  stand  side  by
Bide  with  tlioso  of  Jeliovah.  A  true  prophet
has  no  personal  views ;  so  that  whetlier  his
revelations  are  expressed  in  the  one  form  or
the  other  makes  no  difference.  Dragons ;
rather,  jackals.

Ver.  12.— For  what  the  land  perisheth.
A  closer  rendering  would  be  more  forciblo :

JEBEMIAU.


Wherefore  hath  the  land  pertMhed^  is  it
burned  up  like  the  wilderness  with  none  that
pafseth  tnroughf

Ver.  13. — There  Is  no  answer,  for  the  wisa
men  are  ashamed  (ch.  viii.  9) ;  so  Jehovah
himself  takes  up  his  speech.  My  law  which
I  set  before  them;  not  in  reference  to  the

Sublication  of  the  Law  on  Sinai,  but,  as
leil  rightly  points  out,  to  the  oral  exhibi-
tion of  the  Tdrdh  by  the  prophets.  Neither
walked  therein;  viz.  in  the  Law.  (On  the
precise  contents  of  the  term  here  rendered
"  Law,"  see  note  on  ch.  viiL  8.)

Ver.  14. — Imagination;  rather,  stubborn-
ness (see  on  ch.  iii.  17).  Baalim.  The
Hebrew  has  "the  Baalim;"  practically
equivalent  to  "the  idol-gods"  (see  on  ch.
iL  8).  Which  their  fathers  taught  them.
**  Which  "  refers  to  both  clauses,  i.e,  to  the
obstinacy  and  the  Baal-worship.

Ver.  15.— I  will  feed  them, .  . .  with  worm-
wood. A  figure  for  the  bitter  privations
of  captivity  (comp.  Lam.  iii.  15,  "He  hath
filled  me  with  bitterness,  he  hath  made  me
drunken  with  wormwood  "^.  Wormwood  and
gall — i.e,  the  poppy  (Tristram) — are  com-
bined again  in  Deut  xxix.  17.

Ver.  16. — I  will  scatter  them  alio,  etc
(comp.  Deut.  xxviii.  64;  Lev.  xxvi.  33).
I  will  send  a  [the]  sword  after  them.  Even
in  the  land  of  their  captivity  they  shall
have  no  rest.  A  special  prophecy  to  the
same  effect  was  addressed  to  the  Jewish
fugitives  in  Egypt  (ch.  xliv.  27).  In  both
cases  it  is  tho  unbelievers  who  are  referred
to;  the  nation  as  such  was,  through  its
Divine  calling,  indestructible.

Vers.  17 — 22. — ^A  new  scene  is  introduced.
To  give  an  idea  of  the  greatness  of  the
impending  blow,  all  the  skilled  mourners
are  sent  for  to  raise  the  cry  of  lamentation.
But  no,  this  is  not  enough.  So  large  will
be  the  number  of  the  dead  that  all  the
women  must  take  their  part  in  the  doleful
ofiSce.  The  description  of  the  mourning
women  is  as  true  to  modem  as  to  ancient
life  in  the  East.  "  And,  indeed,"  says  Dr.
Shaw,  a  thoughtful  traveller  and  an  orna-
ment of  Oxford  in  the  dark  eighteenth
century,  "they  perform  their  parts  with
such  proper  sounds,  gestures,  and  com-
motions, that  they  rarely  fail  to  work  up
the  assembly  into  some  extraordinary  pitch
of  thoughtfulness  and  sorrow"  (•Travels
in  Barbary  and  the  Levant,'  2nd  edit.,  p,
242 ;  comp.  Amos  v.  16 ;  Eccles.  xii.  5).

Ver.  18. — That  onr  eyes  may  run  down,
etc. ;  a  justification  of  this  artificial  system.
The  piercing  notes  of  the  hired  mourners
aro  to  relieve  the  sorrow  of  the  afflicted  by
forcing  for  it  a  vent.

Ver.  19.— Forsaken ;  rather,  left  Our
dwellings  have  oast  us  out;  rather,  they
have  cast  doton  our  dwellings.


e


242


THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  ix.  1— 26.


Ver.  20.--Tet  hear ;  rather,  for  hear,

Ver.  21.— Death  ii  come  up,  etc.  "  Death,"
equivalent  to  "pestilence"  (as  ch.  xv.  2),
the  most  dreaded  foe  of  a  besieged  popula-
tion. (For  the  figure,  corap.  Joel  ii.  9.)
nie  children  from  wiUiout.  The  ideal  of
Zechariah  is  that  "  the  streets  of  the  city
should  be  full  of  boys  and  girls  playing
in  the  streets  thereof"  (viii.  5).  But  the
pitiless  reaper,  Death,  shall  cut  off  even
"the  playful  child  from  the  street"  (so  we
might  render  more  literally).  Streets,  in
the  parallel  clause,  moiins  the  **  broad
places"  where  men  congregate  to  tell  the
news.

Ver.  22.— Speak,  Thus  saith  the  Lord.
These  words  are  in  three  important  respects
contrary  to  the  style  of  Jeremiah  :  (1)  such
a  prefix  as  ^'spoalc"  is  unique;  (2)  such  a
phrase  as  ^^  OM  ns  is  alao  unique  in  Jere-
miah; (3)  when  our  prophet  does  use  the
formula  **  dkj  it  is  not  at  the  beginning  of  a
verse.  They  are  omitted  by  the  Septuagint
translator,  who  presumably  did  not  find  ttiem
in  his  oony  of  the  Hebrew,  and  the  text  gains
greatly  oy  their  removal.  Tlie  following
words  are  mistranslated  in  the  Authorized
Version,  and  should  run,  not  even,  but  andj
the  carcases  of  men  shall  fall,  etc.  It  is  most
improbable,  however,  that  a  fresh  Divine
revelation  should  begin  with  "  and."  With
other  points,  the  word  rendered  "speak"
would  mean  **  pestilence."  Possibly  the
word  fell  out  of  ver.  21,  whore  it  would  find
an  excellent  place  in  the  seoond  clause  (as
an  explanatory  parallel  to  "death,"  as  in
Ps.  Ixxviii.  50),  which  would  thus  obtain
ffreater  roundness  and  symmetry.  As  the
aandfnl ;  i.e.  as  thickly  as  one  heap  of  corn
Buoceeds  another  under  the  deft  band  of  the
reaper.

Vers.  23,  24. — These  two  verses  were
hardly  composed  for  their  present  position,
though  a  connection  may,  of  course,  be
thought  out  for  them.    Perhaps    a    com-

¥iri^n  of  Hab.  iii.  17,  18,  may  help  us.
here  the  prophet  looks  forward  to  a  com-
plete desolation  resulting  from  the  Chaldean
invasion,  and  yet  declares  that  he  can  even
exult  in  his  God.  So  here.  All  subjects  of
boasting  have  been  proved  untrustworthy ;
but  one  remains— not  wisdom,  not  valour,
not  riches,  but  the  knowledge  of  the  re-
vealed God.

Ver.  24. — The  knowledge  of  God  relates
to  three  leading  attributes,  the  combination
of  which  is  very  instructive.  First,  loving-
Undness.  This  is  not  to  be  understood  in
a  vague  and  general  sense  of  the  love  of
God  to  all  mankind ;  the  term  has  a  special
oonnotiition  with  regard  to  the  Israelitish
people.  God  shows  loving-kindness  to  those
with  whom  he  is  in  covenant ;  hence  the  com-
bination **  luving-kindness  and  faithfulne^is  "


(Ps.  Ixxxv.  10,  corrected  version),  and  as
here  (com p.  Ps.  v.  7,  8 ;  xxxvi.  5,  6), "  mercy
and  righteousness."  Israel  is  weak  and
erring,  and  needs  mercies  of  all  sorts,  which
Jehovah,  in  his  "loving-kindness,"  vouch-
safes. Next,judgment,  or  justice.  Jehovah
is  a  King,  helps  the  poor  and  weak  to  their
right,  and  punishes  the  wrong-doer  (comp.
cli.  xxi.  12).  Then,  righteonsness — a  similar
but  wider  term.  This  is  the  quality
which  leads  its  subject  to  adhere  to  a  fixed
rule  of  conduct.  God's  rule  is  his  covenant ;
hence  "righteousness"  sliows  itself  in  all
such  acts  as  tend  to  the  full  realizing  of  the
covenant  with  Israel,  including  the  "  plan
of  salvation."  It  is  by  no  means  to  be  con-
fined to  exacting  penalties  aud  conferring
rewards.

Vers.  25,  26. — A  further  enforcement  of
the  doctrine  that  no  outward  privileges,  if
dissociated  from  inward  moral  vitality,  will
avail.

Ver.  25. — All  them  which  are  dronmoised
with  the  onoiroomoised ;  rather,  all  the  cir-
cumcieed  in  uncircumcision^  or,  as  Ewald
turns  it,  "  all  the  uncircumcised-circum-
cised."  But  what  does  this  enigmatical
expression  signify?  Hitzig,  Graf,  and
apparently  Dr.  Payne  Smith,  think  that
it  has  a  twofold  meaning :  tliat,  as  applied
to  the  Jews,  it  means  circumcised  in  the
flesh,  but  not  in  heart,  and,  as  applied  to
the  heathen,  simply  uncircumcisod  (the  one-
half  of  the  phrase  neutralizing  the  other,
like  "a  knife  without  the  blade/'  "angels
with  horns  and  hoofs,"  etc.).  The  latter
meaning,  however,  is  surely  very  impro-
bable, and  it  would  only  become  necessary
if  it  were  proved  that  circumcision  was
practised  by  none  of  the  nations  mentioned
but  the  Jews.  This  is  not  the  case.  There
is  no  doubt  that  the  Egyptians  were  cir-
cumcised in  very  early  times  (see  the
drawing  of  a  bas-relief  in  the  Temple  of
Chunsu  at  Karnak,  given  by  Dr.  Ebers  in
his  *  Egypten  und  die  BUcher  Mosis ').
The  assertion  that  only  the  priests  under-
went the  operation  has  no  older  evidence
than  that  of  Origen  (edit.  Lommatzsch,
iv.  138),  "  in  whose  time  it  is  quite  possible
that  the  Egyptians,  like  the  later  Jews,
sought  to  evade  a  peculiarity  which  exposed
them  to  ridicule  and  contempt."  As  to
the  Ammonites  and  Moabites,  we  have,  un-
fortunately, no  information.  With  regard
to  the  Edomites,  it  is  true  that,  according
to  Josophus  (*  Antiq.,*  xiii.  9,  1),  they  were
compelled  to  accept  circumcision  by  John
Hyrcanus.  But  it  is  still  quite  possible
that,  at  an  earlier  period,  the  rite  was
practised,  just  as  it  was  among  the  ancient
Arabs,  the  evidence  for  which  is  beyond
question  (see  the  writer's  article,  "Circum-
cision," in  *  Encycloptedia  Biitauuica,'  9th


CH.IX.  1— 26.]    THE  BOOK    OF   THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.


243


edit.).  (On  tho  Btatcment  that  **all  these
[the]  nations  are  uncircuracised,"  see  below.)
Ver.  26. — All  that  are  in  the  utmost
corners ;  rather,  all  that  are  corner-clipped ;
i.e.  that  have  the  hair  cut  off  about  the
ears  and  temples.  Herodotus  tells  us,
speaking  of  the  Arabs,  "Their  practice  is
to  cut  the  hair  in  a  ring,  away  from  the
temples  *'  (iii.  8);  and  among  the  representa-
tives of  various  nations,  coloured  figures  of
whom  are  given  in  the  tomb  of  Rameses  HI.,
we  find  some  with  a  square  place  shaved
just  above  the  temples.  The  hair  below
thin  shaven  place  was  allowed  to  grow  long,
and  then  plaited  into  a  lock.  It  is  to  such
customs  that  Jeremiah  alludes  here  and  in


ch.  XXV.  23;  xlix.  32.  A  prohibition  is
directed  against  them  in  the  Levitical  Law
(Lev.  xix.  27 ;  xxi.  5).  For  all  these  nationa
are  nncircnmeised;  ratlier,  aU  the  nations,
etc.  Another  obscure  expression.  Does  it
mean  (taken  together  with  the  following
clause),  "  The  Gentile  peoples  are  uncircum-
cised  in  the  flesh,  and  the  people  of  Israel
is  equally  so  in  heart "  ?  But  this  does  not
agree  with  facts  (see  above,  on  ver.  2.)).  It
is  safer,  therefore,  to  assume  that  "  uncir-
cumcised  "  is  equivalent  to  "  circumcised  in
uncircumcision  "  (ver.  25).  The  next  clause
will  then  simply  give  the  most  conspicuous
instance  of  this  uiispiritual  obedience  to  a
mere  form.


HOMILETICS.

Ver.  1. — One/for  others,  1.  The  right  spirit  in  which  to  reoard  the  miseries
or  otjier  men  is  one  or  grief.  A  less  worthy  spirit  is  too  common.  1.  Self-con'
gratulation.  The  evil  condition  of  others  is  simply  used  as  a  dark  background  on
which  to  throw  out  in  relief  our  own  su|)eriority.  2.  Indifference — the  spirit  of  Cain,
which  cries,  "  Am  I  my  brother's  keeper?"  3.  Vindictiveness.  Jeremiah  denounced
the  sins  of  Israel,  and  threatened  punishment.  Yet  he  regarded  these  sins  with  no
rhnrisaical  sternness,  and  he  could  not  contemplate  the  punishment  of  them  with
indif^nant  satisfaction.  Even  if  men  are  deserving  punishment,  that  punishment  is
still  pitiable.     Sin  inclines  a  good  man  to  sorrow  as  much  as  to  anger.

II.  Grief  for  the  miseries  of  others  will  be  induced  by  a  true  appreciation
OF  those  miseries  in  a  spirit  of  sympathy.  1.  A  spirit  of  sympathy,  Jeremiidi
felt  the  distresses  of  his  nation  as  private  sorrows.  He  was  a  true  patriot.  We  roust
feel  one  with  men  before  we  can  rightly  regard  their  troubles.  2.  A  true  apprecicUion
of  the  miseries  of  men.  Sympathy  implies  knowledge.  We  do  not  feel  aright  because
we  do  not  take  the  trouble  to  inquire  into  the  condition  of  others.  Much  apparent
h£.rd-heartedne8s  arises  simply  from  ignorance — but  culi>able  ignorance.  True  sym-
pathy will  feel  distress  for  the  real  evil  of  others,  not  only  for  their  transient  moods,
it  may  need  to  weep  over  those  who  foolishly  rejoice,  and  rejoice  for  those  who  weep
wholesome  tears  of  penitence.

III.  Grief  for  the  miseries  or  others  may  be  our  best  means  for  helping
THEM.  Barren  pity  is  a  mockery  when  active  aid  is  called  for.  1.  But  genuine
sympathy  is  the  strongest  motive  to  help.  2.  We  can  intercede  in  prayer  most
effectually  when  we  make  the  sorrows  of  others  our  own.  Christ's  sorrow  for  men  was
an  important  element  in  his  intercession.  3.  Sorrow  for  others  may  move  them  to
view  their  condition  in  a  true  light.  Tears  may  avail  where  warnings  are  lost.  Wo
have  no  greater  motive  to  repentance  than  can  bb  furnished  by  a  right  feeling  of  what
Christ  has  suffered  through  our  sin.

IV.  Grief  for  the  miseries  of  others  is  not  alone  sufficient  for  theie
DELIVERANCE.  Jcrcmiah  wept  over  his. nation,  yet  the  threatened  desolation  was  not
averted.  Christ  wept  over  Jerusalem,  but  Jerusalem  was  destroyed.  Though  God  is
•* grieved"  at  our  sin,  we  may  fall  into  ruin.  His  grief  is  a  strong  inducement  to
repentance,  but  every  man  must  repent  and  seek  deliverance  for  himself.

Vers.  4 — 8. — Falsehood,  L  Sin  cui^minates  in  universal  falsehood.  The
intellectual  aspect  of  sin  is  untruth.  Every  sin  is  a  lie.  The  triumph  of  sin  is  the
overthrow  of  all  truth  and  trust.

II.  False  relations  with  God  lead  to  false  relations  with  men.  Religion
and  morality  mutually  influence  each  other.  The  worship  of  a  god  known  to  be  lalse
develops  a  life  of  falseness.  The  hypocritical  service  of  GckI  is  likely  to  be  accompanied
by  dishonest  dealings  with  men.


244  THE  BOOK   OF  TUE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [en.  ix.  1—26.


III.  Habits  of  falsehood  are  fatal  to  human  wklfare.  Society  reposes  on
trust.  Commerce  is  impossible  without  f^ood  faith.  Universal  distrust  must  involve
social  disintegration.  1  he  state,  the  family,  all  mutual  organization,  must  then  fall  to
pieces.  Falsehood  only  succeeds  by  abusing  trust ;  but  by  so  doing  it  tends  to  destroy
trust ;  and  when  it  has  accomplished  this  end  it  will  be  ineffectual.  Universal  lying
would  be  useless  to  everybody.

IV.  Falsehood  is  regarded  by  God  as  a  peculiarly  wicked  sin.  For  this
especially  the  people  must  be  punished  (ver.  9).  Deceit  amongst  men  is  a  sin  against
God,  who  is  the  Truth  eternal  It  is  a  spiritual  sin,  a  sin  most  near  to  the  diabolical
(John  viii.  34).  It  is  a  sin  which  is  peculiarly  injurious  to  the  spiritual  nature  of  the
sinner,  tending  to  destroy  conscience  (Matt.  vi.  23).  It  involves  both  injustice  and
cruelty  towards  men.

Ver.  9. — A  visitation  of  Ood,  I.  Chastisement  is  a  visitation  of  God.  The
pbrase  "a  visitation  of  God"  has  been  too  much  confined  to  calamitous  events.  God
visits  us  every  hour  in  gentleness  and  mercy.  Still,  it  is  important  to  recognize  that
he  also  comes  in  chastisement.  He  comes,  does  not  simply  order,  but  himself  executes
chastisement.  1.  We  should  recognize  the  Divine  visitation.  Outwardly  the  trouble
may  have  a  human  origin.  The  calamities  of  the  Jews  arose  out  of  a  Chaldean
iuvasion,  but  the  prophets  saw  above  and  behind  that  invasion  a  Divine  purpose.
Gt)d  was  in  those  armies  from  Babylon.  God  is  in  our  troubles.  2.  This  fact  should
make  us  dread  to  incur  chastisement.  We  cannot  resist  it,  for  if  God  is  in  it,  all  his
might  and  majesty  are  there.  3.  This  fact  should  make  us  submit  to  the  chastise-
ment when  it  comes  &sju8t  and  good.  Its  origin  is  not  Satanic,  but  Divine.  If  God
is  in  it  he  must  ever  be  true  to  his  character ;  his  fiercest  anger  can  never  break  the
hounds  of  what  is  just  and  fair;  he  must  always  be  ready  to  show  mercy  when  this  is
possible  (Hab.  iii.  2).

II.  Chastisement  is  determined  by  the  personal  relations  between  God  and
men.  It  is  God's  soul  being  avenged.  God's  vengeance  is  quite  unlike  ours;  it  is  never
cruel  or  intemperate;  it  is  always  governed  by  justice  and  consistent  with  unchanging
love.  It  is,  however,  more  than  judicial  punishment.  It  is  an  action  arising  out  of
personal  feeling  and  determined  by  our  personal  offences  against  God.  Sin  is  more
than  transgression  of  Law, — it  is  ungrateful  rebellion  against  God;  and  punishment  is
more  than  the  cold  vindication  of  Law, — it  is  the  result  of  the  provoked  anger  of  God.
8uch  anger  is  right,  for  it  is  not  kindness  but  weakness  that  allows  a  father  to  receive
insult  from  a  child  unmoved.  The  greater  the  love,  the  greater  will  be  the  righteous
aoger  when  this  is  wronged.

III.  Chastisement  is  necessitated  by  the  conduct  of  men.  It  is  "  for  such  things"
and  "on  such  a  nation."  God  does  not  love  vengeance.  He  does  not  send  punish-
ment as  an  arbitrary  exercise  of  sovereignty.  Therefore  our  chastisement  is  virtually
in  our  own  hands.  Even  after  meriting  it,  we  alone  are  to  blame  if  the  full  force  of
the  blow  falls  upon  us.  For  God  has  provided  a  way  of  escape,  and  offers  forgiveness
to  all  who  repent  and  submit.  Therefore  it  is  foolish  for  men  to  complain  of  their
hard  lot  in  falling  under  the  storm  of  a  visitation  of  God  in  wrath.

IV.  The  necessity  for  chastisement  may  be  recognized  by  our  common
intelligence.  The  text  is  an  appeal  to  reason,  a  question  which  unbiassed  minds
could  answer  only  in  one  way.  If  chastisement  is  not  seen  to  be  reasonable,  it  must
he  either  (1)  because  the  depth  of  guilt  is  not  felt,  or  (2)  distorted  views  of  chastise-
ment have  been  entertained.     This  will  be  such  as  befits  the  offence.

V.  The  personal  characteristics  of  chastisement  involve  personal  elements
IN  redemption.  Hence  the  necessity  for  a  "propitiation."  Thus  Christ  redeems  us
by  becoming  a  Propitiation  for  our  sins  (1  John  ii.  2).

Vers.  12 — 16. — Tlie  causes  of  national  disaster,  1.  It  is  profitable  to  inquire
INTO  the  causes  OF  NATIONAL  DISASTER.  1.  Intellectually,  this  is  a  subject  of  profound
interest,  dealing  with  fundamental  principles  and  the  vast  issues  to  which  they  lead
when  working  on  the  largest  scale.  2.  Morally,  it  is  of  great  practical  importance  for
the  warning  it  supplies  to  all  nations.  The  sight  of  terrible  ruin  rushing  down  upon
a  people  is  appalling,  but  the  awe  with  which  it  strikes  us  will  not  have  much  whole-


CH.  IX.  1—26.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  246

some  effect  till  we  have  an  intelligent  appreciation  of  the  sources  from  which  it  comes,
and  are  thus  enabled  to  watch  them  and  guard  against  them.

II.  SpmrruAL  wisdom  is  requisite  fob  the  discernment  of  the  causes  of
NATIONAL  DISASTER.  They  do  not  lie  on  the  surface.  No  study  is  more  difficult  than
that  of  the  philosophy  of  history.  Unless  the  mind  is  awake  to  spiritual  facts,  the
inquiry  will  not  go  beyond  secondary  causes,  or  attem])tiDg  more  will  commit  injustice.
The  prophets  needed  inspiration  for  this  as  much  as  for  the  prediction  of  future  events.
No  mere  literary  historian  is  fit  for  the  work.  Only  a  prophet  can  be  fully  equal  to
it,  and  other  men  can  only  pursue  it  with  safety  when  they  walk  in  his  footsteps.
Hence  the  immense  value  of  the  historical  elements  of  the  Old  Testament  to  too
statesman.

III.  The  CHIEF  oaitses  of  national  disaster  are  moral.  Material  causes  are
visible  on  the  surface,  such  as  famine,  plague,  invasion,  revolution.  Political  causes
lying  deeper  may  be  easily  discerned,  such  as  diplomatic  complications,  class  divisions,
violent  changes  in  popular  sentiment.  But  beneath  all  such  influences  there  are  great
moral  causes.  1.  These  act  through  providence.  Gkxi  takes  note  of  the  conduct  of
nations,  judges,  ministers.  2.  They  also  act  directly.  Luxury  is  enervating ;  injustice
destroys  the  confidence  of  a  people  in  its  government,  eta

IV.  Once  revealed,  the  moral  causes  of  national  disaster  are  simple  and
intelligible.  The  prophets  make  these  clear  to  us  in  the  case  of  their  own  nation.
1.  Negatively,  the  causes  were  traced  to  disobedience  to  the  will  of  God,  culpable  because
this  was  well  understood — "  set  before  them."  2.  Positively,  they  were  found  in
wilful  stubbornness  and  demoralizing  idolatry.  God  was  the  shield  of  his  people.
When  he  was  forsaken  they  were  defenceless.  Nations  are  only  secure  while  they  are
governed  by  the  will  of  God,  by  justice  and  humanity.  Gx)dlcssness,  bearing  fruit  in
falsehood,  cruelty,  and  vicious  lawlessness  of  passion,  is  a  sure  source  of  national  ruin.
The  state  of  the  public  conscience  is  more  important  to  a  nation  than  that  of  its  army.

Vers.  23,  24. — False  boasting  and  true  confidence.  I.  False  boasting.  1.  We  are
inclined  to  overvalue  our  own  possessions.  The  wise  man  thinks  wisdom  the  one
source  of  security,  the  strong  man  strength,  the  rich  man  riches.  That  bulks  most
largely  which  lies  most  near  to  us.  2.  The  very  good  that  is  in  a  thing  may  deceive
us  by  tempting  us  to  overvalue  it.  Wisdom,  strength,  and  riches  are  all  good  in  their
way.  Trust  in  them  is  very  different  from  trust  in  fraud  and  violence.  Not  regarding
them  as  enemies,  we  are  in  danger  of  confiding  in  them  as  saviours  instead  of  simply
employing  them  as  servants.  3.  The  number  of  earthly  resources  leads  us  to  assume
that  security  must  be  found  in  some  of  them  at  least ;  for  when  one  fails  we  can  fall  back
on  another.  But  if  the  best  do  not  protect  in  the  extremity  of  danger,  will  inferior
aids  suffice  ?  Wisdom  is  greater  than  strength,  and  strength  than  riches.  If  wisdom
fails,  what  can  the  rest  do  for  us  ?  4.  The  variety  of  advantages  contained  in  earthly
resources  deceives  us  as  to  their  value.  Wisdom  promises  to  outwit  the  enemy  or
devise  some  means  of  evading  ruin.  Yet  the  wisdom  of  the  wisest  Jews  was  defeated
by  those  who  came  from  the  land  of  "  the  wise ; "  and  how  can  it  avail  against  the
supreme  wisdom  ?  Strength  as  physical  prowess  and  national  power  may  be  imposing
and  yet  not  almighty.  Samson  was  weak  under  a  woman's  wiles.  Goliath  fell  before
the  sling  of  the  stripling  David.  Riches  may  buy  much.  They  could  not  prevent
the  Chaldean  invasion.  They  cannot  buy  off  sickness,  disappointment,  death,  the
punishment  of  sin.  Nebuchadnezzar  found  the  possession  of  the  world  no  security
against  the  most  humiliating  affliction  (Dan.  iv.  28 — 33).  The  rich  fool  was  mocked
by  his  own  prudence  (Luke  xii.  16 — 21).

II.  True  confidence.  1.  This  is  to  be  sought  in  the  knowledge  of  Ood,  Wisdom,
the  best  of  earthly  resources,  is  not  sufficient  for  protection,  but  it  is  the  type  of  a
higher  wisdom,  wherein  is  the  secret  of  safety.  This  is  a  wisdom  which  concerns  itself,
not  with  petty  devices,  subtle  schemes,  cunning,  and  cleverness,  but  with  the  highest
knowledge,  bearing  fruit  in  "  the  fear  of  God  "  (Ps.  cxi.  10).  We  must  know  God  to
trust  him.  2.  The  knowledge  of  God  will  reveal  to  us  the  special  grounds  for
confidence  in  him,  viz.  (1)  loving-kindness,  disiiosing  him  to  help  the  needy;  (2)
justice,  making  it  apparent  that  he  will  concern  himself  in  human  affairs  as  the  King
ruling  all  into  order  j  and  (3)  righleou&ness^  showing  that  in  the  broadest  way  ho  will


246  TDE   BOOK  OP  THE   PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [en.  ix.  1—26.

maintain  the  right.  Hence  it  will  be  apparent  that  G(m1  can  and  will  hel})  us  only  in
accordance  with  these  principles  of  his  character ;  and  we  must  know  them,  not  only  to
learn  thereby  to  confide  in  him,  but  also  to  bring  ourselves  into  that  spirit  which  will
justify  us  in  expecting  his  mercy,  i.e.  reconciliation  to  his  love,  submission  to  his
go?emment,  and  obedience  to  his  righteous  will.

Vers.  25,  26. — Impartial  justice.  I.  Special  privtleoes  do  not  interfeue  with
THE  IMPARTIAL  EXERCISE  OF  DiviNE  JUSTICE.  Juduh  is  specially  privileged,  and  prizes
circumcision  as  a  seal  of  the  peculiar  favour  of  Heaven  (Gen.  xvii.  9 — 14).  Yet
Judah  must  take  its  place  in  the  indiscriminate  catalogue  of  corrupt  nations.  If
privileges  are  noted  in  God's  exercise  of  justice,  this  can  only  be  as  an  aggravation  of
guilt.  The  citizens  of  favoured  nations,  the  heirs  of  rank  and  wealth,  persons  whose
lives  have  been  peculiarly  successful  and  unvisited  with  the  usual  amount  of  trouble,
all  stand  in  this  position.  Their  present  happy  condition  is  no  guarantee  for  favour
in  the  day  of  Divine  judj:;ment,  but,  on  the  contrary,  a  reason  for  regarding  the
ingratitude  of  sin  as,  in  their  case,  the  more  culpable.

II.  The  observance  of  external  ordinances  has  no  influence  on  the  impartial
EXERCISE  OF  DiviNE  JUSTICE.  Their  utility  is  solely  as  regards  their  effect  on  men.
They  are  profitable  only  in  so  far  as  they  assist  the  corresponding  spiritual  acts,  which
are  all  that  God  takes  note  of  (Col.  ii.  11).  The  circumcised  in  body  who  are  not
circumcised  in  heart  will  suffer  just  as  if  they  had  never  been  circumcised  at  all.  The
ordinance  without  the  spirituality  is  an  offence  rather  than  a  pleasing  thing.  It  shows
knowledge ;  it  is  a  mockery  to  God.  This  must  be  so,  (1)  because  God  is  spirit,  and
can  only  be  served  spiritually ;  and  (2)  because  the  highest  justice  is  concerned  with
thoughts,  motives,  deeds  of  the  soul,  rather  than  with  the  ambiguous  actions  of  the
outer  life.

III.    No  EXCEPTIONS  WILL  BE  MADE  TO  THE  IMPARTIAL  EXERCISE  OF  DiVINE  JUSTICE.

All  kinds  of  nations  are  classed  together.  Cultivated  Egyptians  and  wild  Arabs,  scrupu-
lous Jews  and  idolatrous  Ammonites,  all  come  before  the  same  judgment-bar,  all  have
the  same  fair  trial  and  righteous  sentence.  1.  The  heathen  are  not  excluded  from  God's
judgment ;  for  (1)  he  is  the  God  of  all  the  earth,  and  of  those  who  ignore  him  as  well  as
of  those  who  recognize  him ;  (2)  the  heathen  have  a  light  of  nature  and  a  conscience
by  which  to  guide  their  conduct;  (3)  God's  judgment  is  reasonable,  and  can  adapt
requirement  to  opportunity,  so  that  the  heathen  will  have  as  just  treatment  as  those
who  are  more  privileged.  2.  The  Jews  and  professedly  religious  are  not  excluded.
Many  people  make  an  utterly  unwarrantable  assumption  that  their  respectability,
position  in  the  Church,  etc.,  are  such  that  the  stern  ordeal  of  the  judgment  is  not  for
them.    In  his  vision  of  judgment  Christ  made  no  such  exceptions  (Matt.  xxv.  31 — IG).


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Ver.  1. — Vicarious  grief.  It  is  a  common  occurrence  in  the  history  of  God's  Church
that  when  general  indifference  to  religious  truth,  to  impending  judgments,  or  depraved
spiritual  condition,  etc.,  is  exhibited  by  the  multitude,  one  or  at  most  a  few  are  sensible
of  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  evil.  Knowledge  in  such  a  case  is  nearly  always
sorrow.  This  is  intensified  when  remonstrances  are  unheeded,  and  efforts  of  reform  are
defeated.  It  is  the  righteous  man,  the  reformer,  who  is  most  affected  by  the  situation,
and  who  feels  most  keenly  the  disgrace  and  danger.

I.   In  THE  HIGHEST  THINGS  IT  IS  THE  FEW  THAT  MUST  FEEL  FOR  THE  MANY.     This  haS

been  the  law  from  the  beginning.  It  is  a  necessity  of  nature.  It  is  a  Divine  appointment.
Pure  feeling,  even  when  painful,  appears  as  a  stewardship  in  one  or  two  hearts,  perhaps
in  one  alone.  Joseph  is  moved  to  tears  at  the  heartlessness  of  his  brethren.  Jonathan
is  ashamed  for  his  father  Saul.  Elijah  laments  in  loneliness  and  despair  the  apostasy
of  Israel.  Jesus  weeps  over  Jerusalem ;  painfully  wonders  at  the  slowness  of  heart  to
believe  exhibited  by  his  own  disciples  ;  is  "  sore  amazed  "  at  the  cup  of  iniquity  he  has  to
drink.  Jeremiah  is  here  evidently  in  the  same  succession  of  vicarious  suffering.  Wo
see  the  same  principle  working  in  our  own  circle  of  acquaintance.  Men,  wuniun,  sorrow-
ing and  suffering  for  others,  who  are  themselves  unconscious  or  are  partially  so.


CH.  IX.  1—26.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,  217

II.  What  are  the  countervailinq  advantages  which  light  up  this  mystery?
It  cannot  be  wholly  to  the  detriment  of  those  in  whom  it  is  illustrated.  The  justice  of
God  is  involved  in  the  question.  1.  The  keenest  joys  spring  from  or  coincide  with  the
deepest^  purest  sorrows.  2.  By-and-hy  the  sorrow  will  transfer  itself  to  its  objects,  in
the  yrcue  of  repentance,  3.  In  at  least  one  illustrious  instance^  it  exerts  an  atoning,
mediatorial  influerioefor  sinners  with  Ood, — M,

Vers.  2,  3. — The  man  of  Ood's  longing  for  seclusion,  I.  It  is  the  natural  recoil
OF  A  PURE  heart  FROM  WICKEDNESS.  When  the  knowledge  and  love  of  Ood  are  in  the
heart,  sin  appears  more  loathsome.  The  love  of  goodness  will  show  itself  in  a  hatred
of  evil,  and  a  desire  to  be  separated  from  its  workers.  In  some  this  love  of  God  and
goodness  overpowers  even  the  natural  attachments  and  ties  of  life.  And  it  may  be
carried  to  such  an  excess  as  to  become  a  spiritual  disease,  in  its  way  as  sinful  as  the
causes  that  give  rise  to  it.  Monasticism  has  its  root  in  a  good  and  proper  feeling
carried  to  excess,  and  without  the  restraining  and  modifying  considerations  that  ought
to  accompany  it.     In  the  instance  before  us  (and  like  instances) —

II.  It  springs  from  no  selfish  motive.  Jeremiah  did  not  seek  for  the  "  luxury  "
of  grief;  sufficient  the  wanderer's  tent,  or  the  comfortless  caravanserai  of  the  desert.
Kor  has  he  any  desire  to  attitudinize.  It  is  a  loneliness  that  shall  not  be  conspicuous ;
a  losing  of  himself  amongst  strangers  who  care  not  for  him  and  notice  him  not.  Nor
did  he  seek  to  evade  the  duties  of  life.  If  he  separated  himself,  it  was  not  to  escape
from  the  impending  dangers  he  had  announced ;  nor  to  intermit  his  spiritual  activities.
'*  He  wished  there  to  weep  for  them  "  (Zinzendorf) ;  to  study  the  problem  in  fresh  and
more  hopeful  aspects  ;  to  recover  his  mental  and  spiritual  calm ;  to  recruit  his  spiritual
energies  for  a  new  and  more  successful  effort.  So  in  our  own  day,  the  underlying
motive  must  ever  determine  the  lawfulness,  the  character,  and  the  continuance  of  our
spiritual  retirements.

III.  God  did  not  reiiukb  it,  but  he  did  not  see  fit  to  gratify  it.  Here  the
h)nging,  if  it  ever  grew  into  a  prayer,  was  not  answered,  at  least  at  once,  or  in  the  way
C(.>nceived  of.  Whilst  the  day  of  grace  lasted,  and  God's  people  were  open  to  rejient
and  to  be  influenced  by  his  words,  he  is  detained  amongst  them.  When  all  possibilities
were  exhausted,  then  the  dungeon  of  the  king's  prison  or  the  shame  of  the  Egyptian
exile  might  serve  the  purpose.  But  even  then  the  essential  craving  was  satisfied.  There
is  a  longing  that  is  its  own  answer.  To  some  it  is  given  to  experience  solitude  and
spiritual  detachment  in  the  midst  of  the  busy  throng  of  transgressors  for  whom  they
yet  ceaselessly  work.  This  centrifugal  tendency  may  be  productive  of  greater  concen-
tration, real  compassion,  and  capacity  for  usefulness,  when  it  is  controlled  and  overcome
by  a  sense  of  overmastering  responsibility,  and  a  "  heart's  desire  and  prayer  to  Qvd  fur
Israel,  that  they  may  be  saved." — M.

Vers.  2 — 6. — Tlie  self -opposition  and  futility  of  the  sinner^s  life,  A  strong  argument
against  the  practice  of  a  thing  may  often  be  found  in  the  supposition  that  it  should
become  universal.  This  is  valid  in  the  case  of  the  practices  and  desires  of  wicked  men.
The  idea  of  Hobbes  concerning  the  original  state  of  human  society  is  ingenious  and
conceivable  from  this  very  reason,  were  it  not  contradicted  by  the  world's  history.

I.  One  sin  entails  another,  and  crime  leads  to  crime.    (Ver.  3.)

II.  Universal  wickedness  produces  universal  distrust  and  misery.    (Ver.  5.)

III.  Evil-doing  is  a  weary  and  fruitless  toil.

IV.  Its  futility  culminates  when  it  rohs  a  man  of  the  knowledge  and  fellow-
ship OF  God,  and  even  of  the  desire  for  them.    (Ver.  6.) — M.

Vers.  12 — 16. — The  affliction  of  Ood's  professed  people  an  enigma  to  he  explained,
I.  The  mystery.  This  consists  partly  in  the  particular  subjects  of  it,  and  partly  in
the  degree  to  which  it  has  gone.  It  is  spoken  of  here  prophetically  as  a  future  thing
that  has  already  taken  place ;  and  the  problem  is  stated  acconlingly  as  a  realization,  and
not  a  thing  only  conceived  of.  From  time  to  time  the  history  of  Israel  and  Judah
presents  such  scenes.  It  is  by  no  means  one  of  uninterrupted  progress.  There  are
backward  movements,  standings  still,  interruptions,  sharp  and  humiliating  national
disasters,  and  long  e^wchs  of  civil  war,  political  nonentity,  or  foreign  captivity.    1.  Yet


24a  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [en.  ix.  1— 2^.

have  there  not  been  many  gracious  promises  to  the  contrary  f  2.  On  the  whole,  the  past
reverses  of  Israel  have  been  retrievcl,  and  a  meafmre  of  coutinuous  progress  attained,
8.  The  special  affliction  referred  to  is  unj/rtcedenied,  and  its  result  would  almost  appear
to  be  final.  The  history  of  the  Christian  Church  and  of  individual  believers  presents
features  analogous  to  this.  The  slow  progress  of  the  world's  evangelization.  The  com-
parative absence  of  spiritual  blessing  in  the  midst  of  G^kI's  children.  Their  divisions,
scientific  scepticism,  or  unscientific  superstition,  like  parasites,  strangling  the  tree  of  the
Church  and  draining  away  its  life.  Or  the  mystery  apjiears  in  the  individual  Christian.
His  creed  is  orthodox,  his  behaviour  outwardly  prescntmg  little  that  is  blameworthy;
and  yet  worldly  business  is  a  constant  series  of  reverses  and  dishonourable  compromises ;
his  influence  is  lost ;  afflictions  come  upon  him,  and  he  cannot  bear  up  under  them;  the
peace  of  Christ  is  not  his  ;  etc.

II.  The  point  of  view  from  which  it  is  to  be  regarded.  This  very  important  to
be  determined.  The  apostate  people  of  Grod  fail  to  realize  the  extent  to  which  they
have  fallen,  and  confound  the  formal  rites  of  religion  with  its  spirit  and  reality.
They  at  first  attribute  it  to  natural  causes,  or  treat  it  as  a  temporary  thing  that  will
right  itself,  etc.  Ihe  heathen,  looking  on  db  extra,  imagine  that  the  Jehovah  of  Israel
is  no  longer  able  to  deliver,  or  that  he  has  ceased  to  care  for  her.  Here  it  is  declared  to
be  a  judgment  upon  apostasy — utter  departure  from  truth  and  righteousness,  and  the
sterner  because  of  that  fact.  And  when  we  look  at  all  the  circumstances  of  the  case,
this  interpretation  seems  more  probable — to  carry,  as  it  were,  its  evidence  with  it.
The  key,  therefore,  is  for  the  most  part  an  inward  one  ;  at  first,  at  any  rate,  wholly  so.
This  it  is  which  constitutes  the  main  element  of  difficulty  in  the  troubles  of  God's
people.  Hence  the  room  there  must  be  for  mistakes,  and  the  ease  with  which  a  wholly
erroneous  view  may  be  taken  with  superficial  probability.  And  this  suggests  lunu
large  a  part  of  the  Churches  function  is  fulfilled  in  merely  being  a  problem  and  a
mystery  to  the  carnal  mind.  When  judgment  begins  at  the  house  of  God,  it  is  time
for  all  attentively  to  look  on  and  inquire  why  it  is  so.  Greater  perils  lie  on  the  side
of  unfaithfulness  than  of  mere  unbelief.  And  in  the  last  resort  conscience  must  be
appealed  to  in  explanation  of  mysteries  of  reverse  and  trouble.  Thereby  God  is
knocking  at  the  door  of  the  heart  both  of  the  world  and  the  Church.  It  is  of  the
utmost  importance  that  we  settle  the  question  between  us  and  him.

III.  An  interpreter  wanted.  (\er.  12.)  When  men  are  at  a  loss,  or  there  is
radical  difference  of  opinion,  it  is  evident  that  some  authority  is  required  to  decide  the
question.  The  world  and  its  canons  are  by  the  nature  of  the  problem  ruled  out  of
court.  And  the  apostate  is  too  blinded  with  his  own  sin  and  too  callous  through
repeated  acts  and  prolonged  habits  of  wrong-doing  to  be  trusted  in  the  matter.  At
this  juncture  the  advantage  of  revelation  and  of  the  prophetic  office  appears.  So  far
as  God  is  concerned,  the  seer  speaks  with  the  authority  of  direct  inspiration  ;  so  for  as
the  culprit  is  concerned,  he  occupies  a  representative  position,  and  as  one  of  those
implicated,  yet  himself  innocent,  acts  as  general  conscience.  This  is  God's  way — to
raise  a  testimony  and  extract  a  confession  from  the  heart  of  the  transgressor  himself,
or  from  the  midst  of  those  upon  whom  his  judgments  fall.  And  the  same  end  is
accomplished  now  through  the  Spirit  and  the  Word.  The  saint  becomes  the  mouth-
piece of  the  Saviour,  and  the  world  is  convinced  of  "  sin,  of  righteousness,  and  of  judg-
ment."— M.

Ver.  21.— T^«  death  of  the  wicked  contrary  to  nature.  Various  respects  in  which
this  is  so :  it  is  sudden  ;  it  defies  all  the  resources  of  comfort  and  protection ;  it  is
untimely,  and  cuts  off  the  young  in  their  bloom — the  children  for  the  fathers'  sin,  the
hope  of  the  nation  and  the  family.  "Death  will  not,  as  an  enemy  lurking  without,
attack  those  only  who  venture  out  to  him,  but  will  assault  the  people,  penetrating
into  all  their  houses,  to  fetch  his  sacrifices"  (Nacgelsbach,  in  Lange).     Why  so ?

L  It  IS  BECAUSE  the  laws  of  God  and  of  nature  have  been  shamefully

TIOLATED.

II.  The  trial  and  punishment  of  the  confirmed  sinner  are  swiftly  removed
TO  another  judgment-seat.

III.  It  is  intended  as  a  demonstration  aqainst  evil  and  a  tbrrob  to  evil-

D0KB8. — M.


OH.  DL  1—263    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  549


Vers.  22 — 24. — The  knowledge  of  Ood  the  only  real  ^ glory'*  of  man.  Comparison
of  the  earthly  acquisitions  and  properties  of  the  natural  man  with  those  which  are
spiritual  and  Divine  frequent  in  Sicripture.  In  history  and  in  life  they  are  seen  in  com-
petition. It  is  not  that  the  one  claiss  of  gifts  is  to  he  wholly  despised  and  the  other
alone  sought.  A  correct  perspective  must  he  established.  It  is  the  "  glory  "  of  a  man
that  requires  in  the  first  place  to  be  determined.  After  that  is  settled^  all  other  things
will  take  their  due  place  and  precedency.

I.  Thb  ''globt''  of  man  must  depend  upon  the  end  for  which  he  has  beek
BROUGHT  INTO  EXISTENCE.  This  is  written  in  his  nature,  confirmed  by  providence,  and
made  clear  by  revelation.  In  the  words  of  the  Westminster  Catechism,  '*  The  chief  end
of  man  is  to  glorify  God,  and  to  enjoy  him  for  ever"  Everything  else  mnst  be
subordinated  to  this ;  but  if  pursued  in  its  place,  will  show  itself  to  be  a  perversion  of
his  nature,  and  will  end  in  calamity  and  misery.  How  very  few  care  to  satisfy  them*
selves  upon  this  momentous  question  I  Hence  the  necessity  for  the  teachings  and
warnings  of  experience.  1.  The  "  glory  "  of  man  wUl  he  declared  by  the  manner  in  which
the  circumsPjnces  of  hie  earthly  lot  affect  it  in  the  working  out  of  that  end.  Each
of  the  qualities  and  properties  upon  which  men  usually  pride  themselves  has  been  tried
in  this  way  and  found  deficient.  The  wisdom  of  the  world  has  a  thousand  times  been
shown  to  be  foolishness  before  Qod,  There  are  a  myriad  problems  for  which  it  has
no  key.  "Might"  has  been  reduced  to  nothingness  by  the  least  of  the  duties  and
experiences  of  the  spiritual  life.  Disease  and  death  can  bring  down  the  mighty  from
their  seats,  and  stay  the  greatest  worker  at  his  task.  Many  a  time  has  the  cherished
object  after  which  one  has  laboured  with  apparent  success  been  snatched  away  just
when  about  to  be  attained.  And  "  wealth  "  is  similarly  discredited.  The  moth  and  the
rust  can  corrupt  the  treasures  of  earth,  and  the  thief  breaks  through  and  steals  them
from  their  most  guarded  security.  The  accident  of  fortune  may  give  or  take  away  the
greatest  fortune.  And  when  death  comes,  all  these  earthly  possessions  have  to  be  left
behind.  They  cannot  avail  for  what  lies  beyond.  How  seldom  are  these  gifts  used  for
the  highest  end  1  And  how  unavailing  of  themselves  would  they  be  to  secure  it  1
2.  The  "glory  "  of  man  mtut  depend  upon  the  success  with  which  it  contributes  to  secure
thit  end,

II.  The  knowledge  of  God  is  indicated  uniostakablt  bt  these  tests  as  thb
ONLY  TRUE  "  OLORT  "  OF  MAN.  Gkxi  is  identified  with  the  ultimate  aim  of  our  bein^
He  made  us,  and  it  is  for  him  we  live.  Consequently,  the  better  we  know  him,  the
better  shall  we  be  able  to  serve  him.  1.  Imitation  of  Ood  will  spring  from  the  knoW'
ledge  of  him.  The  more  we  know  of  him  the  more  we  must  love  him,  and  admiration
will  lead  to  resemblance  in  spirit  and  in  life.  "  We  love  him,  because  he  first  loved  us."
2.  Knowledge  depends  on  and  leads  to  obedience,  (John  vii.  17.^  The  knowledge  of  God
sheds  light  upon  the  universe  and  life,  and  directs  the  soul  and  body  into  the  channels
of  health,  happiness,  and  usefulness.  3.  It  is  connected  with  and  culminates  in  Divine
fellowship.  In  this  way  the  character  and  presence  of  God  are  brought  into  close >t
contact  with  the  spirit  of  man,  his  character  is  moulded  into  the  image  of  the  Divine
original,  and  the  joys  of  communion  deepen  and  enlarge  into  the  blessedness  of
heaven.  ''  This  is  life  eternal,  [even  now]  to  know  thee  the  only  true  God,  and  Jesus
Christ,  whom  thou  hast  sent." — M.

Ver.  1. — The  testimony  of  tears.  Tears  are  an  unusual,  a  strange  sad  sight  in  a  strong
man.  But  here  Jeremiah  appears  utterly  broken  down.  He  abandons  himself  to  a  very
agony  of  sorrow.  His  tears  remind  us  of  those  of  our  Lord  and  of  St.  Paul.  But  they
are  also  a  relief  to  the  overburdened  heart.  Like  the  cry  of  the  sufifdrer  in  sore  pain.
We  are  glad  when  we  behold  one  enduring  some  crushing  sorrow  enabled  to  pour  forth
his  grief  in  tears.  The  heart-broken  prophet  has  evidently  felt  them  to  be  such  a  relief.
His  thoughts  of  his  country's  sorrows,  when  they  lie  too  deep  for  tears,  are  greater  than
he  can  h&ox.  He  would,  therefore,  that  he  mi^ht  be  able  continually  to  weep.  But
tears  are  admonitory.  They  bear  a  very  powerful  testimony,  which  we  shall  do  well  to
give  heed  to.    For  they  bear  witness—

I.  To  Hiff  PROFOUND  CONVICTIONS.  1.  In  regard  to  the  truth  of  the  message  he  has
delivered.  When  we  behold  God's  servants,  such  as  Jeremiah  and  St.  Paul  and  others,
labouring  with  all  energy  of  soul,  with  infinite  self-aacrificO|  ez^sed  to  every  form  ui


250  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  ix.  1—26.


ill,  and  ''with  many  tears,"  we  are  constrained  to  inquire  the  motive  of  such  a  life.
But  only  one  of  three  suppositions  is  possible.     (1)  Either  he  who  labours  is  a  deceiver.
He  is  consciously  acting  a  part.     But  this  supposition  in  regard  to  prophets  and  apostles
of  God's  Word  has  long  been  given  up.     "  The  world  has  renounced  almost  to  a  man
this  hypothesis.     It  refufes  to  believe  in  the  possibility  of  a  hypocrite  whose  writing;:!!
inculcate  and  whose  conduct  exemplifies  the  highest  order  of  moral   excellence ;    it
refuses    to    believe    in   a  benevolent,  modest,    self-denying,  high-minded,    humble,
magnanimous  liar,  in  whom  falsehood  speaks  with  the  very  tongue,  looks  through  the
very  eyes,  and  personates  the  very  gestures  and  tones  of  truth ;  it  refuses  to  believe
that  a  man  with  no  earthly  motive  for  it,  and  every  earthly  motive  against  it,  should
spend  the  best  part  of  a  lifetime  in  cheating  men  into  truth  and  virtue  which  he  had
himself  utterly  renounced  "  (H.  Rogers).    But  if  this  hypothesis  be  rejected,  then  there
is  another.      (2)  He  has  deceived  himself.      He   is   the  victim  of  enthusiasm,  the
unconscious  agent  of  a  bewildered  and  disordered  brain.     But  this  hypothesis  also  will
not  bear  investigation.     For  such  enthusiasms  are  generally  short-lived,  they  are  soon
detected,  and  the  common  sense  of  mankind  refuses  to  i>articipate  in  them.     No  instance
can  be  found  of  a  mere  enthusiast  persuading  whole  nations  and  convincing  the  purest,
the  most  sober,  and  the  most  thoughtful  of  whole  communities,  and  in  such  manner
that  the  falsehood  thus  originated  shall  live  on  and  acquire  power  over  men's  minds
increasingly.     And  there  are  other  tests  whereby  enthusiasm  may  be   discriminated
from  the  deliberate  convictions  of  the  sober  mind,  and  every  one  of  such  tests,  when
applied  to  the  history  of  faithful  witnesses  for  Grod's  truth,  fail  to  show  that  these  wit-
nesses were,  though  not  dishonest,  yet  merely  mistaken  enthusiasts.     There  remains,
therefore,  (3)  only  the  other  alternative,  that  the  message  which  they  delivered  with  so
much  earnestness  was  true.     And  the  tears  of  the  prophet  and  apostle  do  alike  bear
this  testimony,  and  its  force  men  have  everywhere  felt.     And  would  we  convince  an
unbelieving  world  of  the  truths  we  profess  to  hold,  we  must  manifest  more  of  a  like
conviction.     If  some  wan,  worn,  emaciated  preacher,  bearing  on  him  evidently  the
marks  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  whose  whole  life  had  been,  like  that  of  Jeremiah  or  St.  Paul,
one  long  sacrifice  for  the  truth, — if  such  a  one  could  appear  amongst  us,  then  would  the
world  believe,  as  it  now  altogether  refuses  to  whilst  those  who  profess  belief  show  such
few  tokens  of  the  reality  of  their  belief.     2.  In  regard  to  the  dread  peril  of  those  who
disobey  Qod,     We   know  with  what  impassioned  earnestness  Jeremiah  had  pleaded
with  his  infatuated  countrymen ;   how  he  had  exhorted,  implored,  and  wept  in  his
endeavour  to  win  them  from  their  wicked  ways.     And  now,  when  it  seemed  all  in
vain,  we  behold  him  sunk  in  sorrow,  dissolved  in  tears.     Wherefore  this?     Were  the
theory  of  the  universalist  true,  that  there  is  no  "  fearful  looking  for  of  judgment,"  that
all  will  be  made  blessed  in  the  coming  hereafter,  irrespective  of  what  they  have  been  or
what  their  conduct  in  this  life,— then  such  tears  as  we  are  contemplating  now  would  be
unmeaning.     Had  the  prophet  held  such  views,  had  our  Lord,  had  St.  Paul,  their  deep
distress  would  have  been  inexplicable,  because  altogether  uncalled  for.    Or  even  if  the
theory  of  those  who  hold  that  "death  ends  all"  been  that  of  God's  servants,  still  such
distress  would  be  far  more  than  could  bo  accounted  for.     Or  even  if  it  were  that  only
the  blessedness  of  the  righteous  were  missed,  and  all  others  would  simply  perish,  then
too  the  future  of  the  ungodly  would  call  for  no  such  sorrow.     Or  that  by  such  devices
as  those  of  the  Romish  Church — Masses,  indulgences,  and  the  like — the  guilty  soul,
though  indeed  its  doom  were  terrible,  yet  it  might  by  these  devices  be  rescued  from  such
doom, — then  too  there  could  have  been  no  tears  such  as  these.     But  contemplating
the  overwhelming  sorrow  of  men  like  Jeremiah  when  beholding  the  judgment  of  the
ungodly,  we  are  shut  up  to  the  conviction,  which  evidently  possessed  him  so  profoundly,
that  it  is  a  fearful  thing  for  an  unforgiven  man  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living
God.    3.  In  regard  to  the  exhaustion  of  all  present  resources  of  help.     Could  Jeremiah
have  done  anything  to  turn  aside  that  judgment  which  he  so  vividly  and  with  such
distress  anticipated,  he  would  not  have  given  himself  up  to  tears.      They  are  the
evidence  that  all  resources  are  exhausted,  that  nothing  more  can  be  done,  that  as  ho  says
(ch.  vi.  29),  "  The  bellows  are  burned."    The  language  of  such  tears  is  the  voice  of  God
saying,  concerning  the  hardened  and  impenitent,  **  Ho  is  joined  to  his  idols :  let  him
alone."    God  save  us  all  from  having  to  shed,  and  still  more  from  causing,  such  tears
as  these.    But  they  bear  witness  also —


CH.IX.  1— 26.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  2&1

II.  To  PROFOUND  COMPASSION.  He  who  has  known  the  conipas«ion  of  God  for  his
own  soul  will,  in  proportion  to  the  depth  of  that  knowledge,  feel  compassion  for  the  souls
of  others.  Indifference  and  unconcern  are  no  longer  possible  to  him  who  knows  the
love  of  GK)d  when  ho  sees  men  perishing  in  sin.  "  The  love  of  Christ  constraineth  "  him.
And  the  same  compassion,  thus  begotten,  leads  him  to  mourn  when  the  offer  of  Ood's
mercy  is  refused.  Such  tears,  being  interpreted,  tell  of  his  passionate  but  useless
desire  that  the  sinner's  doom  h(id  h^n  averted.  Gf.  David's  exceeding  bitter  cry,  "  0
Absalom,  my  son,  my  son  I "  etc.  And  they  are  made  to  flow  the  more  freely  by  the
remembrance  that  that  lost  condition  mi(/ht  have  been  so  altogether  different.  There
Avas  no  necessity  for  it.  That  which  could  not  have  been  avoided,  which  we  feel  to
have  been  inevitable,  we  bear  with  more  calmness.  But  when  there  is  the  conscious-
ness, such  as  David  had  concerning  Absalom,  that  he  might  have  come  to  an  end  so
different,  to  an  end  as  honourable  and  blessed  as  this  was  disgraceful  and  miserable,
that  reflection  made  his  tears  flow  faster  than  before.  And  when  it  is  not  mere  folly
but  grievotu  sin  which  has  brought  God's  judgment  upon  men,  then  the  compassionate
heart  grieves  yet  more ;  a  further  drop  of  bitterness  is  infused  into  the  cup,  and  such
tears  as  we  are  contemplating  have  this  sorrow  in  them  as  well  as  the  others  we  have
spoken  of.  And  that  now  there  is  no  hope,  no  remedy, — this  is  the  last  and  worst
reflection  which  wrings  the  compassionate  heart  with  uttermost  grief.  Jeremiah
beholds  the  house  of  Judah  "  left  unto  them  desolate ; "  the  daughter  of  his  people  not
merely  "  hurt,"  but  slain.  How  is  it  that,  with  like  reasons  for  such  compassion  as  that
of  Jeremiah,  we  know  so  little  of  it  ?  "  Rivers  of  waters  run  down  mine  eyes,  because
they  keep  not  thy  Law  "—so  spoke  God's  servant  in  the  hundred  and  nineteenth  psalm*
But  who  can  say  that  now  ?    Compassionate  Saviour,  give  us  of  thy  mind.

III.  To  THE  BEHOLDERS  OP  SUCH  GRIEF,  1.  Are  you  wotkers  for  Oodf  Then
remember  that  disappointment  and  present  failure  have  been  the  lot  of  many  of  the
noblest  of  the  servants  of  God.  There  is  a  goodly  fellowship  of  such.  2.  Are  you
believers  in  Oodf  Then  remember  his  sure  promise  as  to  what  shall  follow  this
**  sowing  in  tears,"  this  "  going  forth  weeping,  bearing  precious  seed."  We  are  not  to
think  that  we  have  seen  the  last  result  of  our  toil  because  that  which  we  do  see  is  so
distressing.  3.  Are  you  rejecters  of  Ood  f  Then  remember  that  GKxi  puts  such  tears
"  in  his  bottle,"  and  they  are  treasured  by  him  ;  and  their  testimony,  whilst  it  will  be
for  the  salvation  of  those  who  have  shed  them,  will  be  far  more  terrible  judgment
against  those  who  have  caused  them.  "  Weep  not  for  mo,"  said  our  Lord  on  his  way
to  the  cross,  "  but  weep  for  yourselves,  and  for  your  children.  ...  If  they  do  these  things
in  a  green  tree,  what  shall  be  done  in  the  dry  ?  "  Yes,  these  tears  tell  of  the  sorrows  of
God's  people,  but  they  predict  a  worse  sorrow  still  for  his  hardened  foes.  Look,  then,
O  thou  who  hardenest  thyself  against  God,  and  ask  thyself,  **  If  this  be  the  sorrow  I
have  caused,  what  shall  that  be  which  I  shall  have  to  bear  ? "  Remember  that  it  is
not  only  here  that  there  are  tears,  but  in  the  future  abode  of  the  impenitent  it  is  dis-
tinctly declared, ''  There  shall  be  weeping."  Then  cease  to  cause  such  lears  here,  that
you  may  never  have  to  shed  tears  far  more  bitter  there. — C.

Ver.  1. — The  moral  degradation  of  women.  The  expression,  "  the  slain  of  the
daughter  of  my  people,"  suggests  this  subject.  Therefore  wo  may  thus  apply  the
prophet's  words.    Note—

I.  The  moral  degradation  of  the  daoghters  of  a  people  is  a  just  cause  fob
THE  deepest  sorrow.  For  think  of  what  and  how  much  is  slain  in  these  slain  ones.
The  ruin  of  health,  and  the  early  and  often  dreadful  death,  are  the  least  that  is  slain.
Happiness  is  slain — that  of  the  victim,  and  of  those  to  whom  she  was  once  precious.
The  joyous  hopes  once  cherished.  The  influence  which  might  have  been  so  pure  and
purifying,  now  corrupt  and  corrupting.  The  character  once  honoured,  now  dragged  in
the  mire.  The  soul,  in  all  its  moral  worth  and  spiritual  energies  and  desires,  that  too
is  slain.  Therefore,  when  contemplating  such  cruelly  slain  ones,  the  prophet's  piteous
cry  of  angmsh  is  no  more  than  such  utter  woe  constrains.

II.  But  such  sorrow  should  turn  into  scorn  and  wrath  for  the  slayers  of
THESE  slain.  Bcware  of  the  hideous  complacency  with  which  the  world  regards  such
murderers.     Pray  to  be  kept  from  the  paths  of  such  "  bloody  men."

III.  But  such  borrow  should  ^0T  forget  that  there  is  a  Divine  Spirit  that


862         THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,  [ch.  ix.  1— 26.

CAN  "  BBEATHK  UPON  THESE  SLAIN,  THAT  THEY  MAY  LIVE."      The  Spirit  of  Christ  did  SO

breathe  upon  one  such,  and  she  lived.     He  said  to  iier,  "  Thy  sins  are  forgiven.  .  .  .
Thy  faith  hath  saved  thee ;  go  in  peace  "  (Luke  vii.  36 — 50).— C.

Ver.  2. — Sighings  after  the  wilderness.  The  text  reminds  us  of  Ps.  Iv.  5,  "Oh  that
I  had  wings,"  etc. !  of  Elijah's  longing  that  he  might  die  ;  of  the  similar  dejection  of
Moses.  Even  our  Lord  said,  "O  faithless  generation,  how  long  shall  I  be  with  you?
how  long  shall  I  suffer  you?  "    But  such  desire  as  that  of  the  text  is  in  itself —

L  Unnatural.  We  are  formed  to  mingle  with  our  fellow-men,  to  live  with  them,
not  away  from  them.  1.  It  is  in  intercourse  with  them  life  becomes  interesting  to  us.
We  are  taken  out  of  ourselves,  fresh  sources  of  pleasure  and  advantage  are  continually
opened  up  to  us.  2.  Sympathy  also  is  in  fellowship.  Our  joys  are  more  than  doubled
and  our  sorrows  more  than  halved  by  the  power  of  that  sympathy  which  solitude  can
never  know.  3.  Opportunities  of  doing  good  are  not  to  be  had  "  in  the  wilderness,"
and  when  we  "  leave  "  our  people.  4.  Nor  are  the  benefits  they  can  confer  on  us  to  be
found  there.  Heart  and  mind  and  soul  are  blessed  by  companionship  and  injured  by
solitude  and  isolation.  Hence  such  wish  as  that  of  the  text  is,  apart  from  the  motive
g^iven,  unnatural.

IL  And  it  may  be  wrong.  1.  It  is  so  when  it  is  the  child  of  impatience.  Doubt-
less there  is  much  often  to  try  our  patience,  and  to  make  us  wish  that  we  could  have
done  with  it  all.  But  we  should  not  think  much  of  the  labourer  who,  because  the  toil
was  arduous,  threw  up  his  work  ere  the  day  was  done ;  or  of  the  soldier  who  left  in  the
Viidst  of  the  campaign.  2.  Yet  more  culpable  is  it  when  it  springs  from  indolence.
There  are  many  who  dislike  real  work  in  any  form.  Exertion  and  efifort  are  shrunk
from  everywhere.  And  in  their  religious  life  it  is  the  same.  And  from  such  poor
motive  such  wish  as  that  of  the  text  sometimes  springs.  3.  Still  worse  is  it  when  it
comes  of  unbelief  When  all  faith  is  gone,  and  the  dark,  dread  falsehood  begins  to  get
hold  of  a  man,  that  rest  is  only  to  be  gained  by  breaking  out  of  this  life  altogether.

III.  But  it  may  proceed  from  causes  which  can  only  excite  oub  compassion.
1.  Extremity  of  suffering :  Job,  Paul.  2.  Experience  of  human  infidelity,  as  in  Ps.  Iv.
8.  When  all  the  purposes  for  which  Gk)d  ordained  us  to  live  in  fellowship  with  one
another  are  unattainable.  Such  was  the  case  with  Jeremiah.  Pleasurable  interest
in  such  fellowship  as  was  his  could  not  be  for  him,  but  only  daily  vexation  of  his
righteous  soul  (cf.  Lot).  Sympathy  he  could  neither  give  nor  find.  Ever  so  desirous
of  doing  them  good,  they  spurned  and  despised  all  his  efforts.  And  as  to  gaining  good
from  them,  it  was  but  a  continual  contact  with  pollution.  What  wonder,  then,  that
Jeremiah  longed  to  be  away  from  such  a  scene?  "The  hermits  of  the  East,  the
anchorites  of  the  desert,  are  more  closely  linked  with  ourselves  in  feeling  than  some  at
first  may  think.  Our  impulses  are  often  identical  with  theirs ;  and  if  our  actions  vary
it  is  because  our  standard  of  right,  not  our  nature,  is  changed.  In  the  life  of  each  man
there  are  hours  when  he  sighs  for  the  desert ;  hours  when,  bowed  down  by  the  sense  of
sin  in  himself  and  the  sight  of  it  in  others,  wearied  out  by  striving  to  teach  a  stiff-
necked  generation,  disheartened  at  seeing  the  *  good  cause '  advance  so  slowly,  he  can
scarcely  refrain  from  following,  in  his  small  way,  the  example  of  that  emperor  who
exchanged  the  palace  for  the  cloister,  and  the  crown  for  the  cowl."  These  are
moments  such  as  came  to  Jeremiah  now.  "  The  Emperor  Charles  uttered  in  deeds
what  we  have  all  breathed  in  sighs.  We  do  and  we  must  long  to  flee  away  and  be  at
rest ;  but  then  it  must  remain  a  longing,  and  nothing  more  "  (G.  Dawson).

IV.  And  God  has  made  provision  fob  its  satisfaction.  Not  by  giving  us  per-
mission to  retire  to  desert  solitudes,  except,  as  with  Elijah  and  Paul,  it  may  be  for
a  while  to  prepare  for  future  and  higher  service.  But  in  the  manner  that  the  psalmist
suggests  where  he  says,  "Oh  that  I  had  wings  like  a  dove!  for  then,"  etc.  Yes,  wings
like  a  dove  will  btar  us  into  the  present  rest  of  God,  The  dove  is  the  emblem  of  meek^
ness.  Like  the  lamb  amongst  the  beasts,  so  the  dove  amongst  the  birds  is  the  symbol  of
lowly  meekness  and  gentleness.  But  lowly  meekness  is  the  way  to  rest,  the  rest  God
gives,  the  peace  of  God.  Listen  to  our  Saviour:  "Come  unto  me,  all  ye  that  labour
.  .  .  Take  my  yoke.  .  .  .  For  I  am  meek  and  lowly  in  heart :  and  ye  shall  find  rest
unto  your  souls"  (Matt.  xi.).  The  dove  is  the  emblem  of  purity.  It  was  not  only  amongst
those  birds  that  were  counted  clean,  but  was  especially  selected  for  presentation  to  God


CH.  IX.  1—26.]    THE  BOOK  OP   THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  25»

in  sacrifice,  as  that  which  was  pure  alone  could  be.  The  doves  were  allowed  to  fly
about  the  temple  and  to  rest  on  its  roofs  and  pillars  (see  H.  Hunt's  picture  of  the
'Finding  in  the  Temple').  But  purity  opens  the  door  of  heaven,  and  enraptures  the
beholder  with  the  beatific  vision  there.  **  Blessed  are  the  pure  in  heart :  for  they  shall
see  Ghxl."  Wings  are  these,  therefore,  well  likened  to  those  of  a  dove,  "  covered  with
silver,  and  her  feathers  with  yellow  gold."  Yes, "  keep  thyself  unspotted  from  the  worliJ,**
and  God  shall  so  manifest  himself  to  thee  that  thy  soul  shall  be  at  rest,  let  the  wicked
rage  around  thee  as  they  may.  And  the  dove  was  the  selected  symbol  of  the  Holy
Spirit.  '*  I  saw  the  Holy  Spirit  descending  like  a  dove,"  said  John  the  Baptist.  But
his  wings  will  bear  thee  where  thou  mayest  see  the  fatherly  love  of  God,  his  wisdom
guiding  all,  and  his  gracious  purpose  being  more  and  more  accomplished.  "  He  will
take  of  the  things  of  Christ  and  show  them  unto  thee."  And  in  them  thou  shoLt  have
peace.  The  psalmist's  passionate  longing  may  then  be  fulfilled  for  us.  We  may  have
"  wings  like  a  dove."  These,  of  meekness,  purity,  and  the  blessed  Spirit  of  God.  And
so,  without  quitting  the  station  assigned  us  or  departing  to  any  wildemessi  we  may
have  even  now  the  rest  of  God. — C.

Ver.  7. — The  doings  and  doom  of  deceit.  The  verses  from  ver.  2  to  the  text  set
forth  its  doings,  and  the  text  and  remainder  of  the  chapter  foretell  its  doom.     Note—

I.  Deceit.  It  is  a  terrible  indictment  that  the  prophet  brings.  He  afiBrms  that
deceit  is :  1 .  Universal,  Ver.  2, "  They  be  aZZ,"  etc.  Ver.  6, "  Thine  habitation  is  in  the
midst  of  deceit;"  t.e.  it  is  evenrwhere,  all  around  you.  That :  2.  It  has  broken  up  the
most  sacred  relationships :  "  They  be  all  adulterers  "  (ver.  2).  3.  It  has  turned  their
solemn  assemblies  into  a  conclave  of  liars  (ver.  2).  4.  It  is  practised  deliberately,
Ver.  3 :  as  a  man  deliberately  bends  and  takes  aim  with  his  bow.  5.  It  has  mounted
the  judge's  seat  (ver.  3 ;  cf.  true  translation  of  phrase,  "  They  are  not  valiant  for  the
truth  "^.  6.  It  has  smoothed  the  way  for  all  evil.  "  They  proceed  from  evil  to  evil "
(ver.  3).  7.  It  has  destroyed  all  confidence  (1)  between  neighbours,  (2)  between
brethren  (ver,  4).  8.  It  is  diligently  studied.  Ver.  5,  "They  have  taught,"  etc.
'*  They  take  the  utmost  pains  to  go  crookedly."  9.  It  is  cruel  and  deadly  in  its  aims
(ver.  8).  In  view  of  a  condition  of  things  so  horrible,  how  unanswerable  is  the  demand
of  ver.  9,  '*  Shall  I  not  visit  them  for  these  things  ?  "  etc.  I  It  will  be  found  in  all  the
judgments  of  God  upon  nations  that  those  judgments  have  never  come  until  there  waa
no  other  way  of  dealing  with  such  nations,  if  the  moral  life  of  the  world  was  to  be
maintained.

II.  Its  Domos.  1.  It  had  made  dwelling  amongst  them  intolerMe  to  the  righteous^
(Gf.  ver.  2.)  Jeremiah  longs  to  get  away  from  them.  The  most  desolate  solitude
would  be  preferable  to  living  amid  such  a  people  as  this.  It  is  an  ominous  sign  for  a
community  when  the  godly,  however  compassionate,  however  long-suiTering,  can  no
longer  endure  to  dwell  in  their  midst.  2.  It  had  mctde  the  thought  of  Qod  intolerable
to  themselves.  Vers.  3,  6,  "They  know  not  me,  saith  the  Lord.'  Just  as  a  man
mav  meet  one  whom  he  desires  to  have  nothing  to  do  with,  but  when  he  meets  him
will  pass  him  as  if  he  did  not  know  him ;  so  deceit  had  made  these  people,  as  it  makes
all  such,  desirous  of  having  nothing  to  do  with  God.  Therefore  they  will  not  recognize
or  acknowledge  him  in  any  way.  3.  And  at  last  it  had  made  them  intolerable  to  God.
Ver.  7 :  God  asks,  "  What  else  can  I  do  for  the  daughter  of  my  people  ?  "  (cf.  Expo-
sition). There  was  nothing  now  but  for  the  judgment  of  God  to  go  forth  against  them.
Therefore  note^

III.  Its  dock.  Ver.  7, "  Therefore  thus  saith,"  etc.  And  down  to  ver.  22  these
awful  judgments  of  Gkxi  are  set  forth.  Inquire,  therefore,  what  there  is  about  deceit
which  renders  it  so  hateful  in  the  sight  of  God.  1.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  it  is  so.
'*  Lying  lips  are  an  abomination  unto  the  Lord  "  (cf.  Ps.  xv.;  Acts  v.).  <*  All  liars  shnll
have  their  part  in  the  lake  that  burneth,"  etc.  2.  And  some  of  the  reasons  are :  (1)
Deceit  cometh  from  Satan,  who  was  "  a  liar  from  the  beginning,"  and  "  the  father  of
lies."  It  was  by  his  lies  that  our  first  parents  were  deceived  and  sin  was  brought  into
the  world.  (2)  It  is  the  source  of  infinite  misery  and  distress.  It  is  *'  the  deceits  of
the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil "  which  still  work  well-nigh  all  our  sorrow  and  our
shame.  (3)  It  tends  to  the  destruction  of  human  scxsicty.  All  our  well-being  and
comfort  depend  upon  good  faith  being  maintained  between  man  and  man.    "  But  now^


264  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [en.  ix.  1—26.


where  fraud  and  falsehood,  like  a  plague  or  cancer,  comes  over  to  invade  society,  the
band  which  held  together  the  parts  compounding  it  presently  breaks,  and  men  are
thereby  put  to  a  loss  where  to  league  and  to  fasten  their  dependencies,  and  so  are
forced  to  scatter  and  shift  every  one  for  himself.  Upon  which  account  every  notori-
ously false  person  ought  to  be  looked  upon  and  detested  as  a  public  enemy,  and  to  be
pursued  as  a  wolf  or  a  mad  dog,  and  a  disturber  of  the  common  peace  and  welfare  of
mankind;  there  being  no  particular  person  whatsoever  but  has  nis  private  interest
concerned  and  endangered  in  the  mischief  that  such  a  wretch  does  to  the  public  **  t
(South).  A  sin,  therefore,  so  destructive  of  the  well-being  of  his  children  cannot  but
be  abominable  in  the  eyes  of  the  Father  of  us  all.  3.  It  shuts  Qod  out  of  the  heart
altogether.  €K)d  has  made  us  for  himself,  but  deceit  bars  fast  the  door  of  man's  heart
against  him.  God  can  only  be  worshipped  in  spirit  and  in  truth  ;  but  deceit  renders
this  primary  condition  of  such  worship  unattainable.  4.  But  God  in  bis  anger
remembers  mercy.  Ver.  7,  "  Behold,  I  will  melt  them,  and  try  them,"  that  is  to  say,
he  will,  as  the  smelter  casts  the  metal  into  the  fire  not  to  destroy  but  to  refine  it,  to
purge  away  its  dross,  and  then,  that  being  done,  tests  and  tries  it  to  see  that  the  pro-
cess has  been  effectual;  so  God  will  send  his  judgments  upon  his  people,  not  to  destroy,
but  to  purify  them,  and  he  will  afterwards  test  them  again,  give  them  another  oppor-
tunity of  serving  him.  He  might  have  destroyed,  but  this  he  will  not  do.  He  "  will
melt  them,  and  try  them."  But  less  than  this  he  cannot  do.  '''What  else,"  etc.?  he  asks.
It  is  a  dread  process ;  Judah  and  Jerusalem  found  it  so,  and  all  who  compel  God  to
cast  them  into  such  a  crucible  find  it  to  be  a  dread  process.  Our  blessed  Saviour  wept
over  Jerusalem,  although  he  told  them  that  when  next  they  saw  him  they  should  say,
**  Blessed  is  he  that  cometh  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord."  It  was  the  thought  of  that
furnace  for  fire  through  which  they  must  be  passed  ere  they  would  come  to  this  better
mind  that  drew  forth  those  tears.  Let  none,  therefore,  deem  the  judgment  of  God  a
subject  for  trifling  with,  because,  as  here,  God  says  its  purpose  is  to  '*  melt  and  try,"
rather  than  to  destroy.

Conclusion.  Let  this  consideration  of  the  doings  and  doom  of  deceit  lead  us  to
listen  to  the  Lord's  appeal,  "  Oh,  do  not  this  thing  that  I  hate  1 " — C.

Vers.  10 — 22. — The  terrible  threatenings  of  love.  There  are  few  more  awful  passages
of  Scripture  than  this.  Ibe  doom  denounced  on  the  guilty  people  is  indeed  dreadful.
Nevertheless  that  doom  had  not  yet  descended.  There  was  a  merciful  pause,  during
which  space  was  given  for  repentance.  Meanwhile  the  prophet  was  bidden  to  utter
these  threatenings.    Notice —

I.  How  TERRIBLE  THEY  ARE.  1.  In  themselves.  The  fertile  bills  and  pastures  of
their  country  shall  be  laid  waste,  so  that  no  living  creature  can  find  food  (ver.  10).
Jerusalem  is  to  be  utterly  destroyed  and  desolate  (ver.  11).  The  deep  anguish  of  the
people — their  very  meat  to  be  as  "  wormwood,"  and  their  drink  as  "  water  of  gall "  (ver.
16).  They  shall  be  carried  captive  and  scattered  among  the  heathen,  and  even  then
shall  not  escape  the  sword  (ver.  16).  They  shall  be  overwhelmed  with  sorrow,  their
eyes  shall  gush  out  with  tears  (vers.  17 — 19).  Death  shall  reign  everywhere  (ver.  21) ;
and  shall  be  accomfianied  with  deepest  degradation  (ver.  22).  It  is  not  possible  to
conceive  of  more  hopeless  misery  than  is  portrayed  in  these  vivid  descriptions  of  the
wrath  that  was  to  come.  2.  Because  of  their  righteousness.  Unrighteous  suffer-
ing can  be  borne,  and  those  who  bear  it  are  bidden  by  the  Lord  to  count  themselves
as  "blessed"  because  of  it  (Matt.  v.  11, 12).  And  sorrows  that  come  to  us  in  the
course  of  God's  providence,  and  the  reason  of  which  we  do  not  know,  these  we  can  bear
sustained  by  the  faith  of  the  Father's  love.  But  when  sore  suffering  is  sent  to  us  as
the  direct  punishment  of  sin,  and  the  righteous  because  so  deserved  anger  of  God  is
evident,  then  those  consolations  which  are  open  to  us  under  other  sufferings  are  closed
to  us  under  these.  The  bitter  reflection,  "  It  was  all  our  own  fault ;  it  might,  it  ought
to  have  been  avoided,"  makes  the  pain  we  endure,  and  the  calamities  that  overtake  us,
more  terrible  than  otherwise  they  could  i)ossibly  be.  We  take  refuge  from  man's  anger
and  from  ordinary  sorrows  in  God's  love,  but  sin  that  has  brought  down  God's  righteous
judgment  has  also  closed  against  us  that  most  blessed  shelter  and  every  shelter,  and
we  are  left  without  defence.  And  another  element  in  their  terribleness  is :  3.  The  cer^
tainty  of  their  fulfilment,    "  God  is  not  mocked :  whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that  %hM


CH.  IX.  1—26.]    THE   BOOK   OF  THE  PROPIIRT  JEREMIAH.  256


he  also  reap."  The  thrcatenings  of  God  are  not,  as  are  many  of  the  throatenings  of  men,
mere  empty  vapourings,  great  swelling  words,  never  designed  to  be  fulfilled.  Let  the
records  of  all  human  history,  of  all  human  lives,  whether  told  of  within  or  without
the  pages  of  the  Bible,  attest  the  absolute  certainty  of  fulfilment  which  evermore
characterizes  the  threatenings  of  God.  When  and  where  has  he  ever  threatened  and
failed  to  fulfil  his  threat  ?  Let  the  Fall,  the  Flood,  the  destruction  of  Sodom,  the
plagues  on  Egypt,  the  deaths  of  the  generation  of  unbelievers  in  the  wilderness,  and
ten  thousand  instances  more,  all  prove  the  steadfastness  of  God  to  his  word.  And
it  is  this  fact  of  the  absolute  certainty  of  his  threatenings  being  fulfilled  that  adds
to  them  a  yet  further  terribleness.  There  is  no  chance  of  escape,  no  hope  of  God's
relenting ;  as  certain  as  the  fixed  laws  of  nature  are  these  awful  denunciations  of  God
to  him  who  persists  in  bringing  them  upon  himself.

IL  But  they  abb  the  threatenings  of  love.  1.  He  who  utters  them  is  the  (Jod
who  in  his  very  nature  and  essence  is  love.  How  manifold  are  the  proofs  of  this  in
creation,  in  providence,  in  grace  I  He,  therefore,  has  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  the
wicked ;  judgment  is  his  "  strange  work."  2.  Those  against  whom  they  are  uttered
are  the  objects  of  his  love.  His  love  for  them  is  deeper  than  his  anger  against  them.
Hence  it  is  that  the  contrite  sinner  never  fails  to  gain  the  pardon  he  seeks.  '*  Fathers
of  our  flesh  "  may  "  chasten  after  their  own  pleasure,  but  he  for  our  profit "  (cf.  ver.  7).
8.  His  purpose  in  these  threatenings  is  a  loving  purpose.  He  would  compel  by  the
scourge  of  fear  his  rebellious  children  to  abandon  their  evil  ways.  4.  And  if  at  length
he  is  compelled  to  execute  his  threatenings,  it  is  out  of  love  that  he  does  so.  For  the
love  of  Gitxi  is  towards  his  children,  not  to  any  one  particular  child,  and  the  welfare
of  the  family  is  the  chief  consideration.  ScUus  populi  suprema  lex.  If  consistently
with  that  the  transgressor  can  be  restored,  he  will  be,  but  not  else.  Hence,  as  an
earthly  father  would  not  permit  one  of  his  children,  ill  with  terrible  and  contagious
disease,  to  mingle  with  the  other  children ;  or,  as  in  the  far  more  sad  case  of  utter  moral
wickedness,  intercourse  with  the  rest  would  be  forbidden ;  so,  for  the  sake  of  the  rest
of  his  children,  Gtxi  will  separate  them  from  the  wicked  and  the  wicked  from  them.
But  it  is  love  which  constrains  to  this,  and  hence  it  is  that  the  seeming  contradic-
tion is  true,  that  he  who  is  the  God  of  love  is  also  "  a  consuming  fire."  The  very
fatherhood  of  God  is  the  most  fearful  fact  of  all  Others  against  the  persistently
rebellious  and  ungodly  soul.    Hence —

JIL  Such  thkeateninos  are  ever  the  most  terrible  of  all.  Cf.  the  threaten-
ings of  our  Saviour.  The  most  awful  utterances  to  be  found  in  the  whole  Bible
proceeded  from  his  lips — the  lips  whose  words  were  wont  to  be  so  "  gracious  "  that  the
people  "  wondered  "  at  them.  It  is  his  sayings  which  have  lit  up  the  lurid  glare  of
the  fires  unquenchable  of  hell,  and  it  is  he  who  has  made  our  souls  shudder  at  the
sight  of"  the  worm  that  dieth  not,"  and  of  the  "  outer  darkness  "  where  there  is'*  weep-
ing and  wailing  and  gnashing  of  teeth."  See,  too,  the  Revelation  of  St.  John.  That
apostle,  whose  great  theme  is  the  love  of  Goii,  whose  soul  was  more  attuned  to  the
music  of  love  than  that  of  any  other,  wrote  that  awful  book,  which  is  full  through-
out of  "  mourning,  lamentation,  and  woe,"  and  which  almost  reeks  with  the  blood  and
fire  and  smoke  of  torments  of  which  it  tells.  These  facts  can  only  be  accounted  for—
and  there  are  more  like  them— on  the  ground  that  the  threatenings  of  love  are  ever
the  most  terrible  of  all.  And  they  are  so,  for  such  reasons  as  these  :  1.  Love  so  hates
what  tends  to  the  barm  of  those  it  loves.  Hence  it  brands  with  its  deepest  curse  that
rin  which  harms  God's  children  most  of  all.  One  chief  argument  with  many  minds
for  the  retention  of  capital  punishments  is  that  only  so  can  a  government  or  nation
mark  its  sense  of  the  supreme  wickedness  of  the  crime  it  so  punishes.  Punish  it  as
other  crimes  are  punished,  and  it  will  come  to  be  regarded  as  no  worse  than  they.
And  in  like  manner  God  would  inspire  us  with  a  holy  abhorrence  of  sin  by  the  awful
condemnation  that  he  has  pronounced  against  it.  2.  Love  so  yearns  to  rescue  those
it  loves.  The  rope  may  cut  and  wound  the  hands  of  the  drowning  sailor  to  whom  we
have  thrown  it,  but  we  do  not  mind  that  if  thereby  he  be  drawn  safe  to  jshore.  The
knife  of  the  surgeon  may  cut  deep  and  cause  fearful  pain,  but  if  it  saves  the  imperilled
life  we  are  thankful  notwithstanding.  So  God  sends  forth  these  stern,  rough,  and
terrible  threatenings,  that  souls  under  the  spell  of  sin  may  bo  awakened,  alarmed,  made
to  tremble^  and  to  "  seek  the  Lord  while  he  may  be  found."    No  gentler  means  will


266         THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,  [cn.n.l— 2^.

avail ;  therefore  these,  so  love  resolves,  shall  not  be  left  untried.  It  will  shrink  from,
nothing  to  accomplish  its  compassionate  purpose  of  rescuing  from  the  murderous  sin
the  soul  it  loves.  3.  And  there  is  no  wickedness  so  deep  as  that  of  outraging  love.  Men
will  never  see  sin  in  all  its  hatefulness  until  they  see  it  as  outrage  done  to  love.  Whilst
they  are  taught  only  that  it  is  disobedience  to  sovereign  rule  rather  than  despite  and
shameful  wrong  done  to  a  Father*8  heart,  they  will  not  look  upon  it  as  they  should,
nor  repent  of  it  as  they  must.  Even  in  human  esteem,  outrage  done  to  a  loving  heart
adds  intensity  to  the  condemnation  with  which  we  view  and  sentence  disobedience
done  to  law.  We  all  recognize  that  such  wickedness  is  the  worst  of  all.  We  cannot
wonder,  then,  that  the  threatenings  against  wrong  persistently  done  to  the  love  of  Grod
are  terrible  as  they  are,  and  the  most  terrible  of  all.

CJoKCLUSioN.  1.  Beware  of  bringing  upon  yourselves  such  threatenings  as  these.
Those  which  are  fulminated  forth  by  hatred,  or  by  pride,  or  by  sovereignty,  or  by  law, —
these,  though  they  may  be  terrible,  are  not  to  be  compared  with  those  that  we  have
been  considering.  "  The  wrath  of  the  Lamb  "  is  the  must  awful  of  all.  2.  Beware  of
despising  them.  So  far  from  believing  what  has  now  been  shown,  men  argue  in  directly
opposite  way,  and,  because  the  threatenings  are  those  of  love,  they  conclude  that  they
may  safely  be  disregarded,  they  will  never  be  carried  out.  But  what  has  now  been
shown  proves  that  this  is  the  very  last  thing  we  can  venture  to  do.  3.  Beware  of  con-
cealing them.  It  is  to  be  feared  that,  in  these  soft,  easy  days  on  which  we  have  fallen,
the  Lord's  watchmen  do  very  often  fail  to  "blow  the  trumpet  and  give  warning."
From  blood-guiltiness  such  as  that  let  us  pray  to  be  delivered.  For  are  there  not
many  now  whom  nothing  but  the  startling  peal  of  the  trumpet  of  God's  threatened
judgments  will  ever  arouse  or  alarm  ?  Assuredly  there  are.  Therefore,  in  view  of
the  doom  of  the  ungodly,  as  well  as  by  the  love  of  Christ,  let  us  "  beseech  men  to  be
reconciled  to  God." — C.

Vers.  12 — 15. —  TTie  inquest  on  the  slain  of  Judah  and  JeriisaJem,  L  God  demands
IT.  1.  For  his  righteousness  is  impugned.  Men  had  not  failed,  could  not  fail,  to
notice  the  terrible  judgments  which  G<Ki  had  sent  upon  Judah  and  Jerusalem,  and,  as
is  implied  by  his  own  declaration  of  their  causes  (ver.  12),  they  had  either  not  seen  or
had  denied  the  righteousness  of  what  had  been  done.  This  questioning  of  the  Divine
righteousness  and  equity  is  a  procedure  all  too  common  still.  2.  And  thus  the  Divine
hold  on  the  loyalty  of  men's  hearts  is  threatened.  For  unless  men  regard  God  a3
righteous,  just,  and  good,  no  power  in  the  universe  can  make  them  yield  him  the
homage  of  their  hearts.  How  much  of  the  alienation  of  heart  in  the  present  day  may
be  attributed  to  the  representations  of  Qt)d  w^hich  a  false  theology  has  set  forth  !  Men
will  not,  for  they  cannot,  love  such  a  being  as  too  many  preachers  represent  God  to  be.
They  may  be  threatened  with  everlasting  perdition,  but  it  will  make  no  difference.  For
God  himself  has  given  us  a  nature  which  renders  impossible  our  yielding  our  hearts*
homage  to  any  one — be  he  whom  he  may — that  our  hearts  do  not  regard  as  worthy  of
that  homage.  3.  But  God's  supreme  solicitude  is  for  this  homage  of  our  hearts.  Hence
what  threatens  it  must  be  intolerable  to  him.  Therefore  he  seeks  for  vindication
before  the  hearts  of  men,  and  demands  this  inquiry.

XL  An  unimpeachable  juby  is  impanelled.  It  is  not  just  any  one  who  can  be
tmsted  to  make  this  inquiry.  The  frivolous,  the  unthoughtful,  would  fail  to  grasp
the  problem  involved,  and  the  ungodly  who  suffered  these  judgments  would  be  sure  to
assign  them  to  any  and  every  cause  rather  than  the  true  one.  Therefore  those  who
are  summoned  to  this  inquest  are  (1)  the  wise — those  who  will  intelligently  consider
all  the  facts  of  the  case  ;  and  (2)  those  "  to  whom  the  Lord  hath  six>ken  " — those,  that  is,
who  have  been  divinely  enlightened,  who  are  in  sympathy  with  truth  and  righteous-
ness. God  summons  such,  and  fearlessly  demands,  now  as  of  old,  the  most  thorough
investigation  into  the  righteousness  of  all  his  ways.

III.  They  abk  bidden  well  and  tbuly  tby  the  case  before  them.  He  would
hare  them  so  consider  it  that  they  may  "  understand  "  it  in  all  its  bearings,  reasons,  and
ends.  He  tells  them  what  he  has  done  and  what  he  yet  will  do,  and  what  are  his
reasons  for  his  conduct.  Ho  does  not  conceal  that  his  judgments  are  tremendous,
notorious,  certain  to  excite  inquiry,  to  be  challenged,  and  by  many  to  be  condemned.
Bat  he  appeals  to  the  '*  wise,"  and  to  thoee  "  to  whom  the  Lord  hath  spoken,"  to  con-


CH.  DC.  1—26.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  267

aider  and  understand  what  he  has  done.  God  calls  not  for  mere  credulity  from  any  of
us ;  he  asks  for  no  mere  blind  faith ;  but  it  is  to  a  "  reasonable  service  "  he  summons
us,  and  this  reasonableness  he  would  have  us  consider  and  "understand."  "  I  speak  as
to  wise  men ;  judge  ye  what  I  say : "  such  is  his  appeal.

IV.  And  when  they  have  "  understood  "  the  righteousness  op  God  thet  arb
TO  "  DECLARE  "  IT.  There  is  no  greater  service  that  can  be  rendered  than  "  to  vindicate
the  ways  of  God  to  man ; "  to  "  commend  the  truth  to  every  man's  conscience  in  tho
sight  of  God."  The  believer  is  established,  the  waverer  brought  to  decision,  the  sinner
— like  as  Felix,  when  Paul  "reasoned  of  righteousness  and  judgment" — is  made  to
tremble,  the  scomer  and  the  atheist  are  silenced.

V.  The  EFFECTS  of  that  verdict  will  be  varied.  1.  It  will  strike  terror  to  the
hearts  of  the  enemies  of  Grod ;  for  it  will  rob  them  of  the  comfort  they  had  in  regarding
God*s  judgments  as  unjust.  Even  this  " drop  of  cold  water**  they  may  not  have.  2.  It
will  give  great  peace  of  mind  to  all  beholders  of  God's  strong  rule ;  for  it  will  show  that
his  rule  is  not  strong  and  supreme  alone,  but  absolutely  righteous.  3.  It  will  make
God's  people  "  sing  unto  the  Lord  a  new  song,"  because  "  he  cometh  to  judge  the  earth  "
(Pa.  xcvi.).  It  will  assure  them  of  the  triumph  of  righteousness,  and  the  utter  impotency
and  impermanency  of  wrong.  But  let  each  one  ask  himself,  *'  How  will  that  verdict
aflfectww?"— C.

Ver.  14. — Hereditary  sin  reed  sin,  God  here  declares  that  he  will  punish  those  who
have  walked  "  after  Baalim,  which  their  fathers  taught  them.*'  Therefore  the  fact  of
their  having  been  trained  in  this  sin  by  their  fathers  is  not  held  to  acquit  them  of  guilt
in  what  they  do.     Their  sin,  though  hereditary,  is  real.

I.  This  seems  unjust.  It  has  often  been  objected  to  that  because  the  fathers  ate
sour  grapes  the  children's  teeth  should  be  set  on  edge  (Ezek.  zviii.  2).  Why  should
I  be  punished  for  another's  man's  sin  ?

II.  But  it  is  the  Divine  Law.  The  sins  of  the  fathers  are  visited  on  the
children.  "  By  the  offence  of  one  all  men  were  made  sinners "  (Rom.  v.).  And  in
daily  life  how  perpetually  we  see  this  law  in  ruthless  operation  ! — children  punished  in
health,  fortune,  character,  reputation,  in  mind,  body,  and  soul,  all  through  their  fathers'
sin.  They  walk  in  the  ways  of  Baalim  because  their  fathers  taught  them.  And  yet,
imjust  though  their  punishment  may  appear-
Ill.  Conscience  endorses  it.    Who  knows  how  much  of  that  strong  passionate

nature  which  led  David  into  such  dreadful  sin  may  have  been  inherited  ?  Indeed,  he
says,  "  Behold,  I  was  shapen  in  iniquity,"  etc.  (Ps.  li.).  But  this  does  not  hinder  him
from  taking  all  the  blame  of  his  sin  upon  himself.  All  the  way  through  we  hear  his
confession — "  my  sin,"  "  my  transgression,"  "  mine  iniquity."  And  never  does  the  con-
science awakened  to  a  sense  of  sin  think  of  palliating  such  sin  by  the  plea  of  its  being
the  result  of  inheritance.  Thus  conscience  witnesses  to  the  righteousness  of  the  Divine
Law.

IV.  And  80  does  human  law.  What  judge  ever  pardoned  a  criminal  because  he
had  a  bad  father  ?  We  execrate  "  bloody  Queen  Mary  "  notwithstanding  she  had  a
bloodthirsty  father.

V.  The  explanation  is:  1.  That  hereditary  sin  does  not  destroy  conscience.  Thai
speaks  in  all ;  it  is  "  the  light  that  lighteth  every  man  that  cometh  into  the  world,"  the
inward  monitor  which  ever  condemns  crime  and  approves  righteousness  (cf.  Rom.  IL
14, 15).  2.  Nor  does  it  destroy  understanding.  Teachers  of  righteousness  are  on  every
hand,  from  whom  all  may  learn.  3.  Nor  does  it  destroy  the  power  of  wUl,  It  may
weaken,  but  it  does  not  destroy.  Therefore,  in  spite  of  hereditary  sin,  every  man  knows,
and  can  choose  if  he  will,  that  which  is  right ;  and  therefore  he  is  held  accountable  before
every  tribunal — that  of  God,  of  conscience,  and  of  man.  4.  But  there  is  yet  another
reason  given  by  St.  Paul :  "  Ood  hath  concluded  all  in  unbelief,  that  he  may  have  mercy
upon  all"  (Rom.  xi.  32  ;  Gral.  iii.  22).  A  cruel  Roman  emperor  wished  that  all  Rome
had  but  one  neck,  that  he  might  kill  it  with  one  blow.  God  hath  in  his  infinite  grace
gathered  up  all  our  humanity  into  one,  even  in  Christ,  so  that,  as  sin  had  destroyed  all
by  one  stroke  (Rom.  v.)jthe  grace  of  God  in  Christ  might  save  all  by  the  one  righteous-
ness of  the  One ;  so  that  **  where  sin  did  abound,  grace,"  etc.  That  gathering  up  of
humanity  into  one  in  Adam,  which  seems  at  first  sight  to  have  worked  such  injustice,

JEREMIAH.  B


258  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,     [ch.  ix.  1— 26.


is  altogether  met,  and  far  more  than  met,  by  the  again  gathering  up  of  all  in  One,  even
in  Christ,  which  works  such  grace.  But  that  ultimate  redemption  which  is  in  Christ
does  not  hinder,  but  that  meanwhile,  and  for  a  weary  while,  hereditary  sin  may  work
woeful  sorrow  and  harm.     Therefore —

VI.  This  fact  appeals  :  1.  To  all  parents.  Seek  to  cut  off  the  entail.  We  may
have  received  such  sad  inheritance,  but  let  us,  as  we  may,  reject  it  for  ourselves,  and  in
so  doing  refuse  to  hand  it  on  to  others.  Again  and  again  has  God  given  grace  to  some
one  member  of  a  godless  house — as  to  Josiah,  son  of  that  Anion  of  whom  it  is  said,
**  But  Araon  sinned  more  and  more  ** — who  has  for  himself  and  those  who  come  after
him  broken  the  bad  succession  and  begun  a  new  and  blessed  departure.  When  we
have  done  our  best,  our  children  will  have  a  sufficiently  heavy  burden  to  bear ;  let  us
not  make  that  burden  heavier,  life  more  terrible,  and  holiness  and  heaven  far  less
attainable  for  them,  by  handing  down  to  them  a  legacy  of  evil  example  and  of  unhallowed
habits  and  propensities  inherited  from  ourselves.  Do  not  let  us  sin  so  against  our
children.  Yet  many  do.  2.  To  all  children.  Your  fathers'  sin  will  not  excuse  yours.
God  has  turned  judgment  away  from  many  an  evil  son  because  he  had  a  godly  father,
but  never  because  he  had  an  ungodly  one.  Therefore  if  yours  be  the  sad  and  too
frequent  lot  of  those  who  inherit  evil  from  their  parents,  reject  that  inheritance,  and
seek  and  gain  from  your  heavenly  Father,  though  you  may  not  be  helped  herein  by
your  earthly  one^  the  better,  the  most  blessed  inheritance  of  the  children  of  God. — 0.

Vers.  21,  22,— Death's  doings.    Behold—.

I.  Death's  carnival.  In  many  an  ancient  continental  city  you  may  see  portrayed
in  still  vivid  colours,  on  the  roofs  of  their  covered  bridges, — as  on  that  of  the  old
bridge  at  Lucerne, — on  the  walls  of  their  churches,  and  elsewhere,  the  grim  *  Dance  of
Death.'  These  verse:*  remind  of  those  paintings,  and  tell  in  yet  more  fearful  form  of
Death's  dread  carnival.  With  what  diabolic  zest  he  is  represented  at  his  work  here  I
He  is  shown  to  us,  not  as  coming  in  in  ordinary  manner  to  the  sick-chamber,  where
bis  coming  has  long  been  expected  and  may  even  be  welcomed ;  but  as  breaking
in  roughly,  unexpectedly,  cruelly,  like  a  thief  coming  in  at  the  windows.  Nor
as  drawing  near  to  the  poor,  the  defenceless,  the  miserable ;  but  entering  into  our
palaces,  the  abode  of  the  great,  the  rich,  the  strong.  Nor  as  calling  home  those  whose
day's  work  is  done,  who  have  lived  their  life,  and  to  whom  eventide  has  long  ago
arrived ;  but  as  cutting  ruthlessly  down  the  dear  young  children  in  the  very  blossom
of  their  days.  Nor  as  ridding  the  earth  of  the  cruel  and  vile ;  but  tearing  from  us
the  innocent,  the  children.  Nor  are  vigour,  strength,  and  promise  any  more  a  defence
against  him  than  decrepit  old  age;  for  "the  young  men"  are  his  victims  even  as
others.  And  no  multitude  of  slain  will  satiate  him.  Yer.  22  represents  the  numbers
of  the  dead  as  so  great  that  they  have  to  be  left  unburied  and  uncared  for  to  rot  upon
the  open  field.  It  is  true  that  this  frightful  picture  is  taken  from  the  awful  experiences
of  a  besieged  city,  but  with  slight  modifications  it  is  true  everywhere  and  always.
This  life  is  the  carnival  of  Death.  What  are  men  but  a  long  succession  of  mourners  ?
As  the  poet  says—

**  Our  hearts  like  muffled  drums  are  beating
Funeral  marches  to  the  grave."

And  when  we  contemplate  the  cruel  consequences  of  this  carnival  of  Death,  which  is
going  on  still,  the  mind  and  heart  reel,  and  faith  in  the  fatherhood  of  God  would  fade
utterly  out  of  men's  souls  were  it  not  that  in  brighter  colours  still  the  Word  of  God
portrays —

II.  Death's  Conquerob.  Christ  has  abolished  death.  The  broken  pillar,  the  iamed-
down  torch,  the  "  Vale,  vale,  in  aitemum  vale,"  of  the  old  pagan  world,  have  now  no
appropriateness  because  no  truth.  Death  is  sorrow  still,  even  to  those  who  believe  in
him  who  is  **  the  Resurrectioii  and  the  Life ;  "  but  it  is  not  and  cannot  be  that  hopeless,
unutterable,  unfathomable  woe  which  it  was  till  he  came  who  hath  abolished  death.
No  doubt  this  terrible  verse  (ver.  21),  which  tells  of  Death's  dread  doings,  is  yet  far
more  true  than  we  would  like  it  to  be,  and  often  and  often,  in  the  blank  desolation  and
shattered  hopes  which  earth's  bereavements  bring  to  us,  we  fail  to  derive  all  the
consolation  and  help  which  Death's  glorious  Conqueror  has  given  to  us.    But,  never*


OH.  IX,  1—26.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  269

tbeless,  lie  has  given  them,  and  it  is  true  that  **  Blessed  are  the  dead  which  die  in  the
Lord."  Let  us  see  to  it  that  we  are,  hy  a  living  abiding  trust,  "  in  the  Lord,"  and  then,
though  we  sorrow^  and  sorrow  bitterly  still,  yet  it  will  not  be,  it  is  not,  "  as  those  that
have  no  hope." — 0.

Vers.  23 — ^26.—"  Whereof  to  glory,**  Introduction.  Cannot  understand  these  pro-
phecies without  a  knowledge  of  the  history  of  the  times.  This  is  true  of  all  prophecies,
and  especially  of  these.    Therefore  we  will  glance  at  such  history  as  we  proceed.    Note—

L  1  HE  OLOBTiNa  THAT  IS  CONDEMNED.  1.  That  of  the  wise  man  in  his  wisdom.
The  statesmen  of  Jeremiah's  days  had  been  thus  glorying*  They  had  prided  them-
selves in  their  political  sagacity.  For  many  years  they  had  formed  alliances,  now  with
one  power  and  now  with  another.  And  they  seemed  to  have  managed  well,  for,  for
nearly  a  whole  century,  Judah  had  been,  though  so  weak  a  power  and  so  valuable
a  prize,  left  unattacked.  Therefore  no  wonder  that  the  wise  men  gloried  in  their
wisdom.  But  now  political  trouble  was  beginning  again.  Egypt  had  become  a  great
power,  and  was  warring  against  Assyria.  In  this  war  the  king  Josiah  sided  with
Assyria,  and  was  slain  in  the  battle  of  Megiddo.  Thus  they  were  without  their  king,
and  compelled  to  ally  themselves  with  Egypt  and  to  share  in  her  fortunes,  which  to
the  eye  of  the  prophet  were  the  reverse  of  bright.  Great  troubles  were  drawing  near,
and  it  is  in  view  of  them  that  Jeremiah  says,  "  Let  not  the  wise  man,*'  etc.  2.  The
strong  in  their  strength.  The  army  of  Judah  was  large,  their  fortress  of  Jerusalem
was  all  but  impregnable,  but  Jeremiah  saw  that  all  this  would  not  avail.  Their  utter
overthrow  was  fast  hastening  on.  The  great  Babylonian  power  which  had  absorbed
the  Assyrian  should  accomplish  this.  Hence  the  word,  "  Let  not  the  strong  man,"  etc.
3.  The  rich  in  their  riches.  The  long  continuance  of  peace  had  enabled  the  nation  to
accumulate  vast  wealth.  But  this  only  made  them  yet  more  an  object  of  desire  to
their  approaching  invaders.  Their  wealth  was  their  woe.  4.  The  children  of  Abraham
in  the  covenant,  of  which  circumcision  was  the  sign  (vers.  25,  26).  From  the  time  of
Hezekiah's  reformation  until  the  time  when  Jeremiah  wrote,  Judah  and  Jerusalem  had
professed  the  ancient  faith.  The  temple  service  had  gone  on,  the  sacrifices  offered,  etc.
There  had  been  a  short,  sad  interval  during  Manasseh's  reign.  But  so  far  as  profession
went  they  had  been  worshippers  of  God.  And  of  late  years  Josiah's  reformation  had
led  to  still  louder  profession.  And  in  this  profession  we  know  they  trusted  very
implicitly  (cf.  ch.  vii.).  But  it  had  not  preserved  them  from  the  Divine  displeasure  in
days  gone  by,  nor  in  the  present,  nor  would  it  in  days  to  come.  For  beneath  all  this
profession  the  moral  and  spiritual  condition  of  the  nation  was  most  evil.  Even  in
Hezekiah's  day  Isaiah  had  told  the  people  that,  in  spite  of  all  their  profession,  "  the
whole  head  was  sick,"  etc.  (cf.  Isa.  i.).  And  that  this  was  so  was  shown  by  the
readiness  with  which  they  followed  Manasseh  in  his  idolatries,  and  joined  in  the  perse-
cution of  the  faithful  servants  of  God.  And  when  Manasseh  repented,  and  there  was
again  an  external  profession,  it  was  scarcely  any  better.  But  the  monstrous  conduct  of
Amon,  who  "  sinned  more  and  more,"  made  the  people  desire  the  old  ways.  Hence,
when  Josiah  came  to  the  throne,  they  were  prepared  for  his  reforms.  But  again  it  was
only  a  change  of  custom,  not  of  character ;  outward,  but  not  inward.  Jeremiah  sought
to  help  forward  a  true  reformation,  for  it  was  indeed  needed  (see  his  description  of  the
moral  condition  of  the  people,  vers.  2 — 8  in  this  chapter).  Hence  it  was  that  he  told
them  their  circumcision  was  no  better  than  uncircumcision.  Apply  aU  this  to  our-
selves :  (1)  As  a  nation.  We  have  all  these  several  advantages  above  named :  wise
statesmen,  great  strength,  vast  wealth,  universal  religious  profession;  but  all  these,
apart  from  moral  and  spiritual  worth,  will  go  for  nothing.  It  is  "  righteousness,"  and
that  alone,  that  "  exalteth  a  nation."  (2)  As  individuals.  We  are  not  to  despise  any
of  these  things.  They  are  God's  good  gifts ;  but  they  will  not  save  us.  We  may  not
glory  in  them  as  a  sure  safeguard.

II.  Whebeof  we  may  and  should  glory.  (Cf.  ver.  24.)  This  means  that  there
should  be :  1.  Intellectual  apprehension  of  the  truth  in  regard  to  God.  His  character  is
shown :  (1)  In  his  exercise  of  loving-kindness.  It  is  well  to  be  open-eyed  to  the  many
and  varied  proofs  of  this — in  creation,  providence,  redemption,  grace.  And  it  is  well
to  be  able  to  trace  these  proofs  and  to  show  that  God  is  good.  (2)  In  his  exercising
judgment.    He  has  given  proois  of  this  also,  and  that  is  but  a  partial  and  therefore


9li>  Tm  !!00?C  05'  THE  T?,r*?7irT  JYZTKLXEL    [•:«.  n.  1— «L


wj*p*  '  -^'^i  *  '  *-  "^  *x^rr;iii*j  of  rijfhteo'wness.  How  full  the  proca  cf  liiis  aljt>!
B:«  -'a:i_^c  :-  Cjir^t.  h\»  UrtkchUiHi^,  life,  death,  his  >pirii's  wcrrk  low,€Cc.!  Xow,  it
u  aii-«  iaiLTi'ije  v>  r.n'J^»»Ar»'i  all  thi«,  for  the  mind  to  grasp  these  mm  tnitiuL  Too
mmsk  f  ZiJt  r*tV^>>*u»T''5«»  of  the  day  iji  weak,  flaccid,  unsuble,  Ix^cao^e  there  »  wanlini;
k2C«'j»SiUfc«   *^  'ufid^rMUridin;?  in   the   truth.     We   are  apt  to  be  aatisted  with  an


a^T  nk^afift,  in  Whle  lanjniape,  to  approve,  to  be  in  sympathy  with,  to  delight  Id,  etc
iJ  •*\  will  not  know  a  wicked  person;"  "  Tne  I^rd  knoweth  the  way  oi  the
riffhteo*!!! ;  "  **  'W\f^  i«  life  eternal,  to  know  thee  the  only,"  etc.).  And  so  here  to  know
God  U  to'harc  moral  sympathy,  per»*^jmil  experience,  inward  approval  and  deUght  in
KMrd  to  God.  Now,  he  who  thus  understandeth  and  knoweth  God  hath  "  whereof  to
SSy."  1^"^  prr>phet  desired  that  his  people  might  have  this  glorying,  for  this  would
flife  them,  whilst  all  the  other  things  in  which  they  gloried  but  left  them  to  perish.
Appeal  to  all  who  profew*  religion  and  who  instruct  others.  Can  you  thus  glory?  Do
jou  understand  ?  Better  still,  Do  you  kiww  God  in  his  loving-kindness,  judgment,
nghteousness  ? — C.

Vers.  23,  24. — Tht  chief  goo^.  The  people  had  little  reason  to  glory  in  their  wisdom,
or  power,  or  wealth.  These  natural  resources  had  utterly  failed  them  as  a  safeguard
pg^mst  the  avenger  and  destroyer.  The  prophet  directs  them  to  an  in6nitely  surer
ground  of  trust,  a  hi;iher  cause  of  rejoicing.  These  words  are  a  striking  appeal  to
iaith,  all  the  more  remarkable  because  of  the  desperate  circumstances  of  the  time.  In
Bpite  of  all  the  desolation  of  the  land,  the  wreck  and  ruin  of  all  their  pride  as  a  nation,
let  them  hold  fast  to  their  faith  in  the  living  God,  and  es|^«cially  in  those  attributes  of
bis  being  and  principles  of  his  government — loving-kindness,  judgment,  righteousness
. — which  such  circumstances  tend  to  obscure  and  seem  even  to  disprove.  We  fix  our
minds  now  simply  on  this  thought — the  knowledge  of  Ood  and  personal  fellowship  with
him  are  immfasurably  more  worth  our  seeking  and  rejoicing  in  than  all  those  endowments
ichich  to  the  carnal  eye  are  so  fvll  of  cliarm.  There  is  a  natural  tendency  in  men  to
rejoice  unduly  in  the  good  that  they  derive  by  birth,  or  education,  or  the  favour  of
providence,  forgetting  that  the  chief  good  is  something  of  a  different  kind,  something
that  must  come  t^>  them  in  a  different  way.  Nothing  that  tends  to  enrich  and  adorn
and  gladden  our  life  in  this  world  is  to  be  despised ;  but  if  we  measure  things  by  a  true
standard,  and  esteem  them  according  to  their  real  and  relative  value,  we  shall  place
everything  else  that  men  call  good  or  great  beneath  that  which  connects  us  directly
with  God  an<l  heaven  and  immortality.     Note  respecting  this  higher  good—

1.  It  is  more  truly  our  own  than  anything  else  can  ever  be.  This  is  seen
if  we  consider :  1.  The  way  in  which  it  becomes  ours.  The  surface  acquirements  and
adornments  of  life — wealth,  social  position,  favourable  circumstances,  etc.,  cannot  be
called  "ours"  in  the  sense  in  which  that  which  is  an  inherent  element  of  our
individuality  is  ours.  And  even  as  regards  personal  qualities,  there  are  important
differences.  Whatever  natural  gifts  belong  to  us,  our  own  will  has  had  nothing  to  do
with  our  possession  of  them.  Their  development  may  be  dependent  on  it,  but  in  their
origin  they  are  not  so.  Whereas  the  affections  that  connect  us  with  Gt)d  tell  how  the
deepest  depths  of  our  being  were  stirred  at  their  birth  within  us.  Nothing  so  truly
ours  as  that  which  has  thus  become  ours.  2.  The  absolute  satisfaction  it  brings.  All
the  "  springs  of  our  being  "  are  in  God.  He  is  the  true  Home  and  blissful  Centre  of
rest  for  every  human  spirit.  "  The  good  man  is  satisfied  from  himself"  (Prov.  xiv.  14),
not  because  of  anything  in  the  resources  of  his  own  finite  being,  but  because  he  has
learnt  by  the  utter  renunciation  of  all  trust  in  these  to  find  his  true  "  self "  in  God.
8,  Jts  perpetuity.  We  may  soon  be  bereft  of  all  other  endowments ;  this  we  can  never
lose.  There  is  no  possession  over  which  a  man  can  rejoice  in  this  world  which  is  not
precarious  and  uncertain.    And  though  the  sense  of  this  need  not  check  our  free  use


ca.  a.  1—26.]  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,        261

and  hearty  enjoyment  of  it,  it  will  always  cast  some  slight  shadow  over  the  sunshine  of
our  delight.  But  there  is  no  shadow  here,  no  sense  of  insecurity,  no  fear  of  disappoint-
ment. Have  your  soul  in  conscious  fellowship  with  God,  and  you  may  rest  in  the
thought  that  "  nothing  shall  ever  he  ahle  to  sc])arate  you  from  his  love  "  (Rom.  viii.
38,  39).  "  This  is  life  eternal,"  etc.  (John  xvii.  3).  "  The  water  that  I  shall  give  him
shall  bo  in  him,"  etc.  (John  iv.  14).

II.  Unlike  otheb  fobms  of  good,  it  is  incapable  of  abuse.  What  natural  gift
is  there  that  men  may  not  turn,  and  have  not  actually  turned,  to  some  purpose  contrary
to  that  for  which  it  was  given  ?  The  false  use  grows,  not  so  much  out  of  any  quality
or  tendency  in  the  thing  itself,  as  out  of  the  innate  perversity  of  our  human  nature.
And  there  is  nothing  in  the  thing  itself,  or  in  the  fact  of  our  possessing  it,  that
necessarily  acts  as  a  cure  for  that  perversity.  Intellectual  capacity,  genius,  literary
culture,  rank,  wealth,  etc., — how  often  have  these  been  allied  with  moral  corruption,  and
given  their  possessors  the  ability  to  inflict  incalculable  mischief  on  the  human  race  ?
The  graces  of  holy  character  which  spring  from  fellowship  with  Qod  Cannot,  in  the
nature  of  things,  be  thus  abused.  Tou  cannot  conceive  of  their  being  prostituted  to
evil  ends.    Tbey  bear  within  them  the  pledge  of  their  Divine  use  and  issue.

III.  It  enables  ub,  as  nothing  else  can,  to  apfbeciate  all  that  is  tbue  and
GOOD  IN  THIS  pbesent  wobld.  Tou  must  know  God  before  you  can  rightly  understand
and  realize  the  highest  profit  of  the  world  in  which  he  has  placed  you.  There  are  two
popular  errors  in  this  directions-one  is  the  error  of  supposing  that  the  apprehensioa
of  the  truth  of  nature  depends  solely  on  mental  capacity  and  scientific  investigation.
Does  not  the  inability  of  some  of  the  most  illustrious  thinkers  of  every  age  to  find  out
the  Divine  in  nature,  rather  show  that  it  is  more  a  question  of  spiritual  sympathy
than  of  intellectual  power?  The  other  error  is  that  of  supposing  that  the  power  to
procure  the  good  of  this  life  is  the  same  thing  as  the  power  to  enjoy  it.  And  yet  how
many  pampered  children  of  wealth  and  fashion  are  there  who  bear  upon  their  faces  the
marks  of  weariness  and  discontent!  Their  souls  are  withered  by  excessive  physical
indulgence  and  artificial  culture.  They  have  lost  the  capacity  of  pure  and  simple
enjoyment,  and  childlike  wonder  and  delight  are  things  to  them  unknown.  Let  your
spirit  be  in  fellowship  with  God,  let  your  "  heart  be  set  to  hallow  all  you  find,"  and  the
deepest  treasures  of  truth  and  the  sweetest  satisfactions  of  life  are  within  your  reach.
GikI  has  made  purity  of  heart  the  condition,  not  only  of  knowing  himself^  but  of  knowing
the  best  of  his  gilts.    It  both  creates  and  verifies^*

**  The  cheerful  faith  that  all  which  we  behold
Is  full  of  blessing."

"  Godliness  ^vith  contentment  is  great  gain  "  (1  Tim.  vi.  6).  "  Blessed  are  the  meek,"
etc.  (Matt.  V.  6).    "  AH  things  are  yours,"  etc.  (1  Cor.  iii.  21 — 23).

IV.  It  GIVES  us  THE  poweb  to  confeb  highest  benefit  on  our  fellow-
CBEATUBES.  We  are  disposed  sometimes  to  envy  the  talents,  the  range  of  influence,
the  means  of  usefulness,  that  others  possess.  It  seems  a  grand  thing  to  us  to  be  in
certain  commanding  positions,  and  have  resources  that  may  be  used  at  pleasure  for  the
working  out  of  certain  desired  ends.  Remember,  however,  that  what  can  alone  give
worth  to  these  things  are  precisely  those  personal,  moral  qualities  that  are  within  the
reach  of  alL  The  influence  of  godly  character  is  deeper,  more  radical^  more  productive
of  enduring  fruits  of  blessedness  than  any  other  kind  of  influence.  Who  would  not
rejoice  in  the  power  to  confer  this  highest  good  upon  the  world  ?-*W.

Ver.  1. — Incessant  weeping  over  the  calamities  of  Israel,  We  have  here  still  another
measure  of  how  great,  in  the  estimation  of  the  prophet,  the  calamity  was  which  had
fallen  upon  his  people.  Other  measures  have  already  been  given,  in  the  despoiling  of
the  tombs  (ch.  viii.  1,  2),  in  the  exile  worse  than  death  (ch.  viii.  3),  in  the  visitation
of  serpents  which  were  beyond  the  charmer's  power  (ch.  viii.  17),  and  in  the  suffering
through  the  sin  of  his  people,  which  even  a  true  servant  of  God  could  not  escape  (ch.
viii.  21).  And  now  this  extraordinary  desire  of  the  prophet  comes  in  to  make  plain
from  yet  another  direction  how  great  ho  reckoned  the  impending  calamity  to  be.  We
may  well  imagine  that  as  he  set  before  Jerusalem  these  gl<x)my  prospects,  the  people
in  their  light-heartednesd  replied. ''  Why  make  all  this  ado  V    Why  try  thus  to  alarm


262  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,     [ch.  ix.  1— 26,


lis  by  these  threatenings  and  cries  and  tears  ?  "    The  exclamation  of  ver.  1  guides  us
to  what  the  prophet's  answer  would  be.     "  My  tears,  which  you  count  so  causeless,
rather  fall  short — short  beyond  all  expressing — of  the  occasion  for  them."    The  fact  is
that  the  deepest,  tenderest  human  pity  and  sorrow,  when  compared  with  the  actual
needs  of  fallen  man,  are  but  as  a  slight  thaw  that  vainly  strugc;les  with  the  penetrating
frost  of  the  heart.    Not  that  human  beings  lack  the  power  of  deep  emotion.    Whole
peoples  will  be  responsive  enough  to  certain  touches.    But  who  is  to  bring  before  the
hearts  of  idl  men  a  sufficient  perception  of  what  it  is  that  underlies  and  perpetuates
the  misery  of  the  whole  world  ?    The  thing  wanted  is  an  abiding  pity  for  men  lying  in
the  suffering  of  sin.    It  is  perfectly  true  that  there  is  not  pity  enough  for  men  because
of  their  poverty,  their  bodily  defects  and  infirmities,  and  all  miseries  that  are  visible  to
the  natural  man.    But  the  real  reason  why  even  this  pity  falls  so  lamentably  short  is
that  there  is  no  searching  consideration  of  what  lies  deeper  than  any  visible  miseries.
Nothing  effectticU  can  be  done  with  the  seen  unless  the  unseen  is  put  right.     Then  we
may  be  sure  of  it  that  the  seen  will  come  right  with  wonderful  quickness  and  stability.
We  must  make  our  hearts  to  dwell  with  the  utmost  pity  on  those  who  are  not  yet  born
again,  not  yet  living  the  life  of  faith,  not  yet  in  living  union  with  the  great  Source  of
eternal  life,  not  yet  rejoicing  with  the  joy  of  the  Holy  Ghost.    If  we  ourselves  are  really
in  process  of  salvation,  and  with  our  increased  knowledge  of  truth  comprehending  more
and  more  what  salvation  will  bring  with  it  for  ourselves,  then  it  will  not  appear  to  us
extravagant  and  rhapsodical  rhetoric  that  a  prophet  should  wish  his  head  to  be  waters,
and  his  eyes  a  fountain  of  tears.    It  is  unmanly  and  utterly  despicable  to  weep  for  trifles,
to  weep  over  some  spoiled  gratification  of  self;  but  what  sort  of  a  heart  must  that  man
have  who  can  watch,  free  from  the  deepest  agitation,  his  brethren  going  on  heedlessly  into
perdition  ?    Jeremiah  would  have  been  unworthy  of  his  call  and  his  visions  as  a  prophet
if  he  had  fallen  short  of  his  exclamation  here.    Not,  of  course,  that  we  are  to  make  too
much  of  the  mere  shedding  of  tears.    In  the  case  of  the  prophet  copious  tears  were  the
index  of  a  heart  within  right  in  its  thoughts,  steady  in  its  purposes.    But  there  are
many  instances  where  copious  tears  have  no  such  value.    They  come  and  go  like
a  thunder -shower,  lasting  us  briefly  and  leaving  as  little  trace  behind.     Men  of  few
tears  may  be  men  of  a  large,  wise,  far-seeing  kindness.    He  who  never  gives  to  beg^i^ars
in  the  street  may  yet  be  doing  much  to  make  beggary  cease  altogether.    Jeremiah's
wish,  then,  was  the  wish  of  a  man  who  saw  deeply  into  the  confusions  of  his  time ;  and
yet  he  did  not  see  as  deep  as  Jesus.    Those  few  tears  that  Jesus  dropped  amid  the
bereaving  agonies  of  Bethany,  had  in  them  more  of  a  pure  and  profound  pity  over  men
than  all  the  tears  that  sinners  themselves  have  shed.    No  sinful  man  can  imagine  that
ideal  of  human  life  which  was  ever  before  the  eyes  of  the  Son  of  God.    He  alone  knows
how  far  man  has  fallen ;  he  alone  knows  how  high  fallen  man  can  be  raised.    He  sees
what  men  miss  who  do  not  repent  and  believe  in  him.    He  sees  what  possibilities  of
remorse  and  shame  and  self-condemnation  may  be  opening  up  in  eternity  to  the
negligent  and  the  impenitent.     What  wonder,  then,  that  he  spoke  of  the  worm  that
dieth  not,  and  the  fire  that  is  not  quenched  1     What  tears  must  not  be  shed  over  those
who  choose  to  sow  the  wind,  seemingly  forgetting  that  they  must  reap  the  whirl-
wind I— Y.

Yer.  2. — The  lodging-place  in  the  wilderness,  I.  What  it  is  the  prophet  wishes
FOR.  The  occurrence  of  the  word  "  wilderness  *'  may  easily  mislead  us  into  thinking
that  the  prophet's  wish  was  for  solitude,  and  thus  we  may  be  disposed  to  reproach  him,
as  if,  Timon-like,  he  wanted  to  get  away  from  his  fellow-men  altogether.  But  it  is  not
on  the  word  "wilderness"  that  we  must  fix  our  attention  to  discover  the  prophet's
feeling.  The  reference  to  a  traveller's  lodging-place  is  the  main  thing  to  be  considered.
It  is  not  between  some  hermit's  humble,  solitary  shelter  and  the  well-built  house,  which
is  but  one  out  of  many  making  up  the  stately  city,  that  the  contrast  is  made,  but  rather
between  the  inn  of  the  traveller  and  the  abode  of  the  man  who,  day  after  day,  has  to
mingle  busily  in  the  society  of  which  he  forms  a  part.  If  you  are  staying  at  an  inn
for  the  night,  it  matters  very  little,  so  far  as  acquaintance  is  concerned,  who  your
fellow-guests  may  be.  You  scarcely  meet  them ;  you  are  in  their  company  for  a  few
hours,  and  on  the  morrow  each  takes  his  several  way.  Jeremiah  prefers  to  live  in  an  inn,
where  he  would  see  a  succession  of  strange  faces,  to  living  even  amongst  his  own  people*


en.  DL  1—26.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  263

Then  that  the  inn  should  be  in  a  wilderness  was  a  sort  of  necessity,  to  round  his  wish
off  and  make  it  perfectly  express  the  state  of  his  mind.  Travellers  had  often  wide
stretches  of  wilderness-land  to  cross,  where,  just  because  it  was  wilderness,  some  sort  of
shelter  needed  to  be  provided  for  the  night.  But  it  might  not  be  an  inn  in  anything
like  our  understanding  of  the  word — perhaps  nothing  more  than  a  rough  enclosure,
where  only  that  was  provided  which  the  bare  necessities  of  the  moment  demanded.

11.  Why  thb  prophet  wishes  fob  this.  The  settled  society  in  which  the  prophet
has  been  living  has  become  rotten  in  all  its  important  relations.  Jeremiah  has  a
people  whom  he  must  describe  as  *'  my  people."  He  is  connected  with  them  by  a  tie
of  nature  which  no  repugnance  of  his  can  destroy.  But,  though  they  are  his  people,
that  cannot  make  him  to  overlook,  excuse,  or  tolerate  their  iniquities.  Nay,  the  very
fact  that  they  are  his  people  helps  to  make  the  iniquity  more  burdensome  to  him ;  for
with  one*s  own  people  one  has  so  mftch  to  do.  A  righteous  son  of  Sodom,  if  such  a
character  were  imaginable,  sickened  with  all  the  abominations  around  him,  might  well
have  left  his  kinsfolk,  if  they  would  not  listen  to  his  warning  or  profit  by  his  refusal  to
join  in  their  wrong-doing.  And  Jeremiah  may  be  looked  on  here  pretty  much  as  if  he
had  been  a  dweller  in  Sodom,  for  Jerusalem  was  spiritually  Sodom.  Adultery,  knavery,
habitual  lying  and  wrong-doing, — these  were  sad  elements  to  be  charged  as  going  to
the  substance  of  the  social  life  of  the  people.  And  the  prophet  wished  to  be  free  from
all  entanglement  with  such.  Of  course  we  are  not  to  take  his  wish  literally.  It  is  but
an  emphatic  way  of  indicating  how  separated  he  was  in  the  spirit  of  his  mind  from
such  considerations  as  ruled  in  only  too  many  hearts  of  Israel,  Though  among  his
people,  he  was  not  of  them.  United  according  to  the  flesh,  there  was  a  great  gulf
between  them  according  to  the  spirit.  His  people  though  they  were,  he  yet  was  com-
pelled to  look  upon  them  as  travellers  whom  he  casually  met  just  for  a  little  time.
And  so  must  Ood's  people  ever  learn  to  look  upon  many  of  those  whom  they  are  con-
tinually meeting  on  earth.  For  enduring  society  there  must  be  something  more  than
natural  ties,  frequent  intercourse,  or  community  of  intellectual  tastes  and  pursuits.  It
is  a  small  thing  to  be  brought  together  in  the  concerns  of  time  if  we  are  not  also
brought  together  in  the  concerns  of  eternity.  Sad  it  is  to  think  that  there  may  be  a
closer  bond  between  those  who  have  never  met  on  earth  than  between  those  who,  on
earth,  have  lived  for  years  together  1  Those  who  are  travelling  to  the  same  place  may
never  meet  by  the  way,  but  when  they  do  meet  it  is  not  in  the  traveller's  mere
lodging-place,  but  where  there  are  many  mansions,  and  whence  they  "  go  out  no  more
for  ever.  A  mansion  is  itself  a  place  that  abides^  and  those  who  dwell  in  it  are  meant
to  abide  also.— Y.

Ver.  3. — Wickedness  prevailing,  and  why  it  prevails,  "  These  wicked  people,"  says
the  prophet,  "  prevail,  but  their  prevailing  does  not  come  by  truth  and  good  faith."

I.  We  have  here  an  admission  that  wickedness  prevails.  It  is,  indeed,  one
great  consideration  in  the  prophet's  unutterable  grief  that  wickedness  is  so  strong  and
successful.  Man,  weak  and  puny  as  he  is  in  some  respects,  is  in  others  strong  to
achieve  very  impressive  results.  In  mere  physical  strength  there  are  many  brutes  that
far  excel  him,  but  he  has  faculties  which  so  multiply  his  strength  as  to  put  the  rest  of
creation  under  his  feet.  That  man,  with  his  peculiar  nature,  should  be  strong  to  do
good,  means  that  if  his  choice  so  falls  he  may  also  be  strong  to  do  evil.  The  prophet
looks  out,  then,  upon  wicked  men  who  prevail  in  their  plots  and  schemes.  He  has  no
wish  to  minimize  their  success.  He  uses  a  strong  word  to  indicate  it.  The  word  used
to  indicate  the  prevailing  of  the  waters  at  the  Deluge  is  the  word  also  used  to  indicate
the  prevailing  of  the  wicked  here.  The  wickedness  is  not  only  extensively  prenent,
but  manifestly  successful.  There  must  be  no  shirking  of  this  fact  It  is  another
matter,  indeed,  what  the  success  may  be  worth,  and  how  long  it  may  last ;  but  there  it
is,  such  as  it  is.  The  wicked  prevail  by  putting  the  good  into  prison,  and  even  to  the
taking  away  of  their  lives.  They  prevail  by  seducing  the  weak  and  self-indulgent  into
temptation.  They  prevail  by  deceiving  the  simple.  They  go  upon  the  maxim  that
everything  is  fair,  and  has  in  it  the  highest  necessity  if  it  helps  toward  the  attain-
ment of  their  ends.  And  their  ends  they  do  attain,  making  a  boast  of  their  success,
and  sneering  at  the  scrupulosity  of  those  who  will  not  follow  in  their  stips.

IL  The  instabiutt  of  this  prevailing  ib  hinted  at.    Integrity,  truth,  good


264  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  ix.  1— 26.

Cuth,  are  thrown  to  the  winds.  The  prophet  does  not  need  to  have  extorted  from  him
mn  admission  that  the  wicked  prevail;  but  alon^  with  the  admission  he  makes  an
anertion  which,  even  in  the  midst  of  his  melancholy,  gives  him  confidence  and  a
measure  of  satisfaction.  This  prevailing,  great  and  proud  as  it  is,  cannot  last,  for  it
lacks  the  essential  constituents  of  endurance.  The  man  who  gains  his  ends  by  deceit
aod  perfidy  must  of  necessity  deceive  himself  as  much  as  he  docs  others.  He  persuades
himself  that  he  will  never  grow  weary  of  what  he  so  much  enjoys.  He  forgets,  too,
that  every  one  whom  he  deceives  may  be  thereby  learning  a  lesson  which  some  day
may  come  back  in  unexpected  and  terrible  treachery  to  himself.  There  is  not  a  single
instance  of  wicked  prosperity  that  need  alarm  or  perplex  us.  The  more  wickedness
raises  its  head  in  boasting,  the  more  sudden  may  be  the  final  overthrow.

III.  Those  who  cleave  to  truth  always  prevail  in  the  end.  They  do  it  by
the  best  kind  of  prevailing — that  of  vanquishing  the  evil  in  their  own  hearts;  and,  so
iar  as  their  overcoming  is  also  an  overa)ming  oi'  others,  they  do  it  in  such  a  way
as  provokes  no  retaliation.  He  who  has  a  settled  regard  for  what  is  real  and  true  and
abiding,  keeps  out  of  his  future  those  very  things  which  bring  confusion  to  the  wicked.
The  prevailing  of  the  righteous  may  not,  indeed,  be  exhibited  so  as  to  impress  the  eyes
of  the  world ;  but  that  is  a  small  matter.  He  who  oveicometh  looks  forward  to  Grod's
rewards,  which  are  such  that  the  world  cannot  appreciate  them.  The  great  thing  is  to
be  calmly  conscious  in  our  own  breasts  that  wo  are  winning  the  victory  God  would
have  us  win. — Y.

Vers.  4 — 8. — The  social  bond  a  rope  of  sand.  This  is  very  strong  language  for  a  man
to  use  concerning  the  society  in  which  he  lives,  but  it  harmonizes  with  the  strength  of
the  language  which  the  prophet  has  been  using  with  respect  to  himself  in  vers.  1,  2.
A  very  bad  state  of  things  cannot  be  described  by  mild  words.  Such  descriptions
as  that  in  this  passage  make  plain  how  just  and  necessary  the  impending  desolation  of
Jerusalem  was.  He  who  has  just  expressed  such  wishes  for  himself  must  speak  with
words  that  startle  when  he  comes  to  counsel  ail  who,  in  the  midst  of  many  perils^
would  wish  to  act  prudently.

I.  There  is  an  implication  herb  as  to  what  society  in  Israel  might  have
BEEN.  Without  looking  for  perfection,  it  was  reasonable  to  expect  something  a  great
deal  better  than  what  the  prophet  saw.  There  is  the  strength  and  help  coming  fron$  real
friendship.  The  more  men  are  brought  together  the  more  chances  they  have  of
making  most  precious  friendships.  Modem  facilities  of  intercourse  have  probably  done
much  to  enlarge  such  relations.  Men  meet  oftener  and  communicate  more  easily  than
they  were  once  able  to  do.  But  it  ought  to  be  especially  true  of  those  living  near  one
another  that  neighbourhood  and  acquaintance,  other  things  being  equal,  should  lead  on
to  friendship.  The  claim  of  friendship  is  recognized  as  something  special — beyond  the
claim  of  kindred,  humanity,  and  common  country,  in  time  of  trouble  we  look  to
friends  as  those  to  whom  we  have  a  right  to  look,  and  we  must  be  ready  for  similar
claims  upon  ourselves.  The  prophet  indicates  also  the  claim  of  brotherhood.  Brother
should  help  brother.  Not,  of  course,  that  mere  natural  nearness  can  compensate  for
deeper  differences  of  disposition  and  temperament ;  but  the  remembrance  of  a  common
parentage  should  have  at  least  the  negative  efifect  of  destroying  all  temptation  to  injure.
Then  there  is  general  integrity  in  all  dtalings  between  man  and  man.  It  is  one  of  the
most  reasonable  of  all  expectations  that  we  shall  so  live  and  act  that  our  word  shall  be
as  good  as  our  bond.  That  which  is  fair  and  just  towards  every  one  should  be  wished
and  provided  for.     The  good  name  of  each  should  be  the  care  of  all.

II.  There  is  a  very  bold  statement  as  to  what  the  society  in  Israel  actually
WAS.  The  man  who  could  speak  thus  must  have  been  a  man  of  great  courage — a  man
into  whom  Gk>d  had  put  a  spirit  of  resolution  agreeing  with  the  words  lie  had  to
speak.  Stem,  unsparing  words  are  only  belied  and  made  to  look  ridiculous  when
uttered  by  a  faltering  Dp.  If  the  prophet's  words  here  were  true,  this  was  a  society
only  in  name.  Some  may  say  that  such  words  could  not  be  true — that  things  could
not  possibly  be  so  bad.  But,  remember,  these  are  the  words  of  a  prophet  of  God,  and
God  is  he  who  searches  the  heart  and  can  tell  exactly  how  far  advanced  in  corruption  a
society  is  at  any  particular  time.  Note  how  a  skilled  physician  will  assert  the  existence
of  mortal  mischief  in  a  patient  when  as  yet  there  is  no  sigu  of  it  to  others^  and  also


OH.  IX.  1—20.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  266

predict  with  tolerable  correctness  how  long  it  will  take  the  mischief  to  run  its  course.
And  shall  not  Gud  be  much  more  discerning?  All  doleful  stiitements  as  to  the  rotten-
ness of  society  have  come  to  bo  called  jeremiads,  as  if  they  were  really  in  the  same
class  as  the  statement  of  Jeremiah  here.  But  very  often  such  doleful  statements  are
only  the  result  of  ignorance  and  partial  views,  coming  from  a  defect  in  him  who  sees
and  not  in  the  thing  seen.  Jeremiah  stated  the  simple  truth  here.  If  there  had  been
hopeful  signs  they  would  have  been  mentioned,  for  God  never  lacks  in  an  encouraging
recognition  of  the  preservative  elements  in  society.  To  one  who  notes  the  warnings  of
Isaiah  it  will  be  nothing  wonderful  that  the  evils  perceptible  in  his  time  should  have
strengthened  into  the  deplorable  universality  indicated  here.  And  even  now,  in  places
where  the  outward  signs  of  Christianity  abound,  there  are  proofs  that  society  might,  in
no  very  long  time,  approach  the  description  of  Jeremiah.  Tne  same  evils  are  continually
present,  though  kept  in  check.  No  one  trusts  a  stranger.  He  must  first  of  all  take  the
lowest  place,  and  do  such  things  as  need  the  least  amount  of  trust,  and  so  gradually
work  himself  into  the  highest  place  of  esteem.  No  one  complains  that  he  canuot  win
confidence  at  the  first  Family  jars  and  disputings  are  proverbial.  Jesus,  we  knowj
divides  brother  against  brother ;  but  it  is  nothing  new  that  he  thus  brings  into  society,
for  Jacob  is  the  supplanter  of  Esau,  and  brother  complains  against  brother  to  this  very
Jesus,  because  he  thinks  himself  defrauded  of  his  rights  in  the  inheritance.  There  were
two  couples  of  natural  brethren  in  the  company  of  the  anostles,  and  in  their  carnal  days
they  were  found  hotly  embroiled  in  the  dispute  as  to  who  should  stand  greatest  in  the
kingdom.  There  are  abundant  seeds  of  evu  in  society  which  are  mercifully  prevented
from  having  free  scope,  else  the  result  might  soon  ^ow  us  that  Jeremiah  was  in  no
wise  going  beyond  the  essential  truth  in  what  is  said  here. — Y.

Vers.  23,  24. — Exultation  of  heart  and  life  according  to  the  will  of  God,    I.  Man  ib

BET  BEFORE  US  HERE  AS  BEING  IN  A  STATE  OF  VEBT  LIVELY  EMOTION.      He  Is  SpokcU  of

as  glorying ;  and  the  Hebrew  word  used  is  such  as  suggests  the  idea  of  a  man,  not  only
intensely  pleased  within  his  own  breast,  but  whose  pleasure,  like  heat  bursting  into  flamcL
finds  vent  in  words  and  songs  of  exultation.  The  glory  and  exultation  felt  by  the  mind
within  may  appear  in  many  ways — in  the  face,  in  the  gestures,  in  the  speech ;  but
the  prophet  indicates  here  the  highest  kind  of  expression,  that  of  poetic  and  musical
utterance.  Genius  comes  in  to  render  permanent  certain  experiences  of  exultation,  the
record  of  which  would  otherwise  speedily  {mss  away.  There  is  thus  set  before  us  a
certain  state  of  mind  and  a  certain  expression  of  it.  And  be  it  observed  that  this
state  of  mind  is  not  condemned  in  itself;  nay,  it  is  rather  invited  and  encouraged.  It
is  only  condemned  when  it  is  produced  by  a  wrong  consideration  of  the  objects  exciting
it,  and  there  is  a  plain  direction  how  to  produce  it  in  the  right  way.  Hence  we  see
how  God  intends  man  to  be  raised  into  great  activity  of  emotion.  It  is  a  wicked  thing
to  repress  and  starve  the  feelings.  Some  there  are  who  act  as  if  the  expression  (3
emotion  were  a  thing  to  be  ashamed  of;  they  seem  to  think  they  are  doing  a  good
work  in  trying  to  kill  everything  like  living  feeling  within  them.  Now,  it  is  perfectly
certain  that  G^  would  encourage  everything  which  gives  the  emotions  a  large  part  to
play  in  human  life,  and  particularly  the  joyful  emotions.  Notice,  for  it  is  an  interest*
ing  thing  to  notice,  how  it  is  Jeremiah,  the  weeping  prophet  as  he  is  called,  who  here
points  out  to  his  erring  brethren  the  way  to  the  best  sort  of  exultation.  The  truth  is
that  Jeremiah  was  a  rejoicing  believer  as  well  as  a  weeping  prophet  He  wept  over
Jerusalem,  as  did  the  greater  One  who  came  long  after ;  but  it  is  plain  that  he  must
also  have  had  deep  joys  in  his  own  soul,  even  as  Jesus  had.  God  wishes  us  to  cultivate
the  singing,  exultant  heart;  for  that  we  all  may  have,  even  when  we  lack  the  singing
lip.  We  are  to  have  much  grief  and  pity,  continual  sorrow  of  heart,  because  of  the
world's  sins,  but  it  argues  a  great  lack  and  a  great  loss  if  we  have  not  much  joy  because
of  God's  salvation.  The  exultation  which  comes  from  a  selfish  use  of  the  world  and  a
selfish  success  must  be  put  away,  but  only  that  another  and  purer  kind  of  exultation
may  take  its  place.

IL  The  warning  lest  this  exultation,  wrm  the  consequent  expression  of  it,
SHOULD  BE  produced  IN  A  WRONG  WAT.  Three  classes  are  spoken  of — the  wise,  the
strong,  the  rich.  Wise  and  strong  by  natural  endowments ;  rich  by  the  acquirement
of  visiblci  tangible  possessions.    iUid  wise^  strong,  and  rich  men  may  rejoice  and  boast


286  I'HB  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  ix.  1— 26.

and  sing  when,  perhaps,  their  feelings  should  rather  tend  to  the  other  extreme,  of
mourning  and  humiliation.     A  word  on  the  warning  to  each  of  these  classes.     1.   The
wise.    The  existence  of  the  wise  man  is  recognized.     A  wise  man  is  not  of  necessity  to
be  always  contrasted  with  the  foolish.     He  has  a  right  to  the  name  of  wise  if  bis
practical  faculties  of  mind  rise  above  the  common  level.     When  such  a  one  has  shown
nimself  foreseeing  and  cautious,  patient  to  wait  when  action  would  be  hurtful,  yet
prompt  to  decide  when  decision  is  necessary — when,  in  short,  he  has  obtained  a  general
reputation  for  wistlom — it  is  then  only  mock-modesty  for  him  to  pretend  that  his  gifts
are  not  beyond  those  of  common  men.    Wisdom  is  the  strength  of  the  mind,  and  the
man  who  has  it  cannot  be  unconscious  of  it,  any  more  than  the  man  strong:  in  body
can  be  unconscious  of  his  strength.     But  this  wisdom,  while  it  is  to  be  used,  disciplinea,
made  the  most  of,  is  not  a  thing  to  glory  in.     The  more  it  is  looked  at,  the  more  its
limits  will  be  seen.     See  how  easily  it  can  be  misused.     It  was  said  of  Burke  that  he
gave  up  to  party  what  was  meant  for  mankind,  although  he  would  strenuously  have
maintained  that,  through  party,  he  got  his  best  means  for  serving  mankind.     But  of
many  it  is  only  too  true  that  their  great  faculties  of  intellect,  meant  for  the  good  of
men  and  the  glory  of  God,  have  been  deliberately  given  up  to  that  which  hurts  men.
Wisdom,  as  wisdom,  is  not  to  be  gloried  in.     It  must  be  an  instrument  in  a  higher
hand  before  it  can  work  out  such  a  result  as  will  fill  the  contemplating  mind  with
exultation  and  praise,     2.  2%e  strong.     How  much  men  admire  strength — strength  of
body,  or  strength  to  maintain  and  carry  out  some  settled  purpose  1     The  young  men
who  contended  in  the  Grecian  games  gloried  in  their  strength,  and  so  did  their  kins-
folk and  all  the  people  who  took  pride  in  the  land  that  produced  such.    And  yet
glorying  of  this  sort  would  not  bear  reflection.     Assuredly  it  could  not  endure  in  a
renewed  mind  to  think  that  the  prize  of  victory  had  been  gotten  by  the  defeat  and
humiliation  of  a  brother  man.     Glorying  in  strength  means  looking  back  on  victories
of  brute  violence,  such  victories  as  Goliath  was  wont  to  rejoice  in.      Glorying  in
strength  means  sitting  down  at  the  banquet  with  the  blood-stained  conqueror,  and
singing  of  his  achievements  amid  the  flush  and  insolence  of  wine.     And  it  means  also
the  encouragement  and  the  formation  of  similar  hoiies  and  purposes  for  the  future.
Such  feelings  of  glorying  in  mere  strength  the  beast  of  prey  may  have  as  he  goes  up
and  down  in  the  forest,  but  they  are  not  the  feelings  of  a  man  considering  the  possible
range  of  his  thoughts  and  aspirations.     A  strong  man  must  employ  his  strength  usefully,
recollecting  that  it  was  given  so  that,  with  a  devout  and  obedient  mind  in  a  strong  body,
he  might  serve  God  in  his  day  and  generation.     3.   The  rich.     Rich  men  glory  in  their
wealth,  and  not  without  plausibility.     They  find  that  it  stands  excellently  well  in  the
place  of  wisdom  and  strength.    They  can  buy  the  wisdom  and  the  strength  of  others ;
and  the  more  freely  they  expend,  the  more  also,  in  certiiin  ways,  they  obtain.     He  who
professes  to  despise  wealth  never  gets  credit  for  sincerity  ;  and  yet  it  is  perfectly  cer-
tain that  those  who  profess  to  glory  in  this  same  wealth  are  preparing  for  themselves,
in  one  way  or  another,  a  terrible  humiliation.    Let  them  lose  their  wealth,  and  they
will  waken  to  the  discovery  that  they  have  also  lost  their  attractions.    There  is  more
to  be  said  for  glorying  in  one*s  wisdom  and  strength  than  in  one's  external  possessions ;
for  the  wisdom  and  strength,  whatever  their  shortcomings,  are  really  a  part  of  the  man,
while  the  external  possessions  are  little  better  than  an  accident.

III.    Man    IB   DIRECTED    TO   A    CAUSE    OF    EXULTATION    WHICH,   WITH    THE    UTMOST
CONFIDENCE,  HE  JfAY  ALLOW  TO  OPERATE   FREELY   ON   HIS   MIND.      There   is   a   SOng   for

man  to  sing  worthy  of  his  highest  powers — a  song  in  which  he  may  glory  with  respect
to  himself,  because  he  has  become  somewhat  of  that  which  he  ought  to  be.  We  are
not  allowed  to  sing  exultingly  and  proudly  of  our  own  natural  powers,  even  if  they
were  the  powers  of  a  Plato,  a  Shakespeare,  or  a  Newton  ;  but  there  is  a  sure  standing-

Slace  for  us  to  exult  lawfully  in  what  we  have  become.  The  least  in  the  kingdom  of
eaven  is  greater  than  the  greatest  born  of  women.  We  may  always  magnify  humanity
when  we  see  one  of  ourselves  coming  to  a  true  knowledge  of  Grod.  The  peculiar
possibility  of  glory  to  man  is  that  he  is  able  to  know  his  Maker.  Understand  and
know.  Surely  these  words  mean  a  great  deal ;  one  can  hardly  put  too  much  of
meaning  and  encouragement  into  them.  Through  Isaiah,  Jehovah  said,  "The  ox
knoweth  his  owner,  and  the  ass  his  master's  crib ;  but  Israel  doth  not  know,  my
people  doth  not  consider.**    And  yet,  if  Israel  will  only  consider  and  turn,  it  is  capable


CH.X.1— 26.]   THE  BOOK  OP  I'HB  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.


267


of  knowing  Qod.  as  no  brate,  however  docile,  attentive,  and  faithful  it  be,  can  ever  come
to  know  its  master.  The  brute  gives  to  its  master  a  brute's  recognition ;  it  does  the
utmost  its  faculties  enable  it  to  do ;  but  in  coming  to  man  we  come  to  one  who  can  be
so  alter^  as  to  know  God  even  as  a  child  knows  its  father.  The  true  glory  of  the
worst  of  men  is  that  he  can  be  regenerated.  The  glory  of  the  best  of  men  is  that  he
hcu  been  regenerated.  The  great  end  to  be  aimed  at  is  that  every  man  should  exult  in
his  having  been  made  a  partaker  of  the  Divine  nature.  The  more  he  thinks  of  his
Saviour,  the  more  he  will  glory  in  this — that  he,  in  spite  of  all  his  spiritual  ignorance
and  blindness,  has  had  in  him  a  power  to  be  so  renewed  and  uplifted ;  that  he  has
become  one  of  the  exceeding  great  multitude,  who  owe  eternal  blessedness  to  the  work
of  GhriaL  To  speak  of  the  possibility  of  such  glorying  as  comes  from  the  knowledge
of  God  was  a  great  matter  in  relation  to  these  chilaren  of  Israel.  They  had  fallen
into  the  most  appalling  errors  as  to  the  character  and  disposition  of  deity.  They  had
come  to  have  gods  many — gods  who  were  the  patrons  of  cruelty,  rapacity,  tyranny,
injustice,  lust,  and  covetousness.  They  had  to  practise,  as  a  matter  of  religion,  things
opposed  to  those  very  things  in  which  Jehovah  here  represents  himself  as  delighting.
What  was  required  from  them,  therefore,  was  to  listen  humbly  and  attentively  to  those
prophetic  expostulations  which  pointed  towards  light,  truth,  redemption,  and  a  new
song  to  be  put  in  their  mouths  by  Jehovah  himself.  And  a  similar  way  is  to  be  ours
if  we  would  be  sure  of  glorying  in  the  Lord.  The  way  of  Qod  in  this  matter  is  by
the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus,  and  into  that  way  Ghxl's  Spirit  must  lead  us,  and  keep  us  in
it  even  to  the  end,  amid  all  the  difficulties  arising  from  the  natural  pride  of  numaa
hearts. — Y.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  X.

Whoever  wrote  the  prophecy  in  vers.! — 16
of  this  chapter,  it  was  not  Jeremiah;  but
of  course,  as  the  passage  forms  part  of  a
canonical  book,  its  claims  to  the  character  of
a  Scripture  remain  the  same  as  if  it  were  the
work  of  our  prophet  It  is  obvious  at  the
very  outset  that  it  interrupts  the  connection ;
vers.  17 — 25  stand  in  no  relation  to  vers.
1 — 16,  but  attach  themselves  most  naturally
(see  below)  to  the  concluding  verses  of  oh,
ix.  The  author  tells  us  himself,  as  clearly
as  he  can,  that  the  people  whom  he  ad-
dresses are  free  as  yet  (or  at  any  rate  have
freed  themselves)  from  the  guilt  of  idolatry,
and  consequently  cannot  be  the  same  as
those  who  are  so  severely  chastised  for  their
polytheism  in  ch.  vii.  17,  18,  30,  31.  The
style  too  is,  on  the  whole,  very  different
from  that  of  the  writer  of  the  preceding
chapters  (see  the  details  in  the  introdnc-
tiou  to  this  passage  in  the  Commentary  of
Naegelsbach).  But  how  can  we  account  for
tfuch  an  insertion?  Only  by  the  view  al-
ready mentioned  (supported  by  a  large  num-
ber of  facts  throughout  the  prophetic  litera-
ture), that  the  prophecies  were  edited,  and
here  and  there  supplemented  by  the  **8ons
of  the  prophets  **  (if  the  term  may  be  ap-


plied in  a  new  sense),  i,e.  by  persons  provi-
dentially raised  up  for  this  purpose,  and
endowed  with  at  least  a  younger  son's
portion  of  the  prophetic  Spirit.  In  the
times  of  the  editor  of  Jeremiah,  to  whom  we
owe  the  first  sixteen  verses  of  this  chapter,
the  Jews  must  have  been  in  danger  of  falling
into  idolatry,  and  our  prophet,  guided  by  the
Divine  Spirit,  took  up  the  pen  to  counteract
this  danger.  His  name  has  not  come  down
to  us;  indeed,  self-abnegation  is  the  cha-
racteristic of  inspired  writers.  How  un-
certain is  the  authorship  of  at  any  rate  not
a  few  of  the  psalms,  and  of  all  the  historical
books!  And  have  we  a  right  to  be  sur-
prised that  the  prophets  too,  absorbed  in
their  glorious  mission,  have  sometimes  for-
gotten to  hand  on  their  names  to  posterity  ?
It  is  of  course  possible,  in  the  abstract,  that
some  fragments  of  the  passage  are  really
due  to  Jeremiah ;  but  how  are  we  to  distin-
guish them  from  the  rest?  Hitzig  thinks
that  vers.  6 — 8  and  ver.  10  are  the  great
prophet's  work;  but  these  are  the  very
verses  the  origin  of  which  is  the  most
doubtful,  since  they  are  entirely  omitted  in
the  Septuagint  One  thing  is  certain — that
the  passage  vers.  1 — 16  stands  in  close  re-
lation to  the  latter  part  of  the  Book  of
Isaiah.    The  prophetic  writer,  whoever  ho


268


THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,      [ch.  x.  1—25.


was,  had  his  mind  Baturatod  with  tho  ideas
and  phraseology  of  tliat  magnificoat  work.
The  similarity,  however,  is  hardly  so  close  as
to  justify  tho  view  that  Isa.  xl. — Ixvi.  and
ch.  X.  1 — 16  are  productions  of  the  same
inspired  writer.  [It  is  no  objection  to  the
theory  here  advocated  that  the  passage  is
found  in  the  Septuagiut;  for  no  one  has
ever  supposed  that  the  process  of  editing
the  Scriptures  was  not  already  long  since
finished  when  the  Alexandrine  Version,  or
rather  collection  of  versions,  was  made.]  It
is  a  singular  fact  that  ver.  11  lb  written  in
Chaldee  (see  note  helow).

Ver.  2.— The  way  of  the  heathen.  **  Way  "
equivalent  to  "  religion  "  (comp.  6^hs,  Acts
ix.  2,  etc.).  Be  not  dismayed  at  the  signs  of
heaven ;  alluding  to  the  astrological  calcu-
lations based  upon  extraordinary  appear-
ances in  the  sky.  Diodorus  Siculus  remarks
(ii.  30) — ^and  his  statement  is  fully  confirmed
by  the  Babylonian  cuneiform  tablets — that
'^the  appearance  of  comets,  eclipses  of  the
8UU  and  moon,  earthquakes,  and  in  fact  every
kind  of  change  occasioned  by  the  atmospliere,
whether  good  or  bad,  both  to  nations  and  to
kings  and  private  individuals  [were  omens
of  future  events]."  A  catalogue  of  the
seventy  standard  astrological  tablets  is  to  be
found  in  the  third  volume  of  the  British
Museum  collection  of  inscriptions.  Among
the  items  we  read,  "  A  collection  of  twenty-
five  tablets  of  the  signs  of  heaven  and  earth,
according  to  their  good  presage  and  tiieir
bad ; "  and  again,  "  Tablets  [rej;arding]  the
signs  of  the  heaven,  along  with  the  star
(comet)  which  has  a  corona  in  front  and  a
tail  behind;  the  appearance  of  the  sky,"
etc.  There  can  hardly  be  a  doubt  that  the
prophetic  writer  had  such  pseudo-science  as
this  in  his  eye  (see  Professor  Sayce,  *■  The
Astronomy  and  Astrology  of  the  Baby-
lonians, with  translations  of  the  tablets,*
etc,  in  the  Trantactiont  of  the  Society  of
Biblical  Archseology,  iii.  145 — 339).

Ver.  3. — The  costoms  of  the  people.
•*  People  "  should,  as  usual,  be  corrected  into
peoplee — the  heathen  nations  are  referred  to.
The  Hebrew  has  **  the  statutes ; "  but  the
Authorized  Version  is  substantially  right,
customs  having  a  force  as  of  iron  in  Eastern
countries.  It  seems  to  be  implied  that  the
•*  customs  "  are  of  religious  origin  (comp.  2
Kings  xvii.  8,  where  "the  statutes  of  tho
heathen"  are  obviously  the  rites  and
customs  of  polytheism.  For  one  catteth  a
tree,  etc.  This  is  intended  to  prove  the
foregoing  statement  of  tho  "vanity."  or
groundlessness,  of  idolatry.  The  order  of
the  Hebrew,  however,  is  more  forcible,  for
Of  iPood  out  of  the  forest  one  cutlelh  it,  viz.
the  idol.


Ver.  4.— They  deck  it  .  .  .  that  it  move
not.  The  close  resemblance  of  this  verse  to
Isa.  xl.  19,  20  ;  xli.  7,  will  strike  every  reader.
**  Move  "  should  rather  be  totter.

Ver.  5. — They  are  upright  as  the  palm
tree;  rather,  they  are  like  a  pillar  (i.e.  a
scarecrow)  in  a  field  of  cucumbers.  This
is  the  interpretation  given  to  our  passage
in  ver.  70  of  the  apocryphal  Epistle  ot
Jeremiah  (written  in  the  Maccabean  period,
evidently  with  reference  to  our  prophecy),
and  is  much  more  striking  than  the  rival
translation,  **like  a  palm  tree  of  turned
work,"  i.e.  stiff,  immovable  (comp.  Virgil,
*Georg.,'  iv.  110,  111;  Horace,  *8at,'i.  8,
1 — 4).  They  must  needs  be  borne  .  .  .  they
oannot  do  evil ;  a  reminiscence,  apparently,
of  Isa.  xlvL  7 :  xli.  23.

Ver.  6.— Forasmuch  as  there  is  none;
rather,  so  thcU^  etc.  But  practically  it  is
merely  a  strengthened  negative.  There  is
none  like  unto  thee ;  none,  that  is,  among
those  who  claim  to  have  Divine  power  (comp.
the  phrase,  "Gotl  of  gods,"  Deut.  x.  17;
Ps.  cxxxvi.  2).  It  would  appear  from  some
passages,  however,  as  if  the  heathen  did
not  worship  mere  nonentities  (though  idols
are  sometimes  called  "  things  of  nought,"
e.g.  ten  times  by  Isaiah)  by  comparison  with
Jehovah,  but  that  there  was  a  dark  back-
ground of  awful  personal  or  quasi-personal
reality  (^e.g,  Deut.  iv.  7;  2  Chron.  xxviiL
23).

Ver.  7. — 0  King  of  nations.  As  time  went
on,  the  sacred  writers  became  more  and
more  distinct  in  their  assertions  of  the
truth  that  Jehovah,  the  Self-revealing  God,
is  not  Israel's  King  only,  but  also  of  the
world  (comp.  Ps.  xxii.  2«  ;  xlvii.  7,  8 ;  xcvi.
10).  To  thee  doth  it  appertain;  viz.  that
men  should  fear  thee.  Forasmuch  as,  etc.
(see  above,  on  ver.  6).  Among  all  the  wise
men.  "Men"  is  supplied,  but  doubtless
rightly.  It  is  a  contest — how  unequal  a
one  I — between  Jehovah  and  the  sages  of
the  heathen  (comp.  "  Yet  he  also  is  wise,"
Isa.  xxxi.  2).

Ver.  8. — Brutish  and  fooUsh.  In  fact,  the
original  meaning  of  the  idolatrous  reli-
gions had  begun,  probably,  to  fade,  and  the
worship  of  Bel  and  Nebo  had  become  (as
the  worship  of  the  Egyptian  gods  became
at  a  later  period)  increasingly  formal  and
ritualistic.  The  stock  is  a  doctrine  of  vani-
ties ;  rather,  an  instmction  of  vanities ;  i.e.
all  that  the  idols  can  teach  is  vanities.
Against  this  is  the  plural  ("  vanities,"  not
"  vanity  ") ;  it  is  more  natural  (and  also  mora
in  accordance  with  usage ;  comp.  Gen.  xli.
26,  Hebrew)  to  render,  the  instruction  of  Vte
vanities  is  wooden  ("  vanities  "  has  the  con-
stant technical  sense  of  "  idols ; "  see  ch.  viii.
19;  xiv.  22;  Deut.  xxxii  21  ;  Ps.  xxxi.  6).
The  clause  then  famishes  a  readou  fox  the


CH.X.1— 25.]   THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.


2<^0


folly  of  the  heathen;  how  should  they
attain  to  more  than  a  "wooden"  know-
ledge, when  the  idols  themselves  are  but
wood  ?    A  bitter  truth  in  an  ironical  form.

Ver.  9. — This  verse  apparently  once
followed  yer.  5.  LikeTvers.  7  and  8,  it  is
omitted  in  the  Sentuagint.  Silyer  spread
into  plates,  etc.  The  silver  and  gold  were
meant  for  the  coating  of  the  wooden  image
(oomp.  Isa.  XXX.  22 ;  xl.  19).  Tanhish ;  t.e.
TartaBsns,  in  south-west  Spain,  between
the  two  mouths  of  the  Bastis,  or  Guadal-

auivir.  Gold  from  Uphai.  A  place  bearing
lis  name,  or  anything  like  it,  is  not  known
from  other  sources  than  the  Old  Testament
writings ;  and  hence  a  corruption  of  the  text
has  naturally  been  suspected  (Ophir  into
XJphaz).  As,  however,  r  and  t  are  not  easily
confounded,  either  in  the  earlier  or  the  later
Hebrew  characters,  this  view  must  be
abandoned,  though  it  has  the  authority  of
several  ancient  versions  of  this  passage
(including  the  Peshito  and  the  Targum).
The  name  occurs  again  in  Dan.  x.  5.  The
Peshito,  moreover,  curiously  enough,  trans-
lates tdhab  mu/dz  in  1  Kings  x.  18  (Autho-
rized Version,  "  the  best  gold  ")  by  "  gold
from  Ophir."  Blue  and  purple.  The  Hebrew
has  no  word,  strictly  speaking,  for  either
•*blue"  or  "purple.  Both  these  words
here  used  probably  express  colouring  matter
rather  than  colours  (this  is  certain  of  the
latter  word,  which  properly  designates  a
kind  of  mussel,  the  shell  of  which  yielded
dye).  The  first  produced  a  violet  purple,  the
second  a  reddish  purple.

Ver.  10.— The  true  God ;  literally,  a  Ood
in  truthf  the  accusative  of  apposition  being
chosen  instead  of  the  usual  genitive  con-
struction, to  emphasize  the  idea  of  "  truth."
Ver.  11.— Thus  shall  ye  say,  etc.  This
verse  is,  unlike  the  rest  of  the  chapter,
written  in  Ghaldee,  and  greatly  interrupts
the  connection.  Whether  it  is  a  fragment
of  a  Targum  (or  Ghaldee  paraphrase)  repre-
senting a  Hebrew  verse  really  written  by
Jeremiah,  or  whether  it  is  a  marginal  note
by  some  scribe  or  reader  which  has  found
its  way  by  accident  into  the  text,  cannot  be
positively  determined.  What  is  certain  is
that  it  is  not  in  its  right  place,  though  it
already  stood  here  when  the  Septungint
Version  of  Jeremiah  was  made.  To  argue,
with  the  *  Speaker's  Commentary,'  that  the
latter  circumstance  is  decisive  of  the  correct-
ness of  the  passage  in  its  present  position,
implies  a  view  of  the  unchangeableness  of
the  text  in  the  early  centuries  which  few
leading  scholars  will  admit.

Vers.  12 — 16. — Repeated  with  a  slight
variation  in  eh.  li.  15—19.

Ver.  12. — He  hath  made  the  earth,  etc.
(comp.  the  frequent  references  to  the  Divine
creatorship  in  the  latter  part  of  Isaiah  (xl.


22 ;  xlii.  5 ;  xliv.  24 ;  xlv.  12,  18  ;  li.  13).  By
his  disoretion ;  rather,  by  his  understanding.

Ver.  13. — ^When  he  uttereth  his  voice,  eta
The  phrase  is  difficult,  but  the  Authorized
Version  probably  gives  the  riglit  sense.
God's  "  voice  "  is  the  thunder  (Ps.  xxix.  3),
which  is  accompanied  by  the  gathering  of
heavy  clouds  ("His  pavilion  round  about
him,"  Ps.  xviii.  11).  He  canseth  the  vapours
to  ascend,  etc. ;  the  storm-clouds  coming  up
more  and  more  thickly  from  the  horizon.
From  this  point  the  verse  agrees  with  Ps.
cxxxv.  7  (the  psalm  is  full  of  such  reminis-
cences, and  is  obviously  very  late).  Light-
nings with  rain ;  rather,  for  the  rain.  The
lightnings  are,  as  it  were,  the  heralds  or
attendants  of  the  rain.  The  wind  out  of  his
treasures ;  a  noble  figure,  used  elsewhere  of
the  snow  and  hail  (Job  xxxviii.  22),  and  of
the  waters  of  the  sea  (Ps.  xxxiii.  7).

Ver.  14. — Before  these  natural  miracles,
all  men,  except  those  who  have  been
enlightened  by  revelation,  are  wtthotU
hnowledge  (so,  and  not  in  his  knowledge,
we  ought  to  render);  i.e.  without  in.-i^ht
into  their  origin  and  meaning  (compare
the  overwhelming  series  of  questions  in  the
sublime  theophany  in  Job,  ch.  xxxviii.,
xxxix.).  Every  founder  is  confounded  by,
etc. ;  rather,  every  goldsmith  is  brought  to
shame  by  the  graven  image ;  for  how  can  the
work  which  has  needed  all  the  resources  of
his  skill  deliver  him  ?

Ver.  15. — The  very  essence  of  idols  is
vanity;  they  are  unreal  as  "a  breath;"
they  are,  not  so  much  tiie  work  of  errors
as  a  vx)rk  of  mockery ^  i.e.  not  op%u  risu
dignum,  but  a  work  which  rewards  the
efforts  bestowed  upon  its  production  by
disappointment.

Ver.  16. — The  portion  of  Jacob ;  i.e.  Jeho-
vah. The  phrase  appears  to  have  been
coined  at  a  lower  level  of  religitm,  when
every  nation  was  supposed  to  have  its  own
patron  deity ;  just  as  the  prophet  says,
ironically,  to  the  fetish- worshippers  of
Israel,  "Among  the  smooth  stones  of  the
stream  is  thy  portion "  (Isa,  Ivii.  5),  and
Moses,  in  Deuteronomy  (iv.  19),  speaks  of
the  host  of  heaven  as  having  been  "  divided
[i.e.  assigned]  unto  all  nations  under  the
whole  heaven."  But,  of  course,  the  phrase
is  susceptible  of  a  high,  spiritual  ap[)lica-
tion  (comp.  Ps.  xvi.  6 ;  cxlii.  5).  God's  people
are,  by  ^heir  very  conception,  an  ^K\oyif^
chosen  out  by  God,  and  choosing  him,  and
not  the  world,  for  their  portion.  "  Making
the  best  of  both  worlds"  is  an  object
implicitly  condemned  by  this  consecrated
phrase.  The  former  of  all  things.  How
much  more  forcible  is  the  original  phrase :
" ...  of  the  whole,"  i.e.  the  universe !  "  To
form  "  is  a  phrase  constantly  used  t»f  God  in
the  second  part  of  Isaiah.    The  rod  of  his


270


THE    BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,     [ch.  x.  1—26.


inheritanee.  **  Rod  "  should  rather  be  tribe.
The  twelve  tribes  had  an  inner  unity,  as
contrasted  with  other  peoples;  comp.  Ps.
Ixxiv.  2  and  Isa.  Ixiii.  17  ("  tribes")-

Vers.  17—22. — This  passage  connects
itself  immediately  with  ch.  iz.,  where  the
invasion  of  Judah  and  the  dispersion  of  its
inhabitants  have  been  foretold.  Here,  after
describing  dramatically  the  departure  of
the  latter  into  exile,  the  prophet  reports  a
distinct  revelation  of  the  same  fact,  so  that
tiiis  can  no  longer  be  assumed  to  be  mere
imaginative  rhetoric.  The  Jewish  people  is
then  introduced,  lamenting  her  sad  fate,  but
expressing  resignation.

Ver.  17. — Gatier  up  thy  wares.  **  Wares  "
should  rather  bo  bundle.  There  is  no
allusion  to  trafficking.  0  inhabitant  of  the
fortreM ;  rather,  thou  Hiat  dwellett  besieged.

Ver.  18. — I  will  sling  ont;  a  forcible
image,  to  express  the  violence  of  the  expul-
gion;  comp.  Isa.  xxii.  17,  18  (ver.  17  needs
correcting).  At  this  once;  rather,  at  this
Ume  (comp.  ch.  Ivi.  21).  Invasion  was  no
novelty  to  the  Jews,  but  had  hitherto  merely
produced  loss  of  goods  rather  than  of  personal
liberty.  That  t^ey  may  find  it  so;  better,
UuU  they  may  feel  it.  Others  supply  as  the
subject  "  Jehovah,"  comparing  Ps.  xxxii.  6,
•*  In  a  time  of  finding  "  (Authorized  Version,
**  When  thou  mayest  be  found  ").  Jeremiah
himself  says,  "  Ye  shall  seek  me,  and  shall
find,  when  ye  shall  search  for  me  with  all

Sour  heart "  (ch.  xxix.  13  =  Deut.  iv.  29).
till,  these  passages  are  hardly  quite  parallel,
as  the  object  of  the  verb  can  be  easily  sup-
plied from  the  connection.  The  Vulgate
apparently  reads  the  text  with  difiiBrent
yowels,  for  it  renders  ut  invenianiuri  the
Septuagint  has  **that  thy  stroke  may  be
found."

Ver.  19. — It  is  rather  doubtful  (as  in  the
parallel  passage,  ch.  iv.  19 — 21)  whether  the
speaker  here  is  the  prophet,  or  **  the  daugh-
ter of  my  people,"  who,  in  ch.  vi.  26,  is
called  upon  to  '*  make  most  bitter  lamenta-
tion." Of  course,  the  prophet  cannot  dis-
sociate himself  from  his  people;  and  we
may  therefore,  perhaps,  consider  both  refer-
ences united.  Hurt;  literally,  breach;  a
term  so  used  for  political  calamities.  A
iprief;  rather,  my  grief;  but  "grief*  is
meant  to  include  ooth  physical  and  mental
sufierings  (literally,  my  sickness).

Ver.  20. — My  tabernacle ;  rather,  my  tent.
It  is  verv  striking  how  present  to  the  minds
of  the  Israelites  was  the  consciousness  of
their  pastoral  origin.  Hence  tho  cry,  **  To
your  tents,  O  Israel"  (1  Kings  xii.  16);


comp.  also,  "And  the  children  of  Israel
dwelt  in  their  tents,  as  aforetime  "  (2  Kings
xiii.  5).  My  cords  .  . .  my  cnrtains.  The
**  cords  "  are  those  which,  by  being  fastened
to  poles  and  strikes,  keep  the  tent  steady ;
the  "  curtains,"  of  course,  are  the  covering
of  the  tent  (comp.  Isa.  liv.  2).

Ver.  21.— The  pastors;  i.e.  tho  civil  au-
thorities (see  on  ch.  ii.  8).  They  shall  not
prosper;  T&theT^  they  have  not  prospered;  or,
better  still,  they  have  not  acted  wisely,  the
notion  of  prospering  being  rather  suggested
than  expressed  (the  same  word  is  used  in
Isa.  lii.  18).

Ver.  22. — Behold,  ...  is  oome;  rathei^
Hark  I  tidings  !  Behold^  it  cometh  !  The
tidings  are  that  the  foe  is  at  hand,  advancing
with  a  great  commotion,  with  clashing
spears,  prancing  horses,  and  all  the  hubbub
of  a  great  army.  A  den  of  dragons ;  rather,
of  jackals  (as  ch.  ix.  11).

Vers.  23—25. — These  verses  confirm  tho
view  taken  above,  of  the  speaker  of  this
whole  section.  Jeremiah  and  the  people,
each  is,  in  a  sense,  the  speaker ;  but  here
the  prophetic  faith  seems  to  run  rather  in
advance  of  that  of  his  fellow-countrymen.
They  form,  however,  a  fitting  sequel  to  tho
charges  brought  against  the  people  in  ch.  ix.
Tho  sneaker  admits  that  he  (either  the  people
of  Judah  personified,  or  Jeremiah  as  a  repre-
sentative of  its  best  portion)  fully  deserves
chastisement  for  having  attempted  to  go  his
own  way  (comp.  Isa-  Ivii.  17).  He  has  now
attained  an  insight  into  the  truth  that  man's
duty  is  simply  to  walk  in  the  path  which
God  has  marked  out  for  him.  He  only  asks
that  Jehovah  would  chastise  him  with  judg-
ment, or,  more  clearly,  according  to  what  i$
just.  **  The  contrast  is  between  punishment
inflicted  in  anger,  the  object  of  which  is  to
cause  pain  to  the  criminal,  and  ti tat  inflicted
as  a  duty  of  justice,  and  of  which  the  object
is  the  criminal's  reformation"  (Payne
Smith).  The  fear  expressed,  however,  is
not  exactly  lest  thou  bring  me  to  nothi^,
which  is  too  strong  for  the  Hebrew,  but  lest
thou  make  me  small.  Israel  was  secured
against  annihilation  by  the  promise  of
Jehovah,  but  feared  he  might  possibly  sur-
vive only  as  the  shadow  of  his  former  self.

Ver.  25. — This  verse  is  repeated,  with
slight  differences,  in  Ps.  Ixxix.  6,  7.  The
fault  of  tho  heathen  is  that  they  exceeded
their  commission  (Isa.  x.  6,  7;  xlvii.  6;
Zech.  i.  15),  and  aimed  at  destroying,  instead
of  merely  punishing,  Jehovah's  erring  people.
His  habitation;  rather,  his  pasture  (comp.
ch.  xii.  10).


CH.X.  1— 25.]     THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PKOPUET  JEREMIAH.  271


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1 — 5. — The  foTly  of  paganism,  I.  The  folly  of  paganism  proves  thr
WEAKNESS  op  SUPERSTITIOUS  FEARS.  The  Jews  Were  tempted  to  fear  astrological
portents  (ver.  2)  and  idol-powers  (ver.  5).  Yet  a  little  reflection  was  enough  to  show
that  these  things  were  impotent  for  harm.  The  lowest  religion  is  a  product  of  fear.
Superstition  finds  converts  where  rational  faith  fails.  The  trouble  thus  resulting
from  the  weakness  of  men  can  only  be  dissipated  by  boldly  confronting  the  source  of
terror  and  thoroughly  examining  it.

II.  The  folly  of  paq anisic  reveals  the  Mistake  of  yielding  to  its  fasci-
nations. For  this  miserable  inanity  the  Jews  were  abandoning  the  God  of  heaven
and  earth  1  Beligion  should  be  accepted,  not  for  its  attractiveness,  but  for  its  truth.
It  must  be  a  reality  or  it  will  be  a  snare.  Yet  how  many  are  led  to  adopt  systems  of
religion  without  any  regard  to  the  truth  of  the  ideas  they  contain,  but  simply  out  of
liking  for  their  ritual,  emotional  sympathy  for  their  poetry,  or  even  mere  love  of  the
musical  accompaniments  of  the  worship  connected  with  them !

III.  The  folly  of  paganism  is  an  evidence  in  favour  of  the  truth  of  the
beligion  of  the  Bible.  The  reason  and  imagination  of  men  in  all  ages,  in  all  climes,
in  all  degrees  of  civilization,  have  been  set  to  the  task  of  inventing  religions  (con-
sciously sometimes,  but  for  the  most  part  unconsciously  and  therefore  the  more
genuinely),  and  the  result  in  all  cases  is  far  inferior  to  Christianity.  A  mere  com-
parison of  religions  should  lead  us  to  prefer  this,  and  a  simple  conclusion  from  such  a
comparison  is  that  this  must  be  of  Divine  origin.

Vers.  6, 7. — The  incomparahle  greatness  of  Ood,  L  God  is  great.  This  simple  item
of  the  Mohammedan's  creed  must  be  accepted  with  etnial  reverence  by  the  Christian,
though  it  forms  but  one  part  of  his  conception  of  the  Divine  nature.  There  is  dan^^er
lest  we  should  regard  the  goodness  of  God  in  such  a  way  as  to  detract  from  his  majesty.
Truly  considered,  it  enhances  the  supreme  glory  of  God's  greatness.  God  is  great  in
power,  in  wisdom,  in  resources,  in  essential  being.  God  is  also  great  in  character,  in
purpose,  in  the  just  and  good  principles  of  his  actions.    The  worship  of  a  God  of  mere

Sower  is  the  cringing  of  a  slave,  and  has  no  spiritual  value,  but  rather  degrades  the
evotee  by  destroying  independence  of  conscience  and  moral  courage.  It  would  be  our
duty  to  resist  a  b«ing  of  infinite  power  if  that  power  were  not  used  righteously,  for
such  a  being  would  not  be  Gt)d,  but  an  infinite  demon ;  and  though  resistance  were
hopeless,  it  would  bo  better  to  be  a  martyr  to  conscience  than  the  degraded  minion  of
an  unrighteous  despotism.  But  God  is  worthy  of  all  worship  because  his  greatness  of
power  reposes  on  greatness  of  character.

II.  The  GEEATNE88  OF  GoD  IS  INCOMPARABLE.  The  Jows  were  led  to  see  that
their  God  was  not  one  among  many  deities,  not  even  the  supremo  God,  the  Zeus  of  a
pantheon  of  lesser  divinities,  but  the  only  God,  and  out  of  all  comparison  with  all  other
beings.  God  is  infinite.  You  cannot  compare  the  infinite  with  anything  finite.  The
greatest  existence  which  has  any  limit  is  as  far  from  the  infinite  as  the  smallest.  This
is  as  much  larger  than  a  world  as  it  is  larger  than  a  grain  of  sand.  The  being  of  God
is  entirely  distinct  from  all  other  orders  of  being — vastly  greater  than  the  universe  of
them — in  its  fulness  incomparable  to  any.  Yet :  1.  God,  being  infinite,  contains  in
himself  all  possibilities  of  being,  and  therefore  all  may  see  their  ideal  perfection  in  him
though  he  transcends  all  (Hcb.  iL  10).  2.  God  has  made  man  in  his  own  image,  and  in
his  power  of  thought,  freedom  of  will,  and  moral  conscience,  man  has  characteristics
like  the  Divine  in  kind,  though  incomparable  with  that  in  degree  (Gen.  i.  26).  Christ
is  the  "  express  Image  of  his  substance "  (Heb.  i.  3),  "  but  only  so  because  in  him
dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily  "  (Col.  ii.  9),

III.  The    INCOMPARABLE    GREATNESS    OF    GOD    SHOULD    MOVE    ALL    MEN     TO     FEAB

BEFORE  HIM.  All  should  fear  because :  1.  He  is  too  great  to  be  concerned  with  a  few ;
all  nations,  all  mankind,  are  equally  under  his  sway.  2.  He  is  infinitely  above  the
greatest,  so  that  kings  and  wise  men,  persons  of  the  highest  rank  and  of  the  most  pro-
found genius,  are  as  much  below  him  as  if  they  were  beggars  and  fools.  3.  He  is  so
vast  in  being,  power,  and  character,  that  it  is  no  mark  of  noble  independence  to  resist


272  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,     [ch.  x.  1— 26*

him,  but  only  a  sign  of  foolish  pride  which  will  certainly  bo  humiliated.  The  fenr  of  Grod
thus  enj]:endered  is  an  awe,  a  reverence,  not  mere  terror.  The  gosix*l  tempers  this  with
the  confident  love  of  cliiMren,  but  docs  not  destroy  it,  since  perfect  love,  while  casting
out  terror,  infuses  feelings  of  reverence.

Vers.  10, 12, 13. — The  nature  of  Ood.  Tlie  true  nature  of  God  is  seen  in  contrast
with  the  objects  of  heathen  worship.  Error  is  sometimes  serviceable  in  furnishing  an
occasion  for  a  clearer  definition  of  truth.  Christian  theology  has  grown  up  through
controversies  with  heresy  and  unbelief.

I.  The  nature  of  God.  1.  Gk)d  is  real,  Jehovah  is  the  true  God.  He  is  not
only  superior  to  heathen  deities.  They  are  non-existent.  He  alone  is.  Religion  is
based  on  facts.  Its  first  afiBrmation  is  this — "God  is."  It  is  not  a  growth  of  the
poetic  imagination,  a  fabric  of  baseless  speculation,  nor  merely  "  morality  touched  with
emotion,"  without  any  object  for  that  emotion  to  rest  upon.  It  is  the  worship  of  a
God  who  exists.  Otherwise  no  poetic  charm  nor  practical  expediency  can  make  it
anything  but  a  delusion,  which  all  who  venerate  truth  should  abjure.  2.  Grod  is
living.  The  word  **  God  '*  is  not  a  name  for  the  totality  of  being,  for  the  unconscious
forces  of  the  universe,  for  a  blind  "  Not  ourselves  that  makes  for  righteousness."  All
faith  affirms  more.  No  worship  is  justified  without  the  belief  that  God  is  spirit,
thinking,  willing,  living.  God.  is,  indeed,  the  one  self-existent  life,  the  life  in  which
all  other  life  is  contained  (Acts  xvii.  28).  3.  God  is  an  everlasting  King,  He  is
eternal  and  changeless — not  a  God  of  the  past  alone,  but  equally  active  in  the  present.
He  is  not  only  the  Creator  who  formed  the  world  ages  ago,  but  the  King  who  now  rules
it.  Our  worship  is  not  merely  veneration  for  what  he  has  done,  but  a  constant  appre-
ciation of  what  he  is  doing,  and  prayer  touching  his  future  action — a  real  and  effectual
communion  with  a  living  and  acting  God.  4.  These  thoughts  of  the  nature  of  GJod
should  induce  submission  and  reverence.  None  can  compare  with  him.  All  are  in  his
power.  His  eternal  presence  demands  constant  attention,  and  his  ceaseless  activity
requires  a  correspondence  in  all  our  activity.

II,  The  manifestation  of  the  nature  of  God.  1.  It  is  seen  in  creation.
Power  is  revealed  in  the  original  formation  of  all  things,  wisdom  in  their  orderly
establishment  (ver.  12).  A  resil  world  can  only  come  from  a  real  Gkxi.  A  living
world  must  derive  its  vitality  from  an  original  source  of  life.  The  less  cannot  produce
the  greater.  All  that  we  see  in  the  universe  must  have  been  originally  in  the  thought
and  power  of  God.  2.  It  is  seen  in  the  present  activities  of  the  world.  The  tumult  of
waters  flows  in  obedience  to  God's  voice.  Clouds,  and  wind,  and  lightning,  and  rain,
follow  his  directions  (ver.  13).  The  great  energy  of  the  physical  world  testifies  to  an
energizing  power  behind  it.  The  universe  is  not  a  beautiful  crystal,  nor  a  fossil  relic
of  past  life.  It  is  replete  with  force,  undergoing  perpetual  change,  and  constantly
developing  fresh  forms  of  vitality.  Such  a  condition  of  things  implies  that  the  real
and  living  Creator  must  be  also  an  ever-present  Ruler,  "  an  everlasting  King.**

Ver.  16. — Ood  the  Portion  of  Israel.  I.  God  is  peculiarly  related  to  his  own*
PEOPLE.  The  previous  verses  describe  the  universal  supremacy  of  God  and  the  claims
he  has  over  all  his  creatures.  He  is  not  one  among  many  gods,  but  the  only  God ;  he
is  the  Creator  of  all  things,  in  him  all  things  consist,  all  men  live  only  through  him.
He  is  gracious  to  all  his  human  family,  he  is  willing  to  give  his  richest  blessings  to  all
mankind.  Still,  there  are  other  and  special  relations  which  God  holds  only  with  those
who  trust  and  love  and  obey  him.  They  who  seek  God  will  find  him  as  the  negligent
will  never  do.  They  who  choose  God  for  their  Portion  will  be  chosen  by  him  for
peculiar  favours.  This  is  quite  consistent  with  the  universality  of  the  being  and  activity
of  God.

II.  God's  peculiar  relation  with  his  people  admits  of  no  rivalry.  Gkxi
must  be  the  Portion  of  his  people  or  in  no  sense  peculiarly  theirs.  Israel  cannot  retain
the  special  privileges  of  the  covenant  with  Jehovah  while  breaking  the  conditions  of
that  covenant  which  require  unwavering  fidelity  (Deut.  xxviii.  14).  He  who  would
find  his  portion  in  God  must  not  also  seek  it  in  the  world.  He  may  have  many
worldly  advantages  while  pursuing  higher  aims,  because  these  may  be  "  added  unto
him ;  *'  but  he  must  "  seek  fint  the  kingdom  of  God  **  (Matt.  vi.  33).


CH.X.1— 26.]  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIiH.         273

in.  Gk)D*8  PECULIAR  RELATION  WITH  HIS  PEOPLE  18  ATH    UNSPEAKABLE   BLESSING  TO

THEM.  1.  He  makes  them  his  inheritance,  i.e.  prizes  them  as  property,  values  them
"  as  the  apple  of  his  eye  "  ^Deut.  xxxii.  10),  as  his  "  peculiar  treasure  "  (MaL  iii.  17).  If
God  showers  down  upon  all  his  creatures  mercies  countless  as  the  stars  of  heaven,  what
mast  be  the  wonder  and  the  glory  of  their  state  whom  Grod  thus  prizes  and  marks  for
special  favour  I  2.  They  find  in  him  their  Portion,  (I')  The  Portion  is  God,  not  the
gifts  of  God,  for  the  Giver  is  better  than  his  gifts.  Gtxl  is  more  to  his  people  than
all  he  bestows  upon  them.  (2)  This  portion  is  independent  of  all  earthly  circum-
stances ;  it  may  be  enjoyed  in  sickness,  in  poverty,  in  human  contempt.  (3)  It  is
the  highest  blessedness  of  the  soul — enjoying  Gtxl,  living  in  the  light  of  his  love,
receiving  the  essential  blessedness  of  Heaven.

lY.   Tmt  BLESSING  OF    THIS    PECULIAR    RELATIONSHIP  WITH    GOD    IS    OPEN   TO  ALL

MEN.  The  Jews  too  often  rested  their  claim  on  inherent  national  rights— their  birth-
rights. But  the  New  Testament  declares  the  spiritual  Israel  to  ^  the  true  Israel
(Gal.  vi  15,  16),  and  this  Israel  is  composed  of  all  who  walk  "  according  to  the  rule  "
of  faith  in  Christ.  Therefore  the  broad  invitation  for  all  to  follow  Clmst  opens  the
door  for  all  to  the  closest  relationship  with  God.  If  all  are  invited  to  Christ  who  is
the  Way,  all  may  become  God's  peculiar  inheritance,  and  find  their  Portion  in  him
(1  Pet.  iL  9).

Vers.  23, 24.— Cim/Jwsum  and  correction,   I.  Genuine  confession  involves  a  clear

RECOGNITION  OF  DUTY  AND   A   WILLINGNESS  TO   RECEIVE   NECESSARY   CORRECTION.      1.

There  must  be  a  recognition  of  duty.  We  cannot  confess  the  wrong  till  we  know  the
right.  Conscience  awakes  only  when  a  standard  of  right  outside  ourselves  is  per-
ceived. 2.  There  must  be  a  willingness  to  receive  necessary  correction.  If  we  make
honest  confession  of  sin,  we  imply  that  we  desire  to  be  free  from  it.  Bat  a  right  under-
standing of  our  own  condition  in  the  light  of  Gtod'a  requirements  makes  the  necessity
of  correction  apparent.

U.  A  CLEAR  RECOGNITION  OF  DUTY  WILL  SHOW  THAT  THIS  CONSISTS  IN  SELF-ABNEGA-
TION TO  ▲  HIGHER  WILL.  The  ossencc  of  sin  is  self-will.  The  first  sin  was  an  act  of
disobedience.  All  wickedness  is  a  rebellion  against  a  supreme  authority.  Man  is  not
free  to  live  to  himself,  swayed  only  by  his  own  lawless  caprice.  He  has  a  vocation  to
fulfil.  1.  He  has  no  right  to  go  his  own  way.  He  is  a  servant.  He  is  lawfully  subject
to  a  righteous  Lord,  before  whom  duty  requires  him  to  say,  *'Not  my  will,  but  thine,
be  done."  2.  He  has  not  light  enough  to  direct  his  own  steps.  Future  accidents
cannot  be  anticipated.  The  ultimate  effects  of  the  simplest  action  are  not  to  be  traced
beforehand.  Hence  the  need  of  a  higher  direction.  3.  He  has  not  povfer  to  succeed
in  his  own  way.  If  he  starts  by  himself,  making  the  awful  experiment  of  a  self-
sustained  pilgrimage  through  the  toils  and  storms  of  life,  he  will  assuredly  make  ship-
wreck. Our  duty  is  not  to  live  for  self,  nor  even  for  G^  in  our  own  way  or  by  our
own  unaided  strength,  but  to  do  his  will,  in  his  way,  by  his  aid.  Thus  the  Christian,
looking  for  authority,  guidance,  and  strength  in  Christ,  is  taught  to  say, "  To  me  to
Uve  is  Christ"

III.  A  WILLINGNESS  TO  RECEIVE  CORRECTION  ARISES  FROK  ▲  PERCEPTION  OF  ITS
JUSTICE  AND  UTILITY  WHEN  VIEWED  IN  THE  LIGHT  OF  THE  REQUIREMENTS  OF  DUTY.

1.  It  must  be  recognized  as  Just,  not  only  merited,  but  coming  in  a  fair  degree.  We
could  not  willingly  accept  a  correcting  chastisement  which  was  disproportionate  to
guilt.  2.  It  must  be  recognized  as  given  on  principles  of  righteousness,  not  out  of
vindictive  wrath.  3.  It  must  be  recognized  as  sent  for  a  merciful  purpose.  It  is  cor-
rection, not  simply  retribution.  This  is  wholesome,  and  given,  not  in  anger,  which
would  be  fatal  ^rs.  ii.  12),  but  in  love  (Prov.  iii.  12\  Such  correction  we  should  not
mnrmur  under,  out  welcome,  accept  as  a  blessing,  and  even  pray  for.  But  we  shall  only
do  this  when  we  are  impressed  with  a  right  sense  of  duty,  which  makes  us  acknow-
ledge that  we  are  not  to  live  for  ourselves,  and  must  be  subdued  and  trained  by  all
necessary  means  to  submission  and  obedience  and  a  true  feeling  of  our  own  helpless-
ness, requiring  the  help  of  Divine  discipline.  Because  man's  way  is  not  in  himself  he
may  naturally  ask  for  wholesome  correction.


JEREMIAH.


274  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,     [ch.  jx.  1-^25.


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  2 — 5.-7^  helplessness  of  heathen  gods  a  conclusive  argument  against  them.
How  18  tho  superstitious  worship  of  nature  and  inanimate  objects  to  be  corrected  ?  It
is  obvious  that  the  attributes  attached  by  the  worshippers  to  the  idols  they  worship
are  wholly  foreign  to  them.  It  is  ignorance,  association,  and  the  tendency  to  transfer
subjective  ideas  to  objects  of  sense,  that  have  largely  to  do  with  this.  The  correction,
therefore,  must  be  furnished  by  a  real  analysis  of  the  idol — a  taking  of  it  to  pieces,  and
examining  how  it  came  into  existence.     But —

I.  Let  U8  inquire  what  worship  ixvolves.  It  is  evident  that  an  impression  most
exist  of  the  power  of  the  object  worshipped  to  help  or  to  hurt.  In  some  way  men  have
associated  it  with  the  production  of  evil  or  good  in  human  destiny.  A  sense  of
dependence  is  generated.  Fear  arises,  to  degenerate  into  vulgar  terror  or  to  refine  itself
into  the  sentiments  of  reverence  and  respect.  A  being  greater  than  ourselves  is  needed
to  constitute  a  veritable  God  to  the  human  heart.

II.  Tested  by  this,  idols  and  celestial  signs  cannot  be  gods.  1.  Careful  ohner-
vation  will  show  that^  whilst  there  may  he  agreement  between  certain  changes  of  the
heavenly  bodies  and  the  changes  of  weather^  physical  amdition^  etc.^  these  are  not
producibie  cks  by  a  responsible  unll  but  according  to  the  fixed  laws  of  nature,  2.  The
stars  of  heaven  and  the  idols  of  earth  are  alike  constituted  of  inanimate  matter,  3.  In
addition  to  thiSy  the  latter  are  wholly  the  creatures  of  man,  4.  Neither  the  heavenly
bodies  nor  the  idols  can  help  themselves, — M.

Vers.  6,  7. — The  uniqueness  of  Jehovah,  When  other  gods  have  been  proved  to  be
false,  it  is  very  important  that  this  unlikeness  of  God  to  anything  else  should  be
established.     His  claim  to  attention  and  reverence  is  thereby  held  in  judgment.

I.  In  what  respects  Jehovah  is  unique.  1.  In  idea.  It  is  a  wondrous  conception
—a  being  so  great,  infinite,  eternal,  and  unchangeable  in  his  being,  wisdom,  power,
holiness,  justice,  goodness,  and  truth.  As  a  conception  it  stands  alone,  commands
respect,  and  invites  reverent  investigation.  Such  goodness  with  such  power  and
wisdom !  2.  In  pretensions,  (1)  He  claims  our  sole  worship ;  (2)  our  highest  and
holiest  service  is  his  by  right,  and  is  unworthy  of  him ;  (3)  our  welfare  and  destiny
are  in  his  hands.  3.  In  works.  There  is  nothing  he  has  claimed  to  be  which  he  has
not  made  good  in  his  works — creation,  providence,  grace.
J     II.  This  conception  of  God  as  unique  harmonizes  with  the  instincts  of  thb

HUMAN  SPIRIT,  AND  THE  TEACHINGS  OF  HISTORY  AND  NATURE.      Jt  has  Cast  its  Spcll  OVef

the  mightiest  intellects,  and  commanded  the  homage  of  the  purest  and  best  of  men.
In  the  worship  of  him  whom  it  represents  the  highest  longings  are  satisfied,  and  the
most  characteristically  human  sympathies  and  principles  encouraged.  The  unity  of
nature;  the  mental  principle  that  traces  everything  to  a  great  First  Cause ;  the  manner
in  which  the  system  of  religion  of  which  he  is  centre  and  dominating  principle  explains
this,  and  harmonizes  the  life  of  man  with  his  surroundings ; — are  all  indications  tliat
point  to  the  same  conclusion. — M.

Ver.  19. — Qrief  borne  that  cannot  be  cured,  I.  An  instance  or  the  power  of
TRUE  RELIGION.  His  sorrow  was  intense.  No  one  could  understand  or  sympathize
with  it.  Yet  he  is  able  to  put  it  under  and,  although  not  removing  it  wholly,  to  bear
it.    This  is  alike  removed  from  self-indulgence  and  stoicism.

n.  The  considerations  that  affected  him  in  this  way.  He  had  to  finish  his
task.  It  was  practical,  and  could  admit  of  no  interruption.  The  sense  of  duty  is,
therefore,  supreme — patience,  submission.  His  grief  is  recognized  as  a  personal
stewardship.  He  is  responsible  for  its  expression  and  repression.  It  has  a  special
relation  to  his  own  character  and  life.  He  regards  it,  therefore,  as  sent  from  God,  and
not,  therefore,  to  be  hastily  dismissed.  How  it  enriched  his  nature,  increased  his  per-
sonal usefulness,  and  enhanced  the  value  of  his  writings  to  generations  then  unborn  I

III.  Christianity  is  tested  by  the  manner  in  which  it  enables  men  to  bear
affliction.  The  relation  of  oiu*  sorrows  to  our  personal  and  spiritual  salvation.  The
ministry  of  sorrow.    The  hopes  of  the  future  alleviating  and  directing  into  profitable


i


CH.X.1— 25.]      THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  275


reOection  and  effort.     "  Our  light  affliction,  which  is  but  for  a  moment,  worketb,"
etc, — M.

Vers.  1 — 17. — Idolatry,  This  section  of  Jeremiah's  prophecy  is  one  of  the  notable
passages  in  the  Scriptures  concerning  idolatry.  It  is  like  that  in  Ps.  cxv.,  and  in
Isa.  xL,  xliv.  It  states  or  suggests  much  of  great  interest  on  this  subject,  and  which
deserves  to  be  well  considered  by  us.    There  is —

I.  The  tremendous  fact  op  idolatry.  See :  1.  The  multitudes  of  mankind  who
have  avowed  such  worship.  2.  The  wide  extent  of  the  world's  inhabited  countries
over  which  it  prevails.  3.  Its  permanence.  It  has  lasted  on  from  age  to  age,  and  has
been  handed  down  unchanged  from  generation  to  generation,  so  that  the  prophet  could
challenjje  his  countrymen  to  tell  of  any  nation  which  had  ever  changed  their  gods  (cf.
ch.  ii.  11).  And  though  vast  portions  of  mankind  have  professedly  thrown  aside  their
idols,  yet  there  are  still  more  who  have  not  even  at  the  present  day.  Idolatry  is  the
dominant  religion  of  the  world  to-day,  if  numbers  are  considered,  even  as  it  was  in  the
days  of  Jeremiah,  and  this  notwithstanding —

II.  Its  manifest  absurdity.  How  scathing  is  the  ridicule  which  the  prophet
pours  out  upon  such  monstrous  worship  I  With  what  sarcasm  he  dwells  upon  the  fact
of  their  being  mere  wooden  dolls,  hideous  as  a  scarecrow  in  a  garden  of  cucumbers  (cf.
ExpOHition,  ver.  5),  chipped  into  such  shape  as  they  have  by  the  hands  of  the  men  who
worship  them,  decked  with  tawdry  finery,  must  be  nailed  up  lest  they  should  tumble
down,  and  "  must  needs  be  borne  because  they  cannot  go  "  (ver.  6),  and  are,  of  course,
powerless  either  for  evil  or  for  good.  And  the  prophet  points  out  (ver.  8)  that  the
absurdity  is  none  lessened  when  the  idols  are  of  a  more  costly  sort  They  may  be
plated  with  silver  and  adorned  with  gold  (ver.  9),  and  the  workmanship  may  be  of  a
much  more  elaborate  and  artistic  kind.  But  it  is  all  the  same ;  the  idol  is  nothing  but
a  piece  of  wood,  and  that  which  is  taught  about  them  is  *'  a  doctrine  of  vanities,"  i,e,
utterly  false  and  absurd.  But  though  idolatry  be  thus  manifestly  absurd,  yet  we  are
forced  to  admit  the  fact  of—

III.  Its  nevertheless  strange  but  strong  attractiveness.  How  else  can  not
only  the  multitude  of  its  votaries  be  accounted  for,  and  their  fidelity  to  it,  but  also  the
high  rank  and  leading  position  of  those  nations  who  adhered  to  it  f  They  were  not  mere
barbarous  savages  who  worshipped  idols,  but  the  foremost  peoples  of  the  world.  The
empires  of  Egypt,  Babylon,  Assyria,  Greece,  Rome,  were  all  sworn  upholders  of  idolatry
(cf.  Acts  xvii.).  And  to-day  it  is  not  the  mere  fetish-worshippers  of  the  South  Seas  and
Africa  who  are  idolaters,  but  people  such  as  the  Chinese  and  Hindoos — to  say  nothing
of  those  who  in  Christian  Churches  bow  down  before  tinsel-decked  images  or  pictures
of  virgins,  apostles,  and  saints,  and,  if  they  do  not  worship  them,  render  them  homage
which  can  hardly  be  distinguished  from  worship.  And  a  yet  further  proof  of  this
attraction  is  that  the  well-instructed  people  of  Godf  the  seed  of  Israel,  the  possessors  of
the  oracles  of  God,  were  for  ever  falling  into  this  sin.  This  entire  chapter  is  one  appeal
and  protest  against  their  so  doing.  And  we  know  how  often  in  the  past  they  had
bowed  down  to  idols.  The  command  which  stands  at  the  head  of  the  Decalogue,  by  its
position  there,  by  its  fulness  of  expression,  and  by  the  severity  of  its  sanctions,  shows
that  the  attraction  of  the  idolatry  which  it  denounced  was  indeed  terrible,  and  therefore
needed  to  be  thus  solemnly  forbidden.  And  age  after  age  the  same  command  had  to
be  repeated,  and  its  violation  sternly  punished,  notwithstanding  that  (ver.  16)  "  the
Portion  of  Jacob  '*  was  "  not  like  "  these  wretched  idols — no  indeed,  but  was  the  alone
true  God,  the  living  God,  the  everlasting  King  (ver.  10).  And  yet  there  were  needed
this  command  and  appeal ;  yes,  and  the  consuming  fire  of  God's  wrath  which  fell  upon
Israel  in  their  captivity,  before  the  taint  of  idolatry  could  be  burnt  out  of  them.  Now,
how  was  this?    Note,  therefore —

IV.  Its  probable  reason  and  cause.  We  cannot  observe  the  tremendous  fact  of
idolatry  without  being  led  to  inquire  into  its  origin.  It  is  not  sufficient  to  refer  to  the
licence  it  gave  to  the  sensual  nature  of  man ;  if  such  licence  were  all  that  was  desired,
why  couple  it  with  some  form  of  worship  ?  The  explanation  must  lie  deeper  than
this.  And  that  missionary  would  get  on  very  poorly  with  any  tolerably  educated
heathen  if  he  were  to  assume  that  the  idolater  worshipped  the  hideous  idol  before
which  he  bows  himself  down.     He  would  tell  you  that  he  did  nothing  of  the  kind.


276  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,     [en.  x.  1-25.


bat  that  which  he  worshipped  was  the  unseen  powers  of  which  that  idol  was  the
»ymbo].  No  doubt  idolatry  degenerates  into  actual  idol-worship.  That  with  which
something  Divine  has  been  so  long  associated  comes  to  be  regarded  as  itself  Divine,
and  worshipped  accordingly.  And  then  idolatry  has  sunk  down  into  fetishism.
And  it  may  be  often  seen  where  you  would  least  expect  it.  But  originally  idolatry
was  not  the  worship  of  images.  That  worship  may  probably  be  thus  explained.
1.  Man  cannot  do  without  a  deity  of  whom,  in  some  form  or  other,  he  must  be
conscious,  and  whose  presence  he  can  realize  so  as  to  be  able  to  look  to  him  in  time
of  need.  Man  cannot  be  a  thorough  atheist.  His  instinctive  religiousness  and  ten*
dency  to  worship  cannot  be  ever  kept  under.  For  a  while  it  may,  but  let  heavy
sorrow  come,  or  let  fear  and  dread  fill  his  mind,  and  he  will,  he  must,  then  call  upon
God.  2.  But  God  will  not  reveal  himself  to  us  except  to  our  spirits.  He  can  be  only
spiritually  discerned.  Not  through  any  of  our  senses,  or  through  our  intellect,  but
through  the  Spirit  alone.  "  They  that  worship  him  must  worship  him  in  spirit  and  in
truth.  3.  But  such  coming  to  God  involves  purity  of  heart  and  life.  "  If  I  regard
iniquity  in  my  heart,  the  Lord  will  not  hear  me."  And  not  only  purity,  but  great
spiritual  effort  How  difficult  we  find  it  to  realize  the  presence  of  God,  to  hold  down  our
minds,  and  to  summon  the  energies  of  the  will  when  we  pray  1  "  We  know  not  how  to
pray  as  we  ought."  And  permitted  sin,  defiling  the  conscience  and  destroying  our  con-
fidence, will  ever  hinder  spiritual  worship.  4.  But  these  imperative  conditions  uf  worship
— that  it  should  bo  in  spirit,  and  that  it  should  bo  pure — men  like  not.  Still,  they
must  worship.  What,  then,  is  to  be  done  ?  The  idol  is  the  solution.  To  avoid  the
strain  and  effort  of  the  spirit,  men  have  taken  as  a  symbol  some  material  thing — as  the
Israelites  at  Sinai  took  the  golden  calf — and  so  have  sought  to  represent  God  to  their
minds.  The  idolater  persuades  himself  he  cannot  know  the  Deity  directly,  and  there-
fore will  avail  himself  of  the  aid  some  sensuous  object  will  afford.  And  such  symbol
he  can  carry  about  with  him,  and  there  is  no  need  of  purity  of  heart  for  such  wor-
ship— it  can  be  done  without.  What  wonder,  then,  that  man,  averse  to  spiritual
exercises  and  sensual-hearted,  should  have  everywhere  fied  to  idolatry,  as  in  fact  he
has  done  ?  It  is  an  endeavour  to  have  the  favour  of  God  on  cheaper  terms  than  he
demands ;  on  conditions  easier  and  more  agreeable  to  our  fallen  nature.  But  in  regard
to  the  idolatries  into  which  Judah  and  Jerusalem  so  often  fell,  there  must  be  remem-
bered not  only  the  force  of  those  universal  causes  of  idolatry  now  considered,  but  the
further  force  of  powerful  example  all  around  them.  Who  were  the  mighty  nations
with  whom  they  had  most  to  do?  Egypt,  Assyria,  Babylon.  Tyre  also,  in  her  wealth
and  might,  stood  on  their  northern  border,  and  yet  others,  whose  fame  reached  them
from  afar,  flourished  and  grew  strong.  But  all  these  worshipped  idols.  Happiness,
success,  strength,  and  power  seemed  to  be  with  these  nations  and  not  with  the  wor-
shippers of  Jehovah.  And  all  this  Judah  saw  and  deeply  observed,  and  at  length
came  to  believe  that  it  was  better  for  them  to  serve  idols  than  to  serve  God  (cf.  for
proof  of  this,  ch.  xliv.  17 — 19).  For  Israel  to  keep  from  idolatry  was  to  swim  against
wind  and  tide,  and  to  do  so  when  wind  and  tide  promised  to  bear  them  on  to  a  condition
of  prosperity  greater  than  they  had  ever  known.  And  Jeremiah  knew  that  in  Babylon,
where  they  were  going,  they  would  be  exposed  to  the  full  force  of  this  temptation.
The  devil  of  idolatry  would  come  to  them,  and,  pointing  to  the  glory  of  Babylon,  would
say,  "  All  these  things  will  I  give  thee,  if,"  etc.  And  to  fortify  them  against  this
temptation  was  the  object  of  the  prophet's  earnest  appeal.  The  tempter  would  suggest
to  them,  "  You  have  lost  everything  by  worshipping  Gk)d.  Your  conquerors,  who
hold  you  now  in  their  power,  and  have  destroyed  your  city,  your  temple,  your  land,
have  gained  all  their  glory  by  worshipping  their  gods.  Do  you  the  same ;  learn  their
ways."

V.  Its  consequences.  These  have  been  very  terrible.  With  Israel  God  dealt  very
sternly.  His  direct  vengeance  came  upon  them  again  and  again.  It  was  hanging  over
them  at  this  time  as  a  dark  thunder-cloud.  But  besides  this,  there  were  the  natural
results  of  such  worship— results  which  were  conspicuous  in  Judah  and  Jerusalem,  and
have  ever  been  so  in  all  idolatrous  nations  (cf.  ver.  8). ,  They  became  '*  brutish,"  "  given
over  to  vile  affections  "  (cf.  Rom.  i.  20 — 32).

VI.  Its  sure  but  only  antidote.  Living  faith  in  the  living  Ood — this  alone,  but
this  surely,  would  enable  them  to  resist,  not  only  the  clamour  and  cravings  of  their


CH.  X.  1—26.]      THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  277

lower  nature,  but  also  tbe  seductive  force  of  the  seeming  success  which  idolatry  had  won
and  they  had  lost.  Only  such  faith  would  serve  them,  and  hence,  in  vers.  6,  7, 10 — IS,
16,  the  prophet  bids  them  remember  the  incomparable  glory,  majesty,  and  power  of  the
Lord,  the  true  God,  the  living  God  (ver.  10),  and  the  terribleness  of  his  wrath.  He
reminds  them  that  God  is  Creator  (ver.  12)  and  Preserver  (ver.  13).  He  who  formed
the  earth  governs  it  still,  and  he  is  their  God,  and  they  are  liis  people.  He  is  their
"  Portion,"  and  **  Israel  is  the  rod  of  his  inheritance ''  (ver.  16).  And  this  which
would  be  Israel's  safeguard  must  be  ours  stilL  Let  that  living  faith  in  the  living  Qod
be  lost,  and  at  once  resort  will  be  had  to  symbols  and  substitutes  for  God,  which,  though
in  form  they  may  be  feu:  different  from  the  idols  of  the  heathen,  yet  in  substance  and
effect  are  the  same.

YIL  Its  fbesent-dat  lessons.  There  are  such,  for  the  peril  of  Israel  is  our  own*
1.  For  we  also  may — and  many  do— substitute  reverence  for  those  things  which  are
associated  with  the  worship  of  God  for  that  worship  in  spirit  and  in  trutii  which  he  alone
cares  for.  Symbols,  sacraments,  creeds.  Churches,  religious  observances,— any  one  of
these  may  become  an  idol,  that  is,  a  substitute  for  God.  They  demand  no  strain  and
energy  of  our  spiritual  nature ;  the  senses  or  the  intellect  can  grasp  them ;  and  they  make
no  such  strenuous  demand  upon  the  surrender  of  the  will,  the  yielding  of  the  heart  to
God ;  they  will  let  us  do  as  we  like,  if  not  entirely  yet  far  more  than  true  spiritual
worship  ever  wilL  And  thus,  though  we  be  called  Christians,  we  may  be  ioolaters
after  all  2.  And  let  us  guard  against  being  deceived  by  the  sanction  which  worldly
success  and  present  good  so  often  lend  to  ways  which  God  forbids.  There  was  very
much  around  Israel  whose  desirableness  said  to  them,  "  Come  with  us,  and  we  will  do
you  good."  Idolatry  did  seem  to  answer,  whilst  their  religion  did  not.  And  the  way  of
the  wicked  will  often  seem  to  prosper,  whilst  *'  waters  of  a  full  cup  **  of  sorrow  **  are
wrung  out "  to  the  people  of  God.  The  mighty  bribe  which  Satan  pressed  upon  our
bless^  Lord,  if  he  would  but  renounce  the  way  of  the  cross  appointed  for  him  by  his
Father,  and  take  ''all  the  kingdoms  of  this  w^rld  and  the  glory  of  them"— that  same
bribe  is  pressed  upon  myriad  souls  still.  3.  By  constant  and  earnest  worship  of  Gk>d
let  us  cherish  and  keep  alive  in  our  hearts  that  living  faith  in  the  livine  wd  made
known  to  us  in  the  I^rd  Jesus  Christ,  which  alone  can,  but  surely  will,  meet  and
overcome  all  those  temptations  to  idolatry,  which  now^  as  of  old,  beset  every  human
soul. — C.

Ver.  16.—**  The  Portion  of  Jacoh/*  By  this  expression,  **  the  Portion  of  Jacob,"  la
meant  the  Lord  God.  Once  again  it  is  met  with  in  Jeremiah's  prophecy  (ch.  li.),
where  several  of  the  verses  of  this  chapter,  our  text  amongst  the  rest,  are  repeated
word  for  word.  It  is  interesting  to  inquire  the  probable  reason  for  this  beautiful  but
unusual  name  being  given  to  Qod.  That  God  is  the  Portion  of  his  people  is  a  precious
truth  often  declared.  But  this  form  of  that  precious  truth  is  unusual,  and  may  well
lead  us  to  ask  why  God  is  so  called.  And  there  can  be  little  doubt,  I  think,  that  the
motive  of  the  prophet  was  to  touch  the  hearts  of  those  whom  he  addressed,  and,  if  so
it  might  be,  to  waken  up  again  a  longing  after  this  **  Portion  of  Jacob,"  which  they
were  so  fast  letting  go.  There  was  an  appealing  power  in  this  name,  and  for  that
reason  it  was  probably  chosen.  The  devout  Jew  loved  to  think  and  tell  of  God  as  the
God  of  Jacob.  You  meet  with  the  two  names  thus  linked  together  perpetually  in  the
psalms  and  often  elsewhere.  **The  God  of  Jacob  is  our  Refuge,"  "The  Name  of
the  God  of  Jacob  defend  thee,"  etc.  Sometimes  we  read  of  Qod  as  the  Gk)d  of  Abraham,
and  as  the  God  of  Isaac,  but  more  commonly  as  the  God  of  Jacob.  Now,  why  is  this?
Is  it  not  because  that  Jacob  was  more  thoroughly  the  representative  and  father  of  the
Jewish  people  than  any  other  patriarch  ?  Abraham  was  a  sreat  hero  of  the  faith ;
Isaac's  career  was  too  still  and  serene  to  be  at  all  a  pattern  of  their  own ;  but  Jacob,  he
was  the  typical  Jew,  both  in  the  mingled  good  and  evil  of  his  character,  and  in  the
manifold  trials  and  vicissitudes  of  his  life.  A  sorrowful,  struggling,  and  often  sinful
man  was  he,  sore  chastened  of  the  Lord  again  and  again,  but  never  given  over  unto
death ;  like  the  bush  burning  in  the  fire  but  never  burnt,  and  coming  out  of  God's
disciplines  the  better  for  having  passed  through  them.  In  him  the  Jews  saw  their
own  character  and  career  vividly  portrayed,  and  they  loved  to  feel  that  Qod  was  the
Qod  of  Jacob;  the  God,  thereiore,  whom  they  needed,  and  in  whom  ho  who  wai  the


278  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,      [ch.x.1— 25.


truest  representative  of  all  their  race  found  strengtli  and  solace  and  salvation.  Thus
this  appellation  here  given  to  God,  "  the  Portion  of  Jacob,"  was  calculated  to  waken
up  many  very  tender  and  holy  memories,  and  mij^ht  lead,  as  was  sorely  needed,  to  a
better  mind  towards  God  amongst  those  to  whom  the  prophet  spoke,  and  to  a  turning
away  from  those  idolatries  by  which  now  and  for  so  long  they  had  been  sinning
against  God  and  destroying  themselves.  And  the  Portion  of  Jacob  waits  to  be  ours  as
well  as  his.  Jacob  was  not  only  a  representative  Jew,  but  also  a  representative  man.
For  men  are  but  rarely  cast  in  the  heroic  mould  of  Abraham,  nor  is  their  career  quiet
and  uncheckered  like  that  of  Isaac.  But  in  the  sins  and  sorrows,  the  struggles  and
falls,  the  temptations  and  trials  of  Jacob  they  behold  themselves.  God  by  this  name
declares  himself  to  be  the  Gt>d  of,  the  Portion  of,  all  sinful,  sorrowing,  struggling,  and
much-tried  men  everywhere  and  at  all  times ;  the  God,  therefore,  that  we  need,  the
Helper  tue  want.  He  is  the  God  who  is  revealed  to  us  in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  in
whom  there  is  neither  Greek  nor  Jew,  no  distinction  of  any  kind,  but  who  is  "  the
Saviour  of  all  men,  specially  of  them  that  believe."  If,  then,  this  Portion  of  Jacob  may
be  our  Portion  too,  we  shall  consider  with  more  interest  what  that  Portion  consists
of,  what  it  was  that  Jacob  possessed  in  God.  And  to  sec  this  let  us  recall  to  our
minds  the  records  that  are  given  of  the  patriarch's  career.  As  we  study  them  we  shall
rsadily  see  what  portion  Jacob  had  in  God,  and  how  precious  a  possession  it  was.  And —
I.  In  God  he  tound  unspeakable  grace.  Was  there  ever  a  more  wretched,  guilty
sinner  than  Jacob,  when  he  fled  away  from  his  home  in  just  fear  of  his  outraged
brother's  wrath  ?  He  had  entrapped  him  once  and  again,  inflicting  on  him  grievous
wrong ;  he  had  deceived  his  aged  father ;  he  had  lied  again  and  again  in  the  basest  and
most  hypocritical  way.  Altogether  the  man  was  odious  in  the  sight  of  all ;  all  our
sympathies  go  over  in  a  rush  towards  the  frank  if  foolish  Esau.  Jacob's  character
was  at  this  time  nothing  less  than  repulsive.  His  mother  was  probably  the  only
living  soul  who  had  either  faith  in  or  affection  for  him.  He  had  deserved  the
reprobation  of  all.  And  we  cannot  but  believe  that  he  must  have  felt  very  much  of
this,  and  that  it  was  with  a  sense  of  deepest  sin  and  shame  he  fled  away  to  Padan-
aram,  from  his  father's  and  mother's  home.  Man  had  cast  him  off;  would  not  God  do
the  like  ?  For  his  sin  had  not  been  that  of  one  who  had  never  known  God.  God  had
been  about  him  all  his  days;  he  had  learnt  to  know,  to  fear,  and  desire  God.  He  had
been,  as  all  knew,  an  avowedly  religious  man.  His  sin  was  therefore  all  the  more
unpardonable,  as  his  guilt  was  all  the  greater.  He  is  shown  to  us  out  on  the  wide
stony  track  over  the  mountains  which  form  the  backbone  of  Palestina  The  day  has
ended,  the  sun  gone  down ;  he  is  all  alone,  the  night  is  gathering  round  him.  The
ground  is  strewn  with  huge  fragments  of  the  bare,  barren  rock  of  which  the  mass  of
those  mountains  is  composed.  On  the  cold  hard  ground  he  lays  himself  down  to  rest,
helpless,  hopeless,  forsaken,  he  might  well  think,  both  of  God  and  man.  But  it  was
not  so,  for  God  came  to  him  there.  **  In  the  visions  of  the  night  the  rough  stones
formed  themselves  into  a  vast  staircase  reaching  into  the  depth  of  the  wide  and  open
sky,  which  without  any  interruption  of  tent  or  tree  was  stretched  over  the  sleejier's
head.  On  the  steps  of  that  staircase  were  seen  ascending  and  descending  the  mes-
sengers of  God ;  and  from  above  there  came  the  Divine  voice,  which  told  the  houseless
wanderer  that,  little  as  he  thought  it,  he  had  a  Protector  there  and  everywhere ;  that
even  in  this  bare  and  open  thoroughfare,  in  no  consecrated  grove  or  cave,  *  the  Lord
was  in  this  place,  though  ho  knew  it  not.*  This  was  Bethel,  the  house  of  God,  the
gate  of  heaven."  What  the  eflect  of  this  glorious  vision  must  have  been  upon  him
we  can  hardly  ever  estimate.  The  nearest  Scripture  parallel  probably  would  be  the
effect  of  the  father's  gracious  reception  upon  the  returning  prouigal.  Somewhat  akin
to  his  feelings  must  have  been  those  of  Jacob  at  this  time.  For  what  he  had  seen
and  heard  had  shown  him  beyond  doubt  that  God  had  not  cast  him  off,  had  not  dealt
with  him  after  his  sins  nor  rewarded  him  according  to  his  iniquities.  It  was  like  the
kiss  of  the  Divine  forgiveness,  the  joy  of  conscious  realization  of  God's  redeeming  love.
Yes ;  Jacob  found  this  Portion  in  God,  the  fulness  of  forgiving  love.  But  is  not  this  the
Portion  we  want,  the  God  we  need  to  know  ?  Not  one  who  will  cast  us  away  from  his
presence  and  throw  us  over  when  we  have  done  wrong.  If  God  were  strict  to  maik
iniquities,  who  of  us  could  stand  ?  But  the  God,  the  Portion  of  Jacob,  meets  our  i;ieed ;
for  as  Jacob  was  sinful  and  often  falling  into  sin,  so  are  we.


CH.X.1— 25.]      THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  279

II.  Another  element  of  this  portion  which  Jacob  possessed  in  God  was  the  ooir«
TiNUAL  AND  MOST  ooMFOBTiNO  KAKiFESTATioNS  OF  GK)D  which  he  was  privileged  to
enjoy.  How  continually  in  his  career  are  we  met  with  instances  of  God's  appearing
to  him  1  And  besides  the  distinctly  recorded  instances,  the  impression  is  left  upon  the
mind  that  it  was  the  constant  privilege  of  Jacob  to  hold  intercourse  with  God,  to  talk
with  him  as  a  man  talketh  with  his  friend.  Yes ;  the  Gkxi  of  Jacob  was  One  who
was  graciously  willing  to  come  near  to  his  servant,  and  to  be  known  by  him  as  his
God — a  God  near  at  hand,  and  not  afar  off.  But  who  can  estimate  what  these  Divine
communications  did  for  Jacob  ? — how  unspeakably  valuable  an  element  in  his  portioQ
this  was  ?  What  courage,  what  confidence,  what  bright  hope,  what  strength  of  faith,
it  must  have  imparted  to  the  patriarch's  mind !  And  such  blessedness  is  assured  to  all
believers.  "  I  will  come  unto  them,  and  will  manifest  myself  unto  them,"  said  our
Saviour.  ''  I  have  set  the  Lord  alway  before  me ;  because  he  is  cU  my  right  hand,  I  shall
not  be  moved."  **  Gkxi  is  our  Refuge  and  Strength,  a  very  present  Help  in  trouble."  It
is  because  we  cannot  realize  God's  presence,  can  in  no  way  feel  him  near  to  us,  that
therefore  our  hearts  fail  us  for  fear  and  our  souls  are  cast  down  within  us.  But  he  to
whom  God  reveals  himself  as  he  did  to  Jacob  has  in  that  fact  a  safeguard  and
protection  from  fear  such  as  nought  else  can  afford.

IIL  But  another  element  in  the  portion  which  Jacob  had  in  God  was  that  of
PURIFYING  DISCIPLINE.    Assuredly  he  was  not  left  without  chastisement ;  yea,  it  was
a  very  scourging  that  was  dealt  out  to  him  on  account  of  his  sins.    Men  are  apt,  both
in  reading  the  Bible  and  in  observing  the  too  frequent  failures  of  godly  men  now,  to
look  steadily  at  the  sins  of  men  like  Jacob  and  David  and  others,  and  to  wonder  how
such  men  can  be  regarded  as  God*s  people  at  all ;  but  they  do  not  look  on  and  observe
how  sorely  they  are  punished  for  their  faults,  and  how  they  in  this  world  find,  beyond
welUnigh  all  others,  that  **  the  way  of  transgressors  is  hard."    Whoever  else  may  seem
to  sin  with  impuoity,  the  children  of  God  may  not  and  do  not.    No  doubt  Rebekah
and  Jacob  thought  they  had  done  a  very  wise  and  clever  thing  when,  by  deceiving
Isaac,  thev  fraudulently  obtained  the  blessing  which  belonged  to  Esau  as  the  firstborn.
But  Rebekah,  in  the  long  years  of  melancholy  bereavement  of  her  favourite  son — ^for
she  never  saw  him  again  after  that  day  he  fled  from  his  home — had  abundant  leisure
to  see  and  repent  of  her  fully  and  her  sin.    And  Jacob,  as  he  ate  the  bread  of  servi-
tude and  dwelt  a  stranger  in  a  strange  land,  haunted  with  dread  of  Esau,  was  made
to  know  that  his  trickery  and  fraud  had  borne  him  but  a  wretched  harvest.    The
consuming  fire  of  God's  holy  love  burnt  fiercely  on  until  this  dross  which  was  so
mingled  with  the  pure  ore  of  Jacob's  fgdth  was  purged  out  of  him.    And  this  is  ever
an  indispensable  and  a  never-absent  part  of  the  portion  of  Jacob.     The  purging,
purifyinu;  disciplines  of  God's  holy  love  we  shall  all  have  to  submit  to  according  to  our
need  of  them.    And  this  should  render  the  Portion  of  Jacob  not  less  but  more  precious
in  our  esteem.    If  we  willingly  submit  to  much  pain  and  distress  in  order  that  the
health  of  the  body,  which  at  best  can  last  only  for  a  few  short  years,  may  be  secured,
may  we  not  much  rather  submit  ourselves  to  whatever  of  painful  discipline  God  may
appoint  in  order  to  secure  the  health  of  our  souls,  which  shall  live  for  ever  ?    How
dreadful  would  it  be  if  God  were  not  thus  to  purge  and  cleanse  us ;  if  he  were  to  allow
the  cancerous  growth  of  our  sins  to  spread  and  grow  until  it  had  obtained  such  hold  on
us  that  death,  eternal  death,  must  follow  I     But  this,  out  of  fatherly  love  to  us,  he  will
never  allow ;  and  therefore  Jacob  was,  and  so  we  must  be,  held  down  to  the  suffering
which  his  disciplines  cause  until  their  perfect  work  is  done,  and  we  are  presented  fault-
less before  the  presence  of  his  glory  with  exceeding  joy.     Oh,  let  us  be  more  anxious
that  God's  will  should  be  done  in  us  than  that  his  hand  should  be  taken  off  from  us.
Never,  never  may  he  say  concerning  any  one  of  us  as  he  did  concerning  Ephraim,  *'  He
is  joined  to  his  idols :  let  him  alone."

IV.  (jk)D'8  PROVIDENTIAL  GUARDIANSHIP  AND  CARE  was  a  further  element  in  the
portion  of  Jacob.  How  God  watched  over  him  I  how  truly  Jacob  could  say,  ''He
knoweth  the  way  .that  I  take  "  1  Never  was  there  any  man  to  whom  these  words  were
more  appropriate  than  they  were  to  him.  With  what  constant  interest  did  God  appear
to  mark  all  the  way  by  which  Jacob  had  to  go  1  His  eye  was  never  off  him,  his  nand
never  withdrawn,  his  help  never  wanting  when  needed.  Even  when  Jacob  did  not
dream  that  God  was  near  him,  ho  was  so  in  fact.    &o  that  he  had  to  confess  as  at


280         THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,  [ch.x.1— 25.

Betbel,  "  Surely  God  is  in  this  place,  though  I  knew  it  not.**  Hearken  how  he  speaks
of  God  when  blessing  the  sons  of  Joseph.  He  tells  of  him  as  "  the  God  which  fed  me
all  my  life  long  imto  this  day,  the  Angel  which  redeemed  me  from  all  evil.**  Such  was
his  confession  of  that  never-failing  care,  that  incessant  interest  with  which  the  Lord
God  had  watched  over  every  stage  of  his  life's  journey.  How  all  his  very  steps  had  been
ordered  by  the  Lord  1  This  is  another  characteristic  of  the  portion  which  Jacob  had  in
God.  And  must  not  that  man  be  blessed  who  consciously  realizes  that  he  has  this
God  for  his  Help  ?  To  have  our  lives  made  God's  care,  our  interests  his  concern,  to  have
his  angels  evermore  keeping  watch  and  ward  over  us,  encamping  round  about  us  to
deliver  us, — this  is  another  blessed  element  in  the  portion  of  Jacob  and  of  all  like  him.

V.  MeETNEBB  fob  "  THE  INHERITANCE  OP  THE  BAINTB  IN  LIGHT."     Gradually,  Step

by  step,  sometimes  with  seeming  retrogression,  but  ever  advancing  on  the  whole,
Jacob  was  lifted  up  from  the  low  level  of  his  former  spiritual  life,  and  ceased  to  be  any
longer  Jacob,  and  became  Israel.  Such  elevation,  such  meetness  for  "  the  inheritance  of
the  saints,"  was  and  ever  is  part  of  the  portion  of  Jacob,  and  a  most  blessed  part  it  is.
And  now,  in  conclusion,  let  us  ask,  Is  there  such  a  Portion  anywhere  dse  f  Our  text
affirms,  "  The  Portion  of  Jacob  is  not  like  them."  The  prophet  is  speaking  of  the
wretched  idols  before  whom  his  countrymen  were  so  prone  to  bow  down.  It  seems
wonderful  that  any  should  have  ever  thought  that  the  God  of  Jacob  was  like  them.
Like  them  1  when  even  to  think  of  them  was  to  despise  them  with  utter  contempt.
What  a  contrast  to  him,  whom  mind,  and  heart,  and  will,  body,  soul,  and  spirit  could
never  sufficiently  adore !  It  seemed  monstrous  that  any  should  substitute  for  him  those
wretched  idols,  upon  whom  the  prophet,  in  the  precediug  part  of  this  chapter,  pours  forth
his  bitter  scorn.  But  he  means  by  the  assertion  we  have  been  considering  to  declare
that  the  Portion  of  Jacob  is  an  incomparable  Portion.  None  can  be  put  beside,  still  less
put  in  the  place  of  him.  And  this  is  a  truth  for  to-day.  We  ask  again  the  question,  "  Is
there  such  a  Portion  anywhere  else?"  Oh  that  they  whom  the  psalmist  calls  ''men
of  the  world,'*  and  of  whom  he  says,  *'they  have  their  portion  in  this  life,"  would
compare  the  two— Jacob's  and  their  own !  Ah  1  you  who  have  not  the  Portion  of  Jacob,
we  allow  that  you  may  have  very  much  that  is  bright  and  fair.  God  may  fill  your  veins
with  health,  your  coffers  with  gold,  your  houses  with  all  luxury,  your  gaidens  with
flowers,  your  fields  with  fruits,  and  your  life  with  comfort  and  outward  peace ;  but  you
are  like  those  trees  which  in  the  winter-time  are  called  Christmas-trees.  "  One  feels  a
kind  of  pang  at  the  first  sight  of  such  trees.  No  doubt  it  is  beautiful  in  its  way,  with
the  little  lights  twinkling  among  the  branches,  and  the  sweet  gifts  of  affection  hanging
from  every  twig.  But  the  tree  itself,  are  you  not  sorry  for  it? — rooted  no  longer,
growing  no  more,  no  more  circulation  of  the  liviog  sap,  no  sweet  discoursing  by  its
means  between  air  and  soil,  between  soil  and  air.  The  last  waves  of  its  life  are  sinking,
and  the  more  you  hang  upon  it  and  the  more  you  gather  round  it  the  hster  it  will
die  "  (Dr.  Raleigh).  And  if  we  have  not  the  Portion  of  Jacob,  we  are  like  one  of  these
trees.  Loaded  it  may  be  with  all  manner  of  pleasant  things,  and  surrounded  with
affection,  but  djring  all  the  while.  But  "  the  Portion  of  Jacob  is  not  like  them  "--one
that  will  abandon  you  at  the  close  of  your  life,  or  maybe  long  before,  and  leave  you  help-
less and  forlorn.  Oh  no ;  but  then,  when  "  heart  and  fiesh  fail,"  Gtxl  will  be  "  the  Strength
of  your  heart,"  and  your  "  Portion  for  evermore."  That  is  the  portion  of  Jacob,  and  ok
may  God  grant  that  it  may  be  yours  and  mine,  and  that  of  all  we  love  I    Amen. — G.

Vers.  17, 18. —  Wherefore  Ood  doth  judge  the  world.  It  is  not  of  the  world  at  large,
but  of  Judah  and  Jerusalem,  that  the  prophet  is  here  speaking.  But  nevertheless  the
judgments  of  God  and  the  design  wherewith  they  were  sent,  though  haviug  reference
only  to  one  people,  are  true  examples  of  all  like  judgments,  whenever,  wherever,  and
however  they  come.    Therefore  note —

L  The  judgments  foretold.  The  people  are  to  be  driven  forth  into  exile  and
captivity.  The  whole  book  tells  of  their  sorrows.  Jeremiah's  prophecy  is  one  long
denunciation  of  the  wrath  of  Gtod  about  to  come  on  the  guilty  land.  He  was  sent  to
declare  this  in  the  hope  that  those  to  whom  he  spoke  might  yet  turn  to  the  Lord  and
live ;  like  Noah,  that  "  preacher  of  righteousness  '*  who  warned  the  godless  of  his  day  of
the  judgment  that  was  coming  upon  them.  More  particularly  in  these  verses  Jeremiah
declares  (ver.  17)  that  not  even  the  meanest  and  jpoorest  will  escajpe.    The  **  wares "


OH.  X.  1—25.]   THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.        281

spoken  of  tell  rather  of  the  few  mean  possessions,  the  small  trifling  properties,  of  a  poor
man,  which  in  his  haste  he  would  gather  together  in  a  bundle  and  so  endeavour  to  save
(of.  Exposition).  In  former  judgments  it  was  mainly  the  high  and  lofty,  those  of  wealth
and  station,  who  had  suffered ;  but  now  all,  from  the  highest  to  the  lowest,  should  be
included  in  the  overwhelming  desolations  about  to  be  poured  forth.  And  so  the  prophet
represents  the  poor  and  wretched  hastily  gathering  up  their  little  effects,  and  making
off*  with  them  as  best  they  may.  And  ver.  18  adds  yet  other  terrible  features  to  this
delineation  of  the  judgment  that  is  coming :  "  Behold,  I  will  sling  out,"  etc.  This,  there-
fore, shows  how  ready  they  must  have  been  for  such  treatment.  David  selected  smooth
stones  from  the  brook,  such  as  were  fit  and  apt  for  his  sling,  and  with  them  he  went
forth  to  meet  Gk)liath.  Not  any  missile,  not  any  stone,  would  serve.  And  so  if  it  were
possible,  as  it  was,  for  a  people  to  be  "  slung  out "  of  a  land,  they  must  have  made
themselves  fit  for  such  judgment,  or  else  they  would  not  have  been  subjected  to  it.
And  this  they  had  been  doing  for  many  a  long  year.  "  When  the  husbandman  seeth
that  the  harvest  .is  come,  he  putteth  in  the  sickle."  This  is  true  of  the  visitation  of
judgment  as  well  as  of  grace.  The  violence  of  the  people's  expulsion  from  their  land  is
also  indicated :  as  a  stone  is  hurled  forth  from  the  sling.  And  the  completeness  of  the
judgment :  "  at  this  once,"  i.e.  completely,  thoroughly,  at  one  blow.  Former  judgments
had  been  partial,  temporary,  long  drawn  out.  This  was  to  be  complete,  perpetual,  and
"  at  once,"  as  a  stone  is  in  a  moment  driven  forth  from  the  sling,  ^d  their  far^distant
destination  is  suggested.  Ood  intended  that  they  should  be  carried  iai  off  into  the  land
of  their  exile  (cf.  Isa.  xxiL  18).    But  note—

IL  The  fact  that  thjsse  judgments  are  declared  to  have  a  purpose  beyond
THEMSELVES.  All  was  to  be  done  "  tJiat  they  may  find**  It  is  plain,  therefore,  how-
ever we  supply  what  must  come  after  the  word  "  find,"  that  there  was  a  definite
Divine  purpose  in  all  these  calamities.  They  were  not  to  be  an  end  in  themselves,  but
to  lead  on  to  one  beyond.  And  surely  this  must  be  the  purpose  of  all  GKxl's  judgments ;
he  can  have  no  satisfaction  in  them  simply  as  punishment.  His  heart  is  set  on  what
is  to  come  forth  out  of  them,  and  the  result  has  regard  to  them.  "  That  they  may  find ;  **
they  who  have  sinned  so  terribly,  they  shall  learn  by  these  judgments  thaJb  he  sends.

III.  What  that  purpose  is.  What  is  it  that  they  may  find?  Our  translators
have  simply  added  the  words  "  it  so,"  thus  leaving  undetermined  what  the  finding  is  to
be.  But  surely  that  which  God  would  have  them  find  is  all  that  which  hitherto  they
could  not  be  persuaded  to  believe  in,  e.g,  the  bitterness  of  disobedience,  the  vanity  of
idols,  the  sure  truth  of  Gkxl's  word,  the  uselessness  of  all  religion  that  is  not  from  the
heart,  etc  But  all  this  to  the  intent  that  they  may  find,  as  at  last  many  of  them  did,
the  way  of  repentance  and  return  to  God.  Gbd  had  made  them  for  himself,  as  he  has
made  us  all  for  himself.  It  is  blasphemy  to  think  of  him  as  creating  human  souls,
endued  as  they  all  are  with  such  vast  capacities,  with  any  other  design.  And  hence
it  is  that  the  heart  of  man  is  unquiet,  has  no  rest,  until  it  find  rest  in  Gkxl.  God  will
not  suffer  it  to  be  otherwise,  blessed  be  his  Name.  And  since  for  Judah  and  Jerusalem
nothing  else  would  do,  they  should  go  into  bitter  exile,  and  suffer  as  in  the  very  fire,
"  that  they  might  find  "  God ;  that  they  might  come  to  themselves,  and  say,  "  I  will
arise  and  go  to  my  father,"  etc.    "  God  will  have  all  men  to  be  saved,  and  to  come  to

As

great

for  the  ungodly  than  this  set  will  of  God  for  their  »Edvation,  and  that  is  that  his  will

should  not  be  as  it  is.

IV.  What,  therefore,  we  are  to  learn  from  this.  1.  Give  thanks  and  praise
to  the  Lord  God  for  his  most  gmcious  purpose  concerning  men,  that  they  should  find
him  (cf.  Ps.  c,  "  Oh  be  joyful  in  the  Lord,  all  ye  lands,  ...  for  it  is  ^c  that  hath  made
us,  and  not  we  ourselves ;  we  are  his  people,  and  the  sheep  of  his  pasture  ").  2.  Compel
nim  not,  as  Judah  did,  to  resort  to  sore  judgments  ere  we  will  seek  and  "  find  "  him.
3.  At  once  take  Christ's  yoke  and  learn  of  him,  and  so  find  rest  in  our  souls  by  finding
him, — C.

Ver.  19. — Suhmission.  I.  The  orief  contemplated.  It  is  told  of  in  ver.  17,  etc
And  It  was  indeed  great ;  the  "  wound  was  grievous  j "  for :  1.  It  was  so  univernal.    It


282  THE  BOOK  OP  THE   PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  x.  1—26.


affected  all  classes  and  in  all  ways,  in  mind,  body,  and  estate.  2.  So  severe.  It  was
not  a  "  light  affliction,'*  but  **  the  iron  entered  into  their  souls."  3.  And  it  was  self-
caused.  The  fangs  of  remorse  were  fastened  in  them  by  the  consciousness  they  could
not  escape,  that  they  had  brought  all  their  sorrows  upon  themselves.  4.  And  they
drew  down  so  many  other s^  and  innocent  ones,  in  their  own  doom.  This  is  ever  one  of
the  most  fearful  torments  to  the  soul  of  the  guilty.  "  I  have  ruined,  not  myself  only,
but  my  wife,  children,  parents,  friends."  Tho  dart,  if  it  be  plun^^ed  first  into  the  heart
of  those  we  love,  will  rankle  in  our  own  all  the  more  terribly  when  it  pierces  us.
5.  And  the  liyht  of  OixTa  countenance  was  gone.  With  that  we  can  bear  anything.
Paul  and  Silas  sang  praises  in  the  dungeon  at  Philippi.  But  withdrawn,  driven  away
by  our  sin,  then  is  the  soul  sad  indeed.  6.  And  it  was  irreparable.  The  wrath  of
God  had  arisen,  and  there  "  was  no  remedy  "  (cf.  ver.  20).     But  note —

IL  The  spirit  in  which  it  was  borne.  "  But  I  said.  Truly  this  is  a  grief,  and  I
most  bear  it."  Now,  these  words  might  be  used  to  express  a  spirit  of  sullen  hardihood.
Some  have  so  understood  them.  But  we  rather  regard  them  as  the  language  of  pious
submission.  It  is  the  true  Israelite  who  speaks ;  not  the  gotUess,  idol-loving  multitude,
but  the  chosen  of  God  who  were  mingled  among  them.  And  that  this  is  so  is  shown  :
1.  By  the  check  the  speaker  puts  upon  his  lament.  He  was  about  seemingly  to  launch
out  in  great  complainings  when  he  arrests  his  speech  by  recollections  of  a  different  kind :
"But  I  said,"  etc.  He  would  not  allow  himself  in  any  more  complaint;  he  replies  to
all  such  thoughts  by  the  considerations  he  now  brings  forward.  2.  He  recognizes  the
cause  of  all  these  sorrows  (ver.  21).  It  was  their  failure  to  '*  seek  the  Lord,"  the  pastors
becoming  **  brutish  " — their  grievous  sin.  Mere  sullen ness  would  never  make  such  a
confession  as  this.  3.  And  the  spirit  of  vers.  23 — 25,  so  lowly,  devout,  and  filled  with
sacred  desire, — all  these  show  that  we  are  to  understand  ver.  19  as  the  utterance,  not  of
defiant  hardihood  or  any  other  evil  spirit,  but  as  that  of  submission.  Parallels,  there-
fore, are  to  be  found  in  the  submission  of  Aaron  at  the  death  of  his  sons  (cf.  also  Lam.
lii  18—21,  39,  40 ;  Micah  vii.  9  ;  Ps.  Ixxvii.  10 ;  xxxix.  9,  etc.).

III.  This  spirit  greatly  to  be  commended.  1.  For  its  nature.  It  is  not  the
spirit  of  a  stoiCf  of  one  who  sets  his  teeth  firm,  and  resolves  to  endure,  come  what
may ;  but  it  is  tender,  gentle,  and  keenly  susceptible  of  pain.  Nor  is  it  silent.  Its
voice  is  heard  in  prayers,  confessions,  praises,  and  it  is  ever  desiring  more  of  God's
presence  and  grace.  Nor  is  it  slothful.  It  will  be  open-eyed  to  see  and  alert  to  act  if
aught  can  be  done  to  minister  relief  or  gain  deliverance.  Thus  it  does  not  violate  any
good  instinct  or  dictate  either  of  nature  or  conscience,  as  it  would  do  were  it  charac-
terized by  either  of  the  undesirable  qualities  named.  They  each  have  some  sort  of
semblance  of  submission,  but  are  far  away  removed  from  being  identical  with  it  or
necessary  to  it.  But  submission  consists  in  that  calm  composure  of  our  whole  nature,
that  meek  acquiescence  in  the  will  of  God,  however  painful  that  will  may  be.  And  there-
fore this  spirit  is  commendable :  2.  For  its  comeliness.  How  morally  beautiful  and  lovely
it  is  I  We  never  tire  of  it,  never  do  anything  but  in  our  hearts  admire  and  praise
it,  and  long  to  make  it  our  own.  How  our  hearts  go  out  towards  those  that  have
eminently  manifested  it  I  As  Aaron  (cf.  supra) ;  Job  saying, "  The  Lord  gave,  and  the
Lord  hath  taken  away,"  etc. ;  Moses ;  and  above  all,  our  Saviour.  Notwithstanding  all
his  present  and  most  deserved  glory  as  our  risen  Lord,  it  is  to  him  on  the  cross,  crowned
with  thorns,  in  all  the  glory  of  his  meek  submission — to  him  the  heart  of  humanity
ever  turns  with  adoring  love  and  trust.  3.  For  its  self-conquest.  Under  the  smart
and  distress  of  great  loss  and  disaster,  how  ready  the  understanding  is  to  think  hard
thoughts  and  to  utterly  resent  what  God  has  done  1  And  the  will,  how  sullenly  it
frowns  upon  God,  and  with  lowering  brow  refuses  to  submit  1  And  the  passions,  how
they  rage  in  torrents  of  tears  and  wild  wailing  cries  of  angry  agony !  And  the  lips,
what  hard  speeches  they  are  prompt  to  utter  (cf.  "  I  said  in  my  hast^,  All  men  are
liars  ") !  And  the  hands,  how  eager  to  take  revenge  upon  any  who  have  been  the  means
and  instruments  of  our  affliction  1  But  the  spirit  of  submission  holds  all  these  hot,  eager
forces  in,  as  with  bit  and  bridle,  and  bids  them  all  be  still.  They  are,  as  were  the  lions
before  Daniel,  awed  and  subdued  by  his  calm,  hallowed  presence.  Blessed  is  he  who
can  thus  conquer  himself.  None  else  shall  conquer  him,  and  least  of  all  any  of  the
mere  circumstances  of  life  (cf.  Prov.  xvi.  32).  4.  For  its  wisdom.  *'  There  are  few
things  in  the  world  so  totally  and  entirely  bad  but  some  advantage  may  be  made  of


C3H.  X.  1—25.]       THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  283


them  by  a  dexterous  management ;  and  it  is  certainly  a  man's  wisdom  to  make  the
best  of  a  bad  condition,  tiiere  being  a  certain  kind  of  pious  and  prudential  husbandry
by  which  a  man  may  so  improve  a  calamity  as  to  make  the  endurance  of  it  the  per-
formance of  a  duty,  and  by  his  behaviour  under  it  to  procure  a  release  from  it.  We
should,  with  Isaac,  take  the  wood  upon  our  shoulders,  though  we  ourselves  are  designed
for  the  sacrifice ;  and  who  knows  but,  as  in  his  case,  so  in  ours  also,  a  patient  resig-
nation of  ourselves  to  the  knife  may  be  the  sure  and  direct  way  to  rescue  us  from  it  ?  **
(South).

<* He  always  wins  who  sides  with  thee;
To  him  no  chance  is  lost ;
Thv  will  is  sweetest  to  him  when
It  triumphs  at  his  cost.

^ni  that  thou  blessest  turns  to  good,
Aud  unblest  good  to  ill ;
And  all  is  right  that  seems  most  wrong.
If  it  be  thy  sweet  wilL"

5.  jPor  its  acceptdhUneu  to  Qod,  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  was  the  **  my  beloved  Son,  In
whom  I  am  well  pleased,**  because  of  it ;  because  his  meat  and  his  drink  was  ever  to  do
the  will  of  the  Father  who  sent  him.  "  Blessed  are  the  meek.**  "  Humble  yourselves
therefore  under  the  mighty  hand  of  Qod,  that,"  etc.

IV.  Not  easy,  but  nevertheless  fully  possible,  op  attainment.  Not  easy,
because  all  our  instincts  under  the  smart  of  pain  and  loss  (cf.  supra)  protest  against  it.
Because  also  the  maxims  of  the  world  are  airectly  contrary  to  it.  But  attainable  by
jnactice,  '*  Let  him  train  himself  whilst  young  to  lesser  self-denials  and  mortifications ;
let  him  learn  to  put  up  with  and  pass  by  a  slight  undervaluing  word,  and  in  time  he  shall
find  himself  strong  enough  to  conquer  and  digest  an  injurious  action ;  let  him  learn  to
overlook  his  neighbour's  incivility,  and  in  time  he  shall  be  able  with  patience  and
firmness  of  mind  to  endure  his  insolence  and  cruelty,  and  that  without  being  dis-
composed by  any  instigations  to  revenge ;  and  let  him  accustom  himself  to  do  this
often,  and  at  length  he  shall  be  able  to  do  it  always "  (South).  And  yet  more  by
communion  and  intercourse  with  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  We  catch  the  tones  and
habits  and  thoughts  of  those  with  whom  we  most  associate.  Live  in  close  cc«npanion-
ship  with  Christ,  and  the  spirit  of  him  who  ''when  he  was  reviled,  reviled  not  again,''
shall  be  formed  in  us,  and  more  and  more  shall  we  know  how  "  blessed  are  the  meek,"
and  how  surely  God  "  will  exalt  us  in  due  time  "  (cf.  PhiL  iL  5 — 11). — C*

Vers.  20,  21. — The  ruin  wrought  hy  the  prayerless  pctstor.  I.  Consider  the  boekb
POBTRAYED  BY  THE  PROPHET.  Consider  it  both  before  and  after  that  dread  invasion  of
which  he  was  ever  warning  his  countrymen.  1.  Before  that  invasion,  whilst  Judah  was
at  peace,  there  might  often  have  been  witnessed  over  the  wide  downs  and  pasture-lands
of  Palestine  the  shepherds'  encampment ;  for  Palestine  was  an  eminently  pastoral
country,  as  the  psalms  of  David  and  the  teachings  of  our  Lord  plainly  show.  And
hence  up  and  down  the  land  might  have  been  seen  the  shepherds  tents,  whole  camps
of  them,  dotting  the  plains  or  valleys  with  their  slender  poles,  their  broad  curtains  and
strong  cords  holding  them  erect  and  securing  them  firmly  to  the  ground  on  which  they
stood.  The  swarthy  children  would  be  running  in  and  out,  and  at  even-time  the
greater  portion  of  the  whole  inhabitants  of  these  tabernacles  would  be  gathered  around
or  within  them.  And  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood,  carefully  watched  by  their
shepherds,  would  be  the  fiocks  quietly  grazing,  in  which  consisted  their  whole  wealth.
It  was  a  pastoral  scene  the  peacefulness  and  beauty  of  which  were  as  manifest  as  the
commonness  of  it  in  the  happier  days  of  Palestine  and  her  people.  2.  Bui  after  the  tntu-
sion,  in  the  unhappy  days  which,  when  Jeremiah  spoke,  were  drawing  so  terribly  near,
when  the  land  should  be  overrun  by  the  armies  of  Babylon,  there  would  be  as  often
seen  the  actual  circumstances  portrayed  in  our  text.  The  tent  thrown  down,  its  cords
cut,  its  curtains  a  shapeless  heap  upon  the  ground,  left  to  decay  and  rot  by  those  who
had  wrought  its  ruin.  And  all  would  be  silent  and  still ;  no  merry  prattle  of  children
heard,  or  the  coming  and  going  of  the  men  and  women  who  once  had  made  that  tent
their  home.    A  few  blackened  ashes  alone  telling  whore  the  camp-fire  had  been.    The


284  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,     [ch.  x.  1—25.

flocks  all  scattered ;  those  that  the  foe  had  not  destroyed  driven  ofif  and  wandering
in  the  wilderness,  none  knew  where*  It  is  a  picture  of  utter  and  most  mournfiU
desolation.

II.  Its  ifEANiNO.  Its  intent  is  to  represent  what  was  about  to  happen  in  regard  to
the  Church  and  people  of  Judah.  The  temple  should  be  overthrown  and  burnt  with
fire ;  her  holy  places  profaned,  her  altars  broken  down,  her  sacred  services  all  brought
to  an  end,  the  solemn  feast-day  no  more  observed.  Her  children — they  who  ministered
at  her  altars  and  sang  the  high  praises  of  the  Lord — should  have  gone  forth  from  her
and  be  as  though  they  were  not,  and  all  the  congregation  of  the  people,  the  flock  of
the  Lord,  should  be  scattered.  And  all  this  came  to  pass,  as  we  well  know,  violently
and  as  in  a  moment,  like  as  a  stone  is  suddenly  hurled  forth  from  the  sling  (ver.
18).  But  the  prophet's  picture  has  a  yet  wider  application ;  for  it  tells  of  the  terrible
desolation  which  may  come  upon  any  Church,  whether  in  a  nation,  or  a  community,  or
in  any  given  district.  Under  the  vivid  imagery  which  Jeremiah  employs  we  may  see
represented  the  deplorable  disaster  of  a  Church's  desolation,  and  whence  and  how  it
comes.  Therefore  let  us  look  at :  1.  The  overthrown  tent.  By  it  we  may  see  represented
the  destruction  of  the  whole  organization  of  the  Church.  How  beautiful  is  the  spectacle
presented  to  the  outward  eye  by  a  Church  that  enjoys  the  blessing  of  Ctod !  Behold  her
ianctuaries.  Look  upon  them,  from  the  stately  cathedral  down  to  the  humblest  house
of  God  in  the  land.  Here,  with  dome  and  towers  and  spires  piercing  the  sky,  pointing
upwards,  heavenwards,  and  breaking  the  dull  level  of  men's  common  habitations,
and  of  the  buildings  which  they  have  reared  for  their  dwellings,  their  labour,  their
trade.  And  out  in  the  country,  on  the  hillside,  scattered  over  the  wide  plains  and
fdong  many  a  quiet  valley,  in  hamlet,  village,  and  town,  we  behold  the  sanctuaries
built  for  God,  and  the  stream,  larger  or  smaller,  of  worshippers  that  continually  go  up
to  them  to  worship.  Each  one  of  these  sanctuaries  a  centre  of  light  and  warmth,  of
energy  and  holy  toil,  blessing  and  being  blessed.  And  think  of  the  aabbatha  of  the
Church— those  bless^  days  of  rest,  when  the  weary  round  of  toil  is  made  to  hush  its
noise,  and  for  the  time  to  cease.  The  ploueh  stands  still  in  the  furrow,  the  horses
roam  in  the  meadow  or  gladly  rest  in  the  stidl ;  but  the  ploughman  is  gone  home,  that
he  may,  if  he  will,  give  heed  to  the  husbandry  of  the  soul  and  to  the  preparation  for
the  harvest  of  heaven.  Nor,  in  this  survey,  may  we  pass  by  the  Churches  worehip.
What  myriads  of  jubilant  anthems  and  glad  psalms  and  triumphant  hymns  go  up
heavenwards,  with  a  merry  noise  1  What  help  for  all  who  desire  it  is  won  by  those
who  give  heed  to  the  holy  truth  that  is  at  such  times  proclaimed !  Ah  I  if  spiritual
thought  and  feeling  could,  by  some  Divine  chemistry,  be  made  visible,  what  a  glorious
scene  would  be  witnessed  I  Like  unto  the  rainbow  which  was  round  about  the  throne,
beautiful  to  behold,  would  the  worship  of  the  Church  be  seen,  even  as  it  is  seen  by
him  to  whom  and  for  whom  and  by  whom  it  is  all  rendered.  Think,  too,  of  the  work
of  the  Church,  The  ships  that  bear  her  messengers,  charged  to  proclaim  the  glad
tidings  of  the  gospel  to  sdl  mankind,  speed  their  way  through  all  seas,  across  all  oceans,
and  enter  every  harbour.  Ah!  yes;  Christ's  Church  on  earth,  faulty,  imperfect,
unfaithful,  as  she  so  often  and  so  largely  is,— where  would  the  world  be  without  her  ?
and  where  would  the  wretched  and  the  lost  find  their  truest  friends,  if  not  in  her?  But
all  this  outward  organization,  this  visible  tabernacle  of  the  Church,  is  contemplated,
not  as  in  her  happy  ideal,  but  in  the  very  reverse.  The  prophet's  picture  portrays  the
tabernacle  thrown  down,  and  desolation  everywhere.  Hence  her  sanctuaries  forsaken,
profaned,  or  left  to  decay  and  ruin ;  her  services  abandoned  or  turned  into  mere  per-
formances of  worn-out  ceremonies ;  her  sabbaths  no  longer  days  of  guarded  rest,  but
like  all  other  days;  her  work  paralyzed  and  dropped  more  and  more,  and  all  her
external  framework  and  organization  overthrown.  Try  and  realize  what  that  would
be.  And  this  is  not  all.  2.  Her  children  are  represented  as  having  gone  forth  from
her.  When  all  is  well  with  a  Church,  it  is  our  joy  to  see  the  children  taking  the  fathers'
place,  coming  forward  to  uphold  the  standard  which  the  aged  hands  of  the  seniors  are
compelled  to  let  go.  How  delightful  such  a  scene  is  we  need  hardly  say.  But  there  is
nothing  of  this  kind  contemplated  here,  but,  on  the  contrary,  those  to  whom  the  Church
would  naturally  look  to  carry  on  her  work  are  seen  borne  away  captive  by  the  foes  of
the  Church,  and  as  slaves  to  the  world.  3.  And  the  last  feature  in  this  sad  picture  is
the  scattering  of  the  flock.    The  people  at  large,  for  whose  interests  the  Church  was


CH.  X,  1—26.]   THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.        285


bidden  to  care,  turniDg  from  her  with  disgust,  scouting  her  claims,  running  riot  in  sin,
unchecked,  unhindered,  unwarned ;  sinking  down  into  awful  depths  of  wickedness  and
spiritual  ignorance,  living  "  without  God  and  without  hope  in  the  world."  Such  is  the
scattering  of  the  flock,  the  alienation  of  her  children,  and  the  spoiling  of  her  tabernacle,
from  all  which  may  GKxl  evermore  keep  and  defend  us.  But  that  we  may  be  thus
defended,  let  us —

III.  Inquibb  the  cause  of  such  DI8ASTEB.  It  \s  clearly  stated  in  ver.  21,  "  Tha
pastors  have  become  brutish,  and  have  not  sought  the  Lord."  1.  Who  are  these
pastors  ?  It  would  be  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  only  ministers  are  meant.  Jeremiah
did  not  mean  these  only,  but  all  to  whom  the  flock  of  Ood  were  entrusted — kings,
rulers,  judges,  parents,  and  teachers,  heads  of  families,  and  all  to  whom,  by  virtue  of
their  position,  the  charge  and  responsibility  of  watching  over  the  souls  of  others  was
given.  2.  Now,  these  pastors  had  "  become  brutish."  By  which  is  meant,  first  of  all,
unintelligent,  stupid,  blind  to  the  meaning  of  facts,  and  incapable  of  perceiving  what
needed  to  be  done ;  with  no  quick  apprehension,  if  any  at  all,  of  their  responsibility,  their
duty,  or  the  peril  that  threatened  both  their  flock  and  themselves ;  settled  down  into
the  stolid  apathy  and  indifiference  of  ignorance,  of  dulled  perception,  and  of  blindness
of  heart.  Brutish,  too,  because  unspiritual,  materialized,  worldly,  earth-bound;  having
little  or  no  regard  for  anything  beyond  what  this  life  can  give  or  take  away  ;  caring
more  for  the  fleece  of  the  flock  than  for  its  faith  and  fidelity.  And  brutish,  it  may
be,  in  a  yet  lower  sense,  because  sensual ;  like  those  of  whom  Paul  tells  with  bitter
tears.  **  Whose  god,"  he  says,  "is  their  belly,  who  glory  in  their  shame,  who  mind
earthly  things."  3.  "The  pastors  have  become  brutish."  What  an  awful  association  of
ideas !  Can  any  condition  be  conceived  of  more  horrible  than  this  ?  No  wonder  such
disastrous  results  followed.  Think  how  dreadful  such  a  fact  must  be  for  t?ie  ?ionour
of  Christ,  How  his  Name  must  be  blasphemed !  How  such  must  crucify  the  Son  of
God  afresh,  and  once  more  put  him  to  open  shame !  How  again  the  Lord  Jesus,  pointing
to  the  wounds  in  his  sacred,  hands  and  feet  and  side,  must  declare,  "  These  are  the
wounds  with  which  I  was  wounded  in  the  house  of  my  finends "  1  Blessed  Saviour,
keep  us  from  such  sin  as  this.  And  how  dreadful  for  the  Church  of  Christ,  which  he
has  purchased  with  his  own  blood  1  How  such  men  discourage  the  Church  1  how
they  chill  its  ardour !  how  they  stagger  its  faith  I  how  they  weaken  its  strength  I  how
they  imperil  its  very  life !  And  how  dreadful  for  tJie  world  1  "  Woe  unto  the  world,"
said  our  Saviour,  *'  because  of  offences  1 "  This  he  ssdd  in  pity  for  the  world,  hindered,
made  to  stumble  and  fall  by  those  who  should  only  have  helped  it  on  its  way  to  God.
How  many  will  be  hardened  in  wickedness,  encouraged  to  despise  all  religion,  furnished
with  fresh  subject  for  impious  mockery  and  new  arguments  for  sin,  by  such  as  they
of  whom  our  text  tells  1  And  how  dreadful  for  these  brutish  ones  themselves !  "  But
woe,"  said  Jesus,  "  unto  them  by  whom  that  ofifenco  cometh  1 "  "  Who  shall  abide
the  day  of  the  Lord's  coming  "  to  execute  his  wrath  on  them  ?  Who,  indeed  I  God,  in
his  infinite  mercy,  save  us  from  ever  knowing  what  that  wrath  is.  4.  But  how  came
this  awful  fall  f  What  brought  down  these  pastors  to  this  dreadful  condition  ?  And
the  answer  to  this  question  is  plainly  given.  They  did  not  seek  the  Lord ;  they  were
prayerl^ss  pastors :  and  that  explains  all.  Now,  this  did  not  mean  that  there  was  no
worship,  no  praise,  no  prayer,  ever  ofiered.  We  know  there  was.  The  temple  service
went  on  and  the  sacrifices  were  presented  as  usual.  But  there  was  no  true,  heartfelt
prayer.  They  did  not  really  seek  the  Lord.  And  so  with  ourselves,  there  may  be,  and
there  probably  will  be,  the  keeping  up  of  pious  customs,  the  daily  prayers,  the  ordinary
worship ;  but  for  such  seeking  of  the  Lord  as  is  here  told  of,  and  the  neglect  of  which
worked  such  ruin,  there  must  be  far  more  than  this.  There  must  be  that  full  appli-
cation of  the  heart  and  mind,  that  lifting  up  of  the  soul  to  God,  that  drawing  out  of
the  affections  after  him,  that  cleaving  of  the  desires  to  him,  that  ardour  and  yet  that
patience,  that  humility  and  yet  that  boldness  which  time  cannot  measure,  which
make  long  prayers  seem  short  to  him  who  offers  them,  and  short  prayers,  if  of  neces-
sity they  must  be  short,  count  as  long  prayers  with  him  who,  for  Christ's  sake,
mercifully  receives  the  soul  who  follows  hard  after  him.  This  is  the  kind  of  prayer
which  can  alone  be  our  safeguard  from  the  abyss  into  which  the  pastors  here  told  of
fell.  Would  we  escape  it,  we  must  seek  the  Lord  so  ;  all  else  is  as  seeking  him  not  at
idL    It  is  no  holiday  task,  but  one  demanding  all  the  energies  of  the  soul.    How  many.


286  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  x.  1—26.


how  mighty,  how  manifold,  how  suhtlo,  are  the  diflBculties  in  the  way!  There  is  the
earth-bound  heart,  that  ever  clogs  our  souls  with  its  clinging  clay ;  that  makes  them
like  the  bird  with  the  lime  of  the  bird-snarer  on  its  feathers,  unable  either  to  fly  or  go :
when  it  would  soar  aloft  it  is  powerless  to  spread  its  wings,  and  so  is  as  if  chained  to  the
sround.  And  incessant  occupations  clamour  for  attention,  and  are  ever  telling  us  we
have  no  time.  And  indolence  and  sloth  keep  suggesting  thoughts  of  ease  and  self-
sparing.  And  want  of  practice  in  this,  as  in  everything  else,  makes  real  prayer  very
difficult.  And  Satan,  when  he  sees  the  soul  threatening  to  escape  him  by  means  of
such  prayer — as  by  such  means  it  ever  will  escape  him — bends  all  his  energies  to
thwart  and  hinder,  to  baffle  and  beat  down,  such  prayer.  All  this  is  so,  but  yet  we
tntut  thus  pray.  And  let  us  not  be  disheartened.  All  these  difficulties  have  been
overcome  by  ten  thousand  of  the  saints  of  God,  and  shall  be  by  us.  And,  for  our
help,  remember  our  Lord's  intercession.  Join  all  our  prayers — poor,  weak  things  as  at
their  best  they  are— on  to  his  almighty,  all-prevailing  intercession,  and  in  this  also  we
shall  come  off  "  more  than  conquerors  through  Christ  who  hath  loved  us."  So  shall
we  be  kept  from  being  one  of  those  wretched  pastors  who  have  become  brutish,  and
have,  therefore,  only  scattered  the  Lord's  flock ;  yea,  we  shall  be  made  and  be  con-
fessed, now  and  hereafter  in  our  Lord's  presence,  as  one  of  the  pastors  after  his  own
heart. — C.

Vers.  23 — 25. — Fruits  of  a  chastened  spirit.  From  what  foul  soil  do  the  fairest
flowers  spring  I  Beautiful  as  they  are,  they  are  rooted  in  that  which  is  altogether
unbeautiful.  The  sweet  perfume  of  many  woods,  seeds,  flowers,  will  not  be  given  forth
nntil  they  are  gashed  with  the  axe,  or  bruised,  or  crushed,  or  otherwise  seemingly  mal-
treated. We  could  not  have  the  many-hued  arch  of  the  exquisitely  tinted  rainbow
were  it  not  for  the  drear,  dark  clouds  and  the  descending  rain.  The  most  precious  of
the  psalms  were  wrung  out  of  the  heart  of  David  when  that  heart  was  well-nigh  borne
down  with  grief.  And  here,  in  these  verses,  it  is  the  chastened  spirit  of  Judah,  per-
sonified in  the  prophet  who  speaks,  that  utters  itself  in  the  lowly  confession  of  the
twenty-third  verse,  the  holy  submission  of  the  prayer  of  the  twenty-fourth  verse,  and
the  settled  hatred  of  them  who  hate  God  which  burns  in  the  twenty-fifth.  Consider,
then,  these  fruits,  and  may  God  make  them  to  abound  in  ourselves.

L  The  confession.  Ver.  23,  "  0  Lord,  I  know,"  etc.  Now,  this  is  a  confession :
1.  0/  humble  dependence  upon  Ood,  It  is  an  acknowledgment  that,  however  much
man  may  propose,  Gtxi  will  dispose;  that  man's  goings  are  of  the  Lord.  The  life  of
each  is,  as  God  told  Cyrus  (Isa.  xliv.),  guided,  governed  by  him.  Illustrations  are
everywhere:  the  cruelty  of  Joseph's  brethren;  the  oppression  of  Israel  in  Egypt;
the  crucifixion  of  our  Lord  (cf.  Acts  ii.  23);  the  persecution  of  the  Church  (Acts
viii.  3);  Paul's  early  life;  etc.  All  these  are  instances  in  which,  whilst  men  did
exactly  as  they  liked,  acting  with  choice  as  unfettered  as  it  was  evil,  they  were  never-
theless made  to  subserve  the  Divine  plans,  and  their  evil  was  compelled  to  work  out
good.  Man  may  have  power  to  "  walk,"  but  whither  his  steps  will  lead  he  cannot
•*  direct."  "  The  way  of  man  is  not  in  himself."  He  is  free  to  choose  his  way,  and  for
bis  choice  he  is  responsible ;  but  he  is  not  allowed  to  determine  all  that  shall  come  of
that  choice  or  what  its  issues  and  results  shall  be.  Every  time  that  men  find  their
plans  turn  out  altogether  differently  from  what  they  expected  or  designed,  proves  the
truth  of  the  prophet's  word.  God  has  planned  the  life  of  each  one  of  us.  He  intends
certain  results  to  be  secured  by  our  lives.

•*  There's  a  divinity  that  shapes  our  ends,
Rough-hew  them  how  we  will."

And  our  wisdom  is  to  see  and  confess  and  conform  ourselves  to  the  Divine  plan-
happy  they  who  do  so  I — and  not  to  thwart  or  hinder  it,  as  so  many  are  bent  upon
doing,  and  hence,  in  the  manifold  sorrows  of  their  lives,  find  it  **  hard  to  kick  against
the  pricks."  Our  wisdom  is  daily  to  pray,  "  Cause  me  to  know  the  way  wherein  I
should  walk ;  make  plain  ray  path  before  my  face."  2.  0/  their  own  folly  and  sin.
There  are  many  teachers  who  will  instruct  us  in  this  truth  of  our  own  incompetence
to  order  our  ways ;  all  that  is  needed  is  that  we  be  willing  to  learn.  Such  teachers
are :  (1)  Reason.    It  is  reasonable  that,  as  we  are  the  creatures  of  God,  he  should  have


CH.X.  1— 26.]     THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  287


the  control  of  our  lives.     (2)  Scripture,     We  have  cited  some  instances  already.

(3)  OhserwUian,    The  world  is  strewn  with  the  wrecks  of  men  who  have  disregarded
the  chart  given  them  of  Ood,  and  have  run  upon  the  rocks  in  consequence.    (4)  But
the  most  strenuous  and  resistless  teacher  of  all  is  Experience.    He  will  make  a  man
learn,  almost  whether  the  man  will  or  no.    And  it  was  this  teacher  who  had  heen
instructing,  in  his  emphatic  manner,  Judah  and  her  people.    By  the  miserable  mess
they  had  made  of  their  lives,  and  the  frightful  calamities  which  now  were  close  at  their
doors  (ver.  22),  they  had  at  length  come  to  see  and  confess  their  own  wretched
ordering  of  their  way.    Hence  now  the  confession,  "  0  Lord,  I  know  that,"  etc.     It  is  a
hlessed  fruit  for  folly  and  fault  to  hear.    It  is  not  the  natural  fruit,  but  one  of  God's
gracious  grafts.     Peter's  folly  of  boasting  bore  such  fruit  when  "  he  went  out  and  wept
bitterly."    Let  our  prayer  be  that  the  faults  and  follies,  the  sins  and  sorrows,  with
which  our  lives  are  scattered  over  may  make  us  see  and  own,  "  0  Lord,  I  know  that,"
etc.    3.  Of  their  trust,  nevertheless,  in  Ood's  infinite  love.    For  not  improbably  this
confession  has  not  only  an  upward  look  to  Grod  as  the  Director  of  men's  ways,  and  an
inward  look  upon  their  own  sin,  but  also  an  outward  look  upon  those  dread  foes  who
were  hastening  to  destroy  them.     And  this  was  their  comfort  that,  after  all,  these
enemies  of  theirs  were  in  God's  hands.    No  doubt  they  designed  fearful  things  against
God's  people  (cf.  ver.  25).    But  then,  "  the  way  of  man  is  not,"  etc.    Hence  even  these
fierce,  relentless  foes  might  be  held  in  and  turned  about  by  the  bit  and  bridle  of  God.
Had  not  God,  in  the  days  of  the  good  King  Hezekiah,  proved  this  in  regard  to  the  King
of  Assyria  and  his  army  ?    Had  he  not,  as  Isaiah  said,  *'  put  a  hook  in  his  nose  . . .  and
turned  him  back  by  the  way  by  which  he  came"?    And  this  confession  breathes  this
hope  and  trust  that  Gk)d  would  do  the  like  by  their  enemies  now  about  to  fall  upon
them.    It  is  a  real  comfort  to  know  that  all  our  enemies,  whether  human  or  spiritual,
are  under  the  control  of  God.    Even  the  apparently  omnipotent  prince  of  evil  has  but
a  limited  power.    He,  too,  cannot  direct  his  own  way.    "  The  Lord,  he  is  the  tme  God,
the  living  God,  the  everlasting  King  "  (ver.  10).

IL  The  fbayer.  Ver.  24,  "  0  Lord,  correct  me,  but,"  etc.  1.  This  is  a  model
prayer.  For:  (1)  It  confesses  wrong.  It  owns  the  need  of  correction.  The  man  is
no  longer  right  in  his  own  eyes.  He  is  seen,  like  the  publican, "  standing  afar  off,"  etc.
(2)  It  desires  to  be  put  right  (cf.  Ps.  li.).  As  there,  so  here,  there  is  the  longing  for
renewal,  the  clean  heart,  the  right  spirit.  (3)  It  deprecates,  not  the  correction,  but
the  wrath  of  God.  The  man  has  a  clear  view  of  that  wrath — its  crushing,  destroying
power.  It  is  good  to  have  this.  Without  it  there  is  the  danger  of  our  looking  lightly
upon  our  sin.  2.  It  is  a  most  instructive  prayer.  It  teaches  us :  (1)  That  all  the  cor-
rections we  have  received  have  been  fatherly  ones — "  in  judgment,"  not  "  in  anger.**
For  had  they  been  in  anger  we  had  not  been  here  at  all.  (2)  That  we  are  alive  and
in  GKxi's  presence  proves  that  the  love  of  God,  and  not  his  anger,  is  ours  still.  For  his
anger  would  have  "  brought  us  to  nothing."  (3)  That  there  are  corrections  in  anger.
There  have  been  such.  Where  are  Egypt,  Nineveh,  Babylon,  Rome?  God  brought
them  "  to  nothing."    And  there  will  be  for  all  who  harden  themselves  against  G^od.

(4)  That,  seeing  all  need  correction  and  will  therefore  receive  it,  either  "  in  judgment"
or  "  in  anger,"  our  wisdom  is  to  make  this  prayer  our  own.  One  or  other  of  these  cor-
rections we  must  have.  Which  shall  it  be  ?  This  prayer  was  answered  for  Israel.
They  have  not  been  brought  to  nothing,  and  they  were  corrected.  That  sin  of  idolatry
which  brought  on  them  Gk)d's  correction  they  have,  ever  since  that  correction,  utterly
abandoned.    Then  let  us  make  this  prayer  our  own.

III.  Holy  anoeb  against  the  enemies  of  God.  We  can  readily  see  that  vers.  23
and  24  are  the  fruits  of  a  chastened  spirit,  but  this  fierce  utterance  of  ver.  25  seems
of  another  kind.  But  it  is  not.  No  doubt  it  has  somewhat  of  the  fierceness  which
belonged  to  that  stem  age,  but  it  is  none  the  less  a  real  fruit  of  a  right  spirit.  We
ought  to  be  very  doubtful  of  our  own  spirit,  however  meek  and  contrite  it  is,  if  it  be  not
accompanied  with  an  intense  detestation  of  eviL  "  Do  not  I  hate  them,  0  Lord,  that
hate  thee  ?  and  am  not  I  grieved  with  those  that  rise  up  against  thee  ?  "  Such  sentiment
is  a  true  note  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  a  religious  life  that  lacks  it  is  sure  to  be  lacking
in  vigour,  strength,  and  reliability.  It  is  not  personal  hatred  that  finds  utterance  here,
80  much  as  a  deep  sense  of  the  wrong  done  to  God  and  the  hindrance  that  is  placed  in
the  way  of  his  will.    The  seven ty-ninth  psalm  is  an  expression  of  this  petition.    Our


288        THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,  [ch.  x.  1— 25.


and  the  temperament  that  so  soft  an  af^  induces,  are  apt  to  make  ns  be  too  euf
with  an  and  sinners.  We  are  so  bred  up  in  the  idea  of  the  ^  Gentle  Jesus,  meek  and
nuld,"  that  we  forget  how  anything  but  gentle  and  mild  he  was  to  the  hopelessly  bad
who  were,  in  regutl  to  the  spiritual  well-being  of  his  people,  doing  as  is  here  said,
''eating  up  Jacob,  devouring  him,**  etc.  What  awfol  words  poured  forth  from  Uie
SaTiouPs  lips  towards  such  1  Let  ns  suspect  a  meekness  that  makes  us  mild  towards
such.  A  man  may  make  the  confession  of  ver.  23,  and  offer  the  prayer  of  ver.  24,  and
UM  and  fall  again  ;  but  if  he  have  the  stem  spirit  of  Ter.  25,  that  deep,  intense  hatred
of  evil,  sin  is  far  less  likely  to  have  dominion  over  him  for  the  future;  he  will  be
**  strong  in  the  Lord,  and  in  the  power  of  bis  might.**  Therefore,  whilst  we  crave  that
fruit  of  the  Spirit  which  is  seen  in  vers.  23,  24,  let  us  crave  that  also  which  we  have
here  in  ver.  25.  It  is  the  result  of  our  being  "  strengthened  with  might  by  the  Spirit
of  God  in  the  inner  man,**  and  leads  on,  in  blessed,  successive  steps,  to  our  being  **  filled
with  all  the  fulness  of  God."— 0.

Ver.  23. — '*  The  way  of  man^  The  prophet  probably  speaks  her©  not  merely  for
himself,  but  in  the  name  of  the  whole  nation.  He  gives  articulate  utterance  to  the
better  elements  of  thought  and  feeling  existing  among  them,  their  conscious  short-
sightedness as  regards  the  meaning  and  issue  of  their  own  national  experiences,  their
helpless  dependence  on  the  unseen  Divine  power  that  is  working  out  through  the
terrible  events  of  the  time  its  own  all-wise  purposes.  An  important  view  of  human
life  is  here  presented  before  us.  Consider  (1)  the  foci  cuseried;  (2)  the  infltumce  it
may  he  expected  to  have  over  us,

L  The  fact  asserted.  "  The  way  of  man  is  not  in  himself,"  etc.  All  human  life
is  a  "  way,**  a  journey,  a  pilgrimage,  through  various  scenes  and  circumstances,  to  the
*'  bourn  from  whence  no  traveller  returns.'*  And,  free  as  we  may  be  and  accountable
for  our  own  actions,  there  is  a  sense  in  which  it  is  equally  true  that  it  is  given  to  none
of  us  to  determine  what  that  way  shall  be.  We  are  called  on  to  recognize  a  governing
power  external  to  ourselves,  above  and  beyond  ourselves.  Look  at  this  fact  in  two
fights  as  indicative  of:  1.  Moral  inability,  A  man's  own  judgment  and  impulse  are
not  in  themselves  a  safe  rule  for  the  conduct  of  his  life.  He  cannot  always  trace  the
mutual  relation  of  interests  and  events,  is  liable  to  be  deceived  by  appearances,  blinded
by  the  glamour  of  his  own  feelings,  misled  by  the  force  of  his  own  self-will.  The  very
complexity  of  the  circumstances  among  which  he  "  walks  "  is  often  a  source  of  danger.
He  is  as  one  surrounded  by  the  diverse  interlacing  paths  of  a  forest ;  he  needs  both
external  guidance  and  internal  influence  to  direct  his  choice.  The  right  way  is  not  '*  in
himself."  2.  Practical  restraint.  No  man  has  the  actual  power  to  determine  altogether
the  course  of  his  own  life.  Free  as  he  may  think  himself  to  be  to  take  what  "  steps  "
he  pleases,  he  is,  after  all,  often  ruled  by  circumstances  over  which  he  has  no  controL
He  is  not  always  master  of  his  own  movements,  cannot  do  the  thing  that  he  would,
constrained  perhaps  to  do  something  totally  different  from  what  he  intended.  Who  has
not  found  himself  to  have  been  drifted,  by  the  silent^  unobserved  current  of  events,  into
a  position  entirely  other  than  he  would  have  chosen  for  himself?  Who  has  not  had  to
accept,  as  the  issue  of  his  own  doings,  something  strangely  unlike  what  he  looked  for?
**Man  proposes;  God  disposes."

**  There's  a  divinity  that  shapes  our  ends,
Bough-hew  them  how  we  wUl."

Human  history — national,  social,  individual — is  full  cf  illustrations  of  the  governing  and
restraining  effect  of  some  mysterious  force  that  underlies  all  the  phenomena  of  life.
Faith  penetrates  the  heart  of  this  mystery,  and  discerns  in  it  a  personal  Divine  provi-
dence, the  energy  of  a  will  that  is  "  holy  and  just  and  good."

II.  The  influence  this  fact  may  be  expected  to  have  over  us.  Such  a  truth,
even  in  the  purely  negative  form  in  which  this  passage  presents  it,  may  well  have  a
marked  effect  on  the  whole  habit  of  our  daily  thought  and  action.  It  teaches  several
iniportant  lessons.  1.  Distrust  of  self.  If  our  judgment  is  thus  fallible,  our  impulse
misleading,  our  power  limited,  shall  we  think  to  make  our  own  will  the  sole  rule  of
life  ?  "  Trust  in  the  Lord  with  all  thine  heart ;  and  lean  not  unto  thine  own  under-
standing," etc.  (Prov,  iii.  6,  6);  "  GK)  to  now,  ye  that  say.  To-day  or  to-morrow  we  will


CH.  X.  1—25.]      THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  289

go  into  such  a  city,"  etc.  (Jas.  iv.  13 — 16).  2.  Thoughtful  observation  of  the  course
of  events,  with  a  view  to  trace  the  path  of  the  providence  that  is  over  us.  Hidden  as
the  power  that  governs  our  life  may  be,  the  teachable  mind  discerns  ever  more  and  more
clearly  the  method  of  its  working.  "  The  secret  of  the  Lord  is  with  them  that  fear
him,"  etc.  (Ps.  xxv.  14) ;  "  The  meek  will  be  guide  in  judgment,"  etc.  (Ps.  xxv.  9).
3.  Practical  obedience  to  the  call  of  present  duty.  Dark  as  our  way  may  be,  we  cannot
go  far  wrong  if  we  follow  the  dictates  of  conscience.  Be  true  in  everything  to  your  own
sense  of  right  and  to  the  clear  lines  of  Divine  Law,  and  you  may  safely  leave  all  issues
with  God.  4.  The  calm  repose  of  faith.  In  the  confused  conflict  of  adverse  circum-
stances, in  the  deep  night  of  our  sorrow  and  our  fear,  we  hear  a  voice  that  whispers
to  us, "  All  is  well."    It  must  be  so  if  we  believe  that  almighty  Love  is  Lord  of  all. — W.

Vers.  1—12. —  What  men  fear  and  what  they  ought  to  fear.  I.  What  men  feab.
They  fear  mere  images  of  their  own  manufacture.  Note  the  connection  between  vers.
2  and  3.  In  ver.  2  the  heathen  are  spoken  of  as  being  dismayed  at  the  signs  of
heaven.  Probably  these  signs,  considered  in  their  more  particular  and  direct  connection
with  the  dismay,  were  really  images  on  earth,  representing  the  supposed  Divine  dignity
of  the  bodies  in  the  heavens.  The  heavenly  bodies  were  signs  to  the  believer  in  Jehovah-
signs  of  the  power  and  wisdom  of  Jehovah.  But  what  signs  could  they  be  to  the  heathen  ?
In  their  eyes  they  were  themselves  Divine  realities,  and  the  signs  were  on  earth  in  the
shape  of  images.  If  this  view  be  correct,  it  makes  dismay  at  the  signs  of  heaven  look
more  than  ever  absurd ;  for  these  signs  were  of  man's  own  making.  He  goes  out  to  the
wood  and  cuts  down  one  tree,  and  it  supplies  material  for  common  use,  beams  and
flooring  and  furniture  for  his  dwelling-place.  He  takes  another  tree,  neighbour  and  of
the  very  same  kind,  and  of  this  he  makes  an  image,  to  be  an  object  of  dread,  to  be
approached  with  trembling  solicitude  and  doubt.  The  very  chips  and  shavings  that
come  off  as  it  is  being  shaped  may  be  burnt,  but  it  itself  is  sacred,  decked  with  silver
and  gold,  perfected  by  the  most  cunning  art  of  the  time,  surrounded  probably  with  the
choicest  treasures  of  the  land  where  it  is  worshipped.  And  yet  in  itself  it  is  nothing.
When  it  grew  in  the  wood  it  bore  leaves  and  fruit,  and  had  vital  movement  in  it.  By
its  life  it  spoke  to  those  who  had  ears  to  understand.  Other  trees  cut  down,  even  when
they  become  dead  wood,  are  useful;  but  here  is  dead  wood  not  only  useless  but  so  treated
that  it  becomes  full  of  the  worst  peril  to  all  associated  with  it,  a  centre  of  abominations,
delusions,  and  cruelties.  And  it  must  be  felt  as  a  very  extraordinary  thing  that  what
men  thus  make  with  their  own  hands  should  be  regarded  with  such  perpetual  dread
and  circumspection.  Partly  it  may  be  accounted  for  by  the  force  of  education.  Those
who  had  been  brought  up  having  their  minds  sedulously  filled  with  certain  associations
in  respect  to  these  images,  would  either  fail  to  see  any  absurdity  in  fearing  them  or,  in
spite  of  the  absurdity,  would  be  unable  to  get  over  the  fear.  It  is  very  absurd  to  be
afraid  of  walking  through  some  secluded  churchyard  at  midnight,  but  many  people
could  only  do  so  with  the  utmost  trepidation — even  those  who  show  plenty  of  good  sense
in  their  ordinary  affairs.  The  mystery  lies  not  so  much  in  the  continuance  of  image-
worship  as  in  the  origin  of  it ;  and  this  is  a  mystery  we  have  no  power  to  penetrate.
A  more  practical  thing  is  to  take  heed  to  the  counsel  here  given.  These  works  of  your
own  hands  cannot  hurt  you.  Neglect  them,  they  cannot  resent  the  negligence.  Pile
up  before  them  all  you  can  in  the  way  of  gift  and  honour,  and  yet  you  get  not  the  least
good  in  return.  You  may  be  hurt  by  other  works  of  your  hands,  but  assuredly  not  by
them ;  and  if  you  are  hurt — as  it  seems  by  the  instrumentality  of  these  images— yet
be  sure  of  this,  that  the  hurt  comes  from  Jehovah's  anger  because  you  are  honounng
and  worshipping  the  creature  in  opposition  to  the  Creator.  And  if  it  be  said,  "How
does  all  this  dissuasion  against  image-worship  concern  twf "  the  answer  is  plain  that,
although  we  do  not  make  images  of  wood,  we  may  have  conceptions  in  our  own  minds
which  are  as  truly  the  cause  of  empty  terror  as  any  visible  image  that  man  ever
made.  The  ultimate  meaning  of  the  counsel  here  is  that  it  is  vain  to  fear  anything
or  any  one  save  the  omnipotent  God,

II.  What  men  ought  to  fear.  Images  are  presented  in  this  passage,  first,  in
themselves,  in  all  their  emptiness,  as  pure  fabrications  of  human  superstitions ;  and
then  they  are  brought  into  the  presence  of  the  exceeding  glory  of  Jehovah,  and  thus
the  exhibition  of  their  nothingness  is  completed.    Moreover,  the  glory  of  Jehovah

JVBEMTAH.  U


290  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,     [en.  x,  1—25*


fibines  more  brightly  still  by  contrast  with  the  darkness  and  shame  that  are  OTer
against  it.  He  is  the  great  and  strong  One,  the  living  One,  and  the  everlasting  King,
^e  ever-living  God  over  against  dead  and  degraded  matter !— can  there  be  a  greater
contrast?  And  to  bring  out  GK)d's  strength,  his  strength  to  make  his  wrath  felt  as  xeal
Buffering  in  the  lives  of  those  who  displease  him,  the  contrast  is  made,  not  between
the  Uving  God  and  dead  idols,  but  between  the  omnipotent  Ruler  and  the  kings  of
the  nations.  Take  the  kings  of  the  nations ;  take  him  who  rules  the  widest  territory,
controls  the  largest  resources,  shows  in  himself  the  greatest  resolution  and  force  of
character,  achieves  the  most  splendid  reign  that  history  can  record— take  such  a  one,
and  yet  what  is  he  over  against  Jehovah  ?  Jehovah  is  the  King  of  the  nations.  It
is  his  x>ower  that  moulds  them  and  gives  them  their  destiny,  their  place  in  his
economy  of  the  ages.  And  as  Jeremiah  contemplates  all  this,  he  says,  "  Who  would  not
fear  thee  ?  "  Certainly  there  are  none  but  what  would  fear,  and  with  a  properly  befitting
fear,  if  only  they  could  properly  regard  the  object  presented  to  them.  But  while  men
are  fearing  that  which  need  not  be  feared,  they  depart  further  and  further  from  a
sense  of  him  who  holds  in  his  self-sufficing  being  complete  power  over  all  their  best
interests.  When  they  suffer,  being  deceived  by  lying  lips,  they  attribute  their  suffer^
ing  to  the  wrath  of  a  God  whom  they  themselves  imagine;  and  so,  fixing  their
mSids  by  a  kind  of  fascination  on  the  wrong  cause,  they  fail  to  have  even  the  least
suspicion  of  the  right  one.  If,  when  a  blow  falls  upon  us,  we  could  trace  that  blow
back,  and  see  how  much  of  it  comes  from  Gk)d,  and  with  what  purpose  it  comes,  then
how  much  useless  suffering  would  be  spared !  But  blows  come  on  men  in  the  dark,
and  they  prefer  to  remain  in  the  dark  with  their  evil  deeds  rather  than  be  freed  from
their  misconceptions  by  coming  to  the  light. — ^Y.

Ver.  2. — The  dismay  of  the  heathen  at  the  signs  of  heaven.  By  the  dgns  of  heaven
here  are  doubtless  meant  those  heavenly  bodies  given  for  signs  and  seasons,  days  and
years  (Gen.  i.  14) ;  this  view  still  further  helping  to  explain  the  reference  in  ch.  viii.  2
to  sun  and  moon  and  all  the  host  of  heaven.  Why  these  should  terrify  it  is  not  very
easy  for  us  to  comprehend,  surroimded  as  wo  are  by  quite  different  associations.  Often,
indeed,  there  is  cause  of  terror  in  the  heavens  above  us,  as  when  the  depths  of  itte
celestial  spaces  are  hidden  from  us  by  the  thunder-cloud,  and  when  the  stormy
blasts  go  forth  on  their  errand  of  destruction  over  land  and  sea.  But  such  terrors,
we  know,  come  from  things  nearer  the  earth.  Sim  and  moon  and  all  the  host  of
heaven  have  quite  a  different  effect  on  our  minds.  And  we  know,  too,  from  the  refer-
ences to  them  in  the  Scriptures,  that  they  did  not  terrify  those  who  knew  God.  The
Book  of  Psalms  shows  nothing  of  dismay  at  the  signs  of  heaven ;  rather  it  sets  them
forth  as  helping  to  produce  cheerfulness,  enjoyment,  and  elevating  adoration  towards
him  who  made  them.  Such  feelings  have  never  been  absent  from  the  minds  of  those
who  have  really  comprehended  whose  handiwork  the  heavenly  bodies  are,  and  why  he
brought  them  into  existence.  How  is  it,  then,  that  by  such  a  strong  expression  they  are
here  represented  as  being  objects  of  terror  f  The  answer  is,  that  the  maker  of  them
being  unknown,  and  the  purpose  of  them  being  undiscemible,  to  those  whose  minds
were  darkened  by  \vickcd  works,  they  had  to  make  their  own  conjectures.  And
thus  they  filled  the  darkness  of  their  ignorance  with  horrid,  stupefying  errors.  To
sun  and  moon  and  all  the  host  of  heaven  they  came  to  attribute  a  kind  of  personality.
And  then  to  the  personality  thus  conceived  there  would  be  attached  the  two  contrasted
states  of  mind  of  complacency  and  wrath.  Complacency  appeared  in  the  warmth,
brightness,  and  clearness  of  day,  and  the  cloudless  skies  of  night,  when  moon  and
stars  were  revealed  in  all  their  milder  splendour.  Wraths  on  the  other  hand,  would
seem  to  be  shown  by  the  eclipse,  the  waning  of  the  moon,  by  rolling  douds,  destructive
storms,  thunder  and  lightning,  long  droughts,  meteors,  comets,  etc.  And  once  having
got  into  their  heads  that  sun,  moon,  and  stars  had  Divine  dignity  about  them,  it  was
nothing  very  wonderful  that  these  heathen  should  be  thus  terrified  by  everything  in
the  wav  of  celestial  commotion.  In  every  such  commotion  the  frowning  faces  of  the
celestial  gods  would  be  visible,  and  every  injury  thus  coming  would  be  reckoned  as
a  blow  from  them.  The  words  of  the  messenger  to  Job,  telling  him  how  the  light-
ning had  destroyed  his  flocks,  may  be  adduced  as  a  very  striking  illustration  of
dismay  at  the  signs  of  heaven.    What  does  the  messenger  tell  Job?    That  the  fire  ^


CH.X.1— 25.]     THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  291

God  had  fallen  from  heaven.  But  the  messenger  did  not  know  that ;  all  he  knew  was
that  some  extraordinary  flame  had  destroyed  the  sheep.  He  went  beyond  the  aotual
fact  of  his  experience,  and  from  it  made  such  an  inference  as  his  superstitious  mind
naturally  led  him  to  make.  Thus,  then,  we  may  take  it  this  dismay  at  the  signs  of
heaven  was  produced ;  and  once  it  became  thoroughly  fixed  in  the  mind  that  every
eclipse,  comet,  storm,  death  by  lightning,  was  an  expression  of  Divine  wrath,  the  next
thing  would  be  an  instant  attempt  to  make  propitiation  and  avert  further  mischief.  And
it  is  easy  to  see  that,  as  priestcraft  grew  in  power,  all  would  be  done  that  could  be
done  to  make  the  people  believe  that  the  signs  of  heaven  needed  constant  remem-
brance in  order  to  keep  them  acting  favourably  towards  the  inhabitants  of  earth.
Such,  then,  was  the  way  of  the  heathen ;  but  the  way  of  Jehovah's  people  was  to  be
quite  different.  These  signs  of  heaven  were  no  sufficient  cause  of  terror,  and  indeed
were  to  be  quite  differently  regarded.  God  says  to  his  people,  "  Be  not  dismayed ;  **
but  the  command  cannot  directly  produce  obedience.  There  must  be  a  showing,  a  clear
showing,  that  there  is  no  cause  for  terror.  Terror  because  of  the  signs  of  heaven  can
only  come  from  ignorance.  The  moment  the  mind  takes  in  the  great  general  drift  of
Gen.  i.,  that  same  moment  dismay  will  yield  to  an  intelligent  veneration  towards  God.
A  savage,  seeing  the  express  train  rush  past  him,  with  its  thunder  and  mystery,  at  the
rate  of  fifty  miles  an  hour,  is  as  a  matter  of  course  utterly  terrified  and  bewildered.
But  there  would  be  no  terror  and  bewilderment  if  he  only  really  knew  all  the  wisdom,
patience,  and  controlling  power  which  have  made  that  express  what  it  is.  Further-
more, who  would  think  of  denying  the  immense  utility  of  railways  to  the  world
because  every  now  and  then  there  is  some  hideous  disaster  to  a  train  ?  And,  simihu'ly,
through  all  the  mysterious  destructions  which  from  time  to  time  come  in  the  natural
world,  we  must  look  at  something  beyond  and  above  them.  Jesus  Christ,  who  came
into  the  world  to  make  manifest  and  explicit  the  love  of  God  as  a  great  reality,  is
higher  than  any  of  these  causes  of  temporal  pain  and  loss.  We  are  not  permitted  to
get  any  satisfactory  view  of  suffering  as  a  whole,  and  we  do  well  to  refrain  from  putting
any  speculation  of  our  own  in  the  place  of  such  a  view.  Our  wisdom  is  to  get  more
and  more  of  a  practical  knowledge  of  God.  Only  so  can  it  become  possible  for  us  to
say  that  "  we  shall  not  fear,  though  the  earth  be  removed,  and  though  the  mountains
be  carried  into  the  midst  of  the  sea." — ^Y.

Ver.  23. — The  nay  of  man  not  in  himsdf,  I.  Man  is  not  to  be  the  chooser  of
HIS  WAY.  "  I  know  that  the  way  of  man  is  not  in  himself."  It  is  surely  not  without
significance  that  dim  is  here  used  for  **  man.**  To  the  Hebrew  there  must  always  have
been  the  opportunitv  of  peculiar  suggestions  upon  the  occurrence  of  this  word.  Adam
would  rise  to  mind,  the  first  man,  with  God's  purposes  for  him,  and  his  speedy
calamitous  departure  from  those  purposes.  God  made  Adam  that  he  might  go  in  God's
way.  When  the  two  accounts  of  the  creation  of  man  are  taken  together,  it  will  be
seen  how  abundant  is  the  evidence  that  the  way  of  Adam  was  not  in  himself.  His
only  condition  of  safety,  peace,  and  happiness  was  in  strict  compliance  with  the
Divine  injunctions.  And  with  regard  to  the  descendant  of  Adam,  he  who  can  read  the
account  of  Adam  and  see  the  essential  correspondence  between  ancestor  and  posterity,
is  there  not  everything  to  teach  him  that  his  way  also  is  not  in  himself?  Why,  he  is
some  little  distance  advanced  in  the  way  before  he  is  conscious  that  it  is  a  way  at  all.
The  preservation  of  his  life  and  the  direction  of  it  have  been  at  the  disposition  of
others.  And  when  life— as  far  as  individusJ  responsibility  is  concerned— really  begins,
how  wise  he  proves  to  be  who  looks  for  the  pointing  of  God's  finger,  and  feels  that  he
must  follow  it !  The  man  who  insists  that  he  can  make  his  own  way  only  finds  it
perish  at  last.  Because  no  way  can  be  considered  just  as  a  way ;  whether  it  is  pleasant
or  painful,  easy  or  difficult,  is  not  the  great  matter,  but  whither  it  leads,  what  lies  at
the  end  of  it.  As  it  would  be  foolish  for  a  man  to  take  charge  of  a  ship,  ignorant  of
his  destination  and  how  to  reach  it,  so  it  is  equally  foolish  for  a  man  to  suppose  that
any  way  will  do  so  long  as  it  is  as  comfortable  and  easy  as  he  can  make  it.  Man's
right  way  must  be  according  to  God's  clear  will ;  and  it  is  the  way  of  trust  in  Jesus
who  is  the  Son  and  Christ  of  God.  Note,  further,  the  strong  expression  of  individual
assurance  here  given.  "  I  know,"  says  Jerenuah.  He  knew  it  indeed  from  his  own
experience.    The  way  in  which  he  now  was,  of  prophet  and  witness  for  Jehovah,  was


292  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,      [ch.  x.  1— 25.


not  of  his  choosing.  He  did  not  think  himself  fit  for  it.  And^  yet  so  far  was  he
from  being  right  in  his  own  impressions  as  a  young  man,  that  it  appears  Qod  had
chosen  him  for  a  special  purpose  or  ever  his  existence  had  begun.  It  is  a  great  bless-
ing to  a  man  when,  either  from  experience  of  his  own  wanderings  or  prudent  observa-
tion of  the  wanderings  of  others,  he  can  say  in  this  matter,  "  I  know."  He  spares
himself  much  anxiety  and  shame  who  is  humble  enough  to  put  himself  under  Divine

guidance.

II.  God  must  establish  man  when  he  is  in  the  right  way.  "  It  is  not  in  man
that  walketh  to  make  sure  of  his  steps."  In  other  words,  though  he  may  have  begun
the  journey  rightly,  that  is  no  proof  that  he  will  go  on  without  hindrance  or  disaster
to  the  end.  In  days  when  the  journeys  of  most  people,  even  long  journeys,  would
have  to  be  undertaken  on  foot,  this  expression  with  regard  to  the  walking  man  would
be  very  significant.  The  perils  of  such  a  journey  were  well  known — perils  from  robbers,
perils  of  losing  one's  way  in  the  dark  and  sometimes  probably  in  the  daylight,  perils
through  trusting  to  strangers  who  may  deceive  or  insufficiently  inform  him,  perils  through
Mckness  far  from  home  and  friends.  And  so  in  the  great  spiritual  way  there  is  needed
humility  all  through.  The  way  is  made  up  of  little  steps,  and  a  false  step  may  not
be  possible  to  retrieve.  Divine  knowledge  and  Divine  intimations  must  stand  in  the
place  of  our  experience.  Faith  in  God's  wisdom  which  cannot  fail,  and  in  God's  Word
which  cannot  lie,  must  be  our  resource  in  all  perplexity.  There  are  times  when  com-
mon sense  find  right  feeling  are  enough  to  guide  our  conduct,  yet  even  those  are  more
the  gift  of  God  than  may  at  first  appear.  We  cannot,  then,  be  too  minutely  observant
as  to  our  need  of  Divine  light  and  truth  and  assurance.  Thus,  being  found  in  the
right  way  and  enduring  to  the  end,  we  shall  be  safe.— Y.

Ver.  24. — God*8  correction  of  his  people.  A  preliminary  difficulty  is  felt  here,  in  that
this  earnest  deprecation  seems  to  apply  to  the  position  of  an  individual.  Ver.  23  is  easily
taken  as  being  the  utterance  of  Jeremiah  himself,  but  ver.  24  can  only  apply  with  pro-
priety to  the  nation.  Such  an  utterance  as  that  of  this  chapter  must  evidently  be  taken
as  a  combination  made  up  by  several  speakers.  Jehovah  speaks ;  Jeremiah  speaks ;  the
nation  speaks ;  and  in  such  an  outburst  as  that  of  ver.  24  the  nation  speaks  fitly,  not  as
a  multitude,  but  as  with  the  voice  of  one  man.  It  will  be  noticed  that  there  is  a  cor-
respondence with  ch.  iii.  4,  where  Israel  is  represented  as  possibly  addressing  Jehovah,
and  saying,  "  My  Father,  thou  art  the  Guide  of  my  youtn."  And  here  is  an  ample
confession  that  the  filial,  de|)endent,  submissive  spirit  is  needed  still.

I.  Observe  the  admission  of  wrong-doing.  *'  Correct  me,"  uttered  at  all,  is  an
admission  that  correction  is  deserved.  The  whole  of  the  supplication  of  course  implies
a  reference  to  the  relation  of  father  and  child,  as  if  Israel  said,  "  My  Father,  I  nave
done  wrong,  and  I  know  that  all  wrong-doing  children,  when  the  wrong  is  discovered,
must  expect  to  be  corrected."  The  correction  of  children  by  their  parents  must  have
been  very  familiar  to  all  Israelites ;  the  Book  of  Proverbs,  in  many  of  its  pithy  sentences,
being  in  part  a  consequence  of  this  familiarity  and  in  part  a  cause  of  it.  A  most
important  part  in  the  benefit  of  correction  came  from  its  very  certainty,  from  the  child's
knowledge  that  the  correction  could  not  be  escaped.  Though  the  extent  of  it  might  bo
an  open  question,  the  certainty  was  to  bo  no  question  at  all.  The  position  might  be
put  thus :  If  an  earthly  father,  being  evil,  yet  nas  firmness  enough  not  to  overlook  the
least  departure  from  his  commandments,  then  the  pure  Jehovah  above,  who  is  regarded
as  the  Father  of  Israel,  cannot  be  less  strict  to  mark  iniquity.  Israel  has  done  wrong,
and  to  make  an  ample  admission  of  the  wrong,  to  welcome  the  needful  chastisement,
is  nothing  more  than  what  is  right.  There  is  no  merit  in  such  an  admission;  the
suppliant  who  makes  it  is  only  doing  what  ho  ought  to  do.  To  continue  insensible  of
the  wrong  adds  to  the  wrong,  and  makes  correction  as  correction  altogether  in  vain.

11.   A   FEAB  lest  the  CORRECTION  MAY  BECOME  EXCESSIVE  AND    INJURIOUS.      Israel

has  before  its  mind,  the  conception  of  a  father  in  his  relations,  powers,  and  duties.
But  since  the  measurements  are  made  from  the  earthly  father  with  all  his  imperfec-
tions, it  follows  that  not  only  are  the  encouraging  aspects  of  the  relation  seen,  but  also
dreadful  possibilities  as  to  how  far  the  chastising  force  may  go.  Israel  argues  too
closely  from  the  father  on  earth  to  the  Father  in  heaven.  The  earthly  father  is  seen
boiling  over  with  rage,  beating  his  child  in  the  wildness  of  his  fury,  not  because  it


CH.  XI.  1—23.]  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.


293


has  done  wrong,  but  because  it  has  thwarted  him.  It  is  important  to  notice  this  very
partial  way  of  conceiving  the  fatherhood  of  God ;  this  exaggeration  of  mere  might.
There  is  thus  given  an  index  to  the  insuflBciency  of  the  knowledge  which  the  Israelites
had  of  God,  and  a  proof  how  much  Jesus  was  needed  to  come  in  and  reveal  the  Father,
bringing  the  serenity  and  composed  action  of  his  attributes  into  full  view.  God,  of
course,  never  acts  with  fury  and  frenzy  as  we  apply  these  words  to  man.  God  produces
results  through  man,  and  there  may  be  fury  in  the  human  agents,  but  in  the  Gk)d
behind  them  there  is  none.  The  narrow  notion  of  Jehovah  expressed  in  vers.  24
and  25  itself  needed  to  be  corrected.  His  favour  towards  Israel  was  not  an  arbitrary
thing,  nor  could  it  be  right  that  his  imagined  wild  fury  might  justly  expend  itself  on
heathens.  If  Israel  was  to  be  corrected  with  judgment,  the  same  judgment  was  surely
needed  to  correct  the  heathen.  If  there  is  fury  with  them,  there  can  be  no  true
dealing  in  judgment  with  Israel.  Severity  with  the  heathen  as  typical  enemies  of  the
typical  people  of  God  is  another  matter ;  but  severity  must  never  be  confounded  with
fury.

III.  The  kind  of  cobrection  desired.  "  Correct  me,  but  with  judgment."  Correc-
tion, to  have  any  proper  effect,  must  be  deliberate,  and  proportioned  to  the  offence  that
has  been  committed.  While  it  comes  from  a  fatherly  purpose,  it  must  come  also  with
the  calmness  and  impartiality  of  a  judicial  procedure.  A  charge  is  made  ;  evidence  is
adduced  and  examined ;  defence,  denial,  extenuation,  are  listened  to ;  everything  must
be  weighed ;  and  so  he  who  is  corrected  will  feel  in  his  conscience  that  the  correction
is  just.  The  severity  is  not  blind  and  measureless  force.  If  it  cannot  fall  short  of  a
certain  standard  of  pain,  neither  will  it  exceed  it.  Any  other  sort  of  dealing  has  no
right  to  the  name  of  correction  at  all.  Foolish  Rehoboam,  threatening  to  chastise  the
people  with  scorpions,  is  an  illustration  of  what  must  ever  be  avoided  by  those  who
are  in  power.  Be  it  a  child  or  be  it  a  man  who  is  smitten,  no  good  can  be  done  unless
there  is  the  sense  that  the  smiting  is  just. — Y.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  XL


The  superscription  in  ver.  1  evidently  be-
longs to  the  three  chapters  xi. — xiii.,  though
ch.  xi.  and  xii.  are  more  closely  connected
with  each  other  than  with  ch.  xiiL  To  which
period  the  group  of  prophecies  belongs —
whether  to  the  reign  of  Josiah,  or  of  Jehoia-
kirn,  or  of  Jehoiachin,  or  to  various  periods,
is  a  matter  of  dispute.  It  contains  at  any
rate  one  passage  (ch.  xii.  7 — 17)  which  was
almost  certainly  put  in  by  a  later  editor.
It  is  doubtless  Jeremiah's  work,  but  seems
out  of  place  here  (see  below,  on  this  pas-
sage). Nacgclsbach's  analysis  of  ch.  xi.,  xii.,
is  striking.  The  fundamental  idea  of  the
entire  discourse  he  assumes  to  be  the  anti-
thesis of  covenant  and  conspiracy,  and  pro-
ceeds thus :  1.  A  reminder  of  the  renewal
of  the  covenant  between  Jehovah  and  the
people  lately  made  under  Josiah  (ch.  xi.
1—8).  2.  First  stage  of  the  conspiracy;  all
Israel,  instead  of  keeping  the  covenant  with
Jehovah,  conspires  against  him  (ch.  xi.  9 —
13).  3.  The  punishment  of  the  conspiracy  is
an  irreversible,  severe  judgment  (ch.  xi.  14 —


17).  4.  Second  stage  of  the  conspiracy ;  the
plot  of  the  men  of  Anathoth  (ch.  xi.  18—23).
5.  Third  stage;  the  plot  in  the  prophet's
own  family  (ch.  xi.  1 — 6).  Naegelsbach,  how-
ever, with  violence  to  exegesis,  continues
thus  (assuming  the  homogeneousness  of  ch.
xii.  1— -6  and  7 — 17) :  6.  Israel's  conspiracy
punished  by  a  conspiracy  of  the  neighbour-
ing peoples  against  Israel  (ch.  xii.  7 — 13).
7.  Removal  of  all  antitheses  by  the  final
union  of  all  in  the  Lord  (oh.  xii.  14 — 17).

The  opening  verses  of  this  chapter  give
us  (as  we  have  seen  already  in  the  general
Introduction)  a  most  vivid  idea  of  the  acti-
vity of  Jeremiah  in  propagating  a  know-
ledge of  the  Deuteronomic  Tordh  (i.e.  the
Divine  **  directions "  with  regard  to  the
regulation  of  life).  It  may  even  be  inferred
from  ver.  6  that  he  made  a  missionary  cir-
cuit in  Judah,  with  the  view  of  influencing
the  masses.  It  was,  in  fact,  only  the  "  elders  "
of  the  different  towns  who  had  taken  part  in
the  solemn  ceremony  described  in  2  Kings
xxiii.  "The  words  of  this  covenant"  had
been  ratified  by  the  national  representa-
tives; but  it  required  a  prophetic  enthn-


THE  BOOK  OF  TEE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    iaa.  xl  1—28.


Mann  to  cnny  them  homo  to  tlio  heuta  ot
tlio  people.  Honce  it  wm  thnt  "the  word
came  to  Jercminli  rrom  JcLomh,  eajring.
Hear  jo  the  words  of  this  covenant,  and
■peak  unto  the  men  of  Jnilah,"  clo.

Ver.  2.— Hear  y«  .  .  .  and  ipeak.  To
whom  is  this  ttiliireased ?  To  Jcniiiiaa  nnd
hi*  diBciplca.  The  Boptnagint,  indL-ud,  tol-
Itnred  by  Hitzig  and  Grar,  read  (instead  ot
'■■peak  \(s"),  "Thoti  ehalt  speak  nnto
tfaem,"  adopting  one  different  Towol-poiat,
Bat  this  involves  an  inconaiiitoQoy  with  the
flntverb,  and  is  not  at  all  necessary,  for  nhy
■bould  wo  suppose  Jetcmiali  to  have  been
completely  isolated?  ir  Iho  pmphet  haii
well-wiehcta  Lvon  among  the  pritirce,  it  i
■tands  to  reason  that  ho  mnst  have  had
more  pronounced  ndhcrcnts  in  the  classes
1«H  Inflnenceil  by  iho  projudirea  ot  Boeioly.

Ver.  3.— Uerc  begins  a  ecrios  of  direct
raf^uoes  to  Denteronomy,  determining  tho
date  of  the  diBConrao.  Cnntd  be  tha  nun,
etc;  alluding  to  Dcut.xivii.  2fi  (which  has,
however,  not  "obeyeth,"  but  "  confiimoth,"
i.*.  ratifieth  as  his  own  personal  rule  oCeon-
dact.  Thewordi  of  this  ooveiianti  rather,
Ike  words  of  tku  ordiiianee.  The  rendering
"covenant,"  however,  is  not  so  much  erro-
noons  as  oDsaitablo  in  tbid  context ;  it  is  n
Bocondary  meaoint!  of  the  Hebrew  fc'nlft,
the  otigiual  sense  being  rather  "  authorita-
tive appointment"  (from  biirah,  to  cut,
hence  to  decide).  Nothing,  pcrbnps,  is  so
injuiiooB  to  a  correct  underijtnnding  of  tlio
Scriptures  as  persistently  tendering  a  He-
brow  or  Qreclc  word  by  the  same  suii-
posed  equivalent.  "  Covenant "  is  no  doubt
appropriate  ineomo  passages  (e.g.  Josh.  ii.  C:
1  Sam.  ivid,  3),  because  an  "  appointment"
between  men,  if  equals, involves  "giving  and
taking ; "  but  ia  inarlequate  when  the  patties
ore  not  equals,  and  most  of  all  when  the
■npcaior  party  is  the  Divine  Being.  In  these
casM  we  must  clearly  rccnr  (o  tho  original
meaning  of  "appointment"  or  "  ordiaatico ; "
and  wo  have  one  such  caao  hero  (sco  aL^o
Hog.  vi.  7 ;  2  Kings  li.  4  ;  Job  mi.  i. ;
P«.  cv.  10;  but  not  Gen.  xvii.  Oj.  Aii8^«ij
(I,  an  arrangement ;  2,  a  will  or  teetament :
3,  a  covenant)  U  to  seme  extent  parallel  (see
Crcmer'a  'Biblico- Theological  Lexicon  of
New  Testament  Greek,'  i.e.),

Ver.  4.— From  tiis  iron  fnmaee;  rather,
oalo/lheirrmfanaee.  It  is  Eftyptwhichis
thus  described  (eonip.  Dent.  iv.2fJ;  1  Kings
viii.  51).  The  opprcBSion  in  Egypt  was  lite
the  furnace  in  which  iron  is  rendered  mal-
leable by  heat  (so  Iso.  xlviii.  10,  "I  have
tested  tboe  in  tho  fumaco  of  nfflietion  ").

Ver.  5.— The  oath  which  I  have  sworn
(«o  Dent.  vii.  S ;  comp.  viii.  13).  As  it  is
this  d*7  i  a  Deuteronomia  formula  (see  e.g.
Deut  u.  30  i  iv.  20),  appealing  to  tho  test  ot"


eipcrience.    Bo  be  it,  0  Lord.    The  Hebrew

baa  "Amen.  Jehovah."  "Amen"  equivalent
to  "true,  faithful,  trustworthy;  "  or  used  In
this  way  as  a  formula  of  asseveration.  "  may
it  bo  vcriQed  by  facU  "  (the  Septua^^t  has
yiroiTa)  ;  comp.  oh.  Iiviii.  G.

Vet.  G. — FiooUim  all  thate  woidi,  ct«.
This  commnnd  probably  points  to  a  mis-
iunnry  circuit  of  Jeremiah,  as  fuggested


__   tho   direction    to  "  proclau

"cry"  elsewhere  (ch,  ii.  2;  iii.  12,  etc).
So  Gabriel,  in  tho  Koran,  directs  Moham-
proclaim   or   praseb


(8...


i.  I).


Vers.  7,  3.— A  condensation  of  oh.  vii.
23— 2G.  Imaginatian ;  ratbcr,  sluUwmneM
(soe  on  eh.  iii.  17),  I  will  bring ;  rather,  1
hroughl.  AUthaworfls.  "  Word  sometimes
means -thing  s|i.. ken  of;"  here,  for  instance,
the  curses  spcciQed  in  Dent.  ixviiL

Ver.  9.— A  oonf  piraay.  Tho  language  u
figurative.  Jehovah  is  the  King  of  Israel;
to  commit  sin  is  "to  rebel  against"  him
(Autliorizod  A'craion  sometimes  weakens
this  into  "  trauegrcss") ;  and  to  encourage
ono  another  in  wickedness  is  "to  con^gdru
against "  God.  Wo  need  not  suppose  any
o]>cn  combination  against  spiritual  religion  ;
it  is  enough  if  "  tho  spirit  of  the  timo  "  waa
directly  contrary  to  it.

Ver.  10. — Thair  fors&tliBM.  The  Hebrew
has  "their  fatliera,  the  former  ones."  The
allusion  is  to  the  sins  of  the  Israelites  in
tho  wildumcss,  and  in  Canaan  under  tho
iudges.  The  prniiheta  are  oonstantly  point-
ing their  hearers  back  to  those  early  times,
eillier  for  warning  (as  here)  or  for  cnoonr-
ngemont  (ch.  ii.  1;  IIos.  ii.  15;  Isa.  i.  26 ;
Ixiii.  II,  i:<).  And  they  went  after;  rather
nnd  Hieij  {theraitlvei)  hare  gone  after.  The
pronoun  is  eipreocd  in  tho  Hebrew,  to
indicate  that  the  prophet's  contempororiea
ato  now  liio  subject.

Vers.  II — 13. — A  summary  of  Jeremiah's
usual  prophecies  (comp.  ch.  iv.  6;  vi.  13;
six.  3 ;  and  especially  ii.  2S ;  vii.  17>

Ver.  13.— That  shametU  thing;  rather,
the  fhame.  Tho  name  Baal  ia  changed,  to
mark  the  abhorreuco  of  the  speaker,  into
Boaheth  (see  oh.  iii.  21).  Mannsseh,  we  ore
totd,  "  raised  up  altars  for  Baal "  (2  Kings
xil.  3).

Ver.  14. — Therefore  pray  not  thou,  etc.
First  Jehovah  dcclircs  (hat  even  tho  inter-
cession of  Iho  prophet  will  be  of  no  avail
(soeonch.  vii.  16),  and  then  that  the  belated
supplications  of  tho  pcojile  themselves  will
be  ineffectual  to  avort  the  calamity.  Tor
their  trouble.  The  four  most  ancient  ver-
sions, and  aome  of  the  extant  Hebrew  mann>
EoriptB,  read  "  in  tho  timo  of  their  trouble  "
(as  in  ver.  12).    The  confosion  between  the


CH,  XI.  1—23.]  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.


295


two  readings  is  easy,  and  the  reading  of  the
versions  Is  to  be  preferred.

Ver.  15.— What  hath  my  beloved  to  do  in
mine  house  1    **My  beloved"  is  evidently
the  Jewish  people,  who  in  eh.  xii.  7  is  callea
•*tlK)  dearly   beloved  of  my  soul."     The
Divine  Speaker  expresses  surprise  that  one
who  has  now  so  poor  a  claim  to  the  title  of
"my  beloved*'  should  appear  in  his  holy
house.    It  is  spoken  in  the  spirit  of  that
earlier  revelation  of  Isaiah,  **  When  ye  come
to  appear  before  me,  who  hath  required  this
at  your  hand,  to  trample  my  courts  ?  "  (Isa.
i.  12).    The  Jews,  it  would  seem,  came  to
the  temple  to  pra^,  but  their  prayer  is  not
accepted,  because  it  is  associated  with  unlioly
practices.    They  thought  by  formal  prayers
and  sacrifices  to  pay  off  their  debt  to  the
Deity,  and  so  be  free  to  go  on  with  their  old
devices  (as  in  ch.  vii.  15).    This  seems  the
best  view  of  the  difficult  words  which  follow,
but  it  implies  a  correction  of  the  certainly
ungrammatical  rendering  of  the  Authorized
.  Version — seeing  she  hath  wrought  lewdness
— into  to  work  the  wicked  device.    But  here
begins  the  most  obscure  part  of  the  verse.
With  many  cannot  be  right;  for  **with"
has   nothing   corresponding   to  it   in    the
Hebrew;  the  word  in  the  original  simply
means  '*  the  many,"  and  as  it  is  immediatelv
followed  by  a  noun  in  the  singubr  with
"  and,"  and  a  verb  in  the  plural,  it  is  plain
that  it  must  (if  correctly  read)  be  part  of
the  subject  of  the  latter.    The  Septuagint,
however,  has  a  difierent  reading,  which  may
very  well  be  correct,  and  out  of  which  the
received  Hebrew  reading  may  easily  have
grrown — •*  Can  vows  and  holy  [i.e.  hallowed]
flesh  remove  from  thee  thy  wickedness  [or
perhaps,  *  thy  calamity  *]  ?  "    The  connection
thua  becomes  easy.    **  Vows  and  holy  flesh  "
(t.e.   the  flesh  of  sacrifices.  Hag.   ii.    12),
naturally  go  together ;  the  only  other  pos-
sible way  of  taking  the  passage  (assuming
the  correctness  of  the 'received  text)— "the
great  ones  and  the  holy  flesh  shall  pass  away
from   thee "  —  is   obviously    inadmissible.
"Vows  and  sacrifices,"  however,  preciselv
express  the  true  association  of  ideas.    A
man  made  a  vow,  and  he  generally  paid  it
in  the  form  of  a  sacrifice.      But,  inquires
Jehovah,  "  Can  such  vows  and  such  victims
please  God,  and  expiate  thy  wickedness  [or,
*  avert  thy  calamity  *]  ?    Then  thou  mightest
rejoice."  The  latter  words  are  not,  indeed,
more  exact  than  those  of  the  Authorized
Version,  but  are  in  accordance  with  grammar,
and  suit  the  preceding  question.    It  is  not
certain,  however,  that  the  text  is  right  here ;
the    Septuagint  has    1j    roirois    Buuptd^ij.
(Notice  that  Keil,  conservative  to  a  fault  in
matters  affecting  the  received  text,  agrees
with  the   above  correction,  which  is  also
adopted  by  Ewald,  Hitzig,  and  Gruf.)


Ver.  16. — A  green  olive  tree.  The  olive
tree  is  "  one  of  the  most  thriving,  hardy,  and
productive  trees  in  the  East"  (it  was  the
first  tree  elected  king  in  the  parable,  Judg.
ix.  8),  and  with  its  "foliage  of  a  deep,
perennial  green,"  furnishes  a  striking  symbol
of  healthful  beauty.  A  psalmist,  speaking
in  the  character  of  the  typical  righteous
man,  compares  himself  to  a  "green  olive
tree  in  the  house  of  God  "  (Ps.  hi.  8).  The
word  rendered  "  green  "  is  one  of  those  which
are  the  despair  of  translators  Tsee  on  oh.  IL
20).  It  gives  a  picture  in  itself.  We  seem
to  see  a  flourishing,  sappy  tree,  with  abun-
dance of  pliant,  gracefully  moving,  peren-
nially green  brancnes.  With  the  noise  of  a
great  tumnlt.  Either  the  tumult  of  the
meUfe  of  battle  is  meant  (the  same  uncommon
word  is  used  with  such  a  reference  in  Ezek.  L
24)  or  the  crashing  of  thunder.  "  With  a
rushing  mighty  sound"  would  be  a  more
forcible  rendering.  (For  tho  concluding
figure,  comp.  Ezek.  xxxi.  12.)  He  hatn
kindled  fire, "etc.  There  is  no  occasion  to
explain  this  as  merely  the  perfect  of  pro-
phetic certitude.  It  was  literally  true  that
the  fire  of  war  had  already  devastated  the
fairest  portion  of  tho  Holy  Land.  Isroel
(expressly  referred  to  in  ver.  17)  had  eJready
been  carried  into  captivity,  and  Jndah  was,
to  the  prophetic  eye,  as  good  as  destroyed.
Hero,  no  aoubt,  that  wonderful  perfect  of
faith  does  come  in.

Ver.  17.— The  Lord  of  hosts,  that  planted
thee.  Ho  who  "  planted  "  Israel  (comp.  ch.
it  21)  could  also  uproot  it ;  and  though,  for
tho  sake  of  his  covenant  with  Abraham,  he
would  not  destroy  it  utterly,  yet  he  could
not  but  interpose  as  Judge  to  pimish  its
manifold  transgressions.  Israel  and  Judah
are  mentioned  together ;  for  the  prophets,  so
far  as  we  know  them  from  their  works,  did
not  recognize  tho  separation  of  the  two
kingdoms.  Against  themselves ;  rather,  for
themselves ;  i.e.  to  please  themselves.

Ver.  18. — Here,  as  Noegclabach  puts  it,
begins  the  second  stage  of  the  "  conspiracy."
Hath  given  me  knowledge,  etc. ;  rather,  gave
me  Jcnoicledge,  and  I  knew  it.  Then;  i.e,
when  I  was  in  utter  unconsciousness.
Jeremiah  had  no  presentiment  of  the
murderous  purpose  of  his  townsmen,  till  by
some  "special  providence"  it  came  to  his
knowledge.

Ver.  19. — Like  a  lamb  or  an  oz;  rather,
as  a  mild  lamb  (as  one  of  tho  old  translations
has  it),  equivalent  to  quasi  agnus  mansuetus
(Vulgate).  Jeremiah  says  that  he  was  as
unsuspicious  as  a  tame  lamb  which  has
grown  up  with  its  master's  family  (2  Sam.
xii.  3).  Tho  Arabs  use  the  veiy  same
adjective  in  a  slightly  different  form  as
»an  epithet  of  such  tamo  lambs  (Bochart,
'  Ilicrozoicon,'  i.  520-522,  edit.  16G3).    It


296


THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  xi.  1—23.


is  impoBsible  to  help  thinking  of  that
"Servant  of  Jehovah,"  of  whom  Jeremiah
was  a  type,  who  is  said,  in  prophetic  vision,
to  have  been  **  brought  as  a  Iamb  to  the
slaughter,"  and  **not  to  have  opened  his
mouth  "  (Isa.  liii.  7).  The  tree  with  the  fruit
thereof;  apparently  a  proverbial  expression.
Giving  the  words  their  ordinary  meaning,
the  rendering  w^ould  be,  the  tree  icith  its
bread  (Vlakhmo).  Our  translators  appear
to  have  thought  that  the  transition  from
"bread"  to  "fruit"  was  as  justifiable  in
Hebrew  as  it  is  in  Arabic  (in  which  *uldu
means  properly  "  food  "  in  general,  but  also
**  date  fruit ").  Fruit,  however,  was  not  such
an  important  article  of  food  with  the
Israelites  as  with  the  Ambs  ;  and  we  must
either,  with  Hitzig,  suppose  a  letter  to  have
intruded  into  the  text,  and  render  (from  a
corrected  reading  hUekho),  with  its  sap  (comp.
Deut  xxxiv.  7,  Hebrew),  or  else  appeal
to  the  etymology  of  kfehem  (commonly
**  bread  "),  which  is  "  firm,  consistent,"  and
render,  the  tree  with  its  pith  (Hence  lahmu
in  Arabic  means  "  flesh,  and  luhmaiu,  "  a
woof").  It  is  no  credit  to  St.  Jerome  tliat
he  followed  the  absurd  version  of  the
Septuagint,  "Let  us  put  wood  into  his
bread."

Ver.  20.— (Parallel  passage,  ch.  xx.  12.)
Unto  thee  have  I  revealed  my  oaiue.  This
u  the  literal  rendering,  but  a  comparison  of


Ps.  xxii.  8  and  Prov.  xvi.  3,  suggests  that  the
meaning  is  *'  Upon  thee  have  I  rolled  my
cause."  This  expression  is  certainly  not
only  more  forcible,  but  more  appropriate
than  the  other.  Jeremiah's  cause  was  not
a  secret  which  needed  to  be  "  revealed  **  to
Jehovah,  but  a  burden  too  heavy  for  so  finely
strung  a  naturo  to  bear  alone.  Grammati-
cally, the  preferred  meaning  is  quite  justifi-
able, tliougli  less  obvious,  as  there  are  other
instances  of  an  interchange  of  meaninn
between  two  classes  of  verbs  (see  on  en.
xxxiii.  6).

Ver.  21.— Prophesy  not,  etc.  The  men
of  Anathoth  tried  first  of  all  to  effect  their
object  by  threatening.  In  the  name  of  the
Lord  should  bo  ratlicr,  hy  the  name,  etc.  The
phrase  is  exactly  parallel  to  Ps.  Iv.  1,  **  Bave
me,  O  God,  by  tliv  Name,  and  judge  me  by
thy  strength."  The  Name  of  God  is  equiva-
lent to  his  revealed  presence  or  personality.
Baal's  prophets  prophesied  **by  Baal"
(ch.  ii.  8),  i.e.  by  an  impulse  thought  to
proceed  from  Baal;  Jehovah's  by  the  con-
sciousness of  his  revealed  presence.

Ver.  22.— Their  sons  and  their  danghters,
etc.  The  lot  of  the  weaker  sex  and  of  the
male  children  under  the  military  age  is
contrasted  with  that  of  the  young  warriors.

Ver.  23. — Even  the  year,  etc. ;  better,  in
the  year  of  their  visitation  (or,  punishment)^
tiking  tlic  accusative  as  that  of  time.


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1—8. — 27^6  ancient  covenant,  I.  The  object  op  the  covenant.  This  was  to
secure  obedience.  No  covenant  was  required  on  God's  side,  since  he  is  ever  willing  to
bless  and  changeless  in  his  beneficence.  But  for  the  sake  of  men's  faith  and  to  secure
their  allegiance  God  graciously  condescended  to  enter  into  covenant  bonds.  It  is  there-
fore foolish  to  claim  the  fulfilment  of  God's  promises  irrespective  of  our  conduct.  They
are  "  covenant "  promises — i.e.  conditional  and  assured  on  certain  terms.  If  we  break
the  terms  we  can  no  longer  expect  the  fulfilment  of  the  promises.

IL  The  sanctions  of  the  covenant.  I.  The  obligations  of  gratitude.  The  past
mercies  of  God  are  recited ;  e.g.  deliverance  from  Egypt.  2.  Promises  of  future  good.
If  faithful,  Israel  was  to  take  possession  of  the  "  land  flowing  with  milk  and  honey."
3.  Threats  in  case  of  disobedience.  If  they  proved  unfaithful,  the  people  were  to  find
the  land  of  promise  full  of  troubles,  and  ultimately  to  bo  expelled  from  it  (Deut.
xxviii.  15).  4.  Constant  Divine  pleading.  The  covenant  could  not  lapse  through
Ibrgetfulness.  Prophets  were  sent  again  and  again  to  urge  its  claims  on  the  people
(ver.  7).

III.  The  obligation  op  the  covenant.  This  was  an  ancient  covenant ;  yet  it  was
still  binding.  God  was  still  fulfilling  his  part  in  blessing  his  people.  The  obligation
was  not  such  as  time  could  affect.  What  is  inherently  right  once  is  right  eternally.
Truth  does  not  lose  force  with  age.  The  Bible  contains  covenants  which  age  has  made
venerable,  but  not  feeble.  Its  commands  and  promises  are  eternally  fresh  and  living,
and,when  the  merely  local  and  personal  exterior  is  laid  aside,  the  essence  of  them  applies
as  much  to  us  as  to  the  Jews.  The  appetite  for  mere  novelty  which  characterizes  much
intellectual  inquiry  in  the  present  day,  as  it  did  that  of  the  Athenians  of  St.  Paul's  age
(Acts  xvii.  21),  ignores  the  fact  that  the  most  important  question  is  "  What  is  true?"
not  "  What  is  new  ?  "    Old  familiar  truths  must  be  noticed  that  they  may  be  remem-


CH.  XI.  1—23.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  207

bered  and  practised,  though  of  course  not  to  the  exclusion  of  new  truths.  The  New
Testament  does  not  abolish  but  perfects  the  spiritual  truth  of  the  old.  It  contains  tiiat
and  more.

IV.  The  breach  op  the  covenant.  The  people  are  accused  of  disobeying  the  preoepts
of  the  covenant  (ver.  8).  Disobedience  involved  both  the  loss  of  the  promised  blessings
and  the  execution  of  the  threatened  curses.  They  who  accept  special  privileges  incur
special  obligations.  They  who  enter  into  a  Divine  covenant  will  be  judged  by  the
terms  of  that  covenant.  Christians  will  be  judged,  not  simply  by  the  common  law  of
righteousness  in  conscience  and  nature,  but  by  the  special  requirements  of  the  New
Testament,  i.e.  of  the  covenant  of  Christianity.

Vers.  11 — IS,^  Idolatry  confounded,  I.  Trouble  is  a  touchstone  for  religious
TRUTH.  The  idolatry  that  is  played  with  in  prosperity  is  found  to  be  useless  in
adversity.  The  Jews  had  regarded  mere  stocks  and  stones  as  their  gods.  But  in  the
season  of  real  distress  they  turn  from  these  and  cry  to  the  true  God  to  arise  and  save
them.  1.  The  ground  of  confidence  which  gives  way  in  the  hour  of  need  is  worse  tTtan
useless ;  it  is  treacherous  and  ruinous,  and  the  discovery  of  its  true  character  confounds
those  who  have  relied  on  it.  A  religion  which  will  not  stand  the  test  of  trouble  is  a
mockery.  2.  Trotible  reveals  the  vanity  of  an  insincere  faith.  In  trouble  we  need  the
true,  the  real;  all  false  religiousness,  all  playing  at  devotion,  breaks  down  then.  If  our
religion  has  been  vain  and  ill  founded,  we  are  then  discovered  and  made  to  be  ashamed,
**  like  a  thief  when  he  is  found  "  (ch.  ii.  26).  3.  There  is  a  deep  instinct  which  cries  out
for  the  true  God  in  the  hour  of  distress.  Old  memories  then  revive,  scouted  faiths
reassert  themselves,  the  first  cry  of  the  child  to  his  Parent  breaks  out  again  involun-
tarily, and  the  godless  man  in  his  agony  groans,  "  0  my  God ! "

II.   If  we  HAVE  FOUSAKEN  GOD  IN  PROSPERITY  WE   HAVE  NO  RIGHT  TO  EXPECT  HIM

TO  SAVE  US  IN  ADVERSITY.  The  religion  which  we  accept  in  our  general  life  is  that
to  which  we  should  justly  look  in  our  hours  of  need.  Here  is  the  natural  irony  of
religion.  A  man  is  punished  by  being  left  to  the  protection  of  the  creed  of  his  own
choice.  It  must  always  be  rememberea,  indeed,  that  whenever  we  truly  repent  and  seek
God  spiritually  he  will  receive  and  save  us  (fios.  vi.  1).  But  the  mere  cry  for  God's
help  in  distress  is  not  repentance,  nor  is  it  a  spiritual  return  to  God.  It  is  a  selfish
utterance,  and  may  be  made  while  the  heart  is  still  far  from  God,  and  the  sins  which
drove  us  from  him  still  unrepented  of.  It  would  be  neither  just  nor  good  for  us  that
God  should  respond  to  so  degraded  and  unspiritual  a  prayer.

III.  All  grounds  of  religious  confidence  except  faith  in  the  true  God
PROVE  false  at  the  TEST  OF  TROUBLE.  This  is  the  result  of  applying  the  touchstone
of  trouble ;  this  is  the  lesson  of  bitter  experience  when  men  are  left  to  cry  to  their  false
gods  in  the  hour  of  need.  1.  If  there  were  any  worth  in  these  grounds  of  confidence
it  would  be  seen  then.  (1)  They  should  answer  to  men's  requirements,  for  men  have
made  them  to  suit  their  own  wishes.  (2)  They  should  be  sufficient  in  number  for  help.
**  According  to  the  number  of  thy  cities  are  thy  gods,  0  Judah."  How  many  religious
refuges  have  men  made  for  themselves !  Shall  all  these  human  inventions  fail  ?  (3)
They  should  be  sufficiently  various  to  afford  the  required  help.  Every  city  had  its
peculiar  cult.  The  human  notions  of  religion  are  infinitely  various.  Cannot  a  man
tind  one  to  meet  his  need  out  of  the  whole  catalogue  of  creeds?  2.  Experience
famishes  the  answer  to  these  questions,  and  shows  the  certain  failure  of  all  the  creeds
of  human  invention.  They  must  fail :  (I)  Because  they  are  human.  How  can  the  god
whom  a  man  has  made  save  him  ?  (2)  Because  they  are  commonly  materialistic —
the  stock  and  stone  of  the  Hebrew  idolatry  find  their  counterparts  in  the  materialistic
philosophy  and  schemes  of  merely  physical  amelioration  of  modern  men.  (3)  Because
they  are  numerous,  and  therefore  none  of  infinite  value,  but  all  limited  in  range.
(4)  Because  they  are  reflections  of  our  own  thought,  not  higher  influences  to  lead  that
thought.  Every  city  had  its  god  embodying  the  ideas  of  the  city.  Men  have  their
se2)arate  creeds  corresponding  to  their  inclinations  and  prejudices.  Such  creeds  afford
no  refuge  when  deeper  questions  open  up  in  the  dark  night  of  distress.

Vers.  16, 17.— 2%e  olive  struck  by  lightning.    Under  the  image  of  an  olive  tree  con-
sumed by  lightning  fires  the  prophet  portrays  the  devastatioa  which  will  come  upon


2aa  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  xl  1—23.

Israel  in  spite  of  former  prosperity.  This  is  a  type  of  the  similar  doom  which  may
overtake  the  happy  and  prosperous.

I.  The  happy  pbobperity.  1.  The  olive  tree  was  green — perennially  green.  Pros-
perity may  be  constant  and  unbroken  before  the  descent  of  judgment.  2.  It  was  fair,
Froffperity  may  come  with  much  honour  and  gladness.  3.  It  was  fi-uit/ul.  The  life
may  abound  in  good  to  others.  4.  It  was  planted  hy  God,  (Ver.  17.)  All  good  comes
from  him,  and  it  is  a  great  good  to  be  established  in  our  way  of  life  by  God's  will  and
help.  Yet  none  of  these  good  things  suflSced  to  avert  a  terrible  doom.  Present  pros-
perity ia  no  security  against  future  adversity.  The  goodness  of  the  past  will  be  no  safe-
guard against  the  punishment  of  sins  of  later  years.  The  long-tried,  honoured,  useful
man  who  falls  into  sin  at  the  end  of  his  life  must  not  delude  himself  into  supposing
that  his  earlier  career  wiU  shield  him  from  all  troublesome  consequences.

XL  The  fearful  devastation.  The  green  and  fair  and  fruitful  tree  was  struck  in
the  thunderstorm,  and  its  branches  consumed  with  fire.  1.  The  devastation  was  from
above — by  fire  from  heaven.  God  who  planted  also  destroyed.  Punishment  is  sent  by
God.  2.  It  was  sudden.  The  lightning  flash  is  instantaneous.  The  terrible  ruin  of  sin
may  fall  in  a  moment,  3.  It  was  irresistible.  The  tree  is  passive  and  helpless  in  the
storm.  Its  very  magnitude  only  invites  the  blow  which  will  destroy  it.  4.  It  was
destructive.  Fire  consumed  the  branches.  The  fires  of  judgment  are  consuming  fires —
they  burn  to  destroy  (Matt.  iii.  12).

Vers.  18 — 23. — The  conspiracy  of  Anathoth,  This  incident  may  afford  us  some
lessons  on  the  subject  of  persecution,  in  its  occasion  and  character,  the  behaviour  of  the
persecuted  and  the  righteous  action  of  God  in  dealing  with  it.

L  The  occasion  of  the  conspiracy  illustrates  a  common  cause  of  persecution.
Jeremiah  had  been  proclaiming  unwelcome  truths.  He  had  exposed  sin  and  threatened
judgment.  Such  preaching  was  ^unpopular,  and  the  men  of  Anathoth  sought  to  stay
it  by  force  (ver.  21).  1.  2'he  faithful  preacher  mtist  expect  to  meet  with  opposition.
Unpopularity  is  no  proof  of  incompetence  (i»e,  if  it  arises  from  the  subject-matter  of  the
teaching,  not  from  the  style  of  the  teacher).  Christ,  who  began  his  mission  with  public
favour,  ended  it  amidst  universal  contumely.  2.  The  most  needful  truth  is  the  most
unwelcome.  The  smooth  words  of  false  prophets  of  "  peace  "  are  acceptable.  But  they  are
narcotics  given  to  men  who  should  be  roused  to  flee  for  their  lives.  The  only  hope  for
those  who  are  spending  wicked  lives  is  in  their  being  awakened  to  a  sense  of  guilt  and
danger.     The  effort  to  awaken  them,  however,  stirs  their  resentment.

n.  The  conduct  of  the  conspirators  reveals  the  true  character  of  perse-
cutors. 1.  It  is  foolish.  Truth  cannot  be  destroyed  by  suppressing  the  voice  that
utters  it.  Some  day  it  will  declare  itself  in  spite  of  all  hindrance.  2.  It  is  unfair.
Words  are  met  by  force.  To  silence  a  voice  is  not  to  reply  to  it.  Violent  opposition  to
the  spread  of  ideas  is  a  tacit  confession  of  inability  to  meet  them  on  their  own  ground  of
reason,  a  virtual  confession  of  their  force  of  truth.  3.  It  is  destructive  of  social  order,
Jeremiah's  fellow-townsmen  conspire  against  him.  The  persecuting  spirit  divides
nearest  neighbours.  It  is  the  greatest  enemy  to  brotherly  charity  (Matt.  x.  36).  4.
It  is  treacherous.  While  Jeremiah  was  ignorant  of  their  enmity — led  like  a  lamb
to  the  slaughter — the  men  of  Anathoth  were  plotting  against  his  life.  5.  It  is
murderous.  The  tree  is  to  be  destroyed  with  its  fruit.  Professing  a  good  purpose,
persecution  is  invariably  possessed  by  a  cruel  spirit.  6.  It  covers  enmity  to  Ood  in
opposition  to  his  servants.  Jeremiah  was  bidden  no  longer  to  prophesy  in  the  Name  of
Jehovah.  It  could  not  be  denied  that  ho  spoke  with  Divine  authority.  Therefore  to
silence  him  was  to  refuse  to  receive  the  message  of  God.

HI,  The  behaviour  of  the  victim  exemplifies  the  right  course  to  be  pursued
UNDER  PERSECUTION.  1.  Kot  to  desist  from  the  duty  which  provoked  the  persecution.
Jeremiah  met  with  little  but  opposition  throughout  his  long  life ;  yet  he  remained  faith-
ful to  the  last.  2.  Not  to  rashly  embrace  danger,  Jeremiah  sought  deliverance.  It  is
childish  to  court  persecution.  3.  To  seek  help  from  Qod,  Jeremiah  at  once  com-
mitted his  cause  to  God.  God  alone  (1)  can  help ;  (2)  has  the  authority  to  execute
vengeance  (Rom.  xiL  19) ;  (3)  judges  righteously,  impartially,  without  the  bias  of
passion  ;  and  (4)  discerns  the  motive  of  men  and  the  degrees  of  guilt  trying  "  the  reins
and  the  heart."


cii.  XI.  1—23.]     THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  29D

IV.  The  action  of  God  typifies  the  ultimate  execution  of  Divine  juDaiiKHT.
1.  Punishment  must  follow  sach  wickedness.  Though  it  is  delayed,  the  vengeance  must
come.  2.  This  punishment  will  be  severe,  "  The  young  men  shall  die  by  the  sword,"
the  children  by  famine.  Fearful  sin  must  bring  feaxful  penalties.  3.  This  punishment
win  be  witkout  exception.  No  remnant  of  the  men  of  Anathoth  will  be  spared.  Ail
are  guilty;  all  must  suffer.  There  is  a  popular  impression  to  the  effect  that  the
nimiber  of  sinful  persons  lessens  the  blame  attaching  to  each  individual.  It  is  a
mistake.  K  all  sin,  each  will  be  punished  individually  as  much  as  if  one  only  were
guilty.  No  conspiracy  of  men,  however  \videspread,  however  subtle  in  schemes,  how-
ever violent  in  action,  can  defeat  the  ends  of  Divine  justice  (Prov.  xi.  21).


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Ver.  6. — The  response  of  the  spiritual  conscience  to  the  words  of  God,  "  And  I  saidt
Amen,  Jehovah."  This  expression,  uttered  by  Jeremiah  with  apparent  originality,  la
really  an  echo  of  Deut.  xxvii.  .15.  There  it  expresses  the  agreement  of  the  whola
congregation  of  Israel :  here  it  is  the  word  of  one  mouth.  The  adoption  by  the  prophet,
at  this  juncture,  of  words  so  solemnly  significant  is  very  impressive.  One  stands  sponsor
for  many ;  a  righteous  and  earnest  man  for  a  nation  of  callous  transgressors.  And  is
it  not  often  so?  What,  indeed,  would  our  poor,  erring,  depraved  humanity  do  with
itself  were  it  not  for  these  individual,  mediatorial  spirits,  whom  God  raises  up  from
time  to  time  through  the  ages  to  interpret  his  will  ana  to  keep  it  in  reverent  obedience
and  spiritual  trust  for  them  who  as  yet  are  ignorant  and  alienated  from  his  life  ?  The
service  such  men  render  is  of  vast  importance  and  but  imperfectly  understood.

I.  Only  those  who  abb  in  communion  with  (jod  can  truly  undebstand  and
APPROVE  his  judgments.  The  commandment  is  intelligently  alluded  to,  and  its
penalty  stated.  The  correspondence  of  Judah's  condition  with  that  anticipated  in  the
original  passage  is  pregnantly  suggested.  All  the  more  so  that  the  transgressors  did  not
feel  or  admit  the  correspondence.  The  prophet  alone  could  say,  "  Amen; "  but  he  said
it  emphatically  and  representatively.  How  many  of  God's  people  find  a  similar
difBcuIty  in  acquiescing  in  his  dispensations  ?  They  do  not  examine  themselves,  or
their  conscience  is  not  sufficiently  awakened,  and  consequently  they  fail  to  recognize
his  judgments  and  to  profit  by  them  as  was  intended.

II.  God  raises  up  those  who  shall  respond  to  his  voice  and  maintain
provisionally  his  covenant  relations  with  the  world.  The  prophets  were  not
only  mouthpieces  of  Divine  truth ;  they  were  saints  whose  consecration  was  essential
to  their  spiritual  discernment  and  the  due  exercise  of  their  functions.  The  people
were  for  the  most  part  spiritually  asleep  or  dead.  In  their  spiritual  and  mc^
constitution  a  medium  was  provided  sensitive  enough  for  the  perception  and  trans-
mission of  Divine  communications.  It  was  no  exaggeration  to  speak  of  these
messengers  as  "  prepared,  ordained,  and  sent."  They  were  specially  raised  up  for  this
duty  of  sustaining  the  conscious  relations  of  Grod  with  his  people.  This  was  a  dim
foreshadowing  of  the  Messiah-consciousness.  In  a  certain  sense  the  prophet  repented,
believed,  obeyed,  for  the  whole  people,  even  as  the  high  priest  made  solemn  offering
once  a  year  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  people.  Not  that  this  spiritual  condition  of  the
inspired  seer  and  saint  could  be  effectual  for  individual  salvation  of  others ;  but  that  it
exercised  a  certain  representative  and  general  influence.  The  prophet  held  the  truth
as  it  were  in  trust  for  others>  continually  and  energetically  sought  to  mediate  between
Jehovah  and  Israel,  and  urged  the  people  to  acts  of  repentance  and  obedience.  With
each  prophet  it  might  be  said  that  a  new  opportunity  was  given,  a  new  day  of  grace
afforded,  for  the  return  of  the  apostate  nation  to  its  primitive  covenant  relations  with
God.  And  in  the  succession  of  the  prophets  a  guarantee  was  given  of  the  enduring
character  of  those  relations,  even  when  the  covenant  itself  was  flagrantly  broken  and
practically  set  aside  by  those  whom  it  chiefly  concerned.  The  essential  point  was  that
there  should  be  no  age  without  some  person  or  persons  who  should  sustain  a  conscious
spiritual  connection  with  Jehovah  for  themselves  and  their  race.

III.  That  which  the  few  have  understood  ksd  accepted  shall  become  the
COMMON  inheritance  OF  ALL.    Tho  prophet  was  for  the  most  part  a  solitary  and


300  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  xl  1—23.


a  lonely  man.  This  isolation  of  his  lot  was  his  grief,  but  the  jxirsistence  of  the
succession  of  the  prophets  proved  the  unswerving  purpose  of  God  ultimately  to  save,
not  only  Israel,  but  the  world.  There  might  be  from  time  to  time  but  one  or  two  who
could  say  **  Amen "  to  his  judgments,  but  some  day  the  people  as  a  whole  would
themselves  endorse  and  approve  them.  And  soon  in  the  "  fulness  of  the  time  "  Christ
would  come,  who  is  the  faithful  and  true  Witness,  the  '*  Amen  "  of  all  the  Divine  Law
and  promise.  In  his  world-wide  reim  as  our  Representative,  Prophet,'  Priest,  and  King,
through  faith  in  him,  the  race  ViTl  be  constituted  into  a  new  Israel,  to  keep  the  word
of  G(>d.  In  this  transfer  of  influence  the  law  is  that  the  communication  shall  proceed
from  the  higher  consciousness  and  consecration  to  the  lower ;  the  travail  for  souls,  etc.,
being  but  a  detailed  sponsorship,  one  day  to  be  done  away  with,  when  *'  all  should  know
hhUj  from  the  least  even  to  the  greatest.'*— M.

Ver.  10. — Spiritual  atavism ;  or,  the  sins  of  the  fathers.  There  are  punishments  and
consequences  of  ancestral  sin  which  reach  even  to  descendants  of  remote  generations.
This  seems  to  imply  a  descent  of  responsibility — a  subject  full  of  difficulty  and  mystery.
The  unity  of  the  race  in  its  sin  and  misery  is,  with  St.  Paul,  an  argument  for  the
probability  and  even  certainty  of  its  unity  in  the  grace  of  salvation.  The  doctrine  of
original  sin  is  treated  in  Scripture  as  antecedent  to  the  doctrine  of  salvation  by  faith  in
Christ.     In  connection  with  this  subject,  notice —

I.  The  influence  of  heredity.  In  modem  times  the  laws  of  heredity  have  been
ficientifically  investigated,  and  startling  results  brought  to  light.  Tendency  can  be
traced  from  parent  to  child  in  gradually  deepening  lines  and  more  confirmed  manifesta-
tions. Spirit  as  well  as  body  acknowledges  this  law,  and,  whether  in  health  or  disease,
its  operation  is  now  placed  beyond  all  dispute.  But  another  law  or  modification  of  this
law  18  perceived  working  alongside  of  it,  namely,  the  law  of  atavism,  in  which  not  the
general  tendency  towards  improvement  or  degeneration  is  observed,  but  an  apparently
arbitrary  and  capricious  recurrence  of  ancestral  peculiarities  that  had  long  disappeared
from  the  race.  Of  this  nature  seems  to  have  been  the  present  sin  of  Israel.  It  was
not  in  the  line  of  continuous  succession,  but  a  recurrent  phase  after  intervals  of  normal
and  religious  life.  Thus  it  showed  that  the  power  of  evil  had  only  been  **  scotched,*'
not  killed ;  and  that  it  was  ready  on  the  slightest  provocation  to  assert  itself  in  the
rankest  forms.  How  much  that  is  mysterious  in  the  conduct  of  individuals  can  be
traced  to  the  influence  of  such  a  principle  I  The  two  selves  of  every  man  represent
influences  that  have  been  at  work  in  his  progenitors  from  remotest  time.

II.  How  solemn  the  EESP0N8IBILITY  OF  PARENTS.  No  carc  cau  be  too  great  in
relation  to  those  we  bring  into  the  world.  Our  own  nature  and  character  should  be
diligently  cultivated,  and  the  utmost  attention  paid  to  parental  example,  family  influence,
and  educative  circumstance  in  their  upbringing.  It  will  not  do  to  ignore  the  fact  that,
from  generation  to  generation,  there  are  transmitted  both  physical  and  spiritual
tendencies  which  have  largely  to  do  with  the  formation  of  character  and  the
determining  of  destiny.  For  good  or  for  evil,  the  parent  exercises  a  despotic  influence
upon  all  whom  he  brings  into  the  world.

nL  Yet  the  accountability  of  the  children  remains.  In  the  sad  entail  of
evil  there  are  many  bright  instances  of  bold  and  pronounced  departure  from  ancestral
sin.  The  individual  is  not  wholly  subject  to  preoeter mining  influences.  If  so,  moral
freedom  would  be  but  an  illusion.  A  power  is  required  to  break  the  tyranny  of  inherited
bin,  and  this  is  provided  in  the  grace  of  God.  The  gospel  is  the  development  of  this
grace  as  an  effectual  and  adequate  means  of  salvation, — M.

Ver.  14.— 2%c  staying  of  intercession.  The  desperate  condition  of  Israel  is  shown  in
this  prohibition.  How  great  must  have  been  tiie  sin  of  God's  people,  ere  prayer  on
their  behalf  could  have  been  forbidden !    What  could  have  been  the  reason  of  this  ?

I.  Whilst  sin  is  persisted  in  there  can  bb  no  removal  of  Divine  judgments.
The  righteousness  of  God  has,  after  long-suffering  mercy,  brought  these  upon  his  people.
The  wisdom  of  their  imposition  is  infellible ;  and  they  spring  from  the  depths  of  an
inscrutable,  infinite  love.  Whilst,  therefore,  the  condition  which  involved  their  imposi-
tion is  unchanged,  it  would  be  presumption  to  suggest  their  removal.  It  is  rather  for
the  righteous  conscience  of  saints  sorrowfully  to  approve  the  action  of  the  Supreme


CH.XI.  1— 23.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  301

Magistrate,  as  he  draws  his  cordon  round  the  transgressor  and  compels  him  to
capitulate.  The  real  calamity  in  connection  with  these  judgments  is  the  spiritual
wrongness  which  necessitates  them,  and  not  the  physical  conditions  through  which
they  are  executed.  Most  men  suppose  that  if  the  pain  or  inconvenience  is  removed
the  evil  is  at  an  end,  and  the  question  between  them  and  God  settled.  They  still  go
on  to  sin.  Impunity  confirms  and  hardens  them  in  their  transgression.  We  have  not
learned  the  real  lesson  of  calamity  until  we  have  detected  its  moral  sources  or  occasions,
and  sought  to  rectify  them  before  God.

II.  Divine  judgments  may  in  certain  instances  be  greater  mercies  than
THE  removal  op  THEM  WOULD  BE.  When  judgment  continues  to  rest  upon  the
transgressor,  it  is  not  mere  vengeance  which  is  represented,  but  mercy  working  on  the
lines  of  severity.  It  is  God's  emphasis  upon  his  commandment  which  must  be  heeded.
The  blessing  that  is  latent  in  it  waits  the  appearance  of  a  repentance  not  to  be  repented
of.  Like  pent-up  waters,  it  will  flow  in  an  overwhelming  stream  when  once  the
barriers  of  law  have  been  removed  by  the  sinner's  return  to  Grod. — ^M.

Vers.  18—23. — Perih  of  prophesying.  The  conspiracy  of  which  these  verses  speak
seems  to  have  been  sudden  as  it  was  secret.  It  affected  the  mind  of  the  prophet  in  a
peculiarlv  painful  way,  as  it  was  the  men  of  his  own  district  who  were  concerned  in  it —
his  friends,  probably  even  kinsfolk,  who  looked  upon  him  ^as  their  worst  enemy.  The
crime  was  all  the  more  heinous  that  the  means  taken  to  execute  it  were  underhand.
It  is  possible  that  they  greeted  him  with  expressions  of  kindness  and  hospitality,  and
that  everything  was  done  to  prevent  his  suspecting  his  real  danger.  Upon  his  discover-
ing the  plot,  it  is  possible  that  they  ceased  to  conceal  their  intentions,  and,  thinking
him  in  their  power,  urged  him  "  prophesy  not  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord."

I.  The  perils  of  the  prophet  arose  from  :  1.  -4  hatred  of  the  truth  in  his  hearers.
There  was  something  unpalatable  in  the  continual  denunciations  of  their  wickedness.
Their  spiritual  and  patriotic  pride  was  wounded.  The  demands  made  upon  them  by
the  righteousness  of  Jehovah  they  did  not  care  to  yield  to ;  and  the  dislike  of  the
prophet  arose  from  his  association  with  his  message.  No  vengeance,  therefore,  could  be
too  great.  It  is  not  imprisonment  they  seek  to  inflict,  but  death  itself,  and  death  in
such  an  obscure  and  ignominious  way  that  "  his  name  may  be  no  more  remembered."
2.  Their  fear  of  the  consequences  of  his  prophecies.  The  future  which  he  described  as
inevitable  was  not  pleasant  to  contemplate.  The  words  he  spoke  threatened  to  overturn
their  most  cherished^  designs  and  to  rob  them  of  their  precious  things.  3.  Ignorance
as  to  how  these  migJU  he  averted.  By  an  easy  process  of^  association  they  came  to  look
upon  Jeremiah  as  not  simply  declaring,  but  in  a  sense  causing,  the  evils  of  which  he
prophesied.  They  reasoned,  therefore,  to  the  foolish  conclusion  that  if  they  could
destroy  him  they  would  free  themselves  from  the  dangers  which  he  threatened.  The
preacher  has  often  to  incur  dislike  of  this  sort  from  his  hearers.  It  is  of  the  nature
of  the  carnal  mind  so  to  misapprehend  the  things  of  God  and  the  things  that  make  for
peace.  At  certain  times  stern  denunciation  and  declaring  of  the  true  consequences  of
evil  action  are  not  to  bo  regarded  as  enmity,  but  friendship.  The  word  spoken  by  an
inspired  mind  is  to  be  distinguished  from  the  expression  of  mere  bitterness  and  dislike.
Paul  had  to  entreat  his  converts  not  to  count  him  their  enemy  when  he  sharply  reproved
them.

II.  These  perils  are  warded  off  by :  1.  Direct  revelation.  This  is  an  advantage
which  the  ordinary  servants  of  God  may  not  count  upon.  It  was  vouchsafed  occasionally
to  prophets  and  apostles,  but  there  is  something  in  the  spiritual  mind  which  enables  it
to  detect  more  quickly  than  others  the  symptoms  of  hatred  to  the  truth.  Promptings
and  suggestions  to  certain  action  in  the  midst  of  circumstances  to  ordinarily  human
eyes  unsuspicious,  have  been  too  frequent  in  the  history  of  the  Church  to  be  doubted.
And  even  where  no  direct  information  may  be  given  as  to  the  reason  of  certain  courses
of  action,  which  Gt)d's  saints  may  be  moved  to  observe,  the  results  clearly  prove  the
presence  of  a  careful  and  ever-watchful  Providence.  2.  Faith  in  Ood,  Jeremiah  said,
**  Unto  thee  have  I  revealed  my  cause  "  (better,  "  Upon  thee  have  I  devolved  my  cause  ").
He  evidently  felt  that  his  duty  was  to  commit  the  whole  matter  into  the  hands  of
God.  And  this  is  ever  the  safest  way.  The  judgment,  the  prevision  of  man,  are  to
be  distnuted.    The  soul  should  cast  itself  by  faith  upon  God,  who  is  able  to  save.


/


302  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  xl  1— 23.


d.  Greater  boldness  in  the  course  of  action  assumed.  This  was  a  distinct  moral
adTantage.  The  men  whose  action  was  inspired  by  fear  were  certain  to  be  influenced
hj  itb  Superstitious  dread  of  the  effects  of  his  words  would  produce  a  reaction  from
ihdr  cowardly  plans.  And  they  would  feel  themselves  more  and  more  helpless  as  they
mw  how  they  aggravated  their  own  punishment.  So  the  preachers  of  the  gospel  and
the  servants  of  Christ  generally  must  not  consult  with  flesh  and  blood,  but  be  bold
in  proclaiming  the  whole  will  of  GKxl,  in  preaching  the  Word,  being  ^  instant  in  Beason
anoout  of  season."  There  are  allies  and  reinforcements  latent  in  tine  constitution  even
of  tli^  worst  enemies  of  the  cross  of  Christ — M.

Ver.  3. — The  doom  of  disobedience.  This  new  discourse,  which  begins  with  ch.  xl,
IB  a  continuation  of  the  same  sad  monotone  of  denunciation  and  doom  which  goes  on
throughout  well-nigh  the  whole  of  Jeremiah's  prophecies.  The  curse  pronounced  here
on  the  disobedient—

I.  Is  VERY  TERRIBLE.  The  words,  **  Cursed,"  etc.,  are  fearful  words  to  come  from
the  lips  of  the  God  of  grace  and  mercy.  And  that  which  they  threatened  was  terrible
also.  What  a  catalogue  of  woes,  which  were  denounced  against  the  guilty  people,
might  be  compiled  from  these  chapters !  And  how  exactly  Uie  event  answered  to  the
prediction !  Read  the  history  of  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  and  of  the  sufferings  of
the  people,  which  is  given  in  the  records  of  the  times,  for  proof  of  this.  It  is  a  dismal
atory,  heart-sickening,  and  one  from  which  we  should  at  once  turn  away  were  it  possible
for  us  to  do  so.  But  all  this,  which  was  written  aforetime,  was  written  for  oar  learning,
and  tiierefore  we  cannot  but  give  heed.    For  not  only  is  the  curse  terrible-*

IL  It  IS  ALTOGETHER  JUST.  What  makes  a  sentence,  such  as  is  pronounced  here,
just  ?  Is  it  not  such  considerations  as  theee  ?— -1.  That  the  Law  which  has  been  violated
should  have  been  aitogeiher  righteous.  None  can  road  over  the  moral  Law  given  by  God
to  his  people  without  confessing  its  righteousness.  **  The  Law  was  holy,  just,  and
good."  Those  who  disobeyed  it  and  were  punished  by  it  could  not  dispute  its  righteous-
ness. 2.  That  it  should  have  been  fuUy  known.  If  ignorance  could  have  been  pleaded
the  equity  of  the  sentence  might  have  been  quesUoned.  But  amid  all  possible  publicity
and  solemnity  the  Law  was  given  at  the  first ;  and  at  a  time  (ver.  4)  when  their  hearts,
by  reason  of  God's  exceeding  goodnen  to  them,  were  peculiarly  susceptible  to  impres^on.
And  ever  since  then,  by  repeated,  prolonged,  and  earnest  appeal  (ver.  7)  that  obedience
should  be  rendered.  3.  When  eofucience  consents  to  the  Law  that  itis  good,  (yer.5.)They
fiiud  "  Amen  "  to  it  The  pronhet  is  not  giving  his  personal  account  only,  but  referring
to  the  fact  that  all  the  people  said  **  Amen "  when  the  curse  upon  disobedience  was
pronounced  from  Mount  £bid ;  cL  also  a  more  recent  ^  standing  to  the  covenant "  to
which  probably  Jeremiah  alludes  (2  Kings  xxiii.  3).  4,  When  the  transgression  has
been  notorious.  (Ver.  8.)  It  was  not  simply  that  they  would  not  obey,  but  they  would
not  even  listen,  and  they  went  on  in  thdr  own  way,  utterly  disregarding  the  covenant
to  which  they  had  promised  obedience(of.  also  vers.  9, 10).  5.  When  ingratitude  has
been  added  to  disobedience,  (Ver.  4.)  What  had  not  God  done  for  them  ?  How  deep
was  the  obligation  to  obey  1  6.  When  forbearance  has  been  exercised.  For  a  thousand
years  and  more  they  had  been  suffered  to  occupy  the  land  of  promise  (ver.  5,  '^  As  it  is
this  day  ").  Wherever,  then,  was  there  or  could  there  be  a  righteous  doom  if  this  were
not?

IIL  ksD  AS  NECESSABT  AB  BK3HTE0US.  Remember  the  purpose  for  which  Gk)d  had
chosen  Israel — ^that  they  might  bo  the  channels  of  his  truth  and  righteousness  to  all
other  people.  God  was  merciful  to  them  and  blessed  them,*'  that  his  way,"  etc  (Ps.  Ixvii.).
"  In  thee  and  in  thy  seed,"  said  God  to  Abraham,  *'  shall  all  the  nations,"  etc.  But  if
the  men  of  the  nation  had  rendered  themselves  incapable  of  this  service,  it  was  essential
for  the  well-being  of  the  world  that  they  should  make  room  for  moro  faithful  men.
And  this  they  had  to  do.

IV.  Airo    CEBTAIK    OP    A€XK>HFIJSHMEHT    IF   THE   BISOBEDIENCE    BE  HOT  FORBAKEK.

The  judgment  that  came  upon  Judah  and  Jerusalem  was  not  at  all  a  solitary  isolated
fact.  The  like  of  it  had  happened  before,  has  since,  happens  now,  and  will  agun  when-
ever like  provocation  is  given,  as  it  all  too  often  is.  God's  way  of  dealing  with  Israel
is  God's  way  of  dealing  with  man  everywhere  and  in  bM  ages ;  therefore  his  way  of
dealing  with  us.    Gbd's  Law,  his  demand  for  obedience,  man's  disobedience,  and  the


CH.  XI.  1—23.]     THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  303


consequent  doom,  are  all  facts  with  which  we  are  familiar.  The  history  of  Israel  is
but  an  example  of  what  \a  ever  taking  place.  Even  the  gospel  of  the  Lord  Jesus,
however  mucn  it  may  avert  the  eternal  results  of  our  transgressions,  will  not  save
U8  from  the  present  temporal  consequences  in  this  world.  *'  These  all  died  in  faith,*'
so  we  read  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  of  those  **  whose  carcases,'*  nevertheless,  *^  fell
in  the  wilderness."  "  Gl^  way  of  transgressors  is,"  has  been,  must,  and  ever  will  be,
"hard."— C.

Ver.  4. — The  precious  recompenses  of  obedience,  "  Obey  my  voice, . .  .  according  to  all
which  I  command  you :  so  snail  ye  be,"  etc.  The  earlier  verses  of  this  chapter  form
part  of  that  earnest  reminder  which  Jeremiah  was  commanded  by  GKkI  to  address  to
the  men  of  Judah  and  Jerusalem  concerning  a  transaction  with  which  they  had  all  had
very  much  to  do.  That  transaction  was  tixeir  solemnly  pledging  themselves,  as  th^
had  done  during  King  Josiah's  recent  I'eign,  to  observe  the  ancient  covenant  which  the
Lord  Qod  had  made  wiUi  their  fathers.  The  sixty  or  seventy  years  before  King  Josiah's
time  had  been  years  dreary  and  degraded  in  the  national  Ufo  of  the  people.  Even
Hezekiah,  the  last  pious  King  of  Judah  before  Josiah,  had  secured  only  a  very  partial
reformation,  and  in  the  days  of  his  godless  son  Manasseh,  and  in  those  of  his  even  worae
grandson  Amon,  who  "  sinned  more  and  more,"  the  religious  life  of  the  people  all  but  died
out.  The  sacred  Scriptures  in  which  this  covenant  was  contained  had,  during  these
miserable  years,  been  neglected  and  put  out  of  sight  as  writings  for  which  they  had  no
longer  love  nor  use ;  as  a  book  which  we  do  not  want  is  either  got  rid  of  or  put  away
on  some  high  shelf,  to  make  room  for  others  which  we  more  highly  prize.  "  The  nation
did  not  want  to  hear  the  Law  which  testified  against  their  multiplied  transgressions,  nor
to  listen  to  a  condemnation  of  the  idols  they  had  chosen."  But  in  King  Josiah's  reign,
in  some  out-of-the-way  comer,  buried  beneath  no  one  knows  what  worthless  rubbish,
a  copy  of  the  despised  Word  of  Grod  was  discovered.  It  produced  on  the  pious  monarch
a  profound  impression.  He  was  overwhelmed  with  shame  and  dismay  when  he  compared
the  commandB  of  the  covenant  of  God  with  the  actual  conduct  of  the  people.  He
shuddered  to  think  of  the  judgments  which  must  come  upon  them — and  which  had
already  come  upon  the  neighbouring  nation  of  Israel — unless  they  repented  and  turned
to  GK)d.  But  he  did  not  waste  time  in  imavailing  regrets.  He  at  once  took  practical
measures  to  bring  about  that  religious  reformation  which  he  saw  to  be  so  much  needed.
He  therefore  summoned  all  the  people  of  Judah  to  Jerusalem,  and  caused  the  book  of
the  Law  to  be  publicly  read  to  them ;  then  he  made  all  the  people  renew  the  covenant
which  they  had  so  long  forgotten.  For  a  time  it  seemed  as  if  the  reformation  and
repentance  were  real ;  but  the  old  idolatries  began  to  make  their  appearance  again  after
a  while,  and  when  Jeremiah  was  sent  from  God  to  remind  them  of  their  violated  vows
they  had  fedlen  back  into  a  condition  as  evil  as,  if  not  worse  than,  that  of  former  davs.
Therefore  the  prophet  opens  his  commission  by  the  awful  denunciation  of  JehoviJ^'s
curse  upon  the  disobedient.  He  would  startle  and  arouse  them,  if  it  might  but  be
possible,  so  that  they  might  awake  to  righteousness  and  to  Gh)d  ere  wrath  arose  against
them  and  there  should  be  no  remedy.  And  here  he  tells  of  the  precious  recompenseB  of
obedience,  "  So  shall  ye  .  .  .  GK)d."    Consider,  then —

I.  These  promises.  1.  "  Ye  shall  he  my  peopled  Now,  by  this  is  meant,  amon^irti
other  blessings,  that  they  shall  be  the  object  of  his  care.  How  many  are  the  proo£i  t£uit
this  is  a  constituent  part  of  the  heritage  of  his  people  1  Were  not  Israel  so?  Did  he
not  watch  over  them  continuously  ?  "  He  suffered  no  man  to  do  them  harm ;  yea,  he
reproved  kings  for  their  sakes."  *'  He  gave  his  angels  charge  over  them  to  keep  them  in
all  their  ways."  The  rage  of  Pharaoh,  the  cruel  thirst  of  the  hot,  waterless  sands,  the
threatened  fomine  of  the  breadless  desert,  the  marauding  Amalekite,  the  pestilence  that
walked  in  darkness,  and  the  destruction  that  wasted  at  noonday,— not  one  of  these
was  suffered  to  harm  them.  How  full  are  the  Law,  the  prophets,  and  the  psalms  with
sweet  assurances  of  the  tender.care  of  Gtod.  over  his  people !  Nor  does  the  New  Testament
come  behind  the  Old  in  like  gracious  declarations.  And  the  experience  of  all  Gkxi's
people  swells  the  volume  of  testimony  to  his  loving  solicitude  and  watchfulness  over
us.  "  And  such  honour  have  all  his  saints."  And  to  be  of  his  people  means  also  to  he  the
abode  of  his  Spirit,  That  Spirit  should  dwell  in  them,  rule  and  mould  them  after  the
Divine  will.    True,  God's  andent  people  do  once  and  again  seem  to  have  been  utterly


304  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [cu.  xi.  1— 23.

abandoned  of  that  Holy  Spirit.  But  there  was  ever  a  faithful  remnant,  ever  a  godly
few,  of  whom  the  Lord  was  wont  to  say,  "  They  shall  be  mine  in  that  day  when  I
make  up  my  jewels."  And  we  must  remember  that  there  were  long  periods  in  Israel's
hifltory  when,  as  a  nation,  thev  lived  under  the  blessed  guidance  of  that  Spirit.  These
more  happy  periods  are  passed  over  in  silence,  as  all  such  in  the  records  of  nations  are,
80  that  the  saying  has  passed  into  a  proverb,  "  Happy  the  nation  that  has  no  history."
It  is  of  the  sad,  troubled  times  that  history  tells,  not  of  the  long,  eventless,  peaceful
times.  When  at  rest,  they  walk  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  and  possess  the  comfort  of
the  Holy  Ghost,  and  are  multiplied.  Oh  the  joy  of  this  possession  of  his  Spirit !  The
thought  of  losing  it  made  the  contrite  psalmist  cry  out  in  his  agony,  '*  Cast  me  not
away  from  thy  presence,  and  take  not  thy  Holy  Spirit  from  me."  "  I  will  put  my  Spirit
within  you  "  was  ever  one  of  the  choicest  promises  of  Otod  to  his  people,  and  one  of  the
surest  tokens  that  they  were  his  people.  And  it  is  so  still.  To  be  his  is  to  be  guided
and  governed  of  that  good  Spirit,  to  have  our  understandings  purified,  our  affections
wisely  controlled,  our  hearts,  our  wills,  under  his  direction  always,  so  that  we  turn
away  from  what  is  evil  and  cleave  to  that  which  is  good.  And  it  includes,  furthermore,
the  being  made  the  channels  of  his  grace.  Others  shall  be  blessed  through  us,  as  it  was
said  to  Abraham,  "  In  thee  and  in  thy  seed  shall  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  be  blessed."
God's  people  are  the  salt  of  the  earth,  the  light  of  the  world.  How  unspeakably  great
and  blessed  is  the  influence  of  the  true  people  of  God !  In  their  presence  impurity,
profanity,  selfishness,  sin  in  all  its  forms,  hide  their  shameful  heads  and  slink  away,
whilst  all  things  lovely  and  of  good  report  flock  around  them  and  attend  upon  them
continually.  And  finally  they  become  the  inmates  of  the  home  of  Ood,  The  heavenly
inheritance,  of  which  the  earthly  Canaan,  the  land  promised  to  the  fathers  of  Israel,
was  the  type  and  symbol,  becomes  theirs.  They  enter  it  through  the  gates  of  death,
and  these  gates  once  passed,  they  are  in  his  presence,  where  "  there  is  fulness  of  joy,  and
at  his  right  hand  there  is,"  etc.  Such  are  some  of  the  elements  of  this  great  joy  of  God
taking  us  for  his  people,  a  joy  which,  of  his  infinite  mercy,  may  he  make  us  all  to
know.  2.  "  I  will  he  your  Ood  J*  This  cannot  mean  less  than  that  he  will  he  known
to  them  as  their  Ood,  They  shall  be  able  to  realize  his  existence,  his  presence,  his
constant  nearness  to  them.  True,  the  God  of  Israel,  whose  promise  this  is,  was  not
known  by  any  organ  of  sense ;  he  was  no  material  God  that  their  hands  could  handle ;
he  spake  with  no  human  voice  that  their  ears  could  hear ;  he  appeared  to  them  in  no
visible  form  that  their  eyes  could  see ;  he  was  manifested  then,  as  now,  only  to  their
spirits.  But  when  they  worshipped  him  in  spirit  they  felt  that  he  was  at  tneir  right
hand,  so  that  they  could  not  be  moved.  Hence  they  went  about  their  daily  work  and
engaged  in  all  the  occupations  of  their  lives,  consciously  realizing  the  presence  of  God ;
so  ihsX  they  constantly  spoke  of  him  as  "  their  God,"  "  our  God,"  "  my  God,*'— so
near,  so  real,  so  present  was  he  to  them.  They  could  not  if  they  would,  and  they
would  not  if  they  could,  escape  from  his  presence  or  withdraw  from  the  observation  of
his  eye,  or  from  the  guidance  and  guardianship  of  his  hand.  In  such  manifestation  of
himself  to  them  did  he  fulfil  his  word,  "  I  will  be  your  God."  Nor  was  this  all.  Not
only  was  he  realized  by  them  but  rejoiced  in.  "  I  will  go  unto  the  altar  of  God,  unto
God  my  exceeding  joy,"  was  the  delighted  declaration  of  the  saints  of  old  and  is  so  of
the  saints  tonday.  Such  joy  had  they  in  him  that,  when  all  earthly  affairs  were  disastrous
for  them,  when  the  fig  tree  did  not  blossom,  and  when  there  was  no  fruit  in  the  vine,
and  the  labour  of  the  olive  failed,  and  the  fields  yielded  no  meat,  when  the  flock  was
cut  off  from  the  fold  and  there  were  no  herds  in  the  stall,— when,  that  is,  ruin  stared
them  in  the  face  and  met  them  on  every  side,  nevertheless  they  could  rejoice  in  the
Lord,  and  joy  in  the  God  of  their  salvation.  "  My  soul  shall  make  her  boast  in  the
Lord,"  was  their  perpetual  song ;  and  it  is  the  song  still  of  all  those  to  whom  God  has
saidy  "  I  will  be  your  God."  And  his  word  came  true  yet  further  by  their  coming  to
resemble  him.  It  is  ever  the  result  of  worship  to  conform  the  worshipper  to  the  deity
he  worships.  Hence  it  was  said  of  the  worshippers  of  idols,  "  They  that  make  them
are  like  unto  them,  so  is  every  one  that  trusteth  in  them."  Accordingly  it  has  ever  been
found  that  they  who  bowed  down  to  gods  impure,  cruel,  and  treacherous,  became  them-
selves impure,  cruel,  and  treacherous.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  they  who  have  worshipped
the  God  of  Israel  have  become  like  him — righteous,  just,  and  true,  merciful,  and  pure,
and  good.    "I  will  be  your  God"  meant,  therefore,  "I  will  make  you  like  myself,"


CH.  XI.  1—23.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  305


and  this  promise  God  ever  fulfils.  And  it  means  also,  *'  /  will  be  your  restJ"  The  soul
whose  God  the  Lord  is,  reposes  on  him.  The  storms  of  life  may  rage,  its  tempests
beat,  but  "firm  and  unmoved  are  they  who  rest  their  souls  on  God."  Everything
may  appear  to  be  slipping  away  from  a  man,  and  he  may  seem  to  be  like  one  gliding
down  a  steep,  smooth  slope,  ever  fester  and  faster  to  the  precipice  over  which  he  will  be
hurled  into  destruction,  unable  to  grasp  any  friendly  rock  or  branch,  or  to  find  foothold
anywhere — and  men's  circumstances  are  like  that  sometimes ;  but  they  to  whom  this
word,  "  I  will  be  your  God,"  is  fulfilled,  do  find  foothold  in  God  and  can  stay  themselves
upon  him.  Hence,  when  heart  and  flesh  fail,  God  is  the  Strength  of  their  heart  and
their  Portion  for  evermore.

II.  Thb  condition  of  their  fulfilment.  They  were  faithfully  to  do  the  command-
ments which  he  had  made  known  to  them:  "Obey  my  voice,  so,"  etc.  And  this
condition  is  not  abrogated ;  it  is  in  as  full  force  to-day  as  it  was  in  the  days  of  old.  But
when  it  is  complied  with,  then,  not  merely  by  the  gracious  appointment  of  God,,  but
also  in  the  way  of  natural  result,  there  follows  the  enjoyment  of  the  promised
blessings.  For :  1.  Obedience  tends  to  such  enjoyment  of  God,  inasmuch  as  it  prevents
the  rising  of  those  mists  whereby  the  sight  of  Ood  is  shut  out  from  the  soul.  Travellers
along  the  Rhine  or  over  the  mountains  of  Switzerland  know  to  their  cost  how  often  the
most  glorious  scenery  the  world  contains  is  completely  hidden  from  their  view  by  the
uprising  of  some  wretched  mist,  wrapping  in  cold,  dark,  impenetrable  fog  all  that  upon
which  their  eyes  would  have  so  delightedly  rested.  They  want  to  gaze  upon  all  that
loveliness ;  they  have  come  for  that  very  purpose ;  but  they  cannot  for  those  thick
clouds.  And  oh,  what  a  beautiful  vision  is  the  face  of  Gkxl  I  How  good  it  is  to  gaze
upon  him,  and  to  behold  the  shining  of  his  countenance  !  And  this  we  should  do  were
it  not  for  those  mists  with  which  disobedience  to  God's  will  ever  blots  out  all  that
otherwise  we  should  so  delightedly  see.  "  If  our  hearts  condemn  us  not,  then  have  we
confidence  toward  God ; "  but  when  they  do  condemn  us,  confidence  vanishes,  and,  as
by  a  veil  of  impenetrable  cloud,  the  face  of  God  is  hidden  from  our  view.  We  have
lost  him ;  we  cannot  realize  him ;  he  is  as  if  he  were  not,  and  the  soul  is  forlorn  and
wretched  and  exposed  to  all  manner  of  ill.  Now,  this  sad  experience,  which  is  as
common  as  it  is  sad,  shows  how  the  obeying  of  the  voice  of  God  must  tend  to  the  enjoy-
ment of  him,  inasmuch  as  it  prevents  all  that  which  hides  God  from  our  souls.  2.  And
before  obedience  that  ukUI  of  the  rebellious  will,  which  more  than  aught  else  displeases
and  dishonours  God  and  keeps  him  out  from  the  soul,  "  falls  down  flat,"  as  did  the
walls  of  Jericho  before  the  obedient  tribes  of  Israel.  That  will  must  be  subdued,  that
stronghold  of  evil  must  be  pulled  down,  and  obedience  is  the  strong  hand  that  accom-
plishes this  much-needed  work.  That  strong  fortress  cast  down,  the  soul  becomes  the  pos-
session of  God,  and  the  hitherto  rebellious  forces  of  the  soul  own  him  as  their  God.  Or,  to
take  another  similitude,  obedience  unbars  that  fastened  door  before  which  the  Lord  Jesus
has  stood  so  long  and  knocked,  but  in  vain,  for  admission.  He  desires  to  enter  and  to
make  us  the  glad  partakers  of  his  grace.  But  till  that  door  be  imbarred  all  this  cannot
be.  3.  Obedience,  furthermore,  keeps  us  in  those  paths  along  which  alone  Ood  is  to  he
met.  Full  well  we  know  that  there  arc  paths  innumerable  along  which  men  go,  along
which  we  have  gone  ourselves ;  but  God  is  never  to  be  met  with  in  them.  But  along
the  path  by  which  obedience  leads  us,  there  we  do  meet  with  him,  and  are  blessed  by
him.  4.  And  without  this  obedience  God  cannot  carry  out  his  purposes  of  grace.
This  is  what  we  are  told  in  the  verse  that  follows  our  text.  God  asks  for  obedience,
'*  that  I  may  perform  the  oath  which  I  have  sworn  unto,"  etc.  Therefore  without  this
he  is  held  back  from  what  he  earnestly  desires,  and  he  cannot  do  the  things  that  ho
would.  God  cannot  admit  the  ungodly  and  the  disobedient  into  the  blessed  land  of
promise.  To  do  that  would  be  to  perpetuate  for  ever  the  sins  and  sorrows  of  time.
Therefore—

**  Those  holy  gates  for  ever  bar
Pollution,  sin,  and  shame."

But  "blessed  are  they  that  do  his  commandments,  that  they,"  etc.  (Rev.  xxii.  14).
Now,  the  first  step  of  this  obedience — that  which  introduces  to  all  these  recompenses-
is  to  surrender  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  (John  vi.  28,  29). — C.

Vers.  16, 17. — ITie  first  last.    Many,  indeed,  are  the  instances  in  which  those  who

JEREMIAH.  3C


306  THE  BOOK  OF  TUE   PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  xl  1— 23.


wero  placed  first  in  opportunity  have  been  found  last  in  attainment.  Privilege,  fiEtvour,
education,  help  of  all  kinds,  have  been  at  their  disposal,  and  yet  the  results  which  had
been  designed  for  them,  and  which  so  surely  should  have  been  theirs,  they  have  missed
(c£  Matt,  xi.,  "  Woe  unto  thee,  Bethsaidal"  etc.).  And  in  ordinary  life,  as  well  as  in
the  records  of  the  Bible,  may  we  learn  how  frequently,  not  the  strong  and  mighty,  but
"  the  lame  take  the  prey."  The  first  are  last  and  the  last  first.  Now,  of  such  sad  and
shameful  failures  these  verses  supply  a  notable  instance.  Under  the  imagery  of  a  green
olive  tree,  fair  and  of  goodly  fruit,  the  prophet  pictures  the  condition  and  prospects  of
the  people  of  God  when  ho  first  planted  them.  No  similitude  could  more  strikingly
convey  to  the  mind  of  the  inhabitant  of  Judah  and  Jerusalem  the  idea  of  happy  and
sure  prosperity.  But,  next,  the  prophet  portrays  a  far  different  scene — that  same  tree,
but  black  and  charred,  its  trunk  riven,  its  fruit  and  foliage  all  gone,  and  its  branches
broken  down  ;  for  the  thunderbolt  and  the  scathing  lightning,  the  wild  tempest  and  the
fierce  wind,  have  all  done  their  deadly  work  upon  it,  and  now  it  stands  a  mere  blackened
stump,  instead  of  the  beauteous  and  fruitful  tree  it  once  was.  From  that  height  of
favour  to  that  depth  of  disaster  were  Judah  and  Jerusalem  to  fall.  They  who  had  been
first  should  be  last.

I.  They  were  first.     The  imagery  employed  by  the  prophet  tells  in  what  respects.
1.  In  the  favour  of  God.    The  olive  was  a  favourite  tree,  held  in  highest  esteem  by
the  people  of  the  lands  where  it  grew ;  hence  it  is  used  here  and  elsewhere  as  an  emblem
of  those  whom  God  favours  and  has  pleasure  in  (cf.  "  I  am  like  a  green  olive  tree  in  the
house  of  my  God,"  Ps.  lii.  8).    The  Bible  seems  to  love  the  tree.     It  is  the  first  named
of  any  known  tree  (Q^n.  viii.  11),  and  is  the  subject  of  the  first  parable  (Judg.  ix.  8).  It
is  everywhere  spoken  of  as  precious ;  hence,  when  Judah  and  Jerusalem  are  thus  named,
we  regard  it  as  a  name  of  endearment,  telling  how  precious  they  were  in  God's  sight.
This  is  borne  out  by  direct  statements  and  by  the  recorded  deeds  of  God,  which  show
the  esteem  in  which  he  held  them.     2.  In  beauty.    No  doubt  the  beauty  of  the  olive
tree  exists  partly  in  the  eyes  of  the  beholder,  who  looks  upon  it  with  affection  for  all
the  service  it  renders  him.     But  to  others  also  there  is  unquestionable  beauty  in  the
olive  which,  with  its  "  noble  groves,  covered  with  foliage  the  whole  year  round,
spreading  like  a  silver  sea  along  the  base  of  the  hills  and  climbing  their  ascending
terraces,  speaks  loudly  of  peace  and  plenty,  food  and  gladness  "  (see  Ruskin, '  Stones  of
Venice,'  vol.  iii.  pp.  175 — 177),    And  without  doubt  it  was  beautiful  in  the  eyes  of
those  to  whom  the  prophet  wrote.    But  there  is  a  moral  beauty  as  well  as  that  which
is  material,  and  of  which  the  material  is  a  fit  symbol.     And,  compared  with  the  dis-
order, the  violence,  the  foulness,  the  wickedness  of  all  kinds,  in  which  the  rest  of  the
world  was  sunk,  Israel  was  as  a  garden  of  the  Lord — a  green  olive  tree,  "  fair  "  and
comely  to  look  upon.     In  them  that  which  was  lovely  and  of  good  report,  that  which
had  virtue  and  praise,  were  found  as  nowhere  else.    Love  to  God  and  love  to  man,
justice,  truth,  and  piety  were  held  in  esteem  amongst  them  as  amongst  none  others.
3.  In  usefulness.    The  olive  tree  was  not  merely  fair,  but  "  of  goodly  fruit."     From
that  fruit  came  one  of  the  commonest  and  most  essential  articles  of  the  Eastern's
food.    Its  oil  was  employed  in  connection  with  almost  everything  that  they  ate.     Its
berries  gave  flavour  to  the  peasant's  bread.    The  evening  lamp  was  kindled  with  the
oil  pressed  from  it.    And  that  same  oil  was  used  to  anoint  their  priests  and  kings,  for
the  lamp  in  the  holy  place,  and  to  mingle  with  many  of  their  sacrifices.    To  "  anoint
the  head  with  oil "  was  deemed  most  delightful  and  refreshing  (Ps,  xxiii.).    Wounds
were  dressed  with  it  (Luke  x.  34),  and  the  sick  were  anointed  with  it  (Mark  vi.  13 ;
Jas.  V.  4).    The  wood  of  the  tree  was  employed  in  the  sacred  furniture  of  the  temple,
and  there  seemed  to  be  no  part  of  the  tree  which  did  not  in  some  way  render  service
to  man.    Now,  such  was  the  purpose  of  God  in  regard  to  his  people,  that  in  them
*'  should  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  be  blest,"    They  were  to  be  the  channel  of  blessing
to  all  people.    Through  them  God's  "saving  health"  should  be  known  "amongst  all
nations."    4.  And  in  permanence.    Their  blessedness  was  to  abide.    The  "  greenness  "
of  the  tree  spoken  of  here  refers  to  its  perpetuity  and  strength.    The  olive  is  known  to
live  to  a  great  age.    It  is  not  improbable  (see  Kitto)  that  some  of  the  olive  trees  now
on  the  Mount  of  Olives  are  contemporaneous  with  our  Lord.    The  tax  jmid  on  them  is
that  which  was  assigned  to  such  trees  when  first  the  Turks  became  masters  of  Palestine.
All  trees  planted  since  are  taxed  far  more  heavily.    But  of  the  great  age  to  which  the


CH.  XI.  1—23.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  307

olive  tree  attains  there  can  be  no  doubt.  It  brings  forth  fruit  in  old  age,  and  its  leaf
doth  not  wither  (Ps.  i.).  It  was,  therefore,  a  fit  emblem  of  permanent  prosperity  and
strength.  Such  was  the  Divine  intent  in  regard  to  his  people.  Their  blessedness  was
to  abide.     Thus  in  all  these  and  yet  other  ways  were  they  first.    But —

II.  Thet  became  last.  See  the  terrible  similitude  employed — the  charred  and
shattered  tree.  But  not  more  terrible  than  true.  The  smouldering  ruins,  the  devastated
city,  the  desolate  land,  which  a  few  years  afterwards  the  prophet  looked  upon,  showed
how  true  his  word  had  been.  They  had  become  last  indeed.  Exalted  to  heaven,  they
had  been  thrust  down  to  hell.    None  can  avoid  inquiring^

III.  The  cause  or  all  this.  It  is  declared  to  be  threefold.  1.  The  evil  of  the  people
themsdves.  (Ver.  17.)  Their  persistence  in  idolatry  in  spite  of  all  remonstrance,  warning,
and  every  inducement  which  should  have  withdrawn  them  from  their  sin.  "  Do  not
the  abominable  thing  which  I  hate  "  had  in  every  variety  of  manner  been  said  to  them
by  GKxi,  but  in  vain.  He  hated  it  because  it  was  the  root  of  so  many  other  sins,  and
the  destroyer  of  all  the  good  he  had  purposed  both  for  and  through  them.  2.  Their
evil  returning  upon  themselves,  Ver.  17,  "  The  evil .  .  .  which  they  have  done  against
themselves."  This  is  ever  the  way  of  sin  (Prov.  viii.  36).  It  wrongs  our  entire  nature.
What  a  man  sows  he  reaps.  The  reason  is  debased,  conscience  trampled  on,  the
power  of  will  prostrated,  the  soul  imprisoned,  the  aifections  perverted,  the  imagination
defiled,  the  body  often  diseased,  character  ruined,  substance  wasted,  all  the  true
springs  of  happiness  poisoned  or  stopped.  He  has  sown  to  the  flesh,  and  of  the  flesh  he
has  reaped  corruption.  Yes,  sin  is  ever  done  against  ourselves,  3.  The  woe  which
comes  from  the  provoked  anger  of  God,  Besides  these  natural  results  of  sin — the  reap-
ing which  is  according  to  the  sowing,  and  which  are  terrible  enough  in  themselves —
there  come  the  punitive  inflictions  of  the  wrath  of  God.  History  as  well  as  the  Bible
is  full  of  proofs  of  this  on  a  lar^o  scale,  and  so  are  the  expericuces  of  individual  tnms-
gressors,  though  in  more  limited  form.  And  wherever  sin,  the  primary  cause,  is  found,
there  sooner  or  later  will  come  these  other  causes  which  together  work  so  dread  a
doom.

Conclusion.  What  effect  should  the  contemplation  of  facts  like  these — and  they
are  written  and  wrought  for  our  learning — have  upon  us  ?  Should  they  not  cause  us  to
reject  at  once  and  for  ever  all  those  suggestions  which  Satan  is  ever  plying  us  with —
that  sin  will  not  be  punished,  and  the  transgressor  may,  after  all,  go  free  ?  In  view  of
facts  like  these,  how. can  that  be  believed  ?  And  should  they  not  lead  us  to  offer  as  our
daily  prayer  the  petition,  "  Give  us  a  heart  to  love  and  dread  thee,  and  diligently  to
live  after  thy  commandments"?  And  not  only  to  dread  and  deprecate  the  wrath
which  sin  provokes,  but  to  desire  and  seek  after  that  preoccupation  of  the  heart  with
the  love  of  God  which  will  bar  out  sin.

**  Guard  my  first  springs  of  thought  and  will,
And  with  ayself  my  spirit  fill."

C.

Ver.  17. — Tlie  limits  of  long-suffering  love,  I.  God's  deaxings  with  his  ancient
PEOPLE  WERE  THOSE  OF  LOVE.  That  he  should  have  chosen  them  and  brought  them
into  covenant  with  himself ;  that  he  should  have  taken  such  precautions  to  preserre
them  in  that  covenant.  See  the  time  selected  for  its  establishment  (cf.  ver.  4}^-
when  their  hearts  were  susceptible  and  softened  by  his  great  goodness  to  them,  and
therefore  the  more  ready  to  receive  and  keep  the  impression  of  his  will.  And  how
forbearing  he  had  been  I  For  more  than  a  thousand  years  they  had  been  in
possession  of  the  land,  though  they  had  so  often  sinned.  See,  too,  the  mighty  motives
to  which  he  appeals — fear  of  the  curse  pronounced  on  the  disobedient,  hope  of  the
precious  recompenses  promised  to  such  as  should  obey.  And  he  enlists  conscience  on
his  side.  They  all  said  "  Amen  *'  to  the  covenant  of  God  (ver.  5).  And  perpetually
he  had  been  reminding  them  of  his  covenant  (ver.  7).  All  this — and  it  is  paralleled
by  God's  dealings  with  men  now — proves  the  loving  solicitude  with  which  God
regarded  his  people.

U.  And  THAT  LOVE  WAS  LONG- SUFFERING.  It  was  not  alone  that  he  had  allowed
them  so  long  possession  of  the  land  promised  to  their  fathers,  though  they  had  often


J


308  TUE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,     [cu.  xi.  1—23.


forfeited  it ;  but  now,  not  till  his  forbearance  had  (vers.  8 — 10)  manifestly  failed  in  its
porpose  and  was  being  even  perverted  into  an  occasion  for  fresh  sin,  did  he  *'  change
nis  way"  toward  them.  And  even  then,  many  years'  respite  was  given  in  which
repentance  and  so  forgiveness  and  restoration  were  possible.  And  to  further  this  end
Jeremiah  was  sent  to  them.  And  all  this  is  like  GK)d*s  dealings  still.  Take  the
history  of  ancient  and  of  all  nations  that  have  fallen,  and  the  several  steps  of  Israel's
career  will  be  found  to  have  been  trodden  by  them  also:  a  time  of  great  favour;
disobedience;  warning,  repeated,  earnest,  continued;  respite  even  at  the  last;  sin
persisted  in  notwithstanding  all ;  then  the  long-threatened  destruction.  And  it  is  true
of  families.  Churches,  individuals,  to-day  as  of  old.

III.  But  that  love  had  its  limits.  The  ruin  that  came  upon  Israel,  upon  Judah,
and  has  so  often  come  upon  those  like  them,  proves  this.

IV.  When  these  limits  were  beached,  nothing  could  then  avert  the
THREATENED  PUNISHMENT.  (Cf.  vers.  11 — 17.)  Not :  1.  The  piteous  **cry**  of  distress
(ver.  11).  2.  Still  less  (ver.  12)  any  appeal  to  their  idol-gods.  "  They  shall  not  save
them  (tt  allf^'  no,  although  (ver.  13)  throughout  the  whole  land,  "  in  every  city,"  and
in  every  street  of  every  city  these  idol-gods  had  their  altars,  their  incense,  and  their
worship.  3.  Nor  even  the  acceptable  prayer  of  the  righteous.  (Ver.  14  and  ch.  vii.  16.)
How  dreadful  this  I  4.  Multiplied  sacrifices.  (Ver.  15 ;  cf.  Exposition.)  The  prophet's
meaning,  which  is  quite  obscured  in  our  translation,  seems  to  be  to  protest  against
their  flocking  to  the  house  of  Gk)d,  seeing  how  guilty  they  had  been— it  could  do  them
no  good ;  and  also  against  their  thinking  that  "  the  holy  flesh  "  of  sacrifices  would
turn  away  wrath  from  a  people  who  "  rejoiced  when  they  did  evil."  6.  Nor  the  fact
oipast  privilege  and  favour.  (Ver.  16.^  No,  although  Ghod  had  made  them  as  a  green
olive  tree  (ver.  16).  Himself  "planted  thee,"  yet  he  will  himself  kindle  the  fire  that
shall  rage  and  devour  it.

V.  From  all  which  men  everywhere  are  to  learn  :  1.  To  dread  every  sin.  For
we  cannot  tell  when  and  where  those  limits  of  God's  long-suffering  are  reached.  That
sin  to  which  a  man  is  tempted  may  be  the  overstepping  of  them  so  far  as  he  is
concerned.  If  he  do  that,  the  word  may  go  forth,  "  Let  him  alone  "  (cf.  Rev.  xxii.  11).
We  are  apt  to  think  that  any  time  will  do  to  turn  to  God.  It  will  not.  It  is  not
universally  nor  commonly  true

^<  That  while  the  lamp  holds  out  to  bum,
The  vilest  siuner  may  return."

It  is  untrue ;  for  the  probability  of  a  man  then,  at  the  very  last,  turning  his  heart  to
God,  when  up  till  then  he  has  ever  turned  his  heart  away  from  God,  is  small  indeed.
The  limit  was  passed  when  the  Spirit  of  God  left  him,  aud  that  may  be  long  before
death  comes,  rrobably  death  has  nothing  whatever  to  do  with  it  either  way.  We
should  then  say  to  ourselves,  when  drawn  to  any  sin  against  which  GK)d's  Holy  Spirit
is  protesting  and  pleading,  *'  If  I  disobey  him  now  he  may  leave  me  altogether."  2.
lb  desire  Ood.  The  clearing  of  the  heart  of  sin  is  not  sufficient,  the  heart  must  be
occupied.  The  house  to  which  the  evil  spirit  came  back  bringing  others  worse  than
himself,  was  swept  and  garnished,  but  it  was  "  empty."  So  if  men's  hearts  be  "  swept "
from  ill  deeds,  yet  if  they  be  not  occupied,  evil  will  come  back.  It  is  when  the  love
of  God  possesses  our  heart  that  there  is  no  fear  of  our  even  approaching,  still  less  of
overstepping,  the  limits  of  his  long-suffering  love.  This  is  our  sure,  our  only  safe-
guard.— 0.

Vei*s.  18 — 23. — The  baffled  plot.  These  verses  are  an  episode.  Like  as  the  miracle
of  the  healing  of  her  who  touched  the  hem  of  our  Lord's  garment  was  an  episode  in
connection  with  the  healing  of  the  daughter  of  Jairus  (Mark  v.  21,  etc.),  so  this
account  of  the  plot  against  Jeremiah's  life  comes  in  here,  breaking  the  thread  of  his
discourse,  which  is  not  renewed  again  till  ch.  xii.  7.  Scripture  has  many  instances
of  similar  plots  contrived  against  the  servants  of  the  Lord ;  they  are  found  in  the
histories  of  Joseph,  David,  Nehemiah,  Elisha,  Paul,  of  our  Lord,  and  of  others.  In
this  one,  note —

I.  Its  circumstances.  Jeremiah  had  given  dire  offence  to  the  men  of  Anathoth,
his  own  city,  men  who,  like  himself  probably,  were  associated  with  the  priestly  office.


en.  XI.  1-23.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  300

''Between  the  priesthood  and  the  prophets  there  had  hitherto  been  more  or  less  of
conflict,  but  now  that  conflict  was  exchanged  for  a  fatal  union.  '  A  wonderful  and
horrible  thing  was  committed  in  the  land ;  the  prophets  prophesied  falsely,  and  the
priests  bore  rule  by  their  means;'  and  he  who  by  each  of  his  callings  was  naturally  led
to  sympathize  with  both,  was  the  doomed  antagonist  of  both — victim  of  one  of  the
strongest  passions,  the  hatred  of  priests  against  a  priest  who  attacks  his  own  order,
the  hatred  of  prophets  against  a  prophet  who  ventures  to  have  a  voice  and  will  of  his
own.  His  own  village,  occupied  by  members  of  the  sacred  tribe,  was  for  him  a  nest
of  conspirators  against  his  life.  Of  him  first  in  the  sacred  history  was  the  Baying
literally  fulfilled,  *  A  prophet  hath  no  honour  in  his  own  birthplace '  (*Ev  rf  mn-plZt
ainov,  Luke  iv,  24)  "  f  Stanley).  They  objected  not  so  much  to  his  prophesying,  for
there  were  plenty  of  them  who  did  this,  but  to  his  strenuous  assertion — an  assertion
that  their  own  consciences  assented  to,  that  he  spoke  in  the  Name  of  the  Ix)rd  (ver.
21).  Warnings  so  faithful  but  yet  so  terrible  were  little  liked,  as  they  ever  are  by
those  who  so  much  needed  them.  And  since  they  could  not  silence  him  in  any  other
way,  they  detennined  to  take  away  his  life.  Secretly  and  craftily  they  laid  their  plot.
Jeremiah  had  not  the  least  suspicion  of  it.  "  I  was,"  says  he  (ver.  19),  **  like  a  lamb,"
that  is,  a  pet  or  house  lamb,  such  as  the  Orientals  oft€n  keep  (see  Exposition).  He
went  in  and  out  amongst  his  brethren,  trusting  them,  and  thinking  no  ill,  whilst  all  the
time  this  dark  and  deadly  plot  was  being  devised  against  him.  And  it  would  have
been  successful,  we  can  hardly  doubt,  had  he  not  been  "  warned  of  the  Lord  **  (ver.
18).  The  shock,  the  dread  revulsion  of  feeling,  which  the  tidings  caused  him  is
evident  in  the  almost  unmeasured  grief  and  indignation  which  the  following  verses
express.  His  first  utterance  is  a  cry  for  vengeance  (ver.  20)  on  them,  an  appeal  to  the
rignteous  Qtod  to  uphold  his  cause.  Then  comes  a  denunciation  of  the  Divine  doom
upon  them,  then  an  aggrieved  remonstrance  (ch.  xii.  1)  and  complaint  addressed  to
God  himself  in  view  of  the  prosperity  of  these  ungodly  and  wicked  men,  followed  by
a  fierce  demand  for  revenge  (ch.  xii.  3) ;  all  which  is  replied  to  (ch.  xii.  5)  by  a  sharp
but  loving  rebuke,  a  revelation  of  yet  further  treachery,  and  that  on  the  part,  not  of
mere  acauaintances  and  neighbours,  but  of  his  own  brethren,  the  inmates  of  the  same
home,  children  of  the  same  father ;  and  finally  (ch.  xii.  6)  God,  who  had  already
baffled  their  first  plottings  against  him,  now  puts  him  on  his  guard  against  all  that
they  should  afterwards  devise, bidding  him  "believe  them  not,  though,"  etc.  (ch.  xii.  6).
Of  the  manner  in  which  they  purposed  to  carry  out  their  deadly  scheme,  or  how  GK)d
revealed  to  his  servant  what  was  going  on,  we  are  not  told ;  only  the  above  noted  facts
are  stated.    But  these  are  full  of  interest  and  instruction.    Note,  therefore,  some  of—

II.  The  suggested  lessons.  They  are  such  as  these.  1.  "  Having  the  form  of
godliness  but  denying  the  power  thereof,  means  subjection  to  the  power  of  all  ungod-
liness though  denying  the  form  thereof."  See  these  would-be  murderers  of  the
prophet;  they  were  consecrated  priests.  ,2.  "He  that  keopeth  Israel  shall  neither
slumber  nor  sleep."  The  plotters  against  the  prophet's  life  were  discovered  and
declared  by  him  to  whom  "the  darkness  and  the  light  are  both  alike,"  and  so  his  servant
was  forewarned  and  saved.  Therefore,  "  They  that  trust  in  the  Lord  shall  be,"  etc.
3.  **  The  servant  will  often  have  to  be  as  his  Master,  and  the  disciple  as  his  Lord."
Like  the  Lord  Jesus,  Jeremiah  was  hated  of  his  countrymen  and  brethren  (cf.  Homily
on  ch.  L  1 — 3,  p.  10,  for  more  of  these  resemblances).  Several  of  them  are  recorded  in
these  verses.  The  hatred  felt  towards  him  by  his  countrymen  and  in  his  father's  house.
The  cause  of  that  hatred.  The  deadly  plots  which  were  devised  against  him.  The
innocence  and  gentleness — "  like  a  lamb,"  etc. — which  characterized  the  hated  one.  And
such  fellowship  with  Christ  is  the  law  of  his  service.  4.  "  Resemblance  between  the
Master  and  his  servant  may  be  often  close  but  is  never  complete."  However  natural
Jeremiah's  outburst  of  rage  and  indignation,  we  cannot  help  noticing  how  far  short  in
moral  elevation  he  falls  of  him  who  prayed,  "  Father,  forgive  them,"  etc.,  and  of  the
first  Christian  martyr,  who  was  taught  of  Christ  to  pray,  "Lord,  lay  not  this  sin,"  etc.
The  perfect  Example  is  Christ ;  we  can  "  call  none  good  but  One,"  that  is,  him.  6.
"  Wrongs  that  Qod  will  suficr  against  himself  he  wOl  not  suffer  against  his  people."
Jeremiah  was  avenged  within  a  very  little  time  and  in  ample  manner,  but  the  wrongs
God  had  sufifered  from  the  same  people  he  had  borne  for  centuries,  and  even  then  there
was  a  reserve  of  mercy — he  made  not  "  a  full  end."    6.  "  Let  our  eyes  be  ever  toward


310  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PKOPUEl'  JEREMIAH,    [en.  xi.  1—23.

iho  Lord,  for  he  will  pluck  our  foot  out  of  evtry  not" — Satxm's,  Sin's,  Sorrow's,
Uoubt'tf,  Death's.— C.

Vers.  1 — 12. — The  covenant  with  the  faUurs  hinding  on  the  children.  Here  it  is
necessary  to  go  back  over  all  the  history  of  Israel,  and  consider  the  great  covenant
transactions  between  God  and  his  people.  Such  transactions  wo  find  to  have  been  filled
with  great  solemnity,  so  that  they  might  make  a  deep  mark  in  history.  We  trace  the
beginnings  of  the  great  covenant  in  God's  dealings  with  Abraham.  Indeed,  the  cove-
nant with  Israel  as  a  nation  was  the  necessary  consequence  of  the  covenant  with
Abraham  as  an  individual.  Then,  as  Jeremiah  says  here,  there  was  a  deBnite  inter-
change of  promise  in  the  day  when  Jehovah  brought  Israel  out  of  Eg}"pt.  He  could
then  ask  them  for  an  undertaking  of  obedience  and  separation  from  the  idolatrous  and
impure  heathens.  While  they  were  in  servitude  to  Egypt  and  manifestly  crushed  in
spirit,  it  was  not  possible  to  ask  anything  from  them.  But  when  Jehovah  had
abundantly  proved  his  power,  his  grace,  and  his  nearness,  when  he  took  his  stand  amid
the  freshness  of  glorious  Divine  achievements,  then  the  covenant  appeared,  to  the  gene-
ration to  which  he  proposed  it,  in  all  its  fitness,  as  an  instrument  for  the  attainment
of  further  ends.  The  gracious  purposes  of  this  covenant  are  made  strikingly  apparent
in  the  continuance  of  it  even  after  the  people  had  lapsed  into  their  riotous  gathering
around  the  golden  calf  (Exod.  xxxiv.  10).  But  this  covenant  in  all  its  amplitude,  ana
with  all  the  diflSculties  surrounding  the  observance  of  it,  is  nowhere  set  forth  with
greater  solemnity  and  particularity  than  in  Deut.  xxvii. — xxx.  There  we  find  the  curses
and  the  blessings  detailed  and  illustrated,  and  the  provision  made  that  between  Ebal
and  G^rizim,  in  the  very  midst  as  it  were  of  the  land  of  promise,  the  covenant  should
receive  a  great  national  acceptance.  "  But"  an  Israelite  might  have  said  to  Jeremiah,
-" these  things  happened  so  long  ago"  Men  think  they  can  easily  set  aside  claims  that
rise  out  of  the  distant  past.  In  the  case  of  this  particular  claim,  however,  no  such
rejoinder  was  possible.  In  2  Kings  xxii.  we  read  of  the  discovery  of  the  Book  of
the  Law  in  the  reign  of  Josiah,  and  in  ch.  xxiii.  we  read  of  the  decisive  and  compre-
hensive action  which  Josiah  took  upon  making  the  discovery.  The  description  in  ver.
2  of  how  he  gathered  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  all  the  men  of  Judah  and  the  inhabitants
of  Jerusalem,  priests  and  prophets,  and  small  and  great,  reminds  us  of  the  gathering
long  before,  between  Ebal  and  Gerizim  (Josh.  viii.  35).  All  the  people,  we  are  further
told,  "  stood  to  the  covenant."  Josiah  was  enabled  to  make  a  general  overthrow  of  all
the  external  visible  instruments  of  idolatry,  and  what  is  of  particular  moment  to  be
observed  is  the  keeping  of  the  Passover  as  arising  out  of  this  renewed  covenant  (2
Chron.  xxx  v.  1 — 19).  It  was  like  coming  face  to  face  with  that  great  event  in  the
early  history  of  the  people,  their  deliverance  from  the  iron  furnace.  Thus  when  we
bring  into  one  view  all  these  great  transactions  in  relation  to  the  covenant,  we  see  how
weighty  and  urgent  is  the  message  Jehovah  here  sends  Jeremiah  to  deliver.  His  cove-
nant was  with  a  nation  in  the  whole  duration  of  its  existence.  Each  generation  as  it
died  handed  on  its  land,  its  possessions,  its  national  customs,  but  in  the  midst  of  all  it
had  to  hand  on  this  covenant.  The  land  was  Israel's  only  u|K>n  a  certain  condition.
The  owner  of  a  piece  of  land  may  covenant  with  some  one  that  he  and  his  heirs  and
assigns  shall  have  the  use  of  the  land  in  perpetuity,  on  the  observance  of  certain  con-
ditions. If  these  conditions  are  willingly,  perhaps  eagerly,  accepted,  there  is  no  just
right  to  complain  of  forfeiture  if  the  conditions  are  completely  and  carelessly  set  at
nought.  God's  works,  we  are  made  to  observe,  go  on  to  their  completion  through  the
service  of  many  generations  of  his  creatures.  How  many  generations  of  insects  have
died  in  making  the  beautiful  coral  islands  I  We  amid  our  spiritual  light  and  advantages
are  the  inheritors  of  many  privileges.  We  have  the  use  of  an  estate,  which  has  been
enriched  by  the  toils  and  sufferings,  the  prayers  and  tears,  of  many  ancestors.  But  we
can  inherit  no  privilege,  no  joy,  no  promise,  no  hope,  without  inheriting  the  responsi-
bilities of  a  covenant.  We  may,  indeed,  neglect  the  covenant,  but  surely  it  requires
great  audacity  to  assert  that  we  have  even  the  faintest  pretence  of  right  to  do  it. — Y.

Ver.  14. — Intercession  unavailing,    God  here  forbids  Jeremiah  to  intercede  for  the
people  in  their  sore  trouble.    Similar  expressions  are  found  in  ch.  yii.  16 ;  ziv.  11 ;


ciLXi.  1— 20.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  311


XV.  1.  It  was  evidently  meant  that  the  prophet  should  feel  how  unavailing  all  iuterces-
sion  was.

I.  We  have  here  a  very  painful  exception  to  a  vert  important  rule.  The
rule  is  to  pray,  to  pray  continually,  and  to  pray  with  not  the  least  fervency  and
devotion  when  our  prayers  are  intercessions,  uod  delights  in  the  dependent  and  con-
fiding approaches  of  his  people ;  and  intercession  must  be  specially  a  joy  to  him  because
it  looks  away  from  individual  good,  and  exemplifies  most  effectively  the  loving  of  one's
neighbour  as  one's  self.  Moses,  Job,  Samuel,  Daniel,  are  all  found  interceding  for  trans-
gressors. Hence  the  very  forbidding  here  makes  continual  remembrance  of  the  needs
of  others  all  the  more  a  duty.  We  have  to  pray  for  those  who  lack  the  faith  or  the
disposition  to  pray  for  themselves.  And  especially  we  have  to  bear  in  mind  him  "  who
ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  '*  for  the  spiritually  needy.  It  is  worth  noting  that,
while  God  here  forbids  Jeremiah  to  intercede  for  the  people,  he  is  represented  in  Rom.
xi.  2 — 4  as  reproving  and  enlightening  Elijah  when  he  interceded  against  the  people.
We  must  give  special  pains  to  say  for  sinners  all  that  we  can.  And  in  order  to  do  this,
we  must  be  observant  and  pitiful ;  for  as  a  general  rule  we  have  a  quick  eye  for  faults,
and  become  censorious  by  a  kind  of  second  nature.  It  wonderfully  suits  the  inclina-
tions of  fallen  man  to  be  an  accuser  of  his  brethren.

II.  Why  the  exception  is  here  made.  There  are  two  considerations  here.  1.  The
petition  J  as  to  its  literal  aim,  could  not  be  granted.  It  was  evidently  a  petition  for  the
delivery  of  Judah  and  Jerusalem  from  the  special  calamity  now  so  near.  That  calamity
had  become  necessary.  There  was  no  choice  for  the  people  but  to  drink  the  waters  of
the  full  cup  now  wrung  out  for  them.  God,  in  refusing  to  hear  Jeremiah,  had  really
the  same  end  in  view  as  the  prophet  himself;  but  the  prophet,  in  his  keen  sensitiveness^
wished  the  end  to  come  by  some  less  painful  way  than  through  desolated  Jerusalem.
But  God  knew  that  this  was  the  right  way — just  because  it  was  the  way  of  humili-
ation and  loss,  and  thus,  in  refusing  the  special  supplication  of  the  prophet,  God  was
really  taking  the  best  way  of  answering  it — paradox  though  it  may  seem  to  say  so.  2.
Jeremiah's  own  position  had  to  be  considered.  We  may  conclude  that  it  was  reckoned
one  of  the  distinctions  of  a  prophet  that  he  could  act  as  intercessor.  Jeremiah,  we
know,  was  asked  to  pray  to  God  for  the  people  (ch.  xxxvii.  3 ;  xlii.  2) ;  and  just  at  the
times  when  the  refusal  was  most  emphatic,  the  appeal  for  intercession  may  have  been
most  urgent.  Well,  then,  was  it  that  Jehovah  should,  as  it  were,  stop  the  mouth  of  his
servant  in  his  supplication,  so  that  no  one  could  take  up  a  reproach  and  say,  "  If  thou
wert  indeed  a  prophet,  thy  petition  for  us  would  immediately  avail."  The  honour  of
Jeremiah  as  a  faithful  servant  was  dear  to  his  Divine  Master.  This  b  brought  out  very
clearly  by  the  reference  to  Moses  and  Samuel  in  ch.  xv.  1.  It  was  no  shame  to  him  to
fail  where  Moses  and  Samuel  could  not  have  succeeded.

III.  Observe  what  lay  beyond  the  present  refusal.  Though  all  is  so  stern  and
forbidding  here,  we  look  further  on  in  the  book,  and  there  is  brightness  again.  Ch.
xxix.  1 — 14  is  a  beautiful  contrast  to  the  word  we  have  been  considering.  Desolation
and  exile  were  a  cheap  price  to  pay  for  such  a  restoration  into  favour  as  God  there  pro-
vides. He  has  shut  the  gates  of  mercy  for  a  while ;  but  only  for  a  little  while—seventy
years,  two  generations  of  men  I  The  permanent  command,  only  to  be  set  aside  by  a
special  interference,  is  that  which  says,  '*  Pray  for  the  peace  of  Jerusalem :  they  shall
prosper  that  love  thee  "  (Ps.  cxxii.  6).— Y.

Vers.  16,  17. —  The  fated  olive  tree,  I.  God's  comparison  op  his  people  to  the
OLTVE  tree.  There  would  have  been  force  in  the  comparison  if  applied  to  any
flourishing  and  fruitful  tree,  but  there  was  peculiar  propriety  in  directing  the  thoughts
of  the  people  to  the  olive.  The  olive  was  already  associated  in  sacred  history  with
the  return  of  hope  after  the  Flood,  and  doubtless,  in  the  times  of  Jeremiah,  it  was  one
of  the  most  valuable  of  trees,  as  it  still  is,  for  the  richness  of  its  produce,  and  the
variety  of  ways  in  which  that  produce  meets  the  common  wants  of  men.  The  extwi-
sive  olive- groves,  composed  of  trees  that  reach  no  great  height,  and  unattractive  to  a
mere  casual  glance,  were  yet  more  to  the  people  than  all  the  cedars  of  Lebanon.  And
as  the  people  were  led  to  consider  these  olive  trees,  full  of  vigour,  abounding  in  blossoms,
many  of  which  never  came  to  fruit,  and  yet,  after  all,  left  abundance  of  fruit  behind :
as  they  recollected  all  the  use  of  the  olive,  for  food,  for  light,  for  anointing,  for  soap-


f


312  THE   BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  xi.  1—23-

making; — the  thoughtful  among  them  would  feel  that  God  could  have  employed  no
better  figure  to  suggest  how  full  Israel  was  of  productivity  of  the  most  practical  sort.
Mention  is  made  in  Hosea  (xiv.  6),  as  well  as  here,  of  the  beauty  of  the  olive  tree.  In
one  sense  the  olive  was  not  beautiful.  As  far  as  the  picturesque  was  concerned,  many
trees  excelled  it.  But,  after  all,  the  deepest  beauty,  the  only  beauty  that  will  bear
inspection,  is  that  which  comes  from  pleasant  experiences  and  associations ;  and  those
who  were  rich  in  profits  from  the  labour  of  the  olive  would  see  in  it  a  beauty  absent
from  many  trees  otherwise  more  attractive.  The  olive,  to  one  seeing  it  for  the  first  time,
might  seem  a  tree  of  small  practical  use.  But  experience  proved  that  its  performance
was  great,  and  so  it  became  more  and  more  a  name  of  honour.  And  this  tree,  having
in  it  such  capabilities,  Qod  had  planted.  The  olive  tree  needs  a  special  soil  to  bring  out
all  its  capabilities.  Dr.  Thomson  says,  speaking  of  a  certain  plain  full  of  olive -orchards,
**  The  substratum  of  these  plains  is  chalky  marl,  abounding  in  flint.  ...  In  such  soil
the  tree  flourishes  best,  both  in  the  plains  and  upon  the  mountains.  It  delights  to
insinuate  its  roots  into  the  clefts  of  the  rocks  and  crevices  of  this  flinty  marl ;  and
from  thence  it  draws  its  richest  stores  of  oil.  If  the  overlying  mould  is  so  deep  that
its  roots  cannot  reach  the  rock  beneath,  I  am  told  that  the  tree  languishes,  and  its
berries  are  small  and  sapless.**  And  so  God  planted  his  people,  being  such  as  they
were  in  his  eye,  in  a  land  promised  and  duly  prepared.  Nay,  in  a  certain  sense,  they
were  planted  even  before  they  reached  the  land  of  promise.  They  were  planted  and
became  fruitful  as  soon  as  ever  God  took  them  in  hand,  fruitful  even  amid  the  pains  of
Egypt  and  the  desolations  of  the  wilderness.

il.  The  destruction  of  this  olive  tree.  All  the  wealth  that  came  from  this
olive  tree  was  being  used  for  bad  purposes.  The  fatness  of  the  soil  went  into  the
olive,  but  the  fatness  of  the  olive  did  not  come  back  to  God  in  grateful  and  propor-
tionate service.  Nay,  rather,  it  was  used  against  him ;  and  the  harm  it  did  was  to
some  extent  measurable  by  the  good  it  might  have  done.  The  axe  is  laid,  not  only  at
the  root  of  the  tree  that  brings  forth  no  fruit,  but  also  at  the  root  of  the  tree  that  brings
forth  its  fruit  to  be  used  in  hostility  against  him  who  planted  the  tree.  Israel  might
say,  "  Is  it  not  plain  that  God  favours  us,  for  are  we  not  as  the  green,  fair,  fruitful  olive  ?
Why,  then,  should  we  believe  threatenings  that  seem  contradicted  by  these  signs  of
favour  ?  "  These  were  signs  of  favour  indeed,  but  they  were  also  grounds  of  expecta-
tion. And  when  the  expectation  was  utterly  disappointed,  and  when  the  fruit  of
Jehovah's  gracious  dealings  was  used  to  prop  up  the  abominations  of  idolatry,  it  was
time  for  him  to  work  in  all  the  severity  of  righteous  judgment. — Y.

Vers.  18 — 23. — The  prophet  in  his  otvn  country.  This  jxissage  describes  a  j)eculiai
peril  to  Jeremiah,  and  a  peculiar  peril  to  those  who  conspired  against  him.

L  A  peculiar  peril  to  Jeremiah.  His  life  was  full  of  perils — "  perils  from  his  own
countrymen  '*  in  many  ways,  perils  from  the  palace  with  its  great  men,  from  priests  and
false  prophets,  from  every  devotee  of  idolatry,  from  every  one,  in  short,  whose  vices  and
iniquities  ho  lashed  with  the  scourge  of  his  Heaven-inspired  tongue.  He  would  expect
to  make  enemies  in  these  directions.  But  here  is  peril  from  an  unexpected  source.
He  was  not  at  all  prepared  for  it,  and  when  the  knowledge  of  it  in  all  its  hideous
reality  came  upon  him,  he  was  correspondingly  excited.  Yet,  though  the  peril  was
unexpected,  it  was  by  no  means  to  be  marvelM  at.  As  soon  as  we  look  at  the  position
of  Jeremiah  and  the  consequent  feeling  of  his  kindred,  we  cease  to  wonder.  Much  may
be  said,  and  justly,  of  the  strength  of  natural  affection ;  but  the  selfishness  so  deeply
settled  in  every  human  breast,  and  so  potent,  is  stronger  than  any  tie  of  nature.
Perhaps  a  mother's  love  may  be  trusted  to  stand  out  against  it,  but  Scripture  shows,
in  more  than  one  instance,  to  what  lengths  a  brother's  jealousy  will  go.  Think  of  Cain
and  Abel,  Joseph  and  his  brethren,  Moses  and  Miriam,  and  David  and  his  elder
brethren.  Christ  said  that  "  a  man's  foes  should  be  they  of  his  own  household ;  "  but
this  was  not  a  new  thing.  It  was  but  the  continuing  of  an  old  and  sad  difficulty  in
the  way  of  regenerating  the  world.  If  things  had  gone  as  they  ought  to  have  gone,  it
was  in  the  comparative  retirement  of  Anathoth  that  Jeremiah  should  have  found  some
slight  opportunities  of  rest  in  the  midst  of  his  arduous  public  labours.  That  he  had
some  quiet  place  of  rest  and  of  converse  with  like-minded  spirits  is  very  probable,  but
he  would  find  it  as  Jesus  did.    Jesus,  we  know,  found  his  nearest  approaches  to  homo


CH.  XII.  1—17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.


3ia


life  in  Capernaum  and  Bethany,  and  not  at  all  in  Nazareth.  We  may  surmise  that  he
never  had  as  much  as  one  quiet  day  there  after  his  public  ministry  began.  The  rela*
tiyes  of  Jesus  said  that  he  was  beside  himself,  and  probably  they  feared  that  the
strange  things  he  did  and  the  ever-increasing  hostility  he  provoked  would  bring  sus-
picion on  themselves.  And  so  it  was  very  awkward  for  these  kinsfolk  of  Jeremiah  in
Anathoth.  Every  one  ran  the  risk  of  being  pointed  at  as  brother,  or  uncle,  or  cousin
of  that  madman  the  prophet.  Farther,  this  peril,  being  from  an  unsuspected  source,
went  on  to  its  height  without  suspicion.  The  prophet  puts  his  position  very  touchingly
and  forcibly  by  the  figure  of  the  tame  lamb.  As  the  lamb  goes  along  with  those  to
whose  company  it  has  been  accustomed,  all  unconscious  of  their  slaughtering  designs,
80  the  prophet  meets  his  brethren,  those  with  whom  he  played  as  a  child,  those  whose
faces  were  among  the  first  he  could  remember.  Why  should  he  suspect  them  ?  True,
he  knows  that  far  too  often  brother  has  been  the  sworn  and  relentless  enemy  of
brother ;  but  let  this  be  the  experience  of  others.  He  cannot  believe  it  till  by  actual
taste  he  finds  the  bitterness  in  his  own  cup.  Jeremiah's  experience  stands  here  to
teach  us,  not  to  be  suspicious,  not  to  let  caution  and  wariness  degenerate  into  a  cynical
putting  on  of  armour  against  everybody,  but  to  let  both  our  safety  and  our  peace  of
mind  Be  in  our  nearness  to  God.  The  nearest  of  brother  men  is  too  weak,  too
uncertain,  to  be  made  an  object  of  trust.

II.  There  was  a  peculiak  peril  to  the  conspirators.  Though  there  was  a
danger  where  Jeremiah  never  thought  of  looking,  it  was  precisely  upon  that  danger
that  Jehovah  had  his  observant  eye  (ch.  xvii.  9,  10).  What  the  conspirators  would
reckon  one  of  their  greatest  helps,  namely,  that  the  proposed  victim  did  not  in  the
least  suspect  their  designs,  doubtless  proved  in  the  end  a  very  material  help  to  the
faith  and  endiurancc  of  the  prophet.  Had  not  God  made  a  sure  provision  for  him
where  he  did  not  even  suspect  that  there  was  anything  needing  to  be  provided?  Let
the  wicked  know  this,  that  whatever  they  reckon  to  be  their  peculiar  advantage  will
assuredly  turn  out  to  be  their  peculiar  weakness,  diflSculty,  and,  indeed,  weapon
of  decisive  overthrow.  The  prophet's  kinsfolk  made  the  not  uncommon  blunder  of
thinking  that  they  would  get  rid  of  difficulties  in  g^^tting  rid  of  one  peculiarly  awkward
and  irritating  difficulty  that  lay  close  to  them.  There  is  one  great  difficulty  we  never
can  get  rid  of,  and  that  is  the  omniscience  of  God.  Let  there  be  a  warning,  then,  to
all  those  who  belong  to  the  irarpd  of  a  prophet.  Let  them  be  careful  how  they  set
themselves  against  anything  strange  and  peculiar  in  any  one  belonging  to  them.  Self-
delusion,  of  course,  is  possible,  and  a  man  may  mistake  some  "  Will-o'-the-wisp  "  for
the  steady  prophetic  illumination.  But  he  is  not  likely  to  be  converted  by  threatening
and  repression.  It  is  only  by  Gamaliel's  policy  that  either  impostors  or  victims  of
delusion  can  be  truly  exposed.  The  men  of  Anathoth,  kinsfolk  and  neighbours  alike,
were  not  required  to  believe  in  Jeremiah  on  his  first  appearance,  but  they  were  required
to  wait  and  see  whereto  this  thing  might  grow.  What  a  pity  they  had  not  some
shrewd  and  commanding  (Gamaliel  to  keep  them  in  the  path  of  prudence ! — Y.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  Xn.


"Ver.  1. — Painfully  exercised  by  the  mys-
teries of  the  Divine  government,  the  prophet
opens  his  grief  to  Jehovah.  Bighteooi  art
thou,  etc. ;  rather,  Righteous  wotUdest  thou  &e,
0  Jehovah,  if  I  should  plead  xjoith  thee ;  i.e.
if  I  were  to  bring  a  charge  against  thee,  I
should  be  unable  to  convict  thee  of  injustice
(comp.  Ps.  11.  4 ;  Job  ix.  2).  The  prophet,
however,  cannot  refrain  from  laying  before
Jehovah  a  point  which  seems  to  him  irre-
concilable with  the  Divine  righteousness.
The  rendering,  indeed,  must  be  modified.
7et  let  me  talk  with  thee  of  thy  Ja4gmeiitt


should  rather  be,  yet  will  I  ddxUe  questions
of  right  tcith  thee.  The  questions  remind  us
of  those  of  Job  in  Job  xxi.,  xxiv.  Thus  to
have  been  the  recipient  of  special  Divine
revelations,  and  to  be  in  close  communion
with  God,  gives  no  security  against  the
occasional  ingress  of  doubting  thoughts  and
spiritual  distress.  'NVherefore  are  all  they
happy,  etc.?  rather,  secure.  The  statement
must  be  qualified  by  what  follows.  In  the
general  calamity  the  wicked  still  fare  the
best.

Yer.  2.— Far  firom  their  rdns;  i.e.  from
their  heart  (the  scat  of  strong  impulses  and
desires) ;  comp.  Ps.  zvi.  7 ;  zxvi.  2.


A4


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [cil  xn.  1— 17.


Ycr.  3. — Hact  seen  me,  and  tried ;  rather,
I  me,  aiid  trie$t.  Pnll  them  out.  Perliaps
thii  is  correct,  and  there  is  an  allusion  to
the  figure  of  the  plant  in  vor.  2.  But  the
verb  need  mean  no  more  than  **  separate "
(eomp.  ch.  vi.  2I))-  Prepare  them ;  literally,
eonaecrate  them^  as  victims  for  the  sacrifice.

Ver.  4. — How  long,  etc.?  Tho  verse  is
decided  rather  differently  by  tho  Hebrew
accents.  The  question  should  end  at  wither,
and  the  following  words  nin  on.  Every
flald  should  be  the  whole  field  (i.e.  open
ocrantry).  Tho  connection  has  caused
some  difficulty.  But  drought  is  constantly
deecri))cd  as  a  judgment  (cli.  iii.  3;  v.  24,
25;  xiv.  2 — 7;  xxiii.  10),  and  it  is  a  pro-
phetic doctrine  tliut  the  lower  animals  sutTer
for  the  fault  of  man.  Beoanse  they  said;
rather,  because  they  say.  The  speakerj  are
the  ungodly.  The  subject  of  the  following
verb  is  uncertain.  Some  think  it  is  God ;  but
when  God  is  said  to  *'  see  "  {i.e.  take  notice
of) aiiy thing,  it  is  always  something  actually
existing.  Tho  subject  must,  tlierefore,  be
the  prophet,  of  whom  tho  ungodly  scoffingly
declare.  He  shall  not  see  our  last  end,
because  his  predictions  are  mere  delusions.

Ver.  6. — Jeremiah's  impatience  corrected.
The  expressions  are  evidently  proverbial.
The  opposition  to  tho  prophet  will  reach
a  still  higher  pitch;  and  if  he  is  so  soon
discouraged,  how  will  ho  bear  his  impending
trials?  And  if  in  the  land  of  peace,  etc.?
A  second  figure,  tho  translation  of  which
needs  amending.  If  (^only)  in  a  land  of  peace
ihou  art  confident,  how  wilt  tlwu  do  in  the
pride  of  Jordan  ?  The  "  pride  of  Jordan  "
means  the  thickets  on  its  banks,  which  were
notorious  as  tho  haunts  of  lious  (ch.  xlix.
19 ;  1.  44 ;  Zech.  xi.  3).  *'  Lions*  bones  have
been  found  by  Dr.  Roth  in  the  gravel  of  tho
Jordan.  Lions  are  seldom  or  never  foimd
now  west  of  the  Euphrates,  although  they
occasionally  cross  the  river"  (Rev.  W,
Houghton,  '  Biblo  Educator,'  i.  22).

Ver.  G. — An  example  of  the  "  treachery  "
referred  to  in  ver.  1;  a  conspiracy  against
Jeremiah  in  his  own  family.  Have  called
a  multitude  after  thee;  rather,  have  called
ahmd  after  thee,  as  one  raises  a  hue  and  cry
after  a  thief.

Vers.  7 — 17. — A  separate  prophecy.  The
key  to  it  is  in  2  Kings  xxiv.  1,  2,  where  it
is  related  that,  after  Jehoiakim*s  rebellion
against  Nebuchadnezzar,  **  Jehovah  sent
against  him  bands  of  the  Chaldees,and  bands
of  the  Syrians,  and  bands  of  the  Moabites,  and
bands  of  the  children  of  Ammon,  and  sent
them  against  Judah  to  destroy  it."  The
prophecy  falls  into  two  strophes  or  sections,
vers.  7 — 1 3  and  vers.  14—17.  In  the  firet  we
have  a  complaint  of  tite  desolation  produced
by  the  guerilla  warfare;  in  tho  second,  a
prediction  of  the  captivity  of  the  hoslile


peoples,  not,  however,  without  a  proepeet
of  their  return  home  and  conversion  to
Jehovah.  It  is  evident  enough  that  this
passage  stands  in  no  connection  with  what
precedes.  The  whole  tone  is  that  of  a  de-
scription of  present  scenes  and  not  of  the
future.  Sometimes,  no  doubt,  a  prophet,  in
the  confidence  of  faith,  represents  the  future
as  though  it  were  already  pabt ;  but  there
is  always  something  in  tho  context  to
determine  tho  reference  and  prevent  am-
biguity. Here,  however,  there  is  nothing
to  indicate  that  the  description  relates  to
tho  future ;  and  it  is  followed  by  a  predic-
tion which  presupposes  that  the  preceding
passage  refers  to  the  literal  post.

Ver.  7. — I  have  forsaken  mine  house.  The
"house"  is  here  not  the  temple,  but  the
people  of  Israel,  as  the  parallel  clause  shows
(see  IIos.  viii.  1,  and  comp.  Heb.  iii.  6;
1  Tim.  iii.  15).  Jehovah,  not  the  prophet,
is  evidently  the  speaker.  I  have  left ;
rather,  I  have  cast  away.  Into  the  hand  of
her  enemies.  Tho  Hebrew  is  more  ex-
pressive: "Into  the  palm  of  the  hand."
Ronomi  (*  Nineveh  and  her  Palaces,*  p.  191)
has  an  engraving  from  the  monuments  of
guests  at  a  banquet,  holding  their  drinking-
vessels  in  the  deeply  hollowed  palm  of  their
hand.  So  here  the  people  of  Israel,  in  her
weak,  fainting  state,  needs  only  to  be  held
in  tho  quiet  pressure  of  the  palm  of  the
hand.  Tlio  remark  and  the  illustration  are
due  to  Dr.  Payne  Smith.

Ver.  8. — The  reason  why  Jehovah  has
given  up  his  people.  Israel  (or,  more
strictly,  Judah)  has  proceeded  to  open
hostility  against  his  God.  lie  is  unto  me —
or  rather,  has  become  unto  me — as  a  lion  in  the
forest ;  a  familiar  circumstance  (comp.  on
ver.  5  and  ch.  iv.  7).  Therefore  have  I
hated  it.  "  To  hate  "  is  a  strong  expression
for  the  withdrawal  of  love,  shown  by  the
giving  up  of  Israel  into  the  power  of  his
enemies,  as  Mai.  i.  3  (Keil).

Ver.  9.  —The  first  part  of  this  verse  is  mis-
translated. Instead  of  Mine  heritage  is  unto
mo,  etc.,  it  should  be,  Is  mine  heritage  unto
mc  (i.e.  to  my  sorrow,  a  dativus  ethicus)  a
coloured  bird  of  preyl  Are  birds  of  prey
round  about  heri  Tho  passage  is  difficult,
but  the  following  seems  the  most  plausible
explanation: — Jehovah  is  represented  as
surprised  to  sec  his  chosen  people  a  prey  to
the  heathen  (a  strongly  anthropomorphic
description,  as  if  Jehovah  had  not  antici-
pated that  his  "  givin<(  up  *'  his  people  would
iiave  such  sad  results).  It  seems  to  him
(adopting  human  modes  of  speech)  as  if
Israel  were  "  a  coloured  bird  of  prey,"  the
bright  plumage  of  which  excites  the  ani-
mosity of  its  less  brilliant  comrades,  who
gather  round  it  and  pull  it  to  pieces.  It  is
I  an  allusion  to  the  phenomenon,  well-known


OH.  xu.  1—17.]  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.


315


to  the  ancients  (Tacit.,  *  Ann.,'  vi.  28 ;  Suet,
*  CiBS.,'  81 ;  Plin.,  *  Hiat.  Nat,'  x.  19),  of  birds
gathering  round  and  attacking  a  strange-
looking  bird  appearing  in  their  midst.  The
prophet  might  liave  simply  said  **  a  bird ; "
why  does  he  say  "  a  bird  of  prey  (*ayiO  "  ?
Probably  because  he  has  just  described  the
hostile  attitude  of  Israel  towards  Jehovah
under  the  figure  of  a  lion.  Some  particular,
rare  kind  of  vulture  seems  to  be  intended.
Sennacherib  apparently  uses  a  cognate  word
Cit)  for  the  vulture  ('Taylor  Cylinder,'  iii.
68).  Bochart  and  Gesenius,  following  the
Septuagint,  think  "  hyena,"  and  not  "  bird
of  prey,"  is  the  right  rendering  in  the  first
clause ;  but  Gesenius  does  not  oBfer  any  other
passage  for  the  meaning  he»tia  rapaz.  Come
ye,  assemble  all  the  beasts  of  the  field.  There
is  a  parallel  passage  in  Isa.  Ivi.  9,  where,  as
here,  the  "  beasts  of  the  field  "  (i.e.  the  wild
beasts  of  the  open  country)  are  the  heathen
powers  employed  as  God's  instruments  for
chastising  Israel  (comp.  also  Ezek.  xxxiv.  5,
where  the  same  figure  occurs).  "  The  prophet
adopts  the  strongest  way  of  expressing  that
Israel,  utterly  bereft  of  his  natural  defenders,
lies  at  the  mercy  of  the  great  heathen  em-
pire" (note  on  Isa.  Ivi.  9).  Come  to  deyoor;
rather,  bring  them  to  devour.

Ver.  10. — Another  simpler  and  more  natural
imago,  expressing  the  same  idea,  as  those  in
ver.  9.  The  favourite  way  of  representing
Jehovah's  relation  to  his  people  is  that  of  a
vine-proprietor  to  his  vineyard  (see  on  ch.
ii.  21).  How  would  a  vineyard  be  ruined  if
a  band  of  shepherds  were  to  drive  their  flocks
among  the  tender  vine-shoots  1  The  many
pastors  (or,  shepherds)  are  clearly  Nebuchad-
nezzar and  his  generals  (comp.  ch.  vi.  3).
My  pleasant  portion.  Jehovah  is  the  ^  por-
tion "  of  his  people ;  his  people  and  its  land
are  the  "  portion  "  of  Jehovah  (see  on  ch.  x.
16).  The  epithet  "  pleasant "  expresses  the
emotion  of  the  surprised  speaker.

.  Ver.  11. — Layeth  it  to  heart;  rather,  laid
it  to  heart.  Inconsiderateness  is  repeatedly
spoken  of  as  an  aggravation  of  the  moral
sickness  of  Israel  (Isa.  xlii.  25;  Ivii.  1,  11).
Ver.  12. — Upon  all  high  places  through  the
wilderness ;  rather,  wpon  all  bare  heights  in
the  foUdemess  (see  on  ch.  iii.  2).  Hardly  with
a  reference  to  their  pollution  by  idolatry;  the
mention  of  "the  wilderness"  (or  posture-
country)  suggests  that  it  is  merely  a  feature
in  the  impoverishment  of  the  country  (a


contrast  to  Isa.  xlix.  9).  The  sword  of  Hm
Lord  shall  devour ;  rather,  the  Lord  kiUh  a
sword  which  devoureth.  It  is  the  heavenly
sword  (Isa.  xxxiv.  5),  the  symbol  of  Divine
vengeance  (see  below  on  ch.  xlvi.  5).

Ver.  13. — A  description  in  proverbial  lan-
guage of  the  absence  of  "  peace  "  (literally,
soundness^  i.e.  prosperity,  security),  from
which  "all  flesh"  in  Judah  at  this  time  shall
sufier.  The  trouble  of  sowing  has  been  in
vain,  for  they  have  reaped  thorns  (so  we  must
render  grammatically,  and  not  shall  reap,
and  in  the  next  clause  shall  not  profit  ought
to  be  have  not  profited).  And  they  shall  be
ashamed  of  your  revenues ;  rather,  be  €uhamed
then  of  your  produce  ;  but  it  is  more  natural
to  emend  the  pronominal  suffix,  and  render,
and  are  ashamed  of  their  produce  (the
Authorized  Version  seems  to  have  very
nearly  taken  this  easy  step).  It  is.  of
course,  the  produce  of  husbandry  which  is
referred  to.

Ver.  14. — Here  occurs  a  transition.  The
prophet  comes  forward  with  a  denunciation
in  the  name  of  Jehovah.  All  mine  evil
neighonrs;  the  hostile  peoples  mentioned
in  2  Kings  xxiv.  "  My  neighbours,"  because
Jehovah  "dwelleth  in  Zion."  Flook  them
out  of  their  land ;  viz.  by  deportation  into  a
foreign  land.  Judah  and  the  neighbouring
nations  shall  share  the  same  fate.  This  is
indicated  by  the  use  of  the  same  verb  "  to
pluck  out "  in  the  next  clause  with  reference
to  Judah  (comp.  1  Kings  xiv.  15,  Hebrew).
In  the  case  of  Judah,  however,  to  be  "plucked
out"  is  a  mercy  as  well  as  a  judgment,  con-
sidering who  they  are  **out  of"  whose
"midst "  the  Jews  are  " plucked."

Ver.  15. — I  will  return,  and  have  eom-
passion.  The  rendering  is  too  Hebraistic;
the  sense  is  simply,  1  wiU  again  have  eoa^
passion.    The  prophets  ofifur  no  partial  or

nationalistic"  view;  of  the  mercy  of  QoA
(comp.  on  ch.  xlviii.  47).

Ver.  16. — Israel  has  been  converted  and
restored,  and  if  the  other  nations  follow  his
example  and  swear  by  my  name,  t.e.  adopt
the  religion  of  Jehovah  (comp.  Isa.  xix.  18),
they  shall  be  rewarded  by  being  sufiered  to
dwell  safely  in  Israel's  midst.  Observe  the
contrast  with  ver.  14.  Before,  Israel  had
dwelt  amidst  them  to  his  own  detriment;
now  they  shall  dwell  amidst  Israel  to  their
profit.


I   ((


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1,  2,— The  prosperity  of  (he  wicked.  I.  The  difficulty.  The  prosperity  of
the  wicked  was  a  difficulty  of  peculiar  force  to  the  Jews,  since  it  seemed  to  contradict
an  item  of  their  peculiar  faith — the  doctrine  of  temporal  rewards  and  punishments.
The  difficulty  is  less  to  us  Christians ;  but  it  is  idle  to  deny  its  existence.  It  is  three-
fold.    1.  Th€  success  of  wickedness.    The  treacherous  plans  of  the  wicked  often  succeed.


31(5  THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  JEREMIAH,     [ch.  xu.  1—17.

Their  violent  actions  are  often  unchecked  and  produce  fatal  results.  How  is  it  that
these  evil  things  are  not  frustrated  before  they  ripen  to  perfection  ?  That  wicked  nien
should  plot  evil,  should  attempt  evil,  we  can  imagine ;  but  that  they  should  be  allowed
to  carry  it  out— often  only  because  many  accidents  are  favourable — this  is  hard  to
understand.  "Wherefore  doth  the  way  of  the  wicked  prosper?"  2.  The  secuniy  of
the  wicked.  After  they  had  succeeded  we  should  expect  that  they  would  discover  the
vanity  of  their  most  prosperous  efforts.  But  they  not  only  attain  their  objects.  They
find  these  to  be  satisfactory,  and  are  able  to  enjoy  them  with  calm  self-complacency.
Here  is  the  greater  mystery :  after  completing  their  bad  deeds  the  wicked  are  left  in
undisturbed  enjoyment  of  the  fruits  of  them.  "  Wherefore  are  all  th(;y  secure  that
deal  very  treacherously?"  3.  The  Divine  blessing  apparently  enjoyed  by  the  wicked.
Not  only  does  their  own  work  succeed,  but  Providence^  bestows  favours  upon  them.
Outside  events  of  life  over  which  they  have  no  control  minister  to  their  prosperity.
Here  is  the  greatest  element  of  the  difficulty.  God  has  planted  them,  and  they  enjoy
fruitfulncss  through  his  help.

II.  The  way  to  treat  the  difficulty.  1.  Face  it,  Jeremiah  bqjdly  confronted
his  troublesome  thoughts.  People  often  try  to  hush  up  their  doubts.  The  result  is
that  a  subtle  spirit  of  scepticism  spreads  unconsciously  through  all  their  ideas,  and  its
disintegrating  influence  undermines  all  solid  faith.  Suppressed  doubt  is  fatal  to  sin-
cerity. It  begets  indifference  to  truth.  We  cannot  hold  firmly  the  truths  we  know
till  we  distinctly  separate  these  from  those  we  doubt.  The  suppression  of  doubt  is
cowardly.  Doubt  can  only  be  conquered  by  being  boldly  confronted.  2.  Do  not
charge  God  foolishly.  Jeremiah  did  not  accuse  the  justice  of  God.  We  are  dim-
sighted  and  weak  in  our  judgment.  Much  of  this  great  world  must  be  a  mystery  to
us.  We  must  not  assume  that,  because  we  cannot  justify  the  ways  of  God,  they  admit
of  no  justification.  It  is  foolish  as  well  as  rebellious  to  presume  to  be  the  judge  of
God.  3.  Bring  the  difficulty  to  Ood,  Doubt  should  drive  us  to  prayer.  God  only
can  enlighten  our  darkness.  God  graciously  permits  his  children  to  plead  and  debate
with  him  (Isa.  i.  18).  Doubt  is  not  necessarily  a  result  of  any  misconduct.  But,  how-
ever it  arises,  it  is  best  to  confess  it  to  God.

III.  The  directions  in  which  to  look  for  a  solution  of  the  difficulty.  1,  The
righteousness  of  God.  Jeremiah  sees  the  difficulty,  but  it  does  not  drive  him  from  faith
in  the  justice  of  God.  Religion  makes  constant  demands  on  faith — the  personal  faith
of  trust  in  the  character  of  God  where  appearances  are  against  what  we  believe  that
character  to  be.  Confidence  in  the  unwavering  righteousness  of  God  will  help  us  to
look  for  certain  indications  of  a  solution  of  the  difficulty  occasioned  by  the  prosperity
of  the  wicked.  Right  must  and  will  be  cTone,  and  if  it  is  not  yet  accomplished  it  will
be  ultimately.  From  the  character  of  God  we  may  thus  reason  to  his  certain  action
fGen.  xviii.  25).  2.  Hence  we  have  an  argument  in  favour  of  future  rectifcation.
Jeremiah  expects  it  to  come  even  in  this  life,  though  it  is  long  deferred  (ver.  3).
The  Christian  looks  for  it  in  the  great  judgment,  and  the  fruits  of  this  in  the  life  to
come.  3.  The  difficulty  may  be  lessened  even  for  the  present  by  the  reflection  that
material  prosperity  is  not  real  prosperity.  It  may  be  well  for  a  good  man  to  suffer.
Prosperity  may  be  an  evil.  True  welfare  consists  not  in  success,  not  in  security  from
calamity,  but  in  inward  peace,  in  progress  in  the  Divine  life.

Ver.  2  (last  clause). — Ood  near  to  the  mouth  but  far  from  the  life,  I.  It  is  possible
to  have  the  Name  of  God  on  oub  lips  while  the  thought  of  God  is  absent  fbom
OUE  MINDS.  This  is  the  case  with  mere  formal  worshippers,  who  use  the  language  of
devotion  without  realizing  to  themselves  its  meaning.  The  danger  of  it  besets  us  all.
Words  come  to  be  handled  like  coins,  without  any  distinct  recognition  of  what  they
represent.  This  applies  especially  to  words  which  refer  to  God,  since  it  requires  a  high
act  of  abstraction  to  keep  constantly  before  us  the  ideas  of  the  unseen  Object  of  such
language.  Understand  that  these  empty  words  are  worse  than  wasted  breath ;  they  are
a  mockery  to  God,  a  deception  to  men,  and  a  source  of  self-delusion  to  the  speaker  of
them.

II.  It  is  possible  to  have  the  Name  op  God  on  our  lips  while  the  love  of  (Jod
IS  ABSENT  fbom  OUR  HEARTS.  We  may  not  fall  into  the  first  mistake.  The  language
may  not  be  empty  words.    The  thought  of  God  may  be  present.    Yet  this  may  be  a


en.  xu.  1— 17J     THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  317

mere  thought — a  cold  and  barren  idea,  having  no  influence  on  our  affections.  This
religion  of  wonis  and  notions  is  a  vain  thing.  Indeed,  it  is  not  a  religion  at  all ;  it  is
only  a  theology.  Religion  does  not  begin  till  the  heart  opens  to  receive  God.  It
consists  not  in  the  intellectual  recognition  of  God,  but  in  the  love  of  God  (Deut.  x.  12).

III.  It  is  possible  to  have  the  Name  of  Qod  on  our  lips  while  the  power  of
God  is  absent  from  our  consciences.  God  may  be  spoken  of,  thought  of,  approached
with  a  certain  affection,  though  not  the  true  love  of  our  hearts,  and  yet  be  practically
disregarded.  His  will  may  still  be  of  no  account  to  us.  We  may  still  not  make  our
lives  subservient  to  his  Law.  There  is  then  no  evidence  of  God  in  our  conduct.  Though
our  thought  may  be  religious,  our  life  is  godless.

IV.  It  is  possible  to  have  the  Name  of  God  on  our  lips  while  the  Spirit  op
God  is  absent  from  our  spirits.  The  deepest  fact  of  religion  is  the  indwelling  of  the
Spirit  of  God — the  real  presence  of  (Jod.  God  inhabits  the  soul  as  a  temple.  We  may
have  much  religiousness  without  this.  The  Name  of  God  may  be  inscribed  on  the
portals  of  the  temple  while  the  shrine  is  empty  of  his  presence.

V.  It  is  possible  to  have  the  Name  of  God  upon  our  lips  and  to  be  very
wicked.  If  the  Name  be  only  on  our  lips,  this  is  no  sign  of  moral  and  spiritual  good-
ness. The  wicked  contemporaries  of  Jeremiah  were  many  of  them  religious  precision-
ists ;  yet  their  moral  guilt  was  none  the  less  for  all  their  language  of  devotion.

VI.  It  is  possible  to  have  the  Name  of  God  on  oub  lips  and  to  suffer  ultimate
ruin.  Formalism  and  hypocrisy  may  prosper  for  a  time.  Those  men  who  had  the
Name  of  Grod  on  their  lips  were  the  wicked  who  prospered  (ver.  1).  Yet  they  were
doomed  to  ultimate  punishment.  It  is  important  to  remember  this  constantly,  since
we  are  too  ready  to  be  deceived  by  professions  and  appearances.

Ver.  6. — A  dark  prospect.  If  Jeremiah  was  ready  to  despair  when  he  discovered  the
conspiracy  of  the  men  of  Anathoth,  how  would  he  bear  the  news  of  the  treachery  of  his
own  brethren  ?  His  condition  under  the  lesser  trouble  made  the  prospect  of  greater
trouble  most  alarming.  The  Divine  admonition  which  such  a.  situation  showed  him
to  need  may  be  of  value  to  others  who  may  be  repeating  the  experience  of  the  prophet.

I.  Despair  under  lesser  trouble  makes  the  anticipation  op  greater  trouble
A  DARK  prospect.  1.  Greater  trouble  may  reasonably  be  expected,  God  usually  pre-
pares us  for  the  endurance  of  trials  by  sending  them  by  degrees,  and  reserving  the
more  severe  till  we  have  been  trained  to  the  endurance  of  milder  ones.  Few  men  can
say  that  they  have  drunk  the  cup  of  sorrow  to  the  dregs,  and  none  can  know  what
bitter  drops  may  yet  be  in  store  for  them.  2.  The  advent  of  greater  trouble  is  not
itself  an  alarming  fact.  Trouble  is  fearful  only  in  proportion  as  it  strikes  fear  into
us.  If  we  are  prepared  to  meet  it  we  need  have  no  terror.  Gtxi  can  give  strength  equal
to  our  requirement,  and  for  the  sterner  trial  the  more  abundant  support.  The  man's
trouble  is  greater  than  the  child's,  but  so  is  the  man's  strength.  3.  The  one  cause  of
alarm  is  in  our  weakness.  If  this  is  revealed  before  slight  tests,  it  must  be  much
worse  when  the  strain  is  harder.  The  important  point  is  not  that  after  enduring  the
foot-race  we  shall  fail  in  contending  with  the  chariots,  but  that,  failing  in  the  one  trial,
we  may  expect  only  failure  in  the  other.

II.  The  prospect  of  greater  trouble  should  help  us  to  bear  the  lesser.  Some
of  us  are  too  ready  to  "  give  way  "  at  once.  But  there  is  more  power  of  endurance  in
all  of  us  than  we  are  ready  to  acknowledge  to  ourselves.  After  the  latest  wrench  of
the  rack  we  cry  out  that  we  can  bear  no  more ;  yet  another  and  still  another  turn  is
given,  and  we  do  bear  it.  The  prospect  of  this  possibility  should  make  us  husband
our  strength.  The  very  sight  of  danger  may  be  a  stimulus  to  courage  by  inspiring  a
heroic  spirit.  Life  is  generally  pitched  in  too  low  a  key,  and  thus  men  whine  under
slight  smarts  and  shrink  before  mean  difficulties.  If  the  same  men  saw  more  impera-
tive calls  to  energy  and  endurance,  they  would  rouse  themselves  and  call  up  latent
powers  which  as  yet  lie  slumbering  unheeded.

III.  Failure  before  lesser  trouble  should  lead  us  to  seek  better  means  for
THE  ENDURANCE  OF  THE  GREATER.  1.  It  is  more  important  that  we  should  be  able  to
bear  the  greater  trouble.  This  is  a  more  serious  matter,  and  defeat  under  it  involves  a
more  overwhelming  disaster.  Therefore  it  is  exceedingly  needful  to  learn  the  lesson  of
our  weakness  before  this  has  brought  us  into  a  more  terrible  condition  of  distress.


818  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch,  xn.  1— 17.

2.  It  is  also  more  difficult  to  endure  the  severer  strain.  The  strength  which  is  barelj
sufficient  for  the  cares  and  toils  of  a  quiet  home  life  will  fail  utterly  if  a  man  has  to
contend  with  lions  in  the  wild  thickets  of  the  lonely  Jordan  valley.  If  health  breaks
down  before  the  soft  breezes  of  summer,  how  will  it  stand  before  the  frost  and  fog  of
winter  ?  If  the  young  man  falls  into  vicious  habits  while  under  the  protection  of  his
father's  home,  what  will  become  of  him  when  he  goes  out  into  the  world?  If  the
prospect  of  sickness  and  earthly  sorrow  fill  one  with  hopeless  distress,  how  will  he  pass
through  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death?  how  will  he  endure  death  itself?  3.
These  questions  should  not  make  us  despondent,  but  should  drive  us  through  self-
diffidence  to  seek  the  help  of  God.  Failure  in  small  things  will  be  good  for  us  if  it
teaches  us  a  wholesome  lesson  on  our  own  weakness,  and  so  inclines  us  to  torn  to  a
higher  source  of  safety.  Then  we  shall  find  that  Gkxi's  strength  is  made  perfect  in  our
weakness  (2  Cor.  xii.  9).

Ver.  7. —  The  forsaken  heritage.  I.  God  regahds  hib  peoplb  as  his  herttaoe.
The  temple  was  God's  house,  the  Jews  were  God's  heritage.  The  Church  is  now  the
habitation  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  her  members  are  God's  possession.  This  fact
implies:  1.  That  God  dwells  with  his  people.  2.  That  he  takes  delight  in  them.
8.  That  he  may  be  expected  to  protect  them  from  harm.  4.  That  he  has  rights
over  them  and  claims  their  submission  to  himself.  5.  That  his  honour  is  concerned
with  his  people's  conduct,  so  that  their  wickedness  is  not  a  matter  of  indifference  to
him,  but  is  an  insult  to  his  Name.

II.  God  may  forsake  his  heritaoh.  God's  people  have  no  such  "  vested  interests  *'
that  nothing  can  destroy  their  claims  upon  him.  The  present  enjoyment  of  God's
favour  is  no  guarantee  that  this  will  be  perixitual.  1.  History  shows  that  God  has
forsaken  his  heritage  in  the  past ;  e.g.  the  Jews,  ancient  Christian  Churches  of  Asia  and
Africa,  individual  Christians  who  have  fallen  from  the  faith.  2.  It  is  reasonable  to
expect  that  he  will  do  this  when  honour  and  righteousness  require  it.  Let  us,  there-
fore, not  presume  on  the  favour  of  God.

III.  God  only  forsakes  his  heritage  when  that  has  become  corrupt.  God
never  leaves  his  people  till  they  leave  him.  He  is  not  changeable,  capricious,  arbitrar^'
in  his  favours.  His  love  never  wanes,  his  grace  never  fails,  his  help  and  blessings  arc
never  limited.  The  change  begins  on  man's  side.  It  is  found  in  rebellion  against  Gh>d.
1.  In  self-will.  The  heritage  becomes  like  a  lion  of  the  forest — i.e.  no  longer  tame,  but
swayed  by  its  own  wild  passions.  2.  In  evil-^oing.  The  lion  is  fierce  and  destructive
— *  beast  of  prey.    3.  In  direct  opposition  to  Qod.    The  lion  "  cries  out  against  '*  God.

IV.  God's  heritage  is  in  a  terrible  condition  when  it  is  forsaken  by  him.
Birds  and  beasts  of  prey  come  up  to  devour  the  heritage.  1.  It  needs  no  positive  act
of  God's  to  bring  desolation  on  his  sinful  people.  If  he  but  withdraw  his  protection,
the  natural  evils  of  the  world  and  the  special  evils  which  they  have  provoked  will  be
enough  to  bring  ruin  on  their  heads.  2,  Gt)d's  people  will  suffer  in  an  especial  way  by
the  withdrawal  of  the  Divine  presence.  The  heritage  is  "  like  a  speckled  bird."  It  is
strange,  and  so  it  draws  upon  itself  opposition.  The  Jews  were  a  mark  for  the  enmity
of  the  heathen  through  the  singularity  of  their  national  customs.  Christians  are  often
singled  out  for  opposition  from  the  world  for  similar  reasons.  If  they  have  lost  their
peculiar  protection,  their  peculiar  position  and  nature  will  invoke  a  peculiar  ruin.

Ver.  13. — Profitless  labour,  I.  Punishment  will  consist  in  part  in  the  profit-
LE88NE8S  OF  LABOUR.  This  will  perhaps  be  the  special  punishment  of  industrious  bad
people.  To  them  it  will  be  peculiarly  painful,  for  in  proportion  to  the  zest  and  eamest-
nws  with  which  any  work  is  carried  on  will  be  the  bitterness  of  disappointment  when
this  is  seen  to  fail.  Thus  the  victorious  general  is  punished  by  being  robbed  of  his
conquests,  the  statesman  by  having  his  political  schemes  frustrated,  the  inventor  by
finding  his  invention  superseded  or  rendered  futile,  the  literary  man  by  seeing  his  pro-
ductions treated  with  neglect.

II.  Labour  may  be  good  in  itbelp  and  yet  profitless.  It  need  not  be  mis-
taken in  direction  nor  incompetent  in  execution.  1.  It  may  be  real  sowing,  "  They
have  sown" — have  not  simply  run  uncertainly  nor  beaten  the  air  with  indefinite


CH.  xn.  1—17.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEBEMIAH.  319

energy.    2.  It  may  be  the  sowing  of  good  seed,    "  They  have  sown  wheat."    3.  It
may  be  assiduous  and  arduous,    "  They  have  put  themselves  to  pain."

III.  Labour  will  be  profitless  if  it  be  cursed  by  God.  "  They  are  ashamed
of  their  increase  because  of  the  fierce  anger  of  Jehovah."  1.  We  cannot  succeed  in
our  work  vnihout  the  blessing  of  Ood,  This  is  necessary,  not  only  for  those  things  in
which  we  can  do  nothing  and  are  wholly  dependent  on  him,  but  also  in  regard  to  our
own  efforts.  Man  sows,  but  God  must  give  the  increase.  We  cannot  order  the  seasons,
command  the  weather,  determine  the  germinating  power  of  nature.  The  farmer  is  but
the  attendant  of  nature.  The  real  work  of  the  farm  is  done  by  nature,  and  nature
is  a  name  we  give  to  the  action  of  Gtxl.  If,  therefore,  God  did  not  follow  with  his
work,  the  farmer  might  as  well  scatter  sand  of  the  desert  over  his  fields  as  sow
good  wheat.  So  also  all  our  labour  depends  on  God's  blessing  for  its  fruitfulness.
2.  The  curse  of  Ood  will  destroy  the  fruits  of  labour.  Tremendous  destructive
agencies  are  in  his  hands.  He  can  send  frost  to  nip  the  tender  buds,  drought  to
wither  the  growing  plant,  blight  to  destroy  the  filling  ears,  storms  to  beat  down  the
ripe  corn.  Sickness,  commercial  disaster,  wars,  etc.,  may  frustrate  the  wisest,  ablest,
most  industrious  efibrts  of  men.  Therefore  let  us  learn  (1)  to  live  so  that  we  dare
ask  for  Gbd's  favour ;  (2)  to  labour  at  such  work  as  God  will  approve ;  and  (3)  to  sedc
the  blessing  of  GK>d  upon  our  efforts  (Ps.  xc.  17).

Vers.  14 — 17.— (7cneraZ  punishment  and  general  restoration.  I.  Punishment  is
GENERAL.  It  is  not  sclectivo,  it  is  impartially  administered.  1.  The  people  of  Ood  do
not  escape.  If  the  Christian  falls  into  sin,  the  Law  of  GxkI  must  be  vindicated  on  him
at  least  as  rigorously  as  on  the  worldly  man.  Judah  had  shared  the  sins  of  her  neigh-
bours ;  she  must  also  share  their  punishment.  If  sin  is  general,  so  must  be  its  penal-
ties. No  religious  position  which  does  not  secure  us  against  wickedness  will  protect
us  against  its  consequences.  2.  The  godless  do  not  escape.  The  heathen  nations  are  to
suffer  with  Judah.  Though  they  were  sometimes  the  instruments  in  the  hands  of  Qtod
for  the  chastisement  of  Judah,  they  were  not  on  that  account  exonerated  from  blame
for  the  bad  motives  of  their  conduct.  The  sin  of  others  is  no  excuse  for  us  in  wronging
them.  The  executioner  of  the  law  is  himself  subject  to  the  law.  They  who  do  not
admit  the  authority  of  God  are  not  the  less  subject  to  his  authority.  Men  who  refuse
to  submit  to  the  Law  of  God  will  be  judged  by  that  Law  as  certainly  as  those  who  have
freely  gone  imder  its  yoke.  It  is  not  for  us  to  choose  our  government  in  spiritual
things,  but  to  submit  to  the  one  righteous  government  which  God  has  set  over  ail  men.
In  the  execution  of  this  it  will  be  found  that  all  men  have  sufBcient  light  to  render
them  accountable  for  their  actions,  though  the  degree  of  their  responsibility  will  yary
with  the  degree  of  their  knowledge.

II.  Restoration  is  general.  This  is  offered  to  the  heathen  nations  as  well  as  to
Judah.  As  general  punishment  must  follow  general  sin,  so  general  restoration  will
follow  general  repentance.  Here,  too,  God  is  impartial.  1.  This  restoration  is  not
the  less  perfect  for  each  individual  by  being  general.  '*  Every  man  "  is  to  come  and
each  to  his  "  own  land  **  and  his  '^  own  heritage."  There  are  men  who  seem  to  fear
the  broadening  of  the  mercies  of  Grod,  lest  they  should  become  less  valuable  to  each
recipient,  and  so  they  would  jealously  narrow  them  to  protect  their  full  privileges  for
a  few.  Such  ideas  are  not  only  basely  selfish — since  the  holders  of  them  quietly
assume  that  they  are  among  the  few — they  are  dishonouring  to  the  grace  of  God,  which
is  exceeding  abundant,  with  enough  for  all  who  need  it.  2.  The  general  character  of
the  restoration  is  its  most  happy  feature.  It  will  mean  the  abolition  of  war,  rivalry,
jealousy,  separation,  and  the  enjoyment  of  peace  and  brotherhood,  the  realization  of  the
glory  of  the  unity  of  the  race  through  harmony  in  the  unity  of  faith.  "  Then  shall
they  be  built  in  the  midst  of  my  people."  Thus  through  the  great  restoration,  i.e.
through  the  perfected  redemption  in  Christ,  wo  may  look  for  the  fulfilment  of  the  great
ideal  human  brotherhood.  3.  The  conditions  of  this  restoration  are  the  same  for  all,
viz.  (I)  the  compassion  of  God,  and  (2)  repentance  and  amendment.  They  who  taught
Judah  to  serve  Baal  must  learn  with  Judah  to  follow  the  true  religion.  But  if  this
condition  is  not  fulfilled,  the  restoration  can  never  be  enjoyed.


S20  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  xii.  1—17.


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1 — 4. — Moral  difficulties  with  the  providence  of  Ood,  The  tone  of  this  address
to  Jehovah  is  strikingly  contrasted  with  tnat  to  the  men  of  Anathoth.  To  them  he
is  as  a  lion  or  a  brazen  wall.  To  Jehovah  he  is  as  a  fretful  child,  ignorant,  wilful,
perverse,  and  requiring  to  be  corrected.

I.  The  prosperity  of  the  wicked  a  stumbling-block  to  faith.  (Vers.  1,  2.)
David  even  is  envious  over  this,  and  many  a  saint  has  felt  its  bitterness  in  his  soul.
That  there  are  instances  enough  to  make  the  idea  plausible  that  wickedness  is  the  best
policy,  we  all  know.  The  difficulties  that  beset  the  honest  trader  or  the  conscientious
ooortier  and  statesman  are  proverbial.  And  often  just  those  measures  which  are  most
clearly  condemned  by  Scripture  and  conscience  appear  to  be  the  means  most  justified  by
the  circumstances  of  the  case.  This  view,  however,  is  corrected  by  larger  experience.
It  does  not  take  all  the  fiicts  within  its  scope,  or  it  does  not  rightly  interpret  them.  It
\b  impossible  for  a  mere  outsider  to  judge  of  any  one's  actual  happiness,  or  the  private
conditions  which  most  powerfully  afifect  the  possession  and  enjoyment  of  wealth  or
high  position.  The  teachings  of  history  and  of  individual  exi^erienco  will  in  the  end
lefui  to  the  conclusion,  "  Better  is  little  with  the  fear  of  the  Lord  than  great  treasure
and  trouble  therewith  "  (Prov.  xv.  16).

II.  The  impulse  to  force  Jehovah's  hand.  (Ver.  3).  This  is  the  meaning  of
Jeremiah's  imprecation.  To  one  who  sees  by  supernatural  aid  the  tendencies  of
things,  it  must  be  very  hard  to  refrain  from  this.  Judgments  that  are  justified  to  the
moral  nature  sometimes  appear  to  be  mysteriously  delayed.  What  would  be  well
done  had  better  be  done  quickly.  But  this  is  the  presumption  of  the  creature,  the
promptings  of  ignorance  and  not  of  faith.  God  can  afford  to  wait.  It  is  his  character
to  have  long  patience,  and  the  results  more  than  justify  this  in  the  end.  He  will
work  out  his  purposes  in  his  own  way  and  in  his  own  time,  notwithstanding  the
impatience  of  his  servants  inquiring,  "  What  or  what  manner  of  time  ?  "  There  is  a
species  of  tempting  Providence  closely  connected  with  this  in  many  spiritual  men.
They  have  the  clearest  conviction  that  certain  things  arc  right  and  proper  for  them
to  ao,  and,  without  consulting  as  to  seasonableness  or  the  best  means  for  their
accomplishment,  they  hasten  to  do  them,  and  then  expect  that  God  will  recoup
them  for  the  loss  they  incur  or  extricate  them  from  the  difficulties  in  which  they  have
entangled  themselves.  This  certainly  is  not  waiting  upon  the  Lord,  but  an  arrogant
assumption  of  his  prerogatives.  It  was  the  principle  that  lay  at  the  root  of  Moses'
great  transgression;  and  even  the  disciples  had  to  be  rebuked  because  they  knew
not  what  spirit  they  were  of.

III.  The  tone  of  the  prophet's  prater.  Superficially  it  appears  reasonable,  con-
sidering the  character  and  position  of  those  to  whom  he  refers.  And  there  is  at  any
rate  a  l()rmal  recognition  of  the  righteousness  of  God  to  begin  with.  It  is  evident,  too,
that  the  couKcience  of  the  prophet  is  without  offence  in  the  night  of  God,  and  yet  there
can  be  no  doubt  that  the  language  he  adopts  is  not  to  be  justified.  He  is  carried  away
by  excess  of  zeal,  but  it  is  zeal  without  knowledge,  and  he  himself  will  be  the  first
bitterly  to  regret  his  presumption.  It  is  a  perilous  thing  for  any  man  to  attempt  to
judge  his  fellows  by  infallible  standards.  One  thing  in  the  behaviour  of  the  prophet
was  to  be  commended.  He  did  not  conceal  these  thoughts  within  himself.  He  says,
"  Let  me  talk  with  thee,"  conscious  that  in  this  openness  of  soul  lay  his  moral  safety.
A' few  minutes'  honest  communion  with  God  will  tap  many  a  festering  sore  and  correct
many  a  subtle  error  of  spirit  and  life.  The  last  lesson  of  Divine  revelation  is  not
severity  but  love. — M.

Vers.  5,  6. — A  prophet's  foes  they  of  his  own  household.  These  two  verses  are  related,
and  must  be  read  together  in  order  to  get  at  their  proper  sense.  The  prophet  had
complained  of  the  treachery  and  prosperous  circumstances  of  the  enemies  of  Jehovah ;
whereupon  he  was  told  that  worse  things  were  in  store  for  him — that  his  own  family
would  be  his  fiercest  opponents.  This  was  in  a  degree  the  lot  of  Christ ;  it  is  experi-
enced by  many  of  the  true  servants  of  God.

I.  The  Word  of  God  is  not  according  to  the  will  or  the  flesh,  and  there-


CU.XU.  1— 17.]    THE   BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  321


FORE  MAY    BE  EXPECTED    TO   EXCITE   HATRED    AND    OPPOSITION   WHERE    THAT    ASSERTS
ITSELF.

II.  The  servant  of  God  will  often  be  tried  by  the  failure  and  defection  op

HIS  MOST  cherished  FRIENDS.

III.  It  behoves  all  who  are  entrusted  with  Divine  truth  to  ask  themselves

WHAT  IS  the  ground  OF  THEIR  CONFIDENCE. — M.

Vers.  7,  8. — Leaving  all  for  Qod,  (Naegelsbach  is  of  opinion  that  the  words  of
vers.  7 — 13  "are  to  be  understood  as  having  a  double  reference,"  i.e,  both  to  the
prophet's  own  feelings  and  to  Jehovah's  judgment.  Zwingli  and  Bugenhagen  consider
that  Jehovah  begins  to  speak  at  "  Go "  or  "  Come,"  in  ver.  9.  There  is  evidently  an
intimate  blendiug  of  the  prophetic  with  the  Divine  consciousness  throughout  the
whole  passage.)  A  hard  duty,  but  one  often  devolving  upon  faithful  servants  of
Jehovah.  Indeed,  spiritually,  it  is  the  first  condition  of  disciplcship  imposed  by
Chiist.  Only  thus  can  the  soul  preserve  its  equipoise  and  integrity  in  what  may  be
required  of  it.    The  Master  will  brook  no  rival.

I.  The  REASONS  for  such  a  sacrifice.  It  is  possible  that  for  one  with  the  keen,
affectionate  nature  of  Jeremiah,  much  intercourse  with  his  family  and  friends  would
have  interfered  with  the  performance  of  his  duty.  He  was  appointed  to  discharge  an
anomalous  function,  for  which  the  greatest  concentration  of  energy  and  spirit  was
required.  Even  though  he  had  to  weep  as  he  spoke  the  words  that  God  had  com-
manded him,  he  must  speak.  His  duty  to  the  nation  overshadowed  or  pushed  into  the
background  the  claims  of  friends.  So  the  follower  of  Christ  may  be  subjected  to
discipline  in  providence,  or  to  voluntary  self-deprivation  of  a  like  kind  by  the  demands
of  spiritual  work.  And  it  behoves  all  who  labour  in  the  cause  of  truth  to  hold  them-
selves spiritually  detached  from  those  things  and  relations  which  might  impede  true
usefulness.

II.  Keen  personal  sorrow  is  frequently  occasioned  by  it.  That  it  was  a  real
trial  to  Jeremiah  there  can  be  no  doubt ;  and  probably  the  special  discovery  made  to
liim  (ch.  xi.  18  seq,^)  was  intended  to  facilitate  the  transfer  of  attachment  to  Jehovah.
The  endearing  terms — "  mine  house,"  "  mine  heritage,"  "  the  dearly  beloved  of  my
soul,"  and  tbe  manner  in  which  he  repeats  the  history  of  his  estrangement,  prove  how
deeply  the  trial  had  affected  him.

III.  Thereby  is  tested  the  loyalty  of  the  saint  to  God.  In  a  question  between
one's  friends  and  Jehovah,  the  settlement  ought  not  to  be  doubtful  to  the  mind  of  the
saint.  The  reasons  for  withdrawal  from  entangling  relations  may  not  immediately
appear,  but  the  believer  can  with  confidence  leave  them  in  the  hands  of  God,  by  whom
they  will  in  due  time  be  revealed.  There  is  a  danger  in  the  midst  of  ordinary  human
relations  that  Jehovah  shall  be  considered  simply  as  an  addition  to  our  obligations,
instead  of  being  the  supreme  and  all-modifying  influence  of  our  life.  In  proportion  to
the  severity  of  the  experience  will  be  the  consolations  to  be  received. — M,

Vers.  14 — 17. — Mercy  and  judgment  In  these  verses  we  have  one  of  the  "  larger
words  "  which  make  the  whole  world's  testament  of  salvation  and  life.  The  threatenings
are  stem  and  will  be  executed  to  the  letter ;  but  the  promises  seem  to  transcend  the
immediate  occasion.  A  gate  of  hope  and  redemption  was  herein  opened  to  multitudes
who  at  that  date  were  not  included  in  the  covenant  of  Israel.  The  conditions  upon
which  their  possible  comprehension  within  the  future  Israel  is  based  are  moral  and
spiritual,  and  therefore  truly  universal.

I.  Thb  greatest  judgments  op  God  upon  the  neighbours  of  Israel  but
corresponded  with  their  ^crimes.  That  grave  evils  were  inflicted  upon  the  enemies
of  Israel  cannot  be  denied.  Multitudes  were  put  to  a  painful  death.  Nations  were
uprooted,  and  human  life  appeared  to  be  looked  upon  as  an  insignificant  thing.  In
judging  of  this,  however,  it  must  be  remembered  that  they  had  done  and  were  ready
to  do  similar  things  to  Israel  and  Judah.  The  moral  platform,  too,  upon  which  they
lived  has  to  be  considered.  Ages  of  depravity  and  barbarism,  upon  which  higher
appeals  would  have  been  utterly  lost,  had  to  be  imaginatively  impressed  and  overawed.
And  there  were  not  wanting  testimonies  of  conscience  amongst  the  enemies  of  Israel
tlicmselvos  to  justify  this  course.    But—

jerrmiah.  t


322  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PKOPHET  JEREMIAH.    tcH.m.1— 17.

II.  Even  in  being  punished  por  the  sake  op  Israel,  tiieiii  destiny  was  LiKnao
WITH  HERS.  If  at  first  their  lot  would  appear  to  be  hard  and  inconceivably  hopeless,
yet  in  the  end  there  can  be  no  question  that  they  were  gainers  by  the  association.
In  common  life,  with  those  whom  they  subdued  they  received  manifold  advantages,
especially  of  a  spiritual  kind,  and  the  choice  was  set  before  them  of  good  as  well  as
evil.  On  the  principle,  therefore,  that  it  is  better  for  one  to  suffer  even  severely  at  firet
if  afterwards  he  may  retrieve  his  position  and  attain  to  a  higher  and  more  desirable  one
through  the  initial  discipline,  it  was  better  for  these  nations  to  be  brought  to  book  in
this  way  for  Israel's  sake.  Enemies  to  begin  with,  they  might,  and  in  many  cases  did,
become  friends  and  fellow-heirs  of  the  promise.

III.  Apparent  leniency  towards  Israel  is  justified  by  ulterior  purposes  of
UNIVERSAL  blessing.  As  Compared  with  her  neighbours,  it  might  appear  as  if  one
measure  were  meted  out  to  her  and  another  to  them.  But  this  is  only  contemporary
aqd  relative.  The  punishment  inflicted  has  to  be  estimated  by  the  spiritual  deprivations
which  accompanied  it.  The  deferring  of  Israel's  hope  must  have  been  a  keener  sorrow
than  any  mere  temporal  reverse.  It  must  be  remembered  that  through  Israel,  the  seed
of  Abraham,  all  nations  were  to  be  blessed.  To  avert  from  Ler  utter  extinction  was
indirectly  to  ensure  the  greater  benefit  to  the  future.  But  that  to  bo  made  to  cease  as
a  nation  from  tho  face  of  the  earth  would  have  been  relatively  less  uainfal  than  many
of  the  dispensations  through  which  she  had  to  pass,  cannot  but  be  allowed.

IV.  In  the  midst  op  deserved  judgment  the  free  mercy  of  God  is  the  more
CONSPICUOUS.  How  unlocked  for  this  promise  concerning  the  future  of  Israel's  enemies !
Tlie  silver  thread  of  hope  traverses  tho  dark  labyrinth  of  judgment.  It  is  only  tho
wisdom  of  infinite  Love  that  could  so  disentangle  spiritual  jx)ssibilities  from  such
stupendous  and  widespread  ruin.  How  glorious  the  mercy  which  can  so  assert  itself!
The  only  phrase  that  can  describe  the  phenomenon  is  ** grace  has  reigned,**  Tho
individual  sinner,  in  the  midst  of  his  deserved  miseries,  may  take  comfort  from  this.
However  great  tne  wretchedness  and  ruin  which  he  has  brought  upon  himself,  and
however  long  continued  his  alienation  from  God,  if  he  but  turn  now  from  his  wicked-
ness, a  way  of  escape  will  bo  opened  up  for  him  through  the  sacrifice  of  Christ. — M.

Ver.  1. — Perplexing  questions,  "  Wherefore  doth  the  way  of  the  wicked  prosper?"
etc.    Unquestionably  tney  very  often  do.     Some  of  the  reasons  are —

I.  They  are  more  shrewd.  *'  Tho  children  of  this  generation  are  wiser  than  the
children  of  light."  They  give  more  heed  to  the  laws  of  success,  are  more  alert  to  seize
opportunities  and  to  guard  against  those  men  and  things  which  would  work  them  harm.
No  amount  of  piety  will  compensate  for  inattention  to  the  laws  of  success.

II.  They  are  less  scrupulous.  Where  success  is  thus  won  by  some  seemingly
short  cut  which  a  godly  man  hesitates  to  take,  it  will  not  seldom  be  found,  after  a  while,
that  the  api)arently  long  way  round  of  the  righteous  was  yet  the  nearest  because  tho
truest  road.     But  meanwhile  the  ungodly  appear  to  have  the  best  of  it.

III.  Their  attention  is  more  concentrated  and  undivided.  The  godly  man
cannot  say  in  regard  to  the  pursuit  of  this  world's  goods,  "  This  one  thing  I  do ; "  but
the  ungodly  can.  Whilst "  not  slothful  in  business,"  the  Christian  has  also  to  "  serve  the
Lord."  Whilst  a  citizen  of  this  world,  he  is  also  a  citizen  of  another  country,  even  a
heavenly  one,  and  by  his  faith  ho  has  avowed  that  he  seeks  that  country.  His  attention
most  therefore  be  divided,  as  his  who  sows  only  to  the  flesh  is  not.

rV.  The  lono-sufferino  of  God.  Tho  ungodly  are  his  children,  though  ungrateful
ones,  and  the  heavenly  Father  would  woo  and  win  them  back.  Therefore  in  all  gentle-
ness he  deals  with  them,  making  his  sun  to  shine  and  his  rain  to  descend  on  them  as
on  his  faithful  children.     The  long-suffering  of  God  is  to  lead  to  repentance.

V.  To  test,  improve,  and  declare  the  faith  of  the  oodly.  If  righteousness
were  a  royal  road  to  riches,  and  faith  infallibly  led  to  fortune,  where  would  be  the  room
for  trust  in  God  ?  how  would  such  trust  be  tested  and  deepened,  and  how  would  it  ever
be  made  manifest  ?  The  devil  would  have  had  reason  for  his  taunt  concerning  Job,
'*  Doth  Job  serve  God  for  nought  ?  "  But  that  there  may  be  such  men  as  Job,  heroes  of
the  faith,  pure,  noble.  God-fearing  souls,  saints  indeed,  Gkxi  does  at  times  let  such  men
serve  him  for  nought  so  far  as  this  world  is  concerned,  and  hands  over  this  world's
wages  to  the  devil,  that  he  may  with  them  bribe,  as  he  in  vain  sought  to  bribe  our


CH.  XII.  1—17.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  323

Lord,  those  who  will  "  fall  down  and  worship  him."  But  that  these  questions  may  not
perplex  us,  let  us  live  day  by  day  in  view  of  the  unseen  and  eternal,  walking  with  God,
holding  communion  with  him;  so  shall  our  estimates  of  this  world's  prosperity  bo
corrected,  and  we  shall  be  able  to  behold  with  calmness  the  allotment  of  that  prosperity
to  the  ungodly  rather  than  to  ourselves. — C.

Ver.  3. — Imprecatory  prayers,  "Pull  them  out  like  sheep,"  etc.  There  are  many
of  these.  Some  of  them,  like  this  one,  are  very  terrible  (of.  Ps.  cix. ;  cxxxvii.  9,  etc.).
How  are  they  to  be  understood  ?  how  justified  ?  Of  what  use  arc  they  to  us  now  ?
Questions  like  these  cannot  but  be  started  in  reading  such  prayers.  The  diOiculty  of
them  has  been  felt  by  almost  every  Christian  and  even  humane  reader.  To  get  rid  of
such  difl&culty^

I.  Some  have  bpibitualized  them.  The  slaughter  work  which  they  call  for  is  to
be  done,  not  on  human  bodies,  but  on  human  wickednesses,  those  inward  and  deadly  foes
which  are  so  many  and  which  hate  us  with  cruel  hatred.  But  whilst  it  is  quite  lawful
to  so  make  use  of  these  petitions,  it  cannot  be  said  that  this  is  what  they  who  first
prayed  them  meant.

II.  Others  have  tried  to  turn  them  simply  into  pnopnETic  predictions — ^mere
announcements  of  what  God  would  do.  But  such  alteration  would  never  have  been
thought  of  but  for  the  moral  difidculty  of  letting  them  stand  as  they  are.  And  the
alteration  is  not  permissible.

HI.  Others,  very  many,  have  explained  them  on  the  ground  op  the  imperfect
spiritual  condition  of  God's  ancient  people.  **  They  knew,"  it  is  said,  "  no  better.
True,  their  prayers  are  wrono:,  unchristian,  cniel,  but  they  are  to  be  excused  because  of
the  dim  light,  the  very  partial  knowledge,  of  those  days."  But,  in  reply,  it  is  clear
that  they  were  not  ignorant ;  they  had  plain  laws  against  revenge  (cf.  Lev.  xix.  8 ;
Exod.  xxiii.  4, 5).  And  hence  St.  Paul,  when  arguing  against  revenge,  cites  the  Old
Testament,  as  in  Rom.  xii.  19,  20,  quoting  from  Deut.  xxxii.  35  and  Prov.  xxv.  21  (cf.
also  Prov.  xx.  22 ;  xxiv.  17).  And  Job  (xxxi.)  emphatically  disavows  both  the  act
and  thought  of  revenge ;  and  so  David  (Ps.  viL  4, 5).  And  see  David's  conduct  in  regard
to  Saul  twice.  See,  too,  his  gratitude  to  Abigail  for  holding  him  back  from  revenge
(1  Sam.  XXV.).  And  they  had  numerous  laws  enjoining  mercy  (cf.  also  Balaam's
speech,  given  in  Micab,  "  What  doth  the  Lord  require  of  thee,  but  to  do  justly,  and  to
love  mercy"  etc.  ?).

IV  Others  have  said  that  such  revengeful  utterances  are  but  the  huuan
element  in  the  Old  Testament  writers — that  they  were  not  inspired  when  they
thus  speak.  But  David  claims  inspiration  (2  Sam.  xxiii.  1,  2).  And  the  apostles  claim
it  for  him  ;  and  with  especial  reference  to  the  hundred  and  ninth  psalm,  one  of  the  most
notable  of  these  utterances  (Acts  i.  16).  And  they  were  composed  for  the  temple  service
as  acts  of  worship.  Hengstenberg  says  of  them, "  They  were  from  the  first  destined  for
use  in  the  sanctuary.  The  sacred  authors  come  forth  under  the  full  consciousness  of
being  interpreters  of  the  spiritual  feelings  of  the  community,  organs  of  God  for  the
ennobling  of  their  feelings.  They  give  back  what  in  the  holiest  and  purest  hours  of
their  life  had  been  given  to  them."  Henco  we  are  compelled  to  regard  these  utterances
as  being  only —

V.  That  which  it  would  be  right  for  a  oood  man,  placed  in  the  likb  cib-
CUMSTANCES,  BOTH  TO  FEEL  AND  UTTER.  Let  it  be  remembered :  1.  They  knew  nothing
or  but  little  of  the  great  day  of  future  judgment  as  we  do.  2.  The  judgments  implicated
are  all  temporal.  It  can  never  be  right  to  pray  for  the  eternal  damnation  of  any  soul,
and  this  they  never  do.  3.  Many  of  the  expressions  are  poetical.  4.  These  desires  for
the  overthrow  of  their  enemies  were :  (1)  Natural,  Resentment  against  wrong,  anger
on  account  of  it,  and  desire  that  it  may  be  punished,  are  implanted  in  us.  Let  us  but
place  ourselves  in  their  position.  How  did  we  feel  in  the  time,  e.g.,  of  the  Indian
Mutiny  ?  (2)  Necessary,  In  those  fierce  days  a  stem  and  fierce  spirit  was  needed  if  any
people  were  to  hold  their  own  at  all  (cf.  Isaac  Taylor,  on  *  Spirit  of  the  Hebrew  Poetry').
(3)  Based  on  the  eternal  truth  of  God's  retributive  justice.  God  had  declared  by  word
and  deed  this  attribute  of  his.  Gould  it,  then,  be  wrong  that  they  should  call  on  him
to  show  himself  what  he  had  declared  himself  to  be  ?  (4)  Le/i  to  Qod  to  carry  out.
"  Unto  God,"  says  Jeremiah,  "  have  I  revealed  [or,  •  committed  Q  my  cause.  (5)  And  in


M


324  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [cu.  xii.  1—17.


the  New  Testament  we  Jiave  some  similar  utterances.  (Cf.  Matt,  xxiii.  11.)  (6)  And  we
ourselves  in  war — which  we  all  allow  to  be  at  times  lawful — act  on  these  very  principles,
and  do  for  ourselves  what  the  Old  Testament  saiuts  only  besought  God  to  do.  Hence
conclude  that,  in  like  circumstances  and  for  similar  reasons,  such  prayers  as  these  are
not  evil.  What  the  New  Testament  condemns  is  revenge  for  private  jxjrsonal  injuries,
for  persecution  when  sufifered  for  the  gospel's  sake ;  but  not  war  for  defensive  purposes,
and  therefore  not  the  stern  spirit  which  is  essential  to  war.  And  one  practical  lesson
from  all  such  utterances  is  that  they  reflect  what  exists  in  God — a  determined  and
fierce  hatred  against  wickedness — and  therefore  they  awaken  a  salutary  fear  of  that
yengeance  and  an  earnest  desire  to  "  flee  from  the  wrath  to  come." — C.

Ver.  Sn'^Failure  in  little  things,  "  If  thou  hast  run  with  the  footmen,"  etc.  ?  The
prophet  of  God  was  weary  hearted.  Like  Job,  like  the  writer  of  the  thirty-seventh
pBalm,  like  John  the  Baptist,  he  was  sore  perplexed  at  God*s  dealings.  The  wicked
proBpered,the  righteous  were  cast  down.  Hence  he  sadly  asks,  "  Wherefore  doth,"  etc.?
(ver.  1).  Now,  God  answers  such  questionings  as  these  in  different  ways.  Sometimes
by  showing  his  servant  the  true  state  of  the  ungodly,  making  him  "  to  understand  their
end."  Sometimes  by  revealing  to  the  righteous  tne  vast  superiority  of  their  portion
over  that  of  the  ungodly.  Sometimes  by  gently  soothing  the  ruffled  spirit.  At  other
times,  as  here,  by  rousing  rebuke  and  sharp  remonstrance,  bidding  him  bethink  himself,
if  he  broke  down  under  these  comparatively  small  trials,  how  would  he  bear  up  when
much  more  terrible  ones  had  to  be  endured?  If  running  with  "footmen"  was  too  much
for  him,  then  how  would  ho  *'  contend  "  with  the  swift  *'  horses  "  ?  If  ho  could  feel
secure  only  in  a  quiet  land  (see  Exix)sition),  how  would  he  do  in  a  region  full  of  peril
like  that  of  the  jungle-land,  the  lair  of  the  lion  and  other  fierce  beasts  of  prey,  which
stretched  along  the  banks  of  the  Jordan  ?  Greater  trials  were  to  come  to  him  than  ho
had  as  yet  known ;  how  would  he  meet  them  if  he  failed  in  the  presence  of  these  lessci
ones?    Now,  in  applying  tiie  principle  here  laid  down,  note—

I.  God  puts  upon  us  first  that  which  is  less,  and  afterwards  that  which  is
GREATER.  In  all  departments  of  life.  1.  Our  physical  powers  are  taxed  first  lightly,
afterwards  more  heavily.  2.  So  oxxr  mental  potvers ;  the  easy  lessons  first,  then  those
that  are  more  difiicult.  3.  So  with  our  moral  life  ;  temptation  comes  "  as  we  are  able
to  bear  it."  4.  So  in  htisiness  life ;  the  lesser  responsibilities  and  duties  first.  5.  And
so  in  the  spiritual  life;  God  does  not  expect  from  the  young  beginner  that  which  the
veteran  in  his  service  can  alone  render.

II.  And  the  less  is  to  prepare  us  for  the  greater.  Childhood  is  to  prepare  for
youth,  that  for  manhood,  and  all  our  life  here  for  our  everlasting  life  yonder.    But-^

III.  Failure  in  that  which  is  less  carries  with  it  failure  in  that  which  is
gbeateb  also.  This  is  the  law  implied  by  the  question  of  ver.  5.  And  it  is  a  uni-
versal law.  Therefore  we  may  ask  this  question,  "  If  thou  hast  run,"  etc.  ?  1,  Of
^uch  as  are  uncible  to  hear  the  lesser  trials  of  life.  What  unmanly  complaining  we
often  hear,  though  in  the  presence  of  sorrows  compared  with  which  their  own  are  as
nothing!  If  they  fail  here  and  now,  what  will  they  do  there  and  then  ?  2.  Q/*  such  as
find  a  little  prosperity  do  them  harm.  This  is  the  reason  why  many  are  kept  poor.
Gbd  sees  that  they  would  be  puffed  up,  spiritually  injured  in  many  ways,  if  worldly
prosperity  were  granted  them;  and  hence  he  keeps  it  away.  A  little  was  given,  as  if
•to  teist  them,  but  they  could  not  bear  it ;  and  hence  in  God's  love  they  were  not  tried
again.  3,  0/  such  as  fall  he/ore  slight  temptation.  If  conscience  is  set  aside  and
trampled  on  in  lesser  matters,  it  will  be  served  no  better  in  such  as  are  greater.  4.  Of
9uch  as  are  looking  for  a  more  convenient  season  than  vow  to  yield  themselves  to  Ood.
Will  the  opposition  of  your  own  heart,  of  the  world  around  you,  of  the  power  which
habit  has  over  you,  become  less?  But  if  you  yield  thereto  now,  how  will  it  be  when
all  these  have  become,  as  they  will,  more  powerful  still  ?

IV.  But  the  reverse  of  this  law  is  true  also.  Victory  over  the  less  will  lead  to
victory  over  the  greater.  By  the  successful  mnning  with  the  footmen  we  shall  be  pre-
pared for  the  severer  contest  with  horses.  Hence  little  trials  borne  well  prophesy  our
bearing  well  such  as  may  be  greater,  should  God  please  to  send  them.  And  if,  when
entrusted  with  but  a  few  things,  we  are  found  faithful  in  them,  the  Lord  whom  we
serve  is  likely  to  make  us  "  ruler  over  many  things."   The  lesser  temptation  resolutely


r\


en.  XII.  1—17.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  323

withstood  prepares  for  withstanding  the  greater  when  it  comes ;  and  the  overleaping  of
the  frail  barriers  that  now  may  oppose  our  self-surrender  to  Christ  ensures  that  notMng
at  any  future  time  shall  be  able  to  keep  us  back  from  him,  nothing  shall  "  separate  us
from  the  love  of  Christ."— C.

Vers.  7 — 13.— 2%c  hiding  of  Ood's/ace.  Here  is  a  most  terrible  condition  of  things
set  forth.  It  may  be  taken  as  telling  of  the  calamities  which  ensue  when  God  hides
his  face  from  his  people.    It  is  terrible  every  way.    Because—

I.  Op  him  by  whom  his  face  is  hidden.  It  is  God,  We  feel  such  conduct  from
our  fellow-men  according  to  our  estimate  of  the  person  who  manifests  it.  Now,  all
these  facts  which  make  the  hiding  of  his  face  grievous  to  us  meet  in  God — righteous-
ness, goodness,  wisdom,  power.  Were  he  devoid  of  these,  could  we  question  the
existence  of  any  of  them  in  him,  we  could  bear  with  more  equanimity  his  hiding  his
face  from  us.

n.  Of  those  fbom  whom  his  face  is  hidden.  Had  they  been  enemies  all  along,  it
would  have  been  taken  as  a  matter  of  course ;  that  he  should  have  regarded  them  with
favour  would  never  have  been  expected.  Or  had  they  been  strangers  and  aliens  to  him,
then,  too,  his  favour  would  not  have  been  looked  for.  Or  had  that  favour  never  been
known  or  enjoyed,  then  its  absence  would  not  have  been  felt,  nothing  that  they  had
been  accustomed  to  would  have  been  missed.  But  the  reverse  of  all  this  is  the  truth.
They  had  been  counted  by  him  as  friends,  as  dear  children,  as  precious  in  his  sight ;
and  he  had  been  wont  to  cause  his  face  to  shine  upon  them.  See  the  endearing  epitnets
by  which  he  describes  them.  He  had  counted  them  as  "  the  dearly  beloved  of  his  soul"
(ver.  7),  "  his  portion,"  "  his  pleasant  portion,"  etc.  (vers.  8—10).  How  dark,  there-
fore,, must  be  the  frown  of  God  to  such !  how  intolerable  to  them  his  displeasure  I

III.  Op  that  which  accompanied  the  hiding  of  his  pace.  There  is  withdrawal :
1.  From  the  sanctuary,  "  I  have  forsaken  mine  house."  The  customary  services  went
on,  but  the  glow,  the  unction,  the  power  of  them  had  departed.  The  place  where  liis
honour  dwelt,  the  dearly  beloved  of  his  soul,  was  forsaken  by  him.  2.  From  the  people.
His  heritage  was  no  longer  pleasant  to  him  ;  he  delighted  not  to  dwell  amongst  them.
All  that  joy,  strength,  prosperity,  which  belonged  to  them  when  God  was  amongst
them  had  departed.  3.  From  the  land,  "  The  whole  land  is  made  desolate."  In  the
outward  circumstances  and  surroundings  of  the  people  the  effect  of  God's  hiding  his
face  from  them  became  terribly  manifest.  And  there  has  come  a  terrible  revulsion  of
feeling  on  the  part  of  God  towards  them  (see  vers.  8,  9).  And  not  only  his  mind,  but
his  hand,  his  providence,  is  awfully  changed  towards  them.  He  calls  on  their  enemies
to  come  (ver.  9).  And  they  come  (ver.  12).  And  the  ruin  is  complete :  "  The  sword
of  the  Lord  shall  devour  from  the  one  end  of  the  land  even  to  the  other"  (ver.  12),  All
their  own  plans — their  sowing  of  wheat  (ver.  13) — for  their  own  good  are  miserably
defeated,  they  "reap  thorns."  Thus  the  inward  displeasure  of  God  manifests  itself
oftentimes  in  the  outward  circumstances  of  a  man  or  nation.

IV.  Op  that  on  account  of  which  God's  pace  is  hidden.  It  was  *'  because  no
man  layeth  it  to  heart "  (ver.  11).  The  lesser  judgments  of  God,  his  repeated  warnings,
had  been  disregarded — ^hearing  they  heard  not,  seeing  they  saw  not ;  and  hence  all  this.
Had  the  cause  of  their  woe  been  their  misfortune,  the  result  of  mistake,  or  ignorance,
or  lack  of  timely  counsel,  then  there  would  have  been  some  element  of  consolation
amid  all  they  had  to  suffer.  But  to  add  to  their  distress  was  the  ever-present  reflection,
•'  It  was  all  our  own  fault ;  we  brought  it  all  on  ourselves."  With  what  intense  hatred,
therefore,  should  we  look  upon  all  that  grieves  the  Spirit  of  God!  and  with  what
earnest  haste  should  we  endeavour  to  return  unto  GK)d,  if  we  have  wandered  from  him!
These  miseries  which  beset  those  from  whom  Gk>d  hides  his  face  are  his  loving  scourgings
whereby  we  may  be  led  to  say,  "  I  will  arise  and  go  to  my  Father,  and  will  say  unto
him.  Father,  I  have  sinned,"  etc.— C.

Ver.  9. — The  speckled  bird,  A  great  preacher  relates  the  following  incident :— He
says,  **  I  had  during  my  early  ministry  to  preach  one  evening  at  a  neighbouring  village,
to  which  I  had  to  walk.  After  reading  and  meditating  all  day,  I  could  not  meet  with
the  right  text.  Do  what  I  would,  no  response  came  from  the  sacred  oracle,  no  light
flashed  from  the  Urim  and  Thummim.   I  prayed,  I  meditated,  I  turned  from  one  verse


92S  THE   BOOK  OF  THE  PBOPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch- xil  1— 17.

to  mooiber ;  bfoi  the  mind  woiild  eu>I  take  hoM,  or  I  was,  as  John  Banjaa  would  «,jr,
'  maeb  tambled  up  aoti  down  in  my  thocghu^'  J(i5t  ihea  I  walked  to  ibe  winded
and  looked  oat.  On  the  other  side  of  the  narrow  street  in  which  I  lired  I  saw  a  poor,
foiitarj  canary  bird  up^on  the  slates,  surrounded  by  a  crowd  of  sparrowa,  who  were  all
pecking  at  it  a*  if  tacy  would  tear  it  to  pieces.  At  that  moment  the  v«se  came  into
mty  BUAd, '  Mine  heritage  is  unto  me  as  a  speckled  bird;  the  birds  round  about  are  against
huJ  I  walked  ofif  with  the  greatest  poseiUe  composure,  considered  the  pMsage  during
my  long  and  lonely  walk,  and  preached  upon  the  peculiar  people  aod  the  penecotioDs
oC  their  enemies,  with  freedom  and  ease  to  myself,  and  I  beliere  with  comfort  to  m j
rustic  audience.  The  text  was  sent  to  me,  and  if  the  ravens  did  not  bring  it,  certainly
the  narrows  did.**  But  while  the  use  here  made  of  the  text  is  a  legitimate  one,  it
OMtainly  is  not  its  meaning.  That,  tiierefore,  as  in  all  cases,  has  the  priority  of  clidm
to  hs  considered,  and  we  note  how  it  tells—

L  Of  what  mat  be  the  relatios  of  God's  heritage  to  HmsELF.  He  who  had
once  so  loved  them  as  to  call  them  by  all  endearing  names,  '*  the  dearly  beloved  of
my  soul  "  (ver.  7),  "  mine  heritage  "  (ver.  8),  "  my  portion,"  "  my  pleasant  portioQ  "
(ter.  10),  and  whose  hand  had  been  wont  to  follow  the  dictates  of  his  heart,  bad  now
conpleteiy  changed  towar^is  them.  His  love  had  departed,  and  in  place  thereof  hid
come  aversion  and  anger  (cf.  Uomily  on  vers.  7 — 13).  Sad  as  it  is,  this  similitude  shows
what  may  come  to  be  the  relation  between  God  and  his  people.  "  Therefore  have  I
hmted  it*^  (ver.  8),  saith  God.  We  cannot  but  inquire  the  came  of  so  terrible  a  change.
It  was  because  "  no  man  layeth  it  to  heart"  (ver.  11) ;  no  man,  i.e.  would  give  heed
to  Ch>d*s  words  and  signs  of  warning,  but  went  on  in  sin  just  the  same.  They  would
not  repent,  but  persisted  in  their  evil  ways.  But  we  may  take  the  words  a!:K)  as
sogs^esting—

IL  What  will  be  the  kelatiox  of  God's  people  to  the  world.  The  world  tcill
bftte  the  Chtircb.  "  The  birds  around  "  will  come  "  against  her."  Sometimes  it  seems
as  if  it  were  not  so.  For  unquestionably  there  are  many  portions  of  God's  heritage  that
the  world  does  not  persecute.  The  age  of  martyrdom  is  over.  Grod  has  shut  the  lions'
mouths.  He  puts  his  fear  upon  the  world ;  they  see  that  God  is  with  his  people ;
or  they  are  partly  in  sympathy  with  them.  But  at  other  times  it  is  true  as  it  was
with  that  \)O0T  bird  amongst  the  sparrows.  "  Well  may  we  pity  a  godly  wife  bound
to  an  ungodly  husband ;  alas !  full  often  a  drunkard,  whose  opposition  amounts  to
brutality.  A  tender,  loving  spirit,  that  ought  to  have  been  cherished  like  a  tender
flower,  is  bruised  and  trodden  underfoot,  and  made  to  suffer  till  the  heart  cries  out  in
grie£  We  little  know  what  lifelong  martyrdoms  many  pious  women  endure.  Children
also  have  to  bear  the  same  when  they  are  singled  out  by  Divine  grace  from  depraved
and  wicked  families.  Only  the  other  day  there  came  under  my  notice  one  who  loves
the  Lord.  1  thought  if  she  had  been  a  daughter  of  mine  1  should  have  rejoiced  beyond
all  things  in  her  sweet  and  gentle  piety ;  but  the  parent  said,  *  You  must  leave  our
house  if  you  attend  such  and  such  a  place  of  worship.  We  do  not  believe  in  such
ibings,  and  we  cannot  have  you  about  us  if  you  do.'  And  nobody  knows  what  godly
working  men  often  have  to  put  up  with  from  those  among  whom  they  labour.  Fre-
quently the  working  men  are  great  tyrants  in  matters  of  religion.  If  a  man  will  drink
with  them  and  swear  with  them,  they  will  make  him  their  companion ;  but  when  a
man  comes  out  to  fear  God,  they  make  it  very  hard  for  him."  Yes  ;  God's  heritage  Is
in  the  eyes  of  the  world  "  as  a  speckled  bird,"  etc.  But  let  God's  servants  remember,
when  they  are  thus  tried,  that  they  have  fellowship  with  Christ.  They  were  forewarned
of  it ;  Christ  did  not  conceal  the  cross  from  them.  "  Behold,"  he  said,  "I  send  you  forth
as  sheep  amongst  wolves."  But  they  cannot  do  you  much  harm  (cf.  Matt.  10).  The  day
is  toon  coming  when  their  power  will  be  for  ever  destroyed.  Meanwhile,  keep  away  from
them  as  much  as  you  lawfully  may.  Do  not  needlessly  provoke  them ;  whilst  harm-
less as  doves,  be  wise  as  serpents  also.  Do  not  bo  like  them,  and  do  not  be  afraid  of
them.  Go  not  alone  with  them ;  have  the  Lord  Jesus  ever  with  you,  and  you  will  be
Abla  to  meet  them  in  all  holy  and  courageous  wisdom  and  meekness.  If  the  persecu-
tion bo  very  great,  ask  the  Lord  to  place  you  somewhere  else,  if  so  it  may  be.  And  till
he  does,  and  always,  pray  for  them--Saul8  may  become  Pauls.

IIL  It  is  a  relation  in  which  God's  heritage  must  stand  either  to  God  or  to
TUB  world.    There  cannot  be  compromise.    "  No  man  can  serve  two  masters,"    *'  If


cii.  xn.  1— 17.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  327


any  man  love  the  world,  the  love  of  the  Father  is  not  in  him.**  *'  The  friendship  of  the
world  is  enmity  against  (Jod."  "  Ye  cannot  servo  God  and  mammon."  Whose  aver-
sion, then,  will  you  have,  since  that  of  God  or  of  the  world  you  must  have  ?  Your  peril
is  not  that  you  should  deliherately  choose  to  have  the  aversion  of  God  rather  than  that
of  the  worla,  but  that  you  should  seek  to  compromise.  But  that  also  is  impossible.
In  coming  to  a  decision  be  sure  you  take  eternity  into  view,  and  may  God  who  compels
you  to  make  this  great  choice  help  you — as  he  will  if  you  seek  his  grace — to  choose,
like  Moses,  "  rather  to  sufifer  affliction  with,"  etc. — C.

Vers.  14 — 17. — Tlte  tide  that  has  no  ebb,  hut  ever  flows.    Such  is  the  grace  of  God.

I.  It  has  no  ebb.  It  seemed  to  be  going  back  in  regard  to  those  to  whom  the
prophet  wrote.  What  terrible  calamities  were  threatened  and  also  came !  How  dark
the  face  of  (Jod  seemed  towards  them !  But  they  were  to  be  restored  Ver.  14,  "  I
will  pluck  out  the  house  of  Judah  from  among  them.*'  And  even  yet  God's  mercies  to
his  ancient  people  are  not  done.  Another  restoration  is  to  be  theirs.  "The  gifts  and
calling  of  uod  are  without  repentance  "  (of.  Rom.  xi.).  And  Israel  is  but  a  type  of
humanity  at  large.  God  has  not  created  all  men  in  vain.  Man,  as  such,  is  precious  in
his  sight;  **  the  dearly  beloved  of  his  soul."  And  notwithstanding  the  dark  records  of
human  history— man's  sins  and  sorrows — God's  love  is  upon  him  still.  He  *'  so  loved
the  world,"  and  that  love  has  not  ceased.  The  tide  of  his  grace  has  not  ceased  to  flow.
But  there  may  be  barriers  in  the  way  of  its  onward  progress.  Human  sin  is  such.  It
is  so  in  nations  and  in  individuals,  and  not  only  do  men  by  their  sin  bar  for  themselves
the  inflow  of  God's  grace,  but  for  those  who  come  after  them.  And  to  break  through
and  break  down  these  barriers  is  a  work  of  time.  Ages  and  generations  may  elapse.
In  mountainous  regions  you  may  often  see  a  river  flowing  through  what  was  manifestly
once  the  bed  of  a  vast  lake.  But  after  the  lapse  of  long  ages  the  waters  rose  and  burst
through  the  barriers  that  held  them  back  from  the  valleys  and  plains  beneath,  and  from
that  moment  the  river  has  flowed  on  in  the  channel  in  which  wo  now  see  it.  So  will
it  be  with  God's  grace  to  mankind  at  large.  Its  waters  shall  rise,  and  by-and-by  the
rocky  barriers  of  man's  sins,  and  all  that  man's  sin  has  built  up,  shall  be  broken  through
and  broken  down,  and  then  '*  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord  shall  cover  the  earth  as  the
waters  cover  the  seas."  The  tide  has  never  gone  back ;  it  has  been  but  delayed.  Wise
and  holy  fatherly  love  is  at  the  root  of  all  things,  and  is  the  key  which  unlocks,  as
none  else  will,  all  the  problems  of  life.  That  love  held  his  people  down  to  the  suffer-
ings they  had  to  endure  until  the  evil  mind  departed  from  them,  and  so  it  holds
humanity  down  and  individual  souls  down  to  what  they  have  to  endure  until  they
bo  changed  in  the  spirit  of  their  minds.  But  all  this  while  the  tide  of  his  gracious
purpose  is  rising,  and  soon  that  which  hinders  shall  be  taken  out  of  the  way.  Judah
was  to  go  into  captivity,  but  Judah  was  to  bo  "  plucked  out "  from  thence,  and  that  is
but  a  pattern  of  God's  dealings  with  us  all.

II.  But  not  only  has  this  tide  no  ebb,  it  flows  on  evebmobe.  Not  only  was  Judah
to  be  restored,  but  forgiveness  and  salvation  are  offered  to  her  "  evil  neighbours  "  (ver.
14),  who  had  done  her  harm.  God's  purpose  in  the  election  of  some  is  not  the  reproba-
tion of  the  rest,  but  the  salvation  of  all.  "  In  thee  and  in  thy  seed  shall  all  the
nations  of  the  earth  be  blessed."  The  "  evil  neighbours  "  had  corrupted  Judah  (ver.
16),  and  they  had  persecuted  her  (ver.  14) ;  but  now  the  set  time  to  favour  them  also
had  come,  and  salvation  is  offered  to  them  (ver.  16).  Thus  the  tide  of  God's  grace
flows  on  evermore,  and  where  it  seemed  as  if  it  would  never  come.  From  all  which
wo  may  learn :  The  redemption  of  the  world  is  the  purpose  of  God.  But  every  nation
and  people  in  their  own  order.  The  elect  are  the  firstfruits ;  those  nearest  to  them
come  next.  If  any  refuse,  their  national  life  is  lost  (ver.  17).  But  the  unfaithful-
ness of  man  shall  not  make  the  faith  of  God  of  none  effect.  Let  us  take  this  tide  at  its
flood ;  it  will  lead  us  on  to  life  eternal.  It  is  the  "  tide  in  the  affairs  of  men  "  which
calls  us  to  launch  forth  upon  it,  that  it  may  bear  us  to  never-ending  bliss. — C.

Vers.  1 — 5. — The  prophet's  complaint.  The  writings  of  the  prophets  are  often  as
much  historic  as  they  are  prophetic ;  historic  of  personal  as  well  as  national  cxi)eriences,
of  inward  thoughts  and  emotions  as  of  outward  incidents.  In  tracing  the  current  of
eventH,  the  writers  disclose  the  workings  of  their  own  spirits,  and  in  expounding  and


328  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ca.  xii.  1—17.


TindScatiDg  God's  waji  with  Israel  or  with  other  DAtioos,  they  iodicate  the  method  of  bis
dealings  with  tbemselres.  This  was  singularly  true  of  Jeremiah,  and  we  hare  here  a
ftriking  illustratioQ  of  it.  This  pasBage  probably  mark j  the  time  when  the  people  of
his  own  natire  city  of  Anathoih,  and  eren  his  kindred,  his  "  brethren  of  the  boose  of
his  fatber,"  coold  no  longer  bear  his  faithful  rebukes,  and  he  was  compelled  to  take
refuge  in  Jerusalem  (ch.  xL  21 ;  xiL  6).  Conjider  (1)  fA«  prophefs  iUUe  cf  mimd  as
here  made  manifest ;  (2)  the  meaning  and  force  of  God't  remonstrance^

L  The  fboph£T*i>  state  of  misd.  It  contains  a  nng'ilar  mixture  of  good  and  eri),
thoughts  and  emotions  both  noble  and  base.  So  confiicting  and  eren  ccsitradictory
sometimes  are  the  voices  of  the  truest  human  heart.  This  outburst  of  hostility  from
the  men  of  Aoatboth  has  plunged  his  spirit  in  confuaion.  JAke  a  ship  checked  in  its
eoone,  with  its  sails  taken  aback  by  a  sudden  saoall,  its  guiding  principles  and  powers
are  for  a  while  disturbed,  and  its  balance  lost.  5^ote  different  elements  of  feeling.  1.
Dtep  perpUxity.  He  cannot  reconcile  the  events  that  are  taking-place  and  the  seeming
prosperity  of  the  wicked  ^ith  the  known  rectitude  of  the  Divine  characto'.  "Righ-
teous art  tbou,  0  Lord ;  .  .  .  yet  let  me  talk  with  thee  of  thy  judgments,"  etc.  Why  this
"  yet "  ?  If  he  is  thus  convinced  of  G«jd's  righteousness,  why  this  wish  to  reason  with
him?  There  is  a  conflict  between  unbelief  and  faith,  between  the  disposition  to  judge
by  sensible  apj^earances  and  the  desire  to  judge  by  eternal  principles.  And  the  difficulty
is  aggravated  by  the  fact  that  the  designs  of  the  wicke«l  seem  to  succeed  because  God
smi^  on  them.  "  Thou  hast  planted  them,"  etc.  This  fact  of  successful  wickedness
under  the  wing  of  a  Divine  Providence  is  the  deep  and  awful  mystery  that  has  been
a  source  of  pjcrplexity  and  trouble  to  though tfal  men  in  every  age.  David  felt  the  full
force  of  it  (Ps.  Ixxiii.).  His  "feet  had  well-nigh  slipped"  because  of  it,  "until  he
went  into  the  sanctuary  of  God,"  and  then  the  problem  was  solved.  It  is  when  we  get
away  from  our  carnal  reasonings  into  the  sanctuary  of  spiritual  contemplation  and  the
realm  of  faith  that  we  can  alone  hope  to  xmderstand  these  things.  When  God's  ways
most  perplex  and  confound  us  we  roust  keep  fast  hold  of  right  thoughts  about  himself.
His  judgmcDts  are  a  mighty  deep.  But  as  beneath  the  heaving,  storm-tossed  ocean
there  lie  great  mountains  of  the  solid  world,  so  does  God*s  righteousness  underlie  all  the
agitations  and  conflicting  phases  of  human  history.  Faith  in  that  will  give  us  rest  and
peace.  2.  J7te  sense  o/hU  own  rectitude,  •*  But  thou,  0  Lord,  knowest  me,"  etc.  This
is  not  the  utterance  of  vain  self-righteousness.  A  "  conscience  void  of  offence,"  the
persuasion  that  our  purpose  is  pure  and  our  hearts  right  with  God,  is  never  to  be  con-
founded with  spiritual  pride.  Without  a  shadow  of  vain-glory  you  may  know  well
that  you  arc  better  than  many  around  yon,  and  could  not  do  as  they  do.  There  are
times  in  a  man's  history  when  nothing  but  the  sense  of  personal  rectitude  can  sustain
him.  When  calamity  comes  upon  him,  when  he  falls,  perhaps,  from  some  hi^h  position
and  ifl  cast  forth  upon  the  world  homeless  and  friendless^  what  a  bitter  ingredient  in  his
cup  is  an  accusing  conscience  I  On  the  other  hand,  he  may  defy  everything  to  rob  him  of
his  peace,  and,  like  Job,  may  preserve  his  soul  in  serenity  in  spite  of  blighted  hopes  and
withered  joys,  a  taunting  world  and  scornful  friends,  if  he  can  say,  *'  My  witness  is  in
heaven,  and  my  record  is  on  high"  (Job  xvi.  19).  3.  The  spirit  of  revenge,  '*  Pull  them
out,**  etc.  He  would  fain  ant^late  the  day  of  slaughter.  This  may  have  been  an
unffuarded,  momentary  outburst  of  impatient  resentment.  But  it  was  none  the  less
evil  and  irrelicious.  Why  was  he  rebuked  for  it  if  it  were  not  wrong?  (Similar
examples  in  Moees,  Elijah,  Jonah,  the  disciples  James  and  John.)  Let  us  beware  how
we  tate  God's  judgments  into  our  own  hands.  "  Vengeance  belongeth  unto  me ;  I  will
recompense,  saith  the  Lord  "  f  Rom.  xli.  19).  Never  let  us  speak  as  if  the  pumshmeot  of
the  wicked,  which  is  the  Lord's  "  strange  work,"  were  regarded  by  us  with  complacenc3%
4.  Euman  sympathy.  "  How  long  shall  the  land  mourn,"  etc.?  The  prophet  is  true  to
himself  here.  He  grieves  for  the  misery  inflicted  on  the  innocent  by  the  wrong-doing
of  others.  The  humane  heart  groans  with  the  "  groaning  creation,"  and  sighs  for  the
time  when  all  shall  be  renewed.  He  who  ^  endured  the  contradiction  of  sinners  against
himself"  teaches  us  to  take  upon  ourselves,  as  he  did,  the  sins  and  sorrows  of  the
world.

*  II,  The  Dtvine  remonstrance.  "  If  thou  hast  run  with  the  footmen,"  etc.  (For
explanation  of  these  references,  see  Exposition.)  There  is  extreme  gentleness  in  this
rebuke.    It  is  interesting  to  note  how  uniformly  gentle  the  reproofs  GK>d  administered


en.  xn.  1—17.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  329

to  the  prophets  were.  Two  things  are  noticeable  in  this  remonstrance.  1.  It  refers  to
Jeremiah's  want  of  courage^  and  says  nothing  about  his  mental  perplexity.  We  are
reminded  that  the  best  cure  for  our  morbid  conditions  of  thought  and  feeling  is  that
we  should  brace  up  the  energies  of  our  soul  to  bear  whatever  Providence  may  see  fit  to
lay  upon  us,  and  valiantly  to  contend  for  the  cause  of  truth  and  goodness  in  the  face  of
all  opposition.  2.  It  speaks  of  severer  trials  that  are  in  store  for  him  in  the  future.  Life
is  for  us  all  a  course  of  Divine  discipline,  in  which  all  lesser  tests  of  faith  and  fortitude
are  intended  to  prepare  us  for  sterner  conflicts  and  nobler  victories. — W.

Vers.  X^A.-^The  prophet  puzzled  by  the  prosperity  of  the  wicked,  I.  How  this  puzzle
ARISES.  It  arises  from  the  presence  of  a  number  of  facts  together,  the  coexistence  of
which  the  prophet  finds  it  impossible  to  explain.  1.  There  is  his  assurance  as  to  the
character  of  Jehovah,  He  speaks  confidently  as  to  the  Divine  righteousness.  Observe
how  it  is  the  thing  that  he  starts  with.  All  our  doubts  will  get  cleared  up  in  the  end,
however  long  the  process  may  be,  if  only  we  start  with  the  sure  practical  conviction
that  Jehovah  is,  and  that  he  is  righteous.  '*  Thy  righteousness  is  like  the  great  moun-
tcuns."  And  as  one  would  not  doubt  the  existence  of  them,  so  neither  r  st  one  doubt
the  righteousness  of  God.  Jeremiah  could  not  but  become  acquainted  with  the  cha-
racter of  one  who  was  so  constantly  manifesting  himself  to  him.  Besides,  there  was
the  history  of  Jehovah's  consistent  and  glorious  dealings  in  the  past  to  fall  back  upon,
and  it  was  presumed  that  Jeremiah  was  well  acquainted  with  that  history.  If  it  nad
not  been  so,  there  would  have  been  little  use  in  referring  him  to  Moses  and  Samuel  (ch.
XV.  1).  It  was  no  earthly  governor  swayed  about  by  all  sorts  of  motives  with  whom
Jeremiah  had  to  deal.  2.  Jrrom  the  manifest  wickedness  of  the  wicked  and  their  equally
manifest  prosperity,  Jeremiah  has  no  more  doubt  about  the  character  and  deserts  of
his  enemies  than  he  has  about  the  character  of  his  God.  He  speaks  as  if  there  were
some  close  connection  between  the  wickedness  and  the  prosperity,  and  as  if  the  unscru-
pulous man  could  boast  himself  without  contradiction  being  possible  as  to  the  results
of  his  audacity.  It  seems  to  the  prophet  as  if  there  should  be  an  instant  and  complete
stoppage  of  all  this  pride  and  deceit.  3.  From  some  special  advantages  they  have  had
not  of  their  own  procuring,  "  Thou  hast  planted  them."  This  is  a  way  of  indicating
that  all  outward  circumstances  favoured  men  when  they  started  on  their  knavery.
They  were  well  placed  for  the  attainment  of  prosperity,  and  the  same  kind  of  outward
circumstances  had  continued.  They  had  grown  and  brought  forth  fruit.  It  seemed
that  if  they  had  been  planted  at  random,  planted  anywhere  else,  these  wicked  purposes
would  have  been  comparatively  fruitless.  Probably  Jeremiah's  notion  was  that  Ood
located  every  man  in  his  starting-place,  and  if  so,  it  is  easy  to  see  how  such  a  considera-
tion would  increase  his  perplexity.  4.  From  the  hypocrisy  of  the  wicked.  While
Jeremiah  sees  only  too  plainly  tneir  wickedness,  they  pretend  to  be  righteous  and
devout  and  God-honouring.  The  name  of  Jehovah  is,  perhaps,  oftener  on  their  lips
than  on  the  lips  of  the  prophet  himself.  They  may  be  full  of  zeal  for  the  temple,  lor
incense,  for  offering;  they  may  even  make  capital  by  reproaching  Jeremiah  for  his
utterances  on  these  subjects  (ch.  vi.  20 ;  vii.).  5.  From  the  suffering  they  inflict  (m
the  land.  The  wicked  may  prosper,  and  yet  in  their  very  prosperity  suck  away  the  life-
blood  of  a  nation.  That  is  no  true  prosperity  where  the  rich  get  richer  and  the  poor
get  poorer.  The  words  of  the  prophet  suggest  that  there  was  grinding  and  rapacity,
and  thus  •  no  encouragement  to  the  tiller  of  the  soil  to  do  his  best.  Truly  have  the
fruits  of  the  earth  been  called  "  kindly,"  for  they  are  kindly  to  one  who  will  diligently
cultivate.  But  no  one  will  diligently  cultivate  if  the  fruits  of  his  toil  are  to  come  to
one  who  reaps  where  he  has  not  sown,  and  gathers  where  he  has  not  strawed.  6«  From
the  scorn  these  wicked  heap  on  the  prophet  himself.  "  They  said,  He  shall  not  see  our
last  end."  Of  course  we  are  not  to  suppose  that  the  prophet  was  influenced  here  by
considerations  of  personal  resentment.  Doubtless  what  chiefly  moved  him  was  to
maintain  his  sacred  work.  These  wicked  men  were  like  the  scoffers  of  whom  Peter
speaks,  walking  after  their  own  lusts,  and  saying,  ''Where  is  the  promise  of  his
coming  ?  "

n.  How  THE  PUZZLE  WAS  TO  BE  DIMINISHED.  By  the  time  we  reach  the  end  of  the
Book  of  Jeremiah,  Gk)d's  judgments  on  all  the  prosperous  wicked  are  amply  manifested.
When  Jeremiah  came  to  close  the  roll  of  his  prophecies,  and  reflect  on  all  that  God  had


C30  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  xn.  1—17.

8ud  in  them  and  done  'even  in  Jeremiah's  0¥ni  time  and  under  hia  own  eyes,  and
when  further  be  recollected  his  own  hasty  complaints,  ho  would  surely  feel  that  a
trustful  and  patient  waiting  for  the  full  event  would  have  been  much  wiser.  Perhaps
no  prophet  ever  saw  more  of  the  accomplishment  of  his  own  prophecies  than  Jeremiah
did.  Ho  did  see  the  end  of  those  who,  in  their  pride  and  fatness,  had  reviled  him.  Let
us  be  true  and  faithful  to  what  the  Spirit  of  truth  has  made  known  to  us  as  the  will  of
Grod,  and  everything  in  the  way  of  vindication  will  come  if  we  only  wait.  We  must
not  mistake  precipitation  and  impetuosity  for  zeal.  God's  people  have  to  wait  for  their
own  perfection  and  their  own  reward ;  they  have  also  to  wait  for  the  execution  of
God's  judgment  against  his  enemies.  Through  all  the  centuries  that  have  passed  since
Jeremiah's  complaint  here,  oppression  and  robbery  have  continued,  and  they  continue
still.  And  as  we  think  of  such  things,  it  will  be  well  for  us  if  we  can  end  onr  thoughts
where  Jeremiah  began  :  **  Righteous  art  thou,  0  Lord." — Y.

Yers.  7 — 11. — The  inheritance  that  has  lost  its  charms.  I.  Wb  have  hebe
BEOBETFUL  THOCGHTs  OP  THE  PAST.  We  cau  SCO  what  thc  prophct  once  hoped  and
desired.  Not  only  what  ho  had  hoped  and  desired  in  those  dreams  of  youth  before  God
had  touched  his  heart  and  claimed  the  service  of  his  lips,  but  also  wliat  he  had  hoped
and  desired  since  becoming  a  prophet.  Dear  as  Anathoth  with  its  inhabitants  may
have  been  before,  it  would  become  dearer  still  when  he  thought  of  impending
calamities  to  the  whole  land.  There  are  cherished  objects  indicated  by  the  words
"house,"  "inheritance,"  and  "desire  of  the  soul."  What  is  precisely  indicated  by
these  words  it  is  of  course  impossible  for  us  to  say  ;  but  any  of  us,  thinking  for  a  little
of  the  objects  that  lie  nearest  to  our  hearts,  will  comprehend  that  the  prophet  is  here
speaking  of  separations  he  had  found  it  very  hard  to  achieve.  Uo  did  not  pretend
that  alienation  from  house  and  heritage  and  kindred  was  an  easy  thin^.  Then  we  must
bear  in  mind  that  the  references  here  have  a  deeper  meaning  thau  to  Jeremiah's  purely
human  relations.  It  is  pretty  well  agreed  that  the  full  truth  of  these  words  is  only
reached  when  wo  think  of  Jeremiah  as  representative  of  Jehovah.  God's  separation
from  his  people  was  the  'thing  of  most  serious  moment.  God  had  a  house ;  God  had
an  inheritance ;  God  had  a  beloved  object,  an  object  of  desire  (Deut.  xxxii.  9).  God
had  been  with  these  people  now  for  many  centuries,  and  there  was  much  to  make  them
precious  in  his  sight.  They  were  the  seed  of  Abraham,  the  descendants  of  those
whom  he  had  delivered  from  Egypt  and  guided  through  the  wilderness  into  the  land
where  they  now  dwelt.  Things  might  have  been  so  different,  if  only  the  people  had
been  of  a  different  spirit.  There  was  no  necessity  in  thc  nature  of  things  that  Israel
should  have  become  so  idolatrous,  so  hostile  to  Jehovah,  any  more  than  there  was
neoeasity  that  Anathoth  should  become  a  place  of  mortal  snares  and  perils  to  the
prophet.  What  a  fall  there  was  from  the  triumphal  march  across  Jordan,  under
Joenuay  to  the  march  at  the  heels  of  a  conqueror  all  the  way  from  Jerusalem  to
Babylon!  Again  we  say  things  might  have  been  so  different.  That  which  God  had
chenshed  misht  have  become  a  rich  earthly  manifestation  of  his  glory.  The  vineyard
on  a  fruitful  hill  might  have  become  what  it  was  intended  to  be— a  fruitful  vineyard.

II.  Peudkxt  and  decisive  action  in  present  necessities.  Natural  affection  must
yield  to  spiritual  duty.  Jeremiah  might  doubtless  have  kept  the  good  will  of  his  kins-
folk, such  as  it  was  worth,  if  only  he  had  been  able  and  disposed  to  remain  silent  as  a
prophet.  Happily  there  is  no  hesitation,  there  is  no  sign  of  its  even  being  possible.
Let  us  seize  on  every  record  that  illustmtes  how  strong,  how  immovable,  those  become
who  put  their  trust  in  God.  The  path  that  Jeremiah  had  to  tread  was  trodden  after-
wards by  Jesus  himself.  His  kinsfolk  would  have  interfered  with  nuun  force  to  stop
what  they  reckoned  the  vagaries  of  one  who  was  beside  himself;  and  so  as  far  as  Jesus
could  be  said  to  have  had  any  abiding-places,  they  were  in  Capernaum  and  Bethany,  not
in  Nazareth.  So  with  Jeremiah.  He  had  to  give  up  all  that  on  earth  he  had  any  natural
claim  to,  and  throw  himself  on  GK)d,  and  those  who  perchance  might  help  him  for  the
sake  of  God.  Nor  was  he  disappointed.  There  is  certainly  no  indication  here  of  the
compensations  that  came  to  the  prophet  for  his  fidelity  and  self-denial.  It  is  hardly
the  place  to  mention  them.  But  we  do  see  this  clearly,  that  when  once  the  lower  is
relinquished,  decisivelv  relinquished,  and  a  higher  station  taken  up,  the  lower  is  seen
to  be  lower.   Temporal  and  natural  relations,  that  count  for  so  much  when  one  is  in  the


cu.  xu.  1—17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.        331

midst  of  them,  are  seen  then  in  their  comparative  unimportance.  Let  it  not  be  supposed
that,  after  cutting  off  the  right  hand,  one  must  of  necessity  wait  for  the  fulness  of  life
eternal  to  get  anything  like  compensation.  The  compensation  begins  in  the  very  act
of  self-sacrifice.  Does  not  the  prophet  here  say  that  what  had  once  been  so  loved  had
come  to  put  on  such  a  threatening,  maleficent  aspect  that  ho  also  had  come  to  hate  it  ?
What  has  had  to  be  relinquished  for  Christ  only  leaves  so  much  the  more  of  opportunity
to  grasp  and  to  use  the  spiritual  wealth  which  is  in  him. — T.

Ver.  10. — Shepherds  where  they  ought  not  to  he.  The  words  of  this  verse  suggest  a
degradation  of  the  vineyard,  which  may  have  been  accomplished  in  one  of  two  ways.
The  prophet  may  have  been  indicating  the  miseries  of  his  country  by  a  scene  from  real
life,  a  literal  spoiling  of  a  vineyard  by  the  literal  flocks  of  careless  or  unscrupulous
shepherds.  Either  a  vineyard  becomes  neglected  by  its  owner,  and  so  lays  itself  open  to
the  inroads  of  a  roaming  flock,  or  the  shepherd  comes,  and,  regardless  of  all  rights  breaks
his  way  in  by  sheer  force.  In  a  land  where  there  were  both  vineyards  and  flocks,  nothing
was  more  likely  than  that  the  oppression  of  the  weak  by  the  strong  should  be  illus-
trated in  some  such  way.  And  when  we  pass  to  the  figure,  recollecting  that  Israel  was
reckoned  as  a  flock  and  its  rulers  as  shepherds,  then  we  begin  to  discern  how  these
rulers  are  once  more  to  be  blamed.  Neglect  is  the  least  thing  to  be  laid  at  their  door ;
they  are  chargeable  with  even  more  than  neglect,  even  with  high-handedness  and
utter  lack  of  regard  for  neighbourly  rights.  These  rulers  are  charged  in  other  pla<^s
for  their  want  of  fidelity  in  making  due  provision  for  the  flock ;  here,  while  they  ma^e
a  sort  of  provision,  they  do  it  in  a  way  which  indicates  how  little  they  think  of  the
real  interests  of  their  sheep.  1.  There  is  presented  to  us  here  a  picture  of  two  occupa-
tions, two  possessions,  both  right  in  themselves.  It  is  not  the  robber  who  desolates  this
vineyard,  the  man  to  whom  violence  is  an  ordinary  element.  It  is  the  shepherd,  the
man  whose  work  is  every  whit  as  useful  and  commendable  in  its  way  as  that  of  the
vinedresser.  God  made  the  surface  of  his  earth  for  his  creatures,  animate  and  inani-
mate, and  there  is  an  appointed  and  sufficient  place  for  all.  There  are  pasture-grounds
where  the  sheep  may  grow  and  by  its  wool  provide  clothing  for  men,  and  there  are
the  tillage-grounds  whence  come  the  com,  the  oil,  the  wine,  which  are  equally  for  the
sustenance  and  pleasure  of  men.  2.  ITie  mischief  which  may  be  done  by  a  selfish  occu^
jHttion  with  ones  own  interests.  In  one  sense  tne  shepherd  could  not  be  too  careful
about  his  own  interest.  He  had  food  to  search  for,  his  flock  to  keep  together,  wanderers
to  restore,  wild  beasts  to  drive  away.  This  was  all  very  difficult,  but  the  difficulty
should  have  taught  him  to  look  sympathetically  at  the  interests  of  others.  The  vine-
dresser would  have  in  his  own  way  as  hard  and  anxious  a  life  as  the  shepherd.  There
are  difficulties  enough  in  human  existence  from  things  which  cannot  be  helped.  Why
should  they  be  add^  to  by  the  thoughtlessness  of  those  who  can  be  thoughtful  if  only
they  care  to  be,  unselfish  if  only  they  care  to  be  ?  A  shepherd  with  the  heart  of  a  brother
in  him  would  be  doubly  careful  when  he  came  near  a  vineyard.  It  was  easy  for  his
heedless  sheep  to  do  a  damage  which,  once  done,  no  amount  of  regret  could  undo.
3.  Heedlessness  of  the  interests  of  others  works  to  our  own  serious  damage  in  the  end.
The  position  of  these  kings  of  Israel  and  Judah  had  to  be  set  forth  by  more  than  one
image.  Their  people  had  to  be  looked  at  in  the  aspect  of  a  flock  and  of  a  vineyard,
and  so  indeed  each  one  of  us  has  to  look  at  his  own  life  in  more  aspects  than  one.  A
narrow,  one-sided  view  is  ruinous ;  it  may  have  temporary  advantages,  but  they  are  soon
gone,  and  then  the  full  folly  of  short-sightedness  will  appear.  These  kings  lived  a
self-indulgent  life,  and  gathered  round  them  a  favoured  few,  whom  they  enriched  and
pampered  in  like  manner.  Meanwhile  the  land  was  suffering  from  oppression  and
injustice,  and  these  great  ones  advancing  to  an  overthrow,  the  completeness  of  which
would  be  intensified  by  the  remembrance  of  past  follies.  1  hat  is  the  truly  prudent
man  who  is  always  looking  beneath  the  surface  and  beyond  the  present.  To  find  an
easy,  ready-to-hand  way  out  of  present  difficulties  may  be  the  surest  way  of  making
future  difficulties  altogether  unmanageable. — Y.

Ver.  13. — Sowing  wheat  and  reaping  thorns.  It  is  true  that  '*  whatsoever  a  man
soweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap."  It  is  also  true  that  '*  men  cannot  gather  grapes  of
thorns,  or  figs  of  thistles."  And  at  the  same  time  it  is  emphatically  true  that  men  may


332  THE  BOOK   OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  xii.  1— 17.

sow  wheat  and  yet  reap  thorns.    The  contradiction  is  only  on  the  surface ;  it  suggests
inquiry,  and  the  further  the  inquiry  is  continued,  the  more  it  is  seen  what  serious  truth
is  contained  in  the  prophet's  statement.    Consider,  then,  the  statement  in  two  aspects.
L  Ab  showing  that  men  do  not  reap  what  they  have  sown.    They  sow  wheat.
It  is  surely  not  to  a  mere  semblance  of  wheat-sowing  that  the  prophet  here  refers.    It
is  true  that  men  sow  unconsciously  the  seeds  of  misery,  of  a  bitter  and  shameful
harvest,  the  gathering  of  which  they  cannot  escape.    It  is  true  that  the  men  who  con-
sult present  pleasure  and  the  present  appearances  of  things  are  every  day  sowing  evil
seed,  without  having  the  least  suspicion  that  they  are  sowing  at  all.    It  is  even  true
that  men  may  be  so  led  away  by  errors  of  education,  or  habits  received  bv  mere  tra-
dition, as  to  go  on  all  life  through  in  what  they  suppose  to  bo  right,  but  which  never-
theless is  utterly  wrong.    All  this,  however,  is  rather  to  be  classed  under  the  sowing
of  tares  which  are  like  wheat.    The  prophet  is  here  dealing  with  the  sowing  of  some-
thing really  good,  and  something  capable  of  truly  satisfactory  results.    The  truth  he
wouM  indicate  is  more  fully  set  forth  in  our  Lord's  parable  of  the  four  different  kinds
of  seed.    The  seed  which  the  sower  went  forth  to  sow  was  all  good  seed.    The  seed
which  fell  in  the  good  ground  was  not  one  whit  better  than  what  fell  by  the  wayside.
We  see,  therefore,  that  a  large  part  of  good  seed  is  not  reaped.    Just  according  to  the
area  comprised  by  the  terms  "  trodden  ground,"  **  stony  ground,"  and  *'  thorny  ground,"
is  there  force  in  the  statement  that  wheat  has  been  sown,  and  yet  wheat  not  reaped.
The  prophet's  reference  is  to  the  great,  unquestionable,  and  peculiar  privileges  of  Israel.
The  Lord  had  not  dealt  with  any  nation  as  ho  had  dealt  with  Israel.    Other  nations
had  found  rising  up  amongst  them  men  of  genius  and  worldly  wisdom  and  originating
power ;  but  no  other  nation  of  antiquity  shows  in  its  history  any  man  like  a  Moses,  a
Hamuel,  or  a  David,  or  even  the  very  least  of  the  prophets.     We  look  upon  Israel,
therefore,  as  representative  of  all  who  have  enjoyed  abundance  of  religious  privileges,  of
those  whose  early  days  have  been  in  the  midst  of  religious  instructions  and  associations.
Yet  out  of  this  very  class  the  worldliest  of  the  worldly  have  come.    For  all  the  truth
that  has  been  bountifully  sown  not  one  stalk  of  result  is  to  be  seen.    Mark  that  what
is  to  be  first  noticed  is  the  negation  of  good  results.     Is  it  not  a  sad  thing  that  one
should  have  to  r^  first  of  all  of  so  much  Divine  truth  coming  down  from  heaven,  so
many  glofious  revelations,  so  many  angelic  visits,  so  many  inspired  prophets  and
witnesses,  and  then,  on  the  other  hand,  of  so  little  manifest  result  in  regenerated  and
purified  human  lives  ?

n.   As   SHOWING  THAT  MEN  REAP  WHAT  THEY  HAVE  NOT  SOWN.      ThomS,  of  COUTSC,

could  not  be  reaped  unless  thorns  were  planted,  but  no  one  would  deliberately  plant
thorns.  That  would  be  to  say,  at  the  very  beginning  of  one's  possibilities  of  choice,
"Evil,  be  thou  my  good."  But  the  heart  of  man,  rich,  deep,  inexhaustible  ground  as
it  is,  has  come  under  a  curse  of  which  Gkn.  iii.  18  is  but  a  shadowy  suggestion.  The
yicious  willingness  of  the  ground  to  bring  forth  thorns  and  thistles  every  husbandman
knows  full  well.  Ch.  iv.  3  needs  to  be  borne  in  mind :  '*  Sow  not  among  thorns."  Men
shrink  from  the  toil  and  suffering  needful  to  uproot  the  false  and  the  injurious,  and
still  more  difiicult  do  they  find  the  watchfulness  and  determination  which  would  pre-
vent thorns  from  getting  hold  at  all ;  and  yet  it  is  perfectly  certain  that  thorns,  allowed
to  continue j  will  in  time  destroy  anything  like  abiding  fruit  from  the  good  seed.  Note
the  important  difference  between  the  tares  and  the  thorns.  The  wheat  and  the  tares
grow  together  till  the  harvest ;  then  the  tares  are  easily  separated  and  burnt.  Ilie
perfected  wheat  is  as  easily  separated  and  garnered.  But  the  thorns  choke  the  wheat,
and  there  is  never  any  real  gathering  at  all.  Wheat  that  does  not  reach  maturity  is
worth  nothing  as  wheat.  It  cannot  be  put  into  the  garner.  Hence  the  keeping  down
of  the  thorns  is  every  whit  as  important  as  the  ^t^^m^  forward  of  the  wheat.  If  the
negative  conditions  are  neglected,  the  positive  conditions  are  nullified.  Israel  was  now,
as  we  see,  sunk  in  the  filthiest  abominations  of  idolatry.  But  it  had  come  to  this  through
a  long  neglect  of  the  most  earnest  warnings.  Note  in  particular  Numb,  xxxiii.  55,  "  If
ye  will  not  drive  out  the  inhabitants  of  the  land  from  before  you ;  then  it  shall  come
to  pass,  that  those  which  ye  let  remain  of  them  shall  be  pricks  in  your  eyes,  and  thorns
in  your  sides."  The  idolatry  of  Israel  was  a  far  worse  thing  than  the  idolatry  of  the
heathen ;  just  as  a  neglected  garden  overrun  with  weeds  and  briars  is  worse  than  a
weedy  and  briery  comer  of  the  wilderness  (Lev,  xxvi.  16 ;  Deut.  xxviii.  38 — 40 ;  Micah
vi.  15 ;  Has.  i.  6).— Y.


CH.  XIII.  1—27.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.


333


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  XIII.

The  chapter  falls  into  two  parts — ^the  one
describing  a  divinely  commanded  action  of
the  prophet,  symbolical  of  the  approaching
rejection  of  the  Jewish  people,  the  other
announcing  in  literal  language  the  ruin
especially  of  the  king  and  the  queen-mother,
and  emphasizing  the  inveterate  corruption
which  rendered  such  a  blow  necessary.  The
mention  of  the  queen-mother  (see  ver.  18)
renders  it  probable  that  Jehoiachin  is  the
king  under  whom  the  prophecy  was  com-
posed. It  is  true  that  other  kings  besides
Jehoiachin  ascended  the  throne  in  the  life-
time of  their  mother ;  but  the  express  and
repeated  mention  of  the  queen-mother  in  the
account  of  Jehoiachin  (2  Kings  xxiv.  12,
15;  comp.  ch.  zxix.  2;  xxii.  26)  warrants
the  inference  that  Nehushta,  Jehoiachin'^
mother,  was  a  more  powerful  personage  than
other  queen-mothers.  This  will  be  con-
firmed if,  with  Hitzig  and  Bertheau,  we
accept  the  statement  of  the  text  of  the
Chronicles  (2  Chron.  xxxvi.  9),  that  Jehoia-
chin was  eight  (not  eighteen)  years  old
on  his  accession  (see  on  ch.,xxii.  28).

Vers.  1 — 11. — The  entire  people  of  the
Jews  is  like  a  good-for-nothing  apron.

Ver.  1. — A  linen  girdle;  rather,  a  linen
apron.  **  Girdle  "  is  one  of  the  meanings  of
the  Hebrew  {*ezar),  but  is  here  unsuitublo.
As  ver.  11  shows,  it  is  an  inner  garment  that
is  meant,  one  that "  cleaveth  to  the  loins  of
a  man  "  (in*  fact,  the  ir€/>/^»/ia  of  the  Septua-
gint,  the  lumbare  of  the  Vulgate).  The
corresponding  Arabic  word,  Hzart  has,  accord-
ingto  LAne,tne  meaning  of  "waist- wrapper."
Israel  was  to  Jehovah  in  as  close  a  relation
spiritually  as  that  in  which  the  inner  gar-
ment referred  to  is  to  him  who  wears  it
materially.  There  is  an  Arabic  proverb
which  well  illustrates  this :  **  He  is  to  me  in
place  of  an 'Mar'*  (Preytag,  *Studium  der
Arab.  Spraohe,'  p.  298).  **  A  linen  apron  '*
may  pernaps  be  specified,  because  linen  was
the  material  of  the  priestly  dress  (Lev.  xvi.
4),  and  Israel  was  to  be  spiritually  *<  a  king-
dom of  priests."  But  this  is  not  absolutely
necessary.  The  common  man  used  linen  in
his  dress  as  well  as  the  priest;  the  only
difierence  between  them  was  that  the  priest
was  confined  to  linen  garments.  But  an
** apron"  would  in  any  case  naturally  be
made  of  linen.    linen;    literally,  flax  (a


product  of  Judah,  Hos.  ii.  5).  Put  it  not  in
water.  The  object  of  the  prohibition  is  well
stated  by  St.  Jerome.  It  was  at  once  to
symbolize  the  character  of  the  people  of
Israel,  stiff  and  impure,  like  unwashed  linen,
and  to  suggest  the  fate  in  store  for  it
(ver.  9).

Vers.  4—6. — After  Jeremiah  has  worn  the
apron  for  some  time,  he  is  directed  to  take  it
to  F*rath,  and  hide  it  there  in  a  cleft  (not
"hole")  of  the  rock.  A  long  interval
elapses,  and  he  is  commanded  to  make  a
second  journey  to  the  same  place,  and  fetch
away  the  apron.  What  docs  this  P'rath
mean  ?  It  is  by  no  means  easy  to  decide.
Hardly  "the  Euphrates,"  (1)  because  the
common  prefix,  "the  river,"  is  wanting,
though  in  so  extraordinary  a  narrative  it  was
peculiarly  needed ;  (2^  because  of  the  length
of  the  journey  to  Babylonia,  which  has  ex
hyp.  to  bo  made  twice;  and  (3)  b^UBe
the  Euphrates  is  not  a  rocky  river.  Ewald
suggested  that  "  some  wet  place  near  Jeru-
salem" probably  had  the  name  of  PWaOt,
and  indicates  a  valley  and  spring  called
Forah,  about  six  English  miles  north-east  of
Jerusalem.  Mr.  Birch  appears  to  have  hit
independently  on  the  same  spot,  which  he
identifies  with  the  Parah  of  Jush.  xviii.  23,
about  three  miles  north-east  of  Anathotb,
and  describes  as  a  picturesque  g^rgo  between
savage  rocks,  with  a  copious  stream  {Quar^
terly  8t<itement  of  (he  Palestine  Exploration
Fund,  October,  1880,  p.  236).  This  com-
bination, however,  involves  an  emendation  of
the  text  (rrath  into  PdrdA)— logically  it
involves  this,  as  Mr.  Birch  has  seen ;  Ewald's
comparison  of  the  Ambio  furdt,  sweet  water,
seems  inconsistent  with  bis  reference  to
Parah — for  which  there  does  not  seem
to  bo  sufficient  necessity;  and  it  is  better
to  adopt  the  view  of  the  great  old
French  Protestant  scholar,  Bochart,  that
P*rath  is  a  shortened  form  of  Ephrath,  i.e.
at  once  Bethlehem  and  the  district  in  which
Bethlehem  lay  (see  1  Chron.  ii.  50 ;  iv.  4 ;  and
perhaps  Ps.  cxxxii.  6).  It  need  hardly  be
said  that  the  limestone  hills  of  this  region
afforded  abundance  of  secluded  rocks.  There
may,  of  course,  be  at  the  same  time  an  allusion
to  the  ordinary  meaning  of  P'rath,  viz.
Euphrates,  on  the  analogy  of  the  allusion  in
Isa.  xxvii.  12.  Those  who  hold  the  view
here  rdocted,  that  Praih  is  equivalent
to  the  Euphrates,  sometimes  suppose  that
the  narrative  is  a  parable  or  symbolical
fiction,  such  as  Luther,  Calvin,  and  others
find  in  Hos.  i.,  iii.,  the  thing  signified
being  in  this  case  the  carrying  captive  of
the  people  to  Babylon ;  and  this  seems  the


834


THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  xni.  1—27.


best   way   of   making    this    interpretation
plausible.

Ver.  6. — After  many  dayi.  To  allow  time
for  the  apron  to  become  rotten.

Ver.  7.— I  went  .  .  .  and  digged.  The
apnm,  then,  had  been  covered  with  a  thick
layer  of  earth.

Vers.  8 — 11. — Explanation  of  the  symbol.
Oonld  there  be  a  greater  humiliation  for
Jndah  and  Jerusalem  than  to  be  compared
to  a  rotting  linen  apron  ?  The  hard  thin«:B
said  of  th&  eyll  people  in  ver.  10  must  of
oonrse  be  understood  with  the  limitations
indicated  in  the  note  on  ch.  ix.  15,  16.
Imagination  ehonld  (as  usual)  be  tiubhomne$$.
The  explanation  in  ver.  11  is  a  strong  argu-
ment for  the  rendering  ^  apron  "  (see  above,
on  yer.  1).

Vers.  12 — 14. — Here  another  symbol  is
introdnoed — a  symbolic  phrase  rather  than
a  eymbolic  action.  The  nrst  symbol  referred
to  the  people  as  a  whole ;  the  second  repre-
sents the  rate  of  the  individual  membt;rs  of
the  people.  The  words,  Thus  salth  the  Lord
Qod  of  Israel,  are  omitted  in  the  Septuagint,
and  certainly  the  form  of  the  following
phrase  seems  hardly  wortliy  of  so  solemn  an
introduction.  Srery  bottle.  It  is  an  earth-
enware bottle,  or  pitcher,  which  seems  from
▼er.  18  to  be  meant  (oomp.  Isa.  xxx.  14),
though  the  Septuagint  renders  here  iL<rK6s,
The  kings  tiiat  sit  npon  David's  throne;
rather,  thai  tit  for  David  upon  hU  throne ;  i.e.
OS  David's  heirs  and  successors.  The  plural
<* kings'*  is  to  include  all  the  kings  who
reigned  during  the  final  period  of  impending
rain.  With  drunkenness.  The  effect  of  the
*•  wine-cup  of  [the  Divine]  fury  **  (oh.  xxv.
15).  Dash  them  one  against  another.  This
is  merelv  the  development  of  the  figure  of
the  pitchers ;  not  a  prediction  of  civil  war.
The  pitchers,  when  oast  down,  must  of  course
fUl  together  into  pieces.

Vers.  15 — 19. — An  admonition  to  seize
upon  the  only  means  of  escape.

Ver.  1 6. — dive  glory,  etc.  Let  your  tribute
to  vour  King  be  that  of  humble  submission
to  nis  will.  The  precise  application  of  the
phrase  must  be  derived  from  the  context
(oomp.  Josh.  vii.  19 ;  Mai.  iL  2).  Upon  the
daric  mountains ;  rather,  tijpon  mountaim  of
twiUghL  A  ^  mountain  "  is  an  image  of  a
great  obstacle  (Zech.  iv.  7 ;  Matt,  xxi  21).
As  Jndah  is  walking  along,  the  hitherto
even  tenor  of  his  way  gives  place  to  huge
moontains  wrapt  in  an  impenetrable  dusk,
over  which  he  will  stumble  and  fall  if  he
does  not  repent  in  time.

Ver.  17.--8hould  all  admonitions  be  in
vain,  Jeremiah  will  return  (like  Samuel,  1
Sam.  zv.  35)  and  give  vent  to  his  sorrowful
amotion.  The  Lord's  flook.  Jehovah  is
likened  to  a  shepherd  (comp.  Zech.  z.  8).
Ver.  18. — ^The  extent  of  the  calamity


shown    in  individual   instances.      For  tho
fulfilment,  see  2  Kings  xxiv.  15.     After  a
reign  of  three  months,  the  young  prince  and
his  mother  were  carried  to  Babylon.    And  to
the  queen;  rather,  and  to  the  queen-mother
(literally,  the  mittreu).    It  will  be  noticed
that,  except  in  two  cases,  the  names  of  the
motiiers  of  the  reigning  kings  of  Judah  are
scrupulously  mentioned  in   the    Books  of
Kings.     This  and  the  title  of  ''mistress''
are  indications  of  the  high  rank  they  enjoyed
iu  the  social  system.    In  the  cose  of  Asa,
we  are  told  that  he  removed  his  mother,
Moachah,  from  her  po:»ition  as  *'  mistress,"
or  queen-mother,  on  account  of  her  idolatry
(1  Kings  XV.  13).     The  political  value  of
the  station  is  strikino^ly  snown  by  the  ease
with    which    Athaliah,    as    queen-mother,
usurped  the  supreme  authority  (2  Kings
xi.).     From  an   historical   point   of  view,
the  "  queen-mother"  of  the  Jews  is  a  most
interesting  personage ;  she  is  a  relic  of  the
primitive  age  in  which   relationship  was
reckoned  with  regard  to  the  mother  (so  with
the  Accadians,  Etruscans,  Finns,  etc.).    It
should  be  added,  however,  that  once  (viz.  1
Kings  xi.  19)  the  same  title,  '*  mistress,"  is
applied  to  the  queen-consort.  Hnmble  your-
selves, sit  down;  rather,  sU  down  in  abase-
ment ;  i.e.  take  the  station  suitable  for  your
abased  circumstances  (oomp.  Isa.  xlvii.  1).
Tonr    principalities ;    rather,    your    head-
ornaments.

Ver.  19. — The  rendering  of  the  Authorized
Version  is  substantially  right,  as  the  events
referred  to  are  obviously  future.  The  tense,
however,  in  the  Hebrew,  is  the  perfect — viz.
that  of  prophetic  certitude.  Jeremiah  sees
it  all  in  prophetic  vision,  as  if  it  were  actually
taking  place.  The  cities  of  the  south;  i.e.
of  the  dry,  southern  country  of  Judah,  called
the  Negeb— shall  be  [are]  shut  up — ue,
blocked  up  with  ruins  (as  Isa.  xxiv.  10>—
and  none  shall  open  them  (openeth  them),
because  all  Judah  will  have  been  carried
captive.    (For  fulfilment,  see  ch.  zxxiv.  7.^

Vers.  20, 21. — The  captivity  being  still  (in
spite  of  the  perfect  tense)  a  thing  of  the
future,  the  prophet  can  seek  to  awadcen  the
conscience  of  the  careless  under-shepherd  by
showing  how  self-caused  is  his  (or  rather
her)  punishment.

Ver.  20. — Lift  np  your  eyes.  Tho  verb  is
fem.  sing.,  the  pronoun  (in  suffix  form)  maso.
plu., — a  clear  indication  that  the  person
addressed  is  a  collective.  Probably  the
**  daughter  of  Zion  "  is  intended,  which,  in
a  certain  sense,  might  be  called  the  **  shep-
herd "  or  leader  of  the  rest  of  the  nation.
From  the  nortiL  Again  this  horror  of  the
north  as  the  source  of  calamity  (see  on  ch.
Hi).

Ver.  21.— What  wilt  thoa  say,  etc  ?  The
rendering  of  the  verse  is  uncertain,  though


OH.  xm,  1—27.]  TEE   BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.


335


the  Authorized  Version  undoubtedly  re-
ouiret  correction.  The  alternatives  are.
What  itilt  thou  tay  txihen  he  shall  appoint
over  thee  (but  thou  thyself  hast  trained
them  against  thee)  familiar  friends  (u  thy
head  f  and,  What  will  thou  say  when  he  tJiall
appoint  over  thee  (hose  whom  thou  hast  taught
to  be  thy  familiar  friends  as  thy  head  f  The
rendering  "  familiar  friends  "  is  justified  by
Ps.  Iv.  13 ;  Prov.  xvi.  28 ;  xvii.  9 ;  Mioah  vii.
5.  The  "  captains  *'  of  Authorized  Version,
or  rather  *'  tribal  chiefs,"  is  unsuitable.

Ver.  22. — Ihy  heeli  made  bare;  rather,
treated  vnth  videnoe.  The  fate  held  out  to
the  daughter  of  Zion  (trained  to  walk  about
with  **  tinkling  ornaments,*'  Isa.  ii.  18)  is  to
plod  wearily  along  with  bare  feet  (comp.  Isa.
xlvii.  1).

Ver.  24.— As  the  itnbble.  "The  word
means  not  what  we  call  stubble,  but  the
broken  straw  which  had  to  be  separated
from  the  wheat  after  the  corn  had  been
trampled  out  by  the  oxen.  Sometimes  it
was  burnt  as  useless ;  at  other  times  left  to
be  blown  away  by  the  wind  coming  from
the  desert,  on  which  see  oh.  It.  11;  Job  i.
19"  (Payne  Smith).

Ver.  25. — ^The  portion  of  thymeanires ;  i.e,
thy  measured  portion.    But  it  is  probably


safer  to  render,  the  portion  of  thy  garment j
the  upper  garment  being  used  instead  of  a
bag  to  hold  anything  (comp.  Ruth  iii.  15 ;
2  Kings  iv.  39).  In  falsehood;  t.e.  in  false
gods  (ch.  xvi.  19).

Ver.  26.— Therefore  will  I,  etc  But  the
Hebrew  is  much  more  forcible,  "And  I
also,"  etc.,  implying,  as  Calvin  remarks
(comp.  Prov.  i.  26),  a  certain  retaliation.
Upon  thy  fiaoe ;  an  allusion  to  Nah.  iii.  5.

Ver.  27. — I  have  seen,  etc.  Tho  Hebrew
is  again  more  forcible  than  the  English.  It
runs,  **  Thine  adulteries  and  thy  neighings,"
etc.  I  (this  is  an  exclamation  as  it  were ;  then
more  reflectively), "  I  have  seen  tfadne  abomi-
nations." Hflighingi ;  t.e.  passionate  craving
for  illegitimate  objects  of  worship  (oomp.  ch.
il  24,  25 ;  v.  8).  In  the  fields.  The  Hebrew
has  the  singular.  The  "field,"  as  usual,
means  the  open  country.  WUt  thou  not,
etc.  ?  rather.  How  long  yet  ere  thou  be  made
dean^  In  ver.  23  the  prophet  had  vehemently
declared  his  people  to  be  incorrigible.  But,
like  the  tenaer  Hosea,  he  cannot  continue
to  hold  such  gloomy  thoughts ;  surely  Israel,
Qod's  people,  must  eventually  be  "  made
clean  " !  But  this  can  only  be  as  the  result
of  judicial  affliction,  and  these  afifiiotions
will  be  no  slight  or  transient  ones.


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1 — 11.— 2%e  spoiled  girdle.  I.  God's  people  are  like  a  girdle  to  Gk)D.
1.  They  aro  his  peculiar  property.  The  girdle  is  a  private  personal  possession.  It
belongs  solely  to  the  wearer.  When  all  ordinary  property  is  taken  from  him  he  retains
the  clothes  on  his  body.  Even  the  bankrupt  has  a  right  to  these.  2.  They  are  near
to  Qod,  This  girdle— really  an  under-garment — ^is  close  to  tho  person  of  the  wearer.
God  does  not  simply  hold  his  people  as  an  absentee  landlord  horns  bis  property.  He
draws  them  near  to  himself.  He  cnerishes  them  with  affection,  sustains  the  burden  of
them,  carries  them  with  him  in  his  glorious  out-going  to  works  of  wonder  and  mercy
and  in  his  blessed  in-coming  to  Divine  peace  and  sab&tio  repose.  3.  They  are  a  glory
to  God,  (Ver.  11.)  Garments  are  worn,  not  only  for  clothine,  but  to  add  grace  and
beauty.  God's  people  are  more  than  safe  with  him ;  they  are  glorious.  It  is  true  that
they  have  no  inherent  grace  which  they  can  add  to  the  splendour  of  God,  but  they  can
adorn  that  splendour  by  reflecting  it,  as  the  clouds  which  gird  about  the  rising  sun
seem  to  increase  its  beauty  by  reflecting  its  own  rich  rays.  4.  They  are  required  to
cleave  to  God,  Gkxl  graciously  takes  his  people  near  to  himself;  yet  they  must  volun-
tarily bind  themselves  to  him  in  love,  in  devotion,  in  submission,  in  obemenoe.

II.  Gk)D's    PEOPLE,   IK    THEIB    BIN,   ABE   LIKE   A   QIBDLE    DEFILED   AND    UNWABHBD.

1.  Jeremiah  was  forbidden  to  put  the  girdle  in  water  (ver.  1).  Whilst  living  in  this
world  the  best  men  daily  contract  stains  of  sin ;  but  God  has  provided  a  fountain  for
cleansing,  and  by  daily  penitence  and  faith  in  his  purifying  grace  the  soul  may  be
made  and  preserved  pure  (Zech.  xiiL  1).  As  all  have  sinned  and  do  sin,  all  need  this
constant  cleansing.  To  neglect  it  is  to  become  increasingly  foul  and  unfit  for  the
honour  that  God  bestows  upon  his  people.  2.  This  corruption  is  manifest  (1)  in
neglect  of  the  will  of  6K)d — ^**  fiiey  refuse  to  hear  my  words ; "  (2)  in  wilful  obstinacy'^
they  *'walk  in  the  stubbornness  of  their  heart;"  (8)  in  positive  disobedience  and
impurity — they  **  they  walk  after  other  gods,  and  serve  them,  and  worship  them ; "
(4)  in  inveterate  impenitence — they  "  would  not  hear."

III.  The  PUNISHMENT  OF  God'B  SINFUL  PEOPLE  18  LIKE  THE  BPOIUNO  OF  THE  OIBDLE.


336  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  xm.  1—27.


1.  They  are  cast  off.  The  unwashed  girdle  can  be  worn  no  longer.  In  their  holiness
Gk)d'8  people  were  his  glorv;  in  their  defilement  they  are  his  dishonour.  Ood  can
endure  the  presence  of  nothing  impure  (Heb.  xii.  14).  2.  They  are  left  to  their  own
increasing  aefilement  The  unwasned  garment  is  buried,  and  becomes  only  worse.
The  most  terrible  punishment  of  sin  is  to  be  left  to  sin  unchecked.  Vice  then  becomes
ingrained — a  second  nature.  3.  They  are  dishonoured.  The  girdle  is  visibly  marred
with  the  earth  in  which  it  is  buried.  Internal  impurity  is  punished  with  external
shame.  Punishment  is  appropriate  to  guilt  Pride  is  chastised  by  humiliation.  4.
Though  their  sin  may  be  hidden  for  a  time,  it  will  be  revealed  at  last.  The  girdle  is
buried  only  to  be  exhumed.  The  longer  it  was  buried  the  worse  must  have  been  its
condition  when  it  was  again  exposed  to  view.  The  corruption  of  the  heart  cannot  be
ultimately  concealed ;  it  must  reveal  itself  in  the  life.  In  the  resurrection-life,  wherein
the  body  is  spiritual  and  fits  truly  and  expresses  clearly  the  soul  that  inhabits  it,  the
foul  soul  will  be  compelled  to  inhabit  a  foul  body.  5.  They  are  rendered  worthless.
The  girdle  is  utterly  spoiled — profitable  for  nothing.  Sin  not  only  dishonours,  it
destroys.  The  girdle  becomes  rotten.  As  dirt  rots  a  garment,  so  sin  rots  a  soul.  It  not
only  makes  it  foul  and  hideous,  but  it  destroys  its  faculties  and  energies,  degrades  its
essential  nature,  and  introduces  the  corruption  of  death  (Jas.  i.  15).

Vers.  12 — 14. — The  parable  of  the  wine-flagons,  I,  Tiie  proud  are  like  wine-
flagons.  Jeremiah  is  thinking  chiefly  of  the  aristocracy  of  his  nation  (ver.  13)  and
their  pride  (ver.  17).  The  metaphor,  therefore,  specially  designates  the  proud.  These
are  swelled-out  and  pretentious,  but  not  solid,  and  do  not  contain  anything  good  of
their  own.    They  are  brittle.    Pride  is  itself  a  source  of  danger  (Prov.  xvi.  18^.

II.  The  wrath  of  God  ib  like  FERMENTiNa  wine.  It  is  a  disturbing  mfluence,
breaking  in  upon  the  quiet  of  self-complacency.  The  more  its  natural  tendency  to
reduce  us  to  repentance  is  suppressed  by  pride,  the  more  terribly  will  its  presence
agitate  us.  The  larger  the  flagon,  the  more  wine  will  it  contain ;  the  gi'eater  the  rank,
the  greater  the  trouble  when  universal  retribution  comes.  The  more  empty  the  flagon,
the  more  wine  will  it  contain;  so  the  less  of  real  solid  worth  there  is  in  a  man's
life,  the  more  room  will  there  be  for  the  exercise  of  Divine  wrath  against  his  wretched
condition.

III.  The  effect  of  the  wrath  of  God  on  the  proud  is  like  the  rolling  of
wine-flagons  filled  with  fermenting  wine.  The  flagons  are  imagined  to  be  drunken,
and  to  behave  as  drunken  men  would  behave.  In  this  condition  they  exemplify  the
state  of  those  into  whom  God  has  poured  the  vials  of  his  wrath.  This  does  not  simply
work  in  them,  leaving  their  exterior  undisturbed.  Spiritual  though  it  is,  it  aficcts  the
whole  life.  We  cannot  escape  the  efiect  of  God*s  anser  by  ignoring  spiritual  facts  and
living  in  the  outside,  worldly  life  alone.  This  and  all  our  experience  will  be  disturbed.
The  flagons  strike  one  another.  (Companions  in  the  pleasures  of  sin  become  mutual
enemies  in  the  punishment  of  it.  Moral  corruption  leads  to  social  discord.  Civil  war
is  one  of  the  greatest  calamities  which  can  overtake  a  nation,  and  when  this  arises,  not
from  any  contention  for  right  or  liberty,  but  from  the  outburst  of  wild  passions,  selfish
greed,  etc.,  it  is  doubly  destructive.  In  such  an  event  wickedness  becomes  its  own
executioner.

Ver.  IC. — Darkness,  I.  Sin  plunges  the  soul  into  darkness.  "Light  is
sown  for  the  righteous  **  (Ps.  xcvii.  11).  The  darkness  of  evil  thoughts  and  an  evil  will
throws  its  shadow  out  on  the  world,  and  ultimately  brines  gloom  over  the  whole  of  life.
1.  This  darkness  is  distressing.  The  benighted  feel  a  horror  of  great  darkness  falling
upon  them  amid  the  wild  and  lonely  mountains.  When  God  withdraws  the  sunshine
01  his  grace  this  mournful  condition  must  be  the  experience  of  the  godless.  2.  It  is
confusing.  They  "  stumble  upon  the  twilight  mountains."  Without  (Jod  we  have  no
true  guide  in  life.  There  are  mountains  of  difficulty  to  be  overcome  in  our  earthly
pilgrimage,  steep  and  toilsome  and  dangerous.  How  dreadful  to  venture  unenlightened
and  unguided  through  such  pathless  wilds!  If  the  life  were  to  be  spent  in  a  paradise,
it  would  be  sad  to  dwell  amidst  its  beauties  in  perpetual  gloom ;  but,  seeing  that  it  is
a  pilgrimage  over  the  mountains,  it  is  fearful  to  be  left  in  darkness.  3.  It  will
grrno  into  deeper  darkness.    At  first  it  is  a  twilight.    Some  hope  that  this  is  the


VH.  XIII.  1— i27.J     THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  337

herald  of  the  dawn;  but  they  are  mistaken — it  is  the  portend  of  the  ni^ht.  The
mingled  lights  and  shadows  will  molt  into  the  blackness  of  midnight.  The  mixed
joys  and  sorrows,  hopes  and  fears,  of  this  life,  which  some  sanguine  souls  suppose  to  be
the  worst  condition  they  will  be  in,  and  likely  to  give  place  to  rest  and  joy  hereafter,
will  end  to  the  sinner  in  the  terrible  darkness  of  a  much  worse  future  retribution.
4.  The  present  light  is  no  guarantee  that  the  darkness  is  not  approaching.  The
brightest  day  may  be  followed  by  the  blackest  night.

II.  The  prospect  of  this  darkness  should  warn  men  to  avert  it.  1.  It  is  not
inevitable.  It  has  not  yet  come.  There  is  still  time  to  escape.  If  there  were  no
remedy,  all  warnings  would  be  useless.  The  very  utterance  of  warnings  implies  that
the  terrors  to  which  they  refer  may  be  avoided.  2.  The  contemplation  of  its
approaching  advent  should  urge  men  to  seek  an  escape.  The  prospect  is  gloomy,  and
many  will  not  face  a  gloomy  prospect.  They  dislike  allusions  to  unpleasant  subjects.
But  it  is  necessary  to  contemplate  such  sad  tniths,  that  men  may  be  roused  by
selfish  fear  when  they  will  not  bo  moved  by  the  love  of  Ood.  3.  The  way  of  escape  is
to  be  found  in  "  giving  glory  to  Otod,"  It  is  returning  from  rebellion  to  the  service
of  Gt)d,  humbling  ourselves,  rejecting  the  pride  which  clings  to  the  old  sin,  and
regarding  Ood  alone  as  worthy  of  honour,  and  so  submitting  to  his  will  and  obeying
his  conmiands  as  to  glorify  him  by  our  acts.  To  the  Christian  all  this  is  implied
in  faith  in  Christ  which  involves  the  humbling  of  ourselves  before  him,  and  our  trust
in  his  grace  which  glorifies  his  love,  and  loyalty  to  his  will  which  honours  his  rights  of
royalty.

Ver.  18. — Boyalty  humbled,  I.  God  is  the  Judge  of  kings.  They  are  as  fur
beneath  Gk)d  as  are  the  meanest  beggars.  Their  rank  is  no  protection  against  the
execution  of  Divine  justice ;  their  power  no  security  against  the  coni^equences  of  the
wrath  of  God.  No  earthly  honour  or  power  will  servo  men  when  they  stand  before
the  great  throne  of  judgment.

II.  Wicked  kings  will  meet  with  severe  punishment.  The  greater  the  privileges
they  have  had,  the  more  have  they  been  able  to  abuse  them,  and  therefore  the  greater
their  guilt.  The  larger  their  influence  has  been,  the  more  harm  have  they  done  in
iLsing  that  influence  for  evil  purposes.  All  who  are  entrusted  with  exceptional  power
should  remember  that  this  incurs  exceptional  responsibility.

III.  The  pride  of  kings  will  be  punished  with  humiliation.  Every  sin  will
have  its  appropriate  retribution.  '*  Whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap,"
not  only  in  the  main  characteristics,  but  in  particular  features.  Pride  thus  naturally
sows  the  seed  of  shame  (Prov.  xxix.  23).

IV.  The  greatness  of  the  present  prosperity  of  wicked  kings  will  enhance
the  suffering  of  their  future  retribution.  They  who  stand  highest  can  fall
lowest  Pjverty  is  felt  more  keenly  by  people  who  were  once  in  affluence  than  by
the  children  of  the  poor.  The  memory  of  his  former  luxuries  must  have  added  keen-
ness to  the  sufierings  of  Dives  in  Hades.  We  are  not  to  infer  from  this  that  future
retribution  is  only  a  compensation  for  the  inequality  of  the  joys  and  sorrows  of  this  life,
that  kings  will  suffer  for  their  very  greatness  (for  the  wicked  poor  will  be  wretched  here-
after, while  the  good  and  great  will  be  blessed  in  the  future  with  heavenly  treasures),
but  that  if  we  are  unfaithful^  the  measure  of  future  distress  will  necessarily  be  partly
determined  by  that  of  present  enjoyment.  We  need  not,  therefore,  be  envious  of  the
prosperity  of  the  wicked.  Rather  it  should  fill  us  with  horror,  grief,  and  pity  as  we
consider  what  a  foors  paradise  they  live  in— what  anguish  will  grow  out  of  the  contrast
of  it  with  the  certain  retribution  of  all  sin  I

Ver.  23. — TTie  Ethiopian's  skin  and  the  lecpard^s  spots,  I.  Sin  becomes  inherent
in  the  nature  of  men.  The  black  of  the  £thiopian*s  skin  and  the  spots  of  the
leopard  are  natural.  Sin  is,  of  course,  originally  unnatural.  Yet  it  is  so  ingrafted  into
the  very  life  of  men  that  it  becomes  part  of  their  nature.  1.  Men  inherit  tendencies  to
evil ;  e,g,  the  child  of  the  drunkard  is  likely  to  feel  strong  temptation  to  intemperance,
etc.  We  are  not  to  blame  for  what  we  inherit ;  but  we  do  suffer  through  it.  The
degraded  moral  nature  is  a  fact,  and  one  for  which  the  possessor  of  it  sufiisrs,  although
be  will  not  be  responsible  for  it,  nor  punished  simply  for  having  it,  but  only  for  the

JEREMIAH.  z


338  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PUOPUET  JEREMIAH,    [cu.  xiii.  1—27.


way  in  which,  with  his  frce«will,  he  yields  to  it,  and,  on  his  own  account,  makes  it
still  more  corrupt.  2.  Men  habituate  themselves  to  sin.  Habit  is  second  nature.  Tho
sin  which  is  wilfully  chosen  becomes  a  tyrannous  habit.  We  are  colouring  our  very
being  by  the  tone  of  our  thoughts  and  actions.  What  we  do  to-day,  that  we  will  be
to-morrow.  We  are  the  result  of  our  own  past  deeds.  He  who  speaks  or  acts  a  lie
becomes  a  liar ;  he  who  indulges  in  impurity  becomes  an  unclean  being ;  he  who  follows
Beltish  impulses  becomes  a  creature  of  selfishness.  Thus  every  man  is  building  up  a
habitation  for  his  soul  by  his  own  deeds.  What  shall  this  house  be  ?  A  temple  of
divinity?  a  palace  of  pure  delights?  a  chamel-houso  of  corruption?  or  a  prison  of
gloom?

II.  Tbib  inherent  condition  of  sin  makes  it  impossible  fob  any  man  to  ibradi-
OATE  IT.  1.  Si'lf-reformaiion  is  impossible.  Sin  is  not  a  mere  defilement  to  bo  washed
off.  It  is  ingrained.  It  Is  in  the  blood,  in  the  life,  in  the  nature.  Action  is  according
to  character.  If  the  character  is  corrupt,  so  must  bo  the  action.  It  is  true  we  are
free  to  do  as  we  will,  but  so  long  as  our  nature  is  corrupt  wo  shall  will  to  do  evil,
because  tho  will  is  part  of  the  nature.  But  apart  from  the  vexed  question  of  the
freedom  of  the  will,  every  man  is  conscious  of  the  diflBculty  of  overcoming  opposing
habits,  even  when  his  will  is  roused  against  them.  When  he  would  do  good  evil  is  pro-
sent  with  him,  and  this  evil  is  so  strong  that  it  can  only  be  regarded  as  a  law  of  (corrupted)
nature  (Kom.  vii.  21 — 23).  2.  Perfect  reformation  must  be  sought  from  Qod,  This
must  be  regeneration  (John  iii.  3).  Man  can  do  much  with  himself,  but  only  God  can
•*  create  "  in  liim  "  a  clean  heart "  and  make  him  "  a  new  creature."  Therefore,  to  be  bom
again;  we  must  be  born  "  from  above."  Regeneration  must  be  the  work  of  the  Spirit,
which  is  the  brooding  source  of  all  life.  But  this  is  possible  for  all  (Matt.  xix.  2G).
The  impossibility  for  self-reformation  should  not  leave  us  in  sullen  indifference,  but
should  rouse  us  to  seek  the  one  sure  means  of  renewal  in  crucifixion  of  the  old  life  and
spiritual  resurrection  to  a  new  life,  through  yielding  ourselves  up  to  the  influence  of  the
grace  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus.

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1 — 11. — The  marred  girdle.  This  and  the  following  emblem  are  intended  to
symbolize  the  characters  and  punishment  of  pride  in  sjuritual  and  carnal  men
respectively.  Tiie  "girdle"  of  linen  cloth  worn  by  the  priest  represents  the  close
relation  of  Judah  and  Jerusalem  to  Jehovah.  He  had  chosen  them,  and  taken  them
into  closest  fellowship.  They  were  as  his  cincture  to  declare  his  character  and  glory  to
men.  But  they  had  abused  his  confidence.  For  them,  therefore,  the  fate  was  reserved
which  is  described  in  connection  with  the  girdle.  Where  the  cleft  of  the  rock  was,
in  Ephrath  or  Euphrates,  is  not  quite  plain ;  but  the  probability  is  that  the  last-
mentioned  is  really  meant,  and  that  a  journey  to  it  was  inaeed  made  by  the  prophet.

I.   The  DIGNITY  AND  IDEAL  CHABACTEB  OF  God's  PEOPLE  THUS  SET  FORTH.    The  linen

girdle  worn  by  the  priests  was  a  portion  of  their  appointed  and  consecrated  garments.
It  represented,  therefore,  the  idea  of  consecration  arising  from  nearness  and  closeness.
They  were  highly  favoured  amongst  the  nations  as  being  brought  into  immediate  rela-
tion with  Jehovah.  "  As  the  girdle  cleaveth  to  the  loins  of  a  man,  so  have  I  caused  to
cleave  unto  me  the  whole  house  of  Israel,  and  the  whole  house  of  Judah,  saith  the
Lord  "  Tver.  11).  And  as  the  girdle,  by  bracing  the  body,  becomes  a  means  of  strength,
80  Israel  was  to  bo  the  power  of  God  amongst  the  nations  of  the  world.  They  were  to
bo  as  kings  and  priests  before  God,  to  show  forth  his  righteousness  and  to  execute  his
will.

II.  The  CONDITION  upon  which  THESE  HAVE  TO  BE  MAINTAINED.  Simply  tecausc
they  had  been  so  designed  in  the  eternal  purpose.  They  had  no  security  for  this  position
being  retained.  It  would  not  do  for  them  to  rely  upon  prestige.  With  spiritual
strength  relaxed  and  moral  purity  lost,  they  were  no  longer  fit  for  the  honourable
service  to  which  they  had  been  called.  It  was  only  as  their  spiritual  life  rose  to  the
height  of  their  calling,  and  maintained  itself  from  age  to  age  by  means  of  Divine  truth
and  continual  exercise  of  faith,  that  they  could  expect  to  retain  their  privileges.  But
this  Israel  was  far  from  seeing.    She  required,  therefore,  to  be  taught  the  truth  of  it  by


en.  xiu.  1— 27.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  339

experience,  and  nothing  would  do  this  better  than  that  which  the  symbol  suggested.
Their  outward  circumstances  and  position  would  be  made  to  correspond  ^vith  their
inward  character,  so  that  all  men,  and  even  they  themselves,  would  cease  to  be  deceived.
This  is  ever  the  order  of  the  Divine  government.  He  will  set  our  secret  sins  in  the
light  of  his  countenance.

III.  The  mebsengeb  of  God  should  spare  no  effort  to  embody  and  enforce  the
TRUTH  HE  HAS  TO  DECLARE.  Whether  Ephrath  in  Israel  or  Euphrates  was  meant,  a
journey  of  considerable  length  had  to  be  taken,  and  much  trouble  was  involved.  But
the  prophet  did  not  grudge  this  if  thereby  he  might  appeal  through  the  imagination
the  more  forcibly  to  the  heart  of  his  people.  So  sometimes  ancient  prophets  had  to
submit  to  themselves  being  made  signs  that  were  spoken  against,  lliere  can  be  no
question  that  the  manner  adopted  by  the  prophet  of  illustrating  his  message  was  most
effective  and  striking.  And  it  was  clear  even  to  the  simplest  understanding.  An  illus-
trative style  of  discourse  is  carefully  to  be  distinguished  from  a  florid  one;  and  anything
which  conveys  more  vivid  impressions  to  one's  self  is  more  likely  to  add  impressive-
ness  and  vivid  force  to  what  one  has  to  say  to  others.  This  going  to  Euphrates
on  the  part  of  the  prophet  was  quite  an  important  business,  but  it  was  justified  by  its
result.  And  so  preachers  should  spare  no  pains  to  link  the  tmth  of  God  with  the
actions,  the  experiences,  and  the  interests  of  men. — M.

Vers.  12, 15. — Broken  pitchers;  or,  worldly  sufficiency  and  its  punishment.  I.  Thr
SIGNS  OF  this  disposition.  The  threatenings  of  God  are  interpreted  as  if  they  had
been  tniisms  of  blessing  justified  by  the  unbelievers'  own  experience.  The  prophet  is
therefore  despised,  and  his  message  wrested  from  its  original  meaning.  The  people
were  so  oblivious  to  their  own  guilt  that  they  looked  forward  without  fear  to  the
future,  or  they  professed  to  do  so.  They  had  clothed  themselves  in  triple  armour  of
self-sufficiencv  against  Divine  warnings.  So  the  worldly  mind  continually  prophecies
good  for  itself  instead  of  evil,  and  inverts  the  messages  of  Divine  grace.  The  sharpest
experiences  and  most  signal  reverses  are  not  enough  to  rid  it  of  this  folly,  and  thereby
it  condemns  itself.

II.  How  it  is  DEALT  WITH  BY  GoD.  That  this  is  provoking  to  the  Divine  mind  is
evident.  It  is  a  fresh  element  added  to  the  guilt  already  denounced,  llie  insult  to
the  messenger  of  God  must  be  avenged,  and  this  is  accomplished:  1.  By  removing  all
ambiguity  from  his  words.  Their  real  meaning  is  explained  so  that  no  one  can  mistake
it.  In  this  pointed  disillusion  there  is  the  greater  emphasis  imparted  to  the  original
message.  Gfod  will  not  suffer  any  one  to  remain  in  ignorance  of  his  final  destiny,
whether  it  bo  good  or  evil.  2.  The  doom  already  predicted  is  repeated  with  expressions
of  Divine  determination  and  anger.  Civil  discord  and  national  destruction  are  plainly
set  forth,  and  whilst  these  take  place  the  ear  of  an  offended  Qod  is  turned  away.  He
will  "  not  pity,  nor  spare,  nor  have  mercy,  but  destroy  them."

III.  It  is  well,  therefore,  for  men  to  give  reverent  hbed  TO  DrviNB  WABNDiaS
AND  instructions.  Sometimes  in  the  history  of  the  Church  omens,  dreams,  and
visions  have  been  given  whose  meaning  was  not  clear,  but  on  prayerful  solicitation  it
has  been  revealed.  Wilful  blindness  cannot  escape  punishment,  because  it  provokes
the  just  anger  of  GK)d.  But  to  those  who  ask  in  humble  inquiry  what  the  will  of  the
Lord  may  be,  he  will  return  a  gracious  answer,  and  declare  how  the  evil  may  be
averted. — M.

Ver.  16. — Days  of  grace  and  how  they  should  he  spent.  The  mind  of  the  prophet  was
full  of  the  doom  which  he  had  predicted,  and  he  was  apprehensive  of  the  spiritual
results  of  exile  and  confusion  with  heathen  nations.  The  people  themselves,  however,
did  not  exhibit  any  such  anxiety.  They  treated  his  words  as  idle  tales,  or  as  the
expression  of  ill  nature  and  enmity.  The  relation  of  these  two  is  a  typical  one.  From
age  to  age  the  preacher  of  righteousness  urges  his  pleas  and  presses  for  immediate
attention  to  reformation  of  life.  As  constantly  those  addressed  put  off  the  needed
repentance  and  waste  the  time  which  is  afforded  them  for  working  out  their  salvation.

I.  The  present  is  to  be  regarded  as  a  gracious  opportunity  for  bepentanck
AND  SPIRITUAL  SERVICE.  The  element  of  time  in  these,  as  in  other  prophecies,  is  left
for  the  most  part  indefinite.    Exact  dates  would  defeat  the  purpose  the  message  of  the


340  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.    [cH.  xni.  1— 27.

prophet  has  in  view.  It  was  sufficient  for  him  to  impress  u^x)n  them  that  there  would
be  but  a  short  time  between  the  present  and  the  fate  he  had  described.  It  was  a  sign  of
€k)d's  grace  that  he  had  been  sent  to  warn  them.  They  were  to  listen  to  his  voice  as  to
the  voice  of  Jehovah.  And  in  the  event  of  repentance,  that  which  was  near  at  hand
might  be  indefinitely  postponed  or  altogether  averted.  But  in  any  case  the  really  essen-
tial worls  of  repentance  ought  to  be  done  whilst  they  had  clear  views  of  the  nature  of
their  sin  and  tne  requirements  of  God's  Law.    From  Josli.  vii.  19  it  is  evident  that  the

ghrase,  "  Give  glory  to  the  Lord,"  meant  nothing  else  than  to  repent.  It  suggests  the
onour  of  God,  which  is  acknowledged  and  felt  by  the  humbled  sinner  as  he  bows
before  the  footstool  of  grace  and  tells  out  the  dark  history  of  his  sin.  The  lower  he  is
in  his  own  estimation  the  higher  is  that  throne  of  glory  before  which  he  lies  prostrate.
And  at  such  a  time  the  grandest  conceptions  are  given  of  the  greatness,  the  power,  and
the  love  of  God.  His  forgiveness  shines  forth  in  new,  unspeakable  splendour.  And
the  restored  sinner  is  eager  to  declare  to  others  the  grace  which  he  himself  has  received.
But  all  this  is  necessarily  a  work  of  time,  and  demands  for  its  adequate  fulfilment  the
full  possession  of  our  faculties  and  the  clearest  perceptions  of  truth.

XL  The  risks  incubred  by  delay  in  these  duties  are  then  described.  The
figure  is  that  of  a  traveller  in  a  mountainous  region  who  loses  his  way  amon^ist  the  dark
rocks  until  eventually  the  deepening  gloom  leaves  him  in  despair  and  death.  The  picture
is  very  vivid,  and  appeals  to  the  deepest  human  feeling.  It  suggested  the  mental  and
spiritual  confusion  which  were  likely  to  arise  from  unlooked-for  reverses,  from  captivity
in  a  heathen  land,  and  from  forgetfulness  of  the  traditions  of  Israel.  But  it  is  even
more  truly  correspondent  with  the  condition  of  those  who  have  delayed  making  their
peace  with  God  until  they  have  suffered  mental  eclipse,  or  been  overtaken  by  the  terror,
the  weakness,  etc.,  of  a  death- bed.  The  worth  of  "a  death-bed  repentance  "  has  been
rightly  discounted  by  every  preacher  and  writer  of  the  Church.  There  is  but  one
instance  of  such  a  thing  in  Scripture.  It  is  but  seldom  that  resolutions  formed  under
such  circumstances,  in  the  event  of  restoration  to  health,  avail  against  the  temptations
and  lifelong  habits  of  the  sinner. — M.

Ver.  17.— (See  on  ch.  x.  19.)— M.

Ver.  23. — Moral  helplessness :  how  induced,  I.  The  extent  to  which  it  may  go.
The  metaphors  employed  are  intended  to  illustrate  the  difticulty  of  getting  rid  of  that
which  has  become  a  part  of  one's  self,  or  which  has  become  natural  to  one.  It  is  evident
that  superficial  means  would  never  produce  the  effect  supposed,  because  that  which
seems  to  bo  superficial  has  really  its  root  in  the  nature,  and  would  be  reproduced
similarly  in  place  of  that  which  was  removed.  The  doctrine  is  that  there  are  certain
^vils  into  which  men  fall  which  may  appear  to  be  external,  matters  of  custom  and
observance,  but  which  have  really  their  origin  in  the  depmvity  of  tlie  heart.  Any
merely  external  reform,  like  that  of  Josiah,  would  fail  to  effect  a  permanent  change,
hecause  the  source  of  the  errors  and  transgressions  which  were  corrected  was  deeper
than  the  remedy  could  reach.  And  this  is  the  case  with  the  sins  of  men.  To  cease  to
do  evil  we  have  not  only  to  stay  the  hand  but  to  purify  the  heart.  To  cease  to  do
evil  we  must  cease  to  think  it,  to  feel  it,  and  to  conceive  it.  So  helpless  is  the  sinner
when  he  stands  face  to  face  with  the  problem  of  reformation.  Effort  after  effort  is
made  and  fails.  It  is  bound  to  fail  because  the  source  of  the  wrong-doing  has  not  been
rectified.     To  change  himself — who  is  capable  of  this  feat?

II.  Causes  of  it,  real  and  unreal.  Excuses  readily  suggest  themselves  to  the
sinner  who  would  avoid  the  humiliation  of  repentance.  He  may  ask  the  question,  as
if  it  were  a  mystery,  "  Wherefore  come  these  things  upon  me?"  Or,  ignoring  the
witness  of  conscience,  he  may  attribute  his  weakness  to  circumslAnces  and  external
influences.  This  is  the  error  which  the  prophet  refutes.  With  great  skill  he  shows
the  terrible  power  of  habit:  how  men  continue  to  do  that  which  they  have  been
doing  simply  because  they  have  been  doing  it.  The  feet  acquire  a  fatal  facility  in
transgression,  and  the  hands  a  skill  in  working  evil.  They  almost  act  automatically
when  things  forbidden  are  suggested.  But  when  the  commandments  of  God  are  con-
cerned they  are  unfamiliar  with  the  duties  enjoined,  and  the  will  is  not  resolute  enough
to  persevere  in  them.


CH.  xm.  1— 27.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  341


III.  Its  great  rekedy.  Seeing  that  in  himself  the  sinner  is  without  strenp;th,  it
would  appear  at  first  as  if  he  could  only  despair.  But  this  is  not  the  teaching  of  the
prophet.  He  has  already  counselled  vigorous  effort,  and  implied  that  a  commencement
and  continuance  in  well-doing  were  possihlc.  But  the  change  could  only  begin  at  a
spiritual  point,  viz.  repentance.  And  this,  as  Scripture  abundantly  shows,  though
within  the  power  of  every  one,  is  a  supernatural  grace.  A  true  sorrow  for  sin  may  be
induced  in  answer  to  prayer,  by  the  study  of  Scripture,  aud  the  contemplation  of
Christ ;  but  it  is  always  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  When  that  grace,  however,  has
once  been  attained,  it  is  open  to  the  sinner  to  reverse  the  process  by  which  he  has  been
enslaved.  After  conversion  evil  habit  will  assert  itself,  and  can  only  be  met  by  con-
stant dependence  upon  Divine  grace  and  constant  effort  after  holiness.  The  good  habit
formed  by  repeated  and  regular  actions  according  to  the  Law  of  God  is  the  best  anti-
dote to  the  evil  one.— M.

Vers.  1^12. — The  ruined  girdle;  or^  it  may  be  too  late  to  mend.  The  much-
needed  lesson  of  this  section  was  taught  by  means  of  one  of  those  acted  parables  of
which  we  have  so  many  instances  both  in  the  Old  Testament  and  in  the  New :  e,g,
Zedekiah's  horns  of  iron  (1  Kings  xxii.  11) ;  the  strange  marriages  of  Isa.  viii.  1,
Hos.  i.  2;  the  two  yokes  (ch.  xxvii.  2);  and  in  the  New  Testament,  our  Lord's  standing
the  little  child  in  the  midst  of  the  disciples;  the  washing  the  disciples*  feet;  the
withering  of  the  fig  tree ;  the  taking  of  Paul's  girdle  (Acts  xxi.  11),  etc.  The  present
instance  seems  very  strange,  and  to  us  it  would  have  appeared  unmeaning,  uncouth,  and
simply  grotesque.  But  to  Orientals,  and  especially  to  Jews,  the  dramatic  action  of  the
prophet—for  we  regard  what  is  here  said  as  having  been  literally  done — would  be  very
impressive.  It  was  a  strange  garb  for  the  prophet  to  be  arrayed  in.  It  would  attract
attention,  be  the  subject  of  much  comment,  and,  when  the  prophet  continued  to  wear  it,,
though  soiled  and  in  much  need  of  washing,  this  would  cause  more  comment  still,  and
would  indicate  to  the  people  that  the  strange  garb  and  conduct  of  the  prophet  had
meaning  and  intent  which  it  would  be  well  for  them  to  gi^e  heed  to.  Then  the  taking
of  the  girdle  to  Euphrates — whatever  place  be  meant— burying  it  there,  leaving  it;  and
then  finding  it  and  fetching  it  back,  and  no  doubt  exhibiting  it,  ruined,  worthless,
good  for  nothing ; — all  this  would  rivet  the  people's  attention,  and  deeply  impress  their
minds.  Now,  one  evident,  if  not  the  chief,  lesson  designed  to  be  taught  by  this  to  us
curious  procedure,  was  the  irreparable  ruin  that  would  come  upon  the  people  through
the  exile  and  captivity  which  they  were  by  their  sin  bringing  upon  themselves.  Many,
no  doubt,  had  comforted  themselves  with  the  idea — as  is  the  manner  of  all  transgres-
sors— that  if  trouble  did  come  to  them  it  would  not  be  so  bad  as  the  prophet  made  out.
They  would  get  over  it,  and  be  but  little  the  worse.  This  dramatic  parable  was
designed  to  shatter  all  such  notions,  and  to  show  that  Judah,  like  the  much-marred
girdle,  would  be,  after  and  in  consequence  of  their  exile,  "  good  for  nothing."  Note,
then —

I.  The  first  part  of  the  parable — the  girdle  worn.  This  would  encourage
their  delusion.  For  the  likening  of  them  to  a  girdle,  especially  to  a  linen  girdle — a
priestly  and  therefore  a  sacred  vestment — and  to  a  chosen  and  purchased  girdle,  would
vividly  declare  to  them  how  precious  they  were  in  God's  sight.  1.  For  as  the  girdle
^ver.  ly  was  worn  close  to  the  person  of  the  wearer,  it  denoted  how  very  near  to  the
neart  of  Ood  they  were  who  by  this  similitude  were  set  forth.  The  known  fieivour  of
God  led  them,  as  it  had  led  others,  to  presume  that  they  could  never  try  Gkxl  too  much.
He  would  be  sure  to  bear  with  them  and  forgive  them,  do  what  they  might.  2.  Then
the  girdle  was  a  portion  of  the  dress  most  necessary  to  the  wearer,  and  so  denoted  how
necessary  his  people  were  to  Ood,  Had  not  God  said,  over  and  over  again,  in  every
variety  of  way.  *'  How  can  I  give  thee  up  ?  how  can  I  make  thee  as  Sodom  ?  "  (Hos.
xi.  8 ;  ch.  ix.  7)?  As  the  girdle  was  indispensable  to  the  comfort,  the  decorousness,
the  strength  of  the  wearer,  so  God  taught  by  this  fisure  that  he  could  not  do  without
his  people.  3.  Moreover,  as  the  girdle  was  adorned  and  ornamented,  and  thus  was  a
most  valuable  portion  of  the  dress,  so  it  showed  that  his  people  were  to  God  a  cherished
ornament  and  praise.  They  were  to  be  to  him  "  for  a  name,  and  lor  a  praise,  and  for
a  glory  "  (ver.  11).  And  as  such  God  had  worn  this  girdle  and  put  it  on  him.  An*'
his  people  knew  all  this,  and  presumed  vpon  i^.


842  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [en.  xiu.  1— 27.

II.  The  second  part — the  girdle  uxcleansed.  This  would  show  wherefore  their
ideas  must  be  a  delusion.  "  Put  it  not  in  water  "  (ver.  1).  The  prophet  was  bidden  to
wear  it  in  this  soiled  and  foul  condition,  and  no  doubt  he  did  so.  It  would  provoke  the
contempt,  which  adornments  associated  with  uncleanliness  ever  excite.  But  its  intent  in
thus  being  worn  unwashed  was  to  depict  the  moral  state  of  those  to  whom  the  prophet
was  sent.  As  they  would  put  away  from  them  a  soiled  and  unclean  girdle,  so  they
were  to  learn  that  God,  though  ho  might  bear  long  with  a  morally  unclean  people,
would  not  always  do  so.     And —

III.  The  third  part  op  the  parable — the  girdle  put  away.  This  would  show
that  their  presumptuous  ideas  were  actually  a  delusion.  The  girdle  was  so  spoiled  by
its  burial  by  the  Euphrates  that  it  was  henceforth  "  good  for  nothing."  And  all  this
came  true.  It  was  but  a  miserable  remnant  of  the  people  that  came  back  from  Babylon,
and  as  an  independent  nation  they  have  never  since  regained  the  position  that  they
then  lost.  All  their  national  glory  came  to  an  end ;  the  lesson  of  the  marred  girdle
was  literally  fulfilled.

IV.  The  whole  a  parable  that  has  many  applications.  To  Churches,  to  indi-
viduals, to  all  the  gifted  of  God*s  grace  in  time,  talents,  opportunities,  and,  above  all,
in  the  presence  and  help  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  They  will  be  tempted  to  presume,  to
think  they  can  never  forfeit  these  things,  that  God  will  be  ever  gracious  to  them  as  he
has  been  in  the  past.  This  jyarable  is  a  word  for  all  such,  and  should  prompt  the
earnest  and  constant  putting  up  of  the  psalmist's  prayer,  "Keep  back  thy  servant  .  ,  .
from  presumptuous  sins,"  etc. — C.

Vers.  12 — 14. —  Vessels  of  wrath.  This  is  another  similitude  having  the  same  general
purpose  as  the  former  one.  "  Every  earthen  flagon  (cf.  ch.  xlviii.  12) — the  inhabitants  of
Jerusalem,  her  king,  her  priests,  and  prophets — will  bo  filled  with  the  wine  of  the
intoxicating  beverage  of  Ghod^s  wrath  (cf.  ch.  xxv.  15 ;  Isa.  xxviii.  7 ;  li.  17  ;  Ezek.  xxiii.
31 ;  Ps.  Ix.  3 ;  Ixxv.  8)  given  them  as  a  punishment  for  the  pride  and  cruelty  and
impiety  which  they  drank  greedily  as  wine ;  cf.  Rev.  xiv.  8 ;  xviii.  3,  where  the
harlot  drinks  the  wine  of  her  own  fornication  and  gives  it  to  others,  and  intoxicates
herself  and  them  with  it  (Rev.  xvii.  2 ;  xviii.  6),  and  therefore  God  gives  her  the  cup
of  his  wrath,  and  she  reels  under  it "  (Wordsworth).  The  awful  tlircatenings  of  these
verses  teach  us  much  concerning  the  characteristics  of  those  whom  the  Lord  "  will  not
pity,  nor  spare,  nor  have  mercy,  but  destroy  "  (ver.  14).

I.  They  gradually  become  vessels  of  wrath.  Not  till  they  are  filled  with  their
intoxicating  sin  are  they  certainly  to  be  so  called.     But  this  goes  on  day  by  day.

II.  They  come  to  jeer  and  mock  at  both  the  message  and  the  messengers  God
bends  to  wahn  them.  Ver.  12,  *'  Do  we  not  certainly  know,"  etc.,  as  if  they  would
say,  "  Tell  us  something  we  do  not  know."  It  is  an  utterance  of  unbelieving  and
mocking  contempt.

III.  They  are  as  drunken  men  :  bereft  of  reason,  unable  to  help  themselves  or
their  brethren,  the  sport  of  fools,  and  at  the  mercy  of  the  most  contemptible  foe.  Either
torpid  and  insensible  to  all  that  concerns  them,  or  else  filled  with  fury  and  lost  to  all
natural  affection,  hurting  and  destroying  those  nearest  and  dearest  to  them  (ver.  14).

IV.  All  vessels,  large  and  small,  are  filled  alike.  (Ver.  13.)  Not  alone
the  common  people  were  to  be  thus  filled,  but  the  magnates  of  the  land — king,  priests,  etc.

V.  They  are  mutually  destructive.    (Ver.  14.)    Such  is  the  doom  of  sin.
Conclusion.     We  all  are  vessels.     We  all  shall  be  filled.    But  what  with  ?    Pray

that  it  may  not  bo  with  the  wine  of  the  wrath  of  God,  but  "  with  the  fulness  of  Goil "
(Eph.  iii.).— C.

Vers.  12— 14.— T^c  last  results  of  sin.    I.  God  and  riis  message  mocked.

II.  Our  entire  nature  under  its  control.

III.  All  ranks  and  orders  possessed  by  it.

IV.  Every  man's  hand  against  his  fellow.

V.  God  known  only  as  the  God  of  wrath. — C.

Ver.  15. — "  Be  not  proud'*  It  is  difficult  to  see  what  those  whom  the  prophet  was
addressing  had  to  proud  of ;  but  it  is  certain  that  they  were  proud,  and  that  therebj'


CH.XIIL1— 27J    THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  343

they  were,  more  than  by  aught  else,  hindered  from  receiving  the  word  of  God.  The
inflated  shape,  the  mean  material,  and  the  easily  destroyed  nature  of  those  "  bottles  "
to  which  he  had  likened  them,  as  well  as  the  arrogant  boastful  talk  of  the  drunkard,
whose  doings  theirs  he  predicted  should  resemble ;  both  these  comparisons  show  bow
vividly  the  prophet  discerned  in  them  this  besetting  sin  of  pride,  and  the  ruin  it  would
be  sure  to  work  them.    Let  us,  therefore,  note —

I.  Some  of  the  reasons  fob  this  exhortation,  *'  Be  not  proud.'*  1.  The  main
reason  which  the  prophet  here  urges  is  its  antagonism  to  the  Word  of  Ood.  Now,  such
antagonism  cannot  but  be,  for :  (1)  The  Word  of  Qod  despises  what  men  most  esteem,  (a)
Their  own  moral  worth.  How  high  men's  estimate  of  this !  how  low  that  of  the  Word
of  God !  (h)  Their  own  capacities.  Man  deems  himself  capable  of  self-support,  self-
deliverance,  and  self-salvation.  The  Word  of  God  tells  him  ne  is  utterly  dependent  on
God  for  all  things,  be  he  who  he  may.  (c)  The  world — its  maxims,  honours,  wealth,
etc.  (2)  It  esteems  what  men  most  despise,  (a)  Such  qualities  of  mind  as  meekness,
fordveness  of  injuries,  humility,  indififerenoe  to  the  world,  great  regard  to  the  unseen
and  the  sj^iritual.  (6)  Persons  who  have  nothing  but  moral  excellence  to  recommend
them,  be  they  poor,  obscure,  and  despicable  in  the  world's  esteem,  (c)  Courses  of  life
which  may  involve  "  the  loss  of  all  things,"  so  only  as  wo  "  may  be  accepted  of  him."
2.  Its  other  terrible  fruits.  Some  of  these  are  given  in  the  verses  following.  It
will  not  suffer  men  to  give  glory  to  God  ;  it  leads  men  into  deadly  peril  (ver.  16).  It
causes  deep  dLstress  to  those  who  care  for  their  souls ;  it  will  end  in  their  utter  ruin
(ver.  17).

II.  How  obedience  may  be  rendered  to  it.  Probably  there  is  nothing  but  that
threefold  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  of  which  our  Lord  speaks  which  will  ensure  such
obedience.  Pride  is  too  deeply  rooted  in  the  hearts  of  men  to  yield  to  any  lesser  force
but:  1.  The  conviction  of  sin — destroying  all  man's  self-complacency.  2.  Of  righteoiiS'
ness — filling  him  at  the  same  time  with  admiration  of  the  righteousness  of  Christ,  with
despair  of  attainment  of  it,  but  with  joy  that,  though  he  cannot  have  it  in  himself,  he  yet
has  it  by  virtue  of  his  faith  in  Christ.  3.  Of  Judgment — destroying  the  supremacy  of
the  world  over  his  mind,  and  so  delivering  him  from  the  temptation  to  its  pride.
This  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  lays  the  axo  at  the  root  of  the  tree,  and  ere  long  hews  it
down.  Let,  then,  this  Holy  Spirit  be  sought  in  all  sincerity,  and  let  his  guidance  be
ever  followed  ;  so  shall  "  the  mind  of  Christ "  be  increasingly  formed  in  us,  and  we  shall
learn  of  him  who  was  *'  meek  and  lowly  in  heart,"  and  so  find  rest  in  our  souls.— C.

Vers.  16, 17.— iosi  tipon  the  dark  mountains,    **  Give  glory  to  the  Lord,"  etc.

I.  The  scene  portrayed.  It  is  that  of  unhappy  travellers  overtaken  by  night,
when  crossing  some  of  the  perilous  mountain  tracks  of  Palestine.  A  traveller  overtaken
as  these  seem  to  have  been  by  a  night  storm,  is  in  imminent  danger  of  falling  over
precipices  and  perishing  miserably.  Even  by  day  the  way  is  perilous :  the  paths  are
easily  lost,  or  are  strewn  with  rocks,  or  they  lead  along  steep  and  slippery  slopes,  or  by
overhanging  clififs,  where  a  single  footslip  may  plunge  the  heedless  passenger  headlong
to  a  frightful  death  in  the  far  depths  below.  But  how  much  more  dangerous  such
journey  must  be  when  night  overtakes  the  travellers,  is  evident.  The  fading  light  has
gone,  but  the  journey  has  still  to  be  pursued.  And  now  comes  that  stumbling  upon
the  dark  mountains,  which  is  so  terrible  and  inevitable.  There  is  the  anxious  looking
for  the  fitful  light  of  moon  or  stars,  and  occasionally  hope  arises  that  the  clouds  wiU
break  and  some  glimmer  appear.  But  this  hope  has  been  speedily  quenched  by  the
clouds  gathering  over  again,  and  with  the  added  darkness  of  the  rain-storm,  so  that  the
darkness  is  "  gross,"  like  imto  that  of  the  shadow  of  death.  Every  step,  therefore,  is
fraught  with  frightful  peril,  and  not  a  few  thus  benighted  amid  such  mountain  passes
perish  miserably  ere  the  morning  dawn.    Such  is  the  scene  portrayed.

II.  That  which  it  represents.  1.  The  temporal  calamities  which  Qod  sends — as
to  the  Jews — in  punishment  for  their  sins.  All  earthly  distress  has  the  sad  tendency
to  unhinge  the  mind,  to  fill  with  foreboding  fear,  and  greatly  to  perplex  and  over-
whelm ;  but  when  to  the  natural  efifects  of  such  earthly  distress  there  is  added  the
consciousness  of  guilt  and  of  having  deserved  what  God  has  sent,  then  the  dismay,
distress,  and  despair  which  are  suggested  by  the  prophetic  picture  are  miserably  increased.
2.  The  hardened  sinner^s  despair  of  Ood's  mercy.    The  vision  of  judgment  and  wrath


3U  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [cii.  xiii.  1—27.

has  come  upon  him,  but  the  remembrance  of  his  sins  crushes  hope  of  mercy  (cf.
Jndas  **  going  out  and  hanging  himself").  3.  The,  entanglements  of  sin.  It  is  a  great
mistake  to  imagine  that  those  who  are  enslaved  by  any  sin  are  happy  in  it.  Not  a  few
of  them  endure  a  very  hell  in  their  frantic  but  futile  endeavours  to  break  the  chain
which  long  indulgence  has  forged  and  fastened  around  them.  The  bitter  repentance,
the  unavailing  remorse,  every  gleam  of  hope  of  deliverance  so  soon  quenched,  the  reck-
lessness of  despair,  the  groaning  as  of  the  prisoner  appointed  to  death, — all  these  are
realities  known  to  the  slaves  of  sin,  and  should  make  every  soul  shudder  lest  the  like
should  come  upon  him.  4.  The  procrasiinator's  death-bed.  He  who  has  been  convinced
over  and  over  again  that  he  ought  to  seek  the  Lord,  but  has  ever  put  it  off, — his  feet
are  likely  to  "  stumble  upon  the  dark  mountains  "  when  the  night  of  the  shadow  of  death
draws  upon  him.

III.  How  SUCH  MISERY  MAY  BE  AVOIDED.  It  was  Very  near :  the  prophet's  words
imply  that  the  oft-threatened  doom  was  at  their  very  doors.  And  so  the  like  doom  may
be  near  to  many  now.  But  yet  it  may  be  avoided.  Giving  heeil  to  God's  Word  (ver.
15).  We  have  much  hope  when  we  see  an  earnest  heeding  of  that  Wc»rd,  a  really
serious  attention  paid  to  it.  But  that  by  itself  is  not  enough.  There  must  be  the
actual  "  giving  glory  to  God  ;  **  by  confession  of  sin,  acknowledging  the  wrong  done  ;
by  casting  the  soul  on  God  for  forgiveness  in  lowly  trust;  by  forsaking  the  evil
that  has  roused  the  just  anger  of  God.  '*  Let  the  wicked  forsake  his  way,  and  the
unrighteous  man,"  etc.

IV.  The  great  reason  for  fear  that  this  misery  will  not  be  avoided  after
ALL.  It  was  and  it  ever  is  the  accursed  pride  (vers.  15,  17)  tliat  will  not  allow  of
such  giving  heed  to  the  Divine  Word  and  such  giving  glory  to  him.  All  the  instincts
of  the  unrenewed  heart  are  up  in  arms  against  such  self-abasement.  Any  sacrifice  will
be  brought  rather  than  that  of  the  broken  and  contrite  heart.

V.  The  utterly  hopeless  condition  of  those  thus  lost.  (Ver.  17.)  See  the
prophet's  piteous  tears.  He  can  do  nothing — every  resource  has  been  tried  and  failed,
and  he  can  but  "  weep  sore  in  secret  places  **  for  the  '*  pride  "  that  has  ruined  those  he
would  fain  have  saved.  Oh  then,  sinful  heart,  down,  down  before  thy  God,  and  "give
glory  to  him,"  as  he  would  have  thee  do,  as  it  is  so  right  and  reasonable  and  good  for
thee  to  do,  as  the  ministers  of  God  entreat  thee  to  do. — C.

Ver.  20. — The  neglected  trust  demanded,  "  Where  is  the  flock  that  was  given  thee,"
etc.?  This  word  is  addressed  to  the  rulers  of  Judah  and  Jerusalem.  Their  people,  the
nation  over  whom  they  ruled,  were  Goii's  flock,  his  "  beautiful  flock."  That  flock  had
been  entrusted  to  the  rulers'  care.  The  influence  of  those  in  power  was  very  great.
As  were  the  leaders  of  the  people— especially  the  king — so  were  the  people  themselves.
They  could  be  led  like  a  flock,  and  were  so.  Tremendous,  therefore,  was  the  responsi-
bility of  those  in  power,  to  whom  was  entrusted  this  flock  of  the  Lord.  But  they  had
used  their  great  authority  and  power  badly.  Ruin  had  come  or  was  about  to  come
upon  the  flock  (cf.  vers.  18,  lOT;  they  were  to  be  scattered,  scattered  wholly,  and  the
greater  portion  of  them  lost.  To  these  careless  and  guilty  shepherds  the  Lord  now
comes,  and  asks  for  the  flock  he  had  placed  in  their  hands.  **  Give  an  account  of  thy
stewardship,'*  was  said  to  those  who  were  to  be  no  longer  stewards  because  of  their
faithlessness.  Now,  this  question,  "  Where  is  the  flock,"  etc.  ?  is  one  which  should  be
often  heard  sounding  in  the  ears  of  many  others  besides  those  to  whom  it  was  first
addressed,  e.g, —

I.  To  the  pastors  of  the  Church.  The  Church  of  God  is  his  flock,  his  "  beautiful
flock."  Its  members  are  very  dear  to  him,  "purchased  with  his  own  blood."  The
Church  is  given,  entrusted,  to  pastors.  When  Christ  ascended  up  on  hi^j^h  he  gave
some  "  pastors."  This  method  of  ordering  his  Church  is  the  one  he  has  willed.  His
blessing  has  evidently  rested  on  it.  What  does  not  the  Church  of  God  owe  to  her
faithful  pastors  ?  But  whatever  their  character  they  cannot  but  have  great  influence.
They  are  trusted  by  the  people.  They  have  received  special  gifts  for  their  work  in
the  form  of  mental  and  moral  endowments.  They  are  much  prayed  for.  They  are
specially  set  apart  for  the  charge  of  the  Church  of  God.  They  have  every  induce-
ment to  fidelity.  Faithful,  the  love  of  their  charge  will  gather  round  them  ;  the  fear
of  God  will  dwell  within  them ;  the  crown  of  life  awaits  them.    And  these  mighty


cii.  xni.  1—27.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  345


motives,  acting  upon  hearts  already  prepared  by  God's  grace  and  devoted  to  this  high
ofiBce,  have  for  the  most  part  secured  a  great  degree  of  fidelity  in  it.  Hence  a  character
and  reputation  have  become  associated  with  the  office,  which  cannot  but  invest  with
much  influence,  as  it  does  with  much  responsibility,  all  those  who  occupy  it.  But  in
spite  of  all  this  there  may  be,  as  there  has  been  at  times,  great  unfaithfulness.  Hence
the  flock  has  been  scattered.  The  Church  has  suffered  in  numbers,  in  purity  of
doctrine,  in  consistency  of  life,  in  spirituality  of  character.  Its  enjoyment  in  all  holy
service  goes ;  its  power  for  good  in  the  neighbourhood  where  it  dwells  goes ;  its  regard
for  all  that  marks  vigorous  life  in  a  Church  all  goes ;  and  ere  long  its  "  candlestick  is
removed  out  of  its  place."  Perhaps  its  numbers  may  not  greatly  diminish.  There  shall
be  the  observance  of  the  sabbath,  its  services,  its  sermons,  its  sacraments— orderly,
regular,  frequent.  Many  things  may  conduce  to  this.  Its  name  may  live,  but  it  is
dead.  Oh,  the  awfulness  of  this  I  And  if  it  have  been  through  the  negligence  and
unfaithfulness  of  the  pastor,  who  shall  deliver  him  from  the  charge  of  blood-guiltiness
which  will  lie  at  his  door?  What  will  he  answer  when  the  question  is  addressed  to
him,  as  one  day  it  surely  will  be,  "  Where  is  the  flock  that  was  given  thee,  thy
beautiful  flock  ?  "    Let  every  pastor  of  Christ's  Church  consider  this  and  pray —

**  Chief  Shepherd  of  thy  chosen  sheep.
From  death  and  sin  set  free,
Let  every  under-shepherd  keep
His  eye  intent  on  thee."

II.  To  ALL  PARENTS.  Our  children  are  the  Lord's  flock,  his  "beautiful  flock."  They
are  very  dear  to  him.  He  puts  his  arm  round  every  one  of  them ;  he  takes  them  all  up
in  his  arms  and  blesses  them.  He  declares  by  his  Word  and  by  their  baptism  that
they  are  of  his  kingdom,  and  he  both  promises  vast  reward  to  those  that  receive  them
in  bis  Name,  and  threatens  with  dreadful  doom  all  those  who  '*  ofiend  "  them.  But
parents  have  unspeakable  influence  over  them.  They  mould  and  fashion  them,  not  in
outward  form  and  habits  alone,  but  in  inward  character.  For  a  long  time  they  are  as
God  to  their  children,  who  know  no  higher  authority,  no  higher  help.  Hence  they  trust
their  parents  utterly.  And  to  guard  against  the  abuse  of  this  tremendous  trust,  God  has
implanted  the  instincts  of  parental  love,  and  given  every  motive  to  parents  to  guard
and  keep  well  those  he  has  entrusted  to  their  care.  Now,  if  through  parental  unfaith-
fulness those  children  become  renegades  from  God,  he  will  surely  ask  this  question,
"  Where  is  the  flock,"  etc.  ?  Let  remembrance  of  this  lead  to  earnest  prayer  and  diligent
heed,  so  that  each  parent  at  last  may  have  the  unspeakable  joy — as  he  may  have— of
standing  at  last  before  God,  and  saying,  with  glad  thankfulness,  "  Behold,  here  am  I,
and  the  children,  thou  hast  given  me."

III.  To  EVEBT  INDIVIDUAL  SOUL.  For  the  sum  of  all  the  faculties,  opportunities,
talents,  the  whole  of  the  varied  gifts  and  capacities  which  together  form  our  spiritual
nature — judgment,  affection,  conscience,  intellect,  will, — all  these  are  the  flock  of  God
which  is  entrusted  to  every  individual  man ;  and  by  due  care  and  cultivation  of  them
ho  can  preserve  and  develop  them  into  an  ofiering  of  worship  and  consecration  which
God  will  ever  accept  and  bless.  Every  man  has  the  making  of  his  own  life  by  the
help  of  God.  There  is  scarce  any  degree  of  honour  and  joy  which  he  may  not  win  bjr
faithfulness  in  the  use  of  that  which  God  has  entrusted  to  him.  Concerning  them  all
God  says,  "  Occupy  till  I  come."  And  how  vast  and  varied  is  the  help  God  gives  to  us
in  this  great  work  I  What  means  of  grace  are  provided !  What  recompense  even  here
and  now  is  siven  I  Victory  over  self;  a  mind  at  peace;  blessed  influence  over  others ;
the  love  and  esteem  of  the  good;  free  communion  and  intercourse  with  Grod  himself;
the  consciousness  of  the  Divine  love ;  the  bright  and  blessed  hope  of  the  eternal  life
hereafter.  So  that  even  now  "  in  keeping  of  Gkxl's  commandments  there  is  great  reward."
But  if  we  be  unfaithful  here  and  "  waste"  all  our  "  goods  "—these high  gifts,  faculties,
and  opportunities — sowing  to  the  flesh  when  we  should  be  sowing  to  the  Spirit,  then
this  question  will  be  heard  concerning  all  these  things, "  Where  is  the  flock,"  etc.  ?  And
then  we  search  in  vain  for  any  answer  to  the  next  question  (ver,  21), "  What  wilt  thou
say  when  he  shall  punish  thee  ?  "  Therefore  let  us  each  keep  continually  before  our
minds  such  truths  as  those  that  are  taught  in  the  well-known  hymn —


816  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  xni.  1—27.

«*  A  charge  to  keep  I  hare,

A  God  to  glorify,
A  never-dying  soul  to  saTO
And  fit  it  for  the  eky.

"  Help  me  to  watch  and  pray.

And  on  thyself  rely ;
Assured  if  I  my  trust  betray

I  shall  for  ever  die."


Vers.  21,  22,-^8in  its  otffn  scourge,  I.  There  abe  other  bcouroes  for  sin.  The
direct  and  positive  inflictions  of  the  Divine  wrath.  Not  alone  the  Bible  but  the  great
books  of  history  and  experience  must  all  be  denied  if  we  deny  such  positive  punish-
ment of  sin.  Never  has  there  been  yet  any  system  of  laws  for  moral  beings  which  has
been  left  to  be  simply  self-acting,  and  which  therefore  have  had  no  positive  sanctions
of  penalty  for  transgression  added.  And  God's  Law  is  not  such.  As  the  Jews  and
other  nations  and  individuals  have  found,  and  as  the  unrepentant  will  find  hereafter,
if  not  now,  God's  Word  upon  this  matter  is  most  assuredly  true.

XL  But  sin  is  its  own  scwurob.  That  scourge  is  woven  and  knotted  with  many
cords.  1.  Conscience^  ever  passing  sentence  of  judgment.  2.  Habits  of  wrong-doing,
hateful  but  fast  clinging  to  the  soul,  and  by  which  it  is  **  tied  and  bound."  3.  The
manifold  difficulty  of  repentance.  The  man  would  heartily  turn  from  his  evil  way,  but
he  has  got  into  the  current  just  above  the  falls,  and  it  is  bearing  him  on  and  down,
resist  as  he  will.  4.  The  sight  of  children^  companions^  etc,  corrupted  and  perhaps  ruined
hy  our  evU  example.  Oh,  what  a  horror  is  this :  seeing  those  whom,  for  every  reason
human  and  Divine  we  were  bound  to  cherish  and  guard  from  evil,  cursed  by  our  sin  I

5.  The  moral  disapprobation  of  tfie  good  around  us.  Their  sentence  of  condemnation
is  felt  to  have  a  binding  power.    What  they  "  bind  on  earth  is  bound  in  heaven."

6.  The  **  fearful  looking  for  of  Judgment"  Such  are  some  of  the  cords  which,  woven
together,  make  up  the  dreadful  scourge  wherewith  sin  scourges  itself.

IIL  And  this  self-made  scourge  is  the  host  terrible  of  ant.  Deep  and
imfathomable  as  were  the  sufferings  of  our  Lord,  he  distinctly  declared  that  those
coming  on  his  enemies  were  worse.  **  Weep  not  for  me,"  he  said,  "  but  weep  for  your-
selves, and  for  your  children. ...  If  they  do  these  things  in  a  green  tree,"  etc.  It  is
evident,  therefore,  that  suffering'in  which  the  consciousness  of  sin  enters  must  be  worst
of  all.  Those  "  stripes  by  which  we  are  healed,"  though  they  "ploughed  deep  furrows  '*
on  the  body  of  our  blessed  Lord,  yea,  upon  his  inmost  soul,  still  there  are  stripes  more
terrible  even  than  they.  The  quenchless  fire  of  God's  positive  inflictions  would  be
more  tolerable  were  it  not  for  the  gnawing  oi  that  undying  worm—- the  sinner's  own
remorse.    Are  not  they,  then,  "  focus  "  indeed  who  *'  make  a  mock  at  sin  "  ?-*C.

Ver.  23. — An  awful  condition  indeed,  "  Can  the  Ethiopian  change  his  skin,"  etc.  ?
This  verse  tells  of  one  who  has  brought  himself  to  such  a  pass  that  he  cannot  cease
from  sin.    It  is  an  awful  condition  indeed.    Note*—

L  Some  of  the  elements  which  make  rr  so.  They  are :  1.  The  memories  of  a
heUerpast,  There  was  a  time  when  his  soul  was  unsullied,  his  hands  clean,  his  heart
pure,  his  life  unstained ;  when  he  could  hold  up  his  head  in  consci'^M<9  integrity  by  the
grace  of  God.  But  that  is  all  eone.  2.  The  prostration  of  his  wil'.^  He  is  continually
making  resolves,  but  they  are  nail  as  cobwebs,  they  are  broken  through  by  the  slightest
temptation  now.  The  power  to  firmly  and  steadfastly  resolve  seems  gone  from  him.
He  has  resolved  so  often,  but  in  vain,  that  his  will  now  refuses  torise  to  the  endeavour.

3.  The  powerlessness  of  all  means  of  deliverance.  He  attend's  God's  house,  he  reads
the  Scriptures,  he  kneels  in- prayer,  he  goes  to  the  Lord's  table  still  it  may  be,  but  they
have  lost  their  power  to  hold  him  back  from  his  sin.    They  seem  to  be  of  no  use  at  au.

4.  The  fearful  onlooh  to  Ood^s  judgment.  He  sees  it  comins  swiftly  upon  him.  He
is  ever  terrified  at  the  near  approach  of  the  day  when  he  will  he  utterly  lost.  "  Lost !
lost  1 "  he  is  ever  saying  to  himself.  He  fears  exposure,  he  fears  the  final  doom,  and
knows  not  how  to  escape.  5.  Shame  in  the  presence  of  the  good.  He  is  haunted  by
the  feeling, ''  If  they  but  knew  me  as  I  am !    and  he  knows  the  day  is  coming  when


I

J


cii.  XIII.  1—27.3    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  847

they  will  know,  -and  he  will  be  cast  out  as  vile.  6.  The  thought  <^  the  misery  and  shame
he  will  bring  upon  others.  Perhaps  he  has  wife,  children,  father,  mother,  a  number  of
friends  and  relations,  whom  he  knows  he  will  drag  down  with  him  in  his  own  ruin.
7.  The  temptation  to  reckUsaness  horn  of  despair,  Satan  is  ever  suggesting  to  him  that,
as  he  cannot  regain  what  he  has  lost,  he  had  better  take  his  fill  of  suchjpleasure  as  he  has.
And  too  often  he  yields.  8.  The  perversion  of  his  understanding,  it  is  his  interest  to
believe  there  is  no  GKxi,  and  hence  his  intellect  is  busy  in  gathering  together  materials
for  this  belief  and  for  doubting  and  denying  all  religious  truth.  And  so  he  sinks  down
into  atheism  and  all  ungodliness.  Tes;  his  is  an  awful  condition  indeed.  But
consider—

II.  Some  counsels  to  those  whom  these  tebrible  tbuths  ooncebn.  1.  Remember
you  cannot  be  certain  that  you  have  come  to  this  condition.  Satan  will  endeavour  to
persuade  you  that  there  is  no  hope.  But  believe  him  not.  Tou  are  lost  if  you  believe
him.  Steadfastly  refuse  to  believe.  2.  If  the  thought  that  such  should  be  your  con-
dition distresses  you,  take  it  as  a  token  for  good  that  Ood  has  not  given  you  up.  3.
Remember  that  others  have  been  saved  who  were  as  near  being  lost  as  you.  4.  Kouse
yourself  to  use  all  means  of  help  which  Ood  has  given  you.  Tl)  Let  there  be  special
seasons  of  prayer.  (2)  Avoid  the  occasions  of  your  sin.  (3)  Put  eveir  hindrance  you
can  in  the  way  of  your  sin  ;  such  as  altering  your  manner  of  life,  avoiding  being  alone,
reading  such  Scriptures  and  such  books  as  will  tend  to  deepen  your  sense  of  the  sin  and
show  you  how  to  escane  from  it.  (4)  Avail  yourself  of  the  counsels  of  some  wise  and
godly  friend.  (5)  Fill  up  your  time,  hands,  and  thoughts  with  useful  and  absorbing
work.  (6)  Do  not  despise  small  victories ;  they  lead  on  to  greater  ones.  (7)  "  Pray
without  ceasing."  Remember  that  Qod  is  able  and  has  promised  to  "  save  to  the  utter^
most  all  that  come  unto  God  by  Christ."    Thus  doing,  even  thou  shalt  be  saved. — 0.

Ver.  27. — The  one  thing  needful,    "Wilt  thou  not  be  made  clean?    When,"  etc.?

I.  Men  ABE  8PIRITUALLT  UNCLEAN.  Like  as  the  Lord  looked  down  upon  the  occu-
pants of  the  porches  at  Bethesda,  and  saw  but  a  multitude  of  impotent  folk  (John  v.);
so  now,  as  "  nis  eyes  behold  the  children  of  men,"  he  sees  a  similar  though  a  far  more
terrible  sight — the  mass  of  mankind  spiritually  diseased.  This  is  manifestly  true  of
the  heathen  world.  The  abominations  and  the  cruelties  that  are  practised  there  show
the  virulence  of  the  soul's  malady  amongst  them.  And  if  we  look  at  the  mass  of
those  who  profess  and  call  themselves  Christians,  in  how  many  of  these  is  the  profession
profession  only,  a  veneer  of  religious  customs  covering  a  corrupt  and  sin-loving  heart.
And  if  it  be  so  with  the  professing  Church,  what  must  it  be  with  those  who  reject  all
the  means  of  grace  which  the  Christian  Church  enjoys?

II.  Bur  God  greatly  desires  that  men  should  be  deliyebed  from  this
UNCLEANNESB.  "  He  will  havc  all  men  to  be  saved  and  to  come  to  the  knowledge  of
the  truth."  He  desires  this :  1.  From  his  very  nature.  He  himself  is  the  most  holy
Gt>d.  But  all  moral  qualities  ever  strive  to  reproduce  themselves  in  those  around  them.
Let  a  man  be  characterized  by  orderliness,  truthfulness,  sobriety,  purity,  and  in  pro-
portion as  he  is  so  the  contact  of  those  of  opposite  character  will  be  painful  to  him,  and
he  will  endeavour  to  make  them  like  himself.  And  so,  because  "  good  and  upright  is
the  Lord,  therefore  will  he  teach  sinners  in  the  way."  2.  ffis  righteousness  also.  The
sense  of  outrage  and  wrong  which  sin  must  produce  in  the  heart  of  God  makes  him
angry  with  the  wicked  every  day.  3.  His  compassion.  Sin  is  sorrow.  We  wonder  at
the  priests  of  Baal  persisting  in  cutting  and  wounding  themselves.  But  is  not  every
sinner  just  such  a  one?  And  with  this  added  sorrow — that  their  wounds  are  for
eternity,  and  not  for  the  short  life  here  alone.  On  the  other  hand,  to  be  "  made  whole  "
spiritually  is  to  be  made  blessed  for  ever.

III.  Yet  men  will  not.  The  tone  of  the  question,  the  woe  which  precedes  it,  the
comparison  of  the  sinner  with  the  Ethiopian  and  the  leopard,  etc.  (ver.  23),  the  half-
despairing  cry,  "  When  shall  it  once  be  ?  "  (ver.  27), — all  this  shows  the  prophet's  con-
viction of  man's  persistent  clinging  to  his  sin.  Were  the  question  concerning  bodily
disease,  it  would  be  unnecessary.  Who  would  not  be  delivered  from  that  ?  But  when
it  is  spiritual  healing,  men  will  not.  From  the  consequences  of  their  sin  they  are  willing
to  be  delivered — the  punishment,  the  remorse,  the  shame,  etc. — but  not  from  tho  sin
itself.    True,  at  times,  in  the  first  keen  pangs  of  remorse^  and  under  the  Tivid  sense  of


348  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  xiii.  1—27.

shame,  they  would  be  willing  then  to  be  rid  of  the  sin  itself.  But  their  return  to  their
sin  shows  how  momentary  and  superficial  this  feeling  was.  And  men  would  be  will-
ing, perhaps,  if  by  some  one  act  the  whole  cure  could  be  effected ;  if  the  being  made
whole  was  not  so  slow,  so  difficult,  so  self-denying  a  process.  And,  in  fact,  they  do  hope
that  by  some  one  act — a  death -bed  repentance — the  whole  process  will  be  accomplish^.

IV.  But  without  man's  own  consent  he  cannot  be  made  whole.  God  does  not
by  a  mere  act  of  power  make  a  man  spiritually  whole,  as  he  makes  one  tree  an  oak,
another  an  elm.  The  will  must  consent.  We  have  this  awful  power  of  compelling
Christ  to  "  stand  at  the  door  and  knock ; "  for  the  door  of  our  hearts  is  opened  from  the
inside.  We  must  undo  the  bolts  and  remove  the  bars.  No  view  of  the  Holy  Spirit's
influence  which  contradicts  this  can  be  a  true  view.  We  can,  and  alas !  do,  say  "  No  "
to  God.    But  also  we  can,  and  he  is  ever  pleading  with  us  to,  say  "  Yes  "  to  his  call.

V.  But  one  day  rr  shall  be  given,  "  My  people  shall  be  willing  in  the  day  of  my
power."  Christ  wept  over  Jerusalem,  but  yet  he  told  them  that  when  next  he  came
they  should  say,  **  Blessed  be  he  that  cometh  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord ;  cf.  also  the

Sredicted  repentance  of  the  Jews,  "  They  also  which  pierced  him,"  etc.  (Zech.  xiv.).
»ut  oh,  what  "  everlasting  burnings,"  what  awful  scourgings,  has  Jerusalem  had  to  go
through  before,  like  the  prodigal,  me  came  to  herself!  Let  none  abuse  this  doctrine.
If  we  will  say  "  Yes  "  to  God  now,  and  come  to  Christ  in  loving  self-surrender,  we  shall
find  his  yoke  easy  and  his  burden  light ;  but  if  we  will  say  "  No,"  then  we  shall  have
to  come  to  ourselves ;  and  what  may  not  that  involve  ?  Truly,  "  now  is  the  accepted
time,"  etc.— C.

Ver.  16.—^  solemn  warning.  This  is  an  appeal  to  the  fears  of  the  people ;  one  of  the
many  instances  in  which  the  prophet  seeks  to  win  them  to  the  way  of  righteousness  by
the  presage  of  impending  woe.  Utter  destruction  is  before  them  (ver.  1^,  the  twilight
is  fast  deepening  into  '*  gross  darkness."  But  even  now  it  is  not  too  late  for  them  to
avert  the  calamity  by  their  repentance.  It  is  not  mainly  through  their  fears  that
Christianity  exerts  its  influence  over  men.  But,  as  many  of  the  discourses  of  Christ
show,  men  may  sometimes  sink  into  conditions  of  moral  insensibility  from  which  only
an  alarming  voice  will  awaken  them.  And  the  gospel  has  its  side  of  terror.  Even  the
gracious  Saviour  and  his  apostles  spoke  of  "  wrath  to  come."  Consider  (1)  t?ie  duty,
(2)  the  motive.

L  The  duty.  "  Give  glory  to  your  God,"  Several  distinct  elements  of  thought  and
life  are  involved  in  this.  1.  A  recognition  of  the  sacred  and  indissoluble  relalion  in
which  we  stand  towards  Ood.  However  we  may  have  forsaken  him,  he  is  still "  the  Lord
our  God."  We  are  still  his  dependent  creatnres,  his  needy  children.  To  please  him,
to  serve  his  purposes,  to  show  forth  his  glory,  must,  in  the  very  nature  of  things,  be
the  end  of  our  existence.  All  religious  &fe  begins  with  the  devout  acknowledgment
of  this  supreme  personal  relationship.  2.  A  due  sense  of  the  claims  Ood  has,  on  the
ground  of  whai  he  is  in  himself ^  on  our  regard.  The  true  glory  of  the  Divine  Being  is
his  infinite  moral  perfections.  When  Moses  said,  "  I  beseech  thee  show  me  thy  p;lory,"
God  answered,  "  I  will  make  all  my  goodness  pass  before  thee,  and  I  will  proclaim  the
Name  of  the  Lord  before  thee."  We  "  give  glory  to  God  "  when,  gazing  upon  the  beauty
and  majesty  of  his  intrinsic  moral  excellences,  we  yield  back  to  him  a  due  response  of
reverence,  and  admiration,  and  trust,  and  love.  8.  Practical  surrender  to  his  service,
"Glorify  God  in  your  body  and  in  your  spirit,  which  are  God's  "  (1  Cor.  vi.  20).  The
actual  homage  of  a  godly  life  is  indicated  here — the  consecration  of  all  the  powers  of
our  nature  as  a  '*  living  sacrifice  "  upon  the  altar  of  the  Loid.  If  the  Name  of  the  Lord
our  God  is  hallowed  in  our  hearts,  we  shall  thus  give  ourselves  and  our  all  to  him.
Practical  goodness  akin  to  his  own  is  the  best  and  most  acceptable  tribute  we  can  pay.
We  honour  him  most  when  we  most  strive  to  be  like  him  in  all  holy  character  and
Ck)dlike  deed.

IL  The  motive.  "  Before  he  cause  darkness,"  etc  Here  is  a  prospect  that  may
well  awaken  fear.  Something  more  than  mere  external  calamity  is  suggested.  There
is  internal  distress,  mental  perplexity  and  bewilderment ;  a  condition  in  which  the
spirits  of  the  people  become  a  prey  to  all  kinds  of  misleading  and  deluding  influences,
wildly  groping  after  a  good  that  is  lost  and  gone  from  them  for  ever.  Few  pictures  of
imagination  could  be  sadder  than  that  of  men  looking  and  longing  for  the  light,  only  to


CH.  xiii.  1—27.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  349


find  tbe  darkness  growing  more  and  more  deep  and  dense  around  them.  It  is  often
something  like  this  when  men  are  unfaithful  to  their  real  convictions  and  negligent  ot
the  acknowledged  claims  of  Gud.  Trifle  with  truth  and  conscience,  and  you  cannot
wonder  that  truth  should  become  to  you  a  mere  mocking  shadow,  and  conscience  a  per-
petual foe  to  your  peace.  Despise  the  sacred  privileges  and  obligations  of  life,  and  you
make  them  to  be  sources  of  heavy  condemnation.  Let  the  light  be  scorned  or  abused,
and  it  turns  into  "  the  shadow  of  death."  "  Walk  while  ye  have  the  light,  lest  dark-
ness come  upon  you :  for  he  that  walketh  in  darkness  knoweth  not  whither  he  goeth  "
(John  xii.  35).— W.

Ver.  23. — A  moral  imposstbility.  This  passage  expresses  the  hopelessness  of  the
prophet  as  regards  the  success  of  any  human  effort  to  persuade  the  people  to  forsake
their  evil  ways,  or  by  any  efforts  of  their  own  to  save  themselves.    It  suggests—

I.  The  invetebacy  op  sin.  1.  Arising  from  the  depravity  of  ncUure.  The  dark
spots  and  the  ebon  skin  have  a  hidden  cause.  Sins  are  the  natural  outcome  of  sin.
All  forms  of  wrong-doing  are  but  symptoms  on  the  surface  of  a  secret  moral  disease.
"  Out  of  the  heart  proceed  evil  thoughts,"  etc.  (Matt.  xv.  19).  2.  The  force  o/  habit,
'*  Use  is  second  nature."  Custom  has  a  power  over  men  that  rivals  that  of  native
propensity.  As  good  habit  is  a  most  effective  educator  of  every  form  of  virtue,  so,  on
the  other  hand,  when  habit  has  been  allowed  to  foster  the  evil  tendencies  of  a  man's
nature,  he  becomes  hopelessly  "  tied  and  bound  with  the  chain  of  his  sins."

II.  The  mobal  impotence  it  engenders.  Sin  not  only  corrupts  the  springs  of  a
man's  moral  life,  but  paralyzes  all  his  nobler  powers,  robs  him  of  the  ability  to  act  out
the  better  instincts  of  his  nature.  The  voice  of  natural  conscience  may  not  be  wholly
silenced,  the  natural  heart  may  not  be  utterly  destitute  of  good  impulses ;  but  there  is
no  redeeming  power  in  these.  As  well  expect  the  darkness  to  give  birth  to  light,  and
life  to  spring  spontaneously  out  of  death,  as  suppose  that  a  sin-loving,  sin-hardened
man  will  of  himself  forsake  his  evil  ways.  He  will  never  be  able  by  his  own  hand  '*  to
pluck  the  vicious  quitch  of  blood  and  custom  wholly  out  of  him."  The  complete
moral  helplessness  of  humanity  was  made  abundantly  evident  before  the  full  revelation
of  gospel  grace.  It  was  when  we  were  "  without  strength  "  that  Christ  '*  died  for  the
ungodly."

III.  The  wondrous  efficacy  of  the  regenerating  power  op  God.  The  most
defiled  and  degraded  nature  may  be  transformed  by  the  touch  of  him  who  made  it.
Even  the  skin  of  the  Ethiopian  and  the  leopard's  spots  must  yield  to  the  sovereignty
of  the  Divine  energy.  Deep-rooted  and  habitual  as  the  evil  in  a  man's  heart  and  life
may  be,  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  cleanseth  him  from  it,  and  when  the  Spirit  of  Christ
moulds  the  substance  of  his  being  he  becomes  "  a  new  creature :  old  things  are  passed
away ;  behold,  all  things  are  become  new  "  (2  Cor.  v.  17). — W.

#

Vers.  1 — 11. — The  marred  girdle.  I.  The  significance  op  the  girdle.  This  is  set
before  us  clearly  in  ver.  11.  God  chose  something  which  should  illustrate  the  close
connection  between  Israel  and  himself,  and  yet  which  should  illustrate  at  the  same
time  how  easily  that  connection  could  be  severed.  The  girdle  was,  of  course,  a  familiar
part  of  an  Israelite's  apparel.  Not  exactly  aneoessity,  for  a  man  could  perhaps  do  without
it ;  and  yet  a  necessity  in  this  sense,  that  habit  had  made  it  so.  The  very  function  of
the  girdle  was  to  bind ;  otherwise  it  was,  as  a  girdle,  of  no  use.  Thus,  by  likening  the
people  to  a  girdle,  God  indicated  that,  in  a  certain  sense,  he  had  made  them  necessary
to  himself.  Ho  had  placed  them  in  a  conspicuous  position,  where  the  service  they  could
render  was  very  important.  He  meant  that  he  and  his  people  should  be  viewed  together ;
he  always  in  relation  to  them,  they  always  in  relation  to  him.  Hence  the  variety  of
terms  in  which  he  indicates  his  purpose  in  making  the  children  of  Israel  to  be  as  his
girdle.  "  That  they  might  be  unto  me  for  a  people/*  Jehovah  was  to  look  on  them
with  a  feeling  of  ownership  and  mastery  which  he  was  not  able  to  feel  with  regard  to
other  nations ;  and  they,  in  turn,  were  to  look  up  to  Jehovah,  feeling  that  all  their
purposes  and  actions  were  to  be  determined  by  his  will.  Jehovah  meant  that  one  of
the  most  suggestive  and  comforting  names  by  which  he  could  be  known  should  be  that
of  the  Gk)d  of  his  people  Israel,  and  that  in  turn  Israel  should  be  known  as  the  people
of  Jehovah.    In  tnem  Jehovah  was  to  bo  praised;  in  them  he  was  to  be  glorified.


860  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  xul  1—27.


Other  nations  might  play  the  part  of  girdle  to  their  deities,  but  there  was  really  nothing
of  substance  to  gird.  But  when  Jehovah  drew  Israel  to  himself,  there  was  the  oppor-
tunity of  a  real,  glorious,  and  ever-extending  service  before  them.  Other  nations  chose
and  fabricated  their  gods;  Jehovah  chose  and  separated  Israel,  and  in  doing  so
intended  the  connection  to  be  a  very  close  one,  and  provided  all  the  means  by  which
it  might  become  such.

XL  The  instabilitt  of  the  gibdle.  The  very  Israelite  who  was  to  be  taught  lessons
by  this  girdle,  when  he  chose  a  girdle  for  himself,  was  generally  able  to  make  it  serve  his
purpose.  He  would  get  it  of  some  durable  substance,  to  wear  long.  Elijah  and  John
the  Baptist  were  girt  with  leathern  girdles.  The  Israelite,  in  the  girdle  with  which  ho
was  familiar,  dealt  with  that  which  was  altogether  under  his  control.  The  longer  he
wore  it,  the  easier  he  found  it,  and  the  more  amenable  to  his  touch.  If  it  began  to  tear
and  slip,  and  to  slacken  and  hinder  just  when  it  should  have  been  tightest  and  mosl
helpful,  Jts  owner  would  very  soon  get  rid  of  it  as  a  deceiving  girdle.  But  while
Jehovah  could  bring  his  people  very  close,  and  compel  them  in  a  certain  sense  to
remain  with  him,  he  could  not  make  them  cleave  to  him.  Cleaving  could  only  be  done
with  purpose  of  heart,  and  must  be  a  voluntary  action.  These  people  were  not  as  a
piece  of  linen  or  leather,  to  be  folded  exactly  as  the  wearer  might  choose.  If  they  had
been  they  could  not  have  rendered  the  service  Jehovah  wisheil  from  them,  and  in  the
result  they  showed  that  they  did  not  wish  to  cleave  to  God.  He  could  not  trust  them.
Again  and  again  he  tried  them,  only  to  find  that  they  cared  nothing  for  their  relation
to  him,  nothing  for  the  golden  opportunity  of  setting  forth  his  praise  and  glory.

UI.  The  humiliation  of  the  girdle.  Jeremiah  was  told  to  take  this  linen  girdle
and  bind  it  round  his  loins.  Linen  was  the  material  of  the  priests*  garments ;  and  was
not  Israel  a  consecrated  people  ?  Jeremiah,  belonging  to  a  priestly  family,  would  easily
be  able  to  get  hold  of  a  linen  girdle ;  although  the  directions  given  to  him  here  would
seem  to  show  that  this  particular  girdle  was,  in  some  way,  to  excite  special  attention.
Notice  how  the  instructions  were  given  to  the  prophet  bit  by  bit.  At  first  he  is
simply  told  to  put  on  the  girdle.  It  was  there  to  teach  its  own  lesson  to  all  who  had
eyes  to  observe  and  a  disposition  towards  timely  repentance.  Then  with  his  girdle  he
was  to  take  a  journey  to  Euphrates.  That  such  a  journey  was  long,  difficult,  and
dangerous,  is  true  as  men  count  length,  difficulty,  and  danger,  but  to  a  prophet  the
greatest  difficulties  and  dangers  come  from  refusing  to  take  the  way  of  God,  however
long  it  may  be.  Jonah  had  to  go  to  Nineveh ;  what  is  there  unreasonable  in  sup-
posing that  Jeremiah  had  to  go  to  the  neighbourhood  of  Babylon?  It  may  have  been
just  as  profitable  a  use  of  time  to  take  long  journeys  there  as  to  go  on  giving  testimony
against  those  who  resolutely  closed  their  ears.  Besides,  it  was  by  Euphrates  that  the
girdle  Israel  was  to  be  marred.  It  was  to  be  shown  to  them  that,  if  they  would  not  act
as  a  girdle,  they  could  easily  be  made  useless  for  any  other  purpose.  If  they  would  not
be  God's  people,  they  should  achieve  no  position  lor  themselves.  If  they  would  not
honour  the  name  which  he  had  given  them,  there  was  no  other  name  by  which  they
could  get  distinction.  If  they  would  not  be  to  his  praise  and  glory,  as  the  girdle
cleaving  firmly  and  serviceably  to  him,  then  they  should  be  to  his  praise  and  glory  as
the  marred  girdle.  If  we  will  not  do  what  God  wishes  us  to  do,  then  he  takes  care
that  we  shall  not  do  what  we  ourselves  wish  to  do.  The  girdle  brought  back  from
Euphrates  was  found  profitable  for  nothing.  That  which  is  meant  for  salt  of  the  earth
and  loses  its  savour,  is  thenceforth  good  for  nothing  but  to  be  cast  out  and  to  be
trodden  underfoot  of  men. — Y.

Vers.  15  16.— ^  demand  for  the  timely  giving  of  what  is  due  to  Jehovah,  It  will  be
observed  that  the  previous  verses  of  this  chapter  set  forth  the  doom  of  Jehovah's
apostate  peopleby  two  very  expressive  figures.  There  is  the  figure  of  the  girdle,  marred
u  fl^^r?!^  for  nothing  by  lying  so  long  in  the  damp  recess  of  the  rock.  There
18  also  the  figure  of  the  mhabitants  of  Jerusalem,  from  those  high  in  station  down  to

^™nt!2lT^^!?^^  ^"^^'^  '^''^  ""^  ^^^°^  ^^™«  ^  i^  w«^  a  living  wine-skin,  filled  with
S^rn?i^?'  destroying  one  another  and  being  destroyed.  This  figure,  bordering  on
£  in«^.^%r'^''^f  ^  ^°^t«^^i«g  a  very  terrible  scene.  But  with  the  verses  now  to
«^nTpn\n/!?  T  ^^  •''^1^''^  ""^H^^  ""^y  «^11  *^  evangelical  interval.  Though  in  these
prophecies  of  Jeremiah  gloom  of  necessity  predominates,  yet  there  are  equall^  necessary


\


CH.  xiu.  1— 27.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  361

intervals  of  light,  intervals  where  the  mercy  of  Jehovah  is  clearly  revealed,  and  his
never-failing  desire  that  his  people  should  return  to  him.  There  is,  of  course,  practi-
cally, no  hope  for  these  people  so  far  as  their  present  social  state  is  concerned.  They
will  go  on  their  own  way ;  but  to  the  last  God  wiU  also  make  his  appeal.  Notice  now
the  things  which  Qod  asks  for  here.

I.  Attention.  "  Hear  ye,  and  give  ear."  These  people  have  never  really  attended
to  the  import  of  the  prophetic  messages.  Either  they  have  been  totally  indifferent  or
they  have  been  irritated  by  some  word  they  did  not  like,  and  so  the  complete  message
has  fallen  uncomprehended  upon  their  ears.  For  instance,  the  why  and  wherefore  of
the  prophet's  extraordinary  journey  to  the  Euphrates,  they  did  not  trouble  themselves
to  consider.  And  it  is  plain  from  ver.  12  how  entirely  they  missed  the  meaning  of  the
prophet's  saying  respecting  the  bottles  being  filled  with  wine.  The  parabolic  sentence
was  to  them  nothing  more  than  mere  commonplace.  And  of  course,  so  long  as  attention
was  lacking,  truth  was  of  no  use.  There  is  an  analogy  between  the  receiving  of  truth  and
the  receiving  of  bodily  food.  As  food  must  be  properly  introduced  into  the  physical
system,  so  truth  must  be  properly  introduced  into  the  mind,  brought  before  the  under-
standing of  the  individual,  firmly  grasped  by  him  in  its  reality,  so  that  it  may  become
a  real  and  beneficial  element  in  the  life.

II.  HuMiLiTT.  There  must  be  submission  to  the  prophet  as  a  proved  messenger  from
God.  Pride  is  going  to  be  the  ruin  of  these  people.  The  prophet  himself  was  humbly
obedient  to  all  commandments  of  God ;  why,  then,  should  his  audience  be  proud  ?
The  grandees  of  Jerusalem  do  not  like  to  be  talked  to  by  the  comparative  rustic  from
Anathoth.  The  elders  resent  remonstrances  from  a  man  comparatively  young.  Those
whose  boast  it  perhaps  was  that  they  had  never  been  in  bondage  to  any  man,  do  not
like  to  hear  of  conquest  and  captivity.  There  is  no  getting  at  truth  and  right  without
humility.  Because  truth  means,  not  only  the  reception  of  that  which  is  true,  but  the
casting  out  of  the  old  and  the  loved  and  the  often  boasted  of.  It  is  very  hard  for  a
man  to  cut  himself  off  from  the  past  and  show  by  a  very  dififerent  future  how  he  feels
the  errors  and  follies  of  which  he  has  been  guilty.  It  is  hard  for  the  itSdaKoXos  like
Nicodemus  to  go  down  from  his  chair  and  become  a  futBrrrfis,  stumbling  among  the
rudimentary  principles  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven.

IIL  The  qivinq  of  glory  to  Jehovah.  "Give  glory  to  Jehovah  your  Gk)d.**
These  people  had  been  giving  elsewhere  what  they  reckoned  to  be  glory,  but  which,  so
far  from  being  glory,  was  indeed  their  own  deepest  shame.  Glory  of  a  certain  sort  they
had  plenty  of,  but  they  came  short  of  the  glory  of  God.  They  did  not,  in  the  conduct
of  their  life,  show  a  proper  response  to  the  wisdom  by  which  GK)d  had  created  them  as
men  and  separated  them  as  a  people.  By  their  present  doings  they  were  exposing  the
Name  of  Jehovah  to  insult  and  scorn  from  all  round  about.  This  asking  for  glory  to  be
given  was  a  request  reasonable  in  itself.  If  a  master  is  a  good  master,  it  is  not  right
that  his  servant  should  act  so  as  to  make  the  master's  reputation  suffer.  If  a  father  is
a  good  father,  it  is  not  right  for  his  child  to  act  as  if  he  had  been  deprived  of  all
beneficial  infiuences  in  the  way  of  teaching  and  training.  What  is  thought  of  a  man
who  basely  forgets  his  nationality  and  laughs  at  the  feelings  that  gather  around  the
idea  of  fatherland?  And  hence  the  Name  of  Jehovah  was  a  name  to  be  magnified  in
word  and  deed  and  every  outcome  of  life  on  the  part  of  his  people.  We  ourselves  must
labour  to  praise  God  with  our  whole  hearts.  And  more  than  that,  we  must  live  as  those
who  show  the  power  of  Qod,  saving  us  and  lifting  us  into  an  altogether  higher  life.

IV.  The  orviNo  of  this  glory  promptly  on  account  of  peril  to  those  who
REFUSE  to  give.  The  figure  employed  is  that  of  a  traveller  on  a  journey.  He  gets
into  the  wrong  road,  gets  indeed  altogether  out  of  any  proper  road ;  but  he  persists  in
mere  wandering,  refuses  to  be  warned,  will  not  accept  guidance  back  to  the  proper  path.
He  sees  dangers,  many  dangers,  but  because  it  is  daylight  he  manages  to  escape  them.
And  now,  as  the  darkness  momentarily  increases,  the  warnings  also  increase  in  urgency.
When  the  darkness  is  fully  come,  where  will  he  be?  On  the  mountains,  not  able  to
take  one  confident  step  in  any  direction,  lest  it  be  over  the  precipice.  Furthermore,
in  the  case  of  a  traveller,  he  has  always  this  resort,  that  if  darkness  comes  amid  such
dangers  he  can  stand  still  till  the  return  of  the  dawn.  But  here  is  the  contrast  in  that
the  expected  dawn  will  never  come.  This  rebellious,  God-dishonouring  generation  is
virtually  walking  into  captivity  of  its  own  accord.    As  fietr  as  it  is  concerned,  it  will  look


30ii  THE  BOOK  OF  TUB  PROPHET  JEUEAUAH.    [ch.  xiii,  1-27.


&c  iv;»Cv'cmSx&.  TVe  rvlormtioQ  will  belong,  not  to  it,  nor  eren  to  its  children,
tet  ri:^<fr  ;v>  r^  c^llrv:i*i  diiMreo.  Those  who  wander  from  God  wander  into  a  state
ti-er  a:v  ieli-dtf^trv'jed.  because  the  resources  of  which  they  boasted  themselves
ccc:«  5v^  nvtrizi:.  OwfifT  God,  willingly,  in  the  light,  or  you  will  end  by  glory-
fyin^  bin  u:iwil'::rg>,  in  the  liarkness.  Think  of  wb.u  came  to  Herod  because  he  did
&ol  ^ire  the  giccy  to  Gcd.^Y.

Ver.  20. — A  MorcMmg  qwfstion  to  the  vtepherd.  The  position  oi  a  kiug  towards  his
people  wjLs  illostrated  by  the  )<«itioQ  of  a  shepherd  towards  his  flock.  Hence  the
questioQ  hire  was  donbtless  meant  for  the  special  attention  of  the  kiug.  The  nation
was  largely  in  the  hands  of  the  king  for  the  time  being.  Formal  authority  belonged
to  him,  ami  it  was  generally  joined  with  corresponding  power ;  hence  the  responsibility
by  which  he  was  justly  held  for  the  exercise  of  his  authority,  and  yet  it  is  plain  that
soch  a  question  as  this  could  only  have  a  partial  application  to  the  resiK)nsil>ilitics  of
any  particular  king.  Whoever  the  king  may  have  been  at  the  time  this  prophecy  was
uttered,  it  was  no  **  beautiful  flock  "  that  had  been  handed  to  him.  He  had  received  it
after  the  neglect  and  abuse  of  many  predecessors.  The  nation  itself,  considered  in  its
collective  capacity  and  through  all  its  past  growth,  is  here  impersonated  and  addressed.
Consider^

I.   To  WHAT   CLASSES    OF    I-ERS0N6   SUCH  A  QUESTION'  AS  THIS  MAY  DE  CO^■^IDERED   AS

STILL  ADDRESSED.  Evidently  it  bears  on  all  who  have  to  do  with  the  goceniment  of  any
people.  Just,  firm  government  has  much  to  do— though  how  much  cannot  be  exactly
expressed — with  the  welfare  of  every  community.  The  personal  conduct  and  example
of  governors  is  also  a  very  important  matter.  Better  kings  in  Israel  might  have  helped
to  make  a  better  people,  and  this  influence  of  government  becomes  ever  a  more  impor-
tant thing  to  recoUr^ct,  because  the  people  are  becoming  more  and  more  their  own
governors.  Each  individual  has  only  an  infinitesimal  part,  but  it  is  a  real  pai  t,  and
therefore  the  conduct  of  each  most  surely  aflects  the  aggregate.  It  is  plain  how  this
question  bears  on  the  parental  relation.  It  did  so  bear  on  Israel  of  old,  and  it  bears
equally  on  all  who  have  offspring  put  in  their  charge,  to  train  as  feu*  as  they  can,  for
the  service  of  Christ,  in  their  day  and  generation,  leachers  may  be  said  to  have  a
"  beautiful  flock  "  in  their  charge.  The  deep  influence  of  Dr.  Arnold  on  his  pupils  shows
how  a  teacher  may  bring  out  all  the  beauty  of  his  flock.  The  applicatiou  to  spiritual
teachers  and  pastors  under  Christ,  the  great  Teacher  and  Pastor,  is  obvious.  And,
generally,  every  one  must  con>i'ier  those  around  him,  on  whom,  by  daily  companionship
or  any  way  of  suflScient  contact,  he  exercises  influence.  Every  one  is  responsible,  not
only  for  that  which  is  formally  handed  to  him,  but  just  as  much  for  all  that  he  can  in
any  way  keep.  Let  no  one  suppose  that  he  himself  has  nothing  to  do  but  be  cared
for.  Just  as  we  are  every  one  of  us  sheep  in  one  sense,  so  we  are  shepherds  in  another.
II.  What  is  required  in  order  to  give  the  right  answer  to  this  question.
Nothing  but  this,  that  we  can  truthfully  assert  ourselves  to  have  been  faithful.  It
cannot  be  required  that  we  should  lose  none  of  the  sheep.  Not  even  the  most  faithful
shepherd  that  trod  the  pastures  of  Palestine  could  manage  that.  He  could  only  do  his
best  to  be  provident,  watchful,  and  courageous,  so  as  to  be  himself  free  from  blame  if
a  sheep  was  lost  or  fell  a  prey  to  the  wild  beast.  And  not  one  of  the  kings  of  Israel
or  Judah  could  have  said  quite  so  much  as  this.  Some  of  them,  indeed,  showed  not
the  slightest  notion  that  sheep  had  been  put  into  their  hands  at  all.  Depend  upon  it,
if  there  were  more  of  this  faithfulness  iliere  would  be  more  success  in  gathering  and
preserving  a  flock  for  God.  Faithfulness  is  the  least  that  can  be  shown  in  our  relations
to  others.  Of  course,  meddlesomeness,  censoriousness,  bigotry,  must  not  be  mistaken  for
it  No  good  can  be  done  if  individual  liberty  is  not  respected,  but  nothing  must  prevail
on  us  to  deviate  in  the  slightest  from  the  line  Christ  has  marked  out  Those  of  Christ's
sheep  who,  being  most  conscious  of  their  own  incapacity  to  make  a  way,  keep  their
eyes  fixed  on  the  way  their  Master  makes  for  them,  are  really  doing  something  of  the
shepherd's  work.  Every  one  living  and  acting  by  the  rule  Christ  has  given  is  more  of
a  shepherd  than  he  thinks.  Then,  for  comfort,  let  it  be  kept  in  mind  that  no  faithful-
ness of  ours  will  prevent  the  waywardness  and  wilfulness  of  others.  Jesus  warned
Judas,  but  Judas  went  obstinately  off  into  his  own  way.  Paul,  faithful  as  none  of  us
can  ever  hope  to  be,  had  to  bewail  many  who,  professing  faith,  yet  walked  contrary  to


CH.  xui.  1— 27.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  TROrHET  JEREMIAH.  353

tho  will  of  Christ.    The  ^eat  thing  to  be  aimed  at  is  that  we  should  be  clear  from
the  blood  of  all  men  (Acts  xx.  26—30).

III.  It  will  be  seen  that  this  was  a  question  for  flocks  as  well  as  for  shepherds.
Bulers  are  responsible  for  right  leading,  but  subjects  and  followers  are  not  altogether  as
sheep,  that  they  should  blindly  follow  those  in  formal  authority.  Truth  has  not  been
put  within  the  formal  shepherd's  exclusive  protection.  We  must  take  care  whom  we
follow.  It  is  a  delusion  to  suppose  that  we  can  hand  ourselves  over  spiritually  to  the
guidance  of  any  one  less  than  Christ.  Others  may  help  and  suggest;  only  he  can
command.  Paul  came  to  his  hearers  with  arguments  and  persuasions,  laying  before
them  the  truth,  which  they  were  able  to  receive  because  it  was  the  truth,  not  because
the  authority  of  the  speaker  made  it  true.  All  New  Testament  preaching  goes  on  the
assumption  that  every  one  can  be  fully  persuaded  in  his  own  mind.  The  same  Scrip-
tures are  open  to  reader  as  to  preacher.  None  can  have  their  eternal  interests  perilled
except  by  their  own  negligence. — ^Y.

Ver.  23.—^  natural  imposBibility.  I.  The  natural  impossibility  here  presented.
It  is  a  profound  and  momentous  truth,  God  himself  being  the  witness — the  heart-
searching  God — that  man  who  is  accustomed  to  do  evil  cannot  turn  to  good.  This
truth  is  not  baldly  stated  here,  but  is  illustrated  in  such  a  way  that  there  can  be  no
possible  doubt  as  to  God's  meaning.  Observe  that  the  impossibility  referred  to  is
a  natural  one.  It  is  not  said  that  under  no  circumstauces  whatever  can  a  man
accustomed  to  do  evil  be  enabled  to  do  good.  The  thing  affirmed  is  that  the  power
of  habit  and  custom  is  so  strong  that  he  cannot  turn  himself.  If  we  are  inclined  to
doubt  this,  and  indulge  in  that  glorification  of  human  nature  which  is  at  once  so  easy
and  so  perilous,  we  have  only  to  think  of  the  illustrations  here  employed.  It  is  vain
to  discuss  with  a  man  who  is  determined  to  magnify  the  power  of  the  natural  man
towards  that  which  is  right  and  good.  The  better  plan  is  to  assure  one's  own  heart  of
the  truth  which  God  would  make  plain  by  these  illustrations  of  his  own  giving.  If  any
one  asserted  that  an  Ethiopian  could  change  his  skin  or  a  leo[)ard  his  spots,  he  would
be  reckoned  a  fool  past  arguing  with.  But  there  are  multitudes  who  think  it  is  very
good  advice  to  tell  the  poor  slave  of  worldliness  and  passion  to  be  a  man  and  exert  the
strength  of  his  will  and  turn  away  from  evil.  Now,  what  God  says  here  by  his  pro-
phet is  that  every  such  attempt  must  end  in  disappointment.  No  doubt  there  are
certain  times  and  stages  in  life  when  it  is  hard  to  accept  such  a  view.  It  is  a  humbling
and  limiting  view,  one  which  exhibits  in  such  an  uncompromising  way  our  weakness.
But  the  sooner  we  come  to  take  such  a  view — to  take  it  practically  and  not  in  a  mere
speculative  manner — to  feel  that  the  way  of  self-recovery  and  self-perfecting  is  closed
against  us,  the  better  it  will  be  for  us.

II.  The  consequent  need  of  a  GRACfious  intervention.  This  is  not  stated  here,
but  we  know  that  it  is  meant  to  be  remembered.  In  all  such  emphatic  assertions  of
human  inability  there  lies  the  suggestion  that  we  may  look  confidently  and  ought  to
look  promptly  for  abundance  of  Divine  help.  God  puts  his  hand  on  our  mouths  to
stop  all  proud  words,  but  at  the  same  time  he  would  lead  us  to  lay  hold  of  his  promises
and  be  filled  with  his  strength.  A  clear  vision  of  our  own  inability  means  a  clear
vision  of  the  need  of  Divine  intervention,  and  a  clear  vision  of  the  need  of  Divine  inter-
vention may  be  expected  to  prepare  for  an  equally  clear  vision  of  the  reality  of  that
intervention.  That  which  measures  the  impossibilities  in  the  corrupted  natural  man
helps  to  measure  the  reasonable  purposes  and  expectations  of  the  man  who  is  renewed
by  the  Spirit  of  God.  When  we  have  got  the  life  that  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God,  we  have
something  within  us  which  defies  the  corruptions  so  powerful  before.  The  Christian,
full  of  the  Divine  Spirit,  is  found  able  to  utter  all  sorts  of  paradoxes.  Though  he  can-
not, of  himself,  make  one  hair  white  or  black,  he  can  be  ** suffering,  yet  alway  rejoic-
ing ;  poor,  yet  making  many  rich."  There  is  a  way,  then,  by  which  those  accustomed
to  do  evil  can  be  brought  to  do  good.  There  are  resources  which  more  than  make  up
for  the  greatest  lack  of  natural  strength.  If  we  only  seek  for  those  resources  in  the
right  place,  we  cannot  fail  to  find  them.

III.  The  teaching  to  be  derived  from  the  employment  of  these  peculiar
illustrations.  fThousands  of  images  were  available  to  show  natural  impossibilities,
but  these  two  are  employed.    It  will  bo  observed  that  they  relate  to  the  alteration  of

JEREMIAH.  2  a


354


THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  xiv.  1—22.


external  appearance.  God  could  change  the  skin  of  the  Ethiopian,  could  change  the
Bpot8  of  tlie  leoiMird ;  but  he  leaves  thorn  as  they  are,  because  no  good  purpose  could
be  served  by  the  alteration.  Where  an  alteration  is  really  wanted,  he  can  make  it,
with  results  that  are  profitable  now  and  promise  a  far  greater  profit  in  eternity.  So  far
as  the  merely  agreeable  is  concerned,  it  would  certainly  have  been  pleasanter  for  the
negro  if  those  features  which  make  him  an  object  of  ridicule  to  the  ignorant,  the  proud,
and  the  fastidious,  were  taken  away.  But  it  is  God's  principle  to  interfere  with  nature
only  where  sin  has  made  the  interference  necessary.  Many  negroes — Gtxi  be  thanked
—have  found  the  better  part,  the  one  thing  needful ;  and,  compared  with  this,  what  is
the  most  disturbing  of  surface  discomforts?  Continual  comfort  at  the  heart,  a  comfort
which  cannot  be  taken  from  him,  makes  him  forget  all  these.  There  would  be  no
object  in  changing  the  spots  of  the  leopard ;  let  ns  rather  rejoice  that  God  takes  away
from  men  the  leopard-ferocity  which  makes  them  as  dangerous  as  any  beast  of  prey.
How  often  we  seek  vain  and  useless  things,  making:  ourselves  miserable  over  physical
defects  and  peculiarities,  and  continuing  quite  indifferent  to  the  washing  of  the  heart
from  wickedoess.  Instead  of  being  anxious  after  things  we  cannot  change  and  need  not
change,  let  us  pray  and  strive  after  that  possible,  fundamental,  radical  change  which
will  bring  in  due  time  perfection  of  the  whole  man.  God,  working  from  the  heart,
will  cause  that  in  due  time  we  shall  be  perfect  and  entire,  lacking  nothing. — Y.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  XIV.


This  chapter  must  be  read  in  connection
with  the  following  one.  They  dt^scribe
chiefly  Jeremiah's  twofold  attempt  at  inter-
cession (see  vers.  7 — 9  and  19 — 22) — a  tender
and  appealing  attempt  indeed.  The  terrible
sufferings  of  the  people  during  a  drought
went  to  the  prophet's  heart.  He  even
ventured,  when  repelled  the  first  time,  to
intercede  anew,  on  the  ground  of  the  cove-
nant, but  in  vain.  On  receiving  (ch.  xv.
2—9)  a  revelation  of  the  bitter  fate  in  store
for  his  people,  he  bursts  out  into  a  heart-
rending complaint  that  his  own  destiny
should  throw  him  into  such  a  whirlpool  of
strife.  His  Lord  at  once  corrects  and  con-
Bolee  him  (ch.  xv.  10 — 21).  There  are
doubts,  however,  about  the  connection  of
these  latter  verses.— The  date  of  the  drought
is  not  stated;  but  as  the  punishment  of
Judah  is  described  as  future,  and  no  refer-
ence is  made  to  the  captivity  of  Jehoiachin,
we  shall  probably  be  right  in  setting  it
daring  the  reign  of  Jehoiakim.

Ver.  1.— The  dearth ;  rather,  the  drought,
or,  more  literally,  the  droughts^  tiie  plural
hemg  used  to  indicate  the  length  of  time
the  drought  lasted.

Ver.  2.— The  tenses  in  the  following
description  should  bo  perfects  and  presents ;
the  Authorized  Version,  by  its  inconsistency,
destroys  the  unity  of  the  picture.  The
gates  thereof;  t.e.  the   people   assembled


there.  They  are  blaek  unto  the  ground.
**  To  be  black,"  in  Hebrew,  is  "  to  be  dr*.  ssovl
in  mourning**  (so  e.g,  Ps.  xxxv.  14,  "I
bowed  down  in  black  **V  Here  we  mu^t
undeTBtmnd  the  same  vero  which  is  expressed
in  the  psalm,  **  They  bowed  down  in  mourn-
ing attire  to  the  ground.'*  "  Black,"  how-
ever, is  not  to  be  taken  literally ;  it  means
rather  '*  squalid,  unwashed  **  (of  garments).
Ver.  3. — Thidr  nobles — i.e.  the  upper
classes  of  Judah  and  Jerusalem — ^have  sent
their  little  ones ;  rather,  their  mean  one* ;  i.e.
their  servants,  or  perhaps  (as  Naegelsbach
and  Pavne  Smith)  simply,  **  the  common
people ;  it  was  not  a  matter  concerning  the
rich  alone.  To  the  pits ;  i.e,  to  the  cisterns.
Covered  their  heads ;  a  sign  of  the  deepest
mourning  (2  Sam.  xv.  80 ;  xix.  4 ;  Esth.  vi.

Ver.  4. — ^The  groimd  is  ohapt  Perhaps ;
but  it  is  more  obvious  to  render,  is  dismayed^
according  to  the  usual  meaning  of  the  word.
Words  which  properly  belong  to  human
beings  are  often,  by  a  **  poetic  fallacy,**  ap-
plied to  inanimate  objects  (as  in  ver.  2).  In
the  earth ;  rather,  in  the  land.

Ver.  5. — Even  the  animals  starve.  Yea,
the  hind  also.  The  hind,  contrary  to  that
intense  natural  affection  for  which  she  was
famous  among  the  ancients,  abandons  her
young.

Ver.  6. — ^The  wild  asses  ...  In  the  high
plaoes ;  rather,  on  Vie  bare  heights.  •*  The
wild  aeses,**  says  a  traveller  cited  by  Rosen-
miillcr, "  are  especially  fond  of  treeless  moun-
tains.** Like  dragons;  render  rather,  like
jackals  (as  ch.  ix.  II ;  x.  22).  The  allusion
is  to  the  way  jackals  hold  their  head  as  thej
howl.    We  are  told  that  even  the  keen  eyes


CH.XIV.  1— 22J  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.


855


of  the  wild  asses  fail,  beoanae  there  was  [is]
no  grass ;  rather,  herbage,  Tliey  grow  dim
first  with  seeking  it  so  long  in  vain,  and
then  from  lack  of  nourishment.

Ver.  7. — The  intercession  of  Jeremiah
begins.  Do  thou  it ;  a  pregnant  expression,
equivalent  to  "  act  gloriously  "  (as  Ps.  xxii.
81;  Isa.  xliv.  23).  For  thy  name's  sake.
Jehovah's  **  Name  *'  pledges  him  to  be  merci-
ful to  his  people,  and  not  to  make  a  full  end
of  them,  even  when  they  have  offended
(comp.  '*  Our  Redeemer  was  thy  name  from  of
old  "  Isa.  Ixiii.  16).

Ver.  8. — How  pathetic  a  supplication !
Jehovah  will  surely  not  be  as  a  stranger  in
the  land — the  strangers,  or  **  sojourners,"  like
the  fi4roiKoij  enjoyed  no  civic  rights,  and
consequently  had  no  interest  in  the  highest
concerns  of  the  state — and  as  a  wayfaring
man  that  tnmeth  aside— or  perhaps,  pit^iheth
his  tent ;  for  the  traveller  in  Palestine  doubt-
less carried  his  tent  with  him  then  as  now —
to  tarry  for  a  night.  With  the  latter  figure
compare  the  b^utiful  comparison  of  the
hope  of  the  ungodly  to  **  the  remembrance
of  a  guest  that  tarrieth  but  a  day  "  (Wisd.
V.  14).

Ver.  9. — ^Afl  a  man  astonied ;  rather  (com-
paring the  Arabic  dahamd),  at  one  struck
dumb.  But  Dr.  Payne  Smith,  with  much
reason,  is  more  than  half  inclined  to  follow
the  Septuagint  reading,  equivalent  to  **  as
one  in  a  deep  sleep."  Leave  na  not ;  literally,
lay  U8  not  doum  ;  as  if  a  burden  of  which  the
bearer  is  tired.

Vers.  10 — 16. — The  answer  of  Jehovah.

Ver.  10. — Thns  have  they  loved  to  wander,
.  .  .  therefore  the  Lord  doth  not  accept
them ;  i.e.  with  such  pertinacity  have  they
been  set  upon  "wandering"  (roving  law-
lessly about),  that  the  Lord  hath  no  more
pleasure  in  them.  "  Therefore,"  is,  literally,
artd.  **  Thus,"  or  **so,"  is  used  in  the  same
sense  as  in  1  Kings  x.  12,  which  runs  liter-
ally, "...  there  came  not  so  [abundantly]
almug  timber."  The  particle  of  compari-
son hns  given  much  occupation  to  the  com-
mentators (see  Payne  Smith's  note),  but  the
above  view  is  at  once  simple  and  suitable  to
the  context ;  for  Jeremiah  has  already  ad-
mitted that  "our  backslidings  are  multi-
plied" (ver.  7).  The  Lord  doth  not,  etc.
(to  the  end  of  the  verse),  is  quoted  var-
hatim  from  Hos.  viiL  13.  Jeremiah  puts
conspicuous  honour  on  the  older  inspired
writers;  he  has  no  craving  for  originality.
Nearly  all  has  been  saivl  already ;  what  he
has  to  do  is  chiefly  to  adapt  and  to  apply,
He  will  now  remember,  etc.  The  emphasis
is  on  "  now."  Nothing  is  more  remarkable
in  the  prophets  than  the  stress  laid  on  the
unerring  justness  of  the  time  chosen  for
Divine  interpositions.  When  the  iniquity  is
fully  ripe,  it  as  it  were  attracts  the  punish-


ment, which  till  then   is  laid  up  in   store
(comp.  Gen.  xv.  16 ;  Isa.  xviii.  5 ;  xxxiii.  10).

Ver.  11. — Pray  not  for  this  people.  So  in
ch.  vii.  16  (on  which  see  note);  ch.  xi.  14.

Ver.  12. — Their  cry.  The  word  is  very
forcible ;  it  is  the  shriek  in  which  an  un-
sophisticated man  gives  vent  to  his  pain  and
grief.  An  oblation.  It  is  the  vegetable
offering  (Authorized  Version,  "  meat  offer-
ing;" Luther,  "  speisopfer ")  which  is  re-
ferred to  in  the  so-called  minkhah  (literally,
^i/t).  Though  sometimes  offered  sepamtely,
it  regularly  accompanied  a  burnt  offering.
I  will  not  accept  them.  Dr.  Payne  Smith
tries  to  soften  the  rejection  of  these  worship-
pers by  the  remark  that "  there  is  a  time  when
the  most  genuine  repentance  avails  nothing
to  avert  the  temporal  consequences  of  sin."
But  the  analogy  of  other  bimilar  passages
(e.g.  Isa.  i.  15)  warrants  the  view  of  Keil  that
the  ground  of  the  rejection  of  the  worship
is  its  heartless  formalism  and  in.^^incerity,
which  was  equally  a  bar  to  Jehovah's  favour
and  the  prophet's  intercession.

Ver.  13. — "  Pleading  with  Providence,
the  good  prophet  lays  the  blame  on  ill
teaching,  but  the  stem  answer  (ver.  14),
admitting  the  plea  as  true,  rejects  it  as
inadequate  (ver.  14),  and  denounces  sorrows
y^hlch  (vers.  17 — 22)  the  prophet  passion-
ately deprecates  "  (Rowland  Williams).  Ah,
Lord  Qod\  rather,  Alasl  0  Lord  Jehovah
(see  -on  ch.  L  6).  The  prophets  say  unto
them.  The  greater  part  of  the  prophetic
order  had  not  kept  pace  with  its  more
spiritual  members  (Isaiah,  Jeremiah,  etc.).
They  still  traded  on  those  natural  gifts  of
divination  (Micah  iii.  6)  which  were,  no
doubt,  where  genuine,  of  Divine  origin,  but
which,  even  then,  needed  to  be  supple-
mented and  controlled  by  a  special  impulse
from  the  Spirit  of  holiness.  Jeremiah,  how-
ever, declares,  on  the  authority  of  a  revela-
tion, that  these  prophets  did  not  divine  by
any  God-given  faculty,  but  **  the  deceit  of
their  own  heart"  (ver.  14).  The  Deutero-
nomio  Tarah,  discovered  after  a  period  of
concealment  at  the  outset  of  Jeremiah's
ministry,  energetically  forbids  the  practice
of  the  art  of  divination  (Dent,  xviii.  10).

Ver.  14. — A  thing  of  nonght  The  word,
however,  is  collective,  and  means  all  the
various  futile  means  adopted  for  prying  into
the  future.

Ver.  16.— I  will  ponr  their  wickedness;
i.e.  the  fruits  of  their  wickedness  (comp.  ch.
ii.  19,  "  Thine  own  wickedness  shall  cor-
rect thee  ").

Vers.  17 — 21. — The  prophet's  grief,  and
second  intercession.

Ver.  17. — Therefore  thou  shalt  say,  etc.
There  is  something  strange  and  contrary
to  verisimilitude  in  the  prefixing  of  this
formula,  not  to  a  Diviue  revelation,  but  to  a


356


THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  xiv.  1— 22.


mere  expregsion  of  the  i»ined  hnman  feel-
ings of  the  pn>phet  It  i»  poarible  that  the
edStor  of  Jeremiah's  prophecies  thought  the
paragraph  which  begins  here  needed  some-
thing to  link  it  with  the  preceding  passage,
and  selected  his  formula  rather  unsuitably.
I^  mine  eyei  mn  down,  etc.  (oomp.  ch.  ziii.
27).  Jeremiah's  tender  compassion  shows
itself  in  his  dioice  of  the  expression,  the
Tirgin  daughter  of  my  people,  just  as  we  feel
an  added  bitti-mcss  in  the  premature  death
of  a  chcrishetl  maiden.

Ver.  18.— A  picture  of  the  state  of  things
after  the  capture  of  Jerusalem :  the  slain
without,  the  famine-stricken  within.  The
latter  are  deacribed  allusively  as  **  sicknesses
of  famine"  (so  literally).  As  a  peculiarly
striking  evidence  of  the  downfall  of  great-
ness, it  is  a<lded  that  even  prophet  and
priest  have  to  go  about  into  a  Und  that  they
know  not.  The  verb  used  here  can  obviously
not  have  its  ordinary  sense  of  going  about
for  purposes  of  traffic  Aramaic  usage
suggests,  however,  a  suitable  meaning;
what  the  prophet  sketches  before  us  is  a
company  of  these  ex-grandees  **  begging
their  way  **  into  an  unknown  land.


Ver.  19.— We  looked  for  peaee,  etc.;  a
repetition  of  ch.  viii.  15.

Ver.  20. — Our  wiokedneM,  and  the  ini-
quity of  our  fathers.  There  is  a  mysterious
connection  between  the  sin  of  the  past  and
of  the  present  So  in  another  prophet  we
read,  **  Your  iniquities  and  the  iniquities  of
your  fathers  to;j;ether  [will  I  requite]."

Ver  21. — The  throne  of  thy  glory;  i.e,
the  temple  (ch.  xvii.  12 ;  Ezek.  xliii.  7),  or
Jeruittilem  (ch.  iii.  17).  It  is  the  same  con-
cei)tion  where  Jehovah  is  said  to  ^'  dwell
between  "  [or,  *  sit  upon  *]  "  the  cherubim  *•
(Isa.  XXX vii.  16;  Ps.  Ixxx.  1;  xcix.  1).

Ver.  22.— None  of  the  Tanitiee,  or  false
gods  (ch.  iii.  17),  of  the  heathen  can  deliver
us  in  this  our  strait  (want  of  rain).  "  Rain-
makers"  is  still  a  common  name  of  sooth-
sayers among  savage  nations.  Thou  alone
art  God,  and  our  God;  or,  in  Jeremiah's
phrase  (not.  Art  not  thou  he,  etc.  ?  but)  Art
thou  not  Jehovah  our  God  t  and  the  g^round
of  the  appeal  follows,  Jehovah  is  the  Maker
of  all  tiiese  things;  t.e.  all  the  heavmly
phenomena,  especially  the  clouds  and  the
rain.


nOMILETTCS.

Vers.  1 — 6. — A  pJagiie  of  drought.  I.  A  plaoue  of  drouoht  is  an  T^•STA^-^E  of
A  NATURAL  CALAMITY  OCCASIONING  GREAT  DISTRESS.  Jeremiah  givcs  a  vivid  picture
of  the  trouble  such  a  plague  causes.  Men  of  all  classes,  from  the  noble  to  the  plough-
man, Bufler  under  it;  the  animal  world  is  driven  from  its  natural  instincts;  universal
desolation  and  agony  prevail.  Yet  this  is  all  natural.  It  is  not  the  result  of  war  nor
of  any  human  interference ;  it  is  a  natural  calamity.  Nature  is  not  always  placid  and
pleaHing.  She  has  her  frowns,  her  storms,  her  droughts.  The  world  is  not  a  waste,
howling  wilderness ;  but  neither  is  it  a  garden  of  Eden.  Thorns  spring  up  among  the
wheat.  Even  away  from  the  perpetual  deserts  fertile  fields  are  occasionally  parched  and
withered.  We  must  ex[)ect  a  mixed  experience  in  human  life,  as  we  meet  with  it  ia
nature.  Showers  of  blessing  are  not  always  falling.  There  come  also  periods  of  dearth,
seasons  of  natural  distress.

II.   A   PLAGUE  OF   DROUGHT  IS  AN  EXAMPLE  OP  ONE   FORM   OP  THE    PUNISHMENT   OF

BIN.  Though  the  drought  is  natural,  it  is  not,  therefore,  to  be  separated  from  all  relation
to  human  and  moral  affairs.  God  rules  Nature  through  her  laws  when  he  does  not
sui^ersede  them.  In  his  government  of  men  God  may  overrule  natural  events  to  the
execution  of  his  decrees.  When  such  a  calamity  as  a  plague  of  drought  falls  upon  a
land,  it  is  well  to  ask  whether  there  are  no  national  sins  for  which  it  is  sent  as  chastise-
ment. Sometimes  the  calamities  of  nature  are  the  direct  result  of  human  conduct.
Thus  Palestine  now  suffers  from  lack  of  water,  partly  because  the  felling  of  trees  has
diminished  the  rainfall,  and  partly  because  what  rain  there  is  is  quickly  drained  off  for
want  of  proper  irrigation  arrangements.  Still,  we  must  not  assume  that  every  natural
calamity  is  sent  for  the  punishment  of  sin.  This  is  but  one  among  many  Divine
purposes.  Wholesome  discipline,  ulterior  advantages,  the  avoiding  of  worse  though
unseen  calamities,  etc.,  may  enter  into  the  Divine  reasons  for  permitting  the  trouble.
Such  calamities  should  make  us  examine  ourselves,  not  humiliate  ourselves  without
thought  and  clear  conviction  of  conscience.

III.   A    PLAGUE    OF     DROUGHT     IN    NATURE    SHOULD    SUGGEST    TOE     POSSIBILITY    OF

BPIBITUAL  DROUGHT.     Outward  things  are  symbolical  of  inward  experiences.     There  is
a  drought  of  the  soul — when  the  soul  is  not  partaking  of  the  "  water  of  life,"  and  it  is  the


CH.  XIV.  1—22.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  867


most  fearful  kind  of  drought  Tet,  while  the  physical  calamity  excites  all  attention  and
occasions  universal  distress,  this  calamity  is  often  unheeded.  But  the  efifects  of  it  are
not  the  less  destructive.  The  soil  becomes  barren,  unfruitful;  the  heavenly  graces
within,  the  instincts  of  Christian  charity,  are  lost ;  the  spiritual  vision  fails.  It  is
unnatural  not  to  feel  thirst  in  a  season  of  drought.  The  soul  that  is  in  this  condition
will  first  come  to  itself  with  a  feeling  of  deep  distress,  a  pain  of  inward  longing,  a
panting  and  thirsting  after  Qod  (Ps.  Ixiii.  1).

IV.  A  FLAQUE  OF  DROUGHT    SHOULD    MAKE  US  HOBB   THANKFUL    FOB  THE  OOMMON

BLESSINGS  OF  DAILY  LIFE.  Tho  Commonest  blessings  are  the  most  valuable.  The  first
necessary  of  life  is  air,  and  air  is  the  most  abundant  thing  in  nature.  The  next  most
important  requirement  is  water,  and  water  is  usually  exceedingly  plentiful.  Gk)ld  and
diamonds  are  rare,  but  these  can  easily  be  spared.  This  very  fact,  which  is  a  result  of
God's  providentiad  care,  induces  an  ungrateful  neglect.  We  take  without  thought
that  which  we  are  always  receiving.  We  must  lose  it  to  appreciate  it  In  sickness  we
prize  health ;  in  thirst  we  value  water.  It  would  be  more  wise  and  grateful  to  acknow-
ledge God's  blessings  while  we  have  them,  instead  of  requiring  bim  ^  ^^  them  from
us  to  teach  us  their  worth.

Ver.  7. — A  plea  for  mercy  in  spite  of  guUt  I.  We  can  only  plead  for  God's
MERCY  AFTEB  A  FRANK  ADMISSION  OF  OUR  OWN  GUILT.  The  commou  habit  of  people  is
to  take  the  opposite  course — to  excuse  themselves,  extenuate  their  &ults,  or  ignore,  or
even  deny  them.  But  this  is  vain  before  God,  and  while  persisted  in  it  shuts  the  door
against  forgiveness.  God  can  only  forgive  sin  that  is  confessed,  can  only  have  mercy
on  the  humble  and  penitent.  This  confession  must  be  frank  and  full.  Such  a  confession
is  contained  in  the  prayer  of  Jeremiah.    1.  Personal  guilt  is  admitted — ''  our  iniquities."

2.  The  shame  of  increasing  guilt  is  admitted — ''  our  backslidings."  If  we  feel  we  are
better  than  we  once  were,  we  excuse  our  present  imperfection  on  the  ground  that  it  is
at  least  an  improvement  on  the  past.  It  requires  a  genuine  penitence  to  admit  that  we
have  been  growing  worse.  3.  Sin  is  seen  to  be  an  ofience  against  Qod — *'  We  have
sinned  against  thee."  It  is  not  a  mere  fault  in  ourselves ;  it  is  a  direct  act  of  warfare
with  Heaven.    David  said  this  (Ps.  li.  4);  so  did  the  prodigal  son  (Luke  xv.  18).

4.  Sin  is  rcco^ipiized  as  abundant — *'  Our  backslidings  are  many."  It  is  vain  to  confess
some  sins  whilst  denying  othere,  or  to  attempt  to  represent  them  as  less  numerous  than
they  really  are.    This  keeping  back  of  part  of  the  confession  mars  the  whole  of  it

5.  Guilt  is  acknowledged  to  be  open  before  God — ^*^  Our  sins  testify ^  6.  It  is  seen  to  be
a  bar  to  our  claim  of  simple  rights — they  testify  "  against  us."  Condemnation,  therefore,
may  justly  follow  the  plain  evidence  of  guilt.  Our  own  sins  are  witnesses  to  oppose
any  plea  we  may  found  on  our  personal  deserts.

II.  Our  own  guilt,  when  frankly  admitted,  is  no  hindrance  to  the  mercy
OF  God.  The  only  hindrance  is  impenitence.  The  ground  of  God's  mercy  is  not  our
desert,  but  his  goodness.  If  there  is  anything  in  us  which  predisposes  him  to  be  gracious,
this  is  not  our  worth,  but  our  want.  The  more  wretched  the  condition  to  which  our
sin  has  brou<;ht  us,  the  more  urgent  the  call  to  his  pity.  The  one  plea  is  "  for  his  Name's
sake."  1.  For  the  sake  of  (^'s  character.  His  Name  expresses  what  he  is.  His
highest  name  is  "  Love."  By  this  name  we  plead  for  mercy.  Because  of  what  he  is,
because  of  his  inherent  goodness,  love,  and  pity,  we  implore  his  help.  2.  For  the  sake
of  God's  honour.  He  has  promised  to  have  mercy  on  the  penitent  {e,g.  Deut  xxx.
1 — 10).    Thus  he  has  pledged  his  Name,  bound  himself  by  his  own  certain  faithfulness.

3.  For  the  sake  of  God's  glory.  His  highest  glory  is  his  goodness.  When  he  delivere  his
children  his  own  Name  is  glorified.  Redemption  honours  God  more  than  creation.  The
song  of  the  redeemed  at  the  end  of  the  world  will  be  more  sweet  and  more  noble
than  the  song  of  the  sons  of  the  morning  at  the  dawn  of  creation.  As  Christians  we
see  these  truths  more  clearly  revealed  in  Christ.  He  is  the  "  Word "  incarnate,  the
"  Name,"  the  highest  manifestation  of  the  character  of  God,  the  fulfilment  of  his
greatest  promises,  the  expression  of  his  brightest  glory.  For  us  to  pray  *'  for  Christ's
sake  "  is  the  same  as  praying  *'  for  God's  Name's  sake."

Vers.  8, 9. — The  Hope  of  Israel  a  stranger  in  the  land,  I.  God  is  the  Hope  and
Saviour  of  his  people.    1.  God  is  the  Hope.    (1)  He  inspires  hope ;  (2)  in  him  is


358  THE  BCMDK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  xiv.  1—22.


the  ground  for  the  realization  of  hope ;  (3)  our  hi^jhest  hope  is  for  the  possession  and
enjoyment  of  God  himself;  (4)  this  hope  is  justifiublc  in  the  jxioplo  of  God.  He  is  the
Hope  of  Israel,  truly  the  Ho|)e  of  the  spiritual  Israel.  2.  God  is  the  Saviour  in  trouble.
He  is  remembered  in  trouble  if  he  is  forcjotten  in  prosjKTity.  In  our  greatest  need  he
is  found  nearest  to  us.  Though  he  does  not  always  prevent  us  from  falling  into  trouble,
he  is  always  rea<ly  to  help  us  when  we  are  in.  There  is  to  us  no  more  important
character  of  God  than  that  of  the  Saviour,  since,  as  "  man  is  born  to  trouble,"  we  all  need
a  Saviour,  and  he  alone  can  deliver  from  the  great  sorrows  and  sins  of  life.

II.  God  may  be  w^ith  us  as  a  stranger.  1.  He  may  be  with  us  and  tinAmoum— -
like  the  stranger  who  passes  through  a  country  unrecognized.  He  was  received  by-
Abraham  as  a  stranger  (Gen.  xviii.  2).  Hagar  and  Jacob  failed  at  first  to  discern  hid
presence.  Christ  was  treated  as  an  unknown  stranger  by  the  two  disciples  journeying
to  Emmaus.  2.  He  may  be  with  us  but  for  a  season — like  the  traveller  who  sojourns
for  a  night  and  is  gone  the  next  morning.  We  may  receive  temporary  yisitations  of
God  without  enjoying  his  abiding  presence,  casual  glimpses  of  the  Divine  instead  of  a
constant  walking  with  God,  the  light  of  Heaven  falling  now  and  again  on  our  path
while  earthly  clouds  fling  long  stretches  of  dreary  shadow  over  the  most  of  it.  3.  He
may  be  with  us  without  having  communion  with  us — as  a  stranger,  not  as  a  companion
—as  the  traveller  who  pitches  his  tent  in  our  land,  not  as  the  guest  whom  we  welcome
to  our  hearth.  Tlius  God  may  be  near  to  us  without  our  receiving  him  into  our
hearts  as  our  great  FrientL  4.  He  may  be  with  us  without  acting  for  our  good
— like  a  mighty  man  slumbering.  So  he  may  see  our  need  and  yet  we  may  not  be
saved.

III.  It  is  most  sad  that  God  should  be  with  us  as  a  stranger.  1.  It  is  sad
because  the  blessings  of  his  presence  are  then  not  received.  (1)  He  must  be  known  if
we  are  to  benetit  by  his  aid.    (2)  We  need  his  constant  presence  for  constant  distresses.

f3^  God  helps  by  inward  grace,  which  must  come  through  close  personal  communion.
4}  We  need  the  active  aid  of  God,  not  the  mere  fact  of  his  presence.  2.  It  is  sad
because  it  is  a  violation  of  our  natural  relations  with  Qod.  God  is  our  Father.  Shall
our  Father  bo  but  as  a  stranger  passing  through  our  midst?  He  is  changeless  in  his
eternal  love  to  us.  We  are  bound  to  him  by  close  and  perj^tual  obligations,  and  we
are  in  great  and  constant  need  of  him.  How,  then,  do  we  ever  find  ourselves  in  this
unnatural  condition  ?  The  cause  is  in  us  (ver.  10).  Great  sin  cherished  in  impenitence
severs  us  from  Gcxl,  and  makes  it  necessary  that  he  should  depart  from  us.  God  is  a
stranger  when  with  us,  (1)  because  we  are  too  earthly  minded  to  discern  his  presence,
and  too  occupied  with  worldly  things  to  think  of  it ;  (2)  because  we  do  not  open  our
hearts  to  receive  him  in  inward  companionship;  and  (3)  because  we  do  not  seek  and
trust  his  help  in  our  need  (Rom.  x,  21).

Vers.  13 — 16. — False  prophets,  I.  Official  teachers  may  be  falsk  teachers.
The  false  prophets  belonged  to  the  recognized  order  of  prophets.  No  rank  in  the  Church
confers  infallibility.  Popes  have  been  heretics.  The  authority  of  a  teacher  must  be
sought  in  his  message,  not  in  his  ofSce.  It  is  our  duty  to  try  the  spirits  by  their
correspondence  with  known  revelation  (1  John  iv.  2),  by  the  fruits  of  their  lives  and
doctrines  (Matt.  vii.  16),  and  by  the  standard  of  our  own  conscience  (2  Cor.  iv.  2).

IL  Preaching  which  is  not  inspired  by  the  Divine  Spirit  of  holiness  is  likely
TO  BE  false.  The  prophet  may  have  a  piercing  intellect  and  a  towering  imagination.
Yet  he  will  err  if  he  be  blinded  by  unholiness  and  excluded  from  the  revelations  of
spiritual  communion.  He  s|)eaks  only  out  of  his  own  heart ;  but  the  heart  is  "  deceitful
above  all  things."  Attempts  are  constantly  made  to  evolve  religious  truth  out  of  the
inner  consciousness  of  the  thinker.  No  idle  dreams  are  more  delusive,  since  (1)  men
have  not  the  materials  out  of  which  to  build  a  theology  of  their  own;  (2)  they  have
not  the  faculties  capable  of  using  those  materials — sin  perverts  the  spiritual  vision,
prejudice  and  self-interest  distort  views  of  truth.

IlL  Consciously  teaching  false  ideas  of  religion  is  a  heinous  crime.  It  is
unng  the  Name  of  God  in  vain  (ver.  14).  It  is  abusing  the  trust  of  a  high  office  for  low
purposes.  It  is  likely  to  involve  many  in  the  toils  of  a  fatal  deception.  It  is  easy  to
prophesy  smooth  things — easy  thus  to  gain  a  vulgar  popularity.  But  if  this  is  done  at
the  expense  of  truth,  it  is  an  awful  sin.    Ail  Christian  teachers  should  beware  of  the


CH.  XIV.  1—22.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  359

temptation  to  degrade  their  mission  by  aiming  at  pleasing  their  hearers  instead  of
faithfully  proclaiming  the  will  of  God.

IV.  False  teaching  in  religion  will  be  punished  by  fatal  results.  It  ought
to  be  clear  to  everybody  that  the  first  question  oonceming  any  teaching  is  whether  it  is
true.  Yet  this  question  is  often  ignored.  The  prophet  is  eloquent ;  the  doctrine  is
pleasing ;  the  prediction  is  inviting.  But  what  of  all  that  if  it  is  false  ?  The  prophecy
will  be  punished  when  truth  is  revealed  by  facts.  Then  the  false  prophet  will  sufifer
by  the  fulfilment  in  himself  of  the  prophecy  he  denied,  and  the  people  by  the  coming  of
the  evil  day  they  were  too  ready  to  hear  discredited.

•

Ver.  20— ch.  xv.  1. — Prayer  for  mercy  rejected,  L  The  prayer  is  based  on  urgent
PLEAS.  1.  A  complete  confession  of  sin.  (Ver.  20.)  It  is  acknowledged  as  hereditary,
but  as  also  personal.  Therefore  all  claims  must  rest  on  Divine  considerations,  since  no
ground  for  prayer  can  be  found  in  anything  human.  2.  The  plea  of  the  Name  of  God,
This  is  a  plea  all  men  can  urge.  The  character,  the  honour,  and  the  glory  of  God  are
suggested  by  his  Name.  For  the  sake  of  what  he  is,  and  the  glory  that  his  mercy  will
reflect,  we  may  plead  for  pardon.  By  his  love  we  beg  for  his  forgiveness.  3.  The  plea
of  disgrace  to  the  throne  of  God's  glory.  This  is  a  more  special  plea.  The  temple  was
the  house  of  God,  wherein  his  glory  was  manifested.  To  destroy  it  was  to  put  an  end
to  the  manifestation  of  Divine  glory  associated  with  it.  God's  glory  is  reflected  on  his
Church.  If  the  Church  is  humiliated,  disgrace  falls  on  the  throne  of  God's  glory.  Tet,
note,  it  is  only  the  throne  that  is  directly  disgraced,  not  the  glory  itself.  The  tarnished
mirror  can  no  longer  reflect  the  radiance  of  the  sun ;  this  is  a  discredit  to  the  mirror,
but  not  directly  to  the  sun,  since  there  is  no  diminution  of  the  sun*s  brightness.  Still,
indirectly,  dishonour  is  done  to  the  original  source  of  glory.  The  sun  is  less  admired  if
its  li^ht  is  less  reflected.  God  is  less  honoured  if  his  glory  is  less  manifested.  4.  The
plea  of  the  Divine  covenant.  This  is  the  most  special  plea.  G<xi  has  made  promises.
To  the  fulfilment  of  these  his  faithfulness  is  bound.  He  has  made  a  covenant  with  his
own  people.  They  who  have  accepted  the  covenant  plead  its  special  claima.  The
Christian  has  not  only  the  universal  mercy  of  God  to  trust  in;  he  has  the  special  piomises
of  the  gospel,  the  assurance  of  the  privileges  of  God*s  restored  children.

II.  Nevertheless  the  prayer  is  rejected.  1.  Intercession  is  useless  for  those  who
will  ftot  repent  and  seek  mercy  for  themselves.  The  prayer  was  that  of  the  prophet  on
behalf  of  his  impenitent  countrymen.  The  intercession  of  good  men  is  recognized  as
powerful.  Their  character  adds  weight  to  their  intercession  (Jas.  v.  16).  But  not  only
must  Jeremiah's  prayer  be  rejected,  even  Moses  the  founder  of  the  nation  and  Samuel
the  father  of  the  prophets  could  not  prevail  in  the  present  case.  The  intercession  of
one  greater  than  Moses,  of  Christ  himself,  will  not  save  those  who  are  obstinately
hardened  against  returning  to  .GKxi.  2.  The  Name  of  God  includes  reference  to  his
Justice  as  well  as  his  mercy.  For  his  Name's  sake  he  must  vindicate  the  right.  The
one-sided  view  of  God  which  excludes  all  reference  to  his  wrath  is  dishonouring.  Even
a  man  who  can  never  feel  righteous  indignation  is  weak  and  imperfect.  For  a  judge  to
acquit  all  criminals  would  be  fatal  to  justice.  3.  The  throne  of  God's  glory  is  more
dishonoured  by  sin  than  by  external  disaster.  The  Jews  feared  discredit  to  the  temple  in
its  desecration  by  the  heathen.  It  was  more  desecrated  by  their  corrupt  practices  in  it.
To  make  the  temple  a  den  of  thieves  is  more  dishonouring  than  to  overthrow  it  so  as  not
to  leave  one  stone  upon  another.  The  sins  of  Christ's  Church  are  more  dishonouring
to  his  Name  than  her  sufiferings,  her  willing  subservience  to  the  spirit  of  the  world  more
humiliating  than  her  apparent  lowly  condition  when  trampled  under  the  feet  of
persecutors.  The  pure  martyred  Church  is  a  glory  to  Christ,  the  corrupt  prosperous
Church  a  shame  to  his  Name.  4.  God's  covenant  has  human  conditions.  He  condescends
to  bind  himself  to  bless  us  so  long  as  we  fulfil  our  obligations  to  submit  to  him.
Disobedience  breaks  the  covenant.  The  faithless  Christian  cannot  urge  the  pleas  of
the  privileges  of  the  gospel.

Ver.  22. — Prayer  for  rain,  I.  Objections  to  prayer  fob  rain.  1.  The  universality
of  law.  It  seems  to  have  been  vaguely  imagined  till  recently  that  the  weather  was
not  subject  to  laws  of  nature  in  the  same  strict  form  in  which  most  material  things
are  thus  bound.    But  this  surmise  was  simply  based  on  ignorance.    Becently  more


860        THE  BOOK  OF  TDE  PROPnET  JEREMIAH,  [ch.  xiv.  1—22.

indications  of  law  have  been  discovered,  and  we  see  the  dawn  of  a  meteorological
science.  How,  then,  can  we  exjHict  God  to  change  tlie  we;ither  in  response  to  our
prayers?  2.  The  limitations  of  knowledge.  We  really  do  not  know  what  weather  is
nest.  What  is  good  for  one  place  is  biid  for  another.  The  efiFects  of  rain  and  of
drought  are  so  far-reaching  that  it  seems  vain  for  us  to  judge  what  is  best  regarding
them.  But  God  knows  all  and  is  infinitely  wise.  Why  should  we  not  trust  to
his  unerring  discretion  ?  3.  The  goodnet^  of  God,  If  God  is  well  disposed  to  his
creatures,  will  he  not  give  them  what  is  for  their  good  ?  Why,  then,  even  if  it  were
possible  for  the  weather  to  be  affected  by  our  prayer,  and  if  we  were  wise  enough  to
Know  what  was  best  for  the  world,  should  it  be  necessary  for  us  to  pray  about  the
weather,  as  if  Qx)d  needed  to  be  urged  to  govern  the  world  for  our  benefit  ?

II.  Reasons  in  favour  of  prayer  for  bain.  1.  The  control  of  Qod  over  the  laws
</  nature,  God  is  not  the  slave  of  his  own  legislation.  Without  changing  his  laws,
he  can  act  through  them,  as  men  who  cannot  alter  the  laws  of  nature  can  still  alter  the
facts  of  nature  by  their  use  of  those  laws.  Moreover, are  there  no  spiritual  laws?
Yet,  without  violating  the  principles  of  the  constitution  of  the  spiritual  universe,  we
believe  that  God  can  answer  prayer  for  spiritual  blessings.  2.  The  conditional  char<icter
of  prayer.  The  limitation  to  our  knowledge  makes  it  necessary  for  us  to  pray  on  the
condition  that  God  will  only  answer  our  requests  so  far  as  they  agree  with  his  wise  and
righteous  will.  Prayer  for  rain,  of  all  prayers,  must  not  be  an  absolute  demand,  but
a  submissive  and  humble  request,  accompanied  by  the  desire  that  not  our  will  but
God's  be  done.  We  have  no  right  to  dictate  to  God  in  prayer,  and  wisdom  would  not
desire  such  a  right.  But  there  need  be  no  limit  to  the  greatness  of  the  objects  of
prayer  when  the  right  condition  of  trust  in  God's  higher  will  is  observed.  3.  The  fact
thai  prayer  alters  our  condition  before  Ood.  It  may  be  wise  and  right  for  God  to  do
after  our  prayer  what  it  would  not  be  well  for  him  to  do  without  it.  The  very  prayer
may  be  a  link  in  a  chain  of  causation.  Drought  may  be  sent  to  us,  as  it  was  to  Judab,
with  a  Divine  purpose  concerning  our  conduct.  A  change  in  our  conduct  will  then
modify  the  action  of  that  purpose.  Prayer  may  be  the  best  indication  of  such  a  change.
We  have  distinct  promises  that  we  may  receive,  when  we  seek  them  in  prayer,  blessings
which  are  withheld  so  long  as  we  abbtain  from  asking  for  them  (Matt.  vii.  7,  8).


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS/

Vers.  7,  9. — A  prayer  for  Ood^s  people  in  time  of  his  judgments.  The  prophet's
words,  as  he  intuitively  places  himself  in  the  position  of  those  who  are  about  to  be
afflicted.  Not,  therefore,  to  be  regarded  as  an  ideal  prayer,  but  a  true  representation  of
the  spiritual  state  of  those  who  are  conscious  of  their  sin  and  their  need  of  salvation.
They  explain  the  lack  of  apparent  answer  to  prayer,  and  truthfully  interpret  the
Bpiritual  condition  of  the  awakened  sinner.

I.  Prayer  is  an  index  of  the  spiritual  state.  Here  we  have  the  oscillatiou
between  fear  and  hope,  doubt  and  faith,  vividly  portrayed.  There  is  a  flitting  to  and  fro
of  the  soul  between  the  extremes  of  dejection  and  of  confidence.  All  real  prayer  ought
thus  faithfully  to  represent  the  mind  of  the  petitioner.  It  is  a  laying  bare  of  secret
thoughts  and  moral  convictions;  an  unconscious  as  well  as  a  conscious  confession.
Whilst  it  may  be  said  that  a  man's  inner  being  is  revealed  in  his  prayer,  he  is  not  to  be
judged  by  it  by  his  fellow-men.  It  is  only  God  who  can  truly  understand  the  indica-
tions which  it  affords,  and  only  he  who  has  a  right  to  interpret  them.  There  is  a
rising,  a  falling,  and  a  rising  again  in  the  course  of  the  prayer.  It  is  the  Name  of  God
which  serves  as  a  reminder  and  spiritual  confirmation.

II.  Prayer  is  a  spiritual  exercise  and  a  means  of  grace.  There  is  evident  in
this  utterance  a  wrestling  with  unbelief.  Memories  of  evil  crowd  upon  the  soul  and
seem  to  darken  the  horizon.  The  sinful  nation  confesses  that  in  itself  there  is  no  hope,
but  as  that  conviction  is  arrived  at,  another  asserts  itself,  namely,  that  God  is  the  Hope
of  Israel,  and  that  in  his  name  or  character  there  is  the  promise  and  potency  of  restora-
tion. It  is  in  spiritual  transitions  like  these  that  the  soul  is  lost  and  found  again.
Temptation  is  anticipated  and  overcome,  sin  is  cast  away,  and  God  is  throned  in  the
heart.    It  is  better  to  make  such  honest  discovery  of  ourselves  to  GKxl,  even  in  our


OH.  XIV.  1—22.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  861

weakness  and  lack  of  faith,  than  that  we  should  carry  these  into  the  conduct  of  life.
It  is  in  these  transitions  of  despair  and  hope  reaching  to  and  resting  in  restored  faith
and  settled  purpose  of  righteousness,  that  the  oyeroomlng  of  the  world  is  already
accomplished.

III.  The  prater  that  seems  to  be  rejected  now  hay  tet  prove  a  condition  or
ACCEPTANCE.  Had  Israel  herself  really  adopted  the  words  of  this  her  represeutative
mediator,  she  would  have  escaped  the  awful  abyss  that  yawned  before  her,  but  she
knew  not  the  day  of  her  opportunity.  By  slow  stages  of  recovery,  marked  by  many
relapses,  was  she  to  climb  to  the  great  truth  from  which  she  had  fallen,  that  the  Name
of  God  was  her  salvation  and  hope.  So  it  is  that  many  a  prayer  uttered  without
apparent  answer  supplies  in  itself  a  spiritual  condition  of  ultimate  blessing.  Its  answer
is  really  begun  in  the  change  of  attitude  assumed,  and  the  spiritual  truth  laid  hold  of.
By-and-by  irresolution  and  uncertainty  will  give  place  to  faith,  and  the  windows  of
heaven  will  be  opened.— M.

Vers.  19,  22. — Prayer  a  fruit  of  chastisement.  There  is  a  deeper  and  more  spiritual
tone  in  this  utterance.  The  heart  of  Israel  is  conceived  of  as  having  been  searched  and
revealed.  Repentance  is  felt,  and  confession  made.  The  true  source  of  peace  and  help
is  sou<rht  after ;  and  the  false  ones  which  have  been  tested  are  rejected.

L  In  the  discipline  and  judgments  of  life  God  teaches  men  how  to  prat.
Thereby  they  learn  in  a  stem  school  their  own  sinfulness ;  the  misery  and  desolation
of  the  soul  that  is  alienated  from  the  life  of  Qod  and  exposed  to  his  wrath  and  curse ;
the  incapacity  of  earthly  things  to  deliver  or  console,  and  the  power  of  God  to  forgive
and  to  save.  It  is  in  this  estimate  of  themselves  and  their  resources  that  the  foundation
is  laid  for  real  spiritual  desire.  When  sin  has  been  felt  and  acknowledged,  a  relation
is  established  between  the  soul  and  God  which  is  immediately  recognized  in  its  claims.

II.  The  spirit  which  is  thus  produced  is  alone  acceptable  to  Gtod.  There  are
many  prayers  which  evidently  ought  not  to  be,  and  with  due  regard  to  the  needs  of  the
sinner  and  the  honour  of  his  heavenly  Father  could  not  be,  answered.  The  chief  end
of  prayer  is  not  gained  in  the  obtaining  of  the  objects  that  are  asked  for,  but  in  the
gradual  assumption  of  a  right  relation  to  God  and  acknowledgment  of  his  character  and
authority.  Thus  it  is  that  some  prayers  sound  like  wails  of  despair,  whilst  others  are  full
of  the  breathings  of  resignation,  obedience,  faith,  and  love.  It  is  with  this  filial  tone
that  true  prayer  begins.  And  it  is  only  when  we  have  learned  that  "  whom  he  loveth
he  chasteneth,  and  scourge th  every  son  whom  he  receiveth,"  that  we  are  able  to  adopt
it.  '*  Thy  will  be  done  "  is  the  burden  of  every  Christ-taught  prayer,  as  it  is  the  out-
come of  all  true  spiritual  discipline. — ^M«

Yer.  21. — Invoking  the  honour  of  Ood,  Not  along  ago  this  phrase, "  Do  not  disgrace
the  throne  of  thy  glory,**  was  employed  in  prayer  by  a  convert  in  a  certain  religious
meeting.  Shortly  after  a  letter  was  sent  to  the  papers,  inveighing  against  the  *'  pro-
fanity" of  the  idea ;  in  apparently  complete  ignorance  of  its  scriptural  origin  and  warrant.
Often  the  language  of  humility  may  conceal  a  conception  of  real  arrogance,  and  so,  on
the  other  hand,  the  most  daring  appeals  to  the  promises,  the  character,  and  the  honour
of  God  may  have  their  root  in  the  profoundest  reverence  and  faith.  It  is  high  ground
to  take,  simply  because  no  other  ground  is  available.

L  As  sinners  have  no  reason  for  merct  in  themselves,  thet  must  appeal  to
God.  Mere  pity  would  be  inadmissible  as  a  motive  to  which  to  appeal.  There  is  no
ground  of  acceptance  in  the  sinner  himself,  and  consequently  there  remains  only  that
course  of  action  which  will  illustrate  and  glorify  the  character  of  God.  That  God  had
chosen  Israel  as  his  servant,  and  Jerusalem  as  the  seat  and  centre  of  the  theocracy,  are
the  only  reasons  that  are  valid  in  approaching  him  for  mercy.  Any  course  of  action
which  would  fail  to  give  due  respect  to  the  attributes  of  his  character  or  the  purposes  of
his  grace  in  the  world  is  already  forbidden  when  it  is  stated.  God  has  been  at  pains  to
pledge  himself  to  the  ultimate  salvation  of  men.  His  Name  is  itself  a  promise  that  no
compromise  shall  be  entered  into  or  inefifectual  means  of  salvation  adopted.  Therefore
the  necessity  of  Christ's  sacrifice  and  resurrection.  In  him  the  justice  of  God  ia
honoured,  and  his  Name  revealed  iu  the  hearts  of  men.    It  is  only  as  the  gospel  is  xhji>


sea  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PBOPHET  JEBEMIAH.    [col  zxr.  1— ^23L

eeived  m  the  offMprin};  of  the  fmrpst,  highest  motiTet  on  the  part  of  God  thai  it  can  call
into  exiitt^-nce  c>rrcft{xjij(iirig  motives  in  the  sinner  bimself.

11.   To  TUB  SAINT  TflK  HONOUR  OF  GoD  BHOCLD  ETEB  BE  OF  MOEE  AOCDCNT  THAX  HB

owir  WRLfAKR.  '*  For  Christ's  sake"  is  a  formnia  in  which  much  of  this  teeling  ia
implicitly  expressed*  The  exigencies  of  God*B  kingdom,  the  fnrtheraoee  of  kk  porpoaea
of  ufu  and  grac«,  the  recognition  of  the  principles  of  righteousness,  are  essential  to  a
true  Cliristian  life  as  to  true  prayer.  Ana  the  keenest  susceptibility  shoiild  be  felt  to
any  conduct  on  the  part  of  God's  servants  which  would  seem  to  injure  hia  cause  in  tha
world  or  to  misrepreseot  his  character.

HI.  God's  Name  ib  pledged  to  and  bound  itp  with  the  saltation  or  Hnr.  li
■aiirni  a  daring  and  wondrous  plea  to  urge  in  the  presence  of  him  with  whom  we  havv
to  do ;  but  it  is  the  only  one  which  we  can  truly  ofler,and  it  is  of  infinite  btbiL  If  we
accept  Christ  as  representing  the  honour  and  righteousness  of  God,  are  we  not  aKured
that  every  prayer  truly  offered  in  his  name  shall  be  answered?  The  welfare  and  usefnU
ness  of  Gcxi's  servants  are  guaranteed  by  such  a  consideration,  and  we  cannoi  offer  it  too
often  or  insist  ujx^n  it  with  too  great  earnestness. — M.

Vers.  1 — 9. —  Thanlcfidneu  through  contrast :  a  harvest  sermon.  These  rerses  are  a
terrible  jiicture  of  drought  and  famine.  Our  thankfulness  for  what  God  has  done  for
us  in  the  bounteous  harvest  he  has  given  may  be  called  forth  the  more  by  considering
the  oontraHt  with  our  happv  lot  which  these  verses  present.  Contrast  is  a  great  teacher.
It  is  the  black  board  on  which  the  teacher's  white  markings  are  more  clearly  seen,  the
dark  background  of  the  sky  on  the  face  of  which  the  stars  shine  out  the  more.  Now,  this
chapiter  is  all  concerning,  not  a  bountiful  harvest,  but  a  dread  famine.  We  cannot  deter-
mine the  date  of  this  famine,  but  it  appears  to  have  been  one  of  those  premonitory  judg-
ments of  (jod  sent  to  teach  his  sinful  {people  wisdom,  so  that  the  more  terrible  judgments
of  the  future  years  might  not  be  needed.  **  A  terrible  drought  had  fallen  upon  the  land,
and  the  prophet's  picture  of  it  is  like  some  of  Dante's  in  its  realism,  its  pathos,  and  in
its  terror.  In  the  presence  of  a  common  calamity  all  distinctions  of  cUss  have
yanished,  and  the  nobles  send  their  little  ones  to  the  wells,  and  they  come  back  with
empty  vcsiiels  and  drooping  heads,  instead  of  with  the  gladness  that  used  to  be  heard
in  the  places  of  drawing  water.  Far  a6eld  the  ploughmen  are  standing  among  the
cracked  furrows,  gazing  with  despair  at  the  brown  chapped  earth,  and  out  in  the  field
the  very  dumb  creatures  are  sharing  in  the  common  sorrow.  And  the  imperious  law  of
ielf-preservation  overpowers  and  crushes  the  maternal  instincts.  '  Yea,  the  hind  also
calved  in  the  field,  and  forsook  it,  because  there  was  no  grass.'  And  on  every  hill-top,
where  cooler  air  might  be  found,  the  once  untameable  wild  asses  are  standing  with  open
nostrils,  panting  for  air,  their  filmy  eyes  failing  them,  gazing  for  the  rain  that  will  not
come.  It  is  a  true  description — so  they  bay  who  know  what  drought  in  Eastern  lands
if  and  does.  How  it  distressed  the  earth,  the  beasts,  and  man,  is  all  vividly  por-
trayed." The  pits,  some  of  them  natural  hollows  in  the  hard  rock  and  in  caves,  where
evaporation  was  less  speedy ;  others  of  them  dykes  and  cisterns,  the  works  of  man  ;^
but  all  alike  were  empty.  The  ground  was  split  by  reason  of  the  long  drought  into
wide  and  deep  fissures ;  earth's  wounds  for  man's  sin,  mute  mouths  crying  to  Heaven
for  pity,  the  lips  of  earth  suffering,  waiting  for  a  drop  of  water  to  relieve  the  torment
of  its  awful  thirst.  And  not  the  land  only,  but  the  dumb  brutes  were  involved  in  the
common  woe.  The  hind,  driven  down  from  her  high  places  into  the  fields  in  search  of
the  grass  that  has  disappeared  from  the  lofty  heights,  meets  with  disappointment  here
also,  and  in  her  agonv  of  hunger  and  thirst  forgot  and  forsook  her  young,  whom  she,
above  most  other  of  tne  beasts  of  the  field,  was  wont  to  care  for  and  cherish  tenderly ;
and  the  hardy  wild  asses  (ver.  6)  found  their  hunger  even  greater  than  they  could  bear,
and  panted  in  terror  and  distress.  And  man — ^all  ranks  and  ages  were  smitten,  the  people
generally  were  languishing.  The  gates  of  the  cities  and  other  chief  places  of  concourse
were  "  black  unto  the  ground,"  with  the  sad,  coloured  garments  of  the  mourners  who
bent  prostrate  there ;  and  one  long,  loud,  bitter  cry  went  up  from  the  whole  city  of  God.
But  what  a  contrast  is  our  condition  to  theirs  I  See  it  in  the  aspects  of  the  fields  ere
harvest  was  gathered  in.  In  the  gifts  of  all  nurturing  powers  from  heaven — rain,  dew,
and  fountains  of  water.  In  the  abundance  provided  for  man  and  beast,  and  in  the  con-
tentment and  peace  of  the  herds  of  the  field.    In  the  glad  congratulations  of  all  classea


CH.  XIV.  1—22.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  368

in  the  land,  from  the  labourer  to  the  noble,  because  of  what  Ood  has  given.  The  whole
nation  rejoices,  a  crj  not  of  sorrow  but  of  gladness  goes  up  from  the  homes  of  the  rich
and  poor,  high  and  low  alike.  And  this  contrast  is  seen  also  in  the  thoughts  of  God
prompted  by  the  two  events.  **  The  dearth  "  made  the  people  think  that  God  was  as  a
stranger  in  the  land,  one  who  knew  nothing  of  them  or  their  need.  If  we  felt  concern-
ing our  distresses  that  GKxl  was  as  a  stranger  to  us,  they  would  be  much  harder  to  bear.
But  so  Judah  and  Jerusalem  thought.  Nor  was  this  the  worst  thought ;  for  if  God
knew  how  they  were  sufifering,  and  yet  no  help  came,  did  not  a  yet  darker  surmise  seem
warranted  ?  Was  it  not  as  if  he  were  "  as  a  wayfaring  man  that  but  turned  aside  to
tarry  for  the  night,"  and  who  therefore,  having  no  interest  in  the  place  or  the  people,
would  care  but  little  for  them  ?  This  was  a  terrible  thought  indeed.  If  our  mind  be
haunted  with  the  dread  thought  that  God  looks  on  unmoved  at  our  affliction,  and  cares
not  for  our  distress — ^what,  then,  can  we  do?  But  so  they  thought.  The  sun  rose  and  set,
the  stars  looked  down  upon  them  just  as  they  had  done  at  other  times ;  but  there  was
no  heart  of  love  in  their  calm,  unmoved  gaze ;  and  so  it  seemed  there  was  no  heart  in
God,  and  that  he,  unmoved  by  their  appeal,  left  them  to  perish.  Or  could  it  be  that^
after  all  their  boasting  in  him  as  mighty  to  save,  One  mightier  than  he  had  arisen  and
overpowered  him ;  that  he  was  "  as  one  astonied,  as  a  mighty  man  that  cannot  save  "?
Was  there  some  cruel  fate  which,  after  all,  was  ruling  over  their  destinies,  and  so  pre-
venting the  mighty  One,  of  whom  their  fathers  told,  from  coming  to  their  help  as  in
the  days  of  old  ?  Such  dark  and  terrible  thoughts  float  about  the  minds  of  men  in  the
hour  of  dire  distress  such  as  this  dearth  had  brought  upon  them.  And  so  all  hope  was
quenched,  the  voice  of  prayer  was  stifled,  their  hearts  died  down  in  complete  despair.
The  dearth  in  itself  was  bad  enough,  causing  bodily  agony  beyond  all  description ,  but
its  horrors  were  heightened  and  awfully  intensified  by  the  dark  thoughts  about  God  to
which  their  distress  gave  rise.  But  in  all  this,  what  a  contrast  does  our  happier  lot
present  ?  The  thoughts  of  God  which  the  harvest  he  has  given  prompt  are  the  very
opposite  of  those  which,  as  we  have  seen,  haunted  the  minds  of  those  who  suffered
under  the  dearth.  Not  as  a  stranger  ignorant  of  us  and  our  wants  does  God  appear,
but  as  One  who  "  knoweth  that  we  have  need  of  all  these  things,''  and  who  openeth
his  hand  and  filleth  us  with  good.  And  still  less  as  a  wayfaring  man,  and  who
therefore  has  no  concern  nor  care  for  land  or  people.  Every  golden  ear  of  corn
has  been  a  tongue  as  well,  and  has  told  eloauently  though  silently  of  our  Father's
care.  The  wide-stretching  fields  of  corn  have  been  filled  with  these  myriad  witnesses
to  his  love,  and  have  stood  up  in  their  serried  ranks,  to  give  the  lie  to  the  unbelieving
heart,  that  would  harbour  hard  thoughts  of  G^.  As  all  with  one  consent  yield  to  the
summer  breeze,  so  with  like  oneness  of  consent,  do  they  attest  his  unfailing  goodness
and  his  never-ceasing  care.  And  they  proclaim  him,  too,  as  the  Hope  of  his  people,  and
their  Saviour  indeed.  He  is  no  "  mighty  man  that  cannot  save."  For  all  the  treasures
of  the  field,  created,  preserved,  and  ripened  for  our  use,  in  spite  of  all  adverse  influences
which  threatened  them,  all  show  that  he  is  mighty  to  save.  His  hand  held  in  check
every  hostile  power,  every  destructive  storm,  every  killing  frost,  every  blighting  mildew,
every  creeping  caterpillar,  and  all  else  that  would  have  robbed  us  of  the  corn  he  has
given.  On,  what  a  gospel  do  the  fields  preach  1  And  how  differently  GKxl  might  have
dealt  with  us  1  For  whilst  there  is  so  vast  a  contrast  between  our  harvest  and  that
dearth  of  which  these  verses  tell,  there  has  been  no  such  contrast  between  our  conduct
and  that  which  brought  upon  Judah  the  calamity  from  which  they  suffered.  Have  we
not  reason  to  make  the  same  confession  which  was  made  concerning  them  ?— -"  0  Lord,
.  .  .  our  iniquities  testify  agamst  us,"  etc.  (ver.  7).  What,  gratitude  then,  does  such
long-suffering  love  call  for  from  us  1  Let,  then,  our  harvest  lead  us  to  do  that  which
Judah's  dearth  led  the  prophet  to  do — to  turn  to  God,  and  confess  him  as  our  Hope  and
our  Saviour  in  time  of  trouble.  In  this  way  he  is  again  standing  at  our  doors  and
knocking  for  admission.  The  "miracle  of  the  loaves"  is  done  over  again  for  our
comfort  and  help.  We  have  '*  the  joy  of  harvest,"  let  him  have  it  also  in  gathering  us
into  the  garner  of  his  faithful  souls  for  time  and  for  eternity.— 0.

Vers.  7 — 9. — An  absent  Ood  deplored.  The  dearth  told  of  in  foregoing  verses  and
the  misery  caused  thereby  led  to  the  conviction  that  Qod  had  abandoned  his  people.
In  these  verses  and  throughout  this  section  down  to  ch.  xv.  9  we  find  the  propnet
pleading  with  God  to  return.    In  these  verses  we  are  shown-*


'864  THE  BCMDK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [cil  xiv.  1— 22.


I.   TUE   CAUSES  WUICH   HAD   BBOUOHT  ABOUT  THE  DiVINE   WITHDRAWAL  FROM  THEM.

Their  "  iuiquities,"  "  Ixickslidings,**  "bIds**  (ver.  7).     Nothing  else  has  such  power;
ain  only  can  bhut  out  Gk>d,  but  it  always  will  and  docs.

IL  The  happy  memories  which  made  it  so  bitter.  God  had  revealed  himself  to
them  in  such  endearing  manner.  He  had  been  ever  **  the  Hope  of  Israel.**  He  had
inspired,  maintained,  and  justified  that  hope  again  and  again.  And  he  had  become
the  Hope  of  Israel  through  having  shown  himself  so  perpetually  "  the  Saviour  thereof
in  the  time  of  trouble."  The  memory  of  God's  servants  was  stored  with  recollections
of  such  deliverances,  national  and  individual,  from  troubles  temporal  and  spiritual ;
youchsafed,  too,  not  because  of  Israel's  deserving,  but  out  of  GKxi's  pure  bounty.  Now,
it  was  these  happy  memories  which  made  Grod's  present  dealings  with  them  so  terrible
to  bear.

lU.  The  sad  contrast  between  the  Divinb  manifestations  now  and  of  old.
We  have  seen  what  he  had  been  to  Israel,  but  now,  the  prophet  complains,  he  is  to
them  very  far  from  what  he  was  then.  He  is  "as  a  stranger,  "a  wayfaring  man,"  as
one  **  taken  by  surprise,"  as  one  strong  but  yet  unable  to  help.  Their  enemies  would
taunt  them  with  the  reproach  that  either  God  was  as  a  stranger,  and  therefore  did  not
care  for  them ;  or,  if  they  denied  that,  then  it  must  be  that  there  was  a  stronger  than
he,  who  had  taken  him  by  surprise  and  prevented  his  rendering  help  to  his  afflicted
people.  Either  he  would  not  or  he  could  not— on  one  of  the  horns  of  this  dilemma
they  by  the  force  of  their  present  circumstances  were  thrown.  And  there  can  be  no
doubt  that  the  great  mystery  of  life,  its  sins  and  sorrows,  do  often  force  perplexed  and
troubled  minds  perilously  near  to  one  or  other  of  these  conclusions,  which  nevertheless
faith  affirms  to  be  alike  false,  and  will  never  admit  for  one  moment.

IV.  The  sources  of  hope  under  circumstances  like  these.  They  are :  1.  The
Name  of  Ood,  This  the  prophet  pleads  (ver.  7).  He  confesses  that  all  their  own  con-
duct is  altogether  against  them.  They  can  have  no  hope  in  themselves.  But  the  Name
of  God  remains  to  be  urged  in  his  pleading,  and  therefore  it  is  this  Name  that  he
does  urge.  "  Do  thou  it  for  thy  Name's  sake."  Here  is  a  fact  which  cannot  change.
When  driven  out  of  all  hope  in  ourselves  by  reason  of  our  sins,  we  may  yet  hope  in  God,
and  plead  the  grace  and  goodness  that  are  evermore  in  him.  2.  The  presence  of  his
appointed  ordinances  and  his  chosen  dwelling-place  in  their  midst.  This  is  the  meaning
of  ver.  9,  "  Yet  thou  art  in  the  midst  of  us."  The  temple,  the  altar,  the  sacrifice,  the
priests,  the  ark,  were  all  there ;  the  appointed  channels  of  communication  between  God
and  his  people.  And  so  long  as  we  may  go  unto  his  footstool,  and  the  throne  of  grace
is  open  to  us,  there  is  hope  in  that.  God  will  come  to  us  again  in  the  way  of  his  holy
and  appointed  ordinances,  if  we  will  go  along  that  way  to  seek  him.  3.  ITiey  were  the
ejects  of  his  love.  "  We  are  called  by  thy  Name."  Israel  was  so.  God  had  chosen
them  at  the  first.  "  When  Israel  was  a  child,  then  I  loved  him."  And  it  is  because
of  that  undying  love  of  God^  they  who  for  their  sins  have  lost  his  presence  may  yet
win  it  back  again.

V.  The  present  duty.  Prayer.  The  prophet  betook  himself  hereto.  **  Leave  us
not,"  he  cries  (ver.  9).  And  nothing  barred  the  success  of  this  prayer  but  that  the
people  for  whom  he  prayed  had  no  heart  in  it.  God  stood  ready  to  forgive  and  restore.
The  prophet's  prayer  was  fully  answered  on  the  part  of  God.  But  those  for  whom  he
prayed  were  not  ready,  and  so  their  judgment  went  on.  But  for  ourselves,  if  we
deplore  an  absent  God,  let  us  betake  ourselves  to  these  potent  arms  of  all-prevailing

grayer,  and  God  shall  ere  long  be  again  known  to  us  as  of  old  as  our  Hope  and  our
aviour  in  time  of  trouble.— 0.

Vers.  13 — 16. — False  teachers  no  adequate  excuse  for  evil  conduct.  No  doubt  the
people  to  whom  Jeremiah  was  sent  had  been  encouraged  in  their  ungodliness  by  the
faithlessness  and  sin  of  their  prophets.  Blind  guides  were  leading  the  blind,  and  with
the  inevitable  result.  And  here  Jeremiah  pleads,  as  an  excuse  for  his  people's  sin,  that
they  had  been  thus  misled.    But  God  refuses  to  admit  the  plea.    Now,  on  this,  note—

I.  False  teaching  is  some  excuse  for  evil  conduct.  The  deepest  instincts  o(
our  hearts  affirm  this.  Our  Lord  himself  does  so,  when  he  says,  "  He  that  knew  not
his  Lord's  will  and  did  it  not,  shall  be  beaten  with  few  stripes."  But  this  word  of  his,
whilst  it  allows  that  lack  of  teaching  is  some  excuse^  denies  that  it  is  sufficient  (cf.


CH.  XIV.  1—22.]  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.        Se^

John  xix.  11).  St.  Paul  also  says,  concerning  the  heathen  nations,  '*  The  time  of  this
ignorance  Gcfd  winked  at."

II.  But  it  is  not  an  adequate  excuse.  For:  1.  Hie  taught  are  the  creators
almost  as  much  a^  the  creatures  of  their  teachers.  The  people  who  clamour  for  smooth
things  to  be  prophesied  to  them  will  find  such  prophets  forthcoming.  Ahab's  pro-
phets— all  of  them  but  Micaiah — ^were  such.  It  is  true,  "  like  priest,  like  people ; "  but
it  is  also  true,  "  like  people,  like  priest."  The  demand  creates  the  supply.  The  pastors
of  the  Church  are  the  product  of  the  Church,  almost  as  much  as  the  Church  is  the
product  of  the  pastors.  What  a  worldly  Church  wants  it  will  have,  for  the  woe  both
of  itself  and  its  pastors  alike.  2.  They  have  a  sure  test  by  which  to  try  all  their
teasers.  "  To  the  Law  and  to  the  testimony,"  etc.  Conscience  also  is  ever  on  the  side
of  God,  and  is  prompt  to  condemn  all  teaching  that  leads  to  sin.  The  Holy  Spirit
likewise  pleads  in  men's  hearts  for  God.  And  the  faithful  words  of  those  in  wnom
God's  Spirit  dwells.  None,  therefore,  are  shut  up  to  any  human  teachers.  3.  And
where  evil  teachers  have  been  followed,  it  has  been  in  spite  of  the  protest  which  these
other  higher  and  surer  guides  have  uttered,  ot  would  have  uttered  had  they  been
suffered  so  to  do.

III.   But   IP  IT   BE   ILL  FOR  THE  TAUOHT,  IT  IS  YET  MORE  ILL  FOR  THE  TEACHERS.

"  His  blood  will  I  require  at  the  watchman's  hands."  The  most  awful  of  our  Lord's
denunciations  were  addressed  to  such  evil  teachers  (cf.  the  oft-repeated,  "  Woe  unto
you,  scribes  and  Pharisees,  hypocrites ! "  cf.  ver.  14,  etc.\

Conclusion.  1.  Let  those  who  are  taught  by  any  human  teachers  test  what  they
receive  by  the  Word  of  God.  Be  as  the  Bereans  (Acts  xviL  II).  2.  Let  those  who
teach  watch  anxiously  and  prayerfully  against  the  temptation  to  conform  their  teach-
ings to  the  likings  of  their  hearers  rather  than  to  their  needs.  Let  them  remember
that  the  causes  of  error  and  false  teaching  are  much  more  moral  than  they  are
intellectual.  3.  Let  teachers  and  taught  alike  sit  daily  at  his  feet  who  said,  '*  I  am  the
Way,  the  Truth,  and  the  Life."— C.

Vers.  17 — 22. — The  distracting  power  of  great  distress.  The  prophet  seems  blinded
by  his  tears.  The  distress  portrayed  here  is  terrible  indeed,  and  the  prophet  so  realized
it  that  his  mind  appears  to  have  reeled  beneath  his  apprehensions  of  the  comlug
calamities.  Hence  he  falls  into  utterances  which  can  only  be  regarded,  however  par-
donable and  comprehensible  under  his  piteous  circumstances  (cf.  ver.  18),  as  exagge-
rated, and  in  many  respects,  as  all  such  utterances  are,  incorrect.  Every  sentence  in
ver.  19,  etc.,  is  open  to  grave  question.  It  would  be  dreadful  if  they  were  not.
Note—

I.  The  prophet's  expostulations.  (Ver.  19.)  Now,  God  did  not  "  utterly  reject
Judah,"  nor  did  "  his  soul  loathe  Zion."  It  was  his  love  for  his  people  that  determined
him  at  all  costs  to  purge  them  from  their  evil.

II.  His  complaints.  (Ver.  19.)  He  complains  that  they  had  been  disappointed
and  implies  that  Grod  was  the  cause  why  their  expectations  had  failed.  They  had
no  right  to  look  for  peace,  being  what  they  were.

III.  His  confessions.  Nothing  could  be  more  appropriate  or  more  sure  to  gain  the
mercy  of  God  than  such  confession  as  this,  if  it  were  indeed  sincere  and  general  on  the
part  of  those  who  had  sinned.  But  this  it  was  not ;  it  was  because  they  would  not
repent,  would  not  return  unto  the  Lord,  that  therefore  his  wrath  arose  against  them
until  there  was  no  remedy.

IV.  His  entreaties.  (Ver.  21.)  God  never  "  abhorred  "  his  people,  but  only  their
sins ;  and  that  God  should  be  thought  to  "  disgrace  "  the  throne  of  his  glory  can  only
be  explained  on  the  grounds  we  have  stated.  Nor  either  is  it  God's  way  to  "  break
his  covenant."

V.  His  pleas.  (Ver.  22.)  Here  the  prophet  pleads  truly.  There  was  no  hope  in
any  heathen  deity,  but  in  God  alone.  And  had  the  people  indeed  "  waited  "  upon  God,
matters  had  gone  more  happily  with  them.  But  this  was  just  what  they  did  not  ao.  Now,
concerning  all  such  utterances  as  these  :  1.  Bear  with  them,  God  did  so.  He  rebuked
not  his  servant,  though  that  servant  had  spoken  imadvisedly  concerning  him.  2.  Be
very  slow  to  believe  them,  Cf.  Naomi,  and  ner  false  forebodings  of  fear.  How  ill  she
thought  God  would  deal  with  her  I    How  gracious,  in  fact,  that  dealing  was  I    And  St.


866  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  xiv.  1— 22.


Paul  assures  us  that  **  God  hath  not  cast  off  his  people."  "  All  Israel  shall  be  saved."
Let  us  wait  on  and  wait  for  God.  3.  Be  ashamed  if  by  our  sin  we  have  caused  such
distress.  Jeremiah  had  not  sinned,  but  he  mourns  as  if  the  sin  were  his  own.  Behold-
ing- the  sorrow  our  sin  causes  to  those  who  love  us  will,  if  we  be  not  utterly  hardened,
arouse  shame,  sorrow,  and  contrition  in  our  own  hearts.  4.  If  those  who  know  most  of
the  mind  of  God  tremble  for  us,  have  we  not  reason  to  tremble  for  ourselves  ? — C.

Ver.  21. — A  dreadful  apprehension.  That  God  should  "abhor"  ub.  Such  appre-
hension filled  the  prophet's  mind,  as  it  has  other  minds.

I.  But  this  God  nkvkr  does.  He  is  our  Father ;  he  so  loved  us  as  to  give  Christ
for  us.  It  is  impossible,  therefore,  let  our  apprehensions  be  what  thej  may,  that  he
can  abhor  us.

II.  But  he  may  seem  to.  1.  No  one  will  think  thus  of  God  by  reason  only  of
temporal  calamities.  These  have  again  and  again  come  and  do  come  to  God's  servants,
but  produce  no  such  distressing  thought  as  this  (cf.  Ps.  xxii.,  "  He  hath  not  despised
nor  abhorred,"  etc.).  2.  Nor  will  spiritual  distress  alone  cause  it.  There  may  be  loss
of  comfort  in  God ;  no  enjoyment  in  prayer  or  worship.  Sin  may  again  reassert  its
mastery,  and  fill  the  soul  with  sorrow.  Doubts  may  insinuate  themselves  into  the
BOuL  But  none  of  these  will  of  themselves  lead  to  the  thought  that  God  abhors  us.
3.  1'hey  may  do  so,  however,  if  the  presence  of  sorrow^  temporal  or  spiritttal^  he  so
gevere  as  to  throw  the  mind  off  its  balance.  (Cf.  former  homily.)  Despair  has  for  a  while
under  such  circumstances  wrought  this  harm,  and  that  in  the  holiest  minds.  Even
our  blessed  Lord  knew  somewhat  of  this  awful  experience  (cf.  the  agony  in  the  garden,
and  the  cry  on  the  cross,  "My  God,  my  God,"  etc.).  Elijah,  John  the  Baptist,  Jeremiah
here,  and  others  have  been  instances.  Cowper  the  poet  also,  and  the  not  unfrequent
cases  of  religious  melancholy  leading  either  to  settled  gloom  or  even  suicide.  The
tenderest  pity  and  compassion  are  to  be  felt  for  such.  4.  Persistent  disobedience  and
repeated  backsliding  are  the  chief  causes  of  this  apprehension.  When  the  world,  the
flesh,  and  the  devil  fill  the  heart,  espc'cially  the  heart  which  has  once  been  cleansed,
then  "  the  last  state  of  that  man  is  worse  than  the  first "  (cf.  Saul,  Judas,  Ahithophel).
Yes;  such  sin  has  power  to  turn  the  sun  into  darkness  and  the  moon  into  blood,  and
to  make  the  very  stars  fall  from  heaven.  God  becomes  the  horror  of  the  soul,  and  men
will  "  make  their  bed  in  hell  "  if  but  they  may  flee  from  his  dreadful  presence.

III.  The  great  destroyer  of  this  dread.  It  is  suggested  by  the  prophet's  own
words  :  "  Abhor  us  not,  for  thy  Name's  sake.**  This  is  the  antidote  of  all  such  fearful
dread.  The  Name  of  God,  i.e.  that  by  which  he  has  made  himself  known.  And  what
lias  been  the  verdict  of  all  the  witness  concerning  God,  which  his  words  and  works  and
ways  have  borne,  but  this,  that  he  is  plenteous  in  mercy  to  all  that  call  upon  him — to
all  that  call  upon  him  in  truth  ?  He  is  the  "  God  of  all  grace."  And  if  Israel  of  old
had  proof  of  this,  how  much  more  have  we  in  Christ !  Behold  God  in  him  ;  he  is  the
Name  of  God  to  us  men.  Then,  where  this  dread  apprehension  exists,  let  Christ  be
preached,  meditated  upon,  sought  in  prayer,  confessed  with  the  lip,  served  and  followed
in  the  life,  waited  on  continually,  ana  soon  this  dread  shall  pass  away.— 0.

Ver.  14. — Lying  prophets.  Every  divinely  inspired  prophet  of  the  olden  times  was
emphatically  a  "  seer,"  gifted  with  the  power  of  looking,  as  other  men  could  not,  into  the
inmost  heart  of  things — passing  events,  natural  laws.  Divine  providences — so  as  to  dis-
cern their  deeper  meaning.  The  past,  the  present,  and  the  future  all  came  under  his
survey,  inasmuch  as  he  had  to  do  mainly  with  those  absolute  and  universal  truths  which
are  in  no  way  subject  to  the  conditions  of  time.  As  the  prophet  is  called  a  seer,  so  the
subject  of  his  prophecy  is  often  called  a  "  vision."  It  is  remarkable  how  large  a  propor-
tion of  the  prophetic  revelations  of  the  Old  Testament  were  of  a  pictorial,  symbolic
character  (see  Numb.  xxiv.  4  ;  1  Kings  xxii.  17 ;  Isa.  vi.  1 ;  Eaek.  xxxvii.  i.  10  ;  Hab.  ii.
1),  and  even  when  they  were  otherwise,  similar  phraseology  is  often  used  to  indicate  the
prophet's  extraordinary  power  of  moral  and  spiritual  insight.  But  this  passage  speaks
of  false  prophets — men  who  assumed  the  prophetic  function  when  not  divinely  called
to  it,  mere  pretenders  to  the  prophetic  gift.  Ezekiel  calls  them  the  "  foolish  prophets,
that  follow  their  own  spirit,  and  have  seen  nothing  "  (Ezek  xiii.  3).  Every  age  has
had  some  such  misleading  witnesses.    Christ  warned  the  people  against  them  in  his


CH.  nv.  1— 22.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  867


day  (Matt.  vii.  15  ;  xxiv.  24).  St.  John  spoke  of  their  uprising  as  a  characteristic  of  the
"last  time"  (1  John  ii.  18;  iv.  1).  Our  own  a^e is  certainly  no  exception.  Men  may
not  claim  Divine  inspiration  in  the  old  prophetic  sense,  but  never  were  there  bolder
claims  to  deep  spiritual  insight,  never  such  adventurous  flights  into  the  realms  of  mys-
tery, never  so  many  dogmatic  remedies  for  the  intellectual  restlessness  or  the  moral
diseases  of  human  nature.     Note,  here —

I.  That  freedom  of  thought  and  op  speech  which  would  seem  to  be  a  fixed
PRINCIPLE  of  Divine  oovernment.  There  was  nothing  to  prevent  the  false  prophets
from  speaking;  the  people  were  only  forbidden  to  listen  to  them.  Though  it  be
nothing  but  a  vision  of  their  own  diseased  fancy,  a  conceit  of  their  own  distempered
brain,  that  men  have  to  deliver,  they  are  allowed  to  deliver  it  Better  so,  that  the  false
should  come  out  to  the  light  of  day,  confronting  the  truth,  rather  than  that  it  should
be  suppressed  by  an  external  force  that  may  at  another  time  be  enlisted  on  its  side.
The  truth  has  nothing  to  fear  from  public  conflict  with  error  and  all  its  forces.  A
marvellous  change,  as  regards  the  openness  of  the  conflict,  has  taken  place  since  the
days  when  Milton  wrote  his  ' Areopagitica '  and  Jeremy  Taylor  his  'Liberty  of  Pro-
phesying.' No  doubt  it  is  full  of  danger  to  the  weak  and  wavering,  to  those  whose
mental  eagerness  is  not  tempered  by  humility  and  whose  hearts  are  not  *'  established
with  grace.**  But  this  is  God's  way  of  leading  the  world  on  to  fuller,  clearer  light.
And  is  it  not  in  harmony  with  his  whole  moral  administration  of  human  afifairs  ?  He
puts  awful,  destructive  powers  into  men's  hands,  and  he  holds  each  one  responsible  for
the  way  in  which  he  wields  them.  There  are  boundless  possibilities  of  evil  around  us
all,  moral  as  well  as  physical,  and  our  case  would  be  sad  indeed  if  there  were  not  equal
and  still  greater  possibilities  of  good.  It  is  well  that  the  false  prophets  should  tell  out
their  ''dreams,"  if  only  that  the  light  of  God  may  expose  their  emptiness  and  the
breath  of  Gtxi  may  scatter  them.

II.  The  need  of  a  bube  criterion  of  judgment.  How  shall  we  discern  between
the  false  and  the  true  ?  These  supposed  prophetic  utterances  of  old  were  subjected  to
certain  tests.  1.  Their  verity.  If  they  were  falsified  by  the  facts  of  history  or  the
inner  consciousness  of  the  people,  they  could  not  be  of  God.  2.  Harmony  with  Divine
Law,  They  must  be  favourable  to  the  cause  of  virtue  and  morality ;  could  not  promise
prosperity  apart  from  repentance,  or  cry,  "  Peace,  peace,"  when  there  was  "  no  peace."
3.  The  ptrsonal  character  of  the  teacher.  The  messengers  of  a  holy  Gkni  must  needs
be  themselves  holy.  The  quality  of  their  message  would  be  reflected  in  their  own  life.
The  same  principles  hold  good  now.  Such  an  essential  connection  exists  between
truth  in  thought  and  truth  of  feeling,  character,  life,  that  every  form  of  doctrine  must
be  judged  by  its  moral  influence,  both  on  the  teacher  and  the  taught.  "  By  their  fruits
ye  shall  know  them."  Moreover,  Christianity  reters  us  to  a  testing  principle  of  still
higher  quality  and  completer  efiicacy — t?ie  presence  of  tJie  Spirit  of  truth  and  grace  in
our  own  souU,  **  He  that  is  spiritual,"  etc.  (1  Cor.  ii.  15).  "  Ye  have  an  unction  from
the  Holy  One,"  etc.  (1  John  ii.  20,  21).  There  is  no  safeguard  against  error  but  this
Divine  faculty.  As  regards  an  external  standard,  the  Scriptures  of  eternal  truth  are
the  touchstone.  "  To  the  Law  and  to  the  testimony,"  etc.  (Isa.  viii.  20).  The  voice,
the  Law,  the  life  of  God  in  your  own  soul,  is  a  touchstone  of  still  more  delicate  quality
and  ready  application.  If  what  you  read  or  hear  will  not  bear  this  test,  it  is  but  the
'*  dream  "  of  a  false  prophet,  '*  the  deceit  of  his  own  heart,"  and  no  true  '*  burden  of
the  Lord."

HI.  God's  sure  vindication  of  the  cause  of  hib  own  truth,  whatever  forces
MAT  assail  it.  (See  vers.  15, 16.)  The  ministry  of  the  true  prophets  was  a  mar-
vellous revelation  of  the  Divine  power  that  sustained  them  and  verified  their  words.
They  were  seldom  called  to  do  battle  with  the  false  prophets  on  their  own  ground,
directly  to  assail  their  errors  by  argument  and  disproof.  They  were  simply  called  to
proclaim  the  truth,  leaving  it  with  God  to  make  it  victorious.  The  apostles  of  Christ
dealt  with  the  abounding  theoretical  and  practical  evils  of  their  day  on  very  much  the
same  principle.  The  thing  that  is  false  gains  its  influence  over  men's  minds  by  reason
of  its  resemblance  to  the  true.  The  counterfeit  circulates  because  it  seems  like  the  real
coin.  There  is  no  way  in  which  we  can  so  effectually  rebuke  it  as  by  setting  forth  the
glory  of  that  of  which  it  is  the  perversion  or  the  mocking  shadow.  In  the  full,  clear
Sght  and  the  spreading  power  of  the  truth  error  must,  sooner  or  later,  wither  and  die.


868  TIIE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [cil  xiv.  1— 22,


Let  us  have  faith  in  the  trinraphant  force  of  God's  own  Word.  "  What  Is  the  chafiF  to
the  wheat?  saith  the  Lord,"  etc  (ch.  xxiii.  28,  29).  We  may  well  trust  in  the  ulti-
mate victory  of  that  which  is  the  product  of  infinite  wi^om,  and  ii  backed  by  all  the
resources  of  omnipotence. — W.

Vers.  1 — 6. — The  miBeries  produced  hy  lack  of  water.  L  The  bitteb  oonsciouskbss
THAT  AK  iMPERATivB  NEED  CANNOT  BE  SATISFIED.  Well  might  there  be  mourning,
languishing,  and  crying.  When  we  are  speaking  of  need,  one  of  the  first  questions  to
be  asked  is  whether  the  need  is  natural  or  artificial.  An  artificial  need,  by  continued
Belf-indul^encc,  may  come  to  be  very  keenly  felt;  and  yet,  when  circumstances  arise
which  prevent  the  satisfying  of  the  need,  the  artificiality  of  it  is  clearly  seen.  But  a
natural  need,  when  the  supplies  are  stopped,  soon  shows  how  clamorous  it  can  become,
how  proiluctive  of  unendurable  pain.  These  Israelites  had  been  multiplying  artificial
needs.  They  thought  they  needed  visible  images,  to  be  richly  adorned  and  constantly
worshipped.  They  thought  they  needed  large  external  possessions,  and  so  the  land
became  full  of  covetousness.  Rich  men  tried  to  increase  their  riches,  and  poor  men
wanted,  above  all  thinqs,  to  get  out  of  their  poverty.  But  all  the  while  the  difference
between  natural  and  artificial  need  was  forgotten.  The  natural  needs  went  on  being
satisfied,  because  God,  who  gives  rain  from  h<>aven,  was  long-suffering ;  and  the  supply
came  so  habitually  that  the  people  did  not  reckon  how  there  was  a  hand  upon  the  foun-
tidn  of  the  waters  which  could  seal  them  up  in  a  moment.  But  now,  no  sooner  is
the  supply  stopped  than  there  is  deep  and  inconceivable  misery.  The  idolater  will
go  on  living,  even  if  you  take  his  images  away ;  a  rich  man  need  not  die  because  he  is
stripped  of  his  possessions;  but  what  shall  one  do  who  cannot  get  water  to  drink?
The  unendurable  pain  of  Dives  in  Hades  came  not  from  the  lost  wealth  and  splendour
of  earth,  but  because  he  could  not  get  the  least  drop  of  water  to  cool  his  tongue.

IL  The  vanity  of  human  resources.  Jerusalem  now  abounds  in  pools  and  cisterns,
and  the  probability  is  that  in  the  time  of  Jeremiah  there  was  a  similar  abundance,  both
within  and  without  the  city.  Great  cities  have  always  had  to  see  to  the  providing;  of
water,  according  to  their  judgment  of  what  was  necessary.  A  due  supply  of  water  is
one  of  the  most  important  charges  that  can  be  entrusted  to  any  municipality.  The
authorities  of  Jerusalem  may  have  done  their  best  according  to  their  lights ;  but  they
had  forgotten  that  the  most  they  could  do  was  to  provide  receptacles  for  the  Divine
bounty.  They  had  hewn  cisterns  without  considering  that  a  time  might  come  when
there  would  be  no  water  to  put  into  the  cisterns.  That  time  has  come,  and  where  is
now  the  wisdom  of  the  wise  and  the  strength  of  the  mighty  ?  Men  may  flatter  them-
selves that  they  rule  on  earth ;  but  it  is  very  plain  that  the  spaces  above,  where  the
clouds  gather  and  whence  the  rains  descend,  are  beyond  their  controL

III.  The  nullifyino  of  human  industby.  The  work  of  the  ploughman  is  in  vain.
(Jod  requires  man  to  work  and  study  in  order  to  get  the  fruits  or  the  earth ;  but  it  is
only  too  easy  for  him  in  all  his  work  and  study  to  forget  God.  He  who  expects  a
harvest  will  not  omit  ploughing,  sowing,  irrigating — without  these  works  expectation
would  be  idiotic — but  he  may  very  easily  omit  faith  in  God.  He  may  neglect  the
bestowment  of  the  firstfruits,  and  all  that  service  of  God  which  the  fruits  of  the  earth
give  us  strength  to  render.  Well  may  such  a  one  be  ashamed  when  the  ground  is
chapped  and  there  is  no  rain  in  the  earth.  This  is  the  sign  of  his  own  folly  in  attending
to  certain  secondary  requisites  and  forgetting  the  one  requisite  most  important  of  all.
When  it  is  so  required,  God  can  feed  thousands  without  any  sowing  and  reaping  at  all;  but
no  man  is  allowed  to  reckon  that  his  sowing  will  assuredly  bo  followed  by  reaping.  He
may  sow  wheat  bountifully,  only  to  reap  thorns  bountifully,  because  he  has  forgotten
Ood  (ch.  xii.  13).  If  the  sowing  is  in  prayer  and  humility,  in  gratitude  for  the  past
and  reasonable  expectation  for  the  future,  then  the  sower  will  have  no  need  to  bo
ashamed.  Whatever  other  things  God's  servants  may  lack,  God  will  put  the  true,
abiding  glory  upon  them.

IV.  The  linking  of  man  with  the  brute  creation  in  a  common  suffering.
The  hinds  and  the  wild  asses  suffer,  and  doubtless  they  were  prominent  representatives
of  many  other  classes  of  the  brute  creation  (*The  Land  and  the  Book,'  p.  172).  A
common  thirst  not  only  brings  down  the  noble  to  the  level  of  the  mean  man,  but  man  in
general  to  the  level  of  the  brute.    It  is  well  that  we  should  have  plain  reminders,  such


CH.  XIV.  1—22.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  369


as  cannot  be  escaped,  of  the  links  that  bind  us  to  the  lower  creation.  We  cannot,  at
present  at  all  events,  get  above  some  of  the  wants  of  the  brute,  although  certainly  it
cannot  rise  to  some  of  ours ;  but  it  is  just  the  wants  of  the  brute  thai  seem  to  be  the
only  wants  many  feel.    They  have  enough  if  they  can  eat,  drink,  and  be  merry.— Y.

Vers.  7 — 9. — An  appeal  out  of  ihe  depths  of  separation  from  God,   I.  The  appeal  of

THOSB  WHO  ADMIT  THAT  IN  THEMSELVES  THEY  HAVE  NO  CLAIM  UPON  GoD.      They  have

no  record  of  faithful  service  to  present ;  no  array  of  good  deeds  goes  before  them  to
plead  for  acceptance  and  approval.  It  is  all  the  other  way.  Their  iniquities  testify
against  them ;  they  have  backslidden  ;  they  have  sinned  against  Jehovah ;  at  least,  so
they  say.  There  is  the  appearance  of  having  come  to  themselves.  It  might  seem  as  if
the  prodigal  nation,  so  loDg  spending  its  substance  in  riotous  living,  had  been  brought
to  a  full  stop  and  a  place  for  repentance  amid  the  privations  of  a  waterless  land.  Why,
indeed,  should  there  be  any  suspicion  as  to  a  genuine  confession  of  great  iniquities,  a
genuine  and  swift  submission  to  Jehovah?  Notice  that  the  confession  is  correct
enough  as  far  as  the  mere  words  are  concerned.  But  after  all,  these  words  were  not
unlike  the  statements  extorted  by  the  pains  of  the  Inquisition.  Confessions  and  pro-
fessions have  been  made  by  tortured  men  in  their  agonies  which  had  no  value  as
genuine  utterances  of  the  heart.  It  is  needless  to  say  that,  as  far  as  purpose  is  con-
cerned, no  resemblance  is  to  be  found  between  Jehovah  depriving  Judah  of  its  water
and  Rome  torturing  heretics  to  make  them  recant.  There  may  be  different  purposes
where  there  are  similar  results.  This  cry  of  the  people  showed  the  severity  with  which
they  had  been  smitten ;  it  did  not  of  necessity  show  the  state  of  their  hearts.  All
that  they  said  was  true ;  their  iniquities  did  testify  against  them ;  they  were  apostates ;
they  had  sinned  against  Jehovah.  Only  when  we  look  at  past  confessions  of  the  like
sort,  we  see  how  little  they  meant  (Numb.  xiv.  40 ;  xxi.  7 ;  Judg.  x.  10 ;  1  Sam.  vii.
r>).  It  was  the  parched  tongue  and  not  the  broken  heart  that  ma3e  them  speak.  And
therefore  it  is  that  their  appeal  has  to  be  met  with  a  refusal.  Earnestly  as  they  cried,
the  cessation  of  chastisement  would  not  have  been  followed  by  the  renewal  of  a  true
obedience.

II.  The  appeal  of  those  who  have  become  conscious  or  their  own  hklplessness
APABT  FROM  Jehovah.  They  want  water,  and  there  is  no  way  of  getting  it  apart  from
the  mercy  of  an  all-powerful  God.  The  very  way  in  which  they  si)eak  shows  how
vain  they  feel  all  resources  to  be  save  one.  But  if  other  resources  had  been  possible,
assuredly  they  would  have  tried  them.  They  come  to  Grod's  door,  not  because  it  is  the
right  one,  but  because  it  is  the  only  one  left  to  try.  So  passengers  begin  to  think  of
God  and  eternity  when  the  captain  says  the  tempest-beaten  ship  cannot  be  saved.  So
sick  people  send  for  a  minister  of  religion  when  the  doctor  says  the  disease  is  mortal.
So  the  doomed  criminal  makes  a  fashion  of  giving  all  his  attention  to  the  chaplain  when
the  plea  for  mitigation  is  rejected.  What  a  humiliating  position  men  take  in  making
an  appearance  of  coming  to  God  only  when  they  can  get  nowhere  else !  What  wonder
is  it  that,  under  such  circumstances,  tbey  fail  to  get  a  right  relation  established  between
God  and  themselves  1  Prayers  in  such  circumstances,  whatever  the  language  employed,
may  prove  no  more  than  the  incoherent  shriek  of  despair,  a  cry  without  any  real  turn-
ing to  God,  without  any  real  trust  in  him.

III.  The  appeal  of  those  who  can  call  to  mind  God's  character  as  already
revealed.  The  description  of  God  in  his  deeds  and  disposition  had  ample  warrant
from  the  history  of  his  ()ast  dealings.  He  had  been  in  the  midst  of  his  people, "  the  Hope
of  Israel,  the  Saviour  thereof  in  time  of  trouble,"  as  a  mighty  man  showing  himself  able
to  save  in  the  greatest  danger.  He  who  now  fastened  up  the  clouds  and  the  springs
had  given  waters  in  the  wilderness.  He  who  now  made  the  earth  fruitless  had  given
manna  which  needed  neither  sowing  nor  reaping.  Jehovah  had  been  behind  all  the
visible  agents  towards  deliverance,  victory,  and  possession  of  the  promised  inheritance.
His  tabernacle  had  been  in  the  midst  of  his  people,  and  his  glory  in  the  midst  of  his
tabernacle.  How  easy  it  is  to  remember,  when  necessary,  that  which,  when  convenient,
it  seems  just  as  easy  to  forget  I  The  clouds  of  heaven  and  the  mountains  in  whose
secret  depths  he  had  wrought  at  the  water-springs  had  been  suffered  to  hide  God ;  but
now  that  his  gracious  works  are  vanished  for  a  while,  men  suddenly  and  painfully  miss
the  worker.    They  can  flatter  him  whom  they  have  not  even  despised,  but  rather

JEREMIAH.  2  B


a70        THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,  [ch.  xiv.  1— 22.


simply  ignored.  When  the  cisterns  are  empty,  when  the  land  is  chapped,  when  there  is
no  water  anywhere  for  man  and  beast,  then  they  cau  talk  effusively  concerning  ''  the
Hope  of  Israel,  and  the  Sayiour  thereof  in  time  of  trouble."  What  self-accusation  is
implied  in  this  appeal  I  It  was  not  in  ignorance  of  Jehovah's  claims  that  they  had
nnned  against  hira.  His  past  dealings  were  known  and  could  be  recollected  under
stress  of  need.  If  God  could  speak  to  Jeremiah  as  one  familiar  with  the  deeds  of
Motes  and  Samuel  (ch.  xy.  1),  then  we  may  be  sure  the  God  connected  with  those
deeds  was  also  known  in  his  historical  manifestations — known  to  some  extent  at  least
to  the  pt»at  bulk  of  the  people.

IV.  The  appeal  of  those  who  have  beoome  keenly  senbitive  to  €k>D's  sepaba-
Tioy  FBOM  THEM.  This  is  set  forth  by  two  figures.  He  has  become  as  a  stranger  in  the
land,  as  a  wayfarer  pitching  his  tent  for  the  night.  The  people  profess  to  wonder  why
it  is  so,  and  yet  they  need  not  wonder.  He  who  has  been  in  their  midst  because,  first
of  all,  he  has  gathered  them  around  him  as  the  recipients  of  measureless  privileges,  finds
rivals  raised  on  every  high  place  and  in  every  grove.  Ills  special  commands  are  shut
out  from  influence  on  the  conduct  of  daily  life.  His  messenger  is  scorned  by  rulers  and
conspired  against  by  his  own  kinsfolk.  What  is  all  this  but  to  become  even  worse
than  a  stranger?  A  stranger  may  advance  through  successive  grades  of  acquaintance-
ship into  bosom  affection  and  trust ;  but  if  he  who  is  and  ought  to  remain  the  centre
gets  pushed  out  little  by  little,  even  beyond  the  circumference,  what  force  is  there
potent  and  exact  enough  to  bring  the  former  relation  back  ?  God  had  told  these  people
now  to  treat  the  stranger,  but  instead  of  attending  to  his  commands  they  had  ended  by
making  Gkxi  himself  a  stranger.  Needless,  then,  was  it  to  ask  the  question,  '*  Why
shouldest  thou  be  as  a  stranger  in  the  land?"  As  well  might  the  ebbing  sea  ask  the
rock  round  which  it  rolled  at  flood,  why  it  had  forsaken  it.  Jehovah  had  remained  the
same  in  truth,  in  love,  and  in  purpose.  It  was  the  people  who  had  failed,  and  flowed
further  and  further  away  from  him.  They  talked  of  him  as  a  mere  wanderer  among
them,  whereas  they  were  the  real  wanderers,  wandering  in  heart,  drifting  about  from
one  temporary  satisfaction  to  another  (Exod.  xxii.  21 ;  Lev.  xix.  9, 10,  33 ;  Matt.  xxv.
35;  Ilcb.  xiii.  2).— Y.

Vers.  10 — 12. — The  severities  of  Jehovah — sivord,  famine,  and  pestilence,  L  The
OCCASION  OF  THESE  SEVERITIES.  This  occasiou  is  stated  in  ver.  10.  The  people  have
spoken  of  Jehovah  as  a  stranger  and  traveller,  which  way  of  speaking  gives  oppor-
tunity for  asserting  that  it  is  they  who  are  the  real  wanderers,  straying  from  Jehovah's
highway  of  righteousness  and  appointed  service ;  and  not  only  have  they  strayed,  but
they  have  loved  to  stray.  The  making  of  a  straight  path  for  Jehovah  has  been  very
hard  and  exacting,  and  the  first  voice  of  temptation  to  turn  into  an  easier  road  has
been  listened  to.  And  even  now,  out  of  the  midst  of  their  agonies,  their  cry  has  no
repentance  in  it.  They  wish  God  to  come  into  their  midst  and  protect  and  comfort
them,  forgetting  that  if  he  is  to  be  really  in  their  midst  they  must  turn  from  their
iniquities.  They  must  show  clear  signs  of  forsaking  their  sins  before  he  can  relax  his
severities.  Dreadful  as  this  experience  of  a  waterless  land  is,  they  must  look  for  the
exciting  cause  of  it  in  themselves.  A  disobedient  child,  suffering  punishment  at  the
hands  of  his  parent,  while  he  knows  that  one  cause  of  his  pain  is  uie  chastising  instru-
ment, knows  also  that  it  is  a  cause  which  only  oi)eratos  beciiuse  of  the  wrong  that  he
himself  has  done.  If  we  would  only  give  due  attention,  it  is  within  our  own  power  to
keep  the  worst  pains  out  of  life.

II.  Vain  defences  against  the  severities.  1.  ITie  intercesBton  of  good  men,
Jehovah  says  once  again  to  his  prophet,  "  Pray  not  for  this  people  for  their  good."
Jeremiah  himself,  naturally  and  commendably  enough,  is  prompted  to  cry  on  their
behalf.  But  doubtless  they  themselves  also  urge  the  prophet's  intercession.  2.  Faaiing,
Outward  and  visible  humiliation ;  such  attire  and  such  attitudes  assumed  as  were  con-
gruous with  the  cry  of  vers.  7 — 9.  All  this  was  easy  enough  without  any  humbling
-  or  chastening  of  the  heart.  Fasting  is  too  often  followed  by  feasting.  For  a  little  while
the  fleshly  comforts  of  life  are  superstitiously  put  aside ;  but  there  is  the  full  purpose
of  resuming  them,  and  making  up  for  lost  time.  3.  Burnt  offerings  and  oblaiums.
The  people  insulted  Jehovah  by  heaping  before  him  the  carcases  of  slain  beasts.  An
idol  was  best  served,  according  to  the  teaching  of  its  priests,  by  those  who  made  the


CH.  XIV.  1—22.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  371

lai^est  offerings  at  its  shrine.  All  these  doings  only  emphasized  the  disohedi^Me  ol
the  people.  They  were  very  diligent  in  giving  what  Jehovah  did  not  want,  vainly
thinking  it  might  stand  in  place  of  what  he  imperatively  required.  When  God  asks  us
for  repentance  and  ohedience,  it  is  the  merest  triBing  hoth  with  his  expectations  and
our  interests  to  bring  some  unusual  demonstration  of  will-worship.  Let  quality,  not
quantity,  be  the  first  thing.  A  little  of  the  right  is  better  than  the  utmost  profession
of  the  wrong.  A  little  of  the  right,  firmly  rooted,  will  increase  and  strengthen  with
wonderful  rapidity.

III.  The  shape  of  the  BEVsamES.  Sword,  famine,  and  pestilence  are  coming ;
coming,  plainly  set  forth  as  the  consuming  agents  of  Jehovah.  When  Jehovah  makes
men  his  stoord,  it  is  vain  to  contend  against  them.  The  history  of  God's  people  had  often
shown  how  a  few  could  be  victorious  and  a  multitude  vanquished.  It  is  he  who  can
put  strength  into  the  arm  that  wields  the  sword  or  take  that  strength  away.  These
invading  armies  were,  of  course,  not  conscious  that  Jehovah  was  wielding  tbem  in  this
way.  They  had  their  own  selfish  aims,  which  God  could  subordinate  and  mould
toward  his  own  ends.  It  is  the  worst  of  blasphemy  for  the  leader  of  an  army  to  talk
as  if  he  were  going  on  Gk)d*s  errands.  Attila  was  not  the  scourge  of  God  because  he
said  so,  thouorh  God  may  have  used  him  in  ways  beyond  Attila's  power  to  conceive.
Famine,  Here  was  a  destroyer  which  there  was  no  guarding  against.  The  sword
could  at  least  be  drawn  against  the  sword,  however  vain  the  result.  But  who  could
stop  a  general  famine  ?  And  even  supposing  a  few  rich  men  could  store  up  grain  for
a  while,  there  was  a  third  foe  in  reserve — the  pestilence,  David  had  his  choice  as
to  which  of  the  three  dread  agents  he  would  prefer ;  but  here  they  all  come  together.
God  has  a  variety  of  weapons,  and  his  enemies  cannot  evade  them  all.  How  wise
men  would  be  if,  instead  of  vainly  trying  to  shut  out  alike  Divine  Law  and  penalty,
they  would  at  once  and  for  ever  take  up  the  attitude  of  entire  submission  to  God!
Then  they  would  be  defended  indeed.  By  sword,  famine,  and  pestilence,  these  rich
men  of  Judah  and  Jerusalem  were  for  ever  separated  from  their  ill-gotten  gains.  But
*'  who  shall  separate  us  from  the  love  of  Christ  ?  Assuredly  not  famine  or  sword,"  says
the  apostle ;  nor  pestilence  either,  he  would  have  added,  if  he  had  thought  of  it.  We
may  be  persuaded  that  nothiug  has  power  to  separate  us  from  the  love  of  God  which  is
in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord.  The  mischief  is  that  we  reject  the  protections  of  that  love
and  all  other  benefits  flowing  from  it. — Y.

Vers.  13 — 16. — The  peculiar  doom  of  the  false  prophets.  I.  The  sin  op  the
PROPHETS.  That  they  are  found  liars  is,  comparatively  speaking,  a  small  part  of  their
offence.  Their  lie  is  productive  of  so  much  that  adds  to  the  peril  of  the  position — so
much  that  is  peculiarly  insulting  to  Jehovah.  Their  sin  and  the  punishment  of  it
were  not  unlike  the  sin  and  punishment  of  Ananias  and  Sapphira.  Ananias  and
Sapphira  were  smitten,  not  because  they  had  lied,  but  because  they  had  lied  against
the  Holy  Ghost.  So  with  these  false  prophets  here ;  they  prophesied  falsely ;  but  that
in  itself  might  not  have  brought  a  peculiar  doom  upon  them.  The  offence  lay  in  this^
that  the  false  prophecy  came  at  a  time  when  it  was  peculiarly  obnoxious  to  Jehovalu
It  was  not  a  distant  danger  that  these  false  prophets  made  light  of,  but  one  close  to
the  door.  The  prophet's  difficulties,  arising  from  the  natural  disposition  of  his  auditors,
were  already  great  enough.  No  false  prophet  was  needed  to  come  in  with  his  contra-
diction. It  must  also  be  remembered  that  there  was  a  peculiarly  insulting  sin  in  that
these  men  told  their  lies  as  prophets.  What  a  dreadful  thing  for  a  man  to  go  forth
with  "  Thus  saith  Jehovah  in  his  mouth,  when  the  words  are  the  deceit  of  his  own
heart  1  This  expression,  *'  the  deceit  of  their  heart,"  seems  to  suggest  the  possibility
that  in  some  instances  these  false  prophets  were  not  deliberate  liars,  but  were  them-
selves deluded  by  a  fanatical  exaggeration  of  patriotism.  Nevertheless,  oven  so,  the
sin  was  none  the  less,  for  the  spirits  of  the  prophets  were  subject  to  the  prophets.  We
had  need  be  very  sure  that  we  are  duly  commissioned  when  we  undertake  to  speak  in
the  Name  of  God,  else  we  may  land  ourselves  in  most  humiliating  exposures,  and  come
to  a  most  admonitory  end.    Thus  we  come  to  notice —

II.  How  THE  SIN  OF  THESE  PROPHETS  WAS  MADE  CLEAR.  Jeremiah  Said  one  thing,
the  false  prophets  said  the  direct  contrary,  and  at  the  time  there  seemed  no  means  6(
vindicating  the  true  prophet  beyond  all  chance  of  cavil.    Doubtless  those  who  were


372


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  xv.  1—21.


rightly  disposed  did  listen  and  believe.  Their  very  disposition  was  in  itself  a  teach-
stone  by  which  to  discriminate  between  the  false  and  the  true ;  while  those  disposed  to
reject  could  make  anything  serve  for  an  excuse.  The  important  thing  to  notice  is  that
the  occasion  of  this  great  sin  was  seized  upon  to  predict  in  due  time  a  terrible,  an
indisputable,  revelation  of  the  sin.  Thus  an  opportunitv  came  for  adding  detail  and
emphasis  to  the  prophecy  already  given.  What  could  not  be  made  plain  at  the
moment  would  be  made  abundantly  plain  hereafter.  Sword  and  famine  were  not  only
eeriain,  they  were  near ;  coming  within  the  lives  of  these  living  men,  who  would  see
these  very  false  prophets  die  by  the  sword  and  famine  which  they  had  sneered  at  as
impossible.  Those  who  during  I\fe  had  told  so  many  inexpressibly  mischievous /oZse-
hoods  with  their  lips,  were  made  the  instruments,  their  own  mU.  not  being  at  all  con-
sulted, of  uttering  uiost  impressive  truth  in  their  death.  Grod  and  his  truth  and  his
true  prophets  and  faithful  witnesses  can  wait.  Time  is  increasingly  on  the  side  of  all
truth,  wliile  false  prophets  are  condemned  out  of  their  own  mouths.

III.  The  deceived  auditors  buffer  just  as  much  as  the  deceiviko  bpeakebs.
The  people  were  not  at  liberty  to  plead  contradictions  in  the  messages  as  a  ground  for
continued  inaction  in  the  matter  of  repentance.  Such  a  plea  was  certain  to  be  seized  on,
but,  while  it  might  help  to  drug  the  conscience,  it  availed  nothing  to  lighten  the  judg>
ments  which  Jeliovah  was  bringing  on  his  unfaithful  people.  That  Qod  who  is  to  be
reckoned  true,  though  such  reckoning  makes  every  man  a  liar,  has  assuredly  not  left
himself  without  ample  witness.  False  prophets  can  be  tested  at  once  by  the  heart
of  each  individual  to  whom  they  appeal,  although  their  exposure  before  the  whole
universe  may  not  come  tor  many  ages.  God  gives  us  for  our  own  sakes  the  present
means  of  guarding  against  them.  As  to  his  Name  and  glory,  we  may  be  sure  he  will
vindicate  them  in  his  own  time  and  way. — Y.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  XV.


Vers.  1 — 9. — Second  reiection  of  Jere-
miah's intercession;  awfuluess  of  the  im-
pending judgment.

Ver.  1.— Though  Moses  and  Samuel,  etc.
It  is  a  mere  supposition  which  is  here  made ;
there  is  no  allusion  to  any  popular  view  of
the  intercession  of  saints  (.-ee  my  note  on
Isa.  Ixiii.  16).  If  even  a  Moses  or  a  Samuel
would  intercede  in  vain,  the  case  of  tlio
Jndahites  muat  indeed  be  desperate.  For
these  were  the  nearest  of  all  the  prophets  to
Jehovah,  and  repeatedly  prayed  their  people
out  of  grievous  calamity  (cump.  Ps.  xcix.  6).
Jeremiah  had  already  sought  to  intercede
for  his  people  (see  on  cli.  vii.  16).  Cast  them
oat  of  my  sight ;  rather,  Dismiss  them  from
my  presence.  The  people  are  represented  as
praying  or  sacrificing  in  the  fore  courts  of  the
tenmle.

Ver.  2. — Snoh  as  are  for  death,  etc. ;  a
sternly  ironical  answer.  Death,  sword,
famine,  captivity,  lie  in  wait  for  them  in
every  possible  road.  "  Death  "  here  means
"pestilence"  (comp.  "the  black  death"  in
the  Middle  Ages),  as  in  oh.  xviii.  21 ;  Job
xxviL  15.  8imilur  combinations  of  evils
oocor  in  ch.  xliii.  11 ;  £zek.  xiv.  21 ;  xxxiii.
27.

Ver.  3. — ^Appoint ;  fc.  give  full  power  to
them  as  my  vicegerents  (ch.  i  10^.    Four


kinds;  literally,  families;  ie.  kinds  of
things.  Tho  first-mentioned  has  reference
to  the  living;  the  remaining  ones  to  the
uuburied  corpses  (ch.  xiv.  16 ;  xix.  7 ;
xxxiv.  20).    To  tear;  rather,  to  drag  along.

Ver.  4.— Cause  them  to  be  removed  into ;
rather,  make  them  a  shuddering  unto.  So  in
tho  Deuteronomic  curses  for  disobedience
(Deut.  xxviii.  25).

Ver.  5. — For  who  shall  have  pity  !  or,  for
tcho  can  have  pity^  etc.  ?  (the  imperfect  in  its
potential  sense).  The  horror  which  will
seize  upon  the  spectators  will  effectually
preclude  pity.  Who  shall  go  aside?  As
one  turns  aside  to  call  at  a  house.  So  Gen.
xix.  2  (literally,  turn  aside,  not  "  turn  in  ").

Ver.  6.— Will  I  stretch;  UteraUy,  /
stretched— the  perfect  of  prophetic  certitude
(so  in  next  verse).  I  am  weary  with  repent-
ing; t.c.  with  recalling  my  (conditional)
sentence  of  punishment  (see  on  ch.  xviii.
1—10).

Ver.  7. — ^The  gates  of  the  land.  The
phrase  might  mean  either  the  cities  in
general  (comp.  Mioah  v.  5 ;  Isa.  iii.  26)  or
the  fortresses  commanding  the  entrance  into
the  land  (comp.  Nab.  iii.  13).  The  context
decides  in  favour  of  the  latter  view.  Ewald's
explanation,  '* borders  of  the  earth"  (i.e.  the
most  distant  countries),  seems  less  natural.
I  will  bereave  them,  etc.  The  proper  obiect
of  the   verb  is  my   people  (personified  as


cii.  XV.  1—21.]  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PHQf  HET  JEREMIAH.


373


a  mother).  The  population  are  to  fall  in
war  (comp.  the  same  figure  in  Ezek.  v.  17).
The  tense  is  the  perfect  of  prophetic  certi*
tude ;  literally,  I  have  bereaved,  etc.

Ver.  8. — ^To  me ;  t.e.  at  my  bidding.  It  is
the  dative  of  cause.  Againft  the  mother  of
the  young  men ;  rather,  upon  .  .  .  young
man.  The  widow  has  lost  her  husband,  the
mother  her  son,  so  that  no  human  power
can  repel  the  barbarous  foe.  The  word
rendered  *< young  man"  is  specially  used
for  "young  warriors,"  e.g.  ch.  xviii.  21  ;
xlix.  26;  li.  3.  Others,  following  Rashi,
take  *•  mother"  in  the  sense  of  **  metropolis,"
or  ** chief  city"  (see  Authorized  Version,
margin),  in  which  case  "  youn^  man  "  must
be  connected  with  the  participle  rendered
*'  a  spoiler ;  "  but  though  the  word  has  this
sense  in  2  Bam.  xx.  19,  it  is  there  coupled
with  "city,"  so  that  no  doubt  can  exist.
Here  the  prophet  would  certainly  not  have
used  the  word  in  so  unusual  a  sense  without
giving  some  guide  to  his  meaning.  The
rendering  adopted  above  has  the  support  of
Ewald,  Hitzig,  and  Dr.  Payne  Smith.  At
noonday ;  at  the  most  unlooked-for  moment
(see  on  ch.  vL  4).  I  have  oauied  him,  etc. ;
rather,  1  have  caused  pangs  and  terrors  to
fall  upon  her  suddenly.

Ver.  9. — ^That  hatii  borne  seven ;  a  pro-
verbial expression  (comp.  1  Sam.  ii.  5 ;  Ruth
iv.  15).  Her  snn  is  gone  down,  etc.  The
figure  is  that  of  an  eclipse  (comp.  Amos  ix.  9).
She  hath  been  ashamed,  etc. ;  rather,  she  is
ashamed,  etc.  Ewald  supposes  the  sun,
which  is  sometimes  feminine  in  Hebrew,
to  be  the  subject  (comp.  Isa.  xxiv.  23) ;  but
the  view  of  the  Authorized  Version  is  more
probable.  The  shame  of  childlessness  is
repeatedly  referred  to  (comp.  ch.  1.  12;
Isa.  liv.  4 ;  Gen.  xvi.  4 ;  xxx.  1,  23).

Vers.  10 — 21. — These  verses  come  in  very
imexpectedly,  and  are  certainly  not  to  bo
regarded  as  a  continuation  of  the  preced-
ing discourse.  They  describe  some  deeply
pathetic  moment  of  the  prophet's  inner  life,
and  in  all  probability  belong  to  a  later
period  of  the  history  of  Judah.  At  any
rate,  the  appreciation  of  the  next  chapter
will  be  facilitated  by  reading  it  in  close
connection  with  ver.  9  of  the  present
chapter.  But  the  section  before  us  is  too
impressive  to  be  cast  adrift  without  an
attempt  to  find  a  place  for  it  in  the  life  of  the
prophet.  The  attempt  has  been  made  with
bome  plausibility  by  a  Jewish  scholar.  Dr.
Gratz,  who  considers  the  background  of
these  verses  to  be  the  soioum  of  Jeremiah
at  Ramah,  referred  to  in  on.  xl.  1.  and  groups
them,  therefore,  with  another  prophecy  (ch.
xxxi.  15— 17),  in  which  Ramah  is  mentioned
by  name  as  the  temporary  abode  of  the
Jewish  captives.  We  are  told  in  ch.  xl.  4,
5,  that  Jeremiah  had  the  choice  given  him


of  either  going  to  Babylon  with  the  exiles,
or  dwelling  with  the  Jews  who  were  allowed
to  remain  under  Gedaliah  the  governor.
He  chose,  as  the  narrative  in  ch.  xl.  tells  ns,
to  stay  with  Gedaliah;  but  the  narrative
could  not,  in  accordance  with  the  reserve
which  characterizes  the  inspired  writers,
reveal  the  state  of  mind  in  which  this
difficult  choice  was  made.  This  omission  is
supplied  in  the  paragraph  before  us.  Jere-
miah, with  that  lyric  tendency  peculiar  to
Iiim  among  the  prophets,  gives  a  vent  to  hia
emotion  in  these  impassioned  verses.  He
tells  his  friends  that  the  resolution  to  go!to
Gedaliah  may  cost  him  a  severe  struggle.
He  longs  for  rest,  and  in  Babylon  he  would
have  more  chance  of  a  quiet  life  than  among
the  turbulent  Jews  at  home.  But  he  has
looked  up  to  God  for  guidance,  and,  how-
ever painful  to  the  flesh,  God's  will  must  be
obeyed.  He  gives  us  the  substance  of  the
revelation  which  he  received.  The  Divine
counsellor  jpoints  out  that  he  has  already
interposed  in  the  most  striking  manner  for
Jeremiah,  and  declares  that  if  he  will  devoto^
himself  to  the  Jews  under  Gedaliah,  a  new
and  fruitful  field  will  be  open  to  him,  in.
whicli,  moreover,  by  Divine  appointment,,
no  harm  can  happen  to  him.  Whether  this
is  really  the  background  of  the  paragraph
must  remain  uncertain.  In  a  case  of  thiti
kind,  we  are  obliged  to  call  in  the  help  of
the  imagination,  if  the  words  of  the  prophet
are  to  be  realized  with  any  degree  of  vivid-
ness. There  are  some  great  difficulties  in
the  text,  and  apparently  one  interpolation
(vers.  13,  14  being  in  all  probability  an
incorrect  copy  of  ch.  xvii.  3,  4).

Ver.  10.— Woe  ii  me,  my  mother !  This  is
one  of  those  passages  (comp.  Introduction)
which  illustrate  the  sensitive  and  shrinking
character  of  our  prophet

"  If  his  meek  spirit  erred,  opprest
That  God  aenied  repose.
What  sin  is  ours,  to  whom  Heaven's  rest
Is  pledged  to  heal  earth's  woes  ?  "
(Cardinal    Newman,  in  *Lyra  Apoe-
tolioa,'  Ixxxviii.).

I  have  neither  lent  on  ninry,  etc ;  a  speak-
ing figure  to  men  of  the  ancient  world,  to
whom,  as  Dr.  Payne  Smith  remarks,  "  the
relations  between  the  money-lender  and  the
debtor  were  the  most  fruitful  source  of
lawsuits  and  quarrellings."

Ver.  11. — The  Lord  ta^  The  prophets  are
usuall  V  so  tenaciousof  the  same  formulss  that
even  their  slight  deviations  are  noteworthy.
"The  Lord  said,"  for  "Thus  saith  the
Lord,"  occurs  only  here  and  in  ch.  xlvi.  25
(where,  however,  the  phrase  has  possibly
been  detached  by  mistake  from  the  preced-
ing verse).  It  loall  be  well  with  thy  rem-
nant I  rather,  Ihave  loosed  thee  for  (thy)  good^


S74


THE  BOOK  OW  T^K  PBOPHET  JEREMIAH,    [cil  xt.  1—21.


OB,  ttf  1m(m»g  (thnU  he  fm  fOf  fwA.
— ■■iliiij,  M  we  ftiiopt  th«  ifitiag  of  the
Ilifcuw  iert  ^  r  thst  of  tli«  s^r^ixu  vtieii
JUfciB  in  fbnn  «•  *li4htly  ^  a  »  |mw  Ue  to
doL  If  ve  ftrt:y-p(  the  hictorieU  teitiiif  prt>-
po0rd  bj  Grmu  f«>r  thu  pMmgrmpo.  the
icfenroce  will  be  to  the  •*  looMBf  **  */  Jew-
■iiii  from  Lis  clmiM  mentioQed  in  cb.  li.  4.
The  RwieriD^  pven  ben:  i*.  boiperer.  oolj
A  fmbftUe  o!)e :  it  u  in  oonfotmitj  with  the
Anaue  iukcv  f^t'nf  ▼■crb (the  T«qnini  uses
ft  in  tlua  teniie  in  ch.  xl.  4>,  and  is  tnpported
hf  iU  MOtabilitT  to  the  eoatext  and,  pLik>-
lB|«iaaIlj,  by  the  fart  of  the  growing
iskaRMe  <^{  Aramaic  upon  Hebrew.  Ge-
Msiva,  in  his  aoxitrty  to  keep  close  to  the
■fttiTe  nse  of  tLe  rooC  producea  a  rendering
fof  the  HeKivw  mar^nal  readin|f)  which
does  not  suit  the  o^Lt'Xt,  Tix.  **  I  afflict  thee
for  (thr)  nrroiL"  Jeremiah  does  not  com-
plain ci  bein?  afflt<^!eii  bj  God,  but  that  all
the  worki  is  a^«iD^t  him  ;  Ewald,  comparing
•  dtiTreat  Aram^i^  Terb  to  that  appealtrd  to
nbore,  renders,  - 1  stretiirthea  thee,"  etc.,
which  b  adopted  br  Keil,  bnt  does  not  ao-
«ord  aith  the  feO'D'!  half  of  the  rerse  ao  well
«a  the  ren*!*  riDic  adr«pt*d.  The  Autb<>rixed
Yertkm  follows  the  Tarcum,  the  Vol  gate,
Aqnila,  Symiuacha^,  lUahi,  and  Kimchi,
aaanming  that  $hrrith  is  ooDtracied  from
tk*inih  (as  in  1  Chn>n.  xii.  38),  and  that  ** rem-
nant" is  equivalent  t^^  *•  n-mnant  of  life."
But,  though  th'*  >»  r:«^  is  not  unacceptable
(emnp.  xt-n.  20.  21),  t  e  f'»rm  of  tx  predion
is  nnnatural ;  we  should  have  ixpc-cted
okkMrUk'ka,  **  thy  1  itt»-r  end  "  (comp.  Job
riii.  7).  I  will  cause  tha  cntmy  to  entreat
that  well.  This  expression  i^  as  difficult  as
the  preceding,  ai.d  oar  rendering  of  it  will
depend  entirelj  on  our  view  of  the  context
If  **the  enemy"  means  the  Chaldeans,
the  Authorized  Version  will  be  snbatantially
correct  Bashi  has  already  mentioned  the
Tiew  that  the  phrase  alludes  to  Xebuzar-
admn's  nspectful  inquiry  as  to  the  wishes
of  Jeremiah  in  ch.  xl.  2—5.  In  this  case,
the  literal  rendering  is  I  vciil  cau$e  the
enemjf  to  me  ft  thee  (as  a  friend);  comp.  Isa.
xlTiL  3;  Ixiv.  4.  But  if  "the  enemv "
means  the  Jews,  then  we  must  render,  I
smU  ccMse  the  enemy  to  gnpplieate  thee,  and
illnatrate  the  phrase  by  the  repeated  appli-
eations  of  Zedekiah  to  the  prophet  (ch.  xxi.  1,
2;  xxxvii.  3;  xxxviii.  14),  and  the  similar
appeal  of  the  **  captains  of  the  forces,"  in
ch.  xlu-  1—3.

Ver.  12.— Shan  iron  break,  etc  ?  Again  an
enigmatical  saying.  The  rendering  of  the
Authorized  Version  assumes  that  by  the
Bortlwm  iron  Jeremiah  means  the  Baby-
lonian empire.  But  the  "  breaking  "  of  the
Babylonian  empire  was  not  a  subject  which
lay  within  the  thouprhts  of  the  prophet  It
WM  not  the  fate  of  Babylon,  but  his  own


troobled  extstenecw  and  the  possibility  ihmX
htt  f^es  wo«ld  nltnatety
in?  him.  which  diiqvietod  this
but  timid  spokesman  of  Jehofimh.  Tho
DiTine  inteHocntor  has  icminded  him  in
the  pteeeding  Terse  of  the  wmkcj  which
already  extended  to  him,  nnd
to  his  recrkUeetioB  the  eneonrmging
inven  him  in  hia  innagnfml
(ch.  i.  1^  19V  Bendec  theraiore*  a
Wmk  mm.  mnriherm  wnm^  mmd  knmze  t  The
iUalofthe  Authorized  Tcnioo  is  eridentljr  n
slip.  The  Hebrew  wofd is  »'U«*elA,whJoh
mfais  sometimes  («^  ch.  ri.  28;  Deot.
riii.  9 :  xxxiiL  t5 ;  Jsh  zzriiL  2)  eopper,
bQt  more  commonly  fasonae,  ainee  ^  copper
nnallojed  aeeaas  to  hnre  been  bat  n^ely
used  airier  its  allors  with  tin  became
known"  ( Prr-feaaor 'Maskelyne).  *^ Steel"
wonld  h*Te  been  mote  fitly  intiodoeed  ns
the  teoond  of  the  three  nsmns  of  metnla.
"Xorthem  iron*  st  ooce  sngs^esto  the
Chalybea,  £amoas  in  antiqnitT  for  their  skill
in  hardening  iron,  and.  nDOoraing  to  classienl
aoth'YS  {e,g.  Stephanna  the  geographerX  ^^
neighbours  of  the  Tibazeni,  in  the  eonntry
adjoining  the  Eoxine  Sea,  the  Tibareni
being,  of  coarse,  the  people  of  Tnbal,  whom
Ezekiel  mtniioo*  (xxriL  13)  as  timfficking
in  Teasels  of  bftxLse.  Any  Jew,  familiar
with  the  wares  of  the  bsoanr,  wonld  at  onoe
appreciate  the  foroe  of  snch  a  qnestion  as
this.  Eren  if  iron  eonld  be  broken,  yet
surely  not  steel  nor  bronie^  Thus  the  Teme
simply  reaffirms  the  original  promises  to
Jeremiah,  and  prqpttres  the  wny  for  Ten.
20,  21.

Vers.  13,  14 —Thy  SBhatnaM,  etc  These
Terses  fcHin  an  a:ilooked-fi»-  digression.  Tlie
prophet  has  been  in  a  state  of  profound
mvLBtncholy,  and  the  object  of  Jehovah  is  to
rouse  him  trom  it  In  tctb.  II,  12,  the  most
eocooraginf  aaramnees  hare  been  given
him.  Saddenly  comes  the  OTerwhehning
declaration  contained  in  Ters.  13,  14.  And
when  we  look  closely  at  these  Terses^  two
points  strike  ns,  whieh  make  it  difficult  to
oonceiTe  that  Jeremiah  intended  them  to
stand  here.  First  their  eootents  are  not  at
all  adapted  to  Jeremiah,  and  dearly  beIon«^
to  the  people  of  Jodah ;  and  next,  they  arc
repeated,  with  some  variaftions,  in  oh.  xvii.
3.  4.  It  ahool  1  also  be  obserred  thai  the
Septnagint  (which  omits  ch.  XTiL  1 — 4)
only  gires  them  here,  which  seems  to  indi-
cate an  early  opinion  that  the  passage
only  ought  to  occur  once  in  the  Book  of
Jeremiah,  though  the  Septuagint  translator
failed  to  choose  the  right  position  for  it
Withontpziee;  UteraUy,nof /or  a  price.  In
the  parallel  passage  there  is  another  read-
ing, •*  thy  high  places,"  which  forms  part  of
the  next  clioso.  Hitzig  and  Graf  snppone
this  to  be  the  original  zendinic,  the  Hebrew


CH.  XV.  1—21.]  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.


376


letters  having  been  partly  effaced  and  then
misread,  after  which  ''  not "  was  prefixed  to
make  sense.  However  this  may  be,  the
present  reading  is  unintelligible,  if  we  com-
pare Isa.  lii.  3,  where  Jehovah  declares  that
his  people  were  sold  for  nothing,  t.e.  were
g^ven  up  entirely  to  the  enemy,  without  any
compensating  advantage  to  Jehovah.  And
that  for  all  thy  sins,  eveui  etc. ;  literally,
atid  in  all  thy  sins  and  in  aU  thy  borders.
The  text  is  certainly  difficult.  Lxtemally
a  parallelism  exists  between  the  two  halves
of  the  clause,  and  one  is  therefore  tempted
to  render  literally.  As  this  will  not  make
sense,  however,  we  are  forced  either  to
render  as  the  Authorized  Version,  or  to
suppose  that  the  text  is  not  accurately
preserved.  The  parallel  passage  has  a
different  but  not  a  more  intelligible  read-
ing. Ewald  omits  **  and  "  in  both  halves  of
the  clause,  which  sli^^htly  diminishes  the
awkwardness.  And  I  will  make  thee  to
pais,  etc.  The  natural  rendering  of  the
Hebrew  is,  "And  I  will  make  thine  ene-
mies to  pass,"  etc.,  which  clearly  cannot  be
the  prophet's  meaning.  The  parallel  pas-
sage (ch.  xvii.  4)  has,  "  And  I  will  make
thee  to  serve  thine  enemies,"  etc. ;  and  so
the  Soptuagint,  the  Syriac,  the  Targum,
and  many  manuscripts  here.  For  a  fire  is
kindled  in  mine  anger;  a  reminiscence  of
Deut.  xxxii.  22,  suggesting  that  the  judg-
ment described  in  the  Song  of  Moses  is
about  to  fall  upon  Judah.

Ver.  15. — 0  Lord,  then  knowest,  etc.
The  prophet  renews  his  complaints.  God's
omniscience  is  the  thought  which  comforts
him  (comp.  ch.  xviL  6 ;  xviii.  23;  Ps.  Ixix.  19).
But  he  desires  some  visible  proof  of  God's
continued  care  for  his  servant.  Visit  me,
equivalent  to  "  be  attentive  to  my  wants  *' —
an  anthropomorphic  expression  for  the  opera-
tion of  Providence.  Take  me  not  away  in
tl^  long-snffering ;  a.e.  "  suffer  not  my  per-
secutors to  destroy  me  through  the  long-
suffering  which  thou  displuyest  towards
them."  "  Take  away,"  viz.  my  life  (comp.
Ezek.  xxxiii.  4,  "If  the  sword  come  and
take  him  away  ").  Eebnke;  rather,  rejproaxih ;
comp.  Ps.  Ixix.  7  (Ps.  Ixix.  is  in  the  style  of
Jeremiah,  and,  as  Delitzsch  remarks,  suits
his  circumstances  better  than  those  of
David).

Ver.  16. — Thy  words  were  found.  Jere-
miah here  describes  his  first  reception  of  a
Divine  revelation.  Truth  is  like  "  treasure
hid  in  a  field ;  "  he  alone  who  seeks  it  with
an  unprejudiced  mind  can  "  find  **  it.  But
tliere  are  some  things  which  no  "searching*'
of  the  intellect  can  "find"  (Job  xi  7;
xxxvii.  23 ;  Ecdes.  iii.  11 ;  viii.  17);  yet  by
a  special  revelation  they  may  be  "  found  "
by  God's  "  spokesmen,"  or  prophets.  TJiis
is  the  train  of  thought  which  underlies


Jeremiah's  expression  here.  The  "  words,"
or  revelations,  of  Jehovah  are  regarded  as
having  an  objective  existence  in  the  ideal
world  of  which  God  is  the  light,  and  as
"  descending  "  from  thence  (comp.  Isa.  ix.  8)
into  the  consciousne^  of  the  prophet.  So
Ezek.  iu.  1,  "  Eat  that  thou  findest."  I  did
eat  them  ;  1  assimilated  them,  as  it  were
(comp.  Ezek.  ii.  8  ;  iii.  3).  I  am  caUed  by
thy  name ;  literally,  thy  name  hath  been  (or,
had  been)  called  upon  me;  i.e.  1  have  (or,
had)  been  specially  dedicated  to  thy  service.
The  phrase  is  often  used  of  Israel  (see  on
ch.  xiv.  9),  and,  as  here  applied,  intimates
that  a  faithful  prophet  was,  as  it  were,  the
embodied  ideal  of  an  Israelite.

Ver.  17. — In  the  assembly  of  the  mockezi ;
rather,  of  the  laughers.  The  serious  thoughts
arising  out  of  his  sacred  office  restrained
him  from  taking  part  in  the  festive  meet-
ings to  which  liis  youth  would  naturally
incline  him  (comp.  on  ch.  xvi.  2).  Beeavse
of  thy  hand.  The  Hand  of  Jehovah  is  a
figurative  expression  for  tlie  self-revealing
and  irresistible  power  of  Jehovah;  it  is,
therefore,  equivalent  to  the  Arm  of  Jehovah
(Isa.  liii.  1),  but  is  used  in  preference  with
regard  to  the  divinely  ordained  actions  and
words  of  the  prophets.  Thus  we  are  told,
in  the  accounts  of  Elijah  and  Elisha,  Uiat
"  the  hand  of  the  Lord  came  upon "  them
(1  Kings  xviii.  46 ;  2  Kings  iii.  15).  Such
a  phrase  was  probably  at  first  descriptive  of
a  completelv  passive  ecstatic  state,  and  was
retained  when  ecstasies  had  become  rare,
with  a  somewhat  laxer  meaning.  Isaiah  uses
a  similar  expression  but  once  (viii.  11) ;
Exekiel,  however,  who  appears  to  have  been
unusually  filled  with  the  overpowering
thought  of  the  supernatural  world,  is  con-
stantly mentioning  "the  hand  of  Jehovah"
(see  Ezek.  i.  3 ;  iii.  22 ;  xxxvii.  1 ;  and  espe-
cially iii.  14 ;  viii.  3).  We  may  infer  from  this
variation  in  the  practice  of  inspired  writers
that,  though  symbolical,  anthropomorphic
language  is  not  always  equally  necessary  in
speaking  of  Divine  tilings,  yet  it  cannot  bo
entirely  dispensed  with,  even  by  the  most
gifted  and  spiritual  teachers.  Then  hast
filled  me  with  indignation ;  rather,  thou  hadst
filled  me.  Jeremiah  was  too  full  of  his
Divine  message  to  indulge  in  impracticable
sentimentalities.  There  was  no  thought  of
self  when  Jeremiah  received  his  mission,
nor  any  bitterness  towards  those  who  op-
posed him.  His  "  indignation  "  was  that  of
Jehovah,  whose  simple  instrument  he  was
(comp.  ch.  vi.  11,  "I  am  full  of  the  fury  of
the  Lord  ").

Ver.  18.— Why  is  my  pain  perpetual  f  One
who  could  honestly  speak  of  himself  in
terms  such  as  those  of  vers.  16,  17,  seemed
to  have  a  special  claim  on  tho  Divine  pro-
tection.   But  Jeremiah's  hopes  have  oeeu


376


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [en.  xv.  1—21.


duappoiuted.  Him  vexation  is  per]>ctiia1,
mud  Ohi  wounded  epirit  finds  no  comfort.
Af  a  liar ;  rutlicr,  a$  a  dec^rit/ul  tiream.  The
word  ** stream"  lias  to  be  understood  as  in
Micah  i.  14.  Many  of  the  water-courses  of
Palestine  nre  filled  with  a  rushing  torrent
in  the  winter,  but  dry  in  summer.  Hence
the  pathetic  complaint  of  Job  (vi.  15).  The
opposite  phrase  to  that  used  by  Jt-reminh
ia  **a  perennial  stream  "  (Amos  v.  24).  The
force  of  the  passage  is  increased  if  wo  read
it  in  the  light  of  Dr.  Gratz's  hyi)othesis.

Ver.  19. — If  thou  return,  etc.  Most  com-
mentators regard  these  words  as  containing
a  gentle  rebuke  to  Jeremiah  for  his  doubts
respectiDg  C)od*s  care  of  him.     It  may  be

Suestioned,  however,  whether  such  passing
oubts  could  be  described  as  a  turning  away
from  Jehovah.  If  the  word  "return"  is  to
be  interprete<l  in  a  spiritual  Bense,  wo  must
sorely  conclude  that  the  people  is  addres^etl
(oomp.  ch.  iii.  12 ;  iv.  1).  But  this  does  not
agree  with  the  context.  Hence  Gratz's  view
seems  very  plausible,  that  the  reference  is
to  the  proiosal  that  Jeremiah  should  place
himseli  under  the  protection  of  Gedaliah
(com p.  ch.  xl.  5,  '*  Go  back  also  to  Gedaliali,"
etc.).  Then  will  I  bring  thee  again;  viz.
into  the  right  relation  to  me,  so  as  to  be  my
nunistcr  (Keil).  But  by  altering  one  of  the
vowel-points  (which  form  no  part  of  the
text),  on  the  authority  of  the  Septungint,  we
get  a  more  satisfactory  sense,  /  \cill  give  thee
a  Bettb'd  place.  The  verb  must  in  any  case  be
coupled  with  the  following  one.  Jeremiah
longs  for  a  quiet  home,  only  as  supplying
the  conditions  of  prophetic  activity.  Then
shalt  stand  before  me.  The  phrase  is  taken
from  the  wont  of  slaves  to  stand  in  their
masters'  presence,  waiting  for  commands.
It  is  also  applied  to  courtiers  (Prov.  xxii.  20)
and  royal  councillors  (1  Kings  xii.  6X  to
an^^els  (Luke  i.  19)  and  to  prophets  (1  Kings
xvii.  1 ;  2  Kings  iii.  14).  Jeremiah  was  by
God's  will  to  find  a  new  and  important
mission  to  the  Jews  with  Gedaliah.  If  thou
take  forth  the  predoui  from  the  vile,  etc.
The  metaphor  is  derived  from  metollnrgy


(comp.  ch.  vi.  27 — 30).  The  prophet  ia  eotu-
pareu  to  a  smelter.    By  the  fervour  of  lua»
inspired  exhortations,  he  seeks  to  draw  Away
from  the  mass  of  unbelievers  all  thooe  who
are  spiritually  capable  of  better  things.  The
^vine-dressers    and    husbandmen/'    whom
Nebuzar-adan  had  left  after  the  captar«  of
Jerusalem,  though  outwardly  "  the  poor  of
the  land,"   might  yet  bo  ennobled  by  the
word   and  example  of   Jeremiah.     [Some
explain  **  the  precious "   and  •*  the  vile  *'
difierently,  takmg   the   former  to   be   the
pure  Word  of  God  (comp.  Pa  xiL  6 ;  Prov.
XXX.  5),  the  latter  the  base,  human  elementa
which  are  apt  to  be  mixed  with  the  Divine
message  (oomp.  ch.  xxiii.  28).    But  waa  it
not  the  very   fidelity  of  Jeremiah  which
exposed  him  to  the  persecutions  of  which
he  has  been  complaining  f    Others  suppose
an  inward  purification  of  Jeremiah  himself
to   be   intended,  "the   vile"  being  those
human  infirmities  of  which  he  had  just
given   evidence,  as  opposed  to  **the  pre-
cious," I.e.   the  spiritual    impulses  which
come  from  above.    But  is  not  such  an  ex-
planation too  evangelical,  too  Pauline,  for
this  context  ?]  Thou  ihalt  be  as  my  mouth.
For    devoting    himself    to    this    possible
** mustard  seed"  of  a    better  and    holier
people,  the  prophet  should  be  rewarded  (1)
oy  close  prophetic  interoourse  with  his  God,
and  (2),    as  the  next  clause  states,  by  a
moral  victory  over  his  opponents.    "  Mouth  "
for  **  prophet,"  as  Exod.  iv.  16  (oomp.  Exod.
vii.  1).    Let  them  retun  unto  thee,  etc.;
rather,  they  $haU  retwm  unto  tkee^  but  thou
shalt  not  return  unto   them.      They   sliall
come  over  to  thy  side,  and  thou  shalt  not
need  to  make  humiliating  advances  to  them.

Yer.  20.— And  I  will  make  thee,  etc ;  a
solemn  confirmation  of  the  promises  in
ch.  i.  18, 19.

Ver.  21.— Out  of  the  hand  of  the  wiekad,
etc.  The  "  wicked  "  (literally,  erfl)  and  the
**  terrible  "  may  bo  the  banditti,  composed
of  desperate  patriots,  who  ultimately  as-
sassinated  Geaaliah  (ch.  xli.  1— -3).


HOMILETICa.

Ver.  2.—  Various  destinies  qf  punishmefit.  I.  Punishment  will  bk  assigked  as
A  DEFINITE  DESTINY.  It  IS  not  casual.  It  cannot  be  evaded.  It  is  decidedly  appointed
and  inflexibly  executed.  The  destiny  it  involves,  though  not  original  but  a  consequence
of  voluntary  actions,  is  as  certain  as  if  it  were  in  accordance  with  a  primary  law  of  nature
(G»L  vi.  7, 8).

n.  Punishment  will  be  assigned  in  a  variety  of  destinies.  All  the  wicked
will  not  sufiFer  alike.  There  will  be  various  forms  of  penalty  and  various  degrees  of
suffering.  Some  are  appointed  to  the  painful  death  of  the  plague,  some  to  the  sudden
death  of  the  sword,  some  not  to  death  at  all  but  to  exile.  Punishment  will  be  various,
(1)  because  men's  constitutions,  capacities,  and  susceptibilities  are  various,  so  that  tho


CH.  XV.  1—21.]  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.         377


form  of  suffering  whicli  is  suitable  for  one  may  not  be  suitable  for  another ;  and  (2)
because  guilt  varies  in  degree  (Luke  xii.  47,  48).

III.  Punishment  will  be  assigned  to  all  the  guilty  without  exception.  They
may  be  numerous,  yet  some  penalty  will  be  found  for  all.  The  varietv  of  destinies  might
suggest  that  among  them  some  would  find  a  way  of  escape,  but,  alas  I  they  are  all  i)enaL
This  variety  will  ever  secure  the  punishment  of  all.  They  who  escape  one  form  of
punishment  will  only  fall  into  another.  Some  hope  to  elude  justice  because  their  case
is  very  exceptional.    But  exceptional  punishment  is  found  for  exceptional  crime.

lY.  Punishment  will  be  severe  in  all  cases.  There  is  a  choice  of  destinies,
but  the  list  is  given  with  somewhat  of  irony.  How  terrible  is  the  mildest  fate  I  All
future  punishment  must  be  inexpressibly  awful  (Heb.  x.  31).  Therefore  let  us  not
delude  ourselves  with  hoping  that  ours  will  be  of  the  milder  kind,  but  seek  deliverance
from  the  certain  fearful  doom  of  sin  in  the  forgiving  mercy  of  Ood  in  Christ.

Ver.  6. — God  weat^  of  repenting,  I.  God  often  appears  to  repent.  He  seems
to  repent  of  his  merciful  intentions  when  the  conduct  of  men  has  called  forth  his
righteous  indignation— even  repenting  that  he  had  ever  made  men  (Gen.  vi.  6),  and  to
repent  of  his  wrathful  intentions  when  his  children  repent  of  their  sins  (e.^.  Exod.  xxxii.
14).  Absolutely  it  cannot  be  said  that  God  repents  (1  Sam.  xv.  29).  He  never  does
wrong,  never  errs,  is  never  moved  from  reason  by  passion,  knows  the  end  from  the
beginning,  and  therefore  never  sees  a  new  thing  to  modify  his  thoughts.  Yet  he  acts  as
if  he  repented,  i.e.  he  grieves  for  the  sorrow  he  has  righteously  brought,  and  desires  ^at
it  may  cease  as  soon  as  possible;  and  he  changes  his  action  towards  his  children  as  tiiey
change  their  conduct  towards  him.  This  fact  is  not  inconsistent  with  the  essential
Divine  immutability.  The  sim  does  not  vary  in  itself  because,  after  developing  a
flower  in  moist  weather,  it  withers  it  in  drought.  A  government  does  not  change  its
policy  if  it  enters  into  amicable  arrangements  with  a  loyal  dependency,  though  it  was
carrying  out  warlike  measures  so  long  as  the  province  was  in  revolt.  So  God  does  not
change  in  his  own  nature  because  his  action  is  varied  according  to  the  varied  require-
ments of  his  people.  Such  variation  is  rather  a  result  of  his  essential  changelessness.
Righteousness,  which  requires  the  punishment  of  the  guilty,  approves  of  the  forgiveness
of  the  penitent ;  so  that  if  the  action  of  God  did  not  change  from  wrath  to  mercy  with
the  change  of  the  guilty  person  to  penitence,  it  would  seem  as  though  the  nature  of
God  had  been  turned  aside  from  its  essential  righteousness.  Because  the  sun  is  stationary
it  appears  to  rise  and  set  as  the  earth  revolves ;  if  it  did  not  so  appear  it  must  be  moving
too ;  and  because  God  is  eternally  good  it  must  seem  to  us,  who  are  constantly  giving
occasion  for  differences  of  treatment  from  the  hand  of  God,  that  he  repents.  We  can
only  speak  of  God  after  the  manner  of  men ;  therefore  we  say  he  repents.

II.  God  may  be  weart  of  repenting.  Here  is  a  second  anthropomorphic  expression^
which  corresponds  to  a  great  and  terrible  fact.  1.  We  may  cease  to  repent  of  our  sin ;
then  God  will  cease  to  repent  of  his  wrath.  2.  We  may  sin  so  deeply  and  so  persistently
that  he  may  no  longer  find  it  possible  to  withhold  his  threatened  punishment.  God  is
long-suffering ;  he  waits  for  the  return  of  his  children.  Though  the  recompense  of
evil-doing  is  due,  it  is  deferred ;  God  spares  the  guilty  for  the  sake  of  the  intercession  of
the  righteous.  But  this  cannot  be  for  ever.  We  may  sin  away  the  grace  of  God.
Though  God's  mercy  endureth  for  ever  the  enjoyment  of  it  by  the  impenitent  cannot
be  perpetual.    Eternal  mercy  may  have  to  give  place  to  eternal  justice.

Conclusion.  Consider  (1)  the  wonderful  love  of  God  in  repeatedly  "repenting"  of
his  wrathful  intentions,  showing  that  he  does  not  desire  the  woe  of  his  children,  but
does  all  that  is  possible  to  avert  it ;  (2)  the  creat  sin  of  persisting  in  impenitence  after
God  has  shown  so  wonderful  a  love ;  and  (3)  the  danger  that  God  may  be  weary  with
repenting,  and  therefore  the  folly  and  presumption  of  relying  upon  our  present  immunity
for  future  safety.

Ver.  9. — Sunset  at  noon,  A  premature  ending  of  any  human  affairs  may  be  compared
to  sunset  at  noon.

I.  This  is  a  common  occurrence.  A  nation  suddenly  collapses;  a  sovereign  is
overthrown  in  the  height  of  his  power ;  a  life  is  cut  off  in  middle  age.  How  often  do
we  see  these  things  1


878        THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PBOPHET  JEBEMIAH.  [en.  xv.  1—21,


XL  This  ib  an  unnatural  occurrence.    No  such  eyent  could  occur  in  the  phyw
world.     Therefore  it  proves  that  the  humau  world  is  deranged.

in.  Thib  is  a  calamitous  occurrence.  National  modifications  may  be  both  peaceful
and  profitable.  Empires  are  slowly  welded  together,  colouies  gradually  assume  powers
and  rights  of  indepen<icnce,  internal  reforms  are  quietly  efiacing  the  old  order.  To  the
indiyidual  natural  death  in  old  age  is  painless.  It  is  the  yiolent  and  premature  end
that  causes  disaster.

lY.  This  is  an  occurrence  resulting  from  error  or  WR05Q>D0iNa.  We  cannot
WKf  that  the  cause  is  always  to  be  traced  immediately  to  the  BufBerers.  With
nsdons  it  may  be  generally  so,  but  not  with  individuals.  But  still  a  law  of  morality,
of  social  order  of  nature,  has  been  broken,  if  not  by  the  sufferers  still  by  some
agent.

y.  This  is  an  occurrence  that  may  come  as  an  act  of  DiynrK  judgkbht.  It
is  not  universally  so,  particularly  in  regard  to  individuals.  But  it  often  is  the  case.
ThuB  it  was  with  the  Jews,  with  Rome,  in  the  dark  a^es,  etc.  Therefore  let  us  beware
iA  presuming  on  the  apparent  distance  of  the  day  of  judgment.

Ver.  16. — The  prayer  of  the  persecuted,  I.  The  grounds  of  his  plea.  1.  A
eetrfeesor'a  fidelity,  Jeremiah  was  suffering  for  God's  sake.  This  plea  implies  (1)
innooeiu^e;  (2)  a  8[)ecial  cLiim  for  God^s  help.  He  who  can  urge  such  a  plea  is  the  heir
of  one  of  the  great  beatitudes  (Matt.  y.  10).  It  is  important  to  note  that  the  promise
of  Christ  rests,  not  on  the  mere  fact  of  persecution,  nor  even  on  unjust  persecution,  but
on  persecution  for  righteousness'  sake.  The  martyr  is  honoured,  not  for  his  suffering,
but  for  his  fidelity,  2.  T?ie  knowledge  of  Ood,  "  0  Lord,  thou  knowest."  When  men
misjudge,  God  knows  all.  They  who  are  cruelly  maligned  by  men  may  take  refuge  in
the  fact  that  God  knows  their  innocence.  It  is  better  to  have  his  approval  in  face  of  a
world's  scorn  and  hate,  than  the  flattery  of  the  world  for  false  merits  together  with  the
anger  of  the  all-seeing  God.  How  happy  to  be  in  such  a  case  that  we  can  fearlessly
appeal  to  God's  knowledge  of  our  fidelity  in  suffering  I  Too  often  trouble  is  consciously
deserved.  3.  The  long-suffering  of  Ood,  The  best  man  can  but  ask  for  (xod's  mercy.
Often  has  that  been  sought  in  tbe  past.  Yet  God  is  not  weary  of  hearing  his  helpless
children's  repeated  cries.     "  His  mercy  endureth  for  ever."

n.  The  objects  of  his  prayer.  1.  To  be  remembered  by  Ood,  It  is  something
to  know  that  God  thinks  of  us.  His  sympathy  is  a  great  consolation.  The  traveller
in  the  desert  is  not  utterly  alone  when  he  calls  to  mind  those  dear  ones  at  home,  in
whose  memory  he  is  constantly  cherished,  and  who  are  therefore  with  him  in  spirit,  while
the  unfortimate  man  who  is  buried  in  a  crowded  city,  neglected  and  forgotten  by  his  old
friends,  is  essentially  lonely  and  desolate.  God's  remembrance  of  us  is  the  prelude  to
his  active  help.  He  remembers  "  for  good."  If  Christ  remembered  the  dying  malefactor
when  he  came  into  his  kingdom,  that  fact  earned  with  it  the  assurance  that  the  poor
man  should  be  with  Christ  in  paradise  (Luke  xxiii.  42, 43).  2.  To  be  visited  by  Ood.
Our  consolation  is  not  in  a  pitying  though  absent  Gtxi,  but  in  an  abiding  presence  and
a  close  communion.  K  God  visits  he  will  come  in  power  to  save.  3.  To  oe  avenged  of
hi$  enemies.  This  was  a  natural  desire,  considering  that  (1)  the  prophet  was  in  the
midst  of  his  distresses, — it  is  easy  to  judge  coolly  from  the  outside  when  we  are  not
feeling  the  oppression  of  cruel  persecution ;  (2)  he  lived  in  Old  Testament  times ;  and
'3)  he  did  not  desire  to  execute  vengeance  himself  but  appealed  only  to  the  great
^udge.  For  us  Christians  the  right  prayer  is,  not  for  harm  to  come  upon  our  enemies,
bat  for  their  forgiveness,  as  Christ  and  Stephen  prayed.  Still,  we  may  rightly  seek  for
the  overthrow  of  wicked  powers,  the  frustration  of  iniquitous  schemes,  and  the  just
and  necessary  punishment  of  persistent  evil-doers.  4.  For  life  to  be  spared.  Jeremiah
does  not  ask  for  triumph,  for  comfort  and  ease,  for  liberation  from  his  arduous  lifelong
task,  but  simply  for  life.  The  love  of  life  is  natural.  Men  have  work  to  do,  a  mission
to  fulfil,  and  it  is  right  to  desire  to  have  time  to  complete  this.  Others  were  benefited
by  the  life  of  Jeremiah.  He  was  the  prophet  of  his  age,  and  a  voice  speaking  for  all
ages.  It  is  our  duty  to  seek  to  escape  persecution  if  we  can  do  so  honourably,  that  we
may  continue  to  serve  Grod  and  work  for  the  good  of  mankind  (Matt.  x.  23).  Courting
a  martyr's  death  is  practically  equivalent  to  committing  suicide  out  of  personal  vanity,
uid  much  the  same  thing  as  falling  under  the  second  of  Christ's  temptations.    Tet  if


J


CH.  XV.  1—21.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  879

mart3rrdom  is  unavoidable  witbout  unfaithfulness,  we  may  honour  GKxl  and  benefit  men
more  by  our  death  than  by  our  life.

Ver.  16. — The  words  of  Ood  found  and  eaten.  I.  Thk  wobds  op  Gk)D  bequibk  to
BE  FOUND.  They  are  not  emblazoned  on  the  face  of  the  world  that  the  most  careloH
may  not  miss  them.  They  are  hidden  treasures  to  be  dug  for,  pearls  of  great  price
to  be  sought  after.  Divine  truth  in  nature  is  only  discoverable  after  thoughtful
observation  and  reflection.  The  prophets  were  especially  commissioned  to  toil  in  deep
mines  of  spiritual  thought.  Revelation  was  bom  in  them  with  labour,  fasting,
watching,  praying.  But  the  words  of  GK)d  are  not  so  hidden  that  they  cannot  he
discovered  by  the  earnest  and  prayerful  seeker  after  truth.  He  that  seeks  8?wUl  find
(Matt.  vil.  8).  Many  honest,  earnest  men  pass  through  a  season  of  doubt,  but  few  such
remain  hopeless  sceptics  all  their  lives.  Of  those  who  never  find  the  light  probably
some  are  suffering  from  some  moral  or  intellectual  perversity  which  distorts  their  vision,
and  others  are  not  content  to  trust  to  the  measure  of  light  that  has  been  given  to  tb«m,
and  remain  restless  and  questioning  because  they  desire  satisfaction  in  a  direction
wherein  it  cannot  yet  be  afiforded.  But  so  long  as  all  such  men  do  not  convert  doubt
into  settled  unbelief,  and  are  not  satisfied  with  doubt,  we  may  be  assured  that  ultimately
the  Father  of  lights  will  dispel  the  darkness  that  now  troubles  their  souls.

II.  The  wobds  of  God  abe  pood.  Truth  is  food  for  the  soul.  Christ,  the  •*  Word
made  fiesh,"  is  the  "  Bread  of  life."  Truth  is  not  simply  revealed  to  amuse  our  curiosity ;
it  is  intended  to  feed  our  starving  souls.  The  object  of  relevation  is  practical  The
result  of  rightly  using  revelation  is  seen  in  an  increase  of  spiritual  vitality,  in  refresh-
ment, heightened  energy  and  growth  in  the  inner  life.  If  the  words  of  God  have  not
attained  this  end,  they  have  failed  of  their  object.  They  are  food  because  they  are  not
empty  breath  but  the  vehicles  of  vital  truths— of  spirit  and  life  (John  vi.  63).  God
is  in  his  own  words.  They  are  inspired  words.  With  the  spoken  words  we  receive  the
life-giving  Spirit.

III.  The  wobds  of  Gk)D  must  be  eaten  to  pbofit  us.  It  is  not  enough  that  they
are  spoken,  heard,  understood,  believed,  remembered,  admired ;  they  must  be  eaten.
1.  We  must  apply  them  to  ourselves.  The  starving  man  gains  nothing  by  looking  at
food  through  a  shop-window.  The  external  intellectual  study  of  truth  is  profitless  to
the  soul.  We  must  bring  it  to  bear  upon  our  own  circumstances — hear  the  voice  of
God  speaking  directly  to  us  and  in  regard  to  our  immediate  conduct.  2.  We  must
meditate  over  the  words  of  Gk>d.  Food  must  be  masticated  and  digested.  Truth  must
be  analyzed,  ideas  separated  and  compared, "  inwardly  digested,"  hidden  in  the  soul  and
quietly  thought  over.  Our  common  habit  is  to  treat  it  too  superficially  and  hastily.
3.  We  must  abstract  the  vital  ideas  from  the  dry  husk  of  words.  Words  are  not
profitable  so  long  as  they  are  regarded  from  the  outside  as  mere  lansua^e.  We  must
break  the  shell  and  get  at  the  kernel,  casting  aside  the  flesh  that  prontetn  nothing  and
assimilating  the  spirit  that  quickeneth.

IV.  The  words  of  God  bbikg  joy  when  they  abe  pound  and  eaten.  To  some
they  appear  to  be  dull  sayings,  to  some  stem  utterances  of  law,  to  some  harsh  messages
of  judgment.  This  is  because  they  are  not  properly  applied.  They  must  first  be
truly  found  and  eaten — applied,  meditated  on,  spiritually  assimilated.  Then  they  lead
to  joy,  for :  1.  All  truth  is  essentially  noble,  beautiful,  and  glorious.  2.  Even  the
darker  truth  is  wholesome  as  a  warning,  like  nauseous  medicine  that  cures  pain  and
restores  the  serenity  of  health.  3.  The  highest  truth  is  a  revelation  of  the  love  of  God
—a  gospel  of  good  will  to  men.

V.  The  secret  op  the  joy  and  pboptt  op  (Jod'b  wobdb  is  in  the  belatiof  of
THE  soul  to  God.  Jeremiah  is  called  by  the  Name  of  Jehovah,  the  Ood  of  hosts.  If
we  are  strangers  to  God,  his  words  will  seem  distant  and  of  little  interest.  We  prize
the  words  of  those  we  love.  God  speaks  helpful  and  comforting  words  to  his  own
reconciled  children.

Ver.  17. — The  sadness  and  solitude  of  a  prophet.  I.  A  pbofhet's  communion  with
God  does  not  preclude  earthly  sadness  and  solitude.  Jeremiah  was  not  plunged
into  grief  through  any  unfaithfulness ;  he  was  imder  no  shadow  in  regard  to  heavenly
communications ;  yet  he  was  sad  and  solitary.    1.  Consider  the  sadness.    While  w«  are


380  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [cii.  xv.  1— 21.


in  this  world  we  suffer  with  it  and  from  its  action  upon  us,  even  though  we  may  be
living  very  near  to  God.  Christ  was  a  man  of  sorrows;  he  nighed  and  wept  and  groaned
in  spirit.  It  is  not  sinful  to  grieve.  It  is  not  a  proof  of  unbelief.  Faith  should  engender
patience,  resignation,  peace,  and  hope ;  but  it  cannot  destroy  natural  sorrow.  It  would
not  be  pious  but  simply  unnatural  for  the  Christian  mother  not  to  be  wrung  with  grief
at  the  death  of  her  child.  2.  Consider  the  solitude.  A  good  man  will  not  be  wrapped
up  in  himself,  for  out  of  the  love  of  Gk>d  springs  naturally  the  love  of  man.  (Godliness
rouses  human  sympathy,  and  this  inclines  to  sociability.  So  Christ  was  remarkable  for
his  social  habits.  Yet  there  may  be  an  inevitable  solitude,  and  a  solitude  which  is
good  both  for  self  and  for  others.  The  more  a  good  man  sympathizes  for  his  brother
men  the  less  can  he  sympathize  with  them  when  their  conduct  is  wicked«

II.  A  pbophet's  gommukion  with  Ood  mat  lead  to  earthly  sadness  and
SOLITUDE.  Jeremiah  was  sad  and  solitary  because  he  was  filled  with  Divine  indignation.
His  wa9  no  atrabiliar  moroseness,  no  theatrical  Byronic  self-pity.  The  prophet's  sorrow
and  solitude  were  reflections  of  the  grief  of  Gk)d  for  his  people's  sin  and  the  aloofness
of  GK)d  produced  by  their  wanderings  from  fidelity.  1.  A  prophet's  communion  with
Gkxl  will  induce  sorrow  /or  the  worliTs  sin  and  wretchedness.  Jeremiah  was  a  young
man.  The  scenes  of  mirth  which  he  shunned  may  have  been  pure,  innocent,  and
naturally  attractive ;  but  his  vision  of  the  thought  and  heart  of  God  made  him  look
behind  this  superficial  joy  to  the  wretchedness  it  sought  to  cover,  and  then  it  seemed
but  a  mockery  to  him.  2.  This  will  lead  to  a  separation  from  tJie  world.  It  will  cause
a  perpetual  separation  from  the  spirit  of  the  world  as  far  as  that  is  earthly  and  sensual,
and  at  times  a  complete  withdrawal  to  solitude.  The  Christian  is  to  live  in  the
world  as  its  salt,  its  light,  its  leaven  of  righteousness,  and  not  to  flee  to  the  wilderness,
selfishly  cultivating  his  own  soul  for  heaven,  while  he  leaves  his  task  undone  and  his
fellow-men  in  hopeless  sin  and  ruin.  But  he  will  meet  with  occasions  for  solitude  and
scenes  from  which  he  must  withdraw  himself,  and  sometimes  feel  an  inner  sense  of
loneliness  as  he  moves  among  the  gay  crowds,  since  he  is  a  pilgrim  and  stranger,  a
citizen  of  another  country,  possessed  by  thoughts  and  swayed  bv  motives  quite  outside
those  of  worldly  life.  Thus  Christ,  in  character  and  outward  nabit  the  most  sociid  of
men,  was  in  inner  life  and  iu  secret  thought  the  most  lonely.  The  Christian  has  a  life
which  is  "hid  with  Christ  in  God"  (Col.  iii.  3).

Ver.  19. — A  wide  recognition  of  the  good  without  compromise  with  the  evil.  Jeremiah
is  bidden  to  return  from  his  solitude  to  his  mission  among  his  people,  when  he  will  be
owned  and  encouraged  by  Qod  if  he  will  see  the  goodness  that  still  lingers  among  them,
and  yet  not  enter  into  any  imrighteous  compromise  with  the  wicked  ways  of  the  mul-
titude of  them.

I.  We  should  exercise  a  wide  recoonition  of  the  good  in  all  things — take  out
the  precious  from  the  vile.  The  gold-washer  may  find  but  a  grain  of  gold  in  a  ton  of
gravel ;  yet  he  will  search  diligently  for  it,  and  treasure  it  when  he  finds  it.  Care-
lessness and  uncharitableness  lead  to  an  unjust,  wholesale  repudiation  of  what  is  no
doubt  largely  corrupt.  But  it  is  not  right  to  judge  of  things  tnus  *'  in  the  lump."  1.
Apply  the  principle  to  persons.  Because  ninety-nine  men  out  of  a  company  of  a
hundred  are  guilty,  it  is  grossly  iniquitous  to  condemn  the  whole  hundred — ^the  one
innocent  man  with  the  rest.  Jeremiah  was  directed  to  look  out  for  the  pious  remnant
among  the  mass  of  the  unfaithful  people.  We  are  too  ready  to  ignore  the  existence  of
the  seven  thousand  who  have  not  l)owed  the  knee  to  Baal.  Goodness  ^ould  be  recog-
nized in  bad  society,  in  heathen  nations,  in  corrupt  Christian  communities,  in  question-
able avocations.  We  should  beware  of  sweeping  condemnations  of  a  whole  class ;  e^.  of
actors,  of  publicans,  etc.  2.  Apply  the  principle  to  religious  systems.  Few  are  wholly
good ;  but  few  are  wholly  bad.  The  dross  and  precious  metal  are  mixed,  though  in
varyiDg  degrees,  in  all  of  them.  The  various  Church  systems  of  Christendom  partake
of  this  mixed  character.  Most  Churches  have  some  peculiarly  precious  ideas  to  which
it  seems  to  be  their  mission  each  severally  to  testify.  It  is  well  if  we  have  the  insight
to  seize  on  these,  and  the  charity  to  begrudee  none  of  their  value  because  of  the  error,
the  superstition,  or  the  perversion  wiUi  which  they  may  be  associated.  Thus,  not  by  an
amorphous  eclecticism  which  can  minister  to  no  deep,  organic  unity  of  life,  but  by  a
genume  assimilating  power,  we  should  learn  to  gather  from  all  sources  the  good  of


CH.  XV.  1—21.]  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.        381


spiritual  thought.  The  same  process  should  be  observed  in  dealinc;  with  non-ChristiaD
religions.  Beneath  a  vast  heap  of  the  vile  a  few  glittering  gems  of  precious  merit  may
be  found  in  the  Talmud,  and  also  in  the  Zend-Avesta,  in  the  Koran,  in  the  religious
writings  of  Greece,  India,  China,  etc,  3.  Apply  the  principle  to  life  gtntraXly,  Take
the  precious  from  the  vile  in  literature,  in  conversation,  in  social  usage,  in  recreation,  in
politics.  Discriminate  in  all  these  things.  Do  not  reject  the  whole  of  any  of  them,  even
if  the  larger  part  may  be  bad,  but  select  the  pure  and  good  and  reject  the  evil.

II.  We  should  maintain  a  stout  refusal  to  compromise  with  the  evil  in  any-
thing. Jeremiah  is  not  to  sacrifice  principle  for  the  sake  of  any  advantage.  He  is  not
to  embrace  the  vile  for  the  sake  of  the  precious,  but  to  separate  the  two.  He  is  not  to
yield  his  position  of  truth  and  right  for  the  sake  of  winoing  the  friendship  of  his
neighbours,  but  patiently  to  expect  them  to  come  over  to  him.  It  is  the  very  love  of
truth  that  should  make  us  welcome  it  in  the  most  unlikely  quarters ;  but  if  we  go  on  to
receive  the  error  that  is  closely  associated  with  it,  we  at  once  become  unfaithful  to  the
very  motive  of  our  search.  The  silver  is  useless  so  long  as  the  dross  is  preserved  with
it.  The  largest  charity  cannot  sanction  any  compromise  with  evil.  Compromise
belongs  to  the  region  of  expediency,  not  to  that  of  truth  and  righteousness.  It  is  a
mistake  to  conciliate  our  enemies  by  jrielding  up  our  fortress.  If  we  abandon  the
essential  mysteries  of  Christianity  for  the  sake  of  winning  over  our  opponents,  we  are
really  only  giving  them  the  victory.  Should  we  come  to  terms,  this  is  at  best  on
their  grounds,  and  the  peace  we  ratify  is  no  record  of  a  victory  for  Christ,  In  the
end  the  policy  of  compromise  fails.  It  indicates  weakness  and  leaves  no  decided
position  about  which  to  rally.  We  must  dare  to  be  firm  to  our  principles,  and  wait
patiently  till  the  world  comes  round  to  them.  This  was  how  Christ  actcMl.  If  we
eagerly  recognize  the  good  in  everything  and  earnestly  desire  to  take  forth  the  precious
from  the  vile,  we  shall  find  our  uncompromising  fidelity  to  principle  resting  on  a  firmer
and  safer  basis  than  if  we  are  narrowly  jealous  of  all  good  outside  our  own  little  circle
of  notions  and  habits.

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Ver.  1.— jSiw«/or  whick  saintly  intercession, cannot  avail,  Moses  is  spoken  of  as  an
intercessor  in  Exod.  xvii.  11 ;  xxxii.  11 ;  Numb.  xiv.  13 ;  Ps.  cvi.  23 :  Samuel  in  1  Sam.
vii.  8 ;  viii.  6  ;  xii.  16—23 ;  xv.  11 ;  Ps.  xcix.  6.  Noah,  Daniel,  and  Job  are  mentioned
similarly  (Ezek.  xiv.  14).  It  is,  then,  in  their  special  intercessory  character  that  these
fathers  are  referred  to.  At  the  time  when  their  intercessions  took  place  they  were  the
leaders  and  representatives  of  Israel,  and  because  of  their  saintliness  they  had  favour
with  God.  But  the  sins  for  which  Judah  and  Jerusalem  are  now  to  be  punished  are
by  this  reference  declared  of  a  more  heinous  description  than  any  that  took  place  in
those  days.  It  is  a  mere  supposition  which  is  made,  evidently  no  description  of  the
normal  relation  of  glorified  saints  to  Jehovah,  but  simply  a  hypothetical  statement  as
to  what  they,  in  their  earthly  capacity,  would  have  failed  to  do.

I.  The  intercessions  of  righteous  men  avail  much.  Many  a  time  in  the  wilder-
ness had  Moses  stayed  the  impending  wrath  of  God  because  of  murmuring  and  disobe-
dience ;  and  this  not  simply  because  he  was  the  civil  leader  of  the  people,  but  through
his  own  saintly,  high-priestly  character.  This  is  a  principle  of  God's  dealings  with
men.  **  The  efiectual  fervent  prayer  of  a  righteous  man  availeth  much ; "  and  one  of
the  chief  occupations  of  the  Church  is  represented  as  praying  for  the  salvation  of  l^e
world  and  the  coming  of  the  kingdom  of  God.  It  is  because  such  men  represent  the
future  hope  of  the  race,  being  a  kind  of  firstfruits  of  them  that  shall  be  saved,  that
they  have  this  power.  In  themselves  too,  because  of  what  they  are,  they  are  pieasing
to  God,  who  deUghts  in  their  prayers  and  praises.  There  is  something  very  strikmg
and  touching  in  this  spectacle  of  one  standing  for  many,  and  we  have  to  think  of  how
<Treat  has  been  the  blessing  which  has  been  thus  secured  to  the  world  through  its
saints.  But  they  all  appear  trifling  compared  with  that  which  Christ  has  secured
through  the  intercession  of  his  prayers,  obedience,  and  sacrifice.  In  his  case  (what
could  scarcely  be  said  of  any  saint)  his  intercession  has  a  solid  objective  worth  because
of  what  it  is  in  itself,  and  avails  as  a  consideration  with  God  for  the  cleansing  of  all
who  identify  themselves  with  him  through  faith.


382        THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,  [ch.  zy.  1-^1.


n.  But  thebb  abk  cokditiobs  whioh  dsbtbot  the  efficact  of  such  nrnsRCBBsioH.
Their  influence  is  but  partial  and  imperfect,  depending  as  it  does  upon  their  own
inadequate  fulfilment  of  the  Law  and  will  of  God.  If  it  were  a  question  of  strict
account,  they  themselves  would  not  be  able  to  stand  in  his  presence.  It  is  of  his
grace  that,  even  for  a  moment,  they  may  be  said  to  have  iDfluence  for  others.  And  it
may  be  sidd  that  their  intercession  is  but  provisional,  and,. if  not  followed  up  by  the
obedience  of  tiiose  for  whom  they  pray,  it  will  be  followed  with  the  more  condign  punish-
moit  upon  the  transgressors.  It  is  a  great  tribute  to  the  vicarious  power  posi^ible  to
saints  that  even  the  most  eminent  of  toem  should  be  quoted  in  such  a  connection.  But
it  shows  how  inadequate  such  a  mediatorship  would  be  for  the  general  sin  of  man.  We
may  do  much,  each  of  us,  to  avert  just  judgments,  to  secure  opportunities  of  salvation,
uid  to  bring  the  grace  of  Ood  to  bear  upon  the  hearts  of  others ;  but  we  cannot  save
them  by  any  communication  of  our  own  acceptance  with  God  to  them.  They  must
stand  or  fall  according  to  their  own  relation  to  the  will  of  God  and  the  person  of  his
Son.  And  there  are  degrees  of  guilt  which  far  surpass  any  intercession  of  this  kind.
The  sin  of  unbelief  especially,  if  it  be  unrepented  of,  will  prevent  any  benefit  being
received.  The  permanent  position  of  our  souls  with  respect  to  Divine  grace  will
depend,  therefore,  upon  their  own  action  or  belief.  Even  Christ  cannot  save  if  we  do
not  believe  in  his  Name  and  obey  him. — M.

Ter.  10. — The  offence  of  faith/td  preaching.  That  the  preaching  of  the  gospel
ahoold  stir  up  the  evil  passions  of  men  would  at  first  appear  strange.  It  is  the  declara-
tion of  good  news  to  them  that  are  perishing,  and  an  effort  to  restore  men  to  happiness
and  peace.  But  that  it  has  been  accompanied  with  such  manifestations  of  ill  will  from
the  beginning  is  sufficiently  well  known.  The  preaching  of  the  cross  has  in  every  age
been  resisted  and  resented  by  the  world.  It  is  '*  to  the  Jews  a  stumbling-block,  and  to
the  Greeks  foolishness ;  but  to  them  which  are  called,  both  Jews  and  Chreeks,  Christ
the  power  of  God,  and  the  wisdom  of  God  "  (1  Cor.  i.  23).

I.  With  what  the  faithful  preacher  compares  himself.  Jeremiah  says  that  ho
might  have  been  a  brawler,  a  dishonest  debtor,  or  a  usurer  to  have  stirred  up  the  strife
and  hatred  which  he  experienced.  As  has  been  said,  lending  and  borrowing  cause  most
lawsuits.  " '  I  have  not  lent  nor  borrowed.'  My  dear  Jeremiah  I  Thou  mightest  have
done  that ;  that  is  according  to  the  custom  of  the  country ;  there  would  be  no  such
noise  about  that "  (Zinzendorf).  Elijah  was  reproached  by  Ahab,  '*  Art  thou  he  that
troubleth  Israel?"  (1  Kings  xiz.  17).  St.  Paul  was  persecuted.  Even  Christ  himself
was  accused  of  stirring  up  sedition,  and  the  preaching  of  the  Word  has  often  been
accompanied  by  demonstrations  of  violence.

n.  To  what  this  mat  be  attrxbuted.  It  is  due  chiefly  to  the  dislike  of  men  to
the  truth  itself,  in  whatever  shape  presented.  The  natural  heart  is  enmity  against  God
and  his  Word.  Care  must  be  taken  to  distinguish  between  accidental  and  essential
povocations  of  this  spirit.  The  manner  of  the  preacher  should  never  be  such  as  of
itself  to  dispose  men  unfavourably  towards  his  message.  The  greatest  care  ought  to  be
taken  to  conciliate  and  to  win.  But  the  original  hatred  of  men  to  truth  mnst  not  be
ignored.  It  exists,  and  will  have  to  be  reckoned  with  in  one  form  or  another.  One
man  will  object  to  it  in  toto ;  another  to  the  degree  of  obedience  which  it  exacts.  With
some  the  idea  will  be  pleasing  but  the  practice  irksome.  If  men  hated  Christ,  we  need
not  suppose  that  they  will  be  more  amiable  towards  us  if  we  are  faithful.

m.  60NSOLATIOK8.  These  troubles  need  not  afflict  us  if  we  remember,  with  respect
to  our  hearers,  that  it  is  not  theirs  but  them  we  desire.  The  worst  enemies  have  been
reconciled  and  the  fiercest  natures  subdued  by  the  power  of  the  Word.  It  is  well  too
in  the  midst  of  sufifering  to  have  the  testimony  of  a  good  conscience.  To  him  also
who  is  faithful  in  the  midst  of  opposition  and  hatred  is  that  beatitude.  Matt  v.  11.
But  perhaps  the  strongest  consolation  of  all  is  in  the  fellowship  of  him  for  whose  sake
the  opposition  is  experienced. — M.

Ver.  15. — ^"  Thou  knowed  it*'  There  is  One  to  whom  the  true  prophet  and  saint  mnst
stand  or  fall.  He  is  anxious,  therefore,  for  his  approval.  He  labours  ever  as  in  the
great  Taskmaster's  eye.  "  Thou  God  seest  me,"  which  is  the  terror  of  the  sinner,  is  the
chief  reward  and  comfort  of  the  saint.    The  prophet  here  consoles  himself—


CH.  XV.  1—21.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  388

L  Bt  an  appeal  to  the  judgment  of  Ood.  In  this  connection  it  is  as  if  conscience
itself  had  been  invoked.  And  yet,  better  still,  if  conscience  should  vacillate  God  would
remain  the  same.  In  this  way  it  is  well  for  the  best  of  men  to  test  their  motives  by
continual  reference  to  Qod,    There  is  no  better  way  of  self-examination.

II.  Bt  a  beference  to  the  syhpatht  of  God.  The  mere  fact  that  the  all-knowing
One  was  constantly  regarding  his  sufferings  for  his  sake,  that  he  had  put  his  tears  in
his  bottle,  and  that  he  was  able  to  appreciate  his  motives,  was  a  comfort  to  the  prophet.
If  possible,  this  source  of  consolation  is  deepened  and  enlarged  by  the  greater  nearness
of  God  in  Christ.  The  fellow-feeling  of  our  great  High  Priest  and  Elder  Brother  is  real
and  can  be  depended  upon  from  moment  to  moment.  It  is  a  well  of  salvation  from
which  we  can  draw  inexhaustible  supplies.

IIL  By  committino  it  to  the  Divine  besponsibilitt.  It  was  in  (Jod's  hands
because  it  was  in  God's  knowledge.  It  was  not  for  the  prophet  to  trouble  himself  as  to
means  of  retaliation.  He  could  commit  his  cause  to  his  Father.  The  wider  issues  of  it,
nay,  even  its  mightiest  results,  were  beyond  his  own  power.  What  he  had  to  do  was  to
be  faithful  and  trusting  and  diligent. — M.

Ver.  IQ.-^Ood's  words  a  heartfelt  joy.  In  the  midst  of  the  prophet's  sorrow  this
passage  occurs  as  a  relieving  feature — a  memory  of  spiritual  joy.  At  the  same  time  it
is  recalled  as  a  consideration  that  will  weigh  with  him  to  whom  he  addresses  himself.
It  defines  his  entire  relation  to  God  and  to  Israel,  and  describes  his  claim.

I.  Thb  words  of  God  test  and  exhibit  the  inwabd  loyalty  of  the  saint.  It  is
not  merely  that  a  certain  feeling  has  been  excited  in  the  mind,  but  that  a  welcome  has
been  given  to  GKxi's  revelation.  A  profound  difference  is  thereby  instituted  between
the  prophet  and  those  who  were  opposed  to  him.  As  the  psalmist  cries,  *'  Thy  word
have  I  hid  in  my  heart,"  in  proof  of  his  earnestness  and  his  love  of  truth,  so  the  prophet
would  commend  himself  to  God  by  the  attitude  he  had  assumed  to  the  message  when
it  was  revealed  to  him.  It  is  as  if  he  had  said,  '*  I  have  never  resisted  thy  Word,  but
ever  held  myself  ready  to  utter  and  obey  it."  The  test  which  they  apply  to  the
spiritual  nature  is  full  of  dread  to  the  unworthy ;  but  to  those  whose  hearts  are  Hght
with  God  it  is  a  satisfaction  and  a  source  of  confidence.  "  The  thoughts  and  intents  of
the  heart "  thereby  disclosed  are  seen  to  be  right  and  good.

II.  They  refresh  and  stbenothen  him  fob  suffebikq  and  duty.  It  is  as  if  the
prophet  were  drawing  comfort  from  recollection  because  his  present  circumstances  arc
so  troublous.  But  many  a  time  the  Word  of  God  comes  in  a  time  of  perplexity  and
darkness,  bringing  with  it  comforting  light  It  is  greedily  welcomed  at  such  seasons
and  is  devoured  as  by  one  who  has  long  fasted.  It  penetrates  thereby  more  deeply  into
the  spiritual  nature  and  more  radically  influences  the  springs  and  motives  of  conduct.
It  comes  as  a  distinctly  supernatural  aid  and  makes  men  masters  of  what  had  previously
overpowered  them.

III.  They  bind  him  mobe  closely  to  theib  Authob.  The  nature  which  has  been
so  affected  by  the  words  of  God  cannot  be  nor  regard  itself  as  in  the  same  position  with
others.  Its  whole  character  and  destiny  are  altered.  The  life  is  leavened  by  that  which
supports  and  nourishes  it.  The  indwelling  Word  is  a  consecrating  influence  and  with-
draws men  from  the  pursuits  and  fellowship  of  the  world.  In  this  way  the  saint  becomes
identified  with  his  Lord ;  a  child  of  grace ;  a  worker  in  the  same  great  cause ;  a  subject
of  like  hatred  and  opposition,  and  an  heir  of  the  same  kingdom.  By  producing  the
character  of  holiness  they  inscribe  the  Divine  Name  upon  the  heart,  and  link  the  life
and  destiny  of  the  saint  with  the  cause  of  God. — ^M.

Vers.  19 — ^21. — The  preacher's  weakness  and  strength,  I.  Hitman  motives  often
lead  him  abide  fbom  the  path  of  duty,  eto.  The  prophet  is  a  man  like  other  men
and  subject  to  the  same  passions.  It  is  difficult  for  him  to  maintain  the  attitude  of
continual  spiritual  loyalty.  Flesh  and  blood  will  fail  and  he  will  fall  into  temptations
peculiar  to  his  office.  Of  these  he  must  be  especially  jealous,  and  a  stricter  standard  of
holiness  should  govern  his  conduct.  Unfaithfulness  in  such  a  position  will  produce  an
exaggerated  effect  upon  those  whom  he  influences.  His  influence  itself  will  cease  to  be
purely  spiritual,  his  love  less  certain,  and  his  conduct  less  irreproachable.  Deflection
like  this  should  be  at  once  corrected,  and  he  who  '*  tries  the  reins  "  is  especially  watch-


384  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  xv.  1— 21.

ful  over  those  who  have  to  deliver  his  message  and  represent  his  cause.    "  If  thou
return."    How  instant  and  yet  how  gentle  the  reproof !

II.  Repentant  FiDELrrY  will  be  rewarded  with  usefulness  and  strength.  1 .
Mediatorship — to  "  stand  hefore  me."  2.  Infallibility — "  As  my  mouth."  3.  Irresist-
ible power — a  "  brazen  wall ; "  "  but  not  prevail  over  thee."  4.  The  presence  and  pi-o-
tectum  of  CM. — ^M.

Vers.  1 — ^9. — Fearftd  aspects  of  the  Divine  character.  These  verses  and  this  whole
discourse  reveal  to  us  an  implacable  Gk>d.  He  will  not  turn  away  from  his  wrath  nor
be  moved :  1.  By  the  spectacle  of  misery  presented  (ch.  xiv.).  2.  By  the  remembrance
of  former  love  (ch.  xiv.  8).  3.  By  the  earnest  prayers  of  his  faithful  servant  (ver.  \\
4.  By  the  prospect  of  more  terrible  miseries  yet  to  come  (ch.  xiv.  17 — ^xv.  9).
Therefore—

I.  Inquire.  Why  is  God  thus  ?  The  answer  is,  he  will  not  change,  because  the
sinner  will  not.    "  To  the  froward  he  will  ever  show  himself  froward."

II.  Learn.  That  while  God's  mercy  is  infinite  to  those  who  turn  to  him,  for  those
who  refuse  there  is  no  mercy  at  all. — C.

Ver.  1. — Hie  limits  of  intercessory  prayer,  "  Though  Moses  and  Samuel,"  etc.
1.  This  verse  seems  at  first  sight  to  be  in  contradiction  to  the  many  Scriptures  which
assure  us  that  the  **  effectual  fervent  prayers  of  righteous  men  avail  much.  The  Bible
teems  with  promises  that  God  will  hear  when  we  call  upon  him.  But  here  is  a  decided
declaration  that^  let  even  the  holiest  and  the  most  eminent  for  their  intercessions  stand
before  God  in  prayer,  they  should  not  avail  to  secure  what  was  denied.  2.  And  were
there  only  this  verse,  the  difficulty  would  not  be  so  great.  But  experience  is  con-
tinually supplying  lis  with  fresh  instances  in  which  blessings  earnestly  sought  have
yet  been  denied.  3.  And  this  also  in  regard  to  spiritual  things.  Were  it  only  tem-
poral blessings  God  refused  to  give  although  we  asked  him  for  them,  we  could  readily
understand  that,  though  they  seemed  so  good  in  our  eyes,  in  his  they  might  bo  seen  to
be  hurtful.  We  know  that  in  such  things  we  do  not  know  what  is  best.  But  the
refusal  of  prayer  is  found  in  regard  to  things  that  we  know  are  good  and  well  pleasing
to  God — ^in  regard  to  things  spiritual  and  eternal,  e,g,  in  the  prayers  of  parents  for  the
conversion  of  their  children,  of  teachers  and  pastors  for  those  committed  to  their
charee.  4.  Hence  from  this  verse  and  from  such  experience  of  rejected  prayer,  the  sad
conclusion  has  been  drawn  that,  in  spite  of  the  most  earnest  intercession,  the  souls  we
pray  for  may  be  lost,  our  intercession  be  of  no  avul.  For  does  it  not  say  even  to  Jeremiah,
who  himself  was  an  eminent  intercessor  with  God,  that  there  were  yet  greater  than  he
—such  as  Moses  and  Samuel — but  that  if  even  they,  etc.  (cf.  references  for  instances  of
their  intercession).  5.  And  some  have  tried  to  escape  the  difficulty  by  drawing  a
sharp  contrast  between  the  intercession  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  that  of  these
men  of  Gbd.  They  have  said,  had  Jesus  interceded,  it  would  have  been  otherwise.
But  this  is  not  true,  for  our  Lord  would  not  have  interceded  as  Jeremiah  did.  He  aJso
foretold  great  calamities  as  overhanging  Jerusalem  and  her  people,  but  we  have  no
record  of  his  ever  having  prayed  that  they  might  not  come.  He  sought  unceasingly
their  eternal  salvation,  but  he  did  not  pray  against  the  destruction  of  (Jerusalem.  It  is
not  permissible,  therefore,  to  account  for  the  failure  of  such  intercession  as  that  of
Jeremiah,  on  the  ground  that  it  is  only  human  intercession  and  not  that  of  the  Son  of
Grod.  6.  But  before  we  certainly  conclude  that  intercession  for  the  eternal  spiritual
well-being  of  others  may  after  all  bo  in  vain,  though  the  intercession  have  been  such
as  that  of  the  great  servants  of  God  here  spoken  of,  who  touched  the  utmost  limits  of
intercessory  prayer,  let  us  note  (1)  That  it  was  not  for  spiritual  blessings  that  Jeremiah
was  interceding.  His  piteous  entreaties  were  "  concerning  the  dearth "  (ch.  xiv.  1),
that  that  might  be  removed.  It  was  strictly  a  prayer  for  temporal  mercies  and  deli-
verances. It  is,  therefore,  unjust  to  conclude  that  intercession  tor  things  spiritual  and
eternal  may  fail  because,  as  we  well  know,  it  may  fail  for  things  material  and  temporal.
Note  also  (2)  That  the  utmost  limits  of  intercession  had  been  rtached.  The  prophet
himself  had  offiered  no  scant  or  insincere  petition,  and  the  intercession  of  these  great
saints  of  God  spoken  of  was,  we  know,  of  the  mightiest  order.  Before,  then,  we  con-
clude that  such  intercession  in  regard  to  spiritual  things  can  be  of  no  avail,  let  us  be


CH.  XV.  1—21.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  385


sure  that  such  intercession  has  been  tried.  Is  our  own  such  ?  There  may  be  cus-
tomary and  too  often  formal  prayers  offered  by  parents,  pastors,  teachers,  for  the  spiritual
good  of  those  about  them.  But  can  we  say  that  such  prayers  are  mighty  intercessions,
like  those  of  Moses  and  Samuel  ?  If  we  know  they  have  not  been  such,  let  us  pause
before  we  conclude  that  such  intercession  avails  not.  But  in  order  to  ascertain  if  our
intercession  has  been  real,  let  us  note  if  we  are  in]  earnest  about  our  own  soul's  salva-
tion. If  we  care  not  for  our  own  acceptance  before  GK)d,  how  can  we  be  solicitous  for
that  of  others  ?  And  are  our  prayers  followed  up  by  practical  effort  in  the  direction  of
our  prayers  ?  Do  they  lead  us  to  see  what  can  be  done  to  secure  the  ends  for  which  we
pray  ?  Or  are  they  substitutes  for  such  endeavour  ?  Hence  it  may  very  often  be  that
we  ask  and  have  not,  because  we  ask  amiss.  We  do  not  intercede  in  that  real,  believ-
ing, earnest  way  which  alone  has  a  right  to  expect  the  blessing  it  seeks.  It  is  bv  no
means  intercession  such  as  that  of  Moses  and  Samuel.  7.  But  if  intercession  nave
been  such  as  theirs,  then,  though  answer  may  be  delayed,  we  are  to  believe  that  it  will
yet  come.  Delay  is  not  denial.  8.  Neither  this  verse  nor  experience  sets  aside  the
many  promises  which  encourage  such  intercession.  9.  And  experience  proves  its  worth.
The  Church  of  to-day  is  in  the  main  the  product  of  the  intercession  of  the  Church
that  has  passed  into  the  heavens.  Instead  of  the  fathers  have  risen  up  the  children.
10.  Learn,  therefore,  (1)  if  Gkxi  refuse  us  temporal  blessings,  it  is  because  he  knows
better  than  we  do  wnat  is  best ;  (*2)  how  best  to  deal  with  transgressors  God  alone
knows,  and  what  his  wisdom  determines  none  may  set  aside ;  ^3)  that  intercession  for
souls  is  well  pleasing  to  Ood  and  full  of  hope,  since  the  belovea  of  God  have  been  ever
distinguished  for  such  intercession,  and,  above  all,  Qtxl's  well-beloved  Son. — C.

Ver.  1. —  Great  intercessors.  I.  Such  are  mentioned  here.  Moses,  Samuel,  etc.
(cf.  Exod.  xvii.  11 ;  xxxii.  11 ;  Numb.  xiv.  13 ;  Ps.  cvi.  23;  1  Sam.  vii.  8;  viii.  6 ;  xii.
16—23  ;  XV.  11 ;  Ps.  xc.  6 ;  Ecclus.  xlvi.  6).  Noah,  Daniel,  and  Job  are  mentioned  in
similar  way  (Ezek.  xiv.  14),  and  Jeremiah  himself  (2  Mace.  xv.  14).  And  there
have  been  such  oftentimes  granted  to  nations,  Churches,  families  (cf.  Mary  Queen  of
Scots  saying  that  she  feared  John  Knox's  prayers  more  than  all  her  enemies).  And  who
has  not  known  such  intercessors  in  connection  with  Christian  Churches — men  and
women  whose  prayers  were  amongst  the  main  supports  of  the  life,  joy,  and  strength  of
those  for  whom  they  were  offered  ?

II.  Theib  value  is  unspeakable.  Cf.  Abraham  praying  for  Sodom.  Though  the
cities  of  the  plain  were  destroyed,  yet  what  an  amount  of  sin  God  was  ready  to  pardon
in  answer  to  his  prayer,  if  but  the  conditions  which  should  have  been  so  easy  to  fulfil
had  been  forthcoming  I  And  "  the  few  names  even  in  Sardis "  (Rev.  ii.),  who  can
doubt  that  they,  as  all  such  do,  warded  off  for  long  periods  those  visitations  of  God's
anger  which  otherwise  would  have  come  upon  that  Church  ?  And  it  is  not  only  the  evils
from  which  they  defend  a  Church,  but  the  positive  good  they  confer.  Such  power  with
God  is  ever  accompanied  by  a  consistency  and  sanctity  of  character  which  is  blessedly
attractive,  inspiring,  contagious ;  and  as  a  magnet  they  gather  round  them  a  band
of  kindred  souls,  like  as  our  Lord  gathered  his  disciples  round  himself.  And  thus  a
hallowed  influence  is  sent  throughout  a  whole  community.

III.  Their  qualifications.  1.  Sympathy  with  God,  They  must  see  sin  as  God
sees  it — as  utterly  hateful  and  wrong.  There  must  be  no  weak  condoning  of  it  or  any
failure  to  behold  it  in  its  true  character.  If  we  ask  God  to  forgive  sin,  indeed,  if  we
seek  forgiveness  for  wrong  done  from  a  fellow-man,  are  we  likely  to  be  acceptable  in
our  request  if  we  regard  him  who  has  been  wronged  as  not  having  much  to  complain
of  after  all  ?  No ;  he  who  would  wish  God  to  forgive  sin  must  see  it  as  God  sees  it,  and
consent  to  his  judgment  concerning  it.  2.  Deep  love /or  those  for  whom  he  intercedes.
And  this  cannot  be  created  in  a  moment.  It  must  be  the  result  of  much  thought,
labour,  and  pains  spent  upon  them.  When  we  have  thus  given  ourselves  to  them,  we
are  sure  to  love  them.  Places,  persons,  things,  most  unattractive  to  others  are  deeply
loved  by  those  who  have  devoted  themselves  to  them.  And  all  great  intercessors
have  been  such,  and  must  be  such  as  become  so,  not  on  the  spur  of  the  moment  or
from  any  mere  movement  of  pity,  but  as  the  result  of  long  and  loving  labour  lavished
for  their  good.  3.  Freedom  from  the  guilt  of  the  transgression^  the  pardon  of  which  is
sought.    Under  the  Old  Testament  the  priest  first  offered  atonement  for  himself  and

JEREMIAH.  2  c


386  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [cii.  xv.  1—21.


then  for  the  sins  of  the  people.  Not  until  he  was  purged  from  sin  himself  could  ho
intercede  for  others.  The  intercessor  must  be  one  untainted  with  the  guilt  he  prays  to
be  removed.  The  prayer  of  the  wicked  can  never  aid.  4.  Experimental  knowledge
both  of  the  hlemngs  which  he  craves  and  of  the  sorrows  a/nd  sufferings  which  he  intei'
cedes  against.  Of  our  Saviour,  the  great  Intercessor,  it  is  said,  "  Ho  himself  took  our
infirmities,  and  bare  our  diseases."  He  was  made  '*  in  all  points  like  unto  his  brethren."
The  joy  of  (Jod's  love  and  also,  by  holy  sympathy,  the  bitterness  of  the  dregs  of  that
cup  of  which  the  wicked  have  to  drink — were  alike  known  to  him.  Thus,  though  he
knew  no  sin,  he  was  made  sin  for  us.  It  was  to  him  as  if  all  the  sin  of  those  he  so
loved  were  his  own,  so  intensely  did  its  shame,  its  misery,  its  guilt,  fill  up  his  soul.
And  with  human  intercessors  there  must  be  like  experience.  5.  Faith  in  Ood,  which
firmly  holds  to  the  belief  that  his  love  for  the  sinner  is  deeper  than  his  hatred  of  the
sin.  Unless  we  believe  this  we  can  have  no  hope  in  interceding  either  for  ourselves  or
for  others.    Faith  in  the  infinitude  of  the  love  of  God  is  cscential.

IV.  Theib  gbbat  Exemplab — the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Sec  how  all  the  qualifications
above  named  combine  in  him.

Conclusion.  1.  To  the  sorrowful  and  sinful.  You  need  a  great  intercessor.  You
have  one  in  Christ.  "  Give  him,  my  soul,  thy  cause  to  plead."  2.  To  the  believer  in
Christ.  Seek  to  become  as  Moses  and  Samuel,  and,  above  all,  as  our  Lord—mighty  in
intercession, — C.

Ver.  4. — The  sins  of  the  fathers  visited  upon  the  children.  This  verse  contains  an
explicit  declaration  that  such  is  God's  rule.  The  calamities  about  to  fall  on  Judah  and
Jerusalem  were  '*  because  of  Manasseh  the  son  of,"  etc.  No  doubt  the  sins  of  Manasseh
were  flagrant  in  the  extreme,  and  they  were  the  more  aggravated  because  he  was  the
son  of  the  godly  Hezekiah.  No  doubt  his  reign  was  one  of  dark  disgrace  and  disaster.
The  sacred  writers  dismiss  it  with  a  few  short  statements,  hurrying  over  its  long  stretch
of  years— it  was  the  longest  reign  of  all  the  kings  of  Judah — as  if  they  were  (as  they
were)  a  period  too  melancholy  and  shameful  to  be  dwelt  upon.  But  why  should  we
find  that  his  guilt  and  sin  were  to  fall  upon  those  who  were  unborn  at  the  time,  and
who  therefore  could  have  had  no  share  therein  ?

I.  Such  visitation  is  an  undoubted  pact.  It  is  plainly  declared  to  be  a  Divine
rule,  and  that  once  and  again  (cf.  Exod.  xx.,  etc.).  And  apart  from  the  Bible — in  the
manifest  law  of  heredity — there  is  the  dread  fact  patent  to  all.  Workhouses,  prisons,
hospitals,  asylums,  all  attest  the  visitation  of  God  for  the  fathers'  sins.

II.  It  IB  A  GBEAT  MY8TEBY.  It  is  ouo  branch  of  that  all-pervading  mystery  into
which  all  other  mysteries  sooner  or  later  run  up— the  mystery  of  evil.  There  is
nothing  to  be  done^  so  £ar  as  its  present  solution  is  concerned,  but  to  "  trust,"  and  so
"  not  be  afraid."

ni.  But  NOT  WITHOUT  ALLEVIATIONB ;  e,g,  1.  Jf  the  sins  of  the  fathers  are  visited
on  their  descendants,  yet  more  are  God^s  mercies.  The  sins  descend  to  "  the  third  and
fourth  generation,"  but  the  mercies  to  "  thousands  "  of  generations — for  this  is  meant.
2.  The  descent  is  not  entire.  The  sins  come  down,  it  is  true,  upon  the  descendants,  but
in  their  fruits  rather  than  in  their  roots.  A  father  cannot  force  on  his  child  his  wicked-
ness, though  be  may  his  diseases  and  tendencies.  3.  The  entail  may  be  cut  off  ia  its
worst  part  at  any  moment,  and  very  often  is.  Coming  to  Christ  may  not  deliver  me
from  pnvsical  suffering,  but  it  will  from  sin.  Grafted  into  Christ  a  new  life  will  begin,
the  whole  tendency  of  which  in  me  and  in  mine  is  to  counteract  and  undo  the  results
of  the  former  evil  life.  4.  And  the  visitation  of  the  fathers*  sins  is  but  rarely  because
of  the  father  if  sins  only.  The  descendants  of  the  age  of  Manasseh  did  their  works,  and
what  wonder  that  they  should  inherit  their  woes?  5.  And  it  ia  a  salutary  law.
Children  are  a  means  of  grace  to  tens  of  thousands  of  parents.  '*  Out  of  the  mouth
of  babes,"  etc.  For,  for  their  children's  sakes,  parents  will  exercise  a  watchfulness  and
self-restraint,  will  seek  after  God  and  goodness  as  otherwise  they  would  never  have
done.  The  remembrance  of  what  thev  will  inflict  on  their  children  by  virtue  of  this
law  fills  them  with  a  holy  fear,  as  GK)a  designed  it  should.

CoNOLUsioN.  1.  Parents,  What  legacy  are  you  leaving  for  your  children  ?  8hall
they  have  to  curse  or  bless  you  ?  0  father,  mother,  "  do  not  sin  against "  your  "  child.'*
2.  Children,    What  have  you  received  ?    Is  it  a  legacy  of  evil  example,  evil  tendency,


CH.  XV.  1—21.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  387


evil  habit  ?  GJod'a  grace  will  help  you  to  break  the  succesaion.  Refuse  it  for  your-
selves, detennine  you  will  not  hand  it  on  to  others.  But  is  it  a  legacy  of  holy
example,  tendencies,  and  habits?  Blessed  be  God  if  it  be  so.  What  responsibility
this  involves  I  What  blessing  it  renders  possible  for  you  and  those  who  come  afber
you ! — C.

Ver.  9. — The  darkened  fiome.  "  She  that  hath  borne  .  .  .  was  yet  day."  Perhaps
in  all  the  range  of  human  sorrows  there  is  none  greater  than  that  which  befalls  a
home  when  the  dearly  beloved  mother  of  many  children,  yet  needing  sorely  her  care,
is  early  cut  off.  Such  a  piteous  case  is  described  here.  The  prophet,  bewailing  the
coming  calamities  of  his  country,  adopts  the  heartbroken  language  of  a  husband
bitterly  mourning  the  death  of  his  wife  and  the  mother  of  his  many  children.  He
seems  to  think  of  her  who  is  gone,  and  all  her  sweetness  and  grace  and  goodness  riso
up  before  him.  He  thinks  of  their  children  and  how  they  will  need  their  mother's
care,  terribly  need  it,  though  never  more  can  they  have  it,  and  his  heart  dies  down
within  him.  He  thinks  of  himself  and  how  utterly  lonely  his  lot  must  be.  At  such
times  heart  and  mind  almost  give  way,  and  faith  and  love  GkKlward  receive  a  blow
beneath  which  they  reel  and  sometimes  never  recover  themselves.  But  this  verse  is
as  a  holy  angel  of  God,  and  enters  that  darkened  home ;  and—

I.  It  calls  to  memobt  what  the  lost  one  was.  Her  life  was  as  the  shining  of
the  sun— bright,  cheerful,  generous,  inspiriting,  attracting,  healthful,  and  joy-giving
to  all.

II.  It  denies  kot  the  fact  which  is  so  bitterly  mourned.  Her  premature  death,
her  sun  went  down,  etc.  Nothing  can  alter  that  fact.  And  perhaps,  as  the  very  words
indicate,  circumstances  of  peculiar  sorrow  may  have  surrounded  her  death.  Like  her
told  of  in  this  verse,  ^she  may  have  breathed  out  her  life  as  if  in  laboured  sighs,
expiring  in  heavy  heart-breaths  of  grief."  Not  a  calm,  gradual,  bright  sunset,  but  the
very  reverse,  the  sun  going  down  in  dark  clouds.  The  power  to  utter  those  blessed
parting  words  of  counsel  and  comfort  taken  from  her,  and  in  darkness  and  silence
she  had  to  wend  her  way  to  the  unseen.  But  amid  all  this  depth  of  gloom  this
verse—

III.  Suggests  most  blessed  truth.  The  sun  of  her  life  has  not  perished  but
shines  elsewhere.  We  know  that  when  the  sun  sinks  below  our  horizon  it  has  gone
to  gladden  and  bless  other  shores.  And  so  with  the  life  of  the  blessed  dead.  They
all  live  unto  GKxl.  All  that  in  them  which  was  so  pure,  so  sweety  so  full  of  the  grace
of  God,  has  not  perished ;  it  is  shining  elsewhere,  it  has  risen  on  another  shore,  the
eternal  and  the  blessed.  And  on  us  it  shall  rise  again,  as  the  sunrise  follows  in  due
time  the  sunset.  That  life  is  not  lost  but  is  hidden  with  Christ  in  Gx>d,  and  so  ^  when
he  who  is  our  life  shall  appear  "  then  shall  that  now  hidden  life  **  appear  with  him  in
glory."— 0.

Ver.  12. — A  vain  contest.  "  Shall  iron  break  the  northern  iron  and  the  steel  ?  *'  So
asks  the  Lord  6K>d  of  his,  at  this  time  not  simply  lamenting  prophet,  he  was  rarely
anything  but  that,  but  also  his  complaining  prophet  And  as  we  read  these  yerses
with  wMch  the  striking  inquiry  contained  in  this  verse  is  connected,  we  cannot  help
feeling  that  his  lamentations  become  him  far  more  than  his  complaints*  Still,  who
are  we,  to  criticize  a  great  hero  of  the  faith  such  as  Jeremiah  imdoubtedly  was?
These  verses,  from  the  tenth  onwards,  are  no  doubt  on  a  lower,  a  less  spiritual  and  less
self-forgetful  level  than  that  which  the  common  strain  of  his  prophecies  and  prayers
maintain.  It  will  be  seen  that  these  verses  come  at  the  close  of  a  long  and  most
earnest  appeal  addressed  by  him  to  Gbd  on  behalf  of  his  countrymen.  They  were
suffering  fearfully  from  the  dearth  of  which  the  opening  of  the  fourteenth  chapter  tells.
Now,  all  this  was  then  present  before  the  prophet  s  mind,  and  these  chapters  record  the
expostulations,  the  pathetic  appeals,  and  the  almost  agonized  prayers  which  he  pours
forth  on  behalf  of  his  suffering  land  and  people.  He  makes  full  confession  of  their
sins,  but  pleads  the  all-mercifiu  Name  of  tne  Lord,  and  when  that  did  not  suffice,  he
urges  the  evil  teaching  that  they  had  received  from  their  prophets  and  that  therefore
they  may  be  held  guiltless  or  far  less  guilty,  and  when  that  plea  also  was  rejected
he  returns  to  his  confessions  and  earnest  entreaties ;  but  it  is  all  of  no  avail.    At  the


S


888  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  xv.  1— 21,


opening  of  this  chapter  God  says,  "  Though  Moses  and  Samuel " — ^men  who  had  once
and  again  proved  themselves  mighty  intercessors  for  the  people,  yet  even  if  they —
'^  stood  before  me,  my  mind  could  not  be  toward  this  people."  The  crimes  of
M&nasseh,  King  of  Judah,  that  kinz  who  reigned  so  long,  so  disgracefully,  and  with
such  disastrous  results  over  Judah,  nad  never  been  repented  of,  and  never  really  for-
saken. They  were  rampant  still,  and  therefore  the  Lord  declares  this  judgment  which
he  had  sent  upon  them  must  go  on — no  prayers  of  his  faithful  servant  oould  avail  to
stay  its  execution.  Upon  this  the  prophet  pours  out  a  piteous  lamentation  over  the
woes  of  his  people,  and  then,  turning  to  his  own  position,  he  complains  bitterly  of  the
hatred  which  was  felt  towards  him  by  those  whom  he  had  sought  to  bless.  "  Woe  is
me,  my  mother,  that  thou  hast  borne  me  a  man  of  strife  and  a  man  of  contention  to
the  whole  earth ! "  He  had  been  no  usurer  nor  fraudulent  debtor,  **  yet  every  one,"  he
cries,  "  curses  me."*  Then  to  him  the  Lord  replies,  promising  him  deliverance  in  the  time
of  evil,  and  asks  the  question,  "  Shall  iron  break  .  .  .  steel  ? "  The  ancients  knew
comparatively  little  of  the  manufactures  of  iron  and  steel.  Amongst  the  Israelites  it
was  very  coarsely  wrought,  but  the  best  iron  was  from  the  north.  So  bad  was  their
own  that  an  admixture  of  brass,  which  among  us  would  be  rather  thought  to  lessen  its
value,  was  regarded  as  in  improvement.  But  the  iron  and  steel  procured  from  the
people  who  lived  in  the  far  north,  on  the  shores  of  the  Black  Sea,  was  the  most
celeorated  for  its  tenacity  and  hardness.  Against  it  the  common  iron  of  every-day  use
could  offer  but  little  resistance,  and  when  opposed  to  it  could  make  little  or  no
impression ;  it  could  not  '*  break  the  northern  iron  and  the  steeL"  And  the  question  of
this  verse  is  a  proverb  denoting  the  impossibility  of  any  force,  though  great  in  itself,
overcoming  one  which  by  its  very  nature  and  by  its  effects  had  been  proved  to  bo
greater  stifi.  Our  Lord  teaches  the  same  truth  when  he  speaks  of  the  folly  of  that
king  who  thought,  with  his  army  of  ten  thousand,  to  encounter  and  overcome  another
king  who  came  against  him  with  twenty  thousand.  But  whilst  the  meanine  of  this
verse  is  plain  enough,  its  application  is  not  so  clear.  If  we  connect  it  with  the  verses
that  immediately  precede,  as  many  do,  then  it  is  a  question  whose  tone  is  bright,
cheerful,  and  reassuring.  But  if  we  connect  it  with  those  that  immediately  follow,  its
tone  is  altered  and  is  full  of  solemn  admonition  and  serious  warning.  In  the  first  case
it  refers  to  Jeremiah  himself,  and  is  for  his  comfort  and  confidence.  It  tells  him  that
the  enemies  who  are  against  him,  however  ironlike  they  might  be— cold,  hard,  fierce,
strong — and  however  much  they  may  oppress  and  afflict  him,  yet  assuredly  they  shall
not  prevail  against  him ;  for  God  will  make  him  as  the  northern  iron  and  the  steel,
against  which  all  their  might  shall  be  in  vain.  God  had  promised  at  the  very  outset
of  the  prophet's  ministry  that  he  would  thus  strengthen  him.  Behold,  he  says,  in  the
first  chapter,  '*  I  have  made  thee  this  day  a  defenced  city,  and  an  iron  pillar,  and
brazen  walls  against  the  whole  laud, .  .  •  and  they  shall  fight  against  thee,  but  they
shall  not  prevail  against  thee ;  for  I  am  with  thee,  saith  the  Lord,  to  deliver  thee."
And  in  the  twentieth  verse  of  this  chapter  the  like  promise  is  given  over  again.  So
that  they  have  much  reason  on  their  siae  who  regard  these  words  as  a  heart-cheering
assurance  conveyed  to  the  prophet  under  the  form  of  a  question,  and  assuring  him  that,
let  the  power  of  those  who  hated  him  be  what  it  might — as  ironlike  as  it  would — ^tho
grace  of  God  which  would  be  given  him  would  make  him  stronger  still,  would  make
nim  as  the  northern  iron  and  the  steel.  Let  us,  then,  view  these  words-
It  As  A  REAssuBma  PROMISE,  and  make  two  or  three  applications  of  them.  1.  And
first,  to  such  as  Jeremiah  himself  was  at  this  time — a  faithful  servant  of  CK>d,  but
mucA  trotibled  and  tried.  What  right  have  we  to  expect  that  sJl  things  will  go
smoothly  with  us  in  this  world,  or  to  be  surprised  when  sore  troubles  come  ?  Did  not
our  Lord  say, "  Behold,  I  send  you  forth  as  sheep  amongst  wolves  **  ?  Well,  it  would  be
strange  if  the  sheep  were  to  find  all  things  just  as  they  wished  amid  such  surroundings
as  that  But,  as  one  has  said,  the  sheep  have  beaten  the  wolves  after  all.  There  are
to-day  tens  of  thousands  of  sheep  for  every  wolf  prowling  on  the  face  of  the  earth.  It
did  seem  very  likely,  when  the  sheep  were  so  few,  that  the  wolves  would  most  certainly
have  quickly  made  a  clearance  of  them.  But,  though  here  and  there  one  like  Saul "  made
havoc  of  the  Church,"  the  flock,  the  Lord's  fold,  went  on  increasiug  and  multiplying  in
a  marvellous  way.  Spiritually  as  well  as  literally  the  sheep  outnumber  the  wolves
who  would  destroy  them«    And  what  is  the  explanation  but  this,  that  to  those  who


CH.  XV.  1—21.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  389

have  no  might  the  Lord  has  increased  strength  ?  He  has  let  the  wolves  be  indeed  like
iron,  biit  his  sheep  he  has  strengthened  as  the  northern  iron,  etc.  And  this  he  will  ever
do.  Gkxl  can  temper  our  souls  to  such  degree  of  hardness  and  tenacity  that  they  shall
blunt  and  beat  back  every  weapon  that  is  formed  against  them.  The  arrows  hurled
against  us  shall  fall  pointless  to  the  ground,  and  the  armour  of  God  wherein  we  stand
engirt  shall  more  than  defend  us  from  the  adversary's  power.  The  shield  of  faith  is
made,  not  of  our  enemies'  imtempered  iron,  but  of  the  northern  iron  and  steel  told  of
here.  Oh,  then,  child  of  Grod,  how  is  it  with  thee  ?  Is  the  world  frowning  upon  thee  ?
are  circumstances  adverse  and  involved,  and  thy  way  hedged  with  difficulties  ?  Has
death  invaded  thy  home  or  is  it  about  to  do  so,  and  is  thy  heart  saddened  thereby  ?
Does  disappointment  dog  thy  steps  and  baffle  all  thy  best-meant  endeavours?  Is
anxiety  creeping  over  thee  and  filling  thee  with  foreboding  fear  ?  Hearken  to  this
word  of  God,  "  Can  iron,"  etc.  ?  Can  these  things,  hard  and  terrible  as  they  are,  break
down  thy  defence  or  break  through  thy  shield?  Oh,  bring  thy  soul  to  Christ,  tell
him  how  weak,  how  defenceless,  in  thyself,  thou  art ;  come  to  him  for  the  armour  of
proof  thou  needest ;  ask  him  to  give  thee  good  courage  and  to  strengthen  thine  heart ;
and  then,  as  thou  comest  off  more  than  conqueror  over  all  these  things,  thou  shalt
triumphantly  ask  this  question  for  thyself.  2.  And  we  may  ask  it  again  in  reference  to
the  opposition  of  the  world  against  the  Church  of  God,  For  that  Church  is  girt  with
invincible  power,  and  stands  like  a  rock  amid  the  raging  of  the  sea.  In  vain  the-,
tempests  hurl  the  mighty  waves  against  it,  in  vain  do  they  fiercely  smite  it  as  witL
force  sufficient  to  make  it  stagger  and  fall ;  but  whilst  you  look  expecting  to  see  it
overthrown,  lo,  the  huge  seas  that  smote  it  are  shivered  into  clouds  of  spray,  and
multitudes  of  foaming  cataracts  are  seen  rushing  down  its  sides  but  leaving  it
unharmed  and  immovable  still.  And — to  return  to  the  metaphor  of  this  verse — the-
iron  of  its  adversary's  weapon  has  broken  against  the  steel  of  its  impenetrable  shield^
and  the  Church  of  God  is  unconquered  still.  Heresy  has  sought  with  insidious  power
to  turn  it  from  the  truth.  Persecution  with  its  fires  and  all  manner  of  deadly
cruelties  has  threatened  every  member  of  its  communion,  and  slain  thousands  upon
thousands  of  them.  Superstition  has  come  with]  its  priestcraft  and  pretended  super-
natural powers  and  taught  men  to  worship  idols  in  the  name  of  God.  Infidelity,  the
sure  offspring  of  Superstition,  disgusted  with  the  miserable  shams  and  the  mass  of
wretched  fables  which  Superstition  has  taught  men  for  truth,  has  thrown  off  all  belief,
and  denied  the  very  existence  of  God  and  the  whole  of  the  precious  faith  that  the  Church
has  received.  The  world,  a  more  deadly  foe  still,  with  her  soft  blandishments  and  her
mighty  bribes,  has  done  more  to  pervert  the  right  ways  of  the  Lord  than  perhaps  all
the  other  enemies  of  the  Church  altogether ;  just  as  on  the  mass  of  iron  used  in  the
construction  of  the  great  railwav  bridges  which  span  so  many  of  the  valleys,  straits,
and  rivers  of  our  land,  it  is  found  that  a  warm  morning's  sunshine  does  more  to  deflect
them  from  their  true  horizontal  line  than  is  accomplished  by  the  ponderous  weight  of
the  heaviest  engines  and  trains  rushing  over  them  at  their  highest  speed.  The  soft
warmth  does  more  than  the  heaviest  weight.  And  again  and  again  in  the  history  of
the  Church  of  God  it  has  been  found  that  when  the  world  is  most  smiling  then  is  it
most  deadly  to  the  best  interests  of  the  Church.  And  in  our  day,  fresh  forms  of
unbelief  or  disbelief  are  gathering  round  the  Church,  and  like  a  mist  enwrapping  the
minds  and  hearts  of  not  a  few,  so  that  the  blessed  firmness  of  faith  which  once  was
the  common  characteristic  of  the  Church  is  giving  way  to  a  general  doubt,  vagueness,
and  uncertainty,  upon  which  no  firm  foothold  can  be  had.  But  what  is  our  confidence
in  view  of  all  this  ?  Is  it  not  in  the  truth,  made  sure  to  us  by  the  experience  of  all  the
ages,  that  the  Church  of  God  is  his  especial  care,  and  that  therefore  His  omnipotence  is
around  it,  and  all  the  powers  of  hell  shall  not  prevail  against  it.  Here  the  Church  of
God  is  to-day,  in  nurabers,  zeal,  faith,  charity,  not  one  whit  behind  the  former  days.
Here  in  this  direction  and  that  there  may  be  loss,  but  if  so,  then  in  other  directions
we  find  gain.  And  the  witness  of  all  the  history  of  the  Church  is  this,  that  the  forces
that  oppose  her  are  but  as  untempered  iron,  whilst  the  power  that  defends  her  is  as
the  northern,  etc.  And  should  there  be  any  anxious  heart  who  is  in  much  doubt  and
fear  as  to  his  own  personal  salvation  because  of  the  multitude  and  magnitude  of  his
sins,  we  would  bid  such  a  one  take  home  to  him  the  truth  of  our  text.  For  although
his  sins  be  all  he  thinks  them,  and  even  more— of  strength  like  iron — yet  the  Saviour's


^


890  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROrHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  xv.  1—21.

will  to  save  is  as  tbo  northern  iron  and  the  steel.  True,  the  retrospect  oyer  the  past  may
begrievous,  and  since  that  was  forgiven  it  may  have  been  too  often  reproduced  again.
"  Thy  backslidings,"  as  God  told  Israel,  "  have  been  many ; "  but  art  thou  hoping  in
Gk>d  ?  dost  thou  grieve  and  mourn  over  sin  and  truly  desire  to  be  made  whole  ?  Then
it  ihall  be  so  with  thee ;  thy  salvation  shall  be  accomplished,  for  thine  accusers'  power
is  but  as  the  iron,  whilst  thy  Saviour's  is  as  the  northern,  etc.  Therefore  yield  not  to
doubt,  still  less  to  despair,  but  go  to  him  who  is  mighty  to  save,  and  ask  him  to  give
thee  of  his  strength  tnat  thou  mayst  now  conquer  thy  sin ;  so  shalt  thou  no  more
doubt  of  his  grace  or  of  thine  interest  therein.  Such  are  some  of  the  applications  of
this  question  which,  taking  it  as  an  implied  promise,  we  are  justified  in  making.  Bat
as  we  said  at  the  outset,  if  we  connect  our  text  with  the  verses  that  follow,  it  will
rather  supply  lessons  of  serious  warning  and  admonition.  For  thus  understood,  the
iron  tells  of  the  power  of  Israel  and  "  the  northern  .  .  .  steel "  of  the  invincible  power
of  the  Chaldean  armies  that  were  so  soon  to  come  against  them,  and  therefore  this
question  is  a  declaration  of  the  sure  overthrow  of  Israel  when  the  time  of  conflict  came.
'The  power  of  God  was  against  Israel,  and  then  what  hope  could  there  be?  Their  poor
defence  would  be  soon  broken,  and  they  would  lie  at  the  mercy  of  their  foe.  It  is,
therefore —

XL   A  SAMPLE   OF  THE   FATE  THAT   ATTENDS  ALL  BANOINO  OF  MSBE  HUMAK  POWERS

A0AIN8T  THE  WILL  OF  GoD.  Whenever  any  such  unequal  contest  is  contemplated  or
being  carried  on,  this  question  may  be  fitly  asked.  And  therefore  we  ask  it :  1.  0/
all  Mese,  and  they  are  very  many^  who  think  that  they  can,  unarmed  of  Ood,  mcoess-
fully  wage  the  war  with  sin.  We  would  be  unfeignedly  thankful  that  there  is  felt  the
•desire  to  wage  this  war  at  all,  that  there  is  no  fatal  apathy  or  content  with  sin,  but
ihat  there  is  a  real  purpose  to  subdue  it  and  keep  it  under  and  to  live  in  all  righteous-
ness. Yes,  wherever  that  purix)se  is,  let  thanks  be  given  to  GK)d.  But  what  all
such  need  to  remember,  yet  what  they  very  often  do  not  remember,  is  that  the  evil  of
their  own  hearts  is  as  '*  the  northern  .  .  .  steel,"  whilst  all  the  strength  of  their  own
resolves  is  but  as  common  "  iron,"  and  when  these  two  come  in  collision  we  know  the
result.  Remember  that  first  of  all  there  is  the  guUt  of  sin  to  be  provided  for,  and  even
supposing  you  were  to  contract  no  further  sin,  what  is  to  be  said  of  all  the  past  ?  How
can  your  own  right  resolves  and  correct  fiiture  conduct — if  it  be  indeed  correct — atone
for  that?  But  supposing  it  were  true  that  in  an  amended  life  there  is  atonement  for
the  past,  as  we  overlook  the  sins  of  youth,  if  the  mature  life  be  what  it  should  be—
supposing  that  were  true,  which  it  is  not,  even  amongst  men,  if  the  past  crimes  have
been  of  a  serious  kind — but  supposing  it  were,  and  that  if  a  man  really  turned  over  a
new  leaf  all  the  records  of  the  foregoing  leaves  should  be  destroyed,  no  matter  what
those  records  were— have  you  any  guarantee  that  the  future  leaves  will  be  altogether
different  from  those  that  went  before  ?  The  Word  of  Gbd,  and  experience  idso,  teach
us  that  we  have  not.  No  doubt  some  sins  may  be  given  up,  some  evil  actions  forsaken,
-especially  if  they  be  such  as  bring  upon  us  the  reproach  of  man,  but  the  true  nature  of
the  man  remains  unchanged — he  is  in  himself  what  he  was.  "  Can  the  Ethiopian  change
his  skin,"  etc.  ?  "  then  may  ye  also  do  good,  that  are  accustomed  to  do  evil.  So  speaks
the  prophet  of  God ;  so,  too,  speaks  the  experience  of  life.  Of  course  we  do  not  affirm
all  this  in  regard  to  the  coming  up  to  the  standard  of  society,  or  of  maintaining  an
external  decency  of  life,  but  we  do  affirm  it  in  regard  to  the  attainment  of  that
renewed  and  alone  morally  excellent  character  to  which  Qod  calls  us  and  of  which  our
Lord  Jesus  Christ  set  us  the  example.  Tou  cannot  bore  through  rock  with  wooden
tools ;  you  cannot  with  soft  iron  cut  or  pierce  the  hardened  steeL  And  so  you  cannot,
by  the  power  of  your  own  resolves,  break  that  heart  of  evil,  hardened  Uke  very  steel,
which  every  man  carries  about  in  him  untU  it  is  regenerated  by  the  Spirit  of  God.
The  grace  of  God  alone  can  help  you.  It  is  at  the  cross  of  Christ,  where  you  gain
forgiveness  from  all  the  guilt  of  the  past,  that  you  gain  also  strength  for  the  better  life
of  the  future ;  and  it  is  in  daily  coming  to  thiat  cross,  daily  looking  imto  Jesus,  that
blessed  Lord  who  is  both  yom:  Redeemer  and  your  perfect  Pattern,  that  you  become
changed  into  the  same  image  and  made  like  him.  Iron  is  striving  to  "  break  the  .  .  .
steel,  whilst  you  are  endeavouringof  yourself  to  save  yourself  from  the  past  results  and
the  present  power  of  sin.  Tou  cannot  do  it,  and  in  view  of  the  gracious  help  the  Lord
Jesus  Ohrist  offers  you  it  is  a  sin  and  an  insult  to  him  to  persist  in  the  attempt


CH.XV.  1— 21.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  TEOPHET  JEREMIAH.  391


2.  Finally,  I  think  of  another  hopeless  contest  in  which  also  many  are  still  engaged,  in
which  the  iron  is  thinking  to  '*  break  .  .  .  steel."  It  is  the  contest  with  Ood,  the  combat
with  the  Most  High,  Gbd  has  made  us  all  for  himself.  Now,  he  himself  so  obeys  the
law  of  truth  and  righteousness  and  goodness  that  we  say  he  is  righteousness.  "  The
Lord  is  righteous  in  all  his  ways  and  holy  in  all  his  works."  "  God  is  love."  There-
fore he  bids  us  surrender  our  hearts,  our  wills,  to  him,  to  obey,  love,  and  serve  him.
It  is  not  simply  right,  but  most  blessed  for  us  as  for  all  his  creatures  to  do  this,  and  the
vast  majority  of  them  do,  and  are  blessed  in  consequence.  But  man  has  the  power  of
saying  *'  Nay  "  to  Grod's  *'  Yea,"  and  "  Yea  "  to  God's  "  Nay,"  and  that  power  he  has  chosen
to  exercise.  In  other  words,  he  has  set  up  his  will  against  the  Divine  will,  and  refuses
obedience  where  the  will  of  God  and  his  own  are  opposed.  This  is  the  contest  that  is
ever  going  on — Grod  seeking  to  win  man's  will,  his  heart  to  himself,  and  man  persifl-
tently  refusing.  Man  wants  to  have  his  own  way,  believing  and  insisting  that  it  is
the  good  way  for  him,  whilst  God  knows  well  that  it  is  a  way  of  evil  and  of  evil  only.
Therefore.by  all  means  God  is  seeking  to  draw  us  from  that  way  to  his  own.  By
the  voice  of  conscience  and  of  his  Spirit  pleading  within  us,  by  his  providences,  his
Word,  his  ordinances,  and  in  other  ways  still,  mostly  gentle  and  gracious,  others  of
them  of  a  sterner  kind,  but  by  them  all  he  is  aiming  at  but  one  result — this,  of
inducing  us  to  yield  to  him,  to  acknowledge  his  authority,  and  confess  him  Lord.
And  remember  this  will  of  his  is  no  passing  wish,  one  which,  when  he  finds  he  can-
not have  it,  he  will  cease  to  care  for.  Oh  no,  but  it  is  his  steadfast  purpose,  that  upon
which  his  heart  is  set.  "  As  I  live,  saith  the  Lord,  all  the  earth  shall  be  filled  with  my
glory."  "  To  Jesus  every  knee  sTudl  bow,  and  .  .  .  Father."  Can  we  think,  then,
that  instead  of  this,  God  will  be  content  with  simply  destroying  man  ?  That  would
be  to  confess  failure  on  his  part,  and  so  would  also  the  mere  infliction  of  vengeance.
Therefore  we  feel  sure  that  the  rebel  will  have  to  yield,  and  the  stoutest  heart  to  bow.
The  iron  cannot  "  break  .  •  .  steel."  Shall  the  will  of  man  for  ever  defy  God,  and
hold  out  against  him  ?  But  ah !  what  of  agony  and  woe  will  not  the  rebel  will  have
to  go  through  ere  it  will  own  itself  wrong !  All  the  awful  words  of  Christ  about  the
quenchless  fire  and  the  undying  worm — those  dreadful  sayings  of  his  at  which  the
soul  shudders— still  are  his  setting  forth  thereof.  Oh,  you  whose  hearts  are  still  unsur-
rendered to  him,  will  you  provoke  him  to  this  ?  will  you  force  him  to  hold  you  down
to  the  consequences  of  your  own  doings  until  you  come  to  see  them  as  he  sees  them?
Then  not  alone  because  of  the  sorrow  that  must  attend  the  refusal  to  yield  to  him,  but
because  such  yielding  is  so  right,  so  blessed,  let  us  cease  from  the  vain  and  sinful  con-
flict ;  let  the  iron  no  more  foolishly  think  to  "  break  the  northern  iron  and  steel,"  but
"  let  us  come  and  worship  and  bow  down  " — not  with  the  knee  alone,  but  in  heart —
"  before  the  Lord  our  Maker  "  and  our  Redeemer.— 0.

Ver.  16. — How  to  study  the  Scriptures,    lliis  verse  declares—

L  How  WE  SHOULD  DEAL  WITH  GoD*8  woEDs.    1,  We  are  to  "find  "  thetn.    We  are
not  to  be  content  with  mere  surface  reading,  but  to  "  search  the  Scriptures."    It  is
certain  that  without  this  searching  they  will  never  be  found.    Now,  it  is  this  conviction
which  has  led  to  the  recent  revision  of  the  Scriptures.    They  who  undertook  t^t
work  were  not  ignorant  of  nor  indifferent  to  the  many  objections  which  would  be
brought  against  their  enterprise.    They  knew  it  would  be  said  that  such  revision  would
disturb  the  faith  of  simple  men  and  women,  that  it  would  provoke  discord,  that  it  would
encourage  restless  spirits  to  be  ever  seeking  change,  that  it  would  destroy  old  and
sacred  associations,  that  it  was  unnecessary  because  by  means  of  commentaries  and
sermons  the  true  meaning  of  any  passage  could  be  given ;  but  they  felt  it  to  be  their
duty  to  set  forth,  as  clearly  as  possible,  the  very  words  of  Scripture,  so  that  men  may
"  find  "  them  as  before  they  could  not  do.    They  knew  such  work  was  needed,  and  they
were  encouraged  by  the  history  of  former  revisions,  that  of  Jerome  and  that  of  our
present  Authorized  Version,  against  which  all  the  present  objections  were  brought  but
were  soon  seen  to  be  futile.    Faith  has  not  been  disturbed ;  union  and  not  discord  has
followed,  the  meaning  of  Scripture  has  been  made  more  manifest,  and  what  is  and
what  is  not  of  real  authority — as  the  Apocrypha — has  been  declared.    And  they
were  encouraged  by  the  fact  that  the  present  was  an  especially  favourable  time  for
their  work :  Uie  existence  of  so  many  capable  ficholars,  not  only  to  do  the  woikp  Iwt


392  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  xv.  1—21.

to  test-  it  after  it  was  done ;  the  increased  knowledge  of  the  Greek  language  and  lite-
rature^a  knowledge  that,  in  view  of  the  growing  disregard  for  the  languages  of  anti-
quity, was  not  likely  to  he  ever  greater  than  at  present ;  the  deepfelt  love  for  the
English  of  our  Bihle,  thus  ensuring  the  preservation  to  a  great  extent  of  its  present  tone
and  style ;  the  spirit  of  concord  which  the  proposal  has  elicited  hetween  this  country
and  America,  and  hetween  all  sections  of  the  Christian  Church.  Hence  for  all  these
reasons  it  was  felt  to  he  a  favourable  time  to  set  out  afresh  on  the  search  for  the  very
words  of  GK)d,  in  order  that  men  might  he  enabled  to ''  find  "  them  the  more  readily.  And
we  may  gratefully  believe  that  to  a  large  extent  the  ends  proposed  have  been  secured,
uid  that  by  the  labours  of  the  revisionists  Qod's  words  in  the  New  Testament  Scriptures
have  been  "  found  "  as  they  have  not  been  heretofore.  2.  But  this  which  others  have
done  for  us  toe  must  do  for  ourselves.  We  must  "  find  '*  God's  Word,  We  must  study
it,  diligently  read  it,  exercise  ourselves  in  the  Scriptures  by  careful,  frequent,  continuous
reading,  resolved  that  we  will  not  merely  read  over  the  words,  but  know  their  meaning.
For  the  Word  of  Grod  needs  finding.  It  is  hidden  away  beneath  the  soimd  of  familiar
words  and  phrases  which,  from  frequent  hearing  or  repetition,  have  lost  their  power
either  to  arrest  or  arouse  our  thought.  And  prejudice,  formality,  indolence,  indifference,
and  other  besetments  of  the  soul  beside,  all  do  their  part  to  hide  from  us  the  true  sense
of  Gk)d*s  Word.  3.  And,  when  found,  God's  Word  should  he  spiritually  "  eaten"  i.e.
we  must  take  his  words  so  into  our  soul's  life  that,  as  our  daily  food  ministers  to  our
bodily  life,  these  words  of  Gbd  shall  minister  to  our  soul's  life.  By  the  strength
derived  from  our  daily  food  all  the  organs  of  our  body,  all  its  functions  and  forces,  are
sustained  in  health  and  in  working  power — brain,  neart,  limbs,  etc.  And  so,  when
God's  words  are  "  eaten,"  they  sustain  and  strengthen  the  functions  and  forces  of  the
soul — its  faith,  courage,  hope,  joy,  etc.  Abraham  so  believed  God's  word  that  he  was
able  to  offer  up  his  son  Isaac  in  obedience  to  what  he  believed  was  God's  command.
Job,  by  the  same  means,  bore  in  glorious  patience  his  heavy  trials.  Our  blessed  Lord
baffled  and  vanquished  the  tempter  by  his  threefold  thrust  of  the  sword  of  the  Spirit —
"  It  is  written."  And  all  the  heroes  of  the  faith  have  become  heroes  by  reason  of  this
same  *'  eating  "  of  God's  Word.  Now,  God's  Word  is  thus  taken  into  and  made  the  life
of  our  souls,  not  by  memory  alone.  Mere  learning  page  after  page  by  heart,  as  we  say,
will  not  feed  the  soul.  Let  Sunday  school  teachers  remember  this.  Nor  will  medita-
tion and  reflection  upon  it  be  sufficient.  There  must  be  added  fervent  prayer  that,  by
the  Divine  Spirit,  Grod's  Word  may  be  so  inwrought  in  us  that  it  shall  be  for  us  as  a
sacrament,  a  veritable  eating  of  the  flesh  of  Christ.  Now,  if  the  Word  of  GKxl  be
thus  found  and  eaten,  see—

11.  How  (Jod's  Word  will  deal  wrrn  us.  It  will  become  "  the  joy  and  rejoicing  of
our  hearts."  True  religion  is  ever  a  joyful  thing.  "  Her  ways  are  ways  of  pleasant-
ness, and,"  etc.  What  is  that  entire  hundred  and  nineteenth  psalm  but  one  con«
tinuous  affirmation  of  joy  in  God's  Word  ?  We  shall  see  in  the  histories  which  the  Bible
records  the  evidence  of  a  Divine  overruling,  in  its  prophecies  the  proof  that  the  future
as  well  as  the  past  is  under  the  same  control ;  in  its  precepts  and  its  holy  Law  the
righteousness  of  the  Divine  rule ;  and  in  the  Gospels  the  love  that  is  beneath,  around,
amidst,  and  above  all.  And  to  the  man  of  Qod,  what  can  all  this  be  but  '*  the  joy  and
rejoicing  of  his  heart "  ?  God's  words  have  done  much  for  us  when  they  have  brought
us  to  repentance,  more  when  we  are  led  to  trust  in  (jK)d,  vet  more  when  they  enable  us
to  live  tne  life  of  obedience ;  but  they  have  not  done  all  they  were  designed  and  are
able  and  willing  to  do,  until  they  have  become  '*  the  joy,"  etc.  But  we  cannot  haye
the  joy  first ;  repentance,  trust,'  obedience,  must  precede  and  accompany ;  let  these
be  lacking,  and  joy  cannot  be.

ni.  The  obound  or  this  joy  and  rejoicino.  "  For  I  am  called  by  thy  Name,"  etc.
The  prophet  was  known  as  the  "  man  of  God."  He  was  so  identified  with  God,  so
notonously  consecrated  to  him,  as  to  be  called  by  his  Name.  It  was  the  prophet's  joy
and  delight  to  be  so  called,  and  yet  more  to  be  so  in  reality.  Therefore  everything
that  was  the  Lord's  had  interest  for  him,  as  an  affectionate  child  rejoices  in  the  letters
of  his  parents,  reads  them  over  and  over  again,  treasures  them,  obeys  them.  And  he
would  joy  in  these  words  also  because  by  them  he  had  been  led  to  the  joy  of  his
present  favour  with  God,  and  by  them  he  was  sustained  therein.  Hence,  he  being  so
unreservedly  and  joyfully  the  iJord's,  all  the  Lord's  words  could  not  but  be  what  they


CH.  XV.  1—21.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,  393


were  to  him.    And  it  is  ever  so,  in  proportion  as  we  are  the  Lord's  by  a  living,  loving
consecration,  will  his  words  be  "  the  joy  and,"  etc.— C.

Ver.  1. — FruitlesB  intercession.  These  words  are  addressed  to  the  prophet  in  his
character  of  intercessor  for  the  people.  He  had  already  been  told  to  plead  no  longer
for  them  (ch.  xiv.  11),  seeing  tnat  their  case  was  hopeless,  and  the  Divine  sentence
that  had  gone  out  against  them  was  irrevocable.    Observe —

I.  The  power  that  human  intercession  may  have  with  Gk)D.  The  fact  that
such  intercession  is  declared  in  this  case  to  be  vain  implies  that,  under  other  conditions,
it  might  be  effectual.  Moses  and  Samuel  often  stood  before  the  Lord  as  mediators  on
behalf  of  the  people  whom  they  represented  (Numb.  xiv.  13 — 20 ;  1  Sam.  vii.  9 ;  Ps.
xcix.  6).  Not  that  they  had  officially  any  priestly  function.  They  were  not  priests ;
their  power  with  God  lay  in  the  elevation  of  their  character  and  the  intimacy  of  their
fellowship  with  him.  Every  age  has  borne  witness  to  the  reality  and  efficacy  of  this
power.  "  The  effectual  fervent  prayer  of  a  righteous  man  availeth  much "  on  behalf
of  his  fellow-men.  Who  can  tell  how  much  it  is  owing  to  such  intercession  that  a
guilty  world  has  been  saved  from  hopeless  abandonment  ?

II.  The  limit  man's  obduracy  puts  to  that  power.  There  are  times  when  no
human  intervention  is  of  any  avail.  Even  the  pleading  of  Moses  and  Samuel  could
not  have  averted  the  threatened  judgments.  "My  mind  could  not  be  towards  this
people."  Why  ?  Simply  because  of  the  obstinacy  of  their  unbelief  and  irreligion.  It
is  not  that  Grod  is  not  merciful  and  gracious  and  ready  to  fordve,  or  that  the  pleadings
of  good  and  holy  men  have  no  power  with  him.  It  is  that  the  inveterate  obduracy  of
men  nullifies  all  the  persuasive  influence  alike  of  Divine  and  human  love.  God's  mind
cannot  be  towards  those  who  with  obstinate  impenitence  refuse  his  grace.  There  is  a
limit  beyond  which  even  Divine  patience  cannot  go.  The  very  pleading  love  of  the
great  Intercessor  is  defeated  in  the  case  of  those  who  will  not  forsake  their  false  and
evil  ways.  It  is  not  so  much  an  irrevocable  Divine  decree,  it  is  their  own  self-willed
perversity  that  dooms  them  and  leaves  the  stern,  retributive  laws  of  God  to  take  their
course.— W.

Ver.  16. — The  living  Word,  The  prophet,  remonstmting  with  God  on  account  of
the  hardness  of  his  lot,  here  looks  back  regretfully  to  the  time  of  his  first  call  to  the
prophetic  office.  It  is  the  language  of  one  disappointed  and  disheartened  by  the
apparent  issue  of  his  life,  and  the  bitterness  of  whose  grief  is  intensified  by  the  remem-
brance of  hopes  unfulfilled,  and  a  joy  that  has  for  ever  passed  away.  It  is  as  if  Gtxi
were  "altogether  unto  him  as  a  liar,  and  as  waters  that  fail."  Apart,  however,
from  the  peculiar  experiences  that  called  it  forth,  this  passage  is  full  of  instruction.
Note—

I.  The  method  of  God's  revelation  of  himself  to  men.  "Thy  words  were
found."  The  term  **  found,"  in  a  case  like  this,  is  suggestive  of  that  which  comes  to
the  soul,'not  so  much  as  the  result  of  its  own  seeking,  but  of  a  spontaneous  Divine
purpose.  All  those  on  whom  the  quickening  light  of  Divine  truth  has  shone  feel
more  or  less  distinctly  the  reality  of  this.  The  inspiration  has  come  to  them  in
mysterious  and  unexpected  ways.  It  has  "  pleased  God  to  reveal  his  Son  in  them.**
It  is  not  so  much  that  they  "  know  God"  as  that  they  are  " known  of  God  "  (GaL  i.  16,
16 ;  iii.  9).  The  initiatory  step  in  this  gracious  process  is  his,  not  ours.  "  Ye  have
not  chosen  me,  but  I  have  chosen  you,"  etc.  (John  xv.  16).

n.  The  vital  relation  truth  bears  to  the  divinely  enlightened  soul.
"  I  did  eat  it."  No  physical  image  could  be  more  suggestive  of  the  intimacy  of  this
spiritual  relationship.  It  indicates :  1,  The  souCs  preparation  to  welcome  the  truth.
There  is  a  divinely  awakened  appetite.  2.  The  active  particijpation  of  the  powers  of
the  soul  in  the  process.  It  is  more  than  a  mere  passive  reception.  3.  The  assimilation
of  the  truth  into  the  very  being  of  the  man.  As  food  is  transformed  into  the  living  fibre
of  the  body,  so  that  truth  becomes  a  part  of  the  very  substance  of  his  spiritual  nature,
the  stay  of  his  strength,  the  inspiration  of  his  life.  The  word  is  translated  into  the
form  of  holy  character  and  Godlike  deed,

III.  The  OLADDENiNa  effect  of  discovered  truth.  "Thy  Word  was  unto  me
the  joy  and  rejoicing  of  mine  heart."    There  can  be  no  purer,  nobler  joy  than  that  which


394  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  xv.  1— 21.


springs  from  conscious  communion  with  the  mind  of  God.  His  Word  admits  us  to  the
realities  of  a  world  un(iarkened  by  the  shadows  and  undisturbed  by  the  storms  that
trouble  this.  Rising  through  it  to  the  heights  of  Divine  contemplation,  the  glory  of
die  unseen  and  eternal  surrounds  us,  and  we  drink  of  *'  the  river  of  the  pleasures  of
God.*'

IV.  TUE    SELF-CONSECUATION    THAT    18    THE    BE8DLT  OP    THE    BEALIZED    POWEB  OF

Divine  truth  over  the  boul.  "  I  am  called  by  thy  Name,"  literally,  "  Thy  Name  is
called  over  me.'*  This  was  the  seal  and  symbol  of  his  personal  dedication  to  his  prophetic
work.  The  Word  of  the  Lord  dwelling  richly  in  the  soul  is  the  unfailing  spring  of  a
oonaecrated  and  holy  life.  **  Sanctify  them  in  thy  truth :  thy  Word  \a  truth,"  etc.
(John  xvU.  17, 19).— W.

Ver.  1. — Tlie  usehssness  of  intercession  once  more  emphatically  stated,  I.  A  bemikdek
OF  God's  LONQ-surFERiNO  in  the  past.  Moses  and  Samuel  had  stood  interceding  before
him,  and  again  and  again  he  had  glorified  himself  in  mercy  and  pardon.  The  mention
of  these  two  great  historic  names  suggests  to  Jeremiah  that  God  can  appeal  to  all  the
past,  confident  that  no  man  can  complain  of  him  as  wanting  in  long-suffering  with  the
wavwuxiness  of  his  people.  They  had  wandered  far  and  often,  and  often  needed  mercy
and  restoration  ;  but  when  God  forgave  them,  they  soon  forgot  the  mercy  and  renewed
flavour.  Thus  we  are  enabled  to  feel  how  very  bad  their  condition  must  have  become
in  the  time  of  the  prophet.  To  have  listened  to  the  plea  of  any  intercessor  would  have
beoi  to  show  a  mercy  which  yet  was  no  mercy — a  mercy  which,  while  doing  no  real
good  to  Israel,  would  have  done  evil  in  confusing  the  boundaries  of  truth  and  falsehood.
God's  mercy  must  ever  be  shown  as  part  of  his  wisdom,  and  the  time  comes  when
severity  to  one  or  two  generations  may  be  the  truest  mercy  to  the  whole  world.

II,  The  honour  done  to  the  memory  op  the  good.  As  servants  of  Jehovah,
Moses  and  Samuel  were  great  in  many  ways,  but  in  none  greater  than  as  urgent  pre-
vailing intercessors.  With  regard  to  Moses,  see  Exod.  xxxii.  11 — 14,  31,  32 ;  Numb.
xiv.  13 — 19.  With  regard  to  Samuel,  see  1  Sam.  vii.  9 ;  xii.  28.  The  listenings  of
God  to  these  men  showed  that  his  general  will  was  that  supplications  should  ever  be
made  on  behalf  of  all  sinners.  God  delights  in  seeing  his  servants  pitiful  towards  all
the  needs  of  men,  especially  those  needs  which  arise  from  their  forgetfulness  of  God
himself.  This  reference  was  surely  meant  to  teach  Jeremiah,  for  one  thing,  that  God
not  only  permitted  intercession  but  expected  it.  Further,  the  intercessions  here  referred
to  were  those  of  righteous  men.  Moses  and  Samuel  fully  appreciated  the  evil-doings  of
those  for  whom  they  interceded.  Doubtless  they  quite  apprehended  that  evil-doing
might  on  certain  occasions  reach  such  a  height  that  intercession  could  not  be  expected
to  prove  successful.  Those  who  had  had  the  opportunity  of  pondering  Gk)d*s  dealings
in  the  Deluge  and  the  destruction  of  Sodom  would  well  understand  that  intercession
had.its  limits.

lU.  Jeremiah  was  thus  reminded  of  the  difficulties  of  God's  servants  in
fobkee  DATS.  Moses  and  Samuel  were  not  only  intercessors,  they  were  intercessors
for  those  who  had  made  life  largely  a  burden  and  a  grief  to  them.  It  was  not  upon  a
scene  where  they  were  comparative  strangers  that  they  came  in,  did  their  interceding
work,  and  then  passed  out  to  return  no  more.  The  success  of  their  intercession  meant
the  renewal  of  their  struggles  with  a  wayward  and  careless  nation.  If  only  Jeremiah
considered  the  whole  history  of  Moses  and  the  whole  history  of  Samnel,  he  would  be  led
to  say,  "  Who  am  I  that  1  should  complain  ?  **  These  conspiracies,  this  bitter  oppo-
sition, this  feeling  of  solitude,  were  nothing  new.  We  can  only  serve  God  in  our  own
day  and  generation,  and  we  must  accept  that  generation  with  all  its  difficulties,  only
let  this  be  remembered,  that  there  is  no  servant  of  God,  in  any  generation,  but  will
need  all  his  faith  and  meekness  and  endurance  to  encounter  and  vanquish  these  difficulUes
in  ft  right  spirit.

rv.  Honour  was  put  upon  Jeremiah  himself.  His  influence  with  God  as  a
faithfol  servant  was  shown  every  whit  as  clearly  as  if  he  had  been  successful  in  his
intercession.  That  influence,  indeed,  the  people  might  fall  to  recognize ;  but  this  was
a  small  matter  if  only  the  prophet  himself  was  made  to  feel  that  hu  God  respected  the
spirit  of  his  prayer.  God's  way  of  honouring  us  is  not  by  making  us  stand  well  with
the  fickle  crowds  but  by  his  own  smile  shining  into  our  hearts  and  making  gladness


CH.  XV.  1— 21J    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  395

there.  The  mention  of  these  two  great  historic  names  lifts  Jeremiah  in  the  esteem  of
God  to  something  like  a  level  with  them.-— Y.

Ver.  10.— 2%€  man  who  felt  he  had  been  horn  to  strife  and  contention,  '  These  words
of  the  prophet  are  not,  of  course,  to  be  taken  too  literally.  They  are  the  language  of
excited  feeling  and  of  poetry,  and  would  not  be  permissible  as  a  prosaic  statement  to
which  the  man  who  makes  it  may  be  expected  deliberately  to  adhere.  The  proper  way
of  regarding  the  words  is  to  take  them  as  vividly  indicating  a  position  whicn  no  words
could  sufficiently  describe.  Jeremiah  sometimes  felt  himself  so  hated  and  so  isolated
that  there  seemed  but  one  way  of  accounting  for  his  experience,  and  that  was  that
he  had  been  bom  to  it.  We  know,  indeed,  that  the  truth  was  far  otherwise  (see  ch.  i.
5).  There  we  see  how  Jehovah  himself  reckoned  Jeremiah  to  have  come  into  this  earthly
existence,  not  for  suffering,  but  for  a  career  of  noble  and  useful  action,  which,  rightly
considered,  was  a  high  privilege.  But  a  man  who  is  constantly  suffering  from  the  sin  of
his  fellow-men  in  all  its  shapes  and  all  its  degrees,  cannot  be  always  looking  at  the
bright  side  and  speaking  in  harmony  with  such  a  view.

L  A  SERVANT  OF  GOD  MAY  HAVE  TO  LIVE  A  LITE  OF  INCESSANT  CONFLICT.    Jercmlah's

case  appears  to  have  been  an  extreme  one,  and  yet  the  history  of  the  Church  shows
that  a  company  by  no  means  few  might  be  reckoned  as  companions  in  his  peculiar
tribulation.  It  is  not  for  us  |to  say  how  far  our  lives  shall  be  marked  by  external  con-
flict. We  must  not  seek  conflict ;  but  we  must  be  ready  for  it  if  it  comes.  God  gives
to  every  one  who  is  willing  to  be  his  servant  a  way  in  which  to  walk,  a  way  which  does
not  infringe  on  a  single  real  right  of  a  single  human  being.  From  beginning  to  end
that  way  may  be  trodden,  not  only  without  injury  to  others,  but  with  positive  benefit
to  them.  At  the  same  time,  nothing  is  more  possible  than  that  treading  in  such  a  way
may  expose  him  who  strives  to  walk  in  it  to  all  the  various  forms  which,  according  to
circumstances  or  opportunity,  opposition  may  take.  And  therefore,  when  we  are  begin-
ning to  feel  our  way  to  the  carrying  [out  of  GKxi's  will,  we  must  lay  our  account  with
opposition.  How  much  of  it  may  come,  how  far  it  may  go,  how  long  it  may  last,  we
cannot  tell ;  and  as  we  must  not  provoke  it  through  mere  exuberance  of  energy,  so
neither  must  we  avoid  it  for  the  sake  of  a  temporary  peace  which  is  really  no  peace.
If  opposition  comes— even  intense  opposition— to  the  truth  faithfully  proclaimed,  this
only  shows  that  tiie  truth  has  provea  itself  an  arrow,  striking  home  and  making  its
wound,  whatevex  the  ultimate  consequence  of  that  wound  may  be.

II.  The  MESSAGE  OF  God  is  not  the  only  cause  of  stbife  and  contention.
Jeremiah  was  reckoned  as  a  troubler  of  Israel,  and  so  in  one  sense  he  was ;  but  Israel
could  only  have  been  troubled  by  him  because,  first  of  all,  it  was  in  a  condition  which
admitted  of  commotion.  The  wind  troubles  the  waters  and  raises  the  waves  into
destructive  fury ;  but  this  is  just  because  they  are  in  a  condition  easily  acted  on.  The
prophet,  however,  has  another  answer,  an  answer  which  served  to  show  how  much  he
marvelled  at  the  universality  and  intensity  of  the  opposition  with  which  he  was  met.
He  is  far  firom  being  the  only  troubler  of  Israel.  Suppose  he  becomes  silent ;  strife  and
contention  would  not  therefore  cease.  When  he  comes  in  with  his  reproofs,  wamines,
and  threatenings,  it  is  not  upon  a  scene  hitherto  tranquil  and  harmonious  that  he
enters.  He  finds  abundance  of  quarrelling  already,  and  one  fertile  source  of  the
quarrelling  lies  in  the  relations  between  borrower  and  lender.  They  may  cease  their
strife,  and  join  their  forces  for  a  little  while  against  the  prophet  who  is  their  common
enemy ;  but  their  mutual  exasperation  is  not  forgotten,  their  quarrel  is  by  no  means
composed.  They  will  return  to  it  with  as  much  bitterness  as  ever.  The  prophet,  it
will  be  noticed,  speaks  as  if  the  hostility  to  him  was  a  marvel.  GK)d  has  sent  him  to
these  men  for  their  good ;  he  has  come  to  turn  their  steps  from  the  way  leading  to
destruction ;  and  yet,  because  he  tells  them  the  truth,  he  has  become  their  enemy.  We
see  that  his  faith  in  human  nature,  as  easily  knowing  its  own  best  interests,  is  hard  to
shake.  He  does  not  at  all  wonder  that  the  borrower  should  hate  the  rapacious  lender
and  the  lender  hate  the  defaulting  borrower ;  but  there  is  a  deep  mystery  when  the
man  who  comes  to  warn  of  danger  is  hated  for  his  message,  and  hated  all  the  more  Just
as  he  becomes  more  earnest  and  persistent  in  the  utterance  of  it.

III.  We  bee  the  fbofhet's  consciousness  of  the  purity  of  his  own  motiyeb.  He
is  sure  that  in  him  there  is  no  reason  for  hostility.    He  had  defrauded  none ;  he  had


396         THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,  [ch.xv.1— 21.

oppressed  none.  With  all  his  complainings  here,  it  was  well  that  he  had  no  cause  for
self-reproach.  Difficulties  we  must  ever  expect  from  that  action  of  others  which  we
cannot  control ;  hut  let  them  not  be  increased  needlessly  by  our  own  selfishness,  obsti-
nacy, and  arrogance.— Y.

Vers.  15 — 17. — The  prophet*8  claim  upon  Jehovah,  and  the  grounds  of  the  claim.
That  which  urged  the  prophet  thus  to  cry  to  GK>d  for  succour  is  stated  with  great
emphasis  in  ver.  18.  He  is  suffering  as  from  a  perpetual  pain  and  an  incurable  wound.  It
is  by  such  a  cry  as  this  that  we  are  able  to  estimate  something  of  the  continuous  reproach
which  he  must  have  had  to  endure.  We  know  how,  in  kter  days,  the  Jews  dogged
the  steps  of  Christ  and  afterwards  of  Paul ;  and  these  persecutors  of  Jeremiah  were
their  ancestors.  Against  them  Jeremiah  could  do  nothing  himsel£  So  £eu:  as  human
sympathy  was  concerned,  he  was  alone  or  nearly  alone,  not  able  to  command  even  the
forbearance  of  his  own  kindred,  and  therefore  he  had  to  turn  all  the  more  to  God.  It
was  well,  indeed,  that  he  was  thus  shut  up  to  the  one  resort.  In  his  approach  to  God,
we  find  him  stating  three  claims  for  God*s  immediate  attention  to  his  position.

I.  SuFFEBiNa  FOB  Jehovah's  SAKE.  Evcry  suffering  man  has  a  claim  upon  God,
even  when  his  suffering  comes  by  his  own  transgression.  God  is  very  pitiful  to  the
tortured  conscience  of  the  man  who  has  been  wakened  up  out  of  a  selfish  and  dis-
obedient life.  It  can  be  no  pleasure  to  him  to  see  a  being  of  such  sensibility  as  man
suffering  from  any  cause  whatever;  and  when  a  man  is  suffering  for  truth,  for
righteousness,  for  the  gospel  and  the  kingdom  of  God,  then  we  may  be  sure  that  there
is  a  peculiar  movement  of  the  Divine  nature  to  help  and  strengthen  such  a  sufferer.
Gh)d  would  help  his  servant  in  this  very  instance,  by  enabling  him  to  look  at  his  suffer-
ing in  the  right  way.  The  suffering  was  an  evidence  of  successful  work ;  successful
because  it  had  been  faithfully  and  courageously  done.  If  only  the  prophet  had  softened
some  words  the  Lord  had  put  into  his  mouth  and  omitted  others,  ho  might  have  escaped
reproach.  But  reproach  smiting  on  a  good  conscience  is  better  than  contempt  falling
deservedly  on  the  coward  who  trims  to  stand  well  with  everybody.  Then  the  prophet
would  also  be  made  to  feel  that  it  was  a  good  thing  to  bear  what  Qtod  was  bearing  him-
self. His  long-si^ering  towards  his  enemies  requires  that  his  friends  should  luso  be
patient.  It  is  better  to  be  abused  in  bearing  testimony  for  God  than  to  share  in  the
rancorous  conflicts  of  selfish  men.  Prophet  and  apostle  alike  had  this  for  their
experience,  that  they  were  compelled  to  st^er  for  the  Lord's  sake ;  smd  he  who  bore  the
clearest,  purest  testimony  of  all,  viz.  Jesus  himself,  was  the  one  who  suffered  the  most.
That  good  and  true  men,  trying  to  serve  God,  should  often  become  impatient  imder
biting,  bitter  words  is  not  wonderful.  The  true  thing  to  be  desired  in  such  a  state  of
mind  is  not  to  escape  the  reproaches,  but  to  have  the  inward  joy  increased,  so  that  it
may  be  an  effectual  counterbalance  to  all  that  comes  from  outside.  '*  If  ye  be  reproached
for  the  Name  of  Christ,  happy  are  ye  "  (1  Pet.  iv.  14).

n.  The  complete  association  of  the  fbophet  with  the  pbophetio  wobd.  He  did
not  receive  it  into  his  mind  reluctantly  and  listlessly,  but  as  one  who  hungered  and
thirsted  after  righteousness.  As  the  word  fell  on  his  inner  ear  it  was  devoured.  It
came  to  him  as  from  the  excellent  glory ;  he  recognized  it  as  Divine.  He  was  not  as
many,  who  will  pamper  and  cram  Uiemselves  with  delicacies  that  are  pleasant  to  the
taste,  and  turn  away  with  unconcealed  aversion  from  food  full  of  nutrition  and  health.
Hence  they  became  to  him  the  joy  and  rejoicing  of  his  inwoxd  life.  All  words  of  Qod,
apprehended  in  their  real  meaning,  give  strength,  peace,  satisfaction,  harmony  in  the
nobler  parts  of  human  nature.  Jeremiah  is  thinking  of  the  parallel  which  may  be
drawn  between  food  for  the  body  and  food  for  the  spirit.  The  food  which  we  take,
just  because  it  is  pleasant  for  the  taste,  may  be  anything  but  a  joy  and  rejoicing  to  the
heart.  We  must  eat  what  is  really  good  for  food,  evidentlv  intended  for  fooo,  if  we
would,  be  kept  from  ill  consequences.  It  was  because  these  words  were  readily
accepted  and  fully  received  that  they  became  a  loy  and  rejoicing  to  the  heart,  and  then
in  the  strength,  fortitude,  zeal,  thus  communicated,  the  prophet  went  forth  to  his
arduous  work.  Here  surely  is  the  secret  of  his  steadfastness.  God  had  put  his  words
in  his  servant's  mouth  (ch.  i.  9) ;  but  that  was  all  he  could  do.  It  was  for  the  prophet
himself  so  to  treat  the  words  that  he  should  give  them  with  all  the  added  force  of  his
own  sanctified  personality.    Other  men  mig^t  have  uttered  the  same  words,  yet  so  as


CH.  XVI.  1—21.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.


397


to  rob  them  of  all  force  and  sting.  Notice  in  particular  that  if  these  words  of  Grod  to
the  prophet — words  mostly  so  stern,  spoken  nearly  all  from  the  judgment-seat — were
nevertheless  the  joy  and  rejoicing  of  his  heart,  how  much  more  may  such  an'experience
be  expected  from  receiving  the  evident  gospel  words  of  the  Lord  Jesus  !  "  The  words
that  I  speak  imto  you,  they  are  spirit  and  they  are  life  "  (John  vi.  63).

in.  The  prophet's  life  was  consistent  with  his  message.  According  to  his
message,  which  was  soon  proved  to  be  a  word  of  truth,  the  whole  land  was  advanc-
ing ever  more  swiftly  into  a  season  of  the  greatest  suffering  and  sorrow.  Yet  the
people  would  not  believe  the  message,  but  went  on,  just  as  usual,  assembling  for  their
merry-makings.  If  now  the  prophet  had  joined  in  these  merry-makings,  the  people
would  have  had  some  plea  for  their  neglect.  As  it  was,  they  could  find  no  excuse
in  any  inconsistent  conduct  of  his ;  as  he  spoke,  so  he  acted.  Probably  some  of  them
tried  to  draw  him  in,  to  get  him  away  from  what,  in  their  shallowness  and  haste,  they
would  reckon  mere  morbid  fancies.  Others  would  accuse  him  as  being  one  who  cared
for  no  pleasure  of  life  himself,  unless  it  was  the  pleasure  of  souring  the  pleasure  of
others.  And  yet  we  see  the  prophet  could  be  as  thankful  for  joy  and  rejoicing  of  heart  as
any  one.  It  is  the  greatest  possible  mistake  to  suppose  that  those  who  keep  away  from
the  world's  pleasures  are  filled  with  gloom.  A  service  of  Gkni,  filled  with  joy,  may  soon
become  a  real  exncrience.  But  if  talking  about  it  stands  instead  of  the  reality,  then
the  pretence  will  soon  be  shown  by  the  avidity  of  our  turning  towards  worldly
pleasures. — Y.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  XVI.


With  this  chapter  should  be  taken  the
first  eighteen  verses  of  ch.  xvii.  The  head-
ing of  the  Authorized  Version  well  ex-
presses the  contents  of  vers.  1 — 9,  provided
that  "  the  types  "  are  understood  to  be  typi-
cal actions  of  the  prophet  himself.  "The
prophet,  under  the  types  of  abstaining  from
marriage,  from  houses  of  mourning  and
feasting,  foreshoweth  the  utter  ruin  of  the
Jews."  To  the  inquiry,  why  these  calami-
ties should  come  upon  them,  the  old  and
well-known  answer  is  to  be  given  (vers.  10 —
12),  accompanied  by  a  definite  prediction  of
captivity  (ver.  13).  Then,  to  relieve  the
picture,  ^a  glimpse  of  a  happier  future  is
introduced  (vers.  14,  15);  but  only  a
glimpse,  for  already  the  Chaldeans,  like  so
many  fishermen  and  hunters,  are  on  the
track  of  the  Jews,  for  a  **  double "  retri-
bution must  precede  the  Messianic  promise
(vers.  16 — 18).  Strange  contrast — the  hea-
then coming  to  the  truth  and  the  Jews
(those  of  the  present,  not  of  the  future  time)
deserting  it  (vers.  19—21) !  We  will  take
up  the  thread  of  thought  again  at  the  open-
ing of  the  next  chapter.— The  date  of  this
prophecy  would  appear  to  be  nearly  the
same  as  that  of  the  preceding  one,  the  cir-
cumstances of   which   are    similar.     The


latter  part  of  it  will  enable  us  to  fix  it  more
precisely  (see  on  ch.  xviL  1 — 18).

Ver.  2. — Thou  shalt  not  take  thee  a  tHfe.
So  St.  Paul,  **I  think  therefore  that  this
is  good  by  reason  of  the  present  distress,
namely,  that  it  is  good  for  a  man  to  be  as
he  is  "  (1  Cor.  vii.  26,  Revised  Version) ;  and
Hosea  has  already  drawn  an  awful  picture
of  "  Ephraim  bringing  forth  his  children  to
the  murderer  *'  (ix.  9).  In  ordinary  times
it  was  a  kind  of  unwritten  law  among  the
Israelites  to  marry  and  beget  children.
Most  of  the  prophets  (e.g.  Isaiah)  appear
to  have  been  married.  In.  this  plaoe ;  i.e,  in
the  land  of  Judah.  A  Jeremianio  phrase
(comp.  ch.  viL  3).

Ver.  4. — Orievoufl  deaths ;  literally,  decUJu
of  sicknestes  ;  i.e.  all  kinds  of  painful  deaths,
including  (as  oh.  xiv.  18  shows)  death  by
starvation.  They  shall  not  be  lamented.  The
absence    of  sepulture   has    already  been

Eointed  to  several  times  as  a  feature  of  the
error  of  the  times  (ch.  viiL  2 ;  xiv.  16 ;
comp.  ch.  vii.  33),  but  this  is  a  new  and
affecting  touch.  Dr.  Pavne  Smith  aptly
refers  to  the  plagues  of  Atnens  and  London,
in  which  the  gentler  elements  of  human
nature  were  for  the  time  almost  extin-
guished.

Ver.  5. — Compare  this  prohibition  with
that  given  to  Ezekiel  (xxiv.  15—27).  The
house  of  mourning ;  literally,  of  acreaming
(an  uncommon  word,  only  occurring  again —
of  banquetters — in  Amos  vi.  7).  It  is,  no
doubt,  the  wail  of  mourning  relatives  which
is  meant.


398


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [en.  xvi.  1-21.


Yer.  6.— Vor  out  themstlTeB,  nor  make
tiiemMl^oi  bald.  Both  praotices  are  for-
bidden in  the  Law  (Deut  ziv.  1 ;  Ley.  xix.
28;  xzi.  5),  but  me  prohibition  was  at
any  rate  unknown  to  the  masses  (see,  for
the  former,  ch.  xU.  5 ;  xlvii.  5 ;  and  for  the
latter,  ch.  xlvii.  5 ;  Isa.  xxii.  12.  "  The  Lord
Jehovah  called  . . .  to  baldness ;  **  Amos  viii.
10 ;  Micah  i.  16 ;  Ezek.  vii.  18).  St.  Jerome
remarks,  and  incidentally  gives  a  valuable
evidence  of  the  tenacity  of  primitive  cus-
toms, "  Mos  hie  fait  apud  veteres,  et  usque
hodie  in  quibusdam  permanet  JudsBorum,  ut
in  luctibus  incidant  lacertos,"  etc.

Yer.  7.— -Tear  themselves  for  them.  The
verb  is  used  in  Isa.  Iviii.  7  of  breaking
bread  (the  accusative  is  there  expressed),
and  there  is  no  doubt  that  this  is  the  mean-
ing here.  The  only  question  is  whether
Idhem,  for  them,  should  not  rather  be
Wehem,  bread  (this  was  read  by  the  Sep-
tuagint,  Peshito,  Vulgate,  Targum).  St.
Jerome  sees  here  an  allusion  to  the  funeral
feasts  (comp.  the  parentalia)^  and  surely  he
Ib  right.  The  Jews  had  a  conception  of  the
nature  of  the  life  of  the  other  world  only  less
distinct  than  that  of  their  Egyptian  neigh-
bours. The  funeral  feast  was  not  merely  for
the  living,  but  for  the  dead.  Indeed,  it  was
primarily  intended  for  the  spiritual  nourish-
ment of  those  who  had  gone  before  to  the
unseen  world  (comp.  Bonwick,  *  Egyptian
Belief  and  Modem  'rhought,*  p.  48).  Char-
din,  the  old  traveller,  asserts  that  **the
Oriental  Christians  still  make  banquets  of
this  kind  by  a  custom  derived  from  the
Jews/'  The  oup  of  oonsolation.  It  would
seem  as  if  the  ^neral  feasts  had  dwindled
among  the  Jews  into  little  more  than  a
lefecnon  for  the  benefit  of  the  mourners.

Yer.  9. — ^The  voioe  of  mirth,  etc. ;  a  striking
defoription,  repeated  from  ch.  vii  34.

Yer.  12. — ^Imagination;  rather,  stubborn'
iMM  (oh.  iii  17).

Yer.  18. — ^A  grim  irony.  In  the  foreign
land  ye  shall  serve  your  idols  to  your  hearts'
content,  day  and  night  if  ye  will,  **  because,
[not,  where!  I  tcia  not  have  mercy  upon
you  "  (by  delivering  you,  and  so  calling  you
Mok  from  your  idols).

Yers.  14,  15. — The  text  of  these  verses
oocurs  in  a  more  characteristic  form  and  in
a  better  connection  in  ch.  xxiii.  7,  8.  The
connection  here  would  be  improved  by  in-
serting the  passage  before  ver.  18;  and  as
displaoements  are  not  unfamiliar  phenomena
in  manuscripts,  this  would  not  be  a  violent
act  The  difficulty  is  not  in  the  therefore
introdnohig  the  promise,  which  frequently


ocenrs  in  prophecies  immediately  after
threatenings  (e.g.  Isa.  x.  23, 24),  as  if  to  say,
**  Things  being  in  such  a  miserable  plight,
your  God  will  interpose  to  help  you ; "  but
m  the  position  of  ver.  18.  How  can  the
prophet  say,  **  And  first  I  will  reoompenso
their  iniquity  double,"  when  vers.  16,  17
contain  a  description  of  this  very  double
recompense  ?

Vers.  16, 17. — I  will  send  for  should  rather
be,  I  wiU  send.  Fishers  and  hunters,  by  a
divinely  given  impulse,  shall  '•fish"  and
"hunt"  the  unhappy  fugitives  from  their
lurking-places.  There  may,  perhaps,  be  an
allusion  to  the  cruel  ancient  practice  of
"sweeping  the  country  with  a  drag-net"
(Herod.,  iii.  149),  and  then  destroying  the
male  population:  Samos,  e.g.  waa  thus
^'  netted  "  and  depopulated  by  the  Persians.
Habakkuk  may  also  refer  to  this  when  ho
says  (i.  15),  "  They  catch  them  in  their  net,
and  gather  them  in  their  drag."

Ver.  18.— First— t.fl.  before  **I  bring  them
back  again  into  their  land  " — I  will  reoom-
pense  .  .  .  double;  i.e.  amply,  in  full
measure  (comp.  ch.  xvii.  18 ;  Isa.  xl.  2  ;
Rev.  xviii.  6).  With  the  oaroases,  etc.  The
idols,  which  "  defile  the  consciences  "  of  those
who  worship  them,  are  compared  to  the  most
unclean  and  loathsome  objects.

Ver.  19. — 0  Lord,  my  strength,  and  my  for-
tress, etc.  Jeremiah  falls  into  the  tone  of
the  psalmists  (Fa.  xviii.  2 ;  xxviiL  8 ;  lix.
17).  All  that  IS  choicest  and  most|perma-
nent  in  Old  Testament  religion  finds  its
adequate  lyric  expression  in  the  Book  of
Psalms.  The  Gentiles  shall  oome  unto  thee.
The  article,  however,  is  not  expressed.
"  Nations,"  i.e,  a  crowd  of  peoples,  hitherto
ignorant  of  the  true  Gk>d,  shall  hasten  to  tho
scene  of  Jehovah's  great  interposition ;  they
have  been  convinced  by  Israel's  unlooked-
for  restoration  of  the  unique  divinity  of
Jehovah.

Ver.  20. — But  the  Jews  of  this  generation,
in  spite  of  the  manifold  proofe  of  the  tmo
religion  which  have  been  vouchsafed  to
them,  are  deserting  the  real  divinity  for  the
unreaL  In  a  tone  of  surprise  the  prophet
exclaims.  Shall  a  man  make  godi  unto  him-
seU^etc.?

Ver.  21. — The  final  answer  of  Jehovah.
There  will  be  no  ftirther  grace-time.  I  will
this  onee  oause  them  to  know ;  rather,  1  wUl
this  time  (comp.  on  ch.  x.  18)  cause  them  to
acknowled^.  The  judgment  which  Jezemiah
has  had  tne  sad  duty  of  announcing  will
prove  to  the  blinded  Jews  that  Je'&ovah
alone  is  true  Gfod,  alone  can  strike  and  heal.


CH.  XVI.  1—21.]    THE  BOOK   OP   THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  399


HOMILETICS.

Vcr.  2. — ** Forbidding  to  marry, ^  I.  Celibacy  is  not  a" scriptural  virtue.  Mar-
riage is  a  Divine  institution.  It  is  natural,  and  God  is  the  Author  of  nature ;  it  is
recognized  and  regulated  by  inspired  teaching  and  blessed  by  Christ ;  it  is  a  means  of
human  welfare.  1

II.  Celibacy  may  be  wisely  observed  in  circumstances  op  peculiar  trouble.
Such  were  the  circumstances  of  Judah  in  the  days  of  Jeremiah ;  such,  in  the  opinion  of
St.  Paul,  were  the  circumstances  of  his  own  time  (1  Cor.  vii.  26).  Those  were  not
times  for  wedding  festivities;  the  married  would  be  encumbered  and  hindered  from
doing  their  best  for  the  public  weal,  and  children  born  then  would  be  bom  only  to  a
heritage  of  misery.    Similar  circumstances  may  recur.

III.  Celibacy  may  be  wisely  observed  by  men  who  are  contemplatinq  tasks
OP  PECULIAR  loneliness,  DANGER,  OR  DIFFICULTY.  There  are  risks  that  a  man  may
encounter  for  himself  which  he  should  avoid  if  others  would  be  seriously  involved  in  his
fate.  There  is  work  which  precludes  the  enjoyment  of  domestic  life.  It  is  not  right
to  undertake  obligations  to  another  that  cannot  be  fulfilled.  The  pioneer  of  dangerous
travel,  the  John  tne  Baptist  of  wilderness  missions,  is  better  unmarried.

IV.  Celibacy  ib  a  duty  for  all  until  they  are  able  to  provide  a  suitable
maintenance  for  a  family.  It  is  not  heroic  but  selfish  to  bring  a  fsimily  into  a  life
of  certain  hardship  and  misery.  The  principle  which  applied  to  the  public  circum-
stances of  distress  in  Jeremiah's  age  applies  to  the  private  circumstances  of  distress
which  are  met  with  in  every  age.

Ver.  12.—'*  Worse  than,  your  fathers  J'  I.  Each  generation  should  be  better
THAN  that  which  PRECEDES  FT.  The  natural  movement  of  all  mankind  should  be
onward  and  upward.  We  have  the  lessons  of  past  history  to  warn  and  to  inspire  us ;
the  continued,  increasing,  long-sufifering  mercy  of  God  to  urge  us  to  serve  him  more
faithfully ;  and  the  growing  light  of  slowly  accumulating  knowledge  to  guide  us  into
better  paths.  Later  generations  have  more  aids  of  Divine  revelation  than  were  vouch-
safed to  the  earlier.  The  Jews  under  the  prophets  had  more  light,  more  Divine  induce-
ments to  fidelity,  than  the  Jews  under  Moses ;  and  Christians  have  a  much  clearer  light
and  much  more  powerful  motives  in  the  revelations  of  GKxi's  will  and  of  God's  love  in
Christ.  To  go  back  when  we  ought  to  go  forward  is  doubly  inexcusable.  Christians
are  bad  inde^  if  they  fall  lower  than  the  men  of  Old  Testament  ages,  and  Protestants
of  modern  times  if  they  do  not  live  up  to  the  attainments  of  the  M^ieval  Church.

n.  Evil  inclines  to  grow  worse  from  generation  to  generation.  Men  ought
to  improve ;  but  if  they  begin  a  course  of  evil  they  deteriorate  in  it.  Nothing  in  the
world  is  stationary.  Nations  are  either  progressing  or  retrograding.  Each  generation
is  either  better  or  worse  than  its  predecessor.  Evil  has  a  contagious  property,  and  if  it
is  unchecked  it  is  certain  to  spread  like  an  epidemic.  It  is  a  leaven  that,  left  to  itself,
will  surely  leaven  the  whole  mass.  We  should,  therefore,  seek  to  stamp  out  a  sin  in  its
earlier  stages.  We  must  not  trust  to  any  necessary  law  of  progress,  any  idea  of  the
inherent  goodness  of  human  nature,  any  thought  of  the  temporary  character  of  evil,  but
seek  at  once  to  resist  and  overthrow  the  sin.  Here  is  a  warning  to  parents.  Evil
tendencies  are  hereditary.  The  vice,  which  seems  to  do  little  harm  in  our  own  day,
taking  root  and  spreading,  will  break  out  into  worse  fruits  in  our  children's  time.  How
sad  to  leave  only  a  bad  example  for  our  children  to  be  referred  to  I

III.  If  evil  is  to  be  conquered  it  must  be  by  some  superhuman  method.  The
natural  laws  of  progress  fail  here.  Depravity  unchecked  grows  more  depraved.  Innu-
merable practical  reforms,  new  systems  of  morality,  draconian  codes,  etc.,  have  been
tried,  and  all  in  vain.  Josiah  made  the  experiment  with  his  violent  reformation,  but  it
failed  of  anything  but  superficial  good.  Some  are  now  trusting  to  sanitary  improvements,
to  industrial  progress,  to  popular  education ;  but  these  too  will  not  touch  the  root  of  the
sore.  The  history  of  sin  furnishes  the  greatest  proof  of  the  need  of  a  Divine  redemp-
tion if  the  world  is  ever  to  be  saved.  For  this  Christ  came,  and  now  the  highest  progress
of  the  world  is  to  be  traced  to  that  new  influence  of  life  which  he  introduced  to  turn
the  current  of  history  from  deepening  depravity  to  growing  truth  and  righteousness.


400  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  xvi.  1—21.

Vers.  14, 15. — The  greatest  gratitude  for  the  latest  blessings.  The  circumstances  of
the  Jews  are  illustrative  of  those  of  all  of  us  in  the  fact  that  we  all  have  occasion  to
feel  most  thankful  for  the  most  recent  gifts  of  God's  goodness.  The  reasons  for  this  are
manifold,  viz.—

L  The  latest  BLESSiKas  abe  most  THOROuaHLY  APPRECIATED.  A  present  impres-
sion is  stronger  than  a  memory.  Even  if  the  good  things  we  are  now  enjoying  are  not
equal  to  those  we  formerly  possessed,  the  immediate  good  we  derive  from  them  is
greater  than  that  which  we  derive  from  a  mere  recollection  of  better  times.  Thanks-
giving tends  to  become  formal  and  conventional — the  empty  repetition  of  phrases  which
Sad  a  deep  signification  when  they  were  the  spontaneous  response  of  the  soul  to  fresh
tokens  of  Qoas  love,  but  which  mive  become  almost  meaningless  after  the  occasion  for
them  has  fallen  into  the  past.  To  be  real,  gratitude  must  refer  to  the  real  mercies
which  we  are  now  enjoying.

n.  The  LATEST  BLESSINGS  ABE  ADDITIONAL  PROOFS  OF  THE  GOODNESS  OF  GOD.      Wc

should  "  sing  a  new  song  "  as  we  see  new  manifestations  of  Divine  love.  We  have  more
to  be  thankful  for  when  we  have  received  two  gifts  than  we  had  when  we  were  only
possessors  of  one  of  them.  Ctod  is  constantly  adding  to  the  vast  pile  of  his  favours  to
us.  The  latest  stands  highest,  is,  so  to  speak,  mounted  on  all  that  precede ;  and  there-
fore this  calls  for  the  strongest  expression  of  gratitude.  Inasmuch  as  the  longer  we
live  the  more  we  have  to  be  thankful  for,  so  also  the  more  deeply  should  our  hearts  be
stirred  with  gratitude.  The  [restoration  of  the  Jews  is  an  additional  mercy  following
that  of  the  Exodus.  One  such  stupendous  deliverance  should  call  forth  never-failing
son^s  of  praise,  but  a  second  should  intensify  the  volume  of  those  songs.

III.  The  latest  blessings  are  also  the  greatest.  The  restoration  is  referred  to
as  containing  grander  blessings  than  those  of  the  Exodus.  Gratitude  should  be  propor-
tionate to  favours.  This  is  often  not  the  case,  because  the  best  things  are  least  appre-
ciated. Their  merits  are  not  superficial  nor  discernible  at  first.  The  spiritual  blessings
are  the  highest ;  yet  to  unspiritual  men  they  are  the  least  valued.  Thus  the  chief
elements  of  the  Messianic  promises  of  restoration  were  spiritual,  and  therefore  not  so
acceptable  to  the  mass  of  the  people  as  the  material  blessings  promised  to  the  Jews  in
the  first  possession  of  the  "  land  flowing  with  milk  and  honey."  We  are  too  ready  to
complain  of  the  present  and  regret  the  lost  past,  ungratefully  selecting  the  troubles  of
our  own  time  for  notice  and  ignoring  its  bright  features,  while  we  forget  the  hardships
of  the  past  and  [remember  only  its  last  pleasant  features,  like  the  Jews,  who  forgot
the  rigours  of  the  slavery  from  which  they  had  escaped,  but  remembered  with  regret  the
flesh-pots  of  Egypt  (Exod.  xvi.  3).  The  Bible  favours  no  sentimental  regrets  for  ''  the
good  old  times ;  it  teaches  us  that  God*s  goodness  is  increasingly  manifest.  The  latter
times  are  better  than  the  former,  the  Gospel  age  than  the  Old  Testament  era,  the  later
years  of  Christendom  than  the  earlier.  The  best  is  not  yet  revealed.  The  songs  of  the
future  should  be  sweeter  than  those  of  the  past,  since  Qod  has  greater  mercies  in  store
for  us  than  any  we  have  yet  enjoyed.  Already  God  has  favoured  us  more  highly  than
our  fathers.  We  need  not  search  Uie  musty  annals  of  antiquity  for  proofs  of  the  good-
ness of  God.    This  is  a  present  goodness,  and  the  richest  friiits  of  it  are  the  latest.

lY.  The  latest  blessings  are  given  in  spite  of  our  greatest  ill  desert.  We
have  added  to  the  tale  of  our  sins  while  God  has  been  adding  to  the  tale  of  his  mercies.
As  his  goodness  has  increased  with  many,  their  sin  has  also  increased.  The  Egyptian
bondage  overtook  the  innocent ;  the  Babylonian  captivity  was  a  punishment  to  the
suilty.  Deliverance  from  the  latter  was  an  act  of  forgiving  mercy.  It  was  a  proof  of
God's  forbearance  that  he  continued  to  be  gracious,  and  of  his  pardoning  love  that  he
forgave  the  sinful  people.  Our  greatest  reason  for  praise  is  in  Qod'a  latest  mercy  of
redemption,  restoring  us  after  our  falls  into  sin.

Vers.  16--18. — Fishers  and  hunters,  I.  The  chase.  The  guilty  will  be  sought
after  for  punishment.  If  they  do  not  seek  God  in  penitence  he  will  seek  them  in
judgment.  However  far  we  may  flee  from  obedience  we  cannot  flee  from  responsibility.
Jonah  fled  "  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord  *'  (Jonah  i.  3),  but  he  was  overtaken  by  a  Divine
judgment.  If  GKxL's  present  long-suffering  makes  him  appear  indifferent,  the  day  will
come  when  his  wrath  will  be  swift,  searching,  and  far-reaching.  Then  none  of  the
impenitent  can  escape.    None  can  hide  from  the  approaching  doom ;  hunters  "  shall


CH.  XVI.  1—21.]  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.        401


hunt  them  from  every  mountain,  and  from  every  hill,  and  out  of  the  holes  of  the
rocks."  It  will  be  useless  then  to  "  call  on  the  hills  to  cover  us,"  etc.  None  will  be  over-
looked. Fishers  will  come  with  their  drag-net,  gathering  all  classes  as  fish  of  all  kinds
and  of  all  sizes  are  collected  in  the  sea.  Rank  counts  for  nothing  when  kings  are
hunted  like  foxes ;  intellectual  ingenuity  can  then  find  no  covert  of  sophistry  beneath
which  to  elude  the  keen  scent  of  the  bloodhounds  of  justice ;  exceptional  originality
can  secure  no  position  beyond  the  reach  of  the  broad  sweeping  net  of  a  general  judgment.

n.  The  beasok  fob  expeoting  a  fatal  result  to  the  chase.  Grod  undertakes
the  direction  of  it  (ver.  17).  He  knows  all ;  he  is  ever  watching  every  one  of  his
children,  for  their  joy  if  they  are  obedient  and  submissive,  for  their  shame  if  they  are
rebellious  and  impenitent.  1.  God's  eyes  are  upon  their  ways.  He  does  not  depend
upon  hearsay  evidence,  upon  the  testimony  of  his  emissaries.  Hence  (1)  none  can  elude
his  searching  gaze,  and  (2)  we  shall  not  be  convicted  on  false  evidence.  2.  Ood's  eyes
are  upon  their  ways.  Ho  notes  conduct,  action,  behaviour.  3.  Qod*s  eyes  are  upon  cUl
their  ways.  The  most  secret  do  not  escape  his  notice.  Little  faults  are  observed ;  nidden
sins  are  known ;  all  is  fairly  weighed  and  compared.  Ood  does  not  select  conduct  for
judgment ;  he  observes  both  the  good  and  the  bad,  and  judges  of  the  whole.  4.  Iniquity
is  not  hidden.  God  looks  beneath  the  ways  to  the  iniquities  which  prompt  them ;  he
reads  the  heart,  and  judges  of  conduct  by  motive.  Who  can  escape  sucn  a  searching
ordeal  ?

III.  The  fatal  end  to  the  chase.  (Ver.  18.)  After  conviction  follows  the  sentence.

1 .  This  is  a  recompense.  It  is  earned  and  it  is  fairly  proportionate  to  guilt.  None  of
us  dare  ask  for  the  simple  reward  of  our  conduct.

"  Consider  this—
That  in  the  course  of  justice,  none  of  us
Should  see  salvation  :  we  do  pray  for  mercy."

2.  It  increases  in  severity  with  the  increase  of  sin.  The  successive  sieges  of  Jerusalem
were  successively  more  terrible ;  so  were  the  repeated  raids  upon  Rome.  The  longer
we  treasure  up  wrath  for  the  day  of  wrath  the  greater  must  be  the  weight  of  it  that
will  ultimately  burst  on  our  heads.  3.  It  is  justly  required  by  great  sin.  This  was
(1)  gjeat  moral  and  reli^ous  corruption  ;  (2)  practised  in  "the  holy  land  " — ^in  Qod's
inheritance,  and  therefore  a  sacrilegious  defilement  of  Divine  things ;  and  (3)  an  abuse
of  Gtxl's  blessings  in  the  land  God  had  given  the  people.  The  sin  of  those  who  enjoy
Divine  privileges  and  hold  positions  in  the  Churcn  by  means  of  which  they  can  glorify
or  dishonour  the  Name  of  God  is,  on  these  accounts,  especially  culpable.

Vers.  19 — 21. — Ood  revealed  to  the  heathen  by  his  judgment  on  his  people,  I.  God
IS  REVEALED  IN  JUDGMENT.  Blessiugs  revcal  Gknl's  love;  judgments,  his  righteous
power.  They  who  ignore  the  perennial  tokens  of  God's  loving-kLidness  may  be  roused
by  startling  manifestations  of  his  justice.  The  judgments  wnich  fall  on  the  professed
people  of  God  are  the  most  striking  proofs  of  his  unfiinching  and  impartial  justice.

II.  The  heathen  mat  leabn  the  lessons  which  abe  lost  to  the  people  of  God.
The  heathen  seem  to  be  here  described  as  returning  to  Gkxl  before  the  Jews.  Nothing
is  so  blinding  as  sin  against  light.  The  publican  repents  before  the  Pharisee.  Worldly
men  are  more  ready  to  receive  religious  impressions  than  people  who  were  once  religious
and  have  fallen  away.

III.  The  revelation  of  God  vouchsafed  to  the  spibitual-minded  is  higheb
than  the  revelation  made  to  the  heathen  in  judgment.  The  latter  is  grand  and
striking,  but  it  does  not  open  up  the  choicer  stores  of  the  knowledge  of  God.  Jeremiah
prizes  these.  To  him  God  is  a  Strength,  Fortress,  and  Refuge.  Qod  is  not  a  mere
Judge.  He  is  a  gracious  Father,  and  this  is  his  chief  character.  He  is  a  Strength —
actively  savins  and  inspiring  energy ;  a  Fortress — protecting  us  when  attacked  in  the
hard  battle  of  life ;  and  a  Befuge  in  the  day  of  affliction,  afibrding  solace  to  his  sorrowing
children.  (}od*s  people  enjoy  personal  relations  with  him  very  different  from  those  of
men  who  simply  recognize  the  terrible  presence  of  G^  in  judgment.  Thus  Jeremiah
says,  "  My  Strength,"  etc.

JEREMIAH.  2  D


i


402  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROTHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  xvi.  1— 21.


HOMILIES  BY  VABIOITS  AUTHORS.

▼era.  1 — ^'--'Celtbacy  as  an  oUtgatum  of  the  minister  of  ChxL  This  ponage  has
been  quoted  in  support  of  the  Romish  doctrine  of  the  celibacy  of  the  clergy.  Like
other  favourite  references  of  the  advocates  of  this  regulation,  however,  it  only  Tequires
to  be  examined  to  show  that  its  bearing  is  quite  of  an  opposite  character.  Its  teims
are  not  by  any  means  absolute  or  universal.  Not  even  the  whole  lifetime  of  the
prophet  nor  his  entire  ministry  are  within  the  scope  of  the  prohibition.  It  was  a
special  revelation  for  exceptional  circumstances,  and  must  not  be  converted  into
a  general  rule.

I.  The  limitations  imposed  upon  the  prophet,  akd  theib  beasoitb.  1.  TTie  com-
mcmd  related  to :  (I)  The  prophet  himself.  It  was  in  the  second  person  singular.  A
matter  affecting  himself  alone.  (2)  The  holy  land — "  in  this  place**  Should  circum-
stances lead  him  elsewhere,  the  infereDoe  is  that  the  restriction  would  be  withdrawn.
(3)  The  period  of  time  elapsing  between  the  delivery  of  the  special  **  vford  of  Jehovah  "
and  its  fulfilment,  2,  That  Jeremiah  himself  was  alone  required  to  observe  this  restrict
Hon  might  at  first  appear  strange  were  it  not  for  his  exceptional  position,  (1)  As  a
symbol  of  the  Divine  attitude  and  intention  towards  Judah,  Not  only  special  actions,
such  as  the  hiding  of  the  girdle,  were  to  be  of  this  character,  but  the  whole  personality
of  the  prophet.  He  was  representative  both  of  God  and  the  ideal  Israel.  Therefore
he  represents  the  mind  of  Gbd  towards  those  who  usurped  the  place  of  the  latter.  The
conditions  of  the  then  present  relations  of  GKxL  and  Judah  were  not  such  as  warranted
an  assumption  of  responsibilities  implying  for  their  happy  fulfilment  the  Divine
acceptance  and  favour.  In  the  midst  of  a  luxurious  people  his  celibacy  would  be
impressive.  (2)  As  an  example  to  others.  The  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  and  Judah,
whatever  they  might  experience  in  the  future,  would  not  be  able  to  say  they  had  been
entrapped  or  deceived  into  a  £Edse  security.  The  self-restraint  and  serious,  sad  aspect
he  presented  were  intended  to  influence  the  action  of  the  people  at  that  juncture.  The
calfunities  foretold  would  not  come  upon  those  who  had  been  unwarned.

n.  The  BBARiNa  of  these  upon  the  question  of  the  "  geubaot  of  the  glbbgft."
It  is  obvious  that,  as  there  were  many  other  ministera  of  Qod.  in  Judah  and  Jerusalem
at  that  time  to  whom  the  command  was  not  given,  it  was  intended  for  one  occupying
an  exceptional  position.  Further,  there  is  no  necessary  permanent  obligation  attaching
to  it.  A  certam  contingency  is  regarded— a  time  of  distress  and  bloodshed— and  the
conduct  of  the  prophet  is  directed  with  regard  to  that.  But  the  celibacy  of  the  clergy
is  a  permanent  institution  with  those  who  uphold  it.  No  regard  is  paid  to  special
circumstances  or  times.  And  the  office  of  the  Christian  minister  is  not  to  be  con-
sidered as  occupied  for  a  season  of  short-lived,  delusive  peace,  but  instituted  and  main-
tained in  a  world  which  is  being  reconciled  to  Ghod;  in  which  the  Holy  Spirit  is  given
to  ^em  that  ask  it  for  direction  and  comfort ;  azid  whose  institutions  are  more  and
more  influenced  bv  the  laws  of  the  kingdom  of  GKxL  So  in  St.  Paurs  day  it  was  the
"present  distress **  which  gave  rise  to  the  injunction.  The  world  was  conceived  of  as
approaching  a  grand  climateric ;  a  sudden  and  overwhelming  oalamity  was  to  inaugu-
rate Ohrist's  reign  amongst  men.  Much  will  depend  upon  this,  viz.  Is  the  minister  of
the  gospel  a  prophet  of  evil  or  a  preacher  of  peace  and  glad  tidings  ?  If  the  latter,  it
can  nardly  ne  necessary  that  he  should  assume  the  bearing  of  Jeremiah.  And  the
influence  of  a  celibate  clergy  upon  the  genend  institutions  of  marriage  has  been
found  to  be  pernicious,  lowering  its  relative  sacredness  and  violating  the  law  of
nature,  which  is  its  greatest  safeguard.

III.  Pbinoiplbs  of  qeneral  oblioatiok  nnroLyED.  The  duties  and  resinonts  here
imposed  upon  the  pn^het  are  not  rightly  apprehended  when  supposed  entireif  peculiar
to  office  and  position.  They  are  not  wholly  those  of  a  class  or  a  special  individoal,  but
rather  the  generally  obligatory  principles  of  die  spiritual  life  intensified  and  iq)ecial-
ized.    Every  Christian  ought  to  nold  himself  ready  to  sacrifice  and  to  adapt  himaelf  9M

l.TkB


the  duties  imposed  upon  him  under  given  oiroumstanoes  may  require.
bUities  of  marriage.  One's  own  happiness  merely  is  not  to  be  consulted  in  marrying,
but  the  probabilities  of  comfort  and  right  upbringing  of  children  that  may  be  bom.  A
Hcason  of  calamity  such  as  that  now  foretold  was  a  sufficient  reason  against  contracting


CH.  xvLl— 21.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  408

marriage,  as  by  that  means  its  effects  would  only  be  the  more  widely  extended.
2.  Consciousness  of  OotTs  displeasure  ought  to  exert  a  restraining  influence  upon  mm.
The  marriage  feast  and  the  usual  rejoicings  that  take  place  on  such  occasions  show  tbst
they  are  regarded  as  of  a  joyous  nature,  and  not  amongst  the  sterner  duties.  It  was
but  fitting,  therefore,  that  it  should  be  refrained  from  in  view  of  what  was  about  ta
take  place.  It  would  have  shown  a  heedlessness  of  Qod's  anger  provoking  the  more
signal  punishment.  The  "  marrying  and  giving  in  marriage  "  of  the  antediluvians  was
a  sign  of  their  godlessness  and  unbeUef.  3.  The  responsibility  of  example  is  here  pre"
sented  in  an  extreme  form.  What  would  have  applied  to  the  case  of  a  private  person
thus  forewarned  was  of  greater  force  in  that  of  one  occupying  an  exceptional  position
and  necessarily  of  great  public  influence.  If  the  declarer  of  the  Divine  message  had
himself  exhibited  no  sign  of  restndnt  or  chastened  severity  of  life,  how  could  others  be
expected  to  believe  him?  The  life  of  the  preacher  is  the  best  illustration  of  his
doctrine,  and  it  naturally  is  regarded  by  others  with  special  and  critical  attention. — M.

Vers.  10—13. — The  destiny  of  sinners  a  self -created  one,  I.  As  rr  IB  in  rrsBLF.
It  is  a  fearful  prospect  which  is  here  held  out  to  the  unbelieving  Jews.  They  are  ta
experience  a  complete  change  of  condition.  The  land  of  promise,  national  independence
and  honour,  family  purity  and  happiness,  and  the  institution  and  ordinances  of  true
religion  are  to  be  forfeited.  The  land  to  which  they  are  to  be  exiled  is  unfamiliar  to
them — full  of  strange  scenes  and  customs ;  a  scene  of  bondage  and  tyranny.  This  is
but  an  illustration  of  the  eternal  destiny  of  sinners.  Much  must  necessarily  be  vague
in  their  conceptions  of  it,  but  it  will  be  a  greater  change  from  their  present  circum-
stances and  experiences  than  can  be  imagined.  The  parable  of  the  rich  man  and  Lazarus
teaches  that  there  will  be  a  complete  reversal  of  relations  and  conditions.  How
impossible  for  the  lost  to  reconcile  themselves  to  circumstances  so  different  from  those
to  which  they  have  been  accustomed !  Their  nature  will  be  wholly  enslaved,  and  the
best  service  they  can  render  will  be  exacted  for  objects  unworthy  of  it  and  known  to
be  so.  Hell,  so  far  as  Scripture  allusion  to  it  can  be  understood,  is  represented  as
abnormal,  unnatural,  a  state  in  which  the  soul  shall  be  filled  with  fraitless  regret,,
and  sink  into  lower  and  still  lower  deeps  of  degradation  and  misery.  It  is  depicted
as  a  strange  and  sunless  land,  irradiated  by  no  celestial  smile  and  no  sunrise  of  hope.

n.  As  THE  BiNKEB  REOABDB  IT.  The  picture  drawu  by  Jeremiah  is  vague  and  yet
terribly  suggestive.  It  is  so  foreign  to  the  experience  and  expectation  of  his  hearera
that  they  look  upon  it  with  incredulity  and  astonishment.  Instead  of  evoking  from
them  expressions  of  repentance  and  fear  concerning  the  way  in  which  they  are
walking,  it  provokes  questions  that  exhibit  the  callous  indifference  and  self-deception
of  hardened  hearts.  They  cannot  conceive  of  such  a  fate  awaiting  them.  What  naire
they  done  ?  Is  it  just  that  their  conduct  should  be  so  dealt  with  V  If  any  ofifenoe  had
been  committed,  surely  it  was  out  of  all  proportion  to  such  a  judgment,  and  so  on.  Is
not  this  the  attitude  of  the  sinner  to-day  ?  The  more  awful  the  future  predicted  for
him  the  more  secure  he  feels  in  himself  now.  He  fails  to  trace  the  dennite  line  of
connection  between  the  germ  and  the  frnit  of  his  sin.  It  is  a  part  of  his  inflBtuation  to
misapprehend  the  law  of  the  Divine  reward  and  punishment,  and  even  the  real  outlines
and  proportions  of  the  Divine  character.  1.  A  destiny  in  his  view  so  disproportionate
to  his  offence  becomes  incredible.  And  just  as  the  Jew  could  not  conceive  of  the
features  and  characteristics  of  the  life  upon  which  he  was  to  enter  when  this  prophecy
should  be  fulfilled,  the  transgressor  now  fails  to  realize  the  position  he  must  occupy
when  circimistance  will  depend  only  upon  character.  Passing  consequences  may  be
seen  and  partly  estimated,  but  the  final  outcome  of  it  all  is,  because  of  its  very  nature
and  extent,  unreal  to  him.  2.  The  future  of  the  sinner  is  strange  and  unreal  to  him,
and  therefore  fails  to  impress  him  cts  it  ought.

III.  Ab  explained  by  Ood.  This  is  one  of  the  main  purposes  of  revelation,  y\z,  to
connect  the  present  with  the  future  and  to  interpret  their  relations.  Whilst  it  is  true
that  every  sinner  already  contains  within  himself  the  elements  of  his  future  punish-
ment, it  is  also  true  that  of  himself  he  could  not  forecast  the  actual  extent  or  nature
of  the  destiny  he  is  working  out.  It  is  necessary,  therefore,  both  for  emphasis  and
enlightenment,  to  supplement  experience  with  revelation.  1.  Their  pwntlnmeni  woe
but  the  naturcd  development  of  their  sin*    The  latter  was  of  old  date.    Their  fiithers


404  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [cu.  xvi.  1—21.

forsook  Jehovah,  did  not  keep  his  Law,  and  went  after  other  gods.  The  tendency  was
i^erited  by  themselves,  and  in  aggravated  degree:  ''Ye  have  done  worse  than
your  fEtthers."  They  now  paid  more  attention  and*  honour  to  idols  than  to  Jehovah,
and  when  this  is  the  case  it  cannot  last  long.  The  veil  of  decency  will  be  cast  aside,
1^6  real  character  will  betray  itself,  and  shame  will  cease.  They  became  more  and
more ''  sold  under  sin.**  The  vices  of  a  false  religion  weakened  their  character  and
made  them  a  ready  prey  to  the  ambition  and  rapacity  of  their  neighbours.  The  same
law  is  apparent  in  spiritual  destiny.  Let  the  sinner  be  warned.  He  may  be  sure  his
sin  will  nnd  him  out.  2.  It  vxts  htU  right  that  they  should  he  so  punished,  as  they  had
added  to  their  ancestral  offence  an  intolerable  personal  aggravation.  The  terms,  of  the
covenant  were  flagrantly  violated,  and  they  had  forfeited  the  land  by  their  moral  unfit-
ness to  occupy  it.  If  an  earthly  country  could  be  so  hallowed  as  not  to  admit  of  being
occupied  by  unclean  idolaters,  how  much  less  possible  must  it  be  for  confirmed  sinners
to  stand  in  the  presence  of  God  amidst  the  multitudes  of  redeemed  I  Heaven  would  be
hell  to  such  persons.  3.  The  spiritual  condition  that  was  so  dealt  with  presented  no
SrtmndfoT  consideration,  Gkxl  said,  "  I  will  show  you  no  favour."  It  was  a  deliberate
sin,  and  there  were  no  signs  of  repentance.  The  day  of  grace,  however,  was  with  them
whilst  the  prophet  spoke.  So  is  it  represented  to  be  with  the  preaching  of  the  gospel.
Whilst  Gbd  caUs  to  us  his  mercy  still  continues.  ''  Now  is  the  accepted  time ;  .  .  .
now  is  the  day  of  salvation.**  But  in  that  day  present  obstinacy  will  be  the  worst
condemnation.    "  I  called,  and  ye  refused,"  etc. — ^M.

Ver.  13. — Sin  a  tyrannous  and  exhaustive  service.  L  That  which  was  at  first  a
FBKE  CHOICE  WILL  IN  TIME  BECOME  A  COMPULSOBT  SEBViOB.  The  waywarducss  and
capricious  eclecticism  of  the  idolatrous  Jews  was  to  be  sternly  visited  upon  them.
They  had  toyed  and  compromised  with  idols ;  soon  it  would  be  discovered  that  that
dalliance  could  not  be  prolonged.  1.  Jehovah  will  not  continue  to  acoepta  half-hearted
service.  It  was  only  his  fon)earance  that  had  suffered  it  so  long.  Whilst  it  might
appear  possible  that  Judah  would  repent,  the  imperfection  of  its  service  was  overlooked ;
but  when  that  imperfection  seemed  likely  to  be  stereotyped,  or  when  it  was  increasing
with  the  growth  of  idolatrous  practices,  it  was  no  longer  to  be  endured.  A  mixeil
worship  is  dishonouring  to  God.  He  refuses  to  accept  half  a  heart.  It  is  impossible
.to  serve  him  aright  with  divided  atteution  and  interest.  Permission  to  worship  and
Juiow  him  even  in  part  is  a  privilege  which  may  be  withdrawn.  The  ''  idolater"  would
Jiot  always  be  able  to  walk  on  the  heights  of  critical  spiritual  eclecticism.  The  time
would  come  when  what  he  thought  so  irksome  would  be  taken  away.  God  would
send  upon  him  *^  strong  delusion  to  believe  a  lie."  And  this  is  rather  to  be  looked
upon  as  a  repudiation  of  Judah  by  God  than  as  a  departure  from  Jehovah  permitted  by
hun  to  his  own  hurt.  Spiritual  power  and  hallow^  circumstance  would  alike  be  for-
feited, and  Gt)d  would  cast  off  the  idolaters.  For :  2.  Sinful  tendency ,  when  let  alone,
cor^rms  and  strengthens  itself.  Daily  contact  with  the  obligations  and  influence  of
the  Law  and  the  temple  was  a  real  benefit  to  the  Israelites.  It  kept  them  from  settling
down  utterly  into  idolatrous  habits.  That  religious  observance  wnich  is  so  wearisome
to  the  sinner  is  his  safeguard ;  it  keeps  him  from  complete  abandonment  to  the  inner
depravity  of  his  nature.  He  is  alarmed,  warned,  disturbed,  whenever  he  is  inclined  to
more. than  ordinary  licence;  and  even  his  ordinary  lax  and  sinful  life  is  constantly
judged  and  corrected  by  the  truth  which  he  hears.  The  Spirit  of  Gkxl  continues
to  plead  and  wrestle  with  him,  and  although  he  does  not  wholly  yield  himself  to
its  influence,  he  is  prevented  from  wandering  quite  beyond  recalL  But  let  this
restraining  influence  of  grace  once  be  withdrawn,  the  natund  impulse  to  evil,  all
unchecked,  will  begin  to  develop  and  gradually  overmaster  the  entu«  nature.  This
is  the  explanation  of  many  a  life  that  seems  to  linger  Ions  upon  the  debatable  line
between  duty  and  sinful  inclination—it  is  the  Spirit  of  Gk)d  that  has  not  ceased  to
strive  with  it,  and  not  the  mere  power  of  the  man  over  his  own  desires  and  habits.  3.
The  circumstances  and  opportunities  of  Divine  worMp,\f  persisienUy  neglected  and
abused,  will  be  withdrawn,  Palestine  under  the  theocracy  was  a  breathing-space  for
the  spiritual  aspirations  of  man.  It  was  a  school  of  purest  affection  and  the  most
exalted  righteousness.  Divine  power  outside  of,  and  also  workins  within,  Israel  had
defended  it  against  the  most  tremendous  invading  forces.    Let  that  power  be  with-


CH.  XYi.  1— 21.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PKOPHET  JEREMIAH.  405

drawn,  the  possibility  of  every  man  worshipping  Qod  under  his  own  vine  and  fig  tree
would  be  taken  away.  The  Jews  would  be  overpowered  by  the  laws  and  customs  of
the  idolatrous  nations  amongst  whom  they  would  be  dispersed.  How  much  do  we  owe
to  the  political,  social,  and  personal  influences  that  make  for  righteousness  around  us !
How  slowly  and  at  what  infinite  cost  have  they  been  acquired!  And  they  depend
upon  unceasing  effort  for  their  support  and  advancement.  Civilization  is  the  product
of  long,  manifold,  and  harmonious  effort  and  growth.  It  is  a  gossamer  fabric  which  a
day  might  destroy.  Yet  is  it  but  an  outwork  and  coarse  expression  of  religion.  The
latter  is  the  breath  and  inspiration  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Let  that  breath  be  withdrawn,
and  it  ceases  to  live ;  and  its  most  characteristic  and  essential  institutions  gradually
become  obsolete  and  sink  into  a  mockery  and  a  snare.  We  shall  probably  never  know
how  much  we  owe  to  the  mere  circumstance  of  religion  that  surrounds  us.  Freedom  to
worship  God,  encouragement  to  obey  him,  and  sustaining  power  to  give  effect  to  our
spiritual  desires,  all  re^lt  from  the  favourable  position  in  which  we  are  placed.  Let
us,  therefore,  seek  to  foster  the  institutions  and  increase  the  social  and  political
influence  of  Christianity  in  the  world.  Without  its  presence  amongst  men,  and  the
hallowed  institutions,  customs,  and  observances  that  embody  its  spirit,  we  should  find
it  infinitely  more  difficult  to  serve  GKxL  with  conscientious  and  honest  service.

II.  This  bervicb  will  afford  no  real  satisfaction  or  peace.  The  exhaustive
and  absorbing  devotion  which  idolatry  entails  is  not  the  sign  of  spontaneous  enthu-
siasm. It  arises  from  the  nature  of  the  idols,  as  senseless,  helpless  blocks.  They^
indeed,  must  cry  loudly  who  would  be  heard  by  such  gods.  In  proportion  as  ritual  is
more  laborious  than  righteousness,  so  is  idolatry  more  exacting  than  true  religion.  But
"  the  idol  is  nothing,*'  only  the  representative  of  the  lusts  and  ignorance  of  its  wor-
shippers. It  is  in  reality  the  latter  that  receive  and  demand  the  service.  All  sin  is
idolatry  in  some  form  or  other,  and  will  prove  as  exacting  of  the  attention  and  labour
of  the  sinner.  Who  is  not  willing  to  admit  that  sin  is  a  hard  taskmaster  ?  And  yet,
what  are  its  rewards?  The  poor  soul,  hurried  and  driven  by  its  own  overmastering
lusts  and  passions,  has  no  rest,  and  no  solid  residuum  of  comfort  is  secured ;  nay,  rather
a  sense  of  deepening  gloom,  indefinite,  unquenchable  craving,  and  a  foreboding  of  th&
final  wrath  of  him  whom  it  has  insulted  and  disobeyed.  To  the  victims  of  wicked
habit,  etc.,  as  to  the  devotees  of  a  false  religion,  the  words  of  Christ  are  addressed^
"  Come  unto  me,  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy  laden,"  etc — ^M.

Vers.  14, 15. — The  old  deliverance  forgotten  in  the  new,    I.  The  greater  aot)  more

INVETERATE   THE  TRANSGRESSION,  THE  GREATER  WILL  BE  THE  PUNISHMENT.      It  WaS  UOt

to  be  supposed  that  the  past  judgments  of  God,  however  great,  were  all  that  he  could  or
would  do.  He  has  many  ways  of  bringing  transgressors  to  their  senses ;  and  it  is
impossible  to  conceive  a  limit  to  his  power  of  imposing  penalty.  His  stem,  uncom-
promising attitude  to  sin  has  been  witnessed  to  by  many  an  awful  judgment  and
destruction,  even  where  previous  calamities  might  seem  to  have  exhausted  his  anger  or
his  invention.

II.  The  PROMISE  of  God  appears  side  by  side  with  the  first  announcements  of
HIS  JUDGMENTS.  Eveu  in  the  way  in  which  it  is  threatened  there  is  encouragement
and  hope.  It  will  be  an  awful  experience,  but  Qtod  will  redeem  his  people.  So  in  the
beginning  of  the  curse  our  first  parents  received  an  anticipatory  evangel.  The  failures
of  God's  people  in  social  and  political  experiment  were  the  occasion  of  the  most  glorious
predictions  of  Messianic  times.  This  shows  the  real  purpose  of  GK)d's  threatenings.
They  are  intended  to  produce  repentance,  and  yet  there  is  reality  enough  in  them  if
that  repentance  be  not  forthcoming.  Fear  is  appealed  to,  but  freedom  of  choice  is
preserved,  and  spiritual  power  called  into  responsible  action.

ni.  The  merciful  power  of  God  will  be  more  gloriously  manifested  in  every

NEW  CALAMITY  WHICH  HIS  PEOPLE  BRING  UPON  THEMSELVES.      The  Captivity  of  whlch

the  prophet  speaks  will  but  give  occasion  for  a  grand  deliverance,  in  comparison  with
which  the  Exodus  from  Egypt  will  sink  into  insignificance.  The  judgments  of  God,
however  great  they  may  appear,  are  limited  with  the  strictest  exactness,  and  are
within  his  control.  There  is  reason,  therefore,  to  expect  his  interference  whenever  the
folly  or  unbelief  of  his  people  imperils  his  cause.  He  will  preserve  a  people  to  praise
him,  and  raise  up  a  generation  to  call  him  blessed.    So  with  the  backslider  from  gospel


406  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  xvi.  1—21.

{Nriyileges  and  obligations.  He  whom  Christ  has  washed  in  his  blood  will  not  be
suffered  wholly  to  pass  into  spiritu^  death.  Quander  exhibitions  of  the  Divine  grace
and  power  will  be  afforded.  The  good  Shepherd  will  go  over  the  dark  mountains  to
recover  the  wanderer.  Those  who  have  been  entangled  again  in  the  yoke  of  bondage
will  be  redelivered  if  they  but  turn  with  new  obed^oe  and  fftith  to  their  Savbur.
They  will  be  saved,  if  "  as  by  fire." — M.

Vers.  19 — 21. — The  heathen  turning  to  the  true  Ood,  The  prophet,  disappointed
and  broken-hearted,  is  driven  to  Jehovah  for  his  own  comfort  and  support.  Wo  see
here  how  much  it  cost  him  to  speak  the  words  he  had  to  utter.  Every  true  minister
of  Christ  must  feel  in  the  same  manner  when  he  has  to  deal  with  hardened  sinners,
and  to  become  the  mouthpiece  of  Divine  warnings  and  threats.  The  soul  that  stands  up
for  righteousness  will  often  find  itself  without  sympathy  and  done  amongst  imbe-
lievinff  men.  Prayer  is  the  refuge  that  is  ever  open  in  such  hours.  An  extremity
like  this  is  of  all  others  God's  opportunity.  Like  Elijah  in  the  wilderness,  he  will
rsoeive  unexpected  succour.  He  will  live,  not  on  bread,  but  on  words  and  revelaUons
of  Qod.    To  Jeremiah  was  given  this  vision.

I.  Whilst  Jbhovah  is  desbbted  bt  his  own  people  the  heathen  will  seek  him.
Th^re  is  a  law  of  displacement  visible  in  Gk>d's  dealiogs  with  his  Church  from  age  to
age.  Like  the  man  in  the  parable,  who  prepared  the  feast  and  bade  many,  he  is
determined  that  his  house  shaU  b^  filled.  1.  In  this  way  Ood  shouts  his  people  that  he
does  not  specially  need  them.  His  favour  depends  upon  their  faithfulness ;  if  they  fail
he  has  others  to  supply  their  place.  His  election  is  no  blind  fEivouritism  or  arbitrary
distinction,  but  proceeds  upon  spiritual  conditions.  2.  Apostasy  from  Ood  is  due  to
imperfenily  understanding  him ;  hut  the  Jieathen  who  turn  to  him  do  so  with  full
experience  of  the  effects  of  their  idolatry.  The  vanity  and  nothingness  of  idols  drives
them  in  despair  to  the  true  Gk)d.  Henceforth  for  them  idolatry  can  have  no  power.  It
has  been,  as  the  Law  was  to  Saul,  a  schoolmaster  to  bring  them  to  Christ  Lessons
jaoquired  in  so  stem  a  school  are  not  soon  forgotten ;  and  the  half-hearted  disciple,  led
jvway  of  his  own  lusts  and  enticed,  is  supplanted  by  a  steadfast  and  faithful  convert.
,So  every  day  is  the  Church  of  Christ  being  recruited  from  the  ranks  of  those  who  have
been  the  *'  chief  of  sinners.''  We  cannot  tell  in  what  depths  of  degradation  those  may
now  be  sunk  who  are  to  shine  as  stars  in  the  eternal  firmament.  Let  the  individual
Christian  strive,  therefore,  to  make  his  calling  and  his  election  sure.  Let  the  Church
see  that  its  candlestick  be  not  removed.

n.  Idolatbt  IB  A  8T6TEM  WHICH  BEFUTEB  ITSELF.  L  U  disappoints  the  expecta-
tions which  it  hat  awakened.  2.  The  conscience  at  last  revolts  against  the  excesses  to
which  it  leads.  3.  By-and-hy  the  evident  truism^  that  what  man  makes  cannot  he  his
gody  is  realized  and  a^ed  upon.  This  process  is  going  on  to-day  in  the  great  seats  of
idolatrous  worship,  and  the  fiercest  iconoclasts  are  to  be  found  amongst  those  who  have
been  brought  up  in  heathenism.  A  similar  process  to  this  goes  on  in  the  lives  of  good
men  as  they  are  gradually  freed  from  the  illusions  of  life  and  the  ensnaring  influences
of  worldly  ideas  and  aims.  The  disappointments  of  life  are  so  many  waves  casting  us
upon  the  shore  of  a  heavenly  life,  and  the  general  drift  of  earthly  experience  is  in  many
and  many  an  instance  bringing  men  surely  to  Ood.

III.  FaILINO  a  BBTTEB  REVELATION,  THE  JUDGMENTS  OF  JeHOYAH  UPON  HXB  OWN
FBOPLB  WILL  SHOW  THE  HEATHEN  THAT  HE  IS  THE  ONLY  BEAL  GOD.      TMs  IS  UOt  the

way  in  which  Ood  would  prefer  to  diow  men  his  glory  and  his  power.  It  is  b^  his
saving  grace  he  would  commend  himself  to  them.  And  the  saints  are  the  appomted
teachers  of  the  world.  They  could  tell  of  his  power  and  his  grace,  of  tniur  own
^ddiverance.  They  could  exhibit  the  blessings  of  a  people  whoM  trust  is  Jehovah.
But,  failing  this,  they  would  be  made  examples.  Tiie  justice  of  God  will  take  the
plica  of  his  mercy  which  has  been  abused.  Li  its  exceptional  severity,  its  evident
4X>nnection  with  and  suggestion  of  supernatural  agency,  etc.,  it  will  attract  attention
and  arouse  curiosity.  Israel,  therefore,  even  in  its  calamity  and  suffering,  will  serve
Ood.  A  vicarious  virtue  will  lurk  in  its  captivity,  its  desolation,  and  itsperaecnUon.
God  is  dealing  thus  with  the  unfaithful  branches  of  his  Church  to-day.  The  perplexi-
tSea,  entanglements,  and  griefs  that  are  due  to  worldly  alliance  and  secular  ambitaons
•ad  desires  are  well  enough  understood  even  by  worldly  men.    Not  from  Eden,  bat


CH.XVL1— 21.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  407

■  — . — . —

from  the  wilderness  to  which  she  has  banished  herself,  will  the  bride,  the  Lamb's  wife,
be  brought  for  her  new  espousals,  and  with  her  shall  come,  as  virgins  in  her  train,  many
who  have  been  taught  by  her  judgments  and  disciplines. — M.

Vers.  1 — 9. — Commands  eotmiermanded.    There  are  three  such  in  this  section.

L  The  oommand  to  mabby.  1,  In  every  way  whereby  the  will  of  God  can  be
expressed — by  his  Word,  his  providence,  his  laws,  written,  moral,  social,  physical,  God
has  commanded  that  '*  a  man  shall  leave  his  father  and  mother,"  etc.  **  A  good  wife
is  from  the  Lord,"  her  companionship  is  the  most  blessed  in  the  world.  All  artificial
hindzanccB  to  marriage  are,  therefore,  to  be  condemned.  The  same  enemy  that  destroys
such  myriads  of  souls  for  eternity,  ruins  their  happiness,  oftentimes,  in  this  life  also.
For  it  is  the  world  which  frowns  upon  marriages,  unexceptionable  in  other  respects,  in
which  a  certain  style  cannot  be  maintained  or  a  certain  amount  of  income  be  secmred ;
and  all  superstitious  teachings  that  inculcate  celibacy  as  a  state  more  pleasing  to  God,
are  equally  guilty  both  in  regard  to  God  and  man.  Disobedience  to  this  commuid
involves  such  frightful  consequences  as  in  themselves  to  clearly  manifest  the  Divine
will,  that  '^  it  is  not  good  for  man  to  be  alone."  2.  But  here  in  these  verses  the  prophet
is  distinctly  forbidden  to  marry.  (Ver.  1,  etc.)  And  the  reasons  werejprobabfy  that,
by  his  abstaining  from  marriage,  he  might  more  powerfully  confirm  his  words  as  to  the
coming  calamities.  It  would  show  his  own  belief  in  what  he  had  foretold  when  it  was
seea  that  he  would  not  make  for  himself  a  homo  under  such  circumstances.  It  would
leave  him  more  free  for  the  arduous  duty  which  he  had  to  discharge.  It  would  save
him  great  sorrow  when  the  evil  days  should  come.  And  so  now  there  are  special  cases
in  which  Gk)d's  will  seems  to  be  that  a  man  should  not  marry.  The  poverty-stricken
ministers  of  religion,  of  whom  there  are  so  many  ;  the  missionary  exposed  to  daily  peril
of  climate,  pestilence,  savage  heathendom ;  or  any  to  whom  it  is  evident  that  by  Uieir
marriage  more  evil  than  good  will  result ; — then,  just  as  we  may  be  called  upon  to  do
without  many  other  great  earthly  advantages,  so  we  may  be  called  upon  to  deny
ourselves  this.  And  there  may  be  physical  conditions  forbidding  marriage.  No  man
has  a  right  to  transmit  to  others  hereditary  disease,  whether  of  body  or  mind.  And
there  are  spiritual  hindrances.  A  man  ought  to  marry  only  "  in  the  Lord."  But  all
these  exceptions  are  rare ;  God*s  general  rule  is  that  men  should  marry.

II.  The  coMMA2n>  to  "weep  with  them  that  weep."  That  there  would  be  no
stint  of  sorrow,  no  lack  of  mourners,  the  awful  declarations  of  this  section  plainly  show.
And  generally  Crod*s  will,  shown  in  a  thousand  ways,  is  that  we  should,  bv  sympathy
and  condolence,  '*  bear  one  another's  burdens,  and  so  fulfil  the  Law  of  Christ.  But  here
such  sympathy  and  '*  weeping  with  them  that  weep  "  is  prohibited  (ver.  5).  This  does
seem  a  stem  command,  and  no  doubt  it  is  so.  But  we  do  not  feel  called  on  to  condole
with  criminals  on  account  of  the  penalties  they  have  to  bear ;  were  any  to  do  so,  we
should  regard  it  as  misplaced  and  mischievous  sympathy,  calculated  only  to  do  haim.
And  whikt  those  to  whom  the  prophet  was  sent  were  hardened  in  their  sin,  sympathy
with  them  on  account  of  their  punishment  would  be  also  mischievous  and  wrong.  We
have  continually  to  be  on  our  guard— for  many  never  are — ^lest  our  sympathy  for  the
sinner's  suffering  should  ma^e  us  forget  or  think  lightly  of  the  sinner's  sin.  Ko  matter
how  glaring  the  crime,  there  are  always  some  who  are  ready  to  agitate  for  a  mitigation
of  the  penalty.  Kow,  it  is  this  hurtful  sympathy  which  God  here  forbids  the  prophet
to  show.

III.  The  command  to  "rejoice  with  them  that  do  bejoicb."  This  also  is  a
constant  injunction  of  the  Divine  Word,  as  it  is  an  instinct  of  the  benevolent  and
Christian  heart.  Jesus  was  as  ready  to  go  to  the  marriage  festival  as  to  the  grave-side.
And  so  should  we  be.  But  here  again  the  command  is  countermanded  (ver.  8).  And
the  reason  is  manifest.  God  woula  not  suffer  his  prophet  to  be  in  any  wise  a  solace  to
sinful  men.  Too  many  professed  Christians  are.  Nothing  is  a  greater  ^  confort  to
Sodom  "  than  the  sight  of  the  serenity  and  joviality  of  men  who  profess  to  beiieve  that
sinners  are  on  their  way  to  everlasting  woe.  The  sinner  argues — and  it  is  an  argument
very  difiBcult  to  refute — ^that  Christians  do  not  believe  this,  no  matter  what  they  say,
and  hence  they,  the  ungodly,  are  in  no  such  awful  peril  after  all.  The  prophet  of  God
was  commanded  to  abstain  from  all  festivity  and  all  outward  joy,  and  no  doubt  the
reason  was,  lest  by  any  sharing  tbcrein,.he  should  throw  doubt  on  the  awful  message  he


408  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,     [ch.  xvi.  1— 21.

was  charged  to  deliver.  Are  the  ministers  of  God  bound  to  do  the  like  now  ?  Our  Lord
did  not.  His  apostles  did  not.  I^o where  are  we  bidden  to  abstain  from  all  earthly  joy.
Rather  are  we  assured  that  Gkxl  has  "  given  us  all  things  richly  to  enjoy."  And  the
unbeliever's  objection  on  the  ground  of  the  inconsistency  of  our  calmness,  and  yet  more
of  our  gladness,  notwithstanding  the  awful  peril  of  ungodly  souls,  may  be  met  by  the
reply  that  we  cannot  say  of  those  whom  yet  we  would  fain  see  drawn  much  nearer  to
God  than  they  to  our  eyes  are,  that  they  are,  as  those  whom  Jeremiah  addressed,  abso-
lutely doomed.  We  are  not  forbidden  to  pray  for  them,  as  Jeremiah  was ;  nor  to  hope
that  even  yet  they  may  turn  to  Gkxl  aud  find  mercy.  The  prophet  had  no  hope ;  we
have  much,  and  it  is  on  the  ground  of  that  hope  which  we  cherish  that  our  calmer,
brighter  moods  are  justified.  Still,  one  shrinks  from  saying  aught  that  would  seem  to
sanction  the  terrible  indifference  we  all  too  much  manifest  in  regard  to  the  spiritual
condition  of  the  world  around  us.  But  yet  we  may  say  that  that  condition  is  not  such
as  to  demand— even  were  it  possible,  which  it  is  not,  to  comply  with  the  demand — that  we
should  all  cease  from  joy,  and  clothe  ourselves  unceasingly  in  sackcloth  and  ashes.  We
cannot  do  that ;  we  are  not  bidden  to  do  that,  nor  would  it  be  of  \ise  were  we  to  do  so.
We  have  a  gospel  to  proclaim,  a  living  Saviour  to  hope  in,  and  a  Holy  Spirit's  energies
to  second  all  our  prayers  and  endeavours  to  win  men  to  God.  But  at  the  same  time,
the  believer  in  God  and  in  his  righteous  Law  cannot  and  ought  not  to  find  pleasure  in  the
rejoicings  of  the  UDgodly,  or  to  give  any  countenance  to  their  defiance  of  God.  No ;  we
are  not  to  go  "  in  the  way  of  sinners,"  not  to  sit ''  in  the  seat  of  soomers/'  though  it  may  be
a  scene  of  festivity  and  mirth.  From  all  such  we  must  turn  away.  We  cannot  rejoice
\fiiti  them  when  they  rejoice ;  in  their  gladness  we  cannot  share,  but  only  mourn  t^at
they  do  not  mourn.  Let  them  turn  to  God,  and  we  will  dwell  among  them,  and  in  their
joy  and  in  their  sorrow  we  will  gladly  share.  But  until  they  do,  for  us  as  for  CK>d's
l)rophet,  his  ordinary  commands  as  to  sympathy  with  them  are  countermanded,  and  we
must  stand  aside.  Light  cannot  have  fellowship  with  darkness,  nor  the  chHdren  of
God  with  the  children  of  the  wicked  one.—  0.

Vers.  10 — 13. — Conscience  dead.  Conscience  is  given  us  of  Gk>d,  to  serve  as  a  faithful
sentry,  warning  of  the  approach  of  sin  and  summoning  the  energies  of  our  souls  to  resist
and  reject  the  intruder.  Or  as  a  just  judge  to  unhesitatingly  condemn  sin,  let  it  be
wrapped  up  in  what  specious  disguise  it  may.  It  is  the  Ithuriers  spear  which,  the
moment  it  touches  any  moral  action,  compels  such  action  to  reveal  itself  of  what  sort  it
is.  Oh,  the  unspeakable  blessing  of  an  enlightened,  healthful  conscience  that  will  not
suffer  sin,  any  sin,  even  the  least,  without  prompt  and  powerful  protest  1  Gtod  help  us
all  diligently  to  guard,  profoundly  to  reverence  and  feiiliifully  to  obey  this  inward
monitor,  this  true  bearer  of  "  the  light  which  lighteth  every  man  that  oometh  into  the
world."  But  these  verses  reveal  a  condition  of  things  in  which  conscience  is  dead.  It
has  lost  all  power  of  perception,  its  voice  is  hushed,  or  rather,  what  is  worse,  it  sees  and
speaks  falsely.  It  is  a  mockery  of  life,  which  would  be  grotesque  were  it  not  so  pro-
foundly sad.  A  [caricature  and  parody  of  what  it  once  was,  its  powers  utterly
perverted,  bent,  warped,  so  that  they  "  call  evil  good,  and  good  evil."    Note—

L  The  fact.  How  else  can  such  a  question  as  this  of  ver.  10  be  accounted  for?
Was  not  their  sin  clear  as  the  sun  at  noonday  ?  Had  it  not  been  for  years  crying  aloud
to  Grod  for  vengeance  ?  Had  it  not  been  condemued  by  all  the  servants  of  God,  by  the
written  Law  of  God,  by  all  the  voices  of  God  in  long  succession  ?  And  yet  these  people
are  asking,  "  Wherefore  hath  the  Lord  pronounced  all  this  great  evil  against  us."  It  is
as  if  the  convicts  in  our  prisons  were  to  begin  to  ask  why  they  were  so  treated,  and  to
profess  ignorance  of  their  having  done  aught  amiss.  But  in  such  case  we  should  say
they  were  playing  the  hypocrite,  pretending  an  innocence  to  which  they  well  knew  they
had  no  claim.  In  this  case,  however,  there  is  no  hypocrisy.  The  question,  monstrous
as  it  seems  to  us,  is  asked  in  all  good  faith.  The  prophet  of  God  is  bidden  to  give  it  a
serious  answer,  not  to  denounce  those  who  ask  it  as  a  set  of  conscious  hypocrites.  Just
as  in  Matt.  zxy.  44,  which  is  a  portentous  parallel  indeed,  the  condemned  there  are
heard  asking  when  they  had  been  guilty  of  the  sins  laid  to  their  charge.  It  is  evident
in  that  case  and  in  this,  not  that  they  were  consciously  Uars,  but  l^t  conscience  was
simply  dead  within  them.  The  writer  knew  also  of  one  who  had  cruelly  defrauded  a
large  number  of  people,  who,  believing  him  to  be  an  eminently  religious  man,  had


CH.  XVI.  1-21.]     THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  409

entrusted  to  him  their  hard-earned  savings,  with  all  of  which  he  had  made  away ;  but,
when  brought  to  justice,  condemned,  and  imprisoned,  he  could  not  be  got  to  confess
that  he  had  done  wrong,  but  would  keep  quoting,  in  regard  to  himself,  texts  which  tell
of  the  afflictions  of  the  righteous,  and  how  "  whom  the  Lord  loveth  he  chasteneth."

II.  The  cause.  Conscience  is  starved  by  neglect-  of  that  seeking  of  Gk)d's  grace
which  is  its  nutriment  and  strength.  And  it  is  stunned  by  repeated  acts  of  sin.  Men
can  and  do  nibble,  if  we  may  so  speak,  at  conscience,  and  gradually  rid  themselves  of
it.  The  clamour  of  sin  drowns  the  still,  small  voice,  and  its  protests,  perpetually
unheeded,  are  at  last  withdrawn.  So  that  at  length  men  find  themselves  able  to  do  evil
and  think  nothing  of  it ;  the  little  rift  that  sin  first  made  has  widened  and  widened
until  the  whole  torrent  of  waters  bursts  through,  for  the  faithful  dyke  that  held  them
back  has  been  gradually  destroyed,  and  so  now  the  whole  nature  of  the  man  is  over-
whelmed, submerged  beneath  the  deluge  of  sin.  And,  what  is  most  sad,  the  man  feels,
no  more  than  do  the  sunken  cities  and  towns  that  lie  at  the  bottom  of  the  Zuyder
Zee,  the  rush  of  the  waves  that  for  centuries  have  rolled  over  them.

III.  The  cube.  Thank  God  there  is  one.  The  sharp  surgery  of  GK)d*s  judgments
arouse  the  deadened  conscience.  The  rags,  the  hunger,  the  degradation  of  the  prodigal
woke  up  his  conscience  and  brought  him  *'  to  himself.''  And  so  it  was  with  the  Jewish
people.  God's  judgments  made  them  hate  and  abhor,  as  they  have  done  ever  since,
the  idolatries  which  brought  those  judgments  upon  them.  It  would  be  dreadful  to
think  that  Qtod  had  no  resources  whereby,  in  full  harmony  with  its  freedom,  he  could
bring  into  due  subjection  and  order  *'  the  unruly  wills  of  sinful  men."  Can  we  conceive
of  God  having  created  a  force  greater  than  himself,  which  can  for  ever  defy  him,  and
ever  maintain,  as  Milton's  Satan  in  hell,  a  rebellious  though  wretched  rule  ?  God  knew
how  to  convert  Israel,  Saul,  the  penitent  thief,  ourselves,  and  we  may  trust  him  to  find
means  whereby  at  length  to  Jesus  every  knee  shall  be  made  to  bow.  Vers.  14  and  15
contemplate  a  converted  Israel  (cf.  also  Isa.  xxx.  18  ;  Matt,  xxvii.  33 — 39).  But  let
a  man  tremble  at  the  thought  of  compelling  God  to  deal  with  him  thus.  Let  him
beware  how  he  wastes  his  conscience,  lest  it  turn  against  him  and  suffer  him  to  sin
unrestrained. — C.

Vers.  14, 15. — Great  mercies  the  forerunners  of  greater  stiU.  At  first  reading  of  these
verses  their  truth  is  hardly  apparent  to  the  ordinary  reader  of  the  Bible.  The  deliverance
from  Egvpt  was  so  magnificent  an  event,  accompanied  by  such  manifestations  of  the
Divine  glory,  that  the  quiet  return  of  but  a  comparatively  few  of  the  exiles  from  Babylon
pales  into  insignificance.  Hence  it  is  the  latter  event  that  seems  not  worthy  to  be
spoken  of  in  comparison  with  the  former,  and  not  the  former  in  comparison  with  the
latter.  The  second  temple  was  so  greatly  inferior  to  the  first  that  old  men  who  had
seen  the  first  wept  when  they  thought  of  those  glories  which  to  the  second  were  quite
unattainable ;  and  so  the  return  from  Babylon  seems  to  fall  far  short  in  glory  of  the
redemption  from  Egypt.  But  these  verses  affirm  that  the  glory  of  the  return  from
Babylon  was  to  be  far  the  greater.  Now,  how  could  this  be  ?  It  may  be  said :  1«  That
in  this  return  there  was  a  msplay  of  the  moral  power  of  God  rather  than  his  physical
might.  That  which  was  needed  to  bring  this  about  was  the  exercise  of  the  Divine
power  on  men's  hearts  rather  than  any  material  force.  It  was  by  mighty  miracles  that
Israel  was  brought  out  of  Egypt ;  it  was  by  the  action  of  GK)d's  Spirit  on  his  people's
hearts  that  those  who  return^  from  Babylon  were  induced  so  to  do.  For  their  lot
was  happy,  prosperous,  peaceful,  so  far  as  this  world  was  concerned.  The  Books  of
Esther,  Nehemian^  and  Daniel  show  this.  Hence  it  was  a  strong  religious  yearning
that  led  to  the  return  of  those  who  returned.  The  mass  of  the  nation  were  content  to
remain,  and  did  remain,  and  formed  *'  those  of  the  Dispersion,"  of  whom  in  so  many  ways
we  hear  in  after  ages.  Hence,  as  Zechariah  says  (iv.  6),  it  was  *'  not  by  might,  nor  by
power,  but,"  etc.  2.  Then,  also,  in  this  return  there  was  a  display  of  God*s  pardoning
love,  Israel  was  a  forgiven  people.  They  had  received  at  the  Lord's  hand  double  for
all  their  sins.  But  God  is  ever  more  glorified  in  the  display  of  pardoning  love  than  in
any  manifestations  of  mere  power.  3.  And  there  was  in  it  stich  a  fulfilment  of  prophecy,
such  a  demonstration  of  the  overruline  power  of  God  in  and  through  all  the  movements
of  different  nations  and  ages,  as  proclaimed  God's  glory  more  than  power  alone  could
ever  do.    For  these  reasons  the  return  of  the  exiles  was  a  more  glorious  event  than  the


410  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [cu.  xvl  1-2L


deliveranoe  finom  Egypt.  4.  And  this  will  be  seen  yet  more  if  wo  take  the  verses  as
pointing  on  to  the  ultimate  restoration  of  Israel,  Zechariah  (xiiL  and  xiv.)  speaks  of  this,
a«  do  many  other  Scriptures.  It  was  the  "hope  of  Israel"  of  which  Paul  told, and  he
places  it  in  connection  with  the  second  advent  and  the  resurrection.  5.  And  ^ill  more  if
we  understand  by  Israel  the  spiritual  Israel,  and  regard  all  these  promisea  as  predicting
the  triumph  of  tiie  Church.  Thus  regarded,  the  deliverance  from  Egypt  was  by  com-
parison a  very  little  thing.  But  when  that  great  triumph  comes,  where  shall  t£«  be  ?  Qod
grant  that  it  be  amongst  those  whom  on  that  day  he  will  confess  before  his  Father  and
the  holy  angels.  But  this  notable  instance  in  which  past  mercies  promise  greater  ones
to  come  is  only  one  out  of  many  more.    Apply  the  principle  declared—

L  To  THE  Chuboh  at  labge.  What  mercies  in  the  past,  what  deliverances,  the
Church  has  enjoyed :  from  persecutorp, "  grievous  wolves,"  superatitian,  infidelity,  etc. !
Bat  all  these  are  to  be  regarded  as  pledges  of  yet  greater  ones  when  thay  shall  be  needed.

IL  To  ixn>iviDUAL  MEXBBBS  OF  THAT  Chuboh.  Who  of  US  caunot  recount,  in  the
course  of  our  lives,  temporal  deliverances :  from  mckness,  poverty,  perplexity,  sorrow,
death,  etc.?  We  are  to  take  them  all  as  reasons  to  anticipate  greater  things  still,  more
to  follow.  And  especially  spiritual  deliverances :  firom  living  on  in  disregard  of  Qod,
from  the  power  of  the  world,  temptation,  sorrow.  But  there  are  greater  ones  stilL  The
Chnrdi  in  its  full  redemption  shall  prove  the  truth  of  this,  and  so  shall  separate  members
of  the  CSmrch.    Ail  sbsdl  confess  that  the  Lord  hath  "  kept  the  good  wine  until  now."

CoNGLuaiOK.  1.  Be  not  dismayed  at  the  troubles  of  the  pcesent ;  do  not  think  God's
giaoe  is  exhausted.  2.  See  to  it  that  you  share  in  the  first  deliveranM — ^that  from  guilt
and  sin.  Unless  we  have  known  the  first,  we  cannot  know  the  aecaiid  and  greater^-
that  final  delivoaince  from  all  guilt,all  sin,  all  sorrow,  all  death,  in  the  preaenoe  of  Qod
for  ever.


Vers.  16 — ^21.— 5tn/ottnd  cut.  The  striking  imagery  of  these  veraea  teaches  us  that
there  shall  be  no  hiding-place,  whether  by  sea  or  l^d,  where  GK)d  will  not  find  those
whom  his  vengeance  pursues.    The  sinner  may  be  sure  that  his  dn  will  find  him  out.

I.  Men  DOUBT  THIS.  Reasons  are:  1.  Long  impunity  has  made  them  bold.  2.  Such
findings  of  them  out  as  have  taken  place,  in  defilement  of  conscience,  hardening  of  the
heart,  loss  of  peace  with  God,  etc.,  they  do  not  care  for.  They  only  care  for  public
exposure  and  punishment.  3.  They  see  others  go  on  in  sin  unpunished.  4L  The  power
wmch  we  all  have  to  believe  what  we  wish  to  believe.  5.  The  direct  agency  of  the
devil  in  fostering  such  false  belief.

n.  BCT  THE  DECLAEATIOK  OF  GOD  OK  THIB  MATTEB  IS  mTVEETHELBSB  TBX7B.      1.  The

Scriptures  affirm  it  {cL  all  those  which  teach  the  omiuscience  and  omnipresence  of
God).  2.  Conscience  attests  it.  3.  Thae  is  nothing  in  sin  to  show  wherefore  it  should
not  be.  4.  The  revelation  of  the  future  life  distinctly  provides  fSor  it.  5.  And  even
now  it  is  continually  bdng  proved  true.  A  man's  sin  finds  him  out  in  many  ways— in
body,  mind,  estate,  reputation,  etc.  And  in  one  or  more  of  these  sin  does  ever  find  a
man  out,  even  now.  6.  The  apparent  exceptions  are  accounted  fiv  on  the  ground  of
(1)  God's  lang-suffering  to  the  sinful ;  (2)  God's  purpose  to  test  and  exercise  the  &ith
of  his  own  people.

HL  A  DEEP  AKD  ABIDING  CONVIOTIOK  OP  THIB  TO  BE  GBEATLY  DE8IBED.     L  What

reatrunt  it  would  exercise  on  the  will !  (cf.  ^  How  can  I  do  this  great  wickedness,  and
sin  against  God  ?  "}.  2.  How  exceeding  sinful  it  would  make  sin  ai^)ear !  3.  What  force
it  would  lend  to  all  endeavoure  after  the  reclamation  and  reformation  of  the  sinful!

IV.  And  such  conviction  mat  be  had.  It  is  the  sacred  and  salutary  power  of
prayer  thus  to  make  GK)d  real  to  us.  In  prayer  we  look  to  him  and  we  see  him  looking
upon  us ;  we  speak  to  him  and  he  speaks  to  us ;  by  aid  of  it  we  walk  w^  him  and  he
walks  with  us.  He  who  thus  lives  in  daily  fellowship  with  Gtod  can  never  be  without
the  conviction  spoken  ot

y.  BCCAUSB  BIN  IB  BUBE  TO  FIND  U8,  LET  UB  AT  OQKS  SEEK  AND  FISD  GbBVT.-^.


Ver.  19— dL  xvii.  3. — The  accusers  of  the  ungodly.    The  prophet  appeals

L  The  anticipated  convebsion  of  the  heathen.    Ver.  19,  "  The  Gentiles  shall

come,"  etc.     These  heathen  peoples  will  declare  the  vauity  of  those  idols  in  which

Jodah  is  now  trusting  (cf.  Matt.  xL  20—24).


CH.  xvL  1— 21.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  411

XL  Conscience.  Their  sin  was  **  written  as  with,"  etc,  "  on  the  table  of  their
heart"  (ch.  xvii.  1).  Nothing  could  erase  the  memories  they  all  had  of  their  own
grievous  sin.  It  was  written  as  if  in  rock,  and  as  with  a  pen  of  iron  and  a  point  of
Hi^mnnii  (allusioiv  piobably,  to  the  inscriptions  On  rocks,  so  frequent  in  the  East).
What  a  witness  is  conscience  I  It  cannot  be  silenced  nor  sophisticated.  It  keeps  a
man's  sins  **  ever  before  "  him.  '^  My  sin  is  ever  before  me,"  said  David.  The  writing
of  oar  sin  on  the  hearths  tablets  is  so  deep,  so  incisive,  so  clear,  that  nothing  can
destroy  it.  No  storms  wiU  wash  them  out ;  no  lapse  of  time  obliterate  and  decay ;  no
rush  of  business  and  occupation  wiU  fill  up  and  conceal  those  deep  engravings;  no
rough  contact  with  the  events  of  life  will  break  them.  There  they  stand,  clearly
legible,  written  on  the  tablets  of  our  hearts—our  conscience — as  letters  written  by  an
iron  or  diamond  pen  on  rock.  To  this  evidence  the  prophet  appeals  (cf.  our  Saviour's
appeal  to  conscience  in  the  case  of  the  accusers  of  the  woman  taken  in  adultery,
John  viii.).

nL  Their  worship.  Not  alone  their  conscience,  but  the  horns  of  their  aUazs,
testified  against  them.  These  horns,  smeared  with  the  blood  of  their  idolatrous  sacri-
fices, blackened  with  the  smoke  of  their  altar  fires,  reeking  continu^y  with  the  fumes
and  smoke  of  their  offered  victims,-*these  also  were  witnesses  whose  testimony  could
not  be  set  aside.  And  what  a  witness  against  a  man  will  the  worship  he  offers— the
horns  of  his  altar — often  be:  its  coldness,  its  carelessness,  its  infrequency,  its
insincerity,  its  formality,  and  sometimes  Us  hypocrisy  I  Yes ;  the  horns  of  the  altar
wiU  prove  swift  witnesses  against  all  who  worship  Gbd  otherwise  than  '*  in  spirit  and
in  truth."

IV.  Their  childben.  (Ver.  2.)  L"  They  would  never  lose  the  impression  of  that
horrible  idolatry  which  Imd  snatched  so  many  from  their  midst.  So  deep  was  this
impression  that  the  mere  sic;ht  of  green  trees  and  high  hills  was  sufficient  to  refinesh  the
hideous  memory  continually."  Or  it  may  mean  that  their  children,  retaining  and
practising  the  idolatry  of  their  fathers,  are  witnesses  against  those  fathers  such  as  none
can  set  aside.  Children  may  become  the  means  of  their  fathers'  condemnation.  They
cannot  help  testifying  against  them.  In  their  memories,  their  habits,  their  very  bodies,
thdr  sins,  they  will  declare  what  their  fathers  were.  Thank  Grod,  they  can  and  do
testify  for  the  godly  and  righteous  parents,  as  Timothy  did  of  his  mother  and  hers.
But  how  awful  to  think  of  having  one's  own  children  brought  forward  as  witnesses
against  us  I    Let  ungodly  parents  ponder  this.

CJoNCLUSiON.  With  such  weight  of  evidence  against  Judah,  what  wonder  that  her
pimishment  was  so  severe !  The  sin  of  Judah,  however,  too  much  resembles,  in  its
aggravation  and  in  the  evidence  brought  against  it,  sin  of  which  tffe  may  be  all  too
conscious.  What  can  we  do  but  turn  to  him  who  has  said,  "  The  sacrifices  of  Gh)d  are
a  broken  spirit,"  etc. ;  and  whose  blood  "  cleanseth  from  all  sin "  ?  Blessed  be  Qod
that  we  may  do  this ;  but  '*  how  shall  we  escape  if  we  neglect,"  eta  ?


Vers.  1 — i. — Domestic  rekUions  become  a  curse.  It  is  evidently  implied  that,  even  in
the  present  deplorable  state  of  Israel,  there  was  much  that  appeared  attractive  and
profitable  in  domestic  relations.  Jesus  reminded  his  servants  that,  in  the  days  before
the  Flood,  there  was  **  marrying  and  giving  in  marriage,  until  the  day  that  Noaii  entexed
into  the  ark ;"  and  so  we  may  conclude  that  in  the  time  of  Jeremiah  there  was  also
marrying  and  giving  in  marriage,  down  to  the  very  coming  of  the  invader  on  the  land.
Individ^ds  would  go  on,  following  out  the  promptings  of  their  affections,  unable  to
discern  the  signs  of  the  times,  and  the  approach  of  a  calamity  such  as  would  overwhelm
every  family  existing  when  it  came.  When  society  is  in  its  ordinary  state,  marriages
ending  in  misery  are  believed  to  be  exceptionaL  But  here  there  is  a  trouble  which  is
to  come  upon  [every  household.  Every  family  is  to  be  smitten,  and  Jeremiah,  in  his
loneliness,  is  called  to  notice  how,  though  deprived  of  domestic  relations,  he  is  to  gain  a
compensation  in  other  ways.  Perhaps  at  times  he  was  inclined  to  murmur  that  he — a
man  of  strife  and  contention  to  tiie  whole  land — ^had  no  home  where  he  might  torn  and
find  some  refuge  and  relief,  if  only  for  a  short  intervaL  Even  in  those  apostate  davs
there  must  surely  have  been  a  few  homes  at  least  where  there  was  fidelity  to  Jehovah ;
where  the  parents  taught  his  truth  to  the  children,  and  the  children  reverenced  the
parents  according  to  hm  commandment   But  Jeremiah's  way  was  closed  up^  so  that  he


412  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  xvi.  1—21.


had  no  opportunity  of  formiDg  such  a  household  for  himself.  His  celibate  life  did  not
come  by  his  own  selfish  resolution,  but  by  the  will  of  God,  clearly  expressed,  and  based
on  certain  necessities  of  Jeremiah's  prophetic  mission.  The  prophet,  therefore,  while
he  lost  some  things,  was  spared  some  great  sorrows  when  the  long-predicted  blow  at  last
came  on  the  nation.  The  external  circumstances  of  life  are  wonderfully  equalized,  when
the  sum  of  them  is  able  to  be  calculated.  We  can  only  be  robbed  of  the  best  posses-
sions by  our  own  fault.  Jeremiah,  however  lonely  his  path  may  have  been,  however
like  to  that  of  him  who  had  "  not  where  to  lay  his  head,"  was  advancing  to  the  state
where  "  they  neither  marry  nor  are  given  in  marriage." — Y.

Vers.  5 — 9.— -TA0  hoiue  of  mourning  and  tJie  hotue  0/ feasting  alike  forbidden.  It  is
made  plidn  upon  the  surface  of  this  command  that  the  house  of  mourning  and  the  house
of  feasting  are  not  forbidden  in  themselves.  The  man  on  whom  the  injunction  is  laid  is
a  special  man,  and  he  is  spoken  to  in  special  circumstances.  All  others  may  cross  the
threshold  of  such  houses;  the  prophet  alone  must  remain  outside.  This  peculiar
conduct  was  meant  to  emphasize  his  predictions.  Every  time  there  is  a  funeral  or  a
marriage-feast,  the  terrible  judgments  shortly  coming  on  the  land  are  once  more  set
forth.  The  worst  sorrows  of  the  present  are  but  as  a  child's  shallow  grief  compared
with  the  imiversal  and  dr^uiful  experiences  that  are  vet  to  come ;  and  in  the  joys  of  the
present  it  would  be  unseemly  for  the  man  to  share  whose  breast  is  filled  with  the  sense
of  how  soon  these  joys  must  pass  away.  A  man  who  had  to  live  as  Jeremiah  lived,  in
such  an  age,  with  such  a  message,  seeing  visions  of  so  much  woe,  how  could  he  [receive
pleasure  ^m  any  festive  gathering,  or  bring  pleasure  to  it  ?  The  more  he  advances  in
nis  mission  as  prophet  Uie  more  he  has  to  walk  alone.  This  commanded  attitude
towards  the  house  of  mourning  and  the  house  of  feasting  indicates  to  us  the  spirit  in
which  those  who  may  have  to  make  such  visits  should  pay  their  visits.  We  must  not
go  to  fall  in  with  the  wishes  of  those  who  are  visited,  but  rather  to  do  the  will  of  God,
at  whatever  cost,  and  with  whatever  difficulty.    Consider  this^

L  With  beoabd  to  the  house  of  MouBNiNa.  One  feels  that  the  prophet  must  have
been  exposed  to  much  misapprehension  in  carrying  out  this  command  with  the  sym-
bolic prophecy  involved  in  it.  It  would  be  said  that  he  was  not  only  an  unpatriotic
man  but  an  unfeeling  one.  Happily  we  have  abundant  proof  that,  whatever  the  imper-
fecUons  of  Jeremiah,  a  cold  indifierence  to  the  griefs  of  others  was  not  one  of  them.
He  may  often  have  had  to  do  violence  to  his  own  impulses  in  keeping  away  from  the
homes  where  the  dead  were  lying ;  and  yet  he  only  did  by  command  what  we  should
sometimes  like  to  do  by  preference,  if  it  were  only  possible  to  do  it  without  wounding
the  feelings  of  others.  Think  of  the  houses  of  mourning  where  little  or  nothing  can
be  said  tmit  is  comforting.  What  could  have  been  done  to  comfort  stricken  parents  that
night  when  there  was  one  dead  in  every  Egyptian  household  ?  There  is  a  way  of  offer-
ing sympathy  which,  well  intended  as  it  is,  only  exacerbates  instead  of  mollifying,
what  false  consolations,  what  hackneyed  commonplaces,  are  made  nse  of  in  the  house
of  mourning  1  There  is  a  falling  back  on  what  is  called  the  good  moral  character  of  tiie
dead.  Death-bed  repentances  may  be  made  too  much  of.  The  chamber  of  mourning
is  the  stronghold  of  an  immense  amount  of  very  dangerous  error  in  the  attitude  or
man  towards  God.  The  temporary  pain  of  the  freshly  wounded  heart  of  man  is  more
considered  thim  the  abiding  truth  of  God.  Then  what  censurable  regrets  there  are !
what  utter  and  unconcealed  selfishness  on  the  part  of  survivors  I  It  is  not  a  jfoeling  of
pain  for  what  the  departed  may  have  lost,  but  rebellious  wrath  for  what  the  survivor
may  have  lost.  And  so  we  may  say  that,  to  enter  into  a  house  of  mourning  where  there
is  tne  right  and  Christian  spirit,  is  a  matter  for  joy  and  not  for  grief,  because  indeed  the
peace  and  the  loving-kindness  and  mercies  of  God  are  there.  Let  us  aim  so  to  live,  in
such  unworldliness  and  heavenliness  of  life,  that  survivors  shall  not  be  tempted  into
vain  consolations  when  we  are  gone.

IL  With  beoabd  to  the  house  OF^FEASTiNa.  The  absence  of  Jeremiah  from  festive
gatherings  would  be  as  a  most  significant  presence ;  seeing  that  he  was  absent,  not  by
accident,  not  from  any  personal  feeling,  not  from  any  ascetic  dislike  to  such  gatherings,
but  by  Uie  special  command  of  God.  Not  only  was  he  forbidden  to  become  himself  a
bridegroom,  he  could  not  even  congratulate  any  other.  It  will  be  noticed  that  tho
marriage-feast  in  particular  is  referr^  to.  The  wedding  was  a  time  for  a  special  gather-


CH.  xvL  1— 21.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  413


ing,  and  invited  guests  would  make  special  efforts  to  be  present.  Jesus,  for  instance,  at
the  wedding-feast  at  Gana.  Mere  rioting  and  revelling,  and  the  lauehter  of  fools  and
such  merry-making  as  cost  the  Baptist  his  life,  were  at  all  times  forbidden.  There  is
much  of  rebuke  to  us  in  this  command  of  the  prophet  here.  He  did  not  take  part  even
in  an  innocent  festive  gathering.  It  jarred  on  nim  as  he  thought  of  the  future,  so
different  and  yet  so  near.  And  possibly,  if  we  thought  more  as  we  ought^to  think  on  what
has  yet  to  come  in  the  way  of  judgment  and  destruction,  we  should  walk  through  the
world  feeling  that  we  had  no  heart  even  for^what  is  reckoned  innocent  merriment.  Wo
can  never  be  sufficiently  serious  when  the  burden  of  human]  life,  with  all  its  vast  and
varied  trials,  comes  to  lie  upon  our  thoughts. — Y.

Vers.  14, 15. — Two  great  recollecttons.  Here  once  again  we  come  upon  the  evan-
gelical elemer^t  in  Jeremiah's  prophecies ;  and  once  again  we  have  to  notice  that,  when
this  element  does  appear,  it  makes  up  for  its  infrequency  by  the  brilliance  and  emphasis
of  the  prediction.  The  prophet  has  just  been  compelled  to  speak  of  domestic  suffer-
ing, national  exile,  and  the  withdrawal  for  a  season  of  Divine  favour.  These  necessary
judgments  must  be  magnified  and  stated  in  all  their  severity ;  not  one  of  them  can  be
omitted ;  the  cup  poured  out  by  Jehovah  must  be  drunk  to  its  last  drop.  But  when
all  these  experiences  are  over,  terrible  and  yet  full  of  discipline,  a  glorious  future
remains.  The  manner  of  the  prophecy  is  full  of  encouragement,  and  not  least  in  this,
that  there  is  such  a  sudden  turning  from  the  deepest  darkness  to  the  brightness  of
noon.    We  have  to  consider —

I.  The  indication  of  what  had  been  one  of  the  most  oustomaby  fobms  of  oath
HiTHEBTO.  On  important  occasions,  when  a  promise  had  to  be  made  or  an  assertion
verified,  it  was  the  Israelite's  habit  to  make  a  solemn  appeal  to  the  living  Jehovah.
'^  As  Jehovah  liveth  "  was  the  general  formula,  to  be  combined  with  imore  particular
references,  agreeing  with  the  occasion,  as  to  what  this  living  Jehovah  had  done  in  the
past.  The  reference  might  be  to  something  that  had  happened  in  the  experience  of  the
individual,  and  probably  still  more  frequently  to  greater  events  in  the  larger  experi-
ence of  the  nation.  To  give  such  an  appeal  all  possible  solemnity  it  was  needful  to
think  of  Jehovah  in  the  most  magnifying  way ;  and  what  could  magnify  him  more  than
ii  recollection  of  the  great  deliverance  from  Egypt,  which  he  had  wrought  out  for  Israel  ?
That  deliverance  gave  Israel  its  great  chance  of  service  and  glory  as  the  people  of  God.
Up  to  that  time  a  nation  of  helpless  slaves  and  sufferers — helpless,  that  is,  for  anything
they  could  do— they  nevertheless  became  in  a  very  few  days  a  nation  of  free  men,
travelling  towards  a  land  of  their  own.  And  all  this  was  by  direct  Divine  interven-
tion ;  and  not  only  was  it  a  great  deliverance  in  itself,  but  all  the  circumstances  made  it
doubly  memorable.  The  narrative  of  what  had  been  done  needed  no  embellishments
to  grave  it  indelibly  on  the  memory  of  each  generation.  Moreover,  Jehov^  himself
had  made  provision  for  the  continued  recollection  of  the  deliverance  by  the  institution
of  the  Passover.  He  wished  it  to  be  remembered.  We  may  well  conclude  that  such  a
form  of  oath  as  appealed  to  him  in  his  character  as  the  Deliverer  of  Israel  from
Egyptian  bondage,  was  peculiarly  agreeable ;  it  being  always  presumed,  of  course,  that
the  oath  was  uttered  sincerely.

II.  The  indication  of  how  this  venebated  oath  was  to  be  sufebseded.  Probably
at  the  time  of  the  deliverance  from  Egypt  many  Israelites  may  have  said  to  themselves,
"  Nothing  can  ever  happen  in  the  history  of  our  nation  more  memorable  than  this.
Whatever  our  vicissitudes,  whatever  our  perils,  we  cannot  be  more  in  need  of  Jehovah's
intervention  than  we  have  lately  been."  But  when  either  nations  or  individuals  speak
thus,  it  is  in  utter  ignorance  of  how  deep  and  terrible  human  need  may  become.  Tnere
was  a  worse  bondage  than  that  of  Egypt ;  it  came  with  no  external  inconveniences,  it
was  invisible  to  the  outward  eye,  and,  worst  of  all,  it  was  heedlessly  accepted  by  the
bondman  himself.  The  Israelites  had  fallen  into  the  bodily  slavery  of  Egypt  by  no
fault  of  their  own ;  there  was  no  point  at  which  it  was  possible  for  them  to  stop  the
process.  But  the  spiritual  enslavement  to  idols  and  to  every  sort  of  consequent  evil
came  by  their  own  act.  They  had  stooped  to  the  yoke.  It  is  a  greater  thing  that  has
to  be  done  now,  so  far  as  the  result  to  the  Israelite  is  concerned,  than  was  done  when  he
was  taken  out  of  Egypt  Then  he  was  delivered  from  Pharaoh  and  his  liost — a  simple
matter  comparatively,  for  the  destruction  of  Pharaoh  and  his  host  in  the  Bed  Sea  did  all


414        THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JBHEMIAH.  [oh.  xvi.  1—21.


ihst  needed  to  he  done.  But  now  the  Israelite  has'  to  be  delivered  from  hirruelf.  There
has  to  be  some  sort  of  change  within  him,  and  this  we  may  weU  believe  was  brought
about  by  the  exile  in  Babylon.  It  is  not  enough  to  say  that,  after  a  time  of  exile,  (rod
brought  them  back  to  Jerusalem.  The  mere  transport  from  one  place  to  another  would
have  been  no  whit  more  memorable  than  the  deliverance  from  Egypt  8urely  there
must  have  been  a  state  of  heart  in  the  returning  generation  which  made  them  very
different  from  the  generation  going  away  into  captivity  seventy  yeara  before.  That
they  came  back  to  a  true,  spiritual,  steadfast  service  of  Jehovah  is  not  to  be  supposed ;
but  neither  would  they  come  back  to  the  old  idolatry.  The  sin  into  which  they  were
hereafter  to  fall  was  a  formal  service  of  the  true  Grod,  mere  ceremonialism  and  Pharisaism,
not  apostasy  to  idols.  The  great  effect  of  the  exile  in  Babylon  was  deliverance  from
formsu  idolatry,  evidently  a  matter  to  be  more  celebrated  than  the  deliverance,  centuries
before,  from  bondage  in  Egypt.  But  in  the  future  beyond  there  was  something  greater
still  to  be  looked  for.  There  was  a  possibility  of  yet  another  form  of  oath,  if  Jesus  had
not  recommended  his  disciples  to  dispense  vdth  all  additions  to  the  simple,  veracious
'<  Tes  "  and  **  No."  Israel  needed  to  be  delivered,  not  only  from  formal  connection  with
false  gods,  but  from  a  mere  formal  connection  with  the  true  Qod.  The  Lord  lives,  who
brought  Israel  out  of  Egypt.  The  Lord  lives,  who  further  delivered  Israel  from  tempta-
tion to  fabricate  idols  and  grovel  before  them  in  licentiousness  and  cruelty.  And  we
may  also  add  that  the  Lord  lives,  who  makes  individuals  of  every  nation  his  children  by
the  accepted  indwelling  of  his  Spirit ;  makes  them  partakers  of  the  Divine  nature,  with
all  the  glorious  consequences  thereof.  Further,  we  may  say  that  Jesus  lives,  who  made
the  blind  to  see  and  who  raised  the  dead.  But  it  is  a  still  greater  thing  to  say,  Jesus  lives,
who  died  to  restore  men  to  hia  Father,  and  rose  again  to  bring  life  and  immortality  to
light.— Y.

Vers.  19 — 21.—  Tke'eonfession  of  the  idolatrous  Oentiles,  I.  The  PiroPHET*8  descbxp-
TION  OF  Jehovah.  Qod,  he  says,  is  his  Strength,  his  Fortress,  md  his  Refage.  1.  The
way  in  whu^  the  deecriber  individualizes  himself.  To  the  prophet  individually  Jehovah
has  a  satisfactory  relation.    So  far  as  external  sufferings  and  losses  are  concerned,  the

Erophet  cannot  escape  some  share ;  but  so  far  as  concerns  his  most  important  interests,
e  IS  effectually  separated  from  his  fellow-countrymen.  When  the  invader  comes  they
lose  everything ;  but  just  then  the  prophet  will  be  able  to  say  more  than  ever  that
Jehovah  is  his  Strength,  Fortress,  and  Befuge.  What  he  has  learned  to  value  most
cannot  be  spoiled  by  any  human  hand  whatever,  and  so  it  is  seen  tiiat  each  one  of  us
may  be  in  the  midst  of  a  perishing  multitude  and  yet  not  of  them.  These  p^^le  had
long  boasted  of  their  resources,  theur  securities,  and  their  satisfaction  in  life.  They  had
virtually  said  to  the  prophet,  ''What  better  are  you  than  us?  Though  you  speak
differently  and  live  differently,  your  end  will  be  the  same."  But  the  end  was  not  the
same.  The  invaden  took  from  the  people  all  that  was  precious  to  ihem^  and  then  it  was
made  evident  that  what  was  most  precious  to  the  prophet  remained  secure  and  unin-
jured with  him.  2.  77ie  necessity  that  the  prophet  should  he  able  to  say  this.  Strengtii,
defence,  and  security  for  the  individual — even  in  the  midst  of  a  nation  having  none  of
these  things — was  not  only  possible  but  necessary.  In  the  last  resort,  no  amount  of
strength  in  the  community  in  which  we  live  will  do  us  any  good.  There  may  be
strength  of  a  certain  kind  all  around,  but  that  may  only  emphasize  our  own  weakness.
Suppose  the  position  of  Jeremiah  reversed.  Actually  he  was  living  almost  a  solitary
believer  amid  a  nation  of  unbelievera ;  and  yet  this  was  far  better  than  to  have  been  an
unbeliever  amid  a  nation  of  believera.  There  is  no  way  to  make  Ood  oxxr  Strength,
Fortress,  and  Refuge,  save  by  personal  trust  and  obedience.  3.  The  sufficiency  ef  Ma<
in  whuA  the  prophet  here  expresses  his  confidence.  It  is  when  we  really  address
Jehovah,  timiking  of  what  we  need  and  of  what  he  is,  that  the  feding  of  an  inexhaust-
ible sufficiency  will  come  to  us.  And  this  is  the  way  one  may  come  to  speak  who
knows  history,  who  has  had  somewhat  in  personal  experience  both  of  need  and  supply,
and,  above  all,  who  looks  heavenward,  assured  bv  a  feeling  of  the  heart  which  nses
above  all  reasoning,  that  he  is  connected  with  One  able  to  do  exceeding  abundantly
beyond  any  conceivable  need  of  man.

U.  Tbb  AimaiFATED  G0KFB8SI0V  OF  THE  Geetilbs.  The  words  here  are  words  of
strong  contrast.    The  Gentile  is  openly  mentioned,  but  the  children  of  Israel  are  thought


CH.  XTO.  1—27.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPBOST  JEHEMIAH.


415


of  at  the  same  time.  1.  The  Oentiles  are  represented  as  coming  to  Jehovah.  They  have
groped  their  way  out  of  darkness  and  disentangled  themselves  from  superstitions,  while
the  very  people  whom  Jehovah  had  brought  to  himself  with  so  much  power  and  patience,
making  their  way  clear  and  safe,  would  not  inwardly  come,  even  though  they  were  out-
wardly brought.  Their  hearts  were  not  changed  with  their  changed  circumstances.
And  it  is  a  thing  which  cannot  be  too  much  remarked,  that  the  Gentiles  have  Ions  had
an  understanding,  not  only  of  the  New  Testament,  but  equally  of  the  Old,  which  the
children  of  Israel  have  been  utterly  unable  to  reach.  And  not  only  are  these  Gentiles
to  come ;  they  are  to  come  from  tlie  ends  of  the  earth.  God's  drawing  power  is  felt
everywhere.  Jerusalem  is  the  centre  from  which  light  and  truth  in  their  great  historical
manifestations  have  gone  out.  But  God  can  make  his  centre  of  spiritu^  light  any-
where, according  to  the  necessities  of  the  individual  and  of  the  time.  2.  When  these
Gentiles  come  they  have  a  confession  to  make.  They  have  to  confess  the  utter  empti-
ness and  falsehood  of  their  idolatries.  They  have,  indeed,  been  taught  all  these  things ;
sucked  them  in  with  their  mothers*  milk ;  but  this  makes  their  own  turning  from  them
all  the  more  remarkable,  for  what  a  man  is  taught  he  too  often  clings  to,  just  because
he  has  been  taught  It  is  to  be  further  noticed  that  these  idolatries  have  always  had
the  same  character.  The  conception  is  not  of  gods  who  once  were  strong  and  true,  but
who  have  at  last  come  into  dotage  and  are  unable  to  help  their  worshippers.  The  lies
that  tend  to  deceive  and  ruin  the  present  generation  have  actually  deceived  and  ruined
many  generations  before.  And  yet  those  things  which  the  Gentiles  show  signs  of  for-
saking Israel  clings  to  with  a  mad  persistency.  Israel  has  chosen  lying,  vanity,  and
loss,  and  forsaken  that  great  Jehovah  whom  their  frithers  inherited.  The  lesson  is,  not
to  value  tradition  for  its  own  sake,  seeing  it  may  only  hand  down  lies.  A  tradition  is
nothing  unless  it  is  something  more  than  a  tradition.  There  must  be  the  personal
experience  of  God,  the  personal  reception  of  truth.  Every  man  must  come  out  of  Egypt,
cross  the  flood,  and  come  to  Sinai  for  himself.  To  every  such  one  tradition  will  become
invaluable ;  for  of  the  things  handed  down  he  will  know  which  to  receive  and  transmit,
and  which  to  reject.  Each  of  us  who  comes  to  reject — ^intelligently  and  decidedly,
courageously  and  openly— a  lying  and  empty  tradition,  at  the  same  time  weakens  the
force  of  that  tradition  just  as  &r  as  our  individual  influence  may  extend.— -Y.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  XVn.


Vers.  1 — 18  are  closely  oonneoted  with
the  preceding  chapter.  We  have  just  been
pointed  to  the  striking  contrast  between  the
conduct  of  the  heathen  and  that  of  the
backsliding  men  of  Judah.  The  inspired
orator's  indignation  swells  as  he  thinks
of  the  inveteratenesB  and  indelibleness  of
Judah's  sin  (vera.  1 — 4  are,  however,  omitted
in  the  Septuagint).  Then  he  passes  to  a
subject  immediately  suggested  by  the  policy
of  the  court,  viz.  the  true  source  of  safety  in
dangerous  times.  Trust  in  man  brings  a
curse ;  trust  in  Jehovah  a  blessing  (vers.  5—
13).  From  this  portion  of  the  prophecy  wo
can  venture  to  fix  the  date  of  the  whole.
Yer.  11  is,  in  fietct,  a  shorter  form  of  the
denunciation  in  oh.  xxiL  13 — 19,  which  is
directly  addressed  to  Jehoiakim;  and  the
most  natural  view  of  vers.  5 — 10  is  to  regard
them  as  a  warning  against  the  negotiations


with  Egypt  entered  into  by  Jehoiakim  after
his  revolt  from  Nebuchadnezzar  (see  Ewald,
<  History  of  Israel,'  iv.  261).  The  emphasis
on  the  deceitfolnesB  of  the  heart,  in  ver.  9,
is  readily  intelligible  in  this  oonneotion ;  it
reminds  us  of  the  woe  pronounced  by  Isaiah
against  those  who  "  seek  deep  to  hide  their
counsel  from  Jehovah  "  (xxix.  15),  and  whioh
undoubtedly  refen  to  a  projected  Egyptian
alliance.

Yer.  1.— Tlie  sin  of  Judah,  etc.  '^  Judah's
sin  *'  is  not  merely  their  tendency  to  sin,  but
their  sinful  practices — ^their  idolatry.  This
is  said  to  be  graven  npon  the  table  of  their
heart,  for  it  is  no  mere  form,  but  earned  on
with  passionate  earnestness,  and  as  indelible
as  if  engraved  with  an  iron  pen.  How  mi-
like,  however,  is  this  record  to  that  of  which
the  same  expression  is  used  in  Job  xix.  24 1
With  the  point  of  a  diamond ;  or,  with  a  point
of  adamant  (harder  than  flint,  as  Eses.  iii.
9  says).  Fragments  of  adamant,  says  PUny
(*  Hist.  Nai,'  xxxvii.  16),  are  sought  out  by
engraven  and  enclosed  in  iron ;  tney  easily


416


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,  [ch.  xvn.  1— 27,


overcome  every  hardness.  XTpon  the  horxiB
of  your  altars.  First  of  all,  what  altars  are
referred  to  ?  Those  erected  for  the  worship
of  idols  or  the  two  in  the  temple  of  Jehovah,
which  had  been  defiled  by  idolatry?  And
why  is  the  sin  of  Judah  said  to  be  engraved
upon  the  horns  of  the  altars?  Probably
because  the  **  horns,"  i,e,  the  projections  at
the  four  upper  comers  (Exod.  zzviii.  2)  were
smeared  with  the  blood  of  the  victims.  The
direction  in  Exod.  xxix.  12  and  Lev.  iv.  7  was
doubtless  not  peculiar  to  the  ritual  of  the
Law.

Yer.  2.— Whilst  their  ohildrexL  remember,
etc.  The  connection  of  this  with  the  pre-
ceding verse  is  rather  obscure.  Probably  it
is  intended  as  an  exemplification  of  the  "  sin
of  Judah,"  the  inveterateness  of  which  is
shown  by  their  thoughts  spontaneously  turn-
ing to  the  altars  and  symbols  of  the  false
gods  whenever  they  are  near  a  leafy  tree  or
a  high  hill  (probcibly  **  under  the  green
trees "  Ib  the  right  reading ;  oomp.  1  Kings
xiv.  23 ;  so  Targum).  To  make  **  tneir  sons  "
the  accusative  (with  Hitzig  and  Keil),  ren-
dering, **  As  they  remember  their  children,
[even  so  they  remember  their  altars],"  seems
unnatural;  why  should  ** children"  and
''altars"  be  associated  in  idea?  Groves;
rather,  idols  of  Atiherah^  the  Canaanitish
goddess.

Yer.  3.— '0  my  mountain  in  the  field;  a
still  more  obscure  passage.  The  Question
is  whether  **  my  mountain  in  the  field  "  is  a
vocative  or  an  accusative  dependent  on  *'I
will  give."  If  the  former,  then  the  phrase
will  mean  Jerusalem  (comp.  <*rock  of  the
plain,"  ch.  xxi.  13).  This,  however,  does  not
suit  with  the  second  half  of  the  verso  (**  thy
high  places,"  etc.),  and  still  less  with  ver.  4,
which  evidently  refers  to  the  people  of
Judah.  Addea  to  this,  if  Jerusalem  were
here  addressed  we  should  certainly  expect
feminine  suffixes.  It  remains  to  take  **  my
mountain,"  etc.,  as  an  accusative.  It
describes,  not  Jerusalem,  but  Mount  Zion  as
the  site  of  the  temple,  the  mountain  of  the
house  of  Jehovah  (Isa.  iL  3 ;  Zech.  viii.  3 ;
Ps.  xxiv.  3).  Render,  therefore,  my  mountain
in  the  fldd  wiU  1  give.  The  prophet  mag-
nifies zion  into  a  mountain  with  a  wide^
extended  prospect  (comp.  ver.  12  and  ch.  xxi .
18).  Thy  suhstamea  and  all  thy  treasures;
i.e,  those  of  the  people.  The  part  of  the
verse  which  begins  here  is  almost  the  same
as  oh.  XV.  18  (see  note).  And  thy  high
plaees  for  sin.  Keil  explains,  Jehovahde-
clares  that  he  will,  on  account  of  the  sinful
practices  upon  them,  deliver  up  the  high
places  throughout  the  land.  G^enius,  **  He
will  deliver  up  the  high  places  with  the  sin
attaching  to  them ; "  Hitzig,  "...  (u  a  sin
offering.'^  There  is  a  question,  however,
whether  there  is  not  a  corruption  in  the


text,  and  whether  we  should  not  read,  with
Ewald,  "  without  price  for  thy  sins  "  (as  in
the  parallel  passage,  ch.  xv.  13).

Yer.  4.— (Comp.  ch.  xv.  14.)  Even  thyself ;
literally,  even  wiih  thytelf,  Le.  with  thy  baro
life  (if  the  text,  «hich  is  here  evidently
rather  out  of  order,  is  correct).  flEhalt  ^Us-
oontinne.  The  word  involves  an  allusion  to
the  Law  in  Exod.  xxiii.  11  and  (especially)
Deut.  XV.  2  (see  the  Hebrew).  The  latter
passage  suggests  a  correction  of  the  difficult
**  even  with  thyself,"  just  preceding,  into
**  thy  hand."  Thus  we  get  for  the  opening
of  this  verse,  **  And  thou  shalt  let  loose  tliy
hand"  (i.e.  as  Authorized  Yersion,  **  shalt
discontinue  ").

Yers.  5—11. — ^In  the  higher  gnomic  or
proverbial  style.  Qod  and  man,  flesh  and
spirit,  are  natural  antitheses  (comp.  Isa.  xxxi.
3 ;  Ps.  Ivi  4).  The  prayer  of  the  believer
is,  **  Be  thou  (O  Jehovah)  their  arm  every
morning;"  not  Egypt,  not  Assyria,  not
any  "  arm  of  fiesh."

Yer.  6.— like  the  heath  in  the  desert;  as
forlorn  as  some  well-known  desert  plant.
But  which  plant  ?  St  Jerome  explains, "  £t
erit  quasi  myrice  [*  tamarisk '],  qun  Hebraic^
dicitur  Aroer  (?)  sive,  at  interpretatus  est
Syrus,  lignum  infiructuosum."  The  versions
agree  in  supposing  the  comparison  to  be  to
a  plant ;  ana  a  very  similar  word  in  Arabic
(ghargar)  means  the  mountain  juniper;
Tristram,  the  dwarf  juniper.  Most,  however,
take  the  word  to  be  an  adjective  equivalent
to  "  destitute."  Dr.  Thomson  tells  a  story  of
a  poor  destitute  woman  he  found  in  the
desert  (comp.  ch.  xlviiL  6— the  form  there  is
Aroer,  here  it  is  *ar*ar;  Ps.  cii.  18).  Shall
not  see ;  i.e,  shall  not  perceive,  or  feel  any
evil  consequences  (oomp.  Isa.  xliv.  16,  "I
have  seen  the  fire,"  equivalent  to  ^  I  feel  the
flame  ").  A  salt  land ;  i.e.  one  entirely  bar-
ren (comp.  Deut.  xxix.  23).

Yer.  8.— Shall  not  sea;  rather,  $haU  not
fear — this  Ib  the  reading  of  the  Hebrew  text,
and  of  the  Septuagint,  Peshito,  and  Yulgate.
The  Authorized  Yersion  represents  that  of
the  margin,  which  is  conformed  to  ver.  6,  but
is  against  the  parallelisms.

Vers.  9, 10. — The  crooked  devices  of  the
human  heart,  which  is  characterized  as
deoeitfnl  above  all  things  (or,  as  Delitzsch,
*  Biblical  Psychology/  English  translation,
p.  340,  **  proud ; "  literally,  uneven  or  rugged ;
comp.  Isa.  xl.  4;  Hub.  ii.  4,  Hebrew;  Ps.
oxxxi.  2,  Hebrew),  and  desperately  wioked,
or  rather,  deeperately  eick  (see  ch.  xv.  18,
where  it  is  explained  by  the  words,  "  which
reAiseth  to  be  healed  *>  The  Septuagint
reads  this  verse  differently,  "  The  neart  is
deep  above  all  things,  and  it  is  a  man."

Yer.  11.— As  the  partridge  .  .  .  hateheth
them  not;  rather,  as  the  partridge  titleth  on
egg*  which  U  hath  not  taid;  a  proverbial


CH.  xviL  1— 27.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.


417


illustration  of  the  Divine  retributive  jostioe.
The  prophet  aasumee  the  truth  of  a  popular
belief  respecting  the  partridge  istul  a
common  bird  in  Judaea),  that  it  orooded
upon  e^gs  which  it  had  not  laid.  As  the
young  birds  soon  leave  the  false  mother,  so
unjustly  acquired  riches  soon  forsake  their
possessors.  [Canon  Tristram  rejects  this
explanation,  on  the  g^und  that  the  state-
ment is  not  true  to  natural  history;  the
partridge  neither  steals  the  broods  of  others
nor  ne^  to  do  so,  as  it  lays  a  very  large
number  of  eggs.  But  grammar  requires  us
to  translate  as  suggested  above,  ana  conse-
quently excludes  any  other  explanation.
May  not  the  unusually  large  numoer  of  the
eggs  laid  by  the  partridge  have  led  to  the
fancy  that  they  could  not  be  all  its  own  ?]

Yers.  12, 13. — An  address  to  Jehovah  in
two  parts,  the  first  specially  referring  to  the
temple  regarded  as  the  sacramental  symbol
of  the  Divine  presence  (comp.  Ps.  v.  7),  the
second  to  Jehovah  himself.  It  seems  to
us,  no  .doubt,  singular  thus  practically  to
identify  Jehovah  and  his  temple;  but  the
prophet's  meaning  is  that  Gkxl  can  only  be
addressed  in  so  far  as  he  has  revealed  him-
self. The  temple  was  not,  strictly  speaking,
the  "Name"  or  revelation  of  God,  but  it
was  '*  the  place  of  the  Name  of  Jehovah,"
And  in  the  language  of  strong  feeling  might
be  addressed  as  if  it  were  really  the  Divine
Name.  The  disciples  of  the  incarnate  Name
were  familiar  with  the  idea  that  their  Master
was  in  some  sense  the  antitype  of  the  tem-
ple (Matt  xiL  6 ;  John  ii.  19).  In  proposing
this  explanation,  it  has  been  tacitly  assumed
that  the  Authorized  Yersion,  A  glorious  high
throne  ...  is  the  plaoe  of  our  sanetuary,  is
wrong.  Grammatically,  indeed,  it  is  not
indefensible ;  but  it  is  a  weak  rendering  in
such  a  context.  Render,  therefore.  Thou
throne  of  gloryy  a  height  from  the  heginningt
thou  place  of  our  sanctuary,  thou  hope  of
Israefj  Jehovah.  The  temple  is  called  "  the
throne  of  thy  glory  "  in  ch.  xiv.  21 ;  "  height"
is  a  common  synonym  for  heaven  (Ps.  vii.
8,  Hebrew ;  Isa.  Ivii.  15,  Hebrew),  but  is  also
applied  to  Mount  Zion  (Ezek.  xvii.  23 ;  xx.
40,  quoted  by  Keil),  which  is  also  in  Isa.  Ix.
13  called,  **  the  place  of  my  sanctuary."  By
adding  the  concluding  words  of  the  address
(at  the  opening  of  ver.  13),  the  prophet
prevents  the  suspicion  that  he  attached
importance  to  the  mere  outward  buildings
of  the  temple,  like  those  formalist  Jews,
whose  words  are  quoted  in  ch.  vii.  4.

Yer.  13. — They  that  depart  from  ma.
The  abrupt  change  of  person  is  extremely
harsh ;  the  Yulgate,  followed  by  Ewald  and
Olshausen,  supposes  that  a  final  caph  has
dropped  out,  reudering,  **they  that  depart
from  thee."  Shall  be  written  in  the  earth ;
a  contrast  to  that  which  is  recorded  for  all

JKRRMTAU,


time  ''with  a  pen  of  iron"  (ver.  1).  13ie
fountain,  etc.;  a  favourite  phrase  of  our
prophet  (see  ch.  ii.  18).

Vers.  14 — 18.— A  prayer  of  the  prophet  in
this  his  hour  of  need.  He  who  makes  his
boast  of  Jehovah  may  reckon  upon  his  help.
This  is  Jeremiah's  principle.  He  prays  for
healing,  Heal  me, . . .  and  I  ihallb6--rather,
that  I  may  &6— healed.  He  is  one  of  those
''broken  in  heart,"  whom  Jehovah  alone
can  "heal"  (Ps.  cxlvU.  3).

Yer.  15. — ^The  occasion  of  this  prayer  is
the  hostility  of  his  neighbours,  and  their
mocking  auestion.  Where  is  the  word  of  the
Lord  f  Tne  prophecy  seems  to  be  floating  as
it  were  in  mid-air,  unable  to  alight  (Isa.  ix.
8)  and  fulfil  itself,  so  that  Jeremiah  could
be  plausibly  treated  as  a  false  prophet  (Dent.
xviiL  22).  Hence,  as  Keil  remarKs,  the  dis-
course of  which  this  forms  the  conclusion
must  have  been  spoken  before  the  first
Babylonian  invasion  of  Judah.

Yer.  16. — I  have  not  hastened  from  being
a  pastor  to  follow  thee;  i.e,  I  have  not
eagerly  withdrawn  from  following  thee  as  a
shepherd  (or  prophet).  The  prophet  does
not  follow  his  own  vague  inclinations;  he
is  but  an  under-shepherd,  and  waits  on  the
will  of  his  superior.  He  is,  as  Hosea  calls
him  (ix.  7,  Hebrew),  "the  man  of  the
Spirit"  If  Qod  leads  any  one,  whether
people  or  individuals,  it  is  through  tiie
agencv  of  the  Spirit  (Isa.  Ixiii.  11, 12) ;  and
it  is  the  characteristic  of  the  typi(»d  prophet
that'his  ear  is  "  wakened  morning  by  morn-
ing "  to  receive  his  daily  lesson.  Only  by
thus  "following"  the  Divine  Leader,  can
a  prophet  act  as  pastor  to  his  people.  [The
construction  is,  however,  rather  simplified
by  the  rondering — a  perfectly  legitimate  one,
.  .  .  from  following  thee  ae  a  compantofi.]
The  woeful  day.  The  word  for  "woeful"
is  the  same  rendered  "  desperately  wicked  "
(ver.  9) ;  the  "  day  "  of  Judah's  calamity  is
metaphorically  "sick,"  like  the  heart  of
man.  So,  other  words  being  used,  Isa.  xviL
11  (end).  Was  right  before  thee;  rather
(since  some  adjective  must  be  supplied),  was
manifest  before  thee.  He  appeals  to  the  all-
seeing  Eye  as  a  witness  to  his  fidelity  to  his
mission.

Yer.  17. — Jeremiah  reckons  on  Jehovah's
protection;  he  therefore  entreats  that  his
God  will  not  bring  him  to  shame  by  leaving
his  prophecies  unfulfilled.  A  terror  is  a
weak  rendering;  a  constemaiion  would  be
better.

Yer.  18.— ^On  this  terrible  execration,
with  reference  to  Jeremiah's  character,  see
the  general  Introduction.)  Destroy  them
with  double  destmotion.  "Double"  here
means  "  amply  sufficient "  (comp.  Rev.  xviii.
6,  and  see  on  ch.  xvi.  18).

Yers.  19 — 27. — An  exhortation  to  a  more

2e


418


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [en,  xvn.  1—27.


strict   observance   of  the   sabbath.     The
reward  held  out  is  Jemsalem's  continnanoe
in   all  its  old  pomp,  both   temporal  and
spiritnal,  and  the  penalty  the  destniotion
of  the  city  by  fire.    This  passage  stands  in
aboolntely  no  connection  with  the  preceding
and  the  following  prophecies ;  and  we  have
just  the  same  sense  of  suspicion  in  meeting
wiUi  it  here,  in  the  midst  of  perfectly  general
exhortations,   as   in   reading  the  iiarallel
exhortations  to  sabbath-keepiag  in  isa.  IvL
and  IvilL,  surrounded  as  they  are  hj  the
moving  and  almost  eyangelicid  rhetoric  of
the  second  part  of  Isaiah.    Oeiger  and  Dr.
Rowland  Williams  have  hence  been  led  to
conjecture  that  this  section  (or  part  of  it)
was  introduced  into  the  roll  of  Jeremiah's
prophecies  t6  assist  the  reforming  movement
of  Ezra  and  Nehemiah.    Certainly  the  re-
sard  for  the  sabbaUi,  so  conspicuous  in  the
utter  Judaism,  dates,  so  far  as  we  can  see,
from  the  time  of  Eaa  and  Nehemiah  (see
Neh.   xiii.),  though  it  is  credible  enough
that  the  perception  of  the  high  importance
of  this  holy  day  (comp.  Heine's  *  Prinoessin
Sabbath ')  began  to  acquire  greater  distinct-
ness as  the  other  parts  of  the  social  and
religious  organization  were  seen  to  be  fading
away  («)mp.  art  *'8abbath"   in  Smith's
'  Bible  Dictionary  ')•

Ver.  19.— In  the  gate  of  the  ohildien  of
the  people.  It  is  uncertain  which  of  the
sates  of  Jerusalem  is  meant,  and  not  per-
fectly dear  what  is  the  meaning  of  the  title.
Does  it  mean  Israelites  as  opposed  to  foreign-
ers, or  laymen  as  distinguished  from  priests  ?
Whereby  the  Idngi  of  Judah  oome  in.  Jere-
miah appears  to  use  the  phrase  *'  kings  of
Judah  '^  in  a  particular  sense  (see  on  ver.
20).  He  may,  no  doubt,  simply  mean  to
say  that  those  who  are  &om  time  to  time
sovereigns  of  Judah  enter  by  this  gate.
But  once  grant  that  the  prophet  does  some-
times use  the  phrase  in  a  sense  of  his  own,
and  that  in  the  very  next  verse,  and  it  is
very  difficult  to  avoid  interpreting  it  so  in
this  passage.

Ver.  20.— Jeremiah  addresses  himself  first
of  all  to  the  kings  of  Judah.  As  it  would
be  very  unnatural  for  a  public  orator  to
appeal  to  the  yet  unborn  members  of  the
reigning  dynasty,  and  as  there  are  several
indications  that  tiie  **  house  of  David"  was
able  at  this  period,  as  also  in  that  of  Isaiah,
to  exercise  a  decisive  political  and  civil
infiuence,  even,  as  appears  from  ch.  xxi.  11,
12,  monopolizing  the  judicial  functions,  it
is  natural  to  suppose  that  "  kings  of  Judali "
is  here  used  in  a  very  special  sense,  viz.  of  the
members  of  the  various  branches  of  the  royal
family  (**  The  sons  of  the  king,"  Zeph.  i.  8 ;
oomp.  oh.  xxxvi.  26,  **  Jerahmeel,  a  king's
son*^),  and  their  deecendants,  who  received
the  royal  title  by  courtesy  (parallels  for  this


will  be  found  in  Oesenius's '  Hebrew  Thesau-
rus,'s.v.m^Jk).  The  queen-mother  was  pro-
bably the  leader  of  this  clan;  **  the  mistress,"
as  she  was  called  (see  on  ch.  xiii.  18),  and  tho
royal  princes  (among  whom  the  **  house  of
Natlum,"  Zeoh.  xiL  12,  would  doubtlees  be
reckoned),  constituted  in  fiaot  a  body  almost
as  numerous  as  they  did  (according  to
Brugsch  Bey)  in  Egypt,  and  politically
much  more  infiuentiaJ ;  so  much  so  indeed
that  only  a  king  of  unusual  force  of  oharaoter,
like  Hezekiah  or  Josiah,  could  venture,  and
that  timidly,  to  oppose  them.  The  weak-
principled  Zedekiah  seems  to  have  been
entirely  dominated  by  this  powerfid  caste,
and  to  have  been  little  more  than  a  maire  du
palais  (the  same  sense  of  the  phrase  is
required  in  ch.  xix.  8,  and  probably  in  oh.
XXV.  18).

Yer.  21.— TIdce  heed  to  younehrM ;  rather,
Takeheed  heartily,  eomeieniiowly ;  literally,
in  your  souh.  So  in  lialachi  (U.  15,  16),
**Take  heed  in  your  spirit"  (not,  **to  your
spirit,"  as  Authorized  version).

Yer.  22. — Heither  do  yo  any  work;  ac-
cording to  the  fourth  commandment  (Exod.
XX.  10 ;  Dent  v.  14).

Yer.  23. — ^This  verse  is  modelled  on  cb.
viL  26,  28.

Yer.  25. — ^Parallel  passage,  ch.  xxii.  4,
where,  however,  we  simply  meet  with** kings
sitting  upon  the  throne  of  David,"not,as  here,
<<  kings  and  princes."  Has  the  latter  woord
come  in  by  accident,  owing  to  the  frequent
combination  of  kings  and  prinoes  in  Jeremiah
(i.  18;  ii.  26;  xxv.  18;  xxxii.  32;  xliv.  17,
21)?  8haU  remain  for  ever;  rather,  slboS  60
ihhahiiedfor  ever,

Yer.  26. — ^Parallel  passage  for  the  cata-
logue of  the  districts  m  Judah,  ch.  xxxii  44.
Three  divisions  are  mentioned.  (1)  The
neighbourhood  of  Jerusalem  (including  the
<* cities  of  Judah");  (2)  the  land  of  Ben-
jamin, i.0.  the  northern  pait  of  the  kingdom ;
and  (8)  the  tribe  of  Judah,  with  its  three
subdivisions — the  Shef<^a  or  lowland  country
by  the  Mediterranean  Sea,  the  hill  coun-
try, and  the  Negeb  or  *'  dry  "  south  country
(comp.  Josh.  XV.  21 — 62).  The  sacrifloes
are  described  with  equal  explicitness ;  they
fall  into  two  classes,  the  bloody  (burnt  offer-
ings and  other  sacrifices)  and  the  unbloody
(the  vegetable  offering  or  minkhahy  and  tho
incense  which  vras  s^wed  upon  the  mtn-
XcftoA,  Lev.  ii  1).  Andhzingingsaerifloesof
praise.  This  was,  no  doubt,  the  title  of  a
particular  variety  of  sacrifices  (Lev.  vii.  12 ;
xxii  29) ;  here,  however,  it  seems  as  if  all
fhe  preceding  sacrifices  were  summed  up
under  this  designation.  St.  Paul  says,  **  In
everything  sive  thanks ; "  and  this  seems  to
have  been  the  prophet's  ideal  of  the  sacri-
fices of  the  future.


OH.  XTO.  1— 27.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  419


HOMILETICS.

Ver.  l.'^Engraved  sin.  I.  Sin  leaves  a  beoobd  of  ttoklf.  It  is  not  am  isolated
act.  It  begets  ooosequences,  plants  memories,  creates  guilt.  The  reoord  remains  ewn
if  we  do  not  read  it.  Qod  still  notes  it,  and  will  some  day  confront  ns  with  it.  Henoe
it  is  not  enough  to  amend  our  ways  for  the  future.  We  need  to  have  past  transgres-
sions blotted  out  if  we  are  to  be  restored  to  peace  with  God.

II.  The  beoobd  of  sin  IB  ENaBAVED  ON  THE  HEABT  OF  THE  8INNBB.      1.  It  is  written

on  the  memory.  Men  who  have  forsaken  the  scenes  of  their  evil  deeds  cannot  shake  off
the  clinging  burden  of  the  memory  of  them.  The  criminal  is  haunted  by  his  crimes.
They  people  his  dreams  with  horrors ;  they  overshadow  his  waking  hours  with  gloom.
Even  when  sin  is  put  out  of  mind  it  is  probably  buried  in  the  secret  chamber  of  menM>iy,
to  be  ultimately  brouj^ht  to  the  light  of  consciousness.  The  experience  of  those  who
have  been  recovered  from  drowning  and  from  delirium  suggests  the  idea  that  forgotten
memories  can  be  revived,  and  that  probably  the  whole  of  the  soul's  experience  is
indelibly  written  upon  the  memory.  No  other  recording-angel  may  be  wanted.  The
soul  carries  its  own  indictment  in  the  record  it  bears  of  its  own  conduct.  2.  This  is
also  written  on  the  affections.  Sin  begets  the  passion  for  sin.  Vice  springs  from  the
heart,  and  it  corrupts  the  heart  Tluit  which  is  first  committed  under  the  stress  of
temptation  comes  at  length  to  be  sought  with  the  hunger  of  a  natural  appetite.

UI.  The  BEOOBD  of  sin  is  enqbaved  on  THE  ALTAB  OF  SAOBiFioB.  Judah  desecratod
the  altar  of  Jehovah  with  idolatrous  rites.  We  desecrate  Divine  things  by  sinful  con-
duct. 1.  We  cannot  leave  our  guUt  behind  us  when  we  enter  the  temple  of  worshipr
If  it  is  not  repented  of  it  will  vitiate  the  worship.  The  sin  of  the  week-day  renders
worthless  the  offerings  of  the  Sundav.  2.  Sin  direcUy  connected  with  religion  is
peculiarly  wicked.  The  altar  is  defiled.  Thus  the  offering  of  gifts  from  base  motives,
deceit,  and  imholiness  in  worship,  stamps  our  sins  with  peculiar  guilt  on  the  altar  of  Qcd,

IV,  Tms  BEOOBD  OF  SIN  IS  NATUBALLY  INDELIBLE.  It  is  gravcu  With  Bu  adamant.
1.  It  is,  therefore,  useless  to  ignore  it,  2.  It  is  vain  to  try  to  wash  it  away  by  any
effort  of  our  own.  3.  It  is  foolish  to  expect  peace  with  God  tUl  this  terrible  hindrance
has  heen  removed  out  of  the  way.  4.  We  have  every  motive  to  seek  in  penitence  and
in  faith  that  Qod  should  blot  out  our  sin,  not  only  from  his  book  of  remembrance,  but
also  from  our  hearts,  even  though  it  is  so  deeply  written  there  that  nothing  short  of  the
creation  of  a  new  heart  will  remove  it  (Fs.  IL 10).

Vers.  5 — 8. — TTie  desert  shrub  and  ihe  flourishing  tree,  L  The  debebt  shbub
EXEMPLIFIES  THE  CUB8B  OF  WOBLDLY  CONFIDENCE.  1.  Notc  the  cJuiracter  of  worldly
confidence.  (1)  Trust  in  man.  There  is  a  trust  in  man  that  is  natural  and  right  The
foolish  and  wrong  confidence  is  when  man  takes  the  place  of  GKxl,  when  the  highest
trust  is  in  man,  when  the  power  of  the  prince,  the  skill  of  the  physician,  or  the  astute-
ness of  the  lawyer  are  thought  to  be  sumcient  to  secure  us  against  the  greatest  dangers.
(2)  Reliance  on  the  arm  of  flesh.  This  illustrates  the  ultimate  ground  of  such  con-
noence  as  trust  in  man.  It  turns  to  the  flesh  rather  than  to  the  spirit,  i,e.  to  worldly
influences  rather  than  to  principles  of  truth,  to  the  mortal  rather  than  to  the  Divine,  to
the  man  who  will  perish  rather  than  to  the  Gbd  who  is  eternal.  (3)  The  departure  qf
the  heart  from  Qod,  We  cannot  have  a  true  confidence  in  GK)d  together  with  a  supreme
worldly  confidence.  The  one  excludes  the  other.  The  tree  cannot  be  growing  both  in
the  desert  and  by  the  water-course.  This  departure  is  of  the  heart.  In  the  heart  we
trust.  Outwardly  we  may  still  seem  near  to  God,  but  if  faith  has  gone  the  heart  has
forsaken  God.  2.  Ck>nsider  the  curse  of  this  worldly  confidence.  It  makes  one  like  a
desert  shrub.  (1)  Dwarfed  and  stunted  in  growth — a  shrub,  not  a  tree— «  miserable
shrub  of  the  desert.  Though  departure  from  God  does  not  involve  sudden  destruction,
it  lowers  the  spiritual  energies,  dwarfs  the  whole  life.  (2)  Not  even  benefited  by  blessings
received.  The  shrub  *'  shall  not  see  when  good  cometh.''  The  breath  of  spring,  which
brings  fresh  bloom  and  growth  to  other  plants,  passes  over  it  with  no  more  fruitful
effects  than  the  chill  blasts  of  autumn  produce.  He  who  has  departed  from  Gbd  and
lives  only  in  worldly  confidence  derives  no  real  benefit  from  the  blessings  that  God  still
sends  him.    (3)  Suffering  from  Utck  qf  the  chitfgood.    The  shrub  is  in  a  parched  land,


420  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  xvn.  1— 27.


is  withered  for  lack  of  water  (see  cb.  iL  13).  (4)  Lonely,  "  In  a  salt  land,  and  not
inhabited."  The  soul  that  is  separated  from  God  is  essentially  solitary,  deserted,  desti-
tute though  immersed  in  the  tumult  of  worldly  society.

XL  ThB  FLOUBISHINa  TBEE   EXBMPLIFIBB    THE    BLESSEDNESS  OF  TBU8T  IN  €k>D.      1

Note  the  character  of  trust  in  God.  (1)  It  is  intelligent  It  is  trust  in  God  revealed
as  Jehovah,  as  supreme,  self-existent,  eternal,  known  in  the  past  for  mercifol  belpfiil-
UMB.  (2)  It  is  whcle-hearied.  It  is  a  simple  trust  in  God,  not  divided  by  partial
worldly  confidence.  (3)  It  is  hopeftd,  '*  Whose  hope  the  Lord  is."  The  stronmt  fidth
rises  into  hope.  2.  Consider  the  hlessednesa  of  this  trust  in  God.  (1)  t'ull  and
flourishing  life — a  tree,  not  a  shrub.  He  who  trusts  in  God  is  not  only  endowed  with
external  blessings,  he  is  enlarged  and  developed  in  his  own  life.  (2)  Nourished  and
rrfftihed.  The  tree  is  planted  by  the  waters,  etc  Trust  in  God  brinfls  and  plants  na
near  to  the  '*  river  of  life."  (3)  Secured  against  trouble.  "  And  shaU  not  see  when
heat  cometh,"  etc.  While  the  shrub  derives  no  benefit  from  the  most  favourable
weather,  the  tree  planted  by  the  water  does  not  suffer  from  the  most  trying.  Trust
in  God  does  not  prevent  the  approach  of  trouble,  but  it  fortifies  us  agunst  suffering  real
harm  from  it.  Hidden  sources  supply  the  Christian  with  spiritual  nourishment  when
outwardly  the  heavens  are  as  brass  and  the  earth  as  iron.  (4)  Perpetual  fruiffulness.
**  Neither  shall  cease  from  yielding  fruit."  Fruitfulness  is  a  sien  of  health,  perpetual
firoitfulness  of  unbroken  health.  Fruitfulness  is  a  blessing.  The  Christian  is  most
blessed  in  being  able  to  work  for  good,  and  to  distribute  blessings  to  others  as  the  chief
glory  of  the  tree  is  its  fruit-bearing.

Vers.  9, 10,—The  evil  heart  searoJied  and  judged,  I.  The  evil  of  the  heabt.
1.  The  most  important  question  concerning  a  man  is  as  to  the  state  of  his  heart — ^his
thoughts,  affections,  intentions.  In  the  heart  we  find  the  true  man.  The  outer  life  is
but  Uie  clothing  and  may  be  the  mask  of  the  man.  From  the  heart  spring  all  the
Jw;tions  of  life.  The  character  of  the  fountain  determines  that  of  the  stream  (Matt.  xv.
18, 19).  2.  The  root  of  the  evil  of  the  heart  is  sdf-wiU,  It  is  rugged  above  all  things,
•proud,  not  compliant  with  God's  will,  wrapped  up  in  self.  8.  The  character  of  the  evil
of  the  heart  is  desperate  sicknsss,  (1)  Sickness,  for  sin  is  a  disease  of  the  soul,  though
one  for  which  we  are  responsible,  and  it  results  in  suffering,  general  derangement  of
life,  and  finally  death ;  (2)  desperate  sickness,  for  sin  is  no  simple  scratch  on  the  skin  of
life,  no  mere  temporary  functional  disorder,  but  heart-disease,  an  organic  constitutional
disease,  terrible  in  its  present  condition,  alarming  in  its  future  prospects.  4.  The  evil
of  the  heart  is  inscrutable  to  man.  "  Who  can  know  it  ?  "  This  is  tne  case,  (1)  because
we  cannot  read  the  hearts  of  our  fellow-men,  but  only  judge  from  external  conduct,
which  is  often  deceptive ;  (2)  because  we  are  blinded  to  our  own  sin  by  pride,  prejudice,
and  self-admiration ;  (3)  because  there  is  an  intricacy  and  subtlety  about  all  wickedness
which  makes  it  difficult  to  trace  it  out,  a  shamefiEu;edness  that  seeks  concealment,  and
an  essential  falseness  that  belies  its  own  nature ;  and  (4)  because  the  disease  has  made
ao  great  progress,  has  penetrated  so  deeply,  ramified  so  far,  and  infected  every  function
of  the  soul  so  completely,  that  it  is  beyond  all  measure.

11.  The  Divine  beabch  and  judgment.  The  heart  is  difficult  to  understand,  but
God  thoroughlv  searches  it.  "  Who  can  know  it?"  "I  the  Lord."  1.  God  searcTies
and  tries,  (!')  by  his  own  silent,  all-penetrating  gaze  that  detects  the  darkest  secrets  ;
and  (2)  by  the  outward  action  of  providence  in  events  v  hich  test  a  man's  nature  and
reveal  it  to  the  world,  for  the  judgment  of  God  is  ultimately  open  and  with  a  fair  trial,
that  all  may  see  and  acquiesce  in  the  righteousness  of  the  sentence.  2.  God  knoios  the
heart.  The  search  is  effectual.  The  trial  is  fruitful.  God  knows  us,  while  the  world
is  deceived.  How  foolish,  then,  to  play  the  hypocrite !  for  it  matters  little  what  men
think  of  us,  but  God's  thoughts  concerning  us  are  of  infinite  moment.  God  will  judge
justly  and  reasonably,  for  he  knows  all.  3.  God  will  administer  Judgment  according  to
the  character  of  men's  actions  revealed  by  his  searching  and  trying.  God's  knowledge
is  followed  by  his  action.  He  is  not  simply  a  great  contemplative  Being.  He  has  an
arm  to  make  bare  for  action  as  well  as  eyes  to  see  the  evil  and  the  gowi.  Judgment
will  be  for  our  actions,  but  according  as  these  are  read  in  the  light  of  the  state  of  our
heart.  God  searches  and  gives  to  men  according  to  their  ways.  This  judgment  is
universal-'" to  every  man/*  discriminating— to  each  "according  to  his  ways/'  and


CO.  xvn,  1—27.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  421


natural — "  according  to  the  fruit  of  his  doings,  according  to  their  natural  products,  each
in  its  own  kmd,  so  that  men  shall  reap  what  they  sow  as  by  a  law  of  nature.

Ver.  ll.'-^Partridge-nesU.  I.  Ill-gottek  bighes  betoken  an  unnatubal  ooh<>
BinoN  OF  SOCIETY.  It  is  not  natural  that  strange  eggs  should  be  found  in  a  partridge-
nest  Violence  and^frand  and  more  subtle  sharp-practice  are  proofs  of  a  disorganized
state  of  society.

IL  Ill-gotten  biobes  may  be  lONaLED  with  just  gains.  It  may  not  be  that  all
the  eggs  are  strange.  The  business  man  who  is  dishonest  in  some  transactions  may  be
honest  in  others ;  but  his  yery  correctness  may  be  only  a  cloak  for  his  fraud.

in.  Ill-gottsn  biohes  may  FB06PEB  FOB  A  TiMB«  The  cggs  are  hatched.  Schemes
of  fraud  succeed.    The  wicked  prosper.

IV.  Ill-gotten  biohes  will  ultimately  be  lost.  How  often  does  the  ablest
device  of  dishonesty  fail  of  ultimate  success !  The  swindler  is  taken  at  the  height  of
his  prosperity.  If  he  is  not  discovered  he  cannot  take  his  wealth  with  him  when
he  dies.

V.  Ill-gotten  biohes  leave  the  possessob  of  them  convioted  of  folly.  He
thinks  himself  supremely  clever,  and  smiles  with  contempt  on  his  credulous  victims.
But  he  is  really  the  greatest  dupe  of  his  own  devices,  since  in  the  end  all  his  labour  is
wasted  and  his  ultimate  condition  ruinous  (Luke  xii.  20,  21).  "  Honesty  is  the  best
policy"  in  the  long  run,  though,  as  has  been  shrewdly  observed,  no  man  is  truly
honest  who  only  acts  on  this  maxim.

Vers.  12 — 14. — The  Hope  of  Israel,  I.  The  bevelation  of  the  Hope  of  Isbael.
1.  God  is  revealed  as  the  Hope  of  his  people ;  i,e.  as  the  source  (1)  of  their  highest  good
— a  "  fear  "  at  first  (Gen.  zxxi.  42),  but  when  better  known  a  "  hope ; "  (2)  of  a  good  not
yet  attained — a  hope,  not  a  full  fruition ;  but  (3)  of  a  good  assured  for  the  future— a  true
hope  resting  on  good  promises,  not  a  vain  dream.  2.  GK>d  is  thus  revealed  in  connection
with  the  sanctuary f  (l)  because  the  worship  of  Gbd  enlarges  the  knowledge  of  God ;  ^2)
because  the  sanctuary  is  the  centre  of  religious  instruction,  either  by  svmbolic  semce
as  that  of  the  temple,  or  bv  direct  teaching  as  that  of  the  Christian  Churches.  God  must
be  known  to  be  loved  and  trusted.  They  who  neglect  the  duty  of  public  worship  lose
the  privilege  of  receiving  light  on  Divine  truth  which  would  be  a  comfort  and  help  to
them.  3.  Experience  conm'ms  this  revelation  of  Gk>d.  The  glorious  character  of  God
has  been  true  of  him  "  from  the  beginning."    The  antiqiuty  of  the  temple  was  the

Eroof  of  this  to  the  Jew,  the  history  of  Christendom  should  be  more  so  to  the
Ihristian.

II.  The  folly  of  fobsaking  the  Hope  of  Israel.  1.  It  is  foolish  to  forsake  God.
We  know  that  it  is  wrong ;  we  have  to  learn  that  it  is  also  injurious  to  ourselves.  Th»
character  of  God  should  make  this  apparent.  Such  a  character  as  has  been  above
ascribed  to  him  shows  that  he  is  '*  the  Fountain  of  living  waters,'*  t.e.  the  one  Source  of
pure,  life-giving  energy.  Though  no  true  religion  can  be  founded  on  low  motives  of
self-interest,  self-interest  should  at  least  show  us  the  mistake  of  irreligion.  2.  The
results  of  forsaking  God  are  shame  and  destruction :  (1)  shame,  because  the  stay  of
confidence  which  was  chosen  in  preference  to  God  is  seen  at  last  to  be  a  rotten  reed,
while  God  is  manifested  as  worthy  of  all  trust ;  and  ^2^  destruction,  for  "  they  shall  be
written  in  the  earth ; "  sin  is  graven  as  with  a  pen  or  ux)n  upon  a  rock,  but  the  life  of
the  sinner  is  written  in  dust,  to  be  dissipated  and  forgotten,  a  wasted  career,  with
nothing  solid  and  lasting  about  it.

.  III.  The  fbayeb  of  confidence  in  the  Hope  of  Isbael.  (Ver.  14.)  1.  A  prayer  for
healing.  Though  we  hope  in  Grod  we  may  suffer  at  present.  We  need  not  so  much
improved  circumstances  as  a  bettering  of  the  condition  of  our  own  souls — not  so  much
wealth  as  health.  2.  A  prayer  for  salvation.  The  prophet  feels  himself  in  danger.
Dangers  of  various  kinds  wait  on  all  of  us.  Salvation  is  a  large  word,  meanmg
deliverance  from  all  real  harm.  It  is  a  large  thing  to  ask  for,  but  not  too  much  for
faith.  3.  A  prayer  of  assurance — "I  shall  be  healed.*'  What  GKxl  does  he  does
effectually.  4,  A  prayer  of  humble  thankfulness—**  For  thou  art  my  Praise."  True
faith  rests,  not  on  our  merits,  but  on  G^'s  mercy,  and  therefore  all  prayer  should
confess  his  goodness  and  all  supplication  be  mingled  with  thanksgiving  (Phil.  iv.  6).


I


4122  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.    £aB.  xvn.  1— 27.

Yen.  19 — 27. — The  9(Math.  As  Gentiles  we  were  never  under  the  spedal  regulations
of  the  Jewish  Law,  and  as  Christians  we  are  free  from  all  formal  laws  of  **  ordinanoes^"
and  called  to  free  Bplritoal  obedience.  Like  St.  Paul,  we  may  be  able  to  see  that  no
one  day  is  more  sacred  than  other  days  (Rom.  xiy.  5) ;  and  if  we  are  unable  to  go  eo
hi  as  this,  we  must  admit  that  there  is,  in  the  New  Testament,  no  direct  command  to
Christians  to  oboenre  the  first  day  of  the  week  just  as  the  Jews  observed  the  seventh.
Still,  to  him  who  is  in  sympathy  with  the  thoughts  of  Gbd  and  desiies  to  do  the
idll  of  God  rather  than  to  seize  excuses  for  liberty  only  to  exercise  his  own  self-will«
there  is  much  in  the  Old  Testament  sabbath  requirements  which  must  command  the
reverence  of  his  conscience  as  springing  out  of  Etcnnal  Divine  oounsebySnd  representing
what  is  inherently  good  and  profitable.

L  CONBIDEB  IN  WHAT  THE  0B8EBVANCE  OF  THE  SABBATH  OOHBISrTKD.     1.  Boi,   **  Bear

no  burden."  Work  is  holy,  but  so  also  is  rest,  and  if  work  usurp  the  plaoe  of  rest  it
beoomes  unholy,  as  anything  does  which  is  in  the  wrong  plaoe.  Men  bear  butdens  on
their  minds,  if  the  shop  is  shut  but  the  mind  of  the  tradesman  continues  devoted  to
business  cares  on  the  Sunday,  he  is  making  no  more  sabbath  of  the  day  than  if  he  were
Openly  buying  and  selling.  The  rest  needed  for  refreshment  is  rest  from  the  toils  and
^«^ri4M»  of  the  mind,  quite  as  much  as  a  cessation  of  manual  labour.  2.  Hallowing
the  day.  The  Jew  treated  the  sabbath  day  as  essentially  holy.  We  may  have  freer
notions.  But  we,  too,  can  hallow  the  day  if  we  devote  it  to  sacred  uses.  We  should
remember  that  it  is  not  the  day  that  hallows  the  conduct,  but  the  conduct  that  hallows
the  day.  Sacred  days,  like  sacred  places,  are  not  endowed  with  a  mystical  consecration
which  transfera  its  grace  to  whatever  is  done  in  them,  but  they  are  simply  made  sacred'
hj  Uie  acts  of  goodness  to  which  they  are  devoted.  3.  Permmal  eart  to  observe  the
mi  and  sanctitv  of  the  day.  **  Take  heed  in  your  souls ; "  *'  diligently  hearken.'*  The
observance  of  the  sabbath  was  to  the  Jew  a  duty  to  be  personally  regarded  and  con-
sctetiouslv  executed.  If  we  feel  any  corresponding  duty,  the  example  of  the  more  lax
oooduct  of  others  should  not  afifect  us,  nor  should  we  be  content  with  the  outward
deoorum  which  satisfies  the  world.

II.  CommiB  THB  oBUOATioH  TO  KSKP  THB  SABBATH.  1.  The  sabbsth  was  instituted
bj  the  command  </  CM.  It  was  required  by  one  of  the  ten  commandments,  and  thus
exalted  to  a  position  of  peculiar  sanctity.  To  the  Jew  who  felt  that  this  law  of  Gbd
was  binding  on  him,  the  duty  of  implicit  obedience  was  imperative.  When  onoe  we
know  Ghxi's  will  no  valid  excuse  can  be  found  for  neglecting  it.  Though  the  letter  of
the  Mosaic  Law  was  limited  and  temporal,  the  spirit  of  its  obligations  is  eternal,  since
they  spring  from  the  changeless  charscter  of  God.  It  is  for  us  to  discover  the  eternal
Divine  principle  which  led  to  the  institution  of  the  sabbath,  and  see  that  this  is
obeyed.  2.  it  corresponded  to  the  constituiion  <^  natwrt.  Changes  in  nature  are
recurrent.  Best  and  labour  alternate  in  the  physical  world.  3.  It  was  designed  to
hmM  men.  (Mark  iL  27.)  The  wealthy  might  not  have  felt  the  requirement,  but  the
burden-bearers  and  hand-labourers  did,  and  must  have  enjoyed  the  repose  it  afforded
ihem.  Do  we  need  this  ?  If  in  quieter  times  such  a  rest  was  necesssry,  is  it  needless
in  the  rush  and  roar  of  our  wearing  modem  life  ?  If  seasons  set  apart  for  religious
observances  were  ever  profitable,  are  they  useless  amid  the  pressing  claims  and  innu-
merable distractions  of  the  age  we  live  in  ?

IlL  Consider  thb  blbssedkbss  of  OBSEBviNa  the  sabbath.  The  Jews  hadpromises
of  Messinm  to  the  court,  the  city,  the  country,  and  the  Chureh  (see  Matthew  ^nry,  in
loc},  1.  This  might  be  expected  as  the  reward  of  obedience.  It  is  always  blessed  to
do  the  will  of  God,  though  the  first  doing  of  it  is  often  painfiiL  2.  This  might  also  be
expected,  because  the  sabbath  was  made  for  man.  It  was  a  beneficent  institution.  It
is  round  by  experience  that  the  observance  of  a  weekly  day  of  rest  is  conducive  to  the
prosperity  of  a  people.  3.  Accordingly,  the  neglect  of  the  sabbath  might  be  expected
to  bring  disaster  (ver.  27).  This  was  the  case  with  the  Jew,  not  because  of  the
inherent  sanctity  of  the  day  or  of  the  essential  immorality  of  working  on  it,  but
because  the  breach  of  the  sabbath  was  a  breach  of  the  Law,  an  act  of  overt  rebellion
agpdnst  God.  If  we  disobey  what  we  believe  to  be  the  will  of  GK>d,  this  must  be  to  our
own  hurt  4.  The  biessedoess  of  the  observance  of  the  Jewish  sabbath  teaches  us  all
to  avcttd  treating  the  day  of  rest  as  a  gloomy  day^  and  making  children  and  dependants
dislike  it  on  account  of  the  formalism  or  harshness  of  our  behaviour.    The  day  of  rest


CH.  XYiL  1—27.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  i28

sbonld  be  the  bri^test  day  of  the  week.    To  the  Christian,  Sunday  is  ^  the  Lord's
day/'  the  day  of  Easter  gladness,  commemorating  the  joy  of  the  Resurrection.

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1, 2. — 8in*s  record.  I.  The  beoobd  is  ineffaceable.  This  is  contrary  to  the
notions  of  very  many.  Sin,  when  it  is  committed,  wears  the  aspect  of  insignificance
and  triflingness.  It  is  the  gratification  of  a  momentary  impulse,  of  a  personal  and
individual  character ;  and  it  is  not  supposed  that  any  one  else,  or  at  any  rate  any  laige
number  of  persons,  can  be  afifected  by  it.  The  sinner  supposes  that  he  himself  will  be
able  to  condone  it,  and  that,  when  the  active  prompting  of  which  he  is  conscious  retires
into  the  backcround,  he  will  be  as  he  was  before.  All  sins,  e.g,  idolatry,  which  deeply
engage  the  affections  and  the  highest  capacities  of  men,  have  a  lasting  influence  upon
their  character.  And  when  they  are  systematized  into  a  religrion  they  exert  a  dailv
influence  which  at  last  fixes  itself.  But  the  same  is  true,  in  a  very  serious  degree,  with
all  sins.  They  are  contradictions  of  conscience  and  the  Law  of  God,  and  can  only  be
repeated  without  scruple  by  inverting  and  hardening  the  moral  nature.  In  this  sense
we  are  all  guilty  before  God.  Our  every  sin  has  hsA  its  infiuence  upon  us,  and  has
left  its  indelible  impress.  Conscience  stores  the  giulty  memory  in  its  archives;
habit  perpetuates  the  evil  impulse  in  conduct ;  and  cur  relations  and  associations  are
involved  in  the  wicked  practices  which  ensue.

IL  How  USELESS,  THEREFORE,  ATTEKFTiNa  TO  EXCULPATE  OURSELVES !  This  arrange-
ment, by  which  sin  leaves  its  impress  upon  the  character  and  life,  is  of  God.  It  is  a
law  of  nature,  and  cannot  be  set  aside  by  private  understanding.  Even  where  it
appears  to  be  inoperative,  its  effects  are  only  accumulating  themselves  in  a  more  hidden
maimer,  and  some  day  they  will  be  the  more  overwhelming  in  their  manifestation.  It
is  the  conmion  question  of  the  sinner,  when  addressed  by  the  ministers  of  God,
**  Wherein  have  we  sinned  ? "  But  this  only  shows  a  dulness  of  spiritual  self-know-
ledge and  a  general  lowering  of  the  moral  standard.  Others  are  not  so  oblivious  to  the
fact.  They  nave  witnessed  the  excesses  and  been  involved  in  the  complications  of
their  immorality.  In  this  case  the  children  whose  companions  had  been  sacrificed  to
Moloch  looked  on  the  horns  of  the  altars  with  aversion  and  loathing.  It  was  a  memory
of  horrid  cruelty  never  to  be  effaced.  There  is  every  reason  to  believe  that  the  sin  we
commit  does  not  cease  its  work  when  its  immediate  outward  effects  take  place.  An
ever  deepening  and  widening  circle  of  influence  results.  And,  just  as  now  it  is
impossible  for  us  to  plead  innocence  with  so  many  proofs  of  our  guilt  staring  us  in
the  faoe,  in  the  great  day  of  judgment  the  secret  sins  will  be  set  in  the  light  of  God's
counteiumce,  and  the  thoughts  and  intents  of  the  heart  revealed.  Our  character
will  be  our  condemnation,  and  many  witnesses  will  rise  on  every  side  to  swell  its
testimony.

nL   How  NECESSARY,  TOO,  THAT  THE  FRIKCIPLE  OF  SALVATION  SHOULD  BE  RADICAL

AND  THOROUGH  1  llic  siuner  needs  a  saving  power  that  can  penetrate  to  his  inmost
nature,  cleansing  the  conscience,  rectifying  &e  character,  and  making  the  weaknesses
and  defects  created  by  sin  a  means  of  grace.  And  this  is  supplied  by  the  gospel,  which
furnishes  a  new  motive  and  principle  to  the  character  and  a  new  law  to  the  conduct.
So  profound  is  its  effect  that  it  may  be  said  by  the  saved  sinner,  ''Old  things  are
passed  away ;  behold,  all  things  are  become  new.^  It  is  as  a  character-power  that  the
''cross"  asserts  its  pre-eminence  over  every  other  principle  of  reformation.  There  is
nothing  superficial,  partial,  or  one-sided  about  it. — ^M.

Vers.  9, 10. — Heart  mysteries  and  their  Interpreter,  The  repudiation  of  his  charges
by  Judah  and  Jerusalem  leads  the  prophet  to  advert  to  the  causes  of  this  behaviour.
They  not  only  declare  their  innocence  when  guilty,  but  pursue  after  unholy  aims  on
the  plea  of  serving  God.  How  are  such  ignorance  and  infatuation  produced  ?  The
reply  is  that  the  natural  heart  is  deceitful  and  corrupt  above  everything  else.

I.  The  mystery  of  the  heart.  1,  It  is  a  *^  mystery  of  iniquity,"  The  heart
is  affected  by  what  it  contains.  It  is  itself  the  greatest  dupe  and  sufferer.  And,
being  so  inextricably  bound  up  with  evil,  it  is  involved  in  its  danger  and  judgment.


424  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  xvn.  1— 27.


2 .  Exceeding  human  diagnosis.  No  one  is  so  ignorant  of  his  own  depravity  as  the  sinner
himself;  and  no  eurtlily  eye  can  read  the  true  significance  of  the  symptoms.  8.  Fre^
eminent  in  this  req>eet.  It  is  the  source  of  it  all.  The  master  is  greater  than  his
work.    The  centre  contains  all  the  threads  of  connection.

IL  Its  Interpbeteb.  1.  Jehovah.  Because  (I)  he  made  it ;  (2)  he  is  related  to  it  in
its  constitution  and  conscience ;  (3)  "  All  things  are  naked  and  laid  open  before  the
eyes  of  him  with  whom  we  have  to  do."  2.  2%«f  qualifies  and  authorites  him  to  judge.
It  is  not  his  only  qualification^  nor  is  that  the  sole  reason  for  his  knowledge.  But  it
is  obvious  that,  as  knowing  man  so  intimately,  he  also  is  able  to  judge  of  his  state.
And  he  alone  has  the  standard  of  perfect  righteousness. — M.

Vers.  12, 13. — The  saints  Brfuge,  The  construction  of  the  clauses  of  the  twelfth
verse  is  very  difficult,  and  it  is  not  easy  to  determine  their  exact  relations.  It  may  be
better  to  take  them  as  simple  and  independent  exclamations,  imited  in  thdr  being
addressed  to.  a  common  object  rather  thim  by  any  grammatical  nexus :  *^  0  throne  of
glory,  height  from  the  beginning,  place  of  our  sanctuary ! "  But|  taken  bv  itself,  this
would  have  no  particular  sense.  It  is  only  as  a  preface  to  ver.  13  that  we  can
thoroughly  understand  its  bearing.  Jeremiah,  full  of  anxiety  and  distress  at  the
general  depravity,  looks  instinctively  upon  Jerusalem,  and  reflects  that  only  through
that  which  it  represents  can  the  future  of  Israel  be  secured.  There  is  a  gradually
ascending  climax  of  spiritual  reference,  culminating  in  the  words,  *'  Hope  of  Israel,
Jehovah?

L  The  BAvnra  power  of  the  holy  ornr  is  derived  from  him  of  whom  rr  m  the
SHRIKE.  It  is  obvious  that  the  descriptions  of  Jerusalem  are  aU  relative  to  this,  which
gathers  up  and  concentrates  everything  in  a  person.  The  series  of  epithets  of  vers.  12
and  13  are  cumulative,  and  express  a  gradually  deepening  spiritual  insight  Through
the  material  the  prophet  looks  until  his  eve  rests  upon  the  spirituaL  (Sod  is  the  centre
of  attraction  and  the  Saviour  of  tJie  worshipping  soul.  Everything  in  the  ritual  and
teaching  of  the  temple  pointed  to  him.  The  glorv  of  the  temple  was  his.  It  was  only
as  he  condescended  to  use  it  that  men  could  find  therein  the  spiritual  rest  and  si^ety
they  needed.  And  the  same  is  true  of  the  Church  of  Christ.  It  is  not  the  institution
which  saves,  but  Christ  working  in  and  throu^  it.  There  is  danger  of  this  being
overlooked  by  non-spiritual  men.  Association  connects  the  grace  of  ralvation  with  the
means  or  instrumentality,  and  ignores  the  original  source.  It  is  the  virtue  of  the
prophet's  insight  that  it  penetrates  the  veil  of  rites  and  ordinances,  and  fastens  itself
upon  Gk)d  as  the  only  saving  power.  1.  Spiritual  men  should  examine  themselves  and
see  whether  they  rest  upon  this  true  spiritual  foundation.  The  process  of  the  prophet's
mind  is  one  through  which  aU  true  saints  have  to  go.  In  many  instances  there  will
not  be  the  eagle-like  directness  and  happy  immediacy  of  his  discovery.  There  may  be
clouds  and  difficulties.  But  no  true  satisfaction  can  be  attained  until  he  be  discovered
and  rested  in.  We  are  all  prone  to  stay  ourselves  upon  prescription,  antiquity,
authority,  that  are  merely  human.  The  doctrine,  the  rite,  Uie  priesthood,  may  mter*
vene,  not  to  unite,  but  to  separate.  2.  It  behoves  those  who  cau  themselves  ly  God's
name  to  exalt  and  honour  him.  If  there  is  danger  of  his  being  ignored  or  pushed  into
the  background,  the  more  need  is  there  of  a  bold  and  frequent  assertion  of  his  power
and  grace.  3.  /(  is  only  hy  a  living^  experimental,  practical  faith  tJiat  this  connection
with  Qod  can  he  sustained.  The  sorrow  and  trouble  of  Jeremiah  drive  him  inwards
for  comfort.  His  meditation  was  like  a  voyage  of  the  soul  through  the  straits  and
shallows  of  ceremonialism  into  the  great  ocean  of  the  personal  presence  and  love  of
God.

n.  The  THREEFOLD  CLAIM  OF  GoD*s  CITY  TO  THE  REGARD  OF  MEN.  Jerusalem,  as
the  seat  of  the  theocracy,  was :  1.  The  seat  of  authority  and  splendour.  The  power  of
Israel  amongst  and  against  the  nations  consisted  in  the  spiritual  influence  emanatmg  from
Jerusalem  and  its  temple.  The  house  of  Gkxl,  as  the  centre  of  all  rule  and  influence,  is
a  throne.  It  is  its  own  protection,  and  its  authority  is  self-sustained  and  self-commendjidd.
It  is  a  refuge  for  the  oppressed  and  a  place  of  justice  for  the  wronsed.  "  Go  round  about
her :  tell  the  towers  thereof.  Mark  ye  well  her  bulwarks ; "  for  this  city  is  our  city,  and
"  this  Gild  is  our  God  for  ever  and  ever.'*  '*  Because  thou  hast  made  the  Almighty  . .  .
thy  habitation ;  there  shall  no  evil  befall  thee,  neither  shall  any  plague  come  nigh  thy


CH.  xvn.  1— 27.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  426

dwelling.**  And  this  power  to  enforce  its  mandates  and  its  authority  brought  with  it
the  glory  of  securityy  honour,  and  respect.  Its  whole  history  had  been  one  of  growins
lustre  and  renown,  and  its  influence  had  ever  "  made  for  righteousness."  The  saved
sinner  breathed  freely  within  its  precincts,  and  the  victories  of  Divine  love  were  celebrated
within  its  courts.  Those  who  believe  in  Christ  constitute  a  Church  which  is  his  abode
and  **  the  praise  of  his  glory."  The  distinction  and  eternal  glory  of  Gfod  is  that  he  is
"just,  and  yet  the  Justifier  of  the  ungodly."  2.  It  is  chosen  from  etemiiy.  Although
only  for  a  few  centuries  the  actual  centre  of  Divine  rule  in  the  earth,  it  was  not  by  acci-
dent it  had  become  so.  From  the  beginning  it  was  foreseen  in  God's  thought :  **  It  was
set  up  from  everlasting,  from  the  beginning,  or  ever  ihe  world  was."  This  was  a  convic-
tion deeply  fixed  in  the  hearts  of  aU  true  Israelites.  The  eternal  purpose  of  Qod  had
not  only  determined  upon  Jerusalem  as  his  dwelling-place,  but,  through  Jerusalem,  that
purpose  was  being  carried  out  in  the  redemption  of  mankind.  And  the  Church  of
Chnst  must  be  regarded  in  like  manner  as  the  abode  of  Gk)d's  Spirit,  chosen  from
eternity.  It  is  a  new  dignity  for  the  saints  that  they  had  been  set  apart  for  this  long
ere  an  had  desolated  the  world.  It  links  the  Church  with  celestial  and  eternal  institu-
tions, and  precludes  the  possibility  of  its  ever  having  originated  in  accident  or  human
contrivance. — M.

.»

Vers.  14 — 18. — Divine  prophecy  and  human  impatience,  I.  The  credit  of  thb
PBOFHBT  IB  BOUND  UP  WTTH  HIS  MESSAGE.  He  is  oouscious  that  this  is  the  case.  It  is
the  test  laid  down  by  the  Law  (Deut.  xviii.  21,  22^,  and  that  it  should  be  so  is  bene-
ficiaL  This  is  the  universal  law  for  all  who  declare  the  will  of  God.  It  is  tried  by
human  experience,  by  spiritual  results.    The  prophet  is  expected  to  *'  heaL"

n.  Men  tby  him  by  CHALLENaiKa  a  speedy  fulfilment.  Just  as  in  nature  men,
as  Bacon  says,  would  anticipate,  so  in  grace.  There  is  a  lack  of  patience,  or  impatience
is  made  a  mask  for  unbelief.  In  either  sign  it  is  a  lack  of  faith.  So  men  manufacture
tests  for  prayer,  for  reality  of  conscience.

III.  He  finds  befuoe  and  comfobt  :  1.  In  the  answer  of  a  good  conscience  totvard
Qod.  It  was  not  idleness,  love  of  filthy  lucre,  or  eagerness  for  pre-eminence  that  led
him  to  the  work,  but  a  consciousness  that  he  was  speaking  GK>d's  own  word,  no  man's
fancy  or  device.  2.  In  earnest  prayer  that  God  vnU  make  good  his  word.  There  are
elements  in  this  prayer  from  which  we  shrink.  But  should  we  ?  The  fulfilling  of  evil
prophecy  may  sometimes  be  a  national  benefit.  3.  In  tJie  unshaken  faith  thai  what  Qod
willeth  wUl  he.  He  appears  to  be  sore  distressed.  Perhaps  personal  perplexity  enters
into  his  grief.  But  there  is  no  dgn  of  lack  of  faith  in  its  ultimate  fulfilment.  What
a  support  is  that  to  him  who  foretells  or  does  the  will  of  GK>d  I  '*  In  due  season  we  shall
reap  if  we  faint  not."  '*  Heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away,  but  my  word  shall  not  pass
away." — ^M.

Vers.  19 — 27. — 7^e  sahhath  and  its  obligation,  L  It  was  of  universal  oblioatioh.
The  prophet  was  to  stand  in  **  the  gate  of  the  children  of  the  people  "  and  "  all  the
gates  "  to  proclaim  its  sanctity.  The  laity  and  Hie  priests,  the  princes  and  the  people,
were  all  bound  to  observe  it,  as  one  of  the  patriarchal  and  Mosaic  institutions.  It  is
expressly  enjoined  in  one  of  the  **  ten  words,   and  without  reservation  of  any  class.

U.  How  it  should  be  observed.  1.  By  rest.  Labour  was  to  cease  as  far  as  prac-
ticable. The  body  was  to  be  set  at  liberty  from  its  burden.  Traffic  was  to  cease.  The
constant  stream  which  flowed  out  and  in  the  gates  of  the  temple  might  still  go  on,  but
for  a  different  purpose.  Care  and  worry  were  to  be  laid  aside.  The  mind  was  to
abstain  from  business.  2.  By  religious  exercises.  (Ver.  26.)  It  is  worthy  of  remark
that  this  portion  of  the  command  is  not  spoken  or  as  a  binding  duty  like  the  other,
or  a  merely  negative  one.  It  is  referred  to  as  part  of  the  blessing  that  would  ensue  on
thorough  sabbath  observances ;  that  they  shomd  have  sacrifices  to  give,  and  be  willing
and  eager  to  offer  them.  With  the  cessation  of  secular  traffic  the  religious  instincts  of
the  people  would  recover  themselves,  and  their  natural  channel  would  be  filled.  The
true  rest  of  man  consists,  not  in  mere  abstinence  from  labour,  but  in  the  free  play  of  his
higher  faculties — a  change  of  occupation  and  interest.  And  the  real  wealth  and  success
of  man  will  show  itself  in  his  religious  gifts.  They  are  poor  who  have  nothing  to  spare
for  God.    Their  conception  of  life  is  such  that  the  true  riches  exist  not  for  them,  how-


426  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEBEMIAH.    [oh.  xvn.  I— 27.

ever  they  may  hare  saoceeded  in  accumulating  material  resouroea.  The  chief  end  of
man  is  thus  to  be  secured  in  the  increase  of  Divine  service  and  the  hearty  dedication  of
himself  and  his  substance  to  Jehovah.

nL  The  blesbinos  that  would  attend  ufqn  sabbath  obsebyahoe.  1.  NBUianal
perpetuUy.  Jerusalem,  the  centre  of  the  theocracy,  should  remain  for  ever.  This  indi-
cates the  essential  and  fundamental  poution  occupied  by  the  sabbath  amongst  Mosaic
institutions.  It  was  in  this  way  that  the  idea  and  authority  of  Jehovah  were  to  be
impressed  upon  the  heart  of  IsraeL  But  to  the  preservation  of  this  primitive  revelaUon
was  due  the  strength  of  Israel  within  herself  and  against  the  heathen.  2.  Naiumdl
pro$penty.  It  is  a  goodly  spectacle  that  is  presented  in  this  promise.  There  is  no  lack
of  ^fts  nor  of  willingness  to  give.  Only  a  time  of  profound  peace  and  of  abounding
harvests  could  furnish  such  a  demonstration.  3.  NaHonal  umity,  Jerusalem  is  the
convergent  point  of  many  pilgrim  trains :  **  from  the  places  abouty  •  .  •  from  the  land  of
Benjamin,  aud  from  the  plain,  and  from  the  mountains,  and  from,  the  south."  In  this
vr^y  the  brotherhood  and  the  solidarity  oi  the  people  would  be  sealed.  4.  National
piety.  This  is  the  natural  outcome  even  of  rudimental  religious  observances.  It  is  the
tendency  of  true  religion  to  increase  upon  itself.  It  cannot  remain  stationary.  There-
fore this  outburst  of  enthusiasm  and  Divine  service.

lY.  How  it  is  bepbesented  in  evakoelioal  times*  So  far  as  it  was  a  physical
requirement  for  the  health  and  efficiency  of  man,  it  must  still  be  obecurved.  This  ia  a
question  for  comparative  physiology.  But  the  essence  of  the  sabbaUi  is  rather  in  its
religious  observance.  What  becomes  of  that?  The  spirit  of  it  is  still  pieserved  in  the
Lord's  day,  although  under  new  associaticms  and  under  other  obligations. — ^M*

Yer.  1. — "  The  sin  of  Judah.**  That  which  the  prophet  has  to  say  conoeming  it  in
this  part  of  his  prophecy  is  in  answer  to  the  question  of  ch.  zvL  IC^  U,  where  Judah
inquires  what  their  sin  is.    In  reply,  the  prophet^

I.  Recites  theib  nnQurriES.    (Vers.  11, 12.)

II.  Denounces  God's  judgkents.    (Vers.  13—18.)
IIL  Cites  witnesses  aqainbt  them. — 0.

Yer.  12. — *^  The  place  of  our  sanctuary,^  Some  four  hundred  yean  had  passed
between  the  date  of  these  words  and  the  marriage  of  Solomon  with  the  ds^ighter  of
the  Egyptian  king.  But  that  remote  event,  fruitful  of  consequences  as  it  was  at  the
time,  was  fruitful  also  in  results  for  generation  after  generation  In  the  centuries  to  come.
And  it  is  to  one  of  those  results  that  this  verse  has  reference,  or  rather  was  occasioned
by  it.  For  ever  since  that  marriage  there  had  been  an  Egyptian  party  in  the  court  of
Judah,  which  sought  to  sway  the  afEairs  of  Judah  in  harmony  with  those  of  I^ypt.
On  the  other  hand,  there  were  the  representatives  of  another  near  and  mighty
monarchy  which  sought  to  render  Judan  subservient  to  their  interests.  This  was
the  Assyrian  power.  There  was  consequently  a  perpetual  tendency  on  the  part  of
Judah,  when  trouble  came,  to  make  alliance  with  one  party  or  another.  Now  the
Egyptian  alliance  was  preferred,  and  now  the  Assyrian — ^Isa.  xxx.  and  the  history  oi  the
reign  of  Josiah  and  his  death  are  instances  in  proof.  But  the  prophets  of  God  were
ever  against  these  alliances,  and  lifted  up  their  voices,  though  in  vain,  in  protest.  These
verses,  6—12,  are  one  of  those  despised  utterances,  denouncing  the  false  trust  and
exhorting  to  the  trae.    This  twelfth  verse—

L  Speaks  of  the  temple  at  Jebusalem.  1.  For  that  temple  has  a  ihrtme.  It
was  the  earthiv  throne  of  God.  There  was  the  meroynseat  and  the  cherubim  bow-
ing in  profound  homage  over  it,  and  between  them  was  the  visible  presence  of  the
glory  of  GKxl,  that  Shechinah,  that  wondrous  appearance  so  bright  and  awful  that  but
one  out  of  all  Israel,  and  he  only  once  a  year,  couM  look  thereupon  and  live.  "  In  Salem
was  his  tabernacle,  and  his  dwelling-place  in  Zion."  2.  And  it  was  a  glorioue  throne.
By  reason  of  its  external  magnificence ;  but  more  especially  of  the  glorious  manifesta-
tions of  God  which  had  been  seen  in  connection  with  it.  3.  And  a  high  a$  weU  ae  a
glorious  throne.  Not  only  because  Jerusalem  was  a  mountain-city,  the  loftiest  in  the
world,  so  high  and  lifted  ujp  was  the  "  mountain  of  the  Lord's  house,"  but  also  because
of  the  spiritual  glory— flo  hi  excelling  all  other— which  belonged  to  it.  llie  ancient
psalmists  and  prophets  were  never  tired  of  declaring  and  demonstrating  how  the  Xoid


CH.  xvn.  1— 27.]  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.       42T

was  ^  King  above  all  gods."  4.  VeMToble  aUo:  **  from  the  beginning/'  from  the  fiist
days  of  their  national  life,  Qod  had  chosen  a  place  for  his  Name— beneath  the  ru^ed
clififs  of  Sinai  then,  and  now  in  the  magnificent  temple,  the  place  of  their  sanctuary.
But—

II.  Is  DESIGNED  TO  suifKON  Qod'b  PEOPLE  TO  TRUST  IN  HIM.  1.  For  to  assert  that
the  place  of  their  sanctuary  was  a  "  throne,"  was  to  assert  that  Jehovah  was  a  King.
Kings  occupy  thrones.  The  sorersignty  of  Ghxl  is  declared  by  the  prophet's  words.
And  what  a  King !  How  glorious^  let  all  the  records  of  their  race  declare.  Howpr»-
emment  over  all  the  gods  of  the  nations,  let  the  gods  of  Egypt,  of  Philistia,  of  lyre,
and  others  confess.  And  he  was  the  eternal  Qod,  **  From  the  beginning  "  his  rule  and
majesty  had  been  confessed.  But  the  prophet  reminds  his  countrymen  of  all  this  that
they  might  see  and  own  the  folly  of  trusting  in  gods  of  the  heathen  as  they  were  so
prone  to  do.  2.  And  he  reminds  them  of  the  nearness  of  God,  For  the  place  of  thdr
sanctuary  was  his  court,  his  throne,  his  abode.  Theremre  to  forsake  sucn  a  Gbd,  and
one  so  near,  for  idol-gods,  and  they  afar  off, — ^what  folly,  what  ingratitude,  what  sin
that  1  But  the  same  memory  cherished  concerning  Qoa,  his  glorious  sovereignty,  his
allHsuperintending  power  and  his  nearness  to  us,— how  would  this  strengthen  and  cheer
our  hearts  oftentimes!  Our  sins  and  sorrows,  our  faint-heartedness,  our  fears  and
dismay,  are  all  largely  owing  to  our  forgetfiilness  of  that  glorious  and  precious  troth
which  the  prophet  here  declares.    And —

HI,  May  BE  TAKEN  AS  A  BETTING  FOBTH  OF  WHAT  OUB  SANOTUABIBS  SHOULD  BE.      1.

For  Qod  should  rule  in  them.  A  Christian  Church,  whether  we  speak  of  the  &bric  or  the
people,  should  be  a  throue  of  Ood.  His  Law  supreme,  his  will  the  rule  confessed  of  aU.
Human  governance  in  any  shape  or  form  which  will  infringe  on  the  Divine  authority,  is
forbidden.  Christ  is  the  Head  of  the  Church,  and  the  "  crown  rights  of  the  Redeemer  "
should  be  jealously  maintained.

"  I^t  CiB8ar*s  dues  be  ever  paid
To  CsBsar  and  his  throne,
But  consciences  and  souls  were  made
To  be  the  Lord's  alone."

2.  And  if  our  churches  be  the  Lord's  throne,  he  will  make  it  " a  glorious  high  throne"
We  should  try  to  make  our  churdi  buildings  glorious  outwardly,  so  far  as  we  may,
coveting  what  is  splendid,  majestic,  beautiful  in  architecture,  music,  adornment,  to  lay
as  a  tribute  at  our  Sovereign's  faet.  Where,  consistently  with  other  claims,  this  may  be
done,  it  should  be.  But  he  himself  will  make  our  Churches  his  **  glorious  high  throne,"
by  coming  into  their  midst.  On  how  many  a  Sunday  his  people  have  known  that  he
has  been  with  them !

*'  The  King  himself  comes  near
And  feasts  his  saints  to-day."

AnH  by  asserting  his  power  over  men's  hearts.  This  is  his  most  glorious  power— to
sway  the  spirit,  to  lead  the  will,  to  bend  the  heart.  And  this,  by  his  Spirit  in  connec-
tion with  the  procUmation  of  the  Word  of  his  grace,  he  will  do,  and  so  tne  Church  will
become  "  a  glorious  high  throne  "  of  the  Lord.  3.  And  because  of  "  the  communion
of  saints,"  and  the  consequent  union  of  the  Church  of  to-day  with  the  Church  of  aU  the
ages  raist,  therefore  the  Church  is  Gk)d's  throne  which  has  been  **/rom  the  beginning.**
The  Church  of  to-day  is  in  the  honoured  succession  of  the  Church  of  the  first  days,
through  its  long  line  of  patriarchs,  prophets,  martyrs,  saints,  and  thus  may  claim  to
have  been  the  "  glorious  high  throne  'of  the  Lord  *'  from  the  b^inning."  Let  us  cherish
and  seek  to  hand  on  this  succession,  and  thus  justify  our  cMm  to  the  august  title  con-
tained in  these  words.    But  most  of  all  these  words —

IV.  Behind  us  of  Chbist  and  hib  cboss,  the  tbde  sanotuaby  of  souls.  The  cross
of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ — type  of  all  ignoniiny  and  shame,  though  it  was — ^has  become
the  Lord's  **  glorious  high  throne."  From  it  and  by  it  he  has  wielded  a  sovereignty
so  glorious,  so  wide,.so  holy,  so  enduring,  that,  £eu:  more  than  the  mercy-seat,  its  ancient
symbol,  it  deserves  thus  to  be  described.  Whether  we  consider  the  number  of  his
subjects,  their  character,  the  means  by  which  his  rule  over  them  has  been  won  and  is
sustained,  or  the  nature  of  his  rule, — ^all  justify  the  ascription  to  his  cross  and  to  him


428  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [oh.  xyii.  1^27.

the  supreme  reference  of  these  words.  Let  each  one  ask  in  condusum — ^Is  the  cross  of
Christ  the  place  of  our  sanctuary,  the  place  where  we  worship,  the  heloved  retreat  of
our  soids?    God  grant  it  may  be  1—0.

Yer.  17. — ''  Be  not  a  terror  vnto  me,**  It  is  a  oommon  observation  how  all  things  are
affected  by  the  medium  through  which  we  view  them.  This  is  true  in  regard  to  the
natural  vision,  but  yet  more  true  in  regard  to  that  which  is  mental  and  spirituaL  Thus
Gk>d,  whom  the  prophet  speaks  of  (ver.  13)  as  **  the  Hope  of  Israel,"  the  '^Fountain  of
living  waters,"  and  as  the  alone  true  Healer,  he  now  prays  not  to  be  **  a  terror  **  unto
him.

L  Gk)D  18  80  TO  THE  UNGODLY.  All  his  attributes  are  terrible  to  them.  His  holtnese^
for  it  oondenms  their  sin.  BlajutHee,  for  it  demands  their  punishment.  His  power^  for
it  leveids  the  means  whereby  he  can  requite  them.  His  love^  for  it  makes  their  sin  with-
out excuse.  His  wiedom^  for  it  renders  them  unable  to  deceive  him.  Hence  it  is  ^t
of  the  wicked  it  is  said,  *'  Gk)d  is  not  in  all  his  thoughts.*'  They  like  not  to  retain
Ood  in  their  knowledge.  To  think  steadily  of  them  must  be  a  terror  to  their  souls.
But—

n.  He  seems  80  AT  TIMES  EYSK  TO  THE  GODLY.  Gk)d  M  to  them  what  in  their
happier  moments'  they  delight  to  call  him — their  Father,  their  Redeemer,  their
Strength,  their  Refuse  (cf.  ch.  zvi.  19).  But  at  times  he  seems  to  be  "  a  terror"  unto
l^em.  The  causes  of  this  are  sometimes :  1.  Morbid  state  of  health.  2.  Lack  of  sub-
minion  to  the  Divine  wilL  3.  Backsliding.  4.  False  theological  teaching.  6.  Dwelling
too  much  on  the  darker  and  more  mysterious  aspects  of  the  Divine  providence.  6.
Depression  of  spirits.    7.  Prolonged  affliction.

m.  But  tbueb  and  bbighteb  thoughts  of  God  may  be  begained.  Various  means
may  be  suggested.  1.  Dwelling  resolutely  on  the  mercies  and  loving-kindnesses  of  God,
This  is  why  St.  Paul  bids  the ''  careful,"  those  weighed  down  with  care,  to  make  known
thdr  requests  to  God,  not  only  ''by  praver  and  supplication,"  but  ''with  thanks-
giving "  also.  And  elsewhere  he  bids  us  "  m  everything  give  thanks."  For  this  com-
pels us  to"go  over  in  our  minds  the  happier  circumstances  of  our  lot,  and  when  we  do
this  we  shall  find —

<<  Our  cheerful  cry  will  oftener  be,
*  See  what  the  Lord  hath  done  for  me.' "

2.  And,  as  the  words  of  St.  Paul  teach,  **prwyer  "  will  help  us.    We

"  Kneel  and  cast  our  load.
E'en  while  we  pray,  upon  our  God,
Then  rise  with  lightened  cheer."

The  public  worship  of  God  in  his  sanctuary,  in  union  with  his  people, — ^how  often,  like
Hannah,  the  soul  has  come  to  God's  house  burdened  but  gone  away  **  lightened  "  1  3.
And  "  supplication/*  This  tells  of  the  more  private,  personal  outpourings  of  the  soul
before  Gbd.  Like  the  supplication  in  Gkthsemane  compared  with  the  prayer — ^the
Lord's  Praver— given  for  the  common  united  use  of  his  people.  Here,  too,  vast  relief  is
found,  and  the  cloud  clears  away  between  us  and  GKxi,  and  his  tsce  shines  upon  us
once  more.  4.  Careful  conscientious  obedience  and  perseverance  therein.  6.  Seeking
to  contort  others.  We  learn  in  teaching,  and  this  is  true  of  the  love  of  Gk)d  as  well
as  of  other  truths.  6.  Coming  again  to  the  cross  of  Christ  as  having  nothing,  but  look-
ing for  all  in  him. — 0.

Vers.  19 — ^27. — Sahbath  sanetification,  L  In  what  it  oonbibts.  Not  in  the  mere
Judidc  strictness  of  the  Old  Testament  Law,  or  of  that  set  forth  in  these  verses.  All
that  might  be,  and  yet  in  its  true  sense  the  sabbath  be  flagrantly  violated  and  its  pur-
pose destroyed.  But  in :  1.  Best.  This  to  be  both  of  body  and  mmd.  The  student  may
no  more  pursue  his  studies  than  the  labourer  his  toil.  Rest  both  of  body  and  mind
from  their  ordinary  pursuits ;  rest,  not  mere  slothfiilness,  but  such  as  will  recreate  the
exhausted  limbs  or  brain.  2.  Worship.  Not  that  it  is  to  absolve  other  days  from
worship  or  to  sanction  their  unhallowed  use,  but  to  lead  to  the  more  religious  regard  of
all  our  days,  the  one  day  in  seven  is  specially  set  apart.    8.  Charity.    In  works  of


CH.  xvn.  1—27.]  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.        429


mercy  and  love  to  our  fellow-men.  Proclaiming  the  gospel,  teaching  the  young,  yisiting
the  sick,  relieving  the  poor.

IL  It  IB  OF  DivisE  comcAND.  It  is  coeval  with  the  creation  of  man  (Gen.  L  81 ;
ii.  1 — 3 ;  Exod.  zz.  8 — 11).  And  its  emhodiment  in  the  moral  Law  seems  to  denote  its
permanence  and  abiding  obligation.

HI.  Its  tbansfeb  to  thx  fibst  day  of  thb  webk  dobs  kot  alter  its  oblioation.
Our  Lord  taught  us  "  the  sabbath  was  made  for  man/'  and  therefore,  Uiough  for  various
reasons  its  observance  was  in  substance  transferred  from  the  seventh  day  to  the  first,  yet^
because  the  need  is  permanent,  the  obligation  is  likewise.

lY.  All  God's  laws — ^as  wsll  as  his  wbttten  Law — sanction  it.  Those  that  are :
1.  PhyaieaL  The  body  requires  it,  is  blessed  by  it,  harmed  if  deprived  of  it.  2.  Beligious
Religion  demands  set  times  and  observances.  Without  these  it  will  die  out.  The
■abMtt^,  therefore,  is  imperativel^r  needed  if  religion  is  to  be  maintained  amongst  any
people.  3.  Moral,  Secular  pursuits  tend  to  absorb  all  the  energies  of  the  soul.  Worlds
uness  is  dominant  enough  as  it  is  in  every  man ;  but  the  break  of  the  sabbath  does
much  to  hold  these  mighty  but  malevolent  forces  in  check,  and  gives  opportunity  for  the
exercise  of  other  and  counteracting  ones.  4.  Sociai,  The  indebtedness  of  happy  family  life,
of  prosperous  national  life,  of  friendship  between  man  and  man,  to  the  weekly  day  of  rest
is  unspeakable  (cf.  prize  essay, '  Workman's  Testimony  to  the  Sabbath ').  5.  Spiritual,
What  records  have  the  sabbaths  of  spiritual  blessing  gained  on  and  through  the  holy
observances  of  that  day  ?  Sinners  won  to  GKxl,  burdened  consciences  blessed  with
peace,  tempted  souls  strengthened,  sad  and  troubled  ones  made  joyful  in  God,  believers
nelped  forward  in  the  heavenlv  road,  etc.  All  these  facts  attest  the  graciousness  and
the  obligation  of  the  command  to  ludlow  God's  sabbath.  And,  on  the  other  hand,  its
disregard  has  ever  been  followed  by  moral  and  spiritual  and  often  secular  deterioration.
It  has  been  ill  with  those  who  have  set  at  nought  this  sure  law  of  God.  Therefore  let
us  each  one  do  what  we  may  to  preserve  to  our  land  the  unspeakable  blessing  of  the
weeklv  sabbath.  Better  to  err  on  the  side  of  strictness  in  its  observance  than  on  the
side  of  laxity.  But  let  us  not  think  that  we  have  hallowed  the  sabbath  unless  the  ends
for  which  it  was  designed  have  been  secured  bv  us.  It  is  but  a  means,  not  the  end,
and,  unless  it  have  furthered  in  us  love  to  GKxl  and  man,  each  sabbath  as  it  returns
is  but  a  lost  day. — 0.

Vers.  6 — 8. — Thrust ;  human  and  Divine,  The  prophet  here  presents  before  us  a  vivid
contrast  between  two  types  of  human  character.  He  does  this  oy  the  use  of  suggestive
images  drawD  from  the  realm  of  nature,  as  one  accustomed  to  see  the  great  lessons  of
man's  moral  life  and  destinv  reflected  in  visible  forms  in  the  sandy  desert  and  sterile
places  of  the  vrildemcss,  and  in  the  fertile  valleys  and  woody  banks  of  the  flowing  river.
The  imagery  is  peculiarly  Oriental  We  can  all  appreciate  it  in  some  measure,  but  those
who  have  seen  the  scanty,  stunted  vegetable  growths  of  the  desert  side  by  side  with
the  rich  foliage  that  clothes  the  moist  ravines  and  the  borders  of  the  water-courses,  can
best  understand  the  exquisite  truth  and  fitness  of  the  analogies.  Consider  these  two
opposite  kinds  of  trust— -(1)  trust  in  man,  (2)  trust  in  the  Lord,

L  Trust  in  man.  To  "make  flesh  one's  arm"  is  suggestive  of  personal  reliance  on
merely  human  and  earthly  resources,  in  neglect  of  the  spiritual  and  Divine.  It  takes
the  form  of  undue  self-confidence— confidence  in  one's  own  wisdom  and  strength,  or
confidence  in  our  fellow-creatures,  who  are  as  ignorant  and  weak  and  fEdlible  as  ourselves,
or  confidence  in  that  which  is  outward  and  circumstantial — worldly  riches,  sensible
gratifications,  material  guarantees.  The  features  of  such  a  trust  are :  1.  Vanity,  Its
hope  is  false  and  delusive.  It  has  no  sure  foundation.  It  seeks  life  in  the  region  of
death.  As  the  plant  finds  nothiofl;  to  nourish  it  in  the  barren  sand,  so  man  can  never
draw  the  nutriment  his  being  needs  from  mere  human  and  earthly  resources.

''Unless  above  himself  he  can  erect  himself,
How  mean  a  thin£  is  man ! "

And  how  can  that  which  is  fieshly,  and  therefore  perishable,  ever  satisfy  the  necessities
of  an  immortal  spirit?  2.  Loss ;  **  He  shall  not  see  when  good  cometb."  As  the  influences
that  come  down  upon  it  from  the  heaven  above  are  lost  upon  the  plant  that  is  rooted


430  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PBOPHET  JEREMIAH,    [oh.  xm.  1—27.


in  tbe  desert  ground,  so  this  earthly  tmst  robs  a  man  of  the  power  to  use  aright  even
the  opportunities  of  higher  good  that  are  within  his  reach.  Heavenly  influences  araeal
to  him  in  vain.  He  knows  not  the  richer  possibility  of  good  that  surrounds  Mm,  fails
to  apprehend  it,  cannot  see  when  it  oometh.  3.  FnUtiessneis.  The  **  parched  pUoes
in  the  wilderness  "  yield  no  solid  food.  Labour  bestowed  on  them  is  profitlen.  Sooh
ii  the  "  ourse  "  that  rests  upon  the  man  who  makes  the  ^armof  flesh^histrost— ATiin
hope,  destitution  of  the  good  that  might  be  his,  a  withered,  wasted  life.

JUL  Tbubt  Dff  THB  IxkRD.  Blessed  is  the  man  whose  whole  being  is  rooted  and
nounded  in  God.  His  is  a  life  fed  at  the  unseen  and  eternal  fountains.  **  Your  hearts
shall  live  that  seek  God  "  (Ps.  Ixix.  32).  The  image  of  the  *'  tree  piaoted  by  the  waters  "
is  suggestive  of  certain  important  aspects  of  that  life.  I.  Orawik.  As  the  tree,  by
the  mysterious  prolific  energy  with  which  it  is  endowed,  strikes  its  roots  deeper,  and

rids  forth  its  branches  over  a  wider  space,  so  the  freshness  and  force  of  Divine  life  in
soul  manifests  itself  in  ever-deepening,  enlarging,  heightening  forma  of  moral  and
pcactical  goodness.  This  is  a  matter  both  of  Divine  purpose  and  of  natural  organic
tendency.  Spirit-life,  like  plant-life,  knows  no  stagnation.  Where  there  is  no  growth
there  is  decay.  2.  Beauty,  Of  all  the  fair  objects  of  nature,  a  well-grown  tree  is  one
of  the  fjEdrest.  The  symmetry  of  its  proportions,  the  blending  in  harmonious  negligence
of  its  forms  and  colours,  the  play  of  light  and  shade  among  its  leaves  and  branches,  all
oombine  to  make  it  the  fitting  type  of  moral  dignity  and  loveliness.  We  cannot  wander
at  the  graceful  imagery  of  Hebrew  poets  and  prophets  when  we  remember  how  they
dwelt  in  a  land  of  olives  and  palm  trees,  of  cedars  and  lign  aloes  and  pomegranates.
Godly  chantcter  is  supremely  beautiful.  The  actual  forms  of  rdigious  life  that  one
sometimes  meets  with  are  intensely  displeasing.  But  these  are  caricatures,  not  just
representations.  Only  as  our  piety  is  pleasing  and  attractive  to  men  is  it  divinely  true.
"  Whatsoever  things  are  true, .  .  .  honest,"  etc.  (PhiL  iv.  8).  3.  Strength,  Here  is  Uio
idea  of  a  resistive  force.  The  tree,  in  the  vigour  of  its  life,  is  able  to  resist  the  pressure
of  unfriendly  climatic  influences.  It  feara  not  the  scorching  heat,  or  the  driving  blast,
or  the  nulling  torrent  It  is  as  though  it  *'  saw  "  them  not.  All  religious  life  is  a  con-
flict with  difficulties.  It  flourishes  just  so  far  as  it  is  able  at  once  to  appropriate  the
good  and  repel  the  evil  that  environs  it.  Christ  gives  *'  the  spirit  of  power ''  to  them
tnat  believe  in  him— power  to  overcome  the  most  oppressive  and  the  most  seduotive
influences  of  a  hostile  world.

**  Whore  is  true  faith,  all  change  comes  graoionsly.''

And  neither  providential  trials  nor  the  assaults  of  evil  can  shake  the  steadfastness  of
him  whose  heart  is  thoroughly  **  established  with  grace."  4.  Productiveness,  "  Neither
shall  cease  from  yielding  fruit "  (see  also  Ps.  i.  3  ;  xcii.  14).  The  fruit  of  the  producing
tree  is  the  final  development,  the  end  and  aim  of  its  life.  All  religious  thought  and
feeling,  and  all  Divine  methods  of  spiritual  culture,  point  to  this  as  their  ultimate  issue
^the  production  of  enduring  forms  of  practical  goodness.  "Herein  is  my  Father
glorified,  that  ye  bear  much  fruit  *'  (John  xv.  8).  If  Christ  is  our  living  root,  there  can
be  no  limit  to  this  process.  The  new-bom  soul  knows  no  decay  of  its  vital  energies,
but  rather  an  eternal  enlargement.  "  It  gives,  but  still  increases."  The  more  it  gives
the  more  it  increases.  *'  As  the  outward  man  perisheth,  the  inward  man  is  renewed
day  by  day."  And  when  death  comes  and  cuts  the  body  down  and  lays  it  in  the  dust,
it  only  sets  the  spirit  free  to  put  forth  the  powers  of  its  sanctified  Me  in  new  forms
of  service  in  a  nobler  sphere,  to  bear  fruit  for  ever  in  the  paradise  of  Qod. — W.

Vers.  1 — 4. — The  profound  impression  of  Judah*s  sin.  I.  There  is  implied  Judah's
OWN  iNDirPERENOE  TO  ITS  SIN.  With  supernatural  clearness  of  vision,  the  prophet  saw
the  sin  of  Judah ;  and  he  spoke  concerning  that  sin  with  words  which  Jehovah  had  put
into  his  mouth.  And  yet  it  is  evident  the  people  would  not  admit  his  representations
as  behig  correct  and  as  needing  urgent  attention.  The  great  bulk  of  them  thought  that
he  was  inventing  or  at  least  exaggerating.  They  had  lived  so  long  amongst  evils  as  to
have  become  quite  used  to  them ;  nay,  more,  they  made  a  pleasure  and  a  profit  of  them.
And  this  is  just  one  of  the  great  difficulties  in  preaching  the  gospel  and  trying  to
persuade  men  to  repentance.    They  cannot  be  brought  to  see  that  there  is  anything  to


OH.  xvn.  1— 27.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  431

repent  of;  that,  as  far  as  the  east  is  from  the  west,  so  far  are  they  from  bemg  in  aright
state*
IL  Over  agidnst  this  evident  indifference  there  must  he  set  the  prophet's  emphatio

STATEMENT  OF  THE  HOLD  WHIOH  SIN  HAS  UPON  THE  PEOPLE.     That  We  do  not  See  the

evil  of  our  life  proves  one  of  two  tilings— either  that  there  is  no  evil  to  see  or  that  we
are  spiritually  htind  and  cannot  see  the  evil  which  there  is.    Now,  spiritual  hlindness
has  lor  its  usual  concomitant  spiritual  pride ;  and  the  man  spiritually  hlind  is  the  very
last  who  will  admit  that  he  is  so.    If  we  are  left  to  ourselves  we  shall  never  discover
the  original  cause. and  fountain  of  all  our  trouhles ;  something  outside  of  ourselves  must
come  in  and  lead  to  an  altered  view  of  the  purposes  and  poesihilitieB  of  life.    This  is  not
the  place  to  speak  of  all  that  is  required  to  produce  that  alteration  of  view;  hut  it  is
very  plain  that  statements  such  as  that  of  the  prophet  hare  must  he  helpM  to  produce
it.    Is  it  not  a  great  matter  for  preachers  to  he  ahle  to  fall  hack  upon  the  thorough-
going, uncompromising  statements  of  the  Word  of  God  ?  For,  though  these  may  find  no
present  practical  response  in  the  consciousness  of  the  hearer,  yet  this  very  failure  is  a
reason  for  repeating  them  over  and  over  again,  until  in  some  critical  hour  the  faculty
ia  given  of  seeing  ourselves  as  Ood  sees  us,  which  is  a  faculty  much  more  to  he  desired
thui  the  one  so  often  commended  of  seeing  ourselves  as  others  see  us.    Two  things  are
here  referred  to— the  inscrihing  instrument  and  the  suhstance  on  which  the  inscription
is  made.    There  is  a  necessity  for  hoth  in  order  to  make  a  deep,  ahiding,  noticeable
impression.    A  pencil  may  make  upon  a  stone  a  mark  of  some  sort,  but  it  is  a  mark
very  easily  ruhbed  out ;  a  pen  of  iron  may  write  some  great  truth  upon  the  sand  of  the
seashore,  but  one  wash  of  the  rising  wave  sweeps  it  all  away.    But  when  you  have  the
materials  for  a  deep  inscription,  then  something  is  produced  which  can  only  be  destroyed
by  destroying  that  on  which  it  is  written,    little  wonder  was  it  that  these  people  of
Judah  would  not  fieu^e  the  task  of  inspecting  their  hearts.    Sin  is  so  intimately  mixed
with  the  heart  that  you  cannot  get  it  away  save  by  a  process  tantamount  to  the  removal
of  the  old  inward  life  and  the  substitution  of  a  new  one.    Hence  the  fitness  of  the  peti-
tion, '*  Create  in  me  a  dean  heart,  0  God,  and  renew  a  right  spirit  within  me.**  But  uiere
is  something  more  to  show  the  hold  which  sin  has  on  these  people,  and  that  is  the
terrible  effect  upon  their  children,    A  great  many  details  might  have  been  heaped  up
to  show  the  resdity  of  Judah's  idolatry,  but  one  crowning  illustration  was  better  still.
Not  even  the  most  hostile  to  the  prophet  could  well  deny  that  the  force  which  compelled
them  to  inflict  such  cruelties  on  their  children  in  the  name  of  religion  was  a  hideous
force.    Every  evil,  in  default  of  ability  immediately  to  see  its  resLl  nature,  must  be
measured  by  its  worst  visible  effects.    And  this  is  just  what  the  prophet  does  here,
when  he  puts  in  the  front  of  his  accusation  the  sufferings  of  the  little  ones  of  Judah.
As  if  these  little  ones  had  not  enough  of  unavoidable  pain  to  suffer^  without  suffering
being  sought  out  for  them.

ni.  The  effeot  of  all  this  'deeply  booted  evil  ab  seen  in  Jehovah's
CONSEQUENT  INFLICTIONS.  fVjBrs.  3,  4.)  The  people  may  cry,  in  professed  amazement,
<*  Why  all  these  sufferings  ?  What  have  we  done  that  we  should  be  treated  in  this  way?"
The  answer  is  that  all  this  spoiling,  all  this  turning  of  the  promised  inheritance  into  a
place  not  worth  having,  all  this  bitterness  of  exile,  were  not  produced  in  some  arbitrary,
incomprehensible  way.  The  prophet  was  not  astonished  at  these  judgments  coming ;
he  saw  them  approaching,  and  knew  why  they  came.  Great  effects  always  have  great
and  appropriate  causes ;  and  great  causes,  left  to  operate  freely,  will  produce  great  and
proper  effects.  Every  human  heart  holds  within  it  enough  to  make  indescribable
misery;  and  imless  that  greater  cause  which  GK)d  offers  to  put  in  certain  operation
comes  in  with  its  counteracting  force,  we  may  be  sure  that  indescribable  misery  will  be
produced.  Wherefore  let  us  pray  that  more  and  more  we  may  have  eyes  to  see  and
perceive,  ears  to  hear  and  understand. — T.

Ver.  6.— 2%«  curse  upon  the  man  who  trusts  in  man.  In  considering  this  passage  it
is  important  to  bear  in  mind  that  two  different  Hebrew  words  (-ai  and  dih)  are  ren-
dered by  the  one  word  "  man."  A  recollection  of  this  difference  will  bring  much  more
meaning  out  of  the  passage.

I.  There  is  suggested  for  consideration  man  in  his  owh  opinion  of  himself.  He
reckons  himself  as  nna,  the  strong  one.    He  likes  to  estimate  his  great  resources  and  use


432  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  xvn.  1— 27.


them  for  liis  own  aggrandizement.  He  is  filled  with  the  ambition  of  achieving  great-
ness in  many  ways.  It  is  by  his  strength  that  he  builds  Babel  and  the  Pyramick  and
all  the  great  stmctures  of  both  ancient  and  modem  times.  He  gathers  great  armies  and
makes  extensive  conquests.  He  leans  to  his  own  understanding  and  is  wise  in  his  own
conceits.  And  it  must  be  admitted  that  it  is  hard  for  a  man  in  the  full  strength  of
body  and  mind  to  take  in,  as  a  practical  check  upon  all  his  casUe-building,  the  necessary
weakness  of  human  nature.  The  discovery  of  our  weakness  will  always  be  a  humili-
ating thing,  at  least  in  the  first  aspect  of  it.  We  do  not  like  to  relinquish  the  glory
which  comes  from  physical  strength,  intellectual  skill,  in  short,  from  the  employment
of  all  those  fiGMSulties  enabling  a  man  to  achieve  what  is  called  a  snccessfol  career.
Gknius  is  semi-deified,  while  the  Spirit  of  Gk)d  working  through  some  common  man,
who  would  be  nothing  without  ihit  Spirit,  is  despised  or  neglected.  Successful  mili-
tary  and  naval  commanders  are  made  mto  nobles  with  the  general  approvaL  Every
fresh  application  of  natural  forces  is  hailed  as  a  tribute  to  the  glory  of  mankind.  Even
those  who  are  not  deceived  by  tiie  coarser  forms  of  human  power  are  decdved  readily
enough  by  the  finer  ones.

IL  Man  in  God*8  estdcatb  of  hdi.  This  is  set  forth  by  a  threefold  indication  of
man's  folly  and  wickedness.  1.  Ee  trutU  in  man ;  man  as  set  forth  by  the  word  p^M.
The  strong  man  is  assuredly  no  stronger  than  that  upon  which  he  leans.  A  building
may  be  of  substantial  mat^ials,  but  all  its  strength  will  avail  nothing  if  the  foundation
be  weak.  Mark  thai  it  is  not  a  question  of  trusting  in  sinful  and  fallen  men.  Ood
does  not  find  fault  with  us  for  trusting  in  bad  men  rather  than  good  ones.  He  is  speak-
ing of  all  that  essential  defectibility,  that  susceptibility  to  temptation,  which  belonged
to  man  even  before  he  felL  We  might  put  the  matter  thus :  Cursed  is  the  man  who
trusts  in  Adam,  who  forgets  that  he  himself  is  beset  with  temptations,  and  that  in  a
moment  of  heedlessness  and  vain  self-confidence  he  may  UAl  into  shame,  confusion,  and
perhaps  despair.  2.  Ee  makes  flesh  his  arm.  All  strength  must  act  through  an  arm
of  some  sort.  A  great  deal  of  human  power  makes  itself  felt  in  a  very  literal  way
through  the  arm.  Sheer  strength  in  wielding  the  sword  or  the  hammer ;  skill,  as  in
holding  the  painter's  brush,  the  sculptor's  chisel,  the  musical  instrument,  and  the
innumerable  tools  of  all  sorts  of  handicraftsmen.  Thus  the  arm  becomes  a  great  repre-
sentative, showing  all  the  varieties  of  human  strength  in  action.  Now,  where  man
shows  his  folly  is  in  this — that  wishing  to  get  his  own  way^to  work  out  his  own
pleasure  and  glorv,  he  has  no  better  instrument  than  fiesh.  What  a  poor,  uncertain
creature  man  is,  if  he  has  nothing  better  to  depend  upon  than  his  natural  faculties !
The  eye  may  lose  its  vision,  the  arm  its  strengtn,  the  hand  its  skill,  and  then  where  are
the  schemes  and  projects  of  the  ingenious  brain  ?  The  thing  intended  by  God  is  that
man  should  be  as  an  arm  to  carry  out  into  action  the  wise  and  loving  projects  of  the
Divine  will.  Then  there  is  no  failure,  no  disappointment.  What  cannot  be  done  in
one  way  will  assuredly  be  done  in  another,  if  only  the  will  and  counsel  of  Gk)d  stand
supreme  in  our  regard.  3.  Eis  heart  departs  from  Jehovah,  The  great  privilege  given
to  iffl^el  was  that  they  had  been  brought  near  to  Jehovah.  Fallen  Adam  had  Men  cast
out  of  Eden,  but  believing  Abraham  had  been  drawn  near  to  Gk)d«  And  his  descend-
ants in  particular,  the  chosen  nation  in  the  wilderness,  had  been  made  to  approach  to
Jehovah,  the  great  I  Am,  the  Source  of  whatsoever  strength  and  eneivy  are  to  be  found
in  his  universe.  Thus,  then,  we  see  the  peculiar  folly  of  the  children  oilsrael.  All  men
are  fools  because  they  trust  in  man  and  make  fiesh  their  arm ;  but  the  Israelite  is  a  fool
more  than  others  because  his  heart  departs  from  Jehovah.  He  cannot  depart  alto-
gether: he  cannot  get  away  from  the  constndnts  of  the  Omnipotent;  he  must  go
through  all  the  sufferings  that  are  coming  upon  the  guilty  land ;  and  even  when  he
departs  to  Babylon  he  will  not  leave  Jehovah  behind.  What  folly,  then,  that  he  does
not  make  an  instantaneous  clearance  of  his  miseries  by  cleaving  with  purpose  of  heart
to  Jehovah  as  Jehovah  desires  to  cleave  with  fulness  of  blessing  to  him  I  And  let  us
recollect  that,  however  far  from  Jehovah  our  hearts  may  depart,  from  his  judgments  and
penal  visitations  it  is  impossible  for  us  to  depart.

UL  The  cubse  which  rests  on  all  this  iostaksn  self-confidenoe.  Though
there  seems  some  uncertainty  as  to  the  meaning  of  ver.  6,  it  is  best  for  practical  pur-
poses to  take  it  in  contrast  with  ver.  8.  If  we  plant  ourselves  down  confidently  among
our  own  resources,  deceived  by  the  smiles  and  attractions  of  first  appearances,  we  must


CH.  xvn.  1— 27.]  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.        433


not  be  astonished  if  in  duo  time  the  appearances  vanish  and  leave  the  cheerless  realities
of  the  wilderness.  Where  man  by  his  natural  vision  sees  the  garden  with  all  manner
of  rich  possibilities,  GK>d  teaches  the  believer  to  discern  the  desolation  and  barrenness
that  lie  underneath.  Gardens  very  soon  become  wildernesses  if  the  heart  of  the  culti*
vator  departs  from  Jehovah.  Men  who  in  the  days  of  their  prosperity  draw  around
them  crowds  of  flatterers  and  dependents  no  sooner  fall  into  adversity  than  they  fall
also  into  comparative  solitude.  The  time  is  coming  when,  if  we  have  nothing  better
than  the  help  of  man  to  trust  to,  we  shall  really  have  no  help  at  all — Y.

Vers.  7,  8. —  Tkehlessing  on  the  man  who  trusts  in  Jehovah.  I.  Man's  olaih  to  bht
REOKONED  AS  STBONG  NEED  NOT  BE  AN  EMPTY  ONE.  He  deserves  the  appellation  of  -u|
if  only  he  will  set  the  right  way  to  obtain  it.  Weak  as  he  appears  from  the  point  of
view  given,  when  his  natural  resources  are  fully  opened  up  and  tested,  he  may  never-
theless become  strong  by  the  favour  of  Jehovah  to  perform  the  most  extraordinary
achievements.  From  one  extreme  where  the  strength  of  the  godless  is  found  to  be  but
a  mockery,  we  are  taken  all  the  way  to  another  extreme,  illustrated  by  the  confident
assertion  of  the  apostle  that  he  could  do  all  things  through  Christ  who  gave  him
inward  strength.  We  are  every  one  of  us  meant  to  be  strong  with  a  strength  which
can  meet  the  severest  tests ;  and  those  who  are  the  weakest  in  other  respects  often  prove
the  strongest  in  spiritual  life  with  what  it  requires  both  of  activity  and  endurance.
And  it  is  of  particular  importance  to  be  observed  that  the  man  weak  of  will,  easily
yielding  to  temptation,  bound  these  many  years  by  the  chain  of  some  dehumanizing
habit,  can  be  made  strong  enough  to  overcome  his  enemies  and  trample  them  under  his
feet.  There  is  that  in  him  which  can  be  so  renewed,  so  vivified,  that  he  will  become
steadfast  and  energetic  in  attaining  the  Divine  purpose  of  existence.  Recollect  the
instance  of  the  man  who  was  above  forty  years  old  when  his  feet  and  ankle-bones
received  strength.  Jesus  of  Nazareth  did  not  bring  this  about  merely  for  this  man's
physical  benefit ;  but  chiefly  that  those  who  were  inwardly  lame  should  be  stimulated
to  seek  him,  and  have  the  feet  and  ankle-bones  of  the  inward  man  strengthened  for  a
holy  and  a  truly  manly  service.  God  must  needs  pour  contempt  upon  the  boastings  of
the  natural  man,  in  order  that,  when  he  has  efiectually  humbled  him,  he  may  then  exalt
him  into  the  possession  of  true  strength.

II.  The  eequisite  fob  the  attainment  op  true  strength  is  pointed  out.
Pointed  out  clearly  and  simply.  He  is  the  strong  man  who  trusts  in  Jehovah,  and  he
is  strong  just  as  far  as  he  does  trust.  Notice  how  the  requirement  of  trust  is  expressed
twice  over,  first  by  a  verb  and  then  by  a  noun,  both  of  which  have  the  same  root4etters.
It  is  as  if  we  first  saw  the  man  in  the  active  exercise  of  trust,  and  then  the  habitual
confidence  of  his  nature.  We  see  the  man  trusting  and  we  also  see  the  trusting  man.
"All  things  are  possible  to  him  that  believeth."  When  God  speaks,  the  trustful  hearer
readily  acts  upon  the  strength  of  God  meaning  what  he  says.  The  statements  of  the
gospel  transcend  human  powers  of  discovery,  and  they  can  only  be  believed  because
God  makes  them — he  whose  regular  and  beneficent  ways  in  nature  prove  him  to  be  so
true.  Man  by  faith  puts  himself  in  the  hands  of  God,  his  Maker,  and  then  he  can
do  things  far  beyond  what  he  has  hitherto  imagined  to  be  practicable.  Look  at  the
sublimest  illustration  of  this  ever  given  upon  earth;  when  the  man  Christ  Jesus
believingly  said, "  Father,  into  thy  hands  I  commend  my  spirit."  Then,  in  a  very  few
hours,  the  strength  imparted  even  to  the  dead  was  revealed  by  the  resurrection  of  Christ.

IIL  The  illustration  of  how  the  blessino  comes.  Possibly  there  is  here  a
reference  to  some  regular  practice  of  the  foreseeing  planter  of  trees.  The  necessity  of
planting  trees  near  water- courses  is  not  obvious  to  us,  seeing  that  in  our  moist  climate
we  often  see  noble  umbrageous  trees  far  enough  from  anything  of  the  kind.  The
children  of  this  world  are  wise  in  their  generation.  They  bear  in  mind — they  have  to
bear  in  mind — the  scorching  heat,  the  rainless,  cloudless  heavens,  or,  if  clouds  there  be,
too  often  waterless  clouds,  mocking,  tantalizing  beauties  of  the  sky ;  and  so  they  plant
their  trees  where  they  may  stretch  out  their  thirsty  roots  to  the  passing  stream.  And
yet  these  same  children  of  this  world,  prudent  for  their  trees,  may  yet  be  foolish  for
themselves,  taking  up  a  position  in  life  admirable  for  the  gaining  of  temporal  ends,  but
leaving  at  a  great  distance  the  river  that  flows  from  "  the  throne  of  God  and  of  tho
Lamb."   Thus  there  is  here  a  lesson  from  the  tree  which  cannot  choose  to  the  man  who

JEREMIAir,  2  F


434  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  xvii.  1^27.


can  choose.  We  all  have  our  clioice  of  the  essentials  of  position.  There  are  two  seta
of  circumstancea — those  we  cannot  choose  and  those  we  are  bound  to  choose.  It  is  in  the
power  of  us  all  to  be  planted  by  the  waters.  Grod's  gifts  of  grace  flow  through  fixed
and  well-dofin^  channels,  and  to  these  we  must  go.  We  are  not  allowed  to  make
compromises.  A  very  little  seeming  difference  may,  in  reality,  make  all  the  difference
between  wisdom  and  folly  in  this  matter.  It  did  not  need  that  the  tree  should  be
planted  very  far  away  from  the  water,  a  few  yards  more  or  less  might  determine  the
result.  There  is  also  in  this  illustration  the  notion  of  a  hidden  means  of  supply.  To
outward  appearance  there  is  no  connection  between  the  tree  and  the  river ;  the  connection
k  underneath,  and  it  is  real,  increasing,  and  constant. — T.

Yen.  9, 10. — The  uarMng  and  knowing  of  the  heart  One  is  reminded  here  of  the
ofl^uoted  piece  of  advice,  "  Know  thyself."  The  prophet's  assertion  places  man  before
ui  as  the  victim  of  self-ignorance,  self-confidence,  and  self-deception.  He  talks  of  truth
when  his  mind  is  full  of  error,  and  thus  he  is  prevented  from  taking  the  only  real  way  by
which  he  can  attain  to  the  knowledge  of  truth.  In  the  prophet's  assertion  and  ques-
tion, and  the  Divine  answer  given  to  the  question,  there  is  much  which  upon  the  first
aspect  may  humiliate.  But  the  humiliation  will  itself  prove  a  cause  for  rejoicing  if  only  it
leadf  us  to  profit  by  Gk)d*s  certain  knowledge  in  matters  when  we  are  profoundly  ignorant.

I.  Thikk  of  tue  vast  and  incbeabino  extent  of  human  knowledge.  If  a  man
be  ignorant  of  his  own  heart  it  surely  cannot  be  because  he  himself  is  unfitted  for  the
knowledge.  He  may  have  become  unfit,  and  the  unfitness  may,  by  neglect,  become  more
pronounced,  but  he  cannot  be  unfit  by  reason  of  his  original  constitution.  One  may
say  that  God  must  have  intended  him  to  have  sufficient  knowledge  to  keep  his  inward
life  right.  Otherwise  we  have  this  curious  contradiction — that  man  has  achieved  an
immense  amount  of  knowledge  with  respect  to  his  physical  constitution,  but  is  doomed
to  remain  in  uncertainty  and  bewilderment  as  to  the  laws  of  a  healthy  and  a  happy
inward  life.  "  Who  can  know  the  heart  ?  "  says  the  prophet  And  yet  even  with  the
limited  knowledge  of  his  age  there  were  many  men,  doubtless,  who  knew  many  things.
We  all  have  the  powers  of  observation,  comparison,  and  experiment,  and  it  is  the  largest
pleasure  of  some  minds  to  exercise  these  powers.  And  yet  it  is  just  to  minds  that
are  most  trained,  most  confident  in  the  principles  of  science,  and  most  stored  with  the
results  of  it,  that  this  question  might  be  put.  It  is  not  a  question  for  the  child  just
beginning  to  learn  or  for  the  savage  unaccustomed  to  think ;  let  it  be  put  to  man  in
his  highest  civilization,  and  then  the  fact  will  be  seen  that  the  question  is  no  vain  and
inappropriate  one.

II.  Thus  we  are  led  to  notice  tub  dreadful  ignorance  which  may  prevail  in
THE  MIDST  OF  ALL  THIS  KNOWLEDGE.  The  progress  of  the  world  does  not  make  the
prophet's  question  one  whit  less  pressing.  Nay,  it  becomes  more  pressing  than  ever.
Other  objects  of  knowledge  have  an  ever-increasing  light  cast  upon  them,  and  by  the
very  force  of  the  contrast  man's  inward  life  appears  in  still  deeper  darkness.  What-
ever the  cause  of  the  continued  ignorance  may  be,  that  ignorance  does  continue,  so  far
as  man's  unaided  effort  to  remove  it  is  concerned.  In  one  single  mind  we  too  often  see
exemplified  vast  intellectual  knowledge  and  complete  spiritual  ignorance.  He  who
seems  to  know  everything  does  not  know  his  own  heart,  and  apparently  does  not  care
to  know  it;  reminding  one  of  the  man  who  had  travelled  over  the  whole  world  and  yet
had  never  beheld  a  scene  as  wonderful  as  any  which  was  visible  from  a  point  on  his
own  estate.  ITie  time  is  coming  when  knowledge  will  vanish  away.  But  the  neglected
heart  will  still  remain  to  force  itself,  in  a  way  which  cannot  be  resisted,  upon  the  thoughts
of  its  long  indifferent  possessor.

III.  The  CAUSE  op  this  ignorance  is  made  plain.  It  all  lies  in  the  deceitfulne«s
and  utter  corruption  of  the  human  heart.  And  notice  in  particular  that  it  is  by  the  heart
that  the  heart  is  to  be  known.  Heart-knowledge  is  not  like  other  kinds  of  knowledge ;
it  depends  on  the  character  of  him  who  knows.  There  is  no  essential  conti-adiction
between  high  intellectual  acquirements  and  a  hard,  selfish,  and  perhaps  even,  in  some
instances,  a  profligate  life.  Men  of  refined  tastes  and  great  intellectual  sensibilities  may
be  thoroughly  selfish,  careless  about  the  toil  and  suffering  of  the  world,  so  long  as  these
|)l:int  no  thorn  in  their  pillows,  infuse  no  bitterness  into  their  cup.  But  one  who  would
know  the  heart  must  be  very  sure  of  his  own  motives,  otherwise  he  may  make  human


CH.  XVII.  1—27.]    I^E  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  435

nature  to  appear  better  in  some  respects  and  worse  in  others  than  it  really  is.  The
description  here  may,  therefore,  be  taken  as  applying  even  more  forcibly  to  the  heart-
that  knows  than  to  the  heart  that  is  to  be  known.  Here  the  great  difficulty  and  danger
lie.  For  the  deceitful  and  corrupt  heart  can  be  known,  if  not  by  any  one  else,  at  all
events  by  Jehovah  himself.  But  the  deceitful  and  corrupt  heart  cannot  know ;  it  doea
not,  in  the  fullest  sense  of  the  word,  know  anything  at  all.  With  hearts  put  right,
what  a  wonderful  increase  of  knowledge  and  of  the  profit  and  pleasure  of  knowledge
will  there  be  I  But  till  then  we  are  not  unlike  those  who  suffer  from  diseased  intellects.
They  come  into  great  contrast  with  sane  people  from  the  way  in  which  their  minds  get
filled  with  hallucinations  and  incongruities.  And  so,  if  we  try  to  compare  ourselves  ia
our  notions  of  things  with  Christ's  teaching,  we  shall  see  the  difference  between  the
view  taken  by  a  sincere  sound  heart,  such  as  was  that  of  our  Lord,  and  the  view  taken
by  corrupt,  deceitful  hearts,  which  ours  are  and  must  be  till  we  discover  the  need  of  a
new  and  pure  life  to  be  put  into  them.

IV.  God's  perfect  knowledge  stands  in  the  place  op  cub  ignorance  and
ERROR.  Grod  knows  us  in  all  our  motives,  through  all  our  concealments,  and  can  set
our  secret  sins — the  operation  of  destroying  causes  that  lie  even  below  our  conscious-
ness— in  the  light  of  his  countenance.  When  once  we  discover  how  competent  God  is
to  search  and  try,  we  shall  then  see  that  it  is  vain  for  us  to  deny  what  he  affirms,  tot
excuse  what  he  condemns,  and  to  make  out  that  we  are  not  responsible  when  he  lays
evil  at  our  doors.  Jeremiah's  scornful  audiences  may  have  said  to  him,  '<  How  come
you  to  know  these  things  about  us  ?  How  come  yon  to  be  so  uncharitable  as  to  bring
these  dreadful  charges?"  But  then  we  know  that  they  were  not  the  prophet's  own
charges,  but  came  from  Gk>d  himself.  It  was  part  of  Jeremiah's  grief  that,  on  Jehovah's
authority,  he  should  have  to  believe  things  so  bad  of  his  nation.  What  God  did  to
Israel  was  just;  and  more  and  more,  as  time  went  on,  it  was  seen  to  be  just.  In  all
great  exhibitions  of  Divine  wrath  we  must  be  silent,  recollecting  that  God  knows  what
we  cannot  know,  and  perceives  necessities  where  we  can  perceive  none. — Y.

Yer.  11. — Riches  wrongly  gotten^  and  the  consequence.  Here  is  an  instance  of  an
illustration  which,  so  far  as  our  knowledge  is  concerned,  is  more  obscure  than  the  thing
to  be  illustrated.  But  there  was,  no  doubt,  with  regard  to  some  bird  a  popular  opinion
which  made  the  prophet's  reference  very  suggestive  to  his  hearers.  The  fact  supposed
is  that  some  bird  gathers  the  young  of  other  birds,  despoiling  the  nests  of  the  real
parents,  only  to  find,  when  the  young  ones  set  sufficiently  strong,  that  they  can  no
longer  be  kept  to  its  nurture  and  control.  Whether  there  was  a  real  fact  corresponding
matters  very  little.  If  we  want  a  familiar  and  sufficiently  corresponding  instance,  we
may  find  it  in  the  not  unfrequent  one  of  a  hen  hatching  a  brood  of  ducklings,  only  to
find  how  soon  their  alien  nature  is  manifested  when  a  pool  of  water  comes  within
reach.    Note— ^

I.  There  is  a  rightful  getting  of  wealth.  External  property  occupies  a
position  of  approval  in  the  Old  Testament  which  is  denied  to  it  in  the  New.  All  the
way  through  the  New  Testament  the  perils  and  deceptions  attaching  to  mere  external
wealth  are  strongly  insisted  on.  If  not  condemned  per  se,  which  of  course  is  not
possible,  it  is  yet  put  forward  as  a  heavy  burden  and  perpetual  stumbling-block  to  the
Christian  who  has  it.  But  in  the  Old  Testament  that  very  wealth  is  magnified,
doubtless  as  a  symbol  of  those  better  riches  which  would  appear  in  something  of  their
proper  glory  and  satisfying  power  through  the  energetic  ministrations  of  Christ's  Spirit.
God  saw  fit  for  a  time  to  recognize  ability,  industry,  and  integrity  in  a  way  which
would  be  plain  to  the  most  carnal  of  men.  Take  Job,  for  instance.  And  even  in  the
New  Testament  a  sharp  line  is  drawn  between  wealth  gotten  honestly  and  that  which
came  by  extortion  and  cheating.  There  is  a  standard  of  integrity  recognized  by  the
natural  man;  and  God  also  recognizes  this  standard,  so  far  as  it  goes.  Miserably
short  does  it  fall  of  his  appointed  height  of  perfection,  but  it  is  better  than  nothing.
Those  who  fall  short  of  even  the  moderate  requirements  of  their  fellow-men^Gk)d  will
condemn.  On  them  he  will  set  an  unmistakable  mark.  But  in  order  to  do  this
there  must  be  some  sort  of  modified  approval  of  those  who,  in  seeking  wealth,  strive  to
keep  their  integrity  and  refrain  from  doing  that  which  may  degrade  and  impoverish-
their  fellow-men«


43G  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  xvii.  1—27.


II.  Thb  peculiar  uncertainty  of  ill-gotten  wealth.  All  external  wealth  is
uncertain.  '*  Riches  take  to  themselves  wings  and  flee  away."  They  furnish  one  of  the
most  impressive  testimonies  to  the  instability  of  terrestrial  society.  But  ill-gotten
gains  are  peculiarly  unstable.  Every  rich  man  is  envied,  and  few  such  escape  slander.
But  he  who  becomes  rich  by  unscrupulous  methods  has  to  lay  his  account  with
hostility  on  the  part  of  all  whom  he  has  spoiled.  Methods  of  unjust  gain  cannot  but
provoke  the  resolute,  persevering,  and  ultimately  successful  opposition  of  all  who  hate
injustice.  Recollect  the  sudden  and  complete  loss  which  canie  to  the  «Iave-holders
of  America,  when  their  slaves  were  freed  as  a  matter  of  military  necessity.  It  is  true
that  unjust  gains  seem  to  be  often  as  stable  as  just  ones;  but  still  the  peculiar
uncertainty  remains.  A  Christian  possessing  external  wealth  bears  in  mind  the
uncertainty  of  it,  just  as  he  bears  in  mind  the  uncertainty  of  his  own  natural  life ;  but
the  heaper-up  olfiUhy  lucre  has  to  reckon,  not  only  with  the  perils  of  all  human  life,
but  also  with  those  Inseparable  from  his  own  evil  courses.  In  some  great  storm,
fatally  threatening  the  ship  of  state,  such  a  one  may  have  to  be  thrown  overboard,
Joni^-fashion,  in  order  to  secure  the  safety  of  the  rest. — Y.

Vers.  12,  13. — An  inwiring  invocation.  We  must  take  ver.  12  as  invocatory
rather  than  indicative.  The  prophet  speaks  smtably  in  the  language  of  apostrophe
as  he  refers  to  the  throne  of  Jehovah  ana  the  holy  heights  where  he  dwells.  **  0  throne
of  glory,  height  of  beginning,  place  of  our  sanctuary ! "  It  will  be  felt  that  this
apostrophe  is  well  fitted  to  make  the  Hope  of  Israel  a  source  of  real  hope  in  the  hearts
of  Israel.

L  The  throne  op  olort.  This  may  be  taken  as  having,  by  contrast,  a  double
reference*  He  who  sits  on  this  throne  is  the  Deity,  Jehovah ;  hence  all  the  seats  of  the
Gentile  gods  may  in  like  manner  be  considered  as  thrones.  And  because  he  who  sits  on
a  throne  is  reckoned  as  a  king,  there  is  also  a  contrast  with  human  kings.  This
reference  to  the  throne  of  glory  amounts,  therefore,  to  a  condemnation  of  all  idol  shrines
and  human  thrones  as  places  to  be  ashamed  of.  The  shrines  were  richly  decorated
and  regarded  with  the  utmost  Teneration,  but  this  did  not  make  them  glorious.  Tho
practices  of  those  connected  with  the  shrines  and  the  character  of  the  worshippers
showed  that  instead  of  glory  there  was  shame.  It  has  been  the  mark  of  all  who  have
turned  from  formal  idolatry  or  from  the  equally  real  idolatry  of  a  worldly  spirit  to  the
living  God,  the  God  of  Sinai  and  the  tabernacle,  of  Calvary  and  of  Pentecost,  that  they
have  become  more  and  more  ashamed  of  their  ungodly  past  Its  defilement  and
unworthiness  have  been  seen  in  a  new  light  and  with  new  eyes.  When  the  slave
becomes  a  freeman,  servitude  is  more  and  more  seen  to  be  inexpressibly  degrading.  And
80  with  regard  to  the  thrones  of  human  kings :  these  are  just  the  places  where  human
selfishness  and  pride  are  most  conspicuous.  To  see  how  base  and  fiendish  a  man  can
become,  we  have  only  to  select  from  the  occupants  of  thrones.  It  is  not  meant  that
kings  have  been  worse  than  common  men;  but  their  elevated  position  has  both
enlarged  their  opportunities  for  mischief,  and  also  exposed  them  to  the  gaze  of  all
succeeding  generations.  A  Tiberius  or  a  Nero  gets  an  immortality  of  infamy,  whereas
an  obscure  villain  of  the  same  age  passes  swiftly  into  oblivion.  Those  kings  who  have
really  glorified  thrones  did  so  only  as  far  as  they  were  viceroys  to  him  who  is  the
King  of  kings.  Human  thrones  may  or  may  not  be  thrones  of  glory  so  far  as  glory
can  Delong  to  the  creature.  Jehovah's  throne  must  be  glorious  seeing  that  it  is  for
ever  transfigured  with  the  efi'ulgence  of  him  who  sits  thereon.

IL  The  height  of  beginning.  *<  In  the  beginning  God  made  the  heaven  and  the
earth."  It  is  man  coming  in  afterwards  who  has  misemployed  and  degraded  what
God  fashioned  with  certain  Divine  and  supremely  beneficial  ends  in  view.  Out  of  that
which  God  has  made  for  his  glory  man  raises  up  things  to  glorify  himsel/.  The
proudest  system  of  idolatry,  the  system  most  deeply  rooted  in  the  hearts  of  millions,  is
but  of  yesterday  when  compared  with  those  heavens  which  are  God's  throne  and  that
earth  which  is  his  footstool.  Measured  against  this  height  of  beginning,  the  most
ancient  of  human  families  is  only  an  upstart.  It  is  like  the  mushroom  of  a  night  when
set  over  against  some  immemorial  tree.  The  abode  where  and  whence  the  glory  of
Jehovah  is  manifested  is  not  a  Babel  edifice,  which,  however  high  it  may  rise^  is
humiliatingly  conditioned  by  the  unstable  foundation  on  whicli  it  rests.    Humnn


CH.  XVII.  1—27.}    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  43Z

power,  at  tlie  summit  of  its  splendour,  has  traversed  and  conquered  large  tracts  of  the
earth ;  and  so  kings  get  the  name  of  great ;  but  the  greatness  is  only  a  momentary^
unsubstantial  swelling.  Their  power,  like  that  of  the  sudden  torrent,  swiftly  passes
away.  One  can  imagine  how  the  prophet,  while  he  talked  of  this  height  of  beginning,
looked  to  the  heavens,  so  unaffected  by  all  the  strife  and  pride  of  the  generations
which,  succeed  one  another  in  this  lower  world.  Jehovah  has  not  climbed  through
long  struggles  to  his  height  of  glory*  There  may  be  evolution  and  graduation  among
the  creatures  of  his  hand,  but  such  conceptions  of  progress  are  nothing  less  thaa
blasphemous  when  we  try  to  apply  them  to  him.

111.  The  flace  of  oxtb  sanctuaby*  The  place  which  God  had  condescended  to
make  holy  in  his  special  connection  with  Israel — the  place  where  the  ark  of  the
covenant  rested — had  become  also  a  place  (th^  history  of  Israel  being  witness)  where
the  people  of  Israel  might  have  every  confidence  in  GtxL  The  temples  of  idols  had
not  an  invariable  connection  with  the  triumphs  of  their  worshippers ;  but  just  in
proportion  as  Israel  honoured  the  ark  of  the  covenant  and  the  Qoi  of  the  ark,  in  the
bame  proportion  they  were  made  to  see  the  effect  of  their  conduct  in  triumph  over
their  enemies  and  success  in  their  own  affairs.  It  was  because  they  forsook  the  ark
that  they  themselves  were  forsaken  in  humiliation,  adversity,  and  shame.  Not,  of
course,  that  the  prophet  is  thinking  of  the  ark  onl^  here.  The  trueplace  of  sanctuary
is  also  in  his  mind—- the  invisible  abode  of  the  invisible  Jehovah. — Y.

Ver.  13. — **  Written  in  the  earth.'*  I.  An  indication  of  why  men  depart  fbom
Gk)D.  "  Those  who  depart  from  Jehovah,**  says  the  prophet,  "  shall  be  written  in  the
earth."  Therefore  we  conclude  that  their  aim  is  to  be  written  in  some  more  durable  and
trustworthy  substance.  When  they  are  spoken  of  as  departing  from  Gk)d,  the  description
is  one  accommodated  to  our  thoughts  rather  than  exactly  correspondent  with,  reality.
The  connection  has  been  real  so  far  as  mere  opportunity  and  privilege  were  concerned,
but  nominal  also,  because  the  opportunity  and  privilege  were  never  seized.  €K>d  has
drawn  near  to  the  man ;  the  man  has  not  been  inclined  to  draw  near  to  God.  It  has
seemed  to  him  that  in  drawing  near  there  would  be  such  a  subordination  of  self  as
would  amount  to  self-effacement.  The  lusts  of  the  natural  man  are  everywhere
checked  and  contradicted  by  the  commandments  of  Ghxl.  Hence  man  strives  to  get
away  from  God  and  into  such  relations  with,  his  fellow-men  as  will,  he  thinks,  cause
his  name  to  be  counted  for  more.  It  may  be  that  it  is  self-glory  he  is  seeking  for ;
to  have  his  name  deeply  graven  on  the  world's  memorial  tablets  as  one  who  has
achieved  much  and  stood  out  like  a  Hercules  from  the  common  crowd*  It  may  be
that  he  hopes  for  great  power ;  to  have  his  name  written  on  the  hearts  of  thousands
whose  interests  will  be  Sound  up  with  his  so  that  they  cannot  succeed  if  he  fails.  It
is  very  gratifying  to  the  pride  of  man  to  feel  that  others  cannot  do  without  him.

II.  The  bube  besxtlt  of.  depaetube  fbox  Gk)D.  Men  go  away  from  God  expecting
to  have  their  names  written  in  the  marbte,  and  a  very  short  experience  shows  that  they
are  written,  as  it  were,  on  the  most  shifty  of  all  materials.  From  a  certain  point  of
view,  nothing  seems  more  irregular  than  the  preservation  of  what  was  written  in
ancient  ages.  Deep  letters  on  hard  stones  are  long  faded  away,  while  characters  written
on  parchment  or  even  paper  survive  to  this  day,  and  are  now  watched  with  an  atten-
tion which,  bids  fair  to  preserve  them  for  many  a  year  to  come.  But  every  one  can
see  that  what  is  written  in  the  earth  must,  in  the  very  nature  of  things,  be  quickly
obliterated.  Such  writing  may  be  the  amusement  of  a  child ;  it  could  never  oe  the
serious  occupation  of  a  man.  And  yet  it  is  just  by  this  figure  that  the  folly  of
apostates  from  God  is  set  forth.  They  write  their  names  on  a  spot  exposed  to  the
trampling  crowd  of  their  fellow-men  ;  and  in  their  own  selfishness  they  forget  of  how
little  account  they  are  to  others  as  selfish  as  themselves.  And  yet,  in  spite  of  such  a
warning  to  those  who  depart  from  God,  they  go  on  complaining  because  men  forget
them.  It  is  just  the  way  in  which  they  must  expect  to  be  treated.  It  is  the  way  of
the  world.  After  all,  we  are  but  weak  creatures,  with  very  limited  powers,  and  we
may  well  be  excused  if  we  cannot  keep  constantly  in  our  minds  those  who  have  some
claim  on  our  sympathy  and  help.  It  is  no  fault  of  earth  that  it  is  earth  instead  of
adamant.  The  fault  ues  with  tnose  who  allow  their  names  to  be  written  there  instead
of  in  the  enduring  place  which  God  has  provided  for  them.


433  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,     [ch.  xvil  1—27.

111.  The  equally  sure  result  from  cleaving  to  God.  Though  not  stated  in
BO  many  words,  it  is  cheeringly  implied  that  those  cleaving  to  God  have  their  names
written  whence  they  can  never  bo  erased.  For  their  names  are  indeed  written,  as  it
were,  on  the  heart  of  GKxi  himself.  He  cannot  either  forget  or  forsake  them.  They
are  ever  remembered  in  the  wisdom  of  his  thoughts  and  the  resistless  movements  of
hlf  ways.  The  best  thing  that  can  happen  to  us  in  purely  human  relations  is  to  bo
written  in  the  hearts  of  those  who  love  us ;  when  they  remember  us,  not  because  it
is  their  interest  to  do  so,  but  out  of  an  unselfish  fulness  of  desire  for  our  welfare  and
happiness.  But  how  much  better  is  it  to  be  thus  remembered  by  God,  seeing  that
with  him  there  abides  a  love  inexpressibly  deeper  than  any  human  affection,  and,
idong  with  this  love,  a  wisdom  and  power  with  wnich  even  the  highest  human  wisdom
and  power  are  not  for  a  moment  to  be  mentioned  I — T.

Ver.  14. — Be  whom  Ood  heaJs  is  rtaUy  heeded,  I.  The  cossciouskess  of  nronriDUAL
Kbed.  The  prayer  is  "  heal  me ; "  "  deliver  me.*'  The  prophet  shows  how  deep  and
pressing  is  his  own  need  by  the  use  of  two  figures.  He  feels  the  need  of  something;
oeing  done  internally  and  externally.  Internally  he  is  sick  at  heart,  wounded  and
bruised  in  spirit.  He  needs  healing  from  the  state  of  mind  produced  through  being
despised  and  rejected  by  his  fellow-countrymen.  Still  worse  is  the  gnawing  pain  pro-
duced as  he  views  the  wickedness  of  the  land  and  takes  knowledge  of  the  steadily
advancing  calamities.  But  we  cannot  doubt  that  beyond  all  this  there  was  the  conscious-
ness of  his  own  heart's  pollution  and  unworthiness.  So  fieir  as  natural  constitution  and
natural  tendencies  were  concerned,  he  who  spoke  was  no  better  than  those  to  whom  he
spoke.  Thus,  in  trying  to  waken  others  from  their  lethargy,  he  became  more  thoroughly
wakened  to  his  own  state.  The  word  which  God  had  put  into  his  mouth  was  spoken,
not  only  to  the  outside  audience,  but  down  to  his  own  sinning  and  ignorant  heart.
Ood  cannot  take  for  prophets  and  apostles  those  who  care  little  about  their  own
spiritual  need.  Paul  oecame  a  better  apostle  because  he  reckoned  himself,  in  such
sincerity^  the  chief  of  sinners.  It  ought  to  be  no  marvel  that  those  to  whom  we  speak
are  indifferent  to  their  state,  if  we  who  speak  to  them  are  largely  indifferent  to  our  own.

II.  The  vanitt  of  beekino  elsewhere  than  to  Gk)D.  The  verv  confidence  which
Jeremiah  expresses  that,  if  only  God  heals  him,  he  will  be  truly  healed,  seems  to  indicate
that  he  had  some  experience  of  other  modes  of  healing,  such  as  had  looked  very  promising
at  first,  but  proved  utterly  vain  in  the  end.  As  a  general  rule,  we  have  to  be  disappointed
in  human  agencies  of  healing  before  we  can  be  satisfied  with  the  Divine  one.  It
cannot  be  said  that  the  nature  and  depth  of  the  disease  are  adequately  discovered,
until  we  discover,  from  experience,  how  vain  human  resources  are  against  it  Wo
may  be  able  to  mitigate  symptoms,  to  deaden  pain,  to  rouse  into  a  temporary  cheerful-
ness ;  but  in  the  end  the  relapse  is  certain  and  more  confirmed  than  ever.  It  was  a
great  thing  for  the  prophet  to  be  brought  to  feel,  as  he  evidently  was,  that  anywhere
else  he  went  would  be  with  the  probability  of  failure.  With  Gk)d  thero  is  not  only  tho
certainty  of  success,  that  success  is  with  him  alone,

III.  The  prophet's  confidence  in  God  as  a  Healer.  The  way  in  which  ho
expresses  this  confideuce  is  most  worthy  of  notice.  His  confidence  is,  not  that  God  will
do  something  for  him,  but  that  whatever  GKxi  does  will  be  adequate  for  the  end  in
view.  It  is  much  to  feel  that  one  may  count  upon  Divine  S3rmpathy  and  effort ;  it  is
still  more  to  feel  that  whatever  help  God  gives  will  rise  to  the  intensity  of  the  need.
He  who  gives  the  spirit  of  conviction,  working  deep  in  the  natural  heart  and  showing
its  diseased  state  and  defiling,  polluting  activity,  gives  also  the  spirit  of  a  real  healing.
The  great  ground  of  apprehension  arises,  not  from  the  magnitude  of  the  spiritual
disease,  but  from  the  indifference  of  the  sufferer  and  his  indisposition  to  submit  his
heart  to  God's  searching,  healing  power.  The  moment  we  are  willing  to  submit  our-
selves to  the  great  Physician,  that  moment  the  worst  disetee  becomes  a  manageable
and  a  virtually  conquered  thing.  The  course  of  the  healing  process  may  be  loog,
tedious,  and  painful;  but  what  matter  these,  if  the  end  be  perfect  healing  and  ever-
lasting health  ?—Y.

Ver.  15,--**  Where  is  the  word  of  the  Lord  f  I.  The  pretext  and  aim  of  this
question.    The  prophet's  subsequent  comment  on  the  question  shows  with  what  bitter


en.  xviL  1— 27.]     THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  430


hatred  to  bim  it  was  asked.  Sad,  indeed,  it  is  to  reflect  that  these  very  words  miglit
be  asked  in  a  far  different  spirit ;  that  they  might  come  from  the  depths  of  an
ignorant  seeking  heart,  wandering  long  amid  idolatries  and  human  systems  of  philo*
sophy,  without  hearing  anything  to  serve  as  bread  of  heaven  for  the  deep  hunger
within.  There  are  people  upon  whom  God's  Word  has  been  pressed  in  every  variety
of  appeal  and  representation.  The  Word  has  sought  them  out  again  and  again;  and
yet  in  the  end  ail  they  can  do  is  to  cast  a  scornful  doubt  on  whether  it  is  the  Word  of
God  at  all.  It  may,  indeed,  be  allowed  that  they  did  not  mean  to  insult  Jehovah ;  all
they  had  in  view  was  to  express,  in  the  most  stinging  way,  their  bitter  hatr^  of
this  pertinacious,  plain-spoken  prophet — this  man  who  had  come  as  a  comparative
youth  from  little  Anathoth,  rebuking  those  who  were  high  in  rank,  old  in  years,  and
looked  up  to  by  the  bulk  of  the  people.  No  fallacy  infecting  the  regions  d  practical
life  is  more  pernicious  than  that  which,  professing  to  admit  the  authority  of  him  who
sends,  yet  discredits  the  status  of  his  professed  messenger.  It  is  thus  very  easy  to
evade  unpleasant,  humiliating  messages.  So  the  Jews  of  our  Lord's  time  were  fanatic-
ally solicitous  to  honour  their  conception  of  Jehovah,  and,  as  part  of  this  devotion,  they
ended  by  crucifying  Jesus  as  a  blasphemer.  The  very  people  who  asked,  **  Where  is
the  word  of  Jehovah  ?  "  may  have  been  the  first  to  frame  plausible  repudiations  of  any
wish  to  blaspheme  bim.  Their  great  aim  and  purpose  was  to  put  this  upstart  Jeremiah
in  his  proper  place.  They  probably  thought  that  these  scornful  speeches  might  become
at  last  as  a  gag  in  his  mouth.  The  lesson  is  plain :  do  not  reject  truth,  or  in  any  wise
try  to  evade  it  because  it  comes  through  some  one  you  do  not  like.  What  Jeremiah
said  here,  respecting  the  character  and  work  of  these  men,  was  true ;  and  they  do  not
deny  the  truth.  They  simply  ignore  the  charges,  and  by  one  scornful  question  hint  that
the  threatenings  connected  with  the  charges  are  but  as  empty  words.

II.  The  WATS  in  which  this  question  may  be  answered.  Jeremiah,  we  perceive,
has  his  own  answer  appropriate  to  his  individual  circumstances.  He  £ei11s  back  on  his
integrity.  God  knows  the  fidelity  and  obedience  of  his  heart.  God  had  put  into  his
mouth  the  words  he  had  spoken.  They  did  not  rise  out  of  his  personal  feeling ;  they
were  not  the  breathings  of  an  egotist,  a  fanatic,  a  madman,  an  enemy  of  his  country.
But  inasmuch  as  this  question  is  ever  being  asked  by  a  certain  class  who  will  not
believe  in  a  Divine  plan  of  the  world — partly  revealed  in  Scripture  and  the  partial
execution  of  which  is  shown  in  history — it  is  well  to  remember  how  Jehovah  has
honoured  his  servants  who  have  had  in  any  way  to  fill  the  office  of  prophets.  He  who
lias  gone  forth  to  threaten  the  persistently  impenitent  has  never  been  without  some
achieved  judgment  of  God  which  he  might  adduce  as  an  illustration.  The  shadows
cast  forward  into  the  future  have  their  correspondences  in  the  substances  belonging  to
the  past.  If  we  could  only  summon  out  of  the  invisible  world  the  generation  which
perished  in  the  Flood,  the  dwellers  in  the  cities  of  the  plain,  Pharaoh  and  his  army,
those  who  were  destroyed  in  the  gainsaying  of  Eorah,  and  many  others,  they  would  be
able  to  give  no  uncertain  answer  to  the  question,  "  Where  is  the  word  of  Jehovah  ?  "
The  kingdom  of  God  is  not  in  word  only ;  it  has  in  it  a  power  which  can  be  manifested
in  all  needful  abundance,  with  all  needful  rapidity,  and  in  whatever  aspect  may
be  proper  to  the  occasion.  God's  Word  becomes  a  complete  and  plainly  perceptible
deed  exactly  when  the  time  is  ripe.  Shall  man  be  able  to  arrange  a  time-piece  so  that
when  the  hour  band  and  minute  hand  together  point  to  twelve  there  shall  be  the
striking  which  signifies  noon  has  arrived ;  and  shall  not  God  be  able  to  order  the
mysteries  and  complexities  of  the  world  so  as  to  bring  out  the  intended  results  just
when  he  wants  them?  It  is  not  for  us  to  know  times  and  seasons ;  but  most  emphatic-
ally it  is  for  us  to  believe  that  every  woyd  of  (Jod  is  true.  These  very  scorners  of
Jeremiah  were  about  to  add,  in  the  course  of  a  few  short  years  at  most,  an  illustration
as  forcible  as  any  that  what  God  has  spoken  may  be  taken  as  already  done.  God's
calm  advancing  of  his  kingdom  should  do  much  to  make  his  people  calm.  It  is  our
fault  if  the  sarcasms  of  the  unbelieving  become  anything  more  than  words ;  and  mere
words  are  best  met  by  a  silent,  patient,  and  believing  continuance  in  well-doing. — Y.

Vers.  16 — 18. — Theprophfs  consciousness  of  integrity.  We  may  take  it  that  this
one  question,  '*  Where  is  the  word  of  Jehovah  ?  "  stands  for  a  great  deal  in  the  way  of
taunt.    The  appeal  to  God,  with  which  the  prophet  follows  up  the  mention  of  thi«


410  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,     [ch.  xvii.  1—27.


question,  shows  how  much  he  felt  the  attacks  made  upon  him.  It  would  he  too  much
to  say  that  he  did  not  expostulate  with  his  enemies  upon  their  injustice ;  but  evidently
his  great  resort  was  to  the  Ctod  who  had  sent  him.  If  men  perversely  attributed  to  him
daring  imposture  and  bitter  malignity /he  could  do  nothing  but  fall  back  on  God's  know-
ledge of  his  cburse  and  motives.    Four  points  are  noticeable.

L  His  office  as  ▲  prophet  was  not  the  besult  of  discontent  with  a
pBEYious  occupation.  He  had  not  hastened  from  being  a  shepherd.  He  was  perfectly
willing  to  have  continued  as  a  shepherd  at  Anathoth.  It  was  not  he  who,  looking  out
on  the  larger  world,  had  wished  to  become  conspicuous  on  a  busier  scene.  He  left  his
sheep  because  God  had  called  him,  as  he  called  Moses,  David,  and  Amos.  It  is  true
that,  if  a  prophet  would  do  his  work  ex  animo,  he  must  choose  it ;  but  first  of  all  ho
must  be  cnosen.  It  must  be  made  perfectly  plain  to  him,  in  a  sober,  wakeful  moment,
when  all  the  faculties  of  life  are  collected,  that  A«,  and  not  some  other  person,  was
called  to  this  work ;  to  this  work,  and  not  to  some  other  work.  The  office  of  a  prophet,
with  all  its  toils,  sufferings,  perils,  and  temptations,  was  assuredly  not  an  office  to  be
grasped  at.  It  needed  that  one  should  count  the  cost.  We  are  not  told  much  of  the
earlier  history  of  the  prophets,  but  some  of  them,  at  least,  must  have  known  long
periods  of  discipline.  For  Jeremiah  to  say  that  he  had  not  hastened  to  be  a  prophet
really  means  that  he  had  gone  into  the  work  with  great  deliberation,  slowly  and
steamly  following  where  God  slowly  and  steadily  walked  before  him.  There  is  no  haste
in  God's  dealings,  though  in  crises  there  may  be  suddenness  and  rapidity  of  action ;  and
therefore  there  can  be  no  haste  with  those  who  are  the  instruments  and  messengers  of
€k>d's  dealings.

II.  The  bepudiation  of  evebtthino  like  pbbsonal  MAuaNrrr.  He  was  com^
pelled  to  speak  of  a  calamitous  day,  but  he  spoke  as  one  whose  inexpressibly  painful
duty  it  is  to  break  bad  news.  Moreover,  it  was  bad  news  which  concerned  him  as  much
as  every  other  member  of  the  nation.  He  was  not  a  mere  outsider,  looking  on  with
pity  at  events  which  did  not  concern  him  individually.  The  calamities  of  his  native
land,  sdthough  he  might  be  free  from  their  worst  effects,  could  not  leave  him  altogether
unsmitten.  Doubtless  there  were  moments  when  he,  like  Paul,  could  have  wished
himself  accursed  for  his  brethren's  sake.  His  feelings  when  he  had  to  speak  of  impend-
ing calamities  would  be  of  the  same  kind  (not,  of  course,  so  pure  and  intense^  as  those
which  Jesus  had  when  he  apostrophized  Jerusalem,  rushing  to  its  fa,]),  and  careless  about
the  things  which  made  for  its  peace.  Terrible  truth  may  be  spoken  very  tenderly  and
beseechingly.  Juries  find  verdicts  condemning  to  death,  and  judges  pass  the  corre-
sponding sentences,  which  they  would  all  of  them  gladly  escape  if  fidelity  to  truth  and
duty  left  an  open  way.  That  tenderness  which  shirks  duty  because  of  present  pain
and  difficulty,  often  proves  in  the  end  to  be  the  worst  of  cruelty.

ni.  The  W0BD6  of  the  pbophecies  abe  expbesslt  attbibuted  to  God.  It  is  a
natural  course  to  hold  a  man  responsible  for  all  that  comes  from  his  lips.  The  prophet
could  not  escape  this  responsibility.  It  was  not  his  to  complain  mat  his  auditors
challenged  him  as  the  constructor  of  these  unpalatable  speeches.  If  they  looked  to
him,  he  in  turn  did  the  wise  thing,  the  only  thing  that  could  be  done — he  looked  to
God.  He  was  able  to  do  this  because  he  had  been  faithful.  He  had  not  garbled  or
mutilated  his  message  to  make  it  more  tolerable.  He  understood  perfectly  well  what,
nevertheless,  many  fail  to  understand,  that  truth  depends,  not  on  what  men  are  able  to
understand,  but  on  what  God  clearly  reveals.  The  prophet  was  in  no  manner  of  doubt
as  to  the  authority  by  which  he  spoke.  Looking  back  and  reviewing  his  utterances,  he
was  perfectly  sure  that  he  had  not  confused  his  own  thoughts  with  the  commanded
words  of  Jehovah.  If  what  God  reveals  for  us  to  speak,  we  speak ;  and  if  what  he
reveals  for  us  to  believe  and  act  upon,  we  do  believe  and  act  upon ;  then  with  the
utmost  confidence  we  can  go  to  him  for  support  and  defence.  What  could  Jeremiah
have  done  in  his  extremity  if  he  had  not  been  conscious  of  his  fidelity  as  a  prophet
of  God?

IV.  God  knew  the  tbuth  of  all  that  the  pbophkt  was  assebtino.  **Thou
knowest."  God  knew  his  servant's  heart ;  knew  the  sincerity  and  simplicity  of  his
service.  It  was  of  no  use  arguins  with  men.  Either  they  were  unable  to  discern  how
tme  and  apposite  were  his  words,  or,  discerning,  they  were  not  willing  to  make  a
corresponding  acknowledgment.     But  where  men  were  ignorant  God  had  pcr&ct


CH.  xvii.  1—27.]     THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  441


knowledge ;  where  men  were  indifferent  God  showed  the  deepest  interest.  Hence  the
prophet  could  look  to  him  confidently  for  continued  support  and  ample  vindication.
Rightly  considered,  there  is  nothing  revengeful  or  merely  personal  in  ver.  18.  We  may
well  believe  that  the  prophet's  great  anxiety  was  that  the  truth  of  Jehovah  should  be
honoured,  even  though  it  might  be  by  terrible  judgments  upon  despisers  and  unbe-
lievers.— Y.

Vers.  19 — 27. — The  hallomng  of  the  tdbhathday,  I.  The  place  fob  announcing
THE  MESSAGE.  1.  It  wos  a  ploce  where  the  king,  as  much  as  the  people^  would  hear.
Whatever  else  may  be  signified  by  "  the  gate  of  the  children  of  the  people,"  it  seems
clear  that  it  was  a  gate  in  which,  at  certain  times,  the  king  would  be  found.  In  his
own  house  it  might  be  impossible  to  gain  access  to  him ;  but  the  gate  was  open  to  all ;
and  there  he  could  not  cnoose  but  listen  to  a  man  who  would  speak  earnestly  and
commandingly ;  because  the  word  of  Jehovah  lodged  in  him,  came  from  the  depths  of
his  concurring  heart.  The  kings,  doubtless,  by  their  own  individual  leadership  and
encouragement,  were  responsible  for  much  of  the  evil  of  sabbath-breaking.  The  state
of  Jerusalem  in  particular  would  be  largely  influenced  by  them.  A  corrupt  court
makes  a  corrupt  capital,  and  a  corrupt  capital  is  not  without  efifect  towards  the  making
of  a  corrupt  nation.  2.  It  was  the  place/or  tJie  greatest  general  publicity.  One  gate  is
specified,  but  not  one  of  the  gates  was  to  be  omitted.  The  &ing,  with  his  peculiar
responsibilities,  was  warned  in  a  peculiar  way ;  but  there  was  no  one  in  such  a  private
and  irresponsible  position  as  to  be  without  concern  in  the  message.  The  ten  command-
ments were  commandments  for  every  individual  among  the  people ;  hence  the  need  of
a  warning  which,  in  the  mode  of  giving  it,  should  be  likely  to  arrest  the  attention  of  all.
It  was  Jehovah's  message  delivered  at  least  as  many  times  as  there  were  gates  in
Jerusalem.  We  may  well  believe  that  it  was  delivered  over  and  over  again.  No  note
of  time  is  given,  but  of  course  the  prophet  would  choose  the  time  when  there  were  most
passengers ;  nor  would  he  omit  to  deliver  the  message  upon  the  sabbath  day  itself.
3.  The  message  was  given  upon  one  of  the  most  conspicuous  scenes  of  transgression.
If  the  prophet  wont  to  one  of  the  most  frequented  gates  on  a  sabbath,  there  he  found
transgressors,  crowds  of  them,  in  the  very  act  of  transgression.  They  could  not  deny
the  act,  and  all  he  needed  to  do  was  to  adduce  the  commandment  against  it.  God  can
always  make  it  clear  that  he  does  not  send  forth  his  prophets  without  occasion.

II.  The  MESSAGE  ITSELF.  This  command  with  respect  to  the  sabbath  day  seems
to  come  in  very  abruptly  here.  And  yet  no  one  who  considers  the  prominence  of
Jehovah's  injunction  to  "  remember  the  sabbath  day  to  keep  it  holy  "  will  wonder  at  the
definiteness  and  emphasis  of  the  prophet's  message.  The  details  of  his  message  make
it  only  too  sadly  evident  how  far  the  people  bad  departed  from  the  original  command-
ment. Here  wo  have  one  of  two  extremes  of  disobedience  in  which  the  practical
attitude  of  Israel  towards  this  commandment  appears.  The  sacred  day  which  God  had
hallowed  both  in  word  and  deed  was  recklessly  and  shamelessly  made  into  a  common
day.  If  a  stranger  went  into  the  streets  of  Jerusalem  on  a  sabbath,  he  might  have
great  difficulty  in  discerning  by  any  external  sign  that  it  was  a  sabbath.  The  people
would  be  going  into  the  city  and  coming  out  of  it  much  as  on  any  other  day.  The  other
extreme  is  seen  in  the  reasonless  and  fanatical  formalism  of  the  Jews,  who  so  often
attacked  our  Lord.  There  is  certainly  a  great  difference  externally  between  these  two
extremes.  It  is  very  wonderful  to  consider  that  such  a  transition  should  be  possible
from  the  careless  crowding  of  the  gates  with  burdens  on  the  sabbath,  to  the  savage
bigotry  which  attacked  Jesus  for  healing  sick  folk  on  the  same  day.  Tet  underneath
external  difibrences  there  was  the  same  unabated,  worldly,  ungodly  spirit.  Those  whom
Jesus  had  to  denounce  for  their  shameless  trafficking  in  the  holy  precincts  were  the
children  of  those  whom  Jeremiah  had  to  denounce  for  doing  their  own  selfish  will  and
needless  acts  on  God's  sabbath.  And  so  we  see  that  this  passage  from  the  prophet
needs  to  be  considered  along  with  those  passages  in  the  Gk)spels  where  Jesus  deals  with
the  Sabbatarianism  of  his  time.  His  painful  experiences  of  such  professed  honourers
of  God,  and  his  searching  exi)Osures  of  them,  need  to  be  complemented  by  this  message
of  Jeremiah.  We  shall  always  find  in  Scripture  something  to  check  us  from  "  the  false-
hood of  extremes."  Sabbatarians  twist  a  commandment ;  sabbath-breakers  trample  it
underfoot.    The  evil  which  Jeremiah  deals  with  here  is  dealt  with  even  more  solemnly


i


442


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAIL    [ch.  xviii.  1—23.


by  Ezekiel  (xxii.  1 — 12,  where  in  vcr.  8  sabbath-breaking  is  particularly  referred  to  as
one  of  many  terrible  transgressions.  See  also  Nch.  ix.  14 ;  xiii.  15—22 ;  Lsa.  Ivi.  2 ;
Ezek.  XX.  12—24  ;  xlvi.  1— 6).— Y.


EXPOSITION,


CHAPTER  XVm.


This  chapter  is  the  introdnction  of  a
group  of  prophecies  (extending  to  ch.  xlv.)
of  varioas  dates ;  their  sequence  has  evidently
not  been  determined  by  chronological  con-
siderations. The  prophet's  first  object  is,
perhaps,  to  refute  the  scoffing  inquiry  (ch.
zvii.  15X  ''What  has  become  of  the
[threatening]  word  of  Jehovah?"  and  to
justify  the  glorious  promise  given  at  the
conclusion  of  the  last  chapter.  The  fulfil-
ment of  tbreatenings  and  promises  alike  is
conditioned  by  the  moral  attitude  of  the
people  (comp.  Ezek.  xxxiii.  11).  €k)d,  as
it  were,  holds  them  in  either  hand,  and
there  is  still  time  (contrast  ch.  xvi.  21)  to
choose  the  sweet  and  reject  the  bitter  by
sincerely  turning  to  their  true  Friend.
Unhappily  the  people  misuses  its  day  of
grace,  and,  instead  of  libtening  to  GKkI's
messenger,  seeks  to  rid  itself  of  him  by
persecution.  Upon  this,  Jeremiah  falls
ogaln  into  the  tone  of  bitter  complaint,  and,
eo  far  from  interceding  for  his  people,  does
the  very  opposite;  on  which  painful  and
mysterious  phenomenon,  see  remarks  in
general  Introduction.

Vers.  1 — 6. — ^I'he  simple  and  familiar
craft  of  the  potter  becomes  a  parable  of
religious  truth  (comp.  lsa.  xxix.  16 ;  xlv.  9 ;
Ixiv.  8;  Ecclus  xxxiii.  13;  Rom.  ix.  20;
and  the  account  of  man*s  creation  in  Gen.
ii.  7,  which  has  doubtless  given  rise  to  the
figure).  God  has  the  sovereign  right  to  do
as  he  wills  with  his  own  handiwork ;  thus
much  can  be  expressed  by  the  figure.  But
the  moral  element  in  Jeremiah's  teaching
stands  outside  this,  viz.  that  the  Divine
action  is  governed,  not  by  mere  caprice,  but
a  regard  for  character.  **The  thought  is  not
80  much  the  arbitrariness  as  the  patience  of
God,  who  will  bring  men  to  be  what  he
would  have  them  be  in  the  ond,  as  the  potter
eventually  twists  the  clay  to  the  shape  he
originallv  intended,  stubborn  as  the  clay
may  be.  But  whether  Jeremiah  meant  the
lesson  which  Mr.  Maurice  deduces  from  his
words  may  be  gravely  doubted.  It  is  not  of
individuals  that  the  prophet  is  thinldug,
but  of  the  nation,  and  not  of  the  nation  as


destined  to  be  all  but  certainly  saved,  but
as  placed  before  a  serious  and  awful  decision.
(For  different  lessons  derived  from  tho
same  figure,  see  the  *  Rabbi  Ben  Eira'  of
Browning.)  Egypt  and  Palestine  were,  as
it  seems,  at  one  in  the  extreme  simplicity
of  the  potter's  art.  Dr.  Birch  has  given  us
an  account  of  the  Egyptian  potter  at  his
work,  as  he  appears  in  the  pictorial
representations  at  Beui  Hassan  ('Ancient
Pottery,'  pp.  Sa— 35),  and  Dr.  Thomson  has
described  tiio  procedure  of  a  potter  in
modem  Palestine  (*The  Land  and  the
Book,*  p.  520).  The  chief  difference  between
them  seems  to  be  that  in  Egypt  the  wheel
was  turned  with  the  left  hand,  and  tiie
vase  shaped  vrith  the  right,  while  in
modern  Palestine  the  wheel  is  turned  with
the  foot  ''Taking  a  lump  in  his  hand,"
says  Dr.  Thomson,  '*  he  placed  it  on  the  top
of  the  wheel  (which  revolves  horizontally),
and  smoothed  it  into  a  low  oone,  like  the
upper  end  of  a  sugar-loaf;  then  thrusting
his  thumb  into  the  top  of  it,  he  opened  a
hole  down  through  the  centre,  and  this  he
constantly  widened  by  pressing  the  edges
of  the  revolving  cone  between  his  hands.
As  it  enlarged  and  became  thinner,  he  gave
it  whatever  shape  he  pleased  with  the
utmost  ease  and  expedition."  It  should  be
observed  that  in  ver.  3  the  "wheels,"  or
rather  '^  two  wheels,"  spoken  of  are  simply
the  two  round  plates  which  formed  the
horizontal  lathe  of  the  potter.

Ver.  4.— And  the  vessel  that  he  made,
etc. ;  rather,  And  wheMoever  the  vessel  .  .  .
was  marred  in  the  hand  of  the  potUr^  he
made  it  again  another  vessel.

Vers.  7, 8. — At  what  instant,  etc ;  rather.
One  instant  I  may  speak  .  .  .  hut  if  that
naiiany  agaimt  which  1  have  spoken,  turn
from  their  evU,  I  repent  of  the  evil  that  I
thought  to  do  unto  them,  A  similar  render-
ing for  the  next  verse.

Yer.  12. — ^And  they  said ;  rather,  But  they
go  on  saying  (comp.  Ezek.  xxxiii.  17,  20).
There  is  no  hope.  The  rendering  may  bo
easily  misunderstood.  The  speakers  aro
not,  as  we  might  suppose,  despondent  about
their  state  and  prospects,  but  they  seek  to
check  the  tronolesome  preacher  by  the
warning  that  he  has  no  chance  of  sucoess
(so  ch.  ii.  25).  Imagination ;  rather,  sfifb-
homness  (as  constantly).

Ver.  14. — ^Will  a  man  leave  the  mow  of
Lebanon,  etc.?    This  passage  is  unusually


CH.  xviii.  1—23.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROrHET  JEREMIAH.


443


obBCTue.  Literally  we  must,  it  would  eeem,
render,  Doth  the  mow  of  Lebanon  fail  from
the  rock  of  the  field  (or  possibly,  cease  to  flow
from  the  rock  unto  the  field)  1  This  is
explained  as  pointing  a  contrast  to  the
infidelity  of  God's  people.  "The  snow
never  leaves  the  snmmit  of  Lebanon;  the
waters  which  take  their  rise  therein  never
dry  up ;  but  my  people  have  forgotten  the
law  of  their  being,  the  source  of  their
prosperity."  The  rendering  of  the  first
clause  is,  however,  grammatically  dubious
(there  is  no  example  of  this  construction  of
*dxabh),  and  all  the  old  versions  point  to  (or
at  least  favour)  a  reading,  Shaddai  (the
Almighty)  instead  of  tadai  (the  field).
If  we  keep  the  text,  wo  must  explain  "  the
rock  of  the  field"  on  the  analogy  of  "my
mountain  in  the  field"  (ch.  xvii.  3),  as
meaning  "the  rock  which  commands  a
^vide  prospect  over  the  open  lowland
country,"  t.e.  Mount  Lebanon.  The  oold
flowing  waters ;  i.e.  the  numerous  "  streams
from  Lebanon,"  referred  to  in  Cant.  iv.  15.
That  eome  from  another  place;  i.e.  whose
sources  are  foreign.  But  as  this  does  not
suit  the  connection,  it  is  better  to  take  the
Hebrew  word  (zartm),  usually  rendered
** foreign,"  in  the  sense  of  "pressing  or
hurrying  along,"  with  Ewald,  Graf,  and
virtually  Henderson.  It  thus  becomes
descriptive  of  these  streams  "  as  contracted
within  narrow  channels  while  descending
through  the  gorges  and  defiles  of  the  rocks."
Comp.  "like  an  onpressing  stream,"  Isa.
lix.  19  (a  cognate  verb).  Be  forsaken.  The
Hebrew  text  has  "be  plucked  up"  {i.e.
destroyed?);  but  as  this  is  unsuitable,  we
must  transpose  two  letters  (as  in  not  a  few
other  cases),  and  render,  dry  up.  So
Gesenius,  Graf,  Keil,  Delitzsch,  and  Payne
Smith.

Ver.  15. — Beoaose  my  people  hath  for-
gotten me;  rather.  Surely,  etc.;  or  better
still,  Yet  surely.  It  is  not  uncommon  for  a
particle  of  asseveration  to  acquire  a  contrast-
ing force  from  the  context;  see  e.g.  ch.  iii.
20;  Isa.  liii.  4;  and,  still  more  completely
parallel,  Isa.  ii.  6;  ch.  ix.  1,  where  Authorized
Version,  with  substantial  correctness,  has
"nevertheless."  Israel  *•  forgot"  Jehovah  (as
ch.  ii.  32) ;  no  doubt  he  was  responsible  for
so  doing,  but  still  it  was  not  "of  malice
prepense."  To  vanity;  i.e,  to  the  unreal
idol-gods.  And  thej  have  caused  them  to
stnmble ;  viz.  the  idol-gods ;  these  are
responsible  (for  they  have  a  real  existence
iu  the  consciousness  of  their  worshippers)
for  this  interruption  of  Israel's  spiritual
progress  (comp.  2  Chron.  xxviii.  23).  In
their  ways  from  the  ancient  paths.  "  From,"
however,  is  interpolated  by  the  Authorized
Version;  the  Hebrew  places  "the  ancient
paths"    in    apposition    to    "their    ways."


"  Stand  ye  in  the  ways,"  Jeremiah  cried  at
an  earlier  period,  "and  see,  and  a^  for
the  old  paths,  which  is  the  good  way"
(ch.  vi.  16).  These  "old"  or  "ancient"
paths  were  ideally  "  their  ways,"  the  ways
appointed  for  the  Jews  to  walk  in.  To
walk  in  paths;  rather,  in  tracks,  footpaths
leading  up  and  down  and  often  ending  in
nothing ;  or,  in  other  terms,  in  a  way  not
east  np  (Isa.  xl.  3,  4,  gives  a  graphic  picture
of  the  operation  of  "  casting  up  a  way  ").

Ver.  16. — The  effect  of  this  is  to  make
the  land  of  the  transgressors  an  object  of
horror  and  astonishment  (so  render  rather
than  desolate).

Ver.  17.— As  with  an  east  wind.  The
east  was  a  stormy  wind  (Ps.  xlviii.  7 ;  Job
xxvii.  21).  I  will  show  them  tiie  back;  as
they  have  done  to  Jehovah  (ch.  ii.  27;
zxxii.  33).

Vers.  18 — 23. — A  fresh  conspiracy  (comp.
ch.  xi.  18),  called  forth  by  the  preceding
discourse ;  Jeremiah's  prayer.

Ver.  18. — ^The  law — or  rather,  direction,
instruction,  which  was  a  special  function  of
the  priests  (Dent,  xzxiii.  10;  xvii.  9 — 11)
— shall  not  perijdi  from  the  priest  The  Jews
were  but  obeying  the  Deuteronomic  Law
(on  which  Jeremiah,  as  we  have  seen,  laid
so  much  stress)  in  alluding  to  the  priests.
Unhappily,  the  priests  in  Jeremiah's  time
(ch.  ii  26),  as  in  Isaiah's  (Isa.  xxviii.  7),
were  forgetful  of  their  high  mission.  Vor
counsel  from  the  wise.  Tho  wise  men
formed  an  important  order  in  Jewish  society,
the  importance  of  which  in  the  Divine
education  of  Israel  has  not  been  sufficiently
recognized.  It  was  their  custom  to  sit  in
public  places,  generally  in  the  chambered
recess  iu  the  city  gate,  and  give  advice  on
questions  of  moral  practice  to  those  who
applied  for  it.  But  there  wore  wise  men
and  wise  men.  Some  appear  to  have
"  mocked  "  at  the  earnest  preaching  of  the
prophets  (hence  the  solemn  rebukes  in  the
Book  of  Proverbs),  others  to  have  as  it  were
prepared  the  way  for  the  latter  by  a  more
or  less  distinct  recognition  of  the  religions
foundation  of  morality,  and  of  these  we
have  ample  monuments  in  the  canooioal
Proverbs.  There  may  also  have  been  other
shades  and  varieties  of  wise  men,  for  their
characteristic  was  not  a  faculty  of  intuition,
but  rather  of  reflectively  applying  funda-
mental moral  principles.  (3ne  highly
esteemed  branch  of  "wisdom"  would,  of
course,  be  political,  and  this  would  be  the
most  liable  to  perversion.  It  is  of  such
that  Isaiah,  like  Jeremiah,  says  that  "  the
wisdom  of  their  wise  men  shall  perish"
(xxix.  14).  Nor  the  word  from  the  prophet.
"  The  word  "  is  a  general  term  for  prophesy-
ing. Of  course,  the  speakers  take  no
account  of  the  advance  in  prophecy  from


*


ii4


THE  BOOK  OF  THR  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  xviii.  1—23.


the  time,  at  any  rate,  of  Amos.  They  are
satisfied  with  the  lower  order  of  prophets
(**  false  prophets,"  as  the  8eptuagint  calls
them) ;  but  still  they  are  afraid  of  Jeremiah,
much  as  Balak  was  afhiid  of  Balaam,  when
that  soothsayer  was  blessing  Israel  (Numb,
xxiii.  25).  Smite  him  with  the  tongue;  t.«.
by  slanderous  aocusations.  The  same  figure
as  in  oh.  is.  3,  8.

Vers.  19, 20.— Them  that  contend  with  me.
Shall  evil,  etc.  ?  Compare  the  phraseology
of  Ps.  XXXV.  1 — 12  (either  Jeremiah  imitated
this  psalm  or  viee  vend);  and  for  another
point  of  contact  with  this  psakn,  see  on  ch.
xxiiL  12.  They  have  digged  a  pit,  etc.
Comp.  Ps.  Ivii.  6.  To  speu  good  for  tham.
See  Jeremiah's  intercessions  in  ch.  xiv.
7—9, 19—22.

Yer.  21.— Pour  out  their  blood  by  the
force,  etc. ;  rather,  «ptU  them  into  the  hand$


of,  etc.  (see  Ps.  Ixiii.  10);  a  phrase  akin  to
that  in  Isa.  liii.  12.  The  sword  is  personified.
Let  their  men  be  put  to  death;  another
personification,  for  the  Hebrew  has  *'  slain
of  Death  " — ^pestilence  is  referred  to,  as  ch.
XV.  2.

Yer.  23. — Let  them  be  overthrown  before
thee;  i.e.  count  them  as  those  who  have
been  brought  to  ruin.  This  explanation
seems  required  by  the  parallelifim,  the
companion  clause  meaning  **  do  not  regard
their  sin  as  cancelled."  The  ruin  may  be
either  spiritual  or  temporal ;  the  paralleUtan
favours  the  former  (comp.  ver.  14;  Hoe.
xiv.  10,  where  "  fall "  should  be  "stumble").
Deal  thus  with  them.  '«Thus"  is  inter-
polated by  the  Authorized  Yersion ;  "  deal "
should  rather  be  deal  terribly  (*<deal"  is
constantly  used  in  a  pregnant  sense;  eee  on
ch.  xiv.  7>


HOMILETICS.

Yers.  1 — 6. — T?ie  potter  and  ihe  clay.  The  relations  of  the  potter  to  his  clav  afford
a  familiar  and  apt  illostration  of  the  relations  between  Qod  and  his  human  £eimiiy*  At
first  sight  this  illustration  suggests  a  harsh  view  of  providence  and  a  hopeless  prospect
for  human  endeavour.  But  on  closer  consideration,  while  it  teaches  lessons  of  humility
and  reverent  submission  on  our  part,  it  also  throws  light  on  the  merciful  goodness  of
God,  and  encourages  us  both  to  nope  and  to  act  for  that  which  will  lead  to  our  highest
blessedness.

L  Men  abe  under  the  absolute  power  of  God,  like  clay  in  the  hands  of  the
POTTEB.  The  potter  has  power  to  leave  the  clay  untouched  or  to  make  out  of  it  either
a  vessel  of  honour  or  a  vessel  of  dishonour,  a  beautiful  vase  or  an  ugly  piece  of  crodcery,
a  dainty  cup  for  a  prince's  banquet  or  a  coarse  culinary  utensil.  God  has  absolute  power
over  us.  He  is  the  Almighty.  No  man  can  eventually  succeed  in  resisting  the  will  of
CKxL  No  Divine  purpose  can  be  eternally  frustrated.  God  has  also  absolute  authority
over  us.  He  has  the  ultimate  right  of  supreme  sovereignty  to  do  as  he  will  with  his
subjects.  Yet  there  is  nothing  alarming  in  this  fact,  but  rather  an  infinite  consolation.
For  Gt)d  is  not  a  heartless,  conscienceless  despot,  displaying  arbitrary  power  by  mere
caprice;  he  is  holy,  and  exercises  his  sovereignty  according  to  principles  of  strict
justice,  truth,  and  right.  He  is  gracious,  and  rules  with  purposes  of  love  for  the  good
of  his  creatures.  Our  dependence  on  God  is,  like  that  of  the  infant  on  its  mother,  the
security  of  our  own  welfare.  Those  horrible  applications  of  the  doctrine  of  Divine
sovereignty  which  attribute  to  it  designs  that  would  be  accounted  cruel  in  any
responsible  being  are  blasphemous  insults  to  the  impartial  justice  and  love  of  God's
character.  If  Giod's  actions  are  not  limited  by  any  phvsical  compulsion  or  constitu-
tional law,  they  are  governed  by  his  regard  to  eternal  righteousness  and  by  the  benefi-
cence of  his  nature.

II.  Men  can  no  mobe  attain  a  worthy  end  in  life  without  Qod  than  the
CTiAY  CAN  beoome  A  SHAPELY  VESSEL  WITHOUT  THE  POTTEB.  There  Hos  the  clay —
a  dead,  heavy,  amorphous  mass,  with  no  possibility  of  spontaneously  generating  forms
of  beauty,  with  no  secret  principle  of  evolution  to  work  it  into  something  orderly.
^Ve  are  as  clay.  Except  Grod  wrought  in  us  and  upon  us,  we  could  simply  lie  helpless,
only  to  waste  away  with  the  flux  of  circumstances.  If  we  are  more  than  clay,  it  is
beo&use  God^  breathes  his  life  into  ns  and  sustains  us  every  moment  by  his
indwelling  Spirit.  If  we  seem  to  effect  anything  actively,  it  is  b^use  he  first  works
in  us  both  to  will  and  to  do.

IIL  God  has  a  purpose  in  every  life  as  the  potter  has  with  the  clat.
There  is  a  meaning  for  the  strange  discipline  of  providence.    God  is  shaping  us  into


CH.  xvni;  1—23.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEUEMIAH.  445


that  form  which  he  deems  most  fitting.  Every  life  has  not  the  same  purpose.  The
potter  makes  vessels  of  innumerable  shapes.  Yet  each  life  is  successful  as  its  own
particular  purpose  is  fulfilled.  The  homely  jug  may  be  perfect,  though  it  is  very
different  from  the  graceful  vase.  A  life  is  no  failure  because  it  is  lowly  and  put  only
.  to  lowly  uses  so  long  as  it  attains  the  end  for  which  Grod  designed  it.  It  is  important
to  note  that  God's  first  work  with  us  is  in  forming  our  own  souls  aright  The  first
question  is  not  as  to  what  we  do,  but  as  to  what  we  are.  The  potter  is  making  vessels :
God  is  making  characters,  souls,  lives.  After  this  we  may  be  put  to  some  further  end
— used  for  gcx)d  after  we  have  been  made  right,  as  the  vessel  is  of  service  after  the
potter  has  done  his  work  with  it.

IV.  God    8HAPF.8    OUE    LIVES    BY    THE  DISCIPLINE    OP    PROVIDENCE   AS  THE  POTTEB

THE  CLAT  UPON  HIS  WHEELS.  The  wheel  of  time  spins  fast,  but  not  carrying  us  away,
ohandng  but  not  destroying  each  separate  individuality.  In  providence  there  are
wheew  within  wheels.  We  do  not  understand  their  meaning.  The  clay  is  pressed  now
below  into  a  solid  base,  now  above  into  a  dainty  rim,  but  it  is  difiScult  to  see  what  the
final  outcome  will  be  till  all  is  finished.  So  our  lives  are  pressed  on  one  side  and
on  another — something  which  in  our  eyes  is  indispensable  is  taken  away,  something
which  to  us  seems  needless  is  added.  But  out  of  the  dizzy  whirl,  the  rush  and  con-
fusion of  life,  God  is  steadily  working  out  his  purpose.

V.  Gk)D    WILL    ULTIMATELY    ACCOMPLISH  HIS  PURPOSE  IN  US,  THOUGH  AT  FIRST  IT

SEEMS  TO  PAIL.  (Vcr.  4.)  The  clay  is  refractory.  It  must  be  broken  up  and  remodelled.
Man  is  more  than  clay.  He  has  free-will,  mysterious  as  may  be  the  connection  of  this
with  the  almighty  sovereignty  of  God.  In  a  much  more  terrible  way  he  too  is  refractory,
wilfully  and  stubbomlv.  For  this  he  must  be  broken.  His  life  must  be  disturbed  and
shaken  up,  but  only  that  God  may  begin  arain  to  fashion  him  for  his  destined  end.
Great  disappointments,  destructive  events,  the  failure  of  a  man's  work,  the  disruption
of  a  Church,  the  revolution  of  a  nation,  may  seem  simply  disastrous.  But  we  see  how
that  by  m^ans  of  these  things  God,  in  his  infinite  patience  and  gracious  perseverance,
will  finally  effect  his  own  great  purposes,  and  so  secure  the  true  blessedness  of  his
creatures.

Vers.  7 — 10. — OocTs  action  determined  hy  man^s  conduct.  These  verses  may  be  read
as  balancing  those  that  precede.  The  illustration  of  the  potter  at  his  work  shows  us
simply  the  Divine  side  of  life.  The  following  verses  take  us  round  to  the  human  side,
and  the  human  conditions  in  accordance  with  which  God  exercises  the  rights  and  power
of  his  absolute  sovereignty.

I.   God   DETERMINES  HIS  ACTION   ACCORDING  TO  THE    CONDUCT    OP    MAN.       He    doeS

not  act  blindly,  inconsiderately,  on  general  principles  alone,  without  regard  to  indi-
vidual cases,  nor  with  one  changeless  course  irrespective  of  the  changes  in  the  beha-
viour of  his  creatures.  He  takes  note  of  these  changes  and  modifies  his  treatment
of  men  by  their  varying  requirements.  1.  This  fact  is  not  derogatory  to  the  absolute
sovereignty  of  God.  A  just  sovereign  considers  his  people.  God  acts  according  to  his
own  will ;  but  his  will,  though  inflexible  in  moral  principles,  varies  in  the  choice  of
particular  actions  according  as  the  application  of  those  principles  varies  with  the
circumstances  of  the  world.  2.  This  fact  is  not  inconsistent  with  the  definiteness  of  the
purposes  of  God.  The  potter  has  his  definite  design,  yet  he  proceeds  with  his  work  to
the  conclusion  or  breaks  up  the  clay  and  begins  again,  accordmg  as  he  finds  it  plastic
or  brittle.

II.  A   CHANGE  ON  MAN's  FART  PROM  REBELLION    TO    PENITENCE  WILL  BE  MET  BY  A

CHANGE  ON  Gou*8  PART  FROM  WRATH  TO  MERCY.  God*s  threats  are  conditional.
Forgiveness  is  the  result  of  no  after-thought,  of  no  change  in  the  "  temper  "  of  God.
It  is  contemplated  by  God  from  the  first,  and  promised  on  condition  of  repentance
whenever  repentance  is  genuinely  experienced.  Therefore  th^re  is  every  encouragement
to  repentance  and  hope.  The  darkest  denunciations  of  judgment  refer  only  to  the
impenitent.  It  is  not  too  late  to  expect  the  forgiving  mercy  of  Grod,  so  long  as  it  is
not  too  late  for  us  to  repent.  This  is  reasonable,  since  the  end  of  punishment  is  not
vindictive  but  remedial.  The  mere  paying  of  a  penalty  is  of  no  good  in  itself.  It  might
please  a  vain  and  vengeful  despot,  but  not  a  merciful  father.  If  the  restoration  of  his
child  is  effected  without  it  the  father  will  gladly  acknowledge  that  it  is  needless.


446  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  xvaii.  1-23.


III.  A  CHANGE  ON  MAN's    PART    FROM    FIDELITY   TO    APOSTASY  WILL   BE   MET  BY   A

CHANGE  ON  God's  PART  FROM  MERCY  TO  WRATH.  Tbis  is  a  Decossary  consequence  of
the  preceding  principles.  God's  promises  are  as  conditional  as  his  threats.  It  would
be  neither  just  nor  merciful  to  us  for  God  to  continue  his  .favours  unabated  after  we
had  departed  from  him.  The  removal  of  them  is  a  wholesome  warning  to  us.  It
springs  naturally  from  the  personal  relation  of  God  to  his  people,  one  which  depends
on  reciprocal  sympathy.  Therefore  it  is  vain  to  presume  on  our  past  experience  of
God's  goodness  for  immunity  from  the  consequences  of  our  later  sins,  or  to  suppose
that  a  happy  condition  of  peace  with  God  once  attained  can  never  be  lost.  We  may
lose  it  and  be  in  a  worse  condition  than  if  we  had  never  had  it  (Heb.  vi.  4 — 6).

Ver.  12, — Rejected  preaching,  I.  The  best  preaching  may  be  rejected.  Jeremiah
was  a  true  messenger  of  God  and  an  able  preacher,  yet  he  was  unpopular.  Christ,
who  "  spake  as  never  man  spake,"  was  *'  despised  and  rejected  of  men."  No  greater
mistake  can  be  made  than  to  judge  of  the  value  of  any  preaching  by  the  popularity
of  it.

11.  It  18  the  duty  of  tub  faithfxtl  preacher  to  bear  his  testimony  even
17  it  be  rejected.  He  must  not  be  unfaithful  to  his  mission  in  order  to  catch  the
ears  of  his  audience,  nor  must  he  silence  his  voice  because  it  is  unheeded.  His  duty  is
to  speak,  whether  men  will  hear  or  whether  they  will  forbear.  If  he  loyally  discharges
this  duty  his  conscience  is  clear,

HI.  The  rejection  of  the  preaching  of  truth  is  often  to  be  attributed
to  the  pride  of  intellect.  People  have  their  "  own  dej^ices."  Divine  truth  does
not  require  the  contradiction  of  intellect  nor  the  suppression  of  it,  but  it  requires  the
submission  of  intellect  to  well-grounded  faith  in  a  God  who  is  worthy  of  trust,  even
when  he  requires  our  acceptance  of  dark  and  painful  doctrines.

IV.  The  rejection  of  the  preaching  of  truth  is  often  to  be  attributed
to  stubbornness  of  will.  The  Jews  are  represented  as  saying,  "  We  will  every  one
practise  the  stubbornness  of  his  evil  heart."  The  excuse  of  intellectual  doubt  may  be
sought  as  a  cloak  for  moral  aversion  to  Divine  truth.  Many  who  have  no  doubt  of  the
truth  of  the  message  of  the  servant  of  God  refuse  to  accept  it  from  sheer  opposition  to
its  spiritual  requirements.

V.  The  truth  preached  is  not  affected  by*  the  rejection  of  it.  If  the
word  would  be  true  when  accepted  it  would  remain  true  when  rejected.  We  cannot
alter  facts  by  closing  our  eyes.  If  we  refuse  to  hear  the  words  of  faithful  admonition,
we  shall  not  escape  the  doom  against  which  they  warn  us,  but  only  the  more  surely
run  into  it.    We  shall  then  simply  rush  blindfolded  to  meet  our  fate.

VI.  The  rejection  of  the  preaching  of  Divine  truth  is  itbklf  a  great  bin.
If  the  truth  is  recognized  as  Divine,  rejection  of  this  is  rejection  of  the  voice  of  God.  It
is  an  act  of  direct  resistance  to  the  will  of  Grod.  It  is  sinning  against  light.  It  is
refusing  to  accept  offers  of  mercy,  and  returning  insult  for  favours.

Ver.  14. — Mountain  snow.  Any  one  who  has  found  himself  in  the  valley  of
Chamoanix  on  a  sultry  summer  afternoon  must  have  felt  the  striking  contrast  between
the  eternal  winter  of  the  vast  snow-fields  of  Mont  Blanc,  spread  out  in  blazing  sunlight
high  above  his  head,  and  the  dust  and  heat  of  the  parched  land  around.  The  perma-
nence of  this  mountain  snow  is  suggestive  of  spiritual  lessons.

I.  Mountain  snow  is  an  emblem  of  spiritual  life  maintained  in  the  midst
OF  worldly  scenes.  Mountain  snow  is  found  in  the  hottest  countries.  You  need
not  travel  to  arctic  regions  for  perpetual  snow,  it  may  be  found  in  the  tropics.
Ghristians  need  not  be  transported  to  heaven  in  order  to  live  a  pure  Divine  life.  The
duty  of  the  Christian  is  to  preserve  this  fresh  and  holy  in  the  midst  of  the  world,  not
to  flee  from  the  world.  By  remaining  in  the  world  the  Christian  is  a  means  of  blessing
it  as  the  mountain  snow  descending  in  glaciers  and  streams  refreshes  and  fertilizes  the
valley.  But  the  Christian's  mission  to  the  world  is  dependent  on  the  preservation  of
his  unworldly  spirituality,  as  the  refreshing  streams  that  flow  down  the  gorges  of  the
mountain  are  dependent  on  the  snows  high  above  them.  If  the  snow  fails  the  stream
is  dried  up.    If  the  spirituality  fails  the  Christian  work  becomes  barren.

II.  Mountain  snow  is  an  emblem  of  spiritual  life  maintained  in  the  most


CH.  XVIII.  1—23.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  447


TBTiNO  TIMES,  llie  remarkable  fact  about  the  roountain  snow  is  that  it  is  perpetual.
It  is  nothing  that  there  is  snow  on  the  hills  in  winter ;  are  not  the  plains  then  equally
snow-clad?  The  Christian  who  only  remains  faithful  under  favourable  circumstances
is  but  superficially  religious.  The  difficulty  is  to  be  true  when  all  things  are  adverse,
in  the  heat  and  burden  of  work,  under  the  fierce  onslaught  of  temptation,  while  the
spirit  of  the  age  is  against  us,  when  Christianity  is  out  of  fashion,  out  of  season.  Yet
we  are  to  be  instant  out  of  season  as  well  as  in  season  (2  Tim.  iv.  2),  to  be  independent
of  the  weather,  of  the  social  atmosphere,  in  the  changeless  purity  of  a  spiritual  life.
HI.  The  causes  op  the  peksistenoe  of  mountain  snow  are  suggestive  of

THE  causes  of  THE  PRESERVATION  OF  THE  FRESHNESS  AND  PURITY  OF  THE  SPIRITUAL

LIFE.  How  is  it  that  we  fiud  snow  in  the  tropics,  snow  in  summer  ?  1.  Great  elevation,
A  few  thousand  feet  in  height  will  produce  climatic  changes  equal  to  those  caused  by
a  distance  of  many  degrees  of  latitude.  The  Christian  must  find  his  fidelity  preserved
by  elevation  of  life.  He  must  live  on  high,  a  risen  life,  with  afiections  above  the  earth,
with  a  treasure  in  heaven,  and  his  heart  there  also.  By  constant  communion  with
heaven  constant  purity  on  earth  may  be  maintained,  as  the  silent  solitudes  of  snow
remain  through  the  summer  in  the  cool  regions  of  their  great  elevation.  2.  Constantly
renewed  supplies.  The  snows  melt  under  the  sun  and  send  roaring  torrents  down
the  hillsides,  and  in  coiu*se  of  time  they  would  disappear  unless  they  were  renewed.
But  clouds  gather  round  the  mountain  summits  and  descend  in  fresh  snows,  and  winter
on  its  return  makes  up  for  the  partial  loss  of  snow  in  summer.  So  the  Christian  must
maintain  his  spiritual  life,  not  only  by  the  elevation  of  his  own  thoughts,  but  by
receiving  repeated  supplies  of  heavenly  grace.  He  may  be  thankful  that  he  is  favoured
by  *'  times  of  refreshing  "  when  the  fierce  heat  of  trial  is  abated,  and  strength  is  accu-
mulated for  the  time  of  need.

Ver.  18. —  The  opposition  of  officials,  I.  It  is  common  to  see  official  persons
RESISTING  THE  WORK  OF  GOOD  AND  GREAT  MEN.  The  prophcts  usually  met  with  this
opposition,  and  it  forced  them  to  become  nonconformists.  Christ  received  the  most
bitter  enmity  from  the  official  classes.  This  opposition  may  be  traced  (1)  to  pedantry
— the  official  only  believes  in  what  comes  in  the  regular  way  of  officialism ;  (2)  to
jealoufty — the  official  is  jealous  of  the  greater  influence  of  the  unauthorized  teacher ;  (3)
to  conviction  of  unfaithfulness — the  true  prophet  exposes  the  faults  of  his  official  con-
temporaries. The  inevitable  result  is  discredit  and  shame  to  them,  rousing  a  spirit  of
revenge.

IL  The  opposition  of  officials  finds  excuse  in  officialism.  Have  they  not  their
appointed  office?  Are  they  not  discharging  their  regular  functions?  They  have  been
so  accustomed  to  the  unbroken  routine  that  this  seems  to  them  part  of  the  eternal
order  of  things.  They  can  believe  in  nothing  better.  They  cannot  conceive  the  pos-
sibility of  any  alteration  in  it.  True,  the  spirit  of  the  Law  has  evaporated  from  the
service,  but  the  droning  of  the  letter  of  it  shall  not  depart  from  the  priest.  The  wisdom
of  spiritual  insight  is  no  longer  enjoyed  by  the  wise  man,  but  there  is  no  end  to  his
casuistical  pleading  with  old  worn  maxims.  Prophecy  in  its  higher  flights  is  denied
to  the  professional  prophet,  but  there  seems  to  be  no  abatement  of  the  power  to  echo
the  cries  of  the  day  and  win  the  popular  favour  by  flattery  and  hollow  rhetoric.  Why,
then,  listen  to  the  disturbing  words  of  the  new  teacher  ?  Thus  officialism  is  always
excusing  its  opposition  to  new  good  movements  on  the  plea  of  its  own  self-sufficiency.

HI.  The  opposition  of  officialism  is  powerful  for  harm.  For  how  many  scenes
of  martyrdom  is  it  responsible  I  It  was  this  that  crucified  Christ.  It  has  peculiar
weapons  of  its  own.  It  carries  the  weight  of  prestige.  It  is  very  effectual  with  the
thoughtless,  who  are  ready  to  submit  to  the  voice  of  the  recognized  authorities,  partly
out  of  indolence,  partly  out  of  fear,  partly  out  of  ignorance.  It  needs  independence  of
thought  and  courage  to  recognize  that  this  may  be  all  wrong,  and  truth  and  right  with
the  irregular  minority — the  peasant  apostles  rather  than  the  haughty  Sanhedrim,  the
plaiu  German  monk  rather  than  the  cardinals  of  Rome,  the  simple  teachers  of  truth
rather  than  the  recognized  masters  of  the  world.


448  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  xvm.  1— 23.


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Yen,  1 — 10. — The  potter  and  the  day.  The  revelations  of  God  are  often  given  in
unlikely  places,  and  common  circumstances  and  scenes  may  symbolize  the  divinest
mysteries.  The  profoundest  things  in  God's  universe  are  side  by  side  with  the
simplest.  If  the  mind  be  open  and  the  spirit  susceptible  we  shall  see  God  in  every-
thing. Is  there  not  a  fitness  in  this  ancient  handicraft  of  the  potter  becoming  the
symbol  of  the  eternal  action  of  God?    The  potter's  clay  suggests  —

I.  The  mrLUKNCB  of  God  upon  human  destiny.  Some  of  the  forms  into  which
human  life  builds  itself  impress  the  imagination  with  the  presence  of  a  power  greater
than  human,  which  conditions  and  determines  them.  The  race,  the  nation,  the
Church,  represent  relations  and  affinities  which  are  not  of  merely  human  origin.  But
even  the  individual  life,  if  properly  studied,  will  be  found  to  be  associated  with  the
same  mystery  and  full  of  the  same  suggestion  of  a  Divine  influence.  In  the  case  before
us  it  is  the  Jewish  nation  which  is  suggested  to  the  mind  of  the  prophet.  The  hand
of  God  is  apparent  in  its  formation  and  history.  God's  influence  upon  these  is  felt  to
be  (1)  omnipotent^  (2)  sudden,  (3)  irresponsible,  (4)  to  create  or  to  destroy.

II.  ClBCUHSTANCES  IN  HUMAN  NATURE  THAT  AFFECT  DESTINY.     The  clky  In  the  hand

of  the  potter  was  marred  and  had  to  be  remoulded.  The  allusion  here  was  to  the
idolatrous  practices  of  the  Jews  in  Jeremiah's  own  time.  The  causes  at  work,  there-
fore, in  the  marring  of  the  vessel  are  not  mechanical  or  constitutional  in  their  nature,
but  moral.  The  history  of  the  same  people  has  shown  that  external  circumstances  are
of  little  account  in  this  Question.  The  chief  hindrances  to  God's  purposes  with  man  in
nations,  institutions,  ana  individuals  arise  from  (I)  original  depravity  and  (2)  wilful
disobedience.    The  free-will  of  man  may  thwart  even  the  grace  of  God.

III.  The  PURPOSE  of  God  with  regard  to  man.  This  is  essentially  and  persistently
a  creative  one.  The  first  effort  of  the  potter  is  formative ;  and  when,  through  the
marring  of  the  vessel,  he  has  to  reduce  the  clay  into  the  lump  again,  there  still  remains
an  intention  to  form  anew.  The  effects  of  sin  are  shown  to  be  profound  from  the  fact
that  the  potter  is  obliged  to  remake  what  has  been  marred.  I'he  effort  of  restoring  love
succeeds  upon  another,  and  "  where  sin  abounded  grace  did  much  more  abound  "  (Rom.
V.  20).  There  is  no  nation  which  has  not  had  many  opportunities  of  recovering  its
position  and  influence  forfeited  by  unfaithfulness  and  unbelief,  and  there  is  no  sinner
hardened  in  his  sins  who  has  not  repeatedly  rejected  a  heavenly  voice.  Each  procla*
mation  of  God's  Word  is  a  fresh  opportunity  which  may  avail  for  salvation  to  every
one  who  will  embrace  it. — M.

Vers.  11, 12. — Hie  fatalism  of  the  wicked.  The  conception  of  God's  judicial  omni-
potence furnished  in  the  parable  of  the  potter  is  misinterpreted  by  the  wicked.  It  is
made  a  reason  for  continuing  in  their  sin,  they  arguing  that  it  is  their  fate,  or  needs  be,
to  follow  in  the  path  they  have  chosen.

I.   In   this   WE    HAVE    AN    ILLUSTRATION  OF    THE  POWER  OF   EVIL   HABIT.      Sin    haS

acquired  such  influence  over  the  nature  that  it  becomes  its  ruler.  A  recklessness  bom
of  desperation  takes  the  place  of  prudent  and  hopeful  counsels.  The  inward  indisposi-
tion colours  the  view  that  is  taken  of  the  possibilities  of  the  situation.  Instead  of  the
sinner  seeing  that  his  condition  is  due  to  a  continual  withdrawal  from  God,  he  declares
that  he  is  "past  feeling,"  that  God's  grace  cannot  save  him,  and  that  it  is  "no  use."
But—

II.  It  is  not  JUSTIFIED  BY :  1.  The  condition  of  God's  opposition.  It  is  the  per-
Terseness  and  unreality  of  man.  He  refuses  to  suffer.  False  religion  God  will  not
accept.  2.  The  circumstances  of  the  sinner.  So  long  as  life  continues  there  is  hope.
The  repetition  of  the  gospel's  appeal  has  the  same  significance.  Are  there  any  signs
of  relenting  in  his  mind  now?  any  stirrings  of  heavenly  aspiration?  any  shame  and
sorrow  for  past  sin  ?  God's  Spirit  has  not  ceased  to  strive  with  him,  and  he  may  yet
be  saved.  3.  The  means  of  salvation  that  offer  themselves.  Christ  is  both  able  and
willing  to  save.  His  sacrifice  on  the  cross  is  a  finished  work  and  a  complete  atonement
for  our  sin.  "The  Spirit  helpeth  our  infirmities."  He  is  able  to  save  "unto  the
uttermost/'  etc.


k


CH.  xvin.  1—23.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  449

lU.  It  IS  A  SUPBEME  EXPRESSION  OF  WICKEDNESS  AND  WILL  BE  PUNISUED  AS  SUCH.
— M.

Vers.  14, 15.^Jehovah  an  unfailing  Help  to  his  peopU;  or^  the  "  snow  of  Lebanon  "
One  of  tho  most  striking  scenes  visible  from  a  great  distance  is  Hermon,  with  its
snow  and  vapours.  It  is  covered  with  white  snow  all  the  year  round,  and  from  its
summits  flow  down  cold,  pent-up  streams  to  the  valley  beneath.  God  asks  why
Israel  has  forsaken  him;  whether  there  was  any  failure  of  his  grace  and  power.
Has  he  not  been  constant  and  ever  ready  to  help?  How  is  it,  then,  that  he  is  for-
saken ?  The  snow  of  Lebanon  is,  like  the  dew  of  Hermon,  a  symbol  of  the  grace  of
God  abiding  upon  Zion,  from  which  the  streams  of  grace  flow  forth  in  inexhaustible


supply.
.    I.  Tb


Those  who  forsake  God  do  so  because  of  their  own  ferversitt  and  not
BECAUSE  of  God's  neglect.  "  Is  his  arm  shortened  that  it  cannot  save  ?  *'  is  a  question
we  ought  to  ask  ere  we  make  up  our  minds  to  leave  CK)d.  The  secret  of  spiritual
disafiection  and  apostasy  is  in  ourselves  and  not  in  God.

II.  Apostasy  from  God  is  a  transcendent  instance  of  ingratitude.  1.  The
providences  of  God  have  been  unceasing,  manifold,  and  overflowing.  They  have  come
without  eflbrt  of  man.  Yet  the  sinner  has  gone  away  and  obstinately  continues  in  his
sin.  2.  But  in  the  grace  of  Qod  there  are  elements  that  appeal  to  our  deepest  afifection
and  trust.  It  is  so  rich,  undeserved,  and  free.  Why  should  he  have  chosen  any  one  ?
How  often  has  he  healed  the  backslidings  of  his  people !  The  cross  of  Christ  is  the
grandest  expression  of  love  of  which  we  know.    It  "  passeth  knowledge."

III.  When  sinners  forsake  God  it  is  to  their  own  injury.  1.  By  their  pursuit
after  sinful  gratifications  they  forfeit  the  enjoyment  of  Divine  mercy.  Providential
mercies  may  not  always  be  withdrawn,  but  their  beneficial  effect  is  destroyed.  The
fellowship  and  presence  of  God  are  lost.  His  favour  and  help  cannot  be  expected*
2.  The  sources  of  pleasure  they  apply  themsdves  to  are  disappointing  and  fatal.  Sinful
pleasures  soon  pall.  There  is  no  endiunng  rapture  in  the  gratification  of  sense,  but  an
enduring  sting  remains.  The  constitution  of  the  sinner  is  sapped  and  undermined  by
his  excesses,  and  the  general,  social,  and  political  life  of  the  nation  corrupted.  There
is  no  sorrow  so  profound  and  incurable  as  that  which  results  from  the  abuse  of  reli-
gious privileges  and  the  loss  of  the  heavenly  birthright ;  it ''  worketh  death."  But,  in
addition  to  all  this,  tho  anger  of  God  is  kindled,  and  who  shall  extinguish  it?  He
himself  can.  With  him  is  forgiveness  that  he  may  be  feared,  and  plenteous  redemption
that  he  may  be  sought  unto.  '*  His  mercy  endureth  for  ever."  It  is  only  needed  that
we  change  in  heart  and  life  to  recover  our  lost  estate  and  experience  again  more  than
our  lost  joy. — M.

Ver.  18. — Ecclesiastical  succession  versus  individual  ministry.  The  spirit  of  these
words  is  not  hard  to  divine.  *'  We  have  a  succession  of  priests,  teachers,  and  prophets
assured  to  us  by  our  traditional  institutions ;  so  there  is  no  great  loss  if  Jeremiah  be
discounted ;  and  we  need  not  fear  the  cessation  of  the  Divine  revelationi— is  it  not  pro-
vided against  by  a  sacred  succession  ?  "

I.  There  are  many  who  believe  in  the  office  of  the  ministry  as  an  inde-
pendent source  of  inspiration  and  truth.

II.  This  is  alleged  in  excuse  for  :  1.  Refusing  support  to  special  religious  effort.
2.  Contempt  and  opposition  of  individual  ministers.

III.  In  correction  of  this  error  may  be  noted  :  1.  T^at  it  is  not  countenanced  by
Qod.  2.  History  has  frequently  shoum  its  falsehood.  3.  It  is  really  a  reliance  upon
the  human  and  not  the  Divine.  4.  Ood  does  his  special  work  nearly  always  through
individuals^   5.  The  dishonour  done  to  t?ie  servant  is  done  to  his  Master.-^M,

Vers.  18,  Id.^^Thepreacher^sfoes ;  or,  false  tongues  and  deaf  ears.  I.  These  oppose
MORE  or  less  every  TRUE  MINISTRY.  The  pcrsecutors  of  Stephen  "  stopped  their  ears
and  ran  upon  him."

II.  They  are  an  indirect  testimony  to  the  truth  and  faithfulness  of  the

MESSAGE  delivered.

III.  They  may  retard,  but  they  cannot  stifle,  the  Divine  message.    Tho

JEREMIAH.  2  G


460  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  xvni.  1—23.


slander  can  be  lived  down.    The  voice  of  jast  men  done  to  death  will  speak  when  they
are  dead.     Magna  est  Veritas  et  prevahhit,

IV.  There  is  a  silent  wttsess  who  shall  take  Accomrr  op  all.  1.  It  Uof  less
consequence  to  us  that  men  approve  and  attend  than  that  God  should  do  so.  The
preacher  addresses  not  only  a  visible,  but  an  invisible,  audience.  Of  every  word  that
proceeds  from  his  servants'  lips  God  takes  note.  2.  He  will  pi'otect  his  servant  untU
his  work  has  been  accomplished.  3.  The  slanders  and  indifference  of  those  to  whom  the
Word  is  spoken  will  be  punished,    (Matt.  xii.  36,  37.)— M.

Vers.  1 — 10. — The  blessed  parable  of  the  potter  and  the  day.  Few  passages  of  Scripture
have  been  more  misread  or  with  sadder  results  than  this  one.  From  St.  Faul's
reference  to  it  in  Rom.  ix.  it  has  been  thought  that  it  taught  the  absolute  sovereignty
of  God,  his  right  to  dispose  of  men  as  he  pleases;  that,  in  the  exercise  of  that
sovereignty,  he  makes  some  vessels  unto  destruction,  and  that  the  vessels  so  made  have
no  ground  of  complaint  whatsoever.  Now,  we  affirm  that,  whilst  there  is  much  truth  in
these  representations,  they  are  not  "  the  whole  truth,"  still  less  are  they  "  nothing  but  the
truth."  God  is  Sovereign,  we  cheerfully  confess,  and  has  right  to  dispose  of  us  as  he
will.  But  that  he  exercises  these  rights  in  any  arbitrary,  or  capricious,  or  cruel  way,
as  is  taught  by  this  misreading,  or  that  if  he  did  the  vessels  made  for  destruction
would  have  no  ground  of  complaint,  we  altogether  deny.  Such  teaching  has  clouded
the  face  of  God  to  many  souls  and  made  God  our  Father  **  a  terror  "  to  them.  But
blessed  bo  his  Name,  this  misreading  is  not  the  truth.  Let  us  try  to  see  what  that
truth  is.  In  passing,  we  may  note  how  the  command  to  the  prophet  to  go  down  to  the
potter's  workshop  teaches  us  how  workshops  and  our  common  work  may  have  precious
lessons  about  God  to  teach  us  if  we  be  like  as  was  the  prophet,  williug  to  learn  them.
The  star-studying  Magi  were  led  by  a  star  to  Jesus.  1  ho  centurion  by  his  soldier-life
gained  true  comprehension  of  Christ.  The  fishermen-apostles  of  how  they  were  to
be  "  fishers  of  men."  Manifold  are  the  ministers  and  ministries  of  God  to  attentive
souls,

•*  There  is  a  book,  who  runs  may  read.
Which  lieavenly  truth  imparts ;
And  all  the  lore  its  scholars  need,
Pure  eyes  aud  Christian  hearts."

That  IS  said  of  the  book  of  nature,  so  it  may  be  of  the  book  of  our  lawful  work.  Now
let  us  go  down  to  the  workshop  told  of  here  and  learn  what  we  may.  And  we  are
taught —

I.  That  "  rr  doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be."  We  are  the  clay.  But
who  can  tell  what  is  to  be  fashioned  out  of  that  mere  mass  of  material  ?  Every  human
soul  is  but  as  clay  in  process  of  formation  into  some  designed  result.

II.  God  has  wise  and  gracious  intent  in  regard  to  all.  The  meanest  vessel
that  the  potter  makes  is  an  advance  in  worth  and  excellence  on  the  clay  ere  it  was
fashioned  by  him.    How  much  more,  then,  in  the  case  of  the  "  vessels  of  honour  "  I

III.   But  the  clay  can   for  a  while  mar  and  frustrate  the  potter's  PUBF06E.

The  vessel  the  prophet  saw  was  marred  in  the  making.  What  innumerable  instances
there  have  been  and  are  of  this  I  Not  Israel  and  Judah  alone,  but  other  nations,  other
churches,  innumerable  separate  souls.  And  they  have  had  to  be  broken  up  and  set
down  from  the  place  of  honour  for  which  they  were  at  first  intended.  They  have  with
shame  to  take  a  lower  place.    But—

IV.  Eventually  the  Maker's  w^ill  will  be  done  in  regard  to  them.  "  So  he
made  it  again  another  vessel,  as  seemed  good  to  the  potter  to  make  it."  It  is  never
*'all  the  same"  to  a  man  if  he  sins  against  God.  He  may  not  be  destroyed,  but  his
will  be  "  another  "  position  and  a  worse  one.

V.  And  all  this  in  harmony  with  the  nature  of  the  material  wroxtoht
UPON.  As  the  potter's  work  was  in  harmony  with  the  clay  out  of  which  he  fashioned
his  varied  vessels,  so  God's  work  will  be  in  harmony  with  the  mental  and  moral  nature
which  he  has  given  to  us.  It  is  to  us  an  inexplicable  problem — the  harmony  of  the
Divine  sovereignty  and  human  freedom.  We  cannot  tell  how  it  will  be  done,  only  that
it  taiU  be  done.


ofl.  xvm.  1—23.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  451


VL  The  lessons  of  thb  wholb  abe  :  1.  Of  inqvkiry.    Are  we,  by  obedience  to
the  DiYine  will,  furthering  the  work  designed  in  us  or  by  disobedience  hindering?


Judah  and  Israel  ?  and  the  process  is  not  finished  yet — ^let  us  repent  of  sin  and  turn
to  Ood  now,  and  so  be  delivered  from  so  great  a  woe.  It  has  been  said  that  the  most
terrible  part  of  the  road  to  heaven  is  that  which  the  sinner  eoes  over  three  times—
once  in  his  first  following  of  Christ,  next  when  he  by  sin  goes  back  that  way,  and  the
third  time  when  in  bitter  repentance  he  travels  over  it  again.  3.  0/  praise  to
God,  that  he  has  revealed  so  gracious  a  purpose  concerning  man,  and  that  his  will
shall  be  done.  4.  0/  prayer,  that  we  may  be  found  not  resisting  but  ever  obedient
to  that  will— C.

Vers.  8—12. — A  never-Uhbe-forgoUen  principle  pf  inierpreiaiion.  These  verses
plainly  teach  that  all  God's  threatcnings,  even  the  most  terrible,  and  all  Gbd's
promises,  even  the  most  blessed,  are  condiiional  on  the  continuance  of  the  moral
character  to  which  they  were  addressed.    Now,  this  is—

I.  A  coBDiAL  AGAINST  DESPAIR.  Whon  the  couvicted  sinner — as  the  men  of
Nineveh— hear  the  awful  denunciations  of  Grod's  judgment,  all  hope  seems  to  be
forbidden.  The  Ninevites,  to  encourage  themselves  in  a  forlorn  hope,  could  only  say,
"Who  can. tell  whether  God  will  be  gracious?"  But  this  and  the  like  Scriptures,
confirmed  by  so  many  {acta  of  experience,  forbid  all  such  despair.

II.  A  CHECK  TO  PBESUHPTiON.  How  many  prate  concerning  final  perseverance  who
are  not  persevering  at  all  except  in  sin  and  worldliness  ?  But  they  ne^  to  be  remiuded
of  this  sure  condition,  one  which  the  great  adversary  of  souls  is  ever  striving  to  make
us  forget.

III.  An  explanation  or  the  stebn  words  of  Scbiptdre.  When  one  would  give
the  alarm  of  fire  he  does  not  whisper  the  word.  So  when  God  would  warn  sinners  he
does  not  soften  his  words,  but  in  most  vivid  manner  sets  before  men  the  awful  doom  of
the  ungodly.  Thus  would  God,  by  his  terrors,  scare  men — if  naught  else  will  do —
to  "  flee  from  the  wrath  to  come,"  so  that  **  he  may  repent  of  the  evil  he  thought  to
do  unto  them."  Such  words  are  not  the  utterance  of  absolute  decrees  against  any
soul  to  whom  they  are  addressed,  but  loving  warnings  to  such  soul  to  turn  to  God  and
live.

IV.  A  REASON  FOR  ITS  WORDS  OF  WARNING.  Thcso  are  fouud  in  varied  form,
addressed  to  disciples  of  Christ,  to  those  to  whom  the  most  glorious  promise  had  been
made.  See  the  sermon  on  the  mount ;  how  full  of  warnings  I  Therefore  this  condi-
tionalness  of  God's  words  speaks :  1.  To  the  believer,  and  bids  him  *'  Be  not  high-minded,
but  fear."  "  If  God  spar^  not  the  natural  branches,  take  heed  lest  ho  also  spare  not
thee."  2.  To  the  ungodly.  See  the  sure  end  of  thy  way :  how  awful !  But  see,  too,
God's  earnest  desire  that  thou  shouldest  forsake  that  way. — C.

Ver.  12. — Despair,  its  causes,  consequences,  and  cure,  ''And  they  sdd.  There  is  no
liope,"  etc.  There  is  a  show  of  humility  about  this  word«  The  man  has  evidently  no
hoi)e  in  himself,  nor  in  any  Church,  nor  in  any  human  help  whatsoever.  Now,  this
so  far  so  good.  To  get  men  away  from  trusting  in  an  arm  of  flesh  is  ever  one  of  God's
purposes.  And  when  a  man  is  thus  weaned  from  self  and  all  human  reliance  it  is  a
good  sign.  But  such  distrust  at  times  goes  beyond  this,  to  belief  that  there  is  no  hope
anywhere,  which  is  despair.  Now,  this  a  sore  evil  (cf.  homily  on  ch.  iL  25^  "  A  dread
snare  of  the  devil ").    And  to  help  in  overcoming  it  we  would  speak—

I.  Of  its  causes.  They  are  of  varied  kinds,  but  a  man  is  near  to  despair  when  he
sees :  1.  That  his  sin  is  inveterate.  When  year  after  year  goes  by  and  still  there  the
sin  is.  2.  That  it  is  continually  successful  in  reducing  his  will  to  consent  to  it  3.
That  his  defences  are  only  those  derived  from  conuderations  of  the  consequences  and
punishment  of  his  sin.  Motives  of  love  to  God  and  Christ,  hatred  of  the  sin  itself^
have  ceased  to  rule  him ;  it  is  only  the  fear  of  what  may  happen  that  holds  him  badi^
though,  inde^,  such  defence  is  weak  enough.  4.  That  his  sih  has  rendered  inefiectoal
many  special  dealings  of  God  with  him  in  regaid  to  it.    He  has  broken  through  i^


452  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch,  xviii.  1—23,

these  gracious  barriers  one  after  another.  All  these  are  dreadful  facts  to  contemplate,
and  tend  to  fill  a  man  with  the  belief  that  "  there  is  no  hoi^e."  The  good  Lord
forbid  that  we  should  ever  have  such  facts  to  contemplate  concerning  ourselves.

II.  Its  consequences.  They  are  dreadful  in  the  extreme.  They  produce  sullen
ebstinacy  in  evil.  "  They  said  ',  ,  ,  but  we  will  walk  after  our  own  aevices."  Also
unrestrained  licence.  The  thought  comes,  "  We  can  but  be  lost ;  we  will  have  what
enjoyment  we  may."  This  is  a  frightful  fruit  of  despair.  If,  then,  any  considering
these  dread  consequences  of  despair  tremble  lest  they  should  yield  to  it,  but  yet
by  reason  of  such  facts  as  those  above  named  are  sore  tempted  thereto,  let  them
remember  there  is  deliverance  for  them.    Consider,  therefore-^

III.  Its  cure.  It  can  only  be,  it  ought  only  to  be,  by  good  hope  of  deliverance
from  that  which  is  the  cause  of  thy  despair — thy  sin.  But  whence  can  come  this
deliverance?  Wise  and  godly  men  have  counselled  after  this  manner.  1.  Seek  to
gain  and  keep  before  the  mind  a  deep  sense :  (1)  Of  the  guilt  of  thy  sin.  You  who  have
received  such  light  and  grace  are  involved  in  far  deeper  guilt  and  your  sin  is  far  more
heinous  than  that  of  others.  (2)  Of  the  danger  of  it.  The  danger  of  being  hardened  by
its  deceit  fulness.  Of  bringing  down  on  thyself  some  great  temporal  judgment  as  Ghod's
punishment  of  thy  sin.  Of  losing  thy  peace  with  God  and  strength  to  serve  him.
Of  eternal  destruction.  (3)  Of  the  evils  of  it.  It  grieves  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God.
The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  wounded  afresh  by  it.  All  thy  usefulness  will  be  destroyed.
God  will  neither  bless  thee  nor  make  thee  a  blessing.  2.  Wrestle  in  prayer.  3.
Watch  against  occasions  and  advantages  of  sin.  4.  Go  again  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,
especially  to  him  as  your  dying,  crucified  Lord.  Live  near  his  cross,  for  "his  blood
cleanscth  from  all  sin."  Cleave  to  him  and  let  thy  faith  fasten  upon  him.  So— his
Word  assures  and  experience  proves,  for  there  is  no  instance  to  the  contrary,  but
innumerable  ones  in  proof — the  chain  of  thy  sin  shall  be  broken,  and  the  sight  of  this
shall  so  cheer  thy  heart  that  the  demon  of  despair  shall  spread  its  dark  wings  and
depart  and  leave  thy  soul  unclouded,  (See  on  all  this,  Owen  on  the  Mortification
of  Sin.)— C,

Vers.  18 — 23. — Persecution,  The  cruel  sufferings  of  God's  prophet  which  here  and
in  other  parts  of  his  prophecy  are  recorded  throw  not  a  little  light  on  all  like  perse-
cution. For,  though  its  rough  and  brutal  forms  have  for  the  most  part  disappeared,
still  in  others  it  yet  lingers,  and  is  the  source  of  much  distress.    Note,  then —

I.  Its  causes.  They  are  ever  the  same — hatred  to  the  faithful  Word  which  the
persecuted  one  persists  in  preaching.  Persecution,  therefore,  is  inevitable  where  a
faithful  messenger  of  God  comes  into  collision  with  those  who  hate  and  will  not  submit
to  his  message.

II.  Its  pretexts.  Zeal  for  the  Church  and  for  sacred  institutions  imperilled  by  the
prophet's  preaching.  We  see  them  standing  up  for  the  priests  and  the  Law  and  the
prophetic  order,  all  which,  of  Divine  appointing,  were  wronged  and  injured  by  the  prophet,
rersecutors  never  will  own,  even  to  themselves,  their  own  true  motives.  Those  who
sought  to  kill  our  Lord  ever  insisted  on  the  highest  motives  for  their  conduct.  Perse-
cution is  such  an  odious  thing  that,  unless  some  fair  disguise  be  thrown  over  it,  no  one
would  have  anything  to  do  with  it.  And  no  doubt  some  persecutors — like  Saul  of
Tarsus — ^have  been  deceived  by  this  disguise,  and  have  sincerely  thought  they  were
doing  God  service.  There  is  never  any  need  for  persecution,  though  our  forefathers
thought  there  was ;  for  if  any  doctrine  be  of  man  only  it  will  come  to  naught.  The
facts  of  life,  the  Word  of  God,  reason  and  conscience,  are  all  against  falsehoods,  and
will  expose  and  so  extinguish  them  without  persecution.  For  the  nature  of  man  is
made  for  truth,  and  hence  what  is  contrary  to  truth  cannot  long  live.

III.  Its  intent.    Eevenge  and  the  forcible  silencing  of  an  adversary.

IV.  Its  METHODS.  1,  Defamation,  "Let  us  smite  him  with  the  tongue."  2,  Ostentatious
disregard  of  his  teaching,  "  Let  us  not  give  heed,"  etc.  (ver.  18).  3,  Whatever  *'  devices "
wiU  most  of  all  tell  against  him.  Sometimes  open  hostility  is  not  safe.  It  was  not
against  John  the  Baptist,  nor  our  Lord,  nor  here  (cf.  ch.  xxvi.  16).  And  then  other
devices  have  to  be  sought  out,  and  the  finding,  when  sought  by  the  persecuting  spirit,
does  not  take  long.

V.  Its  BELIEF.    Not  compromise.    To  give  way  where  conscience  commands  stead-


k


cu.  XVIII.  1—23.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  453

fastness  is  to  incur  such  spiritual  shame  and  distress,  such  hiding  of  the  face  of  God,  as
to  be  more  intolerable  than  the  fiercest  persecution  (cf.  the  history  of  Cranmer  and  his
piteous  misery).  But — as  with  Jeremiah — turning  to  the  Lord  in  grayer.  We  cannot
commend  the  spirit  of  his  prayer,  it  is  all  unlike  our  Lord's  in  regard  to  his  enemies^
and  therefore  not  a  pattern  for  us  to  follow ;  but  it  was  right,  and  ever  is  so,  when
prsecuted  by  man  to  turn  to  him  ''  who  endured  such  contradiction  of  sinners  against
himself."  His  grace  will  keep  us  from  being  wearied  and  faint  in  our  minds.  Patience^
too,  will  greatly  help.  Persecutors  soon  tire  when  they  find  that  their  methods  are  of
no  avail.  Prudence^  likewise,  should  not  be  forgotten.  Sometimes  we  may  get  out  of
its  way,  and  at  no  time  is  there  need  to  provoke  persecution  by  imprudent,  ill-timed,
and  ill-toned  obtrusion  of  the  distasteful  theme.  There  are  times  wnen  at  all  costs  a
man  must  stand  to  his  post  and  speak  out,  but  there  are  other  times,  and  more  of
them,  when  the  quiet,  consistent  life  will  do  more  for  God  and  his  truth  than  the
longest  and  loudest  speech.  But  in  such  difficult  circumstances  it  is  well  to  keep  near
to  God  in  constant  prayer  for  counsel  and  direction  how  to  bear  one's  self  wisely  as  he
would  have  us.    Relief  also  is  found  in  contemplation  of —

VI.  Its  sure  results  if  faithfully  endured.  J.  It  makes  us  have  real  fellowship  with
Christ.  It  wins  for  us  a  glorious  recompense  at  his  coming.  Even  now  the  soul  is
cheered  by  the  communications  of  his  approval  and  the  clear  vision  of  the  shining
of  his  counteuance  upon  his  faithful  servant.  And  not  seldom  likewise  by  beholding
the  lion  turned  into  the  lamb,  the  persecutor  becoming  an  apostle  and  preacher  of  the
faith  he  once  destroyed,  lliese  are  consolations  indeed.  And  confirmation  in  the
truth  for  which  we  have  suffered  is  gained  by  seeing  the  manifest  displeasure  of  God
against  the  persecutors.  How  it  hardens  them  in  their  sin  1  How  it  fills  up  the  cup  of
their  iniquity !  How  sore  the  vengeance  that  befalls  them !  These  considerations  are
derived  from  the  contemplation  of  the  persecution  of  the  Lord's  servant  Jeremiah.
They  will  be  all  of  them  strengthened  if  we  mark  the  sufferings  of  the  Lord  himself.
Here,  but  there  most  vividly,  are  seen  warnings  most  solemn  against  this  great  sin,
and  consolations  most  precious  to  all  the  "  blessed  "  who  endure.— C.

Vers.  19 — 23. — Tlie  propheVa  prayer  for  vengeance  on  his  enemies,  (Cf.  homily  on
**  Imprecatory  prayers,"  ch.  xi.  20.) — C.

Ver.  6. — The  potter  and  the  day.  The  analogy  here  instituted  enshrines  truths  that
are  of  universal  application.  They  have  their  individual  quite  as  much  as  their
national  bearings.  Nowhere  does  the  representative  character  of  the  house  of  Israel
appear  more  clearly  than  in  this  passage ;  nowhere  do  we  get  a  more  striking  view  of
the  general  method  of  the  Divine  dealings  with  the  human  race.    It  suggests^-

I.  God's  absolute  sovereignty  over  the  being  and  life  op  every  man.  The
figure  of  the  potter  and  the  clay  is  one  of  frequent  occurrence  in  Holy  Scripture  {vide
Job  X.  9 ;  Isa,  Ixiv.  8 ;  Rom.  ix.  10).  It  vividly  represents  the  subjection  of  our
nature  and  our  personal  history  to  the  Divine  control.  The  fact  of  our  moral  freedom,
the  mysterious  prerogative  that  belongs  to  us  of  choosing  and  following  our  own  way,
must  needs  make  the  comparison  defective.  There  is  some  point  at  which  all  such
physical  analogies  fail  duly  to  set  forth  the  realities  of  moral  and  spiritual  life.  But  it
is  deeply  true  as  suggestive  of  the  power  God  has  over  us  to  mould  us  as  he  pleases.
Free  as  our  will  may  be,  is  not  our  whole  nature  as  plastic  material  in  the  hands  of
him  who  made  us?  Free  as  we  may  be  to  pursue  our  own  chosen  course  of  life,  can
we  ever  escape  the  "  Divinity  that  shapes  our  ends "  ?  There  is  a  hidden  power,
whether  we  acknowledge  it  or  not,  the  mastery  of  which  over  thought,  feeling,  purpose,
and  action  is  the  deepest  reality  of  our  existence.

II.  Uis  FORMATIVE  PURPOSE.  Distinguish  between  a  sovereign  power  and  one  that
is  arbitrary  an*d  capricious.  Complete  as  the  Divine  mastery  over  us  may  be,  it  is  not
lawless  or  purposeless.  It  has  always  a  definite  end  in  view,  and  that  end  is  wise  and
holy  and  good.  As  the  potter  seeks  to  fashion  the  clay  into  some  beautiful  or  useful
form  that  his  own  brain  has  first  conceived,  so  God,  by  his  providential  and  spiritual
control,  seeks  to  work  out  a  Divine  idea  in  our  being  and  life,  to  body  forth  in  us  some
archetype  of  moral  beauty  that  exists  in  his  own  eternal  mind.  He  would  fain  fashion
us  into  a  noble  form  and  fit  us  for  some  noble  use.    In  God*8  *'  great  house  "  there  are


r


454  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.    [cH.  xvni.  1— 23.


many  utilities.  And  even  the  vessel  ** unto  dishonour"  has  its  place  and  its  purpose.
Our  faith  in  the  infinitely  wise  and  holy  love  that  governs  all  leads  us  to  rest  in  the
thought-*

**  That  notliing  walks  with  aimless  feet ;
That  not  one  life  shall  be  destroyed
Or  cast  as  rubbish  to  the  void,
Viheu  God  hath  made  the  pile  complete.*'

But  he  who  formed  us  for  himself  would  not  have  any  of  us  to  be  content  with  an
inferior  position  and  a  lower  aim.  He  would  so  mould  and  fashion  us  that  we  shall  bo
^  vessels  unto  honour,  sanctified,  and  meet  for  the  Master's  use"  (2  Tim.  ii.  21).

III.  His  LONO-suFFEBiNO  PATIENCE,  When  the  potter's  work  is  marred,  he  presses
the  clay  into  a  shapeless  mass  and  casts  it  upon  the  wheel  again.  We  are  reminded  of
the  various  methods  God  employs  in  moulding  us  to  his  will,  and  how  if  one  fails  he
will  often  subject  us  to  another.  There  are  events  that  sometimes  break  up  the  whole
form  of  a  man's  life ;  old  ties  are  severed,  old  associations  pass  away ;  he  begins  an
altogether  new  career,  with  new  responsibilities,  new  moral  tests,  new  possibilities  of
good.  There  are  afflictions  that  change  the  whole  tenor  of  a  man's  inward  life ;  his
spirit  is  crushed,  wounded,  softened,  that  it  may  the  better  receive  Divine  impressions.
•*  God  maketh  my  heart  soft,"  etc.  (Job  xxiii.  16).  "  My  heart  is  like  wax  "  (Ps.  xxii.
14).  Thus  does  God  "  humble  us  to  prove  us,  to  know  w  hat  is  in  our  heart,  whether
we  will  keep  his  commandments  or  not "  (Deut.  viii.  2\  There  may  come  a  time  when
all  these  Divine  methods  fail  and  the  soul  is  found  to  be  reprobate.  In  ch.  xix.
1 — 11  we  have  a  figurative  prophecy  of  the  ultimate  abandonment  of  the  Jewish
people  to  their  fate.  In  this  case  the  vessel  has  been  baked  in  the  fire ;  it  is  incapable
of  taking  a  new  shape,  and  is  broken  so  "  that  it  cannot  be  made  whole  again."  Such
is  the  doom  of  the  finally  im^xinitent  and  intractable.  But  God's  patience  is  very
wonderful.  In  this  world  at  least  the  door  of  mercy  is  always  open.  There  is  always
the  possibility  of  a  new  and  nobler  life.  He  "  is  long-suffering  to  usward,  not  willin
that  any  should  perish,  but  that  all  should  come  to  repentance    (2  Pet.  iii.  9). — W.


O


Vers.  1 — 10. — The  clay  in  the  potter's  hand,  I.  The  purpose  of  this  practicai
ILLUSTRATION.  It  is  a  practical  illustration  in  the  most  suggestive  sense  of  the  word
•*  practical."  Jeremiah  had  not  to  go  out  of  his  way  to  produce  a  sufficiently  impressive
figure  of  what  God  was  about  to  do.  He  had  to  go  through  a  very  peculiar  and  pro-
tracted experience  to  bring  out  the  lesson  of  the  marred  girdle.  But  here  he  has  only
to  go  down  to  the  potter  at  his  wheel,  a  thing  he  could  do  at  any  time ;  and  there  is  a
lesson  particularly  plain  and  forcible,  as  coming  out  of  the  daily  life,  the  simple  and
common  life,  of  the  people.  Notice^  then,  that  Jeremiah  was  not  sent  down  to  learn
just  what  his  own  unaided  observation  might  tell  him  concerning  the  potter  and  the
clay.  He  might,  indeed,  have  drawn  out  many  inqwrtant  lessons,  yet  overlooked  the
one  that  was  most  important  of  alL  God  wished  the  prophet  clearly  to  understand  and
then  distinctly  to  impress  upon  the  peo2)le  this  truth,  that  as  the  potter  is  to  the  clay,
in  respect  of  the  control  which  he  has  over  it  as  clay  and  in  its  plastic  condition,  so
Jehovah  is  to  Israel  in  respect  of  his  control  over  its  temporal  destiny  as  a  nation.
Hence  we  have  to  look  at  the  potter's  action  upon  the  clay,  positively  and  negatively.
We  have  to  recollect  both  what  he  can  do  and  what  he  cannot  do.  Within  certain
limits  his  power  is  resistless ;  outside  those  limits  he  has  no  power  at  all.  Give  the
potter  a  piece  of  moist  plastic  clay;  he  takes  it  up,  designing  to  make  from  it  a  vessel
of  a  certain  shape  and  for  a  certain  use.  Suddenly  he  finds  it  desirable  to  change  the
shape,  and  because  the  clay  is  still  moist  and  plastic  he  can  do  this  with  the  rapidity,
expertness,  and  success  which  come  from  long  practice.  It  is  this  particular  |x>wer  of
the  potter  which  God  would  have  us  to  understand  is  his  power  over  us.  What  the
potter  does  is  limited  by  the  nature  of  that  with  which  he  works.  He  cannot  turn  clay
mto  something  else  than  clay.  Clay  it  is  when  he  first  touches  it :  clay  it  remains  when
its  shape  is  finally  decided.  Let  the  vessel  be  baked  in  the  furnace  and  come  out  hard,
its  shape  cannot  then  be  altered.  If  it  is  thrown  to  the  ground  it  will  be  broken,  it
may  even  be  shivered  *'  so  that  there  shall  not  be  found  in  the  bureting  of  it  a  sherd  to
take  fire  from  the  hearth,  or  to  take  water  withal  out  of  the  pit "  (Isa.  xxx,  14).    No


en.  xvuL  1— 23.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  455

volition  or  power  of  the'  potter  will  give  to  the  clay  vessel  the  qualities  of  a  wooden
vessel  or  one  of  metaL  Ho  may  fashion  it  for  a  vessel  of  honour  or  dishonour,  just  as
he  pleases ;  but  whatever  its  use  its  material  is  still  of  clay.  And  similarly  we  must
recollect  that,  whatever  God  does  with  us,  he  does  in  harmony  with  our  nature.  He
finds  us,  as  to  the  affections  and  purposes  of  our  hearts,  free  agents,  and,  however
great  the  changes  he  may  affect  in  our  circumstances  and  our  future,  all  must  be  done
without  touching  this  freedom.  The  Divine  potter  hero  was  changing  the  circum-
stances of  the  human  clay,  just  because  that  clay  was  so  stubborn  in  submittiug  to  his
will  so  clearly,  so  lovingly,  so  often  expressed.  If  we  refuse  to  be  moulded  into  the
shape  that  means  for  us  true  peace,  glory,  and  blessedness,  then  we  must  be  moulded
into  the  shape  which  will  secure  at  the  least  peace  and  blessedness  in  God*s  kingdom,
and  manifest  glory  to  his  great  Name.

II.  The  gbeat  result  which  should  be  produced  by  cue  consideration  of
THIS  illustration.  Too  readily  is  it  said  by  many,  '*  If  we  are  as  clay  in  the  hands
of  the  potter,  then  we  need  not  trouble  ourselves.  God  will  shape  our  destiny,  what-
ever we  do."  But  if  we  look  honestly  and  humbly  at  this  illustration,  we  shall  see  that
what  God  would  have  us  above  all  things  to  learn  from  it  is  that  the  shaping  of  our
destiny  lies  practically  with  ourselves.  In  selfish  and  ignorant  obstinacy  we  wi^  our
life  to  take  a  certain  mould.  Strenuously,  and  heedless  of  all  Divine  counsel  and  warn-
ing,  we  try  what  self  can  do  toward  the  shaping.  Then  at  last  our  purpose  comes  to
be  ^broken  off.  All  that  we  have  been  and  all  that  we  have  done  prove  useless  so  far
as  our  aims  arc  concerned.  But  for  all  that  we  cannot  be  useless  to  God.  Qt)d  wishes
to  work  in  us  a  change  which  would  make  all  our  circumstances  those  of  liberty.  He
wishes  to  renew  our  hearts  and  establish  in  them  a  holy  love  as  the  central  principle.
If  we  refuse  this  Divine  appeal,  then  we  must  come  under  ever-narrowing  constraints.
We  are  asked  to  walk  in  the  liberty  of  God's  children ;  if  we  refuse  and  confess  our-
selves the  enemies  of  God,  then  we  must  be  loaded  with  chains  and  put  in  the  inner-
most dungeon.  Our  wisdom  is  to  turn  from  our  hardness  and  impenitent  hearts,  and
allow  God  to  lead  as  into  the  full  fi^rdyoui  (Rom.  ii.  4).  Then  with  understanding  shall
we  address  God,  "  We  are  the  clay,  and  thou  our  potter  "  (Isa.  Ixiv.  8).  If  we  by  repent-
ance come  back  to  God  and  make  ourselves  clay,  such  as  will  have  in  it  a  peculiar
responsiveness  to  the  touch  of  God,  then  we  may  leave  ourselves  to  his  loving-kindness.
He  will  fashion  us  into  just  that  shape  whereby  wo  shall  be  meet  for  the  Master's
service.  And  if  men  say  in  their  ignorance  that  we  are  turning  out  but  vessels  of
dishonour,  let  us  recollect  that  of  honour  and  dishonour  God  alone  is  judge.  If  we  only
stoop  from  our  pride  to  do  the  will  of  God,  God  will  take  care  of  our  position.  For  is
not  God  he  who  exalts  the  humble  and  abases  the  proud  ?— Y.

Vers.  18 — 23. — JeremialCs  enemies  and  his  prayer  against  them,  I.  The  cause  of
HIS  6UFPLICATI0N.  His  eucmies  have  entered  into  a  plot  against  him,  and  ho  has
heard  of  the  plot.  He  has  to  do,  we  may  imagine,  not  only  with  the  open  threats  of
passionate  men,  face  to  face,  but  also  with  secret  wiles.  The  language  of  intense
provocation  in  which  he  speaks  must  be  remembered  in  trying  to  estimate  the  extent,
depth,  and  bitterness  of  the  hostility  against  him.  Who  were  they  that  thus  proposed
to  join  together  in  ruining  the  prophet  f  Doubtless  the  three  classes  embraced  bv  the
reference  that  is  made,  namely,  priest,  wise  man,  and  prophet.  The  priest  would  so
to  the  wise  man  and  prophet,  saying,  **  See  how  this  fellow  speaks  against  us  alL"
A  common  hatred  and  a  common  peril  swallow  up  for  a  time  all  jealousies  amonsst
bad  men,  and  constitute  a  strong  bond  of  imion,  a  strong  incitement  to  all  tne
ingenuity  and  designing  powers  of  the  mind.  We  are  not  left  without  means  of
judging  as  to  the  motives  of  these  three  classes  of  men  and  their  methods  of  proceed-
ing when  we  consider  the  similar  conspiracies  against  Jesus  himself.  Men  belonging
to  conspicuous  classes  of  the  community  attacked  him,  and  they  are  constantly
mentioned  as  being  joined  together.  This  attack  gives  the  strongest  evidence,  both
of  the  appropriateness  of  Jeremiah's  message  and  his  fidelity  in  delivering  it.  Such
truth  as  a  prophet  has  to  speak  must  be  met  either  with  penitent 'friendliness  or  with
bitter  and  active  enmity.  It  must  be  reckoned  no  strange  thing  if  the  faithful
proclaimer  of  truth  is  exposed,  not  only  to  reproaches,  misrepresentations,  and  loss  of
old  associates,  but  even  to  deep-laid  conspiracies.    These  men,  while  they  were  bent  on


456


THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.      [ch.  xix.  1—15.


ruiniDg  Jeremiah,  wished  also  to  do  it  in  a  safe  and  plausible  way.  It  was  to  be  done
by  a  plan.  They  were  going  to  smite  him  with  the  tongue.  Very  likely  they  hoped  to
sot  him  put  to  death  under  judicial  forms.  Again,  one  asks-^How  came  the  prophet  to
hear  of  these  plans  f  The  wise  men  must  have  shown  a  very  imperfect  kind  of  wisdom
in  not  being  able  to  keep  their  designs  secret.  Indeed,  they  may  have  thought  that
they  were  secret.  The  Jews  who  swore  not  to  eat  or  drink  till  they  had  killed  Paul
did  not  reckon  that  Paul's  own  nephew  had  discovered  their  designs.

IL  The  supplication  itself.  In  reading  this  supplication,  we  vainly  try  to  escape
from  feeling  what  a  ferocious,  savage  tone  the  words  have.  The  dreadful  meaning  of
the  words,  taken  in  their  natural  signification,  is  only  too  plain.  We  must  by  no
means  try  to  defend  the  prayer ;  we  can  only  do  something  to  extenuate  the  language
by  remembering  the  provocation  the  prophet  had  received,  and  the  spirit  of  the  age  in
which  he  lived.  It  is  at  least  important  to  remember  that  he  is  distinctly  conscious  of
having  had  good  motives  towards  these  enemies.  He  knew  that  Grod  meant  their  good,
and  he,  in  speaking,  had  meant  the  same.  It  must  bo  noticed  also  that,  whatever  his
feelines,  he  expresses  them  as  a  prayer  to  God.  He  does  not  take  retaliation  into  his
own  hands.  His  rights  and  interests,  whatever  they  are,  he  leaves  in  the  hands  of
Jehovah.  He  has,  indeed,  his  own  estimate  as  to  what  his  enemies  deserve,  but  he  seeks
that  they  may  get  their  deserts  in  the  way  of  manifestly  Divine  judgments.  Then  he
evidently  spoke  in  great  excitement.  The  wrath  even  of  a  good  man  may  boil  over
into  language  which  he  would  not  wish  to  be  held  by  in  cooler  moments.  We  may  be
perfectly  sure  that  if,  in  after  years,  Jeremiah  had  been  reminded  of  this  prayer,  and
asked  if  he  really,  seriously  meant  that  the  innocent  connections  of  his  enemies  should
bo  ruthlessly  slaughtered,  ho  would  have  been  quick  to  plead  that  his  words  were  those
of  excitement.  Shall  it  be  thought  wonderful  that  he  should  utter  such  a  wish  when
the  disciples  of  the  meek  and  lowly  Jesus  had  dnmk  in  so  little  of  the  spirit  of  their
Master  as  to  wish  fire  from  heaven  to  come  down  upon  the  inhospitable  Samaritans  ?
The  passage  under  consideration  is  just  one  of  those  which  strongly  shows  the  difference
which  has  been  made  by  the  sermon  on  the  mount.  If  Jeremiah  had  been  a  Christian
apostle  instead  of  a  Jewish  prophet,  his  prayer  would  have  been  a  very  lamentable
utterance  indeed.— Y.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  XIX.


With  this  chapter,  vers.  1 — 6  of  the  next
ought  undoubtedly  to  be  connected  to  com-
plete the  narrative.  Jeremiah  here  comes
before  us  performing  another  symbolical
action.  By  breaking  a  potter's  vessel  he
foreshows  the  ruin  impending  over  Jerusalem
for  the  idolatry  practised  in  the  valley  of
Hinnom.  Not  (remarks  GraQ  as  if  the
worship  of  Moloch  had  been  restored  after
the  death  of  Josiah;  ver.  13,  in  fact,  ruf-
ficiently  shows  that  the  Tophet  hod,  ever
since  Joeiah's  time,  continued  to  be  an  un-
clean place,  and  the  sins  which  aro  here
rebuked  are  the  unexpiated  abominations
of  Manaaeeh*B  reign  (described  in  ch.  xv.  4,
as  the  immediate  causes  of  the  Captivity).
Jeremiah's  prophecy  on  the  Tophet  is  fol-
lowed by  one  on  the  fate  of  a  certain  Pas-
hur,  a  high  officer  in  the  temple.

The  principal  prophecy  presents  striking


points  of  contact  with  ch.  vii.  (comp.  vera.
4—6  with  ch.  vii.  30—32;  and  ver.  13  with
ch.  vii.  18;  viii.  2),  and  we  may  presume
that  tho  events  here  related  belong  to  the
time  to  which  we  have  already  referred  ch.
vii.,  viz.  the  early  part  of  the  reign  of  Jo-
hoiakim.  The  same  date  is  confirmed  for
the  narrative  of  Pashur  by  the  office  which
is  therein  given  him ;  for  according  to  ch.
xxix.  25,  26,  the  office  was  not  held  by  him,
but  by  Zephuuiah.

Ver.  1.— A  potter's  earthen  bottle.  Dr.
Thomson  speaks  of  the  extreme  cheapness
and  brittlcDcss  of  the  common  pottery  of
Palestine  (comp.  Isa.  xxx.  14).  The  andentB
of  the  people.  The  natund  popular  repre-
sentatives (comp.  Exod.  iii.  16;  2  Sam.
xix.  11 ;  1  Kings  viii.  1  ;  xx.  7).  It  was
an  announcement  concerning  the  whole
people  thiit  Jeremiah  was  alx>ut  to  make.
The  ancients  of  the  priests  (comp.  2  Kings
xix.  2).

Ver.  2. — ^The  valley  of  the  son  of  Hinnom
(see  on  ch.  vii.  31).    The  east  gate ;  rather.


en.  XIX.  1—15.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMUH.


467


the  potsherd  gate,  i.e.  the  gate  vihQTO  pot-
slierds  were}  wont  to  be  thrown.  Another
possible  rendering  is  **8UQ  gate,"  of  which
''  cast  gate  "  is  but  a  paraphrase.  But  there
is  evidently  a  connection  between  the  name
of  the  gate  and  the  action  performed  by
Jeremiah.  The  Authorized  Version  seems
to  liave  misled  Captain  Warren  into  identi-
fying the  valley  of  Hinnom  with  that  of
Kedron.  He  confirms  his  view,  it  is  true,
by  the  Arabic  nomenclature,  which  speaks
of  the  Kedron  as  the  W&dy  Jehinnam — a
nomenclature,  however,  which  is  by  no
means  uniform  (see  Robinson,  *  Biblical
Researches,'  ii.  396,  403).  The  situation  of
the  **  potsherd  gate  "  must  remain  uncertain.

Yer.  3. — 0  kmgs  of  Judah ;  i.e.  the  nume-
rous clan  of  royal  princes,  kings  by  courtesy
(see  on  ch.  xvii.  20).  His  ears  shall  tingle
(so  2  Kings  xxi.  12 ;  comp.  1  Sam.  iii.  11).

Ver.  4.— Have  estranged  this  place;
rather,  have  treated  this  place  as  strange;
i.e.  as  one  that  did  not  belong  to  their  God,
tliat  was  unholy  (comp.  ch.  xvi.  18,
"  They  have  defiled  my  land  ")•  With  the
blood  of  innocents ;  comp.  **  Innocent  blood,
even  the  blood  of  their  sons  and  of  tlieir
daughters"  (Ps.  cvi.  38) — the  children
sacrificed  in  Hinnom  to  Moloch.

Ver.  5. — Baal.  This  seems  to  be  used
loosely  for  Moloch  (comp.  on  ch.  ii.  8).

Ver.  6.— (Comp.  ch.  vii.  32.)  Tophet;
rather,  the  Tophet  (see  on  ch.  vii.  31).

Ver.  7. — ^I  will  make  void;  literally,  I
icill  pour  out,  alluding  to  the  etymology  of
tlie  word  rendered  "  bottle  "  in  ver.  1.

Ver.  8. — (Comp.  ch.  xviii.  16.)

Ver.  9. — The   same  description,  almost


verbatim,  is  given  in  Deut.  xxviii.  53;
(oomp.  Lev.  xxvi.  29 ;  Ezek.  v.  10).  For  the
fulfilment,  see  Lam.  iv.  10.

Ver.  11. — ^As  one  breaketh  a  potter's
vessel  (comp.  Isa.  xxx.  14).  Dr.  Thom-
son speaks  of  the  utter  indifference  with
which  the  common  pottery  of  Palestine  is
handled.  It  is  not  only  brittle,  but  so
cheap  that  no  one  is  distressed  at  breaking
it.  And  they  shall  bury  them  in  Tophet,
etc.  These  words  form  the  conclusion  of
ch.  vii.  32  (see  note),  the  greater  part  of
which  is  repeated  in  ver.  6.  They  are  cer-
tainly out  of  place  here,  and  are  wanting  in
the  Septuagint.

Ver.  12. — ^As  Tophet ;  «.e.  an  unclean  spot,
avoided  by  mankind.

Ver.  13. — The  honsei  of  the  kings  of
Jndah;  i.e.  the  palaces  and  other  buildings
which  together  made  up  **  the  king's  house  "
(ch.  xxii.  6).  Shall  be  defiled  as  tiie  place
of  Tophet.  This  is  one  of  the  few  places  in
wliich  the  Authorized  Version  has  (dlowed
itself  to  interfere  with  the  received  text;
for  the  Hebrew  has  "  which  are  defiled,"  etc.
The  common  reading,  in  fact,  seems  un-
translatable. Because  of  all  the  hooses;
rather,  even  all  the  houses.

Vers.  14, 15. — Here  begins  a  fresh  section
of  the  narrative.  Jeremiah  has  executed
his  commission,  and  now  proceeds  to  the
temple,  where  he  repeats  iNsfore  the  assem-
bled people  his  announcement  of  the  awfol
judgment.

Ver.  15. — Upon  all  her  towns.  The  cities
of  Jndah  are  regarded  as  in  a  manner  subject
to  the  capital.


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1 — 13. — The  broken  bottle.  That  was  a  strange  scene— the  royal  family,  the
nobles,  the  chief  priests,  together  with  the  populace  of  Jerusalem,  gathered,  at  the
summons  of  a  prophet  whose  power  could  not  be  ignored  though  his  teaching  was
opposed,  in  the  valley  of  Hinnom,  now  reeking  with  the  odours  of  foul  crime ;  and  the
prophet  facing  them,  alone  and  fearless,  with  a  common  potter's  vessel  in  his  hand,
while  he  draws  a  most  awful  picture  of  impending  calamity,  and  sternly  charges  his
audience  with  the  terrible  wickedness  which  is  bringing  it  upon  their  heads,  and
brings  his  discourse  to  a  dramatic  climax  by  breaking  the  vessel  to  pieces.

I.  Consider  the  circumstances  of  the  discourse.  1.  It  was  addressed  especially
to  the  leaders  of  the  people  (ver.  1).  "  To  the  poor  the  gospel  is  preached,"  but  to  the
great  sterner  messages  must  often  be  declared.  Nothing  in  the  history  of  the  prophets
is  more  exemplary  than  the  directness  of  their  accusations  of  guilt  in  high  places.
They  were  no  flattering  court  preachers.  Yet  they  were  court  preachers.  They  did
not  reserve  their  harsh  words  for  the  poorest  and  lowest  of  the  people,  as  modern
popular  preachers  are  too  apt  to  do.  The  leaders  were  first  in  crime ;  they  should  bo
first  in  responsibility.  2.  It  was  spoken  on  the  site  of  the  greatest  wickedness.  The
guilty  people  had  the  memorials  of  their  crimes  before  their  eyes  while  judgment  was
being  pronounced  for  them.  Men  naturally  shun  these  valleys  of  Hinnom,  these  scenes
of  old  sins,  the  sight  of  which  stings  the  conscience.  But  they  must  revisit  them.
It  is  sometimes  the  duty  of  the  preacher  to  take  his  hearers  back  in  memory  to  thie


458  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [en.  xix.  1—15.

circumstances  of  the  past  which  they  would  gladly  forget.  3.  It  was  clearly  and
Mdly  exprtssed.  1'ho  language  was  precise,  detailed,  and  graphic,  the  description  ol
the  approaching  ruin  vivid  and  appalling.  Jeremiah  used  no  euphemisms.  His  words
are  enough  to  make  our  blood  curdle  as  we  read  them,  more  than  a  score  of  centuries
after  they  were  spoken.  How  must  they  have  sounded  in  the  ears  of  the  criminals
who  heard  them  as  the  sentence  of  their  own  doom  ?  Lurid  pictures  of  future  punish-
ment frequently  strike  one  as  unreal,  as  though  only  drawn  for  effect ;  they  rouse
unbelief  in  some,  despair  in  others,  or  a  hardening  in  sin.  Tet  a  clear  and  uncompro-
mising statement  of  the  scriptural  revelation  of  the  horrors  of  the  future  is  not  to  bo
set  aside  for  more  pleasing  doctrines,  especially  in  preaching  to  the  great  and  the  self-
satisfied.  4.  It  was  accompanied  by  a  significant  action.  Jeremiah  broke  the  bottle
in  the  presence  of  his  audience.  This  would  strike  the  eye  and  impress  the  imagina-
tion. It  is  not  enough  that  we  convince  the  reason  of  a  truth ;  we  must  rouse  the
imagination  to  realize  it  before  it  will  be  effectual.  The  Eastern  imagery  of  the  Bible
is  useful  to  us  in  this  way.  The  preacher  finds  the  value  of  illustrations  in  making
truth  vivid  and  interesting.  Ideas  may  be  received  through  the  eye  as  well  as  through
the  ear.

II.  Consider  the  subject  of  the  discourse.  1.  It  accused  of  sin,  (I)  in  for-
saking God  and  (2)  in  practising  vice  and  cruelty.  We  must  feci  the  intensity  of
guilt  to  realize  the  justice  of  punishment  2.  It  denounced  a  most  terrible  doom.  This
was  to  correspond  to  the  crimes  committed.  The  Tophct  of  sin  was  to  be  the  Tophet
of  punishment.  They  who  had  sacrificed  children  to  Moloch  would  eat  the  flesh  of
their  sons,  etc  3.  It  exposed  the  rottenness  of  false  confidence,  "  I  will  pour  out  the
counsel  of  Judah."  People  imagine  that  somehow,  without  repentance,  by  mgenuity  or
by  daring,  they  may  escape  the  consequences  of  their  sins.  They  will  find  that  all  such
devices  must  end  in  ignominious  failure.  4.  It  was  accompanied  by  a  symbol  of  Tiope-
less  destruction.  The  bottle  was  broken.  (1)  This  potter's  vessel  was  a  comparatively
worthless  thing :  wickedness  robs  men's  lives  of  all  value.  (2)  It  was  very  brittle :
nothing  is  so  unstable  as  the  security  of  the  wicked  before  their  sins  have  wrought  out
their  natural  consequences.  (3)  It  was  broken  to  pieces :  the  punishment  of  sin  is
destruction — the  destruction  of  a  nation  for  national  sin  as  seen  in  the  breaking  up  of
the  Jewish  people,  the  destruction  of  a  soul  in  the  killing  out  of  it  of  spiritual  activi-
ties and  all  the  higher  capacities  of  its  being.

Vers,  li,  15.— 7%e  warning  confirmed.  The  warning  of  the  discourse  in  the  valley
of  Hinnom  is  confirmed  by  a  repetition  of  it  under  more  ordinary  circumstances.

I.  The  circumstances  of  the  confirmation  of  the  warning.  1.  It  was  repeated.
The  scribe  must  bring  from  his  treasury  things  old  as  well  as  things  new.  Men  need
"  line  upon  line."  Unpopular  truths  must  not  only  be  revealed  once  for  all,  they  must
bo  impressed  upon  people  until  they  are  accepted.  2.  It  was  repeated  in  the  temple.
The  horrible  associations  of  Tophet  were  wanting  there.  All  was  decorum,  order,
propriety.  Yet  the  message  was  not  the  less  true  there  than  in  a  more  congenial  place.
Terrible  truths  must  be  uttered  in  face  of  the  religious  respectability  of  our  Church
worship.  Such  outward  correctness  should  not  make  us  forget  the  true  condition  of
men's  hearts,  which  is  apparent  enough  in  the  darker  scenes  of  life,  in  the  Tophets  of
iniquity.  We  are  tempted  to  bo  deceived  by  the  appearance  of  religious  assemblies
into  a  blindness  to  the  greatness  of  sin  which  is  visible  enough  in  common  life.  3.
It  was  repeated  in  the  ears  of  all  the  people.  The  leaders  were  first  selected  to  hear
the  warning  (ver.  1).  But  it  was  not  confined  to  them.  The  people  generally  wero
guilty.  They  had  quietly  acquiesced  in  the  wickedness  of  their  great  men.  Nay,  they
had  furthered  them  in  it  (ch.  v.  31),  had  followed  their  example,  and  become  guilty  of
similar  crimes.    They,  too,  must  not  expect  to  escape  in  the  hour  of  judgment.

II.  The  form  in  which  the  warning  was  confirmed.  1.  It  was  epUomized.
Truth  needs  to  be  broken  up  into  detail  that  it  may  be  clearly  understood  and  vividly
conceived  by  the  imagination.  But  it  is  possible  to  lose  ourselves  in  details  and  miss
the  drift  of  the  sum  of  them.  Hence  the  advantage  of  broad,  sweeping  enunciations  of
principle.  2.  It  was  repeated  as  a  prediction  of  real  facts.  The  warning  was  not  to  be
regarded  as  an  empty  threat,  nor  as  the  indication  of  a  danger  that  might  be  evaded.
••  I  will  bring  ...  the  evil  that  I  have  pronounced,"  etc.    It  is  both  weak  and  cruel  to


CH.  XIX.  1—15.3    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  459

threaten  without  the  intention  of  executing  the  threat — weak,  for  the  hollowness  of
the  alarm  is  soon  discovered  by  experience,  and  then  it  is  impotent ;  cruel,  for  why
create  distress  about  a  mere  "  bogey  "  danger  ?  God  is  merciful,  but  firm.  His  threats
are  conditional,  but,  while  the  conditions  subsist,  the  execution  is  as  certain  as  any
event  that  depends  on  the  uniform  laws  of  nature.  3.  It  was  repeated  without  dimi"
nution,  AU  the  evil  pronounced  will  fall  on  all  the  towns.  The  effect  of  stem  warn-
ings fades  with  the  lapse  of  time.  We  are  tempted  to  think  that  things  will  not  be
so  very  bad  as  at  first  seemed  likely,  and  to  take  comfort  from  such  reflections.  But
danger  is  not  lessened  by  our  growing  indifference  to  it.  4.  It  was  strengthened  by
an  appeal  to  the  increasing  necessity  for  it.  "  Because  they  have  hardened  their  necks,
that  they  might  not  hear  my  words."  A  deep  consciousness  of  guilt  makes  the  just
punishment  of  it  seem  inevitable.  Wilful  persistence  in  wickedness  after  warning  can
only  increase  the  guilt  and  make  the  punishment  the  more  certain  and  the  more
severe,

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1,  2, 10, 11. — The  breaking  of  the  potter's  vessel.  Another  symbolic  action,
but  in  this  case  the  revelation  to  the  mind  or  the  prophet  was  not  de^ndcnt  upon  its
being  performed.  It  is  because  of  the  public  significance  of  it  he  is  enjoined  to  perform
it.  The  **  elders  of  the  priests"  and  the  "elders  of  the  people"  are  invited  to  the
scene.

I.  The  symbol.  This  was  a  "potter's  earthen  bottle  [or  'vessel*],"  and  thus  had  to
be  carefully  distinguished  from  the  '*•  clay  "  spoken  of  in  ch.  xviii.  The  latter  is  soft
and  unsliaped,  and  may  be  moulded  as  the  potter  wishes ;  but  the  vessel  is  already
formed  and  hardened  into  a  certain  definite  shape,  which  it  is  impossible  materially  to
alter.  As  that  represented  the  stuff  or  material  of  which  nations  and  institutions
could  bo  made,  this  must  stand  for  the  Jewish  nation^  with  its  character  historically
matured  and  fixed,  Jehovah  had  already  given  it  the  form  he  intended  it  to  assume,
and  placed  it  in  certain  relations  with  himself  as  a  theocracy.  The  historic  institutions
and  nations  of  the  world  are  the  creation  of  God,  He  has  raised  them  up  and  con-
trolled the  forces  that  moulded  and  determined  their  specific  character  and  work.
"  The  powers  that  be  are  ordained  of  God."  The  position^  character,  and  life  of
indiuiattaJ  men  are  also  his  work.  No  man  is  "self-made"  in  any  fundamental
sense  of  the  word.  A  gracious  providence  has  nurtured  and  cared  for  him ;  and,  it
may  be,  saving  grace  has  redeem^  and  sanctified  him.  He  "  is  the  noblest  work  of
God."

II.  The  action.  This  was  threefold,  viz :  1.  The  vessel  wets  bought,  "  Get ; "
literally,  "  buy.^'  Jehovah  had  redeemed  Israel  to  be  a  people  for  himself.  The  outlays
of  Divine  love  and  mercy  are  suggested,  'llie  providence  and  grace  of  God  are  now
being  expended.  The  blood  of  Christ  was  shed  for  all  nations,  "  the  Jew  first,  and
afterwards  the  Gentile ; "  and  for  every  man  born  into  the  world.  "  Ye  are  not  your
own :  ye  are  bought  with  a  price."  A  deeper  obligation  is  thereby  incurred  to  him,
and  a  grander  authority  on  his  part  justified.  We  are  all  made  and  saved,  of,  as  it  may  be
expressed,  made  and  remade  by  him.  2.  It  was  probably  poured  out,  Ver.  7, "  I  will
make  void  [literally^  'pour  outn."  This  action  would  be  natural  under  the  circumstances,
and  highly  impressive.  And  if  it  be  objected  that  the  vessel  was  empty,  that  very
fact  might  still  render  the  action  the  more  emphatically  significant.  Their  counsels
were  also  vain  and  empty,  God  suffers  vvickea  nations  and  men  to  devise  evil,  but
only  as  it  works  out  his  own  ends  is  it  allowed  to  be  executed.  He  will  bring  to
naught  the  counsel  of  the  ungodly.  That  which  is  devised  without  his  bles^s  will
come  to  no  successful  issue.  3.  It  vkls  broken,  (Ver.  10.)  This  was  intended  to  depict
the  extreme  and  final  character  of  the  impending  judgment — "As  one  breaketh  a
potter's  vessel,  that  cannot  be  made  whole  again "  (ver.  IIV  The  nationality  of  the
Jews  was  to  be  destroyed.  The  Babylonion  captivity,  altnough  only  obscurely  pre-
dicted, is  apparently  alluded  to ;  but  some  hold  that,  as  this  was  but  an  incomplete
fulfilment,  the  Roman  conquest  must  have  been  meant.  All  nations  and  individuals
are  on  their  trials  and  may  be  subjected  to  this  extreme  penalty.  God  holds  the
sovereign  power  in  his  own  hand.    There  is  no  remedy;  the  past  is  irrevocable.   And


i


460  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.    [cH.  xix.  1— 15.


there  is  no  apix^l  from  his  sentence,  when  the  limit  of  his  forbearance  has  been  passed.
4.  It  was  disgraced  by  being  cast  into  Tophet.  A  double  purpose  was  thereby  ex-
pressed. The  scene  of  idolatrous  rites  was  to  be  disgraced  by  being  made  the  burial-
place  of  the  slaughtered  thousands  of  Jerusalem,  as,  on  the  other  hand,  such  a  burial
and  the  necessity  for  it  would  be  humiliating  to  the  metropolis  of  the  faith.

III.  The  attendant  circumstances.  1.  It  was  done  in  presence  of  the  represent
tatives  of  the  nation,  '*  Take  of  the  ancients  [elders]  of  the  people,  and  of  the  ancients
of  the  priests."  They  were  probably  responsible  for  the  national  guilt,  and  by  their
personal  and  official  influence  might  be  able  to  avert  the  catastrophe.  Those  who
mfluence  a  nation's  life — kings,  princes,  statesmen,  ministers  of  religion,  authors,
etc. — should  be  specially  appealed  to  in  cases  of  national  sin.  So  the  parent  for  the
child.  It  is  both  respectful  and  just  that  such  persons  should  be  addressed  in  the  first
instanQD.  But  every  man  is  responsible  for  his  own  sin.  His  intelligence  and  moral
nature  must,  therefore,  be  addressed.  2.  The  language  used  was  sucK  as  to  recall  the
general  penalties  to  he  incurred  by  breaking  the  Law,  (Deut.  xxviii.)  The  fact  was  thus
suggested  that  the  judgment  was  wilfully  and  knowingly  incurred.  There  is  nothing
new  about  the  evils  that  come  upon  transgressing  nations  and  individuals,  or  about
their  history.  It  is  not  for  man  to  judge.  Qod  knows  the  reasons  for  his  procedure,
and  the  sinner  himself  is  not  ignorant.  3.  ITie  meaning  of  the  breaking  of  the  vessd
is  fully  explained  beforehand.  This  is  ever  the  Divine  order.  There  is  "  space  for
repentance  '  given  even  to  the  worst  sinners.  No  man  will  go  wholly  unwarned  into
perdition.  Nay,  even  the  historic  and  so-called  secular  character  of  nations,  institu-
tions, and  individuals  is  precious  in  Grod's  eyes,  and  efifort  is  constantly  made  to  con-
vert it  into  an  influence  of  blessing.  The  sinner  is  offered  the  '*  means  of  grace  "  that
he  may  become  a  saint  and  a  servant  of  the  Most  High.  And  it  is  only  as  he  obsti-
nately continues  in  his  sin  that  the  irrevocable  judgment  falls. — M.

Vers.  1-^15,'^Denunciations  of  doom.  This  chapter  is  filled  with  these  awful
warnings  of  the  prophet.  And  they  are  made  the  more  awful  by  the  reflection  that,
fitted  as  they  were  to  rouse  the  most  careless  and  hardened,  yet  they  failed  with  those
to  whom  they  were  addressed.  And  so  this  sad  chapter  teaches  us  such  lessons  as
these :  1.  The  earnest  purpose  of  Ood  to  save  man  from  his  sin.  Hence  these  warn-
ings. 2.  The  awfully  hardening  power  of  the  sin  which  could  despise  them.  3.  What
wise  methods  are  to  be  employed  in  the  endeavour  to  arouse  and  alarm  the  ungodly.
On  this  we  will  dwell  awhile.    This  chapter  shows —

I.  That  those  most  likelt  to  influence  them  should  be  specially  appealed
to.  Cf.  ver,  1,  "  Take  of  the  ancients,"  etc.  No  doubt  this  was  because  of  their
influence  over  the  people  generally.    If  they  could  be  won  the  rest  would  follow.

II.  Wb  should  avail  ourselves  op  any  localities  likely  to  lend  fobce  to
what  18  SAID,  The  prophet  led  forth  his  audience  to  "  the  valley  of  the  son  of
Hinnom."  It  was  the  Tophet,  the  Gehenna,  the  place  haunted  with  memories  of
Divine  wrath  against  idolatry,  and  whose  ever-burning  fire  and  gnawing  worm  sym-
bolized the  quenchless  anger  of  God  against  it.  With  what  added  power,  then,  would
the  prophet's  message  come  when  spoken  in  such  a  place  I

III.  Such  modes  of  address  should  be  adopted  as  would  be  most  likely  to
IMPRESS.  The  prophet  was  bidden  take  an  earthen  bottle,  and,  after  he  had  solemnly
denounced  the  aoom  of  God  against  the  idolatrous  city,  he  was  to  dash  the  bottle  on
the  ground  and  shatter  it  utterly,  past  all  possibility  of  mending.  By  this  dramatic
action  he  was  to  declare  the  coming  destruction  of  Judah  and  Jerusalem.  Thus
vividly  and  powerfully  to  the  minds  of  such  as  witnessed  him  would  the  awful  truth
he  had  to  tell  be  impressed  on  their  minds.  But  also  in  clear  words  and  in  full
copious  detail  he  set  forth  what  was  to  come.  Now,  such  symbolic  action  as  that  of
the  prophet  might  be  of  very  little  service  to  such  as  we  speak  to,  however  impressive
to  the  Oriental  mind,  but  it  teaches  us  that  whatever  is  likely  to  deepen  the  effect  of
our  words  upon  men's  minds  we  are  to  use,  and  fearlessly,  as  did  the  prophet,  set
forth  the  coming  judgments  of  God.    And  most  of  all —

IV.  Our  message  must  be  God's  message.  Ood  put  into  the  prophet's  mouth  the
words  he  was  to  speak  and  taught  him  how  to  speak  them,  and  he  obeyed.  Here  is
the  great  essential    If  denunciations  of  judgment  be  spoken  simply  as  part  of  an


cii.  XIX.  1—15.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  461

orthodox  sermon,  or  for  any  other  reason  than  that  God  has  borne  in  upon  our  souls  the
conviction  that  we  must  speak  such  words,  we  are  likely  to  do  but  little  good — indeed,
harm  rather  than  good.  And  let  such  servant  of  God  who  speaks  as  God  bids  him
remember  that,  even  when  speaking  thus,  his  words  may  fail  in  the  effect  designed  and
desired.  "  Lord,  who  hath  believ^  our  report,"  etc.  ?  They  did  so  here.  But  they
will  never  entirely  fail.  God's  promise  is  against  that.  Some  will  receive  them.
Some  did  even  in  Jeremiah's  day.  There  was  a  faithful  remnant.  And  the  preacher
will  have  delivered  his  own  soul,  and  God's  righteousness  in  the  doom  of  the  impeni-
tent will  be  vindicated  before  all.  May  we  be  delivered  from  the  necessity  of  declaring
such  doom  as  that  which  Jeremiah  had  to  speak  of;  but  if  we  have  to,  may  we  M
taught  of  God,  as  he  was,  and  have  better  success. — C.

Ver.  14— ch.  xx.  6. — The  sin  and  punishment  of  Pashur,  This  man  is  to  bo  dis-
tinguished from  him  of  the  same  name  mentioned  in  ch.  xxi.  1.  The  Pashur  mentioned
here  was  a  priest,  and  one  holding  high  office  in  the  temple.  After  Jeremiah  had  de-
livered his  discourse  at  Tophet,  ho  seems  to  have  returned  to  the  city  and  temple,  and
then  to  have  spoken  in  substance  the  same  predictions  of  woe.  Whereupon  Pashur,  with
less  patience  than  those  who  heard  the  prophet  and  had  seen  his  symbolic  declaration
of  the  coming  ruin  when  he  broke  the  earthen  bottle  at  Tophet,  falls  upon  him  and
smites  him,  and  tortured  him  by  putting  him  in  what  is  called  the  stocks  (see  Expo-
sition).   Thus —

I.  He  cruelly  persecuted  the  prophet  op  God.  It  was  sad  that  any  one
should  do  this.  But  yet  more  that  it  should  be  the  act  of  a  priest  of  God,  and  hold-
ing high  position  amongst  the  priests.  What  hope  can  there  be  of  the  people  when
their  appointed  leaders  and  those  to  whom  they  are  wont  to  look  up  for  instruction
and  example  in  what  is  good  thus  prostitute  their  office?  Thus  the  "  wicked  husband-
men beat "  the  servants  who  were  sent  to  them  (Matt.  xx.  35).  And  it  was  the  samo
order  that  ever  opposed,  and  yet  more  fiercely,  our  Lord  himself.  The  sanctity  and
authority  attaching  to  the  priest's  office  have  ever  been  fatal  to  the  integrity  of
unworthy  holders  of  the  office,  and  have  caused  that  amongst  tho  most  infamous  of
mankind  not  a  few  priests  should  be  found.    But —

II.  He  failed  to  secure  the  end  he  had  in  view.  Jeremiah  was  not  silenced,
but  goaded,  as  it  were,  to  declare  yet  more  terrible  judgments  in  which  Pashur  himself
should  bo  awfully  involved  (cf.  Paul,  "God  shall  smite  thee,"  etc..  Acts  xxiii.  3).
The  stout  heart  of  a  true  servant  of  God  is  an  anvil  on  which  many  hammers  may
fiercely  smite,  but  it  will  wear  them  out  long  before  they  wear  it  out.  Saul  of  Tarsus
found  that  the  persecution  he  had  done  so  much  to  further  in  connection  with  Stephen
only  made  matters  worse.  The  blood  of  the  martyrs  is  the  seed  of  the  Church.  And
the  reason  is  that  a  faith  for  which  men  are  willing  to  die  convinces  all  beholders  that
it  must  be  exceedingly  precious  and  well  founded,  and  inspires  them  with  an  irresis-
tible desire  to  know  and  possess  it  for  themselves,  or  at  least  to  know  what  it  is.

III.  He  brought  down  on  himself  sore  judgment.  Jeremiah  declares  to  him
that  the  Lord  *'  has  changed  his  name  to  Magor-Missabib,  for  he  will  be  given  up  a
prey  to  the  torments  of  mortal  anguish,  his  friends  shall  be  slain  before  his  eyes,  Juoah
carried  away  to  Babylon,  all  its  treasures  plundered  ;  he  himself  shall  witness  all  this
and  die  and  be  buried  in  Babylon,  "  There  thou,  and  all  thy  friends,  to  whom  thou  hast
prophesied  lies."  Thus,  look  where  he  would,  he  should  see  nothing  but  terror.  Above
— the  anger  of  God;  beneath — ^a  dishonoured  grave;  around— calamity  and  woe  on
all  near  and  dear  to  him,  and  of  which  he  had  been  largely  the  procuring  cause;
within — a  conscience  tormenting  him  day  and  night.  It  was  an  awful  doom.  *'  Let
persecutors  read  it  and  tremble ;  tremble  to  repentance  before  they  be  made  to  tremble
to  their  ruin." — 0.

Vers.  1 — 13. — The  breaking  of  the  patterns  vessel,  I.  The  preliminaries  of  the
BREAKING.  Spectators  of  the  proper  sort  needed  to  bo  deliberately  gathered  together  in
the  proper  place.  We  may  suppose  that  the  elders  of  the  people  and  of  the  priests
were  peculiarly  responsible  for  all  that  concerned  the  safety  of  the  city.  This  symbolic
action  was  best  performed  before  the  select  responsible  few.  As  they  went  forth  with  the
prophet  they  had  time  to  ask  themselves  what  the  meaning  of  this  unusual  summons


462  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,     [ch.  xix.  1—15.

might  be.  It  is,  perhaps,  a  little  to  be  wondered  at  that  they  should  have  gone  with  the
pn»>het  at  all.  And  yet,  although  none  might  have  quite  the  right  motive  for  going,
each  would  have  his  own  motive,  and  so  an  acquiescent  assembly  be  formed.  Gt^
knows  how  to  subdue  and  blend  the  motives  of  men  for  his  own  purposes.  In  some
minds  there  would  be  a  superstitious  regard  for  the  prophetic  office ;  in  others,  curiosity
would  operate ;  and  in  a  few  there  might  be  somewhat  of  the  hearing  ear  and  under-
standing mind.  We  are,  then,  to  imagine  this  company  going  forth ;  and  they  do  not
go  forth  at  random.  It  is  not  for  mere  seclusion  they  go  out  of  the  city.  They  are  led
to  the  very  place  which,  because  of  the  abominations  practised  in  it,  is  to  be  one  of  the
principal  causes  of  future  woe.  Thus  we  see  how  carefully  (rod  arranges  the  circum-
stances in  which  his  truth  is  to  be  proclaimed.

II.  Tuis  BREAKiNQ  HAD  A  BEASON.  The  thing  was  not  done  in  mere  wantonness
and  thoughtlessness,  nor  in  passion,  nor  in  carelessness.  The  prophet  did  not  draw
his  lesson  from  a  jar  which  some  one  else  had  happened  to  break.  He  got  the  vessel
with  the  deliberate  purpose,  divinely  put  into  his  mind,  of  breaking  it.  This  was  far
enough  away  from  tne  purpose  with  which  it  was  made,  and  the  vessel,  once  shattered,
could  be  of  no  further  use  for  this  first  purpose ;  but  in  its  destruction  it  served  a  far
nobler  end  than  if  it  had  been  carefully  kept  to  carry  water  for  many  long  years.
Rightly  considered,  indeed,  the  vessel  was  not  destroyed,  but  only  its  service  divinely
and  wisely  changed.  So,  looking  from  the  symbol  to  the  reality  behind  it,  we  must
bear  in  mind  that  the  capture  of  Jerusalem  and  the  conquest  of  the  land  of  Israel  served
certain  purposes  of  God.  He  did  not  separate  this  people  and  give  them  this  land  that
at  last  tney  might  be  scattered,  even  beyond  the  usual  scattering  of  a  conquered  people.
But  when  the  scattering  did  come,  he  sought  to  make  it  evident  that  it  was  from  his
band.  It  was  not  a  mere  chance  of  war,  but  something  prepared  for  and  prophesied*^
something  to  teach  and  warn  the  thoughtful  among  all  nations.

III.  The  reasons  why  this  vessel  was  thus  shattered  before  these  spectators.
1.  To  ihow  the  ecLse  with  which  Ood  can  sJiatter  any  construction  of  man.  One  lesson
had  already  been  drawn  from  the  potter's  vessel  (ch.  xviii.  1 — 10).  That  lesson  was
drawn  from  the  plasticity  of  the  raw  material.  Now  another  lesson  has  to  be  drawn
from  the  fragility  of  the  finished  article.  This  fragility  was  part  of  the  nature  of  the
article.  The  potter  could  not  be  blamed  because  the  result  of  his  work  was  so  fragile.
Fragility,  indeed,  is  a  relative  quality.  An  insect  could  no  more  have  broken  this
vessel  than  men  by  a  single  blow  could  level  a  forest  tree.  Men  talk  of  their  power  to
do  and  their  power  to  resist ;  but  this  is  only  in  ignorance  of  the  immense,  exhaustless
power  which  Ood  in  mercy  hides  from  the  eyes  of  man.  A  potter's  vessel  may  be  pre-
served for  millenniums  if  it  is  sufficiently  guarded ;  but  it  has  no  strength  in  ittelf.
These  people  of  Jerusalem  were  reckoning  on  the  natural  position  and  artificial  securities
of  their  city.  Yet  these  very  things  would  only  heighten  their  calamities  and  miseries.
For  they  would  persist  in  defence,  ever  hoping  against  hope,  until,  in  their  extremity,
they  were  forced  to  devour  their  very  children.  We  need  to  bear  in  mind  that,  however
great  our  natural  advantages,  our  prudence  and  foresight,  we,  as  far  as  our  natural  life
is  concerned,  are  but  as  this  fragile  vessel  in  the  prophet's  hand.  2.  To  show  the
impossibility  of  man  retrieving  the  disaster.  "  That  cannot  be  made  whole  again  "  (ver.
II).  This  vessel  was  not  merely  cmcked.  It  was  more  than  simply  broken.  It  not
only  fell,  but  was  dashed  to  the  ground  with  special  force  and  determination.  These
people  of  Israel,  once  scattered,  could  not  gather  themselves  together  again.  God  could
do  It,  but  only  God.  And  God  would  not  do  it ;  because  that  would  only  have  been
to  reconstitute  the  fragile.  The  breaking  of  this  vessel  is  only  one  of  many  lessons  by
which  God  would  teach  man  his  natural  weakness.  He  destroys  the  old  and  the  fragile,
that  he  may  put  in  its  place  the  new  and  the  indestructible.  Our  wisdom  is  not  to
waste  time  in  trying  to  strengthen  what  is  inherently  weak ;  but  to  accept  with  glad
thankfulness  that  real  mercy  of  God  which,  in  destroying  the  old  Jerusalem,  makes  way
for  the  new  and  heavenly  Jerusalem,  that  city  of  God  based  on  the  truly  everlasting
hills.— Y,


CH.  XX.  1—18.3  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.


463


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  XX.


Ver.  1. — The  continuation  of  tho  preceding
narrative.  Pashnr  the  son  of  Immer.  This
man  belonged  to  the  sixteenth  of  the  sacer-
dotal families  or  classes  (1  Chron.  xziv.  14).
Another  of  the  same  name  is  referred  to  in
ch.  xxi.  1  (see  note).  The  one  here  men-
tioned was  ** chief  overseer"  (there  were
several  inferior  overseers,  2  Chron.  zxzi.
13);  the  eminence  of  the  position  appears
from  tiie  fact  that  Zcphaniah,  Pashur's
successor  (ch.  xzix.  26),  is  second  only  to
the  high  priest  (ch.  lii.  24).  Heard  that
Jeremiah  prophesied ;  rather,  Jieard  Jeremiah
prophesying.

Ver.  2. — Pashur,  being  charged  with  tlie
police  of  tho  temple,  smites  Jeremiah,  i.e.
causes  stripes  to  be  given  him  (a  lepd
punishment,  Dcut.  xzv.  3;  comp.  2  C!or.
xl.  24),  and  then  orders  him  to  be  put  into
the  stocks;  literally,  that  which  distorts —
some  instrument  of  punishment  which  hold
tho  body  in  a  bent  or  crooked  position
(comp.  ch.  xxix.  26).  The  "stocks"  were
sometimes  kept  in  a  special  house  (2  Chron.
xvi.  10);  these  mentioned  here,  however,
apparently  stood  in  public,  at  the  high — or
rather,  upper — ^gate  of  Benjamin,  which  was
by — or,  a^— the  house  of  the  Lord.  The
gate,  then,  was  one  of  the  temple  gates,  and
is  called  **  the  upper  "  to  distinguish  it  from
one  of  the  city  gates  which  bore  the  same
name  (ch.  xxxvii.  13;  xxxviii.  7).  It  is
presumably  the  same  which  is  called  **  the
now  gate  of  the  Lord's  house  "  (ch.  xxvi.  10 ;
zxxvi.  10),  as  having  been  comparatively
lately  built  (2  Kings  xv.  35).

Ver.  3.— Symbolic  change  of  name.  Hot
•  .  .  Fashur,  bnt  Magor-missabib ;  i.e.  terror
on  every  side.  There  is  probably  no  allusion
to  the  (by  no  means  obvious)  etymology  of
Pashur.  Jeremiah  simply  means  to  say
that  Pashur  would  one  day  become  an
object  of  general  horror  (see  on  ver.  10).

Ver.  5. — The  strength ;  rather,  the  stores.
The  labours;  rather,  the  fruits  of  labour:
i.e.  the  profits.

Ver.  6.— Comp.  the  prophecy  against
Shebna  (Isa.  xxii.  18).  Since  we  find,  in
ch.  xxix.  26,  Pashur's  office  occupied  by
another,  it  is  probable  that  the  prediction
was  fulfilled  by  the  captivity  of  Pashur  with
Jehoiachin.  To  whom  thou  hast  prophesied
lies  (comp.  oh.  xiv.  13).  Pashur,  then,
claimed  to  be  a  prophet.

Vers.  7— 13.— A  lyric  passage,  expressing
the  conflict  in  the  prophet's  mind  owing  to  the
mockery  and  the  slander  which  his  preach-
ing has  brought  upon  him,  and  at  the  same
time  his  confidence  of  victory  through  tho


protection  of  Jehovah ;  a  suitable  sequel  to
the  narrative  which  goes  before,  even  if  not
originally  written  to  occupy  this  position
(see  general  Introduction).

Ver.  7.— Thou  hast  deceived  me,  etc.;
rather,  thou  didst  entice  me,  and  I  lei  myself
he  enticed,  Jeremiah  refers  to  the  hesita-
tion he  originally  felt  to  accepting  the
prophetic  office  (ch.  i.).  The  verb  does
not  mean  "to  deceive,"  but  "to  entico"
(so  rendered  in  ver.  10,  Authorized  VersionX
or  "  allure."  The  same  word  is  used  in  ib&t
remarkable  narrative  of  "the  spirit"  who
offered  to  "  entice  "  (Authorized  Version,  to
"  persuade ")  Ahab  to  "  go  up  and  fall  at
Ramoth-GUead"  (1  Kings  xxii.  21).  In
Ezekiel,  too,  the  same  case  is  supposed  as
possible  of  Jehovah's  "  enticing  "  a  prophet
(Ezek.  XV.  9).  The  expression  implies  that
all  events  are,  in  somo  sense,  caused  by
God,  even  those  which  are,  or  appear  to  be,
injurious  to  the  individual.  Was  Goethe
thinking  of  this  passage  when  ho  wrote  the
words,  "Wen  Gott  betriigt,  ist  wohl  be-
trogen"?  Applying  the  words  in  a
Christian  sense,  wo  may  say  (with  F.  W.
Robertson)  that  God  teaches  us  by  our
illusions.  Thou  art  stronger  than  I,  and
hast  prevailed;  rather,  thou  didst  take  hold
on  me,  and  didst  prevail.  The  expression
is  like  "  Jehovali  spake  thus  to  me  with  a
grasp  of  the  hand  "  (Isa.  viii.  11).

Ver.  8. — ^For  since  I  spake,  I  cried  ont,
etc. ;  rather.  For  as  often  as  I  speak,  I  must
shout ;  I  must  cry,  Violence  and  spoil ;  1  can
take  up  no  other  tono  but  that  of  indignant
denunciation,  no  other  theme  but  that  of
the  acts  of  injustice  constantly  committed
(not  merely,  nor  indeed  chiefly,  against  the
prophet  himself).  Was  made;  rather,  i$
made.

Ver.  9.— Then  I  said,  etc.;  rather,  And
when  I  say,  I  will  not  make  mention  of  him^
etc.,  then  it  hecometh  (i.e.  I  am  conscious  of
a  feeling)  in  my  heart  as  a  burning  fire  shut
up  in  my  bones  ;  and  I  weary  myself  to  hM
it  in,  but  cannot.  The  prophet  has  repeatedly
been  tempted  to  withdraw  from  the  painful
duty,  but  his  otlier  and  higher  self  (comp.
*01d  Self  and  New  Self  in  the  *Lyra
Apoetolica')  overpowers  these  lower  crav-
ings for  peace  and  ^uiet.  The  fire
of  the  Divine  wrath  against  sin  bums  so
fiercely  within  him  that  he  cannot  help
resuming  his  work.

Ver.  10.— For  I  heard,  etc. ;  rather,  For  I
have  heard  the  whispering  of  many ;  there  i$
terror  on  every  side.  Inform  {say  thetf},  and
let  us  inform  against  him.  Thia  gives  ua
the  reason  for  his  momentarv  indinationa
to  silence.    He  was  surzonnded  by  bitter


164


THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH^     [cu.  xx.  1^18.


enemies,  vtho  were  no  loDger  content  \?ith
malicious  words,  but  urged  each  other  on
to  lay  an  information  against  him  with  the
authorities  as  a  public  criminal.  The  first
claoie  agrees  yerbetim  with  part  of  Ps.
xzxL  13  (thiB  is  one  of  the  psalms  attributed,
by  a  too  bold  conjecture,  to  Jeremiah).
•♦  There  is  terror  on  every  side  "  (see  above,
Ter.  3,  and  also  note  on  ch.  vi.  25)  means
''eyerything  about  mo  inspires  me  with
terror."  All  my  fkmiliart  is,  literally,  all
the  men  of  my  peace;  i.e.  all  those  with
whom  I  have  been  on  terms  of  friendship
(same  phrase,  ch.  xxxviii.  22).  Watehed  for
my  haltixig;  i.e.  either  laid  traps  for  mo  or
waited  for  me  to  commit  some  error  for  them
to  take  advantage  of.  The  phrase,  *'  my
halting,"  is  borrowed  (?)  from  Ps.  xxxv.  15;
xxxviiL  18  (Hebrew).  Re  wrill  be  enticed;
viz.  to  say  something  on  which  a  charge  of
treason  can  be  based.

Ver.  11.— Ai  a  mighty  terrible  one;  rather,
as  a  formidable  voarrior.  They  shall  not
prerau.  This  was,  in  fact,  the  Divine
promise  to  Jeremiah  at  the  outset  of  his
ministry  (ch.  i.  19).  Tor  they  shall  not
profper;  rather,  hecaxise  they  hate  not  proe-
pered,

Ver.  12.— Repeated,  with  slight  variations,
from  ch.  xi.  20.

Ver.  13. — In  the  confidence  of  faith  Jere-
miah sees  himself  already  delivered.  Ho
writes  in  the  style  of  the  psalmists,  who


constantly  pass  from  the  language  of  prayer
to  that  of  fruition.

Vers.  H — 18. — Jeremiah  curses  the  day
of  his  birth.  The  passage  iH  a  further
development  of  the  complaint  in  ch.  xv.  10,
and  stands  in  no  connection  with  the  con-
solator;^  close  of  the  preceding  passage.
There  is  a  very  striking  parallel  in  Job  iii.
3 — 12,  and  the  question  cannot  be  evaded.
Which  is  the  original?  It  is  difficult  to
believe  that  Jeremiah  copied  from  an  earlier
poem.  Deep  emotion  expresses  itself  in
language  suggested  by  the  moment;  and,
even  a^r  retouching  his  discourses,  Jere-
miah would  leave  much  of  the  original
expression.  But  impressions  of  thia  sort
cannot  be  unreservedly  trusted.  The  argu-
ment from  parallel  passages  is  only  a
subsidiary  one  in  the  determination  of  the
date  of  books.

Ver.  16.— As  the  eities  which  the  Lord
oyerthrew.  It  is,  so  to  speak,  the  "  technical
term"  for  the  destruction  of  Sodom  and
Gomorrah  which  Jeremiah   employs.     So
deeply  imprinted  was  the  tradition  on  the
Hebrew  mind,  that  a  special  word  was  appro-
priated to  it,  which  at  once  called  up  thoughts
of  the  awful  justice  of  God  (see  Gen.  xix.
25 ;  Isa.  i.  7  (?) ;  xiii.  19 ;  Amos  iv.  11 ;  Deut.
xxix.  23  [22] ;  ch.  xlix.  18 ;  1.  40V.    The  cry
...  the  ihonting.    The  cry  of  the  besieged
for  help;    the  shouting  of  the  suddenly
ap]^ariug  assailants  (comp.  ch.  xv.  8).


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1 — 6.— Pas/iwr.  At  length  the  smouldering  opposition  to  Jeremiah  breaks  out
into  open  persecution.  Hitherto,  though  he  has  been  answered  by  words  (ch.  xviii.  18)
and  threatened  with  yiolence,  no  overt  act  has  been  committed.  Secret  enemies
have  elaborated  dark  designs,  which  are  alarming  enough  but  come  to  no  serious
issue*  But  now  violent  hands  are  laid  upon  the  prophet;  and  it  is  not  an  obscun^
band  of  illegal  conspirators  who  contrive  evil  against  him,  but  the  official  head  of  tho
temple  guards  formally  anests  him  and  executes  upon  him  the  recognized  punishment
of  a  criminal.  This  action  bears  testimony  to  tho  excitement  produced  by  the  burning
words  of  the  discourse  in  the  valley  of  Hinnom.  So  overawing  were  the  utterances  of
the  prophet  that  no  one  dared  to  touch  him  then  ;  but  when  he  confirmed  them  in  the
temple  courts  the  circumstances  were  altered,  and,  either  from  alarm  or  from  rage,
Pa^ur,  the  chief  of  the  temple  police,  laid  hold  of  the  prophet  and  brought  him  to
severe  punishment.  The  conduct  of  Fashur  and  the  fate  that  is  threatened  him  deserve
our  careful  examination.

I.  The  oonduot  op  Pashub.  1.  Pashur  was  sl  priest  and  of  high  rank  in  the  service
of  the  temple  of  Jehovah.  Such  a  man  should  have  been  able  to  recognize  a  true
prophet  of  Jehovah  as  his  fellow-servant.  Yet  he  was  first  in  persecuting  him.
Official  religious  positions  are  no  guarantees  for  spiritual  wisdom.  But  it  is  scandalous
when  the  professed  leaders  of  the  Cbiuch  are  foremost  in  resisting  the  declaration  ol
Divine  truth  and  the  execution  of  the  will  of  God.  2.  Pashur  was  a  responsible  officer
o/fuitice.  Such  a  man  should  not  have  allowed  himself  to  be  carried  away  by  a  flood
of  popular  indignation,  influences  of  class  jealousy,  or  impulses  of  personal  spite.
Judicial  crimes  are  always  the  most  atrocious  crimes.  They  poison  justice  at  its  very
fbuntain,  they  abuse  high  trustS|  they  disorganize  society,  and  all  this  in  addition  to


OH.  XX.  1—18.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  465


the  inherent  wickedness  of  the  acts,  which  is  the  same  in  all  who  commit  them  with
similar  motives.  3,  Pashur  replied  to  the  words  of  prophecy  with  the  arm  of  farce.
He  could  not  answer  Jeremiah,  so  he  attempted  to  repress  him.  Unable  to  refute  the
arguments  of  the  prophet,  he  endeavoured  to  restrain  the  utterance  of  them.  Here  we
recognize  the  folly,  the  injustice,  and  the  cruelty  of  such  persecution :  the  folly ^  for  to
silence  a  voice  is  not  to  destroy  the  unpleasant  truth  it  declares ;  injustice,  for  nothing
can  be  more  unfair  than  to  do  violence  to  a  man  for  uttering  words  which  we  cannot  deny
to  be  true ;  and  cruelty,  for  it  is  a  man's  duty  to  make  known  what  he  believes  to  be
important  truths.

II.  The  threatened  fate  of  Pashur.  Jeremiah  stood  alone,  unpopular  and  unpro-
tected. Pashur  was  strong  in  the  powers  of  office  and  supported  by  the  sentiment  of
the  country.  Yet  the  prophet  was  more  than  a  match  for  the  officer.  Sensitive  and
naturally  retiring,  Jeremiah  was  bold  in  the  conviction  of  truth,  the  sense  of  duty,  and
the  consciousness  of  the  Divine  presence.  Pashur's  policy  proved  a  failure.  Jeremiah
was  not  silenced  by  scourge  and  stocks.  Either  Pashur  had  too  much  sense  of  justice
left  to  retain  the  prophet  in  prison,  or  ho  feared  that  such  an  action  would  be  recognized
as  illegal  and  damage  his  position,  or  he  thought  the  severe  but  brief  corporal  punish*
ment  of  the  prophet  sufficient.  Jeremiah  was  set  at  liberty  on  the  day  after  he  was
arrested,  and  then,  instead  of  cautiously  measuring  his  language,  he  bolaly  threatened
Pashur  with  a  share  of  suffering  in  the  coming  calamity.  This  was  peculiar.  Pashur
was  not  to  cxijcrience  the  worst,  but  to  witness  it.  1.  He  was  to  be  punished  by/eor.
Tyrants  are  cowards.  A  long-enduring,  harassing  fear  is  more  painful  to  bear  than  a
short,  sharp,  visible  trouble.  Many  evils  are  worse  in  prospect  than  in  experience.
Courage  and  active  resistance  may  make  the  facing  of  danger  easy,  but  to  be  haunted  with
vague  terrors,  powerless  to  do  anything  to  avert  them,  lawied  and  stung  by  innumerable
ideal  and  therefore  intangible  torment^,— this  is  torture.  You  can  fight  a  foe  of  flesh  and
blood,  but  a  fear  is  like  a  ghost.  The  blow  aimed  at  it  passes  through  it,  and  it  remains
still  glaring  at  its  victim  till  his  blood  freezes  with  horror.  May  God  deliver  us  from
the  awful  punishment  of  an  eternal  fear  I  2.  He  was  to  see  the  words  of  the  prophet
verified  by  experience.  He  tried  to  silence  the  warning  voice ;  he  could  not  stay  the
approaching  evil.  They  who  have  rejected  warnings  will  be  dismayed  and  confounded
when  they  see  them  realized  in  facts.  3.  He  was  to  witness  the  calamity  of  his  nation.
Probably  there  was  a  genuine  love  of  his  country  in  this  man.  His  attack  on  Jeremiah
may  have  been  influenced  by  a  sincere  desire  for  the  national  welfare.  But  if  so  he  had
put  his  country  before  his  God.  His  punishment  would  come  in  the  humiliation  of  his
nation.  Patriotism  is  no  excuse  for  resisting  the  will  of  God.  The  godless  patriot
may  be  punished  by  seeing  the  troubles  that  arc  brought  on  his  country  through  its
irreligion.

Ver,  7. — Enticed  and  overpowered  by  Ood»  I.  God  entices  his  servants.  Jeremiah
had  been  led  to  undertake  the  prophetic  mission  with  assurances  of  success  and  victory
(ch.  i.  17 — 19),  and  he  was  surprised  when  he  met  onlv  with  contempt  and  apparent
failure.  So  others  have  entered  God's  service  with  much  confidence  in  the  joy  and  but
little  anticipation  of  the  trouble  it  would  bring.  There  is  really  nothing  either  false  or
unkind  in  this.  1.  Nothing  false  ;  for  (1)  though  all  the  future  trouble  is  not  predicted,
its  approach  is  not  denied ;  we  arc  simply  left  in  the  dark  in  regard  to  it ;  and  (2)
ultimately  the  servants  of  God  will  triumph,  and  the  trouble  will  be  all  forgotten  and
swallowed  up  in  victory.  But  if  the  darker  experience  were  clearly  revealed  at  first,  it
would  throw  such  a  shadow  over  the  future  that  the  ultimate  triumph  would  be
scarcely  thought  of,  and  thus  a  more  false  idea  of  the  whole  course  of  life  would  be
produced  than  tliat  which  comes  from  hiding  from  us  some  of  its  darker  scenes.  2.
Nothing  unkind.  If  the  trouble  must  be  faced  it  need  not  be  anticipated  (Matt.  vi.
34).  If  God  hides  approaching  trouble  from  us  he  does  not  forget  to  provide  against  it.
He  takes  the  burden  of  it  upon  himself,  so.  that  when  the  trouble  is  revealed  the  grace
to  endure  it  is  also  revealed.  Moreover,  on  the  whole,  the  blessedness  of  the  service  of
God  vastly  outweighs  its  distresses.  If  the  alarm  of  the  latter  drove  us  from  the  service,
the  result  would  be  loss  to  ourselves.  It  is,  therefore,  merciful  in  God  to  condescend  to
our  weakness  and  thus  lead  us  on  through  partial  views  of  truth  until  we  are  strong
enough  to  grasp  the  whole.    Still,  when  the  prospect  of  trouble  is  revealed  it  should  b#

JEREMIAH.  2  H


466  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,     [en.  xx.  1—18.


faced.  Something  of  this  must  be  considered  by  us  or  we  may  make*  an  ignominious
failure.  Jeremiah  was  warned  of  opposition.  Christ  discouraged  rash^  heedless
enthusiasm  (Luke  ix.  57,  58),  and  bade  men  count  the  cost  of  his  service.

II.  God  overpowers  ras  servants.  Jeremiah  complained  that  he  was  not  only
enticed  but  prevailed  upon  by  God  by  force.  "  Thou  art  stronger  than  I."  God  never
forces  a  man's  will.  But  still  he  hedges  a  man  in  and  uses  such  influences  upon  him
that  many  of  the  experiences  of  his  life  may  bo  ascribed  to  God's  supreme  power  rather
than  to  the  man's  spontaneous  action.  If  these  result  in  shame  and  apparent  failure,
as  they  often  may,  at  first  sight  it  seems  as  though  God  had  been  dealing  harshly  with
his  servant.  1.  But  we  should  remember  that  it  is  a  blessed  thing  to  suffer  for  Ood,
It  is  an  honour  to  be  a  true  martyr  to  God's  will  (Matt.  v.  10, 11).  2.  Wo  should
understand  that  good  purposes  are  being  efifected  through  such  sufl'ering.  It  is  not
without  its  end.  God  is  honouring  us  as  he  glorifies  his  Son,  by  making  us  the
sacrifices  for  the  accomplishment  of  a  blessing  to  mankind.  3.  We  should  believe  that
a  great  reward  in  heaven  will  compensate  for  tho  patient  endurance  of  these  brief
earthly  troubles.  Without  this  tho  problem  would  be  inexplicable.  With  it  all  wrongs
will  bo  righted.

Ver.  9.— 2%e  burning  fire  of  inspiration.  I.  These  words  are  a  proof  op  the
GENUINE  INSPIRATION  OF  THE  PROPHET.  He  Is  uot  thinking  of  couvincing  others  of  the
fact  of  his  inspiration,  but  simply  pouring  out  the  trouble  of  soul  that  it  occasions.
The  ingenuousness  of  tho  utterance  and  the  indirect  allusion  to  the  inspiration  make
them  the  more  valuable.  Then,  the  words  of  prophecy  gained  the  prophet  no  power
nor  popularity,  but  only  contempt  and  persecution.  It  is  impossible  to  study  the
language  of  Jeremiah  without  feeling  that  he  was  overwhelmed  with  the  consciousness
of  a  Divioo  spiritual  influence,  while  the  dignity,  vigour,  and  mora]  sublimity  of  his
prophecies  make  it  unreasonable  to  suppose  that  he  was  a  self-deceived  fanatic.

II.  These  words  are  an  illustration  of  the  powerful  influence  of  inspiration.
This  was  not  a  mere  illumination ;  it  was  a  power.  The  inspired  prophet  was  not
simply  gifted  with  insight  into  truth ;  he  was  swayed  by  the  might  of  it.  He  did  not
feel  at  liberty  to  deal  with  it  as  he  pleased,  to  mediate  on  it  by  himself,  to  suppress  it,
to  utter  it  only  as  his  convenience  was  suited ;  it  was  his  master,  a  hand  laid  heavily
upon  him,  a  fire  burning  in  his  bosom,  that  must  come  out.  The  same  experience  is
felt  by  all  men  who  have  spiritual  relations  with  truth.  They  do  not  hold  truth ;  they
find  that  truth  holds  them.  That  inspiration  influences  the  will  as  well  as  the  intellect
is  strikingly  proved  in  the  case  of  Balaam  (Numb.  xxiv.).  The  reason  of  this  is
found  in  the  real  presence  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  Revelation  is  by  inspiration,  and
inspiration  is  the  breathing  of  God's  Spirit  into  a  man's  spirit,  so  that  he  becomes
possessed  by  it.  Tho  tremendous  importance  of  the  truth  revealed  increases  this  com-
pulsion of  utterance.  Jeremiah  had  revealed  to  him  no  barren,  abstract  dogmas,  no
trivial  religious  notions,  no  empty  answers  to  curious  prying  questions  of  little  practical
moment,  but  terrible  truths  concerning  his  people  and  their  highest  interests.  How
could  he  hide  such  truths  as  we  have  seen  he  had  been  entrusted  with  ?  If  God  speaks
it  must  be  to  utter  important  words.  The  burden  of  them  urges  their  custodian  to
declare  them.

HI.  These  words  are  an  evidence  of  the  painful  effects  of  inspiration.  No
man  need  desire  to  be  a  prophet  from  motives  of  worldly  ambition  or  selfish  pleasure.
The  high  privilege  of  inspiration  carries  with  it  danger,  toil,  anguish,  terror.  Prophecy
has  its  Gethsemanes  and  its  Gblgothas.  If  its  mission  is  faithfully  carried  out  it  leads
to  the  cross.  If  this  is  faithlessly  abandoned  the  prophet  is  consumed  with  inward  fires.
Inspiration  is  no  substitute  for  mental  labour,  no  excuse  for  intellectual  indolence.  On
the  contrary,  it  rouses  tho  whole  soul,  quickens  its  energies,  and  works  them  to  weari-
ness.  In  so  far  as  any  of  us  are  possessed  in  varying  degrees  by  spiritual  infiuences  wo
shall  find  the  Word  of  God  a  fire  within  us,  which  burns  till  we  have  discharged  Uie
mission  it  brings.

Vers.  10,  11.^^  prophet  persecuted  by  spies,  I.  The  persecution  by  spies.  1,
CJonsider  the  persons  persecuting.  (1)  They  were  mean  and  weak.  Their  names  aro
not  given  \  wo  know  little  of  their  characters  and  actions ;  yet  tho  despicable  conduct


cn.xr.l— 18.]      THE  BOOK  OP  THE   PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  467

here  ascribed  to  them  proctums  tbcm  to  have  been  of  low  and  shallow  natures.  Only
sach  can  pky  the  part  of  a  spy.  Yet  these  men  could  trouble  Jeremmh.  A  spy  can
persccuto  a  prophet.  A  gnat  can  sting  a  lion.  Mean  and  despicable  creatures  that  can
do  little  good  have  conMdursblc  power  of  doing  harm.  This  fact  ia  humiliating  to  our
common  numan  nature,  and  it  shows  the  great  need  of  a  Providence  to  roatrain  the
outrages  of  wickedness  which  are  so  easily  executed.  (2)  They  were  numerotit.  The
prophet  stood  alone  beset  on  e<rery  side  with  malicious  spiea.  How  difficult  to  be
faithful  in  that  drcndful  solitude  of  a  crowd  of  unsymnathizing  persons!  (3)  They
were  Jeremiah's  familiar  acquaintanea.  Bcligious  ana  political  difTerencea  separate
the  best  of  friends.  When  a  man's  own  near  acquaintances  turn  against  him  the  very
ground  he  stands  upon  aecms  to  be  breaking  away  from  beneath  his  feet.  Such  men
have  iKCuliar  power  for  barm,  because  (a)  thoy  have  been  trusted  and  (b)  they  know  the
weak  places  in  a  man's  nrmour.  2.  Consider  the  chafacter  of  the  persecution.  The
persecution  of  spies  must  have  been  peculiarly  harassing.  (1)  It  was  not  optn.  It  is  bo
much  easier  to  meet  a  frank  foe  in  the  field  than  to  cope  with  the  secret  devices  of  apiea.
(2)  It  muEt  have  been  tainted  toith  untruth.  Theapy  would  hear  enough  to  misnnder-
Etitnd,  and  would  unconsciously  misrepresent  Id  the  effort  to  make  his  report  conuslent
and  telling.  The  "  whispering  "  would  heighten  the  colour  of  every  tale  as  it  passed
from  ono  to  another.  (3)  It  was  perpelml  The  spies  were  always  on  the  watefa,
ready  to  take  advantage  of  the  first  unguarded  moment.  (4)  It  was  malieioui.  The
Epics  were  eager  for  Jeremiah's  halting,  hoping  to  entice  him  to  some  mistake.

II.  Thk  RGi'uaB  FEOU  THIS  PED3EcnTiOK.  Jeremiah  found  his  refuge  in  Ood.  1.  He
could  do  BO  because  he  was  innocent  and  because  he  was  sufibring  in  the  lervice  of  Ood.
How  happy  to  be  able  thus  fearlessly  to  challenge  the  arbitration  of  God  between  our-
selves and  our  detractors  I  2.  The  help  of  Ood  is  sought  because  be  knowi  all.  He
sees  "  the  ruins  and  the  heart."  If  the  spy  is  watchruT,  with  bis  prying  looks  capable
of  ticeing  only  the  surface  of  things  and  with  only  partial  views,  and  listening  only  to
catch  up  broken  framaents  of  speech  to  distort  and  misrepresent,  God  is  righteously
watchfulofo/f  that  his  creatures  say  and  do.  3,  The  help  of  Ood  is  trusted  in  hecauso
he  is  "  a  mighty  terrible  one."  "  The  God  is  a  man  of  war."  The  mi^ht  and  majeaty
of  God — so  terrible  to  the  godless — are  the  refuge  of  his  people.  It  should  be  remeroberM
by  all  of  us  that  God  is  actively  concerned  with  human  affairs,  and  in  his  providence,
without  requiring  what  we  call  "  miracle,"  can  frastrato  the  devices  of  the  wise  and
defeat  the  oBurta  of  the  strong,

Ver.  13. — Thankigiving  for  future  hhssingt.  I.  We  mat  db  thanktui.  fob  bliws-
i^cGS  KOT  TET  KEcKivED.  Jeremiah  closes  his  prayer  with  praise.  Ko  sooner  has  he
asked  for  God's  help  than  ha  feels  so  assured  of  receiving  it  that  he  anticipates  it  in
imagination,  and  breaks  forth  into  grateful  song  as  though  ne  were  already  enjoying  it.
This  is  a  proof  of  genuine  faith.   Faith  makes  the  absent  seem  near  and  the  future  appear

firesent  (Heb.  si.  t).  It  influences  our  whole  being — the  imagination  among  other
acuities — BO  that  it  enables  us  to  conceive  the  good  thing  trusted  for  so  vividly  and
so  confidently  that  the  thought  of  it  affects  the  mind  just  as  strongly  as  if  we  saw  the
object  with  our  eyes  and  grasped  it  in  our  bands.  Such  an  effect  is  a  test  of  the
earnestness  and  faith  of  prayer.  Some  people  could  not  be  more  surprised  than  by
receiving  the  exact  answer  to  their  prayers.

II.  Tub  pull  nsLivBaAKCE  fbou  all  harh  ib  a  futubb  dlebsiko  fob  which  wb
MAT  BB  OBATEFOL,  1.  It  IS  n  fulure  bteumg.  Jeremiah  was  not  delivered  immedialely.
Ilia  life  was  beset  with  danger  to  the  end.  After  the  time  to  which  our  text  refers;  ho
met  with  worse  trouhlea  than  any  that  had  hitherto  befallen  him.  The  Christian  must
not  expect  a  sudden  and  perfect  escape  from  ali  distress  and  temptation  the  moment  he
prays  to  God  for  help.  Perfect  deliverance  can  only  come  with  the  conquest  of  the  last
enemy,  death.  "Nowia  our  salvation" — our  perfect  deliverance— "nearer  than  when
we  first  believed"  (Rom.  siii.  11),  hut  it  is  not  yet  enjoyed.  2.  It  is,  nevertheless,
a  blessing  for  which  we  may  be  truly  thankful  at  ance.  For  it  la  positively  asanred
to  tbe  Christian.  The  heir  of  a  great  inheritance  may  r^oice  in  his  prospects,  thoogb
fur  the  present  ho  is  in  want.  But  earthly  pleaaurss  of  nope  are  checked  fay  tern  of
possible  disappointment.  The  buds  may  be  nipped  by  frost;  tbepromlalog  young
may  break  down  before  achieving  any  great  «o»>    MevertheleH  Ood  la  too  por-


468  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,     [ch.  xx.  1—18.


as  well  as  too  faithful,  to  fail  in  fulfilling  his  promises.  Therefore  we  should  anticipate
the  praises  of  heaven  on  earth,  sing  the  songs  of  Zion  in  the  strange  land,  and  enjoy
the  vision  of  the  celestial  city  from  Beulah  heights  though  valleys  of  humiliation  and
waters  of  death  may  lie  between.

III.  It  is  a  good  thing  to  express  oub  gratitude  for  future  blessings.  1.  All
gratitude  should  find  utterance  in  praise.  The  grateful  heart  should  rouse  the  singing
voice.  Of  all  feelings  thankfulness  should  be  the  last  to  be  mute.  We  may  pray  for
mercy  in  secret  communion  with  Grod ;  we  should  utter  praise  as  a  public  testimony
to  others  and  as  an  uncontrollable  gladness  that  must  relieve  itself  in  song.  2.  The
utterance  of  praise  for  future  blessings  is  an  assurance  of  our  faith.  It  will  react
upon  us  and  strengthen  faith.  It  will  be  a  solace  for  the  dark  hours  that  may  yet
intervene  before  the  enjoyment  of  the  anticipated  good.

Vers.  H — 18. — Jeremiah  cursing  tJie  day  of  his  hirth,  I.  Trouble  may  lead  a  good
>f  AN  to  the  verge  OF  DESPAIR.  Jeremiah  was  a  prophet,  a  good  man,  a  man  of  faith,
A  man  of  prayer.  Tet  he  cursed  the  day  of  his  birth.  Jeremiah  was  not  without  pre-
cedents for  his  conduct.  Not  to  mention  Jonah,  whose  character  is  by  no  means
exemplary  (though,  poor  man,  he  may  have  been  good  at  heart),  the  patient  Job  and
the  courageous  Elijah  had  both  regarded  existence  as  a  curse,  and  cried  passionately  for
death.  Jeremiah  had  great  provocations  to  despair.  His  mission  seemed  to  be  a  failure ;
his  old  friends  had  become  spies  in  league  with  his  inveterate  foes ;  he  stood  alone,  watched,
maligned,  hated,  cruelly  misjudged.  We  cannot  be  surprised  that  his  patience  broke
down.  Though  impatience  and  a  yielding  to  despair  are  proofs  of  weakness,  they  are
far  less  culpable  thian  unfaithfulness.  Many  would  have  quietly  declined  the  tasks
which  Jeremiah  manfully  performed,  though  they  led  him  to  the  verge  of  despair.  It
must  be  noted  that,  though  the  prophet  cursed  the  day  of  his  birth,  he  did  not  nee  from
the  mission  of  his  life ;  though  he  longed  for  death,  he  did  not  commit  suicide.  From
his  experience,  (1)  the  sorrowful  may  learn  that  deeper  depths  of  sorrow  have  been
traversed  than  any  they  are  in,  and  yet  the  light  has  been  reached  on  the  further  side ;
(2)  the  desponding  may  see  how  good  men  have  been  near  despair  before  them,  and  so
be  encouraged  by  knowing  that  their  despondency  is  not  a  sin  of  fatal  unbelief.

IL  It  is  foolish  and  wrong  for  a  man  to  curse  the  day  of  his  birth.  He
may  be  a  good  man  who  falls  into  despair,  still  his  despair  is  a  failing.  This  condition
of  Jeremiah  must  be  distinguished  from  that  of  Simeon,  Simeon  was  ready  to  depart
when  his  life's  work  was  finished  and  at  God's  time.  His  prayer  was  one  of  placid
submission  to  the  will  of  God  ^Luke  ii.  29).  But  Jeremiah  bad  not  finished  his  life's
work ;  life  itself  was  regarded  by  him  as  an  evil ;  his  despair  was  contrary  to  a  spirit
of  resignation  to  the  Divine  wilL  Jeremiah's  language  should  also  be  distinguished  from
that  of  St.  Paul  when  he  expressed  his  longing  to  "  depart  and  be  with  Christ"  (Phil.
3.  23).  The  apostle  was  inspired  with  a  hope  of  heaven,  the  prophet  moved  only  by  a
loathing  of  life;  the  apostle  was  willing  patiently  to  remain  and  do  his  work,  the
prophet  felt  impatient  of  life.  1.  Such  conduct  iafooiish,  for  the  whole  value  of  life  ia
thus  judged  by  one  hasty  thought  in  a  mood  of  gloom  and  distress.  Life  is  too  large
and  multifarious  to  bo  estimated  in  this  way.  There  are  recuperative  energies  in  all  of
us  beyond  what  we  can  imagine  in  our  moments  of  weakness.  Besides,  if  the  present
Is  dark,  who  knows  what  the  future  will  produce  ?  2.  Such  conduct  is  wrong,  vVe  are
not  the  judges  of  our  own  lives.  To  despair  is  to  complain  of  the  justice  of  God.  ITie
mistake  of  Jeremiah's  hasty  impatience  is  apparent  when  we  consider  the  value  of  his
life.  Jeremiah's  life  worthless  I  Why,  it  was  the  most  valuable  life  of  the  age.  There
may  be  persons  of  whom  it  can  be  said  that  it  were  better  for  those  men  if  they  had
never  been  bom.  But  these  are  not  the  men  who  are  usually  most  ready  to  despair  of
their  lives.  The  despondent  may  take  courage  from  the  mistake  of  Jeremiah,  and
know  that  when  they  think  their  lives  most  worthless  they  may  really  be  of  most
service.

Ill,  The  Christian  has  strong  inducements  not  to  curse  the  day  of  his  birth.
Jeremiah  lived  before  the  light  and  grace  of  Christianity  had  been  bestowed.  We
should  be  without  excuse  if,  while  enjoying  higher  advantages,  we  imitated  his  despair.
1.  Christianity  sheds  light  on  the  purpose  of  sorrow.  This  was  a  profound  mystery
to  the  Jew.    Christ  has  shown  us  th^  blessedness  of  sorrow,  the  glory  of  the  cross,  the


CH.  XX.  1— la]      THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PHOPHET  JEREMIAH.  469


utility  of  sacrifice.  2.  Christianity  brings  new  grace  to  help  in  the  endurance  of  sorrow.
Christians  have  the  example  of  the  suffering  Christ,  the  sympathy  and  healing  of  the
great  Physician  and  the  new  baptism  of  the  Spirit,  to  help  them  to  endure  the  baptism  of
sorrow,  3.  Christianity  reveals  fresh  Rround  for  confidence  in  Qod  in  the  darkness  of
trouble.  God  is  seen  as  our  Father.  His  will  must  be  wise  and  good.  AH  life  must  be
wisely  ordered  by  him.  Thus  we  are  taught  to  bend  submissively  to  the  higher  will
that  we  cannot  understand.  4.  Christianity  inspires  hope  in  the  final  triumph  over
trouble.  It  lifts  the  veil  from  eternal  things  and  makes  known  the  **  far  more  exceeding
and  eternal  weight  of  glory."  It  assures  us  that  no  true  life  can  ultimately  fail,  that
no  true  man  lives  in  vain,  that^  though  evil  may  vaunt  itself  in  the  present,  ultimately
truth  and  right  shall  triumph.


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.
Vers.  1 — 3. — 17ie  hehauiour  of  tJie  wicked  towards  the  truth,    I.  They  BEOABD  the

TRUTH  AND  ITS  MINISTERS  AS  THEIR  GREATEST  ENEMIES.      If  PashUT  had  kuOWn  better

he  would  have  refrained  from  such  exhibitions  of  temper.  The  prophet  would  then
have  been  accounted  the  greatest  benefactor  of  his  country.  Not  the  soldier  on  the
battle-field  nor  the  statesman  in  the  councils  of  empire  could  have  rendered  so  signal
a  service  as  Jeremiah  did  in  simply  but  persistently  telling  the  truth.  Much  of  what
he  said  was  patent  to  every  honest  observer.  By  saying  what  he  did  the  prophet  did
not  bring  into  existence  that  which  did  not  exist  before ;  and,  if  it  really  existed,  it  was
better  that  it  should  be  recognized  and  reckoned  with.  The  evils  he  denounced  were
the  real  enemies  of  the  country,  and  not  those  who  pointed  them  out  and  suggested
their  reform.  It  is,  however,  unpleasant  to  the  carnal  mind  to  have  its  faults  and  sins
exposed.  With  many  the  calamity  is  not  that  evil  should  be  done,  but  that  it  should
be  found  out.

II.  They  are  not  scrupulous  as  to  the  means  they  employ  to  silence  them.
He  '*  smote  Jeremiah  the  prophet,  and  put  him  in  the  stocks."  These  means  of  punish-
ment were  at  hand,  and  he  used  them  at  once.  It  was  legal  power  used  illegally,  or
law  employed  to  the  detriment  of  righteousness.  Passionate  hatred  is  shown  bv  the
whole  course  of  action.  Could  anything  else  be  expected  of  those  who  tried  to  suovort
righteousness?  They  must  needs  do  it  unrighteously.  Even  the  condemnation  of
Christ  was  legal  only  in  appearance.

III.  The  behaviour  of  the  opponents  of  the  truth  is  frequently  condemned
by  its  own  inconsistency  and  vacillation.  "  It  came  to  pass  on  the  morrow,  that
Pashur  brought  forth  Jeremiah  out  of  the  stocks."  1.  The  course  dictated  hy  passion
is  seen  to  he  impolitic  and  foolish,  2.  The  guilty  intention  is  weakened  by  the  outcries
of  conscience.  It  is  this  conscience  which  makes  cowards  of  us  all— or  heroes.  Hero
it  led  to  vacillation,  which  discredited  the  policy  to  which  Pashur  was  already  com-
mitted, and  made  its  author  ridiculous.  This  is  one  of  the  reasons  why  men  can  do
nothing  against  the  truth.  It  shines  by  its  own  light  and  confounds  the  machinations
that  have  been  wrought  in  darkness.  3.  Truth  has  a  powerful  ally  in  the  bosoms  qfita
worst  enemies,

IV.  Opposition  to  the  truth  is  certain  to  fail.  "Then  said  Jeremiah  unto
him,"  etc.  (vcr.  3).  The  prophet  is  only  the  more  vehement  and  enthusiastic.  Ill-timed
antagonism  to  his  message  has  provoked  him  to  coin  a  nickname  for  Pashur,  which
linked  the  impending  judgment  inseparably  with  his  memory.  It  was  a  bad  eminence
richly  deserved.  He  was  to  be  the  refutation  of  himself,  to  see  all  his  predictions
falsified,  and  to  reap  the  curses  of  those  he  had  deceived  as  they  perished  in  their  sins.
How  often  in  his  disgraceful  exile  he  must  have  wished  he  had  let  the  messenger  of
God  alone  (Acts  t.  38,  39)  !^M.

Vers.  8 — Q.'^Magor^Missabib;  or,  the  fate  of  a  false  prophet,  Tho  person  here
mentioned  cannot  with  certainty  be  identified.  He  will  the  better  serve  as  a  type
and  representative  of  his  kind.  There  is  no  age  or  country  that  has  not  had  ui
Pashur.

L  Th£  iktluence  he  ex£BCI8EI>»    1.  Its  character*    Absolute  and  despotlo.    Al


470  TUE  BOOK  OP  TUE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,      [ch.  xx.  1—18.


the  sugfjjcstion  of  his  own  evil  heart.  Capable  of  destroying  civil  rights  and  character
itself.  The  whole  civil  and  sacred  machinery  of  the  land  was  at  his  disposal.  The
public  trusted  him.  The  state  of  things  condemned  by  Jeremiah  it  was  his  immediate
iDtcrcst  to  support,  and  in  turn  ho  could  rely  vi\x)n  official  support.  He  identifies
himself  with  the  ruling  party  and  becomes  its  representative  and  mouthpiece.  Vested
rights,  traditional  religion,  etc.,  are  his  watchwords,  because  he  owes  everything  to
them.  2.  IJow  it  was  acquired.  Family  connection — "  the  son  of  Immer  the  priest."
Not  by  striving  to  reform  abuses,  but  by  fostering  and  upholding  the  stattts  quo.  He
who  was  so  oblivious  to  the  wrongs  of  which  the  prophet  six)ke  could  not  have  been
scrupulous  as  to  the  means  by  which  he  rose  to  position  and  influence.  Oriental  cor-
ruption and  intrigue  had  doubtless  had  their  part  in  securing  his  elevation.  (**  Pashur  "
probably  means  "extension,"  "pride,"  "eminence.")  3.  How  it  teas  employed.  Hastily,
on  the  passionate  impulse  of  the  moment.  Without  regard  to  the  essential  justice  of
the  case.  And  when  the  error  is  discovered  no  true  repentance  or  effort  at  amends  is
visible.    Cf.  the  time-serving  policy  of  Agrippa  (Acts.  xxvi.  32).

II.  The  character  and  destiny  he  earned.  By  making  himself  the  champion
of  apostate  Judah,  and  insulting  the  prophet  of  God,  he  is  sentenced  to  the  same  fate,
but  in  a  jxjculiarand  aggravated  degree.  1.  Jt  would  be  his  fortune  to  he  looked  upon  as
the  representative  and  embodiment  of  the  system  of  falsehood  which  had  ruined  his
country.  He  who  prophesied  falsely  will  be  justly  punished  by  such  an  association.
Instead  of  saying,  **  It  was  Moloch  or  Astarte  that  deceived  us,"  the  victims  of  the
common  disaster  will  say,  **  It  was  the  prophet  of  these  false  gods  who  led  us  astray."
How  readily  does  j^rsonal  influence  acquire  such  a  representative  character!  There  are
many  evil  forces  and  influences  at  work  in  society,  the  state,  the  Church,  etc.,  which
would  cease  to  exist  were  it  not  for  their  accidental  connection  with  some  personage
who  becomes  their  advocate  or  their  bulwark.  2.  Uis  character  and  influence  wotdd
he  exposed.  The  assurances  he  had  given  would  one  by  one  bo  falsified  by  the  fulfil-
ments of  Jeremiah's  predictions.  Instead  of  being  honoured  and  looked  up  to,  he  would
become  a  loathing  and  a  byword.  He  would  outlive  his  credit,  his  self-esteem,  and
his  happiness.  Shunned  by  others,  ho  would  bo  unable  to  trust  himself.  Each  fresh
catastrophe  would  deepen  his  disgrace  and  remorse.  A  "  terror  round  about "  would  bo
the  name  he  would  earn.  3.  Ilis  exemption  from  immediate  destruction  wotUd  hut
enhance  his  punishment.  Like  the  criminal  obliged  to  stand  in  the  dock  and  hear  all
the  counts  of  his  indictment  made  good  by  the  evidence  of  witnesses,  he  should  outlive
the  first  effects  of  the  national  ruin,  see  all  his  statements  falsified,  bear  the  reproach  of
his  own  wicked  lies,  and  yet  linger  on  when  life  had  ceased  to  be  desirable.  There  is  a
grotesqueness  about  this  punishment  that  would  make  it  ludicrous  were  it  not  so  sad
and  awful.  A  more  severe  punishment  could  hardly  be  conceived.  And  yet  it  is  not
more  than  Pashur  deserved.  Would  that  our  modern  "  prophets  of  lies  "  could  be  com-
pelled to  witness  the  consequences  of  their  advice  and  example  I  A  modified  degree  of
this  exjierienco  has,  indeed,  been  the  sentence  inflicted  upon  many  a  good  man.  But
Christ  takes  up  the  entail  of  sin  and  breaks  it.  Wo  may  do  better  than  to  stand  by
and  sec  the  evil  consequences  of  former  folly;  it  is  for  us  to  strive  to  rectify  them.
So  the  past  may  be  retrieved  and  the  evil  days  redeemed  by  those  who  have  been
servants  of  sin  "  turning  many  to  righteousness." — M.

Vers.  7 — 18. — The  sorrow  and  joy  of  God^s  servant.  There  are  many  such  photo-
graphs of  the  iimer  heart-life  of  God's  people.  It  is  the  touch  of  nature  which  brings
them  near  to  us.  The  words  and  work  of  Jeremiah  become  more  living  and  influential
when  we  witness  his  spiritual  struggles.

I.  The  spiritual  necessity  of  his  position  is  alternately  complained  of  akd
ACQUIESCED  IN.  The  saint  cannot  always  continue  amidst  his  highest  experiences.
There  are  ups  and  downs,  not  only  cf  our  actual  outward  circumstances,  but  of  our
inward  spiritual  states.^  Do  not  condemn  Jeremiah  until  you  are  able  to  acquit  your-
self. The  heavenly  mind  is  not  formed  easily  or  at  once.  There  is  an  inward  cross  in
every  true  heart,  upon  which  it  must  needs  "  die  daily."  But  "  the  powers  of  the
world  to  come"  ever  tend  to  increase  their  hold  upon  the  believer.  This  alternation
of  mood  and  feeling  is  a  necessary  accompaniment  of  spiritual  growth.  Some  day  the
heart  will  bo  fixed.    "  The  reproach  of  Christ "  will  then  bo  esteemed  "greater  riches


CH.XX.1— 18J      THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  471

than  the  treasures  of  E^pt.'*    This  is  what  wo  should  strive  after— inward  oneness
of  heart  and  purpose  with  our  Master.

II.  His  EXPERIENCE  IS  TRANSITIONAL.    1.  FroM  douU  to  faith    (Vers.  11, 12.)    2.
From  sorrow  to  joy.    (Ver.  13.)    3.  One  day  the  struggle  will  end  in  triumph, — M,

Ver.  9. —  Why  God's  servants  labour  on,    "Then  I  said,  I  will  not  make  mention,"
etc.    It  was  under  no  small  provocation  that  Jeremiah  uttered  these  words.    It  was  in
no  fit  of  mere  indolence  or  infidelity  that  he  cried, "  I  will  not  make  mention  of  God,  nor
speak  any  more  in  his  Name."    He  had  stretched  out  his  hand,  but  the  people  to  whom
he  was  sent  refused ;  ho  had  called,  but  they  would  not  answer.    And  this  had  been  their
wont  persistently,  until  he  was  weary,  utterly  weary,  and  out  of  heart,  and  then  it  was
he  spoke  as  we  read  here  and  declared  he  would  try  no  more.    If  any  one  be  inclined
to  judge  him  harshly,  let  us  but  read  the  story  of  his  life — a  story  most  sad,  yet  glorious
too,  so  far  as  the  grace  of  GK)d  and  the  true  honour  of  his  servant  are  concerned ;  but  yet
a  sad  story,  and  one  which,  when  we  have  read  it,  will  most  assuredly  check  all  dis-
position to  censure,  with  anything  like  severity,  the  deeply  tried  servant  of  God  who
in  his  utter  weiriness  said  he  would  speak  no  more  in  the  Name  of  God.    Now,  all  of
us  who  are  familiar  with  our  Bibles  or  who  know  anything  of  the  way  in  which  those
who  labour  for  God  often  fail,  will  know  that  Jeremiah  by  no  means  stands  alone  in
his  sense  of  hopelessness  and  weariness  in  his  work.    We  remember  Moses  (Exod.  v.
22 ;  Numb.  xi.  11) ;  and  how  Elijah  faltered  beneath  his  burden  (1  Kings  xix.  4);  and
John  the  Baptist  (Matt.  xi.  3) ;  and  even  the  holy  Saviour  himself  (John  xii.  29  ;  Luke
XX ii.  42).    Such  is  the  stress  which  doing  the  will  of  God  amongst  wicked  men  puts
upon  the  human  spirit ;  no  wonder  that  it  well-nigh  gives  way.    From  the  experience,
then,  of  our  Saviour  and  of  so  many  of  his  servants  we  must  all  of  us  who  are  his
servants  lay  our  account  with  manifold  aud  often  great  discouragements,  and  yet  more
with  being  tried  by  the  temptation  on  account  of  these  discouragements  to  abandon
our  work  altogether  and  to  speak  no  more  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord.    Now,  where  is  the
spint  that  will  resist  this  temptation ^  that  will  prevent  the  half-formed  resolve  to  cease
endeavour  from  being  wholly  formed  and  carried  out  ?    There  is  such  a  spirit.    This
strong  temptation  may  be  and  has  been  resisted  again  and  again.    What  is  the  secret
of  Christian  constancy  and  steadfastness  in  the  work  of  the  Lord  ?    We  have  the  answer
in  this  verse.    However  much  any  of  God's  servants  may  be  tempted,  as  Jeremiah  was,
to  give  up  his  work,  he  still  will  not  do  so  if,  as  was  the  case  with  Jeremiah,  "the
Word  of  the  Lord  is  in  his  heart  as  a  burning  fire  shut  up  in  his  bones ; "  then  ho  will
be  **  weary  with  forbearing,"  and  he  will  find  that  he  cannot  stay.    Even  as  Elihu  (Job
xxvii.  18),  .who  said,  "  I  am  full  of  matter,'*  etc. ;  and  as  Peter  (Acts  iv.  20),  and  Paul
(Acts  xvii.  6;   xviii.  5;    1  Cor.  ix.   16);  and  our  Saviour  (Luke  ii.  49;   xii.  50).
In  all  these  utterances  we  have  the  expression  of  that  spirit  which  alone  can,  but  surely
will,  bear  up  the  servant  of  God  amid  all  his  difficulties  and  hold  him  steadfast  to  his
duty  in  spite  of  every  discouragement.    But  dropping  all  metaphor,  let  us  inquire  into
this  excellent  spirit  which  renders  such  service  to  the  tried  and  desponding  soul.    It
does  exist.    The  records  of  the  mission  work  of  the  Church  at  home  and  abroad  will
furnish  not  a  few  instances  of  men  and  women  whoso  hearts  the  Lord  hath  touched,
and  who,  moved  by  this  Divine  impulse,  have  felt  themselves  constrained  to  bo  up  and
doing,  to  penetrate  the  spiritual  darkness  around  them,  and  to  resist  the  power  of  the
devil  everywhere  present.    Under  the  influence  of  this  holy  zeal,  such  servants  of  God
have  looked  upon  the  heathen,  the  degraded,  the  vile,  not  with  the  natural  eye  alone.
That  revealed  to  them  only  a  foul  mass  of  vice  and  cruelty,  sensuality  and  all  human
degradation.    From  such  scenes  and  people  nature  turns  away  and  would  let  them
alone.    But  amid  and  beneath  all  this  moral,  spiritual,  and  physical  repulsiveness,  the
ardent  soul  of  God's  servant  sees  jewels  which  may  be  won  for  Christ,  spirits  which
may  be  regenerated  and  restored.    His  eye  looks  right  on  to  what,  through  the  grace
of  the  gospel,  these  degraded  ones  may  become;  and  absorbed,  swallowed  up  by  a  holy
Christ-like  love,  he  determines  to  spend  and  be  spent  in  bringing  to  bear  on  that  mass
of  sin  and  evil  the  power  of  that  gospel  which  has  done  so  much  already  and  which  is
•*  the  power  of  God  imto  salvation  unto  every  one  that  believeth."    **  The  Word  of  (Sod
has  been  in  their  heart  as,"  etc.     There  have  been  times  in  our  history  when  tw  have
known  somewhat  of  this  sacred  impulse  which  fired  the  soul  of  the  prophet  Jeremlab.


472  TUK  BOOK  OP  TllK  rUOPllKT  JEREMIAU.      [en.  xx.  1—18.


Have  wc  nut  known  seasons  when  tlic  impulse  was  strong  on  us  to  say  something  for
God  ?  It  has  come  when  wo  have  been  i)reaching  or  teaching,  and  we  have  broken
jiway  from  the  cahr,  not  to  say  cohi,  tone  in  which  wc  have  been  going  on,  and  have
spoken  to  those  before  us  words  which  have  come  up  from  the  very  depths  of  our  soul,
and  we  have  seen  in  the  countenances  of  our  children  or  our  congregation  that  they,
too,  "were  conscious  that  they  were  being  spoken  to  in  a  manner  other  than  usual,  and
that  portion  of  the  day's  lesson  or  the  sermon  has  been  remembered  when  all  the  rest
has  been  forgotten.  And  sometimes  this  impossibility  of  keeping  silence  for  God  has
come  to  us  on  the  railway  Journey,  in  the  quiet  walk  with  a  friend  or  child,  or  in
social  converse,  or  in  the  casual  talk  with  a  stranger  into  whose  society  we  may  have
been  for  a  while  thrown ;  and  then  we  have  felt  we  must  say  something  for  God,  and  it
has  been  said  feebly,  weakly  perhaps,  but  nevertheless  the  testimony  has  been  borne,
the  endeavour  has  been  made.  God  would  not  let  us  be  silent ;  we  could  not  stay  from
speaking;  necessity  was  laid  upon  us.  These  are  in  their  measure  instances  of  the  same
^irit  as  that  which  moved  the  prophets  and  apostles  of  old,  though  in  a  far  less  degree.
But  it  is  evident  how  well  it  would  be  for  us  all  who  bear  Christ's  name  to  possess  in  far
larger  measure  than  we  do  this  holy  and  irresistible  impulse.  The  spur  is  what  we  too
often  need  ;  how  rarely  the  bridle !  not  the  holding  back,  but  the  urging  on.  Whence,
then,  comes  this  sacred  and  mighty  Spirit,  under  whose  influence  so  many  of  the  saints
of  God,  even  as  the  Son  of  God,  have  laboured  on  in  spite  of  all  discouragement  and
suffering  and  wrong?  It  is  evident,  from  the  history  of  Jeremiah  and  of  all  other
faithful  servants  of  God,  that  the  method  by  which  God  impelled  them  to  their  work
was  by  bestowing  on  them  such  gifts  as  these —

I.  The  knowledge  of  sin.  For  he  who  has  this  knows  how  appalling  is  the  evil
under  which  men  live.  To  him  this  present  world  and  its  inhabitants  present  but
one  aspect,  that  of  being  under  a  yoke  which  no  man  can  bear.  He  has  seen  the  vision
of  sin,  and  it  was  a  sight  so  terrible  that  he  can  never  forget  it.  It  haunts  him,  for  he
knew  it  was  no  dream  of  the  night,  but  a  dreadful  reality  of  the  day  and  of  every  day.
It  was  no  chimera,  no  fiction  of  his  own  imagination,  but  a  real  and  awful  power  that
has  ruled  men  and  still  is  ruling  over  men.  What  scenes  of  beauty  it  has  destroyed  !
What  fearful  misery  it  evermore  produces.  There  was  the  garden  of  Eden  in  all  its  love-
liness, with  every  fair  flower  and  noble  tree,  with  luscious  fruit  and  every  herb  fit  for
the  food  of  man  or  beast ;  it  was  all  beautiful,  so  beautiful  that  even  God  pronounced
it  "  very  good."  And  as  chief  over  this  fair  inheritance  there  were  the  first  created  of
our  race,  in  form  and  mind  and  soul  harmonizing  with  the  beauty  and  goodness  that
was  all  around  them.  How  blest  their  condition !  But  the  scene  changes.  We  see
no  longer  the  garden  of  Eden,  but  a  weary  land  bearing  thorns  and  briars ;  we  see,  too,
haggard  and  careworn  people  bending  in  sore  agony  over  the  murdered  corpse  of  their
child,  murdered  by  his  own  brother,  their  eldest  born.  What  hath  wrought  this
change  ?  An  enemy,  without  doubt,  but  what  enemy  ?  It  is  sin — the  heart  of  man
in  rebellion  against  God.  The  Bible  is  full  of  scenes  like  these — misery,  shame,  ruin,
death,  all,  all  the  work  of  sin.  And  sin  reigns  yet,  as  he  to  whom  God  has  given  to
see  the  vision  of  sin  knows  full  well.  Who  can  recount  its  doings?  Who  can
describe  the  woes  it  causes  ?  What  ocean  would  be  vast  enough  to  receive  the  tears
it  has  made  to  flow?  What  colours  dark  enough  to  depict  the  moral  and  spiritual
evil  it  has  engendered  ?  And  then  the  sorrows  of  the  souls  that  are  lost,  the  doom
of  the  accursed  of  God— the  antitype  of  that  which  Jesus  describes  as  the  "  fire  that  is
never  quenched,  and  the  worm  that  never  dies."  It  is  the  vision  of  this, — the  appalling
evil,  past,  present,  and  most  of  all  to  come,— that  has  risen  up  before  the  soul  of  him
who,  beholding  those  around  him  under  its  dominion,  finds  himself  utterly  unable
to  forbear  telling  them  of  the  Word  of  the  Lord  to  the  end  that  they  may  be  saved.
No  wonder  that,  in  view  of  these  dread  calamities,  "  the  Word  of  the  Lord  was  in
his  heart,"  etc.

II.  But  a  further  knowledge  has  been  given  to  him  to  contribute  to  this  same  result.
Were  the  vision  of  sin  all,  utter  and  dreadful  despair  would  be  alone  left  to  him;  bat  it
is  not  all.  Along  with  the  knowledge  of  sin  there  is  given  to  him  the  knowledge  op
THE  GOSPEL  in  the  Word  of  the  Lord.  It  is  brought  home  to  his  soul,  by  evidence  he
cannot  question,  that  the  gospel  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  the  sure  remedy  for  all
human  ilh    He  has  a  deep  conviction  that  trust  in  the  Kedeemer,  reliance  on  hia


cu.  XX.  1-18.]     TUE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  473

atoning  death  and  sacrifice,  will  bring  peace  to  the  conscience,  purity  to  the  mind,
strength  to  the  will,  hope  to  the  heart,  and  final  and  eternal  acceptance  in  the  presence
of  God,  Very  much  of  what  it  can  do  for  the  soul  in  this  life  he  knows  it  has  done
for  him,  and  he  has  seen  it  do  yet  more  for  others.  He  sees,  not  only  the  need  of  such
great  salvation  as  God  has  provided  in  Christ  Jesus  for  guilty  and  miserable  man,  but
also  the  fitness  and  adaptation  and  the  actual  power  of  this  grace  of  God.  Such  is  his
conviction  concerning  the  Word  of  the  Lord,  the  gospel  of  the  grace  of  Grod;  and,  thus
persuaded  of  its  power  td  bless  and  save  mankind,  he  hears  on  all  sides,  and  coming  up
from  all  depths  of  sorrow  and  sin,  the  imperative  summons  to  him  to  tell  of  this  Saviour
and  this  salvation,  and  by  no  means  to  keep  silence.  From  every  hospital  and  asylum
where  the  victims  of  vice  and  sin  are  reaping  what  they  have  sown ;  from  every  prison
cell ;  from  every  place  where  the  ruined  in  health,  in  fortune,  in  character,  and  in  soul
are  dragging  out  the  remainder  of  their  wretched  life ;  from  every  gallows-tree ;  from
every  ini penitent's  grave;  and  from  the  sinner's  hell; — there  comes  the  solemn  adjuration
which  the  apostle  so  keenly  felt,  "  Woe  is  unto  me  if  I  preach  not  the  gospel  I "  And
not  the  sins  alone,  though  they  most,  but  the  sorrows  of  mankind  also,  utter  forth  the
same  appeal.  For  the  gospel  of  the  Saviour  is  a  healing  balm  to  the  sick  at  heart,  oil
and  wine  to  the  wounded  spirit;  it  is  the  gospel  of  consolation,  of  hope, and  of  peace  to
the  sorrowing  myriads  of  mankind.  Feeling  all  this,  how  can  it  be  otherwise  that  "the
Word  of  the  Lord  is  in  his  heart  as,*'  etc.  ?

III.  But  there  is  one  other  gift  needed  to  the  full  ix)ssession  of  that  Divine  Spirit
which  finds  expression  in  our  text.  It  is  the  knowledge  op  Chbist.  By  this  is
meant,  not  merely  an  acquaintance  with  and  belief  in  the  truths  concerning  our  Lord's
nature  and  work,  nor  even  simply  such  belief  in  him  as  will  save  the  soul,  but  such
knowledge  of  him  as  is  involved  in  deep  love  to  him  and  sympathy  with  those  objects
on  which  his  heart  is  set.  To  know  Christ  as  your  own  loving  Saviour,  who  has  died
for  you,  redeemed  and  pardoned  and  accepted  you,  and  given  you  an  inheritance
amongst  his  own ;  to  know  him  by  oft  and  earnest  communion  with  him,  by  toil  and
sufiering  for  him ; — this  is  that  knowledge  of  Christ  which,  when  added  on  to  that
other  knowledge  of  sin  and  of  the  gospel  of  which  we  have  already  spoken,  will  lead  to
that  irresistible  desire  to  serve  him  which  his  true  servants  have  so  often  felt  and
shown.  The  love  of  Christ  must  be  the  constraining  motive,  and  then  there  will  come
love  and  labour  for  the  souls  for  whom  Christ  died.  1  do  not  know  that  it  is  possible
for  us  to  have  a  deep  regard  and  concern  for  those  whom  we  have  never  seen  or  known
unless  we  see  in  each  individual  member  of  mankind  one  of  the  brethren  or  sisters  of
Christ,  part  of  Christ's  body,  one  of  his  members,  he  being  the  Head  of  all.  If  this  be
believed,  then  we  see  that  the  soul  of  each  of  these  men  and  women,  though  they  may
be  of  different  clime  and  colour,  and  be  altogether  strange  and  perhaps  repulsive  to  us,
still,  the  soul  of  each  of  them  is  as  precious  to  Christ  as  our  own,  and  as  capable  of
honouring  and  as  ready  to  honour  him  as  was  our  own.  This  love  of  Christ  will  lead
to  the  love  of  Christ  in  all  men,  for  indeed  he  is  in  all  men,  and  this  will  beget  a
Divine  charity  which  will  be  ever  a  mighty  motive  to  seek  their  good.  Then  shall  wo
possess  the  mind  which  was  in  him  who  wept  over  Jerusalem  and  prayed  for  his  very
murderers.  Then  shall  we  willingly  bear  disappointment,  reproach,  loss,  or  aught
other  ill  which  may  come  to  us  as  we  toil  on  in  our  Master^s  service.  Here,  then,  in
this  deep  knowledge  of  sin,  of  the  gospel,  and  of  Christ,  have  we  the  secret  of  that
burning  zeal  which  consumed  the  heart  of  Jeremiah  and  of  others  like  minded  to  him.
May  -God,  of  his  mercy,  give  to  all  who  labour  in  his  cause  this  holy  and  quenchless
zeal !  Labouring  under  such  impulse,  let  come  what  will  to  us  in  this  world  as  the
result  of  our  toil,  we  will  still  labour  on.  Blessed  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  let  thy  Word
be  in  our  hearts  as  a  burning  fire,  so  that  when  tempted  to  forbear  making  mention  of
thee  and  speaking  any  more  in  thy  Name,  we  may  be  weary  of  such  forbearing  and
feel  we  cannot  stay. — C.

Vers.  14 — 18. — "7s  U/e  worth  living  f  **  Here  is  one  who  evidently  thought  it  was
not.  How  bitterly  he  grieves  over  the  fact  that  he  was  ever  brought  into  existence  I
It  is  an  illustration,  as  has  been  pointed  out,  of  the  maddening  force  of  suffering.^  It
drives  a  man  to  the  use  of  wild  language.  For  great  sufferings  generate  great  passions
in  the  soul    They  rouse  the  whole  man  into  action.    And  these  great  passions  thxis


474  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,     [ch.  xx.  1— 18.


roused  often  become  irrepressible.  Many  men  of  no  ordinary  meekness  and  self-control
are  overborne  at  such  times — Jeremiah,  Job,  Moses,  Elijah ;  and  then  they  express
themselves  in  unmeasured  terms.  It  is  as  a  flood  broken  loose.  Its  rushing,  foaming
waters  pour  along,  and  over  all  that  lies  in  their  path.  Hence  it  is  that  the  prophet
here,  not  content  with  cursing  the  day  of  his  birth,  utters  wild  execrations  on  the
messenger  tliat  announced  it  to  his  father.  Thus  passionately  does  he  protest  against
the  misery  and  misfortune  of  his  life.  Nor  has  he  been  alone  in  such  dark  thoughts
concerning  life.  Cf.  Job  iii.,  where  the  patriarch,  in  almost  identical  language,  deplores
(he  fact  of  his  birth.  And  Moses  prayed  that  God  would  kill  him  out  of  hand  (Numb,
xi.  15) ;  and  Elijah  (1  Kings  xix.  4).  And  there  have  been  a  whole  host  of  men  who
have  in  the  most  emphatic  way  affirmed  their  belief  that  life  is  not  worth  living  by
refusing  to  live  it  any  longer — Saul,  Ahithophel,  Judas,  and  the  suicides  of  all  a^es
declare  this.  And  many  more  who  have  not  given  this  dread  proof  of  their  sincerity
have  yet  maintained  the  same.  Sophocles  said,  "  Not  to  be  born  is  best  in  every  way.
Once  born,  by  far  the  better  lot  is  then  at  once  to  go  back  whence  we  came."  Goethe,
as  he  drew  near  his  end,  notwithstanding  that  all  men  regarded  his  career  as  one  which
bad  been  highly  favoured  and  very  enviaole,  is  reported  to  have  said,  "  They  have  called
me  a  child  of  fortune,  nor  have  I  any  wish  to  complain  of  the  course  of  my  life.  Yet  it  has
been  nothing  but  sorrow  and  labour ;  and  I  may  truly  say  that  in  seventy-five  years  I
have  not  had  four  weeks  of  true  comfort.  It  was  the  constant  rolling  of  a  stone  that
•was  always  to  be  lifted  anew.  When  I  look  back  upon  my  earlier  and  middle  life  and
consider  how  few  are  those  left  who  were  young  with  me,  I  am  reminded  of  a  summer
visit  to  a  watering-place.  On  arriving  one  makes  the  acquaintance  of  those  who  have
already  been  some  time  there  and  leave  the  week  following.  This  loss  is  painful  Now
one  becomes  attached  to  the  second  generation,  with  which  one  lives  for  a  time  and
becomes  intimately  connected.  But  this  also  passes  away  and  leaves  us  solitary  with  the
third,  which  arrives  shortly  before  our  own  departure,  and  with  which  we  have  no  desire
to  have  much  intercourse.**  And  the  gloomy  musings  of  IJamlet,  "  To  be  or  not  to  be,
that  is  the  question,"  is  another  example,  which  has  been  followed  by  the  whole
tribe  of  those  who  arc  called  pessimists,  of  representing  life  as  a  curse  rather  than  a
blessinpj.  And  we  cannot  deny  that  there  are  many  now  whose  lot  in  life  is  so  sad,
that,  if  we  looked  only  at  the  present,  we  could  not  vindicate  the  justice  and  still  less
the  goodness  of  God  in  regard  to  them.  And  the  terrible  lottery  that  life  is,  a  lottery
in  which  the  blanks  far  outnumber  the  prizes,  goes  far  to  account  for  the  apathetic
indifference  with  which  the  deaths  of  such  myriads  of  children  are  regarded.  If  all
parents  knew  for  certain  that  the  lot  of  their  children  would  be  bright  or  mainly  so,
how  much  more  jealously  would  their  lives  be  guarded  and  avenged  1  And  there  are
many  men  who,  whilst  they  stammer  out  some  kind  of  thanksgiving  for  their  '*  preser-
vation and  all  the  blessings  of  this  life,"  fail  utteriy  to  feel  thankful  for  their  "creation."
They  would  much  rather  not  have  been.  So  that  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  there  is
a  larger  and  it  is  to  be  feared  an  increasing  number  of  people  who  are  desperately  or
despairingly  asking  the  question  which  stands  at  the  head  of  this  homily,  and  which
this  passionate  protest  of  the  prophet  against  his  birth  has  suggested.  But  how  is  all
this?    Let  us  therefore  inquire —

I.  What  are  the  causes  of  such  cheerless  thinking  and  speaking  ?  We  reply :
1.  Temperament  has  a  great  deal  to  do  with  it.  Some  are  bom  with  a  sunny,  bright,
cheerful  disix)sition ;  let  them  go  down  on  their  knees  and  give  God  thanks  for  it,  for
it  is  a  better  gift  to  them,  more  surely  secures  their  happiness,  than  thousands  of  gold
and  silver.  But  others  are  bom  with  a  temperament  the  very  reverse — pessimists
from  their  mothers'  womb,  always  seeing  the  dark  side  of  things,  melancholy,  fore-
boding, complaining.  It  is  a  positive  disease,  and  calls  for  mingled  pity  and  careful
discipline.  2.  But  more  often  still  it  is,  the  continued  and  sore  pressure  of  sorrow.
Bo  was  it  with  Job  and  here  with  Jeremiah.  And  it  is  still  the  bitter  disappoint-
ments, the  miserable  failures,  "  the  slings  and  arrows  of  outrageous  fortune,"  trouble
upon  trouble,— these  are  prolific  sources  of  the  sad  views  of  life  of  which  we  speak.  3.
But  most  of  all,  «m— moral  evil— is  the  real  cause.  The  "  philosophy  of  melancholy  "
finds  its  true  parentage  there.  It  is  this  which  causes  that  unrest  and  torment  of
soul,  that  hiding  of  the  face  of  God  and  uplifting  of  the  scourge  of  conscience,  which
throws  all  life  into  shadow  and  blots  out  the  sun  from  the  heavens.    It  is  this  which


en.  XX.  1—18.]     THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  475

leads  it  to  be  said  of  and  felt  by  a  man,  that  it  had  been  better  for  him  that  he  hod
never  been  born.

II.  What  is  the  truth  on  the  matter  ?  Such  conclusion  as  that  of  the  pessimist
never  can  he  rights  for  our  deepest  moral  instincts  teach  us  that,  if  life  were  more  of
a  curse  than  a  blessing,  he  who  is  the  God  of  mercy  and  righteousness  would  never
have  given  it ;  and  that  if  it  were  better  for  a  man  that  he  had  not  been  born,  he
would  not  have  been  born.  Life  must  be  a  blessing  or  it  would  not  be  given,
1.  Universal  instinct  says  so.  See  how  men  cling  to  life.  The  law  of  self-
preservation  is  the  first  law  of  nature.  2.  The  summing  up  of  the  hours  in  which
we  have  enjoyed  peace  and  satisfaction,  and  of  those  which  have  been  darkened  by
pain  and  distress,  would  probably  in  all  lives  show  a  vast  balance  on  the  side  of  the
former.  Let  any  one  honestly  make  the  calculation  for  themselves.  3.  The  laws
of  life  all  tend  to  produce  happiness;  "In  keeping  of  Grod's  commandments  there
is  great  reward."  4.  (Jood  men  who  may  have  held  dark  views  of  life  have  done
80  "  in  haste,"  as  Ps.  xxxi.  22  and  cxvi.  11 ;  or  through  looking  at  one  point  of  their
lives  only  (cf.  the  joyous  praise  of  ver.  13 ;  what  a  contrast  and  contradiction  to  the
verses  that  follow  !) ;  or  in  ignorance  of  the  truths  and  consolations  which  the  gospel
has  introduced,  ^'hus  was  it  with  Job  and  the  Old  Testament  saints  generally,  and,
of  course,  with  all  pagan  nations.  5.  Evil  men  are  not  to  be  credited.  They  have
themselves  poisoned  life's  springs,  and  whilst  they  speak  truly  enough  concerning
their  own  life,  they  are  not  competent  witnesses  as  to  what  all  life  is.  6.  Then  *'  it  is
the  Lord  that  hath  made  us,  and  not  we  ourselves,"  and  because  of  this  all  lands  are
bidden  "be  joyful  in  the  Lord"  TPs.  qX  Now,  how  could  this  be  if  life  were  not  worth
living  ?  7.  The  future  which  Cnrist  has  prepared.  Let  that  be  taken  into  view  and
oHcpstio  ccedit.  Life  is  but  the  porchway  to  that  which  is  life  indeed — the  eternal
life.  Our  afflictions,  therefore,  which  here  we  suffer  are  light,  and  "but  for  a  moment,"
and  so,  "not  worthy  to  be  compared  with  the  glory  that  shall  be  revealed."  (1)  Then,
"Sursnm  corda,"  "Lift  up  your  hearts;"  "-Be  joyful  in  the  Lord,"  because  he  hath  made
us.  (2)  Bo  reticent  of  such  thoughts  and  words  as  these  of  Jeremiah.  How  far  short
ho  falls  of  the  apostles  of  our  Lord!  They  rejoiced  in  tribulations.  Jeremiah  had
better  not  have  so  spoken  ;  better  have  copied  him  who  said,  "  If  I  speak  thus  I  shall
offend  against  the  generation  of  thy  children."  (3)  Pray  to  be  kept  from  temptation
so  to  speak  or  even  think,  for  such  temptation  is  haid  to  overcome. — C.

Ver.  9. — A  burning  fire  within.  The  mental  condition  of  the  prophet  here  recalls
the  beginning  of  his  ministry.  Just  as  he  then  shrank  from  taking  its  resjwnsibility
upon  him,  so  now  he  is  ready  to  throw  it  up  in  despair.  His  life  seems  to  him
altogether  a  failure.  He  is  a  disappointed  and  defeated  man.  He  will  "make  mention
of  the  Lord  no  more,  nor  speak  any  longer  in  his  Name."  Many  an  earnest  ministering
spirit  has  felt  like  this,  overborne  by  the  force  of  the  world's  evil,  impatient  of  the  slow
progress  of  the  kingdom  of  truth  and  righteousness.  But  the  prophet  cannot  so  easily
throw  up  his  work,  God,  as  at  the  beginning,  is  "  stronger  than  he,"  and  holds  him
firmly  in  his  grasp ;  holds  him  to  his  office  and  ministry  by  the  force,  not  so  much  of
outward  circumstance  as  of  a  spiritual  persuasion,  by  the  strong  necessity  of  an
inward  law.    "  His  Word  was  in  my  heart  as  a  burning  fire,"  etc.    Note  here—

I.  The  inherent  property  of  the  Word  op  God  as  a  livinq  power  in  the
60UL8  of  men.  "  A  burning  fire "  (see  also  ch.  xxiii.  29).  All  Divine  truth  pos-
sesses a  quality  that  may  justly  be  thus  represented.  The  Law  that  came  by  Moses
was  a  "  fiery  Law,"  of  which  the  thunders  and  lightnings  of  Sinai  were  the  appropriate
associations  (Deut.  xxxii.  2).  And  even  the  inspiration  of  gospel  truth  was  fitly
symbolized  by  "  cloven  tongues  of  fire  "  (Acts  ii.  3).  There  is  not  only  light  but  heat,
not  only  a  flame  but  fire.  The  moral  effects  are  manifest.  1.  Melting.  Icy  coldness,
hard  indifference,  stubborn  self-will,  impenitence,  etc., — ^all  these  are  softened  by  the  fire
of  God  when  it  really  enters  into  the  soul.  A  tender  sensibility  is  thus  created  that
prepares  it  to  receive  all  Divine  impressions.  2.  Kindling,  Heaven-tending  affections
are  awakened  by  it  that  did  not  exist  before.  Latent  germs  of  nobler  and  better
feeling  are  quickened  into  new  life.  There  is  no  limit  to  the  holy  energies  that  may
be  developed  in  our  nature  by  the  inspiration  of  the  truth  of  Qod,  In  this  good  sense
we  may  say,  "  Behold,  how  great  a  matter  a  little  fire  kindleth ! "    3.  Consuming,    It


476  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,     [ch.  xx.  1— 18.


destroys  everything  in  us  that  is  destructible.  All  that  is  false,  selfish,  sensual— all
that  is  "of  the  carlh,  earthy" — has  in  it  the  elements  of  dissolution  and  decay,  and
cannot  resist  the  purging,  purifying  force  of  Divine  truth.  The  dross  is  consumed  that
the  precious  gold  may  come  forth  in  all  its  beauty  and  purity.  The  solid  grain  is
quickened  into  fruitful  life,  the  chaff  is  burnt  up  as  with  unquenchable  fire.

II.  The  oDLioATioN  IT  IMPOSES.  "  I  was  weary  with  forbearing,"  etc.  (see  cb.
vi,  11).  The  soul  of  the  prophet  was  acted  upon  by  a  force  that  overcame,  not  only
the  weakness  of  his  fears,  but  the  strength  of  his  self-will  and  of  every  motive  that
would  induce  him  to  relinquish  his  worK.  Every  earnest,  heroic  servant  of  truth  is
sensible  of  this  inward  constraint.  It  is  the  constraint  (1)  of  a  Divine  call,  (2)  of  a
masterful  conscience,  (3)  of  conscious  power  to  benefit  others,  (4)  of  an  instinctivo
impulse  to  communicate  the  good  one^  own  soul  possesses.  St.  Paul  stands  before
US  as  a  conspicuous  example  of  this  when  he  says,  "  For  if  I  preach  the  gospel,  I  have
nothing  to  glory  of:  for  necessity  is  laid  upon  me,"  etc.  (1  Cor.  ix.  16).  Ihere  is  no
clearer  mark  of  a  noble,  Christ-like  nature  than  submission  to  such  a  constraint  as
this.— \V.

Vers.  1 — 6. — A  changed  name  and  a  drea'lful  doom.  The  change  here,  from  Pajihur
to  Magor-Missabib,  reminds  us  of  other  divinely  indicated  changes  of  name  in  Scrip-
ture ;  e.g,  from  Abram  to  Abraham,  from  Jacob  to  Israel,  from  Simon  to  Peter,  from
Zacbarias  to  John.  These  changes,  however,  were  indicative  of  advancement  and
honour;  were  suggestive  of  the  rise  out  of  nature  into  grace.  But  here  is  a  name
which  becomes  at  once  the  memorial  of  great  wickedness  and  of  the  sure  judgment
following  u]x>n  it.

I.  The  name  before  the  chaxge.  Whatever  doubt  there  may  be  as  to  tho
precise  signification  of  the  name  Pashur,  it  seems  quite  clear  that  tho  very  meaning
of  tho  word  had  in  it  something  jieculiarly  honourable.  The  man  himself  belonged  to
a  privileged  order  and  held  an  ofhce  of  influence  and  honour;  and  the  name  must  have
bc«n  given  to  him  because  of  something  auspicious  in  the  circumstances  of  his  birth.
An  honourable  name  is  an  advantage  to  its  bearer,  and  to  a  certain  extent  also  a
challenge.  Ho  who  bears  it  may  so  live  that  in  the  end  there  will  be  the  greatest
contrast  between  the  name  and  the  character.  A  less  suggestive  name,  one  less  pro-
vocative of  contrasts,  might  have  saved  Pashur  from  the  new  and  portentous  name
which,  once  given,  would  never  be  forgotten.  We  are  bound  to  consider  well  the
associations  which  will  gradually  gather  around  the  name  we  happen  to  bear.  Now,
at  least,  the  particular  name  has  very  little  signification  in  itself;  but  the  longer
we  bear  it  the  more  significant  it  becomes  to  all  who  know  us.  Every  time  it  is
mentioned  it  brings  to  mind,  more  or  less,  our  character.  Even  on  prudential  con-
siderations one  must  ever  become  increasingly  careful  of  what  he  does,  for  a  single
not  may  obliterate  all  the  associations  of  res^xjct  and  confidence  which  belong  to  his
name.  Instead  of  becoming,  what  every  one  may  become,  the  object  of  respect  and
confidence  to  at  least  a  few,  he  may  end  in  being  an  object  of  execration  far  and  wide.

II.  What  brought  the  change.  His  treatment  of  Jeremiah.  His  treatment  of
him,  bear  in  mind,  as  a  prophet.  We  feel  that  Jeremiah  was  not  put  in  prison  on  even
a  plausible  allegation  that  he  was  an  evil-doer.  That  ho  was  a  false  prophet  was  the
only  possible  charge  to  lay  against  him.  Now,  Pashur  must  have  known  that  he
himself  was  a  false  prophet,  sixjaking  as  God's  truth  what  was  only  the  fabrication
of  his  own  self-willed  and  deceitful  heart.  If  Jeremiah  was  speaking  falsehood,
Pashur^s  duty  was  to  convince  him  of  error,  and  show  the  people  that  he  was  either
a  fanatic  or  a  mere  impostor.  We  are  not  allowed  to  suppose  that  what  Pashur  did
he  did  from  some  excusable  outbreak  of  zeal  on  behalf  of  tho  building  of  which  he
was  custodian,  A  great  punishment  from  tho  band  of  God  always  argues  a  corre-
spondingly great  offence.  It  is  not  so  amongst  men ;  there  may  be  a  great  punishment
and  a  very  small  offence ;  sometimes,  indeed,  no  offence  at  all,  measurwi  by  the  highest
law.  But  when  God  punishes  severely  it  lets  in  light  upon  tho  character  of  him
whom  he  punishes.  Wo  know  that  Pashur  must  have  been  a  bad  man ;  we  know
it  as  well  as  if  all  his  iniquity  had  been  detailed  in  the  most  forcible  language.

III.  The  significance  op  the  change.  We  have  not  information  enough  to  give
us  the  exact  meaning  of  Fashiur ;  and  one  might  almost  think  this  was  meant  to


CH.  XX,  1-18.]       THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  477

heighten  the  certainty  as  to  the  meaning  of  Magor-Missabib.  At  present  Fashur  was
in  a  position  of  comparative  security.  If  security  can  be  claimed  for  anything  in  this
world,  it  seems  sometimes  to  belong  to  such  as  hold  official  positions.  But  with
regard  to  Pashur  all  depended  on  the  continuance  of  Jerusalem.  The  Lord's  house
where  he  was  governor  was  to  be  destroyed,  and  then  where  would  he  be  ?  Hitherto
Pashur  has  been  a  nameless  unit,  involved,  but  not  peculiarly  involved,  in  the  general
doom.  But  now  he  has  a  prediction  all  to  himself.  Henceforth  he  will  be  known,
must  be  known,  as  the  man  whom  Jeremiah  threatened  with  this  new  and  dreadful
name.  Evidently  the  name  stuck.  Some  speakers  and  writers  have  had  this  power
of  giving  names  that  stick.  It  is  not  an  enviable  oue,  and  has  often  been  cruelly  used.
But  God,  on  whose  lips  it  will  always  be  rightly  used,  can  make  it  to  serve  good
purposes.  The  best  proof  that  the  name  stuck  is  seen  in  this,  that  the  prophet's
enemies  tried  straightway  to  fix  the  name  on  him  (ver.  10).  But  everything  depends
on  who  gives  a  name.  Jeremiah's  enemies  might  speak  of  terror,  but  they  could  not
terrify.  God  both  spoke  of  terror  and  in  duo  time  brought  the  terrifying  realities
around  the  doomed  man.  There  was  nothing  at  present,  and  might  not  be  for  some
time,  to  show  what  was  coming.  But  God  can  wait.  We  have  no  doubt  that  in  due
time  Pashur  was  forced  to  the  confession  that  the  name  was  fully  justified.— Y,

Vers.  7 — 9. — A  conflict  not  to  he  avoided.  The  heart  of  the  prophet  is  here  revealed
to  us  as  the  scene  of  a  bitter  conflict  between  two  sets  of  motives ;  one  set  originating
with  the  vehement  will  of  God,  the  other  in  the  utterly  un sympathizing  dispositions
of  men.  The  prophet  makes  us  feel  that  it  is  utterly  insufficient  to  describe  his  work
simply  as  difficult.  It  is  done  amid  a  continuity  of  reproaches,  some  of  which  a  less
sensitive  man  might  not  have  felt,  but  which  were  peculiarly  irritating  to  a  man  of
Jeremiah's  sensibilities.  Generally  it  may  be  observed  that  God  did  not  send  thick-
skinned  men  to  be  his  prophets.

I.  The  divinely  proddced  conviction  under  the  force  of  which  he  began
THIS  work.  The  people  might  say,  "You  speak  irritating  words  to  us,  and  you
must  not  complain  if  we  speak  irritating  words  to  you.  Those  who  live  in  glass  houses
must  not  throw  stones."  Thus  it  is  well  for  the  prophet  to  assert  most  emphatically,
as  he  docs  in  ver.  7,  that  he  spoke  from  a  divinely  produced  conviction  of  duty,  God
impressed — as  God  alone  can  impress— certain  irresistible  considerations  on  his  mind.
Not  only  was  he  persuaded,  but  it  was  Ood  who  had  persuaded  hinu  The  reasons  for
his  prophetic  action  were  not  such  as  he  had  sought  out  and  discovered  for  himself.
God  put  them  before  him  in  their  proper  aspect,  order,  and  totality.

II.  1'he  first  painful  result  of  fidelity  to  God.  Perhaps  in  the  youthful
confidence  with  which  he  began  his  prophecies  he  would  anticipate  that  since  God  had
so  clearly  sent  him,  the  people  would  as  trustfully  and  obediently  receive  him.  But
not  all  the  genuineness  of  a  Divine  message  can  commend  it  any  more  to  the  selfish
man  who  naturally  hates  to  be  disturbed  and  threatened.  The  prophet  intimates  that
the  reception  he  met  with  was  daily,  universal,  invariable.  He  seemed  to  be  ordained
to  stir  up  the  nests  and  dens  and  hiding-places  of  every  noxious  being  amongst  men.
He  who  goes  among  hornets  and  scorpions  must  not  complain  if  he  has  to  suScr  great
agonies  from  their  venomous  sting.  vVe  are  sure,  indeed,  that  the  prophet  must  have
had  some  sympathizers,  but  the  treatment  which  caused  him  such  agony  would  also
have  the  effect  of  making  friends  keep  silent,  lest  they  might  be  the  next  to  suffer.
It  is  no  strange  thing  that  men  should  become  resentful  and  savage  under  the  home-
thrusts  of  spiritual  truth.  Men  who  love  evil  resent  even  the  gentlest  approaches  of
God  in  trying  to  take  that  evil  away.

III.  The  earlier  result  produced  by  this  intolerable  treatment  in
Jeremiah's  own  mind.  It  is  easy  to  criticize  the  prophet,  and  say  that  he  should  not
have  been  so  much  affected  by  all  these  hard  words.  But  it  was  just  the  multitude  of
them  that  made  them  intolerable.  A  man  would  be  cowardly  to  complain  of  being
stung  now  and  then  ;  but  if  he  is  to  be  exposed  to  stinging  insects  every  hour  of  the
day,  that  is  an  altogether  different  matter.  God  made  one  of  the  terrible  plagues  of
Egypt  out  of  multitudes  of  tiny  creatures,  such  as,  individually,  counted  for  almost
nothing.  Let  us  not,  then,  talk  condemningly  of  this  proposed  repression  of  the  pro-
phetic message.    He  had  reached  a  crisis  in  which|  we  may  well  believe,  Jehovah,  who


478  THE  BOOK  OF  TUB  PROPUET  JEREMIAH.       [en.  xx.  1—18.


sent  him,  was  peculiarly  near  to  him.  May  wc  not  reverently  say  that  even  as  Jesus
reached  the  inexpressible  culmination  of  his  mental  agony  in  Gethsemnne,  so  tho
prophets,  in  their  lesser  measure,  may  have  had  crises,  not  unlike  that  of  Gethsemane,
when  the  forces  arrayed  against  them  seemed  more  than  they  could  possibly  resist?
Profound  should  our  feeling  be  that  it  may  become  a  very  hard  thing  to  bear  faithful
testimony  for  God  in  nn  ungodly  world.

IV.  The  final  result.  The  risk  of  unfaithfulness  is  put  beyond  Jeremiah's
control.  Ho  is  put  between  two  great  "cannots."  He  cannot  bear  the  reproaches
of  the  people.  That  on  the  one  hand.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  he  finds  that  he  cannot
keep  unexpressed  the  message  of  Jehovah.  God  takes  his  Word  into  his  own  keeping.
The  pain  of  prophesying,  great  as  it  was,  was  less  than  the  pain  of  withholding  the
prophecy.  It  is  not  till  we  come  to  deal  with  God  that  we  learn  the  real  meaning  of
the  word  "  intolerable."  It  is  ever  a  mark  of  God*8  true  servants,  that  in  times  when  there
is  great  need  of  testimony  they  cannot  keep  silent.  Better  to  bum  at  the  stake  than
to  have  one's  true,  inner  life  burnt  up  in  resisting  God.  Paul  is  a  grand  example  of  a
man  who  was  forced  to  speak  by  the  fire  within.  Ho  could  not  bo  silent ;  he  could  not
temporize,  compromise,  or  postpone.  Luther  is  another  instance.  Those  destitute  of
the  fire  in  their  hearts  cannot  understand  those  who  have  it ;  and  therefore  it  is  the
very  height  of  ignorant  audacity  to  censure  it.  Nothing  is  more  to  be  desired,  what-
ever pain  it  may  bring  with  it,  than  that  we  should  have  God's  truth  as  a  living  and
growing  fire  in  our  hearts ;  and  in  order  to  do  this,  we  must  be  careful  not  to  quench
it  in  the  beginnings  of  its  risings  within  us. — Y.

Vers.  10 — 13. — The  name  Magor-Missabih  wrongly  applied,  I.  The  hopes  op
Jeremiah's  enemies.  We  have  seen  in  the  preceding  passage  (vers.  7 — 9)  how  the
prophet  was  incessantly  exposed  to  exceedingly  irritating  taunts  from  his  enemies;
and  how  the  jmin  of  these  taunts  in  a  measure  tempted  him  to  try  if  he  could  not
escape  the  pain  by  ceasing  to  prophesy.  Jehovah  perfectly  preserved  him  from  this
danger.  The  prophetic  fire  within  him,  divinely  kindled  and  sustained,  was  too  strong
to  be  thus  extinguished.  It  grew  more  and  more,  and  the  very  taunts  of  the  ungodly
became  as  fuel  to  make  it  burn  more  fiercely.  But  this  very  faithfulness  of  the  prophet
only  increased  his  danger  as  an  object  of  persecution.  His  enemies  will  themselves  begin
to  feel  in  danger  from  this  continual  reference  to  their  evil  doings.  Mere  mockery  has
itself  a  tendency  to  go  further.  Bengel,  referring  to  the  development  of  the  persecuting
spirit,  as  illustrated  in  the  apostolic  days,  says,  "  The  world  begins  with  ridicule  ;
then  afterwards  it  proceeds  to  quesiiomng ;  to  threats ;  to  imprisoning ;  to  inflicting
stripes  ;  to  murder  "  (see  *  Gnomon '  on  Acts  ii.  13).  Jeremian  has  already  been  for  a
night  in  prison,  and  he  knows  not  how  soon  a  longer  and  worse  imprisonment  may
come.  He  hears  threatenings  on  every  hand.  The  name  Magor-Missabib  that,  by
Divine  direction,  he  has  applied  to  Pashur,  is  retorted  on  him,  as  being,  in  the  opinion  of
his  enemies,  a  name  eminently  appropriate  to  his  present  circumstances.  So  far  as
the  human  elements  were  concerned,  his  chances  of  safety  appeared  very  poor  indeed.
His  enemies  are  numerous  and  crafty ;  and,  sharpened  by  self-interest,  they  needed  no
exhortation  to  bo  w^atchful.  Those  who  compare  these  confessions  of  the  prophet  at
difierent  times  with  the  experiences  of  Jesus  at  the  hands  of  his  enemies,  will  notice  a
remarkable  parallelism.  What  Jesus  said  with  respect  to  the  scribes  and  Pharisees  is
peculiarly  forcible  when  considered  in  the  light  of  Jeremiah's  trials :  "  Ye  are  the
children  of  them  which  killed  the  prophets  "  (Matt,  xxiii.  31).

II.  The  sufficiency  of  Jeremiah's  protection.  Here  is  the  man  of  strong  faith,
and  of  a  speech  full  of  confidence  and  calmness.  He  may  well  be  depressed ;  beset  as
he  is  with  so  much  malice,  brought  into  close  contact  with  the  worst  wickedness  of  the
human  heart.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  he  has  this  for  his  comfort,  that,  the  closer
wicked  men  come  to  him,  the  closer  he  finds  himself  to  God,  This  is  the  service  the
wicked  render  to  the  witnesses  of  God,  that,  the  more  they  persecute  them,  the  more
they  press  them  towards  the  great  Helper.  The  ungodly  little  dream  of  the  service
they  render  in  this  respect.  So  far  as  abiding  results  are  concerned,  the  spirit  of  intoler-
ance has  done  the  direct  contrary  of  what  it  was  intended  to  do.  The  purposes  of  evil
might  have  been  better  served  if  the  Church  of  Christ  had  had  an  easier  time  of  it  in
the  beginning.  He  who  is  potentially  the  mighty,  terrible  One  in  the  midst  of  his  people.


en.  XX.  1—18.]   THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.       479

needs  the  opposition  of  the  wicked  in  order  that  all  his  power  to  defend  his  people  may
be  known.  This,  indeed,  is  one  of  the  lessons  taught  by  the  sufferings  of  Jesus  even  to
death.  Darkness  was  to  get  its  hour  and  its  power,  that  so  the  Light  of  the  world  might
be  more  fully  glorified.  Never  was  it  more  emphatically  true  than  when  Jesus  was
laid  in  the  grave,  that  Jehovah  was  with  him  as  a  mighty,  terrible  One.  We  look  with
the  natural  eye,  and  we  see  a  cold  corpse  apparently  gone  the  way  of  all  flesh ;  we  look
with  the  eye  of  faith,  and  we  discern  One  standing  by  who  at  the  appointed  hour  will
raise  that  corpse,  and  make  it  the  channel  of  manifestations  of  life  such  as  were  not
possible  before. — Y.

Vers.  14 — 18. — The  prophet  cursing  the  day  of  his  birth.  It  is  very  perplexing  to
find  these  words  following  so  closely  upon  the  confidences  expressed  in  vers.  11 — 13.
And  yet  the  perplexity  is  to  some  extent  removed  when  we  recollect  how  largely  man
is  the  creature  of  his  moods.  That  he  is  bright  and  confident  to-day  may  not  hinder
him  from  being  in  the  depths  of  despjur  to-morrow.  It  is  well  for  us  to  see  how  low  a
real  and  faithful  prophet  of  God  can  sink.  One  is  reminded  at  once  of  the  similar  words
put  into  the  mouth  of  Job.  We  have  advantages,  however,  in  considering  this  expres*
sion  of  Jeremiah  which  we  lack  in  considering  the  similar  expression  of  Job.  Of  Job
we  know  nothing  except  as  the  subject  of  one  of  the  sublimest  poems  in  the  world.
What  substance  of  fact  may  have  suggested  the  poem  it  is  beyond  our  powers  to  deter-
mine. But  Jeremiah  stands  before  us  unquestionably  a  real  man,  a  prominent  character
in  the  highway  of  history.

I.  The  feelinq  that  underlies  this  tebrible  imprecation.  The  form  of  the
imprecation  is  not  to  be  too  much  regarded.  The  same  feeling  will  be  veiy  differently
expressed  in  different  languages  and  among  different  races.  What  Jeremiah  means  is
made  clear  in  ver.  18.  Just  at  this  particular  time  it  seems  to  him  that  life  has  been
nothing  but  one  huge  failure.  He  has  no  heart  to  accept  suggestions  such  as  might
mitigate  his  gloom.  He  will  not  even  allow  that  life  has  had  any  other  possibilities
than  those  of  failure  and  shame,  and  therefore  the  congratulations  attending  his  birth
were  misplaced.  The  more  we  look  into  his  language  here,  the  more  we  see  that  it  was
very  wild  and  foolish.  The  important  matter  is  that,  in  approaching  the  consideration
of  these  words,  we  should  have  a  distinct  impression  of  how  recklessly  even  a  good  man
may  talk.  A  recollection  of  Jeremiah's  utterance  here  will  keep  us  from  wondering
that  there  should  be  so  much  of  foolish  and  impious  talk  in  the  world.

II.  'J'he  fact  was  as  fab  as  possible  from  corresponding  to  the  feelino.
Wo  look  at  Jeremiah's  career  as  a  whole,  and  at  the  permanent  value  of  his  prophecies,
and  then  we  see  how  little  moods  and  feelings  count  for  just  by  themselves.  Wo  gain
nothing  by  saying  of  any  man  that  it  might  have  been  better  for  him  if  he  had  never
been  l^rn.  It  is  true  that  Jesus  spoke  thus  of  Judas,  but  we  are  not  at  liberty  to  say
what  he  says ;  and  besides,  he  was  speaking  in  the  language  of  necessary  hyperbole,  in
order  to  emphasize  the  dreadful  wickedness  of  the  traitor.  The  safe  ground  for  us  to
take  is  that  entrance  upon  human  life  in  this  world  is  a  good  thing.  Even  with  all  the
trials  of  life,  the  position  of  a  human  being  in  this  world  is  a  noble  one,  and  his  possi-
bilities for  the  future  are  beyond  imagination.  While  it  is  right  that  we  should  have
the  deepest  compassion  for  the  deformed,  the  defective,  the  infirm,  wo  must  also
recollect  that  it  is  better  to  be  the  most  deformed  of  human  beings  than  the  shapeliest
and  healthiest  of  brutes.  In  face  of  all  the  present  afflictions  of  human  nature,  one
thought  should  be  sufficient  to  brighten  them  all,  namely,  the  thought  of  how  perfectly
comprehensive  is  the  renewing  power  of  God.  Within  its  grasp  it  comprehends  the
most  imperfect  and  distorted  of  numan  organizations.  Jeremiah  was  making  the  huge
blunder  of  looking  at  things  entirely  from  the  point  of  view  of  his  own  feelings,  and  his
present  feelings.  His  actions  were  better  than  his  words.  S^xjaking  out  of  his  own
feelings,  he  talked  great  folly  and  falsehood ;  speaking  as  the  prophet  of  God,  his
utterances  were  those  of  wisdom  and  truth.  The  fact  was  that  of  no  one  belonging
to  his  generation  could  it  be  more  truly  said  than  of  him  that  his  birth  was  a  good
thing ;  good  for  the  nation,  good  for  himself,  good  for  the  glory  and  service  of  Jehovah.
We  must  not  bemoan  existence  because  there  is  suffering  in  it.  Suffering  may  be  very
protracted  and  intense,  and  yet  life  be  full  of  blessing.  Jesus  had  to  suffer  more  than
any  man.    He  shrank  from  the  approach  of  death  with  a  sensitiveness  which  we  cannot


4^


THE  BOOK  OP  THE  TROPHET  JEREMIAH,      [cu.  xxi.  1—14.


conceive,  who  have  in  us  the  mortal  taint  by  reason  of  indwelling  sin.  Nothing  recon-
died  him  to  the  thought  of  all  he  had  thus  to  endure  save  that  it  was  the  clear  will  of
God.  What  was  Jeremiah's  mental  suffering  compared  with  that  of  Jesus?  And  yet,
though  the  life  of  Jesus  was  to  be  one  of  peculiar  and  uniwiralleled  sufferings,  his  birth
bad  angels  to  announce  and  celebrate  it. — Y.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  XXI.

The  chapter  falls  into  three  parts,  two  of

which  seem  to  bo  in  some  sort  of  councction,

while  the  third  is  isolated.     First  comes  a

warning  to  the  messengera  of  Zedekiah  of

the  unfortunate  issue  of  the  rebellion  ugiiin^t

Babylon ;  this  is  followed  by  a  counsel  to

the  people  to  give  up  their  futile  rcsisUuice,

and  "  fall  away  "  to  the  Chaldeans.    The

last  four  verses  contain  an  exhortition  to

the  **  house  of  David  "  to  fulfil  their  high

duties  with   greater  conscientiousness,  for

fear  of  the  judgment  which   had  already

begun  to  tike  effect  when  the  former  part  of

this  chapter  was  written.    Compare  Zede-

kiah*8  embassy  to  Jeremiah  with  that  of

Hezekiah  to  Isaiah  on  a  similar  emergency

(Isa.  xxxvii.  2).

Ver.  1 . — Pashnr.  A  d  ifferent  Pashur  from
the  one  mentioned  in  ch.  xx.  1.  This  one
reappears  in  ch.  xxxviii.  1 ;  he  belonged  to
the  fifteenth  of  the  sacerdotal  families,
named  after  Melchiah  (comp.  1  Cliron.  ix.
12).  Zephaniah;  mentioned  again  in  ch.
xxix.  25  ;  xxxvii.  3.  He  was  of  the  priestly
family  or  class  of  Maaseiah  (comp.  1  Chron.
xxiv.  18),  and  was  next  in  rank  to  the  high
priest  (ch.  lii.  24).

Ver.  2. — Hebaohadrenar.  This  form  pre-
dominates in  Jeremiah  and  Daniel,  and  is
the  only  form  found  in  Ezekiel.  It  is,  in
fact,  the  correct  way  of  spelling  the  name,
which  is  in  Babylonian  Nabu-hudura-ufury
i.e.  **  Nebo,  protect  [or  perhaps,  *  has  mode  *]
the  crown.*'  Aooording  to  all  his  wondrous
works ;  e.g.  the  destruction  of  Sennacherib,
which  must  have  occurred  in  the  first  in-
stance to  the  minds  of  devout  Jews.

Ver.  4. — I  will  aisemble  them  into  the
midst  of  this  city ;  i.e.  1  will  compel  the
warriors  to  give  up  resistance,  and  shut
themselves  up  within  the  walls.

Ver.  7. — And  such  as  are;  rather,  left
uhich  are  left.  (There  has  been  an  obvious
error  in  the  repetition  of  *'  and.")


Ver.  9.— He  that  abideth  in  thii  oity,  eta
No  doubt  Jeremiah  often  gave  this  counsel
to  his  fellow-citizens  (comp.  ch.  xxxTiii.  1,
17),  and  it  api)ear8  from  ch.  xxxviiL  19;
xxxix.  0 ;  lii.  15,  that  many  of  the  Jews  acted
in  accordance  with  it.  Falleth;  more  dis-
tinctly, faWih  away  (as  ch.  xxxvii.  14,
Authorized  Version) ;  i.^.  goeth  over  to.

Ver.  11. — And  touching  the  house,  etc.
The  formula  with  which  this  section  is
introduced  [shows  that  it  was  attached  to
vers.  1 — 7  nt  the  same  time  as  vers.  8 — 10,
although  obviously  written  ut  a  much  earlier
period.

Ver.  12.— 0  house  of  David.  The  **  house
of  David  "  here,  as  in  Isa.  vii.  13,  means  tho
various  bnmches  of  tlic  royal  family,  tho
same,  in  fact,  which  are  called  by  courtesy
'*  kings  of  Judah  "  in  ch.  xvii.  20  (see  notejL
They  appear  from  the  present  passage  to
have  monopolized  the  judicial  function.
Deliver  him  that  is  spoiled,  etc.  The  poor
man  would  have  no  advocate  to  plead  for
him ;  in  this  case  tho  judge  was  to  see  that
he  suffered  no  injustice  in  consequence.

Ver.  liJ.— Jehovah,  standing,  as  it  were,
on  the  Mount  of  Olives,  addresses  the  piT>ud
city  beneath  him.  0  inhabitant  of  the  vml-
ley,  and  rock  of  the  plain ;  rather,  O  inhabi-
tress;  Jerusalem  is  personified  as  a  virg;in.
The  poetical  description  of  the  capital  as  a
"valley"  (the  word,  however,  signifies  a
valley  as  wide  as  a  plain)  reminds  ub  of
*•  the  valley  [or  rather,  *  ravine*]  of  vision  "
(Isa.  xxii.  1,  5);  while  **the  rock  of  the
plain  "  recalls  "  my  mountain  in  the  field  "
(ch.  xvii.  3).  So,  as  Gmf  points  out,  Baby-
lon is  called  '^  a  mountain  "  iu  metaphorical
language  (ch.  li.  25).  It  is,  however,  singu-
lar that  the  prophet  should  call  Jerusalem
a  "  valley  "  and  a  "  rock  "  in  the  same  pas-
sage. In  the  former,  perhaps,  Jeremiah  is
thinking  specially  of  the  lower  city,  and  iu
the  latter  of  Mount  Zion.  Who  shall  como
down  against  us  t  viz.  from  the  '*  hills  round
about  Jerusalem."

Ver.  14. — In  the  forest  thereof;  i.e.  in  tho
forest  of  houses  (comp.  ch.  xxii.  G,  7).


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1,  2,'^God  ccnsulted  in  vain.    I.  It  is  vain  to  seek  God's  help  without
AEPENTiNQ  OP  OUB  81K.    Zedekiah  sends  to  Jeremiah  ip  his  alarm.  But  he  gives  no  sigi>


CH.  XXI.  1—14.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  4Sl


of  repentance.  The  dread  of  coming  trouble  and  the  desire  to  escape  it  are  not  penitence ;
the  fear  of  hell  is  not  penitence.  All  men  naturally  desire  to  be  safe  from  sufifering.
But  God  will  only  deliver  those  who  also  desire  to  he  free  from  sin,  who  regret  the  evil
tbey  have  done,  not  merely  that  which  they  endure.

II.  It  is  vain  to  seek  (jod's  help  without  submittino  to  his  will.  Zedekiah
consults  GKxl  as  an  oracle ;  he  wants  information.  But  he  gives  no  indication  of  a  willing-
ness to  obey  the  command  of  God.  He  would  be  glad  of  Divine  aid  for  his  own  plans,
but  he  has  no  thought  of  yielding  himself  up  to  the  execution  of  God's  will.  Many
men  would  have  GckL  for  their  servant ;  their  prayer  is  that  Gbd  would  do  their  will*
Such  presumptuous  conduct  must  be  rebuked  by  failure.

III.  It  is  vain  to  seek  God's  help  fob  deliverance  fbom  that  which  is  moballt
KECESSABT.  There  is  a  moral  necessity  as  well  as  a  physical.  No  sane  man  would
pray  that  two  and  two  might  make  five.  There  are  ^moral  impossibilities  equally
impregnable.  A  just  God  cannot  forgive  the  impenitent.  All  that  God  does  must  be
for  the  best,  and  nothing  can  induce  him  to  turn  from  what  he  knows  is  best.  If
men  need  chastisement  God  will  give  it  them,  though  they  may  most  earnestly  desire
to  be  delivered  from  it.  It  was  good  for  the  Jews  as  a  discipline,  as  well  as  just  as  a
punishment,  that  they  should  be  carried  captive  to  Babylon.  Therefore,  even  if  all
thoughts  of  infiicting  the  penalties  of  justice  were  in  abeyance,  God's  merciful  intentions
to  his  people  would  make  their  prayers  for  escape  vain.

Vers.  8— 10.— 7%«  choice  hetween  life  and  death.  I.  The  choice  was  free.  It  was
left  to  the  Jews  to  choose  which  course  they  would  take.  Otod  has  endowed  every
man  with  freedom  of  will,  opening  up  to  him  a  vast  range  of  possibilities.  All  of  us
have  opportunities  for  choosing  life  and  blessedness  if  only  we  will  seek  them.  A
Divine  vocation  marks  out  for  us  a  course  which  we  ottght  to  follow  in  preference  to
the  fancies  of  our  own  inclination,  and  a  Divine  destiny  sets  us  down  in  a  certain
Bpbere  bounded  by  definite  limitations  beyond  which  we  cannot  go ;  but  within  these
limits  we  are  free  from  compulsion,  and  even  in  regard  to  the  vocation  no  force  is
exerted  to  make  us  follow  it.  We  are  under  moral  obligation  to  do  so,  but  we  are  left
to  freely  acknowledge  or  reject  the  claims  of  that  obligation.

II.  'i'HE  choice  was  momentous.  It  was  between  life  and  death.  These  were  the
great  alternatives  of  the  Deuteronomic  covenant  (Deut.  xxx.  19).  The  same  alterna-
tives are  set  before  us  spiritually  (Rom.  vi.  23).  Life  is  not  to  be  played  with;  tre-
mendous issues  depend  on  the  manner  in  which  it  is  conducted.  Religion  is  no  mere
topic  of  abstract  speculation  for  learned  leisure,  no  empty  toy  for  idle  sentiment ;  it  is
of  vast  practical  moment,  for  it  deals  with  the  choice  of  the  greatest  possible  alterna-
tives— life  and  death.

III.  The  choice  was  limited.  The  choice  which  was  set  before  the  Jews  by  Jere-
miah was  gloomy  enough.  The  best  prospect  offered  to  them  was  escape  from  massacre
indeed,  but  escape  to  exile  and  captivity.  We  may  come  to  such  a  condition  that  no
effort  will  restore  the  lost  possessions  and  gladness  of  the  past.  Even  though  there  is
no  ground  for  despair,  though  the  worst  may  be  avoided,  our  conduct  may  bear  such
inevitable  fruits  in  poverty,  loss  of  position,  alienation  of  friends,  sickness,  etc.,  that  our
best  prospects  may  be  far  from  satisfactory.  This  is  necessary,  for  moral  choice  cannot
undo  past  facts  nor  overleap  the  barriers  of  physical  law.  It  is  wise,  for  the  disagree-
able fruits  of  sin  may  be  useful  medicines  in  the  form  of  chastisement.  Yet  the  New
Testament  offers  us  a  freer  choice  for  the  ultimate  future;  as  the  alternative  of  death
not  captivity  and  a  life  of  sorrow,  but  eternal  life  and  liberty,  the  full  restoration  to
the  blessings  of  God's  favour  (1  John  v.  11,  12).

IV.  The  choice  of  life  involved  safety  with  submission.  Jeremiah  said  that
death  would  await  those  who  stayed  in  Jerusalem  to  resist  the  invader  from  behind  the
city  walls,  while  they  who  went  out  to  the  field  to  yield  themselves  up  without  fight-
ing would  be  spared.  For  this  advice  the  prophet  was  regarded  as  a  traitor.  It  was
justified,  because  (1)  resistance  was  utterly  hopeless,  (2)  submission  was  required  by
God  to  a  divinely  appointed  chastisement,  (3)  the  Divine  aid  with  which  the  Jews
had  won  their  victories  in  the  past  would  not  be  forthcoming  in  this  case.  It  is  never
dishonourable  to  submit  to  the  will  of  God.  True  patriotism  will  seek  the  good  of  the
nation  rather  than  its  transient  glory.    The  method  of  escape  offered  to  the  Jews

JEREMIAH.  2  I


482  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,     [ch.  mi.  1—14.


illustrates  the  Christian  method  of  salvation.     The  Jews  were  to  escape  by  leaving
their  ramparts  and  meeting  their  foes  defenceless  in  the  open  field.     We  are  to  save
our  life  by  losing  it.     The  Jews  found  safety  in  submission.     The  Christian  salvation
is  secured,  not  by  fighting  and  grasping  at  our  rights,  but  by  yielding  to  the  will  of
GK)d  in  Christ,  and  submitting  to  this  even  when  it  brings  chastisement.

Ver.  13. — Ood  against  Jerusalem,  In  the  fact  that  God  wa«  against  her,  Jerusalem
was  to  see  that  all  resistance  to  the  Chaldeans  must  fail.  This  terrible  secret  of  hope-
less ruin  may  be  found  in  others  besides  the  Jews.

I.   It  18  POSSIBLE  FOR  GoD  TO  BE  AGAINST  THOSE  WHO  WERE  ONCE  HIS  MOST  PATOUBSD

PEOPLE.  It  is  Jerusalem,  of  all  cities,  that  finds  God  to  be  her  opponent.  Therefore  they
who  have  enjoyed  the  friendship  of  God  in  the  past  have  no  right  to  presume  that
nothing;  can  break  that  friendship.  Moreover,  God  may  be  actively  opposed  to  us.
The  opposition  may  not  be  all  on  our  side.  Though  God  is  love,  he  can  be  angry,  since
even  love  itself  will  rouse  anger  when  it  is  abused  ;  and  though  he  desires  ultimately'
nothing  but  good,  he  may  first  send  partial  and  temporary  evil  as  a  means  for
effecting  this.

II.  They  who  oppose  themselves  to  God  wirji  ultimately  ttkd  God  opposkd
TO  them.  The  original  enmity  is  on  our  side,  so  is  the  ofifence,  the  wrong-doing,  the
evil  passion  which  stirs  up  contention.  God  would  ever  be  at  peace  with  his  children,
and  it  is  they  alone  who  have  imported  strife  into  his  family.  But  after  they  have
done  so  it  is  impossible  for  God  to  be  indifferent  to  their  conduct  to  him.  His  honour,
insulted,  must  needs  be  vindicated — not,  indeed,  in  the  selfish  way  of  personal  pride,
but  in  the  righteous  regard  for  the  just  and  orderly  government  of  his  kingdom.

HI.  No  more  terrible  fate  can  befall  men  than  for  God  to  be  against  theic
The  horrors  of  the  sieges  of  Jerusalem  are  amongst  the  darkest  scenes  of  history.  Yet
the  moral  effects  of  God*s  wrath  are  far  more  serious  than  the  material.  1.  If  God  is
against  us,  we  lose  all  the  help  of  his  favour.  It  is  impossible  to  measure  the  grace
which,  in  multiform  influences,  streams  into  us  and  sustains  and  strengthens  us  for  duty
and  trial.  If  all  were  removed  we  should  perish.  If  God  were  wholly  against  any
soul,  that  soul  must  at  once  be  driven  to  outer  darkness — be  crushed  and  destroyed,  and
by  negative  causes  alone ;  simply  through  the  loss  of  God's  light  and  life.  But  no  man
in  this  world  has  been  so  cursed.  Yet  even  while  God  withdraws  his  special  favours
the  loss  is  so  great  as  to  entail  certain  failure  in  life.  The  fruit  may  not  be  dashed
from  the  trees,  but  the  summer  sun  will  never  come  to  ripen  it.  2.  If  God  is  against
us,  terrible  evils  will  befall  us.  God  is  ever  active  in  his  presence.  If  we  are  not
blessed  by  it,  we  suffer  from  it.  How  fearful  to  have  God  for  our  enemy  I  All  the  laws
and  forces  of  the  universe  are  then  against  us.  Nature  and  providence,  earth  and
heaven  fulfilling  his  will,  must  direct  their  vast  resources  against  the  wretched  outlaw.
Our  opposition  to  God  will  be  to  our  own  injury,  but  what  much  more  fearful  results
must  follow  his  opposition  to  us !  This  dreadful  fate  is  illustrated  by  our  Lord's  words,
in  which  he  compares  those  who  shall  fall  on  the  stone  with  those  on  whom  the  atone
shall  fall  (Matt.  xxi.  44).

IV.  If  God  is  against  us,  redemption  must  involve  a  change  of  God's  relation
to  us.  The  atonement  must  have  an  aspect  towards  God  as  well  as  one  towards  man.
While  man  is  reconciled  to  God,  God  must  be  propitiated  to  man.  It  is  true  that  this
language  is  only  possible  because  we  speak  of  God  after  the  manner  of  man,  and  that
the  atonement  does  not  originate  in  us  or  in  an  independent  third  party  who  seeks  to
reconcile  man  and  God,  but  in  God  himself,  who  sent  his  Son  to  redeem  the  world  to
himself.  Yet,  though  desiring  to  be  only  gracious  to  men,  God  must  have  recognised
the  necessity  of  that  intercession  and  sacrifice  of  Christ  which  won  the  favour  of  the
Father  to  his  beloved  Son,  and  so  to  mankind,  of  whom  Christ  was  the  representative
Priest.    In  Christ,  therefore,  we  need  not  fear  that  God  is  against  us  (Rom.  iii.  26).

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1, 2.— 2(B(fcAriaA'»  message;  or,  the  prayer  of  the  ungodly,  I.  An  examplb  Tt>  bk
IMITATED.    Whatever  might  be  said  of  the  general  behaviour  of  the  king,  his  conduct


en.  XXI.  1—14.]  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.        488

on  this  occasion  appears  at  first  highly  sagacious  and  commendable.  1.  For  Us
acknowledgment  of  Jehovah  as  the  only  Deliverer.  A  tremendous  danger  threatened  the
state.  Zedekiah  "  counted  the  cost  ^  and  sent  to  the  representative  of  Jehovah.  He
did  not  waste  his  resources  in  useless  expedients,  but  frankly  accepted  the  calamity  as
sent  from  God,  appealing  through  God's  prophet  for  deliverance.  Most  men  in  similar
circumstances  lose  themselves  in  secondary  causes.  *'  It  is  this  unfortunate  accident
or  that.  In  time  circumstances  will  be  better,  and  we  shall  right  ourselves."  2.  Its
respect  for  God.  Great  officers  of  state  sent  to  a  poor  prophet.  Religion  after  all  may
be  the  chief  concern ;  at  least  a  very  important  matter,  and  worthy  the  attention  of
the  highest  in  the  land.

II.  An  example  to  be  avoided.  1.  It  toas  tardy.  The  warning  of  the  prophet
had  been  given  long  before,  but  it  was  not  believed.  Not  until  the  visible  proof  of  his
veracity  appeared  before  the  city  was  Zedekiah  eager  to  come  to  terms  with  the  God  he
had  offended.  However  great  the  alacrity  of  men  to  betake  themselves  to  the  offices  of
religion  in  times  of  calamity,  their  earnestness  has  not  the  spontaneous  character  to
which  it  pretends.  They  are  spurred  on  by  fear.  2.  The  power  instead  of  the  grace
of  Ood  was  appealed  to.  A  compliment  to  Jehovah's  past  achievements  is  delicately
suggested.  No  petty  business  would  bring  him  to  ank  a  favour  of  God,  but  this
trouble  Is  great  and  urgent,  and  beyond  human  means  of  dealins  with  it ;  therefore
God  is  called  in.  "  It  is  worthy  of  his  interference  who  always  '  doeth  wondrously.* "
Now,  there  is  no  real  humiliation  here.  Recognition  of  God's  claims  is  grudgingly  and
of  necessity  made,  but  no  word  is  mentioned  of  sin  or  repentance  from  it ;  no  appeal  is
made  to  the  forgiving  love  of  God.  Human  nature  is  proud  even  in  its  necessities  and
prayers.  "  Help  me  now,  at  this  juncture,  and — afterwards  I  shall  be  able  to  help
myself."  Gtxi  will  not  accept  us  unless  we  come  humbly  as  well  as  prayerfully.  Sin
must  be  confessed.  S.  It  contained  no  promise  of  amendment.  Jehovah  is  summoned
as  a  J9eiM  ex  machind  for  the  solution  of  a  humanly  impossible  problem ;  but  there  is
no  indication  that  the  '*  desperate  resort "  will  grow  into  a  course  of  constant  waiting
upon  God.  4.  The  duty  which  ought  to  have  been  personal  was  delegated  to  others.
Under  the  garb  of  respect  religion  is  often  really  evaded.  The  Bible  teaches  the  great
doctrine  of  mediation,  but  it  does  not  tell  us  how  to  perform  our  religious  duties  by
proxy.  6.  Certainty,  the  note  of  Divine  faith,  is  conspicuous  by  its  essence.  "  If  so
be  that."  The  case  is  stated  as  a  distant  possibility.  The  language  sounds  respectful ;
it  is  so  diffident,  so  unpresuming ;  but  it  really  veils  a  profound  scepticism.  There
ought  to  be,  there  is,  no  "  perhaps  "  in  believing  prayer.  The  king  was  told  that  if  he
and  his  people  repented,  God  would  instantly  avert  the  calamity  or  convert  it  into
blessing.  Perhapses  like  this  are  profanities.  Besides,  the  suggestion  is  dishonouring
to  God,  viz.  that  he  should  stay  his  judgments  and  the  sinner  nevertheless  continue
impenitent.  6.  The  whole  tone  of  the  message  is  false  and  unsatisfactory.  It  is  that  of
one  driven  up  into  a  corner  by  an  unexpected  exigency,  but  resolved  that  what  he  is
obliged  to  do  shall  be  barely  done,  and  in  such  a  manner  as  to  give  it  quite  another
aspect  to  those  who  look  on.  A  moral  distance  is  observed,  as  of  one  who  is  unwilling
to  allow  that  religious  duties  are  of  personal  as  well  as  official  and  conventional  obliga-
tion. It  is  the  courtly  language  of  diplomacy,  and  does  not  come  hot-burning  from  a
heart  full  of  sorrow,  faith,  and  love.  What  wonder  it  should  not  be  answered  save  in
scorn  and  added  severity  ?    The  sarcasm  is  sublime. — M.

Vers.  13, 14. — Ood^s  answer  to  earthly  presumption.  The  indifference  and  callousness
of  Judah  and  her  king  would  appear  to  have  reached  a  climax.  Ignorance  could  not
be  alleged  in  excuse  of  it.  It  had  become  ingrained  systematic  unrighteousness ;  and
had  added  this  to  itself,  that  it  had  rejected  the  warning  counsels  of  Cbd's  prophet.
How  was  it  to  be  dealt  with  ?

I.  It  could  not  be  let  alone.  1.  ITie  long-suffering  mercy  that  had  already
been  shown  had  been  misunderstood.  To  delay  longer  was  therefore  impossible.  2.  For
all  sin  is  a  contradiction  of  tJie  Divine  Spirit  and  rule  in  the  earth.  It  is  a  direct
challenge  to  Heaven.  Especially  is  this  the  case  when  a  positive  law  has  been  re-
vealed, and  a  direct  intimation  of  God's  will  made  by  a  living  representative.  Chxl's
honour  is  therefore  involved  in  the  issue.  3.  The  interests  of  truth  and  the  kingdom  <^
God  on  earth  would  suffer.    The  transgression  of  one  child  of  Grod  is  a  stumbling-block

2  I  2


484  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,     [en.  xxi.  1—14.

to  many,  and  those  who  enjoy  Divine  privileges  should  be  especially  careful  as  to  how
they  behave.  The  world  of  heathenism  witnessing  the  behaviour  of  Judah  would  be
confirmed  in  its  unbelief,  or  would  misinterpret  the  genius  of  the  religion  of  Jehovah.
It  might  suppose  that  Jehovah  was  but  a  likeness  of  one  of  its  own  gods,  full  of
partiality.  This  impression  must  be  dissipated,  and  it  could  only  be  so  by  firm  and
prompt  dealing  with  the  offence.

II.   A    FINAL    PEBEMPTOBY    SUMHOKS    TO    BEFOBMATION    IS    OIYEN.       It    might    be

supposed  enough  to  have  dealt  silent  and  summary  punishments  upon  the  guilty  land
and  its  king.  But  this  would  not  consist  with :  1.  OcxTs  revelcUion  of  righteousness.
Id  blessings  as  well  as  in  punishments  a  rational  connection  had  to  be  shown  with  the
behaviour  and  deserts  of  their  subjects.  The  sinner's  own  conscience  had  to  be
addressed  ere  he  was  cast  off  for  ever ;  and  the  indictment  was  of  world-wide  concern.
A  warning  and  an  example  were  required  for  the  general  guidance  of  men,  and  for  their
api>rehen{>ion  of  the  justice  of  Heaven  in  punishing  those  upon  whom  the  calamity  came.
2.  Go(Vs  mercy.  The  scheme  of  redemption  does  not  exclude  the  possibility  of  the
sinner  himself  being  saved.  Ou  the  contrary,  this  is  its  chief  aim.  Just  as  it  would
not  be  consistent  with  God's  character  to  suffer  unrighteous  practices  to  continue
unrebuked,  so  '*  God  would  not  be  God "  were  the  penalty  to  be  unannounced  and
without  alternative  of  salvation.  With  many  sinners  of  to-day  he  deals  in  like
fashion.  The  warning  is  given  with  gentle,  repeated,  and  terrible  emphasis,  and  the
way  of  escape  is  pointed  out  so  plainly  that  *'  the  wayfaring  man,  though  a  fool,  may
not  err  therein."

III.  Hb  himself  will  be  the  aktaoonist.  *'I  am  against  thee"  (cf.  ver.  5).
1.  This  was  a  reversal  of  his  normal  relation  to  Israel,  It  would  be  hard  for  people  of
their  habits  of  thought  to  realize ;  and  it  is  stated  boldly  in  order  to  emphasis.  Not
mere  neutrality.  He  is  to  be  a  belligerent — the  belligerent  with  whom  they  have  to  do.
They  must  have  felt  foredoonied  to  failure.  They  knew  his  power  and  resources,  for
had  they  not  been  employed  on  their  own  behoof  in  the  past?  Is  not  this  the  present
consciousness  of  many  ?  They  know  that  Grod  is  against  them.  Are  they  prepared  to
carry  the  war  on  to  the  end?  2.  It  represented  the  utter  wrongness  and  hopelessness  of
their  cause.  The  '*  rock  of  the  plain  "  would  be  of  little  avail  against  him.  The  forces
of  the  world  were  at  his  command ;  and  their  own  hearts  would  fail  them  for  fear
against  this  ghostly  combatant.  Against  the  righteous  one  the  sense  of  an  evil  cause
would  be  the  parent  of  discomfiture.

IV.  Yet  the  punishment  was  to  gome  fbom  within  themselves.  *'I  will
punish  you  according  to  the  fruit  of  your  doings ; "  "I  will  kindle  a  fire  in  the  forest
thereof.^  It  is  not  easy  to  gather  from  these  vague  statements  the  precise  form  the
punishment  would  assume.  But  the  description  agrees  best  with  the  circumstances  of
Jehoiakim's  seign,  who  built  palaces  of  cedar,  and  ruled  with  despotic  violence.  A
literal  rendering  of  the  terms  of  the  judgment  is  scarcely  permissible.  Is  civil  war
meant  ?  Or  court  intrigues,  that  may  issue  even  more  disastrously  ?  In  any  case  it
would  be  the  result  of  a  reaction  against  the  tyranny  and  wrong-doing  of  the  court.
1.  T?ie  elements  of  destruction  are  within  the  sinner  himself.  Many  already  know
something  of  what  hell  is  in  themselves.  2.  The  results  of  sin  will  be  its  punish^
wicn<.— M.

Vers.  1 — 14. — Saved  so  as  hyfire.  This  chapter  has  been  by  some  means  put  out  of
its  proper  place ;  for  it  treats  of  King  Zedekiah,  whilst  in  later  chapters  circumstances
connected  with  the  reigns  of  the  kings  who  preceded  him  are  given.  But  being  placed
here  it  serves  to  show  how  God*s  servants,  despised  at  first,  come  to  be  honoured  at  last.
The  stocks  had  been  good  enough  for  Jeremiah — so  the  last  chapter  tell^— and  his
enemies  had  smitten  him  as  if  he  were  a  common  felon.  Here  we  find  the  king  and
high  ofiBcers  of  the  court  coming  and  beseeching  his  intercession  and  help  to  avert  the
calamity  which  was  so  fast  coming  upon  them  and  the  nation  at  large.  **  Give  us  of
your  oil,"  said  the  foolish  virgins  to  the  wise.  And  again  and  aeain  has  it  been  and
will  it  be  that  the  ungodly  shall  come  to  covet  earnestly  the  place  in  God's  favour
which  his  servants  only  enjoy,  but  which,  together  with  them  who  sought  it  when  they
did  not,  they  have  heretofore  despised.  Those  who  honour  Qtod  he  will  honour,  and
will  cause  their  enemies  to  come  and  confess  that  God  is  with  them  of  a  truth.    Thus


cir.  XXL  1—14.]     THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  485

did  the  enemies  of  Jeremiah  at  this  time  acknowledge  him  as  the  true  servant  of  God.
But  it  was  too  late  to  secure  what  they  desired.  "  The  door  was  shut."  But  as  the
foolish  virgins  were  bidden  go  to  them  that  sell  and  buy  for  themselves,  so  the  prophet
of  God  has  one  counsel  to  give  them  whereby  they  might  be  '*  saved,  yet  so  as  by  fire."
"  Behold,  I  set  befure  you  the  way  of  life,  and  the  way  of  death  "  (ver.  8).  But  when
we  come  to  see  what  that  way  of  life  was,  wo  see  how  far  dififerent  it  was  from  what
the  king  and  his  people  would  have  chosen  for  themselves.     Note,  therefore—

I.  What  this  way  of  life  was,  1.  It  was  bare  life — life  only.  They  were  to
suffer  defeat ;  their  weapons  to  be  of  no  avail,  their  strong  fortress  to  be  taken,  their
city  and  their  temple  in  which  they  gloried  to  be  burnt  with  fire,  and  they  themselves
led  into  captivity.  That  now  was  all  that  was  possible  for  them.  It  was  too  late  to
avert  their  calamities,  much  less  to  gain  victory,  or  honour,  or  glory  in  the  war  which
they  were  waging.  A  glorious  deliverance  such  as  Hezekiah  had  known  was  out  of  tho
question.  2.  And  even  this  bare  life  on  hard  conditions.  They  must  surrender  them-
selves to  their  enemies  when  the  summons  came,  and  meanwhile  they  must  reform
their  ways  (ver.  12).  On  these  terms  they  should  be  allowed  to  live.  Refuse  them,
as  many  did,  and  they  perished  miserably.    It  was  indeed  a  salvation  "  so  as  by  fire."

II.  Its  moubnfulness.  How  full  of  this  it  was  is  seen  by  the  plaintive  psalms  of
the  Captivity :  "  By  the  rivers  of  Babylon  we  sat  down  and  wept,"  etc  And  that
which  made  it  so  mournful  was  the  remembrance  of  how  dififerent  their  lot  might  have
been.  Had  they  but  hearkened  to  the  pleadings  of  those  prophets  of  God,  whose  prayers
when  it  was  too  late  they  importunately  sought,  how  happy  had  it  been  with  them
then !  Salvation  in  fulness,  as  their  fathers  had  experienced  and  rejoiced  in  again  and
again,  they  too  might  have  known.     But  now —

III.  Its  plain  teaching  fob  ourselves.  Life  may  be  retained,  but  made  so  wretched
that  only  one  thing  could  be  worse — to  have  lost  it  altogether.  This  certainly  true  of
the  present  life,  it  is  probably  true  of  the  life  after  this.  Beware  of  that  false  doctrine
which  encourages  men  to  believe,  that  if  only  they  can  get  within  what  they  are
pleased  to  call  '*  the  door  of  heaven,"  they  need  desire  no  more.  This  is  not  humility,
but  the  evil  desire  to  escape  that  faithful  following  of  Christ  which  alone  will  win  "  the
prize  of  our  high  callmg."  And  since  salvation  in  fulness  is  offered  to  us  and  Qod
desires  it  to  be  ours,  let  us  be  content  with  nothing  less,  lest  we  be  "  ashamed  before
him  at  his  coming,"  and  have  '*  w  ith  shame  to  take  a  lower  place."  To  any  now
suffering  under  judgment  of  God  this  history  says,  " '  Humble  yourselves  under  the
mighty  hand  of  God.'    Accept  his  terms,  see  in  them  your  only  hope." — C.

Ver.  8. — A  sad  but  common  necessity.  The  surrender  of  a  part  to  save  the  whole.
This  was  the  "  way  of  life  "  the  prophet  put  before  the  people.  The  way  of  deatli
would  be  their  refusal.  *'  If  they  would  submit  to  the  irresistible  pressure  of  the
Babylonian  power,  then  whatever  blessings  were  bound  up  in  the  preservation  of  the
house  of  David  and  of  the  holy  city  would  remain  intact "  (cf.  Stanley, '  Lectures  on
the  Jewish  Church,'  Lect.  xi.  vol.  ii.  p.  533).  But  to  resist.would  not  merely  be  useless,
but  mischievous  in  the  extreme.  It  would  rouse  the  rage  of  their  conquerors  and
involve  the  destruction  of  all  they  held  most  precious.  It  would  be  *'  a  way  of  death."
At  the  final  siege  of  Jerusalem  the  Christians  retired,  but  the  Zealots  drew  down  upon
themselves  the  rage  of  the  armies  of  Vespasian  and  Titus,  and  so  hurried  on  the  ruin  of
the  whole  Jewish  state.  Stanley  says  of  Jeremiah,  "  It  was  not  indifference  to  his
country,  but  attachment  to  its  permanent  interests,  with  the  yet  larger  consequences
wrapt  up  in  them,  which  induced  him  to  counsel  submission.  It  was  his  sense  of  the
inestimable  importance  of  that  sacred  spot,  with  its  sacred  institutions,  which  caused
him  to  advise  every  sacrifice  for  the  sake  of  retaining  it.  He  had  the  courage,  so  rare
in  political  leaders,  to  surrender  a  part  for  the  sake  of  preserving  the  whole~-to  embrace
in  his  view  the  complete  relations  of  the  great  scheme  of  the  world,  rather  than  fix  his
attention  exclusively  on  the  one  pressing  question  of  the  moment.  As  there  are  times
when  the  constitution  must  be  broken  to  save  the  commonwealth,  when  the  interests
of  particular  nations  or  doctrines  must  give  way  to  the  preponderating  claims  of
mankind  or  of  truth  at  large,  so  Jeremiah  staked  the  eternal  value  of  the  truths  which
Jerusalem  represented  against  the  temporary  evils  of  the  Chaldean  dominion.  It  was
a  bitter  pang,  but  the  result  seemed  to  him  worth  the  cost."


486  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  xxi.  1— 14.


**  To  steel  his  melting  heart,
To  act  the  martyr's  sternest  part ;
To  watch  with  firm,  unshrinking  eye
His  darling  visions  as  they  die ;
Too  happy  if,  that  dreadful  day,
His  life  be  given  him  for  a  prey."

(Eeble).

Now—

I.  This  dbead  necessity  is  one  which  may  be  seen  continually  pbessino  on
MEN.  Illustrations  are  numerous:  the  throwing  over  the  cargo  in  storm  at  sea;  the
abandonment  of  outposts  to  concentrate  strength  on  the  key  of  the  position;  the
cutting  off  a  limb  to  save  the  life ;  the  giving  up  a  less  important  branch  of  trade  to
safeguard  one  more  so.  And  in  the  religious  life  we  are  perpetually  summoned  to  such
sacrifice.  "  Whoso  loveth  his  life  shall  lose  it,  but  he  that  loveth  his  life  for  my  sake
shall  find  it;"  ''Except  a  corn  of  wheat  fkll  into  the  ground  and  die/'  etc.  All
ventures  of  faith.  And  death — ^"for  corruption  cannot  inherit  incorruption,"  and
therefore  that  the  true  life  may  be  ours,  the  fieshly  life  must  die.  And  our  Lord
represents  the  awful  doom  of  the  wicked  to  be  a  "  cutting  ofif  of  a  diseased  part,"  a
KoWeuris,  that — so  it  should  seem — entire  destruction  may  not  be  needed.  It  is  an
awful  process,  but  sternly  necessary.  God  save  us  from  it !  And  what  is  the  sub-
mission of  our  will  to  GKxl,  the  self-surrender  for  which  he  ever  asks,  but  the  prudent
conduct  of  that  king  who  feels  that  with  his  puny  force  of  ten  thousand  he  cannot  meet
4he  king  who  comes  against  him  with  twenty  thousand,  and  therefore  straightway  sends
an  embassage  desiring  conditions  of  peace  ?    But —

II.  Men  shrink  from  it.  Those  before  whom  Jeremiah  placed  this  "  way  of  life  "
shrank  from  it.  They  would  not  listen  to  him.  They  cruelly  persecuted  their  far-
seeing  and  Ood-inspired  prophet.  And  it  is  so  still.  In  common  life  the  proverbial
saying,  "  Nothing  venture,  nothing  have,"  implies  that  men  are  loth  to  venture.
Many  a  craft  hugs  the  shore,  thinking  to  find  safety  there,  and  is  driven  on  the  rocks  and
wrecked,  when  by  putting  boldly  out  to  sea  the  storm  might  have  been  safely  weathered.
The  historian  of  the  Crimean  War  finds  fault,  once  and  again,  with  our  generals  for  their
timid  policy,  which  he  maintains  brought  so  great  sufierings  and  losses  on  our  army,
whilst  nad  a  more  daring  strategy  been  adopt^ — as  in  our  recent  Egyptian  campaign
at  Tel-el-Eebir — the  war  might  have  been  speedily  and  gloriously  ended.  And  in  the
religious  life,  how  men  shrink  from  this  self-surrender  I  What  frantic  but  futile  eflforts
there  are  to  serve  God  and  mammon,  notwithstanding  our  Saviour  has  said,  "  There  is
no  man  that  hath  left  house,  or  lands,"  etc.  (Mark  x.  29) !  But  men  cannot  be  per-
suaded to  believe  this.  The  yoimg  ruler  who  had  great  possessions  (Matt,  xix.)  went
away  sorrowful,  because  he  could  not  make  the  great  venture.  And  the  feeble  religious
life  of  so  many,  the  absence  of  all  joy  in  God's  service,  is  owing  to  this  same  cause.
Men  are  ever  trying  to  find  a  via  media  between  the  "  way  of  life  "  and  '*  way  of  death.**
The  husbandman  does  not  refuse  to  cast  into  the  earth  all  ho  has  left  of  last  year*s  com,
in  the  trust  that  it  will  yield  him  a  bounteous  harvest.  But  we  are  slow  to  believe  la
the  wisdom  of  such  sowing  in  spiritual  things.

III.  But  the  refusal  to  submit  is  fatal.  It  was  so  in  case  of  those  to  whom
Jeremiah  preached,  and  it  has  been  so  a  thousand  times  since.  A  ship  was  sinking.  A
man  leaped  from  her  deck  into  the  sea.  Ho  was  a  good  swimmer,  but  he  had  fastened
round  him  a  belt  containing  gold,  which  he  could  not  bring  himself  to  abandon,  and  its
weight  sank  him  ere  he  could  reach  the  boat  for  which  he  was  making.  Our  Lord  bade
him  who  should  be  on  the  house-tops  when  Jerusalem  was  besieged  "  not  go  down  to
fetch  his  clothes."  Such  carefulness  might  cost  him  his  life.  Our  Lord  tells  of  many  of
the  Pharisees  who  believed  on  him,  but  were  afraid  to  confess  him,  lest  they  should  be
put  out  of  the  synagogue.  And  perhaps  there  are  few  of  the  worldly  and  irreligious
amongst  us  who  have  not  sunk  down  to  where  they  are  now,  and  will  sink  down  to
lower  depths  still,  through  this  same  refusal  to  give  up  all  for  Christ.  It  may  be
humiliating  and  involve  present  loss,  and  therefore  men  let  go  the  eternal  gain.  To
refuse  such  sacrifice  is  the  way  of  death.    But —

IV.  To  CONSENT  to  rris  life.  Take  our  Lord  as  the  supreme  example,  who,  not  for
himself  but  for  us,  threw  away  that  infinite  glory,  that  eauality  with  God,  which,  bein^
in  *'  the  form  of  God,"  was  ever  his ;  but  St.  Paul  tells  us  (Phil.  ii.  6)  he  counted


CH.  XXI.  1—14.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  487

it  not  a  thing  to  be  grasped  at,  a  prize  which  he  should  cling  to  with  eagerness  and
retain  with  tenacity,  but  *'  emptied  himself  of  it,  and  made  himself  of  no  reputation.**
Thus  for  the  time  of  his  incarnation  submitting  himself  to  the  cruel  might  of  sin  and
Satan,  he  gained  thereby  that  infinite  exaltation,  that  salvation  of  mankind  upon  which
Ins  loving  heart  was  set.  ''Let  this  mind,"  therefore,  "be  in  us  which  was  also  in
Christ  Jesus.*'  And  whenever  it  is  found,  God  rewards  it.  Self-sacrifice,  the  cross,  is  the
way  to  supreme  reward.  The  shepherds  were  told,  at  the  Nativity,  that  there  was  bom
to  them  "  a  Saviour,  Christ  the  Lord."  And  when  they  came  to  Bethlehem  they  found
a  Babe  wrapped  in  swaddling  clothes,  and  lying  in  a  manger.  What  correspondence
was  there  between  that  saying  of  the  angels  and  that  sight  of  the  infant  Jesus  ?  To
the  outward  eye  none,  but  to  the  eye  instructed  by  God*s  Word  and  God's  providence,
there  is  every  correspondence.  For  those  outward  signs  of  poverty  and  humiliation
which  were  the  characteristic  of  his  life,  have  formed  his  title-deeds,  his  royal  right,  to
the  homage  of  every  human  heart.  ''  Blessed  are  the  meek,"  etc. ;  **  He  that  humbleth
himself  shall,"  etc.  It  is  ever  so ;  and  especially  when  we  humble  ourselves  before
God.  giving  up  self  and  sin,  giving  up  and  losing,  as  the  world  would  say^our  very  lifoi
^-tnen  it  is  we  find  it,  as  God  grant  we  may. — 0.

Vers.  1 — 7. — A  king  appealing  for  a  prophets  intercession,  I.  A  kinq's  acknow-
LEOOMEKT  THAT  HUMAN  RESOURCES  ARE  UNAVAILING.  The  hour  and  the  danger  so  long
and  often  predicted,  referred  to  all  the  more  earnestly  as  the  hour  draws  nigh,  has  come
at  last.  No  time  is  here  taken  up  in  narrating  the  attempts  Zedekiah  may  have  made
himself  to  repel  the  invader.  The  Scriptures  were  not  meant  to  give  us  details  of
sieges.  The  likelihood  is,  however,  that  it  was  long  before  Zedekiah  reached  anything
like  an  extremity  that  he  made  this  appeal  to  the  prophet.  When  an  unusual  danger
comes  close  at  hand  it  is  easy  to  exaggerate.  The  man  who  has  been  indifferent,
imprudent,  heedless  of  all  hints  that  have  been  given  him  to  make  provision  for  the
future,  is  the  very  man  who,  when  peril  comes,  rushes  into  panic  and  becomes  unable
to  use  the  resources  he  has.

IL   A    king's    presumptuous    attempt   to   avail    himself    of    DrVINB    RESOURCES.

Nothing  is  more  beautiful  than  to  see  one  who  has  found  out  the  vanity  of  human  help
turning  to  God.  Only  he  must  come  in  a  right  spirit,  having  made  a  clear  discovery  of
why  it  is  that  man  could  not  help  him.  Anything  of  this  sort  was  utterly  lacking  in
Zedekiah's  approach.  There  is  no  sign  of  repentance,  no  word  of  confession,  no  resolu-
tion of  amendment.  The  only  thing  in  the  shape  of  acknowledgment  is  that  Jehovah  is
the  God  who  does  wondrous  works.  This  is  an  acknowledgment  which  we  find  often
in  the  Old  Testament,  but  it  is  acceptable  to  God  only  when  accompanied  with  a  sense
of  why  it  is  that  God  does  his  wondrous  works.  The  more  we  consider  Zedekiah's
request,  the  more  will  the  blindness  and  audacity  of  it  appear.  Hero  is  the  king  in
Jerusalem,  bound,  if  any  man  ever  was,  to  know  the  significance  of  the  history  of
Israel  as  a  whole ;  and  yet  he  can  only  see  certain  great  manifestations  of  power  which
encourage  him  to  hope  that  a  similar  manifestation  may  now  come  for  his  own  deliver-
ance. There  is  no  real  coming  to  God,  unless  we  come  for  things  that  are  according
to  his  will.  His  power  cannot  wait  upon  our  selfish  needs.  There  is  no  telling
what  might  have  happened,  even  at  this  more  than  eleventh  hour,  if  Zedekiah  had  only
come  with  something  of  true  penitence.  God  knew  beforehand  that  this  could  not  be
expected ;  and  thus  there  is  no  clearer  evidence  of  the  righteousness  of  Jerusalem's
doom  and  of  Israel's  expatriation  than  is  furnished  from  Zedekiah's  own  lips.  He
shows  that  he  has  lost  all  sense  of  the  meaning  and  the  necessity  of  God's  great
covenant  with  his  people.  If  only  they  had  been  obedient  they  would  never  have
lacked  the  benefit  of  many  wondrous  works.

III.  The  plain  and  necessary  answer  of  Jehovah.  We  see  through  all  that  God
here  says  a  purpose  to  make  plain  that  he  is  now  full  of  activity  against  his  apostate
people.  The  object  was  not  to  be  attained  simply  by  leaving  them,  in  their  natural
resources,  to  the  natural  resources  of  the  Chaldeans.  The  contest  is  not  of  man  against
man,  but  of  the  man  who  has  forsaken  God  against  the  man  whom  God  has  taken  to
be  the  instrument  of  his  righteous  indignation.  God  must  specially  intervene  and
make  his  presence  manifest,  to  show  that  all  this  visitation  of  suffering  is  from  him.
If  God  has,  for  a  time,  to  forsake  his  people,  he  must  needs  oppose  them«    If  Qod  be


M


488  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [en.  xxi.  1—14.


not  for  us,  ho  is  against  us ;  and  so  here  the  defenders  of  Jerusalem  are  represented
as  having  difficulties  to  deal  with  such  as  have  arisen  through  God's  own  operation.
Their  weapons  of  war  do  not  produce  the  usual  effect.  God  turns  them  back  upon
those  who  wield  them.  This  may  be  more  than  a  mere  general  figure  of  speech.  It  is
quite  possible  that  either  the  arm  wieliliug  the  heavy,  sharp  sword  becomes  as  the  arm
of  the  little  child,  or  else,  that  remaining  strong,  the  weapon  becomes  but  as  the  child's
toy.  Thus  the  Chaldeans  themselves  would  learn  that  some  mysterious  power  was  at
work,  and  that  the  glory  of  the  victory  was  not  theirs.  Furthermore,  God  was  to  fight
against  these  apostates  with  a  weapon  of  his  own.  He  can  make  the  wicked  and  the
ambitious  his  sword,  but  pestilence  is  of  his  own  sending.  Not  all  the  might  of  the
Chaldeans  could  bring  a  pestilence,  nor  take  it  away  once  it  had  come.  Thus  we  see
how  all  this  dread  combination  of  events  was  intended  to  impress  on  all,  alike  amongst
besiegers  and  besieged,  who  had  minds  to  understand  that  God  himself  was  terribly  at
work.  He  was  ind^  dealing  with  the  people  according  to  his  wondrous  works ;  works
necessitated  in  order  to  prevent  his  holy  and  reasonable  wrath  from  being  nothing  more
than  empty  wind. — Y.

Vers.  8 — 10. — Escape  for  the  individual  among  the  calamities  of  the  nation.  Even
amid  all  the  thick,  impending  horrors  indicated  in  the  previous  passage,  a  clear  and
immediate  way  of  escape  is  indicated  for  the  individual.  Every  one  going  over  promptly
and  resolutely  to  the  Chaldeans  would  be  at  least  safe.  What  mieht  be  reserved  for
him  in  the  future  it  was  not  proper  to  say.  Enough  for  him  to  know  that  he  had
security  for  the  present.  He  who  is  made  safe  may  expect  further  communications  of
positive  blessing  in  due  time.  We  are  not,  indeed,  to  suppose  that  every  one  who  remidned
in  the  city,  exposed  to  sword,  famine,  and  pestilence,  would  assuredly  perish.  That
can  hardly  have  been  the  case.  But  this  certainly  is  meant,  that  every  one  so  remain-
ing would  have  to  take  a  tremendous  risk.  Whereas  every  one  who  took  the  suggestion
as  to  what  is  here  called  the  way  of  life,  found  that  the  great  Preserver  of  life  had  thereby
entered  into  a  special  covenant  with  him.

I.  The  place  left  fob  ikdividual  bespoksibilitt.  God  is  dealing  with  a  whole
nation.  His  representative  and  the  representative  of  this  nation's  king  have  just  been
in  conference.  His  dreadful,  necessary  decision  as  to  the  nation's  fate  is  communicated.
But  now  each  individual  is  impressively  informed  that  God  is  thinking  also  of  him.  The
individual  must,  to  some  extent,  share  in  the  sufifering  of  his  people.  How  far  he  shall
share  depends,  however,  on  his  own  choice.  We  cannot  be  dragged  into  the  worst
experiences  of  human  life  merely  as  sufferers  from  the  wrong-doing  of  others.  The
worst  pains,  the  gloomiest  hours  of  life,  can  only  come  from  our  own  wrong-doing.
Whatever  faithful  remnant  there  might  now  be  in  Jerusalem  had  a  great  chance  given
to  them.  Complete  exemption  from  sufifering  was  not  possible ;  but  they  were  offered
a  kind  of  shelter,  where  tne  great  storm  of  God's  wrath  would  leave  them  untouched,
however  much  it  might  affect  their  temporal  belongings.

II.  All  that  the  best  of  men  must  expect  fob  the  pbesbnt  is  a  mitigation  of
BUFFEBiKO.  Whatever  advantages  come  from  our  connection  with  the  temporal  body
politic  must  be  accepted  with  the  risk  of  corresponding  disadvantages.  Even  while
Israel  was  in  this  doomed  degenerated  state  it  was  the  medium  of  benefits  to  those  who
could  use  it  aright.  No  Israelite  needed  to  regret  that  he  had  belonged  to  Israel ;  if
only  he  had  the  wisdom  to  accept  all  uncomfortable  experiences  as  part  of  a  discipline
that  would  work  out  unmixed  and  abiding  good  in  the  end.  Those  here  addressed  had
much  reason  to  be  thankful  that  at  such  a  terrible  crisis  God  did  so  much  to  make
their  position  safe.  He  who  has  got  safe  to  land  from  the  sinking  ship  would  be
reckoned  a  monster  of  ingratitude  if  he  did  nothing  but  grumble  because  all  his
property  was  lost.  He  may  still  have  the  opportunity  of  a  prosperity  as  great  as  he
had  in  the  past,  or  even  greater.

III.  This  bequiremekt  oave  a  searchino  trial  to  the  faith  op  the  BELiEviNa.
If  any  good  was  to  come  out  of  the  proposition  it  must  be  by  acting  on  it  at  once.  And
SQch  action  could  not  but  have  some  appearance  of  cowardice  and  desertion.  Indeed,
under  certain  circumstances,  it  would  have  been  cowardice  and  desertion.  If  Israel
could  have  been  looked  on  as  a  human  state  and  nothing  more,  if  the  Chaldeans  had
been  a  human  enemy  and  nothing  more,  then  such  a  departure,  self-prompted,  would


en.  XXII.  1—30.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE    PROPHET  JEREMIAH.


4&>


have  been  nothiDg  less  than  apostasy  from  national  duty.  The  sentiment  is  a  noble
one :  better  to  die  a  freeman  than  to  live  a  slave.  This  aspect  of  things  vanishes,  how*
ever,  when  we  recollect  that  Jerusalem  was  divinely  doomed.  This  Chaldean  army  was
nothing  less  than  the  sword  of  God,  and  a  limely  surrender  to  the  Chaldean  was
really  a  timely  surrender  to  him.  To  go  over  to  them  might  look  questionable  enough
on  a  mere  hasty,  superficial  glance ;  but  time  would  show  that  it  was  the  right,  trustful,
obedient  course.  The  real  bravery  is  to  withstand  the  taunts  and  misrepresentations
of  unbelieving  men ;  enduring  *'  as  seeing  him  who  is  invisible."  Some,  indeed,  who
;  escaped  to  the  Chaldeans  did  so,  we  doubt  not,  in  a  really  cowardly  spirit.  But  the
^  Lord  knows  who  are  his ;  and  their  motives  would  be  revealed  in  the  end.  A  bravo
heart  cannot  be  for  ever  misrepresented ;  and  a  mere  outward  appearance  of  obedience
will  have  to  pass  through  that  fire  which  tries  every  man's  work,  of  what  sort
it  is. — Y.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  XXII.


Ch.  xxii.  and  xxiii.  are  connected  to-
gether by  similarity  of  subject  The  tem-
poral and  spiritual  leaders  of  the  people,
who  are  mainly  responsible  for  the  national
catastrophe,  receive  their  merited  castiga-
tion.  Vers.  1 — 8  of  ch.  xxiii.,  properly
sjK^aking,  belong  to  ch.  xxiL ;  thus  we  get
a  well-rounded  discourse  on  the  conduct  of
the  kingi,  with  four  symmetrical  ports  or
strophes— vers.  1—12,  13—19,  20—30,  and
ch.  xxiii.  1 — 8.  Each  begins  with  a  general
exhortation  or  meditation,  and  continues
with  a  poetical  description  of  the  fates,  suc-
cessively, of  Jehoahaz,  Jehoiakim,  and
Jehoiaohin.  The  prophecy  is  concluded,
according  to  the  good  old  rule  of  Isaiah,  by
a  Messianic  promise.

Ver.  1. — Go  down.  Not  literally,  for  the
royal  palace  was  probably  the  highest  build-
ing in  the  city  (oomp.  ver.  6) ;  l?ut  because  of
the  spiritual  eminence  of  the  temple  (oomp.
ch.  XX vi.  10,  "  They  came  up  from  the  king's
house  unto  the  house  of  the  Lord  ").

Ver.  2.^And  thy  people.  The  Septuagint
reads,  **  And  thy  house  and  thy  people ; "
thus  the  passage  will  agree  with  ch.  xxi.
11,12.

Ver.  4. — ^Parallel  passage,  ch.  xvii.  25.

Ver.  5. — ^I  swear  by  myself.  ^Because
he  could  swear  by  no  greater,  he  sware  by
himself"  (Heb.  vi.  13).  A  synonymous
expression  is,  "  As  I  Uve,  saith  Jehovah  *'
(ver.  24).

Ver.  6.— XTnto  the  king's  konie  of  Jndah;
rather,  coneeming  the  house  of  the  King  of
Judah;  i.e.  the  royal  palace,  which,  on  ac-
count of  its  height  and  its  being  constructed
so  largely  out  of  cedar-wood  (comp.  vers.  14,
23),  is  colled  **  Gilead,  and  the  summit  of
Lebanon/'  iust  as  Solomon's  palace  was
colled  **  the  nousc  of  the  forest  of  Ijcbanon  "


(1  Kings  vii.  2).  Of  Gilead  in  gencr.il.
Canon  Tristrom  writes,  **  No  one  can  fairly
judge  of  Israel's  heritage  who  has  not  seen
the  luxuriant  exuberance  of  Gilead,  as  well
as  the  hard  rocks  of  Judeea."  And  again,
**  Lovely  knolls  and  dolls  open  out  at  every
turn,  gently  rising  to  the  wooded  plateau
above.  Then  we  rise  to  higher  ground  and
ride  through  noble  forests  of  onk.  Then  for
a  mile  or  two  through  luxuriant  green  com,
or  perhaps  through  a  rich  forest  of  scattered
oUve  trees,  left  untended  and  uncared  for,
with  perhaps  patches  of  com  in  the  open
glades  "  C  Bible  Places,'  p.  322).  The  cedars
of  Lebanon,  however  diminished,  still  bear
witness  to  the  ancient  fame  of  this  splendid
mountain  district.  A  wildemeis,  and  dtiflf
which  are  not  inhabited.  The  comparison
has  a  terrible  significance  when  read  in  the
light  of  De  Vogues  and  Frcshfield's  dis-
coveries. For  GUead  itself  is  full  of  ruined
cities  of  massive  stone  architecture.  **  It  is
no  uncommon  thing,"  says  Mr.  F.  A.  Eaton,
^  to  see  these  bouses  in  a  complete  state  of

E reservation,  built  of  huge  blocks  of  black
asalt,  with  slabs  of  the  same  for  the  roof,
twelve  feet  long,  a  foot  and  a  half  wide,  and
half  a  foot  thick,  and  entmnce  doors  also  of
basalt  .  .  .  g^eat  solid  stones  of  the  samn
material  being  used  as  lintels  at  the  top  and
bottom  "  (Speech  at  the  meeting  for  setting
on  foot  the  survey  of  Eastern  Palestine,
November  30,  1880:  Statement  of  Palet-
tine  Exploration  Fund^  January,  1880,  p.
11).  Cities  which  are-  not  inhabited;  not,
indeed,  the  cities  of  Gilead  of  the  time
of  Jeremiah,  but  constructed  of  materials
which  may  reasonably  be  presumed  to  havo
been  chiselled  in  a  far  more  remote  an-
tiquity. (The  date  of  the  cities  in  tlielr
present  slate  is  subsequent  to  the  Christian
era.)

Ver.  7. — I  will  prepare ;  literally,  I  teill
consecrate;  the  Babylonians  being  instru-
ments of  the  Divine  vengeance  (see  on  ch.
vi.4).

Vers.  10— 12.— There  is  a  fato  worse  than


490


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,  [ch.  xm.  1— 30.


that  of  the  dead  Josiah.    Weep  not,  in  com-
parLson,  for  him,  but  weep  sore  for  him  that

5oeth  away  (or  rather,  thai  U  gone  away),
*he  king  referred  to  is  probably  Jehoahaz,
who,  though  two  years  younger  than  Jehoia-
kim  (2  Kings  xxiii.  31 ;  comp.  36),  was  pre-
ferred to  him  by  the  people  on  the  death  of
Josiah.  The  counsel  to  "  weep  sore  "  for  this
royal  exile  whs  carried  out,  as  Mr.  Samuel
Cox  observes  (and  we  have,  perhaps,  a  speci*
men  of  the  popular  elegies  upon  him  in  Ezek.
xix.  1 — 4) :  **  A  young  lion  of  royal  strain,
caught  untimely,  and  chained  and  carried
away  captive, — this  was  how  the  people  of
Israel  conceived  of  Sballum"  0  Biblical
Expositions,'  p.  120).  The  conjecture  is
incapable  of  proof ;  and  Ezekiel,  we  know,
was  fond  of  imaginative  elegies.  But  pro-
bably enough  he  was  in  harmony  with
popular  feeling  on  this  occasion.  The
identification  of  Shallum  with  Jehoahaz  is
confirmed  by  1  Chron.  iii.  15  (Shallum,  the
youngest  son  of  Josiah) ;  the  name  appears
to  have  been  changed  on  his  accession  to
the  throne,  just  as  Eliakim  was  changed  to
Jehoiakim  (2  Chron.  xxxvi.  4).  There  is,
therefore,  no  occasion  to  suppose  an  ironical
allusion  to  the  short  reign  of  Jehoahaz,
which  might  be  compared  to  that  of  the
Israelitish  king  Shallum  (somewhat  as
Jezebel  addrestses  Jehu  as  "  O  Zimri,  mur-
derer of  his  lord,"  2  Kings  ix.  31).  This
view  has  the  support  of  F.  Junius  (professor
at  Ley  den,  1592),  of  Graf,  and  Rowland
Williams ;  but  why  should  not  the  Chroni-
cler, though  writing  in  the  Persian  period,
have  drawn  here,  as  well  as  elsewhere  in  the
genealogies,  from  ancient  traditional  sources?
There  is  nothing  in  ver.  11  to  suggest  an
allusion  to  the  fate  of  the  earlier  Shallum.

Ver.  13.^-Shallum,  or  Jehoahaz,  in  his
short  reign  of  three  months,  had  no  oppor-
tunity of  distinguishing  himself  for  good  or
for  evil.  It  was  otherwise  with  Jehoiakim,
whose  eleven  years  were  marked  by  the
worst  characteristics  of  idolatry  and  des-
potism. He  **had,  besides,  a  passion  for
building  splendid  and  costly  housed ;  and  as
he  esteemed  his  own  position  secure  under
the  protection  of  a  superior  power,  he  did
not  scruple  severely  to  oppress  his  helpless
subjects,  and  wring  from  them  as  much
money  as  possible'*  (Ewald,  *  History  of
IbraeV  iv.  252;  see  2  Kiugs  xxiii.  33—35).
The  building  mania,  to  which  Oriental
sovereigns  have  always  been  prone,  had
seized  upon  Jehoiakim.  The  architecture
of  the  original  palace  no  longer,  perhaps,
suited  the  higher  degree  of  civilization ;  the
space  was  as  confined  as  that  of  a  Saxon
mansion  would  have  appeared  to  a  Norman.
That  bnildeth  his  house  by  unrighteonineM ;
i.e,y  as  the  second  half-verse  explains,  by  not
paying  the  workmen  (comp.  Hub.  iL  12).


Ver.  14. — ^A  wide  home ;  literally,  a  haute
of  extension$.  Large  ohamben.  The  Hebrew
specifies  '*  upper  chambers  " — the  principal
rooms  in  ancient  houses.  Gntteth  him  oat
windows ;  and  it  is  oieled  with  oedar ;  rather,
.  .  .  his  windowst  roofing  it  loith  cedar.  (This
involves  no  change  of  letters,  but  a  Yeiy
slight  rearrangement,  and  the  alteration
of  one  poiut ;  grammar  gains  greatly  by  the
change.)  **  Cutteth  out  '  is,  literally,  rend"
eth ;  it  is  the  word  used  in  ch.  iv.  30  of  the
apparent  enlargement  of  the  eyes  bv  putting
powdered  antimony  upon  the  eyelids.  Win-
dows are,  as  it  were,  the  e^es  of  a  building
(Graf  compares  Eccles.  xii.  3).  Beams  of
cedar  wood  were  used  for  the  roof  of  the
palace,  as  being  the  most  costly  and  durable
(comp.  Isa.  ix.  10).  And  painted — rather,  and
painting  it — ^with  vermilion ;  a  taste  derived
from  the  Egyptians  rather  than  the  Baby-
lonians, who  seem  to  have  had  a  difficulty  in
procuring  red.

Ver.  15.— Shalt  thou  reign— rather,  doti
thou  reign;  i.e.  dost  thou  prove  thy  royal
qualities) — beoaue  thou  closest  thyself  in
oedar  1 '  The  second  part  of  the  clause  must
at  any  rate  be  altered.  Some  render,  **•  be-
cause thou  viest  (with  thy  forefathers)  in
cedar"  (i.e.  in  building  cedar  palaces).  Hit-
zig  would  strike  out  "  in  cedar,"  as  having
intruded  from  the  preceding  line  (such  a
phenomenon  meets  us  occasionally  in  the
received  Hebrew  text),  but  this  does  not
help  us  to  a  cormected  translation  of  the
passage.  Grafs  rendering  is  grammatioal,
and  not  against  usage;  it  is,  '*Dost  thou
reign  because  thou  art  eager  about  oedar^
wood  ?  "  and  yet  the  impression  left  on  the
mind  is  that  there  is  some  error  in  the  text
The  Septuagint  finds  a  reference  to  one  of
Jehoiakim's  predecessors,  **  because  thou
viest  with  Ahaz  "  (so  the  Vatican  Codex),
or,  *^.  .  .  with  Ahab"  (so  the  Alexandrine
and  the  Sinaitic  or  Fridorico-Augustan).
The  latter  king  is  celebrated  in  the  Old
Testament  on  account  of  his  buildings,
especially  his  ivory  palace  (2  Kings  xxii.
31>).  The  former  was  at  any  rate  ciddioted
to  the  imitation  of  foreign  ways  (2  Kings
xvi.  11 ;  XX.  1 1).  Did  not  thy  father  eat  and
drink  1  There  was  no  call  upon  Jehoiakim
to  live  the  life  of  a  Nazarite.  **•  Eating  and
drinking,"  i.e.  enjoying  the  good  things
within  his  reach,  was  perfectly  admibsible
(Eccles.  ii.  24);  indeed,  the  Old  Testament
view  of  life  is  remarkable  for  its  healthy
naturalness.  There  was,  however,  one  per-
emptory condition,  itself  as  much  in  accord-
ance with  nature  as  with  the  Law  of  God,
that  the  rights  of  other  men  should  be
studiously  regarded.  Josiah  **ate  and
drank,"  but  he  also  *'  did  judgment  and  jus-
tice," and  so  **  it  was  well  with  him.'*

Ver.  17.— But  thou,  O  Jehoiakim,  art  the


CH.  xxu.  1-30.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.


491


opposite  of  thy  &ther.  For  (not,  But)  thine
eyei  and  thine  heart  are  not  but  for
thy  covetoiunets.  "  Covetousness  "  iDoluiies
the  ideas  of  injustice  and  violence  (coinp.
oil.  vi.  13;  viii.  10);  hence  the  second  hulf
of  the  verse  emphaoizes  the  cruel  tyranny
which  marked  the  internal  policy  of  Johoia-
kim.

Ver.  18. — Josiah  had  been  bitterly  missed
and  universally  lamented  (2  Chron.  xxxv.
25);  and  so,  only  perhaps  with  less
heartiness  in  most  cased,  Jehoiakim's  other
predecessors  (ch.  xxxiv.  5).  The  Baby-
lonian kings,  too,  received  the  honours  of
public  mourning,  e.g.  even  the  last  of  his
race,  who  surrendered  to  Cyrus,  according  to
the  British  Museum  inscription  translated
by  Mr.  Pinches.  Ah  my  brother!  or.  Ah
nster!  The  Septuagint  omits  the  latter
part  of  this  phrase,  apparently  because  it
seemed  inappropriate  to  the  death  of
Jehoiakim;  but  the  parallelism  requires  a
two-membered  clause.  According  to  Movers,
the  funeral  procession  is  to  be  conceived  of
as  formed  of  two  parts,  condoling  with  eacii
other  on  having  to  share  the  same  fate  (*  I^io
Phoiiizier,'  ii.  248).  Or  perhaps  mythology
luuy  supply  a  reason ;  it  is  possible  that  the
formulas  of  public  mourning  were  derived
from  the  ceremonies  of  the  Adonia;  Adonis
was  an  androgynous  deity  (Lenormant,
*■  Lettres  assyriologiques,'  ii.  209),  and
might  be  lamented  by  his  devotees  as  at
once  "  brother  "  and  •*  sister."  (For  another
view,  see  Sayce*s  edition  of  G.  Smith's
*  Chaldean  Genesis,'  p.  267).  Ezekiel  (viii.
13)  testifies  to  the  worship  of  Tammuz,  or
Adonis,  and  the  highest  compliment  a  king
could  receive  might  be  to  be  lamented  in
the  same  terms  as  the  sun-god.  Jeremiah
does  not  approve  this ;  ho  merely  describes
the  popular  custom.  The  recognition  of
the  deeply  roote<l  heathenism  of  the  Jews
before  the  Exile  involves  no  dispamgement
to  Old  Testament  religion ;  rather  it  in-
creases the  cogency  of  the  argumeut  for  its
supernatural  origin.  For  how  great  was
the  contrast  between  Jcremiuh  and  bis
semi-heathen  countrymen  I  And  yet  Jere-
miah's religion  is  the  seed  of  the  faith
which  overcame  the  world.  Ah  lord!  or,
Ah  hiB  glory !  Lord  is  in  the  Hebrew  atldn
(comp.  Adonis  and  see  above).  Uis  glory
is  against  the  parallelism;  we  should  expect
"lady"  or  ••queen."

Ver.  19. — Jehoiakim's  miserable  death,
without  even  the  honour  of  burial.  The
prediction  is  repeated  in  ch.  xxxvi.  80,
where  the  statement  is  made  in  plain
language.  At  first  sight  it  appears  to
conflict  with  2  Kings  xxiv.  6, "  So  Jelioiakim
slept  with  his  fathers:  and  Jehoiachin  his
sou  reigned  in  his  stead;"  but  it  is  only
appearance,  and  when  we  remember  that


the  complete  formula  for  describing  the
natural  death  of  a  king  of  Judah  is,  ^  slept
with  his  fathers,  and  was  buried  with  hia
fathers  in  the  city  of  David  "  (1  Kings  xiv.
31;  XV.  24;  xxii.  50;  2  Kings  viiL  24;  xt.
7,  38;  xvi.  20X  and  that  the  phrase,  *«  slept
with  his  fathers,"  is  used  of  Ahab,  who  fell
on  tlio  field  of  battle  (1  Kings  xxii.  40),  we
are  naturally  led  to  the  conjecture  that
Jehoiakim  did  not  die  a  natural  death,  but
fell  in  battle  in  some  sally  made  by  the
besieged.  Buried  with  the  burial  of  an  aos ;
i.e.  cabt  out  unburied.  Beyond  the  gates;
rather, /ar/rom  the  gates.

Ver.  20. — A  new  strophe  begins  here,
relative  to  Jehoiachin,  the  son  and  successor
of  Jehoiakim.  Oo  np  to  Lebanon,  and  cry.
The  people  of  Judah  is  addresse<],  personi-
fied as  a  woman  (comp.  ch.  vii.  29).  The
penetrating  ciiaracter  of  the  long-toned  cry
of  an  Arab  has  been  mentioned  by  Dr.
Thomson.  In  Isa.  xl.  9  a  similar  command
is  given  to  Zion ;  but  in  what  different  cir-
cumstances! From  the  passages;  rather,
/ram  Abarim.  The  range  of  Abarim — Nebo,
from  which  Moses  surveyed  the  land  of
Israel,  belonged  to  it  (Deut.  xxxii.  49) —
completes  the  circle  of  mountain  stations;
Lebanon  was  in  the  north,  Bashan  in  the
north-east,  Abarim  in  the  south-east.  All
thy  lovers;  viz.  the  nations  whom  self-interest
had  combined  agaiust  Nebuchadrezzar,  and
between  whom  and  Judah  negotiations  had
from  time  to  time  been  entered  into  (ch.  ii.
36 ;  xxvii.  3).  **  Lovers  "  (oomp.  ch.  iv.  30 ;
30 ;  Ezek.  xvi.  33,  37).

Ver.  21. — From  thy  yonth ;  i.e.  from  the
time  that  thou  diist  become  a  nation
(comp.  ch.  ii.  2;  Hos.  ii.  15).  It  is  the
Exudus  which  is  referred  to.

Ver.  22.— Shall  eat  np  all  thy  pastors.
The  verb  is  that  connected  with  the
participle  rendered  "  pastors ; "  strictly,  there-
fore, shall  pasture  upon  all  thy  pastors.  The
"  wind"  referred  to  is  doubtless  the  ptirching
east  wind,  the  symbol  of  calamity,  which  is
actually  called  a  ** sharp"  wind  in  ch.  iv.  11.

Ver.  23. — 0  inhabitant— rather,  O  in-
hahitress — of  Lebanon.  It  is  the  people  of
Jerusalem  which  is  meant ;  the  **  Lebanon  "
are  the  palaces  of  cedar-wood  which  together
are  called  *'  the  house  of  the  King  of  Judah"
(ver.  6).  How  gradons  shalt  then  be!
rather.  How  wilt  Uiou  sigh  I

Ver.  24. — Coniah.  A  shorter  form  of
Jeconiah  (1  Chron.  iii.  1),  found  again  in  ch.
XX  xvi i.  1.  Perhaps  this  was  the  name  this
king  bore  prior  to  his  accession,  after  which
it  was  oertiiinly  Jehoiachin ;  Jeremiah  has
already  spoken  of  one  king  by  his  earlier
name  in  ver.  11.  The  Divine  speaker
solemnly  announces  that  though,  as  the
representative  of  Israel's  invisible  King,
Cuuiah  were — or  rather,  be — the  signet  npon


492


THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,  [ch.  xxn.  1—30.


his  right  hand  (a  most  valued  jewel),  yet
would— or  rather,  vnll — he  pluok  liim  thenoe ;
i.e.  depose  him  from  his  high  dignity.  The
same  figure  is  used  in  Hag.  ii.  23,  **  I  will
take  thee,  0  Zerubbibel,  and  make  thee  as
a  signet ; "  and  Ezek.  xxviii.  12,  where  there
is  a  well-attested  reading,  "  Thou  (O  King
of  Tyre)  art  a  deftly  made  si);net-ring."
(For  the  fulfilment  of  the  prediction  in  this
veree,  see  2  Kings  xxiv.  12,  15;  ch.  xxiv.
1 ;  xxix.  2.)

Ver.  26.---Cast  thee  ont  The  Hebrew  is
stronger — ^*'  hurl  thee  "  ^comp.  Ita.  xxii.  17,
Hebrew).  And  thy  mother ;  i.e.  the  queen-
mother  Nehushta  (com p.  ch.  xxix.  2 ;  2
Kings  xxiv.  8).  She  seems  to  have  been
particularly  influential  (see  introduction  to
ch.  xiii.)

Ver.  28.— Is  this  man  Coniah,  etc.?  The
prophet's  human  feelings  are  stirred;  he
cannot  withhold  his  sympathy  from  the  sad
fate  of  his  king.  What  I  he  exclaims ;  is  it
possible  that  this  Oniah  is  treated  as  a
piece  of  ill-wrought  pottery  ware  (comp.  ch.
xviii.  4),  and  "hurled"  into  a  strange  land?
He  and  his  seed.  These  words  have  caused
some  difficulty,  owing  to  the  youth  of
Jehoiachin.  According  to  2  Kings  xxiv.  8
he  was  only  eighteen  when  he  was  carried
captive,  while  2  Ghron.  xxxvi.  9  makes  him
still  younger,  only  eight  (Josiah's  age  on
his  accession).  Hitzig  thinks  the  latter
number  is  to  be  preferred ;  his  chief  reasons
are  the  prominence  given  to  the  queen-
mother,  and  the  fact  that  the  length  of


Jehoiachin*s  reign  is  given  with  more
precise  aocumcy  in  2  Chronicles  than  in  2
Kin^s.  It  id  true  that  the  king's  wives  aro
mentioned  in  2  Kings  xxiv.  15.  But  that
he  bad  wives  may,  according  to  Hitzig,
have  been  inferred  by  the  late  compiler  of
Kings  from  the  passage  before  us;  or  the
*' wives"  may  have  been  those  of  Jehoiachin's
predecessor  (comp.  2  Sam.  xvi  21).  Grafs
conjecture  is,  perhaps,  the  safest  view  of  the
case,  whether  we  accept  the  number  eighteen
or  the  number  eight ;  it  is  that  the  "  seed  '*
spoken  of  was  bom  to  Jehoiachin  in  his
captivity,  and  is  reckoned  to  him  by
anticipation.  It  should  be  mentioned,  how-
ever, that  the  Septuagint  omits  *'  he  and  his
seed  "  altogether.

Ver.  29.— 0  earth,  earth,  earth.  The
repetition  is  for  solemnity's  Bake  (comp.  cLl
VII.  4).

Ver.  30.— Write  ye  this  man  ehildlsM;
i.e.  enter  him  in  the  register  of  the  citizens
(comp.  Itia.  iv.  3)  as  one  who  has  no  heirs.
He  may  have  children,  but  none  of  them
shall  succeed  to  his  place  in  the  oommnnity.
This  is  all  that  tlie  passage  means ;  thrre  is
no  discrepancy  with  history :  how  shonld
there  be,  when  Jeremiah  himself  has
mentioned  the  posterity  of  Jehoiachin  (ver.
28  and  the  latter  part  of  this  verse)?  Yet
the  Septuagint  tiiought  it  necessary  to
avoid  the  appearance  of  such  a  discrepancy
by  rendering,  not  **  childless,*'  but  **oue
proscribed  "  {ixicfipvicTOp).


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1 — 5. — Court  preaching.  Jeremiah  has  been  preaching  in  the  valley  of
Hinnom,  in  the  temple  coarts  and  in  the  streets  of  Jerusalem;  now  he  is  called  to
enter  the  king's  palace  with  a  message  from  God.  The  preacher  must  not  wait  fur
his  audience  to  run  after  him,  but  he  must  create  it.  He  must  make  his  work  public,
not  hiding  it  in  modesty,  but  bringing  it  to  bear  on  the  widest  possible  field.  He'
must  not  be  content  to  maintain  his  unopposed  ministry  in  the  Church,  but  must  boldly
carry  out  his  mission  in  the  world.  Religion  is  not  a  concern  for  religious  people  alone ;
people  who  will  not  come  to  church  may  be  supposed  to  need  it  more  than  those  who
manifest  their  interest  in  it  by  attendance  at  regular  services.  K  the  court  is  irreligious
there  is  the  more  need  for  the  prophet  to  go  into  its  midst.

L  The  highest  rank  should  not  be  exempt  from  the  most  faithful  preaching.
The  Hebrew  prophets  were  remarkable  for  their  clear  and  bold  utterances  before  kings
— often  at  the  peril  of  their  lives  (e.g.  Amos  vii.  10—13).  Christ  expects  his  servants
to  be  equally  faithful  and  fearless  (Acts  ix.  15).  When  court  preachers  descend  to
become  court  flatterers  they  are  doing  their  utmost  to  ruin  their  patrons.  Kings  may
not  often  need  to  be  addressed  in  the  style  of  John  Knox,  in  his  sermons  before  Mary
Queen  of  Scots ;  but  they  certainly  should  not  be  treated  only  to  the  drawing-room
delicacies  of  Atterbury.  The  fastidiousness  which  makes  strong  words  about  unplea-
sant subjects  seem  in  "  bad  form "  in  fashionable  congregations  is  retiUy  a  sign  of
sacrificing  truth  and  right  to  mean  pleasantness.  Kings  are  men,  and  have  human
failings  and  sins.  Rank  confers  power  for  evil  as  well  as  for  good.  The  privileges  and
talents  of  a  high  position  involve  such  great  responsibilities,  that  the  neglect  or  abuse


CH.  XXII.  1—30.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  493


of  them  is  a  crime  of  first  magnitude  in  the  sight  of  God.    To  ignore  these  truths  is  to
act  crueUy  to  the  persons  whom  the  preacher  deceives  by  his  smooth  words.

II.  The  chabacteb  of  the  court  is  of  great  interest  to  the  nation.  As
men,  the  king  and  his  courtiers  have  a  right  to  be  dealt  faithfully  with  by  the  preacher.
But  as  persons  in  authority,  their  influence  makes  their  condition  of  importance  to  all.
The  people  are  largely  responsible  for  the  condition  of  the  court,  since  popular  applause
and  popular  censure  always  carry  great  weight  there.  Thus  Jeremiah  associates  the
people  with  the  king  in  the  address  which  is  intended  chiefly  for  the  king.  Etbh
un^r  a  constitutional  government  such  as  that  of  our  own  country,  the  court  has
immense  influence  especially  in  social  circles,  and  it  is  of  vital  interest  to  us  all  that
this  influence  should  be  pure  and  true  and  righteous.

III.  I'he  prosperity  of  a  oountbt  laboelt  depends  upon  the  moral  chabacteb
OF  its  government.  Tbis  great  truth  is  one  of  the  chief  lessons  to  be  derived  from
the  Bible  accounts  of  the  history  of  Israel.  We  commonly  rely  too  much  on  physical
resources,  wealth,  commerce,  military  power,  etc. ;  on  political  resources,  legislative
schemes,  diplomatic  complications,  etc.  We  in  England  have  yet  to  learn  how  much  of
our  prosperity  depends  on  honesty  in  trade,  fairness  in  dealing  with  foreign  nations  and
a  high  tone  of  political  morality.  To  judge  by  some  of  our  newspapers,  it  would  seem
that  religion  has  no  business  with  politics ;  that  a  county  is  glorified  when  her  leaders
stoop  to  underhand  work  that  would  disgrace  the  name  of  the  most  unscrupulous
lawyer.  The  doom  of  Israel  should  warn  us  against  this  political  atheism.  Tlu-ee
duties  are  specially  to  be  noted  in  the  discourse  of  Jeremiah.  1.  To  execute  judgment
and  righteousness ;  not  only  to  pronounce  just  verdicts,  but  to  carry  out  an  active
policy  of  justice.  2.  To  deliver  the  oppressed  ;  non-intervention  mav  be  cowardly  and
selfish  when  the  weak  claim  our  help.  3.  Not  to  oppress  the  weak;  this  applies  to
nationsdities  as  well  as  to  individuals,  and  is  a  warning  for  our  conduct  with  depen-
dencies, and  the  native  races  with  which  we  come  in  contact  in  the  colonies.  For
righteousness  in  these  respects  the  promised  reward  is,  not  a  mere  deliverance  from
a])proaching  calamities,  but  glory,  riches,  triumph.

Vers.  8,  9. — On  visiting  the  ruins  of  a  city.  What  a  picture  we  have  here!  Many
nations  passing  by  on  the  high-road  between  Egypt  and  the  East  struck  with  amaze-
ment at  the  ruins  of  Jerusalem.  Is  not  the  sight  of  a  city  in  ruins  always  a  source  of
pathetic  interest?  As  we  wander  about  the  silent  streets  of  Pompeii  the  stillness
of  death  is  appalling  by  contrast  with  the  tumult  of  pleasure  and  commerce  which
formerly  thronged  those  once  busy  thoroughfares.  Such  a  melancholy  spectacle  rouses
thought  and  inquiry.  Gibbon  tells  us  that  it  was  while  seated  among  the  ruins  of  the
Capitol  that  he  first  thought  of  writing  the  history  of  the  decline  and  fall  of  the  city  of
Home.  The  magnificent  ruins  of  Carnac  and  of  Persepolis  naturally  lead  us  to  sak
how  prosperity  and  power  came  to  pass  away  from  Persia  and  Egypt.  So  must  it  have
been  in  ancient  times  with  the  ruins  of  Jerusalem.  Jeremiah  warns  the  citizens  that
their  city,  now  brilliant  in  splendour  and  prosperity,  will  soon  astonish  all  beholders
with  its  overthrow.    We  have  in  the  words  of  the  prophet  a  question  and  an  answer.

I.  The  question.  (Ver.  8.)  It  is  put  by  the  heathen  nations.  These  people  who
cannot  understand  the  religion  of  Jerusalem  can  see  clearly  enough  her  ruin.  The
world  has  eyes  for  the  shame  of  the  Church  in  her  overthrow,  though  none  for  her
highest  glory,  that  of  the  beauty  of  holiness.  The  question  is  asked  by  many  nations.
The  spectacle  is  open  to  all,  and  so  startling  that  many  are  arrested  by  it.  How  true
is  this  even  in  the  case  of  individual  men  !  If  a  Christian  falls  into  sin  and  shame  the
scandal  rings  through  the  world.  1.  Tbis  question  bears  witness  to  the  horrible  doom
of  sin.  The  ruins  are  so  extensive  and  so  completely  wrecked,  that  all  who  pass  by
are  fascinated  and  appsdled  by  the  sight  of  them.  If  strangers  are  so  struck,  how  must
the  children  of  the  city  feel  ?  Well  may  they  hang  their  harps  on  the  willows,  and
sit  them  down  in  despair  by  the  waters  of  Babylon.  Yet  the  temporal  ruin  of  a  city
is  slight  compared  with  the  spiritual  ruin  of  a  soul.  2.  The  question  bears  witness  to
the  surprise  that  this  calamity  excited.  (1)  It  was  in  contrast  to  former  prosperity.
We  are  too  ready  to  see  in  prosperity  the  promise  of  its  continuance.  But  no  deludon
can  be  greater.  (2)  It  was  in  opposition  to  the  boasts  of  the  Jews.  They  had  regarded
their  city  as  sacred  and  invulnerable.    So  the  French  under  the  empire  were  taught  to


i


494  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  xxil  1— 3a

consider  Paris.  And  this  self-confidence  carries  weight  with  others ;  for  the  world  is
indolent  and  thoughtless  enough  to  take  people  very  much  at  their  own  estimate  of
themselves.  Nevertheless  it  is  vain.  (3)  It  was  in  spite  of  the  supposed  proteeiian  of
Qo(L  The  Jews  were  the  elect  nation.  Hence  the  expectation  of  their  immunity ;
but  a  vain  expectation.  No  Divine  favouritism  will  save  us  from  the  consequences  of
our  sins.  3.  The  question  suggests  no  possibility  of  help  from  the  nations.  They  may
pity,  but  they  can  do  nothing.  The  stare  of  the  crowd  only  aggravates  the  calamity*
Well  may  such  a  prospect  strike  grief  into  the  people  interested.

II.  The  answer.  (Ver.  9.)  1.  The  cause  of  this  calamity  may  he  known.  Even
the  heathen  nations  may  know  it.  Providence  is  not  so  mysterious  as  we  suppose.
No  study  is  more  lofty  or  more  useful  than  the  study  of  the  moral  philosophy  of  history.
Treated  only  on  secular  grounds,  it  may  be  perplexing  and  unsatisfactory.  But  regarded
in  the  light  of  the  principles  of  the  Bible,  it  may  be  fruitful  in  sound  results.
2.  The  cause  is  moral.  The  hosts  of  Nebuchadnezzar  conquered  Jerusalem.  Swarms
of  northern  races  and  Asiatic  hordes  swept  away  the  power  of  imperial  Rome.  Paris
fell  before  the  guns  and  discipline  of  the  German  army.  Yet  in  each  of  these  cases
moral  corruption  was  behind  the  physical  cause  of  ruin,  sapping  the  strength  of  the
doomed  city  and  provoking  the  onslaught  of  its  foes.  3.  The  special  cause  was
unfaithfulness  to  Qod :  (1)  forsaking  Ood — for  (Jod  never  withdraws  his  protection  from
his  people  till  they  have  abandoned  their  fidelity  to  him ;  ^2)  breaking  the  covenant —
for  this  had  two  sides,  and  Grod  s  promised  grace  is  conditioned  by  the  conduct  of  his
people ;  and  (3)  positive  idolatry — for  the  unfaithful  servant  of  God  never  rests  with
the  abandonment  of  his  God.  He  must  serve  some  master.  Such  moral  and  religious
corruption  justifies  punishment  and  requires  chastisement.  We  may  believe  that  a  right
understanding  of  the  guilt  and  necessities  of  men  will  ultimately  convince  us  of  the
righteousness  and  wisdom  of  God's  sterner  dealings,  which  at  first  naturally  excite
our  wonder  and  dismay.

Ver.  10. — Misspent  tears,  I.  Why  not  weep  for  the  dead  ?  It  is  natural  to  do
so.  The  religion  of  the  Bible  is  not  stoicism.  Christ  wept  by  the  grave  of  Lazarus.
Yet  there  are  times  aud  circumstances  which  make  it  fitting  not  to  weep  for  the  dead,
and  there  are  always  grounds  for  the  mitigation  of  such  grief.  1.  The  dead  are  taken
from  the  evil  to  come.  This  is  the  idea  of  Jeremiah.  If  death  was  a  calamity,  the  fate
of  the  living  at  the  overthrow  of  Jerusalem  would  have  been  a  worse  one.  If  an  evil,
death  is  still  the  less  of  two  evils.  Even  if  we  only  think  of  the  dead  as  leaving  the  sun-
light of  this  upper  world  and  passing  to  the  dim  land  of  shades,  still  they  go  to  the  place
**  where  the  wicked  cease  from  troubling,  and  the  weary  are  at  rest.'*  In  less  calamitous
times  we  should  feel  that,  as  God  knows  all,  he  may  have  taken  our  loved  ones  to  save
them  from  some  fearful  evil  which  he,  though  he  alone,  saw  in  their  path.  2.  The  dead
are  removed  according  to  the  will  of  Ood,  David  wept  for  his  child  while  it  lived ;
after  it  was  dead  he  dried  his  tears,  for  then  he  knew  God's  wiU  and  resigned  himself  to
it  (2  Sam.  xii.  22,  23).  This  resignation  is  more  than  a  sensible  recognition  of  the
inevitable;  it  is  a  calm  and  trustful  acquiescence  in  the  will  of  Otod  as  righteously
supreme — for  if  the  Lord  gave,  may  he  not  take  away  ? — wise,  and  good.  3.  The  dead
have  fallen  into  the  hands  of  Ood,  In  what  better  hands  can  they  be  ?  How  much
better  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  God  than  into  the  hands  of  man  I  We  dare  not  dogma*
tize  concerning  the  deep  mysteries  of  futurity.  But  one  thing  we  know — "  The  mercy
of  the  Lord  endureth  for  ever."  He  is  just,  he  may  seem  stem  ;  the  impenitent  must
suffer  punishment,  which  can  be  nothing  else  but  fearful,  thoush  fair.  Yet  may  not
this  be  the  very  best  thing  for  them,  even  during  their  sufferings  ?  For  it  is  better  for
us  to  suffer  for  sin  than  to  sin  without  suffering.  And  who  knows  what  liltimate
designs  God  may  have  ?  4.  The  dead  in  Christ  never  need  our  tears.  We  may  weep
for  our  own  loss,  but  this  is  their  gain.  Weep  that  the  battle  is  over  and  victory  won  V
Weep  that  the  pilgrimage  is  finished  and  the  pilgrim  safe  at  home  ?  Weep  Uiat  the
toil  and  sorrow,  the  temptation  and  sin,  of  this  world  are  left  behind,  and  the  joys  of
heaven  inherited?  that  the  night  has  ended,  the  shadows  flown  away?  that  the  light
of  the  celestial  city  is  beaming  on  the  weary  wanderer  ?  Such  tears  are  tears  of  unbelief.


a


II.  Why  weep  tob  the  living  ?    This  may  be  required  by  special  causes.    Life  is
blessing.    God  gives  many  joy.i  to  his  children  in  this  world.    The  continuance  of


CH  xxn.  1—30.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  496

life  is  a  privilege  carrying  with  it  the  extension  of  advantages  for  faithful  service.  The
brave  and  loyal  servant  of  God  will  not  selfishly  crave  a  premature  release  from  the
duties  of  his  life.  Still  there  is  a  pathos  about  all  lite.  "  Our  sincerest  laughter  with  some
pain  is  fraught."  Special  circumstances  may  make  it  fitting  to  weep  for  the  living.
There  are  calamities  that  are  worse  than  death.  Such  seem  to  have  been  realized  in
the  horrors  of  the  sieges  of  Jerusalem.  It  is  worse  to  live  in  sin  than  to  die.  The  lost
and  ruined  life  claims  our  pity  far  more  than  that  which  is  cut  off  by  an  early  death.
What  curse  could  be  greater  than  that  of  the  "  Wandering  Jew  "  ?  Matthew  Henry  says,
"  Dying  saints  may  be  justly  envied,  while  living  sinners  are  justly  pitied.  And  so  dismal
perhaps  the  prospects  of  the  times  may  be,  that  tears  even  for  a  Josiah,  even  for  a  Jesus,
must  be  restrained,  that  they  may  be  reserved  for  ourselves  and  our  children  (Luke  xxiii.
28)."  Why  should  not  this  situation  justify  suicide  ?  Because  (1)  we  are  not  the  masters
of  our  own  lives ;  (2)  no  man  can  tell  what  may  follow  the  gloomiest  prospects  in  the
boundless  possibilities  of  life,  even  in  this  world ;  (8)  the  man  who  lays  violent  hands  on
himself  in  rash,  cowardly,  and  wilful  rebellion  against  Grod,  may  expect  a  worse  condition
in  the  future  life  than  that  of  the  man  who  is  called  away  by  Providence,  and  i)ossibly
far  worse  than  any  he  is  attempting  to  escape.

Ver.  13. — Dishonest  builders.  In  no  age  could  these  words  of  Jeremiah  be  more
appropriate  than  in  our  own.  Whilst  we  must  bo  most  careful  to  discriminate  and  not
to  vent  wholesale  censure,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  building  trade  of  our  day
furnishes  numerous  instances  of  an  unrighteousness  in  business  transactions  which  is  a
scandal  to  the  commercial  character  of  our  nation,  and  which,  if  it  becomes  general,  must
be  a  sure  presage  of  ruin.

I.  The  wickedness  of  the  dishonest  builders.  1.  It  is  seen  in  had  work.
Attempts  are  made  to  palm  ofif  wretched  work  with  external  decorations.  There  is  a
double  crime  here— lying  and  stealing ;  the  work  pretends  to  be  what  it  is  not,  and
undue  payment  is  wrung  out  of  the  purchaser.  Is  not  this  commercial  immorality  to
be  witnessed  in  many  branches  of  trade  ?  In  how  many  instances  is  it  impossible  to
draw  the  line  between  the  trader  and  the  swindler  ?  We  find  people  accepting  it  as  a
maxim  that  every  advantage  should  be  taken  of  the  ignorance,  weakness,  and  trustful*
ness  of  others.  It  is  forgotten  that  work  should  be  done  well  for  its  own  sake  and  in
justice  to  others.  Remember,  God  judges  us  more  by  the  character  of  our  work  in  the
week  than  by  the  appearance  of  our  worship  on  Sunday.  2.  This  wickedness  is  seen  in
the  treatment  of  workmen.  Those  who  live  in  rapidly  growing  neighbourhoods  know
how  common  it  is  for  poor  tradesmen  to  be  ruined  by  the  speculative  builders  to  whom
they  have  supplied  materials,  and  for  the  artisans  to  have  the  utmost  difficulty  in
obtaining  their  wages.  This  is  especially  bad,  because  it  is  the  oppression  of  the  poor
and  the  abuse  of  confidence.  We  have  no  right  so  to  speculate  as  to  risk  the  property
of  other  people.  The  cruelties  of  slavery  which  accompanied  the  gigantic  Duilding
operations  of  antiquity  (e.g.  in  the  building  of  the  Pyramids)  may  be  equalled  in
wickedness  by  the  crime  of  those  who  steal  the  work  of  the  poor  to  increase  the  chance
of  their  own  aggrandizement.

II.  The  buin  of  the  dishonest  btjildebs.  "  Woe  unto  him,"  etc !  Undue  anxiety
to  get  rich  overreaches  itself  and  ends  in  bankruptcy.  Dishonesty  in  trade  is  poison  to
successful  business  in  the  ultimate  issue,  for  it  cuts  at  the  root  of  the  mainspring  of  all
business — trust.  The  abuse  of  confidence  must  finally  destroy  confidence.  No  doubt
commercial  depression  is  largely  due  to  this  cause.  If  the  abuse  were  general,  there
could  be  no  commerce  in  the  form  that  this  must  assume  if  it  is  to  be  carried  on  largely
with  the  complicated  civilization  of  modem  life.  We  may  be  assured,  too,  that  Gk)d
will  not  overlook  this  wickedness.  Success  may  be  attained  at  first.  The  rich  man
may  have  built  his  palace  and  may  be  enjoying  its  luxuries.  The  commercial  man  may
have  brought  his  dishonest  transactions  to  a  successful  termination.  Tet  the  fraud  and
the  cruelty  are  noted  in  heaven ;  and  if  there  is  a  Judge  above,  the  palace  of  the  great
will  be  no  citadel  to  protect  the  guilty  man  from  the  thunders  of  Divine  judgment.

Ver.  21. '•^The  voice  of  Ood  disregarded  in  prosperity.  I.  God  speaks  to  us  in  our
pbospebitt.  1.  There  are  important  words  which  need  to  be  spoken  to  us  at  such
a  time.    We  can  never  have  all  the  wants  of  our  souls  supplied  by  the  richest  abundance


40C  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  xxii.  1—3

of  material  good  things,  and  we  need  heavenly  words  for  our  soul's  sustenance  then  i
much  as  in  the  conscious  helplessness  of  trouble.  Wo  have  special  dutieB  belonging  1
the  time  of  prosperity.  Prosperity  brings  talents,  opens  up  opportunities  for  enlarge
service,  calls  for  renewed  devotion  of  love  and  gratitude,  i'here  are  also  peculii
dangers  attending  prosperity,  and  it  is  well  that  we  should  hear  a  Divine  voice  war
us  against  them,  and  heed  a  Divine  counsel  which  will  direct  us  how  to  conquer  then
2.  There  are  means  by  which  Grod  speaks  to  us  in  prosperity.  He  is  ever  speaking  t
us,  even  when  we  do  not  hear  his  voice — by  the  Bible  we  should  be  reading,  by  th
ordinances  of  the  Church  and  the  institution  of  preaching,  by  the  course  of  providence
by  the  life  of  nature,  by  the  still  small  voice  of  conscience.  But  there  are  special  voice
of  prosperity.  Prosperity  speaks  to  us  of  the  goodness  of  God  exercised  towards  us  ii
spite  of  our  ill-desert  and  in  a  degree  beyond  all  reckoning.

II.  There  is  danger  lest  we  should  disregard  the  voice  of  Gtod  ik  fbospebiti
God  docs  not  thrust  his  messages  upon  unwilling  ears.  We  may  refuse  to  hear.  Yet  h
speaks  so  that  we  may  always  hear,  so  that  if  we  do  not  heed  his  voice  it  must  b<
because  we  will  not  hearken  to  it.  1.  Prosperity  may  disincline  us  to  do  this  becaum
it  seems  to  satisfy  us  without  God.  Really  satisfy  us  it  cannot.  But  temporarily  it  act4
as  an  opiate,  and  when  we  do  not  feel  the  need  of  God  we  are  tempted  selfishly  to  dis'
regard  his  voice.  2.  Then  prosperity  is  distracting.  Sorrow  is  lonely  and  silent^  anc
leaves  us  in  the  dark  night  to  listen  to  heavenly  voices  and  gaze  on  the  wonders  of  thi
world  above.  The  garish  day  of  prosperity,  with  its  noisy  and  dazzling  distractions
withdraws  our  attention  from  such  things.  3.  Further,  prosperity  begets  pride,  II
leads  us  to  think  much  of  self,  to  yield  to  self-will,  and  to  rebel  against  the  requiremenl
to  act  as  God's  servants  and  stoop  beneath  the  yoke  of  his  will.  Hence  it  inclines  uj
to  a  rebellious  disregard  for  his  voice.  4.  If  men  have  been  hardened  against  God  Grom
their  youth,  it  is  not  likely  that  they  will  heed  his  voice  in  the  time  of  prosperity.  The
longer  we  neglect  this  voice  the  more  deaf  do  we  become  to  it.  It  is  terrible  to  think
of  the  folly  and  wickedness  of  persistent  disregard  to  Otod'a  truth  while  he  is  patient  and
long-sufifering  and  persevering  in  seeking  access  to  our  hearts.  Some  great  i^ock
seems  to  be  required  to  disturb  this  habit  of  hardened  indifference.  An  earthquake
of  adversity  may  be  required  to  break  up  such  fallow  ground.  If  trouble  comes  with
this  end  it  is  a  great  blessing.  The  adversity  of  the  Captivity  was  such  a  blessing  to
the  Jews ;  it  led  them  to  regard  the  voice  that  was  unheeded  in  their  prosperity.  So
our  sorrows  arc  often  blessings  if  they  make  us  to  hear  the  voice  of  our  Father  in  heaven.


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1 — 23. — Truth-speaking  under  difficulties.  The  prophet  is  commanded  to  go
down  to  the  king's  palace  and  deliver  his  prophecies  in  the  royal  audience.  *  His  mission
did  not  admit  of  time-serving  or  evasive  utterance.  Like  that  prophet  who  said  to
David, ''  Thou  art  the  man/'  he  had  to  speak  to  the  king  face  to  face  and  with  great
plainness.

I.  GoD*s  children  are  often  called  upon  to  witness  to  hih  in  difficxtlt  placeb.
In  king's  courts  ;  in  society ;  in  unbelieving  homes ;  in  the  office,  workshop,  etc,

II.  Their  witness  is  often  in  sheer  contradiction  to  the  actions  and  habits
that  prevail  there.  The  sin  of  Judah  was  flagrant  and  open,  affecting  the  mo6t
elementary  laws  of  righteousness.  The  Law  of  Moses  guarded  the  widow  and  the
orphan.  The  Law  of  God,  in  its  righteousness,  purity,  and  love,  is  still  strange  to  the
world's  life,  and  is  constantly  violated  in  it.  But  the  duty  of  witnessing  is  only
rendered  the  more  imperative.

IIL  Thet  are  sustained  bt:  1.  The  consciousness  of  inner  rectitude  and  duty,  2.
The  witness  of  conscience  in  the  transgressors,  3.  The  presence  and  promises  qf  him  who
sends  <Aem.*— M.

Vers.  5,  7, 13, 14. — Building  in  unrighteousness.  The  building  of  a  house,  be  it
small  or  great,  is  always  an  interesting  and  suggestive  process.  It  is  a  lengthened
operation,  expensive,  and  representing  a  great  part  of  a  man's  aims  and  efforts,  various
purposes  may  be  sought  in  it  according  to  tne  character,  circumstances,  etc.,  of  the


CH.  xxn.  1-^0.]    THE  BOOK   OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  497

builder— mere  shelter,  comfort,  splendour,  protection.  As  these  come  into  view  the
object  in  which  they  are  to  be  realized  becomes  representative  of  the  living  personality
and  character  with  which  it  is  associated.  Jehoiakim  was  a  despot,  bent  upon  aggran-
dizement, and  so  he  sought  to  build  a  magnificent  palace  with  forced,  unpaid  labour.
The  ambitions  of  unspiritual  men,  the  exclusive  and  absorbing  projects  of  earthly  life,
resemble  the  palace-building  of  this  Hebrew  tyrant  in—

I.  The  union  of  extra vagant  desires  and  dishonest,  unlawful  methods.  Easy
for  Jehoiakim  to  "  go  in  "  for  a  splendid  palace,  as  he  is  not  in  the  habit  of  paying  his
employes.  Are  there  not  many  m  modem  life  who  act  on  the  same  principle  ?  The
desire  for  self-advancement  and  aggrandizement  overtops  every  other  consideration.  1.
Unlawful  methods  of  securing  these  are  employed.  Speculation;  getting  on  in  busi-
ness in  order  to  get  out  of  it ;  adulteration ;  insufficient  wages ;  prices  that  do  not
admit  of  honest  manufacture ;  clap-trap  advertisements,  etc.  2.  Imagining  that  ot?iers
exist  for  the  sake  ofone^s  self.  This  reverses  the  golden  rule  and  the  spirit  of  Christ's
life.

II.  Its  fundamental  sin.  This  is  selfishness — self-glorification,  neglect  of  God  and
of  human  claims.  The  great  principles  of  the  Divine  kingdom  are  contradicted  ;-»jus-
tice,  mercy,  brotherly  sympathy,  etc.

III.  Its  results.  1.  The  ruin  of  the  huUding  ;  Le.  the  life-project^the  unhallowed
aim.    2.  The  ruin  of  the  builder — for  time,  perhaps  for  eternity. — M.

Vers.  8,  9. — Monumental  judgments.  I.  Exceptional  penalties  will  attend  the
abuse  of  exceptional  PRiviLEaES.  1.  As  admeasure  of  justice.  The  position  attained
by  Jerusalem  was  due  not  so  much  to  its  site  as  to  its  being  the  centre  of  a  theocracy.
The  foundation  of  its  prosperity  was  a  spiritual  one.  It  was  Gk>d'8  elective  favour  which
had  lifted  it  up  above  the  cities  of  the  earth.  Presuming  upon  this,  the  first  laws  of
righteousness  bad  been  violated  and  the  whole  conditions  of  the  covenant  relation
ignored.  This  assumption  of  the  inalienability  of  Divine  blessings  is  at  the  root  of
every  great  apostasy.  It  is  doubly  unrighteous.  (1)  As  a  robbing  of  Gk)d.  (2)  As  a
misuse  of  a  falsely  acquired  advantage  and  reputation.  The  robbery  of  such  things  is
of  infinitely  greater  heinousness  in  so  far  as  they  transcend  in  their  value  merely  earthly
treasures,  and  dififer  from  them  in  the  terms  of  their  acquisition.  It  is  free  grace  and
unrequited  love  that  are  trampled  on,  and  the  punishment  must  therefore  be  the  more
exemplary.  2.  As  a  necessary  precaution.  Pretensions  so  great  are  apt  to  mislead
others.  People  who  say,  "  The  temple  of  the  Lord,  the  temple  of  the  Lord  are  we,^  may
be  taken  at  their  own  estimation  if  no  marked  change  takes  place  in  their  external  con-
dition. God,  therefore,  uses  his  judgment  in  its  external  signs  as  an  index  of  his  repro-
bation. Other  nations  than  Israel  have  illustrated  this  principle  in  their  decline  and
fall.  The  great  peoples  of  Christendom  are  on  tMr  triaL  There  is  nothing  more  hateful
in  the  sight  of  Goa  than  a  people  that  has  outlived  its  religion  and  yet  retains  the  pro-
fession of  it.  Although  the  chief  penalties  of  unfaithfulness  in  spiritual  things  must
bo  inward,  external  evidences  will  not  be  wanting  of  what  has  taken  place.  How
colossal  the  ruin  of  a  power  that  has  once  been  Christian,  and  has  been  exalted  through
Divine  grace  for  the  fulfilment  of  pledges  which  have  never  been  redeemed  (Matt,  xxiii.
37  ;  xi.  23) !

U.  The  judgment  of  God  will  be  endorsed  bt  the  verdict  of  the  world.  Even
the  ruins  of  Jerusalem  would  be  a  thing  to  gaze  at.  Its  desolation  would  be  unlike  any
other.  The  epitaph  of  a  forfeited  spiritual  supremacy  would  seem  to  be  graven  on  the
very  stones.  There  is  ever  something  unmistakable  and  peculiar  in  the  condition  of
those  who  are  rejected  by  God.  Their  misery  is  not  as  other  misery,  their  ruin  not
as  other  ruin.  1.  The  spectacle  will  he  self-explanatory.  Not  that  every  sin  and
failing  of  God's  people  would  be  written  in  earthly  chronicles,  but  the  causes  of  their
decay  would  be  brc^y  apparent.  So  is  it  with  the  Church  from  which  God  removes
his  candlestick,  and  the  soul  in  whom  the  light  has  become  darkness.  2.  It  will  be
morally  impressive.  Even  in  its  misery  the  people  of  Gk>d  will  instruct  the  nations ;
and  the  Church  of  Christ  will  be  a  spectacle  to  angels  and  to  men  in  its  failures  as  in
its  successes.— -M.

Vers.  10~12.-»lb^  worse  than  death,   Josiah's  death  was  still  fireah  in  the  memory

JEREMIAH.  2  K


498  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,     [ch.  xxn.  1— 3a

of  the  people.  But  their  hopes  were  reviviDg  at  the  accession  of  the  young  Jehoahas,
his  son.  For  three  months  he  reigned  in  Jerusalem,  following  the  evil  and  not  the
good  of  his  predecessor,  and  *'  Pharaoh-Nechoh  put  him  in  bands  at  Riblah  in  the  land
of  Hamath,  that  he  might  not  reign  in  Jerusalem."  After  appointing  Eliakim,  another
son  of  Josiah,  to  reign  in  his  stead,  he  took  the  captive  prince  to  Egypt,  where  he  died
{2  Kings  xxiii.  31—35).  The  exile  of  "  Shallum  **  was  qmte  recent  at  the  time  of  this
prophecy,  and  the  nation  was  naturally  more  concerned  over  the  tragic  fate  of  Jodah
than  the  evil  fortune  of  his  son.  Jeremiah  hastens  to  correct  this  mistake  by  assuring
them  of  the  miserable  death  of  Shallum  in  Egypt.    From  this  we  learn  that—

I.  Death  is  not  the  greatest  calamitt  that  can  befall  uek.     Shallum  living,
but  in  shameful  exile,  was  really  more  to  be  pitied  in  himself  and  to  be  deplored  for
the  sake  of  his  country,  than  Josiah  dead.  The  latter  was  free  from  the  degradations  to
which  his  descendants  were  exposed,  and  saved  the  pain  of  seeing  his  country  rendered
tributary ;  he  had  also  children  to  occupy  his  place.     But  Shallum  experienced  all  his
nation's  shame,  as  it  were,  vicariously,  and  was  helpless  to  rescue  it  from  the  foreign  yoke
under  which  the  intrigues  of  his  brother  had  brought  it.    The  hopes  of  Israel  had  in
a  special  but  easily  understood  way  centred  upon  Shallum,  in  whom  it  trusted  to  see
the  restoration  of  ancient  glory.    All  these  are  cut  off  by  a  decree  more  than  human*
He   became,  therefore,  the  typo ;   1.  Of  forfeited  possibilities  of  usefulness,      2.  Of
national  ignominy,    3.  Of  an  irremovable  curse.    The  apostate  professor  of  religion,
the  impenitent  sinner,  etc.,  are  worse  than  dead.     It  were  better  for  the  offender  of
the  little  ones  that  he  had  never  been  born  (cf.  Heb.  x.  26 ;  2  Pet.  ii.  20,  21).

II.  The  compassion  of  men  should  be  called  forth  for  the  misery  of  those
WHOSE  WRONO-DoiNQ  THEY  HAVE  SHARED.  1.  Because  of  its  vicarious  character,  2.
Because  of  the  Divine  displeasure  which  it  represents.  This  extends  to  themselves,  even
although  they  are  not  personally  punished.  Shallum,  in  this  respect,  is  a  type  of  him
who  was  "  made  sin  for  us."  3.  In  order  to  practical  measures  being  takers  for  its
reli^.  There  are  many  in  our  own  day  who,  like  Shallum,  are  the  victims  of  national
crimes  and  social  sins.  It  is  for  those  who  have  escaped  the  penalty  to  seek,  by  practical
measures  and  the  earnest  presentation  of  the  gospel,  to  redeem  them  to  a  happier  life.
The  outcast  and  the  fallen  will  be  the  brightest  gems  in  the  crown  of  the  Church
which  gives  itself  to  their  redemption. — M.

Vers.  15, 16. — True  royalty.  The  contrast  between  Josiah  and  his  son  has  had  many
a  parallel.  The  family  emerges  from  honest  homespun  into  splendid  dishonour,  drop-
ping its  virtues  and  its  religion  as  it  goes.  In  all  periods  of  external  development  and
material  civilization  it  is  well  to  remember  that  true  greatness  must  be  in  the  man  and
not  in  his  circumstances,  and  that  the  richest  amongst  us  cannot  afford  to  do  without
the  graces  and  benevolence  that  dignify  and  adorn  even  the  humblest  life.

I.  Sham  royalty.  "Shalt  thou  reign,  because  thou  closest  thyself  in  cedar?"
With  such  persons  the  pomp  of  circumstance  is  everything.  Autocratic  imperiousness
is  mistaken  for  empire.  The  whole  superstructure  is  unsafe  because  the  foundation  is
false.  The  ground  is  undermined.  In  proportion  as  men  lose  the  reality  of  power  they
grasp  at  its  shadow.

II.  True  royalty.  Essentially  a  spiritual  thing.  1.  In  what  it  consists.  In  moral
authority  and  real  influence  over  men.  This  is  never  impaired  by  mere  loss  of  external
circumstance.  The  true  king  does  not  require  his  crown.  2.  How  it  is  secured.  By
(1)  dependence  on  Gk)d,  (2)  simplicity  of  personal  wants,  (3)  singleness  of  patriotic
purpose,  (4)  sympathy  with  the  ruled.  "  It  was  well  with  him."  This  repetition  is
mtended  to  impress.  "  Then  it  was  well  with  him  "—an  emphasis  of  time  that  was  to
be  noted.    Josiah  himself  had  gone  away  from  this  ideal  life  and  God  cast  him  oflT. M.

Vers.  I-^IO,— The  mighty  pleadings  of  Qod.  These  verses  contain  record  of  what
we  may  fitlv  term  a  Divine  wrestling  with  his  sinful  people  to  induce  them  to  abandon
their  wickedness  and  live^  so  intense  and  lu'gent  are  the  motives  which  he  brings  to
bear  upon  them.    Note—

I.  Fob  what  God  pleads.  "  That  they  should  execute  righteousness  and  judgment,^
It  is  the  King  Jehoiakim  who  is  addressed  specially,  a  monarch  one  of  the  worst  who
filled  the  throne  of  David.    **  He  remained  fixed  in  the  recollections  of  his  countrymen


CH.  XXII.  1—30.]    THE  BOOK   OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  499


as  the  last  example  of  those  cruel,  selfish,  luxurious  princes,  the  natural  products  of
Oriental  monarchies,  the  disgrace  of  the  monarchy  of  David.*'  For  the  estimate
formed  of  him,  cf.  ver.  13,  etc.  To  him,  therefore,  God  thus  appeals.  Now,  this  appeal
is  one  God  is  ever  making.  Righteousness  is  his  supreme  solicitude  (cf.  homily  on  ch.
vii.  1—34,  on  "Relation  of  religion  and  righteousness").  False  or  corrupted  religions
are  over  characterized  by  indifference  to  righteousness.  So  long  as  outwurd  adJiesion
to  the  creeds  and  customs  they  enjoin  is  given,  a  wide  margin  is  allowed  for  the  indul-
gence of  the  natural  and  evil  propensities  of  humanity.  But  a  constant  characteristic
of  the  religion  taught  us  in  God's  Word  is  its  demand  for  righteousness.  The  gospel  is
no  less  stringent  than  the  Law,  yea,  is  more  and  justly  more  so,  as  it  has  brought  to  our
aid  a  Divine  force  by  which  the  demands  of  righteousness  may  be  more  readily  met.
It  does  not  make  void  the  Law.  So  far  from  that,  it  establishes  the  Law.  If  we
understand  by  **  belief  "  that  which  a  man  "  lives  by,"  which  some  say  is  the  etymology
of  the  word,  and  at  any  rate  its  meaning,  then  the  scornful  lines  of  the  sceptic  may
be  admitted  to  be  true^

**  For  creeds  and  sects  let  senseless  bigots  fight ;
His  can't  be  wrong  whose  life  is  in  the  ri^t.**

For  if  those  principles  of  conduct,  those  governing  motives  of  a  man's  life,  lead  him
to  right,  then,  though  encrusted  with  what  amount  of  error  and  superstition  soever
they  may  be,  they  nevertheless,  because  bearing  such  fruit,  cannot  be  wrong  at  the
root.  And,  on  the  other  hand,  however  orthodox  and  scriptural  the  professed  creed,
if  it  do  not  tend  to  right  conduct  then  that  fact  proves  that  the  professed  belief  is  not
the  real  one,  but  one  far  other.  **  Be  ye  holy  as  I  am  holy/'  u  ever  GK)d's  demand.
Note—

II.  How  HE  PLEADS.  See  what  forcible  arguments  he  employs.  1.  The  mighty
attraction  of  hope.  Thus  he  would  draw  men  off  from  sin.  If  those  to  whom  he
appeals  would  but  hearken,  he  would  work  what  would  be  virtually  a  miracle  for  them.
He  would  stay  the  progress  of  ruin  and  decay  which  were  now  threatening  the  state ;  he
would  turn  back  the  tide  of  events  which  was  now  rushing  on  in  such  vast  volume
and  force  to  overwhelm  the  throne  and  people,  and  he  would  re-establii^  the  ancient
monarchy  of  David  in  all  its  pristine  glory  (cf.  ver.  4).  To  do  this  now  that  matters
had  gone  so  far  would  be  as  great  a  moral  miracle  as  the  cleaving  of  the  waters  of  Hie
Red  Sea,  and  the  Jordan,  and  the  destruction  of  Sennacherib's  army,  were  physical  ones.
But  God  would  do  that  if  but  the  wicked  king  would  turn  from  his  wickedness  and
execute  righteousness  and  judgment.  2.  The  mighty  compulsion  of  fear.  Thus  he
would  drive  them  off  from  their  present  evil  ways.  See  the  terrible  threatenings
of  ver.  5,  etc.  What  a  picture  the  prophet  draws  of  calamity  and  of  shame,  which
would  be  theirs  if  they  did  **  not  hear  these  words  "  I  And  to  prevent  the  force  of  this
threat  being  diminished,  he  distinctlv  warns  them  that  his  affection  for  them  and  the
joy  he  ever  had  in  them  will  not  hold  him  back  from  doing  what  he  said.  They  had
been  as  Gilead  and  as  Lebanon  for  beauty,  fertilitv,  majesty^his  choice  possession,
his  precious  heritage;  nevertheless  his  wrath  would  go  forth  against  them  if  they
refused  his  words.  Ajid  this  appeal  to  the  King  of  Judah  is  like  the  Divine  appeal
addressed  to  sinful  men  now.  What  promises  to  draw  men  to  himself,  what  threaten-
ings to  drive  them  from  their  sins,  the  Bible  is  filled  with  1  So  intent  is  the  Divine
mind  upon  righteousness.  In  face  of  this  earnestness  of  Qod  in  this  matter,  what  fools
they  must  be  who  make  a  **  mock  at  sin  "  1

III.  Why  he  thus  pleads.  Because  of:  1.  ffis  love  of  righteotuneu.  It  is  the
clement  in  which  God  lives  and  moves  and  has  his  being.  He  cannot  live  in  an
atmosphere  of  unrighteousness.  It  is  hateful  to  him.  Rishteous  men  feel  thus ;  how
much  more,  therefore,  the  righteous  G^  I  2.  His  love  o/men.  How  would  a  fEither
feel  towards  any  one  who  was  ever  causing  distress  and  ruin  to  his  children  ?  How
he  would  detest  such  a  person  I  And,  on  the  other  hand,  how  would  he  desire  that  which
ever  furthers  his  children's  good !  Thus  God  must,  out  of  love  for  us  his  children,  hate
that  which  ever  hurts  and  harms  us,  and  desire  that  for  us  which  ever  ministers  to  our
good.  3.  Eis  love  for  the  sinner,  Gh)d  separates  between  the  sinner  and  the  sin,
and  whilst  his  love  yearns  over  the  sinner,  his  wrath  bums  against  the  sin.  All  his
dealings  with  us  are  designed  to  effect  a  severance  between  the  two.    Death  is  the


500  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  xxn.  1-

last  and  most  effective  separater ;  its  keen  sickle  cuts  the  last  bond  that  binds  G
children  to  the  dominion  of  sin.  ^  He  that  is  dead  hath  ceased  from  sin.'-  Biesse
God  that  it  is  so !  His  providence,  his  Word,  conscience,  the  strivings  of  his  Spirit,
all  designed  to  the  same  end,  and  our  Lord  was  called  Jesus  because  he  should  "  save
people  from  their  sins."

iV.  With  what  result  he  pleads.  In  this  case  it  was  of  no  use  (of.  2  Ch
xxxvi.  16,  etc.).  And — alas  that  it  should  be  so ! — it  is  often  the  same.  When  sin
got  a  certain  hold  on  the  will,  no  considerations  will  stay  its  course.  No  promises
threats.  How  solemn  a  fact  this !  How  it  calls  us  to  resist  the  beginnings  of  sin
dread  lest  it  should  become  such  a  habit  of  the  soul  as  that  God  should  say,  "  H
joined  to  his  idols :  let  him  alone "  1  But  what  is  the  result  of  God's  pleading
ourselves  f  That  is  the  question.  God  grant  we  may  be  able  to  answer  it  as
would  desire  1<«</.

Ver.  10. — Misplaced  sorrow.  "  Weep  ye  not  for  the  dead,**  etc.  Reference  is
Josiah,  the  pious  and  patriotic  King  of  Judah,  who  died  deeply  lamented  (2  Chi
zxxv.  24,  25),  being  spared  the  pain  of  seeing  and  sharing  the  disgrace  and  suffer
of  his  country  (2  Emgs  xzii.  20).  And  by  "  him  that  goethaway  "  Shallum  is  proba
meant.  He  was  a  yoimger  son  of  Josiah,  and  was  raised  by  the  people  to  the  thn
under  the  name  of  Jehoahaz,  but  was  soon  carried  captive  into  Egypt,  never  to  reti
(2  ELings  xziii.  31 — 36).    Taking  the  words  of  this  verse  generally,  we  note^

I.  Wb  do  weep  fob  the  dead.  Not,  however,  in  the  same  hopeless  way  in  wh
the  dead  were  mourned  ere  Christ  brought  life  and  immortality  to  light  by  the  gos]
Still,  though  in  a  very  real  sense  Ghnst  has  abolished  death,  we  yet  weep  for  t
dead.  1.  For  the  beloved  de&d.  We  can  hardly  comprehend  how,  if  they  be  oonscio
they  can  be  happy  without  those  they  have  loved  here  on  earth.  We  know  how  mi:
her  children  were  to  the  fond  mother  of  whom  they  have  been  bereaved,  how  i
delighted  in  them  and  they  in  her,  and  hence  we  cannot  see  how  she  can  be  hap
and  blessed  apart  £rom  them.  And  the  fearful  vacancy  which  the  removal  of  1
beloved  dead  causes  in  the  circle  of  those  who  mourn  them,  the  constant  and  dres
sense  of  irreparable  loss, — all  this  is  sufficient  to  make  us  weep  for  the  dead.  2.  A
for  the  holy  dead,  as  we  think  of  the  influence  they  exerted,  tne  power  for  good  ih
were  to  the  family,  the  Church,  the  neighbourhood.  3.  And  for  all  who  die
mourn.  For  life  itself  is  a  blessing :  ''All  that  a  man  hath  will  he  give  for  his  lif
If,  therefore,  they  have  been  cut  on  in  the  prime  of  their  existence,  their  **  sun  go
down  while  it  was  yet  day,"  we  grieve  over  the  possibilities  of  honour,  happiness,  a
usefulness  which  are  thus  lost  to  them.  And  if  they  have  been  unbelieving  and  godle
wo  weep  yet  more.  So  far  as  we  can  sec,  the  door  of  heaven  is  shut  on  them  ere  ei
they  have  sought  entrance  there.  It  is  a  fearful  thing  for  a  man  to  die  unforg^vi
impenitent,  and  unbelieving.  But  it  is  not  of  such  that  mention  is  made  in  this  ver
How  can  the  thoughtful  soul  do  aught  but  weep  for  them  ?    But—

n.  We  should  at  times  weep  more  fob  the  lfviko.  Great  blessing  as  1
is  generally,  there  are  times  when  death  is  less  a  reason  for  tears  than  life  is.  It  is
when  life  is  a  prolonged  sorrow,  or  shame,  or  suffering,  or,  especially,  sin.  Our  Lc
himself  bade  the  women  of  Jerusalem  weep  not  for  him,  but,  etc.  (Luke  xxiii.  2)
He  thus  declared  that  death— even  such  as  nis  was  to  be—was  preferable  to  life  sa
as  theirs  would  soon  be.  And  death  is  a  relief  in  cases  not  a  few.  Has  not  manj
mother,  heart-broken  by  the  wild,  wicked  ways  of  a  godless  son,  felt  often  that  h
he  been  taken  from  her  when  a  little  child,  that  sorrow  had  been  less  than  his  1
now  causes  her  ?  And  our  Lord  said  of  Judas,  "  It  had  been  better  for  that  man  if
had  never  been  bom."  If  sore  sorrow  can  make  life  to  be  more  piUable  than  death*
and  it  can— how  much  more  grievous  sin  ?  Such  a  one  is  making  the  worst  of  bo
worlds.    What  is  our  life  ?

III.  But  is  not  death,  fob  the  godly,  always  pbefebable  to  life  ?  Is  it  b
always  the  living  who  are  to  be  pitied  ?  St.  Paul  says,  "  To  depart  and  be  with  Chr
...  is  far  better."  And  the  author  of  Eccclesiastes  declares,  "  Better  is  the  day
one's  death  than  the  day  of  one's  birth."  And  without  doubt  the  condition  of  t
blessed  dead  is  better  than  any  earthly  lot  whatsoever.  An  old  divine  represents  o
•uch  as  saying  to  those  who  mourned  him,  "  Weep  not  for  me.    For,"  he  says,  **  co


CH.  XXII.  1—30.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  501


sider  tbo  evils  I  am  freed  from.  I  had  a  sickly,  crazy  body,  especially  toward  my
latter  end ;  wearisome  days  and  nights  were  appointed  me.  What  would  I  have  given
many  times  for  an  hour's  rest?  But  now  all  this  is  at  an  end.  I  shall  be  no  more
sick,  no  more  pained ;  my  head  shall  now  ache  no  more.  And  are  yon  sorry  for  this?
I  had  my  share  also  of  worldly  losses  and  crosses  in  my  worldly  affairs.  I  had  one
house  burned  over  my  head,  and  almost  all  that  was  in  it,  in  a  few  minutes,  and  have
had  other  cares  and  troubles  besides ;  but  now  farewell  all  such  cares.  And  are  you
sorry  for  this  ?  You  know  that  as  long  as  I  was  able  I  was  laborious  in  my  particular
calling.  I  never  ate  the  bread  of  idleness,  but  of  honest  diligence ;  but  now  aU  that
toil  is  over.  I  am  got  to  bed,  where  I  rest  from  my  labours — from  all  my  labours  of
that  kind — ^never  to  return  to  them  again.  And  will  you  grieve  for  this  ?  A  great
deal  of  pains  I  have  taken  in  travelling  and  attending  upon  holy  ordinances,  on  sabbath
days  and  on  week-days,  sometimes  above  and  beyond  my  strength ;  but  I  am  now  where
I  have  communion  with  God  at  the  spring-head,  without  the  conduit-pipes  of  ordi-
nances. And  will  you  grieve  for  this?  You  all  of  you  have,  and  I  doubt  not  some  of
you  feel,  a  body  of  death.  I  am  sure  I  did ;  and  many  a  time  it  made  me  cry  out, '  0
wretched  man  that  I  am ! '  You  know  what  I  mean— the  corrupt  nature  in  the  carnal
mind,  the  sin  that  dwells  in  us,  a  proneness  to  evil,  a  backwardness  to  good ;  but  death
has  eased  me  of  that  burden.  When  the  health  went  out  of  the  body  that  indwelling
sin  went  out  of  the  soul.  There  was  an  end  of  the  leprosy  that  was  in  the  walls.
What  all  the  praying  and  hearine,  the  sabbaths  and  sacraments,  the  care  and  watch-
fulness, of  forty  years  would  not  do,  death  has  done  at  one  blow.  Weep  not  for  me,
then.  I  had  daily  grief  in  my  heart  for  my  own  sins,  for  the  sins  of  others,  and  for
the  afflictions  of  my  friends,  and  for  the  troubles  of  the  Church  of  Gk>d ;  but  now  all
tears,  even  those  of  godly  sorrow,  are  wiped  away  from  mine  eyes.  Therefore  let  none
be  in  yours  upon  my  account.  And,  lastly,  the  bitterness  of  death  is  past  with  me.  I
have  shot  the  gulf;  that  last  enemy,  that  son  of  Anak,  is  vanquished,  and  I  am  triumph-
ing. '  0  Death,  where  is  thy  sting?'  And,  therefore,  weep  not  for  me.  But  this  is
not  all.  If  you  consider  the  happiness  I  am  entered  into,  that  fair  palace  in  which
death  was  but  a  dark  entry,  you  would  not  weep  for  me,  but  rejoice  rather.  Would  you
know  where  I  am  ?  I  am  at  home  in  my  Father's  house,  in  the  mansion  prepared  for
me  there.  I  am  where  I  would  be,  where  I  have  long  and  often  desired  to  be ;  no
longer  on  a  stormy  sea,  but  in  a  safe  and  quiet  harbour.  Would  you  know  how  it  is
with  me  ?  I  am  made  perfect  in  holiness.  Would  you  know  what  I  am  doing  ?  I  see
God.  I  see  him  as  he  is ;  not  as  through  a  glass  darkly,  but  face  to  face.  I  am  in  the
sweet  enjoyment  of  my  blessed  Redeemer,  whom  my  soul  loved  and  for  whose  sake  I
was  willing  to  part  with  all.  Would  you  know  what  company  I  keep?  Blessed  com-
pany, better  than  the  best  on  earth.  Here  are  holy  angels  and  the  spirits  of  the  just
made  perfect.  I  am  set  down  *  with  Abraham  and  Isaac  and  Jacob  in  the  kingdom  of
God,'  with  blessed  Paul,  and  Peter,  and  James,  and  John,  and  all  the  saints,  ^d  here
I  meet  with  many  of  my  old  acquaintance  that  I  fa^sted  and  prayed  with,  who  got
before  me  hither.  And,  lastly,  will  you  consider  that  this  is  to  continue  ?  It  is  a  garland
that  never  withers,  a  crown  that  fadeth  not  away."

lY.  Still  we  abb  to  choose  life,  if  it  be  God's  will.  St.  Paul  did  so ;  and  wo
all,  notwithstanding  the  blessed  revelation  of  the  gospel,  desire  life.  And  it  is  a
natural  and  lawful  desire.  God  has  placed  us  here ;  he  has  visited  us  here ;  he  has
given  us  something  to  enjoy  and  something  to  do  here.  He  expects  us  to  value  what
he  has  bestowed.  Christ  did  not  desire  that  his  disciples  should  be  taken  out  of  the
world,  but  only  kept  from  its  evil.  Paul  desired  to  abide  in  the  flesh,  even  when  he
was  ripe  for  glory,  and  they  are  the  healthiest  Christians  who  in  this  matter  tread  in
his  track.

V.  How,  THEN,  should  THE  TWO  CONDITIONS  OF  LIFE  AND  DEATH  BE  BEOABDED  BY

US?  Are  we,  as  this  verse  implies,  and  as  is  the  common  way,  to  count  death  a  great
misfortune  ?  Certainly  not.  The  world  does,  but  the  believer  in  Christ  should  not.
Then,  on  the  other  hand,  should  we  count  life  a  misfortune,  and  weep  and  moan  over
it?  As  certainly  not.  In  morbid,  unhealthy,  and  therefore  unhappy  moods  (cf.  ch.
XX.  14—18),  a  man  may  long  to  die  and  to  have  done  with  the  weary  woefulness  of  his
life.  And  at  such  times — and  thev  do  occur — ^he  has  felt  some  sort  of  sympathy  with
the  ancient  stoic,  who  said  that  "  the  best  gift  the  gods  had  given  us  in  this  life  was  the


502  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  xxii.  1--3C

power  of  putting  an  end  to  it."  But  the  universal  instinct  of  man  condemns  ibis,  an*
life  is  valued  even  for  its  own  sake,  and  so  it  ought  to  be.  "  All  the  days  of  m;
appointed  time  will  I  wait  till  my  change  come  " — such  should  be  the  soul's  language
even  under  the  heaviest  trial.  But  the  right  regard  of  life  and  death  is  that  of  St.  Fan]
He  was  "  wUlmg  to  wait,  but  ready  to  go  "  (Phil.  i.  23,  24).  To  be  in  his  "  strait "  i
the  best  position  for  us.  To  be  evenly  balanced  between  the  two  desires  for  life  an<
for  death — that  is  the  happiest  mood  in  which  a  man  can  be.  For  the  desire  of  lif
greatly  to  preponderate  is  to  come  under  that  fear  of  death  which  makes  some  "  all  thei
Bfetime  subject  to  bondage."  And  a  preponderating  desire  for  death  is  certainly  nc
good.  The  strait  of  St.  Paul  is  the  place.  God  bring  and  keep  us  there !  His  desir
for  Uie  '*  isj[  better  *'  lot  of  companionship  with  Christ  was  met  and  counteracted  by  hi
desire  to  glorifv  Christ  in  life  through  being  helpful  to  his  brethren,  for  whom  it  wt
"  more  needfid ''  that  he  should  abide  in  the  flesh.  And  so  he  was  kept  in  equilibriun:
as  it  were,  by  these  opposed  forces,  and  the  result  was,  as  it  ever  will  be,  a  saintly  an
devoted  life.  Paul's  "strait"  is  the  only  easy  position  on  the  earth.  Oh,  to  be  in  it
If  you  are  held  by  both  of  these  bonds  you  will  not  fear  a  fall  on  either  side.  **  Althoug
your  life,  instead  of  being  in  your  Father's  hands,  were  at  the  disposal  of  your  won
enemy,  in  his  utmost  effort  to  do  you  harm  he  would  be  shut  up  between  these  two-
either  to  keep  you  a  while  longer  in  Christ's  work  or  send  you  sooner  to  Christ's  pn
sence.  That  were  indeed  a  charmed  life  that  should  tremble  evenly  in  the  blesse
balance.  This  way,  we  shall  do  good  to  men  ;  that  way,  we  shall  be  with  the  Lord
Weep  not,  then,  either  for  the  blessed  dead  or  for  the  holy  living ;  bemoan  neither,  bi
bless  God  for  both.  But  we  may  weep  sore  for  him  that  goeth  away  an  exile  from  Gkx
never  in  this  life,  so  far  as  we  can  see,  to  return.  That  sorrow  is  just;  all  other
misplaced. — C.

Ver.  13. — The  Nemesis  of  oppression,  "Woe  unto  him  that  buildeth  his  house  I
unrighteousness ! "  It  is  one  of  the  many  precious  characteristics  of  the  Bible  that
ever  represents  Qod,  as  the  Avenger  of  the  poor  and  oppressed.  It  tells  over  ar
over  again  how  God  "  plentifully  rewardeth  the  proud  doer."  And  it  is  interestii
and  most  instructive  to  note  the  manner  in  which  God  does  this.  Not  so  much  I
direct  punitive  inflictions  of  his  wrath  as  by  the  results  of  those  laws  according  to  wbic
his  universe  is  ordered.  That  law  of  his  universe  is  against  the  oppressor,  and  soon^
or  later  overtakes  and  overwhelms  him.

••  Though  the  mills  of  God  grind  slowly,
Yet  they  grind  exceeding  small.*'

Now,  here,  in  these  verses,  we  have  a  Divine  denunciation  of  oppression :  "  Woe  tin
him,"  etc.  1    And  we  note —

I.  Thebe  has  been,  and  tet  is,  oppression.  We  trust  that  there  is  far  less  of
than  once  there  was,  but  that  it  has  disappeared  we  cannot  affirm.  Here,  izx  our  ow
land  of  liberty,  we  may  know  but  little  of  it,  but  in  the  lands  of  the  East,  its  origin;
home,  it  prevails  still  to  terrible  extent.  And  the  ancient  kings  of  Israel  were  sore]
tempted  to  allow  themselves  in  it,  and  often  did  so,  and  would  have  more  largely  had
not  Deen  for  the  perpetual  protest  maintained  against  it  by  the  prophets  of  God.  Bi
if  we  feel,  as  we  do,  that  a  tyrant  and  an  oppressor  would  meet  but  with  short  shrift  i
such  a  liberty-loving  land  as  our  own,  how  was  it  that  oppression  became  so  easy  an
so  common  in  other  lands?    Therefore  note—

II.  The  causes  of  oppression.  These  will  be  most  readily  seen  by  noticing  tl
lands  wherein  it  has  most  prevailed.  It  has  ever  been  where  the  eartn  has  brousl
forth  fruit  of  itself  abundantly  and  without  demanding  much  labour  from  the  cult
vator.  And  these  lands,  wiUi  scarce  an  exception,  lie  along  that  belt  of  the  earth
surface  which  reaches  from  the  East  Indies  and  on  westward  to  Mexico  and  Peru,
includes  the  Euphrates  valley,  Egypt,  and  then,  crossmg  the  Atlantic,  it  comprises  tl
extinct  civilizations  of  Equatorial  Ainerica.  It  may  be  remarked  in  passing  that  Juda
and  Jerusalem  were,  at  tne  time  of  Jeremiah's  prophecy,  in  alliance  with  l^ypt,  one  <
these  lands  of  oppression,  and  whence  the  evil  lesson  would  be  easily  learnt.  But
will  be  asked,  Wherefore  was  oppression  more  rife  in  these  lands  than  in  others?


CH.  xxu.  1— 30.]  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.       503


has  never  been  so  in  Nortlicrn  countries  as  in  these  more  favoured  lands.  The  expla-
nation lies  in  such  facts  as  these:  1.  All  these  lands  have  abundance  of  heat  and
moisture.  The  tropical  sun  furnishes  the  one  and  their  magnificent  rivers  the  other.
And  sometimes,  in  addition  to  these  rivers,  if  not  in  place  of  them,  as  in  the  Gulf
of  Mexico,  a  large  extent  of  coast-line  ensures  that  vapours  shall  arise  plentifully  from
the  sea,  which,  descending  on  the  already  heated  soil,  provides  the  moisture  it  needs.
2.  In  consequence  of  all  this  the  soil  becomes  very  fruitful,  and  yields  such  abundance,
and  that  with  so  little  cost  of  labour,  that  it  permits  the  formation  of  a  leisure  class,
who  subsist  on  its  superfluous  wealth.  3.  These  have  become  the  intelligent  and
learned,  and  so  the  powerful,  classes.  4.  Meanwhile  the  wage-receiving  population  has
multiplied  greatly,  and  the  wage  fund  having  to  be  spread  over  so  much  larger  surface,
the  share  of  each  labourer  has  become  less  and  less.  5.  Here,  then,  on  the  one  hand  is  a
vast  swarm  of  impoverished  people,  and  as  ignorant  as  they  are  poor,  and  on  the  other  a
rich,  intelligent,  and  therefore  powerful  minority.  And  as  the  rich  grew  richer  and
richer  the  poor  grew  poorer  and  poorer,  and  gradually  sank  down,  as  in  these  countries
they  have  ever  done,  into  a  mass  of  slaves,  the  ready  victims  of  the  oppressors'  power.
No  doubt  other  forces  were  at  work  at  the  same  time  to  favour  the  growth  of  this
oppression — the  superstition  of  the  people  and  the  enervating  influence  of  the  climate.
But  thus  oppression  grew,  and  its  fruits  are  still  visible  in  the  huge  Pyramids,  temples,
palaces,  and  the  like,  which  remain  to  show  the  abundance  of  labour  and  the  prodigality
with  which  it  was  used.  6.  But  in  the  colder  climes  of  the  North  the  more  niggard
soil  demands  continuous,  careful,  and  laborious  cultivation,  and  thus  the  growth  of
population  was  checked  and  the  distribution  of  wealth  became  more  equal ;  and  at  the
same  time  the  rugged  soil  seemed  to  impart  its  character  to  those  who  cultivated  it,
and  rendered  it  impossible  that  such  men  should  ever  become  the  passive  victims  of
oppression.  And  so,  whilst  the  soft,  luxurious  climes  such  as  those  referred  to  have
never  been  favourable  to  the  development  of  the  people  inhabiting  them,  those  more
stern  and  inhospitable  regions,  where  toil,  severe  and  continued,  is  necessary  would
men  live,  have  nurtured  races  of  men  who,  more  than  any  others,  have  approached  the
true  ideal  of  msmhood.  But  whilst  the  facts  now  noted  became  the  occasion,  oppor-
tunity, and  temptation  to  oppression,  other  laws  have  been  at  work,  securing  that,
where  this  temptation  has  been  yielded  to,  as  it  has  been  so  often,  there  the  oppressed
shall  ere  long  be  avenged.  Note-
Ill.  The  Nemesis  op  oppression.  There  is  such  an  avenger.  For  oppression  ever
kills  patriotism  and  loyalty.  What  can  a  horde  of  wretched  slaves  care  for  a  country  or
a  rule  which  has  never  been  other  than  horribly  cruel  to  them  and  theirs  ?  Patriotism
and  loyalty  are  the  offspring  of  freedom  and  righteous  rule,  but  never  of  the  oppressor's
rule.  And  thus,  sooner  or  kter,  "  woe  "  ever  cometh  "  to  him  who  buildeth  his  house
by  unrighteousness."  For  when  such  a  land  is  invaded,  or  insurrection  arises,  or  in
any  way  the  authority  of  the  rulers  is  threatened,  they  have  no  support  in  the  people
who  are  altogether  indifferent  as  to  who  their  rulers  may  be,  and  feel  that  almost  any
change  must  be  for  the  better.  See  this  illustrated  in  the  revolt  under  Jeroboam,
whereby  Israel  was  for  ever  separated  from  Judah ;  in  the  fall  of  Nineveh  and  of
Babylon,  and  in  the  oft-recurring  revolutions  and  invasions  amid  the  dynasties  and
thrones  of  the  East  (cf.  also  Buckle's  *  History  of  Civilization '  for  further  illustration).
Thus  in  nature  and  in  providence,  as  well  as  in  his  written  Word,  God  has  pronounced
"  woe  "  on  oppression  and  the  oppressor.  Learn  from  all  this :  1.  To  accept  gratefully  the
sterner  conmtions  of  life  which  may  be  appointed  for  us.  Sunny  skies,  warm  climates,
and  prolific  soils  nurture  slaves  rather  than  men.  No  cross,  no  crown,  is  a  universal
law.  2.  Adore  and  trust  in  that  God  who  has  said  so  emphatically,  that  he  will  judge
the  poor  and  needy,  and  hurl  the  oppressors  from  their  seats.  3.  Remember  that  the
woe  against  unrignteousness  falls  on  every  house  that  is  built  thereby."    ^


Vers.  13— 19.— 5a»  and  father  :  a  sad  contrast.  A  wicked  son.  Jehoiakim  is  not
only  reproached  with  his  wickedness,  but  reminded  of  the  very  different  conduct  of  his
honoured  father.    The  contrast  is  very  striking,  varied,  and  instructive.    It  is  seen—

I.  In  the  parentage  of  the  two  princes.  Jehoiakim  had  the  great  advantage  of
being  the  son  of  an  eminently  good  father.  All  the  impulse  and  help  that  could  come
from  such  a  fact  was  his.   Josiah,  on  the  other  hand,  was  the  son  of  a  pre-eminently  bad


604  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,     [ch.  xxn.  1—30.

mAEL — of  King  Amon,  of  whom  it  wms  said,  "  Amon  sinned  more  and  more.*'  Yet,  in
spite  of  hi5  godly  parentage,  Jehoiakim  became  so  evil,  whilst  Josiahj  notwithstanding
his  evil  |xirentage,  became  so  good.  T.  Fuller,  noting  in  connection  with  the  genealogies
of  our  Lord  a  similar  fact,  quaintly  remarks,  '*  I  find  a  good  father  had  a  bad  son ;  that
is  ill  news  for  me :  but  I  find  also  that  a  bad  father  had  a  good  son  ;  that  is  good  news
for  my  son."  For  further  consideration  of  facts  like  these,  see  homily  (infra)  oa
**  Exceptional  facts  in  the  law  of  transmission  of  character.**

II.  In  theib  co!n)rcT.  Jehoiakim  lived  in  splendour  amid  the  misery  of  the  nation,
and  amused  himself  with  building  palaces  when  the  whole  land  was  ground  down
by  heavy  taxation  (cf.  2  Chron,  xxxvL  3;  2  Kings  xxiii.  25).  He  idso  took  the
people's  forced  labour  without  pay  for  these  buildings,  in  violation  of  Lev.  xix.  13;
Deut  xxiv.  14,  15  (cf.  also  vers.  13 — 15).  But  Josiah  his  father  did  ''judgment  and
Justice ;  **  "  he  judged  the  cause  of  the  poor  and  needy  "  ^ver.  15).

III.  In  character.  Jehoiakim's  is  summed  up  in  the  short,  stem  sentence,  "  He
did  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  his  God  "  (2  Chron.  xxxvi.  5).  And  the  facts  above
noted  show  his  rapacity,  cruelty,  and  oppression.  But  what  a  contrast  to  what  his
father  Josiah  was  (cf.  2  Chron.  xxxiv.) !

IV.  In  happiness.  With  all  his  tyranny  Jehoiakim  could  not  command  happiness
for  himself.  The  mutterings  of  the  thunder  of  the  Divine  judgments  were  continually
being  heard,  and  the  rebukes  of  the  prophets  of  Grod,  together  with  those  of  his  con-
science, which  could  not  have  been  silent,  and  the  sullen  discontent  of  his  people,  all
combined  to  haunt  his  palace  with  omens  of  wretchedness  and  to  fill  his  heart  with
fear.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  said  of  King  Josiah  that  he  "did  eat  and  drink,  and  it
was  well  with  him ; "  the  meaning  of  which  is,  that  he  was  no  ascetic,  that  he  enjoyed
life  and  lived  prosperously  and  joyously.  It  is  ever  so.  "  In  keeping  of  Ghxi's  command-
ments there  is  great  reward  *' — in  the  sunshine  of  the  soul  which  comes  from  the  con-
sciousness of  the  Divine  approval,  and  the  testimony  of  a  clear  conscience,  and  the  love
and  esteem  of  those  over  wnom  rule  is  exercised.

y.  In  their  death.  The  actual  circumstances  of  Jehoiakim's  death  are  not  declared.
But  sufficient  hints  are  given  to  show  that  his  sun  went  down  in  clouds  and  darkness,
that  his  end  was  miserable.  **  According  to  one  account,"  says  Stanley,  **  his  memory
was  held  in  detestation ;  there  were  no  funeral  dirges  over  him,  as  there  had  been  over
his  father  and  brother,  but  his  corpse  was  thrown  out,  like  that  of  a  dead  ass  (cf.  ver.
18),  outside  the  walls  of  Jerusalem,  exposed  to  the  burning  sun  by  day  and  the  biting
frost  by  night.  And  this  prophetic  curse  was  darkened  with  a  yet  deeper  hue  by  ^e
legend  which  described  how,  on  the  skin  of  the  dead  corpse,  as  it  thus  lay  exposed,  there
appeared  in  distinct  Hebrew  characters  the  name  of  the  demon  Codonazer,  to  whom  he
had  sold  himself.  He  remained  fixed  in  the  recollections  of  his  countrymen  as  the
last  example  of  those  cruel,  selfish,  luxurious  princes,  the  natural  product  of  Oriental
monarchies,  the  disgrace  of  the  monarchy  of  David."  But  of  King  Josiah  the  record  is
hr  otherwise.  *'  So  mournful  a  death  had  never  occurred  in  the  Jewish  annals.  All
the  population  of  the  city  and  the  kingdom  attended  the  funeraL  There  was  an  elegy
over  the  departed  king,  probably  as  pathetic  as  that  which  David  had  simg  over  &kul
and  Jonathan.  It  was  by  Jeremiah,  the  most  plaintive  of  the  prophets,  who  then  first
appears  on  the  scene  of  public  acts.  Long  afterwards  was  that  ^A  day  remembered,
both  as  it  was  celebrated  on  the  field  of  battle  and  at  Jerusalem.  The  lamentation  of
Jeremiah  was  preserved  in  the  memory  of  the  male  and  female  minstrels  as  a  national
institution,  even  till  long  after  the  return  from  the  Captivity.  Every  family  shut  itself
up  and  mourned  apart  In  the  prospect  of  the  heaviest  calamity  tiiat  could  befall  the
nation,  this  was  the  mourning  which  recurred  to  them,  mourning  as  one  moumeth  for
his  only  son,  in  bitterness  as  one  is  in  bitterness  for  his  firstborn.  The  childless  mother
laid  herself  down  to  die  ;  the  sun  of  her  life  went  down  as  at  midday,  as  in  the  total
eclipse  of  that  fatal  year.  Josiah  was  the  last  royal  hero  of  Israel."  Such  are  some  of
the  contrasts  presented  by  these  two  careers  of  the  son  and  father.  They  teach  us :  1.
That  whilst  we  should  be  thankful  for  ^e  blessings  of  a  pious  parentage,  we  are  not  to
presume  upon  it  as  if  it  were  a  sure  safeguard  or  a  certain  prophecy  of  what  our  end
shall  be.  2.  That  should  it  be  our  lot  to  be  the  child  of  ungodly  parents,  the  same
grace  that  made  Josiah  what  he  was  can  surmount  all  early  disadvantages,  and  make
u&  far  other  and  better  than  what  oiu*  start  in  life  may  have  led  men  to  expect.     He


en.  XXII.  1—30.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  505

who,  as  did  Josiah,  will  set  himself  whilst  he  is  yet  young  to  seek  the  Lord  shall  surely
fiud  hiiiij  and  also  that  he  who  honours  God,  God  will  honour. — C.

Ver.  IS.'—Exeeptiondl  facts  in  the  law  of  transmission  of  character,  "  Concerning
Jchoiakim  the  son  of  Josiah  King  of  Judah."  The  law  is  that  like  begets  like.  It  is
so  physically  and  mentally  to  large  extent,  and  morally  and  spiritually  as  well.  Generally,
blessed  be  (xod,  the  children  of  his  servants  become  his  servants  too.  And,  on  the  other
hand,  the  habit  of  sin  in  the  parent  is  reproduced  in  the  child,  so  that  we  have  criminal
classes,  hereditary  drunkards,  profligates,  and  much  else  of  a  similar  sad  sort.  But  the
law  has  frequent  exceptions  on  both  sides.  The  two  names  in  this  verse  are  both  of
them  instances  of  such  exception.  Now,  how  are  we  to  account  for  them  ?  We  have
frequent  instances  in  the  Old  Testament.  The  sons  of  "  Aaron  the  saint  of  the  Lord ; "
of  Eli,  the  devout  high  priest ;  of  Saniuel,  the  upright  judge.  What  a  set  David's
children  were!  And  here  we  have  Josiah  the  good,  father  of  the  infamous  Jehoiakim.
But  we  have  nothing  of  this  in  the  New  Testament.  It  does  not  seem  to  be  recognized
there  that  the  children  of  the  godly  can  be  otherwise  than  godly  themselves.  Even
when  one  of  the  parents  was  an  unbeliever,  a  heathen,  the  faith  of  the  other  was  held
to  have  such  virtue  that  of  their  children  St.  Paul  says,  **  Now  are  your  children  holy."
We  have  very  many  instances  of  whole  households  being  believers,  but  none  of  the
children  of  believers  being  other  than  what  their  parents  were.  Would  to  God  it  were
always  so  now  1  And,  on  the  other  hand,  we  have,  as  in  the  cases  of  the  pious  Hezc-
kiah,  son  of  the  wicked  Ahaz,  and  Josiah,  son  of  Amon,  who  ''sinned  more  and
more,"  instances  of  ungodly  parents  having  godly  children.  Now,  how  are  these  to
bo  accounted  for  ?    Consider  the  sad  case —

I.  That  godly  parents  should  have  ungodlt  childben.  We  are  accustomed  to
assent  to  the  possibility  and  frequency  of  this  as  an  unquestionable  truth.  But  is  it
so  ?  We  would  ask  two  questions  with  a  view  to  a  better  understanding  of  the  matter.
1.  Is  it  meant  that  godly  parents  who  have  been  both  able  and  anxious  to  train  their
children  for  God  may  yet  have  ungodly  children  ?  (1)  Some  godly  parents  are  not
thus  able.  Probably  Josiah  was  not.  The  might  of  evil,  the  fearful  sweep  and
rush  of  its  tide,  was  probably  in  those  days,  and  in  that  court  and  city,  too  great
for  even  the  godly  king  to  withstand,  and  it  bore  away  his  son  before  his  eyes.
For  a  prince  in  that  age  to  be  godly  was  almost  a  miracle.  And  that  which  we
have  suggested  as  perhaps  and  probably  accounting  for  the  ungodliness  of  Josiah's
son  may  explain  some  similar  cases  now.  (2)  But  more  are  not  really  anxious
about  it.  If  parents  were  as  anxious  about  the  godliness  of  their  children  as  they  are
about  their  health,  education,  and  start  in  life,  and  took  as  much  pains  to  secure  it,
such  cases  as  we  are  considering  would  be  more  rare  than  they  are.  (3)  The
children  of  believers  ought  not  to  need  conversion.  They  should  grow  up  in  the
kingdom  of  God  in  which  their  baptism  declared  them  to  be  already  members.  But
there  is  a  deadly  doctrine  all  too  influential  in  thousands  of  Christian  homes,  that
children  must  go  into  the  far  country  first,  and  there  live  more  or  less  prodigal-like,
and  then  afterwards  come  to  themselves,  be  converted,  and  return.  And  of  course
what  is  expected  of  such  children  happens,  as  far  as  the  going  away  is  concerned :  not
always  the  return.  But  why  should  they  ever  go  into  that  far  country  ?  The  elder
son,  though,  like  Jonah  and  manv  a  devout  Jew  ^f.  Paul's  "  I  bear  them  witness  that
they  have  a  zeal  for  God,"  etc.),  he  was  perplexed  at  the  Father's  gracious  way  of
dealing  with  repentant  sinners,  was  the  elder  son  still  who  had  been  ever  obedient,  and
to  whom  the  father  said,  "  Son,  thou  art  ever  with  me,  and  all  that  I  have  is  thine ; "
as  much  as  to  say,  *'  Why  do  you  complain  of  my  treatment  of  your  poor  wretched
brother  ?  Tours  is  far  the  better  lot ;  you  are* so  much  the  happier  that  you  assuredly
ought  not  to  complain."  So  did  the  father  "  entreat  him,"  and,  no  doubt,  success-
fully. But  from  most  mournful  forgetfulness  of  the  fact  that  there  Is  no  need  that  our
children  should  go  away,  and  that  they  ought  not  to  go  away,  many  parents  let
them  go,  or  at  least  acquiesce  in  their  going  as  something  that  is  inevitable.  Hence,
OS  it  is  of  no  use  to  be  anxious  and  guard  against  the  inevitable,  they  take  no  such
pains  about  their  children's  godliness  as  they  do  about  those  other  more  temporal
matters  which  concern  their  welfare,  and  which  they  know  do  very  largely  depend
upon  the  endeavours  they,  their  parents,  put  forth.     They  cannot  avoid  desiring


60G  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [en.  xxii.  1— 30.

their  children's  highest  good,  and  in  family  prayers  and  pri\rate  ones  it  is  remembered
before  God.    But  the  energies  of  the  will  are  never  roused  up  to  seek  it  as  other
and  lesser  things  are  sought.    Would  to  God  they  were !    Now,  we  say  that  if  you
have  a  case  of  real  ungodliness  in  the  children  of  the  godly,  it  is  to  he  accounted
for  hy  the  fact  that  either  the  parents  were  not  ahlo  or  else  not  really  anxious
to  train  them  for  God.    More  often  the  latter  is  the  sad  truth.    2.  But  we  ask,  also—
What  is  meant  by  ungodly  ?    Do  you  mean  those  who  for  a  while  go  astray,  but  after-
wards come  back  ?    Of  course,  if  the  sin  he  like  ManasseVs,  very  flagrant  and  long-
continued,  then,  even  though  there  may  be  the  after  coming  hack,  as  there  was  in  bis
case,  it  must  ho  allowed  that  such  are  ungodly.    But  that  stem  word  should  generally
be  reserved  for  a  life  wholly  without  God,  and  not  ho  cast  carelessly  on  those  who,  like
so  many  of  God's  saints  have  done,  may  fall  yet  rise  again ;  still  less  on  children
because  of  their  natural  thoughtlessness  and  incapacity  of  thinking  seriously  for  a
long  time  ahout  anything.    God  forhid  they  should!    But  if  the  word  "ungodly"  be
confined,  as  it  should  be,  to  those  whose  lives  are  wholly  or  for  the  most  pa^  without
God,  then  we  affirm  that  such  children  do  not  spring  from  parents  hoth  able  and  really
anxious  to  train  them  for  Qod.    To  affirm  that  they  are  would  be  to  contradict :  (1)  Ood'a
word ;  e.g.  '*  Train  up  a  child  .  .  •  and  when  he  is  old  he  shall  not  depart  from  it ; "
"  Ask,  and  yo  shall  receive ; "  and  the  many  promises  to  answer  prayer.     Now,  wo
know  that  the  godliness  of  our  children  must  he  in  accordance  with  the  Divine  will,
therefore  all  these  promises  must  he  set  aside  if,  etc.    And  St.  Paul  bids  parents  train
their  children  "  in  the  nurture  and  admonition  of  the  Lord ; "  and  he  never  hints
that  such  training  may  after  all  he  thrown  away.    What  was  the  constant  baptism
of  households  but   an  indication  of  the  apostolic  and   primitive  belief  that,  as  a
matter  of  course,  in  the  faith  of  the  father  the  children  would  share  ?    The  promise
was  to  them  and  their  children,     (2)  Analogies,    If  there  be  real  puns  to  train
children  in  a  given  manner  educationally,  socially,  morally— ^as  there  is  on  the  part
of  parents — success  is  gained  nearly  always.    And  so  it  would  be  in  things  spiritual.
There  is  no  slight  done  to  the  truth  of  the  Holy  Spirit's  agency  in  this  great  matter,
but  all  that  is  urged  is  that  we  ohey  the  laws  of  the  Spirit.    (3)  Facts,    No  instance
can  be  shown  where  there  has  been  real  solicitude  and  opportunity  on  the  part  of
the  parents  that  their  children  should  be  godly,  of  such  children  having  been  perma-
nently ungodly.    There  has  not  hecn  permanent  failure,  though  there  may  have  been
temporary.    It  would  he  horrible  to  believe  that  God  had  drawn  forth  the  earnest
yearning  of  the  parent's  heart  for  the  salvation  of  their  children— a  yearning  attested
b^  all  loving  and  consistent  endeavour  in  the  way  of  example,  education,  influence,
direct  and  indirect— and  yet,  after  all,  such  desire  to  be  miserably  and  for  ever  dis-
appointed.   We  will  not  believe  it.    And,  on  the  other  hand,  there  are  innumerable
instances  which  show  that  it  is  the  rule  that  godly  parents  should  have  godly  children.
Nearly  all  the  godly  to-day  are  the  children  of  the  godlv.    Instead  of  the  fathers  have
risen  up  the  children.    Such  is  God's  blessed  order,  and  we  should  be  slow  to  believe
that  he  ever  sets  it  aside.    It  is  well  for  every  father  and  mother  to  take  it  to  heart
that  if  their  children  turn  out  ungodly  the  fault  is,  in  all  probability,  theirs.    But  now
note  the  opposite  case—

II.  That  ungodly  pabents  should  have  godly  childben.  Wo  have  referred
above  to  such  cases.  And  they  frequently  occur.  The  chaff  nourishes  the  wheat  in
its  bosom.  The  ungodly  home  nurtures  godly  children.  How  is  this  ?  1.  Sometimes
it  is  because  ungodly  parents  are  more  careful  than  even  others  about  the  companion-
ships of  their  children.  They  try  to  gain  a  good  for  their  children  which  they  know
they  have  not  for  themselves.  Many  a  bad  parent  wishes  his  child  to  be  good.  2.
Sometimes  the  children,  seeing  how  wretched  sin  makes  their  home,  are  led  to  seek  *'  a
more  excellent  way  "  for  themselves.  The  ways  of  godliness  seem  like  paradise  to
the  victim  of  the  ungodliness  of  many  a  home.  How  Sunday  school  children— -many
of  them  from  terrible  homes— love  their  school !  3.  God  willing  to  show  them  that
there  is  nothing  too  hard  for  the  Lord.  Can  a  man  bring  forth  a  clean  thing  out  of  an
unclean  ?  Certainly  not.  But  God  can,  and  in  these  Instances  does.  And  the  reasons
for  such  gracious  action  may  be:  (1)  Pity  for  the  children.  (2)  Instruction  to  his
Church.  They  are  to  despair  of  none.  (3)  The  glory  of  his  Name.  Hence  he
snatches  these,  trophies  as  it  were,  from  the  very  gates  of  hell ;  plucks  them  as  brands


cii.  XXII.  1—30.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  507


from  the  buTDing.  4.  Conclusion.  Let  us  give  Grod  thanks  that  he  does  this.  That
Amons  have  Josiahs  for  children;  Ahaz,  Hezekiah;  Henry  YIII.,  Edward  VI.
That  from  such  a  court  as  that  of  the  previous  reigns  our  own  beloved  queen  should
have  come.    God  be  praised  for  this  and  every  such  instance  I — C.

Yer.  29. — The  impassioned  cry  of  Ood  to  man.  This  cry,  "  0  earth,  earth,  earth,"
etc.,  sounds  out  like  the  alarm  of  fire,  or  some  bitter  cry  of  distress.  It  startles  by  its
earnestness,  arrests  and  demands  attention,  and  compels ^us  to  inquire  into  its  cause.
Note,  therefore —

I.  The  occasion  of  it.  This  will  show  us  what  word  of  the  Lord's  is  meant.  It
was  wrung  out  from  the  prophet's  heart  by  the  sight  of  the  calamities  now  so  swiftly
coming  upon  his  beloved  land.  To  think  of  that  land  overrun  by  the  cruel  armies  of
Babylon,  the  holy  city  burnt  with  fire,  the  temple  of  the  Lord  desecrated  and  destroyed,
and  her  kings,  one  after  another,  ending  their  days  in  misery ;  Josiah,  the  happiest
of  them,  slain  in  battle  ;  Shallum,  his  son,  exiled  in  Egypt,  and  dying  there ;  Jehoia-
kim  carried  off  by  Nebuchadnezzar,  and  perishiDg  at  a  very  early  age,  and  in  some
miserable  manner — "buried  with  the  burial  of  an  ass"  (ver.  19);  Jeconiah,  with  his
mother,  seized  by  the  Chaldeans,  torn  from  his  home  and  t^ken  to  Babylon,  and  there
living  and  dying  in  drear  exile — he  the  last  of  the  royal  race,  after  whom  none  other
filled  the  throne  of  David.  It  was  the  sight  of  all  these  calamities,  and  the  shame
and  disgrace  attached  to  them,  and  especially  the  rcmembraoce  of  the  cause  of  them
all,  that  extorted  this  loud  cry  of  pain,  this  impassionedappeal.  (Gf.  Stanley's  'Lectures
on  Jewish  Church,'  Lect.  xl.,  for  history  of  period.)  Would  we  realize  the  prophet's
distress,  let  us  endeavour  to  imagine  that  the  circumstances  were  our  own;  that  it  was
our  own  land,  people,  temples,  princes,  thus  threatened,  thus  exiled,  thus  miserably
perishing.  What  should  we  think  then?  No  wonder  that  Jeremiah  was  "the  weeping
prophet ;  *'  that  he  felt  the  woes  of  his  country  to  be  so  great  that  he  could  appeal  to
all  who  witnessed  them,  "  Is  it  nothing  to  you,  all  ye  that  pass  by?  behold,  and  see  if,"
etc.  (Lam.  i.  12).  And,  like  Dives  in  hell,  who  bethought  himself  of  his  five  careless,
godless  brethren,  and  would  have  them  warned ;  so  the  prophet  of  God,  knowing  how
all  the  world  was  heedless  of  God,  even  as  his  own  land  had  been,  to  its  sore  cost,  now
passionately  cries,  "0  earth,  earth,  earth,"  etc.  He  would  have  sinners  everywhere  take
heed,  by  Judah*s  awful  fate,  of  how  God  will  surely  punish  sin.  The  word  he  would
have  them  hear  was  the  word  of  warning.  This  is  the  lesson  which  the  occasion  of
this  appeal  teaches  us.  There  are  many  other  words  which  God  addresses  to  us —
words  of  mercy,  promise,  instruction,  and  the  like;  but  unless  we  take  heed  to  this  word
and  dread  the  sin  which  works  such  woe,  all  the  others  will  be  but  lightly  esteemed.
And  that  which  makes  this  word  yet  more  emphatic  is  the  position  of  privilege  and
honour  and  security  which  those  now  judged  of  God  once  occupied  (cf.  ver.  24).
Coniah  was  as  God's  signet-ring,  precious,  honourable,  and  guarded  with  all  care.  But
it  made  no  difference :  as  a  ring  might  be  plucked  off  and  cast  away,  so  now  God
would  root  out  and  cast  away  these  evil-doers,  though  once  so  dear  to  him.  It  matters
not,  then,  what  position  of  privilege,  profession,  reputation,  service,  and  the  like  we
fill,  disobedience  to  God's  commands  will  cast  us  down  and  work  our  ruin.  "  Let  him
that  standeth  take  heed  lest  he  fall;"  "Be  not  high-minded,  but  fear;"  "If  God
spared  not  the  natural  branches,  take  heed  lest  he  also  spare  not  thee."

II.  The  manner  of  it.  This  will  show  how  disregarded  this  word  of  the  Lord  too
commonly  is.  There  would  have  been  no  need  of  such  impassioned  appeal  if  men  wero
eager  to  listen.  But  the  cry  has  to  be  loud,  repeated,  and  ever  louder  still.  The  world
has  but  to  whisper ;  the  lowest  accents  of  pleasure,  self-interest,  and  .often  of  sin,  arc
caught  in  a  moment  and  obeyed.  But  the  word  of  the  Lord  finds  no  such  reception
ready.  How  different  this  from  all  other  creatures  of  God ! — from  the  holy  angels  that
"  excel  in  strength  and  do  his  commandments,  hearkening  unto  the  voice  of  his  word,"
down  to  the  meanest  and  humblest  of  all  the  works  of  his  nands.  Man  alone  stands  out
in  disgraceful  exception.  One  should  have  thought  that  the  near  approach  of  danger
would  quicken  the  sense  of  fear  and  lead  to  increased  caution.  As  when  the  ship  nears
a  perilous  coast  how  frequent  the  soundings,  how  sharp  the  look  out !  But  the  ungodly,
the  nearer  they  come  to  the  shore  of  the,  for  them,  awful  other  world,  the  leas  concerned
they  seem  to  be,  the  more  dull  of  hearing  the  word  of  the  Lord.    Like  the  cold,  which


508  THE  BOOK  OP  THE   PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  xxn.  1— 30.


benumbs  and  paralyzes  the  more  intense  it  becomes.  Hence,  if  man  is  to  be  awakened
from  his  spiritual  slumber,  God  must  cry  aloud,  lift  up  bis  voice  with  strength,  as  here,
"  0  earth,  earth,  earth,''  etc.  Does  not  our  own  conscience  bear  witness  to  the  truth  of
our  backwardness  to  hear  God's  word  which  the  manner  of  this  appeal  implies.  How
often  Grod  has  called  to  us,  by  his  Word,  his  Spirit,  his  providence,  and  we  have  not
answered !

III.  Those  to  whom  it  is  addbessed.  Thus  we  shall  learn  the  importance  and
universality  of  this  word.  For  by  the  earth  which  is  appealed  to  we  may  understand  :
1.  Inanimate  nature.  As  Isa.  i., "  Hear,  0  heavens,  and  give  ear,  0  earth."  As  if  the
prophet  would  call  on  the  very  stones  to  cry  out  and  attest  the  momentous  importance
of  this  word  of  the  Lord ;  as  if  the  earth  might  be  trusted  to  hear  though  man  would
not.  And  is  not  this  word  important,  in  these  days  especially,  when  the  sense  of  sin
has  become  so  feeble,  and  men  trifle  with  it  as  a  matter  of  indifference  ?  It  is  every  day
cnsnarinc  souls  and  hardening  them  more  and  more.  And  the  time  for  awakening
them  is  short.  The  crash  of  the  gates  shutting  against  them  will  arouse  them,  but  then
it  will  be  too  late.  When  the  ship  has  struck,  the  shock  of  the  blow  is  but  tiie  prelude
to  the  cry  of  despair,  which  tells  that  there  is  no  hope,  for  there  is  no  time  to  escape.
Yes,  men  need  to  be  warned,  need  to  hear  this  word  of  the  Lord ;  and  woe  to  them
whose  duty  it  is  to  declare  it  if  they  fail  so  to  do.  2.  But  earth  or  land  tells  of  the
people  who  dwell  thereon — the  inhabitants  of  the  world.  The  prophet  appeals  to  them
all,  not  to  a  mere  section  of  them.  Not  to  Palestine,  still  less  Judah  only,  but  to  the
whole  earth.  For  it  is  a  word  which  all  need  to  give  heed  to  :  the  believer,  that  his
compassion  for  sinners  may  be  aroused ;  the  undecided,  that  his  indecision  may  come
to  an  end  ;  and  the  ungodly,  that  they  may  tremble  with  a  holy  fear.    Lastly —

IV.  The  Author  of  it.  This  will  show  to  us  the  heart  of  love  that  utters  itself
in  it.  The  stem  "  threats  of  God  do  not  lessen  his  love  but  enhance  it.  They  are  the
crowning  marks  of  mercy.  A  shepherd,  foreseeing  a  snowstorm  that  will  drift  deep  into
the  hollows  of  the  hill,  where  the  silly  sheep,  seeking  refuge,  would  find  a  grave,  pre-
pares shelter  in  a  safe  spot  and  opens  its  door.  Then  ne  sends  his  dog  after  the
wandering  flock  to  frighten  them  into  the  fold.  The  bark  of  the  dog  behind  them  is  a
terror  to  the  timid  sheep ;  but  it  is  at  once  the  sure  means  of  their  safety  and  the  mark
of  the  shepherd's  care.  Without  it  the  prepared  fold  and  the  open  entrance  might  have
proved  of  no  avail.  The  terror  which  the  shepherd  sent  into  the  flock  gave  the  finishing
touch  to  his  tender  care,  and  effect  to  all  that  had  gone  before  it.  Such  precisely,  in  design
and  effect,  are  the  terrible  things  of  Gk)d's  Word  "  (Amot).  It  is  because  God  is  so
intent  on  moving  us  from  impending  woe  that  he  utters  ms  impassioned  appeals,  and
draws,  in  such  terrible  descriptions,  the  portraiture  of  his  wrath.  A  mother  seeking
her  child  lost  in  the  bush  does  not  once  whisper  its  name,  but  she  repeats  it  again  and
again,  with  shrill,  clear,  loving,  strong  cry.  And  it  is  the  like  cry  of  Qod  that  is  heard
in  all  his  warning  words,  awml  as  some  of  them  are.  God  wants  that  we  should  be
saved.

GoNCLUSioK.  But  by  the  earth  which  is  bidden  hear  the  word  of  the  Lord,  our
thoughts  have  suggested  to  them  the  company  of  the  dead.  They  are  in  the  grave?.
They  are  gone  "  earth  to  earth ; "  and  concerning  them  our  Lord  says,  "  Behold,  tiie
hour  Cometh  when  all  that  are  in  the  graves  shall  hear  the  voice  of  the  Son  of  man,  and
shall  come  forth  "  (John  v.  25—28).  What  shall  be  the  manner  of  that  awakening,
when  the  trumpet  shall  sound  and  the  cry,  **  0  earth,  earth,  earth,"  etc.,  b  again  heard  ?
What  ?  Shall  it  be  unto  life  and  immortality,  or  to  shame  and  everlasting  contempt?
All  depends  on  how  we  hear  the  Word  of  the  Lord  now.  May  he  grant  uiat  we  may
both  hear  it  and  hear  it  aright ! — C.

Vers.  1—9.—^  king  addressed  in  mingled  promise  and  warning.  Here  is  the
announcement  of  what  Jehovah  requires  from  the  king  and  his  executive  in  particular ;
although  it  will  be  seen  that  exactly  the  same  principles  apply  to  the  conduct  of  the
king  as  to  the  meanest  of  his  subjects.  But  inasmuch  as  the  king  was  in  circumstances
of  special  power,  responsibility,  and  temptation,  it  was  just  what  might  be  expected
from  the  Divine  consideration  for  every  man's  position,  that  the  king  diould  receive
special  counsels.  If  he  acted  wrongly,  his  conduct  would  be  quoted  and  his  example
followed  by  every  one  who  wished  to  act  in  the  same  way.    This  warning  message  here-


CH.  xxn.  1—30.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  609

however,  so  timely  and  so  plain,  would  take  away  all  ground '  from  those  who  thought
they  might  do  what  a  king  did.  Jeremiah,  preaching  righteousness  to  the  meanest  of
the  people,  could  insist  on  this,  that  he  asked  no  more  from  them  than  he  had  been
specially  enjoined  to  ask  from  the  very  king  himself.    Note—

I.  Those  who  were  to  be  appboached.  This  is  a  message  for  the  king  and  for
such  people  as  live  in  palaces.  Remarkable  to  notice  how  CK>d's  messengers  have  been
brought  into  contact  with  the  kings  and  grandees  of  the  earth.  Divinely  guided,  they
have  been  able  to  find  their  way  where  others,  even  with  large  worldly  influence,  have
been  excluded.  So  Moses  comes  to  deal  with  Pharaoh ;  Jeremiah  with  this  king  here ;
John  the  Baptist  with  Herod ;  Jesus  with  Pontius  Pilate ;  Paul  with  Felix,  Festus,  and
Agrippa.  As  God  can  make  a  way  for  his  servants  out  of  prisons,  bo  he  can  also  make
a  way  for  them  into  palaces.  And  once  entered  into  the  palace,  the  prophet  was  to
address  himself  first  and  chiefly  to  the  king.  Kings  have  many  coimsellors,  and  their
temptation  is  to  say  what  may  be  agreeable  to  the  royal  ears.  This  king,  maybe,  had
not  one  honest,  disinterested  man  about  him ;  if  so,  all  the  more  need  for  Jeremiah's
counsels.  Further,  the  kiug  is  reminded  of  a  former  distinguished  occupant  of  his
throne.  In  pondering  this  expression,  *'  the  throne  of  David,*'  there  was  much  to  fill
the  heart  of  a  king,  who  was  also  a  true  man,  with  noble  purpose  and  endeavour.
David,  even  with  fdl  his  transgressions  and  vicissitudes,  was  a  fine  example  of  the
success  and  glory  following  on  sensitiveness  to  God's  comman(haient8.  If  David  had
not  been  enabled  to  do  so  much  that  was  good,  his  successors  would  not  have  found
scope  for  the  doing  of  so  much  that  was  evil.  Then  from  the  king  there  is  a  turoing
to  those  around  them.  Kings  cannot  help  being  a  great  deal  influenced  and  even
limited  by  those  who  stand  next  to  them.  God,  who  knows  all  conditions  of  life,  sees
the  peculiar  difficulties  of  kings  and  sympathizes  with  them.  One  of  the  greatest
troublers  of  David's  life  was  his  headstrong  servant  Joab.

II.   GOD*S  DEMAND  UPON  THOSE  WHO  HOLD  POSITIONS  OF  AITTHOBITT.      He  SCUt  his

servant  to  show  how  a  king's  government  may  become  stable,  glorious,  and  happy.
Nothing  is  said  about  victorious  armies  and  increased  territories.  These  were  the  things
the  Gentiles  sought  after,  but  God  wished  the  powers  and  opportunities  of  the  kings  of
his  people  to  be  used  for  far  other  ends.  There  was  plenty  of  room  for  this  king  to  make
conquests,  and  conquests  not  easily  made.  He  had  his  own  selfish  inclinations  to
repress,  and  the  selfish  proceedings  of  many  of  his  people  to  undo.  He  is  commanded
to  execute  judgment  and  righteousness.  He  must  not  neglect  the  ever  necessary
functions  of  a  judge ;  righteous  principles  must  rule  in  all  his  decisions ;  and  thirdly,
ho  must  sec  that  the  decisions  are  carried  into  effect.  How  can  any  human  government
be  approved  of  God  unless  there  are  both  righteous  laws  and  a  resolute  execution  of
themr  The  king  must  also  be  the  vigilant  guardian  of  the  weaJL  and  defenceless.
From  out  of  his  palace  his  servants  should  go  forth  commissioned  to  champion  those
who  are  unable  to  protect  themselves.  Never  should  a  strong  man  more  exult  in  hb
strength  than  when  it  enables  him  to  become  sword  and  shield  to  the  feeble.  A
righteous  government  will  not  wait  until  it  is  dinned  with  importimities.  In  many
instances  the  king  was  the  only  one  who  could  rescue  from  the  hand  of  the  oppressor.
Every  temporary  occupant  of  the  throne  of  David  was  in  his  turn  a  type  of  that
abiding  King  and  anointed  One,  of  whom  it  is  true  in  the  highest  sense  that  salvation
is  in  no  other  (Acts  iv.  12).  And  as  the  king  was  to  deliver  from  the  oppressor,  so  ho
was  to  be  careful  not  to  oppress.  So  subtle  is  selfishness  in  its  influence  upon  us  that
we  need  to  be  peculiarly  on  our  guard  against  taking  advantage  of  the  weak.  Lastly,
the  king  is  not  to  be  a  shedder  of  innocent  blood.  Ho  must  not  be  weakly  indulgent
as  to  the  blood  of  the  guilty.  If  a  man  by  the  laws  of  the  land  has  deserv^  to  die  the
death,  there  must  be  no  tampering  with  just  deserts.  And  so,  on  the  other  hand,  a
king  was  not  to  allow  his  fury  free  course  against  some  one  who  had  offended  him,  and
seek  his  death  simply  to  gratify  resentment.  It  is  easy  to  see  that  the  despotic  character
of  Eastern  kings  in  ancient  times  would  make  this  injunction  against  the  shedding  of
innocent  blood  to  have  an  application  such  as  it  fails  to  have  with  the  constitutional
governments  we  are  accustomed  to.

III.  The  prophet  has  to  point  out  that  acgobdino  to  the  beceftion  of  theob
COUNSELS  thebb  WILL  BE  coBBESPONDiNO  BE8ULTB.  The  king  is  plainly  told  that  it
is  for  him  to  determine  whether  his  reign  shall  be  glorious  and  his  palace  continue  and


510        THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  [cH.  xxn.  1— 30.

increase  in  splendour.  The  kins  who  can  rise  above  all  temptations  to  mere  outward
show ;  who  can  be  gloriously  independent  of  selfish  traditions  and  examples ;  who  can
show  the  spirit  of  a  real  king  by  living  for  his  people^  instead  of  expecting  his  people
to  drudge  and  sweat  and  groan  for  him ;— this  is  the  king  whom  God  will  reward.
The  reward  will  come  in  the  very  way  such  a  man  will  desire.  His  throne  will  become
more  stable  for  his  successors ;  the  land  more  prosperous  and  better  worth  living  in.
On  the  other  hand,  if  there  is  negligence  of  these  counsels,  the  ruin  of  the  negligent
ruler  will  be  correspondingly  terrible.  No  man,  however  great  his  resources,  can  build
up  anything  glorious  and  satisfactory  on  a  foundation  of  disobedience  to  God.  Against
that  tree  of  temporal  prosperity  which  has  been  planted  in  selfishness  and  nurtured  in
selfishness,  a  consecrated  axe  is  laid — laid  at  the  root  of  the  tree  to  cut  it  down
altogether.  The  greatness  of  the  prosperity  measures  the  greatness  of  the  ruin.  We
must  ddight  in  the  Law  of  the  Lord  if  we  would  be  as  trees  of  God's  own  planting ;
and  then,  assuredly,  no  weapon  formed  against  us  can  prosper. — Y.

Vers.  10—12. — The  mistakes  of  the  mourner.  Two  persons  are  presented  hero  as
furnishing  occasions  for  lamentation.  One  is  Josiah,  Ring  of  Judah,  lately  dead ;  the
other  is  Shallum,  his  son,  just  succeeding  him,  and  taken  into  captivity  by  Pharaoh-
Nechoh,  King  of  Egypt.  The  prophet,  therefore,  looks  upon  his  coimtrymen  as  sorrowing
both  for  the  dead  and  the  living.  Moreover,  he  sees  that,  in  accordance  with  all  the
natural  tendencies  of  the  human  heart,  a  deeper  sorrow  is  professed  for  the  dead  than
for  him  who  has  been  taken  away  into  a  foreign  land.  And  yet  this  was  not  accord-
ing to  the  necessities  of  the  position.  The  captivity  of  Shallum,  rightly  considered,
was  a  more  distressing  event  than  the  death  of  his  father.  It  may  bo  truly  said  that  we
always  exaggerate  death  as  a  calamity.  In  the  instance  of  Josiah,  his  comparatively
early  death— for  he  seems  to  have  been  no  more  than  forty  when  he  perished  in  battle-
produced  peculiar  feelings  of  pity.  He  seemed  to  be  one  whose  "  sun  had  gone  down
while  it  was  yet  day."  But  we  must  remember  that  this  very  death  had  been  prophe-
tically spoken  of  as  a  blessing  (2  Kings  xxii.  20) :  '^  Thine  eyes  shall  not  see  all  the
evil  that  I  will  bring  upon  this  place."  For  one  who  is  faithfully  trying  to  serve  God,
it  can  matter  very  little  when  he  dies.  His  service  goes  on.  A  man  may  benefit  the
cause  of  God  more  by  the  faithful  testimony  of  a  Christian  death  than  by  fifty  years
of  continued  work.  If  a  man  has  come  to  death  by  his  own  folly  and  recklessness,  we
do  well  to  grieve  over  him ;  but  death  in  itself  is  an  event  which  we  may  only  too
easily  come  to  look  at  in  a  distorted,  exaggerated  way.  There  are  things  far  worse
than  death.  Again  and  again  it  happens  that  people  fall  into  severe  illnesses,  recover,
and  then  return  into  the  world,  only  to  find  that  the  years  seemingly  added  in  mercy
to  life  have  become  a  period  of  disaster  and  shame.  In  the  midst  of  a  world  of  misery,
we  cannot  be  too  pitiful,  too  sympathetic,  but  we  must  be  careful  not  to  make  erroneous
estimates  as  to  what  most  deserves  our  pity  and  sympathy.  We  can  do  nothing  for
the  dead.  When  the  last  breath  is  breathed,  there  is  straightway  a  great  gulf  fixed
between  us  and  them.  But  wo  may  do  much  for  the  living,  if  only  in  a  sell-denying
spirit  we  keep  them  in  our  recollection  and  strive  to  help  them ;  seizing  every  oppor-
tunity, and  economizing  our  energies  so  as  to  make  the  most  of  it. — Y.

Vers.  13 — 19.—^  right  aim  pursued  hy  a  wrong  and  crud  method,  I.  A  bight
AIM.  What  this  aim  was  is  indicated  in  ver.  15.  Jehoiakim  wanted  to  be  a  king.
In  one  sense  he  was  a  king,  without  any  effort  of  his  own,  for  he  had  succeeded  to  the

Eosition  and  honours  of  his  father.  But  very  rightly  he  sought  to  bo  reckoned  a  king
y  virtue  of  something  more  than  mere  rank.  He  wished  to  do  something  which
would  mark  off  his  reign  as  peculiar.  He  wished  something  more  to  be  said  of  him
than  that  he  merely  reigned  so  many  years.  His  office  would  have  made  him  to  be
remembered  in  a  certain  way,  but  he  preferred  that  his  office  should  be  a  mere  vantage-
ground  to  give  him  the  chance  of  showing  what  he  could  do  as  a  man.  Bad  as
Jehoiakim  was,  he  had  individuality  of  character— a  strong  feeling  that  a  king  was
bound  to  do  something  more  than  just  sit  on  a  throne,  wear  a  crown,  and  bold  a
sceptre  in  his  hand.  There  is  nothing  pleasing  to  God  in  our  being  mere  colourless
copies  of  those  who  have  gone  before  us.  Jehoiakim  was  right  in  so  far  as  he  wished
to  go  in  a  way  that  was  more  than  the  mere  beaten  track  of  others.


CH.  xxra.  1— 40.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  511


II.  A  WBONO  NOTION  OF  HOW  THIS  AIM  WAS  TO  BE  ATTAINED,      Jehoiakim  thought

he  could  get  great  renown  for  himself  individually  by  building  a  splendid  palace.
There  would  be  such  a  contrast  between  it  and  the  common  houses  in  tferusalem  as  to
make  people  ask  at  once,  "Whose  abode  is  thatf"  and,  in  so  acting,  Jehoiakim
showed  that  he  understood  pretty  well  the  way  in  which  popular  opinion  is  most
easily  influenced.  The  way  of  the  world  is  to  estimate  men  by  the  visible  splendours
they  can  gather  around  them.  One  who  lives  in  a  wide  house  is  looked  at  through  the
medium  of  his  possessions,  and  thus  becomes  correspondingly  magnified  himself.  But
with  all  the  worldly  shrewdness  of  Jehoiakim,  he  was  taking  the  wrong  way  to  become
really  celebrated.  Even  supposing  he  had  not  been  guilty  of  the  peculiar  wickedness
rebuked  in  this  passage,  he  would  not  have  attained  his  end.  The  building  of  a  big
house  sufficiently  showed  his  ambition ;  but  it  did  not  of  necessity  show  any  of  those
peculiar  powers  by  which  men  live  lives  that  are  remembered.  Many  of  those  whose
fame  will  last  as  long  as  the  world  lasts,  lived  and  died  poor  men.  At  least,  they  did
not  reside  in  wide  houses.  And  thus  the  careers  of  such  men,  whenever  they  are
considered,  cast  a  permanent  irony  on  the  pursuit  of  mere  external  wealth.

III.  The  peculiab  wickedness  consequent  on  the  taking  of  this  weonq  way.
Jehoiakim's  scheme  was  not  only  vain-glorious  and  delusive  in  itself,  but  very  op-
pressive to  his  subjects  in  the  carrying  of  it  out.  What  we  read  of  here  makes  us  regard
very  dubiously  many  of  the  monuments  of  architectural  power  belonging  to  ancient
civilizations.  We  may  suspect  that  only  too  many  of  them  were  constructed  by  forced
labour.  How  much  of  unrequited  toil  there  must  have  been,  not  only  in  temples,
palaces,  Pyramids,  but  also  in  such  plainly  useful  works  as  roads,  bridges,  and
aqueducts!  The  results  have  been  pleasing  enough  to  the  eye,  and  rich  in  giving
resources  to  the  lovers  of  art ;  but  their  beauty  becomes  only  deformity,  if  we  have
reason  to  believe  that  force,  fraud,  and  cruelty  had  a  considerable  share  in  the  pro-
duction of  them.  Even  Christian  cathedrals  and  churches  may  have  been  built  in
this  way  to  a  greater  extent  than  we  should  like  to  think  possible.  Th^re  must  always
be  a  great  temptation  to  the  natural  greed  of  man  to  get  the  largest  amount  of  labour
with  the  least  remuneration.  And  this  prophecy  here  shows  that  Qod  has  his  eye  on  all
such  doings.  His  prophet  sets  forth  principles  which  are  the  condemnation  of  slavery
in  all  its  forms,  and  by  which  every  extortionate  and  greedy  spirit  will  have  to  be
judged.

IV.  A  CONTRAST  with  ONE  WHO  TOOK  THE  RIGHT  WAY.  Jchoiakim  had  been
favoured  with  constant  nearness  to  a  good  example  of  how  a  king  should  live  and  act,
which  made  his  wickedness  the  greater.  Josiah,  succeeding  to  a  throne,  had  also
wished  to  be  more  than  a  nominal  king.  But  he  had  very  dififerent  notions  from  his
son  as  to  how  authority  ^should  be  exerted.  He  was  just  and  righteous,  and  paid
special  attention  to  the  poor  and  humble,  and  the  result  was  that  all  went  well  with
him.  Jehoiakim  may  have  been  feared,  but  he  would  be  hated  at  the  same  time,  or,
if  loved,  loved  only  by  those  who  found  their  chances  in  Jielping  his  pretentious
schemes.  Josiah  was  feared,  but  by  the  extortioners  and  knaves  among  his  subjects.
And  he  would  be  equally  loved  by  all  who,  needing  justice,  knew  that  at  his  throne  it
was  never  sought  in  vain.

V.  The  disgraceful  end  of  Jehoiakim's  pride.  He  would  die  unregretted,  and
be  buried  like  a  beast.  None  of  all  who  had  been  his  associates  while  alive,  would
pay  the  slightest  regard  to  him  when  dead.  The  prophecy  here  does  not,  of  course,
mean  that  God  approves  of  such  indecency  to  a  corpse.  He  is  simply  pointing  out
how  little  selfish  men  may  expect  from  their  selfish  associates.  He  who  squeezes
others  like  sponges,  and  throws  them  away  when  he  can  squeeze  no  more,  only  meets
what  may  be  expected  when  he  comes  to  be  thrown  away  in  turn. — Y.

EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  XXni.

The  first  eight  verses  form  the  necessary
conclusion  of  the  group  of  discourses  sum-


marized in  ch.  xxi.,  xxii.  Like  Isaiah,  our
prophet  follows  up  denunciation  with  con«
eolation,  and  will  have  the  mind  rest  on
the  sure  promises  of  God  for  the  Messianic


512


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.    [cH.  xxni.


future.  A  part  of  the  people  has  been
already  scattered  abroad.  In  ch.  xxiv.  8,
**  those  who  dwell  in  the  land  of  Egypt "
are  a  section  no  less  important  than  '*  those
who  remain  in  this  land ; "  and  the  Babylo-
nian Captivity  is  an  event  only  too  certain
to  take  place  (comp.  vcr.  8).  Unhappy
Judahl  for  though  not  free  from  responsi-
bility, it  is  the  kings  who  are  the  prime
authors  of  the  calamity.  Yet  happy  Judah !
for  '*tho  days  come"  that  an  ideal  king
shall  arise,  even  the  promised  Messiah.
(Ck>mp.  Ezek.  xxxiv.,  which  seems  like  a
development  of  this  section.)  Some  have
represented  the  promises  of  this  chapter  as
fulfilled  in  the  return  from  Babylon,  with
perhaps  the  Maocabean  glories  in  addition.
The  fulfilment  would  in  this  case  correspond
but  ill  to  the  prediction ;  the  context,  too,  is
equally  opposed  to  it  For,  as  Hengstenberg
points  out,  the  *'  gathering  "  and  **  bringing
back  "  of  Israel  is  in  yer.  4  closely  connected
with  the  raising  up  of  good  shepherds;  and,
according  to  ver.  5,  that  promise  is  to  find
at  any  rate  its  culminating  fulfilment  in
David's  *' righteous  Branch,"  the  Messiah.
The  mistake  has  been  partly  caused  by  a
reluctance  to  increase  the  number  of  pro-
phecies still  awaiting  their  fulfilment,  and
partly  by  the  false  supposition  that  the
events  described  must  take  place  simul-
taneously (against  this  view,  see  vers.  7, 8).
Hengstenberg  himself  thinks  that  the  ful-
filment lies  in  the  conversion  of  Israel  to
the  gospel.  *<  Canaan  had  such  a  high  value
for  Israel,  not  because  it  was  its  fatherland
in  the  lower  sense,  bat  because  it  was  the
land  of  God,  the  place  where  his  glory
dwelt"  To  be  in  Christ  is  to  be  in  the
true  Canaan.

Ver.  1.— Woe  be  onto  the  pastors,  etc.  I
This  "woe"  is  a  pendant  to  the  "woe"
upon  Jehoiakim  in  ch.  zxii.  13.  The  original
form  of  the  verse  shows  the  strong  feeling
with  which  the  prophet  both  wrote  and
spoke:  "Woe  I  shepherds  who  destroy,"  etc.
By  "shepherds"  Jeremiah  means  rather
the  civil  than  the  spiritual ,  authorities,
especially  the  kings — woifi4yts  \awvt  as  Ho-
mer calls  them.  This  is,  in  fact  the  general
Old  Testament  application  of  the  term  (see
onch.U.8).  That  destroy.  If  it  is  true  of  all
sin  that  no  one  can  calculate  its  issues,  this
is  specially  true  of  the  sins  of  rulers.  De-
Urant  reges,  pUeturUur  Achivi ;  or,  as  an
inspired  teacher  puts  it,  "  The  leaders  of


this  people  became  false  guides,  and  thoi
whom  they  led  were  lost  men  "  (Isa.  ix.  16
How  these  evil  shepherds  "  destroyed  "  tt
people  we  are  not  hero  told ;  but  from  d
xxii.  3, 13,  it  is  clear  that  sins  of  injustice
ranging  from  oppressive  exaction  to  mm
der,  are  specially  intended.  Scatter;  th
captivities  of  the  Jews  being  directly  owin
to  the  want  of  good  government  and  tead:
ing.  How  could  the  prophets  stem  the  tid
of  popular  corruption,  when  the  mlin
classes  opposed  their  efforts  ?  The  sheep  c
my  pasture ;  or,  the  sheep  of  my  pasturing^
the  "pastors"  are  Jehovah's  under-she|
herds.  The  figure  is  a  favourite  one,  espc
cially  with  the  psalmists  of  the  school  c
Asaph  (see  Ps.  Ixxiv.  1 ;  Ixxvii.  20 ;  Ixxyil
52  (comp.  70—72);  Ixxix.  13;  Ixxx.  1).

Ver.  2.— The  Lord  Ood  of  Israel ;  strictly
Jehovah  the  God  of  Israel.  This  nations
title  of  Jehovah  suggests,  in  such  a  oonnec
tion,  that  the  crime  of  the  kings  is  nothinj
short  of  sacrilege.  Ye  have  scattered,  etc.
i.e.  been  the  cause  of  their  scattering.  Ear
not  visited  them.  "To  visit"  often,  by  (
natural  association  of  ideas,  means  "  to  giv<
attention  to."  By  an  equally  natural  asso
elation,  it  means  "  to  fall  upon,  to  punish.'
Hence,  in  the  next  clause,  I  will  visit  iip<»
yon.  We  have  the  same  combination  o
meanings  in  Zech.  x.  3.

Ver.  3. — Parallel  passage,  Ezek.  xxxiv
12 — 15.  I  will  gather  the  remnant  Fo
the  ill  usage  of  foreign  oppressors  has  sup
plemented  that  of  home  tyrants,  so  tha
only  a  "  remnant "  is  left.  And  thej  dial
be  fmitfol  and  increase.  The  fertility  o
the  Jewish  race  in  modem  times  has  beei
a  frequent  subject  of  observation,  and  sup
plies  the  best  comment  upon  Jezemiahi
prophecy.

Yer.  4. — And  I  will  set  np  shepherds
f.e.  rulers,  not  necessarily  kmgs  (see  oi
next  verse).  Which  shall  feed  them.  Fa
the  evil  shepherds  "  fed  themselves,  and  fe(
not  my  flock  "  (Ezek.  xxxiv.  8).  And  thq
shall  fear  no  more.  Ezekiel  again  oontri
butes  an  essential  feature  to  the  description
The  neglect  of  the  shepherds  left  the  floe]
exposed  to  the  ravages  of  wild  beEists  (Ezek
xxxiv.  8).  Neither  shall  they  be  lajtv-j^g
A  speaking  phrase.  Too  many  of  the  aheei
had  fallen  down  precipices  or  been  carriec
off  by  lions.  Yet  the  context  rather  favoun
a  slight  and  palffiographically  natural  emen
dation  of  Hitzig,  "Neither  shall  they  b
terrified."  The  Septuagint  omits  the  wort
altogether,  which  favours  the  suppositioi
that  they  read  as  Hitzig  would  read,  fo
they  are  apt  to  condense  by  omitting  sy
nonyms.

Vers.  15,^6. — (C^omp.  the  parallel  passage
ch.  xxsiii.  15, 16.)

Yer.  5.— Behold,  the  days  eome.    The  na


cu.  XXIII.  1—40.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.


513


of  tlie  analogons  phrase,  **  And  it  shall  come
to  pass  in  that  day/*  %voiild  lead  us  to  sup-
pose that  this  verse  describes  a  fresh  stage
in  the  progress  of  events,  as  if  the  faithful
shepherds  (vcr.  4)  were  to  precede  the
"  righteous  Branch  "  (ver.  5).  Such  a  view,
however,  is  not  very  plausible,  for  the  Mes-
siah, according  to  propliecy,  is  to  appear  in
the  darkest  of  times.  The  prophet  simply
means  to  impress  upon  us  tlio  greatness  of
the  revelation  which  he  is  about  to  commu-
nicate. I  will  raise  onto  David.  The  pro-
mised Mes^jiah,  tiien,  is  certainly  to  be  of
the  family  of  David  (comp.  Isa.  ix.  7 ;  xi.  1 ;
Micah  V.  2).  A  righteous  Branch ;  rather,
a  rujhteous Plant :  tiie  root  means  "to  bud,
or  sprout."  This  is  tljo  first  time  in  whicli
the  title  *'  the  Plant "  is  unmistakably  ap-

{)lied  to  the  ISIessianic  King  (possibly,  but
ess  probably,  to  the  Messianic  kings).  It
indicates  tliat  this  great  personage  stands
in  connection  with  the  divinely  ordained
and  ancient  royal  family,  but  that  ho  is  in
somo  way  unique,  and  far  surpasses  his
human  ancestors.  He  *'  springs  forth ;  "
tiieroforo  he  is  not  a  sort  of  meteoric  appear-
ance, without  any  natural  home  among  men,
but  ratlier  the  blossom  of  the  Jewish  nation,
the  embodiment  of  its  highest  qualities.
And  yet  there  is  something  extraordinary
about  him,  for  it  is  needful  that  Jehovah
himself  should  **  raise  "  this  Plant  from  the
almost  worn-out  stock  of  David.  Note  that
the  word  rendered  here  in  the  Authorized
Version  **  Branch  "  is  not  the  same  as  that
in  the  parallel  passage  in  Isaiah  (xi.  1).  It
is,  however,  the  word  employed  in  Isa.  iv,  2,
which  is  taken  by  many,  especially  the
older  interpreters  (but  with  very  doubtful
justice),  to  be  a  prophecy  of  the  Messiah.  It
is  also  the  worcl  used  by  Zechariah  (iii.  8 ;
vi.  12),  as  a  proper  name  of  the  Messiah,
which  is  one  strong  reason  for  rejecting  the
view  mentioned  above  that  the  word  ren-
dered "  the  Branch,"  or  "  the  Plant,"  is
to  bo  taken  collectively  as  equivalent  to
"  branches,"  or  rather  "  plants  "  (the  article
is  not  expressed  ir\  the  Hebrew).  In  short,
this  passage  and  the  prophecies  referred  to
in  Jeremiah  arc  exceptions  to  the  general
Old  Testament  usage  of  the  Hebrew  word
(gema1:h)f  which  is  elsewhere  a  collective
term  equivalent  to  "  plantation."  It  is  true
that  in  vcr.  4  "  shepherds,"  in  the  plurnl,
are  spoken  of,  but  there  is  no  reason  why
this  title  should  be  confined  to  kings — it
may  as  fairly  be  extended  to  the  chief  rulers
luider  a  king  as  the  term  "  king  "  itself  (see
on  ch.  xvii.  20);  and  true,  further,  that  in
ch.  xxxiii.  17  a  continuous  succesbion  is
promised  of  Davidio  heirs  to  the  throne,  but
this  is  not  decisive  in  favour  of  the  collec-
tive meaning,  any  more  than  Isaiah's  later
prophecy    that    "the    [reigning    Davidic]

JER£M1AH.


king  shall  reign  in  righteousness  "  disproves
the  strictly  Messianic  reference  of  his  earlier
promise  in  Isa.  xi.  1.  All  prophecy  is  con-
ditional ;  there  may  have  been  moral  reasons
why  a  continuance  of  the  Davidic  dynasty
was  held  out  by  Jeremiah  at  one  time  as  a
possible  prospect.  (It  is,  howeveri  extremelv
probable  that  ch.  xxxiii.  14 — 26  is  the  work
of  some  other  inspired  writer ;  see  ad  loc.)
The  thirty-fourth  chapter  of  Ezekiel,  which
is  so  closely  parallel  to  this  section,  appears
to  interpret  the  prophecy  of  a  single  Mes-
sianic king  (Ezek.  xxxiv.  23).  And  a  King
shall  reign;  rather,  and  he  shall  reign  as
king  ;  i.e.  ho  shall  oe  the  realized  ideal  of
an  Israelitish  king — a  second  David.  And
prosper ;  or,  and  deal  wisely.  There  is  the
same  doubt  as  to  the  rendering  of  the  verb
in  Isa.  Iii.  13  a.  The  radical  idea  is  that  of
wisdom,  and  the  analogy  of  Isa.  xi.  2  favours
the  alternative  rendering  here.  Shall  eze-
cnte  judgment;  in  contrast  to  the  neglect*
ful  conduct  of  Jehoiakim  (ch.  xxii.  3).

Yer.  6. — Israel  shall  dwell  safely,  in  the
parallel  passage  (ch.  xxxiii.  IC)  we  read
"Jerusalem,"  and  there  can  hardly  be  a
doubt  that  "Jerusalem"    ought  to  bo  re-
stored here.    This  is  not  the  only  instance
in  which,  by  mistake,  the  scribe  has  written
"Israel"  instead  of  ** Jerusalem"  (see  ch.
xxxii.  30,  32 ;  li.  49 ;    Zeph.  iii.  14;   Zech.
xii.  1).    In  Zech.  i.  19  the  scribe  discovered
his  mistake,  and  wrote  the  right  word,  "  Je-
rusalem," after  the  wrong  one,  '•  Israel,"  but
without  cancelling  the  latter  (Gr'atz,  *  Mo-
natsschrift,'  1880,  pp.  97—101).    And  this
is  his  name  whereby  he  shall  be  called.
There  is  a  various  rciiding,  which  may  be
rendered  either,  tolierehy  tliey  shall  call  {him,
or  her)y  or,  which  tJiey  shall  proclaim,  sup-
ported by  the  Pcshito,  Targum,  Vulgate,  and
a  few  manuscripts  (St.  Jerome,  too,  mentions
this  reading).    There  is  also  a  more  impor-
tant difference  among  the  commentators  as
to  the  person  who  was  to  bear  the  name.  The
older  Christian  interpreters  contended  with
all  their  might  for  the  view  that  the  name
belonged  to  the  Messiah,  partly  on  real
philological  grounds,  partly  with  the  illegiti-
mate theological  object  of  obtaining  a  proof-
text  for  the  orthodox  doctrine  of  the  person
of  the  Messiah  and  (in  the  case  of  Protestant
writers)  of  justification.    It  is  much  to  the
credit  of  Hengsteuberg  that  he  sets  this
object  aside,  and   whUe  maintainlog  the
Messianic  referenceof  the  pronoun,  intei-prets
the  name  with  a  single  eye  to  the  require-
ments of  the  context,  "Ho  by  whom  and
under  whom  Jehovah  will  be  our  righteous-
ness."   The  objection  is,  that  in  the  parallel
passage  (ch.  xxxiii.  16)  Jeremiah   assigns
the  name  "  Jehovah-Tsidkenu,"  not  to  the
Messiah,  but  to  Jerusalem.    The  prophet
must  bo  allowed  to  be  his  best  interpreter,

2l


614


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  xxm.  1—40.


so  that  wc  muflt,  it  would  bociu,  at  any  rate,
reject  the  Blcsflianio  reference.  But  then
how  are  wc  to  explain  the  pronoun  ?  It  is
right  to  refer  the  parallel  pronoun  in  ch.
xxxiii.  16  to  "Jerusalem,"  because  the  pro-
noun there  is  feminine,  and  evidently  refers
to  a  city,  but  it  is  not  natural  in  our  pas-
sage to  explain  *Miifl  name"  of  "Israel,"
seeing  that  the  subject  of  the  noun  in  the
parallel  line  is,  not  Israel,  but  the  Messiah.
but  is  the  text  here  correct  ?  A  comparison
of  the  parallel  psalms  xiv.  and  liii.,  and
of  the  corresponding  chapters  in  Samuel,
Kings,  and  Chronicles,  will  show  how  easily
errors  made  their  way  into  duplicate  copies
of  the  same  passage.  Granting  that  wo
have  such  duplicate  copies  of  this  prophecv
in  Jeremiah,  there  can  be  no  doubt  which
is  the  more  original ;  the  form  of  ch.  xxiii.  C
has  a  difficulty  from  which  ch.  xxxiii.  16  is
free — a  difficulty  of  interpretation  and  a
difficulty  also  of  grammar.  For,  as  Ewald
has  already  pointed  out  (*  Hebrew  Grammar,*
§  249  h),  the  contracted  suffix  is  very  rarely
attached  to  the  simple  imperfect,  and  the  clear
style  in  which  this  section  is  written  justifies
us  in  regarding  any  unusual  form  with  sus-

Eicion.    ''Israel"  thus  was  probably  written
y  mistake  for  "Jerusalem,"  and  this  error
soon  led  to  others— first,   the  omission  of
"  her,"  and  then  the  prefixing  of  "  his  name  "
for  clearness,  and  (on  the  part  of  the  antliors
of  tlie  points)  the  mispointing  of  the  verb
(so  as  to  include  in  the  form  tlie  pronoun
"him").     It  is  some  confirmntion   of  this
view  that  tljcre  are  sevtral  <jthcr  passnges
in  which  the  words  "Israel"  and  "Jeru-
salem "  appear  to  Iiave  been  confounded  (see
preceding    note).     Read,    therefore,   as   in
ch.  xxxiii.  IC,  And  this  is  the  name  ichcrc-
toilh  she  shall  he  called.    THE  LOBB  OVEL
BIOHTEOUSNESS ;  Hebrew,    Yahveh   (Je-
hovah) Tsidkenu.    The  name  is  formed  on
the  analogy  of  other  symbolic  names,  such  as
El-elohe-J^rael  (Gen.  xxxiii.  20),  Jehovah-
Ki8si(£xod.  xvii.  15),  and  especially  Jehovah-
Shammah  (Ezek.  xlviii.  35),  also  a  name  of
Jerusalem.    These  names  are,  in  fact,  sen-
tences;   Jehovah-Shammah,    for    instance,
means  "The  Lord  (is)  there;"   and   the
name  in  the  present  verse,  "  The  Lord  (is)
our  Righteousness"  (Hen  gs  ten  berg's  view
mentioned  above  seems  less  natural).     It  is
singular  that  Zcdekiuh's  name  should  como
so  near  to  that  announced  by  the  prophet.
But  there  is  still  a  difTcrenoe  between  them.
Zedekiah    must    mean    "The    Lord    (is)
righteousness,"  i.e.  is  ever  faithful  to  his
revealed  principles  of  action.    But  Jehovah-
Tsidkenu  may    be   correctly   paraphrased,
"  The  Lord  is  the  autlior  of  our  prosperity,"
or,  more  strictljr,  "  of  the  justification  of  our
claims  in  the  sight  of  our  enemies  "  (comp.
Isa.  xlv.  24 ;  L  8 ;  My.  17 ;  Iviii.  8 ;  Ixii.  1, 2).


Similar  applications  of  forensic  lang^naoie
are  familiar,  e.g.  "  When  they  speak  with
their  enemies  in  the  gate  '*  (Ps.  cxxrii.  5).

Vers.  7,  8. — This  is  another  of  Jeremiah's
repetitions  ^see  ch.  xvi.  14,  15).  £ither  the
Septuugint  translator  or  the  copyist  of  the
Hebrew  manuscript  which  he  used  appears
to  have  thought  that  the  passage  might,
therefore,  be  dispensed  with.  In  the  Sep-
tunpint  it  is  placed  at  the  end  of  the  chapter
(being  possibly  supplied  from  another  He-
brew manuscript),  and  the  form  given  in
this  version  to  the  close  of  vcr.  G  ('ItM-cScc
iy  ro7s  irpo<fnjrcuSy  combining  tlio  opening
words  of  vcr.  9)  shows  that  ver.  9  followed
immediately  upon  ver.  6  in  the  Hebrew
manuscri|>t.

Vt  rs.  0  —40. — These  verses  form  a  complete
j)ro].li(cy,  the  title  of  which  Jeremiah  him-
st'lf  supplies  in  the  words,  "  Conccruing  the
(false)  propliets  "  (see  below) ;  comp.  ch.  xlvi.
2;  xlviii.  1  ;  xlix.  1,  7,23,  28.  It  is  true  the
rendering  of  the  Authorized  Version  (ver.  9),
Mine  heart  within  me  is  broken  beeanse
of  the  prophets,  is  not  purely  arbitrary ;  it
is  favonretl  by  the  exegetical  tradition  re-
presented by  the  Hebrew  acoents.  But  it
IS  not  x>robable  that  two  entirely  different
causes  should  bo  given  for  the  prophet's
deep  emotion  (see  the  latter  part  of  the
verse).  Besides,  "  breaking  of  tne  heart  **  is
nowhere  a  sign  of  anger  (as  Authorized
Version  would  suggest),  but  cither  of  grief
(see  on  ch.  viii.  21),  or,  as  the  context  im-
plies hero,  physical  disturbance  at  the
solemn  message  of  Jehovah  (comp.  ch.  vi.
11;  XX.  9).  All  my  bones  shake.  It  is  a
very  uncommon  verb,  occurring  only  twice
elsewhere  (^Gen.  i.  2;  Dcut.  xxxii.  11,  in
Piel).  The  words  of  his  holiness;  or,  hi^
icords  of  holiness;  i.e.  his  holy  words,  the
words  of  the  Holy  One  on  the  unholy  doings
of  the  false  prophets.

Ver.  10. — The  land  is  fall  of  adnltervrs.
The  false  prophets  connive  at  flagrant  im-
moralities,  one  of  which  is  mentioned  as  a
tyi)ica1  sin.  As  to  the  nature  of  the  adul-
tery, sec  note  on  ch.  v.  7.  Because  of  swear-
ing ;  rather,  because  of  the  curse ;  the  curse,
namely,  with  which  God  punishes  the  g^lty
earth  (comp.  Zech.  v.  3;  Dan.  ix.  11 ;  and
especially  Isa.  xxiv.  G,  where  in  the  original
there  is  a  paronomasia  very  similar  to  that
here).  The  land  moumeUi;  a  iigumtive
expression,  suggested  partly  by  the  asson-
ance of  the  word  for  **  curse."  Drought  is
what  is  meant  (comp.  ch.  xii.  4;  xiv.  1,  2).
The  pleasant  places  of  the  wilderness;
mther,  the  pastures  of  the  prairie-land
("wilderness"  suggests  ideas  very  alien  to
the  context).  Their  course ;  literally,  their
running  (comp.  ch.  viii.  6).  The  subject  is
"  the  inhabitants  of  the  land."  Their  force
is  not  right ;  nUlicr,  their  might  (or,  heroism)


cii.  xxiiL  1— 40.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.


615


is  untruth.  They  are  *^  mighty  men  "  only  in
telling  nntrnths  (oomp.  oh.  ix.  8 ;  Isa.  v.  22).

Yer.  11. — Both  prophet  and  prieet  are
profane;  i.e.  are  nnholy,  dlBobeying  the
Divine  comroands  (see  on  oh.  v.  7).  The
same  two  important  olasses  specifiod  as  in
ch.Til3.  Tea,  in  my  honse,  eto.  Evidently
some  sin  specially  incongmous  with  its
locality  is  referred  to,  either  idolatry  (comp.
ch.  vii.  30)  or  the  totemistio  worship  of
fignres  of  animals  (Ezek.  yiii.  10,  11).
Comp.  note  on  ch,  v.  7.

Yer.  12. — ^Their  way  shall  be  nnto  them
as  slippery  ways,  eto.;  rather,  alippery
placeB.  The  passage  has  a  manifest  affinity
with  Ps.  zxzv.  6  (in  one  of  the  Jeremian-
izing  psalms ;  see  on  ch.  xviii.  19, 20).  They
shall  be  driven  on;  or,  as  Ewald,  taking
over  the  last  word  of  the  preceding  clause,
they  shall  he  thrust  into  the  darkness.  This
involves  a  reminiscence,  probable  enough,  of
Isa.  viii.  225.  It  is  against  the  accentual
tradition,  but  improves  the  rhythmical  divi-
sion of  tf le  verse.  If  we  ask  who  **  thrusts  "
them,  Ps.  zxxv.  5  supplies  the  answer — ^it
is  not  merely  external  circumstances,  but
**  the  Angel  of  Jehovah,"  i.e.  Jehovah  him-
self. As  Bishop  Hall  says,  '*  God  wounds  us
by  many  instruments,  but  with  one  hand."
I  will  bring  evil  upon  them,  etc.  Favourite
expressions  of  Jeremiah  (comp.  oh.  xi.  23).

Vera.  13,  14. — ^The  prophets  of  Samaria
were  no  doubt  guilty  enough,  but  their
offences  dwindled  by  the  side  of  the  *'  hor-
rible "  transgressions  of  those  of  the  southern
kingdom.  The  prophet  apparently  means,
not  only  that  the  former,  having  fewer
spiritual  advantages,  were  less  responsible
than  the  latter,  but  also  that  they  had  not
violatcMl  the  moral  code  so  conspicuously.

Ver.  13.— I  have  seen  folly ;  rather,
absurdity  or  unseemliness ;  literally,  that
ichich  is  unsavoury  (comp.  Job  vi.  6).  The
word  occurs  with  a  similar  reference  to
Jehovah  in  Job  i.  22 ;  xxiv.  12.    To  *•  pro-

Ehcsy  by  Baal "  was  absurd,"  "  unseemly,"
ecause  Baal  was  a  **  non-entity "  (Isaiah's
^vord  for  an  idol).  In  Baal ;  rather,  by,  or
by  means  of,  Baal  (see  on  ch.  ii.  8).

Yer.  14.— I  have  seen  also,  etc. ;  rather.
But  in  the  prophets  of  Jerusalem  I  have  seen.
Horrible;  as  in  ch.  v.  30.  They  commit
adultery,  etc. ;  literally,  the  oommiUina  adtd*
tery  aiid  the  walking  in  lies — a  mucn  more
forcible  way  of  putting  it.  They  are  all  of
them ;  ratlier.  They  have  become  all  of  them ;
viz.  oitlier  the  prophets  or  the  people  in
general.  The  inhabitants  thereof;  viz.  of
Jerusalem.

Yer.  15. — On  tlio  punishment  here  threat-
ened, see  note  on  cli.  ix.  15.

Yers.  16 — 22. — A  warning  addressed  to  the
people  against  the  falso  prophecies  (comp.
Ezek.  xiii.).


Ver.  16.— They  make  yon  vain;  i,e.  fill
you  with  vain  imagioations.  A  similar
phrase  occurs  in  ch.  ii.  5,  on  which  see  note.
A  vision  of  their  own  heart ;  the  heart  being
the  centre  of  the  intellectual  as  well  as  of
the  moral  life,  according  to  tho  Hebrew
conception.

Ver.  17. — ^Unto  them  that  despise  me.  The
Lord  hath  said.  The  Septuagint  and  the
Byriac  render  the  same  text  (the  consonants
are  alone  tho  text)  with  different  vowels,
thus :  '*  Unto  those  who  despise  the  word  of
the  Lord."  In  favour  of  this  it  may  be
urp:ed  that  tho  phrase,  ^  The  I/)rd  hath
said,"  is  nowhere  else  used  in  this  abrupt
v?ay  to  introduce  a  real  or  supposed  revela-
tion, and  Hitzig  and  Grat  accordingly
accept  it.  Te  wall  have  peaoe;  as  ch.
vi.  14.  After  the  imagination;  rather,  in
the  stubbornness  (see  on  ch.  iii.  17).

Ver.  18. — For  who  hath  stood  in  the  eonn-
sel  of  the  Lord ;  rather,  in  the  eounciL
This  verso  is  connected  with  ver.  16 ;  it  gives
the  reason  why  the  false  prophets  were  not
to  be  listened  to.  None  of  them  had  been
admitted  to  the  secret  council  of  the  Lord ;
the  interrogation  is  here  a  form  of  denial.
*'  To  stand  in  the  council "  is  not  the  same
as  "to  sit"  (Ps.  i.  1);  the  latter  phrase
implies  taking  an  active  part  in  the  consul-
tations. It  is  specially  applicable  to  the
true  prophets,  according  to  ver.  22,  and  this,
as  we  gather  from  other  passages,  in  a  two-
fold sense.  Sometimes  the  prophets  had
visions,  in  which  their  inner  eye  was  granted
a  sight  of  Jehovah  in  consultation  with  his
trusted  servants  (Isa.  vi.  1,  comp.  8 ;  1  Kings
xxii.  19) ;  and  the  words  of  Eliphaz,  '*  Wert
thou  listening  in  the  council  of  God?"
(Job  XV.  8),  appear  to  be  descriptive  of  a
similar  experience.  But  the  phrase  may
also  be  used  in  a  wider  sense  of  entirely
unecstatic  revelations.  Amos  says  (iii.  7%
*'  Surely  the  Lord  Jehovah  will  do  nothing,
but  he  revealeth  his  secret  counsel  unto
his  servants  the  prophets ; "  and  a  psalmist
extends  the  term  ** secret  counsel"  to  the
communion  which  God  grants  to  the  pious
in  general  (Ps.  xxv.  14 ;  oomp.  Prov.  ill.  32).
Thus  there  is  no  hard-and-fast  line  between
the  experiences  of  the  prophets  and  those
of  humbler  believers.  In  so  far  as  the
latter  are  **  disciples  of  Jehovah "  (Isa.
liv.  13),  they  too  may  be  truly  said  to
**  stand,"  at  least  in  the  doorway,  *'in  the
council  of  Jehovah ; "  just  as  a  well-known
collect  inherited  from  the  Latin  Chnrch
beseeches  that  "  by  God's  holy  inspiration
we  may  think  those  things  that  be  good."
Who  hath  marked  his  wordi  A  Jewish
tradition,  represented  bv  the  marginal  notes
in  the  Hebrew  Bible,  has  taken  offence  at
tliis  variation  in  the  expression,  and  would
correct  the  reading  to  "my  word."    But


516


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  xxiii.  1— lO.


such  changes  of  person  are  of  frequent
occurrence,  and  we  know  that  the  prophets
were  thoroughly  assured  that  the  word
which  they  spoko  was  not  theirs,  but  that
of  him  who  sent  them.

Vers.  19, 20. — These  two  verses  seem  to  be
connected  with  ver.  17.  The  false  prophets
say,  "  Ye  shall  have  peace."  How  different
the  message  of  the  true !  (A  duplicate  of
these  verses  occurs  in  ch.  xxx.  23,  24.)

Ver.  19. — A  whirlwind  of  the  Lord,  etc. ;
rather,  A  storm  of  the  Lord,  even  fury ^  is  gone
forth,  and  a  tdhirling  storm — J?^^  ^^  nead
of  the  tciched  shall  it  whirl.  Tlie  hurricane
has  already  broken  out ;  it  will  soon  reach
Jerusalem.  This  seems  to  bo  the  force  of
Jeremiah's  expressive  figure.

Ver.  20.-*The  an|^r  of  the  Lord.  The
proi>het*s  interpretation  of  tho  image.  It  is
the  judicial  anger  of  Jehovah,  personified  as
Divine  manifestations  so  often  are  (hence
**  shall  not  return  ").  The  form  of  the  verse
reminds  us  of  Isa.  Iv.  11.  In  the  latter
days ;  rather,  in  future  days^  as  Dr.  Hen-
derson rightly  renders.  It  seems  better  to
restrict  tho  term  **  latter  days "  to  tho
Messianic  period  ("  the  coming  age,"  ^latt.
xii.  32),  to  which,  in  fact,  it  is  often  applied
{e.g.  Isa.  ii.  2 ;  Hos.  iii.  5).  The  phrase  in
itself  simply  means  **  in  the  sequel  of  the
days,"  i.e.  in  tho  future ;  its  Messianic
reference,  when  this  exists,  is  inferred  solely
from  the  context.  In  the  passage  before  us,
and  in  Deut.  iv.  30,  xxx.  29,  there  can  be
no  intention  of  pointing  to  tho  Messinnio
age.  Precisely  the  same  phrase  occurs  in
un  Assyrian  inscription,  where  its  meaning  is
clear  from  tho  context  (ami  dkhrai  yumi
irihy  **  For  a  sequel  of  days — i.e.  for  a  future
time — I  deposited'*)*  In  the  present  case  it
is  no  distant  period  to  which  tho  prophet
refers,  for  ho  continues,  Te  shall  consider  it,
etc.,  or  rather,  ye  shall  understand  it  clearly^
viz.  that  tho  calamities  whicli  will  have
come  upon  you  are  the  Divino  judgment
upon  your  sins.

Vers.  21,  22.— In  vers.  17—20  Jeremiah
has  shown  that  these  cannot  bo  true  pro-
phets, because  their  message  is  diametrically
opposed  to  tho  true  revelation.  He  now
proves  it  from  the  absence  of  any  moral
effect  from  their  preaching.

Vers.  23— 32.— Jehovah  has  obser>'ed  and
will  punish  the  false  pretensions  of  tho
prophets.

Vers.  23,  24.— Am  I  a  God  at  hand,  etc.  ?
(•*  At  hand"  equivalent  to  "  near.")  Eliphaz
may  again  assist  us  with  an  illustration.
•*  And  thou  sayest  " — ho  is  expostulating
with  Job—'*  What  doth  God  know  ?  can  ho
judge  through  the  dark  oloud?  thick  clouds
are  a  covering  to  him,  that  he  seeth  not ;
yea,  he  walketh  upon  the  vault  of  heaven  "
(Job  xxii.  13, 14).    It  might  seem,  from  tho


l)reix)nderanco  of  the  fidse  prophets  over
tho  true,  as  if  Jehovah  wore  unaware  cf  tlie
mischief.    Not  so;  Jehovah  is  omnipicsent

Ver.  25. — I  have  dreamed.  Jeremiah
mentions  it  as  one  of  the  marks  of  n  false
prophet  tliat  ho  appealed  to  his  dreams
(comp.  ch.  xxix.  8);  true  prophecy  con-
tented itself  with  less  ambiguous  media  of
conmiuuicjition  with  the  unseen  world.  It
may  bo  objected  that  Abraham  (Gon.  xv.
12),  at  any  rate,  and  Abimelech  (Gen.
XX.  3)  received  Divine  revelations  in  dreams;
but  these  were  not  officially  prophets.  Na-
than and  the  contempomries  of  the  author
of  Job  had  messages  from  God  by  night,
but  these  are  called,  not  dreams,  but  visions
(2  Sam.  vii.  14,  comp.  17;  Job  iv.  13).
Deuteronomy  (and  this  is  one  of  its  striking
iwints  of  agreement  with  Jeremiah)  ex-
pressly describes;  a  false  prophet  as  '*  a
dreamer  of  dreams "  (Deut.  xiii.  1 ;  comp.
1  Sam.  xxviii.  6).  Two  passages  in  tho  Old
Testament  seem  inconsistent  with  this  dis-
couragement of  dreams  as  a  medium  of
revelation — Numb.  xii.  G,  where  the  Lord  is
said  to  make  himself  known  to  prophets  by
visions  and  dreams,  and  Joel  ii.  28,  where
tho  prophetic  dreams^of  the  old  men  aro
one  of  the  features  of  a  Messianic  descrip-
tion ;  but  it  is  noteworthy  that  the  first  of
these  refers  to  the  primitive  period  of  IsracFs
history,  and  the  second  to  the  distant  Mes-
sianic age.  In  its  classical  period  prophecy
kept  itself  sedulously  aloof  from  a  field  on
which  it  had  such  compromising  companion-
ship (comp.  Eccles.  v.  7).

Ver.  26.— How  long  shall  this  be  in  the
heart,  etc.  ?  i.e.  how  long  shall  this  be  their
purpose,  viz.  to  prophesy  lies?  But  this
rendering  leaves  out  of  account  a  second
interrogative  which  in  the  Hebrew  follows
*•  how  long."  It  is  better  to  translate  this
difficult  passage,  with  De  Dieu  and  many
moderns,  thus :  *' How  long  (^uotM^/ze  durahit
hue  ipsorum  impudentia)  7  Is  it  in  tho
heart  of  the  prophets  that  prophesy  lies,  and
the  prophets  of  tho  deceit  of  their  own
heart ;  aro  they  thinking  (I  say)  to  cause
my  people  to  forget,"  etc.  ?  On  this  view,
ver.  27  resumes  the  question  interrupted  in
ver.  26.

Ver.  27. — Every  man  to  his  neighbour.
Not  merely  one  prophet  to  another  prophet,
for  it  is  "  my  people  *'  whom  they  cause  to
forget  my  Nome  (comp.  ver.  32),  but  tho
piophet  to  his  fellow-man.  Have  forgotten
my  name  for  Baal ;  oxy  forgot  my  name  through
Baal.

Ver.  28. — Let  him  tell  a  dream;  rather,
let  him  tell  it  as  a  dream  ;  let  him  tcU  his
dreams,  if  ho  will,  but  not  intermix  them
with  Divine  revelations.  Jeremiah,  then,
does  not  deny  that  there  is  a  measure  of
truth  in  what  these  prophets  sny ;  he  only


cu.  xxin.  1— do.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.


517


I


demands  a  distinct  declaration  that  their
(hreains  are  but  dreams,  and  not  equal  in
authority  to  the  Divine  word.  For,  as  he
continues,  What  is  the  ohaff  to  the  wheat  1
What  right  havo  you  to  mix  the  worthless
chaff  with  the  pure,  winnowed  grain  ?  How,
he  implies,  can  such  an  adulterated  messap^e
produce  the  designed  effect  of  a  prophetic
revelation  ?  (St.  Paul  has  a  somewhat  similar
figure,  1  Cor.  ilL  10 — 13.)  So  Naegelsbaoh.
Keil,  however,  denies  that  there  is  any
thought  of  on  adulteration  of  the  Divine
word  by  the  "false  prophets."  According
to  him,  the  question  m  this  verse  is  simply
meant  to  emphasize  the  contrast  between
the  false,  dream-born  prophecy  of  Jeremiah's
opponents  and  the  true  revelations.  How
can  the  false  prophecy  pretend  to  be  the
true  ?  Thov  are  as  different  as  chaff  and
wheat.  Both  Yiews  are  admissible.  Naegels-
baoh introduces  a  new  element  by  suggesting
the  intermixture  of  false  and  true  in  the
utterances  of  the  ^*  false  prophets ; "  but
his  view  is  not  inconsistent  with  what  the
rophet  has  stated  before,  and  it  is  favoured
y  vcr.  30  and  by  the  command,  Let  him
speak  my  word  faithfully ;  t.  e.  in  its  genuine
form ;  comp.  ch.  ii.  21,  **  A  faithful  or  trust-
worthy [i.e.  a  genuine]  seed ; "  also,  for  the
general  sense,  2  Cor.  ii.  17.

Yer.  29. — Is  not  my  word  like  as  a  fire  1
As  in  vers.  19,  20,  so  here,  the  prophet  con-
trasts the  message  of  tho  false  propnets  with
that  of  the  true.  The  former  flatter  their
hearers  with  promises  of  peace :  the  latter
speak  a  stern  but  potent  word,  which  bums
like  a  fire,  and  crushes  like  a  hammer.
Observe,  the  prophet  does  not  define  the
activity  of  the  fire  as  he  does  that  of  the
hammer ;  for  the  fire  has  a  twofold  effect —
protection  to  God's  friends  and  destruction
to  his  enemies.  On  the  figure  of  the  ham-
mer, comp.  ch.  1.  23 ;  Ii.  20.

Vers.  30—32. — The  punishment  solemnly
introduced  by  a  three  times  repeated,  Behold,
I  am  against,  etc.,  corresponding  to  three
several  features  of  the  conduct  of  the  false
prophets.  First  we  are  told  that  the  pro-
phets steal  my  words  every  one  from  his
neighbonr.  The  latter  part  of  the  phrase
reminds  us  of  yer.  27,  but  tho  **  neighoour  "
in  this  case  must  mean,  at  any  rate  primarily,
a  fellow-prophet,  one  who  has  really  received
a  revelation  at  first-hand  from  Jehovah.
Tho  **  false  prophets,"  not  trusting  to  their
** dreams"  alone,  listen  greedily  to  the  dis-
courses of  men  like  Jeremiah,  not  with  a
view  to  spiritual  profit,  bnt  to  making  their
own  utterances  more  effective.  We  must
remember  Uiat  they  lived  by  their  prophesy-
ing (Micah  iii.  5).

Yer.  31.— That  use  their  ton^^nes;  literally,
thai  take  their  tongue,  like  a  workman's  tool
—OS  if  prophecy  could  be  turned  out  to


order.  And  say,  I  He  saith.  The  word
rendered  **  he  saith  "  is  one  which  tho  pro-
phets habitually  used  to  affirm  the  revealed
character  of  their  teaching.  It  is  the  par-
ticiple of  the  verb  rendered  "  say."  Adopt-
ing a  Miltonio  verb,  we  might  render,  *'and
oracle  oracles."  Tho  "false  prophets"  adopt
the  same  forms  as  tho  true ;  but  they  are  to
them  only  forms.

Yer.  32. — That  prophesy  fedse  dreams
(seo  on  ver.  25).  By  &eir  lightness.  The
word  is  an  unconunon  one,  and  implies
arrogance  or  boastfulness  (comp.  Zeph.
iii.  4);  the  root  means  "to  bubble  over."
Therefore  they  shall  not  profit ;  rather,  and
they  cannot  profit

Vers.  33-— 40. — The  abuse  of  a  consecrated
phrase.  The  prophets  were  accustomed  to
apply  the  term  maud  to  their  prophetic
declarations  in  the  sense  of  "oracle,"  or
"  utterance  " — a  sense  derived  from  the  use
of  the  cognate  verb  for  "  to  lift  up  the  voice,"
i.e.  to  pronounce  clearly  and  distinctly.
But  the  word  maeed  was  also  in  common  use
for  "load,  burden,"  and  hence  tho  "false
prophets"  applied  tho  term  derisively  to
Jeremiah's  discourses.  "Rightly  does  ho
call  his  word  a  moMd;  it  is  not  merely  a
solemn  utterance,  but  a  heavy  burden ; "  as
De  Wette  puts  it,  not  merely  a  We'tssagungt
but  a  Wehiaguna,  The  passage  is  important
as  indicating  tue  sense  in  which  the  true
prophets  understood  the  term.  It  should  be
added  that  the  term  maeed  is  prefixed  to  at
least  four  Biblical  passages  which,  not  being
of  threatening  import,  do  not  admit  of  being
entitled  "  burdens  "(Zech.  ix.  1;  xii.  1;  Prov.
XXX.  1 ;  xxxi.  1 ;  comp.  Lam.  ii.  14).  How
remarkable  is  the  line  adopted  by  Jeremiah  I
He  simply  alxEuadons  the  use  of  the  term
moMdj  consecrated  as  it  was  by  the  practice
of  inspired  men  I  Better  to  adopt  a  new
phrase,  than  to  run  the  risk  of  misunder-
standing or,  even  worse,  profanity.

Yer.  33.--What  burden!  etc.  The  He-
brew text,  as  usually  read,  is  extremely
difficult ;  the  Authorized  Yersion  is  entirely
unjustifiable.  It  is  just  possible  to  explain,
with  Ewald,  *^Ab  to  this  question.  What
is  the  burden?  the  true  meaning  of  the
word  is  that,"  etc.  But  how  harsh  and
artificial  I  By  a  change  in  the  grouping  of
the  consonants  (which  alone  constitute  tho
text),  we  may  read,  Ye  are  the  burden.  So
the  Septuagint,  Ynlgate,  Hitzig,  Graf,  Payne
Smith.  We  must  in  this  case  continue,  and
I  will  cast  you  off,  as  the  same  verb  is  to  bo
rendered  in  ch.  viL  29 ;  xii.  7.  Instead  of
carrying  yoa  with  the  long-suffering  of  a
father  (Dent.  i.  31 ;  Isa.  xlvi.  3,  4 ;  Ixiii.  9 ;
Ps.  xxviii.  9),  I  will  cast  you  off  as  a  trouble-
some load  (Isa.  i  14).

Yer.  85.— What  hath  the  Lord  answered  1
i.e.  a  simpler  phraseology  is  to  be  nsedt,


618  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [cu.  xxiil  1—40.


Jehovah  hath  answered,  sayinq,  or,  Jeliovah  '  expression,  the  threatening  already  uttered

hath  upoken,  according  as  a  definite  question  |  fcliall  come  into  operation,

bad  been  put  before  the  prophet  or  not.           ,  Ver.  39.— I,  even  I,  will  utterly  forget

Ver.  36.— And  the  burden  of  the  Lord,  i  you;  rather,  I  wiU  even  take  you  up,  and

etc. ;  i.e.  yo  shall  no  longer  use  the  word  cast  you  off.    This  involves  a  slight  diifer-

massd  at  all.    Every  man's  word  shall  be  enco  in  the  pronunciation  of  the  text  from

his  burden;  rather,  the  burden  to  every  man  ,  that  adopted  bythe  Massoretes,  but  is  adopt<^

8haU  be  his  word;  i.e.  his  derisive  use  of  i  by  the  Septuagint,  Peshito,  Vulgate,  a  few

the  word  massa  shall  be  a  burden  which  i  manuscripts,  and  most  critics ;  it  is,  in  fact,


shall  crush  hiiu  to  the  ground.  Ye  have
perverted  ;  "  i.e.  have  turned  them  round,
and  put  them  into  a  ridiculous  light"  (Payne
Smith).

Ver.  38.— But  since  ye  say,  etc.;  rather,
But  if  ye  say,  etc.    In  case  the  false  pro-


phets disobey,  and  persist  in  using  the  old  !  zx.  11.


HOMILETICS.


almost  required  by  the  figure  which  fills  the
verse.  And  cast  you  out  of  my  presence.
"  And  cast  you"  is  not  in  the  Hebrew ;  nor
is  it  necessary  to  supply  tho  words,  if  the
preceding:  clauses  bo  rightly  translated.
Ver.   40. — With   this   YersBy   comp.    ch.


Vers.  1— 4.— TAtf  character  of  leading  men.  The  character  of  its  leading  men  is  a
matter  of  first  importance  to  a  people.  Israel  had  been  led  astray  by  his  kings ;  one
of  the  first  blessings  promised  to  him  on  his  return  is  the  possession  of  good  leaders.
In  the  most  free  state  there  must  always  be  leading  men — men  exercising  influence  by
reason  of  their  office,  their  rank  and  position,  or  their  capacities.  Observe  this  in  regard
to  the  various  classes  of  leading  men.

I.  PouTiCAL  LEADERS.  On  their  character  depends  the  questions  (1)  whether  laws
shall  be  justly  framed  and  justly  executed,  (2)  whether  the  welfare  of  the  subjects
shall  be  honestly  worked  for,  and  (3)  whether  the  dealings  with  foreign  nations  shall
bo  just  and  peaceable.

II.  Social  leaders.  The  moral  influence  of  the  court  is  always  great  and  wide-
spread ;  how  important  that  this  should  be  pure !  There  are  people  whom  rank  or
personal  attractiveness,  or  powers  of  persuasion,  endow  with  power  to  influence  the
customs  of  their  age.  These  need  be  well  advised  that  their  influence  may  be  on  the
side  of  truth,  purity,  and  humanity.

III.  Intellectual  leaders.  Shall  the  reformer  be  a  Luther  or  a  Voltaire?  the  poet
a  Wordsworth  or  a  Byron  ?  the  historian  an  Arnold  or  a  Gibbon  ?  the  philosopher  a
Butler  or  a  Hume  ?  Surely  for  the  real  welfare  of  a  i)eople  the  moral  tendency  of  its
literature  is  more  important  than  the  intellectual  brilliancy.

IV.  Religious  leaders.  Are  these  men  barren  controversialists,  or  earnest  practical
guides  to  their  flocks?  Are  they  loyal  to  truth,  or  merely  bigoted  defenders  of  their  own
crotchets  ?  Are  they  spiritual-minded  servants  of  Christ,  or  ambitious  priests  ?  Are
they  true  shepherds,  or  wolves  in  sheep's  clothing?  These  questions  touch  the  welfare
of  a  people  very  closely.  Note,  the  one  essential  is  that  the  leading  men  should  desire
to  serve  the  good  of  others  and  not  simply  to  increase  their  own  power  and  honour ;  to
feed  the  flock,  not  to  scatter  it  by  reckless  indifierence,  selfish  ambition,  or  tyran-
nous cruelty.  Tho  power  of  leading  men  is  a  great  and  dangerous  gift,  only  entrusted
by  Providence  to  those  who  possess  it  for  the  sake  of  the  good  it  may  be  the  means  of
conferring  on  the  community  at  large.  The  state  is  in  a  healthy  condition  only  when
public  characters  are  inspired  by  public  spirit.

Ver.  5. — The  Branch  of  David.  The  glorious  prophecy  of  the  Messianic  future  which
here  bursts  forth  from  Jeremiah,  after  his  denunciation  of  his  nation's  sin  and  lamenta-
tion oyer  its  approaching  calamities,  is  necessarily  clothed  in  the  language  of  the  age,
and  viewed  in  an  especial  relation  to  contemporary  wants.  The  people  are  sufifering
from  bad  rulers  and  an  unrighteous  government.  A  good  king,  administering  his
kingdom  happily  and  justly,  is  promised  for  the  golden  age  of  the  future.  Associated
with  this  king  is,  no  doubt,  that  succession  of  righteous  sovereigns  referred  to  in  tlie
fourth  verse.  It  was  not  given  to  anticipatory  visions  to  show  how  unique  and  solitary
ftnd  eternal  was  to  be  the  kingship  of  the  Messiah.    Yet  even  there  ho  stands  forth  in


cii.  XXIII.  I-IOJ    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  610


marked  prominence,  and  towers  above  his  successors,  who  arc  only  regarded  as  following
liis  initiative.  Regarding  the  prophecy  with  the  fuller  light  of  Christian  times,  we  may
see  how  it  is  a  true  foreshadowing  of  the  nature  and  work  of  Christ,  though,  of  course,
only  partial  and  limited,  as  the  shadow  can  only  indicate  the  general  form  of  its  object,
and  that  in  but  one  aspect.

I.  The  origin  of  the  Messiah.  1.  lie  comes  from  a  human  stock.  He  is  called
a  "  Branch,"  or,  rather,  a  *'  Sprout."  Christ  entered  the  world  by  birth ;  ho  was  *'  made
of  a  woman."  Hence  his  oneness  with  us,  his  human  sympathy,  true  example,  and
representative  character  as  the  High  Priest  of  the  race.  2.  He  comes  of  i\iQ  family  of
David,  This  historical  fact  is  significant.  Christ  is  a  born  King,  a  rightful  Sovereign.
He  realizes  the  ideal  which  the  kings  of  the  Jews  had  failed  to  attain,  but  which  tho
best  of  them  had  aimed  at.  3.  He  comes  quietly  and  gradually,  Tho  sprout  springs
from  a  bud  by  slow  growth.  Christ  began  nis  life  as  an  infant,  and  grew  in  physical,
mental,  and  spiritual  powers  (Luke  ii.  52).  He  did  not  astonish  the  world  with  a
sudden  apparition  of  majesty.  His  kingship  is  like  his  kingdom,  a  quiet  and  gradual
growth  as  that  of  a  tree  from  a  seed  (Matt.  xiii.  31 — 32).  4.  He  comes  with  close
relations  to  the  circumstances  of  the  world.  The  sprout  is  vitally  connected  with  tho
earth  and  the  atmosphere.  It  grows  in  the  natural  season  of  growth.  Christ  is  asso-
ciated with  all  human  interests.  The  ages  before  his  advent  were  preparing  for  him.
lie  is  the  representative  of  their  highest  aspirations,  the  satisfaction  of  their  deepest
needs.  He  comes  in  the  "  fulness  of  time."  5.  He  comes  from  a  Divine  origin.  God
raises  up  the  righteous  Branch.  The  text  tells  us  no  more  than  that  the  coming  of
Christ  is  providential  and  through  special  Divine  influences ;  but  we  know  that  God
not  only  raised  him,  but  was  in  him,  as  one  with  his  very  being.

II.  The  office  of  the  Messiah.  He  is  to  be  a  King.  It  was  natural  that  the
Jews  should  anticipate  a  temporal  sovereign,  and  natural,  therefore,  that  they  should
have  been  disappointed  at  the  appearance  and  conduct  of  Jesus  of  Kazareth.  Yet  was
he  not,  is  he  not,  a  King  ?  He  professed  to  be  a  King  (John  xviii.  37).  The  apostles
claimed  submission  to  him  as  to  a  King  (Acts  xvii.  7).  His  influence  is  kingly.  Tho
essence  of  kingship  is  not  seen  in  the  sitting  on  a  material  throne  and  wearing  a  visible
crown,  but  in  the  exercise  of  power  over  men.  Christ  is  the  one  true  King,  ^cause  he
rules  the  thoughts  and  affections  and  wills  of  men.  Human  sovereigns  can  only  com-
mand external  obedience.  While  the  slave  cringes  before  the  throne  he  may  be  cursing
his  master  in  his  heart.  Christ  is  satisfied  with  no  such  superficial  loyalty.  He  seeks
the  allegiance  of  the  heart,  and  he  wins  it  from  all  his  people.  Wo  must,  therefore,
recognize  this  great  fact — Christ  is  a  King  as  well  as  a  Saviour.  While  he  delivers  us
from  ruin,  he  expects  submission  to  his  authority.  He  is  a  Saviour  partly  by  being  a
King,  for  his  royal  influence  is  one  means  of  his  deliverance  of  mankind.  Therefore  tho
selfish  Christianity  which  would  accept  escape  from  ruin,  but  would  not  accord  loyal
obedience,  is  a  delusion.  Wo  cannot  even  bi  safe,  cannot  even  escape  from  the  ruin
of  our  sin,  except  by  bowing  to  the  rule  of  Christ.  We  can  only  find  rest  unto
our  souls  by  taking  on  us  his  yoke.  True  faith,  therefore,  includes  trust  in  the  king-
ship as  well  as  in  the  redemption  of  Christ,  I'.e.  active  fidelity  in  addition  to  passive
confidence.

III.  The  character  op  the  Messiah.  1.  He  is  righteous.  This  was  much  in
contrast  to  the  unrighteousness  of  contemporary  rulers.  Taking  the  word  "righteous"
in  the  largest  sense,  we  have  assurance  of  the  truth,  justice,  holiness,  and  go^ness  of
Christ.  If  this  righteousness  of  the  Messiah  is  a  ground  of  rejoicing  to  the  prophet,
how  much  more  shall  we  Christians  rejoice  in  witnessing  his  gentleness,  compassion,  and
love  ?  2.  He  rides  righteously.  The  character  of  the  government  is  necessarily  deter-
mined by  that  of  the  ruler.  Tho  great  King  comes  to  live  not  for  himself,  but  for  his
l)eople,  and  not  to  execute  stern  judgments  upon  them,  but  to  secure  their  highest  good.
Christ  reigns  for  the  good  of  his  people.  If  we  submit  to  his  rule  we  find  our  own
blessedness  secured  thereby.

Ver.  6. — The  new  name,  (See  also  ch.  xxxiii.  16.)  God's  people  are  to  have  a  new
name.  In  the  epistle  to  the  Church  at  Pergamos,  every  one  "  that  overcometh "  is
assured  that  he  will  receive  *'  a  white  stone,  and  in  the  stone  a  new  name  written  "
(Rev.  ii.  17).    This  is  suggestive,  not  only  of  a  change  of  character,  but  of  a  change  of


520  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [cu.  xxiuu  1— 4(

reputation.  The  redeemed  will  no  longer  be  thought  of  in  connection  with  the  ol
associations  of  their  sin  and  shame.  These  will  be  forgotten,  and  a  new  name  given  t
them,  describing  their  holier  character  and  happier  condition.  Consider  the  significanc
of  this  new  name — "  The  Lord  our  Righteousness."

I.  God  is  the  Righteousness  of  his  people.  1.  He  justifies  his  people  in  the  fac
of  their  maligners  by  proving  the  rightness  of  their  cause.  For  this,  like  David,  the;
may  appeal  to  him  (Ps.  xxxv.  23,  24).  2.  God's  righteousness  is  the  ideal  of  rii^ht
cousness  for  his  people.  True  righteousness  is  that  which  is  after  God's  mind.  Mei
have  their  notions  of  right,  which  are  often  perverted  by  passion  and  prejudice.  Bu
the  redeemed  have  a  vision  of  a  higher  law  and  a  purer  typo  of  goodness.  God  is  right
eousness  to  them.  He  is  the  Good,  the  only  true  Good  (Mark  x.  18).  3.  God  is  th
Source  of  righteousness  to  his  people.  None  can  make  himself  righteous;  righteousnes
is  an  inspiration.  This  idea  is  suggested  by  Plato  in  the  *  Meno,'  where  he  represent
Socrates  as  saying,  "  To  sum  up  our  inquiry — the  result  seems  to  be,  if  we  are  at  al
ri^iht  in  our  view,  that  virtue  is  neither  natural  nor  acquired,  but  an  instinct  given  b^
God  to  the  virtuous ; "  and  again,  "  Then,  Meno,  the  conclusion  is  that  virtue  comes  t
the  virtuous  by  the  gift  of  God."  How  singularly  near  is  this  to  St.  Paul's  tcachin]
about  *'  the  righteousness  of  God  without  the  Law  "  (Rom.  iii.  21^20) !

IL  Righteousness  is  coextensive  with  salvation.  When  the  people  are  saved
they  receive  the  new  name.  We  are  not  delivered  on  account  of  our  righteousness
but  in  our  sin  and  need  and  ill  desert.  Nevertheless,  salvation  brings  righteousness
includes  the  gift  of  righteousness — is,  indeed,  essentially  a  restoration  of  righteous
ness,  a  deliverance  from  sin  to  a  state  of  holiness.  The  two  ideas  may  bo  senarated  ii
thought ;  they  cannot  be  separated  in  experience.  It  would  be  unjust  and  unholy  for  Go<
to  deliver  a  man  from  the  penalties  of  bis  sin  while  he  remained  in  the  practice  of  it
But  when  deliverance  comes,  no  part  of  it  is  more  full  of  joy  and  blessedness  to  th<
redeemed,  and  none  reflects  more  glory  on  the  Redeemer  than  the  salvation  from  tb
IKjwer  of  sin  and  the  creation  of  a  new  nature  of  holiness.

III.  The  Divine  eiguteousness  is  conferred  through  Christ.  ITie  giving  of  th(
new  name  follows  the  advent  of  the  Messiah  and  the  exercise  of  his  kingly  rule.  Ucn
we  are  carried  beyond  the  vague  and  apparently  casual  Platonic  notion  of  the  inspira
tion  of  virtue  to  the  definite  Christian  doctrine  of  righteousness  through  Christ.  1
Christ  secures  redemption  for  us  by  his  life-work  and  his  sacrificial  death,  and  witl
this  comes  righteousness.  2.  Christ  is  the  incarnation  of  the  Divine  righteousness,  anc
breathes  that  into  us  by  his  vital  contact  with  his  people.  3.  Christ  rules  in  righteous
ness  over  a  people  whom  he  teaches  to  follow  and  obey  him  with  righteousness.  There
fore,  if  we  crave  the  honour  and  the  blessedness  of  the  new  name,  let  us  yield  our  soul
in  trust  and  obedience  to  the  claims  and  grace  of  Christ.

Vcr.  W,'^Uninspired  prophect/.  The  Jews  were  warned  not  to  listen  to  the  prophets
because  they  were  not  inspired  by  God.  This  fact  was  considered  to  be  a  sufficient  proo
of  their  inefficiency,  and  necessarily  so,  since  the  prophets  professed  to  be  acting  as  th(
oracles  of  God,  and  not  merely  indulging  in  their  own  speculations  and  conjectures
Herein  lay  the  danger  of  their  position.  They  held  official  rank  as  religious  teachers
their  claims  were  backed  by  venerated  tradition,  they  boldly  professed  to  speak  witli
Divine  authority ;  yet  they  were  not  sent  by  God.  The  same  danger  accompanies  th<
pretensions  of  men  in  our  own  day,  who  claim  a  right  to  be  heard  without  question  bj
reason  of  their  high  office  in  the  Church,  and  yet  have  no  Divine  commission.  Th<
appearance  of  this  uninspired  prophecy  in  Jeremiah's  age  may,  therefore,  be  a  warning
to  modern  times.

I.  The  origin  op  this  prophecy  was  private  speculation.  The  prophets  spoke
'*  a  vision  of  their  own  heart."  Such  a  vision  could  only  be  a  revelation  of  themselves.
This  is  what  uninspired  religious  speculation  amounts  to.  It  is  a  revelation  of  man,  not
a  revelation  of  God.  Attempts  are  made  to  arrive  at  truth  in  three  ways,  1.  By
observation.  But  observation  cannot  reveal  (1)  the  future,  (2)  the  Divine.  2.  B^
reasoning.  This  must  be  based  on  experience,  and  can  bear  no  more  strain  than  its
basis.  It  is  not  found  that  we  have  sufficient  data  in  normal  experience  to  warrant
important  predictions  of  history  and  conclusions  on  vexed  theological  questions.  3,
By  intuition.    Intuition  docs  reveal  truth,  but  only  the  truth  of  our  own  nature.  Wc


ciT.xxin.l— 40.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  621


have  no  reason  for  supposing  that  this  is  always  a  connterpart  to  the  facts  of  the  larger
world.

II.  Private  speculation  was  especially  likely  to  impobt  eeror  into  this
PROPHECY.  It  was  always  fallible,  but  in  the  present  instance  it  was  peculiarly  likely
to  err.  1.  It  was  attempting  too  great  a  task.  The  prophets  were  venturing  to
predict  the  future  of  their  nation  under  the  most  difficult  circumstances.  2.  It  was
biassed  by  prejudice,  passion,  and  interest.  The  prophets  were  swayed  by  their  own
inclination.    In  religious  questions  personal  considerations  blind  men  to  pure  truth.

III.  Nevertheless  this  prophecy  was  very  popular.  1.  It  was  recommended
by  the  official  teachers.  2.  It  was  recommended  by  the  majority  of  the  prophets.
Jeremiah  stood  almost  alone ;  his  opponents  were  numerous.  3.  It  was  flattering  to
the  people ;  it  represented  them  as  less  guilty,  as  deserving  less  punishment  than  was
threatened  by  Jeremiah.  4.  It  was  pleasant.  The  prophets  spoke  smooth  words  and
promised  comfortable  things.    Sach  teaching  is  only  too  popular.

IV.  No  PROPHECY  18  reliable  WHICH  IS  NOT  INSPIRED  BY  GoD.  The  prophccy  is
condemned  simply  for  want  of  this  one  fundamental  condition.  The  history  of  religious
sjieculation  proves  the  helplessness  of  all  attempts  to  solve  the  great  problems  of  the
future  and  of  the  spiritual  by  bare  human  intelligence.  If,  therefore,  we  believe  that  the
Bible  is  inspired,  weight  should  be  given  to  its  teaching  as  to  an  authority.  In  our
own  thought,  and  our  meditation  on  the  Scriptures,  we  need  those  lesser  degrees  of
inspiration  by  which  all  Christians  may  bo  led  into  truth  (John  xvi.  13).

Vers.  23,  24. — The  omnipresence  of  God,  I.  The  fact.  God  must  be  thought  of
as  fully  present  everywhere;  not  as  a  great  Being  who  fills  a  great  space  with,  however,
only  distinct  parts  in  each  section  of  space.  The  whole  of  Gfod  is  present  everywhere.
He  is  as  much  present  in  every  separate  locality  as  if  he  existed  nowhere  else.  All
his  infinite  attributes  of  knowledge,  power,  and  goodness  are  present,  to  be  brought  to
bear  on  each  individual  of  the  infinite  variety  of  things  in  the  universe.  God  is  as
much  present  in  the  less  seemly  places  as  in  those  that  are  recognized  as  fitting
temples  for  him  to  dwell  in.  He  is  in  the  earth  as  well  as  in  heaven.  Heaven  is
described  as  his  throne,  earth  as  his  footstool.  He  is  present  with  the  godless  as  well
as  with  the  godly,  in  the  heathen  world  as  well  as  in  Christendom.    More  particularly :

1.  God  is  present  with  those  who  do  not  recognize  him.  The  sunlight  is  not  limited
by  man's  vision ;  it  shines  as  clearly  about  the  blind  man  as  about  one  with  keen  eye-
sight.   So,  though  we  may  not  think  of  God's  presence,  it  is  not  the  less  near  to  us.

2.  God  is  present  with  those  who  re/use  to  obey  him.  We  cannot  remove  ourselves
from  the  observation  and  control  of  God  by  forsaking  all  allegiance  to  him.  Jonah
could  flee  from  his  mission,  but  he  could  not  flee  from  his  Gtxl.  God's  eyes  are  on  the
evil  as  well  as  on  the  good.  3.  God  is  present  with  those  who  are  far /rom  enjoying
the  blessedness  of  the  full  manifestation  of  his  presence.  God  is  present  with  the
Christian  all  through  his  earthly  pilgrimage.  Though  God  appears  to  hide  himself
for  a  season,  though  thick  clouds  intervene  between  the  soul  and  that  beatific  vision
which  is  reserved  for  the  future  state,  God  is  as  truly  with  his  people  on  earth  as  ho
will  be  in  heaven.

II.  Practical  lessons.  1.  It  is  foolish  to  expect  to  escape  from  the  judgment  of
Ood.  God  never  abdicates  his  right  to  be  the  Judge  of  all  his  creatures.  There  is  no
possibility  of  hiding  from  him.  God  searches  us  and  knows  our  deepest  heart-secret.
Will  it  not,  then,  be  best  for  us  to  be  true  and  open  and  frank  with  him  ?  2.  We
must  not  ascribe  the  confusion  of  the  world  to  OocTs  indifference.  If  he  knows  all
and  does  not  set  it  right,  this  must  bo  (I)  partly  because  he  gives  large  liberty  to  his
creatures  for  the  possibility  of  attaining  higher  good  than  would  be  reached  by  the
exercise  of  any  irresistible  power,  and  (2)  partly  because  he  must  have  higher  ultimate
designs  than  any  we  can  conceive  of  in  the  present  imperfect  condition  of  the  world.

3.  No  change  of  place  will  bring  us  nearer  to  Ood,  **  He  is  not  far  from  every  one  of
us"  (Acts  xvii.  27).  Therefore  (1)  it  is  needless  to  wait  for  some  better  time  for
approaching  God.  No  time  will  be  better  than  the  present.  He  will  never  be  nearer
to  us  than  he  is  now.  He  only  waits  that  we  should  open  onr  eyes.  ^)  It  is  a
mistake  to  suppose  that  any  outward  event  will  lead  us  nearer  to  God.  jD^th  will
not  bring  xxs  more  closely  into  his  piesenoe.    No  journey  to  a  heavenly  world  will  do


522  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  xxiii.  1—40.


this.  "We  only  need  a  cliange  of  heart  to  recognize  and  enjoy  the  eternal  presence  of
God,  which  will  make  heaven  wherever  it  is  felt.  4.  Christians  need  /ear  no  harm.
They  must  meet  with  troubles  and  temptations,  but  God  is  present  to  uphold  them.
They  must  go  through  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death,  but  Grod  is  there.  They
must  enter  the  strange  land  of  departed  souls,  but  ho  is  there  also.  And  wherever
God  is  it  must  be  well  with  his  faithful  children.

Vers.  33,  34. — The  ahuse  of  a  word.  This  is  not  a  mere  play  upon  a  word,  but  a
mocking  abuse  of  the  meaning  of  it,  designed  to  convey  a  sinister  insinuation.  It
illustrates  what  a  dangerous  and  uncertain  weapon  language  is.  We  are  all  inclined
to  attach  too  much  imnortanco  to  words,  foro;etting  that  they  are  not  rigid  landmarks
of  thought,  but  variable  in  meaning  with  the  variations  of  the  ideas  we  import  into
them.

I.  TUE  WORDS  OF  TRUTH  MAT  BE  USED  IN  THE  SERVICE  OF  FALSEHOOD.      Thc  JcWS

repeated  the  phrase  of  Jeremiah,  but  with  a  new  and  false  signification.  The  '*  burden  "
as  an  utterance,  was  entirely  distinct  from  the  "  burden  "  as  a  weight  to  be  borne.  Of
course,  mendacity  belongs  to  our  thought  and  intention,  not  to  our  mere  language.  Wo
may  tell  a  lie  by  using  true  words  in  such  a  way  as  to  infuse  into  them  a  false  mean-
ing. Such  conduct  is  peculiarly  mean  and  dishonourable.  It  is  robbing  the  armoury
of  truth  to  turn  its  weapons  against  itself.  No  condemnation  can  bo  too  strong  for
the  treachery  and  dishonesty  of  those  persons  who  appropriate  the  consecrated  phrases
of  Christianity  as  a  subterfuge  under  which  to  attack  its  spiritual  truths.  Let  us  be
careful  in  using  the  Bible,  not  to  read  our  own  thoughts  into  the  text,  but  to  search
simply  for  the  original  meanin;;  of  it.

II.  Controversy  becomes  dishonest  when  it  is  maintained  by  the  oonfubion  of
WORDS.  This  is  the  essence  of  sophistry.  A  word  is  spoken  with  one  meaning ;  it  is
replied  to  with  another.  Often  and  often  this  is  done  unconsciously.  Indeed,  a  largo
])art  of  our  contentions  rest  on  nothing  but  *'  misunderstandings."  Under  such  circum-
stances we  may  deplore  the  error,  but  we  cannot  severely  condemn  the  moral  conduct
of  the  misguided  disputants.  But  it  may  be  done  deliberately,  to  throw  dust  in  tho
eyes  of  an  opponent,  to  raise  a  laugh  without  justification,  to  gain  a  point  by  mere
word-fencing.  When  this  is  the  case  it  is  untruthful  and  ungenerous.  If  we  must
dispute,  let  us  be  frank  and  fair,  using  every  efifort  to  understand  our  opponent,  care-
fully guarding  against  misrepresenting  him.  So  long  as  a  word  is  used  as  thc
embodiment  of  a  thought,  it  is  a  sacred  thing  to  tamper  with  which  may  be  to  murder
a  truth.

IIL  No  verbal  bulwarks  will  preserve  the  integbity  of  truth.  This  is  just
a  corollary  on  what  precedes.  But  it  is  sufiiciently  important  to  claim  distinct  and
emphatic  notice.  Truth  must  find  its  expression  in  words,  and  to  be  intelligible  these
should  be  clear  and  definite.  Hence  the  need  of  formulae.  But  nothing  is  more
unreliable  than  a  formula.  Since  it  may  be  used  against  truth  with  all  the  force  of  its
prestige  if  a  new  false  meaning  is  foisted  into  it,  we  need  to  bo  constantly  considering
it  afresh  in  the  light  of  facts.  Creeds  may  be  useful  as  the  expression  of  *'  views  "  ot
truth,  but  history  proves  that  they  are  of  little  good  as  defenders  of  the  faith.

iV.  When  a  word  has  given  trouble  in  controversy  it  may  be  well  to
ABANDON  IT.  Jeremiah  is  bidden  no  longer  to  use  the  word  **  burden."  We  are  too
jealous  of  words.  There  is  a  superstition  of  phrases.  It  is  foolish  to  fight  for  a  word.
Anxiety  about  words  is  generally  a  sign  of  the  loss  of  hold  upon  truth.  If  we  are  sure
of  possessing  the  truth  and  feel  the  living  reality  of  it-,  we  can  afford  to  abandon  any
form  of  language,  and  can  soon  find  other  words  in  which  to  clothe  it.  Truth  will
not  suffer.  If  it  loses  the  aid  of  old  associations,  it  loses  also  the  hindrance  of  mis-
understandings and  antagonisms,  and  it  gains  the  freshness  of  new  suggestions.  Let
us  be  careful  not  to  be  the  slaves  of  a  vocabulary.  We  shall  often  find  it  wise  to
melt  down  our  theological  phrases  and  cast  them  in  a  new  form,  or  rather  to  bury  the
old  ones  and  let  new  ones  naturally  spring  up  as  the  embodiment  of  fresh  living
thoughts.    Remember,  '*  the  letter  killeth.**

Vers.  33—40. — j?%«  ** burden"  I.  It  is  a  mistake  to  reoard  the  revelation
OF  truth  ab  a  burden.    It  comes  to  lighten  our  burdens.    At  first  it  may  seem  to


GU.  xxiu.  1—40.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  623


increase  them  by  making  us  conscious  of  thorn.  It  opens  our  eyes  to  our  own  condition.
The  very  light  may  serve  to  reveal  the  existence  of  the  deep  mystery  all  around  us,
which  was  not  felt  while  the  soul  slumbered  in  darkness.  Yet  the  light  does  not  mako
the  darkness  that  fringes  its  radiance.  Revelation  does  not  create  the  burdens  of
which  it  makes  us  conscious.  It  has  rather  the  opposite  efifect.  1.  All  truth  clears
away  some  of  the  burden  of  superstition.  Men  people  the  unknown  with  horrors.
Midnight  shadows  shroud  dread  nightmares.  Daylight  dispels  the  shadows,  and
the  evil  dreams  melt  away.  2.  Divine  truth  is  expressly  designed  to  liberate  the  soul
from  spiritual  burdens.  It  is  a  light  of  blessing,  not  a  message  of  death ;  an
evangel  promising  consolation  to  the  weary.  Even  the  darker  elements  of  truth  have
this  object  to  attain,  since  the  evil  that  they  reveal  is  only  made  manifest  that  wa
may  see  how  to  escape  it,  or  be  prepared  to  endure  it,  or  receive  it  so  as  to  profit  by  it.
On  the  whole  and  in  the  end  the  truth  of  God  is  revealed  for  the  loosening  of  the  weary
weight  of  men's  greatest  burdens,  the  burden  of  unforgiven  sin,  the  burden  of  impos-
sible duty,  the  burden  of  unendurable  sorrow,  the  burden  of  unintelligible  mystery.

II.  Men  who  do  not  receive  the  revelation  op  truth  may  regard  it  as  a
BURDEN.  Thus  these  Jews  derided  Jeremiah  by  mocking  his  language  with  words,
however,  which  expressed  their  own  sentiments  if  not  their  deeper  convictions.  To
them  his  word  was  a  weariness,  a  very  burden.  Is  it  not  so  regaraed  by  many  ?  We
should  note  the  causes  of  this  sad  mistake.  1.  Ignorance,  The  word  is  heard,  but
it  is  not  understood.  On  the  outside  it  is  harsh.  This  is  the  characteristic  of  much
Divine  truth.  Far  off  it  sounds  like  grating  thunder,  terrific  and  repellant.  We  must
be  near  to  hear  its  sweet  but  hidden  music.  2.  Want  of  sympathy.  All  truth  ia
burdensome  to  those  who  have  not  sympathy  with  it.  Spiritual  truth  is  a  weariness
to  the  unspuitual.  3.  Partial  faith,  Jeremiah's  words  produced  enough  conviction
to  rouse  fear,  but  not  enough  to  lead  to  confidence  in  the  wisdom,  righteousness,  and
goodness  of  God  in  his  acts  of  discipline  and  chastisement.  A  weak  faith  always
makes  truth  a  burden.    To  be  joyous  and  exultant  we  must  be  trustful.

III.  The  REJECTION  OF  TRUTH  WILL  BRING  A  BURDEN.  The  revelation  is  not  a
burden,  but  the  neglect  of  it  will  make  one  (ver.  36).  Men  turn  from  God's  truth
for  the  trouble  they  think  it  threatens.  They  will  find  that  this  very  act  will  bring
the  greatest  trouble  upon  their  heads.  1.  This  involves  the  loss  of  the  blessing  that
truth  is  designed  to  bestow  upon  us.  If  we  reject  the  truth  we  must  bear  tho
inevitable  which  the  acceptance  of  it  would  have  lightened.  We  then  go  our  own  way
to  meet  unaided  the  crosses  and  toils  of  life.  2.  This  involves  the  addition  of  a  new
burden  of  guilt  for  the  sin  of  rejecting  truth.  A  wilful  rejection  of  light  is,  of  courso,
wicked  and  most  culj)able  in  the  sight  of  God.    It  must  bring  trouble.


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS,

Vers.  1 — i, — False  shepherds  and  the  true.  The  reference  here  is  to  tho  kings  of  tho
house  of  David,  as  the  leaders  of  a  theocratic  people ;  and  secondarily,  to  the  spiritual
purpose  of  all  true  kingship.

I.  The  mischief  of  false  shepherding.  This  is  twofold,  viz.  scattering  and
destroying.  The  false  shepherd  has  no  real  interest  in  the  sheep ;  being  but  a  hireling,
Lis  chief  consideration  is  a  selfish  one.  The  kings  of  Judah  had  sought  to  realize  their
own  ambitions  and  to  indulge  their  own  lusts.  The  moral  and  spiritual  advancement
of  the  people — the  foundation  of  all  real  material  prosperity — was  not  sought.  The
royal  example  which  ought  to  have  been  influential  for  righteousness  was  directly
opposed  to  this,  and  all  classes  of  the  people  were  infected  with  the  licentiousness  of
prince  and  noble.    The  results  appeared  in  crime,  idolatry,  and  banishment.

II.  Its  JUDGMENT.  The  calamity  was  to  come  chiefly  upon  those  who  had  been
unfaithful  stewards  of  great  responsibilities.  Office  which  is  thus  abused  will  soon  be
taken  away.  According  t )  responsibility  will  be  punishment.  He  who  causes  to
oflend  is  worse  than  the  ofifender,  and  will  meet  with  corresponding  severity  of  judgment.
The  nation  outlives  the  dynasty.  Unfaithful  shepherds  of  the  theocracy  sink  in
ignominy  and  ruin,  but  God  preserves  a  seed  to  serve  him,  and  a  generation  to  call
him  blessed.  .     -


524  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [en.  xxra.  1—40.

III.  Its  correction.  The  deceived  of  God's  people,  being  distinguished  from  the
deceivers,  will  undergo  a  kindlier  discipline.  Tne  shepherd's  care,  as  the  symbol  of
royal  responsibility,  is  intended  as  an  ideal  corrective.  It  teaches  the  principle  that
the  king  exists  for  the  people,  and  not  vice  versa.  It  is  under  Christianity  that  popular
liberties,  national  development,  and  social  purity  have  become  the  aims  of  rulers.  In
modern  times  there  have  been  many  who  have  illustrated  this  ideal  of  royalty ;  but
Christ  alone  is  the  Head  of  redeemed  humanity — the  good  Shepherd  that  lays  down
his  life  for  his  flock.  In  him  the  throne  of  David  is  eternally  restored.  Not  yet  do
we  see  all  things  put  under  him,  but  the  time  draws  nigh  when  he  shall  reign  from
shore  to  shore,  and  from  the  river  even  unto  the  ends  of  the  earth.  Ancient  Israel
depended  for  its  very  existence  upon  spiritual  obedience  to  God's  Law.  The  Church  of
Christ  in  all  its  offices  must  respect  his  authority  and  be  actuated  by  love  to  him.
Its  character  and  influence  must  be  purely  spiritual,  or  its  message  will  be  neutralized
and  soon  perverted  to  unholy  ends. — M.

Vers.  5,  6.—"  The  Lord  otu*  EighieousnessP  I.  The  righteousness  or  God  would
RULE  IN  the  midst  OF  HIS  PEOPLE.  The  qucstiou  of  the  singular  or  plural  interpretation
of  the  word  "  scion  "  need  not  trouble  us.  To  the  prophet  it  was  enough  to  declare  that
the  offspring  of  David  would  yet  reign  in  righteousness.  All  lesser  fulfilments  of  this
prophecy  are  thrown  into  insignificance  by  the  great  Son  of  David,  who  so  grandly
fulfilled  the  essential  conditions  of  the  prediction.  1.  Righteousness  would  yet  become
the  Jaw  of  human  life,  2.  This  would  he  achieved  through  a  personal  influence.  The
King  of  men  will  wield  a  spiritual  sceptre,  but  his  influence  will  be  the  more  real.
Righteousness  will  be  manifested  as  a  'life  and  vindicated  in  sacrificial  death.  3.  The
house  of  David  would  he  restored  in  him  as  its  offspring,

II.  The  RIGHTEOUSNESS  OF  (JOD  WOULD  BE  TRANSFERRED  TO  HIS  PEOPLE.      "  The  Lord

our  Righteousness,"  be  it  the  title  of  Prince  or  people,  is  sufficiently  significant  to  explain
its  own  essential  meaning.  There  would  be  a  transfer  of  the  righteous  character  of  the
Ruler  to  the  ruled ;  their  spirit  and  aims  would  be  identical  with  his  ;  and  he  would
embody  their  ideal  life  and  present  it  to  God.  Through  him  the  Divine  righteousness
would  be  the  possession  of  the  least  saint.  This  evidently  could  only  be  ];>erfect]y
accomplished  in  Christ.  Nothing  less  than  a  unity  of  spirit  and  life  with  Jesus  Christ,
through  faith,  could  achieve  such  a  result.

III.  The  righteousness  of  Gtod  thus  embodied  and  communicated  will  save
HIS  PEOPLE.  1.  The  power  of  this  righteousness.  2.  Its  desirability,  3.  Its  attainable^
ncss.    The  ideal  future  of  Israel  and  the  Church. — M.

Vers.  16—18,  22.—"  Trying  the  spirits:'  In  ver.  18  read,  "  For  who  hath  stood  in
the  counsel  of  Jehovah  ?  Let  him  see  and  hear  his  word :  who  bath  marked  his  word  ?
Let  him  proclaim  it."

I.  Hearers  are  to  discriminate  between  false  prophets  and  true.  A  very
serious  permission.  But  not  for  an  occasion  only :  to  be  exercised  whenever  the
witnesses  conflict.  The  essential  principle  of  Protestantism.  The  prophet  is  one  who
speaks  in  God's  Name  and  reveals  his  will.  The  question,  therefore,  is  of  interest  for
all  time;  is  exceedingly  important,  but  not  morally  difficult.  1.  The  effect  of  false
prophecy  is  disastrous,  2.  Earnest  and  prayerful  discrimination  is  the  best  safeguard
against  religious  indifference,

n.  A  distinguishing  test  is  furnished.  It  is  a  moral  one.  By  their  relation  to
the  Law  of  Moses  were  the  dififerent  prophets  to  be  judged  of.  1.  The  marks  of  the  false
prophet.  His  influence  is  an  unrighteous  one.  He  encourages  evil-doers,  either  by
directly  unrighteous  teaching  or  through  the  indirect  influence  which  he  exercises.
2.  The  marks  of  the  true  prophet.  He  is  as  unmistakably  in  favour  of  morality  and
religion.  He  is  distinguished :  (1)  By  his  reverence.  "  He  who  hath  stood  in  the
counsel  of  Jehovah."  1  o  sit  in  that  counsel  would  be  to  pretend  to  be  equal  and  advise ;
but  the  true  prophet  has  no  word  from  himself.  His  messages  proceed  from  God,  and
in  his  Name  he  speaks.  In  every  age  the  messenger  of  God  is  one  who  has  communion
with  him,  is  conscious  of  a  living  Presence  and  a  revealing  Spirit.  *'  That  which  I
received  of  the  Lord,  delivered  I  unto  you : "  not  "  I  think ;  I  am  of  opinion,"  etc
No  pretence  of  infallibility.    (2)  By  diligent  and  devout  attention  to  God's  revelations.


CH.  XXIII.  1-40.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  526


In  tho  first  place  the  written  Word,  and  in  the  next  the  spoken.  Of  the  latter,  only  the
prayerful  and  studious  soul  can  be  the  vehicle.  We  have  to  be  silent  that  ^€k)d  mav
si)eak.  The  Word  of  God  already  revealed  will  be  respectfully  and  fdthfiilly  observed.
Consecration  and  quietness  are  marks  of  waiting  upon  God.  And  the  message  delivered
will  be  faithful  to  the  original  that  was  seen  or  heard,  and  agreeable  to  what  is  already,
known  of  the  will  of  God.  The  careless  arrogance  of  the  false  prophet  is  soon  corrected
by  what  God  has  already  revealed  of  himself.  It  is  the  devout  "  hearer  "  who  alone
has  right  to  spei^  in  God's  Name,  and  his  testimony  will  be  approved  by  tho  spiritual
sense  of  believers  and  '*  signs  following."  The  spiritual  character  of  the  messenger
of  God — how  much  of  his  message  does  it  represent  ? — M.

Ver.  2L'^U7iauthorized  ministry.  Tho  credentials  of  the  ministers  of  God  are  ever
a  matter  of  consequence.  Exceptional  service  in  the  Church  demands  exceptional
qualifications,  and  amongst  these  a  direct  Divine  call  is  imperative.  The  wickedness
of  those  who  usurp  sacred  office  is  that  they  ignore  the  necessity  for  such  a  call,  and,
adding  deliberate  falsehood  to  impiety,  they  speak  in  the  Name  of  God  without  having
heard  his  voice.

I.  The  conditions  of  legitimate  service  in  God's  Name.  1.  Those  who  minister
in  his  Name  must  be  appointed  by  himself,  '*  I  have  not  sent  them."  For  the  sake  of
order  an  outward  and  conventional  human  recognition  of  office  may  be  requisite.  But
that  is  not  the  'essential  thing.  The  minister  of  God — prophet,  priest.  Christian
minister — must  be  sent  and  set  apart  in  the  first  instance  by  God.  This  is  an  imme-
diate spiritual.  Divine  act.  It  may  be  performed  variously,  as  we  find  in  Scripture
it  actually  was ;  but  the  original  impulse  and  impression  of  obligation  are  from  the
Spirit  of  God.  It  may  be  impossible  to  define  the  mode,  yet  the  fact  and  the  nature  of
it  cannot  bo  mistaken.  So  as  to  the  degree  of  intensity  with  which  the  **  call "  should
be  attended  difference  of  opinion  may  exist ;  but  the  greatest  ministers  of  God  have
been  tliose  who  waited  until  the  Divine  ordination  was  certain  and  confirmed.  A  feeble
impulse  at  the  outset  is  less  likely  to  result  in  a  grand  consecrated  ministry.  And  yet
there  is  a  sense  in  which  the  "  calling  "  cannot;be  made  sure  until  after  it  has  been  acted
upon.  So  little  is  it  a  mechanical  act  that  sinks  into  historical  background, — the
individual  must  ever  have  it  present  to  his  consciousness  and  crescent  through  active
fulfilment  of  it.  And  the  "  call"  is  ever  a  differentiated  one,  having  regard  to  special
service.  It  is  not  enough  for  one  to  assume  the  minister's  office  merely  because  be  is
fired  with  the  general  spirit  of  Christian  enthusiasm.  2.  Only  as  he  reveals  it  to  men
can  they  declare  his  truth.  *'  I  have  not  spoken  to  them."  The  prophecies  of  the  Old
Testament  were  the  outcome  of  special  and  particular  inspirations,  as  a  reference  to  the
descriptions  of  prophets  themselves  will  prove.  With  some  the  period  of  active  inspired
utterance  was  comparatively  brief;  others  were  visited  by  the  inspirations  of  God  all
through  life.  But  even  the  (generally)  inspired  prophet  might  be  destitute  of  inspira-
tion on  particular  occasions,  or  might  outlive  it.  In  such  cases  silence  is  highest
duty  and  truest  wisdom.  "  The  Word  of  God  "  on  special  occasions,  as  generally,  is  a
finely  organized  spiritual  emanation,  a  delicate  creation  or  outbirth  of  the  infinite
Spirit,  and  may  be  misrepresented  by  unsympathetic,  unenthusiastic  reception.  He  must
first  be  a  reverent,  believing  "  hearer "  who  would  worthily  prophesy  or  preach  (the
modem  phase  of  the  same  essential  work).  It  is  only  as  the  Spirit  takes  the  **  things
of  Christ "  and  shows  them  to  us  that  we  can  understand,  appreciate,  and  livingly
present  them  to  others.  This  necessary  experience  is  finely  expressed  in  the  old  phrase,
"  It  was  laid  upon  me,"  or,  as  Jeremiah  has  it,  *'  But  his  word  was  in  my  heart  as  a
burning  fire  shut  up  in  my  bones  "  (ch.  xxv.  9).

II.  He  who  usurps  the  sacred  office  is  ouiltt  of  the  obayebt  sjs.  It  is
instructive  to  observe  that  that  which,  when  worthily  fulfilled,  is  pleasing  to  Ckxi,  is
altogether  otherwise  if  illegitimately  performed.  Because :  1.  True  prophets  are  thereby
discredited.  2.  Divine  truth  is  misrepresented.  By  bald  unsympathetic  literalism^  etc.
3.  Divine  truth  is  actually  contradicted,

III.  God  will  repudiate  and  discredit  all  such.  Through  genuine  revelations.
In  the  event.  By  the  results  attendant  upon  faithful  preaching.  In  ike  great  day
of  account.— M,


626  THE  BOOK  OB'  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.    [cH.xxm


Vers.  23,  24. — The  omntpreience  of  Ood.    L  A  peksonal  attribute.    1.  InfiniU
near  to  aXl  nU  creatures.    2.  AU-Beeing,    3.  Filling  aHl  in  all,

XL  A  MOBAL  INFLUENCE.    The  qucstion  is  asked.    Evety  conscience  confesses
The  dispensation  of  the  Spirit  which  convinces  the  world  "  of  sin,  of  righteousness,  ai
of  judgment"  is  the  latest  expression  of  this.    1.  Deterrent,    2.  Intensifying,
Encouraging, — M.

Vers.  26 — 27.— 2)ream«  that  make  the  Name  of  Ood  to  he  forgotten.  This  is  a  ye
difficult  passage,  but  its  general  sense  is  plain.  It  seems  to  he  this :  The  false  prophe
whom  Jehovah  had  not  sent  imitated  the  form  of  inspired  utterance — ^the  dream
distinct  from  the  vision — which  could  most  easily  and  with  least  chance  of  detecti<
be  fabricated.  This  vehicle  of  communicating  their  false  doctrines  they  strong
affected.  "  I  have  dreamed,  I  have  dreamed."  Although  delivering  these  utterano
in  the  Name  of  Jehovah,  they  thereby  sought  to  alienate  the  people  from  him,  and
cause  his  Name  to  bo  forgotten.

I.  Pebbons  mat  speak  in  (tod's  Name  who  abe  beallt  his  enemies.  These  fal
prophets  used  the  Name  of  Ood  to  commend  their  own  deceitful  doctrines  and  practice
The  latter  would  have  no  permanent  influence  apart  from  this  association.  It  is
favourite  device  of  Satan  to  appear  as  an  angel  of  light.  There  is  nothing  mo
diabolical,  and  the  pretence  should  ever  be  regarded  with  critical  suspicion,  and  expose
without  hesitation  when  discovered.  *'  Take  heed  that  no  man  deceive  you.  F
many  shall  come  in  my  Name,  saying,  I  am  Christ ;  and  shall  deceive  many  "  (Mai
XX  iv.  5.

II.  It  is  easy  to  IMPABT  a  BELIGIOUS  aspect  to  that  which  is  opposed  to  TBI

beligion.  Here  one  of  the  chief  vehicles  of  inspiration  is  employed  for  quite  anoth
purpose  than  the  revelation  of  Ood's  truth.  Its  mystery,  vagueness,  etc.,  imposed  up<
the  people ;  and  detection  was  rendered  difficult,  as  no  one  could  be  sure  whether  tl
prophet  dreamt  or  not.  The  real  message  they  delivered  was  one  of  personal  ambitio
lust,  etc.  So  men  baptizethcir  carnal  dreams  and  desires  with  Christian  names.  It
very  necessary  to  discriminate  and  to  be  sincere.  Now  it  is  a  dream,  anon  an  ordinanc
at  another  time  a  doctrine.

III.  Falsehood  is  most  to  be  dbeaded  when  it  simulates  tbuth.  1.  Because
is  essentially  unaltered.  By  saying  this  is  truth,  it  is  really  no  more  so  than  at  first,  b
it  gets  the  character  of  it.  2.  The  association  thus  created  greatly  increases  its  poux
The  sanctions  of  religion  are  given  to  ungodly  and  sinful  practices.  Delusion  is  mc
inveterate  when  it  blends  with  superstition.  3.  It  destroys  those  whom  it  professes
bless.  The  mental  habit  is  thereby  corrupted,  and  the  spiritual  nature  rendered  un
for  real  Divine  communications.  The  danger  is  not  discovered  until  it  has  made  fearl
advances  and  worked  irrevocable  mischief.

IV.  It  specially  pbovokes  the  angeb  of  God.  It  is  blasphemy ;  mocks  him ;  a:
arrogates  his  place  and  functions,  becoming  more  daring  with  apparent  impunity,—]

Vers.  28,  29. — The  faithful  utterance  of  Divine  revelation.  If  (Jod  in  very  de
reveals  his  will  to  men,  it  is  essential  that  it  be  simply  and  truthfully  conveyed.

I.  Human  intebmixtubes  with  Divine  tbuth  abe  hubtful  and  weakening
theib  influence.  The  word  of  human  origin  is  placed  on  the  same  level  with  t
Divine.  When  the  former  is  proved  fallible  or  untrue,  the  latter  is  discr^ited.  Effo
after  novelty  and  strangeness  generally  ensue ;  and  these  are  condemned  by  the  Wc
of  Gk)d  (vers.  30,  31).

II.  These  abe  wholly  unnecessaby,  as  the  Wobd  of  God  is  sufficient  for  ]
PUBPOSE.  "  God's  Word  shall  not  return  unto  him  void  "  (Isa.  Iv.  11).  It  is  the  tn\i
and  must  prevail.

III.  The  8PUBI0U8  intebmixtube  will  be  bbvealed  by  the  diffebencg  of
effects.  "  What  has  the  straw  to  do  with  the  grain  ?"— a  question  sure  to  arise
those  who  receive  such  messages.  The  connection  of  the  one  element  with  the  otl
is  evidently  incongruous.  The  stalk  sustains  the  ear  which  develops  from  it  whi
growing;  but  when  the  field  has  been  harvested  the  two  are  separated,  and  have  to
used  apart.  To  mix  up  the  chopped  straw  with  the  grain  would  only  be  to  spoil  i
latter.    And  so  it  is  when  human  ideas  arc  mixed  with  Divine  revelations :  the  mixt


CH.  xxra.  1—40.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  627

fails  to  edify  or  satisfy.  And  in  its  effect  upon  the  moral  nature  the  true  message  dis-
tinguishes itself  from  the  false.  *' Fire/*  in .  its  scorching,  consuming  power,  cannot
well  be  counterfeited ;  but  such  is  the  effect  of  the  Word  of  Grod.  The  "  hammer  that
breaketh  the  rock  in  pieces  "  demonstrates  its  legitimacy  as  an  instrument  of  grace  by
its  power  upon  the  hard  and  impenitent  heart  (Heb.  iv.  12). — M.

Vers.  33 — 40. — Despising  prophesyings,  I.  The  honour  of  God  is  bound  up  with
HIS  Word.  1.  It  expresses  his  character,  A  careful,  gradual  unfolding  of  himself  in
his  attributes  and  personal  relations.  2.  It  declares  his  will,  (1)  His  Law ;  (2)  his
gospel ;  both  of  which  express  his  puri^ose.  The  prophecies  of  God  with  his  promises
and  appeals.  3.  In  its  loftiest  embodiment — Jesus  Christ — it  is  identified  with  himself,
(Jolin  i.  1.)

II.  He  will  not  suffer  it  to  be  treated  lightly.  To  do  so  would  be  to  court
contempt,  if  not  to  condone  the  offence.  Asa  sign  of  his  displeasure  :  1.  lie  will  give
the  false  prophets  another  message  to  deliver.  This  is  said  satirically  (ver.  33) ;  their
circumstances  will  prove  that  the  true  message  is  not  one  of  acceptance  but  of  rejection.
The  whole  nation  will  be  thrust  out  of  covenant  relationship.  2.  Special  penalties  will  be
inflicted  upon  particular  offenders,  (Ver.  34.)  Handling  the  Word  of  God  deceitfully
will  bring  upon  a  man  evident  tokens  of  the  Divine  displeasure.  3.  The  word  *'  burden  "
itself  will  have  a  new  and  fearful  significance.  It  was  a  spiritual  offence  to  talk  about
"  burdens  "  so  lightly.  People  to  whom  the  true  message  of  God  had  no  awful  impress! ve-
ness  would  be  taught  reverence  and  fear  by  that  which  he  would  inflict  upon  them.
It  would  be  a  true  "  burden, ''  not  so  readily  got  rid  of  (vers.  39,  40), — M.

Ver.  6. — "  The  Lord  our  Hightcousness,*^  How  pleasant  it  is,  after  a  traveller  has  for
long  days  of  travel  been  occupied  in  passing  through  a  dreary,  monotonous  country,  to
come  to  a  region  where  Nature  puts  on  her  loveliest  and  most  attractive  aspect ;  where,
instead  of  flat  plains,  unrelieved  by  hill  or  dale,  or  any  object  on  which  the  wearied  eye
can  fasten  with  delight,  you  find  yourself  in  a  land  of  noble  rivers  and  rushing  torrents,
lofty  mountains  and  exquisite  valleys,  flourishing  cities  and  noble  buildings  I  With
what  pleasure  does  the  traveller  enter  such  region  after  the  far  different  and  far  less
delightful  scenes  he  has  been  fatigued  with  for  so  long  1  Now,  akin  to  such  pleasure  is
that  of  the  persevering  student  of  these  prophecies  of  Jeremiah,  when  at  lengtn,  quitting
the  monotonous  and  painful  recitals  of  Israel's  sins,  and  the  distressing  records  of  the
dread  judgments  of  God  which  were  to  come  upon  them  inconsequence,  with  which  the
foregoing  chapters  have  been  mainly  filled,  he  enters,  in  these  verses  which  belong  to
our  text,  on  a  portion  of  the  prophet's  writings  which  tells,  not  of  sin,  but  of  righteous-
ness ;  not  of  the  Lord  the  Avenger,  but  of  the  Lord  the  Redeemer  and  Saviour ;  the
Restorer  because  the  Righteousness  of  his  people.  It  is  like  an  oasis  in  the  desert ;  like
what  Elim  must  have  been  to  the  Israelites  after  their  weary  journey  to  Marah,  where
burning  heat  and  thirst  and  much  distress  had  been  their  continued  lot.  And  no
doubt  Jeremiah  and  the  faithful  few  who  adhered  to  him  were  wont  to  solace  their
saddened  minds  by  turning  their  thoughts,  as  they  do  here,  away  from  the  dark  and
terrible  present  to  the  bright  and  happy  future  when  Israel  should  dwell  safely  under
the  rule  of  the  Lord  their  Righteousness.  That  was  a  bright  onlook,  by  means  of
which  the  heavy  burden  of  the  days  in  which  the  prophet  actually  lived  and
laboured  became  more  endurable,  and  their  spirits  were  kept  from  being  utterly
overwhelmed.  Now,  concerning  this  glorious  name  of  Jehovah,  "the  Lord  our
Righteousness,"  we  will  first  show  that —

I.  This  name  belongs  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  It  is  impossible  to  conceive
of  any  devout  Jew  ascribing  the  name  of  Jehovah  to  an  ordinary  earthly  monarch,
however  great  or  famous  he  might  be.  Every  Israelite  would  count  it  blasphemy  so
to  speak  of  him.  Moreover,  the  extravagance  of  the  assertions  here  made,  if  regarded
as  descriptive  of  an  earthly  monarch,  preclude  the  possibility  of  their  having  been  so
intended.  How  could  any  such  be  called  the  righteousness  of  his  people  ?  Zerubbabel
was  undoubtedly  a  noble  prince,  and  in  such  measure  as  was  possible  to  him  answered
to  the  prophetic  description.  He  was  a  branch  of  the  house  of  David,  and  nothing  is
known  against  him.  I3ut  his  power  was  very  limited,  and  in  no  sense  did  ho  fill  np
the  portraiture  that  is  given  here.     Jew  and  Christian  alike  agree  that  neither  he  nor


628  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  xxiiu  1—

any  of  his  obscure  descendants  could  possibly  answer  to  this  name  of  "  the  Lord  <
Righteousness."  Both  alike  affirm  that  the  promised  Messiah  is  meant,  and  to  h
aloDg  can  it  belong.  And  that  our  Lord  Jesus  was  that  Messiah  the  Scriptures  cc
stantly  assert.  He  was  "  the  Root  and  the  Offspring  of  David,"  was  born  "  of  tlie  hoi
and  lineage  of  David"  according  to  the  flesh.  He  was  the  tender  Shoot,  tlio  Sprc
that  sprang  from  the  original  root  when  all  the  stock  and  branches  of  the  stately  ti
that  had  once  grown  on  that  root  had  died  down,  decayed,  and  disappeared.  But
was  more  than  the  Branch  of  Jesse ;  ho  was  the  Lord  from  heaven,  the  Son  of  Gt
Therefore  to  speak  of  him  as  Jehovah  is  consistent  with  all  the  Scripture  represem
tions  of  his  Divine  dignity.  And  although  the  day  of  his  complete  triumph  has  r
yet  come,  nor  is  his  kingdom  fully  set  up,  still  wc  clearly  see  its  bc^inuiugs,
advance,  and  its  continual  growth,  so  that  it  is  not  hard  to  believe  in  all  those  comi
glories  of  his  reign  on  which  the  ancient  prophets,  as  Jeremiah  here,  loved  to  dw(
On  all  these  grounds,  therefore,  we  claim  this  high  and  sacred  title  for  the  Lord  Jcs
Christ.  He  the  Church  has  held  all  along  is  "  the  Lord  our  Righteousness  "  whom  t
inspired  prophet  foretold.    And—

IL  This  name  is  altogether  appropriate  to  niBf.  Not  because  of  t
righteousness  of  his  character  alone,  nor  either  because  of  the  happy  condition
which  he  would  one  day  bring  the  Jewish  people.  We  believe  that  he  will  do  for  th<
all  that  is  here  said.  We  see  no  objection  to  the  taking  of  the  promises  made  concei
ing  them  in  their  literal  meaning.  But  if  this  were  all  that  is  contained  in  this  nan
then  St.  Paul  could  not  be  justified  in  claiming,  as  he  perpetually  does,  the  rightcoi
ness  of  Christ  to  be  to  and  upon  all  them  that  believe.  This  view  is  limited  to
one  age,  no  one  country,  no  one  people,  but  reaches  out  to  all  everywhere  and
every  age.  But  the  true  justification  of  this  glorious  title  lies  in  such  facts
these :  1.  The  Lord  Jesus  makes  us  righteous  in  God's  esteem.  God  ever  deman
righteousness.  It  is  his  incessant  appeal  here  in  all  these  prophecies.  But  it  is  he
that  men  have  ever  failed.  They  have  evaded  this  Divine  demand,  and  ha
endeavoured  to  substitute  all  manner  of  things  in  its  place,  and  so  to  compensate  i
it.  They  have  refused  nothing  so  long  as  they  might  be  let  off  this.  Hence  t
word  of  the  Lord,  "  There  is  none  righteous,  no,  not  one."  It  is  in  this  emergency  th
"  the  Lord  our  Righteousness  "  comes  forward,  takes  up  our  case,  and  causes  us  to
esteemed  righteous  before  God— causes  us  to  be  looked  upon  as  what  we  really  t
not;  as  righteous  when  there  is  much  unrighteousness  in  us  all,  and  scarce  aug
else  in  some.  Of  course  this  is  objected  to  and  cavilled  at  not  a  little,  and  niai
fail  to  see  how  it  can  righteously  be.  But  all  the  while  the  like  is  occurring  eve
day.  Does  not  the  government  of  a  land  continually  do  things  which  involve  t
whole  people  of  the  land,  although  many  of  them  may  entirely  disapprove  ?  Still  it
the  whole  country  that  is  regarded  as  acting  by  and  through  its  government.  Ai
yet  we  assent  to  this  arrangement,  this  principle  of  representation,  as  equitable,  juj
and  necessary,  ^nd  not  merely  in  dealings  between  man  and  man,  but  in  the
between  God  and  man,  this  same  principle  of  representation  may  bo  seen  perpetually
work.  Assuredly  the  whole  human  race  was  represented  in  its  first  parents,  and  G
held  it  to  be  so,  so  that  the  consequences  of  their  actions  have  passed  over  to  their  pc
terity  right  down  to  the  present  day.  And  in  each  family  the  head  of  it  involves  j
the  members,  so  that  there  are  many  innocent  victims  of  their  fathers'  sin,  and  mo;
we  trust,  who  are  recipients  of  favours  won  by  their  fathers*  virtues  and  obedience
God's  will  rather  than  their  own.  It  is  the  principle  of  representation  again.  Is  it,  the
a  thing  to  wonder  at  that  a  good  and  gracious  God  should  devise  another  system
representation  to  meet  and  counteract  that  which  has  wrought  so  much  ill  ?  That
is  it  to  be  wondered  at  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  should  bo  constituted  as  muck  t
Head  and  Representative  of  his  people  as  Adam  was  constituted  the  head  and  represc
tative  of  all  who  have  descended  from  him ;  that  there  should  be  a  second  Adam
well  as  a  first,  and  that  Christ  should  be  that  second  Adam,  as  St.  Paul  declares  he  1
Surely  there  is  nothing  unreasonable  in  all  this.  It  is  in  harmony  with  what  we  p<
petually  see.  And  if  he  who  is  our  Representative  desired  so  to  he,  as  our  Lord  did
ior  ho  yearned  to  draw  all  men  unto  and  into  him-»surely  this,  his  own  desire,  mal
his  being  constituted  our  Representative  more  reasonable  stilU  And  because
qualified  himself  for  this  office  so  perfectly.    He  came  and j was  one  of  us,  liyed  c


cii.  XXIII.  1—40.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  529


life,  bore  our  burdens,  submitted  to  our  sorrows,  bore  the  penalty  of  our  sins,  "was  in
all  points  tempted  like  as  we  are,  yet  without  sin."     Now,  if  the  principle  of  repre-
sentation be  just  at  all,  surely  it  is  still  more  so  that  the  Lord  Jesus  should  be  that
Eepresentative.    But  if  he  be,  then,  because  he  is  altogether  righteous,  acceptable,  and
well  pleasing  before  God,  we  must  be  so  too ;  yea,  we  are  so,  for  he  is  '*  the  Lord  our
Bighteousness."    God  looks  not  upon  iis,  but  he  beholds  Christ,  who  is  "  our  Shield  ;  **
he  looks  on  "the  face  of  his  Anointed."    ""V^e  are  accepted  in  the  Beloved."  "Christ
is  made  unto  us  righteousness."    2.  And  he  makes  us  to  be  cts  the  righteous  in  our  con-
ditions.   So  only  can  the  paramount  and  predominant  features  of  God's  dealing  with
us  now  be  accounted  for.    Man  being  what  he  is,  why  should  he  be  dealt  with  so  mer-
cifully as  he  is  ?    The  answer  is,  because  it  is  the  Lord  who  is  our  Ricrhteousness.    If  I
see  a  number  of  poor  destitute  people  taken,  and  clothed,  and  fed,  and  dealt  with  in  all
kind  and  beautiful  ways,  and  I  ask  the  explanation,  I  am  at  once  pointed  to  some  one
who  has  secured  all  this  favour  for  them,  and  by  whose  kindness  it  has  become  theirs.
And  when  I  see  man,  despising  God,  prayerless,  sinning  daringly  day  by  day,  ungrate-
ful, evil,  disobedient  continually,  destitute  of  all  goodness,  and  yet  treated  with  all  kind-
ness and  love,  must  I  not  conclude  that  the  righteousness  of  another  is  the  secret  of
his  mercies,  and  the  real  cause  of  the  goodly  portion  he  enjoys  ?    3.  But  Christ  is  "  the
Lord  our  Righteousness"  because  he  makes  us  righteous  in  ourselves.    If  it  were  possible
that  God  could  for  over  esteem  and  deal  with  as  righteous,  not  only  those  who  were
not  righteous,  but  who  never  could  become  so,  we  should  find  it  difficult  to  maintain
the  truth  taught  us  by  this  name.    But  God's  counting  us  righteous  in  Christ  is
reasonable  and  ri^ht,  because  we  are  in  the  sure  way  to  become  so.    For  when  any
come  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  living  faith,  a  new  will  is  given  them.    They  are,  as
our  Lord  says,  "  born  again."    It  is  as  on  a  railway,  where  by  one  movement  of  the
points  the  whole  train  is  turned  on  to  another  line,  and  procecids  afterwards  iu  quite
a  different  direction.    So  by  this  coming  to  Christ  the  man  is  placed  on  another  line,
started  in  a  new  direction;  a  new  will  is  his,  and  he  is  a  new  man.     When  the
turbid  stream  of  the  Rhone  falls  into  the  Lake  of  Geneva  it  loses  its  old  character,
and  its  waters  assimilate  themselves  to  the  exquisite  clearness  and  colour  of  that  lake,
so  that  when  they  flow  out  at  the  other  end  they  are  as  a  new  river  altogether  —  "  old
things  have  passed  away,  and  all  things  are  become  new."    So  is  it  in  the  great  change
when  a  man  comes  to  Christ.    And  when  wo  remember  that  whilst  man  looketh  at  the
outward  appearance,  God  looketh  at  the  heart,  it  is  easy  to  see  that  Gt)d  may  count
a  man  to  be  righteous  whom  we  should  not  think  so  at  all.    If  the  will,  the  heart,  be
Christ's,  though  it  may  be  once  and  again  overborne  by  the  fierce  rush  of  temptation,  as
David's  was,  yet,  because  the  lieart  is  right,  God  counts  that  man  righteous  still.  And
this  new  will,  the  new  heart,  ever  tends  to  embody  and  express  itself  in  act.   It  will  be
like  a  hidden  fire,  struggling  and  strug(i:ling  on  till  it  can  nnd  vent  and  work  its  good
desire.    And  it  shall  do  this  in  due  time.    Meanwhile  God  but  anticipates ;  looks  on
to  the  harvest  as  the  husbandman  does  even  when  the  blade  has  not  shown  itself  as
yet  above  the  ground.    But  he  imputes  the  righteousness  of  the  harvest  to  those  fields
though  not  a  blade  appears.     The  parent  imputes  the  righteousness  of  the  intelligent,
loving  youth  to  the  little  infant  just  born,  not  because  it  has  it,  but  because  he  believes
it  will  have  it.  And  God  counts  us  as  righteous,  not  alone  because  Christ  is  our  Repn*-
sentative,  but  because  he  will  restore  our  souls.    He  will  make  us  righteous  in  our-
selves as  well  as  before  God.    And  he  does  this  by  setting  before  us  in  his  own  life  the
perfect  example,  and  attracting  us  thereto  by  an  ever-increasing  attraction ;  and  by
imparting  to  us  his  own  Spirit,  who  nourishes  us  in  all  goodness ;  and  by  bringing  to
bear  upon  us  the  mightiest  motives  which  can  ever  control  or  influence  the  human
heart — love,  gratitude,  holy  fear,  bright,  blessed  hope, — all  these  and  yet  others  ;  so
day  by  day  does  he  strengthen  and  confirm  the  good  will  which,  when  we  first  came
to  him,  he  gave  us  as  his  first  gift.    Thus  does  he  make  those  righteous  whom  God  for
his  sake  now  counts  to  be  so.    And  now —

III.  Can  we  say  that  the  Lobd  is  "  our  "  Riohteousness  ?  We  may  have  correct
views  on  this  great  doctrine,  we  may  believe  in  a  general  and  abstract  way  that  the
Lord  is  tho  Righteousness  of  his  people,  but  all  this  is  far  short  of  being  able  to  say
that  the  Lord  is  our  Righteousness.  We  can  only  say  this  as  we  daily  and  habitually
trust  him — as  wo  "  keep  touch  "  with  him,  as  it  were,  continually  looking  to^  him  and
jebeuiah.  2  M


M


530  THE    BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,     [ch.  xxiu.  1—


relying  upon  him.  For  faith  it  is  which  vitalizes  our  connection  with  him.  The  wi
of  the  electric  cable  may  stretch  all  the  way  beneath  the  ocean,  and  each  shore  of  i
Atlantic  be  joined  together  by  them ;  but  there  is  no  communication  until  the  elec(
current  is  sent  along  that  cable,  and  then  the  circuit  is  complete.  And  so  :
channel  along  which  our  faith  may  pass  is  provided ;  but  until  faith  goes  from  our  he
— that  electric  force  of  faith — the  connecting  bond  may  almost  as  well  not  be.  Ui
then  Christ  is  a  Representative  of  man  before  God,  but  he  is  not  our  Representati
It  is  faith  that  vitalizes  that  connection,  and  he  is  not  our  Righteousness  until
believe.  Faith  bring?  us  into  real  union  with  him,  reproduces  in  us  the  mind  whi
was  in  him,  lays  hold  on  the  grace  which  he  holds  out  to  us,  leads  us  to  repent,  to  lo
to  obey,  to  follow  him  in  the  daily  walk  and  conversation.  Remember,  the  Lk
demands  righteousness.  We  have  it  not  in  ourselves.  In  this  our  destitution  the  Lk
comes  to  us  and  offers  to  be  our  Righteousness.  Wo  have  but  tu  appropriate  a
claim  that  which  he  offers.  Shall  we  be  so  sinful,  so  mad,  as  to  refuse  ?  The  gn
day  when  the  banquet  for  God's  saints  shall  be  spread  is  hastening  on,  and  we  sh
all  of  us  be  eager  to  crowd  in  and  take  our  place  there  with  the  blessed.  E
what  if,  when  the  King  comes  in  to  view  his  guests,  we  have  not  on  the  weddii
garment,  but  are  dressed  in  some  robe  of  our  own,  which  we  think  will  answer
well  ?  You  know  how  he  was  dealt  with  who  presumed  so  to  do.  Oh,  then,  i\
such  may  not  be  our  doom,  let  us  hasten  unto  Christ,  and  pray  him  now  and
ever  to  be  •'  the  Lord  our  Righteousness,'* — 0.


»©•


Ver.  28. — "  What  is  the  chaff  to"  etc,  f  One  seems  to  see  the  flash  of  the  prophe
eye,  the  tremulous  emotion,  the  indignant  scorn,  with  which  he  bursts  out  with  tl
scathing  question ;  one  can  almost  hear  his  loud,  vehement  tones  as  he  taunts  wi
it  the  false  prophets,  against  whose  wickedness  he  had  been  protesting  throughc
the  greater  part  of  this  chapter.  What  sternness,  what  biting  severity,  characterize  i
As  one  has  said,  "  It  cuts  like  the  edge  of  a  razor.  As  a  sabre  flashing  over  on
head ;  a  sword  gleaming  to  the  very  point ;  a  fire  lurid  with  coals  of  juniper ; — we  f
appalled  as  we  glance  at  it.  It  strikes  with  implacable  resentment.  There  is
word  of  mercy  toward  the  chaff;  not  a  thought  of  clemency  or  forbearance.  ]
bloweth  at  it  as  though  it  were  a  worthless  thing,  not  to  be  accounted  of — a  nothii
that  vanishes  with  a  puff."  It  reminds  us,  as  so  much  in  Jeremiah's  character  a
experience  does,  of  our  Lord's  indignation  against  the  false  teachers  of  his  di
What  terrible,  burning  words  were  those  which  he  uttered  against  the  "  scrib
Pharisees,  hypocrites,"  who  swarmed  around  him  I  Where  there  is  deep  love  of  Q
and  of  man,  there  cannot  but  be  such  holy  hatred  of  such  as  are  what  those  w<
whom  our  Lord  and  the  prophet  denounced.  Jeremiah  in  this  chapter,  from  the  nin
verse  downwards,  has  been  pouring  out  his  soul  against  them.  He  declares  hims
broken-hearted  because  of  them — by  their  conduct  and  the  woes  it  was  bringing  up
his  people.  He  laments  the  grievous  wickedness  of  the  nation,  but  charges  it
upon  these  faithless  prophets,  who  taught  men  to  sin  by  their  bad  example,  a
encouraged  them  therein  by  their  false  teachings.  And  as  he  thinks  of  the  wortble
ness  of  the  men  and  of  their  prophesyings,  his  sacred  anger  and  scorn  mount  up  a
burst  forth  in  these  terrible  words,  *'  What  is  the  chaff  to  the  wheat  ?  saith  the  Lo
Is  not  my  word  like  as  a  fire  ?  saith  the  Lord ;  and  like  a  hammer  that  breaketh  the  re
in  pieces?"  Yes,  these  are  terrible  words;  but  how  applicable,  how  necessary  tb
are  to  be  insisted  upon,  even  now  I  For,  monstrous  almost  as  it  may  appear,  m
are,  as  they  have  ever  been,  most  prone  to  care  more  for  the  chaff  than  for  1
wheat ;  to  spend  themselves  on  securing  that  which  is  worthless,  whilst  that  which
most  precious  they  despise.  And  the  danger  is  increased  because  those  things  which  ]
as  the  chaff  to  the  wheat  are  often,  as  the  chaff  and  wheat  themselves,  closely  a&sociai
together,  have  grown  up  together,  are  very  difficult  to  separate,  and  are  mutua
dependent  one  upon  another.  It  is  easy  enough,  when  wc  see  the  wind  driving  \
chaff  away,  to  discern  the  difference  between  it  and  the  wheat,  and  the  inferiority
the  one  to  the  other ;  but  it  is  not  so  easy  whilst  the  two  are  together,  and  seem:
so  much  as  if  they  were  all  of  one  nature  and  value.  Now,  apply  all  this  in  reg;
to  sundry  matters  in  which  this  discrimination  needs  sorely  to  be  made.    And —

1.  To  TUE  pnoruESTiNQ  OF  TUE  PRESENT  DAT.    The  occasiou  and  connection  of  '


CH.  xxiii.  1—40.]    THE  BOOK  OF  TUE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  531

words  we  are  considering  at  once  suggest  this  application.    And  let  us  be  grateful  to
God  that,  amid  the  much  prophesying  of  our  own  day,  we  have  much  of  that  "  sure
Word  "  to  which  St.  Peter  bids  us  give  heed,  as  to  a  light  shining  in  a  dark  place.  Yes,
there  are  faithful  ministries,  blessed  be  God  for  them ;  and  that  they  are  like  the  precious
wheat,  in  contrast  to  the  worthless  chaff,  has  been  proved  over  and  over  again  by  the
testimony  God  himself  has  given  to  them.     For,  like  the  pure  grain,  they  nourish  the
souls  that  are  fed    upon   the  Word  they  minister.    The  instruction  that  builds  up,
consolidates,  and  strengthens  the  spiritual  frame  is  shown  by  that  very  fact  to  be
not  as  chaff,  but  as  wheat.    And  he  would  not  only  be  ungrateful,  but  untruthful,
who  should  deny  that  God   has   given  and  is  maintaining  many  who  minister  to
his  people,  whether  young  or  old,  in  the  congregation,  the  family,  or  the  school,
the  pure  Word  of  Gt)d.    And  the  other  striking  characteristics  of  the  true  Word
of  God  which  are  here  spoken  of  are  also  found  in  their  pro{)hesyings.    The  Word
of  God  which  they  minister  is  as  a  fire.    How  it  enlightens,  how  it  cheers,  as  on  a
cold  wintry  day  1    How  it  consumes  the  dross  of  the  evil  nature,  burning  on  until
all  the  evil  in  us  be  burnt  out  I   Ah,  yes,  the  pure  Word  of  God — which  still,  thank
Gk)d,  is  preached — is  as  a  fire  consuming  the  miserable  pretences  of  self-righteousness
in  which  the  souls  whom  it  touches  have  hitherto  been  trusting,  and  compelling  them
to  hasten  for  shelter  to  him  who  is  "  the  Lord  our  Righteousness."  And  it  is  a  hammer,
which,  smiting  the  obdurate  heart,  causes  the  tears  of  true  repentance  to  flow  forth  and
refresh  those  who  long  have  been  thirsting  to  see  such  living  waters.     As  at  Pentecost
the  hammer  of  that  Word  fell  upon  those  hearts  which  had  been  hard  enough  tocruciiy
the  Lord,  and  it  so  smote  them  as  to  break  them,  rock-like  though  they  were,  and  they
cried  out,  "  What  shall  we  do  ?  "    These  are  the  signs  of  the  Word  of  God,  and  they
are  not  wanting  still.     But  yet  there  is  much  of  instruction  given  that  is  far  different
from  this — as  unlike  it  as  chaff  is  unlike  wheat.     It  may  be  the  ministry  of  eloquence,
or  of  ritual,  or  of  philosophy,  or  of  human  learning,  or  of  taste,  or  of  fashion ;  and  not
a  little  of  such  ministry  there   is  in  the  present  day.    It  is  brilliant,  attractive,
followed  by  crowds,  admired,  applauded ;  it  is  associated  with  all  that  art,  culture,
music,  and  ritual  pomp  can  supply  ;  it  is  very  fashionable ;  for  the  sake  of  it  humbler
worship  is  abandoned,  though  that  which  is  abandoned  may  be  purer  and  more  whole-
some by  far.    But  because  in  connection  with  all  this  ministry  so  pleasing  to  human
likings  there  may  be  lacking  that  which  alone  nourishes  the  soul,  and  w  hich  has  upon
it  the  sure  tokens  of  the  Word  of  God,  therefore,  when  there  is  this  lack,  God  calls  it
chaff,  and  despises  it  accordingly.    Do  not  think  that  all  these  things  are  in  themselves
to  be  despised.    No ;  we  would  fain  have  the  ministry  of  the  Word  of  God  surrounded
with  all  that  can  serve  to  win  attention,  command  reverence,  and  excite  interest ;  we
should  be  alert  to  look  out  for  such  things,  and  to  secure  them  so  far  as  we  may ;  but
let  us  see  to  it  that  they  be  but  subordinate,  that  they  all  are  used  as  aids  to  what
is  far  higher  and  more  imix)rtant  than  themselves — that  within  this  husk  the  pure
grain  of  God's  Word  is  enshrined  and  preserved.     What  is  the  good  of  any  preaching  or
instruction,  however  pleasing  or  attractive  it  may  be,  that  does  not  set  the  pure  wheat  of
God's  Word  before  hungry  souls  ?    Souls  must  live,  and  they  cannot  live  on  chaff.    Oh
that  all  those  who  preach  and  teach  may  more  and  more  hear  ever  sounding  in  their
ears  this  startling  word,  "  What  is  the  chaff,"  etc.  l     Apply  this  word —

IL  To  ouB  OWN  INDIVIDUAL  CHARACTER — what  we,  cach  one,  are.  If  we  are  the
children  of  God,  believing  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  humbly  striving  day  by  day
to  do  his  will  and  to  bo  well  pleasing  to  him,  then  there  is  much  that  is  wheat-
like in  us.  That  repentance,  that  faith,  that  regenerating  grace,  that  law  of  the
Spirit  of  life  in  Christ  Jesus,  its  meekness,  patience,  zeal,  love, — all  these  things  are
as  the  wheat,  and  blessed  be  God  they  are  to  be  found  in  some  measure — would  that  it
were  larger — in  us  all.  But  there  is  so  much  of  a  contrary  nature,  so  chaff-like,  as  well.
Yes,  verily,  as  chaff  lying  close  by  the  side  of  our  heart,  wrapping  it  round,  long
associated  with  it,  grown  up  with  it,  hard,  hard  indeed,  to  be  parted  from  it ;  so  is  the
evil  of  our  hearts,  the  fleshly  nature,  the  carnal  mind,  which  yet  clings  to  us  as  the
husk  does  to  the  grain.  And  often  we  are  at  a  complete  loss  to  tell  whether  there  is
more  of  wheat  or  chaff  about  us — whether  our  destiny  is  to  be  stored  in  the  garner,
or  to  be  as  the  chaff  which  the  wind  driveth  away.  But  do  we  think  about  the  chaff
and  the  wheat  as  Grod  thinks  about  them  ?  Are  we  willing — yea,  longing — to  be  utterly


632  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  xxiii.  1-

rid  of  the  chaff?  Are  we  content  to  bear  "  the  bruisingflails  of  God's  corrections  "  u
they  have  "  threshed  off  from  us  our  vain  affections  '*  ?  Do  we  desire  that  every  portio:
this  chaff  may  be  got  rid  of,  and  "  that  we,  wholesome  grain  and  pure  may  b^"  and  t
only  ?  Perhaps  God's  flails  are  laid  upon  us  now,  or  his  winnowing  work  is  stripp
off  much  from  us,  and  making  ^  our  very  spirit  poor."  Oh,  if  it  be  but  to  rid  us  of  i
chaff,  let  us  not  complain.  Death  itself  is  but  Gt)d's  chief  flail  "  to  purge  the  hi
of  this  our  flesh  away,  and  leave  the  soul  uncovered."  Complain  not,  for  "  what  is
chaff/'  etc.  ?  And  not  only  the  sin  in  us,  but  much  that  looks  and  is  reckoned  as ,
other  than  sin,  may  be,  after  all,  only  chaff.  Much  of  that  feeling  and  cond
which  is  associated  with  our  religious  life  may  be  of  itself  of  a  very  worthless  »
Those  tears  which  flow  so  freely  when  the  preacher  is  in  a  pathetic  mood, — w
are  they  all  worth  if  they  never  lead  to  a  genuine  repentance,  a  real  turning  of
soul  to  Christ?  And  that  open  profession  of  religion,  coming  to  the  table  of
Lord  and  partaking  of  the  sacred  bread  and  wine,  what  is  that  if  it  be  not  the  in(
and  outward  sign  of  a  heart  that  trusts,  that  loves,  that  is  consecrated  to  Chri
And  that  correct  and  orthodox  creed  for  which  we  are  so  ready  to  show  fight,  aud
deniers  or  doubters  of  which  we  so  eagerly  condemn,  what  is  the  good  of  it  if  it
not  the  guardian  of  a  God-fearing  and  righteous  life  ?  And  that  giving  of  money —
it  is  to  the  amount  kept  back  after  we  have  given,  and  to  the  motive  which  prompts  i
gift,  that  God  looks  to  determine  which  is  wheat  and  which  is  chaff.  Ana  that  eaj
activity  in  many  forms  of  Christian  work' which  some  show,  unless  it  be  the  outco
of  a  heart  aglow  with  love  to  Christ,  counts  for  very  little  with  him  who  here  as
*'  What  is  the  chaff,"  etc.  ?  Again  we  say  we  do  not  despise  these  things— we  woi
that  there  were  more  of  them  ;  but  if  at  the  heart  of  them  there  be  not  faith  a
love  towards  Christ,  which  alone  are  the  wheat  which  these  things  are  intended  to  sej
and  minister  to,  then  they  are  but  as  the  chaff  which  the  wind  driveth  away.  We  i
apt  to  think  a  great  deal  of  them,  and  to  rely  upon  them  not  a  little  for  ourselves  a
for  others.  But  they  are  not  the  wheat,  only  its  husk,  and  "  what  .  •  •  Lord."  Ap]
this  question —

III.  To  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  Chuhch.  And  without  doubt  it  may  be  afBm
that  if  the  pure  wheat  of  God's  garner  be  not  to  be  found  in  the  fellowship  of  1
Church,  it  is  to  be  found  nowhere.  What  our  Lord  said  of  his  Church  at  the  beg
ning,  <*  Ye  are  the  salt  of  the  earth  ...  ye  are  the  light  of  the  world,"  is  true  still.  €
how  many,  thank  God,  of  meek,  pure,  devout,  consecrated  souls  has  the  Church  e^
numbei-ed  in  her  fellowship,  and  does  so  even  yet !  But  still,  even  on  the  best  threshii
floors  the  chaff  is  mingled  with  the  wheat.  Even  those  Churches  which  claim  to
most  careful  over  admission  to  their  fellowship,  and  demand  valid  evidence  to
given  that  there  has  been  a  real  change  of  heart,  a  true  conversion  to  God— even  the
can  no  more  keep  out  the  chaff  than  others  who  throw  the  responsibility  of  religic
profession  entirely  on  those  who  make  it.  But  the  presence  of  the  chaff  along  wi
the  wheat  could  be  better  borne  if  the  two  were  always  estimated  as  they  should  i
But  it  is  not  so.  Let  an  unspiritual,  worldly  minded,  hard,  and  unloving  man  find  ]
way  into  a  Church — and  many  such  do— and  if  he  be  rich,  or  hold  a  good  position  in  t
world,  he  will  at  once  be  allowed  an  influence  and  an  authority  which  he  ought  not
have — ^no,  not  for  an  hour.  And  if  a  Church  can  get  hold  of  a  number  of  such  peoj:
if  wealth,  and  social  influence,  and  education,  and  fashion  flock  to  their  doors,  there  y
have  the  Church  of  Laodicea  reproduced  in  most  exact  form.  1'hey  will  count  the;
selves,  and  others  also  will  count  them,  to  be  "  rich,  and  increased  with  goods,  and
have  need  of  nothing."  But  what  will  the  Lord  say  when  he  cometh  with  his  winnowi
fan  to  throughly  purge  his  floor?  We  are  sorely  tempted,  all  of  us,  to  crave  with
great  craving  the  presence  amongst  us  of  persons  of  influence,  wealth,  and  power.  A
all  well  and  good  if  they  be  earnest,  godly  men  at  the  same  time.  But  we  are  in  danj
of  welcoming  them  even  if  this  great  qualification  be  largely  absent.  And  that  we
too  often  find  this  sad  intermixture  of  the],worthless  with  God's  wheat,  is  seen  iu  t
quick  falling  off  of  some  of  those  who  once  were  gathered  with  the  Church  of  God.
little  persecution,  loss  of  worldly  advantage,  desire  to  stand  well  with  those  around,
these  have  all  served  as  pretexts  for  not  a  few  to  break  away  altogether.  Like  **  t
nautilus,  which  is  often  seen  sailing  in  tiny  fleets  in  the  Mediterranean  Sea,  upon  t
smooth  surface  of  the  water.    It  is  a  beautiful  sight,  but  as  soon  as  ever  the  tempi


CH.  XXIII.  1—40.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  633


begins  to  blow,  and  the  first  ripple  appears  upon  tbe  surface  of  the  sea,  the  little  mariners
draw  in  their  sails  and  betake  themselves  to  the  bottom  of  the  sea,  and  you  see  them  no
more.  How  many  are  like  that  1  When  all  goes  well  with  Christianity  many  go  sailing
along  fairly  in  the  summer  tide,  but  no  sooner  does  trouble,  or  affliction,  or  persecution
arise,  than  where  are  they  ?  Ah,  where  are  they  ?  They  have  gone."  Let  us  see  to  it
that  we  esteem  the  wheat,  however  poor  its  surroundings,  above  all  cha£f,  however
richly  it  may  be  endowed.  And  above  all,  let  us  by  our  own  loyalty  to  God,  our
sympathy  with  Christ,  our  love  to  our  brethren,  our  cheerful  self-sacrifice,  our  daily
obedience,  show  that  we  are  of  those  whom  the  Lord  will  own  at  the  last,  and  not
as  the  chaff  which  he  will  despise  and  destroy.

IV.  To  Gr0D*8  FINAL  ESTIMATE  OF  US  ALL.  For  the  great  question  wbicb  concerns
every  man  who  reads  or  hears  these  words  is — Which  am  I,  chaff  or  wheat  ?  And  that
question  is  to  be  decided,  not  according  to  man's  estimate,  but  Ood's.  It  is  what  he
will  judge,  not  what  we  may.  Here  in  this  world  we  are  all  mingled  together,  in  every
Church,  family,  town,  village,  society,  or  community  whatsoever.  In  all  places,
under  all  circumstances  and  in  all  ways  in  this  world,  this  commingling  of  the  evil  and
the  good  is  found ;  the  chaff  is  ever  closelv  associated  with  the  wheat.  *'  Let  both
grow  together  until  the  harvest,"  is  our  Lord  s  command,  and  no  endeavour  of  ours  can
sever  the  two  completely.  But  the  very  word  "  until "  which  our  Saviour  employs
shows  that  there  shall  be  a  separating  time  ;  the  two  shall  not  for  ever  be  conjoined  as
they  are  now.  "  Then  two  shall  be  in  the  field  ;  the  one  shall  be  taken,  and  the  other
left.  Two  men  shall  be  in  one  bed;  the  one  shall  be  taken,  and  the  other  shall  be  left."
In  the  same  church,  sitting  side  by  side  in  the  same  pew,  there  may  be  found  both
chaff  and  wheat.  Anticipate  that  awful  separating  time.  It  will  come  upon  ns  as  it
came  upon  those  ten  virgins,  five  of  whom  wera  wise  and  five  were  foolish,  but  which
was  which  none  knew  until  the  cry  was  heard,  "  Behold,  the  bridegroom  cometh ! "  And
so,  though  now  none  of  us  can  tell  what  those  are  who  gather  with  us^  and  join  in  the
same  holy  service,  listen  to  the  same  gospel,  and  unite  in  the  same  prayers,  praises,  and
confessions,  though  outwardly  we  are  all  as  the  wheat  of  God,  yet  whether  we  be  so  or  no
God  alone  can  tell.  But  do  any  ask— How  can  I,  though  consciously  worthless  as  the
chaff,  yet  become  as  the  wheat?  Blessed  be  God,  such  a  great  change  is  possible.  Go
to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  tell  him  how  poor,  wretched,  evil,  you  know  yourself  to  be.
Cast  yourself  down  at  his  feet.  Call  upon  him  for  his  aid.  Thou  shalt  become  a  new
creature  in  Christ,  old  things  shall  pass  away,  all  things  shall  become  new.  The  chaff
shall  be  changed  into  the  wheat,  death  shall  be  exchanged  for  life,  and  now,  worthless
once,  thou  art  in  Christ  precious  for  ever,  and  the  gamer  of  the  Lord  shall  be  thine
everlasting  home.  Come  unto  Christ  in  iaith  and  love,  for  the  heart  so  yielded  is  alone
God's  wheat;  but  if  when  the  great  separating  day  comes  thou  seekest  to  find  safety  in
aught  else,  however  precious  you  and  others  may  deem  it,  he  will  spurn  both  it  and
you.    For  "  what  is  .  .  ,  Lord." — C,

Vers.  5,  6. — Jehovah-  Tsidkenu,  It  is  in  his  kingly  character  that  the  uprising  of
the  Messiah  is  here  predicted.  The  shepherds  that  destroyed  and  scattered  the  flock
of  God  were  the  corrupt  rulers  of  the  line  of  David.  God  was  visiting  upon  them  one
after  another  "  the  evil  of  their  doings ; "  and  after  them  he  would  raise  up  men  of  a
nobler  sort — men  like  Ezra,  Nehemiah,  and  the  Maccabees,  who  should  be  true  leaders
and  commanders  of  the  people  Tver.  4).  But  these,  again,  would  but  prepare  the  way
for  One  far  greater.  Beyond  all  these  changes  the  eye  of  the  prophet  is  fixed  on  the
time  when  out  of  the  seemingly  withered  root  of  David  a  sapling  shall  arise,  "  the
righteous  Branch ; "  One  who  shall  perfectly  realize  the  Divine  idea  of  "  a  ruler  of
men  "  (2  Sam.  xxiii.  3,  4) — the  King  who  shall  "  reign  in  righteousness,"  and  of  the
"  increase  of  whose  government  and  peace  there  shall  be  no  end "  (Isa.  ix.  6,  7  ;  xi.
1 — 6 ;  xxxii.  1 ;  Zech.  ix.  9).  Towards  him  the  hopes  of  loyal  hearts  through  every
previous  age  reached  forth.  In  him  the  *' desire  of  all  nations"  finds  its  glorious
fulfilment.  "And  this  is  the  name  whereby  he  shall  be  called.  The  Lord  our
Righteousness."  In  unfolding  the  full  significance  of  this  name,  consider  (1)  the  personal
righteousneu  of  Christ,  (2)  the  way  in  which  that  righteousness  becomes  ours,

I.  His  personal  biohteousness.  He  is  emphatically  "  Jesus  Christ  the  RighUous^^
the  one  only  absolutely  righteous  being  ever  bom  into  the  world.    Our  human  natarei


534       THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,  [en.  xxni.  1-


the  beauty  and  harmony  of  which,  in  the  person  of  Adam,  the  father  of  onr  race,

touch  of  moral  evil  had  defaced  and  destroyed,  appeared  again  in  him,  the  ''sec

Adam,"  in  all  its  sinless,  faultless  perfection,  absolutely  free  from  the  taint  of  €

And  this  not  as  a  development,  but  as  a  new  Divine  revelation ;  not  as  the  consi

mate  product  of  moral  forces  inherent  in  our  nature,  but  as  a  supernatural  pbenomei

a  miracle,  in  the  sphere  of  man's  moral  life.    In  him  the  "  righteousness  of  Gi

appeared,  embodied  and  illustrated  in  human  form.    Our  faith  in  this  historic  :

rests  on  different  grounds.     1.  The  angelic  testimony  (Luke  i.  35).    2.  The  dii

testimony  of  the  Father  (Matt.  iii.  17 ;  xvii.  5).    3.  His  declarations  respecting  him

(John  viii.  29,  46 ;  xiv.  30 ;  xv.  10 ;  xvii.  4).    4.  The  witness  of  his  enemies  (Ju<

Herod,  Pilate  and  his  wife,  the  Roman  centurion).    5.  The  apostolic  testimony  (i

iii.  14 ;   2  Ck)r.  v.  21 ;   Heb.  vii.  26  ;   1  Pet.  ii.  22 ;  1  John  ii.  1 ;  iii.  6).     6.  The  i

found  impression  left  on  our  spirits  by  a  careful  study  of  the  Gospel  records.

absolute  sinlessness  of  Jesus  is  one  of  the  foundation*stones  in  the  fabric  of  Christ

doctrine,  and  to  doubt  or  deny  it  is  to  undermine  and  destroy  the  whole.     But

righteousness  means  more  than  faultless  personal  character.    It  includes  the  posit

fulfilment  of  the  Father's  purposes  and  of  the  work  the  Father  had  given  him  to

"  I  have  glorified  thee  on  the  earth,"  etc.  (John  xvii.  4).    "  Wherefore  when

cometh  into  the  world,  he  saith.  Sacrifice  and  offering/'  etc.  (Heb.  x.  5—10).     His  ^

a  righteousness  wrought  out  through  all  the  patient  obedience  of  a  blameless  ]

consummated  in  the  vicarious  shame  and  sorrow  of  the  cross.    As  the  sunbc

receives  no  contamination  from  the  foulest  thing  on  which  it  may  chance  to  (all

did  he  pass  triumphantly  through  all  the  evil  of  the  world  and  go  back  to  the  bofl

of  the  Father  with  a  purity  as  unsullied  as  that  in  which  he  came.    "  Declared  to

the  Son  of  God  with  power,  according  to  the  spirit  of  holiness,  by  the  resurrect

from  the  dead  "  (Rom.  i.  4).

II.  How  HIS  RIGHTEOUSNESS  BECOMES  0UI18.  1.  As  the  groufid  of  OUT  for  given  €88,  Fs
in  him  as  our  righteous  "  Advocate  with  the  Father  "  delivers  us  from  condemnati
We  believe  in  no  "  transference  of  a  moral  quality.'*  As  a  man's  sins  are  his  own  ]
not  another's,  so  whatever  of  virtue  there  may  be  in  him  belongs  to  himself  al<
But  is  it  incredible  that  God  should  deal  with  sinful  men  in  the  way  of  mercy  beca
of  the  perfect  righteousness  of  '*  the  man  Christ  Jesus  "  ?  "  He  was  made  sin  for
who  knew  no  sin,  that  we  might  be  made  the  righteousness  of  God  in  him  "  (2  i
V.  21).  There  is  an  instinctive  witness  in  our  souls  to  the  fact  that  if  "  grace  reig
towards  us  it  must  be  "  through  righteousness."  This  is  God's  answer  to  that  instir
"  By  the  righteousness  of  One  the  free  gift  came  u])on  all  men  unto  justificatioi
life "  (Rom.  v.  18).  2.  As  the  inspiring  cause  of  our  personcU  sanctificcUion,  '
gospel  is  God's  method  of  making  men  righteous,  not  a  scheme  by  virtue  of  which
reckous  them  to  be  so  when  they  are  not.  Faith  in  Christ's  mediatorial  work  as
ground  of  forgiveness  draws  the  soul  irresistibly  into  living  sympathy  with  himi
It  is  impossible  to  dwell  in  fellowship  with  him  without  sharing  his  spirit  and  beconc
"righteous  even  as  he  is  righteous."  Not  more  surely  does  the  prepared  surl
receive  the  picture  the  sun's  rays  paint  upon  it,  than  does  the  reverent,  trustful,  lov
soul  reflect  his  image.  "  We  all,  with  open  face  beholding  as  in  a  glass,"  etc.  (2  i
iii.  18).  Thus  does  his  righteousness  become  ours.  3.  As  the  rectifying  power  in
general  life  of  the  world.  "  A  sceptre  of  righteousness  is  the  sceptre  of  his  kingdo
and  wherever  he  reigns  the  discords  of  the  world  are  resolved  into  a  blessed  harmc
He  is  the  Creator  of  "  the  new  heavens  and  the  new  earth,  wherein  dwelleth  righte<
ness."— W.

Vers.  23,  24. — Hie  omnipresent  God,     It  is  an  essentially  heathen  concept  ioc
the  Deity  against  which  these  grand  words  bear  witness.     There  were  two  false  \
dencies  of  the  heathen  mind  to  which  the  Hebrew  faith  was  a  perpetual  rebuke —
was  that  of  thinking  of  the  Deity  as  dwelling  remote  from  the  ways  of  men,  '*  thro
in  sequestered  sanctity,"  too  lofty  to  take  any  interest  in  the  affairs  of  earth ;
other  that  of  localizing  and  limiting  the  Deity,  conceiving  of  him  as  exercisin
partial  jurisdiction,  as  belonging  to  a  particular  place  and  people.    The  God  of
•Tews  was  no  mere  distant  abstraction,  but  an  ever-present,  ever-active  power ;  not
God  of  one  nation  only,  but  of  the  "  whole  earth,"    Consider —


cir.  xxm.  1-40.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  53n

I.  The  truth  about  God  herb  indicated.  Two  attributes — omnipresence  and
omniscience — are  asserted.  But  they  are  so  mutually  dependent  and  so  inseparable
as  to  be  virtually  one.  By  the  very  necessity  of  his  Being  as  the  infinite  Spirit,  God
is  not  more  in  one  place  or  sphere  of  existence  than  another,  but  alike  in  all,  "afar
off"  as  well  as  "  at  hand/'  filling  heaven  and  earth ;  and  wherever  he  is,  there  he  is  in
all  the  fulness  of  his  perfect  intelligence,  not  observant  or  cognizant  of  some  things  or
beings  more  than  others,  but  having  infallible  knowledge  of  all.  Note  respecting  this
divine  attribute:  1.  lis  mystery.  The  being  of  One  who  is  thus  superior  to  the
limitations  of  space  and  time  and  to  all  our  finite  conditions — to  whom  there  is  no
nearness  and  no  distance,  neither  past  nor  future,  nothing  new  and  nothing  old,  to
whom  ''all  things  are  naked  and  opened,** — must  needs  be  inscrutable  to  us.  Our
boldest  images  are  but  theveil  of  our  ignorance,  and  even  the  sublimest  representations
of  the  inspired  Word  leave  the  problem  as  insoluble  as  ever.  The  celebrated  dictum,
"  His  centre  is  everywhere  and  his  circumference  nowhere,"  in  no  way  helps  us  to
any  real  comprehension  of  infinity;  and  such  grand  poetic  utterances  as  those  of
the  hundred  and  thirty-ninth  psalm,  however  much  they  may  find  their  echo  in  the
depths  of  our  spiiitual  consciousness,  only  call  forth  the  confession,  "  Such  knowledge
is  too  wonderful  for  me ;  it  is  high,  I  cannot  attain  unto  it."  2.  Its  moral  significance.
The  moral  conditions  involved,  the  moral  attributes  associated  with  it,  and  their  direct
relation  to  ourselves,  clothe  it  with  profound  interest  and  solemn  importance.  If  God
were  at  an  impassable  distance,  it  might  little  signify  to  us  what  his  moral  attributes
were.  But  now  that  he  is  thus  near — ^a  presence  from  which  we  cannot  escape,  an  eye
that  is  always  searching  us  through  and  through,  a  hand  that  is  always  laid  upon  us —
the  question  as  to  what  his  dispositions  towards  us  are  is  one  of  unspeakable  moment.
His  absolute  knowledge  of  us  is  connected  with  a  present  secret  act  of  judgment,
prophetic  of  the  open  judgment  to  come.  And  it  is  his  perfection  that  is  thus  coming
into  perpetual  contact  with  our  imperfect  .thoughts  and  ways.  His  holy  love  is  the
light  that  searches  into  us,  the  fire  that  tries  us.  This  attribute  of  omniscience  derives
tremendous  importance  from  the  fact  that  "our  God  is  a  consuming  fire.*'  3.  The
individuality  of  its  application,  "  Can  any  hide  himself?  "  Like  all  other  Divine
truths,  this  is  nothing  to  us  until  we  bring  it  to  bear  on  our  own  personal  condition
and  doings.  The  fact  itself  is  independent  of  all  our  thoughts  about  it,  and  even  of
our  very  existence.  But  for  it  to  have  any  real  influence  over  us  we  must  reduce  it
from  its  vague  generality  to  the  narrow  compass  of  our  own  being,  and  concentrate
the  force  of  it  upon  the  single  line  of  our  own  daily  history — **  Thou  God  seest  me.^
We  apprehend  the  universal  truth  aright  only  so  far  as  that  cry  of  Hagar  expresses
our  soul's  deepest  consciousness — as  if  the  whole  world  of  accountable  beings  around
us  were  annihilated,  and  we  stood,  as  in  the  solitudes  of  a  desert,  alone  with  God.

IL  The  practical  effect  that  truth  may  be  expected  to  produce.  We
cannot  imagine  one  more  fitted  to  have  a  salutary  influence  in  every  way  upon  us.
Let  God  be  to  you  only  a  distant  object  of  contemplation,  as  .he  is  to  the  mere  theo-
logical disputant,  and  with  whatever  attributes  you  may  clothe  him,  they  touch  no
part  of  your  being  with  any  living  power.  Conceive  of  him,  in  a  dreamy  pantheistic
way,  as  a  mere  impersonal,  all-pervading  force,  and  there  is  nothing  in  your  belief  to
elevate  your  moral  character  and  ennoble  your  life.  But  believe  in  the  God  of  the
Bible,  whose  voice  is  heard  in  the  text,  and  you  embrace  the  grandest  and  most
influential  truth  the  human  soul  is  capable  of  entertaining.  The  truth,  rather,  will
possess  you,  as  no  other  truth  can,  moulding  and  governing  your  whole  nature,  and
adapting  itself  in  an  infinite  variety  of  ways  to  every  aspect  of  your  being  and  life.
Chiefly  two  lessons  are  enforced  :  1.  Self-scrutiny.  We  shall  be  concerned  to  become
acquainted  with  ourselves  that  we  may  know  how  far  the  spirit  and  tenor  of  our
moral  life  is  in  harmony  with  the  will  and  the  life  of  God.  Not  that  a  mere  curious
and  anxious  habit  of  testing  the  quality  of  one's  own  feelings,  and  weighing  and
measuring  one's  motives,  has  necessarily  any  healthy  moral  effect.  It  may  be  the
reverse.  But  the  sense  of  God  will  naturally  awaken  a  desire  that  the  relation  in
which  we  stand  towards  him  may  be  a  right  and  happy  one.  "  If  our  heart  condemn
us,  God  is  greater  than  our  heart,"  etc.  (1  John  iii.  23,  24).  The  loyalty  of  the  heart
to  God  is  the  essential  principle  of  a  religious  life.  The  sin  of  these  false  pronhets
was  the  loosening  of  the  Dond  of  their  B[)iritual  allegiance  to  him.    "They  stooa  not


636  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.    [cH.  xxm.  1— 4(

IQ  the  counpel  of  the  Lord."  In  the  case  of  the  Pharisees,  their  external  proprietic
were  but  the  veil  of  iuternal  hoUowness  and  corruption  and  death;  and  Chnat  said  t
them, "Ye  are  they  that  approve  yourselves  unto  men, hut  God  knoweth  your  hearts.
Let  our  hearts  be  right  with  God,  let  the  main  stream  of  our  inner  life  be  flowin
heavenwards,  and  we  need  not  tremble  to  know  that  "  all  things  are  naked  and  opene
unto  the  eyes  of  him  with  whom  we  have  to  do."  2.  Earnest  preparation  for  the/utur
and  final  judgment.  "He  hath  appointed  a  day,"  etc.  (Acts  xvii.  31);  "We  moa
all  af>pear,"  etc  (2  Ck)r.  v.  10).  Your  personal  alienation  from  God  may  give  yoi
little  trouble  now,  but  "  what  will  you  do  when  he  riseth  up  ?  when  he  visitetb,  wha
will  you  answer  him?"  (Job  xxxi.  14).  There  is  no  way  of  preparation  for  th
solemn  judgment  of  the  future  but  in  that  personal  forgiveness  and  reconciliation,  tha
moral  cleansing  and  righteousness  of  life,  that  comes  through  fellowship  with  th
Saviour  (Phil.  iii.  9).

**  I>ow  at  his  cross  we  view  the  day
When  heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away,
And  thus  prepare  to  meet  him."

W.

Vers.  1 — i. — Shepherds,  had  and  good,  I.  The  sentencb  on  the  unfaithtui
SHEPHERDS.  This  is  perhaps  the  most  special  and  emphatic  of  all  Jeremiah's  reference
to  the  unfaithful  shepherds.  Nowhere  does  he  go  into  such  detail  as  Ezekiel  doe
(ch.  xxxiv.).  But  whatever  may  be  lacking  in  illustrative  detail,  the  essential  facti
are  mentioned.  Here  are  men  upon  whom  is  laid  a  charge  such  as  is  laid  on  a  shephen
by  the  owner  of  the  pasture  and  the  flock.  The  business  of  such  a  man  is  to  providi
food  for  the  flock,  defend  it  from  beasts  of  prey,  prevent  as  far  as  he  can  any  of  the  floci
from  wandering ;  and  if  any  should  wander  do  his  best  to  restore  them.  This  might  b
a  task  of  no  small  difBculty  to  the  literal  shepherd  of  the  literal  sheep.  It  require<
courage,  watchfulness,  patience,  promptitude,  and  above  all,  fidelity.  And  yet  even  i
shepherd  enriched  by  these  virtues  might  have  many  losses  and  failures.  God  knew
indeed,  that  for  kings  and  persons  in  authority  to  guide  those  under  them  was  a  tasl
more  arduous  far  than  that  of  shepherding  sheep ;  and  it  was  not  mere  failure  that  h<
complained  of.  He  complained  because  there  had  been  no  serious  attempt  to  attaii
success.  The  very  men  who  should  have  ruled  firmly  and  righteously  and  with  fideliti
to  Jehovah  had  been  spoilers  of  the  sheep,  using  them  to  serve  their  own  ends,  an<
leaving  every  one  to  do  what  was  right  in  his  own  eyes.  The  rulers  had  thus  rejectee
the  authority  and  service  of  Jehovah  and  set  up  self  in  his  place.  Self  was  to  rule,  sel
was  to  be  served.  The  sentence  upon  this  traitorous  conduct  is  given  in  very  genera
terms,  but  was  none  the  less  real  and  effective.  Gtod  did  visit  on  these  rulers  the  evi
of  their  doings.  It  was  necessary  to  give  a  hint  of  this  in  passing,  to  show  that,  whil<
God  delights  in  mercy,  he  must  also  always  be  just.  The  great  matter  to  be  spoken  o
here  is  the  restoring  and  securing  of  the  scattered  flock,  and  if  the  judgment  on  thos*
who  have  helped  to  make  the  mischief  is  simply  mentioned  in  passing,  it  is  enough
Besides,  we  must  remember  that  the  sheep  also  had  their  share  of  the  shame.  The  ruler
could  not  have  done  so  much  harm  if  under  them  there  had  been  a  people  of  a  widely
different  spirit.

II.  The  bestobation  of  the  bcattered.  The  pastors  are  spoken  of  as  those  wh<
have  destroyed  and  scattered  the  sheep.  The  mischief  they  do  is  therefore  not  confines
to  a  simple  scattering.  That  which  is  destroyed  cannot  be  restored.  But  the  part  tha
has  been  scattered,  God  has  in  his  keeping ;  and  in  due  time  he  will  bring  it  togethe
again.  Note  how  Jehovah,  who  announces  punishment  to  the  unfaithful  shepherd
because  they  have  scattered  and  dispersed  his  flock,  goes  on  to  say  that  his  own  banc
has  been  concerned  in  this  same  dispersion.  Here  is  a  beautiful  illustration  of  how  Go(
overrules  calamities.  Though  it  is  the  recklessness  of  evil  men  that  has  scattered
Israel,  yet  the  good  hand  of  God  is  stronger  than  any  hand  of  man ;  and  the  dispersioi
has  been  into  such  directions  as  God  saw  to  be  best.  Though  these  remnants  of  th<
flock  were  far  from  their  proper  pasturage,  they  were  nevertheless  in  safe  places,  when
they  would  be  exercised  in  a  truly  profitable  discipline.  They  were  perhaps  but  a  veri
feeble  remnant  as  man  counts  feebleness,  and  yet  in  God*s  hands  a  small  part  may  be  mon
effectual  for  his  purposes  than  the  incongruous  whole  from  which  it  has  been  separated


cii.  xxiiL  1— 40.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  537

There  may  be  in  it  a  peculiar  coherency  and  submissiveness,  and  a  peculiar  energy  of
growth ;  so  that  the  promise  of  fruitfulness  and  increase  will  be  amply  fulfilled.  The
Divine  course  of  action  with  this  remnant  seems  to  be  much  the  same  as  that  followed
with  Noah  and  his  family  in  the  repeopling  of  the  world  after  the  Deluge.

III.  The  sufficiency  of  pastobal  oyebsioht  fbouised  fob  the  futube.  Of  bad
shepherds  there  have  been  only  too  many,  and  of  good  shepherds  none  have  been  so
good  but  what  they  might  have  been  a  great  deal  better.  The  cause  of  all  these  bitter
experiences  has,  however,  lain  with  the  people  themselves.  Wanting  to  be  lilce  nations
round  about,  they  desired  kings ;  and  God  gave  them  these  desires  to  the  full,  to  show
what  the  end  would  be.  Then  when  the  folly  of  the  sheep,  in  trying  to  choose  shep-
herds of  their  own  devising,  has  been  illustrated  sufBciently,  Gk>d  sends  shepherds  who
shall  be  true  shepherds.  He  alone  is  able,  as  he  alone  has  right,  to  apnoint  such
shepherds  as  will  be  equal  to  all  the  serious  charge  put  into  their  hands.  No  pastors
will  be  able  to  do  anything  for  God's  flock  save  those  who  are  indubitably  of  God's
appointment.  Our  wisdom  is  to  allow  God  to  provide  out  of  his  knowledge,  rather
than  try  ourselves  to  provide,  seeing  how  ignorant  we  are.  The  acceptance  of  Gkxl's
true  teachers  and  guides  has  to  come  at  the  last,  and  many  disappointments  and
vexations  would  be  spared  if  this  acceptance  were  allowed  to  come  at  the  first. — Y.

Vers.  5,  6.— -7%6  righteous  Scion  of  David,  What  is  general  in  vers.  3  and  4  now
becomes  exceedingly  definite.  Attention  is  directed  to  one  particular  person  in  whom
shall  centre  all  the  blessings  that  can  come  through  a  king  worthy  of  the  name.  The
days  are  coming  in  which  he  will  rule  in  the  midst  of  a  kingdom  worthy  of  him.
tJebovah  sees  these  days  coming  as  a  watchman  might  observe  people  approaching  in
the  far  distance  and  moving  steadily  in  the  right  direction.  These  davs  are  on  the
way,  and  the  actual  experience  of  them  is  only  a  matter  of  time.  In  these  days  will
appear —

I.  A  Scion  OF  David.  "  Branch  "  is  a  somewhat  misleading  word  here,  especially  con-
sidering the  use  which  is  made  of  the  branch  in  the  New  Testament.  Tne  branch  is
properly  taken  in  relation  to  the  trunk,  both  being  parts  of  a  living  whole.  **  I  am  the
Vine,  ye  are  the  branches."  Instead  of  the  Christ  being  spoken  of  as  a  Branch  from
David,  David  is  rather  to  be  spoken  of,  by  virtue  of  his  faith  in  the  coming  One,  as  a
branch  of  the  Christ.  The  real  meaning,  of  course,  is  that,  at  some  time  in  the  future,
one  of  the  lineal  descendants  of  David  will  fulfil  these  purposes  of  Qod  and  the  conse-
quent hopes  of  devout  men.  Hence  the  importance  which  belongs  to  the  genealogies
iu  Matthew  and  Luke.  The  more  the  Gospels  are  looked  into,  the  more  it  will  be  seen
how  they  are  constructed  on  certain  lines  indicated  in  the  prophecies.  The  two  (Gospel
genealogies  become  additionally  credible  when  we  reflect  what  a  motive  there  was  to
jireserve  the  record  of  lineal  succession  from  David.  Considering  how  uncertain  it  is
that  any  man  will  have  lineal  descendants  centuries  after  his  own  times,  it  is  a
])eculiarly  noticeable  miracle  that  he  who  appeared  something  like  a  thousand  years
after  David  to  do  such  great  works,  should  have  been  unquestionably  David's
descendant,  bom  at  Bethlehem  and  named  as  Son  of  David  by  the  common  people.

II.  A  BioHTEOus  Scion  of  Dayid.  In  a  not  unreasonable  sense  of  the  word,  David
was  himself  a  righteous  man.  We  cannot  say  anything  for  him,  any  more  than  for
ourselves,  if  we  contrast  him  with  the  righteous  God.  But  we  have  also  to  look  at  him
over  against  the  vile  men  with  whom  he  was  so  often  in  conflict,  men  who  appear  not
to  have  had  one  generous  feeling  or  upward  aspiration.  Especially  we  must  contrast
him  with  some  of  his  own  descendants.  When  we  look  down  the  line  as  far  as  history
^ives  the  opportunity,  we  see  first  good  men  and  then  bad  men.  And  it  is  a  great  mystery
in  the  Chnst's  human  nature  that  he  should  have  been  a  Scion  of  the  bad  as  well  as  the
f^ood  in  this  line.  We  are,  therefore,  obliged  to  recollect :  1.  That  David,  who  was
righteous  in  a  modified  sense,  was  in  due  time  followed  by  a  descendant  who  was  com-
pletely righteous.  He  who  was  ever  reaching  forward,  trying  to  approximate  more  and
more  to  the  will  of  Gk>d,  was  followed  by  One  who  revealed  that  will  in  all  the  conduct
of  his  life  on  earth.  2.  That  even  as  a  bad  father  had  a  good  son  (or  take,  as  a  very
striking  illustration,  the  bad  grandfather  Manasseh  and  the  good  grandson  Josiah),  so
all  these  bad  kings  had  in  due  time  a  successor  in  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  who  was  undefiled
by  any  taint  that  might  reasonably  be  supposed  to  have  come  down  from  them.    As


538  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,     [en.  xxiii.  1—40.


wo  think  of  the  contrasts  thus  furnished,  the  use  of  all  these  deplorable  records  in  the
Books  of  Kings  and  Chronicles  comes  manifestly  out.  The  mischief  and  misery  which
wicked  kings  can  work  must  be  seen  in  all  their  hideousness,  so  that  all  the  more  a
disposition  may  be  excited  to  attend  to  the  blessings  which  Jesus  will  secure  and
multiply  when  he  comes  to  reign  as  King.

III.  The  PR08PEBITT  OP  THIS  RIGHTEOUS  KiNO.  It  must  be  made  clear  in  some
great  and  everlastingly  conspicuous  instance  that  practical  righteousness  is  followed  by
prosperity,  and  that  nowhere  is  the  connection  more  sure  between  a  cause  allowed  fully
to  operate  and  its  full  e£fect.  The  most  hurtful  kind  of  wickedness,  the  men  who  commit
it  do  not  delight  in  for  its  own  sake.  Their  aim  is  outward  prosperity,  to  secure  riches
in  the  easiest  and  most  rapid  way ;  and  this  may  necessitate  a  degree  of  wickedness  of
which  oftentimes  they  seem  not  in  the  least  conscious.  Then,  of  course,  in  the  end  tho
prosperity  proves  corrupt  and  ruins  the  man  who  risked  everything  for  it.  But  now
turn  to  the  individual  experience  of  Jesus.  His  course  in  this  world  had  nothing  in  it
of  prosperity  as  some  count  prosperity.  He  lived  in  poverty ;  he  did  not  live  long ;  and
he  died  as  criminals  die.  All  these  experiences,  however,  only  bring  out  the  real
prosperity.  After  the  cross  the  manifestation  of  his  glory  and  power  began  in  the
acceptance  of  him  by  hearts  that  he  had  completely  subdued.  There  never  has  been
such  a  king  as  Jesus  of  Nazareth ;  never  any  one  who  has  elicited  such  whole-hearted
homage,  such  complete,  faithful,  self-denying  service.  He  prospers  and  he  makes  his
servants  prosper.  The  more  his  glory  shines,  the  more  their  lives  are  brightened.  This
surely  is  mdeed  a  royal  prosperity.

IV.  The  prosperity  op  the  people  is  indicated  :  1.  By  the  king's  own  action  in
judgment  and  righteousness,  or,  as  we  might  otherwise  put  it,  in  righteous  judgment.
As  one  in  authority  and  power,  he  has  to  give  decisions,  and  these  decisions  are  always
righteous.  Human  kings  were  arbitrary  and  capricious ;  their  likes  and  dislikes,  their
political  necessities,  had  much  to  do  with  the  decisions  they  gave.  But  with  this
righteous  Scion  of  David  it  is  very  different.  He  lays  down  great  principles  which,  if
men  would  only  attend  to  them  and  take  in  the  spirit  of  them,  would  stop  all  dis-
putings  and  litigations.  2.  By  the  security  of  the  people.  The  subjects  of  Jesus  have
true  safety.  They  are  safe  in  themselves  and  safe  in  their  spiritual  possessions.  He
who  enables  them  to  acquire  the  true  riches  shows  also  how  to  hold  them  fast ;  else  the
riches  would  not  be  true  riches  at  all.  And  it  is  not  the  least  boon  that  he  gives  them
the  power,  if  only  they  have  faith  to  exercise  it,  of  living  without  anxiety  and  distrac-
tion. It  is  very  dishonouring  to  our  great  King  not  to  believe  that  all  our  best  interests
are  perfectly  safe  in  his  charge. — Y,

Yer.  14. — Prophets  strengthening  the  hands  of  evil-doers,  Jeremiah  had  much  to
say  at  different  times  on  the  unfaithfulness  of  the  prophets — how  flatly  opposed  they
were  in  all  their  conduct  to  that  required  by  the  duiies  of  their  oflSce,  how  utterly
negligent  they  were  of  the  great  opportunities  of  rebuke  which  were  peculiarly  their
own.  And  there  stands  in  this  verse  an  expression  which  gives  a  climax  to  their  evil-
doings.  A  prophet  shows  himself  most  of  all  an  evil-doer  when  he  upholds  the  hands
of  evil-doers.

I.  The  prophet  is  required  in  a  special  manner  to  do  what  he  can  to
WEAKEN  THE  HANDS  OF  EVIL-DOERS.  All  who  rcspect  the  wlll  of  God,  and  feel
sympathy  with  what  is  right  and  true  and  Divine,  are  bound  to  hinder  bad  men  in  their
actions ;  but  he  who  held  the  office  of  a  prophet  among  the  people  of  God  was  looked
to  as  speaking  with  an  authority  higher  than  that  of  a  private  person.  Officialism,  with
all  its  drawbacks  and  perils,  with  all  its  risk  of  self-assertion,  has  been  of  great  advan-
tage to  practical  religion.  It  is  true,  on  the  one  hand,  that  to  put  a  bad  man  into  a
holy  office  is  to  bring  that  office  into  contempt,  but  surely  it  is  also  true,  on  the  other
hand,  that  a  good  man  in  a  holy  office  has  his  power  for  good  much  increased.  Here
in  Israel  at  this  time  there  was  a  multitude  of  evil-doers,  doing  evil  with  both  hands
earnestly.  At  the  same  time,  there  were  doubtless  those  who  did  evil  with  weak  and
uncertain  hands.  It  is  matter  of  thankfulness  that  evil-doers  are  so  often  practically
restrained  in  this  way.  Disposition  is  willing,  but  resolution  is  weak.  There  is  the
desire  to  do  very  bad  things,  but  the  courage  is  lacking.  We  have  an  instance  of  this
in  those  enemies  of  our  Lord  who  were  so  often  hindered  in  their  designs  because  they


en.  xxin.  1— 40.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  639


feared  the  people.  If  all  the  evil  could  be  done  that  is  desired  to  be  done,  8oci(;ty  would
become  intolerable.  Now,  the  peculiar  mischief  that  these  prophets  did  was  in  strength-
ening the  hands  of  wicked  men  who  were  also  weak.  They  spoke  encouragingly,
and  perhaps  drew  them  on  by  example.  Hence  evil  was  done  openly  that  otherwise
might  have  been  done  secretly.  Conspiracies  and  alliances  became  more  practicable.
Evil  was  made  to  put  on  the  aspect  of  good,  and  men  did  energetically  with  perverted
consciences  what  otherwise  they  might  have  done  with  much  hesitation,  and  therefore
with  diminished  force.  There  are  certain  men  always  to  whom  evil-doing  becomes
easy  when  it  becomes  respectable.  Thus  we  see  how  great  were  the  responsibilities
and  opportunities  of  the  old  Hebrew  prophets.

II.  Hence  we  see  something  of  what  a  dutt  and  oppobtukitt  belong  to  all
Christian  people.  Are  not  all  the  Lord's  people  prophets,  if  only  they  choose  to
regard  their  opportunities?  With  regard  to  evil  men,  it  is  especiidly  laid  on  us  to
hinder  their  action  by  all  wise  and  rightful  means.  The  formation  of  their  designs  we
cannot  hinder ;  we  cannot  see  beneath  the  surface,  and  prevent  the  germination  of  the
poisonous  growth ;  but  when  it  appears  above  the  surface,  we  may  do  our  best  to  pluck
it  out.  Under  the  specious  guise  of  love  for  individual  liberty  we  may  tolerate  the
greatest  evils  till  they  grow  beyond  our  control.  The  man  who  took  a  tiger's  cub  for  a
pet  found  it  become  perilous  long  before  he  expected.  We  should  do  all  we  can  to
Btrengthen  those  who  are  the  modem  equivalents  to  the  Hebrew  prophets.  Such  men
appear  from  time  to  time,  and  we  should  pray  for  insight  that  we  may  discern  their
mission  and  claims.  Such  men  are  sent  to  weaken,  and  ultimately  to  paralyze,  the
strong  hands  of  the  wicked.  They  are  the  representatives  of  great  causes ;  and  if
through  cowardice,  self-indulgence,  and  fear  of  being  thought  peculiar,  we  neglect
them,  then  we  may  do  much  harm.

III.  The  great  importance  of  strengthening  the  hands  op  all  who  want
TO  BE  good.  They  are  so  often  weak  in  action.  "  The  spirit  is  willing,  but  the  flesh  is
weak."  They  are  hindered  by  strong  temptations  which  come  in  their  way,  when  they
are  striving  to  get  nearer  Ood's  ide^for  them.  They  are  in  need  of  sympathy.  They
have  to  be  helped  in  reaching  encouraging  views  of  Divine  truth.  They  need  to  be
remembered  in  prayer,  and  generally  to  have  more  heart  and  spirit  put  into  them ;
then,  having  abundant  life  within,  they  will  not  lack  force,  steadiness,  and  persistency
of  hand.  If  we  are  actively  engaged  in  strengthening  the  hands  of  the  good,  we  are  to
this  extent  weakening  the  hands  of  the  eviL  And,  finally,  it  is  very  consoling  to  recollect
that  when  those  who  profess  to  be  good  are  found  strengthening  the  hands  of  evil-
doers, this  is  precisely  the  time  when  God's  indignation  is  arous^  and  his  opposition
most  efifective.    *'  If  God  be  for  us,  who  can  be  against  us  ?  " — Y.

Ver.  16. — Speaking  the  vision  of  one^s  own  heart    Observe —

I.  There  is  the  putting  of  one's  own  imagination  in  the  place  of  God's
truth,  a  prophet,  divinely  sent,  expresses  the  words  which  God  has  put  into  his
mouth,  or  reports  the  vision  which  God  has  made  to  rise  before  him.  If,  then,  it  was
true  that  these  prophets,  as  prophets,  were  speaking  only  the  vision  of  their  own  hearts,
it  was  quite  enougn  to  condemn  them.  It  is  very  possible  that  they  had  brought
themselves  to  believe  that  they  were  speaking  the  trutn.  In  the  days  when  prophetic
vision  was  vouchsafed  to  man  nothing  was  easier  than  for  a  heated  imagination  to  see
whatever  it  wanted  to  see ;  and  then  the  subject  of  this  vision  would  persuade  himself
that  the  vision  was  of  God.  How,  then,  was  a  prophet  to  know  that  what  he  had  seen
was  truly  of  Qod  f  The  answer  is  vcrv  largely  to  be  found  in  considering  the  sense
of  burden  and  responsibility  which  evidently  rested  on  true  prophets.  A^ut  a  true
prophet  there  was  nothing  egotistic,  conceited,  or  impetuous.  Generally,  too,  he  had  to
say  things  which  were  painful  for  a  sensitive  man  to  speak,  and  humiliating  for  self-
willed  people  to  hear ;  whereas  these  prophets  against  whom  Jeremiah  warns  the  people
managed  to  say  things  very  agreeable.  We  read  that  they  proclaimed  peace  ana  pros-
perity to  the  evil-doer.  Now,  whatever  peculiarity  there  was  in  the  visions  given  to  the
prophets,  it  is  plain  that  there  could  be  nothing  contradictory  to  God's  holiness  and
his  laws,  so  clearly  expressed,  for  human  life.  When  prophets  came  with  visions
contradicting  human  self-will  and  human  expectations,  there  was  in  this  a  presumption
that  they  were  sent  of  God.    David  desired  to  build  a  house  for  God  in  place  of  tlM  old


540  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  xxiil  1—40.

tabernacle,  and  doubtless  the  desire  seemed  to  be  one  to  which  there  could  be  no  po6«
sible  objection.  Nathan,  however,  had  a  vision  by  which  David  was  forbidden  to  build.
It  would  have  been  pleasanter  to  go  to  the  king  with  a  message  more  accordant  to  his
wishes,  but  he  could  only  speak  what  God  had  shown  him — a  word  requiring  submission
of  the  human  will  to  a  higher  and  a  wiser  one.  So,  turning  to  the  New  Testament,  we
find  Ananias  at  Damascus  and  Peter  at  Joppa  receiving  visions  which  seemed  to  them
full  of  incredibility,  going  right  in  the  face  of  all  their  previous  experiences  and  con-
victions. Furthermore,  it  must  not  be  forgotten  that  some,  at  least,  of  these  lyin;;
prophecies  were  purchased  with  money.  People  paid  the  diviners  to  hear  pleasant
things,  and  pleasant  things  must  be  told  them  even  if  they  were  false.

II.  There  were  effective  tests  for  these  vain  imaginations  fob  ant  who
CARED  to  employ  THEM.  Houest  miuds  know  how  to  receive  a  true  prophet.  There
is  a  subtle  sympathy  between  speakers  of  the  right  sort  and  hearers  of  the  right  sort.
Ood,  who  sent  so  many  prophets  to  Israel,  was  not  likely  to  leave  Israel  without  a  sore
way  of  testing  them.  So  it  the  prophet  or  dreamer  of  dreams  gave  the  people  a  sign  or
wonder,  and  then  told  them  to  go  after  other  gods,  they  might  thereby  know  that  he
was  a  deceiver.  No  sign,  however  specious  and  wonderful  it  be,  can  make  that  a  truth
to-day  which  yesterday  was  a  lie.  Every  fresh  prophet  must  be  in  harmony  with  the
tried  and  approved  prophets  who  have  gone  before  him.  There  is,  indeed,  no  greater
l)eril  than  to  turn  away  from  any  true  messenger  of  Grod ;  and  happily  there  is  no  need
to  do  so,  through  uncertainty  as  to  his  credentials.  Any  one  who  points  out  a  present
^vrong  in  our  lives  that  needs  to  be  put  right  immediately,  is  to  that  extent  a  prophet
of  Gh^ ;  and  if,  in  addition,  he  ventures  on  certain  predictions,  then  all  we  can  do  is  to
wait.  Gamaliel's  shrewd  advice  cannot  be  too  constantly  kept  in  mind.  What  we
cannot  be  certain  about  while  a  thing  is  in  the  seed  will  be  made  clear  when  it  comes
to  the  fruit.  The  most  important  matters  are  ever  those  on  which  we  have  to  decide
at  once;  and  God  never  fails  to  send  forth  his  light  and  truth  so  as  to  make  the
decision  right, — Y.

Vers.  23 — 32. — Hie  giving  forth  of  the  word  of  man  as  the  word  of  Ood,  I.  God's
unfailing  OBSERVATION.  AH  the  reasonings  within  the  minds  of  these  false  prophets
are  open  to  God.  They  themselves,  audacious,  and  to  some  extent  self-deluded,
reckon  on  not  being  detected.  They  speak  what  the  people  wish  to  believe,  and  are
thus  pretty  certain  of  finding  acceptance  from  them.  But  they  forget,  or  rather  they
have  never  properly  understood,  the  omnipresence  of  God.  If  this  attribute  of  Grod
had  been  a  reality  to  their  minds,  they  woiud  not  have  come  so  much  under  idolatrous
influences.  The  possibility  of  lying  or  in  any  way  distorting  and  manipulating  the  truth
seems  to  depend  on  an  utter  forgetfulness  of  the  fact  that  Qod  is  indeed  everywhere,
filling  all  space,  so  that  his  eye  and  ear  are  everywhere.  When  we  read  of  Grod  appear-
ing to  men  in  different  places,  we  know  that  the  men  travelled  from  one  place  to
another ;  but  God,  even  when  he  appeared  to  them  in  the  new  place,  was  not  a  whit  the
less  remaining  in  the  old.  That  God  is  everywhere  is  a  trutn  meant  to  have  a  most
confirming  and  cheering  influence  upon  the  mind  of  man ;  but  because  this  truth  is  not
apprehended  man  both  loses  what  he  was  meant  to  enjoy,  and  becomes  presumptuous
and  reckless  in  his  practical  denial  of  Grod's  authority.  GJod,  therefore,  makes  his  assur-
ance through  the  true  prophet  that  his  eye  is  upon  every  movement  of  the  false  ones.
Those  who  assure  themselves  that  God  is  ignorant  would  be  far  wiser  in  reckoning  on
the  ignorance  of  the  most  vigilant  and  penetrating  mind  among  their  fellow-men.

II.  GK>d'8  observation  being  such,  the  pbogeedinos  of  these  prophets  can  be
EXACTLY  KNOWN.  What  is  here  said  of  the  false  representations  of  these  prophets  is
civen  forth,  not  as  the  result  of  human  inquiry,  but  of  a  divinely  perfect  observation.
Not  all  that  God  thus  saw  was  here  described,  but  only  such  things  as  the  needs  of  the
times  demanded  to  be  made  known.  Far  more  might  have  been  told  that  was  true,
but  there  was  no  need  to  tell  it.  God  does  not  publish  the  wickedness  of  these  prophets
for  any  delight  that  he  has  in  exposing  them,  out  that  he  may  be  justified  in  tlie  sight
of  the  people  for  the  things  that  he  is  about  to  do.  In  their  hearts,  the  prophets  must
have  known  that  the  thoughts  of  those  hearts  were  discovered.  How  important  it  is
to  bear  in  mind  that  many  of  the  indications  as  to  the  wickedness  of  wicked  men  in
the  Scriptures  come  from  him  who  is  the  omnipresent  and  omniscient  One,  who  scea


CH.  XXIV.  1—10.]     THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.


6n


everything  exactly  as  it  is,  and  who  puts  into  the  mouth  of  those  speakins  his  Word
just  those  expressions  which  will  describe  the  things  essential  to  be  known!  Grod  pub-
lished the  deeds  and  character  of  these  false  prophets  that  those  who  were  true  to  him
might  guard  against  them.  So  Jesus  warned  his  disciples  against  the  time-honoured,
time-consecrated  pretensions  of  the  Pharisees.  GKxl  puts  into  the  hearts  of  those  who
keep  near  him  a  feeling  which  guards  them  against  all  who  for  their  own  selfish  ends
make  a  pretence  of  being  interested  in  holy  things.

III.  There  is  in  this  passage  a  special  charge  against  the  prophets,  to  which  the  pre-
liminary and  more  general  accusations  lead  up.   The  prophets  are  charged  with  making

a  CONFUSION   BETWEEN  THE    HUMAN    AND   THE    DiVINE   IN    THEIB   UTTERANCES.      This

charge  is  summed  up  in  the  question,  *'  What  is  the  chafif  to  the  wheat  ?  '*  or,  as  it  is
more  nearly  rendered,  "  What  has  the  straw  to  do  with  the  grain  ?  "  The  straw  and
the  grain,  close  together  as  they  may  be  for  a  while,  are  separated  at  last ;  and  one  will
by  no  means  serve  the  purpose  of  the  other.  Grain  is  meant  for  man's  support,  and
straw  will  not  take  its  place.  Straw  has  its  own  place,  and  may  be  very  useful,  so  long
as  it  is  kept  in  it.  But  if  straw  and  grain  are  to  be  all  mixed  up  together,  the  result
will  be  very  unsatisfactory.  We  all  need  to  bear  in  mind  this  illustration,  for  we  may
all  have,  to  some  extent,  the  duty  and  opportunity  of  being  prophets  of  God.  He  is  a
rare  man  who  can  tell  forth  things  exactly  as  they  are.  It  is  not  for  man,  by  a  plau-
sible eclecticism,  to  take  something  of  human  experience  and  something  of  Divine
revelation  and  mix  them  up  into  what  he  trusts  may  somehow  prove  acceptable  to
men.  Human  experiences  and  conjectures  have  their  part.  When  a  man  honestly
tells  us  what  he  thinks  and  feels,  we  know  how  to  estimate  his  statement ;  and  when
he  comes  professedly  with  a  Divine  message  we  have  some  notion  how  to  test  him.
But  what  shall  we  do  with  him  who  claims  to  limit  and  modify  Divine  revelation,  so
that  it  may  fit  into  what  he  is  pleased  to  call  the  inexorable  moulds  of  human  reason  ?
We  must  ever  make  the  distinction  between  the  straw  and  the  grain  in  our  search  for
truth.  Some  truth  is  discoverable  by  observation,  experiment,  deduction ;  other  truth
only  by  the  spiritual  intuitions  of  a  devout  and  humble  mind  placing  itself  before  the
statements  of  Divine  revelation.  So  with  regard  to  human  and  Divine  government.
There  is  no  possibility  of  acting  so  as  to  please  both  God  and  men.  There  is  no  possi-
bility of  building  up  a  perfect  society  out  of  such  elements  as  we  have  at  present.  On
one  hand,  we  have  to  bear  in  mind  the  limitations  of  society  in  the  actual  existence  of  it.
What  we  make  a  law  to  ourselves,  in  our  own  individual  relations  to  God,  we  cannot
impose  on  others.  On  the  other  hand,  we  must  not  allow  the  low  conceptions  which
others  may  have  of  God's  claims  to  drag  us  down  to  their  level.  Let  God's  Law  stand
out  distinct  and  authoritative  before  our  minds  to  guide  us  in  our  individual  life.
That  Law  must  not  be  in  any  way  modified,  under  a  notion  that  compliance  with  it  is
impossible  of  attainment.  If  we  persevere  in  receiving  Gt)d'8  Word  and  persevere  in
repeating  it,  we  shall  find  that  it  will  make  its  way  mightily,  not  as  by  brute  force,
but  because  it  is  the  Word  of  truth,  the  Word  that  has  abiding  fitness  for  the  deepest
needs  of  men. — Y.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  XXIV.


Again  Jeremiah's  ungrateful  task  is  to
take  up  an  attitude  of  direct  opposition  to  the
kiDg(comp.  oh.  xxii.  13 — 30),  though,  indeed,
Zedekiah  personally  is  so  weak  and  depen-
dent on  others  that  he  neither  deserves  nor
receives  a  special  rebuke.  He  and  all  the
people  that  are  left  are  likened  to  very  bad
figs,  the  good  figs — the  exiles— having  been
picked  out  and  sent  to  Babylon,  whence
they  will  one  day  be  restored.  The  vision
is  purely  an  interior  process.    This  is  indi-


cated, not  only  by  the  phrase,  "Jehovah

showed  me"    (oomp.  Amos  vii.  1,  4,  7  ;

viii.  1),  but  by  the  contents  of  the  vision.

Yer.  1. — ^Two  baskets  of  flgi  were  set  be-
fore, etc.  (comp.  Amos  viii.  1 — 3).  The
description  is  apparently  based  on  the  law
of  firstfruits  (comp.  Deut.  xxvi.  2),  where
the  "  basket "  is  mentioned,  though  not  the
word  here  used.  The  baskets  were  set
down  in  readiness  to  be  examined  by  the
priests.  Who  rigorously  rejected  all  fruit
that  was  not  sound.  The  princes  of  Jndah.
A  short  phrase  for  all  the  leading  men,
whether  members  of  the  royal  family  or  heads
of  the  princijnl  families'  (oomp.  ch.  xxvii.


512


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  xxiv.  1— K


20).  The  oarpenten  and  Bmiths;  rather,
the  erafUmen  and  smiths  ('*  craftsmen  "  in-
cludes workers  in  stone  and  metal  as  well
as  wood;  the  Hebrew  word  is  rendered
••  smith  "  in  1  Sam.  xiii.  19).

Ver.  2. — Like  the  flgi  that  are  first  ripe.
The  early  spring  fig  was  considered  a  special
delicacy  (com p.  Isa.  xxvii.  4  ;  Hos.  ix.  10);
*«  ficus  pr»cox,"  Pliny  calls  it  ('  Hist.  Nat.,'
XT.  19,  quoted  by  Trench).  Tristram  sug-
gests that  the  **  bad  figs  "  were  those  of  a
sycamore  tree.

Yer.  5. — Acknowledge  them;  or,  talce
knowledge  (notice)  of  them  (as  Buth  ii.  10,
19).


Yer.  6. — I  will  build  them,  etc  (comp.  c]
i.  10;  xii.  16).  As  the  next  verse  show
it  is  not  merely  outward  prosperity  that  :
meant,  but  spiritual  regeneration.

Yer.  8. — And  as  the  evil  figs.  (So  ch.  xxi:
16.)  That  dwell  in  the  land  of  Egyp
Those  who  had  fled  thither  during  the  wt
(comp.  ch.  xlii.,  xliii.);  hardly  those  wh
liad  oeen  carried  captive  to  Egypt  wit
Jehoahaz,  who  would  presumably  have  bee
of  the  better  sort,  such  as  are  symbolize
by  the  good  figs.

Yer.  9.— And  I  will  deliver  thorn,  ei
(see  on  ch.  xv.  4,  and  comp.  ch.  xxiz. ;  Deu
xxviii.  37).


HOMILETICS.

Yers.  1 — 10. — Ttoo  hasIeeU  of  figs,  I.  Mobally  men  are  divisible  into  tw
DISTINCT  CLASSES.  The  two  baskets  of  figs  represent  two  classes  of  Jews :  the  baske
of  good  figs,  Jeconiah  and  his  followers ;  the  basket  of  bad  figs,  Zedekiah  and  his  party
The  great  distinction  between  these  was  moral.  There  were  princes  in  both  classes
yet  the  one  stood  far  higher  in  the  sight  of  Grod  than  the  other.  1.  The  deepest  line  o
cleavage  which  runs  down  through  all  sections  of  mankind  is  moral;  all  other  sepa
rating  marks  are  more  superficiaL  2.  There  are  in  the  main  hut  two  classes — the  goo<
and  the  bad — though,  of  course,  within  each  of  these  great  varieties  occur.  3.  Both  o
these  classes  tend  to  grow  extreme.  The  good  figs  are  very  good,  the  bad  are  very  bad
Character  is  tendency.  As  character  develops  it  moves  further  on  along  the  lines  oi
which  it  is  founded.  Good  men  incline  to  grow  better  and  bad  men  worse.  Like  the
rivers  which  flow  down  the  two  sides  of  a  great  watercourse,  lives  that  begin  in  simila:
circumstances  and  are  near  together  for  a  season,  if  they  once  diverge,  are  likely  t<
separate  more  widely  as  the  years  pass.

II.  The  best  men  mat  be  the  greatest  sufferers.  The  good  figs  represent  th<
Jews  who  suffered  most  severely  from  the  invasion  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  who  were  tom
from  their  homes,  robbed  of  their  property,  driven  into  captivity;  the  bad  figs  represenl
the  seemingly  more  fortunate  Jews  over  whose  head  the  tide  of  invasion  passes,  leaving
them  still  in  their  homes  and  in  quiet,  and  also  those  who  escaped  from  it  entirely  b^
a  flight  into  Egypt.  We  may  often  notice  that  very  good  people  are  not  only  not
spared,  but  suffer  the  most  severe  calamities.  The  sinless  One  was  a  "  man  of  sorrows
and  acquainted  with  grief.**  No  greater  mistake  can  be  made  than  that  of  the  three
friends  of  Job.  Great  misfortunes  are  certainly  not  indications  of  great  guilt ;  often  ol
the  reverse.  1.  Hi^^h  character  may  directly  invoke  trouble.  It  rouses  the  opposition
of  the  wicked;  it  feels  called  to  dangerous  tasks  and  to  a  mission  which  excites  enmity;
it  maintains  a  fidelity  that  excludes  many  avenues  of  escape  which  would  be  open  to
men  of  lower  moral  principles.  2.  God  may  bless  and  honour  his  better  children  by
fending  to  them  the  severer  trials.  "  Whom  the  Lord  loveth  he  chasteneth."  There-
fore chastisement  is  an  evidence  of  God's  love.  Good  men  should  understand  this,  and
not  be  surprised  at  the  advent  of  trouble,  but  expect  it ;  not  be  dismayed  at  the  incon-
gruity of  it,  but  recognize  its  fitness ;  not  despair  of  themselves,  and  think  that  they
must  be  hypocrites  after  all,  nor  doubt  and  distrust  God,  but  submit  to  what  is  clearly
foretold  and  wisely  arranged.

III.  God  looks  favourably  on  those  who  submit  to  his  chastisements.  The
good  figs  represent  those  Jews  who  obey  the  message  of  Jeremiah  and  submit  to  the
invasion  of  the  Chaldeans  as  to  a  Divine  chastisement ;  the  bad  fi^s  stand  for  those
Jews  who  resist.  It  requires  faith  to  recognize  the  wisdom  and  duty  of  submission.
On  the  face  of  it  such  conduct  would  appear  unpatriotic  and  cowardly,  while  resistance
would  seem  noble  and  brave.  It  may  take  more  coura<];e,  however,  to  submit  than
to  resist.  There  is  a  yielding  which  is  calm  and  reasonable  and  really  brave,  since  it
involves  the  curbing  of  instinctive  combativeness  and  the  pursuit  of  an  unpopular


cii.  XXIV.  1—10.]     THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  543

course— one  sure  to  be  misunderstood  and  to  provoke  calumny.  The  sole  guide  must
be  sought  in  the  question  of  what  is  right,  what  is  God's  will.  We  are  not  called  to  a
fatalistic  passivencss.  There  are  circumstances  in  which  self-defence  or  flight  may  be
evidently  right.  What  we  are  to  submit  to  is  not  all  op^wsition,  all  possible  trouble,
but  God's  will,  the  trouble  which  we  know  he  has  sanctioned.  AH  the  good  fruit  of
chastisement  will  be  lost  if  we  rebel  against  it.  No  greater  proof  of  faith  in  the
goodness  of  Gk>d  and  loyalty  to  the  majesty  of  God  can  be  found  than  a  quiet,  unmur-
muriDg  acceptance  of  his  harder  requirements.

IV.  TUE  HARDEST  SUFFERING  MAY  LEAD  TO  THE  HAPPIEST  RESULTS.      The  CaptiveS

are  to  be  restored.  Those  Jews  who  remain  in  the  land  are  ultimately  to  be  driven
forth  as  "  a  reproach  and  a  proverb,  a  taunt  and  a  curse.''  The  shorf)^  sharp  sufi'ering
will  end  in  ultimate  good.  The  temporary  escape  will  be  followed  by  final  ruin.
1.  God's  chastisements  are  temporary ;  they  will  give  place  to  lasting  blessedness.  The
present  affliction  is  light  just  because  it  endures  "but  for  a  moment"  (2  Cor.  iv.  17).
Even  if  they  outlast  the  present  life,  what  is  this  brief  span  of  earthly  trial  compared
with  the  blessedness  of  an  eternity  ?  2.  God's  chastisements  work  our  good.  They
directly  tend  to  produce  the  happier  future.  The  tearful  sowing  is  the  cause  of  the
joyful  harvest.  The  spiritual  improvement  wrought  in  the  soul  by  the  discipline  of
sorrow  is  at  once  a  source  of  future  blessedness  and  a  justification  for  it.  "  It  is  good
for  a  man  that  he  bear  the  yoke  in  his  youth."  3.  A  culpable  avoidance  of  Divine
chastisement  is  highly  dangerous.  The  escape  from  temporary  trouble  must  incur  greater
future  trouble ;  for  (1)  it  prevents  the  chastisement  from  working  the  good  in  us  which
would  have  led  to  a  happier  future,  and  (2)  it  adds  a  new  offence  of  direct  rebellion
against  God  which  must  invoke  upon  the  head  of  the  offender  a  terrible  judgment.

Vers.  6,  7. — Prosperity  restored,  I.  After  chastisement  has  been  rightly
RECEIVED,  God  looks  favourably  on  his  children.  He  sets  his  "  eyes  upon  them  for
good."  Men  shrink  from  the  eyes  of  God  as  from  a  keen  and  fatal  scrutiny.  But  God
is  not  always  looking  as  the  Judge.  He  beholds  his  children  with  love.  There  is  a
wonderful  tenderness  in  this  gaze,  like  that  of  a  mother  fondly  watching  over  her  suf-
fering infant — a  deep  pity  for  sorrow,  an  earnest  care  to  ward  off  harm,  a  kindly  will
to  bestow  all  real  good.  It  is  blessed  indeed  to  be  so  beheld  by  God.  There  are  men
possessed  of  such  great  power  and  influence  that  some  consider  a  favourable  look  from
them  sufficient  to  make  their  fortune.  What  must  be  the  effect  of  God  setting  eyes
on  a  man  for  good?

II.  When  God  looks  favourably  on  his  children  he  may  secure  their  tem-
poral prosperity.  This  will  not  always  happen,  for  it  will  not  always  be  for  tho
real  good  of  men.  Still,  it  does  often  occur.  We  are  too  ready  to  confine  the  recognition
of  God's  action  in  our  lives  to  the  sterner  sides  of  it.  God  sends  prosperity  as  well  as
adversity.  If  he  banishes,  he  restores  ;  if  he  pulls  down,  he  builds  up  again.  And  the
joy  of  the  restoration  and  the  glory  of  the  latter  building  exceed  those  of  earlier  times.
If  earthly  prosperity  comes  from  God  it  is  real  and  solid.  God  can  maintain  it  after
he  has  bestowed  it.  He  will  build  so  that  none  shall  pull  down.  The  man  who  is
innocently  enjoying  a  prosperity  sent  by  God  need  have  no  superstitious  fears  of  a
jealous  Nemesis.  He  is  not  secure  from  trouble;  but  he  has  no  special  ground  for
apprehending  it  simply  because  he  is  happy  at  present.

III.  When  God  looks  favourably  on  his  children  he  will  certainly  secure
THEIR  spiritual  PROSPERITY.  This  is  seen  in  a  restoration  of  a  true  knowledge  of  God.
1.  It  is  good/or  us  to  know  God.  Tho  knowledge  of  God  is  here  represented  not  so
much  as  a  subject  of  duty  as  in  the  light  of  a  form  of  spiritual  blessedness.  The  loss
of  this  knowledge  leads  to  the  darkness  of  a  godless  life.  The  enjoyment  of  this  know-
ledge is  eternal  life  (John  xvii.  3).  2.  A  true  knowledge  of  God  is  the  recognition  of
God  as  he  is — quite  another  thing  from  our  common  conception  of  his  nature.  Then  we
see  and  feel  the  grandeur,  the  mystery,  the  glory  of  "  the  eternal."  3.  This  knowledge
of  God  depends  on  the  condition  of  our  hearts.  The  "  heart "  represents  the  whole
inner  life. .  When  this  is  rightly  disposed  we  can  know  God,  and  only  then.  What
we  need,  therefore,  is  not  a  new  revelation,  but  a  change  of  heart.  When  our  soul  is  in
sympathy  with  God,  when  our  spiritual  vision  is  open,  we  can  see  indications  of  God's
presence  and  character  which  would  otherwise  be  obscure.    4.  The  right  condition  of


544  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,     [ch.  xxiv.  1—10.

heart  for  knowing  God  must  be  produced  by  God,  God  promises  to  give  them  a  heart
to  know  him.  He  only  can  create  the  heart  anew.  The  greatest  blessing  of  redemptioQ
is  that  he  will  do  this.

IV.  The  welfare  op  God's  CHn.DREN  is  restored  by  the  restoration  op  the
CLOSE  RELATIONS  BETWEEN  HIM  AND  THEM.  "  They  shall  be  my  people,  and  I  will  bo
their  God."  This  relation  is  twofold.  God  exercises  paternal  influences,  they  engage
in  filial  duties.  1.  Qod  takes  them  under  his  care.  They  are  his  people,  to  be  guarded
and  blessed  by  him.  So  Christians  are  God's  peculiar  people  (1  Pet.  ii.  9).  2.  They
take  Qod  for  their  portion.    He  is  their  God — theirs  to  worship,  serve,  love,  rejoice  in.

V.  The  restoration  of  true  prosperity  depends  on  the  genuine  return  of
God's  people  to  their  fidelity  to  him.  The  restoration  was  not  a  mere  compensa-
tion for  the  troubles  of  the  exile.  Happiness  does  not  necessarily  follow  trouble.  The
father  runs  to  meet  the  prodigal  son  when  he  returns,  but  cannot  regard  him  favour-
ably before  this.  1.  This  return  must  be  with  the  heart.  Repentance,  of  all  acts,
must  be  genuine  and  heartfelt.  A  formal  acknowledgment  of  God  without  a  change  of
heart  is  a  mockery  and  an  insult  to  him,  which  can  bring  us  no  good.  2.  This  return
must  be  with  the  whole  heart.  A  partial  return  to  God  is  no  true  return.  He  claims
the  whole  heart  or  none  of  it.

Ver.  10. — Stuord,  famine,  and  pestilence,  I.  Trouble  begets  trouble.  War  devas<
tating  the  fields,  checking  industry,  robbing  stores,  etc.,  leads  to  famine;  famine  and
war  create  horrible  causes  of  pestilence.  Trouble  does  not  tend  to  relieve  itself,  but
the  reverse.  The  poor  become  poorer,  the  wretched  more  miserable.  Hence  the  need
of  a  salvation  outside  ourselves.

II.  Trouble  is  cumulative.  The  full  force  is  not  often  felt  at  first.  One  by  one
the  blows  fell  upon  Job.  Thus  each  is  felt  most  acutely.  Though  we  can  bear  present
calamities  unaided,  we  still  need  a  refuge  for  the  future.

III.  Trouble  is  various  in  form — sword,  famine,  pestilence.  If  we  are  not  touched
by  one  kind  of  trouble,  we  may  fall  under  another.  Of  what  avail  is  it  to  escape  the
sword,  only  to  perish  of  the  pangs  of  hunger  or  to  fall  a  victim  to  the  ravages  of  pesti-
lence? Future  punishment  will  probably  be  various  in  kind,  yet  so  adapted  to  all
varieties  of  character  and  condition  that  none  of  the  impenitent  will  be  able  to  escape.

IV.  Trouble  must  be  conquered  by  redemption,  not  evaded  by  plight.  Wc
may  flee  from  some  trouble,  but  cannot  from  all.  When  this  is  judicial  it  is  searching
and  penetrating,  so  that  none  can  elude  it.  It  is  vain  to  rest  in  the  assurance  that  we
have  been  able  to  devise  means  for  resisting  many  troubles.  The  army  of  them  is  so
vast  that  no  victory  over  scattered  detachments  can  affect  our  ultimate  condition.
This  fact  should  not  induce  despair,  but  nrge  us  to  turn  to  the  full  deliverance  oi
Christ's  redemption  (Rom.  viii.  1).


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1—10. — The  two  baskets  of  figs;  or,  predetermining  influences,  lliese  are
not  to  be  understood  of  the  opposite  development  of  character  in  two  sets  of  peraona
in  slightly  diflering  circumstances,  but  rather  of  the  primary  influence  of  Divine  faith
as  contrasted  with  the  want  of  it  amidst  the  trials  of  life.  The  people  left  behind
were  disposed  to  felicitate  themselves  over  their  brethren  who  had  been  carried  off  into
Chaldea,  but  this  impression  is  corrected  by  Jeremiah.  The  exiles  were  the  true
people  of  Gk>d,  and  were  to  be  under  his  constant  supervision  and  loving  care ;  the
others  were  to  be  cast  off,  to  become  a  prey  to  inner  corruption  and  the  unchecked
destructive  influences  of  the  world.

L  The  mystery  of  the  Divine  election.  From  comparatively  similar  circum<
stances  to  evolve  distinct  types  of  character  and  destiny.  Out  of  the  same  clay  to  mould
the  saint  and  the  sinner.  It  is  the  old  lesson  of  the  potter  in  another  form.  There  ii
nothing  in  a  man  himself  to  account  for  God's  favour.  He  chooseth  whom  he  will  and
rejecteth  whom  he  will.  Yet  is  it  true  that  he  willeth  not  the  death  of  a  sinner^  but
rather  that  all  should  come  unto  him  and  live.

II.  The  manner  in  which  elective  grace  manifests  itself.    1.  RecdlUng,   (Ver


CH.  XXIV.  1—10.]     THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  545

6.)  How  unlikely  tinder  the  circumstances  1  Tet  rendered  credible  by  the  remarkable
individuality  of  the  Jewish  people  from  age  to  age.  Reconstituting.  (Ver.  6.)  The
fijjure  is  twofold — building  and  life-growth  (cf.  Eph.  ii.  21,  22).  Spiritually  recreating,
(Ver.  7.)  The  aim  of  the  previous  discipline ;  out  the  beginning  of  great  national
glory  and  blessedness.  For  connection  of  these  processes,  cf.  Rom.  viii.  28 — 30.  2.
Circumstances  are  made  to  subserve  a  merciful  purpose.  The  immediate  condition  of
the  Chaldean  exiles  might  appear  a  harder  one  than  that  of  their  compatriots  at  home ;
but  in  the  end  this  would  turn  to  their  salvation.  Not  only  will  Grod  overrule  all
things  for  the  good  of  his  people,  but  he  will  use  them  for  their  spiritual  education.
The  influence  of  circumstances  is  thus  shown  to  depend  for  the  most  part  upon  the
spiritual  state  of  those  who  are  surrounded  by  them.  3.  Circumstances  are  appointed
for  the  destruction  of  the  obstinately  impenitent.  Moral  reprobation  and  political
annihilation  were  to  come  upon  these.  There  would  be  no  swerving  or  slackening  in
the  execution  of  their  sentence.  This  is  agreeable  with  the  character  of  him  who
hates  sin  with  an  eternal  hatred.  The  climax  of  misery  here  indicated  is  but  a  faint
suggestion  of  that  which  will  follow  upon  rejection  of  the  gospel.  And  yet  how
simple  are  the  elements  of  such  a  punishment !  God  has  but  to  withdraw  his  grace,
and  the  inner  depravity  of  nature  will  work  unchecked  its  fearful  consequences,
accelerating  and  directing  the  external  circumstances  of  life.  And  all  this  has  another
aspect,  which  is  full  of  comfort  to  those  who  are  spiritually  inclined.  The  faintest
dawn  of  repentance  is  the  opening  of  the  **door  of  hope;'  and  when  the  heart  is
changed  the  tendency  of  untoward  circumstance  at  once  is  altered,  and  the  positive
blessings  of  Gt)d  again  return. — M.

Vers.  1 — 10. — Calamity  with  Ood  and  without  him,  L  To  the  child  of  grace.
1.  It  is  a  chastening.     2.  A  restoration,

II.  To  THE  UNGODLY.  1.  An  influence  depreciating  character.  2.  A  source  of
restlessness  and  fresh  transgression,  3.  An  ever-increasing  evil,  4.  An  ultimate
destruction, — ^M.

Vers.  1 — 10. — Punished  for  salvation;  left  alone  for  destruction,  A  general  principle
of  God's  moral  government.  The  flower  of  Judah,  about  to  be  deported  to  Babylon,
are  followed  by  the  prophet  with  wistful  gazse.  They  are  the  seed  of  the  true  Israel ;
whereas  those  who  are  allowed  to  remain  quietly  at  home  are  to  be  of  no  account  in
God's  purpose,

I.   How  DIFFERENT  OFTEN  ARE   THE   EXTERNAL   FROM   THE   SPIRITUAL   PROSPECTS  OF

MEN  I  Jeconiah  and  his  companions  might  have  been  pitied  by  their  friends  left  behind.
The  outward  position  of  any  one  is  no  index  of  his  relations  with  Gt>d.

II.  Present  trial  mat  be  a  proof  of  Divine  love,  and  present  immunity  from

MISFORTUNE  IS  NOT  ALWAYS  TO  BE  TAKEN  AS  AN  EVIDENCE  OF  DiVINE  FAVOUR.   **  Whom

the  Lord  loveth  he  chasteneth,  and  scourgeth  every  son  whom  he  receiveth."  Punish-
ment was  needed  to  atone  for  the  past  and  purify  for  the  future.  The  exile  in  Babylon,
with  its  deprivation  of  political  and  religious  privilege,  was  a  new  point  of  view  for
the  captives.  It  is  a  familiar  experience  to  hear  men  who  have  done  well  in  the  world,
or  who  have  had  a  comparatively  smooth  life,  say, "  Grod  has  blessed  us."  This  statement
is  often  open  to  question.  God  may  simply  let  alone  those  whom  he  has  given  up.  The
lethargy  induced  in  many  by  good  fortune  is  to  be  guarded  against.  Count  them
happy  that "  endure,  as  seeing  him  who  is  invisible."  Inward  depravity  will  soon  work
the  destruction  of  those  in  whom  it  remains.

III.  The  glory  of  the  Divine  in  man  is  evolved  from  the  humiliation  of  the
HUMAN.  A  mere  remnant.  How  few  of  those  who  went  forth  would  return  1  Children's
children  might  be  blessed,  but  not  they  themselves.  And  even  then  it  would  require
not  only  reorganization,  but  rebirth  in  spirituality.  It  is  ever  so.  A  profound  and
radical  change  is  needed  ere  any  one  can  become  a  member  of  the  true  eternal  Israel.
Israel  after  the  flesh  is  sentenced  to  death,  that  Israel  after  the  Spirit  may  live  for
ever. — ^M.

Ver.  6. — '*  I  will  set  mine  eyes  upon  them  for  good,**  The  distressed  and  a£9icted  for
]iis  sake  he  ever  regards  with  special  attention  and  interest.    "  The  captives  are  dearest

JEREMIAH.  2v


546  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  xxiv.  1—3

to  God.'*  Banished  from  Palestine,  they  are  still  "  hia  banished  ones/*  and  he  w
make  them  to  return.  Those  who  are  undergoing  severe  trials,  in  circumstances^
faith,  etc.,  but  who  are  truly  seeking  after  God,  are  to  be  comforted  with  thia  woi
It  is  a  promise  that  has  been  gloriously  fulfilled.    It  pledges—

I.  GoD*8  CAEE.  1.  Protection.  2.  Provision,  temporal  and  spiritual.  Although  ^
see  him  not,  he  ever  sees  us  and  regards  us  with  complacency  and  love.

II.  GoD*8  FAVOUB.  This  indicates  interest,  but  because  of  something  evoking  it
the  first  germs  of  faith  and  repentance.  When  others  see  them  not,  be  sees  t
longings  of  the  soul  and  its  efforts  after  better  things ;  and  he  will  further  them.

III.  GoD*8  GUIDANCE.  Although  they  were  led  away  into  a  strange  land  and  amid
an  alien  people,  he  would  never  lose  sight  of  them ;  but,  directing  their  footstej
would  bring  them  back  again  to  the  land  they  had  left  and  to  himself.  It  was
strange  way,  but  it  was  God's  way,  and  his  influence  would  be  continually  in  them  ai
upon  them  for  good.  It  is  the  surest  proof  that  God's  eye  is  upon  us  for  good  wh(
his  Spirit  is  within  us.    As  many  as  are  led  of  the  Spirit  are  the  children  of  God. — ]

Ver.  7. — The  conditions  and  relations  of  salvation.  I.  The  ability  to  know  Q<
IS  THE  GIFT  OF  GoD.  Not  more  facts,  external,  historical,  etc.,  are  required.  Not
new  Bible — the  letter  of  the  Bible  is  probably  completed  already.  Nor  even  a  new  moi
of  spiritual  demonstration.  But  a  new  heart.  We  cannot  make  a  new  heart.  Gi
will  save  us  by  renewing  :  1.  The  moral  nature.    2.  ITie  whole  life  through  it.

IF.  The  blessings  of  salvation  can  only  be  secured  in  absolute  oonsecratio
"  They  shall  return  unto  me  with  their  whole  heart."  Complete  salvation  is  impoesil:
without  complete  faith.  To  believe — to  believe  simply,  to  believe  wholly, — this  is  tl
condition  of  perfect  salvation.

III.  The  ideal  Israel  must  ever  be  a  theocracy.  In  the  obedience  of  faith  th<
shall  be  God's  people,  and  he  will  be  their  Gxxl.  That  upon  which  we  depend  in  fail
is  that  which  we  observe  and  respect  in  practice ;  it  is  the  law  and  inspiration  of  lii
Christ  leads  us  to  the  Father  that  he  and  we  may  be  one  in  God;  not  merged,  confounds
with  Deity,  but  in  eternal  and  ever-blessed  subordination  to  him. — M.

Vers.  1 — 10. — The  two  baskets  of  figs;  or,  our  character  and  destiny  independent
our  circumstances,    I.  The  symbols  employed.    The  two  baskets  of  figs — one  v«
good,  the  other  very  evil.     But:  1.  lliey  had  each  the  same  advantages  and  disa
vantages.    The  same  seed,  soil,  training,  climate,  sunshine,  and  other  influences  teemii
on  them.     2.  They  were  of  directly  ojtposite  character.     (Ver.  2.)

II.  The  people  represented  by  them.  The  men  of  Judah  and  Jerusalem.  No^
1.  The  circumstances  of  all  these  were  the  same.  Parentage,  religion,  teachers,  di
ciplines,  privileges,  opportunities.  2.  But  some  of  these  people  were  symbolized  1
the  good  figs,  and  the  other  by  the  evil.  Those  who  had  been  carried  off  to  Babyli
were  the  good  ;  those  who  remained  still  in  Jerusalem  were  the  evil.  3.  The  rever
results  might  have  been  looked  for.  For  the  good  had  been  dealt  with  more  stem!
than  the  evil.  How  terrible  and  sad  their  lot  appeared  I  Torn  away  from  all  the
wonted  privileges ;  made  to  endure  a  fate  which  others  deserved  far  more  than  the^
surrounded  with  idolaters  and  blasphemers  of  God.  But  the  evil  continued  in  d
possession  of  all  those  aids  to  religion  and  piety  of  which  those  others  were  deprive
DO  that  the  circumstances  of  the  good  were  less  favourable,  and  those  of  the  evil  fi
more  so.  Exile,  which  might  have  been  thought  to  injure  the  captives,  had  doi
them  good ;  whilst  exemption  from  it,  which  might  have  been  thought  to  benefit  tl
evil,  had  wrought  them  harm.  "  With  the  exiles  were  some  of  the  choicest  spiri
of  the  nation.  Ezekiel,  second  only  to  Jeremiah  himself  in  the  prophets  of  th
epoch ;  and,  probably,  the  ancestor  of  Mordecai ;  and  Daniel,  with  his  three  companions
"  The  exiles  became  humble,  repentant,  reformed.  The  resident  Jews  became  insolen
self-secure,  defiant.  The  former  became  worthy  of  comparison  with  *  the  first  ripe  figs
the  latter  as  the  *  naughty  figs,  which  could  not  be  eaten.'"

III.  The  lessons  taught  thereby.  That  character  and  destiny  do  not  depend  c
circumstances.  We  should  have  thought  that  either  all  would  be  alike,  or  ehse  thi
the  characters  and  destinies  would  have  been  the  reverse  of  what  they  were.  1.  L<
the  good  who  may  be  placed  in  adverse  circumstances  take  encouragement  from  th


CH.  XXIV.  1—10.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  547


fact.  They  can  surmount  and  triumph  over  all  the  evil  influences  which  surround  and
oppose  them  (cf.  ver.  7.)  2,  And  the  evil  are  to  take  warning.  Prolonged  privilege
and  opportunity  have  no  necessary  saving  power.  Such  advantages  may  leave  them
worse  than  before.    It  was  so  here.

IV.  Obsebve  the  obeat  illustration  of  the  tbuth  taught  HEBE  IN  Christ  and
HIS  Chubch.  1.  Christ  was  "  as  a  root  out  of  a  dry  ground."  How  utterly  opposed  to
all  prospect  of  his  becoming  greats  and  his  Name  above  every  name,  were  the  early
circumstances  in  his  history  1  And  yet  he  has  triumphed  over  all.  2.  And  so  with
the  history  of  the  Church.  It  was  small  as  "  a  grain  of  mustard  seed/'  feeble  as
"  sheep  amidst  wolves,"  was  as  a  thing  of  nought  and  despised.  And  yet  what  has  it
not  become,  what  will  it  not  become  ?  And  what  is  true  of  Christ  and  his  Church
shall  be  true  likewise  of  all  that  are  his.  '*  Fear  not,  little  flock,"  said  our  Lord ;  ''  it
is  the  Father's  good  pleasure  to  give  you  the  kingdom^" — 0.

Ver.  7. — A  heart  to  know  the  Lord,  It  was  "  for  good  "  that  God  sent  the  captive
portion  of  his  people  "  into  the  land  of  the  Chaldeans  "  (ver.  6.)  The  germs  of  the
better  life  of  the  future  were  preserved  in  them,  and  their  very  tribulations  were  the
instruments  of  his  gracious  purpose  and  blessings  in  disguise.  In  the  **  evil  figs  " — the
refuse  left  behind — there  was  nothing  worth  preserving  (ver.  8).  Of  all  the  beneficent
Divine  purposes,  this  had  in  it  the  promise  of  highest  good — "  I  will  give  them  an  heart
to  know  me,  that  I  am  the  Lord."

I.  A  TBUB  KNOWLEDQE  OF  GOD  HAS  ITS  SEAT  IN  THE  HEABT.      Intellect  CanUOt  SOlve

the  mystery  of  his  being.  Reason  alone  cannot  even  demonstrate  his  existence.
*'  Who  by  searching  can  find  out  God  ?  "  "  The  world  by  wisdom  knew  not  God."  It
is  a  matter  of  piu'e  spiritual  sensibility.  Moral  sympathy  is  the  true  key  to  this
knowledge.  Reverence,  humility,  love,  trust,  submission,  affections  of  the  heart,  are  its
conditions.  Even  right  ideas  of  God  depend  very  materially  on  the  state  of  the  heart
towards  him.  The  exhalations  of  a  vain,  frivolous,  corrupt,  or  carnal  heart  pervert  the
soul's  vision  and  obscure  his  glory.  Only  as  our  hearts  are  purged  from  every  form  of
earthly  defilement  can  we  behold  him  as  he  is.  "  Blessed  are  the  pure  in  heart :  for
they  shall  see  God."

n.   Gk)D  HIMSELF  CAN  ALONE  DfPABT  THIS  KNOWLEIKJB.      "  I  will  give  them,"  CtC.     It

is  a  matter  of  direct  Divine  revelation ;  a  Divine  science  in  which  mere  human  teaching
is  of  little  avail.  A  secret,  silent,  gracious  power  above  all  natural  influences  can
alone  awaken  in  us  those  moral  affections  which  lie  at  the  root  of  it.  A  true  know-
ledge, like  a  true  Christian  faith,  must  stand  *'  not  in  the  wisdom  of  men,  but  in  the
power  of  (^od."  The  blindness  of  the  man  of  science  to  the  deeper  meaning  of  nature,
and  of  the  sceptical  philosopher  to  the  manifestation  of  GKxi  in  Christ,  and  of  the
worldling  to  the  Divine  presence  in  his  own  life,  does  but  indicate  llie  lack  of  this
power.  Gt)d  must  unveil  himself  to  us,  by  drawing  our  hearts  into  lowly  and  loving
fellowship  with  himself,  before  we  can  truly  know  him. — W.

Vers.  1 — 10. — The  good  and  lad  figs,  1,  Consideb  the  figs  oeneballt.  We
cannot,  of  course,  say  why  figs  should  be  chosen  rather  than  another  fruit,  though  the
choice  can  hardly  be  a  mere  accident.  Some  reason  probably  appeared  to  the  observant
of  that  time  which  we  are  without  sufficient  information  to  discover.  Possibly  the
goodness  of  good  fruits  was  more  obvious  against  the  badness  of  bad  ones,  in  the  case
of  the  fig  than  in  the  case  of  other  fruits.  It  is  to  be  noticed  also  that  the  figure
chosen  to  set  forth  the  difference  between  the  good  and  the  bad  in  Israel  is  taken  from
fruit.  It  was  something  presented  as  the  result  of  growth  and  in  connection  with
culture.  The  question  was  suggested  how  such  a  difference  should  come  between  the
good  and  the  bad.  For  if  trees  of  the  same  sort  grow  in  the  same  soil  and  have  the
same  attention,  and  the  same  external  influences,  how  comes  some  of  the  fruit  to  be
very  good  and  some  very  bad  ?  Notice  also  the  sharpness  of  the  distinction.  These
fruits  were  either  good  or  bad.  To  be  excluded  from  one  is  to  be  included  in  the
other.  There  is  no  third,  no  medium  class.  This  exactly  agrees  with  the  way  of
speaking  in  the  New  Testament,  especially  by  Jesus  himself:  e,g.  the  seed  in  the  good
and  bad  ground,  the  sheep  and  goats,  the  good  kinds  of  fish  and  the  bad  ones,  the
five  wise  and  the  five  foolish  virgins.    It  is  of  the  first  importance  to  bear  in  mind


548  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  xxv.  1—3

that  the  imperceptible  gradations,  as  we  reckon  them,  count  for  nothing  with  Go
There  are  only  two  kinds  of  hearts,  the  good  and  the  bad.

II.  Consider  the  blessings  on  that  class  in  Isbael  set  fobth  by  the  good  fic
Painful  exterDal  experiences  cannot  destroy  the  blessing  coming  from  satisfactoi
internal  character.  These  people  represented  by  the  good  figs  mijijht  say,  "  If  we  a
indeed  as  good  figs,  why  make  us  pass  through  such  pains?"  To  this  it  might  1
answered,  in  the  first  place,  that  it  was  because  of  this  very  goodness  that  God  thi
treated  them.  They  were  being  pruned  and  cleansed  that  they  might  bring  fori
more  fruit.  Secondly,  when  they  looked  on  the  fate  of  those  represented  by  the  bf
figs,  even  captivity  in  a  distant  land  would  be  seen  as  a  blessing.  God  bends  evei
word  that  he  here  speaks  through  his  prophet  so  as  to  form  a  total  of  strong  consolatic
and  hope.  1.  Though  these  people  are  called  captives  of  Judah,  yet  this  is  only  tl
conventional  mode  of  description.  In  reality,  Jehovah  himself  sends  them  into  tl
land  of  the  Glialdeans.  So  tfoseph  was  made  to  feel  that  it  was  God  who  had  brougl
him  into  Egypt.  2.  God's  eye  is  upon  his  people  for  good.  That  which  God  sees  1
be  good  he  always  regards  for  gooii.  Whosoever  has,  to  him  is  given  more.  Not
too,  that  the  people  were  not  merely  remembered,  as  if  God  had  stayed  behind  i
the  land  of  Israel.  He  was  equally  in  Israel  watching  over  it  against  the  day  of  h
people's  return,  and  in  the  land  of  the  Chaldeans  watching  over  his  faithful  ones  ther
3.  There  is  to  be  in  due  time  a  restoration.  He  who  sends  away  can  also  bring  baci
The  external  circumstances  of  his  people  are  completely  under  his  control.  He  wi
speaking  to  those  in  whose  history  was  written  down  all  the  marvellous  things  of  tb
Exodus  from  Egypt.  4.  There  is  to  be  a  Divine  building  and  planting.  What  othei
had  built  Qod  had  pulled  down,  what  others  had  planted  he  had  uprooted.  Ever
plant  not  of  the  heavenly  Father's  planting  must  be  rooted  up.*  All  this  was  done,  nc
for  any  delight  God  took  in  the  ruin  and  the  wilderness,  but  that  a  nation  might  I:
built  up  in  righteousness,  and  bring  forth  only  good  fruit.  5.  The  giving  of  a  tru
knowledge  of  God.  God  must  give  this  knowledge,  for  it  can  only  come  to  a  rencwe
heart  The  mere  exhibition  of  GKkI's  name  and  person  to  the  natural  man  is  nc
enough.  There  may  be  very  elaborate  intellectual  conceptions  of  Deity  without  tfa
slightest  profit  or  comfort.  When  the  renewed  heart  begins  to  know,  then  Gt)d  begin
to  be  truly  known.  His  love  must  not  only  be  set  before  us,  but  must  be  shed  abroa
in  our  hearts  by  the  Holy  Spirit  given  to  us.

III.  The  cubse  on  those  set  forth  by  the  bad  figs.  There  is  the  greatest  poi
Bible  contrast  between  the  treatment  of  good  fruit  and  bad  fruit.  And  so  there  was  tb
greatest  possible  contrast  between  the  treatment  of  the  people  taken  to  Babylon  an
the  treatment  of  those  remaining  at  home  and  nearer  home.  Upon  the  surface  and  n
the  first  aspect  it  might  seem  as  if  these  latter  had  the  best  of  it.  And,  inde^^  thei
might  be  no  immediate  way  of  making  clear  the  dififerencc.  But  a  difference  thei
assuredly  was,  and  every  succeeding  year  would  manifest  and  emphasize  it  the  more.  I
the  mean  time  here  stood  the  contrast  between  the  good  and  bad  figs,  which  would  b
quite  enough  for  the  eye  of  faith.  How  the  history  of  the  Jewish  people  justifies  th
bitter  words  of  vers.  9  and  10 1  Again  and  again  the  Gentile  has  treated  the  Je^
according  to  the  words  of  this  prophecy,  and  found  in  them  and  similar  words  a  justifi
cation  of  his  treatment.  Not,  of  course,  that  the  prophecy  did  really  justify  the  treat
ment,  but  God  could  speak  beforehand  of  the  way  in  which  human  passions  woul<
assuredly  work. — Y.

EXPOSITION.


CHAPTEB  XXV.

This  chapter  may  be  illustrated  by  a
comparison  of  it  with  ch.  xlvL  There  Jere-
miah exults  over  the  destruction  of  a  nation
(Egypt)  which  was  one  of  the  chief  enemies
of  God's  people,  and  on  hearing  or  reading
the  inspired  eloquence  of  the  prophet  the


heart  of  a  Jew  could  not  but  be  moved  wit'
the  liveliest  sympathy.  But  it  is  anothe
strain  which  meets  us  in  this  chapter,  an<
one  which  to  a  Jew  would  certainly  neutral
ize  the  favourable  feelings  which  prophecie
like  that  referred  to  must  have  awakened
Here  Jej^miah  announces  that  the  las
moment  of  grace  for  Judah  is  past,  and  thi


cu.  XXV.  1—38.]  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.


649


time  for  judgment  oome.  The  long-suffering
of  Jehovah  has  been  exhausted ;  the  fall  of
the  commonwealth  cannot  any  longer  be
delayed.  Such  was  the  strange  destiny  of
the  prophet ;  he  was  sent  to  "  pull  down  "
and  *'  to  build,"  but  the  destructive  element
(as  ch.  i.  10  suggests)  was  largely  predomi-
nant. Specially  predominant  is  it  in  this
important  chapter,  in  which  the  prophet
begins  to  fulfil  the  mission  to  the  heathen
with  which  twenty-three  years  ago  he  had
been  entrusted.  One  by  one,  *'all  the
nations"  directly  or  indirectly  connected
with  Israel  are  called  up  to  hear  their
punishment  There  is  no  indulgence,  no
respite  ;  only  a  gleam  of  hope  in  the
promised  final  destruction  of  the  tyrant-
city  Babylon  (vers.  12—14).  The  prophecy
falls  naturally  into  three  parts,  vers.  15—29
forming  the  centre.  The  date  assigned  to
this  chapter  in  the  first  verse  is  remarkable :
it  is  the  fatal  year  of  the  battle  of  Oar-
chemish,  which  brought  Syria  and  Palestine
within  the  grasp  of  Babylon.

Yer.  1.— The  flnt  year  of  Kebnehadrenar
(comp.  2  Kings  xxiv.  12;  xxv.  8;  ch.  liL
12:  xxxiL  1).

Yer.  3.— From  th»  thirteenth  year;  etc. ;
alluding  to  the  chronological  statement  in
ch.  L  2.  The  three  and  twentieth  year;
counting  ninete>.'n  years  under  Josiah  and
four  under  Jehoiachin,  and  including  the
three  months  of  Jehoahaz.

Vers.  4,5. — (Gomp.  ch.  vii.  25 ;  xi.  7;  xxxv.
15.)  They  said;  literallv,  taying.  The  pro-
phet mentally  resumes  the  statement  of  ver.
4,  "He  hath  sent  his  servants  the  prophets."
Turn  ye ;  rather,  return  ye^  conversion  being
the  return  of  the  sinner  to  his  natural  home.

Yer.  9.— The  fiunilies  of  the  north  (oomp.
ch.  i.  15,  note).  And  Kebnehadrenar  the
king  of  Babylon,  my  servant.  This  is  the
rendering  of  the  Targum,  the  Syriac,  and
the  Yulgate,  and  corresponds  with  the  read-
ing of  a  few  extant  manuscripts.  The  re-
ceived text,  however,  reads,  ''and  unto
Nebuchadrezzar,"  etc.  Neither  reading  is
satisfactory.  The  latter  one  is  intolerably
harsh ;  the  former  makes  Nebuchadrezzar  a
mere  adjunct  of  the  tribes  of  the  north.  In
the  other  passaj^es,  moreover,wheTe  this  king
is  solemnly  entitled  **my  servant,"  the  clause
id  the  most  prominent  one  in  the  sentence
(see  ch.  xxvii.  6 ;  xliii.  10).  The  words  in
question  have  a  sort  of  family  resemblance
to  the  glosses  which  meet  us  occasionally
both  in  the  form  of  the  Hebrew  text  repre-
pented  by  the  Mnssoretio  recension,  and
those  by  the  principal  ancient  versions.  The


words  are  omitted  by  the  Septnagint.  Hj
servant.  Generally  to  be  a  •*  servant "  of
Jehovah  or  of  any  supposed  deity  is  to  be
a  worshipper.  Thus  Daniel  is  called  by
Darius,  "  servant  of  the  living  God  "  (Dan.
vi.  20),  and  thus  Abdallah,  **  servant  of
Allah,"  has  become  a  favourite  surname  of
the  followers  of  Mohammed.  In  the  Book
of  Jeremiah  itself  (xxx.  10;  xlvi.  27,  28),
and  in  Ezekiel  (xxxvii.  25),  **my  ser-
vant" is  the  form  in  which  Jehovah  ad-*
dresses  his  chosen  people ;  and  in  the  second
part  of  Isaiah  the  suffering  Messiah  is  so
styled.  Here,  however,  a  foreign  king  is
thus  entitled.  How  is  this  to  l)e  explained  ?
Cyrus,  no  doubt,  in  Isa.  xliv.  28,  xlv.  1,  is
called  **  my  shepherd "  and  "  my  anointed
one ; "  but  then  Cyrus,  in  the  view  of  the
prophet,  was  a  genuine  though  nnconsciouB
worshipper  of  Uie  true  Qoa  (Isa.  xli.  25%
whereas  Nebuchadrezzar  was  known  to  be  a
polytheist  and  an  idolater.  We  must,  there*
fore,  take  *'  servant "  to  be  applied  to  Nebn«
ohadrezzar  in  a  lower  sense  than  to  the  other
bearers  of  the  title.  The  Hebrew  *ebhedj
in  fact,  may  be  either  *'  slave  "  in  something
approaiching  to  the  terrible  modem  sense,  or
in  the  sense  in  which  EUiezer  was  one  (t.e.
little  less  than  a  son,  and  a  possible  heir.
Gen.  xxiv.  2 ;  Gal.  iv.  1),  and  which  is  still
in  full  force  in  Arabia.  An  astoniahmtnt
(see  on  ch.  ii.  11).  An  hisiing  (oomp.  ch.
xviii.  16 ;  xix.  8).

Yer.  10.— The  sonnd  of  the  millitonet.
Modem  travel  enables  us  (so  conservative  is
the  East)  to  realize  the  full  force  of  this
image.  The  hand-mill  is  composed  of  two
stones.  As  a  rule,  **two  women  (comp.  Matt,
xxiv.  41)  sit  at  it  facine  each  other;  both
have  hold  of  the  handle  oy  which  the  upper
is  turned  round  on  the  *  nether '  millstone.
The  one  whose  right  hand  is  disengaged
throws  in  the  grain  as  occasion  reouircs,
tlirough  the  hole  in  the  upper  stone  **  (Dr.
Thomson).  **The  labour,**  remarks  Dr.
Robinson,  ^  is  evidently  hard ;  and  the
grating  sound  of  the  mill  is  heard  at  a  dis-
tance, indicating  (like  our  ooffee-mills)  the
presence  of  a  family  and  of  household  life  **
(*  BibUcal  Researches,'  ii.  181).  Add  to  this
the  light  of  the  oandle  (or  rather,  lamp),  and
we  have  two  of  the  most  universally  cha-
racteristic signs  of  domestic  life.  No  family
oould  dispense  with  the  hand-mill,  and,  as
the  sermon  on  the  mount  implies,  the
poorest  household  had  its  "  lamp  (Matt.  ▼.
15 — the  poverty  of  the  family  is  indicated
by  the  various  uses  to  which  tne  lamp-stand
was  applied).  Oomp.  this  verse  with  the  imi-
tation in  Rev.  xviii.  22,  23.

Yer.  11. — Shall  serve  the  king  of  Babylon
seventy  years.  Widely  different  opinions
are  held  as  to  the  meaning  of  this  prophecy.
The  most  probable  view  is  that  "  seventy  "


650


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch,  xxv.  1—38,


is  an  indefinite  or  round  number  (as  in  Isa.
xxiiL  17),  equivalent  to  "  a  very  long  time."
This  is  supported  by  the  analogy  of  oh.  xxvii.
7,  wbero  the  captivity  is  announced  as  last-
ing through  the  reigns  of  Nebuchadrezzar,
his  son,  and  his  grandson — a  statement  evi-
dently vague  and  indefinite  (see  ad  loc.),
and  in  any  case  not  answering  to  a  period  of
seventy  years.  Besides,  we  find  the  **  seventy
years"  again  in  ch.  xxix.  10,  a  passage
■written  probably  eleven  years  later.  Others
think  the  numoer  is  to  be  taken  literally,
and  it  is  certainly  true  that  from  b.o.  606,
the  fourth  year  of  Jeboiakim,  to  the  fall  of
Babylon,  b.o.  539,  sixty-seven  years  elapsed.
But  is  it  desirable  to  press  this  against  the
internal  evidence  that  Jeremiah  himself
took  the  number  indefinitely  ?

Vers.  12 — 29. — The  judgment  upon  Jndah
and  the  nations.

Yer.  12.— Perpetual  desolations.  Thus,  too,
we  read  in  Isa.  xiii.  20,  that  Babylon  '*  shall
never  be  inhabited."      There  is  a  dispute
between  Dr.  Keith  and  Dr.  Kay  on  the  one
side,  and    rationalistic  commentators  (e.g.
Kuenen)  on  the  other,  whether  these  pro-
phecies have  received  a  circumstantial  fulfil-
ment.   The  truth  is  that  authorities  are  not
entirely  agreed  on  the  area  covered  by  the
site  of  Babylon.    General  Ghesney  remarks
that,  BO  far  from  being  uninhabited,  "  A  town
of  considerable   population,  villages,  date
groves,  and  gardens,  are  found  still  on  the
very  site  of  ancient  Babylon  "  (extracts  from
a  private  letter  in  B.  W  .  Nowton*s  *  Baby-
lon :  its  Revival  and  Final  Desolalioni'  pp.
88 — 42).    Similarly  M.   Menant,  a  veteran
French  Assyriologist,  remarks  that  **  Hillah,
according  to  M.  Opport,  was  a  quarter   of
Babylon,  probably  that  which  was  inhabited
by  the  working  population,  without  the  pre-
emcts  of  the  royal  palaces.  Numberless  traces
of  ancient  habitations  indicate  this  origin  of
the  modem  town  "  (*  Babylone,*  p.  177).  Mr.
George  Smith,  however,  in  his  'At<syrian
Ditcoveries.*  simply  states  that,  **A  little
to  the  south  rose  the  town  of  Hillah,"  ap-
parently assuming  (what  is  impossible  to
prove,  as  the  walls  of  Babylon   have  not
yet  been  discovered)  that  Hillah  lay  just
outside  the  city  enclosure.  But  even  he  adds
that  it  was  "  built  with  the  bricks  found  in
the  old  capital,"  which  is,  strictly  speaking,
inconsistent  with  the  absolute  abandonment
of  the  site  of  Babylon  implied  in  Isa.  xiii.
20 — 22.    The  dispute  is  an  unfortunate  one,
as  it  tacitly  implies  that  circumstantiil  ful-
filments are   necessary   to   the  veracity  of
prophecy.     The  truth  seems  to  lie  in  the
mean  between  two  opposing  views.    As  a
rule,  the  details  of  a  prophetic  description
cannot  be  pressed ;  they  are  mainly  imagina-
tive  elaborations  of  a  groat  central  truth  or
fact    Occasionally,  however,  regarding  the


prophecies  in  the  light  of  gospel  times,  it
IS  almost  impossible  not  to  observe  that
**the  Spirit  of  Ohrist  which  was  in"  the
prophets  (1  Pet.  i.  11)  has  overruled  their
expressions,  so  that  they  correspond  more
closelv  to  facts  than  could  have  been  rea-
sonably anticipated.  Such  superabundant
fiivours  to  believers  in  inspiration  oocur  re-
peatedly in  the  prophecies  respecting  Christ.
They  may,  of  course,  occur  elsewhere  for  a
sufficient  reason,  but  we  have  no  right  to  be
surprised  if  we  do  not  meet  with  them.  The
general  truth  of  the  prophecy  is  that  the
empire  of  Babylon  shall  fall  for  ever.  As
Dr.  Payne  Smith  remarks,  it  was  practically
the  work  of  one  man  (Nebuchadrezzar),  and
after  his  death  it  only  lasted  for  a  few  vears,*
during  which  its  history  is  a  series  of  mur-
ders and  usurpations.

Yer.  13.— And  I  will  bring,  etc.  Clearly
this  verse  cannot  have  formed  part  of  the
original  prophecy,  but  must  have  been  added
whenever  the  collection  of  prophecies  against
foreign  nations  finally  assumed  its  present
form  (see  introduction  on  ch.  L,  li.).  It
should  be  mentioned  that  the  Septua^nt
sejparates  the  last  clause  of  the  verse,  ^  that
which  Jeremiah  prophesied,"  etc.,  and  makes
it  the  heading  of  the  group  of  prophecies
against  the  nations,  which  in  the  Hebrew
Bible  stand  at  the  end  of  Jeremiah's  pro-
phecies, but  which,  beginning  with  '*  Elain,"
the  Alexandrian  Version  Inserts  at  this
point.

Yer.  14. — For  many  nations  .  .  .  shall
serve  themselves  of  them  also;  i.e.  put
forced  labour  upon  them  also.  The  same
phrase  is  used  of  the  conduct  of  the
Egyptians  to  the  Israelites  (Exod.  i.  14).
0/  them  aho;  and  '*also"  suggests  that
the  calamity  of  the  Chaldeans  is  a  retri-
bution (comp.  Isa.  Ixvi.  4),  as  the  next
clause,  in  harmony  with  ch.  1.  29,  IL  24,
emphatically  declares.

Yer.  15. — For  thus  saith,  etc.  Out  of
this  verse  and  the  following,  to  the  end  of
the  chapter,  the  Septuagint  makes  the
thirty-second  chapter,  ch.  xxv.  being  com-
pleted by  the  prophecy  a^mst  Elam  (ch.
xlix.  34— 39).  The  symbolic  act  which  the
prophet  is  directed  to  perform  is  mentioned
in  order  to  explain  the  word  of  threatening
just  uttered.  So,  at  least,  we  must  under-
stand it,  if  we  accept  the  arrangement  of
the  Hebrew  text.  But  the  connection  is
certainly  improved  if  we  follow  Graf,  and
omit  vers.  11  h — 14  ;  ver.  15  thus  becomes
an  explanation  of  the  threat  against  Judah
and  the  other  nations  in  vers.  9 — 11  a.
The  wine-onp  of  this  fury ;  or,  thit  wine-cup
of  fury.  The  wine  with  which  the  cup
is  filled  is  the  wrath  of  Gk)d.  The  figure
is  not  an  un frequent  ono  with  the  prophets
and  the  psalmists  (comp.  ch.  xlix.  12 ;  li.  7 ;


CH.  XXV.  1—38.]  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.


651


Isa.  li.  17,22;  Ezek.  xxiii.  31— 34;    Hab.
iL16;  Ps.  lx.3;  Ixxv.  8).

Yer.  16. — And  be  moved,  and  be  mad;
rather,  and  reel  to  and  fro,  and  behave
ihemselvei  madly.  The  inspired  writers  do
not  scruple  to  ascribe  all  phenomena,  the
*«bad"  as  well  as  the  ^good,"  to  a  Divine
operation.  **  Shall  there  be  evil  in  a  city,
and  Jehovah  hath  not  done  it  ?  "  (Amos  iii
6).  '*  An  evil  spirit  from  Elohim  came  upon
Saul,  and  ho  became  firenzied  '*  (1  Sam.  xviii.
10 ;  see  also  Isa.  xix.  14 ;  xxix.  10 ;  1  Kings
xxii.  19 — 23,  and  especially  the  very  remarK-
able  prologue  of  the  Book  of  Job).  To  un-
derstand Uiis  form  of  expression,  we  must
remember  the  strength  of  the  reaction
experienced  by  the  prophets  against  the
po^theism  of  the  surrounding  nations.  It
was  not  open  to  them  to  account  fur  the
existence  of  evil  b^  ascribing  it  to  the  ac-
tivity of  various  divinities ;  they  knew  Je-
hovah to  be  the  sole  cause  in  the  universe.
To  us,  **  sicklied  o*er  with  the  pale  cast  of
thought,"  such  a  doctrine  occasions  '*  great
eearcnings  of  heart,"  and  is  sometimes  a
Bore  trial  of  our  faith.  But  the  prophets
were  not  logicians,  and  their  faith,  compared
to  ours,  was  as  an  oak  tree  to  a  sapling ;
hence  they  can  generally  (see,  however,
Isa.  Ixiii.  17)  express  the  truth  of  the  uni-
versal causation  of  Jehovah  with  perfect
tranquillity.  Beoaiue  of  the  sword.  Here
Jeremiah  deserts  the  figure  of  the  cup,  and,
as  most  commentators  think,  uses  the  lan-
guage of  fact.  It  is  not,  however,  certain
that  *'the  sword"  means  that  of  God's
human  instruments;  Jehovah  himself  has
a  sword  (ch.  xlvi.  10 ;  xlvii.  6 ;  1.  35—38 ;
Isa.  xxvii.  1 ;  xxxiv.  5 ;  and  elsewhere),  just
as  he  has  a  hand  (Isa.  viii.  11 ;  lix.  1)  and
an  arm  (Isa.  xl.  10 ;  liii.  1).  All  these  belong
to  a  group  of  childlike  symbolic  expressions
for  the  manifestation  of  toe  Deity,  tfehovah's
"  sword  "  is  described  more  fully  in  Gen.  iii.
24 ;  it  '*  turns  hither  and  thither,"  like  the
lightning — a  striking  figure  of  the  com-
pleteness with  which  God  performs  his  work
of  vengeance  (see  also  on  ver.  27).

Yer.  17.— Then  took  I  the  onp  .  .  .  and
made  all  tiie  nations  to  drink.  It  is  too  pro-
saic to  suppose  either  that  Jeremiah  made
a  journey  to  **  all  the  nations,"  or  that  he
actually  went  through  the  form  of  present-
ing the  cup  to  the  ambassadors  who  (it  is
conjectured,  comp.  ch.  xxvii.  3  h)  had  come
to  Jerusalem  to  take  measures  against  the
common  foe  (so  J.  D.  Michaelis).  But  the
supposition  arises  (as  Keil  has  well  observed)
out  of  an  imperfect  comprehension  of  the
figure.  It  is  not  a  cup  with  wine  which
the  prophet  receives  from  Jehovah,  but  a
wine-cup  filled  with  the  wine  of  God's  fury,
winch  wine  (one  may  add)  is  no  more  a
literal  wine  Uuin  the  **  sword  of  Jehovah  "


is  a  literal  sword.  The  **  making  all  the
nations  to  drink "  is  simply  a  way  of  ex-
pressing the  prophet's  firm  faith  that  the
word  of  Jehovah  will  not  "  return  unto  him
void " — that  a  propheoy  once  uttered  must
fulfil  itself;  and  **8ent  me,"  in  the  last
clause,  merely  means  '*  entrusted  me  with  a
message"  (comp.  Prov.  xxvi.  6).  For  the
fulfilment  of  this  detailed  prediction,  see  on
ch.  xlvL — li.

Yer.  18.— The  kings  thereof  (see  on  ch.
xix.  3).  As  it  is  this  day.  As  to  the  meaning
of  this  phrase,  see  on  oh.  xi.  5.  The  words
evidently  presuppose  that  the  prediction
has  already  been  fulfilled  (comp.  en.  xliv.  6,
23) ;  consequently,  they  cannot  have  stood
here  in  the  original  draft  of  the  prophecy.
An  early  editor,  or  even  Jeremiah  himself,
must  have  inserted  them.  They  are  omitted
in  the  Septuagint.

Yer.  19.— Fharaoh  king  of  Egypt.  After
leaving  Jndah  and  Jerusalem,  the  prophet
turns  to  the  far  south — to  Egypt;  tnen  ho
ascends  to  the  south-east  (Uz),  and  the
south-west  (the  Philistines);  thence  he
passes  to  the  east  (Edom,  Moab,  Ammon) ;
and  thence  to  the  west  of  the  Holy  Lrfind
(PhcDnicia).  This  suggests  the  maritime
lands  "beyond  the  sea"  (including  espe-
cially Cyprus) ;  a  sudden  transition  brings
the  prophet  to  the  Arabian  tribes  (Dedan,
etc.),  from  whence  he  passes  by  the  road  of
the  north-east  (Elam,  Media)  to  the  indefi-
nitely distant  north.  Last  of  all,  in  solitary
grandeur  or  infamy,  Babylon  is  mentioned.

Yer.  20. — The  mingled  people;  Septua-
gint, K<d  irdyras  rohs  avfifjdKrovs :  Yulgate,  et
universoa  generaXiUr.  The  Hebrew  ^erebh
probably  means,  not  ^* mingled  [t.0.  'motley']
people,"  as  the  Authorized  version,  but
"foreign  people,"  i.c.  a  body  of  men  be-
lon^ng  to  some  particular  nation  intermixed
or  interspersed  among  those  belonging  to
another.  This  explanation  will  account  for
the  use  of  the  word  in  all  the  passages  in
which  it  occurs  (here  and  in  ver.  24 ;  also
Exod.  xii.  38 ;  Neh.  xiii.  3 ;  *  1  Kings  x.
15;  oh.  1.  37;  Ezek.  xxx.  5;.  and  perhaps
2  Chron.  ix.  14).  The  context;  here  and  in
1  Kings  X.  15  seems  to  imply  that  the  name
was  given  especially  to  the  tribes  (probably
Bedawin  tribes)  on  the  frontier  of  Judah
towards  the  desert,  though  in  Ezek.  xxx.  5
it  is  evidently  applied  to  a  people  which
in  some  sense  belonged  to  Egypt.  In
Exod.  xii.  38  it  may  be  doubted  whether
the  phrase  is  used  uom  the  point  of  view
of  Egypt  or  of  the  Israelites;  in  ch.  1.  87  it

*  In  Exodus  and  Nehemiah  the  word  is
pointed  *ere&^  (with  cere  instead  of  »egh6l\
out  no  one  will  think  of  denying  that  the
word  is  tho  same  as  in  Jeremiah,  Ezekiel,
and  1  Kings.


552


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  xxv.  1— ^


is  used  of  the  forei^ers  in  Babylon  in  2
ChroD.  ix.  14  the  Massoretio  critics  have
pointed  the  consonants  of  the  text  wrongly
Qardbhf  Arabia,  instead  of  *erebh),  but
without  injury  to  the  sense;  the  Vul^te
and  Syriao  have  done  the  same  in  1  Kings
X.  15.  The  notion  that  the  word  means
*  auxiliary  troops  "  arises  (as  Thenius  on  1
Kings  X.  15  remarks)  from  the  free  rendering
of  the  Targum  at  1  Kings  x.  15  and  ch.  1.
37.  TTs.  The  land  associated  with  the  name
of  Job,  and  probably  east  or  south-east  of
Palestine,  and  adjacent  to  the  Edomites  of
Mount  Seir  (Lam.  iv.  21).  Of  the  PhillBtines.
Obserre,  Gath  is  alone  omitted  of  the  five
Philistine  towns  (Josh.  xiii.  3 ;  1  Sam.  yi.
17).  It  had  been  reduced  to  complete  in-
significance  (Amos  vi  2),  through  Uzziah's
having  "  broken  down  "  its  walls  (2  Chron.
xxvi.  6),  and  is  equally  passed  over  in
Amos  (i.  6 — 8),  Zephaniah  (it  4),  and
Zechariah  (ix.  5,  6).  Anah;  i.e.  Gaza,
the  Soptuagint  form  (the  G  representing
the  initial  ayin),  which  is  everywhere  else
adopted  by  the  Authorized  Version.  The
remnant  of  Ashdod.  A  significant  phrase,
which  can  bo  explained  from  Herodotus  (ii.
157) :  For  twenty -nine  years  Psamnutiohus
"  pressed  the  siege  of  AzOtus  without  inter-
mission.'' We  can  imagine  that  he  would  not
be  disposed  to  lenient  dealings  with  the  town
upon  its  capture.  (An  earlier  and  shorter
siego  of  Ashdod  is  mentioned  in  Isa.  xx.)

Ver.  22.— Kings  of  Tyros  .  .  .  king!  of
Zidon.  Under  the  names  of  the  two  leading
cities,  thf  prophet  includes  the  various  de-
pendent Phoenician  commonwealths.  Hence
the  pluml  "  kings."  The  isles.  The  Hebrew
has  the  singular,  **  the  isle,"  or  rather,  "  the
ooast-land  '*  (more  strictly,  the  region\  i.e.
perhaps  either  Tartessus  in  Spain,  or  Cyprus
(which  Esarhnddon  describes  as  **  lying  in
the  midst  of  the  sea,"  and  as  having  two
kinprs,  *  Records  of  the  Past,*  iii.  108).

Ver.  23. — Dedan,  and  Tema,  and  Bos.
Three  tribes  of  North  Arabia,  bordering  on
Edom.  The  two  former  are  mentioned  as
commercial  peoples  in  Isa.  xxi.  13, 14 ;  Ezek.
xxvii.  15,  20 ;  xxxvili.  13;  Job  vi.  19.  Elihu,
Job's  youngest  friend,  was  of  Buz  (Job  xxxii.
2).  All  that  are  in  the  utmost  comers;
rather,  aU  the  comer-clipped  (see  on  ch.
ix.  26).

Ver.  24.— All  the  kings  of  Arabia.  Not
"  Arabia"  in  our  sense  T  which  is  never  found
in  the  Old  Testament),  but  the  desert  region
to  the  east  and  south-east  of  Palestine,  oc-
cupied by  nomad  or  "  Ishmat  litiuh  "  tribes.
The  mingled  people ;  rather,  the  intermingled
people  (see  on  ver.  20) ;  i.e.  probably  in  this
passage  populations  of  a  different  race  in-
terspersed among  the  Aramaic  tribes  to
which  ro(>st  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  desert
belonged.


Ver.  25. — Zimri  The  Zimri  were  a  peop
to  the  north-east  of  Assyria,  against  who
various  Assyrian  kings  waged  war  (Tmn
actions  of  the  Society  of  Biblical  Arcfueolog
1878,  pp.  13, 15,  34 ;  'Records  of  the  Paai
V.  41).  Whether  they  are  to  be  ooDDectc
with  the  Zimran  of  Gen.  xxv.  2  Been
doubtful ;  their  locality  hardly  suits.  Elsu
£lam,  one  of  the  most  ancient  monarehii
in  the  world  (comp.  Gen.  xiv.),  is  agai
coupled  witli  Media  in  Isa.  xxL  2.  It  ws
a  region  on  the  east  of  the  lower  Tigrh
bounded  westward  by  Babylonia,  northwai
by  Assyria  and  Media,  southward  by  tfa
Persian  Gulf.  To  say  that  it  is  put  eithc
here  or  anywhere  else  in  the  Old  Testamei
for  the  whole  of  Persia  seems  a  mistake,  a
the  Persians  were  hardly  known  before  th
time  of  Cyrus.

Ver.  26.— The  king!  of  the  nortli.    Th

distant,  mysterious  north.     Far  and  mtm

one  with  another.    The  Hebrew  has,  *'  tb

near  and  tho  for,  the  one  to  the  other ; "  tu

whether  near  or  far  in  relation  to  GBtch.  othei

for  of  course  with  regard  to  Judah  they  wer

all  *<  the  far  north."  All  the  kingdoms  of  tfa

world,  etc.    This  is  far  from  being  the  onl;

instance  in  which  a  special  judgment  upcM

a  nation  or  nations  is  apparently  identifier

with  a  great  final  judgment  upon  the  worU

(see  Isa.  iL  12 ;  iii.  13 ;  xiii.  9 ;  xxiv.  1 — 12J

The  truth  is  that  every  great  self-manifesta

tion  of  the  Divine  Governor  of  the  world  i

a  fresh  act  in  that  great  drama  of  which  th(

universal  judgment  will  be  the  close.  Heno

the  prophets,  whose  perspective  was  necea

sarily  limited,  seeing  the  end  but  not  al

that  was  to  precede  it,  speak  as  if  the  enc

were  nearer  at  hand  than  it  really  was.  Tfai

king  of  Sheshaoh,  etc.  This  clause,  however

is  omitted  in  the  Septuagint,  and  is  too  maoi

festly  the  insertion  of  an  unwise  copvisi

or  editor.     For,  though  perfectly  true  tnai

Babylon  was  to  suffer  punishment    uft^r

wards,  it  is  most  inappropriate  to  mention  il

here  at  the  end  of  a  list  of  the  nations  which

Babylon  itself  was  to  punish.  '*  Sheshach."  it

should  be  explained,  is  the  form  assumed  bj

the  word  **  Babylon  "  in  the  cypher  called

Athbash  ( A = T,  B = SH,  etc.).    It  happeni

to  convey  a  very  appropriate  meaning,  viz,

*' humiliation "  (comp.  Isa.   xlvii.   1).      A

similar  instance  of  cypher  allegory  oocora

in  ch.  li.  1.    "  Sheshach  "  occurs  again  in

ch.  li.  41,  where,  however,  it  is  omitted  by

the  Septuagint.     [Dr.  Lauth,  of  Munioh,

thinks    that    Shobhach    is    equivalent    to

Sisku,  the  name  of  a  district  in  Babylonia ;

but  tho  reading  Sisku  is  uncertain.   (See

Transactions  of  the  Society  of  Biblical  Arehm*

oloqy,  1881,  p.  48.)]

Yer.  27. — ^Therefore  thon  shalt  laj,  etc. ;
rather.  And  thou  shall  say,  etc.  This  verse  is
probably  a  continuation  of  vers.  16, 17,  vers.


cu.  XXV.  1—38.]  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.


553


18—26  beinfc  apparently  inserted  by  an  after-
thono^ht.  Tho  message  given  to  Jeremiah
to  deliver  is  that  the  judgment  is  both  over-
poweringly  complete  and  irreyersible.  If
Qod's  own  people  has  not  been  spared,  how
should  any  other  escape  (comp.  ch.  xlix.l2)  ?

Ycr.  29.— I  will  eall  for  a  sword.  It  is
probably  that  awful  sword  referred  to  in
ver.  16  (see  note).

Vers.  30—38. — The  judgment  upon  the
world.

Yer.  30. — Therefore  prophesy  fhon,  etc.
Babylon,  like  tho  smaller  kingdoms  which
it  absorbed,  has  fallen,  and  nothing  re-
mains (for  nothing  had  been  revealed  to  tho
prophet  concerning  an  interval  to  elapse
previously)  but  to  picture  the  great  assize
from  which  no  flesh  should  be  exempt  As
the  lion  suddenly  bursts,  roaring,  from  his
lair,  so  Jehovah,  no  longer  the  "  good  Shep-
herd,*' shall  roar  from  on  high  (comp.  Amos
i.  2 ;  Joel  iii.  16)  even  upon  hii  habitation,
or  rather,  agairut  hU  wuturej  where  his
flock  (ch.  xxiiL  1)  has  been  feeding  so  se-
curely. He  shall  give  a  ihont.  It  is  the
technical  term  used  at  once  for  the  vintage-
shout  and  for  the  battle-cry.  In  Isa.  zvi.  9,
10,  there  is  a  beautiful  Elusion  to  this  double
meaning,  and  so  perhaps  there  is  here
(comp.  ch.  IL  14).

Yer.  31. — A.  noiie.  The  word  is  used
elsewhere  for  the  tumultuous  sound  of  a
marching  army  (see  Isa.  xiii.  4 ;  xvii.  12).
He  will  plead ;  rather,  he  toill  hold  judgment
Jehovah's  **  contending  "  sometimes  involves
the  notion  of  punishing^  e.g,  Ezek.  xxxviii.
22;  Isa.  Ixvi.  16.  In  2  Chron.  xxii.  8,  the
same  verb  in  the  same  conjugation  is  forcibly
rendered  in  the  Authorized  Yersion,  ^to
execute  judgment"

Yer.  32. — A  great  whirlwind;  rather,  a
great  $torm  (as  ch.  xxiii.  19).  The  coasts  of
the  earth ;  rather,  the  furthest  parts  of  the
earth.  The  storm,  as  it  appears  on  the
horizon,  comes  as  it  were  from  the  ends  of
tho  earth ;  perhaps,  too,  there  is  an  allusion
to  the  distant  abode  of  tho  foe  (comp.  ch.
vi.  22).


Yer.  83. — ^The  slain  of  the  Lord ;  i.e.  those
slain  by  the  Lord,  as  Isa.  Ixvi.  16,  where  his
sword  is  further  spoken  of  as  the  agent  (see
on  ver.  16).  They  shall  not  be  Umented,
etc. ;  parallel  to  ch.  viiL  2 ;  xvi.  4.

Yer.  34. — ^Wallow  yourselves  in  the  ashes.
Supply  rather,  in  the  dust  (comp.  Micah  i.
10),  as  more  suitable  to  the  figure  (see  on
ch.  vi.  26).  The  shepherds,  and  the  prin-
cipal (or,  fioUe  ones)  of  the  flock,  are,  of
course,  merely  different  forms  of  expression
for  the  rulers.  The  days  of  your  slaughter
and  of  your  dispersions  are  aecompli^ed;
rather,  your  days  for  being  slaughtered  are
fulfilled  i  and  I  will  scatter  you  (or,  dash  you
in  pieces).  This  is  the  reading  of  an  old
and  valuable  manuscript  at  St.  Petersburg,
and  is  partly  favoured  by  the  pointing ;  it  vs
adopted  by  most  modem  critics,  the  form  in
the  text  being  ungrammatical.  Pleasant:
or,  precious  (comp.  Dan.  xL  8,  Authorized
Yersion).  Omparo  the  figure  in  ch.  xxii.  28.

Yers.  36,  37. — The  prophet  seems  in  his
spirit  to  hear  the  lamentation  to  which  in
ver.  34  he  sunmaoned  the  "  shepherds."  A
voice  of  the  cry  should  be.  Hark  !  the  cry
(omitting  "  shall  be  heard  ") ;  the  clause  is
an  exclamation.  Hath  spoiled;  rather,  is
spoiling  (or,  laying  waste).  The  peaceable
luibitations ;  rather,  ihe  peaceful  fields  (or,
pastures).  Are  cut  down;  rather,  are  da-
stroyed ;  literally,  are  hrimght  to  silenoe
(comp.  ch.  ix.  10).

Yer.  38.— Close  of  the  prophecy  with  a
fuller  enunciation  of  the  thought  with  which
tho  paragraph  was  introduced.  He  hath
forsaken ;  comp.  ver.  30,  and  notice  the  im-
pressive non-mention  of  the  subject  (as  ch.
IV.  13,  etc.).  Their  land;  i.e.  that  of  the
shepherds.  The  fierceness  of  the  oppressor.
A  various  reading,  supported  by  some  manu-
scripts, the  Septuagmt  and  tho  Tai^um,
and  accepted  by  Ewald,  Hitzig,  and  Uraf.
and  is  **the  oppressing  sword"  (so  oh.
xlvi.  16 ;  1.  16).  The  text  reading  is  very
difficult  to  defend,  and  the  punctuation
itself  is  really  more  in  favour  of  the  variant
than  of  the  received  text


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1 — 7. — A  melancholy  review  of  ixoenty-ihree  years  of  work,  L  The  character
OF  THE  WORKER.  A  three  and  twenty  years'  experience  furnishes  a  good  test  of  character.
tSo  long  a  time  is  quite  sufficient  to  eliminate  the  accidents  of  passion  and  temporary
enthusiasm,  and  to  bring  to  light  the  general  principles  of  a  man  s  conduct.  These  con-
stitute his  character;  they  reveal  the  true  features  of  him.  We  should  not  judge  a
man  by  his  latest  action,  perhaps  a  hasty  and  quite  uncharacteristic  one ;  to  be  fair,
not  to  say  charitable,  we  should  consider  the  whole  course  of  his  life.  To  know  our-
selves we  must  look  back  on  the  years  of  our  lives,  and  not  pass  a  superficial  judgment
on  our  present  mood.  Tho  character  of  Jeremiah,  revealed  by  the  test  of  twenty-three
years  of  work  under  the  most  harassing  circumstances,  is  worth  our  reverent  study.
Consider  the  salient  points  in  it :  1,  Fidelity^    All  this  time  he  was  working  as  God's


654  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  xxv.  1— »

servant,  in  opposition  to  the  spirit  of  the  age,  provoking  enmity,  calumny,  hatred.  Th
bearer  of  a  message  which  it  roust  have  been  a  pain  for  him  to  deliver,  a  message  c
denunciation  and  menace,  Jeremiah  boldly  declared  it  and  adhered  to  it,  in  spite  c
every  inducement  to  follow  the  fashion  of  the  prophets  of  flattery.  We  meet  wit
men  who  are  proud  of  representing  the  spirit  of  their  age.  Nothing  is  easier.  Nothin
is  more  simple  than  to  be  an  echo,  a  reflection,  a  mouthpiece  to  the  general  voice.  Th
difficulty  is  to  utter  a  contrary  voice,  not  out  of  stubbornness,  or  a  spirit  of  wilful  anta
gonism,  but  out  of  calm  fidelity  to  duty.  This  is  the  task  of  the  great.  2.  Peraever
ance.  For  three  and  twenty  years  Jeremiah  had  persisted  in  his  unpopular  course.  W(
know  that  he  continued  equally  staunch  for  many  more  years.  Here  is  the  great  tesi
It  is  possible  to  be  an  Elijah,  and  stand  alone  facing  the  howling  multitude  of  priests  am
slaves  of  Baal  in  one  supreme  moment  of  conflict  and  speedy  triumph,  and  yet  after  thi
to  flee  to  the  wilderness,  and  to  feel  unequal  to  the  task  of  constant  fidelity,  in  seasoi
and  out  of  season,  through  long  dreary  years,  Without  the  excitement  of  a  dramatic
scene  of  heroism,  worn  and  fretted  by  incessant,  petty,  spiteful  enmity.  Tet  this  wai
the  experience  of  Jeremiah.  3.  Eamestnesa.  "  I  have  spoken,"  he  says, "  rising  earlj
and  speaking."  The  prophet  is  not  a  passive  martyr,  nor  a  mere  confessor  who  darei
to  speak  out  his  conviction  when  it  is  directly  challenged.  He  goes  forth  on  a  missior
urging  his  mesii^e  upon  men.  He  is  a  model  preacher.  He  is  no  perfunctory  officia]
droning  through  a  dreary  task,  no  mere  professional  preacher,  honestly  discharging  hit
work,  but  with  little  interest  in  it,  like  a  hired  pleader.  His  heart  is  with  his  work,
He  has  an  end  in  view,  and  he  sets  himself  with  all  his  might  to  accomplish  it  In  ali
this  the  prophet  reveals  to  us  the  long-suflering  and  earnest  desire  of  Ood  to  deliver  hii
children.  All  this  while  GK)d  was  inspiring  Jeremiah,  as  he  had  inspired  a  successioD
of  prophets,  to  rouse  and  urge  the  people  to  repentance.

II.  The  results  of  the  work.  Apparent  failure.  "  Te  have  not  hearkened,  noi
inclined  your  ear  to  hear."  It  would  seem  that  all  this  labour,  earnestness,  persist-
ence, and  fidelity  had  been  so  much  wasted  work.  1.  The  preacher  must  not  be  bkimea
for  apparent fruitlessness.  No  greater  mistake  can  be  made  than  that  of  judging  a  man
by  the  manifest  eflect  of  his  work.  The  most  popular  preacher  is  not  necessarily  the
most  faithful  servant  of  GKxl.  The  unpopularity  and  seeming  failure  of  a  preacher  is
not  in  itself  a  reason  for  condemning  him.  No  fault  can  be  found  with  the  preaching
of  Jeremiah,  yet  it  was  not  successful.  Christ  spake  as  never  man  spake,  and  "  the
Pharisees  derided  him.*'  He  was  popular  for  a  season,  but  ultimately  "  all  men  forsook
him."  The  most  important  truths  may  be  the  least  popular.  2.  The  preacher  must
not  be  too  confident  in  expecting  time  to  reveal  the  fruits  of  his  work.  Twenty-three
vears  made  no  such  revelation  to  Jeremiah.  A  faithful  man  may  toil  on  through  the
long  night  of  a  whole  lifetime  of  difficulty,  and  die  without  seeing  the  results  of  hia
labour.  It  is  well  to  be  prepared  for  this  possibility.  3.  The  responsibility  of  righUy
receiving  a  Divine  message  rests  with  the  hearers.  We  are  always  lecturing  the  preachers.
**  Take  heed  how  ye  speal(."  Th^se  words  are  not  in  the  Bible.  Christ  was  more
anxious  about  the  hearers.  '*  Take  heed  how  ye  hear."  Of  course  the  preacher  has  his
high  responsibilities,  but  so  have  the  hearers.  The  poorest  sermon  of  a  good  man  who
is  trying  to  expound  Divine  truth  may  contain  something  of  profit  to  a  devout  listener,
who  is  more  anxious  to  receive  the  good  in  it  than  to  pass  a  barren  criticism  on  its
defects;  for  if  the  messenger  is  sadly  wanting,  and  his  language  and  thought  as  poor  aa
possible,  the  message  which  he  handles  so  badly  is  not  the  less  Gkxl's  truth.  But  if  the
preaching  of  a  Jeremiah,  of  a  Christ  even,  is  unheeded,  what  qualities  in  the  preacbei
can  command  success  with  an  unsympathiztng  audience  ?  4.  StiU  no  good  work  ulti-
mately/ails. Jeremiah  did  not  speak  for  nothing.  His  message  bore  good  fruit  with
many  of  the  captives — perhaps  with  Daniel.  Preserved  to  our  time,  it  has  been  a  bless-
ing to  generations.

Vers.  5,  6. — The  chief  purpose  of  prophecy.  Jeremiah  here  sums  up  the  genera]
purpose  not  only  of  his  own  mission — extending  now  over  twenty-three  years — but  oi
that  of  the  whole  series  of  Hebrew  prophets.  We  may  thus  see  the  one  great  bXtd
towards  which  all  their  labours  were  directed.

I.  pRoi'HECY  18  PRACTICAL.  Jercmiali's  summary  takes  the  form  of  an  exhortation.
The  prophets  were  preachers,  not  philosophers.    Their  aim  was  not  to  satisfy  cunosity


/


CH.  XXV.  1—33.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  565

but  to  affect  conduct.  In  this  they  are  an  example  to  all  preachers.  The  preacher's
duty  is  to  lead  men,  not  merely  to  teach  doctrines.  Still  the  exposition  of  truth  is
necessary  to  effect  this  end.  The  prophets  did  not  content  themselves  with  simple
exhortations  to  good  conduct.  These  exhortations  needed  the  enforcement  of  clear
conviction.  Their  authority  was  not  magisterial  (a  mere  command  of  superior  power)
nor  priestly  (an  influence  of  spiritual  rank  erected  on  unquestioning  faith),  but  reason-
able (the  authority  of  truth  seen  and  felt).  Hence  their  revelations  of  God  and  of  the
future.  Yet  these  were  all  given  for  a  practical  end.  The  preacher  should  make  his
most  abstract  expositions  of  truth  point  towards  some  course  of  conduct.

II.  Prophecy  is  a  call  to  bepentance.  This  urgent  call  rings  through  the  messages
of  all  the  prophets.  It  was  revived  by  John  the  Baptist  (Matt.  iii.  2),  adopted  by  our
Lord  (Matt.  iv.  XT')  and  his  apostles  (e,g,  St.  Peter,  Acts  ii.  38 ;  and  St.  Paul,  Acts
xvii.  30),  and  by  all  great  reformers,  such  as  Savonarola,  John  Knox,  John  Wesley,  etc

1.  Men  must  be  preached  to  about  their  ovm  condition  as  well  as  about  God's  will.  We
want  a  Divine  revelation  that  we  may  know  ourselves  just  as  much  as  that  we  may
know  God.    A  large  part  of  the  Bible  is  occupied  with  revelations  of  human  nature.

2.  Together  with  these  revelations  there  comes  the  call  to  turn  and  change.  The  result
of  the  exposure  of  mankind  to  itself  is  not  satisfactory.  This  exposure  alone  is  a  call
to  turn  from  our  evil  ways.  The  mere  exposure,  however,  is  of  little  use.  A  Juvenal
is  not  a  Jeremiah.  A  satirist  is  not  a  prophet.  There  must  be  the  call  to  a  better  life^
and  a  declaration  of  the  way  to  find  it.  3.  The  prophets  imply  that  men  not  only
need  to  change  but  can  change.  The  most  fundamental  change  of  heart  must  be
through  the  influence  of  God.  Yet  this  is  only  possible  when  men  freely  and  willingly
turn  to  him  in  repentance.  4.  The  special  sin  denounced  was  apostasy  from  Ood ;  the
special  repentance  called  for  was  a  return  to  God.  These  are  always  the  fundamental
elements  of  sin  and  repentance.

III.  Prophecy  is  a  voice  of  warning  and  op  promise.  Evil  is  denounced  to  the
impenitent ;  good  is  promised  to  the  penitent.  This  is  the  simplest  form  in  which  the
motives  to  repentance  can  be  put.  But  the  tracing  out  of  it  is  not  simple.  It  required
an  inspired  prophet  to  detect  the  seeds  of  ruin  in  riotous  prosperity  and  the  dawning  of
a  day  of  redemption  in  the  stormy  night  of  adversity.  The  prophets  not  only  detect
these  facts,  they  discern  the  principles  that  govern  them.  Thus  they  speak  for  all
ages.  They  show  us  how  sin  is  ruinous ;  how  God  has  a  sure  blessedness  in  store  for
his  faithful  children-*-a  blessedness  which  is  eternal.

Ver.  9. — *'  Nebuchadrezzar  .  ,  .  my  servant."  A  strange  expression !  It  is  not  found  in
many  manuscripts  and  versions.  But  it  is  more  likely  that  dull  officious  scribes  should
erase  such  an  "  improper  "  phrase  than  that  any  should  insert  it  in  the  manuscripts
and  Targum  where  it  is  preserved.  We  cannot  suppose  that  Nebuchadrezzar  is  calle4
God's  servant  in  consideration  of  any  characteristics  of  his  later  career,  such  as  the
repentant  state  following  his  insanity  recorded  in  the  Book  of  Daniel  (iv.  33 — 37).
The  prophecy  of  Jeremiah  belongs  to  a  much  earlier  period.  Nebuchadrezzar,  a
heathen,  an  idolater,  entirely  ignorant  of  the  religion  of  the  Jews,  just  appearing  as  the
great  conqueror  and  oppressor,  and  striking  Syria  dumb  with  terror  by  his  victory  at
Carchemish — this  man  is  called  God's  servant.    The  expression  is  significant.

I.  God's  authoritt  extends  to  all  mankind.  He  is  not  the  God  of  the  Jews
only,  nor  of  the  Christians  only,  nor  of  the  religious  only.  He  is  the  God  of  heaven
and  earth,  the  Sovereign  and  supreme  Master  of  all  creatures.  We  talk  of  the  godless
heathen.  They  may  be  living  without  the  knowledge  of  Qod,  but  not  without  his
knowledge  of  them,  his  care,  his  influence.

II.  God  can  use  for  his  purposes  men  who  do  not  know  him.  Nebuchadrezzar
did  not  know  the  true  God.  Yet  he  was  an  instrument  in  God's  hands  for  the  chastise-
ment of  the  Jews.  Many  a  man  is  unconsciously  working  out  God's  will  even  when
he  thinks  he  is  fighting  against  it.     God's  purposes  are  deeper  than  our  thoughts.

III.  God  can  make  bad  men  do  his  >vill.  Such  men  do  not  do  God  s  will  in
themselves,  but  by  doing  their  own  evil  will  they  produce  results  which  fall  in  with
God's  larger  designs.  Of  course  this  is  no  justification  for  their  conduct,  since  our
responsibility  turns  on  our  motives,  not  on  th^  unexpected  result-s  of  our  conduct.  It
must  not  be  supposed  that  God  sanctions  the  wicked  passions  that  drive  a  man  to  an


556        THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,  [ch.  xxv.  1—38.

action  which  God  overrules  for  good.  Nebuchadrezzar  is  to  be  punished  for  the  very
act  in  which  God  uses  him  as  his  servant  (ver.  12).  Yet  the  relation  between  Gkxi
and  his  wicked  servants  is  wholly  mysterious.

IV.  God  exercises  authority  over  the  most  irresponsible  tyrants.  Nebu-
chadrezzar is  the  greatest  monarch  of  the  world.  He  is  just  inflated  with  one  of  the
grandest  victories  in  all  history.  Naturally  he  is  an  autocratic  tyrant  who  makes  an
idol  of  his  own  will.  This  man  is  really  God's  slave.  God  overrules  all  kings,  shapes
and  moulds  all  history,  and  manifests  his  providence  in  the  great  onward  march  of
humanity.  This  fact  should  give  us  confidence  in  the  midst  of  the  darkest  events*
It  should  humble  the  great  to  feel  that  they  are  as  nothing  before  God.

V.  The  unconscious  servants  of  God  do  not  know  the  blessedness  of  his
HiQHER  SERVICE.  As  they  do  not  willingly  serve,  so  they  do  not  reap  the  spiritual  joys
of  service.  The  service  is  nothing  to  them,  though  much  to  the  world.  The  true  ser-
vant of  God  knows  his  master's  will  and  delights  to  do  it,  sacrifices  his  own  will  and
submits  obediently  to  the  higher  will.  To  fulfil  such  service  is  the  highest  privilege
of  mankind.    In  the  accomplishment  of  it  is  peace  and  blessedness  (Ps.  xl.  6— -8).

Ver.  15. — The  wine-^up  of  fury,    I.  The  wrath  of  God  is  like  intoxioatino  wikb.

1.  It  is  powerful.  The  wine  is  strong  drink.  We  are  too  ready  to  close  our  eyes  to
this  aspect  of  the  Divine  nature.  The  love  of  God  is  so  treated  by  some  that  it  leaves
no  room  for  anger.  But  God  is  not  weakly  indulgent ;  if  he  were  so,  even  his  love
would  be  found  wanting,  for  there  is  no  wrath  more  terrible  than  that  of  outraged  love.

2.  The  anger  of  God  produces  terrible  effects.  The  wine  intoxicates.  It  cannot  be  a
matter  of  no  concern  to  us  to  know  how  God  feels  towards  us.  All  afifections  tend  to
actions.  The  anger  of  a  man  is  not  likely  to  waste  itself  in  aimless  fury  ;  it  will  flow
out  in  deeds.  God  is  a  King  whose  wrath  will  find  expression  in  acts  of  sovereignty,
a  Father  whose  anger  must  necessarily  affect  his  treatment  of  his  children.  If  there
are  men  at  whose  anger  we  may  smile,  there  are  others  who  cannot  be  safely  despised*
But  who  dare  disregard  the  wrath  of  God  ?  Once  it  is  outpoured  it  must  be  over-
whelming, must  take  possession  of  men.  3.  It  will  not  only  produce  outward  distress,
but  inward  confusion  and  helplessness,  so  *'  that  they  shall  reel  to  and  fro,  and  behave
themselves  madly."  Therefore  the  man  who  is  smitten  by  Divine  wrath  has  not  those
internal  som'ces  of  comfort  and  strength  with  which  we  try  to  bear  up  under  outward
calamity.

II.  There  are  times  when  the  wine-cup  of  fury  is  poured  out.  It  is  not
always  flowing.  Though  **  God  is  angry  with  the  wicked  every  day,"  he  is  forbearing,
and  restrains  his  wrath  till  it  cannot  longer  be  justly  withhold.  Then  we  may  suppose
that  the  longer  it  has  been  accumulating  the  worse  will  be  its  outflow.  Men  have
been  treasuring  up  wrath  against  the  day  of  wrath.  Such  seasons  of  the  outpouring  of
the  cup  of  fury  may  be  noted  in  history ;  e.g.  in  the  invasions  of  Nebuchadrezzar,  the
destruction  of  Jerusalem  by  Titus,  the  sacking  of  Rome  by  Alaric.  It  is  important  to
note  that  this  happens  in  seasons.  It  is  not  always  harvest.  But  the  spring  sowing
prepares  for  the  autumn  reaping.  We  may  be  now  preparing  for  an  outburst  of  wratk.
How  foolish  not  to  guard  against  it  because  it  has  not  yet  come  I  Delay  of  judgment
is  no  excuse  for  doubt  about  it,  for  this  is  part  of  the  Divine  method  of  action.

III.  All  the  guilty  must  drink  of  the  wine-cup  of  fury.  Jeremiah  summons
the  various  nations  to  partake  of  it.  The  Jews  are  not  spared  though  they  are  the
"elect  people."  The  heathen  are  not  excluded  though  they  do  not  recognize  GK>d
truly.  God  is  still  the  impartial  Father  of  all,  and  must  execute  judgment  upon  all
classes,  while,  of  course,  he  has  due  regard  to  the  light  and  opportunities  of  each.
"  Religious  "  people  will  have  to  drink  of  the  dreadful  cup,  if  they  are  morally  corrupt.
Worldly  people  will  also  have  to  receive  it,  though  they  may  profess  to  have  nothing  to
do  with  God  and  his  laws.  There  is  no  escape  in  the  day  of  judgment.  Men  may
refuse  to  taste  of  God's  love ;  they  cannot  refuse  to  partake  of  his  wrath  (ver.  28).

IV.  The  bitter  cup  which  Christ  drank  is  an  antidote  to  the  wine-cup  of  fury.
God  could  never  have  been  angry  with  his  beloved  Son.  He  must  have  regarded  him
as  he  was  in  his  pure  goodness ;  could  not  have  imputed  to  him  sins  of  which  he  was
not  guilty,  nor  have  looked  wrathfully  upon  him  when  he  was  regarding  him  with
nothing  but  love  and  approval.    But  Christ  was  so  one  with  us,  so  took  our  place  as  our


cu.  XXV.  1—58.]     THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEKEMIAH.  657


High  Priest,  that  he  must  have  felt,  as  the  most  guilty  man  never  felt,  the  horror  of
the  wrath  of  God  against  the  sinful  world  of  which  he  stood  forth  as  the  Representative.
He  drank  to  the  dregs  the  hitter  cup  of  spiritual  woe  as  well  as  that  of  his  bodily  passion«
The  gospel  of  his  grace  proclaims  to  us  that  they  who  are  liable  to  the  outix)urings  of
a  Divine  judgment  on  their  sins  may  find  through  Christ's  sacrifice  peace  with  Ood.  By
faith  in  Christ  we  are  reconciled  to  God,  and  find  that  his  anger  is  put  away  for  ever
in  the  free  pardon  of  our  sins,

Ver.  29. — The  ineffectual  palladium  of  a  great  name.  Jerusalem  was  called  by
God's  name ;  yet  Jerusalem  was  not  to  be  spared  in  the  general  outpouring  of  the
wine-cup  of  fury.  The  Jews  were  vainly  trusting  in  their  name.  We  are  all  inclined
to  think  too  much  of  mere  names.  Certainly  there  is  something  in  a  name  ;  it
may  command  respect^  influence,  etc.  Yet  this  applies  only  in  regard  to  human
considerations ;  it  can  have  no  weight  with  God.  Even  with  men  it  is  less  potent
than  its  possessors  would  fain  believe.  The  influence  of  it  is  slowly  won,  easily  lost,
and  only  recovered  with  the  utmost  difficulty,  if  at  all.

I.   A  NAME  HAY  BE  GREAT  BECAUSE  IT  BEPBE8ENTS  CONNECTION  WITH  THE  OBEAT.      It

may  indicate  relationship  to  a  family,  a  clan,  a  nation.  We  are  proud  of  the  name  of
Englishmen.  St.  Paul,  professing  himself  a  Roman,  was  able  to  claim  the  rights  of
Roman  citizenship  (Acts  xzii.  25).  But  the  name  is  here  useful  only  in  so  far  as  the
privilege  it  implies  extends.  St.  Paul  had  a  right  not  to  be  scourged,  but  none  to
save  him  from  being  beheaded  by  the  order  of  the  emperor.  We  may  claim  undue  privi-
leges because  we  bear  the  name  of  Christian,  because  wo  were  bom  in  Christendom,
are  citizens  of  a  Christian  state,  are  members  of  a  Christian  Church.  These  associations
count  for  nothing  before  God.  Wc  shall  "  all  appear  before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ,
that  every  one  may  receive  the  things  done  in  his  body  "  (2  Cor.  v.  10).  It  will  be  vain
then  to  say,  "  Lord,  Lord,  have  we  not  prophesied  in  thy  Name,"  etc.  ?  if  Christ  must
answer,  "  I  never  knew  you :  depart  from  me,  ye  that  work  iniquity  "  (Matt.  vii.
23,  24).

IL  A  NAME  MAY  BE  GREAT  BEOAUSE  IT  REPRESENTS  HIGH  RANK.      Social  distinctions

cannot  be  ignored  while  they  exist,  and  in  them  the  favoured  necessarily  enjoy  many
amenities  that  are  denied  to  the  commonalty.  But  they  are  snares  when  they  tempt
their  owners  to  expect  peculiar  privileges  with  Heaven.  In  spiritual  matters  we
approach  God,  not  as  rich  or  poor,  not  as  prince  or  beggar,  but  as  man.  Rank  goes  for
nothing  there;  character  is  everything.  This  applies  to  ecclesiastical  rank.  They
who  hold  high  office  in  the  Church  are  tempted  to  expect  exceptional  judgment.  They
will  be  judged,  not  as  officials,  not  as  popes,  bishops,  priests,  but  as  men,  and  will  find
that  their  holy  office  will  be  no  sanctuary  when  tne  awful  sword  of  Divine  judgment
is  unsheathed.

III.  A  NAME   MAY  BE  GREAT   BECAUSE  IT  REPRESENTS  A  GOOD  REPUTATION.      If  the

reputation  is  justly  earned,  the  name  is  a  real  honour.  '*  A  good  name,"  says  the  wise
man,  '*  is  rather  to  be  chosen  than  great  riches  "  (Prov.  xxii.  1).  Shakespeare's  Cassio
exclaims,  "  Reputation,  reputation,  reputation !  Oh,  I  have  lost  my  reputation  1  I  have
lost  the  immortal  part  of  myself,  and  what  remains  is  bestial."  Yet,  if  reputation  is
^  got  without  merit,"  it  is  a  poor  refuge  to  fice  to  from  before  the  all-seeing  God.  Even
when  it  is  solid  and  honest  it  stands  only  as  a  record  of  the  past,  and  a  presumption
in  our  favour  when  our  conduct  is  equivocal.  But  it  does  not  mitigate  the  guilt  of
subsequent  offences.  We  are  judged  by  our  conduct,  not  by  our  fame.  It  is  vain  to
have  a  name  to  live  if  we  are  dead ;  the  name  will  not  galvanize  us  back  into  life.

IV.  A    NAME    MAY    BE  OBEAT   BECAUSE   IT  REPRESENTS  A  GREAT    PROFESSION.      Men

assume  big  names  and  flourish  them  before  the  world  in  pretended  evidence  of  their  own
excellence,  aud  the  world,  being  too  blind  and  too  indolent  to  make  very  searching
inquiries,  commonly  takes  men  much  at  their  own  reckoning.  The  advantoge  of  such
a  deception  can  only  be  superficial  and  transitory.  The  foolish  boast  wiU  soon  be
exploded.  Before  God  it  matters  little  what  a  man  calls  himself.  The  one  question
is  as  to  what  he  is.

Vers.  34 — 38. — Howling  shepherds.  In  the  general  calamity  of  the  nation  the
shepherds  are  especially  called  upon  to  howl  and  cry  and  wallow  in  the  dust.    The


668  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,     [ch.  xxv.  1—4

shepherds  are  the  leaders  of  the  people.  These  leaders,  therefore,  are  not  to  be  exem
from  the  distresses  of  the  common  people ;  on  the  contrary^  trouble  is  to  fall  upon  the
in  an  aggravated  degree.

L  High  bank  is  no  secubitt  against  tbouble.  It  may  free  a  man  from  mai
annoyances,  it  cannot  defend  him  from  all  kinds  of  calamity.  It  is  chiefly  a  safegua
against  the  smaller  vexations  of  life ;  the  more  serious  troubles  sweep  over  it  uncheckc
It  is  like  a  small  breakwater  that  will  keep  back  the  little  waves  of  a  fresh  sea,  but
overwhelmed  in  the  storm.  When  it  is  most  needed  it  is  of  least  use.  Rank  is  ]
protection  against  disease  and  death,  against  general  human  calamities,  such  as  i
desolation  of  an  earthquake,  the  ravages  of  a  plague,  the  devastation  of  a  war.  Neve
theless  men  do  trust  to  rank  unreasonably,  and  find  it  a  snare  when  their  false  co
fidence  is  exposed.

II.  Leadbbs  of  men  euffeb  fbom  the  tboubles  that  fall  upon  theib  to
LOWEBS.  The  shepherd  suffers  with  his  flock.  The  patron  is  dependent  on  his  clieni
The  king  is  great  with  the  greatness  of  his  people,  and  brought  into  trouble  by  his  natioi
distress.  This  is  more  than  sharing  a  general  calamity.  It  is  experiencing  a  trout
that  is  directly  caused  by  the  distress  of  dependants.  History  has  proved  the  mista]
of  those  tyrants  who  have  thought  to  secure  their  own  grandeur  by  the  brutal  degi
dation,  the  bondage  and  misery  of  their  subjects.  The  truly  prosperous  sovereign
not  the  Pharaoh  reigning  in  lonely  magnificence  over  a  nation  of  slaves,  but  the  belovi
ruler  of  a  free  and  enlightened  people.

III.   PeBSONS  in  exalted  positions  abb   LIABLE  TO  FECULIAB  TBOUBLES  FBOM  WHI<

OBDiNABY  MEN  ABE  EXEMPT.    Not  ouly  are  they  not  free  from  the  common  distresses
mankind,  not  only  are  they  directly  affected  by  the  distresses  of  those  beneath  then
they  are  also  subject  to  special  dangers  arising  from  their  high  and  prominent  positio
1.  They  are  burdened  with  a  rtsponsibilxty  that  is  proportionate  to  their  elevation,
much  has  been  given  to  them,  much  is  expected  of  them.    Every  eye  is  upon  thei
Any  mistake  of  theirs  which  might  pass  unnoticed  in  obscure  men,  is  dragged  in
the  full  blaze  of  jealous  criticism.    If  such  men  abuse  a  great  trust  they  may  ezpe
to  be  visited  with  a  great  judgment.    2.  They  are  liable  to  speciaZ  attacks  of  animosii
Like  officers  in  the  field,  they  are  picked  out  by  opponents.    Kings  have  dangers
assassination  which  obscure  men  need  never  fear.    The  highest  tree  catches  the  fierce
blast  of  the  gale,  while  humble  shrubs  grow  at  peace  in  sheltered  nooks.    3.  They/<
the  blow  of  trottble  most  acutely.    They  who  stand  highest  can  fall  lowest.    Poverty
not  the  calamity  to  a  bom  pauper  that  it  proves  itself  to  a  bankrupt  prince.


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1 — 7. — Messages  recapitulated.  L  Cabeful  bemindeb  of  the  extent  of  i
MINI8TBY.  (Vers.  1 — 3.)  1.  The  moral  value  of  this  is  great.  It  is  no  vague  indie
ment,  but  one  made  out  with  all  accuracy  and  conscientiousness.  We  ought  to  ta
note  of  the  extent  of  our  privileges  and  opportunities,  for  we  shall  have  to  give  an  exa
account  of  them  all.  2.  Its  evidential  value  is  equally  great.  The  date  of  the  pi
diction  is  thus  fixed,  and  history  becomes  a  long  verification  of  his  prophetic  truth.

II.  Assebtion  of  his  own  and  of  God's  diligence  and  faithfulness.  (Vers.  3- — (
1.  Ood  has  been  diligent.  He  has  "  risen  up  early .**  The  welfare  of  his  people  is
intense  interest  to  him.  The  delays  of  his  dispensations  are  only  seeming.  No  earner
ness  on  the  part  of  the  creature  can  ever  anticipate  or  outrun  his  love  or  readiness
provide.  2.  His  servant  the  prophet  was  so  also.  It  was  God's  Spirit  in  him  that  th
heard.  He  was  obedient  to  the  heavenly  Spirit,  and  announced  its  messages  as  th
were  received.

III.  The    PEB8I8TENT    UNBELIEF    AND    DISOBEDIENCE    OF    THE    NATION    DEKOUNCl

(Vers.  3 — 7.)  There  is  something  very  impressive  in  the  repeated  "Ye  have  i
hearkened."  It  defines  and  characterizes  the  guilt  of  the  apostate.  There  was  i
even  the  beginning  of  serious  attention  (vers.  5,  6) ;  and  their  indifference  had  becoi
systematic  and  habitual  What  wonder  that  God  should  have  been  provoked
wrath  ?  And  thb  is  the  sinner's  position  tonday.  It  would  be  impossibk  to  fath<
the  depths  of  our  depravity  by  nature,  or  to  trace  it  to  its  ultimate  issues.


CH.  XXV.  1—38.]     THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  559

IV.  The  spirit  and  substance  of  the  message  is  repeated.  How  great  is  the
long-suffering  of  Gk>d !  The  unbelief  of  the  people  had  been  marvellous,  considering
the  signs  which  had  been  given.  Another  opportunity,  however,  was  afforded  ere  the
catastrophe  should  take  place.  No  details  of  the  teaching  are  entered  into,  but  great
plainness  of  speech  is  used.  The  emphasis  is  upon  essentials  and  permaneut  principles.
The  "spirit  of  prophecy"  is  intensely  moral  j  and  this  is  why  the  **  testimony  of  Jesus"
represents  it.  It  is  the  grand  resultant  of  all  the  forces  working  through  ancient
prophecy,  and  casts  its  revealing  light  backward  upon  the  prophetic  page.  These
repentances  so  often  urged  but  never  forthcoming,  these  "  returns "  and  obediences
which  were  to  crown  with  blessing  and  surround  with  Divine  favour,  are  only  possible
through  his  Spirit.  The  future  of  the  world,  as  of  every  individual  and  nation,  is
ineztricablv  associated  with  the  cause  of  righteousness,  and  therefore  with  the
gospeL — yL

Vers.  7 — ll.-^ttdgment  plainly  declared.  The  agents  of  the  visitation  are  more
precisely  defined  than  hitherto,  and  the  leader  of  the  invasion  is  actually  named.
The  extent  also  of  the  region  to  be  devastated,  and  the  time  the  captivity  is  to  last,
viz.  seventy  years,  are  set  forth.

I.  This  tended  to  heighten  the  moral  consciousness  op  the  people.  A  vague
indefinite  calamity  or  series  of  calamities  would  have  failed  to  strike  deeply  enough
into  the  conscience  of  the  transgressors ;  whereas  a  precisely  marked  off  and  defined
set  of  occurrences  could  not  be  misunderstood.  1.  The  nearness  and  inevitable  character
of  the  judgment  are  thereby  realized,  2.  It  is  seen  to  be  imposed  by  the  moral  govern"
ment  of  Ood.    "  My  servant."    God  permits,  nay,  appoints,  Nebuchadrezzar.

IL  It  presented  the  period  of  calamity  as  part  of  an  ordered  whole,  with
A  definttb  outcome  and  object.  Great  as  the  trial  would  be,  it  was  nevertheless
a  measured  and  therefore  a  bearable  one.  There  need  be  no  wild  abandonment  to
despair.  The  believer  could  possess  his  soul  in  patience.  The  allurements  of  heathenism
would  lose  much  of  their  power.  A  quiet,  reverent,  and  repentant  study  of  the  me.an-
ing  of  the  dispensation  would  be  encouraged ;  and  in  this  way  it  would  act  as  disci-

Eline  for  the  future.  We  can  never  be  certain  as  to  the  limits  of  our  trials ;  but  we
ave  the  assurance  that  our  Saviour,  who  has  a  fellow-feeling  with  his  people,  will  not
impose  anything  above  what  we  are  able  to  bear.  And  through  the  revelation  of
spirituality  in  the  gospel,  and  the  greater  spiritualization  of  our  hopes  and  aims  through
its  teaching,  we  are  able  with  greater  calmness  to  contemplate  our  *'  light  affliction,
which  is  but  for  a  moment."

III.  The  prophecy  was  thereby  proved  to  be  genuine,  and  the  providence  of
God  revealed  beyond  dispute.  As  if  conscious  of  this,  Jeremiah  for  the  first  time
calls  himself  '*  the  prophet,"  when  he  has  fairly  committed  himself  to  exact  dates
and  personages.  It  would  be  open  to  the  survivors  of  that  predicted  dispensation  to
denounce  him  an  an  impostor,  and  to  discredit  the  practice  of  prophesying.  But  the
seer  was  certain ;  and  the  verdict  of  history  confirms  his  forecast,  and  demonstrates
that  it  was  no  ex  post  facto  fabrication,  but  real  Divine  foreknowledge  of  events  yet
future. — M.

Ver.  29. — Judgment  beginning  at  the  house  of  Ood,  I.  The  order  of  God'b  judgment.
1.  It  begins  with  his  own  people,  2.  Reasons  for  this  are:  (1)  The  harmony  of  the  Divine
rule  in  the  earth.  The  Church  is  his  own  house.  It  ought,  therefore,  to  be  in  perfect
order  first.  His  authority  ought  to  be  recognized  among  those  whom  he  calls  his  own.
He  will  therefore  deal  with  them  first,  and  then  with  better  grace  address  the  impenitent
and  unbelieving  world.  (2)  The  purity  of  Ood*s  character.  He  cannot  endure  wrong
^-cannot  look  upon  sin.  Yet  he  is  to  dwell  in  the  Church,  in  individual  believers.  It
is  necessary,  therefore,  that  they  be  made  pure  as  he  is  pure.  Their  discipline  must  be
immediate  if  they  are  to  become  vessels  prepared  unto  honour.  (3)  The  justice  of  God,
Immediately  the  sin  of  the  child  is  worse  than  that  of  the  stranger,  because  it  is  done
in  the  midst  of  light*  and  privilege.  Sharp  and  immediate  chastisement  is  the  only
way  in  which  he  can  show  his  sense  of  the  wrong  done  (Amos  iii.  2).  (4)  The  mercy
of  Ood,  If  it  begins  with  the  children  of  God,  it  is  that  they  may  the  sooner  be  saved.
He  embitters  the  breast  of  the  world  to  wean  them  (Leighton).    It  is  because  he


560  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,     [oh.  xxv.  1— 38.

loves  he  rebukes  and  chastens.  But  the  grief  of  sin  begins  first  in  the  breast  of  God
and  in  the  person  of  his  Son.  It  is  of  the  nature  of  Divine  love  to  suffer  for  the  sinful,
even  to  die,  that  he  may  be  made  a  child  of  grace.

II.  The  extent  of  it.  "All  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth."  Thus  early — ^nay,
from  the  first  sin  onwards — does  he  begin  the  judgment  of  the  whole  earth.  The  »m
of  one  is  but  a  symptom  of  the  universal  depravity  of  all.  The  oneness  of  the  world
in  its  fall  and  the  evolution  of  its  sin,  is  constantly  declared  in  Scripture.  1.  This
is  demanded  hy  the  justice  of  Qod,  "  Should  ye  be  utterly  unpunished  ?  '*  It  would
be  manifestly  unfair  that  the  child  of  God  alone  should  suffer  for  that  which  is
primarily  a  sin  of  all  mankind.  2.  It  is  founded  upon  the  solidarity  of  the  race.  There
is  a  universal  kinship  in  sins.    *'  In  Adam  (they)  all  die"  (1  Cor.  zv.  22).

III.  The  measure  of  it.  "A  sword"  (cf*  ver.  33).  This  signifies  destruction,  death.
That  which  opposes  itself  to  him  will  be  utterly  destroyed.  He  begins  his  judgment
upon  his  own,  but  it  passes  from  them  and  rests  for  ever  upon  his  enemies.  The
picture  painted  by  Jeremiah  (vers.  30 — 38)  is  but  one  of  many  similar  ones  in  the  Bible.
The  utter  holiness  of  God  cannot  endure  the  sinfulness  of  men ;  it  must  consume  it
and  all  that  identify  themselves  with  it.  In  the  New  Testament  the  horizon  widens,
and  the  spiritual  world  participates  with  the  living  upon  earth  in  the  sentence  of  the
Judge.  The  first  duty,  therefore,  of  every  awakened  sinner  is  to  flee  from  the  ^  wrath
to  come."  Whilst  he  remains  unconverted  he  is  a  "  child  of  wrath."  Punishment
has  a  different  significance  to  him  from  what  it  would  have  if  he  were  "  in  Christ.*'
It  is  the  same  principle  of  solidarity  which  condemned  us  that  now  avails  for  our
salvation.  *'For  as  in  Adam  all  die,  even  so  in  Christ  shall  all  be  made  alive"*
(1  Cor.  XV.  22).— M.

Vers.  30 — 38. — TJie  vision  of  final  judgments  A  sublime  and  terrible  description;
corresponding  with  many  others  throughout  the  Old  and  New  Testaments.

L  It  serves  a  great  ethical  purpose.  The  sense  of  wrong-doing  is  thereby
intensified,  and  some  idea  is  given  of  the  awful  consequences  of  sin  and  its  hatefulness
to  the  mind  of  God.

II.  An  evidence  of  the  historic  biqnifioancb  of  sin  and  salvation.  By  such
visions  as  these  the  ages  of  the  world  are  linked  together  and  shown  to  be  convergent
in  one  point.  There  are  not  to  be  so  many  judgments  of  isolated  offences,  but  one
judgment,  towards  which  all  the  world  has  looked  forward.  Sin  increases  with  the
lapse  of  time,  and  develops  into  a  more  pronounced  opposition  to  truth  and  goodness
Only  in  final  judgment  can  all  its  significance  be  comprehended  and  its  issues  be  stayed.

III.  An  evidence  of  the  reality  of  the  prophetic  gift  and  its  spiritual  end.
This  vision  is  corroborated  by  the  universal  instincts  of  man,  on  the  one  hand,  and  by
the  endorsement  of  Christ  on  the  other.  The  various  minor  judgments  which  have
intervened  between  that  time  and  this  are  so  many  proofs  of  the  correctness  of  the
prophet's  intuition.  And  the  manner  in  which  he  and  other  seers  have  laid  chief
emphasis  ui)on  this  event  exhibits  the  fundamental  moral  purpose  of  all  prophecy.
Its  intention  is  to  reveal  the  righteousness  of  God,  and  to  lead  men  into  its  practice
and  love. — M.

Vers.  1 — 7. — A  twenty-three  years*  ministry.  Here  we  get  a  statement,  brief  but
not  at  all  uncertain,  of  what  had  been  done  in  the  prophetic  way  during  twenty-three
years.  Three  parties  are  concerned  in  this  statement:  (1)  Qod;  (2)  ihe  prophet;
(3)  thepeople,

I.  God.  Nebuchadrezzar,  who  is  to  act  as  the  servant  of  God  (ver.  9)  in  the  great
overthrowing  work,  has  just  come  to  his  throne,  and  is  unconsciously  preparing  for
that  to  which  God  had  appointed  him.  Hence  it  was  fitting  that,  just  at  this  crisis,
God  should  point  back  over  the  past  and  show  how  very  much  he  had  done  to  bring
about  a  different  result.  Not  that  this  comprehensive  view  was  likely  at  the  eleventh
hour  to  make  any  change  in  Israel  itself;  but  it  is  well  that  it  should  stand  recorded
in  the  history.  It  is  well  that  we  who  come  after  should  be  made  to  see  clearly  how
continuously  God  protested  against  the  wickedness  of  his  jpeople.  Jeremiah  himself,
out  of  his  own  experience,  speaks  as  a  witness  of  what  had  been  going  on  for  twenty-
three  years ;  and  he  knew  further  that  he  was  only  one  out  of  many  agents  by  whom
Uod  had  been  doing  the  same  kind  of  work.


CH.  XXV.  1—38.]  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.       561

II.  The  prophet.  Not  Jeremiah  peculiarly,  but  Jeremiah  as  representative  of  all
the  faithful  prophets ;  those  to  whom  he  here  refers  as  having  been  engaged  in  the
same  kind  of  service.  Ho  brings  against  the  people  a  serious  charge  of  persistent
neglect ;  but  it  also  involves  a  serious  confession  with  respect  to  himself.  A  serious
confession,  but  not  a  shameful  one.  Though  his  long  ministry  has  not  had  the
desired  end,  it  is  by  no  means  a  failure.  For  twenty-three  years  the  work  has  been
laid  upon  him  of  denouncing  national  apostasy  and  individual  transgression,  in  all  the
varieties  of  it.  The  substance  of  this  long  ministry  is  written  down  and  the  spirit  of
the  ministry  made  evident.  We  know  the  things  he  spoke  of,  and  how  he  spoke  of
them;  the  enemies  he  made,  the  sufferings  he  endured,  the  pangs  with  which  his
heart  was  torn.  In  his  ministry  he  gave  himself,  without  stint.  Nor  does  his  work
stand  alone.  He  was  not  the  first  to  exhort  to  repentance.  He  succeeded  men  who
had  been  as  faithful  as  himself,  and  engaged  as  long  a  time  in  the  service  of  God.
And  yet,  after  so  many  remonstrances,  the  nation  remains  stubborn  in  its  apostasy,
infatuated  as  ever  in  its  rapid  descent  to  ruin.  Hence  we  learn  how  chary  we  should  be
in  talking  of  unsuccessful  ministries.  No  ministry,  whatever  its  other  results  may  be,
can  be  unsuccessful  in  the  sight  of  GKhI,  if  only  there  is  unshaken  fidelity  to  him.  It
is  fidelity  that  he  rewards,  not  obvious  results.  In  spite  of  all  the  husbandman's  care,
digging  about  the  tree  and  dunging  it,  it  may  yield  no  fruit ;  but  the  fidelity  of  the
husbandman  deserves  a  reward  all  the  same.  Industry  cannot  overcome  the  bad
elements  in  what  is  given  him  to  cultivate.  All  who  have  to  engage  in  preaching  and
prophesying  duties  must  learn  the  lesson,  that  more  is  needed  for  success  than  mere
l^rseverance.  Perseverance  is  like  the  dropping  water  which  wears  away  the  stone ;
but  what  is  here  required,  is  that  the  stone  should  be  changed  as  to  its  nature,  not
worn  away.  If  Jeremiah  had  been  able  to  prophesy  twenty-three  centuries,  instead  of
twenty-three  years,  the  result  would  have  been  the  same.  All  he  could  do  was  to
reiterate,  in  the  ears  of  the  people,  the  necessity  of  repentance.  It  is  in  the  light  of
a  )iassage  like  this  that  we  learn  more  of  what  Jesus  meant  when  he  scud  he  came  to
fulfil  the  prophets.  It  was  his  not  only  to  accomplish  their  predictions,  but  do  what
they  could  not  possibly  do  by  all  their  appeals — turn  the  hearts  of  the  disobedient  to
God.  Compare  the  barren  ministry  of  Jeremiah,  prophet  of  Jehovah,  with  the  fruitful
ministry  of  Paul,  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ.  Tet  Paul  did  not  speak  one  whit  more
earnestly  concerning  righteousness  and  repentance  and  submission  to  God.  The
difference  lay  in  this,  that  Paul  was  not  only  a  preacher,  but  when  he  preached  there
was  a  subduing  and  renewing  Spirit.

III.  The  people.  This  is  a  serious  charge  brou^icht  against  them,  that  one  man
had  been  in  their  midst  for  all  these  years,  with  one  message,  never  varying  and  never
slackening,  and  yet  that  they  had  paid,  as  a  nation,  not  the  slightest  heed  to  it.  When
Nebuchadrezzar  did  come,  there  ^was  no  chance  for  them  to  say  that  they  had  not
received  proper  warning.  They  could  not  blame  Jeremiah.  Their  very  persecution
of  him  was  a  witness  against  themselves.  Thus  there  is  a  warning  to  those  who  are
hearers  of  the  gospel  with  all  the  voices  with  which  it  is  addressed  to  them.  It  is  not
outside  of  themselves  they  must  look  for  explanations  of  why  the  truths  of  the  gospel
have  found  no  lodgment  in  their  hearts.  The  cause  is  within.  How  many  have  been
listening  to  the  news  of  Jesus  Christ  for  many  more  years  even  than  twenty-three,
and  every  year  seems  to  bring  a  lessening  probability  that  they  will  treat  the  message
as  having  a  practical  concern  for  themselves  I — Y.


Ver.  9. — Nebuchadrezzar,  the  servant  of  Ood,    I.  The  contrast  with  otheb  fer-
VANTS.    Observe  the  mention,  in  ver.  4,  of  those  very  different  servants  of  God,  the

Erophets  (so  mentioned  elsewhere).  God  had  sent  many  of  them  and  many  times,  and
ardly  any  attention  had  been  paid  to  them.  Higher  motives  had  been  appealed  to  in
vain.  Considerations  of  duty  and  prudence  were  thrown  to  the  winds.  Aiid  now  the
mighty  king  Nebuchadrezzar  comes,  with  a  very  different  sort  of  force — not  looking  at
all  like  a  servant  of  God ;  and  yet  he  is  just  as  much  the  servant  of  Qtod  as  is  any  of  the
prophets.  Indeed,  king  of  a  great  people  though  he  was,  his  rank  in  the  service  of  God
was  not  so  high  as  that  of  the  prophets.  He  appears  in  this  place  as  nothing  more
than  the  final  executioner  of  justice.
II.  None  tub  less  efficient  ▲  sebyant  because  the  sebvicb  was  rendered

JEBEMIAH.  2  O


5C2  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  xxvi.  1—2


UNCONSCIOUSLY.  Nebuchadrezzar,  despot  as  he  was,  would  have  been  very  wrathf
if  he  had  known  exactly  how  ho  appeared  in  the  sight  of  Grod.  He  had  certain  purpos
of  his  own, and  he  succeeded  in  effecting  them;  but  the  very  energy  with  which  1
worked  for  himself  only  made  him  to  render  his  service  to  God  more  complete.  Ai
may  it  not  be  happening  in  the  world,  a  great  deal  more  frequently  than  we  think,  th
the  very  success  of  selfish  and  domineering  men  is  being  so  handled  by  Grod  as  all  t]
more  to  serve  his  purposes  ?

111.  The  limitations  of  Nebuohadbezzab's  bbbyicb.  The  service,  with  all  i
completeness,  was  only  within  certain  limits.  It  does  not  require  much  Intel ligenoe
destroy  what  is  destructible.  But  if  there  is  to  be  a  building-up  work  for  God,  th<
there  must  be  a  conscious,  voluntary,  and  devoted  service.  Israel  was  meant  to  be
servant  of  God  in  the  fullest  and  noblest  sense  of  the  word.  It  had  been  instruct
in  the  will  of  Gk>d  and  borne  with  patiently  in  many  failures  to  obey  that  will.  Hen
the  description  of  Nebuchadrezzar  as  a  servant  is  an  implied  rebuke  of  those  who  h
refused  to  be  servants.  Note  the  great  contrast  found  in  the  New  Testament,  wbc
Christ's  apostles,  at  the  beginning  of  their  Einstlcs,  hasten  to  proclaim  themselves
the  servants  of  God. — Y.

Ver.  31. — Jehovah*a  controversy  with  *Jie  nations.  This  necessary  controver
explains  all  the  proceedings  described  from  ver.  15  to  the  end  of  the  chapter.  Jeremi
is  not  a  prophet  to  Israel  only,  but  to  all  who  are  guilty  of  similar  transgresiuons.  T
cup  of  God's  holy  wrath  goes  on  filling  wherever  he  beholds  wrong-doing.  It  is  ea
to  see,  if  we  only  ponder  a  little,  that  some  suoh  outburst  as  this  must  come  in  all  tr
prophecy.  As  the  Apostle  Paul  puts  it,  the  nations  that  sinned  without  law  perish
without  Uw.  The  peculiar  light  vouchsafed  to  Israel  was  not  the  only  light  for  whi
men  were  responsible  to  GK)d.  Accordingly  we  find  that  it  seems  to  have  been  o
main  ground  of  appeal  taken  by  the  apostle  to  the  Gentiles  that  God  had  not  left  hii
self  without  witness  amongst  them.  If,  on  the  one  hand,  he  could  denounce  Israel  i
being  so  indifferent  to  the  Law  he  had  formally  given,  so,  on  the  other  hand,  he  coi
denounce  the  Gentiles  for  their  negligence  of  the  light  of  nature.  Idolatry,  as  we  percei'
had  produced  the  most  fearful  results  in  Israel ;  but  everywhere  else  it  must,  of  cour
have  produced  results  quite  as  bad,  only  they  do  not  happen  to  occupy  such  a  proniin<
position  in  history.  And  thus  we  have  indicated  to  us  here,  as  indeed  in  so  ma
places  elsewhere,  the  way  in  which  to  consider  the  decline  and  fall  of  great  nations,
is  not  enough  for  the  Christian  to  rest  in  the  consideration  of  secondary  causes.  Am
a  nation's  decadence  be  so  gradual  and  imnerceptible  as  to  show  no  obvious  sign  of  w]
secondary  causes  may  be  operating,  then  there  is  all  the  more  need  to  rise  to  the  hei{
of  a  true  faith  in  Grod  and  believe  that  his  judgments  are  assuredly  at  work.  Where^
there  is  unbridled  self-indulgence,  still  spreading  wider  and  wider,  there  we  may  be  s^
God  is  carrying  on  those  judgments  which  cannot  fail.  But  is  there  not  also  abrish
side  suggested  by  one  passage  in  this  chapter  ?  As  we  read  of  all  these  lands  to  whi
in  a  kind  of  apocalyptic  vision,  Jeremiah  presented  the  cup  of  Jehovah's  fury,  we  cam
but  think  of  that  other  list  so  graciously  represented  on  the  day  of  Pentecost.  Katio
in  the  manifold  wisdom  of  God,  may  rise,  decline,  and  fall ;  but  such  a  fate  will  trou
none  save  those  who  exaggerate  patriotism  into  a  cardinal  virtue.  The  serious  mal
is  when  the  individual  will  not  show  a  timely  wisdom,  and  in  humble  repentance  ]
away  his  mistaken  past,  and  in  humble  faith  accept  the  redemption  and  guidance  wb
God  alone  can  provide. — Y.

EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  XXVI.

Jebkmiah's  Trial  and  Deliverakcb.

The  prophecy  in  vers.  2— G  is  a  summary
of  that  contained  In  ch.  vii.  1 — 15;  the  nar-
rative, which  stands  in  no  connection  either
with  oh.  zxiv.  or  oh.  xxvii.,  relates  the  con-


sequences of  that  bold  deolarattoa  of
word  of  the  Lord.  The  present  poeittoi
the  chapter  is  only  surprising  to  those  i
assume  that  the  works  of  the  prophets  vi
necessarily  arranged  chronolegicidly.  I
many  violations  of  chronological  order  n
us  in  other  books.  e,g.  in  Isaiah  1    It  is  «


cH.  xxn.  1— 24.]  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.


rea*oiiab1«  to  expect  stmiUr  phenomena  in
the  Book  of  JereicEah.

To  estimate  the  circnmBtancea  of  the
propbeof  arieht,  we  mmt  remember  that
in  Jehoiftkim'B  reign  ■  Chnldsan  inTaaioo
was  the  dangai  by  which  all  minds  were
oonitandy  preoocnpied.

Ter.  2.^eroiniah  is  to  take  his  stand  In
tke  oowt  of  the  Lord'*  hooM ;  i.e.  the  outer
court,  where  the  people  Msembled  (comp.
ch.  lii.  Hy,  and  pieftcb  nnto  all  the  oltlM
of  Jndah ;  t.a.  to  the  pilgdms  who  had  come
rrom  the  provlnoial  toirn»  (comp.  ch,  zi.  IS),
His  discourse  is  not  to  be  on  eloquent
appeal  to  the  feelings,  but  a  strict  and
peremptory  sunonDcement:  he  is  to  dinlniih
(or,  tKblraet)  not  a  word  (comp.  Deut.  Iv.  2 ;
xiL  32;  BeT.  xiii.  19}.

Ver.  3— That  I  may  repent;  lllerallj,
<tnil  /  wiU  repaU;  the  idea  or  oliject  is
derived  IVom  IJie  conleiL  (On  the  DiTioe
repentance,  see  note  on  ch.  iriiL  S.)

Vew.  1-6.— The  contoDts  of  Ihe  dU-
ecarse  (see  especially  on  cb.  viu  12 — 15).
The  priests  and  the  prophets  interfere,
arrest  Jeremiah,  aud  accuse  him  of  a  capital
crime.  It  would  appear  that  some  at  leaat
ot  the  " false  proplieto"  were  priests;  thus
I'ashnr,  we  are  told,  was  a  priest  (cb.  XX.  6).
VerB.7— 11.— To  all  doTout  Jews  this  pre-
diction of  the  destruction  of  the  temple
mast  have  been  stnrtliug;  but  to  those  who
placed  their  confldence  in  the  mere  exist-
ence of  a  consecrated  building  (ch.  vii.  4),  it
was  like  a  blow  aimed  at  their  very  life.
Besides,  were  not  the  majority  of  the  prophets
of  Jehovah  of  entirely  another  way  of  tliint-
ing?  Did  tbcy  not  promise  peace?  And
wliat  could  justifj  Jert'mish  in  annoam  '
not  merely  war,  but  the  downfall  of
Divine  Ijabitatioii  itself?  Hence  no  sooner
had  the  prophet  roncluded  his  discoarse,
than  ,  he  was  arrested,  accused,  aud  oon-
demned  to  death.

Ver.  e.— Had  made  aa  end  of  ipeaUag.
They  allowed  Jeremiah  to  flnish  his  dis-
course (of  which  we  have  here  only  the
brieftat  summary),  eillier  from  a  lingering
revereuoe  for  liia  person  and  offlco,  or  to
obtain  fuller  materials  for  an  accusation
(comp.  the  trial  of  Stephen,  Acts  ii.  12 — 14).
All  uie  people.  The  "people"  appear  to
have  been  always  under  some  coniitraint.
As  long  as  the  priests  and  prophets  were
alone,  tney  dominated  the  unofficial  classes,
but  wlicu  the  princes  appeared  (ver.  11),
the  new  influence  proved  anperior.  In
ver.  16  uriuccs  and  people  tojcetber  go
over  to  the  side  of  Jeremiah,  Thon  shalt
rarely  die.  Death  was  the  legal  peualtf
both  for  blasph^ny  (Lev.  ziiv.  IS)  and
for  prsanmtng  to  prophesy  without  having
receivod  a  prophetio  revelation  (Dent,  xviii.


20).    Jeremiah's  declaration  ran  bo  entirely

counter  to  the  prejudices  of  bis  hearers  that
be  may  well  bare  been  accused  of  both
theee  sine,  or  crimes.  True,  Isaiah  and
Amot  had  already  predicted  tbedeetmction
of  Jernealem  (Isa.  v.  6,  (i ;  vi.  1 1 ;  Amos  ii,
4,  5 ;  vi.  1,  2) ;  but  it  may  have  been
contended  that  the  timely  repentance  of
Judab  under  Hezekiah  and  Josiah  had
effectually  cancelled  tlie  threatened  doom,
and  though  Isa,  liir.  10,  II  evidently  refer*
to  a  time  later  than  Josiah,  and  repreaent*
the  ruin  of  Jerusalem  aa  practically  oertain,'
it  would  seem  that  the  prophetio  book  (Isa.
il,— IzTl.)  to  which  this  belongs  (to  say  the
least)  was  not  generally  kuowu.

Ver.  9. — Were  githaied  agaiiut;  rather.
ouenMed  VtemitlveM  unto;  i.e.  oonBtituteti
themselves  tnlo  a  legal  qakal,  or  assembly


r.17).


Ver.  10.— The  piinoe*.  The  term  irlll
iDctade  the  members  of  the  various  btMiehes
of  the  lOyal  family,  who  acted  a*  jndge*
(see  on  oh.  ixL  12),  and  the  "elders,"  or

heads  of  families  (see  ver.  17>  Without
the  presence  of  the  former,  Jeremiah  could
only  have  had  a  mock-trinl.  Came  up,  etc,
(see  on  cb.  iiii.  1),  Of  ths  Lord'*  huuw;
better  simply,  of  the  Lord.  The  gate  is  the
same  which  is  rererred  at  ch,  xi.  2.

Ver.  11, — This  man  is  worthy  to  die;  liter-
ally, d  tentenes  of  death  (btlong$)  to  thi*

Ven,  12— 15,— Jeremiah's  defmoe.  He  ia
conscious  that  he  has  not  spoken  uncom-
missioned, aud  leaves  the  result.  He  ui^ea
the  people  to  smendment  of  life,  while  there
is  time,  aud  warns  tbem  that  his  own  un-
merited death  will  bring  a  curse  upon  them-

Vers.  16— 19.— The  troth  makes  an  im.
prcBsion  upon  the  princes  and  the  people,
who  decUro  Jeremiah  to  be  a  true  propbe^
and  therefore  inoocenL

Ver.  17.-The  elder*  of  the  land  add  their
voice  in  favour  of  Jeremiah,  not,  however,
without  first  of  all  coosulting  the  people
whose  representatives  tbey  are.  The  whole
verse  Is  thoroughly  technical  in  its  phrase-
ology. The  word  l^akal)  rendcrod  "b»-
Bcmbly  "  is  the  traditional  legal  term  for
the  "congregation  of  Israel"  (Deut.  xxxi.
30);  comp,  ver.  9,  where  Ihe  verb  ia  the
corresponding  one  to  qataL  Thus,  with  all
the  fanlts  of  the  guvemment  of  Judab,
which  Jeremiah  himself  reveals  to  us,  it
was  very  far  removed  from  the  Oriental
despotisms  of  our  day.  The  "elders"  are
slill  an  important  element  in  the  social
system,  and  form  a  link  with  that  earlier
period  in  nhlch  the  family  was  the  lending
power  in  the  social  organixation.  Originallr
the  term  denoted,  strictly  and  In  tlie  full
sense,  heads  of  families;   tbey  have   Ibei^


C6l


THE   BOOK   OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [en.  xxvi.  1—2


analogue  in  the  oooncils  of  tho  Aryan
village  communities.  **  References  to  their
parliamentary  status  (if  the  phrase  may
be  used)  occur  in  Exod.  iii.  16;  2  Sara,
xix.  11 ;  1  Kings  Tiii.  1 ;  zx.  7.  The  insti-
tution lingered  on  during  and  after  the
Babylonian  Exile  (oh.  xxix.  1 ;  Ezek.  xiv.  1 ;
XX.  1 ;  Ezra  v.  5 ;  vL  7 ;  x.  14  ;  Matt.  xxvi.
3,  47 ;  Mark  xiv.  43 ;  Acts  iv.  5,  etc.)."  We
find  another  reference  to  their  quasi-judiciul
authority  in  Dent.  xxi.  2.

Vers.  18,  19.— Mioah  the  Xorasthite,  etc.
The  **  elders  "  appeal  for  a  precedent  to  the
case  of  Micah  (called  after  his  native  place,
Moresheth-Gath,  to  distinguish  him  from
other  Micahs),  who  had  been  equally  ex-
plicit in  his  declarations  of  woe  to  Jeru-
salem, without  incurring  the  charge  of
blasphemy.  The  prediction  referred  to  is
in  Miofth  iii.  12,  tne  form  of  which  agrees
verbally  with  our  passage.

Yer.  19. — ^Thni  might  we  proenre,  etc.;
rather,  and  we  are  about  to  eommit  a  great
evil  againet  our  $oul$  (not  merely  **  against
ouiselves*').  The  blood  of  the  slain  would
cry  for  vengeance  against  his  murderers,
who  would  come  to  an  untimely  end,  their
*' souls"  being  sent  down  to  lead  a  miser-
able parody  of  a  life  {^ios  &3(05)  in  Sheol  or
Hades.

Vers.  20— 23.— The  murder  of  the  prophet
Urijah.  At  first  sight,  these  four  verses
appear  to  belong  to  the  speech  of  the  elders,
but  the  appearance  is  delusive,  (l)beoause  the
issue  of  the  affair  of  Urijah  cannot  possibly
have  taken  place  "  in  the  beginning  of  the
reign  of  Jehoiakim"  (ver.  1);  and  (2)  occause
the  passage  stands  in  no  connection  with  what
preoeeds,  whereas  it  is  related,  and  that  very
closely,  to  ver.  24  (see  below).  The  case  is
simili^  to  that  of  certain  passages  in  St.
John's  Gospel,  where  the  reflections  of  the
evangelist  are  put  side  by  side  with  the
sayings  of  our  Lord.  Jeremiah,  writing
down  his  experiences  at  a  later  time,  intro-
duces the  story  of  Urijah  to  show  the  mag-
nitude of  the  danger  to  which  he  had  been
exposed.  The  notice  of  Urijah  has  an
additional  importance,  as  it  shows  incident-
ally how  isolated  a  spiritual  prophet  like


Jeremiah  was,  and  how  completely  the  ord
of  prophets  had  fallen  below  its  high  ide£
We  have  no  further  knowledge  of  tl
prophet  Urijah.

Ver.  20. — Kiijath-jearim ;  a  city   in  tl
territory  of  Judah,  on  the  west  frontier
Bemamin.

Ver.  21 .  —His  mighty  men.  The  "  mighi
men"  (gibborim)  are  not  mentioned  aga:
in  Jeremiah,  and  the  Septuagint  omits  tl
word.  But  it  is  clear  from  Isa.  iii.  2  thi
the  "mighty  men"  were  recognized  as  s
important  part  of  the  community.     Fro:

1  Ghron  x.  10  it  appears  that  the  ten
indicates  a  position  of  high  command  in  tl
army,  which  is  in  accordance  with  tl
notice  in  2  Kings  xxi  v.  16.  Went  in
2fiTP^*  Egypt  was  the  natural  refuge  f
a  native  of  Palestine  (comp.  1  Kings  xi.  1
40 ;  Matt.  ii.  14),  just  as  Palestine  was  f
a  native  of  Egypt.  The  latter,  howevc
proved  to  be  not  a  safe  asylum  for  Urija
as  Pharaoh  was  the  liege  lord  of  Jehoiaxi
(2  Kings  xxiii.  34),  and  the  extradition  '
Urijah  as  a  criminal  naturally  followed.

Ver.  22. — ^Klnathan.  The  name  occu
again  in  ch.  xxxvi.  12,  25.  Possibly  th
man  was  the  **Elnathan  of  Jerusalem
mentioned  in  2  Kings  xxiv.  8  as  the  fathe
in-law  of  Jehoiakim.

Ver.  23. — Into  the  graves  of  the  eommc
people;  literally,  of  Sie  tons  of  the  peop
(comp.  ch.  xvii.  19 ;  2  Kings  xxiii.  6).  "Tl
graves"  is  equivalent  to  **the  graveyard
as  Job  xvii.  1.

Ver.  24. — NeverthelesB  the  hand  of  All
kam,  etc. ;  i.e.  in  spite  of  the  prepossessic
against  prophets  like  Jeremiah  which  th
incident  reveals,  Ahikam  threw  all  h
influence  into  the  scale  of  toleration.  Tl
same  Ahikam  is  mentioned  in  circumstano
which    reflect   credit  on    his   religion    i

2  Kings  xxii.  12 — 14.  One  of  his  son
Gemariah,  lent  Baruch  his  official  room  f
the  reading  of  the  prophecies  of  Jeremie
(ch.  xxxvi.  10);  another  was  thewell-knon
Gedaliah,  who  became  governor  of  Juda
after  the  fall  of  Jerusalem,  and  who  wi
himself  friendly  to  Jeremiah  (ch.  %%%i
14 ;  xl.  6).


HOMILETICS.

Ver.  2. — The  duty  of  declaring  the  whole  truth.  I.  The  duty.  Jeremiah  is  con
manded  to  "  diminish  not  a  word "  from  the  Divine  message.  A  similar  obligatic
rests  upon  every  man  who  is  called  to  speak  for  God  to  his  fellow-men.  The  dul
is  urgent  for  two  reasons :  1.  Truth  is  a  trust.  Thus  Timothy  is  admonished  I
St.  Paul  to  keep  that  which  is  committed  to  his  trust  (1  Tim.  vi.  20)  ;  and  the  apost
speaks  of  the  "gospel  which  was  committed  to  my  trust"  (1  Tim.  i.  11).  2.  iW
18  needed  by  the  world.  It  is  not  a  private  monopoly  ;  it  belongs  to  mankind.  Tl
world  is  dyin^  for  lack  of  it.  He  who  has  possession  of  it  and  refuses  to  reveal
to  others  is  like  a  man  who  has  discovered  a  secret  spring  of  abundant  water  az


CH.  XXVI.  1—24.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  665

churlishly  keeps  his  knowledge  to  himself  though  his  companions  are  perishing  of
thirst.  Divine  truth  is  of  practical  moment.  It  is  not  a  mere  curiosity,  to  be  exposed
or  hidden  as  its  owner  thinks  fit,  as  though  his  treatment  of  it  made  Httle  difference
to  other  men.  When  the  four  lepers  of  Samaria  found  the  Syrian  camp  deserted,  their
first  impulse  was  to  pillage  it  quietly  and  hide  the  treasures,  keeping  the  great  discovery
secret ;  but  wiser  thoughts  prevailed,  and  they  hastened  to  acquaint  the  citizens  with
their  unexpected  deliverance  (2  Kings  vii.  3--11).  So  every  one  who  has  seen  the
redemption  of  Christ  has  no  right  to  keep  his  knowledge  to  himself  while  the  world
is  in  sore  need  of  it.  The  Church  is  entrusted  with  the  gospel,  not  for  her  own  enjoy-
ment alone,  but  for  the  good  of  the  world.  The  same  duty  applies  also  to  the  posses-
sion of  darker  truths.  It  is  evident,  indeed,  that  a  certain  liberty  and  discretion  are  left
with  us.  It  is  for  us  to  arrange  and  present  truth  as  it  seems  best  to  us ;  to  give
relative  prominence  to  its  various  parts  according  to  our  idea  of  their  importance ;  to
lead  men  up  to  the  reception  of  it  by  degrees.  It  may  be  that  there  are  truths  which
the  teacher  sees,  but  which  the  scholar  is  not  yet  fit  to  receive.  If  they  were  declared
to  him  he  would  not  understand  them,  and  they  would  only  injure  him.  A  wise
teacher  will  reserve  these.  We  act  in  this  way  with  children.  It  may  be  right  some-
times to  do  the  same  with  those  who  are  babes  in  knowledge.  But  is  not  this  a  viola-
tion of  the  duty  of  the  text  ?  By  no  means.  For :  (1)  If  we  are  sure  the  truth  will  be
misunderstood  we  cannot  really  teach  it;  for  to  teach  a  thing  is  to  make  another
understand  and  know  it,  not  merely  to  speak  out  unintelligible  words  about  it.  We
are  not  to  cast  our  pearls  before  swine,  though  we  are  to  remember  that  no  human
beings  are  to  be  regarded  as  hopelessly  and  for  ever  swinish.  (2)  Truth  may  be  with-
holden  for  a  time  with  the  object,  not  of  suppressing  it,  but  of  the  better  leading  them
up  to  the  ripe  reception  of  it.  (3)  The  vision  of  truth  must  be  distinguished  from  the
mission  to  declare  it.  No  doubt  the  one  directly  leads  to  the  other.  But  they  may
not  be  contemporaneous.  Questions  of  method,  order,  seasoDableness,  come  between.
The  duty  is  to  diminish  nothing  of  the  prophet's  message.

II.  The  temptation  to  fail  in  this  duty.  1.  Personal  fear  may  tempt  a  man
to  "  diminish "  part  of  the  Divine  message.  Jeremiah  knew  that  the  full  utterance
of  his  message  would  provoke  violent  opix)sition.  He  was  warned  not  to  shrink  from
declaring  it  on  that  account.  In  Christian  lands  and  quiet  times  we  do  not  feel  the
same  terrible  temptation  to  unfaithfulness.  But  it  comes  to  us  in  another  form.  There
are  ideas  which  we  believe  to  be  true,  but  we  fear  they  are  unpopular ;  they  will  excite
controversy,  they  will  provoke  ridicule,  they  will  lead  to  neglccc  of  the  preacher.  He
is  tempted  to  shun  these  truths  that  he  may  swim  with  the  tide  of  popularity.
But  he  is  guilty  of  gross  unfaithfulness  if  he  thus  shuns  to  declare  the  whole  counsel
of  God.  2.  It  may  appear  that  Tnen  will  not  receive  the  message.  Of  course,  as  has
been  remarked,  we  must  use  wisdom  and  discretion,  seeking  rather  to  convince  men
than  to  provoke  them.  But  it  may  even  be  a  duty  to  declare  a  truth  as  a  testimony
against  men.  In  any  case  the  responsibility  for  rejecting  it  will  lie  with  them,  as  it
should.  But  who  can  tell  whether  or  no  his  work  will  be  fruitless?  The  most
unsympathetic  hearers  have  sometimes  been  reached  and  affected  and  subdued  by  the
truth* which  they  came  to  mock  or  oppose.  When  the  bow  is  drawn  at  a  venture  it  may
hit  the  most  unlikely  marks.  It  is  certain  that  more  good  has  been  missed  by  our
faithlessness  in  not  **  sowing  beside  all  waters "  than  harm  done  by  our  rashness  m
blurting  out  truths  in  unseemly  circumstances.  3.  Certain  truths  may  seem  to  be
of  no  practical  use.  We  are  inclined  to  neglect  these  for  those  that  are  plainly
profitable.  Now,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  some  truths  are  of  more  practical  impor-
tance than  others,  and  these  should  naturally  receive  our  more  earnest  attention.  But
it  is  a  mistake  to  neglect  any  truth  on  this  account  Truth  should  be  loved  and  taught
for  its  own  sake.  It  is  degraded  when  it  is  regarded  solely  from  a  utilitarian  stand-
point. It  is  well  that  men  should  be  true  philosophers — ^lovers  of  wisdom.  Moreover,
it  is  impossible  to  tell  what  will  be  the  future  practical  influence  of  a  truth.  Some
of  the  most  abstruse  scientific  inventions  have  led  to  results  of  great,  though  unexpected,
human  advantage.  If  research  were  confined  within  the  limits  of  the  evidently
practical,  it  is  certain  that  many  of  the  most  important  discoveries-^discoveries  of  the
greatest  use  to  man — would  never  have  been  made.  Thus,  if  electricity  had  not  been
studied  for  purely  scientific  purposes  w^  should  never  havQ  had  the  telegraph.    We


566  TUG  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [gb.  zxvt.  1—2

do  not  know  all  the  efiects  of  Diyine  truth.  It  may  not  affect  others  as  it  does  i
It  may  have  special  effects  in  the  future,  not  felt  as  yet.  It  ia  our  duty  to  preaer
and  transmit  it  to  the  ages  when  it  may  hear  most  fruit.  4.  Some  truths  mi
appear  difficult  and  mysterious.  Of  course,  if  a  truth  is  wholly  unintelligible,  it  <»Qn
he  taught.  We  are  only  uttering  words  when  we  try  to  expound  it.  But  witha
being  unintelligible  it  may  be  mysterious,  it  may  be  inexplicable;  St  may  eom
so  to  speak,  wiUi  trails  of  dark  shadows.  The  temptation  is  to  leave  thia  and  on
touch  what  is  clear  throughout  But  the  very  sense  of  mystery  may  be  beoeficia
So  much  of  the  truth  as  is  clear  may  be  useful.  If  we  are  convinced  that  a  thing
true,  we  may  accept  it  without  explaining  the  whole  rationale  of  it.  The  mystery  ms
grow  clearer  as  we  practise  what  we  know  of  the  truth.  In  any  case  the  Christia
teacher  is  God's  ambassador,  commissioned  to  declare  his  Master's  message  entlr
unmutilated,  whatever  opinions  he  may  have  of  the  utility  of  it.

Vers.  8 — 19. — A  scene  in  a  Jewish  court  of  law.  We  have  here  a  graphic  pictni
of  the  procedure  under  the  Hebrew  criminal  law,  for  it  would  appear  that  Jeremia
was  inaicted  and  tried  in  accordance  with  correct  legal  order.  The  details  of  sue
a  tiial  are  not  imimportant  to  the  student  of  constitutional  history.  But  they  are  ah
full  of  human  interest.  The  law-court  is  a  strange  mirror  of  character.  Many  as  ai
the  objections  to  the  publication  of  police  news  in  the  daily  papers,  it  does  at  laai
serve  to  open  our  eyes  to  the  eccentricities  as  well  as  the  enormities  of  our  variegate
human  world.  Let  us  see  what  light  this  trial  of  Jeremiah  throws  upon  the  varioi
persons  concerned.

I.  The  aocusebs.  The  leading  accusers  are  priests  and  prophets.  The  priests^  ala
were  foremost  in  the  accusation  of  our  Lord.  Jeremiah  had  threatened  the  tempU
it  is  not  wonderful  that  temple  officials  should  be  enraged  with  him.  Religioi
persecution  is  generally  instigated  by  the  professional  clerical  class,  whose  veste
interests  have  been  attacked  by  the  reformer.  The  prophets  were  directly  oppose
by  the  teaching  of  Jeremiah.  If  orthodoxy  is  to  be  decided  hy  the  vote  of  the  majority
they  were  the  orthodox  of  their  day.  They  were  annoyed  by  the  contradiction  of  tfa
greatest  man  of  their  order.  Unable  to  answer  him,  they  tried  to  suppress  him.  Th
conduct  of  these  men  may  suggest  some  general  lessons,  viz.  (1)  fidelity  to  the  ordinance
of  worship  is  no  proof  of  fidelity  to  God;  (2)  professional  religiousness  may  be  far  remove
from  religiousness  of  character ;  (3)  they  who  claim  to  be  regular  teachers  of  religic
may  be  the^last  to  recognize  fresh  truth ;  (4)  they  who  are  interested  in  a  controven
are  bad  judges  of  the  merits  of  the  case.

II.  The  accused.  1.  Jeremiah  remains  faithful  to  his  message.  He  reiterates
with  new  emphatic  warnings.  His  defence  is  that  he  is  sent  by  God  to  speak  as  1
has  spoken.  He  rests  on  innocence,  truth,  Divine  authority.  With  such  a  ph
ho  dare  not  recant.  The  true  servants  of  God  will  know  that  they  ought  to  *'  obc
Crod  rather  than  men,"  and  therefore,  like  St.  Peter  and  St.  John,  that  they  ''  canni
but  speak  the  things  which  they  have  seen  and  heard "  (Acts  iv.  20).  2.  Jeremii
showed  indifference  to  his  own  life  (ver.  14).  He  was  a  brave  man,  though  his  enemi
accused  him  of  advocating  a  coward's  policy.  It  is  noble  thus  to  have  strength  to  a
on  the  conviction  that  truth  is  more  precious  than  life.  8.  Jeremiah  warned  t1
people  of  the  consemiences  of  injustice  (ver.  15).  This  he  did  more  for  their  sak
than  for  his  own.  Toothing  can  be  more  fktal  to  a  country  than  the  corruption
jtisMoe.

III.  The  judges.  The  princes  and  elders  seem  to  have  the  position  of  judg<
They  are  cool  and  impartial.  In  the  Jewish  state  the  office  of  judge  came  with  bir
and  rank.  The  most  radical  friend  of  the  people  may  see  that  the  superior  culture  ai
freedom  from  popular  passions  of  these  men  may  have  fitted  them  in  some  measure  I
their  work.  Unhappily,  Jeremiah  has  exposed  another  side  of  their  character,
speaks  well  for  them,  however,  after  the  severe  castigation  he  had  given  "  the  she
herds  **  (e.g,  ch.  xxv.  84—38),  that  they  had  the  magnanimity  to  lend  the  prophet
impartial  hearing,  in  spite  of  the  virulent  opposition  of  the  priests.  But  possibly  these  t^
classes  of  leading  men  were  not  on  the  friendliest  of  terms  with  one  another.  Even
this  be  the  case  it  is  well  that,  unlike  Herod  and  Pontius  Pilate,  they  did  not  come
an  agreement  through  the  sacrifice  of  an  innocent  victim.    Some  of  the  elders  cited  t


CH.  XXVI.  1—24.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  667


precedent  of  Micah's  case.  We  see  here  the  value  of  such  an  illustration.  It  serves
to  detach  the  principle  under  consideration  from  the  prejudice  of  the  passions  of  the
hour.

IV.  The  jubt.  The  assembly  of  the  people  seems  to  have  acted  as  a  jury.  The
priests  and  prophets  present  their  accusation  to  them  and  the  princes.  The  people  and
the  princes  pronounce  the  opinion  that  Jeremiah  is  innocent.  The  elders  address  them-
selves exclusively  to  the  assembly  of  the  people.  This  assembly  shows  the  weakness
of  a  popular  concourse.  The  people  are  swayed  from  side  to  side.  First  they  side  with
the  priests,  then  with  the  rulers.  It  also  shows  its  advantages.  The  people  are  open
to  impression ;  they  do  not  care  for  formal  consistency  to  a  previous  conviction  ;  they
like  to  see  fair  play.  When  their  broad  human  instincts  are  appealed  to  they  respond
rightly.

Vers.  20 — 23. — The  story  of  an  obscure  martyr,  L  Unoriginal  men  may  do  good
SERVICE  IF  THET  FOLLOW  GOOD  LEADERS.  Urijah  had  no  new  message;  but  he  fol-
lowed Jeremiah  fully  and  firmly.  Accordingly,  though  not  especially  inspired,  he  was
able  to  prophesy  "  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord.^  It  is  more  important  to  be  true  than  to
be  original.  It  is  the  duty  of  the  Christian  teacher  to  speak  in  the  Name  of  Ood,  but
only  according  to  the  teaching  of  prophets  and  apostles,  and  above  all,  Jesus  Christ.
If  we  do  this  we  can  speak  **  with  authority.**

II.  Small  men  mat  exert  great  power  when  thet  abb  on  the  side  of  bight
AND  TBUTH.  CJrijah  is  an  insignificant  personage,  yet  all  the  court  is  in  dismay  at  his
preaching.  There  is  irony  in  this  fact,  if  not  intended  by  the  language  with  which
it  is  described.  We  have  "  Jehoiakim  the  king,  with  all  his  mighty  men,  and  all  his
princes,"  alarmed  and  enraged  at  the  preaching  of  one  obscure  man.  What  a  testimony
to  the  power  of  truth  1    Magna  est  Veritas  et  preixdehit.

III.  Obscure  men  mat  suffer  when  greater  men  are  spared.  Urijah  is  killed ;
Jeremiah  is  acquitted.  The  Jews  were  overawed  by  Jeremiah ;  Urijah  was  an  enemy
small  enough  to  be  made  a  victim  without  danger.  There  is  something  terribly  humi-
liating to  human  nature  in  this.  How  often  do  we  see  the  same  meanness  choosing  tho
underling  rather  than  the  leader  for  spiteful  but  safe  revenge  1

IV.  It  is  SOMETIMES  safer  to  face  danger  THAN  TO  FLEE  FROM  IT.  Jeremiah  hold
his  ground,  and  his  life  was  spared ;  Urijah  fled  to  Egypt,  and  he  was  dragged  back  to
Jerusalem  and  ignominiously  slain.  The  dauntless  courage  of  the  one  man  overpowered
opposition ;  the  cowardice  of  the  other  tempted  it.  It  is  always  better  even  for  our-
selves to  be  brave  and  faithful.  After  his  previous  recantations  Archbishop  Cranmer
could  feel  little  of  the  triumph  of  a  Ridley  and  a  Latimer  in  the  flames  of  his  mar*
tyrdom.

Ver.  24. — A  friend  in  need,  Abikam  proves  himself  to  be  a  true  friend  to  Jeremiah
by  standing  by  him  in  the  hour  of  danger.  He  is  not  like  Joseph  of  Arimathiea,  who
was  unheard  of  till  he  came  and  begged  the  dead  body  of  his  Lord.  When  the  danger
was  greatest,  he  first  made  himself  known  on  the  side  of  the  prophet.

I.  He  was  just.  Jeremiah  had  been  maligned.  But  Abikam  knew  him  to  be
innocent.  To  have  allowed  him  to  perish  would  have  involved  complicity  in  the
murder  of  the  prophet.  Yet  how  many  would  have  washed  their  hands  and  contented
themselves  with  taking  no  active  part  in  a  public  crime  1  It  is  not  enough  to  refrain
from  joining  in  an  injustice ;  duty  requires  us  to  resist  it.

II.  He  was  independent.  Jeremiah  was  unpopular.  Though  the  unanswerable
truthfulness  of  his  defence  secured  him  a  verdict  of  acquittal  at  the  regular- trial,  there
can  be  no  doubt  that  his  life  was  in  imminent  peril  from  unscrupulous  conspirators,
now  that  the  general  sentiment  was  against  him.  It  is  a  proof  of  staunch  fidelity  to
stand  by  a  man  when  he  is  unpopular.  There  is  little  merit  in  showing  friendship  for
men  who  are  fawned  upon  by  lashion.

IIL  He  was  courageous.  He  could  only  defend  Jeremiah  at  the  peril  of  his  own
life.  By  siding  with  the  prophet  he  allowed  his  name  to  be  associated  with  all  that  was
disliked  and  feared  in  tho  persecuted  man,  and  he  must  have  known  this.  For  %
person  in  high  station  to  come  out  in  this  way  by  himself  and  defend  a  solitary^
persecuted  man  required  no  little  boldness.


568       THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,  [ch.  xxvi,  1—2

IV.  He  was  usefui*.  Ahikam  could  not  prophesy ;  but  he  could  save  a  propbei
life.  Possibly  but  for  him  Jeremiah's  mission  would  have  been  cut  short.  To  hii
therefore,  we  owe  the  possibility  of  all  the  remainder  of  the  great  prophet's  work,
is  noteworthy  that  Ahikam  had  shown  respect  for  the  prophetic  order  before  this,  whe
with  his  father  and  others,  he  went  on  an  important  mission  from  King  Josiah  to  oonsn
the  prophetess  Huldah  (2  Kings  xxiL  12 — li\  Many  a  man  who  can  do  little  direct!
may  be  the  means  of  securing  immense  good  by  fostering  and  furthering  the  work
others.  It  would  be  happy  for  us  to  think  less  of  our  own  prominence  and  more  of  t1
accomplishment  of  God  s  will,  no  matter  who  may  be  the  honoured  instrument.  \^
may  look  beyond  the  human  friend  and  see  the  hand  of  Providence  in  this  deliverani
of  the  prophet.  Ood  raises  up  helpers  when  we  least  look  for  them.  Amons  all  tl
blessings  of  life  none  should  command  more  thankfulness  to  God  than  the  gill  of  goc
friends.

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1 — 3. — OocTs  mercy  shown  in  his  mesiageM,  I.  In  thsib  being  befratkd.  ]
was  substantially  the  same  message  as  had  been  delivered  before  and  been  re^tec
The  question  was  not  finally  closed.  Jehoiakim  might  show  a  disposition  to  repent  an
idter  the  policy  of  his  father's  government.  In  any  case  a  new  chance  is  afforded  hiz
and  his  people.  God  is  slow  to  anger  (Rom.  x.  21).  The  invitations  of  his  love  ai
still  extended  to  us,  notwithstanding  the  sins  of  the  fathers  and  our  own  repeated  vie
lations  of  his  Law  (Heb.  iv.  6 — 9).  Even  the  backslider  is  addressed  witn  frequec
wamines  and  appeals — a  proceeding  which  would  have  no  meaning  apart  from  God'
reserved  purpose  of  grace.

II.  In  THEiB  TIMELINESS.  It  was  uot  Only  at  the  middle  or  end  of  Jehoiakim'
reign,  when  he  might  have  thought  himself  involved  too  deeply  to  retrace  his  steps,  bv
at  the  very  beginning.  With  a  new  king  a  fresh  opportunity  is  offered  for  the  natioi
also  to  return  to  its  allegiance.  Similarly  does  he  stand  at  the  threshold  of  every  lif
and  the  opening  of  every  career.  Ho  has  **  risen  up  early  "  and  anticipated  the  trans
gressor  in  nis  evil  way,  or  guided  his  faithful  child  into  the  paths  of  peace  (cf.  John  L  9]

III.  In  THEIB  FAiTHTULNESS.  "  Stand  in  the  court  of  the  Lord's  house,  and  speal
unto  all  the  cities  of  Judah ;  . . .  diminish  not  a  word."  To  declare  **  all  the  words  c
this  life  "  is  the  commission  of  Christ's  servants,  and  to  do  this  "  in  season  and  out  c
season."  The  exact  situation  of  men,  and  the  relation  into  which  sin  has  brought  ther
with  respect  to  God,  must  be  plainly  stated  ;  there  is  no  room  for  flattery.  It  is  absur
to  suppose  that  such  a  policy  is  due  to  vindictiveness.  It  can  only  be  explained  o
the  hypothesis  of  an  earnest  and  thorough-going  scheme  of  salvation.  Sinners  requir
to  be  faithfully  dealt  with,  in  order  to  awaken  their  conscience  and  constrain  them  t
take  advantage  of  the  means  provided  for  their  deliverance.

rV.  In  their  bevelation  of  his  wiLLiNaNESS  TO  SAVE.  It  might  almost  appea
weakness,  yet  is  Dot  Jehovah  ashamed  of  this  long-suffering.  The  attribute  of  mere;
does  not  detract  from  the  dignity  or  authority  of  Divine  character;  rather  la  it  it
elory.  This  forbearance  and  hesitation  to  inflict  punishment  can  be  attributed  to  n
base  motives.  It  is  in  harmony  with  his  behaviour  at  all  times.  How  important  ia  i
that  tho  repentant  sinner  should  know  the  merciful  disposition  of  him  with  whom  h
has  to  do !  It  is  essential  in  every  preaching  of  the  gospel  that  this  impression  shoul
be  produced.  The  failure  of  one  generation,  again,  is  no  reason  for  anotner  being  con
demned  before  probation.  God  is  *'  not  willing  that  any  should  perish "  (2  Pet
iil  9).— M.

Vers.  1— «17y  24.— 2%6  prophet  of  Ood  arraigned  hy  the  ncUion,  Jeremiah's  podtior
as  that  of  ali^rophets^  was  necessarily  a  public  one ;  to  every  man  is  he  sent  with  th
message.  It  is  inadmissible  for  him  to  soften  or  lessen  what  he  has  to  speak,  which  i
nothing  else  than  an  indictment  of  the  entire  people  (vers.  4 — 6).  In  default  of  thei
repentance  his  amdgnment  by  them  is,  therefore,  all  but  inevitable.  Indifference  coul<
not  well  be  feigned ;  words  like  his  were  certain  to  produce  an  effect.

L  His  begeftion.  It  is  tumultuous  and  threatening.  He  is  treated  as  a  crimina
"llie  people,  under  the  influence  of  his  enemies,  tho  priests  and  the  prophets^  sail


cfl.  xxvL  1—24.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  569

"  Thou  shalt  surely  die,"  and  were  "  gathered  together  a^inst  **  him  (vers.  8, 9).  It  was
to  be  expected  that  the  priests  and  the  prophetA  should  have  been  his  accusers  (ver.
11),  and  they  already  anticipate  an  unfavourable  verdict.  It  is  the  educated  and  influ-
ential amongst  the  laity  who  are  his  judges  (ver.  10) — ^a  fortunate  thing  for  him,  as  the
event  showed.  They  seem  to  have  been  more  open  to  conviction,  as  they  were  probably
better  acquainted  with  the  moral  condition  of  the  court  and  the  political  situation.
The  opposition  of  men  is  to  be  expected  by  the  follower  and  witness  of  truth,  for
"  the  carnal  mind  is  enmity  against  God  *'  (Riora.  viii.  7).  But  some  will  ever  be  found,
if  not  convinced  by  him,  yet,  through  the  work  of  the  Spirit,  open  to  conviction.  There
is  nothing  which  true  religion  demands  in  these  crises  but  a  fair  hearing  and  an  impar*
tial  judgment.

II.  £&  DEFENCE.  He  declares  the  reality  of  his  mission— '*  the  Lord  sent  me  "  (vers.
12, 15) ;  his  faithfulness  to  his  instructions,  and  the  merciful  aim  which  he  had  in  view
(ver.  13) ;  his  helplessness  and  indifference  to  personal  consequences  (ver.  14) ;  and
his  own  innocence  of  any'  evil  design  against  the  nation.  Goa's  servants,  when  thus
arraigned,  ought  to  be  gentle  and  yet  faithful  to  their  message ;  the  issue  is  to  be  left
to  him.  The  fear  of  man  is  to  be  forgotten  in  the  fear  of  God  and  the  enUiusiasm  of
salvation.

III.  His  DELiVEBAKCE.  1.  The  vcrdict  is  sensible  and  wise  (ver.  16),  and  receives
the  adhesion  of  the  people.  It  is  the  false  prophets  who  are  most  obstinately  opposed,
who  would  probably  have  aroused  the  popular  prejudices,  had  it  not  been  for  the
interference  of  certain  elders  who  recalled  previous  instances  in  point  (vers.  17 — 23) ;
and  the  strong  personal  influence  of  Ahikam,  son  of  Shapban.  We  are  reminded  of
our  Saviour's  experience  at  the  bar  of  Pilate  (Matt,  xxvii.  19 — 25).  2.  The  most
prominent  feature  of  the  judgment  is  its  consequence.  God's  children  must  frequently
DO  disappointed  in  their  appeals  to  men  and  their  expectation  of  residts  from  his  Word.
His  ways  are  hidden,  inscrutable,  and  hard  to  acquiesce  in.  A  clear  and  intelligent
verdict  is  not  to  be  expected  from  those  who  are  not  prepared  to  yield  themselves  to
God's  authority.  The  clearest  and  most  faithful  expositions  of  truth  will  frequently
appear  to  fail  of  immediate  effect.  The  servant  of  God  is  to  care  chiefly  to  deliver  his
soul ;  his  personal  safety  may  be  left  to  God.  God  can  raise  up  influential  friends  for
his  people  in  critical  times,  but  he  will  work  out  his  schemes  in  his  own  way.-*M.

Ver.  6. — Spiritual  prerogative  not  inalienable.  The  utterance  of  these  words  is  the
chief  charge  against  the  prophet ;  only,  as  in  the  case  of  Stephen  (Acts  vi.  13),  the
statement  is  mutilated  in  the  accusation,  the  condition  of  the  prophecy  being  entirely
ignored  (vers.  9, 11).  The  principle  of  indestructible  consecration  is  still  clung  to  by
many  in  the  face  qf  the  plainest  declarations  of  Scripture.  It  may  be  well,  therefore,
to  discuss  its  bearings  in  the  present  instance.

I.  The  cibcumstakges  of  its  bestowal.  It  was  Divine  grace  to  which  it  was  due ;
but  for  this  Jerusalem  would  have  been  like  other  cities.  This  favour  had  to  be  con-
tinned  from  moment  to  moment,  being  indeed  only  secured  by  the  continued  indwelling
of  the  Holy  Spirit.  What  was  due  to  grace  could  be  freely  withdrawn  by  its  Donor.
As  a  matter  of  history,  the  most  sacred  places  of  Israel  were  repeatedly  ruined  and  pro-
faned. This  destruction  is  matter  of  ancient  prophecy,  as  in  the  present  instance  (Dan.
ix.  26 ;  Mark  xiiL  2).

n.  The  terms  of  its  tenube.  The  repeated  warnings  and  injunctions  given  prove
that  the  consecration  of  the  sacred  places  depended  upon  their  occupancy  by  God's
Spirit,  and  this  in  turn  upon  the  faithfulness  of  his  people.  Either  these  had  no  mean-
ing or  the  grace  could  be  taken  away.  Jeremiah  said,  ^  If  ye  will  not  hearken  to  me,
then  will  I  make  this  house  like  Shiloh."  The  testimony  of  1  Kings  ix.  6—8  is  pre-
cisely similar  (cf.  Ps.  Ixxviii.  60 ;  ch.  vii.  12).

III.  Its  owh  essential  nature.  Strictly  speaking,  all  things  made  by  God  are
good  and  holy,  but  they  may  be  desecrated,  in  a  secondary  sense,  by  being  misused,  pro-
Sined,  or  defiled.  Institutions,  buildings,  or  material  or  mechanical  structures  of  any
sort,  are  at  best  but  secondary  receptacles  of  Divine  grace.  "  God  dwelleth  not  in
temples  made  with  hands."  It  is  the  person  occupying  these  who  is  the  true  temple,
and  when  he  is^  defiled  by  sin  or  unfaitiifulnoss  there  can  be  no  virtue  inherent  in  the
places  which  he  frequents.    Consecration  is  alone  transmissible  through  the  operation


570  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  xxvi.  1—24.


aud  presence  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  ceases  with  the  withdrawal  of  the  same.  It  cua-
sists  primarily  in  the  personal  character  through  which  it  is  expressed,  and  only
secondarily  in  places  and  things,  through  the  uses  and  practices  carried  on  by  holy  men
in  connection  with  them.  To  the  unnoly,  therefore,  every  place  and  thing  will  bo
unholy,  and  vice  versd  (Titus  i.  15).  Material  ediOces,  organization,  and  official  preroga-
tive, are  nothing  apart  from  this  personal  consecration  associated  with  them ;  and  the
loss  of  that  involves  the  loss  of  usefulness,  of  peace,  and  of  sacredness,  even  in  connec-
tion with  that  with  which  they  have  been  most  identified. — M.

Vers.  8,  9. — The  perils  of  prophesying.     I.  Thb  prophet  or  God  meets  with

UNIVEBSAL  OPPOSITION.

II.  He  18  IN  PERSONAL  DANGER.  1.  The  responsibility  of  the  judgments  predicted
is  attached  to  himself.  This  is  due  to  a  false  principle  of  association,  haying  its  root  in
human  ignorance  and  depravity.  Not  even  Ood  is  responsible.  The  sinner  moBt  blame
himself  (Gral.  iy.  16).  2.  The  worst  consequences  are  threatened.  Hatred  to  Ghxl
expresses  itself  in  hatred  to  his  servant.  It  is,  therefore,  violent  and  in  defiance  of
all  justice.  Transgressors  think  to  escape  judgment  by  denying  it  and  destroying  its
witnesses.

IIL  Ghab^oteb  is  JEOPARDIZED.  The  verdict  was  but  a  half-hearted  one,  and  did
not  meet  with  general  assent.  The  worst  charges  are  brought  against  Christian  men
who  are  faithful  to  their  convictions ;  and  it  is  not  always  the  case  that  their  ground*
lessness  is  made  clear.    This  is  part  of  the  "  reproach  of  Christ.'' — M.

Vers.  12 — 15. — The  defence  of  tJie  witness  for  the  truth.  I.  An  appeal  to  cojt-
eciENCB.  The  message  repeated  in  its  baldest  form.  Its  genuineness  insisted  upon,
and  its  reception  earnestly  urged  upon  men.  A  high  moral  standpoint  is  maintained,
and  there  is  no  compromise  or  apology.    He  stands  at  the  bar  of  human  conscience.

II.  Obedienob  to  lawful  authobitt.  He  hands  himself  over  to  them  to  deal
with  him  as  they  will;  is  careful  to  state  his  case  as  God  gives  him  ability;  and
appeals  to  no  unlawful  means  of  deliverance.

III.  Refebencb  of  the  whole  MATTER  TO  GoD.  God  scut  him — that  is  suffi-
cient. He  has  been  faithful  to  his  instructions ;  is  really  not  to  be  judged  by  man,  but
leaves  all  with  God. — M.

Ver.  24. — Help  raised  up  for  Qod^s  servants  in  times  of  peril.  I.  Of  what  bobt  it
18.     1.  Unexpected.    2.  Opportune.    3.  Effective.    4.  Not  tvhat  man  would  choose.

11.  What  it  teaches  us.  1.  The  infinite  resources  of  Ood.  2.  The  weakness  of
evil.  3.  Hiose  who  will  not  willingly  obey  Ood  are  made  to  serve  him  unu;Ulingly.
4.  Ood  chooses  his  own  way  of  dealing  with  his  servants  and  his  truth. — ^M.

Ver.  ll.^^eremiah  reckoned  worthy  of  death.  L  Who  they  were  that  pro-
nounced this  judgment.  There  is  already  a  statement  in  ver.  8  that  priests,
prophets,  and  people  had  laid  hold  on  Jeremiah  with  a  threatening  pf  death ;  but  we
must  allow  something  for  the  feelings  produced  on  the  first  reception  of  an  exasperating
and  humiliating  message.  The  case  is  worse  when  the  priests  and  prophets,  having
had  some  time  for  consideration,  however  short,  press  upon  the  princes  and  people  a
demand  for  the  death  of  Jeremiah.  The  lead  the  priests  and  prophets  here  take  goes
a  long  way  in  showing  who  were  mostly  respondblo  for  the  deplorable  state  of  thuigs
in  the  land.  If  things  were  to  be  put  right,  these  two  classes  of  men  must  be  con-
spicuous in  repentance.  Those  who  were  so  ready  to  sentence  Jeremiah  to  death  were
really  most  of  all  deserving  of  death  themselves.  He  had  simply  spoken  words  aeainst
the  city  and  the  temple,  words  which  were  not  his  own ;  those  who  condemned  bim
had  so  lived  that  their  life  had  been  a  sedulous  undermining  of  all  that  constituted  the
prosperity  and  glory  of  their  country.

II.  What  it  was  that  provoked  the  judgment.  Jeremiah  had  prophesied
against  the  city.  Observe,  not  simply  that  he  had  spoken  blasphemous  and  contemp-
tuous words  against  the  city ;  but  that  he  had  prophesied  against  it.  Thus  did  the
priests  and  prophets  show  how  little  they  understood  the  nature  of  true  prophecy.
They  did  not  understand  that  when  the  Lord  sends  forth  a  man  to  speak,  ne  puts  a


CH.  xxvT.  1—24.]    TUB  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  571

word  in  his  month  which  shall  commend  itself  to  all  who  love  truth  and  certainty.  To
the  mind  of  these  priests  and  prophets  everything  began  with  this  postulate,  that
nothing  must  bo  said  against  Jerusalem  and  the  temple.  And  to  them  it  was  no  sort
of  answer  that  the  sins  of  Jerusalem  deserved  and  demanded  that  something  should  be
said  against  it.  The  good  name  of  Jerusalem,  however  lacking  in  any  sort  of  corre-
spondence with  reality,  had  become  a  sort  of  point  of  honour.  Thus  we  see  how  the
pride  of  men  goes  before  their  destruction.  A  conventional  sense  of  honour  leads  them
into  paths  thickly  strewn  with  stumbling-blocks.  These  men  had  become  so  stufTod
with  spurious  patriotism  that  they  could  not  bear  to  have  Jerusalem  spoken  against.
Hence  they  are  logically  compelled  to  imply  that  Jeremiah  is  a  false  prophet,  and  that
Ood  has  not  spoken  at  all  They  were  as  those  who  shut  their  eyes,  and  then  say
there  is  nothing  to  be  seen.

III.  The  doom  thet  invoked.  The  man  who  speaks  against  Jerusalem  is  reckoned
worthy  of  death.  We  must  not,  of  course,  measure  this  judgment  by  our  notions  of
what  may  require  the  death-penalty.  To  speak  against  a  parent  was  by  the  Law
of  Moses  to  incur  the  death-penalty.  As  the  Apostle  James '  uses  many  forcible
expressions  to  illustrate,  great  is  the  power  of  the  tongue ;  and  a  bad  man  may  do
mischief  with  his  tongue  worthy  of  the  severest  punishment  men  can  inflict.  If
Jeremiah  had  gone  about  among  the  people  birring  them  up  to  rebellion  and  national  dis-
cord, there  would  have  been  nothing  very  astonishing  in  an  attempt  to  put  him  to  death.
But  he  gave  no  exhortation  to  the  people  save  what  each  one  could  carry  into  effect
without  the  slightest  injury  to  any  one ;  nay,  rather  the  obedience  of  each  would  be
to  the  real  and  abiding  advantage  of  all.  He  spoke  not  of  anything  he  himself  intended
to  bring  about,  but  of  what  was  going  to  happen  altogether  irrespective  of  him.  His
death,  supposing  he  were  slain,  would  make  no  difference ;  nay,  it  would  only  help  to
proclaim  his  message  louder  and  more  abidingly,  lliose  who  feel  themselves  attacked
oy  the  truth,  strike  out  recklessly  with  the  first  instrument  they  can  get  hold  of ;  but
though  they  may  seem  thus  to  destroy  Grod*s  agencies,  it  is  found  in  the  end  that  they
are  efficiently  promoting  his  work.  They  that  were  scattered  abroad  by  the  great
persecution  which  arose  at  the  time  of  Stephen's  death,  *'  went  everywhere  preaching
the  Word.»*— Y.

Vcr.  IQ,;^^ Jeremiah  reckoned  not  worthy  of  death.  The  contrast  is  very  decided
between  ver.  11  and  ver.  16.  In  ver.  11  there  is  what  appears  an  irresistible  and
deadly  accusation,  coming  from  men  who  hardly  knew  a  check  of  any  kind.  In  ver.
16  there  is  the  answer  of  those  to  whom  they  speak,  refusing  to  ratify  their  demand.
What  has  happened  between?  Only  the  appeal  of  one  who  was  strong  in  the  conscious-
ness that  he  had  been  a  faithful  servant  of  God.  If  we  consider  his  words  carefully,
we  shall  see  that  underneath  them  there  are  three  considerations,  of  which  the  first  is
more  important  than  the  second,  and  the  second  more  important  than  the  third.

I.  We  may  say  that,  first  of  all,  he  is  thinking  of  the  GU)d  who  had  sent  Hiir,
That  which  threatened  him  at  the  same  time  insulted  and  tried  to  thwart  Jehovah.
Not  that  Jeremiah  was  careless  about  his  own  safety,  but  the  glory  of  his  God  was
paramount  in  his  thoughts.  He  had  in  him  the  true  spirit  of  apostleship ;  the  claims
he  had  to  make  were  not  his  own  claims ;  he  was  a  sent  man,  and  sent  of  God.  Just
in  proportion  as  a  man  feels  that  God  has  sent  him,  must  be  his  distress  to  find  that
others  do  not  recognize  the  credentials  of  the  messenger  and  the  importance  of  the
message.  On  one  side  the  prophet  was  dealing  with  God,  on  the  other  with  men.
Every  day  deepened  on  him  the  impression  of  God's  intimate  presence  with  him ;  and
yet  this  same  God  who  was  so  much  to  him  was  nothing  to  these  people ;  the  name
that  thrilled  and  subdued  his  snsceptible  heart,  was  perhaps  the  least  potent  of  sounds
in  their  ears.  Hence  the  need  of  appealing  to  them  again  and  again,  if  perchance
there  might  be  roused  in  them  some  sort  of  apprehension  that  they  were  dealing,  not
with  a  brother  man,  but  with  the  almighty  and  holy  God.  While  they  were  all
absorbed  in  considerations  of  their  own  territorial  dignity,  God  in  his  justice  was
coming  ever  nearer.  Whatever  happens  to  the  people  or  to  the  prophet  himself,  that
prophet  will  at  all  events  exalt  God  before  them  to  the  latest  hour  of  his  existence.
If  he  has  to  die,  the  message  of  God  shall  live  more  gloriously  in  his  closing  hours.

IT.  He  is  thinking  of  the  intebbsts  of  this  apparently  obdctbate  people.


I

I  i


6?2  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,     [ch.  xxvl  1

•"  '  MM-  m^m^tm^m^m^^^  ■■»!■■■  ■     i  ■  ■     »  ■■        ■■    ■  ^^m^^m^         ■■         ■  ■  ■    ■         ■  — ^^ww^^^^a^^^^— ^^^^im^  ,  ,    ,

Though  at  the  present  moment  it  is  he  who  seems  to  be  in  danger,  he  well  knows
his  peril  is  but  a  surface  trifle  when  compared  with  that  attaching  to  the  scoi
enemies  who  are  crowded  around  him.  He  can  be  rescued,  if  so  it  please  Gkxl .
who  is  to  rescue  those  who  are  striding  onwards,  ever  more  swiftly,  to  a  right
doom?  God  can  deliver  the  prophet  from  his  enemies,  for  the  prophet  himself  i
poses  no  obstacle  to  his  deliverance ;  but  these  people  of  Judah  and  Jerusalem  intei
insurmountable  obstacles,  in  that  they  will  not  amend  their  ways  and  doings  and
the  voice  of  God.  More  than  that,  it  seems  as  if  they  were  about  to  add  %  i
obstacle  by  shedding  the  innocent  blood  of  God's  latest  messenger.  The  persecnt
always  in  greater  peril  than  the  persecuted.  Physical  pain  and  physical  death
transitory  and  unreturning  ills,  but  the  evil-doer  has  to  face  the  worm  that  dieth
Compare  with  the  words  of  the  prophet  here  the  words  of  Jesus  as  he  was  being  Ic
crucifixion  :  **  Daughters  of  Jerusalem,  weep  not  for  me,  but  weep  for  yoareelves,
for  your  children  "  (Luke  xxiii.  28).

IIL  Hb  is  thinking  op  his  own  pbesent  position.  rSee  ver.  14.)  This  i
reveals  a  calm,  intermediate  position  between  the  reckless  fanaticism  that  even  co
death  and  the  spirit  that  turns  back  the  moment  threatening  is  heard.  ^  I  am  in  ^
hands,"  says  the  prophet.  He  admits  their  power  to  the  mllest  extent,  and  he  '
not  in  any  way  dare  them  to  the  exercise  of  it.  He  is  neither  anxious  for  life  nor  ai
of  death.  This  surely  is  the  spirit  to  be  gained  if  one  would  be  a  true  witness  for  (
Jeremiah  seems  to  speak  here  as  one  who  had  gained,  for  the  moment  at  least,  so
thing  of  the  calm  of  eternity.  And  his  very  calnmess  must  surely  have  been  a  <
siderable  element  in  determining  the  rapid  change  of  feeling  among  the  multit'
Perfect  presence  of  mind,  when  it  comes  from  an  all-sufficient  Divine  stay  within,  n
have  a  wondrous  power  in  checking  those  whose  fury  is  roused  by  an  attack  on  t
base  and  selfish  interests. — Y.

Vers.  17 — 23. — An  argument  from  history,  A  prophet,  a  king,  and  a  pec
belonging  to  a  past  generation  are  brought  forward  to  justify  the  conclusion  to  wl
the  princes  and  the  people  here  had  come.  Here,  then,  is  an  eminent  instance  of  w
a  practical  study  history  may  become.  One  must  be  so  acquainted  with  the  past
to  seize  just  that  completed  event  which  will  cast  light  on  the  duties  and  necessitief
the  present.

I.  An  instance  of  a  prophet's  unpalatable  messaob.  No  word  could  have  b
more  provocative  of  resentment  than  this.  It  threatened  those  to  whom  it  was  spo
in  the  closest  possible  way.  It  meant  that  they  Were  to  be  subjected  to  their  enem
driven  from  their  homes,  and  deprived  of  their  most  substantial  possessions.  [
message  being  such,  what  comfort  Jeremiah  might  obtain  from  recollecting  that
predecessors  treading  his  thorny  path  before  him  were  now  remembered  in  such
honourable  way  I  Micah  had  been  faithful  to  his  God,  his  message,  and  his  audien
and  the  impression  of  his  faithfulness  is  still  deep  when  something  like  a  century
elapsed.  These  people  now  listening  to  Jeremiah  were  thus  made  responsible  for  Mies
words  as  well  as  Jeremiah's.  What  harmony  there  is  in  true  prophecy  I  False  {
phets,  from  their  very  position,  cannot  be  got  to  agree ;  but  here  Jeremiah's  words
once  recall  to  mind  Micah's  similar  words,  and  help  to  drive  them  with  a  dee
impression  into  some  at  least  of  this  subsequent  generation.  Thus  also,  reciproca
Micah*s  words  help  Jeremiah's.  And  not  only  was  there  harmony  between  the  i
phecies ;  there  was  harmony  between  the  characters  of  the  prophets  as  well.  All
prophets  would  have  understood  one  another  perfectly  if  they^  had  been  gathe
together  in  one  assembly.

II.  An  instance  of  how  a  prophet  should  ever  be  received.  Jeremiah  is  a
to  look  back  on  a  man  of  like  spirit  with  himself  in  the  prophet  Micah,  but  the  pres
leaders  of  Israel  have  their  thoughts  turned  to  a  very  dififerent  king  from  Jehoiak
We  can  guess  how  Hezekiah  behaved  toward  Micah  from  the  way  in  which  he  bc^
toward  Isaiah.  The  narrative  here  concerning  the  fate  of  Urijah  seems  to  be  int
duced  to  show  that,  though  Jeremiah  escaped  from  peril  at  the  hands  of  these  prii
and  prophets,  their  nature  and  the  nature  of  Jehoiak im  remained  the  same.  WJ
Hezekiah  heard  the  truth,  bitter  as  it  was,  he  humbled  himself  and  averted  den
But  Jehoiakim  and  his  profligate  and  rapacious  circle  hated  every  one  who  spoke


en.  xxvn.  1— 22.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.


573


truth.  Hence  it  was  not  enough  for  them  that  Urijah  fled;  they  followed  him  and
brought  him  back  to  suffer  their  vengeance.  Thus  it  is  made  evident  how  Jehoiakim
was  a  man  of  very  different  spirit  from  Hezekiah. — Y.

Ver.  24. — A  friend  in  need,  L  The  evident  peril  op  Jeremiah.  A  large  body  of
the  people  had  been  somehow  influenced  to  take  his  side,  but  how  long  their  favourable
mood  of  mind  might  continue,  who  could  tell  ?  There  was  no  Hezekiah  on  the  throne
to  encourage  such  a  feeling  and  make  it  permanent.  Moreover,  there  is  an  ebullition
of  fury  which  is  fatal  to  one  who,  as  far  as  the  record  enables  us  to  judge,  occupied  a
far  less  prominent  position  than  Jeremiah.  If  Urijah  was  slain,  how  could  Jeremiah
hope  to  escape  ?  We  must  try  to  get  a  distinct  impression  of  all  the  peril  in  which
Jeremiah  was  in  order  to  appreciate  the  services  rendered  to  him  by  Ahikam.

II.  The  timely  help  of  Ahikam.  Nothing  is  told  us  save  the  bare  fact  of  pro-
toction.  We  must  not  assume  that  Ahikam  was  fully  in  sympathy  with  Jeremiah.
We  have  no  means  of  judging  as  to  his  character  and  his  motives,  as  to  the  risks  that
lie  ran,  and  the  ultimate  results  to  him.  The  one  clear  thing  is  that  at  this  time  he
was  a  man  of  power,  and  was  for  some  reason  disposed  to  shield  the  prophet.  It  may
be  that,  if  we  could  lay  bare  and  analyze  his  motives,  they  would  be  found  very
mixed  as  to  their  kind.  But,  whatever  the  motives,  the  practical  service  was  the
same.  Jehovah  could,  of  course,  have  protected  his  servant  by  supernatural  means,  but
it  is  his  principle  of  working  not  to  employ  the  supernatural  when  the  natural  would
serve  the  purpose.  Hezekiah  could  do  more  than  Ahikam,  seeing  that  he  turned  to
God  and  kept  back  the  dreadful  visitations.  But  Ahikam  did  all  that  was  necessary
for  the  present  occasion.  Compare  the  position  of  Ahikam  here  with  that  of  the  Duke
of  Lancaster  towards  Wickliffe  and  the  Lollards. — Y.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  XXVIL


This  and  the  two  following  chapters  are
closely  connected.  They  all  relate  to  the
curly  part  of  the  reign  of  Zedekiah,  and  con-
tain  warnings  arising  out  of  the  deepening
gloom  of  the  political  horizon.  It  must,
however,  be  noted  that  there  is  evidently
some  mistake  in  the  first  verse  of  ch.  xxvii.,
and  also  that  the  contents  of  ch.  xxix.  point
to  a  somewhat  earlier  time  than  ch.  xxvii.,
xxviii.  Cviz.  the  first  or  second  year  of  King
Zedekiah).  To  understand  the  circum-
stances of  ch.  xxvii.,  wo  must  remember
that  Zedekiah  had  accepted  the  throne  as
the  vosial  of  Nebuchadnezzar  (2  Kings  xxiv.
17).  The  self- righteousness  and  formalism
of  the  people,  however,  would  not  allow
them  to  remain  quiet  under  such  a  humi-
liation. Deuteronomy,  it  seemed  to  them,
hod  promised  success  and  prosperity  to  an
obedient  performance  of  the  Law,  and  the
priests  and  the  prophets  assured  them  that
these  conditions  had  been  complied  with.
In  the  fourth  year  of  Zedekiah  (comp.  ch.
xxviii.  1)  the  popular  discontent  was  still
further  stimulated  by  the  presence  of  am-


bassadors from  the  neighbouring  nations,
who  had  oome  to  organize  a  common  move-
ment against  the  common  enemy.  Jeremiah
believed  that  he  could  not  give  more  forcible
expression  to  the  Divine  warnings  of  which
he  was  the  bearer  than  by  a  symbolic  act
akin  to  that  related  of  Isaiah  in  Isa.  xx.
2.  He  appeared  in  some  public  place,
where  the  ambassadors  would  bo  sure  to
pass,  with  a  yoke  upon  his  neck,  and  in
this  strange  guise  delivered  an  impressive
exhortation  to  the  foreign  visitors.  It  would
appear  as  if  Jeremiah's  exertions  on  this
occasion  were  successful,  so  far  as  Judah
was  concerned ;  for  we  are  informed  (ch.  li.
59)  that,  in  the  fourth  year  of  his  reign,
Zedekiah  took  a  journey  to  Babylon,  doubt-
less to  renew  his  oath  of  fidelity  to  the  King
of  Babylon.

It  is  instructive  to  compare  this  chapter
as  given  in  the  Hebrew  Bible  with  the  form
in  which  it  appears  in  the  Septuagint.  We
must  not  too  hastily  assume  that  the  Greek
is  incorrect,  but  examine  in  each  case  which
form  gives  most  force  and  expressiveness  to
the  prophecy.

Ver.  1.— In  the  beginning  of  the  reign


574


THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [en.  xxvu.  1-


i^a^


of  JehoiaUaitf  The  Syriao  subBiitutes  for
"Jehoiakiin"  "Zedekiah,"  to  bring  the
passage  into  conformity  with  oh.  xxviii.
1,  where  the  fourth  year  of  the  reign  of
Zedekiah  is  expressly  mentioned.  But  is
this  emendation  sufficient?  Can  the  fourth
year  be  called  *'  the  beginning  of  the  reign
of  Zedekiah,"  when  that  reign  lasted  alto-
gether  only  eleven  years  ?  Is  it  not  probable
that  the  transcriber  has  inadvertently  copied
the  heading  of  cli.  xxvi.,  which  corresponds
verbally  with  ch.  xxviL  1,  except  that  **imto
Jeremiah  "  is  wanting  ?

Yer.  2.— Xake  thee  bonds  and  jokes;
lather,  hands  and  poles ;  i.e.  the  bands  which
secured  the  two  pieces  of  wood  placed
respectively  above  and  beneath  the  neck  of
the  ox,  so  formine  a  yoke.  Hence,  in  Lev.
xxvi.  13,  we  find  the  phrase,  '*the  poles
[Authorized  Version  wrongly,  *  the  bands  'J
of  yotir  yoke."  It  is  clear  from  ch.  xxviii.
H^  that  uiis  account  is  to  be  taken  literally.
-  Yer.  8.— And  send  them,  etc.  The  letter
of  the  text  certainly  suggests  that  Jeremiah
actually  delivered  a  separate  yoke  to  each
of  the  five  ambassadors.  Some  commen-
tators, however,  finding  such  an  act  almost
incredible,  suppose  the  statement  to  be
allegorical,  and  the  "  sending  of  the  yoke  "
to  mean  the  declaration  of  the  subjection  of
the  nations  to  Nebuchsulnezzar  which  fol-
lows, somewhat  as  in  ch.  xxv.  15  the  "causing
all  the  nations  to  drink  "  means  the  utterance
of  a  prophecy  of  woe  to  the  various  peoples
concerned.  ISut  we  can  hardly  pronounce
upon  this  passage  by  Itself.  We  have  to
consider  whether  a  whole  group  of  similar
statements  is  or  is  not  to  be  taken  literally.
It  may  be  enough  to  instance  ch.  xiii.  1 — 7.
Which  oome ;  rather,  vshick  are  come.

Vers.  5,  6.— Jehovah  is  the  Creator  and
Proprietor  of  the  earth  and  all  that  is  there-
in. Therefore  he  Ciin  give  any  part  of  it  to
whomsoever  he  will.  Therefore,  Jeremiah
being  his  trustworthy  prophet,  the  kings
are  called  upon  to  take  notice  that  Jehovah
has  transferred  their  kingdoms  to  Nebu-
chadnezzar. Observe,  in  rhs.  xxvii. — xxix.
the  form  employed  is  not  *•  Nebuchadrezzar,"
but  *'  Nebuchadnezzar  "  (so  also  ch.  xxxiv.
1 ;  xxxix.  5).    (See  on  ch.  xxi.  7.)

Yer.  6. — My  servant  (see  on  ch.  xxv.  9).
The  beasts  of  the  field ;  t.e.  the  wild  beasts.
This  last  feature  indicates  the  unlimited
character  of  Nebuchsulnezzor^s  power.

Yer.  7. — Him,  and  hii  son,  and  his  son^s
•on.  This  is  intelligible  only  if  the  seventy
years  predicted  by  Jeremiah  in  ch.  xxv.
11,  12,  xxix.  10,  are  a  round  number.
Nebuchadnezzar  died  in  b.o.  561,  and  was
sucoeciled  by  his  son  Evil-Merodaeh,  who,
after  two  years,  was  put  to  death  by  Neri-
glissar.  In  b.o.  555  l^aborosoarchod  (?)  bo-
Ciime  king,  but  after  nine  months  a  U8ur|Kir


belonging  to  another  family,  Nabonedi
Nabunita,  ascended  the  throne,  'whicl
oocupied  till  b.o.  538,  the  year  of  the  fa
Babylon.  **  Seventy  years,"  taken  liten
only  brines  us  to  b.o.  555,  seventeen  y
short  of  the  conquest  of  Babylon  by  Cj
Until  the  very  time  of  his  land  oome ;  rat
until  the  time  of  his  oum  land  come.  N(
chadnezzar  cannot  ensure  his  realm  aga
captivity.  Shall  senre  themBolvefl  of  1
(For  the  meaning  of  the  phrase,  see  on
xxv.  14.)

Yer.  9. — Tour  dreamers;  rather,  j
dreams.  So  in  oh.  xxix.  8  the  **  dreams
the  people  are  expressly  distingui^ed  f
the  utterances  ot  the  prophets  and  so<
sayers.  In  our  passage  the  **dreamc
are  appropriately  mentioned  between
"  diviners  "  and  the  "  enchanterd,"  bea
the  skill  of  the  soothsayers  partly  la}
the  interpretation  of  dreams  (comp.  1
xli.  8 ;  Dan.  iL  2).

Yer.  10.— To  romoTO  yon  fsr;  or,  n
distinctly,  that  1  may  remove  you  far,
laa.  vi.  12,  **  (Unlil)  Jehovah  have  remc
men  afar  off."  The  deportation  polic
the  Assyrians  and  Babylonians  was  o
ruled  by  God  for  his  own  deep  purposes

Yer.  11.— The  nations  that  bring  t
neck,  etc.  The  Hebrew  has,  <*  The  na
that  shall  bring  its  neck,"  etc.

Vers.  12— 15.— But  the  warnings  of  J
miah  were  not  confined,  far  from  it,  to
neighbouring  kings.  Zedekiah  had  recei
a  precisely  similar  message.  Bring  i
nooks.  The  plural  is  used,  for  Zedel
was  but  an  individual  amon^  a  numbe
much  more  vigorous  personalities  (comf
ch.  xxii.  2).

Vers.  16— 22.— The  warning  to  the  pri
and  to  the  rest  of  the  people.  The  last
verses  of  this  section  app^r  in  a  much  si;
ened  form  in  the  Septuagint,  and  it  mus
admitted  that  the  description  is  singul
lengthy.  It  is,  therefore,  quite  conceiv
that  this  is  one  of  the  cases  in  which
Hebrew  text  has  been  disfigured  by  w;
interpolation.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is
possible  that  the  description  was  filled
by  an  editor,  e.g.  by  Baruch,  conscientio
for  the  benefit  of  later  readers.

Yer.  16.— The  vessels  of  the  Lord's  ho
t.e.  the  golden  vessels  which  Solomon
made,  and  which  Nebuchadnezzar  had  ta
away  (I  Kings  vli.  48 — 60 ;  2  Kings  xxiv.
Now  shortly.  These  words  are  wantinj
the  Septuagint,  and,  oouftidi'ring  that
Greek  is  also  without  the  prediction  in
22,  that  the  vessels  of  the  temple  and  oi
palace  should  be  brought  back  in  the
of  visitation  (which  seems  inconsistent
oh.  Hi.  17),  the  questiun  arises  whether
words  ^  now  shortly  "  hero  are  not  du
a  hasty  copyist.


en.  xxvn.  1—22.]     THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.


575


Yer.  18. — But  if  they  be  prophets,  etc.
The  **  false  prophets/'  so  Jeremiah  declares,
have  neglected  one  of  the  principal  functions
of  a  prophet,  viz.  intercessory  prayer  (comp.
on  en.  vii.  16).  Seeing  that  a  part  of  the
sncred  vessels  had  been  carried  to  Babylon,
all  true  prophets  ought  to  intercede  with
Jehovah  that  those  still  left  might  be
spared.  The  end  was  that  the  remaining
vessels  were  carried  off  on  the  capture  of
Jerusalem  (2  Kings  xxv.  13).

Ver.   19. — This  and   the  two    following


verses  are  thus  given  in  the  Septuagtut;
"  For  thus  saith  the  Lord,  .  .  .  and  the  rest
of  the  vessels  which  the  king  of  Babylon
took  not,  when  he  carried  Jeconiah  captive
from  Jerusalem;  they  shall  come  to  Babylon,
saith  the  Lord."  This  bhortened  form
throws  a  light  on  the  fact  of  the  absence  of
"  now  shortly  "  in  ver.  16  (see  note).  The
pillars,  etc. ;  i.e,  the  two  bronze  pillars  called
Jachin  and  Boaz  (1  Kings  vii.  21).  The
sea;  i.e,  the  molten  " sea,"  or  basin  (1  Kings
vii.  23).    The  bases  (1  Kings  vii.  27).


HOMILETICS.

Ver.  5. — The  rights  of  the  Creator.  This  address  on  the  rights  of  the  Creator  is.
made  to  heathen  men  because  God  has  rights  over  all  men,  and  because  they  who
eannot  yet  understand  his  higher  character  may  be  able  to  recognize  his  natural  rights.

I.  The  foundation  of  the  biqhts  of  the  Creator.  1.  They  rest  on  the  fact  that
all  things  that  exist  were  created.  It  is  a  fundamental  axiom  of  science  that  everything
that  has  a  beginning  must  have  a  cause.  The  universal  testimony  of  experience  is
against  the  notion  that  existences  could  spring  forth  spontaneously  from  nothing,  or
that  organisms  could  come  of  themselves  from  a  lawless  chaos.  The  theory  of  an  end-
less chain  of  causation  is  illogical.  If  this  is  regarded  as  cyclic  we  have  nothing  to
account  for  the  motion  of  the  whole  cycle.  ,  The  notion  is  parallel  to  that  of  a  wheel
revolving  because  the  several  parts  of  the  circumference  press  on  those  which  are  before
them — a  mechanical  absurdity.  If,  however,  the  chain  is  regarded  as  infinitely  long,  wo
have  another  absurdity.  Since  it  is  made  up  of  finite  links  each  of  which  is  no  perfect
cause  in  itself,  we  have  not  solved  the  question,  we  have  only  driven  it  bick  to  the
infinite  distance.  It  is  the  grand  lesson  of  the  first  chapter  of  the  Book  of  Genesis —
whatever  we  may  think  of  the  details  of  that  chapter — that  it  comes  to  our  rescue  with
the  assertion  of  a  personal  Creator,  the  only  doctrine  that  will  fit  the  requirements  of
the  case.  2.  The  rights  of  the  Creator  rest  on  the  fact  that  all  things  were  created  by
his  energy.  We  do  not  know  what  subordinate  agencies  God  may  employ.  But  in  any
case  the  fundamental  power  must  be  his.  He  cannot  delegate  powers  of  creation  in  the
sense  of  investing;;  any  beings  with  them  without  any  dependence  on  his  power.  The
power  must  be  Gkxl's,  though  the  channel  through  which  it  flows  may  be  some  lower
agency.  The  doctrine  of  evolution  would  not  touch  this  fact.  The  important  question
is  not  as  to  the  method  of  creation,  but  as  to  the  originating  power.  This  lies  behind  the
question  of  design.  It  is  the  question  of  primitive  causation.  Whether  with  succes-
sive sudden  emergencies  or  through  gradual  development,  it  is  equally  true  that  God  has
created  the  world  by  his  great  power  and  by  his  outstretched  hand.

II.  The  nature  of  the  rights  of  the  Creator.  They  are  absolute.  We  know
nothing  like  them  among  men.  A  man  is  supposed  to  have  a  right  to  dispose  of  the
work  of  his  own  hands.  But  his  work  is  not  creation.  If  he  has  built  a  house  he  has
not  made  the  ground  on  which  it  stands,  nor  the  stone  and  wood  of  which  it  is  con-
structed. But  by  Divine  creation  we  understand  not  merely  building  up  the  materials
of  the  universe  into  new  forms,  but  the  original  making  of  these  materials  and  the
determination  of  the  laws  of  nature.  From  this  fact  comes  the  right  of  GK>d  to  dis-
pose of  his  creation  as  he  thinks  fit,  to  give  the  world  and  its  contents  to  whomsoever
he  pleases.  But  in  admitting  this  we  are  saying  that  he  will  do  that  which  is  best  for
the  world  itself.  For  God  is  just  and  good  and  merciful.  He  will  please  to  do  that  which
is  right,  and  that  which  will  bless  his  creatures.  God  exercises  his  rights  through  his
will.  If  creation  reveals  the  rights,  Christ  reveals  the  will.  Through  this  higher  reve-
lation we  see  reasons  for  acquiescing  in  God*s  exercise  of  sovereignty,  not  with  mere
resignation  to  the  inevitable,  nor  even  only  with  dutiful  yielding  to  recognized  law  and
ftilthority,  but  with  thankful  submission  to  the  care  of  a  merciful  Father.  Thus  we  see
that  the  exercise  of  God's  rights  is  limited  by  his  character ;  limited  by  his  justice,  so
thftt  he  can  never  dispose  of  things  arbitrarily  or  cruelly ;  limited  by  his  love,  so  that


576  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [csh.  xxvn.  1-


he  will  dispose  of  them  so  as  to  secure  the  welfare  of  his  children.  This  is  a  consi
atioQ  of  the  first  importance.  The  neglect  of  it  has  led  to  the  interpretation  of  )
words  as  those  of  our  text  so  as  to  represent  God  as  an  arbitrary,  capricious  Soven
who  may  be  feared  and  must  be  submitted  to,  but  cannot  be  loved  or  freely  adored.

Vers.  6,  7. — Qod^s  disposal  of  marCs  possessions,  I.  God  has  a  bight  to  dispos
han's  possessions.  He  made  them,  and  they  are  always  his,  only  lent  to  be  withdr
or  transferred  when  he  wills.  If  the  Lord  gave,  he  has  a  right  to  take  away  (J(
21).  If  he  takes  much,  we  should  be  thankful  for  what  he  leaves — for  this  ovei:
have  no  claim.  Nations  should  feel  that  God  has  rights  over  them.  Their  liberties
subject  to  his  government,  their  territory  to  his^disposal.

II.  God  does  dispose  of  man's  possessions.  '  He  exercises  his  right.    He  is  no
faineant.    God  does  not  reserve  his  interference  for  the  last  day  of  judgment.     H
always  working  among  the  nations.    In  a  national  disaster  we  should  recognize
hand  of  Providence ;  so  should  we  in  the  advent  of  national  glory.    God  does  not  c
overthrow ;  he  appoints,  prospers,  gladdens.

HI.  God  does  not  always  qivb  the  qbeatest  poweb  to  the  best  men.  Nebucl
nczzar  was  a  bad  man ;  yet  God  gave  him  the  largest  dominion  in  the  world.  We  i
believe  that  he  was  best  suited  for  the  work  that  was  'required  of  him.  EUs  mia
was  to  be  a  scourge  of  the  nations.  An  angel  would  find  himself  ill  at  ease  in  s
a  work.  In  appointing  a  hangman  we  do  not  expect  to  get  the  most  high-soi
person  in  the  kingdom  for  the  post.  God  can  overrule  the  evil  nature  of  bad  men
make  it  serve  some  good  end,  as  we  can  employ  the  refuse  of  one  factory  as  us
materials  in  another.

IV.  God  does  not  always  give  the  most  abundant  possessions  to  the  best  i
We  see  bad  men  enriched,  good  men  pauperized.  Goodness  seems  on  the  whole  to
favourable  to  temporal  prosperity,  but  with  innumerable  exceptions.  Therefore
must  conclude  that  God  does  not  value  earthly  prosperity  so  highly  as  we  yalu(
He  regards  it  as  subordinate  to  higher  interests.

V.  God's  disposal  of  man's  possessions  does  not  hindeb  the  fbeb  exebcisi
man's  fowebs.  God  gave  Nebuchadnezzar  his  powers,  but  the  king  put  these  fort!
his  own  will.  By  his  daring,  his  energy,  the  use  of  his  resources,  he  won  his  brill:
victories  and  conquered  his  vast  dominions.  Gt)d  works  through  our  work.  He  g;
to  the  diligent.

VI.  God's  disposal  of  man's  possessions  does  not  limit  man's  besponsibility.
Nebuchadnezzar  got  his  territory  by  violence  and  rapacity,  he  was  not  the  less  gu
because  God  assigned  it  to  him.  For  he  was  responsible  for  bis  own  actions  and  t
motives,  irrespective  of  any  unknown  design  that  Gh)d  might  work  out  through  tfa
We  cannot  throw  the  blame  of  our  misconduct  on  the  providence  of  God.  He  o
rules  the  issue  of  our  actions,  but  he  does  not  fetter  or  force  the  choice  of  our  willa

Ver.  11. — The  duty  of  non-resistance.  Again  and  again  in  various  forms  Jerem
recurs  to  the  advice  of  submission  to  Nebuchadnezzar.  In  the  present  instance
addresses  it  to  representatives  of  foreign  nations,  and  urges  it  as  politic,  while  to
Jews  he  was  more  anxious  to  show  that  it  was  in  accordance  with  God's  will.  Vie
from  various  standpoints  there  were  several  grounds  for  non-resistance.

I.  The  will  of  Qod.  This  was  the  highest  reason.  It  could  not  be  fully  ap
elated  by  the  heathen ;  yet  even  they  were  reminded  that  the  Creator  was  the  supr
disposer  of  the  destiny  of  nations.  The  condition  of  the  Jews,  however,  was  pecu
They  were  living  under  a  theocracy.  The  prophets  were  the  ministry  of  the  Dr
King.  Their  utterances  were  revelations  of  law  for  the  government  of  the  people,
resist  Nebuchadnezzar  in  opposition  to  these  utterances  was  to  rebel  against  the  de
of  the  supreme  Sovereign  of  the  nation.  We  do  not  stand  in  the  same  outward  circ
stances.  But  we  should  learn  that  the  first  thought  in  public  as  well  as  in  pri
affairs  should  be  as  to  what  is  right,  what  is  God's  will ;  and  all  considerations  of  gl
etc.,  should  be  subordinate  to  this.  We  cannot  learn  God's  will  from  oracular  teacl
but  we  can  ascertain  it  from  a  devout  study  of  revelation,  prayer,  and  honest  thou

II.  Sound  policy.  Events  proved  that  Jeremiah  was  politically  as  well  as  moi
right.  Religious  duty  lies  nearer  to  useful  policy  than  either  fanatic  dreamers  or  woi


cu.  xxvn.  1—22.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  677


statesmen  are  able  to  see.  History  shows  that  all  resistance  to  the  mighty  flood  of  the
Babylonian  invasion  was  futilo.  Timely  submission  alone  could  secure  a  mitigation  of
its  violence.  It  is  foolish  for  a  nation  to  flourish  empty  notions  of  glory  alx)ve  con*
siderations  for  the  welfare  of  the  people.  The  loyal  statesman  will  care  less  for  the
fame  of  a  great  name,  or  the  splendour  of  brilliant  achievements,  than  for  the  peaceful
prosperity  of  his  fellow-countrymen.  The  first  interest  of  a  nation  is  this  peaceful
prosperity.  There  may  be  times  when  to  maintain  it  self-defence  becomes  a  duty.  But
wheo  self-defence  cannot  secure  it,  when  it  is  rather  hindered  than  helped  by  resistance,
it  is  foolish  to  resist  for  the  sake  of  mere  pride.

III.  Wholesome  moral  good.  The  Jews  were  taught  that  the  invasion  by  Nebu-
chadnezzar was  sent  by  God  as  a  chastisement  for  sin.  To  submit  to  it  was  to  submit
to  profitable  correction.  In  the  end  the  nation  might  hope  to  be  the  better  for  it.  We
have  no  right  to  complain  of  troubles  which  our  own  misconduct  has  brought  upon  us.
We  may  *'  count  it  all  joy  "  that  we  have  fallen  into  tribulation  if  this  works  our  higher
and  lasting  good.  Temporal  distress  should  be  patiently  borne  in  the  prospect  of
eternal  blessedness,  material  adversity  calmly  endured  when  this  is  the  means  of
securing  iuward  spiritual  good.

Ver.  18. — Prophecy  tested  hy  prayer,  I.  It  is  the  duty  op  a  prophet  to  pray.
Ho  should  be  spiritually  what  the  priest  can  only  be  ceremonially,  the  mediator
between  man  and  God.  Mediation  has  two  sides.  It  implies  the  work  of  the  interces-
sor as  well  as  that  of  the  prophet — the  speaking  to  God  for  men  as  well  the  speaking
to  men  for  God.  The  former  work,  however,  is  in  more  danger  of  falling  into  neglect.
It  is  more  spiritual,  it  requires  more  humility,  it  gains  less  credit  from  men.  But  no
prophet  can  even  discharge  his  mission  to  men  aright  unless  he  is  also  a  man  of  prayer.
God  reveals  himself  to  those  who  seek  him.  Revelations  from  Heaven  are  vouchsafed
to  those  who  live  in  communion  with  Heaven.

li.  Inspiration  is  requisite  for  prayer  as  well  as  for  prophecy.  The  true
prophet  is  the  inspired  man ;  he  also  has  the  first  requisite  for  prayer.  We  need  inspi-
ration for  prayer  to  bring  us  into  sympathy  with  God.  Prayer  is  more  than  asking
for  the  satisfaction  of  our  wants — it  is  communion  with  God  ;  and  communion  implies
sympathy.  Like  the  bird  which  soars  aloft  because  its  wings  rest  on  the  surrounding
air,  we  can  only  rise  heavenwards  as  we  bear  ourselves  up  through  an  atmosphere  of
heavenly  thought.  Without  the  breath  of  God's  Spirit  in  us  we  cannot  withdraw
from  the  world  and  attain  to  the  vivid  consciousness  of  spiritual  things.  For  prayer
involves  the  rising  above  our  common,  our  ordinary  life.  Thus  we  may  understand
the  mission  of  the  Spirit  as  an  intercessor.  Christ  intercedes  for  us  with  God.  The
Holy  Spirit  intercedes  for  God  in  us,  helping  our  infirmities,  teaching  us  what  we
should  pray  for,  and  how  to  pray,  and  breathing  into  us  yearnings  deep  and  unutterable
(Rom.  viii.  26).

III.  Divinely  inspired  prayer  will  be  reasonable  and  according  to  God's
WILL.  If  the  prophets  were  inspired  they  would  not  ask  for  the  impossible;  they
would  not  pray  for  that  which  they  knew  was  contrary  to  God's  will ;  they  would  not
utter  prayers  of  greed  and  pride.  Inspiration  does  not  make  a  man  irrational ;  on  the
contrary,  it  makes  him  see  facte  as  they  are.  If  these  prophets  were  inspired  they
would  see  the  folly  of  asking  back  the  lost  vessels.  Inspiration  is  concerned  with  the
present  and  the  future.  It  is  foolish  to  waste  time  in  lamenting  the  irretrievable.  Let
us  see  that  we  preserve  what  still  remains  with  us,  and  secure  what  is  best  for  the
future.  It  is  absurd  to  be  boasting  of  great  things  when  we  cannot  secure  small  ones.
If  the  prophete  could  not  protect  the  vessels  in  Jerusalem,  much  less  could  they  recover
those  which  had  been  already  removed  to  Babylon.  They  might  be  uttering  great
prayers  about  the  lost  treasure ;  but  while  they  made  no  prevailing  prayer  to  secure  the
treasure  still  in  hand  they  only  exposed  their  own  incompetence.

IV.  Prayer  and  its  results  are  tests  op  a  man's  spiritual  condition.  If  it  can
be  said  of  a  person,  "  Behold,  he  prayeth  I  "  we  may  know  much  of  him.  Prayer  is
the  barometer  that  rises  or  tails  with  the  changing  tone  of  the  spiritual  atmosphere..
When  we  "  restrain  prayer  "  this  is  a  sad  sign  that  our  better  life  is  failing.  It  is  use-
less to  boast  of  spiritual  attainments  such  as  those  of  the  professional  prophets;  these
are  nothing  but  delusions  if  the  prayer-test  reveals  a  condition  of  spiritual  deadness,

jerkmiah.  2 1


678  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,     [ch.  xxvii.  1-

•

The  results  of  prayer  are  a  further  test.  We  cannot  say  that  a  particular  prayer  ii
acceptable  to  Grod  because  it  does  not  bring  us  the  particular  thing  we  seek,  sine
are  always  making  foolish  requests,  and  God  mercifully  deals  with  us  accordins  U
wise  and  good  will  rather  than  according  to  the  letter  of  our  language.  Still,  i
answer  is  ever  received  to  prayer,  something  must  be  wrong.  Either  all  our  pra
are  mistaken,  which  shows  we  could  not  be  receiving  the  help  of  God's  inspiration
our  spiritual  condition  is  one  of  separation  from  God,  in  which  condition  no  pi
could  be  answered.  If  not  in  every  detail,  yet  in  the  main,  religious  experience  ma
tested  by  the  facts  of  life.  The  prophet  must  find  his  prediction  confirmed  by  hisi
The  man  of  prayer  must  show  some  fruits  of  his  devotion.


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers,  lrr'22,^ Divine  judgments  not  to  he  resisted,  A  conference  of  ambassa
from  neighbouring  nations  had  been  held  at  Zedekiah's  court  to  consider  plan
revolt  against  Nebuchadnezzar.  The  king  himself  and  a  patriotic  party  were  '
upon  resistance.  This  movement  Jeremiah  checked  at  its  very  outset  by  his  symbo
warning.

I.  GK)D  IS  Ruler  of  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth.    He  made  them,  and
trols  their  destinies.    Of  the  earth  he  says,  '*  I  have  given  it  unto  whom  it  seemed  i
^nto  me."    His  control  over  human  interests,  possessions,  and  destinies  is  absolute
unlimited.

^.  Even  the  ukoodly  i^at  be  instruments  of  his  purposes.  "  Nebucbadnes
my  servant," — a  remarkable  title  when  applied  to  a  heathen  prince.  The  charact
the  authorities,  the  agents,  and  the  instrumentalities  by  which  we  are  opposed  is
in  itself  a  reason  fo^  resisting  them  if  they  are  evidently  of  Divine  appointment,
such  a  case  we  should  be  fighting  against  God.  Moral  evil  is  ever  to  be  resisted
yritnessed  against,  but  that  which  God  appoints  must  be  acknowledged  and  submitte

\IJ,  In  such  cases  circumstances  will  clearly  show  whether  the  APPOINTl

18  of  God  or  not,  anp.  now  we  must  ^.e  guided,  in  our  conduct.  The  advice  of
prophet  is  not  to  be  interpreted  as  an  expression  of  mere  political  prudence.  It  wai
moral  significance  of  Nebuchadnezzar's  supremacy  to  which  he  appealed.  In  defau
revelation  our  own  conscience  and  common  sense  must  be  our  guides.  1.  In  cast
unmis^ahible  Divine  dispensations  the  Ic^w  of  submission  is  clearly  taught.  Of
cl^ss  is  the  rule  of  submission  to  the  powers  that  be ;  of  pheerful  contentment '
one's  lot  in  life,  so  far  as  it  seems  beyond  our  own  legitimate  control  or  to  be  pi
dentially  arranged.  2.  The  ordinary  miscellaneous  trials  and  difficulties  of  life  an
t<f  he  regarded  in  this  way.  Where  there  is  not  witness  of  conscience  emoining
mission,  energetic  efibrt  must  be  made.  The  Bible  is  no  book  of  fatalism.  It  incuU
self-help,  manly  fortitude,  and  lielieving,  intelligent  enterprise.

IV.  Guidance  and  instruction  mat  be  granted  to  men  bybn  whilst  us
Divine  discipline.  1.  Injunctions,  To  be  punished  does  not  mean  to  be  cast
quite  the  contrary.  And  therefore,  if  there  be  any  gracious  purpose  in  the  dispe
tion,  it  is  well  that  it  should  be  explained.  False  prophets  nave  foretold  favoui
turns  of  fortune  with  mischievous  efiect.  These  must  be  contradicted,  and  t
tendency  exposed.  The  Bible  is  full  of  instruction  to  the  perplexed  in  all  ages,
the  Spirit  of  God  still  speaks  to  the  hearts  of  his  children.  2.  Signs,  Somet:
these  will  be  of  one  kind,  sometimes  of  another.  Here  a  crucial  test  was  prop
viz.  the  challenge  to  the  false  prophets  to  bring  back  the  vessels  of  the  temple  i
Babylon.  If  God  heard  their  prayer,  then  it  would  appear  that  their  advice  was  so
Signs  will  never  be  wanting  to  those  who  earnestly  seek  to  know  God's  will
llieH  are  to  he  sought  through  prayer  and  waiting  upon  Ood. — M.

Ver.  18. — Prophets  tested  hy  prayer.     I.  By  this  their  disposition  was
covered.    Prayer  is  one  of  the  most  vital  indications  of  the  presence  of  spiritual
It  is  only  by  constant  devotion  and  spiritual  intercourse  with  God  that  any  one  ca
truly  acquainted  with  him  or  know  his  will.    The  taunt  of  the  prophet  is  to  the  <
th^t  they  ar^  not  ov^r  addicted  to  this  practice,  but  prefer  to  indulge  in  poll


CH.  xxvn.  1— 22.]      THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  579

trifling  and  bombast.  They  bad  no  pleasure  ia  tbe  exercises  of  true  piety ;  and  it
might  be  were  even  afraid  directly  to  invoke  Jehovah.  It  was  the  neglect  of  the  latter
by  themselves  and  their  idolatrous  followers  which  had  entailed  the  present  evils  upon
Judab.  The  prophet  points  out,  therefore,  the  true  method  of  discovering  the  will  of
GK)d,  and  of  restoring,  not  only  the  vessels  to  the  temple,  but  the  exiles  to  their  land.
II.  Their  pretensions  would  be  tested  by  the  efficacy  of  their  interces*
8I0N.  This  is  the  most  disinterested  form  of  prayer.  By  betaking  themselves  to  it,
instead  of  prophesying  lies,  they  would  do  real  service  to  the  nation.  Because  he  who
can  efifectually  intercede  :  1.  Is  a  source  of  blessing  to  all  who  are  about  him.  He  has
true  sympathy  and  insight,  and  can  bring  down  forgiveness  even  upon  the  undeserving.
'J'he  grandest  promises  of  Holy  Scripture  are  encouragements  to  this  practice.  2.  /s
thereby  (acknowledged  and  accepted  by  Ood.  As  Elijah  provoked  with  a  similar
challenge  the  prophets  of  Baal,  so  Jeremiah  taunts  his  enemies  with  their  spiritual
im potency.  The  restoration  of  the  vessels  under  the  circumstances  would  be  nothing
short  of  a  miracle,  and  supernatural  aid  would  be  required.  He  alone  is  truly  great
who  can  prevail  with  God.  And  the  greatest  of  the  prophets  is  he  who  makes  inter-
cession for  mankind  according  to  the  Divine  will. — M,

Vers.  1 — 11. — Jehovah's  consideration  toioards  some  neighbours  of  Israel.  I.  God
FORESBBB  THE  NATURAL  PROBABILITY  OP  A  STRUGGLE.  Nebuchaduezzar  and  his  hosts
are  not  to  drop  from  the  clouds  on  the  land  of  Jehovah's  people  whom  Jehovah  has
now  doomed.  These  hosts  come  from  a  distant  land,  and  have  many  intervening  lands
to  pass  through;  and  how  can  they  pass  through  in  any  but  a  destroying,  impoverishing
fasnion  ?  If  the  King  of  Babylon  is  to  reach  Jerusalem,  the  lands  here  mentioned
must  assuredly  suffer  from  him  scarcely  less  than  Judab  itself.  And  naturally  they
will  prepare  to  meet  him.  Alliances  will  be  formed ;  resources  will  be  accumulated  ;
the  greatest  strain  will  be  put  on  every  one  in  order  to  make  the  defence  successful.
These  attacked  people  cannot  assume  that,  because  Babylon  is  such  a  mighty  power,  it
is  folly  to  think  of  resisting  it.  Thus  they  seem  to  have  sent  to  Zedekiah,  hoping  to
make  a  confederation  strong  enough  to  drive  the  invader  back.

II.  Natural  as  the  struggle  might  be,  it  was  doomed  to  certain  failure.
Doomed,  not  because  it  was  the  strength  of  many  against  the  weakness  of  few,  but
because  God's  great  purposes  required  that  any  scheme  of  defence  should  be  a  failure.
If  the  defenders  had  become  as  tne  invaders  in  point  of  strength,  and  the  invaders  as
the  defenders,  this  apparently  decisive  exchange  of  resources  would  have  left  the  resuU
unaffected.

III.  Tbe  struggle,  therefore,  being  vain  beyond  all  doubt,  the  true  wisdom  was  not
even  to  attempt  it.  These  nations,  persevering  in  a  vain  struggle,  were  only  com-
mitting self-slaughter.  If  the  issue  nad  been  in  any  way  uncertain,  self-respect
would  have  said  '*  fight."  But  the  issue  was  clear ;  and  to  make  it  clear  and  impres-
sive by  some  visible  symbol,  God  commands  his  prophet  to  send  these  yokes  to  the
kings  of  the  nations  by  their  messengers.  When  the  yoke  is  seen  on  the  neck  of  the
ox  labouring  at  the  plough  or  drawing  the  waggon,  that  yoke  signifies,  not  only  sub-
mission, but  a  submission  that  is  inevitable.  The  ox  is  made  for  the  service  of  man,
and  although  when  young  it  may  rebel  and  defy  for  a  while,  it  must  submit  at  last.
The  superior  intelligence  and  the  ordained  master  cannot  but  conquer.  And  what  the
ox  is  in  the  hands  of  man,  that  every  nation,  even  the  strongest  and  bravest,  is  in  the
bands  of  God.  Babylon,  conqueror  and  spoiler  as  it  was,  was  no  more  free  from  God's
yoke  than  any  of  the  nations  it  defeated.  It  is  quite  compatible  with  the  carrying
out  of  God*s  great  purpose  that  there  should  be  the  most  striking  disparities  in  the
temporal  conditions  of  both  individuals  and  nations.  That  Babylon  should  be  the
victor  and  these  other  nations  the  vanquished,  was  m  his  eyes  a  matter  of  very
secondary  moment.  He  cannot  recognize,  as  a  state  of  things  to  obtain  even  a  modified
permanence,  that  any  nation  should  have  the  right  to  any  particular  territory.  Men
count  it  a  great  matter  that  they  can  show  a  title,  as  they  call  it,  to  a  piece  of  land.
This  simply  means  that  for  tbe  purposes  of  present  society  it  is  better  for  one  particular
person  to  have  the  piece  of  land  than  any  one  else.  But  wars  and  revolutions  make
short  work  of  these  so-called  rights  of  property.  The  Lord  has  given  the  earth  in
trust  to  the  human  race,  and  one  division  he  puts  here  and  another  there,  one  man


THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMLAH.    [cu.  xxTm.  1


here  and  anotbar  there.  From  the  throDe  where  Jehovah  Bits  in  his  righteou
buniftn  patriotism  and  mere  territorial  pride  are  esteemed  as  QOthing  more  tha
feelipp  of  ignorant  children.  We  eJbo,  as  taught  of  God,  must  become  less  intei
ia  the  traditions  and  rivatrjea  of  the  kingdoms  of  earth,  and  more  interested  ic
$!reat  procedure  of  Ood  by  which  the  whole  earth  will  become  a  part  of  the  kin
of  heaven.— Y,

EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  XXVKI.  |

Hananiab's  false prophee;:  his  reprimand
from  Jeremiah;  end  bis  fate.  The  precise-
ness  of  the  date  in  ver.  1  is  to  emphasize
the  anpenatural  character  of  Jeremiah's
prediction.  The  latter  was  uttered  in  the
nrih  month  of  the  fourth  year  of  Zede-
kiah,  and  Hananiah  died  in  the  seventh
month  of  the  same  fear  (ver.  IT).

Ver.  1. — In  the  beginninf  of  the  ralgn  of
ZediJdab.  It  seems  stronge  that  the  fourth
jeer  of  a  leign  which  onl;  lasted  eleven
years  in  all  shoald  be  called  "the  be-
ginning. Is  it  not  probable  that  the  clause
was  interpolated  here  b;  a  later  copyist  on
account  of  ch.  zxvii.  1,  where  at  present  a
similar  clause  (see  note)  is  foond?  Origin-
ally placed  in  the  margin  at  a  gloss  npon
tlie  words  "  the  same  year,"  It  would  very
cesil;  find  ilsvay  into  the  text.  HananJali
...  the  prophet  (see  on  ver.  15).  Otbeon.
This  was  a  priestly  city  (Josh.  xxl.  IT),  bd
that  Hananiah  was  probably  himself  a  prieet
like  Jeremiah  (ch.  i.  1)  and  Fashnr  (en.  xi.
]).  The  modem  El  Jib,  on  an  isolated,
rocky  hill,  doubtless  repreeeota  the  ancient
Gibean.  In  the  presanoa  of  the  priavti  and
of  all  the  people.  Apparently  the  event
took  place  on  either  a  new  moon  or  a
sabbath,  when  the  people  would  throng  to
the  temple.

Ver.  2.— Hananiah  opens  bis  prophecy
wilh  tbe  nsual  formula,  claim iueDivi tie
inspiration  in  the  fullest  sense.  His  mes-
sage is  short  and  sweet:  I  have  broken —
i.e.  I  have  decreed  to  break  (the  perfect  of
prophetic  certitude)— tbe  yoke  of  the  king
of  Babylon.  Had  Hananiah  stopped  liere.
he  might,  perhaps,  have  eeraped  Jeremiah's
indignant  tebuke.  But  with  light-hearted
arrogtince  he  ventures  to  fix  a  time  oloae  at
hand  for  tbe  event,  which,  no  doubt,  was
doBtined  to  occur,  but  after  a  long  interval.
Dr.  Payne  Smith  anggests  that  he  probably
cherished  tbe  belier  that  the  confederacy
then  on  foot  (ch.  xzvii.  3)  would  defeat
Nebaobaduezzar.

Ver.  4.— And  I  will  bring  again  .  .  .
Jseonlah.  Hananiah  thua  directly  cootra-
dicts  the  assurance  of  Jertniiah  (ch.  xxii.
StI,  27)  that  Jehoiacbin  would  not  return,
but  would  die  in  a  foreign  land.    Ha*  he  a


friends  of  Zedekiah  ?  The  v
possible,  and  may  seem  to  be  oonflrmi
the  empbatio  repetition  of  the  fall  oi
buchadneuar,  tbe  liege  lord  of  Zedt
Stil!  there  is  evideaoe  enongh  in  m<
history  that  the  return  of  an  exile  i
necessarily  tantamount  to  his  reiustatt
in  his  offloe.

Vers, 5 — 9.— Jeremiah's  reply.  Hehci
wishes  that  Hananiah'*  prMidJon
capable  of  fulfilment,  but  it  runs  dii
counter  to  the  declaration*  of  all  the
prophets.  "  War,  and  evil,  and  peatilt
was  tlieir  constant  burden,  Eot  tbe  p
to  whom  tbey  prophetied  were  unw
of  tbe  golden  age  of  felicity  In  whici
prophets  so  firmly  believed.  Only
terrible  indgment  could  the  people  of  J
be  purified  for  the  Messiauio  age.
appears  to  be  what  Jeremiah  mean
ver.  H.  True,  he  speaks  of  "  countries
"  kingdoms  "  in  the  plural,  but  alt  the
prophets  include  the  nations  best  knc
them  within  the  range  of  their  pre«e
and  even  of  their  Messianic  preoc
'    *  "     "      '   itance,  threatens   sore


end  Assyria  will  have  a  part  i:

sianio  felicity.  Thus  Eauaniah's  predi
I  has  probabilities  very  strongly  agmlu

He  not  only  prophesies  "  peace,"
,  attaches  no  condition  to  his  promise,  w
,  therefore,  bas  double  need  of  verificetii
:  the  event  (comp.  Deut  iviiL  22>

Vers.  10,  11.— Instead  of   any  rejoi

Hanaoiah  has  reoourae  to  violence.

off  and  breaks  the  yoke  en  Jeremiih'a

and  repeats  his  declaration  of  the  ft

Nebuchadneiziir  within   tvo  years.

miah  meekly  suffers.
Ver*.  12— 17.— No  long  time  after

the  prophet  is  oommissioned  to  tell
'  bitter  truth  more  fully  than  be  had
I  before,  and  to  warn  Hananiah  of  hi*  oo

ptiDidiment
Ver.  13.— The  joke*  of  wood;  tatli

j/olct  of  wood.    The  word  rendered  h

Authorized  Version  "  yokes  "  mean*  pn
,   "poles,"  two  of  whicli,  with  the  "ba

composed  a  "yoke"  (see  on  oh.  ixvi


CH.  XXVIII.  1—17.1    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.


581


But  thou  thalt  make ;  rather,  hut  tJiau  hast
made.  The  sense  in  which  Hananiah  is
said  to  have  made  **a  yoke  of  iron"  (we
bhould  render  in  the  singular)  comes  out  in
ver.  14.  The  point  is  that  there  was  a
certain  justification  for  Hananiah's  violent
uct,  but  not  that  which  he  supposed.  Jere-
miah's wooden  yoke  was  really  an  inadequate
symbol ;  the  prophet  was  too  tender  to  his
people.  Thus  Qod  made  the  truth  appear
in  still  fuller  brightness  from  the  very  per^
verseness  of  its  enemy.

Yer.  14.— The  beasta  of  the  field  (see
on  oh.  xxvii.  6).

Yer.  15. — ^The  prophet  Jeremiah  unto
Hananiah  the  prophet  In  one  sense
Hananiah  was  a  prophet  as  much  as
Jeremiah.  He  claimel  to  have  received
the  prophetic  call,  and  God  aJone,  who
searcnetn  the  heart,  could  pronounce  upon
the  justice  of  his  claim.  Wnatever  training
was  regarded  as  necessary  for  the  office  he
had  probably  gone  through,  and  now  for  a


number  of  years  he  had  been  universally
recognized  as  a  member  of  the  prophetic
class.  Probably  he  had  those  natural  gifts,
including  a  real,  though  dim  and  not  un-
erring, **  second  sight,*'  which  seems  to  have
formed  the  substratum  of  Old  Testament
prophecy;  but  he  certainly  had  not  the
moral  backbone  so  conspicuous  in  Jeremiah,
and  he  lacked  that  intimate  communion
with  Gk»d  (this  became  dear  on  the  present
occasion)  which  alone  warranted  the  assur-
ance that  **  Jehovah,  the  Gkxl  of  Israel,  hath
sent  me."

Yer.  16.— I  will  oatt  thee ;  rather,  I  $end
thee  away.  Possibly,  as  Hitzig  suggests,
there  is  an  allusion  to  the  preceding  verse,
in  which  the  same  verb  occurs.  Thou  hait
taught  rebeUion ;  literally,  thoa  hast  spoken
turning  cuide.  To  **sp^E^  turning  aside
(or,  *  rebellion ')  "  is  a  phrase  of  Deuteronomy
(xiii.  6X  where  it  is  used,  as  here,  of  op-
position, not  to  Jehovah,  but  to  revealed
truth.


HOMILETICa

Yers.  1 — 17. — The  story  of  Hananiah  the  prophet,  Hananiah,  priest  and  professional
prophet,  now  presents  himself  as  the  rival  and  opponent  of  Jeremiah.  A  rude  and
tihallow  man,  he  probably  thrusts  himself  forward  unasked,  as  the  representative  of  the
]>opular  prophets  of  smooth  things  whom  it  is  the  true  prophet's  painful  duty  to  refute
and  rebuke.  His  own  conduct  and  Jeremiah's  behaviour  to  him  are  both  clearly
brought  before  us  in  this  chapter.

I.  The  conduct  of  Hananiah.  1.  He  utters  a  pleasing  prophecy.  He  promises  a
speedy  overthrow  of  the  tyranny  of  Nebuchadnezzar.  Even  Jeremiah  heartily  echoes
the  wish  that  the  prediction  could  be  true.  It  is  always  easiest  to  prophesy  smooth
things,  to  soothe  and  flatter  rather  than  convince  men  of  sin  and  persuade  them  to
accept  the  darker  truths.  2.  Hananiah  speaks  with  great  positiveness.  He  boldly
claims  the  authority  of  Gtod  for  what  he  says  (ver.  2).  £Us  assertions  are  definite,
minute,  inherently  consistent.  Daring  assumptions  such  as  those  of  Hananiah  carry
the  unthinking  as  by  storm.  A  brazen  face,  a  loud  voice,  a  positive  assertion,  are
enough  to  convince  many  people  without  the  slightest  ground  in  reason.  You  have
only  to  say  a  thing  very  strongly  and  to  repeat  it  very  often,  and  the  mere  force  of  utter-
ance will  make  way  for  it  where  calm,  measured  reasoning  quite  fails.  Hananiah  is
definite  in  detaiL  People  have  a  tendency  to  believe  what  they  can  understand  clearly
and  imagine  vividly.  \Ye  must  be  warned,  therefore,  (I)  that  they  who  make  the
loudest  claims  to  speak  for  Ood  may  have  least  right  to  do  so ;  (2)  that  the  truth  of  a
statement  must  be  measured,  not  by  the  vehemence  with  which  it  is  asserted,  but  by
the  strength  of  the  grounds  on  which  it  rests ;  and  (3)  that  the  reality  of  things  cannot
be  ascertained  by  reflection  on  the  consistency,  clearness,  and  fulness  of  our  subjective
ideas  about  them.  3.  Hananiah  manifests  a  stupid  insolence  under  contradiction.  He
cannot  reason  with  Jeremiah,  he  cannot  refute  the  great  prophet*s  words,  he  has  no  new
thoughts  to  contribute ;  he  can  only  repeat  his  former  assertion  with  loud  words  and
passionate  actions.  He  is  a  poor,  unintellectual  creature,  whose  notion  of  controversy
is  like  that  of  foolish  people  we  sometimes  meet  with — people  who  imagine  that  to  argue
is  just  to  repeat  an  assertion  with  dogged  obstinacy.  Hananiah  loses  his  temper  and
behaves  with  rudeness  to  Jeremiah.  The  last  refuge  of  the  helpless  controversialist  is
insolence  and  abuse.

II.  The  behaviour  of  Jeremiah  to  Hananiah.  1.  He  heartily  assents  to  the
false  prophet's  desire  for  the  happiness  of  the  nation.  "  Jeremiah  said.  Amen :  the
Lord  do  so,*'  etc.  (ver.  6).    He  had  been  accused  of  a  traitorous  wish  to  see  his


682  THE  BOOK   OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  xxvin.  ]

country  hnmiliated.  Ko  charge  could  be  more  false.  The  preacher  who  feels
duty  to  threaten  Divine  punishments  to  wicked  men  should  not  be  accused  of  wi
them  evil.  He  may  speak  with  grief  and  regret,  as  God  also  punishes  reluct
(Ezek.  xxxiii.  11).  2.  Jeremiah  appeals  to  the  example  of  the  older  prophets,
is  true  to  their  teaching,  while  Hananiah  contradicts  it.  This  appeal  shoui
unanswerable  to  one  who,  like  Jeremiah^s  opponent,  professes  to  be  the  successor  of
men.  Amongst  men  who  believe  in  the  Bible  the  appeal  to  Scripture  should  be  a
resort  How  can  a  Christian  teacher  maintain  his  ground  if  he  is  contradicting
highest  authority  ?  Jeremiah  was  fond  of  "  the  old  paths/'  the  traditions  and  exai:
of  earlier  prophets.  There  is  a  consistency  in  prophecy,  a  common  spirit,  con
ideas  and  principles  in  the  prophets,  and  in  revelation  generally^  3.  Jeremiah  ap;
to  the  confirmation  of  facts,  (Yer.  9.)  He  dares  to  await  the  verdict  of  history
challenges  Hananiah  to  do  the  same.  We  are  too  hasty  in  following  the  loud
pushing  popular  spirits  of  the  hour.  Wait  and  see  the  issue  of  their  work  whei
first  excitement  has  died  away.  4.  Jeremiah  meets  the  insolence  of  Hananiah  with  (
courtesy.  He  calmly  reasons  with  him  at  fijrst  When  he  finds  his  opponent  ]
against  arguments  which  only  rouse  his  temper,  he  quietly  leaves  him.  There  are  t
when  men  are  too  heated  for  argument,  and  there  are  men  with  whom  it  is  al
useless  to  argue.  Under  such  circumstances  the  interest  of  truth,  our  own  rig]
dignity,  and  charity  to  our  opponent,  caution  us  to  leave  him  in  silence*  5.  Jerei
reiterates  his  prediction  at  a  later  time,  with  more  stringent  threats,  and  pronoun<
solemn  sentence  of  death  on  Hananiah.  This  he  does  after  receiving  fresh  oommunicai
from  Heaven  and  under  the  urgency  of  a  Divine  commission.  It  is  always  our  dul
forgive  our  enemies ;  but  if  they  are  also  the  enemies  of  Ghxl,  we  may  recognize
justice  of  Grod's  judgment  on  them.  It  is  to  be  noted  that  Jeremiah  did  not  com
the  death  of  Hananiah ;  he  only  foretold  it,  and  this  under  a  Divine  impulse,
words  of  Jeremiah  were  verified.  Hananiah  died  long  before  events  proved  the  fut
of  his  own  prophecy.  Perhaps  this  was  best  for  him.  His  death  is  a  solenm  war
to  people  who  may  be  tempted  to  sacrifice  truth  for  popularity*

Ver.  8.—* ^n  appeal  to  ancient  prophecy,  L  Tab  pbinciflbs  or*  thk  app
Several  important  principles  are  here  illustrated.  1.  The  value  of  a  precedeni,  N
circumstances  demand  novel  actions.  The  spirit  of  progress  should  teach  us  to  imp
on  the  conduct  of  our  forefathers.  Yet  the  most  radical  progressionist  must  often  see
use  of  a  precedent.  It  is  an  appeal  from  the  confusion  and  excitement  of  the  moo
to  an  example  which  can  be  studied  more  calmly.  If  the  precedent  is  respected
both  parties  of  a  quarrel,  there  is  in  it  a  common  meeting-place  for  a  reconcilial
The  Bible  is  useful  to  us  in  this  way  for  Its  great  examples.  2*  The  duty  of  r^eri
to  Scripture,  Jeremiah  did  not  simply  refer  to  antiquity ;  he  referred  to  ancient
phecy — to  the  authority  of  a  series  of  inspired  teachers.  This  is  the  justification  ol
appeals  to  the  Bible.  It  is  not  that  the  Bible  is  an  old  book,  but  that  it  is  the  foun
of  special  Divine  illumination.  8.  The  unity  of  Scripture,  The  most  original  thin]
have  usually  started  on  the  foundation  prepared  by  their  predecessors^  But  such  i
as  Kepler  and  Newton  have  left  their  teachers  far  behind,  and  exposed  the  error  of  m
of  their  teaching.  It  is  different  with  the  Bible.  Here,  too,  there  is  the  pn^rosi
development  of  thought,  the  growing  light  of  revelation*  But  while  the  outer  h
of  the  earlier  ideas  of  the  Bible  is  cast  aside,  those  ideas  themselves  are  not  discan
but  enlarged  and  glorified  by  a  fuller  evolution.  Definite  laws  are  changed,  but  v
principles  remain.    Thus  there  is  a  marvellous  unity  in  the  Bible.

II.  Thb  BESuliT  OF  THE  APPEAL.  Thls  led  to  a  confirmation  of  the  darker  vief
the  future.  It  was  a  sad  result.  It  is  only  too  true  that  the  old  prophets  were  preacl
of  repentance,  threatening  wrath  and  judgment.  Their  visions  of  the  brighter  fut
were  few  compared  with  their  more  stem  predictions.  The  former,  too,  referred
distant  times,  the  latter  to  circumstances  of  immediate  interest.  It  is  a  terrible  thou
that  an  inspired  view  of  human  nature  should  lead  so  many  great  and  good  men  to  I
gloomy  conclusion.  If  these  men  rose  from  their  graves  and  lifted  up  their  voicei
our  own  cities  would  they  completely  change  their  tone?  Such  a  man  as  Thoi
Carlyle  seemed  to  realize  something  of  the  spirit  of  these  old  Hebrew  prophets,  and
him  the  condition  of  the  modem  world  suggested  the  gloomiest  foreboaings*    Happ


cir.  xxviiL  1—17.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMUH.  68S

we  do  not  look  to  the  verdict  of  a  prophet  for  our  salvation.  Christ  has  come.  Wla
listen  to  the  teaching  of  apostles  as  well  as  to  that  of  prophets.  We  have  a  New  Testa*
ment.  If  the  prophet  exposes  our  sin  and  threatens  our  ruin,  the  gospel  teacher  points
to  the  remedy  in  the  redemption  of  the  world  by  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.

Vers.  13,  14. — Yokes  of  iron.  Hananiah  broke  the  wooden  yoke  which  Jeremiah
wore  in  token  of  the  approaching  servitude  of  the  Jews.  In  return  he  was  told  that  the
real  yoke  of  Babylon  would  be  much  more  severe— a  yoke  of  iron.

I.  Facts  are  mobe  ivfobtakt  than  opinions.  If  the  rule  of  Babylon  really
would  be  as  a  yoke  of  iron,  what  was  the  use  of  circulating  milder  views  of  the  future  ?
We  are  too  much  inclined  to  judge  of  ideas  by  their  fitness  for  our  own  previous  notions,
instead  of  testing  them  solely  by  their  consistency  with  facts.

II.  The  future  may  be  worse  than  we  expect.  There  are  dreadful  events  in
past  history.  May  there  not  also  be  dreadful  events  in  future  experience  ?  Life  is  not
a  harmless  plaything,  nor  the  earth  a  thornless  garden.  There  are  terrors,  jud);;ments,
agonies,  in  this  strange  world  of  ours.  Who  knows  what  may  be  in  the  next  ?  I^hls
much  we  should  all  know :  Ood  is  not  the  easy,  indulgent  Being  of  lax  p;incipli^
that  shallow  optimists  fancy  him  to  be,  but  wisely  firm  as  well  as  infinitely  merciful
where  mercy  can  be  justly  exercised.

III.  Neglect  op  timely  wabning  will  incbease  futube  buffebing.  If  the  yoke
of  wood  is  broken,  a  yoke  of  iron  shall  be  forged  to  take  its  place.  The  longer  we  delajr
hearkening  to  the  warnings  of  God  the  worse  must  be  our  future  punishment,  because
our  sin  is  increasing  while  we  remain  impenitent ;  because  to  sin  against  light,  against
admonition,  is  to  sin  more  plainly  and  wilfully ;  and  also  because  the  rejection  of  ^
warning  sent  in  mercy  is  itself  an  act  of  resistance  to  the  will  of  Godk

Ver.  16. — '*  This  year  ihou  shalt  die.^*  It  is  a  great  mercy  that  Qod  has  hidden  from
us  the  date  of  our  death.  If  this  were  known  all  life  would  be  deranged  ;  some  would
grow  reckless,  some  negligent  of  their  highest  duty  tilldedth  was  near,  some  despondent
and  unfit  for  all  work,  some  overclouded  with  grief  for  the  approaching  separation
from  loved  friends.  We  may  be  thankful,  therefore,  that  Qod  keeps  the  secret  to  him-
self. "  Our  times  are  in  his  hand.^'  Still,  it  may  be  profitable  for  us  to  question  our-
selves how  we  should  act  if  such  a  revelation  wire  made— if  an  angel  came  to  us  with
the  message,  '*  This  year  thou  shalt  die."    What  would  be  the  effect  of  such  a  message  ?

I.   It  would  UBGE   us  to  put   OUB   TEMPOBAL   AFFAIBS   in    BEADINESS  fob  t)EAt!t.

We  should  wish  to  **  put  our  house  in  order,"  to  see  that  all  was  left  right  and  stnlight
for  those  who  come  after  us,  to  do  all  in  our  power  to  provide  for  those  who  are  depen-
dent on  us.  But  none  of  us  knows  but  that  he  may  die  this  year.  We  should  not}
therefore,  delay  in  providing  for  those  who  will  be  left.  It  is  foolish  for  a  man  not  to
make  his  will  till  ho  knows  he  is  dying.  Cruel  injustice  has  often  been  done  through
the  postponement  of  this  duty  until  too  late.

II.  It  would  urge  us  to  be  beady  fob  anotheb  wobld.  It  would  matter  little
what  happned  to  us  for  the  few  months  that  remained  of  our  earthly  course;  This
life  would  then  seem  a  poor  shadow,  its  treasures  not  worth  a  thought.  All  anxiety
would  be  fixed  on  "  that  undiscovered  country.*'  But  we  do  not  know  but  that  we
shall  die  this  year ;  and  we  do  know  that  life  is  fast  fleeting,  Should  we  not  be  ready
in  any  c^se  ?  Should  we  not  feel  as  pilgrims  and  strangers,  and  seek  fo^  better  treasures
than  those  of  earth,  which  all  lie  a  prey  to  thief  and  moth  and  rust  ?  Besides,  spiHtual
preparation  for  death  is  not  the  simple,  mechanical  thing  it  appears  to  be  in  con-
ventional language.  Do  we  know  we  shall  ever  be  able  to  fit  ourselves  for  atiother
world  if  we  postpone  all  considerations  of  this  momentous  subject?  It  should  be
remembered,  too,  that  he  who  is  not  fit  to  die  is  not  fit  to  live ;  that  spiritual  condition
which  is  real  preparedness  for  heaven  is  just  the  condition  for  serving  God  here ;  if  Wb
are  rightly  living  now  we  are  fit  to  die — then  and  only  then,

III.  It  would  ubge"*  us  to  a  diligent  completion  of  oub  life's  work.  It
would  be  a  call  to  earnest  effort  to  redeem  the  short  remainder  of  our  days.  There
would  be  much  that  we  should  desire  to  see  finished.  It  would  be  sad  to  let  the  task
fall  from  our  hands  unaccomplished,  but  the  same  appeal  is  made  to  all  of  us.  Life
is  short,  and  the  work  of  life  is  great.    There  is  much  for  the  longest  life  to  do.    1&


B84  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  xxvhl  1—1

any  case  there  is  no  time  for  idle  postponement  of  service.  Every  day  has  its  duty
neglect  this,  and  you  can  never  return  to  it  without  neglecting  the  duty  of  the  morron
Let  us  all  "  work  while  it  is  day,"  seeing  that  "  the  night  cometh,  when  no  man  ca
work  "  (John  ix.  4).

lY.  It  should  not  trouble  the  Chbistdln  with  any  fear.  To  him  death  hi
lost  its  sting.  The  natural  human  shrinking  from  it  may  remain,  but  this  should  I
overwhelmed  by  the  thought  of  the  home  beyond.  For  him  to  die  is  to  end  **  the  hear
ache,  and  the  thousand  natural  shocks  that  flesh  is  heir  to,"  and  to  enter  the  rest,  tb
safety,  the  joy  of  heaven.  But  to  the  spiritual  man  it  is  more  than  this.  All  his  bett<
days  he  has  been  seeking  to  be  nearer  to  Qod ;  for  GKxi  he  has  been  panting  and  yean
ing.  Death  will  be  the  fruition  of  this  his  heart's  hunger;  it  will  make  him  "for  en
with  the  Lord."  Earthly  ties  will  still  be  strong,  but  be  will  feel  that  all  is  well  thi
is  Grod's  will.  If  Grod's  will  be  that  he  live,  he  will  rejoice  in  the  privilege  of  service
if  it  be  that  ho  die,  he  will  feci  this  as  "  gain/'  so  that,  **  whether  he  live  or  die,  he
the  Lord's."

**  Lord,  it  belongs  not  to  my  care

Whether  I  die  or  live ;
To  love  and  serve  thee  is  my  shares

And  this  thy  grace  must  give."


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1 — 17. — How  to  answer  those  who  oppose  the  truth.  Where  the  light  is  thei
will  be  the  deepest  shadow ;  the  truth  is  ever  sharply  defined  against  falsehood.  Ju
when  it  was  most  important  that  the  will  of  GKxl  and  the  real  position  of  Israel  sbou
be  ascertained,  there  were  many  striving  to  deceive  and  misrepresent.  The  behavioi
of  Jeremiah  on  this  occasion  was  twofold.

I.  AcCOBDINa    TO     HUMAN     KKOWLEOOE     AND     JUDGMENT.        1.     WUh      fnodertUio\

"Amen:  the  Lord  do  so."    Under  such  trving  circumstances  the  behaviour  of  tl

Erophet  is  praiseworthy  in  the  extreme.  The  contradiction  and  indignity  to  whic
e  had  been  subjected  might  have  excused  a  hut  rejoinder.  He  is  willing  to  hai
the  dispute  settled  in  a  very  effectual  way.  Meanwhile  he  is  careful  to  make  it  clei
that  he  too  desired  what  his  opponent  had  prophesied.  This  was  the  disposition  of  tl
Master,  and  should  be  copied  by  all  his  disciples.  "  A  soft  answer  tumeth  awa
wrath ; "  "  The  servant  of  the  Lord  must  not  strive,  but  be  gentle  unto  all  men
2.  By  an  appeal  to  the  great  principle  that  the  event  will  determine  the  truth  of  ike
predictions  or  (he  wisdom  of  their  conduct.  (Vers,  8,  9.)  This  was  an  appeal  to  tl
conscience  of  his  opponent.  3.  Quiet  submission  to  the  wHl  of  Ood.  ^And  tl
prophet  Jeremiah  went  his  way."  When  there  is  no  sign  of  reasonableness  in  oi
antagonists,  or  no  prospect  of  immediate  success,  it  is  well  to  submit  quietly  and  l
wait  GK)d's  time.  This  is  the  test  of  spiritual  reality.  True  Christianity  will  sho
itself  in  earnest,  unobtrusive  actions  and  patient  waiting  for  Christ.  The  most  eloquei
enforcement  of  the  gospel  is  a  quiet,  consistent  life.

11,  As  INSPIRED.  Whilst  he  had  no  direct  message  he  was  silent.  But  Gt>d,  wb
will  not  leave  his  servants  without  a  witness,  and  who  resents  the  slightest  dishonoi
to  which  they  are  subjected,  came  to  his  rescue.  The  whole  attitude  of  the  prophi
is  now  changed.  With  certainty  he  recovers  also  his  vivacity,  energy,  and  fearlet
power  of  denunciation.  He  is  now  the  minister  of  judgment  1.  To  the  nation,  Tb
yoke  of  wood  gives  place  to  one  of  iron.  The  complicity  of  the  people  in  the  guilt  <
the  false  prophet  must  be  punished.  Their  resistance  to  the  will  of  Qod  and  dlsbeli<
of  his  servant  involves  them  in  a  heavier  sentence.  So  it  is  with  all  impenitence  an
rejection  of  God's  Word.  The  position  of  the  transgressor  cannot  remain  the  8am<
With  each  step  he  plunges  into  deeper  guilt  and  more  fearful  judgment.  2.  To  U
originator  of  the  offence.  In  this  case  the  sentence  is  proportionately  heavier  and  moi
immediate.  Death  is  pronounced  against  the  offending  prophet  with  terrible  brevit
and  clearness.  There  is  ever  a  distinction  between  offenders  and  those  who  cause  thei
to  offend.  Primacy  in  disobedience  will  ensure  a  special  and  unmistakable  mark  <
God's  anger.    This  announcement  of  doom,  simple  as  it  was  in  itself,  must  have  bee


CH.  XXVIII.  1—17.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  5R5


appalling  to  its  hearer,  whose  inner  sense  of  degradation  and  falseness  would  enhance
its  force.  It  is  possible  that  the  time  and  manner  of  this  communication  may  have
been  intended  to  awaken  repentance;  failing  which  it  was  carried  into  efifect.  All
around  us  such  judgments  are  taking  place,  and  it  is  well  for  men  to  examine  what
manner  of  spirit  they  are  of  ere  they  presume  to  occupy  sacred  offices  or  to  set  them-
selves against  the  laws  of  God's  kiiigdom. — M.

^   Vers.  10, 11. — Presumption  increasing  with  impunity.    The  meekness  of  Jeremiah's

reply  emboldened  the  false  prophet,  and  he  forthwith  proceeded  from  words  to  actions.
The  symbol  appointed  by  uod  was  publicly  removed  from  the  shoulders  of  Jeremiah
'ud  destroyed.    Opposition  to  the  spirit  and  will  of  God  could  scarcely  go  further.

'I'he  interpretation  given  to  the  action  reveals  how  false  and  dangerous  the  position

assumed.

I.  The  servants  of  God  are  frequently  at  apparent  disadvantage  ab
€X)MPARED  WITH  THE  SERVANTS  OF  Satan.  The  actiou  was  SO  suddcu  and  unex-
pected that  Jeremiah  had  but  little  to  say,  and  eventually  went  his  way,  sad  but  silent.
Everything  seemed  to  favour  his  opponent.  The  "  patriotic  party  "  was  enthusiastic,
and  not  to  be  restrained.  The  wisdom  of  this  world  is  prompt  and  versatile  because  it
is  unprincipled ;  and  it  is  bold  because  it  is  profane  and  unbelieving.  Yet  this  is  the
condition  under  which  the  followers  of  the  truth  are  to  contend.

II.  The  servants  of  Satan  are  thereby  encouraged  to  more  pronounced
BEHAVIOUR^  AND  COMMIT  THEMSELVES  BEYOND  RECALL.  Hauauiah's  casc  illustrates
this  in  two  ways,  viz. :  1.  Sacrilegious  action.  Touching  the  person  of  the  prophet.
Deliberately  destroying  the  yoke  which  he  must  have  known  was  of  Divine  appoint-
ment. 2.  Its  definitive  interpretation.  He  not  only  rebelled  [against  the  Lord,  but
committed  himself  to  a  prediction  with  a  fixed  date,  and  one  that  must  soon  arrive.
Tlie  necessity  of  the  position  he  had  assumed  was  upon  him.  Woe  to  the  prophet  of
lies  who  ventures  upon  definite  and  verifiable  prophecies  1  There  is  no  halting-place
to  those  who  begin  systematically  to  oppose  God's  truth.  They  must  ere  long  be
caught  in  their  own  snares.  With  the  sense  of  reverence  the  fear  of  consequences  is
forgotten  and  caution  is  discarded.

III.  By  so  DOING  THEY  HASTEN  THEIR  OWN  JUDGMENT.  The  triumph  Is  brilliant
but  short-lived,  and  purchased  at  terrible  cost.  Let  sinners  pause  when  their  crimes
are  made  easy  for  them  and  excess  follows  upon  excess.  The  motion  of  the  rapid  may
but  precede  the  fall  (Jude  8 — 13).  When  human  resources  and  precautions  are
exhausted,  it  may  be  a  sign  that  God  will  undertake  his  own  cause.  Uis  servants  are
justified  at  such  a  time  in  looking  for  and  invoking  his  help,  which  is  likely  to  be  of  a
very  signal  and  determining  kind. — M.

Vers.  1 — 17. — A  false  prophet  and  his  fate,  I.  Hananiah's  presumption.  Note
his  direct  challenge  to  the  true  prophet.  He  seeks  out  Jeremiah  in  the  house  of
Jehovah, "  in  the  presence  of  the  priests  and  of  all  the  people."  A  prophet  was,  of  course,
bound  to  make  his  utterances  in  public,  but  Hananiah  waited  his  chance  until  he  found
an  opportunity  of  bearding  the  hated  Jeremiah  in  as  open  a  way  as  possible.  He
speaks  explicitly  in  the  Name  of  Jehovah,  He  is  not  afraid  to  take  the  great  Name  in
vain.  Let  us  be  warned  lest  we  heedlessly  utter,  under  the  pretended  authority  of  God«
what  is  nothing  more  than  the  daring  imagination  of  our  own  hearts.  The  false
I)rophet  ventures  on  the  very  figure  which  had  been  employed  by  the  true  prophet.  It
would  almost  seem  as  if  Jeremiah  had  habitually  borne  something  in  the  shape  of  a
yoke,  and  if  so,  it  must  have  been  a  very  irritating  sight  to  the  false  prophets.  Little
wonder  that,  under  the  pretence  of  a  prophetic  mission,  he  ventured  on  tne  removal  of
this  yoke.  Above  all  things,  there  is  the  confident  assertion  with  respect  to  time.
Notwithstanding  all  the  manifest  difficulties  of  the  achievement,  Hananiah  is  not
afraid  to  say  that  in  two  years  Judah  will  again  be  firmly  resting  on  its  old  founda-
tions. Thus  from  all  these  indications  of  presumptuous  action,  we  have  an  illustration
of  how  confident  heretics  are  in  their  error.  Too  often  we  are  doubtful  and  partial  in
our  statements  of  truth.  We  lack  that  faith  and  that  thorough-going  assertion  of  the
truths  God  has  revealed  which  are  so  necessary  to  make  those  truths  full  of  operative
and  irresistible  force.     Hananiah  here  is  as  confident  as  ho  can  be  in  all  his  deadly


5]6


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [cil  xxix.  1— 3


errors.  Ho  has  not  the  least  fear  of  plunging  into  the  greatest  responsibilities  wil
regard  to  definite  predictions.  He  passes  from  the  ground  of  mere  ozpostulatioofl  ao
remonstrances,  and  ventures  on  statements  which  in  a  very  short  time  must  eith<
make  him  or  ruin  him.  Let  ns  learn  from  our  enemies,  and  labour  to  be  confident  ao
determined  in  our  assertion  of  truth,  seeing  there  is  no  lack  of  determination  on  tl
part  of  those  who  have  cast  in  their  lot  with  error.

II.  Hanakiah*s  persistence.  It  is  very  noticeable  that  Jeremiah  does  not  met
him  in  anything  of  an  angry  or  denouncing  manner.  •  It  would  have  well  pleased  tL
true  prophet  to  see  the  predictions  of  the  false  prophet  brought  about;  for  it  is  mac
abundantly  evident  that  the  sufferings  of  his  country  were  an  unspeakable  grief  1
Jeremiah.  An  angry  reply  served  no  good  purpose;  The  true  prophet  could  manifei
a  dignified  patience,  and  leave  timd  to  vindicate  both  the  validity  of  his  prc^het
claim  and  his  fidelity  in  speaking  the  truthi  Meantime,  he  can  only  recommeo
Hananiah  to  consider  well  the  lessons  of  history,  and  how  the  prophets  of  old  ha
spoken  of  stem  dealings  with  many  wicked  nations.  Unfortunately,  bad  men  a:
hardly  ever  discriminating  students  of  historyt  Hananiah  was  here  given  an  oppo
tunity  of  repentance,  if  only  he  hild  chosen  to  avail  himself  ot  it.  But  so  full  was  1
of  his  own  devices  that  gentle  treatment  only  increased  his  audacity,  and  he  dre
public  attention  more  than  ever  to  himself  by  removing  the  symbolic  yoke  froi
Jeremiah's  neck^  That  he  was  allowed  to  do  all  this  should  teach  ns  a  lesson  <
patience  and  trust  when  we  see  wicked  men  pursuing,  undisturbed,  their  chosen  pat]
They  are  only  climbing  higher  that  their  ultimate  ruin  may  become  more  wide)
manifest.

III.  Hananiah*b  DOOiL  The  first  result  of  his  presumptuous  conduct  is  to  bring
more  emphatic  prophecy  with  regard  to  the  captives*  The  second  is  to  bring
sentence  of  death  on  the  false  prophet  himself.  He  who  has  dealt  rashlr  with  tl
ordering  of  times  and  seasons  is  to  know  by  a  bitter  experience  that  GK>a  has  the
times  and  seasons  in  his  own  hands.  He  is  to  die  within  the  year*  Notice  the  si
which  he  is  charged  with  committing.  He  is  doomed  to  death,  not  simply  for  t)
falsehood  or  the  profanity,  but  for  this,  that  he  had  taught  rebellion  against  Jehova
His  words  were  an  incitement  to  make  a  useless  and  premature  attempt  at  liberatio
God's  prediction  with  regard  to  the  captivity  in  Babylon  had  in  it  the  nature  of
command.

IV.  Hananiah*s  death.    It  came  very  quickly.    Two  months  at  the  outside  wi
the  space  between  the  utterance  of  a  false  rebellious  statement  and  the  confirming
a  true  one.    The  death  came  at  such  an  interval  as  was  very  impressive.    Compare  tl
relations  between  Jeremiah  and  Hananiah  here  with  those  between  Peter  and  Anania
Both  Hananiah  and  Ananias  dealt  presumptuously  with  the  holiest  of  things,— T.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  XXIX.


Despised  and  rejected  at  home,  Jeremiah
turned  his  thoughts  to  those  distant  brethren
in  captivity,  whom  he  had  already  likened  to
«*  good  figs,  very  good  "  (ch.  xxlv.  8,  5).  He
had  heard  with  sorrow  that  they  could  not
readily  submit  to  their  altered  circumstances •
Judah,  with  its  consecrated  associations,  was
still  too  near  to  them  in  spirit.  Probably  a
rumour  of  the  expected  confederacy  (ch.
xxvii.  8)  had  troubled  their  minds,  and  the
discontent  was  increased  by  the  pernicious
discourses  of  prophets  and  soothsayers  similar
to  that  Hnnaniah  of  whom  we  have  just
heard.     Two  of  these  in  particular   are


mentioned,  and  a  terrible  fate  is  held  out
them.  The  appendix  (vers.  24<-32)  dea
with  another  prophet  of  the  same  type^  w]
had  not,  indeed,  offended  so  deeply  as  h
companions,  but  had  stirred  up  those  i
home  to  persecute  Jeremiah  in  revenge  f
the  preceding  letter.  ^

The  chapter  is  evidently,  what  it  profess
to  be,  a  letter,  at  any  rate  in  substance.  Froi
the  looseness  of  its  structure  (see  especial]
on  vers.  16 — 20)  it  has  been  thought  to  hai
been  dictated,  like  those  Epistles  of  St.  Pav
of  which  it  may  be  regarded  as  a  preoursi
(Ewald).  The  date  seems  to  be  a  litt
earlier  than  that  of  the  two  precedin
chapters  (comp.  vcr.  2  with  eh.  xxiv.  IJ


CTi.  XXIX.  1—32.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  JEREMIAH.


587


the  mesBengers  in  yer.  3  are  therefore  not
to  be  regarded  as  Zedekiah's  companions
in  the  journey  mentioned  in  ch.  li.  59.

Yer.  1. — Tbe  restdue  of  the  elders;  i,e.
the  surviving  elders.  Some  may,  perhaps,
have  died  from  natural  causes,  some  by
violence,  some  from  grief.

Yer.  2. — ^The  queen;  rather,  the  queen-
mother  (see  on  oh.  xiii.  18).  The  eunuohs,
the  prineee  of  Judah  and  Jerusalem.  A
marginal  gloss  appears  to  have  intruded
itseu  into  the  text,  for  there  is  no  other
passage  in  which  the  **  eunuchs,"  or  (as  Uie
word  may  equally  well  be  rendered,  with
the  margin),  **  chamberlains,"  are  called
'*  princes  of  Judah."

Yer.  7. — Seek  the  peaoe  of  the  eity,  etc^
Interest  vourselves  in  the  ••peace"  or
welfiEure  of  the  city,  whether  nabylon  or
any  other  place  where  ye  may  be  in  exile,
and  pray  for  its  welfare,  for  your  own  welU
being  is  inseparable  from  it

Yer.  8. — ^Let  not  your  prophets  and  your
diviners,  etc  It  seems  as  if  the  Babylonian
**  Jewry  **  were  a  copy  of  that  at  home.  It
had  not  only  its  **  princes  "  and  its  **  elders,"
but  its  **  prophets  and  its  "  diviners,"  who
oiicouraged  the  same  false  hopes  as  those  in
Judah  (comp.  ch.  xxvii.  9 ;  xxviiL  2).  Tour
dreams  which  ye  oaused  to  be  dreamed ;  or^
\chich  ye  datue  yourtelvee  to  dream  (comp.
ch.  xxvii.  9).

Yer.  10. — Seventy  yean  (see  on  ch.  xxv.
11).  At  Babylon ;  rather, /or  £a5y2on.  A
long  period,  such  as  seventy  years,  is  ap-
pointed  for  Babylon  **  to  enjoy  "  the  fruits
of  her  ambition ;  when  this  is  over  (comp.
Gen.  XV.  13—16),  God  will  pay  heed  to  his
people.  Visit  you.  To  "visit"  frequently
has  the  sense  of  ''taking  notice  of,"  or
"paying  heed  to'  (e.g.  ch.  xxiii.  2).  My
good^word.  "Word,"  equivalent  to  "pro-
mise;" the  allusion  is  to  eh.  xxiv.  6.

Yer.  II. — For  I  know  the  thoughts,  etc. ;
i.e.  though  seventy  years  must  pass  over
you  in  exile,  yet  do  not  apprehend  that  I
have  forgotten  you,  for  I  know  full  well
what  my  purpose  is  towards  you — a  purpose
of  restoring  to  you  "  peace  "  and  prosperity.
An  expected  end ;  rather,  a  future  and  a
hope ;  i.e.  a  hopeful  future  (comp.  ch.  xxxi.
17,  "There  is  a  hope  for  thv  future").
That  unexpectant  apathy  which  is  the
terrible  accompaniment  of  so  much  worldly
sorrow  was  not  to  be  an  ingredient  in  the
lot  of  the  Jews.

Yer.  12. — ^And  ye  shall  go  and  pray  unto
me.  "  Go,"  that  is,  to  the  places  "  where
prayer  is  wont  to  be  made."  The  clause
seems  to  refer  to  common  prayer  for  a
common  object.  Comp.  striking  passages
in  Solomon's  prayer  (1  Kings  viii  48),  and
in  Deuteronomy  (iv.  29,  30).


Yers.  15 — 23. — Jeremiah's  denunciation
of  two  leading  false  prophets  at  Babylon,
with  a  digression  on  the  fate  of  Zedekiah
and  Jerusalem.  Some  eminent  critics  main-
tain that  vers.  16 — ^20  are  an  interpolation,
and  this  view  is  certainly  supported  by  the
omission  of  these  verses  in  the  Septuagint.
It  must  also  in  fairness  be  admitted  that
the  natural  connection  of  ver.  15  is  with
ver.  21,  not  with  ver.  16.  But  it  does  not
follow  that  vers.  16 — 20  are  an  arbitrary
interpolation.  They  may  be  regarded  either
as  a  dig^ssion  in  the  original  letter,  or
as  inserted  by  an  affcer'thought  when  the
substance  of  the  letter  was  brought  into  its
present  form.

Yer.  16.— Know  that  thus  nith  the  Lord ;
rather.  Surely  thus  eaith  the  Lord,

Yer.  17. — I  will  send  upon  them,  etc.;
alluding  to  ch.  xxiv.  10.  Vile  figs;  liter-
ally, fig$  exciting  a  ehudder.  The  figure
involves  an  allusion  to  ch.  xxiv.  2,  3.

Yer.  19. — But  ye  would  not  hear.  The
prophet,  by  a  very  natural  illusion,  falls  out
of  the  style  of  letter-writer  into  that  of  the
prophet.  For  the  moment  he  fancies  him-
self addressing  an  audience  of  his  country-
men (comp.  ch.  xxv.  3,  4,  7,  8).

Yer.  21. — Zedekiah.  The  name  is  inte-
resting ;  it  shows  that  this  prophet  belonged
to  a  family  which  took  pleasure  in  the
thought  of  Jehovah  and  his  righteousness.
Doubtless,  too,  he  did  so  himself;  but  ho
under«estimated  the  demands  of  that  right-
eousness, which  extended  to  the  heart  as
well  as  to  the  outward  conduct.

Yer.  22. — ^A  eune ;  i.e.  a  formula  of  curs-
ing (comp.  Isa.  Ixv.  15).  There  is  here  a
play  upon  words,  such  as  the  Biblical
writers  delighted  in,  partly  with  the  view
of  assisting  the  memory.  "  A  curso  "  is  in
Hebrew  ^Idldh,  and  "to  roast"  is  kaldh.
Boasted  in  the  fire.  "Oisting  into  the
midst  of  a  burning  fierv  furnace"  was  a
common  punishment  both  among  the  As-
syrians and  the  Babylonians,  see  e.a.  *  Re-
cords of  the  Past,'  voL  ix.  p.  56 ;  and  oomp.
Dan.  iiL

Yer.  23. — An  important  and  melancholy
addition  to  our  knowledge  of  these  false
prophets.  They  were  not  only  misleading
prophets,  but  immoral  men  in  their  private
capacities.  Yillany ;  rather,/o2Iy,  as  the  word
is  always  rendered  elsewhere.  The  phrase
"to  commit  folly  in  Israel"  is  always
(except  Josh.  vlL  15)  used  of  sins  of  un-
ohastity.

Yers.  24 — 32.  —  A  threatening  oracle
against  the  false  prophet  Shemaiah.  Great
excitement  had  Seen  caused  among  the  so-
called  prophets  in  Babylon  by  the  emphatic
language  of  Jeremiah.  Accordingly  one  of
them,  named  Shemaiah,  wrote  letters  to  the
Jews  at  home,  and  especially  to  a  high


588


THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  xxix.  1—32


offioial  called  ZepbaDiah  (see  on  ver.  26)  to
put  a  stop  to  Jeremiah's  bold  agitation,
kepbaniaby  bowever,  was  not  tbe  man  for
whom  Sbemaiab  took  bim,and  read  tbe  letter
to  Uie  intended  victim.  Upon  this,  Jeremiah
receiyed  a  special  revelation,  announcing
dire  punishment  to  Sbemaiah  and  bis
family  (according  to  the  principle  of  the
Divine  government  described  in  Exod.
XX.  5).

Ver.  24. — To  Shemaiah ;  or,  o/,  concerning
(as  the  same  preposition  U  rendered  in  vers.
16,  21,  31).  The  oracle  itself  speaks  of
8hemaiab  in  tbe  third  person  (vers.  31,  32).
The  Authorized  Version,  bowever,  can  be
defended  by  its  accordance  with  ver.  25.
The  Nehelamite.  This  is  evidently  a  patro-
nymic, but  whether  of  tbe  family  or  tbe
locality  of  the  bearer  cannot  be  decided.
The  analogy  of  "Jeremiah  of  Anathoth"
(ver.  27),  however,  favours  tbe  view  that  it
is  local.

Ver.  26.— In  the  stead  of  Jehoiada  the
priest.  Some  (Grotins,  Hitzig,  Graf)  think
that  this  Jehoiaida  was  the  famous  high  priest
of  that  name,  who  is  said  to  have  "appointed
officers  over  the  bouse  of  the  Lord  "  (2  Kings
xi.  18 ;  2  Gbron.  xxiiL  18).  It  is  true  that
Zephaniah  was  not  literally  the  successor
of  Jehoiada,  but  be  was  so  in  the  same
metaphorical  sense  in  which  tbe  scribes
aro  said  by  our  Lord  to  "  sit  in  Moses*  seat "
(Matt  xxiii.  2).  It  is  safer,  however,  to
suppose  that  another  Jehoiada  is  meant,  of
whom  we  have  no  further  information.  It
is  not  said  that  either  Jehoiada  or  Zephaniah
was  high  priest,  and  as  tbe  special  obiect  of
tbe  elevation  of  tbe  latter  is  said  to  be  tbe
supervision  of  the  temple  police,  it  is  more
probable  that  Jehoiada  and  he  were  succes-
sively **  second  priests,"  or,  to  use  a  phrase
which  seems  to  be  synonymous,  "deputy
governors  in  tbe  house  of  the  Lord  "  ^ch.  xx.
1).  The  passage  may  thus  without  violence
be  harmonized  with  ch.  Hi.  24 ;  2  Kings
XXV.  18,  where  Seraiah  is  called  "  the  chief

friest "  and  Zephaniah  "  tbe  second  priest."
t  is  possible  that  Jehoiada  had  been  fa-
vourable to  tbe  better  class  of  prophets.  In
this  case  there  will  be  a  delicate  hint  to
Zephaniah  that  God  bad  bid  own  purpose
in  promoting  him  to  honour,  viz.  that
unruly  prophets  like  Jeremiah  might  be
held  in  with  a  tighter  band  (Ewald).  That
ye  should  be  officers;  rather,  that  there
thould  be  officers.  Zephaniah  himself  was
an  "  officer  "  or  "  deputy  "  (see  above) ;  but
he  was  also  "chief  in  the  bouse  of  the
Lord,"  and  had  the  appointment  of  inferior
"officers,"  whose  duty  it  was  to  preserve
order  in  tbe   tem])lc.    To  understand  tbe


following  words,  we  must  remember  that  tb
outer  court  of  tbe  temple  was  a  favourit
place  for  prophetic  teaching  (comp.  cb.  vi
2 ;  xxvi.  2).  For  every  man  that  is  mad,  an
maketh  himself  a  prophet;  i,e,  to  keep  ai
eye  upon  "madmen"  and  propbetizers
The  term  "  mad  "  is  used  in  a  disparagin]
sense  (as  2  Kings  ix.  11 ;  comp.  Hos.  ix.  7]
with  regard  to  tbe  apparently  senseles
behaviour  of  those  who  were  overpowers
by  the  spirit  of  prophecy.  In  earlier  timet
no  doubt,  the  phenomena  of  prophecy  wer
more  violently  opposed  to  everyday  life  thai
in  Jeremiah's  time ;  but  such  symbolic  act
as  appearing  in. public  with  a  yoke  upoi
his  neck  would  at  least  excuse  tbe  applica
tion  of  the  epithet  even  to  Jeremiah.  It  i
more  than  probable,  however,  that  it  wa
not  so  much  the  abnormal  actions  as  th
contents  of  Jeremiah's  prophecies  whicl
stirred  up  such  vehement  opposition;  ob
serve  bow  in  the  next  verse  only  the  6aun<
of  these  descriptive  nounq  is  retaine
("which  maketh  himself  a  prophet").  1
was  the  making  prophecy  a  reality  whio
disturbed  tbe  men  of  routine,  and  Shemaia
well  knew  this  when  be  made  this  appes
to  Zepbaniah.  There  was  no  harm  i
being  nominally  a  "prophet,"  but  to  "make,
or  rather,  "  show  one's  self  as  a  prophet,"  I
be  an  energetic  prophet,  a  prophetizer  (;
tbe  word  may  be  invented^, — this  was  worn
I  wood  to  those  who  cried,  "Peace,  peaoe^
when  there  was  no  peace.  In  prison,  and  i
the  stocks;  rather,  in  the  stocks  (see  on  el
XX.  2)  and  in  the  eoUar.  Tbe  meanin
seems  to  be  that  Jeremiah  was  subjected  1
both  forms  of  punishment  at  once.

Ver.  27. — Beproved ;  t.e.  threatened  wit
punishment.

Ver.  28. — ^For  therefore,  eta ;  t.e.  tlie  ooi
sequence  of  Jeremiah's  not  having  bee
kept  within  bounds  by  authoritv  is  tl|at  I
has  even  ventured,  in  bis  fanatical  zeal,  1
trouble  tbe  exiles  in  Babylon.  This  oa;
tivity  is  long;  rather.  It  (is)  long;  a  moi
forcible  expression.

Ver.  29.— And  Zephaniah  the  priest,  et
This  should  rather  be  printed  as  a  paiei
thetical  remark.

Vers.  30—32. — ^Then  came  the  word
the  Lord,  etc  A  fresh  introduction  of  tl
Divine  oracle  was  rendered  necessary  I
tbe  long  description  of  Zephanlah's  letter
The  reason  for  Shemaiab's  punishmei]
bowever,  is  stated  here  a  little  differentl
Of  course,  it  was  equally  contrary  to  tl
will  of  God  to  deliver  a  false  prophecy  ai
to  stir  up  persecution  against  his  tr
prophet  Taoght  rebellion  (see  on  ch.  xxvi
16).


cu.  XXIX.  1—32.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  5r9


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  4 — l^-^How  to  make  the  best  of  adversity,  Jeremiah  advises  the  captives  ia
Babylon  to  take  a  course  that  is  eminently  brave  and  wise.  The  first  inclination  would
be  to  stir  up  a  useless  revolt,  the  second  to  sit  down  in  sullen  despondency.  When
trouble  overcomes  us  we  are  tempted  to  follow  one  or  other  of  these  courses — to  rebel
or  to  despair.  Jeremiah  teaches  us,  as  he  taught  the  Jews  of  his  day,  that  neither
is  right.    He  indicates  a  better  way.

I.  Submit  patiently  to  inevitable  adveUsity.  We  are  not  required  to  court
trouble,  nor  to  yield  weakly  when  we  might  successfully  throw  it  off.  But  when  it  is
plainly  inevitable  resistance  is  wrong  as  well  as  foolish.  1.  It  is  foolish.  Why  dash
our  heads  against  the  prison  walls  ?  The  brain  will  suffer  before  the  granite.  The
Jews  could  not  successfully  revolt  against  Babylon ;  to  live  on  the  ev^  of  rebellion,  as
restless  conspirators,  would  be  dangerous  and  futile.  The  mistake  of  such  misplaced
patriotism  was  seen  later  in  the  wretched  failure  of  the  fanatic  attempts  of  the  Jews  to
throw  off  the  yoke  of  Rome.  The  folly  of  the  Jews  would  be  the  greater  that  the
lengthy  duration  of  the  Captivity  had  been  predicted  and  revealed  as  a  Divine  judgment.
When  we  know  the  providential  assignment  of  adversity,  to  resist  this  is  to  resiijt  the
power  of  Heaven.  2.  This  resistance  is  wrong,  I'he  Captivity  was  ordained  by  Go<l
(ver.  4).  It  was  sent  as  a  wholesome  chastisement.  To  those  who  understood  the
teaching  of  the  prophets  on  this  point,  rebellion  was  at  once  disobedience  to  God's  will
and  the  refusal  of  a  useful  corrective.  We  should  remember  this  when  we  grow
impatient  under  trouble,  and  learn  to  bow  silently  before  the  will  of  our  King  and  our
Father,  to  receive  without  complaining  the  discipline  which  is  intended  to  cleanse  and
strengthen  our  spiritual  life.

II.  Seek  the  brightest  course  under  the  darkest  circumstances.  The  captives
could  not  return  home.  They  were  not,  therefore,  to  treat  the  laud  of  their  exile  as  a
hopeless  desert,  but  to  build  and  plant  and  eat  the  fruit  of  it.  1.  How  often  trouble  is
worse  in  prospect  than  in  experience!  The  Captivity  loomed  in  the  distance  as  a  very
purgatory ;  when  it  came  it  was  found  to  contain  many  of  the  fruits  and  flowers  of
quiet  happiness.  2.  Our  lot  in  life  will  be  very  much  what  we  make  it  for  ourselves.
If  we  treat  it  as  a  '*  waste,  howling  wilderness,"  it  will  be  that  to  us.  But  the  hardest
lot  will  prove  to  have  many  alleviations  for  him  who  searches  for  its  mercies  rather  than
for  its  grievances.  Surely  it  is  best  to  do  this.  Mourners  are  inclined  to  nurse  their
sorrows  with  a  melancholy  satisfaction  in  aggravating  the  pain  of  them,  or  as  though
any  abatement  of  grief  were  a  sacrilege.  But  we  should  learn  a  more  robust  treatment
of  adversity.     There  is  no  virtue  in  distressing  one's  self  beyond  necessity.

III.  Cherish  hopes  for  the  future  under  the  most  trying  present  circum-
stances. The  Jews  were  to  remember  the  promise  of  the  restoration.  They  were  not
to  allow  their  race  to  die  out  (ver.  6).  A  great  future  was  still  before  them.  History
has  confirmed  the  prediction  of  the  prophets.  The  scattered  and  ruined  people  were
recalled  to  their  homes.  From  the  stock  of  the  despondent  exiles  there  sprang  not
only  all  that  was  great  and  good  in  later  Jewish  history,  but  also  Jesus  Christ  and
Christianity.  In  our  darkest  moments  we  should  not  forget  that,  though  not  a  ray  of
light  has  yet  appeared  on  the  horizon,  the  sun  will  surely  rise  and  the  day  return.
Christianity  is  peculiarly  a  religion  of  the  future;  it  encourages  us  to  press  forward  to
the  golden  age  which  is  yet  to  come.

IV.  Find  our  happiness  by  seeking  the  welfare  of  others.  "  Seek  the  peace
of  the  city  ...  for  in  the  peace  thereof  shall  ye  have  peace."  The  alien  was  to  act
with  the  loyalty  of  a  citizen.  Though  a  nation  may  be  under  the  unrighteous  rule  of  a
conqueror,  it  should  still  remember  that  it  has  duties  to  the  government  under  which
it  lives,  and  claims  of  charity  in  regard  to  the  people  of  the  superior  power.  If  it  is
our  duty  to  seek  the  peace  of  a  strange  city,  how  much  more  are  we  bound  to  interest
ourselves  in  public  duties  for  the  good  of  our  own  country?  Private  citizens  will  find
their  personal  condition  improved  through  the  successful  discharge  of  public  duties.
The  citizens  reap  the  fruits  of  the  peace  of  the  city.  In  ministering  to  others  generally
we  shall  discover  the  secret  of  our  own  blessedness.


690  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.       [cfl.  xxix.  1— Si

Ver.  7. — Civic  duties.  From  the  duty  of  the  Jews  to  the  cities  of  their  exile  w
may  deduce  the  still  more  urgent  duties  of  citizens  to  their  own  city.

I.  One  of  the  first  interests  of  a  people  is  peace.  There  are  times  whei
war  18  necessary  and  right — to  defend  the  hearth  and  home,  to  save  the  weak  fron
oppression,  etc.  But  such  war  must  only  be  the  means  for  securing  a  better,  mor
lasting  peace.  The  glory  of  war  is  an  empty  dream.  The  people  gain  little  and  suffe
much,  though  the  kings  may  win  fame  and  power.

II.  Peace  is  to  be  sought  bt  the  action  of  cittzens.  Individual  men  canno
wage  a  war  or  declare  a  truce.  But  the  units  constitute  nations.  If  each  is  peaceabl
the  nation  is  peaceable.  Insignificant  people  have  vast  power  for  harm  if  they  choo»
to  execute  it.  It  should  be  understood  that  seditious  conduct  is  not  only  a  politica
offence,  it  is  a  sin  in  the  sight  of  GKxi,  a  cruelty  to  the  many  people  whom  it  disturb
and  injures.

III.  Private  men  have  public  duties.  We  all  reap  benefits  from  the  state.  I
is  mean  to  accept  them  without  taking  our  part  in  bearing  the  burdens  of  the  state
There  are  people  who  deny  the  right  of  Christian  men  to  take  part  in  "worldly  politics,'
yet  these  people  are  glad  to  avail  themselves  of  the  protection  and  other  advantage
which  are  provided  for  them  by  the  secular  government  they  affect  to  despise.  Th
neglect  of  public  duty  evidences  a  narrow  and  selfish  disposition.

IV.  Private  men  abb  benefited  bt  public  prosperity.  We  are  members  on
of  another.  There  is  a  general  harmony  and  health  of  the  whole  body,  over  and  abov
the  well-being  of  each  member,  when  all  work  together  for  the  mutual  good.  A
individual  men,  we  have  great  reason  to  be  thankful  for  the  general  prosperity  of  tb
nation  and  for  the  maintenance  of  public  peace.

V.  We  should  discharge  our  duties  to  the  state  though  we  may  not  approv
of  the  government.  To  be  in  opposition  is  no  excuse  for  being  in  sedition.  Unles
we  can  change  the  government  it  is  foolish  and  wrong  to  revolt  against  it.  The  natio:
is  larger  than  the  government.

Ver.  10. — Seventy  years.  I.  Seventy  years  are  a  limited  time.  Babylon  was  t
tyrannize  for  a  limited  period  only ;  the  Jews  were  to  suffer  for  a  limited  period.  ]
God  has  set  a  limit  to  the  triumph  of  evil.  The  storm  rages ;  yet  Ood  says  to  i
"Hitherto  shalt  thou  come, and  no  further."  The  lions  roar,  but  they  are  chaine<
Wicked  men  fling  the  reins  to  their  passions,  break  through  all  restraints  of  respect  fc
the  will  of  God  and  appear  to  be  at  liberty  to  work  evil  and  revel  in  the  fruits  or  sin  a
libitum ;  but  God  has  put  bounds  about  their  course.  In  due  time  he  will  lay  his  han
upon  them  and  arrest  them.  2.  God  has  set  a  limit  to  the  duration  of  trouble.  Tb
sorrow  of  God's  people  is  temporal ;  their  blessedness  will  be  etemaL  Every  trouble
weighed  and  measured  by  God.    "  Our  times  are  in  his  hand."

II.  Seventy  years  are  a  short  time  in  the  history  of  a  nation.  The  Captivit
was  to  last  for  seventy  years ;  prosperity  had  been  enjoyed  for  hundreds  of  years  befoi
this,  and  would  return  and  endure  long  after.  1'he  troublesome  times  are  conspicuou
while  the  quiet  times  glide  by  unnoticed.  Hence  we  are  likely  not  to  note  ho
much  more  we  have  of  the  latter.  History  reads  like  a  record  of  wars  and  con
motions,  because  the  happy  but  dull  annals  of  prosperity  do  not  contain  many  strikic
events.  It  is  much  the  same  in  private  life.  For  most  of  us  the  blessings  great)
outnumber  the  troubles,  the  times  of  quiet  far  exceed  those  of  distress.  Yet  it
difficult  to  recognize  this,  because  what  hurts  us  impresses  our  memory  more. than  whi
pleases  us.

III.  Seventy  years  are  a  lifetime.  Few,  if  any,  of  the  first  captives  woui
survive  the  exile.  To  the  individual  man  it  was  as  bad  as  if  it  were  perpetual.  Yet
they  were  true  patriots  the  national  hope  must  have  been  a  great  comfort  in  the  darkne
of  personal  suffering.  And  the  patriotic  hope  of  Israel  was  one  of  the  grandest  featur
in  the  Hebrew  character.  We  are  all  too  selfish  in  our  hopes.  Christians  should  consid
the  cause  of  Christ  and  the  interest  of  humanity  as  of  far  more  importance  than  the
private  prosperity.  If  in  the  end  Christ  will  triumph,  and  the  world  will  be  lifted  out
the  sin  and  sorrow  which  have  overwhelmed  it,  should  not  we  rejoice,  though  our  1
may  not  be  to  live  till  this  is  accomplished  ?  Moses  rejoiced  in  the  Pisgah-view  of  tl
land  he  could  never  enter ;  Simeon  was  glad  at  seeing  the  infant  Saviour,  and  ecu


CH.  XXIX.  1— 32J    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  591

dciart  in  peace  with  the  assurance  of  a  redemption  not  yet  accomplished.  Still,  the
Christian  may  have  a  great  personal  hope  beyond  this.  Seventy  years  1 — but  a  span
compared  with  eternity  I  When  these  swift  days  have  flown  the  door  will  be  opened
to  the  infinite  ages  of  eternity.  What  if  the  little  U(e  b^  tempest-tossed  ?  the  voyage
18  short,  the  haven  is  near  (2  Cor.  iv.  17, 18).

Ver.  11. — Ood's  thoughts  concerning  tu,  I.  God  thinks.  If  God  exists  he  must  be
a  thinking  being.  To  apply  the  name  '*  God  "  to  a  stream  of  tendencies,  a  collection
of  laws,  the  totality  of  being,  etc.,  is  to  misapply  it.  Either  God  is  personal  or  there
is  no  GxkI,  for  the  conception  of  personality  is  essential  to  that  of  divinity.  If  God  is  a
person  be  may  be  "  without  parts  or  passions."  The  anthropomorphic  ideas  of  repentance,
wrath,  etc.,  may  be  as  much  mere  metaphorical  images  as  those  of  the  eyes  and  the
hands  of  God ;  but  thinking  is  essential  to  the  nature  of  what  we  understand  by  a
person,  by  a  spiritual  being.    Unless  God  thinks,  he  is  no  spirit,  no  person.

II.  GrOD  THINKS  ABOUT  US.  As  far  as  he  is  revealed  to  us  in  the  Bible  and  in  Christ,
and  as  far  as  we  may  verify  this  revelation  by  experience,  he  is  directly  concerned  with
his  works  and  his  children.  His  thoughts  are  not  to  be  imagined  as  only  consisting  of
vast  abstractions,  iofinite  ideals.  They  may  soar  to  lonely  heights  where  no  finite
intellect  can  follow,  but  they  can  also  stoop  to  humble  concerns  of  human  life.  He  is
but  an  imperfect  thinker  who  is  so  absorbed  with  philosophic  speculation  that  he  has
no  room  in  his  mind  to  consider  his  family.  The  greatest  thinker  will  be  wide  as  well
as  lofty,  able  to  take  in  small  details  in  addition  to  grand  abstractions,  and,  above  all,
wise  to  apply  the  highest  thinking  to  the  simplest  practical  necessity.  It  is  a  great
comfort  for  us  that  God  so  thinks.  With  sublime  ideas  of  eternity,  and  innumerable
cares  of  the  universe  in  his  infinite  mind,  God  has  yet  room  for  thoughts  about  us,  and
condescension  to  concern  himself  with  them.

III.  What  God  thinks  about  us  is  of  great  importance  to  us.  1.  God  thinks
what  is  true  and  wise  and  good.  If,  therefore,  we  can  know  God's  thoughts  about
anything  we  shall  see  the  thing  in  its  true  light.  Our  thoughts  are  blinded  by
prejudice,  coloured  by  passion,  liniite^  by  ignorance,  broken,  fragmentary,  perverted.
God's  only  are  clear  and  perfect  as  truth.  2.  God*s  thoughts  are  the  prelvde  to  his
fictions.  If  we  know  what  he  thinks  concerning  us  we  know  how  he  intends  to  act.
God's  thinking  is  not  the  contemplation  of  the  philosopher,  it  is  the  consideration  of
the  king.  We  forget  this  when  we  are  so  very  anxious  about  what  the  world  will
think  of  us  and  so  very  indififerent  about  Gt)d's  thoughts  concerning  us.  A  brave  man
will  learn  to  dare  the  world's  misjudgment,  its  scorn,  its  condemnation.  But  who  can
face  God's  thoughts  if  they  mean  evil  to  us  ?

IV.  God  thinks  thoughts  op  peace  concerning  us.  So  Jeremiah  saw  in  the
case  of  the  Jews ;  so  we  may  see  for  all  mankind  how  that  Christ  '*  has  broken  down
the  middle  wall  of  partition  between  us."  Even  when  God  finds  it  necessary  to
punish  his  desire  is  to  bless,  and  when  he  chastises  it  is  in  mercy,  that  he  may  reclaim.
6ut  this  is  not  seen  at  the  time.  There  are  things  which  prevent  us  from  seeing  that
(Jod's  thoughts  are  of  peace.  Thus — the  peace  is  not  yet  enjoyed;  when  God
chastises  us  it  looks  as  though  he  meant  evil  to  us,  because  we  feel  the  blow  before  we
see  the  good  fruit  of  it ;  we  cannot  see  Gt>d's  thoughts,  and  must  accept  them  in  faith,
waiting  for  a  later  confirmation  of  experience.  Yet  if  God  does  think  thoughts  of
peace  concerning  us,  is  it  necessary  for  us  to  know  the  exact  nature  of  them  ?  They
are  known  to  him  if  they  are  not  known  to  us,  and  he  can  carry  them  out  without
any  previous  understanding  of  them  on  our  part.

V.  God's  thoughts  op  peace  will  be  ultimately  realized.  God  promises  that
he  will  make  "  a  future  and  a  hope."  God's  best  thoughts  are  not  memories,  but  hopes,
promises,  intentions.  The  grandest  page  of  revelation  is  prophecy.  But  though  these
thoughts  refer  to  the  future,  we  must  not  lose  faith  in  their  practical  interest.  1.  The
realization  is  delayed  by  our  faulty  not  by  God's  will.  He  thinks,  intends  peace.  But
he  is  hindered  from  carrying  out  his  intention  by  our  conduct.  He  waits  to  be
gracious.  If,  therefore,  we  prepare  ourselves  for  the  accomplishment  of  Gk)d's  thoughts,
there  is  nothing  further  to  prevent  us  from  enjoying  the  peace  they  presage.  2.  God
is  as  great  in  power  as  he  is  wise  ai^d  good  in  thought.  He  has  bestowed  upon  us  the
noble  but  perilous  faculty  of  free-will,  and  we  cannot  measure  the  limits  of  this  faculty.


592  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [en.  xxix.  1—32.

Yet  we  may  rest  assured  that  by  some  means  the  infinite  God  can  and  will  ultimately
accomplish  all  his  great  designs  of  peace  for  his  children.

Ver.  13. — Seeking  Ood  wiih  the  whole  heart,  I.  God  must  bb  foukd  before  be
CAN  BE  KNOWN  AND  ENJOTED.  "  He  is  uot  far  from  each  one  of  us :  for  in  him  we  live,
and  move,  and  have  our  being."  Tet  this  natural  nearness  of  God  may  be  unrecognized
by  us,  and  may  not  be  sufficient  to  bring  us  into  the  spiritual  communion  with  him.
The  God  of  nature  may  be  "  the  unknown  God,"  or  he  may  be  recognized  and  yet
not  enjoyed  as  the  "  Portion  "  of  the  soul.  1.  Sin  hides  the  vision  of  God,  and  drives
the  soul  into  remote  spiritual  banishment  from  Qrod,  even  though  it  cannot  afifect  his
physical  presence.  2.  Our  natural  limitations  of  thought  and  experience  surround
the  idea  of  the  Divine  with  mystery,  and  make  us  feel  that  though  God  is  partly
known  there  are  still  ways  of  God  that  are  far  beyond  our  ken,  so  that  we  exclaim  in
bewilderment  and  distress,  "  Verily,  thou  art  a  (Ml  that  hidest  thyself  I "  (Isa.  xlv.  15).

XL  To  BE  FOUND,  God  ihtst  be  searched  fob  with  the  whole  heart.  1.  He  must
be  searched  for.  God  does  discover  himself  to  men  unexpectedly,  as  to  Hagar  in  the
desert  and  to  Moses  on  Horeb,  though  we  may  rest  assured  that  even  such  exceptional
revelations  were  made  to  souls  whose  habit  it  was  to  seek  after  him.  Nevertheless  before
such  experience,  God  draws  near  to  those  who  do  not  seek  him,  to  urge  them  to  search
and  find  him  (Isa.  Ixv.  1).  He  seeks  us  before  we  seek  him.  Our  search  is  the  response
of  our  hearts  to  his  invitation  (Ps.  xxvii.  8).  But  this  search  must  be  made.  The
promise  of  finding  is  attached  to  the  condition  of  seeking  (Matt.  viL  7).  The  prodigal
must  return  to  his  father  before  he  can  receive  the  welcome  home.  Men  are  waiting
for  God  to  visit  them,  reveal  himself  to  them,  do  something  that  will  bring  them  back
to  him.  They  may  wait  for  ever,  and  in  vain.  God  is  waiting  for  us.  It  is  our  part
to  arii^  and  seek  him.  2.  This  search  must  be  with  all  the  heart.  The  reason  why
we  are  disappointed  of  the  answers  of  our  prayers  is  often  that  our  prayers  are  so
insincere,  so  cold,  so  half-hearted.  It  is  reasonable  to  expect  God,  the  all-seeing,  to
answer  our  prayers,  not  according  to  the  vigour  of  the  language,  but  according  to  the
fervency  of  our  desires.  If  we  value  the  knowledge  and  communion  of  God  aright,
we  shall  seek  him  with  all  the  heart :  (1)  with  the  heart,  i.e.  sincerely,  spiritually,
inwardly,  not  with  mere  formal  inquiries;  and  (2)  with  the  whole  heart,  t.e.  with
singleness  of  purpose,  intensity,  earnestness.

III.  The  reward  of  seekinq  God  with  all  the  heart  will  consist  in  finding
HIM.  1.  The  search  will  be  sucass/ul,  God  may  not  be  found  at  first,  or,  being  found,
may  not  be  recognized  in  the  way  expected.  But  Scripture  and  experience  both
testify  to  the  utility  and  fruitfulness  of  the  soul's  search  after  God.  If  we  have  not
yet  found,  that  may  be  because  (1)  we  have  not  sought  with  "  all  the  heart;"  or  (2)
have  not  sought  in  the  right  way  as  far  as  our  light  and  knowledge  have  indicated  it —
«.e.  humbly,  penitently,  and  as  Christians  through  Christ.  2.  The  success  of  the  search
will  be  its  own  reward.  The  finding  of  God  is  described  as  a  blessing  of  the  restora-
tion. It  will  bring  other  and  lower  benefits  in  its  train  (ver.  14),  but  it  is  itself  the
greatest  boon.  "  Blessed  are  they  that  seek  God  with  all  the  heart,  for  they  shall  find
him,'*'~that  is  enough  for  a  perfect  beatitude.  To  find  God  is  to  find  our  light,  our
rest,  our  home.  To  know  him  is  life  eternal ;  to  commune  with  him  is  the  joy  of
heaven.

Vers.  20— 32.— 5/<cmaioA.  I.  His  action.  1.  He  is  irritated  at  the  letter  of
Jeremiah.  From  Babylon  he  writes  back  in  a  rage.  It  is  foolish  to  be  thus  anery
with  those  who  tell  us  unpleasant  truths,  but  it  is  very  common.  2.  He  describes
Jeremiah  as  mad.  People  often  depreciate  the  intelligence  of  those  who  differ  from
them.  Weak  men  set  down  strong  words  to  the  excitement  of  the  speaker  because
they  have  not  the  imagination  or  the  nerve  to  receive  them  as  true.  3.  He  urges  the
temple  officials  to  arrest  and  punish  Jeremiah.  We  have  here  another  instance  of  the
common  effort  to  suppress  those  whom  we  are  unable  to  answer.

II.  His  moral  conduct.  1.  He  usurps  the  name  of  a  prophet,  though  he  is  not  sent
by  God.  His  pretence  to  speak  in  the  Name  of  God  is  unwarranted.  A  prophet  is  one
who  nets  as  God*s  messenger,  as  an  apostle  is  one  who  acts  as  the  messenger  of  Christ.
No  man  has  a  right  to  enter  the  ministry  of  Christ  unless  he  is  called  to  itj  nor  to


CH.  XXIX.  1—32.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  593


speak  as  God's  ambassador  unless  he  is  conviDced  in  his  conscience  that  he  is  sent  by
God.  2.  He  deceives  the  Jews  into  "  trusting  in  a  lie.**  It  is  not  only  that  he  falsely
claims  to  be  a  prophet;  his  prophetic  message  is  also  false.  Truth  is  sacred ;  to  tamper
with  it  is  a  sin,  but  to  deceive  others  to  their  hurt  increases  the  sin.  3.  He  instigates
revolt  against  God.  If  it  is  wrong  to  utter  a  falsehood  to  serve  a  good  end,  it  must  be
more  wrong  to  do  so  with  a  bad  intention.  But  all  false  religious  teaching  tends  to
induce  disobedience  to  the  will  of  Qod,

III.  His  DOOM.  1.  He  is  to  be  punished.  The  evil  that  he  discredits  shall  fall  upon
him.  This  is  a  severe  but  an  appropriate  punishment  for  a  deceiving  prophet.  2.  His
children  are  to  share  his  doom.  There  is  a  great  mystery  in  the  hereditary  character
of  punishment,  and  it  is  increased  in  some  respects  by  the  fact  that  tendencies  to  sin
are  also  hereditary.  But  the  fact  is  as  clearly  visible  in  nature  as  it  is  revealed  in
Scripture.  3.  He  is  not  to  see  the  joy  of  the  restoration.  They  who  refuse  wholesome
chastisement  cannot  receive  the  happy  fruits  that  follow  it.  It  is  natural  and  reasonable
that  the  wilful  rejection  of  Divine  warnings  should  be  followed  by  a  severe  judgment.


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORa

Vers.  1 — 14. — Duties  and  consolations  of  Ood^s  captivity,  I.  Theib  DuriEg.  The
imposition  of  definite  lines  of  conduct  and  policy  upon  the  exiled,  was  one  proof  that
they  were  not  cast  ofif ;  the  promise  of  deliverance  was  another.  Although  amongst
the  heathen,  they  were  not  to  be  as  the  heathen ;  neither  were  they  to  be  wholly  given
over  to  desmir.  As  children  of  God  they  were  to  exhibit  the  virtues  of:  1.  Industry,
( Ver.  5.)  Misanthropy  and  despair  are  the  parents  of  idleness ;  Divine  faith  endues  men
with  energy.  The  exiles  had  a  testimony  to  bear  before  the  heathen.  It  was  a  present
duty  to  achieve  an  honest  independence.  2.  Domestic  attachment,  (Ver.  6.)  The  family,
with  all  its  joys  and  responsibilities,  is  still  to  be  cared  for.  If  the  present  be  forfeited
the  future  is  still  capable  of  being  redeemed.  The  new  generations  would  reap  the
advantages  of  which  the  fathers  had  been  deprived.  3.  Public  spirit,  (Ver.  7.)  They
were  not  to  abstain  from  the  duties  of  citizenship  merely  because  they  were  amongst
heathen  conquerors.  Even  there  they  might  exert  an  influence  for  good.  The  funda-
mental law  of  God's  kingdom  is  to  seek  the  good  of  all  men.  Work  faithfully  rendered
to  the  commonwealth  would  not  be  vain  or  without  its  reward.  Even  the  heathen
and  the  men  of  this  world  can  appreciate  good  citizenship.  That  a  distinctive  work
and  testimony  still  remained  to  tne  Church  as  a  Church,  is  no  reason  for  neglecting
those  less  direct  and  more  general  duties  which  so  powerfully  commend  the  religious
profession  that  inculcates  them.  4.  Cheerfulness  This  is  not  so  much  to  be  classified
along  with  the  preceding  as  to  be  understood  as  the  spring  and  governing  principle  of
them  all.  What  more  natura.  than  a  spirit  of  resentment  under  the  circumstances  ?
How  easy  to  hang  the  harp  on  the  willows  1  But  this  would  only  be  to  misunderstand
Gbd  and  thwart  his  purposes.  He  seeks  the  happiness  and  prosperity  of  his  people —
even  here  and  now,  and  notwithstanding  the  discipline  to  which  he  may  be  subjecting
them.  Not  resignation  merely,  but  cheerful  acquiescence  and  co-operation,  are,  there-
fore, to  be  expected  of  his  people.    "  I  opened  not  my  mouth,  because  thou  didst  it."

II.  Theib  consolations.  These  were  partly  to  consist  in  the  natural  results  of  the
course  of  conduct  enjoined,  or  the  happiness  inseparably  associated  with  the  observance
of  it ;  but  chiefly  in  the  anticipation  of  the  future.  1.  A  definite  term  was  set  to  their
captivity,  (Ver.  10.)  It  was  one  that  could  easily  be  verified,  and  was  not  too  far
distant  to  extinguish  hope.  Some  of  those  who  as  children  were  taken  to  Babylon,
might  in  their  old  age  return  to  the  land  of  promise.  There  is  measure  as  well  as
meaning  in  all  God's  discipline.  He  never  imposes  upon  his  people  a  burden  greater
than  they  can  bear.  The  darkest  night  is  illumined  by  light  beyond.  When  they
sorrow,  their  sorrow  is  not  without  hope,  2.  The  present  was  linked  with  the  future.
They  might  be  comforted  in  the  fulfilment  of  their  daily  tasks  by  the  knowledge  that
everyt^ng  done  in  obedience  to  God  and  the  spirit  of  true  benevolence  would  have  its
influence  upon  the  promised  deliverance.  At  the  very  worst,  what  was  done  in  this
dispoution  would  not  retard  that  event  or  rob  it  of  its  fulness  of  blessing.  In  like
maimer  the  children  of  God  are  assured  that  this  earthly  life  is  but  a  "  sojourning,"

JSREMIAH.  2  Q


594  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  xxix.  1—32

and  that  **  all  things  work  together  for  good."  This  life  will  have  an  immense  inflaenc^
upon  the  complexion  of  the  next.  The  duties  of  every  day  are  therefore  to  be  attendee
to  in  the  full  conviction  of  their  absolute  worth  and  avail  in  the  sight  of  Ood.  The]
have  the  promise  not  only  of  the  life  which  now  is,  but  of  that  which  is  to  come,  3
Sptrittial  blessings  were  promised,  (Vers.  11—14.)  The  good  will  and  faithfulness  o
God ;  the  restoration  of  religious  communion ;  the  gathering  and  reconstitution  of  th(
theocracy. — M.

Vers.  12 — 14. — Signs  that  OocTs  favour  is  restored.  I,  What  hb  does  in  hh
PEOPLE.  1.  In  turning  their  hearts  to  himseff.  They  had  been  worshipping  Baal  an<
the  gods  of  heathendom.  Only  now  and  then  did  they  offer  a  half-hearted  wot
ship  to  Jehovah.  The  idolatries  that  pandered  to  their  lusts  were  uppermost  ii
their  thoughts,  and  it  was  only  occasionally,  in  seasons  of  desperate  need,  thej
bethought  themselves  of  Jehovah.  Now  he  was  to  assume  a  higher  place  in  thei"
regard.  Their  views  of  life,  its  purposes  and  destinies,  would  be  elevated,  and  he  woulc
become  their  chief  desire.  The  new  era  of  favour  and  happiness  would  be  distinguishec
by  intense  personal  love  for  God.  In  Nehemiah's  day  a  measure  of  spiritual  affectioi
like  this  showed  itself,  but  it  could  only  be  fully  developed  through  the  personal  mani
festation  of  Christ,  who  was  to  draw  all  men  unto  him.  2.  In  pouring  forth  the  spirt
of  true  prayer.  Where  the  heart's  affections  go  forth  towards  God  the  spirit  of  tru<
prayer  commences.  It  is  that  which  cries  within  us, "  Abba,  Father,"  which  la  th<
spirit  of  prayer  and  supplications.  It  has  been  supposed  that  the  first  clause  of  ver.  1!
refers  to  private  and  the  second  to  public  prayer.  The  habit  and  delight  of  devotioi
were  to  be  restored.  Where  these  -are  there  is  already  the  earnest  of  all  substantia
and  eternal  good.    Pentecost  was  prefaced  and  penetrated  with  prayer.

II.  What  he  does  for  his  people.  1.  In  revealing  himself  They  who  seek  foi
him  with  their  whole  heart  will  find  him.  The  veil  will  be  withdrawn,  and  calamity
understood  as  fatherly  chastisement,  patiently  borne.  In  the  subsequent  history  o
Israel  this  was  largely  experienced ;  but  the  fulness  of  the  spiritual  meaning  of  th<
promise  was  only  realized  in  Christ  and  the  outpourings  of  nis  Spirit,  2.  Be  wil
hearken  to  their  petitions.  The  sense  of  acceptance  will  come,  even  in  the  midst  o
captivity.  Faithful  hearts  will  fill  with  presage  of  ooming  deliverance,  and  prayer  wil
not  only  be  effectual  but  be  felt  to  be  so.  It  is  in  this  exercise  the  true  relationship  o
God  and  his  people  becomes  evident,  and  the  blessings  of  a  present  and  oltimati
redemption  are  secured.  There  can  be  no  more  marked  proof  of  God's  favour  towards
any  one  than  answers  to  his  prayers,  3.  He  vnU  bring  back  to  the  promised  land  one
the  privilege  of  covenant  relation^ip.  That  is  a  matter  of  course,  seeing  he  already
hears  them.  And  yet  none  the  less  imposing  will  their  redemption  be.  How  oompleU
the  restoration  I  how  miraculous  I  Its  supernatural  character  is  to  be  as  evident  a:
that  of  their  dispersion.  That  which  under  anomalous  circumstances  has  been  f
difficult,  unauthorized,  or  intermittent  exercise  will  become  easy,  honourable,  anc
constant,  as  they  will  return  to  their  own  land,  where  every  man  will  sit  under  his  owi
vine  and  fig-tree,  none  daring  to  make  him  afraid.  In  the  case  of  the  Christian  thh
promise  will  be  fulfilled  in  either  the  gradual  conquest  of  the  world  by  the  Church,  oi
entrance  into  heaven.  But  there  is  a  roretaste  of  this  in  the  self-conquest  and  perfected
spiritual  life  of  the  regenerate  soul.'^M.

Vers.  20— 32.— 2%e  punishment  of  false  prophets.  The  oppoMtion  between  Jeremlal
and  the  false  prophets  is  one  of  the  most  interesting  phenomena  of  the  period  to  whicl
these  prophecies  belong.  It  is  a  real  battle,  albcdt  not  with  earthly  weapons.  Th<
question  between  them  could  not  be  suffered  to  remain  doubtful,  as  it  involvec
immense  consequences,  A  striking  correspondence  is  discovered  in  Uie  antagonism  U
the  labours  of  the  apostles.  There  is  the  same  barefiaiced,  fearless  lying  and  dishoneaty
the  same  terrible  denunciation  of  judgment.  (We  are  reminded  of  the  sentence  oi
Simon  Ma^us,  '*  Thy  silver  perish  with  thee,"  etc..  Acts  viii.  20—24 ;  and  the  reply  t<
Ananias,  the  high  priest,  "  God  shall  smite  thee,  thou  whited  wall,"  Acts  xxm.  3,'
How  is  the  latter  to  be  regarded?  Evidently  as  the  word  of  God  through  bis  trui
servants,  and  not  as  the  expression  of  vindictive  feeling.  lu  regard  to  this  punishmeni
notice-^


CH.  XXIX.  1—32.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  695

I.  Its  nature.  It  had  direct  reference  to  that  concerning  which  they  spoke.  From
the  future  they  had  denied  they  were  to  be  cut  off.  In  the  case  of  Ahab  and  Zedekiah
the  instrumentality  of  man  is  indirectly  employed ;  in  that  of  Shemaiah  it  is  brought
about  by  what  we  might  regard  as  natural  causes.  In  both  instances  the  penalty  was :
1.  ExceptUmcHly  severe.  The  fate  of  the  lying  prophets,  even  apart  from  its  associated
consequences  in  the  eternal  sphere,  was  tragic  in  the  extreme,  and  presents  hardly  an
element  of  hope.  Abab  and  his  companion  are  subjected  to  a  fearful  death  and  an
eternity  of  shame  in  Israel.  Shemaiah  is  consigned  to  efifacement  and  deprived  both
as  regards  himself  and  his  posterity,  of  the  promi^  blessings.  2.  Exemplary.  Unmis-
takably these  men  were  but  the  leaders  of  many  of  like  mind,  and  it  was  intended  they
should  be  marked  out  for  signal  retribution.  Their  fate  would  appeal  to  the  imagina-
tion and  spiritual  feeling  of  their  people,  and  in  either  case  it  corresponded  closely  with
the  peculiarity  of  their  conduct  In  their  heathen  exile  they  were  to  be  taught  that
Grod  s  hand  could  still  reach  them  and  that  an  exact  justice  waited  upon  their  actions.
Ahab  and  Zedekiah  so  lived  that  even  a  heathen  monarch  had  to  make  them  examples.
3.  OraducUed  according  to  Jieinousnesa  of  offence,

II.  Its  justification.  1.  The  opposition  to  Ood*8  truth  was  necessarily  direct  and
maiicious.  Nothing  could  well  be  more  consciously  wicked  than  their  whole  behaviour.
It  occurred  at  a  critical  period,  when  great  destinies  were  determined.  The  prophet  of
God  was  thereby  discredited  and  hindered,  and  the  people  prevented  from  receiving  and
acting  upon  his  message.  In  every  season  of  critical  consequence  and  great  spiritual
activity  such  manifestations  occur.  Merely  to  overcome  them  is  not  sufficient.  The
victory  must  be  signal  and  conspicuous.  2.  The  offence  was  one  to  which  God  himself
is  ever  most  sensitive.    It  affected  his  character  and  prerogatives,  and  was  therefore

'  nothing  else  than  blasphemy  (cf.  Matt.  xii.  32.  "  Even  I  know,  and  s^m  a  witness,  saith
the  Lord,"  ver.  23).  3.  T?ie  interests  of  truth  required  the  penalty.  The  people  had
to  be  overawed  by  the  presence  of  the  supernatural ;  their  obedience  had  to  be  won  to
the  direction  of  the  true  prophet,  and  the  spiritual  ends  of  the  Captivity  were  thus  to  be
secured.  A  moral  demonstration  like  this  was  requisite,  and  enables  the  human  mind
more  completely  to  realize  the  Divine  conceptions  of  righteousness  and  truth. — M.

Vers.  4—7. — God's  message  to  the  captives.  There  is  an  encouraging  tone  in  this
Divine  message  to  the  captives  in  Babylon  that  must  have  been  strikingly  fitted  to  call
forth  every  better  element  of  thought  and  feeling  within  them.  They  were  not,
indeed,  to  dream  of  deliverance.  The  appointed  time  must  run  its  course.  The  gene-
ration then  in  their  prime  could  not  hope  ever  to  see  their  own  land  again.  But  their
children  should.  Their  wisdom,  therefore,  lay  in  making  the  best  of  their  condition,
and  nourishing,  as  far  as  possible,  the  resources  and  the  strength  of  their  family  life.
Let  them  build,  and  plant,  and  marry,  and  enjoy  the  good  of  that  strange  kmd  as  if  it
were  their  own.  Let  them  sow,  though  it  be  with  many  tears,  for  the  better  and
happier  future.  Let  them  so  live  as  to  commend  themselves  to  the  good  will  of  their
conquerors,  that  even  "  their  enemies  may  be  at  peace  with  them,"  identifying  them-
selves with  the  interests  of  the  place  of  their  captivity,  seeking  by  their  prayer  to
bring  down  blessings  upon  it  from  above,  seeing  that  in  its  well-being  and  peace  they
would  find  their  own.  This  is  strictly  in  harmony  with  the  general  Divine  purpose  as
to  the  relation  in  which  the  Jews  should  stand  towards  other  nations.  They  were
called  to  bo  a  separate  and  peculiar  people  only  that  they  might  the  better  be  instru-
ments of  blessing  to  the  world.  The  Captivity  was  not  merely  a  punishment  for  their
sins,  but  a  part  of  the  method  by  which  God  taught  them  to  fulfil  their  mission.
Important  lessons  are  suggested  respecting  the  relation  the  people  of  God  should  always
maintain  towards  the  wond  in  which  he  nas  placed  them.    Note —

L  The  fbee  use  it  is  permitted  them  to  have  of  this  world's  good.  "  Build
ye  bouses,  and  dwell  in  them,"  etc.  In  being  carried  beyond  the  bounds  of  Israel  these
captives  were  not  passing  beyond  the  domain  of  Israel's  Gkxl.  He  is  the  **  Lord  of  the
whole  earth."  And  whether  in  Jerusalem  or  in  Babylon,  all  resources,  all  materials,
all  power  to  labour,  and  all  products  of  labour,  are  his.  Shall  not  the  children  of  the
heavenly  Father  make  themselves  "  at  home  "  in  their  Father's  world,  free  to  use  and
to  enjoy  whatever  good  he  puts  within  their  reach  ?  Remember  St.  Paul's  counsel  to
the  Corinthians,  "  Whatsoever  is  'spld  in  the  shambles,"  etc.  (1  Cor.  x.  25,  26).    All


596  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH,    [ch.  xxix.  1— 3:

natural  good  has  the  stamp  of  God's  ownership  upon  it.  Whatever,  therefore,  com<
to  you  in  the  honourable  commerce  of  life  do  not  shrink  from  it  or  refuse  it.  It
yours  to  enjoy  because  he  made  it ;  it  is  yours  because  it  is  his.  The  freedom  of  t\
earth  is  given  to  his  true  children.  There  is  a  sense  in  which  it  may  be  said  of  all  on
ward  good  that  they  who  know  best  how  to  use  it  aright  have  most  right  to  its  us
There  is  no  "  possession  "  of  these  things  like  that  which  springs  from  spiritual  affinit
and  sympathy  with  him  who  gave  them,  and  from  the  power  to  discern  and  appreciai
their  inner  meaning.  There  is  no  "right**  like  that  of  Divine  sonship.  "All  thinj
are  yoiurs,*'  etc.  (1  Cor.  iii.  21 — 23).  We  dishonour  our  Christian  faith  when  we  moi
about  in  the  world  timidly  or  gloomily,  as  if  we  had  no  right  to  live  in  it,  or  as  if
were  a  mere  "house of  bondage;*'  hedged  in  on  all  sides  with  painful  restriction
bound  with  fetters  of  restraint ;  afraid  to  share  with  a  free,  hearty,  childlike  gladnei
any  of  its  innocent  delights.  If  this  is  "  Emmanuel's  land,"  have  we  not  the  ranse  of  a
its  delectable  mountains  ?  Is  it  a  world  that  our  Father's  hand  has  made  and  filled  wil
the  tokens  of  his  beneficence,  and  that  has  been  trodden  by  the  feet  of  the  gre
Redeemer,  and  shall  we  throw  over  it  the  shadow  of  our  discontent  or  fear  (Neh.  yi:
10;  Eccles.  ix.  7 ;  1  Tim*  iv.  4,  6)?

II.  ThB  IDENTITT  of  INTEBEST  BUB8ISTIN0  BETWEEN  THEM  AND  THE  WORLD.      "  Se<

the  peace  of  the  city,"  etc.  Captives  and  bondmen  as  these  Jews  were,  they  were  neve
theless  involved  in  all  that  affected  the  welfare  of  the  Babylonian  state.  The  administr
tion  of  its  affairs  for  good  or  ill,  for  peace  or  war,  must  ne^  be  a  matter  of  great  intere
to  them,  since  they  would  so  largely  share  the  consequences.  (See  illustrations  in  Josc]
and  his  brethren,  Daniel  and  the  three  Hebrew  youths,  Esther  and  Mordecai,  etc
The  citizens  of  the  heavenly  Jerusalem  have  also  an  earthly  citizenship  to  mai
tain,  the  bonds  of  which  are  not  broken  through  their  being  raised  spiritually  to
higher  level  than  that  of  the  worldly  life  around  them.  Rather  are  those  bonds  co
respondingly  raised  and  made  more  sacred  and  binding.  Their  Christian  faith  elevat
the  character  of  their  earthly  citizenship,  invests  it  with  a  new  dignity,  attaches  to
higher  and  diviner  sanctions.  "  In  the  peace  thereof  shall  ye  have  peace."  All  pai
of  the  social  system  are  so  linked  together  by  a  law  of  mutual  dependence  and  influen
that  the  well-being  of  one  is,  in  a  measure,  the  well-being  of  all.  "  The  eye  cann
say  to  the  hand,"  etc. ;  "  Whether  one  member  suffer,"  etc.  We  are  all  personal
affected  for  good  or  ill  by  the  political  order  and  the  general  tone  of  the  moral  U
around  us.  There  are  deep  rankling  wounds  in  the  body  politic — ignorance,  drunke:
ness,  roving  beggary,  domestic  vice  and  violence,  the  systematic  training  of  the  youi
in  crime,  the  oppression  of  the  hireling  in  his  wages,  etc. — which  it  is  to  the  interest
us  all  most  earnestly  to  seek  to  heal.  No  class  of  the  community  can  escape  the
effect  of  these  things,  and  religion  does  but  bring  us  into  the  deeper  sympathy  wii
those  who  most  suffer  by  such  forms  of  wrong.

III.  Their  responsibility  to  live  for  the  world's  highest  benefit.  "  Sock  t
peace  of  the  city, .  .  .  and  pray  to  the  Lord  for  it."  Real  peace  is  the  fruit  of  rightcov
ness.  There  can  be  none  while  the  Divine  order  is  violated  and  the  Divine  will  set
nought.  The  gospel  is  in  every  way  God's  message  of  peace  to  the  world.  The  Church
call^  to  be  the  "  light  of  the  world  "  and  the  "  salt  of  the  earth,"  as  a  witness  for  GKx
truth  and  righteousness.  The  Christian  philanthropist  alone  has  in  his  hands  a  thorouj
cure  for  the  diseases  and  wounds  of  our  humanity  ;  and  of  all  the  weapons  he  can  wie
in  his  conflict  with  them,  none  so  mighty  as  prayer,  inasmuch  as  that  unseals  the  fou
of  all  blessing,  and  brings  down  from  heaven  the  healing,  saving  power.  Well  may
Christian  apostle  enlarge  and  emphasize  the  old  prophetic  message,  saying,  "  I  exhc
therefore,  first  of  all,  that  supplications,  prayers,  intercessions,  thanksgivings,  be  ma
for  all  men,"  etc.  (1  Tim.  ii.  l— 4).— W.

Ver.  11. — Thoughts  of  peace.  Such  is  the  consoling  word  that  God  sends  to  I
*'  banished  ones  "  in  their  affliction.  He  bids  his  servant  "  speak  comfortably  **
them,  even  now  that  their  "  warfare  "  is  only  beginning,  and  they  are  having  their  ft
taste  of  the  bitterness  of  exile.  Blending  with  the  lamentations  of  the  weeping  ca
tives  as  they  "  hung  their  harps  on  the  willows  by  the  waters  of  Babylon,'*  we  a
imagine  that  this  gracious  word  would  have  a  more  salutary  effect  u|>on  them  than  tl
living  voice  of  the  prophet  ever  had.    What  message  has  it  for  us  ?


CH.  XXIX  1— 32.J    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.  597


I.  The  mind  of  God  is  a  profound  mystery  to  us,  but  he  knows  his  own
COUNSELS.  1.  God  has  his  "  thoughts,^*  even  as  we  have  ours.  We  believe  in  a  Gkxl  who
is  no  mere  philosophic  abstraction,  but  a  living,  personal  being,  of  whose  infinite  intelli-
gence ours  is  but  the  dim  and  distant  reflection.  2.  His  thoughts  are  immeasurMy
higher  than  ours,  "  As  the  heavens  are  higher  than  the  earth,"  etc.  (Isa.  Iv.  9).  We
cannot  solve  the  mystery  or  trace  the  course  of  our  own  mental  processes,  and  how
should  we  be  able  to  comprehend  his?  Our  minds,  with  all  their  utmost  range  and
activity,  move  but  upon  the  outskirts  of  the  glorious  realm  of  the  infinite  and  eternal
thought  of  God.  3.  His  thoughts  are  all  conformed  to  the  eternal  truth  of  things,
Inde^,  they  are  themselves  the  eternal  truth  of  things.  For  what  are  all  created
existences— material  and  spiritual,'all  laws,  forces,  etc.,  but  embodiments  and  reflections
of  the  "  thoughts  *'  of  God  ?  And  whatever  his  purposes  may  be  they  are  not  variable  ;
they  partake  of  the  immutability  of  his  essential  nature.  *'  The  counsel  of  the  Lord
standeth  for  ever,  the  thoughts  of  his  heart  to  all  generations  "  (Ps.  xxxiii.  11).

II.   Gk)D's    WAYS  OF    DEALINQ    WITH   US    ARE   OFTEN  PERPLEXING,    BUT    A    GRACIOUS

FUEPOSE  GOVERNS  ALL.  "  Thoughts  of  peace  and  not  of  evil "  lie  concealed  within  his
darkest  providences.  1.  The  constitution  of  the  universe,  in  spite  of  all  its  discords^
hears  abundant  witness  to  the  benign  spirit  that  inspires  it.  We  have  no  sympathy
with  that  gloomy  and  morbid  view  of  it  according  to  which,  for  aught  that  appears,  it
might  have  been  fashioned  by  some  spirit  of  cruelty  and  hate.  True  as  it  may  be  that
"  the  whole  creation  groaneth  and  travaileth  in  pain  together,"  there  is  proof  enough
that  "  God's  tender  mercies  are  over  all  his  works."  2.  The  BU>le  has  its  anomalies,  hut
it  is  the  unfolding  of  a  redemptive  purpose.  The  revelation  of  God's  mercy  towards
a  guilty,  ruined  world  in  the  person  of  the  Christ  is  the  key  to  all  its  historic  dispen-
sations. As  every  chastisement  inflicted  on  the  Jewish  people  had  some  gracious
design  in  it  as  regards  themselves,  so  the  whole  course  of  their  national  life  and  eccle-
siastical polity  played  its  part  in  the  development  of  that  world-wide  plan.  And
through  all  the  changes  and  storms  and  conflicts  that  may  yet  be  in  store  for  the
Church  and  the  world,  Scripture  keeps  alive  the  blessed  hope  of  the  future.  The  pro-
phetic word  is  "  as  a  light  shining  in  a  dark  place,  until  the  day  dawn  and  the  day-star
arise  in  our  hearts  "  (2  Pet.  i.  19).  3.  The  saddest  experiences  in  our  personal  life  have
their  Iteneficent  Divine  intent.  Every  cloud  has  its  "silver  lining.'*  Our  keenest
sorrows  often  prove  to  be  *'  celestial  benedictions  in  a  dark  disguise."  God's  "  thought
of  peace  "  is  at  the  heart  of  all  our  earthly  tribulations  (Heb.  xii.  6 — 11).

III.  The  issue  always  justifies  God's  thoughts  and  ways.  The  "  expected  end,"
when  it  comes,  never  fails  to  solve  the  mystery  of  the  path  that  led  to  it.  The
gracious  purpose,  hidden  in  the  secrecy  of  the  Eternal  Mind,  veiled  under  many  forms
of  dark  aisguise,  is  then  made  manifest.  God  is  his  own  Interpreter,  and  the  day  of
his  glorious  self-vindication  will  surely  come.

"  His  ways  are  love — though  they  transcend
Our  feeble  range  of  sight.
They  wind  through  darkness  to  tlicir  end
In  everlasting  light."

W.

Vers.  1 — 7. — The  letter  to  the  captives.  Notice  the  mention  of  those  who  bore  this
letter.  We  may  conclude  thoy  were  not  mere  messengers  having  no  interest  in  the
message  they  conveyed,  but  those  who  themselves  would  have  much  to  say  over  and
above  what  was  written.

I.  God's  consideration  for  his  people  in  their  captivity.  He  not  only  means  to
bring  that  captivity  to  an  end  in  his  own  time,  but  while  it  lasts  it  is  to  be  made  as
little  like  captivity  as  possible.  It  was  not  enough  that  he  should  leave  the  nation  in
Babylon  till  the  time  of  his  chastisement  expired.  While  they  remained  there,  they
were  to  have  the  largest  opportunities  compatible  with  the  circumstances  in  which  he
had  found  it  necessary  to  place  them.  And  so  when  the  circumstances  of  any  life  are
untoward,  when  perhaps  we  have  made  them  so  by  our  own  folly,  (Ml  shows  his
solicitude  that  we  should  nevertheless  have  peace  in  our  own  hearts,  and  such  ample
guidance  as  may  turn  even  the  untoward  into  the  helpful.  Gbd  will  not  banish  circum-


698  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PllOPHET  JEREMIAH.    Cch.  xxix.  1-


staDces  merely  because  we  find  them  hard ;  bat  this  we  may  always  be  sure  of,  Hu
will  enable  us  to  make  the  very  best  of  them.

U.  God's  assertion  of  his  part  in  BRiNonra  this  captivitx  about.  He
caused  his  people  to  be  carried  away  from  Jerusalem  to  Babylon.    The  place  of  i

E resent  abode  was  by  his  arrangement.  It  was  their  own  &ult  as  a  nation  that
ad  had  to  leave  Jerusalem :  but  it  was  in  God's  own  wisdom  that  they  were  pla
in  Babylon  rather  than  another  place.  Clearly  to  perceive  that  the  omnipotent  wd
disposing  their  outward  relations,  would  enable  them  to  listen  all  the  more  attenti
to  what  instructions  he  had  to  give  them  for  making  the  best  of  their  present  circ
stances.

III.   Gk>D's  PLAN  FOR  THE  PROFIT  AND  COMFORT  OF  THE  PRESENT  GENERATION.

people  are  plainly  told  that  they  are  to  be  there  for  seventy  years.    No  enerey  of
own  can  get  Uiem  away  a  year  sooner ;  and  no  might  of  their  captors  can  keep  t
a  year  later.    Hence  it  is  the  true  wisdom  to  accept  the  divinely  settled  position,
man  among  them  was  to  neglect  the  possibilities  of  his  brief  temporal  life  by  reasc
a  baseless  expectation  that  ne  might  soou  return  to  his  own  land.    He  might  in
say,  '*  If  I  show  signs  of  settling  down  here,  I  shall  be  reckoned  a  very  pow  patr
And  so  over  against  all  temptations  to  restlessness  and  utter  waste  of  exist
there  is  this  explicit  direction  from  Jehovah.    If  any  Israelite  lives  a  wasted  11
Babylon  it  will  oe  his  own  foult.  So  to  speak,  Gkxi  makes  Babylon,  for  the  time,  a
of  substitute  for  the  promised  land«    If  the  Israelite  has  only  sufficient  of  the  spii
true  faitii  and  obedience  in  him,  he  may  make  even  the  land  of  captivity  a  plai
bleasing.    For  the  nation  Babylon  was  a  mere  place  of  sojourning,  but  for  the
vidual  it  was  to  be  his  chief  abode  on  earth.    Hence  the  loving-kindness  of  Gh
manifest  in  telling  him  he  might  build  a  house  and  make  a  home  and  plant  fields,
settling  down  to  a  useful  and  cheerful  life.

IV.  God's  will  with  regard  to  the  relations  between  Israel  and  Babi
Israel  was  to  seek  the  peace  of  Babylon.  It  was  to  support  everything  tiiat  pron
peace  and  security.  Naturally  Israel  would  expect  to  find  its  chance  in  the  cuffici
of  Babylon.  If  any  formidable  foe  threatened  the  country,  or  the  equal  danger  of
war,  it  might  only  too  easily  seem  to  Israel  that  this  would  give  the  chance  ror  lib
But  so  far  from  this  being  really  the  case,  CKxl  assures  his  people  that  Babylon's  ]
is  their  peace.  This  sets  before  us  a  principle  of  action  which  Christian  people  ca
too  diligently  observe.  While  it  is  true  that  we  are  not  of  this  world,  but  must
stantly  rise  superior  to  its  habits  and  maxims,  yet  at  the  same  time  we  cannot  d(
much  to  maintain  the  stability  of  governments  and  the  public  order  of  the  lai
which  we  live.  While  Christ  would  have  us  turn  away  from  the  cant  of  what  is  c
patriotism,  he  would  also  have  us  to  abhor  everything  that  tends  to  anarchy.  \
the  Spirit  of  Gkxi  promotes  the  highest  individuality,  he  also  promotes  the  greatest
(1  Tim.  U.  1— 4).— y.


END  OF  VOL.  1.


fKINTBO  BY  WILLIAM  CU>WBS  AMD  SOMS,  UMITBO,   LONDON  AND  BKCLKS.


HOMILETICAL  INDEX


TO


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH.


VOLUME  I.


•  ••


•  •t


•  ••


CHAPTER  I.

The  External  Surroundings  of  the  Life

4,9
5
5
6
7,17
8,17
8


of  Jeremiah
Predestination
Diffidence  overoome
The  Power  of  Prophecy
The  Almond  Rod ...
The  Seething  Pot
Encouragements  to  Fidelity
Introductory    Statements  concerning

Jeremiah*8  Parentage,  etc.  •••      10

The  Dread  Commission      ...  ...      11

The  Ministry  for  a  Corrupt  Age       ...      13
Jeremiah's  Visions  ...  ...      13

Jehovah  calls  Jeremiah,  etc  15, 19,  20

The  Vast  Compass  of  the  Prophet's

Work  •••  •••  •••  •.•      •I'O

A  Protracted  Ministry        ...  ...      18

« What  seest  thou?"  ...  ...      20

Hastening  Ills      •••  ...  •••      20


CHAPTER  IL

Recollections  of  the  Happy  Past

The  Ingratitude  of  Sin

Wickedness  in  Lea  ling  Men

Broken  Cisterns   ...

Sin  Self-Corrected

The  Stains  of  Sin

False  Confidence  . .  •

A  Sweet  Remembrance  embittered

The  Divine  Ideal,  how  lost  and  re-


...


•*•


gained


!••


tt.


•  .•


28
29
30
30
31
32
33
33

35


Tmin  FAOB

Jehovah's  Indictment  against  Israel    36, 89
The  Sinner's  Attempt  to  wash  away

his  Sin  ...  ...  •..

A  Dread  Snare  of  the  Devil

The  Restlessness  of  Sin

God's  Estimation  of  his  People's  Love

First  Love  to  God

Guilty  Instruments  of  Divine  Judg-

rncuw   ...  ...  .«.  ...

The  Marvel  of  Unbelief     ...

The  Unreasonableness  of  appealing  to

Worldly   Assistance    in    Spiritual

Enterprises       ...  ...  ...

God's  Method  of  punishing  Apostasy
The  Shameless  Shame  of  Idolatry    ...
*'  Lords  many  and  Gods  many  "
Rejecting  the  Chastisements  of  God
The  Plea  of  Innocence  a  Colminating

DlU  ...  ...  .,,  ...

Israel's  Desertion  of  Jehovah  viewed

in  the  Light  of  the  Past ...
Heathendom    gives   an   Unconscious

Rebuke  to  Apostate  Israel
Forsaking   the   Fountain  of   Living

Waters  ...  ...  ...

A  Shame  to  be  ashamed  of  ...

Why  the  Confidences  of  Men  do  not

prosper  •,.

The  People's  Sin  ...


•••


••.


•••


•••


CHAPTER  HL

Filial  Reminiscences  of  God
Insincere  Repentance


•••


•••


•*.


87
87
87
38
38

88
40


40
41
41
41
41

41

41

42

44
45

46
47


54


\i


INDEX


rHEUB  rAOB

God  inviting  the  Return  of  his  Sin-
ful Children      ...           ...           ...  55

Religious  Individualism    ...            ...  56

The  Blessings  of  Redemption           ...  56

Invitation  and  Response    ...            ...  57

From  False  to  True  Salvation          •..  58

Shame    ...            ...            ...            ...  58

A  Call  to  the  Toung           ...           .,.  59

" Backsliding  Israel"         ...            ...  60

The  Offer  of  a  Great  Forgiveness     ...  61
Israel's  Cry  to  the  Father  and  the

Friend              ...            ...            ...  62

Actions  speak  louder  than  Words    ...  63
God  will  provide  Pastors  according  to

his  own  Heart   ...           ...           ...  64

The  Superseding  of  the  Ark            ...  65
The   Gathering   of  the   Nations    to

Jehovah's  Throne            ...            ...  60

A  Sincere  Repentance  in  an  Appro-
priate Place       ...            ...            ...  67

SiUj  Law,  Grace   ...            •..           ...  68

An  Old  and  Sad  hut  very  True  Story  69
The  Comparative  Advantages  of  Juduh
and  Israel;    Professors   and   Non-
Professors          ...            .,.           ...  70

Confession  of  Sin  the  Indispensable

Prerequisite  for  its  Pardou            ,..  71

Blarried  to  God    ...           ...           ...  73

The  Great  Difficulty  overcome         ...  74
God*8  Way  of  Restoration ;    or,  tlio

Experiences  of  a  Toung  Convert  ..  76
Supercession  of    External   Religious

Ordinances  and  Institutions          ...  77

•*  Put  among  the  Children "              ...  77

Typical  Penitence              ...            ...  78


CHAPTER  IV.

Fallow  Ground     ...  ...  82, 87

Divine  Illusions    ...            ...            ...  83

The  Cleansing  of  the  Heart  a  Neces-
sary Condition  of  Salvation           ...  83
The  Folly  of  Misdirected  Wisdom    ...  84
Chaos  the  Result  of  Sin      ...           ...  85

The  Abject  Helplessness  which  resorts

to  Failse  Pretensions,  and  its  Failure  85
The  Duty  of  Reality  in  Religious  Pro-
fession              ...           ...           ...  86

Human  Uncertainty  co-existing  with

Divine  Illumination        ...            ...  86

The  Wisdom  of  this  World              ...  87
Vain  Thoughts    ...            ...               88,94

The  Peril  of  Profession  without  Posses-
sion of  Real  Religion      ...           ...  89


Tntan

The  Proclamation  of  Woe  ...

Inflicted  Infatuation ;  or,  the  Deceived
ofGod  ...

The  Loving  Charge  of  the  Great
Searcher  of  Hearts  ...

Qod*B  Reserve  of  Mercy

A  Surely  Coming  Confession  com-
pelling a  Present  Serious  Question

•<The  Fellowship  of  Christ's  Suffer-
ingo     ...  ...  •.«  ...

Broken  Reeds

**  There  shall  be  Weeping  "

The  Kind  of  Return  which  Jehovah
requires

Jehovah's  Requirement  with  Respect
to  the  Oath

Thoroughness  in  Spiritual  Culture  ...

Despair  among  the  Leaders  in  Israel

The  Uses  of  the  Wind

The  Unwashed  Heart  and  the  Vuin
Purposes  cherished  in  it

Those  who  are  Wise  to  do  Evil

A  Threatened  Return  from  Cosmos  to
v/uaos ...  ...  ...  «••

Departed  Charms  that  cannot  be  re-
stored ...


•••


•••


•••


•••


CHAPTER  V.

Forgiveness  for   Many   through   the

Righteousness  of  One
Fruitless  Chastisement      ...  116,

Culpable  Unbelief  •••

Suitable  Retribution  ...

Man  rebuked  by  Nature     ...
The  most   Appalling    Condition    to

which  a  Nation  can  sink
A  Wicked  City  spared  for  the  Sake  of

One  Saint         ...
What  God  requires  of  Man
Sparing  Meroy      ...
God*s  Power  in  restraining  the  Forces

of  Nature
Can  a  Righteous  Man  be  found  in

Jerusalem?       ...  ,.•  ..•

The  Vineyard  spoiled  because  of  the

Degenerate  Branches
Those  who  call  the  Word  of  Jehovah

a  xjIo  ...  ...  ...  «.«

A  Lesson  from  the  Raging  Sea

The  Worst  Kind  of  Wickedness  found

among  the  People  of  Jehovah       •••
Mutual  Heifers  in  Wrong^Doing     •..


•••
•••
•••


%


'x"


INDEX.


iii


THKXB  PAOB

True  llanbood     •••           •••            ...  128

An  UnfailiDg  Appeal         •••           ...  131

The  Sorrow  of  Sorrows       ...           ...  131

The  Rich  and  the  Poor  meet  together  132

The  Moral  DisadTantages  of  the  Poor  133

How  Men  curse  their  Blessing^        ..•  134

Battlements  not  the  Lord's              •••  135

The  Silken  Fetter              136

Ood's  Gifto  of  the   Rains   and  the

Harrest             •••           ,..           ...  138

The  Devirs  Lure  ...           ...           ...  142

A   Wonderful  and    Horrible   Thing

indeed              ...           ...           ...  142

Nature's  Witness  against  Blind  Eyes

and  Rebellious  Hearts    •••           •••  143


CHAPTER  VL


Wells  of  Wickedness  ...  ...    149

^he   Indifference  of  Men   and   the

Burden  of  Truth  ...  ...    149

False  Peace  •••  ...  ...    150

The  Old  Paths     151,155,171

Watchmen  ...  ...  ...    152

Worthless  Sacrifices  ...  ...    152

Testing  Fires        ...  ...  ...    152

The  Apostate  City  that  cannot  be  lot

aiono  ...  ...  ...  ...    xoo

The  Ministry  of  Deceit       ...  ...    154

The  Reasonableness  of  the  Divine

Judgments        ...  ...  ...    156

The  Prophet  a  Spiritual  Assay cr      ...    156
A  Dreadful  Onlook  ...  ...    157

Bignal-Fires         ...  •••  ...    159

The  Lord's  Pasture  ...  ...    159

Borrow  because  of  Eventide  ...    160

How  the  ELingdom  of  Heaven  is  to  be

taken ...  ...  ...  ...    163

The  Real  Director  of  Human  Affairs  163
8in  compared  to  a  **  Fountain "  ...  164
The  Worst  Woe  of  the  Wicked         ...    165

•< Turn  back  thine  Hand" 165

The  Preacher's  Bitter  Cry  ...  ...    166

The  Unciroumcised  Ear     •<•  ...    167

The  Vampires  of  the  Soul ...  ...    168

The  Sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost      <..    170
At  the  Meeting  of  the  Ways  ...    173

God's  Appeal  for  Vindication  of  his
Vengeance        ...  ...  ...    174

The  Fruit  of  Thought       ...  ...    174

Abhorred  Sacrifices  ...  ...    175

**  The  Bellows  are  Burned  '*  ...    175

The  Good  Way    ...  ...  ...    176


TIIEMB  r.VGI

Jerusalem  like  a  Fountain   casting

forth  Evil          ...           ...           ...  177

Covetousness  a  Universal  Sin           ...  178

Healing  the  Hurt  slightly               ...  179
The  Ancient  Paths  to  be  sought  and

walked  in          ...           ...           ...  180

Sweet   and   Fragrant  Things   made

Abominable  to  God         ...           ...  181


^  Reprobate  Silver


)»


...


•.•


182


CHAPTER  VIL


Preaching  Repentance        ...           ...  187

The  Confidence  of  Superstition        «..  188

The  Voice  Unheeded         ,o           ...  188
Forbidden  Prayers             ...           189, 206

Declension            ...           .«•           ...  lOO

Horrors  of  Retribution      ..<           *..  190

Keeping  the  Temple  Gate  ...           ...  191

Who  shall  dwell  in  the  House  of  the

Lord?...           ...           ...           ...  192

**  Rising  up  early "             ...           ...  102

Idolatry  a  Detailed  Insult  to  Jehovah  193

The  Desecration  of  Tophct               ...  194
The  Relations  of  Righteousness  and

Religion            ...           ...           ...  194

The  Indispensable  Condition  of  all

Grace  ...           ...            ...           ...  196

How  Men  deceive  themselves           ,«.  197

Strange  Church-Goers        ...           ...  199

Sacrilege              ...           ...           ...  200

Warning  Voices    ...           ...           ...  201

Shiloli,  or  the  God-Forsaken  Shrine ...  201

The  Divine  Long-Suffering  worn  out. . .  204
Idolatrous  Worship  both  a  Waniiug

and  a  Model      ...           ...           ...  206

The  Recoil  of  Sin               ...           ...  207

The  Innocent  Victims  of  Sin            ...  208
The  Indispensable  Condition  of  Well-
being  ...           ...           ...           ...  209

The  Harvest  of  Sin            ...           ...  209

«« Lying  Words  " 210

Tlie  Doom  of  the  Temple  ...           ...  210

The  Family  joined  in  Idolatry          ...  211
The     Inveterate     DLtobt-dience     of


Israel  ...


..I


...    212


CHAPTER  VIII.


Persistent  Depravity
A  Lesson  from  the  Birds
Untrustworthy  Literature
Despair  ...
Harvest  Contrasts...


217
217
218
219
219


I'


tr


w


INDEX.


THKm  rAOB

•«  Balm  In  GUeod  "             ...           220, 232
Apofltasy  an  Anomaloiui  and  Incal-
culable Thing  ...           ...           ...  221

*<  Peace,  Peace;    ^hen  there   is   no

Peace"              221

False  Hopes  ministering  Despair      ...  222
Occasions  of  Hoped-for  Salvation  that

have  not  availed              ...           ...  223

"Physician,  heal  thyself" 223

Befooled  indeed    ...           ...           ...  224

Backsliding  in  its  Worst  Forms        ...  226

The  Way  Home    ...           ...           •«•  227

The  Prophet's  Grievous  Lament       ...  229

Christ  and  the  Holy  Ghost  Realities  230
The  Bones  of  the  Dead  Idolaters  cast

out  before  their  Cities     ...           ...  233

A  Pitiable  Condition:  Death  Prefer-
able to  Life       ...            ...            ...  234

The  Unnatural  Conduct  of  Jerusa-


lem


235


The  Exposure  of  Pseudo-Wisdom     ...  236

The  Serpents  which  cannot  be  charmed  237

**  The  Life  is  more  than  the  Meat "...  238

Why  the  Hurt  of  Israel  is  not  healed  239

CHAPTER  IX.


Grief  for  Others   ...           •••           ...  243

Falsehood             ...           ...           ...  243

A  Visitation  of  God           244

The  Causes  of  National  Disaster      ...  244

False  Boasting  and  Truo  Confidence  245

ImpartialJustice...            ...           ...  216

Vicarious  Grief    ...           ...           ...  246

The    Man    of    God's   Longing    for

Seclusion          ...           ...            ...  247

The  Self-Opposition  and  Futility  of

.the  Sinner*s  Life             ...           .«•  247

liie   Affliction   of    God*s   Professed

People  an  Enigma  to  be  explained  247
The  Death  of  the  Wicked  contrary  to

Nature              ...           ...            ...  248

The  Knowledge  of  Gtod  the  only  Real

"Glory "of  Man             249

The  Testimony  of  Tears     ...           ...  249

The  Moral  Degradation  of  Women  ...  251

Sighings  after  the  Wilderness          ...  252

The  Doings  and  Doom  of  Deceit      ...  253

The  Terrible  Threatenings  of  Love ...  254
The  Inquest  on  the  Slain  of  Judah

and  Jerusalem  ...           ...           ...  256

Hereditary  Sin  Real  Sin     ...            ...  257

Death's  Doings    ...           ...           ...  258


THEXS

"Whereof  to  glory"

The  Chief  Good

Incessant  Weeping  over  the  Calamiti

of  Israel
The  Lodging-Place  in  the  Wildeme
Wickedness   prevailing,  and  why

prevails
The  Social  Bond  a  Rope  of  Sand
Exultation  of  Heart  and  Life  accoi

ing  to  the  Will  of  God   ...

CHAPTER  X.


...


The  Folly  of  Paganism

The  Incomparable  Greatness  of  Goc

The  Nature  of  God

God  the  Portion  of  Israel   ...

Confession  and  Correction  ...

The  Helplessness  of  Heathen  Goda

Conclusive  Argument  against  thei
The  Uniqueness  of  Jehovah
Grief  borne  that  cannot  be  cured
Idolatry ...  ...  ...

"  The  Portion  of  Jacob "    ...

Wherefore  God  doth  judge  the  Worl

Submission

The  Ruin  wrought  by  the  PrayerU

Pastor...
Fruits  of  a  Chastened  Spirit
"  The  Way  of  Man  "
What  Men  fear  and  what  they  oug

to  fear
The  Dismay  of  the  Heathen  at  tl

Signs  of  Heaven
The  Way  of  Man  not  in  himself
God's  Correction  of  his  People         «

CHAPTER  XL

The  Ancient  Covenant       •••  ,

Idolatry  confounded  ...

The  Olive  struck  by  Lightning        \

The  Conspiracy  of  Anathoth

The  Response  of  the  Spiritual  Co

science  to  the  Words  of  God
Spiritual  Atavism;  or,  the  Sins  of  tl


Fathers


...


The  Staying  of  Intercession
Perils  of  Prophesying         ...  ,

The  Doom  of  Disobedience...
The  Predous  Recompenses  of  Ob
dience...  ...  ...  ,

The  First  Last


INDEX.


The  liimitfl  of  Long-Suflfering  Love ...  807

The  Baffled  Plot 308

The  Covenant  with  the  Fathers  Bind-
ing on  the  Children         ...  ...  *^10

Intercession  Unavailing      ...  ••«  310

The  Prophet  in  his  own  Country       •••  312

CHAPTER  XII.

The  Proeperity  of  the  Wicked         •••  815
God  Near  to  the  Mouth  but  Far  from

the  Life  •••  •••  ...  316

A  Dark  Prospect  ...  •••  ...  317

The  Forsaken  Heritage      •••  •••  318

Profitless  Labour  ...           •••           ...  318
General  Punishment  and  General  Re-
storation          ...           ...           ...  319

Moral  Difficulties  with  the  Providence

of  God  ...  ...  ...  320

A  Prophet's  Foes  they  of  his  own

Household         ...  •••  ...  320

Leaving  All  for  God  •••  ...  321

Mercy  and  Judgment  ...  ...  321

Perplexing  Questions         •••  ...  322

Imprecatory  Prayers  •••  ...  323

Failure  in  Little  Things     •«•  ...  324

The  Hiding  of  God*s  Face...  ...  325

The  Speckled  Bird  ...  ...  325

The  Tide  that  has  no  Ebb,  but  ever

HOWS    •••  •**  •••  ...  o A /

The  Prophet's  Complaint  ...  ...  327

The   Prophet  puzzled  by   the  Pros-
perity of  the  Wicked       ...  ...  329

The  Inheritanoe   that    has    lost   its

Charms...  ...  ...  ...  330

Shepherds  where  they  ought  not  to  be  331

Sowing  Wheat  and  Reaping  Thorns  831


CHAPTER  Xm.

The  Spoiled  Girdle  335,  838,  841,  349

The  Parable  of  the  Wine-Flagons    ...  836

Darkness              ...           ...            ...  836

Royalty  Humbled               ...            ...  837

The  Ethiopian's  Skin  and  the  Leo-
pard's Spots       ...            ...           ...  887

Broken  Pitchers;   or.   Worldly    Suf-
ficiency and  its  Punish mcut          ...  839
jJays  of  Grace,  and  how  they  should
be  spent            ...           ...           ...  339

Meral  Helplessness:  how  induced    ...  340

YetselB  of  Wrath ...  342


THEMB  PACE

The  Last  Results  of  Sin 342

"Be  not  Proud"  ..»           312

Lost  upon  the  Dark  Mountains        ...  313

The  Neglected  Trust  demanded       ...  344

Sin  its  own  Scourge            ...            ...  846

An  Awful  Condition  indeed             ...  346

The  One  Thing  Needful 847

A  Solemn  Warning            ...           ...  848

A  Moral  Impossibility        ...           ...  349

A  Demand  for  the  Timely  Giving  of

what  is  due  to  Jehovah  ...           ..^  850

A  Searching  Question  to  the  Shepherd  852

A  Natural  Impossibility     •••           ...  853

CHAPTER  XIV.

A  Plague  of  Drought          ...           ,„  856

A  Plea  for  Mercy  in  Spite  of  Guilt  ...  857
The  Hope,  of  Israel  a  Stranger  in  the

Land  ...           ,„           ...            ...  357

False  Prophets     ...  ...  358,366

Prayer  for  Mercy  rejected  ...           ...  850

Prayer  for  Rain    ...           ...           ...  859

A  Prayer  for  God's  People  in  Time  of

his  Judgments  ...           ...           ...  360

Prayer  a  Fruit  of  Chastisement        ...  861

Invoking  the  Honour  of  God  ...  861
Thankfulness   tlirough    Contrast:    a

Harvest  Sermon              ...           ...  3G2

An  Absent  God  deplored   ...           ...  803

False  Teachers  no  Adequate  Excuse

for  Evil  Conduct             ...           ...  3C4

The    Distracting    Power    of   Great

Distress             ...            ...            ...  365

A  Dreadful  Apprehension  ...           ...  866

The  Miseries  produced  by  Lack  of

w ater ...           ...           ...           ...  868

An  Appeal  out  of  the  Deptlis  of  Sepa-
ration from  God              ...           ...  369

The    Severities   of  Jehovah— Sword,

Famine,  and  Pestilence  ...           ...  870

The   Peculiar   Doom    of    the   False

Prophets           ...  371


CHAPTER  XV.

Various  Destinies  of  Punishment     ...  376

God  Weary  of  Repenting    ...  ...  877

Sunset  at  Noon    ...  ...  ...  877

The  Prayer  of  the  Persecuted  ...  878

The  Words  of  God  found  and  eaten ...  879

The  Sadness  and  Solitude  of  a  Prophet  879


•  I


INDEX.


THKm  PAGB

A  Wide   Becognition   of  tbe   Good

without  Gompromifie  with  the  E^il  380
Sins  for  which  Saintly  Intercession

cannot  avail      ...           ...           ...  381

The  Offence  of  Faithful  Preaching  ...  382

"Thouknowest  it"            ...            ...  382

God's  Words  a  Heartfelt  Joy            ...  383
The      Preacher's      Weakness      and

Strength           ...           ...            ...  383

Foarfol  Aspects  of  the  Divine  Cha-
racter ...            ..•            ...            ...  384

The  Limits  of  Intercessory  Prayer   ...  384

Great  Intercessors               ...            ...  385

The  Sins  of  the  Fathers  visited  upon

the  Children     •••            •••            ...  386

The  Darkened  Home          ...           ...  387

A  Vain  Contest    ...           ...           ...  387

How  to  study  the  Scriptures            ...  391
Fruitless  Intercession         ...           303, 394

The  Living  Word               393

The  Man  who  felt  he  had  been  boru

to  Strife  and  Contention  ...           ...  395

The  Prophet's  Claim  upon  Jehovah,

and  the  Grounds  of  the  Claim      •••  396


CHAPTER  XVL

**  Forbidding  to  marry "      ..»  •..  399

**  Worse  than  your  Fathers "  ...  399

The  Greatest  Gratitude  for  the  Latest

Blessings  ...  •••  ...  400

Fishers  and  Hunters  ...  ...  400

God  revealed  to  the  Heathen  by  his

Judgment  on  his  People ...  ...  401

Celibacy  as   an    Obligation   of   the

Minister  of  God  ...  ...  402

The  Destiny  of  Sinners  a  Self-Creiited

Crue    ...  ...  ...  ...  tUo

Bin    a   Tyrannous    and    Exhaustive

Service  ...  ...  ...  404

The  Old  Deliverance  forgotten  in  the

M ew    •..  ...  ...  *••  tUu

The  Heathen  turning  to  the  True  God  406

Commands  Countermanded  ...  407

Conscience  Dead  ...  ...  ...  408

Great   Mercies   the    Forerunners   of

Greater  still      •••  ...  ...  409

Sin  found  out       ...  ...  ...  410

The  Accusers  of  the  Ungodly  ...  410

Domestic  Relations  become  a  Curse ...  411
The  House  of  Mourning  and  the  House

of  Feasting  alike  forbidden  ...  412


TUKMB  rx*

Two  Great  Beoollections    •••            ...  41
The    Confession    of   the    Idolatrous

Gentiles            •.«           •••           ...  41


CHAPTER  XVn.

Engraved  Sin       ...           ...           •••  41

The  Desert  Shrub  and  the  Flourish-
ing Tree            ...           ...            ...  41

The  Evil  Heart  searched  and  judged  42

Partridge-Nests    ...            ...            ...  42

The  Hope  of  Israel             ...            ...  42

The  Sabbath         ...  422,  425,  428,  44

Sin's  Record         ...            ...            ...  42

Heart  Mysteries  and  their  Interpreter  42

The  Saint's  Refuge            ...           ...  42

Divine    Prophecy  and   Human   Im-
patience           ...           ...           ...  42

"  The  Sin  of  Judah "           42

"  The  Place  of  our  Sanctuary  "         ...  42

<*  Be  not  a  Terror  unto  me "              ...  42

Trust :  Human  and  Divine ...           ...  42

The  Profound  Impression  of  Judah's

Din      ...             ...             ...            ..•  T«j

The  Curse  upon  the  Man  who  trusts  in

ALan    ...            ...            .«.           ...  4«j

The  Blessing  on  the  Man  who  trusts

in  Jehovah         ...            ...            ...  42

The  Searching  and  Knowing  of  the

xxearc ...           ...           ...           ...  to

Riches  wrongly  gotten,  and  the  Con-
sequence          ...           ...           ...  4S

An  Inspiring  Invocation     ...            ...  4S

"Written  in  the  Earth"     ...            ...  43

He  whom  God  heals  is  really  healed  4S
"Where  is  the  Word  of  the  Lord?"  43
The  Prophet's  Consciousness  of  In-
tegrity              ...            ...            ...  A?i

CHAPTER  XVilL

The  Potter  and  the  Clay

444,  448,  450,  453,  45
God's  Action  determined   by   Man's

Conduct            ...            ...            ...  44

Rejected  Preaching            ...           ...  41

Mountain  Snow    ...           ...           ...  44

The  Opposition  of  Officials               ...  44

The  Fatalism  of  the  Wicked             ...  44
Jehovah  an  Unfailing  Help  to  his

People ;  or,  the  **  Snow  of  Lebanon  "  44
Ecclesiastical  Succession  ventu  Indi-

yidual  Ministry               ...           ...  44


The    Pra&chei'i     Foes;    or,     F«l*a

■    Tongues  and  Deat  Eiua

A  Nerer-to-bc-forgotten  Principle  of

IntcrpreUlioti
Di^pair — itt    CauBes,    Coiuequcncea,

and  Curs
Pmccution
Jeremiah'*  Eneniei  and  his  Prajer

KgRinM  tbem     ...  ...  ...

CU&PTER  XIX.

ThB  Broken  Bottle  ...  457,  4S9,

The  Warning  CoDflnned    ...
DenunciationB  of  Doom
The  Stn  ond  Fanliihment  of  Piuhur


COAPTER  XX.
Pofbnr  ...
Enticed  and  OTerpowered  b;  God     ...

TbeBiuning  Fire^rinspimtioD
A  Prophet  ptreecuted  hy  Bpiee        ,„    ■
Tbnnk-giviiig  for  Future  Blessing  ...
Jeremiah  cnreiug  the  Day  ot  hii  Birth

4G8,
The  BchaTioiu  of  the  Wicked  towardi

tho  Truth         ■

Jlasor-MiHa.iblb ;   or,  tho   Fate   of  a

False  Prophet  ...  ...  ...    ■

The     Sorrow    aod    Joy    of     God's

Why  Qod'a  Sorvaala  kboor  on

"I*  Life  worth  Living?"   ...  ...

A  BniniDgFiTO  within      ...

A  Changed  Nome  and  a  Dreadfal

A  Confliot  not  to  be  arniilC'l

The  Name   Mu^r-Iliiieabib  wrongly


CHAPTEB  XXL

God  ooniulted  in  Tain       ...  „.  480

The  Choice  between  Life  and  Drath  481

God  against  Jeruaolem       ...  ...  4B2

Zudekiub'B  MoiBHge;  or,  the  Prayer

orthoUagodly  ...  ...  1B2

God'a  Answer  to  Earthly  Pre«iimplion  483

Baied  w  u  by  Fire  ...  ...  4gi

A  Bad  but  CommoD  Necearily         ...  4SS


A  King  appealing  for  a  Prophet's  In-

tercossiun           ...            ...            ...  4

Eicape  for  the  Individnal  among  the

Calatiutiea  of  the  Kation              ...  4

CHAPTER  XXIL

Conrt  Preaching  ...           ...           ...  4

On  Visiting  the  Bnini  of  a  City       ...  4
Miaapoiit  Tear*    ...            ...            494, 5

Dishoneet  Buliden             ...            ...  1

Tho  Voico  of  God  diiregarded  in  Pro«-

pority 4

Truth- Speaking  nodcr  DiUlcultiee  ...  4

Building  in  Unrighteoutiutoa            ...  4

Moniuneulul  Jud^onts     ...          ...  4

Fnies  viono  thuD  Death     ...           ...  4

True  Rojrulty        ...            ...            ...  4

Tbe5IiEhty  Plciiaiiif,'ao(Go.l          ...  4

Tho  Nemesis  of  Opproasion              ...  5

Son  and  Father :  a  Sad  Contrast  ...  5
Eiceptionui  I'uots  in  tho  lAWoJ'Ttaiis-

niisaion  of  Clinr.iclcr       ...           ...  G

Till}  InipLiSHDiicd  Cry  of  God  to  Man  S
A  KiugiidilresM'd  In  Uinglod  Pramiie

and  Wuniiiig    „.           ...           ,.,  5

TlioWistakpsuftheMonmor  ...  5
A  Hiu'lit  Aim   piir^iioJ  by  a  Wrong

and  Cruel  Method            ...            ...  S

CUAPTEB   XXIIL

The  Character  of  Leading  Uen         ...  5

The  liraneh  of  David          5

TheNewNimo                 5

Uninspired  Propbccy          ...            ...  5

llie  OmnipresGiiM  of  God  ...   3-21,520,3

The  Abase  of  a  Word        ...           ...  9

The  "Burden" ...  5

False  Shepherds  and  the  True       „.  5

"TheLoidour  BightooufDCSd"       ...  5

"Trjing  the  Spirits"        5

Unauthorized  Authority     ...            ...  S

Dreams  that  make  the  Nome  of  God

to  be  forgotten                 ...            ...  5

The   Faithful    Dtteranoe    of  Divine

EcTuhilion        ...           ...           ...  5

Despising  Frophesyiugg      ...            ,.,  5

"  Tho  Lord  our  Rijrhloousness  "       ...  3

"WhatistheCbftff?"       5

JthoTab'Tsidfct'Bu             ...          ...  5

t)hepherd«,  Bod  and  Good  ...           ...  S

The  Bighteoni  Bdoo  of  Datid         ...  S


1


I        4


▼111


INDEX.


THBMB  FAOB

Prophets  stiengthening  the  Hands  of
Evil-Doers        ...  ...  ...    538

Bpeakiug  the  Vision  of  one's  own
Hesxt ...  ...  ...  ...    oo«i

The  Giving  Forth  of  the  Word  of  Man
as  the  Word  of  God         •••  ...    540


CHAPTEB  XXIV.

Two  Baskets  of  Figs         542,  544,  546,  547

Prosperity  Restored            ...            ...  543

Sword,  Famine,  and  Pestilence         ...  544

Calamity  with  God  and  without  him  545
Punished  for  Salvation ;  left  alone  for

Destruction       ...            ...           ...  545

<*  I  will  set  mine  Eyes  upon  them  for

IxOOd     ...                ...                ...                ...  0x0

The  Conditions  and  Relations  of  Sal-
vation ...           ...           ..•           ...  546

A  Heart  to  know  the  Ix)rcl                •••  547


CHAPTER  XXV.

A  Melancholy  Review  of  Twenty-Three
Years  of  Work  ...  ...  553,  560

The  Chief  Purpose  of  Prophecy        ...    554
**  Kebuchadrezzar  ...  my  Servant"

555,  561
The  Wine-Cup  of  Fury      ...  ...    556

The  Ineffectual  Palladium  of  a  Great
Name ...  ...  t.*  ...    557

Howling  Shepherds  ...  ...    557

Messages  Recapitulated     ...  ...    558

Judgment  plainly  Declared  ...    559

Judgment  beginning  at  the  House  of

CxOQ        ...  ...  ...  t.*        Dd9

The  Vision  of  Final  Judgment         ...    560
Jehovah's     Controversy     with     the
Nations  •••  ...  #..    562


CHAPTER  XXVL

The  Duty  of  Declaring   the  Whole

Truth  ..a            ...            0..            •.•  vo4

A  Scene  in  a  Jewish  Court  of  Law  •••  566

The  Story  of  an  Obscure  Martyr      ...  567
A  Friend  in  Need               ...           567, 573

Qod'B  Mercy  shown  in  his  Messages  568


THEXS

The  Prophet  of  God  arraigned  by  tl

Nation
Spiritual  Prerogative  not  Inalienable
The  Perils  of  Prophesying ...
The  Defence  of  the  Witness  for  tl;

Truth ...  ...  ...  •

Help  raised  up  for  Gk)d's  Servants  i

Times  of  Peril  ...  ...

Jeremiah  reckoned  Worthy  of  Deat
Jeremiah   reckoned    not  Worthy   <

Death...
An  Argument  from  History


..•


CHAPTER  XXVn.

The  Rights  of  the  Creator  ...  •

God's  Disposal  of  Man's  Possessions
The  Duty  of  Non-R^istance  •

Prophecy  tested  by  Prayer ...  5

Divine  Judgments  not  to  be  resisted
Jehovah's  Consideration  towards  son
Neighbours  of  Israel


•.•


CHAPTER  XXVIII.

The  Story  of  Hananiah  the  Prophet
An  Appeal  to  Ancient  Prophecy
Yokes  of  Iron       ...  ...  .

<<  This  Year  thou  shalt  die  "

How  to  answer  those  who  oppose  tb

JLTUtn  *••  0*.  ...  .1

Presumption  increasing  with  Lmpunit;
A  False  Prophet  and  his  Fate  •,


CHAPTER  XXIX.

How  to  make  the  Best  of  Adversity .,
Civic  Duties         ..0  ...  «,

Seventy  Years      ...  ...  .,

God's  Thoughts  concerning  us
Seeking  God  with  the  Whole  Heart ..
Shemaiah  ...  ...  .,

Duties  and  Consolations  of  God's  Cap
tivity  ..•  •••  *•.  .«

Signs  that  God's  Favour  is  restored .,
The  Punishment  of  False  Prophets  .,
God's  Message  to  the  Captives  ..
Thoughts  of  Peace  ...

The  Letter  to  the  Captives  .,


"iV
